0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
1

 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Electron correlation in C4N +2 carbon rings: aromatic vs. dimerized structures

1 Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801

2 National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801

Tommaso Torelli1 and Lubos Mitas2

(February 21, 2014)

The electronic structure of C4N +2 carbon rings exhibits competing many-body eﬀects of H¨uckel
aromaticity, second-order Jahn-Teller and Peierls instability at large sizes. This leads to possible
ground state structures with aromatic, bond angle or bond length alternated geometry. Highly
accurate quantum Monte Carlo results indicate the existence of a crossover between C10 and C14
from bond angle to bond length alternation. The aromatic isomer is always a transition state. The
driving mechanism is the second-order Jahn-Teller eﬀect which keeps the gap open at all sizes.

The discovery of carbon fullerenes and nanotubes has
opened a new materials research area with a vast poten-
tial for practical applications. Unfortunately, our under-
standing of the rich variety of structural and electronic
properties of carbon nanostructures is far from satisfac-
tory. For example, experiments [1] indicate that quasi-
one-dimensional structures such as chains and rings are
among the primary precursors in the formation process
of fullerenes and nanotubes. However, our insights into
their properties and behavior are incomplete due to the
complicated many-body eﬀects involved. In particular,
recent studies [2,3] have demonstrated a profound im-
pact of the electron correlation on stability and other
properties of such all-carbon structures. An important
example of such nanostructures is the system of planar
monocyclic carbon rings Cn with n = 4N + 2, where N
is a natural number. These closed-shell molecules mani-
fest an intriguing competition between conjugated aro-
maticity, second-order Jahn-Teller and, at large sizes,
Peierls instability eﬀects. Consequently, this leads to dif-
ferent stabilization mechanisms that tend to favor one of
the following structures: a cumulenic ring (A), with full
Dnh symmetry, with all bond angles and bond lengths
equal; or either of two distorted ring structures, of lower
2h symmetry, with alternating bond angles (B) or bond
D n
lengths (C). Further structural details are given in Fig. 1.
Accurate studies for the smallest sizes (C6 and C10) ﬁnd
isomer B to be the most stable. However, for larger sizes
the results from commonly used methods are contradic-
tory and available experiments [4] are unable to clearly
specify the lowest energy structures.

In order to identify the most stable isomers and to elu-
cidate the impact of many-body eﬀects, we carried out
an extensive study of electronic structure and geometries
of C4N +2 rings of intermediate sizes up to 22 atoms (with
some methods up to 90 atoms). We employed a number
of electronic structure methods including the highly ac-
curate quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method which has
been proven very eﬀective in investigations of C20 [2] and
larger carbon clusters [3], as conﬁrmed also by an inde-
pendent study by Murphy and Friesner [5]. Our QMC re-
sults reveal that the C4N +2 ground state structures have
alternated geometries at all sizes while cumulenic isomer

A is a structural transition state. The results also pro-
vide valuable insights into the shortcomings of the den-
sity functional approaches such as inaccurate balance be-
tween exchange and correlation in commonly used func-
tionals. In addition, the letter presents a ﬁrst evaluation
of interatomic forces in large systems within the QMC
framework.

According to the H¨uckel rule, the 4N+2 stoichiometry
implies the existence of a double conjugated π-electron
system (in- and out-of-plane). Combined with the ring
planarity, this suggests a strong aromatic stabilization in
favor of isomer A. Although the highest occupied and
the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (HOMO and
LUMO) are separated by a gap of several eV, a double
degeneracy in the HOMO and LUMO states opens the
possibility for a second-order Jahn-Teller distortion [6],
resulting in either cumulenic B or acetylenic C structure.
Such distortion lowers the symmetry and splits the de-
generacy by a fraction of an eV, with an overall energy
gain. Moreover, as N → ∞, the picture is complicated
further by the fact that the system becomes a semimetal-
lic polymer with two half-ﬁlled π bands. As ﬁrst pointed
out by Peierls [7], such a one-dimensional system is intrin-
sically unstable and undergoes a spontaneous distortion
which lowers the symmetry. The symmetry breaking en-
ables the formation of a gap, in analogy to the elusive
case of trans-polyacetylene [8].

FIG. 1. The most stable isomers of C4N +2 rings (shown
for C10). The parameters needed to specify the geometries
are: average bond length ¯r = (r1 + r2)/2, and bond angle
¯α = (α1 + α2)/2; relative bond length and Ar = (r1 − r2)/¯r
bond angle alternation Aα = (α1 − α2)/ ¯α

It is very instructive to see how the commonly used

1

computational methods deal with such many-body ef-
fects. Density functional theory (DFT) methods tend to
favor a “homogenized” electronic structure with delocal-
ized electrons. In fact, for sizes larger than C10, there is
no indication of any stable alternation up to the largest
sizes we have investigated (C90). Calculations performed
within the local density approximation (LDA) and gen-
eralized gradient approximations (GGA, with BPW91
functional) consistently converge to the aromatic struc-
ture A, in agreement with other studies [9]. Only by
extrapolation to the inﬁnite-chain limit, Bylaska, Weare
et al. [10] claim to observe a very small, yet stable, bond
alternation within LDA. A very diﬀerent picture arises
from the Hartree-Fock (HF) method, which shows a pro-
nounced dimerization for C10 and larger. This agrees
with the HF tendency to render structures less homoge-
neous in order to increase the impact of exchange eﬀects.
We also veriﬁed that using GGA functionals with an ad-
mixture of the exact HF exchange (B3PW91) recovers
qualitatively the HF results for large sizes (>C46), as al-
ready observed by others [11].

Obviously, this problem calls for much more accurate
treatments. High-level post-HF methods, such as multi-
conﬁguration self-consistent ﬁeld (MCSCF) and coupled
cluster (CC), indeed provide answers for the smallest ring
sizes (C6 [12] and C10 [13,14]).
In particular, Martin
and Taylor [14] have carried out a detailed CC study
demonstrating that both C6 and C10 have angle alter-
nated ground state structures, although for C10 the en-
ergy of the aromatic isomer A is found to be extremely
close (1 kcal/mol). In addition, we have performed lim-
ited CCSD calculations of C14 and have found the dimer-
ized isomer to be stable by ≃ 6 kcal/mol. Unfortunately,
these methods are impractical for larger cases or more
extensive basis sets [11].

The quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method was used
to overcome these limitations. This method possesses
the unique ability to describe the electron correlation ex-
plicitly and its favorable scaling in the number of parti-
cles enables us to apply it to larger systems [15]. In the
variational Monte Carlo (VMC) method we construct an
optimized correlated many-body trial wavefunction ΨT ,
given by the product of a linear combination of Slater
determinants and a correlation factor

ΨT = X

n

dnD↑

n{ϕα}D↓

n{ϕβ} exp X

u(riI , rjI , rij ) (1)

I,i<j

where ϕ are one-particle orbitals, i, j denote the elec-
trons, I the ions and riI , rjI , rij are the corresponding
distances. The correlation part, u, includes two-body
(electron-electron) and three-body (electron-electron-
ion) correlation terms and its expansion coeﬃcients are
optimized variationally. Most of the variational bias
is subsequently removed by the diﬀusion Monte Carlo
(DMC) method, based on the action of the projection

2

]
l

o
m

/
l

a
c
k
[
 

y
g
r
e
n
E

20
0
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
−120

20

0

−20

−40

0

C10
C14
C18
C22

0.0%

HF

12.9%

14.3%

14.6%

14.3%

MCSCF

10.9% 13.7%

7

3.5

17.5
Ar[%] − bond length alternation

10.5

14

21

24.5

FIG. 2. HF and MCSCF energy as a function of the degree
of dimerization Ar. Least-squares estimates of the positions
of the minima are indicated by arrows.

operator exp(−τ H); in the limit of τ → ∞, this projec-
tor recovers the lowest eigenstate from an arbitrary trial
function of the same symmetry and nonzero overlap. The
fermion antisymmetry (or sign) problem is circumvented
by the ﬁxed-node approximation. More details about the
method are given elsewhere [15].

DFT, HF and MCSCF calculations have been carried
out using standard quantum chemistry packages [16]. All
calculations employed an accurate basis set, consisting of
10s11p2d Gaussians contracted to 3s3p2d, and smooth ef-
fective core potentials [17] to replace the chemically inert
core electrons.

The geometries of smaller rings with 6 and 10 atoms
have already been established from previous calcula-
tions [12–14]. We have veriﬁed that the most reliable
published structural parameters agree very well (within
≃ 0.002 ˚A and 1◦) with our own GGA values. However,
since the dimerized isomer C is unstable within DFT,
we followed a diﬀerent strategy. We began from HF ge-
ometries, which show that the degree of bond length al-
ternation saturates at Ar ≈ 14% (Fig. 2).
In order to
correct for the HF bias favoring acetylenic structures, we
performed limited MCSCF calculations (see below) for
C10, C14, and C18. The electron correlation has a pro-
found eﬀect on the geometry, to the extent of causing
the dimerized isomer to be unstable for C10, while for
C14 it decreases the dimerization to Ar ≈ 10%. Clearly
the limited MCSCF for C14 and C18 provides rather poor
geometry improvement although one expects a larger cor-
rection as more correlation energy is recovered. In order
to verify this and to estimate the correct degree of dimer-
ization for C14, we carried out the evaluation of the Born-
Oppenheimer forces by a ﬁnite-diﬀerence scheme using

]

m
o
t
a
 
r
e
p
 
l
o
m

/
l
a
c
k
[
 
m
o
r
a

E
−

t
l
a

E

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

QMC

LDA

MCSCF

HF

  C6

    C10

    C14

    C18

correlated sampling, in the VMC method [18,19]. The
computation of interatomic forces is a new development
in QMC methodology and, to our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst application in this range of system sizes. We probed
the tangential C-C stretching/shortening which leads to
a change in the degree of dimerization, Ar. For Ar = 7%,
our force estimate is F = −dE/dθ = 0.010(2) a.u. (and
a second derivative of H = 0.30(1) a.u.), suggesting
proximity to the minimum. Moreover, at Ar = 10.5%
we ﬁnd a force of opposite sign: F = −0.013(3) a.u.
(H = 0.33(1) a.u.). For C18, we have instead performed
two QMC single point calculations at Ar = 7%, 14% and
found the ﬁrst energy to be lower by ∆E ≃ −12 kcal/mol.
Finally, we assumed Ar = 7% and ¯r = 1.286 ˚A as our best
estimate for calculations of the acetylenic isomer with
n > 10.

The crucial ingredient for very accurate QMC calcu-
lations is a trial function with a small ﬁxed-node error.
The quality of the one-particle orbitals is of prime im-
portance for decreasing such error. While HF or DFT
orbitals are commonly used for construction of Slater de-
terminants, our recent projects [20] have demonstrated
that natural orbitals from limited correlated calculations
(e.g., MCSCF) lead to more consistent results.
Inclu-
sion of the electron correlation into the method used
to generate the orbitals is indeed very relevant for ob-
taining improved fermion nodes, especially for such sys-
tems which exhibit strong non-dynamical correlation ef-
fects [11,14]. Extensive tests conﬁrmed that orbitals from
MCSCF (with an active space consisting of 4 occupied
and 4 virtual orbitals) yield the lowest energies and so
they were used in all of our calculations.
In addition,
the inclusion of the most important excited conﬁgura-
tions into ΨT (about 20–30 determinants) provided fur-
ther signiﬁcant improvement of the total energies.
In
particular, the weights of single excitations were surpris-
ingly large for the alternated geometries and comparable
to the largest weights of conﬁgurations with double exci-
tations. A more detailed analysis on the multi-reference
nature of the wavefunction in these systems will be given
elsewhere.

Equipped with such high quality trial functions we
have carried out QMC calculations from C6 to C18. A
plot of the energy diﬀerences, with comparison to other
methods, is shown in Fig. 3. For the very compact C6
ring, where the overlap between π in-plane orbitals is
large, as observed by Raghavachari et al. [21], the angle
alternated isomer B is the most stable. The aromatic
structure A is instead a transition state leading to angle
alternation (B1u mode), while the dimerized isomer C is
unstable in all methods.

C10 is the case which was studied extensively in the
past. Our DMC results agree with calculations of Martin
and Taylor [14]. We conclude that the angle alternated
isomer is still the lowest energy structure, albeit

