to appear in Applied Physics B, Special Issue “Optical Properties of Nanoparticles” manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collectivity in the optical response of small metal clusters

S. K¨ummel1, K. Andrae2, P.-G. Reinhard2

1 Department of Physics and Quantum Theory Group, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70118, USA
2 Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Erlangen, D-91077 Erlangen, Germany

Received: / Revised version:

Abstract The question whether the linear absorption
spectra of metal clusters can be interpreted as density
oscillations (collective “plasmons”) or can only be under-
stood as transitions between distinct molecular states is
still a matter of debate for clusters with only a few elec-
trons. We calculate the photoabsorption spectra of Na2
and Na+
5 comparing two diﬀerent methods: quantum
ﬂuid-dynamics and time-dependent density functional
theory. The changes in the electronic structure associ-
ated with particular excitations are visualized in “snap-
shots” via transition densities. Our analysis shows that
even for the smallest clusters, the observed excitations
can be interpreted as intuitively understandable density
oscillations. For Na+
5 , the importance of self-interaction
corrections to the adiabatic local density approximation
is demonstrated.
PACS: 36.40.Vz, 31.15.Ew

1 Introduction

Among the earliest experiments providing insight into
the electronic structure of metal clusters were measure-
ments of the linear photoabsorption spectra [1,2]. To-
day, still, they are among the most powerful probes of
a cluster’s structure, and understanding the eﬀects of
collectivity in absorption spectra in general is also one
prerequisite for understanding the nonlinear regime that
is being probed experimentally with increasing sophisti-
cation [3]. In particular for positively charged sodium
clusters, linear spectra have been measured for a broad
range of cluster sizes and temperatures [4]. Typically,
the experiments show a few strong absorption lines that
exhaust most of the oscillator strength. However, despite
the fact that the absorption spectra have been known for
a long time, their theoretical interpretation is still being
discussed. Since sodium is the nearly-free electron metal

Correspondence to: skuemmel@tulane.edu

par excellence, allowing to study metallic behavior in
one of its purest forms, a lot of theoretical work over the
years has been devoted to photoabsorption in Na clusters
[5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. From these studies, two
diﬀerent and somewhat opposing points of view on the
interpretation of the observed resonances emerged. On
the one hand, small clusters can accurately be described
in the language of quantum chemistry, understanding
the excitations as transitions between distinct molecular
(electronic) states. On the other hand, the experiments
found an early, intuitive interpretation in terms of col-
lective oscillations of the valence electron density against
the inert ionic background, similar to the plasmon in
bulk metals or the giant resonances in atomic nuclei.
Since the strong delocalization of the valence electrons
that characterizes nearly free electron metals is found
even in the smallest Na clusters, it has been argued that
the second interpretation should also be applicable to
small clusters.

A theoretically well founded [16] and practically tested
[5,9,10,12,13,15] method for the theoretical investiga-
tion of excitations in metal clusters is time dependent
density functional theory (TDDFT) at the level of the
adiabatic, time-dependent local density approximation
(TDLDA). A reﬁnement of TDLDA corrects for the self-
interaction error leading to the scheme of a time-dependent
self-interaction correction simpliﬁed by a global averag-
ing procedure (TDSIC) [12]. A somewhat simpler, yet
powerful, alternative is quantum ﬂuid-dynamics. In an
extension of earlier works [6,7], quantum ﬂuid-dynamics
in a local current approximation (LCA) was recently de-
rived making direct use [17] of the ground-state energy
functional of density functional theory. In this work we
are comparing these methods using two very small clus-
ters as test cases with a threefold aim: First, compar-
ing LCA to TDDFT for exactly the same system allows
to judge on the reliability of LCA results. Second, by
comparing TDLDA to its on-average self-interaction cor-
rected counterpart, we check the impact of self-interaction
corrections on low-energy photoabsorption spectra. Third,

2

S. K¨ummel et al.

the combination of methods allows us to demonstrate
that, indeed, the experimental spectra for even the small-
est clusters can be interpreted as valence electron density
oscillations, leading to an intuitive understanding of the
experimentally observed eﬀects.

In section 2 our theoretical methods are reviewed.
5 , which

Section 3 presents the results for Na2 and Na+
are discussed and summarized in section 4.

2 Theory

Starting point of our investigations is the usual ground-
state energy functional

E[n; {R}] = Ts[{ϕ}] + Exc[n] +

n(r)Vion(r; {R}) d3r

d3r′ d3r

Z
n(r)n(r′)
|r − r′|

1
|Ri − Rj|

+

e2
2 Z Z

+

Z 2e2
2

N

Xi,j=1
i6=j

(1)

for a cluster of N ions of valence Z (for Na, Z = 1),
valence-electron density n and ionic coordinates {R}.
The noninteracting kinetic energy Ts is calculated from
the Kohn-Sham orbitals {ϕ} and Exc[n] denotes the ex-
change and correlation energy for which we use the LDA
functional of Ref. [18]. Generalized gradient approxi-
mations, e.g. [19], in general lead to a better descrip-
tion of correlation eﬀects in small systems. However,
in the present case LDA is not too bad an approxima-
tion due to the strong delocalization of the valence elec-
trons. Vion is the sum of pseudopotentials Vion(r; {R}) =
N
i=1 vps(|r − Ri|). We employ the smooth-core pseu-
dopotential of Ref. [14]. In combination with LDA it
P
provides accurate bond lengths, which are important for
optical absorption spectra and polarizabilities [14,20].
The ionic coordinates were obtained by self-consistent
minimization of the functional (1) with respect to both
n and {R} and are given in Ref. [14]. The Kohn-Sham
equations are solved directly, i.e., without basis sets, on a
real space grid. We have veriﬁed that the coordinates ob-
tained in the symmetry restricted optimizations of Ref.
[14] do not change noticeably if the optimization is done
fully three-dimensional. In order to be consistent, the
ionic conﬁgurations were reoptimized on the SIC level
for the TDSIC calculations, as discussed below.

Eq. (1) is also the key ingredient for the quantum
ﬂuid-dynamical LCA. A detailed discussion of the the-
ory can be found in Ref. [17]. Therefore, we here re-
strict ourselves to a brief sketch. The essential idea of
LCA is to describe excitations as harmonic density os-
cillations. The oscillating density is obtained from the
scaling transformation

n(r, α(t)) = e−α(t)Sn n(r),

(2)

where α(t) ∝ cos ωt and Sn is the so called density scal-
ing operator

Sn =

∇u(r)

+ u(r) · ∇,

(3)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
which contains – hallmark of a ﬂuid-dynamical descrip-
tion – a displacement ﬁeld u(r). A similar, consistent
transformation is also applied to the Kohn-Sham orbitals
from which the density is constructed. From a variational
principle and Eq. (1), a set of coupled, partial diﬀerential
eigenvalue equations for the Cartesian components of u
is derived. The eigenvalues are the excitation energies,
and from the solutions uν, absolute oscillator strengths
and intrinsic current densities

jν(r,t) = ˙αν(t) uν (r) nν(r, αν (t))

(4)

associated with a particular (the ν-th) excitation are
derived. Eq. (4) is the reason for the name “local cur-
rent approximation”. If a mode jν can be excited by the
dipole operator D = −ez we call it a z-mode (or x,y,
respectively).

It is important to note that the LCA is not a (semi)
classical but a quantum mechanical method in the sense
that it is derived on the basis of the quantum mechanical
Kohn-Sham energy functional, which contains informa-
tion on the quantal single-particle states in the kinetic
energy. But the range of validity for the LCA is hard
to assess formally [21]. However, gathering experience
on its performance, as done for earlier versions which
were truly semiclassical methods [6] or approaches using
a well guessed expansion basis of local operators [7], will
lead to a better understanding. It is therefore one aim
of the present work to test the accuracy of the LCA by
comparing it to the well established TDLDA.

For TDLDA and TDSIC, the numerical solution of
the Kohn-Sham equations is done on a spatial grid with
Fourier transformation for the deﬁnition of the kinetic
energy. Accelerated gradient iteration is used for the
static part. The dynamic propagation is done with the
time-splitting method. For details of the technology see
the review [22]. The spectra are computed as described in
[22,23,24]. We start from the electronic and ionic ground
state conﬁguration. An instantaneous boost of the whole
electron density initializes the dynamical evolution ac-
cording to time-dependent LDA or SIC. The emerging
dipole momentum as function of time is ﬁnally Fourier
transformed into the frequency domain. This delivers the
spectral distribution of dipole strength. The initial boost
is kept small enough for the method to produce the spec-
tra in the regime of linear response.

3 Results

With the methods described in the previous section we
ﬁrst investigated the sodium dimer. At ﬁrst glance, it
could be expected that the two-electron system Na2 is

Collectivity in the optical response of small metal clusters

3

Table 1 Dipole excitations up to 4 eV for Na2. Energies EE in eV and oscillator strengths OS as percentages of the dipole
sumrule m1 = e2¯h2N Z/(2m) for LCA (superscript a), TDLDA (superscript b) and TDSIC (superscript c). Columns labeled
“mode” indicate the direction of oscillation, see text for discussion. For comparison, we also list TDLDA results (superscript
d) and experimental values (superscript e) from Ref. [15]. — indicates that the corresponding mode is not found in LCA, -
that the strength in TDSIC was beyond numerical accuracy, no v. that no corresponding value has been given in the literature.

a
Mode

b

OS

b
Mode

c

OS

d
EE

d

OS

e
EE

a
EE

1.93
2.56
3.93
—

a

OS

30.9
58.9
1.7
—

z
x/y
z
—

b
EE

2.09
2.63
3.67
3.72

31
56
1
3

z
x/y
z
x/y

c
EE

2.13
2.65
3.89
3.95

36
57
-
-

2.09
2.52
3.28
no v.

31.4
53.1
<1
no v.

1.82
2.52
3.64
no v.

not described accurately in the quantum ﬂuid-dynamical
LCA. However, as seen from Fig. 1, TDLDA and LCA
give similar results. Since the LCA currents were calcu-
lated with the LDA functional, we ﬁrst compare them
to TDLDA and discuss TDSIC results later. It is im-
portant to note that our TDLDA and LCA calculations
were performed on exactly the same basis, i.e, using the
same internuclear distance and pseudopotential. For a
closer inspection we give in Table 1 the excitation en-
ergies and percentages on the dipole sumrule for the
excitations up to 4 eV that carry most of the oscilla-
tor strength. Comparing columns 1–3 to columns 4–6
reveals some noteworthy diﬀerences between LCA and
TDLDA. First, for the lowest excitation, LCA gives an
energy lower than TDLDA with a diﬀerence larger than
the numerical uncertainty. Since LCA rests on a varia-
tional principle, the fact that it leads to a lower excita-
tion energy than TDLDA points at that it can be seen
as an independent method. In this context we also note
that our TDLDA for the z-excitation is consistent with
the result in [15]. Second, whereas LCA is very accurate
for the two low-lying, strong transitions, it does not seem
to perform as well for the higher lying excitations. For
technical reasons, the oscillator strength for the weak
transitions is hard to asses in our TDLDA and TDSIC
and could only be estimated in TDLDA. However, Fig.
1 shows that in comparison to TDLDA, the strength of
the third peak is underestimated in LCA, and the LCA
eigenvalue is too high. Tab. 1 shows why the TDLDA
spectrum in Fig. 1 looks better. Whereas LCA only leads
to one z mode, TDLDA around 3.7 eV gives excitations
in both z and x/y direction. A “double-peak” structure
has also been found in other TDLDA calculations [13].
Thus, we conclude that LCA gives some of the strength
carried by transitions at higher energies, but it does not
provide the same resolution as TDLDA. This is under-
standable since TDLDA embraces the whole fragmenta-
tion into the various one-particle-hole (1ph) states of the
excitation spectrum, while LCA is bound to a “collective
deformation path”.

For Na2, TDSIC leads to overall similar results as
TDLDA, therefore we do not show the spectrum in a
separate plot. Besides the fact that the TDSIC spectrum
does not show the “cut” in the low energy shoulder of

S

S

Experiment

1

2

3

eV

LCA

S

1

2

3

eV

TDLDA
1

2

3

eV

Fig. 1 Experimental [25], LCA and TDLDA photoabsorp-
tion spectrum S of Na2 in arbitrary units against excitation
energy in eV. The line broadening is chosen phenomenologi-
cally to match the experiment.

the excitation at 2.09 eV, the main diﬀerence is that
TDSIC leads to slightly higher excitation energies than
TDLDA (see Tab. 1). The deviation is less than 0.05 eV
for the low-lying, strong transitions, but it is more than
0.2 eV for the higher ones (placing them at a similar en-
ergy as LCA). The reason is that the bonding distance is
0.1 a0 smaller than in LDA [12]. This slight compression
leads to a small blue shift. The higher excitations are

∇jν +

dnν(r, t)
dt

= 0.

(5)

5

10

25

30

5

10

20

25

30

20

15

x
dn/dt

15

x

TDLDA transition

30

25

20

15

10

5

30

25

20

15

10

5

z

z

4

more sensitive because they are dominantly 1ph transi-
tions, and it is known that SIC has stronger eﬀects on
the single-particle states. A recent, detailed discussion of
how several other approximations for Exc inﬂuence the
dimer spectrum can be found in [15].

An intuitive understanding of the observed excita-
tions can be obtained by looking at “snapshots of the
density change”. In LCA, these are easily accessible since
the local currents, Eq. (4), obey the continuity equation

Thus, one only needs to numerically calculate and then
plot the divergence of jν to obtain a visualization of the
density change associated with the ν-th excitation at one
particular instant. This can be done separately for each
LCA eigenmode. As an analogon in TDLDA, we record
the time evolution of the density n(r, t) and evaluate the
Fourier components

˜n(r, ων ) =

n(r, t) exp(−iωνt)dt

(6)

Z

for the frequencies ων that are associated with particu-
lar excitations. Since this procedure is numerically more
demanding, we have restricted the TDLDA analysis to
a one dimensional section along the axis of symmetry,
integrating (6) over x and y coordinates.

The top left picture in Fig. 2 shows a contour plot
of the ground-state valence electron density of Na2 in
a plane containing the axis of symmetry. (The grid for
the calculation was larger than the shown part.) The
ionic cores are clearly visible since they repel the va-
lence electrons, leading to “holes” in the density. The
bottom left picture visualizes how this valence electron
density changes in time at the ﬁrst excitation. Dark col-
ors indicate a density increase, light colors a decrease.
Obviously, the electron density increases at one end of
the molecule and decreases at the other end. Thus, the
valence electrons are shifted predominantly along the
axis of symmetry. But the shift is not a uniform, sim-
ple translation of the density along the dipole ﬁeld (as it
would be obtained from the sumrule estimate [26]), but
the intrinsic structure of the cluster is impressed on and
reﬂected in the currents, leading to a shift “around” the
ionic cores. The second excitation in LCA is a (twofold
degenerate) x/y mode. Its density change (not shown
in Fig. 2) is predominantly perpendicular to the axis of
symmetry, as one also naively would expect. The third
LCA excitation, shown in the top right picture, is again
a z mode. The regions of strongest density variation are
shifted compared to the ﬁrst z mode, and the oscilla-
tion pattern shows a node at greater separation from the
ionic cores. This reﬂects the mathematical requirement
of orthogonality for the diﬀerent modes [6,17,27],

uν (r)uµ(r) n(r) d3r ∝ δµν .

(7)

Z

n

S. K¨ummel et al.

dn/dt

30

25

20

15

10

5

z

30

25

20

10

5

Z

15

5

10

20

25

30

15

x

-0.003

-0.001 0 0.001
n(z,w)

0.003

Fig. 2 “Snapshots” of the changes in valence electron den-
sity associated with particular excitations of Na2. Contour
plots show a plane containing the axis of symmetry of the
molecule. Unit for the axes is the numerical grid spacing, 0.8
a0. Top left: ground-state valence electron density n. Bot-
tom left: dn/dt associated with the ﬁrst excitation, i.e. ﬁrst
z-mode, in LCA. Top right: dn/dt associated with the third
excitation, i.e. second z-mode, in LCA. Shadings lighter than
the background gray indicate a density decrease, darker shad-
ings an increase. Bottom right: ˜n(r, ων) integrated over x and
y as a function of z for lowest (i.e., ν = 1) TDLDA excita-
tion. The pictures are in accordance with understanding the
excitations as density oscillations (see text).

Physically, the plots show that the observed electronic
transitions can be interpreted as diﬀerent eigenmodes,
i.e., intrinsic oscillation patterns of the valence electron
distribution. The TDLDA transition densities conﬁrm
this picture. The bottom right part of Fig. 2 shows Eq.
(6) evaluated for the frequency of the lowest mode. Since
x and y coordinate have been integrated over, some of
the ﬁner structure might have been smoothed out. But
it is clearly visible that also in TDLDA, the lowest exci-
tation is associated with a density increase at one end of
the molecule and a decrease at the other. The regions of
maximum density change are found very similar in LCA
and TDLDA. We have veriﬁed this also for the second
excitation that is not shown in Fig. 2. Thus, the simple
picture of excitations as density oscillations seems to be
remarkably close to the truth, even for the small Na2.

Fig. 3 shows the experimental low-temperature pho-
toabsorption spectrum [4] of Na+
5 and below the spec-
tra obtained in TDSIC, TDLDA, and LCA. Again, the
LCA results (bottom) are shown with a phenomenolog-
ical line broadening to make comparison with TDLDA
easier. Overall, the spectrum obtained in LCA is rather

Collectivity in the optical response of small metal clusters

5

S

Experiment

tation which originally was close to 1 eV and which has
given most of its strength to the dominant peak. The
comparable state in TDLDA is found at about 1.5 eV,
i.e., so close to the main peak that its strength is hardly
recognizable. Second, whereas the peak at 2.09 eV is
hardly changed by the averaged SIC, the peak which
in TDLDA was at 2.76 eV shifts to 2.86 eV in TDSIC
and appears broader since there is another transition
close by at 3.03 eV. This might contribute to explaining
why also in the experimental low temperature data, the
middle peak appears to be somewhat broader. Finally,
the last excitation again stays nearly unchanged at 3.57
eV. Thus, by shifting the peak which in our TDLDA
is found at 3.20 eV to lower energies, TDSIC leads to
a spectrum that is close to the experimental one. We
also tested whether this is only an indirect eﬀect, due
to slight rearrangements when the ionic geometry is re-
optimized on SIC level. However, this is not the case:
even when compared for exactly the same ionic struc-
ture, TDLDA and TDSIC spectra show noticeable dif-
ferences. We ﬁnd, in accordance with earlier investiga-
tions [12], that TDSIC leaves the main resonance peaks
basically unchanged, but it strongly modiﬁes the single-
particle energies, and thus the underlying 1ph excita-
tion spectrum. Our comparison with experimental data
shows that while TDLDA gives reasonable results for
the gross features of a spectrum, it can be inaccurate for
details. In the energy range and for the clusters stud-
ied here, the TDSIC description improves on TDLDA
deﬁciencies in details of the coupling to 1ph structures.

4 Conclusions

Our investigation of the photoabsorption spectra of two
small sodium clusters with three diﬀerent methods shed
new light on the theoretical methods as well as on the
understanding of the experiments. The local current ap-
proximation is based on a “collective” picture of exci-
tations. It exploits information that is contained in the
curvature of the ground-state energy functional, and its
success in the cases studied here demonstrates that the
functional, indeed, contains relevant information on the
excited states. Furthermore, LCA’s quantitatively accu-
rate description of the strong excitations and partial suc-
cess in describing higher lying ones shows that the con-
cept of “collectivity” and the detailed view in terms of
particle-hole excitations have more in common than ex-
pected, even for these small clusters. TDLDA has the
advantage of being robust throughout a wide range of
energies. It leads to a reliable description of overall fea-
tures of photoabsorption spectra. The comparison with
TDSIC showed, however, that details of the excitation
spectrum can be rather sensitive to self-interaction ef-
fects, even for a simple metal like sodium. Thus, treating
exchange and correlation on a level beyond LDA is very
desirable.

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
S

TDSIC

eV

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
S

TDLDA

eV

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
S

LCA

eV

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4

eV

Fig. 3 From top to bottom: Experimental
TDLDA and LCA photoabsorption spectrum S of Na+
arbitrary units against excitation energy in eV.

[4], TDSIC,
5 in

close to the experiment, which again is remarkable in
view of the small cluster size. However, our main focus
here is on the comparison between TDLDA and TDSIC.
TDLDA gives the energies and relative peak heights for
the two lower transitions close to the experimental ones.
But instead of one peak that is seen experimentally at
about 3.3 eV, TDLDA leads to two peaks at 3.20 eV
and 3.53 eV. A similar pattern was also found but not
explained in recent TDLDA calculations [28] that fo-
cused on the explanation of the observed linewidths. By
going over to TDSIC, we can further investigate the na-
ture of the double peak. The TDSIC spectrum in Fig.
3 shows noticeable diﬀerences to TDLDA. First, a small
subpeak is found at 0.92 eV. It is a relic of a 1ph exci-

6

S. K¨ummel et al.

16. For overviews see, e.g., E. K. U. Gross, C. A. Ullrich,
and U. J. Gossmann, in Density Functional Theory, edited
by E. K. U. Gross and R. M. Dreizler (NATO ASI series,
Plenum, New York 1994); E. K. U. Gross, J. F. Dobson,
and M. Petersilka, in Density Functional Theory, edited
by R. F. Nalewajski (Topics in Current Chemistry, Vol.
181, Springer, Berlin, 1996); for interesting recent caveats
see N.T. Maitra and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. A 63, 042501
(2001).

17. S. K¨ummel and M. Brack, Phys. Rev. A 64, 022506

18. J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 45, 13244

(2001).

(1992).

19. J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.

20. S. K¨ummel, J. Akola, and M. Manninen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

84, 3827 (2000).

21. At the heart of this matter is Eq. (27) of Ref. [17].
22. F. Calvayrac, P.-G. Reinhard, E. Suraud, C. Ullrich,

Phys. Rep. 337, 493 (2000).

23. K. Yabana, G.F. Bertsch, Z. Phys. D 42, 219 (1997).
24. F. Calvayrac, E. Suraud, P.-G. Reinhard, Ann. Phys.

254 (N.Y.), 125 (1997).

25. W. R. Fredrickson and W. W. Watson, Phys. Rev. 30,
429 (1927); presentation of experimental data adapted from
Ref. [13].

26. An extensive discussion of the sumrule approach can be
found, e.g., in M. Brack, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 667 (1993).
27. S. K¨ummel, Structural and Optical Properties of Sodium
Clusters studied in Density Functional Theory (Logos Ver-
lag, Berlin, 2000) 37.

28. M. Moseler, H. H¨akkinen, U. Landman, Phys. Rev. Lett.

87, 053401 (2001).

The success of density-functional methods to accu-
rately describe the excitation spectra of small clusters
in general, and the LCA in particular, leads to an alter-
native interpretation of the photoabsorption data. Our
results show that the traditional way of thinking of ex-
citations in small metal clusters as transitions between
distinct molecular states coincides nicely with the more
intuitive way of understanding them as collective elec-
tronic eigenmodes, i.e., oscillations of the valence elec-
tron density. Of course, these oscillations are neither ex-
actly like the Mie plasmon in a classical metal sphere
nor like the compressional bulk plasmon. Their frequen-
cies and oscillation patterns are determined by the clus-
ters’ intrinsic structure, which for small systems like the
ones studied here must of course be described quantum
mechanically. But if this is taken into account, the pic-
ture of density oscillations is well compatible with the
“molecular states” point of view, and with experimental
data.

Acknowledgements S.K. acknowledges discussions with M.
Brack and ﬁnancial support from the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft under an Emmy-Noether grant.

References

1. C. R. C. Wang, S. Pollack, D. Cameron, and M. M.
Kappes, Chem. Phys. Lett. 166, 26 (1990); J. Chem. Phys.
93, 3787 (1990).

2. K. Selby, V. Kresin, J. Masui, M. Vollmer, W. A. de Heer,
A. Scheidemann, and W. D. Knight, Phys. Rev. B 43, 4565
(1991).

3. For a recent example, see e.g. T. Doppner, S. Teuber, M.
Schumacher, J. Tiggesbaumker, K.H. Meiwes-Broer, Appl.
Phys. B 71, 357 (2000).

4. C. Ellert, M. Schmidt, C. Schmitt, T. Reiners, and H.
Haberland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1731 (1995); M. Schmidt
and H. Haberland, Eur. Phys. J. D 6, 109 (1999).

5. W. Ekardt, Phys. Rev. B 31, 6360 (1985); W. Ekardt and

Z. Penzar, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1322 (1991).
6. M. Brack, Phys. Rev. B 39, 3533 (1989).
7. P.-G. Reinhard, M. Brack and O. Genzken, Phys. Rev. A

41, 5568 (1990).

51, 1327 (1995).

8. M. Madjet, C. Guet, and W. R. Johnson, Phys. Rev. A

9. U. Saalmann and R. Schmidt, Z. Phys. D 38, 153 (1996).
10. A. Rubio, J. A. Alonso, X. Blase, L. C. Balb´as, and S. G.
Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 247 (1996); M.A.L. Marques,
A. Castro, and A. Rubio, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 3006 (2001).
11. V. Bonaˇcic-Kouteck´y, J. Pittner, C. Fuchs, P. Fantucci,
M. F. Guest, and J. Kouteck´y, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 1427
(1996).

12. C. A. Ullrich, P.-G. Reinhard, and E. Suraud, Phys. Rev.

13. I. Vasiliev, S. ¨O˘g¨ut, and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev.

14. S. K¨ummel, M. Brack, and P.-G. Reinhard, Phys. Rev.

15. S. J. A. Gisbergen, J. M. Pacheco, and E. J. Baerends,

Phys. Rev. A 63 062301 (2001).

A 62, 053202 (2000).

Lett. 82, 1919 (1999).

B 62, 7602 (2000).

