1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

Ilia A Solov’yov
†

, Andrey V Solov’yov
‡

§
Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit¨at, 60054
Frankfurt am Main, Germany

and Walter Greiner

Abstract. We have investigated structure and properties of small metal clusters
using all-electron ab initio theoretical methods based on the Hartree-Fock
approximation and density functional theory, perturbation theory and compared
results of our calculations with the available experimental data and the results of
other theoretical works. We have systematically calculated the optimized geometries
of neutral and singly charged sodium clusters having up to 20 atoms, their multipole
moments (dipole and quadrupole), static polarizabilities, binding energies per atom,
ionization potentials and frequencies of normal vibration modes. Our calculations
demonstrate the great role of many-electron correlations in the formation of electronic
and ionic structure of small metal clusters and form a good basis for further detailed
study of their dynamic properties, as well as structure and properties of other atomic
cluster systems.

1. Introduction

Atomic clusters and small nanoparticles have been recognized as new physical objects
with their own properties relatively recently. This became clear after such experimental
successes as the discovery of electron shell structure in metal clusters [1], observation
of plasmon resonances in metal clusters [2–4] and fullerenes [5, 6], formation of singly
and doubly charged negative cluster ions [7] and many more others. The novelty of
cluster physics is also greatly connected with the fact that cluster properties explain the
transition from single atoms or molecules to solid state. Comprehensive survey of the
ﬁeld can be found in review papers and books, see e.g. [8–14].

There are many diﬀerent types of clusters, such as metallic clusters, fullerenes,
molecular clusters, semiconductor clusters, organic clusters, quantum dots, positively
and negatively charged clusters, which all have their own features and properties. In
this paper we focus on the detailed systematic study of the structure and properties
of small metal clusters and in particular sodium clusters using ab initio all-electron
many-body theory methods.

E-mail:

solovyov@rpro.ioﬀe.rssi.ru; on leave from St.Petersburg State Technical University,

†
Politechnicheskaya 29, 195251 St.Petersburg, Russia

E-mail: solovyov@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de; on leave from A.F.Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute,

‡
Russian Academy of Sciences, Politechnicheskaya 26, St. Petersburg 194021, Russia

E-mail: greiner@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de

§

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

2

So far, for sodium clusters, systematic calculations of cluster properties on the same
level of theory as in our present work (i.e. all electron ab initio) have been performed
10 [13, 15–19], where N is a number of atoms in a cluster.
only for clusters with N
In our work we extend this limit up to N
20. Note that most of the cited papers
are focused on the investigation of neutral cluster properties rather than ions. In our
present work we perform systematic comparative analysis of properties of neutral and
singly charged sodium clusters in the speciﬁed size range.

≤

≤

During the last decade,

there were performed numerous experimental and
theoretical investigations of the properties of small metal clusters as well as the processes
with their involvement. Here we are not able to review even all essential results
obtained in the ﬁeld and only refer to those, which are related the most closely to
the subject of our paper. In [1], it was experimentally proved that metal clusters have
the shell electronic structure and the magic cluster numbers have been determined by
observation of the sodium cluster abundances in mass spectra. Experimental study
of electronic structure and properties of small metal clusters have been performed
in [20, 21] (for review also see [8, 10, 11, 13, 14]). In [20], there have been measured the
ionisation potentials for a sequence of small neutral and positively charged sodium metal
clusters, which independently proved their shell structure. The dipole polarizabilities
of sodium clusters have been experimentally determined in [21]. Dissociation energies
of neutral and positively charged small sodium and potassium metal clusters have been
measured in [22–24]. Dynamical properties of clusters have been studied by means of
photon, electron and ion scattering. These methods are the traditional tools for probing
properties and internal structure of various physical objects. Using these methods,
for example, plasmon excitations in metal clusters [2, 25] and fullerenes [6] have been
observed (for review also see [8, 10]).

Metal clusters have also been studied theoretically. Structural properties of small
metal clusters have been widely investigated using quantum chemistry methods. Here
we refer to the papers [15–18, 26–29], in which optimized geometries, binding energies,
ionization potentials, electron structure and electron transport properties of small
In these papers the systematic
lithium and sodium clusters have been calculated.
analysis of the cluster properties has been limited by cluster sizes N
In the
present paper we extend this limit up to N
20 and perform systematic analysis of
various cluster characteristics both for neutral clusters and singly charged cluster ions.
In a last few years, a number of papers have been devoted to the calculation of
dipole static polarizabilities of neutral sodium and lithium clusters [19,30–33]. Note that
most of these studies have been performed within the cluster size range N
20. The
results of diﬀerent theoretical approaches have been compared with the experimental
data from [21]. However, only in [19], calculations of the cluster geometries and
polarizabilities have been performed on the same level of theory (i.e. all electron ab
initio) as in our work and were limited by N

≤
Alternatively, the jellium model for metal clusters was suggested. This model
explains well enough the shell structure of metal clusters and their essential dynamic

10.

≤

≤

≤

8.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

3

properties, such as plasmon excitations. Initially, jellium calculations for metal clusters
were based on the density functional formalism with the use of pseudopotentials for
the description of electron relaxation eﬀects and lattice structure [34]. Fully self-
consistent calculations for spherical jellium metal clusters have been performed within
the framework of the spin-density-functional method [35] and the Kohn-Sham formalism
for the self-consistent determination of electron wave functions [36, 37]. The Hartree-
Fock scheme for the self-consistent determination of the electron wave functions of
spherical jellium metal clusters was also introduced later in [38, 39]. This approach
was generalized for axially deformed cluster systems in [40]. Dynamical jellium model
for metal clusters, which treats simultaneously collective vibrational modes (volume
vibrations, i.e. breathing, plus shape vibrations) of the ionic jellium background in a
cluster, the quantized electron motion and interaction between the electronic and ionic
subsystems was developed in [41, 42].

The jellium model provides a very useful basis for studying various collision
processes, such as photabsorption [43], photoionization [5, 44, 45], elastic [46, 47] and
inelastic scattering [47–50], electron attachment [51, 52], photon emission [53, 54] and
others, involving metal clusters,. On the basis of the jellium model one can develop
ab initio many-body theories, such as the random phase approximation with exchange
or the Dyson equation method and eﬀectively solve many-electron correlation problem
even for relatatively large cluster systems containing up to 100 atoms or even more.
Review of these methods in their application to the electron scattering of metal clusters
one can ﬁnd in [55]. As elucidated in the papers cited above, many-electron correlations
are quite essential for the correct description of various characteristics of the cluster
systems.

In spite of the fact that the jellium model with all its modiﬁcations is rather
successful in explaining numerous phenomena involving metal clusters it obviously has
its limits, because this model does not take into account the detailed ionic structure of
clusters. The correspondence between predictions of the jellium model and the results of
more advanced quantum chemistry calculations have not been performed in a systematic
way so far. Partially, this is connected with the fact that quantum chemistry calculations
are usually limited by small sizes of clusters, while the jellium model becomes adequate
for larger cluster systems. Knowledge of the ranges of applicability of the jellium model
and the level of its accuracy is important, because the jellium model often gives much
more eﬃcient theoretical basis particularly, when dealing with larger cluster systems.

In this paper we have undertaken detailed systematic theoretical study of structure
and properties of sodium clusters beyond the jellium model using all-electron ab
initio theoretical methods based on the Hartree-Fock approximation, density functional
theory and perturbation theory,
for clusters that size is large enough for jellium
calculations. Namely, we have calculated optimized geometries of neutral and singly-
charged sodium clusters consisting of up to 20 atoms, their multipole moments (dipole
and quadrupole), static polarizabilities, binding energies per atom, ionization potentials
and frequencies of normal vibration modes. We compare results of our calculations with

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

4

the available experimental data, results of other theoretical works performed both within
the framework of the jellium model and beyond, using quantum chemistry methods, and
elucidate the level of accuracy of diﬀerent theoretical approaches. Also, we demonstrate
the great role of many-electron correlations in the formation of structure and properties
of small metal clusters. Our results form a good basis for the detailed study of dynamic
properties of small metal clusters as well as structure and properties of other atomic
cluster systems.

Our calculations elucidate the level of accuracy of various theoretical schemes for
the treatment of electronic structure in metal clusters, which is important to know and
is not obvious in advance due to complexity of theoretical methods involved. Some
characteristics (dipole and quadrupole moments or spectra of normal vibration modes,
for example), which we have calculated in this paper are new and were not studied
before, at least according to our knowledge. These characteristics, however, might be,
important, for instance, when considering dynamics of a cluster beam in an external
non-homogeneous electric or magnetic ﬁeld. Indeed, namely, cluster multipole moments
should be responsible for the cluster isomers separation in the non-homogeneous external
ﬁelds. We analyse the connection between the principal values of the cluster quadrupole
moments tensor and the cluster shape (oblate, prolate or triaxially deformed).

The frequencies of the surface and volume vibration modes have been determined
in the spectra of the cluster normal vibration frequencies and their correspondence to
the predictions of the dynamical jellium model [41, 42] was established.

Our calculations have been performed with the use of the Gaussian 98 software
= 1

package [56]. We have used the atomic system of units in this paper, ~ = me =
unless other units are not indicated.

e
|

|

2. Theoretical methods

In this work we are studying structure and properties of small sodium clusters on the
basis of all-electron ab initio many-body theory methods. We calculate the optimized
20 atoms, where N is the number of atoms
geometries of clusters consisting of up to N
in the cluster. For the sequence of clusters with N
20, we determine size dependence
of the cluster ionization potentials, total energies, multipole moments (dipole and
quadrupole), bonding distances and dipole polarizabilities. We also calculated and
analyze vibration spectra of the clusters.

≤

≤

We have done these calculations using diﬀerent theoretical schemes. We have
calculated cluster characteristics in the all-electron Hartree-Fock approximation. This
approximation does not take into account many-electron correlations in the system,
which turn out to play essential role in the formation of clusters properties. Therefore,
we also calculate all the characteristics using post Hartree-Fock theories accounting
for many-electron correlations. Namely, this was done in the Møller and Plesset
perturbation theory of the second and the fourth order and the three parameter
Becke’s gradient-corrected exchange functional with the gradient-corrected correlation

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

5

functional of Lee, Yang and Parr.

Below, we discuss theoretical methods used in our work. The aim of this discussion
is to present essential ideas of the methods and give the necessary references, rather
than to describe them in detail.

2.1. Hartree-Fock method (HF)

In the Hartree-Fock approximation, the many-electron wave function of a cluster is
expressed as antisymmetrized product of the single-electron wave functions, ψi, of cluster
electrons, which are also often called molecular orbitals. The Hartree-Fock equation for
the determination of the molecular orbitals ψi reads as (see e.g. [57]):

∆/2 + Uions + UHF ) ψi = εiψi.

(

−

Here, the ﬁrst term represents the kinetic energy of the i-th electron, and Uions describes
its attraction to the ions in the cluster. The Hartree-Fock potential UHF represents the
Coulomb and the exchange interaction of the electron i with other electrons in the
cluster, εi is the single electron energy.

In Gaussian 98,

the molecular orbitals, ψi, are approximated by a linear
combination of a pre-deﬁned set of single-electron functions, χµ, known as basis
functions. This expansion reads as follows:

ψi =

cµiχµ,

N

Xµ=1

χµ =

dµpgp,

Xp

where coeﬃcients cµi are the molecular orbital expansion coeﬃcients, N is the number
of basis functions, which are chosen to be normalized.

The basis functions χµ are deﬁned as linear combinations of primitive gaussians:

where dµp are ﬁxed constants within a given basis set, the primitive gaussians, gp =
g(α, r), are the gaussian-type atomic functions having the following form:

g(α, r) = cxnymzle−αr2

Here, c is the normalization constant. The choice of the integers n, m and l deﬁnes the
type of the primitive gaussian function: s, p, d or f (for details see [58]).

Substituting these expansions in the Hartree-Fock equations (1), one can rewrite

them in the form, known also as the Roothaan and Hall equations:

Being written in the matrix form, this equation reads as:

N

Xν=1

(Hµν −

εiSµν)cνi = 0

HC = SCε,

µ = 1, 2, ..., N

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

6

where each element is a matrix. Here, ε is a diagonal matrix of orbital energies, each of its
elements εi is the single-electron energy of the molecular orbital ψi, H is the Hamiltonian
matrix as it follows from (1), S is the overlap matrix, describing the overlap between
orbitals. For more details regarding this formalism see [58].

Equations (6) are none linear and must be solved iteratively. The procedure which

does so is called the Self-Consistent Field (SCF) method.

The above written equations consider the restricted Hartree-Fock method. For the
open shell systems, the unrestricted Hartree-Fock method has to be used. In this case,
the alpha and beta electrons with spins up and down are assigned to diﬀerent orbitals,
resulting in two sets of molecular orbital expansion coeﬃcients:

ψα

i =

cα
µiχµ

ψβ

i =

cβ
µiχµ,

N

Xµ=1
N

Xµ=1

(7)

(8)

The two sets of coeﬃcients result in two sets of the Hamiltonian matrices and the

two sets of orbitals.

2.2. Møller-Plesset perturbation theory method (MPn)

The Hartree-Fock theory provides an inadequate treatment of electrons motion within
a molecular system, because it does not properly treat many-electron correlations. The
many electron correlations can be accounted for using diﬀerent methods. The most
straightforward way for achieving this goal is based on the perturbation theory. Indeed,
the total Hamiltonian, H, of the cluster can be divided into two parts

H = H0 + V

Here H0 is the Hamiltonian corresponding to the Hartree-Fock level of theory and V is
the residual interelectron interaction, which can be treated as a small perturbation.

Considering V as a small perturbation one can construct the solution of the
Schr¨odinger equation for many-electron system in an arbitrary order of the perturbation
theory. The perturbation theory of this type is well known since the work by Møller-
Plesset [59] and can be found in numerous textbooks on quantum mechanics (see
e.g. [60]).

Below we refer to this theoretical method as to the Møller-Plesset perturbation
theory [59] of the second or forth order, MP2 or MP4. Indices here indicate the order
of the perturbation theory.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

7

2.3. Density functional methods (B3LYP)

The density functional theory (DFT) is based upon a strategy of modelling electron
correlation via general functionals of the electron density. Within the DFT one has to
solve the Kohn-Sham equations, which read as (see e.g. [8, 9, 11–14])

ˆp2
2

(cid:18)

+ Uions + VH + Vxc(cid:19)

ψi = εiψi,

where the ﬁrst term represents the kinetic energy of the i-th electron, and Uions describes
its attraction to the ions in the cluster, VH is the Hartree part of the interelectronic
interaction:

ρ(~r ′)
~r ′
~r
|
|
and ρ(~r ′) is the electron density:

VH(~r) =

−

Z

d~r ′ ,

ρ(~r) =

N

Xν=1 |

ψi(~r)

2

,

|

where Vxc is the local exchange-correlation potential, ψi are the electronic orbitals and
N is the number of electrons in the cluster.

The exchange-correlation potential is deﬁned as the functional derivative of the

exchange-correlation energy functional:

The approximate functionals employed by DFT methods partition the exchange-

correlation energy into two parts, referred to as exchange and correlation parts:

Vxc =

δExc[ρ]
δρ(~r)

,

Exc[ρ] = Ex(ρ) + Ec(ρ)

Physically, these two terms correspond to same-spin and mixed-spin interactions,
respectively. Both parts are the functionals of the electron density, which can be of
two distinct types: either local functional depending on only the electron density ρ or
gradient-corrected functionals depending on both ρ and its gradient,

ρ.

In literature, there is a variety of exchange correlation functionals. Below, we refer

∇

only to those, which are related to the calculation performed in this work.

The local exchange functional is virtually always deﬁned as follows:

ELDA
x

=

3
2

(

3
4π

−

)1/3

ρ4/3d3r

Z

This form was developed to reproduce the exchange energy of a uniform electron
gas. By itself, however, it is not suﬃcient for the adequate description of atomic clusters.
The gradient-corrected exchange functional introduced by Becke [61] and based on

the LDA exchange functional reads as:

EB88

x = ELDA

x −

γ

Z

ρ4/3x2
1 + 6γsinh−1x

d3r

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

8

where x=ρ−4/3
|∇
energies of the noble gas atoms.

ρ
|

and γ = 0.0042 is a parameter chosen to ﬁt the known exchange

Analogously to the above written exchange functionals, there are local and gradient-
corrected correlation functionals, for example, those introduced by Perdew and Wang
[62] or by Lee, Yang and Parr [63]. Their explicit expressions are somewhat lengthy and
thus we do not present them here and refer to the original papers.

In the pure DFT, an exchange functional usually pairs with a correlation functional.
For example, the well-known BLYP functional pairs Becke’s gradient-corrected exchange
functional (15) with the gradient-corrected correlation functional of Lee, Yang and
Parr [63].

In spite of the success of the pure DFT theory in many cases, one has to admit
that the Hartree-Fock theory accounts for the electron exchange the most naturally
and precisely. Thus, Becke has suggested [61] functionals which include a mixture of
Hartree-Fock and DFT exchange along with DFT correlations, conceptually deﬁning
Exc as:

Emix

xc = cHF EHF

x + cDF T EDF T

xc

,

where cHF and cDF T are constants. Following this idea, a Becke-type three parameter
functional can be deﬁned as follows:

EB3LY P
xc

= ELDA
x
+ EV W N 3
c

+ c0(EHF

x −
+ cc(ELY P
c

ELDA

X ) + cx(EB88
EV W N 3
)

x −

c

ELDA
x

) +

−
Here, c0 = 0.2, cx = 0.72 and cc = 0.81 are constants, which were deﬁned by
ﬁtting to the atomization energies, ionization potentials, proton aﬃnities and ﬁrst-row
atomic energies [58]. ELDA
is
the functional corresponding to Hartree-Fock equations (1). The explicit form for the
correlation functional EV W N 3
as well as for gradient-corrected correlation functional of
Lee, Yang and Parr, ELY P
, one can ﬁnd in [64] and [63] correspondingly. Note that
c
instead of EV W N 3
and ELY P
in (17) one can also use the Perdew and Wang correlation
functional [62].

are deﬁned in (14) and (15) respectively. EHF

and EB88

x

x

x

c

c

c

2.4. Geometry optimization

The cluster geometries, which we have calculated in our work, have been determined
using the geometry optimization procedure. This procedure implies the calculation
of the multidimensional potential energy surface for a cluster and then ﬁnding local
minima on this surface. The key point for this search is ﬁxing the starting geometry of
the cluster, which could converge during the calculation to the local or global minimum.
There is no unique way in achieving this goal with Gaussian 98.

In our calculations, we have created the starting geometries empirically, often
assuming certain cluster symmetries. Note, that during the optimization process the

(16)

(17)

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

9

geometry of the cluster as well as its initial symmetry sometimes change dramatically.
All the characteristics of clusters, which we have calculated and presented in next
section, are obtained for the clusters with optimized geometry.

In our calculations, we have made no assumptions on the core electrons in the
optimized clusters, which means that all electrons available in the system, have been
taken into account, when computing potential energy surface. For clusters with N > 10,
this process becomes rather computer time demanding. Thus, in this work we have
limited our calculations by clusters consisting up to N

20.

≤

2.5. Normal vibrations

Knowledge of the potential energy surface in the vicinity of a local minimum, allows
one easily to determine corresponding normal vibration modes of the system. We have
performed such calculation and determined the vibration energy spectrum for a number
of clusters. Particular attention in this calculation has been paid to the identiﬁcation
of the breathing and the surface vibration modes and comparison their frequencies with
those predicted in [41, 42] for spherical sodium clusters on the basis of the dynamical
jellium model.

3. Results of calculations and discussion

In this section we present the results of calculations performed with the use of
methods described above. We have calculated the optimized geometries of neutral and
singly charged sodium clusters consisting of up to 20 atoms, their multipole moments
(dipole and quadrupole), static polarizabilities, binding energies per atom, ionization
potentials and frequencies of the normal vibration modes. We compare results of our
calculations with the available experimental data and the results of other theoretical
works performed both within the framework of the jellium model and beyond, using
quantum chemistry methods and establish the level of accuracy of diﬀerent theoretical
approaches. Particular attention is paid to the clusters in the range 10 < N < 20,
because some characteristics of the clusters in this size range have been calculated on
the ab initio basis in our paper for the ﬁrst time. Also, we demonstrate the great role of
many-electron correlations in the formation of structure and properties of small metal
clusters.

3.1. Geometry optimization of Nan and Na+

n clusters

Results of the cluster geometry optimization for neutral and singly charged sodium
clusters consisting of up to 20 atoms shown in ﬁgures 1 and 2 respectively. The cluster
geometries have been determined using the methodology described in section 2. Namely,
the optimization of the cluster geometries has been performed with the use of B3LY P
and MP2 methods.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

10

≤

For clusters with N

6, we preferably used the MP2 method. This method leads
to the results, which are in a reasonable agreement with those derived by other methods
(see e.g. [16, 17]). For example, the side bond length in the rhomboidal Na4 cluster
calculated in [16] by the all-electron Hartree-Fock method is equal to 3.74 ˚A, while in
our case it is equal to 3.56 ˚A. The smaller diagonal value for Na4 is equal to 3.25 ˚A
in [16], while we determine it as 3.18 ˚A.

The MP2 method becomes more and more computer time demanding with the
growth cluster size. This happens due to increase in a number of integrals involved in
the computations. It turns out that for larger cluster systems the B3LY P method is
more eﬃcient. The accuracy of the B3LY P method is comparable with the accuracy
of the MP2 method, as it is clear from the comparison of the B3LY P and MP2 cluster
geometries with those computed in [16] by the conﬁguration interaction method.

Clusters of a certain size can possess various isomer forms, those number grows
dramatically with increasing cluster size. We illustrate the situation, and calculate
several isomers of the the Na3, Na6, Na10, Na11 and Na20 clusters. They all are
presented in ﬁgure 1. Note, that the linear and equilateral triangular Na3 isomers,
have not been described in the earlier papers [15–17] (see also [11, 13, 14]), in which
isosceles triangular isomers were considered. The comparison of properties (dipole and
quadrupole moments, total energies, bonding distances) of these clusters will be given
below.

On the example of the Na4 cluster, we demonstrate how the multiplicity of an
electronic state of the system can inﬂuence its geometry. Figure 1 shows that the Na4
cluster has the rhomboidal geometry corresponding to the D2h point symmetry group,
if the multiplicity of the cluster is equal to 1, while, for the multiplicity being equal to 3,
the cluster has the quadratic geometry characterised by the D4h point symmetry group.
5 have the plane structure, while for N = 6 both plane
and spatial isomers are possible. This feature is consistent with the jellium picture and
can be explained from the minimization principle for the cluster surface. Indeed, the
surface of small plane cluster isomers is less in comparison with the surface of their
possible spatial forms.

Sodium clusters with N

≤

Comparison of geometries of the neutral and singly-charged clusters presented in
ﬁgures 1 and 2 shows their signiﬁcant diﬀerence. For smaller sizes (N
8), singly-
charged and neutral clusters have sometimes diﬀerent point symmetry groups and
bonding distances (see images of the Na4, Na5, Na6 and Na8 clusters and their ions).
The alteration in the geometry of cluster ions occurs due to the excessive positive charge
available in the system. The structural change of cluster ions becomes less profound with
increasing cluster size, see clusters with N
10, because the excessive positive charge in
≥
this case turns out to be insuﬃcient to produce substantial change in a massive cluster,
although sometimes (compare Na15 and Na+
15) noticeable change in the cluster geometry
is also possible.

≤

The striking diﬀerence in geometries of small singly charged and neutral clusters
It is natural to assume that with

is closely linked to the problem of cluster ﬁssion.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

11

increasing cluster charge small clusters should become unstable and fragment into two
parts, while for larger cluster sizes one can expect quasi-stable conﬁgurations, which
should decay via the ﬁssion process. Calculation of such conﬁgurations is an interesting
task, because it may provide the essential
information on the predominant ﬁssion
channels in the system. We do not perform such an analysis in our work, but draw
attention that geometries of the cluster ions, like Na+
15, lead to
the obvious hints on the possible fragmentation channels in these cluster systems.

6 and Na+

5 , Na+

4 , Na+

Figure 1 shows that the clusters Na8 and Na20 have the higher point symmetry
group Td as compared to the other clusters. This result is in a qualitative agreement with
the jellium model. According to the jellium model [36–40], clusters with closed shells
of delocalized electrons have the spherical shape, while clusters with opened electron
shells are deformed. The jellium model predicts spherical shapes for the clusters with
the magic numbers N = 8, 20, 34, 40..., having respectively the following electronic shells
ﬁlled: 1s21p6, 1d102s2, 1f 14, 2p6, ...,.

We have also found the Td symmetry group isomer for the Na10 cluster. However,
this cluster isomer is not the lowest energy isomer of Na10 (see table A1). The similar
situation occurs in the jellium model, where the 1s21p6, 2s2 closed shell electronic
conﬁguration does not minimize the cluster total energy.

Note also, that both the LDA and HF jellium models predict some deviation from
sphericity for the Na18 cluster [40] having 1d subshell ﬁlled, which is a result of electron
conﬁgurations mixing. This fact is also in a qualitative agreement with the results of
our ab initio calculations. The point group symmetry of the Na18 cluster, C5v, is lower
than Td, which is the point symmetry group for the Na8 and Na20 clusters, and even
lower than the point symmetry group for some opened shell clusters, like Na7 and Na19,
having the point symmetry group D5h.

Note that there are some clusters possessing relatively low point symmetry group,
that nevertheless is quite close to the higher point symmetry group. The higher
symmetry breaking is not occasional and can be explained via the Jahn-Teller eﬀect [60].
Such situation occurs, for example, in the Na9 and Na11 clusters, which posses the C2v
point symmetry group, but their geometry is close to the geometry of the D3h group.

The jellium prediction on the sphericity of the magic clusters works not so well
for cluster ions. Indeed, the geometry and the point symmetry group of Na+
9 does not
allow one to state the higher sphericity of this cluster as compared to its neighbours.
The analysis of the quadrupole moments and cluster deformations performed below
demonstrates this conclusion quite clearly. This happens because forces emerging in
the cluster during its transition from neutral to singly charged state turns out to be
insuﬃcient to rearrange the cluster geometry from deformed to spherical one.

We have found two isomers of the Na20 cluster, which have rather regular structure
and diﬀer signiﬁcantly one from another. The cluster geometries presented in ﬁgure
1 allow one to assume that there exist at least two independent paths of the cluster

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

12

structure formation. Indeed, the following isomers

NaC5v

6 →

Na7

NaC4v

10 →

→

Na13

Na15

Na16

Na17

Na18

Na19

→

→

→

→

→

→

NaC2v
20

probably belong to the chain leading to the formation of the C2v isomer of the Na20
cluster, while the clusters

NaD3h

6 →

Na8

Na9

→

NaTd

10 →

NaC1

11 →

→

Na12

Na14

→

→

NaTd
20

form the path on which the Td isomer of the Na20 cluster is formed. Figure 1 clearly
shows the steps of the cluster formation process along these two paths. Although, for
most of N, we have calculated isomers belonging to one path or another, it is natural
to assume that the two diﬀerent type of geometries exist for all N, similar to how
it happens for Na6 and Na20 clusters. For clusters smaller than Na6, one can not
distinguish the two paths clearly enough as it is seen from ﬁgure 1. Conclusions made
for neutral clusters regarding the growing process are applicable to the great extent to
singly charged cluster ions as it is clear from ﬁgure 2, although cluster ions geometries
sometimes diﬀer substantially from their neutral prototypes.

Cluster geometries allow one easily to compute and analyze the average bonding
distance as a function of cluster size. The result of this analysis for neutral and singly
charged sodium clusters is presented in ﬁgures 3 and 4. These ﬁgures show how the
average bonding distance converge to the bulk limit indicated in the ﬁgures by horizontal
lines. When calculating the average bonding distance in a cluster, interatomic distances
smaller than 4.1 ˚A have only been considered. This upper limit on the interatomic
distances has been chosen as a distance, which is 10 per cent larger than to the bcc-
lattice nearest neighbour distance in the bulk sodium.

i

h

i

h

R

R

Figures 3 and 4 show that the dependence of the average bonding distance,

, on
cluster size is non-monotonous. For neutral clusters, one can see odd-even oscillations
atop its systematic growth and approaching the bulk limit. These features
of
have the quantum origin and can be explained by the delocalization of valence atomic
electrons. Indeed, the odd-even oscillations arise due to the spin paring of the delocalised
electrons. This type of behaviour is also typical for other cluster characteristics and will
be discussed below in more detail. Relatively large increase of the average distance, seen
for small sodium cluster ions with N
9, is also qualitatively clear. It can be explained
by the Coulomb instability developing in the cluster with increasing its ionization rate.
Cluster shape can be characterized by the oblate, prolate or triaxial deformation.
The prolate deformation of the cluster is characterized by larger distortion of the ionic
In
charge distribution along z-axis as compared to distortions along x- and y axes.
the oblate deformation case the situation is opposite. Deformations of the ionic charge
distribution in x- and y- directions are larger than in z-direction.
In both cases the
deformations along x- and y- directions are equal. The triaxial shape deformation is
characterized by unequal distortions of the ionic charge distribution along x-, y- and z-
directions. Often, however, two of three deformations are close to each other and this

≤

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

13

allows one to discuss the triaxially deformed prolate or oblate cases. Knowledge of the
type of the cluster deformation is quite useful for the comparison with the jellium model
results and the analysis of the metal cluster photon absorption spectra by metal clusters
(see [13]).

P

The type of cluster deformation can be easily determined by the principle values of
xixj. Here, the summation is performed over all ions in the system.
the tensor Rij =
The principle values of this tensor Rxx, Ryy and Rzz deﬁne the dimensions Rx, Ry and
Rz of the ionic charge distribution in the cluster along the principle axes x, y and z via
Rzz/N. Note that tensor
the relations: Rx =
p
Rij is closely connected with the cluster moment of inertia tensor and the quadrupole
moment tensor of the ionic distribution.

Ryy/N and Rz =

Rxx/N, Ry =

p

p

In ﬁgures 5 and 6 we present the principle values Rxx, Ryy and Rzz for a sequence of
neutral and singly charged clusters respectively. Figures 5 and 6 demonstrate how the
cluster deformation change as a function of cluster size. Figure 5 shows that all three
principle values are equal for the tetrahedron group isomers of the magic clusters Na8
and Na20. This feature is in the qualitative agreement with the jellium model, which
predicts spherical shapes for the magic clusters. In many cases two of three principal
values of Rij are equal or nearly equal. Using the deﬁnition of the prolate and oblate
cluster distortions given above and ﬁgures 5 and 6, one can easily determine the type of
cluster deformation. For example, clusters Na2, Na10, Na18 and Na19 have the prolate
deformation along z-principle axis, because the following condition Rxx = Ryy < Rzz is
fulﬁlled. The clusters Na6 and Na7 possess the prolate deformation because in this case
Rxx = Ryy > Rzz. Figures 5 and 6 show that most of clusters are triaxially deformed.
However, it is often possible to assign clusters triaxially deformed prolate or oblate
shape, because two of three principle values are close to each other. Thus, for instance,
Na4, Na15 are triaxialy prolate clusters, while Na14 is a triaxialy oblate one. Figures 5
and 6 also show the relative value of prolate and oblate deformations in various clusters.
One can deﬁne a tensor analogous to Rij, but for electrons. We do not plot the
principle values of such a tensor because they are very close in absolute value to the
principle values shown in ﬁgures 5 and 6 and could be traced from the principle values
of the cluster total quadrupole moment tensor considered below in subsection 3.4.

3.2. Binding energy per atom for small neutral and singly-charged sodium clusters.

The binding energy per atom for small neutral and singly-charged sodium clusters is
deﬁned as follows:

Eb/N = E1
E+
b /N =

−
(N

EN /N

1)E1 + E+

E+
N

/N,

1 −

−

(cid:1)

where EN and E+
respectively. E1 and E+

(cid:0)

N are the energies of a neutral and singly-charged N-atomic cluster

1 are the energies of a single sodium atom and an ion.

(18)

(19)

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

14

≤

Figures 7 and 8 show the dependence of the binding energy per atom for neutral and
singly-charged clusters as a function of cluster size. The energies of clusters have been
computed using the B3LY P , MP4 and HF methods described in section 2. For clusters
with N
8, computations of the energies have been performed by the three methods
for the sake of comparison. We wanted to compare the methods by their accuracy and
computation eﬃciency. The results of our calculations have also been compared with
those derived by the conﬁguration interaction (CI) method in [15–17]). Figures 7 and
8 demonstrate that the results of the MP4 and B3LY P methods are in a reasonable
agreement with each other and with the CI results. The HF points signiﬁcantly diﬀer
from the MP4, B3LY P and CI ones, which demonstrates the importance of many-
electron correlations, taken into account in the MP4, B3LY P and CI methods and
omitted in the HF approximation. Note that the energy of Na2, if computed in the
pure HF approximation, is close to zero, which means that bonding in this molecule
takes place mainly due to many-electron correlations.

The energies of clusters larger than Na8 and Na+

8 have been computed by the
B3LY P method only, because this method is more eﬃcient than MP4 and the accuracy
of both methods is comparable.

Figures 7 and 8 demonstrate the even-odd oscillation behaviour in the dependence
Indeed, for singly charged clusters, odd numbers
of binding energy on cluster size.
corresponding to the singlet multiplicity have higher energies as compared to their even
neighbours. Analogous situation takes place for neutral clusters.
In this case, even
cluster numbers have higher binding energies as compared to their odd neighbours. Note
that for neutral clusters this phenomenon occurs simultaneously with slight systematic
growth of the binding energies per atom with increasing cluster size.

Figures 7 and 8 also show that the binging energy per atom in the magic neutral
clusters, Na8 and Na20, is a little higher as compared to other clusters of the close size.
The similar situation takes place for the Na+
9 cluster in the ionic case. This feature
can be qualitatively understood on the basis of the jellium model: increasing the magic
clusters binding energy takes place due to the delocalised electrons shell closure. Note
that the binding energy per atom for the magic Na+
21 turns out to be smaller than
that for the neighbouring cluster ions. This happens because this particular cluster ion
isomer is characterized by the Oh point symmetry group. Cluster isomers based on this
point symmetry group usually have the lower binding energy per atom as compared to
the isomers based on the icosahedron point symmetry group like those with N
13
shown in ﬁgures 1 and 2.

≥

Tables A1 and A2 given in Appendix A provide the accurate values of the cluster
total energies calculated by MP4, B3LY P and HF methods. For neutral clusters with
N
8, we also present the cluster energies calculated in [16] by the CI method. The
values given in these tables have been used to plot ﬁgures 7 and 8. For some clusters,
energies of diﬀerent symmetry isomers are also given in the tables.

≤

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

15

3.3. Ionization potentials

Let us now consider how the ionization potentials of sodium clusters evolve with
increasing cluster size. Experimentally, such a dependence has been measured for sodium
clusters in [8, 20].

The ionization potential of a cluster consisting of N atoms is deﬁned as a diﬀerence

between the energy of the singly-charged and neutral clusters:

IP = E+

EN

N −

(20)

Figure 9 shows the dependence of the clusters ionization potential on N. Figure 9
demonstrates the comparison of the results derived by diﬀerent methods, B3LY P , MP4
and HF (see section 2), with the experimental data from [8] and [20]. The results of
the B3LY P and MP4 methods are in a reasonable agreement with the experimental
data, while the ionization potentials calculated on the basis of the HF approximation
diﬀer substantially from the experimental observations. This comparison shows the role
of many-electron correlations in the formation of the cluster ionization potentials. The
correlation eﬀects are taken into account by the B3LY P and MP4 methods and omitted
in the HF approximation.

Figure 9 demonstrates that the ionisation potentials drop with increasing cluster
size, which is consistent with predictions of the classical spherical droplet model.
However, this process has many irregularities, which have quantum origin.
Indeed,
the dependencies derived by the MP4 and B3LY P methods as well as the experimental
one have a prominent odd-even oscillatory tendency. The maxima in these dependences
correspond to the even-N-clusters, which means their higher stability as compared to the
neighbouring odd-N-clusters. This happens because the multiplicities of the even- and
odd-N-clusters are diﬀerent, being equal to one and two correspondingly. Interestingly
enough that the B3LY P method reproduces correctly even the experimentally observed
irregularity in the odd-even oscillatory behaviour, which happens at N = 16 and N = 17,
and some other minor details of the experimental data.

A signiﬁcant step-like decrease in the ionization potential value happens at the
transition from the dimer to the trimer cluster and also in the transition from Na8 to
Na9. Such an irregular behaviour can be explained by the closure of the electronic 1s-
and 1p-shells of the delocalized electrons in the clusters Na2 and Na8 respectively. The
next signiﬁcant drop in the ionization potential value takes place in the transition from
the magic Na20 to the Na21 cluster.

3.4. Multipole moments

We have calculated multipole moments (dipole, quadrupole, octapole and hexadecapole)
for the sodium clusters those geometry is shown in ﬁgures 1 and 2. In ﬁgures 10 and 11,
we plot the absolute values of the dipole moments for the neutral and singly charged
sodium clusters as a function of cluster size.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

16

The dipole moments of some sodium clusters (see ﬁgure 10), which we predict in our
paper, arise due to the fact that the electron charge distribution not always matches the
ionic charge distribution and can be shifted with respect to the cluster centre of mass.
Our calculations show that only clusters with the C-point symmetry groups, like the
isosceles triangle isomers of Na3, the pentagonal Na6 pyramid isomer, Na12, Na18 and
others, possess dipole moments. These clusters have either an axis of a certain order or
a plane of symmetry, but no perpendicular symmetry elements (plains or axes). This
rule remains correct even for the Na20 cluster isomer with the symmetry C2v, which
has the closed shell conﬁguration 1s21p61d102s2 of delocalised electrons according to the
jellium model. Geometries of the cluster ions diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the geometries of
the corresponding neutral clusters, but the rule formulated above on the appearance of
the cluster dipole moments remain valid in this case also as it is clear from ﬁgure 11.

The principal values of the quadrupole moments tensor for the optimized neutral
and singly charged clusters are presented in ﬁgures 12 and 13 respectively. For clusters
with an axis of symmetry, this axis has been chosen as z-axis of the coordinate system, in
which the calculation of the quadrupole moments has been performed. The quadrupole
moment tensor is deﬁned as an average value of the following operator:
δijr2)

Qij =

(21)

q(3xixj −

X

Here, the summation is performed over all electronic and ionic charges in the cluster.
Note that the trace of the tensor Qij is equal to zero.

The ionic part of Qij can be expressed via the components of the tensor Rij discussed
in section 3.1. Note that the knowledge of Qij and Rij allows one to construct easily
the tensor analogous to Rij, but for electrons. This might be useful for the analysis of
deformations of electron density distribution in a cluster.

The quadrupole moment tensor can be expressed via the tensor ˜Qij =

qxixji
,
characterising the averaged dimensions of the total charge distribution. Here, brackets
mean averaging over the electronic charge distribution. The principal values of the tensor
˜Qij should be negative at least for neutral clusters, because electron density is spilled
out of the cluster, which makes its distribution a little broader than the distribution of
ions. The similar situation takes place for cluster ions, but in this case there is non-
compensated positive charge in the system, which brings certain positive contribution
to ˜Qij and makes the principal values of ˜Qij positive in some cases.

P

h

3 and Na+

The numerical analysis performed in this work shows that for neutral sodium
clusters the principal values of ˜Qij are always negative, while for the small cluster ions:
Na+
4 (C2v), some of the principal values are positive.

2 , Na+
The principle values of the quadrupole moment tensor characterize the distortion
Indeed, ﬁgure 12 shows that the Na8 and
of the total cluster charge distribution.
Na20 tetrahedron group isomers have the zero quadrupole moments, which reﬂect the
closeness to sphericity of the magic clusters. Our calculations demonstrate that for
some open shell clusters like Na11 and Na12 the quadrupole moments turn out to be
rather small, although the ionic charge distribution in these clusters has the prominent

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

17

deformation as it is clear from ﬁgures 1 and 5. The small quadrupole moments in these
clusters is the result of compensation of the electron and ion components of Qij.

The quadrupole moments diagram allows one to make some conclusions on the
type of the shape of the total charge distribution in a cluster. The averaged dimensions
of the cluster total charge distribution in x-, y- and z- directions can be characterized
by quantities Qk
x = ˜Qxx =
.
i
Here, the summation is performed over all electrons and ions in the cluster and brackets
mean averaging. These quantities are connected with the quadrupole moments tensor
y = Q⊥ and
deﬁned in (21). Indeed, in both the prolate and oblate cases, when Q⊥
Qk

z = Qk, the principal values of the tensor Qij read as

y = ˜Qyy =

z = ˜Qzz =

x = Q⊥

and Q⊥

, Q⊥

ex2

ey2

ez2

P

P

P

h

i

h

i

h

Qzz = 2(Qk

Q⊥)

Qxx = (Q⊥

Qk) =

−

−

Qzz
2

−

Qyy = Qxx =

Qzz
2

−

(22)

These equations deﬁne the important relationships between the principal values of
the quadrupole moments tensor in the oblate and prolate cases and help understanding
the quadrupole moments diagrams shown in ﬁgures 12 and 13.

Equations (22) show that the sign of the principal values Qxx, Qyy and Qzz depends
on the relative value of Qk and Q⊥. With the use of equations (22) and the cluster
quadrupole moment diagrams shown in ﬁgures 12 and 13, one can easily analyse the
total charge distribution of the clusters shown in ﬁgures 1 and 2. Note that conclusions
made on the shape of the total charge distribution and the shape of ionic component
(see ﬁgures 5 and 6) sometimes diﬀer signiﬁcantly one from another for some clusters.
For example, the ionic charge distribution in the Na12 cluster has a prolate shape, while
the total charge distribution is oblate.

The quadrupole moments of singly charged sodium clusters diﬀer substantially from
those for the corresponding neutral ones. The excessive positive charge leads to the
rearrangement of the cluster structure and to the appearance of the quadrupole moment
in the cluster ions like Na+
20. Although, the electron exchange-correlation force
in a cluster turns out to be insuﬃcient to change the cluster geometry so signiﬁcantly
to make the magic cluster ion Na+
9 , having the closed shell electronic structure of
delocalised electron, spherical-like without quadrupole moment. Instead, Na+
9 remains
a noticeable deformation.

8 and Na+

Let us now discuss the idea for which the cluster multipole moments play the
crucial role and consider the possibility of the cluster isomers separation by placing
the mass selected cluster beam in the inhomogeneous external ﬁeld. As we have seen
from the calculations presented above, diﬀerent cluster isomers of the same mass often
possess diﬀerent structure and as a result of that diﬀerent multipole moments (dipole
or quadrupole). However, such cluster isomers are indistinguishable in the nowadays
experiments with mass selected cluster beams. They can nevertheless be separated if

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

18

one puts the mass selected cluster beam in the inhomogeneous external ﬁeld. Let us
estimate this eﬀect for the characteristic values of the dipole and quadrupole moments
calculated above.

From the dipole moments diagrams shown in ﬁgures 10 and 11 one can conclude
that the diﬀerence in dipole moments for some cluster isomers can be as large as 1Debye
˚A or even larger. The force acting on
and for the quadrupole often it is about 40Debye
·
the cluster with the dipole moment D in an external inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld E(r)
is equal to [65]

The components of the force acting on the cluster with quadrupole moment Qij is as
follows [65]

FD(r) =

D

E(r)

.

∇{

·

}

F Q

i (r) =

Qjk
6 ∇jEk(r)

.

}

∇i{

(23)

(24)

Here, the summation is assumed over the repeated indices j and k of the vector and
tensor components in the right hand side of (24).

∼

Let us introduce the time period τ during which the cluster beam passes the
inhomogeneous electric ﬁeld. One can estimate the distance ∆ on which isomers will be
F τ 2/2M, where M is the mass of the isomer
separated during this period of time as ∆
considered and F is the force acting on either the dipole (see (23)) or quadrupole (see
(24)) moment of the cluster. Substituting in these equations the characteristic values
for the dipole and quadrupole moments, assuming that the inhomogeneity of the electric
103V /cm2, one derives from (23) (24) that during the period
ﬁeld is about
τ
0.7mm
and that ∆

5
·
10−3s the isomers with N = 3 and δD

10s, N = 5 and no dipole moment.

1Debye become separated on ∆

∼
These estimates demonstrate that one can create signiﬁcant separation distances
for reasonably short periods of time with the electric ﬁeld strengths and their gradients
achievable in laboratory conditions. The experiments with mass selected and isomer
separated cluster beams could provide the most accurate information on the structure
and properties of atomic clusters.

40Debye
·

2.8mm for δQ

∼
˚A, τ

∇

∼

∼

∼

∼

∼

E

3.5. Polarizabilities

We have calculated the polarizabilities for the optimized neutral sodium clusters (see
ﬁgure 1) as a function of cluster size. Results of this calculation are shown in ﬁgure 14. In
this ﬁgure, we also plot experimental points from [21]. Calculation of the polarizabilities
has been performed by the B3LY P method. Figure 14 demonstrates quite reasonable
agreement of the B3LY P results with the experimental data.

In ﬁgure 14 we also compare the polarizabilities calculated in our work with
those derived by other theoretical methods [19, 32]. This ﬁgure demonstrates a
satisfactory agreement of the results of diﬀerent approaches with each other and with
the experimental data. This comparison is quite important, because in our work as well
as in [19] the polarizabilities have been calculated using all electron ab initio approach,

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

19

while in [32] they were obtained with the use of pseudopotentials. Note that our points
are closer to the experimental values than those from [19], in spite of the fact that
both calculations have been performed on the basis of the density functional theory.
The diﬀerence between the two schemes of calculation arise in the form of the density
functional and the emploied set of the basis functions. In [19], the so-called Perdew-
Wang-91 density functional [62] was used, while we applied its B3LY P form.

Let us also compare the polarizabilities for the Na8 and Na20 clusters calculated
in the random phase approximation with exchange in the spherical jellium model,
αN a8 = 755a.u. and αN a20 = 1808a.u. [66], with our results: αN a8 = 797a.u. and
αN a20 = 1964a.u. The closeness of the values show that the detailed ionic core structure
does not inﬂuence much the value of the clusters polarizabilities. This comparison shows
that the jellium model turns out to be quite a reasonable approximation.

Figure 14 shows that the disagreement between theoretical and experimental points
is not always less than the experimental error bars. Such a disagreement might indicate
that for certain N there have been experimentally detected cluster isomers other than
those calculated in our work. For example, the calculated value αC5v
N a6 = 659a.u. lies
beyond the experimental error bars, while αD3h
N a6 = 706.876a.u. is within the range of the
experimental error.

Note that the polarizabilities of clusters Na8, Na10 and Na20, possessing the Td
point symmetry group, surpass a little the corresponding experimental values, being
quite close to them. For the Na8 and Na10 clusters, the disagreement of the theoretical
and experimental values is within the range of the experimental error. The similar
situation occurs for the Na14 cluster, characterized by the C2v point symmetry group.
This cluster likely belongs to the cluster chain leading to the formation of the tetrahedron
Na20 cluster from the tetrahedron Na8 one (see our discussion in section 3.1). Such a
situation allows us to assume that the polarizabilities of other clusters of this chain,
which we have not analized in this paper, because they are energetically not favorable,
will be also quite close to the experiment.

3.6. Normal vibration modes

Using the B3LY P method, we have calculated the normal vibration frequencies for the
optimized neutral sodium clusters. The results of this calculation are shown in ﬁgure
15. In this ﬁgure, we indicate the point symmetry group for those clusters for which
more than one cluster isomer has been considered (see ﬁgure 1). Numerous frequencies
shown in ﬁgure 15 are degenerate or nearly degenerate. This explains why the total
number of frequencies for most of clusters is less than the number of vibrational degrees
of freedom available in the system. In the more symmetric clusters, like Na7, Na8, Na10
or Na20, the rate of generacy of the normal vibration modes is higher.

Knowledge of normal vibration modes and their frequencies is important for
physical understanding and quantitative description of the relaxation of electron
plasmon excitations in metal clusters [42]. One can visualize normal vibration modes,

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

20

showing the directions and amplitudes of the atoms displacements by corresponding
vectors. Since it is diﬃcult to show all such pictures in this paper due to their large
number. We focus instead only on the two types of modes breathing and quadrupole
surface vibration modes. Namely these modes have been considered in [42] within the
dynamical jellium model [41] for the treatment of the electron-phonon coupling in the
spherical metal clusters Na20, Na40 and Na92.

In this paper, we discuss the appearance of these speciﬁc vibration modes in a
cluster system and compare their frequencies with the predictions made in [42] on the
basis of the jellium model. For this purpose, we have analysed all calculated vibration
modes and identiﬁed the breathing and three quadrupole vibrations for each cluster. In
ﬁgure 16, we present images of the breathing and quadrupole vibration modes for some
clusters to illustrate the way, how the identiﬁcation of the modes has been performed.
This ﬁgure shows that the identiﬁcation made is deﬁnite enough.

The results of this analysis are shown in ﬁgure 15, where for each cluster we mark
the breathing mode in the spectrum by dotted line and the surface quadrupole vibration
modes by dashed lines. The number near some of the lines indicate the degeneracy of
the corresponding modes. Note that we make this only for quadrupole surface vibration
modes. The degeneracy rate and the number of quadrupole surface vibration modes
can be easily understood with the help of the cluster images shown in ﬁgure 1. This
ﬁgure shows that the prototype of the breathing mode exists already in the Na3 and
Na4 clusters. For the Na4 cluster, one can identify the quadrupole surface vibration
mode, although it is meaningful to discuss surface vibrations only for the Na6 cluster
and larger. Figure 15 shows the frequencies of the breathing and surface vibration
modes decrease systematically with increasing cluster size, although this decrease has
numerous irregularities, particularly for the clusters with N < 8. The frequency of
the breathing mode decreases faster with the growth of N than the frequency of the
quadrupole surface vibration mode.

Let us compare the calculated frequencies of the breathing and surface vibration
modes with the predictions of the jellium model.
it was shown that the
breathing vibration mode frequencies calculated for the spherical Na20, Na40 and Na92
respectively within the framework of the dynamical jellium model are quite close to the
values derived from the phonon dispersion law for metals [67]
F k2

In [42],

(25)

Ω2 =

3v2
MN a(9 + k2v2

,

F r3
0)

·

104 is the mass of sodium atom, vF = (9π/4)1/3/r0 is the velocity
where MN a = 4.2
of cluster electrons on the Fermi surface, r0 is the Wigner-Seitz radius.
In the long
wave limit, equation (25) reduces to the Bohm-Staver formula for the velocity of sound,
105cm/s. This number is quite close to the real value of the
dΩ/dk = vF /√3MN a ≈
velocity of sound in the bulk sodium: 3.2

105cm/s.

3

·

Using the dispersion low (25), we estimate the breathing mode frequencies for
the magic Na8 and Na20 clusters. The results of this calculation are as follows

·

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

21

ΩN a8 = 104.09cm−1, ΩN a20 = 80.49cm−1. In this calculation we have used r0 = 4.

The frequency values obtained from (25) are close to those presented in ﬁgure 15,
ΩN a8 = 127.15cm−1, ΩN a20 = 78.11cm−1. The agreement of the frequencies is rather
good for the Na20 cluster case. For Na8, the agreement is reasonable, but not as good
as for Na20. Some disagreement arises due to the fact that the Wigner-Seitz radius for
the Na8 cluster is about 10% smaller than its bulk value. Indeed, substituting r0 = 3.6
in (25) one derives ΩN a8 = 127.10cm−1, which is in the nearly perfect agreement with
the ab initio result. The decrease of the Wigner-Seitz radius can be easily understood
from the analysis of the cluster geometry shown in ﬁgure 1.

Now let us compare the quadrupole surface vibration mode frequencies calculated
in our paper (see ﬁgure 15) with those following from the dynamical jellium model.
According to [42], the quadrupole surface vibration frequencies, Ω2, for the spherical
Na20, Na40 and Na92 clusters are equal to 56.48cm−1, 48.41cm−1 and 32.28cm−1,
respectively. The value of the quadrupole surface vibration frequency for the Na20
cluster calculated in the present work is equal to 63.15cm−1, which is rather close to the
value predicted in [42].

The values of the quadrupole surface vibration frequencies calculated for Na20, Na40
and Na92 show relatively slow decrease with the growth cluster size. Extrapolating these
values towards smaller cluster sizes, we derive frequency values, which are consistent
with those shown in ﬁgure 15. This comparison demonstrates that the jellium model
calculation of the surface vibration frequencies is in a reasonable agreement with the
more accurate ab initio many-body theory.

The comparison of the jellium model results with those derived by the more accurate
ab initio many-body theory is important, because it forms theoretical background for
the jellium model calculations in larger cluster systems, for which ab initio methods are
hardly possible. The comparison with the jellium model, which we performed in this
paper, can be extended towards larger cluster sizes and other collective modes of ions
motion.

4. Conclusion

In this paper we have calculated the optimized structure and various characteristics of
sodium clusters consisting of up to 20 atoms. We have used three diﬀerent methods:
B3LY P , MP4 and HF .
It was demonstrated that the ﬁrst two methods due to
accounting for many-electron correlations provide much better agreement with the
available experimental data and theoretical results based of the conﬁguration interaction
method as compared to that for the Hartree-Fock approximation. This was checked for
various cluster characteristics: cluster geometries, binding energies per atom and the
ionization potentials.

We have also calculated and analyzed the dependence of the ionic component
It was
and total quadrupole moments of sodium clusters as a function of their size.
demonstrated that the cluster shapes characterized by the quadrupole moments are in

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

22

a reasonable agreement with the predictions of the jellium model and the results of the
experimental observations.

We have determined the normal vibration modes and their frequencies for a number
of clusters and demonstrated their qualitative agreement with the predictions based on
the jellium model.

The results of this work can be extended in various directions. One can use
the similar methods to study structure and properties of various types of clusters.
It is interesting to extend calculations towards larger cluster sizes and perform more
comparison with the results following from the jellium model and other simpliﬁed
theories, based either on pseudopotentials or eﬀective interatomic potentials. A lot of
novel problems arise, when considering collisions and electron excitations in the clusters
with the optimized geometries. These and many more other problems on atomic cluster
physics can be tackled with the use of methods considered in our work.

The authors acknowledge support from the INTAS, the Volkswagen Foundation, the
Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and DAAD.

5. Acknowledgements

References

[1] Knight W D, Clemenger K, de Heer W A , Saunders W A , Chou M Y and Cohen M L 1984 Phys.

[2] Br´echignac C, Cahuzac Ph, Carlier F, Leygnier J 1989 Chem. Phys. Lett. 164 433
[3] Selby K, Vollmer M, Masui J, Kresin V, de Heer W A, and Knight W D 1989 Phys. Rev. B 40

[4] Selby K, Kresin V, Masui J, Vollmer M, de Heer W A, Scheidemann A, Knight W D 1991 Phys.

[5] Bertsch G F, Bulcac A, Tomanek D, Wang Y 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 1991
[6] Hertel I V, Steger H, de Vries J, Weisser B, Menzel C, Kamke B and Kamke W 1992 Phys. Rev.

Rev. Lett. 52 2141

5417

Rev. B 43 4565

Lett 68 784

[7] Herlert A, Kr¨uckeberg S, Schweikhard L, Vogel M, Walther C 1999 Physica Scripta T 80 200
[8] de Heer W A 1993 Rev. Mod. Phys. 65 611
[9] Brack M 1993 Rev. Mod. Phys. 65 677
[10] Br´echignac C, Connerade J P 1994 J.Phys.B:At.Mol.Opt.Phys. 27 3795
[11] Haberland H (ed.) 1994 Clusters of Atoms and Molecules, Theory, Experiment and Clusters of

Atoms (Springer Series in Chemical Physics 52) (Berlin: Springer)

[12] N¨aher U, Bjørnholm S, Frauendorf S, Garcias F and Guet C 1997 Physics Reports 285 245
[13] Ekardt W (ed.) 1999 Metal Clusters (New York: Wiley)
[14] Proceedings of the Les Houches 2000 Summer School Atomic Clusters and Nanoparticles July 2000

(Les Houches, France) (to be published in EDP Sciences and Springer Verlag)

[15] Boustani I, Pewestorf W, Fantucci P, Bonaˇci´c-Koteck´y V, Koteck´y J 1987 Phys. Rev. B 35 9437
[16] Bonaˇci´c-Koteck´y V, Fantucci P, Koteck´y J 1988 Phys. Rev. B 37 4369
[17] Boustani I, Koteck´y J 1988 J. Chem. Phys. 88 5657
[18] Bonaˇci´c-Koteck´y V, Boustani I, Guest M F, Koteck´y J 1988 J. Chem. Phys. 89 4861
[19] Rayane D et al. 1999 Eur. Phys. J. D9 243
[20] Akeby H, Panas I, Petterson L G M, Siegbahn P, Wahlgreen U 1990 J. Chem. Phys. 94 5471

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

23

[21] Knight W D, Clemenger K, de Heer W A, Saunders W A 1985 Phys. Rev. B 31 2539
[22] Br´echignac C, Cahuzac Ph, Leygnier J and Weiner J 1492 J. Chem. Phys. 90 1492
[23] Br´echignac C, Cahuzac Ph, Carlier F, de Frutos M and Leygnier J 1990 J. Chem. Phys. 93 7449
[24] Br´echignac C, Cahuzac Ph, Carlier F, Leygnier J and Sarfati A 1991 Phys. Rev. B 44 11386
[25] de Heer W A, Selby K, Kresin V, Masui J, Vollmer, Chatelain A and Knight W D 1987 Phys.

Rev. Lett. 59 1805

[26] Martins J L, Buttet J and Car R 1985 Phys. Rev. B 31 1804
[27] Spiegelmann F, Poteau R, Montag B, Reinhard P-G, 1998 Physics Letters A242 163
[28] Nogueira F, Martins J L and Fiolhais C, 1999 Eur. Phys. J. D9 229
[29] Guti´e rrez R, Grossmann F, Knospe O, Schmidt R 2001 Phys. Rev. A64 013202
[30] Blundell S A, Guet C, Rajendra R Zope 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 4826
[31] Kronik L, Vasiliev I and Chelikowsky J R 2000 Phys. Rev. B62 9992
[32] K¨u mmel S, Berkus T, Reinhard P-G and Brack M 2000 Eur. Phys. J. D11 239
[33] K¨u mmel S, Akola J and Manninen M 2000 Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 3827
[34] Martins J L, Car R and Buttet J 1981 Surf. Sci. 106 265
[35] Hintermann A and Manninen M 1983 Phys. Rev. B 27 7262
[36] Ekardt W 1984 Phys. Rev. B 29 1558
[37] Ekardt W 1985 Phys. Rev. B 32 1961
[38] Guet C and Johnson W R 1992 Phys. Rev. B 45 283
[39] Ivanov V K, Ipatov A N, Kharchenko V A, Zhizhin M L 1993 Pis’ma JETPh (in Russian) 58 649;

1994 Phys. Rev. A 50 1459

Mol. Opt. Phys. 33 3653

33 4905-4926

Worls Scientiﬁc) pp 73-91

[40] Lyalin A G, Semenov S K, Solov’yov A V, Cherepkov N A and Greiner W 2000 J. Phys. B: At.

[41] Gerchikov L G, Solov’yov A V, Greiner W 1999 International Journal of Modern Physics E 8 289
[42] Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2000 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

[43] Ivanov V K 1996 Correlations in Clusters and Related Systems ed. J-P Connerade (Singapore:

[44] Bertsch G F, Bulgac A, Tomanek D and Wang Y 1991 Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 2690
[45] Ivanov V K, Kashenock G Yu, Polozkov R G, Solov’yov A V 2001 accepted as Letter to the Editor

in J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

[46] Gerchikov L G, Connerade J P, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 1997 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

[47] Gerchikov L G, Eﬁmov P V, Mikoushkin V M and Solov’yov A V 1998 Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 2707-

Phys. 30 4133-4161

2710.

31 3065-3077

Phys. 31 L27-L34

Phys. 32 877-894

[48] Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N and Solov’yov A V 1997 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 30 5939-59359
[49] Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 1998 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.

[50] Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N, Polozkov R G and Solov’yov A V 2000 Phys. Rev. A 62 043201
[51] Connerade J P, Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N and Solov’yov A V 1998 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

[52] Connerade J P, Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N and Solov’yov A V 1999 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt.

[53] Gerchikov L G and Solov’yov A V 1997 Z. Phys. D: Atoms, Molecules, Clusters 42 279-287
[54] Gerchikov L G, Ipatov A N and Solov’yov A V 1998 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31 2331-2341
[55] Solov’yov A V, ”Electron scattering on metal clusters and fullerenes”, in Proceedings of the
Les Houches 2000 Summer School Atomic Clusters and Nanoparticles July 2000 (Les Houches,
France) (to be published in EDP Sciences and Springer Verlag)

[56] Frisch M J, Trucks G W and et al 1998

Gaussian 98 (Revision A.9) Gaussian Inc. Pittsburgh PA

[57] Lindgren I and Morrison J 1986 Atomic Many-Body Theory (Springer-Verlag, New York Heidelberg

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

24

[58] James B. Foresman and Æleen Frisch Exploring Chemistry with Electronic Structure Methods 1996

Berlin).

(Pittsburgh, PA: Gaussian Inc)

[59] Møller C and Plesset M S 1934 Phys. Rev. 46, 618
[60] Landau L D and Lifshitz E M 1965 Quantum Mechanics (London: Pergamon)
[61] Becke A D 1988 Phys. Rev. A 38, 30098
[62] Burke K, Perdew J P and Wang Y, in Electronic Density Functional Theory: Recent Progress and

New Directions, Ed. Dobson J F, Vignale G and Das M P 1998 (Plenum)

[63] Lee C, Yang W and Parr R G 1988 a functional of the electron density”, Phys. Rev. B 37 785
[64] Vosko S H, Wilk L and Nusair M 1980 critical analysis”, Canadian J. Phys. 58 1200
[65] Landau L D and Lifshitz E M 1959 The Classical Theory of Fields (London: Pergamon)
[66] Madjet M, Guet C and Johnson W R 1995 Phys. Rev. A 51 1327
[67] Kittel C 1967 Introduction to Solid state Physics (London: John Wiley & Sons)

Appendix A. Tables

In Appendix, we present tables of the essential cluster characteristics. The binding
energies per atom for neutral and singly charged clusters are compiled in tables A1
and A2. The principal values of the quadrupole moment tensor for neutral and singly
charged clusters are presented in tables A3 and A4.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

N Symmetry

EN (a.u.)

HF/6-311G(d) MP4/6-311G(d,p) B3LYP/6-311G(d)

1
2
3

4

5
6

7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

D∞h
D∞h
a.C2v
b.C2v
D3h
D2h
D4h
C2v
C5v
D3h
D5h
Td
C2v
C2
D4d
C4v
Td
C2v
C1
C2v
C1
C2v
Cs
Cs
Cs
C5v
D5h
Td
C2v

-161.8459
-323.6911
-485.5405
-485.5403
-485.5385
-485.5282
-647.3871
-647.3897
-809.2518
-971.0915
-971.0998
-1132.9462
-1294.8015
-1456.6466
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-161.8459
-323.7149
-485.5626
-485.5653
-485.5656
-485.5626
-647.4433
-
-809.3008
-971.1880
-971.1872
-1133.0634
-1294.9410
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

25

Ref: [16]
-
-323.3176
-
-484.9729
-
-
-646.6494
-
-808.3174
-969.9899
-989.9884
-1131.6610
-1293.3395
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-162.2866
-324.5999
-486.8963
-486.8960
-486.8939
-486.8889
-649.2076
-649.1965
-811.5164
-973.8324
-973.8344
-1136.1430
-1298.4606
-1460.7597
-1623.0758
-1623.0734
-1623.0554
-1623.0530
-1785.3737
-1785.3726
-1947.6917
-2110.0045
-2272.3092
-2434.6188
-2596.9370
-2759.2537
-2921.5704
-3083.8730
-3246.2015
-3246.1981

Table A1.
In this table we present the total energies of the optimized neutral sodium
clusters. Numbers of atoms in clusters are given in the ﬁrst column. In the second
column, the point symmetry groups of clusters are shown. In the next three columns,
the cluster total energies derived by the HF , M P4 and B3LY P methods are compiled.
For the sake of comparison, the total energies computed by the CI method in [16] are
presented in the sixth column.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

26

N Symmetry

N (a.u.)
HF/6-311G(d) MP4/6-311G(d,p) B3LYP/6-311G(d)

E+

1
2
3
4

5

6
7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

D∞h
D3h
D2h
C2v
D2h
D2d
C2v
D5h
C2v
D3h
D4d
C4v
Td
D3h
Cs
C2v
C1
C2v
Cs
Cs
Cs
Cs
D5h
C2v
Oh

-161.6642
-323.5447
-485.4084
-647.2653
-647.2681
-809.1226
-
-970.9749
-1132.8278
-1294.6866
-1456.5346
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-161.6642
-323.5447
-485.4322
-647.2915
-647.2919
-809.1740
-
-971.0364
-1132.9261
-1294.7863
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-162.0874
-324.4114
-486.7457
-649.0502
-649.0489
-811.3727
-811.3629
-973.6742
-1135.9994
-1298.3082
-1460.6326
-1622.9335
-1622.9278
-1622.9273
-1785.2509
-1785.2455
-1947.5479
-2109.8718
-2272.1654
-2434.4907
-2596.8051
-2759.1222
-2921.4365
-3083.7499
-3246.0655
-3408.3434

Table A2.
In this table we present the total energies of the optimized singly charged
sodium clusters. Numbers of atoms in clusters are given in the ﬁrst column. In the
second column, the point symmetry groups of clusters are shown. In the next three
columns, the cluster total energies derived by the HF , M P4 and B3LY P methods are
compiled.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

27

N Symmetry Qxx, (Debye˚A) Qyy, (Debye˚A) Qzz, (Debye˚A)
2
3

D∞h
a.C2v
b.C2v
D∞h
D2h
D4h
C2v
C5v
D3h
D5h
Td
C2v
D4d
C2
C4v
Td
C2v
C1
C2v
C1
C2v
Cs
Cs
Cs
C5v
D5h
Td
C2v

4

5
6

7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

-11.5622
-9.9300
-7.5625
-16.3309
-12.9139
5.1177
-20.3760
6.5817
14.4807
13.3285
0.0000
-22.2202
13.5248
31.6087
-14.6949
0.0000
-0.3816
-18.4455
0.0392
3.5616
-40.2978
-9.0476
-18.0272
2.2310
-14.0456
-2.9626
0.0000
-69.7510

-11.5622
-5.3883
31.0631
-16.3309
26.2865
5.1177
23.0544
6.5817
14.4807
13.3285
0.0000
-7.8457
13.5248
-15.5561
-14.6949
0.0000
3.6348
13.9570
1.7777
7.3169
54.2376
-21.7878
1.6718
18.9437
-14.0540
-2.9626
0.0000
79.8143

23.1244
15.3183
-23.5006
32.6618
-13.3726
-10.2354
-2.6784
-13.1634
-28.9614
-26.6570
0.0000
30.0659
-27.0496
-16.0526
29.3898
0.0000
-3.2532
4.48848
-1.8169
-10.8785
-13.9398
30.8354
16.3554
-21.1747
28.0996
5.9252
0.0000
-10.0633

Table A3.
In this table we present the principal values of the quadrupole moment
tensor calculated for neutral sodium clusters. The ﬁrst column shows numbers of atoms
in clusters. The second column gives their point symmetry groups. In the last three
columns, the principal values Qxx, Qyy and Qzz are given. They have been computed
by the B3LY P method.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

28

N Symmetry Qxx, (Debye˚A) Qyy, (Debye˚A) Qzz, (Debye˚A)
2
3
4

D∞h
D3h
D2h
C2v
D2h
D2d
C2v
D5h
C2v
D3h
D4d
C4v
Td
D3h
Cs
C2v
C1
C2v
Cs
Cs
Cs
Cs
D5h
C2v
Oh

5

6
7
8
9
10

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

-27.9109
21.8547
-67.8170
-86.4460
-101.2157
-46.6091
-34.9108
24.3267
4.4346
23.1994
-34.9547
-3.5448
0.0000
-18.5476
19.4836
-58.0823
69.5400
-178.1183
-37.4527
-55.6664
-47.1267
-33.5207
-57.3045
-79.3111
0.0967

-27.9109
21.8547
-12.6716
-27.4786
6.2746
-46.6091
53.8712
24.3267
-51.8751
23.1994
-34.9547
-3.5448
0.0000
-18.5476
-10.0197
-21.8996
25.4745
149.0275
44.8752
58.5058
60.3728
65.9999
-57.3045
95.8676
0.0967

55.8218
-43.7094
80.4886
113.9246
94.9411
93.2182
-18.9604
-48.6534
47.4405
-46.3988
69.9094
7.0896
0.0000
37.0952
-9.46382
79.9819
-95.0145
29.0908
-7.4225
-2.8394
-13.2461
-32.4792
114.6090
-16.5565
-0.1934

Table A4.
In this table we present the principal values of the quadrupole moment
tensor calculated for singly-charged sodium clusters. The ﬁrst column shows numbers
of atoms in clusters. The second column gives their point symmetry groups. In the
last three columns, the principal values Qxx, Qyy and Qzz are given. They have been
computed by the B3LY P method.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

29

Figure captions

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

30

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

31

N a10 (part a),
Figure 1. Optimized geometries of neutral sodium clusters N a2
N a11
N a20 (part c). The interatomic distances are given
in angstroms. The label above each cluster image indicates its point symmetry group

N a18 (part b) and N a19

−

−

−

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

32

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

33

Figure 2. Optimized geometries of singly charged sodium clusters N a+
11 (part
a) and N a+
21 (part b). The interatomic distances are given in angstroms. The
label above each cluster image indicates the point symmetry group and the calculation

N a+

N a+

12 −

2 −

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

34

C

2v

T

d

 
Average interatomic distance in neutral sodium clusters

               

               

               

               

bcc lattice nearest
neighbor distance

               

               

               

               

               

               

b. C

2v

D

2h

C
               

5v

               

               

               

D
               

3h

               

               

               

 

D

4h

D

3h

D¥ h

               

a. C

2v

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

               
C

2v

C

, T

d

2
D

C
4d
               
1

C

4v

N

3,8

3,7

3,6

3,5

3,4

3,3

3,2

3,1

Å

 
,

>
R
<

Figure 3. Averaged bonding distance as a function of cluster size for optimized
geometries of neutral sodium clusters. For some cluster numbers more than one isomer
has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate the point symmetry group of the
corresponding isomers. Geometries of the optimized clusters one can ﬁnd in ﬁgure 1.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

35

3,75

3,70

3,65

3,60

3,55

3,50

3,45

3,40

Å

 
,

>
R
<

Average interatomic distance in singly charged sodium clusters
 

               

               

               

               

bcc lattice nearest
neighbor distance

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

D

2h

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

C

2v

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

D

2h

D

2d

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

4v

4d

C
D
T

d

C

s

               

               
D

3h

N

Figure 4. Averaged bonding distance as a function of cluster size for optimized
geometries of singly charged sodium clusters. For some cluster numbers more than
one isomer has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate the point symmetry
group of the corresponding isomers. Geometries of the optimized clusters one can ﬁnd
in ﬁgure 2.

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

)

2
Å

(
 

,

Z
Z
Y
Y
X
X

,

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

36

T

d

R

 tensor components for neutral sodium clusters

 

               

               

               

               

               

ij

 XX
 YY
 ZZ

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

D

2h

a. C

2v

C
               
5v

               

               

               

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

C

2v

D

4d

N

Figure 5. The principal values of tensor Rij for optimized neutral sodium clusters
as a function of cluster size calculated by the B3LY P method. Squares, circles and
triangles represent the Rxx, Ryy and Rzz tensor principal values respectively. For some
clusters, more than one isomer has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate the
point symmetry group of the corresponding isomers. Geometries of the optimized
clusters one can ﬁnd in ﬁgure 1.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

37

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

)

2
Å

(
 

,

Z
Z
Y
Y
X
X

,

R

 tensor components for singly charged sodium clusters

 

               

               

               

               

               

ij

 XX
 YY
 ZZ

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

D

2h

               

D

2h

               

               

               

               

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

               
D

3h

D

4d

N

Figure 6. The principal values of tensor Rij for optimized singly charged sodium
clusters as a function of cluster size calculated by the B3LY P method. Squares, circles
and triangles represent the Rxx, Ryy and Rzz tensor principal values respectively. For
some clusters, more than one isomer has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate
the point symmetry group of the corresponding isomers. Geometries of the optimized
clusters one can ﬁnd in ﬁgure 2.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

38

T

d

 
Binding energy per atom for neutral sodium clusters

               

               

               

               

D
               

4d

C

2v

C

5v

D

2h

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

0,2

0,1

0,0

V
e
 
,

N

/

b
E

b. C

2v

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

-Koutecký et al

i

j

 Bona
j
 B3LYP/6-311G(d)
               
 HF/6-311G(d)
 MP4/6-311G(d,p)

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

N

Figure 7. Binding energy per atom for neutral sodium clusters as a function of
cluster size. Circles represent the binding energies per atom calculated by the B3LY P
method, lower and upper triangles correspond to the energies obtained by the M P4
method and in the HF approximation respectively. Squares show the result of the
conﬁguration interaction approach from the work by Bonaˇci´c-Koteck´y et al (for details
see [16, 18]). Some points in ﬁgure have labels, indicating the point symmetry group
of the isomers represented. Geometries of the corresponding clusters one can ﬁnd in
ﬁgure 1.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

39

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,4

0,3

V
e
 
,

N

/

+

b
E

0,5

 
Binding energy per atom for singly charged sodium clusters

               

               

               

               

D

2h

               
D

3h

D

4d

               

D

2h

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

-Koutecký et al

i
j

 Bona
j
               
 B3LYP/6-311G(d)
 HF/6-311G(d)
 MP4/6-311G(d,p)

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

N

Figure 8. Binding energy per atom for singly charged sodium clusters as a function of
cluster size. Circles represent the binding energies per atom calculated by the B3LY P
method, lower and upper triangles correspond to the energies obtained by the M P4
method and in the HF approximation respectively. Squares show the result of the
conﬁguration interaction approach from the work by Bonaˇci´c-Koteck´y et al (for details
see [16, 18]). Some points in ﬁgure have labels, indicating the point symmetry group
of the isomers represented. Geometries of the corresponding clusters one can ﬁnd in
ﬁgure 2.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

40

5,5

5,0

4,5

4,0

3,5

3,0

V
e
 
,

P

I

Ionization potential for neutral sodium clusters 

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 H. Akeby et al
               
 W. A. De Heer
 B3LYP/6-311G(d)
 HF/6-311G(d)
 MP4/6-311G(d,p)

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

b.C

2v

D

2h

C

2v

C

5v

D

3h

D

2h

D

2h

C

2v

D

4d

C

2v

D

4d

D

3h

N

C

2v

C

2v

20

Figure 9.
Ionization potentials of neutral sodium clusters as a function of cluster
size. Circles show the results derived by the B3LY P method. Triangles and
rhomboids represent the ionization potentials calculated by the HF and M P4 methods
respectively. Filled and open squares are the experimental values taken from [20] and [8]
respectively. For some clusters, more than one neutral and/or singly charged cluster
isomer has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate the point symmetry group
of the initial neutal and the ﬁnal charged cluster isomers used for the calculation of
the ionization potential.

ﬂ
ﬂ
ﬂ
ﬂ
ﬂ
ﬂ
ﬂ
Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

41

1,4

1,2

1,0

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0,0

e
y
b
e
D

 
,
|

D

|

Dipole moments of neutral sodium clusters

 

               

2v

               

               

               

               

b. C
a. C
D¥ h

2v

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

5v

C
D
               

3h

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

2v

C
T

d

D

, D

2h

4h

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

4v

2

C
C
D

, T

               
d
4d

1

C
C

2v

N

Figure 10. Dipole moments of the optimized neutral sodium clusters as a function
of cluster size calculated by the B3LY P method. For some clusters, more than one
isomer has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate the point symmetry group
of corresponding isomers. Geometries of the optimized clusters one can ﬁnd in ﬁgure
1. 1 Debye=0.3935 a.u.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

42

e
y
b
e
D

 
,
|

D

|

1,2

1,0

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0,0

 
Dipole moments of singly charged sodium clusters

               

               

               

               

               

C
D

2v

2h

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

D

, D

2h

2d

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

C
               
D

s

3h

C
T

4v
, D

d

4d

N

Figure 11. Dipole moments for the optimized singly charged sodium clusters as a
function of cluster size calculated by the B3LY P method. For some clusters, more
than one isomer has been considered. In these cases, labels indicate the point symmetry
group of corresponding isomers. Geometries of the optimized clusters one can ﬁnd in
ﬁgure 2.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

43

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

º

Å
e
y
b
e
D

 
,

z
z
,
y
y
,
x
x

Q

 
Quadupole moments of neutral sodium clusters

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               
a. C
2v

               

               

               

D

2h

C

5v

               

               

               

               

T

d

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 Qxx
 Qyy
 Qzz

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

               
D

4d

C
2v
               

N

Figure 12. The principal values of quadrupole moment tensor for the optimized
neutral sodium clusters as a function of cluster size calculated by the B3LY P method.
Squares, circles and triangles represent the Qxx, Qyy and Qzz tensor principal values
respectively. For some clusters, more than one isomer has been considered. In these
cases, labels indicate the point symmetry group of corresponding isomers. Geometries
of the optimized clusters one can ﬁnd in ﬁgure 1.

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

44

º

Å
e
y
b
e
D

 
,

z
z
,
y
y
,
x
x

Q

150

100

50

0

-50

-100

-150

-200

 
Quadrupole moments of singly charged sodium clusters

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

D

2h

D

2h

D

               
4d

D

3h

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 Qxx
 Qyy
 Qzz

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

N

Figure 13. The principal values of quadrupole moment tensor for the optimized singly
charged sodium clusters as a function of cluster size calculated by the B3LY P method.
Squares, circles and triangles represent the Qxx, Qyy and Qzz tensor principal values
respectively. For some clusters, more than one isomer has been considered. In these
cases, labels indicate the point symmetry group of corresponding isomers. Geometries
of the optimized clusters one can ﬁnd in ﬁgure 2.

1,0

0,9

0,8

0,7

0,6

1

N
>

/

<

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

45

T

d

Static dipole polarizability of neutral sodium clusters

a. C

2v

D

2h

               

3h

D
C
               

5v

 

2v

C

T
d
C
               
C
D

4v

2

4d

               

               

               

               

               

               

 Knight et al (experiment)
 B3LYP/6-311G(d)
 Kümmel at al
 Rayane at al

               

a B3LYP

=141.231 a.u.

1

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

N

Figure 14. Static mean polarizability per atom for neutral sodium clusters normalized
to the polarizability of a single sodium atom. Circles show the results derived in this
work by the B3LY P method. For some clusters, more than one isomer has been
considered. In these cases, labels indicate the point symmetry group of corresponding
isomers. Stars and triangles represent the polarizabilities calculated in [19] and [32]
respectively. Squares are the experimental values taken from [21].

a
a
Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

46

T

d

a. C

2v

D

2h

C

5v

 
C

2v

D

4d

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

1
-

m
c
 
,
f

               

               

               

               

               

2

2

3

               

               

               

               

               

 

3

               

               

               

               

               

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

               

               

               

               

               

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

N

Figure 15. Normal vibration frequencies calculated by the B3LY P method for the
neutral sodium clusters with N
20. For each cluster we mark the breathing mode
in the spectrum by dotted line and the surface quadrupole vibration modes by dashed
lines. The number near some of the lines indicate the degeneracy of the corresponding
mode. Note that we make this only for quadrupole surface vibration modes.

≤

Structure and properties of small sodium clusters.

47

Figure 16. Surface and volume vibration modes for the selected neutral sodium
clusters. Number near each cluster image indicates the frequency of the corresponding
normal vibration mode. The values are given in cm−1.

