2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Scissors modes in triaxial metal clusters

P.-G. Reinhard1, V.O. Nesterenko1,2, E. Suraud3, S. El Gammal4, and W. Kleinig2,5

1 Institut fur Theoretische Physik,Universitat Erlangen, D-91058 Erlangen,

Germany, E-mail: mpt218@theorie2.physik.uni-erlangen.de

2 Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics,

Joint Institute for Nuclear Research 141980, Dubna,

Moscow Region, Russia, E-mail: nester@thsun1.jinr.ru

3 Laboratoire de Physique Quantique, Universit´e Paul Sabatier,

118 Route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, cedex,

4 Physics Department, Faculty of Science,

El-Menouﬁa University, Shebin El-Kom, Egypt

5 Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institut f¨ur Analysis, Dresden, D-01062, Germany

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We study the scissors mode (orbital M1 excitations) in small Na clusters, triaxial

metal clusters Na12 and Na16 and the close-to-spherical Na9

+, all described in DFT

with detailed ionic background. The scissors modes built on spin-saturated ground

and spin-polarized isomeric states are analyzed in virtue of both macroscopic collec-

tive and microscopic shell-model treatments. It is shown that the mutual destruction

of Coulomb and the exchange-correlation parts of the residual interaction makes the

collective shift small and the net eﬀect can depend on details of the actual excited

state. The crosstalk with dipole and spin-dipole modes is studied in detail. In par-

ticular, a strong crosstalk with spin-dipole negative-parity mode is found in the case

of spin-polarized states. Triaxiality and ionic structure considerably complicate the

scissors response, mainly at expense of stronger fragmentation of the strength. Nev-

ertheless, even in these complicated cases the scissors mode is mainly determined by

the global deformation. The detailed ionic structure destroys the spherical symme-

try and can cause ﬁnite M1 response (transverse optical mode) even in clusters with

zero global deformation. But its strength turns out to be much smaller than for the

genuine scissors modes in deformed systems.

I.

INTRODUCTION

2

The scissors mode in nuclei is a small-angle collective rotation of a deformed proton cloud

against the complementing deformed neutron cloud. It thus belongs to the basic magnetic

orbital dipole excitations. A rotation-like character of the mode assumes that it exists only

in the systems with broken spherical symmetry. Early theoretical predictions are found in

Refs.

[1, 2] and its ﬁrst experimental observation was reported in Ref.

[3]. For a review

see Ref.

[4]. Since then, the scissors mode has also been discussed in other deformed

systems, for example in quantum dots [5], Bose-Einstein condensates [6], and last not least

in metal clusters [7, 8]. In the case of deformed metal clusters, the mode is viewed as a

rotation-like collective oscillations of the electron cloud against the ionic background. There

exist already a few theoretical considerations on that topic, early estimates from a collective

perspective [7], RPA calculations with a phenomenological Woods-Saxon potential [8], and

fully detailed RPA calculations using density-functional theory and jellium for the ionic

background [9]. The relation of scissors modes to orbital magnetism had been discussed in

Refs. [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Experimental access to scissors modes in clusters is yet an unresolved

problem [12] (see also discussion in Ref. [9]). Nevertheless, or just because of that, further

theoretical investigations are worthwhile in order to elucidate the nature of these modes and

their key features.

It is the aim of this paper to present a theoretical investigation of scissors mode in Na

clusters using time-dependent density functional theory for the electrons and fully detailed

ionic background. We will consider in particular the triaxial clusters Na12 and Na16. These

two test cases provide several interesting features. As triaxial clusters, they have deforma-

tion in all three spatial directions and thus should display three distinct scissors modes.

On the other hand, the single-particle excitation spectra are most diﬀuse in these soft sys-

tems which may give rise to strong fragmentation. Both clusters have spin-polarized and

axially symmetric isomers which give rise to crosstalk with the spin-dipole mode which is

energetically very close to the scissors mode. (The dipole and spin-dipole excitation spectra

in Na12 had been studied extensively in Ref.

[13].) The axial isomers allow also a direct

comparison between scissors modes in axial versus triaxial shapes. We will investigate the

impact of ionic structure on the scissors modes in two ways: ﬁrst, we compare the triaxially

deformed test cases with the results of the smooth jellium model, and second, we consider

as a complementing example the nearly spherical Na9

+ with full ionic structure. The test
+ with jellium background is used to disentangle the various

case of axially symmetric Na11

(counteracting) parts of the interaction, which compose the ﬁnal prediction of the frequency

of the mode.

3

II. FRAMEWORK

The electron cloud of the clusters is described by density-functional theory (DFT) at

the level of the time-dependent local-density approximation (TDLDA) using actually the

density functional of Ref.

[14]. The coupling of ions to electrons is described by a local

pseudo-potential which has been proven to yield correct ground state and optical excitation

properties of simple sodium clusters [15]. The electronic wavefunctions are represented on an

equidistant grid in three-dimensional coordinate space. The ground state solution is found

by iterative relaxation. The time evolution is done by the time-splitting method. For details

see the review [16].

To compute the spectral distributions, we employ spectral analysis after TDLDA prop-

agation [16, 17]. This technique which had been developed and much applied for studying

dipole resonances [16, 17, 18] is equally well adapted to the present case of the scissors mode.

The dedicated initialization of the scissors channel is achieved by rotating the ground-state

electron cloud by a small angle out of the equilibrium. The subsequent dynamics is ana-
lyzed with the orbital angular moment < ˆLi > which is the appropriate observable for the

orbital M1 strength. Crosstalk between the principal axes of the cluster is very small. Thus
ˆLxi
rotation about the x-axis (using ˆLx as a generator) explores the dynamics of ¯L(t) =
and similarly for y and z. We follow the time evolution for 200 fs. The Fourier transform of
¯L(t) provides the spectral strength distribution of orbital M1 strength. We also study the

h

crosstalk to other modes. This is done simply by taking a protocol of the dipole moments
ˆDi ∝
tion direction) and Fourier transforming them. In that case, we consider the spectral power

riˆσ0 (where ˆσ0 is the Pauli spin matrix along quantiza-

ri as well as spin-dipoles Si ∝

distribution which is the sum of squared absolute values of the respective Fourier transforms.

For a more detailed discussion of the spin-dipole see Ref. [13].

The global deformation of the cluster ionic background is crucial for the scissors excita-

tions [7, 8]. It is characterized by the dimensionless quadrupole moments recoupled to the

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

total deformation β and triaxiality γ:

β = qβ2

20 + 2β2
22

,

γ = atan

√2β22
β20

,

β2m =

4π
5NI

r2Y2m
r2

where NI is the number of ions (atoms). The deﬁnition of the β2m contains a simple classical

averaging over the ionic positions.

In order to check the impact of ionic structure, we also use, as an alternative to the

detailed ionic background, the soft jellium model [19] for the ionic density

ρI(r) =

1 + exp((r

R(Θ))/α)

,

ρI0

R(Θ) = R0

−
1 + X
m=0,





2

±

δ2mY2m(Θ)


1/3
where R0 = CrsN
I

, rs = 3.96 a0 is the Wigner-Seitz radius, the coeﬃcient C is adjusted

to ensure volume conservation

drρi(r) = NI , ρI0 = 3/(4πrs) is the bulk density. The

diﬀuseness α of the jellium surface allows to achieve a good reproduction of the empirical

optical properties [19, 20]. It can be justiﬁed by folding a steep jellium drop with a local

ionic pseudo-potential [19]. We choose the diﬀuseness α = 1 a0. The generating deformation

parameters δ20 and δ22 = δ2

2 are adjusted to give the intended deformations β and γ

according to Eq. (1). The averaging in Eq. (1) then becomes a weighted integration over

R

−

the jellium density ρI.

III. BASIC ASPECTS OF SCISSORS MODE

Before proceeding to the fully detailed TDLDA calculations, it is worthwhile to look at

macroscopic features of the scissors mode as well as to present its simple microscopic view

in terms of a deformed shell model.

A. Collective picture of rotational vibrations

In a collective picture, the scissors mode can be viewed as small-angle rotations of the

spheroid of valence electrons against the spheroid of ions (see Fig. 1 , part a)). More

precisely, the displacement ﬁeld of this mode consists out of a rigid rotation of the electrons

against the positive ionic background plus a compensating quadrupole term which serves to

tune vanishing velocity at the surface [7] (see Fig. 1 , part b)).:

~u(~r) = ~Ω

×

~r + β(1 + β/3)−

(yz)

.

1

∇

The distortion of the momentum Fermi sphere generates a restoring force leading to rota-

tional oscillations which constitute the scissors mode [7].

The mode is characterized by low-energy oscillations with strong magnetic dipole transi-
Λπ = 1+ >

tions to the ground state. In axial clusters, the mode is speciﬁed by the states

|

where Λ is the projection of the orbital moment onto the symmetry axis z and π is the space

parity. The corresponding energy and magnetic strength are [7, 8]

ωM 1

2
r2
s

≃

N −
e

1/3

β

2µ2
b

|

0

1+

ˆLx |
B(M1) = 4
h
i
2
ωM 1Ner2 µ2
b
3
e β µ2
N 4/3

=

b

≃

where Ne is the number of valence electrons (we use here natural units me = ¯h = c = 1).

The value B(M1) stands for summed strength of the degenerated x- and y-branches. The

z-branch has vanishing strength for symmetry reasons. It is worth noting that B(M1) does

not depend on rs and so is the same for diﬀerent metals.

In triaxial clusters, the scissors mode splits into three branches with the frequencies [7]

and the strengths

ωi

M 1 = ωM 1

cos γ + 1
√3 sin γ
1
√3 sin γ

cos γ

−
2
√3sinγ















Bi(M1) =

M 1Ner2µ2
ωi

1
3

1
2

=

B(M1)

b
cos γ + 1
√3 sin γ
1
√3 sin γ

cos γ

−
2
√3 sinγ















where vectors run over i = x, y, z components. The estimates show that both the frequencies

and strengths are proportional to deformation β, which reﬂects the fact that collective

5

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

6

scissors modes can exist only in deformed systems. This feature may serve as an additional

indicator of quadrupole deformation in clusters. The scissors mode has been already observed

in several systems with diﬀerent physical nature (nuclei, Bose condensate, quantum dots).

This means that the mode is a general dynamical phenomenon persistent for deformed two-

component systems. It is interesting to note that there is another kind of universal orbital

magnetic mode, the twist M2 mode, which has been recently predicted in clusters [22]. The

twist may exist in systems of any shape and it is the strongest multipole magnetic mode in

medium and large spherical alkali metal clusters [22].

B. M1 transitions in the deformed shell model

In order to see which single electron states are the most relevant in building the scissors

mode, we check the structure of the transition in the framework of the Clemenger-Nilsson

model [23, 24]. The major shells

of the spherical oscillator remain a useful sorting scheme

for slightly deformed clusters. Taking into account that

is connected with the space parity
1)N , one may immediately conclude that Λπ = 1+

N

of the levels inside the shell as π = (

−

scissors mode has to be mainly generated by low-energy ∆

= 0 transitions inside the

N

valence shell and high-energy ∆

= 2 transitions through two shells.

N

N

More information can be obtained from the expression for the orbital M1 transition

element which in axially deformed clusters has the form

2 δπp,πhδΛp,Λh+1

ˆL+1

Ψp|

h

|

= 1

Ψhi
ap
nLah

X
nL

nLqL(L+1)

Λh(Λh+1)

.

−

(9)

Here, the wave function of a particle (ν = p) or hole (ν = h) deformed state Ψν=
PnL aν
which n stands for the number of radial nodes; nz labels the projection of the principle

nLRnL(r)YLΛ(Ω)χ1/2ν is written as a superposition of spherical (nL)-conﬁgurations in

nzΛ =

N

N

= nx + ny + nz into z-axis. Eq.

shell number
generated by Λp = Λh ±
and the same spherical (nL)-conﬁguration. In spherical systems (nLΛ)-states belonging to

1 transitions between wave function components belonging to one

(9) shows that the scissors mode is

such conﬁguration are degenerate while in deformed systems these states are energetically

split and so may be connected by M1 transitions with non-zero energies. This is just the

origin of the scissors mode. Obviously, the energy scale of the scissors mode is determined

7

by the deformation energy splitting and so is rather small. This explains predominantly

low-energy (∆

=0) character of the scissors mode. Just the low-energy branch exhausts

N

most of the scissors B(M1) strength. The high-energy (∆

=2) branch of the mode carries

much weaker strength since the particle states involved into (∆

=2) transitions include

N

N

only small fractions of (nL)-conﬁgurations from the valence shell.

One may show [8] that in the harmonic oscillator space the M1 transition matrix element
is proportional to the matrix element of the quadrupole operator r2Y21. This indicates a

coupling between the high-energy (∆

=2) branch of scissors mode and electric λµ = 21

quadrupole plasmon in deformed clusters [8].

N

Note that in spherical clusters the M1 transitions connect degenerated states from one and

the same (nL)-conﬁguration. These transitions have zero energy and, therefore, the scissors

mode in spherical jellium clusters is absent. The ionic structure destroys the spherical
symmetry even at zero global deformation β = 0 and thus allows some ˆL
±

1 -response in

such clusters. It remains to be seen how strong this eﬀect is in actual calculations.

Eq. (9) hints that the strength of the scissors modes increases with the orbital moments

L which are involved. Besides that, low azimuthal quantum numbers Λ favor the mode. In

heavy clusters high orbital moments are accessible and thus these clusters can exhibit strong
orbital eﬀects [8]. Already at Ne ∼
value of 300-400 µ2

b. The RPA calculations conﬁrm the trend (5) for the frequency but

300 the magnetic strength B(M1) can reach impressive

reveal in light clusters considerable ﬂuctuations around the trend (7) for the strength [8, 9].

These ﬂuctuations are due to quantal shell eﬀects. Finally, it is worth to mention that the

scissors mode determines van Vleck paramagnetism and leads to strong anisotropy of orbital

magnetic susceptibility [7, 8, 9, 10].

C. Preparatory example

As a ﬁrst example, we consider the simple case of a strictly axial cluster. To this end we
+ with a soft jellium background (generating deformation δ20 = 0.38, γ = 0). The

chose Na11

symmetry allows only degenerate x- and y-scissors modes. The associated spherical valence
+, the Fermi level

nzΛ = 220, 211, 202 and 200. In Na11

shell (2s,1d) consists of 4 levels:

N

220 is fully occupied and the other three levels remain empty. The only possible scissors

transition is 220

211. The low density of particle-hole (1ph) excitations reduces fragmen-

→

8

tation of the M1 strength and thus one has only one pronounced scissors peak, the ideal

scenario for a ﬁrst exploration. The upper panel of Fig. 2 shows the spectral distribution

of M1 strength. The full line is the result from the linearized TDLDA calculations [9, 21]

with full interaction. We use this clean test case to identify the various contributions of the

residual interaction. The ground state is always computed with the full energy functional.

But for the excitation spectrum, we consider also the terms of the residual interaction sepa-

rately. One ﬁnds in the upper panel the spectrum for the cases of no residual interaction at

all (unperturbed 1ph response) and of pure Coulomb. The Coulomb interaction is strongly

repulsive (like for the dipole mode) and results in a strong blue shift of the unperturbed

strength. The blue shift for the total residual interaction is much smaller. This is due to

the strongly attractive residual interaction from the exchange-correlation part of the func-

tional. In fact, the exchange-correlation interaction alone produces so much attraction that

the scissors mode acquires an imaginary frequency. The mode becomes unstable and is thus

missing in the ﬁgure.

The lower panel of Fig. 2 shows as a complementing information the radial proﬁle of

the residual interaction. The density dependent operator Q21(~r) of multipolarity λµ = 21 is
(∂2E/∂ρ2)δρ where δρ is the transition

in fact the (radially averaged) response potential

−

density and E is the energy functional. The plot shows the full residual interaction as well as

its two separate contributions. Repulsive parts are negative in this representation. One sees

nicely that Coulomb is strongly repulsive, exchange-correlation is attractive and the total

eﬀect is a moderate repulsion. After all we see that the net residual interaction is composed

from two counteracting pieces. This inhibits any general statement about the expected shift.

Blue shift as well as red shift can emerge depending on the actual transition density. But

one can predict that the total residual interaction will always be rather small (with possible

exceptions in special cases).

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Na12: global deformation versus ionic structure

Figure 3 shows for Na12 the scissors strength, i.e. the Fourier transformed signal ¯Li(t),

as computed from real time TDLDA (section II). The spin-saturated triaxial ground state

9

and spin-polarized axial isomer are considered with both ionic and jellium backgrounds.

Triaxiality mixes the states with diﬀerent Λ but still conserves the space parity. The ionic

background makes the states parity mixed as well.

The spectra for the triaxial ground state (left lower panel) show the modes Lx, Ly, and Lz.

The z-mode has one dominant peak at the low-energy end. Two other modes are strongly

fragmented. A quick glance at the lower insert explains this. The density of 1ph states is

very large in this neutral and triaxial cluster and thus spectral fragmentation is very likely.

The lower end of the spectrum coincides with the lowest 1ph excitation which hints that

the net eﬀect of the residual interaction is rather weak. A simpliﬁed axial treatment can

roughly explain the origin of three main peaks in x- and y-responses: in Na12 the Fermi level

is one-half occupied level

nzΛ =211 and within the valence (2s-1d)- shell there should be

N

three main scissors transitions: 220

211, 211

202, and 211

200.

→

→

→

Note also the M1 strength around 3 eV. This is the high-energy branch of the scissors

mode. It emerges from the scissors transitions through two quantum shells (∆

= 2) as

N

mentioned in subsection III B. This branch exhibits a coupling to the λµ = 21 component

of the quadrupole plasmon [8]. The energy range coincides perfectly with the position of the

quadrupole plasmon around 3 eV (it is placed approximately at q6/5 times the frequency of
the Mie plasmon which is here around 2.8 eV). The strength is strongly fragmented because

the weakly bound triaxial Na12 has a high density of 1ph states in this energy region (actually

not shown in the ﬁgure).

The upper left panel of Fig. 3 shows results for a comparable jellium background. For this

aim, we have computed the global deformation of the ionic conﬁguration. This yields β =

0.55 and γ = 17o. The jellium background is tuned to have precisely the same deformation.

The 1ph states start now at much lower energy since the energy gap at the Fermi surface

is lower than with an explicit ionic conﬁguration. This has two reasons: the jellium model

is less bound here and we are not perfectly in the minimum of the jellium deformation

energy surface, which does not coincide with the deformation associated to the case with

explicit ions. Consequently, the whole spectra are shifted to lower frequencies where the ﬁrst

1ph states are now situated. This corroborates again the fact that the residual interaction

has a small eﬀect. Moreover, we see by comparison with the 1ph spectra that the residual

interaction can act both ways, repulsive or attractive. It is interesting to note that, in spite

of the strong general downshift as compared to the case with detailed ionic background, the

10

relation amongst the scissors states (ordering, fragmentation) remains almost unchanged.

And the downshift is simply given by the spectral gap in the ground state. This hints that

global deformation is the crucial ingredient determining the pattern of the scissors spectra.

The comparison of the 1ph spectra in the left column of Fig. 3 is puzzling. It looks as if

the better bound ionic conﬁguration has the higher density of states. Part of this is indeed

the eﬀect that the larger spectral gap compresses the states just above the gap. Another

part is generated by the fact that the jellium background is reﬂection symmetric about all

three major planes while the ionic background induces slight symmetry breaking. There are

more degeneracy in the jellium spectrum and none at all for the ionic background.

The right panels of Fig. 3 show the same analysis for the ﬁrst isomer. This conﬁguration

is axially symmetric, i.e. γ = 0o, but spin polarized with net spin 2 [13]. Total deformation

is β = 0.58, close to the deformation of the triaxial state. The upper right panel (axial

jellium model) shows nicely the exact degeneracy of x with y modes and the absence of

the z mode. The spectrum is again fragmented in accordance with the high density of 1ph

states. The lower right panel shows results with ionic structure. The z mode still nearly

disappears. The degeneracy of x and y modes is somewhat broken because a detailed ionic

structure breaks strict axial symmetry. This cluster is axial only in average, i.e.

in the

sense that γ = 0o. The 1ph spectra are about at the same position in both cases here and

similarly the fully coupled spectra. The responses are compatible with the assumption of

small residual interaction. Moreover, we see that the detailed ionic structure does not help

the z mode to show up (which would, in principle, be possible). Again, we conclude that

global deformation determines the overall pattern of scissors modes.

The inserts between upper and lower panels in Fig. 3 show the collective estimates (7)

and (5) for the scissors frequencies, obtained in a jellium model with given deformation

parameters. Although the estimates belong to the jellium case, they can be connected with

lower panels as well, as a collective view where only the global deformation counts. The

estimates provide rough positions of the scissors modes but they miss any details. The

actual spectra show that the details, driven by interference with 1ph structure, are crucial

in these very soft clusters with a high level density.

B.

Na16: crosstalk

11

The orbital M1 mode and spin excitations belong to the same channel (see more on spin

modes in clusters in Refs.
N 8/3
e

B(M1)2

spectra

∼

∝

[25]-[27]). The orbital strength

evidently overrules the spin strength (

∼

B(M1)
N 0

N 4/3
e

and power

∝
e ) for large clusters.

∝

But they can compete in the small clusters considered here. There is an intriguing question

how strong is a crosstalk between the modes. This point is better discussed in terms of

power spectra, although we are in the linear regime. Mind that we are now plotting in

logarithmic scale which is more appropriate for power spectra with their larger variations.

The various power spectra emerging from excitation of the scissors mode (i.e. with a

rotational distortion) are shown for Na16 in the upper block of Fig. 4 The block exhibits

angular, spin-dipole and dipole responses. Both unpolarized ground state and spin-polarized

ﬁrst isomer of the cluster are considered. This case is diﬀerent from Na12 in that both

conﬁgurations are triaxial. The spin-saturated ground state and spin-polarized isomer have

deformations β = 0.35 with γ = 38o and β = 0.32 with γ = 15o, respectively.

The uppermost panels show the angular momentum spectra associated with M1 strength.

The patterns are similar to the previous case of Na12 but diﬀer in detail due to diﬀerent

1ph distributions. The lowest panels of the upper blocks show the power spectrum in the

dipole channel driven by the crosstalk with the angular momentum mode. The coupling is

obviously very weak. In fact, there would be no crosstalk at all in a reﬂection symmetric

jellium model. The eﬀect here is triggered by the slight asymmetries in the detailed ionic

conﬁguration.

The middle panels show the crosstalk with the spin-dipole mode. There is no crosstalk

at all in the case of the spin saturated ground state. But a strong crosstalk appears for

the spin-polarized isomer. In that case, the scissors and spin motions are fully coupled and

have to be considered as one hybrid mode. As complementing information, we show in the

lower block of Fig. 4 the spin-dipole strength after spin-dipole excitation. For the isomer

(right column), one recognizes the same spin-dipole spectrum as in middle panel of the

upper block. The strength distribution is, of course, diﬀerent because the excitation channel

was diﬀerent. For the spin saturated ground state (left column), there is now a clear spin-

dipole signal. This mode is clearly separated from the scissors, but it resides precisely in the

same low-energy range as the scissors mode. An experimental discrimination would require

12

to separate the spin and orbital currents. This question has been extensively discussed in

nuclear physics where the form factor for inelastic electron scattering may give access to the

separate information (see, e.g., Ref. [3]). The problem is much worse for clusters due to very

low energies involved. The easiest way is to exploit the scaling with system size and to go for

large clusters where spin-dipole excitations become relatively unimportant (see discussion

in Ref. [9]).

It is worth to emphasize that the cross-talks discussed above connect the modes of the

opposite space parity. This becomes possible due to mixing conﬁgurations of a diﬀerent

parity in the detailed ionic background.

C.

Na9

+: pure ionic eﬀects

As we have seen in the examples above, the scissors mode exists if the electron cloud can

accomplish rotational-like oscillations against a massively deformed background. The mode

does not work at all in the case of the perfect spherical symmetry. But clusters do have

ionic structure which breaks spherical symmetry even if the global quadrupole deformation

vanishes. It is then conceivable that the electron cloud performs rotational-like vibrations

against the ionic background. Such transversal optical modes exist in the solid state [28].

Their frequency is proportional to momentum as in the acoustic branch. One may expect

similar low-energy modes in a ﬁnite system with zero global deformation as well.

To check this, we consider the example of Na9

+. Its conﬁguration consists in two rings

of four ions toped by one single ion. The conﬁguration has β = 0.08 and is thus fairly close

to global spherical symmetry. It is to be noted that the top ion breaks reﬂection symmetry.

Figure 5 shows the angular momentum strength in this cluster. There is some strength

at 1.5-2 eV and another branch at 3.5-4.5 eV. The latter has position and strength much

similar to the high-frequency branches in the previous examples. (The slight blue-shift is

caused by positive net charge as compared to the neutral clusters considered before.) The

branch is again related to the quadrupole plasmon and is predominantly composed of ∆

=

2 transitions. However, the low-frequency branch has higher frequency and much weaker

strength than in the previous examples. In fact it is related to ∆

= 1 transitions. The

N

larger frequency is explained by the fact that we deal here with a small magic cluster with

a big HOMO-LUMO gap. The much lower strength is no surprise. Note that ∆

= 1

N

N

13

transitions change space parity and would not be accessed by M1 motion in a jellium model.

But the detailed ionic background mixes conﬁgurations of diﬀerent parity and so even-parity
ˆLi operators can generate, though weak, the transitions of ∆

=1 kind. This explains why,

N

unlike the previous examples, the ﬁrst branch is weaker than the second one.

Such motion may be related to the transversal optical mode. But it is not possible to

track that down unambiguously because in this small cluster the low-frequency M1 mode

is predominantly of 1ph nature. Larger magic clusters are required for such an analysis.

Altogether, we have seen magnetic M1 strength in a “spherical” cluster. This strength has

diﬀerent sources than the scissors mode. It takes place even at zero global deformation and

has very little strength as compared to the genuine scissors modes.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented fully microscopic TDLDA calculations for the scissors mode in small

Na clusters taking into account detailed ionic structure, triaxiality and spin-polarization.

The results were analyzed in terms of a simple collective (=macroscopic) picture and of more

microscopic shell-model view of the mode. To single out the eﬀects of ionic background, a

comparison to jellium cases was done. Clusters with diﬀerent global deformation (spherical,

axial and triaxial) were considered.

The test case of Na11

+ with jellium background displays straightforward and unfrag-

mented scissors peak. This case was used to study the various contributions to the residual

interaction deﬁning the actual peak position.

It revealed that Coulomb and exchange-

correlation terms act in opposite directions, resulting ﬁnally only in a small collective energy

shift. The actual sign depends on details, as e.g. interplay with particle-hole structures. The

calculations for Na12 show that jellium results demonstrate good agreement with macroscopic

estimates for the low-energy scissors branch, though the estimates miss such important as-

pect as fragmentation of the strength due to particle-hole states. There is also a high-energy

scissors branch which is explained as a result of the transitions through two quantum shells.

Triaxiality produces a richer picture. It gives rise to an additional Lz-scissors branch and

to considerable increase of the fragmentation. Besides that, triaxiality combined with the

delicate balance between Coulomb and exchange-correlation contributions can lead to both

red and blue shifts in one and the same spectrum.

14

Detailed ionic structure leads to the blue-shift of the scissors mode as compared to jellium

results. It also considerably enhances the fragmentation. The ionic background causes small

parity-mixing which results in a crosstalk, although weak, between positive-parity scissors

and negative-parity dipole excitations. This crosstalk takes place for both spin-saturated

and spin-polarized states. Spin-polarized states demonstrate in addition a strong crosstalk

of the scissors and spin-dipole modes, the eﬀect which is absent in spin-saturated states.

Both modes happen to reside in the same corner of low-energy states which makes their

experimental discrimination extremely tough.

Comparison of results from jellium with those using detailed ionic background shows that

the scissors modes are mainly determined by the global deformation. The ionic background

as such destroys locally the spherical symmetry and gives rise to some M1 orbital strength

(as the transversal optical modes in solids). This becomes apparent by the existence of Li
response even in clusters with zero global deformation, like Na+

9 . The strength of such a

mode is an order of magnitude smaller than the collective scissors strength which lives up

in truly deformed systems.

The scissors mode is a general dynamical eﬀect peculiar to diﬀerent Fermi (and even

Bose) systems with a disturbed symmetry.

In the particular case of atomic clusters, the

mode demonstrates very interesting features deserving further study. The main problem,

not tackled in this paper, is its unique experimental identiﬁcation. Such questions will be

considered in a forthcoming publication.

Acknowledgments

The work was supported by grants from RFBR (00-02-17194), Heisenberg-Landau pro-

gram (BMBF-BLTP JINR), DFG (436RUS17/102/01) the French-German exchange pro-

gram PROCOPE (99074), and Institut Universitaire de France. V.O.N. thanks N. Lo Iudice

for useful discussions.

[1] N. Lo Iudice and F. Palumbo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1532 (1978).

[2] E. Lipparini and S. Stringari, Phys. Lett. 130B, 139 (1983).

[3] D. Bohle et al, Phys. Lett. B137, 27 (1984).

15

[4] N. Lo Iudice, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 28, 556 (1997).

[5] Ll. Serra, A.Puente, and E. Lipparini, Phys. Rev., B20, R13966 (1999).

[6] D. Gu´eri and S. Stringari, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4452 (1999).

[7] E. Lipparini and S. Stringari, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 570 (1989); E. Lipparini and S. Stringari,

Z. Phys. D 18, 193 (1991).

[8] V.O. Nesterenko, W. Kleinig, F.F. de Souza Cruz, and N. Lo Iudice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 57

[9] V.O. Nesterenko, W. Kleinig, P.-G. Reinhard, J.R. Marinelli, and F.F. de Souza Cruz, preprint

(1999).

2002.

233402 (2001).

271 (1999).

[10] V.O. Nesterenko, W.Kleinig, F.F. de Souza Cruz, and J.R. Marinelli, in Proc. of Intern.

Symposium on Cluster and Nanostructure Interfaces, Richmond, USA, 1999. Eds. P. Jena,

S.N. Khanna and B.K. Rao, World Scientiﬁc, Singapour, 2000, p.209-216; Preprint JINR

E4-2000-14, Dubna, 2000.

[11] S. Frauendorf, V.V. Pashkevich and S.M. Reimann, Surf. Review and Letters 3, 441 (1996).

[12] H. Portales, E. Duval, L. Saviot, M. Fujii, M. Sumitomo, and S. Hayashi, Phys. Rev. B63,

[13] C. Kohl, S.M. El-Gammal, F. Calvayrac, E. Suraud, P.-G. Reinhard, Eur.Phys.Journ. D 5,

[14] O. Gunnarsson and B.I. Lundqvist, Phys.Rev. B 13, 4274 (1976).

[15] S. K¨ummel, M. Brack, P.-G. Reinhard, Euro. Phys. J. D 9, 149 (1999).

[16] F. Calvayrac, P.-G. Reinhard, E. Suraud, and C. Ullrich, Phys. Rep. 337, 493 (2000).

[17] F. Calvayrac, P.-G. Reinhard, and E. Suraud, Ann.Phys (N.Y.) 255, 125 (1997).

[18] K. Yabana and G. F. Bertsch, Phys. Rev. B54, 4484 (1996).

[19] P.-G. Reinhard, O. Genzken, and M. Brack, Ann. Physik (Leipzig) 5, 576 (1996).

[20] A. Rubio, L.C. Balbas, and J.A. Alonso, Z. Phys. D19, 93 (1991).

[21] W. Kleinig, V.O. Nesterenko and P.-G. Reinhard, to be published in Ann.Phys (N.Y.); arXiv:

physics/0110057.

[22] J.R. Marinelli, V. Nesterenko, F.F. de Souza-Cruz, W. Kleinig, and P.-G. Reinhard, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 85, 3141 (2000).

[23] K. Clemenger, Phys.Rev. B 32, 1359 (1985).

[24] W.A. de Heer, Rev.Mod.Phys. 65, 611 (1993).

[25] Ll. Serra et al, Phys.Rev. A 47, R1601 (1993).

[26] L. Mornas, L. Calvayrac, E. Suraud, and P.-G. Reinhard, Z. Phys. D 38, 73 (1996).

[27] Ll. Serra and E. Lipparini, Z. Phys. D 42, 227 (1997).

[28] H. Ibach, H. L¨uth, Festk¨orperphysik, ch. 9.4, (Springer, Berlin 1981).

16

17

Figure captions:

rigid surface.

Figure 1: Macroscopic view of scisors mode [7]: a) rigid rotation, b) rotation within a

Figure 2: Scissors photo-absorption cross section (upper panel) and radial proﬁle of
+. Four cases are compared: no residual interaction

residual interaction (lower panel) for Na11

at all (denoted ph, dashed line in upper panel), only Coulomb residual interaction (dotted

lines), only exchange-correlation part of residual interaction (dashed line in lower panel),

full residual interaction (full line). No scissors strength could be shown for the exchange-

correlation part alone because in this case the residual interaction is so strongly attractive

that an imaginary frequency emerges.

Figure 3: Strength distribution of angular momentum modes in Na12. The quadrupole

deformation of the jellium background is chosen to be the same as in the states with full

ionic structure. The modes Lx, Ly, and Lz are distinguished by the lines as indicated in

the left upper panel. Inserts under the panels show the 1ph spectra (bars) up to

2 eV.

∼

The boxes in the left and right inserts between upper and lower panels show the collective

estimates (7) and (5), respectively, for the scissors frequencies in the jellium model.

Figure 4: The upper block shows various power distributions in Na16 after angular ex-

citation: angular (upper), spin-dipole (middle), dipole (lower). Unpolarized triaxial ground

state (left) and spin-polarized axial isomer (right) are considered. The lowest block shows

spin-dipole power following spin-dipole excitation. In all the calculations, full ionic struc-

ture is taken into account. Every case has three modes in each spatial direction. They are

distinguished by lines as indicated.

Figure 5: Strength distribution of angular momentum modes in Na9

+, described with

detailed ionic structure. The 1ph spectra at low energies are indicated in the insert below.

ph
Coulomb
total

+

 Na 11

0

0.2

0.8

1

0.6

0.4
w [ eV]

xc
Coulomb
total

5

10

15

r [Å]

]
6
-
0
1

 
 
2

Å

[

 
e
N

/
)
1
M

(

8

6

4

2

0

]
.
n
u

 
.

b
r
a
[
1
2

 

Q

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

s
