2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

STRUCTURE AND SPECTROSCOPY OF DOPED HELIUM
CLUSTERS USING QUANTUM MONTE CARLO TECHNIQUES

ALEXANDRA VIEL

Lehrstuhl f¨ur Theoretische Chemie
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen
85747 Garching, Germany

K. BIRGITTA WHALEY

Dept. of Chemistry and K.S. Pitzer Center for Theoretical Chemistry
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1460, USA

We present a comparative study of the rotational characteristics of various
molecule-doped 4He clusters using quantum Monte Carlo techniques. The the-
oretical conclusions obtained from both zero and ﬁnite temperature Monte Carlo
studies conﬁrm the presence of two diﬀerent dynamical regimes that correlate with
the magnitude of the rotational constant of the molecule, i.e., fast or slow rotors.
For a slow rotor, the eﬀective rotational constant for the molecule inside the he-
lium droplet can be determined by a microscopic two-ﬂuid model in which helium
densities computed by path integral Monte Carlo are used as input, as well as by
direct computation of excited energy levels. For a faster rotor, the conditions for
application of the two-ﬂuid model for dynamical analysis are usually not fulﬁlled
and the direct determination of excitation energies is then mandatory. Quanti-
tative studies for three molecules are summarized, showing in each case excellent
agreement with experimental results.

1 Introduction

Droplets of 4He provide a unique quantum environment that constitutes an ultra-
cold and gentle matrix for high resolution spectroscopy1 and for investigating the
nature and dynamic consequences of quantum solvation for a wide range of im-
purities doped into superﬂuids.2 One of the most unusual features deriving from
those experiments is the apparent free rotation of small molecules embedded inside
these bosonic clusters at temperatures T ∼ 0.4 K.3 Rotational spectra obtained
for a series of molecules possessing gas phase rotational constant B0 in the range
0.01−50 cm−1,1, 3 appear to fall into two dynamical regimes. The heavier molecules
(slow rotors) show a reduction in rotation constant of ∼ 60 − 80%, while lighter
molecules (fast rotors) show a much smaller reduction of 0 − 30%. In this article,
we focus on the behavior of the three molecules SF6, OCS, and HCN. The ﬁrst two
belong to the ﬁrst dynamical regime of slow rotors, showing a similar reduction of
B/B0 ∼ 37% in both cases.1 The third molecule, HCN, is a much faster rotor and
the experimentally observed reduction of rotational constant B/B0 is only 19%.4
For each of these molecules, accurate pair interaction potentials with helium ex-
ist, rendering quantitative calculations meaningful and reliable tests of quantum
theories for molecular rotation in helium droplets.

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

1

2 Methodologies

Our theoretical studies of molecule-doped helium clusters are based both on T = 0
methods diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC) and the projector Monte Carlo extension of
this for excited states (POITSE), and on the ﬁnite temperature path integral Monte
Carlo (PIMC) approach with incorporation of full quantum exchange symmetry.3
With DMC based techniques we evaluate directly the ground and excited energy
levels of the doped cluster, focusing in this study on rotational excited states.
With the PIMC calculations we are able to compute ﬁnite temperature helium
densities. These can then used as input for a two-ﬂuid dynamical model that
combines notions of adiabatic following with hydrodynamic estimates of superﬂuid
response to molecular rotation.3 We provide in this section a short summary of how
the quantum Monte Carlo methods are implemented for study of systems composed
of a single molecule treated as a rigid body, together with N helium atoms.

2.1 Diﬀusion Monte Carlo

The diﬀusion Monte Carlo technique for solving the Schr¨odinger equation for many-
body systems is based on the imaginary time (τ = it/¯h) Schr¨odinger equation

∂Ψ(R)
∂τ

=

N

Xj

Dj∇2

j Ψ(R) − [V (R) − Eref ] Ψ(R),

(1)

where R is a vector in the N -dimensional space, Dj = ¯h2/2mj if the jth degree of
freedom corresponds to a translation, and Dj = Bj = ¯h2/2Ij if it corresponds to a
rotation. In the above equation, Eref is a constant deﬁning the zero of the absolute
energy scale, and V is the potential. This formulation implies the use of Cartesian
coordinates for the atom-like particles and for the center of mass of the rigid body,
and the use of rotational angles around the principal axes of the rigid body. This
diﬀusion-like equation is solved using random walks and a short time approximation
for the Green’s function.5 The eﬀects of statistical noise on the results can be
drastically reduced by introducing a guiding (or “importance sampling”) function
ΨT that approximates the true solution Ψ of Eq.(1), and by then rewriting the
diﬀusion-like equation for the product function f (R) = Ψ(R)ΨT (R) :

∂f (R)
∂τ

=

N

Xj (cid:8)

Dj∇2

j f (R) − Dj∇j [f (R)Fj (R)]

− [El(R) − Eref ] f (R).

(2)

(cid:9)

Here El(R) = ΨT (R)−1 ˆHΨT (R) is the local energy, and Fj(R) = ∇j ln |ΨT (R)|2
is the quantum force that controls the drift terms (second set of terms on right-
hand side of Eq. (2)). We have recently shown6 that one can use this importance
sampling scheme for all degrees of freedom, including the rotation of the molecule
when treated as a rigid body. The average of the potential (in unbiased walks) or of
the local energy (in biased, or “importance sampled” walks) over the random walk
yields the ground state energy of the system. Whenever a short-time expansion
for the Green’s function is used, it is necessary to check that any time step bias is
removed, or is at least smaller than the statistical noise.

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

2

With the incorporation of importance sampling into DMC it becomes possible to
compute the helium density, or at least a mixed density hΨT |ρ|Ψi, by simply binning
the position of the helium atoms in a frame attached to the molecule during the
random walk. It is also possible to analyze the extent of adiabatic following of the
molecular motion by the helium density, by artiﬁcially suppressing the rotational
kinetic term of the dopant molecule in the Hamiltonian operator.3, 7, 8 Complete
adiabatic following implies that the helium density in a frame attached to the
molecule must be identical in both cases, i.e., with and without the incorporation of
molecular rotation. We have also proposed3, 8 a straightforward method to quantify
the extent of the adiabatic following. This can be done by evaluating the ratio
of the densities along privileged axes in the molecule-helium system, with and
without rotation: Q(r) ≡ ([ρsaddle/ρmin]no rot) / ([ρsaddle/ρmin]rot). When adiabatic
following is signiﬁcant, Q(r) is close to one. In contrast, a value of Q(r) close to
zero indicates weak or minimal adiabatic following.

Just as in analysis of experimental spectra,1 the rotational constants can be
extracted by ﬁtting the energy diﬀerences between diﬀerent rotational states. For
spherical and linear rotors, the ﬁrst energy diﬀerence between ground and ﬁrst ex-
cited states is equal to 2B. This approach requires the explicit computation of
excited state energies. Such computations can be done in an approximate way by
making use of the widely employed ﬁxed node approximation. In this approxima-
tion, one imposes a predeﬁned nodal surface on the excited state wave function by
use of a trial wave function bias, Eq. (2). However, unless the trial function node
is determined by symmetry considerations, great care must be taken when using
such a method. As we have seen for the dimer HCN-He,6, 9 a non-physical node can
easily lead to spurious energy levels. Exact calculations for N = 1 ”dimers” have
been useful for calibrating ﬁxed node calculations. A more reliable approach to cal-
culation of excited states is provided by the intrinsically more powerful and exact
method of Projection Operator Imaginary Time Spectral Evolution10 (POITSE).
This method allows the computation of excitation energies without imposing any
ﬁxed node constraints. The POITSE approach makes use of the inverse Laplace
transform of a ”projected” correlation function that leads to the spectral function

κ(E) =

|hψ0| ˆA|ψf i|2δ(E0 − Ef + E).

(3)

Xf

Diﬀerent excited energies Ef are accessed by choosing the projector ˆA such that
the overlap hψ0| ˆA|ψf i is non-vanishing for one or a few excited states ψf . The
evaluation of the correlation decay that constitutes the transform of Eq. (3) is done
by making DMC side walks on the Metropolis sampling of a ground state density.10
The numerical implementation used in the studies we summarize here has been
described elsewhere.9, 11 It is based on performing the DMC side walks with pure
branching, rather than the pure weights version that was used originally.10 This
allows for the computation of excited states of much larger systems than studied
previously.

For both ﬁxed node and POITSE calculations, one needs to have some infor-
mation about the nodal structure of the excited state of interest. In the case of
ﬁxed node, this is obviously extremely important since as mentioned above, the

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

3

results are completely dependent on the choice of this nodal surface.9 In contrast,
with POITSE, one can reach the exact energy level even with a ”wrong” projector.
This is nicely illustrated by the diﬀerent behavior in 4HeN of the three molecules
studied here. Examination of the symmetry of rotational spectra obtained in he-
lium droplets (spherical top for SF6 and linear molecule for OCS), as well as the
theoretical study of rotational excitations, made for the reduced dimensionality
”diatomic” SF6 model12 indicates that the relevant excited energy levels are those
in which the rotational energy is located primarily on the molecule, i.e., J ∼ j.
One corresponding wave function for this situation in the case of a free molecule is
the Wigner function |j = 1, k = 0, m = 0i. One can use this Wigner function as a
trial nodal structure or, alternatively, as a projector for POITSE. In the ﬁxed node
approximation, the results are valid only insofar as this particular nodal constraint
is valid, i.e., physically correct. In contrast, application of the POITSE method
with this Wigner projector leads to the correct energy levels no matter how weakly
the true nodal structure in the cluster resembles that of the free molecule.

For small N , these rotational constants derived from direct computations of the
rotational energy levels of the doped cluster can be usefully compared with values
obtained from rigid coupling approximations for the total helium density. This
extreme dynamical approximation can also be described as a form of adiabatic
following, although it is important to realize that the consequences of following
with rigid coupling of the total helium density are diﬀerent from both the adiabatic
following of a hydrodynamically responding ﬂuid,3, 13 and the adiabatic following
analysis for a two-ﬂuid decomposition of the density.3, 8

2.2 PIMC, two-ﬂuid, and hydrodynamic models

The path integral Monte Carlo approach allows direct calculation of thermal aver-
ages of observables, with incorporation of the boson permutation symmetry for 4He
and without introduction of any trial function bias. It is currently also the only
numerical method capable of directly addressing superﬂuidity at non-zero temper-
atures.

In PIMC one computes the average of a quantum operator over the thermal

density matrix:

h ˆOi =

dRdR′ρ(R, R′; β)hR| ˆO|R′i,

(4)

1
Z Z

R

Here ρ(R, R′; β) = hR′|e−β ˆH |Ri is the thermal density matrix in the position rep-
resentation, Z =
dRρ(R, R; β) is the partition function, and β = 1/kbT . The
path integral Monte Carlo approach to evaluating Eq. (4) starts from the discrete
Feynman path-integral expansion of ρ(R, R′; β) in terms of high temperature com-
ponents ρ(R1, R2; τ ), where τ = β/M constitutes an imaginary time step. Use
of the discrete path integral expansion relies on the ability to ﬁnd accurate high-
temperature density matrices ρ(R1, R2; τ ) that render evaluation of the consequent
highly multi-dimensional integrals worthwhile, given the intractatibility of ﬁnding
representations for the low temperature density matrix of an interacting quantum
system, ρ(R, R′; β). For 4He systems, the density matrix must also be symmetrized

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

4

with respect to particle permutation exchanges, increasing the computational com-
plexity. This can be done with multi-level Metropolis sampling schemes that pro-
vides simultaneous sampling of the permutation and conﬁguration space, allowing
direct numerical study of superﬂuid properties at ﬁnite temperature, in addition to
structural and energetic properties.14

Path integral calculations provide estimators for thermal expectation values
(Eq. (4)). Linear response estimators for global superﬂuid fractions can be deﬁned
for both homogeneous and inhomogeneous systems, bulk or ﬁnite in extent.14 Thus
quantiﬁcation of a superﬂuid on a nanoscale is accessible from the global superﬂuid
fraction for a pure helium droplet. The study of molecules in helium clusters has
raised the question of what the local superﬂuid density around a molecule is, and
how this is distributed over the quantum solvation structure induced by the molecu-
lar interaction.3 Recent work in our group has proposed a local superﬂuid estimator
in terms of the length of the Feynman paths.15 This has been used to establish
a local two-ﬂuid model of the quantum solvation structure, based on the ﬁnding
from PIMC calculations that within the ﬁrst solvation shell, a local nonsuperﬂuid
density is induced by the molecular interaction with helium.3, 15 The extent of this
molecular-interaction induced nonsuperﬂuid density depends on the strength of the
interaction potential.

This local two-ﬂuid model has provided an atomic scale analysis of superﬂuid
solvation,15 and has also been used to analyze the rotational dynamics of the
molecule.3 The key additional concept for analysis of molecular rotation is the
notion of adiabatic following of some or all of the local helium density with the
molecular rotation. This adiabatic following, already encountered and quantiﬁed
in the T = 0 diﬀusion Monte Carlo calculations discussed above, leads to very dif-
ferent consequences for the local nonsuperﬂuid density and for the local superﬂuid
density. For the local nonsuperﬂuid density, adiabatic following implies an eﬀective
rigid coupling to the molecular rotation, while adiabatic following of the local su-
perﬂuid density can give rise to hydrodynamic added inertia,3, 5 analogous to the
well-known added mass of macroscopic hydrodynamics. As discussed in detail in
Ref.3, this results in a microscopic analog of the Andronikashvili experiment, with
the additional distinction that the molecular rotation is quantized and does not
provide a continuously varying driving force, unlike a macroscopic rotating probe.
This results in additional angular momentum constraints when the two-ﬂuid analy-
sis of molecular rotation is applied to interpretation of spectroscopic experiments.3
An alternative pure hydrodynamic model is obtained as the limiting case of the
two-ﬂuid model when the entire density is assumed to be superﬂuid and undergoes
adiabatic following.3, 13

3 Applications

In this section we present a summary of the various quantum Monte Carlo appli-
cations made to date for molecules embedded in 4He clusters. We focus on three
diﬀerent molecules: SF6, a slow spherical rotor, OCS, a slow linear rotor, and HCN,
a fast linear rotor. Table 1 summarizes the corresponding rotational constants in
the gas phase (B0) and in helium clusters (B), and also gives the molecular masses

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

5

used in the calculations.

Table 1. Experimentally rotational constants in gas phase B0 and inside helium droplets B, in
cm−1 . Also reported are the corresponding masses, in amu.

Molecule
SF6
OCS
HCN

B0
0.091
0.20
1.47

B
0.034
0.073
1.20

Ref.
16, 17
18
4

mass
146.0288
60.07455
27.01104

3.1 SF6

The ﬁrst experimental rotational spectrum was obtained for the spherical top
SF6.16, 17 For this slow rotor, the reduction of the B value inside a helium cluster is
relatively large, with B/B0 ∼ 36%. This molecule was also the ﬁrst for which the-
oretical studies of the rotational dynamics were made.3, 7, 12 Using the anisotropic
potential energy surface of Pack and co-workers,19 SF6 HeN has been studied both
with PIMC,3 and with DMC in the ﬁxed node approximation.7 A POITSE study
of a diatomic model of SF6 has also been made.12

The nonsuperﬂuid density of helium computed via PIMC is located in the
ﬁrst solvation shell and shows angular modulation structure resulting from the
anisotropic interaction of helium with the octahedral SF6 molecule.2, 3, 15 The ener-
getic criterion for adiabatic following is fulﬁlled in this case, and application of the
two-ﬂuid dynamical model leads to a value of B = 0.033 cm−1 in very good agree-
ment with the experimental value. Hydrodynamic calculations employing PIMC
densities calculated at the experimental temperature of T = 0.3 K show negligible
added mass contribution from either the superﬂuid or total density.3 The average
of the Q-factor for the dimer SF6-He is found to be around 0.7.8 This value is large
but not equal to unity, indicating that the adiabatic following of the helium density
with the molecular rotation is substantial but not complete in this system. The
Q-factor is similarly less than unity in larger clusters,3 implying that there is only
partial adiabatic following by the density within the ﬁrst solvation shell. This is
consistent with the detailed dynamical analysis of the two-ﬂuid model.3

The extraction of the rotational constant B has also been performed by direct
computation of energy levels. J = 1, 2, 3 levels for clusters with N = 1 to 20
helium atoms were calculated in ﬁxed node, employing the free molecule nodal
surfaces. For all sizes, the levels can be beautifully ﬁt to the spherical top formula
BJ(J + 1). The resulting B value decreases monotonically from the gas phase
value as N increases from unity until it reaches a plateau at N = 8 (Fig. 1). An
asymptotic value of B = 0.035 cm−1 is obtained, in very good agreement with the
experimental value extracted from spectra in large 4He droplets (Table 1).

In the POITSE study for SF6, the octahedral SF6 molecule was represented
by an eﬀective diatomic.12 The use of the original numerical implementation of
POITSE employing continuous weights in the DMC sidewalks limited this study to
N = 1, 2 and 3 helium atoms. Nevertheless, the extracted B values are similar to

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

6

the values obtained from the full dimensionality DMC calculations within the ﬁxed
node approximation (see discussion in Ref. 3), indicating that the free molecule
nodal structure used is indeed physical in this particular case.

0

B
B

/

0.6

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.4

0.2

0.0

HCN

SF6

1 2 3 4

6

8 10 12

15

20

25

N

Figure 1. Evolution of B/B0 with the number of helium atoms N for SF6 (circles) and HCN
(triangles). The experimental values in large droplets, 36% (SF6) and 81% (HCN), are indicated
by the arrows on the right hand axis. For SF6 the theoretical results were obtained within the
ﬁxed node approximation,7 and for HCN from POITSE calculations.9

3.2 OCS

The second dopant molecule studied by quantum Monte Carlo methods is OCS,
which is a linear rotor possessing a gas phase rotational constant B0 twice as big as
that of SF6. The increase of the moment of inertia measured in helium droplets18
leads to a ratio B/B0 ∼ 37 % that is nevertheless similar to the ratio for SF6.
Because the anisotropy of the OCS-He potential20 is very pronounced, we expect
that adiabatic following will also be strong for this system, even though the rotor
is somewhat faster than SF6. Path integral computation of the local superﬂuid
and nonsuperﬂuid solvation densities show that the energetic criterion for adiabatic
following is indeed fulﬁlled.3 Computation of the rotational constant using the two-
ﬂuid dynamical model leads to a value B = 0.067cm−1 when angular momentum
constraints are applied,3 in good agreement with the experimental value reported
in Table 1. For this system, the Q-factor computed by DMC is also around 0.7,
from which we can conclude that for OCS, adiabatic following of the helium density
is signiﬁcant but not complete.

When a quasi-adiabatic rigid coupling analysis3, 21, 22 is made for a small num-
ber of helium atoms (N < 7), this shows that as for SF6, the rotational B constant
decreases monotonically with N , and that a saturation will probably occur for 5 or
6 helium atoms. However, as pointed out in Ref. 3, and conﬁrmed in Ref. 23, this
saturation cannot be seen within the rigid coupling approximation, which continues

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

7

to show a monotonic decrease of B as the cluster size increases. In contrast, the
POITSE approach allows calculation of the rotational excitation without any dy-
namical approximation. POITSE calculations have recently allowed the saturation
at small N values to be demonstrated explicitly.22 A projector based on the free
molecule Wigner function, |j = 1, k = 0, m = 0i produces a POITSE decay which
contains only a single exponential term. This is easily Laplace inverted using the
maximum entropy approach. The position of the single peak obtained, which we
equate with 2B, moves towards a smaller value as N increases from 1 to 6. The
peak position then remains unchanged as N is further increased to 10 and to 20.
The extracted saturation B value of 0.07 cm−1 is in good agreement with the ex-
perimental value measured in much larger clusters (see Table 1). This saturation
at a small number of helium atoms corresponding to only a fraction of the ﬁrst
solvation shell is similar to the situation described above for the octahedral SF6
molecule.7 It similarly implies that for OCS a fraction of the ﬁrst solvation shell
density undergoes adiabatic following characterized by an eﬀective rigid coupling
of only that density fraction to the molecular rotation.

3.3 HCN

The last dopant molecule we discuss here, HCN, is also a linear rotor, but a much
faster one than OCS. The value of B0 for HCN is more than one order of magni-
tude larger than the values for SF6 and OCS. The reduction of rotational constant
observed experimentally for HCN is also much smaller than the corresponding re-
duction for the two previous molecules. Thus, for HCN the ratio B/B0 is ∼ 81%.4
Path integral analysis concluded that both the two-ﬂuid dynamical model and hy-
drodynamic models are not applicable here because of lack of eﬃcient adiabatic fol-
lowing of the HCN rotation.3 This is not surprising, given the very weak anisotropy
of the interaction potential for HCN with a single helium atom24 and the relatively
high value of the gas phase rotational constant B0.

Confronted with the impossibility of applying two-ﬂuid or hydrodynamic models
in this case of a fast rotor, energy level calculations have been performed to directly
access the rotational excitations in helium clusters.9 These have been made with
both ﬁxed node and with the exact POITSE method, and the eﬀective rotational
constant B extracted in each case by ﬁtting energy level diﬀerences. By comparison
with levels obtained from basis set calculations,9, 24 it was found that for HCN at
the very smallest cluster size (N = 1), the nodal structure of the free molecule is
not physical and leads to an erroneous energy level that does not appear in the
basis set calculations. We have proposed that this feature derives from an unusual
coincidence between the ground state energy and the potential barrier in the HCN-
He system.9

Since the nodal structure of the excited state is not easily approximated for this
light molecule, the POITSE approach is certainly the method of choice here. We
have shown that the spectral inversion of exponential projector correlation decays
obtained from the same projector as that used for OCS (see above) leads now to
spectra with two peaks.9 Excellent agreement is found while comparing the posi-
tions of these two peaks for HCN-He with results of basis set calculations, implying

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

8

that this projector now overlaps with two excitations neither of which possesses
the free molecule nodal structure. This diﬀerence in the number of excitations
seen in the POITSE spectra obtained from the same projector for the OCS and
HCN molecules derives from the fact that these two systems lie in very diﬀerent
dynamical regimes, for which quite diﬀerent nodal structures appear to apply.

The size dependence of the calculated B value for HCN is compared with that
for the heavier SF6 molecule in Fig. 1.
It is evident that molecules in the two
diﬀerent dynamical regimes show diﬀerent saturation behavior. While the heavy
molecule shows a monotonic decrease in B/B0 to its saturation value, the light
molecule ﬁrst undershoots and then gradually increases to its saturation value at
a signiﬁcantly larger value of N . This slower saturation behavior is believed also
to be related to the complex interplay between rotation and potential hindrance in
the HCN-He system.9 In both cases it is nevertheless evident that saturation to
the experimental value of B/B0 occurs at a cluster size N that is far smaller than
the experimental cluster sizes (N ∼ 40001), conﬁrming that the bosonic quantum
solvation eﬀect on dopant rotations in 4He is primarily a local eﬀect.

4 Conclusion

We have presented a comparative study of several doped helium clusters using
quantum Monte Carlo techniques. For the heavier two dopants presented here,
SF6 and OCS, the path integral calculations show that the quantum solvation
in superﬂuid 4He exhibits a molecule-induced nonsuperﬂuid density in the ﬁrst
solvation shell. The extent of this nonsuperﬂuid density is directly related to the
strength of the impurity-helium interaction potential. For HCN, the interaction
potential is suﬃciently weak that a nonsuperﬂuid density cannot be consistently
deﬁned. With both ﬁnite and zero temperature techniques, we are able to calculate
the extent of adiabatic following of molecular rotation by a fraction of the helium
density. The adiabatic following calculated for the two heavier molecules, SF6 and
OCS, is quite similar and strong, whereas for HCN the extent of adiabatic following
is very small. This strong diﬀerence between the heavy and light molecules has the
consequence that neither two-ﬂuid, pure hydrodynamic, nor quasi-adiabatic rigid
coupling models apply for the computation of the rotational constant of HCN in
helium clusters.

We note that rotation of the rigid body molecule is not included in the path
integral studies summarized here. While we know that the eﬀect of molecular rota-
tion on the helium density is limited for slow rotors, this eﬀect is likely to be much
more important for fast rotors, as was already seen with DMC densities for HCN.9
Introduction of the molecular rotation in our path integral computations is there-
fore planned for future studies. Moreover, the weak coupling angular momentum
constraint J ≃ j appears to be invalid for HCN, at least for the small cluster sizes,
as demonstrated by the marked inaccuracy of ﬁxed node calculations employing
free molecule nodal surfaces. All these points, plus the fact that spectra obtained
by the exact POITSE method using the same projector are nevertheless diﬀerent
for the two linear molecules HCN and OCS, underline the marked diﬀerences be-
tween the rotational dynamics of the fast linear rotor HCN from that of the heavier

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

9

molecules SF6 and OCS in helium clusters.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the National Science Foundation through
NSF grant CHE-9616615. Supercomputer time was made available through a Na-
tional Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (NPACI) program
of NSF, administered by the San Diego Supercomputer Center. We would like to
thank Patrick Huang for stimulating discussions and Francesco Paesani for permis-
sion to discuss the OCS POITSE results prior to publication.

References

1. J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 49, 1 (1998).
2. J. P. Toennies, A. F. Vilesov, and K. B. Whaley, Physics Today 54, 31 (2001).
3. Y. Kwon et al., J. Chem. Phys. 113, 6469 (2000).
4. A. Conjusteau et al., J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4840 (2000).
5. K. B. Whaley, Advances in Molecular Vibrations and Collision Dynamics, vol.
III (ed. J. Bowman and Z. Ba˘ci´c, Academic Press, JAI Press Inc., 1998), pp.
397–451.

6. A. Viel, M. V. Patel, P. Niyaz, and K. B. Whaley, Comp. Phys. Com. in press

(2001).

(1997).

7. E. Lee, D. Farrelly, and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3812 (1999).
8. M. V. Patel, A. Viel, F. Paesani, and K. B. Whaley, to be published .
9. A. Viel and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 115, XX (2001).
10. D. Blume, M. Lewerenz, P. Niyaz, and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. E 55, 3664

11. P. Huang, A. Viel, and K. B. Whaley, in Recent advances in Quantum Monte

Carlo Methods, Part II (WORLD Scientiﬁc, New York, 2001).

12. D. Blume, M. Mladenovi´c, M. Lewerenz, and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem. Phys.

110, 5789 (1999).

13. C. Callegari et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5058 (1999).
14. D. M. Ceperley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 67, 279 (1995).
15. Y. K. Kwon and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4108 (1999).
16. M. Hartmann, R. E. Miller, A. F. Vilesov, and J. P. Toennies, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 75, 1566 (1995).

17. J. Harms et al., J. Mol. Spectrosc. 185, 204 (1997).
18. S. Grebenev et al., J. Chem. Phys. 112, 4485 (2000).
19. R. T. Pack, E. Piper, G. A. Pfeﬀer, and J. P. Toennies, J. Chem. Phys. 80,

20. K. Higgins and W. H. Klemperer, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 1383 (1999).
21. M. Quack and M. A. Suhm, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 28 (1991).
22. F. Paesani, F. A. Gianturco, A. Viel, and K. B. Whaley, to be published .
23. F. Paesani, F. A. Gianturco, and K. B. Whaley, Europhys. Lett.

in press

4940 (1984).

(2001).

24. K. M. Atkins and J. M. Hutson, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 440 (1996).

Copyright c(cid:13) 2002 by World Scientiﬁc, reprinted with permission

10

