2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cluster growing process and a sequence of magic numbers.

Andrey Koshelev, Andrey Shutovich

A.F.Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, Politechnicheskaya 26, 194021 St.Petersburg, Russia

Ilia A. Solov’yov,∗ Andrey V. Solov’yov,∗ and Walter Greiner

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Universit¨at Frankfurt am Main,

Robert-Mayer 8-10, Frankfurt am Main, Germany 60054

We present a new theoretical framework for modelling the cluster growing process.

Starting from the initial tetrahedral cluster conﬁguration, adding new atoms to the

system and absorbing its energy at each step, we ﬁnd cluster growing paths up to

the cluster sizes of more than 100 atoms. We demonstrate that in this way all known

global minimum structures of the Lennard-Jonnes (LJ) clusters can be found. Our

method provides an eﬃcient tool for the calculation and analysis of atomic cluster

structure. With its use we justify the magic numbers sequence for the clusters of

noble gases atoms and compare it with experimental observations. We report the

striking correspondence of the peaks in the dependence on cluster size of the second

derivative of the binding energy per atom calculated for the chain of LJ-clusters

based on the icosahedral symmetry with the peaks in the abundance mass spectra

experimentally measured for the clusters of noble gases atoms. Our method serves an

eﬃcient alternative to the global optimization techniques based on the Monte-Carlo

simulations and it can be applied for the solution of a broad variety of problems in

which atomic cluster structure is important.

It is well known that the sequence of cluster magic numbers carries essential information

about the electronic and ionic structure of the cluster [1]. Understanding of the the clus-

ter magic numbers is often equivalent or nearly equivalent to the understanding of cluster

electronic and ionic structure. A good example of this kind is the observation of the magic

numbers in the mass spectrum of sodium clusters [2]. In this case, the magic numbers were

explained by the delocalised electron shell closings (see [3] and references therein). Another

example is the the discovery of fullerenes, and in particular the C60 molecule [4], which was

made by means of the carbon clusters mass spectroscopy.

2

The formation of a sequence of cluster magic numbers should be closely connected to

the mechanisms of cluster formation and growing.

It is natural to expect that one can

explain the magic numbers sequence and ﬁnd the most stable cluster isomers by modelling

mechanisms of cluster assembling and growing. On the other hand, these mechanisms are

of interest on their own and the correct sequence of the magic numbers found in such a

simulation can be considered as a proof of validity of the cluster formation model.

The problem of magic clusters is closely connected to the problem of searching for global

minima on the cluster multidimentional potential energy surface. The number of local

minima on the potential energy surface increases exponentially with the growth cluster size
and is estimated to be of the order of 1043 for N = 100 [1]. Thus, searching for global minima

becomes increasingly diﬃcult problem for large clusters. There are diﬀerent algorithms and

methods of the global minimisation, which have been employed for the global minimisation

of atomic cluster systems (see [1] and references therein). These techniques are often based

on the Monte-Carlo simulations.

The algorithm which we describe in this work is based on the dynamic searching for the

most stable cluster isomers in the cluster growing process. Our calculations demonstrate

that our approach is an eﬃcient alternative to the known techniques of the cluster global

minimisation. The big advantage of our approach consists in the fact that it allows to study

not just the optimized cluster geometries, but also their formation mechanisms.

In the present work we approach the formulated problem in a most simple, but general

form. In our most simple scenario, we assume that atoms in a cluster are bound by Lennard-

Jones potentials and the cluster growing takes place atom by atom. In this process, new

atoms are placed on the cluster surface in the middle of the cluster faces. Then, all atoms

in the system are allowed to move, while the energy of the system is decreased. The motion

of the atoms is stopped, when the energy minimum is reached. The geometries and energies

of all cluster isomers found in this way are stored and analysed. The most stable cluster

conﬁguration (cluster isomer) is then used as a starting conﬁguration for the next step of

the cluster growing process.

Starting from the initial tetrahedral cluster conﬁguration and using the strategy described

above, we have analysed cluster growing paths up to the cluster sizes of more than 100

atoms. We have found that in this way practically all known global minimum structures

of the Lennard-Jonnes clusters (see [1] and references therein) can be determined, which

3

(1)

proves that our method is indeed an eﬃcient alternative to other cluster global optimization

techniques such as basin hoping algorithm [1].

In our model we consider an atomic cluster as a group of atoms that interact with each

other by pairing forces. The interaction potential between two atoms in the cluster can, in

principle, be arbitrary. In this work, we use the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential:

U(r) = 4ε{(σ/r)12 − (σ/r)6},

where r is the interatomic distance, −ε is the depth of the potential well (ε > 0), 21/6σ is

the pair bonding length.

The constants in the potentials allow one to model various types of clusters for which

LJ paring force approximation is reasonable. The most natural systems of this kind are the

clusters consisting of noble gases atoms Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe. The magic numbers for this type

of clusters have been experimentally determined in [5, 6]. In our modelling of the cluster

growing process we focus on this example and consider it below in detail. The constants in

the LJ potential appropriate for the noble gases atoms one can ﬁnd in [7]. The LJ forces are

also appropriate for modelling nuclear clusters consisting of alpha particles [8]. Note that

for the LJ clusters it is always possible to chose the coordinate scale so that σ = 1. It makes

all LJ cluster systems scalable. They diﬀer only by the choice of the energy parameter ε

and the mass of a single constituent (atom).

In our approach the atomic motion in the cluster is described by the Newton equations

with the LJ pairing forces. The system of coupled equations for all atoms in the cluster

are solved numerically using the 4-th order Runge-Kutta method. The primary goal in

this simulation was to ﬁnd the solutions of the equations that lead to the stable cluster

conﬁgurations and then to chose energetically the most favourable one. The choice of initial

conditions for the simulation and the algorithm for the solution of this problem are described

below.

Our cluster searching algorithm is constructed on the idea that each minimum on the

cluster potential energy surface corresponds to the situation, when all the atoms are located

in their equilibrium positions. A minimum can be found by allowing atoms to move, starting

from a certain initial cluster conﬁguration, and by absorbing all their kinetic energy in the

most eﬃcient way. If the starting cluster conﬁguration for N + 1 atoms has been chosen on

the basis of the global minimum structure for N atoms, then it is natural to assume, and

4

we prove this in the present work, that the global minimum structure for N + 1 atoms can

be easily found. The success of this procedure reﬂects the fact that in nature clusters in

their global minima often emerge namely in the cluster growing process, which we simulate

in such calculation.

We have employed the following algorithm for the kinetic energy absorption. At each

step of the calculation we consider the motion of one atom only, which undergoes the action

of the maximum force. At the point, in which the kinetic energy of the selected atom is

maximum, we set the absolute value of its velocity to zero. This point corresponds to the

minimum of the potential well at which the selected atom moves. When the selected atom

is brought to the equilibrium position, the next atom is selected to move and the procedure

of the kinetic energy absorption repeats. The calculation stops when all the atoms are in

equilibrium.

We have considered a number of scenario of the cluster growing on the basis of the

developed algorithm for ﬁnding the stable cluster conﬁgurations.

In the most simple scenario clusters of N + 1 atoms are generated from the N-atomic

clusters by adding one atom to the system. In this case the initial conditions for the sim-

ulation of N+1-atomic clusters are obtained on the basis of the chosen N-atomic cluster

conﬁguration by calculating the coordinates of an extra atom added to the system on a cer-

tain rule. We have probed the following paths: the new atom can be added either (A1) to

the center of mass of the cluster, or (A2) randomly outside the cluster, but near its surface,

or (A3) to the centers of mass of all the faces of the cluster (here, the cluster is considered

as a polyhedron), or (A4) to the points that are close to the centers of all the faces of the

cluster, located from both sides of the face on the perpendicular to it, (A5) to the centers

of mass of the faces laying on the cluster surface.

The choice of the method how to add atoms to the system depends on the problem to be

solved. For example, with A1 and A2 methods large clusters consisting of many particles can

be generated rather quickly. The A2 method is especially fast, because adding one atom to

the boundary of the cluster usually does not lead to the recalculation of its central part. The

A3 and A4 methods can be used for searching the most stable, i.e. energetically favourable,

cluster conﬁgurations or for ﬁnding cluster isomers with some other speciﬁc properties. The

A4 method leads to ﬁnding more cluster isomers than the A3 one, but it takes more CPU

time. The A5 method is especially convenient for modelling the cluster growing process

5

which we focus on in this paper. Using this method one can generate the cluster growing

paths for the most stable cluster isomers.

When considering the cluster growing process, new atoms should be added to the system

starting from the initially chosen cluster conﬁguration step by step until the desired cluster

size is reached. Each new step of the cluster growing should be made with the use of the

methods A1-A5. The criteria for the cluster selection in this process can be as follows: at

every step (SE1) one of the clusters with the minimum number of atoms is selected, or

(SE2) the cluster with the minimum energy among the already found stable clusters of the

maximum size is selected, or (SE3) the cluster with the maximum energy among the already

found stable clusters of the maximum size is selected.

The SE1 criterion is relevant in the situation, when the full search of cluster isomers is

needed. It is applicable to the systems with relatively small number of particles. The SE2

criterion is relevant for modelling the cluster growing process. It turns out to be very eﬃcient

and leads to ﬁnding the most stable cluster conﬁgurations for a given number of particles.

The SE3 criterion might be useful for the redirection of the cluster growing process towards

the lower energy cluster isomers branches.

Calculations performed with the use of the methods described above show that often

clusters of higher symmetry group possess relatively low energy. Thus, the symmetric cluster

conﬁgurations are often of particular interest. The process of searching the symmetric cluster

conﬁgurations can be speed up signiﬁcantly, if one performs the cluster growing process with

the imposed symmetry constraints. This means that for obtaining a symmetric N atomic

cluster isomer from the initially chosen symmetric (N − M)-atomic conﬁguration one should

add M atoms to the surface of this isomer symmetrically.

Using our algorithms we have examined various paths of the cluster growing process and

determined the most stable isomers up to the cluster sizes of more than 100 atoms. The

binding energies per atom as a function of cluster size for the calculated cluster chains are

shown in ﬁgure 1.

In the insertion to ﬁgure 1 we present the experimentally measured

abundance mass spectrum for the Ar clusters at 77K [5, 6].

We have generated the chains of clusters based on the icosahedral, octahedral, tetrahedral

and decahedral symmetries with the use of the A3-A5 and SE2-SE3 methods.

In a few

particular cases for N > 70, we have also used manual modiﬁcations of the starting cluster

geometries. In all our calculations we have used the dimensionless form of the LJ-potential,

6

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.20

0.15

0.10

/

N
N
E

-

0.30

0.25

 

               
61
55

64

46

49

43

71

74

81
               

91

87

101

109

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 icosahedron
 octahedron
 decahedra
 tetrahedron
 global minimum

29

34
               
32

26

23

19

               
13

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               
               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

 

60

N

0

20

40

80

100

120

FIG. 1: Binding energy per atom for LJ-clusters as a function of cluster size calculated for the

cluster chains based on the icosahedral, octahedral, tetrahedral and decahedral symmetry. In the

insertion we present the experimentally measured abundance mass spectrum for the Ar clusters at

77K [5, 6]

choice of σ and ε.

i.e. put σ = 1. The potential constant has been chosen as ε = 1/4. Such a choice of

constants is the most universal. It allows one to rescale easily all the results to any concrete

Figure 1 shows that the most stable clusters are obtained on the basis of the icosahedral

symmetry conﬁgurations with exceptions for N = 38, 75 ≤ N ≤ 77 and N = 98. In these

cases the octahedral cluster symmetry becomes more favourable. The cluster chains based

on the tetrahedral and decahedral symmetries have no intersections with the icosahedral

chain of clusters although there is interplay between these two curves and the octahedral

one.

The main trend of the energy curves plotted in ﬁgure 1 can be understood on the basis

7

(2)

of the liquid drop model, according to which the cluster energy is the sum of the volume

and the surface energy contributions:

EN = −λV N + λSN 2/3 − λRN 1/3

Here the ﬁrst and the second terms describe the volume, and the surface cluster energy

correspondingly. The third term is the cluster energy arising due to the curvature of the

cluster surface. Choosing constants in (2) as λV = 0.71703, λS = 1.29302 and λR = 0.56757,

one can ﬁt the global energy minimum curve plotted in ﬁgure 1 with the accuracy less

than one per cent. The deviations of the energy curves calculated for various chains of

cluster isomers from the liquid drop model (2) are plotted in ﬁgure 2. The curves for the

icosahedral and the global energy minimum cluster chains go very close with each other and

the peaks on these dependences indicate the increased stability of the corresponding magic

clusters. The ratio between the volume and surface energies in (2) can be characterised by

the dimensionless parameter δ = λV /λS, being equal in our case to δ = 0.5545.

The dependence of the binding energies per atom for the most stable cluster conﬁgu-

rations on N allows one to generate the sequence of the cluster magic numbers.
insertion to ﬁgure 2 we plot the second derivatives ∆E2

n for the chain of icosahedral iso-

In the

mers. We compare the obtained dependence with the experimentally measured abundance

mass spectrum for the Ar clusters at 77K [5, 6] (see insertion to ﬁgure 1) and establish

the striking correspondence of the peaks in the measured mass spectrum with those in the
n dependence. Indeed, the magic numbers determined from ∆2EN are in a very good
∆E2
agreement with the numbers experimentally measured for the Ar and Xe clusters: 13, 19,

23, 26, 29, 32, 34, 43, 46, 49, 55, 61, 64, 71, 74, 81, 87, 91, 101, 109, 116, 119, 124, 131,

136, 147 [5, 6]. The most prominent peaks in this sequence 13, 55 and 147 correspond to

the closed icosahedral shells, while other numbers correspond to the ﬁlling of various parts

of the isosahedral shell.

The connection between the second derivatives ∆2EN and the peaks in the abundance

mass spectrum of clusters one can understand using the following simple model. Let us

assume that the mass spectrum of clusters is formed in the evaporation process. This

means that changing the number of clusters, nN , of the size N in the cluster ensemble

takes place due to the evaporation of an atom by the clusters of the size N and N + 1, i.e.

∆nN ∼ nN +1WN +1→N −nN WN→N −1, where the evaporation probabilities are proportional to

8

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

-0.01

-0.03

3

/

2
-

N
R

-

3

/

1
-

N
S

+

V

-
 

/

N
N
E

-

0.2

0.1

-0.1

               

               

               

               

               

               

               
               

               

               

13    19  2326293234      43 46 49   55    61 64    71          81    87  91        101       109

E
2
               

0.0

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

 

               

               

               

               

               

               

-0.2

0

               
20

               

40

               
80

               

100

120

               

               

               

               

               

 

 

60
 N

               

               

               

               

               

-0.02

               

               

               

=0.71703

               

=1.29302

=0.56757

V

S

R

 icosahedron
 octahedron
               
 tetrahedron
 decahedra
 global minimum

0

20

40

80

100

120

60
N

FIG. 2: Energy curves deviations from the liquid drop model (2) calculated for various cluster

isomers chains.

In the insertion we plot the second derivative ∆2EN = EN +1 + EN −1 − 2EN

calculated for the icosahedral cluster isomers chain.

WN +1→N ∼ e−

EN +E1−EN+1
kT

and WN→N −1 ∼ e−

EN−1+E1−EN
kT

. Here T is the cluster temperature,

k is the Bolzmann constant. In the limit ∆EN /kT ≪ 1, one derives ∆nN ∼ nN (EN +1 +
EN −1 −2EN )/kT ∼ ∆2EN . These estimates demonstrate that the positive second derivative
∆2EN should lead to the enhanced abundance of the corresponding clusters.

In ﬁgure 3, we plot images of the magic clusters up to N = 71. For N = 32 and N = 34,

we present the icosahedral isomer and the one possessing the global energy minimum. We

also plot the image of the octahedral N = 38 cluster, which is found to be more stable than

the clusters from the icosahedral chain. Experimentally N = 38 is not found to be the magic

cluster, although it is the global minimum cluster, being magic for the octahedral cluster

chain (see ﬁgures 1 and 2). This fact can be understood if one takes into account that

diﬀerent symmetry cluster chains are formed independently and the transition of clusters

l
l
l
l
l
l
D
9

FIG. 3: Geometries of the magic LJ-clusters. The labels indicate the cluster size and the cluster

point symmetry group.

from one chain to another at certain N is not possible. It is clear from the binding energy

analysis that the icosahedral chain of clusters should be dominating. In experiments, clusters

of the icosahedral chain mask clusters of other symmetry chains even in the situations when

these other clusters are energetically more favourable, like it occurs for N = 38.

In this paper we have discussed the classical models for the cluster growing process, but

our ideas can be easily generalized on the quantum case and be applied to the cluster systems

with diﬀerent than LJ type of the inter-atomic interaction. It would be interesting to see

to which extent the parameters of inter-atomic interaction can inﬂuence the cluster growing

process and the corresponding sequence of magic numbers or whether the crystallization

in the nuclear matter consisting of alpha particles and/or nucleons is possible. Studying

cluster thermodynamic characteristics with the use of the developed technique is another

interesting problem which is left opened for future considerations.

The authors acknowledge support from the the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and

DAAD.

10

∗ Permanent address:A. F. Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences,

Polytechnicheskaya 26, St. Petersburg, Russia 194021; Email address: solovyov@th.physik.uni-

frankfurt.de

[1] NATO Advanced Study Institute, Les Houches, Session LXXIII, Summer School ”Atomic Clus-

ters and Nanoparticles” (Les Houches, France, July 2-28, 2000), Edited by C. Guet, P. Hobza,

F. Spiegelman and F. David, EDP Sciences and Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,

Hong Kong, London, Milan, Paris, Tokyo (2001).

[2] W.D. Knight, K. Clemenger, W.A. de Heer, W.A. Saunders, et al Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 2141

(1984)

[3] W. Ekardt (ed.), Metal Clusters (Wiley, New York ,1999)

[4] H.W. Kroto et al., Nature 318, 163 (1985)

[5] O. Echt et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1122 (1981)

[6] H. Haberland (ed.), Clusters of Atoms and Molecules, Theory, Experiment and Clusters of

Atoms (Springer Series in Chemical Physics, Berlin 52, 1994)

[7] A.A. Radzig and B.M. Smirnov, Parameters of atoms and itomic ions (Energoatomizdat,

[8] A. Bohr and B.R. Mottelson, Nuclear Structure (W.A.Benjamin, inc., New York, Amsterdam,

Moscow, 1986)

1969)

