Explosions of water clusters in intense laser ﬁelds

V. Kumarappan∗, M. Krishnamurthy, and D. Mathur
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 1 Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India.
(February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Energetic, highly-charged oxygen ions, Oq+ (q ≤ 6), are copiously produced
upon laser ﬁeld-induced disassembly of highly-charged water clusters, (H2O)n
and (D2O)n, n ∼ 60, that are formed by seeding high-pressure helium or argon
with water vapor. Arn clusters (n∼40000) formed under similar experimental
conditions are found undergo disassembly in the Coulomb explosion regime,
with the energies of Arq+ ions showing a q2 dependence. Water clusters,
which are argued to be considerably smaller in size, should also disassemble
in the same regime, but the energies of fragment Oq+ ions are found to depend
linearly on q which, according to prevailing wisdom, ought to be a signature of
hydrodynamic expansion that is expected of much larger clusters. The impli-
cation of these observations on our understanding of the two cluster explosion
regimes, Coulomb explosion and hydrodynamic expansion, is discussed. Our
results indicate that charge state dependences of ion energy do not constitute
an unambiguous experimental signature of cluster explosion regime.

3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

∗Now at: Institute for Physical Sciences and Technology, University of Maryland, Maryland, USA

1

I. INTRODUCTION

A number of scientiﬁc and technological reasons have been responsible for a recent resur-
gence of interest in studies of the interaction of very intense optical ﬁelds with large, gas-
phase clusters of atoms. It is now established that the mesoscopic nature of cluster dynamics
in intense, ultrashort laser ﬁelds results in features that are unique to clusters, observed nei-
ther in the interaction of low-density matter (atoms and molecules) with ﬁelds of similar
magnitude and duration, nor in that of high-density matter (solids). For instance, the ex-
traordinarily high degree of eﬃciency with which clusters absorb the incident laser energy
ﬁnds no analog in other gaseous matter. Energy deposition rates of up to 240 mW per
atom have been measured [1] in clusters comprising several hundreds of thousands of atoms.
Primarily, it is the electrons in the cluster that directly absorb such energy, but the energy
is rapidly redistributed in the form of intense incoherent radiation and very energetic ions.
The level of ionization and the mean energy of the electrons are both signiﬁcantly higher
than expected from laser-ﬁeld-induced ionization of isolated, gas-phase atoms and molecules.
The hot cluster expands and breaks up in a few picoseconds; this rapid disassembly results
in the emission of ions with kinetic energies that can be as high as 1 MeV [2]. These are
up to ﬁve orders of magnitude larger than the energies that are obtained upon Coulomb
explosion of multiply-charged molecules [3].

The motivation for research in this ﬁeld has been two-fold, scientiﬁc and technological.
From the scientiﬁc point of view, we have noted above that clusters in intense ﬁelds are
intermediate to atoms and small molecules on the one hand, and solids on the other. The
transition from single-atom behavior to bulk properties is complex enough to merit investi-
gation for its own sake. For clusters that are not too large, it is also possible for a substantial
fraction of electrons to leave the cluster early in its break-up, leaving behind a hot, non-
equilibrium and non-neutral plasma, the evolution of which can be strongly inﬂuenced by
radiation. Such phenomena are of interest in astrophysics, and cluster plasmas oﬀer one of
the few avenues available for studying them in the laboratory. From a technological point of
view, laser-cluster interactions oﬀer tantalizing possibilities of developing table-top charged
particle accelerators. Clusters have also emerged as one of the promising sources of extreme
ultraviolet (EUV) radiation for lithography. EUV lithography is the favored approach to the
next generation of chip manufacturing technology, where features on the integrated circuit
will be less than 100 nm wide. Much research eﬀort is being devoted to improving the yield
of EUV radiation so that suﬃcient emission around 13.5 nm, the wavelength of choice for
this application, can be generated [4]. Apart from incoherent radiation, clusters have shown
promise as a source for high-harmonic generation, wherein extremely non-linear processes
result in the emission of coherent radiation at large multiples of the laser frequency [5]. The
interaction of laser pulses from tabletop lasers with deuterium and deuterium-rich clusters
has also made it possible to study hot-plasma fusion in small facilities, which was hitherto
restricted to very large national facilities [6]. The fusion process also holds promise as a
source of mono-energetic and short-pulse neutrons for medical and material science studies
[7].

Although various theoretical models have been proposed to explain the evolution of the
cluster under intense ﬁeld irradiation, none can adequately explain all the experimentally
observed features that presently drive research in this area. It is known that most atoms in

2

a cluster get tunnel ionized at the leading edge of the incident laser pulse. As the ionized
electrons leave the cluster, what gets left behind is a positively charged core that gives rise
to an increasing potential barrier to further removal of electrons. The question of whether
the barrier is suﬃcient to retain a large fraction of electrons or not is a major point of
contention between the two major models of laser-cluster interaction. In the hydrodynamic
expansion model, it is assumed that retention of most of the electrons by the cluster results
in a spherically symmetric plasma of uniform density. The retained electrons absorb energy
from the laser by collisional inverse bremsstrahlung. The hot electron plasma expands due
to hydrodynamic pressure, and transfers energy to the ions. The expansion velocity of the
plasma is determined by the plasma sound speed, and since the ion and electron charge
clouds expand at the same speed, the ions are expected to be signiﬁcantly hotter than the
electrons. In the Coulomb explosion-ionization ignition model of the dynamics, on the other
hand, electrons leave the cluster rapidly after tunnel ionization. As a result, there is a build-
up of charge on the cluster that gives rise to a radial ﬁeld that can become large enough
to drive further ionization at the surface of the sphere. The removal of these electrons
increases the radial ﬁeld further and “ignites” ionization. The cluster then explodes due to
the Coulombic repulsion between the positively charged ions.

Although most researchers in the ﬁeld still regard the details of a cluster explosion as a
matter of some debate, at the most basic level, prevailing wisdom tends to indicates that
the hydrodynamic expansion model is expected to hold for clusters that are large enough in
size to retain a substantial fraction of the electrons, while the ionization ignition-Coulomb
explosion model requires the prompt removal of most of the electrons, which would be the
case for small clusters. This may be rationalized by considering the cluster diameter a in
terms of parameters that are of utility in characterizing plasmas, such as the electron skin
depth, δe (δe = ωp/c, where ωp is the plasma frequency), and electron excursion length
due to the action of the ponderomotive potential, ζe [7]. When the electron skin depth is
greater than the cluster size (δe > a), the laser ﬁeld can penetrate the interior regions of the
cluster. If, under such circumstances, the laser intensity is also high enough to fulﬁll the
relation ζe >> a, most ionized electrons would leave the vicinity of the cluster within one
optical cycle, thereby setting up a large electrostatic ﬁeld that, in turn, would lead to further
electron heating. This is the ionization ignition-Coulomb explosion scenario. On the other
hand, when the cluster size fulﬁlls the conditions a >> ζe and a >> δe, the hydrodynamic
expansion situation is expected to prevail.

We present in the following results of experiments that we have conducted on water
clusters using a two-dimensional time-of-ﬂight technique that enables us to probe the energy
and charge state spectrum of ions produced upon cluster explosion. Analysis of the measured
dependence of ion energy on ion charge state shows a linear relationship that might have been
indicative of the explosion dynamics proceeding in the hydrodynamic regime. However, the
water clusters that are produced in our experiments are certainly not large enough to warrant
invocation of the hydrodynamic regime. Instead, our results appear to oﬀer experimental
evidence that, contrary to expectations on the basis of prevailing wisdom on the dynamics
of cluster disassembly in intense laser ﬁelds, charge state dependences of ion energy do not
constitute an experimental signature of explosion regime.

3

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

The fact that irradiation of clusters by intense laser radiation invariably results in forma-
tion of energetic, highly-charged ions precludes the use of conventional mass spectrometry.
Sector instruments would need to employ unrealistically high values of magnetic ﬁeld in
order to carry out momentum discrimination of the type of ions that are produced in such
interactions. Radio frequency (rf) methods would also require unacceptably high amplitudes
of rf voltages. We show later that conventional time-of-ﬂight techniques are also of limited
utility.

We present in the following results of experiments in which a new two-dimensional
time-of-ﬂight (2D-TOF) method is utilized to probe the dynamics of water clusters in
femtosecond-duration laser ﬁelds of intensity in the range 1014-1016 W cm−2. Conventional
Wiley-McLaren time-of-ﬂight (WM-TOF) methods cannot reliably be used due to the ex-
tremely large range of ion energies that are produced in the laser-cluster interactions. The
WM-TOF geometry ensures space and time focusing such that the resulting mass resolution
that is achieved is high; in order to achieve this, it is necessary that the intrinsic spread
in the initial velocity of ions of given m/q (mass-to-charge ratio) is small. In the cluster
explosion experiments of the type we report here, the initial ion velocities span a range that
can cover 5-6 orders of magnitude. Though spatial focusing is intrinsically achieved as the
ions are produced in a small and well deﬁned focal volume, the spread in ion velocities and
charge states is large enough to make regular WM-TOF experiments impossible. In such ex-
periments, therefore, one might resort to simple arrival time measurements to determine the
velocity of the ions. Such measurements, do not resolve charge of the ions and, in the case
of hetero-nuclear clusters, the additional problem of distinguishing diﬀerent atomic species
becomes very diﬃcult. To overcome this experimental problem, arrival time spectra have
been measured in conjunction with a magnetic deﬂection TOF spectrometer in one recent
measurement involving argon and xenon clusters [8]. As noted by these authors, direct mea-
surements of ion energies are diﬃcult, particularly for the more energetic components in the
total spectrum. To analyze the experimental TOF data in order to deduce ion energies, the
authors had to compare measured data with results of numerical simulations. Though the
charge states of the atomic ions were, indeed, deciphered in these experiments, it is not very
clear if the technique can be applied to hetero-nuclear clusters except, perhaps, for clusters
like HIn, where the mass diﬀerence between the two constituents is very large and protons
may be separated from Iq+ ions by distinguishing the pulse height of the signal produced by
the microchannel plate (MCP) detectors. However, this technique is obviously limited since
MCP’s are intrinsically not very good as pulse height discriminators; with a wide range of
ion velocities the experimental limitations become even larger.

The approach we have adopted in our 2D-TOF method is diﬀerent, relatively simple to
implement, and it demonstrates that these experimental problems can be better addressed.
We take recourse to one simpliﬁcation aﬀorded by the very energetic nature of the laser-
cluster interaction that we are interested in probing. It is established, and will be shown in
the following, that the laser deposits several keV, or more, energy per ion in the cluster. On
the other hand, the cluster itself is bound by very weak van der Waal’s forces. The binding
energy of these forces is, at most, a few millielectron volts for rare gas clusters. Hence, it is a
reasonable expectation that the ionic products of the laser-cluster interaction will almost ex-

4

clusively be atomic ions that exhibit no clustering. The masses of all these (atomic) ions (in
the homonuclear clusters) are therefore the same, and velocity measurements directly yield
the energy spectrum. This spectrum of the arrival times of atomic ions is one-dimensional
TOF spectrometry. On the other hand, the velocity (energy) information that is readily
forthcoming from such measurements alone does not reveal anything about the charge state
distribution within the plasma that is produced in the course of the laser-cluster interac-
tion. A two-dimensional experimental approach is required to obtain this information, as is
described in the following.

The experimental set-up used in our measurements is schematically depicted in Figure 1.
A pulsed expansion valve with a supersonic nozzle was used for producing clusters of large
size. The nozzle was of 500 µm diameter, and could be backed up with gas pressures up to 14
bar. The solenoid-activated valve was capable of being operated at up to 50 Hz repetition
rate, and the duration of the pulse was variable over 0.1-1 ms. By triggering the pulsed
valve and the laser externally, the cluster beam and the laser beam was made to temporally
coincide, with a relative jitter of much less than 1 µs. The large gas load produced by the
valve was handled by a 3000 ℓ s−1 diﬀusion pump backed by two 1200 ℓ m−1 rotary pumps.
In our experiments with Arn (n >5000) clusters, the pulsed valve was operated at repetition
rates of less than 10 Hz in order to keep the background pressure to workably low values.
As the gas expanded from the nozzle into our vacuum chamber, adiabatic cooling facilitated
the formation of large clusters. Conﬁrmation of the formation of clusters and an estimation
of their size was carried out by means of Rayleigh scattering, which depends strongly on the
mean size of the scatterer. Details of this aspect of the methodology adopted by us have
been presented elsewhere [9] but the salient features of the methodology are summarized in
the following.

Although the experiments on cluster disassembly dynamics that are reported here were
conducted using intense 806 nm light, we used 355 nm radiation produced from the third
harmonic of a picosecond Nd:YAG laser in order to carry out the light scattering measure-
ments for estimation of the sizes of rare gas clusters. The use of short-wavelength light is,
of course, appropriate since the scattering signal scales as λ−4. The ultraviolet (UV) light
was crossed ∼2-3 mm from the supersonic jet nozzle shown in Fig. 1. In light scattering
experiments, since the scattered light at the same wavelength is probed, and its intensity is
very low, stray light from the incident laser tends to overwhelm the signal. We took care
that stray light was kept to a minimum by using Brewster windows at laser entry and exit
ports, by blackening the walls of the chamber, and by a system of optical baﬄes. Scattered
light was imaged onto a photomultiplier by an f/3.3 lens. The photomultiplier signal was
read by a digital storage oscilloscope that was coupled, via a fast bus, to a computerized
data acquisition system. Rayleigh scattering signals of easily measurable intensity appeared
for Ar stagnation pressures greater than 2 bar. The variation of the intensity of the scattered
light (S) as a function of stagnation pressure (P ) was measured. The scattered signal scales
as S ∝ P 3. We employed the Hagena scaling law [10] to estimate the mean cluster size, N,
using the empirical parameter, Γ∗,

N ≈ A(Γ∗)1.95.

Γ∗ = k

P[mbar]
(To[K])2.29 (cid:16)

φ[µm]
tan α (cid:17)

0.85

,

5

(1)

(2)

where k = 1700 (for Ar), To=298 K, α is the half opening angle of the jet, φ is the nozzle
diameter and A is an empirical constant determined from Ref. [11]. Using the facts that (i)
Rayleigh scattering eﬃciency scales as r6, where r is the radius of the cluster, and (ii) that
cluster size scales as P 2 [10], the scattered light signal should scale as P 3. The dependence
of the scattered light signal with pressure that we measured was found to be consistent with
this scaling [9], thus conﬁrming that Hagena’s law is applicable to our cluster source.

(H2O)n and (D2O)n clusters were produced in our experiments by bubbling either He or
Ar gas through liquid water at the stagnation chamber. To estimate the size of the water
clusters, we resorted to the correspondence principle formulated by Hagena in estimating
the sizes of metal clusters produced in supersonic jet expansion [12]. The modiﬁed Hagena
parameter is

where

Γ∗ = Γ r2.15

ch T 1.29
ch ,

rch = (m/ρ)1/3,
Tch = ∆ho
s/k.

In the above, m represents the mass, ρ the solid density, and ∆ ho
s the enthalpy of sublimation
of the cluster system. We use the correspondence principle in conjunction with the argon
cluster size measurements using Rayleigh scattering [9] in order to obtain an estimate of
the size of water clusters which seed high pressure helium gas under similar experimental
conditions. Using these equations we derive the ratio of the Hagena parameter for Ar and for
H2O (D2O). For water, ∆ ho
s= 7.7 kJ/mol,
ρ=1707 kg m−3, yielding

s= 50.9 kJ/mol, ρ=917 kg m−3 and for Ar, ∆ ho

Γ∗(Ar)
Γ∗(H2O)

= 0.08 ·

P (Ar)
P (H2O)

,

and mean cluster sizes are given by

< N(H2O) >= 154h

· < N(Ar) > .

P (H2O)
2
P (Ar) i

The vapor pressure of water is 0.03 atmosphere at 300 K temperature. Taking the partial
pressure for water in the supersonic beam that is seeded with 3 atmosphere of He to be 0.03
atmosphere, and from our earlier results that the mean size of Ar cluster is ∼4000 atoms
at 3 atmosphere pressure, we estimate the corresponding size for the water clusters to be
about 60 atoms.

We note that recourse to the correspondence principle has also been made in earlier
studies of large (HI)n clusters [13] as well as carbon-containing clusters (CO2)n and (C3H8)n
[14]. Diﬀerences in the nature of bonding in these cluster species, as compared to the
bonding in rare gas clusters, might be considered to be of some importance in determining
the degree of clustering that may be attained, and in determining the applicability of the
correspondence principle to clustering that relies on hydrogen bonding. Direct measurements
of water cluster sizes have been made by mass spectrometry in apparatus with a supersonic

6

(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

nozzle of the type we use [15]. Variation of the average cluster size with stagnation pressure
has enabled a scaling law to be established [16]. Comparison of the cluster sizes we estimate
shows good accord with the results of direct measurements.

Velocity analysis and detection of charged particles produced in the laser-cluster inter-
action were carried out by means of a 58-cm long time-of-ﬂight spectrometer and a chan-
neltron/microchannel plate, respectively. Charge state analysis of velocity-discriminated
charged particles was accomplished using a retarding potential energy analyzer (RPA) com-
prising three electrodes, each with 90% transmission nickel mesh, placed in front of the
detector. Grounded plates of the same type were placed at a separation of 5 mm on both
sides of the central retarding plate so that the ﬂight-tube remained ﬁeld-free. The retard-
ing plate could be held at a potential of up to ±5 kV. The stable high-voltage supply
was remote-controlled by means of a 0-9 V input signal that was generated using a 12-bit
digital-to-analog converter (DAC). The DAC was used to ramp the voltage on the RPA
such a two-dimensional matrix of TOF spectra could be constructed from a series of spec-
tra taken at diﬀerent values of voltage on the RPA. The column number of such a matrix
represents the time-of-arrival of the ion, and the row number corresponds to the voltage
applied to the RPA. The ion intensity distribution in time was transformed to a distribution
in energy, and adjacent-averaged to reduce noise. The 2D distribution thus obtained was
then diﬀerentiated with respect to RPA voltage to obtain an energy spectrum. The process
of numerical diﬀerentiation was, in this case, equivalent to taking the diﬀerence between
adjacent voltage spectra, and this diﬀerence corresponds to the yield of ions at energies
covered by this voltage interval.

The 2D spectrum thus represents charge-resolved ion yields as a function of kinetic
energy, with the novelty of our approach being, as shown in the following, that a single
spectrum displays the energy distribution for the plethora of charge states that are produced
in the course of the laser-cluster interaction. The technique is easily applicable to hetero-
nuclear clusters. In the experiments presented here we show that one can distinguish the
protons very clearly from the Oq+ produced in the water clusters. Use of pulse height analysis
techniques on the other hand for distinguishing atomic ions in this case on the other hand
would have not succeeded.

The laser pulses in these experiments were produced by a 100 femtosecond, 55 mJ Ti-
tanium:sapphire laser. The laser was focused into the vacuum chamber with a 25 cm focal
length plano-convex lens to produce intensities up to 1016 W cm−2. The experiments re-
ported in this study were performed at intensities ranging from 1014 to 1016 W cm−2.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Argon clusters

A typical raw TOF spectrum for Ar40000 is shown in Figure 2. This spectrum was
acquired at a laser intensity of 8×1015 W cm−2, with the laser polarization vector aligned
along the axis of the TOF spectrometer. The stagnation pressure was 10 bar. The narrow
fast peak that is observed at very short (<0.2µs) ﬂight times is due to electrons/photons.
The remaining structure, beyond ﬂight times of 0.5µs, is ascribed to energetic ions. It was
conﬁrmed that both peaks are present only when there is spatial and temporal overlap

7

between the cluster beam and the laser beam. The corresponding ion energy spectrum,
f (E), that was obtained from the time-of-ﬂight spectrum, f (t), using the relation

is shown in Figure 3. The general features of this spectrum are in good accord with a
spectrum reported earlier [17]. The highest energy seen in this spectrum is about 500 keV,
and the mean energy of the ions,

f (E) = f (t)[dE/dt]−1,

¯E = R

Ef (e)dE
f (E)dE

,

(8)

(9)

is about 20 keV. The highest ion energy is determined from the minimum in the raw TOF
spectrum shown in Figure 2, between the ion and the electron/photon features. Note that
the minimum in the TOF spectrum is not zero, implying that there is an overlap between
the two peaks. The determination of the maximum ion energy is, therefore, a conservative
estimate - the highest energy ions probably have energies higher than 500 keV. The digital
oscilloscope used in these experiments also had a ﬁnite record-length (5000 points in this
case) and this determined the low-energy cut-oﬀ in the spectrum. For our experimental
setup, this cut-oﬀ for argon ions is at 180 eV. The averaging over ion energies therefore
does not include ions with energies lower than this limit. As we will show in the following,
fragmentation of Arn clusters gives rise to argon ion charge states up to 8+ and each of
the ejected electrons typically possesses an energy of the order of 0.5 keV under conditions
prevailing when data in Figure 2 was acquired. Taken together with the potential energy
associated with the highly-charged argon ions, it is clear that in the interaction of the laser
with Ar40000 clusters at an intensity of 8×1015 W cm−2, the total energy that is deposited
is of the order of 25 keV per argon atom. In the case of larger clusters, such as Xe150000,
irradiated by similar laser ﬁelds, energy deposition as high as 100 keV per atom has been
measured [18]. Figure 3 also shows the energy proﬁle obtained in the case of a somewhat
smaller cluster (Ar2000) obtained by using a stagnation pressure of 2 bar. Values of the peak
and average energies obtained in this case are both signiﬁcantly smaller than those obtained
in the case of Ar40000, although the overall morphology of the ion energy distribution function
remains very similar. The asymmetry in ion emission that was recently reported in the case
of Ar40000 [19] is also observed when Ar2000 clusters undergo explosion.

Energy spectra were also acquired with various positive voltages applied on the RPA.
Results for Ar40000 obtained with 200 V and 400 V are shown in Figure 4. When a voltage
V is applied to the retarding plate, all ions with charge q and energy less than qV are
unable to overcome the potential barrier, and cannot reach the detector. The TOF of ions
with energies greater than the cut-oﬀ remains unaﬀected because the ions spend only a very
small fraction of their total ﬂight time in the RPA assembly. Therefore, the spectrum that is
obtained shows a series of steps corresponding to values of ionic charge state q. The height
of each step indicates the yield of the charge state q at energy qV . The spectra shown in
Figure 4 show steps for Ar+ to Ar7+ when 200 V is applied to the RPA while Ar4+ to Ar8+
can be distinguished when the RPA voltage is 400 V.

In order to reinforce the utility of our two-dimensional technique, we reiterate that con-
ventional, one-dimensional TOF spectrometry would not be able to yield the type of infor-
mation that is discussed above. If we were to apply normal Wiley-McLaren conditions to our

8

TOF spectrometer, using extraction voltages of ±250 V, Ar+ ions possessing either thermal
energy, or 10 keV energy, would have mean ﬂight times of 12.6 µs or 2.6 µs, respectively. For
Ar2+ ions, the corresponding mean ﬂight times would be 8.9 µs (thermal energy ions) and
2.6 µs (10 keV ions). In the case of Ar10+ ions, the corresponding mean ﬂight times would
be 3.9 µs and 2.2 µs. Even if we disregard the inevitable temporal widths of the TOF peaks
associated with each of these ion species, it is clear that conventional TOF spectrometry
would not enable us to disentangle the plethora of ions that would appear in the ﬂight time
region of 2.5 µs.

Figure 5 shows a two-dimensional spectrum of Ar40000 constructed from a series of spectra
taken with diﬀerent RPA voltages.We have reported this spectrum earlier [19] in connection
with the discovery of asymmetric ion emission upon fragmentation of Ar40000 clusters. As
noted above, the 2D spectrum represents charge-resolved ion yields as a function of ion ki-
netic energy. As the y-axis also represents the energy per charge state on the ion, the various
charge states appear in our 2D spectrum as lines whose slope is q−1. In such a depiction, a
linear dependence of ion energy on charge state, as prevailing wisdom would expect if the
hydrodynamic model were to provide a realistic representation of the laser-Ar40000 dynam-
ics, would cause the mean energies to lie on a horizontal line. Our 2D-TOF data shows
that this is clearly not the case. In fact, analysis shows that the observed dependence is
approximately quadratic, indicating a Coulomb explosion according to prevailing wisdom.
This ﬁnding is consistent with the results of ion energy measurements conducted by Lez-
ius et al. [8] on somewhat larger argon clusters where the authors had concluded that the
clusters undergo Coulomb explosion. In both studies, multiply charged ions are observed
up to Ar8+; beyond that the spectrum could not be resolved into constituent charge states.
We attribute this to the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the ionization energies of Ar7+ (143 eV)
and Ar8+ (422 eV). While higher charge states are certainly produced, as evidenced by the
appearance of recombination lines in the emission spectrum, the fraction of ions in these
highly charged states is likely to be very small.

B. Water clusters

We have conducted experiments on molecular clusters, (H2O)n and (D2O)n, that were
produced by passing high-pressure helium or argon gas through a reservoir of high-purity
H2O or D2O. As noted above, we estimate that the degree of clustering that we obtain in
our experiments is such that n ∼60. The formation of these water clusters is dependent upon
hydrogen bonding and polarizable intramolecular forces. In aggregates of water molecules,
the electric ﬁeld from nearest neighbors induces alterations in electronic conﬁguration that,
in turn, further aﬀect interactions with other water molecules. This form of cooperativity
has been studied by Xu et al. [20] who describe the process when a water molecule forms
a hydrogen bond and undergoes an internal rearrangement of charge density such that it
leads to an overall strengthening of other hydrogen bonds that are formed by the same water
molecule. This mutual enhancement of hydrogen bond strength accounts for the observed
propensity of water to aggregate into clusters.

Typical ion energy spectra that we obtained in our experiments by applying two diﬀerent
RPA voltages on the spectrometer are depicted in Figure 6. Several charge states of oxygen
ions are readily identiﬁed in both spectra: in the case of 500 V on the RPA, note the sharp

9

onset of peaks at 1000V, 1500V, and so on, that indicate O2+, O3+ ions, and so on. Charge
states as high as 6+ are observed (helium-like oxygen). As in the case of argon ions, the
contribution from ionization states resulting from K-shell vacancies in oxygen are probably
too small to be of much import in the overall dynamics. We note that peaks due to H +
ions ostensibly appear at the highest end of the spectra that are shown; this is, obviously, a
manifestation of both the low mass (short-duration TOF) of protons as well as the energies
that they possess. Of course, the disassembly of highly-charged water clusters will give
rise to energetic ions, and largest kinetic energies will be carried away by the lowest-mass
protons.

Figure 7 shows a 2D spectrum that is obtained for (H2O)n clusters.

It is clear from
the spectrum that our 2D-TOF technique shows a clear advantage in distinguishing atomic
ions of diﬀerent mass. The energy scale in the spectrum is calculated from the arrival time
taking the proton mass into account. So to actually obtain the oxygen ion energies one has
to multiply the energy scale by 16, the mass of oxygen atom. The spectrum clearly shows
evidence for Oq+ ions, with q as large as 6. Careful analysis reveals, most unexpectedly,
that the energy dependence of diﬀerent values of q for Oq+ ions actually scales linearly
with q. This is most clearly seen by considering, for example, the maximum values of
ion energy on each of the straight lines in Fig. 7 that represent diﬀerent charge states
of oxygen.
It is clear from the spectrum that the maximum ion energy values fall on a
line that is parallel to the x-axis, indicating that Oq+ ion energies scales linearly with q.
This is surprising if we recall the earlier discussion on the two prevalent models that seek to
describe laser-cluster explosion dynamics: hydrodynamic expansion and Coulomb explosion.
Conventional wisdom based on these two models demands that relatively large clusters would
follow, at least qualitatively, the predictions of the uniform density hydrodynamic expansion
model whereas smaller clusters would tend to behave according to the expectations of the
Coulomb explosion model. As noted in the Introduction, in the former case, disassembly
of clusters would yield highly charged ions whose energy scales as q. In the latter case, the
corresponding energy dependence would be close to q2. Our experiments on Arn clusters,
with n as large as 40000, reveal an ion energy dependence that scales approximately as q2.
On the other hand, experiments that we conducted on Xen clusters [19], with n ∼ 150000,
yielded deﬁnite evidence that the explosion dynamics in this case most deﬁnitely occurred
in the hydrodynamic regime (even though our results indicated the need to introduce a two-
dimensional component into the hydrodynamic expansion model in order to rationalize the
asymmetry in the ion emission process that was discovered.) The present results indicate a
linear dependence of ion energy of charge state in the case of relatively small water clusters,
(H2O)n and (D2O)n, n ∼60, that have been produced by seeing high pressure He and Ar
gases. From the estimates of the size of water clusters presented earlier, the water clusters in
our experiments are very much smaller in size than the rare gas clusters that are produced
at the stagnation pressure utilized in our experiments. The estimation that the clusters are
smaller in size is also augmented by the fact that the maximum ion energies observed in
water clusters are lower by nearly two orders in magnitude. If the cluster size was bigger,
the kinetic energy release would have been much larger. These ﬁnding raise the question
whether the linear energy-charge relationship that is measured for water clusters does, in
fact, indicate hydrodynamic expansion.

10

C. Coulomb explosion versus hydrodynamic expansion

An important consequence of the prevailing wisdom regarding cluster explosion dynam-
ics, as already discussed in outline in the Introduction, dictates that relatively large clusters
follow the predictions of the hydrodynamic expansion model whereas smaller clusters be-
have according to the expectations of the Coulomb explosion model. In the former case,
disassembly of clusters whose diameter a >> ζe, δe, would yield highly charged ions whose
energy scales as q, the ionic charge. Speciﬁcally, the mean energy, ¯E, and the mean charge
of fragment ions, ¯q, would be related by

¯E =

¯qkBTe ∝ ¯q,

3
2

where kB is the Boltzmann constant and Te is the electron temperature which, it is assumed,
depends only weakly on ¯q.

On the other hand, the Coulomb explosion scenario demands that the corresponding
energy dependence be q2. In practice, a cluster comprising N atoms would be expected to
explode into ions that possess a range of values of charge and energy that may be represented
by qj and Ej, respectively, for the jth ion. The mean energy and mean charge state would
then be speciﬁcally related by

(10)

(11)

¯E =

¯q2
N

N =1

N

X
i=1

X
j=i+1

1
|Ri − Rj|

∝ ¯q2,

where Ri denotes the initial position of the ith ion.

The dependence of the ion energy on q has constituted the criterion that have been
used in previous studies to experimentally disentangle cluster explosion dynamics in the
two regimes [8], despite the fact that experiments give direct access only to ¯E and not to ¯q.
Experiments provide access to information on speciﬁc charge states q and associated energies
E of individual ions that are formed upon explosion of the parent cluster. Ishikawa and
Blenski [21] have carried out Monte Carlo classical particle-dynamics simulations of small
clusters of Ar and Xe (up to 147 atoms) and have determined values of q and E for speciﬁc
subshells in the clusters. Their results show that Coulomb explosion of relatively small
clusters like Xe147 give rise to a distinctly linear dependence of ion energy on high charge
states which, in prevailing wisdom, would be attributed to hydrodynamic expansion. In other
words, the results of the simulations question the wisdom of using the simple experimental
recipe of ion energy being proportional to either q or to q2 in order to disentangle Coulomb
explosion from hydrodynamic expansion.

Relatively little work has been reported on the interaction of intense laser light with
molecular clusters [13,14,22] and it has relied exclusively on the application of one-
dimensional TOF methodology to clusters of modest size. The application of 2D-TOF
methodology to atomic [2,19] and molecular clusters opens new vistas for such research; as
the present results indicate, it also questions prevailing wisdom regarding cluster explosion
dynamics. The method certainly establishes the fact that water clusters formed by seeding
with high pressure argon gas can be used to produce energetic and highly-charged ions of
oxygen. Moreover, our results appear to oﬀer experimental conﬁrmation of what the simula-
tion studies of Ishikawa and Blenski [21] predicted (but have not, hitherto, been taken proper

11

cognizance of): charge state dependences of ion energy do not constitute an unambiguous
enough experimental signature of cluster explosion regime.

12

REFERENCES

[1] K. Boyer, B. D. Thompson, A. McPherson, and C. K. Rhodes, J. Phys. B 27, 4373

(1994).

[2] T. Ditmire, J. W. G. Tisch, E. Springate, M. B. Mason, N. Hay, R. A. Smith, J.

Marangos, and M. H. R. Hutchinson, Nature (London) 386, 54 (1997).

[3] D. Mathur, Phys. Reports 225, 195 (1993).
[4] S. Ter-Avetisyan, M. Schrer, H. Stiel, U. Vogt, W. Radloﬀ, W. Karpov, W. Sandner,

and P. V. Nickles, Phys. Rev. E 64, 036404 (2001).

[5] T. D. Donnelly, T. Ditmire, K. Neuman, M. D. Perry, and R. W. Falcone, Phys. Rev.

[6] T. Ditmire, J. Zweiback, V. P. Yanovsky, T. E. Cowan, G. Hays, and K. B. Wharton,

Lett. 76, 2472-2475 (1996).

Nature 398, 489 (1999).

[7] Y. Kishimoto, T. Masaki, and T. Tajima, Phys. Plasmas 9, 589 (2002).
[8] M. Lezius, S. Dobosz, D. Normand, and M. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 261 (1998).
[9] V. Kumarappan, M. Krishnamurthy, D. Mathur, and L. C. Tribedi, Phys. Rev. A 63,

023203 (2001).

[10] O. F. Hagena and W. Obert, J. Chem. Phys. 56, 1793 (1972).
[11] J. Farges, M. F. de Feraudy, B. Raoult, and G. Torchet, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 3491 (1986).
[12] O. F. Hagena, Z. Phys. D 4, 291 (1987).
[13] J. W. G. Tisch, N. Hay, E. Springate, E. T. Gumbrell, M. H. R. Hutchinson, and J. P.

Marangos, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3076 (1999).

[14] E. S. Toma and H. G. Muller, Phys. Rev. A 66, 013204 (2002).
[15] M. Ahmed, C. J. Apps, C. Hughes, and J. C. Whitehead, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 12530

[16] A. A. Vostrikov and D. Yu Dubov, Z. Phys. D 20, 429 (1991).
[17] T. Ditmire, E. Springate, J. W. G. Tisch, Y. L. Shao, M. B. Mason, N. Hay, J. Marangos,

and M. H. R. Hutchinson, Phys. Rev. A 57, 369 (1998).

[18] V. Kumarappan, M. Krishnamurthy, and D. Mathur, Phys. Rev. A 66, 033203 (2002).
[19] V. Kumarappan, M. Krishnamurthy, and D. Mathur, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 085005 (2001).
[20] H. Xu, H. A. Stern, and B. J. Berne, J. Phys. Chem. B 106, 2054 (2002).
[21] K. Ishikawa and T. Blenski, Phys. Rev. A 62, 063204 (2000).
[22] J. V. Ford, Q. Zhong, L. Poth, and A. W. Castleman, Jr., J. Chem. Phys. 110, 6257

(1994).

(1999).

13

FIGURES

FIG. 1. Schematic representation of the experimental apparatus for the measurement of ion
energy spectra upon disassembly of rare gas and rare gas + water clusters. HV: High voltage sup-
ply for the retarding potential analyzer, DAC: Digital-to-Analog-Convertor, DSO: Digital Storage
Oscilloscope, GPIB: General Purpose Interface Board.

FIG. 2. Typical raw output signal from the microchannel plate (MCP) detector near the laser
arrival time (t=0) obtained when Ar40000 clusters are irradiated by a laser intensity of 8×1015 W
cm−2. The feature occuring at very short times (<0.2 µs) is ascribed to photons and electrons.
The features beyond 0.5 µs are due to energetic ions.

FIG. 3. Ion energy distributions of Ar40000 and Ar2000 clusters irradiated by a laser intensity of
8×1015 W cm−2, with the laser polarization vector directed parallel to the axis of the time-of-ﬂight
spectrometer.

FIG. 4. Ion energy distribution of Ar40000 clusters irradiated by a laser intensity of 8×1015 W
cm−2 with two diﬀerent voltages applied on the retarding potential analyser (RPA). The spectra
are mutually displaced along the vertical scale for clarity.

FIG. 5. 2D-TOF spectrum showing charged-resolved ion energy distributions of Ar40000 clus-
ters. Each charge state q is depicted as a line with slope q−1. The ion energy depends on ion
charge state as ∼ q2.

FIG. 6. Energy distribution of ions from water clusters irradiated by a laser intensity of 8×1015
W cm−2 with voltages of 500 V and 600 V applied on the retarding potential analyser (RPA). The
spectra are mutually displaced along the vertical scale for clarity. Note that the time-to-energy
conversion of the raw TOF spectra is with respect to oxygen ions in this depiction.

FIG. 7. 2D-TOF spectrum of water clusters showing charged-resolved ion energy distributions.
Note that the time-to-energy conversion of the raw TOF spectra is with respect to H + ions in this
depiction. The energies of Oq+ ions depend almost linearly on ion charge state q.

14

Skimmer (1 mm)

10-8-10-4
Torr

10-8-10-7
Torr

Laser focus

To 550 l/s
turbo pump

Photodiode

Pulsed valve 
with
supersonic
nozzle

Cluster
beam

To 2500 l/s
diffusion pump

Repeller plate

DAC

HV

GPIB

Channeltron/MCP

DSO

 

Ar40000

electrons/photons

 

ions

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

 

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

5
 Time-of-flight (m

10

m s)

15

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i

s
n
e

t

n

I

1013

1012

1011

1010

109

108

107

 

Ar40000

 

Ar2000

103

104

105

106

Ion energy (eV)

1013

1012

1011

1010

109

108

107

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i

s
n
e

t

n

I

 

Ar5+

RPA = 200 V

RPA = 400 V

 

103

104

105

Ion energy (eV)

Ar7+ 

Ar6+ 

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i

s
n
e
t
n
I

 

O5+

O3+

RPA voltage = 500 V

O6+

 

RPA voltage = 600 V

O4+

O2+

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

Oxygen ion energy (eV)

 

O 4+ 

O 3 +  

H + 

