3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ab initio density functional investigation of B24 cluster: Rings, Tubes, Planes, and
Cages

S. Chacko†, D. G. Kanhere⋆, and
Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune 411 007, India

I. Boustani††
Universit¨at Wuppertal, FB 9 - Theoretische Chemie, Gauβ Straβe 20, D-42097 Wuppertal, Germany.
(July 28, 2013)

We investigate the equilibrium geometries and the systematics of bonding in various isomers
of a 24-atom boron cluster using Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics within the framework
of density functional theory. The isomers studied are the rings, the convex and the quasiplanar
structures, the tubes and, the closed structures. A staggered double-ring is found to be the most
stable structure amongst the isomers studied. Our calculations reveal that a 24-atom boron cluster
does form closed 3-d structures. All isomers show staggered arrangement of nearest neighbor atoms.
Such a staggering facilitates sp2 hybridization in boron cluster. A polarization of bonds between the
peripheral atoms in the ring and the planar isomers is also seen. Finally, we discuss the fusion of
two boron icosahedra. We ﬁnd that the fusion occurs when the distance between the two icosahedra
is less than a critical distance of about 6.5a.u.

I. INTRODUCTION

Atomic clusters are of great interest due to their novel properties which can serve as building blocks for self-
assembled material in order to realize miniaturized nanodevices. Due to increasing technological importance of
nanoscale devices, the investigation of the structural, and the related physical and chemical properties of clusters,
especially boron, carbon, silicon-based systems, is becoming an expanding research area.

The discovery of C60 carbon buckminsterfullerene molecule1 and its unique electronic properties has triggered an
explosive growth of research in the ﬁeld of cluster physics. Superconducting and magnetic fullerides2, atoms trapped
inside the fullerene cage, chemically bonded fullerene complexes have generated much excitement. Since then, much
attention has been focused to fabricate small caged clusters of various elements like C, Si, and B. However, small
clusters of silicon and carbon (n < 15) do not form stable cage structures. One of the ways of stabilizing these cages
is by trapping a foreign atom at the center of the cage. Recent work by Kumar et al demonstrated the feasibility of
metal-encapsulation of fullerene-like caged clusters of Si4.

On the similar grounds it would be interesting to look at boron cages, since boron and boron-rich compounds exhibit
some of the most interesting chemistry of all elements in the periodic table5. Atomic boron is the ﬁrst light element
of group III with one p- valence electron3. It is semiconducting in its bulk phase with low density, very high melting
point, and hardness close to that of diamond. Due to sp2 hybridization of the valence electron, large coordination
number, and short covalent radius, boron prefers to form strong directional bond with various elements.

Boron clusters have been investigated mainly via computer simulation although some experimental results are
available. La Placa et al proposed existence of B36N24 cluster with the same structure as that of the fullerene
6. However, the only heteroatomic species that were observed in the experiment were BN and B2N. In contrast,
C60
an earlier experiment had detected the existence of BnN+
m for various combination of n and m for n = 2 − 177.
Other abundant distribution and fragments of clusters of group III were also found8. Rao and Jena carried out a
comprehensive theoretical study of the equilibrium geometries, vertical ionization potentials, and the fragmentation
patterns of B2-B6 clusters in neutral and singly charged states, as well as the stability of boron-rich clusters, BnX;
n=1,5,12;X=Be,C9. They show that the electronic bonding in boron clusters is similar to that in boron-rich solids
and is characterized by a three-center bond. In spite of being trivalent element having three centered bonds, a B20
dodecahedron composed of pentagonal faces with each atom being three-fold coordinated, does not exhibit unusual
stability9. Ab initio investigations of small boron clusters by Boustani reveal that most of the stable structures are
composed of two fundamental units: hexagonal or pentagonal pyramids10. Hayami has investigated the encapsulation
11 icosahedron. He found that H and Li are most likely to get trapped and
of impurity atoms, from H to Ne, in B12
stabilize the cage. He also found that the highest occupied molecular orbital(HOMO)-lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital(LUMO) gap is largest for C.

1

Boron exists in various crystalline and amorphous forms of which α−, β− rhombohedral (α−rh and β−rh) and
α− tetragonal (α−tet) are well known phases5. The α and β-rh boron solids are composed of unit cells containing
icosahedra. The α-rh boron, also called low temperature or red boron, have high level of crystal purity. The
B12
B12
icosahedra in this form are slightly distorted which are weakly bound to each other by three-center bonds
situated in alternating parallel planes. This leads to weak thermal stability and therefore α−rh boron on annealing at
a temperature of about 1200oC transforms into β−rh. In contrast, a hypothetical α−rh boron quasicrystal contains
two elemental unit cells: a prolate and an oblate, stacked in a quasi-periodic manner12,13. The prolate unit cell in
the quasicrystal is slightly distorted which transforms into oblate unit cell to form the quasicrystal. Formation of
such icosahedral quasicrystal is also seen in Al-Mn alloy14. An interesting question concerns the transformation of
the distorted prolate unit cells into oblate unit cell. Takeda et al
found that the mechanism of this transition as
an inter-penetrating process of the two B12 icosahedra lying along the short body diagonal in a prolate cell in the
quasicrystal15. Boustani and coworkers investigated the fusion of those two B12 icosahedra lying along the short body
diagonal16. Their calculations reveal that a stable drum-like boron cluster can be formed without removing any atoms
within the two approaching icosahedra as suggested by Takeda et al. They have considered various conﬁgurations of
two B12 icosahedra connected to each other in diﬀerent orientation. The optimization and search for local minima
was performed with certain symmetry restrictions. The relative stability of these geometries were not compared with
the other possible isomers of the 24-atom boron cluster. This is especially important since the geometry most stable
isomer of B24 could be completely diﬀerent from the drum-like structure and could be much lower in energy.

In the present work, we address some of these questions concerning fusion of two boron icosahedra and the B24 clus-
ter. It is known that the number of isomers on an energy surfaces increases exponentially with the size of the cluster.
Since, B24 is a medium size cluster, it has a large number of isomers. An interesting aspect of medium size boron
cluster is the competition between quasiplanar, tubular and closed structures17. The strains in the bonds due to the
curvature in the closed structures favors the quasiplanar structure, whereas, the dangling bonds in quasiplanar and
convex structures favors the tube and cage isomers. We discuss the energetics, stability and bonding properties in
certain representative isomers of the 24-atom boron cluster, followed by the discussion on the process of fusion of
two B12
icosahedra. Previous reports as well as our investigation reveals that such the fusion results into a closed
structure. Although, this structure is stable, it need not be the lowest energy isomer. In order to understand the
relative stability of this fused structure, and hence the stability of the quasicrystal, we have investigated the various
representative low-lying structure of the 24-atom boron cluster.

In section-II, we describe the numerical method used followed by a discussion of the results in section-III.

II. THEORETICAL DETAILS

We employ Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics (BOMD) based on Kohn-Sham (KS) formulation of density

functional theory using damped equation18 method within the pseudopotential approximation.

The electronic structure and the total energy of the isomers, have been computed using the ultrasoft
pseudopotentials19 within the local density approximation (LDA) and the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)
using the VASP26 package. The Ceperley-Alder20 exchange-correlation potential for LDA and the Perdew-Wang21
potential for GGA has been used. The geometries were optimized using the conjugate gradient and the steepest
descent method18. The size of the simulation cell was varied according to the structure studied.

Isomer
Ring 1x24
Ring 1x24
Tube 3x8
Tube 4x6
Quasiplanar and Convex
Cages
The structures were considered to be converged when the forces on each ion was less than 0.01eV/˚Awith a conver-

Simulation Cell (˚A)
18x18x4
17x17x11
14x14x13
15x15x16
15x15x10
13x13x15

gence in the total energy of about 10−4 − 10−6eV.

The fusion of two icosahedra was carried out using the inhouse package. Norm-conserving pseudopotential of
Bachelet et al22 in Kleinman and Bylander23 form with s-part treated as non-local was employed. The exchange-
correlation potential by Ceperley-Alder20, was used. A cubic supercell of length 40a.u. with an energy cutoﬀ of
21.0 rydberg provided suﬃcient convergence in the total energy. During the dynamics, the norm of each of the states
deﬁned as, | hψi − ǫiψi |2 (where ǫi being the KS-eigenvalue corresponding to the KS-eigenstate ψi) was maintained
at 10−7 − 10−9a.u. The ﬁnal structures were considered to be converged when the forces on all atoms were less than
10−4 to 10−3 a.u.

2

The nature of the bonding has been investigated using the electron localization function (ELF)24 along with the
charge density. Such ELF have been found to been useful for elucidating the bonding characteristics of a variety of
system, especially in conjunction with the charge density. For a single determinantal wavefunction built from KS
orbitals ψi, the ELF is deﬁned as

where

χELF =

1 +

(cid:20)

−1

D
Dh (cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18)

D =

1
2 Xi

2
|∇φi|

−

2
|∇ρ|
ρ

1
8

Dh =

3
10

3π2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

5/3

ρ5/3

A. Isomers of B24

1. Rings

with ρ = ρ(r) the valence-electron density. A value of χELF nearly 1 represents a perfect localization of the valence

electron density24.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The present investigation can be separated into two groups. First, we present results for various isomers of a
24-atom boron cluster which can be classiﬁed into: (i) the rings, (ii) the tubes, (iii) the convex and the quasiplanar
structures and, (iv) the closed structure isomers of B24. Since B24 has a large number of isomers, we restrict our
study to a certain isomers of the above representative classes. First, we discuss the geometry and the bonding in these
isomers computed by GGA, followed by the energetics and stability of these isomers. Finally, we discuss the fusion of
two boron icosahedra.

In this section, we present the results for two rings, viz. a monocyclic-ring and a double-ring. In ﬁg.1, we show, the
optimized geometry, the isovalued surfaces of the electron localization function, and the total charge density for the
HOMO and the LUMO states for the monocyclic-ring. It turns out that this structure is the least stable, and makes
an interesting contrast with the most stable structure, viz., the double-ring.

The monocyclic-ring has a diameter of 11.81˚A. In spite of being the least stable isomer, the ELF plot, in ﬁg.1b,
shows a localized px − px σ bond. It is interesting to examine the behavior of the HOMO state. The HOMO state
in the monocyclic ring is doubly degenerate. In ﬁg.1c, we show the charge density for the one of the HOMO state.
It can be noted that the π-bond has six spatial nodes. The other HOMO state is similar to this state with a phase
shift. As a result, an eﬀective delocalisation of the π bonds similar to that in benzene25 is seen. The diﬀerence in the
HOMO states of benzene and B24 is that in benzene the π bonds is perpendicular to the plane of the carbon ring,
whereas in B24, the HOMO is formed by the in-plane py − py orbitals. During the formation of benzene molecule,
each carbon atom promotes an electron from the 2s2 state into the empty 2pz orbital, whereas in boron, an electron
from the 2s2 state is promoted to the empty 2py orbital. Thus, the reason for formation of in-plane π bond in B24 is
the absence of pz electron. The LUMO state of B24 , on the other hand, is out of the ring-plane pz − pz(ﬁg.1d).

In ﬁg.2, we show, the optimized geometry, the isovalued surfaces of the electron localization function, and the total
charge density for the HOMO and LUMO states for a double-ring. The double ring of diameter of 6.22˚A, is composed
two ring of 12-atoms each, 1.45˚A apart, arranged in a staggered conﬁguration. Each ring is rotated by an angle of
π/12 with respect to the other ring in order to form the staggered conﬁguration. It is known that boron, boron-rich
compounds and boron clusters exhibit sp2 hybridization. Such a staggered double-ring formation, facilitates such an
hybridization, thereby making it the most stable structure.

3

The ELF plot (ﬁg.2b) shows a polarized σ bond between the atoms in the same ring, the polarization caused by the
atoms in the neighboring ring. This is a signature of three-centered boron bond which is a precursor to the bonding
in solid state boron. The total charge density (not shown) is also localized in the region between the two rings. The
charge-density for the HOMO (ﬁg.2c) and the LUMO (ﬁg.2d) represents a strongly localized π-bond between two
atoms. While the HOMO state is a π bond between an atom of each ring, the LUMO state shows a lateral p − p
overlap between the atoms of both the rings. Similar to the monocyclic ring, the HOMO state in this case is also
doubly degenerate, giving rise to an eﬀective delocalization.

It is instructive to analyze the total p-character in the orbitals as a function of orbital number. In ﬁg.3a and 3b,
we show such a plot for the monocyclic and the double-ring, respectively. The character in the orbitals is calculated
by projecting the orbitals onto spherical harmonics centered at each ionic sites within a sphere of a speciﬁed radius
around each ion. The radius of the sphere is usually taken to be half of the distance of the ion from the nearest
ion. It can be noted that a monotonic decrease in the amount of s-character in a monocyclic-ring is seen, whereas,
it is oscillatory for the double-ring in the central occupied orbitals. A substantial amount of p-character in the lower
occupied states in the double-ring is seen. This indicates a higher degree of sp-hybridization. For both the structures,
a double degeneracy is seen in most of the occupied states. These states represents resonant structures.

2. Tubes

We discuss three tubes composed of: (a) three planar rings of eight atoms, (b) four planar rings of six atoms, and

(c) four rings, each ring consisting of six atoms arranged in a staggered conﬁguration.

In ﬁg.4, we show, the optimized geometry of the tubular drum shaped boron cluster along with the HOMO state,
and the ELF. This structure is composed of three rings of eight boron atoms each, with the height of the drum
alternating between 2.92˚A and 3.01˚A. The surface of the drum is made up of an elongated rhombus with the atoms
in the central rings coming closer to each other, thereby pushing apart the atoms on the outer rings. This structure
has a distorted D4h symmetry. Energetically, this structure is nearly degenerate to the double ring. It has a very
small HOMO-LUMO gap (0.3eV as compared to 1.28eV in the double-ring), due to Jahn-Teller distortions. The
HOMO state is doubly degenerate, which on distortion gives rise to this small gap. The isovalued plot of the HOMO
(ﬁg.4b), shows a bond between an atom of the outermost rings with the two nearest atoms in the central ring along
the bonding region, unlike the ring isomers where a π bond is formed. The peculiar alternating height is due to the
characteristic bonding in this structure. The ELF (ﬁg.4c), shows a strong localized bond between the central atoms
of the rhombus. The bonds amongst the outer-ring atoms are similar to that of the double-ring, i.e. polarized by the
atoms in the central ring.

A four-ring tube with six boron atoms each, is shown in ﬁg.5a. This tube with a small diameter of about 3.0˚Ais
the initial structure. On geometry optimization, the open tubular structure distorts thereby closing both the ends.
The optimized geometry is shown in ﬁg.5b. It is seen that the alternate atoms in the outermost rings on either side,
approach the center of the ring closing the ends. This structure can also be viewed as a distorted cage, as shown in
ﬁg.7b, without the icosahedral closing. It is interesting to note that, despite of sp2 hybridization, there is a possibility
of getting a 3-d closed structure.

We have also carried out a geometry optimization of a B24-D3d open structure. The geometry of this structure is
depicted in ﬁg.5c. This structure too undergoes a similar structural transformation into a close D3d boron cage (ﬁg.7b),
due to higher bond strains and a large curvature at the open ends. This result is contradictory to that reported by
Boustani and coworkers16. According to them, the stability of the closed tubular form B24-D3d increases when the
closed tubular ends rearrange to form an additional ring of 6-atoms, as found within an open tubular structure of
B24-D6d. This diﬀerence is mainly due to the diﬀerences in the theoretical approaches. We have done unrestricted
geometry optimization, whereas, they have imposed certain symmetry restriction for the minimization. Moreover, we
have used density functional method within plane-wave pseudopotential and GGA approximations, whereas, Boustani
et al have done an all electron calculations using Hartree-Fock and local spin density functional theory.

3. Quasiplanar and Convex Structures

We present the results for a couple of open structures viz. the quasiplanar and the convex stable isomers of B24.
According to the Aufbau principle proposed by Boustani10, we construct a quasiplanar and a convex structure from
the basic unit of a hexagonal pyramid B7. Upon optimization, we ﬁnd that the LDA computed geometry of the
quasiplanar structure is nearly planar. The quasi-planarity comes from the GGA calculations. The GGA-optimized
geometry of the quasiplanar structure is shown in ﬁg.6a. Some atoms are raised above the plane while some atoms are

4

shifted below the plane leading to a staggered-like conﬁguration. Thus, even in the open structures, the staggering
is preferred. The convex structure, on the other hand, gets distorted by both LDA as well as GGA, although the
It can be noted that both these isomers,
convexity is maintained. This distorted structure is depicted in ﬁg.6d.
the quasiplanar and the convex have nearly similar structure. However, the HOMO state of these structures diﬀer
drastically. In ﬁg.6b, we show, the isovalued plot of the HOMO state of the quasiplanar structure at 1/10th of its
maximum value. The HOMO state is delocalized within the plane along the bonding region. An excess electron cloud
outside the cluster is also seen. This behavior in the HOMO state of the quasiplanar structure can be contrasted with
that of the convex structure. In ﬁg.6e, we show, the plot of the HOMO state for the convex structure at 1/6th of the
maximum value. It is clear from this plot that the HOMO state is more localized. It represents a π bond between
atoms of the outermost layer, the π bond being formed on the two sides of the plane of the structure.

In ﬁg.6c and 6f, we plot, the ELF for these two structures, respectively. The nature of the ELF in both the
structures is nearly similar. A polarization of the bond between the peripheral atoms is seen in both the cases. A
higher degree of polarization in the quasiplanar structure is seen. Moreover, a 3-centered bond is seen in interior
atoms in the quasiplanar structure.

4. Closed Structures

In this class we have studied three structures. The geometry of these structures are shown in ﬁg.7a(i), 7b(i) and
ﬁg.7c(i). We will refer these closed structures as cage-I, cage-II and cage-III respectively. It is seen that upon formation
of closed structure the stability of the boron isomers decreases as compared to that of the most stable isomer. Cage-I
(7a(i)) represents two interacting B12.
It has D3h symmetry. These two icosahedra, on fusion, transforms into a
closed tubular form viz. cage-II, shown in ﬁg.7b(i). The fusion process will be discussed later. This structure has
the symmetry D3d. In case of cage-II, it is seen that the atoms moves towards the fusion region, thereby decreasing
the bond strains in the icosahedral units. This structure is the most stable cage isomer of B24. Cage-III shows a
diﬀerent behavior than the other two structures. The ﬁrst two cages show an icosahedral unit, whereas, cage-III can
be visualized as double ring of eight atoms, placed side by side. Each side of this ring is capped by 4 atoms which
forms a quinted roof or bend rhombus-like structure. This cage turns out to be the least stable closed isomer of B24.
The bonding in the cage-I and II is similar to that of the B12 icosahedra except at the fusion region. In ﬁg.7a(ii),
ﬁg.7b(ii), ﬁg.7c(ii), we plot the ELF for cage-I through cage-III. It can be seen that in case of cage-I and cage-II,
the ELF shows a high localization of the charge in the fusion region of the two icosahedra. A slight delocalization
at the tube ends, as compared to the central fusion region, is seen. This shows an aﬃnity of the boron icosahedra
to get bonded to each other. On the other hand, the ELF for the cage-III, depicted in ﬁg.7c, shows a three-centered
bond between an atom of the quinted roof and two atoms from the octagonal ring. It is interesting to note that
such bonding is seen in solid state boron5. Thus, in spite of a three-centered bond, the boron clusters does not show
enhanced stability.

5. Energetics and Stability

The energetics and the stability of isomers of B24 can be explained via the binding energy, content of p-character in
the total density, and the HOMO-LUMO gap. In ﬁg.8a, we plot, the the binding energy per atom for all the isomers
studied, computed by LDA and GGA. The binding energy is calculated as Eb = Eatom − EB24 /24. The trend in the
binding energy by both methods is remarkably similar. The GGA gives lower binding energy for all isomers, the shift
being nearly identical. The double-ring is the most stable isomer. With the exception of the monocyclic-ring and the
cage-III, all the isomers are nearly degenerate to the double-ring. The stability of the isomers can be associated to
the amount of p-character in the total charge density. In ﬁg.8c, we plot, the content of p-character in the total charge
density computed by GGA. The p-character is calculated by the method discussed above. The amount of p-character
in the total charge density is the sum of all the projection over all the ionic sites. Interestingly, the p-character plot,
nearly follows a similar trend to the binding energy. The least stable structure, viz. the monocyclic-ring, has the least
p-character in the total charge density. Thus, the binding energy is largely inﬂuenced by the amount of p-character
contained in the total charge density.
It can be noted that due to similar structure, the convex and quasiplanar
structures have nearly same binding energy, and the amount of p-character in the total density. The lower binding
energy of the monocyclic-ring is not only a result of lower content of p-character but also the coordination number.
The coordination number for the monocyclic-ring is 2, whereas, it is 4 for the double-ring. Among the closed structure
studied, cage-II, is the most stable structure, due to larger content of p-character. In ﬁg.8d, we plot, the minimum
interatomic distances for various isomers. An increase in the interatomic distances in the double-ring is seen over the

5

monocyclic-ring. This is due to increases the coordination number in the double-ring. The strains in the bonds also
inﬂuences the interatomic distances. In the cage-I and cage-III, due to larger bond strains, the boron atoms moves
away from each other, leading to a larger bond distance. As a result their binding energies is lowered.

The HOMO-LUMO gap shows a diﬀerent behavior. In ﬁg.8b, we plot, the HOMO-LUMO gap for these isomers,
computed by LDA and GGA. Unlike the the binding energy, both methods gives nearly same value for the gap,
with the exceptions of the double-ring and the isomer shown in ﬁg.5b, where the gap is lowered as expected, and
the cage-III, where the gap is increased. The increase in the gap for the cage-III is due to the degenerate HOMO
state. Moreover, a wide variation in the gap for various isomers is seen. The drum-shaped isomer (ﬁg.4a), in spite of
being nearly degenerate to the most stable structure, the double-ring, exhibits a very small gap due to Jahn-Teller
distortion. A similar behavior is also seen for cage-III. The quasiplanar and the convex isomer exhibits nearly same
HOMO-LUMO gap.

B. Fusion of Two Boron Icosahedra

As mentioned earlier, an unit cell of α-rh boron hypothetical quasicrystal consists of a prolate unit cell and an oblate
unit cell, stacked in a quasi-periodic manner. The prolate unit cell is slightly distorted which transforms into oblate
unit cell. The mechanism of this transformation has been studied by Takeda et al15 and Boustani et al16. Takeda et
al suggests that in order to undergo this transformation, the two icosahedra lying along the short body diagonal in
the prolate unit cell should inter-penetrate. Their model also suggests the removal of three interfacing atoms. On the
other hand, Boustani et al has shown that there is no need of removing any such atoms. Their investigation reveals
that a much stable closed tubular structure is formed upon fusion of the two icosahedra. To get a better insite of
the fusion process, as the two icosahedra approaches towards each other, we simulate the process by the following
method. Two icosahedra were kept at various distances starting from 5.0a.u. to 8.5a.u., and a linear search for an
equivalent local minima was carried out. This distance is deﬁned as the distance between the icosahedral centers. It
is assumed that the composite B12-B12 will take the structures corresponding to these local minima as they approach
towards each other. Local geometry minimization was carried out for nine diﬀerent distances in the above mentioned
range. The corresponding total energies, in hartrees, of the equilibrium structures as a function of the distances are
plotted in ﬁg.9a. This plot shows a barrier of 5.31eV at a critical distance of 6.5a.u., which the icosahedra has to
cross in order to get fused. The composite structure of the two icosahedra sees a local minima just before the barrier.
The structure corresponding to this minima is shown in ﬁg.7a(i). It can be seen that the icosahedra are bonded to
each other by three bonds. Each black atom of the left icosahedra is bonded to the nearest white atom of the right
icosahedra. As the icosahedra moves further towards each other, these six atoms forms a staggered ring-like structure.
Such staggering, as discussed earlier, facilitates sp2 hybridization, thereby increasing the stability. At the barrier,
an intermediate structure during the transition is seen. The geometry of this structure is depicted in ﬁg.9b. Due to
strained staggered ring, this structure is unstable. As the icosahedra moves further towards each other, the strains
in the ring is reduced ﬁnally giving a closed D3d structure, shown in ﬁg.7b(i). A slight rearrangement is seen during
the formation of this closed tubular structure. The atoms moves towards the fusion region, consequently reducing
the strains in the icosahedral units. This structure is the most stable cage isomer of B24 cluster. It is also nearly
degenerate to the most stable isomer i.e. the double ring. This structure (cage-II) is about 1.91eV lower than the
structure corresponding to the local minima (cage-I) just before the barrier. Thus, the eﬀective barrier as seen by
the fused structure is about 7.22eV. As a result, the oblate unit cell becomes much more stable than the prolate unit
cell. Hence, the transformation of the prolate unit cell to oblate unit cell enhances the stability of the quasicrystal
signiﬁcantly.

IV. CONCLUSION

In the present work, we have reported the geometries and the systematics of bonding in various isomers of a 24-atom
boron cluster and the fusion of two boron icosahedra using BOMD method within the framework of density functional
theory. We ﬁnd that the monocyclic-ring is the least stable structure. A staggered double-ring formation facilitates
the sp2 hybridization, thereby making it the most stable structure. Our calculations reveal that a 24-atom boron
cluster does form a closed 3-d structures. The bonding analysis shows that a polarization of the bonds between the
peripheral atoms is seen in the ring and the planar isomers. The binding energy of all isomers is largely inﬂuenced
by the amount of p-character in the total charge density. An interesting observation common to all structures is the
staggered arrangement of nearest neighbor atoms. In the rings, the staggering obtained by rotating the alternate
rings, while in the open structures it is obtained by moving the atoms out of the plane as well as within the plane.

6

The fusion occurs when the distance between the two icosahedra is less than a critical distance of about 6.5a.u. In
order to get fused, the icosahedra has to then cross a barrier of 5.31eV. Such fusion enhances the stability of the
quasicrystal signiﬁcantly.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We gratefully acknowledge the partial ﬁnancial assistance from Indo-French Center for Promotion of Advance
Research (New Delhi)/Center Franco-Indian Pour la Promotion de la Recherche Advancee. IB gratefully acknowledges
the ﬁnancial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie. SC gratefully
acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of CSIR (New Delhi) and the local hospitality at the Universit¨at W¨urzburg
Germany.

† chacko@physics.unipune.ernet.in
⋆

kanhere@unipune.ernet.in
†† boustani@uni-wuppertal.de
1 H. W. Kroto et. al., Nature, 318, 162 (1985).
2 A. F. Hebard, M. J. Rosseinsky, R. C. Haddon, D. W. Murphy, S. H. Glarum, T. T. M. Palstra, A. P. Ramirez, A. R. Kortan,
Nature, 350, 600 (1991); K. Holczer, O. Klein, S. M. Huang, R. B. Kaner, K. J. Fu, R. L. Whetten, F. Diederich, Science,
252, 1154 (1991).

3 CRC, Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, edited by D. R. Lide (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1995).
4 Vijay Kumar, Yoshiyuki Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 45503 (2001).
5 The chemistry of boron and its compounds E. L. Mutterties (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1967). Boron hydride

chemistry, edited by E. L. Mutterties (Academic, New York, 1975).

6 S. J. La Placa, P. A. Roland, and J. J. Wynne, Chem. Phys. Lett. 190, 163 (1992).
7 S. Becker and H. J. Dietze, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes 73, 157 (1986).
8 L. Hanley, J. L. Whitten, and S. L. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. 92, 5803 (1988).
9 J. Niu, B. K. Rao, and P. Jena, J. Chem. Phys. 107 132 (1997).
10 I. Boustani, Phys. Rev. B 55 16426 (1997).
11 Wataru Hayami, Phys. Rev. B 60 1523 (1999).
12 Katz A. and Duneau M., J. Phys., 47, 181 (1986).
13 Levine D. and Steinhardt P. J., Phys. Rev. B, 34, 596 (1986).
14 Levine D. and Steinhardt P. J., Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2477 (1984); Shechtman D. S., Blech I., Gratias D., and Cahn J. W.,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 1951 (1984).

15 Takeda M., Fujimori M. Hori A. and Kimura. K. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Quasicrystals, Avignon,

edited by C. Janot and R. Mosseri (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore) 1995, p. 739.

16 I. Boustani, A. Quandt, and P. Kramer Europhys. Lett. 36, 583-588 (1996).
17 Ihsan Boustani, Angel Rubio, and Julio A. Alonso, Chem. Phys. Lett. 311, 21-28 (1999); I. Boustani, and A. Quandt,
Europhys. Lett. 39, 527-532 (1997); M. K. Sabra, and I. Boustani, Europhys. Lett. 42, 611-617 (1998); Ihsan Boustani,
Alexander Quandt, Eduardo Hernandez, and Angel Rubio, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 3176 (1999); Ihsan Boustani, Chem. Phys.
Lett. 233, 273-278 (1995);

18 M. C. Payne, M. P. Teter, D. C. Allan, T. A. Arias, and J. D. Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 1045 (1992).
19 D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892 (1990).
20 D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566 (1980).
21 J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 13244 (1992)
22 G. B. Bachelet, D. R. Hamann, and M. Schl¨uter, Phys. Rev. B. 26, 4199 (1982).
23 L. Kleinman and D. M. Bylander, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1425 (1982).
24 B. Silvi and A. Savin, Nature (London) 371, 683 (1994).
25 The organic chemist’s book of orbitals, W. L. Jorgensen, L. Salem (Academic Press Inc., New York, 1973).
26 Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP), Technishe Universit¨at Wien (1999).

7

List of ﬁgures

1 (a) The optimized geometry of the monocyclic-ring of 24-boron atoms. (b) The isovalued surface of the ELF
at the value 0.75. (c) The isovalued charge density surface of the HOMO state at the value 0.0059electron/˚A3,
(d) The isovalued charge density surface of the LUMO state at the value 0.0052electron/˚A3.

2 (a) The optimized geometry of the double-ring of 24-boron atoms. (b) The isovalued surface of the ELF at
the value 0.75. (c) The isovalued charge density surface of the HOMO state of the double-ring at the value
0.0075electron/˚A3. (d) The isovalued charge density surface of the LUMO state of the double-ring at the value
0.0091electron/˚A3.

3 The amount of s (continuous line) and p-character (dotted line), in arbitrary units, in various occupied states
and the LUMO state as a function of orbital number for, (a) the monocyclic-ring and, (b) the double-ring.

4 (a) The optimized geometry of the drum shaped boron B24

cluster composed of three rings of eight boron
atoms each. (b) The isovalued charge density surface of the HOMO state at the value 0.0036electron/˚A3. (c)
The isovalued surface of the ELF at the value 0.75.

5 (a) The initial geometry of the four-ring tube, each ring formed by 6-boron atoms. (b) The optimized structure.

(c) The open tube with D3d symmetry composed of 4-rings of staggered B6.

6 (a) The optimized geometry of the quasiplanar structure. The black circles represents atoms below the plane
while the white circles represents atoms above the plane, giving the quasiplanar nature. (b) The isovalued charge
density surface of the HOMO state of the quasiplanar structure at the value 0.0017electron/˚A3. This value is
1/10th of the maximum. (c) The isovalued surface of the ELF at the value 0.75. (d) The optimized geometry of
the convex structure. The black circles represents atoms above the plane giving the convex nature. Remaining
atoms are nearly planar. (e) The isovalued charge density surface of the HOMO state of the convex structure
at the value 0.0031electron/˚A3. This value is 1/6th of the maximum. (f) The isovalued surface of the ELF at
the value 0.75.

7 The geometries of closed structures: a(i) Cage-I representing two icosahedra interacting by three bond, each
bond formed by atoms represented by black and white dots. a(ii) ELF plots for Cage-I at the value 0.75, b(i)
Cage-II, the resultant structure of the fusion of two B12 icosahedra. A staggered-ring of six atoms (3 white and
3 black) is seen. b(ii) ELF plots for Cage-II at the value 0.75, c(i) Cage-III, composed of two rings of eight atoms
each placed side by side, and capped by four atoms on both sides. The four atoms forms a quinted roof-like
structure. c(ii) ELF plots for Cage-III at the value 0.75.

8 (a) Binding energy in eV per atom of the various B24

isomer computed by LDA and GGA. The dotted line
represents the LDA binding energy while the continuous line represents the GGA binding energy.
(b) The
amount of p-character in the total density for various isomers computed by GGA. (c) The minimum interatomic
distances in various isomers computed by GGA. (d) HOMO-LUMO gap, in eV, of the various B24
isomer
computed by LDA and GGA. The dotted line represents the LDA gap while the continuous line represents the
GGA gap.

9 (a) The total energy (in hartrees) of the clusters composed of two B12 icosahedra as they approach towards each
other as a function of the inter-icosahedral distance. The arrows marked with (I) and (II) corresponds to the
cage-I and cage-II. respectively, while the arrow marked with (T) corresponds to the transition structure (cage-
T) depicted in ﬁg.9b. (d) Cage-T, the intermediate structure between cage-I (ﬁg.7a(i)) and cage-II (ﬁg.7b(i)),
representing the transition state during the fusion of two icosahedra. It shows an intermediate stage of formation
of completely relaxed staggered-ring of six atoms (3 white and 3 black).

FIG. 1.

FIG. 2.

FIG. 3.

8

FIG. 4.

FIG. 5.

FIG. 6.

FIG. 7.

FIG. 8.

FIG. 9.

9

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig8.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

This figure "fig9.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0305103v1

