3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fusion process of Lennard-Jones clusters: global minima and

magic numbers formation.

Ilia A. Solov’yov,∗ Andrey V. Solov’yov,† and Walter Greiner

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Universit¨at Frankfurt am Main,

Robert-Mayer str. 8-10, Frankfurt am Main 60054, Germany

We present a new theoretical framework for modelling the fusion process of

Lennard-Jones (LJ) clusters. Starting from the initial tetrahedral cluster conﬁg-

uration, adding new atoms to the system and absorbing its energy at each step, we

ﬁnd cluster growing paths up to the cluster sizes of up to 150 atoms. We demonstrate

that in this way all known global minima structures of the LJ-clusters can be found.

Our method provides an eﬃcient tool for the calculation and analysis of atomic clus-

ter structure. With its use we justify the magic number sequence for the clusters

of noble gas atoms and compare it with experimental observations. We report the

striking correspondence of the peaks in the dependence on cluster size of the second

derivative of the binding energy per atom calculated for the chain of LJ-clusters

based on the icosahedral symmetry with the peaks in the abundance mass spectra

experimentally measured for the clusters of noble gas atoms. Our method serves an

eﬃcient alternative to the global optimization techniques based on the Monte-Carlo

simulations and it can be applied for the solution of a broad variety of problems in

which atomic cluster structure is important.

I.

INTRODUCTION

It is well known that the sequence of cluster magic numbers carries essential information

about the electronic and ionic structure of the cluster [1]. Understanding of the cluster magic

∗Permanent address:A. F. Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Polytechnich-

eskaya 26, St. Petersburg 194021, Russia; Email address: ilia@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de
†Permanent address:A. F. Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Polytechnich-

eskaya 26, St. Petersburg 194021, Russia; Email address: solovyov@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de

2

numbers is often equivalent or nearly equivalent to the understanding of cluster electronic

and ionic structure. A good example of this kind is the observation of the magic numbers in

the mass spectrum of sodium clusters [2]. In this case, the magic numbers were explained

by the delocalized electron shell closings (see [3] and references therein). Another example

is the discovery of fullerenes, and, in particular, the C60 molecule [4], which was made by

means of the carbon clusters mass spectroscopy.

The formation of a sequence of cluster magic numbers should be closely connected to

the mechanisms of cluster fusion. It is natural to expect that one can explain the magic

number sequence and ﬁnd the most stable cluster isomers by modeling mechanisms of cluster

assembly and growth. On the other hand, these mechanisms are of interest on their own,

and the correct sequence of the magic numbers found in such a simulation can be considered

as a proof of the validity of the cluster formation model.

The problem of magic numbers is closely connected to the problem of searching for global

minima on the cluster multidimensional potential energy surface. The number of local

minima on the potential energy surface increases exponentially with the growth cluster size
and is estimated to be of the order of 1043 for N = 100 [1]. Thus, searching for global minima

becomes increasingly diﬃcult problem for large clusters. There are diﬀerent algorithms and

methods of the global minimization, which have been employed for the global minimization

of atomic cluster systems.

One of the most widely used global optimization methods calls the simulated annealing

[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. This method is an extension of metropolis Monte Carlo techniques [11].

In the simulated annealing one starts calculation from a high energy state of the system

and then cools the system down by decreasing its kinetic energy. In standard application,

the system is annealed using molecular dynamics or Monte-Carlo based methods, but also

more sophisticated variants of this algorithm are used, such as gaussian density annealing

and analogues [7, 8, 9].

A related method is quantum tunnelling [12, 13, 14]. This method attempts to reduce

the eﬀects of barriers on the potential energy surface. This is done by allowing the system

to behave quantum mechanically, leading to the possibility of tunnelling. However, the

computational expense of this method grows exponentially with increasing the number of

atoms in the system, what makes this method applicable for relatively small clusters [15, 16].

Another class of global optimization methods is based on smoothing the potential energy

3

surface [17, 18, 19]. Within the framework of this method, a transformation is applied to

the potential energy surface in order to decrease the number of high lying local minima.

The global minimum of the smoothed potential energy surface, which is found by steepest

descent energy minimization method, or by Monte-Carlo search, is then mapped back to the

original surface.

Another successful method of global optimization is the basin-hopping algorithm [1, 20,

21]. This method involves a potential energy transformation, which does not change neither

the global minimum, nor the relative energies of local minima as it is usually done in the

potential energy surface smoothing methods. In this method, the potential energy surface

in any point of the conﬁguration space is assigned to that of the local minimum obtained by

the given geometry optimization method and the potential energy surface is mapped onto a

collection of interpenetrating staircases with basins corresponding to the set of conﬁgurations

which lead to a given minimum after optimization.

Successful global optimization results for LJ clusters reported to date were obtained with

the use of genetic algorithms [22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. These methods are based on the idea

that the population of clusters evolves to low energy by mutation and mating of structures

with low potential energy. There are diﬀerent versions of genetic algorithm (see papers cited

above). One of them is seeding algorithm, or seed growth method [23, 24]. In this method it

is assumed that the most stable cluster of N particles can be obtained from the most stable

cluster of N −1 particle by a random addition of one particle near the boundary of the cluster

and then by optimizing the structure with a given optimization method. Genetic algorithms

and other methods related to them are based on stochastic minimization technique, and

require no quantum calculation or much information about the potential energy surface, as

the previously mentioned algorithms.

The new algorithm [27] which we describe in detail in this work for the ﬁrst time is based

on the dynamic searching for the most stable cluster isomers in the cluster fusion process.

We call this algorithm as the cluster fusion algorithm (CFA). Our calculations demonstrate

that the CFA can be considered as an eﬃcient alternative to the known techniques of the

cluster global minimization. The big advantage of the CFA consists in the fact that it allows

to study not just the optimized cluster geometries, but also their formation mechanisms.

In the present work we approach the formulated problem in a simple, but general, form.

In our simplest scenario, we assume that atoms in a cluster are bound by LJ potential and

4

the cluster fusion takes place atom by atom. At each step of the fusion process all atoms in

the system are allowed to move, while the energy of the system is decreased. The motion

of the atoms is stopped when the energy minimum is reached. The geometries and energies

of all cluster isomers found in this way are stored and analyzed. On the ﬁrst glance, this

method is somewhat similar to the genetic algorithms and to the seed growth method, in

particular. However, the principle diﬀerence between the CFA and the genetic algorithms

consists in the fact that in CFA the new atoms are fused to the system not randomly, but to

certain speciﬁc points in the system, like the cluster centre of mass, the centres of mass of

the cluster faces or some speciﬁc points in the vicinity of the cluster surface (see section II for

detail). Such an approach, allows one to model various physical situations and scenarios of

the cluster fusion process, which are beyond the scope of the stochastic seed-growth method.

Thus, with the use of the CFA, we have determined the fusion paths for all known global

energy minimum LJ cluster conﬁgurations in the size range up to N ≤ 150. We have also

determined the fusion paths for the chains of clusters based on the icosahedral, octahedral,

decahedral and tetrahedral symmetries. We report the striking correspondence of the peaks

in the dependence on cluster size of the second derivative of the binding energy per atom

calculated for the chain of LJ clusters based on the icosahedral symmetry with the peaks

in the abundance mass spectra experimentally measured for the clusters of noble gas atoms

[28, 29, 30].

Our paper is organized as follows. In section II, we describe theoretical model for the

cluster fusion process and the CFA. In section III, we present and discuss the results of

computer simulations based on the CFA. In section IV, we draw a conclusion to this paper.

In Appendix A, we provide additional details of the numerical algorithms developed in our

II. THEORETICAL MODEL FOR CLUSTER FUSION PROCESS

A group of atoms bound together by interatomic forces is called an atomic cluster (AC).

There is no qualitative distinction between small clusters and molecules. However, as the

number of atoms in the system increases, ACs acquire more and more speciﬁc properties

making them unique physical objects diﬀerent from both single molecules and from the solid

work.

state.

5

Each stable cluster conﬁguration corresponds to a minimum on the multidimensional

potential energy surface of the system. The number of local minima on the potential energy

surface increases very rapidly with the growth cluster size. Thus, searching for the most

stable cluster conﬁgurations possessing the absolute energy minimum, the so-called global

energy minimum structures, becomes increasingly diﬃcult problem for large clusters.

Searching for such global energy minimum cluster structures is one of the focuses of our

paper. This problem by itself is not new as it is clear from introduction. However, in our

work we approach this problem at a new perspective and investigate not just the global

energy minimum cluster structure by its own, but rather the formation of such structures

in the cluster fusion process.

From the physical point of view, it is natural to expect that one can ﬁnd the most stable

cluster isomers by modeling the mechanisms of cluster assembly and growth, i.e. the cluster

fusion process [27]. This idea is based on the fact that in nature, or in laboratory, the most

stable clusters are often obtained namely in the fusion process. This idea is general and is

applicable to diﬀerent types of clusters.

In this work we consider ACs formed by atoms interacting with each other via the pairing

force. The interaction potential between two atoms in the cluster can, in principle, be

arbitrary. For concrete computations, we use the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential,

U(r) = 4ε

12

σ
r (cid:17)

−

6

σ
r (cid:17)

,

(cid:19)

(cid:16)

(cid:18)(cid:16)

(1)

where r is the interatomic distance, ε is the depth of the potential well (ε > 0), 21/6σ is

the pair bonding length. The constants in the potential allow one to model various types of

clusters for which LJ paring force approximation is reasonable. The most natural systems

of this kind are the clusters consisting of noble gas atoms Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe formed by van der

Waals forces. The constants of the LJ potential appropriate for the noble gas atoms one can

ﬁnd in [31]. Thus, for Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, ε = 3.6, 12.3, 17.2, 24.3 meV and σ = 3.1, 3.8, 4.0, 4.4
˚A respectively. Note that for the LJ clusters it is always possible to choose the coordinate

and energy scales so that σ = 1 and ε = 1. It makes all LJ cluster systems scalable. They

only diﬀer by the choice of σ, ε and the mass of a single constituent (atom). In our paper

we use LJ potential with σ = 1 and ε = 1/12.

The AC treatment with the use of the LJ forces often implies the applicability of the

classical Newton equations for the description of the AC dynamics. Following this line,

6

FIG. 1: Experimentally measured abundance mass spectrum for the Ar, Kr and Xe clusters

[28, 29, 30].

we describe the atomic motion in the cluster by the Newton equations with the LJ pairing

forces. In this case, the information about quantum properties of the system is hidden in the

LJ-potential constants σ and ε. In computations, the system of coupled Newton equations

for all atoms in the cluster is solved numerically using the 4th order Runge-Kutta method.

Experimentally, mass spectra of the Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe clusters have been investigated in [28,

29, 30]. In ﬁgure 1, we compile the results of these measurements. This ﬁgure demonstrates

that the mass spectra for the clusters of noble gas atoms have many common features. Some

diﬀerences in the spectra can be attributed to the diﬀerences in the experimental conditions

in which the spectra have been measured.

The peaks in the spectra indicate the enhanced stability of certain clusters. These clusters

are called the magic clusters and their mass numbers N are the magic numbers. The

enhanced stability of the magic clusters can have diﬀerent origin for various types of clusters.

For LJ clusters, the origin of magic numbers is connected with the formation and ﬁlling the

icosahedral shells of atoms. The completed icosahedral shells of atoms correspond to the

following sequence of magic numbers:

N =

z3 + 5z2 +

z + 1

10
3

11
3

(2)

7

as it is clear from a simple geometry analysis. Here, the integer z = 1, 2, 3, 4... is the order

of the icosahedral shell. The ﬁrst four icosahedral magic numbers, N, as they follow from

(2) are equal to 13, 55, 147, 309.

In ﬁgure 1, one can see, however, many more peaks

corresponding to the formation of magic clusters having the partially completed icosahedral

shells. In this paper, we elucidate the origin of all the peaks in the recorded mass spectra of

the noble gas ACs in the size range up to N ≤ 150 by modeling the mechanisms of cluster

fusion and by ﬁnding in this way the most stable cluster isomers, i.e. the global energy

minimum cluster structures.

To solve this problem, for each N, we need to ﬁnd solutions of the Newton equations

leading to the stable cluster conﬁgurations and then to choose the one, which is energetically

the most favourable. The choice of the initial conditions for the simulation and the algorithm

for the solution of this problem are described below.

Each stable cluster conﬁguration corresponds to a minimum on the cluster potential

energy surface, i.e. to the point in which all the atoms in the system are located in their

equilibrium positions. A minimum can be found by allowing atoms to move, starting from

a certain initial cluster conﬁguration, and by absorbing all their kinetic energy in the most

eﬃcient way. If the starting cluster conﬁguration for N + 1 atoms has been chosen on the

basis of the global minimum structure for N atoms, then it is natural to assume, and we

prove this in the present work, that very often the global minimum structure for N +1 atoms

can be easily found. The success of this procedure reﬂects the fact that in nature clusters in

their global minima often emerge, namely, in the cluster fusion process, which we simulate

in such calculation.

We have employed the following algorithm for the kinetic energy absorption. At each

step of the calculation we consider the motion of one atom only, which undergoes the action

of the maximum force. At the point, in which the kinetic energy of the selected atom is

maximum, we set the absolute value of its velocity to zero. This point corresponds to the

minimum of the potential well at which the selected atom moves. When the selected atom

is brought to the equilibrium position, the next atom is selected to move and the procedure

of the kinetic energy absorption repeats. The calculation stops when all the atoms are in

equilibrium.

We have considered a number of scenarios of the cluster fusion on the basis of the devel-

oped algorithm for ﬁnding the stable cluster conﬁgurations.

8

In the simplest scenario clusters of N + 1 atoms are generated from the N-atomic clusters

by adding one atom to the system. In this case the initial conditions for the simulation of

(N +1)-atomic clusters are obtained on the basis of the chosen N-atomic cluster conﬁguration

by calculating the coordinates of an extra atom fussed to the system on a certain rule. We

have probed the following paths: the new atom can be fussed either

(A1) to the center of mass of the cluster, or

(A2) randomly outside the cluster, but near its surface, or

(A3) to the centres of mass of all faces of the cluster, or

(A4) to the points that are close to the centres of all faces of the cluster, located from

both sides of the face on the perpendicular to it, or

(A5) to the centres of mass of the faces laying on the cluster surface.

Here, the cluster surface is considered as a polyhedron, so that the vertices of the poly-

hedron are the atoms and two vertices are connected with an edge, if the distance between
them is less than the value d = 1.2d0, where d0 = 21/6σ is the bonding length of a free pair

of atoms. The cluster surface is considered as a polyhedron that covers all the atoms in

the system and has the minimum volume. The whole cluster volume is divided on a sum of

attached triangle, square and pentagonal pyramids. In the A3 method, all the faces in the

cluster are counted as a sum of the faces laying on the cluster surface and the faces of the

pyramids ﬁlling the cluster volume.

The choice of the method how to fuse atoms to the system depends on the problem

to be solved. The A1 method is appropriate in situations when the new atoms are fused

into the cluster volume. The A2 simulates the process when atoms are fused to the cluster

surface. By both A1 and A2 methods, large clusters consisting of many particles can be

generated rather quickly. The A2 method is especially fast, because fusion of one atom to

the boundary of the cluster usually does not lead to the recalculation of its central part. The

A3 and A4 methods can be used for searching the most stable, i.e. energetically favourable,

cluster conﬁgurations or for ﬁnding cluster isomers with some other speciﬁc properties. The

A4 method leads to ﬁnding more cluster isomers than the A3 one, but it takes more CPU

time. The A5 method is especially convenient for modeling the cluster fusion process which

we focus on in this paper. Using this method one can generate the cluster growth paths for

the most stable cluster isomers.

In the cluster fusion process, new atoms should be added to the system starting from the

9

initially chosen cluster conﬁguration step by step until the desired cluster size is reached.

Each new step in the cluster fusion process should be made with the use of the methods

A1-A5. By methods A3-A5, one generates many diﬀerent cluster isomers at each new step

of the fusion process, those number grows rapidly as N increases. It is not feasible and often

it is not necessary to fuse new atoms to the all found isomers. Instead, one can fuse atoms

only to the selected clusters, which are of interest. Below, we outline a number of selection

criteria, which can be used for the cluster selection in the fusion process depending on the

problem to be solved. At each new step of the fusion process:

(SE1) one of the clusters with the minimum number of atoms is selected, or

(SE2) the cluster with the minimum energy among the already found stable clusters of

the maximum size is selected, or

maximum size are selected, or

the maximum size is selected, or

stable clusters is selected.

(SE3) a few low energy cluster isomers among the already found stable clusters of the

(SE4) the cluster with the maximum energy among the already found stable clusters of

(SE5) the cluster possessing a signiﬁcant structural change among the already found

The SE1 criterion is relevant in the situation, when the full search of cluster isomers is

needed. It is applicable to the systems with relatively small number of particles. Note that

each cluster can be selected only once. The SE2 criterion is the most relevant for modelling

the cluster fusion process and the purposes of the present work. It turns out to be very

eﬃcient and often leads to ﬁnding the most stable cluster conﬁgurations for a given number

of particles. However, this is not always the case, particularly for large clusters. In these

situations, the better results on the cluster global optimization can be achieved with the use

of SE3 method. However, this method takes more CPU time. The SE4 and SE5 criteria turn

out to be useful for the redirection of the cluster fusion process towards the lower energy

cluster isomer branches.

Calculations performed with the use of the methods described above show that often clus-

ters of higher symmetry group possess relatively low energy. Thus, the symmetric cluster

conﬁgurations are often of particular interest. The process of searching for the symmetric

cluster conﬁgurations can be speed up signiﬁcantly, by the impose of the symmetry con-

straints in the cluster fusion process. This means that for obtaining a symmetric N atomic

10

cluster isomer from the initially chosen symmetric (N − M)-atomic conﬁguration one should

fuse M atoms to the surface of this isomer symmetrically.

This goal can be achieved by various methods.

(SY1) The planes of symmetry of the parent cluster are to be found. Their intersections

determine the axes of symmetry. The atoms of the parent cluster do not move and held

their position, then an atom is added outside the cluster surface. The initial coordinates of

it are not important, because its stable position in the vicinity of the frozen cluster surface

is calculated. Then, this atom is reﬂected many times with respect to the found symmetry

planes, and the atoms are added on the places of its images. The obtained conﬁguration

is symmetric also. After that, all the atoms in the system are allowed to move while their

kinetic energy is absorbed. If the obtained stable cluster conﬁguration is symmetric, it can

be used as the initial cluster for further computations of this type. Using this procedure

several times the chains of clusters of certain symmetry can be found.

(SY2) This method is similar to the one described above, but now the atoms are added

to the centres of the faces on the cluster surface. If the cluster has two (or more) diﬀerent

types of faces, then, at ﬁrst, the atoms are added to the centres of the faces of the ﬁrst

type and their positions are optimized with frozen cluster core. Then, the whole system is

optimized and checked for symmetry. If it is symmetric, the process continues, atoms are

added to the faces of the second type and the same actions are performed. This method

makes possible to ﬁnd more stable conﬁgurations than the ﬁrst one.

(SY3) The atoms are added to the axes of symmetry outside the cluster surface. Then,

the atoms of the parent cluster are assumed to be frozen and the optimized coordinates of the

added atoms are calculated. After that the optimization of the whole system is performed.

If the obtained cluster conﬁguration is symmetric, it can be used as the initial cluster for

further computations.

Note that the SY1-SY3 methods do not model any concrete physical scenario for the

cluster fusion process. They rather represent eﬃcient mathematical algorithms for the gen-

eration symmetrical cluster conﬁgurations, which often turn out to be very useful for the

cluster structure analysis.

Note also that in addition to the cluster fusion techniques described above any stable

cluster conﬁguration can be manually modiﬁed by adding or removing a number of atoms.

These modiﬁcations can also be performed using advantages of the cluster symmetry if

11

it does exist. The manual modiﬁcation of the cluster conﬁguration is useful when the

cluster geometry is already established or nearly established and only small modiﬁcations

of the system are required. For example, by this method one can perform the surface

rearrangement of atoms leading to the growth the number of bonds in the cluster and thus

to the enhancement of its stability. This goal can be achieved by the replacement of a

few loosely bound atoms on the cluster surface to the positions, in which they have larger

number of bonds. As it is demonstrated in the next section, such rearrangements result

in ﬁnding the cluster isomers, which alternatively can be obtained when performing the

fusion simulation with the use of the SE3 criterion. The manual modiﬁcations technique

requires usually much less CPU time. Cluster conﬁgurations found in this way can be used

as starting conﬁgurations for the subsequent cluster fusion process.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

Using our algorithms, we have examined various paths of the cluster fusion process, and

determined the most stable cluster isomers for the cluster sizes of up to 150 atoms.

We have generated the chains of clusters based on the icosahedral, octahedral, tetrahedral

and decahedral symmetries with the use of the A3-A5 and SE2-SE5 methods. We show

that clusters possessing icosahedral and decahedral type of lattice are energetically more

favourable. For the calculated cluster chains, we analyze the average interatomic distances

in clusters, average number of bonds and binding energies. Using these results we explain the

sequence of magic numbers, experimentally measured for the noble gas clusters, and elucidate

the level of applicability of the liquid drop model for the description of the LJ cluster systems.

Using the A1-A2 methods we calculate chains of energetically unfavourable cluster isomers

as an example of the spontaneous cluster growth of such systems. Also, we consider the

formation of symmetrical clusters using methods SY1-SY3 and their correspondence to the

global energy minimum cluster structures.

12

13

14

15

FIG. 2: Growth of Lennard-Jones global energy minimum cluster structures based on the icosa-

hedral type of packing. LJ4 − LJ66 (part a), LJ67 − LJ99 (part b), LJ100 − LJ129 (part c) and

LJ130 − LJ150 (part d). The new atoms added to the cluster are marked by grey circles, while grey

rings show the atoms removed.

A. Fusion of global energy minimum clusters

1. LJ cluster geometries

16

The growth of the most stable, i.e. possessing the lowest energy, LJ clusters based

on the icosahedral symmetry, the so-called global energy minimum cluster structures, is

illustrated in ﬁgure 2, parts a-d. We analyse the cluster geometries within the size range

4 ≤ N ≤ 150 and determine the transition path from smaller clusters to larger ones. The

cluster geometries have been determined using the methods described in section II. Namely,

we have used A3-A5 methods combined with SE2-SE5 cluster selection criteria.

For each cluster, we show the cluster axis, i.e. a group of atoms located on a line, that

goes through the cluster centre of mass. The cluster axis can be linear (see the clusters

with higher symmetry, for example, LJ13, LJ55, LJ71, LJ147) or slightly distorted (see, for

example, non-completed cluster conﬁgurations LJ25, LJ27, LJ76, LJ116). Other atoms in the

cluster are located around the cluster axis and form the completed or open polygonal rings

(see ﬁgure 2). The bonds between the atoms laying in the axis and in the rings are shown by

thick and thin lines respectively. In some particular cases, we present additional connections

in order to stress speciﬁc structural properties of some clusters (see, for example, LJ11, LJ31,

LJ51, LJ82).

Figure 2 demonstrates how the cluster of a certain size can be obtained from the smaller

one. For each cluster, we draw the added atoms by grey circles. For some clusters, it is

necessary additionally to replace one atom, or even a few atoms from one position to another

in order to reach the global energy minimum. In these cases, we mark the positions, from

which the atoms are removed, by grey rings (see, for example, LJ96, LJ102, LJ126).

Figure 2 demonstrates that the majority of energetically favourable cluster structures

can be obtained with the use of the A5 method combined with the SE2 cluster selection

criterion, according to which the global energy minimum cluster geometry is obtained from

the preceding cluster conﬁguration by fusion a single atom to the cluster surface. Such

situation takes place for N = 4-17, 19-26, 28-29, 32-34, 36-37, 39-50, 52-64, 67, 70-72, 74-75,

77, 79-81, 83, 89-92, 94-95, 97, 99-101, 103-104, 106-110, 112, 114, 116-120, 122, 124-125,

127, 129, 131-132, 134, 136-150, i.e. in about 75% cases.

The global energy minimum cluster structures presented in ﬁgure 2 coincide with those

17

FIG. 3: Fusion of a single atom to the global energy minimum cluster structure of 26 atoms does

not lead to the global energy minimum of the LJ27 cluster (ﬁrst row). Rearrangement of surface

atoms in the LJ27 cluster leading to the formation of the global energy minimum cluster structure

is needed (second row). The result of such rearrangement can be obtained if one starts the growth

from the excited state cluster isomer of the LJ25 cluster (third row).

found by other cluster global optimization techniques (see [1, 20, 21] and references therein).

Note that the diﬀerent choice of the constants ε and σ in various calculation schemes does

not change the cluster geometry and inﬂuences only the scale of the system’s size and its total

energy. However, the existing global optimization techniques do not allow to perform the

cluster growth analysis, which we carry out in our work for the ﬁrst time. Some preliminary

results of our work have been published in [27, 32].

It is interesting that all the calculated cluster geometries have the structure, in which

a number of completed and open polygons round the cluster axis. The maximum number

18

of atoms in polygons depends on the cluster size. Within the size range of N ≤ 150, as it

is seen from ﬁgure 2, the pentagonal, decagonal and pentadecagonal polygons are possible.

The fact that this type of rings within the cluster structure dominates is closely connected

with the prevalence of the icosahedral type of packing of atoms in the LJ clusters.

Note that only the clusters possessing relatively high symmetry have all the polygons

rounding the axis completed. For the most of the clusters, the polygons laying close to the

cluster surface are open (see e.g. LJ61, LJ89, LJ124). For such clusters, the atoms added to

the system occupy the positions in the open polygons located near the cluster surface.

2. Surface atoms rearrangements

Our simulations demonstrate that the fusion of a single atom to the global energy min-

imum cluster structure of N atoms, in some cases does not immediately lead to a global

energy minimum of (N + 1)-atomic cluster. This happens for N = 18, 27, 30, 35, 38, 51,

65, 66, 68, 69, 73, 76, 78, 84, 86, 87, 88, 93, 96, 98, 102, 105, 111, 113, 115, 121, 123, 126,

128, 130, 133, 135. The global energy minimum cluster structure for these cluster sizes can

not be found directly with the use of A5 method combined with the SE2 criterion from the

global energy minimum cluster conﬁguration of the smaller size. In these cases the SE2 cri-

terion leads to ﬁnding the higher energy cluster isomers, which we also call the excited state

cluster isomers.

In order to determine the global energy minimum cluster conﬁgurations

for the above mentioned N, it is necessary to rearrange additionally one or a few atoms in

the excited state cluster isomer (see example shown in ﬁgure 3). In ﬁgure 2, we illustrate

this procedure by marking the positions of the rearranged atoms by grey circles. The initial

positions of the atoms are marked by grey rings. This ﬁgure shows that the rearrangement

takes place always in the vicinity of the cluster surface. This fact has a simple physical

explanation. The surface atoms are bound weaker than those inside the cluster volume,

and thus they are movable easier and allow the favourable surface atomic rearrangement.

This consideration demonstrates that the surface rearrangement of atoms is an essential

component of the cluster growth process.

We illustrate the surface rearrangement of atoms in ﬁgure 3. The ﬁrst row in ﬁgure

3 shows that the fusion of a single atom to the global energy minimum cluster structure

of 26 atoms does not lead to the global energy minimum of the LJ27 cluster. Thus, the

19

rearrangement of surface atoms in the LJ27 cluster leading to the formation of the global

energy minimum cluster structure is needed. The necessary rearrangement of atoms is shown

in the second row of ﬁgure 3. The result of such rearrangement can be obtained if one starts

the cluster growth from the excited state cluster isomer of the LJ25 cluster, as it is illustrated

in the third row of ﬁgure 3.

In this particular example, only the two smaller cluster sizes are involved in the fusion

process of the LJ27 cluster. However, the cluster fusion via excited states is not always

that simple and evident. In some cases, it involves more than 10 intermediate steps. Such

situation takes place, for example, for the LJ69 cluster, which can be obtained from the

excited state isomer of the LJ55 cluster.

3. Average number of bonds in LJ clusters

The rearrangement of the surface atoms can be performed algorithmically by freezing

almost all the atoms and allowing only a few atoms on the cluster surface to move. However,

the number of possible cluster conﬁgurations increases rapidly with the growth cluster size,

and it becomes not feasible to optimize and investigate all of them. Thus, one has to use

a simple criterion for the selection of some clusters, for which the surface rearrangement

of atoms is of interest. For such an analysis, we have introduced the criterion based on

counting the number of bonds in the cluster. We consider the two atoms as bound if the

distance between them is smaller than the given cut-oﬀ distance value d. Deﬁning bonding

between the atoms in such a way, we then calculate the total number of bonds in the cluster.

This characteristic can be used in searching for the required cluster rearrangement, because

the cluster with the maximum number of bonds, possesses the highest binding energy.

In ﬁgure 4, we present the dependence of average number of bonds in the cluster as a

function of the cluster size. For this calculation we have used the cut-oﬀ value d = 1.2d0,
where d0 = 21/6σ is the LJ potential bonding length. In ﬁgure 4, circles and squares show

the average number of bonds for the global energy minimum structures presented in ﬁgure

2 and for the excited state cluster isomers with the energy close to the global minimum

correspondingly. This ﬁgure demonstrates that circles always show the upper limit for the

average number of bonds in the cluster.

For some clusters, like LJ27 or LJ30, the number of bonds in the global energy minimum

20

FIG. 4: Average number of bonds in the icosahedral LJ global energy minimum cluster structures

as a function of cluster size (circles). Squares show that for the close energy excited state cluster

isomers and stars for the non-icosahedral global energy minimum cluster structures. In the insets we

show in greater scale the average number of bonds in the regions 15 ≤ N ≤ 60 and 60 ≤ N ≤ 150.

cluster structure and the closest excited state cluster isomer appears to be very close. Such

situations occur, when the energies of the two clusters turn out to be very close. In such

cases, bonding between atoms at distances larger than the chosen cut-oﬀ value becomes

important and needs to be counted in order to see that the number of bonds in the global

energy minimum cluster structure is maximal. For example, the total number of bonds for

the two diﬀerent cluster isomers of LJ30 calculated with the cut-oﬀ value d is equal to 121.

Doubling the value of d results in the total number of bonds 343 and 339 for the global

energy minimum and the excited state cluster isomer respectively.

Such an analysis turns out to be very useful for the algorithmic search of the surface

rearrangement of atoms leading to the growth of the number of bonds in the cluster and its

global optimization. In simple cases, the favourable rearrangement is often obvious and it

can be performed manually, by the replacement of a group of atoms from one position to

another. This is often the case for larger clusters, see, for example, the rearrangement in

the LJ38 or LJ69 clusters.

Note that the average number of bonds in the clusters with icosahedral symmetry con-

verges to the bulk limit relatively slowly. As it is clear from a simple geometrical analysis,

for an inﬁnitively large icosahedron the average number of bonds should be equal to 6, while

for LJ55, LJ147 and LJ309 it is 4.25, 4.73 and 5.00 respectively.

4. LJ cluster lattices

The methods and criteria described above appear to be insuﬃcient for the complete

description of the LJ cluster fusion process. At certain cluster sizes, a radical rearrangement

of the cluster structure is necessary. Below, we call such rearrangements as the core or

lattice rearrangements.

Indeed, clusters in the fusion chain form the lattice of a certain

type. Diﬀerent lattices are based on diﬀerent principles of the cluster packing and symmetry.

For LJ clusters, we analyzed four diﬀerent lattices: icosahedral, decahedral, octahedral and

tetrahedral. The cluster conﬁgurations found in our simulations have been distinguished

between the four groups according to their core symmetry. The cluster core is formed by a

certain number of completed shells of atoms. Clusters consisting of the completed shells only

are called the principal magic clusters. The mass numbers for the principal magic clusters

(principal magic numbers) with the icosahedral, decahedral, octahedral and tetrahedral type

of packing can be easily determined from simple geometric consideration and read as:

21

(3)

Ni =

Nd =

No =

z3 + 5z2 +

z + 1

z2 +

5
2
z3 + 2z2 +

z + 1

z + 1

Nt =

z3 + 1z2 +

z + 1

10
3
5
z3 +
6
2
3
1
6

11
3

8
3
7
3
11
6

where Ni, Nd, No and Nt are the principal magic numbers for the icosahedral, decahedral,

octahedral and tetrahedral cluster packing, z is the number of shells in the cluster or its

22

FIG. 5: Geometries of magic clusters with decahedral lattice (ﬁrst row), icosahedral lattice (second

row), octahedral lattice (third row), tetrahedral lattice (fourth row).

23

order.

In ﬁgure 5, we show the geometrical structure of a few principal magic clusters of each

type. All the clusters are formed by polygons rounding the cluster axis. Their number and

type varies for diﬀerent clusters.

The decahedral principal magic clusters are formed by pentagonal rings, that are located

one above another along the cluster axis (see row 1 in ﬁgure 5). The number of rings and

their size depends on the number of shells, z. Note that in decahedral clusters, the lines

connecting corresponding vertices of pentagonal rings of the same size are parallel to the

cluster axis.

The icosahedral principal magic clusters diﬀer from the decahedral ones (see row 2 in

ﬁgure 5). Depending on the order of cluster, the icosahedral cluster can additionally to

pentagonal rings contain decagonal, pentadecagonal and etc ones. These additional rings

glue together two equal decahedrons of the same order having the common axis, along which

the decahedrons are turned one with respect to another on the angle 36o. As a result, some

of neighbouring rings in the icosahedral clusters are also turned one with respect to another

(see ﬁgure 5).

In row 3 and 4 of ﬁgure 5, we show the geometries of the principal octahedral and

tetrahedral magic clusters respectively. In clusters of this type, squares and triangles corre-

spondingly round the cluster axis.

5. LJ cluster lattice rearrangements

Let us now consider the role played by the lattice rearrangement in the formation of the

global energy minimum cluster structures. Figure 2 demonstrates that the global energy

minimum for LJ31, LJ82 and LJ85 can not be found by the surface rearrangement of atoms.

Figure 2 clearly demonstrates that the LJ31 cluster has obvious elements of the deca-

hedral packing. In order to stress this fact, we connect the corresponding vertices of the

pentagons by thin lines. In the clusters of the smaller size, the neighbouring pentagonal

rings (completed or uncompleted) are turned one with respect to another. This feature is

characteristic for the icosahedra type of cluster packing. The LJ31 cluster structure arises

in the cluster growing process via a long chain of excited state cluster isomers with N ≥ 13.

This chain is shown in ﬁgure 6. This ﬁgure demonstrates that the essential rearrangement

24

FIG. 6: Formation of the LJ31 global energy minimum structure takes place via a chain of excited

state cluster isomers with N ≥ 13. New atoms added to the system are marked by grey circles,

while grey rings demonstrate the atom removal.

occurs already in the LJ18 cluster leading to the formation of the two co-ordinated pentag-

onal rings located one above another. After that point, the formation of the LJ31 cluster

takes place in a regular way and can be generated atom by atom.

The next prominent rearrangement of the cluster core takes place for the LJ82 cluster.

The formation of this cluster involves a long chain of excited state cluster isomers with

N ≥ 55.

In ﬁgure 7, we present this chain of clusters. The core structure for the LJ82

cluster emerges in the LJ59 cluster, in which the three atoms from one pentagonal ring are

located just above the three atoms from another pentagonal ring (see ﬁgure 7). The further

formation of the LJ82 cluster happens in a regular manner atom by atom.

The next cluster that can not be found from the previous one by the surface rearrangement

of atoms is the LJ85 cluster. However, this cluster conﬁguration can be easily generated

starting from LJ81 (see ﬁgure 2, part b) and using a simple rearrangement of atoms located

at the cluster surface.

To illustrate that the lattice transformations aﬀect signiﬁcantly various cluster character-

istics, in ﬁgures 4 and 8, we present dependences of the average number of bonds hni and the

25

FIG. 7: Formation of the LJ82 global energy minimum structure involves a chain of excited state

cluster isomers with N ≥ 55. Atoms added to the system are marked by grey circles, while grey

rings demonstrate the atom removal.

26

FIG. 8: Average bonding length hRi in the icosahedral LJ global energy minimum cluster struc-

tures as a function of cluster size (circles). Squares show hRi for some excited state cluster isomers

with the energy close to the global energy minimum and stars that for the non-icosahedral global

energy minimum cluster structures.

average bonding length hRi on cluster size. These ﬁgures demonstrate that for the cluster

sizes N = 31, 82, 85 the dependences have the step-like irregularities. These irregularities

are caused by the cluster lattice rearrangements.

In ﬁgure 2, we present the geometries of the global energy minimum cluster structures

with the icosahedral type of atomic packing. This type of packing is the most favourable for

the LJ clusters. However, other type of packing is also possible and in a few cases it becomes

even more favourable than the icosahedral one. Within the cluster size range considered,

there are only 8 clusters for which packing other than icosahedral results in the cluster

energy lower than obtained for the icosahedral clusters. These cluster structures having

the octahedral, decahedral and tetrahedral type of atomic packing are presented in ﬁgure

9. They can not be obtained from their icosahedral neighbours directly. In order to ﬁnd

27

FIG. 9: Geometries of non-icosahedral global energy minimum LJ clusters.

these cluster structures, one needs either to consider a chain of excited state cluster isomers

analogous to the described above for the formation of the LJ31 and LJ82 clusters or to treat

separately the growth of the octahedral decahedral and tetrahedral cluster families. Each

of the cluster families should have its own magic numbers. Only a few of all these cluster

conﬁgurations can compete in energy with the clusters based on the icosahedral packing as

we demonstrate it in the next section. Within the size range considered such situation arises

only for N =38, 75-77, 98, 102-104.

Note that in ﬁgures 4 and 8, we also show the average number of bonds hni and the

average bonding length hRi for non-icosahedral global energy minimum cluster isomers and

compare these characteristics with hni and hRi for clusters with icosahedral symmetry of

the same size.

28

(4)

B. Cluster binding energies

The binding energy per atom for LJ clusters is deﬁned as follows:

Eb/N = −EN /N

where EN is the total binding energy of N-atomic cluster. In tables I and II, we compile

total energies and point symmetry groups for the global energy minimum cluster structures

within the size range considered.

Figure 10 shows the dependence of the binding energy per atom for LJ clusters as a

function of cluster size. We have generated the chains of clusters based on the icosahedral,

decahedral, octahedral and tetrahedral types of lattices with the use of the A3-A5 methods

combined with SE2-SE5 cluster selection criteria.

Figure 10 shows that the most stable clusters are mostly based on the icosahedral type

of packing with exceptions for N = 38, 75 ≤ N ≤ 77, 98 and 102 ≤ N ≤ 104. In these cases

the octahedral, decahedral, tetrahedral and again decahedral cluster symmetries respectively

become more favourable. To illustrate this, in the insets to ﬁgure 10, we show the behaviour

of the curves in the regions 30 ≤ N ≤ 45 and 70 ≤ N ≤ 110 in greater detail. In these

regions, energies of the clusters with diﬀerent type of packing become especially close.

In previous section, we have demonstrated that the structural cluster properties experi-

ence dramatic change at N = 31, 82, 85. In the contrary to the structural characteristics,

the dependence of binding energy per atom on N behaves smoothly in the vicinity of these

points. In order to stress the role of the cluster lattice rearrangement in the formation of the

global energy minimum cluster structures, in the inset to ﬁgure 10, we plot by open squares

the energies for the chains of clusters growing up from LJ30 and LJ81 without rearrangement

of their lattice. Clusters in these chains become more and more energetically unfavourable

with the growth cluster size as compared to the global energy minimum structures.

On the top of ﬁgure 10 we present the sequence of magic numbers experimentally mea-

sured for noble gases [28, 29]. It is seen that the magic numbers correspond to the peculiar-

ities in the curve for the binding energy per atom as a function of cluster size calculated for

the cluster chain based on the icosahedral type of packing. The peculiarities indicate the

enhanced stability of the corresponding clusters. Note that in experiment the magic num-

bers are seen much better in the regions of N, in which the icosahedrally packed clusters are

29

FIG. 10: Binding energy per atom for LJ clusters as a function of cluster size calculated for

the cluster chains based on the icosahedral (solid line), octahedral (doted line), tetrahedral (dash

dotted line) and decahedral (dashed line) types of packing. In the insets we show the behaviour

of the curves in the regions 30 ≤ N ≤ 45 and 70 ≤ N ≤ 110 in which energies of the clusters with

diﬀerent type of packing become especially close. We also present the energies for the chains of

clusters growing up from LJ30 and LJ81 without rearrangement of their lattice (opened squares).

energetically the most favourable. The most prominent peculiarities arise for the completed

icosahedral shells with 13, 55 and 147 atoms. The peculiarities in the dependence of binding

energy per atom on N diminish with the growth of the cluster size due to approaching to

the bulk limit, in which the binding energy per atom is constant.

30

(5)

C. Liquid drop model

The main trend of the energy curves plotted in ﬁgure 10 can be understood on the basis

of the liquid drop model, according to which the cluster energy is the sum of the volume

and the surface energy contributions:

EN = −λV N + λSN 2/3 − λRN 1/3

Here the ﬁrst and the second terms describe the volume, and the surface cluster energy

correspondingly. The third term is the cluster energy arising due to the curvature of the

cluster surface. Choosing constants in (5) as λV = 0.71554, λS = 1.28107 and λR = 0.5823,

one can ﬁt the global energy minimum curve plotted in ﬁgure 10 with the accuracy less than

1%. The deviations of the energy curves calculated for various chains of cluster isomers

from the liquid drop model (5) are plotted in ﬁgure 11. We have ﬁted the energies of the

icosahedral clusters in the cluster size range 4 ≤ N ≤ 150 using the nonlinear least squares

ﬁtting method.

The peaks on these dependences indicate the increased stability of the corresponding

magic clusters. The ratio between the volume and surface energies in (5) can be characterised

by the dimensionless parameter δ = λV /λS, being equal in our case to δ = 0.559. Note,

that this value slightly diﬀers from the previously reported in [27], δP RL = 0.555, which was

obtained by ﬁtting the cluster global energy minima within the same cluster size range.

This result can be compared with those published in [33]. In this paper the energy of

the ﬁrst four completed icosahedral shells was ﬁtted using equation (5). This ﬁtting gives

the value δ = 0.576 diﬀering from our result due to the diﬀerence in the ﬁtting method. In

[33] the energies of the 4 selected clusters have been used, while we ﬁt the energies of all the

clusters within the size range 4 ≤ N ≤ 150

Note that a similar model is used in nuclear physics for the description of the nuclei

binding energy. For the nuclear matter, the constant δ is equal to δ = 0.903 [34].

D. Cluster magic numbers

The dependence of the binding energies per atom for the most stable cluster conﬁgurations

on N allows one to generate the sequence of the cluster magic numbers. In ﬁgure 12, we plot

31

FIG. 11: Energy curves deviations from the liquid drop model (5) calculated for the cluster chains

based on the icosahedral (solid line), octahedral (doted line), tetrahedral (dash dotted line) and

decahedral (dashed line) type of packing.

the second derivatives ∆2EN for the cluster chains with icosahedral, decahedral, octahedral

and tetrahedral type of packing.

We compare the obtained dependences with the experimentally measured abundance

mass spectra for the noble gas clusters [28, 29] (see ﬁgure 1) and establish the striking

correspondence of the peaks in the experimentally measured mass spectra with those in the
∆2EN dependence calculated for the icosahedral type of clusters. The sequence of the magic

numbers for the Ar, Xe and Kr clusters reads: 13, 19, 23, 26, 29, 32, 34, 43, 46, 49, 55, 61,

64, 71, 74, 81, 87, 91, 101, 109, 116, 119, 124, 131, 136, 147 [28, 29]. The most prominent

peaks in this sequence 13, 55 and 147 correspond to the closed icosahedral shells, while other

numbers correspond to the ﬁlling of various parts of the icosahedral shell.

The connection between the second derivatives ∆2EN and the peaks in the abundance

mass spectrum of clusters one can understand using the following simple model. Let us

32

FIG. 12: Second derivatives ∆2EN for the icosahedral (squares), decahedral (circles), octahe-

dral (upper triangles) and tetrahedral (lower triangles) cluster isomer chains. Open squares show

∆2EN for the chains of energetically unfavourable clusters growing from LJ30 and LJ81 without

rearrangement of their lattice.

assume that the mass spectrum of clusters is formed in the evaporation process. This means

that changing the number of clusters nN of the size N in the cluster ensemble takes place

due to the evaporation of an atom by the clusters of the size N and N + 1, i.e.

∆nN ∼ nN +1WN +1→N − nN WN→N −1

where the evaporation probabilities are proportional to

WN +1→N ∼ e−

WN→N −1 ∼ e−

EN +E1−EN+1
kT

EN−1+E1−EN
kT

Here T is the cluster temperature, k is the Bolzmann constant. In our model E1 = 0, so

after simple transformations the equation for ∆nN reads as:

∆nN ∼ nN +1e−

EN −EN+1
kT

(1 −

∼ nN e−

EN −EN+1
kT

(1 − e−

EN−1−2EN +EN+1
kT

)

e−

nN
nN +1
EN−1−2EN +EN+1
kT

)

Here we assumed that nN +1 ∼ nN ∼ nN −1 ≫ 1. Let us now estimate the relative abundances
EN −EN+1
in the mass spectrum for Ar clusters for temperatures about 100 K. The exponent e−
kT

inﬂuences the absolute value of ∆nN . This factor becomes exponentially small at kT ≪

EN − EN +1, which for the Ar clusters means T ≪ 800K, because

= 0.071eV ∼

800K. The small value of this factor results in the growth of the characteristic period of

∆EAr
N
(cid:10)

(cid:11)

the evolution of nN with time. The factor in the brackets determines the relative cluster

abundances. Indeed, its positive value for certain N leads to the growth of the corresponding

clusters in the system, while the negative value of the factor to the opposite behaviour. The
factor in the brackets is characterised by ∆2EN = EN −1 − 2EN + EN +1, which is for the Ar
clusters h|∆2EN |i = 0.008eV ∼ 90K. Thus, for temperatures T >

∼ 90K the exponent in the

brackets can be expanded. In this case one derives

∆nN ∼ nN e−

EN −EN+1
kT

∆2EN
kT

33

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

34

This equation demonstrates, that positive values of ∆2EN leads to the enhanced abundance

of the corresponding clusters.

For Xe and Kr clusters this approximation becomes applicable at somewhat larger T ,

because the depth of the LJ potential, ε, for this type of clusters, is larger than for Ar

clusters. For Ar clusters ε = 12.3 meV while for Kr and Xe it is 17.2 and 24.3 meV

respectively.

Within the size range considered there are only ﬁve magic numbers, which can not be
directly explained on the basis of ∆2EN calculated for the chain of icosahedral clusters. This

situation takes place for N =34, 81, 87, 91 and 136. However, the origin of these magic

numbers can also be understood.

The magic number N =34 is not seen in the chain of the energetically most favourable

icosahedral clusters, because of the lattice rearrangement that occurs for N =31. Beginning

from LJ31 a new cluster growing chain becomes energetically more favourable, but the chain

of clusters growing from LJ30 without its lattice rearrangement turns out to be rather close to

the global energy minimum chain (see ﬁgure 10). As a result, in the vicinity of the transition

point both chains inﬂuence the magic number formation. Thus, for N =34, the positive peak
in the ∆2EN for the chain of the global minimum clusters is absent, but it for present in the

chain of clusters growing from the LJ30 cluster without its lattice rearrangement (see open

squares in ﬁgure 12). This magic number can also be seen for the octahedral and tetrahedral

cluster chains, which come energetically rather close to the icosahedral chain in this region

of N.

For the LJ81 cluster the situation is similar. Here again a structural rearrangement of

the cluster lattice takes place inﬂuencing the magic number formation. Thus, the magic

numbers 81, 87, 91 arise in the chain of clusters growing from the LJ81 cluster without its

lattice rearrangement. The number 81 arises also in the chain of the decahedral clusters,

which in this region of N is energetically close to the global energy minimum (see ﬁgure

12). The chain of tetrahedral clusters aﬀects the formation of the 91 magic number due to

the same reason. Though this magic number is absent in the sequence of magic numbers

generated for global energy minimum cluster structures, it is well pronounced in the magic

number sequence for the tetrahedral clusters and the chain of clusters growing from LJ81

without its lattice rearrangement.

Another magic number, which is masked in the magic number sequence for the icosahedral

35

clusters is N =136. This number is masked because of the radical surface rearrangement of

atoms needed for obtaining its conﬁguration from the LJ135 one. The LJ135 cluster is the

truncated 147 icosahedron. It possesses the Ih point symmetry group. It can be obtained

from the LJ134 cluster by a rearrangement of 7 atoms located on the cluster surface. This

cluster conﬁguration can be obtained via a long chain of excited state cluster conﬁgurations

which starts from the LJ55 icosahedral cluster. In experiment, the formation of the global

energy minimum LJ135 cluster structure should occur with relatively low probability because

of the reasons outlined above.

Instead, it is feasible to assume that for this particular

cluster size diﬀerent cluster isomers with energies close to the global minimum can be readily

created. This inﬂuences the 135 magic number formation resulting in its shift to N = 136.
Note that ∆2EN values calculated for the chain of icosahedral clusters in the size range

136 ≤ N ≤ 146 are very close to zero. This fact can be explained as follows. There

are 12 vacancies in the outer icosahedral shell of the LJ135 cluster, which are located at

the vertices of the LJ147 icosahedron. These vacancies are sequentially ﬁlled within the

size range 136 ≤ N ≤ 146. Within this size range the energy diﬀerence between the two

neighbouring clusters practically does not vary and is determined by the energy of an atom

placed in one of the icosahedron vertice vacancies. Such a situation takes place, because

the distances between any of two vertices are much larger than the pairing bond length in

the LJ potential and the interaction between the atoms placed in the icosahedron vertices
is neglible. As a result, of this the total energy grows nearly linearly and ∆2EN ≈ 0

In ﬁgure 13, we plot images of the magic global energy minimum cluster structures. In

this ﬁgure it is clearly seen how one icosahedral shell emerges from another. This ﬁgure

demonstrates that the process of the LJ55 icosahedron cluster formation has similarities

with the formation of the LJ147 cluster. In both cases, at the ﬁrst stage a cap is formed on

the top of the completed icosahedron shell, see the LJ19 and LJ71 magic clusters. Then, in

both cases a structural rearrangement of the cluster takes place. When the rearrangement

of the cluster lattice is completed (LJ31, LJ82), the growth of the cluster occurs by ﬁlling the

atomic vacancies in the vicinity of the cluster surface up to the point when a new icosahedral

shell is formed.

We have demonstrated that the magic numbers for the icosahedral clusters map well

enough the experimentally observed magic numbers. In ﬁgure 9, we present the images of

the non icosahedral global energy minimum cluster structures. Experimentally these clusters

36

FIG. 13: Geometries of the magic LJ clusters. The labels indicate the cluster size.

are not found to be the magic clusters, although, they are the global minimum clusters being

magic for the chains of clusters based on the decahedral, octahedral or tetrahedral type of

packing (see ﬁgures 10 and 12). This fact can be understood if one takes into account

that the chains of clusters with diﬀerent type of atomic packing are formed independently

37

FIG. 14: Binding energies per atom for a chain of spontaneously produced clusters in comparison

with the binding energies per atom for the global energy minimum cluster structures.

and the transition of clusters from one chain to another at certain N occurs with the small

probability. From the binding energy analysis, it is clear that the chain of icosahedral clusters

prevails. Thus, in experiment, the icosahedral clusters mask the clusters belonging to the

chains of non-icosahedraly packed clusters, even when the non-icosahedral cluster structures

happen to become energetically more favourable.

E. Spontaneous cluster fusion

Using the A2 method and the SE2 cluster selection criterion we have generated a chain

of energetically unfavourable cluster isomers with N ≤ 84 as an example of the spontaneous

cluster growth.

In ﬁgure 14, we compare the binding energies per atom for the chain of the sponta-

neously produced clusters with the binding energies per atom calculated for the global

energy minimum cluster structures. This ﬁgure shows that the binding energy per atom for

38

FIG. 15: Structural rearrangements in spontaneously generated cluster structures with N = 19−20

and N = 68 − 69. Fusion of just one atom to the cluster boundary rearranges its structure and

leads to the formation of a stable cluster core.

the spontaneously generated cluster structures are systematically lower than those for the

global energy minimum structures. However, the two dependences behave quite diﬀerently.

Thus, at certain cluster sizes, the binding energy per atom for the spontaneously generated

chain of clusters increases in a step-like manner. In the size range considered, this occurs

for the cluster sizes N = 19 − 20, 37 − 38, 50 − 51, 68 − 69, 81 − 82. These irregularities

originate from the signiﬁcant structural rearrangement taking place in the spontaneously

generated cluster structures. In ﬁgure 15, we illustrate such a rearrangement for the clusters

with N = 19 − 20 and N = 68 − 69.

The structural rearrangement in the LJ19 cluster leads to the formation of the com-

pact 13-atomic icosahedron shell. Indeed, in the initial LJ19 cluster isomer, only a part of

the icosahedron can be identiﬁed (see ﬁgure 15). Fusion of just one atom to the cluster

boundary rearranges its structure and forms the compact icosahedral shell as a cluster core.

39

This transformation stabilizes the cluster structure and makes it energetically much more

favourable.

The situation with the LJ68 cluster is similar. Again, we consider a highly asymmetric

cluster isomer (see ﬁgure 15), which deviates signiﬁcantly from the global energy minimum

cluster structure based on the 55-atomic icosahedron shell (see ﬁgure 2). Fusion of a single

atom to the boundary of the initial cluster conﬁguration rearranges its structure completely

forming a relatively compact LJ69 cluster isomer (see ﬁgure 15). The LJ69 cluster conﬁgura-

tion possesses the evident elements of the 55-atomic icosahedron shell, which are absent in

the initial LJ68 cluster isomer. The compact conﬁguration of the found LJ69 cluster isomer

brings its binding energy per atom close to the binding energy per atom calculated for the

global energy minimum cluster structure.

F. Symmetrical cluster fusion

Using the SY1-SY3 methods, we now consider the formation of symmetrical clusters and

perform their energy analysis. We have generated the cluster conﬁgurations with N ≤ 309

possessing the icosahedral and octahedral symmetry.

In ﬁgure 16, we plot the binding energies per atom calculated for clusters possessing the

icosahedral and octahedral symmetry and compare them with the binding energies per atom

calculated for the global energy minimum cluster structures. Figure 16 demonstrates the

irregular behaviour of the binding energies of the calculated symmetrical cluster conﬁgu-

rations. Note that this irregularities are not of the physical nature, because the SY1-SY3

methods do not model any concrete physical scenario of the cluster fusion process. These

methods rather represent an eﬃcient mathematical algorithm for the generation of symmet-

rical cluster conﬁgurations (see section II for details).

It is interesting that some of the found symmetrical cluster conﬁgurations within the size

range N ≤ 150 appear to be the global energy minimum cluster structures. This is the

case for the clusters with N =13, 55, 135, 147, possessing the icosahedral point symmetry

group, IH. The binding energy of the highly symmetrical cluster isomer LJ115 possessing

also the IH point symmetry group is only about 0.0033 units smaller than the energy of

the corresponding global energy minimum.

It is interesting that the LJ115 global energy

minimum cluster structure possesses the C5V point symmetry group, being lower than the

40

FIG. 16: Binding energies per atom for sequences of symmetrical clusters with icosahedral

(squares) and octahedral (triangles) types of packing and their comparison with the binding en-

ergies per atom for the global energy minimum cluster structures (solid line) and the liquid drop

model (5) ﬁtting (dotted line).

IH point symmetry group. The fact that the cluster isomer with the lower symmetry becomes

energetically more favourable can be understood after counting the total number of bonds in

the system (see section III A for details). In the LJ115 icosahedral isomer the total number

of bonds is equal to 524, while in the global energy minimum isomer it is equal to 534. Here
we have used the cut-oﬀ value equal to d = 1.2 · 21/6σ. Comparison of the two number shows

that the large number of bonds can be created in a system with the lower symmetry and

that the larger number of bonds means the higher stability of the system.

Among the octahedral cluster conﬁgurations found with the use of the same technique

there are also a few ones with the energy being very close to the cluster global energy

41

FIG. 17: Clusters with icosahedral point symmetry group having low binding energy per atom.

minimum. Thus, the truncated octahedron LJ38 appears to be the only global energy

minimum cluster structure within the size range of N ≤ 150 possessing the octahedral

symmetry (see section III A for more details). The LJ116 cluster isomer has also the form of

truncated octahedron. Its binding energy is smaller than the binding energy of the global

energy minimum cluster structure of the same size on 0.0024 unit.

Note that some highly symmetric clusters, like the icosahedral LJ63, LJ145, LJ255 can have

relatively low binding energy as compared to their neighbours (see ﬁgure 16). The geometries

of these clusters are shown in ﬁgure 17. They appear to be relatively low stable, because the

total number of bonds in these clusters (222, 654 and 1194 respectively) is signiﬁcantly lower

than it is in the corresponding global energy minimum cluster structures (269 for LJ63, 684

for LJ145, for LJ255 the total number of bonds in the global energy minimum is not known).

The calculation of the symmetrical cluster conﬁguration and their energies turns out to

be very useful for the preliminary analysis of the binding energy curve in a wide range. Thus,

ﬁtting the points N = 13, 55, 115, 135, 147, 267, 297, 309 with use of the liquid drop model

equation (5), one derives the following values of λV = 0.72948, λS = 1.40469, λR = 0.84143,

which are in a good agreement with the results following from the global energy minimum

calculations, see section III C. We note that the performed analysis of symmetrical cluster

conﬁgurations is essentially easier than the complete analysis of the global energy minima

and thus it can be used for the eﬃcient calculation of cluster binding energies in a wide

range of N at relatively high level of accuracy.

IV. CONCLUSION

42

In this paper we have discussed the classical models for the cluster growing process, but

our ideas can be easily generalized on the quantum case and be applied to the cluster systems

with diﬀerent than LJ type of the inter-atomic interaction. It would be interesting to see

to which extent the parameters of inter-atomic interaction can inﬂuence the cluster growing

process and the corresponding sequence of magic numbers or whether the crystallization

in the nuclear matter consisting of alpha particles and/or nucleons is possible. Studying

cluster thermodynamic characteristics with the use of the developed technique is another

interesting problem which is left open for future considerations.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge support of this work by the Studienstiftung des deutschen

Volkes, Alexander von Humbolt Foundation, DFG, Russian Foundation of Basic Research,

Russian Academy of Sciences and the Royal Society of London.

APPENDIX A: ALGORITHM DETAILS

In this section we provide some details of the algorithms used in the computations [32].

In the described algorithm, the potential energy of selected atom decreases during its

motion. Therefore, the total potential energy of the cluster decreases at each step of the

algorithm and it ﬁnally converges to a stable cluster conﬁguration.

In most cases, this

convergence is rather fast. The time required for the obtaining of a stable conﬁguration

with the error ∆E of the potential energy is usually proportional to −ln∆E. To speed

up the process of conversion the procedure for the determination of the LJ force acting

on the atom was written in Assembler x86. The performance of the calculations increased

approximately 1.5 times comparing to the version written entirely in C.

Note that the described algorithm of the kinetic energy absorption is much more eﬃcient

as compared to those reducing the kinetic energy of moving atoms at each step of the

Runge-Kutta integration procedure. Firstly, the following method was used: during the

motion on each Runge-Kutta step the speed of an atom was decreased k times. Therefore,

the whole energy of oscillations that occur near the equilibrium position decreases because

43

of the decreasing of the kinetic energy. So far, when the speed becomes very small, atoms

start to oscillate very close to the potential energy minimum position. This method is rather

simple, but too much time is required for atom coordinates to converge to their equilibrium

position. Therefore we introduced another suﬃcient energy absorption algorithm, that was

described in section II.

To prevent the fragmentation of the cluster caused by the unfavourable initial condi-

tions, the adaptive choice of time-step in the Runge-Kutta integration procedure has been

implemented. The fragmentation of the system might happen, for example, in the case

when initially a pair of atoms are placed at a small distance one from another so that they

experience a very strong repulsive force. In such a situation the moving atom gains high

acceleration and during the ﬁrst step of the Runge-Kutta procedure might go far away from

the cluster.

If the force acting on this atom in its ﬁnal position is smaller than a given

value Fmin, it will be assumed in equilibrium and it will never be attracted back to the

cluster, although the ﬁnal conﬁguration won’t be stable. The adaptive choice of the integra-

tion time-step prevents the atoms to ﬂy apart. The idea of this procedure is rather simple.

Each time step ∆t in the Runge-Kutta integration procedure is repeated with the time step

∆t/2. If the coordinate or velocity change on the interval ∆t/2 is found too large then the

integration step ∆t is reduced and the procedure repeats. If the coordinate change is too

small than the larger value of the interval ∆t is set and the calculation is repeated again.

The adaptive choice of the integration time step prevent the atoms to ﬂy away, because in

the unfavourable initial conditions situation the integration time-steps will become small,

though the velocity will be high. Nevertheless, when the atom reaches the boundary of the

cluster, it will stop: at that moment its velocity starts to decrease because of the attraction

to the cluster.

APPENDIX B: TABLES

TABLE I: Total energies and point symmetry groups for LJ global energy minimum isomers within

the size range 4 ≤ N ≤ 78.

N

Point group

Energy

N

Point group

Energy

N

Point group

Energy

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

TD

D3H

OH

D5H

CS

C2V

C3V

C2V

C5V

IH

C3V

C2V

CS

C2

C5V

D5H

C2V

C2V

CS

D3H

CS

CS

TD

C2V

CS

-0.500000

-0.758654

-1.059339

-1.375449

-1.651791

-2.009447

-2.368544

-2.730498

-3.163967

-3.693900

-3.987096

-4.360219

-4.734645

-5.109833

-5.544246

-6.054982

-6.431420

-6.807048

-7.234149

-7.737039

-8.112401

-8.531055

-9.026301

-9.406132

-9.818533

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

D3H

C2V

CS

C2V

CS

C2V

C1

CS

C1

OH

C5V

CS

CS

CS

CS

C1

C1

C2V

C1

CS

C3V

CS

C2V

C3V

C2V

-10.29895

-10.69055

-11.13220

-11.63629

-12.07023

-12.50371

-12.97972

-13.48545

-13.91947

-14.49404

-15.00277

-15.43749

-15.87802

-16.35646

-16.86372

-17.30739

-17.81541

-18.39003

-18.83435

-19.34996

-19.92432

-20.37916

-20.93783

-21.51917

-22.10025

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

C5V

IH

C3V

CS

C3V

C2V

CS

C2V

CS

C1

CS

C2

C1

CS

C1

C5V

C5V

C5V

CS

CS

CS

D5H

CS

C2V

CS

44

-22.68405

-23.27071

-23.63693

-24.02855

-24.53151

-24.97817

-25.48962

-26.00074

-26.44616

-26.95748

-27.46835

-27.91429

-28.42588

-28.93767

-29.44955

-29.99021

-30.57435

-31.11247

-31.55310

-32.06578

-32.57571

-33.12436

-33.57457

-34.09029

-34.56620

TABLE II: The same as table I but within the size range 79 ≤ N ≤ 150.

N

Point group

Energy

N

Point group

Energy

N

Point group

Energy

-35.15091

104

C2V

-48.50722

129

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

C2V

CS

C2V

C1

C2V

C1

C3V

C1

CS

CS

C3V

CS

CS

C3V

C1

C1

C1

C1

C1

TD

C2V

CS

C2V

C2V

CS

-35.67363

105

-36.19530

106

-36.71254

107

-37.24367

108

-37.72143

109

-38.25465

110

-38.78204

111

-39.34151

112

-39.91939

113

-40.50449

114

-41.03616

115

-41.56759

116

-42.09876

117

-42.57314

118

-43.10534

119

-43.63668

120

-44.15660

121

-44.72345

122

-45.30545

123

-45.88888

124

-46.41998

125

-46.95094

126

-47.44697

127

-47.98051

128

C1

C1

CS

CS

C1

CS

CS

CS

CS

CS

C1

CS

CS

C1

C1

C1

CS

CS

CS

C1

C5V

C5V

C2V

C1

-49.02221

130

-49.58842

131

-50.16726

132

-50.75275

133

-51.28426

134

-51.81566

135

-52.33903

136

-52.90622

137

-53.48289

138

-54.06942

139

-54.64636

140

-55.23411

141

-55.69023

142

-56.23080

143

-56.78493

144

-57.25183

145

-57.81830

146

-58.41161

147

-58.98351

148

-59.57674

149

-60.10860

150

-60.61249

-61.20664

-61.77768

45

-62.37172

-62.93926

-63.53680

-64.00352

-64.58527

-65.18385

-65.85651

-66.45444

-67.05262

-67.65107

-68.24949

-68.84789

-69.44655

-70.04488

-70.64347

-71.24204

-71.84058

-72.43938

-73.03843

-73.42275

-73.89112

-74.44252

CS

C1

C2V

C1

CS

C3V

IH

C5V

C2V

C3V

C2V

CS

C5V

CS

C2V

C3V

C2V

C5V

IH

CS

CS

C3V

REFERENCES

46

[1] NATO Advanced Study Institute, Les Houches, Session LXXIII, Summer School ”Atomic

Clusters and Nanoparticles” (Les Houches, France, July 2-28, 2000), Edited by C. Guet,

P. Hobza, F. Spiegelman and F. David, EDP Sciences and Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,

New York, Barcelona, Hong Kong, London, Milan, Paris, Tokyo (2001).

[2] W.D. Knight, K. Clemenger, W.A. de Heer, W.A. Saunders, M.Y. Chou and M.L. Cohen,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 2141 (1984)

[3] W. Ekardt (ed.), Metal Clusters (Wiley, New York ,1999)

[4] H.W. Kroto et al., Nature 318, 163 (1985)

[5] J. Kirkpatrick, Jr., C.D. Gelatt, and M.P. Vecchi Science 220, 671 (1983)

[6] L.T. Wille, Chem. Phys. Lett. 133, 405 (1987)

[7] J. Ma, D. Hsu, and J.E. Straub J. Chem. Phys. 99, 4024 (1993)

[8] J. Ma, and J.E. Straub J. Chem. Phys. 101, 533 (1994)

[9] C. Tsoo, and C.L. Brooks J. Chem. Phys. 101, 6405 (1994)

[10] P.J.M. van Laaarhoven, and E.H.L. Aarts Simulated Annealing: Theory and Applications

[11] M.H. Kalos, and P.A. Whitlock Monte Carlo Methods (Wiley, New York ,1986)

[12] A.B. Finnila, M.A. Gomez, C. Sebenik, C. Stenson, and J.D. Doll Chem. Phys. Lett. 219, 343

(Reidel, Dordrecht ,1987)

(1994)

[13] P. Amara, D. Hsu, and J.E. Straub J. Chem. Phys. 97, 6715 (1993)

[14] P. Amara, D. Hsu, and J.E. Straub J. Chem. Phys. 95, 4147 (1991)

[15] C.D. Maranas, and C.A. Floudas J. Chem. Phys. 97, 7667 (1992)

[16] C.D. Maranas, and C.A. Floudas J. Chem. Phys. 100, 1247 (1994)

[17] F.H. Stillinger, and T.A. Webber J. Stat. Phys. 52, 1429 (1988)

[18] L. Piela, K.A. Olszewski and J. Pillardy J. Mol. Struct. 308, 229 (1994)

[19] J. Pillardy, K.A. Olszewski and L. Piella J. Phys. Chem. 96, 4337 (1992)

[20] D.J Wales and J.P.K. Doye J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 5111 (1997)

[21] R.H Leary and J.P.K. Doye Phys. Rev. E 60, 6320 (1999)

47

[22] D.E. Goldberg Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning (Addison-

Wesley, Reading, MA, 1989)

[23] J.A Niesse and H.R. Mayne J. Chem. Phys. 105, 4700 (1996)

[24] S.K Gregurick, M.H. Alexander and B. Hartke J. Chem. Phys. 104, 2684 (1996)

[25] D.M Deaven, N. Tit, J.R Morris and K.M. Ho Chem. Phys. Lett. 256, 195 (1996)

[26] D. Romero, C. Barron, S. Gomez Comp. Phys. Comm. 123, 87 (1999)

[27] Il.A. Solov’yov, A.V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 053401 (2003)

[28] O. Echt et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1121 (1981)

[29] H. Haberland (ed.), Clusters of Atoms and Molecules, Theory, Experiment and Clusters of

Atoms (Springer Series in Chemical Physics, Berlin 52, 1994)

[30] I.A. Harris, K.A. Norman, R.V. Mulkern, J.A. Northby Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2390 (1984)

[31] A.A. Radzig and B.M. Smirnov, Parameters of atoms and itomic ions (Energoatomizdat,

[32] A. Koshelev, A. Shutovich, I.A. Solov’yov, A.V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner International Meeting

”From Atom to Nano structures”, (Norfolk, Virginia, USA, December 12-14 2002), American

Institute of Physics, editors J. Mc Guire and C.T. Whelan, AIP Conference Proceedings, in

[33] J.P.K. Doye, M.A. Miller, D.J. Wales J. Chem. Phys. 111, 8417 (1999)

[34] A. Bohr and B.R. Mottelson, Nuclear Structure (W.A.Benjamin, inc., New York, Amsterdam,

Moscow, 1986)

print (2003).

1969)

