EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical Manipulation of Long-range Interactions at the 3s+3p
Asymptote of Na2

Chr. Samuelis1, St. Falke1, T. Laue1, P. Pellegrini2, O. Dulieu2, H. Kn¨ockel1, and E. Tiemann1a

1 Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, Universit¨at Hannover, Welfengarten 1, 30167 Hannover, Germany
2 Laboratoire Aim´e Cotton, CNRS, Campus d’Orsay, Bˆatiment 505, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France

Received: date / Revised version: date

Abstract. We investigate the inﬂuence of a laser ﬁeld, which is near-resonant to the atomic sodium
32P1/2 → 32D3/2 transition, on the last bound levels of the A1Σ+
u state in Na2. In a molecular beam
experiment level shifts up to ≈ 100 MHz and light induced line broadenings were observed using an opti-
cal double resonance excitation scheme. Moreover, the coupling laser can reduce the number of bound levels
of the A state by one or more units, which eﬀectively means that in the picture of a collision of a 32S1/2
and a 32P1/2-atom the scattering phase is altered by more than π. The observed eﬀects are interpreted as
u state, which correlates to the 3s1/2+3p1/2 asymptote, to the 41Σ+
light induced couplings of the A1Σ+
g
and 21Πg states at the 3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote. We performed multi-channel calculations, applying the
mapped Fourier grid method, which reproduce our experimentally observed level shifts well.

PACS. 34.50.Rk Laser-modiﬁed scattering and reactions – 33.80.-b Photon interactions with molecules –
42.62.Fi Laser spectroscopy

1 Introduction

Due to the fast progress in cooling and trapping of ul-
tracold atoms and the achievement of Bose-Einstein con-
densation [1,2,3,4,5,6,7], the interest in a detailed knowl-
edge of ultracold collisional properties has increased [8].
They are often described by the s-wave scattering length
as, which is correlated to the scattering wave function
at vanishing collisional energy. It has been shown [9,10,
11] that this important physical quantity can be derived
from spectroscopy of the vibrational levels and resonances
around the atomic asymptote. But the scattering length is
diﬃcult to derive purely on theoretical grounds because it
does not only depend on the long-range part of the molec-
ular ground state interaction potentials but also on the
accumulated phase from the inner part of the potential.

Beside the knowledge of cold collision properties, the
possibilities of their manipulation are central points of in-
terest. It has been shown in Na-Na, Rb-Rb, and recently
also in Cs-Cs ultracold collisions that the sign of the scat-
tering length can be altered in the vicinity of a magnetic
ﬁeld induced Feshbach resonance by varying the magnetic
ﬁeld strength [12,13]. This oﬀers a wide range of experi-
ments on the dynamics in ultracold ensembles and BEC
and a further understanding of two and three particle in-
teraction. Unfortunately, magnetic tuning of two particle
interaction is not applicable in typical magnetic traps be-
cause the trapping ﬁeld conditions are aﬀected by the ﬁeld

a email: tiemann@iqo.uni-hannover.de

strength needed according to the desired tuning of the col-
lision conditions.

An alternative approach for the manipulation of cold
collisions has been developed in [14], where DC electric
ﬁelds are proposed to control diatomic collisions at ul-
tralow temperatures.

A further promising proposal is the use of near reso-
nant light ﬁelds to inﬂuence the scattering length as [15,
16,17]. This technique oﬀers the possibility to manipulate
the two-particle interaction by coherent light ﬁelds. First
experiments with photoassociation [18] show that it is pos-
sible to observe the optical analogue to the magnetic ﬁeld
induced Feshbach resonances if a laser with a frequency
close to a photoassociation transition is focused into a
magneto optical trap. The study of an optically induced
Feshbach resonance is important for possible control of
condensate dynamics.

In this paper we follow another approach to determine
the eﬀect of near resonant laser light on cold atomic col-
lisions. We use the high resolution of Doppler free spec-
troscopy on a molecular beam to investigate the eﬀect of
a laser ﬁeld that is near resonant to the atomic sodium
32P1/2 →32D3/2 transition. Thus, this laser induces a cou-
pling of the A1Σ+
u state at the 3s1/2+3p1/2 asymptote to
states at the 3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote (41Σ+
g , 21Πg) with
their vibrational and continuum manifold. This results
in energy shifts of asymptotic rovibrational energy levels
with internuclear separations of about 100 ˚A in all coupled
states modeling atomic pairs with low relative kinetic en-

2

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

ergy. We extract quantitative information on light induced
coupling from the induced level shifts. A similar laser con-
trolled manipulation of the asymptotic ground state po-
tential can be used to investigate schemes to modify the
ground state s-wave scattering length as. The advantage
of the experiment at the 3s1/2+3p1/2 asymptote presented
below is the simpler detection via direct laser-induced ﬂu-
orescence, which is not possible in the case of the ground
state asymptote.

This article is organized as follows: First, an outline
of our experimental setup and the excitation scheme is
given (Section 2). In the following Section 3 we focus
on the extraction of quantitative data from the observed
line proﬁles. Experimental results are presented in Sec-
tion 4. A theoretical model that simulates the investigated
light induced energy shifts and line broadenings utiliz-
ing a coupled-channel calculation including six channels
is developed in Section 5 in the framework of the Mapped
Fourier Grid Hamiltonian (MFGH) method involving a
complex potential [19,20]. In the concluding section we
compare the results of the simulation with the experi-
ment and give also prospects for further experiments and
extended simulations.

2 Experiment

We brieﬂy review the experimental setup and focus on
the changes made in comparison to [21] were we studied
asymptotic sodium A state levels within our molecular
beam experiment. For the investigation of light induced
energy shifts below the asymptote of the A state, we start
from molecules in a well collimated beam (molecular ve-
locity of ≈ 1000 m/s) which are initially in the lowest vi-
brational levels (vX = 0, 1) of the X 1Σ+
g ground state (see
Figure 1). In a ﬁrst interaction zone (Figure 2) a Franck-
Condon pumping step is applied with laser L1 to cre-
ate population in thermally unpopulated vibrational levels
vX ≈ 31 of the ground state. For this purpose a dye laser
(sulforhodamine b) operating at about 615 nm is used. Its
frequency is stabilized on the maximum of ﬂuorescence of
the selected molecular transition.

Starting from such vibrationally excited ground state
levels the A state asymptote is reached with a tunable
dye laser L2 at 532 nm operating with coumarin 6. It is
applied in a second interaction zone about 0.35 m down-
stream from the ﬁrst zone. The ﬂuorescence from the ex-
cited levels is monitored by a photomultiplier. An OG 570
color glass ﬁlter suppresses the scattered laser light from
L2.

For the manipulation of bound levels close to the A state
asymptote a third laser L3 is used. It is an extended cav-
ity diode laser in Littrow conﬁguration operating near the
atomic sodium 32P1/2 → 32D3/2 transition at 818 nm. It
is overlapped with L2 by a dichroitic beam splitter and fo-
cused into the second interaction zone. In that way a cou-
pling of the A1Σ+
g and the 21Πg state
at the 3s+3d asymptote is created. The waist radius is
≈ 80µm for L2 and about ≈ 100µm for the laser L3. Over-
lap and diameter of both beams are controlled with a CCD

u state to the 41Σ+

Fig. 1. Potential scheme of Na2. Laser L1 transfers popula-
tion to a desired vibrational level (vX = 31), so that the 3s+3p
asymptote can be reached via the second laser L2. The oblique
arrow indicates that this laser is scanned during the experi-
ment. A coupling of asymptotic A state levels to the 3s+3p
asymptote is induced via the coupling laser L3. The ﬂuores-
cence from the A state is detected with a lock-in detector syn-
chronized to the chopper frequency of laser L3.

Fig. 2. Experimental Setup. A well-collimated molecular beam
is crossed by three laser beams. Laser L1 is stabilized on the
molecular ﬂuorescence in the ﬁrst interaction zone, while the
ﬂuorescence in the second interaction zone is recorded. The
perturbing laser L3 is locked on a stabilized cavity. The signal
from the second interaction zone is processed with a channel
switch to record a manipulated (L3 on) and unmanipulated
(L3 oﬀ) spectrum, simultaneously.

camera. Both laser beams are linearly polarized, and their
polarization axes are parallel to the molecular beam.

For the determination of the atomic transition fre-
quency 32P1/2 → 32D3/2 we apply optogalvanic spectros-
copy in a conventional sodium hollow cathode lamp as
reference. By this means a Doppler broadened spectrum
of the atomic transition can be obtained. The position of

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

3

Starting from vX =31, JX =6, L2 stimulates the transitions
P(6) and R(6) to the asymptotic vibrational levels vA=178
and 179. The spectrum for every vA thus consists always
of two angular momentum components JA = JX ± 1 for
each vA, to which we refer as P line (JA = JX − 1) and
R line (JA = JX + 1) in the following. The spectrum is
shifted to red (lower frequency) by laser L3, the lines are
broader and show asymmetry.

3 Extraction of Line Shifts and Line
Broadenings

In this section we explain how we extract information on
the line shift ∆ between the manipulated and the unma-
nipulated trace in a spectrum like in Figure 3. We deter-
mine the induced light shift by applying a line shape ﬁt.
We deal with the two channels — with and without the
coupling laser L3 — simultaneously because the two traces
can be described by several common line shape parameters
and few additional parameters describing the line shift. It
is useful to concentrate on simultaneous simulation of P/R
doublets because the two lines overlap for large induced
line shifts. The line broadening is determined within the
same line shape ﬁt.

For the description of the spectrum several hyperﬁne
components underneath each rotational line have to be
taken into account: Due to nuclear spin statistics both P
and R line for an even JX have contributions from nu-
clear spins I = 0, 2. For the latter diﬀerent orientations
with respect to JA appear, which results to 1+5 hyper-
ﬁne components. For the electric dipole transitions I and
MI remain unchanged to good approximation. Each con-
tributing hyperﬁne component is described by a standard
proﬁle

A [A0, ν, ν0] =

A0
1 + αX 2 + (1 − β − α)X 4 + β6X 6

with

X =

ν − ν0
HWHM

.

The parameters α, β and HWHM (half width at half
maximum) are equal for all lines contributing to the un-
shifted spectrum. α and β are line proﬁle parameters,
which depend on the contribution of the Lorentzian (α =
1, β = 0) and residual Gaussian shapes to the line shape.
They are determined by the collimation ratio of the ex-
perimental apparatus (1:1000) and possibly by frequency
jitter. For the proﬁle ﬁts presented here, α has been kept
ﬁxed at 1 while β is variable.

The ﬁt results show that the observed line proﬁles can
be simulated using the scalar and the tensorial nuclear
spin-spin interactions. The center frequency ν0 and the
amplitude of each line component thus does not only de-
pend on the rotational quantum number JA and the nu-
clear spin I, but also on the total molecular spin F = J +I.

(1)

(2)

Fig. 3. A spectrum ≈ 2.5 GHz below the asymptote of the
A state. L1 was stabilized on the R(6)(17-0) transition, and
L2 is tuned across the P(6)/R(6) transitions vX = 31 → vA =
178, 179. The dotted line is a signal with the coupling laser
switched oﬀ, while the solid one corresponds to the situation
when the coupling laser is on (IL3 ≈ 74 W/cm2). The back-
ground results from scattered light of L2. The additional oﬀ-
set in the solid spectrum is due to additional scattered light
from the coupling laser. This laser is stabilized in frequency
with a detuning of 75 MHz to blue with respect to the atomic
sodium 32P1/2 → 32D3/2 transition. For both vibrational lev-
els the line proﬁles of the P and R line are asymmetric. Each
line has a shoulder on the low frequency (left) side originating
from underlying hyperﬁne structure.

the peak can be determined with an uncertainty of about
30 MHz. For a good long-term frequency stability of L3
it is stabilized to a 150 MHz marker cavity that itself is
locked to an iodine stabilized HeNe laser [22]. Long term
drifts of L3 less than 1 MHz/h are achieved in this way.
The cavity is locked to the HeNe laser using an acousto-
optic modulator (AOM) which allows interpolation be-
tween the 150 MHz markers. Hence, we are able to deter-
mine the relative detuning with an absolute uncertainty
in the order of 1 MHz as long as the cavity is locked to
the HeNe laser (see Section 4).

The eﬀect of L3 on the energetic position of asymptotic
levels in the A state is observed by a switching technique:
L3 is modulated with a mechanical chopper at a frequency
of about 1 kHz. The current of the photomultiplier in the
second interaction zone is ampliﬁed with a fast current
ampliﬁer and then fed into an electronic switch, triggered
by the chopper signal. It divides the signal into two out-
put channels: The ﬁrst channel is correlated to ‘L3 oﬀ’,
the second to ‘L3 on’
if the switching phase is adjusted
properly.

A typical recorded spectrum, tuning laser L2 while
keeping L1 and L3 ﬁxed, is shown in Figure 3. Several
scans are averaged to improve the signal-to-noise ratio of
the recording. For the presented scan the total integration
time per data point was 1s. The Franck-Condon pumping
laser L1 is usually stabilized to the A-X R(6) (17-0) tran-
sition. The population in vA =17, JA =7 decays to JX =6
and 8 preferentially of vibrational levels around vX =31.

4

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

The total contribution diagonal in J of the hyperﬁne in-
teraction to the line position is [23]:

EHFS =hΩ = 0JI
δ
2

δII

=

′

(cid:20)

′

F |HHFS|Ω = 0JIF i

I(I + 1) − 2i(i + 1)

(cid:21)
′
+F +1

+ d i(i + 1)(2i + 1)(−1)I

×

30(2I + 1)(2I

+ 1)

′

1/2

(3)

(cid:20)

× (2J + 1)

J J 2
0 0 0

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:26)

(cid:21)

′

J
F I
2 J I

i i 1
i i 1
2
I I

′

.







(cid:27)

′





I=I
=i1+i2 is the total nuclear spin, i = i1 = i2 = 3/2
is the nuclear spin of a single sodium atom and Wigner’s
symbols are used. The ﬁrst term in equation (3) is the
scalar part of the hyperﬁne interaction while the second
one is the tensorial contribution of the hyperﬁne energy.
The δ-parameter for the scalar and the d-parameter for the
tensorial part depend on the states mixed by the hyper-
ﬁne interaction. At the 3s+3p asymptote a large variety
of states is coupled to the A state, so that the functional
dependence of the ratio of δ and d does not have a simple
analytic form. Thus, for the P/R line we let both parame-
ters vary in the ﬁt. The quadrupole and magnetic rotation
hyperﬁne interactions are negligible in the present case of
asymptotic levels.

For the proﬁle simulations, we assume that all hyper-
ﬁne components for a single J resulting from equation (3)
are of equal intensity and thus we need two parameters
for the description of the intensities of each P/R doublet.
This assumption would be not suﬃciently good for small
angular momenta J, F . For the positions of P and R lines
ν0 = νv + BvJA(JA + 1) + EHFS is used. For every vA the
unperturbed proﬁle is composed by (for even JX )

(4)

(cid:3)

U (ν) = Uoﬀ +

XJA=JX

1 XI=0,2

±

JA+I

A

A0 (I, F, JA) , ν, ν0 (I, F, JA)

,

XF =
JA
−
|

I

|

(cid:2)

with Uoﬀ to account for a background oﬀset in the exper-
imental trace.

For the simulation of the recordings with the coupling
light ﬁeld on, we use the same parameters α and β but
a diﬀerent HWHM. It can be larger than without cou-
pling laser due to predissociation broadening induced by
the optical coupling to the upper states (41Σ+
g , 21Πg, see
discussion below).

The oﬀset of the trace recorded with coupling laser Soﬀ
diﬀers from the oﬀset Uoﬀ of the uncoupled trace as the
detector sees some additional scattered light originating
from the coupling laser. We introduce an additional pa-
rameter for the description of the absolute intensities of
both P and R line of the shifted spectrum.

A coupling laser ﬁeld causes the splitting of a line at
ν0 into two Autler-Townes components at ν0 ± ∆. The

line shift ∆ and the relative weight of the Autler-Townes
components of each line depend on the frequency of the
coupling laser and on the Rabi frequencies of the coupling
transitions. For P and R line the ratio of the intensities of
the two Autler-Townes components are ﬁtting parameters
and are later called qJA. Due to reasons discussed below
the shifted doublet is composed of various lines with dif-
ferent shifts ∆.

The geometries of the laser beams L2 an L3 need to be
considered for a proper simulation: The detection proba-
bility is proportional to the local intensity of L2, IL2(r),
and as the dipole coupling is M dependent, the induced
shift is a function of M and of the local intensity of L3,
IL3(r).

As the polarization vector of L2 and of L3 are deﬁned
in the laboratory frame and the transition moments of the
molecules are given in the molecular frame a transforma-
tion between those two systems has to be performed. We
assume that the projection M of the angular momentum
J onto to the laser polarization vector remains unchanged
in the second interaction zone, and that all M are equally
populated. The latter assumption is justiﬁed as we start
from a thermal molecular beam and the light of L1 is un-
polarized.

As P, R, and Q (state 21Πg) coupling contribute to the
induced shift of a level for a speciﬁc M , the M -dependence
is not the regular parabolic dependency as for a single P,
Q, or R coupling like M 2 or J 2 − M 2 that results from
the direction cosine matrices. We derived from a simula-
tion with diabatic, rotationally corrected potentials and
ab initio coupling strengths (see Section 5) that for large
internuclear distances the shift ∆ resulting from P, Q, and
R coupling can be factorized into a function parabolic in
M and linear in IL3:

∆ (M, I3) ∼ IL3

1 − b

"

2

M
JA (cid:19)

#

(cid:18)

(5)

We derived b = 0.7 in our simulation. This result of poten-
tial shift calculations at large internuclear distance is ap-
plied to asymptotic levels because in such cases the main
contribution of the overlap integral of the vibrational wave
functions results from large internuclear separations.

0 ≪ ρ ≪ zi

For the geometric model of the laser intensity distribu-
tion we assume Gaussian TEM00 laser modes. Although
the beams L2 and L3 are focused (waist w2,3
0 ) into the sec-
ond interaction zone, we can assume that we have plane
waves because the Rayleigh ranges z2,3
R are larger than the
radius of the detection zone ρ (wi
R). With good
approximation we can assume that the molecular density
is constant in the observed zone. Taking the cylindrical
symmetry of the laser ﬁelds into account, the description
of the space dependent interaction can be reduced to one
coordinate: the radial distance r from the common axis of
the laser beams L2 and L3. We deﬁne as an approximation
to a Gaussian proﬁle a distribution of a discrete number
pmax of equi-thick hollow cylinders. In each of them we
assume a constant intensity I p
L3 representing the
average intensity of L2 and L3 in the cylinder p where p
counts from the center to the outer range.

L2 and I p

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

5

Fig. 4. Experimental and simulated spectrum of vA = 178,
JA = 5, 7. The dotted trace is the unshifted experimental spec-
trum. The dashed trace is the shifted experimental one (cou-
pling laser on the atomic 32P1/2 → 32D3/2 resonance, IL3 =74
W/cm2). The two solid traces correspond to the simulation of
the spectra as explained in the text.

With this model the proﬁle of one Autler-Townes com-
ponent of one rotational line JX → JA with an unper-
turbed transition frequency ν0 can be described as follows:

T± [ν, ν0, JA, A0] ∼

×

pmax

p=1
X

2p − 1
p2
max

I p
L2 A

JX

JA 1 JX
−M 0 M

2

(cid:19)

JX (cid:18)

XM=
−
ν, ν0 ± ∆(M, I p

L3), A0

.

(6)

1

(cid:2)
The Wigner 3j-symbol gives the relative detection proba-
bility for a single M in the unsaturated case for L2 and
2p
is the statistical weight for the hollow cylinder p
p2
of molecules. Like for the unshifted spectra described by
equation (4), the summation over all contributing lines
needs to be performed for the shifted spectra, too:

−
max

(cid:3)

JA+I

XJA=JX

1 XI=0,2
ν, ν0 (I, F, JA) , JA, A0 (I, F, JA)

XF =
JA
−
|

±

I

|

S (ν) = Soﬀ +

×

q±JAT+

(cid:20)

(cid:2)
1 − q±JA

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

+

(cid:3)

(7)

.
(cid:21)

(cid:3)

T−

ν, ν0 (I, F, JA) , JA, A0 (I, F, JA)

The intensity ratios of the Autler-Townes components q±JA
are limited by 0 ≤ q±JA ≤ 1 and are either almost 0 or
almost 1 because the detuning of L3 from the coupling
transitions is rather large compared to the Rabi frequency
(see above).

In the following the derived parameter of the level shift
corresponds to the maximal shift, i.e., the shift for M = 0
molecules at the beam center, ∆(0, IL3) in equation (5).

Figure 4 shows the result of a ﬁt to an experimen-
tal spectrum for vA = 178. The experimental traces are
plotted in dotted (unshifted) and dashed style (shifted).

Fig. 5. Eﬀect of the optical manipulation on the last vibra-
tional levels of the A state. The coupling laser is 75(30) MHz
blue detuned with respect the atomic 32P1/2 →32D3/2 tran-
sition. The intensity is 43 W/cm2. The dotted spectrum is
recorded in absence of the coupling laser while the solid one is
recorded with coupling laser switched on.

L3 was resonant to the 32P1/2 →32D3/2 transition and
caused an intensity of IL3 = 74 W/cm2. The criterion
for the quality of the ﬁt is the sum of squared diﬀerence
between experimental and ﬁtted points. The agreement
between experimental and ﬁtted line proﬁles is within the
noise interval. The line shift obtained from the ﬁt is -28.9
MHz for JA=5 and -29.7 MHz for JA =7 in the above case.
The uncertainty of the shifts can be estimated by varying
the starting conditions of the ﬁt and is determined to be
less than 3 MHz here.

4 Experimental Results

The dependence of the light induced energy shifts of vA =
173, . . . , 182, JA =5,7 on power and detuning of the cou-
pling laser L3 has been investigated. First we will focus
on the eﬀect on the last bound levels directly below the
A state asymptote. Figure 5 shows a spectrum of the lev-
els vA = 181 to 184. The trace plotted in dotted style
is recorded without the coupling laser while the second
trace, plotted in solid style, is recorded in presence of the
coupling laser ﬁeld. The intensity of the coupling laser
was set to IL3 = 43 W/cm2 and the frequency was stabi-
lized 75(30) MHz blue detuned with respect to the atomic
32P1/2 →32D3/2 transition. All levels are shifted to lower
frequencies or energies, note the position of the poten-
tial asymptote. Additionally, the line proﬁles of the levels
vA = 182 to 184 have remarkably changed: The lines are
broader than without the coupling laser. The P and the R
line start to overlap. The dissociation continuum has been
shifted, vA = 184 disappears.

In Figure 6 the variation of the observed shifts of vA=178,

JA =5 as a function of the intensity of the coupling laser is
shown. The laser frequency of L3 was kept ﬁxed 75(30) MHz
blue detuned as before, but the intensity was varied from
15 to 67 W/cm2. This corresponds to energy shifts in the
central region of the beam up to 26.9(30) MHz. The de-
pendence of the shift on the laser intensity is linear within
the experimental accuracy.

6

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

Fig. 6. Dependence of the light shift of vA =178, JA =5 on
the intensity of the coupling laser. Without coupling laser this
level is bound by 2646 MHz. The frequency of the coupling
laser is stabilized 75(30) MHz blue detuned from the atomic
32P1/2 →32D3/2 transition. The absolute uncertainty of the
coupling laser intensity is 50% and originates from the resolu-
tion of the beam view camera utilized for the determination
the laser beam diameters. The relative uncertainty between
diﬀerent measurements is less than 5%.

The error limits for the absolute intensity result mainly
from the uncertainty in the determination of the focus di-
ameter of the coupling laser beam. We use for this pur-
pose a CCD camera with a pixel size of 23µm × 27µm, on
which we project a 10% reﬂex of each laser beam of the
second interaction zone. The CCD and the second interac-
tion zone are equi-distant from the beam splitter, so that
the beam diameter measured with the CCD is the same
as the focus diameter in the second interaction zone and
can be derived with an absolute uncertainty of one pixel
size of the CCD chip which results in the 50% uncertainty
for the determination of the coupling laser intensity. The
relative change of the intensity in Figure 5 is known with
an uncertainty of 5%, limited by the uncertainty of the
power meter.

As an example for the dependence of level shifts on
the detuning of the coupling laser experimental shifts of
vA =179, JA =7 are plotted in Figure 10. The reference
frequency for the detuning is the energy diﬀerence δω from
vA =179, JA =7 to the 3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote. This is rea-
sonable because in the region of the outer turning point of
the A state vibrational wave function (where the coupling
is induced) the potential of the upper 3s+3d asymptote
has almost reached its asymptotic value. This is due to the
1/R5-dependence from a quadrupole-quadrupole coupling
of a s-electron and a d-electron and is in contrast to the
1/R3-behavior of the resonant dipole-dipole interaction of
the A state potential correlated to the s+p asymptote. For
the series of measurements in Figure 10 the laser intensity
of the coupling laser was held ﬁxed at 74 W/cm2. The
circles in Figure 10 are results from simulations, which we
will describe in the following section.

Fig. 7. Potential scheme of the dipole coupling of A1Σ+
u state
g and the 21Πg states. Dipole selection rules allow
to the 41Σ+
P and R coupling to the 41Σ+
g -state, and P, Q, and R coupling
to the 21Πg-state. The inset shows the rotational barriers at
the 3s + 3d asymptote for JA = 7.

5 Theoretical Interpretation

u state to the 41Σ+

The observed level shifts originate from the laser-induced
dipole coupling of the A1Σ+
g and the
21Πg states, both correlated to the 3s+3d asymptote (Fig-
ure 1). We use a dressed molecule picture similar to [24]
for the simulation of the coupled system. After eliminating
the explicit time dependence from the theoretical model,
a mapped Fourier grid method [19] is used to determine
line positions and light induced line broadenings.

For the correct description of the dipole coupling we
have to take care of the e/f symmetries of the involved
rotational levels and the selection rules for an optically
induced dipole coupling. Thus, the A state can only cou-
ple to the 41Σ+
g state on a P and R line, while there is P,
Q, and R coupling to the 21Πg-state. For a proper sym-
metrization, the latter state usually is expressed as a linear
combination |21Πgi = 1
√2
plus sign gives the e component of the Π-state that can
only be reached by P and R couplings, while the minus
is the f component which couples to the A state by a Q
line. For each M (projection of J onto space ﬁxed axis
neglecting hyperﬁne structure), a coupled system can be
calculated. Thus, the system to be solved consists of six
(except ﬁve for M =0, where the Q coupling for Σ → Π
vanishes) coupled channels, as illustrated in Figure 7.

|Ω = 1i ± (−1)J |Ω = −1i

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

The coupled system is described by a six component
wave function. For a simple notation we use G, Σ, and
g , and 21Πg for the electronic
Π instead of A1Σ+
part of the wave functions. With Born-Oppenheimer basis
functions, the coupled channel wave function thus can be

u , 41Σ+

. The

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

7

expressed as

Ψ(R, t) =












Ψ (J)
G (R, rk, t)
Ψ (J
1)
(R, rk, t)
−
Σ
Ψ (J+1)
(R, rk, t)
Σ
1)
Ψ (J
(R, rk, t)
−
Π
Ψ (J)
Π (R, rk, t)
Ψ (J+1)
(R, rk, t)
Π
1
R χG(R, t) φG(rk; R) |ξJ i
1
R χΣ(R, t) φΣ(rk; R) |ξJ
1i
1
R χΣ(R, t) φΣ(rk; R) |ξJ+1i
1
R χΠ (R, t) φΠ (rk; R) |ξJ
1i
−
1
R χΠ (R, t) φΠ (rk; R) |ξJ i
1
R χΠ (R, t) φΠ (rk; R) |ξJ+1i

−






















=

,











where R is the distance of the two nuclei and rk are the
coordinates of the electrons in the molecular frame. |ξJ i
are the basis functions for the rotation for an angular mo-
mentum J. φG(ri; R), φΣ(ri; R), and φΠ (ri; R) are the
electronic wave functions corresponding to the potential
curves UG, UΣ, and UΠ . The functions χG, χΣ, and χΠ
describe the radial motion in these potentials.

The Hamiltonian of the coupled system divides into

two parts:

ˆH = ˆH

mol

+ ˆW.

(9)

mol

i

mol

are the matrixes ˆHmol

The molecular part of the Hamiltonian ˆH

describes
the ﬁeld free case, whereas the second part ˆW describes
the dipole coupling between the diﬀerent electronic states.
Both matrices are set up as a matrix of k×k blocks where k
is the number of coupled channels. The diagonal blocks of
ˆH
(1 ≤ i ≤ k), all non-diagonal
blocks vanish. ˆW is set up of ˆWij (1 ≤ i, j ≤ k). ˆWij
represents the dipole coupling between the states of chan-
nel i and j. ˆWij vanishes if i and j are equal or if none of
the channels i, j is G. Operators denoted with underscore,
i.e., ˆH, represent operators that act on all channels (in our
case ﬁve or six for all internuclear distances). In contrast
operators without underscore represent operators that ei-
ther act on one channel only or describe the coupling of
exactly two channels ( ˆHmol

resp. ˆWij).

i

i = ˆTi + ˆUi
ˆHmol
¯h2

+

(cid:2)

J (J + 1) + S (S + 1) + L (L + 1) − Ω2 − Σ2 − Λ2
2µR2

i

is the molecular part of the Hamiltonian. ˆTi is the kinetic
energy operator and ˆUi the electronic potential energy
operator of the electronic state i. The third term is the
rotational energy of the two nuclei relative to each other
represented in Hund’s coupling case (a). µ is the reduced
mass of the molecule.

The coupling laser L3 is assumed to be a plane and
monochromatic wave with frequency ωL. Thus, in dipole
approximation

(8)

1
2

(cid:0)

ˆW (t)ij = −Di,j(R) · ǫLE0

eiωLt + e−

iωLt

.

(11)

(cid:1)

Di,j(R) is the dipole moment for the transition between
the electronic states φi and φj resulting from the integra-
tion over rk according to equation (8). Di,j (R) vanishes
for transitions between Σ- and Π-state because g ↔ g
couplings are forbidden by electric dipole selection rules.
ǫL describes the unity vector in the direction of the laser
polarization and E0 is the electric ﬁeld strength.

With this Hamiltonian, the time-dependent Schr¨odinger

equation for the six-components wave function Ψ(t) is:

i¯h

Ψ(R, t) =

mol

ˆH

∂
∂t

+ ˆW(t)
i

h

Ψ(R, t)

(12)

Fig. 8. Asymptotic region of the coupled electronic potentials.
The A state potential is dressed by a photon energy of the cou-
pling laser L3. The energy diﬀerence ∆ω is due to the detuning
of the coupling laser relative to the atomic transition. δω is the
relative position of one individual vibrational level vA to the
3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote within the dressed state picture.

The radial wave functions for the nuclear motion in
the electronic channels at the lower and upper asymptote
are transformed via

χG(R, t) = ˜χG(R, t) exp(i∆ωt),
χΣ(R, t) = ˜χΣ(R, t) exp(−iω0t),
χΠ (R, t) = ˜χΠ (R, t) exp(−iω0t),

(cid:3)
(10)

where ω0 (see Figure 7) is the transition frequency of the
atomic 32p1/2 → 32d3/2-transition, ∆ω is the detuning of
the coupling laser with respect to ω0 (∆ω = ωL − ω0).
By the transformation (13) we shift (dress) the origin of
energy for the electronic potentials,

(13)

(14)

˜UG(R) = UG(R) + ¯h∆ω,
˜UΣ(R) = UΣ(R) − ¯hω0,
˜UΠ (R) = UΠ(R) − ¯hω0.

8

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

Hence, all three electronic potentials have almost the same
asymptotic energies. In Figure 8 the resulting molecular
potentials dressed by one photon of a blue detuned (rela-
tive to the atomic transition) coupling laser are plotted.

Adapting the dressed potentials in the ˆHmol

, the Schr¨o-
dinger equation (12) for the vibrational motion in the six
coupled channels can be written as

i

∂
∂t

=













˜χJ
G(R, t)
1
˜χJ
Σ (R, t)
−
˜χJ+1
Σ (R, t)
1
˜χJ

Π (R, t)
−

˜χJ
Π (R, t)


˜χJ+1

Π (R, t)


1
1
Π ¯hΩ0
Hmol
Σ ¯hΩ−
GJ ¯hΩ−
1
Σ Hmol
¯hΩ−
0
0
0
ΣJ−1
¯hΩ+1
0 Hmol
0
0
ΣJ+1
Σ
1
0 Hmol
¯hΩ−
0
0
Π
¯hΩ0
0
0
Π
¯hΩ+1
0
0
Π

Σ ¯hΩ+1

Π ¯hΩ+1
Π
0
0
0
ΠJ−1
0 Hmol
0
ΠJ
0 Hmol
0

ΠJ−1

i¯h












˜χJ
G(R, t)
1
˜χJ
Σ (R, t)
−
˜χJ+1
Σ (R, t)
1
˜χJ
Π (R, t)
−
˜χJ
Π (R, t)
˜χJ+1
Π (R, t)
(15)






















where J is short for JA used in the other sections.

To solve this multi-channel problem the explicit time
dependence of the Hamilton operator can be eliminated
if the rotating wave approximation [25] is applied. It is
based on the suppression of the fast oscillating terms in the
coupling matrix elements, which average out over times
given by the vibrational period of the molecule.

The coupling matrix elements between the G (origi-
nally the A state) and electronically higher excited states
Σ and Π are expressed by time independent Rabi frequen-
cies Ωβ
j (R)/2π (j = Σ, Π) where β = 0, ±1 indicates the
diﬀerence of the rotational quantum number between the
coupled states. They are related to the electronic transi-
tion dipole moment by

¯hΩβ

j (R) = −

E0

|DG,j(R)|

1
2

= −

1
2

r

2IL3
cǫ0

|DG,j(R)|

(16)

J+β 1 J
−M 0 M

J+β 1 J
−M 0 M

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

.

Here we take into account the earlier discussed M -depen-
dence by the linear polarized light in the experiment. For
each projection of M on the laboratory frame the eigen-
value problem of the coupled channel system gives the sta-
tionary solution and can be solved for each M separately.
Levels with diﬀerent M do not couple.

The light induced energy shifts (the diﬀerence of cor-
responding eigenvalues with and without light ﬁeld) and
line broadenings are computed using the Mapped Fourier
Grid Hamiltonian (MFGH) representation, described in
detail in [19]. The MFGH method has been designed in
the context of photoassociation of cold atoms and cold
molecule formation, where interactions at large internu-
clear distances play the key role. In subsequent papers
[26,20], a complex potential has been introduced to treat
the interaction of bound levels embedded into dissociation

continua. Here we recall only the main steps of the MFGH
method:

– In the standard Fourier Grid Hamiltonian (FGH) method,
the total Hamiltonian for the coupled channels is ex-

pressed in a basis on N plane waves, exp

i2πkR
L

,

2 − 1), . . . , 0, . . . , N

(cid:19)
k = −( N
2 , where L is the range of
internuclear distances under investigation. The diago-
nalization yields eigenfunctions represented as an ex-
pansion over the same basis, the coeﬃcients being the
value of the wave function at each point of the grid of
length L with N equi-distant points.

(cid:18)

,



– As the local de Broglie wavelength of wave functions
varies by orders of magnitude between the small and
the large internuclear distance range, an adaptative co-
ordinate can be deﬁned in the FGH framework, which
maps the variation of the local kinetic energy. The
number of required grid points is reduced substan-
tially, allowing accurate calculations of energy levels
with large elongations, i.e., close to the dissociation
limit.








– The width of the energy levels interacting with a disso-
ciation continuum is obtained after the diagonalization
of the total Hamiltonian, including a pure imaginary
potential (or an optical potential) Vopt placed at large
distances, which ensures absorbing boundary condi-
tions for the outgoing waves. In a stationary approach,
the dissociating wave functions behave asymptotically
as Siegert states [20]. We choose the form proposed in
[27]:

Vopt = AoptNoptexp

(17)

−2Lopt
,
R − Ropt (cid:19)

(cid:18)

where Nopt is a normalization factor, Ropt, Lopt and
Aopt are respectively the position, the length, and the
amplitude of the optical potential. The values of these
parameters are chosen according to the recommenda-
tion of [27]. The imaginary part of the eigenvalues re-
sulting from the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian
matrix provides the predissociation line width

In our calculations, we used a grid with L=1100 a.u.(1 a.u.
10 m), with typically 700 grid points,
=0.5291772083 × 10−
which induces a diagonalization of 4200×4200 squared
matrix, using standard LAPACK routines. As we are look-
ing for very small energy shifts, a high accuracy is needed
for the eigenvalues, which is checked by studying their
convergence depending on the contraction (equal to 0.2
here) of the grid step. A contraction of 1 corresponds to a
local grid density of four points per local de Broglie wave-
length. The optical potential is set up to absorb outgoing
waves with kinetic energies corresponding to the detuning
∆ω of the coupling laser L3, following the rules described
7 a.u.,
in [27]. The parameter values are Aopt = 5.6 × 10−
Lopt = 210 a.u., Ropt = L − Lopt, and Nopt = 13.22.
Changes of Aopt, L and Lopt in reasonable ranges do not
aﬀect the simulation results for the line positions and the
line widths, so that their choice is appropriate to represent
the loss of molecules by predissociation.

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

9

Fig. 9. Simulation of light shifts and line broadenings of the
last 25 vibrational levels of the A1Σ+
u state calculated for JA=7
and an intensity of the coupling laser of 75 W/cm2. The cou-
−1 blue detuned to the
pling laser is assumed to be 0.0375 cm
atomic 32p1/2 → 32d3/2 transition. All levels of the A state are
shifted to lower energies.

For the simulations, we applied the following poten-
tials: For the A1Σ+
u state a RKR potential (Rydberg-
Klein-Rees) generated from experimental values is used.
It is based on energies from [21]. The potentials for 41Σ+
g
and 21Πg state for internuclear distances up to 35 a.u.
are taken from ab initio calculations in [28] (method b)
therein). The long range part is calculated from the dis-
persion coeﬃcients given in [29] and is connected contin-
uously diﬀerentiable to the inner part.

The dipole moments used for the light induced cou-
pling originate from calculations in [28]. They converge
for internuclear distances above 100 a.u. to the atomic
values. For the inner part below 14 a.u., we generated ad-
ditional values of the dipole moment by smooth continu-
ation of the ab initio curves. This inner part of the dipole
moments has only minor inﬂuence on the results of the
numerical simulation as the contribution to the overlap
integral of the A state and upper states wave functions at
small internuclear distances is almost negligible.

For the simulation of line shifts of asymptotic A state
levels, we compare the theoretical energy positions of the
single channel calculation of the A state with the cor-
responding values of the six channel system. A typical
result of a simulation is presented in Figure 9. We dis-
play the energy shifts (squares) of vibrational levels vA =
165, . . . , 184 with JA=7 for a peak intensity of the coupling
laser IL3 = 75 W/cm2 and a blue detuning of 0.0375 cm−
1
with respect to the atomic 32P1/2 → 32D3/2 transition.
Moreover, the ﬁgure contains light induced line broaden-
ings (circles) obtained from the simulations with imagi-
nary absorbing potential. With the blue detuning of 0.0375
1 all levels bound by less than this energy starting
cm−
with vA = 181 show considerable predissociation broad-
ening of up to 49 MHz.

Similar calculations have been performed for all stud-
ied laser intensitites IL3 and detunings ∆ω of the coupling
laser. In Figure 10 the circles show a simulation of the de-

Fig. 10. Dependence of the light shift of vA =179, JA =7 on
the detuning of the coupling laser relative to a hypothetical
transition (vA =179, JA=7)→3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote (see also
Figure 7 and Figure 8). The squares are experimental points
taken for a peak intensity of IL3 =74 W/cm2. The circles are
from a simulation with IL3 =75 W/cm2.

pendence of level shifts for vA =179, JA =7 on the detun-
ing δω of the coupling laser with respect to a hypotheti-
cal transition (vA =179, JA =7)→3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote.
Experimental points are plotted by squares.

The agreement between experimental and simulated
line shifts is convincing, but one has to keep in mind that
due to the uncertainty in the determination of the cou-
pling laser beam waist, we have a 50% uncertainty in the
laser intensities applied for the simulation. For detuning
less than 1000 MHz our ﬁtting procedure fails to deter-
mine line shifts from the experimental spectra. The exper-
imental signal of the shifted trace decreases and broadens
remarkably towards the resonance frequency. A typical
spectrum showing this eﬀect for vA = 179, JA = 5, 7 is
presented in Figure 11. The theoretical model applied for
the ﬁts of line proﬁles is no longer able to simulate the
observed line proﬁles properly.

The deviations in Figure 11 are not noise; the slow
variation is reproducible. For a proper simulation, the ﬁt
should include the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure on the op-
tical coupling.

A comparison of the line broadening observed in the
experiment with theoretically predicted line broadening
due to laser induced predissociation is shown in Figure 12.
The experimental broadenings are calculated from the ﬁt-
ted FWHM in presence of the coupling laser minus the
FWHM without light induced broadening. In the experi-
ment we observe a signiﬁcant line broadening, which has
a maximum if the coupling laser is on resonance with a
hypothetical transition frequency from the level under in-
vestigation to the 3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote (δω = 0). The
broadening eﬀect for δω < 0 cannot be described by the
laser induced predissociation calculated with our six chan-
nel model because the dissociation channel is not yet open.

10

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

Fig. 11. Example of an experimental scan of vA =179, JA =5,7
when the coupling laser is on resonance (δω = 0) with respect
to an hypothetical transition vA =179, JA =7→3s1/2+3d3/2
asymptote. The intensity of L3 was IL3=74 W/cm2. The dot-
ted trace is taken without the coupling laser, while the dashed
one is the manipulated spectrum. The solid traces represent
ﬁts on the experimental data with the model presented in Sec-
tion 3.

Fig. 13. Hyperﬁne potentials at the asymptote 3s + 3d for a
total angular momentum F = 0.

adiabatic asymptotic potentials are shown in Figure 13.
From the A state, which correlates to the 3s1/2(f = 1)+3p1/2
asymptote, a dipole transition is only possible to the
3s1/2(f = 1)+3d3/2 asymptote. Thus, the light induced
shifts of an asymptotic A state level shows a frequency
dependence which can be described by an eﬀective cou-
pling to only this asymptote. In the region above the
3s1/2(f = 1)+3d5/2 asymptpote, which is the lowest asymp-
tote due to the inverted ﬁne structure, a predissociation
can appear. This will lead to an increased line width of the
A state levels under investigation starting at a detuning
δω > −|EFS|. This threshold is included in Figure 12.

A second eﬀect leading to a predissociation and thus
a decreased lifetime of the 41Σ+
g state is the vibrational
coupling of this state to lower lying molecular states with
the same symmetry. In Figure 14 the region of an avoided
crossing with the 31Σ+
g -state is marked by a dashed box.
The 31Σ+
g state correlates to the 3s+4s asmyptote so that
in the region above this asymptote a predissociation to
this asymptote is possible. Therefore, the optical coupling
of the A state to the 41Σ+
g -state can also induce a predis-
sociation of A state levels to the 3s+4s asymptote.

Due to limitations of the memory available on our com-
puters the two additional predissociation channels can not
be implemented in our coupled channel code. Hence, it is
diﬃcult to estimate the contribution of the two eﬀects to
the experimentally observed line width.

Fig. 12. Dependence of the line broadening of vA = 179,
JA = 7 on the detuning δω of the coupling laser (see Figure 8).
The squares represent the diﬀerence of the two FWHM ﬁtting
parameters. The circles are from a simulation for the experi-
mental peak intensity of IL3 =74 W/cm2, neglecting the ﬁne
and hyperﬁne structure of the asymptote 3s+3d. The threshold
is only given for the discussion in the text.

6 Conclusion

There are two diﬀerent eﬀects, which can lead to the
experimentally observed line broadening for detuning δω <
0. The molecular structure of the states at the 3s+3d
asymptote is not as simple as we have assumed for the
simulation. Due to the ﬁne structure energy of the 3d
atom and hyperﬁne energy of the 3s atom, which have
1 [30],
almost the same magnitude (EFS(3d)=-0.0498 cm−
1 [31]) the 3s+3d asymptote splits
EHFS(3s)=-0.0590 cm−
into four diﬀerent hyperﬁne asymptotes. The calculated

A high resolution molecular beam experiment has been
used to investigate the eﬀect of a light induced coupling
on the last vibrational levels of the sodium A state. The
coupling is induced by a laser ﬁeld which is near res-
onant to the atomic sodium 32P1/2 → 32D3/2 transi-
tion and thus couples the A1Σ+
g and
21Πg state, which are both correlated to the 3s1/2+3d3/2
asymptote. From the experimental data we see that with
the usual laser intensities available from lab size laser

u state to the 41Σ+

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

11

3s+3p asymptote [32]. Here we want to investigate sys-
tematically a laser induced coupling between the X1Σ+
g
ground state of sodium to levels in the A state. This ex-
perimental situation is of very high interest, as in most
cooling and trapping experiments lasers (either for a MOT
or dipole trap) are present, which are slightly detuned
from the atomic resonance. These experiments show very
complex dynamical Stark eﬀect which asks for further ex-
tensions of our model system.

7 Acknowledgments

We thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft support-
ing this work within the SFB 407. We also thank the
PROCOPE program, which provided the money for the
travelling expenses between France and Germany.

References

1. M.H. Anderson, J.R. Ensher, M.R. Matthews, C.E. Wie-

2. K.B.

mann, E.A. Cornell, Science 269, 198 (1995)
Davis, M.-O. Mewes, M.R.

Andrews,
N.J. van Druten, D.S. Durfee, D.M. Kurn, W. Ket-
terle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3969 (1995)

3. C.C. Bradley, C.A. Sacket, J.J. Tollet, R.G. Hulet, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 75, 1687 (1995)

4. D.G. Fried, T.C. Kilian, L. Willmann, D. Landhuis,
S.C. Moss, D. Kleppner, T.J. Greytak, Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, 3811 (1998)

5. A. Robert, O. Sirjean, A. Browaeys, J. Poupard, S. Nowak,
D. Boiron, C.I. Westbrook, A. Aspect, Science 292, 461
(2001)

6. F. Pereira Dos Santos, J. L´eonard, J. Wang, C.J. Bar-
relet, F. Perales, E. Rasel, C.S. Unnikrishnan, M. Leduc,
C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3459 (2001)
7. T. Weber, J. Herbig, M. Mark, H.C. N¨agerl, R. Grimm,

Science, 299, 232, (2002)

8. E. Tiesinga, C.J. Williams, P.S. Julienne, K.M. Jones,
P.D. Lett, W.D. Phillips, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Tech-
nol. 101, 505 (1996)

9. A. Crubellier, O. Dulieu, F. Masnou-Seeuws, M. Elbs,
H. Kn¨ockel, E. Tiemann, Eur. Phys. J. D. 6, 211 (1999)

10. M. Elbs, H. Kn¨ockel, T. Laue, Chr. Samuelis, E. Tiemann,

Phys. Rev. A 59, 3665 (1999)

11. Chr. Samuelis, E. Tiesinga, T. Laue, H. Kn¨ockel, E. Tie-

mann, Phys. Rev. A 63, 012710-1 (2001)

12. S. Inouye, M.R. Andrews, J. Stenger, H.-J. Miesner,
D.M. Stamper-Kurn, W. Ketterle, Nature 392 151 (1998)
13. S.L. Cornish, N.R. Claussen, J.L. Roberts, E.A. Cornell,

C.E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1795 (2000)

14. M. Marinescu, L. You, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 2596 (1998)
15. P.O. Fedichev, Y. Kagan, G.V. Shlyapnikov, J.T.M. Wal-

raven, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2913 (1996)

16. J.L. Bohn, P.S. Julienne, Phys. Rev. A 56, 1486 (1997)
17. V. Kokoouline, J. Vala, R. Kosloﬀ, J. Chem. Phys. 114,

18. F.K. Fatemi, K.M. Jones, P.D. Lett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,

3046 (2001)

4462 (2000)

19. V. Kokouline, O. Dulieu, R. Kosloﬀ, F. Masnou-Seeuws,

J. Chem. Phys. 110, 9865 (1999)

Fig. 14. Molecular potentials with 1Σ+
of the 41Σ+
31Σ+

g -symmetry. The shape
g -potential is due to an avoided crossing with the

g -state that correlates to the 3s + 4s asympote [28].

sources (≈ 50 W/cm2) light induced level shifts in a
molecular system in the order of several 10 MHz can be
induced. Furthermore, we observe an increased line width
of the A state levels under investigation due to light in-
duced predissociation. The number of bound states of the
A state could be changed by the inﬂuence of the coupling
laser by one or more units. Thus, in the picture of collid-
ing atoms, the scattering phase was altered by more than
π.

We developed a theoretical model of the light induced
coupling, which describes the observed level shifts in good
agreement with the experimental data. It is based on a
six channel calculation using the Mapped Fourier Grid
Method for the solution of the coupled channel eigenvalue
problem. We use ab initio data for the electronic potentials
at the 3s1/2+3d3/2 asymptote and for the dipole moments
for the description of the light induced coupling. For the
simulation of the induced line shifts of deeply bound states
it is not necessary to take into account the ﬁne and hy-
perﬁne structure of the 3s+3d asymptote.

The interpretation of the light induced line broaden-
ing eﬀects needs a more detailed analysis of the molecular
structure at the 3s+3d asymptote. The predissociation of
the 41Σ+
g and 21Πg state due to ﬁne structure, hyper-
ﬁne structure, and vibrational motion must be taken into
account.

This research is in progress with a similar experiment
that couples the sodium ground state asymptote with the

12

Chr. Samuelis et al.: Optical manipulation of long-range interactions at the 3s+3p asymptote of Na2

D, 20, 77-86 (2002)

(1996)

39, 592 (1978)

20. P. Pellegrini, O. Dulieu, F. Masnou-Seeuws, Eur. Phys. J.

21. E. Tiemann, H. Kn¨ockel, H. Richling, Z. Phys. D 37, 323

22. PMT Lasertechnik, Manual, G¨ottingen (2000)
23. M. Broyer, J. Vigu´e, J.C. Lehmann, Journal de Physique

24. M. Vatasescu, O. Dulieu, R. Kosloﬀ, F. Masnou-Seeuws,

Phys. Rev A 63, 033407-1 (2001)

25. The theory of coherent atomic excitation I. B. W. Shore,

Wiley NY (1990)

26. V. Kokoouline, O. Dulieu, R. Kosloﬀ, F. Masnou-Seeuws,

Phys. Rev. A, 62, 032716 (2000)

27. A. Vibok, G.G. Balint-Kurti, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 8712

(1992)

(1987)

28. S. Magnier, Ph. Milli´e, O. Dulieu, F. Masnou-Seeuws, J.

Chem. Phys. 98, 7113 (1993)

29. M. Marinescu, A. Dalgarno, Phys. Rev. A 52, 311 (1995)
30. B. Burghardt, B. Hoﬀmann, G. Meisel, Z. Phys. D 8, 109

31. E. Arimondo, M. Inguscio, P. Violino: Rev. Mod. Phys.

49(1), 31 (1977)

32. Chr. Samuelis, PhD thesis, Universiy of Hannover

