manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
3
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Small rare gas clusters in XUV laser pulses

D. Bauer⋆

Max-Born-Institut, Max-Born-Strasse 2a, 12489 Berlin, Germany

Abstract Semi-classical molecular dynamics simula-
tions of small rare gas clusters in short laser pulses
of 100 nm wavelength were performed. For comparison,
the cluster response to 800 nm laser pulses was inves-
tigated as well. The inner ionization dynamics of the
multi-electron atoms inside the cluster was treated ex-
plicitly. The simulation results underpin that at XUV
wavelengths collisions play an important role in the en-
ergy absorption and the generation of the surprisingly
high charge states of Xe atoms inside clusters, as they
were observed in the free-electron laser experiment at
DESY, Hamburg, Germany [Wabnitz et al., Nature 420,
482 (2002)].

1 Introduction

Clusters can absorb laser energy more eﬃciently than
both gas targets and solids. This is because the clus-
ter size is smaller than the skin depth so that all atoms
experience the same laser ﬁeld, despite the locally high
particle density. Moreover, unlike solid targets there is
no cold bulk that serves as a reservoir of cold electrons.
Consequently, the laser-heated electrons cannot as easily
escape from the cluster as they can from a solid surface.
The electrons that absorb enough energy to leave the
cluster as a whole contribute to the so-called “outer ion-
ization.” Other electrons are removed from their parent
atom or ion (“inner ionization”) but remain trapped by
the positive background of the cluster. These electrons
and the ions form a nanoplasma that hydrodynamically
expands or Coulomb-explodes. In experiments at wave-
lengths ≥ 248 nm highly energetic electrons [1], ions [2,
3,4], photons [5,6,7], and neutrons originating from nu-
clear fusion [8] were observed (see Refs. [9,10] for re-
views).

⋆

E-mail: bauer@mbi-berlin.de

Recently, Xe cluster experiments in the XUV regime
have been performed at the DESY free-electron laser
(FEL), Hamburg, Germany [11]. Surprisingly, for laser
intensities of a few times 1013, 100 fs pulse duration,
and 98 nm wavelength multiply charged Xe ions were
observed in the laser-cluster experiments even for small
clusters whereas isolated Xe atoms loose only one elec-
tron under such conditions.

The goal of this work is to shed some light on the
mechanism underlying the generation of higher charge
states inside clusters for laser parameters close to the
FEL experiment. For that purpose molecular dynam-
ics (MD) simulations have been performed. The inner-
atomic dynamics is treated explicitly. The classical
multi-electron atoms are rendered stable by introduc-
ing a momentum-dependent potential. Mechanisms con-
tributing to inner ionization such as ﬁeld ionization, col-
lisional ionization, and even non-sequential ionization
and “shake-oﬀ” processes are all self-consistently incor-
porated on a classical level.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 the nu-
merical model is introduced. In Sec. 3 the numerical re-
sults are presented. Finally, we conclude in Sec. 4.

Atomic units (a.u.) are used throughout unless noted

otherwise.

2 MD model of rare gas clusters

The rare gas cluster consisting of Na atoms at the posi-
tions Ri, 1 ≤ i ≤ Na, and Z “active” electrons per atom
at the positions rj, 1 ≤ j ≤ ZNa in a laser ﬁeld E(t) is
modeled by the Hamiltonian

H(R, P; r, p; t) =

(1)

Na

ZNa

P2
i
2M

+

p2
j
2

i=1
X

j=1
X
Z
|Ri − rj|

(cid:19)

+

VH (˜rij , ˜pij) −

Na

ZNa

i=1
X

j=1 (cid:18)
X

2

D. Bauer

Na

i−1

i=1
X
ZNa

Xk=1 (cid:18)
j−1

+

+

j=1
X

Xl=1

Vaa(|Ri − Rk|) +

Z 2
|Ri − Rk|

1
|rj − rl|

+ E(t) ·

rj −

ZNa





j=1
X

(cid:19)
Na

i=1
X

.

Ri


Apart from the usual terms describing the kinetic energy,
the Coulomb interactions, and the interaction with the
laser ﬁeld in dipole approximation, there are the addi-
tional potentials Vaa and VH accounting for the Lennard-
Jones interaction between neutral atoms and the Heisen-
berg uncertainty principle for the electrons inside the
atoms, respectively. The purpose of introducing these
potentials will become clear when we now describe how
the initial, unperturbed cluster conﬁguration is built up.
(I) First, we seek an energetically optimal conﬁgura-
tion for the neutral cluster without laser ﬁeld. To that
end we set Z = 0 and

12

6

#

(cid:18)

(2)

− ζ

"(cid:18)

Vaa(Rik) = D

a
Rik (cid:19)

a
Rik (cid:19)
where Rik = Ri − Rk, Rik = |Rik|, and ζ is commonly
set to either unity or two in the chemical physics lit-
erature. The potential minimum of Vaa is at Rmin =
(2/ζ)1/6a and should be chosen close to the known near-
est neighbor distance of the cluster under consideration.
By varying the parameter D the overall strength of the
Lennard-Jones potential Vaa can be adjusted.

Starting from a random atom distribution with the
nearest neighbor distances > Rmin a local minimum in
the energy landscape is obtained by propagating the
atoms according the equations of motion

(4)

(3)

− νPi

˙Pi = −

˙Ri = Pi/M,
∂H
∂Ri
with a non-vanishing but small friction ν and the nuclear
mass M set to a small value so that relaxation occurs on
an acceptable time scale. For small clusters (say, Na <
10) it is quite likely that also the global minimum is found
in this way as long as one starts with a reasonable guess
for the cluster structure. Finding the global minimum
for bigger clusters is far from trivial. Fortunately, the
structures of Lennard-Jones clusters with Na < 150 are
available in the literature [12,13].

(II) Secondly, we seek an electronic conﬁguration
for the single atom with Z active electrons and call
this the “mother conﬁguration.” Since “classical atoms”
with more than one electron are generally unstable, a
momentum-dependent potential

V(r, p, ξ, α, µ) =

exp

α

1 −

(5)

ξ2
4αr2µ

4

rp
ξ

(

"

(cid:18)

#)

(cid:19)

is introduced [14] that enforces approximately the
Heisenberg uncertainty relation when applied in the form

VH (˜rij , ˜pij) = V(˜rij , ˜pij, ξH , αH , µei)

(6)

where

M pi − Pj
1 + M

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

.

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

˜rij = |ri − Rj|,

˜pij =

(7)

Here, µei = M/(1 + M ) ≈ 1 is the reduced mass and ˜rij
and ˜pij are the absolute values of relative distance and
momentum, respectively.

The “hardness parameter” αH governs how strictly
the uncertainty relation ˜rij ˜pij ≥ ξH is fulﬁlled. Big val-
ues of αH enforce it severely but also make the diﬀeren-
tial equations of motion stiﬀ (which is numerically un-
favorable). We have chosen αH = 2. The parameter ξH
may be adjusted in such a way that the known essential
ground state features of the system under study (e.g.,
the total energy or the ionization potentials) are prop-
erly mimicked.

Although we neglect the spin in the current study it
is worth noticing that the Pauli principle could be mod-
eled in a similar way so that an atomic shell structure is
obtained [15,16].

By solving the Hamilton equations of motion cor-
responding to (1) with a non-vanishing but small fric-
tion ν, the “mother conﬁguration” of atoms or molecules
with only a few electrons can be easily found. For “big-
ger” atoms more advanced minimization routines have to
be employed [15,16]. Note that contrary to other classi-
cal trajectory Monte Carlo (CTMC) methods where the
classical atom is modeled by an ensemble of electrons
moving on Kepler orbits, in our case the groundstate is
stationary, that is ˙r = ˙p = 0 but, owing to the Heisen-
berg potential, p 6= 0.

(III) Finally, the entire cluster is build up by tak-
ing Na randomly rotated electronic mother conﬁgura-
tions and attaching them to the naked ions. The ion
positions are known from the ﬁrst step. Since now all
electrons “see” each other (as well as all the other ions),
another propagation with non-vanishing friction ν is re-
quired. During this step the electrons orient themselves
in an energetically favorable way while the ions hardly
move due to their huge mass M . Note that the cluster
structure obtained in this way is not completely self-
consistent because the ions are still sitting at the po-
sitions determined in step (I) where just the Lennard-
Jones potential was eﬀective. In a fully self-consistent
procedure the semi-classical cluster should be assembled
without a Lennard-Jones potential at all. However, this
is numerically much more demanding and may lead to
an ion distribution which is physically less reasonable
than the Lennard-Jones structure after step (I).

We call the cluster conﬁguration obtained after step
(III) the “cluster mother conﬁguration.” In order to ob-
tain meaningful results concerning the ionization dy-
namics of the isolated atom or the cluster in a laser
pulse, an ensemble of atoms and clusters had to be sim-
ulated. The members of such an ensemble were con-
structed by randomly rotating the cluster mother con-
ﬁguration. While this did not change the total energy

Small rare gas clusters in XUV laser pulses

3

of the cluster or single atom, of course, the orientation
with respect to the laser polarization axis changed, and,
hence, so did the ionization dynamics. As expected, the
ensemble-averaged entities converged more rapidly with
respect to the time step for the integration of the equa-
tions of motion (a fourth order Runge-Kutta scheme was
used) as the individual particle trajectories did. Conver-
gence of the latter may be accelerated by reducing αH
or introducing a “soft-core” smoothing parameter for
the electron-electron and electron-ion interaction, that
is, e.g., replacing |rj − rl|−1 by [(rj − rl)2 + aee]−1/2
since all this loosens the requirement of small time steps
during close encounters of the particles.

3 Results

We simulated small Xe clusters in intense laser ﬁelds.
Each semi-classical Xe atom had Z = 3 active electrons
that were supposed to mimic three of the six 5p electrons
of Xe. Treating more than three electrons per atom is not
necessary for the modest laser intensities we consider in
this work.

The other simulation parameters were chosen M =
131 × 1836, D = 0.04, ζ = 1, Rmin = 8.0, αH = 2,
ξH = 1.75. The “mother conﬁguration,” i.e., a single Xe
atom, consists of the three active electrons sitting on
the corners of an equilateral triangle and the ion sitting
in the center. The ion-electron distance was 1.6 for all
three electrons. The total energy of the conﬁguration
was E1 = −2.30 while the three ionization potentials
were I1 = 0.32, I2 = 0.80, and I3 = 1.18. The ﬁrst
three ionization potentials for the real Xe atom are 0.45,
0.77, and 1.18. The parameter ξH = 1.75 was chosen
to optimize I2 and I3 since we are interested in multiple
ionization and are particularly interested in the intensity
regime where the removal of the ﬁrst electron is given for
granted for both the isolated atom and the atoms inside
the cluster but higher charge states only occur in the
cluster. Spin was neglected for if we also introduced a
Pauli-blocking potential VP of the form (5) into (1) we
would have modeled the Li atom (with its closed s-shell
plus a loosely bound valence electron) rather than three
of the six 5p electrons of Xe.

3.1 Isolated atom

In Fig. 1 the charge state of the isolated Xe atom is
shown vs the peak laser intensity of a T = 1764 (≈ 42 fs)
laser pulse. The envelope of the electric ﬁeld was linearly
ramped up (and down) over Tr = 331 (≈ 8 fs) while it
was constant for the rest of the pulse. The two laser
frequencies ωl = 0.057 (corresponding to 800 nm) and
ωh = 8ωl (corresponding to 100 nm) were used.

As expected, for the same pulse duration and laser
intensity the higher laser frequency ionizes the isolated

Fig. 1 Charge state of the isolated model Xe atom after
a 42 fs laser pulse of diﬀerent peak intensity. Low frequency
case: ωl = 0.057, + symbols; high frequency case: ωh = 8ωl,
* symbols. Multiplication of the laser intensity by 3.5 × 1016
yields the laser intensity in the common units Wcm−2.

atom more eﬃciently than the lower one. For laser in-
tensities I < 0.001 (≈ 3.5 × 1013 Wcm−2) it is unlikely
to observe charge states higher than the singly ionized
Xe. This is in agreement with the results of Wabnitz et
al. [11] where at an intensity ≈ 2 × 1013 Wcm−2 for 12.7-
eV photons (corresponding to 8.2 ωl) and ≈ 100 fs pulse
durations also higher charge states than Xe+ were found
to be absent for isolated atoms.

3.2 Small cluster

In Fig. 2 the unperturbed Xe model cluster consist-
ing of Na = 27 triply charged ions (black) plus the
ZNa = 3 × 27 electrons (gray) is shown. The ion struc-
ture is in agreement with Refs. [12,13]. The electrons
roughly maintain their triangular setup with respect to
their parent ion. However, the triangles are in general
not equilateral anymore due to the interaction with the
neighboring atoms.

The total energy of the unperturbed cluster amounts
to E27 = −63.3 < NaE1 = −62.1, i.e., the calculated
cluster conﬁguration is indeed energetically more favor-
able than Na isolated atoms. The binding energy per
atom is 0.04 which is a reasonable value for rare gas
clusters.

From Fig. 1 one can infer that for laser intensities
I less than 0.001 no charge states > 1 are expected in
the case of isolated Xe atoms. Hence it is interesting to
investigate whether higher charge states are observed for
clusters. In Fig. 3 the results for the two laser frequen-
cies ωl = 0.057, ωh = 8ωl and the two laser intensities
I = 4 × 10−4 ( ˆE = 0.02), I = 1.6 × 10−3 ( ˆE = 0.04)
are collected for both the isolated atom and the cluster

4

z

(a.u.)

y

(a.u.)

x (a.u.)

Fig. 2 Unperturbed model Xe cluster conﬁguration for
Na = 27, Z = 3, and Rmin = 8.0. Ions are drawn in black,
electrons in gray. Three projections are also shown.

consisting of Na = 27 atoms. The laser pulse duration
and shape was the same as in Sec. 3.1.

The inner ionization of the cluster at the high fre-
quency ωh (indicated by “inner (hf)” in the plots) is
relatively high for both laser intensities. The inner ion-
ization was calculated by counting the number of elec-
trons that are more than 8 a.u. away from their initial
position and therefore must have left their parent ion. If
recombination plays an important role inner ionization
is overestimated by this method. However, by looking
at the particle trajectories we inferred that it is unlikely
that an electron which left its parent ion is permanently
trapped by another ion.

Inner ionization is rather low for Il and ωl. This is
because an important prerequisite is missing for these
parameters, namely the eﬃcient removal of the outer-
most electron. It is clear that the very early inner ion-
ization dynamics of clusters is the same as in the isolated
atom case since there is not yet a strong inﬂuence of the
other ions at that stage. In fact, the single atom ion-
ization is small for Il and ωl (see Fig. 3a, dashed curve
close to the bottom) so that the inner ionization of the
cluster also remains quite modest. This is diﬀerent for
the higher laser intensity Ih (Fig. 3b) where the isolated
atom looses the outermost electron. Consequently, in the
case of a cluster a space charge builds up that yields fur-
ther inner ionization (“ionization ignition,” [17]).

Outer ionization (calculated by counting the number
of electrons which are farther away than r = 30) is al-
ways smaller than the corresponding ionization of the
isolated atom for the parameters in Fig. 3 (see dotted
curves). This means that a signiﬁcant fraction of elec-
trons that were removed from their parent ions do not
make it to leave the cluster as a whole. This can be at-

D. Bauer

Fig. 3 Number of removed electrons per ion for the two laser
−4 ( ˆE = 0.02) and (b) Ih = 1.6 ×
intensities (a) Il = 4 × 10
−3 ( ˆE = 0.04). The results for the isolated atom (dashed
10
curves), the cluster outer ionization (dotted), and the cluster
inner ionization (full) are plotted for the two frequencies ωl =
0.057 (lf) and ωh = 8ωl (hf).

tributed to the low quiver energies of the electrons inside
the cluster so that no collective electron dynamics sets
in that could help to absorb additional laser energy and
to overcome the strong backholding ﬁeld of the cluster
ions [18]. Note that the ponderomotive energies for the
parameters in Fig. 3 all lie between 4.8 × 10−4 and 0.12
and are thus neither large compared to the photon en-
ergy nor large compared to the binding energies.

In Fig. 4 the total energy (per atom) E(t) during the
course of the laser pulse is plotted vs time. The laser
and cluster parameters were the same as in Fig. 3. The
net absorbed energy (per atom) |E(T ) − E(0)| is for both
frequencies and laser intensities greater for the cluster
than for the isolated atom. As already mentioned in the
discussion of the ionization degrees shown in Fig. 3, the
absorbed energy is low for Il and ωl owing to the rather
small probability for single ionization. For the higher in-
tensity Ih instead, slightly more energy is absorbed at
the low frequency ωl. This matches with the increased

Small rare gas clusters in XUV laser pulses

5

Fig. 5 Sample trajectories of electrons which at the end of
the laser pulse are more than 30 a.u. away from the cluster
center. The absolute value of the distance to the electron’s
initial position, |r − r0|, is plotted for the four diﬀerent cases
(a) Il, ωl, (b) Il, ωh, (c) Ih, ωl, and (d) Ih, ωh.

At higher frequency (b) it is seen from the erratic
motion for 8 < |r − r0| < 23 that the electrons experi-
ence several collisions with the cluster ions before they
leave the cluster. Moreover, the electrons are temporar-
ily trapped by other cluster ions.

In plot (c), for twice the laser intensity and the low
frequency, there are only a few collisions despite the fact
that inner ionization is huge. However, it is expected that
if the quiver velocity is comparable or greater than the
thermal velocity the collision frequency decreases with
increasing quiver energy (see, e.g., [19]), and the case
(c), in fact, is the one with the highest quiver energy in
Fig. 5. For high frequency and high intensity (d) there
are still more collisions than in the low frequency case
but less than for lower intensity.

From the trajectories we deduce that the eﬃcient
absorption of laser energy, as it is seen in Fig. 4, is
due to collisional heating or, in other words, inverse
bremsstrahlung. Similar conclusions were drawn recently
by other authors using diﬀerent methods [20,21]. The
increased inner ionization is due to (i) the reduced ion-
ization potential because of the neighboring ions, (ii) the
ﬁeld generated inside the cluster by all other ions, and
(iii) collisions. All three mechanisms are included self-
consistently in our numerical treatment which, unfortu-
nately, implies that it is diﬃcult to separate the diﬀerent
contributions and to identify their relative importance.
Although high charge states are generated inside the
cluster during the course of the laser pulse it is not yet
clear which charge states would arrive at the time-of-
ﬂight (TOF) detector in a real experiment. Upon the
expansion of the cluster the electrons cool and some
of them recombine, leading to a lower average charge
state. Therefore we simulated the cluster disintegration
as well. Since the cluster expansion happens on a pi-

Fig. 4 Total energy vs time for the cluster (full curves) and
the isolated atom (broken curves). Laser and cluster param-
eters were the same as in Fig. 3.

outer ionization at low frequencies (cf. Fig. 3b). More-
over, the kinetic energy of the freed electrons depends
on the laser frequency as well.

In order to understand the absorption mechanism at
short wavelengths it is worth to look at sample electron
trajectories. In Fig. 5 one sees how electrons that at the
end of the laser pulse are more than 30 a.u. away from
the cluster center (and therefore contribute very likely
to outer ionization) manage to escape from the cluster.
As long as the distance from the initial position, |r − r0|,
is less than ≈ 8 a.u., the electrons can be considered
bound with respect to their parent ion. Zig-zag motion
between distances from ≈ 8 to ≈ 23 is due to collisions
with other ions while electrons at distances > 23 left the
entire cluster.

For long wavelength and low intensity (a) one can see
that the few electrons that made it to leave the cluster
did so without collisions. This is because of the low prob-
ability for the removal of even the outermost electrons:
most of the atoms remain neutral so that it is unlikely
that the few freed electrons encounter an ion.

6

s
n
o
i
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

E=0.02
ω
=0.456

(a)

E=0.04
ω
=0.456

(b)

Xe+

s
n
o
i
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

++Xe

Xe+

++

Xe

Number of bound electrons

Number of bound electrons

Fig. 6 Charge state distributions after the expansion of the
cluster for ωh and (a) Il, (b) Ih.

cosecond time scale we reduced the ion mass to M = 50
in order to make the simulation feasible [22]. While this
mass reduction changes the time scale of the cluster ex-
pansion it should not aﬀect too strongly the ﬁnal energy
and charge state distribution as long as m/M ≪ 1.

The result is shown in Fig. 6 for the high frequency
ωh and the two intensities Il and Ih. In Fig. 6a it is seen
that despite the plasma cooling a signiﬁcant amount of
Xe2+ ions survive the cluster expansion. In the case of
the higher intensity Ih the doubly charged Xe ion is the
most likely charge state and even triply ionized Xe atoms
can be observed.

Comparison of Fig. 6a with Fig. 1 in [11] (TOF spec-
trum for N = 2–20) suggests reasonable agreement.
However, a precise comparison with the experiment [11]
is not straightforward because of the not exactly known
experimental laser intensity, the varying sensitivity of
the TOF spectrometer with respect to diﬀerent charge
states, and focus eﬀects.

4 Conclusions

Molecular dynamics was used to investigate small rare
gas clusters in short XUV and 800 nm laser pulses. Inner
ionization was treated explicitly. In order to render clas-
sical, stable multi-electron atoms possible, a momentum-
dependent potential that accounts for the Heisenberg un-
certainty principle was introduced. Higher charge states
in clusters than in the isolated atoms were observed, in
accordance with experimental results. The mechanism
underlying the eﬃcient absorption of XUV laser energy
was found to be inverse bremsstrahlung.

The study of bigger clusters consisting of several hun-
dreds or even thousands of atoms would be desirable.
However, in order to keep the numerical simulations fea-
sible one then has to give up the explicit treatment of
the inneratomic dynamics.

D. Bauer

Acknowledgments

The author thanks A. Macchi for proofreading and
valuable suggestions. This work was supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and by the INFM Ad-
vanced Research Project CLUSTERS. The permission to
run our codes on the Linux cluster at PC2 in Paderborn,
Germany, is gratefully acknowledged.

References

1. Y. L. Shao, T. Ditmire, J. W. G. Tisch, E. Springate, J.
P. Marangos, and M. H. R. Hutchinson, Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3343 (1996).

2. T. Ditmire, J. Tisch, E. Springate, M. Mason, N. Hay, R.
Smith, J. Marangos, and M. Hutchinson, Nature 386, 54
(1997).

3. T. Ditmire, T. Donnelly, A. M. Rubenchik, R. W. Falcone,

and M. D. Perry, Phys. Rev. A53, 3379 (1996).

4. E. Springate, N. Hay, J. W. G. Tisch, M. B. Mason, T.
Ditmire, M. H. R. Hutchinson, and J. P. Marangos, Phys.
Rev. A61, 063201 (2000).

5. A. McPherson, B. D. Thompson, A. B. Borisov, K. Boyer,

and C. K. Rhodes, Nature 370, 631 (1994).

6. T. Ditmire, P. K. Patel, R. A. Smith, J. S. Wark, S.
J. Rose, D. Milathianaki, R. S. Marjoribanks, and M. H.
R. Hutchinson, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 31, 2825
(1998).

7. S. Ter-Avetisyan, M. Schn¨urer, H. Stiel, U. Vogt, W.
Radloﬀ, W. Karpow, W. Sandner, and P. V. Nickles, Phys.
Rev. E 64, 036404 (2001).

8. J. Zweiback, R. A. Smith, T. E. Cowan, G. Hays, K. B.
Wharton, V. P. Yanovsky, and T. Ditmire, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 2634 (2000).

9. V. P. Krainov and M. B. Smirnov, Phys. Rep. 370, 237

(2002).

10. Jan Posthumus (ed.) Molecules and Clusters in Intense
Laser Fields (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
2001).

11. H. Wabnitz, L. Bittner, A. R. B. de Castro, R.
D¨ohrmann, P. G¨urtler, T. Laarmann, W. Laasch, J. Schulz,
A. Swiderski, K. van Haeften, T. M¨oller, B. Faatz, A. Fa-
teev, J. Feldhaus, C. Gerth, U. Hahn, E. Saldin, E. Schnei-
dmiller, K. Sytchev, K. Tiedke, R. Treusch, and M. Yurkov,
Nature 420, 482 (2002).

12. David J. Wales, Jonathan P. K. Doye, J. Phys. Chem. A

13. http://brian.ch.cam.ac.uk/
14. C. L. Kirschbaum and L. Wilets, Phys. Rev. A21, 834

15. James S. Cohen, Phys. Rev. A51, 266 (1995); Phys. Rev.

101, 5111 (1997).

(1980).

A57, 4964 (1998).

16. James S. Cohen, Phys. Rev. A62, 022512 (2000).
17. C. Rose-Petruck, K. J. Schafer, K. R. Wilson, and C. P.

J. Barty, Phys. Rev. A55, 1182 (1997).

18. D. Bauer and A. Macchi, Phys. Rev. A68, 033201 (2003).
19. P. Mulser, F. Cornolti, E. B´esuelle, and R. Schneider,

Phys. Rev. E63, 016406 (2000).

20. Robin Santra and Chris H. Greene, physics/0307058.
21. Christian Siedschlag and Jan M. Rost, physics/0310123.
22. Note that our numerical timesteps had to resolve the

inneratomic dynamics.

