3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optical response of small magnesium clusters

Ilia A. Solov’yov,∗ Andrey V. Solov’yov,† and Walter Greiner

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, J.W. Goethe Universit¨at,

Robert-Mayer str. 10, D-60054 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

We predict the strong enhancement in the photoabsorption of small M g clusters

in the region of 4-5 eV due to the resonant excitation of the plasmon oscillations of

cluster electrons. The photoabsorption spectra for neutral M g clusters consisting of

up to N = 11 atoms have been calculated using ab initio framework based on the time

dependent density functional theory (TDDFT). The nature of predicted resonances

has been elucidated by comparison of the results of the ab initio calculations with the

results of the classical Mie theory. The splitting of the plasmon resonances caused

by the cluster deformation is analysed. The reliability of the used calculation scheme

has been proved by performing the test calculation for a number of sodium clusters

and the comparison of the results obtained with the results of other methods and

experiment.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Optical spectroscopy is a powerful instrument for investigation of the electronic and

ionic structure of clusters as well as their thermal and dynamical properties. During the

last decades these issues have been intensively investigated both experimentally by means of

photodepletion and photodetachment spectroscopy and theoretically by employing the time-

dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), conﬁguration interaction (CI) and random-

phase approximation (RPA) (for review see [1, 2] and references therein). These methods

have been used in conjunction with either jelium model [2] deﬁned by a Hamiltonian, which

∗Permanent address: A. F. Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Polytechnich-

eskaya 26, 194021 St. Petersburg, Russia ; Email address: ilia@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de
†Permanent address: A. F. Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Polytechnich-

eskaya 26, 194021 St. Petersburg, Russia; Email address: solovyov@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de

2

treats the electrons in a cluster in the usual quantum mechanical way, but approximates
the ﬁeld of the ionic core treating it as a uniform positively charged background, or with ab
initio calculations of the electronic and ionic cluster structure, where all or at least valence

electrons in the system are treated accurately.

During the last years, numerous theoretical and experimental investigations have been

devoted to the study of optical response properties of alkali metal clusters. The plasmon

resonances formation in Na, K and Li clusters has been studied both theoretically and

experimentally (see [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and references therein). Some attention was also devoted to

the splitting and broadening of the plasmon resonances (see citations above). The mentioned

metal elements belong to the ﬁrst group of the periodic table, i.e. possess one s-valence

electron.

The situation diﬀers for clusters of the alkali-earth metals of the second group of the

periodic table, such as Be, Mg, Ca. Study of these clusters is of particular interest, because

they exhibit a transition from the weak van der Waals bonding being the characteristic

of the diatomic molecule to the metallic bonding present in the bulk. Thus, signiﬁcant

attention was paid to the magnesium clusters. Various properties of Mg clusters, such

as their structure, the binding energy, ionization potentials, HOMO-LUMO gap, average

distances, and their evolution with the cluster size have been investigated theoretically (see

[6, 7, 8] and references therein). Recently, the mass spectrum of Mg clusters was recorded [9]

and the sequence of magic numbers was determined. The investigation of optical response

of small Mg clusters has not been performed so far in spite of the fact that it should carry

a lot of useful information about the dynamic properties of magnesium clusters.

In this paper we predict the strong enhancement in the photoabsorption of small Mg

clusters in the region of 4-5 eV due to the resonant excitation of the plasmon oscillations of
the cluster electrons. Using all electron ab initio TDDFT we calculate the spectra for cluster

structures with up to 11 atoms possessing the lowest energy. The geometries of these clusters

were calculated using all electron DFT methods and described in our recent work [6]. In

this work we focus on the formation of the plasmon resonances in magnesium clusters. We

elucidate their nature by comparing our results with the results of the classical Mie theory

and analyse the splitting of the plasmon resonances caused by the cluster deformation.

II. THEORETICAL METHOD

3

Theoretical methods used in our calculations are based on the density functional theory

and many-body-perturbation theory.

In the present work we use the gradient-corrected

Becke-type three-parameter exchange functional [10] paired with the gradient-corrected Lee,

Yang and Parr correlation functional (B3LYP) [11], as well as with the gradient-corrected

Perdew-Wang 91 correlation functional (B3PW91) [12]. We do not present the explicit forms

of these functionals, because they are somewhat lengthy, and refer to the original papers

[10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Our calculations have been performed with the use of the Gaussian

98 software package [15]. We have utilized the 6-311+G(d) basis set of primitive Gaussian

functions to expand the cluster orbitals [13, 15].

The absorption of light by small metal spheres has been investigated theoretically by Mie

long ago (see e.g. [16]). For particles with the diameter being considerably smaller than the

wavelength, the absorption cross section based on the Drude dielectric function reads as:

(ω2
where ω0 is the surface-plasma frequency of a sphere with Ne free electrons, ω is the photon

+ ω2Γ2

0 −

(1)

σ(ω) =

4πNee2
mec

ω2Γ
2
ω2)

frequency, Γ represents the width of the resonance, me is the electron mass, e is its charge and

c is the light velocity. Equation (1) assumes that the dipole oscillator strengths are exhausted

by the surface plasma resonance at ω0. In metal clusters this resonance corresponds to the

collective oscillation of the spherical valence-electron cloud against the positive background.

Using the sum rule one can easily show (see e.g. [16]) that ω0 =

Nee2/meα, where α

is the static polarizability of the cluster. For a classical metal sphere, α = Ner3

s, where rs is

p

the Wigner-Seitz radius. With rs = 4.0 a.u. for Na and rs = 2.66 for Mg [17], one derives

the classical surface-plasma-resonance energies ωN a

0 = 3.40 eV and ωM g

0 = 6.27 eV for Na

and Mg respectively.

For small metal clusters the photoabsorption pattern diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the Mie

prediction. In these systems the plasmon resonance energy is smaller as compared to the

metal sphere case. The lowering of the plasmon energies in small metal clusters occurs

because of the spill out eﬀect according to which the electron density is spilled out of the

cluster, increasing its volume and polarizability. For example, for spherical Na8 and Na20

clusters the average static polarizability is 796.840 (a.u) and 1964.484 (a.u.) respectively

[14]. Thus, the plasmon resonance energies, ω0, read as 2.73 and 2.75 (eV) for Na8 and Na20

respectively. Beside the lowering of the plasmon resonance energy in small metal clusters

the photoabsorption pattern is splitted. This fragmentation arises mainly due to the cluster

deformation. With the use of the sum rule, equation (1) can be generalized and written in

the following form (see e.g. [16]):

σ(ω) =

n

4πe2
mec

Xi=1

(ω2

i −

fiω2Γi
2
ω2)

+ ω2Γ2
i

where ωi are the transition energies, fi and Γi are the corresponding oscillator strengths and

widths, n is the total number of the resonant transitions.

In the case of the triaxial cluster deformation the photoabsorption cross section possesses

the three peak structure. The splitting of the plasmon resonance into three peaks can easily

be understood assuming the ellipsoidal form of the cluster surface. Within the framework of

the deformed jelium model the ionic density is considered to be uniform within the volume
a2 + y2
conﬁned by the ellipsoid surface deﬁned by x2
c2 = 1. If one assumes that the electron
density ﬁlls in entirely in the interior of the ionic ellipsoid, one ﬁnds the following dipole

b2 + z2

plasmon energies corresponding to the electron density oscillations in three directions x, y,

z, (for more details see [18]):

4

(2)

(3)

ωx = ω0

1 +

√3tanγ)

(1

−

ωy = ω0

1 +

(1 + √3tanγ)

(cid:20)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

δcosγ
5
δcosγ
5
2δcosγ
5

(cid:21)

ωz = ω0

1
(cid:20)

−

Where ω0 is the classical Mie frequency being the average of ωx, ωy and ωz, δ and γ are
the deformation parameters deﬁned by equations: δcosγ = 3
4

2c2−a2−b2
a2+b2+c2 , tanγ = √3 a2−b2

2c2−a2−b2 .

Note that in the axially symmetric case one derives γ = 0 and ωx = ωy.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In ﬁgure 1, we present the oscillator strengths for the dipole transitions calculated for the

most stable cluster isomers of Mg2-Mg11. Cluster geometries are shown in the insets to the

5

FIG. 1:

Photoabsorption cross section calculated for M g clusters with N

11 using the

≤

B3P W 91/6

311 + G(d) method. Vertical solid lines show the oscillator strengths for the op-

−

tically allowed transitions. Their values are shown in the left hand side of the plots. The right

hand side of each plot shows the scale for the corresponding photoabsorption cross section. Cluster

geometries calculated in [6] are shown in the insets. The label near each cluster image shows the

sum of the oscillator strengths and the excitation energy range considered. By solid and dotted

arrows we show the adiabatic and vertical ionization potentials respectively, calculated in [6].

6

ﬁgure. They were calculated and discussed in [6].

For sodium [2], the plasmon resonance arises for the clusters with less than 10 atoms.

Thus, it is natural to expect that for the magnesium clusters with N

10 the formation of

≤

the plasmon resonance should be clearly seen.

Calculating the oscillator strengths fi and substituting the found values in equation 2,

we obtain the photoabsorption cross sections for magnesium clusters plotted in ﬁgure 1.

In this calculation we have used the width Γ0 = 0.4 eV, which is the average width for

Na clusters at room temperature [2].

In this paper we do not calculate the excitation

line widths for Mg clusters and do not investigate the line widths temperature dependence.

These interesting problems are beyond the scope of the present paper and deserve a separate

careful consideration.

In the photoabsorption spectra for Mg2 and Mg3 one can identify the strong resonances

in the vicinity of 4 eV, which can be interpreted as the plasmon resonances splitted due to

the cluster deformation. Below, we discuss this splitting in more detail. For larger clusters,

the plasmon resonance energy increases slowly and evolves towards the bulk value, 6.26 eV,

see dots in ﬁgure 2. The lowering of the plasmon resonance energy in small Mg clusters as

compared to its bulk value occurs because of the spill out eﬀect.

There are two main factors, which determine the resonance pattern of the photoabsorption

spectra for magnesium clusters: collective plasmon excitations of the delocalized electrons

and the resonant transitions of the electrons bound in a single magnesium atom. In the

excitation energy range considered, the photoabsorption spectrum of a single Mg atom
4p(1P 0
exhibits the two strong resonant excitations: 3s(1S0)
1 )

1 ) and 3s(1S0)

3p(1P 0

→

→

with the energies (oscillation strengths) 4.346 (1.8) and 6.118 (0.2) eV respectively [19]. The

TD/B3PW91/6-311+G(d) method gives the following energies and the oscillator strengths

for these lines: 4.225 (1.63) and 5.765 (0.29) eV, which are in the reasonable agreement
with the data given in [19]. The 3p(1P 0

1 ) line can be easily identiﬁed in the photoabsorption

spectrum for Mg2. In terms of the plasmon resonance excitations, this line corresponds to

the oscillations of the electronic density perpendicular to to the cluster axis, while the strong

line in the vicinity of 3 eV corresponds to the collective electron oscillations along the cluster
axis. For larger clusters, the 3p(1P 0
excitation occurring at the close energy. The situation is diﬀerent for the 4p(1P 0

1 ) line is strongly coupled with the plasmon resonance

1 ) line. Due

to its higher energy, this excitation line does not couple that strongly with the plasmon

7

FIG. 2: Size dependence of the plasmon resonance energies ωx, ωy, ωz: x (upper triangles), y

(lower triangles) and z (left triangle). Circles are the Mie-frequencies ω0 being the average of ωx,

ωy and ωz.

resonance and can be identiﬁed in the photoabsorption spectra for the Mg2, Mg3, Mg6 and

Mg7 clusters in addition to the plasmon resonances. For larger clusters (e.g. Mg8, Mg9,
Mg10), due to the growth of their plasmon resonance energies, the 4p(1P 0

1 ) line becomes

more and more of the plasmon resonance type.

For many clusters the plasmon resonance is splitted. This splitting arises mainly due to

the cluster deformation. In order to illustrate this eﬀect we plot in ﬁgure 2 the energies ωx,

ωy, ωz of the strongest resonances versus the cluster size. Using equation (3), we determine

the deformation parameters δ and γ and present them in ﬁgure 3. One can distinguish four

diﬀerent cases: i) δ = γ = 0 the cluster is spherical (see N = 4); ii) δ < 0, γ = 0 the cluster

is oblate (see N = 3, 7, 9); iii) δ > 0, γ = 0 the cluster is prolate (see N = 2, 5, 10, 11); iv)

δ

= 0, γ

= 0 the cluster is triaxially deformed (see N = 6, 8). This analysis shows that most

of the clusters considered are close to the axially symmetric form, although some clusters

(Mg6 and Mg8) are triaxially deformed. Note that many additional satellite resonances

6
6
8

FIG. 3: Cluster deformation parameters versus the cluster size. The labels indicate the cluster

deformation type.

appear in the photoabsorption spectra. The additional satellite lines are often the result of

higher order cluster deformations. Thus, they are beyond the ellipsoidal model.

To show the connection between the plasmon resonance splitting and the cluster defor-

mation we have determined the plasmon resonance energies for Mg2 and Mg3 from the

Mie theory via the static dipole polarizabilities of the clusters and compared them with the

TDDFT result. The principle values of cluster polarizability tensor αxx, αyy,αzz are 130.386,

130.386, 246.769 (a.u) for Mg2 and 282.412, 282.412, 159.757 (a.u.) for Mg3 respectively.

Thus, the plasmon resonance energies ωx, ωy and ωz read as 4.82, 4.82, 3.39 (eV) for Mg2

and 3.8, 3.8, 5.46 (eV) for Mg3 respectively. These values are very close to those obtained

directly from the photoabsorption spectra analysis and presented in ﬁgure 2. This fact

independently proves that the plasmon resonance is already formed in such small systems.

In insets to ﬁgure 1, we present the sum of the oscillator strengths and the excitation

energy range considered for each cluster. The sum of the oscillator strengths characterises

the valence electrons delocalization rate. Note, that for many clusters it is close to the

9

total number of valence electrons in the system. For some clusters the total sum of the

oscillator strengths is signiﬁcantly smaller than the number of the valence electrons (see, for

example, Mg10, Mg11). To increase the sum of the oscillator strengths one has to calculate

the photoabsorption spectra up to the higher excitation energies. The calculation of cluster

excited states becomes an increasingly diﬃcult problem with the growth of the cluster size,

because of the rapid growth of the number of possible excited states in the system.

In

this paper we focus on the investigation of the plasmon resonances in small Mg clusters,

manifesting themselves in the energy range about 4-5 eV as it is clear from our discussion.

Therefore, for clusters with N > 8, we have calculated the photoabsorption spectra only

up to the excitation energies of about 6 eV, which is signiﬁcant for the elucidation of the

plasmon resonance structure and at the same time it does not acquire substantial computer

power.

Photoabsorption spectra for sodium clusters have been earlier investigated in a large

number of papers. There were performed experimental measurements, as well as theoretical
calculations [1, 2] involving ab initio and model approaches. In order to check the level of

accuracy of our calculation method, in ﬁgure 4, we compare the photoabsorption spectra

for a few selected neutral and singly charged sodium clusters, calculated with the use of

the methods described above, with the results of experimental measurements and other
calculations. In ﬁgure 4, the experimentally measured photoabsorption spectra for Na+

3−5,

Na4−8 are plotted by dots. The results of our TDDFT calculation performed with the use
of the B3LYP functional are shown by solid lines. The CI results of Bonaˇci´c-Kouteck´y et al

[1, 2] are shown by dashed lines.

In [14] we demonstrated that the B3LYP functional is well applicable for the description

of sodium clusters. Thus, we used it for the photoabsorption spectra computations. The

comparison shown in ﬁgure 4 demonstrates that our calculation method is a good alternative

to the CI method, and our results are in a good agreement with the experimental data.

The photoabsorption spectrum of Na5 has a prominent peak at the energy about 2.3

eV, which can be identiﬁed as a Mie plasmon resonance. This peak is also seen in the

photoabsorption spectra of Na6, Na7 and Na8. The plasmon resonance energy for these

clusters is smaller than the bulk value, 3.4 eV, because of the spill out eﬀect. As it is seen

from ﬁgure 4, the resonance energy evolves slowly towards the bulk limit with increasing
cluster size. For the Na+

5 , the plasmon peak is hardly to identify in the

4 and Na+

3 , Na+

10

FIG. 4: Photoabsorption cross section calculated for N a+

3−5, N a4−8 using the B3LYP functional

(solid lines). Vertical lines show the oscillator strengths for the optically allowed transitions.

Cluster geometries calculated in [14] are shown in the insets. The label near each cluster image

shows the sum of the oscillator strengths, the excitation energy range considered and the line width.

We compare our results with experimentally measured photoabsorption spectra [1, 2] (dots) and

with the results of previous ab initio CI calculation [1, 2] (dashed lines).

11

distribution of oscillator strengths, which means that the number of delocalized electrons in

these clusters turns out to be insuﬃcient for the formation of the plasmon resonance in this

system, see ﬁgure 4.

Note, that often the plasmon peaks for sodium clusters are splitted due to the cluster

axial quadrupole deformation. Using equations (3), we have calculated the deformation

parameters for axially symmetric Na6 and Na7. The result reads as δ =

0.55 and

0.34

−

−

respectively. The deformation parameter γ vanishes for both clusters. The axially symmetric

jelium model leads to the following values of δ [20]: δJM =

0.48 and

0.24 for Na6 and

−

−

Na7 respectively. Comparison shows that the splitting of the plasmon resonances can be

explained by cluster deformation.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper we predict the enhancement of the photoabsorption spectra for small Mg

clusters in the vicinity of plasmon resonance. The photoabsorption spectra for neutral Mg
clusters consisting of up to N = 11 atoms have been calculated using ab initio framework

based on the time dependent density functional theory. The nature of predicted resonances
have been elucidated by comparison of the results of the ab initio calculations with the results

of the classical Mie theory. The splitting of the plasmon resonances caused by the cluster

deformation is analysed. The reliability of the used calculation scheme has been proved by

performing the test calculation for a number of sodium clusters and the comparison of the

results obtained with the results of other methods and experiment. The calculation of the

photoabsorption spectra for larger clusters requires much more computer power and is left

open for further investigations.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge support from the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant

No 03-02-16415-a), Russian Academy of Sciences (grant No 44) and the Studienstiftung des

deutschen Volkes.

12

[1] H. Haberland (ed.), Clusters of Atoms and Molecules, Theory, Experiment and Clusters of

Atoms (Springer Series in Chemical Physics, Berlin 52, 1994)

[2] W. Ekardt (ed.), Metal Clusters (Wiley, New York ,1999)

[3] J.-P. Connerade and A.V. Solov’yov, Phys. Rev. A 66, 013207 (2002).

[4] W. Klenig, V.O. Nesterenko, P.G. Reinhard and L. Serra, Eur. Phys. J. D 4, 343 (1998).

[5] M. Moseler, H. H¨akkinen and U. Landman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 053401 (2001)

[6] A. Lyalin, I.A. Solov’yov, A.V. Solov’yov and W. Greiner, Phys. Rev. A. 67, 063203 (2003)

[7] P.H. Acioli and J. Jellinek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 213402 (2002).

[8] J. Jellinek and P.H. Acioli, J. Phys. Chem. A 106, 10919 (2002).

[9] Th. Diederich T. D¨oppner, J. Braune, J. Tiggesb¨aumker and K.-H. Meiwes-Broer, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 86, 4807 (2001).

[10] A.D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A 38, 30098 (1988)

[11] C. Lee, W. Yang and R.G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B 37, 785 (1988)

[12] K. Burke, J.P. Perdew and Y. Wang, in Electronic Density Functional Theory: Recent Progress

and New Directions, Ed. J.F. Dobson, G. Vignale and M.P. Das (1998) (Plenum)

[13] James B. Foresman and Æleen Frisch Exploring Chemistry with Electronic Structure Methods

(Pittsburgh, PA: Gaussian Inc, 1996)

[14] I.A. Solov’yov, A.V. Solov’yov and W. Greiner, Phys. Rev. A 65, 053203 (2002).

[15] M.J. Frisch and et al Gaussian 98 (Revision A.9) Gaussian Inc. Pittsburgh PA (1998)

[16] U. Kreibig and M. Vollmer, Optical Properties of Metal Clusters (Springer Series in Materials

Science, Berlin 25, 1995)

[17] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 7th edn., (John Wiley and Sons, New York,

[18] E. Lipparini, S. Stringari, Z.Phys.D 18, 193 (1991)

[19] A.A. Radzig and B.M. Smirnov, Parameters of atoms and itomic ions (Energoatomizdat,

[20] A. Matveentsev, A. Lyalin, I. Solov’yov, A. Solov’yov and W. Greiner, Int. J. of Mod. Phys.

1996)

Moscow, 1986)

E 12, 81 (2003)

