Predicting atomic dopant solvation in helium clusters: the MgHen

case.

5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Massimo Mella
School of Chemistry, Cardiﬀ University,
Main Building, Park Place, Cardiﬀ CF10 3AB (UK),
Electronic mail: mellam@cf.ac.uk

Gabriele Calderoni
Dipartimento di Chimica Fisica ed Elettrochimica,
Universit`a degli Studi di Milano, via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy
Electronic mail: gabriele.calderoni@unimi.it

Fausto Cargnoni
Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari (ISTM-CNR),
via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy
Electronic mail: fausto.cargnoni@istm.cnr.it

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We present a quantum Monte Carlo study of the solvation and spectroscopic properties of the Mg
doped helium clusters MgHen with n = 2 − 50. Three high level (MP4, CCSD(T) and CCSDT) MgHe
interaction potentials have been used to study the sensitivity of the dopant location on the shape of
the pair interaction. Despite the similar MgHe well depth, the pair distribution functions obtained in
the diﬀusion Monte Carlo simulations markedly diﬀer for the three pair potentials, therefore indicating
diﬀerent solubility properties for Mg in Hen. Moreover, we found interesting size eﬀects for the behavior
of the Mg impurity.

As a sensitive probe of the solvation properties, the Mg excitation spectra have been simulated for
various cluster sizes and compared with the available experimental results. The interaction between the
excited 1P Mg atom and the He moiety has been approximated using the Diatomics-in-Molecules method
and the two excited 1Π and 1Σ MgHe potentials. The shape of the simulated MgHe50 spectra show a
substantial dependency on the location of the Mg impurity, and hence on the MgHe pair interaction
employed.

To unravel the dependency of the solvation behavior on the shape of the computed potentials, exact
Density Functional Theory has been adapted to the case of doped Hen and various energy distributions
have been computed. The results indicate the shape of the repulsive part of the MgHe potential as an
important cause of the diﬀerent behaviours.

1

I. INTRODUCTION

The cold and gentle environment represented by bulk 4He and by 4He clusters has been attracting the
attention of the physical chemistry community due to very peculiar properties such as the absence of internal
friction, the small interaction energy with a doping impurity, and the ability to dissipate promptly the excess
energy of excited molecules (see Ref.
[1] for an extensive review on these subjects). These features make
the He nanodroplets an ideal environment to carry out reactions without the kinetic bottleneck represented
by the time needed by the reactants to diﬀuse and collide, and to record high accuracy spectra of ultra-cold
molecules and molecular complexes.

Despite the fact that the interaction energy between He atoms and the doping impurities is usually very
small, such interaction plays an important role in many interesting quantum phenomena. As an example
we recall the ”adiabatic following” of the molecular rotations by the neighboring He atoms [2]. This eﬀect
induces the increase of the momentum of inertia of molecules solvated by helium, and is experimentally
detected by the decrease of the spacing between the adsorption lines in the microwave spectrum [1].

Due to the highly quantum nature of He aggregates, even the much simple solvation process of a neutral
impurity is not completely rationalized, and up to now only few attempts to reach a detailed description
of the experimental ﬁndings have been carried out [3, 4]. Among the unsolved issues, the subtle interplay
between the various parameters of the system playing a role in the solvation mechanism (i.e. the features of
the interaction potential between helium and the impurity) still waits to be fully uncovered.

An attempt in this direction has been made by Ancillotto et al. [5]. These authors modeled superﬂuid
helium by means of a Density Functional Theory (DFT) approach, using an approximate energy functional.
Assuming an inﬁnite atomic mass for the impurity, and that its interaction energy curve with helium takes
the form of a Lennard-Jones potential, they reached a clear cut description of the solvation phenomenon in
terms of the single dimensionless parameter λ, deﬁned as:

λ = 2−1/6σ−1ρǫre

(1)

where σ is the surface tension of liquid He, ρ is the number density of bulk He, ǫ and re are the well depth and
the equilibrium distance of the He-impurity potential, respectively. The computed value of λ unambiguously
discriminates between opposite behaviours. Indeed, if λ is larger than 1.9 the free energy of the impurity
decreases as it moves from the surface to the bulk helium, indicating the onset of the solvation process.
Conversely, if λ < 1.9 the minimum free energy is reached when the impurity resides on the surface of the
bulk, and thus no solvation occurs.

Despite the merits of simplicity, and of reducing the number of independent variables to a single one,
this model was not devised to describe in detail the solvation process, but only to predict whether for a
given impurity the solvation occurs or not. Furthermore, the DFT approach does not take into account
properly the discrete nature and the anisotropic deformation [6, 7] of the He aggregates, and this might lead
to overestimate the overall interaction energy with the impurity. The drawbacks of this approximation, as
well as the ones cited above, are expected to be particularly relevant in systems with λ close to the critical
value 1.9.

A deep description of the solvation process can be gained by solving exactly the Schr¨odinger equation
of nuclear motion using an explicit many-body algorithm. In systems where accurate interaction potentials
between helium and the impurity are available, the quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) approach is probably
the best suited, and has been already applied successfully to the study of doped helium clusters [6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12]. Though the DMC simulations cannot recover the temporal evolution of the system, they
provide many important quantities that are hardly accessible experimentally, such as radial and angular
distribution functions, solvation energies, excitation spectra, as well as their dependence on the size of the
helium aggregate.

In the present study we applied this method to study the doping of helium clusters with a neutral Mg
atom, a system that in recent years has been the subject of two experimental investigations [13, 14]. Moriwaki

2

et al. [13] measured the emission and the excitation spectra of Mg dispersed in liquid helium by means of ul-
traviolet laser excitation, and focused their attention on the signals arising from the Mg(3s2)1S→Mg(3s3p)1P
transition. Reho et al. [14] studied this same transition of Mg while interacting with helium nanodroplets.
Based on the comparison with the available experimental data for Mg [13] and for other neutral metal atoms
in helium, Reho et al. concluded that Mg is indeed solvated by helium, and thus does not reside on the
surface of the nanodroplets. However, they stressed that no clear cut description of this system could be
recovered by theory using the model proposed by Ancillotto et al. [5] because the λ values computed from
the available model potentials for Mg-He are heavily scattered around the critical value of 1.9 (see Refs. [15]
and [16], and Ref. [14] for an exhaustive review up to 1999); furthermore, the performance of this scheme in
nearly critical conditions (i.e. for λ values close to 1.9) still needed to be assessed.

To shed light on these arguments is the main scope of the present work. As a ﬁrst step we generated
accurate potential energy surfaces (PES) for the interaction between a Mg atom in the ground state and
He using the MP4 and CCSD(T) methods, and for Mg in the 1P state and He with a multiconﬁgurational
approach, adopting for all computations high quality basis sets. The PES of the excited Mg-He complex
are necessary to compute the excitation spectrum of Mg attached to He clusters. While our investigation
was on its way, two alternative potentials for the ground state Mg-He interaction were proposed, based
on CCSD(T) [16] and CCSDT [17] computations. The interaction energies computed by Partridge et al.
[16] were nearly superimposable to our CCSD(T) potential, while the ones by Hinde [17] turned out to
be noticeably diﬀerent from both potentials computed by us; therefore we extended our investigation by
adopting also Hinde’s proposal.

Second, we detailed the solvation phenomenon by performing DMC simulations on MgHen clusters with
growing size (n=2-50); this approach helps in highlighting possible size eﬀects that are diﬃcult to probe
experimentally. Since the manifolds of the excitation spectrum largely depend on the onset of solvation, we
also computed the PES for the three low-lying Mg(3s3p)-He excited states. Their implementation in DMC
simulations according to the Diatomics-in-Molecules (DIM) [18] scheme allowed to recover the excitation
spectrum of magnesium interacting with helium clusters, and thus to compare directly theoretical with
available experimental results.

The outline of this work follows. Section II presents the details of the ab-initio computations performed
to determine the ground and excited states two-body Mg-He interaction potentials, with a short discussion
on the relevance of the three-body eﬀects in MgHen clusters. In Section III we give a short introduction to
the quantum Monte Carlo methods used in this work to solve the Schr¨odinger equation for nuclear motion.
In Section IV we present the results of the DMC simulations, and compare our data with the available
experimental measurements [13, 14]. Finally, Section V reports our conclusions, along with a prospect on
future applications.

II. INTERACTION POTENTIALS

The availability of accurate interaction potentials is a prerequisite for a reliable modeling of doped helium
clusters. In the present investigation, the complete PES of the ground and excited states Mg-Hen clusters are
approximated by means of two-body terms. Within this approach the interaction energy in the ground state
clusters is predicted simply by summing up all the pairwise Mg(1S)-He and He-He contributions. Conversely,
in the excited clusters we adopted the DIM formalism [18] to recover the overall Mg-Hen interaction energy
from the computed two-body Mg(1P)-He potentials.

As concerns the He-He interaction, we selected the TTY potential proposed by Tang et al. [19], which is

established as one of the most accurate PES for this system.

In the case of the ground state Mg-He complex, a number of interaction energy curves were proposed
in the last ﬁfteen years [14, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23]. The most accurate were computed by Funk et al. [21],
Partridge et al.
[16], and by Hinde [17]. Funk et al. performed MP4 computations adopting a basis set
derived from Huzinaga et al. [24] and augmented with diﬀuse functions; these authors provided a well depth

3

estimate of 4.54 cm−1 at the Mg-He internuclear distance of 5.16 ˚A. Partridge et al. carried out CCSD(T)
computations with the aug-cc-pVQZ basis set for both He and Mg [25], supplemented with the 332 set of
bond functions proposed by Tao and Pan [26]. They obtained a well depth of 4.76 cm−1 at the distance
of 5.09 ˚A. More recently, Hinde combined valence-only CCSDT computations of nearly Full Conﬁguration
Interaction (FCI) quality with a core-valence correction estimated at CCSD(T) level and, using high quality
basis sets, he proposed a minimum interaction energy of 5.01 cm−1 at the internuclear distance of 5.07
˚A. In the present investigation, we adopted the potential given by Hinde, and we also computed two new
MP4 and CCSD(T) PES adopting a larger basis set [21] and a ﬁner spatial grid [21, 16] than the available
investigations with these same theoretical schemes.

Contrary to the ground state complex, the interaction between helium and magnesium in the Mg(3s3p)
excited state has received much less attention. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge the only data available is
42 cm−1 for the well depth of the 1P state, but this single value was reported by Moriwaki et al. [13] without
any details on the method of calculation. We therefore determined the complete potential energy curves of
the three Mg(3s3p)-He states by performing MR-CI computations, since these potentials are necessary for
the implementation of the DIM scheme [18].

All the ab initio computations were carried out with the GAMESS [27] and the Gaussian [28] suite of
programs; all interaction energy data were corrected for BSSE with the counterpoise scheme proposed by
Boys and Bernardi [29].

a. Choice of the basis set.

To deﬁne an appropriate set of basis functions, we performed a series of test MP4 computations in the
region of the PES minimum, keeping frozen only the 1s electrons of Mg. For the He atom, we adopted the
d-aug-cc-pVnZ (n=3-5) sets proposed by Woon and Dunning [25]; for Mg we considered three alternatives:
the 6-311+G3df [30], the Roos augmented triple-zeta A.N.O. [31], and the basis set proposed by Archibong
and Takkar [32]. We also tested the eﬀect of including bond functions, placed at midway between helium
and magnesium, using alternatively the 332 set of Tao and Pan [26] and the 33221 set by Cybulski and
Toczylowski [33].

The results for the combinations of the basis set considered are reported in Table 1 and can be summarized
as follows: i) whatever the basis set adopted for Mg and He atoms, the inclusion of bond functions lowers
signiﬁcantly the well depth; ii) given a set for the two atoms, the well depths obtained with the 332 and
the 33221 bond functions agree within 0.05 cm−1; iii) once a basis set for He is chosen, and a set of bond
functions is included, the diﬀerences among the three sets for the Mg atom are limited to 0.2 cm−1; iv) to
use the d-aug-cc-pVQZ or the d-aug-cc-pV5Z set for He is nearly equivalent, provided that a set of bond
functions is included. We also tested that these same conclusions holds true at the CCSD(T) level of theory.
We ﬁnally devised to use the 6-311+G3df basis set for Mg, the d-aug-cc-pVQZ set for He, and the 332 set
of bond functions, this choice representing the smallest basis set that provides interaction energies nearly
converged.

b. Ground state PES

The ground state PES for Mg-He has been computed at the MP4 and CCSD(T) levels of theory, keeping
frozen only the 1s electrons of magnesium. We considered 25 internuclear distances, ranging from 4.0 to
10.0 ˚A with 0.25 ˚A steps. Within this interval the energy data have been interpolated by means of natural
quintic splines, whereas the long range potential has been expressed with the analytical form −C6/r6.

The computed energy curves for Mg-He are shown in Figure 1 along with the one proposed by Hinde [17]
and the He-He TTY potential. The MP4 and the CCSD(T) PES exhibit a minimum interaction energy of
-5.70 and -4.75 cm−1, respectively, at the internuclear distances of 5.03 and 5.11 ˚A. Our CCSD(T) potential
is nearly superimposable to the one presented by Partridge et al. [16] using the same level of theory, while

4

our MP4 estimate is signiﬁcantly more attractive as compared to the one determined by Funk et al. [21].
As for the potential proposed by Hinde [17], it is intermediate between CCSD(T) and MP4 results (ǫ=5.01
cm−1, re=5.07 ˚A), being much closer to the former. Finally, it is noteworthy that the computed MP4
potential is about 1 cm−1 deeper than the CCSD(T) one computed with the same basis set, contrary to the
common experience for van der Waals systems. Funk et al.
[21] suggested that this feature is due to the
quasi-degenerate eﬀects proper of the alkaline-earth metal atoms.

The gross features of these potentials allow to draw a ﬁrst picture of the behaviour of Mg in He using the
scheme proposed by Ancilotto et al. [5]. At variance with the uncertain situation encountered by Reho et
al. [14], all the new generation PES provide the same clear cut prediction. Indeed, the λ values range from
2.66 (CCSD(T) potential) to 3.14 (MP4), and a value of 2.78 is found for the potential by Hinde. These
data are well beyond the critical value of 1.9, and even considering the correction proposed to account for
the zero point motion energy of the impurity [5], we may assert that the model unambiguously foresees the
Mg atom to be solvated by helium.

c. Excited states PES.

The ﬁrst singlet excited state of a free Mg atom is (3s3p) 1P, and its threefold degeneracy is removed upon
interaction with a He atom, thus splitting in two degenerate 1Π and a single 1Σ state. Roughly speaking, in
the 1Π states one electron of magnesium lies in a p orbital orthogonal to the Mg-He internuclear axis, and
consequently He essentially interacts with a positive ionic core: we expect the PES to exhibit a deep well at
short distances. Conversely, in the 1Σ state the excited electron lies in the p orbital pointing toward helium,
thus generating a potential largely repulsive even at long Mg-He distances. The PES of these states were
determined by means of CAS (4 electrons in 10 orbitals) computations, followed by a multi-reference single
and double substitutions conﬁgurations interaction. The CAS scheme included in the active space the 3s,
3p and 4s orbitals of Mg, and the 1s, 2s, 2p orbitals of He. These computations were density averaged over
the ﬁrst four states.

The MRCI method is not size consistent, and therefore the interaction energies have been calculated as
E = EMgHe − EMg − EHe + ESC, where the last term is a size consistency correction deﬁned as ESC =
EMgHe(r = ∞) − EMg − EHe. To check for the soundness of this approach, we carried out an extensive
comparison between MRCI and FCI computations, considering two combinations of basis sets: 6-31+G*/aug-
cc-pVTZ and 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVTZ, where A/B indicates the set for Mg and He, respectively. As it
can be seen from Figures 2 and 3, the overall agreement between MRCI and FCI results is very satisfactory
for the two basis set choices. We are therefore conﬁdent that even the use of a more extended basis set would
not alter this agreement, and thus we determined the three PES at MRCI level using the same basis set as for
the ground state case. The interaction energies have been determined on 26 Mg-He arrangements, ranging
from 3.0 to 12.0 ˚A; the analytical representations are obtained according to the same strategy adopted for the
ground state. The 1Π potential reported in Figure 2 exhibits a well depth of 39.58 cm−1 at the equilibrium
distance of 3.82 ˚A, whereas the 1Σ curve is repulsive from 7.79 ˚A inward, and has a very shallow well of 0.81
cm−1 at 8.62 ˚A, as reported in Figure 3. Finally, the asymptotic separation between the excited levels and
the ground state was set to the experimental value of 35051.264 cm−1 [34].

d. Relevance of the many-body contributions.

As mentioned in the introduction, in the DMC simulations the ground state PES of MgHen has been
approximated as a sum of pairwise interactions. Among the contributions excluded, the major role is certainly
played by the three-body eﬀects. In systems scarcely polarizable such as the helium aggregates, the most
important three-body component arises from the non additivity of both the exchange and dispersion terms,
and the former is generally much larger than the latter. Exchange contributions are typically attractive in
triangular arrangements and repulsive in collinear geometries, while the dispersion ones behave oppositely.

5

In helium based systems these eﬀects are usually quite small, and therefore the common practice is to neglect
them regardless of the doping impurity.

Nevertheless, we carried out a series of test computations to check the validity of this approximation
in Mg doped He clusters. We considered MgHe2 complexes with C2v symmetry, since the highest three-
body contributions arise in triangular arrangements. All calculations have been performed at the MP4
level of theory, using the same basis set choice as for the two-body potentials but for the exclusion of the
bond functions, that proved nearly negligible in this respect. In Figure 4 we report the two- and three-
body contributions to the interaction energy as scans along the HeMgHe angle at ﬁxed Mg-He internuclear
distances. The three-body terms are not negligible only at short Mg-He distances and small He-Mg-He
angles. In these arrangements the two body PES is only slightly attractive or even repulsive, and therefore
we are conﬁdent that the inclusion of many-body eﬀects in the MgHen complexes would scarcely aﬀect the
results of the DMC simulations.

III. METHODS

It is well known that pure and doped He clusters are characterized by a highly quantum nature, a
feature manifesting itself in a small total binding energy and a wide anharmonic motion of both the doping
impurity and the He atoms. As a consequence of the intrinsic anharmonicity and of the experimental size of
these clusters (usually of the order of several thousands atoms), the possibility of using either the harmonic
approximation or more accurate basis set/ grid-bases approaches is usually hindered.

To describe at atomistic level the solvation properties of doped clusters and to compute their excitation
spectra, we believe that the quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods are the best suited techniques. Since these
methods are well described in the literature [35], we restrain ourselves from presenting long discussions, except
for the technical details that are relevant to the present work. Here, we employed variational Monte Carlo
(VMC) to optimize a trial wave function ΨT (R) and diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC) to correct the remaining
deﬁciencies of ΨT (R), projecting out all the excited state components and sampling f (R) = Φ0(R)ΨT (R).
In both cases a description of the ground state is sought, the low temperature of the clusters (0.37 K) and
the large energy gap between vibrational excited states in Hen suggesting that thermal excitations should
not play a relevant role (for a discussion on this topic see Ref. [7]).
In atomic units, the Hamiltonian operator for MgHen reads as

As mentioned before, we assume a pair potential of the form V (R) =
the clusters with the magnesium atom in the 1S electronic ground state.
P

Our trial wave function has the common form

i<j VHeHe(rij ) +

i VMgHe(riMg) for

P

H = −

n

1
2  

i=1
X

∇2
i
m4He

+

∇2
Mg
mMg !

+ V (R)

N

N

ΨT (R) =

ψ(rij )

φ(riMg)

i<j
Y

i
Y

where no one-body part was used, and [36]

ψ(r) = φ(r) = exp[−

p5
r5 −
The parameters of the model wave function were fully optimized minimizing the mean absolute error
of the local energy Eloc(R) = HΨT (R)/ΨT (R) = Hloc(R) over a ﬁxed set of points as proposed in Ref.
[37]. The optimized wave functions were successively employed to guide the DMC simulations of the doped
clusters in order to sample the mixed distribution f (R) = Φ0(R)ΨT (R). These distributions were used to
compute exactly the energy values using the mixed estimator

p2
r2 − p1r − p0 ln(r)]

(4)

(2)

(3)

(5)

hHiM =

R

f (R)Hloc(R)dR
f (R)dR

R
6

as well as the mixed and second order estimate (SOE) hOiSOE = 2hOiM −hOiV MC of many other expectation
values (e.g. the interparticle distribution functions). The SOE was used to reduce the bias introduced in
the mixed estimate of operators that do not commute with the Hamiltonian by the use of a non-exact trial
wave function.

As for the absorption spectrum of the Mg atom, we computed it with the same semiclassical approach
used in Ref.
[7] to compute the Ag spectrum, adapting a technique previously proposed by Cheng and
Whaley [38] for the Franck-Condon line shapes of an electronic transition in a condensed phase system. The
method was originally presented by Lax [39] and modiﬁed to take into account the system temperature of 0
K. In its crudest approximation, the spectral lines of a chromophore are computed collecting the distribution
of the diﬀerences Vexc(R) − Vgs(R) over the sampled f (R). In our case, Vgs(R) (Vexc(R)) is the interaction
potential between the ground (excited) state Mg atom with the He atoms. The three electronic states for
the excited Mg attached to the He cluster are obtained from the two dimer excited potentials 1Σ and 1Π
using the DIM method [18]. Since all the details needed to implement it are well described by Nakayama
and Yamashita [8], we refer to their paper and to Ref. [7] for further discussions, especially related to the
general accuracy of the method.

IV. RESULTS

a. Energetics

Due to the highly quantum nature of Hen, we limit our presentation of the MgHen energetics only to the fully
quantal DMC results and postpone a short discussion on the potential energy values of the global minimum
structures to the next section.

The DMC energies E(n) and the diﬀerential values ∆(n) = [E(n) − E(m)]/(n − m) obtained using the
three potentials for the MgHen clusters are presented in Table 2. Here, MgHem is the largest cluster for which
n > m still holds. From these energetic results, it appears that the CCSD(T) and the CCSDT data give a
very similar description of the clusters, while the MP4 produces slightly lower total energies as expected on
the basis of the deeper well.

The ∆(n) values can be interpreted as the negative of the He evaporation energies and are shown in
Figure 5. From this, we notice that for all three interaction potentials ∆(n) monotonically decrease upon
increasing n, a ﬁnding that is diﬀerent from what is usually found for impurities interacting strongly with He
[7, 40, 41], and for which a multiple-shell eﬀect is usually found. Instead, the behavior of ∆(n) for MgHen
is quite similar to the one obtained for pure Hen [42] (also shown in Fig. 5) and for dopants ﬂoating on the
surface [9, 11]. In particular, our CCSD(T) and CCSDT ∆(n) values for the large clusters are very close to
the pure cluster results presented in Ref. [42]. The MP4 potential gives somehow larger values for the same
quantity, a diﬀerence in touch with the slightly larger interaction energy computed by the MP4 method and
that might induce a more compact structure for the He moiety.

Another interesting quantity is represented by the binding energy of Mg to the helium cluster BE(n) =
EHen − EMgHen (often indicated as the dopant chemical potential) shown in Table 3 for Hen up to n = 40.
These values were obtained using the DMC energies for the pure helium clusters presented in Ref. [7]. The
energy data obtained with the MP4 potential monotonically increase with cluster size, and appear to be
nearly converged at n=40. A similar behaviour is found using the CCSDT and CCSD(T) potentials up
to n=30, but in these cases there is an unexpected decrease of BE when the largest clusters (n=40) are
considered. This diﬀerent behaviour of BE is due to relevant diﬀerences in the structures of the doped
clusters depending on the potential adopted and the cluster size, as will be discussed in the next section.

b. Structure

7

Let us start considering the relative shape of the MgHe and HeHe interaction curves shown in Figure 1. It is
clearly evident that the He-He curve has a deeper minimum ǫ and a shorter equilibrium distance re than all
the Mg-He ones. Similar situations have been previously investigated [43] and it is easy to predict that the
largest species should segregate on the surface to reduce the strain in the optimized structure. It is therefore
quite likely that a classical minimization of the cluster interaction potential would produce global minimum
structures showing a compact He moiety with Mg lying outside this core, as already found for NenH− [44]
and HenH− [11]. To conﬁrm this tendency for our systems, we minimized the interaction potential starting
from several thousands random conﬁgurations for each cluster, invariably obtaining a ”ﬂoating” Mg impurity
and a compact He moiety as lowest energy structure. As a consequence, the solubility of Mg in Hen suggested
by the cluster experiments [14] must be considered a purely quantum phenomenon.

To extract the structural properties of the Mg doped clusters from DMC simulations, we computed several
average values and distribution functions for the particle-particle distances and for the distance between a
particle A (either He or Mg) and the (geometrical) centre of the He moiety (gc)

RgcMg = krMg −

ri/nk

RgcHe = k

(rj − n

−1

ri)/nk

n

j
X

n

i=1
X
n

i=1
X

(6)

(7)

Figure 6 shows the behavior of the average RgcMg as a function of the number of He atoms in the
cluster for the three interaction potentials used in this work. As for the MP4 potential, hRgcMgi shows a
steep decrease upon increasing n, strongly resembling the case of AgHen [7] where this behavior indicated
the onset of solvation of the Ag atom in the He clusters. Conversely, the two CC-based pair interactions
produced somehow unexpected and peculiar behaviors that, to the best of our knowledge, have never been
found before with other dopants. More precisely, both the CCSD(T) and CCSDT potentials generated
almost constant hRgcMgi values for n ≤ 30; this similar behavior is then followed by a sudden increase for
CCSD(T) and a less rapid decrease in the case of CCSDT. Indeed, the trends shown by both CCSD(T) and
CCSDT are somewhat intermediate between the one exhibited by the impurities undergoing solvation (with
RgcMg decreasing as a function of n) and the ones ﬂoating on the helium droplet surface (in these systems
RgcMg monotonically increases with increasing n) as in the case of H−Hen [9, 11]. These unusual features are
hardly interpreted on the basis of the available literature results, and to put them in relation with a deﬁnite
cluster structure - particularly concerning the onset of solvation - requires a more detailed treatment of the
DMC data.

∞

Figure 7 shows the pair distribution function p(RgcMg) for several MgHen clusters and for any of the PES
0 r2p(r)dr = 1.
adopted: MP4, CCSD(T) and CCSDT. The curves in the ﬁgure are normalized so that 4π
As clearly seen in Fig. 7a, the simulations with the MP4 potential produced a solvated dopant sitting in the
R
centre of the large He clusters, the smaller ones showing a slightly diﬀerent behavior due to the incomplete
ﬁrst solvation shell of Mg. The simulations carried out using the CCSD(T) potential (Fig 7b) gave instead a
largely diﬀerent prediction of the solvation properties: for n ≤ 30, the distributions present a peak with the
maximum in the range of 7-8 bohr, therefore locating Mg relatively far away from the centre of the droplet
and explaining the almost constant RgcMg values; for n = 40 and 50, the peak maximum is displaced further
away from the He moiety centre, clearly indicating the lack of solvation for Mg. As for the CCSDT results
(Fig 7c), the behavior of p(RgcMg) is even more complicated. For n ≤ 20, the distributions show a single
peak whose maximum is located in the range of 7-8 bohr similarly to the CCSD(T) ones. Upon increasing n,
they ﬁrst assume a bimodal shape (n = 25 and 30), and then transform their shape building a single broad
peak centered at RgcMg = 0.

As mentioned before, the dependency of the solvation properties on the number of He atoms shown by
both the CCSD(T) and CCSDT Mg-He pair interactions has never been observed for any previously studied
dopant. In the CCSDT case, our ﬁndings suggest the onset of a dynamical many-body eﬀect stabilizing the

8

solvated dopant more than the surface one after a critical number of heliums is reached. A likely explanation
for this behavior is obtained considering what happens displacing a Mg atom from the surface to the interior
of the droplet. During this process, a cavity is formed inside the cluster due to the incoming Mg, this cavity
and the displaced He atoms contributing to increase the droplet external surface area by a quantity ∆S.
Upon increasing n (and hence the total volume of the He moiety), the absolute value of ∆S is reduced
generating, as a consequence, a smaller increase in ”surface energy” due to the lost He-He interactions, and
making more favorable the dopant solvation [45]. It must be stressed, however, that the dopant solubility
depends also on the shape (e.g. well depth and location) of the interaction energy between He and Mg: if
the energy loss due to the formation of the cavity and the increase in surface area is not overcompensated
by the stronger interaction between the solvated dopant and the droplet, the impurity will be segregated
on the surface as a way to reduce the total energy of the system. So, the cause for the diﬀerent behavior
of the CCSD(T) and CCSDT distributions must be sought in the slight diﬀerences presented by the two
interaction potentials.

A somehow diﬀerent perspective of the structural features of MgHen is given by the distributions of the
cosine values for the HeMgHe angle presented in Figure 8 where, again, diﬀerent behaviors are shown. In the
case of the MP4 interaction (Fig. 8a), the distributions show a gradual change upon increasing the number
of He atoms: the pronounced features present in the distribution for the small clusters ( i.e.
the sharp
maximum around cos(HeMgHe) = 0.8 and the two minima at cos(HeMgHe) = 1 and -1) smooth for larger n
producing, in the case of MgHe50, a substantial raise of the minimum at cos(HeMgHe) = 1, a displaced short
maximum around cos(HeMgHe) = 0.85, and a plateau at lower values of the cosine. A similar behavior was
exhibited by the AgHen clusters, an evidence of the complete solvation of the dopant and of the formation
of a compact and ordered ﬁrst shell of He atoms around the silver atoms. Furthermore, the raise of the
minimum at cos(HeAgHe) = 1 indicated the onset of the second solvation shell for Ag. The same process
occurs also for MgHen when the MP4 data are considered, though a substantial diﬀerence between Mg and
Ag doped clusters occurs. Indeed, in AgHen the plateau at low cosine values is present even in small clusters
(e.g. AgHe6), while in MgHen it becomes evident only for clusters with at least 25 He atoms. This ﬁnding
is probably a consequence of the smaller ǫ and the larger re in the MgHe interaction potential than in the
AgHe one, the shallower interaction curve allowing the He atoms in MgHen to be less tightly bound to the
dopant and to cluster together in more compact way. In turn, this retards the formation of an angularly
uniform ﬁrst solvation shell around the dopant.

Figure 8b shows the cosine distribution functions for the CCSD(T) curve, two striking diﬀerences being
apparent with respect to the previous results. First, only small changes in the distributions are produced
upon increasing the number of He atoms; this indicates the presence of a similar structure for the all the
clusters. Second, the density at cos(HeMgHe) = 1 is substantially diﬀerent from zero already at n = 8 and
increases for larger n; this feature suggests that two He atoms can be found along the same radius departing
from Mg even in the small clusters, and these angular distributions would be consistent with a dopant
ﬂoating on the surface of the He droplet whose radius increases upon increasing the number of He atoms. At
variance with this interpretation, Figure 8b also shows a substantial density at cos(HeMgHe) = −1 for the
small clusters suggesting the presence of a less ”clear-cut” structural situation that can be explained either
by imaging the Mg atom as ”sitting” in a deep dimple on the surface and having a ﬂuctuating ”crown” of
He atoms in equatorial position or, alternatively, by invoking large excursions of one helium away from the
cluster surface and around the dopant.

Figure 8c shows the probability densities obtained during the DMC simulations employing the CCSDT
pair interaction. For n ≤ 30, these distributions show an almost identical shape and are quite similar to
the ones obtained using the CCSD(T) curve, therefore indicating the presence of a strongly anisotropic
environment around the Mg atom. Upon increasing n, the distributions change smoothing the maximum
around cos(HeMgHe) = 0.9 and increasing the density at lower values of cos(HeMgHe), a ﬁnding which is in
phase with the behavior of the radial probability density previously described. However, the absence of the
distribution plateau characterizing the MP4 results at low cosine indicates that the He environment around

9

Mg is still far from being isotropic.

All the structural information discussed so far can, somehow, be condensed in the more pictorial repre-
sentation provided by snapshots of the cluster geometries obtained during the DMC simulations with the
three pair interactions; Figure 9 shows typical conﬁgurations sampled during the simulations of the largest
clusters. Whereas the conﬁguration extracted from the MP4 simulation (Fig. 9a) clearly shows a Mg com-
pletely surrounded by He atoms, walkers from CCSD(T) (Fig. 9b) show Mg preferentially resident in a quite
profound dimple. A less clear-cut situation was found for CCSDT data: although a completely solvated, but
slightly oﬀ-centered, dopant is the most likely geometry extracted from the DMC simulations (Fig. 9c), we
also found clear evidences that Mg can and does reach the surface of the droplet during the simulations.

The overall picture given by the results discussed in this section is very intriguing. First, we found that
even very small diﬀerences among the potentials adopted in the DMC simulations produce quite diﬀerent
structures in the doped clusters. Second, the onset of the solvation itself is highly sensitive to very small
changes in the interaction potential of the dopant and to the number of He atoms contained in the droplet.
In borderline systems it is therefore quite restrictive to describe the solvation as simply occurring or not,
and the properties of the dopant are very hard to classify (see the DMC simulations on MgHen adopting
the CCSD(T) and CCSDT PES). Further discussion on the role of the Mg-He interaction energy curve in
several components of the solvation phenomenon is outlined in Section IV.

c. Excitation spectra of Mg in Hen

As mentioned in the introduction, the experimental spectra for the 1P←1S excitation of Mg dispersed
in superﬂuid bulk He [13] and attached to He nanodroplets [14] are available. Their features, as well as the
comparison with excitation spectra of the free Mg atom, strongly suggest that Mg is soluble in superﬂuid
helium.
In this Section, we discuss the simulation results obtained employing the various ground state
interaction curves for MgHe as a function of the number of helium atoms, and compare the experimental
spectra with the simulated ones for the largest clusters available.

Figures 10a, 10b and 10c show the spectra computed with the MP4, CCSD(T) and CCSDT PES, re-
spectively. In all cases, it is clearly evident an increasing blue-shift and FWHM of the absorption peak upon
increase of the number of He atoms in the clusters. This ﬁnding is in line with what previously found for
helium clusters doped with alkali metals [8] and with atomic silver [7]. However, diﬀerently from the AgHen
case, no red-shift is present for the small clusters. This result, in conjunction with the relative shape of the
ground and excited MgHe potentials, suggests that the direct formation of exciplexes [13] during the vertical
excitation process is quite unlikely. We also notice that the magnitude of the blue-shift is larger for Mg than
in the case of alkali-doped helium clusters [8], indicating that the excited Mg atom ﬁnds itself in a more
repulsive environment, and the characteristic long tail of ﬂoating dopant is absent even in the CCSD(T)
results.

Despite the similar trend observed upon increasing the number of He atoms, the three sets of spectra
present several interesting diﬀerences for a given cluster size: both the blue-shift and the FWHM increase
in the sequence CCSD(T) < CCSDT < MP4. Furthermore, the CCSD(T) and CCSDT sets of results show
a spectral shape diﬀerent from the absorption curve obtained with the MP4 for some of the medium-size
droplets, the MP4 spectra presenting a shoulder in the absorption curve at large wave-numbers already for
MgHe30. This feature is evident in the CCSDT case only starting from MgHe40, and is never present in the
CCSD(T) results.

Given the previous discussion on the dopant location obtained from the simulations, it is straightforward
to suggest that this shoulder is due to the onset of a more compact and complete ﬁrst solvation shell of Mg
at n = 30 for MP4 and at n = 40 for CCSDT. A similar explanation was previously proposed to rationalize
the increase in blue-shifts and in FWHM in AgHen [7]. More precisely, we recall that some of the DMC
simulations generated an anisotropic He environment around the dopant.
In these systems, Mg resides
preferentially in a deep dimple on the cluster surface, and the local environment allows the excited 1P state

10

to orient itself so that the 3p orbital containing the excited electron is directed outside the cluster. As a
consequence of this freedom, the repulsive interaction between the 1P Mg state and the local He environment
is decreased (we recall that the Σ excited state is highly repulsive), and so is the shift of the component of
the spectral line due to the Σ state [46]. In turn, this delays the onset of the shoulder at large wave-numbers
until the complete solvation has occurred.

bind(MP4) ≃ −518 cm−1, Eexc

The location of the maximum in the spectra can be used to better quantify the physical picture of
the vertically excited Mg and to compute its binding energy to the cluster using the formula Eexc
bind =
Egs
bind − (hνcluster − hνvac). Extracting the position of the maxima for the simulations on MgHe50 and
bind(CCSDT) ≃ −589 cm−1 and
using the data in Table 3, one obtains Eexc
bind(CCSD(T)) ≃ −235 cm−1, clearly indicating the instability of the excited Mg atom attached to the
Eexc
clusters. In turn, these results suggest that the break up of the excited system into the excited Mg atom and
the ground state He cluster is a likely dissociation channel, and that the excited Mg could leave the droplet
converting some of the excess electronic energy into kinetic energy. On the other hand, another possible
outcome following the vertical excitation is represented by a rearrangement of the He atoms surrounding
the excited dopant; these atoms would adjust their distribution to reﬂect the new shape of the interaction
potential and to produce a more anisotropic, but also more strongly bound, environment around the Mg.
During this process, some of the excess energy contained in the system after the excitation must be somehow
dissipated, and it is likely that this would produce a partial break up of the He moiety. Unfortunately,
it is diﬃcult to predict the likelihood of this process using exclusively our DMC results, and a dynamical
simulation of the relaxation process of the He cluster appears mandatory to clarify this detail.

Comparing the experimental spectra reported in Refs. [13] and [14] with the simulation results obtained
for our largest clusters (collected together in Fig. 10c), several interesting observations can be made. First,
all the results show a good agreement concerning the location of the two experimental spectra, once again
indicating the good accuracy of the DIM model to approximate the interaction energy for the dopant excited
state. However, the shape of the MP4 and CCSDT spectra for MgHe50 are much closer to the experimental
bulk-He spectrum [13] than to the one obtained in clusters [14]; the latter presents a convex shape in the
region 35800-36500 cm−1 where the bulk spectrum shows a concave behavior (henceforth, a ”shoulder”). It is
also interesting to note that none of our simulation results present an absorption shape similar to the cluster
spectra in the region 35300-35800 cm−1, where the experimental results were ﬁtted using two Gaussians;
this feature was explained invoking the quadrupolar deformation of the Mg cavity similarly to what was
previously found for heavy alkali and Ag. Since it was previously shown that coupling the DIM method with
DMC or PIMC simulations [7] accurately describes the features due to the anisotropy in the local dopant
environment, at this stage it is diﬃcult for us to propose an explanation for the lack of structure found in the
range 35300-35800 cm−1. The possibility to invoke the presence of a vibronic coupling between the He atoms
and the Mg electrons during the excitation process seems to be ruled out by the lack of similar features in
the bulk-He spectrum. As an alternative, we can conceive that the diﬀerent shape of the excitation spectra
in clusters and bulk may be due to the two diﬀerent detection mechanisms used; this implies that the shape
of the ﬂuorescent emission is strongly dependent on the wavelength used to excite the chromophore, though.
On the computational side, we cannot rule out a priori the possibility that the absence of structure
in the excitation spectrum may be due to size eﬀects and that larger clusters may indeed have this very
feature. However, both the very similar spectral shape obtained for MgHe30, MgHe40 and MgHe50 using
MP4, and the almost saturated binding energy, strongly suggest that the local Mg environment -and hence
the excitation spectrum- is converged with respect to the size of the system.

d. Analysis of the solvation parameters

The DMC simulation results presented in the previous Sections have highlighted a dependency of the sol-
ubility and the spectral properties of Mg in Hen clusters on the shape of the interaction curve for 6 ≤ n ≤ 50.
However, a deeper quantitative understanding of the underlying causes producing such distinct behaviours

11

is still missing, in spite of the accurate numerical results. In particular, we would like to understand which
speciﬁc feature, if any, in the three potentials is primarily responsible for the change in solubility highlighted
by the Mg-GC distance and cos(HeMgHe) distribution functions.

To shed some light on the peculiarities of this phenomenon, we turned to an exact formulation of Density
Functional Theory (DFT) as a way to extract energetic quantities that are expected to play an important
role in deﬁning the impurity solvation. To this end, we extended the exact DFT formalism for homogeneous
systems proposed by Levy, Perdue and Sahni [47] to describe an impurity attached to a homogeneous cluster.
More speciﬁcally, we derived an eﬀective one-particle Schr¨odinger equation for the Mg-GC radial probability
density and the Mg binding energy µ to the droplet containing the eﬀective potential

where

and

Vef f (RgcMg) ≃ V HeHe

ef f

(RgcMg) + V MgHe

ef f

(RgcMg)

V HeHe
ef f

(RgcMg) =

hΦ|VHeHe(yHe)|Φin−1
hΦ|Φin−1

V MgHe
ef f

(RgcMg) =

hΦ|VMgHe(yHe, RgcMg)|Φin−1
hΦ|Φin−1

(8)

(9)

(10)

Here, yHe indicates the 3(n − 1) dimensional vector describing the He atoms position with respect to the
centre of the He moiety and h...in−1 represents the average over yHe. For clarity of discussion, we present the
complete derivation of this equation in Appendix A and only mention that the two terms in the righthand
side of Eq. 8 represent the average interaction of the He atoms among themselves and with Mg, as a function
of the position of the dopant in the cluster. Both quantities can be exactly or accurately computed with
DMC simulations.

Figure 11 shows the radial dependency of the angular average of Vef f (RgcMg), V HeHe

(RgcMg) and
V MgHe
(RgcMg) obtained during the simulation of MgHe30 with the MP4 and CCSD(T) pair potentials.
ef f
Basing on the results shown in Figure 7, this cluster and these two PES were chosen as representative cases
of the possible diﬀerent behaviours.

ef f

ef f

The computed V MgHe

values decrease for kRgcMgk → 0, and this is due to the increased number of He
atoms surrounding the dopant [3]; in turn, this indicates the increased stabilization of the impurity when
brought inside the cluster. V MgHe
also shows a parabolic shape when kRgcMgk ≃ 0, strongly suggesting that
the analysis carried out by Lehmann [3] is valid for small clusters. Two diﬀerences are however present for
the two PES, namely a global shift in value reﬂecting the diﬀerence in the well depth between MP4 and
CCSD(T), and a larger curvature for the MP4 results; the latter indicates a tighter binding of the impurity
to the cluster centre in the MP4 case.

ef f

ef f

, V HeHe
ef f

At variance with V MgHe

increases in value when the impurity is closer to the geometrical centre
of the He moiety, a ﬁnding that can be easily explained by recalling that the He atoms lose stabilizing
interactions due to the formation of a cavity inside the cluster and to the increase of the cluster surface area.
Similarly to the discussion given by Lehmann [4] on the so called ”buoyancy correction”, we also found that
the He atoms lose more stabilizing interactions when the impurity sits close to the cluster centre than when
it is just below the surface of the droplet. In this respect, the CCSD(T) results show a steeper increase in
V HeHe
than the MP4 ones, the most likely explanation for this feature being the diﬀerent eﬀective radius for
ef f
Mg produced by the two potentials. Deﬁning this radius as the distance at which a given PES has a value
of zero, we found that the CCSD(T) PES is larger by roughly 0.2 bohr than the MP4 one.

and V MgHe

ef f

ef f

Due to the diﬀerent features of V HeHe

as a function of the interaction curve, Vef f shows
two qualitatively diﬀerent shapes: the CCSD(T) potential presents an overall repulsive interaction from the
cluster surface inward due to the large values of V HeHe
, while the MP4 potential shows an almost complete
cancellation between the two components and produces a shallow attractive interaction between the dopant
and the centre of the He moiety. In the latter case, it should be stressed that both the larger interaction
between Mg and He and the smaller size of Mg play a relevant role in deﬁning the shape of the total eﬀective
potential. Vef f was also computed using the MP4 curve for MgHe12, MgHe20, MgHe30 and MgHe40 and gave

ef f

12

a qualitatively correct prediction of the solvation phenomenon. Indeed, whereas it presents a deep minimum
away from the droplet centre in the small clusters, a shallow minimum close the centre of the He moiety is
produced upon increasing the system size.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this work we presented a computational study of the ground state properties and excitation spectrum
of Mg attached to Hen clusters (n = 2 − 50). This study was carried out using the exact DMC method in
conjunction with accurate model potentials written as a sum over pair interactions, a commonly used and
fairly accurate approximation for weakly interacting systems. For the He-He interaction potential we used
the well known and widely employed TTY model [19], whereas large basis set ab initio MP4 and CCSD(T)
energies were computed and interpolated using quintic splines to produce two accurate potentials for the Mg-
He pair. Additionally, a third Mg-He model potential was obtained by interpolating the CCSDT interaction
energies computed by Hinde [17]. The well depth and equilibrium distance of the ground state PES are -5.70
cm−1 and 5.03 ˚A for MP4, -4.74 cm−1 and 5.11 ˚A for CCSD(T), and -5.01 cm−1 and 5.07 ˚A for CCSDT
computations.

We computed total, evaporation and Mg binding energies as a function of n using the three interaction
curves; the comparison between the results for MgHe40 and MgHe50 indicates an almost converged He
environment around the atomic dopant for n = 50. In spite of the similar shape of the interaction curves
(Fig. 1), the results of the DMC simulations revealed markedly diﬀerent solubilities of Mg in Hen as a
function of both the Mg-He pair interaction and n: the MP4 PES suggests that Mg is located in the centre
of Hen independently of n ; CCSD(T) always predicts a surface location for the dopant; CCSDT, instead,
presents a change in Mg behavior around n = 25, predicting Mg to be soluble in the larger clusters. These
results highlight both a marked sensitivity of the solvation properties with respect to the global shape of the
PES and the ability of DMC to discriminate qualitatively diﬀerent behaviors generated by subtle diﬀerences
in the interaction potentials. To gain a deeper understanding of the solvation process in these species, we
used a modiﬁed version of the DFT approach proposed in Ref. [47] and found that both the well depth and
the position of the repulsive wall inﬂuence the solubility of Mg in Hen.

Our simulation results bear relevance also with respect to the solvation model proposed by Ancilotto et al.
[5]. This model predicts solvation whenever the dimensionless parameter λ exceeds 1.9, whereas our results
present a quite diﬀerent scenario: the simulations using the CCSD(T) PES strongly suggest that solvation
is not automatically assured in spite of the large λ (λCCSD(T ) = 2.66). Furthermore, the dopant solubility
may depend on the size of the cluster (as highlighted by the CCSDT simulations) and be sensitive to subtle
diﬀerences between interaction potentials (for instance, compare the CCSD(T) and CCSDT case). In turn,
this ﬁndings stress that highly accurate pair interactions are needed to correctly predict the solubility of
neutral dopants with isotropic pair potential.

We found a dependency on the shape of the PES also for the simulated excitation spectra, the solvated
Mg (MP4 and CCSDT cases) showing a broader and more blue-shifted absorption band than the ﬂoating
dopant (CCSD(T)). Diﬀerently from the results obtained for AgHen [7], no red-shifted bands were found
for the small MgHen clusters, suggesting that the formation of exciplexes would require a re-organization of
the He environment around Mg following the vertical excitation. Indeed, this outcome is considered quite
likely by Reho et al. [14] on the basis of their time-resolved results, and it would be interesting to study the
dynamical changes involved during this process.

Comparing the simulated and experimental cluster spectra we found a good agreement between the
position of the excitation bands, once more validating the usage of the DIM method to approximate the
excited PES. In spite of this agreement, there is a marked diﬀerence in shape between the experiments
and the results obtained by theory for MgHe50: whereas the simulated spectra always present a smooth
band without peculiar features, the experimental spectrum shows a two-peaks structure interpreted as the
outcome of a quadrupolar deformation of the He cage around the solvated Mg. Bearing in mind that DMC

13

was previously found to describe correctly this kind of deformations [7], this discrepancy calls for further
theoretical and experimental investigations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

MM acknowledges Dario Bressanini for independently testing some of the simulation results and for providing
a more precise DMC energy for He40, and the EPSRC for an Advanced Research Fellowship (GR/R77803/01).

14

Appendix A. Eﬀective Schr¨odinger equation for a single atomic impurity in He clusters

The present derivation of the eﬀective Schr¨odinger equation for an atomic dopant (e.g. Mg) attached
[47] for a homogeneous many-particle

to Hen is a modiﬁcation of the derivation presented by Levy et al.
system.

As ﬁrst step, the Schr¨odinger equation for a generic MgHen cluster with the Hamiltonian operator shown

in Eq. 2 must be rewritten in Jacobi coordinates yj−1 = rj −

where ri (i ≤ n) is the position of

the i-th He atom, mi its mass, and rn+1 and mn+1 are the position and mass of Mg, respectively. Using
these deﬁnition, yn and µn represent the distance and reduced mass of the impurity with the geometrical
centre of the He moiety, while yn+1 = RCOM is the position of the MgHen centre of mass in the laboratory
frame. It is also worth pointing out that the set of coordinates yHe = (y1, ..., yn−1) describes the relative
positions of the He atoms within the helium moiety.

After the rotation in Jacobi’s coordinates, the Hamiltonian for the cluster can be written as

miri

j−1

i

j−1

mi

i

P
P

H = −

n

1
2

∇2
j
µj

−

∇2
COM
2MCOM

+ VHeHe(y1, ..., yn−1) + VMgHe(y1, ..., yn)

(11)

j=1
X
j
i=1 mi, and MCOM = Mn+1 is the total mass of the system,

where µj = mj+1Mj
Mj+1
Neglecting the term −

, Mj =

∇2
COM
P
2MCOM

from Eq. 11 allows to eliminate the contribution of the centre of mass
kinetic energy to the system total energy, so that the formal ground state solution of this equation Ψ(Y)
(Y = (y1, ..., yn)) will describe only the internal motion of the system.

To proceed further, we partition the total Hamiltonian into the two operators

H0(yHe, yn) = −

+ VHeHe(y1, ..., yn−1) + VMgHe(y1, ..., yn)

(12)

1
2

n−1

j=1
X

∇2
j
µj

∇2
n
2µn

, the latter representing the kinetic energy of the relative motion of the impurity with respect to
and −
the centre of mass of the He moiety. The exact ground state wave function can also be arbitrarily written as

Ψ(Y) = ρ1/2(yn)Φ(Y)

(13)

where ρ(yn) is the probability density of ﬁnding the impurity at position yn with respect to the centre of
the He cluster.

A series of algebraic steps are now necessary. First, let us indicate by En

0 (pure) the ground
state energy for MgHen and Hen, respectively. Inserting Eq. 13 into the Schr¨odinger equation obtained elimi-
0 (pure)ρ1/2(yn)Φ(Y)
nating the centre of mass kinetic energy from the Hamiltonian in Eq. 11, subtracting En
from both sides, and integrating both sides of the Schr¨odinger equation over dy1...dyn−1Φ(Y) leads to

0 (Mg) and En

− hΦ|Φin−1

∇2

nρ1/2(yn) + ρ1/2(yn)hΦ|H0(yHe, yn)|Φin−1

(14)

1
2µn

−

∇nρ1/2(yn)hΦ(Y)∇nΦ(Y)in−1 −

1
µn
0 (pure)ρ1/2(yn)hΦ|Φin−1 = (En
−En

1
2µn
0 (Mg) − En

ρ1/2(yn)hΦ(Y)∇2

nΦ(Y)in−1

0 (pure))ρ1/2(yn)hΦ|Φin−1

where h...in−1 indicates the integration over dy1...dyn−1.
0 (Mg) − En

Recognizing that En

0 (pure) = µMg is the chemical potential of the Mg impurity attached to
the Hen cluster, that hΦ(Y)∇nΦ(Y)in−1 is identically zero, and dividing both sides of Eq. 15 by hΦ|Φin−1,
the previous equation can be written as

−

1
2µn

∇2

nρ1/2(yn) + ρ1/2(yn)

hΦ|H0(yHe, yn) − En

0 (pure)|Φin−1 − 1
2µn
hΦ|Φin−1

hΦ(Y)∇2

nΦ(Y)in−1

=

∇2

nρ1/2(yn) + Vef f (yn)ρ1/2(yn) = µMgρ1/2(yn)

(15)

−

1
2µn

15

where it is shown that the exact density and chemical potential for the impurity can be obtained by solving
an eﬀective Schr¨odinger equation for the impurity alone. However, the eﬀective potential Vef f (yn) is not
know in advance, and must be obtained, in principle, by solving the many-body problem and computing
the relevant quantities over the exact wave function Ψ(Y). Besides, it should be expected to be highly
system-dependent, so that a general form valid for a family of systems may be diﬃcult to obtain.

From Eqs. 15 and 12, we notice that Vef f contains components deriving from the average values of the
interaction potentials and of the kinetic energy operators, the latter being zero or constant if and only if the
exact wave function can be factorized exactly into Φ(yHe) and ρ1/2(yn). Such an instance obviously implies
a complete decorrelation between the He atoms and dopant motion, a situation that cannot be encountered
in practice because the impurity always modiﬁes both the value and the curvature of Φ as a function of
its position. However, neglecting this contribution may represent an accurate approximation in the case of
ﬂoating impurities spending most of the time away from the region of high He density in the cluster.

Due to the presence of these kinetic energy terms, the eﬀective potential introduced in Eq. 15 is diﬀerent
from the one previously deﬁned by Lehmann [3, 4] to describe the energetic eﬀects of displacing an impurity
[3], the change in curvature (hence in the
from the droplet centre. In the formulation presented in Ref.
kinetic energy) of the He wave function due to the location of the impurity was disregarded. Moreover, our
deﬁnition of Vef f takes naturally into account the local increase of He density around the impurity due to
the interaction potential, a feature neglected in the simpliﬁed discussion made by Lehmann, and that we
expect to play a fundamental role in deﬁning the solubility of a neutral dopant.

Despite our ignorance about its form, the eﬀective potential deﬁned in Eq. 15 may still be an useful tool
to provide insight in the dopant behavior as it is easy to show that Vef f can be computed during a QMC
simulation

16

References

[1] J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 43, 2622 (2004).

[2] E. Lee, D. Farrelly, and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3812 (1999).

[3] K. K. Lehmann, Mol. Phys. 97, 645 (1999).

[4] K. K. Lehmann, Mol. Phys. 98, 1991 (2000).

[5] F. Ancillotto, P. B. Lerner, and M. W. Cole, J. Low. Temp. Phys. 101, 1123 (1995).

[6] S. Ogata, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 68, 2153 (1999).

[7] M. Mella, M. C. Colombo, and G. Morosi, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 9695 (2002).

[8] A. Nakayama and K. Yamashita, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 780 (2001).

[9] M. Casalegno, M. Mella, G. Morosi, and D. Bressanini, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 69 (2000).

[10] D. Bressanini, M. Zavaglia, M. Mella, and G. Morosi, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 717 (2000).

[11] F. Sebastianelli, C. Di Paola, I. Baccarelli, and F. A. Gianturco, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 8276 (2003).

[12] F. Paesani, F. A. Gianturco, and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10225 (2001).

[13] Y. Moriwaki and N. Morita, Eur. Phys. J. D 5, 53 (1999).

[14] J. Reho and U. Merker and M. R. Radcliﬀ and K. K. Lehmann and G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 112,

8409 (2000).

[15] F. Stienkemeier, F. Meier, and H. O. Lutz, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 10816 (1997).

[16] H. Partridge, J. R. Stallcop, and E. Levin, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 6471 (2001).

[17] R. J. Hinde, J. Phys. B- At. Mol. Opt. 36, 3119 (2003).

[18] F. O. Ellison, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 85, 3540 (1963).

[19] K. Tang, J. P. Toennies, and C. L. Yiu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1546 (1995).

[20] E. Czuchaj, H. Stoll, and H. Preuss, J. Phys. B- At. Mol. Opt. 20, 1487 (1987).

[21] D. J. Funk, W. H. Breckenridge, J. Simon, and G. Chalasinski, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 1114 (1989).

[22] Q. Hui, Ph.D. Thesis, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, 1997.

[23] U. Kleinekath¨ofer, Chem. Phys. Lett. 324, 403 (2000).

[24] S. Huzinaga, M. Klobakowski, and H. Tatewaki, Can. J. Chem. 63, 1812 (1985).

[25] D. Woon and T. Dunning, J. Chem. Phys. 100 , 2975 (1994).

[26] F.-M. Tao and Y.-K. Pan, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 4989 (1992).

[27] M.W. Schmidt, K.K. Baldridge, J.A. Boatz, S.T. Elbert, M.S. Gordon, J. H. Jensen, S. Koseki, N.
Matsunaga, K.A. Nguyen, S.J. Su, T.L. Windus, M. Dupuis, and J.A. Montgomery, J. Comput. Chem.
14, 1347 (1993); A.A. Granovsky, http://lcc.chem.msu.su/gran/gamess/index.old.html.

17

[28] Gaussian 98, Revision A.11.1, M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J.
R. Cheeseman, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., R. E. Stratmann, J. C. Burant, S. Dapprich,
J. M. Millam, A. D. Daniels, K. N. Kudin, M. C. Strain, O. Farkas, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, M. Cossi,
R. Cammi, B. Mennucci, C. Pomelli, C. Adamo, S. Cliﬀord, J. Ochterski, G. A. Petersson, P. Y. Ayala,
Q. Cui, K. Morokuma, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, D. K. Malick, A. D. Rabuck, K. Raghavachari,
J. B. Foresman, J. Cioslowski, J. V. Ortiz, A. G. Baboul, B. B. Stefanov, G. Liu, A. Liashenko, P.
Piskorz, I. Komaromi, R. Gomperts, R. L. Martin, D. J. Fox, T. Keith, M. A. Al-Laham, C. Y. Peng,
A. Nanayakkara, M. Challacombe, P. M. W. Gill, B. Johnson, W. Chen, M. W. Wong, J. L. Andres, C.
Gonzalez, M. Head-Gordon, E. S. Replogle, and J. A. Pople, Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburgh PA, 2001.

[29] S. F. Boys and F. Bernardi, Mol. Phys 19 , 553 (1970).

[30] A. D. McLean and G. S. Chandler, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 5639 (1980).

[31] P. O. Widmark, B. J. Persson, and B. Roos, Theor. Chim. Acta 79, 419 (1991).

[32] E. F. Archibong and A. J. Thakkar, Phys. Rev. A 44, 5478 (1991).

[33] S. M. Cybulski and R. R. Toczylowski, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 10520 (1999).

[34] W. C. Martin, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 9, 1 (1980).

[35] B. L. Hammond, J. W. A. Lester, and P. J. Reynolds, Monte Carlo Methods in Ab Initio Quantum

Chemistry (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994).

[36] S. W. Rick, D. L. Lynch, and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 95 , 3506 (1991).

[37] D. Bressanini, G. Morosi, and M. Mella, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 5345 (2002).

[38] E. Cheng and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 3155 (1996).

[39] M. Lax, J. Chem. Phys. 20, 1752 (1952).

[40] F. Paesani, F. A. Gianturco, and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10225 (2001).

[41] D. Blume, M. Lewerenz, F. Huisken, and M. Kaloudis, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 8666 (1996).

[42] E. Sola, J. Casulleras, and J. Boronat, J. Low Temp. Phys. 134, 787 (2004).

[43] S. Cozzini and M. Ronchetti, Phys. Rev. B 53, 12040 (1996).

[44] F. Sebastianelli, I. Baccarelli, C. Di Paola, and F. A. Gianturco, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 5570 (2003).

[45] Assuming the liquid He droplet to behave as an uncompressible ﬂuid, it can be shown that the increase
in the droplet surface S due to the solvation of a rigid impurity or radius r is given by ∆S(V, r) =
4πV 2/3[3/(4π) + r3/V ]2/3 − [3/(4π)]2/3, where V is the original volume of the droplet. For large r3/V
ratios, ∆S(V, r) can be shown to decay as V −1/3 indicating a smaller surface increase for larger V .

[46] We tested this idea by decomposing the spectrum in its three components due to the three eigenvalues
obtained from the DIM matrix. Invariably, we found that the one with the largest blue-shift was primarly
due to the Σ state interactions and that it was responsible for the right shoulder on the spectrum peak.

[47] M. Levy, J. P. Perdew, and V. Sahni, Phys. Rev. A 30, 2745 (1984).

18

Bond functions De (cm−1)

Mg
6-311+G3df
6-311+G3df
A.N.O. triple zeta [31]
A.N.O. triple zeta
6-311+G3df
6-311+G3df
6-311+G3df
6-311+G3df
6-311+G3df
A.N.O. triple zeta
A.N.O. triple zeta
Archibong [32]
Archibong
Archibong

He
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pV5Z
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pV5Z
d-aug-cc-pVTZ
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pV5Z
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pV5Z
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pVQZ
d-aug-cc-pV5Z
d-aug-cc-pVQZ

-
-
-
-
332
332
332
33221
33221
332
33221
332
332
33221

-5.21
-5.36
-5.34
-5.44
-5.63
-5.74
-5.76
-5.77
-5.78
-5.64
-5.67
-5.79
-5.82
-5.84

re (A)
5.09
5.07
5.10
5.08
5.07
5.07
5.06
5.06
5.06
5.08
5.08
5.06
5.06
5.06

Table 1: Eﬀect of the basis set choice on the equilibrium properties of the MgHe dimer. The diﬀerent basis
sets are introduced in the text. The estimate of the equilibrium parameters are obtained by interpolation
with a quadratic polynomial of the energy data at 4.75, 5.00, and 5.25 ˚A.

19

ECCSD(T)
DMC

∆CCSD(T)
DMC

ECCSDT
DMC

∆CCSDT
DMC

n
2
4
6
8
12
15
18
20
25
30
40
50

EMP4
DMC
-2.5366(6)
-5.660(2)
-9.2445(9)
-13.172(5)
-21.795(3)
-28.84(1)
-36.33(1)
-41.54(2)
-55.031(8)
-68.75(3)
-97.13(5)
-126.70(9)

∆MP4
DMC
-1.2683(3)
-1.5618(8)
-1.7921(9)
-1.964(2)
-2.156(1)
-2.346(3)
-2.498(5)
-2.61(1)
-2.698(4)
-2.744(6)
-2.838(6)
-2.96(1)

-4.127(4)
-6.9881(9)
-10.244(5)
-17.619(6)
-23.717(3)
-30.26(2)
-34.76(2)
-46.73(2)
-59.37(3)
-85.88(3)
-114.27(5)

-1.0317(4)
-1.431(1)
-1.628(3)
-1.843(2)
-2.032(2)
-2.182(7)
-2.25(1)
-2.394(5)
-2.526(7)
-2.651(4)
-2.839(5)

-18.406(4)
-24.648(7)
-31.26(1)
-35.894(7)
-47.984(9)
-60.75(1)
-87.93(2)
-116.84(3)

-2.081(2)
-2.204(3)
-2.317(5)
-2.418(2)
-2.553(2)
-2.718(2)
-2.891(4)

Table 2: DMC energy EDMC (n) and ∆(n) = [E(n) − E(m)]/(n − m) as a function of the number of He
atoms in the cluster for the three interaction potentials. For a given n, MgHem is the largest cluster available
with n > m. Energetic quantities are in cm−1.

20

n
2
4
6
8
12
20
25
30
40

EMP4
DMC
2.5357(6)
5.271(2)
7.6368(9)
9.604(5)
13.049(7)
18.50(2)
24.4(3)
26.69(3)
26.85(5)

ECCSD(T)
DMC

ECCSDT
DMC

3.738(4)
5.3804(9)
6.676(5)
8.873(6)
11.72(2)
16.1(3)
17.31(3)
15.60(3)

9.660(7)
12.85(1)
17.4(3)
18.69(3)
17.65(3)

Table 3: Binding energy of Mg to Hen as a function of the number n of He atoms in the cluster for the three
interaction potentials. Quantities are in cm−1.

21

Figure captions:
Figure 1: Ground state interaction energy curves for Mg-He and He-He. The CCSDT potential is taken
from Ref. [17]. Energies in cm−1 and distances in atomic units.
Figure 2: 1Π interaction energy curve between 1P Mg and He as a function of the method (FCI or MRCI)
and of the basis set used. Energies in cm−1 and distances in atomic units.
Figure 3: 1Σ interaction energy curve between 1P Mg and He as a function of the method (FCI or MRCI)
and of the basis set used. Energies in cm−1 and distances in units.
Figure 4: Two-body (empty symbols) and three-body (ﬁlled symbols) eﬀects computed at the MP4 level
for MgHe2 complexes in isosceles triangular geometry, as a function of the MgHe distance and the HeMgHe
angle. Energies in cm−1, distances in ˚A and angles in degrees.
Figure 5: Evaporation energy ∆(n) as a function of the interaction potential and of the number of helium
atoms for MgHen. The ∆(n) values for pure Hen are also included. Energies in cm−1.
Figure 6: Average distance (bohr) between Mg and the geometrical centre (GC) of the He moiety as a
function of the number of He atoms in the cluster and of the interaction potential.
Figure 7: Mg radial probability density function with respect the geometrical centre (GC) of the He moiety
as a function of the number of He atoms in the cluster and of the interaction potential: a) MP4 b) CCSD(T)
c) CCSDT. Distances in bohr.
Figure 8: Probability density function for the cosine of the He-Mg-He angle as a function of the number of
He atoms in the cluster and of the interaction potential: a) MP4 b) CCSD(T) c) CCSDT. Each curve has
been shifted upward by 0.1 with respect to the previous one to facilitate the comparison.
Figure 9: Snapshots of the walker distributions for MgHe50 extracted during the DMC simulations using a)
the MP4, b) the CCSD(T) and c) the CCSDT pair interactions. Panel a) evidences the complete solvation
of the Mg atom inside the He cluster. Panel b) clearly corresponds to Mg resident in a deep dimple on
the surface, while c) indicates the typical asymmetric distribution of the He atoms around the Mg dopant
obtained with the CCSDT model.
Figure 10: Simulated excitation spectra of Mg attached to Hen clusters. a) Results obtained using the MP4
potential for n = 12, 15, 20, 30, 40 and 50. b) Results obtained using the CCSD(T) potential for n = 18, 20,
25, 30, 40, and 50. c) Results obtained using the CCSDT potential for n = 25, 30, 40, and 50. The results
obtained with MP4 and CCSD(T) for MgHe50 are also reported in this panel for a direct comparison.
Figure 11: Radial dependency of the angular average of the total eﬀective potential Vef f and of its compo-
nents V HeHe
for MgHe30 using the MP4 and CCSD(T) potential curves.

and V MgHe

ef f

ef f

22

Mella et al. Fig. 1

Mg-He MP4
Mg-He CCSD(T)
Mg-He CCSDT
He-He TTY

)

m
c
/
1
(
 
)

R
V

(

 4

 2

 0

-2

-4

-6

-8

 4

 6

 8

 10

 12

 14

 16

 18

 20

R (bohr)

Mella et al. Figure 2

MRCI 6-31+G*/aug-cc-pVTZ
FCI 6-31+G*/aug-cc-pVTZ
MRCI 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVTZ
FCI 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVTZ
MRCI 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVQZ/332

)

m
c
/
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

 20

 10

 0

-10

-20

-30

-40

 6

 7

 8

 9

 10

 11

 12

 13

 14

 15

R (bohr)

Mella et al. Figure 3

MRCI 6-31+G*/aug-cc-pVTZ
FCI 6-31+G*/aug-cc-pVTZ
MRCI 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVTZ
FCI 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVTZ
MRCI 6-311+G3df/d-aug-cc-pVQZ/332

)

m
c
/
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

 100

 80

 60

 40

 20

 0

-20

 10

 12

 14

 16

 18

 20

R (bohr)

)

m
c
/
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

-5

-10

-15

-20

 20

Mella et al. Figure 4

R=4.5 2body
R=5.0 2body
R=5.5 2body
R=6.0 2body
R=4.5 3body
R=5.0 3body
R=5.5 3body
R=6.0 3body

 30

 40

 50

 60

 70

 80

 90

HeMgHe angle (degrees)

)

m
c
/
1
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
o
p
a
v
E

 0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

-2.5

-3.0

 

Mella et al. Figure 5

MP4
CCSD(T)
CCSDT
pure He clusters

 10

 20

 30

 40

 50

Number of He atoms

Mella et al. Figure 6 

)
r
h
o
b
(
 
e
c
n
a
t
s
d
 
C
G
-
g
M

i

 11

 10

 9

 8

 7

 6

 5

 4

 3

MP4
CCSD(T)
CCSDT

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

 45

 50

 55

Number of He atoms

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

0.000

0.0003

0.0002

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

0.0001

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

 
0.0000

 0.0016

 

 

 

 

 0.0008

 0.0004

 0.0000

Mella et al. Figure 7

N=40

N=30

N=50

N=20

N=18

N=15

N=12

N=6

N=40

N=12

N=30

N=20

N=25

N=50

a)

b)

c)

 0.0012

N=30

N=12

N=40

N=50

N=25

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

 12

 14

 16

N=15

N=20

R (bohr)

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Mella et al. Fig. 8

N=8 N=15

N=20

a)

N=30 N=50

N=50

N=40

N=20

N=15

N=8

N=30

b)

N=40 N=50

N=25

c)

N=18

N=12

-0.2
0.2
0.0
cos(He-Mg-He)

-1.0

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Mella et al. Figure 9

a)

b)

c)

0.0035

0.0030

0.0025

0.0020

0.0015

0.0010

0.0005

0.0000

0.0035

0.0030

0.0025

0.0020

0.0015

0.0010

0.0005

 
0.0000
 0.0018
 0.0016
 0.0014
 0.0012
 0.001
 0.0008
 0.0006
 0.0004
 0.0002
 0

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

Mella et al. Figure 10

N=12

N=30

N=50

N=18

N=20

N=25

N=30

N=40

N=50

N=25 

N=30 

N=40 

N=50 CCSD(T)

a)

b)

c)

N=50 MP4

N=50 

 35250  35500  35750  36000  36250  36500  36750
cm-1

)

m
c
/
1
(
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f

E

0

-20

-40

-60

-80

-100

-120

-140

-160

-180

Mg-He

He-He

CCSD(T)
MP4

Mella et al Figure 11

Total

R (bohr)

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

