5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Determination of the lowest energy structure of Ag8 from ﬁrst-principles calculations

M. Pereiro1, ∗ and D. Baldomir1
1Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela E-15782, Spain.
(Dated: December 16, 2013)

The ground-state electronic and structural properties, and the electronic excitations of the lowest
energy isomers of the Ag8 cluster are calculated using density functional theory (DFT) and time-
dependent DFT (TDDFT) in real time and real space scheme, respectively. The optical spectra
provided by TDDFT predict that the D2d dodecahedron isomer is the structural minimum of Ag8
cluster. Indeed, it is borne out by the experimental ﬁndings.

PACS numbers: 36.40.-c, 36.40.Mr

In latter years, a new ﬁeld has emerged from the
understanding, control and manipulation of objects at
nanoscale level (nano-objects).
It is commonly known
as nanoscience. This ﬁeld involves physics, chemistry
and even engineering, and addresses a huge number of
important issues starting from basic science and end-
ing in a large variety of technological applications [1].
Among the nano-objects, the small clusters or nanoclus-
ters play a very important role, since they are the bricks
of nanoscience. Therefore, the study of small clusters
deserves a special attention.
In this respect, the steps
to follow for a complete description of a cluster can be
summarized in the following three questions: what is the
lowest energy structure?, what is the eﬀect of increasing
or decreasing the temperature on the structural proper-
ties of a cluster? and the last step deals with the kinetic
eﬀects in the formation of the nanocluster. Here, we are
only concerned about the ﬁrst question for the silver oc-
tamer, leaving the other two questions open for future
investigations.

From the theoretical point of view, ﬁrst-principles
methods give an enormous advantage for understanding,
projecting and inventing new materials that is reﬂected in
the huge number of articles published in the ﬁeld of mate-
rials science. Likewise, density functional theory (DFT)
has emerged as a new and promising tool for ab initio
electronic structure calculations and gives valuable infor-
mation about the geometry of nanoscale systems [2] but
unfortunately it not always predict the correct structure
of the cluster under consideration.
In this regard, the
silver octamer belongs to the group of the controversial
systems for which the lowest energy structure is unre-
solved by DFT.

Recently, P. Radcliﬀe et al.

[3] have proposed Ag8
clusters embedded in helium droplets as a suitable sys-
tem for light ampliﬁcation based on an optically accessi-
ble long-living excited state (E*) and thereby, from the
theoretical point of view, the determination of the struc-
ture becomes a key point as the ﬁrst step for identifying
and controlling the levels that populate E*. Up to now,
it has not been possible to make a reliable theoretical
prediction of the most stable structure of Ag8. A review

of the literature reveals that there are two competing
geometries in eight-atom clusters of s-electron elements,
having Td and D2d symmetry.
In fact, diﬀerent levels
of theories favor diﬀerent geometries: DFT in its local
density approximation (LDA) [4], multireference conﬁg-
uration interaction method [5], a tight-binding approach
[6], and the many-body perturbation theory-based calcu-
lations [7] give the D2d geometrical shape as the lowest
energy structure of Ag8 whereas the equation-of-motion
coupled cluster method [8], time-dependent DFT only at
LDA level [9] and molecular-dynamics simulations [10]
predict a Td structure as the structural minimum. It was
reported in Refs. [5, 8] that the D2d geometry is favored
energetically over Td symmetry when explicit correlation
treatments for 5s electrons are included, but since the
calculated energy diﬀerence between Td and D2d isomers
is very small, the predicted theoretical ordering is un-
certain. One way of solving this vexing problem comes
from the hand of the time-dependent density functional
theory (TDDFT) [11] that is a generalization of tradi-
tional ground stationary state DFT to treat the dynamic
response of the charge density to a time-dependent per-
turbation. TDDFT is a powerful methodology towards
the calculation of the optical spectra, and thereby gives
access to excited-state information.

In this brief report, we have calculated the optical re-
sponse of the Td and D2d geometries and they were com-
pared both with each other and the experimental ﬁnd-
ings. The atomic positions were fully optimized with
an all-electron DFT implementation at the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) level, representing an im-
provement over other TDDFT studies in small silver clus-
ters [9]. This work relies on the combination of the tra-
ditional DFT and its generalization to excited states, as
a promising tool for elucidating structures that DFT by
its own is unable to predict. Here, we demonstrate that
the D2d structure is the structural minimum of Ag8 and
the calculated spectra allow us to estimate the interac-
tion of Ag8 with the surrounding helium or argon matrix
presented in experimental observations.

With the aim of elucidating the lowest energy struc-
ture of Ag8 cluster, we have performed density functional

theory-based calculations consisting of a linear com-
bination of Gaussian-type orbitals-Kohn-Sham-density-
functional methodology (LCGTO-KSDFM) to obtain the
structural and electronic ground-state properties [12],
and a TDDFT implementation to compute the electronic
excitations [13]. For the former, all-electron calculations
were carried out with DEMON-KS3P5 [12] at GGA level
to take the exchange-correlation (XC) eﬀects into ac-
count [14]. An orbital basis set of contraction pattern
(633321/53211*/531+) was used in conjunction with the
corresponding (5,5;5,5) auxiliary basis set for describ-
ing the s-, p- and d-orbitals [15]. The grid for numer-
ical evaluation of the XC terms had 128 radial shells
of points and each shell had 26 angular points. Spuri-
ous one-center contributions to the XC forces, typically
found in systems with metal-metal bonds when using a
nonlocal functional, are eliminated in a similar way as
has been done in Ref. [16]. Trial geometries were fully
optimized without symmetry and geometry constraints
for diﬀerent multiplicities using the Broyden-Fletcher-
Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm [17]. The multiplicities were
ranged from 1 to 11 and in all reported structures the
singlet state was favored energetically. During the opti-
mization, the convergence criterion for the norm of the
energy gradient was ﬁxed to 10−4 a.u. while it was 10−7
a.u. for the energy and 10−6 a.u. for the charge density.
For the latter, after inserting the atomic coordinates of
the converged structures provided by DEMON-KS3P5
all the dynamical quantities are computed by evolving
the electronic wave functions in real time and real space
[13]. The electron-ion interaction is described through
the Hartwigsen-Goedecker-Hutter relativistic separable
dual-space gaussian pseudopotentials [18] and the XC
eﬀect were treated in the GGA, implemented via the
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional [19]. The grid in real
space to solve the Kohn-Sham equations consists in a sum
of spheres around each atom of radius 5.5 ˚A and a mesh
spacing of 0.23 ˚A. The time step for the propagation of
the electronic orbitals was ﬁxed to 0.0013 fs, which en-
sures the stability of time-dependent propagation. An
artiﬁcial electronic temperature of 10 K was included ac-
cording to the Fermi-Dirac function used to distribute
the electrons among the accessible states.

After a review of the literature on silver clusters
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8], we have decided to optimize, as a good
candidate to the structural minimum of the octamer, the
following isomers of Ag8: a D2d dodecahedron (D2d-DD),
which can also be viewed as a distorted bicapped octa-
hedron, a Td tetracapped tetrahedron (Td-TT) and a
Cs 1-pentagonal bipyramid (Cs-PBP) in Fournier’s no-
tation [4]. The main results (density of states (DOS),
optimized structures, polarizabilities, ground state en-
ergies, . . . ) of the electronic structure calculations are
collected in Table I and Fig. 1. The LCGTO-KSDFM
calculations clearly show that the Cs-PBP geometry is
energetically far from the lowest energy structure by an

2

TABLE I: Ground-state energies relative to the most stable
isomer (D2d-DD) and electronic structure properties of the
DFT-optimized Ag8 cluster isomers. The Fermi level is de-
noted by Ef and ∆ξ stands for the HOMO-LUMO gap. The
mean static polarizability ¯α and the polarizability anisotropy
∆α were calculated under the inﬂuence of an external electric
ﬁeld of strength 0.0005 a.u..

Symmetry ∆EDF T
(meV)
0.00
6.14
181.25

D2d
Td
Cs

∆ξ
Ef
(eV)
(eV)
-4.302 1.719
-4.574 2.335
-4.048 1.327

¯α

6.32
6.46
6.45

∆α

1.22
0.01
1.71

(˚A3/atom) (˚A3/atom)

amount of 181.25 meV. Therefore, we will concentrate
our attention in D2d and Td structures.

Despite the fact that the lowest energy isomer corre-
sponds to a D2d symmetry, it should be noted that the
ground-state energy diﬀerence between D2d-DD and Td-
TT isomers is very small (∆ED2d→Td = 6.12 meV) com-
pared to 0.19 eV which is the averaged energy diﬀerence
between the ground-state structure and the second sta-
ble structure of Agn (2≤n≤12) [4]. Furthermore, the po-
larizabilities and the HOMO-LUMO gaps (HLg) do not
oﬀer a clear picture for elucidating the structural mini-
mum of the octamer. That is, it is well known that the
Ag8 cluster is a closed-shell system and it was demon-
strated experimentally and theoretically that the closure
of electronic shell manifest itself in particularly large HLg
( see [6] and references therein), consequently the HLg
reported in Table I are on the side of stabilization of
the Td-TT isomer. As far as the reported polarizabil-
ities are concerned, in molecular electronic distribution
studies under the inﬂuence of an external electric ﬁeld,
the relevant quantities are the mean static polarizability
3
¯α = (
i=1αii)/3 and the polarizability anisotropy ∆α,
deﬁned as:

P

2,3

Pi,j=1,2
i<j

v
u
u
u
u
t

∆α =

(αii − αjj )2 + 6

2,3

Pi,j=1,2
i<j

α2
ij

2

(1)

2,3
i,j=1,2;i<j α2

where αij = ∂(µe)i/∂Ej is the ij-component of the po-
larizability tensor under the action of an external elec-
tric ﬁeld Ej. It is not a common procedure to express
the polarizability anisotropy such as it was deﬁned in
Eq. (1). The commonly-used deﬁnition omits the second
ij) and thus neglects the important
term (6
inﬂuence that the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the second-
rank polarizability tensor play in the symmetry consid-
erations of the electric charge distribution [20]. The mean
static polarizabilities, reported in Table I, are quite sim-
ilar to each other showing in average that the electron
charge is nearly equally distributed among the three iso-
mers. However, only the polarizability anisotropy of the

P

3

FIG. 1: (color online). Energy levels, partial and total density of states and shapes of the delocalized molecular orbitals for
the higher-lying occupied and lower-lying unoccupied levels of Ag8 isomers: a) Td-TT and b) D2d-DD. The orbitals below the
Fermi level are double occupied; for these levels only one molecular orbital is presented. The solid vertical line represents the
Fermi level.

Td-TT isomer is clearly reduced. This result tends to
stabilize the Td symmetry over D2d because the less po-
larizability anisotropy is, the more spherically symmetric
charge distribution is and the latter condition is favored
by a closed-shell system like the silver octamer. Indeed,
the delocalized molecular orbitals for the higher-lying oc-
cupied levels of the D2d and Td geometries, presented in
Fig. 1, exhibit a hybridization of the atomic 5s levels with
the 5p levels leading to a nearly spherical shape whereas
for the lower-lying unoccupied levels, the spherical sym-
metry becomes less important. The proximity in energy
and the corresponding superposition of the spatial distri-
bution of the higher-lying occupied molecular orbitals of
the Td-TT isomer with respect to the ones of the D2d-DD
isomer, contribute to a spherical symmetrization of the
Td-TT charge distribution.

The balance of the aforementioned contrary tenden-
cies does not allow a reliable prediction of the structure,
such as it was discussed in literature [4, 6, 7, 8, 10].
The TDDFT calculations using the structural parame-
ters provided by the LCGTO-KSDFM as starting point
can shed some light on the better understanding of this
vexing controversy on the structure of Ag8. In this re-
spect, as it is shown in Fig. 2, the calculated spectrum
for D2d symmetry is in excellent agreement with the res-
onant two-photon ionization spectrum reported by F.
Federmann et al.
[21] and the excitation spectrum re-

ported by C. F´elix et al.
[22], whereas the Td-TT cal-
culated spectrum only shows one resonant peak and it is
about 0.31 eV blue-shifted with respect to the experimen-
tal measurements. Thus, the LCGTO-KSDFM predicted
structure is conﬁrmed by the TDDFT calculations of the
optical response when it is compared to the experimental
evidences.

Some of the relevant states involved in the transitions
that populate the peaks of Fig. 2 are provided through
the calculated DOS depicted in Fig. 1. For the D2d iso-
mer, the eigenvalues of the HOMO and HOMO-1 states
are both close together in energy and the HOMO-2 state
is 0.7 eV further down meanwhile for the Td-TT isomer,
this three states were grouped together in a window en-
ergy of only 3 meV. It is worthwhile to mention here that
the Td-TT isomer has high symmetry, so many states will
be degenerate. However, because of small numerical er-
rors, it is quite possible that states that should strictly
be degenerate will show as being within very small en-
ergy windows. In the energy range displayed in Fig. 2
for D2d symmetry, the TDDFT calculations predict four
electronic transitions starting from the twofold degener-
ate HOMO and HOMO-1 states to two excited states sep-
arated 0.07 eV in energy and it gives rise to two peaks
because of the nearness in energy of the HOMO-1 and
HOMO states. In the case of the Td symmetry, six tran-
sitions are predicted giving rise to only one peak because

4

ture below 10 K. Our calculation thus conﬁrms that the
structural minimum of Ag8 is the D2d-DD isomer, whose
geometrical structure is depicted in Fig. 1. The TDDFT
calculations have provided a number of electronic transi-
tions involving the resonant peaks showed in Fig. 2 and
demonstrate that the R2PI experiment is a good tech-
nique to measure experimentally the electronic excita-
tions of bare silver clusters because it is less aggressive
than, for example, the experiments that consider argon
as the spectroscopic matrix.

The authors acknowledge the CESGA for the comput-
ing facilities. The work was supported by the Xunta de
Galicia under the Project No. PGIDIT02TMT20601PR.

(2005).

(1993).

(2001).

(2003).

(1999).

Email address: fampl@usc.es

∗
[1] F. Baletto and R. Ferrando, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 371

[2] P. Jena, S. N. Khanna and D. K. Rao, in Density Func-
tional Theory of Molecules, Clusters, and Solids (Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1995), chap. 5.
[3] P. Radcliﬀe et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173403 (2004).
[4] R. Fournier, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 2165 (2001).
[5] V. Bonacic-Koutecky et al., J. Chem. Phys. 98, 7981

[6] J. Zhao, Y. Luo, and G. Wang, Eur. Phys. J. D 14, 309

[7] M. N. Huda and A. K. Ray, Phys. Rev. A 67, 013201

[8] V. Bonacic-Koutecky, V. Veyret, and R. Mitric, J. Chem.

Phys. 115, 10450 (2001).

[9] K. Yabana and G. F. Bertsch, Phys. Rev. A 60, 3809

[10] S. Erkoc and T. Yilmaz, Physica E 5, 1 (1999).
[11] M. Casida,

in Recent Advances in Density Functional

Methods, Part I (Word Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995).
[12] A. St-Amant and D. R. Salahub, Chem. Phys. Lett. 169,

[13] M. A. L. Marques, A. Castro, G. F. Bertsh, and A. Rubio,

Comp. Phys. Comm. 151, 60 (2003).

[14] J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 46, 12947

387 (1990).

(1992).

[15] S. Huzinaga et al., Gaussian Basis Sets for Molecular

Calculations (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1984).

[16] L. Versluis and T. Ziegler, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 322 (1988).
[17] H. B. Schlegel, Modern Electronic Structure Theory
(Word Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995), chap. 8, p. 459.
[18] C. Hartwigsen, S. Goedecker, and J. Hutter, Phys. Rev.

B 58, 3641 (1988).

Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[19] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.

[20] Y. J. Alvarado et al., J. Phys. Org. Chem. 15, 154 (2002).
[21] F. Federmann, K. Hoﬀmann, N. Quaas, and J. P. Toen-

nies, Eur. Phys. J. D 9, 11 (1999).

[22] C. Felix et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2992 (2001).
[23] A. Bartelt et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3525 (1996).

FIG. 2: Comparison between two experimental recorded spec-
tra and the calculated spectra for both (solid line) D2d-
DD and (dashed line) Td-TT isomers at a temperature of
10 K. Open circles correspond to the resonant two-photon-
ionization (R2PI) spectroscopy on Ag8 clusters in He droplets
[21] while the solid triangles are for the excitation spectrum
of Ag8 excited with monochromatic Xe light in an Ar matrix
[22]. The D2d-DD isomer spectrum is in excellent agreement
with the experiment whereas the Td-TT isomer spectrum is
around 0.31 eV blue-shifted compared to the R2PI spectrum.

the two excited states that electronic transitions populate
are only 1 meV separated, as commented above.

Some consequences can be extracted going further in
the analysis of the calculated spectrum for D2d-DD iso-
mer when it is compared with the experimental references
reported in Fig. 2. On one hand, for the case of R2PI
experiment we attribute the slight diﬀerence in peak po-
sition (∼ 3 meV) to the helium environment through the
formation of electron bubble states that signiﬁcantly blue
shift the transition [23]. As already mentioned above,
our TDDFT calculations also conﬁrm the authors’ feel-
ing of Ref. [21] that the asymmetry of the peak involves
more than one transition. On the other hand, the com-
parison between the excitation spectrum in Ar matrix
[22] and the calculated D2d isomer spectrum allow us to
measure the interaction of the Ar matrix with the Ag8
cluster. Thus, the shift of energy probably due to Ar ma-
trix eﬀects is estimated to be about 25 meV that is great
enough compared to the slight diﬀerence in peak position
(∼ 3 meV) attributed to the helium surrounding the Ag8
clusters in R2PI experiment. Consequently, the use of
liquid helium droplets as a spectroscopic matrix has the
advantage over argon matrix of providing an environment
more suitable for study the electronic excitations of small
and free silver clusters.

In conclusion, we have shown that a combination of
a LCGTO-KSDFM and TDDFT approach is able to re-
produce the measured optical response of the silver oc-
tamer and allow us to elucidate its lowest energy struc-

