submitted to PRA

A versatile electrostatic trap

Jacqueline van Veldhoven1,2, Hendrick L. Bethlem1,3, Melanie Schnell1, and Gerard Meijer1
1Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Faradayweg 4-6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
2FOM-Institute for Plasmaphysics Rijnhuizen, P.O. Box 1207, NL-3430 BE Nieuwegein, The Netherlands
3Laser Centre Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, de Boelelaan 1081, NL-1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A four electrode electrostatic trap geometry is demonstrated that can be used to combine a dipole,
quadrupole and hexapole ﬁeld. A cold packet of 15ND3 molecules is conﬁned in both a purely
quadrupolar and hexapolar trapping ﬁeld and additionally, a dipole ﬁeld is added to a hexapole
ﬁeld to create either a double-well or a donut-shaped trapping ﬁeld. The proﬁle of the 15ND3 packet
in each of these four trapping potentials is measured, and the dependence of the well-separation and
barrier height of the double-well and donut potential on the hexapole and dipole term are discussed.

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 33.80.Ps, 33.55.Be, 39.10.+j

I.

INTRODUCTION

The creation of cold molecules oﬀers unique possibili-
ties for studying cold collisions [1, 2, 3, 4], dipole-dipole
interaction [5, 6, 7], or for doing high-resolution spec-
troscopy [8, 9]. In each of these ﬁelds, traps are either
necessary, or they enhance the potential of the method
considerably. Electrostatic traps in particular are highly
versatile. They are rather deep (on the order of 1 K) and
by changing electrode geometries, many diﬀerent trap-
ping potentials can be formed [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
Here we demonstrate an electrode geometry that is used
to form diﬀerent trapping ﬁelds by changing the voltage
applied to the electrodes. In the trap a predominantly
dipolar, quadrupolar or hexapolar ﬁeld can be created.
When implementing the latter two, a pure quadrupole or
a pure hexapole trapping potential is generated. Combin-
ing a dipole ﬁeld with a hexapole ﬁeld gives rise to two
additional trapping potentials, a double-well or a ring-
shaped potential, depending on the sign of the dipole
term. As voltages can be switched on relatively short
timescales, rapid changing between these trapping ﬁelds
is feasible as well.

A double-well trap in particular has proven to be fruit-
ful in atomic physics experiments. For instance, double-
well potentials have been used in interference experi-
ments to study coherence properties of BEC’s [16] and to
visualize phase singularities associated with vortices in a
Na BEC [17]. Furthermore, two weakly coupled BEC’s
in a double-well potential have been shown to form a
Josephson junction [18], and collision studies have been
performed in a double-well interferometer, enabling the
determination of the s- and d-wave scattering amplitudes
of 87Rb [19].

In electrostatic traps the formation of a double-well po-
tential with variable barrier height and well separation is
relatively straightforward. Along with the possibility of
rapid switching to other types of trapping ﬁelds, this cre-
ates favorable conditions for the study of cold collisions.
Molecules trapped in either of the two wells of a double-
well trap will gain potential energy when switching to
a single-well trap, resulting in two packets of molecules

FIG. 1: Scheme of the trap. The trap is cylindrically sym-
metric and consists of two parallel rings in the middle and
two endcaps at the sides.

that are accelerated towards each other. As they reach
the center of the trap, they will collide with a velocity
that is dependent on the shape of both the single- and
double-well potential. As these shapes can be readily
varied, the velocity of the molecules is tunable. Combin-
ing this feature with an inherently low velocity spread
of the trapped molecules makes rapid single- to double-
well conversion an excellent starting point for studying
collisions at low temperatures.

II. THE VARIOUS TRAPPING
CONFIGURATIONS

In a cylindrically symmetric geometry, the electric po-

tential Φ(ρ, z) can be expressed as [14, 15, 20]:

Φ(ρ, z) = Φ0 +Φ1

+Φ2

z
z0

z2 − ρ2/2
z2
0

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

+Φ3

z3 − 3ρ2z/2
z3
0

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

. . . , (1)

with z0 a characteristic length scale. Here, the ﬁrst
term is a constant voltage, the second term a constant
electric ﬁeld, the third a quadrupolar electric ﬁeld and
the fourth a hexapolar electric ﬁeld. A molecule with
a quadratic Stark shift will experience a harmonic force

=

in a quadrupolar electric ﬁeld, whereas a hexapolar ﬁeld
is needed to form a harmonic trap for a molecule with
a linear Stark shift. In our experiments we use 15ND3
molecules in the low-ﬁeld seeking hyperﬁne levels of the
inversion doublet of the vibrational and
J, K
|
electronic ground state. These molecules experience a
quadratic Stark shift for small electric ﬁeld strengths and
a linear Stark shift for larger electric ﬁeld strengths. The
dependence of the Stark shift on the electric ﬁeld strength
E for 15ND3 in these levels is given by [21]:

1, 1
|

i

i

WStark(E) =

Winv
2

2

(cid:19)

s(cid:18)

+ (

µE)2 −

1
2

Winv
2

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(2)

with Winv the inversion splitting and µ the dipole mo-
ment. For 15ND3 the inversion splitting is 1430.3 MHz
[8] and the dipole moment is taken to be the same as for
14ND3, i.e. 1.48 D [22]. At even larger ﬁeld strengths,
the eﬀect of mixing with higher rotational levels becomes
more important and higher order terms have to be taken
into account.

Using the four electrode geometry shown in Fig. 1
it is possible to create a ﬁeld with dominant dipolar,
quadrupolar or hexapolar contributions, by applying the
appropriate voltages. The geometry of the trap is the
same as was used previously to create an ac electric trap
[23]. It consists of two rings with an inner diameter of
10 mm and two endcaps. The two rings have a width
of 4.6 mm and are separated by 2.9 mm, whereas the
two endcaps are separated by 2z0 = 9.1 mm. They each
have a hole with a diameter of 2.0 mm, the ﬁrst to allow
molecules to enter and the second to extract the ions that
are produced in the detection scheme.

−

In Fig. 2 the voltages needed for two diﬀerent trapping
U2 is applied to the
ﬁelds are shown. When a voltage
two ring electrodes and a voltage U2 is applied to both
endcaps, such as shown on the left-hand side of the ﬁgure,
a ﬁeld is formed with a dominant quadrupole term. Using
a commercially available ﬁnite element program [24] the
potential of this conﬁguration is simulated. Below the
trap cross-section the electric ﬁeld strength as a function
of position is shown for both the ρ-direction (solid line)
and the z-direction (dotted line). Fitting the correspond-
ing potential to equation 1, we ﬁnd that Φ0 ≈ −
0.43 U2,
0.04 U2 and that
0.35 U2, and Φ6 ≈ −
Φ2 ≈
the uneven terms are zero due to symmetry. Beneath the
electric ﬁeld strength in Fig. 2 the Stark energy in mK
(T = WStark/k, with k the Boltzmann constant) of a
15ND3 molecule in this ﬁeld is shown. The electric ﬁeld
in the quadrupole trap increases linearly with distance,
but, because of the nonlinear dependence of the Stark en-
ergy on the electric ﬁeld, the potential is harmonic near
the center of the trap. Further away from the center the
potential is linear. The resulting trap is tight (the trap-
ping frequency is ωz/2π = 1.7 kHz at the center of the
trap) and has a depth of 0.09 K for 15ND3.

1.05 U2, Φ4 ≈

A hexapole trap results when the voltages U3 and

U3
are applied alternately to the four electrodes of the trap
as shown on the right-hand side of Fig. 2. A ﬁt of the po-
U3
tential of this ﬁeld to equation 1 yields Φ1 = 0, Φ3 ≈

−

2

FIG. 2: Two cross-sections of the trap. On the left-hand side,
the voltages that result in a quadrupole trap are shown, along
with lines of constant electric ﬁeld for electric ﬁeld strengths
of every kV/cm from 1 to 7 kV/cm and every 5 kV/cm from
10 to 25 kV/cm (shown in color online, with increasing ﬁeld
strength going from blue to red). On the right-hand side,
the same is shown for a hexapole trap. Below the two cross-
sections, the electric ﬁeld is shown along with the Stark energy
of a 15ND3 molecule as a function of position in the ρ- and
z-direction (solid line and dotted line, respectively).

0.04 U3, with the even terms being zero due
and Φ5 ≈ −
to symmetry. Again, both the electric ﬁeld strength along
the ρ- and z-direction (solid and dotted line, respectively)
and the Stark energy of a 15ND3 molecule in this ﬁeld are
shown below the cross-sections of the trap. The electric
ﬁeld strength in this trap is quadratically dependent on
the distance from the center. However, due to the non-
linear Stark eﬀect the potential is essentially ﬂat near the
center of the trap. Away from the center the potential
becomes harmonic. This trap is less tight (the trapping
frequency is ωz/2π = 0 at the center of the trap and goes
to ωz/2π = 750 Hz further away from the center) and
has a depth of 0.35 K for 15ND3.

When applying voltages of -U1, -0.6 U1, 0.6 U1, and U1

3

dent on the ratio between the dipole and hexapole term.
In the upper graph of Fig. 4 the distance between the two
in the
wells is shown as a function of the ratio
case of an ideal hexapole and dipole ﬁeld (solid line). The
dotted line shows the same for the diameter of the donut-
shaped minimum. The crosses and triangles (double-well
trap and donut trap, respectively) indicate the simulated
value of this well separation, using the ﬁnite element pro-
gram with U3 = 5 kV and diﬀerent values of U1.

U1/U3|
|

The height of the barrier between the two wells is
shown in the lower graph of Fig. 4, given in mK for
15ND3. In the case of an ideal hexapole and dipole ﬁeld
(solid line), this height is the same for the double-well and
donut trap and is solely dependent on the value of
.
U1|
|
Note that the barrier height is identical to the amount
of potential energy gained by a 15ND3 molecule in the
center of one of the wells when switching to the single-
well conﬁguration. This can be seen by realizing that
in the center of the double-well trap, i.e. at the top of
the barrier, the electric ﬁeld strength is determined by
the dipole term only, as the hexapole ﬁeld is zero there.
In the center of one of the wells the hexapole ﬁeld is
equal to the dipole ﬁeld, although opposite in direction.
Therefore, when switching the dipole ﬁeld oﬀ to produce
a single-well trap, molecules originally at the center of
one of the two wells will now have a potential energy
equal to the barrier height. Values for the barrier height
were obtained using the ﬁnite element program as well
and are shown as crosses (double-well trap) and trian-
gles (donut trap) in the lower graph of Fig. 4. From
these two graphs it is clear that both the well separation
and the barrier height, and therefore also the collision
energy of the molecules upon double- to single-well con-
version, can easily be changed by varying the voltages on
the four electrodes. At the maximum value of
used
in the experiment,
= 0.55 kV, the barrier height is
U1|
|
on the order of 5 mK. The separation between the wells
is 1.8 mm in this case (U3 = 5 kV), whereas the diameter
of the donut-shaped minimum is 2.2 mm.

U1|
|

III. EXPERIMENT

In Fig. 5 the experimental setup is shown. In the ex-
periments, the trap is loaded from a Stark-decelerated
molecular beam. A mixture of 5 % 15ND3 seeded in
Xenon is supersonically expanded from a pulsed valve
70 ◦C,
at a 10 Hz rate. Due to cooling of the valve to
the gas pulse has a velocity of 280 m/s. In the expan-
sion, about 60 % of the ammonia molecules are inter-
nally cooled to the ground state of para-ammonia, the
inversion doublet in the electronic and
J, K
|
vibrational ground state. After passing through a skim-
mer, those molecules that reside in the low-ﬁeld seek-
ing hyperﬁne levels of the upper component of the inver-
sion doublet are focused into the Stark decelerator by a
6 cm long hexapole. Molecules in high-ﬁeld seeking lev-
els are attracted by the high electric ﬁelds of both the

1, 1

=

−

i

i

|

FIG. 3: Two cross-sections of the trap. On either side the
voltages that are applied when a dipole ﬁeld is added to
a hexapole ﬁeld are shown. Lines of constant electric ﬁeld
are shown for electric ﬁeld strengths of 0.1 kV/cm, every
0.5 kV/cm from 0.5 to 2 kV/cm, and every 5 kV/cm from
5 to 25 kV/cm (shown in color online, with increasing ﬁeld
strength going from blue to red). On the left-hand side (right-
hand side) U1 and U3 have the same (opposite) sign. In each
case both the electric ﬁeld and the Stark energy of a 15ND3
molecule as a function of position are shown in both the ρ-
and z-direction (solid line and dotted line, respectively).

0.88 U1, Φ3 = 0 and Φ5 ≈

consecutively to the four electrodes of the trap, a dipolar
ﬁeld is formed. Fitting the potential of this ﬁeld to equa-
0.09 U1,
tion 1 results in Φ1 ≈
with the even terms being zero due to symmetry. Adding
a dipole ﬁeld to a hexapole ﬁeld results in either a double-
well potential or a donut potential, depending on the rel-
ative sign of the dipole and hexapole term.
In Fig. 3
both conﬁgurations are shown, along with the electric
ﬁeld strength and the Stark energy of a 15ND3 molecule
in this ﬁeld along the ρ- and z-direction (solid and dot-
ted line, respectively). Both the distance between the
two minima in the double-well trap and the diameter of
the ring-shaped minimum in the donut trap are depen-

4

between pairs of rods. Each consecutive pair of rods is
rotated over 90 ◦ and within each pair, a positive voltage
of 10 kV is applied to one electrode, whereas the same
negative voltage is applied to the other. A more extensive
description of this part of the setup, along with the oper-
ation principle of the decelerator can be found elsewhere
[8, 25]. Using a phase angle of 57.5◦ a subset of low-
ﬁeld seeking molecules with an initial velocity of around
280 m/s is decelerated to about 15 m/s at the exit of
the decelerator. After 5 mm the molecules are transver-
sally focused into the trap by a second (12.5 mm long)
hexapole. Subsequently, they are longitudinally focused
into the trap using a buncher that is placed another 5 mm
downstream of the hexapole. The buncher has a similar
geometry as the trap. Before the ammonia molecules en-
ter the trap, voltages are applied to the trap such that a
last electric ﬁeld slope is formed. In gaining Stark energy
when entering the trap, the low-ﬁeld seeking molecules
lose their last kinetic energy and reach a stand-still in
the middle of the trap. At this moment the voltages on
the four electrodes are switched to generate a particular
trapping potential, thereby conﬁning the molecules in ei-
ther a quadrupole, hexapole, double-well or donut poten-
tial. After a certain trapping time, the trap is turned oﬀ
and molecules in the upper component of the inversion
doublet are ionized in a state-selective (2+1)-Resonance
Enhanced Multi Photon Ionization (REMPI) scheme, us-
ing a pulsed UV-laser around 317 nm [26]. The resulting
ions are subsequently detected in a time-of-ﬂight (TOF)
mass-spectrometer. Using a 75 cm lens the ionization
laser is focused into the trap passing through the 2.9 mm
gap between the two ring electrodes. The laser focus is
estimated to be about 200 µm in diameter. Applying
small bias voltages of 200 V, 150 V, -150 V and -200 V
to the four electrodes of the trap results in an electric
ﬁeld that accelerates the ions towards the detector. The
ions are detected over a length of 2 mm along the laser-
beam, limited by the size of the hole in the endcap. Us-
ing a computer controlled translation stage, the focus of
the laserbeam can be moved along the beam-axis, i.e.
along the z-direction, over about 2.5 mm. In this way,
the spatial distribution of the trapped molecules can be
measured.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In Fig. 6, the density of trapped 15ND3 molecules is
shown as a function of position in the z-direction, both
for hexapole and for quadrupole trapping voltages. The
measurements are taken after the molecules have been
trapped for about 72 ms. We found that in order to
obtain a single-well proﬁle for the molecules conﬁned in
the hexapole trap a small dipole term had to be added.
We attribute this to deviations of the distances between
the electrodes from the ideal geometry. This compen-
sating dipole term is added in all subsequent measure-
ments. As the quadrupole trap is much tighter than the

FIG. 4: Well separation as a function of |U1/U3| and barrier
height (for 15ND3) as a function of |U1| in the ideal double-
well (solid line) and donut trap (dotted line). In both graphs
the crosses (double-well trap) and triangles (donut trap) show
the same quantities obtained from electric ﬁeld simulations of
the actual trap geometry.

FIG. 5: Experimental setup. A pulsed supersonic beam of
15ND3 molecules seeded in Xenon exits a cooled valve with a
velocity of 280 m/s. Ammonia molecules in the low-ﬁeld seek-
ing hyperﬁne levels of the |J, Ki = |1, 1i state are focused into
the decelerator by a hexapole, decelerated, and then transver-
sally and longitudinally focused into the trap by a hexapole
and buncher, respectively. The molecules are detected in a
TOF-mass spectrometer.

hexapoles and the decelerator and will be lost from the
beam. Molecules that reside in the remainder of the hy-
perﬁne levels of the inversion doublet, that only have a
higher order Stark eﬀect, will hardly be eﬀected by the
electric ﬁelds. The decelerator consists of 95 pairs of
parallel 3 mm-diameter rods, with a closest distance of
2 mm between two rods and a closest distance of 2.5 mm

5

FIG. 6: Density of trapped 15ND3 molecules as a function of
position in the z-direction for both the quadrupole trap (upper
trace) and the hexapole trap (lower trace), after trapping for
about 72 ms.

hexapole trap (see Fig. 2), a signal diﬀerence arises be-
tween the two traces. The peak density of molecules in
the hexapole trap is about 107cm−3, whereas it is about
ten times higher in the quadrupole trap. The loading
process is identical for both traps and is matched to the
hexapole trap, resulting in a less than perfect match of
the decelerated packet to the quadrupole trap. This gives
rise to the peculiar shape of the measured distribution in
the quadrupole trap, which seems to consist of two pack-
ets with diﬀerent temperatures.

In Fig. 7 the density of 15ND3 molecules in the
hexapole trap is shown as a function of position in the
z-direction. By adding a dipole term to the hexapole
term, the shape of the trap and thereby the proﬁle of the
trapped molecules can be changed signiﬁcantly. Each
trace in Fig. 7 corresponds to a diﬀerent value of the
added dipole term. When no dipole is added, the trap
consists of only a single well. A single peak results, as
trace (d) shows. Adding a negative dipole term trans-
forms the single well to a double well, with a distance and
barrier between the two wells that depend on the value
of the dipole term. The upper three traces of Fig. 7 show
two peaks that move closer together as the dipole term
is increased from -0.55 kV (trace (a)) to -0.3 kV (trace
(b)) to -0.15 kV (trace (c)). When a positive dipole term
is added, the shape of the trap becomes that of a donut.
As only molecules in the relatively small laser focus near
the center of the trap are ionized in the detection scheme,
this transformation to a donut-shaped trap leads to a re-
duction in signal only, as is shown by trace (e) and (f)
(U1 = 0.25 kV and U1 = 0.55 kV, respectively).

At the densities that we have in the trap, no thermal-
izing collisions occur, and formally no temperature can
be assigned. To nevertheless characterize the trapped
sample in terms of a temperature, we ﬁtted the density
proﬁle to the thermal density distribution [27]:

n(ρ, z) = n0e

−WStark(ρ,z)/kT ,

(3)

with n0
trap minimum and
WStark(ρ, z) the potential energy as a function of posi-

the density at

the

FIG. 7: Density of 15ND3 molecules conﬁned in a hexapole
trap as a function of position in the z-direction. A negative
dipole term of -0.55 kV, -0.3 kV and -0.15 k V is added to the
hexapole term (U3 = 5 kV) in the upper three traces (a-c),
resulting in a double-well potential. Trace (d) shows a packet
in a purely single well. A positive dipole term of 0.25 kV and
0.55 kV is added for the lower two traces (e-f), thereby creat-
ing a donut potential. On the right-hand side, trace (a) and
(d) are shown once more, along with simulations of the den-
sity distribution of the packet of molecules for temperatures
of 5, 10 and 20 mK.

−

tion. On the right-hand side of Fig. 7 the measurements
with a dipole term of U1 =
0.55 kV and U1 = 0 kV
are shown once more, along with the thermal density
distribution as obtained from equation (3) for tempera-
tures of 5, 10 and 20 mK. It can be seen that in either
case the simulated distribution with a temperature of
10 mK matches the measurement best. The same sim-
ulation has been performed for the spatial distribution
of molecules conﬁned in a quadrupole trap. Due to the
seemingly double proﬁle, it is more diﬃcult to describe
this distribution with a single temperature. A temper-
ature of 75 mK seems to best describe the broad base,
whereas the sharp center peak agrees best with a tem-
perature of 5 mK. An alternative method to deduce a
temperature is to measure the width of the packet of
trapped molecules as a function of time after the trap
has been turned oﬀ. Measurements of this type are
shown in Fig. 8. On the left-hand side two proﬁles of
15ND3 molecules are seen, one after 20 µs and one after
420 µs after switching oﬀ the hexapole trap (upper and
lower curve, respectively). In either case the molecules
have been conﬁned for about 72 ms. Due to the veloc-
ity spread of the molecules the packet spreads out af-
ter the trap has been turned oﬀ, resulting in less signal

6

together, this analysis only serves to indicate that the
temperature of the trapped sample is in the mK range.
In Fig. 9 the density of ammonia molecules is shown in
both the quadrupole and the hexapole trap as a func-
tion of time that the trap is on. The molecules are
seen to leave the trap with a 1/e time of 0.16 s for the
hexapole trap and 0.17 s for the quadrupole trap, the
same within error bars. The trapping lifetime is mainly
limited by background collisions (background pressure
10−8 mbar). Optical pumping by black-body radiation
4
·
cannot be completely neglected, however. In the room-
temperature trap, pumping of the 15ND3 molecules to
the vibrationally excited ν2 level (umbrella mode) around
750 cm−1 is expected to occur on the time-scale of a sec-
ond.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a new electrostatic trapping geom-
etry, that illustrates the versatility of electric ﬁelds in
forming tailored trapping potentials. By applying diﬀer-
ent voltages to a set of four electrodes, diﬀerent trapping
ﬁelds are created, between which rapid switching on a
timescale of 100 ns is possible. Spatial distributions and
lifetimes of a cold packet of 15ND3 molecules loaded into
both a hexapole and a quadrupole trap are shown. Ad-
ditionally, we studied a hexapole trap that transforms
into a double-well or donut trap when diﬀerent dipole
terms are added. The barrier height and well separation
of either one of these two traps depend on the strength
of the dipolar and hexapolar electric ﬁeld and are easily
changed.

Rapid switching between, for instance, the double-well
trap and a pure hexapole trap oﬀers good prospects for
measuring collision cross-sections as a function of col-
lision energy at low temperatures. The amount of en-
ergy gained by molecules trapped in one of the wells
after switching to the single-well depends solely on the
strength of the electric dipole ﬁeld, which can be easily
varied.

Acknowledgments

This work is part of the research program of the ‘Sticht-
ing voor Fundamenteel Onderzoek der Materie (FOM)’,
which is ﬁnancially supported by the Netherlands Organ-
isation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO). H.L.B. acknowl-
edges ﬁnancial support from NWO via a VENI-grant.
The research of M.S. was made possible through a Liebig
stipend of the ‘Fonds der Chemischen Industrie’. We
thank Andr´e J.A. van Roij and Henrik Haak for the me-
chanical design and construction of the trap and Boris
Sartakov for helpful discussions.

FIG. 8: Determination of the temperature of a packet of
15ND3 molecules trapped in the hexapole trap. On the left,
the proﬁle of a packet is shown 20 µs and 420 µs after the
trap is turned oﬀ (upper and lower trace, respectively). From
a ﬁt to a Gaussian lineshape the FWHM of the distribution
is obtained, as shown as a function of free-ﬂight time (solid
line with crosses) on the right-hand side of the ﬁgure.

FIG. 9: Density of 15ND3 molecules in the quadrupole (upper
trace) and the hexapole (lower trace) trap as a function of
time that the trap is on.

and an increased width. To obtain this width a Gaus-
sian lineshape is ﬁtted to each proﬁle. The acquired
full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) is shown as a func-
tion of free-ﬂight time on the right-hand side of the ﬁg-
ure (solid line with crosses). To deduce a temperature,
t)2 (dotted line
this curve is ﬁtted to
with triangles), resulting in a velocity spread of 2.3 m/s
and a position spread of 1.8 mm (both FWHM). Using
∆vz = √8ln2
kT /m [28], this gives a temperature of
·
about 2.5 mK.

(∆z)2 + (∆vz ·

p

The diﬀerent temperatures of 10 mK and 2.5 mK ob-
tained by the two diﬀerent methods actually correspond
to a diﬀerence of only a few tenths of a mm in the width
of the initial packet. Such a small diﬀerence can be ex-
plained by possible misalignments of the electrodes of the
trap, causing uncertainties in the actual electric ﬁeld, and
therefore in WStark(ρ, z). Moreover, extracting the width
of the packets from the measurements is quite sensitive
to how the baseline is taken into account in the ﬁt. All

p

7

[1] K. Burnett, P. S. Julienne, P. D. Lett, E. Teisinga, and

C. J. Williams, Nature 416, 225 (2002).

[2] N. Balakrishnan and A. Dalgarno, J. Chem. Phys. 113,

621 (2000).

341, 652 (2001).

[3] N. Balakrishnan and A. Dalgarno, Chem. Phys. Lett.

[4] J. L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. A 63, 052714 (2001).
[5] L. Santos, G. V. Shlyapnikov, P. Zoller, and M. Lewen-

stein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1791 (2000).

[6] K. G´oral, L. Santos, and M. Lewenstein, Phys. Rev. Lett.

88, 170406 (2002).

[7] J. Stuhler, A. Griesmaier, T. Koch, M. Fattori, T. Pfau,
S. Giovanazzi, P. Pedri, and L. Santos, Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 150406 (2005).

[8] J. van Veldhoven, J. K¨upper, H. L. Bethlem, B. Sartakov,
A. J. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 337
(2004).

[9] E. R. Hudson, H. J. Lewandowski, B. C. Sawyer, and

J. Ye, arXiv p. physics/0601054 (2006).
[10] W. H. Wing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 631 (1980).
[11] H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, F. M. H. Crompvoets, R. T.
Jongma, A. J. A. van Roij, and G. Meijer, Nature 406,
491 (2000).

[12] F. M. H. Crompvoets, H. L. Bethlem, R. T. Jongma, and

G. Meijer, Nature 411, 174 (2001).

[13] S. Y. T. van de Meerakker, P. H. M. Smeets, N. Van-
haecke, R. T. Jongma, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett.
94, 023004 (2005).

[14] N. E. Shafer-Ray, K. A. Milton, B. R. Furneaux, E. R. I.
Abraham, and G. R. Kalbﬂeisch, Phys. Rev. A 67,
045401 (2003).

[15] G. Xu, Ph.D. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin

(2001).

[16] M. R. Andrews, C. G. Townsend, H.-J. Miesner, D. S.
Durfee, D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle, Science 275, 637
(1997).

[17] S. Inouye, S. Gupta, T. Rosenband, A. P. Chikkatur,
A. G¨orlitz, T. L. Gustavson, A. E. Leanhardt, D. E.
Pritchard, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 080402
(2001).

[18] M. Albiez, R. Gati, J. F¨olling, S. Hunsmann, M. Cris-
tiani, and M. K. Oberthaler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 010402
(2005).

[19] C. Buggle, J. L´eonard, W. von Klitzing, and J. T. M.

Walraven, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 173202 (2004).

[20] T. Bergeman, G. Erez, and H. J. Metcalf, Phys. Rev. A

35, 1535 (1987).

[21] C. H. Townes and A. L. Schawlow, Microwave Spec-

troscopy (Dover Publications, New York, 1975).

[22] R. L. Bhattacharjee, L. H. Johnston, G. R. Sudhakaran,

and J. C. Sarker, J. Mol. Spec. 138, 38 (1989).

[23] J. van Veldhoven, H. L. Bethlem, and G. Meijer, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 94, 083001 (2005).

[24] D. A. Dahl, Simion 3D Version 6.0 (Idaho National En-

gineering Laboratory, Idaho Falls (USA), 1995).

[25] H. L. Bethlem, F. M. H. Crompvoets, R. T. Jongma,
S. Y. T. van de Meerakker, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. A
65, 053416 (2002).

[26] M. N. R. Ashfold, R. N. Dixon, N. Little, R. J. Stickland,
and C. M. Western, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 1754 (1988).
[27] O. J. Luiten, M. W. Reynolds, and J. T. M. Walraven,

Phys. Rev. A 53, 381 (1996).

[28] F. Reif, Fundamentals of statistical and thermal physics

(McGraw-Hill, Singapore, 1985).

