6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Unexpected Magnetism of Small Silver Clusters

M. Pereiro,1, 2, ∗ D. Baldomir,1, 2 and J. E. Arias2
1Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela E-15782, Spain.
2Instituto de Investigaci´ons Tecnol´oxicas, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela E-15782, Spain.
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

The ground-state electronic, structural, and magnetic properties of small silver clusters, Agn
(2≤n≤22), have been studied using a linear combination of atomic Gaussian-type orbitals within
the density functional theory. The results show that the silver atoms, which are diamagnetic in bulk
environment, can be magnetic when they are grouped together in clusters. The Ag13 cluster with
icosahedral symmetry has the highest magnetic moment per atom among the studied silver clusters.
The cluster symmetry and the reduced coordination number speciﬁc of small clusters reveal as a
fundamental factor for the onset of the magnetism.

PACS numbers: 36.40.Cg,36.40.Qv,31.15.Ar

In the last two decades, the research ﬁeld of clusters
has shown a rapid development in both experimental and
theoretical investigations [1], since the clusters are well
suited for several applications. For example, there has
been a traditional interest in applications to catalysis [2],
due to the considerable surface/volume ratio of clusters.
More recently, clusters or nanoparticles that possess mag-
netic properties have oﬀered exciting new opportunities
for biomedical applications including (i) magnetic sepa-
ration of labeled cells; (ii) therapeutic drug delivery; (iii)
hyperthermic treatment for malignant cells; (iv) contrast
enhancement agents for magnetic resonance imaging ap-
plications; (v) and also very recently for manipulating
cell membranes [3].

Clusters are on the border line between atoms and bulk
and thereby, they play an important role in understand-
ing the transition from the microscopic structure to the
macroscopic structure of matter. Although 4d and 5d
transition metal atoms have unﬁlled localized d states,
none of them are magnetic. Only a few of the 3d transi-
tion metals form magnetic solids. Thus, from the mag-
netic point of view, one of the long standing problems
in condensed matter physics is to understand why some
nonmagnetic metals become magnetic when they con-
dense into clusters. There are two factors characteristic
of clusters that mainly contribute to the onset and en-
hancement of the magnetism, namely, the reduced coor-
dination number and the high symmetry since that, sym-
metry enables degeneracy and degeneracy spawns mag-
netism [4]. According to this, an icosahedral structure is
a good candidate for the appearance of the magnetism
because the maximal degeneracy of an irreducible rep-
resentation of the icosahedra (Ih) group is 5 whereas all
other cluster symmetries allow at most three-fold degen-
eracy, as was reported by Reddy et al. for Pd, Rh, and
Ru [5].

In this letter, we present ﬁrst-principles calculations on
small silver clusters exhibiting an important magnetism,

∗Email address: fampl@usc.es

which has not been predicted until now. In the present
work, we study the evolution of the magnetism of sil-
ver clusters as a function of the cluster size and special
emphasis is placed on the eﬀects of cluster symmetry.
The magnetic behavior that we got is very interesting, if
not astonishing, compared with the silver bulk magnetic
properties. To the best knowledge of us, nobody has pre-
dicted or even observed magnetism in small bare silver
clusters, however our computational simulations antici-
pate the onset and enhancement of the magnetism for
the silver clusters that gather special conditions like high
symmetry, and reduced coordination number.
In this
respect, the Ag13 cluster exhibits the highest magnetic
moment among the studied clusters and converges into a
very stable structure.

With the aim of studying the magnetic properties of
small silver clusters, Agn (2≤n≤22), we have performed
density functional theory-based calculations consisting
of a linear combination of Gaussian-type-orbitals Kohn-
Sham density-functional methodology as implemented
in the demon-ks3p5 program package [6]. All-electron
spin-unrestricted calculations were carried out at the gen-
eralized gradient approximation (GGA) level to take the
exchange-correlation (XC) eﬀects into account [7]. Local-
density approximation sometimes yields inaccurate bond
lengths and total energies due to the insuﬃciency in de-
scribing the strong correlation eﬀect of the localized d
electrons and charge density inhomogeneities. In these
regards, the GGA should be a better choice [8]. For this
reason, at the beginning of this work and to satisfy our-
selves that the numerical procedure is reliable, we initiate
a search of the functional that better ﬁtted the calcu-
lated bond length of the silver dimer to the experimental
one. We found that the functional that better ﬁtted the
bond length was the one developed by Perdew and Wang
[7], given a bond length of 2.535 ˚A, that is in excellent
agreement with the experimental measure (2.53350 ˚A)
reported in Ref. [9]. An orbital basis set of contraction
pattern (633321/53211*/531+) was used in conjunction
with the corresponding (5,5;5,5) auxiliary basis set for
describing the s, p and d orbitals [10]. The grid for nu-
merical evaluation of the XC terms had 128 radial shells

2

building block for a nanomaterial is its chemical stability
relative to other clusters of the same material. With the
aim of studying the stability of Ag2-Ag22 clusters, we
have plotted the HOMO-LUMO gaps, and the cohesive
energies in Fig. 2(a),(b). The cohesive energies for Ag
clusters are ﬁtted to a linear regression and compared in
Fig. 2(b) with the spherical droplet model of Miedema
[16]

Ec(n) = Ebc −

γ0Va

2/3,

(1)

1/3

36π
n (cid:19)

(cid:18)

where Ebc is the bulk cohesive energy, γ0 = 7.8 ×
1018 eV/m2 is the surface energy of the bulk silver, Va
is the atomic volume, and n is the number of atoms in
the cluster. Despite that some clusters (2≤n≤6) are far
from spherical, our calculated cohesive energies are in
good agreement with the Miedema’s model. Indeed, the
bulk cohesive energy predicted by our calculations (2.63
eV/atom) diﬀers by only 10% from the experimental
ﬁndings (2.95 eV/atom) [17], given us conﬁdence that the
lowest energy structures plotted in Fig. 1 are reliable. In
Fig.2(a) we can see that the most stable even-numbered
clusters are Ag2, Ag6, Ag8 and Ag18. Except for Ag6, it
is a consequence of the closure of the electronic shell [18].
For the odd-numbered clusters, the HOMO-LUMO gaps
decrease monotonically as the cluster size increase, ex-
cept for the Ag13 cluster. The large HOMO-LUMO gap
of Ag13 relative to the odd-numbered clusters enhances
its chemical stability and inertness, as well as its ability
to assemble into magnetic nanoparticles because it is a
magnetic cluster with a considerable magnetic moment
per atom, as is discussed below.

Our results on the magnetic properties of the Agn
(2≤n≤22) clusters are most fascinating,
if not unex-
pected, compared with the silver bulk magnetic prop-
erties.
Indeed, the silver bulk magnetic ordering is
well-known to be diamagnetic, as can be inferred from
its negative magnetic susceptibility (χm=-19.5×10−6
cm3/mol), whereas silver atoms when they coagulate to a
cluster become either magnetic or non-magnetic depend-
ing on the cluster size, as is shown in Fig. 3. For Ag2,
Ag8 and Ag18 clusters, our calculations clearly show that
they are highly stable with large HOMO-LUMO gaps [see
Fig. 2(a)] and diamagnetic [see Fig. 3]. The phenomenon
can be understood simple from the 2, 8, and 18-electron
rule, as described by the cluster shell models [19]. The
former rule predicts transition metal clusters to be sta-
ble and diamagnetic when the valence shell of the metal
atom contains 2, 8 or 18 electrons that completely ﬁll
electron shells forming closed electronic structures with
paired spins.

From Ag3 up to Ag12 excluding Ag2 and Ag8, the clus-
ter topologies converge into a geometry where all atoms
belong to the surface [Fig. 1], and consequently with a
reduced coordination number [Fig. 3(b)]. This condition
favors a reduced charge accumulation in nearest neighbor
atoms that according to the calculated Mulliken popula-
tion analysis (MPA) is less than 0.1 electron per atom in

FIG. 1: (Color online). Lowest energy structures and the
symmetry point groups assigned to the Agn (2≤n≤22) clus-
ters. The magnetic moments, namely m, of the atoms showed
in green (-1.5 µB≤m≤-0.4 µB) and blue (-0.1 µB≤m≤0 µB)
are aligned antiferromagnetically to the other ones.

of points and each shell had 26 angular points. Spuri-
ous one-center contributions to the XC forces, typically
found in systems with metal-metal bonds when using a
nonlocal functional, are eliminated in a similar way as
has been done in Ref. [11]. A wide set of spin multi-
plicities ranging from 1 to 11 was checked to ensure that
the lowest-energy electronic and magnetic conﬁguration
is reached. The geometries were fully optimized without
symmetry and geometry constraints using the Broyden-
Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm [12]. During the op-
timization, the convergence criterion for the norm of the
energy gradient was ﬁxed to 10−4 a.u. while it was 10−7
a.u. for the energy and 10−6 a.u. for the charge density.
A huge sampling of trial geometries taken from the lit-
erature was evaluated. While for these small clusters it
is nearly impossible to search for all possible geometries,
the detailed search that we have carried out give us some
conﬁdence that the structural minima has been found.
For clusters with size varying from 2 up to 12, the struc-
tural minima resulting from our calculations are closely
related to the ones reported by R. Fournier [13], whereas
all other cluster structures are quite similar to the ones
of Ref. [14]. In the early stage of the geometry optimiza-
tion process for silver clusters with size ranging from 13
to 22 and with the aim of speeding up the calculations,
the structure of the silver clusters was ﬁrst optimized in
conjunction with a 17-electron scalar relativistic model
core potential designed for the adequate description of
the silver dimer bond length [15]. Once the geometry of
the cluster was converged for the model core potential,
an all-electron structural-relaxation calculation was per-
formed leading to the current lowest energy structures
showed in Fig. 1.

One of the criteria for a cluster to be used as a potential

3

FIG. 2: (a) The HOMO-LUMO gap, and (b) the cohesive
energy per atom of small silver clusters as a function of the
cluster size n (2≤n≤22).

FIG. 3: (Color online). Evolution of magnetic moment per
atom of the most stable cluster isomers of each size. (a) Aver-
age magnetic moment per atom versus cluster size. (b) Color
representation of the magnetic moment per atom of each silver
cluster. The numbers inside the small charts denote the co-
ordination number. On the right side, the color palette gives
information about the numerical values of the atomic mag-
netic moments. The numbers labeling every atom of each
cluster in Fig. 1 are closely related to the ones displayed in
x-axis.

average. Likewise, the Mayer bond order analysis reveals
that silver atoms are sharing the unpaired 5s electrons
forming a covalent bond and thereby, low spin conﬁgu-
rations are expected. For example, the even-numbered
clusters become diamagnetic because they have an even
number of 5s electrons that create a cloud of paired 5s
electrons [Fig. 3(a)], whereas for the odd-numbered clus-
ters the electronic conﬁguration with one unpaired spin
electron is favored energetically over the whole feasible
spin conﬁgurations studied in this work. The resulting
odd-numbered clusters retain an average magnetic mo-
ment per atom that decreases monotonically with the
increase of the coordination number [Fig. 3(a),(b)] since
the orbital overlap expands as the coordination number
does, such as was reported for Fe, Co and Ni in Ref. [20]
and for 13-atom clusters of Pd, Rh, and Ru in Ref. [5].

In Fig. 3(a) we can see that Ag13 exhibits the highest
average magnetic moment per atom among the studied
clusters. To understand the origin of this considerable

FIG. 4: (Color online). Contour plot of the electron localiza-
tion function for the three mutually orthogonal golden planes
((a), (b), (c)) of the icosahedral symmetry and densities of
states (DOS) for the outer-shell atoms (d1), and inner atom
(d2) in an Ag13 cluster. The spin-polarized DOS is shown in
(d3). The dashed vertical line represents the Fermi level.

magnetic moment (0.39 µB/atom) we show in Fig. 4(a)-
(d3) the electron localization function (ELF) and the
densities of states (DOS) for the inner and the outer-shell
atoms. The MPA reveals that the electron charge trans-
fers from the outer-shell Ag atoms to the central Ag atom
which gains an excess of charge of about 0.8 electrons.
The charge transfer, that is favored by the icosahedral
symmetry, can be described graphically from our corre-
sponding ELF plot.
In Fig. 4(a)-(c), the contour plot
of the ELF indicates a slight concentration of the light
blue color (0.15-0.30 in bar color) surrounding the cen-
tral atom, and give rise to an enhancement of the electron
localization around inner atom. The large coordination
number of the central Ag atom results in an enhancement
of the overlap of its 4d orbitals with those of other outer-
shell Ag atoms. Therefore, for the inner atom the charge
transfer populate mainly the lower energy 4d states (∼ -
10.2 eV) with reduced exchange splitting whereas for the
outer-shell atoms these states become less occupied, as is
shown in Fig. 4(d1),(d2) [21] and Fig. 4(d3), respectively.
Thereby, the charge transfer lead to a small loss of the
spin-up DOS at the Fermi level for the inner atom com-
pared with the outer-shell atoms and consequently, the
inner atom weakens its magnetism (0.35 µB/atom) and
the outer-shell atoms enhance their magnetic moments
(0.39 µB/atom) given rise to an increase of the average
magnetic moment of the Ag13 cluster.

4

From Ag14 to Ag22 except for Ag18 that have already
been studied above, the clusters converge into a distorted
icosahedral symmetry that depending on the cluster size,
the number of inner atoms is either one or two (see Fig.1).
In this case, the MPA conﬁrms a charge transfer mainly
from the peripheral atoms to the inner ones even greater
than the Ag13 case. This eﬀect decompensate the spin
pairing state and give rise to an antiferromagnetic align-
ment of the inner atoms to the outer ones and thus, the
clusters decrease the total magnetic moment compared
with the Ag13 cluster, as is shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3(b).
It is also observed in Fig. 3(a) that the average magnetic
moment per atom decreases as the cluster size gets bigger
up to n=19 and then, oscillates tending to decrease. The
phenomenon can be understood simply from the loss of

symmetry that reduces orbital degeneracy and weakens
magnetism [4]. According to this tendency, we expect for
greater clusters in size an enhancement of the magnetic
moment as long as the cluster stabilizes in a geometry of
high symmetry (e.g., Ag38, Ag55, and Ag75).

In conclusion, we have shown that the silver atoms can
be magnetic when they are grouped together in small
clusters. Particularly, the Ag13 cluster exhibits the high-
est magnetic moment per atom among the studied silver
clusters due to its high symmetry and degeneration.

The authors acknowledge the CESGA (Centro de Su-
percomputaci´on de Galicia), especially A. G´omez and C.
Fern´andez for computational assistance. The work was
supported by the Xunta de Galicia under the Project No.
PGIDIT02TMT20601PR.

[1] H. Haverland, ed., Clusters of Atoms and Molecules:
Theory, Experiment, and Clusters of Atoms. (Springer,
Berlin, 1994).

[2] C. R. Henry, Surf. Sci. Rep. 31, 235 (1998).
[3] C. C. Berry and A. S. G. Curtis, J. Phys. D:Appl. Phys.
36, R198 (2003); Q. A. Pankhurst, J. Connolly, S. K.
Jones, and J. Dobson, ibid. 36, R167 (2003); P. Tartaj
et al., ibid. 36, R182 (2003).

[4] B. I. Dunlap, Phys. Rev. A 41, 5691 (1990).
[5] B. V. Reddy, S. N. Khanna, and B. I. Dunlap, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 70, 3323 (1993).

[6] A. St-Amant and D. R. Salahub, Chem. Phys. Lett. 169,

[7] J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 46, 12947

387 (1990).

(1992).

[8] M. Pereiro et al., Int. J. Quantum Chem. 81, 422 (2001).
[9] B. Simard et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 186, 415 (1991).
[10] S. Huzinaga et al., Gaussian Basis Sets for Molecular

Calculations (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1984).

[11] L. Versluis and T. Ziegler, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 322 (1988).
[12] H. B. Schlegel, Modern Electronic Structure Theory

(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1995), chap. 8, p. 459.

[13] R. Fournier, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 2165 (2001).
[14] The

Cambridge

Cluster

Database,

http://www-wales.ch.cam.ac.uk/CCD.html.

[15] E. R. J. Andzelm and D. R. Salahub, J. Chem. Phys. 83,

4573 (1985).

[16] A. R. Miedema, Z. Metallkd. 69, 287 (1978).
[17] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics (Wiley,

New York, 2005), 8th ed.

[18] M. Pereiro and D. Baldomir, Phys. Rev. A 72, 045201

(2005).

[19] R. H. Crabtree, The Organometallic Chemistry of the

Transition Metals (Wiley, New York, 1988).
[20] F. Liu et al., Phys. Rev. B 39, 6914 (1989).
[21] In Fig. 4(d1), we show the DOS for the atom labeled with
the number 2 in Fig. 1 as a representative example of
the DOS for the outer-shell atoms, since from symmetry
considerations the external atoms have all of them similar
DOS plot.

