Spectroscopy of free radicals and radical containing entrance-channel complexes in
superﬂuid helium nano-droplets

Jochen K¨upper∗
Fritz-Haber-Institut der MPG, Faradayweg 4–6, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Jeremy M. Merritt§
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA and
Fritz-Haber-Institut der MPG, Faradayweg 4–6, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Dedicated to Roger E. Miller†

(Dated: 2nd February 2008)

The spectroscopy of free radicals and radical containing entrance-channel complexes embedded in
superﬂuid helium nano-droplets is reviewed. The collection of dopants inside individual droplets
in the beam represents a micro-canonical ensemble, and as such each droplet may be considered
an isolated cryo-reactor. The unique properties of the droplets, namely their low temperature
(0.4 K) and fast cooling rates (∼ 1016 K s−1) provides novel opportunities for the formation and
high-resolution studies of molecular complexes containing one or more free radicals. The production
methods of radicals are discussed in light of their applicability for embedding the radicals in helium
droplets. The spectroscopic studies performed to date on molecular radicals and on entrance / exit-
channel complexes of radicals with stable molecules are detailed. The observed complexes provide
new information on the potential energy surfaces of several fundamental chemical reactions and on
the intermolecular interactions present in open-shell systems. Prospects of further experiments of
radicals embedded in helium droplets are discussed, especially the possibilities to prepare and study
high-energy structures and their controlled manipulation, as well as the possibility of fundamental
physics experiments.

PACS numbers: 33.15.-e,34.20.-b,39.10.+j,82.30.Cf,82.33.Fg

Keywords: free radicals; superﬂuid helium nano-droplets; infrared spectroscopy; entrance / exit-channel com-
plexes; reaction dynamics; high energy structures; chemical energy storage

∗Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; electronic
address: jochen@fhi-berlin.mpg.de
§Electronic address: merritjm@unc.edu

†Deceased 6. November 2005

6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Contents

I. Introduction

II. Experimental methods

A. Spectroscopy in superﬂuid helium nano-droplets

B. Radical production

Pyrolysis

Other schemes

A. Propargyl

B. Nitric oxide

C. Other species

III. Radical monomers in helium droplets

IV. Radical-containing molecular complexes

A. Complexes containing halogen atoms

B. Complexes of hydrocarbon radicals

1. Complexes of methyl radical with HF and HCN

2. Larger hydrocarbon radicals

C. NO-HF

V. Interactions between helium droplets and embedded molecules

VI. Future directions

A. High energy structures for chemical energy storage

B. Other applications

C. Experimental improvements

VII. Summary

Acknowledgments

References

3

4

4

5

6

6

7

7

7

8

8

9

13

13

14

15

16

17

17

20

20

21

21

21

I.

INTRODUCTION

Doped superﬂuid helium nano-droplets have emerged as
a new and exciting tool for the study of the structure and
dynamics of a quantum solvent as well as the embedded
or attached atomic and molecular impurities themselves.
The unique properties of the droplets, namely their low
temperature and rapid cooling, make them a versatile
tool for spectroscopic studies of metastable species. Al-
though there have been a number of reviews on the spec-
troscopy of particles embedded in or attached to helium
nano-droplets [1–7], none of these articles covers the re-
cent advances made in the study of open shell, free rad-
ical metastable species. Therefore, an overview of this
emerging ﬁeld and the new possibilities it provides for the
understanding of chemical reaction dynamics is timely.

Radicals and molecular ions are among the most chemi-
cally reactive species known and play a key role in chem-
istry ranging from combustion processes [8] to the upper
atmosphere [9] and molecular synthesis in the interstellar
medium [10]. This high reactivity comes at a consider-
able cost to experimentalists; such transient species are
often very diﬃcult to maintain at suﬃcient concentra-
tions to be probed experimentally. While a great deal
of progress has been made by isolating radicals in vac-
uum, much less is known about the interactions of rad-
icals, or more generally, the features of their potential
energy surfaces (PES). A focal point in chemical reac-
tion dynamics has been to elucidate the properties of the
transition state, the point on the PES where bonds are
broken and reformed. Already in 1884 van’t Hoﬀ pro-
posed [11], and ﬁve years later Arrhenius provided an
physical interpretation [12], for an empirical, analytical
expression for the rate constant of a reaction, relating it
to an energy penalty needed to produce an activated com-
plex, which could then go on to produce the products. A
quantum-mechanical interpretation of the activation pro-
cess was ﬁrst given by London [13] and successively by
Eyring and Polyani [14], who introduced the concepts
of a reaction path and the transition state as a saddle-
Res-
point on a multi-dimensional PES (Sattelgebiet des
onanzgebirges“) for the H+H2, H+HBr, and H+Br2 re-
action systems.[245] Later, the eﬃciency of a reaction
could be predicted based on the initial reagent energy
(whether it be translational or vibrational) by develop-
ing the concept of early or late potential barriers [15, 16].
Recent advances in reactive scattering have now enabled
fully (initial and ﬁnal) quantum state resolved reaction
crosssections to be determined for a few prototype sys-
tems, like F+H2 [17–20], which was once considered to be
the holy grail of the ﬁeld. The matrix of initial and ﬁnal
quantum states provides a rigorous test of theoretical po-
tential energy surfaces. One should note, however, that
even at the full state to state level, impact parameter av-
eraging acts to convolute the experimental results, some-
times making it diﬃcult to draw quantitative conclusions
on the detailed features of the potential. Furthermore,

”

3

the scalability of such experiments to larger and larger
systems is prohibitive. Oriented collisions [21–24], and
especially the application of state-selected, decelerated
molecular beams [25–29] and their use in scattering ex-
periments [30] are likely to be important tools enabling
the experimentalist to further reduce the eﬀects of impact
parameter averaging.

While reactive scattering is a sensitive probe of the re-
pulsive wall of the PES, much less is known about the
long-range dispersive forces between reactive species. In-
deed, already Eyring and Polyani [14] discussed the ad-
ditional eﬀects of dispersion forces on the PES, which
predicted a minimum for the symmetric H3 molecule on
their collinear PES. For the heavier systems they con-
cluded that their calculations were not accurate enough
to incorporate these eﬀects quantitatively. However, the
van der Waals minima which result from the balance of
attractive and repulsive forces lie at the base of the tran-
sition state, and correspond to weakly bound clusters of
two (or more) reactants or products. These species are
labeled as entrance or exit channel complexes, respec-
tively. Given that the barriers to chemical reaction are
typically several orders of magnitude larger than disper-
sion (van der Waals) forces, the importance of these van
der Waals forces to reaction dynamics has largely been
neglected. Recent experimental and theoretical work on
the Cl + HD → HCl (DCl) + H (D) reaction, however, has
shown that the corresponding orientational eﬀects of the
long range potential can strongly inﬂuence the branching
ratios and the ﬁnal state distributions by giving the reac-
tants a torque, towards or away from the transition state
[31–35]. Therefore, the long-range van der Waals forces
can no longer be neglected for obtaining really quantita-
tive results. For collisions at even lower temperature [30]
such eﬀects will be even more important. Moreover, also
for the dissociation of formaldehyde [36, 37] and the hy-
drogen abstraction from hydrocarbon molecules by chlo-
rine [38] the eﬀects of long-range van der Waals interac-
tions have clearly been observed. Therefore, it must be
concluded, that a quantitative understanding of van der
Waals wells of molecular complexes is imperative.

One of the legacies that Roger E. Miller has left with
us is the sensitivity of high resolution spectroscopy of
such weakly bound complexes as a probe of the surround-
ing PES. Here again, theory plays a crucial role in solv-
ing the multidimensional problem standing between the
PES and the observed spectral transitions between eigen-
states of the exact Hamiltonian. More recently, these
spectroscopic techniques have been applied to reactive
systems, where now the experimental methods have the
added challenge of stabilizing the weakly bound com-
plex and preventing the reaction. Sometimes the cooling
provided by a free jet expansion is suﬃcient to stabi-
lize such pre-reactive species, which can then be studied
spectroscopically. The most common examples are X-
HY radicals, where X are, for example, H2 or noble gas
atoms and Y=C, O, N, S, B, or CN radicals. Many of

resolution spectroscopy. It should be possible, for exam-
ple, to build linear chains from polar OH radicals just
like in the case of HCN molecules [60], or similar highly
reactive systems. Such systems are ideal candidates for
chemical energy storage and provide large energy-to-mass
ratios. The details of such prospective experiments are
discussed in section VI A. Moreover, the spectroscopic
study of such highly energetic systems provides comple-
mentary information to scattering experiments on chem-
ical reaction dynamics.

In this review we will detail the experimental methods
for embedding and studying radicals embedded in super-
ﬂuid helium nano-droplets.
In the following section a
general introduction into helium droplet experiments is
given, followed by the details of radical production. Then
we will describe the experiments on radical monomers
(section III) and on radical-molecule van der Waals com-
plexes in section IV. Afterward, a discussion of molecule-
droplet interactions, emphasizing the additional informa-
tion from spectroscopy of open-shell systems embedded
in helium droplets (section V), and an outlook for further
applications (section VI) are given.

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

A. Spectroscopy in superﬂuid helium nano-droplets

The experimental details concerning the production of
neat and doped helium droplets have been given in pre-
vious reviews [1–6] and their thermodynamic properties
have been discussed [64–66]. Therefore, here we will only
discuss the relevant details and specialties for embed-
ding radicals in the droplets. A schematic of the ﬁrst
apparatus for infrared spectroscopy of radicals embed-
ded in helium droplets [67], built at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC), is shown in Fig-
ure 1. In brief, the setup consists of a continuous helium
droplet beam source and several, diﬀerentially pumped
vacuum chambers. The source chamber contains the su-
personic droplet beam source. The droplet beam passes
through a skimmer into a region with a series of load

4

the previous experiments have been performed using an
noble-gas atom such as argon or neon to study the ef-
fects of polarization, and in these cases no reaction can
occur [39, 40]. Complexes have also been observed be-
tween reactive partners such as, for example, OH+CO
[41], OH+H2 [42–46], and CN+H2 [47–50]. However,
in these systems the barriers to reaction are still quite
large. So far these experimental techniques have relied
on the exquisite sensitivity of laser induced ﬂuorescence
double-resonance methods in order to measure the spec-
tra, somewhat limiting the choice of chromophores.

Many transient radicals have also been studied in solid
noble-gas matrices [51–53].
Indeed, the inert matrix
can be used to keep the radicals from interacting with
one another, and in general the number of radicals can
be built up using long deposition times. One can also
raise the temperature of the solid matrix, which gives
the dopants some mobility, eventually initiating the re-
actions. Due to the large matrix eﬀects, however, the
spectra are often strongly perturbed, thus limiting the
amount of information which can be extracted. Indeed,
the highly anisotropic interaction is found to quench the
free rotation of most molecules. In contrast to the more
classical cryogenic matrices described above, cold, solid
para-hydrogen matrices have also recently been used to
study molecules in a more soft, quantum mechanical ma-
trix [54–56], but even this special matrix does not give
such great control over the growth process as liquid he-
lium droplets. Reactions of embedded impurities with
H2, the matrix material itself, can easily be studied, but
for other purposes the matrix is not as inert as noble-gas
environments [57].

Liquid helium nano-droplets combine the advantages of
both types of solid matrix environments. They are in-
ert due to the very noble, unreactive character of the
helium atoms constituting the matrix and they per-
turb embedded impurities only very weakly due to their
quantum-ﬂuid nature, which manifests itself in the su-
perﬂuidity of the droplets [58]. The droplets provide a
very low ambient temperature of approximately 0.37 K,
due to evaporative cooling and the low binding energy
of helium atoms to the droplet. Molecules embedded
in 4He droplets show free rotation [59]. The forma-
tion of weakly bound molecular complexes inside helium
nano-droplets proceeds through unique growth dynam-
ics which are mainly determined by long-range forces
between the complexation partners [1]. Therefore, of-
ten metastable clusters are stabilized and can be stud-
ied in the droplets [60, 61]. Additional information on
the PES can be obtained using infrared-infrared double-
resonance spectroscopy, where the photo-initiated an-
nealing of complexes provides branching ratios between
diﬀerent minima and limits on the barrier heights and al-
lows to observe the products of photo-initiated chemical
reactions [62, 63].

Extending such studies to transient, reactive species can
provide novel materials, that can be studied using high-

Figure 1: Experimental setup for the infrared spectroscopy of
radicals in superﬂuid helium droplets; see text for details.

lock ports to introduce pick-up sources of varying nature.
After the droplets are doped they ﬂy into a laser exci-
tation region, where a multipass cell, consisting of two
plane, parallel gold-coated mirrors, is used to increase
the laser-droplet beam interaction. This spectroscopy
region also has a pair of parallel electrodes, providing
homogeneous ﬁelds up to 80 kV/cm, in which Stark and
pendular spectroscopy [68] can be performed. In all ex-
periments reported here, the electric ﬁeld is parallel to
the laser-polarization, yielding ∆m = 0 selection rules
for the associated Stark and pendular spectra. The over-
all kinetic energy of the beam is then detected further
downstream by a cooled semiconductor bolometer detec-
tor [1]. Alternatively, mass-spectrometric detection has
been used in similar ways [1, 2], however, in that case
the infrared laser beam is typically sent collinear to the
droplet beam to achieve suﬃcient signal to noise ratios.

Droplets are typically produced by expanding high-
pressure helium (20–100 bar) through a small, cooled
pinhole (5–10 µm, 5–30 K), as originally demonstrated
by Becker et al. in 1961 [69]. Droplets are formed in the
early, high-pressure portion of the expansion and then
successively cooled by evaporation. In the case of 4He,
as used in all spectroscopic studies on radicals embedded
in helium droplets so far, the evaporation temperature
converges at ∼ 0.37 K [64] and 4He droplets exhibit su-
perﬂuidity under these conditions [58].

Atomic and molecular impurities are embedded in the
droplets by pick-up in scattering regions [1, 2]. The pick-
up process is sequential, that is, individual atoms and
molecules are picked up from the scattering gas, where
only low densities are necessary, because the pick-up
probability is determined by the large, geometrical cross-
sections of the droplets. The cooling of dopants inside the
helium droplet occurs on a timescale considerable faster
than the complexation of multiple embedded species. For
(HCN)n complexes embedded in a single droplet, for ex-
ample, about 1000 cm−1 binding energy are released
upon addition of an additional HCN molecule.
If that
energy would be deposited in the molecular complex, the
cluster would anneal to its global minimum structure.
However, the helium removes the energy quickly as the
complex is forming, forcing it to stay at the zero-point
level while traversing the PES. Therefore, the complexes
are often trapped in local minima and metastable species
can be observed [60, 61]. Moreover, since the pick-up
can be performed in multiple separate scattering regions,
considerable control over the formation of larger clus-
ters can be achieved, as, for example, shown for HF-Arn
complexes [70]. This separable pick-up also allows to pro-
duce clusters with quite complex compositions, possibly
containing multiple species, and to embed species under
quite diﬀerent conditions into the droplet. For exam-
ple, thermally labile bio-molecules and metal atoms from
a hot oven or radicals from an 1800 K pyrolysis source
can be embedded in the same droplet, because the two
species only come together in the cold conﬁnes of the

5

droplet. This unique production process allows to specif-
ically design desired complexes inside helium droplets.

All molecular radicals or radical-molecule complexes em-
bedded in a helium droplet that have been studied using
high-resolution spectroscopy so far have either been sta-
ble molecules, like NO, that were picked up in an ordinary
scattering chamber, or were produced in a continuous ef-
fusive pyrolysis source developed some years ago [67]; see
section II B for details.

Diﬀerent detection schemes used in helium droplet spec-
troscopy have been described before [1, 2]. In all stud-
ies described in detail in this review, infrared depletion
spectroscopy is used, where the evaporation of helium
atoms from the droplet due to resonant infrared excita-
tion of the dopant is detected [1]. In most of the stud-
ies reported here the reduced total kinetic energy of the
droplet beam on a 1.1 K bolometer is measured using
lock-in techniques, but mass spectrometric techniques,
albeit less sensitive, have also been employed [1], also
for performing electronic spectroscopy of doped helium
droplets [2, 7]. However, the bolometer detection proved
to be the most sensitive so far. It is very general as it de-
tects directly the evaporation of helium atoms from the
droplet and does not require any specialized UV laser
systems. Due to its quasi-continuous operation mode it
matches the continuous droplet beams very well and pro-
vides optimal experimental duty cycle.

In the interpretation of rotationally resolved spectra of
species embedded in helium droplets the matrix eﬀects
of the droplet environment needs to be considered. Vi-
brational frequencies of the embedded molecules are typ-
ically shifted very little from their gas-phase values, and
due to the superﬂuidity of the droplets, free rotation of
the embedded species can be observed [59]. The obtained
rotational constants, however, are reduced from their cor-
responding gas-phase values [1, 59] and the inﬂuence of
the droplet environment on the electronic structure can
also be considerable. These eﬀects are discussed in sec-
tion V.

B. Radical production

Some molecular radicals are not transient at all and
can be bought and stored under ambient conditions.
Therefore a simple pick-up cell can be used to embed
these species in the droplets. NO is an example of
such a molecule that has also been studied in helium
droplets [71].

For transient species, however, one has to resort to in situ
production of the radical in the experiment. Several dif-
ferent methods for producing radicals for molecular beam
studies have been developed, including pyrolysis, radio-
frequency or microwave discharges, corona discharges,
and photolysis [72, 73]. The most popular sources for

6

use in combination with the extreme cooling provided
in supersonic jet experiments are ﬂash pyrolysis [74–76],
electric discharge sources [77–79], and photolysis sources
[80–82].

These methods are, however, not currently generally ap-
plicable for embedding molecules into helium droplets,
as they are mostly operated in a pulsed fashion and re-
quire relatively high gas-pressures. While these radical
sources are eﬃcient in producing a large number of radi-
cals, especially the discharge and photolysis sources often
produce a large number of by-products. For gas-phase
studies this does not necessarily represent a problem as
long as the background pressure is kept low enough to
prevent collisions, and that the target-radical concen-
tration is high enough for the experimental sensitivity.
Also, if a precursor or decomposition product absorbs
in the same spectral region as the species of interest,
then it may be diﬃcult to separate out the overlapping
bands.
In a helium droplet experiment, however, all
species are picked up by the droplets without any dis-
crimination. Therefore, extremely clean sources of rad-
icals are required for these experiments in order not to
contaminate all droplets. This includes buﬀer gas, which
makes up most of the gas-phase expansion. Moreover,
most helium droplet experiments today are operated as
continuous beams and are therefore most eﬃciently used
with continuous doping methods. Coupling pulsed radi-
cal sources to these beams, especially photolysis sources
using intense pulsed lasers operating at 10 Hz, leads to
large reductions of duty cycle and correspondingly lower
signals. Once pulsed helium droplet sources are wider
applicable [83, 84], however, they may make such radical
sources more compatible.[246]

Pyrolysis

The ideas from ﬂash pyrolysis, even if not directly appli-
cable, can be transferred to conditions suitable for em-
bedding radicals in helium droplets [67]. A scheme of the
low-pressure, continuous, eﬀusive pyrolysis source used at
UNC is shown in Figure 2. The source can routinely be
heated to 1800 K to produce clean eﬀusive beams of rad-
icals from appropriate precursor molecules. Due to the
optical transparency of liquid helium over an extremely
wide energy range (up to 21 eV), black-body radiation
from the hot source does not eﬀect the droplet beam.

Other schemes

While our approach has been to generate the radicals
externally and dope them into the droplets, another ap-
proach would be to produce radicals from photolysis
of a stable molecule already embedded inside a helium

Figure 2: A schematic diagram of a pyrolysis source that
can be load-locked into the helium nano-droplet apparatus,
to facilitate the easy change of pick-up sources. In this case,
an alumina tube is heated by a tantalum ﬁlament. A needle
value is used to regulate the ﬂow of the precursor through the
source.

droplet. Near threshold photo-dissociation of NO2 has
been attempted by Conjusteau et al. [85], with the goal of
observing the NO-O radical-radical van der Waals com-
plex, but this has not been successful.
It is unclear
whether the helium is able to quench the energy faster
than the time necessary to break the molecule apart, or
the two fragments always react to give back NO2. Braun
and Drabbels [86] have used 266 nm photodissociation
of CF3I and CH3I embedded in helium droplets to study
the translational dynamics of the recoiling CH3 (CF3)
and I atom fragments. Here, 266 nm photolysis promotes
the CH3I to a highly repulsive electronic state, which is
known to dissociate very rapidly in the gas-phase [87].
In the helium droplet study gas-phase fragments ejected
from the droplets were detected by velocity map imag-
ing [88] and their product distributions were found to be
less anisotropic and shifted to lower velocities than com-
pared to the equivalent gas-phase experiment [86], con-
sistent with a model of hard sphere collisions. Since the
detection method was based on imaging the gas-phase
recoil products, studies were carried out using relatively
small droplets, which allowed the fragments to escape.
Photolyzing the embedding precursor in a much larger
droplet, however, could allow one or both of the prod-
ucts to stay within the droplet.

Cold ion-molecule reactions have also been observed in
helium droplets [89]. In this study 80 eV kinetic energy
electrons were used to bombard the helium droplets, re-
sulting in ionization of a single He atom in the droplet.
The molecular impurity may then be ionized after res-
onant charge transfer [90]. Although the newly formed
molecular ions are ejected from the droplet due to the
energy released in the charge transfer step, ion-molecule
reactions between these secondary molecular ions and ad-

ditional molecules embedded in the droplet could be ob-
served, yielding, for example N2D+ (from N+
2 and D2),
CH4D+, or CH3D+
2 (from CH+

3 and D2) [89].

4 or CH+

III. RADICAL MONOMERS IN HELIUM
DROPLETS

A. Propargyl

The ﬁrst spectroscopic study of a molecular radical in he-
lium droplets was performed on propargyl (2-propynyl,
C3H3) just ﬁve years ago [67]. In light of its role in soot-
ing ﬂames, the propargyl radical has been the focus of
particular experimental attention [91–94]. Propargyl is
one of the simplest conjugated systems with an odd num-
ber of electrons, also making it the focus of considerable
theoretical study [95–98]. There is compelling evidence
that propargyl is the most important radical precursor
in the formation of benzene, polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons, and soot in certain combustion processes [91–
94, 99–104]. For example, the simple dimerization of two
propargyl radicals is thought to be important in the for-
mation of benzene, as suggested by Wu and Kern [99].

The work on the transient and very reactive propargyl
radical embedded in helium droplets demonstrated how
to couple our continuous, low-pressure pyrolysis source
to a helium droplet beam for pick-up of such transient
species [67]. From a ﬁt to the rotationally resolved in-
frared spectrum of the ν1-transition the molecular pa-
rameters given in Table I are obtained. We ﬁnd that the
Ka = 1 states are populated due to nuclear spin statis-
tics, conﬁrming the C2v symmetry of this radical. This
shows, moreover, that the local environment inside the
Indeed,
helium droplet does not lower the symmetry.
nuclear spin conversion processes are extremely slow in
the gas-phase [108], but even the presence of the un-
paired electron and the collision rich condensed phase
environment inside the droplet does not induce any no-
ticeable spin relaxation on the timescale of the exper-
iment (∼ 1 ms), demonstrating the weak perturbation
of the embedded radical by the helium droplet environ-
ment. Nuclear spin relaxation was observed in quantum-
solid para-hydrogen matrices on a much longer timescale
of minutes to hours [109] and the accelerating eﬀect of
added ortho-hydrogen was clearly observed. Since the
ensemble of complexes studied in a helium droplet ex-
periment is only from droplets with exactly the wanted
composition and the helium–complex interaction is gen-
erally weaker then the solid-hydrogen–molecule interac-
tion, one would expect the conversion even to be consid-
erably slower in helium droplets.

While the A rotational constants cannot be determined
from the experimental data, the (B + C)/2 inertial pa-
rameters for ground and excited vibrational state were

7

gas-phaseb
9.60847 (18)
0.312386 (12)
0.0105762 (35)
7.35 (122) · 10−8
9.60258 (11)
0.311641 (7)
0.010496 (13)
5.37 (76) · 10−8
3322.292 (10)
—
—

helium dropleta
constant
9.60847 c
A′′ (cm−1)
(B′′ + C ′′)/2 (cm−1)
0.1198 (5)
B′′ − C ′′ (cm−1)
0.035 (2)
N (cm−1)
∆′′
0.00042 (1)
c
A′ (cm−1)
9.60258
(B′ + C ′)/2 (cm−1)
0.1185 (5)
B′ − C ′ (cm−1)
0.035 (2)
N (cm−1)
∆′
0.00062 (1)
ν0 (cm−1)
3322.15 (1)
µ′′
a (D)
-0.150 (5)
∆µa (D)
0.02 (1)
aReported helium droplet values are from reference 67. The val-
ues for B − C were mistyped in the original publication and the
corrected values are given here.
bReported ground state values are from reference 105, excited
state values are from reference 106.
cA” and A′ are ﬁxed at their respective gas-phase values.

Table I: Summary of the molecular constants for the propar-
gyl radical in superﬂuid helium droplets [67], compared to
those obtained in gas-phase studies [105–107]. Numbers in
parenthesis are one standard deviation.

about one third of the gas-phase values, a reduction that
is typical for rotational constants of this size [1]. The
asymmetry-splittings B − C are increased in the helium
droplet environment, probably due to diﬀerential eﬀects
of the helium droplet environment on the rotation around
the diﬀerent axes.

This study was the ﬁrst to experimentally determine
the permanent dipole moment of propargyl radical by
measuring the rotationally resolved infrared spectrum
in the presence of a strong homogeneous electric ﬁeld
(50 kV cm−1). It is known that dipole moments deter-
mined by Stark spectroscopy in helium droplets are very
comparable to the gas-phase values [110]. This is con-
ﬁrmed by the good agreement of the measured values
for propargyl (µ0 = −0.150(5) D and the ∆µv=1←0 =
0.02(1) D) and calculated values (µe = −0.14(3) D,
µ0 = −0.124 D, µv=1←0 = 0.011 D) [96, 111].

B. Nitric oxide

Recently, the nitric oxide (NO) radical was studied using
infrared diode laser spectroscopy in helium droplets [71].
Only the Q(1/2) and R(1/2) transitions of the v = 1 ← 0
transition in the 2Π1/2 electronic ground state were ob-
served due to the low temperature (0.4 K) of the droplet
and the small moment of inertia of NO. From the line sep-
aration the rotational constant of NO in helium droplets
is measured to be B = 1.253 cm−1, which is 76 % of the
gas-phase value, in good agreement with previous closed
shell systems of this size.

8

For the Q(1/2) line sharp transitions are obtained. This
reﬂects the fact that vibrational relaxation is slow due
the absence of low-lying vibrational modes [112, and ref-
erences therein]. Indeed, previous studies of HF embed-
ded in helium droplets have shown that the monomer
does not vibrationally relax at all on the timescale of the
experiment (∼ 1 ms) [113], so instead of depleting the
droplet beam intensity, the extra vibrational energy of
HF is simply carried to the bolometer. Using a mass-
spectrometer based detection scheme, such as that used
in the study of NO, one would not a priori expect a de-
pletion signal in this case. Molecular absorption beam
depletion can still be detected, however, due to pick-
up of an impurity, i. e. a second NO or N2, after the
infrared excitation, leading to relaxation of the vibra-
tionally excited molecular dimer, as shown conclusively
for HF [112]. The resulting long monomer lifetime allows
the nuclear hyperﬁne and Λ-doubling splittings of the
transition to be resolved. The nuclear hyperﬁne splitting
is unchanged from the isolated gas-phase value, whereas
the Λ-doubling is increased by a factor of 1.55 compared
to the gas-phase [71]. The authors discuss this eﬀect in
terms of electronic coupling and also suggest the possible
inﬂuence of the helium density around the NO molecular
axis [71]. For more details of these eﬀects see the results
on the NO-HF complex in section IV C and the general
discussion of molecule-droplet interactions in section V.

The R(1/2) line, on the other hand, shows a single un-
resolved band that ﬁts well to a Lorentzian lineshape,
which is attributed to fast rotational relaxation in the vi-
brationally excited state with a lifetime of 1.52 · 10−10 s.
The large rotational constant of NO places the excited
rotational state in a region of high density of states for
the fundamental excitations of the droplet, leading to a
strong coupling and the corresponding short lifetime [1].

The NO molecule was also used as a sensitive probe of
electronic eﬀects of molecule-droplet interactions [114].
In that study, NO embedded in liquid helium droplets
was photoionized and the ongoing dynamics was found to
be quite complex. NO is initially excited by a two-photon
excitation from its 2Π electronic ground state to low-
lying Rydberg states (NO∗). Subsequently, the nuclear
degrees of freedom in NO∗ and between the NO∗ and
the helium environment relax and NO∗ is transported to
the droplet surface on a time-scale shorter than the laser
pulse (< 10 ns), where it can then leave the droplet along
with a modest number of helium atoms or, alternatively,
be photoionized. The formed ion can then be resolvated
by snowball formation around the ion-core or leave the
droplet surrounded by helium atoms.

C. Other species

Several other radicals or transient species have been ob-
served in or on liquid helium droplets. For example

the spectra of individual open shell metal atoms on he-
lium droplets have been obtained [4, 7, 115–117] and the
chemiluminescence emission spectrum of the BaO∗ prod-
uct from the reaction Ba + N2O → BaO∗ + N2 inside a
helium droplet has been observed [118]. The reaction was
found to proceed very eﬃciently inside the droplet, and
the inﬂuence of co-embedded xenon clusters was stud-
ied, which showed that the xenon pulls the nascent BaO,
initially formed at the surface, into the center of the
droplet. Experiments on the photodissociation of CF3I
to form CF3 and I inside the helium droplets [86] and
on ion-molecule reactions [89] were already discussed in
section II B.

IV. RADICAL-CONTAINING MOLECULAR
COMPLEXES

Whereas the eﬀects of the moderately strong long-range
electrostatic interactions in ion-molecule reactions are
well known to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the asso-
ciated reaction rates [119, 120], the importance of the
weaker van der Waals forces in the entrance channels of
neutral reactions have been only recently fully appreci-
ated [38, 41, 121, 122]. Experimental and theoretical
work on the Cl + HD → HCl (DCl) + D (H) reaction
shows that the torque experienced by the HD in the en-
trance valley of the potential has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
the overall reaction rates and branching ratios [31–34].
Furthermore, the rotational excitation of HCl products
formed from abstraction reactions of chlorine and organic
molecules, for example, can only be accurately described
by taking into account the features of the exit channel.
The dipole-dipole interaction of the departing fragments
was found to be very important in determining the prod-
uct ﬁnal state distributions [38]. For the dissociation
of formaldehyde a completely new dissociation mecha-
nism (roaming hydrogen atom mechanism) has been pro-
posed [36, 37]. These results are clear examples, that en-
trance and exit channel complexes of molecular reactions
probe the associated PES at energies that are relevant
to the systems’ chemical reaction dynamics, despite be-
ing much lower in energy than the corresponding transi-
tion states. However, the torque on the reactants at long
range acts to deﬂect trajectories towards or away from
the transition state [33]. Therefore, these complexes are
of considerable importance in understanding the nature
of the reactions, particularly at low translational energies
(low temperatures).

The isolation and stabilization of entrance and exit chan-
nel complexes in liquid helium droplets and their high-
resolution spectroscopic study provides a novel experi-
mental approach for studying these important systems.
In the remainder of this section we will summarize the
experiments performed on such complexes in liquid he-
lium droplets to date. In the ﬁrst part we will discuss the
hydrogen-bound complexes of halogen atoms with small

linear molecules and in the second part of this section we
will proceed to complexes of hydrocarbon radicals with
hydrogen acids.

A. Complexes containing halogen atoms

Recently, a large series of complexes of closed shell
molecules with halogen atoms embedded in liquid helium
droplets have been studied using high-resolution infrared
spectroscopy, i. e. the complexes of chlorine, bromine, and
iodine with HF and HCN, respectively [123, 124]. These
systems represent the prototypical heavy—light-heavy X–
HY (X=Cl, Br, I; Y=F, CN) complexes which serve as
prominent benchmark systems for the understanding of
elementary reaction dynamic studies. They can be stud-
ied in great detail theoretically [125–138], as they contain
only two heavy atoms (X-HF) and only a few nuclear de-
grees of freedom. Some stationary points of such systems
have also been studied experimentally, for example, by
spectroscopy of the transition states [134, 139–141] and
using infrared spectroscopy in noble-gas matrices [142–
144]. These studies, however, did not reveal detailed
information on the associated entrance or exit channel
regions of the reactions.

The X-HF [145–150] and X-HCN [151–153] PES have also
been studied in collision experiments. Recently, strong
rotational enhancement has been described for the F +
HCl reaction [150, 154]. The chemiluminescence from
HF produced in chemical lasers, i. e. from reactions of
ClF with hydrogen, has been observed [155]. However,
so far no spectra of the stationary points on the PES
have been obtained for the free molecular complexes.

the

interaction of

these X-HY systems,

For
the
quadrupole moment of the halogen atom with the dipole
moment of the molecule suggests two linear structures
with the atom sitting on either end of the linear molecule.
However, T-shaped minima are also predicted due to
the considerable quadrupole moments of the molecules
[125, 130, 131, 133, 138]. The weak interaction be-
tween a halogen atom and the molecules in a van der
Waals complex suggests, that, to a ﬁrst approximation,
the orbital angular momentum jA of the atom will be
conserved in the complex. This interaction removes the
degeneracy of the 2P atomic states, which in Cs sym-
metry gives rise to two states of A′ and one state of A′′
symmetry. These correspond to the three relative ori-
entations of the singly occupied orbital with respect to
the complexation partner, i. e. the unpaired electron be-
ing in the px, py, and pz orbital, respectively. Solving
for the eigenvalues of the electronic Schr¨odinger equa-
tion under the Born-Oppenheimer approximation yields
the adiabatic PES. However, since these surfaces are cou-
pled by non-adiabatic coupling terms originating from
the nuclear kinetic energy operator, it is often helpful to
solve for the bound states in a diabatic representation

9

[133, 138]. The electronic anisotropy is further compli-
cated due to electron spin, and spin-orbit coupling can
also have an important eﬀect on shaping the PES. For
comparison we reproduce the lowest diabatic and adia-
batic PES including spin-orbit coupling for the Cl-HCl,
Cl-HF, and Br-HCN complexes in Figure 3(A–C), (D–F),
and (G), respectively. The results for Cl-HCl [132, 133]
and Cl-HF [136, 137] have been published previously,
while preliminary results for Br-HCN have been pro-
vided by A. van der Avoird. The general topology of
the Cl-HCl and Cl-HF surfaces are quite similar. How-
ever, the larger dipole of HF, compared to HCl, makes
the linear hydrogen bound minimum deeper for Cl-HF
and the T-shaped minimum has almost completely dis-
appeared in the lowest adiabatic surface. Indeed, for Cl-
HF only the linear hydrogen bound isomer was observed
experimentally in helium droplets, suggesting that the
T-shaped or linear HF-X isomers are not formed. De-
tailed comparisons of the experimental and theoretical
results for the X-HF systems have been given elsewhere
[124, 131, 136, 137]. In contrast, the lowest adiabatic sur-
face for the Br-HCN system shows two deep minima cor-
responding to the hydrogen-bound and nitrogen-bound
linear isomers, respectively, which are also both observed
experimentally [123].
The 1 2A′ and 1 2A′′ surfaces are degenerate at the lin-
ear H-bound conﬁguration (θ = 0), whereas the 1 2A′
and 2 2A′ surfaces are degenerate at the linear N-bound
conﬁguration (θ = 180). Therefore, the electronic sym-
metry is 2Σ for HCN-X, with the unpaired electron along
the axis of the molecule, and 2Π for X-HCN, with the un-
paired electron perpendicular to the axis of the molecule.

In Figure 4 survey scans for the Br-HCN systems with
cold (room temperature) and heated (∼ 1600 K) pyroly-
sis source are shown as an example. Such overview scans
are infrared depletion spectra obtained in the presence
of strong homogeneous electric ﬁelds (∼ 60 kV cm−1) in
which the complete rotational structure is collapsed into
a single pendular transition [68, 156, 157] due to the large
degree of orientation of the polar molecules in the cold
environment.

When the pyrolysis source is cold, only complexes of HCN
with halogen molecules are formed. When the pyrolysis
nozzle is heated, however, the signals associated with the
precursor complexes are signiﬁcantly reduced, due to the
dissociation into atoms, and a new set of signals is ob-
served to grow in, which are readily assigned to binary
complexes of bromine atoms with HCN. Based on har-
monic vibrational frequency calculations as well as phys-
ical intuition, the largely diﬀerent frequency shifts of the
νCH stretching vibrations result from the two diﬀerent
structures of the complexes, namely the peak shifted fur-
thest to the red corresponds to the Br-HCN complex, and
the peak which exhibits only a small shift is related to the
HCN-Br complex. This assignment is conﬁrmed by anal-
ysis of the ﬁeld-free spectra of each of these transitions
[123, 158].

10

Figure 3: (A, D) Diabatic potential energy surfaces for Cl-HCl and Cl-HF jA = 3/2 ω = 3/2 and (B, E) jA = 3/2 ω = 1/2,
respectively. (C–F) The lowest adiabatic potential energy surface including spin-orbit coupling for Cl-HCl (C), Cl-HF (F), and
Br-HCN (G), respectively. Jacobi coordinates as shown in the inset have been used throughout and θ = 0 ◦ corresponds to the
hydrogen bound arrangement. See text for details.

11

Figure 5: (A) The ﬁeld-free infrared spectrum of Br-HF shown
together with (B) a simulation that includes nuclear magnetic
hyperﬁne interactions due to the bromine nucleus (I = 3/2).
The stick spectrum shows all of the transitions that underlie
the observed features.

tings of the transitions that are not visible at the resolu-
tion of our experiment.

It had been proposed that Cl-HCl complexes may posses
T-shaped structures, but display several of the proper-
ties of a linear open-shell molecule [133]. Given the fre-
quency shift from the HF monomer, however, this is un-

Figure 6: (A) The ﬁeld-free infrared spectrum of HCN-Br
shown together with (B) a simulation that includes parity
splitting induced by spin-orbit coupling of the 2Σ1/2 and the
2Π1/2 states of the complex.

Figure 4: Pendular survey scans revealing the pyrolysis source
temperature dependence (upward peaks are with a hot source,
downward peaks are with a cold source) for the HCN +
bromine experiment. The scans show peaks which we identify
as molecular and atomic bromine complexed with HCN. The
peak labeled with an asterisk is a known impurity.

In Figure 5 the ﬁeld free spectrum of Br-HF is shown
as an example. The vibrational frequency is shifted by
131 cm−1 to lower energy compared to the HF monomer
transition [113], indicating the binding of Br to the hy-
drogen end of HF. The simulation of the rotationally re-
solved spectrum, constituted by all the individual simu-
lated transitions shown at the bottom of the ﬁgure, re-
produces all of the important features of the spectrum.
Some deviations are observed especially for the lowest-
J transitions, an eﬀect that is regularly observed for
molecules embedded inside helium droplets; see section V
for details. The overall structure and all features are
clearly reproduced by the simulation. Therefore, these
spectra conﬁrm the 2Π3/2 ground states of these hydro-
gen bound complexes, consistent with the 2P3/2 ground
state of atomic bromine. Spectra and simulations of the
same quality are obtained for all other hydrogen bound
X-HF/HCN complexes studied. The molecular parame-
ters obtained for the ground states for all complexes are
given in Table II. In Figure 6 the ﬁeld-free spectrum of
the nitrogen-bound HCN-Br complex is shown for a com-
parison and the molecular constants of all correspond-
ing HCN-X complexes are also given in Table II. These
nitrogen-bound complexes exhibit quite diﬀerent features
than the hydrogen bound complexes. Whereas the νCH
vibrational frequencies are shifted by tens of wavenum-
bers for the hydrogen bound complexes, these N-bound
complexes are shifted only by a few cm−1 compared to
the free HCN molecule. The rotationally resolved spec-
tra of the HCN-Br and HCN-I complexes also show a
very diﬀerent ﬁne-structure, which is assigned to parity-
splitting due to the spin-orbit interaction between the
2Σ1/2 and the 2Π1/2 states of the complex [123, 158].
For the HCN-Cl complex no such ﬁne-structure could
be observed, what is consistent with the much smaller
spin-orbit coupling constant of atomic chlorine than for
bromine and iodine an the correspondingly small split-

12

−1) B

a

(cm

−1) D (10

−1) µ (D) aΛ + (b + c)Σ (cm

b

(cm

−1) Bgas/BHe

c

−1) isotope splitting
0.038

ν0 (cm

species
35Cl-HF 3887.54
79Br-HF 3867.46
3847.82
I-HF

Br-HCN 3284.61

I-HCN

3277.79

HCN-Cl

3309.33

HCN-Br

3309.55

0.055

0.043

0.037

0.0151

0.0120

0.032

0.019

−4 cm
1.2

0.95

0.3

1.5

1.0

0.50

0.12

1.9

2.1

2.2

3.0

3.78

e

0.005

0.045

0.035

0.04

0.04

–

–

0.010

–
d

–

d

0.001
d

2.3

2.2

2.2

2.7

2.83

2.7

2.75

0.10

0.016

3309.37

HCN-I
aFrom references 123, 124
bThe frequency of the heavier complex subtracted from the corresponding one of the lighter isotopologue.
cGas-phase values are from ab initio calculations [123, 124]. For the HCN-X complexes the gas-phase values are B0 values from one-
dimensionally spin-orbit corrected adiabatic PES [123].
dNo isotope splitting is observed experimentally, which is consistent with bound state calculations on an one-dimensional ab initio
potential energy surface for HCN-Cl; splittings for the bromine complexes are expected to be even smaller [123].
eab initio value from reference 123

(3.91)

2.75

–

–

Table II: Ground states molecular parameters from infrared spectroscopy for all complexes of HF and HCN with halogen atoms
observed so far [123, 124]. For chlorine and bromine the constants of the lighter isotopologue are given (iodine has only a single
isotope) and the isotope splittings are the frequency of the lighter isotopologue subtracted from the frequency of the heavier
one.

likely the case for the X-HF complexes observed here;
see reference 124 for a detailed discussion. Nevertheless,
the fact that this point is subject of considerable debate
illustrates how poorly we still understand these species,
calling out for more experiments and theory on these en-
trance channel complexes.

No complexes of atomic ﬂuorine with HF or HCN have
been observed, despite extensive searches for such com-
plexes and a previous assignment for the νHF stretching
vibrations of F-HF in argon matrices [144]. Moreover,
from ab initio calculations it is clear, that the reaction
of F + HCN to form HFCN via an insertion mechanism
is quite exothermic and exhibits only a small barrier, if
at all [123, 158]. The fact that the ﬂuorine containing
F-HCN complexes cannot be observed, could indeed be
an indication that the insertion reaction takes place, even
at 0.37 K. This reasoning is also supported by argon ma-
trix work where the insertion product has been observed,
whereas no pre-reactive (van der Waals) complexes were
found [159, 160]. Guided by the experimental vibrational
frequency of 3018 cm−1 for HFCN in solid argon, we
also searched for the HFCN reaction product in the he-
lium droplets. However, since this frequency is at the
edge of the F-center laser tuning range and the transi-
tion strength is about 50 times weaker than for the HCN
monomer, no manifestations of the HFCN product could
be observed. Revisiting the experiment using newer tech-
nology OPO lasers [158, 161, 162], which have enhanced
tuning ranges and improved power, might show the cor-
responding spectral signatures.

Similar studies to the ones described here have also been
performed on the pre-reactive complexes of open-shell
metal atoms (Al, Ga, In) [158] and semiconductor atoms
(Ge) with HCN and preliminary results were presented
in an earlier review [1]. Upon complex formation in liq-
uid helium droplets the same linear van der Waals com-

plexes as for the halogen atom HCN complexes are ob-
served. However, these atom-HCN complexes can un-
dergo an exothermic insertion reaction and the corre-
sponding barriers are low enough that the reactions do
actually proceed even at the low ambient temperatures
of the helium droplet, depending on the metal, either di-
rectly or initiated by a single-quantum excitation of the
νCH stretching vibration in the HCN moiety. Details on
the van der Waals complexes and the insertion products
will be published elsewhere [163]. Furthermore, the com-
plexes of HCN with several alkaline (Na, K, Rb, Cs) and
earth alkaline (Mg, Ca, Sr) atoms [164, 165], with Zn
atoms [166], and with Cu and Au atoms have been ob-
served. The complexes of one to six magnesium atoms
with several small molecules have been studied exten-
sively [167–170]. Due to the electronic quasi-closed shell
structure of magnesium and high barriers to reaction in
these systems, these complexes exhibit the simple spectra
of closed shell van der Waals complexes. For the heavier
atoms from these series it is known that the atom resides
on the surface of the droplet, forming a dimple [2, and
references therein]. It is interesting to study the eﬀects
of embedding an atom that wants to stay on the surface
of the droplet, and a molecule that wants to be inside the
droplet, which, in addition, strongly attract each other.
For Na-HCN, one of these systems, a very strong absorp-
tion line is observed [164, 165]. The remaining rotational
structure, however, is the spectrum of a linear or spher-
ical top with a very much larger inertial moment than
that expected for a Na-HCN binary complex, even in-
side a helium droplet. The spectrum is actually consis-
tent with the rotation of the Na-HCN mass around the
droplet and the observed rotational constant scales nicely
with the droplet radius. Therefore, it is concluded, that
the sodium pulls the HCN into a dimple on the surface
of the droplet and the complex can freely rotate over the
surface of the helium droplet [164, 165]. However, no

13

Figure 7: (A) An experimental spectrum corresponding to
the HF stretching vibration of the CH3-HF molecular com-
plex, along with a symmetric top simulation (B) which clearly
shows the C3v symmetry of this complex.
In (C) and (D)
we plot the contributions from the K=1 and K=0 bands re-
spectively, illustrating that the nuclear spin statistics prevent
interconversion of these two manifolds of states. Scan (E)
shows the corresponding spectrum for CD3 radicals, illustrat-
ing a dramatic increase in the lifetime of the complex and (F)
the corresponding simulation.

rotational ﬁne-structure can be observed due to the un-
resolved features in the extremely small B spectra. The
spectra of the heavier atoms (K, Rb, Cs, Ca, Sr) show
similar eﬀects; for some of them even both species can be
observed simultaneously – an embedded van der Waals
complex as for Mg-HCN and a surface-bound complex as
for Na-HCN [164, 165].

B. Complexes of hydrocarbon radicals

1. Complexes of methyl radical with HF and HCN

The reactions of hydrocarbons are of particular inter-
est due to the wide range of reactions for which they
play a key role, for example combustion processes [8].
The hydrogen exchange reaction with ﬂuorine atoms
form a basis of our understanding of much larger sys-
tems. The most simple ﬂuorine + hydrocarbon system,
F + CH4 → HF + CH3, has been extensively studied
both experimentally [171] and theoretically [172], how-
ever, high-resolution spectroscopic studies of the entrance
and exit channel regions of the PES are still lacking. Pre-
vious studies have identiﬁed the CH3-HF complex in ar-
gon matrices [52, 173–175].

In order to probe the exit channel region of the PES,
methyl radicals have been produced via pyrolysis, while
a second pick-up cell was used to dope the droplet with
an HF molecule. Azomethane, di-tert-butyl peroxide
(DTBP), and CH3I were all used as precursors to conﬁrm
that the signals genuinely arose from CH3. In addition,
several transitions of the CH3 monomer were also ob-
served in helium. Figure 7 (A) shows a partially rotation-

Figure 8: A plot of the corresponding energy levels of the CH3
and CD3 monomers. The eﬀect of deuteration in the CD3-
HF complex is to lower the vibrational frequencies of the CH
stretches, eﬀectively quenching the vibration-vibration reso-
nance that occurs with the excited HF stretching state of the
complex. See text for details.

ally resolved experimental spectrum which is assigned
to the HF stretching vibration of the CH3-HF molec-
ular complex. The C3v symmetry of the complex can
be uniquely identiﬁed from the large Q branch present
Indeed, at the temperature of the
in the spectrum.
droplets, we would not normally expect population of
the excited K states since the rotation about the a-axis
only moves the three hydrogen atoms, giving rise to a
large energy spacing between diﬀerent K states. Assum-
ing nuclear spin conversion is slow compared with the
timescale of the experiment, the nuclear spin statistics of
the ro-vibrational wavefunction treat the K = 0, 3, 6 . . .
and K = 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 . . . states as separate identities of
A and E symmetry, respectively, and thus they do not
interconvert upon cooling to 0.37 K. At the tempera-
ture of the droplets, all of the population is cooled into
the K = 0 and K = 1 states, and only for the K = 1
states ∆J = 0 transitions are allowed. The intensities
reﬂect the population of A : E states of CH3 in the high-
temperature source, yielding a ∼ 1 : 1 population ration
for the K=0 and K=1 bands.

The linewidths in the CH3-HF spectrum are rather
broad, somewhat limiting the accuracy of the molecular
parameters determined by the ﬁt to the spectrum, shown
in Figure 7 (B)–(D). Considering the cause of the broad-
ening we concluded that a vibration-vibration resonance
was the likely cause of the shortening of the excited state
lifetime, coupling the HF stretch excited state to the CH3
stretches of the methyl radical. To test this idea, we also
recorded the spectrum of CD3-HF, which is shown in
Figure 7 (E). CD3 radicals were produced by pyrolysis of
CD3I. Deuteration of CH3 lowers the frequencies of the
vibrations as shown in Figure 8, detuning the resonance,
and resulting in much narrower lines, as expected. The

14

molecular parameters derived from the ﬁts to the spectra
are summarized in Table III.

In addition to the importance of the long-range van der
Waals forces in giving the reactants a torque, which may
be towards or away from the transition state [31–35], the
stabilization of weakly bound reactive complexes may
represent an ideal starting point for the study of reac-
tive resonances [17]. The experimental observation of
reactive, or Feshbach, resonances in chemical reactions
are highly sought after because they result from purely
quantum mechanical eﬀects and probe regions of the PES
which are typically not sampled by current experimental
techniques. Such resonances result from a coupling of
the vibrationally adiabatic PES near the transition state,
giving rise to dynamical trapping. To date, reactive res-
onances have been conﬁrmed in the crossed molecular
beam reactive scattering of F + H2 → HF + H [17] and
the photo-electron spectrum of IHI− [176]. Resonances
of this type are not expected to be constrained to such
simple systems, it is only our ability to detect or recog-
nize them, which has limited current experiments to such
simple systems. Only recently has a reactive resonance
been implicated in a true polyatomic reaction, namely
F + CH4 → HF + CH3 [171]. At low collision energies
the transient resonance in this reaction can proceed via
predissociation into HF(v = 2, j′) + CH3(v = 0), sim-
ilar to F + HD [17]. The extra degrees of freedom of
the CH3, however, may allow intramolecular vibrational
energy relaxation (IVR) which would shorten the reso-
nance lifetime, allowing the HF(v = 2) + CH3(v1 = 1)
channel to compete eﬀectively with the pre-dissociative
decay described above. At higher collision energies the
decay of the resonance state into HF(v = 3)+CH3(v = 0)
dominates [171].

From our experiments on the CH3-HF and CD3-HF com-
plexes we can conﬁrm a similar coupling between the
HF(v = 1) + CH3(v1 = 0) and HF(v = 0) + CH3(v1 = 1)
states, as indicated by the vibration-vibration resonance
lifetime, which is considerably shortened in the case of
CD3-HF. Overtone pumping of the CH3-HF van der
Waals complex may allow access to the region of the PES
directly involved in the reactive resonance, as proposed
for F + H2 [17].

In order to further experimentally explore the V-V cou-
pling mechanism observed for the CH3-HF complex, one
can also alter the energy of the bright state by changing
the identity of the chromophore. Rotationally resolved
infrared spectra have been recorded for the CH3-HCN
and CD3-HCN complexes [177]. As seen from the energy
level diagram in Figure 8, the CH stretching frequency
of HCN lies below the combination levels of the CH3
monomer, implicated in the relaxation of CH3-HF, so
a more direct comparison of the coupling can be made
Interestingly
with just the ν1 and ν3 levels of CH3.
for CD3-HCN, the combination band for CD3 is a vi-
able relaxation channel. The peaks in the CH3-HCN
spectrum are well ﬁt by a Lorentzian lineshape, just

as in CH3-HF, suggesting that the broadening results
from the ﬁnite lifetime of the excited state. Comparing
the observed linewidths for CH3-HCN and CH3-HF we
ﬁnd that the lifetime of CH3-HCN is approximately two
times longer than for CH3-HF, suggesting that the cou-
pling to the combination band is indeed the important
relaxation channel for CH3-HF. The CD3-HCN molecu-
lar complex exhibited linewidths which were only slightly
smaller than for CH3-HCN, clearly showing that the ef-
fect of coupling to the CH stretches of the CH3 directly
is much smaller.

To our knowledge no studies have investigated the pos-
sibility that combination modes are excited in the F
+ CH4 reaction, other than pure overtones. Based on
our observed coupling of the HF(v = 1) + CH3(v = 0)
to HF(v = 0) + CH3(v1 = 1 or v3 = 1 + v2 = 1)
it may be possible to observe this reaction channel in
an crossed molecular beam reactive scattering experi-
ment similar to the ones reported by the group of Kopin
Liu [171, 178], where the experimental conditions favor
the production of methyl in the CH-stretch excited state,
i. e. near threshold.

2. Larger hydrocarbon radicals

Larger hydrocarbon radicals, including ethyl (C2H5) and
allyl (C3H5) radicals, may be readily formed by pyroly-
sis of their corresponding iodine precursors [74, 179–181],
and spectra have been recorded for their complexes with
HCN and HF embedded in helium droplets. These sys-
tems are of interest since they may be directly compared
with the methyl radical complexes observed previously.
Figure 9 shows a pendular survey scan for the HF stretch-
ing region. In the bottom trace C2H5I is ﬂowed through a
room temperature pyrolysis source, and the peak at 3747
cm−1 is assigned to a C2H5I-HF complex. Upon heating
the source, this peak is observed to decrease in intensity,
and a new strong peak is observed at 3774 cm−1 which
we assign to a C2H5-HF complex. Turning oﬀ the electric
ﬁeld we recover the rotationally resolved spectrum shown
in Figure 10 (A). Figure 10 C) shows the Stark spectrum
for this band recorded at an electric ﬁeld strength of 3.86
kV cm−1. The molecular parameters determined from
the ﬁts to the spectra are given in Table III, together with
the values for the ethyl-HCN complex. In Figure 11 (A)
and (C) the ﬁeld free spectrum and the Stark spectrum
of the allyl radical-HF complex are shown, respectively.
Still for a molecule of that size clear rotational structure
is observed and the obtained molecular parameters are
summarized in Table III, together with the values for the
allyl-HCN complex. The results on these larger hydro-
carbon radicals are very promising for studying radicals
that are even more important in radical chain reactions in
combustion processes, such as, for example, CnH2n+1OO
peroxy-radicals, which are some of the most important
intermediates in these reactions [182]. High resolution

15

0.06a
a
0.027

ν0 (cm−1) A (cm−1) ∆A (cm−1) (B + C)/2 (cm−1) DJ (cm−1) µ (D)
species
2.6
3797.00
CH3-HF
2.6
3787.14
CD3-HF
2.7
3774.45
C2H5-HF
2.4
C3H5-HF
3810.10
3.1
CH3-HCN 3265.70
3.1
CD3-HCN 3262.09
4.1
C2H5-HCN 3260.29
3.2
C3H5-HCN 3260.14

2.5 · 10−4
2.6 · 10−4
4.8 · 10−5
1.0 · 10−4
3.7 · 10−5
2.6 · 10−5
2.9 · 10−5
8.0 · 10−6

0.09
0.083
0.059
0.040
0.030
0.027
0.15
0.016

a
0.04
0.018a

0.30
0.095

0.30
0.09

aThese parameters are taken from gas-phase work [52, 173].

Table III: Ground-state experimental molecular constants of hydrocarbon-HF and -HCN complexes. Comparison to ab initio
inertial parameters shows reduction factors for the rotational constants like closed shell systems of the same size [1].

Figure 10: Rotationally resolved ﬁeld-free (A) and Stark (C)
spectra corresponding to the HF stretching vibration of the
HF-C2H5 complex and the corresponding simulations, (B)
and (D), respectively.

radical. Theoretical calculations predict that the reaction
to form hydroperoxy radicals (ROO•) is barrierless [189],
however, at low temperatures this might only apply if the
oxygen directly approaches the radical center. Instead,
the helium might trap the complex in a local van der
Waals minimum, forming a pre-reactive complex, similar
to what is discussed in section VI A. Vibrational exci-
tation could then be used to initiate the corresponding
reaction.

C. NO-HF

Figure 9: Pendular survey scans corresponding to ﬂowing
ethyl iodide through a cold (downward going peaks) or hot
(upward going peaks) pyrolysis source. HF is then picked up
downstream in a separate pick-up cell. We assign the peak at
3747 cm−1 to an HF-C2H5I complex, the intensity of which
decreases substantially at temperatures appropriate for pyrol-
ysis. At pyrolysis temperatures of about 1000 K, the peak at
3774 cm−1 appears which is assigned to the HF-Ethyl radical
complex.

spectra of these molecules have been diﬃcult to obtain
in free-jet expansions, though [183–188].

Moreover, given that we have shown that pure eﬀusive
beams of hydrocarbon radicals can be made under suit-
able conditions for helium droplet pick-up, the possibility
of studying radical-radical and radical-molecule reactions
inside the helium droplets is reasonable. A very inter-
esting and simple experiment would be to dope a single
oxygen molecule into a droplet containing a hydrocarbon

Given the recent observation that the Λ doubling of
NO was increased by 55 % upon solvation in a helium
droplet, there is considerable need to further study this
phenomenon, since exciting new molecules and clusters
might only be formed in helium, with no gas-phase data
available for comparison. This statement is already par-
ticularly true given our preliminary results on open shell
clusters with Br, I, Ga, and In atoms which have revealed
large parity splittings. Indeed, recent high-level theoreti-
cal calculations on the HCN-Br complex indicate that the
parity splitting is much smaller in a helium droplet than

16

Figure 11: Field-free (A) and Stark (C) spectra for the HF-
Allyl radical complex, and the corresponding simulations, (B)
and (D), respectively. The peak marked with an asterisk
corresponds to a known impurity which overlaps at this fre-
quency.

one might expect in the gas-phase [190]. The electronic
angular momentum couplings, which are responsible for
such open-shell eﬀects, are very sensitive probes of ex-
cited electronic states. Moreover, there is relatively little

where J is half-integer, starting at J = 1/2, and the −
and + signs in front of the square bracketed term are
deﬁned for the e and f parity sub-states, respectively. B
and p are the rotational and parity doubling constants,
respectively, and D and pJ are the corresponding cen-
trifugal distortion parameters. Fitting the helium droplet
spectrum to the same model Hamiltonian resulted in the
molecular constants listed in Table IV, which are com-
pared with the gas-phase values [191]. In contrast to NO
in helium, we ﬁnd that for NO-HF, the parity constant
p, is reduced from the gas-phase value by exactly the
same amount (within experimental uncertainty) as the
rotational constant B. As pointed out for NO [71], the
expression for the parity splitting does have a linear rela-
tionship with B, and this is exactly what we see for NO-
HF. For NO monomer, however, the parity splitting was
increased by 55 % despite the fact that the rotational con-
stant was 76 % of the gas-phase value, illustrating that
the mechanism with which the helium interacts with the
molecule is diﬀerent [71].

information available so far on how the helium droplet
eﬀects these.

To further our understanding of such open shell species
in helium, we have recorded the infrared spectrum of the
NO-HF complex, which has been observed previously in
the gas-phase by Fawzy et al. [191]. While NO-HF is a
bent complex, we can use a diatomic, or more generally,
a linear molecule Hamiltonian to describe the |Ω| = 1/2
levels just as one can use a closed shell linear rotor Hamil-
tonian for the K = 0 levels of a symmetric top. If we
take P as the projection of the total angular momentum
on the a-axis of the complex, then we are considering
only the |P | = 1/2 levels. Since NO-HF is only slightly
bent away from linearity, these excited P states are of
signiﬁcantly higher energy and are not populated at the
rotational temperatures typical of molecular beams or he-
lium droplets. The observed spectrum in the gas phase is
dominated by pairs of transitions, reminiscent of Λ-type
doubling. In their original model, the rotational energies
were obtained by ﬁtting the spectrum using

constant (cm−1) helium droplet gas-phase
3871.76
ν0
B′′
0.0473
B′
0.0479
p′′
0.0676
p′
0.0802
1.25×10−4
D′′
J
1.43×10−4
D′
J
3.8×10−4
p′′
J
4.2×10−4
p′
J

3877.47269(12)
0.111320(17)
0.116167(19)
0.15274(19)
0.19652(18)
2.56(31)×10−6
2.56(31)×10−6
0.932(54)×10−4
0.503(38)×10−4

Table IV: Molecular constants of the NO-HF complex derived
by ﬁtting the experimentally observed spectrum for the HF
stretching vibration in both helium droplets and in the gas-
phase [191]. The ﬁt to the ﬁeld free spectrum was performed
using the contour ﬁtting routines in pgopher [192]. Note that
in pgopher the signs of pJ must be reversed when compared
to the origin model of Fawzy [191].

V.

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN HELIUM

DROPLETS AND EMBEDDED MOLECULES

Since the ﬁrst spectroscopic investigation of SF6 embed-
ded in helium droplets in 1992 [193] and the ﬁrst obser-
vation of free rotation thereof a few years later [59], a

F (J) = BJ(J + 1) − DJ 2(J + 1)2 ±

[p(J +

) − pJ (J +

)J(J + 1)]

(1)

1
2

1
2

1
2

large number of molecules and cluster systems have been
studied and trends are now being established. The most
easily recognized and well publicized trend is the eﬀect of
the helium droplet on the associated rotational constants
of the embedded cluster. Two dynamical regimes have
been established. Light rotors with their large rotational
constants do not couple eﬃciently to the helium, result-
ing in only a slight decrease in the observed rotational
constant compared to the gas phase. In contrast, heavier
rotors typically exhibit a much more anisotropic interac-
tion with the helium, which allows some of the helium
to follow the rotational motion, thus adding to its mo-
ment of inertia. Typically rotational constants of heavy
rotors (B < 1 cm−1) are reduced by a factor of 2.5 ± 0.5
when compared to the gas-phase [1]. The scatter in the
reduction factors of the rotational constants results from
the unique dopant-helium interactions for the individual
systems, and, for example, two similar molecules such as
CO2 and N2O, which have nearly the same gas-phase ro-
tational constant, have very diﬀerent helium droplet ro-
tational constants due to the diﬀerences in the interaction
potentials [194]. Since inside helium droplets metastable
structures can be formed, which may be impossible to be
observed in the gas-phase, there is certainly a desire to
be able to extract quantitative bond lengths and angles
from the rotationally resolved spectra. Fully quantum
mechanical calculations have been able to reproduce the
experimentally determined rotational constants for a few
prototype systems, which is certainly a ﬁrst step [195–
197]. Despite the ambiguity in rotational constants, the
overall symmetry of the system is not aﬀected, what can
aid in structural determinations. Indeed the nuclear spin
statistical weights for propargyl and all CH3-HX-type
complexes have conﬁrmed the C2v and C3v symmetries
of the isolated molecules, respectively.

As can be seen from previous reviews on the subject, al-
most all of our knowledge on the interaction of the droplet
with a dopant has come from closed shell molecules.
From the admittedly small group of open-shell molecules
studied, which are all summarized in this review, we ﬁnd
that the interactions are generally the same for radicals.
The biggest exception would be the fact that open shell
alkali and the quasi closed shell heavier earth alkali metal
atoms are not solvated by the droplets and instead reside
on the surface, which generally results from a stronger
He-He interaction than the corresponding He-metal in-
teraction. It was ﬁrst unclear as to whether the interac-
tion with an open shell molecule would be favorable at
all, i. e. whether the radical would go into the droplet,
based on the known repulsive interaction between lone
electrons and helium droplets. For open shell atoms in
non-S states, i. e. halogen atoms (2P ), the electrostatic
interactions with the quadrupole moment of the atom are
quite strong, thus in general allowing for solvation.

Even if the species goes into the droplet, a localized un-
paired electron may cause density distortions of the sur-
rounding helium, which could lower the overall symme-

17

try. Indeed such eﬀects were postulated for NO, which
would give rise to a ﬁrst order splitting of the two par-
In that light the diﬀerent eﬀects of
ity components.
the helium droplet environment on the parity splitting
of bare NO and the NO-HF complex show how such ef-
fects depend on details of the molecular system and the
molecule-helium interactions. Theoretical support is ur-
gently needed to describe and understand these detailed
experimental results.

VI. FUTURE DIRECTIONS

A. High energy structures for chemical energy
storage

The possibilities to build metastable molecular cluster
structures inside liquid helium nano-droplets was demon-
strated, for example, by observing a ring of six water
molecules [61] or by the self-assembly of long linear chains
of HCN [60]. These chains are built up due to the spe-
ciﬁc kinetic control of the complex formation inside the
helium droplets. Since individual molecules are picked up
successively by the droplet and are rapidly cooled inside
with a rate of ∼ 1016 K s−1, they approach each other
isothermally at low temperature (0.4 K). Already at rel-
atively long distance the molecules are oriented in the
ﬁeld produced by the dipole of the complexation part-
ner. The ground states are high-ﬁeld seeking and there-
fore the molecular dipoles of both partners are oriented
along the intermolecular axis while they approach each
other. Once they are close to each other, they ﬁnd them-
self in a linear, hydrogen bonded geometry. Due to the
low temperature they cannot rearrange to form the ther-
modynamically more stable cyclic structures observed in
free jets [198, 199].

In the same way as for HCN it should be possible to as-
semble chains of polar radicals in helium droplets, e. g.
chains of CN or OH radicals. Considering two ground-
state OH radicals approaching one another from long
range at very low temperatures, the hydrogen perox-
ide structure is the global minimum product. Neverthe-
less, there is also a hydrogen bonded minimum at long
range analogous to the HF dimer [200, 201]. At long
range the ground state OH–OH interactions are essen-
tially the same as for the HF dimer. Since the length
scale for the hydrogen-bond is very diﬀerent from that of
the chemical well, it is expected that after reaching the
hydrogen-bonded well there is a barrier to further bond-
compression, before the O–O distance is decreased suﬃ-
ciently to access the chemical bonding region. In systems
with such barriers the possibility exists for stabilizing the
pre-reactive complex in the hydrogen bonded well inside
a helium droplet, in analogy to the physisorbed state in
surface science. The challenge is to remove the condensa-
tion energy from the system as it forms, before it can sur-

18

mount any barriers, thus trapping it in the pre-reactive
form. The natural extension to larger OH clusters sug-
gests that one might be able to make a whole new class
of pre-reactive radical solids.

The qualitative description given above is supported by
extensive theoretical studies of the hydrogen peroxide
system. Particularly interesting is a high-level theoret-
ical study by Kuhn et al., in which a minimum energy
path analysis shows how the bonding character changes
from long range hydrogen bonding to covalent bonding
at decreased O–O distances [202]. These two regions
are separated by a signiﬁcant barrier – some hundred
wavenumbers for the highest quality potential – that is
presumably high enough to exhibit bound states in the
hydrogen bonded well. Moreover, the minimum energy
path from these calculations shows a cusp at the max-
imum of the barrier, corresponding to a sudden change
in the angular geometry of the complex at that distance.
This is due to the need for switching from a geometry
with the molecular dipoles oriented parallel (OH–OH) to
an head-to-head structure (HO–OH).

With this theoretical work supporting the existence of
a barrier between the hydrogen bonded and the chem-
ical bonded minima, there is good reason to think that
the pre-reactive dimer, as well as larger nanoclusters, can
be stabilized by following the minimum energy approach
path analogous to the production of HCN chains [60],
cyclic water hexamer [61], and polymers of HF [203–
206].
(H2)n-HF clusters, which are a good model for
the OH/H2 metastable system, have also been studied in
helium droplets [207–210]. These studies show that there
is considerable control on the number of molecules picked
up by the droplets, allowing the study of a wide range
of stoichiometries. Generally, supermolecular structures
with large dipoles are favored by the formation process.
It has to be pointed out that all systems mentioned
form diﬀerent, metastable, structures in liquid helium
droplets, than obtained from gas-phase nucleation. The
implication is that liquid helium provides a new growth
medium for creating and stabilizing higher energy iso-
mers of clusters that are not normally observed in the
gas-phase. It is also encouraging that diﬀerent clusters
of quite large size using can be diﬀerentiated using in-
frared pendular state spectroscopy [60].

To illustrate what might be achieved by producing anal-
ogous metastable structures of radicals, consider the
hydrogen-oxygen reactions [211–213]:

2 H2 + O2 −→ 2 H2O

H2 + O2 −→ H2O2

∆f H◦ = -484 kJ mol−1
∆f H◦ = -273 kJ mol−1

and for comparison, consider the following reactions:

2 OH + H2 −→ 2 H2O

2 OH −→ H2O2

∆f H◦ = -562 kJ mol−1
∆f H◦ = -351 kJ mol−1

Thus, if solids of pure OH or with a OH/H2 ration of 2:1

could be stabilized, these would exhibit exothermicities
that are considerably higher than that of the hydrogen-
oxygen system, which is widely used as fuel. As such they
would be ideal combustibles for high energy consump-
tions. From the discussion given above, there is plenty
of evidence to suggest this could be achieved, both in
nano-droplets and in bulk helium.

Other systems that could potentially provide an even
larger amount of chemical energy storage are nitrogen
(oxygen) oligomers, which react very exothermally to
form stable N2 (O2) molecules. The N3 and N4 molecules
have been predicted [214–216] and observed experimen-
tally [217, 218]. The cluster formation mechanism in he-
lium droplets described above should allow one to pro-
duce a wide variety of such metastable Nn systems from
nitrogen atoms, where n could be much larger than 3 and
is solely determined by the N-atom density in the pick-up
region.

Gordon and co-workers have shown that similar radical
solids can be stabilized in bulk liquid helium.[247] They
directed a helium beam containing atomic nitrogen into
a dewar of liquid helium, to ﬁnd that a highly energetic,
snow-like precipitate was formed [219–221]. Upon warm-
ing that material thermally detonated. Electron spin
measurements have shown an unexpectedly high concen-
tration of N atoms with more than 10 % of the N2 con-
centration in the original experiments. Later the experi-
ments were optimized to obtain atomic concentrations as
high as 50 % [222]. Although a number of techniques have
been used to study the properties of these cryo-solids, de-
tailed structural information is still lacking. Nevertheless
the authors point out that the liquid helium is only nec-
essary during the formation process and have shown that
the resulting solids are stable when the liquid helium is
completely evaporated, as long as the temperature re-
mains below approximately 8 K [220]. Most remarkably
the authors were able to use a plunger to compact the
solid precipitate into a pellet without causing it to react
[223]. They suggest that the method should be appli-
cable to a wide range of species and we suspect that it
will be even more eﬀective for molecular radicals, where
there are steric considerations that also inhibit recombi-
nation. A number of fascinating observations have been
made by this group, including the appearance of an in-
tense green glow when the sample was irradiated with
an helium neon laser. More recently they showed that
captured N(2D) atoms show thermoluminescence upon
slight heating by 0.1 K or when irradiating them using
microwaves [224, 225]. Details of the impurity conden-
sation in liquid and solid helium and the interpretation
of their X-ray and IR spectroscopic studies have recently
been discussed [226].

Structural information on such materials is clearly desir-
able and can be obtained from vibrational spectroscopy
on small (nanoscale) samples of these materials. Studies
in liquid helium droplets will provide better control of the
growth, as well as the ability to use high resolution vi-

brational and rotational spectroscopy to characterize the
resulting structures. For smaller clusters rotational reso-
lution will be possible, providing detailed information on
the corresponding structures.

The nanosolids we are proposing to make in these stud-
ies are highly energetic and it is interesting to consider
what will happen when they are vibrationally excited. If
the vibrational energy deposited in the molecules is suf-
ﬁcient to overcome the barriers that are responsible for
the stability of the clusters, and the energy becomes re-
distributed into the reaction coordinate by intramolecu-
lar vibrational energy redistribution (IVR), it is expected
to observe strong responses to the laser excitation. This
laser-induced detonation (LID) will result in complete
evaporation of the helium droplet resulting in very strong
depletion signals Alternatively, the clusters might dissi-
pate the vibrational energy to the helium so quickly that
no reaction does occur and the system simply cools back
down by evaporation of liquid helium atoms. These ef-
fects could be studied using IR-IR pump-probe experi-
ments, similar to the ones demonstrated for stable species
embedded in helium droplets [62, 63]. Considering the
OH–OH system, it is interesting to consider excitation
of the OH–OH intermolecular vibrations, i. e. using com-
bination modes of this vibration. This will put energy
into the reaction coordinate and may push the system
over the barrier and into the reactive well. Such tests
of the stability of these solid materials are important in
accessing the usefulness of such materials as specialty fu-
els. Understanding the growth of such new classes of high
energy density materials in liquid helium can be used to
make and study the properties and structures of these
systems on the nanometer scale. What is exciting abut
this approach is that it has the potential to be scaled up
to macroscopic sizes, as demonstrated by the experiments
of Gordon and co-workers [219–222].

Considering the Br-HCN and HCN-Br complexes de-
scribed above, it seems reasonable to allow for the for-
mation of a metastable Br-HCN-Br complex as such a
high-energy structure. Whereas we were not able to ﬁnd
this HCN complex, ﬁrst experiments using the equivalent
cyanoacetylene (HCCCN) chromophore reveal the exis-
tence of such complexes. In Figure 12 pendular survey
scans for the bromine-cyanoacetylene system are shown
for diﬀerent experimental conditions.
It is important
to note that scans 12 (A) - (C) were recorded by pick-
ing up the HCCCN ﬁrst, but in 12 (D) the order has
been reversed, and we instead pick-up from the pyrolysis
source ﬁrst. In scan 12 (A), only HCCCN is added to the
droplets, while in 12 (B), Br2 is ﬂowing through a room
temperature pyrolysis source. The result of heating the
pyrolysis to the appropriate temperatures for bromine
atom pick-up are shown in scans 12 (C) and (D). In good
agreement with the results of X + HCN, we ﬁnd two
peaks at 3326.1 and 3302.4 cm−1, marked by a †, which
we assign to the Br-HCCCN and HCCCN-Br complexes,
respectively, based on their frequency shifts and signal

19

strengths. The peaks labeled with an ∗ were found to
optimize at higher HCCCN pressure, therefore they cor-
respond to complexes containing more than one HCCCN.
The peak at 3297.65 cm−1 optimizes at the same HC-
CCN pressure as the 1:1 complexes, however, it is found
to optimize at higher bromine pressure, suggesting that
it is a complex containing two bromine atoms [123, 158].
Since it only appears in the spectrum when the HCCCN
is picked up ﬁrst, it is a good candidate for being Br-
HCCCN-Br, a metastable van der Waals complex con-
taining two spatially separated bromine atoms. The de-
pendence on pick-up order is to be expected because two
bromine atoms will likely recombine to form Br2 in the
absence of the molecular spacer.

To aid in this preliminary assignment we performed
bromine pressure dependence measurements [123]. This
new peak is found to optimize at higher bromine pres-
sures than those peaks assigned to the 1:1 complexes,
and agrees well with a simulation of a dimer using a Pois-
son distribution for the pick-up statistics. Although we
cannot rule out that a Br-HCCCN-Br2, or similar com-
plex might have such a pick-up cell pressure dependence,
a double-resonance population transfer experiment [63]
in which this new peak is pumped and the HCCCN-Br2
complex is recovered would be deﬁnitive.

It is also interesting to note, that the the original inter-
est in stabilizing spin-polarized hydrogen arose because

Figure 12: Pendular survey scans for the Br + HCCCN sys-
tem, where the bromine pressure is intentionally high to facil-
itate forming larger clusters. In (A) only HCCCN is picked up
by the droplets and in (B) Br2 is ﬂowing through the cold py-
rolysis source. Scans (C) and (D) were both recorded with the
pyrolysis source at the appropriate temperature for bromine
atom production. Whereas in (C) the HCCCN is picked up
ﬁrst, in (D) the bromine atoms are picked up ﬁrst. See text
for details.

20

of the same reasons, namely searching for novel high-
energy structures [227–229]. The reaction H + H → H2 is
exothermic by more than 400 kJ cm−1, yielding an very
large energy-to-mass ratio if samples of atomic hydrogen
could be stabilized. For two polarized hydrogen atoms
direct molecule formation is not possible, as their 3Σ+
u
potential is purely repulsive, and a spin-ﬂip is necessary
for the binding energy of the hydrogen molecule to be
released. Whereas the preparation of dense samples of
spin-polarized hydrogen for energy storage has not been
successful yet, these studies emerged into the quest for
the experimental realization of Bose-Einstein condensa-
tion and yielded a whole new ﬁeld in atomic and molec-
ular physics [230, 231]. Nowadays similar ideas are also
discussed in the context of deep space propulsion systems
based on antihydrogen [232].

B. Other applications

Recently a new experiment for a sensitive search for
the electric dipole moment (EDM) of the electron us-
ing matrix-isolated dipolar radicals was proposed [233].
It was suggested to measure the magnetization of an ori-
ented sample of diatomic radicals embedded in a solid
noble-gas matrix. While the solid state matrix will pro-
vide a larger number density of radicals, it is not clear to
what degree molecular orientation can be achieved, since
neither the break-down voltages of the matrix nor the de-
tails of the cage eﬀects in the matrix sites are know [233].
As shown for several examples in this review, pendular
states with a high degree of orientation can easily be
achieved for polar molecules embedded in liquid helium
droplet. Therefore, the techniques of strong ﬁeld orien-
tation of radicals embedded in liquid helium droplets,
as described in this review, might provide a well-deﬁned
environment for sensitive EDM tests.

The OH radical receives also considerable attention in the
ﬁeld of ultracold polar molecules and it has been success-
fully conﬁned in electrostatic traps for times > 1 s and at
temperatures of ∼ 50 mK [28, 234], and there is consider-
able interest to cool such trapped molecules further down
to even lower temperatures. In that context the interac-
tion of two OH molecules at very long range has been
considered and for two rotational ground state OH radi-
cals in their low-ﬁeld seeking state, so-called ﬁeld-linked
states have been predicted: bound states of long-range
OH-OH dipole aligned dimers that are stabilized by an
external electric ﬁeld on the order of 10 kV/cm [235].
Such ﬁeld linked states provide a similar degree of control
over the chemical reaction as the van der Waals-dimers
described above. As long as the ﬁeld is on, they are safely
separated by several nanometers in their long-range well,
but when the ﬁeld is ramped down they can react —
assuming that,
for example, the exothermic reaction
2 OH→H2O+O proceeds at ultracold temperatures [235].
However, a gas of OH radicals in low-ﬁeld seeking states is

subject to large collisional losses and is therefore not suit-
able for evaporative cooling [236]. The high-ﬁeld seeking
state is collisionally stable, being the lowest energy state
of OH, however, it does not show such long-range states
and the collisional parameters are strongly depending on
the short-range potential and must be determined by a
“suitable experiment” [235]. Experiments on entrance-
channel complexes in helium droplets, like the ones de-
scribed in this paper, would provide detailed information
on this PES.[248]

C. Experimental improvements

The main hurdle for studying transient species embedded
in superﬂuid helium droplets is the generation of the nec-
essary clean samples of radicals. Albeit the continuous
pyrolysis source [67] proves to be a very successful and
versatile tool for the production of a wide range of rad-
icals, the types of radicals that can be produced is still
quite limited. It seems impossible, for example, to use
it to create clean sources of oxygen or nitrogen atoms,
as necessary for the experiments proposed above, as that
would require to thermally break the extremely strong
O2 or N2 bonds.

Alternative techniques that have been used so success-
fully in free jet experiments, such as photolysis or dis-
charge sources, can not easily be coupled to the continu-
ous droplet beam setups, which up to date in the vast ma-
jority are operated in a cw fashion. Once pulsed droplet
beams mature they will provide much larger droplet den-
sities, what might allow to couple them to pulsed radical
sources. Nevertheless, the droplet property of embedding
any species in the scattering region requires extremely
clean sources that would still need to be developed, but
the possibility of using photodissociation should help con-
siderably to break strong bonds.

It would be extremely interesting to perform time-
resolved studies on the processes of molecules embedded
in helium droplets in order to study reactions and relax-
ation dynamics in real time. Femtosecond pump-probe
experiments on alkali-doped helium droplets [237–239]
show the feasibility of such experiments. In these exper-
iments the dynamics of the helium-alkali atom interac-
tion could clearly be observed. In a similar way it should
be possible to observe relaxation dynamics after vibra-
tional excitation of molecules like HCN embedded inside
the helium droplets. Once metastable radical complexes,
as described above, can be produced inside the helium
droplets one could even photoinitiate their reaction and
follow the complete chemical dynamics from the educts
to the ﬁnal products due to the conﬁning environment of
the droplets.

VII. SUMMARY

optically induced chemical reactions.

Superﬂuid helium droplets provide a novel medium for
the study of transient and reactive species. A contin-
uous pyrolysis source to produce extremely clean, ef-
fusive beams of radicals suitable for pick-up by helium
droplet beams was developed and the radicals embedded
in helium droplets were studied using high-resolution in-
frared spectroscopy. Using this setup, halogen atoms and
hydrocarbon radicals were produced and their van der
Waals complexes with HF or HCN were studied. In re-
lated studies NO and also a few other transient molecules
were studied as well. Many of the systems studied pro-
vide new, detailed information on stationary points of
PES that were previously only studied using reactive
scattering experiments. Even further information and
the possibility for optically controlled chemistry can be
obtained using double-resonance techniques.

The results from these studies also provide a very sensi-
tive probe of the quantum ﬂuid the helium droplet en-
vironment provides, due to the inﬂuence of the droplet
not only on the inertial parameters, as for closed shell
molecules, but also on the electronic properties, as man-
ifested in parity splitting or Λ-doubling parameters.

The ability to design complexes of multiple, potentially
diﬀerent stable and transient species inside these cryo-
reactors promises a wide variety of possibilities, from
studying stationary points on the PES of these reactive
species, developing novel high-energy species, studying
reaction dynamics under cold and deﬁned conditions, to

21

However, the extraction of quantitative structural data
from high-resolution spectra of molecules embedded in
helium droplets is still quite limited, due to missing ac-
curate models for the molecule-helium droplet interac-
tion. However, there are progresses in the theoretical
descriptions of these eﬀects and they might once allow to
determine accurate structural information, i. e. geomet-
ric rotational constants for the isolated molecular system
from helium droplet experiments.

Acknowledgments

Most of the experimental work described herein was per-
formed at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill in the group of Roger E. Miller, who deceased on
6. November 2005. The authors are very grateful for the
opportunity to work with him and for the stimulating
environment and support he provided to his group.

J. M. M. thanks Tom Baer for supporting him during the
ﬁnal stage of his graduate work. We thank Ad van der
Avoird for providing the potential energy surfaces in Fig-
ure 3.
Financial support by NSF and AFOSR is acknowledged.
J. K. gratefully acknowledges a Feodor Lynen fellowship
of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and J. M. M.
a scholarship by the Max Planck Society.

[1] M. Y. Choi, G. E. Douberly, T. M. Falconer, W. K.
Lewis, C. M. Lindsay, J. M. Merritt, P. L. Stiles, and
R. E. Miller, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 25, 15 (2006).
[2] F. Stienkemeier and K. K. Lehmann, J. Phys. B 39,

[12] S. Arrhenius, Z. Phys. Chem. 4, 226 (1889).
[13] F. London, Zeitschrift f¨ur Elektrochemie und Ange-

wandte Physikalische Chemie 35, 552 (1929).

[14] H. Eyring and M. Polanyi, Z. Phys. Chem. B 12, 279

[3] J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov, Angew. Chem. Int.

R127 (2006).

Ed. 43, 2622 (2004).

[4] G. N. Makarov, Physics-Uspekhi 47, 217 (2004).
[5] J. A. Northby, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10065 (2001).
[6] C. Callegari, K. K. Lehmann, R. Schmied, and

G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10090 (2001).

[7] F. Stienkemeier and A. F. Vilesov, J. Chem. Phys. 115,

10119 (2001).

[8] J. Warnatz, U. Maas, and W. Dibble, Combus-
tion: Physical and Chemical Fundamentals, Model-
ing and Simulation, Experiments: Pollutant Formation
(Springer, Berlin, 1996).

[9] R. P. Wayne, Chemistry of Atmospheres: An introduc-
tion to the Chemistry of the Atmospheres of Earth, the
Planets, and their satellites (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, GB, 1991), 2nd ed.

[10] D. Chastaing, P. L. James, I. R. Sims, and I. W. M.
Smith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 1, 2247 (1999).
[11] J. H. Van’t Hoﬀ, ´Etudes de dynamique chimique

(Muller, Amsterdam, 1884).

(1931).

(1969).

[15] G. S. Hammond, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 77, 334 (1955).
[16] J. C. Polanyi and W. H. Wong, J. Chem. Phys. 51, 1439

[17] M. H. Qiu, Z. F. Ren, L. Che, D. X. Dai, S. A.
Harich, X. Y. Wang, X. M. Yang, C. X. Xu, D. Q. Xie,
M. Gustafsson, et al., Science 311, 1440 (2006).

[18] S. D. Chao, S. A. Harich, D. X. Dai, C. C. Wang, X. M.
Yang, and R. T. Skodje, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 8341
(2002).

[19] J. Y. Zhang, D. X. Dai, C. C. Wang, S. A. Harich, X. Y.
Wang, X. M. Yang, M. Gustafsson, and R. T. Skodje,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 093201 (2006).

[20] J. J. Valentini, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 52, 15 (2001).
[21] D. H. Parker and R. B. Bernstein, Ann. Rev. Phys.

Chem. 40, 561 (1989).

[22] H. J. Loesch, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 46, 555 (1995).
[23] A. J. OrrEwing, J. Chem. Soc. – Faraday Trans. 92,

881 (1996).

[24] P. Casavecchia, Rep. Prog. Phys. 63, 355 (2000).
[25] H. L. Bethlem, M. R. Tarbutt, J. K¨upper, D. Carty,

22

K. Wohlfart, E. A. Hinds, and G. Meijer, J. Phys. B
39, R263 (2006).

[26] H. L. Bethlem, G. Berden, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev.

Phys. Chem. 24, 533 (2005).

[57] T. Momose, H. Hoshina, N. Sogoshi, H. Katsuki,
T. Wakabayashi, and T. Shida, J. Chem. Phys. 108,
7334 (1998).

[27] H. L. Bethlem and G. Meijer, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.

[58] S. Grebenev, J. P. Toennies, and A. F. Vilesov, Science

Lett. 83, 1558 (1999).

22, 73 (2003).

279, 2083 (1998).

[28] S. Y. T. van de Meerakker, N. Vanhaecke, and G. Mei-

[59] M. Hartmann, R. E. Miller, J. P. Toennies, and A. F.

jer, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 57, 159 (2006).

Vilesov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1566 (1995).

[35] P. F. Weck and N. Balakrishnan, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.

Lett. 68, 1303 (1992).

[29] C. E. Heiner, H. L. Bethlem, and G. Meijer, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 2666 (2006).

[30] J. J. Gilijamse, S. Hoekstra, S. Y. T. van de Meerakker,
G. C. Groeneboom, and G. Meijer, Science (2006), ac-
cepted for publication.

[31] H. J. Werner, W. Bian, M. Menendez, F. J. Aoiz,
P. Casavecchia, L. Cartechini, and N. Balucani, Chem.
Phys. Lett. 328, 500 (2000).

[32] N. Balakrishnan, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 5563 (2004).
[33] D. Skouteris, D. E. Manolopoulos, W. Bian, H. J.
Werner, L. H. Lai, and K. Liu, Science 286, 1713 (1999).
[34] H. J. Werner, W. Bian, and U. Manthe, Chem. Phys.

Lett. 313, 647 (1999).

25, 283 (2006).

[36] D. Townsend, S. A. Lahankar, S. K. Lee, S. D. Cham-
breau, A. G. Suits, X. Zhang, J. Rheinecker, L. B. Hard-
ing, and J. M. Bowman, Science 306, 1158 (2004).
[37] S. D. Chambreau, D. Townsend, S. A. Lahankar, S. K.
Lee, and A. G. Suits, Physica Scripta 73, C89 (2006).
[38] C. Murray and A. J. Orr-Ewing, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.

[39] M. C. Heaven, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 24, 375 (2005).
[40] Y. Kim and H. Meyer, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 20, 219

23, 435 (2004).

(2001).

[41] M. I. Lester, B. V. Pond, M. D. Marshall, D. T. Ander-
son, L. B. Harding, and A. F. Wagner, Faraday Disc.
118, 373 (2001).

[42] R. A. Loomis, R. L. Schwartz, and M. I. Lester, J.

Chem. Phys. 104, 6984 (1996).

[43] D. T. Anderson, R. L. Schwartz, M. W. Todd, and M. I.

Lester, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 3461 (1998).

[44] R. A. Loomis and M. I. Lester, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem.

48, 643 (1997).

[60] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Science 283, 1895 (1999).
[61] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Science 287, 293 (2000).
[62] J. M. Merritt, G. E. Douberly, and R. E. Miller, J.

Chem. Phys. 121, 1309 (2004).

[63] G. E. Douberly, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 7, 463 (2005).

[64] D. M. Brink and S. Stringari, Z. Phys. D 15, 257 (1990).
[65] F. Dalfovo and S. Stringari, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 1078

(2001).

[66] K. K. Lehmann, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 3336 (2003).
[67] J. K¨upper, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem.

Phys. 117, 647 (2002).

[68] P. A. Block, E. J. Bohac, and R. E. Miller, Phys. Rev.

[69] E. W. Becker, R. Klingelhofer, and P. Lohse, Z. Natur-

forsch. A 16, 1259 (1961).

[70] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10138

(2001).

[71] K. von Haeften, A. Metzelthin, S. Rudolph, V. Staemm-
ler, and M. Havenith, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 215301
(2005).

[72] H. Pauly, in [240], chap. 4, pp. 83–123.
[73] H. Pauly, in [240], chap. 5, pp. 124–152.
[74] D. W. Kohn, H. Clauberg, and P. Chen, Rev. Sci. In-

[75] M. R. Cameron and S. H. Kable, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 67,

strum. 63, 4003 (1992).

283 (1996).

[76] X. Zhang, A. V. Friderichsen, S. Nandi, G. B. Ellison,
D. E. David, J. T. McKinnon, T. G. Lindeman, D. C.
Dayton, and M. R. Nimlos, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 74, 3077
(2003).

[77] P. C. Engelking, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 57, 2274 (1986).
[78] P. C. Engelking, Chem. Rev. 91, 399 (1991).
[79] D. T. Anderson, S. Davis, T. S. Zwier, and D. J. Nesbitt,

[45] R. L. Schwartz, D. T. Anderson, M. W. Todd, and M. I.

Chem. Phys. Lett. 258, 207 (1996).

Lester, Chem. Phys. Lett. 273, 18 (1997).

[80] D. L. Monts, T. G. Dietz, M. A. Duncan, and R. E.

[46] J. M. Hossenlopp, D. T. Anderson, M. W. Todd, and

Smalley, Chem. Phys. 45, 133 (1980).

M. I. Lester, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 10707 (1998).

[81] M. Heaven, T. A. Miller, and V. E. Bondybey, Chem.

[47] Y. L. Chen and M. C. Heaven, J. Chem. Phys. 109,

Phys. Lett. 84, 1 (1981).

5171 (1998).

347, 199 (2001).

7416 (2000).

[48] A. L. Kaledin and M. C. Heaven, Chem. Phys. Lett.

Phys. 81, 571 (1984).

[82] P. Andresen, D. Hausler, and H. W. Lulf, J. Chem.

[83] M. N. Slipchenko, S. Kuma, T. Momose, and A. F.

[49] Y. L. Chen and M. C. Heaven, J. Chem. Phys. 112,

Vilesov, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 73, 3600 (2002).

[50] M. D. Wheeler, D. T. Anderson, and M. I. Lester, Int.

Instrum. 76, 104102 (2005).

Rev. Phys. Chem. 19, 501 (2000).

[85] A. Conjusteau, Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University,

[51] Z. Mielke and L. Andrews, J. Phys. Chem. 94, 3519

Princeton, NJ, USA (2002).

(1990).

[86] A. Braun and M. Drabbels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 253401

[84] S. Yang, S. M. Brereton, and A. M. Ellis, Rev. Sci.

[52] M. E. Jacox, Chem. Phys. 42, 133 (1979).
[53] L. Khriachtchev, H. Tanskanen, and M. Rasanen, J.

Chem. Phys. 124, 181101 (2006).

Rev. Phys. Chem. 25, 469 (2006).

(2004).

(2000).

(1997).

[54] K. Yoshioka, P. L. Raston, and D. T. Anderson, Int.

[88] D. H. Parker and A. Eppink, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 2357

[87] K. Kavita and P. K. Das, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 8426

[55] T. Momose, H. Hoshina, M. Fushitani, and H. Katsuki,

[89] M. F´arnik and J. P. Toennies, J. Chem. Phys. 122,

Vibrational Spectroscopy 34, 95 (2004).

014307 (2005).

[56] T. Momose, M. Fushitani, and H. Hoshina, Int. Rev.

[90] W. K. Lewis, C. M. Lindsay, R. J. Bemish, and R. E.

23

Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 7235 (2005).

Chem. Phys. (2006), submitted.

[91] N. M. Marinov, W. J. Pitz, C. K. Westbrook, A. M.
Vincitore, M. J. Castaldi, S. M. Senkan, and C. F.
Melius, Combust. Flame 114, 192 (1998).

[124] J. M. Merritt, J. K¨upper, and R. E. Miller, Phys. Chem.

Chem. Phys. 7, 67 (2005).

[125] M. L. Dubernet and J. M. Hutson, J. Chem. Phys. 101,

[92] P. R. Westmoreland, A. M. Dean, J. B. Howard, and

1939 (1994).

J. P. Longwell, J. Phys. Chem. 93, 8171 (1989).

[93] U. Alkemade and K. H. Homann, Z. Phys. Chem. 161,

19 (1989).

[94] S. E. Stein, J. A. Walker, M. M. Suryan, and A. Fahr,
in Symp. (Int.) Combust. (1990), vol. 23, pp. 85–90.
[95] P. Botschwina, R. Oswald, J. Fl¨ugge, and M. Horn, Z.

[126] C. S. Maierle, G. C. Schatz, M. S. Gordon, P. Mccabe,
and J. N. Connor, J. Chem. Soc. – Faraday Trans. 93,
709 (1997).

[127] P. Jungwirth, P. Zdanska, and B. Schmidt, J. Phys.

Chem. A 102, 7241 (1998).

[128] M. Bittererova and S. Biskupic, Chem. Phys. Lett. 299,

Phys. Chem. 188, 29 (1995).

145 (1999).

[96] P. Botschwina, M. Horn, R. Oswald, and S. Schmatz, J.

[129] M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson, Phys. Chem. Chem.

Electron. Spectrosc. 108, 109 (2000).

Phys. 2, 441 (2000).

[97] H. Honjou, M. Yoshimine, and J. Pacansky, J. Phys.

[130] M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 592

Chem. 91, 4455 (1987).

[98] A. Hinchcliﬀe, J. Mol. Struct. 37, 295 (1977).
[99] C. H. Wu and R. D. Kern, J. Phys. Chem. 91, 6291

(2000).

(2003).

(1987).

p. 295.

p. 461.

[100] N. M. Marinov, M. J. Castaldi, C. F. Melius, and
W. Tsang, Combust. Sci. Technol. 128, 295 (1997).
[101] I. Glassman, in Symp. (Int.) Combust. (1988), vol. 22,

[102] J. A. Miller, in Symp. (Int.) Combust. (1996), vol. 26,

[103] J. M. Goodings, D. K. Bohme, and C.-W. Ng, Combust.

Flame 36, 27 (1979).

(1981), vol. 18, p. 453.

[105] K. Tanaka, T. Harada, K. Sakaguchi, K. Harada, and

T. Tanaka, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 6450 (1995).

[106] L. Yuan, J. DeSain, and R. F. Curl, J. Mol. Spec. 187,

102 (1998).

[107] K. Tanaka, Y. Sumiyoshi, Y. Ohshima, Y. Endo, and
K. Kawaguchi, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 2728 (1997).
[108] P. L. Chapovsky and L. J. F. Hermans, Ann. Rev. Phys.

(1994).

[109] M. Fushitani and T. Momose, J. Chem. Phys. 116,

Chem. 50, 315 (1999).

10739 (2002).

90, 135301 (2003).

[111] P. Botschwina, The zero-point corrected dipole moment
of propargyl radical (2002), private communication.
[112] C. M. Lindsay, W. K. Lewis, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem.

Phys. 121, 6095 (2004).

[114] E. Polyakova, D. Stolyarov, and C. Wittig, J. Chem.

[115] F. Stienkemeier, J. Higgins, W. E. Ernst, and G. Scoles,

(2000).

Phys. 124, 214308 (2006).

Z. Phys. B 98, 413 (1995).

[116] J. Reho, C. Callegari, J. Higgins, W. E. Ernst, K. K.
Lehmann, and G. Scoles, Faraday Disc. 108, 161 (1997).
[117] F. R. Br¨uhl, R. A. Trasca, and W. E. Ernst, J. Chem.

[131] M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 8873

[132] J. A. K los, G. Cha lasi´nski, M. M. Szcz¸e´sniak, and H.-J.

Werner, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 3085 (2001).

[133] W. B. Zeimen, J. A. K los, G. C. Groenenboom, and
A. van der Avoird, J. Phys. Chem. A 107, 5110 (2003),
see erratum: [241].

[134] D. M. Neumark, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 43, 153 (1992).
[135] M. P. Deskevich, M. Y. Hayes, K. Takahashi, R. T.
Skodje, and D. J. Nesbitt, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 224303
(2006).

Journal Of Physical Chemistry A 110, 5273 (2006).

[137] A. V. Fishchuk, G. C. Groenenboom, and A. van der
Avoird, Journal Of Physical Chemistry A 110, 5280
(2006).

[138] M. L. Dubernet and J. Hutson, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 5844

[139] K. Liu, A. Kolessov, J. W. Partin, I. Bezel, and C. Wit-

tig, Chem. Phys. Lett. 299, 374 (1999).

[140] K. Imura, H. Ohoyama, R. Naaman, D. C. Che,
M. Hashinokuchi, and T. Kasai, J. Mol. Struct. 552,
137 (2000).

ticot, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 22, 285 (2003).

[142] L. Andrews and R. D. Hunt, J. Chem. Phys. 89, 3502

[143] R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 3599

(1988).

(1988).

(1988).

[145] A. M. G. Ding, L. J. Kirsch, D. S. Perry, J. C. Polanyi,
and J. L. Schreiber, Faraday Disc. Chem. Soc 55, 252
(1973).

[146] E. W¨urzberg, A. J. Grimley, and P. L. Houston, Chem.

Phys. Lett. 57, 373 (1978).

[147] E. W¨urzberg and P. L. Houston, J. Chem. Phys. 72,

5915 (1980).

[113] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9466

[144] R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews, J. Phys. Chem. 92, 3769

[104] D. B. Olson and H. F. Calcote, in Symp. (Int.) Combust.

[136] A. V. Fishchuk, P. E. S. Wormer, and A. van der Avoird,

[110] P. L. Stiles, K. Nauta, and R. E. Miller, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[141] J. M. Mestdagh, B. Soep, M. A. Gaveau, and J. P. Vis-

Phys. 115, 10220 (2001).

[148] C. M. Moore, I. W. M. Smith, and D. W. A. Stewart,

[118] E. Lugovoj, J. P. Toennies, and A. Vilesov, The Journal

Int. J. Chem. Kin. 26, 813 (1994).

of Chemical Physics 112, 8217 (2000).

[149] K. Tamagake, D. W. Setser, and J. P. Sung, J. Chem.

[119] E. Herbst and K. W., Astron. J. 185, 505 (1973).
[120] D. Smith, Chem. Rev. 92, 1473 (1992).
[121] D. M. Neumark, Phys. Chem. Comm 5, 76 (2002).
[122] A. J. C. Varandas, P. J. S. B. Caridade, J. Z. H. Zhang,
Q. Cui, and K. L. Han, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 064312
(2006).

Phys. 73, 2203 (1980).

[150] A. Zolot and D. J. Nesbitt, manuscript in preparation.
[151] R. B. Metz, J. M. Pfeiﬀer, J. D. Thoemke, and F. F.

Crim, Chem. Phys. Lett. 221, 347 (1994).

[152] C. Kreher, R. Theinl, and K. H. Gericke, J. Chem. Phys.

104, 4481 (1996).

[123] J. M. Merritt, J. K¨upper, and R. E. Miller, Phys. Chem.

[153] B. K. Decker, G. He, I. Tokue, and R. G. Macdonald,

24

J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 5759 (2001).

[184] M. B. Pushkarsky, S. J. Zalyubovsky, and T. A. Miller,

[154] M. Y. Hayes, M. P. Deskevich, D. J. Nesbitt, K. Taka-
hashi, and R. T. Skodje, J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 436
(2006).

[155] O. D. Krogh and G. C. Pimentel, J. Chem. Phys. 67,

[156] H. J. Loesch and A. Remscheid, J. Chem. Phys. 93,

2993 (1977).

4779 (1990).

J. Chem. Phys. 112, 10695 (2000).

[185] S. J. Zalyubovsky, B. G. Glover, and T. A. Miller, J.

Phys. Chem. A 107, 7704 (2003).

[186] S. J. Zalyubovsky, B. G. Glover, T. A. Miller, C. Hayes,
J. K. Merle, and C. M. Hadad, J. Phys. Chem. A 109,
1308 (2005).

[187] B. G. Glover and T. A. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A 109,

[157] J. M. Rost, J. C. Griﬃn, B. Friedrich, and D. R. Her-

11191 (2005).

schbach, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1299 (1992).

[188] G. Tarczay, S. J. Zalyubovsky, and T. A. Miller, Chem.

[158] J. M. Merritt, Ph. D. thesis, University of North Car-
olina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA (2006).
[159] R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews, Inorg. Chem. 26, 3051

(1987).

[160] I. U. Goldschleger, A. V. Akimov, E. Y. Misochko, and
C. A. Wight, Mendeleev Comm. pp. 43–45 (2001).
[161] K. Schneider, P. Kramper, S. Schiller, and J. Mlynek,

Opt. Lett. 22, 1293 (1997).

Phys. Lett. 406, 81 (2005).

[189] J. Rienstra-Kiracofe, W. Allen, and H. Schaefer, III, J.

Phys. Chem. A 104, 9823 (2000).

[190] A. Fishchuk, J. M. Merritt, and A. van der Avoird

(2006), in preparation.

[191] W. M. Fawzy, G. T. Fraser, J. T. Hougen, and A. S.

Pine, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 2992 (1990).

[192] C. M. Western, Pgopher, a program for simulating ro-

[162] M. van Herpen, S. te Lintel Hekkert, S. E. Bisson, and

tational structure, University of Bristol, Bristol, GB.

F. J. M. Harren, Opt. Lett. 27, 640 (2002).

[193] S. Goyal, D. L. Schutt, and G. Scoles, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[163] J. M. Merritt and R. E. Miller, in preparation.
[164] G. E. Douberly, P. L. Stiles, and R. E. Miller, to be

69, 933 (1992), see erratum [242].

[194] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10254

[165] G. E. Douberly, Ph. D. thesis, University of North Car-
olina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA (2006).
[166] P. L. Stiles and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A 110,

[195] E. Lee, D. Farrelly, and K. B. Whaley, Phys. Rev. Lett.

83, 3812 (1999).

[196] A. Viel and K. B. Whaley, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 10186

[167] K. Nauta, D. T. Moore, P. L. Stiles, and R. E. Miller,

[197] N. Blinov, X. G. Song, and P. N. Roy, J. Chem. Phys.

[168] P. L. Stiles, D. T. Moore, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem.

[198] K. W. Jucks and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 2196

120, 5916 (2004).

[169] D. T. Moore and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A 108,

[199] D. S. Anex, E. R. Davidson, C. Douketis, and G. E.

[170] F. Dong and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 2181

[200] M. Quack and M. A. Suhm, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 28

Ewing, J. Phys. Chem. 92, 2913 (1988).

[171] W. Shiu, J. J. Lin, and K. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,

[201] B. J. Howard, T. R. Dyke, and W. Klemperer, J. Chem.

published.

5620 (2006).

Science 292, 481 (2001).

Phys. 121, 3130 (2004).

9908 (2004).

(2004).

103201 (2004).

(2001).

(2001).

(1988).

(1991).

[172] T. S. Chu, X. Zhang, L. P. Ju, L. Yao, K. L. Han, M. L.
Wang, and J. Z. H. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett. 424, 243
(2006).

[173] G. L. Johnson and L. Andrews, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 102,

5736 (1980).

[174] E. Y. Misochko, V. A. Benderskii, A. U. Goldschleger,
A. V. Akimov, and A. F. Shestakov, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
117, 11997 (1995).

[175] E. Y. Misochko, V. A. Benderskii, A. U. Goldschleger,
A. V. Akimov, A. V. Benderskii, and C. A. Wight, J.
Chem. Phys. 106, 3146 (1996).

[176] Z. Liu, H. Gomez, and D. M. Neumark, Chem. Phys.

[177] S. Rudi´c, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem.

Phys. 81, 5417 (1984).

[202] B. Kuhn, T. R. Rizzo, D. Luckhaus, M. Quack, and
M. A. Suhm, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 2565 (1999).
[203] G. E. Douberly and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. B 107,

4500 (2003).

[204] D. Blume, M. Lewerenz, F. Huisken, and M. Kaloudis,

J. Chem. Phys. 105, 8666 (1996).

[205] F. Huisken, E. G. Tarakanova, A. A. Vigasin, and G. V.
Yukhnevich, Chem. Phys. Lett. 245, 319 (1995).
[206] F. Huisken, M. Kaloudis, A. Kulcke, C. Laush, and J. M.

Lisy, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 5366 (1995).

[207] D. T. Moore and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A 108,

1930 (2004).

(2003).

(2003).

Lett. 332, 65 (2000).

[208] D. T. Moore and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 9629

Phys. 124, 104305 (2006).

[209] D. T. Moore and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 119, 4713

[178] K. P. Liu, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 52, 139 (2001).
[179] T. Gilbert, T. L. Grebner, I. Fischer, and P. Chen, Jour-

nal Of Chemical Physics 110, 5485 (1999).

10805 (2003).

[180] L. Castiglioni, A. Bach, and P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. A

[181] S. J. Blanksby and G. B. Ellison, Acct. Chem. Res. 36,

109, 962 (2005).

255 (2003).

[210] D. T. Moore and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A 107,

[211] D. R. Lide, ed., CRC Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics, vol. 71 (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1990).
[212] B. R. Strazisar, C. Lin, and H. F. Davis, Science 290,

958 (2000).

[182] H. J. Curran, P. Gaﬀuri, W. J. Pitz, and C. K. West-

[213] I. W. M. Smith and F. F. Crim, Phys. Chem. Chem.

brook, Combust. Flame 114, 149 (1998).

Phys. 4, 3543 (2002).

[183] O. J. Nielsen and T. J. Wallington, Ultraviolet Absorp-
tion Spectra of Peroxy Radicals in the Gas Phase (John
Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, USA, 1997), pp. 72–73.

[214] P. Zhang, K. Morokuma, and A. M. Wodtke, J. Chem.

Phys. 122, 014106 (2005).

[215] M. Bittererova, H. Ostmark, and T. Brinck, Chem.

25

Phys. Lett. 347, 220 (2001).

[235] A. V. Avdeenkov and J. L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

[216] M. Bittererova, H. Ostmark, and T. Brinck, J. Chem.

043006 (2003).

Phys. 116, 9740 (2002).

[236] A. V. Avdeenkov and J. L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. A 66,

[217] N. Hansen and A. M. Wodtke, J. Phys. Chem. A 107,

052718 (2002).

[223] E. B. Gordon, private communication with R. E. Miller

[244] N. Mudrich, O. Bunermann, F. Stienkemeier, O. Dulieu,

10608 (2003).

480 (2002).

[218] F. Cacace, G. de Petris, and A. Troiani, Science 295,

[219] E. B. Gordon, L. P. Mezhov-Deglin, O. F. Pugachev,
and V. V. Khmelenko, Chem. Phys. Lett. 54, 282
(1978).

[220] E. B. Gordon, V. V. Khmelenko, A. A. Pelmenev, E. A.
Popov, O. F. Pugachev, and A. F. Shestakov, Chem.
Phys. 170, 411 (1993).

[221] R. E. Boltnev, E. B. Gordon, V. V. Khmelenko, I. N.
Krushinskaya, M. V. Martynenko, A. A. Pelmenev,
E. A. Popov, and A. F. Shestakov, Chem. Phys. 189,
367 (1994).

[222] E. B. Gordon, V. V. Khmelenko, A. A. Pelmenev, E. A.
Popov, and O. F. Pugachev, Chem. Phys. Lett. 155,
301 (1989).

(2000).

[224] R. E. Boltnev et al., in 55th International Symposium on
Molecular Spectroscopy (Ohio State University, Colum-
bus, OH, USA, 2000), WI13, p. 183.

[225] E. A. Popov et al., in 55th International Symposium on
Molecular Spectroscopy (Ohio State University, Colum-
bus, OH, USA, 2000), WI14, p. 183.

[226] E. B. Gordon, Low. Temp. Phys. 30, 756 (2004).
[227] R. D. Etters, J. John V. Dugan, and R. W. Palmer, The

Journal of Chemical Physics 62, 313 (1975).

[228] I. F. Silvera and J. T. M. Walraven, Phys. Rev. Lett.

44, 164 (1980).

[229] E. S. Meyer, Z. Zhao, J. C. Mester, and I. F. Silvera,

Phys. Rev. B 50, 9339 (1994).

[230] E. A. Cornell and C. E. Wieman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74,

875 (2002).

[231] W. Ketterle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1131 (2002).
[232] M. M. Nieto, M. H. Holzscheiter, and T. J. Phillips, J.

Opt. B 5, S547 (2003).

[233] M. G. Kozlov and A. Derevianko, arXiv physics,

0602111 (2006), accepted for Phys. Rev. Lett.

[234] S. Y. T. van de Meerakker, P. H. M. Smeets, N. Van-
haecke, R. T. Jongma, and G. Meijer, Phys. Rev. Lett.
94, 023004 (2005).

[237] F. Stienkemeier, F. Meier, A. Hagele, H. O. Lutz,
E. Schreiber, C. P. Schulz, and I. V. Hertel, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 83, 2320 (1999).

[238] C. P. Schulz, P. Claas, and F. Stienkemeier, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 8715, 153401 (2001).

[239] G. Droppelmann, O. Bunermann, C. P. Schulz, and

F. Stienkemeier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 023402 (2004).

[240] G. Scoles, ed., Atomic and molecular beam methods,
vol. 1 (Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA,
1988).

[241] W. B. Zeimen, J. A. K los, G. C. Groenenboom, and
A. van der Avoird, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 9319 (2004).
[242] S. Goyal, D. L. Schutt, and G. Scoles, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[243] R. Cˆot´e, V. Kharchenko, and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev.

73, 2512 (2004).

Lett. 89, 093001 (2002).

and M. Weidem¨uller, Eur. Phys. J. D 31, 291 (2004).

[245] It is interesting to note that these studies — on sys-
tems which are quite similar to the X-HY systems
described in section IV A – were performed at the
Kaiser Wilhelm-Institut in Berlin-Dahlem: the prede-
cessor of the Fritz Haber-Institut were this review was
written.

[246] Commercial atom sources provide so called clean atomic
beams, but for the purposes of the experiments de-
scribed here the atom-content is still too low. Initial
experiments by ourselves to use microwave discharge
sources were not successful due to the necessary low gas
ﬂow and pressure, in order not to destroy the helium
droplet beam by a gas-jet from the discharge source.

[247] It was recently proposed that similar eﬀects should
also be obtainable in atomic Bose-Einstein condensates,
where ionic impurities could lead to the formation of
mesoscopic molecular ions [243].

[248] In a similar approach groups from the ﬁeld of ultracold
atomic physics and helium droplet spectroscopy have
successfully collaborated to obtain information on the
PES and spectroscopy of mixed alkali dimers [244].

