6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A high-resolution infrared spectroscopic investigation of the halogen atom-HCN
entrance channel complexes solvated in superﬂuid helium droplets

Jeremy M. Merritt,* Jochen K¨upper,§ and Roger E. Miller„
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Rotationally resolved infrared spectra are reported for the X-HCN (X = Cl, Br, I) binary com-
plexes solvated in helium nanodroplets. These results are directly compared with that obtained
previously for the corresponding X-HF complexes [J. M. Merritt, J. K¨upper, and R. E. Miller,
PCCP, 7, 67 (2005)]. For bromine and iodine atoms complexed with HCN, two linear structures
are observed and assigned to the 2Σ1/2 and 2Π3/2 ground electronic states of the nitrogen and hy-
drogen bound geometries, respectively. Experiments for HCN + chlorine atoms give rise to only
a single band which is attributed to the nitrogen bound isomer. That the hydrogen bound isomer
is not stabilized is rationalized in terms of a lowering of the isomerization barrier by spin-orbit
coupling. Theoretical calculations with and without spin-orbit coupling have also been performed
and are compared with our experimental results. The possibility of stabilizing high-energy struc-
tures containing multiple radicals is discussed, motivated by preliminary spectroscopic evidence for
the di-radical Br-HCCCN-Br complex. Spectra for the corresponding molecular halogen HCN-X2
complexes are also presented.

INTRODUCTION

Much of our knowledge of intermolecular forces has
come from the high-resolution spectroscopy of weakly
bound closed shell complexes [1], and there is consid-
erable promise that similar advances can be made for
open shell complexes. Experimentally, the study of open
shell reactive molecular complexes is more diﬃcult than
their closed shell counterparts due to the fact that their
tendency to react must also be surpressed. The cooling
provided by free jet expansion [2, 3, 4] and matrix isola-
tion [5, 6, 7] is sometimes suﬃcient to stabilize complexes
of this type. Recently, nano-scale liquid helium droplets
have also emerged as a nearly ideal spectroscopic matrix
for the study of highly metastable species [8, 9, 10, 11],
including the stabilization of pre- and post-reactive clus-
ter systems [12, 13, 14]. Such weakly bound complexes
sample the long range van der Waals forces in the en-
trance and exit channel regions of the potential energy
surface, which have recently been shown to strongly in-
ﬂuence the reaction dynamics of Cl + HD [15, 16, 17]
and the near threshold photo-dissociation of formalde-
hyde [18, 19]. Despite the fact that the magnitude of
such orientational forces are usually very small in com-
parison with the energy of the transition state, the torque
on the reactants at long range acts to deﬂect trajectories
towards or away from the transition state [16].

“Heavy+light-heavy” systems such as X-HY, where X
and Y are both halogen atoms, have emerged as proto-
typical systems to study chemical reaction dynamics at a
fully quantum mechanical level [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. The
attraction of such complexes is due to the fact that they
contain only 2 heavy atoms, thus simplifying the nuclear
degrees of freedom, yet the corresponding electronic de-
grees of freedom can be quite complex. Indeed, because
the unpaired electron of the free halogen atom resides in

a p orbital, three potential energy surfaces are needed to
fully characterize the interactions, which correspond to
the three relative orientations of the p orbital with re-
spect to HX. These surfaces become degenerate for large
separations, and the coupling between the surfaces can-
not be neglected [25]. Furthermore, spin-orbit coupling
will also reshape the potential energy surfaces [25, 26, 27].
In this work we extend these studies by looking at a re-
lated X-HY complex, where Y is now the pseudo-halogen
CN.

The reactions of halogen atoms with HCN have been
the focus of extensive experimental [28, 29, 30] and the-
oretical study [31, 32, 33], aimed at elucidating the role
of the potential energy surface in determining the associ-
ated reaction dynamics. The CN group is often regarded
as a pseudo-halogen, and thus there is interest in com-
paring the reaction dynamics of this tetra-atomic sys-
tem with the analogous X-HY (X & Y = halogen atoms)
triatomic systems. Interestingly, the long range interac-
tions between XH + CN are expected to diﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly from X + HCN due to the threefold degeneracy
associated with the 2P ground state of halogen atoms,
compared to the nondegenerate 2Σ ground state of CN
radicals, further lowering the symmetry of this hydro-
gen exchange reaction. Despite this, HCN is an ideal
test case because the CN group is usually found to act
as a single unit, but there is still considerable debate
about whether or not the CN bond is a spectator to the
dynamics of many diﬀerent reactions [30, 34, 35]. The
additional degrees of freedom that the HCN molecule
presents, open up many new channels of the potential
energy surface that can be explored, and the X + HCN
systems have provided benchmarks for the theoretical
treatment of such multi-dimensional dynamics.

The Cl-H-C-N potential energy surface has been stud-
ied experimentally from three diﬀerent starting positions.

De Juan et al. [33] have investigated the H + ClCN →
HCl + CN reaction by colliding translationally hot H
atoms formed from the 248 nm photolysis of H2S, with
ClCN. This experimental arrangement prepares the re-
actants with 21.6 kcal mol−1 of collision energy, which is
∼43 kcal mol−1 above the energy of Cl + HCN (see Fig-
ure 2). By analyzing the nascent CN rovibrational popu-
lations, as well as the Doppler proﬁles of the vibrational
transitions, it was proposed that CN is a spectator under
these conditions, and that most of the available energy
goes into HCl vibration and into translational energy of
the two fragments. Sims and Smith [34] and Frost et al.
[35] have studied the HCl(vHCl) + CN(vCN ) → HCN +
Cl reaction, and came to the conclusion that CN is also a
spectator in this reaction, due to the fact that there is a
negligible enhancement of the reaction rate upon exciting
the CN stretching vibration. A third set of experiments
were carried out by Metz et al.
[30, 36] and Kreher et
al. [28, 37] focusing on the reaction of translationally hot
chlorine atoms with highly vibrationally excited HCN:

Cl + HCN (v1, v2, v3) → HCl + CN

Metz and coworkers showed that HCN, when prepared
with either 4 quanta of CH stretch (004) or 3 quanta of
CN stretch plus two quanta of CH stretch (302) react
with comparable rates, and conclude that under these
conditions CN “is clearly not a spectator”[84]. An-
other interesting observation from this work is that only
14% of the available energy was found as HCl vibration,
which is surprisingly small since this is the bond that is
formed in the reaction. To justify this observation an
addition-elimination mechanism was proposed which in-
volved an intermediate HClCN product, as opposed to
direct collinear abstraction. Indeed, experiments in ar-
gon matrices have now proven the existence of HFCN
[38, 39]. If the intermediate survived long enough in the
gas-phase to permit energy redistribution, this could ac-
count for the transfer of energy from HCl(v) to CN(v).
According to this mechanism the CN cannot be a simple
spectator. Kreher et al. conﬁrm these observations, how-
ever point out that HCN(302) does give rise to higher vi-
brational excitation of CN than does HCN(004), so some
memory of the initial state is retained.

The global potential energy surface for Cl + HCN
was ﬁrst studied theoretically by de Juan et al. at the
MP4/3-21G* level to aid in the interpretation of their
experimental results [33]. Their calculations did show
the existence of a covalently bound HClCN intermediate
product, but the relative energies of the reactants and
products showed signiﬁcant discrepancies with the exper-
imentally determined values. Harding later revisited the
Cl-HCN surface at the RHF+1+2+QC/cc-pVDZ level
and found the energies to be in much better agreement
with experiment [32]. Although the overall topology of
the two surfaces are similar, the existence of a direct
HClCN → HCl + CN pathway originally proposed by de

2

Juan et al. was not found by Harding. Instead, Harding
points out that they most likely found the transition state
for collinear abstraction. Currently an exhaustive search
of the six-dimensional potential energy surface is not pos-
sible, however Harding states that this HCl elimination
pathway is unlikely based on the overall topology of the
potential. He ﬁnds that the transition state of the Cl
+ HCN → HCl + CN reaction is a collinear abstraction
mechanism, and that the reaction path does not directly
involve the HClCN complex, in contrast to that proposed
by Metz and coworkers. Indeed the HClCN complex can
be formed at energies well below the abstraction reaction,
however further reaction to form HCl + CN would require
surmounting barriers in excess of that for direct abstrac-
tion. In order to explain the experimental results, which
clearly show vibrational excitation of the CN, Harding
proposes two possible mechanisms. First, the CN stretch-
ing frequency is found in the calculations to be largely
unaﬀected along the reaction coordinate. In contrast, the
reagent CH stretch and product HCl stretches, which are
initially above the CN frequency, go through a minimum
at the transition state and are below the CN frequency.
Because these normal modes cross the CN stretching fre-
quency, energy could ﬂow between these two modes along
the course of the reaction. Secondly, Harding’s calcula-
tions predict the existence of long-range entrance chan-
nel complexes on both sides of the abstraction transition
state (Cl-HCN, HCN-Cl, and CN-HCl) which could also
inﬂuence the ﬁnal product state distributions.

Most recently Troya et al. have performed a quasi-
classical trajectory study of the Cl + HCN → HCl +
CN reaction [31]. Their ﬁndings are in agreement with
Harding, in that the intermediate HClCN product only
constitutes a minor channel (<5%) at the translational
energies relevant to the previous experiments. The focus
of the current study is to explore the long-range entrance
channel complexes of X + HCN.

EXPERIMENTAL

A detailed description of the experimental apparatus
has been given previously [40], therefore only the most
salient features will be described here. Helium droplets
are formed by expanding ultra-high-purity helium gas
through a 5 µm nozzle which is cooled to 18-22 K. The
helium stagnation pressure was maintained at 50 bar, re-
sulting in the formation of droplets with a mean size of
2500 - 6000 atoms [41]. Halogen radicals were produced
by pyrolysis [12, 42] and doped into the droplets using an
eﬀusive source while the HCN is added to the droplets
downstream using a simple scattering cell. The docu-
mented growth of non-equilibrium structures in helium
droplets is suggestive of a successive capture mechanism
where dopants are pre-cooled before complexation occurs
[8, 9, 43]. The relative timescales for species ﬁnding each

other in a droplet, to form a complex, and the rate of
cooling are not precisely known. The cooling rate how-
ever must at least be competitive with coagulation in or-
der to prevent annealing of previously formed metastable
structures in the pick-up process. In much the same way,
the energy gained due to the mutual interaction of two
dopants must also be quickly removed and complexation
will occur at low interaction energies comparable to the
droplet temperature of 0.4 K. Therefore, complexes are
typically trapped in a local minimum reﬂecting the ap-
proach geometry of the dopants; the low temperature
does prevent rearrangement to the global minimum [8, 9].
The infrared light from an F-center Laser (Burleigh
FCL-20) or a PPLN-OPO (Linos Photonics OS-4000)
interacts with the droplet beam using a linear multi-
pass cell, designed to increase the eﬀective interaction
length. Excitation of the dopant inside the droplet leads
to evaporation of approximately 600 helium atoms from
the droplet [44], which reduces the on-axis beam ﬂux
reaching a liquid helium cooled bolometer. By mechani-
cally chopping the laser and using phase-sensitive detec-
tion, the resulting beam depletion can be recorded as a
function of the laser frequency to obtain the absorption
spectrum. A set of Stark electrodes was aligned orthog-
onal to the laser interaction so that Stark and pendular
spectroscopy could be performed. The DC electric ﬁeld
was oriented parallel to the laser polarization yielding
∆M=0 selection rules. Details on the calibration of the
electric ﬁeld are given elsewhere [45]. In order to optimize
conditions for the pickup of a single halogen atom, the
temperature of the pyrolysis source is adjusted, monitor-
ing the percent dissociation of the precursor by probing
both the X-HCN and X2-HCN binary complexes.

ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE CALCULATIONS

In order to characterize the precursor complexes we
have calculated a two-dimensional angular potential (at
the RMP2/aug-cc-pVDZ level) for HCN-Cl2 correspond-
ing to the two rotors being ﬁxed within the same plane.
The two angles, θ and φ, were stepped in increments of
10°, and the intermolecular distance R was relaxed to
ﬁnd its minimum in energy. The remaining geometric
parameters were held ﬁxed at the values found for sepa-
rate HCN and Cl2 optimizations, namely rCH = 1.0779
˚A, rCN = 1.1828 ˚A, and rClCl = 2.3275 ˚A. The disso-
ciation energy of the complex was corrected for basis
set superposition error [46], and a spline interpolation
was used to generate the ﬁnal surface shown in Figure
1. The surface predicts a deep minimum for a linear ni-
trogen bound geometry (θ, φ) = (180, 180), and a very
ﬂat minimum around (90, 20) corresponding to a near
T-shaped hydrogen bound complex. Previous gas-phase
studies [47, 48, 49] have conﬁrmed the linear geometry
of the HCN-Cl2, HCN-BrCl, and HCN-FCl complexes

3

FIG. 1: A two-dimensional angular potential for HCN-Cl2
showing two possible local minimum structures. At each point
only the intermolecular distance was optimized to ﬁnd its min-
imum in energy. Counterpoise correction was applied and the
ﬁnal surface generated using a bi-cubic spline interpolation
algorithm. Contour lines are drawn in 100 cm−1 intervals. In
helium droplets both isomers are observed for I2, Br2, and
Cl2 complexes with HCN, where as in the gas-phase only
the global minimum (linear nitrogen bound) isomer has been
identiﬁed [47]. Interestingly only the global minimum HCN-
F2 isomer was observed in helium.

however there has been no previous evidence (nor predic-
tion) of a hydrogen bound isomer. Fully relaxed geom-
etry optimizations and harmonic vibrational frequency
calculations conﬁrm that the local minimum equilibrium
structure is slightly bent away from an exactly T-shaped
geometry, however vibrational averaging is likely to be
important due to the weak anisotropy. Exploratory cal-
culations in which the restriction of planarity was relaxed
did not result in any new minima.

As pointed out by Harding [32], the reactivity toward
HCN by halogen atoms is such that two reaction products
have been postulated, with the halogen covalently bind-
ing to either the carbon or nitrogen atom of HCN. Due to
limitations of the basis set used and computational ex-
pense, Harding admits that the calculations performed
to date are more qualitative in nature. In this section we
extend these calculations to higher-levels of theory and
calculate each of the F, Cl, and Br reactions so that they
may be directly compared, but we only focus on the low-
est energy channels including HXCN formation. To ex-
plore the relative energetics of these complexes, we have
employed the G2 method [50], and the resulting station-
ary points, including zero-point energy, on the potential
energy surface are shown graphically in Figure 2. For
comparison, a few stationary points have also been cal-
culated at the UMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ and UCCSD(T)/6-
311++G(d,p) levels in addition to the G2 results, and

4

FIG. 2: Relevant stationary points of the X + HCN reactions calculated using the composite G2 method. Two reacted
complexes in addition to two weakly bound entrance channel species are predicted. The HCNX products of chlorine and
bromine atoms binding on the nitrogen end of HCN could not be stabilized in our calculations, however HCNCl was found in
reference [32]. The experimental heats of formation for the X + HCN → HX + CN and X + HCN → H + XCN reactions are
taken from reference [51]. The photon energy used to study the pre-reactive X-HCN complexes is greater than the barriers to
form HXCN, suggesting that it may be possible to photo-initiate this reaction.

are summarized in Table I. The calculated enthalpies of
reaction are found to be in qualitative agreement with
experiment at the G2 and UCCSD(T)/6-311++G(d,p)
levels of theory, however the agreement is much worse at
the UMP2 level.

From Figure 2 it is clear that the X + HCN → HCNX
reactions are all quite endothermic, and therefore we ex-
pect that this reaction channel will not play at role in the
dynamics at 0.37 K. More relevant to the experimental
conditions is the reactivity of the halogen atoms with the
carbon atom of HCN. For the F + HCN reaction, a very
stable HFCN intermediate product is found in the calcu-
lations. At the G2 level no barrier is predicted for this re-
action, however at the UCCSD(T)/6-311++G(d,p) level
the reaction barrier is 3.05 kcal mol−1. Four of the six
vibrational modes of this product were ﬁrst observed by
Andrews et al. [38] in an argon matrix by codepositing F2
and HCN, and then subjecting the matrix to broadband
UV photolysis. Although rotational resolution was not
achieved, the observation of the CN stretching vibration
at 1672 cm−1 indicates that the CN bond has double-
bond and not triple-bond character. Of interest to the
current study, the CH stretching vibration was observed
at 3016 cm−1. Later Misochko et al. conﬁrmed Andrews
observations, and assigned the two remaining vibrational
modes which were not observed previously [39]. Exper-
imental evidence for a pre-reactive X+HCN complex or
HClCN however is still lacking.

Harding’s calculations on Cl+HCN are given in Table
I, and in general, agree well with our current calculations.
G2 (UCCSD(T)) calculations predict that the reaction of
a chlorine atom with the carbon of HCN is exothermic by
-7.07 (-3.41) kcal mol−1 , and that the barrier height is
3.30 (6.97) kcal mol−1 . For bromine atoms, the reaction
to form HBrCN is predicted to be endothermic at the G2
level of theory. Since the CH stretching vibration of the
entrance channel complexes has a higher frequency than
the barrier to form HXCN, it may be possible to photo-
initiate the reaction starting from the entrance channel.

While the above calculations give us an overview of
the reaction energetics for the halogen atom - HCN re-
actions, we are particularly interested in the topology of
the surface around the entrance channel. For instance,
it appears that HCN+X might be most reactive in a T-
shaped arrangement, so the long-range orientational ef-
fects of the potential may be very important in deter-
mining the reaction dynamics. To begin to answer these
questions we have calculated three-dimensional (R, θ,
rCH) non-relativistic adiabatic potential energy surfaces
for Br + HCN and Cl + HCN at the RCCSD(T)/aug-
cc-pVDZ+{332} level of theory. The transformation of
these surfaces to include spin-orbit coupling, and the cal-
culation of the resulting bound states is being performed
in collaboration with the group of van der Avoird, and
details on these results will be presented elsewhere [52].
In order to gain insight into our experimental results, we

5

G2

UCCSD(T)

UMP2

6-311++G(d,p) aug-cc-pVTZ

Experimental
(∆H)

Harding [32]
RHF+1+2+QC/cc-pVDZ

Cl (F) + HCN
T.S.

0.0
3.30 (-1.70)
HClCN (HFCN) -7.07 (-35.83)
HCNCl (HCNF)
HCl (HF) + CN 24.21 (-9.45)
ClCN (FCN) + H 23.11 (2.71)
aCould not be stabilized in the geometry optimization.

0.0
6.97 (3.05)
-3.41 (-28.44)
-a (22.60)
25.37 (-6.54)
26.80 (9.17)

-a (15.32)

0.0
-a
4.91 (-27.18)
-a (26.86)
42.90 (6.18) 21.41 (-11.58)
19.03 (-3.03) 23.45 (9.26)

0.0
-
-
-

0.0
8.2
-2.2
27.9
25.9
28.8

TABLE I: A summary of the calculated energetics of the Cl (F) + HCN reactions including zero-point energy. T.S. corresponds
to the transition state of the reaction with the carbon atom of HCN to form HXCN. The experimentally determined heats of
reaction (∆H) are also shown for reference [51]. One can see that while the G2 and UCCSD(T) methods predict the enthalpies
quite well, the UMP2 method shows much larger deviations. A graphical representation of these energies is shown in Figure 2
for the G2 calculations. Previous calculations by Harding for Cl + HCN are also given for reference.

will focus our attention on the qualitative features of a
2D slice (rCH = 1.0655 ˚A) from our 3D non-relativistic
adiabatic potentials, which are shown in Figure 3 for Br
+ HCN. The incorporation of the dimension correspond-
ing to the CH bond length of HCN (rCH ) will lend insight
into the change of the 2D potentials upon vibrational ex-
citation of HCN (ν1).

Calculations were performed using MOLPRO [53], em-
ploying Jacobi coordinates, R and θ, and restricting the
electronic wavefunction to Cs symmetry, which gives rise
to the 1A’, 2A’, and 1A” surfaces, corresponding to the
three relative orientations of the unpaired orbital of the
halogen atom with respect to HCN. A set of uncontracted
mid-bond functions with exponents sp: 0.9, 0.3, 0.1, and
d: 0.6, 0.2 (denoted as {332}) have been added to the
aug-cc-pVDZ basis set and were placed at the midpoint
between the halogen atom and the HCN nuclear center
of mass [54, 55]. For the plots shown in Figure 3, R and
θ have been incremented by 0.1 ˚A and 10° respectively.
The rCH and rCN bond lengths of HCN were ﬁxed at
1.0655 and 1.1532 ˚A respectively. Basis set superposition
error has been accounted for by performing counterpoise
correction [46], and a spline interpolation used to smooth
the surface. As noted by Fishchuk et al. for Cl-HF [56],
there is some choice in how counterpoise correction is ap-
plied due to the two A’ states of the free halogen atom.
Our procedure is the same as that reported for Cl-HF,
in that the lowest RCCSD(T) energy of the free halo-
gen atom was subtracted from both A’ dimer energies,
which preserves the double degeneracy of the Π state for
both linear geometries. The nitrogen bound (HCN-X)
geometry corresponds to θ = 0°.

The surfaces clearly show that both linear geometries
have stable minima, with well depths of -810 and -401
cm−1 for the HCN-Br and Br-HCN isomers respectively.
The isomerization barrier connecting Br-HCN to HCN-
Br is found to be only 90 cm−1 (neglecting zero-point ef-
fects). At θ = 0, the 1A” and 2A’ surfaces correlate with
the doubly degenerate 2Π state, where as for θ = 180, it

is the 1A’ and 1A” surfaces. The ground electronic state
of the HCN-Br isomer is 2Σ and for Br-HCN it is 2Π in
agreement with that found by Harding [32]. These sym-
metries illustrate that the unpaired orbital of the halogen
atom is along the axis of the molecule for 2Σ, while it is
perpendicular to the molecular axis for 2Π. These diﬀer-
ent electronic symmetries are determined by electrostatic
interactions of this dipole-quadrupole system. In the lin-
ear nitrogen bound complex the negative end of the HCN
dipole will want to approach the positive p-hole created
by the unpaired orbital, thus orienting the unpaired or-
bital on the molecular axis. When the positive end of
the HCN dipole approaches the Br, the positive p-hole
will be repelled, and orient itself perpendicular to the
molecular axis, resulting in a Π ground state.

Fully relaxed geometry optimizations, at the RMP2
level, were also undertaken for each of these stable struc-
tures to generate dipole moments and scaled harmonic
frequencies to compare with our experiment, which are
summarized in Table II. Note that vibrational frequen-
cies could not be calculated for the basis sets which in-
clude mid-bond functions, so we have instead used the
aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. Calculations for iodine con-
taining complexes employed the aug-cc-pVTZ-PP [57]
pseudo-potential
for the iodine atom. One can see
that while the binding energy for Br-HCN is in very
good agreement with the 2D surfaces (399.5 cm−1 at
the RMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ level compared with the 2D
RCCSD(T)/aug-cc-pVDZ+{332} result of 401 cm−1),
the diﬀerences found for HCN-Br are somewhat greater
(910 vs. 810 cm−1).

Relativistic - adiabatic potential energy surfaces

The eﬀects of spin-orbit coupling on reshaping the po-
tential energy surface is well documented [54, 58] and in
order to make detailed comparisons with our experiment
we must incorporate it. To include spin-orbit coupling

6

FIG. 3: The three non-relativistic adiabatic potential energy surfaces for HCN + Br calculated at the RCCSD(T)/aug-cc-
pVDZ+{332} level. Contour lines are drawn in 50 cm−1 intervals. The surfaces predict both linear structures to be minima.

HCN-F HCN-Cl HCN-Br
(F-HCN) (Cl-HCN) (Br-HCN)

HCN-I (ECP)
(I-HCN (ECP))

RMP2
aug-cc-pVTZ
−1)

De (cm

νharmonic (cm

−1)

νscaled (cm

−1)

R (˚A)

B (cm−1)

µ (D)

405.2
(189.0)
-a
-a
-
-
3.240
(4.015)
0.1310
(0.0881)
3.24
(3.18)

834.3
(359.9)
3464.21
(3443.85)
3309.11
(3291.66)
3.416
(4.342)
0.0885
(0.0561)
3.66
(3.40)

909.8
(399.5)
3463.11
(3433.52)
3308.06
(3281.78)
3.542
(4.475)
0.0636
(0.0405)
3.77
(3.47)

935.1
(429.4)
-a
(3430.88)
-
(3279.26)
3.726
(4.670)
0.0525
(0.0339)
3.91
(3.58)

aTight geometry convergence was achieved but imaginary frequencies were calculated

TABLE II: Computed properties of the HCN-X (X-HCN) isomers at the RMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ level. The calculations for iodine
incorporate a small core relativistic pseudo-potential (aug-cc-pVTZ-PP) in which 28 core electrons were replaced with the ECP
[57]. Binding energies have been corrected for BSSE [46]. Harmonic frequencies have been scaled by a factor of 0.9552, which
is obtained by comparing a HCN calculation at this level to the corresponding experimental helium droplet band origin. R, is
the X-HCN center of mass distance.

for the linear geometries (1D slices) of our 2D ab ini-
tio potentials we take note of the operator form of the
spin-orbit Hamiltonian:

H so = AL · S

= A(LzSz +

L+S− + L−S+
2

)

The spin-orbit coupling constant, A, is -269.3, -587.3, -
2457, and -5068 cm−1 for F, Cl, Br, and I, respectively
[59]. Note that the negative sign for A illustrates that the
2P3/2 state lies below the 2P1/2 state in the free atoms.
We make the approximation that the spin-orbit coupling
is independent of the geometry of the complex, and re-
mains that of the isolated atom. That this approxima-
tion is valid for the long-range part of our potentials is
justiﬁed because the electron-nuclei interaction scales as
[59], and therefore the inner lobes of the orbitals
are more heavily weighted, which are expected to be
(cid:11)
(cid:10)
only slightly perturbed by the relatively weak van der
Waals interaction. Recent calculations on O(3P ) + HCl
by Rode et al. [60] have examined the validity of this ap-
proximation by explicit calculation of the spin-orbit ma-
trix elements using the Breit-Pauli operator [61]. Their
results indicate that for internuclear distances similar to
the van der Waals separation the spin-orbit coupling is
not substantially aﬀected.

1
r3

The diagonal term of the spin-orbit Hamiltonian
(LzSz) gives the 2Π1/2 and 2Π3/2 potentials as 2Π ∓ A
2 ,
while the 2Σ potential is simply 2Σ1/2. This is illustrated
by plugging in the eigenvalues of the Lz and Sz opera-
tors, namely Λ = 1 and Σ = +1/2 for the 2Π3/2 state
and Λ = 0 and Σ = |1/2| for the 2Σ1/2 state. The oﬀ-
diagonal spin-orbit term (L±S∓) couples the 2Π1/2 state
with the 2Σ1/2 state and has the following form [59]:

A
2

(cid:28)

2Π1/2|

L+S−|2Σ1/2

= 21/2(A/2)

(cid:29)

To derive the relativistic adiabatic potentials we set up
a R dependent 2 × 2 matrix for the Ω = 1/2 states, set
the diagonal elements to the energies from the ab initio
calculation, and the oﬀ-diagonal elements to 21/2( A
2 ), and
diagonalize the matrix numerically to get its eigenvalues
and eigenvectors. For this simple two level system, the
potentials (eigenvalues) are given by:

2Σ1/2 = a2(2Π −

) + (1 − a2)(2Σ)

A
2

2Π1/2 = a2(2Σ) + (1 − a2)(2Π −

A
2

)

where a is an R dependent mixing coeﬃcient. The re-
maining 2Π3/2 state is simply 2Π + A
2 . The diagonal-
ized relativistic and non-relativistic adiabatic potentials
are shown in Figure 4. At long range, where the Σ
and Π states are nearly degenerate, the 2Σ1/2 state is

7

FIG. 4: Relativistic and non-relativistic adiabatic potential
energy curves for the HCN-Br complex derived from the ab
initio results. See text for details.

pushed lower in energy compared to 2Σ while the 2Π1/2
is pushed to higher energies compared to 2Π − A/2 due
In the limit of R → ∞ , the 2Π3/2
to the coupling.
and 2Σ1/2 states converge and the separation between
2Π1/2 and 2Π3/2 becomes (3/2)A, or that observed in
the free atom. The bound states of these potentials were
calculated numerically using the program Level [62] and
the binding energies, rotational constants, and the van
der Waals stretching frequencies are summarized in Ta-
ble III. To estimate the eﬀects of CH stretching of HCN
on the potentials, computations were also performed in
which the HCN geometry was constrained to have a CH
bond length of rCH = 1.09 ˚A, which is close to the vi-
brationally averaged bond length for the v = 1 state. In
general, the excitation of HCN results in a slight increase
in the binding energy of the complex which we attribute
to an increased dipole - quadrupole interaction.

As noted above, spin-orbit coupling can strongly inﬂu-
ence the potentials, and indeed the dissociation energy
of the HCN-Br (2Σ1/2) complex is much smaller than in
the non-relativistic calculation (383 vs 773 cm−1). The
spin-orbit interaction is even strong enough to create a
bound state in the upper 2Π1/2 well, despite the fact
that the 2Π state is purely repulsive. But since this state
correlates with the excited spin-orbit component of the
atom, we would not expect this isomer to be produced
in helium. For the hydrogen bound isomer, the ground
state is predicted to be 2Π3/2. Since this potential is not
distorted from the non-relativistic 2Π, we expect that
the nonrelativistic ab initio calculations for this isomer
should be suﬃcient to compare with experiment. This
may not be the case for the HCN-X complexes, and thus
the nonrelativistic ab initio results should be interpreted
with caution. After inclusion of the spin-orbit coupling,

8

Constant (cm−1)
HCN v1 = 0 (v1 = 1)

2Π

Br-HCN
2Π1/2

a

a

a

2Σ1/2

a

a

a

376.43 (390.04)
0.03893 (0.03893)
47.37 (48.36)

HCN-Br
2Σ1/2
383.33 (384.94)

2Σ
773.23 (775.89)

2Π1/2
111.24
0.06233 (0.06235) 0.05379 (0.05382) 0.04051
26.91

69.71 (69.84)

47.88 (47.97)

aNo bound states found

D0
B0
νvdws

D0
B0
νvdws

TABLE III: A summary of the computed properties for the HCN-Br and Br-HCN isomers from bound state calculations on
one-dimensional relativistic adiabatic potentials. Note that the computed bound states for the 2Π3/2 state are the same as
those for the non-relativistic 2Π state.

we ﬁnd that both isomers for bromine are now nearly
isoenergetic. The smaller spin-orbit coupling constant
for chlorine atoms allows the HCN-Cl complex to remain
the global minimum. We look forward to the results of
including spin-orbit coupling into our 2D and 3D sur-
faces as it will be particularly interesting to investigate
how the isomerization barrier is eﬀected. Table IV col-
lects the molecular parameters derived from the bound
states for the HCN-Cl, HCN-Br, and HCN-I complexes.

THE HCN-X2 COMPLEXES

Given that previous experimental [48, 49] studies have
shown that halogen molecules bind to the nitrogen end of
HCN, the search for the HCN-X2 complexes was straight-
forward given the weak perturbation on the CH stretch-
ing frequency. Pendular survey scans for Br2, Cl2, and
F2 + HCN are shown in Figure 5, and the new peaks are
labeled according to their gas dependence. The smooth
variation in frequency shifts is telling of the magnitude
of the interactions. Figure 5 also shows the resulting
zero-ﬁeld spectra for the HCN-Br2, HCN-Cl2, and HCN-
F2 binary complexes. Molecular iodine complexes with
HCN were also observed but are not shown in the ﬁgure.
Due to the fact that our calculations predict that each
complex is linear, in accordance with the previous mi-
crowave results [48, 49], the Q branches in the bromine
and chlorine spectra are clearly unexpected. At this time
we leave their explanation to a future study. We only pos-
tulate here that an impurity complex could be overlap-
ping the band, or that the helium interaction with these
species is quite strong, due to the increased polarizability
compared to F2, and thus more strongly inﬂuences the
spectra [63, 64]. A similar eﬀect in HCN trimer, another
linear complex with a Q branch, has been treated theo-
retically, and the Q branch was found to result from the
thermal excitation of the droplet in the ﬁrst few solva-

tion shells, which rotates more rigidly about the a-axis
[64]. Possibly these molecular halogen complexes exhibit
similar behavior.

Longer pendular scans were also carried out to search
the hydrogen bonded frequency region, given the predic-
Indeed,
tion of a second, nearly T-shaped, minimum.
as shown in Figure 6 for the case of bromine, a strong
peak is observed at 3286.14 cm−1 which we assign to
such a complex. Our assignment is based on pick-up
cell pressure dependence measurements (optimized 1:1
with HCN-Br2), scaled harmonic frequency calculations,
rotational band contour analysis, and pyrolysis source
temperature dependence. Hydrogen bonded complexes
between molecular iodine and chlorine with HCN were
also observed whereas the corresponding isomer of ﬂuo-
rine was not. The survey scans for all cases are shown
in Figure 6 as downward going peaks. The fact that a
hydrogen bound F2-HCN isomer is not formed might be
attributed to a smaller well depth, due to the smaller po-
larizability of ﬂuorine compared with chlorine, bromine,
and iodine, and larger zero-point energy eﬀects allowing
it to convert back to the global minimum linear nitrogen
bound geometry, which is observed. The infrared spec-
tra for these complexes taken under ﬁeld-free conditions
will be presented elsewhere. The dotted lines in Figure
6 illustrate the almost perfect linear scaling of the band
origins for both the free stretch and the hydrogen bonded
complexes.

THE Br-HCN AND I-HCN COMPLEXES

Br-HCN

Given the identiﬁcation of the precursor complexes,
we are now in a position to heat the pyrolysis source to
produce the corresponding atoms. As in our previous
study of the X-HF systems, at suﬃciently high pyrolysis

Constant (cm
v=0 (v=1)

−1)

HCN-35Cl

2Σ

687.65 (689.98)

773.23 (775.89)

2Σ1/2
476.78 (478.86)

HCN-79Br

2Σ

HCN-Ia

2Σ1/2
383.33 (384.94)

2Σ

781.08

2Σ1/2
375.61 (377.24)

0.08784 (0.08786) 0.08478 (0.08482) 0.06233 (0.06235) 0.05379 (0.05382) 0.05038 0.04245 (0.04247)

75.85 (75.98)
-

64.23 (63.53)
-587.3

69.71 (69.84)
-

47.88 (47.97)
-2457

62.37
-

43.44 (43.52)
-5068

D0
B0
νvdws
A

aThis calculation was performed with the aug-cc-pVDZPP+{332} basis set [57].

TABLE IV: A summary of the molecular parameters derived from the bound states of one-dimensional potential energy surfaces (see text). A is the atomic spin-orbit
coupling constant used in the calculations and νvdws is the van der Waals stretching frequency, deﬁned as the energy separation between the two lowest calculated
bound states. For the “v = 1” calculations, the CH bond length was ﬁxed at 1.09 ˚A (compared to 1.0655 ˚A for v = 0) in order to estimate the eﬀects of vibrational
excitation of the HCN. Note that the corresponding calculations for the X-HCN isomers are not presented since the ground electronic state of these complexes is 2Π3/2,
which does not experience a ﬁrst order coupling with the 2Σ state, and so the molecular parameters are the same as those found in a standard ab initio calculation
presented in Table II.

9

10

FIG. 5: Pendular survey scans showing the formation of HCN-X2 molecular complexes (left panel) and their corresponding
ﬁeld-free spectra (right panel). Signiﬁcant perturbations are observed in the HCN-Br2 and HCN-Cl2 spectra (leading to the
otherwise forbidden Q branch) which we ascribe to a helium droplet interaction.

11

Constant
ν0 (cm−1)
−1)
B (cm
D (cm−1)

Br-HCN

I-HCN

3284.61(1) 3277.79(1)
0.0151(5)
0.0120(5)
1.5 × 10−4 1.0 × 10−4

[aΛ + (b+c)Σ] (cm

0.04(1)

0.04(1)

−1)

TABLE V: A summary of the experimental parameters for
the linear hydrogen bound X-HCN complexes obtained from
a ﬁt to the ﬁeld-free spectra.

we can say with conﬁdence that this is also 2Π3/2 band in
analogy with Br-HF. A ﬁt to the spectrum adopting the
same Hamiltonian as used for Br-HF is shown in Figure
7(B). A nuclear magnetic hyperﬁne perturbation of the
form [65]:

H ′ = aΛ(I · k) + b(I · S) + c(I · k)(S · k)

was also included in the Hamiltonian to reproduce the
relative intensities of the P, Q, and R branches, in agree-
ment with that observed for Br-HF, although here we
do not resolve the individual hyperﬁne transitions. The
(I · k) term represents the coupling of the nuclear spin
with the axial magnetic ﬁeld of the molecule, which
is proportional to Λ, (I · S) is the direct coupling of
the nuclear and electronic spin angular momenta, and
(I · k)(S · k) is a second order interaction of the nuclear
and electronic spins due to both of their projections on
the molecular axis. Assuming Hund’s case (a), the ex-
pression for the interaction energy is:

W = [aΛ + (b + c)Σ]

Ω
J(J + 1)

I · J

where

I · J =

F (F + 1) − J(J + 1) − I(I + 1)
2

Note that the quantum number representing nuclear spin
(I) equals 3/2 for bromine atoms, and F (the quantum
number representing the total angular momentum in-
cluding nuclear spin) is the coupling of J and I. The rela-
tive transition intensities were calculated using spherical
tensor matrix elements similar to those already reported
for the Stark eﬀect for X-HF [12, 66], and a Boltzmann
distribution for the rotational state population at 0.37 K.
Individual transitions are convoluted with a 0.024 cm−1
Lorentzian lineshape function which was also varied to
obtain the best ﬁt. The spectroscopic constants (ν, B,
D, and [aΛ+ (b+c)Σ]) resulting from the ﬁt are summa-
rized in Table V.

The experimental (helium) rotational constant is a fac-
tor of 2.7 smaller than that predicted from our ab initio
calculations due to the fact that some of the helium fol-
lows the rotational motion of the molecule, thus adding
to the complexes moment of inertial [67]. This magnitude

FIG. 6: Pendular survey scans revealing the pyrolysis source
temperature dependence (upward peaks are with a hot source,
downward peaks are with a cold source) on the correspond-
ing HCN + halogen experiment. The scans show peaks which
we identify as molecular and atomic halogens complexed with
HCN. The dotted lines are drawn to guide the eye, exempli-
fying the linear scaling of the molecular halogen complex fre-
quency shifts. The peaks labeled with an asterisk are known
impurities. Vertical arrows point to the peaks which corre-
spond to free CH stretch HCN-X complexes.

source temperatures the signal levels associated with the
molecular halogen complexes decrease, due to dissocia-
tion into atoms, and a complementary set of peaks grow
in. The pendular survey scans performed with a hot py-
rolysis source are shown in Figure 6, as upward going
peaks. Each scan was taken at the appropriate pyrolysis
source temperature for the dissociation of that particu-
lar precursor. Concentrating on the bromine spectra, two
new peaks are observed with the hot source, namely at
3309.55 and 3284.61 cm−1. Based on the frequency shifts
of these two bands it is already apparent that both linear
isomers of HCN - Br may be formed, with the hydro-
gen bonded isomer giving a much larger redshift on the
CH stretching frequency than the corresponding nitrogen
bonded isomer. We choose to ﬁrst focus on the peak we
preliminarily assign to a hydrogen bonded complex since
a direct comparison can be made with the corresponding
X-HF complexes studied previously [12].

A ﬁeld-free spectrum of the pendular peak centered at
3284.61 cm−1 is shown in Figure 7(A). Again this band is
only observed under conditions appropriate for bromine
atom pickup. In agreement with that found for the Br-
HF complex, P, Q, and R branches are observed, consis-
tent with a linear complex in a Π ground electronic state.
For Br-HF a distinct 5B gap was observed between the
Q branch transitions and those arising from the ﬁrst P
and R branch transitions which conﬁrmed the ground
state is 2Π3/2, consistent with the fact that the ground
state of free bromine atoms is 2P3/2. The smaller rota-
tional constant of Br-HCN however, makes these gaps in
the spectra more obscure, but due to the predicted weak
coupling of the spin-orbit interaction upon complexation,

12

FIG. 7:
(A) The rotationally resolved spectrum of the hydrogen bound Br-HCN isomer recorded under electric ﬁeld-free
conditions. The band shape is consistent with a 2Π3/2 ground electronic state which is in agreement with theoretical predictions.
The simulation (B) includes a nuclear magnetic hyperﬁne interaction (I=3/2 for bromine) due to the large magnetic moment
of the bromine nucleus. A Lorentzian linewidth of 0.024 cm

−1 was used for the simulation.

of reduction is in good agreement with that observed for
many other systems. The fact that the rotational con-
stant of Br-HCN is reduced by a factor of 2.7 while the
rotational constant of Br-HF is reduced by a factor of
2.2 is also in agreement that the rotational constant re-
duction factor is usually proportional to the magnitude
of the B value in this range [67]. For Cl-HF, the experi-
mental vibrational frequencies have provided a very pre-
cise benchmark for theoretical calculations [56, 68], and
it will be interesting to compare similar calculations for
X-HCN [52]. The scaled harmonic vibrational frequency
(RMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ) for this isomer is 3281.78 cm−1,
in good agreement with that observed (3284.61 cm−1).

The vibrational frequencies of helium solvated rotors
are typically very close to the gas phase values, owing to
the weak interactions of the solvent, thus in general al-
lowing a direct comparison with theory. A systematic in-
crease in the vibrational red-shifts of complexes exhibit-
ing linear hydrogen bonds has been observed however
[67]. While a fully quantitative theory for this observa-
tion is still lacking, such an eﬀect can be qualitatively
understood by the fact that the helium will act to reduce
the amplitude of vibrational averaging, therefore making
the hydrogen bond more linear, and thus stronger, lead-
ing to a greater frequency shift. A second contribution
to the observed red-shift is also expected to arise from a
polarization eﬀect due to the transition dipole moment
of HCN, giving rise to dipole - induced dipole interac-
tions with the solvent, which further lowers the energy
of excited state with respect to the ground state. By
ﬁtting the enhancement of the frequency shift (helium -
gas phase origin (Y)) versus the absolute magnitude of
the shift observed in helium (complex - monomer origin

(X)) for a database of 13 complexes observed both in he-
lium and the gas phase, we have developed an empirical
correction factor for the inﬂuence of the helium on the
“gas-phase” band origin (in cm−1):

Y = 1.822 + 0.03655X

(1)

The standard deviation of Y is 1.2 cm−1. See Figure 21 of
reference [67] for a plot of the experimental data points.
Correcting for the helium induced shift one arrives at a
predicted gas-phase origin of 3287.40 cm−1. Although
this makes the agreement with the scaled harmonic fre-
quency somewhat worse, it is probably within the error
of the ab initio calculations, and we await an estimate for
the vibrational frequency from bound state calculations.

I-HCN

A similar study was carried out for the I-HCN com-
plex, the infrared ﬁeld-free spectrum being shown in Fig-
ure 8(A). The ﬁt to the spectrum includes the hyperﬁne
eﬀects discussed above, however, I = 5/2 for iodine. The
molecular constants derived from the ﬁt are given in Ta-
ble V. Here again the experimental rotational constant
is consistent with the ab initio calculations, correspond-
ing to a ratio of 2.83. The frequency shift from HCN
monomer is measured to be -33.41 cm−1 (estimated gas-
phase value using Equation 1: -30.37 cm−1), in excellent
agreement with the calculations employing the ECP (-
31.94 cm−1). The nuclear magnetic hyperﬁne constant
used in the ﬁt is the same as for Br-HCN, namely 0.04
cm−1. This is reasonable given that the magnetic mo-
ments for the atoms are quite similar [69, 70].

13

FIG. 8:
(A) A ﬁeld-free spectrum of the I-HCN complex in
helium droplets. The ﬁt to the spectrum (B), which includes
the eﬀects of nuclear hyperﬁne (I=5/2 for iodine), was used
to derive the spectroscopic constants given in Table V. A
−1 was used for the simulation.
Lorentzian linewidth of 0.03 cm

From the survey scans of Figure 6, peaks corresponding
to the analogous Cl-HCN and F-HCN complexes are not
observed. This is in contrast to the free stretch region
where a new peak is observed for the HCN + Cl case,
which will be discussed below.

THE HCN-Br AND HCN-I COMPLEXES

HCN-Br

We now turn our attention to the second set of new
pendular peaks that grow in under the appropriate con-
ditions for halogen atom pickup, namely those that ex-
hibit a much smaller red-shift from HCN monomer. In
the HCN + Br pendular survey scan (Figure 6), a peak is
observed at 3309.55 cm−1 which is red-shifted from HCN
monomer by -1.65 cm−1, in qualitative agreement with
the calculations for a nitrogen bound HCN-Br isomer (-
3.14 cm−1 at the RMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ level). Because
the ground electronic state of this complex is predicted
to be 2Σ1/2, spin-orbit coupling could be important in
this system, and thus harmonic frequency calculations
(which are performed on the 2Σ surface) are only semi-
quantitative. From our 1D PES’s which include spin-
orbit coupling, we ﬁnd that the binding energy of the
complex is increased by 1.61 cm−1 upon “vibrational ex-
citation” of the HCN. Neglecting dynamical coupling of
the diﬀerent dimensions of the PES, this increase in the
binding energy upon excitation necessitates a red-shift
in the vibrational frequency of equal value, in excellent
agreement with that observed, namely -1.65 cm−1. Such

FIG. 9: Br-HCN and HCN-Br pyrolysis source pressure de-
pendence measurements which aid in the determination that
both observed bands are due to 1:1 complexes.

excellent agreement could be fortuitous, and it will be in-
teresting to compare this estimate with the results from
higher dimensional calculations. An analogous compar-
ison between the vCH =0 and vCH =1 bound states for
the non-relativistic curves gives a frequency shift of -2.66
cm−1, which is in much poorer agreement with experi-
ment.

The pick-up of dopants by helium droplets is a sta-
tistical process, and the signal intensity as a function of
dopant pressure, a Pick-Up Cell (PUC) pressure depen-
dence curve, is given by a poisson distribution weighted
by the droplet size distribution for a given set of source
conditions [67]. PUC curves are a valuable characteri-
zation tool because higher order clusters can easily be
distinguished by their optimum pressure. For our py-
rolysis measurements, the pick-up zone is rather ill de-
ﬁned, however the optimum molecular halogen pressure
upstream of the pyrolysis region could be used to aid in
the determination of this new band to a second isomer of
bromine atoms complexed with HCN. A pressure gauge
was added to the pyrolysis source and the resulting pres-
sure dependence curves for the two peaks at 3309.54 and
3284.55 cm−1 are shown in Figure 9. Both bands are
found to have exactly the same bromine pressure depen-
dence, conﬁrming that this new band at 3309.54 cm−1 is
also due to a 1:1 complex.

The ﬁeld-free and Stark spectra for this band are
shown in Figure 10(A) and (C). The band shape is consis-
tent with that of a linear rotor in a 2Σ electronic state,
as predicted by our earlier electrostatic arguments.
In
the ﬁeld-free spectrum there appears to be ﬁne structure,
most notably as a splitting in the low rotational transi-
tions. We tentatively ascribe this splitting to an inter-
action of the (relativistic) 2Σ1/2 and 2Π1/2 states, which

14

FIG. 10:
(Left panel) (A) An infrared ﬁeld-free spectrum for the CH stretching vibration of the HCN-Br complex. Fine
structure is observed which we preliminarily assign to a parity splitting induced by spin-orbit coupling of the 2Σ1/2 and 2Π1/2
states of the complex. A simulation of the band is also shown (B) which includes the eﬀects of spin-orbit coupling. (Right
−1.
panel) (C) The corresponding Stark spectrum for the HCN-Br complex recorded at an electric ﬁeld strength of 2.25 kV cm
The peak marked with an asterix is assumed to be related to an impurity complex. Lorentzian linewidths of 0.025 and 0.01
cm

−1 were used for ﬁtting the ﬁeld free and Stark spectra respectively.

are coupled by the oﬀ-diagonal spin-orbit perturbation.
The simulation shown in Figure 10 was generated using
an eﬀective Hamiltonian which includes the oﬀ-diagonal
spin-orbit interaction derived from one-dimensional cal-
culations, however the splitting is not readily visible on
this scale [71]. Based on preliminary calculations of the
bound states on the 3D spin-orbit corrected diabatic po-
tential energy surfaces, it appears that the magnitude
of the parity splittings for HCN-Br are smaller in a he-
lium droplet than in the predicted gas-phase spectrum
[52].
Interestingly this behavior would be opposite to
that observed recently for NO, where an increase in the
parity splitting was observed [72]. The spectroscopic
constants derived from the ﬁt to the HCN-Br spectrum
are collected in Table VI. The rotational constant ob-
tained from the simulation is 0.019 cm−1, which can be
compared with the zero-point corrected (B0) values de-
rived from the bound states on both the non-relativistic
(2Σ) and relativistic (2Σ1/2) 1D potential energy sur-
faces, namely 0.0623 and 0.0538 cm−1 respectively. As
shown in the 1D potentials, and reﬂected in the B values,
the spin-orbit coupling shifts the potential minimum to
slightly longer internuclear distance. Since a fully quan-
titative theory for the reduction of rotational constants
due to the helium is still lacking, we cannot deﬁnitively
say which of these calculated B values is in better agree-
ment with experiment, since both reduction factors are
within the range typically observed. By comparing the
B reductions for the HCN-Cl, HCN-Br, and HCN-I com-
plexes however we do gain some insight into the accuracy
of our relativistic potentials; see details below.

A Stark spectrum for HCN-Br is shown in Figure

10(C), recorded at an applied electric ﬁeld strength of
2.25 kV cm−1. The simulation includes the eﬀects of the
e/f symmetry splitting, however due to the mixing of
J levels, its incorporation only slightly modiﬁes the pre-
dicted spectrum. The peak marked with an asterix is
ascribed to an impurity complex and likely contributes
slightly to the congestion in the ﬁeld-free spectrum. The
ground and excited state dipole moments obtained from
the simulation are 3.78 D, in excellent agreement with
that found at the RMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ level (3.77 D).

HCN-I

Based on the pendular survey scans shown in Figure 6,
we observe a pendular peak at 3309.37 cm−1 , which we
tentatively assign a free stretch complex between HCN
and an iodine atom. The ﬁeld-free spectrum for this
band is shown in Figure 11(A). Again the band shape
is consistent with a molecule with no net orbital angu-
lar momentum (a Σ state), in agreement with the re-
sults for the HCN-Br complex. The observed frequency
shift from HCN monomer is -1.83 cm−1, which agrees
nicely with the predicted increase in the binding energy
upon vibrational excitation on the relativistic potentials,
namely 1.63 cm−1. The rotational constant derived from
the simulation (B) is B = 0.016 cm−1 which is consistent
with the results for HCN-Br. The corresponding value
of the rotational constant derived from the lowest bound
state of the 2Σ1/2 potential is B0 = 0.04247 cm−1. Figure
11(C) also shows a Stark spectrum for HCN-I. The lines
in the Stark spectrum appear to be much narrower than

15

FIG. 11: The ﬁeld-free (A) and Stark (C) infrared spectra of the CH stretching vibration of the HCN-I complex observed in
helium droplets. The simulation of the ﬁeld free spectrum (B) was used to determine the molecular constants and includes
an oﬀ-diagonal spin-orbit perturbation, which however only slightly modiﬁes the band shape at this resolution. Lorentzian
linewidths of 0.025 and 0.01 cm

−1 were used for ﬁtting the ﬁeld free and Stark spectra respectively.

in the corresponding ﬁeld-free scan, which we attribute to
considerable unresolved ﬁne structure in ﬁeld-free scan,
which is decoupled by the ﬁeld. Such ﬁne structure is
most likely caused by the spin-orbit coupling in this sys-
tem, in analogy to that observed for HCN-Br. The elec-
tric ﬁeld strength used to record the Stark spectrum (C)
was not accurately calibrated and we can only say that
the dipole moment is consistent with the ab initio value
of 3.91 D.

THE HCN-Cl COMPLEX

When ﬂowing Cl2 through the hot pyrolysis source,
no bands were observed that could be assigned to a hy-
drogen bound Cl-HCN complex. In the free stretch re-
gion however, a new peak is observed at 3309.33 cm−1 in
good agreement with the previously observed bands for
the HCN-Br (3309.55 cm−1) and HCN-I (3309.37 cm−1)
complexes. The ﬁeld-free and Stark spectra for HCN-Cl
are shown in Figure 12(A) and (C) respectively. This new
peak is only slightly shifted from the HCN-Cl2 band, and
thus the pyrolysis source was run at the highest possible
temperatures to reduce the Cl2 related signals. Unfor-
tunately these conditions also lead to an increase in the
amount of HCl produced in the source, presumably from
the reaction of chlorine atoms with the quartz pyrolysis
tube, and the HCN-HCl molecular complex is also ob-
served. The assignment of this band to HCN-HCl was
conﬁrmed by a separate experiment in which HCl was
intentionally introduced into the pick-up cell. Despite
the overlap of two impurity complexes, we are able to re-
produce all of the features of the spectrum, and extract
the molecular parameters which are listed in Table VI. In

the analysis of the spectrum we were not able to identify
any ﬁne structure that could be attributed to a spin-orbit
interaction, which we tentatively assigned in the bromine
and iodine complexes. This is consistent with the much
smaller spin-orbit coupling constant for atomic chlorine
compared to bromine or iodine. Indeed a simulation of
the HCN-Cl spectra using the eﬀective Hamiltonian de-
veloped for the HCN-Br, shows no such splittings at the
experimental resolution.

The vibrational band origin of HCN-Cl

is shifted
from HCN monomer by -1.87 cm−1. The ab initio
frequency calculations predict a shift of -2.09 cm−1 at
the RMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ level (see Table II) in good
agreement with the experimental value. The shift pre-
dicted from the change in the binding energy upon vi-
brational excitation from 1D potential energy surfaces is
-2.08 cm−1. This value is nearly identical to the non-
relativistic results due to the relatively small spin-orbit
coupling constant for chlorine atoms. Bound state calcu-
lations predict that the isotope splitting between HCN-
35Cl and HCN-37Cl is approximately 0.001 cm−1, which
is negligible at our resolution. In contrast, the two iso-
topes of Cl-HF were found to have a much larger splitting
(0.038 cm−1), due to the fact that it is a hydrogen bound
complex [12, 68].

The rotational constant deduced from the ﬁt to the
spectrum is 0.032 cm−1. Because the spin-orbit coupling
is small in this case, the predicted rotational constants
from the bound states on the 2Σ and 2Σ1/2 potentials
are very similar, namely B0= 0.08478 (0.08784) cm−1
for HCN-35Cl on the 2Σ1/2 (2Σ) potential. The reduc-
tion of the rotational constant upon solvation is thus a
factor of approximately 2.7. If we assume that the solva-
tion behavior between the HCN-Cl, HCN-Br, and HCN-

16

FIG. 12: (Left panel) (A) A rotationally resolved spectrum of the νCH band of the HCN-Cl complex in helium nanodroplets.
The spectrum also has features due to both the HCN-HCl and HCN-Cl2 complexes which overlap in this frequency region.
Trace (B) is a summation of the 3 bands. (Right panel) (C) An experimental Stark spectrum of the corresponding band taken
−1 electric ﬁeld. (D) A simulation of the experimental spectrum based only on the molecular
in the presence of a 2.833 kV cm
parameters for HCN-Cl. The peaks marked with an asterix are due to the overlapping bands. Lorentzian linewidths of 0.028
and 0.013 cm

−1 were used for ﬁtting the ﬁeld free and Stark HCN-Cl spectra respectively.

I complexes is the same, then this reduction factor also
gives support to our earlier comparison of HCN-Br and
HCN-I with the B values obtained from the spin-orbit
corrected potentials. On these potentials the reduction
factor was also determined to be 2.75, however if we had
compared the experimental value to the B value from the
non-relativistic potentials, the B reduction would have
been 3.2.

Figure 12(C) also shows a Stark spectrum for HCN-Cl
recorded at an applied ﬁeld strength of 2.833 kV cm−1.
The dipole moment determined from the ﬁt is 3.0(2) D,
which is signiﬁcantly smaller than the ab initio value of
3.66 D. It is interesting to note that the ab initio cal-
culations are in better agreement for bromine than for
chlorine what could be due to vibrational averaging over
the low frequency bending and stretching modes of the
complex. This would be more important for Cl due to its
lighter mass, reducing the dipole moment from its equi-
librium value. Indeed a similar trend was also observed
for the X-HF complexes.

DI-RADICAL Br-HCCCN-Br COMPLEXES

Given the observation of the HCN-Br, Br-HCN, HCN-
I, and I-HCN complexes, it is interesting to consider the
possibility of picking up two halogen atoms, to form a
di-radical complex such as Br-HCN-Br, which utilizes
the HCN as a stabilizer, preventing the recombination
to form HCN + Br2. Such complexes would represent
the beginnings of nano-scale radical solids which could
be used as high-energy density materials [73]. Gordon et

HCN-Br

HCN-I

Constant HCN-Cl
ν (cm−1)
3309.33
−1)
B (cm
0.032
−1) 5.0 × 10
D (cm

µ (D)

3.0

3309.55
0.019
−5 1.2 × 10
3.78

3309.37
0.016
−5 1.0 × 10

−5

-

TABLE VI: The experimental spectroscopic constants ob-
tained from a ﬁt to the infrared spectra for each of the pre-
reactive HCN-X complexes. Fine structure is observed in the
HCN-Br and HCN-I spectra, which is attributed to spin-orbit
interaction. A more detailed theoretical treatment for this ef-
fect is given elsewhere [71].

al. proposed a similar mechanism was responsible for the
stabilization of nitrogen atoms in a N2 matrix (of up to
10% atomic concentration) frozen in bulk liquid helium
[74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79]. While we have yet to perform
extensive searches for HCN, we did explore this possi-
bility for Br atoms and cyanoacetylene (HCCCN), where
better signals are observed. Figure 13 shows a set of pen-
dular survey scans covering the important frequency re-
gion. It is important to note that scans 13(A) - (C) were
recorded by picking up the HCCCN ﬁrst, but in 13(D)
the order has been reversed, and we instead pickup from
the pyrolysis source ﬁrst. In Figure 13(A), only HCCCN
is added to the droplets, while in 13(B), Br2 is ﬂowing
through a room temperature pyrolysis source. The result
of heating the pyrolysis to the appropriate temperatures
for bromine atom pick-up are shown in Figures 13(C) and
(D). In good agreement with the results of X + HCN, we
ﬁnd two peaks at 3326.1 and 3302.4 cm−1 (labeled by a

17

FIG. 13: A series of pendular scans for Br + HCCCN where the bromine pressure is intentionally high to facilitate forming
larger clusters. In (A) only HCCCN is picked up by the droplets and in (B) Br2 is ﬂowing through the cold pyrolysis source.
Scans (C) and (D) were recorded with the pyrolysis source at the appropriate temperature for bromine atom production, but
for (D) the bromine is picked up ﬁrst where as in (C) the cyanoacetylene is picked up ﬁrst. The two peaks marked with a †
are assigned to the linear Br-HCCCN and HCCCN-Br complexes, respectively. The two peaks marked with an * are found to
−1 optimizes
optimize at higher HCCCN pressure and therefore correspond to more than one HCCCN. The peak at 3297.65 cm
at the same HCCCN pressure as the 1:1 complexes however is found to optimize at higher bromine pressure, suggesting that
it is a complex containing two bromine radicals. The diﬀerent behavior based on pick-up order is expected, since in (D) two
bromine atoms will likely recombine to form Br2 in the absence of the HCCCN.

† in the ﬁgure) which we assign to the Br-HCCCN and
HCCCN-Br complexes, based on their frequency shifts
and signal strengths. The peaks labeled with an * were
found to optimize at higher HCCCN pressure, so they
correspond to complexes containing more than one HC-
CCN. The peak at 3297.65 cm−1 is a good candidate
for being Br-HCCCN-Br because it only appears in the
spectrum when the HCCCN is picked up ﬁrst. This de-
pendence on pick-up order is to be expected because two
bromine atoms will likely recombine to form Br2 in the
absence of the molecular spacer. To aid in this prelimi-
nary assignment we performed bromine pressure depen-

dence measurements which are shown in Figure 14.

This new peak is found to optimize at higher bromine
pressures than those peaks assigned to the 1:1 complexes,
and agrees well with a simulation of a dimer using a Pois-
son distribution for the pick-up statistics. For these pick-
up “cell” pressure dependence measurements the main
chamber ion-gauge was used as the x -axis, however since
this really monitors recombined Br2 after collisions with
the walls, instead of the local pressure of Br atoms in
the pick-up zone, the pick-up curve for the dimer does
not correspond to twice the optimum monomer pressure.
Although we cannot rule out that a Br-HCCCN-Br2, or
similar complex might have such a pick-up cell pressure

18

[38] and Misochko [39] where the insertion product has
been identiﬁed. No pre-reactive complexes were observed
in these works. Guided by their observed frequency of
the CH stretching vibration of 3018 cm−1, we searched
for HFCN in helium. No signals were observed, however
this frequency range is at the edge of the tuning range of
the lasers used in this work. The oscillator strength for
this vibration is also approximately 50 times weaker than
the HCN fundamental, based on harmonic frequency cal-
culations, and thus the argon matrix experiment has the
big advantage of concentrating the product using longer
deposition times. We hope to revisit this experiment us-
ing newer technology OPO lasers, with a larger tuning
range and higher output power [81, 82].

Due to the statistical nature of the pick-up process it
should be possible to “tag” the HFCN product with an-
other weakly bound molecule, which could then act as a
stronger infrared chromophore. Indeed we have prelim-
inary evidence that such a situation also arises in reac-
tion of aluminum atoms with HCN and HF [83]. Shown
in Figure 15 is a two-dimensional angular potential for
HCN + HFCN calculated at the RMP2/aug-cc-pVDZ
level, which shows that multiple van der Waals isomers
may indeed exist. Since cluster formation in helium oc-
curs sequentially and obeys Poisson statistics, these clus-
ters should be formed when picking up HCN after the
ﬂuorine atom, given that the droplet is large enough to
stabilize the HFCN. Based on the calculated exothermic-
ity, the formation of HFCN would boil oﬀ approximately
2500 helium atoms (assuming 5 cm−1 per atom [44]).

The last remaining question in this study is the exis-
tence of a hydrogen bound Cl-HCN complex in analogy
with that observed for bromine and iodine atoms. Due
to the fact that the isomerization barriers between the
hydrogen and nitrogen bound isomers are so small, one
possible explanation is that this isomer is not formed
due to a zero-point energy eﬀect, and that the complex
simply converts to the global minimum HCN-Cl isomer.
To make any further analysis of this possibility we must
await the spin-orbit corrected 2D potentials [52], to get
a more realistic view of how the isomerization barrier is
eﬀected by spin-orbit coupling. A second possibility is
that the reactivity is enhanced when the chlorine atom
approaches the hydrogen end of HCN and it reacts, in
analogy with that proposed for F + HCN.

SUMMARY

We have presented here a combined experimental and
theoretical investigation of the halogen atom - HCN en-
trance channel complexes in order to compare with the
X-HF complexes studied previously. The potential en-
ergy surfaces for X + HCN are found to be considerably
more complex than for X+HX, due to the possibility of
hydrogen atom abstraction and addition reactions. The

FIG. 14: Bromine pressure dependencies for the peaks as-
signed to the Br-HCCCN, HCCCN-Br, and Br-HCCCN-Br
−1 optimizes
complexes. The fact that the peak at 3297.65 cm
at higher bromine pressure than the 1:1 complexes lends sup-
porting evidence to our claim that this is a di-radical complex.
The smooth curves are the calculated pick-up probabilities ob-
tained by ﬁtting a Poisson distribution to the 1:1 curve, and
then re-simulating the curve for the dimer.

dependence, a double-resonance population transfer ex-
periment [80] in which this new peak is pumped and the
HCCCN-Br2 complex is recovered would be deﬁnitive.

DISCUSSION

Extensive pendular survey scans have been performed
in order to ﬁnd evidence for the entrance channel com-
plexes of ﬂuorine atoms with HCN. From the ab initio
calculations presented above, it is clear that the reaction
to form the HFCN product is quite exothermic, and ex-
hibits only a small barrier, if any, to the reaction. The
calculated energies of the HFCN product and its barrier
relative to F + HCN are -34.05 and -2.45 kcal mol−1
(-28.44 and 3.05 kcal mol−1), respectively, at the G2
(UCCSD(T)/6-311++G(d,p)) level of theory. Two en-
trance channel complexes (F-HCN and HCN-F) were also
found in the G2 calculations with energies -0.55 and -1.58
kcal mol−1 respectively. The unintuitive result that the
transition state is calculated (at the G2 level) to be lower
in energy than the corresponding van der Waals minima
is simply an artifact of the calculation, and this small
energy diﬀerence is within the estimated accuracy of the
method. The fact that we do not observe a ﬂuorine atom
pre-reactive complex could be an indication that indeed
the insertion reaction takes place, even under our ex-
perimental conditions at 0.37 K. This conclusion is also
partially supported by the argon matrix work of Andrews

19

FIG. 15: A two-dimensional interaction potential calculated at the RMP2/aug-cc-pVDZ level for the insertion product HFCN
with a second HCN molecule. The second HCN molecule was assumed to lie in the plane of HFCN due to the fact that no
non-planar geometries were observed in fully relaxed optimizations. The two angles were stepped in increments of 15° and
only the intermolecular distance was allowed to optimize in the calculation. Counterpoise correction was applied and a spline
−1 intervals. By tagging the F + HCN
interpolation used to generate the ﬁnal surface. Contour lines are drawn in 100 cm
reaction product with a second HCN molecule, we regain a strong high-frequency CH stretch which could be then probed
experimentally.

lone pair on the nitrogen of HCN is also found to signiﬁ-
cantly alter the shape of the long-range potential energy
surfaces, and for X + HCN, we ﬁnd that the global min-
imum is a linear nitrogen bound geometry in contrast to
the hydrogen bound global minimum for X-HF. A lin-
ear hydrogen bound X-HCN complex is also predicted
to be stable, however the isomerization barrier back to
the global minimum is small. Ab initio calculations pre-
dict that for iodine and bromine signiﬁcant barriers to
the chemical reactions exist, and thus the entrance chan-
nel complexes should be quite stable when formed in a
helium droplet. Both of the linear van der Waals iso-
mers predicted by theory are observed experimentally for
bromine and iodine atoms. Interestingly a HCN-Cl iso-
mer was also observed whereas Cl-HCN was not. Since
HCN-Cl is predicted to be the global minimum on the
van der Waals potential, it could be that the isomeriza-
tion barrier is simply too small to prevent Cl-HCN from
rearranging to HCN-Cl. A second possibility is that the
reactivity is enhanced on the hydrogen end of HCN, and
Cl-HCN goes on to react to form HClCN. No entrance
channel complexes were observed in the ﬂuorine exper-
iments, and we preliminarily interpret this as a result

of reaction. The intermediate reaction product HFCN
has been recently observed in an argon matrix, how-
ever, also in that work no pre-reactive complexes were
observed. Preliminary searches for HFCN in this work
in helium nanodroplets did not reveal this species. The
photon energy used to study the CH stretching vibra-
tion of the entrance channel complexes is greater than
the predicted barriers, suggesting that photo-initiation
of the corresponding reactions could be possible. The
unique asymptotic degeneracy of the multiple electronic
states in the region of the entrance and exit channels for
free radical - molecule complexes is found to give rise to
ﬁne structure in the observed spectra for HCN-Br and
HCN-I.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Anna Fishchuk and Ad van
der Avoird for their theoretical work on these X-HCN
systems and its correspondence before publication. This
work was supported by the Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc
Research (AFOSR). Partial support is also acknowledged

from the National Science Foundation (CHE-99-87740).
J. K. acknowledges ﬁnancial support of the Alexander
von Humboldt foundation through a Feodor Lynen fel-
lowship.

* Electronic address: merritjm@unc.edu
§ Present address: Fritz-Haber-Institut der MPG, Fara-

dayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin, Germany

„ Deceased: Nov 6, 2005

[1] J. M. Hutson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 123–

154.

[2] M. I. Lester, B. V. Pond, M. D. Marshall, D. T. Ander-
son, L. B. Harding, and A. F. Wagner, Faraday Disc.,
2001, 118, 373–385.

[3] Y. L. Chen and M. C. Heaven, J. Chem. Phys., 1998,

109(13), 5171–5174.

[4] M. C. Heaven, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 24, 375–420.
[5] T. C. McInnis and L. Andrews, J. Phys. Chem., 1992,

96(5), 2051–2059.

[6] E. Y. Misochko, V. A. Benderskii, A. U. Goldschleger,
A. V. Akimov, and A. F. Shestakov, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
1995, 117, 11997–11998.

[7] R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 88,

[8] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Science, 1999, 283, 1895–

3599–3606.

1897.

[9] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, Science, 2000, 287, 293–295.
[10] F. Madeja, M. Havenith, K. Nauta, and R. E. Miller, J.

Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 10554.

[11] F. Stienkemeier, W. E. Ernst, J. Higgins, and G. Scoles,

J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 615–617.

[12] J. M. Merritt, J. K¨upper, and R. E. Miller, Phys. Chem.

Chem. Phys., 2005, 7(1), 67–78.

[13] J. M. Merritt, S. Rudi´c, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys.,

2006, 124, 084301–084313.

[16] D. Skouteris, D. E. Manolopoulos, W. Bian, H. J.
Werner, L. H. Lai, and K. Liu, Science, 1999, 286, 1713–
1716.

[17] P. F. Weck and N. Balakrishnan, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.,

2006, 25, 283.

[18] D. Towsend, S. A. Lahankar, S. K. Lee, S. D. Chambreau,
A. G. Suits, X. Zhang, J. Rheinecker, L. B. Harding, and
J. M. Bowman, Science, 2005, 306, 1158.

[19] X. Zhang, J. Rheinecker, and J. M. Bowman, J. Chem.

Phys., 2005, 122, 114313.

[20] C. S. Maierle, G. C. Schatz, M. S. Gordon, P. Mccabe,
and J. N. Connor, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 1997,
93, 709–720.

[21] W. B. Zeimen, J. Klos, G. C. Groenenboom, and
A. van der Avoird, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 5110–
5121.

[22] G. W. M. Vissers and A. B. McCoy, J. Phys. Chem. A,

2006, 110, 5978–5981.

[23] W. B. Zeimen, J. Klos, G. C. Groenenboom, and
A. van der Avoird, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 107, 9319–
9322.

20

[24] M. P. Deskevich, M. Y. Hayes, K. Takahashi, R. T.
Skodje, and D. J. Nesbitt, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124,
224303.

[25] P. Zdanska, D. Nachtigallova, P. Nachtigall, and P. Jung-
wirth, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115(13), 5974–5983.
[26] M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000,

112(2), 592–600.

[27] J. Klos, M. M. Szczesniak, and G. Chalasinski, Int. Rev.

Phys. Chem., 2004, 23, 541–571.

[28] C. Kreher, R. Theinl, and K. H. Gericke, J. Chem. Phys.,

1996, 104(12), 4481.

[29] B. K. Decker, G. He, I. Tokue, and R. G. Macdonald, J.

Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105(24), 5759–5767.

[30] R. B. Metz, J. M. Pfeiﬀer, J. D. Thoemke, and F. F.

Crim, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 221, 347–352.

[31] D. Troya, M. Gonzalez, G. S. Wu, and G. C. Schatz, J.

Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105(11), 2285–2297.

[32] L. B. Harding, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 10123–10130.
[33] J. de Juan, S. Callister, H. Reisler, G. A. Segal, and

C. Wittig, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 1977–1985.

[34] I. R. Sims and I. W. M. Smith, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday

Trans. 2, 1989, 85, 915–923.

[35] M. J. Frost, I. W. M. Smith, and R. D. Spencer-Smith,

J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 2, 1993, 89, 2355.

[36] J. M. Pfeiﬀer, R. B. Metz, J. D. Thoemke, E. Woods,
and F. F. Crim, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 104, 4490–4501.
[37] C. Kreher, J. L. Rinnenthal, and K. H. Gericke, J. Chem.

Phys., 1998, 108, 3154–3167.

[38] R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26,

[39] I. U. Goldschleger, A. V. Akimov, E. Y. Misochko, and
C. A. Wight, Mendeleev Comm., 2001, (2), 43–45.
[40] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111,

3051–3054.

3426–3433.

[41] E. L. Knuth, B. Schilling, and J. P. Toennies, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1995; Vol. 19, pp. 270–276.
[42] J. K¨upper, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem.

Phys., 2002, 117(2), 647–652.

[43] K. Nauta and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys., 2001,

[44] D. M. Brink and S. Stringari, Z. Phys. D, 1990, 15, 257–

[45] G. E. Douberly and R. E. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003,

107(19), 4500–4507.

[46] S. F. Boys and F. Bernardi, Mol. Phys., 1970, 19(4),

[47] A. C. Legon and J. C. Thorn, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday

Trans., 1993, 89(23), 4157–4162.

[48] K. Hinds and A. C. Legon, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 240,

[49] A. C. Legon and K. Hinds, Mol. Phys., 1996, 88(3), 673–

[50] L. A. Curtiss, K. Raghavachari, G. W. Trucks, and J. A.

Pople, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 94(11), 7221.

[51] M. W. Chase Jr, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1998, 4(9),

553–566.

467–473.

682.

1–1951.

[52] A. Fishchuk, J. M. Merritt, and A. van der Avoird, in

preparation, 2006.

[53] H. J. Werner, P. J. Knowles, R. D. Amos, A. Bern-
hardsson, A. Berning, P. Celani, D. L. Cooper, M. J. O.
Deegan, A. J. Dobbyn, F. Eckert, C. Hampel, G. Het-
zer, T. Korona, R. Lindh, A. W. Lloyd, S. J. McNi-
cholas, F. R. Manby, W. Meyer, M. E. Mura, A. Nick-
lass, P. Palmieri, R. Pitzer, G. Rauhut, M. Schutz,

[14] S. Rudi´c, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller, J. Chem. Phys.,

115(22), 10138–10145.

[15] N. Balakrishnan, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121(12), 5563–

263.

2006, 124, 104305.

5566.

[56] A. V. Fishchuk, P. E. S. Wormer, and A. van der Avoird,

J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110(16), 5273–5279.

295, 480–481.

U. Schumann, H. Stoll, A. J. Stone, R. Tarroni, and
T. Thorsteinsson, MOLPRO, A package of Ab initio Pro-
grams, version 2002.1, University College Cardiﬀ Consul-
tants Limited, Wales, UK, 2002.

[54] J. Klos, G. Chalasinski, H. Werner, and M. M. Szczes-

niak, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 115(7), 3085–3098.

[55] F. M. Tao and Y. K. Pan, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 97(7),

4989–4995.

[57] K. A. Peterson, D. Figgen, E. Goll, H. Stoll, and M. Dolg,

J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119(21), 11113–11123.

[58] M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,

2000, 2(4), 441–446.

[59] H. Lefebvre-Brion and R. W. Field, Perturbations in the
Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, Academic Press, Orlando,
Fl., 1986.

[60] J. E. Rode, J. Klos, L. Rajchel, M. Szczeniak, G. Cha-
lasinski, and A. A. Buchachenko, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005,
109, 11484–11494.

[61] A. Nicklass, K. A. Peterson, A. Berning, H. J. Werner,
and P. J. Knowles, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112(13), 5624–
5632.

[62] R. J. LeRoy, Level 7.7: A computer program for solv-
ing the radial schr¨odinger equation for bound and qua-
sibound levels University of Waterloo Chemical Physics
Research Report CP-661; see the “computer programs”
link at http://leroy.uwaterloo.ca, 2005.

[63] K. Nauta, D. T. Moore, and R. E. Miller, Faraday Disc.,

[64] E. W. Draeger and D. M. Ceperley, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

1999, 113, 261–278.

2003, 90(6), 065301.

1337–1349.

[66] J. Brown and A. Carrington, Rotational Spectroscopy of
Diatomic Molecules, Cambridge molecular science, 2003.
[67] M. Y. Choi, G. E. Douberly, T. M. Falconer, W. K. Lewis,
C. M. Lindsay, J. M. Merritt, P. L. Stiles, and R. E.
Miller, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2006.

[68] A. V. Fishchuk, G. C. Groenenboom, and A. van der
Avoird, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110(16), 5280–5288.

21

[69] V. Jaccarino, J. G. King, R. A. Satten, and H. H. Stroke,

Phys. Rev., 1954, 94, 1798–1799.

[70] H. H. Brown and J. G. King, Phys. Rev., 1966, 142(1),

53–59.

[71] J. M. Merritt and R. W. Field, in preparation, 2006.
[72] K. von Haeften, A. Metzelthin, S. Rudolph, V. Staemm-
ler, and M. Havenith, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95(21),
215301.

[73] F. Cacace, G. de Petris, and A. Troiani, Science, 2002,

[74] E. B. Gordon, V. V. Khmelenko, A. A. Pelmenev, E. A.
Popov, and O. F. Pugachev, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1989,
155, 301–304.

[75] R. E. Boltnev, E. B. Gordon, V. V. Khmelenko, I. N.
Krushinskaya, M. V. Martynenko, A. A. Pelmenev, E. A.
Popov, and A. F. Shestakov, Chem. Phys., 1994, 189,
367–382.

[76] E. B. Gordon, A. A. Pelmenev, O. F. Pugachev, and

V. V. Khmelenko, Chem. Phys., 1981, 61, 35–41.

[77] E. B. Gordon, L. P. Mezhov-Deglin, O. F. Pugachev, and
V. V. Khmelenko, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1978, 54(2), 282–
285.

[78] E. B. Gordon, V. V. Khmelenko, A. A. Pelmenev, E. A.
Popov, O. F. Pugachev, and A. F. Shestakov, Chem.
Phys., 1993, 170, 411–426.

[79] R. E. Boltnev, E. B. Gordon, I. N. Krushinskaya, M. V.
Martynenko, A. A. Pelmenev, E. A. Popov, V. V. Khme-
lenko, and A. F. Shestakov, Low Temp. Phys., 1997, 23,
567–577.

[80] G. E. Douberly, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7(3), 463–468.

[81] J. M. Merritt, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of North

[82] F. J. M. Harren, S. Li, S. E. Bisson, and M. M. J. W. V.

Herpen, Appl. Phys. B, 2002, 75, 329–333.

[83] J. M. Merritt, G. E. Douberly, P. L. Stiles, and R. E.

Miller, in preparation, 2006.

[84] The P(4) transition of the (004) ← (000) band (12623
−1) and the P(8) transition of the (302) ← (000) band

cm
(12631 cm

−1) were used for the excitation

[65] R. A. Frosh and H. M. Foley, Phys. Rev., 1952, 88(6),

Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2006.

