6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Tracing ultrafast interatomic electronic decay processes in real time and space

Alexander I. Kuleﬀ∗ and Lorenz S. Cederbaum
Theoretische Chemie, PCI, Universit¨at Heidelberg
Im Neuenheimer Feld 229, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
(Dated: December 9, 2013)

Tremendous advances in laser pump-probe techniques open the door for the observation in real
time of ultrafast electronic processes. Particularly attractive is the visualization of interatomic
processes where one can follow the process of energy transfer from one atom to another. The inter-
atomic Coulombic decay (ICD) provides such a process which is abundant in nature. A multielectron
wavepacket propagation method enables now to trace fully ab initio the electron dynamics of the
process in real time and in space taking into account all electrons of the system and their corre-
lations. The evolution of the electronic cloud throughout the ICD process in the rare gas cluster
NeAr following Ne2s ionization is computed and analyzed. The process takes place on a femtosecond
timescale, and a surprisingly strong response is found at a much shorter attosecond timescale.

PACS numbers: 34.30.+h, 31.70.Hq, 82.33.Fg

In recent years tremendous developments of

laser
pump-probe experimental techniques made possible a di-
rect observation in real time of diﬀerent kinds of ultra-
fast processes with sub-femtosecond resolution [1, 2, 3, 4].
This opened the door for the investigation of electronic
processes in the attosecond/femtosecond timescale that
take place before the nuclear dynamics comes into play.
Processes like the rearrangement of the electronic system
following an excitation of an inner-shell electron can now
be traced in time and space and analyzed. These capabil-
ities promise a revolution in our microscopic knowledge
and understanding of matter.

The excitation of an electron from an atomic shell other
than the outermost valence orbital creates a transient
hole state. This hole is not stable and the system tends
to minimize its energy by ﬁlling the vacancy with an elec-
tron from an outer shell, the excess binding energy be-
ing carried away either by an extreme UV or X-ray ﬂu-
orescence photon, or transferred via Coulomb forces to
another electron, which subsequently escapes from the
atomic binding. When possible energetically, the latter
non-radiative mechanism of de-excitation is extremely ef-
ﬁcient in comparison to the competing photonemission.
Indeed, the characteristic times are typically less than
100 femtoseconds (1 fs = 10−15 s) to even well less
than a femtosecond entering the attosecond regime (1 as
= 10−18 s), compared to radiative decay lifetimes which
except for core levels of heavy elements, belong to the
nanosecond range (1 ns = 10−9 s).

The non-radiative decay processes can be divided into
two major categories depending on whether the electrons
involved in the process belong to the same or to diﬀerent
subunits of the system. The former are referred to as
intra-atomic/molecular decay processes and the latter as
inter-atomic/molecular decay processes. An example of
intra-atomic decay is the well known Auger eﬀect, follow-
ing a core ionization of atoms, which besides its funda-
mental importance has a wide range of applications. De-

pending on the energy of the core hole and the strength
of the electronic coupling, the Auger lifetimes range from
few femtoseconds to few hundreds attoseconds (in the so-
called super-Coster-Kronig transitions). That is why the
observation in real time of the electron dynamics of such
processes became possible only recently. Few years ago,
Drescher et al. [1] using a sub-femtosecond X-ray pulse
for excitation and a few-cycle light pulse for probing the
emission traced the electron rearrangement during the
M4,5N1N2,3 Auger decay in Kr, with lifetime of the M-
shell vacancy of about 8 fs, giving birth to time-resolved
atomic inner-shell spectroscopy.

Contrary to core ionization, the ionization of inner-
valence electrons usually produces ions in excited states
lying energetically below the second ionization threshold
thus making the slow radiative decay the only possible
de-excitation mechanism as long as the resulting ions are
isolated. It has been shown recently [5] that the situa-
tion is fundamentally diﬀerent if the ions are embedded
in an environment or have neighbors like in a cluster.
Then, the possibility to distribute the positive charges
between cluster subunits substantially lowers the double
ionization threshold of the cluster compared to that of the
isolated subunit giving rise to an inter-atomic/molecular
decay mechanism, where the excess energy of the ion
with the inner-valence hole is utilized to ionize a neu-
tral neighbor. The process is ultrafast, in the femtosec-
ond timescale, and the emitted electron has a kinetic en-
ergy of a few electronvolts. This process, called inter-
atomic (or intermolecular) Coulombic decay (ICD), was
predicted theoretically and shown to follow a general de-
cay mechanism, taking place both in hydrogen bonded
and in van der Waals clusters [5, 6, 7]. Very recently,
the theoretical ﬁndings have been conﬁrmed in a series
of spectacular experiments carried out by several groups
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Other experimental groups are engaged
in the preparation of time-resolved ICD experiments us-
ing novel attosecond pulse techniques [13, 14].

The goal of the present work is to provide for the ﬁrst
time a theoretical description of an interatomic decay
process in real time and space. Such a description re-
quires accurate ab initio calculations of the time evolu-
tion of the electronic cloud including explicitly the corre-
lations among all the electrons, i.e., it requires multielec-
tron wavepacket dynamics. Here, we present such a com-
putational method and apply it for tracing in time and
space the ICD process in NeAr following the 2s ioniza-
tion of Ne. It should be noted that the method is equally
suitable for calculating in real time all kinds of ultrafast
electron relaxation processes following an ionization of a
system. The technical details of the method are given
elsewhere [15], where it is used to compute electron dy-
namics of non-decaying states. Here, only the theoret-
ical foundations of the method will be sketched as well
as some subtleties concerning its application to decaying
states. We stress that treating the dynamics of a decay
process represents a much higher degree of complexity.

The starting point of our investigation is a neutral sys-
tem |Ψ0i. The ionization of the system generates a non-
stationary state |Φii. The resulting hole charge then is
traced in time and space, i.e., the time-dependent hole
density is calculated. For convenience we assume that the
initial state is created by the sudden removal of an elec-
tron. The hole density of the ionized system is deﬁned
by

Q(~r, t) := hΨ0|ˆρ(~r, t)|Ψ0i−hΦi|ˆρ(~r, t)|Φii = ρ0(~r)−ρi(~r, t),

(1)
where ˆρ is the local density operator, and |Φii is the gen-
erated initial cationic state. The ﬁrst term in Eq. (1)
is the time-independent ground state density of the neu-
tral system, ρ0, and the second one, ρi, is the density of
the cation which is time-dependent, since |Φii is not an
eigenstate of the cation. The quantity Q(~r, t) describes
the density of the hole at position ~r and time t and by
construction is normalized at all times t. In the Heisen-
berg picture, the time-dependent part ρi(~r, t) reads:

ρi(~r, t) = hΦi|ei ˆHt ˆρ(~r, 0)e−i ˆHt|Φii = hΦi(t)|ˆρ(~r, 0)|Φi(t)i,
(2)
where |Φi(t)i = e−(i/¯h) ˆHt|Φii is the propagating multi-
electron wavepacket.

Using the standard representation of the density oper-
ator in a one-particle basis {ϕp(~r)}, often called orbitals,
and occupation numbers {np}, Eq. (1) can be rewritten
in the following form

Q(~r, t) = X
pq

ϕ∗
p(~r)ϕq(~r)Npq(t),

(3)

where the matrix N(t) = {Npq(t)} with elements

Npq(t) = δpqnp − X
M,N

hΦi(t)| ˜ΨM iρMN h ˜ΨN |Φi(t)i

(4)

2

is referred to as the hole density matrix. The second term
of Eq. (4) is obtained by inserting in Eq. (2) a resolution
of identity of a complete set of appropriate ionic eigen-
states | ˜ΨM i. The matrix ρMN is the representation of
the density operator within this basis.

Diagonalization of the matrix N(t) for ﬁxed time
points t leads to the following expression for the hole
density

Q(~r, t) = X
p

| ˜ϕp(~r, t)|2 ˜np(t),

(5)

where ˜ϕp(~r, t) are called natural charge orbitals, and ˜np(t)
are their hole occupation numbers. The hole occupation
number, ˜np(t), contains the information which part of
the created hole charge is in the natural charge orbital
˜ϕp(~r, t) at time t. Because of the conservation of hole
charge, one ﬁnds that Pp ˜np(t) = 1 at any time. The hole
occupation numbers, together with the hole density, are
central quantities in the observation and interpretation of
the multielectron dynamics taking place after the removal
of an electron.

For calculating the hole density matrix, Eq. (4), we
have used ab initio methods only. The description of the
non-stationary ionic state was done by means of the for-
malism of Green’s functions, using the so-called algebraic
diagrammatic construction (ADC) scheme [16, 17], and
the direct time propagation of the electronic wavepacket
was performed through the short iterative Lanczos tech-
nique (see, e.g., Ref. [18]). For more details see Ref. [15]
and references therein. An important point should be
addressed. Since the formalism is used for tracing the
evolution of decaying states, i.e., a second hole is created
in the system and an electron is ejected into the con-
tinuum, special care must be taken in constructing an
appropriate basis set in order to have a good description
of the continuum electron at least in some volume around
the origin.

We have applied the above sketched methodology to
describe in real time the interatomic decay of the Ne2s
vacancy in NeAr. The choice of the system is motivated
by the availability of NenArm clusters [11], and by the
fact that the lifetime of the Ne2s hole (35fs, see below)
is short compared to the nuclear motion (vibrational pe-
riod of NeAr is 1.2 ps and the rotational period is 180
ps), justifying the use of clamped nuclei. Furthermore,
the presentation simpliﬁes by choosing a heteroatomic
system where the initially ionized atom (Ne) is well dis-
tinguishable for its neighbor (Ar). The internuclear dis-
tance is taken to be 3.5 ˚A, the equilibrium geometry of
the NeAr cluster. To simulate an experiment one would
have to compute the process at various internuclear dis-
tances and then to average over the weighted distribution
of these distances. Such a procedure is too costy in view
of the very large eﬀort already invested in the present
calculations. Nevertheless, such an averaging should only

induce some smoothing of the curves presented below and
a small shift of the predicted decay time.

The electron dynamics calculations on NeAr have been
performed using a combination of atomic and distributed
Gaussian basis sets. The atomic basis set was chosen
to be d-aug-cc-pVDZ on Ne and aug-cc-pVDZ on Ar.
The distributed Gaussian basis consisted of (6s,4p,3d)
Kaufmann-Baumeister-Jungen [19] diﬀuse functions cen-
tered between the Ne and Ar, and 36 s-functions placed
on a grid on the x, y and z axes. The positions and the
exponents of the latter are optimized to approximate up
to 15 ˚A from the system the radial part of the Coulomb
s-wave with a kinetic energy of the ICD electron.

 1

 
r
e
b
m
u
n
 
n
o
i
t
a
p
u
c
c
o
 

 0.5

 0

-0.5

Ne2s hole
Ne2p hole
Ar3p hole
electron

-1

0

[as]

100

 10

 30

 40

 20
time [fs]

FIG. 1: (color online) Time-dependent hole occupation num-
bers of NeAr after Ne2s ionization. Note the diﬀerent
timescale on the left part of the graphic. The initially ionized
Ne2s orbital, plotted in black, loses more than 80 % of its hole
charge in about 35 fs. In the same time, two other holes are
opened – one on Ne2p (red curve), and one on Ar3p (green
curve) – and more than 90 % of an electron is created in the
continuum (blue curve).

In Fig. 1 we show the results for the hole occupation
numbers (see Eq. (5)) as a function of time for NeAr af-
ter sudden removal of a Ne2s-electron. This implies that
˜nN e2s = 1 at t = 0 and all other hole occupation numbers
are zero. As time proceeds, the initial hole (black curve)
is gradually ﬁlled up, and two other holes are opened (red
and green curves). This is accompanied by the creation of
an electron (“negative” hole) in the virtual orbital space
(blue curve). For transparency, the hole occupations cor-
responding to the px, py and pz components of the or-
bitals are grouped together, as well as all negative occu-
pations contributing to the description of the continuum
electron. The time evolution of the hole occupations re-
ﬂects the timescale of the ICD process. After about 35 fs,
the initial hole on Ne2s is ﬁlled by an electron from the
Ne2p orbitals and an electron from the Ar3p orbitals is
ejected into the continuum, represented in our treatment

3

by a vast number of virtual orbitals. The ICD lifetime
is thus about 35 fs, in a very good agreement with the
result obtained by elaborate ab initio calculations of the
decay width [20]. Several decay channels participate (see
below) and, therefore, the shape of the Ne2s hole occu-
pation curve is not purely single-exponential, but rather
a linear combination of several exponential functions. In
principle, one may think of another process – the hole on
Ne2s is ﬁlled by an electron from the Ar3p and an elec-
tron from the Ne2p is ejected. However, our numerical
analysis of the propagating electronic wavepacket shows
that the decay probability of this pathway is negligible
being several orders of magnitude smaller than that of
the ICD process.

It is worth mentioning that due to the ﬁnite basis set
used, after some time the hole occupation numbers cease
to reﬂect the physical reality when dealing with decaying
states, since the so described continuum electron actu-
ally cannot leave the system. When the ICD electron
reaches the spatial end of the basis set it can be reﬂected
back yielding unphysical oscillations of the hole occupa-
tion numbers. In the present study such oscillations ap-
pear after about 50 fs. That is why, the size of the space
covered by the basis set is of crucial importance for the
proper description of decaying states.

An interesting phenomenon is observed in the ultra-
short timescale after the sudden ionization. On the left-
hand side of Fig. 1 the ﬁrst 100 as of the process are
presented on an expanded scale. Besides the fast drop of
the initial occupancy for about 50 as, shown to be uni-
versal for multielectron systems and related to the ﬁlling
of the exchange-correlation hole [21], one observes an ex-
tremely strong response of the system to the creation of
the Ne2s hole.
In just 30 as, more than half of a full
hole is opened on Ne2p and more than half of an elec-
tron is already in the continuum. In such a short time
the system is already “prepared” for the consecutive ICD
process which is completed 35 fs later. The removal of
a Ne2s-electron is seen to introduce an enormous distur-
bance of the electronic cloud yielding an extremely fast
hole-particle excitation. We mention that at such short
times a local “violation” of the energy conservation is
possible.
Indeed, following the Heisenberg uncertainty
relation, ∆E∆t ∼ ¯h, one ﬁnds for times ∼ 30 as an en-
ergy dispersion ∆E ∼ 220 eV! This is by far more than
the energy involved in the whole ICD process.

More insight into the process is gained by inspecting
the time evolution of the hole density, Eq. (5). In Fig.
2 the charge Q(z, t) obtained by integrating Q(~r, t) over
the coordinates perpendicular to the Ne-Ar axis (z axis)
is plotted. The displayed results support the conclusion
that the dominant decay is to Ne+(2p−1
z ); see
also Ref. [20]. Indeed, the initial hole density (left-hand
side of the surface in Fig. 2) changes its character from
an one- to a two-ridge surface, corresponding to the ﬁll-
ing of the initial Ne2s-hole predominantly by a Ne2pz-

z )Ar+(3p−1

hole density Q(z,t)
hole density Q(z,t)

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

Ne

cluster axis z

Ar

 10

 0

 50

 40

 30

 20

time [fs]

FIG. 2: (color online) Hole density Q(z, t) plotted against
the Ne-Ar axis z as a function of time after Ne2s ionization
of NeAr. Q(z, t) is obtained by integrating the total charge
over the coordinates perpendicular to the z axis. The initial
hole density changes its character from an one- to a two-ridge
surface, corresponding to the ﬁlling of the Ne2s-hole predom-
inantly by a Ne2pz-electron. In the same time a Ar3p-hole is
created (right-hand side of the plot), which also has mainly
pz-character up to about 40 fs. One clearly sees that the dom-
inant ICD-channel is Ne+(2s−1)Ar→Ne+(2p−1

z )Ar+(3p−1

z ).

electron. The second hole opened on Ar (right-hand side
of the surface) displays predominantly pz-character up to
about 40 fs. The channel ending with Ar+(3p−1
x,y), seen
as a tiny, steadily increasing ridge situated between the
two wide humps on the right-hand side of the surface,
becomes important after that time indicating a slower
decay channel.

The surface in Fig. 2 represents the total charge den-
sity obtained by summing over both positive and negative
occupancies, i.e., over hole and electron charges. Because
of the mutual cancellations in some spatial regions, it is
insightful to separate the hole and electron charges, i.e.,
to show separately the positive and negative occupancies.
In Fig. 3 the so determined hole charge density Q(~r, t) is
shown in 3D for the three diﬀerent times t = 0, 10 and 35
fs. One clearly sees the stages of the ICD process. After
10 fs the initial 2s hole on Ne is already a mixture of s-
and pz-character, and at the same time the pz-hole on Ar
is already partly formed. After 35 fs the decay via the
faster channel of the ICD process is essentially completed
and we see Ne2pz and Ar3pz holes, while the Ar3px,y or-
bitals have just started to contribute to the formation of
the Ar3p-hole. For completeness, the electron density in
the continuum at t = 35 fs is also displayed in Fig. 3.

Let us summarize. A fully ab initio methodology for
calculating in real time ultrafast electron relaxation dy-
namics processes after ionization of a system is proposed.

4

Ne

Ar

t = 0

t = 10 fs

t = 35 fs

FIG. 3: (color online) The contribution of the holes (˜np(t) ≥ 0
in Eq. (5)) to the hole density Q(~r, t) at times 0, 10 and 35
fs. For completeness, at t = 35 fs the electron density in the
continuum (˜np(t) < 0 in Eq. (5)) is also given (light blue).
The colors used correspond to those utilized in Fig. 1.

The method gives the possibility to trace in time and
space the electron dynamics throughout diﬀerent non-
radiative decays taking into account all electrons of the
system and their correlations. We have presented the
ﬁrst study of the multielectron dynamics of the inter-
atomic Coulombic decay in NeAr following Ne2s ioniza-
tion. The results disclose many microscopic details of the
decay process in space as time proceeds. To trace the
dynamics of the decay directly in the time domain with
attosecond resolution, a pump-probe experiment can be
done in analogy to that described in Ref.
[1]. We hope
that the present research will stimulate future experimen-
tal and theoretical studies.

Financial support by the DFG is gratefully acknowl-

edged.

e-mail: alexander.kuleﬀ@pci.uni-heidelberg.de

∗
[1] M. Drescher et al., Nature 419, 803 (2002).
[2] H. Niikura et al., Nature 417, 917 (2002).
[3] H. Niikura et al., Nature 421, 826 (2003).
[4] H. Niikura, D.M. Villeneuve and P.B. Corkum, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 94, 083003 (2005).

5

[5] L.S. Cederbaum, J. Zobeley and F. Tarantelli, Phys. Rev.

Phys. 123, 044111 (2005).

Lett. 79, 4778 (1997).

[6] R. Santra and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

[7] V. Averbukh and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,

153401 (2003).

053401 (2006).

[8] S. Marburger et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 203401 (2003).
[9] T. Jahnke et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 163401 (2004).
[10] G. ¨Ohrwall et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 173401 (2004).
[11] S. Barth et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 3218 (2006).
[12] Y. Morishita et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 243402 (2006).
[13] S. Leone and D. Neumark, private communication.
[14] H. Kapteyn, private communication.
[15] A.I. Kuleﬀ, J. Breidbach and L.S. Cederbaum, J. Chem.

[16] L.S. Cederbaum,

in Encyclopedia of Computational
Chemistry, P.v.R. Schleyer et al. (eds), (Wiley, Chich-
ester, 1998).

[17] J. Schirmer, A.B. Troﬁmov and G. Stelter, J. Chem.

Phys. 109, 4734 (1998).

[18] C. Leforestier et al., J. Comp. Phys. 94, 59 (1991).
[19] K. Kaufmann, W. Baumeister and M. Jungen, J. Phys.

B 22, 2223 (1989).

[20] S. Scheit et al., J. Chem. Phys. 124, 154305 (2006).
[21] J. Breidbach and L.S. Cederbaum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,

033901 (2005).

