7
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
6
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Structural and Electronic Properties
of Small Neutral (MgO)n Clusters

E. de la Puente1, A. Aguado1, A. Ayuela2 and J.M. L´opez1
1. Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, Facultad de Ciencias,

Universidad de Valladolid. 47011 Valladolid, Spain.
2. Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Technische Universit¨at Dresden,
01062 Dresden, Germany.

January 17, 2014

Abstract

Ab initio Perturbed Ion (PI) calculations are reported for neu-
tral stoichiometric (M gO)n (n ≤ 13) clusters. An extensive number
of isomer structures was identiﬁed and studied. For the isomers of
(M gO)n (n ≤ 7) clusters, a full geometrical relaxation was consid-
ered. Correlation corrections were included for all cluster sizes using
the Coulomb-Hartree-Fock (CHF) model proposed by Clementi. The
results obtained compare favourably to the experimental data and
other previous theoretical studies. Inclusion of correlation is crucial
in order to achieve a good description of these systems. We ﬁnd an
important number of new isomers which allows us to interpret the ex-
perimental magic numbers without the assumption of structures based
on (M gO)3 subunits. Finally, as an electronic property, the variations
in the cluster ionization potential with the cluster size were studied
and related to the structural isomer properties.

PACS: 36.40.+d; 61.50.Lt; 61.60.+m; 79.60.Eq
Keywords: Clusters. Magnesium oxide. (MgO)n clusters.

1

1 Introduction

Clusters provide a new state of aggregation from which the condensed mat-

ter properties eventually emerge, being thus of formidable interest in or-

der to investigate the transition from the molecular world to the solid state

physics. Small clusters often present substantial deviations in their physical

and chemical properties when compared both to the molecule and the bulk

phase. Rationalizing the evolution of those properties with the cluster size is

a major challenge to the nowadays science. As an example, for an intermedi-

ate size cluster, the number of diﬀerent isomers which may coexist in a small

energy range may be quite large. Though it is a very diﬃcult task, a full

characterization of those isomer conﬁgurations for each cluster size would be

highly desirable for a good understanding of cluster growing processes.

In this paper we focus our interests in small stoichiometric (MgO)n clus-

ters. These have received special attention in the last few years both from

experimentalists and theoreticians. Saunders[1, 2] published mass-spectra

and collision-induced-fragmentation (CIF) data for sputtered MgO cluster
ions, and found enhanced stabilities for (MgO)+

n clusters with n = 6, 9, 12
and 15. The results were interpreted there in terms of (MgO)3 subunits

from which the clusters built up. Ziemann and Castleman[3, 4, 5] per-

formed experimental measurements by using laser-ionization time-of-ﬂight

mass spectrometry[6, 7]. They found “magic clusters” at n = 2, 4, 6, 9, 12

and 15. In order to explain the features observed in their mass spectra, they

performed theoretical calculations by using the rigid ion and the polarizable

ion shell models[8, 9, 10]. Their main conclusion was that the clusters form

compact cubic structures similar to pieces of the MgO crystal lattice. Self

consistent calculations on these clusters were performed by Moukouri and

2

Noguera[11, 12] with the use of a semiempirical tight binding approach. The

necessity of going beyond a fully ionic model like that of pair potential inter-

actions was there remarked. Recio et al[13, 14] reported ab initio molecular

orbital calculations on neutral clusters of MgO containing up to 26 atoms.

These calculations included correlation eﬀects in the clusters with n = 1-6

molecules. Their results were in agreement with Saunders’ hypothesis, in the

sense that structures based on the (MgO)3 subunit were preferred over the

cubic like ones. Very recently, Malliavin et al[15] have performed calcula-

tions on (MgO)n (n ≤ 6) clusters using the DMOL method. The geometries

obtained in that work are in total agreement with those presented by Recio

et al.

Each particular work from the above mentioned ones represented, in prin-

ciple, an improvement over the preceding investigations. Pair potential mod-

els provided the ﬁrst theoretical attempt to identify and classify diﬀerent iso-

mers and calculate the energy diﬀerences between them. Nevertheless, some
selected set of empirical parameters for Mgq+ and Oq− (q = 1,2) ions has to

be used as input, and that set is the same for ions which are in nonequivalent

cluster sites. The studies by Moukouri and Noguera added self consistency

to the calculations, but they were not free of empirical parameters. Finally,

the ﬁrst ab initio study on these systems was carried out by Recio et al.

Several approximations had to be done in their calculations, however, in

order to maintain the computational time at reasonable values: (a) Large

geometrical distortions in their considered isomers were not allowed, as the

optimization process was carried out just by varying the nearest neighbour

distance R (for ringlike structures, the stacking distance between rings was

also independently optimized) and, for some structures, even this value was

kept ﬁxed; (b) Several other isomers, which may be important in a more

3

complete characterization of the diﬀerent isomer structures adopted by small

(MgO)n clusters, were not considered; (c) Correlation corrections could be

included (at the MP2 level) only in clusters containing up to 12 atoms.

The present work undertakes a new extensive and systematic ab initio

study of (MgO)n clusters with n up to 13. We have used the ab initio

Perturbed Ion (aiPI) model[16], which is based on the Theory of Electronic

Separability (TES)[17, 18] and the ab initio Model Potential (aiMP) ap-

proach of Huzinaga et al[19], within the Restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) ap-

proximation. The model has been used by our group in several studies on

(NaCl)n[20] and (NaI)n[21] clusters, and also in a global study of alkali

halide clusters[22]. Although we do not expect to obtain accurate results for

the only partially ionic MgO molecule, our main concern is by far not the

molecule, but intermediate size clusters where a full range of diﬀerent isomer

structures may be studied. The solid MgO has been excellently described

by the aiPI model[23], and precise results are achieved for (MgO)n clusters

from n = 3 on.

Our calculations represent a major advance with respect to pair potential

or semiempirical methods. The ion-cluster consistency achieved in the calcu-

lations results in a diﬀerent ab initio description of each nonequivalent ion in

the cluster, without requiring the use of any empirical parameter[20, 21, 22].

On the other hand, they represent an alternative description to the molecu-

lar orbital models, and complete the results obtained by Recio et al in the

following aspects: (a) For (MgO)n (n ≤ 7) clusters, a full geometrical re-

laxation of the diﬀerent isomers has been considered; (b) We have studied a

more complete set of isomers; (c) Correlation corrections have been included

for all cluster sizes (up to 26 atoms). Finally, some electronic properties as

ionization potentials have been also considered.

4

Results presented here are also aimed to assist in the interpretation of pos-

sible future experimental investigations on these clusters. Renewed interest

in isomer geometries has recently emerged because of the drift tube experi-

mental studies, which, by measuring the mobility of cluster ions through an

inert buﬀer gas under the inﬂuence of a weak electric ﬁeld, provide valuable

information about the cluster geometries[24, 25, 26]. However, we have no

knowledge on experimental studies of this kind on (MgO)n clusters.

The rest of the paper is structured in several sections. In the next one, we

give a brief r´esum´e of the aiPI model for the study of clusters (the interested

reader can obtain more details in our previous works[20, 21, 22]), and some

computational details. Section III deals with the principal structural and

electronic results of the present study. Conclusions are given in the last

section.

2 Computational Method

The ab initio perturbed ion model[16] was originally designed for the descrip-

tion of ionic solids[27], and subsequently adapted to the study of clusters in

our group[20, 21, 22]. Its theoretical foundation lies in the theory of elec-

tronic separability[28] for weakly overlapping groups[29], and its practical

implementation in the Hartree-Fock (HF) version of the TES[17, 18]. The

HF equations of the cluster are solved in localized Fock spaces, by breaking

the cluster wave function into local nearly orthogonal group functions (ionic

in nature in our case). When the self-consistent process (see details below)

ﬁnishes, the outputs are the total cluster energy Eclus and a set of localized

wave functions for each geometrically nonequivalent ion in the cluster. The

5

cluster energy can be written as a sum of ionic additive energies[20, 21, 22]:

Eclus =

ER

add,

N

X
R=1

(1)

where the sum runs over all ions in the cluster, and the contribution of each
particular ion to the total cluster energy (ER

add) can be expressed in turn as

a sum of intraionic (net) and interionic contributions:

ER

add = ER

net +

ERS

int = ER

net +

ER

int.

(2)

1
2

X
S(6=R)

1
2

Once Eclus has been obtained, the binding energy per molecule of the (MgO)n
cluster with respect to the dissociation process (MgO)n → nMg2+ + nO− +
ne− + nEbind, is given by:

Ebind = −

[Eclus − nE0(Mg2+) − nE0(O−)],

(3)

1
n

where E0(Mg2+) and E0(O−) are the energies of the Mg2+ and O− free ions,
respectively.

The localized nature of the aiPI procedure has some advantages over the

usual molecular orbital models. As in weakly overlapping systems the cor-

relation energy correction is almost intraionic in nature (being therefore a

sum of contributions from each ion), the localized cluster-consistent ionic

wave functions may be used to attain good estimations of this correction. In

this paper, the correlation energy correction is obtained through Clementi’s

Coulomb-Hartree-Fock method[30, 31]. Besides, it also allows the devel-

opment of computationally eﬃcient codes[32] which make use of the large

multi-zeta basis sets of Clementi and Roetti[33] for the description of the

ions. At this respect, our optimizations have been performed using basis sets
(5s4p) for Mg2+ and (6s4p) for O2−, respectively. Inclusion of diﬀuse basis

6

functions has been checked and shown unnecessary. A general discussion on

the election of the most appropriate basis set within the aiPI model has been

given elsewhere[22].

A few comments regarding the weak-overlap assumption and the descrip-
tion of the O2− anions are worth of mention. O2− is an unstable anion in

free space, so a basic problem in an ionic description of MgO clusters is the
correct description of the O2− wave function. Lua˜na et al have shown how
the O2− anion is stabilized by the action of the crystal environment in solid

MgO[23]. Speciﬁcally, the 2p oxygen orbital experiences a large contraction

in the lattice, which makes it stable as an embedded anion. The resulting
O2− wave function leads to a diamagnetic susceptibility and an electron ki-

netic energy increase in quantitative agreement with the experiment. Thus,

the quality of that wave function is asserted. An analysis of the PI results

reveals that the orbital contraction is mainly due to the action of the projec-

tion operators. The same conclusion has been achieved for the MgO clusters

studied here. The projection operator supplies two major eﬀects[29]: On

one hand, it tries to maintain the strong-orthogonality hypothesis, being

therefore responsible for the orbital contraction. On the other hand, it has

a well-deﬁned physical meaning, namely, its expectation value coincides ex-

actly with the overlap energy if we assume that this overlap is “weak”. By

“weak” it is meant that the products of two overlap integrals (SAB)ij(SCD)km
with A 6= B and C 6= D are negligible ((SAB)ij =< φA
i

j >, where φA
i

| φB

is

the ith orbital of the ion A). This corresponds to the following truncation of
the L¨owdin expansion[34] for S−1:

S−1 ≈ I − T

(T = S − I).

(4)

Within this context, the hypothesis of weakly overlapping ions does not im-

7

ply that the overlap contribution to the cluster energy is negligible. What

is neglected is those contributions to the overlap energy coming from second
and higher orders in the L¨owdin expansion. The overlap energies of the O2−

anions in the (MgO)3 clusters are just ∼ 0.5eV larger than the correspond-
ing value in the solid (12.84 eV for O2− : MgO), and they are decreasing

functions of the cluster size. The assumption of weakly overlapping ions is

good in the solid (the results are exceptional), and we consider that such an

small increase in the overlap energies does not invalid that assumption for

cluster studies. Our basis set for oxygen anion is ﬂexible enough because by

adding diﬀuse basis functions the cluster energy does not lower anymore, nor

the projection operator is more eﬀective in projecting the frozen orbitals out

of the active space (we would like to remark that an extensive set of diﬀerent

basis functions was considered in test calculations on (MgO)2 and (MgO)6

isomers. The ones selected gave the lowest cluster energies and achieved

saturation in the value of the overlap energies).

We have used the following self-consistent method: for a given distribu-

tion of the ions forming the cluster, we consider one of them as the active ion

R (for instance, a particular oxygen anion), and solve the Self-Consistent-

Field equations for anion R in the ﬁeld of the remaining ions, which are

considered frozen at this stage. The solution obtained is transferred to all

the anions equivalent to anion R, that is, to the anions which have equiva-

lent positions in the cluster. Next, we take a non equivalent oxygen anion

(anion S) as the active ion and repeat the same process. Evidently, since

anions S are not equivalent to anions R, the energy eigenvalues and wave

functions of electrons in anions S are diﬀerent from those of anions R. We

continue this process in the same way until all the inequivalent anions have

been exhausted. The same procedure is then followed for the magnesium

8

cations. The process just described is a PI cycle. We iterate the PI cycles

until convergence in the total energy of the cluster is achieved.

As input geometries we considered cubic structures resembling pieces of

bulk MgO crystal, ring structures (mainly hexagonal, but also some octag-

onal and decagonal), mixed structures made up usually of a regular isomer

with a molecule attached to it, and some more open structures like the trun-

cated octahedron for n = 12 or the wurtzite piece for n = 7. These trial

geometries have been either taken from the geometries considered in pair po-

tential calculations on MgO and alkali halide clusters or intuitively guessed

with the experience gathered in our previous works on alkali halide clus-

ters. The input geometries have been fully relaxed (that is, the total cluster

energy has been minimized with respect to variations in all the (3N − 6)

independent variables, where N is the number of ions) for (MgO)n (n ≤ 7)

clusters, at the HF level. A simplex downhill algorithm has been used in

these calculations[35, 36]. For clusters with n =8-13 this procedure became

computationally quite expensive and we turned to geometrical optimizations

(also at the HF level) with respect to a limited number of relevant parame-

ters. Cuboid structures have been relaxed with respect to a single parameter,

the ﬁrst-neighbour cation-anion distance, whereas in the ring structures the

cation and anion distances to the center of the ring, and the distance be-

tween rings have been independently varied. For the mixed structures, the

part of the regular structure which is nearest (ﬁrst and second neighbours)

to the attached molecule is relaxed together with the molecule, and the rest

of the isomer is kept ﬁxed at the geometrical conﬁguration with the mini-

mum energy found for that isomer without the molecule attached. The CHF

correlation correction is then introduced for all the studied isomers at the

equilibrium geometries found at the HF level. These geometries are fur-

9

ther scaled (without shape modiﬁcations) until the minimum CHF energy is

achieved. We do not expect, from the results obtained by Recio et al[13],

that inclusion of correlation substantially modiﬁes the isomers shape. We

have carried out these scaling calculations mainly because they can aﬀect

diﬀerently to ringlike and cubiclike structures (and therefore to the energetic

isomer ordering) and also in order to assess its inﬂuence on the averaged

cluster bond length, and its evolution towards the bulk value.

3 Results.

3.1 Lowest energy structures and isomers.

Results concerning the structural properties of small neutral (MgO)n clus-

ters, obtained by following the method explained in the previous section, are

shown in ﬁgure 1. Small and large spheres are used to represent Mg and O

ions, respectively. The most stable CHF structure (ﬁrst isomer) is shown on

the left side for each cluster size. The rest of the structures are the low-lying

isomers obtained in the calculation. For clusters with 3, 4 and 5 molecules

we show two diﬀerent views of some isomers. The numbers given below each

isomer are the total cluster energy diﬀerences with respect to the ground

state (denoted GS in the ﬁgure), at the CHF (ﬁrst row) and HF (second

row) levels.

For small clusters sizes (n = 2-6) only two isomers have been considered.

The ground state geometries in the HF calculations are mainly rings: hexag-

onal for n = 3, decagonal for n = 5 and a stacking of two hexagonal rings for

n = 6. However for n = 4 the GS is a cube. The inclusion of correlation does

not change the GS structures except for n = 5, where a distorted cube with

a MgO molecule attached to it becomes energetically more stable. These re-

10

sults are in total agreement with the results of Recio et al[14] and Malliavin

et al[15]. However, the isomers obtained in our calculations have large geo-

metrical distortions compared to those obtained by Recio et al, mainly those

which have non-ringlike conﬁgurations: the ﬁrst excited isomer for n = 3 was

obtained after a full relaxation of a planar piece of the MgO bulk lattice;

this planar piece, with no distortions, is also the ﬁrst excited isomer in Recio

et el results, but we can see in ﬁg. 1 that the ﬁnal geometry is greatly dis-

torted with respect to the perfect bulk structure. This kind of deformations

has been also obtained in lithium halide [22] and sodium iodide [23] clusters.

The above results show that the PI calculations agree with those of other

more “popular” ab-initio calculations: GAUSSIAN[13, 14] and DMOL[15].

That means that the PI method is a good candidate for obtaining the ground

state and other geometrical and electronic properties of clusters with ionic

bonding like the (MgO)n clusters considered in this paper.

For the clusters with n = 7-13 we have considered a larger number of

initial geometries in our calculations. Overall, the ground state geometries

obtained in the HF calculations are the same that those obtained by Recio et

al. We appreciate diﬀerences only for those cluster sizes in which the ground

state structures that we obtain were not considered by Recio et al in their

calculations (n = 11,12,13).

The inclusion of correlation in the calculations changes the GS geometries

for n = 7 and 8. These results can not be compared with the calculations

performed by Recio et al because they did not include the correlation con-

tribution in this range of sizes; neither with the calculations of Malliavin

et al because they did not perform any calculations in this size range. For

n = 7 the HF ground state isomer is the wurtzite piece whereas the CHF

ground state is the bulk-like (MgO)6 piece with a MgO molecule attached

11

to it. For n = 8 the HFGS is a stacking of two octagonal rings whereas the

CHFGS is a mixed structure formed by “joining” the most stable (MgO)6

and (MgO)4 isomers. The last structure is also the second isomer in the HF

results. For n = 9 the ground state isomer is a stacking of three hexagonal

rings, the same as in the HF calculations; the other isomers considered are a

piece of MgO bulk and the (MgO)8 HFGS with a molecule attached to it.

For n = 10 the GS geometry is a piece of the MgO lattice. The other isomers

considered in our calculations are, in order of increasing energy: a stacking

of two decagonal rings, a piece formed by “joining” two stackings of two

hexagonal rings by a face, and a piece of bulk MgO lattice with a molecule

attached to it (attaching a molecule to the (MgO)9 GS leads to an isomer

which lies higher in energy). For n = 11 the GS isomer is a mixed structure

composed by a stacking of two hexagonal rings plus a bulk-like part, and the

other isomers considered are either from mixed type or bulk-like. A trun-

cated octahedron is obtained as the GS for n = 12. This isomer has been also

found to be specially stable in (NaI)12 clusters[21]. It was not considered in

ref.[14]. Finally, a mixed structure composed by a piece of the MgO lattice

and an octagon is found as the (MgO)13 ground state. Our second isomer

is the defect-cuboid structure, which was the single isomer tried in ref.[14].

A point which is worth of mention from these two ﬁnal cluster sizes is that

there is the possibility to obtain diﬀerent isomers with the same geometrical

shape but with cations and anions interchanged. The electrostatic interac-

tion tends to stabilize energetically anions[20, 21], so those isomers with a

central oxygen are more stable.

We compare now the preceding results to the results obtained with the PI

model for alkali-halide (AX)n clusters[20, 21, 22]. In our previous works we

found evidence of a clear-cut separation between the structural properties of

12

diﬀerent alkali-halide clusters. (KX)n and (RbX)n clusters showed almost

from the very beginning a preference to adopt minimum energy structures

which are fragments of the bulk lattice. However, (LiX)n clusters adopted

preferentially more open structures.

(NaX)n showed an intermediate be-

haviour. Our structural results for (MgO)n clusters show, in outline, large

similarities with those of (LiX)n or (NaI)n clusters. These are the least

ionic compounds in the alkali-halide series. Rounded geometries had been

proposed by Twu et al[7] in those cases showing a decreased ionic bond-

ing character. Then, our minimum energy isomers are consistent with a

reduced ionic character in (MgO)n clusters. This non-fully ionic charac-

ter was also pointed out in the analysis of Recio et al[14]. The discussion

there was based on a comparison with the classical results of Ziemann et

al[3], who performed pair potential calculations by using two diﬀerent (but

both fully ionic) models, with diﬀerent nominal charges assigned to the ions.
The calculations for (Mg+1O−1)n clusters revealed mainly cubic structures,
whereas in (Mg+2O−2)n calculations a set of much more open structures was
obtained. As the (Mg+1O−1)n calculations explained better the experimen-

tal mass spectra, Ziemann et al concluded that pieces of MgO bulk lattice

are obtained for small (MgO)n clusters. Both our calculations and those of

refs.[14, 15] obtain results which are in between these two limit cases, so nom-

inal charges between |1| and |2| should be ascribed to Mg/O ions in classical

pair potential simulations. However, our calculations show that a descrip-
tion in terms of weakly overlapping Mg2+ and O2− groups is completely

appropriate provided that all the relevant quantum-mechanical interactions

(overlap included) are accounted for properly and a full ion-cluster consis-

tency is achieved. It is worth of stressing that such a description does not

enter in conﬂict with a possible assignment of fractional charges to each ion.

13

A population analysis is best carried out directly in terms of the total density,

following the Bader’s scheme for deriving atomic properties from the topol-

ogy of the charge density[37]. That has been recently done in PI calculations

on solids[38], and fractional ionic charges have been derived for a variety of

ionic crystals.

From the study of small (MgO)n (n = 2-13) clusters we conclude that, in

the earliest stages of cluster growing, the bulk lattice fragments are not the

GS isomers except for some particular values of n. For the rest of cluster sizes

other (more open) structures are preferred. Thus, the convergence to the bulk

structure is not reached yet in this size range (the solid MgO crystallizes in

the f.c.c. structure[39]).

We can appreciate in ﬁg.1 for n = 6, 9 and 12 (and also for other cluster

sizes), that the inclusion of correlation enhances the stability of the hexagonal

isomers over the cubic ones. Though in the size range covered open structures

are preferred over the cubic ones, eventually there will be a cluster size where

the cubic structures become energetically more stable, and this speciﬁc value

of n will depend on the inclusion or not of correlation in the calculations.

The above observation suggests that this “critical” n will be larger upon

inclusion of correlation, that is, pieces of the MgO bulk lattice will appear

as GS isomers for values of n which are larger in CHF calculations than in

HF calculations.

The magic numbers for small (MgO)+

n clusters emerging from mass spec-
tra experiments have been explained by Saunders[1] and by Recio et al[14] as

resulting from specially enhanced structures based on the stacking of (MgO)3

subunits. Our results show that, at least for neutral (MgO)n clusters (and
also for ionized (MgO)+

n clusters if the vertical approximation holds[14]), this
conclusion is not universal. The truncated octahedron obtained as the ground

14

state isomer for n = 12 in our calculations indicates that this interpretation

should be taken with some care.

3.2

Inter-ionic distances and binding energies.

In ﬁgure 2 we present the average interionic CHF distance d between Mg

and O nearest neighbours for the ground state geometry as a function of the

cluster size n. d presents an irregular behaviour as a function of n, due to

the fact that the ground state geometries for the diﬀerent values of n do not

correspond to the same type of structural family. The points that correspond

to the same structural family have been joined by the two dashed lines, and

it can be appreciated that the variation of d is smoother for each structural

family. The value of d increases with the number of ions in the cluster. The

cubic clusters have an interatomic distance larger than the hexagonal ones.

The isomers which resemble pieces of the bulk MgO lattice are the important

set in order to compare with the bulk value. In the MgO crystal d = 2.106
˚A[39], and we obtain a value of d = 1.999 ˚A for the GS isomer with n = 10.

The saturation value is not achieved yet, but the trend is the correct one.

The contraction of the distances induced by the inclusion of correlation is

more important in cubiclike pieces than in ringlike ones: the average eﬀect

in cubic structures is a contraction of approximately 4 %, while in hexagonal

structures the contraction is only of some 2 %. The inclusion of correlation

is necessary in order to obtain quantitative agreement with the experimental

bulk value in the limit of n large.

In Figure 3, we represent Ebind as a function of n, both for the HF and

CHF calculations. The general trend is an increase of the binding energy with

n in both cases. Superposed to that general trend, especially stable clusters

are predicted for certain values of n (“magic numbers”); these are identiﬁed

15

in the ﬁgures as maxima or pronounced changes in the slope. We observe

that both type of calculations do not predict the same set of magic numbers.

The HF curve is quite smooth for small values of n, and maxima are observed

only at n = 9, 12 (pronounced slope changes are not observed). The inclusion

of correlation eﬀects (CHF curve) is crucial to achieve agreement with the

experimental results[1, 3], which predict magic clusters at n = 2, 4, 6, 9, 12,

15... The maxima at n = 6, 9, 12 are clear, and a pronounced slope change is

appreciable at n = 4. The abundance maximum obtained experimentally at

n = 2 should be probably related to the singly-ionized stoichiometric clusters

and not to the neutrals[14].

3.3 Cluster ionization potentials.

In this subsection we analyse the variation of the cluster ionization potential

(IP) with the cluster size. The output of the PI calculation contains a fully

cluster-consistent wave function for each inequivalent ion in the cluster. In

our model, the electron must be extracted from a speciﬁc localized anionic

orbital when the cluster is ionized. The vertical IP of the cluster is calcu-

lated as the smallest binding energy of a 2p anionic electron (Koopmans’

approximation). The results are given in ﬁgure 4, where we have plotted the
eigenvalues of the 2p orbitals of O2− anions as a function of n for the most

stable structure of each cluster size in the HF (ﬁg.4a) and in the CHF (ﬁg.4b)

calculations. We appreciate a band of eigenvalues for each cluster size be-

cause the anions can occupy inequivalent positions in the cluster. These band

gaps are indicative of the diﬀerent reactivity of each nonequivalent cluster

site, they can determine the preferred adsorption sites, and could be helpful

in photoionization spectroscopy studies.

The dashed lines, which join the lowest 2p energy eigenvalues for each

16

cluster size, indicate the variation of the HF (4a) and CHF (4b) ionization

potentials with the cluster size. The variation of the vertical cluster ionization

potential with n is related to the relative stabilities of neutral and singly-

ionized stoichiometric clusters[14]: When there is a maximum in the IP for a

cluster size n, the ionized structure is less stable than the neutral one against

loss of a MgO monomer; the opposite occurs at the minima in the IP curve.

For the HF results, a set of minima at n = 4, 7, and 11 and maxima at

n = 3, 5, 8, and 10 is observed, in agreement with the results of Recio et

al. The diﬀerence is that they obtain a maximum at n = 12; but the results

are not directly comparable for these cluster sizes (n = 12, 13), because the

isomers that we obtain as the GS were not considered in their calculations.

This pattern changes upon inclusion of correlation eﬀects (see CHF curve):

minima are found at sizes n = 5, 7, and 11, and maxima at n = 3, 6, and 10.

These changes are directly related to the change in the GS isomer for n =

5. We can give a clear geometrical interpretation to the minima in the light

of the localized picture provided by the PI model. At the minima (n = 5,

7, and 11), mixed structures were found as the most stable isomers (ﬁg.1).

The least bound anionic p-electron in those clusters corresponds always to

that oxygen with the smallest number of neighbouring ions. That speciﬁc

oxygen is less stabilized than the other oxygens in the cluster because of the

reduced electrostatic interaction for those cluster sites. An electron will be

removed from it more easily than for the rest of cluster sizes (for which the

GS isomer is more “compact”). Such a clear geometrical interpretation of

the maxima in the IP’s is not apparent for the small size range covered in this

work: the opposite situation (maxima in the IP for those ground states with

the highest symmetries) is not always observed. As the main contribution to

the anionic binding energy is the Madelung potential, and this is the largest

17

for the bulklike structures, we expect maxima to appear precisely in compact

cubic structures for larger cluster sizes.

In simple metallic clusters, the variations in the cluster ionization poten-

tial are correlated with the magic numbers, indicating that the magic num-

bers are electronic in nature[40]. There is not such a deﬁnite connection in

ionic clusters, and the variations observed in the cluster ionization potential

are related mainly to structural features. From our discussion, the existence

of such a connection between electronic (IP’s) and geometrical properties

in (MgO)n clusters becomes clear. The question of the interconnection be-

tween electronic, energetic, and geometrical cluster properties has been more

thoroughly addressed in ionic alkali-halide materials[22].

4 Conclusions

Ab initio Perturbed Ion (PI) calculations have been carried out in order to

investigate the structural, energetic and some electronic properties of small

neutral stoichiometric (MgO)n clusters. The set of studied isomers has been

more complete than in previous calculations, and some of the not previously

considered isomers have resulted to be either the ground state structure or

a low-lying isomer for several cluster sizes. Speciﬁcally, we have shown that

the interpretation of the magic numbers of small (MgO)n clusters in terms

of stackings of (MgO)3 subunits is not universal, because a truncated octa-

hedron is more stable for n = 12 than the corresponding hexagonal isomer.

General structural distortions have been considered for (MgO)n (n ≤ 7) clus-

ters, and these deformations have been shown to be really important in those

isomers with the lowest symmetries. Correlation corrections have been in-

cluded for all cluster sizes with the Clementi’s Coulomb-Hartree-Fock (CHF)

18

method. Their inclusion has been very important in the determination of

some ground state isomers and of the energy diﬀerences between isomers for

each cluster size. Speciﬁcally, at n = 5, 7, 8, and 10 diﬀerent ground state

structures are obtained after accounting for correlation eﬀects. Comparison

with previous ab initio calculations has been made and the agreement has

been good whenever the comparisons have been possible.

The evolution of the average inter-ionic distance with the cluster size has

been studied. Clusters from the same structural family show a smooth vari-

ation of their inter-ionic distances with n. The correlation-induced distance

contractions are the largest for those isomers which are fragments of the

MgO bulk lattice. Energetically, however, the correlation correction stabi-

lizes more the hexagonal isomers, so the transition towards bulk structures

will take place at larger cluster sizes than HF calculations would predict.

This result contrasts with the situation encountered in alkali halide clusters,

where the inclusion of correlation induces a larger energetical stabilization of

the cuboid isomers[22, 41]. The (MgO)n magic numbers have been identiﬁed

as maxima or pronounced slope changes in the binding energy versus cluster

size curve. They are n = 4, 6, 9, and 12, in agreement with the experimental

results n = 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, 15, ... (n = 2 has been considered to be due to
a larger enhancement of the singly-ionized (MgO)+

Inclusion of

2 species).

correlation has also shown to be completely necessary in order to reproduce

the correct (experimental) magic numbers.

The interconnection between electronic and structural cluster properties

has been studied by considering the variations in the cluster ionization po-

tential (IP) with the cluster size n. For the minima in the IP, which occur

for the lowest symmetry ground state isomers at n = 5, 7, and 11, a clear

geometrical interpretation can be given:

in those isomers, there is always

19

an oxygen anion with a number of neighbouring ions notably reduced, from

which is relatively easy (compared to the rest of cluster sizes) to remove an

electron and create a singly-ionized isomer. Such a deﬁnite connection has

not been found for the maxima in the size range considered in this work. The

corresponding opposite situation of maxima in the IP emerging for all those

ground state isomers with the highest symmetries is not observed. The in-

creased classical electrostatic (Madelung) energy of isomers resembling pieces

of the MgO crystal explains the maximum observed at n = 10. Then, max-

ima for larger cluster sizes should be expected to appear whenever the ground

state becomes a compact fragment of the MgO bulk lattice.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. This work has been supported by DGI-

CYT (Grant PB95-D720-C02-01). One of us (A. Aguado) acknowledges a

predoctoral Grant from Junta de Castilla y Le´on.

References

[1] W. A. Saunders, Phys. Rev. B 37, 6583 (1988).

[2] W. A. Saunders, Z. Phys. D 12, 601 (1989).

[3] P. J. Ziemann and A. W. Castleman, Jr., Z. Phys. D 20, 97 (1991).

[4] P. J. Ziemann and A. W. Castleman, Jr., J. Chem. Phys. 94, 718 (1991).

20

[5] P. J. Ziemann and A. W. Castleman, Jr., Phys. Rev. B 44, 6488 (1991).

[6] C. W. S. Conover, Y. A. Yang and L. A. Bloomﬁeld, Phys. Rev . B 38,

3517 (1988).

[7] Y. T. Twu, C. W. S. Conover, Y. A. Yang and L. Bloomﬁeld, Phys.

Rev. B 42, 5306 (1990).

[8] T. P. Martin, Phys. Rep. 95, 168 (1983).

[9] J. Diefenbach and T. P. Martin, Surf. Sci. 156, 234 (1984).

[10] N. G. Phillips, C. W. S. Conover and L. A. Bloomﬁeld, J. Chem. Phys.

94, 7498 (1991).

[11] S. Moukouri and C. Noguera, Z. Phys. D 24, 71 (1992).

[12] S. Moukouri and C. Noguera, Z. Phys. D 27, 79 (1993).

[13] J. M. Recio and R. Pandey, Phys. Rev. A 47, 2075 (1993).

[14] J. M. Recio, R. Pandey, A. Ayuela and A. B. Kunz, J. Chem. Phys. 98,

4783 (1993).

[15] M. J. Malliavin and C. Coudray, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 2323 (1997).

[16] V. Lua˜na and L. Pueyo, Phys. Rev. B 41 , 3800 (1990).

[17] S. Huzinaga and A. P. Cantu, J. Chem. Phys. 55 , 5543 (1971).

[18] V. Lua˜na. Thesis Dissertation, Universidad de Oviedo (1987).

[19] S. Huzinaga, L. Seijo, Z. Barandiar´an and M. Klobukowski, J. Chem.

Phys. 86, 2132 (1987).

21

[20] A. Ayuela, J.M. L´opez, J.A. Alonso and V. Lua˜na, [a] Z. Phys. D 26,

S213 (1993); [b] An. Fis. (Spain), 90, 190 (1994); [c] Physica B 212,

329 (1996).

accepted for publication.

[21] A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J.M. L´opez and J.A. Alonso, J. Phys. Chem.,

[22] A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J.M. L´opez and J.A. Alonso, Preprint

[23] V. Lua˜na, J. M. Recio and L. Pueyo, Phys. Rev. B 42, 1791 (1990).

[24] G. von Helden, M. T. Hsu, P. R. Kemper and M. T. Bowers, J. Chem.

Phys. 95, 3835 (1991).

[25] M. F. Jarrold, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 11 (1995).

[26] M. Maier-Borst, P. L¨oﬄer, J. Petry and D. Kreisle, Z. Phys. D (in press).

[27] V. Lua˜na, M. Fl´orez, E. Francisco, A. Mart´ın Pend´as, J. M. Recio, M.

Bermejo and L. Pueyo, in Cluster Models for Surface and Bulk Phenom-

ena, edited by G. Pacchioni, P. S. Bagus and F. Parmigiani (Plenum,

New York, 1992), p. 605

Press. London (1994).

6504 (1992).

[28] R. McWeeny, Methods of molecular quantum mechanics, Academic

[29] E. Francisco, A. Mart´ın Pend´as and W. H. Adams, J. Chem. Phys. 97,

[30] E.Clementi, IBM J. Res. Develop., 9, 2 (1965).

[31] S.J.Chakravorty and E.Clementi, Phys. Rev. A, 39, 2290 (1989).

22

[32] V. Lua˜na, A. Mart´ın Pend´as, J. M. Recio and E. Francisco, Comput.

Phys. Commun. 77, 107 (1993)

[33] E. Clementi and C.Roetti, At. Data Tables, 14, 177 (1974).

[34] P. O. L¨owdin, Adv. Phys., 5, 1 (1956).

[35] J.A. Nelder and R. Mead, Comput. J. 7, 308 (1965).

[36] William H. Press and Saul A. Teukolsky, Computers in Physics, 5, 426,

[37] R. F. W. Bader, Atoms in Molecules (Oxford University Press, Oxford,

[38] A. Mart´ın Pend´as, A. Costales and V. Lua˜na, Phys. Rev. B, 55, 4275

[39] N.M.Ashcroft and N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehart

and Winston, New York (1976).

[40] W. A. de Heer, W. D. Knight, M. Y. Chou and M. L. Cohen, Solid State

Physics 40, 93 (1987).

[41] C. Ochsenfeld and R. Ahlrichs, Ber. Bunsenges Phys. Chem. 98, 34

(1991).

1990).

(1997).

(1994).

23

Captions of ﬁgures

Figure 1. Isomer geometries for (MgO)n clusters. The most stable CHF

structure (ﬁrst isomer) is shown on the left side. Total energy diﬀerences (in

eV) with respect to the most stable structure are given for each isomer (ﬁrst
row: CHF; second row: HF). Mg2+, small spheres; O2−, large spheres. For

n = 3 − 5, two diﬀerent views of some isomers are provided.

Figure 2. Averaged nearest neighbour Mg-O distance for the CHF ground

state structures of Figure 1. The two lines join cubic and hexagonal clusters.

Figure 3. Binding energy per molecule as a function of the cluster size.

Figure 4. Orbital energies (with opposite sign) of the 2p levels of O2− an-

ions as a function of the cluster size for the ground state structures of (MgO)n

clusters. The dashed line joins the vertical cluster ionization potentials. (a)

HF results; (b) CHF results.

24

This figure "dibujos1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

This figure "dibujos2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

This figure "dibujos3.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

This figure "dist.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

This figure "enbind.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

This figure "ipchf.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

This figure "iphf.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9706030v1

