8
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
6
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ab initio calculations of structures and stabilities of (NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+ cluster
ions.

Andr´es Aguado
Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Valladolid, 47011 Valladolid, Spain

Andr´es Ayuela
Laboratory of Physics, Helsinki University of Technology, 02015 Espoo, Finland

Jos´e M. L´opez and Julio A. Alonso
Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Valladolid, 47011 Valladolid, Spain

Ab initio calculations using the Perturbed Ion model, with correlation contributions included, are
presented for nonstoichiometric (NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+ (n≤14) cluster ions. The ground state
and several low-lying isomers are identiﬁed and described. Rocksalt ground states are common and
appear at cluster sizes lower than in the corresponding neutral systems. The most salient features of
the measured mobilities seem to be explained by arguments related to the changes of the compactness
of the clusters as a function of size. The stability of the cluster ions against evaporation of a single
alkali halide molecule shows variations that explain the enhanced stabilities found experimentally for
cluster sizes n=4, 6, 9, and 13. Finally, the ionization energies and the orbital eigenvalue spectrum
of two (NaI)13Na+ isomers are calculated and shown to be a ﬁngerprint of the structure.

PACS numbers: 31.20.Gm 36.40.+d 61.46.+w

I. INTRODUCTION

Alkali halide clusters have received substantial experi-
mental and theoretical attention. From the experimental
side, they are relatively easy to form, and their ionic
bonding character has allowed the development of sim-
ple models for the interaction between the ions that form
the cluster. They provide a nice opportunity to study
the emergence of condensed matter properties. An im-
portant point in this respect is the determination of the
most stable isomers for each cluster size.

In this paper, we present the results of ab initio cal-
culations of the structures and stabilities of (NaI)nNa+
and (CsI)nCs+ clusters with n=1-14. Large clusters of
these materials were ﬁrst produced by bombardment of
crystalline targets with Xe+ ions and detected by means
of secondary-ion mass spectrometry.1–3 The mass spec-
tra showed anomalies in the cluster intensities for certain
values of n, which were tentatively interpreted as reveal-
ing the enhanced stability of “cuboid-like” structures.
The results were explained in terms of a direct emis-
sion model, which assumes that “cuboid-like” cluster ions
are directly sputtered from the crystal. Ens et al.4 per-
formed time-of-ﬂight measurements for (CsI)nCs+ clus-
ters, again produced by bombardment of CsI crystals,
and considered diﬀerent observation times after cluster
emission. In that way, they found that the anomalies in
the mass spectra were a consequence of evaporative de-
cay after production of the cluster ions, and that the pre-
ferred decay channel was the ejection of a CsI molecule.
Anomalies in the mass spectra of clusters formed by
the inert-gas condensation technique were observed by
Pﬂaum et al.5. Twu et al. published mass spectra of
sodium chloride, sodium iodide, cesium chloride, and ce-
sium iodide cluster ions6 produced by laser vaporization.
They observed the same magic numbers for all those ma-

terials, namely n=4, 6, 9, and 13 in the small size range.
The diﬀerences in the detailed structure of the mass spec-
tra were attributed to the relative sizes of the ions making
up the clusters. All those techniques, however, give no
direct information of the cluster shapes. Drift cell experi-
ments, which measure the mobility of the cluster ions and
stand as a promising technique for structural analysis of
clusters, have been performed to study the structures of
small covalent and metallic clusters.7–10 More recently,
ion mobility experiments have been performed for alkali
halide clusters11 and have revealed isomerization transi-
tions12,13 in (NaCl)nCl−.

It was pointed out by Martin14 that precise measure-
ments of the photoionization spectrum should also help
in determining the structure of clusters of ionic materi-
als. The reason is that, due to the strong localization
of the electrons in closed-shell alkali halide clusters, the
structure of the photoionization spectrum should be a
ﬁngerprint of the structure of the cluster, giving infor-
mation on the set of inequivalent anions. Li et al. used
this idea to correlate the optical absorption spectra of
(CsI)nCs+ with the structures obtained by using a pair
potential model.15–17 Photoelectron and photoionization
spectroscopy as well as theoretical studies have also been
performed to study the relation between the cluster struc-
ture and the localization mode for small alkali halide clus-
ters with excess electrons,18–21 and to study the structure
and emergence of metallic properties in alkali-rich alkali
halide and alkali hydride clusters.22–26

Some theoretical calculations for alkali halide clus-
ters have been based on phenomenological pair poten-
tial models.14,17,27–29 Such simpliﬁed models have been
successful in explaining their main characteristics, and
furthermore, are very useful to ﬁnd the diﬀerent local
minima in the potential energy surface. Ab initio calcula-
tions performed by Ochsenfeld et al.30–32 used molecular

1

orbital methods including correlation at the MP2 level.
We have used the ab initio perturbed ion (PI) model,33
which is formulated within the restricted Hartree-Fock
(RHF) approximation, in studies of neutral stoichiomet-
ric alkali halide34–36 and (MgO)n clusters,37 and in a
preliminary study of nonstoichiometric (NaCl)nNa+ clus-
ters.38 In some of those studies correlation contributions
were included using an unrelaxed Coulomb-Hartree-Fock
(uCHF) model proposed by Clementi.39,40 The PI model
represents a major advance with respect to pair poten-
tial methods and provides an alternative description to
the molecular orbital methods. In this paper we present
an extensive study of charged (NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+
clusters with n up to 14. The results are aimed to assist
in the interpretation of the experimental investigations of
the structure of alkali halide clusters, as provided by the
ion mobility studies, or of the relation between structure
and photoionization spectrum.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
In Sec. II we brieﬂy review the computational method
used in this study. In Sec. III we report the results for
the isomer structures, relative stabilities, and ionization
potentials. Section IV summarizes our conclusions.

II. COMPUTATIONAL METHOD

The ab initio perturbed ion model,33 as adapted to
the study of ionic clusters, has been described at length
in our previous works.34,35 In brief, the HF equations of
the cluster are selfconsistently solved in localized Fock
spaces, by breaking the cluster wave function into local
nearly orthogonal ionic wave functions and accounting
for ion-cluster consistency. The average binding energy
per ion of the (AX)nA+ cluster is given by

Ebind =

1
2n + 1

[nE0(X −

) + (n + 1)E0(A+) − Ecluster],

(1)

where E0(A+) and E0(X−) are the energies of the free
cation A+ and anion X−, respectively. The localized na-
ture of the PI model wave functions has some advantages.
In weakly overlapping systems, the correlation energy is
almost intra-atomic.
In this paper, the correlation en-
ergy correction is obtained through Clementi’s Coulomb-
Hartree-Fock method.39,40 The PI model also allows for
the development of eﬃcient computational codes41 which
make use of large multi-zeta Slater-type basis sets42,43 for
the description of the ions. Our calculations have been
performed using the following basis sets: (11s9p5d) for
Cs+, taken from Ref. 43; (5s4p) for Na+, and (11s9p5d)
for I−, both taken from Ref. 42. As input geometries for
the optimization of the atomic structure we have consid-
ered the structures obtained from pair potential calcu-
lations.14,17,28,29 Those input geometries have been fully
relaxed for (NaI)nNa+ (n ≤ 6) and (CsI)nCs+ (n ≤ 4)
clusters, that is, the total cluster energy has been min-
imized with respect to variations in all the (3N-6) inde-
pendent coordinates, where N is the number of ions. For
larger clusters, full relaxations are expensive and we have

relaxed these structures with respect to a limited num-
ber of relevant parameters, which depend on the spatial
symmetry of each isomer. A downhill simplex algorithm
has been used in all the optimizations.44 All the cluster
energies are converged within a precision of 1 meV.

III. RESULTS

A. Structures of Isomers

The calculated structures of small (NaI)nNa+ and
(CsI)nCs+ clusters are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respec-
tively. Small spheres represent cations and large spheres
represent anions. The most stable structure, or ground
state (GS) is shown on the left side for each cluster size.
The other structures represent low-lying isomers. Below
each isomer, the energy diﬀerence with respect to the
ground state is given. The structures exhibit several dis-
tinct motives which can be roughly classiﬁed in chains,
rocksalt pieces, and rings (mainly hexagonal). It is pos-
sible that other isomers could exist between the ground
state and the low-lying isomers plotted in the ﬁgure,
since our search has been limited mainly to the structures
provided by pair potential calculations,14,17,28,29 and the
possibility of overlooking some isomers can not be ex-
cluded. For n ≥ 10, the rocksalt motives consistently
dominate the ground state and the crystalline structure
emerges, although signs of the appearance of the rock-
salt structure are also found for some of the clusters with
n < 10. Let us describe ﬁrst the structures obtained for
the smaller cluster sizes. A linear chain is obtained as
the ground state of (NaI)2Na+. Bent chains, a rhombus
with a cation attached, and a three-dimensional isomer
are found less stable. All those structures are closer in
energy for (CsI)2Cs+ and its three-dimensional GS is de-
generate with the linear chain. The same GS structure is
found for both materials at n=3, namely a cube with an
anion removed. The linear chain is still the second iso-
mer for NaI, while it is found at a higher energy in CsI. A
planar rocksalt piece plus a cation appears as a high lying
isomer. The rest of the isomers are obtained by attaching
a molecule in several ways to some of the n=2 structures.
The n=4 GS can be described as a quasi-two-dimensional
sheet, which is quite curved in NaI but almost planar for
CsI. The chain isomers are not competitive anymore. A
cube with a cation attached is obtained as the second
isomer. Again an essentially two-dimensional sheet, de-
rived from the GS structure of (NaI)4Na+ is the GS of
(NaI)5Na+. This isomer is still more stable than the
three-dimensional (3D) structures, although the 2 × 2 × 3
rocksalt piece with a corner anion removed is energeti-
cally very close. This notation indicates the number of
ions along the x, y and z directions, respectively. For
CsI, a cube with a linear chain on-top is obtained as
the GS. The tendency for three-dimensional structures is
stronger for the Cs-clusters. Rounded cages with quad-
rangular and hexagonal faces form the GS for n=6 and
n=7 in Fig. 1. Rocksalt isomers are still high in energy,
although an hexagonal isomer is only 0.02 eV above the
GS in (NaI)6Na+. GS structures with higher coordina-

2

tion are obtained for CsI at these cluster sizes: a centered
hexagonal prism for n=6, and a complex structure con-
taining a cube for n=7. We can notice that the centered
hexagonal prysm is also related to the rock-salt struc-
ture since the central cation is coordinated to six ions.
Both in the ground state and in the low-lying isomers
discussed until now (n ≤ 7) we appreciate a tendency
to distorted structures that, in the more extreme cases
leads to elongated clusters. This is driven by the excess
positive charge. The distortion (elongation) lowers the
repulsion between cations.

A 3×3×2-like structure with an anion missing from the
center of a basal plane is obtained as the GS for n=8. The
absence of this cation induces a distortion of that basis to
an octogonal ring. A structure with an eight-coordinated
cation is close to the GS for CsI. Eight is the coordina-
tion number of solid CsI. Structures obtained by adding a
cation in several ways to the hexagonal prismatic form of
(NaI)9 (which is the GS of the neutral cluster35) are the
most stable (NaI)9Na+ isomers. In the GS, this cation
induces a strong cluster deformation. The (CsI)9Cs+ GS
is also related to an hexagonal prysm. Cuboid-like rock-
salt structures are less stable in both systems, but we
can again notice that the upper half of the hexagonal
prysm is distorted in (CsI)9Cs+, and contains an inner
cation with coordination six (the rock-salt coordination).
Starting with n=10 the emergence of cuboid-like rock-
salt features becomes apparent. From n=10 to n=14,
all the NaI GS clusters have the rocksalt structure. No-
tice in particular the high stability for n=13. More open
structures with lower average coordination, or based on a
stacking of rings are less stable. The same can be said of
CsI, with due exception of n=12, where a hexagonal pris-
matic structure (although with a central six-coordinated
cation) is more stable.

The structural trends of neutral alkali halide clusters
have been studied in Ref. 36. Those trends were ratio-
nalized in terms of the relative ion sizes. As the ratio
rC/rA between the cation and anion radii increases, the
tendency to form rocksalt fragments becomes enhanced.
NaI has a small value of this ratio (0.44) while CsI has a
large ratio (0.76). In spite of this diﬀerence, the charged
nonstoichiometric clusters behave in a similar way. Rock-
salt pieces appear early; about three quarters of the clus-
ters between n=3 and n=14 have a rocksalt fragment, or
a closely related structure, as the GS. The exceptions oc-
cur for n=6, 7, 9; in these cases the rocksalt isomers have
one or two low-coordinated cations. One can notice the
inﬂuence of nonstoichiometry and net charge: the per-
cent of GS rocksalt structures in neutral (NaI)n is only
about one half.35 The reason seems to be that hexagonal
prysmatic structures are less competitive for the charged
nonstoichiometric clusters. A perfect prysm formed by
hexagonal rings has equal number of cations and anions,
so only defect-structures, obtained by removing an anion
or by adding a cation, can be built for nonstoichiomet-
ric clusters. We ﬁnd one example of the ﬁrst type in
one of the isomers of (NaI)5Na+. A cation can be added
on top of a terminal ring or in the interstitial hole be-
isomers of both types exist
tween two hexagonal rings:
for (NaI)6Na+. These only become competitive when the

3

rocksalt isomers are very unstable, like for n=6, 9.

Pair potential calculations have been performed by
Diefenbach and Martin28 and Li et al.17 for these two
systems. A comparison with the PI results shows
some discrepancies. The pair potential calculations for
(NaI)nNa+ with n=8, 10, 11, 12, and 14 predict rather
complex GS structures (independently of the use or not
of polarization terms) which correspond to some of the
isomers in ﬁg. 1, whereas the PI calculations lead to
rock-salt-type structures. For (CsI)nCs+ the discrepan-
cies are rather insigniﬁcant. In the PI model the bind-
ing energy of the cluster can be written35 as a sum of
classical and quantum interaction energies between the
ions plus a term that accounts for the radial deforma-
tion of the electronic cloud of the free ions (in practice
the anions) in response to the environment. These energy
contributions contain quantum many electron terms that
in principle describe the interatomic interactions better
than the empirical potentials. There is also a second
type of discrepancies between the PI and pair potential
calculations, although much less signiﬁcant. These occur
when the rigid-ion and polarizable-ion model potentials
disagree with each other and the PI model agrees with
one of them. These cases are found for (NaI)nNa+ with
n=2, 5, and for (CsI)nCs+ with n=2, 7, 8, 11, 12.
In
those cases the PI model agrees sometimes with the rigid
ion model and sometimes with the polarizable ion model,
but the two isomers involved are generally close in energy,
so the nonuniformity of the agreement can be ascribed
to the small energy diﬀerences involved. In addition one
has to bear in mind that, due to one basic assumption
of the PI model (spherically symmetric electron density
clouds, centered on the nuclei), the polarization contri-
bution coming from dipolar terms is absent in this model.
Kreisle and coworkers11 have studied the mobility of
(NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+ clusters under the inﬂuence
of an electric ﬁeld in a chamber ﬁlled with helium gas. In
these experiments the mobility is larger the lower the He
scattering cross section by the cluster, and this cross sec-
tion is inversely related to the compactness of the cluster.
Kreisle and coworkers have plotted the inverse mobilities
as a function of cluster size. Some salient features are
common to the two curves and, in our opinion, can be
related to the structural features found in Figs. 1 and 2.
The main feature is a clear drop in the inverse mobility
between n=12 and n=13. In fact, the inverse mobility be-
comes a local minimum for (NaI)13Na+. It is suggestive
to associate the high mobility of n=13 to its compact
“perfect cube” form. Other feature is a visible change
(decrease) of the slope of the inverse mobility curve at
n=4. It is tentative to associate this to the change from
the two-dimensional to more compact three-dimansional
character of the ground state of (CsI)nCs+ between n=4
and n=5. Although the calculated GS of (NaI)5Na+ is
planar, there is a low-lying isomer, only 0.02 eV higher
in energy, that could easily be present in the beam and
contribute to increase the mobility.

B. Relative Stabilities as a Function of Cluster Size
and Comparison with Experiment

The experimental mass spectra of alkali halide cluster
ions1–6 show intensity anomalies which reﬂect the special
stability of some cluster sizes. In order to study the rel-
ative stability of (NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+ cluster ions,
we plot in Fig. 3 the average binding energies per ion (eq.
1) as a function of n. Maxima or pronounced changes of
slope in these curves are considered as indicators of en-
hanced stability. Clear maxima at n=4 and n=13, and
main slope changes at n=6 and n=10, are obtained for
(NaI)nNa+. For (CsI)nCs+ a maximum is apparent at
n=13, and main slope changes occur at n=4, 6, and 9.
Those features correlate with the observed abundance
maxima. The most prominent observed maximum1–6
is n=13. The magic numbers at n=4, 6 and 9, and
speciﬁcally the enhanced abundances of (NaI)6Na+ and
(NaI)9Na+ clusters,6 are less pronounced. The only dis-
crepancy between experiment and theoretical predictions
occurs for (NaI)9Na+. However, the slope changes in
Fig. 3 are so weak that the average binding energies are
not the best indicators of the enhanced stability of some
magic clusters.

The quantity Ebind measures the cluster stability with
respect to the inﬁnitely separated ions. The experiments
indicate, however, that the abundance mass spectrum
should be probably best explained in terms of the stabil-
ity against evaporation of an alkali halide molecule.4,6,29
The energy required to remove a molecule AI from an
(AI)nA+ cluster ion (A = Na, Cs) is given by

Eevaporation = Eclus[(AI)n−1A+] + E(AI)

(2)

−Eclus[(AI)nA+]

The evaporation energies are plotted in Fig. 4. A sharp
increase in the evaporation energy between n=14 and
n=13, between n=10 and n=9, between n=7 and n=6,
and ﬁnally between n=5 and n=4 is evident for the
(CsI)nCs+ clusters. This means that evaporative cooling
will result in enrichment of clusters with n=4, 6, 9 and 13
in the beam. The results are similar for (NaI)nNa+, pre-
dicting enrichment of clusters with n=4, 6 and 13, but a
discrepancy with respect to experiment is again obtained
since enrichment is predicted for n=10, instead of n=9.
In an attempt to resolve this discrepancy we have also
plotted in Fig. 4 a “vertical” evaporation energy. This
is deﬁned by removing from the parent cluster (size n)
the least-bound molecule (this can be identiﬁed in the PI
model, since the total binding energy of the cluster can
be separated into a sum of ion contributions; see Refs.
33–36 for details), and relaxing the resulting structure
(size n-1) to its nearest local minimum. This is in many
cases not the ground state of the (n-1)-cluster and the
diﬀerence between the “adiabatic” and “vertical” evapo-
ration energies in Fig. 4 accounts for this fact. In spite
of this diﬀerence the use of vertical evaporation energies
leads to the same predictions for (CsI)nCs+ as before, but
changes the predictions for (NaI)nNa+ to improve agree-
ment with experiment for n=9, which is a maximum in
the curve of the vertical evaporation energies. The in-
terpretation is that, although the adiabatic evaporation

of a molecule from (NaI)10Na+ costs more energy than
adiabatic evaporation from (NaI)9Na+, there are in both
cases isomeric forms of the (n-1)-clusters with i) a struc-
ture similar to that of the n-cluster and ii) large energy
barriers between those isomeric forms and the ground
state structure of the (n-1)-cluster, such that the vertical
evaporation from (NaI)9Na+ is larger. In summary, our
calculations suggest the possible relevance of isomers of
the (n-1)-cluster with a structure similar to that of the
GS of the n-cluster to explain the details of the mass
spectra when evaporative cooling is involved. This point
deserves further investigation. The main magic numbers
n=4 and n=13 are a consequence of the enhanced stabil-
ity of very symmetrical rocksalt structures, in two and
three dimensions, respectively. On the other hand, n=6
and n=9 are “ﬁne structure” peaks of the spectra and the
explanation in terms of structural features is less evident.
These occur for (CsI)nCs+ because structures are formed
that optimize the value of the Madelung energy more eﬃ-
ciently than for neighboring cluster sizes. (CsI)9Cs+ has
some highly coordinated ions: one cation with coordina-
tion 6 and three anions with coordination 5. (CsI)6Cs+
also contains one cation with coordination 6. At the
same time the lowest coordination found in these two
clusters is 3. In contrast, some of the neighbor clusters,
like (CsI)5Cs+ and (CsI)10Cs+ contain some ions with
coordination 2. Those highly coordinated structures are
less competitive for (NaI)6Na+ and (NaI)9Na+. Figure
3(a) also shows, for comparison, the binding energies per
ion of neutral stoichiometric (NaI)n clusters.35 The local
maxima occur for n=6, 9 and 12, and have been associ-
ated to the formation of compact structures with large
atomic coordination compared to clusters with n+1 and
n-1 molecules.

C. Ionization Energies and Structure

In previous studies of alkali-halide clusters,34,35 we
have analyzed the variation of the ionization potential
(IP) with the cluster size. The vertical IP was calculated
in the Koopmans’ approximation as the binding energy
of the lowest bound electron in the cluster, which is of
course located on a speciﬁc anion. Here we investigate
the relation between the geometrical structure and the
spectrum of electronic states for diﬀerent isomers of the
same cluster. This could provide a way to distinguish
isomers, already explored for other types of clusters.45
In the PI model the electrons near the HOMO level are
localized on distinct anions, and the diﬀerent eigenval-
ues arise from the diﬀerent atomic environment around
nonequivalent anions. Thus, the set of one-electron en-
ergy eigenvalues characteristic of each isomer can be con-
sidered as a ﬁngerprint of its structural shape.14 As an
example, we present in Fig. 5 the orbital energy spectrum
corresponding to the two isomers of (NaI)13Na+ given in
Fig. 1. It is apparent that the two isomers have quite
diﬀerent spectra. These could be measured by photoelec-
tron spectroscopy, and in principle it could be possible to
determine the structure of the diﬀerent isomers present
in a mass-selected beam by comparing the experimental

4

Captions of ﬁgures

Figure 1. Lowest-energy structure and low-lying iso-
mers of (NaI)nNa+. The energy diﬀerence (in eV) with
respect to the most stable structure is given below the
corresponding isomers.

Figure 2. Lowest-energy structure and low-lying iso-
mers of (CsI)nCs+. The energy diﬀerence (in eV) with
respect to the most stable structure is given below the
corresponding isomers.

Figure 3. Binding energy per ion as a function of the
cluster size of (NaI)nNa+ (circles) and (NaI)n (squares)
in panel (a) and of (CsI)nCs+ in (b).

Figure 4. Adiabatic (circles) and vertical (squares)
energies required to evaporate a neutral molecule from
(NaI)nNa+ (a) and (CsI)nCs+ (b) clusters as a function
of n.

Figure 5. Spectrum of orbital energy eigenvalues for
the two isomers of (NaI)13Na+ studied. Inequivalent an-
ions are labelled with diﬀerent letters. The vertical scale
gives the number of equivalent anions of each type.

spectra with theoretical results.
In our example, only
two peaks are expected in the lowest energy part of the
spectrum for the case of the GS isomer, because the sym-
metry of this structure induces high degeneracies. One of
the peaks corresponds to removing one electron from any
of the twelve surface anions (labelled A in the ﬁgure) and
is identiﬁed with the vertical IP. The other corresponds
to the removal of one electron from the central anion (la-
belled B) with coordination six. The second isomer has
a larger number of inequivalent anions and the spectrum
is broader. Besides, the ionization energy is 1.3 eV lower
than for the GS isomer. Similar “ﬁngerprints” distin-
guish diﬀerent isomers for other cluster sizes.

IV. SUMMARY

The determination of the structures of alkali halide
cluster isomers is a challenging subject for present-
day experimental techniques.11,12 Theoretical calcula-
tions can throw light on these problems.
In this pa-
per, we present ab initio calculations of the structures
and stabilities of (NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+ cluster ions
with (n≤14). Starting from several local minima found
with phenomenological pair potential models, we have
used the Perturbed Ion Model (with correlation included)
in order to determine the ground state and some low-
lying isomers. Our results indicate an early formation
of rocksalt fragments. The rocksalt features appear
at values of n lower than in the corresponding neutral
species.35,36 Arguments related to the compactness of
some clusters appear to be able to explain the main fea-
tures obtained in the mobility measurements of Kreisle
and coworkers.11 The mass spectra obtained by several
experimental techniques1–6 show evidence of enhanced
population for cluster sizes n= 4, 6, 9, and 13. Our cal-
culations conﬁrm the enhanced stability of these clusters,
namely, those clusters are very stable against evapora-
tion of a single molecule. We have investigated the pos-
sibility to determine isomeric structures by comparing
experimental photoelectron spectra with those obtained
theoretically. As an example we have shown how the
spectra of orbital energy eigenvalues of two (NaI)13Na+
isomers depend on the structure. With all these results
in mind, we are conﬁdent that the identiﬁcation of the
isomer structures of clusters of ionic materials can be
feasible in a near future if experimental and theoretical
eﬀorts work together.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: Work supported by
DGES (PB95-0720-C02-01) and Junta de Castilla y Le´on
(VA63/96). A. Aguado is supported by a predoctoral
fellowship from Junta de Castilla y Le´on. A. Ayuela ac-
knowledges a Marie Curie Fellowship supported by the
EU TMR program.

5

(1985).

(1994).

29 N. G. Phillips, C. W. S. Conover, and L. A. Bloomﬁeld,

J. Chem. Phys. 94, 4980 (1991).

30 C. Ochsenfeld and R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 5977

31 C. Ochsenfeld, J. Gauss, and R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys.

32 C.Ochsenfeld and R. Ahlrichs, Ber. Bunsenges Phys. Chem.

103, 7401 (1995).

99, 1191 (1995).

33 V. Lua˜na and L. Pueyo, Phys. Rev. B 41, 3800 (1990).
34 A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, J. A. Alonso, and V. Lua˜na,
Z. Phys. D 26, S213 (1993); An. Fis. (Spain) 90, 190
(1994); Physica B 212, 329 (1996).

35 A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, and J. A. Alonso,

J. Phys. Chem. 101B, 5944 (1997).

36 A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, and J. A. Alonso,

Phys. Rev. B, 56, 15353 (1997).

37 E. de la Puente, A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, and J. M. L´opez,

Phys. Rev. B, 56, 7607 (1997).

38 A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, J. A. Alonso, and V. Lua˜na,

Can. J. Phys., accepted.

39 E. Clementi, IBM J. Res. Develop. 9, 2 (1965).
40 S. J. Chakravorty and E. Clementi, Phys. Rev. A 39, 2290

(1989).

41 V. Lua˜na, A. Mart´ın Pend´as, J. M. Recio, and E. Francisco,

Comput. Phys. Commun. 77, 107 (1993).

42 E. Clementi and C. Roetti, At. Data and Nuc. Data Tables

14, 177 (1974).

43 A.

McLean
and R. S. McLean, At. Data and Nuc. Data Tables 26,
197 (1981).

D.

44 W. H. Press and S. A. Teukolsky, Computers in Physics 5,

45 N. Bingelli and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 493

426, (1991).

(1995).

1 T. M. Barlak, J. E. Campana, R. J. Colton, J. J. DeCorpo,

and J. R. Wyatt, J. Phys. Chem. 85, 3840 (1981).

2 J. E. Campana, T. M. Barlak, R. J. Colton, J. J. DeCorpo,
J. R. Wyatt, and B. I. Dunlap, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1046
(1981).

3 T. M. Barlak, J. R. Wyatt, R. J. Colton, J. J. DeCorpo,
and J. E. Campana, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104, 1212 (1982).
4 W. Ens, R. Beavis, and K. G. Standing, Phys. Rev. Lett.

5 R. Pﬂaum, K. Sattler, and E. Recknnagel, Phys. Rev. B

50, 27 (1983).

33, 1522 (1986).

6 Y. J. Twu, C. W. S. Conover, Y. A. Yang, and L. A. Bloom-

ﬁeld, Phys. Rev. B 42, 5306 (1990).

7 G. von Helden, Y. T. Hsu, P. R. Kemper, and M. T. Bow-

ers, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 3835 (1991).

8 D. E. Clemmer, K. B. Shelimov, and M. F. Jarrold, Science

260, 784 (1993).

9 J. M. Hunter, J. L. Fye, E. J. Roskamp, and M. F. Jarrold,

J. Phys. Chem. 98, 1810 (1994).

10 M. F. Jarrold, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 11 (1995).
11 M. Maier-Borst, P. L¨oﬄer, J. Petry, and D. Kreisle,

Z. Phys. D 40, 476 (1997).

12 R. R. Hudgins, P. Dugourd, J. M. Tenenbaum, and

M. F. Jarrold, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4213 (1997).
13 J. P. K. Doye and D. J. Wales, Preprint

(cond-

matter/9801152).

14 T. P. Martin, Phys. Rep. 95, 167 (1983).
15 X. Li, R. D. Beck, and R. L. Whetten, Phys. Rev. Lett.

68, 3420 (1992).

16 X. Li and R. L. Whetten, Z. Phys. D 26, 198 (1993).
17 X. Li and R. L. Whetten, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 6170 (1993).
18 Y. A. Yang, L. A. Bloomﬁeld, C. Jin, L. S. Wang, and

R. E. Smalley, J. Chem. Phys. 96, 2453 (1992).

19 G. Durand, F. Spiegelmann, P. Labastie, J. -M. L’Hermite,
and Ph. Poncharal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 633 (1997); U.
Landman, R. N. Barnett, C. L. Cleveland, and G. Ra-
jagopal, Physics and Chemistry of Finite Systems: From
Clusters to Crystals, Eds. P. Jena, S. N. Khanna, and B.
K. Rao, Vol. 1, Kluwer, Dordrecht (1992) p.165.

20 D. J. Fatemi, F. K. Fatemi, and L. A. Bloomﬁeld,

Phys. Rev. A 54, 3674 (1996).

21 F. K. Fatemi, D. J. Fatemi, and L. A. Bloomﬁeld,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4895 (1996).

22 N. Yu, P. Xia, L. A. Bloomﬁeld, and M. Fowler,

J. Chem. Phys. 102, 4965 (1995).

23 V. Bonaci´c-Kouteck´y, J. Pittner, and J. Kouteck´y,
Chem. Phys. 210, 313 (1996), and references therein; R.
N. Barnett, H. P. Cheng, H. Hakkinen, and U. Landman,
J. Phys. Chem. 99, 7731 (1995).

24 R. Antoine, Ph. Dugourd, D. Rayane, E. Benichou, and

M. Broyer, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 2664 (1997).

25 D. J. Fatemi, F. K. Fatemi, and L. A. Bloomﬁeld,

Phys. Rev. B 55, 10094 (1997).

26 S. Frank, N. Malinowski, F. Tast, M. Heinebrodt,
I. M. L. Billas, and T. P. Martin, J. Chem. Phys. 106,
6217 (1997).

27 D. O. Welch, O. W. Lazareth, G. J. Dienes, and

R. D. Hatcher, J. Chem. Phys. 64, 835 (1976).

28 J. Diefenbach and T. P. Martin, J. Chem. Phys. 83, 4585

6

