8
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
8
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Structures and Stabilities of doubly-charged (MgO)nMg2+ (n=1–29) Cluster Ions

Francisco L´opez, Andr´es Aguado∗, and Jos´e M. L´opez
Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Valladolid, 47011 Valladolid, Spain

Ab initio perturbed ion plus polarization calculations are reported for doubly-charged nonstoi-
chiometric (MgO)nMg2+ (n=1–29) cluster ions. We consider a large number of isomers with full
relaxations of the geometries, and add the correlation correction to the Hartree-Fock energies for all
cluster sizes. The polarization contribution is included at a semiempirical level also for all cluster
sizes. Comparison is made with theoretical results for neutral (MgO)n clusters and singly-charged
alkali-halide cluster ions. Our method is also compared to phenomenological pair potential models
in order to asses their reliability for calculations on small ionic systems. Bulk-like rocksalt structures
are predominant from n=13 on. The relative stabilities of the cluster ions against evaporation of a
MgO molecule shows variations that are in excellent agreement with the experimental abundance
spectra.

PACS numbers: 36.40.c; 61.46.+w; 61.50.Lt; 61.60.+m; 79.60.Eq

I. INTRODUCTION

Cluster science has become a ﬁeld of intensive research
both for experimentalists and theoreticians. Small aggre-
gates have a fundamental interest because they provide
a link between the molecular and the solid state physics,
and furthermore they are important in new technological
applications like nanoelectronics. Elucidating the struc-
tural and electronic properties of clusters remains a ma-
jor challenge for present-day science, due to the signiﬁ-
cant deviations that clusters present in their physical and
chemical properties when compared both to the molecule
and the bulk. Another diﬃculty arises from the huge in-
crease in the number of diﬀerent isomers with cluster
size. Many interesting cluster properties depend largely
on the cluster structure, at least in the case of ionic and
covalently-bonded materials, so a complete description
of the relevant isomer conﬁgurations for each cluster size
is highly desirable for an appropriate understanding of
cluster processes.

In the last years, considerable eﬀort has been de-
voted to the understanding of metallic and semicon-
ductor clusters. Meanwhile, studies on metal-oxide
clusters have been comparatively scarce, in despite of
their fundamental role in important physical processes
In this work the inter-
like heterogeneous catalysis.
est is focused on magnesium oxide.
Stoichiometric
MgO clusters have been investigated both experimen-
tal and theoretically. Saunders1,2 reported mass spectra
and collision-induced-fragmentation data for sputtered
(MgO)+
n cluster ions, and Ziemann and Castleman3,4
performed experimental measurements by using laser-
ionization time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry.5,6 Theoret-
ical calculations have been performed at diﬀerent levels
of accuracy: simple ionic models based on phenomenolog-
ical pair potentials7–9 were performed by Ziemann and
Castleman4 to explain the global trends found in their ex-
periments; semiempirical tight-binding calculations were
reported by Moukouri and Noguera;10,11 ﬁnally, ab initio
calculations on stoichiometric MgO clusters have been
presented recently by Recio et al.,12,13 Malliavin and
Coudray,14 and de la Puente et al.15 Nonstoichiometric
(MgO)nMg+ and (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions have been

also detected and studied experimentally by Ziemann
and Castleman.3,4,16 Speciﬁcally, they have obtained, by
changing the ﬂow rate of the carrier gas in a gas ag-
gregation source, a mass spectrum comprised almost en-
tirely of doubly-charged (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions.16 En-
hanced stabilities in the small-size regime were found for
n=8,11,13,16,19,22,25,27, and were explained in terms
of compact cubic clusters resembling pieces of the MgO
crystal lattice.
If we exclude the pair potential calcu-
lations performed by Ziemann and Castleman,4,16 there
is no theoretical investigation of nonstochiometric MgO
cluster ions.

The “extra” cation present in nonstoichiometric clus-
ter ions is expected to result in large structural distor-
tions whenever a specially compact structure can not be
constructed. That is not a problem in pair potential cal-
culations, where the simplicity of the interactions allows
for a complete geometrical relaxation of the diﬀerent iso-
mers at a very modest computational cost. Nevertheless,
the need to use some selected set of empirical parameters
for Mgq+ and Oq− (q=1,2) ions results in a serious ques-
tioning of the reliability of these simple ionic models. On
the opposite side, traditional ab initio calculations based
on the molecular orbital–linear combination of atomic or-
bitals (MO-LCAO) approximation are very reliable but
computationally expensive, the computer time require-
ments scaling with the fourth power of the number of
atoms in the cluster. Thus, the calculations of Recio et
al. on (MgO)n and (MgO)+
n clusters12,13 were performed
under certain restrictions: (a) the geometries of most of
the isomers were optimized with respect to a single pa-
rameter, namely the nearest-neighbor distance; (b) only
2 or 3 diﬀerent isomers were considered for each cluster
size; (c) the correlation energy corrections (calculated at
the MP2 level) were included only for n ≤ 6. In the calcu-
lations of Malliavin and Coudray14 the geometries were
more carefully optimized but the results were limited to
the size range n=1–6.

In the present work we report the results of an exten-
sive and systematic study of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions
with n up to 29. We have employed the ab initio per-
turbed ion (aiPI) model,17 which is a Hartree-Fock model
based on the theory of electronic separability18,19 (TES)

1

and the ab initio model potential approach of Huzinaga et
al.,20 supplemented with some interaction energy terms
to account for polarization contributions (see next sec-
tion). The model has been successfully employed by our
group in several studies of alkali halide clusters and clus-
ter ions.21–25 It has been used also in a study of neu-
tral stoichiometric (MgO)n (n=1–13) clusters.15 On one
hand, our calculations represent a major advance with re-
spect to pair potential methods, and on the other hand,
they overcome most of the technical diﬃculties found in
more sophisticated ab initio methods: (a) we have al-
lowed for an appropriate geometrical relaxation of the
isomers; (b) we have studied a large set of isomers for
each cluster size (speciﬁcally, the total number of iso-
mers studied is around 400); (c) correlation corrections,
which have been proved to be essential for an accurate
description of metal-oxide clusters,15 have been included
for all cluster sizes; (d) we have been able to study rela-
tively large cluster sizes (up to n=29), enlarging thus the
usual size range covered by traditional ab initio methods.
The structural results presented in this work could also
be useful in the interpretation of possible future exper-
imental investigations on these clusters. By measuring
the mobility of cluster ions through an inert buﬀer gas
under the inﬂuence of a weak electric ﬁeld, drift tube
experimental studies provide valuable information about
the cluster geometries.27–29

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section
II we give a brief resume of the aiPI model as applied to
clusters (full expositions of the method have been given
elsewhere21,22), a comparison with pair potential models
which serves to assert the quality of the aiPI method-
ology, and the details of the computational procedure.
The results are presented in section III, and ﬁnally sec-
tion IV summarizes the main conclusions extracted from
this study.

II. THE AIPI MODEL. COMPARISON TO PAIR
POTENTIAL MODELS.

The ab initio perturbed ion model17 was originally
designed for the description of ionic solids,30 and sub-
sequently adapted to the study of clusters in our
group.21–25 Its theoretical foundation lies in the theory
of electronic separability,31,32 and its practical implemen-
tation in the Hartree-Fock (HF) version of the TES.18,19
The HF equations of the cluster are solved stepwise, by
breaking the cluster wave function into local group func-
tions (ionic in nature in our case). In each iteration, the
total energy is minimized with respect to variations of
the electron density localized in a given ion. The elec-
tron densities of the other ions are frozen. In the subse-
quent iterations each frozen ion assumes the role of non-
frozen ion. When the self-consistent process (see more
details below) ﬁnishes, the outputs are the total cluster
energy Eclus and a set of localized wave functions for
each geometrically nonequivalent ion in the cluster. The
cluster energy can be written as a sum of ionic additive
energies:21–23

Eclus =

ER

add,

N

X
R=1

(1)

where the sum runs over all ions in the cluster, and the
contribution of each particular ion to the total cluster
energy (ER
add) can be expressed in turn as a sum of in-
traionic (net) and interionic contributions:

ER

add = ER

net +

ERS

int = ER

net +

ER

int.

(2)

1
2 X

S(6=R)

1
2

The localized nature of the aiPI procedure has some ad-
vantages over the usual molecular orbital models. As
the correlation energy correction in weakly overlapping
systems is almost intraionic in nature (being therefore
a sum of contributions from each ion), the localized
cluster-consistent ionic wave functions may be used to
attain good estimations of this correction.
In this pa-
per, the correlation energy correction is obtained through
Clementi’s Coulomb-Hartree-Fock method.33,34 Besides,
it also allows the development of computationally eﬃ-
cient codes35 which make use of the large multi-zeta ba-
sis sets of Clementi and Roetti36 for the description of
the ions. At this respect, our optimizations have been
performed using basis sets (5s4p) for M g2+ and (5s5p)
for O2−, respectively. Inclusion of diﬀuse basis functions
has been checked and shown unnecessary. Another ad-
vantage coming from the localized nature of the model
is the linear scaling of the computational eﬀort with the
number of atoms in the cluster. This has allowed us to
study clusters with as many as 59 atoms at a reasonable
computational cost.

Selfconsistency has been achieved in the following way:
for a given distribution of the ions forming the cluster, we
consider one of them as the active ion R (for instance, a
particular oxygen anion), and solve the Self-Consistent-
Field equations for anion R in the ﬁeld of the remaining
ions, which are considered frozen at this stage. Next, we
take another oxygen anion (anion S) as the active ion and
repeat the same process. If the anion S is geometrically
inequivalent to anion R, the energy eigenvalues and wave
functions of electrons in anions S are diﬀerent from those
of anions R. We continue this process in the same way
until all the anions have been exhausted. The same pro-
cedure is then followed for the magnesium cations. The
process just described is a PI cycle. We iterate the PI
cycles until convergence in the total energy of the cluster
is achieved. Note that the selfconsistent process can be
accelerated if equivalences between anions or cations are
imposed by ﬁxing the symmetry of an isomer. In order
to allow for completely general distortions, we have not
employed that simpliﬁcation in the present study. Nev-
ertheless, equivalences in some ionic wave functions have
been observed at the end of the calculations for some
highly symmetrical isomers.

It is very interesting to compare any quantum model
designed for the study of ionic materials with the rigid ion
and polarizable ion models.7–9 These pair potential mod-
els are very intuitive, and include in a phenomenological
way all the relevant terms in the interatomic potential
energy. The quality of an ab initio method developed for

2

application on ionic materials can thus be assested by
specifying in which way it improves over a pair poten-
tial description. The binding energy in a pair potential
model can be expressed as Ebind = 1
2 Pi6=j Vij + Pi ES
i ,
where Vij is the potential energy between ions i and j,
and ES
is the self-energy of the ion i measured relative
i
to the self-energy of the isolated atom. In the rigid ion
model, we have9

V rigid
ij

=

+ Aij e−rij/ρ,

ES,rigid

i

= 0.

(3)

qiqj
rij

The ﬁrst term is the electrostatic Coulomb energy be-
tween two point ions with charges qi and qj, and the
second term is the short-range repulsive Born-Mayer en-
ergy reﬂecting the mutual repulsion due to the overlap
of the wave functions of the ions. In the polarizable ion
model, a polarizability αi is assigned to each ion so that
the electron shells can be polarized by the electric ﬁeld
created by the other ions in the cluster. Now we have9

ij = V rigid
V pol

ij

+ V MD

ij + V DD

ij

,

ES,pol
i

=

µ2
i
2α

.

(4)

The self-energy is now diﬀerent from zero, and the inter-
action energy contains two new terms: a monopole-dipole
and a dipole-dipole interaction term. In the Born-Mayer
repulsive potential, the distance rij is replaced by an ef-
fective value ref f
to take into account the deformation of
ij
the electronic shells upon cluster formation. An interme-
diate pair potential model exists in which the repulsive
radii of ions are allowed to deform isotropically under
the eﬀects of other ions in the system, but ionic polar-
izations arising from the positional displacements of each
shell from its own core are not considered. This is the
breathing shell model (BSM),43 and constitutes an im-
portant improvement over the rigid ion model.
In the
aiPI model, the binding energy can be written as a sum
of ionic contributions, which are in turn expressed as a
sum of deformation and interaction terms21–23

Ebind = X
R

ER

bind = X
R

(ER

def +

ER

int).

(5)

1
2

The interaction energy term is of the form

ER

int = X
S6=R

ERS

int = X
S6=R

(ERS

class + ERS

nc + ERS

X + ERS

overlap),

(6)

where the diﬀerent energy contributions are: the clas-
sical electrostatic interaction energy between point-like
ions; the correction to this energy due to the ﬁnite exten-
sion of the ionic wave functions; the exchange interaction
energy between the electrons of ion R and those of the
other ions in the cluster; and the overlap repulsive energy
contribution.32 The deformation energy term ER
def is the
self-energy of the ion R measured relative to the self-
energy of the isolated ion. It is an intrinsically quantum-
mechanical many-body term that accounts for the en-
ergy change associated to the compression of the ionic
wave functions upon cluster formation, and incorporates
the correlation contribution to the binding energy. All

3

those terms are calculated in an ab initio selfconsistent
way. Thus, the improvement over the classical rigid-ion
description is clear. Improvement over a polarizable-ion
description can be questionable in principle due to one
basic assumption used in the actual aiPI code, namely
spherically symmetric electron densities, centered on the
nuclei. The electron density clouds of the ions are thus
allowed to distort just isotropically under the eﬀect of
the other ions in the cluster, and indeed the aiPI model
could be considered as an ab initio breathing shell model
(aiBSM). In summary, although the aiPI method treats
quantum-mechanically all the terms present in a breath-
ing shell model, plus other many-body terms absent from
any classical model, it does not describe the dipolar terms
present in a polarizable-ion model because there are not
induced dipoles. In our previous works on alkali halide
clusters,21–25 inclusion of polarization was not considered
essential. However, the O2− anion has a very deformable
density cloud (that is a large polarizability), and dipolar
contributions are expected to be more important than for
halide anions. Relaxing the spherical symmetry assump-
tion would allow in principle for a proper description of
those terms, but many of the computational advantages
of the aiPI model (which have allowed us to perform such
a detailed study) would be lost. The solution we have
chosen is to include the polarization terms in the selfcon-
sistent process with a polarizable point-ion description.
In such a way, the “enlarged” aiPI model obtained im-
proves clearly over all classical descriptions, and can be
considered a benchmark for the pair potential calcula-
tions. The price to be paid is the inclusion of empirical
polarizabilities for the ions. The reliability of the model is
thus reduced a little compared to the most sophisticated
ab initio methods, but complete geometrical distortions
can be considered and a large number of isomers studied
at less cost. Furthermore, the only cases in which doubts
related to the energetical ordering of the isomers arise
are those showing near-degenerate isomers, and we will
show that those situations are not frequent.

Now we explain the calculational method used in our
study of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions. We had no knowl-
edge a priori as to what shapes can adopt these clusters.
So we performed an extensive sampling of the potential
energy surface by generating a large set of random clus-
ter conﬁgurations for each cluster size n with n=1–13.
Except for the smallest sizes (n=1,2), tipically 100,000
conﬁgurations were generated for each n. All those ran-
dom conﬁgurations were fully optimized by using a rigid-
ion model. The parameters in equation 3 were those used
by Ziemann and Castleman,4,16 although some tests were
also performed with the set of parameters of Bush et al.37
Both sets of parameters led to essentially identical struc-
tures, diﬀering just in minor details. These pair potential
calculations could be performed at a low computational
cost and therefore were very useful in locating reasonable
initial guesses for the diﬀerent minima on the potential
energy surface. Then we took tipically the 15–20 lowest-
energy isomers obtained in the pair potential calculations
for each cluster size as input geometries for the aiPI cal-
culations. We also studied structures obtained by adding
or removing in diﬀerent ways a molecule from those pair-

potential structures, of course whenever such a structure
was not already present in the pair-potential results. For
n=13, a compact 3×3×3 structure (the notation a×b×c
indicates the number of atoms along three perpendicular
edges) is found to be a specially stable isomer (see next
section), so for n>13 we have studied geometries which
contain the 3×3×3 structure as a subunit (furthermore,
test pair potential and aiPI calculations performed for
n=14 revealed that less coordinated structures are not
competitive anymore from the energetic point of view).
We have considered also stackings of the diﬀerent pla-
nar structures found for n≤13. While we can not rule
out completely the possibility of having overlooked some
important isomer, we believe that we have reduced it
considerably. We have performed aiPI+polarization cal-
culations on all those isomers, without considering any
equivalence between the ions. The optimizations of the
geometries have been performed by using a downhill sim-
plex algorithm.38,39 Bulk values have been used for the
ionic polarisabilities.40

We ﬁnish this section with a comment about the ionic
character of our model. Although the aiPI model de-
scribes the MgO cluster ions in terms of Mg2+ and O2−
units, we would like to stress that it does not enter in con-
ﬂict with any possible assignment of fractional charges
to each ion in classical models. In fact, the charges used
by Ziemann and Castleman4,16 were +/-1, the charges
in the potential of Bush et al.37 are +/-2, and both
potentials give very similar results. The diﬀerence in
the Coulomb part is compensated by a diﬀerence in the
repulsive part.
In other words, those charges are just
parameters. On the other hand, ionic charges can be
derived from quantum-mechanical calculations following
the ideas of Bader.41 That has been done recently in aiPI
calculations on ionic solids from which fractional ionic
charges have been derived.42

III. RESULTS

A. Ground State Structures and Low-lying Isomers.

In the following, we restrict our discussion to the
structural properties of the lowest-lying isomers. The
(MgO)nMg2+ aiPI+polarization structures are shown in
Figure 1. The ground state (GS) and one or two low-lying
isomers are given for each n, except for n≥24 where only
one isomer is shown. A cutoﬀ of 2.54 ˚A, that exceeds by
≈ 20 % the Mg–O distance in the bulk, was arbitrarily
chosen in order to decide whether an O atom is bonded to
a Mg neighbor or not. The energy diﬀerence with respect
to the most stable isomer is given (in eV) below each iso-
mer. For cluster sizes n=1 and n=2 (not shown in the
ﬁgure), a linear chain is obtained as the GS isomer. The
emergence of the bulk crystalline structure can be appre-
ciated from ﬁg. 1: one-dimensional chains are observed
for the smallest cluster sizes (n=1–3); next there is a size
region (n=3–7) where planar two-dimensional (2D) struc-
tures occur, either as the GS or as low-lying isomers; for
n=7–12, compact three-dimensional (3D) structures are
already predominant, although without a clear establish-

ment of the f.c.c. symmetry; ﬁnally from n=13 on, the
clusters form rocksalt fragments. The (MgO)13Mg2+ GS
isomer is a highly compact 3×3×3 rocksalt piece that can
be considered a building block for the larger cluster sizes.
Let us describe now in more detail the structures ob-
tained for each value of n, ﬁrst for the small cluster sizes
(n<13). Linear chains are the GS isomers for n=1 and
n=2. The n=3 GS is a planar rectangular structure with
a cation attached to a corner. A 3D structure obtained
by removing an anion from a perfect cube appears just
0.04 eV above the GS, and a linear chain is still observed
as a competitive isomer. The n=4 GS is a quasiplanar
3×3 sheet, and can be considered the ﬁrst occurrence of
a rocksalt fragment. A 3D isomer obtained by adding
a cation to a (MgO)4 cubic cluster is still high in en-
ergy. Linear chains are not competitive anymore. The
ﬁrst 3D GS isomer occurs for n=5. It is a 2×2×3 piece
with an anion removed from a corner. A planar sheet
obtained by adding a MgO molecule to the n=4 GS is
obtained as a low-lying isomer. 3D structures, obtained
by adding a cation to the hexagonal prysm that is the
GS of the neutral (MgO)6,15 are the lowest-lying near-
degenerate isomers for n=6. As a low-lying isomer we
ﬁnd a structure that shows the (MgO)4Mg2+ GS as a
subunit. A 2×2×3 rocksalt piece with a triatomic Mg–
O–Mg attached to an edge is the GS for n=7. The planar
sheet is found at a high energy, and 2D isomers are not
competitive from this size on. A rounded cage struc-
ture with quadrangular and hexagonal faces is found as
a low-lying isomer. From n=8 to n=12, signs of the emer-
gence of the rocksalt structure are more apparent. For
example, rocksalt-based structures are the GS for n=8
(a 2×3×3 fragment with an anion removed from a basal
plane), n=10 (a 2×3×3 fragment with a triatomic Mg–
O–Mg attached to an edge), and for n=12 (an incomplete
3×3×3 fragment). But the establishment of f.c.c. sym-
metry is not complete yet. Rounded cages and structures
based on stacking of hexagonal rings are obtained as low-
lying isomers for these cluster sizes, and they turn out to
be the GS isomers for n=9 and 11.

The situation changes dramatically at n=13. The GS
isomer is a perfect 3×3×3 rocksalt fragment, and is spe-
cially stable (the ﬁrst isomer lies 5.24 eV higher in en-
ergy). This high stability makes the growing pattern sim-
pler for the larger cluster sizes. With few exceptions, the
(MgO)nMg2+ GS isomer (n≥14) is obtained by adding
a molecule to the GS isomer of (MgO)n−1Mg2+, and the
establishment of the bulk structure is almost complete.
The low-lying isomers are also rocksalt fragments in al-
most all cases. The growing pattern in this size range
can also be described in terms of the stacking of an odd
number of planar sheets, that are found as low-lying iso-
mers in the size range n=4–8. The n=13 GS isomer can
indeed be viewed as a stacking of three planar sheets,
each one with the (MgO)4Mg2+ GS structure. As the
minimum number of planar sheets necessary to build
up a compact isomer with an odd number of atoms is
three, the next example is found for n=16, where the GS
isomer is formed by the stacking of three (MgO)5Mg2+
planar isomers. Similarly, the GS structures for n=19,
22, and 25 are stackings of three planar (MgO)6Mg2+,

4

(MgO)7Mg2+, and (MgO)8Mg2+ isomers. All these iso-
mers are specially compact for this reason. The next
stacking of three planar isomers occurs for n=28, but
the periodicity of three is not the only possible for these
cluster sizes. The GS state of n=27 is formed by stacking
ﬁve (MgO)5Mg2+ planar isomers, and a new periodicity
of ﬁve is expected to start at this cluster size (the GS
structure for n=22 can be considered also as a stacking
of ﬁve (MgO)4Mg2+ planar sheets). For clusters larger
than those studied in this work one would expect to see
stackings of seven, nine, etc, planar structures. We will
see in the next section that those periodicities are impor-
tant to interpret the experimental abundance spectra.

A comparison with the results obtained for alkali halide
cluster ions24,25 and neutral (MgO)n clusters15 is illustra-
tive. Hexagonal prysmatic structures are very common
for (MgO)n clusters,15 as well as for some neutral alkali
halide (AX)n clusters.21–23 However, rocksalt structures
are clearly predominant for (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions,
being this the main eﬀect of nonstoichiometry and net
charge: (a) perfect rocksalt structures can be built up
with an odd number of ions (n=4,13,...), but an even
number of ions is needed to construct a perfect hexagonal
prysm; (b) for “defect-like” structures, the extra charge
is screened more eﬀectively in the cuboid-like isomers.
Examples can be found at n=3, where the hexagonal
(MgO)3 GS isomer15 converts into a rectangular struc-
ture upon adding Mg2+ to lower the repulsion between
cations, and at n=10, where adding a triatomic Mg–O–
Mg to the hexagonal prysm which is the GS of the neu-
15 results in an isomer 0.57 eV less stable
tral (MgO)9
than that obtained by adding Mg–O–Mg to a rocksalt
piece. Nevertheless, signs of the preference for hexagonal
prysmatic structures found in neutral (MgO)n clusters
can still be observed in the largest (MgO)nMg2+ clus-
ter ions. Speciﬁcally, (MgO)9 and (MgO)15 hexagonal
subunits are observed for n=19, 25, and 27. Let us now
compare with the results obtained for alkali halide clus-
ter ions.24,25 While the GS isomers are not the same in
many cases, overall the structures of (MgO)nMg2+ clus-
ter ions are similar to those obtained for (NaI)nNa+ and
(CsI)nCs+.25 There is just one major diﬀerence: cen-
tered hexagonal structures, containing an inner alkali
cation with high coordination, were found frecuently for
(NaI)nNa+ and (CsI)nCs+, but such isomers are not ob-
served for (MgO)nMg2+. Evidently, the repulsion be-
tween oxide anions is larger than the repulsion between
halide anions, and allocating six O2− anions around a
Mg2+ cation in energetically less favorable. In the next
section we will see that this structural diﬀerence is im-
portant to understand the diﬀerences between the magic
numbers observed in (MgO)nMg2+ and in alkali halide
cluster ions.

We ﬁnish this section with a discussion of the validity
of pair potential models and the eﬀects of the polariza-
tion correction on cluster structure. Comparison of our
pair potential calculations with the aiPI results lead us
to the following two important points: (a) pair potential
models fail to reproduce quantitatively the expansion of
the interionic distances with cluster size; (b) the energet-
ical ordering of the diﬀerent isomers for a given cluster

size is not reliable. On the positive side, the shape of the
isomers is usually quite well reproduced, and the main
structural correction obtained with an aiPI calculation
is a global scaling of all the interionic distances. This
last observation supports the use of pair potentials to
locate good initial conﬁgurations for ionic clusters, from
which ab initio calculations can be started. The eﬀects of
the polarization correction are rather negligible for n≥13.
The main eﬀect in that size range is a reduction of the
energy diﬀerences between the isomers. The energeti-
cal ordering is aﬀected only in those sizes showing near-
degenerate isomers. An example is n=17, where an aiPI
calculation without polarization predicts the second iso-
mer in ﬁg. 1 to be the GS. For n<13 the energy diﬀer-
ences between isomers are smaller and the eﬀects of po-
larization are more accussated. Speciﬁcally, linear chains
are the GS isomers for n=1–3 and planar structures are
the GS isomers for n=4–7 in aiPI calculations without
polarization. Thus, inclusion of polarization speeds up
the emergence of 3D structures.

B. Relative Stabilities. Comparison to Experimental
Results.

to

In

order

study
the relative stabilities of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions we
calculate the evaporation threshold energy9,25 required
to remove a MgO molecule from the ground state iso-
mer. For a cluster (MgO)nMg2+ this is done as follows:
we consider the optimized GS structure and identify the
MgO molecule that contributes the least to the cluster
binding energy. Then we remove that molecule and relax
the resulting (MgO)n−1Mg2+ fragment to the nearest lo-
cal minimum. The total energy required to evaporate a
molecule is then the diﬀerence between the energy of the
parent cluster and the energies of the two fragments, one
of which is the MgO molecule:

Eevaporation(n) = Ecluster[(M gO)n−1M g2+]
+E(M gO) − Ecluster[(M gO)nM g2+].

(7)

This process can be termed locally adiabatic because
both fragments are allowed to relax to the local minimum
energy conﬁguration after the evaporation. For some
cluster sizes, the fragment of size (n-1) left when a MgO
molecule is removed from (MgO)nMg2+ does not lie on
the catchment basin of the (MgO)n−1Mg2+ GS isomer,
so that the evaporation threshold energies are larger than
the energy diﬀerences between adjacent ground states mi-
nus E(MgO) in those cases. The evaporation energies
are plotted as a function of n in ﬁgure 2.
In the ex-
periments performed by Ziemann and Castleman,16 the
abundances in the mass spectra reﬂect the relative sta-
bilities of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions against evaporation
of a MgO molecule. Starting from the largest cluster
size studied, we can appreciate minima in ﬁgure 2 for
n=28, 26, 23, 20, 17, 14, 12, 9, and 5. Thus, evaporation
of a MgO molecule from those clusters is easy relative
to evaporation from clusters of other sizes. Moreover,
the curve shows abrupt increases precisely at those clus-
ter sizes, so that evaporation of a MgO molecule from

5

the clusters of size (n-1) is signiﬁcantly more expensive
than evaporation from cluster ions of size n. All of this
results in an enrichment of (MgO)nMg2+ clusters with
n=4, 8, 11, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, and 27, a result which is in
complete agreement with the experiment.16 Nevertheless,
there is not a total correspondence between the experi-
mental magic numbers and maxima in the evaporation
energy curve. The experimental enhanced abundances
result from a balance between two main processes: (a)
evaporation from clusters with size (n+1) results in an
enrichment of the (MgO)nMg2+ clusters; (b) evaporation
from clusters with size n has the opposite eﬀect. A quan-
tity that measures the stability of a (MgO)nMg2+ cluster
ion relative both to (MgO)n+1Mg2+ and (MgO)n−1Mg2+
cluster ions is thus

∆2(n) = Eevaporation(n + 1) − Eevaporation(n),

(8)

where both terms in the diﬀerence are calculated using
eq. (7) as explained above. This quantity is plotted as a
function of n in Figure 3. Maxima are apparent at n=4,
8, 11, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, and 27. Thus, the experimental
results concerning enhanced relative stabilities are prop-
erly reproduced by our calculations.

As in the case of alkali halide clusters23 and cluster
ions,25 the magic numbers observed for (MgO)nMg2+ can
be explained in terms of a compactness argument. Most
of those magic numbers are due to the occurrence of spe-
cially compact GS structures (n=4, 13, 16, 22, 25, and
27). For the neigboring cluster sizes, the GS isomers have
“defect-like” structures for which the Madelung interac-
tion is optimized less eﬀectively. n=19 has a “defect-like”
GS structure which nevertheless is more compact than
the GS structures of n=18 and n=20. The GS struc-
tures for n=10 and n=12 contain some low-coordinated
ions that are not present in the n=11 GS isomer. Our
explanation of the magic numbers and that oﬀered by
Ziemann and Castleman16 are essentially the same if we
associate the formation of hexagonal subunits observed
for some clusters in our work to the formation of ter-
races proposed by those authors (the only discrepancy
is then the n=11 GS structure). The magic numbers
show an stricking periodicity of three from n=13 to n=25,
that breaks ﬁrst at n=27. These regular periodicities
in the enhanced stabilities can be explained in terms of
the structural trends described in the previous section.
Speciﬁcally, for the size range studied in this work we can
consider the planar isomers obtained for n=4–8 (some of
which are not shown in Figure 1) as building blocks for
the larger clusters. A stacking of at least three planar
sheets is needed to build up a compact cluster with an
odd number of ions, but it is also possible to stack 5,
7, 9, etc planar sheets. Starting from the stacking of
three (MgO)4Mg2+ planar isomers, this growing pattern
explains all the magic numbers. n=27 breaks the period-
icity of three because a more compact isomer is obtained
stacking ﬁve (MgO)5Mg2+ planar subunits than stacking
three (MgO)9Mg2+ planar subunits. Most of the magic
numbers for n≥30 can be explained in this way. For
example, stacking seven (MgO)4Mg2+ planar isomers we
would obtain a specially compact isomer for n=31; stack-
ing ﬁve (MgO)7Mg2+ planar isomers results in a compact

isomer for n=37, etc. These are magic numbers in the
experiments.16 We conclude that the picture given in the
work of Ziemann and Castleman16 for n≥13 is essentially
correct and thus there is no need of more theoretical cal-
culations to elucidate the structures of larger clusters.

Turning to the small-size regime, the magic numbers
obtained for diﬀerent alkali halide cluster ions6,25 are
n=4, 6, 9 and 13. The main magic numbers (n=4 and
13) are a consequence of the enhanced stability of very
symmetrical rocksalt structures, and are observed also
for (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions. However, the “ﬁne struc-
ture” peaks (n=6, 9 for alkali halide (AX)nA+ cluster
ions and n=8, 11 for (MgO)nMg2+) diﬀer. Specially
compact structures can be formed for (AX)6A+ and
(AX)9A+, namely centered hexagonal conﬁgurations, re-
sulting in an enhanced stability for those cluster sizes.25
But those structures are not even low-lying isomers for
(MgO)nMg2+, and the clusters formed for n=9 and n=12
are not specially compact. Thus, the explanation of the
magic numbers is the same in both cases. The structural
diﬀerences between both materials determine which are
the speciﬁc magic numbers.

IV. SUMMARY

The ab initio perturbed ion model, supplemented with
a semiempirical treatment of dipolar terms, has been em-
ployed in order to study the structural and energetic
properties of (MgO)nMg2+ (n=1–29) cluster ions. We
have used a rigid ion model to generate a large set of
initial conﬁgurations for each cluster size. Next, those
structures have been optimized without consider any
equivalence between diﬀerent ions, allowing thus for an
appropriate geometrical relaxation. Correlation correc-
tions, which turned out to be essential for a proper de-
scription of (MgO)n clusters,15 have been added to the
Inclusion of
Hartree-Fock energies for all cluster sizes.
polarization corrections at a semiempirical level reduces
a little the reliability of the model compared to full ab
initio methods, but allows to perform such a system-
atic study with appropriate geometrical relaxations at
a signiﬁcantly reduced computational cost. The struc-
tural trends of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions have been de-
scribed. The emergence of the bulk crystalline symme-
try proceeds in diﬀerent overlapping stages, from one-
dimensional conﬁgurations for n=1–3 to planar struc-
tures for n=3–8, and then to three-dimensional structures
with a clear predominance of rocksalt structures from
n=13 on. For (MgO)13Mg2+, a perfect 3×3×3 rocksalt
isomer appears which serves as a building block for larger
cluster ions. Specially compact isomers can be built up
by stacking an odd number of the planar isomers found
in the size range n=3–8. A comparison with the struc-
tures obtained for neutral (MgO)n clusters15 shows that
the preference for cuboid-like structures is a direct con-
sequence of nonstoichiometry and net charge. Compari-
son with the structures obtained for alkali halide cluster
ions25 reveals some diﬀerences that can be explained in
terms of the larger repulsion between oxide anions com-
pared to the repulsion between halide anions. The main

6

eﬀect of the polarization correction is to speed up the
emergence of 3D structures. Once those 3D structures
are well stablished polarization plays just a minor role.
The relative stabilities of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions
have been studied by calculating the energy required to
evaporate a MgO molecule from the GS structures and
the ﬁrst diﬀerences between those evaporation energies,
that reﬂect the stability of a cluster of size n relative to
the stabilities of the neighbor clusters of sizes (n+1) and
(n-1). Both sets of calculations predict the clusters with
n=4, 8, 11, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, and 27 to be specially
stable, a result that is in complete agreement with the
experimental enhanced abundances reported by Ziemann
and Castleman.16 Those enhanced stabilities have been
explained in terms of a compactness argument, namely
it is possible to construct isomers for those values of n
that are more compact than for the neighboring sizes.

Finally, a comparison has been made with the re-
sults obtained by using a phenomenological pair poten-
tial model. This comparison has shown that, while pair
potential calculations are really helpful when obtaining
initial guesses for the isomer geometries, the distances
and the energetical ordering of the isomers obtained with
them are generally not reliable.

The authors gratefully acknowledge Prof. J. D. Gale
for providing us with a copy of reference 37 and Prof. A.
W. Castleman Jr. for discussing with us the experimental
results in reference 16. Work supported by DGES (PB95-
0720-C02-01) and Junta de Castilla y Le´on (VA63/96).
A. Aguado is supported by a predoctoral fellowship from
Junta de Castilla y Le´on.
Captions of ﬁgures

Figure 1. Lowest-energy structure and low-lying iso-
mers of (MgO)nMg2+ cluster ions. Light balls are Mg2+
cations and dark balls are O2− anions. The energy dif-
ference (in eV) with respect to the most stable structure
is given below the corresponding isomers. For n≥24 only
the ground state isomer is shown.

Figure 2. Evaporation threshold energies required to
remove a neutral MgO molecule from (MgO)nMg2+ clus-
ter ions as a function of n.

Figure 3. Second derivative ∆2(n) for (MgO)nMg2+
cluster ions as a function of the cluster size. Maxima
identify those cluster sizes with an enhanced relative sta-
bility.

∗

Corresponding Author.

1 W. A. Saunders, Phys. Rev. B 37, 6583 (1988).
2 W. A. Saunders, Z. Phys. D 12, 601 (1989).
3 P. J. Ziemann and A. W. Castleman, Jr., Z. Phys. D 20,

97 (1991).

7

4 P. J. Ziemann and A. W. Castleman, Jr., J. Chem. Phys.

94, 718 (1991).

5 C. W. S. Conover, Y. A. Yang, and L. A. Bloomﬁeld, Phys.

Rev. B 38, 3517 (1988).

6 Y. T. Twu, C. W. S. Conover, Y. A. Yang, and L. Bloom-

ﬁeld, Phys. Rev. B 42, 5306 (1990).

7 T. P. Martin, Phys. Rep. 95, 168 (1983).
8 J. Diefenbach and T. P. Martin, Surf. Sci. 156, 234 (1984).
9 N. G. Phillips, C. W. S. Conover, and L. A. Bloomﬁeld, J.

Chem. Phys. 94, 7498 (1991).

10 S. Moukouri and C. Noguera, Z. Phys. D 24, 71 (1992).
11 S. Moukouri and C. Noguera, Z. Phys. D 27, 79 (1993).
12 J. M. Recio and R. Pandey, Phys. Rev. A 47, 2075 (1993).
13 J. M. Recio, R. Pandey, A. Ayuela, and A. B. Kunz, J.

Chem. Phys. 98, 4783 (1993).

14 M. J. Malliavin and C. Coudray, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 2323

(1997).

15 E. de la Puente, A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, and J. M. L´opez,

Phys. Rev. B 56, 7607 (1997).

16 P. J. Ziemann and A. W. Castleman, Jr., Phys. Rev. B 44,

17 V. Lua˜na and L. Pueyo, Phys. Rev. B 41 , 3800 (1990).
18 S. Huzinaga and A. A. Cantu, J. Chem. Phys. 55 , 5543

6488 (1991).

(1971).

19 S. Huzinaga, D. McWilliams, and A. A. Cantu, Adv. Quan-

tum Chem. 7, 183 (1973).

20 S. Huzinaga, L. Seijo, Z. Barandiar´an,
Klobukowski, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 2132 (1987).

and M.

21 A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, J. A. Alonso, and V. Lua˜na, [a]
Z. Phys. D 26, S213 (1993); [b] An. Fis. (Spain) 90, 190
(1994); [c] Physica B 212, 329 (1996).

22 A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, and J. A. Alonso, J.

Phys. Chem. B 101, 5944 (1997).

23 A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, and J. A. Alonso,

Phys. Rev. B 56, 15353 (1997).

24 A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, J. A. Alonso, and V. Lua˜na, Can.

25 A. Aguado, A. Ayuela, J. M. L´opez, and J. A. Alonso,

26 V. Lua˜na, J. M. Recio, and L. Pueyo, Phys. Rev. B 42,

J. Phys. 76, 311 (1998).

Phys. Rev. B, accepted.

1791 (1990).

27 G. von Helden, M. T. Hsu, P. R. Kemper, and M. T. Bow-

ers, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 3835 (1991).

28 M. F. Jarrold, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 11 (1995).
29 M. Maier-Borst, P. L¨oﬄer, J. Petry, and D. Kreisle, Z.

Phys. D 40, 476 (1997).

30 V. Lua˜na, M. Fl´orez, E. Francisco, A. Mart´ın Pend´as, J.
M. Recio, M. Bermejo, and L. Pueyo, in Cluster Models for
Surface and Bulk Phenomena, edited by G. Pacchioni, P.
S. Bagus and F. Parmigiani (Plenum, New York, 1992), p.
605.

31 R. McWeeny, Methods of molecular quantum mechanics,

Academic Press. London (1994).

32 E. Francisco, A. Mart´ın Pend´as, and W. H. Adams, J.

Chem. Phys. 97, 6504 (1992).

33 E. Clementi, IBM J. Res. Develop. 9, 2 (1965).
34 S. J. Chakravorty and E. Clementi, Phys. Rev. A 39, 2290

(1989).

35 V. Lua˜na, A. Mart´ın Pend´as, J. M. Recio, and E. Francisco,

Comput. Phys. Commun. 77, 107 (1993).

36 E. Clementi and C. Roetti, At. Data and Nuc. Data Tables

14, 177 (1974).

37 T. S. Bush, J. D. Gale, C. R. A. Catlow, and P. D. Battle,

J. Mater. Chem. 4, 831 (1994).

38 J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, Comput. J. 7, 308 (1965).
39 W. H. Press and S. A. Teukolsky, Computers in Physics 5,

40 P. W. Fowler and N. C. Pyper, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 398,

426 (1991).

377 (1985).

41 R. F. W. Bader, Atoms in Molecules (Oxford University

Press, Oxford, 1990).

42 A. Mart´ın Pend´as, A. Costales, and V. Lua˜na, Phys. Rev.

B 55, 4275 (1997).

43 M. Matsui, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 3304 (1998).

8

[

12

9

9

5

13.0

12.0

11.0

10.0

)

V
e
(

n
o
i
t

a
r
o
p
a
v
e

E

9.0

8.0

0

17

20

23

26

14

15
n

5

10

20

25

30

0.2

0.1

)

V
e
(
∆

2

0

−0.1

−0.2

0

1
0

13

22

16

19

25

27

4

8

11

5

10

20

25

30

15
n

This figure "aguado.fig1.mgomg2+.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808036v1

This figure "aguado.fig1cont.mgomg2+.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808036v1

This figure "aguado.fig1contt.mgomg2+.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808036v1

This figure "aguado.fig1conttt.mgomg2+.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808036v1

This figure "aguado.fig1contttt.mgomg2+.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808036v1

This figure "aguado.fig1conttttt.mgomg2+.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808036v1

