9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
9
2
 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photoelectron Spectra of Aluminum Cluster Anions: Temperature Eﬀects and
Ab-Initio Simulations

Jaakko Akola1, Matti Manninen1, Hannu H¨akkinen2, Uzi Landman2, Xi Li3, and Lai-Sheng Wang3
1Department of Physics, University of Jyv¨askyl¨a, FIN-40351 Jyv¨askyl¨a, Finland
2School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0430
3Department of Physics, Washington State University, Richland, WA 99352, and W. R. Wiley Environmental Molecular
Sciences Laboratory, Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, MS K8-88, P. O. Box 999, Richland, WA 99352
(May 24, 1999)

Photoelectron (PES) spectra from aluminum cluster anions, Al

−
n (12 ≤ n ≤ 15), at various tem-
perature regimes, were studied using ab-initio molecular dynamics simulations and experimentally.
The calculated PES spectra, obtained via shifting of the simulated electronic densities of states by
the self-consistently determined values of the asymptotic exchange-correlation potential, agree well
with the measured ones, allowing reliable structural assignments and theoretical estimation of the
clusters’ temperatures.

PACS: 36.40.Cg, 36.40.Mr, 71.24.+q

Photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) is a rich source of
information pertaining to the electronic structure and
excitation spectra of atoms, molecules and condensed
phases. Materials clusters exhibit a high sensitivity of the
electronic spectrum to the geometrical structure which
often diﬀers from that of the bulk, and show a high
propensity to form structural isomers that may dynam-
ically interconvert at ﬁnite temperatures. Consequently,
high-resolution PES emerges as an important tool in clus-
ter science, particularly in the face of severe diﬃculties
in applying common direct structure-determination tech-
niques to such systems.

However, a reliable interpretation of PES spectra is
often theoretically challenging due to several factors, in-
cluding: ﬁnite-state eﬀects, electronic and ionic relax-
ations, thermal ionic motions, and structural isomeriza-
tions. With the advent of accurate ab-initio methods
for electronic structure calculations, theoretical investi-
gations of some of these issues have been pursued [1–3].
Particularly pertinent to our study is the development of
methods which allow practical and reliable simulations
of PES spectra including dynamical (ﬁnite-temperature)
eﬀects [2-4a].

In this paper we address, via the use of ab-initio BO-
LSD-MD (Born-Oppenheimer local-spin-density molecu-
lar dynamics) simulations [4a], methodological issues per-
taining to simulations and analysis of ﬁnite-temperature
PES spectra. We performed accurate (and practical) cal-
culations of PES spectra from recorded density of states
of the clusters using a ”generalized Koopmans’ theorem”
(GKT) [5], concurrent with simulations of the ionic dy-
namics. Furthermore, in conjunction with measured [6]
high-resolution PES spectra for Al−
n (12≤n≤15) clus-
ter anions, we illustrate that the simulated spectra pro-
vide a (quantitatively) faithful description of the mea-
sured ones, including thermal eﬀects, thus allowing re-
liable assignments of ground as well as isomeric struc-
tures. Additionally, we demonstrate that through com-

parisons between simulated PES spectra and those mea-
sured in three (experimentally undetermined) tempera-
ture regimes estimates of the clusters’ temperatures can
be obtained.

In the BO-LSD-MD method the motions of the ions
evolve in time according to classical equations of motion,
with the electronic Hellmann-Feynman forces evaluated
at each MD time step via a self-consistent solution of the
Kohn-Sham (KS) equations, using the LSD exchange-
correlations after Ref. [7], and in conjunction with non-
local norm-conserving pseudopotentials [8]. An impor-
tant element of the method, distinguishing it from those
used previously in PES studies [2,3], is the fact that it
does not employ supercells (periodic replicas of the sys-
tem), and consequently charged systems as well as those
having permanent and/or dynamically developed multi-
pole moments are simulated accurately in a straightfor-
ward manner on equal footing with neutral ones (i.e. alle-
viating the need for an artiﬁcial neutralizing background,
large calculational cells, and/or approximate treatment
of long-range multipole image interactions).
−
15, determined
by us through structural optimization starting from those
of the corresponding neutral clusters [4b], are displayed
in Figure 1. Aluminum clusters in this size range favor
−
energetically icosahedral-based structures [9]; Al
12 hav-
−
ing an oblate deformed shape, that of Al
13 being close to
−
−
an ideal icosahedron, and those of Al
15 being
14 and Al
−
capped icosahedra. For Al
15 we ﬁnd that in the energy-
optimal structure the two capping atoms are located on
the opposite sides of a ”core” icosahedron, resulting in a
strongly deformed prolate shape (see Fig. 1) [10].

The ground state structures of Al

−
12–Al

The electronic structure of the ground state cluster
anions exhibits sizable gaps (Eg) between the highest-
occupied KS molecular orbitals (HOMO) and the lowest
unoccupied ones (LUMO), as well as odd-even alterna-
tion (as a function of the number of electrons) in the ver-
−
13 is
tical detachment energy (vDE) shown in Table I. Al

1

electronically ”magic” (i.e. 40 valence electrons), having
an exceptionally high vDE [6] and the largest Eg. Its elec-
tronic structure reﬂects the corresponding neutral clus-
ter, which was found [4b] to exhibit a clear jellium-type
ﬁlling sequence 1s21p61d102s2 for the lowest 20 single-
particle states. The remaining 20 states, which would
correspond to jellium 1f 142p6 states, are grouped into
two broadly overlapping subbands (ﬁnite temperature
broadening of these bands is displayed in Figure 2) and
show signiﬁcant pf mixing; this level scheme is known to
be a consequence of the Ih icosahedral symmetry.

Although the KS states are not necessarily the ”true”
molecular orbitals of the system, it has been observed
that the KS HOMO eigenvalue of the N -electron sys-
tem, ǫHOMO(N ), bears a well-deﬁned relation to the ion-
ization potential I(N ) and electron aﬃnity A(N ) [11,5];
through Janak’s theorem [12]. Following these ideas we
make use here of a ”generalized Koopmans’ theorem”
(GKT) [5,13]

(1)

ǫHOMO(N ) − v∞
xc = −IGKT (N ),
where v∞
is the asymptotic limit of the exchange-
xc
correlation potential. This nonvanishing energy shift is
required for an accurate description of the asymptotic
KS equations [5]. While rigorously the vertical detach-
ment energy would be given by E(N − 1) − E(N ), where
E(N ) and E(N −1) are, respectively, the total energies of
the anion and neutral (unrelaxed) clusters, Eq. (1) sug-
gests a practical approach for evaluation of the threshold
region of ﬁnite-temperature PES spectra through MD
simulations. Accordingly, neglecting hole-relaxation ef-
fects, the vDE for removing the electron from the HOMO
state may be well estimated by (−ǫHOMO + v∞
xc), pro-
vided that v∞
xc remains constant to a good approxima-
tion, regardless of spatial details of the N –electron sys-
tem (such as isomeric atomic conﬁgurations of the clus-
ter). To explore the validity of this condition we have
calculated for each of the cluster anions the energy shift
v∞
xc = E(N − 1) − E(N ) + ǫHOMO(N ) for a selected set of
structures (including the ground state one and 10 other
conﬁgurations chosen randomly from ﬁnite-temperature
MD trajectories). The calculated values of v∞
xc were
found to have a spread of no more than 0.04 eV for each
of the clusters, and furthermore we found that the de-
pendence of v∞
xc on N (37 ≤ N ≤ 46) is very weak (see
Table I).

While this procedure could be repeated to deter-
mine v∞
xc values for vDEs from deeper (lower-energy) KS
states, we have chosen to use a simpler (and more prac-
tical) procedure whereby we use the shift calculated for
the HOMO level also for the deeper states [14]. In this
way we generate the full PES spectra from the density
of states (DOS) recorded in the course of the BO-LSD-
MD simulations [15]. As shown below, this theoretically
founded procedure yields a faithful description of the ex-
perimental data, and it is a viable and reliable alternative
to previously used methods for ﬁnite-temperature ab-
initio MD simulations of PES spectra which were based

on either ad-hoc shifts (aligning the theoretical DOS with
the dominant features in the measured spectra) [2] or on
a ﬁrst-order pertubative treatment [3b]. Furthermore,
the comparative analysis of the simulated PES spectra
and the measured ones (see below) validates a posteriori
certain general assumptions underlying MD simulations
of PES spectra, i.e.: neglect of ﬁnite-lifetime eﬀects of
the hole (see also Ref. [2] where it is noted that such
eﬀects may contribute only for very small clusters); the
use of vDEs (i.e. neglect of ionic relaxations following the
detachment process); and, assumed equal weights for all
states contributing to the PES spectrum (i.e. neglect of
photoelectron transition-matrix eﬀects, which may aﬀect
line-shape features and certainly the absolute PE cross-
sections, but not the locations of spectral features i.e.
binding energies).

−
12–Al

The measured PES spectra for Al

−
15 are shown
in Figures 2 and 3 (solid line).
It is found that clus-
ters leaving the nozzle early (short residence time) are
quite ”hot” whereas clusters leaving the nozzle late (long
residence time) are ”colder”. Indeed the PES spectra for
the cold clusters shown in Fig. 2 and the bottom panel of
Fig. 3 exhibit well-deﬁned features. On the other hand,
hot clusters exhibit much broader and diﬀused spectral
−
features, as shown in Figure 3 for Al
13, where we display
spectra measured for three diﬀerent residence times, la-
beled as ”cold”, ”warm”, and ”hot”. Comparisons be-
tween the locations (binding energies) of the peaks and
shoulders in the measured and simulated spectra for the
cold clusters (simulation temperatures of 130 K to 260 K,
see caption to Fig. 2), validate the v∞
xc–shifting procedure
of the calculated DOS described above. The widths of
the peaks in the theoretical PES spectra originate solely
from atomic thermal vibrations since at these low tem-
peratures isomerization eﬀects and/or strong shape ﬂuc-
tuations do not occur. The good agreement achieved
here, without any adjustable parameters other than the
ionic temperature in the MD simulations, strongly in-
dicates that the ”cold” clusters in the experiments are
indeed well below room temperature.

−
13–Al

−
14 and Al

Theoretical PES spectra corresponding to isomeric
−
structures of Al
15, calculated at 0 K, are also shown
−
13, and
in Fig. 2 (see inset for the threshold regions of Al
−
the dotted line in the panels for Al
15). The
−
−
isomers for Al
14 are the aforementioned deca-
13 and Al
−
hedral ones [9], and in the Al
15 isomer two neighboring
triangular facets are capped. Comparison between these
spectra and those calculated for the ground state clusters
as well as with the measured ones, suggests overall that
at low temperatures either these isomers do not occur, or
that their abundance in the cluster beam is rather low.
In this context we note that starting from the decahedral
−
isomer of Al
13, it transformed readily during short MD
simulations into the icosahedral one at about room tem-
perature. This supports our conclusion pertaining to the
low abundance in the cold beam of clusters ”trapped”
in isomeric structures; however, an even small relative

2

at EMSL, a DOE user facility located at PNNL, which is
operated for DOE by Battelle Memorial Institute. L. S.
W. acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foun-
dation. J. A. wishes to thank the V¨ais¨al¨a Foundation for
support.

TABLE I. Number of valence electrons (N ) in the cluster
anions, HOMO-LUMO gap (Eg), vertical detachment energy
(vDE) of 0 K ground state anion, and numerically determined
∞
xc). Energies in eV.
asymptotic exchange-correlation shift (v
∞
v
xc
1.63
1.64
1.57
1.57

vDE
2.82
3.59
2.67
3.07

Eg
0.25
1.89
0.32
0.79

N
37
40
43
46

Al
Al
Al
Al

−
12
−
13
−
14
−
15

−
(quenched) concentration of such isomer in the cold Al
13
beam may be suﬃcient to account for the low-binding en-
−
ergy tail observed in the measured PES spectra for Al
13
(see inset in Fig. 2).

Both the experimental and theoretical PES spectra,
−
13, which were measured at the
shown in Figure 3 for Al
three temperature regimes mentioned above and sim-
ulated at the indicated temperatures, exhibit gradual
broadening and ”smearing” of the PES spectral features
as the temperature increases. We also observe that
the binding energy of the main peak is rather insensi-
tive to the thermal conditions, while the line-shape near
the threshold region (lower binding energies) exhibits a
rather pronounced temperature dependence.

The broadening of the spectral features and the (so
called) ”thermal tail eﬀect” near threshold originate from
the variations of the electronic structure caused by en-
hanced vibrational motions at the higher temperatures,
as well as from increased isomerization rates (e.g. in the
”warm” regime) governed by the free-energy of the clus-
ter (that is enhanced contributions of lower frequency
modes to the vibrational entropy [16]), and from dis-
ordering (”melting”) of the cluster in the ”hot” regime
(where inspection of the atomic trajectories reveals fre-
quent transitions between a broad assortment of conﬁg-
urations). Indeed, examination of the vibrational DOS
of the simulated clusters (obtained via Fourier transfor-
mation of the atomic velocity autocorrelation functions)
revealed a marked gradual softening of the clusters at
the ”warm” and ”hot” regimes (that is shifting of the
vibrational spectrum to lower frequencies) coupled with
increasing overlap between the frequency regions of the
various modes due to large anharmonicities.

In light of the above we judge the overall agreement be-
tween the simulated and measured spectra and their ther-
mal evolution as rather satisfactory, and the remaining
discrepancies (mainly in line-shapes) may be attributed
to insuﬃcient sampling during the 5 ps MD simulations
of the thermally-expanded phase-space of the clusters.

The methodology developed in this study for practical
calculations of ﬁnite-temperature PES spectra, through
ab-initio MD simulations of aluminum cluster anions
with no adjustable parameters other than the clusters’
temperatures, was demonstrated to yield results in agree-
ment with high-resolution PES spectra measured at var-
ious thermal conditions of the cluster beam. Such com-
parative analysis allows reliable structural assignments
and theoretical estimation of the clusters’ temperatures,
as well as gaining insights into the electronic and struc-
tural properties of clusters and their thermal evolution.

Computations were performed mainly on Cray T3E
at the Center for Scientiﬁc Computing, Espoo, Finland,
and in part on an IBM RISC 6000/SP2 at the GIT Cen-
ter for Computational Materials Science. Work in the
University of Jyv¨askyl¨a is supported by the Academy of
Finland, and at Georgia Tech by the US DOE. The ex-
perimental work is supported by the NSF and performed

3

FIG. 1. The ground state geometries of Al

−
12-Al

−
15 (left to

right).

−
12- Al

FIG. 2. Measured photoelectron spectra of cold (long res-
−
idence time) Al
15 at 193 nm (solid lines) compared to
the simulated spectra (dashed lines). The simulation temper-
−
15, respectively.
atures are 160, 260, 200, and 130 K for Al
The arrows correspond to the vDE of the ground state struc-
ture at 0 K, given in Table I. The inset shows the 0 K PES
spectra for the ground state (solid line) and the decahedral
−
14 is the
isomer (dashed line) of Al
−
15 is
0 K spectrum of the decahedral isomer, and that for Al
the 0 K spectrum of an icosahedral-based isomer (see text).

−
13. The dotted line for Al

−
12–Al

FIG. 3. Measured temperature-dependent PES spectra of
−
13 (solid lines) compared to the simulated ones at 930 K,
Al
570 K and 260 K (dashed lines). HOT - short residence time,
WARM - medium residence time, COLD - long residence time.

[1] V. Bonacic-Koutecky et al., J. Chem. Phys. 93, 3802

(1990); ibid., 100, 490 (1994).

[2] N. Binggeli and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,

493 (1995).

[3] (a) C. Massobrio et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2104 (1995);

(b) Phys. Rev. B 54, 8913 (1996).

[4] (a) For a formulation and details of the BO-LSD-MD
method see: R.N. Barnett and U. Landman, Phys. Rev.
B 48, 2081 (1993). (b) For recent studies of Al clusters
using this method see: J. Akola et al., Phys. Rev. B 58,
3601 (1998); Europ. Phys. J D (Vol. 9, in print (1999)).
[5] D.J. Tozer and N.C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 2545

(1998); ibid., 109, 10180 (1998).

[6] X. Li et al., Phys. Rev Lett. 81, 1909 (1998). The ex-
perimental setup described in this paper is the same as
that used in the current study, where in addition, here
PES spectra were measured also at various temperature
regimes (see discussion in connection with Figs. 2 and 3).
[7] S.H. Vosko et al., Can. J. Phys. 58, 1200 (1980); S.H.

Vosko and L. Wilk, J. Phys. C 15, 2139 (1982).

[8] N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993
(1991). For the aluminum 3s23p1 valence electrons, we

use s-nonlocal and p-local components with cut-oﬀ radii
of 2.1 and 2.5 a0, respectively. The KS orbitals are ex-
panded in a plane wave basis with a cutoﬀ of 15.4 Ry.
[9] In Ref. [4b] it has been noted that a truncated decahedral
motif, obtained from the icosahedron by a π/5 rotation of
the two opposing capped pentagons with respect to each
other, is energetically close to the icosahedral geometry of
Al13 – Al15. On the other hand, fcc-based cuboctahedral
structure are much higher in energy in this size range.
For other recent ab-initio studies of aluminum clusters in
this size range, see references in [4b].

[10] The pattern of shape deformations for all the cluster an-
ions shown in Fig. 1 correlates well with that obtained
via jellium calculations for clusters with the number of
electrons corresponding to that in this size range (37 to
46 electrons). For a review, see C. Yannouleas and U.
Landman, in ”Large Clusters of Atoms and Molecules”,
T. P. Martin, Ed. (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1996), p. 131.
[11] J.P. Perdew et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1691 (1982); J.P.
Perdew and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1884 (1983);
J.P. Perdew and K. Burke, Int. J. Quantum. Chem. 57,
309 (1996).

[12] J. F. Janak, Phys. Rev. B 18, 7165 (1978).
[13] Koopmans’ theorem, ǫHOM O(N ) = −I(N ), originally
proposed in the context of the Hartree-Fock method,
provides often a reasonable estimate for I (within the
method), and is in a wide use in quantum chemistry.
[14] Restricted (spherical) jellium calculations (rs(Al)=2.07
−
a0) for a 40 electron system (Al
13), where electrons are
removed from deeper levels (with a ”frozen-orbital” ap-
∞
proximation), show that the v
xc shifts for these deeper
levels are approximately constant to within 0.2 eV [M.
Manninen, unpublished].

[15] Microcanonical MD simulations were performed at vari-
ous temperatures around and below room temperature,
−
and Al
13 was also simulated at 570 K and 930 K. A 5 fs
time step was used in integration of the classical equa-
tions of motion, and the DOS data was recorded in 5
ps simulations (after equilibrating the system at the de-
sired temperature for about 2 ps). The DOS spectra were
smoothed by replacing every data point by a 0.05 eV
FWHM Gaussian. These spectra were then shifted by the
∞
v
xc values given in Table I for each cluster anion. This
gives the absolute binding energy scale on which the cal-
culated spectra are plotted in Figures 2 and 3. The height
of the calculated spectra are scaled to the main peak of
−
the experimental spectra in Al
15 and to the sec-
ond peak in the case of Al

−
13 to Al

−
12.

[16] T. P. Martin, Phys. Rep. 95, 167 (1983).

4

This figure "fig1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909058v1

This figure "fig2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909058v1

This figure "fig3.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/9909058v1

