0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
2
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evolution in the Multiverse

Russell K. Standish

High Performance Computing Support Unit

University of New South Wales

Sydney, 2052

Australia

R.Standish@unsw.edu.au

http://parallel.hpc.unsw.edu.au

February 29, 2008

Abstract

In the Many Worlds Interpretation of quantum mechanics, the range
of possible worlds (or histories) provides variation, and the Anthropic
Principle is a selective principle analogous to natural selection. When
looked on in this way, the “process” by which the laws and constants of
physics is determined not too diﬀerent from the process that gave rise to
our current biodiversity, i.e. Darwinian evolution. This has implications
for the ﬁelds of SETI and Artiﬁcial Life, which are based on a philosophy
of the inevitability of life.

1

Introduction

The Many Worlds Interpretation (MWI)[4] of Quantum Mechanics has become
increasingly favoured in recent years over its rivals, with a recent straw poll
of eminent physicists[14, pp170–1] showing more than 50% support it. David
Deutsch[5] provides a convincing argument in favour of MWI, and the multi-
verse in the title is due to him. Tegmark[13] has somewhat waggishly suggested
that a Principle of Plenitude (alternatively All Universes Hypothesis — AUH),
coupled with the Anthropic Principle1[3] could be the ultimate theory of ev-
erything (TOE). Tegmark’s Plenitude consists of all mathematically consistent
logical systems, the principle of plenitude according each of these systems phys-
ical existence, however by the anthropic principle, we should only expect to
ﬁnd ourselves in a system capable of supporting self-aware substructures (SAS),

1In the all universes hypothesis, the anthropic principle acts to select those universes that
are “interesting”, i.e. capable of supporting self aware consciousness. In this ensemble picture,
the distinction between the weak and strong forms of the anthropic principle is meaningless.

1

i.e.
conciousness. Alternative Plenitudes have been suggested, for example
Schmidh¨uber’s all possible programs for a universal turing machine. I have ar-
gued elsewhere[12], that the quantum mechanical subset of the Plenitude, i.e.
the multiverse, by far dominates the set of systems supporting SASes.

In this paper, we accept the MWI as a working hypothesis, and consider
what the implications are for evolutionary systems. An evolutionary system
consists of a means of producing variation, and a means of selecting amongst
those variations (natural selection). Now variations are produced by chance,
in the MWI picture, this corresponds to a branching of histories, whereby a
particular entity’s oﬀspring will have diﬀerent forms in diﬀerent histories. The
measure of each variant is related to the proportions in which the variants are
formed, and the measure of each variant evolves in time through a strictly
deterministic application of Schr¨odinger’s equation.

What, then, determines which organisms we see today, given that a priori,
any possible history, and hence any mix of organisms may correspond to our
own? Is natural selection completely meaningless?

The ﬁrst principle we need to apply is the anthropic principle, i.e. only
those histories leading to complex, self-aware substructures will be selected. We
also need to apply the self sampling assumption, namely that we expect to ﬁnd
ourselves in an anthropic principle consistent history that is nearly maximal in
its measure. This, then, gives an alternative interpretation of natural selection
as being the process that diﬀerentiates the measure attributed to each variant.

2 Complexity Growth in Evolution

As I argued elsewhere[12], lawful universes with simple initial states by far
dominate the set consistent with the AP. This implies that the AP ﬁxes the end
point of our evolutionary history (existence of complex, self-aware organisms),
and the SSA ﬁxes the beginning (evolutionary history is most likely started with
the simplest organisms). We should expect to see an increase in complexity
through time in a system governed by these two principles.

What about systems not governed by the anthropic principle? Examples
include extra terrestrial life (within our own universe, if it exists) and artiﬁcial
life systems. Proponents of SETI (the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence)
believe in an inevitability of the evolution of intelligent life, given the laws of
physics. The anthropic principle does indeed ensure that the laws of physics are
compatible with the evolution of intelligence, but does not mandate that this
should be likely (excepting, obviously in our own case). Hanson[6] has studied a
model of evolution based on easy and hard steps to make predictions about what
the distribution of such steps should be within the fossil record. He ﬁnds that the
fossil record is consistent with there being 4–5 hard steps in getting to intelligent
life on Earth. By hard steps, he means steps who’s expected duration greatly
exeeds the present age of the universe. This would imply that intelligent life is

2

fairly unique within our own universe, to the chagrin of the SETI proponents.
Of course, it is also true that a single example of extra terrestrial intelligence
would be an important counterexample to these arguments based on the AP
and SSA, so SETI is by itself not a fruitless exercise. It is probable, however,
that extraterrestrial life, whilst ubiquitous, will be no more complex than the
most primitive prokaryote, as suggested by the recent Martian meteorite ﬁnds.
Likewise, for artiﬁcial life, it would seem plausible that a serious of easy and
hard steps are required to climb the complexity ladder. Already, the ﬁrst such
hard transition (the creation of replicators from the primeval soup) has been
observed[8, 7], but equivalents of other transitions (eg transition to sexual re-
production, prokaryote to eukaryote or multicellularity) have not been observed
to date. Ray is leading a major experiment designed to probe the transition
to multicellularity[9, 10] — success in this experiment will provide remarkable
constraints on just how ﬁnely tuned the physics and chemistry needs to be in
order for the system to pass through a hard transistion.

Adami[1, 2] and co-workers examined the Avida alife system for evidence of
complexity growth during evolution. They did ﬁnd this, although this is largely
seen as the artiﬁcial organisms learning how to solve arithmetic problems that
have been imposed artiﬁcially on the system. An analogous study by myself[11]
of Tierra showed no such increase in complexity over time — if anything the
trend was to greater simplicity. This work is still in progress.

3 Evolutionary Physics?

Returning back to the picture of the “All Universes Hypothesis”, we can see
that our current universe is made up from contingency and necessity. The ne-
cessity comes from the requirements of the anthropic principle, however when
a particular aspect of the universe is not constrained by the AP, its value must
be decided by chance (according to the SSA) the ﬁrst time it is “measured”
by self-aware beings (this measurement may well be indirect — properties of
the microscopic or cosmic worlds will need to be consistent with our everyday
observations at the macroscopic level, so may well be determined prior to the
ﬁrst direct measurements). Evolution is also described as a mixture of con-
tingency and necessity. When understood in terms of the AP supplying the
necessary, and the SSA supplying the rationale for resolving chance, the con-
nection between the selection of phyical laws and the selection of organisms in
evolution is made clear. It is as though the laws of physics and chemistry have
themselves evolved. Perhaps applying evolutionary principles to the underlying
physico-chemical laws of an alife system will result in an alife system that can
pass through these hard transitions.

References

3

[1] Chris Adami. Introduction to Artiﬁcial Life. Springer, 1998.

[2] Chris Adami. Physical complexity of symbolic sequences. Physica D, 1999.

To appear.

[3] J. D. Barrow and F. J. Tipler. The Anthropic Cosmological Principle.

Clarendon, Oxford, 1986.

[4] Bryce de Witt and R. Neill Graham. The Many Worlds Interpretation of

Quantum Mechanics. Princeton UP, 1973.

[5] David Deutsh. The Fabric of Reality. Penguin, 1997.

[6] Robin Hanson.

Must early life be easy?

jor evolutionary transitions.
http://hanson.gmu.edu/hardstep.pdf.

Origins of Life, 2000.

the rythm of ma-
submitted;

[7] A. N. Pargellis. The evolution of self-replicating computer organisms. Phys-

ica D, 98:111, 1996.

[8] A. N. Pargellis. The spontaneous generation of digital life. Physica D,

91:86, 1996.

[9] Tom Ray. A proposal to create two biodiversity reserves: One digi-
tal and one organic. See ftp://tierra.slhs.udel.edu/tierra/doc/reserves.tex,
http://www.hip.atr.co.jp/˜ray/pubs/reserves/reserves.html. Also see New
Scientist, vol 150, no 2034, pp32–35.

[10] Tom Ray and Joseph Hart. Evolution of diﬀerentiated multi-threaded digi-
tal organisms. In Chris Adami, Richard Belew, Hiroaki Kitano, and Charles
Taylor, editors, Artiﬁcial Life VI, pages 295–304, Cambridge, Mass., 1998.
MIT Press.

[11] Russell K. Standish. Some techniques for the measurement of complexity
in Tierra. In Advances in Artiﬁcial Life, volume 1674 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, page 104, Berlin, 1999. Springer.

[12] Russell K. Standish. Why Occam’s razor? Physics Review, 2000. submit-

ted.

[13] Max Tegmark. Is ”the theory of everything” merely the ultimate ensemble

theory. Annals of Physics, 270:1–51, 1998.

[14] Frank J. Tipler. The Physics of Immortality. Doubleday, 1994.

4

