Why Occam’s Razor

Russell K. Standish

High Performance Computing Support Unit

University of New South Wales

Sydney, 2052

Australia

R.Standish@unsw.edu.au

http://parallel.hpc.unsw.edu.au/rks

Abstract

In this paper, I show why in an ensemble theory of the universe, we should
be inhabiting one of the elements of that ensemble with least information
content that satisﬁes the anthropic principle. This explains the eﬀectiveness of
aesthetic principles such as Occam’s razor in predicting usefulness of scientiﬁc
theories.
I also show, with a couple of reasonable assumptions about the
phenomenon of consciousness, that quantum mechanics is the most general
linear theory satisfying the anthropic principle.

03.65.Bz,01.70.+w

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
2
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset using REVTEX

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Wigner [1] once remarked on “the unreasonable eﬀectiveness of mathematics”, encap-
sulating in one phrase the mystery of why the scientiﬁc enterprise is so successful. There
is an aesthetic principle at large, whereby scientiﬁc theories are chosen according to their
beauty, or simplicity. These then must be tested by experiment — the surprising thing is
that the aesthetic quality of a theory is often a good predictor of that theory’s explanatory
and predictive power. This situation is summed up by William de Ockham “Entities should
not be multiplied unnecessarily” known as Ockam’s Razor.

We start our search into an explanation of this mystery with the anthropic principle [2].
This is normally cast into either a weak form (that physical reality must be consistent with
our existence as conscious, self-aware entities) or a strong form (that physical reality is the
way it is because of our existence as conscious, self-aware entities). The anthropic principle
is remarkable in that it generates signiﬁcant constraints on the form of the universe [2,3].
The two main explanations for this are the Divine Creator explanation (the universe was
created deliberately by God to have properties suﬃcient to support intelligent life), or the
Ensemble explanation [3] (that there is a set, or ensemble, of diﬀerent universes, diﬀering in
details such as physical parameters, constants and even laws, however, we are only aware
of such universes that are consistent with our existence). In the Ensemble explanation, the
strong and weak formulations of the anthropic principle are equivalent.

Tegmark introduces an ensemble theory based on the idea that every self-consistent
mathematical structure be accorded the ontological status of physical existence. He then goes
on to categorize mathematical structures that have been discovered thus far (by humans),
and argues that this set should be largely universal, in that all self-aware entities should
be able to uncover at least the most basic of these mathematical structures, and that it is
unlikely we have overlooked any equally basic mathematical structures.

An alternative ensemble approach is that of Schmidhuber’s [4] — the “Great Program-
mer”. This states that all possible programs of a universal turing machine have physical
existence. Some of these programs will contain self-aware substructures — these are the
programs deemed interesting by the anthropic principle. Note that there is no need for
the UTM to actually exist, nor is there any need to specify which UTM is to be used —
a program that is meaningful on UTM1 can be executed on UTM2 by prepending it with
another program that describes UTM1 in terms of UTM2’s instructions, then executing the
individual program. Since the set of all programs (inﬁnite length bitstrings) is isomorphic
to the set of whole numbers N, an enumeration of N is suﬃcient to generate the ensemble
that contains our universe. The information content of this complete set is precisely zero,
as no bits are speciﬁed. This has been called the “zero information principle”.

In this paper, we adopt the Schmidhuber ensemble as containing all possible descrip-
tions of all possible universes, whilst remaining agnostic on the issue of whether this is all
there is.1 Each self-consistent mathematical structure (member of the Tegmark ensemble)
is completely described by a ﬁnite set of symbols, and a countable set of axioms encoded in

1For example, this ensemble does not include uncomputable numbers — but should these peculiar
mathematical beasts be accorded physical existence?

2

those symbols, and a set of rules (logic) describing how one mathematical statement may be
converted into another.2 These axioms may be encoded as a bitstring, and the rules encoded
as a program of a UTM that enumerates all possible theorems derived from the axioms, so
each member of the Tegmark ensemble may be mapped onto a Schmidhuber one.3. The
Tegmark ensemble must be contained within the Schmidhuber one.

An alternative connection between the two ensembles is that the Schmidhuber ensemble
is a self-consistent mathematical structure, and is therefore an element of the Tegmark
one. However, all this implies is that one element of the ensemble may in fact generate the
complete ensemble again, a point made by Schmidhuber in that the “Great Programmer”
exists many times, over and over in a recursive manner within his ensemble. This is now
clearly true also of the Tegmark ensemble.

II. UNIVERSAL PRIOR

The natural measure induced on the ensemble of bitstrings is the uniform one, i.e. no
bitstring is favoured over any other. This leads to a problem in that longer strings are far
more numerous than shorter strings, so we would conclude that we should expect to see an
inﬁnitely complex universe.

However, we should recognise that under a UTM, some strings encode for identical
programs as other strings, so one should equivalence class the strings. In particular, ﬁnite
strings (ones in which the bits after some bit number n are “don’t care” bits) are in fact
equivalence classes of all inﬁnite length strings that share the ﬁrst n bits in common. These
strings correspond to halting programs under the UTM. One can see that the size of the
equivalence class drops oﬀ exponentially with the amount of information encoded by the
string. Under a UTM, the amount of information is not necessarily equal to the length of
the string, as some of the bits may be redundant. The sum

PU (s) =

X

2|p|,

p:U computes s from p and halts

(1)

where |p| means the length of p, gives the size of the equivalence class of all halting programs
generating the same output s under the UTM U. This measure distribution is known as
a universal prior, or alternatively a Solomonoﬀ-Levin distribution [5]. We assume the self-
sampling assumption [6,7], essentially that we expect to ﬁnd ourselves in one of the universes
with greatest measure, subject to the constraints of the anthropic principle. This implies we
should ﬁnd ourselves in one of the simplest possible universes capable of supporting self-aware
substructures (SASes). This is the origin of physical law — why we live in a mathematical,

2Strictly speaking, these systems are called recursively enumerable formal systems, and are only
a subset of the totality of mathematics, however this seem in keeping with the spirit of Tegmark’s
suggestion

3In the case of an inﬁnite number of axioms, the theorems must be enumerated using a dovetailer
algorithm.

3

as opposed to a magical universe. This is why aesthetic principles, and Ockam’s razor in
particular are so successful at predicting good scientiﬁc theories. This might also be called
the “minimum information principle”.

There is the issue of what UTM U should be chosen. Schmidhuber sweeps this issue
under the carpet stating that the universal priors diﬀer only by a constant factor due to the
compiler theorem, along the lines of

PV (s) ≥ PU V PU (s)

where PU V is the universal prior of the compiler that interprets U’s instruction set in terms
of V ’s. The inequality is there because there are possibly native V -code programs that
compute s as well. Inverting the symmetric relationship yields:

PU V PU (s) ≤ PV (s) ≤ (PV U )−1P(U)(s)

The trouble with this argument, is that it allows for the possibility that:

PV (s1) ≪ PV (s2), but PU(s1) ≫ PU(s2)

So our expectation of whether we’re in universe s1 or s2 depends on whether we chose V or
U for the interpreting UTM.

There may well be some way of resolving this problem that leads to an absolute measure
over all bitstrings. However, it turns out that an absolute measure is not required to explain
features we observe. A SAS is an information processing entity, and may well be capable
of universal computation (certainly homo sapiens seems capable of universal computation).
Therefore, the only interpreter (UTM) that is relevant to the measure that determines which
universe a SAS appears in is the SAS itself. We should expect to ﬁnd ourselves in a universe
with one of the simplest underlying structures, according to our own information processing
abilities. This does not preclude the fact that other more complex universes (by our own
perspective) may be the simplest such universe according to the self-aware inhabitants of
that universe. This is the bootstrap principle writ large.

III. THE WHITE RABBIT PARADOX

A criticism levelled at ensemble theories is to consider universes indistinguishable from
our own, except for the appearance of something that breaks the laws of physics temporarily,
e.g. a white rabbit is observed to ﬂy around the room at speciﬁc time and place.4 There
are two possible explanations for this:

1. that there is some previously unknown law of physics that caused this rather remark-
able phenomenon to happen. However, it would have to be an extremely complex law,
and thus belong to a rather unlikely universe.

4This problem was ﬁrst discussed in Marchal [8], where it is called the Universal Dovetailer
Paradox. Marchal used the term “White Rabbit” in [9], presumably in a literary reference to
Lewis Carrol.

4

2. that there is some “glitch” or “bug” in the program governing the universe, that allows
some of the “don’t care” bits to be interpreted. Since there are many more ways a
program can fail, than be correct, surely then, the “White Rabbit” universes should
outnumber the lawlike ones.

Consider more carefully the latter scenario.
In most of the universes where the “don’t
care” bits are interpreted, the “don’t care” bits will be devoid of information, and appear
as random noise to the self-aware entity, and thus the universe is indistinguisable from a
law-like one. Only when the “don’t care” bits form a pattern recognisable by the self-aware
entity, will a breakdown of physical laws be observed (such as seeing a ﬂying white rabbit).
Such patterns, of course, will be sparse in the space of all such “don’t care” bitstrings, and
so the vast majority of the pathological universes would be indistinguishable from the law
abiding universe they approximate.

Another viewpoint on this explanation is to realise that SASes are themselves ﬁnite
entities, with ﬁnite discriminatory powers and memory. Therefore, the SAS imposes an
interpretation ﬁlter on the data perceived from the universe it inhabits, imposing order
(or compressibility) in its interpretation of the universe, even if no such order exists. Even
though incompressible strings vastly outnumber compressible ones, the “interpretation ﬁlter”
of the SAS maps these incompressible strings onto compressible ones. This implies a large
number of “don’t care bits” in any description of a universe, with correspondingly larger
numbers of “don’t care bits” for simpler descriptions, giving rise to the universal prior.
Any white rabbit universe must therefore take on the appearance of being a consequence of
complicated physical law, (i.e. case 1 above) which must be rare accoding to the universal
prior.

Marchal’s universal dovetailer paradox is expressed somewhat diﬀerently to the preceding
description of the white rabbit paradox. He assumes that all SASes are neither more nor less
than universal turing machines, and concious experiences are implemented as computations.
This is a form of strong AI he calls COMP. The set of all possible computational continua-
tions can be generated by the dovetailing algorithm. Since all such continuations exist, and
bizarre experiences (eg the white rabbit) by far dominate the numbers of continuations, the
paradox is why we experience order in the world.

This speciﬁcation of the problem does not admit an obvious measure on which to decide
which experiences are more likely than others. However, each such computational continua-
tion can be identiﬁed with a string from the Schmidhuber ensemble, so the universal prior is
deﬁned over the set of such experiences, and the above arguments about the general white
rabbit problem also apply to the universal dovetailer paradox.

IV. QUANTUM MECHANICS

In this section, I ask the question of what is the most general (i.e. minimum information
content) description of an ensemble containing self-aware substructures. Firstly, it seems
that time is critical for consciousness — i.e. in order for there to be a “ﬂow of consciousness”.
Denote the state of an ensemble by ψ. This induces an evolution equation

∂ψ
∂t

= H(ψ, t)

5

(2)

Now conscious observers induce a partitioning for each observable A : ψ −→ {ψa, µa}, where
a indexes the allowable range of “classical” observable values corresponding to A, and µa
is the measure associated with ψa (Pa µa = 15). The ψa will also, in turn, be solutions to
equation (2).

aψ

aψa

If we further assume that the states ψ are elements of a vector space, and that the
evolution equation (2) is linear, we may write ψ = Pa µaψa, and the observable operators
can be written compactly as a linear operator Pa ψaψ†
a, where ψ† is the dual of ψ. Measure
is clearly given by µa = ψ†
. Furthermore, since scaling does not change the physical state
ψ†
represented by ψ, we can assert without loss of generality that ∂
∂t (ψ†ψ) = 0, implying that
H = iH, where H is Hermitian, and ψ is a vector in a Hilbert space. The most general
Hilbert space is one over the ﬁeld of complex numbers. In short, by means of 3 assumptions,
2 of which appear to be irreducible properties of consciousness, and the third being that of
linearity, Quantum Mechanics is derived from the anthropic principle applied to an ensemble.
Returning then, to the issue of linearity. This is not an obvious requirement for anthropic
universes, so must have an explanation. Weinberg [10,11] experimented with a possible non-
linear generalisation of quantum mechanics, however found great diﬃculty in producing a
theory that satisﬁed causality. This is probably due to the nonlinear terms mixing up the
partitioning {ψa, µa} over time. It is usually supposed that causality [3], at least to a certain
level of approximation, is a requirment for a self-aware substructure to exist.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank the following people from the “Everything” email discussion list for
many varied and illuminating discussions on this and related topics: Wei Dai, Hal Finney,
Gilles Henri, James Higgo, George Levy, Alastair Malcolm, Christopher Maloney, Jaques
Mallah, Bruno Marchal and J¨urgen Schmidhuber.

5Here, as elsewhere, we use Σ to denote sum or integral respectively as a is discrete of continuous

6

REFERENCES

[1] E. P. Wigner, Symmetries and Reﬂections (MIT Press, Cambridge, 1967).
[2] J. D. Barrow and F. J. Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (Clarendon, Ox-

ford, 1986).

[3] M. Tegmark, Annals of Physics 270, 1 (1998).
[4] J. Schmidhuber,

in Foundations of Computer Science: Potential-Theory-Cognition,
Vol. 1337 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, edited by C. Freska, M. Jantzen,
and R. Valk (Springer, Berlin, 1997), pp. 201–208.

[5] M. Li and P. Vit´anyi, An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and its Applications,

2nd ed. (Springer, New York, 1997).

[6] J. Leslie, The End of the World (Routledge, London, 1996).
[7] B. Carter, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A310, 347 (1983).
[8] B. Marchal, in Proceedings of WOCFAI ’91, edited by M. de Glas and D. Gabbay

(Angkor, Paris, 1991), pp. 335–345.

[9] B. Marchal, Technical Report No. TR/IRIDIA/95, Brussels University (unpublished).
[10] S. Weinberg, Annals of Physics 194, 336 (1989).
[11] S. Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory (Pantheon, New York, 1992).

7

