0
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
2
v
1
2
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evolution in the Multiverse

Russell K. Standish
High Performance Computing Support Unit
University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052
Australia
R.Standish@unsw.edu.au
http://parallel.hpc.unsw.edu.au

February 2, 2008

Abstract

In the Many Worlds Interpretation of quantum mechanics, the range
of possible worlds (or histories) provides variation, and the Anthropic
Principle is a selective principle analogous to natural selection. When
looked on in this way, the “process” by which the laws and constants of
physics is determined not too diﬀerent from the process that gave rise to
our current biodiversity, i.e. Darwinian evolution. This has implications
for the ﬁelds of SETI and Artiﬁcial Life, which are based on a philosophy
of the inevitability of life.

1

Introduction

The Many Worlds Interpretation (MWI)[6] of Quantum Mechanics has become
increasingly favoured in recent years over its rivals, with a recent straw poll
of eminent physicists[18, pp170–1] showing more than 50% support it. David
Deutsch[7] provides a convincing argument in favour of MWI, and the multi-
verse in the title is due to him. Tegmark[17] has somewhat waggishly suggested
that a Principle of Plenitude (alternatively All Universes Hypothesis — AUH),
coupled with the Anthropic Principle1 2[3] (AP) could be the ultimate theory of

1http://www.anthropic-principle.com
2The Anthropic Principle is a statement that the universe we observe must be consistent
with the existence of us as observers. In the all universes hypothesis, the anthropic principle
acts to select those universes that are “interesting”, i.e. capable of supporting self aware
consciousness. In this all universes picture, the distinction between the weak and strong forms
of the anthropic principle is meaningless, so we will simply refer to the Anthropic Principle
throughout ths paper.

1

everything (TOE). Tegmark’s Plenitude consists of all mathematically consis-
tent logical systems, the principle of plenitude according each of these systems
physical existence, however by the anthropic principle, we should only expect
to ﬁnd ourselves in a system capable of supporting self-aware substructures,
i.e.
conciousness. Alternative Plenitudes have been suggested, for example
Schmidhuber’s[14] all possible programs for a universal turing machine. I have
argued elsewhere[16], that the quantum mechanical subset of the Plenitude,
namely the Multiverse, is the most likely system to be observed by conscious
beings.

In this paper, we accept the MWI or Multiverse as a working hypothesis,
and consider what the implications are for evolutionary systems. An evolution-
ary system consists of a means of producing variation, and a means of selecting
amongst those variations (natural selection). Now variations are produced by
chance and in the Multiverse picture, this corresponds to a branching of histo-
ries, whereby a particular entity’s oﬀspring will have diﬀerent forms in diﬀerent
histories. The measure of each variant is related to the proportions in which the
variants are formed, and the measure of each variant evolves in time through a
strictly deterministic application of Schr¨odinger’s equation.

What, then, determines which organisms we see today, given that a priori,
any possible history, and hence any mix of organisms may correspond to our
own? Is natural selection completely meaningless?

The ﬁrst principle we need to apply is the anthropic principle, i.e. only
those histories leading to complex, self-aware substructures will be selected.
We also need to apply the self sampling assumption[4, 5] (SSA). The SSA is
that each observer should regard itself as a random sample drawn from the
set of all observer.
It is the implicit assumption used in Carter and Leslie’s
Doomsday argument[9], and much other anthropic reasoning. Stated another
way, as observers, we should expect to see a world that is nearly maximal in
In this picture,
measure, subject to it being consistent with our existence.
natural selection is a process that diﬀerentiates the measure attributed to each
variant organism.

2 Complexity Growth in Evolution

As I argued elsewhere[16], lawful universes with simple initial states by far
dominate the set consistent with the AP. So the AP ﬁxes the end point of our
evolutionary history (existence of complex, self-aware organisms), and the SSA
ﬁxes the beginning (evolutionary history is most likely started with the simplest
organisms). We should therefore expect to see an increase in complexity through
time.

What about living systems not governed by the anthropic principle? Ex-
amples include extra terrestrial life (within our own universe, if it exists) and
artiﬁcial life systems. Nonhuman terrestrial life is governed by the AP, since one

2

expects that the evolutionary process that produced us will also produce the
numerous other organisms found on Earth. A system of life that has evolved
completely independently of Earth has no requirement to produce intelligent
beings, and unless complexity growth is inevitable given the laws of physics and
chemistry, no requirement to produce complex life forms. Proponents of SETI
(the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) believe in an inevitability of the
evolution of intelligent life, given the laws of physics. The anthropic principle
does indeed ensure that the laws of physics are compatible with the evolution
of intelligence, but does not mandate that this should be likely (excepting, ob-
viously in our own case). Hanson[8] has studied a model of evolution based on
easy and hard steps to make predictions about what the distribution of such
steps should be within the fossil record. He ﬁnds that the fossil record is consis-
tent with there being 4–5 hard steps in getting to intelligent life on Earth. By
hard steps, he means steps who’s expected duration greatly exeeds the present
age of the universe. The hard steps include

• origin of ﬁrst replicator

• origin of sex

• origin of eukaryotic cells

• origin of multicellularity

• possibly the origin of self-aware conscious entities

This would imply that intelligent life is fairly unique within our own universe,
to the chagrin of the SETI proponents, but simple prokaryotic life may well be
ubiquitous. Of course, it is also true that a single example of extra terrestrial
intelligence would be an important counterexample to these arguments based
on the AP and SSA, so SETI is by itself not a fruitless exercise.

Likewise, for artiﬁcial life, it would seem plausible that a serious of easy and
hard steps are required to climb the complexity ladder. Already, the ﬁrst such
hard transition (the creation of replicators from the primeval soup) has been
observed[11, 10], but equivalents of other transitions (eg transition to sexual re-
production, prokaryote to eukaryote or multicellularity) have not been observed
to date. Ray is leading a major experiment designed to probe the transition
to multicellularity[12, 13] — success in this experiment will provide remarkable
constraints on just how ﬁnely tuned the physics and chemistry needs to be in
order for the system to pass through a hard transistion.

Adami[1, 2] and co-workers examined the Avida alife system for evidence of
complexity growth during evolution. They did ﬁnd this, although this is largely
seen as the artiﬁcial organisms learning how to solve arithmetic problems that
have been imposed artiﬁcially on the system. An analogous study by myself[15]
of Tierra showed no such increase in complexity over time — if anything the
trend was to greater simplicity. This work is still in progress.

3

3 Evolutionary Physics?

Returning back to the picture of the “All Universes Hypothesis”, we can see
that our current universe is made up from contingency and necessity. The ne-
cessity comes from the requirements of the anthropic principle, however when
a particular aspect of the universe is not constrained by the AP, its value must
be decided by chance (according to the SSA) the ﬁrst time it is “measured”
by self-aware beings (this measurement may well be indirect — properties of
the microscopic or cosmic worlds will need to be consistent with our everyday
observations at the macroscopic level, so may well be determined prior to the
ﬁrst direct measurements). Evolution is also described as a mixture of con-
tingency and necessity. When understood in terms of the AP supplying the
necessary, and the SSA supplying the rationale for resolving chance, the con-
nection between the selection of phyical laws and the selection of organisms in
evolution is made clear. It is as though the laws of physics and chemistry have
themselves evolved. Perhaps applying evolutionary principles to the underlying
physico-chemical laws of an alife system will result in an alife system that can
pass through these hard transitions.

References

[1] Chris Adami. Introduction to Artiﬁcial Life. Springer, 1998.

[2] Chris Adami. Physical complexity of symbolic sequences. Physica D,

137:62–69, 2000.

Clarendon, Oxford, 1986.

[3] J. D. Barrow and F. J. Tipler. The Anthropic Cosmological Principle.

[4] Nick Bostrom.

Paradoxes

of

the

self-sampling

assumption.

http://www.anthropic-principle.com/preprints.html.

[5] Nick Bostrom. Observational Selection Eﬀects and Probability. PhD thesis,

Dept. Philosophy, Logic and Scientiﬁc Methods
London
http://www.anthropic-principle.com/preprints.html.

School

of

Economics,

2000.

[6] Bryce de Witt and R. Neill Graham. The Many Worlds Interpretation of

Quantum Mechanics. Princeton UP, 1973.

[7] David Deutsh. The Fabric of Reality. Penguin, 1997.

[8] Robin Hanson.

Must early life be easy?

Origins of Life, 2000.

the rythm of ma-
submitted;

jor evolutionary transitions.
http://hanson.gmu.edu/hardstep.pdf.

4

[9] J. Leslie. The End of the World. Routledge, London, 1996.

[10] A. N. Pargellis. The evolution of self-replicating computer organisms. Phys-

ica D, 98:111, 1996.

91:86, 1996.

[11] A. N. Pargellis. The spontaneous generation of digital life. Physica D,

[12] Tom Ray. A proposal to create two biodiversity reserves: One digi-
tal and one organic. See ftp://tierra.slhs.udel.edu/tierra/doc/reserves.tex,
http://www.hip.atr.co.jp/˜ray/pubs/reserves/reserves.html. Also see New
Scientist, vol 150, no 2034, pp32–35.

[13] Tom Ray and Joseph Hart. Evolution of diﬀerentiated multi-threaded digi-
tal organisms. In Chris Adami, Richard Belew, Hiroaki Kitano, and Charles
Taylor, editors, Artiﬁcial Life VI, pages 295–304, Cambridge, Mass., 1998.
MIT Press.

[14] J¨urgen Schmidhuber. A computer scientist’s view of life, the universe and
everything. In C. Freska, M. Jantzen, and R. Valk, editors, Foundations
of Computer Science: Potential-Theory-Cognition, volume 1337 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 201–208. Springer, Berlin, 1997.

[15] Russell K. Standish. Some techniques for the measurement of complexity
in Tierra. In Advances in Artiﬁcial Life, volume 1674 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, page 104, Berlin, 1999. Springer.

[16] Russell K. Standish. Why Occam’s razor? Annals of Physics, 2000. sub-

mitted.

[17] Max Tegmark. Is ”the theory of everything” merely the ultimate ensemble

theory. Annals of Physics, 270:1–51, 1998.

[18] Frank J. Tipler. The Physics of Immortality. Doubleday, 1994.

5

