0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

6

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

What quantum mechanics describes is discontinuous motion

Gao Shan

Institute of Quantum Mechanics

11-10, NO.10 Building, YueTan XiJie DongLi, XiCheng District

Beijing 100045, P.R.China

E-mail: gaoshan.iqm@263.net

We show that the natural motion of particles in continuous space-time (CSTM) is not classi-
cal continuous motion (CCM), but one kind of essentially discontinuous motion, the wave func-
tion in quantum mechanics is the very mathematical complex describing this kind of motion, and
Schr¨odinger equation is just its simplest nonrelativistic motion equation, we call such motion quan-
tum discontinuous motion or quantum motion; furthermore, we show that, when considering gravity
the space-time will be essentially discrete, and the motion in discrete space-time (DSTM) will nat-
urally result in the collapse process of the wave function, this ﬁnally brings about the appearance
of classical continuous motion (CCM) in macroscopic world.

I. INTRODUCTION

The analysis about motion has never ceased since the old Greece times, but from Zeno Paradox to Einstein’s
relativity [6], only CCM is discussed, and its uniqueness is taken for granted ever since, but as to whether or not CCM
is the only possible and objective motion, whether CCM is the real motion or apparent motion, no one has given a
deﬁnite answer up to now, in fact, people have been indulging in the study of the motion law, but omitted the study
of the motion itself.

On the other hand, we have entered into the microscopic world for nearly one century, but our understanding
about it is still in confusion, the orthodox view [5] renunciates CCM in microscopic world, but permits no existence
of objective motion mode for the microscopic particles, while the opponents [3,4,7] still recourse to CCM to lessen the
pain of losing realism, no other objective motion modes have been presented for the microscopic particles till now,
thus the above problem is more urgent than ever.

In this paper, we will mainly address the above problem, after given a deep logical and physical analysis about
motion, we demonstrate that the natural motion in continuous space-time or CSTM is not CCM, but one kind of
essentially discontinuous motion, we call it quantum discontinuous motion or quantum motion, since we show that
the wave function in quantum mechanics is the very mathematical complex describing it, and Schr¨odinger equation
of the wave function is also its simplest nonrelativistic motion equation; Furthermore, since the combination of
quantum mechanics and general relativity will result in the discreteness of space-time, namely the real space-time
will be essentially discrete, we further study the motion in discrete space-time, or DSTM, and demonstrate that it
will naturally result in the collapse process of the wave function, and ﬁnally bring about the appearance of CCM in
macroscopic world.

The plan of this paper is as follows: In Sect. 2 we ﬁrst give a general analysis about CSTM, the motion state
of particle is physically deﬁned, its general form and description are also given based on the mathematical analysis
in the Appendix. In Sect. 3 we work out the simplest evolution law of CSTM, which turns out to be Schr¨odinger
equation in quantum mechanics. In Sect. 4 we give a strict physical deﬁnition of CSTM, and further discuss the
constant ¯h involved in its law. In Sect. 5 we point out that space-time is essentially discrete due to the ubiquitous
existence of gravity, and give a simple demonstration. In Sect. 6 we further give a general analysis about DSTM, and
the general form of motion state in such space-time is given. In Sect. 7 the evolution law of DSTM is worked out, and
we demonstrate that it will naturally result in the collapse process of the wave function. In Sect. 8 we further show
that CCM and its evolution law can be consistently derived from the evolution law of DSTM. At last, conclusions are
given.

II. GENERAL ANALYSIS ABOUT MOTION IN CONTINUOUS SPACE-TIME (CSTM)

In this section, we will give a deep logical and physical analysis about CSTM.

1

A. The motion state of particle

First, we should deﬁne the motion state of particle, there are two alternatives, one is the instant state of particle,
the other is the inﬁnitesimal interval state of particle, it has been generally accepted that the motion state of particle
should be the inﬁnitesimal interval state of particle, not the instant state of particle, while people usually omit their
essential diﬀerence, here we will present some of them.

(1).The instant state of particle contains only one point in space, its potential in mathematics is zero, while the
inﬁnitesimal interval state of particle contains inﬁnite innumerable points in space, its potential in mathematics is ζ1.
(2).The instant state of particle contains no motion, but only the existence of particle, while the inﬁnitesimal interval

state of particle may contain abundant motion elements, since it contains inﬁnite innumerable points in space.

(3).The instant state of particle possesses no physical meaning, since we can not access it through physical mea-
surement, while the inﬁnitesimal interval state of particle possesses real physical meaning, since we can measure it by
means of the following inﬁnite process:∆t → dt.

(4).We can only ﬁnd and conﬁrm the law for the inﬁnitesimal interval state of particle, while as to the instant state

of particle, even if its law exists, we can not ﬁnd it, let along conﬁrm it.

In fact, in physics there exist only the description quantities deﬁned during inﬁnitesimal time interval, this fact can
be seen from the familiar diﬀerential quantities such as dt and dx, whereas the quantities deﬁned at instants come only
from mathematics, people always mix up these two kinds of quantities, this is a huge obstacle for the development of
physics. Thus we can only discuss the motion state and relevant quantities deﬁned during inﬁnitesimal time interval,
as well as their diﬀerential laws, if we study the point set corresponding to real physical motion.

For simplicity, in the following we say the motion state of particle at one instant, but it still denotes the inﬁnitesimal

interval state of particle, not the instant state of particle.

B. The general form of the motion state of particle

Secondly, we will give the general form of the motion state of particle, according to the analysis about point set(see
Appendix), the natural assumption in logic is that the motion state of particle in inﬁnitesimal time interval is a
general dense point set in space, since we have no a priori reason to assume a special form, its proper description is
the measure density ρ(x, t) and measure density ﬂuid j(x, t).

Certainly, at some instant t the motion state of particle may assume some kind of special form, such as the
continuous point set described by dx or ρ(x, t) = δ(x − x(t)), but whether or not this kind of special form can exist
for other instants should be determined by the motion law, not our prejudices.

III. THE EVOLUTION OF MOTION IN CONTINUOUS SPACE-TIME (CSTM)

In the following, we will give the main clues for ﬁnding the possible evolution equations of CSTM, and show that
Schr¨odinger equation in quantum mechanics is just its simplest nonrelativistic evolution equations. Here we mainly
analyze one-dimension motion, but the results can be easily extended to three-dimension situation.

A. The ﬁrst motion principle

First, we should ﬁnd the ﬁrst motion principle similar to the ﬁrst Newton principle, this means that we need to
ﬁnd the simplest solution of the motion equation, in which we can get the invariant quantity during free motion, it is
evident that the simplest solution of the motion equation is:

∂ρ(x, t)

∂t

= 0

∂j(x, t)

∂x

= 0

∂j(x, t)

∂t

= 0

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

∂ρ(x, t)

∂x

= 0

(4)

using the relation j(x, t)=ρ(x, t) · v we can further get the solution, namely ρ(x, t)=1,j(x, t)=v=p/m, where m is the
mass of the particle, p is deﬁned as the momentum of particle. Now, we get the ﬁrst motion principle, namely during
the free motion of particle, the momentum of the particle is invariant, but it can be easily seen that, contrary to
classical continuous motion, for the free particle with one constant momentum, its position will not be limited in the
inﬁnitesimal space dx, but spread throughout the whole space with the same position measure density.

Similar to the quantity position, the natural assumption in logic is also that the momentum (motion) state of
particle in inﬁnitesimal time interval is still a general dense point set in momentum space, thus we can also deﬁne the
momentum measure density f (p, t), and the momentum measure ﬂuid density J(p, t), their meanings are similar to
those of position.

B. Two kinds of description bases

Now, we have two description quantities, one is position, the other is momentum, and position descriptions ρ(x, t)
and j(x, t) provide a complete local description of the motion state, we may call it local description basis, similarly
momentum descriptions f (p, t) and J(p, t) provide a complete nonlocal description of the motion state, since for the
particle with any constant momentum, its position will spread throughout the whole space with the same position
measure density, we may call it nonlocal description basis.

Furthermore, at any instant the motion state of particle is unique, thus there should exist a one-to-one relation
between these two kinds of description bases, namely there should exist a one-to-one relation between position de-
scription (ρ, j) and momentum description (f, J), and this relation is irrelevant to the concrete motion state, in the
following we will mainly discuss how to ﬁnd this one-to-one relation, and our analysis will also show that this relation
essentially determines the evolution of motion.

C. One-to-one relation

First, it is evident that there exists no direct one-to-one relation between the measure density functions ρ(x, t) and
f (p, t), since even for the above simplest situation, we have ρ(x, t) = 1 and f (p, t) = δ2(p − p0)∗, and there is no
one-to-one relation between them.

Then in order to obtain the one-to-one relation, we have to create new properties on the basis of the above position
description (ρ, j) and momentum description (f, J), this needs a little mathematical trick, here we only give the main
clues and the detailed mathematical demonstrations are omitted, ﬁrst, we disregard the time variable t and let t = 0,
as to the above free evolution state with one momentum, we have (ρ, j) = (1, p0/m) and (f, J) = (δ2(p − p0), 0), thus
we need to create a new position state function ψ(x, 0) using 1 and p0/m, a new momentum state function ϕ(p, 0)
using δ2(p − p0) and 0, and ﬁnd the one-to-one relation between these two state functions, this means there exists a
one-to-one transformation between the state functions ψ(x, 0) and ϕ(p, 0), we generally write it as follows:

ψ(x, 0) = Z +∞

−∞

ϕ(p, 0)T (p, x)dp

(5)

where T (p, x) is the transformation function and generally continuous and ﬁnite for ﬁnite p and x, since the function

ϕ(p, 0) will contain some form of the basic element δ2(p−p0), normally we may expand it as ϕ(p, 0) = P∞i=1 aiδi(p−p0),

while the function ψ(x, 0) will contain the momentum p0, and be generally continuous and ﬁnite for ﬁnite x, then
it is evident that the function ϕ(p, 0) can only contain the term δ(p − p0), because the other terms will result in
inﬁniteness.

On the other hand, since the result ϕ(p, 0) = δ(p − p0) implies that there exists the simple relation
f(p,0)=ϕ(p, 0)∗ϕ(p, 0)†, and owing to the equality between the position description and momentum description, we also
have the similar relation ρ(x, 0)=ψ(x, 0)∗ψ(x, 0), thus we may let ψ(x, 0) = eiG(p0,x) and have T (p, x) = eiG(p,x), then

∗ This result can be directly obtained when considering the general normalization relation RΩ ρ(x, t)dx = RΩ f (p, t)dp.

†Evidently, another simple relation f(p,0)=ϕ(p, 0)2 permit no existence of one-to-one relation

3

considering the symmetry between the properties position and momentum‡, we have the general extension G(p, x) =

we let ¯h = 1 in the following discussions), then we get the basic one-to-one relation, it is ψ(x, 0) = R +∞

P∞i=1 bi(px)i, furthermore, this kind of symmetry also results in the symmetry between the transformation T (p, x)
and its reverse transformation T −1(p, x), where T −1(p, x) satisﬁes the relation ϕ(p, 0) = R +∞

ψ(x, 0)T −1(p, x)dp,
thus we can only have the term px in the function G(p, x), and the resulting symmetry relation between these two
transformations will be T −1(p, x) = T ∗(p, x) = e−ipx, we let b1 = 1/¯h, where ¯h is a constant quantity(for simplicity
ϕ(p, 0)eipxdp,
where ψ(x, 0) = e−ip0x and ϕ(p, 0) = δ(p − p0), it mainly results from the essential symmetry involved in CSTM itself.
In order to further ﬁnd how the time variable t is included in the functions ψ(x, t) and ϕ(p, t), we may consider
the superposition of two single momentum states, namely ψ(x, t) = 1√2
[eip1x−ic1(t) + eip2x−ic2(t)], then the position
measure density is ρ(x, t) = [1 + cos(△c(t) − △px)]/2, where △c(t) = c2(t) − c1(t) and △p = p2 − p1, now we let
△p → 0, then we have ρ(x, t) → 1 and △c(t) → 0, especially using the measure conservation relation we can get
dc(t)/dt = dp · p/m, namely dc(t) = d(p2/m) · t or dc(t) = dE · t, where E = p2/m, is deﬁned as the energy of
the particle in the nonrelativistic domain, thus as to any single momentum state we have the time-included formula
ψ(x, t) = eipx−iEt.

−∞

−∞

In fact, there may exist other complex forms for the state functions ψ(x, t) and ϕ(p, t), for example, they are not the
above simple number functions but multidimensional vector functions such as ψ(x, t) = (ψ1(x, t), ψ2(x, t), ..., ψn(x, t))
and ϕ(p, t) = (ϕ1(p, t), ϕ2(p, t), ..., ϕn(p, t)), but the above one-to-one relation still exists for every component function,
i=1 ψi(x, t)∗ψi(x, t) and
i=1 ϕi(p, t)∗ϕi(p, t), these complex forms will correspond to the particles with more complex structure,

and these vector functions still satisfy the above modulo square relations, namely ρ(x, t) = Pn
f (p, t) = Pn

say, involving more inner properties of the particle such as charge and spin etc.

At last, since the one-to-one relation between the position description and momentum description is irrelevant to the
concrete motion state, the above one-to-one relation for the free motion state with one momentum should hold true for
any motion state, and the states satisfying the one-to-one relation will be the possible motion states. Furthermore, it is
evident that this one-to-one relation will directly result in the famous Heisenberg uncertainty relation △x · △p ≥ ¯h/2.

D. The evolution law of motion in continuous space-time (CSTM)

Now, we will work out the evolution law of CSTM.
First, as to the free motion state with one momentum, namely the single momentum state ψ(x, t) = eipx−iEt, using
m and including the constant quantity ¯h we can easily ﬁnd its nonrelativistic

the above deﬁnition of energy E = p2
evolution law, which is

i¯h

∂ψ(x, t)

∂t

= −

¯h2
2m

·

∂2ψ(x, t)

∂x2

(6)

then owing to the linearity of this equation, this evolution equation also applies to the linear superposition of the
single momentum states, namely all possible free notion states, or we can say, it is the free evolution law of CSTM.
Secondly, we will consider the evolution law of CTSM under outside potential, when the potential U (x, t) is a

constant U , the evolution equation will be

i¯h

∂ψ(x, t)

∂t

= −

¯h2
2m

·

∂2ψ(x, t)

∂x2 + U · ψ(x, t)

then when the potential U (x, t) is related to x and t, the above form will still hole true, namely

i¯h

∂ψ(x, t)

∂t

= −

¯h2
2m

·

∂2ψ(x, t)

∂x2 + U (x, t) · ψ(x, t)

for three-dimension situation the equation will be

i¯h

∂ψ(x, t)

∂t

= −

¯h2
2m

· ∇2ψ(x, t) + U(x, t) · ψ(x, t)

(7)

(8)

(9)

‡This symmetry essentially stems from the equivalence between these two kinds of descriptions, the direct implication is for
ρ(x, 0) = δ2(x − x0) we also have f (p, 0) = 1.

4

this is just the Schr¨odinger equation in quantum mechanics§.

At last, the above analysis also shows that the state function ψ(x, t) provides a complete description of CSTM,
since CSTM is completely described by the measure density ρ(x, t) and measure ﬂuid density j(x, t), and according
to the above evolution equation the state function ψ(x, t) can be expressed by these two functions, namely ψ(x, t) =
+ C(t)∗∗, and these two functions can also be expressed by
the state function, namely ρ(x, t) = |ψ(x, t)|2 and j(x, t) = [ψ∗∂ψ/∂t − ψ∂ψ∗/∂t]/2i, then there exists a one-to-one
relation between (ρ(x, t), j(x, t)) and ψ(x, t) when omitting the absolute phase, thus the state function ψ(x, t) also
provides a complete description of CSTM.

ρ1/2 · eiS(x,t)/¯h, where S(x, t) = mR x

, t)/ρ(x

, t)dx

−∞

j(x

′

′

′

On the other hand, we can see that the absolute phase of the wave function ψ(x, t), which may depend on time, is
useless for describing CSTM, since according to the above analysis it disappears in the measure density ρ(x, t) and
measure ﬂuid density j(x, t), which completely describe CSTM, thus it is natural that the absolute phase of the wave
function possesses no physical meaning.

IV. FURTHER DISCUSSIONS ABOUT MOTION IN CONTINUOUS SPACE-TIME (CSTM)

A. The deﬁnition of motion in continuous space-time (CSTM)

Now we can give the physical deﬁnition of CSTM in three-dimension space, the deﬁnition for other abstract spaces

or many-particle situation can be easily extended.

(1). The motion of particle in space is described by dense point set in four-dimension space and time.
(2). The motion state of particle in space is described by the position measure density ρ(x, t) and position measure

ﬂuid density j(x, t) of the corresponding dense point set.

(3). The evolution of motion corresponds to the evolution of the dense point set, and the simplest evolution equation

is Schr¨odinger equation in quantum mechanics.

Compared with classical continuous motion, we may call CSTM quantum discontinuous motion, or quantum motion,
the commonness of these two kinds of motion is that they are both the motion of particle, namely the moving object
exists only in one position in space at one instant, their diﬀerence lies in the moving behavior, namely the behavior
of the particle during inﬁnitesimal time interval [t,t+dt], for classical motion, the particle is limited in a certain local
space interval [V,V+dV], while for quantum motion, the particle moves throughout the whole space with a certain
position measure density ρ(x, t).

In fact, all physical states of CSTM are deﬁned during inﬁnitesimal time interval in the meaning of measure, not
at one instant, for example, the single momentum state ψp(x, t) = eipx−iEt, especially even the single position state
ψ(x, t) = δ(x − x0) is still deﬁned during inﬁnitesimal time interval.

B. Some discussions about the constant ¯h

First, from the above analysis about CSTM, we can understand why the constant ¯h with dimension J · s should
appear in the evolution equation of CSTM, or Schr¨odinger equation, the existence of ¯h essentially results from the
equivalence between the nonlocal momentum description and local position description of CSTM, it is this equivalence
that results in the one-to-one relation between these two kinds of descriptions, which requires the existence of a certain
constant ¯h with dimension J · s to cancel out the dimension of the physical quantities px and Et in the relation, at the
same time, the existence of ¯h also indicates some kind of balance between the dispersion of the position distribution
and that of momentum distribution limited by the one-to-one relation ( there is no such limitation for CCM and ¯h = 0
), or we can say, the existence of ¯h essentially indicates some kind of balance between the nonlocality and locality of
motion in continuous space-time.

§In fact, Schr¨odinger equation is also the simplest evolution equation of dense point set, this fact manifests the identity of
physical reality and mathematical reality to some extent.

′

′

′

jx(x

, y, z, t)/ρ(x

, y, z, t)dx

+ C(t) =

∗∗When in three-dimension space, the formula for S(x,y,z,t) will be S(x, y, z, t) = mR x
mR y

, z, t)dy
∇ × {j(x, y, z, t)/ρ(x, y, z, t)} = 0.

+C(t) = mR z

, z, t)/ρ(x, y

, t)/ρ(x, y, z

jz(x, y, z

jy(x, y

, t)dz

−∞

−∞

′

′

′

′

′

′

−∞

+C(t), since in general there exists the relation

5

Secondly, even though the appearance of ¯h in the evolution equation of CSTM is inevitable, its value can not be
determined by CSTM itself, we only know that ¯h possesses a ﬁnite nonzero value, certainly, just like the other physical
constants such as c and G, its value can be determined by the experience, but there may exist some deeper reasons
for the special value of ¯h in our universe, although motion can not determine this value alone, the solution may have
to resort to other subtle realities in this world, for example, gravity (G), space-time(c), or even the existence of our
mankind.

V. THE REAL SPACE-TIME IS DISCRETE

The combination of quantum mechanics and general relativity strongly implied space-time is essentially discrete,
and the minimum space-time unit will be Planck size Tp and Lp, thus owing to the ubiquitous existence of gravity,
the real space-time will be essentially discrete with the minimum size Tp and Lp.

Here we will give a simple operational demonstration about the discreteness of space-time, consider a measurement
of the length between points A and B, at point A place a clock with mass m and size a to register time, at point
B place a reﬂection mirror, when t=0 a photon signal is sent from A to B, at point B it is reﬂected by the mirror
and returns to point A, then the clock registers the return time, for classical situation the measured length will be
L = 1
2 ct, but when considering quantum mechanics and general relativity, the existence of the clock introduces two
kinds of uncertainties to the measured length, the uncertainty resulting from quantum mechanics is: δLQM ≥ ( ¯hL
mc )1/2,
the uncertainty resulting from general relativity is: δLGR ∼= 1
c2 , then the total uncertainties is:δL =
2
c3 )1/2, is Planck length, thus we conclude that the minimum measurable
δLQM + δLGR ≥ (L · Lp
length is Planck length Lp, in a similar way, we can also work out the minimum measurable time, it is just Planck
time Tp.

2)1/3, where Lp = ( G¯h

2Gm

c2 ln a+L

a ≥ Gm

VI. GENERAL ANALYSIS ABOUT MOTION IN DISCRETE SPACE-TIME (DSTM)

In the discrete space-time, there exist absolute minimum sizes Tp and Lp, namely the minimum distinguishable size
of time and position of the particle is respectively Tp and Lp, thus in physics the existence of the particle is no longer
in one position at one instant as in the continuous space-time, but limited in a space interval Lp during a ﬁnite time
interval Tp, it can be seen that this state corresponds to the instant state of particle in continuous space-time, we
deﬁne it as the instant state of particle in discrete space-time, this state evidently contains no motion, but only the
existence of particle.

Furthermore, during the ﬁnite time interval Tp the particle can only be limited in a space interval Lp, since if it
can move throughout at least two diﬀerent local regions with separation size larger than Lp during the time interval
Tp, then there essentially exists a smaller distinguishable ﬁnite time interval than Tp, which evidently contradicts the
fact that Tp is the minimum time unit, thus the discreteness of space-time essentially results in the existence of local
position state of the particle, in which the particle stays in a local region with size Lp for a time interval Tp, we may
call such general local position state Planck cell state.

Similar to the analysis of the motion state in continuous space-time, in discrete space-time, the natural assumption
in logic is that the motion state of particle in ﬁnite time interval, which is much longer than Tp but still small enough,
is a general discrete point set or cell set in space, since we have no a priori reason to assume a special form, its proper
description is still the measure density ρ(x, t) and measure density ﬂuid j(x, t), but in the meaning of time average.
Certainly, we can also get the motion state of particle in discrete space-time from that in continuous space-time,
since in continuous space-time the particle, which instant state is the particle being in one position at one instant,
moves throughout the whole space during inﬁnitesimal time interval, while in discrete space-time the instant state
of particle turns to be the particle being in a space interval Lp during a ﬁnite time interval Tp, the motion state of
particle in discrete space-time will naturally be that during a ﬁnite time interval much larger than Tp the particle
moves throughout the whole space with the position measure density ρ(x, t) in the meaning of time average.

Now the visual physical picture of DSTM will be that during a ﬁnite time interval Tp the particle will stay in a local
region with size Lp, then it will still stay there or ”jump” to another local region, which may be very far from the
original region, while during a time interval much larger than Tp the particle will move throughout the whole space
with a certain average position measure density ρ(x, t).

As we can see, on the one hand, the particle undergoing DSTM stays in a local region during inﬁnitesimal time
interval, this may generate the display of CCM, on the other hand, during a ﬁnite time interval much larger than Tp
the particle will continually jumps from one local region to another local region, and move throughout the whole space
with a certain position measure density ρ(x, t), this may generate the display of CSTM, then DSTM is evidently some

6

kind of uniﬁcation of CCM and CSTM, in fact, owing to the ubiquitous existence of quantum and gravity, space-time
is essentially discrete, and DSTM will be the only real motion in Nature, while CSTM and CCM are the apparent
motion modes, they are only two ideal approximators of DSTM in microscopic and macroscopic world, thus DSTM is
just the lost reality unifying quantum motion (CSTM) and classical motion (CCM), and it will undoubtedly provide
an uniform realistic picture for microscopic world and macroscopic world, the following analysis will conﬁrm this
conclusion more convincingly.

VII. THE EVOLUTION OF MOTION IN DISCRETE SPACE-TIME (DSTM)

A. A general discussion

Since CSTM is some kind of time average of DSTM, the evolution of DSTM will follow the evolution law of CSTM
in the meaning of time average, on the other hand, the particle undergoing DSTM does stay in a local region for a
ﬁnite nonzero time interval, and jump from this local region to another local region stochastically, thus the position
measure density ρ(x, t) of the particle will be essentially changed in a stochastic way due to the ﬁnite nonzero stay
time in diﬀerent stochastic region††, and the corresponding wave function will be also stochastically changed, then this
kind of stochastic jump inevitably introduce the stochastic element to the evolution, so the evolution law of DSTM
will be the combination of the deterministic linear evolution and stochastic nonlinear evolution, in the following we
will work out this law.

B. Two rules

At ﬁrst, since CSTM is some kind of average of DSTM during a ﬁnite time interval much larger than Tp, thus the
position measure density ρ(x, t) of the particle undergoing CSTM will be also the average of the position distribution of
the particle undergoing DSTM during this time interval, then it is natural that the position of the particle undergoing
DSTM will satisfy the position measure density ρ(x, t), namely for DSTM the stochastic stay position of the particle
satisﬁes the distribution

P (x, t) = |ψ(x, t)|2

(10)

this is the ﬁrst useful rule for ﬁnding the evolution law of DSTM.

Secondly, according to the deﬁnition of the position measure density ρ(x, t), the ﬁnite nonzero stay time of the
particle in a local region evidently implies that the position measure density ρ(x, t) in that region will be increased
after this ﬁnite nonzero stay time interval, and the increase will be larger when the stay time is longer. We consider
the general situation that the particle undergoing DSTM stays in a local region Lp for a time interval T , in the ﬁrst
rank approximation the increase of the position measure density ρ(x, t) in this region can be written as follows after
normalization:

ρ(x, t + T ) =

1

A(T )

(ρ(x, t) + T /Tm)

(11)

where A(T ) is the normalization factor, Tm is a certain time size to be determined, which may be relevant to the
concrete motion state of the particle, this will be the second useful rule.

We ﬁrst work out the normalization factor A(t), considering the following two conditions:(1)when T = 0,ρ(x, t+T ) =
ρ(x, t), and A(0) = 1;(2)when T → ∞,ρ(x, t + T ) → 1, and A(∞) → T /Tm, we can get A(T ) = 1 + T /Tm, then the
above formula will be:

ρ(x, t + T ) =

ρ(x, t) + T /Tm

1 + T /Tm

(12)

or it can be written as follows:

††For CSTM, the stay time of the particle in any position is zero, so its position measure density ρ(x, t) is not inﬂuenced by
the stochastic jump.

7

∆ρ(x, t) =

T

Tm + T

(1 − ρ)

(13)

in general, when T > Tp, namely when the particle undergoing DSTM stays in a local region Lp for a time interval
longer than Tp, we can divide the whole time interval T into many Planck cell Tp, and the above formula is still valid
for every cell, thus in the following discussions we let T = Tp for simplicity.

In order to further ﬁnd the formula of Tm, we need to study the limitation on the jump of the particle undergoing
DSTM, since the item Tm just denotes this kind of limitation, this can be seen from the following two extreme
situations:(1)when Tm → ∞, we have ∆ρ → 0, this denotes that the position measure density will be not inﬂuenced
by the jump, and the particle can jump freely;(2)Tm → 0, we have ρ → 1, this denotes that the position measure
density will turn to be one in the region where the particle stays, and the position measure density in other regions
will turn to be zero, so the particle can not jump at all. In fact, from the physical analysis about the jump we can
see that the limitation results from the principle of energy conservation, according to which during a ﬁnite nonzero
time interval ∆t the possible change of energy ∆Ej resulting from jump will be limited by the uncertainty relation
∆Ej ≈ ¯h/∆t, now we consider two situations, ﬁrst, if the total diﬀerence of energy ∆E between the original stay
region and other regions satisﬁes the condition ∆E ≫ ∆Ej , then the particle can hardly jump from its original region
to other regions, namely after the stay time ∆t the position measure density ρ(x, t) in the original region will be
greatly increased, especially when ∆E → ∞, we have ρ(x, t) → 1, and Tm → 0‡‡; Secondly, if the total diﬀerence of
energy ∆E between the original stay region and other regions satisﬁes the condition ∆E ≪ ∆Ej, then the particle
can jump more easily from its original region to other regions, namely after the stay time ∆t the position measure
density ρ(x, t) will be only changed slightly, especially when ∆E → 0, we have ∆ρ(x, t) → 0, and Tm → ∞. Then
we can see that Tm is inversely proportional to ∆E, considering the dimension requirement their relation will be
Tm = ¯h/k∆E, where k is a dimensionless constant.

Now, the change of the position measure density after stay time Tp can be formulated in a more complete way:

or it can be written as follows:

ρ(x, t + T ) =

ρ(x, t) + k∆E/Ep

1 + k∆E/Ep

∆ρ(x, t) =

∆E

kEp + ∆E

(1 − ρ)

(14)

(15)

where Ep = ¯h/Tp is Planck energy, thus we get the second useful rule for ﬁnding the evolution law of DSTM.

C. The evolution law of motion in discrete space-time (DSTM)

Now, according to the above two rules, we can give the evolution equation of DSTM.
For simplicity but lose no generality, we consider a one-dimension initial wave function ψ(x, 0), according to the
above analysis, the concrete evolution equation of DSTM will be essentially one kind of revised stochastic evolution
equation based on Schr¨odinger equation, here we assume the form of stochastic diﬀerential equation ( SDE ), it can
be written as follows:

dψ(x, t) =

1
i¯h

HQψ(x, t)dt +

1
2

[

δxxN
ρ(x, t)

− 1]

∆E(xN , xN )

kEp + ∆E(xN , xN )

ψ(x, t)dt

(16)

where the ﬁrst term in right side represents the evolution element resulting from CTSM, the average behavior of
DSTM, HQ is the corresponding Hamiltonian, the second term in right side represents the evolution element resulting
from the stochastic jump resulting from DSTM itself, δxxN is the discrete δ-function, k is a dimensionless constant,
ρ(x, t) = |ψ(x, t)|2, is the position measure density, ∆E(xN , xN ) is the total diﬀerence of energy of the particle
between the cell containing xN and all other cells xN , xN is a stochastic position variable, whose distribution is
P (xN , t) = ρ(xN , t).

In physics, this stochastic diﬀerential equation is essentially a discrete evolution equation, all the quantities are

deﬁned relative to the Planck cells Tp and Lp, and the equation should be also solved in a discrete way.

‡‡In fact, in this situation the wave function has collapsed into this local region in order to satisfy the requirement of energy
conservation, and this also indicates that in order to satisfy the principle of energy conservation DSTM will naturally result in
the collapse of the wave function.

8

D. Some further discussions

Now we will give some physical analyses about the above evolution equation of DSTM, ﬁrst, the linear item in the
equation will result in the spreading process of the wave function as for the evolution of CSTM, while the nonlinear
stochastic item in the equation will result in the localizing process of the particle or collapse process of the wave
function, this can also be seen qualitatively, since according to the nonlinear stochastic item, in the region where the
position measure density is larger the stay time of the particle will be longer, moreover, the longer stay time of the
particle in one region will further increase the position measure density in that region much more, thus this process is
evidently one kind of positive feedback process, the particle will ﬁnally stay in a local region, and the wave function of
particle will also collapse to that region, so the evolution of DSTM will be some kind of combination of the spreading
process and localizing process.

Secondly, the strength of the spreading process and localizing process is mainly determined by the energy diﬀerence
between diﬀerent branches of the wave function, if the energy diﬀerence is so small, then the evolution of DSTM will
be mainly dominated by the spreading process, or we can say, the display of DSTM will be more like that of quantum
motion (CSTM), this is just what happens in microscopic world; while if the energy diﬀerence is so large, then the
evolution of DSTM will be mainly dominated by the localizing process, or we can say, the display of DSTM will be
more like that of classical motion (CCM), this is just what happens in macroscopic world, and the boundary of these
two worlds can also be estimated, the following example indicates that the energy diﬀerence in the boundary may

assume ∆E ∼= p¯hEp ≈ 7M ev, the corresponding collapse time will be in the level of seconds.

Thirdly, if the particle ﬁnally stay in a local region during the evolution of DSTM, the localizing probability of the
particle, or the collapse probability the wave function in one local region is just the initial position measure density of
the particle in that region, namely the probability satisﬁes the Born rule in quantum mechanics, since the stochastic
evolution of DSTM satisﬁes the Martingale condition, this can be seen from the following fact, namely during every
jump the position measure density ρ satisﬁes the equation P (ρ) = ρP (ρ + ∆E
kEp+∆E ρ)
[12], where P (ρ) is the probability of ρ turning into one in one local region, namely the probability of the particle
localizing in a local region, moreover, the solution of this equation is P (ρ) = ρ, this just means that the localizing
probability of the particle in one region is just the initial position measure density of the particle in that region.

kEp+∆E (1 − ρ)) + (1 − ρ)P (ρ − ∆E

Fourthly, the collapse process resulting from the evolution of DSTM has no tails, since the evolution is essentially
discrete, the wave function is just the description of the motion of particle, and its existence is only in the meaning
of time average, while the particle, the real object, always exists in one local position, thus in the last stage of the
collapse process, when the particle stays in one of the branches long enough it will de facto collapse into that branch
owing to the limitation of energy conservation, and the wave function, the apparent ”object”, will also completely
disappears in other branches§§.

At last, the existence of DSTM will help to tackle the well-known time problem involved in formulating a complete
theory of quantum gravity [13], since as to DSTM, the local position state of particle will be the only proper state,
and the only real physical existence, during a ﬁnite time interval Tp the particle can only be limited in a local space
interval Lp, namely there does not exist any essential superposition of diﬀerent positions at all, the superposition
of the wave function is only in the meaning of time average, thus the essential inconsistency of the superposition of
diﬀerent space-time in the theory of quantum gravity, which results from the existence of the essential superposition
of the wave function, will naturally disappear, and the real physical picture based on DSTM will be that at any
instant ( during a ﬁnite time interval Tp ) the structure of space-time determined by the existence of the particle ( in
a local space interval Lp ) is deﬁnite or ”classical”, while during a ﬁnite time interval much larger than Tp but still
small enough it will be stochastically disturbed by the stochastic jump of the particle undergoing DSTM, this kind
of stochastic disturbance will be the real quantum nature of the space-time and matter.

In this section, as one example we will analyze the DSTM evolution of a simple two-state system, and quantiﬁca-

tionally show that the evolution of DSTM will indeed result in the collapse process of the wave function.

E. One simple example

§§If the wave function is taken as some kind of essential existence, and its evolution is essentially continuous, then the tails
problem will be inevitable.

9

We suppose the initial wave function of the particle is ψ(x, 0) = α(0)1/2ψ1(x)+β(0)1/2ψ2(x), which is a superposition
of two static states with diﬀerent energy levels E1 and E2, these two static states are located in separate regions R1
and R2 with the same size.

Since the energy of the particle inside the region of each static state is the same, we can consider the spreading space
of both static states as a whole local region, and only study the stochastic jump between these two regions resulting
from the evolution of DSTM, namely we directly consider the diﬀerence of the energy ∆E = E2 − E1 between these
two states, through some mathematical calculations we can work out the density matrix of the two-state system, it
is:

ρ11(t) = α(0)

ρ22(t) = β(0)

ρ12(t) = [1 −

ρ21(t) = [1 −

1
2

(

1
2

(

∆E

kEp + ∆E

)2]t/Tppα(0)β(0) ≈ (1 −

(∆E)2
2k2¯hEp

t)pα(0)β(0)

∆E

kEp + ∆E

)2]t/Tppα(0)β(0) ≈ (1 −

(∆E)2
2k2¯hEp

t)pα(0)β(0)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

It is evident that these results conﬁrm the above qualitative analysis deﬁnitely, namely, the evolution of DSTM
indeed results in the collapse of the wave function describing DSTM, and the distribution of the collapse results
satisﬁes the Born rule in quantum mechanics, besides, we also get the concrete collapse time for two-state system, it
is τc ≈ 2k2 ¯hEp

(∆E)2 ∗∗∗.

VIII. THE APPEARANCE OF CLASSICAL MOTION IN MACROSCOPIC WORLD

The above analysis has indicated that, when the energy diﬀerence between diﬀerent branches of the wave function is
large enough, say for the macroscopic situation†††, the linear spreading of the wave function will be greatly suppressed,
and the evolution of the wave function will be dominated by the localizing process, in fact, the motion state of the
particle will be only local position state in appearance, and the evolution of this state will be only still or continuously
move in space, this is just the display of CCM in macroscopic world.

dt =< p > and d<p>

Furthermore, we will show that the evolution law of CCM can also be derived, in fact, some people have strictly
given the demonstration based on revised quantum dynamics [9,10], here we simply use the Enrenfest theorem, namely
d<x>
∂x >, as we have demonstrated, for macroscopic object its wave function will no
longer spread, thus the average items in the theorem will represent the eﬀective description quantities for the classical
motion of the macroscopic object, and the classical motion law is also naturally derived in such a way, the result is
dt = p, the deﬁnition of the momentum, and dp
dx

dt =< − ∂U

dt = − ∂U

∂x , the motion equation.

IX. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we strictly demonstrate the logical inevitability of the existent form and evolution law of CSTM,
the existence of discrete space-time in Nature and resulting real existence of DSTM and its evolution law, this not
only explains the appearance of classical motion in macroscopic world, as well as quantum motion in microscopic
world consistently and objectively, but also presents a clear logical connection between quantum motion and classical
motion, and unveils the uniﬁed realistic picture of microscopic and macroscopic world.

∗∗∗This result has also been obtained by Hughston [11] and Fivel [8] from diﬀerent point of views, and discussed by Adler etc
[1,2].
†††The largeness of the energy diﬀerence for macroscopic object results mainly from the environmental inﬂuences such as
thermal energy ﬂuctuations.

10

Acknowledgments

Thanks for helpful discussions with X.Y.Huang ( Peking University ), A.Jadczyk ( University of Wroclaw ), P.Pearle
( Hamilton College ), F.Selleri ( University di Bari ), Y.Shi ( University of Cambridge ), A.Shimony, A.Suarez ( Center
for Quantum Philosophy ), L.A.Wu ( Institute Of Physics, Academia Sinica ), Dr S.X.Yu ( Institute Of Theoretical
Physics, Academia Sinica ), H.D.Zeh.

Appendix:Mathematical Analysis About Motion In Continuous Space-time

First, we will give three general presuppositions about the relation between physical motion and mathematical
point set, they are basic conceptions and correspondence rules before we discuss the physical motion of particles in
continuous space-time.

(1). Time and space in which the particle moves are both continuous point set.
(2). The moving particle is represented by one point in time and space.
(3). The motion of particle is represented by the point set in time and space.
The ﬁrst presupposition deﬁnes the continuity of space-time, the second one deﬁnes the existent form of particle in

time and space, the last one relates the physical motion of particle with the mathematical point set.

For simplicity but lose no generality, in the following we will mainly analyze the point set in two-dimension space-

time, which corresponds to one-dimension motion in continuous space-time.

A. Point set and its law—a general discussion

As we know, the point set theory has been deeply studied since the beginning of this century, nowadays we can
grasp it more easily, according to this theory, we know that the general point set is dense point set, whose basic
property is the measure of the point set, while the continuous point set is one kind of special dense point set, its basic
property is the length of the point set.

Naturally, as to the point set in two-dimension space-time, the general situation is the dense point set in this
two-dimension space-time, while the continuous curve is one kind of extremely special dense point set, surely it is
a wonder that so many points bind together to form one continuous curve by order, in fact, the probability for its
natural formation is zero.

Now, we will generally analyze the law of the point set, as we know, the law about the points in point set, which
can be called point law, is the most familiar law, and it is widely taken as the only rational law, for example, as to the
continuous curve in two-dimension space-time there may exist a certain expressible analytical formula for the points
in this special point set‡‡‡, but as to the general dense point set in two-dimension space-time the point law possesses
no mathematical meaning, since the dense point set is discontinuous everywhere, even if the diﬀerence of time is very
small, or inﬁnitesimal, the diﬀerence of space can be very large, then inﬁnitesimal error in time will result in ﬁnite
error in space, thus even if the point law exists we can not formulate it in mathematics, and owing to ﬁnite error in
time determination and calculation, we can not prove it either, let alone predict the evolution of the point set using
it, in one word, there does not exist point law for dense point set in mathematics.

B. Deep analysis about dense point set

Now, we will further study the diﬀerential description of point set in detail.
First, in order to ﬁnd the diﬀerential description of the special dense point set—continuous curve, we may measure
the rise or fall size of the space ∆x corresponding to any ﬁnite time interval ∆t near each instant tj, then at any
instant tj we can get the approximate information about the continuous curve through the quantities ∆t and ∆x at
that instant, and when the time interval ∆t turns smaller, we will get more accurate information about the curve.
In theory, we can get the complete information through this inﬁnite process, that is to say, we can build up the

‡‡‡People cherish this kind of point laws owing to their infrequent existence, but perhaps Nature detests and rejects them,
since the probability of creating them is zero.

11

basic description quantities for the special dense point set—continuous curve, which are the diﬀerential quantities dt
and dx, then given the initial condition the relation between dt and dx at all instants will completely describe the
continuous curve.

Then, we will analyze the diﬀerential description of the general dense point set, as to this kind of point set, we still
need to study the concrete situation of the point set corresponding to ﬁnite time interval near every instant. Now,
when time is during the interval ∆t near instant tj, the points in space are no longer limited in the local space interval
∆x, they distribute throughout the whole space instead, so we should study this new point set, which is also dense
point set, for simplicity but lose no generality, we consider ﬁnite space such as x∈[0,1], ﬁrst, we may divide the whole
space in small equal interval ∆x, the dividing points are denoted as xi, then we can deﬁne and calculate the measure
of the local dense point set in the space interval ∆x near each xi, which can be written as M∆x,∆t(xi,tj), since the
measure sum of all local dense point sets in time interval ∆t just equals to the length of the continuous time interval
∆t, we have:

M∆x,∆t(xi,tj)= ∆t

Xi

(21)

On the other hand, since the measure M∆x,∆t(xi,tj) will also turn to be zero when the intervals ∆x and ∆t turn
to be zero, it is not an useful quantity, and we have to create a new quantity on the basis of this measure. Through
further analysis, we ﬁnd that a new quantity ρ∆x,∆t(xi, tj) = M∆x,∆t(xi, tj)/(∆x · ∆t), which can be called average
measure density, will be an useful one, it generally does not turn to be zero when ∆x and ∆t turn to be zero, especially
if the limit lim∆x→0,∆t→0ρ∆x,∆t(xi, tj) exists, it will no longer relate to the observation sizes ∆x and ∆t, so it can
accurately describe the whole dense point set, as well as all local dense point sets near every instant, now we let:

then we can get:

ρ(x, t) = lim∆x→0,∆t→0ρ∆x,∆t(x, t)

ZΩ

ρ(x, t)dx = 1

(22)

(23)

this is just the normalization formula, where ρ(x,t) is called position measure density, Ω denotes the whole integral
space.

Now, we will analyze the new quantity ρ(x,t) in detail, ﬁrst, the position measure density ρ(x,t) is not a point
quantity, it is deﬁned during inﬁnitesimal interval, this fact is very important, since it means that if the measure
density ρ(x, t) exists, then it will be continuous relative to both t and x, that is to say, contrary to the position
function x(t), there does not exist the discontinuous situation for the measure density function ρ(x,t), furthermore,
this fact also results in that the continuous function ρ(x,t) is the last useful quantity for describing the dense point
set; Secondly, the essential meaning of the position measure density ρ(x,t) lies in that it represents the dense degree
of the points in the point set in two-dimension space and time, and the points are denser where the position measure
density ρ(x,t) is larger.

C. The evolution of dense point set

Now, we will further discuss the evolution law for dense point set.
Just like the continuous position function x(t), although the continuous position measure density function ρ(x,t)
completely describes the dense point set, it is one kind of static description about the point set, and it can not be used
for prediction itself, so in order to predict the evolution of the dense point set we must create some kind of quantity
describing its change, enlightened by the theory of ﬂuid mechanics we can deﬁne the ﬂuid density for the position
measure density ρ(x,t) as follows:

∂ρ(x, t)

∂t

+

∂j(x, t)

∂x

= 0

(24)

we call this new quantity j(x, t) position measure ﬂuid density, this equation measure conservation equation, it is
evident that this quantity just describes the change of the measure density of dense point set, thus the general
evolution equations of dense point set can be written as in the following:

∂ρ(x, t)

∂t

+

∂j(x, t)

∂x

= 0

12

(25)

∂j(x, t)

∂t

+ ... = 0

(26)

[1] S.L.Adler, L.P.Horwitz, e-print quant-ph/9904048, (1999)
[2] S.L.Adler, L.P.Horwitz, e-print quant-ph/9909026, (1999)
[3] J. S. Bell,Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1987)
[4] D.Bohm, Phys.Rev. 85,166-193. (1952)
[5] N.Bohr, Nature( London ). 121, 580-590 (1927)
[6] Albert Einstein, Ann.Phys.( Leipzig ) 17, 132 (1905)
[7] H.Everett. Rev.Mod.Phys. 29, 454-462.(1957)
[8] D.I.Fivel, e-print quant-ph/9710042, (1997)
[9] G.C.Ghiradi, A.Rimini, and T.Weber, Phys. Rev. D. 34 470-491. (1986)

[10] G.C.Ghiradi, A.Rimini, and T.Weber, Phys. Rev. D. 42 1057-1064. (1990)
[11] L.P.Hughston, Proc.Roy.Soc.Lond.A, 452,953 (1996)
[12] P.Pearle, Combining stochastic dynamical state-vector reduction with spontaneous localization. Phys. Rev. A 39, 2277-

2289. (1989)

[13] R.Penrose, On gravity’s role in quantum state reduction. Gen. Rel. and Grav., 28, 581-600. (1996)

13

