0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Emergence of the Planck Scale

Centre for Applicable Mathematics & Computer Sciences

B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

B.G. Sidharth∗

Abstract

In this paper we ﬁrst observe some interesting parallels between
Planck scale considerations and elementary particle Compton wave-
length scale considerations, particularly in the context of Wheeler’s
space time foam and a space time arising out of a stochastic ran-
dom heap of elementary particles discussed in previous papers. These
parallels lead to a semi qualitative picture which shows how the short
lived Planck scale arises from the Compton wavelength considerations.
Finally all this is quantiﬁed.

1 Introduction

1

2

c3 (cid:17)
About a century ago Max Planck had pointed out that the quantity (cid:16) ¯hG
∼
10−33cms is a fundamental length. This so called Planck length ties up Quan-
tum Mechanics, Gravitation and Special Relativity and leads to the Planck
mass ∼ 10−5gms.
It is but natural that the Planck length has played a
crucial role in Quantum Gravity as also in String Theory which includes a
description of Gravitation, unlike Quantum Theory or Quantum Field The-
ory.
It turns out to be the scale at which we have no longer the smooth space time
of Classical Theory and Quantum Theory, but rather we have the space time
foam of Wheeler[1, 2]. This is inextricably linked with gravitational collapse

0 ∗Email:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in; birlard@ap.nic.in

1

which has been described by Wheeler as ”The greatest crisis of Physics”. As
he puts it, ”These are small scale ﬂuctuations telling one that something like
gravitational collapse is taking place everywhere in space and all the time;
that gravitational collapse is in eﬀect perpetually being done and undone ....
at the Planck scale of distances.” In this space time foam, worm holes and
non local eﬀects abound.
On the other hand there is also a stochastic ﬂuctuational picture of space
time that deals with phenomena at the Compton wavelength scale and leads
to meaningful physics and cosmology including a uniﬁed description of grav-
itation and electromagnetism consistent with observation[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In
this picture, space time has been considered to be a random heap[8] of ele-
mentary particles. If we consider a typical elementary particle to be a pion
with Compton wavelength l, then the above picture leads to a dispersion
length in the Gaussian distribution ∼
elementary particles in the universe, this being the correct dimension of the
universe itself.
We will now show a parallel between the Planck length considerations and
the Compton wavelength considerations referred to above, which will then
show us how the Planck length considerations emerge.

√Nl, N ∼ 1080 being the number of

2 The Emergence of the Planck Scale

We ﬁrst show the parallels between the Compton wavelength picture and
the Planck length picture. We note that in the former scenario, particles
are ﬂuctuationally created at the Compton wavelength from a background
pre space time Zero Point Field (ZPF) of the kind considered in stochastic
electrodynamics[9, ?]. The energy content in terms of the magnetic ﬁeld of
such a particle is given by (Cf.ref.[3])

∆B ∼

(¯hc)1/2

L2

(1)

where L is the dimension under consideration, which in this case is of the or-
der of the particle’s Compton wavelength. We note that in (1) if ¯hc or equiv-
alently 137e2 is replaced by its gravitational counterpart, namely 137Gm2

2

then we get, as in the ﬂuctuation of the metric[1],

∆g ∼

LP
L

(2)

where LP is the Planck length and L as in (1) is of the order of the dimension
under consideration.
The space time foam referred to above arises at the Planck scale because
the right hand side in (2) becomes unity, indicating perpetual collapse and
creation.
From this point of view, as Wheeler points out our space time is an approxi-
mation, an average swathe at the Planck scale of several probable spaces and
topologies which form the super space (Cf.ref.[2]). There is an immediately
parallel in terms of the Compton wavelength considerations also: As pointed
out by Nottale, Abbot-wise, El Naschie, the author and others[11, 12, 13, 14]
the Quantum behaviour below a critical length is fractal and as pointed out
by the author[8], our space time is the thick brush stroke of thickness of the
order of the Compton wavelength of a jagged, fractal coastline like underpin-
ning.
In the light of the above considerations the ﬂuctuational creation of particles
considered by Hayakawa[15] and the author[5] have a parallel in the non local
worm hole related appearance of particles and ﬁelds at the Planck scale[2].
We will now quantify the above parallels and show the actual emergence of
the Planck scale particles from the Compton wavelength considerations.
We ﬁrst observe that in an actual random heap of particles, the smaller par-
ticles (in our case those having smaller Compton wavelengths and therefore
higher mass) tend to settle down together due to gravity. In a ﬂuctuationally
created random heap of particles, there is no gravity, but as this space time
heap is not only non diﬀerentiable, but is also not required to be even a
continuum the random motion would have a similar eﬀect: Of the N ′ = √N
particles which are less dispersed, √N ′ particles would similarly ﬂuctuation-
ally, that is non locally be together. This ﬂuctuationally bound group would
have a mass √N ′m ∼ 10−5gms or the Planck mass, since m is the mass of

the pion. (Cf.ref.”Ramiﬁcation” for another interesting perspective).
One way of looking at this is that in the above scenario, space time no longer
has the rigid features of Classical and Quantum Physics - on the average it
is a measure of dispersion of a random distribution of particles which them-
selves have a stochastic underpinning. So the length scale or dispersion would

3

be less, the less dispersed the random collection of particles is - this leads
to the Planck scale from the Compton scale. However it must be borne in
mind that a Planck mass has a life time ∼ 10−42 seconds, and can hardly be
detected.
The Planck scale corresponds to the extreme classical limit of Quantum Me-
chanics, as can be immediately seen from the fact that the Planck mass
mP ∼ 10−5gms corresponds to a Schwarzchild Black Hole of radius LP ∼
10−33cms, the Planck length. At this stage the spinorial Quantum Mechan-
ical feature as brought out by the Kerr-Newman type Black Hole and the
Compton wavelength (Cf.detailed discussion in refs.[3, 4]) disappears. Infact
at the Planck scale we have

GmP
c2 = ¯h/mP c

(3)

In (3), the left side gives the Schwarzchild radius while the right side gives
the Quantum Mechanical Compton wavelength. Another way of writing (3)
is,

Gm2
P
e2 ≈ 1,

(4)

Equation (4) expresses the well known fact that at this scale the entire energy
is gravitational, rather than electromagnetic, in contrast to equation (1) for
a typical elementary particle mass, vi.,

Gm2

1
√N

≈

e2

∼ 10−40e2

Interestingly from the background ZPF, Planck particles can be produced
at the Planck scales given by (3), exactly as in the case of pions, as seen
earlier. They have been considered to be what may be called a Zero Point
Scale[17, 18, 19]. But these shortlived Planck particles can at best describe
a space time foam.
We will now throw further light on the fact that at the Planck scale it is
gravitation alone that manifests itself.
Indeed Rosen[20] has pointed out
that one could use a Schrodinger equation with a gravitational interaction
to deduce a mini universe, namely the Planck particle. The Schrodinger
equation for a self gravitating particle has also been considered[21], from a
diﬀerent point of view. We merely quote the main results.

4

The energy of such a particle is given by

where

Gm2
L ∼

2m5G2

¯h2

L =

¯h2

2m3G

(5)

(6)

(5) and (6) bring out the characteristic of the Planck particles and also the
diﬀerence with elementary particles, as we will now see.
We ﬁrst observe that for a Planck mass, (5) gives, self consistently,

while (6) gives,

Energy = mP c2,

L = 10−33cms,

as required.
However, the situation for pions is diﬀerent: They are parts of the universe
and do not constitute a mini universe. Indeed, if, as above there are N pions
in the universe, then the total gravitational energy is given by, from (5),

NGm2

L

where now L stands for the radius of the universe ∼ 1028cm. As this equals
mc2, we get back as can easily be veriﬁed, the pion mass!
Indeed given the pion mass, one can verify from (6) that L = 1028cms which
c
is the radius of the universe, R. Remembering that R ≈
H , (6) infact gives
back the supposedly mysterious and adhoc Weinberg formula, relating the
Hubble constant to the pion mass[22].
This provides a justiﬁcation for taking a pion as a typical particle of the
universe, and not a Planck particle, besides re-emphasizing the basic uniﬁed
picture of gravitation and electromagnetism. It must be mentioned that just
as the Planck particle constitutes a mini universe or Black Hole, so also the
N ∼ 1080 pion ﬁlled universe can itself considered to be a Black hole[23]!
To proceed, let us now use the fact that our minimum space time intervals
are (lP , τP ), the Planck scale, instead of (l, τ ) of the pion, as above.

5

With this new limit, it can be easily veriﬁed that the total mass in the volume
∼ l3 is given by

(7)

ρP × l3 = M

where ρP is the Planck density and M is the mass of the universe.
Moreover the number of Planck masses in the above volume ∼ l3 can easily
be seen to be ∼ 1060. However, it must be remembered that in the physical
time period τ , there are 1020 (that is τ
) Planck life times. In other words
τP
the number of Planck particles in the physical interval (l, τ ) is N ∼ 1080, the
total particle number, as if all these were the seeds of the ﬁxed number of
N particles in the universe. This is symptomatic of the fact that instead of
the elementary particle Compton wavelength scale of the physical universe
we are using the Planck scale (cf. also considerations before equation (3)).
That is from the typical physical interval (l, τ ) we recover the entire mass
and also the entire number of particles in the universe, as in the Big Bang
theory. This also provides the explanation for the above puzzling relations
like (7).
That is the Big Bang theory is a characterization of the new Compton wave-
length model in the classical limit at Planck scales, but then, in this latter
case we cannot deduce from theory the relations like the Dirac coincidences
or the Weinberg formula.
In the spirit of[7], one can now see the semi-classical and Quantum Mechani-
cal divide between Planck particles and elementary particles in the following
way. We will see that Planck particles have a life time given by the Hawking
Radiation Law of Black Hole Thermodynamics, whereas elementary particles
are characterised by Quantum Mechanical life times.
It is well known that[24] the life time due to the Hawking Radiation Law is
given by

t =

G2m3
¯hc4

(8)

which for the Planck particles gives the usual Planck time.
However this formulation is not valid for elementary particles. In this case,
we consider the gravitational energy ∆E of a pion as given by an equation
like (5) and use instead the Quantum Mechanical relation

to get

∆E.∆t ∼ ¯h

Gm2

π(¯h/mπc)∆t ∼ ¯h

6

(9)

(10)

H , the age of the universe! (cf.also ref.[24])).
which is correct if in (9) ∆t ∼
In this case equation (10) gives the well known and supposedly mysterious
and empirical formula of Weinberg referred to earlier, viz.,

1

m3

π ∼

H¯h2
Gc

(11)

One way of looking at this is that it is the emergence of Quantum Mechanical
eﬀects and electromagnetism at the Compton wavelength scales from classical
gravitational considerations at the Planck scale as seen above, which gives
stability to the universe as expressed by (9) and (10).
All this has been justiﬁed from stochastic considerations[7].
Another way of looking at all this is the following: The gravitational constant
G is taken to be a universal constant in most conventional theories. However
in the above formulation it turns out that,

G =

G0
√N ∝

1
T

(12)

where N is the number of elementary particles in the universe and T is the age
of the universe. This time varying gravitational constant can be shown to lead
to consistent results including an explanation for the all important precision
of the perihelion of the Planet Mercury [6, 25]. The equation (12) also shows a
Machian or holistic character. In any case for a single particle universe, N = 1
the G above leads to the Planck length or Planck mass, while for N ∼ 1080 the
same equation leads to the pion Compton wavelength and the usual Physics
and Cosmology. Infact if the pion Compton time scales (l, τ ) tends to zero or
the Planck scale we recover the big bang scenario and the usual space time
of Classical and Quantum Physics or the Prigogine Cosmology[26]. In these
cases we cannot explain the large number ”coincidences” and Weinberg’s
mysterious formula (11), whereas at the elementary particle Compton scale
these features can be deduced as consequences of the theory.

References

[1] Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S., and Wheeler, J.A., (1973), Gravitation,

Freeman (San Francisco).

7

[2] Wheeler, J.A., (1968) ”Superspace and the Nature of Quantum Ge-
ometrodynamics”, Battelles Rencontres, Lectures, Eds., B.S. De Witt
and J.A. Wheeler, Benjamin, New York.

[3] Sidharth, B.G., (1998) Int.J. of Mod.Phys.A 13(15), pp2599ﬀ.

[4] Sidharth, B.G., (1998) Gravitation & Cosmology, 4 (2) (14), 158ﬀ.

[5] Sidharth, B.G., (1998) International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 37

(4), 1307-1312.

[6] Sidharth, B.G., ”Eﬀects of Varying G” to appear in Nuovo Cimento B.

[7] Sidharth, B.G., ”Universe of Chaos and Quanta”, in Chaos, Solitons

and Fractals, in press. xxx.lanl.gov.quant-ph: 9902028.

[8] Sidharth, B.G., ”Space Time as a Random Heap”, to appear in Chaos,

Solitons and Fractals.

[9] De Pena, L., (1983), in ”Stochastic Processes Applied to Physics”, Ed.,

B. Gomez., World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.

[10] Haisch, B., Rueda, A., and Puthoﬀ, H.E., (1994), Phys. Rev. A49(2),

pp 678-694.

[11] L. Nottale, (1994), Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 4, 3, 361-388 and refer-

ences therein.

[12] Abbott L.F., and Wise, M.B., (1981), AMJ Phys., 49, 37-39.

[13] El Naschie, M.S., (1993), Vastas Astr. 37, 249-252.

[14] Sidharth, B.G., (1999) ”Dimensionality and Fractals”, Invited contribu-
tion to Special Issue of Chaos, Solitons and Fractals on ’Fractal Geom-
etry in Quantum Physics’.

[15] Hayakawa, S., (1965), Suppl of PTP Commemmorative Issue, 532-541.

[16] Sidharth, B.G., ”Quantum Mechanical Black Holes: Issues and Ramiﬁ-
cations”, to appear in Proceedings of ’Frontiers of Fundamental Physics’.

[17] Winterberg, F., Intl.J.Th.Phys. 33(6), (1994).

8

[18] Padmanabhan, T., IUCAA Preprint 1/98, (1998).

[19] Isham, C.J., Kubyshin, Y., and Renteln, P., Class.Quantum Grav.

(1990), 7, 1053-1074.

[20] Rosen, N., (1993) International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 32 (8),

1435-1440.

[21] Sidharth, B.G., and Popova, A.D., (1996), Diﬀerential Equations and

Dynamical Systems, 4 (3/4), 431-440.

[22] Weinberg, S., (1972), Gravitation and Cosmology, Wiley, New York.

[23] Sidharth, B.G., (1999) ”Fluctuational Cosmology” in Quantum Mechan-
ics and General Relativity” in Proceeding of the Eighth Marcell Gross-
mann Meeting on General Relativity, Ed., T. Piran, World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, pp.476ﬀ.

[24] C. Sivaram, (1982), Astrophysics and Space Science, 88.

[25] Sidharth, B.G., ”Further Eﬀects of Varying G”, xxx.lanl.gov Phys

0001062.

[26] Sidharth, B.G., (1999) Ast & Geophysics (Journal of Royal Astronomi-

cal Society), 40, p.2.8.

9

