0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
9

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON M THEORY, QUANTUM PARADOXES AND THE NEW RELATIVITY

Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems

Carlos Castro

Clark Atlanta University

Atlanta, GA. 30314

Alex Granik

Department of Physics
University of the Paciﬁc

Stockton, California 95211

January 2000

(Dedicated to the memory of Leonard Ainsworth, a true pioneer and a scientist )

Abstract

Recently a New Relativity Principle has been proposed by one of the authors as the underlying physical
and geometrical foundations of String and M Theory. It is explicitly shown that within the framework of
the New Relativity Theory, some Quantum Mechanical Paradoxes like the Einstein-Rosen Podolsky and the
Black Hole Information Loss, are easily resolved. Such New Relativity Theory requires the introduction of an
Inﬁnite Dimensional Quantum Spacetime as has been shown recently by one of us. This can be viewed as just
another way of looking at Feynman’s path integral formulation of Quantum Mechanics. Instead of having
an inﬁnite dimensional funcional integral over all paths, smooth, forwards and backwards in time, random
and fractal, in a ﬁnite-dimensional spacetime, one has a ﬁnite number of paths in an Inﬁnite Dimensional
Quantum Spacetime. We present a few-lines proof why there is no such a thing as an EPR Paradox in
this New Relativity theory. The reason is not due to a superluminal information speed but to a divergent
information charge density. In the inﬁnite dimensional limit, due to the properties of gamma functions, the
hypervolume enclosed by a D-dim hypersphere, of ﬁnite nonzero radius, shrinks to zero : to a hyperpoint ,
the inﬁnite-dimensional analog af a point. For this reason, Information ﬂows through the inﬁnite-dimensional
hypersurface of nonzero radius, but zero size, the hyperpoint, in an instant. In this fashion we imbue an
abstract mathematical ”point” with a true physical meaning : it is an entity in inﬁnite dimensions that has
zero hypervolume at nonzero radius . A plausible resolution of the Information Loss Paradox in Black Holes
is proposed.

1. Introduction : Historical background

From the very beginning the relativity principle has been one of the cornerstones of mechanics. In 1686
, in the opening pages of P rincipia, Newton wrote : ” I do not deﬁne time, space, place, and motion, as being
well known to all. Only I must observe, that the common people conceive those quantities under no other
notions but from the relations they bear to sensible objects ”. Based on this preamble, Newton introduced
the absolute space, time, and motion which in his own words do not bear ” relation to anything external ” .
It is clear that such absolute space, time, motion, are purely metaphysical notions, stand outside the realm
of physics, and serve the purpose of ” geometrization ” of physical phenomena. Thus at the foundations of
Newtonian mechanics lie the above metaphyisical concepts. The very same Metaphysical concepts that so
many members of the scientiﬁc community, by their own admission, are unwilling to accept.

Much later, Mach rather broadly , and then Einstein deﬁnitely, set Physics on physical ground by
deﬁning measurements relative only to the physical phenomena, and not to the metaphysical entities. Instead
of vaguely-deﬁned ( if at all) metaphyiscal concepts of absolute space, time, and motion, new ( rather narrow)
but well deﬁned physical concepts of physical measurements had been introduced. The old ”absolutes ” had
been dismissed by Einstein’s Theory of Relativity. Measurements required a universal standard which had
been furnished by a physical quantity : the speed of light.

Based on this historical perspective we introduce the New Relativity Principle [1] that rest on the four
postulates presented in the next section. In the last sections an amazingly simple proof is presented why there

1

is no EPR Paradox in such New Relativity Theory. In addition, a plausible resolution of the Information
Loss in Black Holes is proposed.

2. The Program of the New Relativity Principle : The Demolition of Today’s Absolutes

Recently one of the authors has proposed that a New Relativity principle may be operating in Nature
which could reveal important clues to ﬁnd the origins of M theory [1]. We were forced to introduce this
new Relativity principle, where all dimensions and signatures of spacetime are on the same footing, to ﬁnd a
fully covariant formulation of the p-brane Quantum Mechanical Loop Wave equations. This New Relativity
Principle, or the principle of Polydimensional Covariance as has been called by Pezzaglia, has also been
crucial in the derivation of Papapetrou’s equations of motion of a spinning particle in curved spaces that
was a long standing problem which lasted almost 50 years [2]. A Cliﬀord calculus was used where all the
equations were written in terms of Cliﬀord-valued multivector quantities; i.e one had to abandon the use of
vectors and tensors and replace them by Cliﬀord-algebra valued quantities, matrices, for example .

The New Relativity Theory [1] rests on four postulates :
1. The old Bootstrap Idea of Chew : Each p-brane is made of all the others. To view a single p-brane
as a fundamental identity is a meaningless concept. p-branes are deﬁned only in relation to others. This
is Mach’s principle once again. For this reason, one must include all dimensions and signatures on the same
footing. Pezzaglia [2] has called this the principle of Polydimensional Covariance or Dimensional Democracy.
The New Relativity theory reshuﬄes, for example, a string history for a 5-brane history; a 9-brane history
for a membrane history; an 11-brane history for a history encompassing all other p-branes...and so forth.
Point and extended instantons and tensionless p-branes are also inlcluded. The tensionless p-brane history
excitations of the inﬁnite dimensional Quantum Spacetime are the ” photons ” in this New Relativity Theory.
We honestly believe that M Theory does not stand for mystery, membrane, matrix, master, mother,
murky, Moyal....it stands for Mach. The New Relativity theory is based on the ultimate Machian view of
the Quantum Universe ( the Ultimate Machian ” Quantum Computer ” ) : Relationships among entities
are the only meaningful statements one can make . A perfect example of this are : spin-networks, quantum-
networks, quantum sets, cellular networks, p-Adic Physics,...etc. Since it is undesirable to run oﬀ the letters
of the alphabet, by keep adding letters like M, F, S... Theory, we gather courage to say that by abandoning
the Egocentric Anthropomorphic view of the Universe and, instead, embracing Mach’s view that everything
in the Quantum Universe is interconnected, one reaches the end of the alphabet at Z theory : Z stands for
the ultimate Machian view of the Quantum Universe ( that dismisses the egocentric view of the Universe
) for a Zenthropic Quantum Universe. Who are we to say that we know everything that an electron , a
photon, a quark really ” sees ” ? Do electrons, quarks....perform Feynman diagrams ? Has anyone seen a
point ?

2. Laurent Nottale’s Scale-Relativity theory [3].
In the ﬁnal analysis, Physics involves, and is about, measurements. Physics is an experimental science.
Physics deals with experiences. On the other hand to measure something one needs a standard of measure-
ment to compare measurements with. It is essential , it is of prime importance, to introduce resolutions
in Physics. It is meaningless to say that the one has a ﬁeld at x. By x meaning : specifying the value of
the real number x to an inﬁnite number of non-periodic decimal places. In mathematics we can inﬁnitely
increase the accuracy ( or degree of resolution) at will of any real number by adding digits. However, in
practice we cannot have such arbitrary accuracy provided by mathematical constructions. Even writing an
inﬁnite aperiodic decimal fraction would require an inﬁnite amount of memory. Therefore, in Physics, it is
necessary to have a ﬁnite universal physical ”yardstick” which would deﬁne the ultimate Physical Resolution.
Nottale’s Scale Realtivity takes the Planck scale as such Universal physical standard of measurement that
is invariant, by deﬁnition, under Scale Relativistic transformations of resolutions, like the speed of light was
in Einstein’s Relativity.

p-adic numbers and p-adic Physics is a nice attempt to eliminate the problem of having to specify a real
number up to inﬁnite digits [11]. The Planck scale is therefore taken as that universal standard of measure
invariant under Scale Relativistic transformations of resolutions . In the same vein that the speed of light
was taken by Einstein as the maximum speed in Nature, the Planck scale is taken to be the minimum length.
The speed of light allowed Einstein to embrace space with time, since space and time have diﬀerent units.

2

By the same token, to embrace all dimensions one needs a Universal length scale in all dimensions : the
Planck Scale.

As the years pass by, more and more planets have been found conﬁrming Nottale’s predictions within
his framework of Scale-Relativity. Instead of being properly rewarded with increased curiosity and interest in
his remarkable theory, he has been increasingly rewarded with insults and a suﬀocating censorship [12]. As
the number of his planet conﬁrmations increases, so does the number of insults increases and the censorship
of his work is tightened further. Unfortunately, the New Relativity Theory will never be able to explain such
odd phenomena.

The Universal scale, in units of ¯h = c = 1, in any dimensions, D > 2 ( in two dimensions the Einstein-

Hilbert action is a topological invariant) is :

1

Λ = G

D−2

D = G

1

D−3

D−1 = ........... = 10−33cms.

(1a)

where GD, GD−1..... are the Newton gravitational coupling constants in diﬀerent dimensions. In the same
fashion that in Newtonian Physics one only can assign a deﬁnite meaning to the ratio of masses ( it is
meaningless to say that one has a value of m without a comparison to another mass ), in the New Relativity
theory it only makes sense to write :

D − 3
D − 2

=

lnGD−1
lnGD

.

(1b)

In the New Relativity Theory it is meaningless to talk about such things as ” compactiﬁcation ” , ”
decompactiﬁcation ” used in the literature that relates the Newton constants in diﬀerent dimensions through
the small radius of a compactiﬁed unseen dimension at low energies. It as meaningless as saying that the
velocities of the gas molecules in a room experience a dynamical or spontaneous ” compactiﬁcation ” to a
ﬁxed average value.

Problems with the compactiﬁcation picture of Superstring theory from 10 to 4 were already alarming
signals that something could be wrong. Billions and billions of possible four-dimensional phenomenological
theories of the world were obtained : the so-called uniqueness of string theory went out the window when
this was found. String theory wasn’t the problem, assuming a ﬁxed dimensions was ! Witten already proved
long ago that something might be inherently wrong with the compactiﬁcation schemes, when he showed
using Index Theory arguments, that the standard 11-dim Supegravity Kaluza-Klein compactiﬁcations of
ordinary manifolds did not yield chiral fermions in 4 dimensions. This problem was bypassed in the second
string revolution by saying that orbifold compactiﬁcation were ﬁne because orbifolds are not really ordinary
manifolds, so things were satisfactory after all. The New Relativity Theory does not have to face these
challenges. One has a truly inﬁnite-dimensional Quantum Universe which suggests that Topological Field
Theories could be the most natural candidates for a theory of the world. Since below the Planck scale there
is no such thing as a distance; it is very likely that Topology should play a more important role.

Conformal Field Theories and their Higher Conformal spin extensions are the ones to use in D = 2. In
D = 2, one has induced gravity : W2, W3...W∞ gravity as a result of integrating out the conformal matter
ﬁeld ﬂuctuations. This replaces the topological invariant Einstein-Hilbert action. In D = 1 dimension there
is only extrinsic curvature. One can view a one-dim loop as the boundary of a two-dimensional surface.
This allowed [7] to write down a String Representation of Quantum Loops from a covariantized phase space
Schild action path integral. The eﬀective action for the boundary, with induced extrinsic curvature terms
was obtained, in addition to the Polyakov Bulk partition function and the holographic boundary Eguchi
wave functional as well.

3. Noncommutative C-spaces. One of the authors was forced to enlarge the naive notion of commuting
spacetime coordinates to fully covariantize the Quantum Mechanical Loop Equations for p-branes. One
achieved that goal if one extended the notion of ordinary spacetime vectors and tensors, to a Noncommutative
C-space, or Cliﬀord manifold, where all p-branes were uniﬁed in one single footing by using Cliﬀord-algebra
valued multivectors quantities ( matrices) instead of ordinary vectors and tensors. In order to combine
objects of diﬀerent dimensionality one needs a length scale : the Planck scale.

There was a one-to-one correspondence between a nested hierarchy of point, loop, 2-loop, 3-loop .......p-
loop histories in D dimensions encoded in terms of hyper-matrices and single lines in Cliﬀord Manifolds. This
is roughly similiar to the aim of Penrose’s twistor progam. By using Cliﬀord-algebra valued multivectors,

3

one could argue why it may be meaningless to say that the cosmological constant is a constant in its deﬁnition
! The so-called cosmological constant is observer-dependent in this New Relativity Theory : it is just one
of the many components of the Cliﬀord multivectors. Due to Polydimensional Covariance, only the norm
of such multivector is truly an invariant. So using this simple argument one of us was able to argue why it
is meaningless to try to measure such constant, unless one is specifying what is the frame of reference one
lives in !

The reader may say that the value of p = −1 was not included here. Point and Extended Instantons
can also be treated very naturally in this framework [1]. The New Relativity Theory reshuﬄes, for example,
a loop-history represented by the coordinates : xµ, σµν , A in one frame of reference, to another history, in
another frame of reference, represented by the loop-instanton x′µ, (σµν )′, A′ = 0. The xCM are the center of
mass coordinates of the loop. A is the areal-time spanned by the motion of the loop through spacetime. σµν
are the holographic coordinates of the loop. It can reshuﬄe a massive point history ( a line ) : xµ, τ 6= 0 to
a massive point-instanton : x′µ, τ ′ = 0 in another frame of reference. An so forth.
4. Quantum Spacetime must be treated from a Multivector-Multiscale point of view. The use of Cliﬀord-
valued multivectors was explained above. The multi-scale or resolution aspects are based on Nottale’s fractals
and El Naschie’ s Cantorian-Fractal Quantum Spacetime views that dimensions are resolution dependent
concepts and not ﬁxed notions [3,4] .

Nottale, by abandoning the hypothesis of the diﬀerentiablity of spacetime , was led to three eﬀects ( at
least ) : (i) . The number of geodesics becomes inﬁnite. This forces upon us to jump to a statistical ﬂuid-like
description. (ii) Each geodesic becomes a fractal curve of higher and higher fractal dimensionality as the
resolution of the ” physical apparatus ” becomes ﬁner and ﬁner, asympotically approaching the minimum
Planck scale resolution where the fractal dimensionality becomes inﬁnite. This forces us to embed the fractal
geodesics in an spacetime of inﬁnite-Hausdorﬀ dimensions. (iii). The symmetry dt → −dt is broken by the
non-diﬀerentiablity which leads to a two-valuedness character of the average velocity vector and which is,
in Nottale’s view, the underlying reason why the wave function in QM is complex.

This is not the ultimate status of things. To be consistent and to move forward along the path charted
by Mach and Einstein, one cannot, and should not , accept this status quo as the ” end of the road ” in
Physics. This reminds us of the status of things at the end of the 19 century when ” two clouds ” were the
only obstacles hovering over the horizon that prevented the ” end ” of Physics. In fact, one cannot but to
feel compelled to say that from the beginning, a truly quantum mechanical description of the world must
start by abandoning the very notion of spacetime itself and other ” idols ” from our minds, as Finkesltein
has pointed out [8]. This is precisely the goal of p-Adic Physics [11] to remove the notion of spacetime
per se and replace it by objects and their relationships. A truly Categorical view of the Universe. An
extension of Einstein’s motion Relativity and Nottale’s Scale Relativity into a unﬁed Scale-Motion Realtivity
was outlined brieﬂy in [13]. Whatever the ”ﬁnal” view of the world may be, it seems that it is wrong to
assume that Quantum Spacetime has a ﬁxed dimension. On the contrary, it may have uncountably-inﬁnite
dimensions as El Naschie has argued [4]. Taking this inﬁnite-dimensional point of view allows us to eliminate
the notion of a EPR , and possibly, Black-Hole Information Loss ”paradoxes ”. For this reason we believe
it ought to be investigated further. Dimensions are not ﬁxed absolutes. They are resolution dependent
concepts.

Quantum Gravity is not a quantization of the spacetime coordinates, metric.....If this were the case,
In String Theory, from the two-dim
one would have had quantized the spacetime coordinates long ago.
world sheet point of view , the spacetime coordinates are nothing but a ﬁnite number of scalar ﬁelds whose
quantization is essentially trivial by selecting the conformal or orthonormal gauge. The same arguments
applies with the ( linearized ) spin two graviton. Quantum Gravity it is something much deeper than the
naive notion of coordinates and gravitons. It is something that doesn’t need any spacetime background nor
metrics whatsoever. Morever, it involves something that disposes of the ill-conceived notion of having a ﬁxed
dimension. The classical spacetime that we perceive with our senses is just a long distance averaging eﬀect
associated with a quantum network of processeses of a deeper underlying Quantum Universe. Einstein’s
Gravity is an eﬀective theory as suspected long ago. To merge Quantum Mechanics with Relativity it is
necessary to enlarge the Einsteinian view of Relativity to a New Relativity Principle [1]. To proceed further
one has to demolish the concept of dimension as an absolute , as an idol.

To sum up what has been said so far :

4

The New Relativity Theory forces upon us to take a radically diﬀerent view of the Quantum World,
an ultimate Machian/Zenthropic view, and to dismiss the concepts of false absolutes (idols) of dimensions,
spacetime, cosmological constant , from our classical minds, as Finkelstein [8] has advocated.
If a true
evolution ( revolution) of Physics is to take place one has to embrace the plausible extensions of Relativity
as Finkelstein has insisted [8]. For those who believe that we have reached the end of the road, the end of
Physics, we feel that they are setting themselves for similar surprises that Lord Kelvin experienced with the
advent of Quantum Mechanics and Relativity.

To this day , to the best of our knowledge, there is no satisfactory deﬁnition yet of Quantum Field
Theory. QFT today is being challenged by deeper concepts : Noncommutative Geometry, Quantum Groups,
Hopf algebras, Monoidal Braided Categories, Braided QFT, etc.... Relativity itself is hereby extended to
a deeper meaning by the New Relativity Theory : Scale Relativity and Cantorian-Fractal Geometry. A
Nested Hierarchy of Histories have replaced the old fashioned concepts of spacetime events; vectors and
tensors have been replaced by Cliﬀord-multivectors; Riemannian Geometry by Finsler Geometry and by
Fractal-Cantorian, Non-Archimedean, p − Adic , Noncommutative and Nonassociative Geometries.....
Recently we have proposed to even abandon the the idea of the cosmological constant as a constant.
The so-called cosmological constant is not a constant in its deﬁnition ! It is observer-dependent within the
framework of the New Relativity Theory [1]. Trying to estimate the absolute values of such a ” constant ”
is like trying to detect absolute spacetime motion and to verify the existence of the ether ! Such ideas that
the vacuum energy could be observer dependent orginated with discussions held in Trieste by one of us with
Miguel Cardenas and Devashis Benarjee [9]. Even the notion of the ”vacuum” per se ! Special Relativity
demolished such framework of thinking. We believe that the New Relativity Theory will also replace the
existence of such ill-conceived notions that spacetime has a ﬁxed dimension and that the cosmological
constant has an well deﬁned absolute value in all frame of references.

The observed spacetime dimension of D = 4 is interpreted in this New Relativity Theory [4] as a result
of an averaging procedure over all the possible inﬁnite values of Quantum Spacetime. In a sense it is
similar to what happens with the statistical distribution of velocities of a gas. There is an average velocity (
average over all the inﬁnite possible values of the statistical ensemble ) proportional to the Temperature. To
assume that there is a spacetime compactiﬁcation from D=11 to D=4 ( like it is assumed in mainstream
Physics today ) is an incongrous assumption in this New Relativity Theory :
it is like saying that there
is a ” velocity compactiﬁcation/decompactiﬁcation ” from higher/lower velocities to the average observed
velocity in a gas. Problems with the compactiﬁcation picture of Superstring theory from 10 to 4 were already
alarming signals when billions and billions of possible four-dimensional theories of the world were obtained
: the so-called uniqueness of string theory went out the window when this was found. String theory wasn’t
the problem, assuming a ﬁxed dimensions was ! The fact that there might be an Statistical approach to the
Dimensions, and to Quantum Gravity per se, was already lurking behind the scenes long ago in the work of
Hawking : Black Hole Thermodynamics !

3. There is No Such Thing as an Einstein-Rosen-Podolski Paradox in the New Relativity

We will present a few-lines proof why there is no EPR Paradox within the framework of the New
Relativity Theory if one assumes that information ﬂows in a similar fashion as ordinary charges in Electro-
magnetism ; i.e information is to be thought of as a ” ﬁeld ” [14]. Interestingly enough, this will be our only
assumption. We are not implying that there is such a thing as a ” ﬁfth ” force in Nature found one morning
in the closet of our homes after a bad night. We are just voicing out what has been irrefutably proven over
and over by experiments.

Take an electron-positron pair colliding at the center O of an inﬁnite dimensional sphere, SD for D → ∞,
at a givent moment we call t = 0. After the collision a pair of two photons will travel in opposite directions
imposed by energy-momentum conservation. An any given moment after the collision, we can locate those
two photons at the surface of a multidimensional sphere of radius R = ct. The ﬂux of information from
the center of the sphere O ﬂowing from the moment of the e−/e+ collision radially outwards through the
hypersurface is :

Φ =I ~JD.d~SD−1 = JDSD−1.

5

(2)

This is nothing but the usual Gauss Law in Electromagnetism. The D-dimensional information-current, JD,
points radially outwards from the center O. Due to hyper-spherical symmetry its magnitude only depends
on the radius R = ct. At each given point on the hypersurface, the current is pointing radially outwards and
has the same value of magnitude, JD(R), along all the points of the hyper-sphere, This is why one can pull
out the current outside the integral. The hypersurface SD−1 encloses inside a VD volume given in terms of
gamma functions. Similar considerations apply to the higher-dimensional solid angle :

VD =

πD/2RD
Γ( D+2
2 )

. SD−1 =

dVD
dR

= RD−1ΩD−1. ΩD−1 =

1

RD−1

dVD
dR

.

Therefore, the total information-ﬂux is given by the usual Gauss Law :

Φ = JD(R).RD−1ΩD−1 = JD(R).RD−1.

1

RD−1

dVD
dR

= JD(R).

DπD/2RD−1

Γ( D+2
2 )

.

(3)

(4)

Now we take the D → ∞ limit and make use of Stirling’s asymptotic formula for the gamma function : (
Pictures drawn on a Mathematica package also verify explicitly the results below )

limD→∞ Γ(

D + 2

2

√2π(

D + 2

2

) ∼

D+2

2 e−

)

D+2

2

.

(5)

By Radius R = ct one means radius in Planck scale units. We will set the Planck scale to 1. So by lnR in
all of the formulae below we mean ln(R/Λ) Otherwise the units will not match up.

As D → ∞ one can verify that in the asymptotic D = ∞ limit the numerator expression for the ﬂux

approaches :

exp [lnD +

D
2

lnπ + (D − 1)lnR] ∼ exp [lnD +

D
2

lnπ + DlnR] ∼ exp [lnD + Dlnπ + DlnR]

(6)

whereas the denominator approaches :

exp [

D + 2

2

ln(

D + 2

2

) −

D + 2

2

Hence, the ﬂux in the inﬁnite D limit is :

] ∼ exp [DlnD − D] ∼ exp [(D − 1)lnD] ∼ exp [DlnD].

(7)

To be precise, upon reinserting the Planck scale one has that the ﬂux is given in Planck units as :

Φ = Jexp [lnD + Dlnπ + DlnR − DlnD] = Jeα.

where α is :

Φ = J(Λ)D−1eα = Jeα × 1D−1 = Jeα.

α = D(lnπ + lnR) + (1 − D)lnD ∼ D[lnπ + lnR − lnD]

For f inite times , in units of Λ = 1, R = ct 6= ∞ the coeﬃcient α goes to negative inﬁnity :

α ∼ −DlnD → −∞ ⇒ eα → 0

So

limD→∞ JD(R).

DπD/2RD−1

Γ( D+2

2 ) → J∞(R) × 0 = Φ ⇒ J∞(R) → ∞.

(8a)

(8b)

(9)

(10)

(11)

hence, in the D = ∞ limit, the current ( in Planck units, Λ = 1 ) blows up. This is not because there is a
superluminal speed of information. It is because the hyper-volume, hyper-area elements, for ﬁnite values
of R, go to zero in inﬁnite dimensions!. Everything shrinks to a hyperpoint despite the fact that the radius

6

is not zero ! The hyperpoint is the inﬁnite-dimensional version of a point in ordinary ﬁnite-dimensional
spacetime.

The current is as usual of the form : J = ρv. As the hyper-volume, hyper-area elements, for ﬁnite
values of R, go to zero, the information charge density ρ, charge per unit hyper-volume, blows up !. The
information charge density diverges at the hyperpoint. The information velocity v is constant and cannot
exceed the speed of light. From the point of view of an inﬁnite-dimensional observer, all
the points of
the hypersurface are interconnected. There is no such thing as non-locality in Quantum Mechanics.
This is an illusion due to the shrinking to zero ( for ﬁnite radius) of the inﬁnite-dimensional volume of the
hypersphere, resulting from the asymptotic behaviour of the gamma functions !

This corroborates Mach’s brilliant insight that everything is connected in the ( Quantum ) Universe.
What happens here and now, aﬀects everything in the Universe in an instant. Based on the recent teletrans-
portation experiments of a single photon by several experimental teams, this view of the Quantum Universe
may lead an advance future generation of open minded scientists to achieve the ultimate communication
system : instant exchange of information to anyplace in the Universe by tapping into the inﬁnite dimensions
of Quantum Spacetime. An speculative application of this would be to tele-transport a quantum copy of
the human genome to other distant Planets in the Universe suitable for life. This would be a way out of the
Galactic bounds we live in and an escape of the ultimate fate of the earth : consumed by the Sun when it
becomes a Red Giant.

Spacetime travel in an instant will be much harder to achieve if by travel on means tele-transporting a
quantum copy of ourselves to another point in the Universe. In order to do that one has to be able to tele-
transport our consciousness as well. We adscribe to Penrose’s view that consciousness is a non-algorithmic
process. This agrees with the Uncountably-inﬁnite number of dimensions of the Cantorian-Fractal Spacetime
view of El Naschie [4]. It would be impossible for a Quantum Turing Machine ( a Quantum Computer) to
quantum-process such vast of uncountably-inﬁnite number of quantum bits. Never, in our wildest dreams
we could possibly count such large number of dimensions of the Cantorian-Fractal Spacetime of El Naschie
[4] . Such World is not a mere Mathematical abstraction : it is essential for Consciousness to emerge. It is
desirable that The Theory of ” Everyhthing ” should include Consciousnes. The Theory of Everything has to
account for the existence of Conscious life and when, why, how, and for what it emerged from the Quantum
Universe. A ”pointeless ” Universe is another one of those alarming signals that something is inherently
incomplete with our view of the World. We believe that it is not suﬃcient to dismiss these questions as
”meaningless metaphyiscs ”.

Upon closer inspection of eq-(11), if one were to set J = f inite ; this would imply that the information
ﬂux Φ = 0 so by Gauss Law there is no net information charge enclosed in the hypersphere. This is not
correct for the following reason.

Nottale’s Scale Relativity implies that it is not possible to have zero measures with zero resolutions.
It is possible to have zero measures but with ( nonzero) Planck scale resolutions. The e−/e+ pair never
goes beyond the minimum Plank scale resolution. The center O of the hypersphere is not a physical point.
It is a smeared fuzzy hypersphere of inﬁnite dimensions but with a nonzero Planck scale radius. This is a
reason why Noncommutative Geometry, Fuzzy Phyiscs, Quantum Groups ....could be the right approaches
to look at the world at small scales. Thus the information charge is distributed ” uniformly ” , in discrete
bits of Planck hyper-area, in Planck units , over the outer ” surface ” of the hyperball of Planck radius.
There is no inside. Inside is meaningless notion below the Planck scale, this is why the information charge
has to reside on the ” surface ”. It would not be so surprising if this mechanism could be linked to the
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy-area relationship of Black Holes.

The number of dimensions increases as one probes ﬁner and ﬁner resolution-scales ( not to be confused
with lengths, although they both have the same units). By resolutions one means the resolutions that a
physical apparatus can resolve. Resolutions which are not the same thing as the spacetime labels of a ”
point ”, event ” like xµ. Resolutions that so far ( until Nottale) have been overlooked in the description of
Physics. As one approaches asymptotically the Planck scale resolution , the hypersphere of Planck scale
radius becomes more and more ” visible” to us . To be able to reach this limiting ” threshold ” of resolutions
in our physical apparatus, an inﬁnite amount Energy is required as Nottale has argued. By the same token
that it takes an inﬁnite amount of energy to accelerate a mass ( nonzero rest mass) from rest to the speed of
light, it takes an inﬁnite energy to probe Planck scale-resolutions. The ﬁnal inﬁnite-dimensional hypersphere,

7

containing the information charge located at the ” origin ” O, shrinks to a hyperpoint of zero size , but
ﬁnite Planck radius, The information charge density also diverges at the inﬁnite-dimensional point : the
hyperpoint of nonzero Planck radius. Exactly in the same way it did for hyperspheres of radius R = ct upon
taking the inﬁnite dimension limit.

Concluding, the ﬂux Φ is not zero. There is a net information charge enclosed by the hypersphere with

center O and radius R = ct.

Exactly the same argument occur if one asks the question : What does one of the photons ” see ” ?
It will ” see ” the other photon at a distance l = 2R = 2ct ( in Planck units) move away at the speed of
light. Due to the Doppler eﬀect, the frecuency will be redshifted so much that the photon will appear to be
completely dark, with zero frecuency . For ﬁnite values of the radius, l = 2R = 2ct, the hypersphere centered
at one of the photons will again shrink to a zero size , to a hyperpoint, in the inﬁnite Dimensional ( large
D ) limit. Therefore, when a Macroscopic Observer with a Physical Apparatus measures the polarization
of one particular photon, it will transfer its information to the other photon in an instant due to the fact
that both of the photons have access to an extremely large number of dimensions in comparison to the
macroscopic observers; i.e the photons truly live inside the hyperpoint. For this reason, they are able to
exchange information in an instant without actually having a superluminal speed of information ! It is the
information charge density ( and information current J) that diverges once again at the hyperpoint, and not
the information speed. It is only an illusion due to the shrinking to zero of the hypersphere in the inﬁnite
dimensional limit.

Of course, the e−/e+ pair does not attain such inﬁnite energies to probe Planck scale resolutions, they
come very close to each other but never reach the Planck scale. As they approach each other more and
more dimensions become visible to them. Much more dimensions than the dimensions of the apparent
one-dimensional world to a macroscopic observer looking at the line between the two emerging photons
while performing his experiment. . Eﬀectively, the number of dimensions of the world visible to the e−/e+
pair, and the two emerging photons , is very high in comparison to the apparent D = 1, D = 4 of the
macrospcopic observers , that for all practical purpopses, one can take the inﬁnite dimensional limit of the
gamma functions. The diagrams explicitly show that the hypervolume, hyperareas fall-oﬀ very rapidly to
zero as D moves far away from the D = 4. It is not necessary to actually take the inﬁnite dimensional limit
too literate.

A related textbook issue is the following : Imagine a rapid moving observer passing by ourselves during
the night while we are gazing at the stars. Due to the Lorentz contraction the celestial sphere that he
experiences will naturally shrink with respect to us. It shrinks, but does it appear ﬂattened ? The answer
is no. One can view the Lorentz transformations in spinor terms as a SL(2, C) Mobius transformation. Since
the Mobius transformation maps circles to circles, the celestial sphere will have shrunk in radius only but it
will not be ﬂattened.

Similar analogy happens to the photon. What does a photon ” see ” ? Since we have said earlier
that one cannot for certain answer such questions. We can only follow what we know so far : Due to the
inﬁnite Lorentz contraction the celestial sphere will shrink to a point. Doesn’t this contradict Nottale view
that the Planck scale is the mimimal length ? The answer is no. Once again we have to take the variable
dimensions of the Quantum World that a photon experiences. The photon is a quantum entity. Nobody
can deny this. The photon of a given energy E = ¯hω will probe resolutions larger than the Planck scale.
Rigorously speaking , we should write : E = ¯hef f (k2)ω.
In [1] we have shown that the New Relativity
Theory demands an energy-dependent eﬀective Planck constant so that [x, p] = i¯hef f (k2) to reproduce the
full blown Quantum Spacetime Uncertainty Relations that are more general than the String Uncertainty
Relations : we have included the eﬀects of all extended objects [1]. It was shown rigorously why one cannot
probe resolutions smaller than the Planck scale. As energy begins to be pump-in, one cannot probe smaller
scales. Spacetime actually starts to grow. It is possible that a polymerization growth process of the Quantum
Spacetime begins : an inﬁnite chain of self similar branched polymers is triggered and baby universes branch
oﬀ. The Quantum Universe might be an ever self-reproducing , self-recursive, self-iterated fractal process as
Linde has suggested.

Only at inﬁnite energy will a photon be able to probe the Planck scale. The celestial hypersphere that
the photon ” sees ” has a radius of the order of the inverse photon Energy, roughly, assuming it is a low
energy photon, Energy and resolution are inversely correlated at that level., not at higher enegy levels. Scale

8

Relativity implies that the Compton wavelength and momentum are decoupled as one approaches Planck
scales. It takes an inﬁnite energy to probe the Planck scale. The Planck scale is the ultimate Ultaviolet
Regulator. However, due to the eﬀectively large number of dimensions that the photon has access to, despite
the fact the hypersphere has a nonzero radius, the celestial hypersphere shrinks to zero size consistent with
the inﬁnite Lorentz contraction ! . It is true that one has to construct the full Scale-Motion Relativity [13]
to be fully rigourous and consistent. We have presented a solution to the apparent paradox of how one can
have a zero measure/size ( due to the inﬁnite Lorentz contraction) with a nonzero resolution for a radius :
Inﬁnite ( large number of ) Dimensions is the key once again !

Therefore, in essence : By introducing the notion of hyperpoint in physics, which is forced upon us
by the New Relativity Principle as a result of having a truly inﬁnite dimensional Quantum World. we have
imbued a mathematical point with a true physical meaning : it is an inﬁnite-dimensional hypersphere, of
zero size but nonzero radius !.

When t = ∞ then the coeﬃcient α will no longer be negative inﬁnity due to a cancellation between

lnR and lnD :

α ∼ D[lnπ + lnR − lnD] = D[lnπ + ln(ct) − lnD] ∼ Dlnπ ⇒ eα → ∞.

(12)

In this case, one has the opposite result : the value of the information current JD at R = ∞ collapses to
zero, as it should on physical grounds. The information ﬁeld must vanish at inﬁnity in any dimension, ﬁnite
or inﬁnite. As the photons move away from eachother, if one waits an inﬁnite amount of time to peform the
EPR experiment, the photons will no longer be correlated !

To sum up :
The EPR Paradox only occurs to the one-dimensional beings ( or ﬁnite-dimensional beings) living along
the linear path ( around the linear path) of the photons who wish to perform the EPR gedanken experiment.
From their ﬁnite-dimensional point of a view, QM appears to be non-local
: a superluminal transfer of
information appears to take place. From the point of view of the New Relativity Theory there is no paradox
because Quantum Spacetime is truly inﬁnite-dimensional. For those Quantum-dimensional beings who were
able to tap into the eﬀectively ”inﬁnite” number of dimensions of Quantum Spacetime at the very ” moments
” when the e−/e+ pair collided, at a very small distance separation among them, distance which cannot
be smaller than the Planck scale as indicated by Nottale’s Scale Relativity, there is no such Paradox at
all !
: the information current blows up because from their inﬁnite-dimensional point of view, for ﬁnite
values of the radius, the hypersphere has shrunk to a hyperpoint. The transfer of information to the two
photons, about the spin and other quantum numbers of the e−/e+ pair, occurs in an instant ! Every point
in their universe is inter-connected as Mach argued long ago. Similar arguments apply to the two photons
when a macroscopic observer measures the polarization of one photon, the information is transfered to the
other photon in an instant via an eﬀectively ” inﬁnite ” dimensional ( relative to the macroscopic observers)
Quantum Spacetime accesible to them.

This should encourage us to view Feynman’s path integral formulation of QM taking all posible paths
in a ﬁnite dimensional spacetime, from the New Relativity Theory point of view : it is possible to have a
ﬁnite number of paths in an Inﬁnite Dimensional Quantum Spacetime. The main question is : Where does
the Feynman statistical complex-weighting of the paths via the eiS comes from ?

The partial answer was given by Ord [10] , Nottale [3] and others :
Since fractal paths have a dominant weight in the path integral compared to the smooth ones, the
latter have a zero measure compare to the former, roughly speaking, Quantum Eﬀects manifest or channel
themselves via the fractality of spacetime. Although there are people who do not subscribe to this view.
Fractal curves are continous but nowhere diﬀerentiable. This means that the derivatives are discrete-
valued. The discrete jumps of the values of the tangents are ”quantized” in units of what has been called
by mathematicians the ” Planck ” constant of a curve. In this fashion the Feynamn eiS weighting factor is
interpreted although , we must say that no rigorous proof of this has been given as far as we know.

Fractals and Scale Relativity are essential because as the resolutions that a physical apparatus can
resolve reach the mimimal Planck scale resolution ( resolutions must not to be confused with statistical
uncertainties nor with ordinary lengths) the number of fractal dimensions blows up. For a new Phase space
path integral derivation of Feynman’s particle propagator that is roughly based on these ideas that a fractal
particle ” path ” can have a meaning in QM see [7].

9

The apparent superluminal information velocity happens in other aspects of Physics. There is a very
simple analogy with superluminal jets in Astrophysics [5] . If one takes a ﬂash light at a suﬃciently large
distance from a wall and rotates it very rapidly , the image on the wall can appear to move faster than light.
However the image is not a truly physical object. The physical photons never move faster than light. The
image is comprised of many diﬀerent photons and not of a ﬁxed particular number of them . The maximum
angular velocity of rotation of the ﬂash light is bounded by Special Relativity :

where r is the length of the ﬂashlight. If the distance to the wall is R then the apparent velocity of the
shadow is :

ωmax =

c
r

(13)

v =

cR
r

> c.

(14)

The ( unphysical object) shadow can move faster than light. One does not even have to go to such extremes
of achieving the maximal angular speed for the ﬂash light , one can simply choose the wall far enough, and
the ﬂashlight suﬃcently bright, ( R large enough ) so the image on the wall moves with a superluminal
velocity ωR > c. Exactly similar arguments occur with the phase velocity in wave propagation. The phase
velocity can be greater that c but the physical group velocity is always bounded by c. Taking the number of
Dimensions to inﬁnity, mimics this simple example of taking the distance to the wall far enough and rotating
the ﬂash light fast enough.

Similar arguments can be taken with the so called Back Hole Information loss Paradox. Since Quantum
Spacetime is truly inﬁnite dimensional, there is no such thing as an Information Loss. This information is
stored in all the inﬁnite number of dimensions that are inaccesible to an outside low energy observer. There
is information radiated away and a remnant ” hidden ” in the inﬁnite number of dimensions inaccesible to
the outside observers. Black Hole evaporation stops at the minimal scale in Nature : the Planck scale,
reaching a maximum temperature, Planck’s Temperature. Scale Realtivity not only induces an eﬀective
value of the Planck’s constant : ¯hef f (k2) [1], it also aﬀects the Boltzmann constant as well : kB(k2) so that
: kB(k2)T = ¯hef f (k2)ω. As one reaches the Planck scale, energy blows up but the temperature reaches
asymptotically the maximum Planck Temperature ( thermal Relativity). One must have a standard of
temperature to compare temperatures with. That maximum universal standard is the Planck Temperature
whose deﬁnition in D = 4 is :

TP =s ¯hc5

Gk2
B

= 1.42 × 1032K.

(15)

Astrophysicits have been baﬄed by recent ﬁndings that there are unexplained extremely bright and
unrelenting sources of energy.
It is warranted to study these phenomena within the framework of the
New Relativity Theory. To be able to ” see ” all the information one has to tap into all the inﬁnite
number of dimensions of the Quantum Spacetime. To achieve that one requires inﬁnite amount of energy
to probe the Planck scale resolutions according to the Scale Relativity Principle . At that scale (inﬁnite)
Dimensions, (inﬁnite) Energy and (inﬁnite) Information merges into the ” Omega ” hyperpoint , the ”
Trinity ” hyperpoint..... the ultimate inﬁnite-dimensional point : At that scale, the ” Trinity ” hyperpoint,
Dimensions, Energy and Information are indistinguishable from each other. More details will be given later.

Acknowledgements

We are indebted to E. Spallucci for a very constructive critical remarks. We thank G. Chapline.
L.Nottale , W. Pezzaglia, M. El Naschie and D. Finkelstein for illuminating discussions. Finally many
thanks to C. Handy and M. Handy for their assistance and encouragement .

1. C. Castro : ” The String Uncertainty Relations follow from the New Relativity Principle ”
hep-th/0001023. ”
” Hints of a New Relativity Principle from p-brane Quantum Mechanics ” hep-th/9912113.
” Is Quantum Spacetime Inﬁnite Dimensional ? hep-th/0001134.

References

10

”Towards the Search for the Origins of M Theory, Loop Quantum Mechanics and
Bulk/Boundary Duality ........hep-th/9809102.
2. W. Pezzaglia : ” Dimensionally Democratic Calculus and Principles of Polydimensional
Physics ” gr-qc/9912025.
3. L. Nottale : Fractal Spacetime and Microphysics, Towards the Theory of Scale Relativity
World Scientiﬁc 1992.
L. Nottale : La Relativite dans Tous ses Etats. Hachette Literature. Paris. 1999.
4. M. El Naschie : Jour. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals vol 10 nos. 2-3 (1999) 567.
5. Phillip Morrison : Conversations held with Carlos Castro at MIT in 1980.
6. . C. Castro, A. Granik et al : In preparation.
7. S. Ansoldi, A. Aurilia and E. Spallucci : Eur. J. Physcs C 21 (2000) 1-12. quant-ph/9910074.
S.Ansoldi, C. Castro, E. Spallucci : Class. Quantum. Gravity 16 (1999) 1833.
8. D. Finkelstein : ” Third Relativity ” Georgia Tech preprint, January 2000.
” Emptiness and Relativity ” Georgia Tech preprint. December 1999.
9. D. Benarjee, M. Cardenas : Private Communication.
10. G. Ord : J. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 10 (2-3) (1999) 499.
11. M. Altaisky, B. Sidharth : Journal of Chaos, Solitons and Fractals vol 10 (2-3) (1999) 167.
l. Brekke, P. Freund : Phys. Reports 231 (1993) 1-66.
V. Valdimorov, I. Volovich, E. Zelenov : p-adics in Mathematical Physics. World Scientiﬁc 1992.
A. Khrennikov : Non Archimedean Analyis, Quantum Paradoxes , Dynamical Systems and
Biological Models. Kluwer Publisng 1998.
12. L. Nottale : Private Communication
13. C. Castro : J. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 10 (2-3) (1999) 295.
14. M. El Naschie : On the Uniﬁcation of the Fundamental Forces and Complex Time
in the E (∞) Space. Jour. Chaos. Solitons and Fractals 11 (2000) 1149-1162.

11

