0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
4
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Can Science ‘explain’ Consciousness ?

M. K. Samal

Non-Accelerator Particle Physics (NAPP) Group,

Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore-560 034, India.

(e-mail: mks@iiap.ernet.in)

Consciousness is the process by which one attributes ‘meaning’ to the world. Considering
Fφllesdal’s deﬁnition of ‘meaning’ as the joint product of all ‘evidence’ that is available to those who
‘communicate’, we conclude that science can, not only reduce all the evidence to a Basic Entity (we
call BE), but also can ‘explain’ consciousness once a suitable deﬁnition for communication is found
that exploits the quantum superposition principle to incorporate the fuzzyness of our experience.
Consciousness may be beyond ‘computability’, but it is not beyond ‘communicability’.

I. INTRODUCTION

Among all the human endeavours, science can be considered to be the most powerful for the maximum power it endowes
us to manipulate the nature through an understanding of our position in it. This understanding is gained when a set of
careful observations based on tangible perceptions, acquired by sensory organs and/or their extensions, is submitted to the
logical analysis of human intellect as well as to the intuitive power of imagination to yield the abstract fundamental laws
of nature that are not self-evident at the gross level of phenomenal existence. There exists a unity in nature at the level of
laws that corresponds to the manifest diversity at the level of phenomena.

Can consciousness be understood in this sense by an appropriate use of the methodology of science ? The most diﬃcult
problem related to consciousness is perhaps, ‘how to deﬁne it ?’. Consciousness has remained a unitary subjective experience,
its various ‘components’ being reﬂective (the recognition by the thinking subject of its own actions and mental states),
perceptual (the state or faculty of being mentally aware of external environment) and a free will (volition). But how
these components are integrated to provide the unique experience called ‘consciousness’, familiar to all of us, remains a
mystery. Does it lie at the level of ‘perceptions’ or at the level of ‘laws’ ? Can it be reduced to some basic ‘substance’ or
‘phenomenon’ ? Can it be manipulated in a controlled way ? Is there a need for a change of either the methodology
or the paradigm of science to answer the above questions ? In this article, I make a modest attempt to answer these
questions, albeit in a speculative manner.

II. CAN CONSCIOUSNESS BE REDUCED FURTHER ?

Most of the successes of science over the past ﬁve hundred years or so can be attributed to the great emphasis it lays on
the ‘reductionist paradigm’. Following this approach, can consciousness be reduced either to ‘substance’ or ‘phenomena’
in the sense that by understanding which one can understand consciousness ?

A. Physical Substratum

The attempts to reduce consciousness to a physical basis have been made in the following ways by trying to understand

the mechanism and functioning of the human brain in various diﬀerent contexts.

• Physics

The basic substratum of physical reality is the ‘state’ of the system and the whole job of physics can be put into a
single question : ‘given the initial state, how to predict its evolution at a later time ?’. In classical world, the state
and its evolution can be reduced to events and their spatio-temporal correlations. Consciousness has no direct role
to play in this process of reduction, although it is responsible to ﬁnd an ‘objective meaning’ in such a reduction.

But the situation is quite diﬀerent in the quantum world as all relevant physical information about a system is
contained in its wavefunction (or equivalently in its state vector), which is not physical in the sense of being directly
measurable. Consciousness plays no role in the deterministic and unitary Schr¨odinger evolution (i.e. the U-process
of Penrose [1]) that the ‘unphysical’ wavefunction undergoes.

To extract any physical information from the wavefuction one has to use the Born-Dirac rule and thus probability
enters in a new way into the quantum mechanical description despite the strictly deterministic nature of evolution

1

of the wavefunction. The measurement process forces the system to choose an ‘actuality’ from all ‘possibilities’ and
thus leads to a non-unitary collapse of the general wavefunction to an eigenstate (i.e. the R-process of Penrose [1])
of the concerned observable. The dynamics of this R-process is not known and it is here some authors like Wigner
have brought in the consciousness of the observer to cause the collapse of the wavefunction. But instead of explaining
the consciousness, this approach uses consciousness for the sake of Quantum Mechanics which needs the R-process
along with the U-process to yield all its spectacular successes.
The R-process is necessarily non-local and is governed by an irreducible element of chance, which means that the
theory is not naturalistic: the dynamics is controlled in part by something that is not a part of the physical universe.
Stapp [2] has given a quantum mechanical model of the brain dynamics in which this quantum selection process is
a causal process governed not by pure chance but rather by a mathematically speciﬁed non-local physical process
identiﬁable as the conscious process. It was reported [3] that attempts have been made to explain consciousness by
relating it to the ‘quantum events’, but any such attempt is bound to be futile as the concept of ‘quantum event’ in
itself is ill-deﬁned !
Keeping in view the fundamental role that the quantum vacuum plays in formulating the quantum ﬁeld theories of
all four known basic interactions of nature spreading over a period from the big-bang to the present, it has been
suggested [4] that if at all consciousness be reduced to anything ‘fundamental’ that should be the ‘quantum vacuum’
in itself. But in such an approach the following questions arise: 1) If consciousness has its origin in the quantum
vacuum that gives rise to all fundamental particles as well as the force ﬁelds, then why is it that only living things
possess consciousness ?, 2) What is the relation between the quantum vacuum that gives rise to consciousness and
the space-time continuum that conﬁnes all our perceptions through which consciousness manifests itself ?, 3) Should
one attribute consciousness only to systems consisting of ‘real’ particles or also to systems containing ‘virtual’ particles
? Despite these questions, the idea of tracing the origin of ‘consciousness’ to ‘substantial nothingness’ appears quite
promising because the properties of ‘quantum vacuum’ may ultimately lead us to an understanding of the dynamics
of the R-process and thus to a physical comprehension of consciousness.
One of the properties that distinguishes living systems from the non-living systems is their ability of self-organisation
and complexity. Since life is a necessary condition for possessing consciousness, can one attribute consciousness
to a ‘degree of complexity’ in the sense that various degrees of consciousness can be caused by diﬀerent levels of
complexity? Can one give a suitable quantitative deﬁnition of consciousness in terms of ‘entropy’ that describes
the ‘degree of self-organisation or complexity’ of a system ? What is the role of non-linearity and non-equilibrium
thermodynamics in such a deﬁnition of consciousness ? In this holistic view of consciousness what is the role played by
the phenomenon of quantum non-locality, ﬁrst envisaged in EPR paper [5] and subsequently conﬁrmed experimentally
[6] by Aspect et. al ? What is the role of irreversibility and dissipation in this holistic view ?

• Neuro-biology

On the basis of the vast amount of information available on the structure and the modes of communication (neuro-
transmitters, neuro-modulators, neuro-hormones) of the neuron, neuroscience has empirically found [7] the neural basis
of several attributes of consciousness. With the help of modern scanning techniques and by direct manipulations of the
brain, neuro-biologists have found out that various human activities (both physical and mental) and perceptions can
be mapped into almost unique regions of the brain. Awareness, being intrinsic to neural activity, arises in higher level
processing centers and requires integration of activity over time at the neuronal level. But there exists no particular
region that can be attributed to have given rise to consciousness. Consciousness appears to be a collective phenomena
where the ‘whole’ is much more than the sum of parts ! Is each neuron having the ‘whole of consciousness’ within
it, although it does work towards a particular attribute of consciousness at a time ?
Can this paradigm of ﬁnding neural correlates of the attributes of consciousness be fruitful in demystifying con-
sciousness ? Certainly not ! As it was aptly concluded [8] the currently prevalent reductionist approaches are
unlikely to reveal the basis of such holistic phenomenon as consciousness. There have been holistic attempts [9,1]
to understand consciousness in terms of collective quantum eﬀects arising in cytoskeletons and microtubles; minute
substructures lying deep within the brain’s neurons. The eﬀect of general anaesthetics like chloroform (CHCl3),
isoﬂuorane (CHF2OCHClCF3) etc. in swiching oﬀ the consciousness, not only in higher animals such as mammals or
birds but also in paramecium, amoeba, or even green slime mould has been advocated [10] to be providing a direct
evidence that the phenomenon of consciousness is related to the action of the cytoskeleton and to microtubles. But
all the implications of ‘quantum coherence’ regarding consciousness in such approach can only be unfolded after we
achieve a better understanding of ‘quantum reality’, which still lies ahead of the present-day physics.

• Artiﬁcial Intelligence

Can machines be intelligent ? Within the restricted deﬁnition of ‘artiﬁcial intelligence’, the neural network approach
has been the most promising one. But the possibility of realising a machine capable of artiﬁcial intelligence based

2

on this approach is constrained at present [11] by the limitations of ‘silicon technology’ for integrating the desired
astronomical number of ‘neuron-equivalents’ into a reasonable compact space. Even though we might achieve such
a feat in the foreseeable future by using chemical memories, it is not quite clear whether such artiﬁcially intelligent
machines can be capable of ‘artiﬁcial consciousness’. Because one lacks at present a suitable working deﬁnition of
‘consciousness’ within the frame-work of studies involving artiﬁcial intelligence.

Invoking G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem, Penrose has argued [1] that the technology of electronic computer-controlled
robots will not provide a way to the artiﬁcial construction of an actually intelligent machine–in the sense of a machine
that ‘understands’ what it is doing and can act upon that understanding. He maintains that human understanding
(hence consciousness) lies beyond formal arguments and beyond computability i.e. in the Turing-machine-accessible
sense.

Assuming the inherent ability of quantum mechanics to incorporate consciousness, can one expect any improvement
in the above situation by considering ‘computation’ to be a physical process that is governed by the rules of quantum
mechanics rather than that of classical physics ? In ‘Quantum computation’ [12] the classical notion of a Turing
machine is extended to a corresponding quantum one that takes into account the quantum superposition principle.
In ‘standard’ quantum computation, the usual rules of quantum theory are adopted, in which the system evolves
according to the U-process for essentially the entire operation, but the R-process becomes relevant mainly only at
the end of the operation, when the system is ‘measured’ in order to ascertain either the termination or the result of
the computation.

Although the superiority of the quantum computation over classical computation in the sense of complexity theory have
been shown [13], Penrose insists that it is still a ‘computational’ process since U-process is a computable operation
and R-process is purely probabilistic procedure. What can be achieved in principle by a quantum computer could
also be achieved, in principle, by a suitable Turing-machine-with-randomiser. Thus he concludes that even a quantum
computer would not be able to perform the operations required for human conscious understanding. But we think
that such a view is limited because ‘computation’ as a process need not be conﬁned to a Turing-machine-accessible
sense and in such situations one has to explore the power of quantum computation in understanding consciousness.

We conclude from the above discussions that the basic physical substrata to which consciousness may be reduced are
‘neuron’, ‘event’ and ‘bit’ at the classical level, whereas at the quantum level they are ‘microtuble’, ‘wavefunction’ and
‘qubit’; depending on whether the studies are done in neuro-biology, physics and computer science respectively. Can there
be a common platform for these trio of substrata ?

We believe the answer to be in aﬃrmative and the ﬁrst hint regarding this comes from Wheeler’s [14] remarkable idea:
“ it from bit i.e. every it – every particle, every ﬁeld of force, even the spacetime continuum itself – derives its function,
its meaning, its very existence entirely – even if in some contexts indirectly – from the apparatus-elicited answers to yes
or no questions, binary choices, bits”. This view of the world refers not to an object, but to a vision of a world derived
from pure logic and mathematics in the sense that an immaterial source and explanation lies at the bottom of every item
of the physical world.
In a recent report [15] the remarkable extent of embodiment of this vision in modern physics has
beed discussed alongwith the possible diﬃculties faced by such a scheme. But can this scheme explain consciousness by
reducing it to bits ? Perhaps not unless it undergoes some modiﬁcation. Why ?

Because consciousness involves an awareness of an endless mosaic of qualitatively diﬀerent things –such as the colour of
a rose, the fragrance of a perfume, the music of a piano, the tactile sense of objects, the power of abstraction, the intuitive
feeling for time and space, emotional states like love and hate, the ability to put oneself in other’s position, the abilitiy to
wonder, the power to wonder at one’s wondering etc. It is almost impossible to reduce them all to the 0-or-1 sharpness of
the deﬁnition of ‘bits’. A major part of human experience and consciousness is fuzzy and hence can not be reduced to yes
or no type situations. Hence we believe that ‘bit’ has to be modiﬁed to incorporate this fuzzyness of the world. Perhaps
the quantum superposition inherent to a ‘qubit’ can help. Can one then reduce the consciousness to a consistent theory
of ‘quantum information’ based on qubits ? Quite unlikely, till our knowledge of ‘quantum reality’ and the ‘emergence of
classicality from it’ becomes more clear.

The major hurdles to be cleared are (1) Observer or Participator ? (In such equipment-evoked, quantum-
information-theoretic approach, the inseparability of the observer from the observed will bring in the quantum measurement
problem either in the form of dynamics of the R-process or in the emergence of classicality of the world from a quantum
substratum. We ﬁrst need the solutions to these long-standing problems before attempting to reduce the ‘fuzzy’ world of
consciousness to ‘qubits’ ! ); (2) Communication ? (Even if we get the solutions to the above problems that enable us to
reduce the ‘attributes of consciousness’ to ‘qubits’, still then the ‘dynamics of the process that gives rise to consciousness’
will be beyond ‘quantum information’ as it will require a suitable deﬁnition of ‘communication’ in the sense expressed by
Fφllesdal [16] “ Meaning is the joint product of all evidence that is available to those who communicate”. Consciousness
helps us to ﬁnd a ‘meaning’ or ‘understanding’ and will depend upon ‘communication’. Although all ‘evidence’ can be
reduced to qubits, ‘communication’ as an exchange of qubits has to be well-deﬁned. Why do we say that a stone or a tree is

3

unconscious ? Is it because we do not know how to ‘communicate’ with them ? Can one deﬁne ‘communication’ in physical
terms beyond any verbal or non-verbal language ? Where does one look for a suitable deﬁnition of ‘communication’ ?
Maybe one has to deﬁne ‘communication’ at the ‘substantial nothingness’ level of quantum vacuum.); (3) Time’s Arrow
? (How important is the role of memory in ‘possessing consciousness’ ? Would our consciousness be altered if the world
we experience were reversible with respect to time ? Can our consciousness ever ﬁnd out why it is not possible to inﬂuence
the past ?).

Hence we conclude that although consciousness may be beyond ‘computability’, it is not beyond ‘quantum communicabil-
ity’ once a suitable deﬁnition for ‘communication’ is found that exploits the quantum superposition principle to incorporate
the fuzzyness of our experience. Few questions arise: 1) how to modify the qubit ?, 2) can a suitable deﬁnition of ‘com-
munication’, based on immaterial entity like ‘qubit’ or ‘modiﬁed qubit’, take care of non-physical experience like dream or
thoughts ? We assume, being optimistic, that a suitable modiﬁcation of ‘qubit’ is possible that will surpass the hurdles
of communicability, dynamics of R-process and irreversibility. For the lack of a better word we will henceforth call such a
modiﬁed qubit as ‘Basic Entity’ (BE).

B. Non-Physical Substratum

Unlike our sensory perceptions related to physical ‘substance’ and ‘phenomena’ there exists a plethora of human expe-
riences like dreams, thoughts and lack of any experience during sleep which are believed to be non-physical in the sense
that they cannot be reduced to anything basic within the conﬁnement of space-time and causality. For example one cannot
ascribe either spatiality or causality to human thoughts, dreams etc. Does one need a frame-work that transcends spatio-
temporality to incorporate such non-physical ‘events’ ? Or can one explain them by using BE ? The following views can be
taken depending on one’s belief:

• Modiﬁed BE [ M(BE) ]

What could be the basic substratum of these non-physical entities ? Could they be understood in terms of any
suitably modiﬁed physical substratum ? At the classical level one might think of reducing them to ‘events’ which,
unlike the physical events, do not have any reference to spatiality. Attempts [17] have been made to understand the
non-physical entities like thoughts and dreams in terms of temporal events and correlation between them. Although
such an approach may yield the kinematics of these non-physical entities, it is not clear how their dynamics i.e.
evolution etc. can be understood in terms of temporal component alone without any external spatial input, when
in the ﬁrst place they have arose from perceptions that are meaningful only in the context of spatio-temporality ?!
Secondly, it is not clear why the ‘mental events’ constructed after dropping the spatiality should require new set of
laws that are diﬀerent from the usual physical laws.

At the quantum level one might try to have a suitable modiﬁcation of the wavefunction to incorporate these non-
physical entities. One may make the wavefunction depend on extra parameters [18], either physical or non-physical, to
give it the extra degrees of freedom to mathematically include more information. But such a wavefunction bound to
have severe problems at the level of interpretation. For example, if one includes an extra parameter called ‘meditation’
as a new degree of freedom apart from the usual ones, then how will one interpret squared modulus of the wavefunction
? It will be certainly too crude to extend the Born rule to conclude that the squared modulus in this case will give the
probability of ﬁnding a particle having certain meditation value ! Hence this kind of modiﬁcation will not be of much
help except for the apparent satisfaction of being able to write an eigenvalue equation for dreams or emotions ! This
approach is certainly not capable of telling how the wavefunction is related to consciousness, let alone a mathematical
equation for the evolution of consciousness !

If one accepts consciousness as a phenomenon that arises out of execution of processes then any suggested [19]
new physical basis can be shown to be redundant. As we have concluded earlier, all such possible processes and
their execution can be reduced to BE and spatio-temporal correlations among BE using a suitable deﬁnition of
communication.

Hence to incorporate non-physical entities as some kind of information one has to modify the BE in a subtle way.
Schematically M(BE)= BE ⊗ X, where ⊗ stands for a yet unknown operation and X stands for fundamental substratum
of non-physical information. X has to be diﬀerent from BE; otherwise it could be reducible to BE and then there will
be no spatio-temporal distinction between physical and non-physical information. But, how to ﬁnd out what is X ?
Is it evident that the laws for M(BE) will be diﬀerent from that for BE ?

• Give up BE

One could believe that it is the ‘Qualia’ that constitutes consciousness and hence consciousness has to be understood
at a phenomenological level without disecting it into BE or M(BE). One would note that consciousness mainly consists

4

of three phenomenological processes that can be roughly put as retentive, reﬂective and creative. But keeping the
tremendous progress of our physical sciences and their utility to neuro-sciences in view, it is not unreasonable to expect
that all these three phenomenological processes, involving both human as well as animal [20] can be understood oneday
in terms of M(BE).

• Platonic BE

It has been suggested [21] that consciousness could be like mathematics in the sense that although it is needed to
comprehend the physical reality, in itself it is not ‘real’.

The ‘reality’ of mathematics is a controversial issue that brings in the old debate between the realists and the
constructivists whether a mathematical truth is ‘a discovery’ or ‘an invention’ of the human mind ? Should one
consider the physical laws based on mathematical truth as real or not ?! The realist’s stand of attributing a
Platonic existence to the mathematical truth is a matter of pure faith unless one tries to get the guidance from the
knowledge of the physical world. It is doubtful whether our knowledge of physical sciences provides support for the
realist’s view if one considers the challenge to ‘realism’ in physical sciences by the quantum world-view, which has
been substantiated in recent past by experiments [6] that violate Bell’s inequalities.

Even if one accepts the Platonic world of mathematical forms, this no way makes consciousness non-existent or
unreal. Rather the very fact that truth of such a platonic world of mathematics yields to the human understanding
as much as that of a physical world makes consciousness all the more profound in its existence.

III. CAN CONSCIOUSNESS BE MANIPULATED ?

Can consciousness be manipulated in a controlled manner ? Experience tells us how diﬃcult it is to control the thoughts
and how improbable it is to control the dreams. We discuss below few methods prescribed by western psycho-analysis and
oriental philosophies regarding the manipulation of consciousness. Is there a lesson for modern science to learn from these
methods ?

A. Self

The subject of ‘self’ is usually considered to belong to an ‘internal space’ in contrast to the external space where we deal

with others. We will consider the following two cases here:

• Auto-suggestions

There have been evidences that by auto-suggestions one can control one’s feelings like pain and pleasure. Can one
cure oneself of diseases of physical origin by auto-suggestions ? This requires further investigations.

• Yoga and other oriental methods

The eight-fold (asthanga) Yoga of Patanjali is perhaps the most ancient method prescribed [22] to control one’s
thought and to direct it in a controlled manner. But it requires certain control over body and emotions before one
aspires to gain control over mind.
In particular it lays great stress on ‘breath control’ (pranayama) as a means to
relax the body and to still the mind.
In its later stages it provides systematic methods to acquire concentration
(dhyan) and to prolong concentration on an object or a thought (dharna).

After this attainment one can reach a stage where one’s awareness of self and the surrounding is at its best. Then
in its last stage, Yoga prescribes one’s acute awareness to be decontextualized [23] from all perceptions limited by
spatio-temporality and thus to reach a pinnacle called (samadhi) where one attains an understanding of everything
and has no doubts. In this sense the Yogic philosophy believes that pure consciousness transcends all perceptions
and awareness. It is diﬃcult to understand this on the basis of day to day experience. Why does one need to sharpen
one’s awareness to its extreme if one is ﬁnally going to abandon its use ? How does abandonning one’s sharpened
awareness help in attaining a realisation that transcends spatio-temporality? Can any one realise anything that is
beyond the space, time and causality ? What is the purpose of such a consciousness that lies beyond the conﬁnement
of space and time ?

5

B. Non-Self

The Non-Self belongs to an external world consisting of others, both living and non-living. In the following we discuss

whether one can direct one’s consciousness towards others such that one can aﬀect their behaviour.

• Hypnosis, ESP etc...

It is a well-known fact that it is possible to hypnotise a person and then to make contact with his/her sub-conscious
mind. Where does this sub-conscious lie ? What is its relation to the conscious mind ? The eﬃcacy of the method of
hypnosis in curing people of deep-rooted psychological problems tells us that we are yet to understand the dynamics
of the human brain fully.

The ﬁeld of Para-Psychology deals with ‘phenomena’ like Extra Sensory Perception (ESP) and telepathy etc. where
one can direct one’s consciousness to gain insight into future or to inﬂuence others mind. It is not possible to explain
[23] these on the basis of the known laws of the world.
It has been claimed that under hypnosis a subject could
vividly recollect incidents from the previous lives including near-death and death experiences which is independent of
spatio-temporality. Then, it is not clear, why most of these experiences are related to past ? If these phenomena
are truely independent of space and time, then studies should be made to ﬁnd out if anybody under hypnosis can
predict his/her own death, an event that can be easily veriﬁable in due course of time, unlike the recollections of
past-life !

• PK, FieldREG etc.

Can mind inﬂuence matter belonging to outside of the body ? The studies dubbed as Psycho-Kinesis (PK) have been
conducted to investigate the ‘suspect’ interaction of the human mind with various material objects such as cards,
dice, simple pendulum etc. An excellent historical overview of such studies leading upto the modern era is available
as a review paper, titled “ The Persistent Paradox of Psychic Phenomena: An Engineering Perspective”, by Robert
Jahn of Princeton University published in Proc. IEEE (Feb. 1982).

The Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) programme of the Department of Applied Sciences and
Engineering, Princeton University, has recently developed and patented a ‘Field REG’ (Field Random Event Generator)
device which is basically a portable notebook computer with a built-in truely random number generator (based on
a microelectronic device such as a shot noise resistor or a solid-state diode) and requisite software for on-line data
processing and display, speciﬁcally tailored for conducting ‘mind-machine interaction’ studies.

After performing large number of systematic experiments over the last two decades, the PEAR group has reported [24]
the existence of such a consciousness related mind-machine interaction in the case of ‘truely random devices’. They
attribute it to a ‘Consciousness Field Eﬀect’. They have also reported that deterministic random number sequences
such as those generated by mathematical algorithm or pseudo-random generators do not show any consciousness
related anomalous behaviour. Another curious ﬁnding is that ‘intense emotional resonance’ generates the eﬀect
whereas ‘intense intellectual resonance’ does not ! It is also not clear what is the strength of the ‘consciousness
ﬁeld’ in comparison to all the four known basic force ﬁelds of nature.

One should not reject outright any phenomenon that cannot be explained by the known basic laws of nature. Because
each such phenomenon holds the key to extend the boundary of our knowledge further. But before accepting these eﬀects
one should ﬁlter them through the rigours of scientiﬁc methodology. In particular, the following questions can be asked:

• Why are these events rare and not repeatable ?

• How does one make sure that these eﬀects are not manifestations of yet unknown facets of the known forces ?

• Why is it necessary to have truely random processes ? How does one make sure that these are not merely statistical

artifacts ?

If the above eﬀects survive the scrutiny of the above questions (or similar ones) then they will open up the doors to a new
world not yet known to science. In such a case how does one accomodate them within the existing framework of scientiﬁc
methods ? If these eﬀects are conﬁrmed beyond doubt, then one has to explore the possibility that at the fundamental level
of nature, the laws are either diﬀerent from the known physical laws or there is a need to complement the known physical
laws with a set of non-physical laws ! In such a situation, these ‘suspect’ phenomena might provide us with the valuable
clue for modifying BE to get M(BE) that is the basis of everything including both physical and mental !

6

IV. IS THERE A NEED FOR A CHANGE OF PARADIGM ?

Although reductionist approach can provide us with valuable clues regarding the attributes of consciousness, it is the
holistic approach that can only explain consciousness. But the dualism of Descarte [25] that treats physical and mental
processes in a mutually exclusive manner will not suﬃce for understanding consciousness unless it makes an appropriate
use of complementarity for mental and physical events which is analogous to the complementarity evident in the quantum
world.

V. CONCLUSION

Where does the brain end and the mind begin ? Brain is the physical means to acquire and to retain the information for the
mind to process them to ﬁnd a ‘meaning’ or a ‘structure’ which we call ‘understanding’ that is attributed to consciousness.
Whereas attributes of consciousness can be reduced to BE [or to M(BE)], the holistic process of consciousness can only be
understood in terms of ‘quantum communication’, where ‘communication’ has an appropriate meaning. Maybe one has to
look for such a suitable deﬁnition of communication at the level of ‘quantum vacuum’.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It is a pleasure to thank the organisers, in particular to Prof. B. V. Sreekantan and Dr. Sangeetha Menon; for the

hospitality and encouragement as well as for providing the conducive atmosphere that made this article possible.

[1] Penrose, R., Emperor’s New Mind and Shadows of the Mind, Vintage Editions, (1998).
[2] Stapp, H. P., Chance, Choice, and Consciousness: The Role of Mind in the Quantum Brain, quant-ph/9511029 (electronic

archive at LANL).

[3] Nair, Ranjit, Consciousness and the Quantum in this conference.
[4] Sreekantan, B. V., Scientiﬁc Explanations and Consciousness in this conference.
[5] Einsten, A., Podolsky, P., and Rosen, N., (1935), Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered

complete ?, Phys. Rev. 47, 777-80.

[6] Aspect, A., Grangier, P., and Roger, G. (1982), Experimental realization of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm Gedankenex-

periment: a new violation of Bell’s inequalities, Phys. Rev. Lett., 48, 91-4.

[7] Rao, Shobhini, Neural Correlates and Consciousness in this conference.
[8] Tondon, P. N., Exploring Consciousness–Neurobiological Approaches in this conference.
[9] Hameroﬀ, S. R., (1987) Ultimate computing, Biomolecular consciousness and nano-technology, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

[10] Hameroﬀ, S. R. and Watt, R. C. (1983), Do anesthetics act by altering electron mobility ?, Anesth. Analg., 62, 936-40.
[11] Vidyasagar, M., Artiﬁcial Intelligence in this conference.
[12] Deutsch, D. (1985), Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal quantum computer in Proc. Roy. Soc.

(London), A 400, 97-117; Feynman R. P., (1986), Quantum mechanical Computers, Found. of Phys., 16(6), 507-31.

[13] Deutsch, D. and Jozsa, R. (1992), Rapid solution of problems by quantum computation, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), A 439,

553-8.

[14] Wheeler, J. A., (1989), Information, Physics, Quantum: the Search for the Links, Proc. 3rd Int. symp. Foundations of

Quantum Mechanics, Tokyo, pp. 354-368.

[15] Wilczek, F., (1999), Getting its from bits, Nature 397, 303-6.
[16] D. Fφllesdal, (1975), Meaning and Experience in ‘Mind and Language’, ed. S. Guttenplan (Clarendon, Oxford), pp. 25-44.
[17] Singh, N., Fundamental Laws of mental events in this conference.
[18] Kaushal, R. S., Plurality of Consciousness in Vedantic Philosophy and its role in Scientiﬁc Observations in this conference.
[19] Singh, R. K., A Physical Basis of Consciousness in this conference.
[20] Sinha, A., Almost Minds? The Search for Animal Consciousness in this conference.
[21] Sarukkai, S., Reality and Consciousness in this conference.
[22] Iyengar, B. K. S., Light on Yoga, Unwin Publishers, London.
[23] Krishna Rao P. V., Yoga and Transformation of Consciousness in this conference.
[24] Srinivasan, M., Experimental studies on interaction of human consciousness with physical systems in this conference.
[25] Narasimhan, M. G., The Emergence of Cartesian Paradigm and Its Impacts on Later Developments in this conference.

7

