0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
4
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New Hierarchic Theory of Matter, general for

liquids and solids:

dynamics, thermodynamics and mesoscopic

structure of water and ice

Alex Kaivarainen

University of Turku, JBL, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland

H2o@karelia.ru

URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk

Summary

A basically new hierarchic quantitative theory, general for solids
and liquids, has been developed.
It is assumed, that unharmonic
oscillations of particles in any condensed matter lead to emergence
of three-dimensional (3D) superposition of standing de Broglie waves
of molecules, electromagnetic and acoustic waves. Consequently, any
condensed matter could be considered as a gas of 3D standing waves
of corresponding nature. Our approach uniﬁes and develops strongly
the Einstein’s and Debye’s models.

Collective excitations in form of coherent clusters, representing at
certain conditions the mesoscopic molecular Bose condensate, were
analyzed, as a background of hierarchic model of condensed matter.

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B) length is deter-
mined by the ratio of Plank constant to the most probable impulse
of molecules, or by ratio of its most probable phase velocity to fre-
quency. The waves B are related to molecular translations (tr) and
librations (lb).

As the quantum dynamics of condensed matter does not follow in general
case the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the real most probable de
Broglie wave length can exceed the classical thermal de Broglie wave length and
the distance between centers of molecules many times.

This makes possible the atomic and molecular partial Bose con-
densation in solids and liquids at temperatures, below boiling point.
It is one of the most important results of new theory, which we have
conﬁrmed by computer simulations on examples of water and ice.

Four strongly interrelated new types of quasiparticles (collective

excitations) were introduced in our hierarchic model:

1. Eﬀectons (tr and lb), existing in ”acoustic” (a) and ”optic” (b) states

represent the coherent clusters in general case;

2. Convertons, corresponding to interconversions between tr and lb types of

the eﬀectons (ﬂickering clusters);

1

3. Transitons are the intermediate [a ⇋ b] transition states of the tr and lb

eﬀectons;

4. Deformons are the 3D superposition of IR electromagnetic or acoustic

waves, activated by transitons and [lb⇋ tr] convertons.

Primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are formed by 3D superposition of
the most probable standing de Broglie waves of the oscillating ions,
atoms or molecules. The volume of eﬀectons (tr and lb) may contain
from less than one, to tens and even thousands of molecules. The ﬁrst
condition means validity of classical approximation in description of
the subsystems of the eﬀectons. The second one points to quantum
properties of coherent clusters due to molecular Bose condensation.

It leads from our computer simulations, that liquids are semiclassical systems
because their primary (tr) eﬀectons contain less than one molecule and primary
(lb) eﬀectons - more than one molecule. The solids are quantum systems to-
tally because both kind of their primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are molecular Bose
condensates.

It is shown, that the 1st order [gas → liquid] transition is accompanied by
strong decrease of librational (rotational) degrees of freedom due to emergence
of primary (lb) eﬀectons.
In turn, the [liquid → solid] transition is followed
by decreasing of translational degrees of freedom due to Bose-condensation of
primary (tr) eﬀectons.

In the general case the eﬀecton can be approximated by par-
allelepiped with edges corresponding to de Broglie waves length in
three selected directions (1, 2, 3), related to the symmetry of the
molecular dynamics. In the case of isotropic molecular motion the
eﬀectons’ shape may be approximated by cube.

The edge-length of primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) can be considered

as the ”parameter of order”.

The in-phase oscillations of molecules in the eﬀectons correspond to the
eﬀecton’s (a) - acoustic state and the counterphase oscillations correspond to
their (b) - optic state. States (a) and (b) of the eﬀectons diﬀer in potential
energy only, however, their kinetic energies, impulses and spatial dimensions -
are the same. The b-state of the eﬀectons has a common feature with Fr¨olich’s
polar mode.

The (a → b) or (b → a) transition states of the primary eﬀectons
(tr and lb), deﬁned as primary transitons, are accompanied by a
change in molecule polarizability and dipole moment without density
ﬂuctuation. In this case the transitions lead to absorption or radiation
of IR photons, respectively.

Superposition (interception) of three internal standing IR pho-
tons, penetrating in diﬀerent directions (1,2,3) - forms primary elec-
tromagnetic deformons (tr and lb).

On the other hand, the [lb⇋ tr] convertons and secondary transitons are
accompanied by the density ﬂuctuations, leading to absorption or radiation of
phonons.

2

Superposition resulting from interception of standing phonons in three direc-

tions (1,2,3), forms secondary acoustic deformons (tr and lb).

Correlated collective excitations of primary and secondary eﬀectons and
deformons (tr and lb), localized in the volume of primary tr and lb electromag-
netic deformons, lead to origination of macroeﬀectons, macrotransitons
and macrodeformons (tr and lb respectively).

Correlated simultaneous excitations of tr and lb macroeﬀectons in the vol-
ume of superimposed tr and lb electromagnetic deformons lead to origination
of supereﬀectons.

In turn, the coherent excitation of both:

tr and lb macrodeformons and
macroconvertons in the same volume means creation of superdeformons. Su-
perdeformons are the biggest (cavitational) ﬂuctuations, leading to microbub-
bles in liquids and to local defects in solids.

Total number of quasiparticles of condensed matter equal to 4!=24,
reﬂects all of possible combinations of the four basic ones [1-4], intro-
duced above. This set of collective excitations in the form of ”gas” of
3D standing waves of three types: de Broglie, acoustic and electro-
magnetic - is shown to be able to explain virtually all the properties
of all condensed matter.

The important positive feature of our hierarchic model of matter is that it
does not need the semi-empiric intermolecular potentials for calculations, which
are unavoidable in existing theories of many body systems. The potential energy
of intermolecular interaction is involved indirectly in dimensions and stability
of quasiparticles, introduced in our model.

The main formulae of theory are the same for liquids and solids
and include following experimental parameters, which take into ac-
count their diﬀerent properties:

[1]- Positions of (tr) and (lb) bands in oscillatory spectra;
[2]- Sound velocity;
[3]- Density;
[4]- Refraction index (extrapolated to the inﬁnitive wave length of

photon).

The knowledge of these four basic parameters at the same temperature and
pressure makes it possible using our computer program, to evaluate more than
300 important characteristics of any condensed matter. Among them are such
as: total internal energy, kinetic and potential energies, heat-capacity and ther-
mal conductivity, surface tension, vapor pressure, viscosity, coeﬃcient of self-
diﬀusion, osmotic pressure, solvent activity, etc. Most of calculated parameters
are hidden, i.e. inaccessible to direct experimental measurement.

The new interpretation and evaluation of Brillouin light scattering and
M¨ossbauer eﬀect parameters also have been done on the basis of hierarchic
theory. Mesoscopic scenarios of turbulence, superconductivity and superﬂuity
are elaborated.

Some original aspects of water in organization and large-scale dynamics of
biosystems - such as proteins, DNA, microtubules, membranes and regulative

3

role of water in cytoplasm, cancer development, quantum neurodynamics, etc.
have been analyzed in the framework of hierarchic theory.

Computerized veriﬁcation of our Hierarchic concept of matter
on examples of water and ice has been performed, using special
computer program: Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties
[CAMP, copyright, 1997, Kaivarainen]. The new optoacoustic device
(CAMP), based on this program, with possibilities much wider, than
that of IR, Raman and Brillouin spectrometers, has been proposed
(see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [CAMP & Innovations]).

This is the ﬁrst theory able to predict all known experimental tem-
perature anomalies for water and ice. The conformity between theory
and experiment is very good even without adjustable parameters.

The hierarchic concept creates a bridge between micro- and macro-
liquids and solids in

phenomena, dynamics and thermodynamics,
terms of quantum physics.

I. INTRODUCTION

A theory of liquid state, as well as a general theory of condensed matter, is
still absent. However, this fundamental problem becomes more and more crucial
for diﬀerent brunches of science and technology.

The existing solid states theories did not allow to extrapolate them success-

fully to liquids.

Widely used molecular dynamics method is based on classical approach and
corresponding computer simulations. It cannot be considered as a general one.
The understanding of hierarchic organization of matter and developing of gen-
eral theory is essential, as a mesoscopic bridge between microscopic and macro-
scopic physics, between liquids and solids.

There are strong evidence obtained that at least part of molecules
of solids and liquids did not follow classical Maxwell-Boltzmann dis-
tribution. This means that only quantum approach is valid for elab-
oration of general theory of condensed matter.

Our theoretical study of water and aqueous systems was initiated in
1986. It was stimulated by necessity to explain the nontrivial phenomena, ob-
tained by diﬀerent physical methods in our investigations of water-protein solu-
tions. For example, the Drost-Hansen temperature anomalies in water [1], cor-
relating with changes in large scale protein dynamics were found in our group
by specially elaborated experimental approaches.
In the process of study it
becomes evident, that the water clusters and water hierarchical cooperative
properties are dominating factors in self-organization, function and evolution
of biosystems. The living organisms are strongly dependent on water proper-
ties, representing about 70% of the body mass. On the other hand, due to

4

its complicity and numerous anomalies, water is an ideal system for
testing a new theories of condensed matter. One may be sure that if
the theory works well with respect to water and ice, then it must be
valid for other liquids, glasses or crystals as well. For this reason we
have made the quantitative veriﬁcation of our hierarchic mesoscopic
concept [2, 3, 4] on examples of water and ice.

Our theory proceeds from fact that two main types of molecular heat mo-
tion: translational (tr) and librational (lb) oscillations - are characterized with
non Maxwell-Boltzmann distributions in three- dimensional (3D) impulse
space. The most probable impulses (p) determine the most probable de Broglie
wave length (λB = h/p = vph/νB) and phase velocity (vph).

Conformational intramolecular dynamics is taken into account indirectly, as
far it has an inﬂuence on the intermolecular dynamics and the value of the most
probable parameters of waves B in condensed matter.

Solids and liquids are considered as a hierarchical system of collective excita-
tions - metastable quasiparticles of the four new type: eﬀectons, transitons,
convertons and deformons, strongly interrelated with each other.

When the eﬀecton sizes determined by standing waves B of molecules

exceed the distances between them, then the coherent molecular clus-
ters appear as a result of high temperature molecular Bose-condensation.
The possibility of molecular Bose-condensation in liquids and solids
at ”normal” temperatures is one of the most important statements
of our model, conﬁrmed by computer simulations.

Eﬀectons represent the self-organization of matter on a mesoscopic

(nanoscale) level.

In contrast to Fr¨olich’s single polar mode excitation [5], the co-
herence of thermal oscillations in the eﬀectons: three-dimensional
(3D) standing de Broglie waves (waves B) of molecules and atoms is
induced not only by Coulomb interaction, determined the in-phase
oscillations of dipole moments of cluster of molecules in the ”opti-
cal” b-state, but mainly by the distant Van der Waals interactions
and equality of 3D waves B length of molecules, forming eﬀectons in
both: (a) and (b) states.

The values of standing wave B length, determined the dimensions of the
eﬀectons in selected directions (1,2,3) and may be considered as a mesoscopic
parameter of order.

The primary transitons and convertons have common features with coherent
dissipative structures introduced by Chatzidimitrov-Dreisman and Br¨andas in
1988 [6]. Such structures were predicted on the background of complex scaling
method and Prigogine theory of star- unitary transformations.

Estimated from principle of uncertainty, the minimum boson’s ”degrees of

freedom”(nmin) in these spontaneous coherent structures are equal to:

nmin ≥ τ (2πkB T /h)

5

where τ is relaxation time of coherent-dissipative structures.

If, for example, τ ≃ 10−12c, corresponding to excitation of a molecular sys-
tem by infrared photon, then at T = 300K one get nmin ≃ 250.
It means
that at least 250 degrees of freedom, i.e. [250/6] molecules, able to translations
and librations act coherently and produce a photon absorption/emission phe-
nomenon. The traditional consideration of an oscillating individual molecule as
a source of photons is replaced by the notion of a correlation pattern in such a
model.

The interactions like Josephson’s junctions are possible between

the eﬀectons also.

In associated liquids like water, all hydrogen bonds between molecules

of the primary eﬀectons are saturated. This condition corresponds
to minimum of their thermal mobility and maximum of de Broglie
wave length. The quantum eﬀects, related to Bose condensation of
molecules, forming primary eﬀectons are responsible for stabilization
of clusters in both: (a) and (b) states of the eﬀectons.

The Fr¨olich’s polar mode reﬂects only private case of thermal coherent dy-
namics, considered by our model, corresponding to optical (b)-state of primary
eﬀectons.

We have to point out that the interactions between atoms and molecules in
condensed matter is much stronger and thermal mobility/impulse much lesser,
than in gas phase. It means that the temperature of Bose condensation, when
condition (1) starts to work can be much higher in solids and liquids than in the
gas phase. The lesser is interaction between molecules or atoms the
lower temperature is necessary for initiation of Bose condensation.

This conclusion is conﬁrmed in 1995 by Ketterle’s group in MIT and later
by few other groups, showing the Bose-Einstein condensation in gas of neutral
atoms, like sodium (MIT), rubidium (JILA) and lithium (Rice University) at
very low temperatures, less than one Kelvin.

However, at this conditions the number of atoms in primary gas eﬀectons
(Bose condensate) was about 20,000 and the dimensions were almost macro-
scopic: about 15 micrometers.

For comparisons the number of water molecules in primary librational eﬀec-
ton at freezing point 2730K is only 280 and linear dimension about 20 ˚A (see
Fig. 7).

Our Hierarchic concept of matter unites and extends strongly two earlier

existing most general models of solid state [7]:

a) the Einstein model of independent quantum oscillators;
b) the Debye model, taking into account only collective phenomena - phonons

in a solid body like in a continuous medium.

Among earlier models of liquid state the model of ﬂickering clusters by Frank
In our days the quantum ﬁeld
and Wen (1957) is closest of all to our model.
theoretical approach to description of biosystems with some ideas, close to our
ones has been developed intensively by Umesawa’s group [8,9] and Italian group
[10,11].

6

Del Giudice and Preparata (1998) introduced the notion of Coherent Elec-
trodynamic Condensate (CEC), which may occur in the volume of 3D photon’s
standing waves, radiated by atoms/molecules of matter. This idea is close to our
notions of mesoscopic collective excitations of condensed matter in the volumes
of 3D IR photons (Kaivarainen, 1992, 1995), related to translations (transla-
tional macroeﬀectons) and librations (librational macroeﬀectons).

The new physical ideas required a new terminology. It is a reason why one
can feel certain discomfort at the beginning of reading this work. To facilitate
this process, we present below a description of a new quasiparticles, notions and
terms, introduced in our Hierarchic Theory of matter (see Table 1).

II. THE NEW NOTIONS AND DEFINITIONS, INTRODUCED

IN HIERARCHIC CONCEPT OF MATTER

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B).
In composition of condensed matter the dynamics of particles could be char-
acterized by the thermal unharmonic oscillations of two types: translational (tr)
and librational (lb).

The length of the most probable wave B of thermally activated molecule,
atom or atoms group in condensed matter can be estimated by two following
ways:

(λ1,2,3 = h/mv1,2,3

gr = v1,2,3

ph /ν1,2,3

B )tr,lb

where the most probable impulse p1,2,3 = mv1,2,3
is equal to product of the
particle mass (m) and most probable group velocity (v1,2,3
). The wave B length
also could be evaluated as the ratio of its most probable phase velocity (v1,2,3
ph )
to most probable frequency (ν1,2,3

gr

gr

B ).

The indices (1,2,3) correspond to selected directions of motion in 3D space,
related to the main axes of the molecules symmetry and their tensor of po-
larizability.
In the case when molecular motion is anisotropic one, we have
inequalities:

B 6= λ2
λ1

B 6= λ3
B

Due to unharmonicity of oscillations: (mv2/2) < (kT /2) - the most proba-
ble kinetic energy of molecules (Tkin)tr,lb is lesser than potential one (V )tr,lb.
Consequently, the most probable wave B length: λ1,2,3

B > h/(mkBT )1/2.

The most probable (primary) eﬀectons (tr and lb). Such a new type
of quasiparticles (excitations) is represented by 3D superposition of three most
probable standing waves B of molecules. The shape of primary eﬀectons in a
general case can be approximated by a parallelepiped, with the length of its 3
ribs determined by 3 most probable waves B length. The volume of primary
eﬀectons is equal to:

7

The number of molecules or atoms forming eﬀectons is:

Vef = (9/4π)λ1λ2λ3.

nm = (Vef )/(V0/N0),

where V0 and N0 are molar volume and Avogadro number, correspondingly.
The nm increases with temperature decreasing and may reach hundreds or even
thousands of molecules.

In liquids, primary eﬀectons may be checked as a clusters and in solids as

domains or microcrystalline.

The thermal oscillations in the volume of corresponding eﬀectons are syn-
chronized. It means the coherence of the most probable wave B of molecules
and their wave functions. We consider the primary eﬀectons as a result of
partial Bose condensation of molecules of condensed matter. Primary eﬀec-
tons correspond to the main state of Bose-condensate with the packing number
np = 0, i.e. with the resulting impulse equal to zero.

Primary eﬀectons, as a coherent clusters, represent self-organization of con-
densed matter on mesoscopic level. It is a quantum phenomenon. For the other
hand, if the volume of primary eﬀectons is less than the volume, occupied by
one molecule (V0/N0), it points to the classical behavior of molecules.

”Acoustic” (a) and ”optical” (b) states of primary eﬀectons.
The ”acoustic” a-state of the eﬀectons is such a dynamic state when molecules
or other particles composing the eﬀectons, oscillate in the same phase (i.e. with-
out changing the distance between them).

The ”optic” b-state of the eﬀectons is such dynamic state when particles
oscillate in the counterphase manner (i.e. with periodical change of the distance
between particles). This state of primary eﬀectons has a common features with
Fr¨olich’s mode [5].

The kinetic energies of ”acoustic” (a) and ”optical” (b) states are equal
[T a
kin] in contrast to potential energies [V a < V b]. It means that the
kin = T b
most probable impulses in (a) and (b) states and, consequently, the wave B
length and spatial dimensions of the eﬀectons in the both states are
equal. The energy of intermolecular interaction (Van der Waals, Coulomb,
hydrogen bonds etc.) in a-state are bigger than that in b-state. Consequently,
the molecular polarizability in a-state also could be bigger than in b-state. It
means that dielectric properties of matter may change as a result of shift of the
(a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium of the eﬀectons.
Primary transitons (tr and lb).
Primary transitons represent intermediate transition states between (a) and
(b) modes of primary eﬀectons - translational and librational. Primary transi-
tons (tr and lb) - are radiating or absorbing photons corresponding to trans-
lational and librational bands in oscillatory spectra. The volumes of primary
transitons and primary eﬀectons coincides (see Table 1).

8

Primary electromagnetic and acoustic deformons (tr, lb).
Electromagnetic primary deformons are a new type of quasiparticles (excita-
tions) representing a 3D superposition of three standing electromagnetic waves.
The IR photons originate and annihilate as a result of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb transitions of
primary eﬀectons, i.e. corresponding primary transitons. Such quantum tran-
sitions are not accompanied by the ﬂuctuation of density but with the change
of polarizability and dipole moment of molecules only.

Electromagnetic deformons appear as a result of interception - superposi-
tion of 3 pairs of photons, penetrating in matter in diﬀerent selected directions
(1,2,3). We assume, that each of these 3 pairs of photons form a standing wave
in the volume of condensed matter.

The linear dimension of each of three ribs of primary deformon is determined

by the wave length of 3 intercepting standing photons:

λ1,2,3 = [(n˜ν)−1]1,2,3
tr,lb

where: n is the refraction index and (˜ν)tr,lb - the wave number of transla-
tional or librational band. These quasiparticles as the biggest ones, are respon-
sible for the long-range space-time correlation in liquids and solids.

In the case when (b → a)tr,lb transitions of primary eﬀectons are accom-
panied by great ﬂuctuation of density they may be followed by emission of
phonons instead of photons. It happened when primary eﬀectons are involved
in the spatial organization of macro- and supereﬀectons (see below). Primary
acoustic deformons may originate or annihilate in such a way. But for primary
eﬀectons the probability of collective spontaneous emission of photons during
(b → a)tr,lb transition is much higher than that of phonons.

The coherent electromagnetic radiation as a result of self- correlation of
many dipole moments in composition of coherent cluster, like primary eﬀectons,
containing N ≫ 1 molecules is already known as superradiance [12]. The time
of collective transition in the case of superradiance is less than that of isolated
molecule and intensity of superradiance (I ∼ N · hν/τ ∼ N2) is much bigger
than that from the same number of independent molecules (I ∼ N·hν/T1 ∼ N).
The (b → a) transition time of the primary eﬀectons has the reverse dependence
on the N (τ ∼ 1/N). The relaxation time for isolated atoms or molecules (T1)
is independent on N. The main energy is radiated in the direction of most
elongated volume, i.e. ends of tubes. In technic superradiance is used for very
powerful masers and lasers with ultra short optic impulses. The properties of
water as an dipole laser were considered in [13].

Secondary eﬀectons (tr and lb).
In contrast to primary eﬀectons, this type of quasiparticles is conventional.
They are the result of averaging of the frequencies and energies of the ”acoustic”
(a) and ”optical” (b) states of eﬀectons with packing numbers nP > 0, having
the resulting impulse more than zero.

For averaging the energies of such states the Bose-Einstein distribution was
used under the condition when T < T0 (T0 is temperature of degeneration and,

9

simultaneously, temperature of ﬁrst order phase transition). Under this con-
dition the chemical potential: µ = 0 and distribution has a form of Plank
equation.

Secondary transitons (tr and lb).
Secondary transitons, like primary ones are intermediate transition state
between (¯a) and (¯b) states of secondary eﬀecton - translational and librational.
Secondary transitons are responsible for radiation and absorption of phonons.
As well as secondary eﬀectons, these quasiparticles are conventional, i.e. a
result of averaging. The eﬀective volumes of secondary transitons and secondary
eﬀectons - coincides.

Secondary ”acoustic” deformons (tr and lb).
This type of quasiparticles is also conventional as a result of 3D superposi-
tion of averaged thermal phonons. These conventional phonons originate and
annihilate in a process of (¯a ⇔ ¯b)1,2,3 thermoactivated transitions of secondary
conventional eﬀectons (translational and librational transitons). In the case of
secondary transitons (¯a ⇔ ¯b)tr,lb transitions are accompanied by the ﬂuctuation
of density.

Convertons (tr ⇔ lb).
These important excitations are introduced in our model as interconversions
between translational and librational primary eﬀectons. The (acon) convertons
correspond to transitions between the (a) states of these eﬀectons and (bcon)
convertons - to that between their (b)-states. As far the dimensions of trans-
lational primary eﬀectons are much less than that of librational ones, the con-
vertons could be considered as the dissociation and association of the primary
librational eﬀectons (coherent clusters). Both of convertons: (acon) and (bcon)
are accompanied by density ﬂuctuation, inducing phonons with corresponding
frequency in the surrounding medium.

The ca- and cb- deformons, induced by convertons.
Three-dimensional (3D) superposition of phonons, irradiated by two types
of convertons: acon and bcon, represent in our model the acoustic ca- and cb-
deformons. They have the properties, similar to that of secondary deformons,
discussed above.

The c-Macrotransitons (Macroconvertons) and c-Macrodeformons.

Simultaneous excitation of the acon and bcon types of convertons in the
volume of primary librational eﬀectons lead to origination of big ﬂuctuation,
like cavitational one, termed c-Macrotransitons or Macroconvertons.

In turn, such ﬂuctuations induce in surrounding medium high frequency
thermal phonons. The 3D-superposition these phonons forms c- Macrodefor-
mons.

Macroeﬀectons (tr and lb).
Macroeﬀectons (A and B) are collective simultaneous excitations of the pri-
mary and secondary eﬀectons in the [A ∼ (a, ¯a)]tr,lb and [B ∼ (b, ¯b)]tr,lb states in
the volume of primary electromagnetic translational and librational deformons,

10

respectively. This correlation of similar primary and secondary states results in
signiﬁcant deviations from thermal equilibrium. The A and B states of macroef-
fectons (tr and lb) may be considered as the most probable volume-orchestrated
thermal ﬂuctuations of condensed matter.

Macrodeformons or macrotransitons (tr and lb).
This type of conventional quasiparticles is considered in our model as an
intermediate transition state of macroeﬀectons. The (A → B)tr,lb and (B →
A)tr,lb transitions are represented by the coherent transitions of primary and
secondary eﬀectons in the volume of primary electromagnetic deformons - trans-
lational and librational. The (A → B)tr,lb transition of macroeﬀecton is accom-
panied by simultaneous absorption of 3 pairs of photons and that of phonons in
the form of electromagnetic deformons. If (B → A)tr,lb transition occur without
emission of photons, then all the energy of the excited B-state is transmitted into
the energy of ﬂuctuation of density and entropy of Macroeﬀecton as an isolated
mesosystem. It is a dissipative process: transition from the more ordered struc-
ture of matter to the less one, termed Macrodeformons. The big ﬂuctuations
of density during (A ⇔ B)tr,lb transitions of macroeﬀectons, i.e. macrodefor-
mons are responsible for the Raleigh central component in Brillouin spectra of
light scattering (see Chapter 9 in [3]). Translational and librational macrode-
formons are also related to the corresponding types of viscosity (Chapter 12 in
[3]). The volumes of macrotransitons/macrodeformons (tr or lb) and macroef-
fectons coincide with that of tr or lb primary electromagnetic deformons
correspondingly.

Supereﬀectons.
This mixed type of conventional quasiparticles is composed of translational
and librational macroeﬀectons correlated in space and time in the volumes of
superimposed electromagnetic primary deformons (translational and librational
- simultaneously). Like macroeﬀectons, supereﬀectons may exist in the ground
(A∗
S) states representing strong deviations from thermal equi-
librium state.

S) and excited (B∗

Superdeformons or supertransitons.
This collective excitations have the lowest probability as compared to other
quasiparticles of our model. Like macrodeformons, superdeformons represent
the intermediate (A∗
S) transition state of supereﬀectons. In the course
of these transitions the translational and librational macroeﬀectons undergo
simultaneous

S ⇔ B∗

[(A ⇔ B)tr and (A ⇔ B)lb]

transitions.

S → B∗

The (A∗
S) transition of supereﬀecton may be accompanied by the absorp-
tion of two electromagnetic deformons - translational and librational simultane-
ously. The reverse (B∗
S) relaxation may occur without photon radiation.
In this case the big cavitational ﬂuctuation originates.

S → A∗

Such a process plays an important role in the processes of sublimation, evap-

oration and boiling.

11

The equilibrium dissociation constant of the reaction:

H2O ⇋ H + + HO−

should be related with equilibrium constant of supertransitons: KB∗
A∗
activation of reversible dissociation of part of water molecules.

. The
S cavitational ﬂuctuation of supereﬀectons can be accompanied by the

S → B∗

⇋A∗
S

S

Supertransitons and macrotransitons have the properties of dissipative sys-

tems.

In contrast to primary and secondary transitons and deformons,
the notions of [macro- and supertransitons] and [macro- and superde-
formons] coincide. Such types of transitons and deformons represent the dy-
namic processes in the same volumes of corresponding primary electromagnetic
deformons.

Considering the transitions of all types of translational deformons (primary,
secondary and macrodeformons), one must keep in mind that the librational
type of modes remains the same. And vice versa, in case of librational defor-
mons, translational modes remain unchanged. Only the realization of a con-
vertons and supereﬀectons are accompanied by the interconversions between the
translational and librational modes, between translational and librational eﬀec-
tons.

Interrelation between quasiparticles forming solids and liquids.
Our model includes 24 types of quasiparticles (Table. 1):

4 - Eﬀectons
4 - Transitons

4 - Deformons  translational and librational, including

primary and secondary




the set of interconvertions
between translational and librational
primary eﬀectons

2 - Convertons
2 − C-deformons
1 − M c-transiton
1 − M c-deformon


(cid:20) 2 - Macroeﬀectons
2 - Macrodeformons (cid:21) translational and librational
(cid:20) 1 - Supereﬀectons
1 - Superdeformons (cid:21) translational ⇋ librational

(superposition of tr and lb eﬀectons
and deformons in the same volume)

(spatially separated)

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

Each level in the hierarchy of quasiparticles (I - IV) introduced in our
model is based on the principle of correlation of corresponding type of a dynamic

12

process in space and time. All of these quasiparticles are constructed on the
same physical principles as 3D -superposition (interception) of diﬀerent types
of standing waves.

Such a system can be handled as an ideal gas of quasiparticles of

24 types.

As far each of the eﬀecton’s types: tr and lb, macroeﬀectons [tr + lb] and
supereﬀectons [tr/lb] has two states (acoustic and optic) the total number of
excitations is equal to:

Nex = 31

Three types of standing waves are included in our model:
- de Broglie waves of particles (waves B);
- acoustic waves (phonons);
- electromagnetic waves (IR photons).
This classiﬁcation reﬂects the duality of matter and ﬁeld and represent their

self-organization and interplay on mesoscopic and macroscopic levels.

Our hierarchical system includes a gradual transition from the Order (pri-
mary eﬀectons, transitons and deformons) to the Chaos (macro- and superdefor-
mons). It is important, however, that in accordance with the model proposed,
this thermal Chaos is ”organized” by hierarchical superposition of deﬁnite types
of the ordered quantum excitations. It means that the ﬁnal dynamics condensed
matter only ”looks” as chaotic one. Our approach makes it possible to take into
account the Hidden Order of Condensed Matter.

The long-distance correlation between quasiparticles is determined mainly
by the biggest ones - an electromagnetic primary deformons, involving in its
volume a huge number of primary and secondary eﬀectons. The vol-
ume of primary deformons [tr and lb] could be conventionally subdivided on
two equal parts, within the nodes of 3D standing IR electromagnetic waves.
The big number of the eﬀectons (primary and secondary) as well as secondary
deformons in each of these parts is equal also. However the dynamics of the
eﬀectons is orchestrated in such a way, that when one half of their quantity
in the volume of big primary deformon undergo (a → b)tr,lb transitions, the
other half of the eﬀectons undergo the opposite (b → a)tr,lb transition. These
processes compensate each other due to equilibrium energy exchange of IR pho-
tons and phonons. Such ”internal” dynamic equilibrium makes it possible to
consider macroeﬀectons and macrodeformons as the isolated systems. The sim-
ilar orchestrated equilibrium dynamics is pertinent also for supereﬀectons and
superdeformons.

The increasing or decreasing in the concentration of primary deformons is
directly related to the shift of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium of the primary eﬀectons
leftward or rightward, respectively. This shift, in turn, leads also to correspond-
ing changes in the energies and concentrations of secondary eﬀectons, deformons
and, consequently, to that of super- and macro-deformons. It means the ex-
isting of feedback reaction between subsystems of the eﬀectons and
deformons, necessary for long-range self-organization in macroscopic
volumes of condensed matter.

13

Table 1. Schematic representation of the 18 types of quasiparticles
of condensed matter as a hierarchical dynamic system, based on the
eﬀectons, transitons and deformons. Total number of quasiparticles,
introduced in Hierarchic concept is 24. Six collective excitations,
related to convertons- interconversions between primary librational
and translational eﬀectons and their derivatives are not represented
here for the end of simplicity.

The situation is possible when spontaneous oscillations between the sub-
systems of eﬀectons and deformons are not accompanied by the change in the
total internal energy due to compensation eﬀect. In such a way a long-period
macroscopic autooscillations in liquids, revealed experimentally [5, 6], could be
explained. Such kind of phenomena, related to equilibrium shift of
two subsystems, could be responsible for long relaxation (memory)
of water containing systems after diﬀerent perturbations (like mag-
netic treatment, ultra high dilution, etc.). The instability of macrosystem

14

arises from competition between discrete quantum and averaged thermal equilib-
rium types of energy distributions of coherent molecular clusters, as it leads
from our theoretical calculations.

The total internal energy of substance is determined by the contributions of
all types of quasiparticles with due regard for their own energy, concentration
and probability of excitation. Contributions of super - and macroeﬀectons and
corresponding super - and macrodeformons as well as polyeﬀectons and coherent
superclusters to the internal energy of matter normally are small, due to their
low probability of excitation, big volume and, consequently, low concentration.

III. THE MAIN STATEMENTS AND BASIC FORMULAE OF

HIERARCHIC MODEL

As far the acoustic (a) and optical (b) thermal coherent modes of molecules
in composition of elementary cells or bigger clusters of the condensed matter
are unharmonic, the quantum a ⇔ b transitions (beats) with absorption and
radiation of phonons or photons can exist.

The number of acoustic and optical modes is the same and equal to
three [3], if oscillation of all p-atoms in the basis are coherent in both
optical and acoustic dynamic states. Remnant modes are degenerated.

The states of system, minimizing the uncertainty relation, when:

[∆p · ∆x ∼  and ∆x = L ∼ /∆p]1,2,3

(3.1)

are quantum coherent states.

A system of eﬀectons could be considered as a partially degenerate Bose-gas.
The degree of the degenerateness is proportional to the number of molecules in
the volume of primary eﬀectons. Degeneration in liquids grows up at lowering
temperature and make a jump up as a result of (liquid → solid) phase transition
as it leads from our theory and computer calculations.

It is known from the Bose-Einstein theory of condensation developed by

London in 1938 [14] that if the degeneration factor:

λ = exp(µ/kT )

(3.2)

is close to λ ≃1 at a low chemical potential value:

µ ≪ kT

(3.2a)

then the contribution of bosons with the resulting impulse Pef ≃ 0 (like

primary eﬀectons) cannot be neglected, when calculating internal energy.

We assume in our theory that for all types of primary and secondary eﬀectons

of condensed matter (solids and liquids), the condition (3.2a) is valid.

15

Partial Bose-Einstein condensation leads to the coherence of the waves B of
molecules and atoms forming primary eﬀectons in the both: acoustic (a) and
optic (b) states. Primary eﬀectons are described with wave functions coherent
in the volume of an eﬀecton.

In non ideal Bose-gas, despite the partial Bose-condensation, the quasiparti-
cles exist with nonzero impulse, termed as secondary eﬀectons. These eﬀectons
obeys the Bose-Einstein statistics.

The sizes of primary eﬀectons determine the mesoscopic scale of the con-
densed matter organization. According to our model, the domains, nods,
crystallites, and clusters observed in solid bodies and in liquid crys-
tals, polymers and biopolymers - can be a consequence of primary
translational or librational eﬀectons.

Stabilization of molecules, atoms or ions in composition of coherent clus-
ters (eﬀectons) and correlation between diﬀerent eﬀectons could be provided
by distant Van der Waals interaction and new Resonant Vibro-Gravitational
Interaction, introduced in Chapter 17 of book [3].

It leads from quantitative consequences of mesoscopic concept, that [gas
→ liquid] phase transition is related with appearance the conditions for par-
tial Bose-condensation, when the primary librational eﬀectons, containing more
than one molecule emerge [3, 4]. At the same time it means the beginning
of degeneration when the chemical potential µ → 0. At this condition wave B
length, corresponding to librations, starts to exceed the mean distances between
molecules in the liquid phase.

It means that the temperature, at which the phase transition [gas → liquid ]
occurs, coincides with the temperature of partial Bose- condensation (Tc), [i.e.
primary librational eﬀectons formation] and degeneration temperature (T0).

The changes of quasiparticles volume and shape in three dimensional

(3D) space are related to corresponding changes in the impulse space.

The total macroscopic Bose-condensation, in accordance with our model,
responds to conditions, when [a ⇔ b] equilibrium of primary eﬀectons strongly
shifts to the main (a)- state and (b)- state becomes thermally inaccessible.
At the same time the wave B length tends to macroscopic value. For quantum
systems at temperature (T) higher than degeneration temperature T0 (T > T0),
when chemical potential (µi = ∂Gi/∂ni) < 0 has a negative value, the mean
number of Bose-particles (ni) in state (i) is determined by the Bose- Einstein
distribution:

ni = {exp[(ǫi − µi)/kT ] − 1}−1

(3.3)

where ǫi is the energy of the particle in state (i). For ”normal” condensed matter
ǫi ≫ µ ≪ kT .

The Bose-Einstein statistics, in contrast to the Maxwell- Boltzmann statis-
tics, is applied to the indistinguishable Bose- particles with zero or integer spin
values. The Fermi-Dirac distribution is valid for systems of indistinguishable
particles with a semi-integer spin obeying the Pauli principle.

16

In the case of condensed matter at the temperature:

N∗ particles of Bose condensate have a zero impulse [3, 28]:

0 < T < [T0 ∼= Tc]

N ∗ ≃ N [1 − (T /T0)3/2]

(3.4)

where N is the total number of particles in a system.

A. Parameters of individual de Broglie waves (waves B)
The known de Broglie relation expressing Wave-Particle Duality, has a simple

form:

−→p = −→
k = h/
−→
−→p = /
L B = m−→v gr

−→
λ B

where ~k = 2π/~λ = 1/~LB is the wave number of wave B with length ~λ =
2π~LB, ~p is the impulse of particle with mass (m) and group velocity (vgr),  =
h/2π is the Plank constant.

Each particle can be represented as wave packet with group velocity:

and phase velocity:

vgr =(cid:18) dωb
dk (cid:19)0

vph =

ωb
k

(3.4a)

where: ωB is the angle frequency of wave B determining the total energy of the
wave B : (EB = ωB).

Total energy is equal to the sum of kinetic (Tk) and potential (VB) energies
and is related to particle’s mass and product of phase and group velocities
(vgrvph) as follows [15]:

EB = ωB = Tk + VB = (k)2

2m

+ VB = mvgrvph

(3.4b)

where (m) is particle mass; (c) is light velocity.
From 3.4a and 3.4b it is possible to get an important relation between phase

and group velocities of wave B and its kinetic, potential and total energy:

vph
vgr

=

Tk + VB

2Tk

=

EB
2Tk

(3.4c)

17

B. Parameters of de Broglie waves of molecules of condensed mat-

ter

The formulae given below allow to calculate the frequencies of the corre-
sponding primary waves B in the directions 1,2,3 in a and b states of primary
eﬀectons (translational and librational) [2, 3, 4]:

are related to the wave

(3.5)

(3.6)

in os-

(3.7)

p

="

ν1,2,3
p
exp(hν1,2,3

(cid:2)νa
1,2,3(cid:3)tr,lb
(cid:2)νb
1,2,3(cid:3)tr,lb

/kT ) − 1#tr,lb
(cid:3)tr,lb
The most probable frequencies of photons(cid:2)ν1,2,3
(cid:3)tr,lb
numbers of the maxima of corresponding bands (tr and lib) (cid:2)˜ν1,2,3

=(cid:2)νa

cillatory spectra:

1,2,3 + ν1,2,3

p

p

p

(cid:3)tr,lb

p

p

(cid:3)tr,lb

(cid:2)ν1,2,3

= c(cid:2)˜ν1,2,3

(cid:3)tr,lb
p = 60cm−1; eν(2)
determined by maxima with the wave numbers: eν(1)

where (c) is light velocity. For water the most probable frequencies of photons,
corresponding to (a ⇔ b)tr transitions of primary translational eﬀectons are
p =

p = 700cm−1 corresponds to the (a ⇔ b)lb
transitions of primary librational eﬀectons. The degenerateness of frequencies
characterizes the isotropy of the given mobility type for molecules.

p =eν(3)

The band ˜ν(1)

p = ˜ν(3)

p = ˜ν(2)

190cm−1.

The distribution (3.5) coincides with the Plank formula, for the case when

frequency of a quantum oscillator is equal to the frequency of photon and:

νp = npνp

(3.8)

where ¯np = [exp(hνp/kT − 1)]−1 is the mean number of photons with the fre-
quency νp..

The transition a → b means that ¯np

increases by one

νb = νa + νp = nνp + νp = νp(n + 1)

(3.9)

The derivation of the formula (3.5) is based upon the assumption that (a ⇔
b)1,2,3 transitions are analogous to the beats in a system of two weakly inter-
acting quantum oscillators.

In such a case the frequency (ν1,2,3

) of photons is equal to the diﬀerence
between the frequencies of waves B forming a primary eﬀectons in (b) and (a)
states as a frequency of quantum beats [15]:

p

18

hν1,2,3

p

B itr,lb

= νb

1,2,3 − νa

1,2,3 = ∆ν1,2,3

(3.10)

where ∆ν1,2,3
the marked directions (1,2,3).

B

is the most probable diﬀerence between frequencies of waves B in

The ratio of concentrations for waves B in a and b states (na

B) at such
consideration is equal to the ratio of wave B periods T a,b or the inverse ratio of
wave B frequencies in these states:

B/nb

(T a/T b)1,2,3 = (νb/νa)1,2,3.

At the same time, the ratio of concentrations is determined with the Boltzmann
distribution. So, the formula is true:

B(cid:19)1,2,3
(cid:18) na

B
nb

=(cid:18) νb

νa(cid:19)1,2,3

= exp  hν1,2,3

kT ! = exp  hν1,2,3
kT !

B

p

(3.11)

Substituting the eq.(3.10) into (3.11) we derive the eq.(3.5), allowing to ﬁnd
(νa
1,2,3)tr,lb from the data of oscillation spectroscopy at every
temperature.

1,2,3)tr,lb and (νb

The energies of the corresponding three waves B (Ea

1,2,3 and Eb
of the primary eﬀectons as 3D standing waves with energies (Ea
a and b states are equal to:

1,2,3) and that
ef and Eb
ef ) in

1,2,3 = hνa

ef = h(νa

1 + νa

2 + νa

(cid:2)Ea
(cid:2) Eb

;

1,2,3(cid:3)tr,lb
1,2,3 (cid:3)tr,lb ;

(cid:2)Ea
(cid:2)Eb

1,2,3 = hνb

ef = h(νb

1 + νb

2 + νb

3(cid:3)tr,lb
3(cid:3)tr,lb

(3.12)

(3.13)

In our model energies of quasiparticles in each state are thus determined only
by the three selected coherent modes in directions (1,2,3). All remnant degrees
of freedom: (3n − 3), where n is the number of molecules forming eﬀectons or
deformons, are degenerated due to their coherence.

The mean packing numbers for ¯a and ¯b states are thereby expressed with the
formula (1.27), and the mean energies ( ¯Ea
1,2,3) -
with Bose-Einstein distribution (1.21; 1.28), coincident with the Plank formula
at chemical potential µ = 0.

1,2,3 and ¯Eb

1,2,3 = h¯νa

1,2,3 = h¯νb

Finally, the averaged Hamiltonians of (a, ¯a) and (b, ¯b) states of the system
containing primary and secondary eﬀectons (translational and librational) have
such a form:

1,2,3 = Ea

1,2,3 + E

(cid:2) ¯H a

a
1,2,3 = hνa

1,2,3 + h¯νa

1,2,3 (cid:3)tr,lb

(3.14)

19

(3.15)

(3.16)

(3.17)

νa
1,2,3

(cid:2) exp(hνa
(cid:2) exp(hνb

1,2,3)/kT − 1 (cid:3) =
1,2,3)/kT − 1 (cid:3) =

νb
1,2,3

¯va
ph
¯λ1,2,3
a

¯vb
ph
¯λ1,2,3
b

#tr,lb
#tr,lb

h ¯H b

1,2,3 = Eb

1,2,3 + E

where

b
1,2,3 = hνb

1,2,3 + h¯νb

1,2,3 itr,lb

"¯νa
"¯νb

1,2,3 =

1,2,3 =

1,2,3 are the mean frequency values of each of three types of co-

1,2,3 and ¯νb
¯νa
herent waves B forming eﬀectons in (¯a) and (¯b) states; ¯va
corresponding phase velocities.

ph and ¯vb

ph are the

The resulting Hamiltonian for photons, which form the primary deformons
and phonons forming secondary deformons, are determined with the term-wise
subtraction of the formula (3.14) from the formula (3.15):

| ∆ ¯H1,2,3 |tr,lb= h | νb

1,2,3 − νa

1,2,3 |tr,lb +h | ¯νb

1,2,3 − ¯νa

1,2,3 |tr,lb=

= h(ν1,2,3

p

)tr,lb + h(ν1,2,3

ph )tr,lb

(3.18)

where the frequencies of six IR photons, propagating in directions (±1, ±2, ±3)
and composing in the interceptions primary deformons are equal to:

(ν1,2,3

p

)tr,lb = | νb

1,2,3 − νa

1,2,3 |tr,lb = (c/λ1,2,3

p

· n)tr,lb

(3.19)

where: c and n are the light velocity and refraction index of matter; λ1,2,3
the wavelengths of photons in directions (1,2,3); and

ph

are

(ν1,2,3

ph )tr,lb = | νb

1,2,3 − νa

1,2,3 |tr,lb= (vs/λ1,2,3

ph )tr,lb

(3.20)

are the frequencies of six phonons (translational and librational) in the directions

(±1, ±2, ±3), forming secondary acoustic deformons; vs is the sound speed;
¯λ1,2,3
ph

are the wavelengths of phonons in three selected directions.

The corresponding energies of photons and phonons are:

E1,2,3

p

= hν1,2,3

p

;

E1,2,3
ph = h¯ν1,2,3

ph

(3.21)

20

The formulae for the wave B lengths of primary and secondary eﬀectons are

derived from (3.5) and (3.16):

a

λ1,2,3
= (va

)tr,lb = λ1,2,3
p /ν1,2,3

b

= va

p /νa
p

1,2,3 =

p

) ·(cid:2) exp(hν1,2,3
ph ) ·h exp(h¯ν1,2,3

)/kT − 1 (cid:3)tr,lb
ph )/kT − 1 itr,lb

ph/¯νa

1,2,3 =

= ¯va

)tr,lb = ¯λ1,2,3
ph/¯ν1,2,3

b

¯λ1,2,3
a
= (¯va

(3.22)

(3.23)

The wavelengths of photons and phonons forming the primary and secondary

deformons can be determined as follows

(λ1,2,3

p

)tr,lb = (c/nν1,2,3

p

)tr,lb = 1/(eν)1,2,3

tr,lb

where: (˜ν)1,2,3

tr,lb are wave numbers of corresponding bands in the oscillatory

spectra of condensed matter.

(¯λ1,2,3

ph )tr,lb = (¯vs/¯ν1,2,3

ph )tr,lb

For calculations according to the formulae (2.59) and (2.60) it is necessary to
ﬁnd a way to calculate the resulting phase velocities of waves B forming primary
and secondary eﬀectons (va

ph and ¯va

ph).

C. Phase velocities of standing de Broglie waves, forming new

types of quasiparticles

In crystals three phonons with diﬀerent phase velocities can propagate in
the direction set by the longitudinal wave normal. In a general case, two quasi-
transversal waves ”fast” (vf
⊥) and one quasi-longitudinal (vk)
wave propagate [7].

⊥) and ”slow” (vs

The propagation of transversal acoustic waves is known to be accompa-
nied by smaller deformations of the lattice than that of longitudinal waves,
when they are caused by external
impulses. The thermal phonons, sponta-
neously originating and annihilating under conditions of heat equilibrium may
be accompanied by even smaller perturbations of the structure and could be
considered as transversal phonons.

Therefore, we assume, that in the absence of external impulses in solid state:
and the resulting thermal phonons velocity is determined as:

vf
⊥ ≈ vs

⊥ = v1,2,3

ph

s = (v(1)
vres

⊥ v(2)

⊥ v(3)

⊥ )1/3 = vph

(3.24)

In liquids the resulting sound speed has an isotropic value:

21

vliq
s = vph.

According to our model, the resulting velocity of elastic waves in condensed me-
dia is related to the phase velocities of primary and secondary eﬀectons in both
(acoustic and optic) states and that of deformons (translational and librational)
in the following way:

(cid:2) vs = fava
(cid:2) ¯vs = ¯fa¯va

ph (cid:3)tr,lb
ph (cid:3)tr,lb

ph + fbvb

ph + fdvd

ph + ¯fb¯vb

ph + ¯fd¯vd

(3.25)

(3.26)

where: va
eﬀectons in the ”acoustic” and ”optic” states; and

ph, ¯va

ph, vb

ph, ¯vb

ph are phase velocities of the most probable and mean

ph = vd
vd

ph = vs

are phase velocities of primary and secondary acoustic deformons, equal to
phonons velocity.

Nevertheless, (a → b)tr,lb or (b → a)tr,lb transitions of primary eﬀectons are
mainly related with absorption or emission of photons, the rate of such process
(relaxation time) is limited by the rate of changing the mode of oscillations in
(a) and (b) state, i.e. by sound velocity (vs = vph). The phonons [absorp-
tion/radiation] during these transitions could accompanied the like processes in
composition of macrodeformons;

fa =

Pa

Pa + Pb + Pd

; fb =

Pb

Pa + Pb + Pd

;

fd =

Pd

Pa + Pb + Pd

(3.27)

and

f a =

¯Pa

¯Pa + ¯Pb + ¯Pd

;

fb =

¯Pb

¯Pa + ¯Pb + ¯Pd

;

fd =

¯Pd

¯Pa + ¯Pb + ¯Pd

(3.28)

are the probabilities of corresponding states of the primary (f ) and secondary
quasiparticles; Pa, Pb, Pd and ¯Pa, ¯Pb, ¯Pd - relative probabilities of excitation
(thermoaccessibilities) of the primary and secondary eﬀectons and deformons
(see eqs. 4.10, 4.11, 4.18, 4.19, 4.25 and 4.26).

Using eq. (3.4c) it is possible to express the phase velocities in b and ¯b states

of eﬀectons (vb

ph and ¯vb

ph) via (va

ph and ¯va

ph) in the following way:

gr#tr,lb
" vb

ph
vb

=(cid:20) Eb

tot
2T b

k(cid:21)tr,lb

=(cid:20) hνb

m(vb

gr)2(cid:21)tr,lb

res

(3.29)

22

From this equation, we obtain for the most probable phase velocity in (b) state:

(vb

ph)tr,lib =(cid:2)λres

ph νres

b (cid:3)tr,lib

=(cid:20)(va

ph)

νb
res
νa

res(cid:21)tr,lb

(3.30)

We keep in mind that according to our model vb

gr = va

gr and ¯vb

gr = ¯va

gr, i.e.

the group velocities of both states are equal.

Likewise for the mean phase velocity in ¯b-state of eﬀectons we have:

(¯vb

ph)tr,lb =(cid:20)(cid:0) ¯va

a (cid:21)tr,lb

ph (cid:1) ¯νres

b
¯νres

where in (3.30):

(cid:20) νb

res = (νb
νa
res = (νa

1νb
1 νa

2νb
2 νa

3)1/3

3 )1/3 (cid:21)tr,lb

(3.31)

(3.32)

are the resulting frequencies of the most probable (primary) eﬀectons in b and
a states. They can be calculated using the eqs. (3.5 and 3.6); frequencies; and
in (3.31):

res = (ν b

1νb

2νb

res = (ν a

1νa

2νa

(3.33)

(3.34)

hν b
hνa

3)1/3itr,lb
3)1/3itr,lb

are the resulting frequencies of the mean eﬀectons in ¯b and ¯a states. They can
be estimated according to eqs. (3.17 and 3.16).

Using eqs.

(3.25 and 3.30), we ﬁnd the formulas for the resulting phase

velocities of the primary translational and librational eﬀectons in (a) state:

ph(cid:1)tr,lb
(cid:0)va

=

vs

(1−fd)

fa

res

Pa(cid:16) νb
res(cid:17)

νa

1 + Pb

tr,lb

(3.35)

Similarly, for the resulting phase velocity of secondary eﬀectons in (a) state we
get from (3.26) and (3.31):

ph(cid:1)tr,lb
(cid:0)¯va

=

vs

(1− ¯fd)

¯fa

res

¯Pb

¯Pa(cid:16) ¯νb
res(cid:17)

¯νa

1 +

23

tr,lb

(3.36)

As will be shown below, it is necessary to know va
ph to determine
the concentration of the primary and secondary eﬀectons. When the values of
resulting phase velocities in a and ¯a states of eﬀectons are known, then from
eqs. (3.30) and (3.31) it is easy to express resulting phase velocities in b and ¯b
states of translational and librational eﬀectons.

ph and ¯va

D. Concentrations of quasiparticles, introduced in Hierarchic model

of condensed matter

It has been shown by Rayleigh that the concentration of the standing waves

of any type with wave lengths within the range: λ to λ + dλ is equal to:

nλdλ =

4πdλ
λ4

(3.37)

or, expressing wave lengths via their frequencies and phase velocities λ = vph/ν
we obtain:

nνdν = 4π

ν2dν
v2
ph

(3.38)

For calculation the concentration of standing waves within the frequency range
from zero to the deﬁnite characteristic frequency, for example, to the most
probable (νa) or mean (¯νa) frequency of wave B, then eq.
(3.38) should be
integrated:

na =

4π
v3
ph

νaZ0

ν2dν =

4
3

vph(cid:19)3
π(cid:18) νa

=

4
3

π

1
λ3
a

(3.39)

Jeans has shown that each standing wave formed by photons or phonons can
be polarized twice. Taking into account this fact the concentrations of standing
photons and standing phonons in the all three directions (1,2,3) are equal to:

n1,2,3

p

= 8

¯n1,2,3
ph = 8

1,2,3

c1,2,3/n(cid:17)3
3 π(cid:16) νp
ph (cid:19)3
3 π(cid:18) ¯νph

1,2,3
v1,2,3

(3.40)

where: c and n are the light speed in vacuum and refraction index of matter;
vph = vs - velocity of thermal phonons, equal to sound velocity.

The standing waves B of atoms and molecules have only one linear polariza-
tion in directions (1,2,3). Therefore, their concentrations are described by an
equation of type (3.39).

According to our model (see Introduction), superposition of each of three
diﬀerently oriented (1,2,3) standing waves B forms quasi-particles which we have

24

termed eﬀectons. They are divided into the most probable (primary) (with zero
resulting impulse) and mean (secondary) eﬀectons. Quasiparticles, formed by
3D superposition of standing photons and phonons, originating in the course
of (a ⇔ b) and (¯a ⇔ ¯b) transitions of the primary and secondary eﬀectons,
respectively, are termed primary and secondary deformons (Table 1).

Eﬀectons and deformons are the result of thermal translations (tr) and libra-
tions (lb) of molecules in directions (1,2,3). These quasiparticles are generally
approximated by a parallelepiped with symmetry axes (1,2,3).

As far three coherent standing waves of corresponding nature take part in
the construction of each eﬀecton, it means that the concentration of such quasi-
particles must be three times lower than the concentration of standing waves
expressed by eq. (3.39). The coherence of molecules in the volume of the ef-
fectons and deformons due to partial Bose-condensation is the most important
feature of our model, which leads to degeneration of waves B of these molecules.

Finally, we obtain:

The concentration of primary eﬀectons, primary transitons and convertons:

(cid:0) nef (cid:1)tr,lb =

4
9

where

π  νa

ph!3

res
va

tr,lb

νa
res = (νa

1 νa

2 νa

3 )1/3

tr,lb

= nt = nc

(3.41)

(3.42)

is the resulting frequency of a-state of the primary eﬀecton; νa
3 are the
most probable frequencies of waves B in a-state in directions (1,2,3), which
are calculated according to formula (3.5); va
ph - the resulting phase velocity of
eﬀectons in a-state, which corresponds to eq. (3.35 ).

2 , νa

1 , νa

The concentration of secondary (mean) eﬀectons and secondary transitons

is expressed in the same way as eq. (3.41):

(¯nef )tr,lb =

4
9

π  ¯νa

ph!3

res
¯va

tr,lb

= nt

(3.43)

where phase velocity ¯va

ph corresponds to eq. (3.36);

res = (¯νa
ν a

1 ¯νa

2 ¯νa

3 )1/3

(3.44)

- the resulting frequency of mean waves B in ¯a-state. The mean values ¯νa
are found by the formula (3.16).

1,2,3

Maximum concentrations of the most probable and mean eﬀectons (nmax
ef )
) and

ef ), as well as corresponding concentrations of transitons (nmax

and (¯nmax

t

25

) follow from the requirement that it should not be higher than the con-

t

(¯nmax
centration of atoms.

If a molecule or elementary cell consists of [q] atoms, which have their own

degrees of freedom and corresponding impulses, then

nmax
ef = nmax

t = nmax

ef = nmax

t = q

N0
V0

The concentration of the electromagnetic primary deformons from eq. (3.40):

(cid:0) nd (cid:1)tr,lb =

8
9

c/n(cid:19)3
π(cid:18) νres

d

tr,lb

where (c) and (n) are light speed and refraction index of matter;

(cid:0) νres

d

(cid:1)tr,lb =(cid:16) ν(1)

p ν(2)

p ν(3)

p

(cid:17)1/3

tr,lb

- the resulting frequency of primary deformons, where

p

(cid:0) ν1,2,3

(cid:1)tr,lb = c(cid:0) ˜ν1,2,3

p

(cid:1)tr,lb

are the most probable frequencies of photons with double polarization, related
to translations and librations; c - the speed of light; ˜νp - the wave numbers,
which may be found from oscillatory spectra of matter.

The concentration of acoustic secondary deformons derived from eq. (3.40)

is:

(cid:0) ¯nd (cid:1)tr,lb =

where vs is the sound velocity; and

8
9

vs (cid:19)3
π(cid:18) ¯νres

d

tr,lb

(3.46)

(3.47)

(3.48)

(3.49)

(3.50)

(3.51)

is the resulting frequency of secondary deformons (translational and librational);
in this formula:

are the frequencies of secondary phonons in directions (1,2,3), calculated from
(3.16) and (3.17).

(cid:0) ¯νres

d

(cid:1)tr,lb =(cid:16) ¯ν(1)

ph ¯ν(2)

ph ¯ν(3)

ph (cid:17)1/3

tr,lb

(cid:16) ¯ν1,2,3

ph

(cid:17)tr,lb

=(cid:12)(cid:12) ¯νa − ¯νb (cid:12)(cid:12)1,2,3

tr,lb

26

Since the primary and secondary deformons are the results of transitions
(a ⇔ b and ¯a ⇔ ¯b)tr,lb of the primary and secondary eﬀectons, respectively,
then the maximum concentration of eﬀectons, transitons and deformons must
coincide:

nmax
d = nmax

d = nmax

ef = nmax

t = nmax

ef = nmax

t = q

N0
V0

(3.52)

IV. HIERARCHIC THERMODYNAMICS

A. The internal energy of matter as a hierarchical system of col-

lective excitations

The quantum theory of crystal heat capacity leads to the following equation

for the density of thermal internal energy [7]:

ǫ =

1
V

iPEi exp(−Ei/kT )
iP exp(−Ei/kT )

where V - the crystal volume; Ei - the energy of the i-stationary state.

According to our Hierarchic theory, the internal energy of matter is deter-
mined by the concentration (ni) of each type of quasiparticles, probabilities of
excitation of each of their states (Pi) and the energies of corresponding states
(Ei). The condensed matter is considered as an ”ideal gas” of 3D standing
waves of diﬀerent types (quasiparticles and collective excitations). However,
the dynamic equilibrium between types of quasiparticles is very sensitive to the
external and internal perturbations.

The total partition function - the sum of the relative probabilities of exci-
tation of all states of quasiparticles (the resulting thermoaccessibility) is equal
to:

(4.1)

(4.2)



ef + Pd(cid:17) +
ef + ¯Pd(cid:17) +
M(cid:1) + P M
D (cid:3)

(cid:16)P a
+(cid:16) ¯P a
+(cid:2)(cid:0)P A

ef + P b
ef + ¯P b
M + P B

Z =Xtr,lb
+ (Pac + Pbc + PcMd) +(cid:0)P A

S + P B

+

tr,lb

S + P s

D∗(cid:1)

(a ⇔ b)tr,lb

and (¯a ⇔ ¯b)tr,lb transitions.

27

Here we take into account that the probabilities of excitation of primary and
¯Pd = ¯Pt) and
secondary transitons and deformons are the same (Pd = Pt;
related to the same processes:

The analogous situation is with probabilities of a, b and cM convertons and
corresponding acoustic deformons excitations: Pac, Pbc and PcMd = PcMt. So
it is a reason for taking them into account in the partition function only ones.
The ﬁnal formula for the total internal energy of (Utot) of one mole of matter
leading from mesoscopic model, considering the system of 3D standing waves as
an ideal gas is:

(cid:21) +

Utot = V0

1

ef

¯Eb

ef

¯Ea

ef Ea

M EA

M EB

M + P B

ef + ¯P b

ef + P b
ef Eb
+ndPdEd

Z Xtr,lb(cid:26)(cid:20) nef(cid:0) P a

+(cid:2)¯nef(cid:0) ¯P a
+(cid:2)nM(cid:0) P A

ef + PtEt (cid:1)
ef + ¯Pt ¯Et (cid:1) + ¯nd ¯Pd ¯Ed(cid:3) +
M(cid:3)tr,lb +
M (cid:1) + nDP D
Z(cid:2)ncon(cid:0) PacEac + PbcEbc + PcMtEcMt (cid:1) +
+ (ncdaPacEac + ncdbPbcEbc + ncMdPcMdEcMd) (cid:3) +
(cid:3)

(cid:1) + nD∗ P D∗

ns(cid:2) (cid:0) P A∗

S + P B∗

S ED∗
S

S EB∗
S

S EA∗

M ED

+V0

1
Z

1

+V0

where all types the eﬀecton’s contributions in total internal energy correspond
to:

ef (cid:1) +
M (cid:1) (cid:3)tr,lb +

M EB

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

+¯nef(cid:0) ¯P a

ef

¯Ea

ef + ¯P b

ef

Uef = V0

ef + P b

ef Eb

¯Eb

1

Z Xtr,lb(cid:2) nef

ef Ea

(cid:0) P a
ef (cid:1) + nM (cid:0) P A
ns(cid:0) P A∗

s EA∗

+V0

1
Z

s + P B∗

s P B∗

s

(cid:1)

M EA

M + P B

all types of deformons contribution in Utot is:

V0

Ud =

1

Z Ptr.lb(cid:0) ndPdEd + ¯nd ¯Pd ¯Ed + nM P D

Z nsP D∗

S ED∗
S

+V0

1

M ED

M (cid:1)tr,lb +

and contribution, related to [lb/tr] convertons:

28

Ucon = V0

1

Z(cid:2) ncon(cid:0) PacEac + PbcEbc + PcMtEcMt (cid:1) +
+ (ncdaPacEac + ncdbPbcEbc + ncMdPcMtEcMd) (cid:3)

Contributions of all types of transitons (Ut) also can be easily calculated.

The intramolecular conﬁgurational dynamics of molecules is automatically
taken into account in our approach as it has an inﬂuence on the intermolecular
dynamics, dimensions, and on concentration of quasiparticles as well as on the
energy of excitation of their states. These dynamics aﬀects the positions of the
absorption bands in oscillatory spectra and values of sound velocity, that we use
for calculation of internal energy.

The remnant small contribution of intramolecular dynamics to Utot is related
It

to oscillation energy corresponding to fundamental molecular modes (νi
may be estimated using Plank distribution:

p).

Uin = N0

h¯νi

p = N0

iX1

iX1

hνi

p(cid:2) exp(cid:0) hνi

p/kT (cid:1) − 1 (cid:3)−1

where (i) is the number of internal degrees of freedom.

i = 3q − 6 for nonlinear molecules; i = 3q − 5 for linear molecules
q is the number of atoms forming a molecule.
It has been shown by our computer simulations for the case of water and ice

that Uin ≪ Utot. It should be general condition for any condensed matter.

Let us consider now the meaning of the variables in formulae (4.2

- 4.5), necessary for the internal energy calculations:

V0 is the molar volume;
nef, ¯nef

3.42) eﬀectons; Ea
states:

are the concentrations of primary (eq. 3.41) and secondary (eq.
ef are the energies of the primary eﬀectons in a and b

ef , Eb

where

(cid:2) Ea
(cid:2) Eb

ef = 3hνa

ef = 3hνb

ef (cid:3)tr,lb
ef (cid:3)tr,lb

,

ef = 1

1 + νa

2 + νa

(cid:2) νa

3(cid:0) νa

3 (cid:1) (cid:3)tr,lb

29

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

ef = 1

1 + νb

2 + νb

(cid:2) νb

3(cid:0) νb

3 (cid:1) (cid:3)tr,lb

(4.9)

are the characteristic frequencies of the primary eﬀectons in the (a) and (b)
- states;

νa
1,2,3, νb
P a
ef , P b

1,2,3 are determined according to formulas (3.5 and 3.6);
ef - the relative probabilities of excitation (thermoaccessibilities) of

eﬀectons in (a) and (b) states [2-4] introduced as:

kT

ef = exp−(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ea
P a
ef = exp−(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ea
P b

ef − E0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ef − E0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

kT

 = exp−
 = exp−

kT

3h(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)νa
ef − ν0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ef − ν0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
3h(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)νb

kT

tr,lb
tr,lb

(4.10)

(4.11)

where

E0 = 3kT = 3hν0

(4.12)

is the equilibrium energy of all types of quasiparticles determined by the tem-
perature of matter (T):

ν0 =

kT
h

is the equilibrium frequency.

¯Eb

¯Ea
ef,
a and states:

ef are the characteristic energies of secondary eﬀectons in b

h E
h E

a
ef = 3h¯νa

b
ef = 3h¯νb

ef itr,lb
ef itr,lb

,

where

ef = 1

1 + ¯νa

2 + ¯νa

(cid:2) ¯νa
(cid:2) ¯νb

3(cid:0) ¯νa
3(cid:0) ¯νb

ef = 1

1 + ¯νb

2 + ¯νb

3 (cid:1) (cid:3)tr,lb
3 (cid:1) (cid:3)tr,lb

30

(4.13)

(4.14)

(4.15)

(4.16)

(4.17)

are the characteristic frequencies of mean eﬀectons in a and ¯b states; ¯νa
determined according to formulae (3.16 and 3.17).

1,2,3, ¯νb

1,2,3

¯P a
ef , ¯P b

ef are the relative probabilities of excitation (thermoaccessibilities) of

mean eﬀectons in ¯a and ¯b states (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1989a) introduced as:

ef = exp−(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)E
 ¯P a
ef = exp−(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)E
 ¯P b

a

kT

ef − E0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ef − E0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

kT

b

 = exp−
 = exp−

kT

ef − ν0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
3h(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)¯νa
ef − ν0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
3h(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)¯νb

kT

tr,lb
tr,lb

Parameters of deformons (primary and secondary) [tr and lb]:

(4.18)

(4.19)

nd, ¯nd are the concentrations of primary (eq. 3.46) and secondary (eq.

3.49) deformons;

Ed, Ed are the characteristic energies of the primary and secondary defor-

mons, equal to energies of primary and secondary transitons:

where: characteristic frequencies of the primary and secondary deformons are
equal to:

(cid:2) Ed = 3hνres
(cid:2) Ed = 3h¯νres

d = Et (cid:3)tr,lb
d = Et (cid:3)tr,lb

d = 1

p + ν(2)

p + ν(3)

p

(4.20)

(4.20)

(4.22)

(4.23)

h νres
h ¯νres

3(cid:16) ν(1)
3(cid:16) ¯ν(1)

d = 1

ph + ¯ν(2)

ph + ¯ν(3)

(cid:17) itr,lb
ph (cid:17) itr,lb

The frequencies of the primary photons are calculated from the experimental
data of oscillatory spectra using (3.48).

The frequencies of secondary phonons are calculated as:

(cid:16) ν1,2,3

ph

(cid:17)tr,lb

= |νa − νb|1,2,3
tr,lb

(4.24)

where ν1,2,3
Pd and

a

and ν1,2,3

b

are founded in accordance with (3.16) and (3.17).

¯Pd are the relative probabilities of excitation of primary and
secondary deformons in medium, surrounding eﬀectons, introduced as the prob-
abilities of intermediate transition states:

31

(a ⇔ b)tr,lb and (¯a ⇔ ¯b)tr,lb :

(cid:0) Pd = P a
(cid:0) ¯Pd = ¯P a

ef · P b

ef · ¯P b

ef (cid:1)tr,lb
ef (cid:1)tr,lb

(4.25)

(4.26)

Parameters of transitons:

(nt)tr,lb and (¯nt)tr,lb are concentrations of primary and secondary transitons,

equal to concentration of primary (3.41) and secondary (3.43) eﬀectons:

(nt = nef )tr,lb;

(nt = nef )tr,lb

(4.27)

(Pt and ¯Pt)tr,lb are the relative probabilities of excitation of primary and sec-
ondary transitons, equal to that of primary and secondary deformons:

(Pt = Pd)tr,lb;

( ¯Pt = ¯Pd)tr,lb

(Et and Et)tr,lb are the energies of primary and secondary transitons:

h Et = Ed = h(ν(1)

p + ν(2)

p + ν(3)

p ) itr,lb

(4.28)

(4.29)

n Et = Ed = 3h(cid:2) | ¯νa

ef − ν0 | + | ¯νb

ef − ν0 | (cid:3)1,2,3 otr,lb

Primary and secondary deformons in contrast to transitons, represent the quasielas-
tic mechanism of the eﬀectons interaction via medium.

Parameters of macroeﬀectons [tr and lb]:

(nM = nd )tr,lb are the concentrations of macroeﬀectons equal to that of

primary deformons (3.46);

(EA
and νB

M and EB
M )tr,lb are corresponding frequencies, deﬁned as:

M )tr,lb are the energies of A and B states of macroeﬀectons; (νA
M

M = 3hνA

M = −kT ln P A

(4.29a)

(cid:2)EA

M(cid:3)tr,lb

32

where

and

(4.29b)

(4.29c)

(4.29d)

(cid:2)EB

M = 3hνB

M = −kT ln P B

M(cid:3)tr,lb

M = Pa · P a(cid:3)tr,lb
(cid:2)P A
(cid:2)P B
M = Pb · P b(cid:3)tr,lb

are the relative probabilities of excitation of A and B states of macroeﬀectons.

Parameters of macrodeformons [tr and lb]:

(nD

M )tr,lb is the concentration of macrodeformons equal to that of macroeﬀec-
tons (macrotransitons) corresponding to concentration of corresponding primary
deformons: see eq.(3.46);

(P D

M )tr,lb = (P A

M · P B

M )tr,lb

are the probabilities of macrodeformons excitation;

(EM

D )tr,lb = −kT ln(P D

M )tr,lb = 3h(νD

M )tr,lb

are the energies of macrodeformons;

Parameters of convertons and related excitations

The frequency and energy of a-convertons and b- convertons:

(4.29e)

(4.29f)

νac =| (νa

ef )lb − (νa

ef )tr |;

νbc =| (νb

ef )lb − (νb

ef )tr |;

Eac = 3hνac

Ebc = 3hνbc

(4.30)

where: characteristic frequencies (νa
where characteristic frequencies (νb
Probabilities of (a) and (b) convertons, equal to that of corresponding acous-

ef )tr correspond to (4.8).
ef )tr correspond to (4.9).

ef )lb and (νa
ef )lb and (νb

tic c-deformons excitations:

(cid:18)Pac = (P a

Pbc = (P b

ef )tr · (P a
ef )tr · (P b

ef )lb

ef )lb(cid:19)

(4.30a)

33

Probability and energy of c - Macrotransitons

(Macroconvertons) excitation [simultaneous excitation of (a) and (b) con-

vertons], equal to that of c- Macrodeformons is:

PcMd = Pac · Pbc;

EcMt = EcMd = −kT · ln PcMd

(4.30b)

The characteristic frequency of cM-transitons and cM-deformons is:

νcMt = νcMd = EcMd/3h

The concentrations of (a), (b)-convertons (ncon) and c-Macrotransitons (ncMd)

are equal to that of primary eﬀectons (nef ).

The concentrations of acoustic deformons, excited by convertons..

The concentrations of ca-deformons and cb-deformons, representing 3D stand-

ing phonons, excited by a-convertons and by b-convertons correspondingly are:

(cid:0) n (cid:1)cad,cbd =

where [vs] is the sound velocity and

8
9

vs (cid:19)3
π(cid:18) νac,bc

νac = (νa

ef )lb − (νa

ef )tr,

νbc = (νb

ef )lb − (νb

ef )tr

(4.30c)

(4.30d)

are characteristic frequencies of a- and b-convertons, equal to the diﬀerence
between characteristic frequencies of primary librational and translational ef-
fectons (see eqs.4.8 and 4.9) in a and b states correspondingly.

The concentration of cM-deformons, excited by cM-transitons (or Macro-

convertons) is equal to:

ncMd =

8
9

vs (cid:19)3
π(cid:18) νcMd

(4.30e)

where: νcMd is characteristic frequency of c-Macrodeformons, equal to that of
c-Macrotransitons (Macroconvertons).

The maximum concentration of all convertons-related excitations is also lim-

ited by concentration of molecules

Parameters of supereﬀectons:

34

(nS = nd)lb is the concentration of supereﬀectons, equal to that of primary

librational deformons (3.46);

S ; P B∗
P A∗
S

are the relative probabilities of excitation of A∗ and B∗:

P A∗
S = (P A

M )tr · (P A

M )lb

P B∗
S = (P B

M )tr · (P B

M )lb

(4.30f)

and EA∗

S ; EB∗
S
(3.27) and (3.28);

are the energies of A and B states of supereﬀectons from

EA∗

S = −kT · ln P A∗
S

EB∗

S = −kT · ln P B∗
S

Parameters of superdeformons:

nD∗ is the concentration of superdeformons, equal to that of supereﬀectons;

P D∗
S = (P D

M )tr · (P D

M )lb

is the relative probability of superdeformons;
ED∗

is the energy of superdeformons, deﬁned as:

S

ED∗

S = −kT · ln P D∗

S

(4.30g)

(4.30h)

Substituting the parameters of quasiparticles, calculated in this way into
eqs. (4.2 and 4.3), we obtain the total internal energy of one mole of matter
in solid or liquid phase. For water and ice the theoretical results coincide with
experimental one fairly well (see Fig. 2).

It is important that our equations are the same for solid and liq-
uid states. The diﬀerence in experimental parameters, such as molar volume,
sound velocity, refraction index, positions of translational and librational bands
determines the diﬀerence of internal energy and of more than 100 another pa-
rameters of any state of condensed matter, which can be calculated using eq.
(4.3). It is important to stress that our concept is general for solids
and liquids, for crystals, glasses and amorphous matter.

4.2. The contributions of kinetic and potential

energy to the total internal energy

The total internal energy of matter (U tot) is equal to the sum of total kinetic

(T tot) and total potential (V tot) energy:

U tot = T tot + V tot

35

The kinetic energy of wave B (TB) of one molecule may be expressed using
its total energy (EB), mass of molecule (m), and its phase velocity as wave B
(vph):

TB =

mv2
gr
2

=

E2
B
2mv2
ph

(4.31)

The total mass (Mi) of 3D standing waves B forming eﬀectons, transitons and
deformons of diﬀerent types are proportional to number of molecules in the
volume of corresponding quasiparticle (Vi = 1/ni):

Mi =

1/ni
V0/N0

m

the limiting condition for minimum mass of quasiparticle is:

Consequently the kinetic energy of each coherent eﬀectons is equal to

M min

i = m

"T i

kin =

E2
i
2Miv2

ph#

(4.32)

(4.33)

(4.34)

where: Ei is a total energy of given quasiparticle.

The kinetic energy of coherent primary and secondary deformons and tran-
sitons we express analogously to eq. (4.34), but instead of the phase velocity
of waves B we use the light speed and resulting sound velocity vres (eq.3.24),
respectively:

(cid:20)T i

kin =

E2
i

2Mic2(cid:21)d

and

(cid:20)T

i
kin =

The kinetic energies of [tr/lb] convertons:

E2
i

s )2(cid:21)d

2Mi(vres

(cid:20)T i

kin =

(Ei/3)2
2Mi(vres

s )2(cid:21) =(cid:20)T i

kin =

E2
i

s )2(cid:21)con

6Mi(vres

(4.35)

(4.35a)

According to our model, the kinetic energies of the eﬀectons in a and b and also
in the ¯a and ¯b states are equal. Using (4.34) and (4.35) we obtain from eq.(4.3)
the total thermal kinetic energy for 1 mole of matter:

T tot = V0

1

ZXtr,lb



nefP (Ea)2

2Mef (va

1,2,3

ph)2 ∗(cid:0)P a

36

ef + P b

ef(cid:1) + ¯nefP(cid:0) ¯Ea(cid:1)2

2Mef (va

1,2,3

ph)2 ∗(cid:0) ¯P a

ef + ¯P b

ef(cid:1) +

¯Pd +

2Mdc2 Pd + ¯ndP(cid:0) ¯Ed(cid:1)2

2Md(vres

1,2,3

1,2,3
s )2

+

D #)tr,lb
s )2 PcMd# +

6MD(vres

s )2 P M

¯Pd +ndP (Ed)2
M (cid:1) + nD (cid:0) ED (cid:1)2
s )2 Pbc +(cid:0) EcMd (cid:1)2
ncMd(cid:0) EcMd (cid:1)2
S #
s )2 P D∗

s )2 Pbc +
S (cid:17) + nS

(ED∗ )2
6MS(vres

6Mc(vres

6Mc(vres

s )2

PcMd# +

(4.36)

+ntP (Et)2

2Mt(vres

1,2,3

s )2 Pd + ¯ntP(cid:0) ¯Et(cid:1)2

2 ¯Mt(vres

1,2,3
s )2

+V0

ncon

ph)2

6Mc(vres

6Mc(vres

6MM (vA

M + P B

+"nM (cid:0) EA
M (cid:1)2
Z " (cid:0) Eac (cid:1)2

∗(cid:0) P A
s )2 Pac + (cid:0) Ebc (cid:1)2
Z"ncda (cid:0) Eac (cid:1)2
s )2 Pac + ncdb (cid:0) Ebc (cid:1)2
Z"nS
(cid:0)EA∗
S (cid:1)2
ph (cid:1)2 ∗(cid:16)P A∗
6MS(cid:0) vA∗
" 1
ph#tr,lb

S + P B∗

6Mc(vres

6Mc(vres

1
va
ph

1
¯va

vA
ph

+

=

1

1

V0

+ V0

→"vA

ph =

va
ph · ¯va
ph
va
ph + ¯va

ph#tr,lb

where the eﬀective phase velocity of A-state of macroeﬀectons is introduced as:

(4.37)

(4.38)

and the eﬀective phase velocity of supereﬀecton in A∗-state:

vA∗
ph =

ph)tr · (vA
(vA
(vA
ph)tr + (vA

ph)lb
ph)lb

Total potential energy is deﬁned by the diﬀerence between total internal (eq.
4.3) and total kinetic energy (eq. 4.36):

V tot = U tot − T tot

(4.39)

Consequently, we can separately calculate the kinetic and potential energy con-
tributions to the total thermal internal energy of matter, using four experimental
parameters, obtained at the same temperature and pressure:

1) density or molar volume;
2) sound velocity;
3) refraction index and
4) positions of translational and librational bands in oscillatory spectrum of

condensed matter.

37

It is important to stress that the same equations are valid for

liquids and solids.

The contributions of all individual types of quasiparticles in thermodynamics
as well as a lot of characteristics of these quasiparticles also may be calculated,
using hierarchic theory.

4.3. Some useful parameters of condensed matter:

The total Structural Factor can be calculated as a ratio of the kinetic to

the total energy of matter:

SF = T tot/U tot

(4.40)

The structural factors, related to contributions of translations (SFtr) and to
librations (SFlb) could be calculated separately as:

SF tr = Ttr/U tot

and

SF lb = Tlb/U tot

(4.41)

The dynamic properties of quasiparticles,

introduced in meso-

scopic theory

The frequency of c- Macrotransitons or Macroconvertons excitation, repre-
senting [dissociation/association] of primary librational eﬀectons - ”ﬂickering
clusters” as a result of interconversions between primary [lb] and [tr] eﬀectons
is:

FcM =

1
τMc

· PMc/Z

(4.42)

where: PMc = Pac · Pbc is a probability of macroconverton excitation;
Z is a total partition function (see eq.4.2);
the life-time of macroconverton is:

τMc = (τac · τbc)1/2

(4.43)

The cycle-period of (ac) and (bc) convertons are determined by the sum of
life-times of intermediate states of primary translational and librational eﬀec-
tons:

τac = (τa)tr + (τa)lb;
τbc = (τb)tr + (τb)lb;

(4.44)

The life-times of primary and secondary eﬀectons (lb and tr) in a- and b-

states are the reciprocal values of corresponding state frequencies:

38

[τa = 1/νa;
[τb = 1/νb;

τa = 1/νa]tr,lb;
τ b = 1/νb]tr,lb

(4.45)
(4.45a)

[(νa) and (νb)]tr,lb correspond to eqs. 4.8 and 4.9;
[(νa) and (νb)]tr,lb could be calculated using eqs.4.16; 4.17.
The frequency of (ac) and (bc) convertons excitation [lb/tr]:

Fac =

Fbc =

1
τac

1
τbc

· Pac/Z

· Pbc/Z

(4.46)

(4.47)

where: Pac and Pbc are probabilities of corresponding convertons excitations

(see eq.4.29a).

The frequency of Supereﬀectons and Superdeformons (biggest ﬂuc-

tuations) excitation is:

FSD =

1

(τA∗ + τB∗ + τD∗ )

· P D∗

S /Z

(4.48)

It is dependent on cycle-period of Supereﬀectons: τSD = τA∗ + τB∗ + τD∗
and probability of Superdeformon activation ( P D∗

S ), like the limiting stage

of this cycle.

The averaged life-times of Supereﬀectons in A∗ and B∗ state are dependent

on similar states of translational and librational macroeﬀectons :

τA∗ = [(τA)tr · (τA)lb] = [(τaτa)tr · (τaτa)lb]1/2

(4.49)

and that in B state:

τB∗ = [(τB)tr · (τB)lb] = [(τbτb)tr · (τbτb)lb]1/2

(4.50)

The life-time of Superdeformons excitation is determined by frequency of

beats between A∗ and B∗states of Supereﬀectons as:

τD∗ = 1/ |(1/τA∗ ) − (1/τB∗)|

(4.51)

The frequency of translational and librational macroeﬀectons A ⇋

B cycle excitations could be deﬁned in a similar way:

39

where:

and

(cid:20)FM =

1

(τA + τB + τD)

· P D

M /Z(cid:21)tr,lb

(τA)tr,lb = [(τa · τa)tr,lb]1/2

(τB)tr,lb = [(τb · τb)tr,lb]1/2

(τD)tr,lb = 1/ |(1/τA) − (1/τB)|tr,lb

(4.52)

(4.53)

(4.54)

(4.55)

The frequency of primary translational eﬀectons (a ⇋b)tr transi-

tions could be expressed like:

Ftr =

1/Z

(τa + τb + τt)tr

· (Pd)tr

(4.56)

where: (Pd)tr is a probability of primary translational deformons excitation;

[τa; τb]tr are the life-times of (a) and (b) states of primary translational ef-

fectons (eq.4.45).

The frequency of primary librational eﬀectons as (a ⇋ b)lb cycles

excitations is:

Flb =

1/Z

(τa + τb + τt)lb

· (Pd)lb

(4.57)

where: (Pd)lbis a probability of primary librational deformons excitation; τa and
τb are the life-times of (a) and (b) states of primary librational eﬀectons deﬁned
as (4.45).

The life-time of primary transitons (tr and lb) as a result of quantum beats

between (a) and (b) states of primary eﬀectons could be introduced as:

[τt = |1/τa − 1/τb|−1]tr,lb

(4.58)

The fraction of molecules (Fr) in each type of independent excita-

tion (quasiparticle):

F r(i) = P (i)/Z

(4.59)

40

where: P (i) is thermoaccessibility (relative probability) of given excitation
and Z is total partition function (4.2).

The concentration of molecules in each type of independent exci-

tation (quasiparticles):

Nm(i) = F r(i) · (NA/V0) = [P (i)/Z] · (NA/V0)

(4.60)

where: NA and V0 are the Avogadro number and molar volume of matter.

The concentration of each type of independent excitations
(quasiparticles):

N (i) = F r(i) · n(i) = [P (i)/Z] · n(i)

(4.61)

where: n(i) is a concentration of given type (i) of quasiparticles; Fr (i) is a
fraction of corresponding type of quasiparticles.

The average distance between centers of i-type of randomly dis-

tributed quasiparticles:

d(i) = 1/[N (i)]1/3 = 1/[(P (i)/Z) · n(i)]1/3

(4.62)

The ratio of average distance between centers of quasiparticles to

their linear dimension [l = 1/n(i)1/3]:

rat(i) = 1/[(P (i)/Z)]1/3

(4.63)

The number of molecules in the edge of primary translational and

primary librational eﬀectons:

κtr =(cid:0)V tr
κlb =(cid:0)V lb

ef /vm(cid:1)1/3
ef /vm(cid:1)1/3

= (1/ntr

ef )/(V0/NA)

(4.63a)

= (1/nlb

ef )/(V0/NA)

(4.63b)

where: (1/ntr,lb

ef ) is the volume of primary translational or librational eﬀec-

tons; (V0/NA) is the volume, occupied by one molecule in condensed matter.

A lot of other parameters, characterizing diﬀerent properties of condensed
matter are also possible to calculate, using Hierarchic mesoscopic theory and
our special software elaborated as will be shown in the next chapters.

V. QUANTITATIVE VERIFICATION OF HIERARCHIC

THEORY FOR ICE AND WATER

41

All the calculations, based on Hierarchic mesoscopic concept, were performed
on the IBM-compatible personal computers. The special software: ”Com-
prehensive analyzer of matter properties” was elaborated. The pro-
gram allows to evaluate more than hundred parameters of any con-
densed matter if the following data are available in the temperature
interval of interest:

1. Positions of translational and librational bands in oscillatory

spectra;

2. Sound velocity;
3. Molar volume;
4. Refraction index.

The basic experimental parameters for ice:

The wave numbers (˜νtr), corresponding to positions of translational and
librational bands in oscillatory IR spectra were taken from book of Eisenberg
and Kauzmann [16]. Wave numbers for ice at 0oC are:

(cid:16)˜ν(1)
ph(cid:17)tr
(cid:16)˜ν(2)
ph(cid:17)tr
(cid:16)˜ν(3)
ph(cid:17)tr

= 60cm−1;

= 160cm−1;

= 229cm−1

Accordingly to our model, the IR photons with corresponding frequencies are
irradiated and absorbed a result of (a ⇔ b) primary translational deformons in
ice. Temperature shifts of these bands positions are close to zero:

∂(cid:16)˜ν1,2,3
ph (cid:17)tr

/∂T ≈ 0

Wave numbers of librational IR bands, corresponding to absorption of photons,
related to (a ⇔ b)1,2,3

transitions of primary librational eﬀectons of ice are:

lb

(cid:16)˜ν(1)
ph(cid:17)lb

=(cid:16)˜ν(2)
ph(cid:17)lb

=(cid:16)˜ν(3)
ph(cid:17)lb

≈ 795cm−1.

The equality of wave numbers for three directions (1,2,3) indicate the spatial
isotropy of the librations of H2O molecules. In this case deformons and eﬀectons
have a cube geometry. In general case they have a shape of parallelepiped (like
quasiparticles of translational type) with each of three ribs, corresponding to
most probable de Broglie wave length in selected direction.

The temperature shift of the position of the librational band maximum for

ice is:

∂(cid:16)˜ν1,2,3
ph (cid:17)lb

/∂T ≈ −0.2cm−1/C0

42

with temperature shifts:

(cid:16)˜ν(1)
ph(cid:17)tr
∂(cid:16)˜ν(1)
ph(cid:17)tr

≈(cid:16)˜ν(3)
ph(cid:17)tr

(cid:16)˜ν(2)
ph(cid:17)tr
∂(cid:16)˜ν(2,3)
ph (cid:17)tr

/∂T = 0;

/∂T = −0.2cm−1/C0

The resulting thermal phonons velocity in ice, responsible for secondary acoustic
deformons, is taken as equal to the transverse sound velocity [27]:

vres
s = 1.99 · 105cm/s

This velocity and molar ice volume (V0) are almost independent on temperature
[16]:

V0 = 19.6cm3/M ≃ const

The basic experimental parameters for Water

The wave numbers of translational bands in IR spectrum, corresponding to
quantum transitions of primary translational eﬀectons between acoustic (a) and
optical (b) states with absorption or emission of photons, forming electromag-
netic 3D translational deformons at 00C are [16]:

= 60cm−1;

≈ 199cm−1

The primary librational deformons of water at 00C are characterized by follow-
ing degenerated wave numbers of librational bands in it IR spectrum:

(cid:16) ˜ν(1)
ph (cid:17)lb

with temperature shift:

≈(cid:16) ˜ν(2)
ph (cid:17)lb

≈(cid:16) ˜ν(3)
ph (cid:17)lb

= 700cm−1

∂(cid:16)˜ν1,2,3
ph (cid:17)lb

/∂T = −0.7cm−1/C0

Wave numbers are related to the frequencies (ν) of corresponding transitions
via light velocity as: ν = c˜ν

The dependence of sound velocity (vs) in water on temperature within the

temperature range 0 − 1000C is expressed by the polynomial [17]:

vs = 1402.385 + 5.03522t − 58.3087 · 10−3t2 +

+ 345.3 · 10−6t3 −

43

−1645.13 · 10−9t4 + 3.9625 · 10−9t5 (m/s).

The temperature dependence of molar volume (V0) of water within the same
temperature range can be calculated using the polynomial [18, 19]:

V0 = 18000/[(999, 83952 + 16.945176t −

− 7.98704 · 10−3t2 −

− 4.6170461 · 10−5t3 + 1.0556302 · 10−7t4 −
− 2.8054253 · 10−10t5)/

/(1 + 1.687985 · 10−2t)]

(cm3/M )

The refraction index for ice was taken as an independent of temperature (nice =
1.35) and that for water as a variable, depending on temperature in accordance
with experimental data, presented by Frontas’ev and Schreiber [20].

The refraction index for water at 200C is approximately:

nH2O ≃ 1.33

The temperature dependences of diﬀerent parameters for ice and water, com-
puted using the formulas of our mesoscopic theory, are presented in Figs.(1-4).
It is only a small part of available information. In principle, it is possible to cal-
culate about 200 diﬀerent parameters for liquid and solid state of any condensed
matter [3].

A. Discussion of theoretical temperature dependences.

It will be shown below that our hierarchic theory makes it possible to cal-
culate unprecedently big amount of parameters for liquids and solids. Those
of them that could be measured experimentally are in excellent correspondence
with theory.

44

Fig. 1. (a, b, c). Temperature dependences of the resulting ther-
moaccessibility (Z) (eq.4.2) and contributions related to primary
and secondary eﬀectons and deformons for ice (a,b) and water (c).

The resulting thermoaccessibility minimum (Fig. 1a) for ice (Z) corresponds
to the temperature of -1700C. The interval from -198 to -1730C is known indeed
as anomalies one due to the fact that the heat equilibrium of ice establishes very
slowly in the above range [21]. This fact can be explained by the less probable
ice structure (minimum value of partition function Z ) near −1700C.

For the other hand, experimental anomaly, related with maximum heat
capacity (Cp), also is observed near the same temperature. It can be explained,
if we present heat capacity as:

Cp =

∂
∂T

(

1
Z

U ∗) = −

1
Z 2

∂Z
∂T

U ∗ +

1
Z

∂U ∗
∂T

One can see, that heat capacity is maximal, when (∂Z/∂T ) = 0 and Z is min-
imal.
It is a condition of Z(T) extremum, just leading from our theory at
−170oC (Fig.3a).

45

In liquid water the temperature dependences of Z and its components are
linear. The thermoaccessibility of mean secondary eﬀectons in water decreases,
while that of primary eﬀectons increases with temperature, just like in ice (Fig.
1 b,c).

On lowering down the temperature the total internal energy of ice (Fig. 2a)
and its components decreases nonlinearly with temperature coming closer to
absolute zero. The same parameters for water are decreasing almost linearly
within the interval (100 − 0)0C (Fig. 2b).

In computer calculations, the values of Cp(t) can be determined by diﬀeren-

tiating Utot numerically at any of temperature interval.

Fig. 2.

(a,b). Temperature dependences of the total internal
energy (Utot) and diﬀerent contributions for ice (a) and water (b)
(eqs. 4.3 - 4.5). Following contributions to Utot are presented:

(Uef + ¯Uef ) is the contribution of primary and secondary eﬀec-

tons;

(Ud + ¯Ud) is the contribution of primary and secondary defor-

mons;

(Uef +Ud) is the contribution of primary eﬀectons and deformons;
( ¯Uef + ¯Ud) is the contribution of secondary eﬀectons and defor-

mons.

The contributions of macro- and supereﬀectons to the total in-
ternal energy and corresponding macro- and superdeformons, as well
as all types of convertons, are much smaller than those of primary
and secondary eﬀectons and deformons.

46

It follows from Fig. 2a that the mean value of heat capacity for ice in the

interval from -75 to 0oC is equal to:

¯Cice

p =

∆Utot
∆T

≈ 39J/M · K = 9.3 cal/M · K

For water within the whole range ∆T = 1000C, the change in the internal
energy is: ∆U = 17 − 9.7 = 7.3kJ/M (Fig.2b). This corresponds to mean value
of heat capacity of water:

Cwater

p

=

∆Utot
∆T

= 73 J/M · K = 17.5 cal/M · K

These results of our theory agree well with the experimental mean values

Cp = 18 Cal/M · K for water and Cp = 9cal/M · K for ice.

It can be seen in Fig. 3 a, b that the total kinetic energy of water (Tkin) is
approximately 30 times less than the potential energy (Vp) at the same tempera-
tures. In the case of ice, they diﬀer even more: (Tkin/V ) < 1/100. The resulting
Tkinof water increases almost twice over the range (0 − 1000C) : from 313 to
585J/M . However, the change of the total internal energy (Utot = Tkin + Vp) is
determined mainly by the change in potential energy Vp(t) of ice and water.

It is reasonable to analyze the above ratio between total kinetic and potential

energies in terms of the Viral theorem (Clausius, 1870; see Prokhorov, 1988).

This theorem for a system of particles relates the averaged kinetic ¯Tk(~v) =

i /2 and potential ¯V(r) energies in the form:

Pi miv2

2 ¯Tk(~v) =Xi

miv2

i =Xi

~ri∂V /∂~ri

This equation is valid for both quantum-mechanical and classical systems.

If the potential energy V (r) is a homogeneous n-order function like:

then average kinetic and average potential energies are related as:

V (r) ∼ rn

Tk(~v) = n

V (r)

2

(5.1)

(5.2)

For example, for a harmonic oscillator: n = 2 and ¯Tk = ¯V . For Coulomb

interaction: n = −1 and ¯T = − ¯V /2.

For water our calculation of Tk and V gives: nw ∼ 1/15 and for ice: nice ∼
1/50. It follows from (5.1) that in water and ice the dependence of potential
energy on distance (r) is very weak:

47

Vw(r) ∼ r(1/15);

Vice ∼ r(1/50)

(5.3)

This result can be considered as indication of very distant inter-
action due to the expressed cooperative properties of water as an as-
sociative hierarchic liquid. It points that the role of distant Van der
Waals interactions, stabilizing primary eﬀectons, representing molec-
ular Bose condensate, is increasing with dimensions of these coherent
clusters, i.e. with temperature decreasing. It is a strong evidence
that water and ice can not be considered as a classical systems.

Fig. 3.

(a,b). Temperature dependences of the kinetic (Tkin)
and potential (Vp) energy for the ice (a) and water (b). Note that
Utot = Tkin + Vp.

For classical equilibrium systems containing N-particles, the virial the-
orem shows that average kinetic and potential energies related to each degree of
freedom are the same and are equal to:

¯Tk =

1
2

kT = ¯V

n = 2

(5.4)

It means that in classical approximation the particles of condensed matter
are considered as the harmonic oscillators. It leads from our theory and com-
puter simulations that for real matter this approximation is not valid in general
case .

5.2. Explanation of Drost-Hansen temperature anomalies

48

Our Hierarchic theory is the ﬁrst one enable to predict and give a clear expla-
nation to deviations of temperature dependencies of some physical parameters
of water from monotonic ones.

It clarify also the interrelation between these deviations (transitions) and
corresponding temperature anomalies in properties of biosystems, such as dy-
namic equilibrium of [assembly-disassembly] of microtubules and actin ﬁlaments,
large-scale dynamics of proteins and the enzymes activity, etc.

Fig. 4. (a) : The temperature dependencies of the number of

H2O molecules in the volume of primary librational eﬀecton (nlb
axis) and the number of H2O per length of this eﬀecton edge (κ,
the temperature dependence of the water pri-
right axis);
mary librational eﬀecton (approximated by cube) edge length [llib
ef =
κ(V0/N0)1/3].

(b):

M )ef , left

The number of H2O molecules within the primary libration eﬀectons
of water, which could be approximated by a cube, decreases from nM = 280
at 00 to nM ≃ 3 at 1000 (Fig. 4a). It should be noted that at physiological
temperatures (35 − 400) such quasiparticles contain nearly 40 water molecules.
This number is close to that of water molecules that can be enclosed in the open
interdomain protein cavities judging from X-ray data. The ﬂickering of these
clusters, i.e. their (dissociation ⇋ association) due to [lb ⇔ tr] conversions
in accordance with our model is directly related to the large-scale dynamics of
proteins.

It is very important that the linear dimensions of such water clusters (11˚A)
at physiological temperature are close to common ones for protein domains (Fig.
4b).

49

Such spatial correlations indicate that the properties of water ex-
erted a strong inﬂuence on the biological evolution of macromolecules,
namely, their dimensions and allosteric properties due to cooperative-
ness of intersubunit water clusters.

We assume here that integer and half-integer values of number of water
molecules per eﬀecton’s edge [κ] (Fig. 4a) reﬂect the conditions of increased and
decreased stabilities of water structure correspondingly. It is apparently related
to the stability of primary librational eﬀectons as cooperative and coherent
water clusters.

Nonmonotonic behavior of water properties with temperature is widely known
and well conﬁrmed experimental fact (Drost-Hansen, 1976, 1992; Clegg and
Drost-Hansen, 1991; Etzler, 1991; Roberts and Wang, 1993; Roberts and Wang,
1993; Roberts, et al., 1993, 1994; Wang et al., 1994).

We can explain this interesting and important for biological functions phe-
nomenon because of competition between two factors: quantum and
structural ones in stability of primary librational eﬀectons. The quan-
tum factor such as wave B length, determining the value of the eﬀecton edge:

hlef = κ(V0/N0)1/3 ˜ λBilb

(5.5)

decreases monotonously with temperature increasing. The structural factor is a
discrete parameter depending on the water molecules eﬀective length:
lH2O =
(V0/N0)1/3 and their number [κ] in the eﬀecton’s edge.

In accordance with our model, the shape of primary librational
eﬀectons in liquids and of primary translational eﬀectons in solids
could be approximated by parallelepiped in general case or by cube,
when corresponding thermal movements of molecules (lb and/or tr)
and are isotropic.

We suggest that when (lef ) corresponds to integer number of H2O, i.e.

[κ = (lef /lH2O) = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6...]lb

(5.6)

the competition between quantum and structural factors is minimum and pri-
mary librational eﬀectons are most stable. On the other hand, when (lef /lH2O)lb
is half-integer, the librational eﬀectons are less stable (the competition is maxi-
mum). In the latter case (a ⇔ b)lb equilibrium of the eﬀectons must be shifted
rightward - to less stable state of these coherent water clusters. Consequently,
the probability of dissociation of librational eﬀectons to a number of much
smaller translational eﬀecton, i.e. probability of [lb/tr] convertons increases
and concentration of primary librational eﬀectons decreases. Experimentally
the nonmonotonic change of this probability with temperature could
be registered by dielectric permittivity, refraction index measure-
ments and by that of average density of water. The refraction index
change should lead to corresponding variations of surface tension, va-
por pressure, viscosity, self-diﬀusion in accordance to our hierarchic
theory (Kaivarainen, 1995).

50

In accordance to our model the density of liquid water in compo-
sition of librational eﬀectons is lower than the average in the bulk .
In the former case all hydrogen bonds of molecules are saturated like in ideal
ice in contrast to latter one.

We can see from Fig.4a that the number of water molecules in primary lb

eﬀecton edge (κ) is integer near the following temperatures:

60(κ = 6); 170(κ = 5); 320(κ = 4); 490(κ = 3); 770(κ = 2)

(5.7)

These temperatures coincide very well with the maximums of relaxation time in
pure water and with dielectric response anomalies (Roberts, et al., 1993; 1994;
Wang, et al., 1994). The special temperatures predicted by our theory are close
also to chemical kinetic (Aksnes, Asaad, 1989; Aksnes, Libnau, 1991), refrac-
tometry (Frontas’ev, Schreiber 1966) and IR (Prochorov, 1991) data. Small
discrepancy may result from the high sensitivity of water to any kind of pertur-
bation, guest-eﬀects and additional polarization of water molecules, induced by
high frequency visible photons. Even such low concentrations of inorganic ions
ester and NaOH as used by Aksnes and Libnau (1991) may change water proper-
ties. The increase of H2O polarizability under the eﬀect of light also may lead to
enhancement of water clusters stability and to corresponding high-temperature
shift of nonmonotonic changes of water properties.

The semi-integer numbers of [κ] for pure water correspond to temperatures:

00(κ = 6.5); 120(κ = 5.5); 240(κ = 4.5); 400(κ = 3.5);
620(κ = 2.5); 990(κ = 1.5)

(5.7a)

The conditions (5.7a) characterize the less stable water structure than con-
ditions (5.7). The ﬁrst order phase transitions - freezing at 00 and boiling at
1000 of water almost exactly correspond to κ = 6.5 and κ = 1.5. This fact can
be important for understanding the mechanism of ﬁrst order phase transitions.

The temperature anomalies of colloid water-containing systems,
discovered by Drost-Hansen (1976) and studied by Etzler and coauthors (1987;
1991) occurred near 14-160; 29-320; 44-460 and 59-620C. At these tempera-
tures the extrema of viscosity, disjoining pressure and molar excess entropy of
water between quartz plates even with a separation 300-500 ˚A has been ob-
served. These temperatures are close to predicted by our theory for
bulk water anomalies, corresponding to integer values of [κ] (see 5.7).
Some deviations can be a result of interfacial water perturbations,
induced by colloid particles and plates.
It is a ﬁrst theory which
looks to be able to predict and explain the existence of Drost-Hansen
temperatures.

The dimensions, concentration and stability of water clusters (primary li-
brational eﬀectons) in the volume of vicinal water should be bigger than that
in bulk water due to their less mobility and to longer waves B length.

Very interesting ideas, concerning the role of water clusters in biosystems

were developed in works of John Watterson (Watterson, 1988a,b).

51

It was revealed in our laboratory (Kaivarainen, 1985; Kaivarainen et al.,
1993) that nonmonotonic changes of water near Drost Hansen temperatures are
accompanied by in-phase change of diﬀerent protein large-scale dynamics, re-
lated to their functioning. The further investigations of like phenomena are very
important for understanding the molecular mechanisms of thermoadaptation of
living organisms.

5.3. Physiological temperature and the least action principle

The Fig.5 a, b shows the resulting contributions to the total kinetic energy
of water of two main subsystems: eﬀectons and deformons. The minimum of
deformons contribution at 430 is close to the physiological temperatures for
warm-blooded animals.

Fig. 5. Temperature dependences of two resulting contributions
kin) of all types to the total kinetic

kin) and deformons (T d

- eﬀectons (T ef
energy of water.

The minima at temperature dependences of diﬀerent contributions to the total
kinetic energy of water at Fig.5 correspond to the best implementation of the
least action principle in the form of Mopertui-Lagrange.

In such a form, this principle is valid for the conservative holonom systems,
where limitations exist for the displacements of the particles of this sys-
tem, rather than the magnitudes of their velocities. It states that among
all the kinematically possible displacements of a system from one conﬁguration
to another, without changing total system energy, such a displacements are most

52

probable for which the action (W) is least: ∆W = 0. Here ∆ is the symbol of
total variation in coordinates, velocities and time.

The action is a fundamental physical parameter which has the dimension of

the product of energy and time characterizing the dynamics of a system.

According to Hamilton, the action:

S =

tZt0

Ldt

is expressed through the Lagrange function:

L = Tkin − V,

(5.4)

where Tkin and V are the kinetic and potential energies of a system or a sub-
system.

According to Lagrange, the action (W) can be expressed as:

W =

tZt0

2Tkindt

We can assume that at the same integration limit the minimum value of the
action ∆W ≃ 0 corresponds to the minimum value of Tkin.. Then it can be said
that at temperature about 430 the subsystems of deformons is most stable (see
Fig. 6). This means that the equilibrium between the acoustic and optic states
of primary and secondary eﬀectons should be most stable at this temperature.

5.4. Mechanism of phase transitions in terms of the hierarchic

theory

The abrupt increase of the total internal energy (U) as a result of ice melting
(Fig. 6a), equal to 6.27kJ/M , calculated from our theory is close to the experi-
mental data (6kJ/M ) (Eisenberg, 1969). The resulting thermoaccessibility (Z)
during ice → water transition decreases abruptly, while potential and kinetic
energies increase (Fig. 6b).

53

Fig. 6. The total internal energy (U = Tkin + Vp) change during
ice-water phase transition and change of the resulting thermoacces-
sibility (Z) - (a); changes in kinetic (Tkin) and potential (Vp) energies
(b) as a result of the same transition.

It is important that at the melting point H2O molecules number in a primary
translational eﬀecton (ntr
M )ef decreases from 1 to ≃ 0.4 (Fig. 7a). It means that
the volume of this quasiparticle type gets smaller than the volume occupied by
H2O molecule. According to our model, under such conditions the individual
water molecules get the independent translation mobility. The number of water
molecules forming a primary libration eﬀecton decreases abruptly from about
3000 to 280, as a result of melting. The number of H2O in the secondary
librational eﬀecton decreases correspondingly from ∼ 1.25 to 0.5 (Fig. 7b).

Fig. 8a, b contains more detailed information on changes in primary libra-

tional eﬀecton parameters in the course of ice melting.

The theoretical dependences obtained allow us to give a clear interpretation
of the ﬁrst order phase transitions. The condition of melting at T = Tcr is
realized in the course of heating when the number of molecules in the volume
of primary translational eﬀectons nM decreases:

nM ≥ 1(T ≤ Tcr)

Tc→ nM ≤ 1(T ≥ Tcr)

54

M )ef and secondary (¯ntr

Fig. 7. Changes of the number of H2O molecules forming pri-
mary (ntr
M )ef translational eﬀectons during
ice-water phase transition (a). Changes in the number of H2O
molecules forming primary (nlb
M )ef librational
eﬀectons (b) as a result of phase transitions.

M )ef and secondary (¯nlb

The process of boiling, i.e. [liquid → gas] transition, as seen from Fig. 7a,
is also determined by condition (6.6), but at this case it is realized for primary
librational eﬀectons.

In other words this means that [gas → liquid] transition is related to orig-
ination (condensation) of the primary librational eﬀectons which contain more
than one molecule of substance.

In a liquid as compared to gas, the quantity of rotational degrees
of freedom is decreased due to librational coherent eﬀectons forma-
tion, but the number of translational degrees of freedom remains the
same. The latter, in turn also decreases during [liquid → solid] phase
transition, when the wave B length of molecules corresponding to
their translations begins to exceed the mean distances between the
centers of molecules (Fig. 7a). This process is accompanied by partial
Bose-condensation of translational waves B and by the formation of coherent
primary translational eﬀectons, including more than one molecule. The size of
librational eﬀectons grows up strongly during this [water → ice] transition.

55

Fig. 8. Changes of the number of H2O molecules forming a
primary librational eﬀecton (nlb
M )ef , the number of H2O molecules
(κ) in the edge of this eﬀecton (a) and the length of the eﬀecton
ef = κ(V0/N0)1/3 (b) during the ice-water phase transition.
edge: llb

In contrast to ﬁrst order phase transitions the second order phase transitions
are not related to the abrupt change of primary eﬀectons volume, but only to
their shape and symmetry changes. Such phenomena may be the result of
a gradual [temperature/pressure] - dependent decrease in the diﬀerence between
the dynamics and the energy of ai and bi states of one of three standing waves
B, forming primary eﬀectons:

(cid:2) hνp = h(cid:0) νb − νa (cid:1) (cid:3)i
at (cid:2) λTc

b = λTc
a

(cid:3)i

tr,lb

tr,lb

Tc→ 0

>(cid:0) V0/N0 (cid:1)1/3 

As a result of the second order phase transition a new type of primary eﬀectons
with the new geometry appears. It means the emergency of new values of ener-
gies of (a)1,2,3 and (b)1,2,3 -states and new constants of (a ⇔ b)1,2,3 equilibrium.
Degree of polymerization of primary eﬀectons, participating in the polyeﬀec-
tons or orchestrated superclusters formation can also change in the course of
the second order phase transitions.

The second order phase transitions of ice could be induced by pressure at

certain temperatures.

The second order phase transition usually is accompanied by nonmonotonic
changes of sound velocity and the low-frequency shift of translational and libra-
tional bands in oscillatory spectra (so-called ”soft mode”). According to our
theory these changes should be followed by jump of heat capacity, compress-
ibility and coeﬃcient of thermal expansion. It points that the parameters of
elementary cells, depending on the sizes and geometry of primary eﬀectons have
to change also.

56

5.5. The energy of quasiparticle discrete states.

Activation energy of dynamics in water

Over the entire temperature range for water and ice the energies of ”acoustic”
a-states of primary eﬀectons (translational and librational ones) are lower than
the energies of ”optic” b-states (Fig.9). The energy of an ideal eﬀecton (3RT)
has the intermediate values.

Fig. 9. Temperature dependences for the energy of primary
eﬀectons in ”acoustic” (a) and ”optical” (b) states and that for the
energy of a harmonic 3D oscillator (the ideal thermal eﬀecton: E0 =
3RT ) for water and ice calculated according to the formulae (4.6,
4.7 and 4.12): a) for primary translational eﬀectons of water in a
and b states; b) for primary librational eﬀectons of water in a and b
states; c) for primary translational eﬀectons of ice in a and b states;
d) for primary librational eﬀectons of ice in a and b states.

According to the eq.(4.10 and 4.11) the thermoaccessibility of (a) and (b)

states is determined by the absolute value of the diﬀerence:

57

| Ea

ef − 3kT |tr,lb;

| Eb

ef − 3kT |tr,lb .

where E0 = 3kT = 3hν0 is energy of an ideal eﬀecton.

The (a ⇔ b) transitions (quantum beats) can be considered as autooscil-
lations of quasiparticles around the thermal equilibrium state (E0), which is
quantum-mechanically prohibited. In terms of synergetic the primary eﬀectons
are the medium active elements.

(b → a) transitions are related to origination of photons, and electromagnetic
deformons, while the reverse ones (a → b) correspond to absorption of them,
i.e. annihilation of deformons.

The nonequilibrium conditions in the subsystems of eﬀectons and deformons
can be induced by the competition between discrete quantum and continuous
heat energy distributions of diﬀerent quasiparticles. Sometimes these nonequi-
librium conditions could lead to macroscopic long-period oscillations in con-
densed matter.

The temperature dependences of the excitation (or ﬂuctuation) energies
for translational and librational macroeﬀectons in A(a, ¯a) and B(b, ¯b) states:
M )tr,lb; (ǫB
(ǫA
D )tr,lb and superdeformons
(ǫs
D∗ ), for water (a,b) and ice (c,d) can be calculated according to formulas (5.8,
5.9 and 5.10). E0 = 3RT is the energy of ideal quasiparticle, corresponding to
thermal equilibrium energy.

M )tr,lb and that for macrodeformons (ǫM

The knowledge of the excitation energies of macrodeformons is very impor-
tant for calculation the viscosity and coeﬃcient of self-diﬀusion (see sections 6.6
and 6.8).

The A and B states of macro- and supereﬀectons represent the signiﬁcant de-
viations from thermal equilibrium. The transitions between these states termed:
macro- and superdeformons represent the strong ﬂuctuations of polarizabilities
and, consequently, of refraction index and dielectric permeability.

The excitation energies of A and B states of macroeﬀectons are determined

as:

(ǫA

M )tr,lb = −RT ln(P a

ef P a

ef )tr,lb = −RT ln(P A

M )tr,lb

(ǫB

M )tr,lb = −RT ln(P b

ef P b

ef )tr,lb = −RT ln(P B

M )tr,lb

(5.8)

(5.9)

ef and ¯P a

where P a
ef are the thermoaccessibilities of the (a) − eq. (4.10) and (¯a) −
eq. (4.18) - states of the primary and secondary eﬀectons, correspondingly; P b
ef
ef are the thermoaccessibilities of (b) − eq.(4.11) and (¯b) − eq.(4.19) states.
and ¯P b

The activation energy for superdeformons is:

58

ǫs
D∗ = −RT ln(P s

= (ǫM

D )tr + (ǫM

D) = −RT [ln(P M
D )l

D )tr + ln(P M

D )lb] =

(5.10)

The value (ǫM
D )tr ≈ 11.7kJ/M ≈ 2.8 kcal/M characterizes the activation energy
for translational self-diﬀusion of water molecules, and (ǫM
D )lb ≈ 31kJ/M ≈ 7.4
kcal/M - the activation energy for librational self-diﬀusion of H2O. The latter
value is close to the energy of the hydrogen bond in water (Eisenberg, 1969).

On the other hand,the biggest ﬂuctuations-superdeformons are
responsible for the process of cavitational ﬂuctuations in liquids and
the emergency of defects in solids. They determine vapor pressure
and sublimation, as it leads from our theory.

Fig. 10. Temperature dependences of the oscillation frequen-
cies in (a) and (b) state of primary eﬀectons - translational and
librational for water (a) and ice (b), calculated from (Fig. 9).

The relative distribution of frequencies on Fig.10 is the same as of energies
on Fig. 9. The values of these frequencies reﬂect the minimal life-times of
corresponding states. The real life-time is dependent also on probability of
”jump” from this state to another one and on probability of states excitation.

5.6. The life-time of quasiparticles and frequencies of their

excitations

The set of formula, describing the dynamic properties of quasiparticles, in-

troduced in mesoscopic theory was presented earlier.

For the case of (a ⇔ b)1,2,3 transitions of primary and secondary eﬀectons
(tr and lb), their life-times in (a) and (b) states are the reciprocal value of

59

corresponding frequencies:
tr,lb . These parameters
and the resulting ones could be calculated from eqs.(2.27; 2.28) for primary
eﬀectons and (2.54; 2.55) for secondary ones.

[τa = 1/νa and τb = 1/νb]1,2,3

The results of calculations, using eq.(4.56 and 4.57) for frequency of excita-

tions of primary tr and lb eﬀectons are plotted on Fig. 11a,b.

The frequencies of Macroconvertons and Superdeformons were calculated

using eqs.(4.42 and 4.48).

Fig. 11.

(a) - Frequency of primary [tr] eﬀectons excitations,

calculated from eq.(4.56);

(b) - Frequency of primary [lb] eﬀectons excitations, calculated

from eq.(4.57);

(c) - Frequency of [lb/tr] Macroconvertons (ﬂickering clusters)

excitations, calculated from eq.(4.42);

(d) - Frequency of Superdeformons excitations, calculated from

eq.(4.48).

At the temperature interval (0-100)0C the frequencies of translational and

librational macrodeformons (tr and lb) are in the interval of

(1.3 − 2.8) · 109s−1 and (0.2 − 13) · 106s−1

correspondingly. The frequencies of (ac) and (bc) convertons could be deﬁned
also using our software and formulae, presented at the end of Section IV.

60

The frequency of primary translational eﬀectons [a ⇔ b] transitions at 200C,

calculated from eq.(4.56) is

ν ∼ 7 · 1010 (1/s)

It corresponds to electromagnetic wave length in water with refraction index
(n = 1.33) of:

λ = (cn)/ν ∼ 6mm

For the other hand, there are a lot of evidence, that irradiation of very diﬀerent
biological systems with such coherent electromagnetic ﬁeld exert great inﬂuences
on their properties (Grundler and Keilman, 1983).

Between the dynamics/function of proteins, membranes, etc. and
dynamics of their aqueous environment the strong interrelation exists.

The frequency of macroconvertons, representing big density ﬂuctuation in
the volume of primary librational eﬀecton at 370C is about 107(1/s) (Fig 11c),
the frequency of librational macrodeformons at the same temperature is about
106 s−1,i.e. coincides with frequency of large-scale protein cavities pulsa-
tions between open and closed to water states (see Fig.11). This conﬁrm
our hypothesis that the clusterphilic interaction is responsible for stabilization
of the proteins cavities open state and that transition from the open state to the
closed one is induced by coherent water cluster dissociation.

The frequency of Superdeformons excitation (Fig.11d) is much lower:

νs ∼ (104 − 105) s−1

Superdeformons are responsible for cavitational ﬂuctuations in liquids and orig-
ination of defects in solids. Dissociation of oligomeric proteins, like hemoglobin
or disassembly of actin and microtubules could be also related with such big
ﬂuctuations. Superdeformons could stimulate also the reversible dissociation of
water molecules, which determines the pH value.

The parameters, characterizing an average spatial distribution of primary lb

and tr eﬀectons in the bulk water are presented on the next Fig.12.

61

Fig. 12. Theoretical temperature dependencies of:
(a) - the space between centers of primary [lb] eﬀectons (calcu-

lated in accordance to eq.4.62);

(b) - the ratio of space between primary [lb] eﬀectons to their

length (calculated, using eq.4.63);

(c) - the space between centers of primary [tr] eﬀectons (in ac-

cordance to eq.4.62);

(d) - the ratio of space between primary [tr] eﬀectons to their

length (eq.4.63).

One can see from the Fig.12 that the dimensions of primary translational
eﬀectons are much smaller and concentration much higher than that of primary
librational eﬀectons. We have to keep in mind that these are the averaged
spatial distributions of collective excitations. The formation of polyeﬀectons -
coherent clusters of lb (in liquids) and tr (in solids) primary eﬀectons, interacting
side-by-side due to Josephson eﬀect is possible also.

62

Fig. 13.

centrations of primary eﬀectons
(a) and (b) states: (N a
similar dependencies for ice (c and d).

(a and b): Temperature dependences for the con-
(translational and librational) in
ef )tr,lb for water (a and b):
the

ef )tr,lb, (N b

Concentrations of quasiparticles were calculated from eqs.:

.

(N a
(N b

ef )tr,lb = (nef P a
ef )tr,lb = (nef P b

ef /Z)tr,lb;
ef /Z)tr,lb;

These dependences can be considered as the quasiparticles dis-

tribution functions.

To get the information, presented in this article about mesoscopic/cluster
structure of solids and liquids, using conventional methods, i.e. by means of
x-ray or neutron scattering methods is very complicated task. However, even
in this case the ﬁnal information about properties of collective excitations will
not be so comprehensive.

The results of computer simulations, conﬁrms the correctness of
our general model of condensed matter, as a hierarchic system of 3D
standing waves of diﬀerent nature. It is evident that the application
of Hierarchic theory can be useful for elucidation and quantitative

63

analysis of very diﬀerent physical phenomena in liquids and solids.
For example, for monitoring the processes in new materials technol-
ogy, self-organization in colloid and biological systems (Babloyantz,
1986; Chernikov, 1990; Kaivarainen, 1996).

Our theory based idea of new optoacoustic device: Comprehensive

Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP) [see web site: www.karelia.ru/˜alexk]
may provide a huge amount of data (more than 300 parameters) of
any condensed system under study.

REFERENCES:

[1]. W. Drost-Hansen, J.Singleton, in: Fundamentals of Medical
Cell Biology, v.3A, Chemisrty of the living cell, JAI Press Inc.,1992,
pp.157-180.

[2]. A. K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen J.Mol.Liq. 41, 53 (1989).
[3]. A. Kaivarainen Book: Hierarchic concept of matter anf ﬁeld.

Water, biosystems and elementary particles. New York, 1995.

The set of articles, representing new version of this book soon

will be placed in URL: http://kftt.karelia.ru/˜alexk/

[4]. A.K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen Paper in Proc.of Sec. Ann Adv. Water Sci.

Symp. October 4-6, 1996, Dallas, Texas.

[5]. Fr¨ohlich H. (ed.) Biological coherence and response to ex-

ternal stimuli. Springer, Berlin, 1988.

[6]. Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann C.A. and Brandas E.J. Int. J.

Quantum. Chem. 37, 155 (1990).

[7]. N.Ashkroft, N.Mermin. Solid state physics. N.Y. (Helt,

Rinehart and Winston, 1976).

[8]. H. Umezava, H. Matsumoto and L. Tachiki. Thermo ﬁeld
dynamics and condensate states (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982).
[9]. H.Umezawa. Advanced Field Theory: Micro, Macro and

Thermal Physics. American Institute of Physics, New York, 1993.

[10]. E. Del Giudice, S.Doglia, M.Milani and G.Vitello, Nucl.

Phys. B275 [Fs 17], 185 (1983).

[11]. E. Del Giudice, S. Doglia, M.Milani Physica Scripta. 38,

505, (1988).

[12]. R.H. Dicke Phys.Rev. 93, 99-110 (1954) .
[13]. E. Del Guidice, G.Preparata , G.Vitello, Phys. Rev. Lett.

, 61, 1085, (1989) .

[14]. F. London On the Bose-Einstein condensation. Phys.Rev. 54, 947

(1938) .

[15]. F.S.Grawford Waves. Berkley Physics Course. Vol.3.

McGraw- Hill Book Co., N.Y., 1973.

[16]. Eisenberg D., Kauzmann W. The structure and properties

of water. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969.

64

[17]. Fine R.A., Millero F.J. J.Chem.Phys. , 59, 5529 (1973) .
[18]. Kell G.S. J.Chem.Eng. Data 20, 97 (1975).
[19]. Kikoin I.K. (Ed.) Tables of physical values. Atomizdat,

Moscow, 1976.

[20]. Frontas’ev V.P., Schreiber L.S. J. Struct. Chem. (USSR) 6,

512 (1966).

[21]. Maeno N. Science about ice. Mir, Moscow, 1988.
[22]. Prokhorov A.M. (Ed) Physical encyclopedia. Soviet ency-

clopedia. Moscow, 1988.

[23]. Drost-Hansen W. In: Colloid and Interface Science. Ed.

Kerker M. (Academic Press, New York, 1976), p.267-280.

[24]. Clegg J.S. and Drost-Hansen W. Elsevier Science Publ.

vol.1, Ch.1, pp.1-23, (1991).

[25]. Etzler F.M., Conners J.J. Langmuir , 7, 2293 (1991).
[26]. Etzler F.M., White P.J. J. Colloid and Interface Sci., 120,

94 (1987).

[27]. Johri G.K., Roberts J.A. J. Phys. Chem. , 94, 7386 (1990) .
[28]. Roberts J. and Wang F. J.Microwave Power and Electro-

magnetic Energy, 28, 196 (1993).

[29]. Roberts J., Zhang X. & Zheng Y. J. Chem. Phys. 1994.
[30]. Wang H., Lu B. & Roberts J.A. Molecular materials, 1994.
[31]. Aksnes G., Asaad A.N. Acta Chem. Scand.
, 43, 726

(1989) .

[32]. Aksnes G., Libnau O.. Acta Chem.Scand., 45, 463 (1991).
[33]. Watterson J. Mol.Cell.Biochem. 1988,79,101 − 105.
[34]. Watterson J. Bio Systems .22, 51 (1988) .
[35]. K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Solvent-dependent ﬂexibility of proteins

and principles of their function. D.Reidel Publ.Co., Dordrecht, Boston,
Lancaster, 1985. 290 p.

[36]. K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A., Fradkova L., Korpela T. . Acta Chem.Scand.

47, 456 (1993) .

[37]. W. Grundler, F.Keilmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1214,

(1983).

[38]. Babloyantz A. Molecules, Dynamics and Life. An intro-
duction to self-organization of matter. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York, (1986), pp.320. Haken H. Synergetics, computers and
cognition. Springer, Berlin, 1990.

[39]. F.R. Chernikov, Bioﬁzika (USSR), 35, 711 (1990) .
[40]. A. Kaivarainen.

In: Abstracts of conference: Toward a

Science of Consciousness. Tucson, USA, p74, (1996).

65

This figure "Fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig5.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig6.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig7.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig8.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig9.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig10.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig11.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig12.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Fig13.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

This figure "Table.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0003044v1

