0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
3

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
1
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hierarchic Theory of Condensed Matter:

Long relaxation, macroscopic oscillations

and the eﬀects of magnetic ﬁeld

Alex Kaivarainen

JBL, University of Turku, FIN-20520, Turku, Finland

http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk

H2o@karelia.ru

Materials, presented in this original article are based on

following publications:

[1]. A. Kaivarainen. Book: Hierarchic Concept of Mat-
ter and Field. Water, biosystems and elementary particles.
New York, NY, 1995, ISBN 0-9642557-0-7

[2]. A. Kaivarainen. New Hierarchic Theory of Matter
General for Liquids and Solids: dynamics, thermodynam-
ics and mesoscopic structure of water and ice (see URL:
http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [see New articles]).

[3]. Hierarchic Concept of Condensed Matter and its
Interaction with Light: New Theories of Light Refraction,
Brillouin Scattering and M¨ossbauer eﬀect (http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk
[see New articles]).

[4]. A. Kaivarainen. Hierarchic Concept of Condensed
Matter : Interrelation between mesoscopic and macroscopic
properties (see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk
[see
New articles]).

See also set of previous articles at Los-Alamos archives:

http://arXiv.org/ﬁnd/physics/1/au:+Kaivarainen A/0/1/0/all/0/1

Contents:
Summary of new Hierarchic theory, general for liquids

and solids.

1. Theoretical background for macroscopic oscillations

in condensed matter

2. The hypothesis of [entropy - mass - time] interrelation
3. The entropy - information content of matter as a

hierarchic system

4. Experimentally revealed macroscopic oscillations
5. Phenomena in water and aqueous systems, induced

by magnetic ﬁeld

Coherent radio-frequency oscillations in water, revealed

by C. Smith

1

6 Inﬂuence of weak magnetic ﬁeld on the properties of

solid bodies

7 Possible mechanism of perturbations of nonmagnetic

materials under magnetic treatment

Summary of new Hierarchic theory, general for liquids

and solids

A basically new hierarchic quantitative theory, general for solids

and liquids, has been developed.

It is assumed, that unharmonic oscillations of particles in any con-
densed matter lead to emergence of three-dimensional (3D) superpo-
sition of standing de Broglie waves of molecules, electromagnetic and
acoustic waves. Consequently, any condensed matter could be con-
sidered as a gas of 3D standing waves of corresponding nature. Our
approach uniﬁes and develops strongly the Einstein’s and Debye’s
models.

Collective excitations, like 3D standing de Broglie waves of molecules,

representing at certain conditions the mesoscopic molecular Bose con-
densate, were analyzed, as a background of hierarchic model of con-
densed matter.

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B) length is deter-
mined by the ratio of Plank constant to the most probable impulse
of molecules, or by ratio of its most probable phase velocity to fre-
quency. The waves B are related to molecular translations (tr) and
librations (lb).

As the quantum dynamics of condensed matter does not follow in general
case the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the real most probable de
Broglie wave length can exceed the classical thermal de Broglie wave length and
the distance between centers of molecules many times.

This makes possible the atomic and molecular Bose condensation in solids
and liquids at temperatures, below boiling point. It is one of the most important
results of new theory, which we have conﬁrmed by computer simulations on
examples of water and ice.

Four strongly interrelated new types of quasiparticles (collective excita-

tions) were introduced in our hierarchic model:

1. Eﬀectons (tr and lb), existing in ”acoustic” (a) and ”optic” (b) states

represent the coherent clusters in general case;

2. Convertons, corresponding to interconversions between tr and lb types of

the eﬀectons (ﬂickering clusters);

3. Transitons are the intermediate [a ⇋ b] transition states of the tr and lb

eﬀectons;

2

4. Deformons are the 3D superposition of IR electromagnetic or acoustic

waves, activated by transitons and convertons.

Primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are formed by 3D superposition of the
most probable standing de Broglie waves of the oscillating ions, atoms or
molecules. The volume of eﬀectons (tr and lb) may contain from less than one,
to tens and even thousands of molecules. The ﬁrst condition means validity
of classical approximation in description of the subsystems of the eﬀectons.
The second one points to quantum properties of coherent clusters due to
mesoscopic molecular Bose condensation.

The liquids are semiclassical systems because their primary (tr) eﬀectons
contain less than one molecule and primary (lb) eﬀectons - more than one
molecule. The solids are quantum systems totally because both kind of their
primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are molecular Bose condensates. These conse-
quences of our theory are conﬁrmed by computer calculations.

The 1st order [gas → liquid] transition is accompanied by strong decreasing
of rotational (librational) degrees of freedom due to emergence of primary (lb)
eﬀectons and [liquid → solid] transition - by decreasing of translational degrees
of freedom due to Bose-condensation of primary (tr) eﬀectons.

In the general case the eﬀecton can be approximated by par-
allelepiped with edges corresponding to de Broglie waves length in
three selected directions (1, 2, 3), related to the symmetry of the
molecular dynamics. In the case of isotropic molecular motion the
eﬀectons’ shape may be approximated by cube.

The edge-length of primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) can be considered

as the ”parameter of order”.

The in-phase oscillations of molecules in the eﬀectons correspond to the
eﬀecton’s (a) - acoustic state and the counterphase oscillations correspond to
their (b) - optic state. States (a) and (b) of the eﬀectons diﬀer in potential
energy only, however, their kinetic energies, impulses and spatial dimensions -
are the same. The b-state of the eﬀectons has a common feature with Fr¨olich’s
polar mode.

The (a → b) or (b → a) transition states of the primary eﬀectons
(tr and lb), deﬁned as primary transitons, are accompanied by a
change in molecule polarizability and dipole moment without density
ﬂuctuations. At this case they lead to absorption or radiation of IR
photons, respectively.

Superposition (interception) of three internal standing IR pho-
tons of diﬀerent directions (1,2,3) - forms primary electromagnetic
deformons (tr and lb).

On the other hand, the [lb⇋ tr] convertons and secondary transitons are
accompanied by the density ﬂuctuations, leading to absorption or radiation of
phonons.

Superposition resulting from interception of standing phonons in three direc-

tions (1,2,3), forms secondary acoustic deformons (tr and lb).

3

Correlated collective excitations of primary and secondary eﬀectons and
deformons (tr and lb), localized in the volume of primary tr and lb electromag-
netic deformons, lead to origination of macroeﬀectons, macrotransitons
and macrodeformons (tr and lb respectively).

Correlated simultaneous excitations of tr and lb macroeﬀectons in the vol-
ume of superimposed tr and lb electromagnetic deformons lead to origination
of supereﬀectons.

In turn, the coherent excitation of both:

tr and lb macrodeformons and
macroconvertons in the same volume means creation of superdeformons. Su-
perdeformons are the biggest (cavitational) ﬂuctuations, leading to microbub-
bles in liquids and to local defects in solids.

Total number of quasiparticles of condensed matter equal to 4!=24,
reﬂects all of possible combinations of the four basic ones [1-4], intro-
duced above. This set of collective excitations in the form of ”gas” of
3D standing waves of three types: de Broglie, acoustic and electro-
magnetic - is shown to be able to explain virtually all the properties
of all condensed matter.

The important positive feature of our hierarchic model of matter is that it
does not need the semi-empiric intermolecular potentials for calculations, which
are unavoidable in existing theories of many body systems. The potential energy
of intermolecular interaction is involved indirectly in dimensions and stability
of quasiparticles, introduced in our model.

The main formulae of theory are the same for liquids and solids
and include following experimental parameters, which take into ac-
count their diﬀerent properties:

[1]- Positions of (tr) and (lb) bands in oscillatory spectra;
[2]- Sound velocity;
[3]- Density;
[4]- Refraction index (extrapolated to the inﬁnitive wave length of

photon).

The knowledge of these four basic parameters at the same temperature and
pressure makes it possible using our computer program, to evaluate more than
300 important characteristics of any condensed matter. Among them are such
as: total internal energy, kinetic and potential energies, heat-capacity and ther-
mal conductivity, surface tension, vapor pressure, viscosity, coeﬃcient of self-
diﬀusion, osmotic pressure, solvent activity, etc. Most of calculated parameters
are hidden, i.e. inaccessible to direct experimental measurement.

The new interpretation and evaluation of Brillouin light scattering and
M¨ossbauer eﬀect parameters may also be done on the basis of hierarchic the-
ory. Mesoscopic scenarios of turbulence, superconductivity and superﬂuity are
elaborated.

Some original aspects of water in organization and large-scale dynamics of
biosystems - such as proteins, DNA, microtubules, membranes and regulative
role of water in cytoplasm, cancer development, quantum neurodynamics, etc.
have been analyzed in the framework of Hierarchic theory.

4

Computerized veriﬁcation of our Hierarchic theory of matter on
examples of water and ice is performed, using special computer pro-
gram: Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP, copy-
right, 1997, Kaivarainen). The new optoacoustic device (CAMP),
based on this program, with possibilities much wider, than that of IR,
Raman and Brillouin spectrometers, has been proposed (see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk).

This is the ﬁrst theory able to predict all known experimental
temperature anomalies for water and ice. The conformity between
theory and experiment is very good even without any adjustable pa-
rameters.

The hierarchic concept creates a bridge between micro- and macro-
liquids and solids in

phenomena, dynamics and thermodynamics,
terms of quantum physics.

=============================================================

1. Theoretical background for macroscopic oscillations in

condensed matter

One of the consequences of our concept is of special interest. It is
the possibility for oscillation processes in solids and liquids. The law
of energy conservation is not violated thereupon because the energies
of two quasiparticle subsystems related to eﬀectons and deformons,
can change in opposite phases. The total internal energy of matter
keeps almost constant.

The equilibrium shift between subsystems of condensed matter can be in-
duced by any external factor, i.e. pressure or ﬁeld. The relaxation time, neces-
sary for system to restore its equilibrium, corresponding to minimum of potential
or free energy after switching oﬀ external factor can be termed ”memory” of
system.

The energy redistribution between primary and secondary eﬀec-
ton and deformon subsystems may have a periodical character, cou-
pled with the oscillation of the (a ⇔ b) equilibrium constant of pri-
mary eﬀectons (Ka⇔b) and correlated oscillations of primary electro-
magnetic deformons concentration if dissipation processes are weak
or reversible. According to our model (Table 1 of [1, 2]) the (a → b)
transition of primary eﬀecton is related to photon absorption, i.e. a
decrease in primary electromagnetic deformon concentration, while
the (b → a) transition on the contrary, radiate photons.
If, there-

fore, the [a ⇔ b] and (cid:2)¯a ⇔ ¯b(cid:3) equilibriums are shifted right ward, and
equilibrium constants Ka⇔b and ¯Ka⇔b decreases, then concentrations
of primary and secondary deformons (nd and ¯nd) also decreases. If
Ka⇔b grows up, i.e. the concentration of primary eﬀectons in a-states
increases, then nd increases. We remind that (a) and (b) states of

5

the primary eﬀectons correspond to the more and less stable molec-
ular clusters (see Introduction). In accordance with our model, the
strong interrelation exists between dynamic equilibrium of primary
and secondary eﬀectons. Equilibrium of primary eﬀectons is more
sensitive to any perturbations. However, the equilibrium shift of sec-
ondary eﬀectons aﬀect the total internal energy, the entropy change
and possible mass defect (see below) stronger than that of primary
eﬀectons.

As we have shown (Fig. 28a,b of [1] and [3]), the scattering ability
of A-states is more than two times as high as that of B-states. Their
polarizability, refraction index and dielectric permeability are also
higher. It makes possible to register the oscillations in the condensed
matter in diﬀerent ways.

In accordance with our theory the oscillation of refraction index
must induce the corresponding changes of viscosity and self-diﬀusion
in condensed matter (see Chapter 11 of [1] and [4]). The diﬀusion
variations are possible, for example, in solutions of macromolecules
or other Brownian particles. In such a way self-organization in space
and time gradually may originate in appropriate solvents, solutions,
colloid systems and even in solid bodies.

The period and amplitude of these oscillations depend on the times
of relaxation processes which are related to the activation energy of
equilibrium shifts in the eﬀectons, polyeﬀectons or coherent super-
clusters of primary eﬀectons subsystems.

The reorganizations in the subsystems of translational and libra-
tional eﬀectons, macro- and supereﬀectons, as well as chain-like poly-
eﬀectons, whose stabilities and sizes diﬀer from each other, must go on
at diﬀerent rates. It should, therefore, be expected that in the exper-
iment the presence of several oscillation processes would be revealed.
These processes are interrelated but going with diﬀerent periods and
amplitudes. Concomitant oscillations of self-diﬀusion rate also must
be taken into account. In such a way Prigogine’s dissipative struc-
tures could be developed (Prigogine, 1984). Instability in the degree
of ordering in time and space is accompanied by the slow oscillation
of entropy of the whole macroscopic system.

The coherent extraterrestrial cosmic factors and gravitational in-
stabilities can induce long relaxation and oscillation processes in wa-
ter and other kind of condensed matter (Udaltsova, et. al., 1987).

2. The hypothesis of [entropy - mass - time] interrelation

The second law of thermodynamics for the closed system having the perma-

nent number of particles and the constant internal energy is:

dQi
T

= dSi ≥ 0

6

(1)

where: dQi appears to be due to the irreversible processes within the system
and is referred to as uncompensated heat (Prigogine, 1980, 1984, Babloyantz,
1986).

This law means the only possibility of the processes, accompanied by the

increase of entropy (S) (related neither to chemical or nuclear reactions).

The statistical interpretation of entropy is expressed with the Boltzmann

formula:

S = k · lnP ≃ k · lnW

(2)

where: k is the Boltzmann constant, P is the statistical weight, which is
proportional to the number of realizations (number of microstates) for the given
state of the macroscopic system (W).

Correspondingly the probability of one of this microstates is: pi = 1/W.
It follows from (2) that the second law of thermodynamics expresses the fact

that the system tends to the most probable state.

or

dS = k dlnW ≥ 0

dQi = T dSi = kT dlnWi

(3)

(4)

Boltzmann has put forward the hypothesis that the irreversibility (i.e. asymme-
try) of time is determined with the irreversibility of processes according to the
second law of thermodynamics. Prigogine has modiﬁed and developed this idea
(Prigogine, 1984), introducing the notions of the internal time and micro-
scopic operator of entropy. The ”ARROW OF TIME” and irreversibility is
a result of asymmetry of physically accessible states after Prigogin. The micro-
scopic mechanism of irreversibility is discussed also in Chapter 8 of Part II of
book [1].

It follows from the second law and formulae (1.12) from Part II of this book,
that the mass of a system of N similar particles with the mass (M ≃ N m) either
does not change in the course of time, or decreases:

dt
t

= −

1
2

dM
M

≥ 0,

(5)

where: dM is the change in the mass of a macroscopic system related to
electromagnetic and acoustic radiation, and also to intermolecular interaction
induced small mass defect.

It follows from (5) that the positive pace of time in the system is related
to the decrease in its mass, while the negative pace of time - to the increase
in its mass. Hence, the coherent oscillation processes in the system (which

7

are not related to chemical reactions) are related to oscillation of mass [M]. It
is known that phonons and photons do not have the rest masses. Therefore,
the coherent periodical energy exchange between subsystems of eﬀectons and
deformons (primary and secondary) must be accompanied by changes in the
mass of the eﬀecton subsystem and total system.

The macroscopic ﬂuctuations of mass values for solid bodies were registered

experimentally indeed (Kozyrev, 1958).

The oscillations of temperature and thermal conductivity also must accom-

pany the oscillation of secondary acoustic deformons concentration.

The total internal energy of the closed system can be represented as a sum
of contributions from the primary (U a and U b), secondary ( ¯U a and ¯U b), macro
(U A, U B) and super (U A∗
) eﬀectons, convertons and contributions of cor-
responding deformons and transitons (see formula 4.3).

, U B∗

At Utot = const the exchange of energies between the subsystems of eﬀectons

and deformons can be approximately represented as:

−d(mc2

x)N ≈ d(h¯ν d)N

(6)

where: N is the number of particles in the system;

(cid:2)cx = (vgrvph)1/2 = const(cid:3) is the characteristic wave B velocity in the sys-

tem, which is equal to the product of the generalized group (vgr) and phase (vph)
velocities of wave B of particles; [d(h¯νd)N ] is the change of energy contribution
of secondary deformons, which is much bigger than that of primary deformons
due to low concentration of latter; [dm] is the defect of mass per particle in the
system as a result of energy exchange between subsystems of the eﬀectons and
deformons.

Because phonons are carriers of the heat energy, then the uncompensated
heat (dQi) in eq.(1) could be easily related to the irreversible increment of
secondary acoustic deformons and convertons energy or to the uncertainty in
this energy:

dQi = TdS = N d(hν d)tr,lb

or

dQi = TdS = −d(mc2

x)N = −d(M c2

x)tr,lb

(7)

(8)

where:

¯νd = [(¯νd)tr,lb + (¯νd)ca,cb,cMd] + (νd)tr,lb

(¯νd)tr,lb is the resulting frequency of secondary deformons (tr and lb);
(¯νd)ca,cb,cMd is the resulting frequency of convertons and related deformons;
M = N m is the total mass of particles in the system.

8

(νd)tr,lb are a frequencies of tr and lb IR photons.
Let us enter the notion of absolute entropy (S) as a measure of the
uncompensated heat change (∆Qi/T ), which could occur at (¯a ⇔ ¯b)
transitions of mean eﬀectons and convertons subsystems at the given
temperature:

S = Z dQi

T

(9)

Putting (7) and (8) into (9) and multiplying numerator and denominator, to
Boltzmann constant (k) keeping in mind (5), we derive a new approximate
formula for absolute entropy:

S =

∆Q
T

=

N ∆ (3h¯νd)

T

≈ 3N k(cid:18) h¯νa

kT (cid:19) ≈ −

∆M c2
x

T

=

2M
T

∆t
t tr,lb

(10)

where: ¯νd =|¯νa − ¯νb| ∼ ¯νa is a frequency of secondary acoustic deformon; ¯νa

is calculated from formula (2.54).

Formula (10) relates the positive entropy value not only to heat radiation
from the system or the increase of the deformons contribution into the total
internal energy (∆Qi > 0), determined the corresponding decrease of its mass
(∆M < 0), but also to positive time course in this system (∆t > 0).

The interesting experiments done by Kosyrev (1958) conﬁrm one of the
consequences of our theory, that the shift of equilibrium between subsystems
of the eﬀectons and acoustic deformons to the latter ones should decrease the
mass of body. In his experiments with special balance it was shown that the
activation of phonons with suﬃciently high energy by means of sound generator
- decreases the mass of solid body: (100 − 800) g. The value of decreasing
was proportional to the total mass of body. The relative mass decreasing was
estimated as:

∆M/M=(2.3−3.4) · 10−5

In liquids and solids, the concentration of secondary deformons can be lower
than the concentration of molecules. Therefore, in a general case N in the
formula (10) must be substituted by the number of secondary deformons in the
system:

(N d)tr,lb = V (nd)tr,lb,

(11)

where V is the volume of the system;

(¯nd)tr,lb =

8
9

π(cid:18) ¯νd

vres(cid:19)3

tr,lb

9

is the concentration of secondary translational and librational eﬀectons;

νres

ph = (cid:0)¯ν1

ph ¯ν2

ph ¯ν3

ph(cid:1)1/3

(12)

is the resulting frequency of secondary deformons; ¯ν1,2,3
are calculated from
(3.15); vres is the resulting thermal phonons velocity, which is equal to isotropic
hypersonic velocity in liquids and to transversal one (v) in solids.

ph

The total entropy of a condensed substance (Stot) is approximately a sum
of secondary eﬀecton contribution (tr and lb) and contribution of convertons.
Using (10) and (11), we obtain:

Stot ≈ Str + Slb + Scon =

V0h

T (cid:2) ¯ntr

d (cid:0) 3¯νres

d

(cid:1)tr + ¯nlb

d (cid:0) 3¯νres

d

+

V0h
T

ncon3(cid:2) (νa

ef )tr − (νa

ef )lb (cid:3)con

(cid:1)lb (cid:3) +

(13)

where: ¯ntr
d
equal to that of primary librational eﬀectons (nlb);

and ¯nlb
d

correspond to (11); ncon is a concentration of convertons,

tr,lb are the resulting frequencies of secondary deformons (tr and lb).

(ν d)res
Knowing the positions of translational and librational bands in the oscilla-
tory spectra and sound velocity, one can estimate the entropy of matter at each
temperature using (13).

At constant pressure and volume the change of enthalpy (H) is equal to the
change of internal energy (U). Therefore, the formulae that we have obtained
for (U) and (S) allow to calculate also changes in free energy:

∆GP,V = ∆U − T ∆S

(14)

The qualitative correctness of the formula obtained for entropy is obvious from
(10) in the form:

Str,lb ≈ N k(3hνa/kT )tr,lb + N k(3h∆νa/kT )acon ≃ N k(3hνa/kT )tr,lb

(15)

It follows from (2.54) and (15) that:

a) at T → 0 : h¯νa/kT → 0 and S → 0;
b) at decreasing νp in the melting point at the growth of T both h¯νa/kT

and S grow up;

c) if the mixing of liquids and gases leads to the weakening of pair interaction

in eﬀectons or clusters, then νp = (Eb − Ea)/h decreases and S increases.

Equalizing (2) and right part of (15) we have in the framework of our ap-

proximations:

10

S = k ln P ≈ k(cid:18)N0

hνa

kT (cid:19) = R

hνa
kT

from (16) we can derive an approximate formula for statistical weight:

P ≈ exp(cid:18)N0

h¯νa

kT (cid:19)tr,lb

(16)

(17)

According to (16) the law of entropy growth means the striving of the real
quantum properties of the substance to ideal properties. It means the tending of
primary eﬀectons energy in the (a) state (hνa) to the thermal equilibrium value
(kT):

∆S > 0,

if

[hν a → kT ]

(18)

Competition between the discrete quantum energy distribution and
its tendency to kT may be a reason for instability of diﬀerent parame-
ters of condensed matter. This may lead to origination of macroscopic
oscillations in the system interrelated with entropy, temperature and
mass (eq.10). Such oscillations could be considered as a kind of self-
organization process due to feedback links in a hierarchic system of
interrelated quasiparticles of matter.

3. The entropy - information content of matter as a hierarchic

system

The statistical weigh for macrosystem (P), equal to number of
microstates (W), corresponding to given macrostate, necessary for
entropy calculation using (2) could be presented as:

where:

W =

N !

N1! · N2! · . . . · Nq!

N = N1 + N2 + ...Nq

(19)

(20)

is the total number of molecules in macrosystem;
Ni is the number of molecules in the i-th state;
q is the number of independent states of all quasiparticles in macrosys-

tem.

We can subdivide macroscopic volume of 1cm3 into 24 types of quasiparticles

in accordance with our hierarchic model (see Table 1 of [1, 2]).

11

In turn, each type of the eﬀectons (primary, secondary, macro- and super-
eﬀectons) is subdivided on two states: ground (a,A) and excited (b,B) states.
Taking into account two ways of the eﬀectons origination - due to thermal trans-
lations (tr) and librations (lb), excitations, related to [lb/tr] convertons, macro-
and super deformons, the total number of independent states is 24 also. It is
equal to number of independent relative probabilities of excitations, composing
partition function Z (see eq.4.2 of [1, 2]). Consequently, in eqs.(4.19 and 4.20)
we have:

q = 24

The number of molecules, in the unit of volume of condensed matter (1cm3),
participating in each of 24 excitation states (i) can be calculated as:

Ni =

(v)i

V0/N0

· ni ·

Pi
Z

=

N0
V0

Pi
Z

(21)

where: (v)i = 1/ni is the volume of (i) quasiparticle, equal to reciprocal value
of its concentration (ni); N0 and V0 are Avogadro number and molar volume,
correspondingly; Z is partition function and Pi are relative probabilities of in-
dependent excitations in composition of Z (eq.4.2).

The total number of molecules of (i)-type of excitation in any big volume of

matter (VMac) is equal to

N i

Mac = NiVMac = VMac

N0
V0

Pi
Z

(21a)

Putting (20) into (18) and (19), we can calculate the statistical weight and
entropy from eq.(2).

For large values of Ni it is convenient to use a Stirling formula:

Ni = (2πN )1/2(N/e)N · exp(Θ/12N ) ∼ (2πN )1/2(N/Θ)N

(21b)

Using this formula and (20), one can obtain the following expression for entropy:

S = k · ln W = −k ·

q

Xi

(Ni +

1
2

) ln Ni + const = S1 + S2 + ...Si

(22)

From this eq. we can see that the temperature increasing or [solid → liquid]
phase transition will lead to the entropy elevation:

∆S = SL − SS = k · ln(WL/WS) > 0

(23)

12

It follows from (22, 20) and (19) that under conditions when (Pi) and Ni un-

dergoes oscillations it can lead to oscillations of contributions of diﬀerent types
of quasiparticles to the entropy of system and even to oscillations of total en-
tropy of system as an additive parameter. The coherent oscillations of Pi and
Ni can be induced by diﬀerent external ﬁelds: acoustic, electromagnetic and
gravitational. Macroscopic autooscillations may arise spontaneously also in the
sensitive and highly cooperative systems.

Experimental evidence for such phenomena will be discussed in the next

section.

The notions of probability of given microstate (pi = 1/W ), entropy (Si)
and information (Ii) are strongly interrelated. The smaller the probability the
greater is information (Nicolis 1986):

Ii = lg2

1
p i

= − lg2 pi = lg2 Wi

where pi is deﬁned from the Boltzmann distribution as:

(24)

(25)

exp(−Ei/kT )

m=0 exp(−nmhνi/kT )

pi =

P∞

where nm is quantum number; h is the Plank constant; Ei = hνi is the energy
of (i)-state.

There is strict relation between the entropy and information, leading from

comparison of (24) and (2):

Si = (kB ln 2)Ii = 2.3 · 10−24Ii

(26)

The information entropy is given as expectation of the information in the system
(Nicolis,1986; Haken, 1988).

< I >= ΣPi lg2(1/pi) = −Σpi lg2(pi)

(27)

From (26) and (22) we can see that variation of probability pi and/or Ni in (20)
will lead to changes of entropy and information, characterizing the matter as a
hierarchical system.

The reduced information (entropy), characterizing its quality, related
to selected collective excitation of any type of condensed matter, we introduce
here as a product of corresponding component of information [Ii] to the number
of molecules (atoms) with similar dynamic properties in composition of this
excitation:

qi = (vi/vm) = N0/(V0ni)

(27a)

13

where: vi = 1/ni is the volume of quasiparticle, reversible to its concentration
(ni); vm = V0/N0 is the volume, occupied by one molecule.

The product of (27) and (27a), i.e. the reduced information gives the
quantitative characteristic not only about quantity but also about the quality
of the information:

(Iq)i = pi lg 2(1/pi) · N0/(V0ni)

(27b)

This new formula could be considered as a useful modiﬁcation of
known Shennon equation.

4. Experimentally revealed macroscopic oscillations

A series of experiments was conducted in our laboratory to study oscil-
lations in the buﬀer (pH 7.3) containing 0.15 M NaCl as a control system
and immunoglobulin G solutions in this buﬀer at the following concentrations:
3 · 10−3; 6 · 10−3; 1.2 · 10−2 and 2.4 · 10−2mg/ml.

The turbidity (D∗) of water and the solutions were measured every 10 sec-
onds with the spectrophotometer at λ = 350nm. Data were obtained automat-
ically with the time constant 5 s during 40 minutes. The number of D∗ values
in every series was usually equal to 256. The total number of the fulﬁlled series
was more than 30.

The time series of D∗ were processed by the software for time series analysis.
The time trend was thus subtracted and the autocovariance function and the
spectral density were calculated.

The empty quartz cuvette with the optical path about 1 cm were used as a

basic control.

Only the optical density of water and water dissolved substances, which
really exceeded background optical density in the control series were taken into
account. It is shown that the noise of the photoelectronic multiplier does not
contribute markedly to dispersion of D∗.

The measurements were made at temperatures of 17, 28, 32, and 370. The
period of the trustworthily registered oscillation processes related to changes
in D∗, had 2 to 4 discrete values over the range of (30 − 600) s under our
conditions. It does not exclude the fact that the autooscillations of longer or
shorter periods exist. For example, in distilled water at 320C the oscillations of
the scattering ability are characterized by periods of 30, 120 and 600 s and the
spectral density amplitudes 14, 38 and 78 (in relative units), respectively. With
an increase in the oscillation period their amplitude also increases. At 280C
the periods of the values 30, 41 and 92s see have the corresponding normalized
amplitudes 14.7, 10.6 and 12.0.

Autooscillations in the buﬀer solution at 280C in a 1 cm wide cuvette with
the optical way length 1 cm (i.e. square section) are characterized with periods:
34, 52, 110 and 240 s and the amplitudes: 24, 33, 27 and 33 relative units. In
the cuvette with a smaller (0.5 cm) or larger (5 cm) optical wavelength at the

14

same width (1 cm) the periods of oscillations in the buﬀer change insigniﬁcantly.
However, amplitudes decreased by 50% in the 5 cm cuvette and by 10-20% in the
0.5 cm-cuvette. This points to the role of geometry of space where oscillations
occur, and to the existence of the ﬁnite correlation radius of the synchronous
processes in the volume. But this radius is macroscopic and comparable with
the size of the cuvette.

The dependence of the autooscillations amplitude on the concentration of
the protein - immunoglobulin G has a sharp maximum at the concentration of
1.2 · 10−2 mg/ml. There is a background for considering it to be a manifesta-
tion of the hydrodynamic Bjorkness forces between the pulsing macromolecules
(K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1987).

Oscillations in water and water solutions with nearly the same periods have

been registered by the light-scattering method by Chernikov (1985).

Chernikov (1990d) has studied the dependence of light scattering ﬂuctua-
tions on temperature , mechanic perturbation and magnetic ﬁeld in water and
water hemoglobin and DNA solution. It has been shown that an increase in
temperature results in the decline of long-term oscillation amplitude and in the
increase of short-time ﬂuctuation amplitude. Mechanical mixing removes long-
term ﬂuctuations and over 10 hours are spent for their recovery. Regular ﬂuc-
tuations (oscillations) appear when the constant magnetic ﬁeld above 240A/m
is applied; the ﬂuctuations are retained for many hours after removing the ﬁeld.
The period of long-term oscillations has the order of 10 minutes. It has been
assumed that the maintenance of long-range correlation of molecular rotation-
translation ﬂuctuation underlies the mechanism of long-term light scattering
ﬂuctuations.

It has been shown (Chernikov, 1990b) that a pulsed magnetic ﬁeld (MF), like
constant MF, gives rise to light scattering oscillations in water and other liquids
containing H atoms: glycerin, xylol, ethanol, a mixture of unsaturated lipids.
All this liquids also have a distinct response to the constant MF. ”Spontaneous”
and MF-induced ﬂuctuations are shown to be associated with the isotropic com-
ponent of scattering. These phenomena do not occur in the nonproton liquid
(carbon tetrachloride) and are present to a certain extent in chloroform (con-
taining one hydrogen atom in its molecule). The facts obtained indicate an
important role of hydrogen atoms and cooperative system of hydrogen bonds in
”spontaneous” and induced by external perturbations macroscopic oscillations.
The understanding of such phenomena can provide a physical basis for of
self-organization (Prigogine, 1980, 1984, Babloyantz, 1986), the biological sys-
tem evolution (Shnol, 1979, Udaltsova et al., 1987), and chemical processes
oscillations (Field and Burger, 1988).

It is quite probable that macroscopic oscillation processes in biological liq-
uids, e.g. blood and liquor, caused by the properties of water are involved in
animal and human physiological processes.

We have registered the oscillations of water activity in the protein-cell system
by means of light microscopy using the apparatus ”Morphoquant”, through the
change of the erythrocyte sizes, the erythrocytes being ATP-exhausted and
fulﬁlling a role of the passive osmotic units. The revealed oscillations have a

15

few minute-order periods.

Preliminary data obtained from the analysis of oscillation processes in the
human cerebrospinal liquor indicate their dependence on some pathology. Per-
haps, the autooscillations spectrum of the liquor can serve as a sensitive test
for the physiological status of the organism. The liquor is an electrolyte and
its autooscillations can be modulated with the electromagnetic activity of the
brain.

We suggested that the activity of the central nervous system and
the biological rhythms of the organism are dependent with the os-
cillation processes in the liquor. If it is the case, then the directed
inﬂuence on these autooscillation processes, for example, by means of
magnetic ﬁeld makes it possible to regulate the state of the organism
and its separate organs. Some of reﬂexotherapeutic eﬀects can be
caused by correction of biorhythms.

During my stay in laboratory of Dr. G.Salvetty in the Institute of Atomic
and Molecular Physics in Pisa (Italy) in 1992, the oscillations of heat capac-
ity [Cp] in 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer (pH7) and in 1% solution of lysozyme in
the same buﬀer at 200C were revealed. The sensitive adiabatic diﬀerential mi-
crocalorimeter was used for this aim. The biggest relative amplitude changing:
[∆Cp]/[Cp] ∼ (0.5 ± 0.02)% occurs with period of about 24 hours, i.e. corre-
sponds to circadian rhythm.

Such oscillations could be stimulated by the variation of magnetic

and gravitational conditions of the Earth during this period.

5. Phenomena in water and aqueous systems, induced by magnetic

ﬁeld

In the works of (Semikhina and Kiselev, 1988, Kiselev et al., 1988, Berezin
et al., 1988) the inﬂuence of the weak magnetic ﬁeld was revealed on the di-
electric losses, the changes of dissociation constant, density, refraction index,
light scattering and electroconductivity, the coeﬃcient of heat transition, the
depth of super-cooling for distilled water and for ice also. This ﬁeld used as a
modulator a geomagnetic action.

The absorption and the ﬂuorescence of the dye (rhodamine 6G) and protein
in solutions also changed under the action of weak ﬁelds on water. The latter
circumstance reﬂects feedback links in the guest-host, or solute -solvent system.
The inﬂuence of constant and variable magnetic ﬁelds on water and ice in
the frequency range 104 − 108Hz was studied. The maximum sensitivity to
ﬁeld action was observed at the frequency νmax = 105Hz. In accordance with
our calculations, this frequency corresponds to frequency of superdeformons
excitations in water (see Fig. 48d of [1] and article [2]).

A few of physical parameters changed after the long (nearly 6 hour) inﬂuence
of the variable ﬁelds ( ˜H), modulating the geomagnetic ﬁeld of the tension [H =
Hgeo] with the frequency (f ) in the range of (1 − 10) · 102Hz (Semikhina and
Kiselev, 1988, Kiselev et al., 1988):

16

H = H cos 2πf t

(28)

In the range of modulating magnetic ﬁeld (H) tension from 0.08 A/m to 212A/m
the eight maxima of dielectric losses tangent in the above mentioned (f )
range were observed. Dissociation constant decreases more than other param-
eters (by 6 times) after the incubation of ice and water in magnetic ﬁeld. The
relaxation time (”memory”) of the changes, induced in water by ﬁelds was in
the interval from 0.5 to 8 hours.

The authors interpret the experimental data obtained as the inﬂuence of
magnetic ﬁeld on the probability of proton transfer along the net of hydrogen
bonds in water and ice, which lead to the deformation of this net.

The equilibrium constant for the reaction of dissociation:

H2O ⇔ OH − + H +

in ice is less by almost six orders (≃ 106) than that for water. On the other
hand the values of the ﬁeld - induced eﬀects in ice are several times more than in
water, and the time for reaching them in ice is less. So, the above interpretation
is doubtful.

In the framework of our concept all the aforementioned phenom-
ena could be explained by the shift of the (a ⇔ b) equilibrium of
primary translational and librational eﬀectons to the left. In turn, this
shift stimulates polyeﬀectons or coherent superclusters growth, under the in-
ﬂuence of magnetic ﬁelds. Therefore, parameters such as the refraction index,
dielectric permeability and light scattering have to enhance symbatically, while
the H2O dissociation constant depending on the probability of superdeformons
must decrease. The latter correlate with declined electric conductance.

As far, the magnetic moments of molecules within the coherent
superclusters or polyeﬀectons formed by primary librational eﬀectons
are additive, then the values of changes induced by magnetic ﬁeld
must be proportional to polyeﬀecton sizes. These sizes are markedly
higher in ice than in water and decrease with increasing temperature.
Inasmuch the eﬀectons and polyeﬀectons interact with each other by means
of phonons (i.e. the subsystem of secondary deformons), and the velocity of
phonons is higher in ice than in water, then the saturation of all concomitant
eﬀects and achievement of new equilibrium state in ice is faster than in water.
The frequencies of geomagnetic ﬁeld modulation, at which changes in the
properties of water and ice have maxima can correspond to the eigen-frequencies
of the [a ⇔ b] equilibrium constant of primary eﬀectons oscillations, determined
by [assembly ⇔ disassembly] equilibrium oscillations for coherent super clusters
or polyeﬀectons.

The presence of dissolved molecules (ions, proteins) in water or ice can inﬂu-

ence on the initial [a ⇔ b] equilibrium dimensions of polyeﬀectons and,consequently
the interaction of solution with outer ﬁeld.

17

Narrowing of 1H-NMR lines in a salt-containing water and calcium bicar-
bonate solution was observed after magnetic ﬁeld action. This indicates that the
degree of ion hydration is decreased by magnetic treatment. On the other hand,
the width of the resonance line in distilled water remains unchanged after 30
minute treatment in the ﬁeld (135 kA/m) at water ﬂow rate of 60 cm/s (Klassen,
1982).

The hydration of diamagnetic ions (Li+, M g2+, Ca2+) decreases, while the
hydration of paramagnetic ions (F e3+, N i2+, Cu2+) increases. It leads from
corresponding changes in ultrasound velocity in ion solutions (Duhanin and
Kluchnikov, 1975).

There are numerous data which pointing to an increase the coagulation of
diﬀerent particles and their sedimentation velocity after magnetic ﬁeld treat-
ment. These phenomena provide a reducing the scale formation in heating sys-
tems, widely used in practice. Crystallization and polymerization also increase
in magnetic ﬁeld. It points to decrease of water activity.

Increasing of refraction index (n) and dielectric permeability (ǫ ≃
n2) and symbatic enhancement of water viscosity (Minenko, 1981) are
in total accordance with our viscosity theory (eqs. 11.44 and 11.45 of
[1] and article [4]).

It follows from our mesoscopic model that the increase of (n) is related
to the increase of molecular polarizability (α) due to the shift of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb
equilibrium of primary eﬀectons leftward under the action of magnetic ﬁeld. On
the other hand, distant Van der Waals interactions and consequently dimensions
of primary eﬀectons depend on α. This explains the elevation of surface tension
of liquids after magnetic treatment (see Chapter 11 of [1] or [4]).

The leftward shift of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium of primary eﬀectons must
lead to decreasing of water activity due to (n2) increasing and structural fac-
tor (T/Utot) decreasing its structure ordering. Corresponding changes in the
vapor pressure, freezing, and boiling points, coagulation, polymerization and
crystallization are the consequences of this shift and water activity decreasing.

It follows from mesoscopic theory that any changes in condensed
matter properties must be accompanied by change of such parameters
as:

1) density;
2) sound velocity;
3) positions of translational and librational bands in oscillatory

spectra;

4) refraction index.

Using our equations and computer simulations by means of elabo-
rated software (CAMP: Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Proper-
ties), it is possible to obtain from these changes very detailed infor-
mation (more than 200 parameters) about even small perturbations
of matter on meso- and macroscopic levels.

18

Available experimental data indicate that all of above mentioned 4 experi-
mental parameters of water have been changed indeed after magnetic treatment.

Minenko (1981) has shown that bidistilled water density increases by about 0.02%

after magnetic treatment (540 kA/m, ﬂow rate 80 cm/s).

Sound velocity in distilled water increases to 0.1% after treatment under

conditions: 160 kA/m and ﬂow rate 60 cm/s.

The positions of the translational and librational bands of water were also

changed after magnetic treatment in 415kA/m (Klassen, 1982).

Coherent radio-frequency oscillations in water, revealed by C.

Smith

It was shown experimentally by C. Smith (1994) that the water
display a coherent properties. He shows that water is capable of
retaining the frequency of an alternating magnetic ﬁeld. For a tube
of water placed inside a solenoid coil, the threshold for the alternating
magnetic ﬁeld, potentising electromagnetic frequencies into water, is
7.6 µT (rms). He comes to conclusion that the frequency information
is carried on the magnetic vector potential.

He revealed also that in a course of yeast cells culture synchronously
dividing, the radio-frequency emission around 1 MHz (106 1/s), 7-
9 MHz (7-9×106 1/s) and 50-80 MHz (5-9×1071/s) with very narrow
bandwidth (˜50 Hz) might be observed for a few minutes.

These frequencies could correspond to frequencies of diﬀerent wa-
ter collective excitations, introduced in our Hierarchic theory, like
[lb/tr] macroconvertons, the [a ⇋ b]lb transitons, etc. (see Fig. 48 of
[1] and [2]), taking into account the deviation of water properties in
the colloid and biological systems as respect to pure one.

Cyril Smith has proposed that the increasing of coherence radius in
water could be a consequence of coherent water clusters association
due to Josephson eﬀect (Josephson, 1965): tunneling of molecules
between clusters. As far primary librational eﬀectons are resulted
from partial Bose-condensation of molecules, this idea looks quite
acceptable in the framework of our Hierarchic theory.

The coherent oscillations in tube with water, revealed by C.Smith
could be induced by coherent electromagnetic radiation of micro-
tubules of cells, produced by correlated intra-MTs water excitations
(see Section 17.5 and Fig. 48 of [1]).

The biological eﬀects of magnetically treated water are very im-
portant practically. For example, hemolysis of erythrocytes is more
vigorous in magnetically pretreated physiological solutions (Trincher,
1967). Microwave radiation induces the same eﬀect (Il’ina et al.,
1979). But after boiling such eﬀects in the treated solutions have been
disappeared. It is shown that magnetic treatment of water strongly
stimulates the growth of corn and plants (Klassen, 1982).

19

Now it is obvious that a systematic research program is needed to
understand the physical background of multilateral eﬀects of magne-
tized water.

6. Inﬂuence of weak magnetic ﬁeld on the properties of solid bodies

It has been established that as a result of magnetic ﬁeld action on solids
with interaction energy (µBH) much less than kT, many properties of matter
such as hardness, parameters of crystal cells and others change signiﬁcantly.

The short-time action of magnetic ﬁeld on silicon semiconductors is followed
by a very long (many days) relaxation process. The action of magnetic ﬁeld was
in the form of about 10 impulses with a length of 0.2 ms and an amplitude of
about 105A/m. The most interesting fact was that this relaxation had an oscil-
latory character with periods of about several days (Maslovsky and Postnikov,
1989).

Such a type of long period oscillation eﬀects has been found in magnetic and

nonmagnetic materials.

This points to the general nature of the macroscopic oscillation phenomena

in solids and liquids.

The period of oscillations in solids is much longer than in liquids. This may
be due to stronger deviations of the energy of (a) and (b) states of primary
eﬀectons and polyeﬀectons from thermal equilibrium and much lesser probabil-
ities of transiton and deformon excitation. Consequently, the relaxation time
of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium shift in solids is much longer than in liquids. The
oscillations originate due to instability of dynamic equilibrium between the sub-
systems of eﬀectons and deformons.

7. Possible mechanism of perturbations of nonmagnetic materials

under magnetic treatment

We shall try to discuss the interaction of magnetic ﬁeld with dia-
magnetic matter like water as an example. The magnetic suscepti-
bility (χ) of water is a sum of two opposite contributions (Eisenberg
and Kauzmann, 1969):

1) average negative diamagnetic part, induced by external mag-

netic ﬁeld:

¯χd =

1
2

(χxx + χyy + χzz) ∼= −14.6(±1.9) · 10−6

2) positive paramagnetism related to the polarization of water
molecule due to asymmetry of electron density distribution, existing
without external magnetic ﬁeld. Paramagnetic susceptibility (χp) of
H2O is a tensor with the following components:

20

χp
xx = 2.46 · 10−6; χp

yy = 0.77 · 10−6; χp

zz = 1.42 · 10−6

(29)

The resulting susceptibility:

χH2 = ¯χd + ¯χp ∼= −13 · 10−6

The second contribution in the magnetic susceptibility of water is
about 10 times lesser than the ﬁrst one. But the ﬁrst contribution
to the magnetic moment of water depends on external magnetic ﬁeld
and must disappear when it is switched out in contrast to second one.

The coherent primary librational eﬀectons of water even in liquid state con-

M )lb ≃ 100i at room temperature (Fig. 7a of [1]
tain about 100 molecules h(nef
or Fig.4a of [2]). In ice (nef
M )lb ≥ 104. In (a)-state the vibrations of all these
molecules are synchronized in the same phase, and in (b)-state - in counterphase.
Correlation of H2O forming eﬀectons means that the energies of interaction of
water molecules with external magnetic ﬁeld are additive:

ǫef = nef

M · µpH

(30)

In such a case this total energy of eﬀecton interaction with ﬁeld may exceed
thermal energy:

ǫef > kT

(31)

In the case of polyeﬀectons formation this inequality becomes much stronger.
It follows from our model that interaction of magnetic ﬁeld with (a)-state
of the eﬀectons must be stronger than that with (b)-state due to the additivity
of the magnetic moments of coherent molecules:

a > ǫef
ǫef

b

(32)

Consequently, magnetic ﬁeld shifts (a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium of the eﬀectons
leftward. At the same time it minimizes the potential energy of matter, because
potential energy of (a)-state (Va) is lesser than (Vb):

Va < Vb

and Ea < Eb,

(33)

where Ea = Va + T a

kin; Eb = Vb + T b

kin are total energies of the eﬀectons.

We keep in mind that the kinetic energies of (a) and (b)-states are equal:

T a
kin = T b

kin = p2/2m.

21

These energies decreases with increasing of the eﬀectons dimensions, deter-

mined by the most probable impulses in selected directions:

λ1,2,3 = h/p1,2,3

The energy of interaction of magnetic ﬁeld with deformons as a transition state
of eﬀectons must be even less than ǫef
b due to lesser order of molecules in this
state and reciprocal compensation of their magnetic moments:

ǫd < ǫef

b ≤ ǫef

a

(34)

This important inequality means that as a result of external magnetic ﬁeld
action the shift of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb leftward is reinforced by leftward shift of equilib-
rium [eﬀectons ⇋ deformons] subsystems of matter.

If water is ﬂowing in a tube it increases the relative orientations of all ef-
fectons in volume and stimulate the coherent superclusters formation. All the
above discussed eﬀects must increase. Similar ordering phenomena happen in a
rotating tube with liquid.

After switching oﬀ the external magnetic ﬁeld the relaxation of induced ferro-
magnetism in water begins. It may be accompanied by the oscillatory behavior
of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium. All the experimental eﬀects discussed above can
be explained as a consequence of orchestrated in volume (a ⇔ b) equilibrium
oscillations.

Remnant ferromagnetism in water was experimentally established
using a SQUID superconducting magnetometer by Kaivarainen et al.
in 1992 (unpublished data). Water was treated in constant magnetic
ﬁeld 50G for two hours. Then it was frozen and after switching oﬀ
external magnetic ﬁeld the remnant ferromagnetism was registered
at helium temperature. Even at this low temperature a slow relax-
ation time- dependent decrease of ferromagnetic signal was revealed.
These results point to the correctness of the proposed mechanism of
magnetic ﬁeld - water interaction.

The attempt to make a theory of magnetic ﬁeld inﬂuence on water,
based on other model were made earlier (Yashkichev, 1980). How-
ever, this theory does not take into account the quantum properties
of water and cannot be considered as satisfactory one.

The comprehensive material obtained by Udaltsova, Kolombet and
Shnol (1987) when studying various macroscopic oscillations reveals
their fundamental character and their dependence on gravitation fac-
tor.

The correlated changes of time, entropy and mass of

any condensed matter follows from our theory.

**************************************************************************

22

REFERENCES

Babloyantz A. Molecules, Dynamics and Life. An intro-
duction to self-organization of matter. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. New York, 1986.

Berezin M.V., Lyapin R.R., Saletsky A.N. Eﬀects of
weak magnetic ﬁelds on water solutions light scattering.
Preprint of Physical Department of Moscow University,
No.21, 1988. 4 p. (in Russian).

Chernikov F.R. Lightscattering intensity oscillations in

water- protein solutions. Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1985, 31, 596.

Chernikov F.R. Eﬀect of some physical factors on light
scattering ﬂuctuations in water and water biopolymer so-
lutions. Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1990a, 35, 711.

Chernikov F.R. Superslow light scattering oscillations in
liquids of diﬀerent types. Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1990b, 35, 717.
Duhanin V.S., Kluchnikov N.G. The problems of theory
and practice of magnetic treatment of water. Novocherkassk,
1975, p.70-73 (in Russian).

Einstein A. Collection of works. Nauka, Moscow, 1965.
Eisenberg D., Kauzmann W. The structure and proper-

ties of water. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969.

Egelstaﬀ P. A. Static and dynamic structure of liquids

and glasses. J.Non-Crystalline solids.1993, 156, 1-8.

Fild R., Burger M. (Eds.). Oscillations and progressive
waves in chemical systems. Mir, Moscow, 1988. K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen
A.I. Solvent-dependent ﬂexibility of proteins and principles
of their function. D.Reidel Publ.Co., Dordrecht, Boston,
Lancaster, 1985, pp.290.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. The noncontact interaction between
macromolecules revealed by modiﬁed spin-label method.
Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1987, 32, 536.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Thermodynamic analysis of the sys-

tem: water-ions-macromolecules. Bioﬁzika (USSR), 1988, 33, 549.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Theory of condensed state as a hier-
archical system of quasiparticles formed by phonons and
three-dimensional de Broglie waves of molecules. Applica-
tion of theory to thermodynamics of water and ice. J.Mol.Liq.
1989a, 41, 53 − 60.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Mesoscopic theory of matter and its
interaction with light. Principles of selforganization in ice,
water and biosystems. University of Turku, Finland 1992,
pp.275.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A., Fradkova L., Korpela T. Separate con-
tributions of large- and small-scale dynamics to the heat ca-

23

pacity of proteins. A new viscosity approach. Acta Chem.Scand.
1993, 47, 456 − 460.

Kampen N.G., van. Stochastic process in physics and

chemistry. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1981.

Kiselev V.F., Saletsky A.N., Semikhina L.P. Theor. experim. khimya

(USSR), 1988, 2, 252 − 257.

Klassen V.I. Magnetization of the aqueous systems. Khimiya,

Moscow, 1982 (in Russian).

Kozyrev N.A. Causal or nonsymmetrical mechanics in a
linear approximation. Pulkovo. Academy of Science of the
USSR. 1958.

Maslovski V.M., Postnikov S.N. In: The treatment by
means of the impulse magnetic ﬁeld. Proceedings of the IV
seminar on nontraditional technology in mechanical engi-
neering. Soﬁa-Gorky, 1989.

Minenko V.I. Electromagnetic treatment of water in ther-

moenergetics. Harkov, 1981 (in Russian).

Nicolis J.C. Dynamics of hierarchical systems. Springer,

Berlin, 1986.

Nicolis J.C., Prigogine I. Self-organization in nonequilib-
rium systems. From dissipative structures to order through
ﬂuctuations. Wiley and Sons, N.Y., 1977.

Prigogine I. From Being to Becoming: time and com-
plexity in physical sciences. W.H.Freeman and Company,
San Francisco, 1980.

Prigogine I., Strengers I. Order out of chaos. Haine-

mann, London, 1984.

Semikhina L.P., Kiselev V.F. Izvestiya VUZov. Fizika

(USSR), 1988, 5, 13 (in Russian).

Semikhina L.P. Kolloidny jurnal (USSR), 1981, 43, 401.
Shih Y., Alley C.O. Phys Rev.Lett. 1988, 61, 2921.
Shnol S.E. Physico-chemical factors of evolution. Nauka,

Moscow, 1979 (in Russian).

Udaltsova N.B., Kolombet B.A., Shnol S.E. Possible cos-

mophysical eﬀects in the processes of diﬀerent nature. Pushchino,
1987 (in Russian).

Yashkichev V.I. J.Inorganic Chem.(USSR), 1980, 25, 327.

See also set of previous articles at Los-Alamos archives:

http://arXiv.org/ﬁnd/physics/1/au:+Kaivarainen A/0/1/0/all/0/1

24

