0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
7
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hierarchic Theory of Complex Systems

(biosystems, colloids):
self-organization & osmos

Alex Kaivarainen

JBL, University of Turku, FIN-20520, Turku, Finland

URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk

H2o@karelia.ru

Materials, presented in this original article are based on

following publications:

[1]. A. Kaivarainen. Book: Hierarchic Concept of Mat-
ter and Field. Water, biosystems and elementary particles.
New York, NY, 1995 and new version of this book.

(see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [Book prospect

and New articles]).

[2]. A. Kaivarainen. New Hierarchic Theory of Matter

General for Liquids and Solids:

dynamics, thermodynamics and mesoscopic structure of

water and ice

(see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [New articles]).
[3]. A. Kaivarainen. Hierarchic Concept of Condensed
Matter and its Interaction with Light: New Theories of
Light Refraction, Brillouin Scattering and M¨ossbauer ef-
fect

(see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [New articles]).

[4]. A. Kaivarainen. Hierarchic Theory of Condensed
Matter: Interrelation between mesoscopic and macroscopic
properties (see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [New
articles]).

Computerized veriﬁcation of described here new theo-
ries is presented, using special computer program, based on
Hierarchic Theory of Condensed Matter (copyright, 1997,
A. Kaivarainen).

CONTENTS OF ARTICLE

Summary to Part I of book: ”Hierarchic theory of con-
densed matter”

Introduction

1

1. Protein domain mesoscopic organization
2. Quantum background of lipid domain organization in biomem-

branes

3. Hierarchic approach to theory of solutions and colloid systems
4. Distant solvent-mediated interaction between macromolecules
5. Spatial self-organization in the water-macromolecular systems
6. Properties of [bisolvent - polymer system]
7. Osmosis and solvent activity. Traditional and mesoscopic ap-

proach

==============================================================

Summary of

New Hierarchic Theory of Condensed Matter (see

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003044)

A basically new hierarchic quantitative theory, general for solids

and liquids, has been developed.

It is assumed, that anharmonic oscillations of particles in any con-
densed matter lead to emergence of three-dimensional (3D) superpo-
sition of standing de Broglie waves of molecules, electromagnetic and
acoustic waves. Consequently, any condensed matter could be con-
sidered as a gas of 3D standing waves of corresponding nature. Our
approach uniﬁes and develops strongly the Einstein’s and Debye’s
models. Collective excitations, like 3D standing de Broglie waves of
molecules, representing at certain conditions the mesoscopic molec-
ular Bose condensate, were analyzed, as a background of hierarchic
model of condensed matter.

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B) length is deter-
mined by the ratio of Plank constant to the most probable impulse
of molecules, or by ratio of its most probable phase velocity to fre-
quency. The waves B are related to molecular translations (tr) and
librations (lb).

As the quantum dynamics of condensed matter does not follow in general
case the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the real most probable de
Broglie wave length can exceed the classical thermal de Broglie wave length and
the distance between centers of molecules many times.

This makes possible the atomic and molecular Bose condensation in solids
and liquids at temperatures, below boiling point. It is one of the most important
results of new theory, which we have conﬁrmed by computer simulations on
examples of water and ice.

Four strongly interrelated new types of quasiparticles (collective excita-

tions) were introduced in our hierarchic model:

2

1. Eﬀectons (tr and lb), existing in ”acoustic” (a) and ”optic” (b) states

represent the coherent clusters in general case;

2. Convertons, corresponding to interconversions between tr and lb types of

the eﬀectons (ﬂickering clusters);

3. Transitons are the intermediate [a ⇋ b] transition states of the tr and lb

eﬀectons;

4. Deformons are the 3D superposition of IR electromagnetic or acoustic

waves, activated by transitons and convertons.

Primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are formed by 3D superposition of the
most probable standing de Broglie waves of the oscillating ions, atoms or
molecules. The volume of eﬀectons (tr and lb) may contain from less than one,
to tens and even thousands of molecules. The ﬁrst condition means validity
of classical approximation in description of the subsystems of the eﬀectons.
The second one points to quantum properties of coherent clusters due to
molecular Bose condensation.

The liquids are semiclassical systems because their primary (tr) eﬀectons
contain less than one molecule and primary (lb) eﬀectons - more than one
molecule. The solids are quantum systems totally because both kind of their
primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are molecular Bose condensates. These conse-
quences of our theory are conﬁrmed by computer calculations.

The 1st order [gas → liquid] transition is accompanied by strong decreasing
of rotational (librational) degrees of freedom due to emergence of primary (lb)
eﬀectons and [liquid → solid] transition - by decreasing of translational degrees
of freedom due to Bose-condensation of primary (tr) eﬀectons.

In the general case the eﬀecton can be approximated by par-
allelepiped with edges corresponding to de Broglie waves length in
three selected directions (1, 2, 3), related to the symmetry of the
molecular dynamics. In the case of isotropic molecular motion the
eﬀectons’ shape may be approximated by cube.

The edge-length of primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) can be considered

as the ”parameter of order”.

The in-phase oscillations of molecules in the eﬀectons correspond to the
eﬀecton’s (a) - acoustic state and the counterphase oscillations correspond to
their (b) - optic state. States (a) and (b) of the eﬀectons diﬀer in potential
energy only, however, their kinetic energies, impulses and spatial dimensions -
are the same. The b-state of the eﬀectons has a common feature with Fr¨olich’s
polar mode.

The (a → b) or (b → a) transition states of the primary eﬀectons
(tr and lb), deﬁned as primary transitons, are accompanied by a
change in molecule polarizability and dipole moment without density
ﬂuctuations. At this case they lead to absorption or radiation of IR
photons, respectively.

Superposition (interception) of three internal standing IR pho-
tons of diﬀerent directions (1,2,3) - forms primary electromagnetic
deformons (tr and lb).

3

On the other hand, the [lb⇋ tr] convertons and secondary transitons are
accompanied by the density ﬂuctuations, leading to absorption or radiation of
phonons.

Superposition resulting from interception of standing phonons in three direc-

tions (1,2,3), forms secondary acoustic deformons (tr and lb).

Correlated collective excitations of primary and secondary eﬀectons and
deformons (tr and lb), localized in the volume of primary tr and lb electromag-
netic deformons, lead to origination of macroeﬀectons, macrotransitons
and macrodeformons (tr and lb respectively).

Correlated simultaneous excitations of tr and lb macroeﬀectons in the vol-
ume of superimposed tr and lb electromagnetic deformons lead to origination
of supereﬀectons.

In turn, the coherent excitation of both:

tr and lb macrodeformons and
macroconvertons in the same volume means creation of superdeformons. Su-
perdeformons are the biggest (cavitational) ﬂuctuations, leading to microbub-
bles in liquids and to local defects in solids.

Total number of quasiparticles of condensed matter equal to 4!=24,
reﬂects all of possible combinations of the four basic ones [1-4], intro-
duced above. This set of collective excitations in the form of ”gas” of
3D standing waves of three types: de Broglie, acoustic and electro-
magnetic - is shown to be able to explain virtually all the properties
of all condensed matter.

The important positive feature of our hierarchic model of matter is that it
does not need the semi-empiric intermolecular potentials for calculations, which
are unavoidable in existing theories of many body systems. The potential energy
of intermolecular interaction is involved indirectly in dimensions and stability
of quasiparticles, introduced in our model.

The main formulae of theory are the same for liquids and solids
and include following experimental parameters, which take into ac-
count their diﬀerent properties:

[1]- Positions of (tr) and (lb) bands in oscillatory spectra;
[2]- Sound velocity;
[3]- Density;
[4]- Refraction index (extrapolated to the inﬁnitive wave length of

photon).

The knowledge of these four basic parameters at the same temperature and
pressure makes it possible using our computer program, to evaluate more than
300 important characteristics of any condensed matter. Among them are such
as: total internal energy, kinetic and potential energies, heat-capacity and ther-
mal conductivity, surface tension, vapor pressure, viscosity, coeﬃcient of self-
diﬀusion, osmotic pressure, solvent activity, etc. Most of calculated parameters
are hidden, i.e. inaccessible to direct experimental measurement.

The new interpretation and evaluation of Brillouin light scattering and
M¨ossbauer eﬀect parameters may also be done on the basis of hierarchic the-
ory. Mesoscopic scenarios of turbulence, superconductivity and superﬂuity are

4

elaborated.

Some original aspects of water in organization and large-scale dynamics of
biosystems - such as proteins, DNA, microtubules, membranes and regulative
role of water in cytoplasm, cancer development, quantum neurodynamics, etc.
have been analyzed in the framework of Hierarchic theory.

Computerized veriﬁcation of our Hierarchic concept of matter on
examples of water and ice is performed, using special computer pro-
gram: Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP, copy-
right, 1997, Kaivarainen). The new opto-acoustical device (CAMP),
based on this program, with possibilities much wider, than that of IR,
Raman and Brillouin spectrometers, has been proposed (see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk).

This is the ﬁrst theory able to predict all known experimental
temperature anomalies for water and ice. The conformity between
theory and experiment is very good even without any adjustable pa-
rameters.

The hierarchic concept creates a bridge between micro- and macro-
liquids and solids in

phenomena, dynamics and thermodynamics,
terms of quantum physics.

5

Introduction

Domain granular structure is pertinent to solid bodies, liquid crys-
tals, and polymers of artiﬁcial and biological origin. In liquids, as is
seen from the X-ray data, the local order is also kept like in solid
bodies. Just like in the case of solids, local order in liquids can be
caused by the most probable - primary eﬀectons (see Introduction to
[1] and [2]), but smaller in size.

In water, the relatively stable clusters of molecules are revealed by the
quasielastic neutron scattering method. The diameter of these clusters are (20-
30) ˚A and the lifetime is of the order of 10−10s (Gordeyev and Khaidarov,
1983). These parameters are close to those we have calculated for librational
water eﬀectons (Fig. 7a of [1] or Fig4a of [2]).

A coherent-inelastic neutron scattering, performed on liquid D2O at room
temperature revealed collective high-frequency sound mode. Observed collective
excitation has a solid-like character with dimension around 20˚A, resembling
water clusters with saturated hydrogen bonds. The observed sound velocity
in these clusters is about 3300 m/s, i.e. close to velocity of sound in ice and
much bigger than that in liquid water: 1500 m/s (Teixeira et al., 1985). Such
data conﬁrm the existence of primary librational eﬀectons as molecular Bose
condensate, leading from our hierarchic theory.

Among the earlier theoretical models of water the model of ”ﬂickering clus-
ters” proposed by Frank and Wen (1957) is closer to our model than others. The
”ﬂickering” of a cluster consisting of water molecules is expressed by the fact
that it dissociates and associates with a short period (10−10 − 10−11) s. Near
the non-polar molecules this period grows up (Frank and Wen, 1957, Frank and
Evans, 1945) and ”icebergs” appear. The formation of hydrogen bonds in water
is treated as a cooperative process. Our [lb/tr] convertons, i.e. interconversions
between primary lb and tr eﬀectons, reﬂect the properties of ﬂickering clusters
better than other quasiparticles of hierarchic model.

Proceeding from the ﬂickering cluster model, Nemethy and Scheraga (1962),
using the methods of statistical thermodynamics, calculated a number of pa-
rameters for water (free energy, internal energy, entropy) and their temperature
dependences, which agree with the experimental data in the limits of 3%. How-
ever, calculations of heat capacity were less successful. The quantity of water
molecules decreases from 91 at 00C to 25 at 700C (Nemethy and Scheraga,
1962). It is in rather good agreement with our results (Fig. 7a of [1] or Fig.4a
of [2]) on the change of the number of water molecules in a primary librational
eﬀecton with temperature.

The stability of primary eﬀectons (clusters, domains), forming the condensed
media, is determined by the coherence of heat motions, the equality of the most
probable 3D standing waves B of atoms (molecules), increasing distant Van der
Waals interaction in the volume of the eﬀectons.

It could be possible that molecules, atoms, or ions of diﬀerent molecular
masses belong to the same eﬀectons. The equality of wave B lengths for such

6

diﬀerent particles, forming the eﬀectons:

λ1 =

h

m1v1

= λ2 =

h

m2v2

= ... = λi =

h

mivi

(1)

means that diﬀerences in masses are compensated by diﬀerences in the group
velocities of these particles so that their most probable impulses are equal:

Pi = m1v1 = m2v2 = ... = mivi

(2)

The domains or the crystallites in solid bodies, which could be con-
sidered as a primary eﬀectons, can contain a big number of elemen-
tary cells. Transitions between the diﬀerent types of elementary cells
(second order phase transitions) means cooperative redistribution in
the positions and dynamics of atoms, leading to origination of new
primary eﬀectons. In accordance with our model, the second order
phase transitions are related sometimes also with emergency of con-
ditions for primary eﬀectons polymerization or distant association
in coherent superclusters, and concomitant shifting of their (a ⇔ b)
equilibrium to the left.

The mesoscopic theory could be used to describe a wide range of

physico-chemical and biological phenomena.

1. Protein domain mesoscopic organization

If the geometry of cavities of protein surface are complementary
to the geometry of water librational eﬀectons, then the latter are sta-
bilized. In the opposite case, the water eﬀectons in cavities are either
not realized, or unstable. In that case, the probability of the water
cluster dissociation in the cavity, related to [lb → tr] conversion, in-
creases. The evolution of biological macromolecules could have gone
in such a way that they ”learned” to use the cooperative proper-
ties of water clusters and their dissociation for regulation of their
large-scale dynamics and signal transmission. Calculated frequency
of [lb/tr] convertons (106 − 107) c−1 coincide with frequency of protein
cavities large-scale pulsations, accompanied by domains relative ﬂuc-
tuations.

All suﬃciently large globular proteins consist of domains whose dimensions
(10-20)˚A (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen,
under normal conditions vary in the narrow limits:
1985). This value is close to dimensions of librational water eﬀecton (Fig. 7a of
[1] or Fig. 4a of [2]) that conﬁrms the important role of water in evolution of
biopolymers. We may predict that the lower is the physiological temperature
of given organism the larger are the interdomain cavities and domains of its
proteins. It is known that the water in pours or cavities with diameter less than
50 ˚A freeze out at very low temperatures (about −600C) and its viscosity is

7

high (Martini et al., 1983). For the other hand, our calculations shows (Fig.17b
of [1]), that freezing in normal conditions should be accompanied by increasing
the linear size of primary librational eﬀectons just till 50 ˚A.

As far the condition for librational eﬀectons growth in narrow
pours is absent, the formation of suﬃciently big primary translational
eﬀectons is also violated. As a result of that, condition (6.6 of [1])
for [liquid → solid] phase transition occurs in such cavities at much
lower temperature than in bulk water.

If the sound velocity in proteins and the positions of maxima in their oscil-
latory spectra, which characterize the librations of atoms are known, then the
most probable wave B length of aminoacids groups and atoms, forming the do-
mains (λ1, λ2, λ3) can be estimated. If the volume of an eﬀecton is approximated
by a sphere:

Vef =

9(λ1λ2λ3)

4π

=

4
3

πr3,

then its radius:

r =(cid:20) 27(λ1λ2λ3)

16π2

(cid:21)1/3

= 0.555λres,

(3)

(4)

where: λres = (λ1λ2λ3)1/3, and the diameter: d = 2r = 1.11λres.

The collective properties of protein’s primary eﬀectons presented by α-structures,
β-sheets and whole domains can determine the cooperative properties of biopoly-
mers.

Heat oscillations of atoms and atom groups, forming the protein

eﬀectons must be coherent, like in any other condensed matter.

Such ideas agree with the Fr¨ochlich hypothesis about the possibility of Bose-

condensation in biological systems (Fr¨ohlich, 1975).

The notion of ”knots” in proteins was introduced by R.Lumry and B. Gre-
gory (1986). The knots are regions, containing very slow H ⇔ D exchangeable
protons in composition of compact cooperative structures.

The dimensions of knots are less than dimensions of domains.
It looks that knots could represent a translational eﬀectons, as far their
(a ⇔ b)tr transitions, in contrast to (a ⇔ b)lb ones of librational eﬀectons do not
accompanied by reorganization of hydrogen bonds. Consequently, the possibility
for H ⇔ D exchange in knots is more limited.

The molecular dynamic computer simulations of proteins reveal, indeed, a
highly correlated collective motion of groups of atoms, inhomogeneously dis-
tributed in proteins structure (Swaminathan et al., 1982).

It looks that the traditional theory of protein tertiary native structure self-
organization from primary one (Cantor and Shimmel, 1980) is not totally suc-
cessful as far it does not take into account quantum process, related to formation
the protein eﬀectons as 3D standing waves B of protein atoms.

8

The change of interdomain interactions, the stabilization of its small-scale
dynamics of proteins by ligands leading to the increase of λres (see eq.4) as a
measure of cooperativeness, can provide the long- distance signal transmission
in macromolecules and allosteric eﬀects in oligomeric proteins. The [lb/tr] con-
vertons, i.e. dissociation of librational water eﬀectons in the protein cavities is
the key phenomenon in the above mentioned processes.

The described events interrelate the small-scale dynamics of atoms and the
large-scale dynamics of domains and subunits to the dynamics of water clusters
in protein interdomain cavities, dependent in turn on the properties of bulk
water (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985,1989b, K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen et al., 1993).

Our mesoscopic mechanism of signal transmission in proteins is alternative
to Davidov ’s soliton mechanism. The latter is good only for highly ordered
systems with small dissipation..

2. Quantum background of lipid domain organization in

biomembranes

The importance of lipid domains in membranes for their functioning is

known, but the physical background for domains origination remains unclear.

Our mesoscopic theory was used for computer simulations of lipid domain
dimensions in model membranes. The known data on the position of IR bands,
corresponding to asymmetric [N − (CH3)3] stretching in holine for trance (920cm−1)
and gauche (900 and 860cm−1) conformations where taken for calculations. The
knowledge of sound velocity and its changes as a result of phase transitions:
(1.97 · 105cm/s)38o
is also necessary for calculations
of the domain dimensions, using eq.(2.59 of [1]). The results of calculations
are presented on Fig.1.
In our approach the lipid domains in biomembranes
and their artiﬁcial models are considered as quasiparticles-primary librational
-eﬀectons, formed by 3D superposition of the most probable de Broglie waves
(λ = h/p)1,2,3, determined by coherent thermal oscillations of lipid molecules.
The lesser the value of the most probable impulse (p = mv)1,2,3 of lipid, the
bigger is corresponding λ1,2,3 and the eﬀecton volume (eq.3).

→ (1.82 · 105cm/s)42o

According to our calculations, a rise in temperature from 0 to 700 leads to a
decrease in the most probable λ from 88 to 25 ˚A. In the phase transition region
(38 − 420) λ decreases from 46 to 37 ˚A (Fig.1). The former process corresponds
to change of the lipid domains volume from (50 to 2) · 104˚A3 and the latter one
from (7.5 to 5)·104˚A3, respectively (Fig. 2). The values of these changes coincide
with available experimental data. Like the calculations we made earlier for ice
and water, these results provide further support of our theoretical approach.

9

Fig. 1. Temperature dependencies of the most probable de
Broglie wave length of lipids (λ1, λ2, λ3), related to their stretching.
The values of λ1, λ2, λ3 determine the spatial dimensions of lipid
domains. Domains are considered as quasiparticles (primary eﬀec-
tons), formed by 3D superposition of the most probable de Broglie
waves of lipids.

Fig. 2. Temperature dependence of the volume of lipid domains:

V = 9

4π λ1λ2λ3.

The volume is determined by 3D superposition of the most prob-
able de Broglie waves of lipid molecules or their fragments. Phase
transition occurs in the region of 312K (390) and accompanies by
trance - gauche change of lipid conformation.

As discussed in Chapter 17 of [1] and my paper: Hierarchic Model
of Consciousness in URL: [http://kftt.karelia.ru/˜alexk/papers] the
mesoscopic organization of biomembranes, related to their dynamics

10

and that of microtubules system - may play an important role in
elementary act of consciousness.

3. Mesoscopic approach to theory of solutions

The action of the dissolved molecules can lead to the shift of (a ⇔ b)
equilibrium to the right or to the left for eﬀectons (tr and lb) of
solvent. In the former case the lifetime of unstable state for primary
eﬀectons increases, and in the latter case the stabilization of molecular
associates (clusters) takes place.

The same is true for convertons equilibrium:

[lb ⇔ tr], reﬂecting
[association ⇔ dissociation] of water clusters (primary librational ef-
fectons).

The eﬀects of stabilization of clusters can be reinforced at such con-
centration of dissolved molecules, when the mean distances between
them (r) coincide with one of the primary eﬀectons ribs (λ1, λ2, λ3) or
their integer number:

r =

11.8
(CM )1/3 (˚A)

(5)

where CM is the molar concentration.

So the concentration dependence of the stabilizing action brought by the
dissolved substance upon the solvent can be non-monotonic and periodic. Such
data have been published indeed (Tereshkevitch et al., 1974).

If the wave B length of the dissolved molecule or atoms exceeds the dimen-
sions of primary eﬀectons, then it must increase the degree of liquid associa-
tion. In the opposite case the ordering of liquid structure decreases. To prove
the aforementioned, it should be noted that the structure-forming ions, with a
positive hydration (Li+, N a+, F −), as a rule, have a lesser mass and lesser im-
pulse (i.e. a larger value of λB = h/mvgr) than those with a negative hydration
(Rb+, Cs+, Br−, I −) with the same charges.

In accordance with such ideas, nonpolar atoms, minimally distorting the
properties of a pure liquid, e.g. He, Ne, Ar, have a maximal structuring action,
stabilizing a-states of primary librational eﬀectons.

Our Hierarchic model may be useful for elaboration a general

theory of solutions.

In host-guest systems a following situations are possible:
1) guest molecules stabilize (a)-states of host eﬀectons (tr and lb)
and increases their dimensions. The (a ⇔ b) equilibrium of the eﬀec-
tons and [lb ⇔ tr] equilibrium of convertons becomes shifted leftward
decreasing potential energy of a system, corresponding to its stabi-
lization eﬀect;

11

2) guest molecules destabilize (a)-states of host eﬀectons. The
(a ⇔ b) and [lb ⇔ tr] equilibriums of the primary eﬀectons and conver-
tons correspondingly are shifted rightward, inducing general destabi-
lization eﬀect of the system;

3) guest and host molecules form separate individual eﬀectons

(mesophase) without separation in two macrophases;

With the increasing concentration of guest in solution of two molecular liq-

uids (for example, water - ethanol) the roles of guest and host may change.

It was shown that conductivity of aqueous solutions of NaCl, containing
ions: N a+, Cl−, H3O+ and OH− show to vary in a diﬀerent linear fashion
over two ranges of temperature: 273 ≤ T ≤ 323K and 323 ≤ T ≤ 360K.
The change in slope of the plot shows transition in the character of water-ions
interaction near 323 K (Roberts et al.1994). In the same work was revealed,
that the above aqueous systems exhibited some ”memory” of the temperature
eﬀects after changing the temperature from low to high and then from high to
low values. Such memory could mean a slow relaxation process, accompanied by
redistribution between populations of diﬀerent excitations and their equilibrium
constants, i.e. the new type of self-organization in solution.

In accordance with our theory, all reorganizations of liquid’s prop-
erties must be accompanied by correlated changes in the following
parameters of solutions:

1) sound velocity;
2) positions of translational and librational bands in oscillatory

spectra;

3) density;
4) refraction index;
5) share and bulk viscosities;
6) coeﬃcient of self-diﬀusion
7) light scattering;
8) heat capacity and thermal conductivity;
9) vapor pressure and surface tension.

There are also a lot of other parameters and properties that should change
It could be revealed by

in solutions as a result of solute-solvent interaction.
computer simulations, using software, elaborated.

The ﬁrst four of the above listed parameters are present in the main for-
mulas of Hierarchic theory and must be determined under similar conditions
(temperature, pressure, etc.).

There are some experimental data which are in general agreement with the
consequences of our theory, pointing to interrelation between the above listed
parameters. The changes of sound velocity in diﬀerent water - ethanol mixtures
as well as that of light and neutron scattering were studied in detail by D’Arrigo
and Paparelli (1988a, 1988b, 1989), Benassi et al. (1988), D’Arrigo and Teixeira
(1990).

12

Correlations between density, viscosity, the refractive index, and the dielec-
tric constant of mixed molecular liquids at diﬀerent temperatures were investi-
gated by D’Aprano’s group in Rome (D’Aprano et al., 1989, 1990a, 1990b).

The interaction of a solute (guest) molecule with librational solvent eﬀectons
can be subdivided into two cases: when the rotational correlation time of a guest
molecule (τ rot
M ) is less (a) and more (b) than the rotational correlation time of
librational eﬀectons (τ lb

ef ):

and

a)

M < τ lb
τ rot
ef

b)

τ rot
M > τ lb
ef

(6)

(7)

In accordance with the Stokes-Einstein formula the corresponding rotational
correlation times:

τ rot
M =

VM
k

η
T

and τ lb

ef =

V lb
ef
k

·

η
T

(8)

where: η and T are the share viscosity and absolute temperature of the

solvent;
τ rot
M and τ lb

ef are dependent on the eﬀective volumes of a guest molecule (VM )

and the volume of primary librational eﬀecton:

V lb
ef = nlb

M (V0/N0) =

9
4

π(λ1λ2λ3)

(9)

λ1,2,3 are most probable wave B length in 3 selected directions; nlib
M - number of
molecules in a librational primary eﬀecton, depending on temperature: in water
it decreases from 280 till to 3 in the temperature interval 0 − 1000C (Fig. 7a of
[1] or Fig. 4a of [2]).

When the condition (6) is realized, small and neutral guest molecules aﬀect

presumably only the translational eﬀectons.

In the second case (7) guest macromolecules can change the properties of
both types of eﬀectons: translational and librational and shift the equilibrium
[lb ⇔ tr] of convertons to the left, stimulating the cluster-formation.

In accordance with our model, hydrophilic interaction is related to the
shift of the (a ⇔ b) equilibrium of translational eﬀectons to the left. As far
the potential energy of the (a) state (Va) is less than that in the (b) state
(Vb), it means that such solvent-solute (host- guest) interaction will decrease
the potential and free energy of the solution. Hydrophilic interaction does not
need the realization of condition (7).

Hydrophobic interaction is related to the shift of the (a ⇔ b)lb equilib-
rium of librational eﬀectons to the right. Such a shift results in the increased

13

potential energy of the system. The dimensions of coherent water clusters rep-
resenting librational eﬀectons under condition (7) may even increase. However,
the decrease in of entropy (∆S) in this case is more than that in enthalpy (∆H)
and, consequently, free energy will increase: ∆G = ∆H − T ∆S > 0. This
is a source of hydrophobic interaction, leading to aggregation of hydrophobic
particles.

Clusterphilic interaction was introduced by the author in 1980 already
(K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1980, 1985) to describe the cooperative water cluster interaction
with nonpolar protein cavities. This idea has got support in the framework of
our hierarchic concept. Clusterphilic interaction is related to the left-
ward shift of (a ⇔ b)lb equilibrium of primary librational eﬀectons
under condition (7), similar shift of the equilibrium of [lb ⇔ tr] of
convertons and increasing of lb eﬀectons dimensions due to water
immobilization (eqs.. 1 and 9)

The latter eﬀect is a result of decreasing of the rotational correlation time
of librational eﬀectons and decreasing of the most probable impulses of water
molecules (2), related to librations under the eﬀect of guest particles. Cluster-
philic interactions can be subdivided into:

1.Intramolecular -when water cluster is placed in the ”open” states of big

interdomain or intersubunit cavities and

2.

Intermolecular clusterphilic interaction.

Intermolecular cluster-

philic interactions can be induced by very diﬀerent suﬃciently big macromolecules.

Clusterphilic interactions can play an important role in the self-organization
of biosystems, especially multiglobular allosteric enzymes, microtubules and the
actin ﬁlaments. Cooperative properties of the cytoplasm, formation
of thixotropic structures, signal transmission in biopolymers, mem-
branes and distant interactions between diﬀerent macromolecules can
be mediated by both types of clusterphilic interactions.

From (4.4 of [1, 2]) the contributions of primary translational and librational

eﬀectons to total internal energy are:

The contributions of this type of eﬀectons to total kinetic energy (see 4.33) are:

V0

Z (cid:2)nef (cid:0)P a

ef(cid:1)(cid:3)tr,lb

U tr,lb

ef =

ef Ea

ef + P b

ef Eb

(10)

T tr,lb
ef =

V0

Z "nefP3

1(Ea)2
2m(V a

1,2,3
ph)2

ef + P b

(cid:0)P a

ef(cid:1)#tr,lb

(10a)

Subtracting (10a) from (10), we get the potential energy of primary eﬀectons:

Vef = Vtr + Vlb = (Uef − Tef )tr + (Uef − Tef )lb

(11)

14

Clusterphilic interaction and possible self-organization is promoted mainly

by decreasing of Vlb in the presence of macromolecules.

Hydrophilic interaction, in accordance with our model, is a result of Vtr.

decreasing.

On the other hand, hydrophobic interaction is a consequence of Vlb and Vtr

increasing in the presence of guest molecules.

Clusterphilic interaction has been revealed, for example, in dependencies of
freezing temperature (Tf ) for buﬀer solutions of polyethyleneglycol (PEG) on
its molecular mass and concentration (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985). The anomalous in-
creasing of Tf in the presence of PEG with molecular mass more than 2000 D
and at concentration less than 30mg/ml, pointing to increasing water activity,
were registered by the cryoscopy method. It may be explained as a result of
clusterphilic interaction increasing, when the fraction of ice-like water structures
with saturated hydrogen bonds, presented by primary librational eﬀectons, in-
creases. Big macromolecules and small ions should have the opposite: positive
and negative eﬀects on the stability and volume of primary librational eﬀectons.
Macromolecules or polymers with molecular mass less than 2000 do not sat-
isfy the condition (7) and can not stimulate the growth of librational eﬀectons.
On the other hand, a considerable increase in the concentrations of even big
polymers, when the average distance between them (eq.5) comes to be less than
the dimensions of a librational water eﬀecton, perturbs clusterphilic interactions
and decreases freezing temperature, reducing water activity (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985,
Fig.82).

In general case each guest macromolecule has two opposite eﬀects
on clusterphilic interactions. The equilibrium between these tenden-
cies depends on the temperature, viscosity, concentration of a guest
macromolecule, its dynamics and water activity.

When solute particles are suﬃciently small they can associate
due to distant Van der Waals interaction, forming coherent primary
eﬀectons, when [solute-solvent] interaction is more preferable than
[solvent-solvent] and the conditions (1 and 2) are fulﬁlled.

Important conﬁrmation of this consequence of mesoscopic theory
of complex systems is the observation of compact clusters of ions even
in dilute salt solutions. For example, the extended x-ray absorption
ﬁne structure data showed that the average distance between Zn2+and
Br− is 2.37 ˚A in 0.089M ZnBr2 aqueous solutions and 2.30 ˚A in 0.05 M
solutions (Lagarde et al., 1980).

These values are very close to the inter ionic distance observed in the crys-

talline state (2.40˚A).

The same conclusions was reached for NiBr2 ethyl acetate solutions (Sadoc
et al., 1981) and aqueous CuBr2 solutions (Fontaine et al.,1978). The average
distance between ions for the case of monotonic spatial distribution (see eq.5)
are much bigger than in ionic clusters under experimental conditions.

Our theory of solutions consider formation of crystallites (inor-
ganic ionic clusters), as a solute coherent primary eﬀectons self-
organization. It is more favorable process, than separate ion-water

15

interactions.

For quantitative application of hierarchic theory to the description
of the processes in diﬀerent solutions, using our special software, it is
necessary to have four experimental parameters, obtained under the
same conditions (temperature and pressure):

- density,
- sound velocity,
- positions of translational and librational bands in oscillatory spec-

tra,

- refraction index.
The Combined analyzer of matter properties (CAMP), proposed
by us (see URL: http://kftt.karelia.ru/˜alexk), could be the main
tool for such a measurements and study of complicated properties of
solutions and colloid systems.

The multi-fractional nature and properties of interfacial

water,

leading from hierarchic theory

We can present here a classiﬁcation and description of four inter-

facial water fraction properties, based on our hierarchic model:

1. The ﬁrst fraction - primary hydration shell with maximum
energy of interaction with surface. The structure and dynamics of
this 1st fraction can diﬀer strongly from those of bulk water.
Its
thickness: (3-10 ˚A) corresponds to 1-3 solvent molecule;

2. The second fraction - vicinal water (VW) is formed by elongated
primary lb eﬀectons with saturated hydrogen bonds. It is a result of
lb eﬀecton adsorption on the primary hydration shell from the bulk
volume. The thickness of this fraction of interfacial water: (30-75
˚A) corresponds to 10-25 molecules and is dependent on temperature,
dimensions of colloid particles and their surface mobility. VW can
exist in rigid pores of corresponding dimensions;

3. The third fraction of interfacial water - the surface-stimulated
Bose-condensate (SSBC), represented by 3D network of primary lb
eﬀectons has a thickness of (50-300 ˚A). It is a next hierarchical level
of interfacial water self-organization on the surface of second fraction
(VW). The time of gradual formation of this 3D net of linked to
each other coherent clusters (strings of polyeﬀectons), is much longer
than that of VW and it is more sensitive to temperature and other
perturbations. The second and third fractions of interfacial water can
play an important role in biological cells activity;

4. The biggest and most fragile forth fraction of interfacial water is
a result of slow orchestration of bulk primary eﬀectons in the volume
of primary (electromagnetic) lb deformons. The primary deformons

16

appears as a result of three standing IR photons (lb) interception.
Corresponding IR photons are superradiated by the enlarged lb eﬀec-
tons of vicinal water. The linear dimension of primary IR deformons
is about half of librational IR photons, i.e. 5 microns (5·104 ˚A). This
”superradiation orchestrated water (SOW)” fraction easily can be
destroyed not only by temperature increasing, ultrasound and Brow-
nian movement, but even by mechanical shaking. The time of spon-
taneous reassembly of this fraction after destruction has an order of
hours and is dependent strongly on temperature, viscosity and dimen-
sions of colloid particles. The processes of self-organization of third
(SSBC) and forth (SOW) fractions can be interrelated by feedback
interaction.

Consequences and predictions of new model of interfacial solvent

structure

In accordance to generally accepted and experimentally proved models of
hydration of macromolecules and colloid particles, we assume that the ﬁrst 2-3
layers of strongly bound water molecules, serves like intermediate shell, neutral-
izing or ”buﬀering” the speciﬁc chemical properties of surface (charged, polar,
nonpolar, etc.). Such strongly bound water can remain partially untouched even
after strong dehydration of samples in vacuum.

This ﬁrst fraction of interfacial water serves like a matrix for second fraction
- vicinal water shell formation. The therm ’paradoxal eﬀect’, introduced by
Drost-Hansen (1985) means that the properties of vicinal water are independent
on speciﬁc chemical structure of the surface from quartz plates, mineral grains
and membranes to large macromolecules (Clegg and Drost-Hansen, 1991). This
can be a result of ”buﬀering” eﬀect of primary hydration shell.

Vicinal water (VW) is deﬁned as a water the structure of which is mod-
iﬁed in the volume of pores, by proximity to curved and plate interfaces and
interaction with strongly ’bound’ water.

For discussion of Vicinal water (VW) properties we proceed from
the statement that if the rotational correlation time of hydrated
macromolecule is less than that of primary librational eﬀecton of
bulk water, corresponding to condition (1.3 and 1.4), these eﬀectons
should have a tendency to ”condensate” on their hydration shell. It
is a condition of their ”surviving” and life-time increasing, because
the resulting impulse of the primary eﬀectons is close to zero, in
accordance to our model.

The decreasing of most probable lb thermal impulses of water molecules, es-
pecially in direction, normal to the surface of macromolecule or colloid particle,
should lead to increasing of corresponding edges of the 1st ”ground” layer of
primary lb eﬀectons as compared to the bulk ones:

[λ = h/mvgr]vic

lb > [λ = h/mvgr]bulk

lb

(20b)

17

This turns the cube-like shape of eﬀectons of the bulk water to shape of

elongated parallelepiped..

Consequently, the volume of these waves B three-dimensional (3D) super-
position, representing the vicinal
lb and tr primary eﬀectons - is bigger than
that of bulk liquid eﬀectons. As far the stability and life-time of these enlarged
primary lb eﬀectons are increased, it means the increasing of their concentration
as well.

As far we assume in our multifractional model, that VW is a result of
”condensation” of primary librational eﬀectons on primary hydration shell and
their elongation in direction, normal to surface, we can make some predictions,
related to properties of this 2nd interfacial water fraction:

1. The thickness of VW can be about 30-75 ˚A, depending on properties of
surface (geometry, polarity), temperature, pressure and presence the perturbing
solvent structure agents;

2. This water should diﬀer by number of physical parameters from bulk

water. It can be characterized by:

a) lower density;
b) bigger heat capacity;
c) bigger sound velocity
d) bigger viscosity;
e) smaller dielectric relaxation frequency, etc.).
These diﬀerences should be enhanced in a course of third fraction
of interfacial water formation: surface-stimulated Bose-condensate
(SSBC) as far the concentration of primary librational eﬀectons in
this fraction is bigger than that in bulk water. The time, necessary for
SSBC three-dimensional structure self-organization can have an order of minutes
or hours, depending on temperature, geometry of surface and average distance
between interacting surfaces.

From Fig.4b we can see that the linear dimension of primary librational ef-
fecton of bulk water at 250C is about [λ]bu
lb ˜ 15˚A. The lower mobility of water
molecules of vicinal water is conﬁrmed directly by almost 10-times diﬀerence of
dielectric relaxation frequency (2·109 Hz) as respect to bulk one (19·109 Hz) (see
Clegg and Drost-Hansen, 1991). The consequence of less mobility and most
probable impulse (momentum) of water molecules should be the increasing of
most probable wave B length and dimensions of primary eﬀectons. The en-
hancement of lb primary eﬀecton edge should be more pronounced
in the direction, normal to the interface surface. In turn, such elon-
gation of coherent cluster can be resulted in increasing the intensity
of librational IR photons superradiation.

The increasing of temperature should lead to decreasing the vicinal libra-

tional eﬀectons dimensions.

The dimensions of primary translational eﬀectons of water is much less than
of librational ones (see Fig. 4a). The contribution of translational eﬀectons in
vicinal eﬀects is correspondingly much smaller than of librational.

18

Our model predicts that not only dimensions but as well concentrations of
primary librational eﬀectons should increase near rigid surfaces. The system of
vicinal 3D polyclustrons can emerge.

In accordance to our model the Drost-Hansen thermal anomalies of
vicinal water behavior near 150, 300, 450 and 600 has the same explana-
tion as presented in comments to Fig. 4a for bulk water. Because the
dimensions, stability and concentration of vicinal librational eﬀectons
are bigger than that of bulk eﬀectons the temperature of anomalies
for these two water fraction can diﬀer also.

As far the positions of disjoining pressure sharp maxima of water
between quartz plates did not shift markedly when their separation
change from 100 ˚A to 500 ˚A it points that the main contribution in
temperature anomalies is related to bulk librational eﬀectons. The
same is true for viscosity measurements of water between plates with
separation: 300-900 ˚A.

The possible explanation of Drost-Hansen temperature values sta-
bility is that the vicinal water layer (50-70˚A) has the bigger dimen-
sions of primary librational eﬀectons edge, than that of bulk water,
presumably only in the direction, normal to the surface of the in-
terface. Such ﬁrst layer of surface - stimulated Bose-condensation
induces the formation of string-like librational polyeﬀectons, com-
posed from elongated in the same direction bulk primary eﬀectons
and stabilized by Josephson’s junctions and distant Van-der-Waals
interactions. These strings can be cross-linked by short ”chains” of
primary lb eﬀectons, making such 3D polyeﬀecton net more stable
as respect to Brownian motion. We can term this fraction of interfa-
cial water as ”Surface-stimulated Bose-condensate (SSBC)”. As far in
such mesophase the linear dimensions of two of three edges of primary
lb eﬀectons, approximated by parallelepiped, remains the same as in
the bulk water, it explains the relative stability of thermal anomalies
at temperature scale. It means the similar conditions of maximum
stability for primary lb eﬀectons (see eq.20c), in composition of SSBC
and calculated for bulk water.

For the other hand, the elongated structure of primary lb eﬀectons, com-
posing SSBC, should increase all the eﬀects, related to intensive and coherent
superradiation of lb IR photons in directions of the longest edge of the eﬀec-
tons (see Introduction). This largest and most subtle fraction of inter-
facial water also has more orchestrated cooperative properties than
the unperturbed by superradiation bulk water due to stronger dis-
tant Van-der-Waals interaction between primary lb eﬀectons. Such
a ”superradiation-orchestrated water (SOW)” is even less ordered
and stable than the second fraction of interfacial water:
surface-
stimulated Bose-condensate (SSBC).

Its 3D structure of SSBC and SOW could be easily destroyed by
mechanical perturbation or heating. The relaxation time of ”regener-
ation” or self-organization of these water fractions can take an hours

19

and depends on temperature and mobility of the surface.

The sharp conditions of maximum stability of librational primary
eﬀectons at certain temperatures - the integer number of molecules in
the edge of lb eﬀecton:

κ = 6, 5, 4, 3, 2

(see comments to Fig.4a)

(20c)

are responsible for deviations of temperature dependencies for many parameters

of water from monotonic ones.

Vicinal water (VW) and surface-stimulated Bose-condensation of
water near biological membranes and ﬁlaments (microtubules, actin
polymers) can play an important regulation role in cells and their
compartments dynamics and function. Its highly cooperative prop-
erties and thermal sensitivity near Drost-Hansen temperatures can
be used eﬀectively in complicated processes, related to cells prolifer-
ation, diﬀerentiation and migration. Changing of water activity: its
increasing as a result of VW and SSBC deassembly and decreasing in
a course of it 3D structure self-organization, can aﬀect strongly the
dynamic equilibrium [association ⇋ dissociation] of oligomeric pro-
teins, their allosteric properties and osmotic processes in cells.

COMPARISON OF EXPERIMENTAL DATA WITH

THEORETICAL PREDICTIONS

It will be shown below that our hierarchic model of interfacial
water explains the comprehensive and convincing experimental data,
available on subject.

The following experimental results, illustrating the diﬀerence be-
tween the second (VW) and third (SSBC) fractions of interfacial and
bulk water will be discussed:

1. The lower density of vicinal water near plates and in pores
(˜0.970g/cm3) as compared to bulk one (˜1.000 g/cm) (Etzler and
Fagundus, 1983; Low, 1979; Clegg 1985);

2. Diﬀerent selectivity of vicinal water in pores to structure-

breaking and structure-making inorganic ions;

3. Volume contraction on sedimentation of particles dispersed in

water (Braun et al. 1987);

4. Higher heat capacity of vicinal water as compared to bulk water

(Etzler 1988);

5. Higher ultrasound velocity in the interfacial water;
6. Higher ultrasound absorption in the interfacial water;
7. Higher viscosity of interfacial water (Peshel and Adlﬁnger 1971)

and its dependence on shearing rate;

20

8. Sharp decreasing of the eﬀective radius of dilute solution of

polysterone spheres, in a course of temperature increasing.

In accordance to our model, the water molecules in composition of primary
librational eﬀectons (see Fig. 4a) are four-coordinated like in ideal ice structure
with lowest density. In contrast to that, the water in the volumes of translational
eﬀectons, [lb/tr] convertons and lb and tr macroeﬀectons and supereﬀectons has
the nonsuturated hydrogen bonds and a higher density. The compressibility of
primary [lb] eﬀectons should be lower and sound velocity - higher than that of
bulk water. It is conﬁrmed by results of Teixeira et. al. (1985), obtained by
coherent- inelastic- neutron scattering. They point on existance in heavy water
at 25 0C the solid-like collective excitations with bigger sound velocity than in
bulk water. These experimental data can be considered as a direct conﬁrmation
of our primary librational eﬀectons existence..

As far the fraction of water involved in primary librational eﬀectons in vicinal
water is much higher than in the bulk one, this explains the result [1] at the list
above. The biggest decreasing of density occur in pores, containing enlarged
primary librational eﬀectons, due to stronger water molecules immobilization.
Diﬀerent selectivity of vicinal water in pores of silica gel (result [2]) to
structure-breaking and structure-making inorganic ions (Wiggins 1971, 1973),
leading to higher concentration of the former (like K+) as respect to latter (like
Na+) ones in pores was revealed. It is in total accordance with our model as far
for penetration into the pore the ion have at ﬁrst to break the ordered struc-
ture of enlarged librational eﬀectons in the volume of pore. Such kind of Na/K
selectivity can be of great importance in the passive transport of ions throw the
pores of biological membranes.

Result [3] of volume contraction of suspension of 5-µm silica particles in a
course of their sedimentation - is a consequence of mechanical perturbation of
cooperative and unstable 3D fraction: surface - stimulated Bose condensation
(SSBC), its partial ’melting’ and increasing of water fraction with nonsuturated
hydrogen bonds and higher density.

The available experimental data of the vicinal water thickness evaluate it as
about 50-70 ˚A (Drost-Hansen, 1985). In totally or partly closed volumes like in
silica pores the vicinal eﬀect must be bigger than near the plain surface. This
explains the maximum heat capacity of water at 250 (result [4]) in silica pores
with radii near 70 ˚A (Etzler and White, 1988).

As far the cooperative properties of 2nd and 3d fractions of interfacial water,
corresponding to vicinal water and surface - stimulated Bose condensation are
higher than that of bulk water, it explains the bigger heat capacity of both of
these fractions.

The higher sound velocity in the VW and SSBC fractions as compared to
bulk water (result [5]) is a consequence of higher concentration of primary li-
brational eﬀectons with low compressibility due to saturated H-bonds.

21

Higher absorption of ultrasound by interfacial water (result [6]) can be a con-
sequence of dissipation processes, accompanied the destruction of water fraction,
corresponding to SSBC by ultrasound.

The higher viscosity of vicinal water (result [7]) is a result of higher activation

energy of librational macrodeformons excitation(cid:0)εM

of vicinal polyclustrons (see our mesoscopic theory of viscosity).

D(cid:1)lb in a more stable system

Sharp decreasing of the eﬀective dimensions of dilute solution of
polysterone (PS) spheres (0.1%), in a course of temperature increas-
ing (result [8]) - is a consequence of cooperative destruction (melting)
of 3d fraction of interfacial water (SSBC).

The corresponding transition occur at 30-34 0C, as registered by Photon
correlation spectroscopy and is accompanied by the eﬀective Stocks radius of
PS spheres decreasing onto 300 ˚A.

The ”regeneration time” of this process is about 20 hours. It may
include both: time of SAPS self-organization and self-organization of
the less stable forth interfacial fraction: ”Water, orchestrated in the
volume of IR primary deformons”.

The frequent non-reproducibility of results, related to properties of interfa-
cial water, including Drost-Hansen temperature anomalies, can be resulted from
diﬀerent methods of samples preparation and experimental conditions.

For example, if samples where boiling or strongly heating just before the
experiment, the 3d and 4th fractions of interfacial water can not be observable.
The same negative result is anticipated if the colloid system in the process of
measurement is under stirring or intensive ultrasound radiation inﬂuence.

Nonobserved yet predictions, related with third (SSBC) and forth

(water, orchestrated by IR standing photons) fractions of new

interfacial model

1. Gradual increasing of pH of distilled water in a course of these fractions
formation near nonpolar surface - due to enhancement of probability of superde-
formons excitation. Corresponding increasing of concentration of cavitational
ﬂuctuations are accompanied by dissociation of water molecules:

H2O ⇋ H + + HO−

and the protons concentration elevation;
2. Increasing the UV and visible photons spontaneous emission near nonpo-
lar surface as a result of increasing of the frequency of water molecules recom-
bination:

H + + HO− → H2O + photons

These experiments should be performed in dark box, using sensitive photon

counter or photo-ﬁlm.

22

The both predicted eﬀects should be enhanced in system, containing parallel
nonpolar multi-layers, with distance (l) between them, corresponding to condi-
tions of librational IR photons standing waves formation: l = 5, 10, 15, 20 microns.

3. More fast and ordered spatial self-organization of macromolecules, like
described in the next section is anticipated also in the volume of forth fraction
of interfacial water.

The dynamics of such process can be registered by optical confocal or tun-

neling microscope.

4. Our model predicts also that the external weak coherent electromagnetic
ﬁeld, generated by IR laser, like the internal one, also can stimulate a process
of self-organization in colloid systems.

4. Distant solvent-mediated interaction between macromolecules

The most of macromolecules like proteins can exist in dynamic equilibrium
between two conformers (A and B) with diﬀerent hydration (nH2O) and ﬂexi-
bility:

A + nH2O ⇔ B

(11 a)

Usually correlation time of more hydrated B- conformer (τB) and its eﬀec-

tive volume are less than that of A-conformer (τA) :

τA,B = VA,B

k (η/T )

τA > τB and VA > VB

This means that ﬂexibility, determined by large-scale dynamics of B-conformer
is more than that of A-conformer.

For such case a changing of the bulk water activity (aH2O) in solution by
addition of another type of macromolecules or by inorganic ions induce the
change of the equilibrium constant: KA⇔B = (KB⇔A)−1 and the dynamic
behavior of macromolecules (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985, 1986) :

∆ ln KB⇔A = nH2O · ∆ ln aH2O

(12)

In mixed systems: [PEG + spin-labeled antibody] the dependence of large-
scale (LS) dynamics of antibody on the molecular mass of polyethylenglycol
(PEG) is similar to dependence of water activity and freezing temperature (Tf )
of PEG solution, discussed above (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985, Fig. 82).

The presence of PEG with mass and concentration increasing (aH2O) and
(Tf ) stimulate the LS-dynamics of proteins decreasing their eﬀective volume V
and correlation time τM in accordance to eq.(12).

23

If ∆Tf = T 0
is the diﬀerence between the freezing point of a solute
f ) and solution (Tf ), then the relation between water activity in solution

f − Tf

(T 0
and ∆Tf is given by the known relation:

ln aH2O = −h ∆H/R(cid:0) T 0

f (cid:1)2 i · ∆Tf

(13)

where ∆H is the enthalpy of solute (water) melting; R is the gas constant.
In our experiments with polymer solutions 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer (pH7.3 +

0.3M NaCl) was used as a solvent (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985, Fig. 82).

One can see from (13) that the negative values of ∆Tf in the presence of
certain polymers means increasing water activity in three component [water -
ions - polymer] system (∆ ln aH2O > 0). In turn, it follows from (12) that the
[A ⇔ B] equilibrium of guest proteins in the same system will shift to the right.
Consequently, the ﬂexibility of the proteins will increase. Correlation between
Tf , water activity (aH2O) and immunoglobulin ﬂexibility (τM ), corresponding
to (11 - 13) was conﬁrmed (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985, Table 13).

It was shown in our experiments that protein-protein distant inter-
action depends on their large-scale (LS) dynamics and conformational
changes induced by ligand binding or temperature (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985).
Such distant solvent-mediated eﬀects may be explained using our
idea of inter- and intramolecular clusterphilic interactions, discussed
above.

We use the assumption that between inter- and intra-clusterphilic interac-
tion the positive correlation exist.
It means that increase of dimensions and
stabilization of the librational bulk (inter) water eﬀectons induce an increase of
the water clusters dimensions in protein cavities and shift A ⇔ B equilibrium
of the cavities to the right, i.e. to the more ﬂexible conformer. This leads to
decreasing of resulting correlation time and eﬀective volume of protein.

Our interpretation is conﬁrmed by fact that a decline in temperature, in-
creasing the dimensions of the bulk librational eﬀectons has the stimulating
inﬂuence on the ﬂexibility of protein like the presence of guest macromolecules.
Decreasing of the temperature shifts the equilibrium between hydrophobic and
clusterphilic interaction to the latter one.

At low concentration of macromolecules (CM ), when the average distance
(r) between them (eq.5) is much more than dimensions of primary librational
water eﬀecton (r ≫ λlb), the intermolecular clusterphilic interaction does not
work eﬀectively.
In this case the large-scale [A ⇔ B] pulsations of proteins,
accompanied by acoustic impulses in solvent can enhance the activity of
water.

This dynamic eﬀect of proteins on solvent can be responsible for the dis-
tant solvent- mediated interaction between macromolecules at low concentration
(K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985, 1987).

Acoustic impulses in protein solutions are result of the jump-way B → A
transition of interdomain or intersubunit cavities with characteristic time about

24

10−10 sec. This rapid transition follows the cavitational ﬂuctuation of a wa-
ter cluster formed by 30 - 50 water molecules. The ﬂuctuation is a result of
conversion of (lb) primary eﬀecton to (tr ) one: [lb/tr] converton excitation.

The hydrodynamic Bjorkness interaction between diﬀerent type and
identical proteins can be induced by acoustic wave packets in solvent, stimu-
lated by large-scale pulsations of proteins (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen et al., 1988). This new
approach was used for estimation of frequency of LS- pulsations of interacting

proteins like (immunoglobulins) as (cid:0)104 − 105(cid:1)s−1.

In very concentrated solutions of macromolecules, when the distance between
macromolecules starts to be less than linear dimension of primary librational
eﬀecton of water:

r ≤ λlb, the trivial aggregation process begins to dominate. It is related to

the decrease of water activity in solutions.

Let us analyze in more detail the new eﬀect - increasing water activity (aH2O)
under the eﬀect of macromolecules in a three component [water - salt - macro-
molecules] system. The Gibbs-Duhem law for this case can be presented as
(K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1988):

XH2O∆ ln aH2O + XM

∆¯µM
RT

+ Xi∆ ln ai = 0

(14)

where XH2O, XM , Xi are the molar fractions of water, macromolecules and

ions in the system;

aj = yjXj = exp(cid:18)−

µ0 − µj

RT (cid:19) = exp(cid:18)−

∆µj

RT (cid:19)

(15)

is the activity of each component related to its molar fraction (Xj ) and coeﬃ-
cients of activity (yj);

∆µM ≃ (GB − GA)∆fB

(16)

- the change of the mean chemical potential (¯µM ) of a macromolecule (protein)
pulsing between A and B conformers with corresponding partial free energies
¯GA and ¯GB, when the change of B-fraction is ∆fB and

where

µM

∼= fBGB + fAGA

∆ ln ai = (∆ai/ai) ≃ −∆κi

κi = 1 − yi

25

(17)

(18)

(19)

is the fraction of thermodynamically excluded ions (for example, due to ionic
pair formation).

One can see from (15) that when aH2O < 1, it means that

µ0
H2O > µS

H2O = H S

H2O − T SS

H2O

(20)

It follows from (20) that the decrease of water entropy (¯S) in solution related
to hydrophobic and clusterphilic interactions may lead to increased µS
H2O and
water activity.

It is easy to see from (14) that the elevation of concentration and XM of
macromolecules in a system at constant temperature and ∆¯µM may induce a
rise in water activity (aH2O) only if the activity of ions (ai = yiXi) is decreased.
The latter could happen due to increasing of fraction of thermodynamically
excluded ions (κ) (eqs. 18 and 19).

There are two processes which may lead to increasing the probability of ionic

pair formation and fraction κ elevation.

The ﬁrst one is the forcing out of the ions from the ice-like structure of en-
larged librational eﬀectons, stimulated by the presence of macromolecules. This
exclusion volume phenomenon increases the eﬀective concentration of inorganic
ions and their association probability.

The second one dominates at the low concentration of [A ⇔ B] pulsing
macromolecules, when thixotropic structure fail to form (r = 11.8/C1/3
M ≫ λlb).
Acoustic impulses in solvent generated by pulsing proteins stimulate the ﬂuc-
tuation of ion concentration (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1988) increasing the probability of
ionic pairs formation.

5. Spatial self-organization in the water-macromolecular systems

The new type of self-organization in aqueous solutions of biopolymers was
revealed in Italy (Giordano et al., 1981). The results obtained from viscosity,
acoustic and light-scattering measurements showed the existence of long-range
structures that exhibit a thixotropic behavior. This was shown for solutions of
lysozyme, bovine serum albumin (BSA), hemoglobin and DNA. Ordered struc-
ture builds up gradually in the course of time to become fully developed after
more than 10-15 hours.

When a sample is mechanically shaken this type of self-organization is de-
stroyed. The ”preferred distance” between macromolecules in such an ordered
system is about L ≃ 50 ˚A as revealed by small angle neutron scattering (Gior-
dano et al., 1991). It is important that this distance can be much less
than the average statistical distance between proteins at low molar
concentrations (CM) (see eq.5).

This fact points to attraction force between macromolecules. In
accordance with our mesoscopic model, this attraction is a result of
external intermolecular clusterphilic interaction. It has been shown ex-
perimentally that hypersonic velocity in the ordered thixotropic structures of

26

10% lysozyme solutions is about 2500m/s, i.e. 60% higher than that in pure wa-
ter (1500m/s) (Aliotta et. al., 1990) Quasielastic and elastic neutron scattering
in 10% lysozyme aqueous system at 200 shows that the dynamic properties of
the ”bound” water in a thixotropic system are similar to the properties of pure
water at 3 − 40C, i.e. 160C below actual temperature (Giordano et al., 1991).
Experimental evidence for heat capacity increasing in lysozyme solutions dur-
ing 10-15 hours of self-organization was obtained by adiabatic microcalorimetry
(Bertolini et al., 1992). The character of this process is practically independent
on pH and disappears only at the very low concentration of protein (< 0.2%),
when the average distance between macromolecules becomes too big. Increasing
the temperature above 400 also inhibits thixotropic-type of self-organization in
water-macromolecular systems.

In the series of experiments with artiﬁcial polymers - polyethyleneglycols
(PEG) with decreasing molecular mass it was shown that self-organization (SO)
in 0.1 M phosphate buﬀer (pH 7.3, 250) exists in the presence of PEG with a
weight of 20.000, 10.000 and 8.000 daltons, but disappears at a molecular mass
of 2.000 and lower (Salvetti et al., 1992).

These data are in good agreement with the inﬂuence of PEG on the freezing

temperature and intramolecular interaction described above.

Independently of Italian group, similar ordering process were observed in

Japan (Ise and Okubo, 1980) for aqueous solutions of macroions.

The process of ”compactization” or ”clusterization” of solute (guest) molecules

in one volumes of solution or colloid system, should lead to emergency of voids
in another ones. Such a phenomena were revealed by means of confocal laser
scanning microscope, ultramicroscope and video image analyzer (Ito et al.,1994;
Yoshida et al.,1991; Ise et al.,1990).

Inhomogeneity of guest particles distribution were revealed in diﬀerent ionic
systems, containing ionic polymers or macroions, like sodium polyacrilate, the
colloid particles, like polysterone latex (N 300, 1.3 µC/cm2) and Langmuir-Blodgett
ﬁlms. The time evolution of the numbers of diﬀerent clusters from such particles
were followed during few hours.

The colloid crystal growth at 25 0C in H2O and (H2O−D2O) systems

can be divided on four stages (Yoshida et all.,1991).

In the ﬁrst stage the particles were diﬀusing freely.
In the second stage the local concentration of the particles took

place.

In the third stage clusters from 3-10 particles were formed.
In the last fourth stage the smaller clusters turns to the bigger
ones and macroscopically well ordered structures were formed. Si-
multaneously the huge voids as large as 50 − 150µm were observed.

Such an ordering can be immediately destroyed by mechanical shaking or by
adding of inorganic salts (NaCl), even in such relatively small concentrations as
10−4 mol/dm3.

Authors conclude that the repulsion as only one assumption is not enough
for explanation of the phenomena observed. The model, considering a short-

27

range repulsive interaction and long-range attraction between particles should
be used. They try to explain attraction between similar charged macroions
by presence of small inorganic counterions. Authors believe that short range
repulsion can be overwhelms by attraction. But such a simple model does
not explain ”clusterization” of electrically neutral guest macromolecules and
acceleration of this process due to decreasing the concentration of inorganic
salts in presence of ionic sorbents.

Despite a large amount of diﬀerent experimental data and great importance,
the mechanism of spontaneous type of self-organization in colloid systems re-
mains unknown. It is evident, however, that it can not be attributed to trivial
aggregation.

Our explanation of distant attraction between macromolecules, by means of
clusterphilic interaction and polymerization of clustrons in the volume of pri-
mary electromagnetic deformons (see below) is more adequate for description
of self-organization phenomena in aqueous colloid systems, than counterion hy-
pothesis.

Just clusterphilic interactions determines the attraction between
large guest molecules or colloid particles on mesoscopic scale. They
are responsible for the lot of vicinal water eﬀects described below.

Our computer calculations of water properties based on the mesoscopic the-
ory show that the volume of primary librational eﬀecton of water at 250 includes
about 100 water molecules (Fig. 7a of [1] or Fig. 4a of [2]).

In accordance with condition (7) for clusterphilic interactions, the macro-

molecules with volume

VM > 100 · (V0/N0)

can decrease the librational mobility of H2O molecules, their impulses and,
consequently, (eqs. 1 and 9) increase the dimensions of the librational eﬀectons
of water. Obviously, there must exist a direct correlation between the eﬀective
Stokes radius of a macromolecule (i.e.
its molecular mass) and the process of
self-organization.

The mass of a lysozyme (Lys) is about 13.000 D, and available
experimental data (Giordano et al., 1991) show that the mobility
of water in a hydration shell in composition of thixotropic system
at 250 is about 3 times less than that of pure water. This mobility
is directly related to the most probable group velocity and impulse
of H2O (mvgr). It means a three-fold increase in the dimensions of
librational eﬀectons in the presence of lysozyme (see eq. 1).

[λH2O ≈ 15 ˚A] → [L(H2O ≈ 45 ˚A]

(20a)

o
This value is quite close to the experimental preferred distance (50
A) between
proteins after self-organization (SO). Because the shape of the eﬀectons can be
approximated by parallelepiped or cube, we suggest that each of its 6 sides can

28

be bordered and stabilized by at least one macromolecule (Table). We termed
corresponding type of quasiparticles ”clustrons”. Enlarged librational eﬀectons
serve as a ”glue”, promoting interaction between surrounding macromolecules or
colloid particles. Probability of librational eﬀectons dissociation to translational
ones, i.e. [lb/tr] convertons excitation,- is decreased in composition of clustrons.
Cooperative water clusters in the volume of clustrons are very sensitive to
perturbation by temperature or by ion-dipole interactions. When the colloid
particles have their own charged groups on the surface, very small addition of
inorganic salts can inﬂuence on clustrons formation.

Our model can answer the following questions:
1. Why polymers with a molecular mass less than 2000 D do not

stimulate self-organization ?

2. Why is self-organization inhibited at suﬃciently high tempera-

ture (> 400) ?

3. What causes the repulsive hydration force?
The answer to the ﬁrst question is clear from condition (7) and eqs.(8).
Small polymers can not stimulate the growth of librational eﬀectons and clus-
trons formation due to their own high mobility.

The response to the second question is that a decrease in the dimensions
of librational eﬀectons with temperature (Fig. 7 of [1]) leads to deterioration of
their cooperative properties and stability. The probability of clustrons formation
drops and thixotropic structures can not develop.

The repulsion, like attraction between colloid particles can be explained
by clusterphilic ineraction.. The increasing of external pressure should shift the
(a ⇔ b)lb equilibrium of librational water eﬀectons to the left, like temperature
decreasing. This means the enhancement of librational water eﬀecton (and
clustron) stability and dimensions. For this reason a repulsive or disjoining
hydration force arises in diﬀerent colloid systems. The swelling of clays against
imposed pressure also is a consequence of clusterphilic interactions enhancement,
i.e. enlargement of water librational eﬀectons due to H2O immobilization.

In accordance with our model, eﬀectons and their derivatives, clustrons, are
responsible for self-organization in colloid systems on a mesoscopic level (Stage
II in Table).

The macroscopic level of self-organization (polyclustrons), responsible for
the increase of viscosity and long-distance interaction between clustrons origi-
nates due to interaction between the electric and magnetic dipoles of clustrons
(Stage III, Table). Because the thermal movement of the H2O molecules, com-
posing clustrons is coherent, the dipole moment of clustron is proportional to
the number of H2O in its volume.

29

Table. Schematic representation of three stages (I → II → III)
of gradual spatial self-organization in aqueous solutions of macro-
molecules (M ).

Formation of polyclustrons (Stage III, Table) as the space-time
correlated large group of clustrons can be stimulated in the volume
of primary electromagnetic deformons (tr and lib), having almost
macroscopic dimensions.

Clustrons (stage II) are complexes of enlarged primary librational
eﬀectons, bordered by each of 6 side with macromolecules. The in-
crease of librational eﬀecton dimensions (λ → L) is related to de-
creased water molecule mobility due to external clusterphilic inter-
action.

Polyclustrons (stage III) are space and time correlated systems of a
large group of clustrons in the volume of electromagnetic deformons.

30

Their linear dimensions (0.01 − 0.001cm) correspond to translational
and librational wave numbers:

˜νtr ≃ 60cm−1

and ˜νlb ≃ 700cm−1

We suppose that for optimal process of self-organization, the molar concentra-
tion of macromolecules (CM ) must satisfy the condition:

10L > [r = 11.8 · C −1/3

M ] ≥ L,

lb

lb

where: L ∼= qλlb = h/m(vlb/q) is the dimension of a clustron (λ1,2,3

=
h/mv1,2,3
is the dimension of primary librational eﬀecton in pure water; r -
statistically most probable distance between macromolecules (eq.5); q is the lib
eﬀecton magniﬁcation number, reﬂecting the eﬀect of water molecules immo-
bilization (decreasing of their group velocity) in presence of macromolecules or
colloid particles.

Under condition r >> 10L, formation of clustrons can be accompanied by
big voids in colloid system. At the opposite limit condition r < L, the triv-
ial aggregation will dominate, accompanied by ”melting” of vicinal librational
eﬀectons.

The librational IR photon wave length, calculated from the oscillatory spec-

tra of water, is about (eq. 1.37):

λp = (n · ˜ν)−1 ≈ (1.33 · 700)−1 ≈ 0.001cm

where ˜ν ≃ 700 cm−1 is the wave number of librational band in the oscillatory
spectra of water; n = 1.33 is the water refraction index.

The 3D superposition (interception) of such three photons forms primary

electromagnetic deformons, stimulating development of polyclustron system.

Our model predicts that the external electromagnetic ﬁeld, like
internal one, also can stimulate a process of self-organization in col-
loid systems. On the other hand, the agents perturbing the structure
of librational eﬀectons (temperature, ions, organic solvents) should
have the opposite eﬀect. The slowest stage of self-organization, poly-
clustrons and polyclustron net formation (thixotropic -like structure),
is also sensitive to mechanical shaking. Due to the collective eﬀect
the energy of interaction between clustrons in polyclustrons is higher
than kT at suﬃciently low temperatures.

The model presented explains the increasing of viscosity, heat ca-
pacity and sound velocity in an aqueous system by enhancing the
cooperative units with ice-like water structure - clustrons and poly-
clustrons (Table) due to self-organization in water -macromolecular
systems.

31

The density of ice-like structures in clustrons and polyclustrons is

lower than in usual bulk liquid water.

Consequently, one can predict that the free volume of water will
increase as the result of self-organization in aqueous systems of macro-
molecules.

Such a type of eﬀect was revealed in our microcalorimetry study
of large-scale and small-scale protein dynamics contributions in the
resulting heat capacity of solvent (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen et al., 1993). The ad-
ditional free volume (vf ) in [0.2 − 0.3%] (w/v) concentration of diﬀerent
proteins is quite close to the volume occupied by macromolecules in
the solution itself. The vf is dependent on the active site state (ligand-
dependent) and large-scale dynamics of proteins. The more intensive
the large-scale pulsations of proteins and their ﬂexibility and the less
its eﬀective volume, the smaller the additional free volume solvent.
This correlation could be resulted from acoustic impulses generated
by pulsing protein. This additional acoustic noise can stimulate dis-
sociation (melting) of water clusters - librational eﬀectons with sat-
urated hydrogen bonds in a system (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen et al., 1993).
In
therms of mesoscopic model it means increasing the probability of
[lb/tr] convertons excitation.

The vicinal water in combination with osmotic processes could be
responsible for coordinated intra-cell spatial and dynamic reorgani-
zations.

7. Osmosis and solvent activity. Traditional and mesoscopic

approach

It was shown by Van’t Hoﬀ in 1887 that osmotic pressure (Π) in the dilute

concentration of solute (c) follows a simple expression:

Π = RTc

(24)

This formula can be obtained from an equilibrium condition between a solvent
and an ideal solution after saturation of diﬀusion process of the solvent through
a semipermeable membrane:

µ0

1(P ) = µ1(P + Π, Xi)

where µ0
1 and µ1 are the chemical potentials of a pure solvent and a solvent in
solution; P - external pressure; Π - osmotic pressure; X1 is the solvent fraction
in solution.

At equilibrium dµ0

1 = dµ1 = 0 and

dµ1 =(cid:20) ∂µ1

∂P1(cid:21)X1

dP1 +(cid:20) ∂µ1

∂X1(cid:21)P1

dX1 = 0

(24a)

32

Because

then

µ1 =(cid:0) ∂G/∂n1 (cid:1)P,T = µ0

1 + RT ln X1

(cid:18) ∂µ1
∂P1(cid:19)X1

=(cid:18) ∂2G

∂P ∂n1(cid:19)P,T,X

=(cid:18) ∂V

∂n1(cid:19) = V 1

(25)

(26)

where V 1 is the partial molar volume of the solvent. For dilute solution: ¯V1 ≃
V 0
1 (molar volume of pure solvent).

From (25) we have:

∂µ1
∂X1

= RT(cid:18) ∂ ln X1

∂X1 (cid:19)P,T

Putting (26) and (27) into (24a) we obtain:

Integration:

gives:

dP1 = −

RT
V 0
1 X1

dX1

p+π

ZP

dP1 = −

RT
V 0
1

x1

Z1

d ln X1

Π = −

RT
V 0
1

ln X1 = −

RT
V 0
1

ln(1 − X2)

(27)

(28)

(29)

and for the dilute solution (X2 ≪ 1) we ﬁnally obtain Van’t Hoﬀ equation:

where

and

Π =

RT
V 0
1

X2

∼= RT

n2/n1

V 0
1

= RTc

X2 = n2/(n1 + n2) ∼= n2/n1

(30)

(31)

33

n2/n1

V 0
1

= c

(32)

Considering a real solution, we only substitute solvent fraction X1 in (29) by
solvent activity: X1 → a1. Then taking into account (25), we can express
osmotic pressure as follows:

Π = −

RT
¯V1

ln a1 =

∆µ1
¯V1

(33)

where: ∆µ1 = µ0

1 - µ1 is the diﬀerence between the chemical potentials of a
pure solvent and the one perturbed by solute at the starting moment of osmotic
process, i.e. the driving force of osmose; ¯V1
∼= V1 is the molar volume of solvent
at dilute solutions.

Although the osmotic eﬀects are widespread in Nature and are very impor-
tant, especially in biology, the physical mechanism of osmose remains unclear
(Watterson, 1992).

The explanation following from Van’t Hoﬀ equation (30) and pointing that
osmotic pressure is equal to that induced by solute molecules, if they are consid-
ered as an ideal gas in the same volume at a given temperature is not satisfactory.
The osmose phenomenon can be explained quantitatively on the
basis of our mesoscopic theory and state equation (11.7). To this end,
we have to introduce the rules of conservation of the main internal
parameters of solvent in the presence of guest (solute) molecules or
particles:

1. Internal pressure of solvent: Pin = const

2. The total energy of solvent: Utot = const (cid:27)

(34)

This conservation rules can be considered as the consequence of Le Chatelier
principle.

Using (11.6), we have for the pure solvent and the solvent perturbed by a

solute the following two equations, respectively:

V

Pin =

P 1

in =

where:

Utot
V 0

f r (cid:18)1 +
f r (cid:18)1 +

U 1
tot
V 1

Tk(cid:19) − Pext
k(cid:19) − P 1

V1
T 1

ext,

V 0
f r =

V0
n2

and V 1

f r =

V0
n2
1

34

(35)

(36)

(37)

are the free volumes of pure solvent and solvent in presence of solute (guest)
molecules as a ratio of molar volume of solvent to correspondent value of refrac-
tion index.

The equilibrium conditions after osmotic process saturation, leading from

our conservation rules (34) are

Pin = Pin when Pext = Pext + Π
Utot = V + Tk = V1 + T 1

k = U 1
tot

From (39) we have:

Dif = Tk − T 1

k = V1 − V

(38)

(39)

(40)

The index (1) denote perturbed solvent parameters.

Comparing (35) and (36) and taking into account (37 - 39), we obtain a new

formula for osmotic pressure:

Π =

n2
V0

Utot(cid:20) n2

1Tk − n2T 1
k

TkT 1
k

(cid:21)

(41)

where: n, V0, Utot and Tk are the refraction index, molar volume, total
energy and total kinetic energy of a pure solvent, respectively; T ∗
k and n1 are the
total kinetic energy and refraction index of the solvent in the presence of guest
(solute) molecules, that can be calculated from the mesoscopic theory (eq.4.33).
k and n ∼= n1, the eq.(41)

For the case of dilute solutions, when TkT 1
k

∼= T 2

can be simpliﬁed:

or using (40):

The ratio:

Π =

n2

Tk (cid:19)2
V0 (cid:18) Utot

(cid:0)Tk − T 1
k(cid:1)

Π =

n2

Tk (cid:19)2
V0 (cid:18) Utot

(V1 − V )

S = Tk/Utot

(42)

(43)

(44)

is generally known as a structural factor (see eq. 2.46):

We can see from (42) and (43) that osmotic pressure is proportional to the
diﬀerence between total kinetic energy of a free solvent (Tk) and that of the
solvent perturbed by guest molecules:

35

∆Tk = Tk − T 1
k

or related diﬀerence between the total potential energy of perturbed and pure
solvent:

∆V = V1 − V where: ∆Tk = ∆V ≡ Dif (see Fig. 3).
As far ∆Tk > 0 and ∆V > 0, it means that:

Tk > T 1
k

or

V1 > V

(45)

Theoretical temperature dependence of the diﬀerence

Dif = ∆Tk = ∆V

calculated from (42) or (43) at constant osmotic pressure: Π ≡ P os = 8 atm,
pertinent to blood is presented on Fig. 3.

The next Fig. 4 illustrate theoretical temperature dependence of osmotic
pressure (43) in blood at the constant value of Dif = 6.7 · 10−3(J/M ), corre-
sponding on Fig. 3 to physiological temperature (370).

The ratios of this Dif value to total potential (V) and total kinetic energy

(Tk) of pure water at 370(see Fig. 5b) are equal to:

(Dif/V ) ≃

(Dif/Tk) ≃

6.7 · 10−3
1.3 · 104
6.7 · 10−3
3.5 · 102

∼= 5 · 10−7 and

∼= 2 · 10−5

i.e. the relative changes of the solvent potential and kinetic energies are very
small.

36

Fig. 3. Theoretical temperature dependence of the diﬀerence:
Dif = V1 − V = Tk − T 1
k at constant osmotic pressure: Π ≡ P os =
8 atm, characteristic for blood. The computer calculations were
performed using eqs. (42) or (43).

For each type of concentrated macromolecular solutions the optimum amount
of water is needed to minimize the potential energy of the system determined
mainly by clusterphilic interactions. The conservation rules (34) and self-organization
in solutions of macromolecules (clustron formation) may be responsible for the
driving force of osmose in the diﬀerent compartments of biological cells.

Comparing (43) and (33) and assuming equality of the molar volumes V0 =
¯V1, we ﬁnd a relation between the diﬀerence in potential energies and chemical
potentials (∆µ) of unperturbed solvent and that perturbed by the solute:

∆µ = µ0

Tk (cid:19)2
1 − µ1 = n2(cid:18) Utot

(V1 − V )

(46)

Fig. 4. Theoretical temperature dependence of osmotic pressure
(eq. 43) in blood at constant value of diﬀerence: Dif = ∆T = ∆V =
6.7 · 10−3J/M. This value in accordance with Fig.3 corresponds to
physiological temperature (370).

The results obtained above mean that solvent activity (a1) and a lot
of other thermodynamic parameters for solutions can be calculated
on the basis of our hierarchic concept:

a1 = exp(cid:18)−

∆µ

RT(cid:19) = exp(cid:20)−(cid:16) n

RT (cid:21)
S(cid:17)2 V1 − V

(47)

where: S = Tk/Utot is a structural factor for the solvent.

37

The molar coeﬃcient of activity is:

where

yi = ai/ci,

ci = ni/V

(48)

(49)

is the molar quantity of i-component (ni) in of solution (V - solution volume in
liters).

The molar activity of the solvent in solution is related to its vapor pressure

(Pi) as:

ai = Pi/P 0
i

(50)

where: P0
i is the vapor pressure of the pure solvent. Theoretical temperature
dependence of water activity (a1) in blood at constant diﬀerence: Dif = ∆T =
∆V = 6.7 · 10−3J/M is presented on Fig. 5.

Fig. 5. Theoretical temperature dependence of water activity
(eq.47) in blood at constant diﬀerence: Dif = ∆T = ∆V =

(a1)
6.7 · 10−3J/M.

Another colligative parameter such as low temperature shift of freezing tem-
perature of the solvent (∆Tf ) in the presence of guest molecules also can be
calculated from (47) and (13):

∆Tf = −

f )2

R(T 0
∆H

ln a1

(T 0

f )2

S(cid:17)2
∆H · T (cid:16) n

(V1 − V )

(51)

38

where: T0

f is the freezing temperature of the pure solvent; T is the temper-
ature corresponding to the conditions of calculations of V1(T ) and V(T) from
(eqs. 4.33 and 4.36 of [1,2]).

The partial molar enthalpy ( ¯H1) of solvent in solution are related to solvent

activity like:

H 1 = H

0

1 − RT 2 ∂ ln a1
∂T

= H

0
1 + L

0
1

where H

0
1 is the partial enthalpy of the solvent at inﬁnitive dilution;

¯L1 = −RT 2 ∂ ln a1
∂T

= T 2 ∂

∂T (cid:20)(cid:16) n

S(cid:17)2 V1 − V

T

(cid:21)

is the relative partial molar enthalpy of solvent in a given solution.
From (52) we obtain partial molar heat capacity as:

C1

p =

∂
∂T

(H1) = C0

p − R(cid:18)T 2 ∂2 ln a1

∂T 2 + 2T

∂ ln a1

∂T (cid:19)

(52)

(53)

(54)

An analogous equation exists for the solute of this solution as well as for partial
molar volume and other important parameters of the solvent, including solvent
activity (Godnev et al., 1982).

It is obvious, the application of Hierarchic theory to solvent activ-
ity determination might be of great practical importance for diﬀerent
processes in chemical and colloid technology. Our theory based Com-
prehensive Analyzer of mattr Properties (CAMP - see www.karelia.ru/
˜alexk) may be conveniant tool for monitoring of such processes.

0.0.1 References

Aksnes G., Asaad A.N. Inﬂuence of the water structure
on chemical reactions in water. A study of proton-catalyzed
acetal hydrolysis. Acta Chem. Scand. 1989, 43, 726 − 734.

Aksnes G., Libnau O. Temperature dependence of esther

hydrolysis in water. Acta Chem.Scand. 1991, 45, 463 − 467.

Aliotta F., Fontanella M.E., Magazu S. Sound propaga-

tion in thyxotropic strucures. Phys. Chem. Liq. 1990,

Benassi P., D’Arrigo G., Nardone M. Brilouin light scat-

tering in low temperature water-ethanol solutions. J.Chem.Phys.
1988, 89, 4469 − 4477.

Bertolini D., Cassetari M., Grigolini P., Salvetti G. and
Tani A. The mesoscopic systems of water and other complex
systems. J.Mol.Liquids, 1989, 41, 251.

39

Bertolini D., Cassetari M., Salvetti G., Tombari E., Veronesi

S., Squadrito G. Il nuovo Cim. 1992, 14D, 199.

Cantor C.R., Schimmel P.R. Biophysical Chemistry. W.H.Freemen

and Company, San Francisco, 1980.

Clegg J. S. On the physical properties and potential roles
of intracellular water. Proc.NATO Adv.Res.Work Shop.
1985.

Clegg J.S. and Drost-Hansen W. On the biochemistry
and cell physiology of water. In: Hochachka and Momm-
sen (eds.). Biochemistry and molecular biology of ﬁshes.
Elsevier Science Publ. vol.1, Ch.1, pp.1-23, 1991.

D’Aprano A., Donato Ines., Liveri V.T. Molecular asso-
ciation of n- alcohols in nonpolar solvents. Excess volumes
and viscosities of n- pentanol+n-octane mixtures at 0, 5,
25, 35 and 450C. J.Solut.Chem. 1990a, 19,711 − 720.

D’.Aprano A., Donato I., Liveri V.T. Molecular interac-
tions in 1- pentanol + 2-butanol mixtures: static dielectric
constant, viscosity and refractive index investigations at 5,
25, and 450C. J.Solut.Chem. 1990b, 18, 785 − 793.

D’Aprano A. and Donato I. Dielectric polarization and
Polarizability of 1-pentanol + n-octane mixtures from static
dielectric constant and refractive index data at 0, 25 and
450. J.Solut.Chem. 1990c, 19, 883 − 892.

D’Arrigo G., Paparelli A. Sound propagation in water-
ethanol mixtures at low temperatures. I.Ultrasonic veloc-
ity. J.Chem.Phys. 1988a, 88, No.1, 405 − 415.

D’Arrigo G., Paparelli A. Sound propagation in water-
ethanol mixtures at low temperatures. II.Dynamical prop-
erties. J.Chem.Phys. 1988b, 88, No.12, 7687 − 7697.

D’Arrigo G., Paparelli A. Anomalous ultrasonic absorp-
tion in alkoxyethanls aqeous solutions near their critical and
melting points. J.Chem.Phys. 1989, 91, No.4, 2587 − 2593.

D’Arrigo G., Texiera J. Small-angle neutron scattering
study of D2O-alcohol solutions. J.Chem.Faraday Trans.
1990, 86, 1503 − 1509.

Del Giudice E., Dogulia S., Milani M. and Vitello G.
A quantum ﬁeld theoretical approach to the collective be-
haviour of biological systems. Nuclear Physics 1985, B251[F S13], 375−
400.

Del Guidice E. Doglia S., Milani M. Spontaneous sym-
metry breaking and electromagnetic interactions in biolog-
ical systems. Physica Scripta. 1988, 38, 505 − 507.

Drost-Hansen W. In: Colloid and Interface Science. Ed.

Kerker M. Academic Press, New York, 1976, p.267.

Drost-Hansen W., Singleton J. Lin. Our aqueous her-
itage: evidence for vicinal water in cells. In: Fundamentals

40

of Medical Cell Biology, v.3A, Chemisrty of the living cell,
JAI Press Inc.,1992, p.157-180.

Etzler F.M., Conners J.J. Structural transitions in vic-
inal water: pore size and temperature dependence of the
heat capacity of water in small pores. Langmuir 1991, 7,
2293-2297.

Etzler F.M., White P.J. The heat capacity of water in
silica pores. J. Colloid and Interface Sci., 1987, 120, 94-99.
Farsaci F., Fontanella M.E., Salvato G., Wanderlingh
F. and Giordano R., Wanderlingh U. Dynamical behaviour
of structured macromolecular solutions. Phys.Chem. Liq.
1989, 20, 205 − 220.

Fontaine A. et al., Phys Rev. Lett. 1978, 41,504.
Fr¨ohlich H. Phys.Lett. 51 (1975) 21.
Fr¨ohlich H. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 1975, 72, 4211.
Giordano R., Fontana M.P., Wanderlingh F. J.Chem.Phys.

1981a, 74, 2011.

Giordano R. et al. Phys.Rev. 1983b, A28, 3581.
Giordano R., Salvato G., Wanderlingh F., Wanderlingh
U. Quasielastic and inelastic neutron scattering in macro-
molecular solutions. Phys.Rev.A. 1990, 41, 689 − 696.

Glansdorf P., Prigogine I. Thermodynamic theory of
structure, stability and ﬂuctuations. Wiley and Sons, N.Y.,
1971.

Gordeyev G.P., Khaidarov T. In: Water in biological
systems and their components. Leningrad University Press,
Leningrad, 1983, p.3 (in Russian).

Haken H. Information and selforganization. Springer,

Berlin, 1988.

Haken H. Synergetics, computers and cognition. Springer,

Berlin, 1990.

Ise N. and Okubo T. Accounts of Chem. Res. 1980, 13, 303.
Ise N., Matsuoka H., Ito K., Yoshida H. Inhomogenity
of solute distribution in ionic systems. Faraday Discuss.
Chem. Soc. 1990, 90, 153 − 162.

Ito K., Yoshida H., Ise N. Void Structure in colloid Dis-

persion. Science, 1994, 263, 66.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Solvent-dependent ﬂexibility of pro-
teins and principles of their function. D.Reidel Publ.Co.,
Dordrecht, Boston, Lancaster, 1985, pp.290.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. The noncontact interaction between
macromolecules revealed by modiﬁed spin-label method.
Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1987, 32, 536.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Thermodynamic analysis of the sys-

tem: water-ions-macromolecules. Bioﬁzika (USSR), 1988, 33, 549.

41

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Theory of condensed state as a hier-
archical system of quasiparticles formed by phonons and
three-dimensional de Broglie waves of molecules. Applica-
tion of theory to thermodynamics of water and ice. J.Mol.Liq.
1989a, 41, 53 − 60.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Mesoscopic theory of matter and its
interaction with light. Principles of selforganization in ice,
water and biosystems. University of Turku, Finland 1992,
pp.275.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A., Fradkova L., Korpela T. Separate con-
tributions of large- and small-scale dynamics to the heat ca-
pacity of proteins. A new viscosity approach. Acta Chem.Scand.
1993, 47, 456 − 460.

Lagrage P., Fontaine A., Raoux D., Sadoc A., Miglardo

P. J.Chem. Phys. 1980, 72,3061.

Lumry R. and Gregory R.B. Free-energy managment in
protein reactions: concepts, complications and compensa-
tions. In book: The ﬂuctuating enzyme. A Wiley-Interscience
publication. 1986, p. 341- 368.

Nemethy G., Scheraga H.A. J.Chem.Phys. 1962, 36, 3382.
Peschel G. Adlﬁnger K.H. J. Coll. Interface Sci., 1970,

v.34 (4), p.505.

Sadoc A., Fountaine A., Lagarde D., Raoux D. J.Am.Chem.Soc. 1981,

103, 6287.

Tereshkevitch M.O., Kuprin F.V., Kuratova T.S., Ivishina

G.A. J. Phys. Chem. (USSR) 1974, 48, 2498.

Watterson J. Solvent cluster size and colligative proper-

ties. Phys. Chem.Liq. 1987, 16, 317 − 320.

Watterson J. The role of water in cell architecture. Mol.Cell.Biochem.

1988,79,101 − 105.

Yoshida H., Ito K., and Ise N. Colloidal crystal growth.

J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 1991, 87(3), 371 − 378.

42

