0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
8
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ICRC1999EveningWorkshopSessiontalk(updatedversion)

Deformed Lorentz Symmetry

and High-Energy Astrophysics (I)

L. Gonzalez-Mestres1,2

1Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France

2L.A.P.P., B.P. 110, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract

Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV) can be generated at the Planck scale, or at some other fundamental length
scale, and nevertheless naturally preserve Lorentz symmetry as a low-energy limit (deformed Lorentz symme-
try, DLS). Deformed relativistic kinematics (DRK) would then be consistent with special relativity in the limit
k (wave vector) → 0 and allow for a deformed version of general relativity and gravitation. If LSV is a very
high-energy, very low-distance phenomenon, it is expected to be driven by energy-dependent parameters and,
if at all detectable, to produce the cleanest signatures at the highest attainable energies. We present an updated
discussion of the possible implications of this pattern for high-energy cosmic-ray physics, focusing mainly
on an approach where the LSV parameter varies like the square of the energy scale (quadratically deformed
relativistic kinematics, QDRK). It turns out that a ≈ 10−6 LSV at Planck scale, leading to a DLS pattern,
would potentially be enough to produce very important observable effects on the properties of cosmic rays at
the ≈ 1020 eV scale (absence of GZK cutoff, stability of unstable particles, lower interaction rates, kinemat-
ical failure of any parton model as well as of standard formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation...).
Possible neutrino pulses at energies up to ≈ 1019 eV from ≈ 1020 eV protons accelerated by gamma-ray
bursts, with neutrino arrival times implying energy-dependent delays from DRK, are also discussed. Although
ultra-high energy cosmic rays (UHECR) appear to be the most appropriate probe to test Planck-scale LSV, we
also discuss suggestions to explore it at the observed gamma-ray burst (GRB) photon energies using models
with a LSV parameter proportional to the energy scale (linearly deformed relativistic kinematics, LDRK).

This paper updates and further develops contributions H.E. 1.3.16 and OG 3.1.10 published in the Pro-
ceedings of the ICRC 1999 Conference, Salt-Lake City August 1999 (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1999a and 1999b).

1 What is relativity?

Arguments used in the priority debate: ”who was (were) the author(s) of the special relativity theory?”
tacitly involve, without really addressing it, a fundamental physics issue. It is implicitly assumed that the
basic physics behind special relativity is exactly what standard textbooks have been teaching in the last eight
decades: Lorentz symmetry would be an abstract, intrinsic property of space-time that matter cannot escape.
In this approach, all particles are compelled to move inside the minkowskian space-time. However, such a
non-trivial interpretation of special relativity is not a well-established physical law and there is no proof of its
absolute validity. It does not correspond to the initial formulation of the Poincar´e relativity principle (1895-
1905), and current particle theory suggests that Lorentz symmetry can be violated. A close look reveals that
historical arguments are biased by physical prejudices and arbitrary interpretations.

The French mathematician Henri Poincar´e was the ﬁrst author to consistently formulate the relativity prin-
ciple, stating (Poincar´e, 1895): ”Absolute motion of matter, or, to be more precise, the relative motion of
weighable matter and ether, cannot be disclosed. All that can be done is to reveal the motion of weighable
matter with respect to weighable matter”. Such a revolutionary claim was not easily accepted. Poincar´e was
ﬁghting for a decade to convince other scientists as well as the public opinion. He further emphasized the deep
content of this new and, at the time, unconventional law of Nature when he wrote (Poincar´e, 1901): ”This
principle will be conﬁrmed with increasing precision, as measurements become more and more accurate”.

1

Although textbooks and press usually present special relativity as having been formulated in the celebrated
Einstein’s 1905 paper, several authors have emphasized the actual role of H. Poincar´e in building relativity
theory previous to Einstein and the relevance of Poincar´e’s thought (Logunov, 1995 and 1997; Feynmann,
Leighton, & Sands, 1964). In his June 1905 paper (Poincar´e, 1905), published before Einsteins’s article (Ein-
stein, 1905) arrived (on June 30) to the editor, Henri Poincar´e explicitly wrote the relativistic transformation
law for the charge density and velocity of motion and applied to gravity the ”Lorentz group”, assumed to hold
for ”forces of whatever origin”. All the ingredients of special relativity, as well as its basic original concepts,
are clearly formulated in this work which, furthermore, emphasizes the need of a new, relativistic, theory of
gravitation. But Poincar´e’s priority is sometimes denied on the scientiﬁc grounds that ”Einstein essentially
announced the failure of all ether-drift experiments past and future as a foregone conclusion, contrary to
Poincar´e’s empirical bias” (Miller, 1996), that Poincar´e did never ”disavow the ether” (Miller, 1996) or that
”Poincar´e never challenges... the absolute time of newtonian mechanics... the ether is not only the absolute
space of mechanics... but a dynamical entity” (Paty, 1996). Is this argumentation correct, is it based on well-
established physical evidence? We do not think so. In fact, these authors implicitly assume that A. Einstein
was right in 1905 when ”reducing ether to the absolute space of mechanics” (Paty, 1996) and that H. Poincar´e
was wrong because ”the ether ﬁts quite nicely into Poincar´e’s view of physical reality: the ether is real...”
(Miller, 1996). But, with the present status of particle physics and cosmology, as well as of condensed-matter
physics and of the theory of dynamical systems, there is no scientiﬁc evidence for Einstein’s 1905 absolute,
”geometric” view of relativity. The existence of a physical ”ether”, playing an important dynamical role,
would not be incompatible with the existing (low-energy) experimental evidence for the relativity principle.

1.1 Particle physics point of view:

Modern particle physics has brought back the concept of a non-empty vacuum where free particles propa-
gate: without such an ”ether” where ﬁelds can condense, the standard model of electroweak interactions could
not be written and quark conﬁnement could not be understood. The mechanism producing the masses of the
W and Z bosons is close to the Meissner effect, where the condensed Cooper pairs (equivalent to the Higgs
ﬁeld) prevent the magnetic ﬁeld (virtual photons) from propagationg beyond a certain distance (the London
length) inside a superconductor: in the case of the standard model, the effect is mainly observed through the
masses (inverse London lengths) of the intermediate bosons propagating in the (vacuum) Higgs ﬁeld conden-
sate. Furthermore, modern cosmology is not incompatible with the idea of an ”absolute local frame” close to
that suggested by the study of cosmic microwave background radiation (see f.i. Peebbles, 1993).

Therefore, the ”ether” may well turn out to be a real entity in the XXI-th century physics and astrophysics.
Then, the relativity principle would become a symmetry of physics, another revolutionary concept whose
paternity was attributed to H. Poincar´e by R.P. Feynman (as quoted by Logunov, 1995): ”Precisely Poincar´e
proposed investigating what could be done with the equations without altering their form. It was precisely his
idea to pay attention to the symmetry properties of the laws of physics”. Actually, Poincar´e did even more: in
all his papers since 1895, he emphasized another deep concept: the dynamical origin of special relativity.

Dynamics is, by deﬁnition, a scale-dependent property of matter. In a global view of physics, a dynamical
property of matter would be the opposite concept to an intrinsic, geometric property of space-time. A basic,
unanswered question for particle physics is therefore: was Poincar´e right when, in his papers since 1895 and
in particular in his note of June 1905 strongly premonitory of nowadays grand-uniﬁed theories, he considered
the relativity principle as a dynamical phenomenon, related to a common origin of all the existing forces?

As symmetries in particle physics are in general violated, Lorentz symmetry may be broken and an absolute
local rest frame may be detectable through experiments performed beyond some critical scale or close to that
scale. Poincar´e’s special relativity (a symmetry applying to physical processes) could live with this situation,
but not Einstein’s approach such as it was formulated in 1905 (an absolute geometry of space-time that matter
cannot escape). But, how to check whether Lorentz symmetry is actually broken? We discuss here two issues:

2

a) the scale where we may expect Lorentz symmetry to be violated and the scale(s) at which the effect may
be observable; b) the physical phenomena and experiments potentially able to uncover Lorentz symmetry
violation (LSV). Previous papers on the subject are (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c and 1999a) and
references therein. We have proposed that Lorentz symmetry be a low-energy limit, broken following a k2-law
(k = wave vector) between the low-energy region and some fundamental energy (length) scale.

1.2 Condensed-matter point of view:

It seems obviously justiﬁed to examine what could be a ”condensed-matter point of view”, as particle
physics and cosmology have used many condensed-matter analogues in the last ﬁve decades (e.g. the pattern
of spontaneous symmetry breaking) and the Klein-Gordon equation is a typical equation for wave propagation.
Particle physics uses nowadays concepts such as strings, vortices, monopoles, topological defects... which are
closely related to condensed-matter phenomena and make reference to the ”vacuum” as a material medium.

Lorentz symmetry, viewed as a property of dynamics, implies no reference to absolute properties of space

and time (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995). In a two-dimensional galilean space-time, the wave equation:

α ∂2φ/∂t2

− ∂2φ/∂x2 = F (φ)

(1)

with α = 1/c2
o and co = critical speed, remains unchanged under ”Lorentz” transformations leaving invariant
the squared interval ds2 = dx2
odt2 . Any form of matter made with solutions of equation (1) , built in
the laboratory in a set-up at rest, would feel a relativistic space-time even if the real space-time is galilean
and if an absolute rest frame exists in the underlying dynamics beyond the wave equation. The solitons of the
sine-Gordon equation are obtained taking in (1) :

− c2

F (φ) = − (ω/co)2 sin φ

(2)

ω being a characteristic frequency of the dynamical system. The two-dimensional universe made of such sine-
Gordon solitons would indeed behave like a two-dimensional minkowskian world with the laws of special
relativity. The actual structure of space and time can only be found by going to deeper levels of resolution
where the equation fails, similar to the way high-energy accelerator experiments explore the inner structure
of ”elementary” particles (but cosmic rays have the highest attainable energies). As modern particle physics
views ”elementary” particles as excitations of vacuum, there would be no inconsistency in assumig that the
space-time felt by such particles is similar to the soliton analogy. and does not have and absolute meaning. In
such a scenario, that cannot be ruled out by any present experiment, superluminal sectors of matter can exist
and even be its ultimate building blocks. This clearly makes sense, as: a) in a perfectly transparent crystal,
at least two critical speeds can be identiﬁed, those of light and sound; b) the potential approach to lattice
dynamics in solid-sate physics is precisely the form of electromagnetism in the limit cs c−1
→ 0 , where cs
is the speed of sound and c that of light. See, for instance, (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1999a) and references therein.
At the fundamental lenght scale, and taking a simpliﬁed two-dimensional illustration, gravitation may even
be a composite phenomenon (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a), related for instance to ﬂuctuations of the parameters
of equations like:

A d2/dt2 [φ (n)] + H d/dt [ φ (n + 1) − φ (n − 1)] − Φn [φ] = 0

(3)

where we have quantized space to schematically account for the existence of the fundamental length a, φ is a
wave function, n designs by an integer lattice sites spaced by a distance a, A and H are coeﬁcients and Φn [φ]
is deﬁned by:

Φn [φ] = Kf l [2 φ (n) − φ (n − 1) − φ (n + 1)] + ω2

rest φ

(4)

Kf l being a coefﬁcient and (2π)−1 ωrest a rest frequency.

3

In the continuum limit, the coefﬁcients A = g00 , H = g01 = g10 and −Kf l = g11 can be regarded as
the matrix elements of a space-time bilinear metric with equilibrium values: A = 1 , H = 0 and Kf l = K .
Then, a small local ﬂuctuation:

A = 1 + γ

Kf l = K (1 − γ)

(5)
(6)

with γ ≪ 1 would be equivalent to a small, static gravitational ﬁeld created by a far away source.

In conclusion, our present knowledge of condensed-matter physics does not plead in favour of Einstein’s
1905 , intrinsically geometric, approach to relativity. It instead suggests that Poincar´e was right in not ruling
out the Ether and in developing instead the concept of physical symmetry (the ”Lorentz group”).

2 Lorentz Symmetry As a Low-Energy Limit

Low-energy tests of special relativity have conﬁrmed its validity to an extremely good accuracy (≈ 10−21
from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments), but the situation at very high energy remains unclear. Not
only high-energy measurements are less precise, but the violation of the relativity principle can be driven by
energy-dependent parameters. To discuss possible Lorentz symmetry violation, the hypothesis of a preferred
refrence frame seems necessary. In what follows, all discussions are performed in this frame, that we assume
to be close to the natural cosmological one deﬁned by cosmic background radiation (see, f.i. Peebles 1993).

If Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV) follows a E2 law (E = energy), similar to the effective gravitational
coupling, it can be ≈ 1 at E ≈ 1021 eV (just above the highest observed cosmic-ray energies) and ≈ 10−26
at E ≈ 100 M eV (corresponding to the highest momentum scale involved in nuclear magnetic resonance
experiments). Such a pattern of LSV (deformed Lorentz symmetry, DLS) will escape all existing low-energy
bounds. If LSV is of order 1 at Planck scale (E ≈ 1028 eV ), and following a similar law, it will be ≈ 10−40
at E ≈ 100 M eV . Our suggestion is not in contradiction with Einstein’s thought such as it became after he
had developed general relativity. In 1921 , A. Einstein wrote in ”Geometry and Experiment” (Einstein, 1921):
”The interpretation of geometry advocated here cannot be directly applied to submolecular spaces... it might
turn out that such an extrapolation is just as incorrect as an extension of the concept of temperature to particles
of a solid of molecular dimensions”. The absoluteness of the minkowskian space-time was clearly abandoned
through this statement. It is in itself remarkable that special relativity holds at the attained accelerator energies,
but there is no fundamental reason for this to be the case above Planck scale.

2.1 Deformed relativistic kinematics

A typical example of patterns violating Lorentz symmetry at very short distance is provided by nonlocal
models where an absolute local rest frame exists and non-locality in space is introduced through a fundamental
length scale a where new physics is expected to occur (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a). Such models naturally lead
to a deformed relativistic kinematics (DRK) of the form (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b):

E = (2π)−1 h c a−1 e (k a)

(7)

where h is the Planck constant, c the speed of light, k the wave vector, and [e (k a)]2 is a convex function of
(k a)2 obtained from vacuum dynamics. Such an expression is equivalent to special relativity in the small k
limit. Expanding equation (1) for k a ≪ 1 , we can write (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997c):

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2

− α (k a)4 + (2π a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

(8)

α being a model-dependent constant, in the range 0.1 − 0.01 for full-strength violation of Lorentz symmetry
at the fundamental length scale, and m the mass of the particle. For momentum p ≫ mc , we get:

E ≃ p c + m2 c3 (2 p)−1

− p c α (k a)2/2

(9)

4

The ”deformation” approximated by ∆ E = − p c α (k a)2/2 in the right-hand side of (9) implies a Lorentz
symmetry violation in the ratio E p−1 varying like Γ (k) ≃ Γ0 k2 where Γ0 = − α a2/2 . If c is a
universal parameter for all particles, the DRK deﬁned by (7) - (9) preserves Lorentz symmetry in the limit
k → 0, contrary to the standard T Hǫµ model (Will, 1993). If, besides c , α is also universal, LSV does not
lead (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a, c and e) to the spontaneous decays predicted in (Coleman, & Glashow, 1997
and subsequent papers) at ultra-high energy using a T Hǫµ-type approach. On more general grounds, as we
also pointed out, the existence of very high-energy cosmic rays can by no means be regarded as an evidence
against LSV, as the relevant kinematical balances can be sensitive to many small parameters. In particular, any
form of LSV should be considered (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d and 1997e) and not only (like in the papers by
Coleman and Glashow) models driven by low-energy constant parameters.

As previously emphasized, the above non-locality may actually be an approximation to an underlying
dynamics involving superluminal particles (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996, 1997b, 1997f and 1997g), just as elec-
tromagnetism looks nonlocal in the potential approximation to lattice dynamics in solid-state physics: it would
then correspond to the limit c c−1
i → 0 where ci is the superluminal critical speed. Contrary to the T Hǫµ-
type scenario considered by Coleman and Glashow, where LSV occurs explicitly in the hamiltonian already
at k = 0 through a non-universality of the critical speed in vacuum (the rest masses of charged particles are
no longer given by the relation E = m c2 , c being the speed of light in the k → 0 limit), our DLS approach
can preserve standard gravitation and general relativity as low-energy limits. Furthermore, phenomenological
estimates by Coleman and Glashow do not consider possible deformations of the relativistic kinematics: they
use undeformed kinematics for single particles at ultra-high cosmic-ray energies. More recent (1998) papers
by these authors bring no new result as compared to our 1997 papers and present the same fundamental limi-
tation as their 1997 article. Physically, the two approaches are really different: by choosing a T Hǫµ scenario,
Coleman and Glashow implicitly assume that Lorentz symmetry is broken in an ”external” way, by a small
macroscopic effect. On the contrary, as explained above, our pattern attributes LSV to an ”internal” very
high-energy, very low-distance phenomenon completely disappearing at macroscopic scale.

A fundamental question is whether c and α are universal. This may be the case for all ”elementary”
particles, i.e. quarks, leptons, gauge bosons..., but the situation is less obvious for hadrons, nuclei and heavier
objects. From a naive soliton model (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997b and 1997f), we inferred that: a) c is expected
to be universal up to extremely small corrections (∼ 10−40 , far below the values considered by Coleman and
Glashow) escaping all existing bounds; b) an approximate rule can be to take α universal for leptons, gauge
bosons and light hadrons (pions, nucleons...) and assume a α ∝ m−2 law for nuclei and heavier objects, the
nucleon mass setting the scale. With this rule, DRK introduces no anomaly in the relation between inertial and
gravitational masses at large scale (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1998c). Basically, the α ∝ m−2 law makes compatible
DRK for a large body with a similar DRK for smaller parts of it which, otherwise, could not travel at the same
speed as the whole body if the relation v = dE/dp (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a , 1997d and 1997f) is used.

The main effect of DRK can be decribed as follows. The deformation term increases with energy roughly
like ≈ E3 , whereas the ”mass term” in (9) decreases like ≈ E−1 . The ratio between the two terms
varies like ≈ E4 and, above some energy depending on the parameters involved, the deformation becomes
dominant as compared to the mass term. Very-high energy kinematics in the laboratory rest frame is, basically,
dominated by longitudinal momentum: as everything else becomes ”small”, and longitudinal momentum has
to be exactly conserved, the real kinematical balances occur entirely between ”small” terms. Therefore, a
”small” violation of the relativity principle can potentially play a crucial role in these balances. If c is universal,
α must be positive to avoid the spontaneous decay of UHE (ultra-high energy) particles (unless the effect is
not observable below 3.1020 eV ). The universality of α up to small corrections is imposed by the requirement
that elementary particles be able to reach very high energies (again, if the effect is to be obervable below
3.1020 eV ). Otherwise, particles with smaller positive values of α would decay into those with larger α
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e) and the effect would manifest itself in high-energy cosmic-ray events.

5

2.2 Alternative models

The above model is not the only possible way to deform relativistic kinematics. Alternatives are:
Mixing with superluminal sectors (MSLS). A form of DRK was predicted in our papers since 1995, where
we attributed (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995) Lorentz symmetry violation to a very high-energy, very low-distance
phenomenon which would modify the propagators of ”ordinary” particles (those with critical speed in vacuum
equal to c , the speed of light): the dynamics driving LSV was expected to be generated at Planck scale or at
some other fundamental length scale. The energy-dependence of LSV was claimed to be the explanation to
the apparent validity of the Poincar´e relativity principle, as inferred from low-energy tests. We also pointed
out (see, e.g. Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996) that ultra-high-energy cosmic rays would be a natural experimental
framework to explore possible Lorentz symmetry violation phenomena. A LSV scenario suggested in all
these papers was mixing between ”ordinary” and superluminal particles directly deforming propagators (see
also Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d where energy-dependent mixing parameters were explicitly used, preserving
Lorentz symmetry in the k → 0 limit). Using such models, counterexamples to the claims made in (Coleman
and Glashow, 1997) were presented, based on the energy-dependence of LSV effective parameters. Through
the parametrizations thus considered, it was also pointed out that, besides a fundamental length scale, masses
of heavy superluminal particles can play a signiﬁcant role in killing low-energy LSV.

The basic idea of our superluminal particle (superbradyons, see e.g. Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997g) model was
that several sectors of matter are generated at the fundamental length scale(s), each sector possibly satisfy-
ing a ”sectorial” Lorentz invariance vith a ”sectorial” critical speed in vacuum (ci for the i-th superluminal
sector). Superbradyons would have positive mass and energy, and satisfy sectorial motion equations (e.g.
Klein-Gordon) with critical speed ci : thay are not tachyons. Dynamical mixing between two sectors would
break both Lorentz invariances, and mixing with superluminal sectors (MSLS) would be enough to produce a
consistent DRK for ”ordinary” matter. But, if LSV is generated in this way, we also expect more conventional
deformations of particle propagators to occur, other than direct mixing between different sectors of matter.

Linear deformation. When building (1997) the DRK approach given by (7)-(9), where the effective defor-
mation parameter depends quadratically on energy (quadratically deformed relativistic kinematics, QDRK),
we were also naturally led to consider models where this dependence is linear (linearly deformed relativistic
kinematics, LDRK), i.e. where e (k a) is a function of k a and, for k a ≪ 1 :

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2

− β (k a)3 + (2π a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

β being a model-dependent constant. For momentum p ≫ mc :

E ≃ p c + m2 c3 (2 p)−1

− p c β (k a)/2

(10)

(11)

the deformation ∆ E = − p c β (k a)/2 being now driven by an effective parameter proportional to
momentum, Γ (k) = Γl

0 = − β a/2 .

0 k where Γl

QDRK naturally emerges when a fundamental length scale is introduced to deform the Klein-Gordon equa-
tions. It is typical, for instance, of phonons in condensed-matter physics. As recently pointed out (Ellis et al.,
1999a and b) using a class of string models, LDRK can be generated by introducing a background gravitational
ﬁeld in the propagation equations of free particles. In the ﬁrst case, the Planck scale is an internal parameter
of the basic wave equations generating the ”elementary” particles as vacuum excitations. In the second case, it
manifests itself only as a parameter of the background gravitational ﬁeld, similar to a refraction phenomenon.
By discriminating between the two parametrizations, or excluding both approaches, feasible experiments at
available energies can potentially provide very valuable information on fundamental Planck-scale physics. Our
choice in 1997 was to concentrate on the QDRK model and disregard LDRK, for phenomenological reasons
which seem to remain valid if the new physics is expected to be generated not too far from Planck scale.

If existing bounds on LSV from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments are to be intepreted as setting a
bound of ≈ 10−21 on relative LSV at the momentum scale p ∼ 100 M eV , this implies β a < 10−34 cm .

6

However, as it will be explained later, it turns out that LDRK can lead to many inconsistencies with cosmic-ray
experiments unless β a is much smaller. Concepts and formulae presented in our previous papers for QDRK
(see next section) can be readily extended to LDRK, using similar techniques. In particular:

- the linear deformation term − p c β (k a)/2 and the mass term m2 c3 (2 p)−1 become of the same order

at the energy scale Etrans ≈ π−1/3 h1/3 (2 β)−1/3 a−1/3 m2/3 c5/3 ;

- the linear deformation term and the target energy ET become of the same order at the energy scale

Elim ≈ (2 π)−1/2 (ET a−1β−1 h c)1/2 .

- if the same philosophy as for QDRK is to be followed, c and β would be universal for all ”elementary”

particles including light hadrons, whereas for larger objects β ∝ m−1 , the nucleon mass setting the scale.

Modiﬁcations of QDRK. Our conjecture that α has the same value for light hadrons as for the photon
and leptons derives from the result (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997f) that the elementary soliton solution on a one-
dimesional space lattice obeys the same deformed kinematics as plane waves on the same lattice and with the
same dalembertian operator (discretized in space), if the soliton size scale is basically the quantum inverse of
its mass scale. As the highest-energy observed cosmic-ray events seem to be hadronic and not electromagnetic,
the conjecture seems sensible on practical grounds. But it can also be argued that quarks are the real elementary
particles and that, to be consistent with quark propagation, the value of α should be divided by a factor
≈ 4 for mesons and ≈ 9 for baryons. Actually, the parton picture seems impossible to implement when
the deformation becomes important, as in the conventional parton model the constituents can carry arbitrary
fractions of energy and momentum at very high energy and the deformation energy depends crucially on these
fractions (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997f): we therefore expect the failure of any parton model at these energies.

A phenomenological discussion of the latter hypothesis is nevertheless worth attempting: for instance, if
alpha is to be divided by a factor of 9 for the proton and 4 for the pion, and the highest-energy cosmic-ray
events are due to protons, the requirement that the spontaneous decay p → p + γ does not occur would then
imply α a2 < 2.10−73 cm2 . This would exclude LSV with strong coupling at the Planck scale. A similar
kinematical analysis seems to hold for nuclei unless dynamics prevents the decay (see next section). With
α a2 = 2.10−73 cm2 , a proton with E ≈ 1021 eV could also emit pions and, above E ≈ 1020 eV , pion
lifetimes would become much shorter than predicted by special relativity and charged pions can emit photons.

3 QDRK and Ultra-High Energy Cosmic-Ray (UHECR) Physics

If Lorentz symmetry is broken at Planck scale or at some other fundamental length scale, the effects of LSV
may be accessible to experiments well below this energy: in particular, they can produce detectable phenomena
at the highest observed cosmic ray energies. DRK (Gonzalez-Mestres 1997a, 1997b, 1997c, 1997h and 1998a)
plays a crucial role. Taking the quadratic deformation (QDRK) version of DRK, it is found that, at energies
above Etrans ≈ π−1/2 h1/2 (2 α)−1/4 a−1/2 m1/2 c3/2, the very small deformation ∆ E dominates over
the mass term m2 c3 (2 p)−1 in (3) and modiﬁes all kinematical balances: physics gets thus closer to Planck
scale than to electroweak scale (this is actually the case in a logarithmic plot of energy scales) and UHECR
become an efﬁcient probe of Planck-scale physics. Because of the negative value of ∆ E , it costs more and
more energy, as energy increases above Etrans, to split the incoming logitudinal momentum in the laboratory
rest frame. As the ratio m2 c3 (2 p ∆ E)−1 varies like ∼ E−4 , the transition at Etrans is very sharp.

With such a LSV pattern, we also inferred (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997f) from a toy soliton model that the
parton picture (in any version), as well as standard relativistic formulae for Lorentz contraction and time
dilation, are expected to fail above this energy (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997b and 1997f) which corresponds to
≈ 10−72 cm2 (f.i. α ≈ 10−6 and a = Planck length), and to
E ≈ 1020 eV for m = proton mass and α a2
E ≈ 1018 eV for m = pion mass and α a2
≈ 10−67 cm2 (f.i. α ≈ 0.1 and a = Planck length). Such effects
are in principle detectable. A phenomenological study of the implications of DRK allowed to draw several
important conclusions for UHECR experiments (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997-99).

7

3.1 Our previous predictions with QDRK

Assuming that the earth moves slowly with respect to the absolute rest frame (the ”vacuum rest frame”), so
that the approximation (9) remains valid in the laboratory rest frame, QDRK can lead to observable phenomena
in future experiments devoted to the highest-energy cosmic rays:

a) For α a2 > 10−72 cm2 , assuming universal values of α and c , there is no Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin
(GZK) cutoff (Greisen 1966; Zatsepin & Kuzmin, 1966) for the particles under consideration. Due to the new
kinematics, interactions with cosmic microwave background (CMB) photons are strongly inhibited or forbid-
den, and ultra-high energy cosmic rays (e.g. protons) from anywhere in the presently observable Universe can
reach the earth (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997c). In particular, for an incoming UHE nucleon hitting a
CMB photon, the ∆ resonance can no longer be formed due to the deformation term. Proton deceleration in
astrophysical objects (e.g. gamma-ray bursters) can be inhibited in a similar way.

b) With the same hypothesis, unstable particles with at least two stable particles in the ﬁnal states of all
their decay channels become stable at very high energy. Above Etrans, the lifetimes of all unstable particles
(e.g. the π0 in cascades) become much longer than predicted by relativistic kinematics (Gonzalez-Mestres,
1997a, 1997b and 1997c). Then, for instance, the neutron or even the ∆++ can be candidates for the primaries
of the highest-energy cosmic ray events. If c and α are not exactly universal, many different scenarios can
happen concerning the stability of ultra-high-energy particles (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a, 1997b and 1997c).
c) In astrophysical processes at very high energy, similar mechanisms can inhibit radiation under external
forces (e.g. synchrotron-like, where the interactions occur with virtual photons), GZK-like cutoffs, decays,
photodisintegration of nuclei, momentum loss trough collisions (e.g. with a photon wind in reverse shocks),
production of lower-energy secondaries... potentially contributing to solve all basic problems raised by the
highest-energy cosmic rays (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e), including acceleration mechanisms.

d) With the same hypothesis, the allowed ﬁnal-state phase space of two-body collisions is strongly reduced
at very high energy, leading (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e) to a sharp fall of partial and total cross-sections for
incoming cosmic ray energies above Elim ≈ (2 π)−2/3 (ET a−2 α−1 h2 c2)1/3, where ET is the energy
of the target. As a consequence, and with the previous ﬁgures for Lorentz symmetry violation parameters,
above some energy Elim between 1022 and 1024 eV a cosmic ray will not deposit most of its energy in the
atmosphere and can possibly fake an exotic event with much less energy (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e).

e) Actually, requiring simultaneously the absence of GZK cutoff in the region E ≈ 1020 eV , and that
cosmic rays with energies below ≈ 3.1020 eV deposit most of their energy in the atmosphere, leads in the
DRK scenario to the constraint: 10−72 cm2 < α a2 < 10−61 cm2 , equivalent to 10−20 < α < 10−9
for a ≈ 10−26 cm (≈ 1021 GeV scale). Remarkably enough, assuming full-strength LSV forces a to be in
the range 10−36 cm < a < 10−30 cm . But a ≈ 10−6 LSV at Planck scale can still explain the data. Thus,
the simplest version of QDRK naturally ﬁts, on phenomenological grounds, with the expected potential role
of Planck scale in generating the standard ”elementary” particles and opening the door to new physics.

f) Effects a) to e) are obtained applying DRK to single particles and collisions.

If further dynamical
anomalies are added (failure, at very small distance scales, of the parton model and of the standard relativis-
tic formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation...), we can expect much stronger effects in the early
cascade development proﬁles of cosmic-ray events (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997b, 1997f and 1998a). Detailed
phenomenology and data analysis in next-generation experiments may uncover spectacular new physics and
provide a powerful microscope directly focused on the fundamental length (Planck?) scale.

g) Cosmic superluminal particles would produce atypical events with very small total momentum (due to
the high E/p ratio), isotropic or involving several jets (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996, 1997b, 1997d, 1997 and
1998b). In the atmosphere (f.i. AUGER or satellite-based experiments), such events would generate excep-
tional cascade development proﬁles and muon spectra, as will be discussed in a forthcoming paper.

8

***************************************************************************************
It should be noticed that our description of all these phenomena and, in particular, of points a) and b) , on

the grounds of DRK was prior to any similar claim by Coleman and Glashow from T Hǫµ-like models.
***************************************************************************************

It follows from b) and f) that early cascade development is a crucial point for possible tests of special
relativity in UHCR cosmic-ray events. Unfortunately, this part of the interactions induced by the incoming
cosmic ray is not easily detectable:
it occurs early in the atmosphere, and it takes a few collisions before
energy is degraded into a large enough number of particles to produce an observable ﬂuorescence signal. Data
on cascade development start well below the ﬁrst interaction of the primary with the atmosphere whereas we
expect LSV, if present, to manifest itself only in the ﬁrst few collisions. But the effect will propagate to later
multiparticle production and be observable: for instance, if the π0 does not decay at very high energy, we
expect a smaller electromagetic component developing later and more muons produced. A serious drawback
is the present ambiguousness of phenomenological air shower models, but combined data from AUGER and
satellite-based experiments should help to clarify this situation. A recent ﬁt to the UHECR spectrum with a
model close to QDRK, reproducing the absence of GZK cutoff, can be found in (Chechin & Vavilov, 1999).

3.2 On cosmic-ray composition

Cosmic-ray composition above 1017 eV is a crucial question. Protons are often preferred as candidates to
UHECR events (Bird et al., 1993), but detailed analysis are not yet conclusive (f.i. AGASA Collaboration,
1999) and there are claims in favor of light nuclei up to 2.1019 eV (f.i. Wolfendale & Wibig, 1999). It is
commonly agreed that the UHECR composition becomes lighter above 5.1017 eV , as energy increases, and
tends to be protons at the highest observed energies. It may be interesting to compare this phenomenon with
QDRK predictions, keeping in mind the proposed α ∝ m−2 law. This law naturally allows, kinematically,
spontaneous N → N + γ decays (N = nucleus) at very high energy. If α a2
≈ 10−67 cm2 , the threshold
for spontaneous gamma emission would be ≈ 3.1019 eV for F e and ≈ 1019 eV for He4 .

It should be noticed, however, that although spontaneous gamma emission will be kinematically allowed
for large objects because of the α ∝ m−2 law, it will become more and more unnatural dynamically as their
size increases. Such an outgoing photon would carry an energy much larger than that of any incoming nucleon
and its wavelength would be smaller, by orders of magnitude, than the size of the composite object.

3.3 Neutrinos from gamma-ray bursts

The basic idea (Waxman and Bahcall, 1999) is that, in reverse shocks, protons are accelerated to energies
∼ 1020 eV and collide with ambient photons producing, in the kinematical region where the center of mass
energy corresponds to the ∆+ resonance, charged pions with about 20% of the initial proton energy. These
pions subsequently decay into muons and muon neutrinos (π+
→ µ+ + νµ), and the muons decay later
→ e+ + νe + νµ) . It should be noticed
into electrons, electron neutrinos and muon antineutrinos (µ+
that, beacuse of Lorentz dilation, the lifetime for the ﬁrst decay at pion energy ∼ 2.1019 eV is ∼ 3000s
whereas the muon lifetime at ∼ 1019 eV is ∼ 105 s . These time scales are already longer than those of
gamma-ray bursts. But the situation, for UHE neutrino production, may be considerably worsened by LSV.
For α a2 > 10−72 cm2 , the lifetime of a ∼ 1020 eV ∆+ is modiﬁed by QDRK and gets much longer. If
α a2 > 10−70 cm2 , the resonance becomes stable at the same energy with respect to the n e+ νµ νµ νe
decay channel. Also, as previoulsy stated, much higher photon energies are required to form a ∆ resonance. In
both cases, pion photoproduction is strongly inhibited and the calculation presented in (Waxman and Bahcall,
1999) is to be modiﬁed leading to a lower neutrino ﬂux. Similarly, the lifetimes of UHE charged pions and
muons become much longer and lower the neutrino ﬂux further. At the same time, QDRK may inhibit UHE
proton syncrotron radiation and allow the proton to be accelerated to energies above ∼ 1020 eV .

9

As DRK makes velocity, v = dE/dp , energy-dependent (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997d), the
arrival time on earth of particles produced in a single burst is expected to dependent on the particle energy.
But, contrary to the claim presented in (Ellis et al., 1999a), it follows from the above considerations that
observing UHE neutrinos from GRB bursts for QDRK with α a2 > 10−72 cm2 will most likely be much
more difﬁcult (if at all possible) than naively expected from the Waxman-Bahcall model.

4 LDRK, gamma-ray bursts and TeV physics

Considering vacuum as a medium similar to an electromagnetic plasma, it was suggested in (Amelino-
Camelia et al., 1998) that quantum-gravitational ﬂuctuations may lead to a correction, linear in energy, to the
velocity of light. This is equivalent to a LDRK that, for k a ≪ 1 , can be parameterized as:

E ≃ p c − p c β (k a)/2 = p c − p2 M −1

(12)

where M is an effective mass scale. Possible tests of this model through gamma-ray bursts, measuring the
delays in the arrival time of photons of different energies, have been considered in (Norris et al., 1999) having
in mind the Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST) and in (Ellis et al., 1999b) with a more general
scope. Biller et al. (1998) claim a lower bound on M slightly above ≈ 1016 GeV .

However, from the same considerations already developed in our 1997-99 papers taking QDRK as an
exemple, stringent bounds on LDRK can be derived. Assume that LDRK applies only to photons, and not to
charged particles, so that at high energy we can write for a charged particle, ch , the dispersion relation:

Ech ≃ pch c + m2

ch c3 (2 pch)−1

(13)

where the ch subscript stands for the charged particle under consideration. Then, it can be readily checked
that the decay ch → ch + γ would be allowed for p above ≃ (2 m2

ch M c3)1/3 , i.e:

- for an electron, above E ≈ 2 T eV if M = 1016 GeV and ≈ 20 T eV if M = 1019 GeV
- for a muon or charged pion, above E ≈ 80 T eV if M = 1016 GeV and ≈ 800 T eV if M = 1019 GeV
- for a proton, above E ≈ 240 T eV if M = 1016 GeV and ≈ 2.4 P eV if M = 1019 GeV
- for a τ lepton, above E ≈ 400 T eV if M = 1016 GeV and ≈ 4 P eV if M = 1019 GeV

so that none of these particles would be oberved above such energies, apart from very short paths. Such decays
seem to be in obvious contradiction with cosmic ray data, but avoiding them forces the charged particles to
have the same kind of propagators as the photon, with the same effective value of M up to small differences.
Similar conditions are readily derived for all ”elementary” particles, leading for all of them, up to small
devations, to a LDRK given by the universal dispersion relation:

E ≃ p c + m2 c3 (2 p)−1

− p2 M −1

(14)

For instance, π0 production would otherwise be inhibited. But if, as it seems compulsory, the π0 kinematics
follows a similar law, then the decay time for π0
→ γ γ will become much longer than predicted by special
relativity at energies above ≈ 50 T eV if M = 1016 GeV and ≈ 500 T eV if M = 1019 GeV . Again, this
seems to be in contradiction with cosmic-ray data. Requiring that the π0 lifetime agrees with special relativity
at E ≈ 1017 eV would force M to be above ≈ 1026 GeV , far away from the values to be tested at GLAST.
Another bound is obtained from the condition that there are 3.1020 eV cosmic-ray events. Setting Elim to
this value, and taking oxygen to be the target, yields M ≈ 3.1021GeV . In view of these bounds, it appears
very difﬁcult to make LDRK , with M reasonably close to Planck scale, compatible with experimental data.
It therefore seems necessary to reconsider the models to be tested at GLAST.

10

5 Conclusions and comments

If, as conjectured by Poincar´e, special relativity is a symmetry of dynamical origin, Lorentz symmetry
violation at very high energy would not be unnatural. But checking it appears to be a difﬁcult task. If LSV
is generated at some fundamental length (e.g. Planck) scale, we expect it to be driven by energy-dependent
parameters becoming very small in the low-energy region where impressive tests of the validity of the relativity
principle have been performed (Lamoreaux et al., 1986; Hills & Hall, 1990).
It therefore seems natural,
contrary to the T Hǫµ model, to preserve Lorentz symmetry as a low-energy limit.
In deformed Lorentz
symmetry models, leading in particular to various versions of deformed relativistic kinematics, the deformation
disappears in the limit k → 0 . DRK is far from being unique, as it can be generated in many different ways,
and its predictions are strongly model-dependent. Unlike a previous attempt (Kirzhnits & Chechin, 1972),
we have pursued the idea that: a) the fundamental length scale is at the origin of LSV and should be taken
seriously in all respects; b) physics can vary smoothly down to this scale where a new dynamics manifests
itself; c) LSV is not related to any other fundamental symmetry generalizing special relativity. It then turns
out that, at energies well below the fundamental length scale, a very small LSV can generate observable
leading-order effects and even allow to discriminate between models of vacuum at Planck scale.

Ambitious prospects, based on LDRK (linearly deformed relativistic kinematics, obtained from Planck-
scale ”vacuum recoil” models), to measure a possible systematic energy-dependence in time delays from
gamma-ray bursts are confronted to apparent incompatibilities between cosmic-ray data and the orders of
magnitude of LDRK parameters considered. The basic reason is that LSV, if realized in this way, would
manifest itself in many other phenomena already accessible to experiment (cosmic rays in the TeV - PeV
range). However, the fact that the study of LDRK has led to consider such comparatively low energies pleads
in favour of precision tests of special relativity at the highest-energy accelerators (LHC, VLHC and beyond).
Although the existence of observable effects of LDRK at the gamma-ray burst photon energies seems unlikely,
systematic tests of special relativity at energies between 1 TeV and 1 PeV are missing and should be performed.
On phenomenological grounds, QDRK (quadratically deformed relativistic kinematics, obtained when a
fundamental length scale is introduced in the dynamics generating ”elementary” particles) seems to be the
most performant model and naturally ﬁts with possible new Planck-scale physics. UHE (ultra-high energy)
CR (cosmic-ray) physics appears to be the safest laboratory to test LSV, allowing for unconventional phe-
nomena in early cascade development. If Lorentz symmetry is violated, the study of UHECR events may
be a powerful tool to get direct information on fundamental physics at Planck scale. At the highest oberved
cosmic-ray energies, the effect of LSV at Planck scale can already lead to spectacular signatures: absence
of the GZK cutoff; drastic modiﬁcations of lifetimes, as well as of total and partial cross-sections; failure of
any parton picture as well as of standard formulae for time dilation and Lorentz contraction... But further
work is required to clearly translate the physical signatures into measurable data (cascade development pro-
ﬁle, muons, electromagnetic yield...). Models of air shower formation should be improved in order to remove
many interpretation uncertainties. A basic difﬁculty is that, although the primary interaction occurs quite early
in the atmosphere, a detectable ﬂuorescence yield is emitted only after a few interactions, when many charged
particles have been produced and the atmosphere is denser. Combined information from future experiments,
such as AUGER and satellite-based measurements, will hopefully make this task easier.

The existence of superluminal particles (superbradyons) is not excluded if LSV occurs at Planck scale:

they may even be the ultimate constituents of matter. This subject will be discussed at length elsewhere.

References

AGASA Collaboration, 1999, Proceedings of the 26th International Cosmic Ray Conference (ICRC 1999),
Salt Lake City August 1999, paper HE 2.3.02.
Amelino-Camelia, G., Ellis, J., Mavromatos, N.E., Nanopoulos, D.V. & Sarkar, S., Nature 393, 319 (1998).

11

Biller, S.D., Breslin, A.C., Buckley, J., (Biller et al.), 1998, paper gr-qc/9810044 .
Bird, D.J., Corbato, S.C., Dhai, H.Y. et al. (Bird et al.), 1993, Proceedings of the 23th International Cosmic
Ray Conference (ICRC 1993), Calgary 1993, Vol. 2, p. 38.
Chechin, V.A., & Vavilov, Yu.N., ICRC 1999 Proceedings, paper HE 2.3.07.
Coleman, S., & Glashow, S., 1997, Phys. Lett. B 405, 249 and subsequent (1998) papers in LANL (Los
Alamos) electronic archive as well as in the TAUP 97 Proceedings.
Einstein, A., 1905, ”Zur Elecktrodynamik bewegter K¨orper”, Annalen der Physik 17, 891.
Einstein, A., 1921, ”Geometrie und Erfahrung”, Preus. Akad. der Wissench., Sitzungsberichte, part I, p. 123.
Ellis, J., Mavromatos, N.E., Nanopoulos, D.V. & Volkov, G. (Ellis et al.) 1999a, paper gr-qc/9911055.
Ellis, J., Farakos, K., Mavromatos, N., Mitsou, V.A. & Nanopoulos, D.V. (Ellis et al.), paper astro-ph/9907340.
Feynman, R.P., Leighton, R.B., & Sands, M., 1964 ”The Feynman Lectures on Physics”, Addison-Wesley.
Greisen, K., 1966, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1995, paper astro-ph/9505117 of LANL electronic archive, Proceedings of the Moriond
Workshop on ”Dark Matter, Cosmology, Clocks and Fundamental Laws”, January 1995, Ed. Fronti`eres.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1996, paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL electronic archive and references therein.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997a, paper physics/9704017 of LANL archive.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997b, Proc. of the International Conference on Relativistic Physics and some of its
Applications, Athens June 25-28 1997, Apeiron, p. 319.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997c, Proc. 25th ICRC (Durban, 1997), Vol. 6, p. 113.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997d, papers physics/9702026 and physics/9703020 of LANL archive.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997e, papers physics/9706022 and physics/9706032 of LANL archive.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997f, paper nucl-th/9708028 of LANL archive.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997g, Proc. 25th ICRC (Durban, 1997), Vol. 6, p. 109.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1997h, talk given at the International Workshop on Topics on Astroparticle and Under-
ground Physics (TAUP 97), paper physics/9712005 of LANL archive.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1998a, talk given at the ”Workshop on Observing Giant Cosmic Ray Air Showers From
> 1020 Particles From Space”, College Park, November 1997, AIP Conference Proceedings 433, p. 148.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1998b, same Proceedings, p. 418.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1998c, Proc. of COSMO 97, Ambleside September 1997, World Scientiﬁc, p. 568.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1999a, ICRC 1999 Proceedings, paper HE. 1.3.16.
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., 1999b, ICRC 1999 Proceedings, paper OG 3.1.10.
Hills, D. & Hall, J.L., 1990, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697.
Kirzhnits, D.A., and Chechin, V.A., 1972, Soviet Journal of Nuclear Physics, 15 , 585.
Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J. & Forston, E.N., 1986, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 , 3125.
Logunov, A.A., 1995, ”On the articles by Henri Poincar´e on the dynamics of the electron”, Ed. JINR, Dubna.
Logunov, A.A., 1997, ”Relativistic theory of gravity and the Mach principle”, Ed. JINR, Dubna.
Miller, A.I. 1996, Why did Poincar´e not formulate Special Relativity in 1905?”, in ”Henri Poincar´e, Science
and Philosophy”, Ed. Akademie Verlag, Berlin, and Albert Blanchard, Paris.
Norris, J.P., Bricell, J.T., Marani, G.F. & Scargle, J.D., 1999, ICRC 1999 Proceedings, paper OG 2.3.11.
Paty, M., 1996, ”Poincar´e et le principe de relativit´e”, same reference.
Peebles, P.J.E., 1993, ”Principles of Physical Cosmology”, Princeton University Press. Poincar´e, H., 1895, ”A
propos de la th´eorie de M. Larmor”, L’Eclairage ´electrique, Vol. 5, 5.
Poincar´e, H., 1901, ”Electricit´e et Optique: La lumi`ere et les th´eories ´electriques”, Ed. Gauthier-Villars, Paris.
Poincar´e, H., 1905, Sur la dynamique de l’´electron”, Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Vol. 140, p. 1504, June 5.
Waxman, E. & Bahcall, J., 1999, paper hep-ph/9909286.
A.W. Wolfendale & T. Wibig, 1999, ICRC 1999 Proceedings, paper OG 1.3.01.
Will, C., 1993, ”Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics”, Cambridge University Press.
Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114.

12

