0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

HIERARCHIC MODEL OF

CONSCIOUSNESS:

FROM MOLECULAR BOSE

CONDENSATION

TO SYNAPTIC REORGANIZATION

Alex Kaivarainen

University of Turku, JBL, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland

H2o@karelia.ru

URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk

Hierarchic Model of Consciousness, proposed in this work, is based
on Hierarchic Theory of Matter and Field, developed by the author
( Kaivarainen, 1995; 1998).

In accordance to our Hierarchic Model of Consciousness (HMC),
each speciﬁc kind of neuron ensembles excitation - corresponds to
hierarchical system of three-dimensional (3D) standing waves of fol-
lowing interrelated kinds:

- thermal de Broglie waves (waves B), produced by unharmonic
translations and librations of molecules and providing the possibility
of high-temperature molecular Bose condensation;

- electromagnetic (IR) waves;
- acoustic waves;
- vibro-gravitational waves, excited by coherent translational and
librational oscillations of molecules, accompanied by alternating ac-
celerations.

Corresponding hierarchic system of 24 excitations, describing vir-
tually all the properties of any condensed matter, can be generated
by quantum transitions of the coherent water clusters, localized in
cytoplasm and in the microtubules of neurons bodies. Most impor-
tant primary collective excitations in form of coherent clusters are
resulted from high-temperature molecular Bose-condensation of wa-
ter (see Appendix).

We assume in our model the existence of feedback reaction be-
tween the following hierarchy of phenomena, representing interrela-
tion of quantum microscopic, mesoscopic and nonlinear macroscopic
events:

a) hologram-like superposition of four types of 3D waves, listed

above;

b) correlated MTs orientations, responsible for volume and ge-

ometry of cells body in the tuned ensembles of neurons;

c) quantity and distribution of synaptic contacts on the surface

of the nerve cells bodies, dependent on geometry of cells.

1

It is assumed in our model that [gel→sol] transitions in cytoplasm
of neuron’s body, produced by collective disassembly of big number of
actin ﬁlaments and microtubules, as a consequence of nerve excitation
and neuron’s body depolarization, - is accompanied by its volume and
shape ”pulsation”. The twisting of centrioles in cells to orientation,
corresponding to maximum energy of the MTs distant interaction
by means 3D electromagnetic and vibro- gravitational waves - is an
important stage of the excited neurons dynamic adaptation to each
other. Such adaptation becomes possible only in low viscosity - [sol]
state of cytoplasm.

As a result of cell’s volume/shape pulsation, induced by reversible
osmotic equilibrium change, the distribution of synaptic contacts on
the surface of cells and/or ionic channels activity - change. These
changes provide the long-term and short-term memory correspond-
ingly. The synaptic redistribution is determined by MTs spatial re-
orientations and changes of their length. The processing of huge
number of such ”informational acts as MTs - dependent synaptic re-
arragements”, accompanied by emergency of new states of neuron
ensembles and hologram-like ﬁelds, is responsible for consciousness
and braining.

The mechanism proposed needs the existence of feedback reaction

between following stages of HMC:

a) simultaneous depolarization of big enough number of neurons,
forming ensemble, accompanied by opening the potential-dependent
channels and increasing the concentration of Ca2+ in cytoplasm of
neurons body;

b) collective disassembly of actin ﬁlaments and MTs, accompanied
by [gel →sol] transition of big group of depolarized neurons due to
their destruction by Ca2+− activated proteins like gelsolin and villin;
c) strong decreasing of cytoplasm viscosity and disjoining of the
(+) ends of MTs from membranes, making possible the spatial redis-
tribution of MTs orientations, corresponding to maximum resonance
exchange interaction of MTs by means of IR photons and vibro-
gravitational waves in simultaneously excited group of neurons;

d) volume/shape pulsation of neuron’s body and dendrites, induc-
ing reorganization of ionic channels activity and synaptic contacts in
the excited neuron ensembles. These volume/shape pulsations occur
due to reversible decrease of the intracell water activity and corre-
sponding swallow of cell as a result of passive osmotic diﬀusion of
water from the external space.

The probability of actin ﬁlaments and MTs disassembly and [gel→sol]

transition can be enhanced not only by the Ca2+ concentration in-
creasing, but also by cavitational ﬂuctuations, stimulated by superde-
formons and macroconvertons in accordance to our Hierarchic the-
ory of matter. Our model predicts that if the neurons or other cells,

2

containing actin and MTs, will be treated by modulated acous-
tic or electromagnetic ﬁeld with resonance frequency of cytoplasmic
water cavitational ﬂuctuations (νres ≥ 1 · 104 s−1), it will activate si-
multaneous disassembly of big number of actin ﬁlaments and MTs,
responsible for maintaining the speciﬁc cell volume and geometry.
As a result, it activates the neuron’s body volume/shape pulsation,
depending on applied modulation.

Such external stimulation of supercatastrophe or [gel→sol] transi-

tions has two important consequences:

-The ﬁrst one is generation of strong high-frequency nerve impulse,
propagating via axons and exciting huge number of other nerve cells,
i.e. distant nerve signal transmission in living organism;

-The second one is stimulation the leaning process as far long-
term memory in accordance to HMC, is related to synaptic contacts
reorganization, accompanied the neuron volume/shape pulsation.

I. INTRODUCTION

In accordance to our Hierarchic concept (Kaivarainen, 1992, 1995)
general for liquids and solids, any condensed matter, including the
biosystems, represents cooperative [opto-acoustic-gravitating] system.
Summary of this theory is presented in the Appendix.

A usual hologram is a record of the object on the light-sensitive
material in the form of interference image, resulting from mixing of
the ﬁeld, radiated by object with a coherent pilot wave.

We assume here that interrelated subsystems of the eﬀectons,
transitons, acoustic, electromagnetic deformons and corresponding
vibro-gravitational excitations in biosystems, can be considered as
superposition of three types of holograms: acoustic, optic and gravi-
tational ones. An acoustic hologram (secondary acoustic deformons),
as well as an optical and gravitational ones (formed by 3D electromag-
netic and gravitational standing waves), represent the interference
image, determined by cell’s components and diﬀerent water fractions
properties.

Under certain conditions an acoustic pilot signal can be substituted for an
electric one (Prokhorov, 1988). This can occur during the transmission of a
nerve impulse along axons and neurons.

The frequency of electromagnetic ﬁeld related to change of ionic ﬂux in
excitable tissues usually does not exceed 1000 Hz (Kneppo and Titomir, 1989).

The electrical recording of human brain activity demonstrate a coherent (40
to 70 Hz) ﬁring among widely distributed and distant brain neurons (Singer,
1993). Such synchronization in a big population of groups of cells points to pos-
sibility of not only regular axon-mediated, but also of physical ﬁelds-mediated
distant or even quantum nonlocal interaction between them.

3

We put forward a hypothesis here that a ”informational state”,
which reﬂects a kind of brain excitation, is related to certain hi-
erarchic hologram-like system of coherent electromagnetic, acoustic
and vibro-gravitational 3D standing waves. Such a system can be
produced by coherent unharmonic oscillations of water molecules in
composition of primary eﬀectons and their quantum transitions. In
microtubules the degree of Bose condensation, which determined the
fraction of primary librational eﬀectons and orchestration of all dy-
namic process in water should be enhanced due to stabilization of
water by walls of MTs.

The coherent large-scale ﬂuctuations of α and β tubulins, stimu-
lated by water macroconvertons with frequency of about 107 Hz also
could be a source of vibro-gravitational and electromagnetic waves.

Reorganization of actin and microtubule systems after collective
disassembly (supercatastrophe), accompanied by [gel→sol] transition,
induced by nerve excitation, is interrelated with cells volume and
shape changes. The reorientation of centrioles of cells to state, corre-
sponding to most eﬀective resonance exchange between MTs by 3D
IR photons and vibro-gravitational waves is one of the stage of the
”elementary act of consciousness”. Such ”tuning” of MTs becomes
possible because of strong declining of cytoplasm viscosity, resulted
from [gel-sol] transition.

As a consequence of such reorganization of microﬁlaments and mi-
crotubules system in the nerve cell body and dendrites, the number of
the active ionic channels and distribution of active synaptic contacts
on the surface of cells - will change. The processing of these ”in-
formational acts” in the head brain is responsible for consciousness,
short and long-term memory and cognition.

Such a mechanism means the existence of feedback reaction be-

tween two stages of consciousness act:

a) quantum exchange process in microtubule (MT) system of si-
multaneously excited distant nerve cells, leading to spatial reorienta-
tion of MTs and their tuning;

b) reorganization of synaptic contacts in corresponding neuron en-
sembles, depending on the new ”tuned” spatial distribution of MTs.

The vibro-gravitational 3D standing waves contain information
about all kind of dynamic processes in condensed matter (eﬀectons
and deformons), i.e. their informational volume is much more than
that of IR- optic and acoustic deformons (see ”New articles” in http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk).

In such a way our model agrees with idea of Karl Pribram (Lan-
guages of the Brain, CA, 1977) of holographic principles of memory
and braining and with its later development (Hameroﬀ, 1987, 1994;
Lechleiter et al., 1991; Jibu et all.., 1994).

4

Nowadays to derive an acoustic hologram in the range of ultrasonic fre-
quencies, the nematic liquid crystals have already been used. The long axes of
molecules in nematic liquid crystals are parallel to each other, like in biomem-
branes.

Biological membranes are formed by lipids representing two-chain amphiphylic

molecules. They form double layers in the aqueous environment, where the
nonpolar tails are turned to each other, and the polar ones - to the aqueous
environment (Cantor and Schimmel, 1980).

Brain represents a complex liquid crystal system. The grey substance con-
sists mainly of cerebrosides, phosphatides, and glycerides forming lyotropic liq-
uid crystals.

Myelin shell, which surrounds the conducting nerve ﬁbers - axons, has the

properties of high-ordered nematic crystals (Chistyakov, 1966).

Some types of holograms, e.g. echo-holograms, have a properties
of not only spatial, but also temporal memory. Three-dimensional
holograms have a big informational capacity and an associative char-
acter of memory.

The pilotless writing of a hologram is possible, when the radiation
of every object’s point can be considered as a pilot one relative to its
all other points. In this case, the three-dimensional hologram, can be restored
by means of only the part of the object’s points, which is able to ”recollect” it
as a whole.

In contrast to usual holograms, reﬂecting the three-dimensional
geometric properties of objects in photo materials, the information
in the membranes and cytoskeleton of nerve cells is encoded in the
form of the eﬀectons and deformons. Hence, it is immediately related
to the dynamic, mechanic and geometrical properties of membranes,
cell’s ﬁlaments and even [DNA-protein] complexes.

The code way of keeping the information in the form of the eﬀectons and de-
formons as 3D standing waves (de Broglie waves, electromagnetic, acoustic and
vibro-gravitational) in the intra-microtubule coherent water looks very eﬀective
and could be used in future quantum computer technology.

It is an important point of our Hierarchic model of consciousness
that two subsystems: [microtubules + internal water] and [actin ﬁla-
ments+cytoplasmic water] are strongly interdependent and their in-
teraction can be modulated by postsynaptic potential (PSP) changes,
activating Ca2+− channels.

Stability of MT, actin ﬁlaments and probability of their disassem-
bly is dependent also on the concentration of Ca2+ and water activity
changing in a course of membranes depolarization.

Before depolarization the concentration of Ca2+ outside of cell is
about 10−3M and inside about 10−7M. Such strong gradient provide
fast increasing of these ions concentration in cell till 10−5M, enough
to activate protein gelsolin.

It is shown that [gel-sol] dynamic equilibrium (cycles) can be rapid and cor-

5

relate with release of neurotransmitter vesicles from presynaptic axon terminals
(Miyamoto, 1995; Muallem et al., 1995).

Hameroﬀ proposed that in his and Penrose ”orchestrated objective re-
duction [orch. OR]” model (Hameroﬀ and Penrose, 1996a,b; Hameroﬀ,
1996, 1998) quantum computation/superposition phase occurs in MTs during
the gel phase of sol-gel cycles of frequency about 40 Hz. He assumed that
solid-like gel surrounding the MTs can serve as a shield of thermal noise and
provide a condition for MTs dynamics coherency, necessary for OR. It is shown
by Wachstock (1994), that gel state, depending on actin cross linkers, can serve
as a shock absorber indeed.

In our model, in contrast to that of Hameroﬀ’s, the key phenomena - spatial
adaptation of MTs of distant cells due to resonance electromagnetic and vibro-
gravitational interaction as an intermediate stage of synaptic reorganization
occur in low viscous sol state.

However, our HMC as it will be shown below, does not contradict the idea of
Orch. OR model. Instead of coherent redistribution of mass of MT’s proteins,
which after Hameroﬀ’ assumption should lead to new space-time geometry, our
model propose the coherent change of water mass, involved in high-T molec-
ular Bose condensate inside MTs in form of coherent water clusters - primary
librational eﬀectons (see Appendix).

HMC also have some common features with model of Quantum Brain Dy-
namics (QBD ), proposed by L.Riccardi and H.Umezawa in 1967 and devel-
oped by C.I.Stuart, Y.Takahashi, H.Umezava (1978, 1979), M.Jibu and K.Yasue
(1992, 1993). In addition to traditional electrical and chemical factors in the
nerve tissue function, this group introduced two new types of quantum excita-
tions (ingredients), responsible for the overall control of electrical and chemical
signal transfer: corticons and exchange bosons (dipolar phonons). Corticons
has a deﬁnite spatial localization and can be described by Pauli spin matri-
ces. The exchange bosons, like phonons are delocalized and follow Bose-
Einstein statistics. ”By absorbing and emitting bosons coherently, corticons
manifest global collective dynamics, providing systematized brain functioning”
(after M.Jibu and K.Yasue,1993).
In other paper (1992) these authors gave
more concrete deﬁnitions:

”Corticons are nothing but quanta of the molecular vibrational ﬁeld of
biomolecules (quanta of electric polarization, conﬁned in protein ﬁlaments). Ex-
change bosons are nothing but quanta of the vibrational ﬁeld of water molecules. . . ”.
One can ﬁnd some analogy between spatially localized ”corticons” and
our eﬀectons as well as between ”exchange bosons” and deformons.

Jibu, Yasue, S.Hagan and others (1994) discussed a possible role of quantum
optical coherence in cytoskeleton microtubules: implications for brain function.
They considered MTs as wave guides for coherent superradiation - collective
nonlinear phenomena. They assumed also that coherent photons, penetrating
in MTs, lead to phenomenon called ”self-induced transparency”.

II. PROPERTIES OF ACTIN FILAMENTS, MICROTUBULES

6

AND INTERNAL WATER

There are six main forms of actin existing. Most general F-actin is a polymer,
constructed from globular protein G-actin with molecular mass 41800. Each
G-actin subunit is stabilized by one ion Ca2+ and is in noncovalent complex

with one ATP molecule. Polymerization of G-actin is accompanied by splitting

of the last phosphate group. The velocity of F-actin polymerization is

enhanced strongly by hydrolysis of ATP. However, polymerization itself do not

needs energy. Simple increasing of salt concentration (decreasing of water

activity), approximately till to physiological one - induce polymerization and

strong increasing of viscosity.

The actin ﬁlaments are composed from two chains of G-actin with diameter
of 40 ˚A and forming double helix. The actin ﬁlaments are the polar structure
with diﬀerent properties of two ends.

Let us consider the properties of microtubules (MT) as one of the
most important component of cytoskeleton, responsible for spatial
organization and dynamic behavior of the cells.

The [assembly ⇔ disassembly] equilibrium of microtubules composed of α
and β tubulins is strongly dependent on internal and external water activity
aH2O (see Section 13.7 of book: Kaivarainen 1995; 1997), concentration of Ca2+
and on the electric ﬁeld gradient change due to MTs piezoelectric properties.

The α and β tubulins are globular proteins with equal molecular mass
(M M = 55.000), usually forming αβ dimers with linear dimension 8nm. Poly-
merization of microtubules can be stimulated by NaCl, M g2+ and GTP (1:1
tubulin monomer) (Alberts et al., 1983). The presence of heavy water (deu-
terium oxide) also stimulates polymerization of MTs.

In contrast to that the presence of ions of Ca2+ even in micromolar con-
centrations, action of colhicine and lowering the temperature till 40C induce
disassembly of MT.

Due to multigene composition, α and β tubulins have a number of isoforms.
For example, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis revealed 17 varieties of β tubu-
lin in mammalian brain (Lee et al., 1986). Tubulin structure may also be altered
by enzymatic modiﬁcation: addition or removal of amino acids, glycosylation,
etc.

Microtubules are hollow cylinders, ﬁlled with water. Their internal diameter
about din =140˚A and external diameter dext =280˚A (Fig. 1). These data, in-
cluding the dimensions of αβ dimers were obtained from x-ray crystallography
(Amos and Klug, 1974). However we must keep in mind that under the condi-
tions of crystallization the multiglobular proteins and their assemblies tends to
more compact structure than in solutions due to lower water activity.

This means that in natural conditions the above dimensions could be a bit

bigger.

The length of microtubules (MT) can vary in the interval:

lt = (1 − 20) · 105˚A

(2.1)

7

The spacing between the tubulin monomers in MT is about 40 ˚A and that
between αβ dimers: 80 ˚A are the same in longitudinal and transversal directions
of MT.

Microtubules sometimes can be as long as axons of nerve cells, i.e. tenth
of centimeters long. Microtubules (MT) in axons are usually parallel and are
arranged in bundles. Microtubules associated proteins (MAP) form a ”bridges”,
linking MT and are responsible for their interaction and cooperative system for-
mation. Brain contains a big amount of microtubules. Their most probable
length is about 105˚A.

The viscosity of ordered water in microtubules seems to be too high for

transport of ions or metabolites at normal conditions.

All 24 types of quasiparticles, introduced in our hierarchic theory of matter
(Table 1 in book: Kaivarainen 1995; 1997), also can be pertinent for ordered wa-
ter in the microtubules (MT). However, the dynamic equilibrium between
populations of diﬀerent quasiparticles of water in MT must be shifted
towards primary librational eﬀectons, comparing to bulk water due to
clusterphilic interactions (see section 13.3 of book: Kaivarainen 1995
and ”New articles” in: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk). The dimen-
sions of internal primary librational eﬀectons have to be bigger than
in bulk water as a consequence of stabilization eﬀect of MT walls
on the thermal mobility of water molecules, increasing their most
probable de Broglie wave length.

Strong interrelation must exist between properties of internal water in MT
and structure and dynamics of their walls, depending on [α − β] tubulins in-
teraction. Especially important can be a quantum transitions like convertons
[tr ⇔ lb] and a big ﬂuctuations of internal water, like superdeformons, local-
ized in the volume of primary IR librational deformon. The convertons in are
accompanied by [dissociation/association] of primary librational eﬀectons, i. e.
ﬂickering of coherent water clusters and can induce the change of angle between
α and β subunits in tubulin dimers.

The biggest cavitational ﬂuctuations - (superdeformons) can in-
duce total cooperative disassembly of MT. Superdeformons excitation in
MT internal water could be an explanation of experimentally revealed dynamic
instability (catastrophes) as a stochastic switching of MT growth to shrinkage
(Mitchison and Kirschner, 1984; Horio and Hotani, 1986; Odde at al., 1994).

8

Fig. 1. Construction of microtubule from α and β tubulins,
globular proteins with molecular mass 55 kD, existing in form of
dimers (αβ).

Each αβ dimer is a dipole with negative charges, shifted towards α subunit
(De Brabander, 1982). Consequently, microtubules, as an oriented elon-
gated structure of dipoles system, have the piezoelectric properties
(Athestaedt, 1974; Mascarennas, 1974).

Intra-microtubular clusterphilic interactions (see Section 13.5) stimulate
the growth of tubules from αβ tubulin dimers. The structural physical-chemical
asymmetry of αβ dimers in composition of microtubules determines their dif-
ferent rates of growth from the opposite ends ([+ ] and [- ]).

The equilibrium of ”closed” (A) and ”open”(B) states of nonpolar cavities
between α and β tubulins in (αβ) dimers can be shifted to the (B) one under
the change of external electric ﬁeld in a course of membrane depolarization. It
can be a consequence of piezoelectric properties of MTs and will stimulate the
formation of coherent water clusters in the open cavities of (αβ) dimers. The
open cavities can serve as a centers of water cluster formation and molecular
Bose condensation. The coherent properties of water, in the hollow core of
microtubules should be enhanced as a result of such process.

The water in the microtubules, is orchestrated in the volumes of
primary electromagnetic deformons (tr or lb). Water can exist al-

9

ternatively in the form of translational or in the form of librational
eﬀectons. Conversion from one type of collective excitation (tr) to
another one (lb) can occur simultaneously in many parallel micro-
tubules with similar coherent properties of intra-MT water. It is a
result of resonance-exchange process, mediated by electromagnetic,
acoustic and vibro-gravitational deformons.

The parallel orientation of MT in diﬀerent cells, optimal for maxi-
mum [MT-MT] resonance interaction could be achieved due to twist-
ing of centrioles, changing spatial orientation of MT. However, it
looks that the normal orientation of MT as respect to each other
corresponds to the most stable condition, i.e. minimum of potential
energy of interaction (see Albreht-Buehner, 1990). It is important to
stress here that the orientation of two centrioles as a source of MT
bundles in each cell are always normal to each other. The stronger
is the nerve excitation, the bigger is population of coherently ﬁring
cells, tending to similar orientation of their internal MT.

We suppose that the critical number of reorganized synaptic con-
tacts is necessary for conversion of short-term memory to the long-
term one.

The linear dimensions of the edge (llb

ef ) of coherent water clusters - primary
librational eﬀectons in pure water at physiological temperature (360C) - is about
11 ˚A and 45 ˚A in the ice at 00C.

We assume that in the rigid internal core of MT, the linear dimension (edge
length) of librational eﬀecton, approximated by cube is between 11˚A and 45 ˚A
i.e. about llb

ef ∼ 23˚A.

It will be shown below, that this assumption ﬁts the spatial and symmetry

properties of MT very well.

The most probable group velocity of water molecules in composition of pri-

mary lb eﬀectons is:

vlb
gr ∼ h/(mH2O · llb
ef )

(2.2)

The librational mobility of internal water molecules in MT, which determines
(vlb
gr) should be about 2 times less than in bulk water at 370C, if we assume
ef ∼ 23˚A (see article 1.1 in ”New articles” http://www.karelia.ru).
llb

The length of a orchestrated group of primary lb eﬀectons in the direction
of microtubule main axis can be determined by the length of edge of primary
librational IR deformons (see attachment), i.e. about 10 microns.

Results of our computer simulations for pure bulk water shows, that the
distance between centers of primary [lb] eﬀectons, approximated by cube exceed
their linear dimension to about 3.5 times (Fig 2b). For our case it means that
the average distance between the eﬀectons centers is about:

d = llb

ef · 3.5 = 23 · 3.5 ∼ 80˚A

(2.3)

10

It gives a possibility for equidistant (80 ˚A) localization of the primary lb eﬀectons
in clefts between α and β tubulins of each (αβ) dimer in the internal core
of MT. Such a regular spatial symmetry of the internal ﬂickering clusters
distribution in MT (Fig 2) is an important factor for realization of the [opto-
acoustic-conformational] signal propagation of conﬁgurational waves along the
MT, accompanied by their bending is related to alternating [closing⇋opening]
clefts between α and β tubulins. This large-scale protein dynamics is correlated
with dissociation/association of water clusters in clefts between (αβ) dimers of
MT (Fig.2) due to [lb/tr] convertons excitation and phonons exchange.

The size of tr primary eﬀectons in MT is signiﬁcantly smaller, than that
of lb ones and the microviscosity of water in regions, occupied by translational
eﬀectons - lower. The average angle between α and β tubulins change and the
cavity’s [open ⇔ closed] states equilibrium shifts to the closed one as a result
of conversion of lb eﬀectons to tr ones (dissociation of coherent water cluster).
The dynamic equilibrium between tr and lb types of the intra MT water
eﬀectons must to be very sensitive to α − β tubulins interactions, dependent on
nerve excitation, in accordance to our model.

Fig. 2. Theoretical temperature dependencies of:
(a) - the space between centers of primary [lb] eﬀectons (calculated in ac-

cordance to eq.4.62);

(b) - the ratio of space between primary [lb] eﬀectons to their length (calcu-

lated, using eq.4.63);

11

(c) - the space between centers of primary [tr] eﬀectons (in accordance to

eq.4.62);

(d) - the ratio of space between primary [tr] eﬀectons to their length (eq.4.63).
Two statements of Hierarchic model of consciousness are impor-

tant:

1. The ability of intra-MT primary water eﬀectons (tr and lb) for
superradiation of six coherent IR photons from each of the eﬀectons
side, approximated by parallelepiped:

two identical - ”longitudinal” IR photons, penetrating along the
core of microtubule, forming the longitudinal standing waves inside
it, and two pairs of identical - ”transverse” IR photons, also respon-
sible for the distant, nonlocal interaction between microtubules. In
accordance to superradiation mechanism the intensity of longitudinal
radiation of MTs is much bigger than that of transverse one;

2. The parameters of the intra MT water radiation (frequency,
coherency/amplitude, intensity) is regulated by the interaction of in-
ternal water with MT walls, dependent on the [open ⇔ closed] equi-
librium of cavity between α and β tubulins, changing in the process
of neuron depolarization.

We have to stress here that our idea of IR superradiation, pro-
duced by water in MT’s or in other condensed matter - is an in-
herent property of our primary eﬀectons, resulted from mesoscopic
molecular Bose condensation (Kaivarainen 1992, 1995). This idea is
independent on the model of MT’s as wave guide of superradiation
for longitudinal photons, proposed by M. Jibu, S. Hagan, K. Yasue,
et al., (1994). The diﬀerence of our approach from the latter one
is that we assume in MT the existence of ”transverse” radiation of
IR photons as well as ”longitudinal” ones. In our model the den-
sity of electromagnetic energy is low enough and not destroying the
protein’s of MT’s. Another advantage of our model - is the possibil-
ity of electromagnetic interaction between MT’s by the exchange of
coherent transverse IR photons.

III. THE SYSTEM OF 3D STANDING WAVES, PRODUCED BY

MICROTUBULES

The most probable length of microtubules (l) satisfy the condi-
tions of standing electromagnetic wave, corresponding to librational
longitudinal IR photons, radiated by primary eﬀectons:

llb = κ

λlb
p
2

=

κ

2n¯νlb
p

12

(3.1)

The similar dimension for translational IR photons is:

ltr = κ

λtr
p
2

=

κ

2n¯νtr
p

(3.2)

here κ is the integer number; λlb

p and λtr

p are the librational and translational

IR photons wave length:

λlb
p = (n˜νlb

p )−1 ≃ 105˚A = 10µ

λtr
p = (n˜νtr

p )−1 ≃ 3.5 · 105˚A = 35µ

where: n ≃ 1.33 is a refraction index of water; ˜νlb
wave number of librational photons and ˜νtr
translational photons.

p ≃ (700 − 750) cm−1 is
p ≃ 200cm−1 is the wave number of

When condition (3.1) of standing waves is violated, i.e. [κ] is non-
integer, then the probability of IR radiation of librational photons
increases strongly.

Deviation of [κ] from integer values due to change of microtubules length as a
result of electrostriction, induced by electric ﬁeld or as a result of Ca2+, induced
disassembly in the process of nerve excitation, - should be accompanied by
corresponding oscillations of microtubules radiation.

Role of electromagnetic, acoustic and gravitational 3D standing

waves

in the adaptive reaction of nerve cells to excitation

In the normal cells, microtubules grow from the cell center to
the cell periphery. In the animals cell center the pair of centrioles is
placed. In the center of plant cells the centrioles are absent, only high
electron density region is registered. Two centrioles in cells of animals
are always oriented at the right angle with respect to each other.
Centrioles represent a construction of 9 triplets of microtubules (Fig.
3), i.e. two centriole are a source of: (2 · 27 = 54) microtubules. The
centriole length is about 3000 ˚A and its diameter is 1000 ˚A.

These dimensions mean that all 27 microtubules of each centrioles can be or-
chestrated in the volume (vd) of one translational or librational electromagnetic
deformon:

[vd =

9
4π

λ3
p]tr,lb

where: (λp)lb ∼ 105˚A and (λp)tr ∼ 3.5 · 105˚A

13

Two centrioles with normal orientation as respect to each other and a lot of
microtubules, growing from them, contain the internal orchestrated system of
librational water eﬀectons. It represent a quantum system with correlated (a ⇋
b)1,2,3
transitions of the eﬀectons. The resonance superradiation or absorption
of a number of librational photons (3q) in the process of above transitions, is
dependent on the number of primary lb eﬀectons (q) in the internal hollow core
of a microtubule:

lb

where: [L∗] is the length of microtubule;

q ∼ [L∗]/Lk

(3.3)

Llb
k

mary librational eﬀectons;

≃ 3.5 · llb

ef ∼80˚A is the approximate space between internal water pri-

ef ∼23˚A is the edge length of the primary lb eﬀecton in MT at 360C .
llb
The value of q in (3.3) - determines the intensity (amplitude) of coherent
longitudinal librational IR photons radiation from microtubule with length L∗,
for the case, when condition of standing waves (3.1) is violated. The frequency
of this radiation is represented by eq.(3.5).

Fig. 3. (a) : The scheme of centriole construction from nine triplets

of microtubules. The length and diameter of cylinder are 3000 ˚A and
1000 ˚A, correspondingly. Each of triplets contain one complete mi-
crotubule and two noncomplete MT; (b): the scheme of cross-section

14

of cilia with number of MT doublets and MT-associated proteins
(MAP): [2 · 9 + 2] = 20. One of MT of periphery doublets is com-
plete and another is noncomplete (subﬁbrilles A and B).

It is important that the probabilities of pair of longitudinal and two pairs of
transversal photons, emission as a result of superradiance by primary librational
eﬀectons are equal, being the consequence of the same collective (b → a)lb
transition. These probabilities can be ”tuned” by the electric component of
electromagnetic signals, accompanied axon polarization and nerve cell excitation
due to piezoelectric properties of MT.

Coherent longitudinal emission of IR photons from the ends of each pair of
microtubules of two perpendicular centrioles of the same cell and from ends of
one microtubule of other cell can form a 3D superposition of standing photons
(primary deformons) as a result of 3 photons pairs interception. This becomes
possible, when the condition of standing waves for longitudinal lb photons in
MT is violated.

The system of such longitudinal electromagnetic deformons, as
well as those formed by transversal photons, have a properties of
pilotless 3D hologram. Such an electromagnetic hologram can be
responsible for the following physico-chemical phenomena:

-Nonmonotonic distribution of intra-cell water viscosity and dif-
fusion processes in cytoplasm due to corresponding nonmonotonic
spatial distribution of macrodeformons (sections 11.6; 11.8 of book:
Kaivarainen 1995 and ”New articles” in http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk);

-Regulation of spatial distribution of water activity (aH2O) in cy-
toplasm as a result of corresponding distribution of inorganic ions
(especially bivalent such as Ca2+) in the ﬁeld of standing electromag-
netic waves. Concentration of ions in the nodes of standing waves
should be higher than that between them. Water activity (aH2O)
should vary in the opposite manner than ions concentration.

The spatial variation of (aH2O) means the equilibrium of [assem-
bly ⇔ disassembly] modulation and regulation the length of actin
and MTs ﬁlaments. As a consequence, the volume and shape of
cell compartments will be modulated also. The activity of numerous
oligomeric allosteric enzymes could be regulated also in such a way.

The system of coherent electromagnetic 3D standing waves (pri-
mary deformons) is interrelated with that of acoustic and gravita-
tional 3D waves, in accordance with our model.

Microtubules may regulate very diﬀerent processes in cells and in
cells ensembles in space and time. The 3D holograms, creating by
MTs, may represent the internal and external ”morphogenic ﬁelds”
and be responsible for diﬀerentiation of cells.

The following properties of microtubules can aﬀect the properties

of morphogenetic ﬁeld:

15

a) total number of microtubules in the cell;
b) spatial distribution of microtubules in the volume of cytoplasm;
c) distribution of microtubules by their length.

The constant of (a ⇔ b) equilibrium of primary librational eﬀectons

(Ka⇔b)lb = exp[−(Ea − Eb)/kT ]lb

(3.4)

and that of (A∗ ⇔ B∗) equilibrium of supereﬀectons are dependent on the

structure and dynamics of αβ tubulin pairs forming MT walls.

This equilibrium is interrelated, in turn, with lb photons frequency (νlb)1,2,3:

[νlb = c(˜ν)lb = (Vb − Va)lb/h]1,2,3

(3.5)

which is determined by the diﬀerence of potential and total energies between
(b) and (a) states of primary eﬀectons in the hollow core of microtubules:

[Vb − Va = Eb − Ea]1,2,3

lb

(3.6)

lb

is the librational band wave number.

(˜ν)1,2,3
The refraction index (n) and dielectric constant of the internal water in MT
depends on [a ⇔ b] equilibrium of the eﬀectons because the polarizability of
water and their interaction in (a) state are higher, than that in (b) state (see
Articles at: www.karelia.ru/˜alexk).

IV. ROLE OF ACTIN FILAMENTS AND MICROTUBULES IN

NEURON’S BODY VOLUME/SHAPE ADAPTATION TO NERVE

EXCITATION

The normal nerve cell contains few dendrites, increasing the sur-
face of cell’s body. It is enable to form synaptic contacts for reception
the information from thousands of other cells. Each neurone has one
axon for transmitting the ”resulting” signal in form of the electric im-
pulses from the ends of axons of cells-transmitters to neuron-receptor.
The synaptic contacts, representing narrow gaps (about hundreds of angstrom
wide) could be subdivided on two kinds: the direct-electric and more univer-
sal - chemical ones. In chemical synapsis the signal from the end of axon - is
transmitted by neuromediator, i.e. acetylholine. The neuromediator molecules
are stored in synaptic bubbles near presynaptic membrane. The releasing of me-
diators is stimulated by ions of Ca2+. After diﬀusion throw the synaptic gap
mediator form a speciﬁc complexes with receptors of post synaptic membranes
on the surface of neurons body or its dendrites. Often the receptors are the
ionic channels like (N a+, K +) - ATP pump. Complex - formation of diﬀer-
ent channels with mediators opens them for one kind of ions and close for the

16

other. Two kind of mediators interacting with channels: small molecules like
acetilholine, monoamines, aminoacids and big ones like set of neuropeptides are
existing..

The quite diﬀerent mechanism of synaptic transmission, related to stimu-
lation of production of secondary mediator is existing also. For example,
activation of adenilatcyclase by ﬁrst mediator increases the concentration of
intra-cell cyclic adenozin-mono-phosphate (cAMP). In turn, cAMP can activate
enzymatic phosphorylation of ionic channels, changing the electric properties of
cell. This secondary mediator can participate in a lot of regulative processes,
including the genes expression.

In the normal state of dynamic equilibrium the ionic concentration gradi-
ent producing by ionic pumps activity is compensated by the electric tension
gradient. The electrochemical gradient is equal to zero at this state.

The equilibrium concentration of N a+ and Cl+ in space out of cell is bigger
than in cell, the gradient of K + concentration has an opposite sign. The external
concentration of very important for regulative processes Ca2+ (about 10−3M ) is
much higher than in cytosol (about 10−7M ). Such a big gradient provide fast
and strong increasing of Ca2+ internal concentration after activation of corre-
sponding channels.

At the ”rest” condition of equilibrium the resulting concentration
of internal anions of neurons is bigger than that of external ones,
providing the diﬀerence of potentials equal to 50-100mV. As far the
thickness of membrane is only about 5nm or 50˚A it means that the
gradient of electric tension is about:

100. 000 V /sm

i.e. it is extremely high.

Depolarization of membrane usually is related to penetration of N a+ ions into
the cell. This process of depolarization could be inhibited by selected diﬀusion
of Cl− into the cell. Such diﬀusion can produce even hyperpolarization of mem-
brane.

The potential of action and nerve impulse can be excited in neuron - receptor

only if the eﬀect of depolarization exceeds certain shreshold.

In accordance to our Hierarchic model of concsiousness (HMC)
three most important consequences of neuron’s body polarization can
occur:

- reorganization of MTs system and ionic channels activity, accom-

panied by short-term memory emergency;

-reorganization of synaptic contacts on the surface of neuron and

its dendrites, leading to long-term memory;

- generation of the nerve impulse, transferring the signal to another

nerve cells.

Propagation of nerve signal in axons may be related to intracellular water
activity (aH2O) decreasing due to polarization of membrane. As a result of

17

feedback reaction the variation of aH2O induce the [opening/closing] of the
ionic channels, thereby stimulating signal propagation.

We suppose that the change of clusterphilic interaction of ordered
water between inter-lipid tails in nonpolar central regions of biomem-
branes, could be responsible for lateral signal transmission in mem-
branes (K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen, 1985, 1995). Such mechanism can provide dis-
tant cooperative interaction between diﬀerent receptors and channels
on cell surface.

As far the αβ pairs of tubulins have the properties of ”electrets” (Debra-
bander, 1982), the piezoelectric properties of core of microtubules can be
predicted (Athenstaedt, 1974; Mascarenhas,1974).

It means that structure and dynamics of microtubules can be regu-
lated by electric component of electromagnetic ﬁeld, which accompa-
nied the nerve excitation. In turn, dynamics of microtubules hollow
core aﬀects the properties of internal ordered water.

For example, shift of the [open ⇔ closed] states equilibrium of
cavity between α and β tubulins to the less stable open one in a
course of excitation should lead to:

[I]. Increasing the dimensions and life-time of coherent clusters, represented
by primary lb eﬀectons in the open states of inter α-β tubulins nonpolar cavities;

[II]. Destabilization of MT, increasing the probability of its disassembly;
[III]. Stimulation the distant interaction between MT of diﬀerent neurons
as a result of increased frequency and amplitude/coherency of IR librational
photons;

[IV] The rightward shift of (A∗ ⇔ B∗) equilibrium could be stimulated
by the elevation of lb IR- photons density due to enhancement of superradi-
ance eﬀect and IR photons pumping. This shift increases the probability of
cavitational ﬂuctuation of the intra MT water and reversible disassembly of
microtubules.

The lower stability of MTs in the nerve cell body as respect to
its bundles in axon or in cilia is a result of fact that microtubules in
bundles are interconnected by ”handle”-like proteins (deneins) and
other microtubule associated proteins (MAP).

Twisting of the centrioles of distant interacting cells and bending of MTs can
occur after [gel→sol] transition. This tuning is necessary for enhancement of the
number of MTs with the parallel orientation, most eﬀective for their exchange
interaction by means of 3D coherent IR photons and vibro-gravitational waves.
Reorganization of actin ﬁlaments and MTs system should be accompanied
by corresponding changes of neuron’s body and its dendrites shape and activity
of certain ionic channels and synaptic contacts redistribution;
This stage is responsible for long-term memory emergency.
At [sol]-state Ca2+ - dependent K + channels turns to the open state and
internal concentration of potassium decreases. The latter oppose the depolar-
ization and decrease the response of neuron to external stimuli. Decay of neu-
ron’s response is termed ”adaptation”. This response adaptation is accompanied

18

by MTs-adaptation, i.e. their reassembly in conditions, when concentration of
Ca2+ tends to minimum. The reverse [sol→gel] transition stabilize the new
equilibrium state of given group of cells.

The described hierarchic sequence of stages: from molecular Bose
condensation to synaptic reorganization, responsible for described cy-
cles of nerve cells, reﬂects the idea of our model of consciousness.

The equilibrium constants of the intra-microtubule water convertons
(K[tr/lb]) and supereﬀectons (KA∗ ⇔B∗ ), which determines the probability of cav-
itational ﬂuctuations - superdeformons may also be dependent on following ex-
ternal as respect to MT factors:

- the dynamics of MT (+) ends, ﬁxed on cell’s membranes, depending on

concentration of Ca2+, water activity (aH2O) and cells swelling;

- the frequency and intensity of the resonant IR-radiation of MTs, external

as respect to selected cell;

- resonant opto-acousto-gravitational ﬁelds, produced by water of MTs of
other cells and large-scale (LS) and small scale (SS) dynamics of αβ tubulin
pairs.

The LS-dynamics of tubulin dimers represent the change of ”bending” angle
between α and β tubulins of about 210 (Melki et al., 1989), corresponding to
ﬂuctuation of the inter-tubulins cavity between closed (A) and open (B) states.
Such bending is a result of macroconvertons (ﬂickering clusters) excitations with
frequency: (106 − 107) Hz (see Fig.48c).

The [assembly ⇋ disassembly] dynamic equilibrium of the actin ﬁl-
aments and MT subsystems in cells in terms of colloid chemistry rep-
resents [coagulation ⇋peptization] or [gel ⇋sol] equilibrium. The increas-
ing of cell’s volume, accompanied the MTs orchestrated disassembly is a result
of cell ”swelling” due to osmotic diﬀusion of water from the extracell medium.
The decreasing of water activity in cell, inducing such osmose, is a consequence
of increasing of ”bound” or ”hydration” water fraction after microﬁlaments and
MT disassembly to huge number of subunits.

The nerve cell body and dendrites swelling will induce the collec-
tive nonspeciﬁc opening of big number of ionic channels and strong
resulting postsynaptic potential (PSP) emergency. The bigger is re-
sulting PSP the higher is frequency of the nerve impulses, generated
by this cell and penetrating via axon to other neurons (Coombs, et
al., 1957).

The new assembly of MT-system in nerve cell’s body - stimulates,
in accordance to our model, the reorganization of synaptic contacts
on the cell surface.
It is accompanied by pumping out the extra
water from cell and restoring the rest - properties of ionic channels.
However, the ”sensitivity” of certain ionic channels might be changed
as a result of MTs and synaptic systems perturbation. This could be
responsible for short-term memory.

The cooperative disassembly/assembly of MTs, induced by cavita-

19

tional ﬂuctuations (superdeformons) can be accompanied by coherent
”biophotons” emission/absorption in the ultraviolet (UV) and visible
range due to water molecules [dissociation ⇋ recombination] reaction
in a course of intra-MT water cavitational ﬂuctuations. These high-
frequency coherent photons exchange, like the IR photons and high-
frequency nerve impulses, propagating via axons - may be responsi-
ble for synchronized ﬁring of distant neuron ensembles in head brain
(Singer, 1993). The ﬁring is a complex nonlinear process. Its char-
acteristic time of about 1/50 of second (20ms) is much longer than
pure quantum phenomena in MT like photons radiation and Bose
[condensation ⇋ evaporation], corresponding in our model to [lb/tr]
convertons excitation.

One of the important idea of HMC is that collective interactions of distant
neurons in head brain could be realized not only by means of conventional nerve
impulse via axons. It happens more eﬀectively by combination of simultaneous
cells bodies depolarization with resonant quantum exchange between their MTs
with similar orientation.

4.1 The entropy-driven information processing

It leads from HMC is that changes of systems of electromagnetic,
acoustic and gravitational 3D standing waves and corresponding holo-
grams in the ensemble of nerve cells, produced by the orchestrated
internal water of MTs in course of braining, enhance the quantum
exchange between neurons.

This process induces redistribution of probabilities of diﬀerent wa-
ter excitations in huge number of microtubules. It means correspond-
ing change of informational entropy <I> in accordance with known
relations (Kaivarainen 1995; 1997):

< I >= X

Pi lg(1/Pi) = −X

Pi lg(Pi)

i

i

where:Pi is a probability of the (i) state with energy (Ei), deﬁned as:

Pi =

exp(− Ei
kT )
Pi exp(− Ei
kT )

(4.1)

(4.2)

For the total system the relation between entropy (S) and information (I) is:

S(e.u.) = k · lnW = (k · ln2)I = 2.3 · 10−24I(bit)

(4.3)

where: statistical weight of macrosystem:

20

W =

N !

N1!N2! . . . Nq!

(4.4)

where total number of internal water molecules in macrosystem of interacting
MT is: N = N1 + N2 + . . . + Nq;

[q] is number of non degenerated states of 24 quasiparticles of intra MT

water.

The reduced information of condensed matter [see Chapter 14, eq.14.27b
in book: Kaivarainen 1995; 1997] gives the quantitative characteristic not only
about quantity (I) but also about the quality of the information:

< Iq >= −[N0/V0] · X

Pi lg 2(Pi)/ni

i

(4.5)

where N0 and V0 are the Avogadro number and molar volume; ni is a con-

centration of excitation of (i)-type.

The distant energy exchange between MT, accompanied by the
change of Pi for diﬀerent excitations can be considered as an infor-
mational exchange between nerve cells.
It is related to change of
fractions of water excitations in MT system with volume (vi= 1/ni).
The factors, aﬀecting the equilibrium constant of two-state exci-

tations of water in MT

The dimensions of water librational eﬀectons in given microtubule and their
life- time increases with probability of open states of nonpolar cleft between
α and β tubulins.

The equilibrium constants between ”acoustic” (a) and ”optic” (b) states of
primary eﬀectons (Ka⇔b)tr,lb, between tr and lb primary eﬀectons (Ktr⇔lb), sec-
ondary eﬀectons (Ka⇔b)tr,lb and that of supereﬀectons (KA ∗⇔B ∗) are presented
below:

(Ka⇔b)tr,lb = exp[−h(νa − νb)/kT ]tr,lb = exp[−hνp/kT ]tr,lb

(4.6)

Ktr⇔lb = (Ka⇔b)tr · (Ka⇔b)lb = exp[−h(νtr

p + νlb

p )/kT ]lb

(4.7)

(Ka⇔b)tr,lb = exp[−h(νa − νb)/kT ]tr,lb = exp[−hνph/kT ]tr,lb

(4.8)

KA ∗⇔B ∗ = exp[−h(νA ∗ −νB ∗)/kT ] =

(KA⇔B)tr · (KA⇔B)lb == [Ka⇔b · Ka⇔b]tr · [Ka⇔b · Ka⇔b]lb

(4.9)

21

The primary eﬀectons equilibrium constants (Ka⇔b)tr,lb are related to diﬀerence
between the total and potential energies of (b) and (a) states and resulting
frequency of coherent IR radiation (νp)tr,lb of water primary tr and lib eﬀectons.
We have at least ﬁve deﬁned parameters, involved in the quantum

processes of nerve activity in our model:

1.

Intensity of IR superradiance and vibro-gravitational waves,

radiated by MT system;

2. Frequency of coherent IR radiation, produced by water of the
microtubule system, responsible for distant cooperation between mi-
crotubules;

3. The life-time of primary lb eﬀecton (τlb) responsible for [order
⇔ disorder] equilibrium of water in MT, interrelated directly with
[B ⇔ A] equilibrium of nonpolar cavities between α and β tubulins;

4. Frequency (νA∗ →B∗ ) of a big ﬂuctuations- superdeformons, re-
sponsible for MT reversible disassembly (catastrophe), collective bend-
ing and reorganization of microtubule system, leading to a new [vol-
ume / shape] state of the nerve cell body;

5. Frequency and intensity of high-frequency ”biophotons”, re-
sulted from recombination of water molecules after their dissociation
in a course of intra-MT water cavitational ﬂuctuation (superdefor-
mons).

Thus, braining and consciousness in accordance with HMC is a
process of synaptic contacts redistribution as a result of direct axons-
mediated interaction and distant quantum exchange between MT of
diﬀerent cells by means of coherent IR photons, and vibro-gravitational
waves (VGW).

This exchange can be accompanied by the oscillations of constants of [tr ⇔
lb], (a ⇔ b) and (A∗ ⇔ B∗) equilibrium, as a result of periodic redistribu-
tion of energy between subsystems of the eﬀectons and deformons (Kaivarainen
1995; ”New articles” in: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk). In the case of braining,
however such autooscillations could be stimulated by periodic excitation, which
accompanied nerve impulse propagation along the axon.

Autowaves originate as a result of interaction of given cell microtubules
with the microtubules of the surrounding cells, mediated by electromagnetic
and, possibly, gravitational primary deformons. In this case, autowaves repre-
sent spatially distributed oscillations of [A∗ ⇔ B∗] equilibrium constant in the
active medium of nerve cells ensembles, accompanied by their reorganization.
The active medium is deﬁned as an two-level system which can relax to the
former energy distribution after excitation.

As a result of competition, one of the sources of the autowaves with high-
est frequency in form of rotating curl (reverberator) rises up and becomes the
leading and dominating one. It is known that autowaves with highest frequency
suppress other sources of autowaves in the active medium. Reverberators
originate as a result of the autowave breach at non-homogeneities of the active
medium and they are able to multiplication.

22

Dissipative structures, introduced by Prigogin, can be considered as a private
case of the autowaves and termed ”freezing out” autowaves (Andronov et al.,
1981).

Autowaves in the neuron chains, related to oscillation of

[A∗ ⇔ B∗] and M T s [assembly ⇋ disassembly]

equilibrium in a big groups of nerve cells, include two possible phenomena

on mesoscopic and macroscopic scale:

1. Polarization/depolarization of neurons;
2. Collective activation/relaxation of synaptic connections, accompanied by

[assembly/disassembly] of MTs system.

As was mentioned above, both of these processes can be accompanied by the

change of volume and shape of nerve cell body.

Competition between autowaves in neuron ensembles is the crucial
phenomena in ”selection of ﬁnal result” as an elementary act of consciousness
in the process of recalling and braining in accordance with our model.

The subsystems of primary electromagnetic, acoustic and gravitational de-
formons with properties of pilotless hologram, produced by microtubules, are
responsible for distant phenomena, necessary for autowave emergency.

Resonance energy exchange between systems of microtubules of diﬀerent
”normal” cells, leading to the change of KA∗ ⇋B∗ and aH2O can be responsible
also for diﬀerentiation and morphogenesis of cells.

Frequency and amplitude of supereﬀectons equilibrium constant
(KA∗ ⇔B∗ ) oscillations can serve as an additional informational pa-
rameter, related to autowaves excitation in brain.

Our model consider ﬂuctuations and dissipation, stimulating [gel ⇌
sol] transitions and synaptic system reorganization, as a necessary
phenomena for brain ”working”. However this CHAOS is organized
by quantum phenomena, like Bose-condensation of water in compo-
sition of primary lb eﬀectons in MT, their superradiance and self-
induced bistability. The higher is quantum order and coherence, the
less is the number of mistakes in brain working. At the same time, the
possibility of mistakes due to competition between discreet quantum
and continuous thermal properties - make the process of braining
NON-DETERMINISTIC and means its ability for creativity. The
main diﬀerence between computer and brain looks be in the fact that
in the brain, in contrast to computer, the input and output the in-
formation is not always adequate to each other.

The INTUITION from such point of view means the ability to
choose one right solution (rigorously inadequate) from huge number
of wrong, but adequate to the available at the moment information.
It looks that associative memory, helping such choose, is the most
probable background for INTUITION.

Von Neumann model of cellular automata was used by Hameroﬀ
et al. as a background for description of information processing. The

23

essential features of cellular automata after Hameroﬀ et al. (1992, 1994) are the
following:

1. At a given time, each ”cell” is in one of a number of ﬁnite states (usually

two);

2. The ”cells” are organized according to a ﬁxed geometry;
3. Each ”cell” communicates with other cells in its neighborhood only. The

size and shape are the same for all ”cells”;

4. There is a universal clock. The each ”cell” may change to a new state
at each tick of the clock, depending on its present state and the states of its
neighbors.

The time step of cellular automata clock in Hameroﬀ’s model is related with
tubulins, composing MT, conformational changes with coherent phonons fre-
quency (1010 − 1011) Hz, proposed by Fr¨olich (1968, 1975). Fr¨olich assumed
that acousto-conformational transitions are coupled to charge redistributions,
that accompanied the dipole oscillations or electron movements in nonpolar re-
gions of protein with a low dielectric constant. Hameroﬀ assumed that such
conformational transitions induce the acoustic waves, propagating across mi-
crotubule diameter, providing ”clocking frequency” for cellular automata.

In our approach the ”clocking frequency” can be related to that of
[A∗ ⇔ B∗] transitions of supereﬀectons, having the order of 104Hz. The role
of ”cell” in cellular automata could be played by deﬁnite parts of microtubules,
changing as a result of superdeformons excitation, between nodes of the stand-
ing wave length of librational IR photons (∼ 105˚A). The number of hierarchic
cellular automata can be very high.

The notion of gliders, as of patterns, moving through the medium of cellu-
lar automata unchanged, i.e. without dissipation is important for interaction
between number of ”cells”.

In our model the PRIMARY (electromagnetic, gravitational) de-
formons for one side and SECONDARY acoustic deformons - could be
termed the long distance and short distance gliders correspondingly.

V. POSSIBLE MECHANISM OF WAVE FUNCTION

COLLAPSING

A lot of superimposed possible quantum states of any quantum
system are always ”collapsed” or ”reduced” to single state (or looks
to be so) as a result of measurement, i.e. interaction with detector.

In accordance to ”Copenhagen interpretation”, the collapsing of
such system to one of possible states is unpredictable and purely
random.

Roger Penrose supposed (1989) that such a collapse is due to quan-
tum gravity, because the latter inﬂuences the quantum realm acting
on space-time. After certain gravity threshold the system’s wave
function collapsed ”under its own weight”.

Penrose (1989, 1994) considered the possible role of quantum superposition
in synaptic plasticity. He characterized the situation of learning and memory by

24

synaptic plasticity in which neuronal connections are rapidly formed, activated
or deactivated: ”Thus not just one of the possible alternative arrangements is
tried out, but vast numbers, all superposed in complex linear superposition”.
The collapse of many cytoskeleton conﬁguration to single one is a
nonlocal process, required for consciousness.

Herbert (1993) estimated the mass threshold of wave function collapse
roughly as 106 daltons. Penrose and Hameroﬀ (1995) calculated this threshold
as

∆Mcol ∼ 1019D

(5.1)

Non-computable self-collapse of a quantum coherent wave function within the
brain may fulﬁll the role of non-deterministic free will after Penrose and Hameroﬀ
(1995).

Our model, including the increasing of the total mass of water, in-
volved in mesoscopic Bose-condensate (primary librational eﬀectons),
as a crucial stage of perception elementary act does not contradict
the above idea of nonlocal mechanism of collapsing of conﬁgurational
space of cytoskeleton.

However, we explain the selection of certain conﬁgurational space
of huge number of the excited neurons ensemble as a result of spa-
tial tuning of MTs orientations and corresponding redistribution of
synaptic contacts due to distant (not nonlocal) electromagnetic and
vibro-gravitational resonant interactions between MTs.

The mass of water in one microtubule with most probable length ∼ 105 ˚A

and diameter 140 ˚A is about

mH2O ∼ 108D

In accordance with our calculations for bulk water, the fraction of molecules
in composition of primary tr eﬀectons is about 23% and that in composition of
primary lb eﬀectons is about ten times less (Fig.4). In MTs due to clusterphilic
interaction, the [lb] fraction, representing molecular Bose condensate can be
bigger.

We assume, that in MTs at least 10% of the total water mass can be ad-
ditionally converted to primary librational eﬀectons as a result of neuron de-
polarization before MT disassembly. This corresponds to increasing of mass of
these quasiparticles in one MT as:

∆mH2O ≃ 106D

accompanied by decreasing of water mass, involved in other types of excitations
in MT.

Based on known experimental data that each nerve cell contains about 50
MT , we assume that the maximum increasing of mass of primary lb eﬀectons
in one cell could be:

∆MH2O ∼ 50 · ∆mH2O = 5 · 107D

(5.2)

25

If the true value of mass threshold, responsible for wave function collapse,
∆Mcol is known, then the number (Ncol) of neurons in assemblies, required for
this process is

Ncol ∼ (∆Mcol/∆MH2O)

(5.3)

Fig.4. Calculated ratio of water fractions involved in primary
[lb] eﬀectons to that, involved in primary [tr] eﬀectons for the bulk
water.

The total number of nerve cells in human brain is about: Ntot ∼ 1011. The
critical fraction of cells population, participating in elementary act of perception
can be calculated as:

fc = (Ncol/Ntot)

The [gel→sol] transition of simultaneously excited neurons body,
followed by ”tuning” of their microtubules orientations, is another
explanation of coherent ”collapsing” of neurons group, leading to
”choosing” of one state from huge number of possible, after our HMC.
Our model agree with general idea of Marshall (1989) that Bose- conden-
sation could be responsible for ”unity of conscious experience”. However, our

26

model explains how this idea can work in detail and what kind of Bose conden-
sation is necessary.

VI. Distant [cell-cell] interaction by means of

high-frequency biophotons in our model

We propose that all the intra-cell processes, accompanied by drastic reorga-
nization of the actin ﬁlaments and microtubules systems, i.e. collective disas-
sembly (supercatastrophe), leading to [gel-sol] transition. This process can be
stimulated by intra-MT water superdeformons, which are accompanied by high-
frequency (UV, visible) biophotons radiation. It is be a result of water molecules
recombination after their dissociation to the protons and hydroxyl groups, ac-
companied by superdeformons and cavitational ﬂuctuations.

It is possible that dynamic reorganizations of chromatin ﬁbrils with diameter
30nm (elongated complexes of DNA with proteins-histones ), also can inﬂuence
on water and other molecules recombination probability and biophotons emer-
gency.

Large- scale (LS) dynamics of the chromatin ﬁbrils (CF) has a few

hierarchic levels.

The ﬁrst one is due to relative ﬂuctuations of nucleosomes, linked to each
other with ﬂexible regions of ”free” DNA. The width of cavities between of nucle-
osomes is about 11˚A. It is close to that of proteins domains and linear dimension
of water lb eﬀectons at physiological temperature.(see http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk
[New articles]).

The second level of large scale (LS) dynamics of CF can be related
to reversible cooperative dissociation of chromatin domains (composed from few
nucleosomes) and histone H1, leading to unfolding of these domains.

The third level of LS dynamics of CF is assumed to occur in a course

of relative ﬂuctuations of big (400nm) loops of chromatin ﬁbril.

Each level of LS dynamics of CF is correlated with water den-
sity ﬂuctuations like macroconverton and superdeformons (see Ap-
pendix).

Biophotons radiation, related to MTs and chromatin large-scale dynamics,
their [assembly⇋disassembly] could happen in a course of cells division or poi-
soning. We suggest that this radiation could be responsible for ”mitogenic
rays”, discovered by Gurvich in 1920. Later such eﬀect was conﬁrmed on divi-
sion of synchronized yeast cultures. The ”Degradation radiation” was observed
on strongly damaged or dying cells, regardless of the cause of death.

The ”cytoxic eﬀect”, revealed by Kaznacheev and others (1976) involves in-
teraction between two cell cultures separated by quartz or regular glass. In such
a system a poisoned, dying culture shown to be able to communicate via quartz
glass only with normal cell culture initiating its pathological changes and even
death. These experiments point to ultraviolet range of biophotons, ra-
diated by dying culture, producing cytoxic eﬀect in distant healthy

27

cells. The ultra-weak radiation of coherent biophoton by diﬀerent living organ-
isms was profoundly studied by group of F. Popp (1992).

Our model explains the emission of visible and UV-biophotons as
a result of water molecules recombination, accompanied the super-
catastrophe of microtubules systems of cells.

The dissociation⇋ recombination of [anion–cation] bridges of chro-
matin, induced by LS-dynamics like [DNA + H1 hystons] complexes
reversible disassembly, also could be accompanied by biophotons ra-
diation.

In course of cells division both kinds of these interrelated processes

make contribution in coherent biophotons emission.

The distant action of UV-biophotons on other cells could be a con-
sequence of increasing of water molecule dissociation probability to proton
(H+) and hydroxyl group (HO−) due to photo-activation:

hνp + H2O → [H2O]∗ ⇋ HO− + H +

(6.1)

Shifting the equilibrium of this reaction to the right, leads to perturbation of
water structure in microtubules as a result of strong solvatation of protons (H +).
In turn, this perturbation destabilize the primary librational eﬀectons, increase
the probabilities of superdeformons excitation and disassembly of microtubules
and chromatin.

The shift of equilibrium [assembly ⇋ disassembly] of group of the actin ﬁl-
aments, microtubules and chromatin ﬁbrils to the right in one conditions
will stimulate cell division (when cell is ready for it), in other conditions - its
morphogenic reorganization (diﬀerentiation) and in another ones - death of cell.

CONCLUSIONS OF HIERARCHIC MODEL OF

CONSCIOUSNESS

We can resume now, that in accordance with our HMC, the se-
quence of following interrelated stages is necessary for elementary act
of perception and memory:

1. The change of the electric component of cell’s electromagnetic ﬁeld as a

result of neuron depolarization;

2. Shift of A ⇋ B equilibrium between the closed (A) and open to water (B)
states of cleft, formed by α and β tubulins in microtubules (MT) to the right
due to the piezoelectric eﬀect;

3. Increasing the life-time and dimensions of coherent ”ﬂickering” water clus-
ters, representing the 3D superposition of de Broglie standing waves of H20
molecules with properties of Bose-condensate (eﬀectons) in hollow core of MT.
This process is stimulated by the open nonpolar clefts of tubulin dimers in MT
with regular 80˚A spacing;

4. Increasing the superradiance of coherent IR photons induced by synchro-
nization of quantum transitions of the eﬀectons between acoustic and optic like
states;

28

5. Opening the potential dependent Ca2+ channels and increasing the con-

centration of these ions in cytoplasm;

6. Activation of Ca2+ - dependent protein gelsolin, which induce fast dis-
assembly of actin ﬁlaments and [gel-sol] transition, decreasing strongly the vis-
cosity of cytoplasm and water activity;

7. Spatial ”tuning” of quasi-parallel MTs of distant simultaneously excited
neurons due to distant electromagnetic and vibro-gravitational interaction be-
tween them and centrioles twisting;

8. The coherent volume/shape pulsation of big group of depolarized cells
as a consequence of (actin ﬁlaments+MTs) system disassembly and [gel →sol]
transition. It happens as a result of [MF+MT] system reversible disassembly to
huge number of subunits and increasing of water fraction in hydration shell of
actin and tubulin subunits due to increasing of their surface. This should de-
crease the water activity in cytoplasm and increase the passive osmotic diﬀusion
of water from the external volume to the cell.

This stage should be accompanied by four eﬀects:
(a): Increasing the volume of the nerve cell body;
(b): Disrupting the (+) ends of MTs with cytoplasmic membranes,
making MTs possible to bend in cell and to collective spatial tuning of
huge number of MTs in the ensembles of even distant excited neurons;
(c) Origination of new MTs system switch on/oﬀ the ionic channels

and change the number and properties of synaptic contacts;

(d): Decreasing the concentration of Ca2+ to the limit one when
its ability to disassembly of actin ﬁlaments and MT is stopped and
[gel ⇋.sol] equilibrium shifts to the left again, stabilizing a new MTs
and synaptic conﬁguration.

This cyclic consequence of quantum mechanical, physico-chemical
and nonlinear events can be considered as elementary act of memory
and consciousness realization. This act can be as long as 500 ms, i.e.
half of second.

The elementary act of consciousness include a stage of coherent electric
ﬁring in brain (Singer, 1993) of distant neurons groups with period of about
1/40 sec.

Probability of superdeformons and cavitational ﬂuctuations in-
creases after [gel→sol] transition. This process is accompanied by
high-frequency (UV and visible) ”biophotons” radiation due to re-
combination of part of water molecules, dissociated as a result of
cavitational ﬂuctuation.

The dimension of IR superdeformon edge is determined by the length of
librational IR standing photon - about 10 microns. It is important that this
dimension corresponds to the average microtubule length in cells conﬁrming in
such a way our idea. Another evidence in proof is that is that the resonance
wave number of excitation of superdeformons, leading from our model is equal
to 1200 (1/cm).

29

The experiments of G.Albrecht-Buehler (1991) revealed that just around
this frequency the response of surface extensions of 3T3 cells to weak IR irra-
diation is maximum. Our model predicts that IR irradiation of microtubules
system in vitro with this frequency will dramatically increase the probability of
microtubules catastrophes.

Except superradiance, two other cooperative optic eﬀects could be in-
volved in supercatastrophe realization: self-induced bistability and the pike
regime of IR photons radiation (Bates, 1978; Andreev et al.,1988).

Self-induced bistability is light-induced phase transition.

It could be
related to nonlinear shift of [a ⇔ b] equilibrium of primary librational eﬀectons
of intra MT water to the right as a result of saturation of IR (lb)-photons
absorption.

As far the molecular polarizability and dipole moments in (a) and (b) states
of the primary eﬀectons - diﬀers, such shifts of [a ⇔ b] equilibrium should
be accompanied by periodic jumps of dielectric permeability and stability of
coherent water clusters. These shifts could be responsible for the pike
regime of librational IR photons absorption and radiation.

As far the stability of b-states of lb eﬀectons is less than that of a-states, the
characteristic frequency of pike regime can be correlated with frequency of MTs-
supercatastrophe activation. This eﬀect can orchestrate the [gel-sol] transitions
of neuronal groups in head brain.

30

Fig.5. The schematic presentation of the local, acousto-conformational

and distant - electromagnetic interactions between microtubules (MT1
and MT2), connected by MAP.

MAP– microtubules associated proteins stabilize the overall structure of
MTs. They prevent the disassembly of MTs in bundles of axons and cilia in
a course of their coherent bending. In neuron’s body the concentration of MAP
and their role in stabilization of MTs is much lower than in cilia.

The local acousto-conformational signals between MT are realized via
MTs - associated proteins (MAP), induced by transitions of the cleft, formed
by α and β tubulins, between closed (A) and open (B) states. The orchestrated
dynamics of individual MT as quantum conductor is a result of phonons (hνph)
exchange between (αβ) clefts due to [lb/tr] conversions, corresponding to water
clusters, ”ﬂickering”, in-phase to [B ⇋ A] pulsations of clefts.
The distant electromagnetic and vibro-gravitational interactions be-
tween diﬀerent MT are the consequence of IR photons and coherent gravitational
waves exchange. The corresponding two types of waves are excited as a result of
orchestrated (a ⇔ b) transitions of water primary librational eﬀectons, localized
in the open B- states of (αβ) clefts.

31

When the neighboring (αβ) clefts has the alternative open and closed states
like on Fig 5, the general spatial structure remains straight. However, when
[A ⇔ B] equilibrium of all the clefts from one side of MT are shifted to the
left and that from the opposite side are shifted to the right, it leads to bend-
ing of MT. Coherent bending of MTs could be responsible for [volume/shape]
vibrations of the nerve cells and the cilia bending.

Experimental data, conﬁrming the HMC

There are some experimental data, which support the role of microtubules
in the information processing. Good correlation was found between the learn-
ing, memory peak and intensity of tubulin biosyntesis in the baby chick brain
(Mileusnic et al.1980). When baby rats begin their visual learning phase after
they ﬁrst open eyes, neurons in the visual cortex start to produce vast quantities
of tubulin (Cronley- Dillon et. al., 1974). Sensory stimulation of goldﬁsh leads
to structural changes in cytoskeleton of their brain neurons (Moshkov et al.,
1992).

There is evidence for interrelation between cytoskeleton properties and nerve
membrane excitability and synaptic transmission (Matsumoto and Sakai, 1979;
Hirokawa, 1991). It has been shown, that microtubules can transmit electro-
magnetic signals between membranes (Vassilev et al., 1985).

Desmond and Levy (1988) found out the learning-associated change in den-
dritic spine shape due to reorganization of actin and microtubules containing,
cytoskeleton system. After ”learning” the number of receptors increases and
cytoskeleton becomes more dense.

Other data suggest possibility that cytoskeleton regulates the genome and

that signaling along microtubules occurs as cascades of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
linked to calcium ion ﬂux (Puck, 1987; Haag et al, 1994).

The frequency of superdeformons excitations in bulk water (see Fig.48 d in
book: Kaivarainen 1995) at physiological temperature (370C) in bulk water is
around:

νS = 3 · 104 s−1

The frequency of such cavitational ﬂuctuations of water in MT, stimulating
in accordance to our model cooperative disassembly of MT, could diﬀer a bit
from the above value for bulk water. The diﬀerence is due to stabilizing inﬂuence
of cavities between α and β tubulins on coherent water clusters (primary lb
eﬀectons).

Our model predicts that if the neurons or other cells, containing MTs, will be
treated by acoustic or electromagnetic ﬁeld with resonance frequency of intra-
MT water (νres ˜ νMT
S ≥ 1 · 104 s−1), it can induce simultaneous disassembly
of number of MTs, responsible for maintaining the speciﬁc cell volume and
geometry. As a result, it activates the neuron’s body volume/shape pulsation.
Such external stimulation of supercatastrophe has two important

consequences:

32

-The ﬁrst one is generation of strong high-frequency nerve impulse, prop-
agating via axons and exciting huge number of other nerve cells, i.e. distant
nerve signal transmission in living organism;

-The second one is stimulation the leaning process as far long-term mem-
ory in accordance to HMC, is related to synaptic contacts reorganization, ac-
companied the neuron volume/shape pulsation.

The ﬁrst of these two consequences of HMC is in accordance with phenomena
of ”ultrasound hearing”, discovered by P. Flanagan and used in his invented de-
vice: ”Neurophone”(Flanagan, 1996). It consists of a (30-50) kHz amplitude
modulated by ordinary acoustic waves ultrasonic oscillator that generated 3.000
volts peak across two plastic insulated electrodes that were placed in
contact with skin. It was shown that the skin under the electrodes
was caused to vibrate by the energy ﬁeld. Even some totally nerve-
deaf people could hear with Neurophone.

The ordinary audio frequencies are in the range of 20 Hz to 20.000 Hz. These
ordinary audio frequencies are percepted by cochlea or inner ear through the
air or through the bones.

Lehardt et al. (1989) supposed that ultrasonic vibrations are perceptive by
another channel: tiny gland in the inner ear known as the Saccule. It looks that
Saccule may have a dual functions of detection gravity and auditory signals.
Cohlea could be a result of Saccule evolution in mammals.

Lenhardt and colleagues constructed the an amplitude modulated by audio-
frequencies ultrasonic transmitter that operated at frequencies: (28-90) kHz.
The output signal from their device was attached to the deaf people heads by
means of piezo-electric ceramic vibrator. All people ”heard” the modulated
signal with clarity.

The second mentioned above consequence of HMC also is conﬁrmed by means
of digital Neurophone version: Thinkman Model 50, developed by Flanagan.
It was demonstrated that if the educational tapes were played throw device,
the information is very rapidly incorporated into long-term memory (Flanagan,
1996).

Another very interesting optical phenomena, conﬁrming HMC, was revealed
by Flanagan also. It is a stimulation of light emission (visible and may be UV
biophotons, aﬀecting the photo ﬁlm) by the human skin and any living things as
well, induced by Neurophone’s radio-frequency (RF): 4·104 Hz (Begich, 1996).
It is in accordance with consequence of HMC that external ﬁelds, inducing
cavitational ﬂuctuations and MTs supercatastrophe, should lead to enhance-
ment of ”biophotons” radiation in visible and UV regions, emitted as a result
of recombination reaction:

HO− + H +

hνp
⇋ H2O

(6.2)

We can predict one more important consequence of HMC. Exci-
tation of water superdeformons in MTs, leading to their collective
disassembly (supercatastrophe), cell’s volume/shape pulsation and

33

generation of high-frequency nerve impulse - could be stimulated not
only by US acoustic and RF electromagnetic signals, but as well by
coherent laser emitted IR photons with frequency, corresponding to
excitation energy of superdeformons.

We can calculate the photons frequency equal to

and wave length:

νS
p = c · eνS
p = c/(cid:0)nH2O · νS
λS

p = (cid:0)3 · 1010(cid:1) · 1200 = 3.6 · 1013 c−1

p (cid:1) ≃ 6.3 · 10−4 cm = 6.3µ

(6.3)

(6.4)

where: eνS

perdeformons excitation;

p = 1200 cm−1

is wave number, corresponding to energy of su-

nH2O ≃ 1.33 is refraction index of water.

The idea of new device: Audio/Video Signals Skin
Transmitter is proposed by us. In this device the laser beam with
corresponding to (6.3) frequency and ultraweak intensity will be mod-
ulated by acoustic and/or video signals. Then, the modulated output
optic signals will be transmitted to the nerve nodes of skin or to
chacras, using wave-guides. The nerve impulses, stimulated by mod-
ulated laser beam, can propagate via complex axon-synapse system
to brain centers, responsible for perception and processing of audio
and video information. The long-term memorizing process also can
be stimulated eﬀectively by Skin Transmitter.

The telepathic abilities of people could be enhanced strongly due
to increasing the coherency of quantum neurodynamics of the nerve
nodes in chacras and brain.

Another principle of neuromodulator can be based on ability of
Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect inﬂuence the biocells. The applicators, con-
taining solenoids, producing Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect with frequency
of acoustic signals or brain’s [α or β] rhythms, applied to scull and
chacras, can be of help for deaf people and that with nerve system
diseases.

The direct and feedback reaction between brain centers, respon-
sible for audio and video information processing and certain nerve
nodes on skin is predictable. The coherent electromagnetic radiation
of these nodes, including the acupuncture one can be responsible for
so-called aura.

One of the important consequence of our Hierarchic model of
consciousness is related to radiation of ultraviolet and visible pho-
tons (”biophotons”) as a result of water molecules recombination af-
ter their dissociation. Dissociation can be stimulated by cavitational
ﬂuctuation of water in the volume of superdeformons, inducing re-
versible disassembly of MTs. The frequency and intensity of this

34

electromagnetic component of bioﬁeld, in turn, can aﬀect the kinetic
energy of the electrons, emitted by skin in the process of Kirlian
eﬀect measurement. It is predictable that the above mentioned stim-
ulation of psi-activity by resonant external radiation, should inﬂuence
on colors and character of Kirlian picture even from distant untreated
points of skin.

There are another resonant frequencies also, calculated from our
theory, enable to stimulate big ﬂuctuations of water in MTs and their
disassembly.

Veriﬁcation of these important consequences of our model and
elaboration of Audio/Video Signals Skin - Transmitter is the intrigu-
ing task of future.

The practical realization of Audio/Video Signals Skin Transmitter
will be a good additional evidence in proof of HMC and useful for lot
of people with corresponding diseases.

The ways for experimental veriﬁcation of HMC in vitro

It is possible to suggest some experimental ways of veriﬁcation of our HMC
using model systems. The important point of HMC is stabilization of highly
ordered water clusters (primary librational eﬀectons) in the hollow core of mi-
crotubules. One can predict that in this case the IR librational and translational
bands of water in the oscillatory spectra of model system, containing suﬃciently
high concentration of MT, must diﬀer from IR spectra of bulk water as follows:
- the shape of lb band in the former case must contain 2 components: the
ﬁrst one, big and broad, like in bulk water and the second one small and sharp,
due to increasing coherent fraction of lib eﬀectons and superradiance;

- sound velocity in the system of microtubules must be bigger, than that in

bulk pure water due to bigger fraction of ordered ice-like water ;

- all the above mentioned parameters must be dependent on the external

electromagnetic ﬁeld, due to piezoelectric properties of MT;

-the irradiation of MTs system in vitro by ultrasonic or electromagnetic
ﬁelds with frequency of superdeformons excitation of the internal water of MTs
at physiological temperatures (25 − 400C) :

νs = (2 − 4) · 104 Hz

have to lead to increasing the probability of disassembly of MTs, induced
by cavitational ﬂuctuations. The corresponding eﬀect of decreasing turbidity of
MT-containing system could be registered by light scattering method.

Another consequence of superdeformons stimulation by external ﬁelds could
be the increasing of intensity of radiation in visible and UV region due to emis-
sion of corresponding ”biophotons” as a result of recombination reaction of water
molecules:

HO− + H + hν

⇋ H2O

35

Cavitational ﬂuctuations of water, representing in accordance to our theory
superdeformons excitations, are responsible for dissociation of water molecules,
i.e. elevation of protons and hydroxyls concentration.

The coherent transitions of (αβ) dimers, composing MTs, between ”closed”
(A) and ”open” (B) conformers with frequency (νmc ∼ 107 s−1) are determined
by frequency of water macroconvertons (ﬂickering clusters) excitation, local-
ized in cavity between α and β tubulins.
If the charges of (A) and (B) con-
formers diﬀer from each other, then the coherent (A⇋B) transitions generate
the vibro-gravitational and electromagnetic ﬁeld with the same radio-frequency.
The latter component of bioﬁeld could be detected by corresponding radio waves
receiver.

The amplitude of corresponding vibro-gravitational waves (VGW)
is not dependent on diﬀerence in electric charge, but on mass and
accelerations of α and β tubulins in course of (A⇋B) large-scale ﬂuc-
tuations.

The VGW generated by relative LS oscillations of nucleosomes in
composition of chromatin ﬁbrils and electromagnetic waves generated
by second level of the ﬁbrils LS dynamics, described above - also could
be responsible for distant [cell-cell] interaction.

We can conclude that our Hierarchic theory of condensed matter
and its application to water and biosystems - provide reliable models
of informational exchange between diﬀerent cells and correlation of
their activity. Hierarchic model of consciousness is based on proposed
quantum exchange mechanism of interactions between neurons, based
on very special properties of microtubules, [gel-sol] transitions and
interrelation between spatial distribution of MTs in neurons body
and synaptic contacts on their surface.

*********************************************************************************

APPENDIX:

SUMMARY OF

NEW HIERARCHIC THEORY OF CONDENSED MATTER

by: Alex Kaivarainen

The basically new hierarchic quantitative theory, general for

solids and liquids, is developed.

It is assumed, that unharmonic oscillations of particles in any con-
densed matter lead to emergency of three-dimensional (3D) super-
position of standing de Broglie waves of molecules, electromagnetic
and acoustic waves. Consequently, any condensed matter could be
considered as a gas of 3D standing waves of corresponding nature.

36

Our approach modify, unify and develops strongly the Einstein’s and
Debye’s models.

Collective excitations, like 3D standing de Broglie waves of molecules,

representing at certain conditions the mesoscopic molecular Bose con-
densate, were analyzed, as a background of hierarchic model of con-
densed matter.

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B) length is deter-
mined by the ratio of Plank constant to the most probable impulse
of molecules, or by ratio of its most probable phase velocity to fre-
quency. The waves B could be related to molecular translations (tr)
and librations (lb).

As far the quantum dynamics of condensed matter did not follow in general
case the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the real most probable de
Broglie wave length can exceed the classical thermal de Broglie wave length
and the distance between centers of molecules many times. This makes possible
the atomic and molecular Bose condensation in solids and liquids at tempera-
tures, below boiling point. It is one of the most important results of our theory,
conﬁrmed by computer simulations on examples of water and ice.

Four strongly interrelated new types of quasiparticles (collective excita-

tions) were introduced in our hierarchic model:

1. Eﬀectons (tr and lb), existing in ”acoustic” (a) and ”optic” (b) states

represent the coherent clusters in general case;

2. Convertons, corresponding to interconversions between tr and lb types of

the eﬀectons (ﬂickering clusters);

3. Transitons, presenting the intermediate [a ⇋ b] transition states of the tr

and lb eﬀectons;

4. Deformons, as the 3D superposition of IR electromagnetic or acoustic

waves, activated by transitons and convertons.

Primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are formed by 3D superposition of the
most probable standing de Broglie waves of the oscillating ions, atoms or
molecules. The volume of eﬀectons (tr and lb) could contain from less than one,
to tens and even thousands of molecules. The ﬁrst condition means validity
of classical approximation in description of the subsystems of the eﬀectons.
The second one points to quantum properties of coherent clusters due to
molecular Bose condensation.

The liquids are semiclassical systems, as far their (tr) primary eﬀectons con-
tain less than one molecule and (lb) primary eﬀectons - more than one molecule.
The solids are quantum systems totally because both kind of the eﬀectons (tr and
lb) are molecular Bose condensates. These consequences of our theory are
conﬁrmed by computer calculations. The 1st order gas-liquid transition
is accompanied by strong decreasing of rotational degrees of freedom due to
emergency of primary (lb) eﬀectons and liquid-solid transition - by decreasing
of translational degrees of freedom due to Bose-condensation of primary (tr)
eﬀectons.

In general case the eﬀecton can be approximated by parallelepiped

37

with ribs corresponding to de Broglie waves length in three selected
directions (1, 2, 3), related to symmetry of molecular dynamics. In
the case of isotropic molecular motion the eﬀectons shape could be
approximated by cube.

The edge’s length of primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) can be consid-

ered as the parameter of order.

The in-phase oscillations of molecules in the eﬀectons correspond to the
eﬀecton’s (a)- acoustic state and the counterphase oscillations correspond to
their (b)- optic state. States (a) and (b) of the eﬀectons diﬀer in potential
energy only, however, their kinetic energies, impulses and spatial dimensions -
are the same. The b-state the eﬀectons has a common features with Fr¨olich’s
polar mode.

The (a → b) or (b → a) transition states of the primary eﬀectons
(tr and lb), deﬁned as primary transitons, are accompanied by a
change in molecule polarizability and dipole moment without density
ﬂuctuations. At this case they lead to absorption or radiation of IR
photons, respectively.

Superposition (interception) of three internal standing IR pho-
tons of diﬀerent directions (1,2,3) - forms primary electromagnetic
deformons (tr and lb).

On the other hand, the [lb/tr] convertons and secondary transitons are
accompanied by the density ﬂuctuations, leading to absorption or radiation of
phonons with corresponding frequencies.

Superposition - interception of standing phonons of three directions (1,2,3),

forms secondary acoustic deformons (tr and lb).

Correlated collective excitations of primary and secondary eﬀectons and
deformons (tr and lb), localized in the volume of primary tr and lb electromag-
netic deformons, lead to origination of macroeﬀectons, macrotransitons
and macrodeformons (tr and lb respectively).

Correlated simultaneous excitations of tr and lb macroeﬀectons in the vol-
ume of superimposed tr and lb electromagnetic deformons lead to origination
of supereﬀectons.

In turn, the coherent excitation of both:

tr and lb macrodeformons and
macroconvertons in the same volume means origination of superdeformons.
Superdeformons are the biggest (cavitational) ﬂuctuations, leading to microbub-
bles in liquids and to local defects in solids.

Total number of quasiparticles of condensed matter equal to 24
= 4! reﬂects the all of possible combinations of the four basic ones
[1-4], introduced above. This set of collective excitations in the form
of ”gas” of 3D standing waves of three types: de Broglie, acoustic
and electromagnetic - is shown to be able to explain virtually all the
properties of any condensed matter.

The important positive feature of our hierarchic model of matter is that it
does not need to use the semi-empiric intermolecular potentials for calculations,
which are unavoidable in existing theories of many body systems. The potential

38

energy of intermolecular interaction is involved indirectly in dimensions and
stability of quasiparticles, introduced in our model.

The main formulae of theory are the same for liquids and solids
and include following experimental parameters, which take into ac-
count their diﬀerent properties:

[1]- Positions of (tr) and (lb) bands in oscillatory spectra;
[2]- Sound velocity;
[3]- Density;
[4]- Refraction index (extrapolated to the inﬁnitive wave length of

photon).

The knowledge of these four basic parameters at the same temperature
and pressure makes it possible using our computer program, to evaluate more
than 150 important characteristics of any condensed matter. Among them are
such as: total internal energy, kinetic and potential energies, heat-capacity and
thermal conductivity, surface tension, vapor pressure, viscosity, coeﬃcient of
self-diﬀusion, osmotic pressure, solvent activity, etc. Most of calculated param-
eters are hidden, i.e. inaccessible to direct experimental measurement.

The new interpretation and evaluation of Brillouin light scattering and
M¨ossbauer eﬀect parameters also are done on the basis of hierarchic model.
Mesoscopic scenarios of turbulence, superconductivity and superﬂuidity are
elaborated.

Some original aspects of water in organization and large-scale dynamics
of biosystems: proteins, DNA, microtubules, membranes and regulative role
of water in cytoplasm, cancer emergency, quantum neurodynamics, etc. are
analyzed in the framework of Hierarchic theory.

Computerized veriﬁcation of our Hierarchic concept of matter
on examples of water and ice has been performed, using special
computer program: Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties
(CAMP, copyright, 1997, Kaivarainen). The new opto-acoustical de-
vice (CAMP), based on this program, with possibilities much wider,
than that of IR, Raman and Brillouin spectrometers, has been pro-
posed (see URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk).

It is a ﬁrst theory enable to predict all known experimental tem-
perature anomalies for water and ice. The conformity between theory
and experiment is very good even without ﬁt parameters.

Hierarchic mesoscopic concept makes a bridge between micro- and
macro- phenomena, dynamics and thermodynamics, liquids and solids
in terms of quantum physics.

0.0.1 References

Aksnes G., Asaad A.N. Inﬂuence of the water structure on chemi-
cal reactions in water. A study of proton-catalyzed acetal hydrolysis.
Acta Chem. Scand. 1989, 43, 726 − 734.

39

Aksnes G., Libnau O. Temperature dependence of ether hydrol-

ysis in water. Acta Chem.Scand. 1991, 45, 463 − 467.

Alberts B., Bray D., Lewis J., Ruﬀ M., Roberts K. and Watson
J.D. Molecular Biology of Cell. Chapter 10. Garland Publishing,
Inc.New York, London, 1983.

Albrecht-Buehler G. Surface extensions of 3T3 cells towards dis-

tant infrared light sources. J.Cell Biol. 1991, 114, 493 − 502.

Albrecht-Buehler G. Rudimentary form of cellular ”vision”. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA

1992, 89, 8288 − 8292.

Aliotta F., Fontanella M.E., Magazu S. Sound propagation in

thyxotropic strucures. Phys. Chem. Liq. 1990.

Amos L. A. and Klug A. Arrangements of subunits in ﬂagellar

microtubules. J. Cell Sci. 1974, 14 523-550.

Andronov A.A., Vitt A.A., Haikin S.E. Theory of oscillations.

3d-Ed. Moscow, 1981.

Antonchenko V.Ya. Physics of water. Naukova dumka, Kiev,

1986.

Ashkroft N., Mermin N. Solid state physics. N.Y.:Helt, Rinehart

and Winston, 1976.

Atema J. Microtubule theory of sensory transduction. J.Theor.

Biol. 1973, 38, 181-190.

Athenstaedt H. Pyroelectric and piezoelectric properties of ver-

tebrates. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1974, 238, 68 − 93.

Audenaert R., Heremans L., Heremans K., & Engleborghs Y.
Secondary structure analysis of tubulin and microtubules with Ra-
man spectroscopy. Biochim. Biophys.Acta, 1989, 996, 110 − 115.

˚Akesson E., Hakkarainen A., Laitinen E., Helenius V., Gillbro T.,
Korppi-Tommola J., Sundstr¨om V. Analysis of microviscosity and
reaction coordinate concepts in isomerization dynamics described
by Kramers’ theory.

Babloyantz A. Molecules, Dynamics and Life. An introduction
to self-organization of matter. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York,
1986.

Bardeen J., Cooper L.N., Schrieﬀer J.R. Phys. Rev., 108, 1175,

1957

Bardeen J., Schrieﬀer J.R. Progr. Low. Temp. Phys, 3, 170,

1960.

Bednorz J.G., Muller K.A. Z.Phys.B. Condensed Matter, 64, 189,

1986

Bates R. Phys.Reports, N3, v.35, 1978.
Begich N. Towards a new alchemy. The millennium science.

Earth Press. Anchrage, Alaska, 1996.

Bershadsky and Vasiliev J.M. Cytosceleton.

In: Cellular Or-

ganelles, ed. P.Siekevitz (Plenum Press, New York, 1988).

Beizer A. Basic ideas of modern physics. Nauka, Moscow, 1973.

40

Ben-Naim A. Hydrophobic Interaction. Plenum Press, New York,

1980.

Bellisent-Funel M.C., Teixeira J., Chen S.H., Dorner B., Crespi
H.L. Low-frequency collective modes in dry and hydrated proteins.
Byphys. J., 1989, 56, 713-716.

Bellfante F.J. The Casimir eﬀect revisited. Am.J.Phys. 1987, 55(2), 134.
Benassi P., D’Arrigo G., Nardone M. Brilouin light scattering in

low temperature water-ethanol solutions. J.Chem.Phys. 1988, 89, 4469−
4477.

Berezin M.V., Lyapin R.R., Saletsky A.N. Eﬀects of weak mag-
netic ﬁelds on water solutions light scattering. Preprint of Physical
Department of Moscow University, No.21, 1988. 4 p. (in Russian).
Bertolini D., Cassetari M., Grigolini P., Salvetti G. and Tani
A. The mesoscopic systems of water and other complex systems.
J.Mol.Liquids, 1989, 41, 251.

Bertolini D., Cassetari M., Salvetti G., Tombari E., Veronesi S.,

Squadrito G. Il nuovo Cim. 1992, 14D, 199.

Bischof M. Vitalistic and mechanistic concepts in the history
of bioelectromagnetics, in book: Biophotononics - non-equilibrium
and coherent systems in biology, biophysics and biotechnology, eds.
L.Beloussov and F.A.Popp, Bioinform Services, Moscow, 1996.

Blakemore J.S. Solid state physics. Cambrige University Press,

Cambrige, N.Y. e.a, 1985.

Bogolyubov N.N. Lectures on quantum statistics. Collected works.

Vol.2. Kiev, 1970.

Bohm D. A new theory of the relationship of Mind and Matter.

J.Amer.Soc. for Psyhial Research. April 1986, N 2, p.128.

Br¨andas E.J. and Chatzdmitriou-Dreismann C.A. Intrn. J. Quan-

tum Chem. 1991, 40, 649 − 673.

Casimir H.B. Proc. K. Akad.Wet. 1948, 51, 793.
Cantor C.R., Schimmel P.R. Biophysical Chemistry. W.H.Freemen

and Company, San Francisco, 1980.

Celegnini E., Graziano E., Vitello G. Classical limit and sponta-
neous breakdoun of symmetry as an environment eﬀect in quantum
ﬁeld theory. Physics Letters A., 1990, 145, 1 − 6.

Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann C.A. and Br¨andas E.J. Coherence in
disordered condensed matter. I. Dissipative structure in liquids and
dynamics of far-infrared absorption. Ber.Bundsenges.Phys.Chem.
1988, 92, 549.

Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann C.A. and Br¨andas E.J. Coherence in
disordered condensed matter. II. Size of coherent structure in con-
densed systems owing to luminescent transitions and detection of D-
ﬂuctuations. Ber.Bundsenges.Phys.Chem. 1988, 92, 554.

Chernikov F.R. Lightscattering intensity oscillations in water-

protein solutions. Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1985, 31, 596.

41

Chernikov F.R. Eﬀect of some physical factors on light scatter-
ing ﬂuctuations in water and water biopolymer solutions. Bioﬁzika
(USSR) 1990a, 35, 711.

Chernikov F.R. Superslow light scattering oscillations in liquids

of diﬀerent types. Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1990b, 35, 717.

Cooper L.N. Phys. Rev., 104, 1189.
Christiansen P.L., Pagano S., Vitello G. The lifetime of coherent
excitations in Langmuir-Blodgett Scheibe aggregates. Phys.Lett. A,
1991, 154(7,8), 381-384.

Clegg J. S. On the physical properties and potential roles of in-

tracellular water. Proc.NATO Adv.Res.Work Shop. 1985.

Clegg J.S. and Drost-Hansen W. On the biochemistry and cell
physiology of water. In: Hochachka and Mommsen (eds.). Biochem-
istry and molecular biology of ﬁshes. Elsevier Science Publ. vol.1,
Ch.1, pp.1-23, 1991.

Conrad M. Proton supermobility: a mechanism for coherent dy-

namic computing. J.mol.Electron. 1988, 4, 57 − 65.

Coﬀey W., Evans M., Grigolini P. Molecular diﬀusion and spec-
tra. A.Wiley Interscience Publication, N.Y., Chichester, Toronto,
1984.

Crick F. and Koch C. Towards a neurobiological theory of con-

sciousness. Semin. Neurosci. 1990, 2, 263 − 275.

Cronley-Dillon J., Carden D. & Birks C. The possible involve-
J. Exp. Biol.

ment of brain microtubules in memory ﬁxation.
1974, 61, 443 − 454.

D’Aprano A., Donato Ines., Liveri V.T. Molecular association of
n- alcohols in nonpolar solvents. Excess volumes and viscosities of n-
pentanol+n-octane mixtures at 0, 5, 25, 35 and 450C. J.Solut.Chem.
1990a, 19,711 − 720.

D’.Aprano A., Donato I., Liveri V.T. Molecular interactions in 1-
pentanol + 2-butanol mixtures: static dielectric constant, viscosity
and refractive index investigations at 5, 25, and 450C. J.Solut.Chem.
1990b, 18, 785 − 793.

D’Aprano A. and Donato I. Dielectric polarization and Polar-
izability of 1-pentanol + n-octane mixtures from static dielectric
constant and refractive index data at 0, 25 and 450. J.Solut.Chem.
1990c, 19, 883 − 892.

D’Arrigo G., Paparelli A. Sound propagation in water-ethanol
mixtures at low temperatures. I.Ultrasonic velocity. J.Chem.Phys.
1988a, 88, No.1, 405 − 415.

D’Arrigo G., Paparelli A. Sound propagation in water-ethanol

mixtures at low temperatures. II.Dynamical properties. J.Chem.Phys.
1988b, 88, No.12, 7687 − 7697.

D’Arrigo G., Paparelli A. Anomalous ultrasonic absorption in
alkoxyethanls aqeous solutions near their critical and melting points.
J.Chem.Phys. 1989, 91, No.4, 2587 − 2593.

42

D’Arrigo G., Texiera J. Small-angle neutron scattering study of
D2O-alcohol solutions. J.Chem.Faraday Trans. 1990, 86, 1503 −
1509.

Davydov A.S. Solitons in molecular systems. Phys. Scripta,

1979, 20, 387 − 394.

Davydov A.S. Solitons in molecular systems. Naukova dumka,

Kiev, 1984 (in Russian).

Del Giudice E., Dogulia S., Milani M. and Vitello G. A quantum
ﬁeld theoretical approach to the collective behaviour of biological
systems. Nuclear Physics 1985, B251[F S13], 375 − 400.

Del Guidice E. Doglia S., Milani M. Spontaneous symmetry break-
ing and electromagnetic interactions in biological systems. Physica
Scripta. 1988, 38, 505 − 507.

Del Guidice E., Doglia S., Milani M., Vitello G. Dynamic Mech-
anism for Cytoskeleton Structures.In: Interfacial phenomena in bi-
ological systems. Marcel Deccer,Inc. New York, 1991.

Del Guidice E., Preparata G., Vitello G., Water as a true electric

dipole laser. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1989, 61, 1085 − 1088.

Desmond N.L. & Levy W.B. Anatomy of associative long-term
synaptic modiﬁcation.
In: ”Long-Term Potentiation: From Bio-
physics to Behavior”, eds. P.W. Landﬁeld and S.A. Deadwyler,
1988.

Dicke R.H. Coherence in spontaneous radiation processes. Phys.Rev.

1954, 93, 99 − 110.

Dirac P. Principles of quantum mechanics. 1957.
Dote J.L., Kivelson D., Schwartz H. J.Phys.Chem. 1981, 85, 2169.
Drost-Hansen W. In: Colloid and Interface Science. Ed. Kerker

M. Academic Press, New York, 1976, p.267.

Drost-Hansen W., Singleton J. Lin. Our aqueous heritage: evi-
dence for vicinal water in cells. In: Fundamentals of Medical Cell Bi-
ology, v.3A, Chemisrty of the living cell, JAI Press Inc.,1992, p.157-
180.

Duhanin V.S., Kluchnikov N.G. The problems of theory and
practice of magnetic treatment of water. Novocherkassk, 1975, p.70-
73 (in Russian).

Dunne B.J. and Jahn R.G. Experiments in remote human/machine

interactions. J.Scientic Exploration. 1992, 6, No 4, 311 − 332.

Dzeloshinsky I.E., Lifshiz E.M., Pitaevsky L.P. Uspekhi ﬁzitch-

eskikh nauk (USSR) 1961,73, 381.

Eftink M.R., Hagaman K.A. Biophys.Chem. 1986, 25, 277.
Einstein A. Collection of works. Nauka, Moscow, 1965 (in Rus-

sian).

Eisenberg D., Kauzmann W. The structure and properties of

water. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969.

Egelstaﬀ P. A. Static and dynamic structure of liquids and glasses.

J.Non-Crystalline solids.1993, 156, 1-8.

43

Etzler F.M., Conners J.J. Structural transitions in vicinal water:
pore size and temperature dependence of the heat capacity of water
in small pores. Langmuir 1991, 7, 2293-2297.

Etzler F.M., White P.J. The heat capacity of water in silica pores.

J. Colloid and Interface Sci., 1987, 120, 94-99.

Farsaci F., Fontanella M.E., Salvato G., Wanderlingh F. and
Giordano R., Wanderlingh U. Dynamical behaviour of structured
macromolecular solutions. Phys.Chem. Liq. 1989, 20, 205 − 220.

Farwell L.A. Quantum -mechanical processes and consciousness:
an empirical investigation. Abstracts of Conference: Toward a Sci-
ence of Consciousness 1996, p.162. Tucson, USA, 1996.

Ferrario M., Grigolini P., Tani A., Vallauri R., Zambon B. Adv.

Chem. Phys. 1985, 62, 225.

Feynman R. Statistical mechanics.
Feynman R. The character of physical law. Cox and Wyman

Ltd., London, 1965.

Flanagan P. and Flanagan Crystal. The neurophone. Earthpulse

Flashpoints. 1996, 1.

Fild R., Burger M. (Eds.). Oscillations and progressive waves in

chemical systems. Mir, Moscow, 1988 (in Russian).

Fine R.A., Millero F.J. J.Chem.Phys. 1973, 59, 5529.
Fontaine A. et al., Phys Rev. Lett. 1978, 41,504.
Frank H.S., Evans M.W. J.Chem.Phys. 1945, 13, 507.
Frank H.S., Wen W. V. Disc.Faraday Soc. 1957, 24,133.
Franks F., Mathias S. (eds): Biophysics of water. John Wiley,

N.Y. 1982.

Franks F. ed. Water. Acomprehensieve treatise. vols: 1-4.

Plenum Press, New York-London, 1973.

Franks F. The hydrophobic interaction. In:Franks F.(ed) Water.

A comprehensive treatise, vol.4. Plenum Press, N.Y p.1-64, 1975.

Frauenfelder H. (1983) Summary and outlook.

In: Porter R.
O’Conner M, Wehlan J. (eds) Mobility and function in proteins and
nucleic acids. Pitman, London, p.329-339. (Ciba Foundation Sym-
posium, vol 93).

Frauenfelder H., Wolynes P.G. Rate theories and puzzles in hemo-

protein kinetics. Science. 1985, 229, 337.

Frauenfelder H., Parak F., Young R.D. Ann. Rev. Biophys.

Biophys. Chem. 1988, 17, 451.

Frehland E. (ed.) Synergetics from microscopic to macroscopic

order. Springer, Berlin, 1984.

Frontas’ev V.P., Schreiber L.S. J. Struct. Chem. (USSR) 6(1966)512.Frolich

H. Phys. Rev., 79, 845, 1950

Fr¨ohlich H. Phys.Lett. 51 (1975) 21.
Fr¨ohlich H. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 1975, 72, 4211.
Fr¨ohlich H. (ed.) Biological coherence and response to external

stimuli. Springer, Berlin, 1988.

44

Fr¨olich H. In book: The ﬂuctuating enzyme. A Wiley-Interscience

Publicatin, 1986, p.421-449.

Gavish B., Weber M. Viscosity-dependent structural ﬂuctuations

in enzyme catalysis. Biochemistry 18 (1979) 1269.

Gavish B. in book: The ﬂuctuating enzyme. Ed. by G.R.Welch.

Wiley- Interscience Publication, 1986, p.264-339.

Gell-Mann M. and Hartle J.B. Quantum mechanics in the light of
quantum cosmology. In: Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Found of Quantum
Mechanics. ed. Kobyashi, Phys. Soc. of Japan, Tokyo, 1989.

Genberg L., Richard L., McLendon G., Dwayne-Miller R.V. Di-
rect observation of global protein motion in hemoglobin and mioglobin
on picosecond time scales. Science, 1991,251,1051-1054.

Genzel L., Kremer F., Poglitsch A., Bechtold G. Relaxation pro-
cess on a picosecond time-scale in hemoglobin observed by millimeter-
wave spectroscopy. Biopolimers, 1983,22,1715-1729.

Giordano R., Fontana M.P., Wanderlingh F. J.Chem.Phys. 1981a, 74, 2011.
Giordano R. et al. Phys.Rev. 1983b, A28, 3581.
Giordano R., Salvato G., Wanderlingh F., Wanderlingh U. Quasielas-

tic and inelastic neutron scattering in macromolecular solutions.
Phys.Rev.A. 1990, 41, 689 − 696.

Glansdorf P., Prigogine I. Thermodynamic theory of structure,

stability and ﬂuctuations. Wiley and Sons, N.Y., 1971.

Gordeyev G.P., Khaidarov T. In: Water in biological systems and
their components. Leningrad University Press, Leningrad, 1983, p.3
(in Russian).

Grawford F.S. Waves. Berkley Physics Course. Vol.3. McGraw-

Hill Book Co., N.Y., 1973.

Grebennikov V.S. Priroda i tchelovek (”Svet”), (USSR), 1990,

No.8, p.22.

Grigolini P. J.Chem.Phys. 1988, 89, 4300.
Grundler W. and Keilmann F. Sharp resonance in Yeast growth

proved nonthermal sensitivity to microwaves. Phys.Rev.Letts., 1983, 51, 1214−
1216.

Guravlev A.I. and Akopjan V.B. Ultrasound shining. Nauka,

Moscow, 1977.

Haag M.M., Krystosek A., Arenson E., Puck T.T. Reverse trans-
formation and genome exposure in the C6 glial tumor cell line. Can-
cer Investigation, 1994, 12(1), 33 − 45.

Haake F. Quantum signatures of chaos. Springer, Berlin, 1991.
Haida A., Matsuo T., Suga H., Seki S. Proc. Japan Acad. 1972, 48, 489.
Haken H. Advanced synergetics. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
Haken H. Information and selforganization. Springer, Berlin,

1988.

Haken H. Synergetics, computers and cognition. Springer, Berlin,

1990.

45

Hameroﬀ S.R. Ultimate Computing: Biomolecular Conscious-
ness and Nanotechnology, Elsevier-North Holland, Amsterdam, 1987.
Hameroﬀ S. Quantum automata in cytosceletal microtubules: a

nanoscale substrate for cognition. 1994.

Hameroﬀ S. Cytoplasmic gel states and ordered water: possi-
ble roles in biological quantum coherence. Proceedings of 2nd An-
nual advanced water science symposium. October 4-6, 1996, Dallas,
Texas, USA.

Hameroﬀ S. Quantum mind posting from Dec.19, 1998.
Hameroﬀ S.R. and Penrose R. Orchestrated reduction of quan-
tum coherence in brain microtubules: A model of consciousness.
In: Toward a Science of Consciusness - Tucson I, S. Hameroﬀ, a.
Kaszniak and A.Scott (eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 1996, pp.
507-540.

Hameroﬀ S.R. and Watt R.C. Information processing in micro-

tubes. J.Theor.Biol. 1982, 98, 549 − 561.

Hameroﬀ S.R., Dayhoﬀ J.E, Lahoz-Beltra R., Samsonovich A.V.,
Rasmussen S. Models for molecular computation: Conformatioanal
automata in the cytosceleton. Computer, November 1992, 30 − 39.
Huang K. Statistical mechanics. Mir, Moscow, 1966 (in Russian).
Il’ina S.A., Bakaushina G.F., Gaiduk V.I. et al. Bioﬁzika (USSR), 1979, 24, 513.
Ise N. and Okubo T. Accounts of Chem. Res. 1980, 13, 303.
Ise N., Matsuoka H., Ito K., Yoshida H. Inhomogenity of so-
lute distribution in ionic systems. Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc.
1990, 90, 153 − 162.

Ito K., Yoshida H., Ise N. Void Structure in colloid Dispersion.

Science, 1994, 263, 66.

Jahn R.G. and Dunne B.J. Margins of Reality: The role of Con-
sciousness in the Physical World. San Diego, New York, London:
Hacourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987, 415 pp.

Jahn R.G. and Dunne B.J. On the quantum mechanics of con-
sciousness with application to anomalous phenomena. Foundations
of physics, 1986, 16, No.8, 721 − 772.

Jibu M., Hagan S., Hameroﬀ S.R., Pribram K.H., Yasue K.
implica-

Quantum optical coherence in cytosceletal microtubules:
tions for brain function. Biosystems, 1994, 32, 195-209.

Jibu M. and Kunio Y. The basis of Quantum Brain Dynamics.
Materials of the First Appalachian Conference on Behavioral Neu-
rodynamics. Center for Brain Research and Informational Science.
Radford University, Radford, Virginia, September 17 − 20, 1992.

Jibu M. and Kunio Y. Intracellular Quantum Signal Transfer in
Umesawa’s Quantum Brain Dynamics. Cybernetics and Systems:
An International Journal, 1993, 24, 1 − 7.

Jibu M. and Yasue K. Introduction to quantum brain dynamics,
in: Nature, Cognition and System III, E. Carvallo (ed.), Kluwer
Academic, London.

46

Johri G.K., Roberts J.A. Study of the dielectric response of wa-
ter using a resonant microwave cavity as a probe. J.Phys.Chem.
1990, 94, 7386.

Kivelson D., Tarjus G.Connection between integrated intensities
of depolarized-light-scattering spectra and mesoscopic order in liq-
uids. Phys. Rev. E, 1993, 47(6), 4210-4214.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Solvent-dependent ﬂexibility of proteins and
principles of their function. D.Reidel Publ.Co., Dordrecht, Boston,
Lancaster, 1985, pp.290.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. The noncontact interaction between macromolecules
revealed by modiﬁed spin-label method. Bioﬁzika (USSR) 1987, 32, 536.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Thermodynamic analysis of the system: water-

ions-macromolecules. Bioﬁzika (USSR), 1988, 33, 549.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Theory of condensed state as a hierarchical sys-
tem of quasiparticles formed by phonons and three-dimensional de
Broglie waves of molecules. Application of theory to thermodynam-
ics of water and ice. J.Mol.Liq. 1989a, 41, 53 − 60.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A.I. Mesoscopic theory of matter and its interaction
with light. Principles of selforganization in ice, water and biosys-
tems. University of Turku, Finland 1992, pp.275.

Kaivarainen A. Dynamic model of wave-particle duality and Grand

uniﬁcation. University of Joensuu, Finland 1993. pp.118.

Kaivarainen A. Mesoscopic model of elementary act of percep-
tion and braining. Abstracts of conference: Toward a Science of
Consciousness-II 1996, p.74. Tucson, USA.

Kaivarainen A. Hierarchic model of consciousness. Abstracts of
conference: Toward a science of consciousness-III, 1998, No: 1078,
Tucson, USA.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A., Fradkova L., Korpela T. Separate contributions
of large- and small-scale dynamics to the heat capacity of proteins.
A new viscosity approach. Acta Chem.Scand. 1993, 47, 456 − 460.

Kampen N.G., van. Stochastic process in physics and chemistry.

North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1981.

Karachentseva A., Levchuk Yu. J. Biopolymers and Cell, 1989,

5, 76.

Karmaker A., Joarder R.N. Molecular clusters and correlations in

water by x-ray and neutron diﬀraction. Physical Rev. E 1993, 47(6), 4215−
4218.

Karplus M., McCammon J.A. Scientiﬁc American, April 1986,

p.42.

Kauzmann W. Quantum Chemistry. Academic Press, New York,

1957.

Kell G.S. J.Chem.and Eng.Data. 1975, 20, 97.
Kikoin I.K. (Ed.) Tables of physical values. Atomizdat, Moscow,

1976 (in Russian).

47

Kirschner M. and Mitchison T. Beyond self assebly: from micro-

tubules to morphogenesis. Cell, 1986, 45, 329 − 342.

Kiselev V.F., Saletsky A.N., Semikhina L.P. Theor. experim. khimya

(USSR), 1988, 2, 252 − 257.

Kittel Ch. Thermal physics. John Wiley and Sons,Inc., N.Y.,

1975.

Kittel Ch. Introduction to the solid state physics. Nauka, Moscow,

1978 (in Russian).

Klassen V.I. Magnetization of the aqueous systems. Khimiya,

Moscow, 1982 (in Russian).

Kneppo P., Titomir L.I. Biomagnetic measurments. Energoat-

omizdat, Moscow, 1989.

Koshland D.E. J.Theoret.Biol. 2(1962)75.
Kozyrev N.A. Causal or nonsymmetrical mechanics in a linear

approximation. Pulkovo. Academy of Science of the USSR. 1958.

Kovacs A.L. Hierarcical processes in biological systems. Math.

Comput. Modelling. 1990, 14, 674 − 679.

Kovacs A.L. A hierarchical model of information ﬂow in complex

systems. Int.J.General Systems. 1991, 18, 223 − 240.

Kramers H.A. Physika 1940, 7, 284.
Krinsky V.J. (ed.) Self-organization. Springer, Berlin, 1984.
Krtger J. Neuronal cooperativity. Springer, Berlin, 1991.
Lagrage P., Fontaine A., Raoux D., Sadoc A., Miglardo P. J.Chem.

Phys. 1980, 72,3061.

Lockwood M. Mind, brain, and the quantum. Basil Blackwell,

1989.

London F. On the Bose-Einstein condensation. Phys.Rev. 1938, 54, 947.
London F. Superﬂuids, v1, Wiley, 1950.
Landau L.D., Lifshits E.M. Statistical physics. Nauka, Moscow,

1976 (in Russian).

Lahoz-Beltra R., Hameroﬀ S., Dayhoﬀ J.E. Cytosceletal logic: A
model for molecular computation via Boolean operations in micro-
tubules and microtubule-associated proteins. BioSystems, 1993, 29, 1−
23.

Lechleiter J., Girard S., Peralta E., Clapham D. Spiral waves:
spiral calcium wave propagation and annihilation in Xenopus laevis
oocytes. Science, 1991, 252, 123 − 126.

Lee J.C., Field D.J., George H.J. & Head J. Biochemical and
chemical properties of tubulin subspecies. Ann NY Acad. Sci.
1986, 466, 111 − 128.

Leggett A.J. Progr. Theor. Phys., supp. 1980, 69, 80.
Lenhardt M., et al., Human ultrasonic speech perception. Sci-

ence, July 5, 1991.

Lumry R. and Gregory R.B. Free-energy managment in protein
In book:

reactions: concepts, complications and compensations.

48

The ﬂuctuating enzyme. A Wiley-Interscience publication. 1986,
p. 341- 368.

Maeno N. Science about ice. Mir, Moscow, 1988.
Manning Jeane. The coming energy revolution. 1996.
Marshall I.N. Consciousness and Bose-Einstein condensates. New

ideas in Psychol. 1989, 7, 77 − 83.

Magazu S., Maisano G., Majolino D., Mallamace F., Migliardo
P., Aliotta F., and Vasi C. Relaxation process in deeply supercooled
water by Mandelstam-Brilloin scattering. J.Phys.Chem., 1989, 93, 942−
947.

Maisano G., Majolino D., Mallamace F., Aliotta F., Vasi C. and
Wanderlingh F. Landau-Placzek ratio in normal and supercooled
water. Mol. Phys. 1986, 57, 1083 − 1097.

Magazu S., Majolino D., Mallamace F., Migliardo P., Aliotta
F., Vasi C., D’Aprano A. and Donato D.I. Velocity and damp-
ing of thermal phonons in isomeric alcohols. Mol.Phys. 1989, 66,
No.4, 819 − 829.

Mascarenhas S. The electret eﬀect in bone and biopolymers and
the bound water problem. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1974, 238, 36 − 52.
Maslovski V.M., Postnikov S.N. In: The treatment by means
of the impulse magnetic ﬁeld. Proceedings of the IV seminar on
nontraditional technology in mechanical engineering. Soﬁa-Gorky,
1989.

Miamoto S. Chaneges in mobility of synaptic vesicles with as-
sembly and disassembly of actin network. Biochemica et Biophysica
Acta. 1995, 1244, 85-91.

McCall S.L., Hahn E.L. Self-induced transparency by pulsed co-

herent light. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1967, 18, 908 − 911.

Melki R., Carlier M.F., Pantaloni D., Timasheﬀ S.N. Cold de-
polimerization of microtubules to to double rings: geometric stabi-
lization of assemblies. Biochemistry, 1989, 28, 9143 − 9152.

Mileusnic R., Rose S.P. & Tillson P. Passive avoidance learning
results in region speciﬁc changes in concentration of, and incorpora-
tion into, colchicine binding proteins in the chick forebrain. Neur.
Chem. 1980, 34, 1007 − 1015.

Minenko V.I. Electromagnetic treatment of water in thermoen-

ergetics. Harkov, 1981 (in Russian).

Moshkov D.A., Saveljeva L.N., Yanjushina g.V., Funticov V.A.
Structural and chemical changes in the cytosceleton of the gold-
ﬁsh Mauthner cells after vestibular stimulation. Acta Histochemica
Suppl- Band. 1992, XLI, 241-247.

Muallem S., Kwiatkowska K. Xu X, Yin HL. Actin ﬁlament dis-
assembly is a suﬃcient ﬁnal trigger for exocytosis in nonexcitable
cells. J. Cell Biol. 1995, 128, 589-598.

Nemethy G., Scheraga H.A. J.Chem.Phys. 1962, 36, 3382.

49

Neubauer C., Phelan A.M., Keus H., Lange D.G. Microwave irra-
diation of rats at 2.45 GHz activates pinocytotic uptake of tracer by
capillary endothelial cells of cerebral cortex. Bioelectromagnetics,
1990, 11, 261 − 268.

Nicolis J.C. Dynamics of hierarchical systems. Springer, Berlin,

1986.

Nicolis J.C., Prigogine I. Self-organization in nonequilibrium sys-
tems. From dissipative structures to order through ﬂuctuations. Wi-
ley and Sons, N.Y., 1977.

Ohmine I. Water dynamics: Inherent structure, analysis for ﬂuc-

tuations and collective motion. In book of abstracts: Water- Biomolecule
Interactions. Palermo, May 31-June4, 1992.

Penrose R. The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford University Press,

London. 1989.

Penrose R. Shadows of the Mind. Oxford University Press, Lon-

don, 1994.

Peres A. Classiﬁcation of quantum parodoxes: nonlocality vs.
contextuality. Conference proceedings: ”The Interpretation of Quan-
tum Theory: Where do we stand?”, New-York, April 1992.

Peres A. Quantum theory: Concepts and Methods. Kluwer Acad.

Publ. Dordrecht, 1993.

Peschel G. Adlﬁnger K.H. J. Coll. Interface Sci., 1970, v.34 (4),

p.505.

Pribram K. Languages of the Brain. Monterey, Calif.: Wadsworth

Publishing, 1977, p.123.

Pribram K. Brain and Perception. Lawerence Erlbaum, New

Jersey. 1991.

Prigogine I. From Being to Becoming: time and complexity in
physical sciences. W.H.Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1980.
Prigogine I., Strengers I. Order out of chaos. Hainemann, Lon-

don, 1984.

Prokhorov A. M. (Ed.) Physical encyclopedia. Vol.1-4. Moscow,

1988.

Prokhorov A. A. Study of thermoinduced processes in liquid wa-
ter within the range of associative absorption band (ν2 +νL). J.Appl.
Spectroscopy (USSR) 1991, 54, 740.

Prokhorov A.A. Sensitivity of associative absorption band (ν2 +
νL) to structural changes in water and water solutions. J.Appl.
Spectroscopy (USSR) 1991, 55, 951.

Pokorny J., Fiala J. Condensed energy and interaction energy in
Frolich systems. J.Neural network world, 1994, v.4, N 3, 299 − 313.
Pokorny J., Fiala J. Information content of Frolich coherent sys-

tems. J.Neural network world, 1994, v.4, N 3, 315 − 325.

Popp F.A., Li K.H. et. al., Physical aspects of biophotons. Ex-

perentia, 1988, 44, 576-585.

50

Popp F.A., Li K.H. and Gu Q. Recent advances in biophoton

research. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1992.

Rasmussen S., Karampurwala H., Vaidyanath R., Jensen K.S.,
Hameroﬀ S. Computational connectionism within neuros: A model
of cytosceletal automata subserving neural networks. Physica D, 1990, 42, 428−
449.

Ribary J., Ioannides A.A., Singh K.D., Hasson R., Bolton J.P.,
Lado F., Mogilner A., Llinas R. Magnetic ﬁeld tomography of coher-
ent thalamcortical 40 Hz oscillations in humans. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 1991, 88, 11037 − 11041.

Riccardi L.M. and Umezawa H. Brain and physics of many-body

problems. Kybernetik, 1967, 4, 44-48.

Roberts J. and Wang F. Dielectric relaxation in water over the
frequency range 13 ≤ f ≤ 18 GHz using a resonant microwave cavity
operating in the T M010 mode. J.Microwave Power and Electromag-
netic Energy, 1993, 28, 196 − 205.

Roberts J., Zhang X. & Zheng Y. Determination of hydrogen
bonding in water clusters through conductivity (d.c.) measurments
of aqueous solutions of NaCl. J. Chem. Phys. 1994.

Rubik B. Life at the edge of science. The Inst.

for Frontier

Science. 1996, pp.185.

Sadoc A., Fountaine A., Lagarde D., Raoux D. J.Am.Chem.Soc. 1981,

103, 6287.

Samsonovich A., Scott A., Hameroﬀ S.R. Acousto-conformational
implications for neuro-

transitions in cytosceletotal microtubules:
like protein array devices. Nanobiology, 1992, 457 − 468.

San Biagio P.L. and Palma M.U. Biophys.J. 1991, 60, 508- .
Sciortino F. Geiger A., Stanley H.E. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1990, 65, 3452−

5.

Schulz G.E., Schirmer R.H. Principles of protein structure. Springer-

Verlag, New York, 1979.

Semikhina L.P., Kiselev V.F. Izvestiya VUZov. Fizika (USSR),

1988, 5, 13 (in Russian).

Semikhina L.P. Kolloidny jurnal (USSR), 1981, 43, 401.
Shih Y., Alley C.O. Phys Rev.Lett. 1988, 61, 2921.
Shnol S.E. Physico-chemical factors of evolution. Nauka, Moscow,

1979 (in Russian).

Shpinel V.C. Gamma-ray resonance in crystals. Nauka, Moscow,

1969 (in Russian).

Shutilov V.A. Principles of ultrasound physics. Leningrad Uni-

versity Press, Leningrad, 1980 (in Russian).

Singer W. Synchronization of cortical activity and its putative
role in information processing and learning. Annu. rev. Physiol.
1993, 55, 349-374.

Singvi K., Sielander A. In: M¨ossbauer eﬀect Ed. Kogan Yu.

Moscow, 1962, p.193 (in Russian).

51

Smith C. W. Coherence in living biological systems. Neural Net-

work World. 1994, v.4, N3, pp.379-388.

Somogyi B. and Damjanovich S. In book: The ﬂuctuating en-
zyme. Ed. by G.R.Welch. A Wiley-InterScience Publication. 1986,
341-368.

Strogats S.H.and Stewart I. Coupled Oscillators and Biological

Synchronization. Scientiﬁc American, Dec. 1993, 68-75.

Taubes G. Neutrino watchers go to extremes. Science. 1994, 263, 28.
Teixeira J., Bellisent-Funel M.C., Chen S.H., Dorner B. Obser-
vation of new short-wavelength collective excitations in heavy water
by coherent inelastic neutron scattering. Phys. Rev. Letters, 1985,
v.54, #25, 2681-2683.

Tereshkevitch M.O., Kuprin F.V., Kuratova T.S., Ivishina G.A.

J. Phys. Chem. (USSR) 1974, 48, 2498.

Theiner O., White K.O. J.Opt. Soc.Amer. 1969, 59, 181.
Timashev S.F. Doklady Academii Nauk SSSR 1985, 281, 112.
Trincher K.S. State and role of water in biological objects. Nauka,

Moscow, 1967, p.143-149.

Tsukita S., Kobayashi T., Matsumoto G. Subaxolemmal cytoscele-
ton in squid giant axon.
II.Morpological identiﬁcation of micro-
tubules and microﬁlament-associate domains of axolemma. J. Cell
Biol. 1986, 102, 1710 − 1725.

Udaltsova N.B., Kolombet B.A., Shnol S.E. Possible cosmophys-
ical eﬀects in the processes of diﬀerent nature. Pushchino, 1987 (in
Russian).

Umezawa H. Advanced Field Theory: Micro, Macro and Thermal

Physics (American Institute of Physics, New York), 1993.

Umezawa H. Matsumoto H. and Tachiki. Thermo ﬁeld dynamics

and condensate states (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982).

Vassilev P., Kanazirska M., Tien H. Intermembrane linkage medi-
ated by tubulin. Biochem. Biophys. Res.Comm., 1985, 126(1), 559−
565.

Vuks M.F. Light scattering in gases, liquids and solutions. Leningrad

University Press, Leningrad. 1977.

Vuks M.F. Electrical and optical properties of molecules and con-

densed matter. Leningrad University Press, Leningrad, 1984.

Wang H., Lu B. & Roberts J.A. Behavior of hydrogen bonding
in water over the temperature range 100 ≤ T ≤ 360 K. Molecular
materials, 1994.

Watterson J. Solvent cluster size and colligative properties. Phys.

Chem.Liq. 1987, 16, 317 − 320.

Watterson J. The role of water in cell architecture. Mol.Cell.Biochem.

1988,79,101 − 105.

Watterson J. A model linking water and protein structures. Bio

Systems 1988, 22, 51 − 54.

52

Wiggins P.M. Thermal anomalies in ion distribution in rat kidney
slices and in a model system. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 1972,
2, 171-176.

Y.Kuchino, W.E.G.Muller, P.L.Pine. Springer-Verlag. Berlin,

Heidelberg, 1991.

Wertheim G.K. M¨ossbauer eﬀect. Academic Press, N.Y. and

London. 1964.

Yoshida H., Ito K., and Ise N. Colloidal crystal growth. J. Chem.

Soc. Faraday Trans., 1991, 87(3), 371 − 378.

Yashkichev V.I. J.Inorganic Chem.(USSR) 1980,25,327.
Zeldovitch Ya.B., Khlopov M.Yu. Drama of concepts in cognition

of nature. Nauka, Moscow, 1988 (in Russian).

Zohar Danah. The quantum self. N.Y., 1989.

53

