0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
5
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
3
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Underpinning for Space Time

Centre for Applicable Mathematics & Computer Sciences

B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

B.G. Sidharth

Abstract

We argue, that from a background pre space-time Zero Point Field,
physical space-time emerges on averaging over unphysical Compton
scales.

1 Introduction

In a previous communication[1] it was shown how from the fractal dimension
two of a Quantum Mechanical path, the space time divide emerges: The
real coordinate x, shows up as a complex number x + ix′, and it was de-
duced that x′ = ct. The underpinning for the complex coordinate is the
double Weiner process, which in the Nelsonian formulation leads to a com-
plex velocity (Cf.ref.[1] and [2]). It also appears as zitterbewegung and the
resulting complex or non Hermitian position operator. It was also argued[3]
that this Quantum Mechanical indeterminism gives birth to time. Indeed it
was pointed out that the above fractal behaviour has an immediate analogue
in Richardson’s coastline[4], while the Compton scale is the thick brush that
delineates the coastline[5]. We will now see that all this implies the emer-
gence of space-time from a pre space-time background Zero Point Field or
Quantum Vacuum.

0Email:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in

1

2 Space-time

In the light of the above comments, we can now notice that within the Comp-
ton time, for example we have a double Weiner process leading to non diﬀer-
entiability with respect to time. That is, at this level time in our usual sense
does not exist. To put it another way, within the Compton scale we have
the zitterbewegung eﬀects - these are non local and chaotic. As pointed out
by Dirac[6], it is only after an averaging over these scales that meaningful
physics emerges.
Indeed in the stochastic formulation of the Schrodinger,
Klein-Gordon and Dirac equations[5, 7], we again encounter minimum space
time units, the Compton scale within which there are unphysical eﬀects. It
is only outside the Compton scale that physics emerges.
This is a Quantum Mechanical and an experimental fact. It expresses the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle - space time points imply inﬁnite momenta
and energies and are thus not meaningful physically. However Quantum The-
ory has lived with this contradiction[8]. To put it simply to measure space
or time intervals we need units which can be to a certain extent and not
indeﬁnitely subdivided - but already this is the origin of discreteness. So
physical time emerges at values greater than the minimum unit, which has
been shown to be at the Compton scale[9]. Going to the limit of space-time
points leads to the well known inﬁnities of Quantum Field Theory (and clas-
sical electron theory) which require renormalization for their removal.
The conceptual point here is that time is in a sense synonymous with change,
but this change has to be tractable or physical. The non diﬀerentiability with
respect to time, due to the double Weiner process, within the Compton time,
precisely highlights time or change which is not tractable, that is is unphys-
ical. However Physics, tractability and diﬀerentiability emerge from this
indeterminism once averages over the zitterbewegung or Compton scale are
taken. It is now possible to track time physically in terms of multiples of the
Compton scale.
To elaborate on this point it may be mentioned that in[9, 10] and elsewhere,
it was argued that given n particles in the universe, within the Compton
time τ,√n particles would be ﬂuctuationally or unphysically created (out of
a background Zero Point Field), so that we would have,

dn

dt

=

√n
τ

2

(1)

On integrating (1) from n = 0 to n = N ∼ 1080, as we have in the present
universe, it was shown that we recover the ﬂow of time, infact the correct
age of the universe, as indeed can be easily veriﬁed from (1).
The above considerations can be looked at from another point of view. Time
is essentially an ordering or sequencing of events. We would like to know
the basis on which this ordering takes place and which leads to our physical
universe. The question is, can we liberate this sequence of events from any
ordering at all, even though this would on the face of it lead to a totally
chaotic universe without any physics. However within the Compton scale
this should certainly be possible:
As noted in [9], let us start with hypothetical instantaneous point particles
(or Zero Point Energies or Ganeshas as they were designated). Their states
could be denoted by φn, which form a basis, so that a general state could be
written as

ψ = Xn

cnφn,

(2)

φn could be eigen states of for example the position or energy, with eigen
values λn. It is known that, owing to the Random Phase Axiom, viz.,

(cn, cm) = 0, n 6= m.

(3)

where n could stand not for a single state but also for a set of states ni and
so also m, and where the bar denotes an average over a suitable interval we
have[11]

ψ = Xn

bnφn,

(4)

where |bn|2 = 1 if λ < λn < λ + ∆λ and = 0 otherwise.
What all this means is the following. We take a totally random sequence of
states like φn. Such a sequence averaged over the interval τ , the Compton
time and there by using (3), constitutes a particle that has physical existence,
as expressed by (4). Without such an average, that is within the Compton
time, we have instead of equation (4), equation (2), wherein there is no or-
dering or sequencing whatsoever, that is time in the physical sense has no
meaning. This is a pre time (or pre space time) perfectly random background
Zero Point Field scenario. It is only on averaging that we recover the physi-
cally meaningful equation (4).
Identical arguments apply to the case of space, except that there is the space

3

time divide arising out of the fractal two dimensionality of the Quantum path
as noted above: We have x + ict. Indeed it was pointed out[1] that this is
the origin of Special Relativity. This apart we can proceed in terms of the
Compton wavelength l to get this time instead of (1),

dn

dx

=

√n
l

(5)

Integrating (5) exactly as we did (1), we recover this time, the well known
hitherto empirical Eddington formula,

√N l

R ∼

(whose time analogue from (1) is, T ∼ √N τ ).

Once again within the Compton wavelength we have non local unphysical
eﬀects.
However as we will now see, in the case of space, we recover three dimensions.
The reason is that as pointed out in[12, 13] and elsewhere the zitterbewe-
gung or unphysical eﬀects represent charge and double connectivity or spin
half which in terms of spin networks[14] or similar arguments[15] immedi-
ately leads to three dimensionality. Thus the the three dimensionality is not
apriori, but rather is a holistic property arising from several particles.
Another way of looking at this is when two particles interact without any spe-
ciﬁc reference to electromagnetism and three dimensionality, their potential
energy is given by, as is well known[16]

V = −α

¯hc
r

(6)

where α is the ﬁne structure constant and r the distance between the two
particles, without reference to any dimensionality.
We would now like to point out that the signiﬁcance of (6) is that it gives
the inverse square Coulumb Force Law and therefore three dimensionality.
Indeed as Barrow [8] points out ”Interestingly the number of dimensions of
space which we experience in the large plays an important role....
it also
ensures that wave phenomena behave in a coherent fashion. Were there four
dimensions of space, then simple waves would not travel at one speed in free
space.... in any world but one having three large dimensions of space, waves
would become distorted as they travel...” Also as pointed out in[17], in the

4

case of two elementary particles separated by a distance r, as the spectral
density of the background Zero Point Field is given by

ρ(ω) ∝ ω3

where ω is ∝ 1

r , the electromagnetic force is given by

Force ∝ Z ∞

r

ω3dr,∝

1
r2

which in eﬀect is the same as (6).

3 Discussion

The picture that presents itself is the following: There is a perfectly random,
incoherent background Quantum Vacuum or Zero Point Field. From what
we term as ﬂuctuations of this Quantum Vacuum, particles are created at
the Compton scale. This is a transition from an equation like (2) which
represents total incoherence, to (4), where we have particles occupying a
coherent space time with physics. The coherence or link between the various
particles is interaction provided by the background Zero Point Field within
the Compton scales, or in more conventional language by the virtual photons
linking the various constitutents. In the transition from (2) to (4), there has
been a totally random sequencing within the Compton scale, as expressed by
the Random Phase equation (3). In other words within the Compton scale,
there is no physics - indeed this is the Zitterbewegung region of non local
eﬀects.

References

[1] B.G. Sidharth, ”Space Time at a Random Heap”, to appear in Chaos

Solitons and Fractals.

[2] L. Nottale, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 4, 3, 361-388, 1994, and refer-

ences therein.

[3] Sidharth, B.G., ”Comment on the Paper ’Uniﬁcation of Fundamen-

tal....’”, to appear in Chaos Solitons and Fractals.

5

[4] B.B. Mandelbrot,”The Fractal Geometry of Nature”, (1982) W.H. Free-

man, New York, pg.2,18,27.

[5] B.G. Sidharth, ”The Chaotic Universe”, CSF 11 (2000), pp.1171-1174.

[6] P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1958, p263.

[7] B.G. Sidharth, ”The Universe of Chaos and Quanta”, CSF 11 (2000),

pp1269-1278.

[8] J.D. Barrow, ”Theories of Everything”, Vintage, London, 1992.

[9] B.G. Sidharth, ”Universe of Fluctuations”, Int.J.of Mod.Phys. A 13(5),

1998, pp599ﬀ.

[10] B.G. Sidharth, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 37 (4),

1307-1312, 1998.

[11] K. Huang, ”Statistical Mechanics”, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1975.

[12] B.G. Sidharth, ”Quantum Mechanical Black Holes:Towards a Uniﬁca-
tion of Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity”, IJPAP, 35, 1997.

[13] B.G. Sidharth, Gravitation & Cosmology, Vol.4, No.2, 1998.

[14] R. Penrose, ”Angular Momentum: An approach to combinational space-
time” in, ”Quantum Theory and Beyond”, Ed., Bastin, T., Cambridge
University press, Cambridge, 1971.

[15] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, ”Gravitation”, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, 1973.

[16] T. Jacobsen, European Journal of Physics, 17, 1996, p.92.

[17] B.G. Sidharth, in Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern Physics:
”Pro and Contra” , Eds., A.E. Chubykalo et. al., Nova Science Publish-
ing, New York, 1999.

6

