Space-time as a lattice of harmonic oscillators:

quantitatively deriving relativity, mass, and gravitation

1Department of Physics, University of Alabama, Huntsville, AL 35899, U.S.A.

Richard Lieu 1

Received

;

accepted

0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
6
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
7
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

– 2 –

ABSTRACT

The microscopic structure of space and time is investigated. It is proposed

that space and time of an inertial observer Σ are most conveniently described

as a crystal lattice Λ, with nodes representing measurement ‘tickmarks’ and

connected by independent quantized harmonic oscillators which vibrate more

severely the faster Σ moves with respect to the object being measured (as due to

the Uncertainty Principle). The Lorentz transformation of Special Relativity is

be derived. Further, mass is understood as a localized region ∆Λ having higher

vibration temperature than that of the ambient lattice. The eﬀect of relativistic

mass increase may then be calculated without appealing to energy-momentum

conservation. The origin of gravitation is shown to be simply a transport of

energy from the boundary of ∆Λ outwards by lattice phonon conduction, as

the system tends towards equilibrium. Application to a single point mass leads

readily to the Schwarzschild metric, while a new solution is available for two

point masses - a situation where General Relativity is too complicated to work

with. The important consequence is that inertial observers who move at relative

speeds too close to c are no longer linked by the Lorentz transformation, because

the lattice of the ‘moving’ observer has already disintegrated into a liquid state.

In this work I propose a model for the microscopic structure of space and time

to understand relativity and the origin of mass and gravitation in terms of statistical

mechanics.

The underlying ideas originated from an examination of Special Relativity (Einstein

– 3 –

1905), which does not treat distances and times as absolute. For a uniformly ‘moving’

observer, one can disregard spatial dimensions perpendicular to the velocity of motion

v and elaborate the previous statement as meaning that if Σ′ measures: (i) position

diﬀerences between events at the same time, or (ii) time diﬀerences at the same position,

the resulting distances and intervals are smaller than those of a ‘stationary’ observer Σ

who measures the same events from a frame at rest with respect to them, by a common
factor γ = (1 − v2/c2)−
interference from the other, they can in general be superposed to form the Lorentz

2 . Since each of the two eﬀects (i) and (ii) was presented without

1

transformation (i.e. rotation) of space-time (Lorentz 1923). One could also describe the

phenomenon as due to a measuring apparatus having diﬀerent intrinsic properties when

set in ‘motion’. Thus another way of expressing (i) is to visualize the ‘tickmarks’ which

calibrate the ruler of Σ′ as more widely separated than those of Σ, as illustrated in Figure 1.
If a unit of length for Σ is xm then the same for Σ′ will be xmγ, which is of the form xm√N
(N ≥ 1), suggesting that microscopically space-time might be undergoing a ‘random walk’
process of some kind. Similarly, (ii) may also be viewed in this way, because the Lorentz

transformation of time is the same as that of space, except time is being re-scaled by the
speed c = 1/√ǫoµo to form a diﬀerent dimension, see Figure 2. To avoid duplication, the

ensuing treatment will emphasize eﬀect (i) only.

The particular manner of considering Special Relativity as changes in the measuring

devices of a travelling observer matches well with a statistical approach: an obvious way

of further separating the ‘tickmarks’ of a ‘moving’ ruler, is if they are not part of a rigid

body, but their relative positions can ﬂuctuate while in motion, maintaining the mean

translational velocities = v. I shall pursue the ﬂuctuations speciﬁcally as oscillations,

the amplitude of which increase with the relative speed v. The spirit of approach is in

accordance with the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (Heisenberg 1930): the higher the

velocity (or momentum) being measured the larger the inherent uncertainties (deviations)

– 4 –

in the ability of an apparatus to determine p and x, with the product ∆p∆x reaching

the smallest value ∼ ¯h only for ground states where motion of the object is minimized. I
therefore let the natural separation of the ‘tickmarks’ be xo (note that xo < xm, for reasons

to be explained). To this I add a sinusoidal variable x1, which has a mean < x1 >= 0. The

total separation x = xo + x1, then, has a mean < x >= xo, but the r.m.s. value is given by:

xrms = xo 1 +

< x2
x2

1 >

o !

1

2

(1)

and is > xo. For the purpose of distance measurements it is the magnitude of x, not the

sign, which calibrates the length between a pair of ‘tickmarks’ at any phase of the cycle.

If x oscillates rapidly1 and substantially about xo, it is then xrms which deﬁnes a unit

of length. An analogy is that of our mains AC power supply. Most electric appliances

recognize only the magnitude of V and have response times slow compared with typical

AC cycle frequencies of ∼ a few × 10 Hz, so that the relevant output voltage is Vrms, even
though < V >= 0.

The fundamental postulates of the theory are stated here. The starting point concerns

the ﬁrst two of them.

(a) Space and time form a crystal lattice, the lattice points (hereafter simply referred to

as ‘nodes’, which represent the ‘tickmarks’ of an observer) are connected by independent

harmonic oscillators with quantized energy levels E = (n + 1/2)ǫ. All inertial observers

Σ at rest relative to each other are assigned a common rest frame lattice Λ with which

1Caution should be exercised while interpreting this word, because not only do the spatial

‘tickmarks’ oscillate, but the same applies to time which behaves just like space (see earlier).

Thus the period of a cycle cannot be deﬁned with respect to ordinary time. The quantum

mechanical approach of this paper alleviates somewhat the urgency of settling the issue,

however, since one considers < x2 > as an expectation value, proportional to energy.

– 5 –

measurements are naturally performed.

(b) The degree of oscillation of Λ is parametrized by a temperature which may be deﬁned

not only with respect to Σ, but also any inertial observer Σ′. If Σ′ = Σ, this will become

the rest temperature, which is taken to have an ambient value of 0 K. If a relative speed

v 6= 0 exists between the two frames, this temperature will be > 0 K, by an amount T
which increases with v in a simple manner to be formulated below; as a result the quantity

xrms is larger for Σ′ than for Σ.

(c) Matter owes its origin to a localized region ∆Λ of Λ having a rest temperature > 0 K.

The quantity we deﬁne as rest mass is proportional to this surplus of energy within ∆Λ.

An oscillator in ∆Λ has larger than ambient amplitude, i.e. xrms → Xrms. With respect to
Σ′ this amplitude is further increased, by the same factor as xrms does in Postulate (b), see

Figure 3. The situation may be likened to Σ being already in a local Lorentz frame (which

widens xrms to Xrms), and Σ′ moving relative to Σ at the stipulated speed v.

(d) The eﬀect of gravitation is due to conduction of energy by the oscillator waves (phonons)

from the hotter region of ∆Λ to the cooler ambient region. The process causes a gradual

downward trend in the temperature as one moves away from ∆Λ. There is consequently

a distribution of oscillator lengths, thereby aﬀecting the separation of the measurement

‘tickmarks’, see Figure 3. This is the reason for the curvature of space-time responsible for

the existence of universal gravitation in the lattice surrounding ∆Λ.

None of the above is in conﬂict with the First Relativity Postulate, viz. that no preferred

frame of rest exists. There is also no violation of the Second Postulate.

I now focus on Special Relativity, viz. Postulates (a) and (b). When applying to

inertial observers in relative motion, note that even for Σ the ambient separation between

nodes of Λ is larger than xo, due to the zero point energy which leads to a ﬁnite < x2

1 >

– 6 –

given by < x2

1 >= E(n = 0)/κ = ǫ/2κ where κ is the oscillator (spring) constant. The

absolute minimum unit of length is then obtained from Equ (1) as

xm = xo 1 +

ǫ

2κx2

1

2

o!

Since energy is additive, for ﬁnite v (ambient T > 0) xm increases to:

xrms = xm 1 +

< x2
x2

1 >

m !

1

2

(2)

(3)

where < x2

1 >= ¯E(T )/κ is the mean energy at temperature T , calculated with the

lowest level now having energy E = ǫ (i.e. n = 1). The relevant Partition Function is
Z = 1/[1 − exp(−ǫ/kT )], leading to a mean energy of ¯E = ǫZe− ǫ
Equ (3), one obtains:

kT . Substituting these into

xrms = xm 1 +

ǫ

2κx2
o

1

2

kT

e− ǫ
kT !
1 − e− ǫ

(4)

At this point I complete postulate (b) above with the following quantitative relationship

between v and T :

Combining (4) and (5), one gets:

v2
c2 = e− ǫ

kT  =

¯E

ǫ + ¯E!

1 − v2
Finally, postulate (a) is made more speciﬁc by invoking:

2κx2
o

c2

xrms = xm
1 +

ǫ

v2
c2

ǫ = 2κx2
o,

1

2




(5)

(6)

(7)

which simply states that the zero point ﬂuctuations double the mean-square separation of

nodes from the natural value of x2

o. Equs (4), (5) and (6) altogether tell us that the unit

length for observer Σ′ is not xm, but xrms = xmq1/(1 − v2/c2), implying smaller measured

distances for Σ′ than those for Σ, in accordance with Lorentz contraction.

– 7 –

There remains the possibility that the suceess achieved so far is an illusion, viz.

statistical mechanics of harmonic oscillators is a wrong and completely irrelevant approach

to questions concerning the nature of space and time. Although it so happens that Special

Relativity can be explained in this way, the procedure could be merely formal: a wide

variety of mathematical formulae describe the many diverse phenomena of the known

physical world, the fact that some of the formulae resemble each other in appearance does

not immediately imply a parallel in the physics involved. In this instance, however, such

concerns are settled by the theory’s ability to go beyond Special Relativity, to shed light on

the issues of mass and gravitation.

I ﬁrst discuss the relativity of mass. According to Postulate (c), mass is an energized

lattice region ∆Λ wherein an oscillator has large r.m.s. amplitude, as illustrated in Figure

2. Upon transformation from Σ to Σ′ (so that Λ is no longer the rest lattice) X, like xm, is

required by (c) and (b) to increase by a factor γ. Thus the oscillator energy is increased by

γ 2. The number of oscillators is, of course, decreased by γ, see Figure 2. As a result, the

total energy within ∆Λ is higher with respect to Σ′ by γ. This then aﬀords an exceedingly

simple derivation of the relativistic increase of the energy within ∆Λ. By (c) the same eﬀect

applies to mass.

Next, I demonstrate how equally straightforward it is to explain gravitation as an

energy transport eﬀect. Let us center ∆Λ at the origin of the rest lattice Λ, and consider

the 1-D conduction of energy in the +x-direction from some position x = xmin, Figure 3.

Note that the notion of an inner boundary from which conduction commences is an abstract

one: the boundary does not have to represent the physical size of the mass depicted in

Figure . The transport equation is:

σth

dT
dx

= n ¯E¯v.

(8)

Here σth = n¯vλd ¯E/dT is the thermal conductivity of phonons: n is the linear phonon

– 8 –

density, ¯v is the ‘speed of sound’ in the lattice2, ¯E(T ) is the mean energy of a phonon, and

λ is the phonon mean free path, which is the size of the available lattice (since phonons do

not interact), i.e. λ = x. Thus equ (8), together with the meaning of the various symbols

involved, imply that

d ¯E
dx

− x

= ¯E, or ¯E =

1
αx

where α is a constant of integration. Combining equs (5) and (9), one obtains

v2
c2 =

1

αǫx + 1

(9)

(10)

as equation giving the speed of the local Lorentz (or ‘free fall’) frame at x.

Since the x-axis can represent a radial direction, we now write x = r− rg and rg = xmin.

In the limit of r ≫ rg (v ≪ c) there should be agreement with Newtonian gravity. This
requires αǫ = c2/2GM, which removes the arbitrariness of the solution. Returning to equ
(9), one clearly sees that ¯E ∝ M, consistent with the proposition in Postulate (c) that
mass is proportional to incumbent energy. At high speeds the role of rg must be taken

into account (v → c as r → rg). In the case of spherical symmetry there is only one free
parameter in the problem, i.e. rg must depend on α. By setting rg = 1/αǫ = 2GM/c2, equ
(10) reduces to v2/c2 = rg/r, or γ = (1− rg
of r (or x) are non-uniformly distributed throughout Λ, due to the energy outﬂow, in such

2 . It is therefore apparent that the ‘tickmarks’

1

r )−

a way that if they are used to measure r (or x) the result is radius in Euclidean (ﬂat)

space-time. In fact, the expression for γ contains all the information one needs to construct

the full Schwarzschild metric (Schwarzschild 1916) of General Relativity. For example, as

a falling object approaches the gravitational radius (or event horizon) r = rg time dilation

2The conduction of energy takes place in Λ, which is a lattice of space and time. Thus,

like the oscillations, there is the need to introduce a new ‘time’ axis when deﬁning the

propagation speed of these phonons - signature of a ﬁfth dimension.

– 9 –

becomes inﬁnite. The notion of a ‘boundary’ for ∆Λ is now clear: phonon energy transport

to other parts of the lattice takes place only beyond the event horizon.

Apart from its ability to oﬀer insightful, even elegant, explanations of fundamental laws

of physics, the model presented here can also make predictions. One immediate application

is the problem of two point masses, where no known solution of the Einstein Field

Equations exist. The phonon conduction approach reduces the mathematical complexities

by manifold. A member of the pair may be taken as the mass M described above (except

now M → M1) while the other (mass M2) is positioned at Euclidean distance R from the
g, where rg = 2GM1/c2
ﬁrst. The separation between their event horizons is then R − rg − r′
and r′

g = 2GM2/c2. Since the presence of mass M2 cannot alter the boundary conditions

for the outward energy transport from mass M1

3 and vice versa, one simply solves for the

oscillator (phonon) energy E1 due to mass M1, likewise E2 due to M2, for any position

along the line joining the two masses and distance r from the ﬁrst. The total energy at this
position is ¯E = ¯E1 + ¯E2 = ǫ[rg/(r − rg) + r′
speed v of the local Lorentz frame at r:

g)]. By using equ (5), we have the

g/(R − r − r′

v2
c2 =

rg

+ r′

g

r−rg
1 + rg
r−rg

R−r−r′
g

+ r′

g

R−r−r′
g

(11)

This gives for the ﬁrst time the space-time metric at any position between two masses. For

more complicated mass distributions, the metric at any point is given by the superposition

of all the outwardly conducted energy distributions, in the same manner as above.

In conclusion, I found that a simple microscopic model of space-time can explain the

Lorentz transformation and the origin of mass and gravitation very naturally. In this

model, space and time form a crystal lattice, with nodes connected by harmonic oscillators.

3Otherwise one will not be able to restore the single mass solution by letting the other

mass tend to zero

– 10 –

The notion of distances and times has no meaning unless measurements are performed

using the nodes as ‘tickmarks’ to deﬁne unit intervals. The faster the speed of an object,

the ‘fuzzier’ the measurement, and this is reﬂected in equ (5) wherein the nodes vibrate

with a temperature T which increases with the relative speed v between a rest lattice and

a ‘moving’ object. When v = c, T reaches inﬁnity, implying that the lattice has already

disintegrated before that. Thus there must exist a threshold v (< c) which corresponds to a

critical T , observers who move with respect to each other at speeds high than this value are

no longer connected by the Lorentz transformation. In other words, while Relativity links

the macroscopic properties of crystal lattices at diﬀerent vibration temperatures, here we

are comparing two fundamentally diﬀerent lattices, viz. those of a crystal and a liquid.

I am indebted to Dr Massimilano Bonamente for suggesting a harmonic oscillator

model for the space-time lattice of a moving observer.

– 11 –

Reference

Einstein, A., 1905, Annalen der Physik, 18, 891.

Heisenberg, W., 1930, Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Dover, NY.

Lorentz, H.A., Einstein, A., Minkowski, H., & Weyl, H., 1923, The Principles

Relativity - a Collection of Original Memoirs, trans. W. Perret & G.B.

Jeﬀrey, London: Methuen & Co. Ltd., paperback reprint, Dover Publ. (1958).

Schwarzschild, K., 1916, ¨Uber das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes

nach der Einsteinschen Theorie, Sitzber Preuss. Acad. Wiss. Berlin

189 – 196.

– 12 –

Figure Captions

Figure 1: The space-time lattice of stationary (Σ) and moving (Σ′) observers are illustrated

here for the case of distance measurements. The ‘tickmarks’ of the ruler of Σ are marked

as the topmost set of black dots. The rod to be measured is the short bar immediately

beneath, and is at rest with respect to Σ. Observer Σ′ measures the length of this rod

while in motion, by simultaneously acquiring data on the positions of the front and rear

end of the rod. It is postulated that eﬀectively Σ′ is using a moving set of ‘tickmarks’,

and if microscopically these are connected by oscillators which vibrate while in motion, the

‘tickmarks’ widen as depicted in the lower half of the diagram. Consequently Σ′ obtains a

smaller value for the length of the rod.

Figure 2: The space-time lattices of inertial observers Σ (top) and Σ′ (bottom), the latter

‘moving’ at velocity v with respect to the former, who is regarded as ‘stationary’. If Σ′

measures ∆x between two ‘stationary’ events at the same time, or ∆t at the same position,

in each case the result is less than that obtained by Σ. This means for ‘orthogonal’

measurements of space and time performed by Σ′, the ‘tickmarks’ of Σ are more widely

separated, as indicated by the lower grid.

Figure 3: Illustrating the origin of mass and gravitation. Top: a region ∆Λ of Λ (the rest

frame lattice of observer Σ) has higher than ambient temperature. Mass is proportional

to the incumbent extra energy. The physical boundary of the mass (shown here in the

space dimension only) is drawn as a rectangular box, inside of which all the energy surplus

resides, as a result the nodes are much more widely spaced than outside. Middle: The

same region as it appears in the lattice of observer Σ′ who ‘moves’ with respect to Σ at

velocity v. Separation between any pair of nodes is now increased by the factor γ, meaning

fewer oscillators within ∆Σ, but more energy per oscillator. The net increase in enclosed

energy (hence mass) is γ (see text). Bottom: Energy is conducted outwards from ∆Λ to the

– 13 –

ambient lattice by phonons, which causes the separation between nodes to gradually reach

the natural minimum at asymptotically large distances. Note that the inner boundary

from which the energy transport commences is an abstract quantity which need not be the

physical size of the mass; in fact, the former is usually within the latter.

