0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
8

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
1
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Han-Shin Apt. 121-402, Dobong-dong Dobong-ku, Seoul, 132-012 KoreaE-mail: yyg kr@hotmail.com

Abstract

A general recession of distant galaxies is discussed in relation to the
apparent acceleration Pioneer 10/11 have indicated. This paper describes
how the anomalous acceleration shed additional light on the dynamic fea-
ture of expanding universe.

By 1998 when Pioneer 10 was 69 AU away from the Sun, Anderson,
Laing, Lau, Liu, Nieto, and Turyshev [1] announced that radio metric data
from Pioneer 10/11 had indicated an apparent anomalous, constant, ac-
celeration acting on the spacecraft with a magnitude ∼ 8.5 × 10−8 cm/s2,
directed towards the Sun since 1980 when 20 AU away from the Sun.
Comments and Replies [2] argue its possible relations with nonisotropic
radiative cooling of the spacecraft electronics, or with the recoil of radi-
ation coming from the spacecraft radioactive thermal generator, adding
interest in the origin of the anomalous signal. What possible origin for
the Pioneer signal comes to mind? In the ﬁrst place it leads to speculate
on the possibility that the origin of the anomalous signal is new physics
or some standard physics such as the velocity of propagation of gravita-
tion. This possibility is of interest in itself, given that they have found no
plausible explanation. In this review I shall try to give an account of the
anomalous acceleration on physical considerations.

In attempting to explain the acceleration, my attention focused on the
fact that the centrifugal acceleration of about 1.8×10−8 cm/s2 in the solar
system due to rotation of our galaxy is of the same order of magnitude.
Moreover, the centrifugal acceleration is consistent with observation that
no magnitude variation of the acceleration with distance was found, within
a sensitivity of 2times10−8 cm/s2 over a range of 40 to 60 AU. The points
have led me to put the weight of its possible explanation in the motion of
our galaxy.

Non-uniform rotation of our galaxy gives a hint on its internal motions
such as local expansion or contraction while rotating, making an addi-
tional contribution to the centrifugal acceleration.
It can be estimated
using the experimental curve of the rotating velocity vs the distance from
the axis [3]. In the curve the gradient of velocity at the position of the
solar system is seen to be about −10 km/s/kpc, by which non-uniform
rotation makes one order of magnitude small contribution to the centrifu-
gal acceleration [4]. The Coriolis eﬀect on the moving Pioneers at 12.5
km/s is about 11% in magnitude of the centrifugal acceleration. As no
further explanation was found in the rotational motion of our galaxy, my
attention was turned to the translational motion of our galaxy as a whole.
Continuing my search for acceleration I speculated with reluctance on a
possibility whether an acceleration could be deduced from the recessional,
virtually uniform, velocity of galaxies. But it came out under scrutiny how
acceleration was being involved in the recessional velocity of galaxies. The
argument of indicating an acceleration existing in a general recession of
distant galaxies is as follows:

1

The announcement by Hubble in 1929 of a “roughly linear relation
between velocities and distances” established in most astronomers’ minds
a sort of bird’s-eye view of a general recession of distant galaxies. But
extra care should have been taken for understanding the relation. Our
information about the frequency shifts comes to us through the observa-
tion of light emitted by distant sources. It becomes evident therefore that
velocity at a distance r presents itself as a direct consequence of the time
△t = r/c of propagation of light, and Hubble’s law is interpreted in terms
of v = cH△t. Then the linear increase in velocity with distance turns out
to be a result of longer light travel times from further distant galaxies.
Obviously it reveals an acceleration existing in the general recession of
distant galaxies.

The times of propagation of light enable one to identify the red shifts
in frequency of sources in terms of their recessional velocities at the re-
tarded times compared with the time of observation. As we look further
and further out into space, we see galaxies that are presumably younger
and younger, the furthest naturally being those in the remotest past. Ob-
servation makes it obvious that the linear increase in recessional velocities
with distance can be interpreted as due to the linear decrease in relative
velocities with time up to the time of observation. This manifests the
direction of acceleration against the recession. The general recession in
deep space of distant galaxies must therefore be slowing down at a uniform
rate.

Of particular interest is that Hubble’s law is thereby looked upon as
a consequence of the recessional velocities of the form v = v0 − cHt. It
is to be emphasized that our galaxy too is in a recession so far as it is
not at the center of expanding universe. Scattering around a straight line
of observational data might be due to recession of our galaxy itself while
observing distant galaxies. If our galaxy were at the center of expanding
universe, observational data would fall along a straight line. It seems thus
possible to locate the center of expanding universe by using conversely
this notion of expansion [5].

It is supposed on purely dynamical grounds that the universe will
eventually cease its expansion and begin to contract. Taken literally, this
means that the state of the hot early universe with which the present uni-
verse has started will be reached again at some ﬁnite time in the future,
rendering justice to the Friedmann model based on the Robertson-Walker
metric with k = +1. The deceleration of expansion seems to be of gravi-
tational character occuring on a scale of the universe, in which the value
cH is identiﬁed with the gravitational ﬁeld of the universe as seen by the
solar system. The physics of the situation can most easily be illustrated
by assuming a nongravitational origin for the present expansion of the
universe.

Summarizing the results we see that the acceleration existing in the
general recession of distant galaxies relative to our galaxy is given by
adding to cH the centrifugal acceleration arising from rotation of the so-
lar system. On the basis of the argument the acceleration as seen by the

2

solar system, that is to say, directed towards the solar system has been
assumed to be cH. Pioneer 10/11 moving at the constant velocity away
from the solar system make themselves ideal instruments to probe for an
additional acceleration in space. The diﬀerence they have observed in
the retarded velocities of Pioneer 10/11 reﬂects the dynamic character we
have seen here from the general recession of distant galaxies. The anoma-
lous acceleration which appeared in Pioneer 10/11 tracking can thus be
interpreted to be equivalent to that as-yet-unknown acceleration. Indeed
the value cH is in substantial agreement with the anomalous acceleration.
Considerations lead to the conclusion that the apparent acceleration act-
ing on Pioneer 10/11 is a reﬂection of the dynamic feature of expanding
universe, and the Hubble constant inferred from the spacecraft data is
∼ 87 km/s/Mpc.

References

[1] J. D. Anderson, P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, and

S. G. Turyshev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2858 (1998); gr-qc/9903024.

[2] E. Murphy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1890 (1999); gr-qc/9810015; J. I.
Katz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1892 (1999); gr-qc/9809707. Replies in
the following pages.

[3] D. P. Clemens, Astrophys. J. 295, 422 (1985).

[4] H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics (Dover, 1945), 6th ed., p.28.
[5] The Andromeda galaxy is at a distance of 2.2 × 106 light years from
our galaxy. According to the present argument, the retarded veloc-
ity of the Andromeda galaxy is seen to be approaching our galaxy
if both galaxies are receding from beyond that galaxy. The “cos-
mological” blue shift of 80 km/s of the Andromeda galaxy suggests
such a possibility with an inference that the Hubble constant along
such a direction may be 120 km/s/Mpc or more.

3

