0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New families of supercompact objects and a gravitational

mechanism for multiperiodicity of Syg X-1 ∗†

Zahid Zakir

Institute of Noosphere, 11a Sayram,

Tashkent, 700170 Uzbekistan

zahid@in.edu.uz

February 25, 2013

Abstract

It is shown, that a topological diﬀerence between Newtonnian and relativistic gravity leads to some
observable eﬀects and it allow predict a hierarchy of supercompact objects - multibaryonic, quark and
(possible) subquark stars instead of black holes. A reﬂection on the source of a falling matter (mirror
horizon eﬀect) leads to a gravitational breathing of exterior layers of stars and a multiperiodicity of
spectrum of supercompact stars (or nucleys of stars and galaxies).

In the general relativity a creation and properties of supercompact objects with sizes near a gravitational
radius can be considered from a point of view of physical time dependence of radial coordinate. In [1] I show,
that as result we obtain a new physical picture for star evolution after neutron star stage with hierarchy of
superdense (but ordinary) matter stars, instead of black holes.

It is shown, that ﬁrstly, in general relativity a starting point of physical radius r = 0 is the horizon
R(0) = rg, where R(r) is the standard Schwarzschild’s radius, rg is the gravitational radius. Secondly, a
dependence of R from the physical time τ leads to the reﬂection on the horizon of the falling from inﬁnity
particles. The matter not ”penetrate” to the interior of horizon and process is fully reversible in time.

These facts lead to interesting and intriguing predictions in astrophysics. Detail consideration and dis-
cussion will be presented in [2]. Here I consider some qualitative predictions of this new version of general
relativity of supercompact objects.

The physical radial interval, measured by the radially oriented rest scale at the orbit R in the Schwarzschild

ﬁeld is:

After integration we obtain for ﬁnite radial distances:

dr2 =

dR2
1 − rg

R

dR

r = Z
= Rr1 −

q1 − rg

R

rg
R

=

+ rg ln |s R

rg

(1 +r1 −

rg
R

) |

or:

Here:

r = Rr1 −

rg
R

+ F (R)

∗To be published in: ”Z.Zakir. Structure of space-time. Part II, paper 17, I.N., Tashkent, 2000.”
† c(cid:13) Institute of Noosphere, 2000.

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

and therefore:

F (R) |R=rg = 0

r(R) |R=rg = 0

2

(5)

(6)

This means, that the Schwarzschild horizon R = rg is the starting point of the physical radius r = 0.
Then the interior values of radial coordinate R < rg are nonphysical and they are not describe any physical
reality.

A physical velocity of falling to horizon photon is equal to c in all frames of reference:

where dr =p−g11(R)dR is the physical radial distance and dτ = √g00dt is the physical time. Therefore,

a dependence of R from the physical time is:

ds2 = c2dτ 2 − dr2 = 0

(7)

or:

± cτ = Rr1 −

rg
R

+ F (R)

c2τ 2 = R(R − rg) + F 2(R) + 2F (R)Rr1 −

rg
R

(8)

(9)

Here we take τ = 0 at r = 0 (or R = rg). When the physical time τ changes at intervals (−∞, 0)
and (0,∞), the physical radius r changes at intervals (∞, 0) and (0,∞). The trajectory of photon is
time symmetric and for the rest observer the photon elastically reﬂects from the horizon and it can not
”penetrate” to interior (”mirror horizon”). Here the scattering on the horizon for rest frame observer is in
fact the scattering on source, ’placed’ at r = 0 .

For the ﬁnite mass particle, which falls freely from the inﬁnity we have:

and after integration we obtain [1]:

± cdτ =

1
1/2

g s R
(1 − rg
R )

r

dR

or:

± cτ =

2
1/2
3r
g

(R − rg)3/2 + 2r1/2

g

(R − rg)1/2

c2τ 2 =

4
9rg

(R − rg)[(R − rg)2 + 2rg(R − rg) + 9r2
g]

(10)

(11)

(12)

We can see, that:
1) The falling particle can not cross the ’horizon’ and at all values of T = (−∞,∞) the radial coordinate
2) The falling particle elastically reﬂects at the source r = 0 (or at horizon R = rg) and the process is

R changes from 0 to ∞.
fully reversible in time.

We see that the standard radial coordinate R has an excess nonphysical part, which equal to rg and
appears because of the topological diﬀerence between the euclidean (or orbital) radius and true radial distance
in curved space. For this reason more convenient form of the radial coordinate can be the ”topologically
corrected” radial coordinate R0:

a zero point of which coincides with a zero point of physical radius r(R) = 0:

R = R0 + rg

R0 |R=rg = 0

(13)

(14)

3

All physical observables and eﬀects, which depend from the distance to the source, will contain speciﬁcal
corrections to the Newtonnian formulas. These corrections appear because of the fact that the radius of
the relativistic source has the shift rg and it placed nearer to the same orbit than Newtonnian one. In other
words, relativistic source act to the particle at orbit R exactly same as Newtonnian source act to the particle
at orbit R − rg. Thus, we have a ”topologically corrected” Newton potential:

and Kepler law:

ϕ = −

γM
R − rg

T 2 = a · (R − rg)3

(15)

(16)

The perihelion shift, the light deﬂection and the horizon are such topological eﬀects. For a planet at the

orbit with the length 2πR we simply have:

ω =s 2M γ

(R − rg)3 =

2π
T0

[1 +

3rg
2R

]

(17)

and then we directly obtain Einstein’s formula for the perihelion shift per period, which for the elliptic

orbit with focal parameter L is:

In Newtonnian gravity an angle of the deﬂection of photons is:

∆ϕ =

3πrg

L

=

6πγM

c2L

α =

rg
R

(18)

(19)

where R is nearest distance to the source from the photon’s path. This formula describe a simpliﬁed
picture, where the gravitational ﬁeld of the source eﬀectively act only on the part of the photon’s path with
length R, and the result of this interaction is falling of the photon nearer to the source (αR = rg) to the
distance rg. Then we must take into account that if the relativistic source begin act to the photon from
the same point as Newtonnian one, then the photon will fall to rg since the Newtonnian gravity and it will
fall an additional rg since the diﬀerence between relativistic orbit and Newtonnian one. Then the resulting
deﬂection angle will be two times more than in Newtonnian gravity:

Thus, we see that due to the topological nature of these two eﬀects, ﬁrst order relativistic corrections to

Newtonnian gravity can be obtained without any complicated (geometric) calculations.

The proper time dependence of the radial coordinate of freely falling particle is:

α =

2rg
R

(20)

c2T 2 =

4
9rg

R3

(21)

and we see, that not only R must be ”topologically shifted” to R − rg for convenience with the physical

radius, but proper time T also contains such ”topological gap” which equal to:

c∆T =

4
3

rg

(22)

Same as radial coordinate shift, this ”proper time shift” leads to observable eﬀects. The time delay eﬀect

partly contain such contribution and it is an example of the ”proper time gap” eﬀect.

The results of preceding considerations lead to new treatments of supercompact states of matter. The
interior of horizon is not exist, black holes are unphysical objects and the collapse is impossible. All spacetime
intervals for physical objects are timelike or lightlike, the time behavior of physical coordinate of falling
matter up to the source (r = 0) principally not diﬀers from the falling to ordinary stars and they contain
gravitational contractions only. The principal new phenomena is the disappearing of Newtonnian potential’s
singularity.

REFERENCES

4

Supercompact stars with physical radius, which less than the gravitational radius, have a ﬁnite phys-
ical volume and a ﬁnite physical density. Hence, the hierarchy of supercompact stars with ordinary and
extraordinary physical matter not stop on the neutron star’s level, but it continued to more dense physical
states.

For stars with masses, more than the critical mass of neutron star’s stability M > (3 ÷ 5)M⊙, the next
family of stable states can appear. This is the family of multiquark hadron (multibaryon and multimeson)
stars, containing 3n-quark baryons or 2n-quark mesons.

The principally new type of supercompact exotic objects are quark stars, which appear after quark-
hadron phase transition at high pressures and temperatures in case of massive supercompact stars. Some of
observing candidates to black holes can be multihadronic or multiquark stars.

The very important perspective for the particle physics is the search of supermassive supercompact stars,
containing subquarks or other type of substituents of quarks and leptons - subquark stars, and heavy particles
of the grand uniﬁcation and the supergravity - super(symmetry)stars.

The falling matter strongly accelerated by a supercompact star’s ﬁeld, than the accelerated matter
bombard the surface of the compact star, which here is ideal target. The products of such bombardment
then will emitt from the surface, then they can interact with other falling matter and resulting rich spectrum
can be registered. Therefore, the supercompact stars act as superaccelerators and ideal laboratories for the
superhigh energy physics.

An energy generation in quasars and galaxy nucleis can be better understanded taking into account
emission during falling and scattering at the source and processes of interaction of the falling matter with a
reﬂecting matter.

The time reversibility of falling and scattering of the matter at horizon leads to a breathing mode for
objects with a physical radius r near rg and less than rg. During the period of breathing the falled matter
will emitt a suﬃcient part of its energy and a luminocity of the star will change with this period.

But in real stars can fall not all the exterior matter, but only some layers with diﬀerent densities and
with diﬀerent particle content. Then we obtain a multiperiodical supercompact stars model. Periods of
breathing depend from the initial radiuses of the falled layers.

A well known candidate to black hole - Syg X-1 has such multiperiodical spectrum and we can suppose,
that this object can be a star with heavy baryonic, multibaryonic (or quark) exotic state superdense nucley
and several breathing layers of the less dense matter with ordinary particle content.

Not only the exotic stars periodicity, but the periodicities of some ordinary stars also can be explained
partly by a contribution of the gravitational breathing modes of their layers, periodically reﬂecting from
superdense nucleis.

Thus, instead of unphysical black holes, the general relativity really predicts the hierarchies of exotic
supercompact stars, which repeat or represent the hierarchy of high energy particle physics states. The mass
spectrum of such exotic stars represent in some approximation the mass spectrum of elementary particles.
The dynamics of such exotic objects is nontrivial, complicated, but it interesting because of their predic-

tions can be studied by the methods of ordinary physics and observable.

References

[1] physics/0005009 Zakir Z. (2000) One topological secret of gravitation and its surprises for astrophysics,

cosmology and particle physics. 7 p.

[2] Zakir Z. (2000) Structure of space-time. (in preparation)

