0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
5

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
1
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Do The Particles With Nonzero Mass Need Duality ?

Genrikh Bayatian

Yerevan Physics Institute

Alikhanian Brothers St. 2, Yerevan 375036 Armenia

Abstract

Unsuﬃciency of conditions for the formation of interference in monoparticle

”which path” experiments is proven. The version of corpuscular interpretation

of diﬀraction pattern based on the action discreteness is presented, which makes

unnecessary to accredit duality to the particles with nonzero mass. The experiment

to check the above mentioned concepts are proposed.

1. Introduction.

Interpreting all the ”which path” experimental data one usually proceeds from the

fact that the observed irregularities at single microparticle diﬀraction have interferencial

origin in spite of the lack of strictly deﬁnitive experimental evidence. The resemblance

of diﬀraction pattern in multiphoton (classical optics) and monophoton experiments may

appear a scanty proof of interference presence in the latter case.

It is an axiom that simultaneous arrival of at least two monochromatic and coherent

waves to the observation point is an obligatory condition for the formation of interference.

Observing no second wave in monophoton (monoparticle) experiments and basing on the

generally accepted understanding of the interferencial origin of mentioned irregularities

most of the researchers were forced to assume the interference of a single particle (photon)

with itself by its violent simultaneous pulling through both slits separated with spatial

distance by several orders longer (by the order of 4 for the experiments with atoms of

helium [1]) than the transverse sizes of these particles. Meanwhile, the particles do not

undergo ﬁssion: no loss of microparticle energy or photon frequency is observed behind

the slits.

This paper shows that the registered irregularities in monoparticle (monophoton)

”which path” experiments may not have interferencial origin due to the insuﬃcicency

1

conditions for the interference realization (two waves as minimum). This is why the at-

tempts to interpret diﬀraction pattern in monophoton (monoparticle) experiments using

interference (maybe only seeming) bring to well-known logical contradictions or, according

Feynman, to a puzzle [2].

In order to discover a logical hitch and to provide obligatory conditions for the in-

terference we are forced using superposition principle and diﬀraction grating to ﬁssion

a single photon into two ones [3], ignoring the law of conservation of energy and other

quantum numbers (lepton and hadron numbers in case of diﬀraction of electrons, nucleons

and nuclei).

The only one way out of this logical deadlock is may seem to withdraw seeming

interference because of scanty conditions for its realization in the monoparticle ”which

path” experiments and to search for new mechanisms of origin of detected irregularities

from the corpuscular point of view by analogy to photo- and Compton-eﬀects, when one

has to use corpuscular representations, although nobody doubts in the wave properties of

photons.

2. The version of corpuscular interpretation.

In our recent publication [3] a brief description of this interpretation is given. Due to

the importance of the problem we are giving below more detailed presentation.

In the diﬀraction experiments the corpuscular-ﬁeld interactions of microparticles with

matter of grating are not taken into account. Only the wave-diﬀractional aspects are

regarded. Such approach is acceptable in the classical optics, where out of a huge ﬂux of

photons simultaneously dropping on the diﬀraction grating, two or more photons will ap-

pear, which passed through the diﬀerent slits. Meeting each other they will interfere here

among themselves. Although in this case the mechanism of light beam deﬂection from

the initial direction is not clear enough without accounting of Huygens-Fresnel approx-

imate model, which should be corrected in the light of corpuscular presentation. Quite

diﬀerent situation is observed, when a single photon, which may interfere only with itself

(a puzzle!) [2] falls on two slits with b ≫ λ (b is the distance between the slits and λ is

the length of photon wave).

In order to understand why the corpuscular-ﬁeld interpretation is the only correct

2

way out to solve the puzzle we shall present the experimental results. The possibility of

diﬀractional scattering of electrons and neutrons with the identical de Broglie wave lengths

at one and the same crystal diﬀers by the order of ∼ 7 to the electrons. The electron

interacts with the crystal through Coulomb ﬁeld, while the neutron - mainly through

the short-range nuclear forces. Such substantial diﬀerence at the same λ/b proportions

shows the dominant importance of corpuscular-ﬁeld interactions as compared with the

wave-diﬀractional ones.

The account of microparticle interaction with the grating matter becomes more simple,

if we accept the action multiplicity from the Planck constant (h) for the non-bound states

as well. This hypothesis has no heuristical value.

It is used for a long time in non-

explicit form in theoretical analysis of microparticle scattering angular distribution using

the method of partial waves [4] in the form of discreteness angular momentum having

dimension of action.

The discrete behaviour of the action is natural because of the fact, that the non-bound

state may diﬀer in principle from its analogue in bound state in as less ”surplus” as the

kinetic energy. The nature is hardly arranged in the manner, when, e.g. at Coulomb

interaction of electron with proton in hydrogen atoms the action is quantized, while at

Coulomb scattering of the same particles one over another near to kinematic region of

hydrogen atoms the action will not be quantized.

Let a parallel beam of microparticles with P momentum falls on the crystal with

b period and as a result of elastic scattering obtains Pr transverse momentum. The

scattering angle θ is determined by the relation

P sin θ = Pr .

It is necessary to ﬁnd out Pr from the following diﬀerential equation

d ~Pr = ~Frdt

(1)

(2)

where Fr is the force acting on the particle from the crystal in the direction perpendicular
to the beam. Scalaraly multiplying [2] by d~r of path in ~Fr direction we shall receive

d ~Pr · d~r = ~Fr · d~r · dt = dSr(r, t)

(3)

3

where dSr - is the action in ~Fr direction of path d~r in dt time period.

In order to receive complete action during t time when the particle is in crystal it is

necessary to deﬁne the integration limits of r and t variables. Choosing the limits for r

from 0 to b and for the time period from 0 to t the equation (3) may be rewritten as

Z t

0

dPr Z b

0

dr = Z t

0 Z b

0

dSr(r, t)

(4)

With the account that the right side is the complete action and, as we suppose, should

be equal to the multiple of Planck constant h, we may have

Pr · b = nh

If we substitute from here the value Pr in (1), we shall receive

b · sin θ = n · h/P = nλ

(5)

(6)

where λ = h/P . The formula (6) shows, that the quantitative agreement with de Broglie

hypothesis observed in the experiment is not accidental. The de Broglie hypothesis con-

tains in a latent form our hypothesis [3] about the action discreteness of h in all types

of interactions. Due to the latter fact, as it may be seen from (6), the diﬀraction scat-

tering angles θ obtain discrete values, imitating interferencial pattern. The corpuscular-

ﬁeld interpretation, which leads to the same quantitative results as the de Broglie wave

diﬀractional representations, allows to avoid generally known logical diﬃculties [2] at the

interpretation of the diﬀractional pattern. This removes the discussed contradictions [3] of

the superposition principle to the assumption of interference in the monoparticle ”which

path” experiments. This principle is apparently is not acceptable in the case of alternative

and mutually transitional in time states, such as the transition of a single particle either

through the ﬁrst or the second slit. Such events are unable to interfere due to the absence

of partner. The composition of their probability amplitudes is impossible, because they

will compose the mixture combination of the probabilities.

3. Expected experimental evidences.

3.1. The analysis of existing experiments.

In [3] we have proposed the real version of two slit Young type experiment [1], capa-

ble to give the conclusive description of the eﬀect of open slit, that has not passed by

4

microparticle, on its behaviour. It is proposed to compare the diﬀraction pattern of two

open slits with a total picture, when either one or another slit opens in its turn. In the

total exposure the interference must not appear by deﬁnition.

It is easy to propose that under b ≫ λ conditions the pattern with two open slits will

be identical to the total picture, as far as the single microparticle will pass through one of

two slits, while the other slit, which is not passed, may be at that moment considered as

closed. Hence, the interference should be not possible at two slits either in the experiments

with single particles. While the irregulations observed in [1, 5, 6] may be interpreted by

the formula (6). However, this does not mean that the experiment should not be done.

It will ﬁnally prove what is correct.

3.2. New possible experiments.

In order to prove the impossibility of a single microparticle transit through two slits

(and therefore the impossibility of interference) we propose the experiment based on the

Young scheme (or its analogy). Let us dispose detectors one by one after each slit and

direct their signals to the coincidence scheme. The absence of coincidence signals will

evidence of the impossibility of simultaneous passing of a single particle through the both

slits, while the existence of such signals will prove the opposite concept.

Let us discuss the scheme of one more experiment. The parallel beam of coherent

photons using semitransparent mirror is ﬁssioned into two parts: reﬂected and transmitted

ones. Arranging the meeting of these two parts we shall see the interferencial picture.

Then using the optical ﬁlter we create out of multiphoton beam a single photon beam

with tm ≪ tc parameters, where tm is a mean time interval between neighbour photons

and tc is the train duration. In this case there will be no interference, because the photons

will enter the observation zone at diﬀerent times.

This one and two slit Young type experiments have the same origin. In both cases the

photon has two possible unpredictable paths. The advantage of such version, based on the

absence of the interference imitation conditioned on formula (6), will serve as a touchstone

for the corpuscular interpretation [3] of diﬀraction pattern, in contrast to the previous

tests, when only the legitimacy (correctness) of the wave representations (interpretations)

could be resolved.

5

Conclusion.

The causality principle excludes the emergence of interference in the single particle

(monophoton) ”which path” experiments. Proceeding from this it is impossible to inter-

pret the irregularities observed in these experiments using wave representations. They

are likely to be connected with the discreteness of action and for non-bound states.

The experiment according the described schemes are necessary in order to prove the

correctness of the proposed fundamental statement together with corpuscular interpreta-

tion.

Acknowledgments.

It is a pleasure to thank Professor E.Mamidjanian for useful discussions.

References

[1] O.Carnal and J.Mlynek. Phys.Rev.Lett., 66, 2689 (1991).

[2] R.Feynman, R.Leighton and M.Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics (MA.

1965), vol. 3, h. 37, par. 5-7.

[3] G.L.Bayatian. E-preprint physics/9906024 (1999).

[4] L.J.Schiﬀ. Quantum Mechanic S., par. 19, N.-Y.-T.-L. (1955).

[5] D.W.Keith, C.R.Estrom et al. Phys.Rev.Lett., 66, 2693 (1991).

[6] M.S.Chapman et al. Phys.Rev.Lett., 75, 3783 (1995).

[7] Markis Arndt et al. Nature, 401, 680 (1999).

6

