0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
5
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
7
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Is the Time a Dimension of an Alien Universe?

L.Ya.Kobelev

Department of Physics, Urals State University
Lenina Ave., 51, Ekaterinburg 620083, Russia

E-mail: leonid.kobelev@usu.ru

On the base of the hypothesis about a nature of the time as a dimension of alien Universe relation
between alteration of time with coordinates ∂t
∂x = Htt . This relation is
an analogy of the Habble law in the time space. The consequence of it is additional redshift ZDT
depending on diﬀerences τ of times existence of the objects with redshift that are compared (t0 is

∂x and time t oﬀered: ∂t

1+ τ
t0

− 1. The redshift of Arp galaxies may

)2

the time existence of more old object): ZDT =

p1−( τ

t0

be explained if this relation is used and this explanation doe’s not contradict Arp hypothesis about
supernova explosions. Discussion a possibilities of experimental veriﬁcation of the hypothesis is
considered.

01.30.Tt, 05.45, 64.60.A; 00.89.98.02.90.+p.

I. INTRODUCTION

The appearance in recent years many variants of quan-
tum gravity, including theories with change of signature
sign, gravitational quantum tunnel transitions in the in-
ﬂation phase, diﬀerent methods of quantizing and so
forth (see, e.g., a review in [1]) do not allow to choose
the criteria to distinguish ”right” theories from ”wrong”
ones. The situation is similar to that existed in the begin-
ning of our century in physics, when Lee groups theory
was invented and included as a special case the Lorenz
sub-group but there were no convincing reasons to single
out of it the Dirac equation. Now there is no a quite clear
idea on the time nature which would permit to predict
the phenomena whose experimental examination in its
turn would help to judge its reliability. If there is any, it
would be able to signiﬁcantly narrow down the choice for
possible quantum gravity theories. It is one of such ”time
models” that is discussed in the present paper. Treating
time as a dimension of another universe with laws simi-
lar to those of our world, it gives the way to a number of
experimentally phenomena, some of which are discussed
in the paper.

II. INTERSECTING UNIVERSES HYPOTHESIS

Let us consider time to be one of dimensions of a three-
dimensional space of another universe which adjoins to
ours and penetrate into it by this dimension (see [2]). To
do this, assume that at the ”Big Bang” the quantum state
of the early universe gave the birth to an ensemble of
inﬂation formations with diﬀerent values of Hubble con-
stant H = ˙a
a (a is the scale factor of the space elements
of metric). This does not contradict to the contemporary
conception of the world in the inﬂation universe models.
Then a chains of initially three-dimensional formations

also could emerge, with one dimension penetrating into
another one and thus making it four-dimensional. So, re-
strict ourselves to only such formations. Stress, that this
formations are primordial three-dimensional but in addi-
tion there exist a ”penetration” of one dimension of an-
other formation (we shall call it ”neighboring”) into it. In
other words, we are interested in only the formations hav-
ing total number of dimensions being equal to four: three
of them are ”own” and the fourth one penetrated from
another formation and is of diﬀerent, generally speak-
ing, origin. Thus, this fourth dimension belongs to both
of the neighboring formations and is common to them.
It is ”own” to one formation and ”foreign” to another.
We shall refer to such formations as ”universes”. In the
neighboring universe (whose the fourth dimension is) the
situation would be the same. To its own three dimensions
(one of which is common with the ﬁrst universe consid-
ered) a new ”foreign” dimension from another universe is
added - either from that mentioned before or not. In the
ﬁrst case we have an isolated pair of universes, and in the
second one have the chain of intersecting universes which
can be closed and ﬁnite or open and inﬁnite. If we are to
suppose non-equal inﬂating of the three-dimensional vol-
umes of this universes in regard to each other (because of
diﬀerent value a ), the fourth dimension penetrated into
a universe from another one can play the role of natu-
ral calibrating value while comparing the volumes and be
treated as ”time”. In this case the dimension of ”foreign”
universe common to ours is time to us, but in the foreign
universe the role of time is played by a dimension of an
alien to it universe (either new one, or, probably, ours).
Note, that this model does not reduce to the York theory
(see [3]) or to the ”scale” theories of time. Here time is
not simply a scale factor but a dimension of origin and
properties diﬀerent from that of our three space dimen-
sions, though it plays in its own universe role exactly the
same as them. All what is needed for such treatment is a
diﬀerence in expanding between the three ”own” and the

1

fourth ”foreign” dimensions. Therefore, from this point
of view, time can be considered as a dimension of an-
other formation and common to our universe but with
properties diﬀerent from that of our own three spatial
dimensions and, hence, expanding unlike them. The con-
cept of the expansion rate of the universe (as well as time
and rate concepts themselves) are then deﬁned by com-
paring the laws of changing three-dimensional volumes
of neighboring universes having one common (the fourth
to us) dimension. The four-dimensional interval of spe-
cial relativity ds2 = dr2
− c2dt2 in this case, at ds2 = 0
will yield the rate of changing of our spatial coordinates
in relation to t coordinate which characterize the alter-
ation of the ”spatial” dimensions of the other universe.
Light velocity c in this terms is simply the diﬀerence be-
tween changing in own three-dimensional volumes of two
neighboring universes. It appeared as a result of the Big
Bang and can be exceeded in our space only at local but
not at large scales. In the neighboring universe, provided
validity after the phase of blowing a kind of special rel-
ativity condition like that of our world, we shall have
ds∗2 = dt2
− c∗2dr2, and, c∗ = c−1 from our point of
view, in the simple case. What consequences arise from
this hypothesis concerning the nature of time, based on
existing of at least two such four-dimensional universes
with one common dimension?

III. ANOMALOUS REDSHIFT BEHAVIOR

As the ﬁrst consequence of the model proposed we shall
discuss the red shift in the spectra of far star objects. Let
the physical laws of nature be equal in the neighboring
universes. Then in both of them, ours ”spatial” and the
other ”temporal” the following Hubble laws can be writ-
ten:

dx
dt

dt
dx

= vx = Hxx

= vt = Htt

(1)

(2)

where vx and vt are the rates of scattering of star ob-
jects in the corresponding universes, Hx and Ht are the
Hubble constants in them and x and t mean the distances
between the objects in the ”spatial” and ”temporal” uni-
verses. One of three dimensions making in the ”tempo-
ral” universe vector t penetrates into our universe and
plays the role of time to us.We shall denote it as t, be-
cause only one component of t is common. Stress, that
instead of the Hubble law (1) now one should take into
account in addition to it the new relation (2), that is

vt = Htt

(3)

The physical sense of vt is the rate of time alteration
per distance unit and can be bound up with the time

passed since the star object was born in our universe. The
Doppler wavelength shift Z = (λ0 − λe)/λe (here λ0 and
λe are wavelengths in the observer’s frame of reference
and in the object’s own one) then should be calculated
using (3) as well as (1). Denote it as ZDT and ZDX
accordingly. If ZDT ≪ ZDX or ZDT ≫ ZDX then the
resulting shift is simply their sum:

Z = ZDX + ZDT

For ZDT , using (3) one easily ﬁnds

ZDT =

1 + vt
c∗
q1 −

t

v2
c∗2

− 1

(4)

(5)

where c∗ = c−1. When c∗ = αc−1, α = const. Putting
vt from (3) into (5) and assuming, in virtue of similarity
of the nature’s laws in both of the universes, Ht = H0c−1
we obtain (for c∗ = c−1)

vec∗−1 = Httc∗−1 = H0t(c∗c)−1 =

t
t0

(6)

0

with t0 = H −1

being the time since the universe for-
mation and t is the diﬀerence between the birth time of
the star objects of whose spectra redshift is investigated
(i.e, t = te − t0 or t = t0 − te depending on the sign of
the expression). Then

ZDT =

1 + t
t0
q1 − ( t

t0

)2 − 1

(7)

and

Z = ZDT + ZDX ≈

1 + v
c
p1 − ( v
c )2

+

1 + t
t0
q1 − ( t

t0

)2 − 2 (8)

If the contributions of ZDT and ZDX into Z are com-
parable by value, it is not clear which way to calculate
the Doppler shift in the direction to the observer is more
preferable,

or

where

Z = ZDX + ZDT

Z =

1 + A

√1 − A2 − 1

A =

vx

c + t
t0
1 + vxt
ct0

(9)

The ﬁrst case corresponds to independent contribution
of ZDT and ZDX , while (9) represents the attempt to
add velocities of diﬀerent origin (in diﬀerent universes)
in the direction to the observer (note, that velocity in the
”temporal” universe is a vector only in that universe, but
not in ours).

2

IV. NEW ENERGY -MOMENTUM RELATION
FOR ALIEN NON-RELATIVISTIC PARTICLES?

As the second example we put the following question:
whether a particle (with rest mass m0) can penetrate
from one universe into another (say, from ours to the
neighboring or into our universe from elsewhere) and if
yes, which energy it should posses? To answer it, let
ﬁrst write two Dirac equations for a free particle in our
universe and in the other one:

∂γψ(x) = 0; (x = r, it)

∂γψ(xt) = 0; (xt = t, ix)

(10)

(11)

where γ means Dirac matrices. Energy eigenvalues for

the particle then

E 2 = p2 + E 2

0 ; E 2

0 = m0c2

P 2
t = E 2

t c∗2 + P 2

0t; P0 = m0c∗

(12)

(13)

Here the particle energy and momentum are written
for our and the neighboring universes accordingly. Note,
that momentum corresponds to the space derivative of
wave function, that is ∂Ψ/∂r and energy corresponds to
the time derivative ∂Ψ/∂t. As space and time exchange
their role while turning from one universe to the other,
the derivatives also will exchange their role. That is,
what we usually call ”momentum” will behave like energy
and vice versa. We shall keep the notations P for ∂Ψ/∂r
and E for ∂Ψ/∂t though their sense in diﬀerent universes
may change and this fact is taken into account in (13).

If we may admit that when a particle tunneling from
one universe into another its momentum remains, then
Pt = P and (12) takes the form

E 2 = (E 2

t c∗2 + P 2

0t)c2 + E 2

0

(14)

But in the neighboring universe P0t = m0c∗ and in our
universe momentum can be of any quantity. Therefore
Et turns into relativistic energy and can not be less then
E0 = m0c2. Then from (14) follows an inequality for the
particle energy

E > 2E0

(15)

This condition is necessary but not suﬃcient, because
our assumptions require that vector momentum conser-
vation law must realize. Probably, the validity of this
law can be achieved only for a selected direction in our
space or only near massive bodies which get the remain-
der energy and momentum. Nevertheless, the expres-
sion (15), in principle, can be examined experimentally,
since it indicates on the possibility of an apparent vi-
olations of the laws of conservation of energy, charge,
number of particles faster than p3/4c, which originates
from the particles going out into another universe. For

3

massless particles (i.g., photons) this transition may re-
duce to a frequency renormalization (a simultaneous for
all the frequencies ”reddening”). Beside that, one can
take into consideration a possibility for both mass and
massless particles tunneling through a potential barrier
of unknown nature which divided he universes since they
was born. Discuss now some aspects of tunneling of quan-
tum particles from one universe into another.
If it is
possible, no matter how small the probability of such a
transition is, it seems that one can point out two observ-
able consequences. The ﬁrst of them is as follows. In the
neighboring universe a free non-relativistic particle obeys
the equation

ih

∂
∂x

Ψ =

h2

2m0c3

∂ 2
∂t2 Ψ

(16)

therefore the relation between its energy and momen-
tum will diﬀers from that for a particle in our universe.
Namely,

E = p2E0c√p

(17)

V. DOES INTENSITY OF RELIC RADIATION

HAVE A SECOND MAXIMUM?

The second consequence observable appears from the
relic radiation of the neighboring universe. This radia-
tion, if tunneling through the barrier between the uni-
verses, can, in principle, be detected. Its frequency and
wavelength can be calculated using the assumed earlier
similarity of the physical laws in both of the universes.
Thus, in the neighboring one the relic radiation wave-
lengths λtr (measured in seconds) will coincide numer-
ically with the wavelength obtained in our universe λr.
But while turning to our universe from the ”foreign” one,
the wavelength must be multiplied by the light velocity
c. So, λr of the foreign relic radiation came to us is ( in
case c∗ = c−1)

λrt = λc

(18)

Though in (18) the wavelength is very large (it cor-
responds to the frequencies of about 0,1 sec−1), at the
intensity curve of relic radiation background there will
be an anomaly in this (or another) region, observed as
a maximum with fast decreasing low frequency border.
Whether it is possible to distinguish this maximum from
the galaxies heat noise?

VI. IS THE REDSHIFT OF ARP GALAXIES

CONSEQUENCE OF DIFFERENCES IN TIME

EXISTENCE OF THEIR PARTS?

Very interesting problem is interpretation of large dif-
ferences in value of redshift of diﬀerent parts of Arp

galaxies [4]. All diﬃculties may be take of if use for
explaining this the new relation (equation (7)) The hy-
pothesis of Arp about explosion of supernova stars may
be includes in this interpretation . The interpretation of
redshift is: the diﬀerent parts of Arp galaxies were borne
in diﬀerent times.

shift if simple postulate the inhomogeneity of time ﬂows
and relation ∂t

∂x = Htt without any explanations.

VII. FINAL REMARKS

[1] B.L.Altshuler, A.O.Barvinsky // Uspekhi Phis. Nauk,

1995, vol.166 Nam.5(in Russia);

[2] Kobelev L.Ya. Redshift Yielded by Dependence of Rate
of Changing of Time upon the Time Passes Since
Galaxy’s birth//Ural State Univ., Ekaterinburg, 1996.
Dep. v VINITI 28.10.96, No 3142-B-96 (in Russia)

[3] York J.,Phys. Rev. Lett. vol. 26, 1656 (1971); 28,1082

(1972);

[4] Arp .C. Atlas of Special Galaxies, 1966, Astrophys. J.

Suppl. Ser., v.14, p.1 ( Added: 14-Sep-1995) ;

[5] Kobelev L.Ya.What Dimensions Do the Time and Space
Have:Integer or Fractional? XXX.arXiv:physics/0001035
[6] Kobelev L.Ya. Can a Particle’s Velocity Exceeds the
Speed of Light in the Empty Space? XXX.arXiv:gr-qc
/0001042

[7] Kobelev L.Ya. Physical Consequences of Moving Faster

than Light in Empty Space XXX.arXiv:gr-qc /0001043

[8] Kobelev L.Ya.Multifractality of Time and Space, Covari-
ant Derivatives and Gauge Invariance, XXX.arXiv:hep-
th/0002005

[9] Kobelev L.Ya.Generalized Riemann -Liouville Fractional
Derivatives for Multifractal Sets XXX.arXiv:math.CA
/0002008

[10] Kobelev L.Ya. The Multifractal Time and irreversibility

in Dynamic Systems. XXX.arXiv:physics/0002002

[11] Kobelev L.Ya. Is it Possible to Transfer an Information
with the Velocities Exceeding Speed of Light in Empty
Space?XXX.arXiv:physics/ 0002003

[12] Kobelev L.Ya. Maxwell Equation, Shroedinger Equation,
Dirac Equation, Einstein Equation Deﬁned on the Mul-
tifractal Sets of the Time and the Space XXX.arXiv:gr-
qc/0002003

[13] Are the Laws of Thermodynamics Consequences of a

Fractal Properties of Universe? physics/0003036

In the frames of the model considered a number of
other questions arises. Is our universe non-isotropic in
relation to the direction of ”foreign” dimension penetrat-
ing? Is there only a pair of universes or every dimension
can penetrate into some universe or other making an inﬁ-
nite series of universes? If it is possible to send a particle
into another universe in what time it will ﬁnd itself when
returned and so on. Apparently answering such questions
can stimulate producing more complicated theories (in-
cluding the proposed here as a special case) and further
investigations the nature of time.

In conclusion we name again the main ideas and results.
1. The model of the ”Universes” discussed treats the
time as one of the dimensions of a ”neighboring” Uni-
verses born together with ours and expanding by another
law. The rate of expanding is calibrated by comparing
the change in ”own” three-dimensional volumes of the
neighboring universes.

2.

If we are to assume the similarity of the physi-
cal laws in diﬀerent universes, then beside the Hubble
law the analogous law is exist concerning to the rate of
changing the time coursing in dependence on the time
passed. This law allows to avoid some contradictions re-
lated to redshift in spectra of a number of anomalous far
galaxies (including Arp galaxies).

3. The model considered gives way to a number of
statements which can in principle be examined by exper-
iment. Some of the consequences are brieﬂy discussed:
existing of relic radiation come from ”foreign” universes;
a possibility for non-conservation of energy, charge and
number of particles with energies greater than 2E0 (be-
cause of leaving into the neighboring universes); anoma-
lous dependence of energy upon momentum for nun-
relativistic particles of ”foreign” origin.

All the results following from the model of Universe
structure proposed, though it seems to be unlikely and
leading to an unusual treatment of time, allow to hope
for an experimental examination. Stress,the hypothesis
about nature of time doe’s non contradict the hypothe-
sis of multifractal nature of time and space presented by
author in [5]- [13]. Some results of multifractal theory of
time and space coincide with results of hypothesis con-
sidered in this paper, but here was presented hypothesis
that gives new look on the possible origin of time and its
nature. As the last remark we once more pay attention
on possibility to receive the results concerning the red-

4

