0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
5

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

One topological secret of gravity and its surprises for astrophysics,

cosmology and particle physics ∗

Zahid Zakir

Institute of Noosphere, 11a Sayram,

Tashkent, 700170 Uzbekistan

zahid@in.edu.uz

December 10, 2012

Abstract

It is shown, that the horizon (2-sphere) in fact is the central source point (r=0) for a physical
radius in Schwarzschild ﬁeld and an interior of horizon does not exists. Such topological diﬀerence
between Newtonnian and relativistic gravity leads to the observable eﬀects. The light deﬂection and the
perihelion shift are examples of topological eﬀects. A reﬂection on the source of falling matter (mirror
horizon eﬀect), a hierarchy of supercompact stars after neutron stage - multibaryon, quark, (possible)
subquark and other heavy particle stars are predicted instead of unphysical black holes. It is shown,
that the cosmological singularity and quantum ﬁeld theory divergencies are results of ignorance of the
nontrivial topology of gravity near gravitational radius and they can be simly excluded by taking into
account topology of gravity (the renormalization is a such prescription).

1

Introduction

In the general relativity we can use coordinate systems, but true physical picture and true geometry of
spacetime in some static gravitational ﬁeld more rationally describe in physical variables, directly measured
by local observer.

In the present paper we describe a particle’s kinematics in Schwarzschild ﬁeld in term of physical time
and physical radius. We will see, that the results of such consideration not only solve some diﬃculties
of particle physics and cosmology, but lead to many interesting and intriguing predictions in astrophysics.
Detail consideration and discussion will be published in [2]

2 Schwarzschild’s world in physical variables and ”mirror hori-

zon” eﬀect

The ”orbital” radial coordinate R in Schwarzschild frame of reference deﬁned as l = 2πR, where l is the
length of orbit. This deﬁnition leads to the standard formula for space-time interval ds2(R, ϑ, ϕ) and it
simpliﬁed further calculations with appropriate metric tensor. But the true radius r, which is the physical
radial distance from the orbits to the center of the sphere (point source), is not equal to R in curved space.
At the same time true physical picture and the physical observables of sample particle in the gravitational
ﬁeld depend from the physical distance r between the particle and the source. Therefore, we need in the
expression of the physical radius r via the radial coordinate R.

The physical radial interval, measured by the radially oriented rest scale at the orbit R is:

∗To be published in: ”Z.Zakir. Structure of space-time. Part II, paper 16, I.N., Tashkent, 2000.”

dR2
1 − rg

R

(1)

dr2 =

1

3 THE SCATTERING OF FALLING PARTICLES AT THE SOURCE

2

We see, that ∆r > ∆R which means that if sample particle falls from the orbit with length 2πR1 to the
orbit with length 2πR2, the real radial distance of particle’s path (the radial distance between two orbits) is
equal to ∆r which is longer than an orbit lengths diﬀerence (l1 − l2)/ 2π = ∆R < ∆r.

For ﬁnite radial distances we obtain:

r = Z
| s R

rg

R

q1 − rg
(1 +r1 −

+rg ln

dR

= Rr1 −

rg
R

) |

and ﬁnally:

where F (R) is positive deﬁned and:

r = Rr1 −

rg
R

+ F (R)

F (R) |R=rg = 0

Therefore, we obtain the very important result, that:

r(R) |R=rg = 0

rg
R

+

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

This means, that the value of radial coordinate between the orbit (of the length l = 2πR) and the source
is shorter than R since the Schwarzschild horizon R = rg is the starting point of the physical radius r = 0.
Then the values of radial coordinate R < rg are nonphysical and they are not describe any physical reality
in the Schwarzschild’s frame.

As illustration of last statement, we consider an equation of motion for the radially falling photon. A

physical velocity of photon is equal c in all frames of reference:

ds2 = c2dτ 2 − dr2 = 0

(7)

where dr =p−g11(R)dR is the physical radial distance and dτ = √g00dt is the physical time. Therefore,

a dependence of R from the physical time is:

or:

± cτ = Rr1 −

rg
R

+ F (R)

c2τ 2 = R(R − rg) + F 2(R) + 2F (R)Rr1 −

rg
R

(8)

(9)

Here we take τ = 0 at r = 0 (or R = rg). When the physical time τ changes at intervals (−∞, 0)
and (0,∞), the physical radius r changes at intervals (∞, 0) and (0,∞). The trajectory of photon is time
symmetric and for the rest observer the photon elastically reﬂects from the horizon and it not ”penetrate”
to interior (”mirror horizon”).

Further we can see that analogous elastically reﬂection from the horizon is available for falling ﬁnite mass
particles also. Then we can consider inelastic processes when falling particles interact with the source. Here
the scattering on the horizon for rest frame observer is in fact the scattering on source, ’placed’ at r = 0 .

3 The scattering of falling particles at the source

Let in the Schwarzschild ﬁeld the radially moving sample particle freely falls from the inﬁnity. The space-time
interval of the particle is:

ds2 = (1 −

rg
R

)c2dt2 − (1 −

rg
R

)−1dR2

(10)

4 THE TOPOLOGICAL SHIFT RULE AND CLASSICAL EFFECTS OF GENERAL RELATIVITY 3

From the energy conservation condition we have for the falling from inﬁnity particle:

E = m0c2s 1 − rg
1 − v2

c2

R

= m0c2

and

Then the dependence of the radial coordinate from the physical time dτ of can be represented as:

v2
c2 =

dr2
c2dτ 2 =

dR2
c2dτ 2 (1 −

rg
R

)−1 =

rg
R

and after integration we obtain:

± cdτ =

1
r1/2

g s R
(1 − rg
R )

dR

or:

± cτ =

2

3r1/2

g

(R − rg)3/2 + 2r1/2

g

(R − rg)1/2

c2τ 2 =

4
9rg

(R − rg)[(R − rg)2 + 2rg(R − rg) + 9r2
g]

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Therefore, we see, that:
1) The falling particle can not cross the ’horizon’ and at all values of T = (−∞,∞) the radial coordinate
2) The falling particle elastically reﬂects at the source r = 0 (or at horizon R = rg) and the process is

R changes from 0 to ∞.
fully reversible in time.

Let local Lorentz frames (LL-frame) start falling by zero initial velocity at the same time when meet with
the freely falling particle at orbit R. The space-time interval of freely falling particle in term of LL-frame
coordinates is:

where dτ is the physical time and dr is the physical radius. The physical velocity of freely falling particle

ds2 = c2dτ 2 − dr2

(16)

is equal to:

dr2
c2dτ 2 =

v2
c2 =

rg

R(r)

(17)

and taking into account the relationship between dr and dR, we obtain the previous time dependence

equation for R(τ ).

For an observer, which freely fall with particle (L-frame) the distances of S-frame, including the distance
between points R = 0 and R = rg, will contract by the increasing of the velocity. At the horizon, where the
falling tends to the light velocity, the distance between R = 0 and R = rg tends to zero and for the falling
observer (and particle) the ”interior’ of the S-frame horizon disappears.

4 The topological shift rule and classical eﬀects of general rela-

tivity

We see that the standard radial coordinate R has an excess nonphysical part, which equal to rg and appears
because of the topological diﬀerence between the euclidean (or orbital) radius and true radial distance in
curved space. For this reason more convenient form of the radial coordinate can be the ”topologically
corrected” radial coordinate R0:

a zero point of which coincides with a zero point of physical radius r(R) = 0:

R = R0 + rg

(18)

4 THE TOPOLOGICAL SHIFT RULE AND CLASSICAL EFFECTS OF GENERAL RELATIVITY 4

R0 |R=rg = 0

(19)

All physical observables and eﬀects, which depend from the distance to the source, will contain speciﬁcally
corrections to the Newtonnian formulas. These corrections appear because of the fact that the radius of the
relativistic source has the shift rg and it placed nearer to the same orbit than Newtonnian one. In other
words, relativistic source act to the particle at orbit R exactly same as Newtonnian source act to the particle
at orbit R − rg.
I will call results of such corrections as topological eﬀects. These eﬀects are results only of the ﬁniteness
of light velocity and the principle of equivalence. Therefore, they will present in any theory of gravity taking
into account these two properties of the ﬁeld. The perihelion shift, the light deﬂection and the horizon are
such topological eﬀects.

Another type of corrections to the Newtonnian observables appear due to radial dependence of relativistic
and Newtonnian observables, which are diﬀerent from the above-mentioned source shift. These are geometric
eﬀects, depending from details of the ﬁeld Lagrangian and the type of geometry. This type classical eﬀect
is the gravitational red shift of photon frequency. The eﬀect depends only from the diﬀerence of potentials
of two orbits and it not depends from the initial point of physical radius. As result, in ﬁrst order the eﬀect
has the same value in Newtonnian and relativistic theories.

Relativistic source act to the planet at orbit R as the Newtonnian source act to the planet at orbit R− rg.

Therefore we can simply shift the radius in Newtonnian formula for the angular velocity:

ω =s 2M γ

(R − rg)3 =

2π
T0

[1 +

3rg
2R

]

(20)

and directly obtain Einstein’s formula for the perihelion shift per period, which for the elliptic orbit with

focal parameter L is:

In Newtonnian gravity an angle of the deﬂection of photons is:

∆ϕ =

3πrg

L

=

6πγM
c2L

α =

rg
R

(21)

(22)

where R is nearest distance to the source from the photon’s path. This formula describe a simpliﬁed
picture, where the gravitational ﬁeld of the source eﬀectively act only on the part of the photon’s path with
length R, and the result of this interaction is falling of the photon nearer to the source (αR = rg) to the
distance rg .

If we consider this picture in relativistic gravity, we must take into account that Einsteinnian source act
to the photon same as Newtonnian source with R − rg. This means, that if relativistic source begin act to
the photon from the same point as Newtonnian one, then the photon will fall to rg since the Newtonnian
gravity and it will fall an additional rg since the diﬀerence between relativistic orbit and Newtonnian one.
Then the resulting deﬂection angle will be two times more than in Newtonnian gravity:

α =

2rg
R

(23)

Thus, we see that due to the topological nature of these two eﬀects, ﬁrst order relativistic corrections to

Newtonnian gravity can be obtained without any complicated (geometric) calculations.

In term of ”topologically shifted” radial coordinate R0 = R − rg the Schwarzschild’s solution can be

written as:

ds2 = (1 +

rg
R0
gdΩ2. This is not suﬃcient for the Schwarzschild’s
If R0 → 0, the interval on the orbital sphere tends to r2
problem since dΩ2 → 0. But in cosmology this fact is important and it leads to the exclusion of cosmological
singularity (see below).

0 − (R0 + rg)2dΩ2

(24)

rg
R0

)−1c2dt2 − (1 +

)dR2

5 ASTROPHYSICS OF MULTIBARYONIC, MULTIQUARK AND SUBQUARK STARS

5

5 Astrophysics of multibaryonic, multiquark and subquark stars

The result of preceding considerations leads to a new paradigm for supercompact states of matter. The
interior of horizon is not exist, black holes are unphysical objects and collapse impossible. All spacetime in-
tervals for physical objects are timelike or lightlike, the time behavior of physical coordinate of falling matter
up to the source (r = 0) principally not diﬀers from the falling to ordinary stars and they contain gravi-
tational contractions only. The principally new phenomena is the disappearing of Newtonnian potential’s
singularity. Supercompact stars with physical radius, which less than the gravitational radius, have a ﬁnite
physical volume and a ﬁnite physical density. Hence, the hierarchy of supercompact stars with ordinary and
extraordinary physical matter not stop on the neutron star’s level, but it continued to more dense physical
states.

For stars with masses, more than the critical mass of neutron star’s stability M > (3 ÷ 5)M⊙, the next
family of stable states can appear. This is the family of multiquark hadron (multibaryon and multimeson)
stars, containing 3n-quark baryons or 2n-quark mesons.

The principally new type of supercompact exotic objects are quark stars, which appear after quark-
hadron phase transition at high pressures and temperatures in case of massive supercompact stars. Some of
observing candidates to black holes can be multihadronic or multiquark stars.

The very important perspective for the particle physics is the search of supermassive supercompact stars,
containing subquarks or other type of substituents of quarks and leptons - subquark stars, and heavy particles
of the grand uniﬁcation and the supergravity - super(symmetry)stars.

The falling matter strongly accelerated by a supercompact star’s ﬁeld, than the accelerated matter
bombard the surface of the compact star, which here is ideal target. The products of such bombardment
then will emitt from the surface, then they can interact with other falling matter and resulting rich spectrum
can be registered. Therefore, the supercompact stars act as superaccelerators and ideal laboratories for the
superhigh energy physics.

Thus, instead of unphysical black holes, the general relativity really predicts the ﬁreworks of hierarchies
of exotic supercompact stars, which repeat or represent the hierarchy of high energy particle physics states.
The mass spectrum of such exotic stars represent in some approximation the mass spectrum of elementary
particles.

6 Excluding of the cosmological singularity

In the standard cosmological models of the general relativity [1] the space-time interval represented as:

where adη = cdt. Here the (conformal) radial coordinate a(η) tends to zero at the initial cosmological

ds2 = a2(η) · dΩ2(η, χ, θ, ϕ)

(25)

time t → 0 :

As result, a density of matter ε(a) tends to inﬁnity (the cosmological singularity):

a2(t) = Bt → 0

ε =

A
t2 =

AB2
a4 → ∞

(26)

(27)

This problem can be considered qualitatively same as Schwarzschild’s singularity. Here we again deal
with the behavior of radial coordinate inside of the gravitational radius a < rg. Due to the speciﬁcally
topology of relativistic gravity, this region really not exist and can be simply excluded.

The space-time interval is:

and true physical radial parameter of cosmological models is not a, but ag(t), where a(t) = ag(t) + rg.

Since ag(0) = 0, we have a = rg and the cosmological singularity disappears:

ds2 = [a(η) + rg]2 · dΩ2(η, χ, θ, ϕ)

(28)

ε0 =

AB2
r4
g

(29)

7 THE RENORMALIZATION IN FIELD THEORY AS A GRAVITATIONAL SOURCE SHIFT

6

In term of the physical radial coordinate the size of the Universe at initial time is as small as possible in

concrete cosmological scenarios of creation, but without the initial density singularity.

7 The renormalization in ﬁeld theory as a gravitational source

shift

The quantum ﬁeld theory is the theory of local interactions of point particles. But this locality and pointness
of particles lead to inﬁnities for values of physical observables.

In the relativistic theory of gravity a point particle of ﬁnite mass ”live” inside of its gravitational radius.

Therefore, in standard paradigm of general relativity, each point particle is the microscopic ”black hole”.

From the point of view of the new paradigm, proposed in the present paper, a space distance between
two points x1 and x2 of ﬁnite energy quantum point particle is not directly equal to y = x1 − x2. Due to
the gravitational contraction, it is equal to | y |= ρ + rg, where ρ is the true physical distance, rg is the
”gravitational radius”, maximal value of which is equal to Planck length lp.
A size of localization region of quantum particle is inverse proportional to the energy, while the gravita-
tional radius is proportional to the energy. These two curves intersect at Planck length lp and Planck energy.
Before Planck scale the wave lengths of quantum ﬂuctuations of particles exceed the ”gravitational radiuses
of particles. Here the ordinary quantum theory works successfully without gravitational corrections.

Thus, we must shift a low limit of integration in space-time integrals from y = 0 to Planck scale lp. As
result, we have simple cutting low limits of spacetime integrals at lp for taking into account the gravitational
shift rule, which automatically excludes divergencies in quantum ﬁeld theory observables.

We can illustrate this procedure on a simple self energy diagram for electron in quantum electrodynamics.
Let a momentum of electron at initial time is p, at intermediate time q, a momentum of virtual photon is k.
The self energy amplitude contains integrals:

G =Z d4kd4qF (k, q, p)(Z d4yei(p−k−q)·y)

If limits of spacetime integral over | y | are (0,∞), then the integral equal to momentum conservation
δ-function, which remove one of momentum integrations. But second momentum integral preserved and it
is divergent.

After the gravitational source shift procedure and integration over physical distance ρ, low limit in

spacetime integration is lp and the self energy is ﬁnite:

G =Z d4kd4qF (k, q, p)[I |y=∞

y=lp

]

(31)

Such corrections not so great in comparison with bare parameters. For example, second order corrections
to the self energy and charge of electron after such cutting are approximately 10% from physical mass m
and charge e of electron. Therefore, the bare mass and charge of electron are (0, 8 ÷ 0, 9)m from physical
ones.
If we want work with δ-function for calculational simpliﬁcations, we can write old divergent self energy

integrals, but then we must substract a nonphysical part of spacetime integral with limits (0, lp):

(30)

(32)

G =Z d4kd4qF (k, q, p)[I |y=∞

y=0 −I |y=lp
y=0 ]

We see that this is exactly a renormalization procedure. Therefore, we can conclude, that renormalization
procedure in quantum ﬁeld theory is method of taking into account gravitational contractions due to high
energy ﬂuctuations at small distances.

8 Conclusion

The Schwarzschild’s world in physical variables becomes simple and normal from a point of view of traditional
physics. Falling matter normally scatters on the source (horizon) and no any irreversibility. The interior of
the horizon, collapse, irreversibility and singularity are disappear, an evaporation make no sense [2] .

REFERENCES

7

Only methods and results retain their validity which work with exterior of the horizon and not use

unphysical variables of the interior of horizon.

The general relativity in combination with particle physics, predicts new families of supercompact exotic

stars instead of black holes.

It is shown, that the possible physical reason for the appearing of cosmological singularity may be working
by Newtonnian radius in curved relativistic volume. By taking into account inexistence of the ”interior” of
the horizon, the problem can be solved naturally.

Taking into account the speciﬁcal topology of gravity allow us to better understand and going to the

principal solution of the problem of inﬁnities in quantum ﬁeld theory.

References

[1] Landau L.D., Lifshitz E.M. (1988) Theory of Field. M.

[2] Zakir Z. (2000) Structure of space-time. (in preparation)

