0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
1
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
3
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Nonstandard Derivation for the Special Theory of Relativity*

Robert A. Herrmann

Mathematics Department

U. S. Naval Academy

572C Holloway Rd

Annapolis, MD 21402-5002 USA

21 SEP 1993

Abstract: Using properties of the nonstandard physical world, a new
fundamental derivation for all of the eﬀects of the Special Theory of
Relativity is given. This fundamental derivation removes all the con-
tradictions and logical errors in the original derivation and leads to the
fundamental expressions from which Prokhovnik [7] derives the basic
Special Theory transformations. However, it is shown that the correct
interpretation is completely distinct from Prokhovnik’s. It is shown that
the Special Theory eﬀects are but manifestations of the interaction be-
tween our natural world and a nonstandard substratum. This derivation
eliminates the controversy associated with any physically unexplained
universal time dilation and length contraction. It is shown that there is
no such thing as a universal time dilation and length contraction but,
rather, there are alterations in pure numerical quantities associated with
an electromagnetic interaction with a NSP-world substratum.

1. The Fundamental Postulates.

There are various Principles of Relativity. The most general and least justiﬁed
is the one as stated by Dingle “There is no meaning in absolute motion. By saying
that such motion has no meaning, we assert that there is no observable eﬀect by
which we can determine whether an object is absolutely at rest or in motion, or
whether it is moving with one velocity or another.”[1, p. 1] Then we have Einstein’s
statements that “I. The laws of motion are equally valid for all inertial frames
of reference.
II. The velocity of light is invariant for all inertial systems, being
independent of the velocity of its source; more exactly, the measure of this velocity
(of light) is constant, c, for all observers.”[7, pp. 6-7] I point out that Einstein’s
original derivation in his 1905 paper (Ann. der Phys. 17: 891) uses certain well
know processes related to partial diﬀerential calculus.

In 1981 [5] and 1991 [2], it was discovered that the intuitive concepts asso-
ciated with the Newtonian laws of motion were inconsistent with respect to the
mathematical theory of inﬁnitesimals when applied to a theory for light propaga-
tion. The apparent nonballistic nature of light propagation when transferred to

*This is an expanded version of the paper: Herrmann, R. A., Special relativity

and a nonstandard substratum, Speculat. Sci. Technol., 17(1994), 2-10.

1

inﬁnitesimal world would also yield a nonballistic behavior. Consequently, there is
an absolute contradiction between Einstein’s postulate II and the deriva-
tion employed. This contradiction would not have occurred if it had not been
assumed that the ether followed the principles of Newtonian physics with respect
to electromagnetic propagation.
[Note: On Nov. 14, 1992, when the information
in this article was formally presented, I listed various predicates that Einstein used
and showed the speciﬁc places within the derivations where the predicate’s domain
was altered without any additional argument. Thus, I gave speciﬁc examples of the
model theoretic error of generalization.]

I mention that Lorentz speculated that ether theory need not correspond di-
rectly to the mathematical structure but could not show what the correct corre-
spondence would be. Indeed, if one assumes that the (mathematical) substratum
satisﬁes the most basic concept associated with an inertial system that a body can
be considered in a state of rest or uniform motion unless acted upon by a force, then
the expression F = ma, among others, must be altered for inﬁnitesimal substratum
behavior. Further, the substratum, when light propagation is discussed, does not
follow the Galilean rules for velocity composition. The additive rules are followed
but no subtraction is allowed for real substratum velocities exterior to the Euclidean
monads. Indeed, subtraction is replaced by the velocity metric d(ωi, ωj) = |ωi−ωj|.
The derivation in section 3 removes all contradictions by applying the most sim-
plistic Galilean properties of motion, including the ballistic property, but only to
behavior within a Euclidean monad.

As discussed in section 3, the use of the NSP-world (i.e. nonstandard physi-
cal world) substratum allows for the elimination of the well-known Special Theory
“interpretation” contradiction that the mathematical model uses the concepts of
Newtonian absolute time and space, and, yet, one of the major interpretations is
that there is no such thing as absolute time or absolute space.

Certain general principles for substratum light propagation will be speciﬁcally
stated in section 3. These principles can be gathered together as follows: (1) There is
a nonstandard electromagnetic ﬁeld (or simply a substratum) that sustains N-world
electromagnetic propagation. Such propagation follows the inﬁnitesimally presented
laws of Galilean dynamics, when restricted to monadic clusters, and the monadic
clusters follow an additive and metric property for linear relative motion when
considered collectively. [The term “nonstandard electromagnetic ﬁeld” should only
be construed as an entity, a substratum, where the propagation of electromagnetic
radiation follows slightly diﬀerent principles than within the natural world.] (2)
The motion of light-clocks within the N-world (natural world) is associated with
one single eﬀect. This eﬀect is an alteration in the appropriate light-clock counts.
[The light-clock concept will be explicitly deﬁned at the end of section 3.] It will
be shown later that an actual physical cause may be associated with all Special
Theory veriﬁed physical alterations. Thus the Principle of Relativity, in its general
form, and the inconsistent portions of the Einstein principles are eliminated from
consideration and, as will be shown, the existence of a special type of substratum

2

can be assumed without contradicting experimental evidence.

In modern Special Theory interpretations [1] [6], it is claimed that the eﬀect
of “length contraction” has no physical meaning, whereas time dilation does. This
is probably true if, indeed, the Special Theory is actually based upon the intrin-
sic N-world concepts of length and time. What follows will further demonstrate
that the Special Theory is a light propagation theory, as has been previously ar-
gued by others, and that the so-called “length contraction” and time dilation can
both be interpreted as physically real eﬀects when they are described in terms of a
substratum. The eﬀects are only relative to a theory of light propagation.

2. Pre-derivation Comments.

Recently [2]–[4], nonstandard analysis [8] has proved to be a very signiﬁcant
tool in investigating the mathematical foundations for various physical theories. In
1988 [4], we discussed how the methods of nonstandard analysis, when applied to
the symbols that appear in statements from a physical theory, lead formally to a
pregeometry and the entities termed as subparticles. One of the goals of NSP-world
research is the re-examination of the foundations for various controversial N-world
theories and the eventual elimination of such controversies by viewing such theories
as but restrictions of more simplistic NSP-world concepts. This also leads to indirect
evidence for the actual existence of the NSP-world.

The Special Theory of Relativity still remains a very controversial theory due to
its philosophical implications. Prokhovnik [7] produced a derivation that yields all
of the appropriate transformation formulas based upon a light propagation theory,
but unnecessarily included an interpretation of the so-called Hubble textural ex-
pansion of our universe as an additional ingredient. The derivation we give in this
article shows that properties of a NSP-world electromagnetic substratum also lead
to Prokhovnik’s expression (6.3.2) in reference [7] and from which all of the ap-
propriate transformations can be derived. However, rather than considering the
Hubble expansion as directly related to Special Relativity, it is shown that one only
needs to consider simplistic NSP-world behavior for light propagation and the mea-
surement of time by means of N-world light-clocks. This leads to the conclusion
that all Special Theory eﬀects may be produced by a dense substratum within the
NSP-world. Such an electromagnetic substratum – an ether – yields all N-world
Special Theory eﬀects.

3. The derivation

The major natural system in which we exist locally is a space-time system.
“Empty” space-time has only a few characterizations when viewed from an Eu-
clidean perspective. We investigate, from the NSP-world viewpoint, electromag-
netic propagation through a Euclidean neighborhood of space-time. Further, we
assume that light is such a propagation. One of the basic precepts of inﬁnitesimal

3

modeling is the experimentally veriﬁed simplicity of such a local system. For ac-
tual time intervals, certain physical processes take on simplistic descriptions. These
NSP-world descriptions are represented by the exact same description restricted to
inﬁnitesimal intervals. Let [a, b], a 6= b, a > 0, be an objectively real time interval
and let t ∈ (a, b).

The term “time” as used above is very misunderstood. There are various
viewpoints relative to its use within mathematics. Often, it is but a term used in
mathematical modeling, especially within the calculus. It is a catalyst so to speak.
It is a modeling technique used due to the necessity for inﬁnitesimalizing physical
measures. The idealized concept for the “smoothed out” model for distance measure
appears acceptable. Such an acceptance comes from the use of the calculus in such
areas as quantum electrodynamics where it has great predictive power.
In the
subatomic region, the assumption that geometric measures have physical meaning,
even without the ability to measure by external means is justiﬁed as an appropriate
modeling technique. Mathematical procedures applied to regions “smaller than”
those dictated by the uncertainty principle are accepted although the reality of the
inﬁnitesimals themselves need not be assumed. On the other hand, for this modeling
technique to be applied, the rules for ideal inﬁnitesimalizing should be followed.

The inﬁnitesimalizing of ideal geometric measures is allowed. But, with respect
to the time concept this is not the case. Deﬁning measurements of time as repre-
sented by the measurements of some physical periodic process is not the deﬁnition
upon which the calculus is built. Indeed, such processes cannot be inﬁnitesimalized.
To inﬁnitesimalize a physical measurement using physical entities, the entities being
observed must be capable of being smoothed out in an ideal sense. This means that
only the macroscopic is considered, the atomic or microscopic is ignored. Under
this condition, you must be able to subdivide the device into “smaller and smaller”
pieces. The behavior of these pieces can then be transferred to the world of the in-
ﬁnitesimals. Newton based the calculus not upon geometric abstractions but upon
observable mechanical behavior. It was this mechanical behavior that Newton used
to deﬁne physical quantities that could be inﬁnitesimalized. This includes the deﬁ-
nition of “time.”

All of Newton’s ideas are based upon velocities as the deﬁning concept. The
notation that uniform (constant) velocity exists for an object when that object is
not aﬀected by anything, is the foundation for his mechanical observations. This
is an ideal velocity, a universal velocity concept. The modern approach would be
to add the term “measured” to this mechanical concept. This will not change
the concept, but it will make it more relative to natural world processes and a
required theory of measure. This velocity concept is coupled with a smoothed out
scale, a ruler, for measurement of distance. Such a ruler can be inﬁnitesimalized.
From observation, Newton then inﬁnitesimalized his uniform velocity concept. This
produces the theory of ﬂuxions.

Where does universal or ideal Newton time come into this picture? It is simply
a deﬁned quantity based upon the length and velocity concept. Observationally,

4

it is the “thing” we call time that has passed when a test particle with uniform
velocity ﬁrst crosses a point marked on a scale and then crosses a second point
marked on the same scale. This is in the absence of any physical process that will
alter either the constant velocity or the scale. Again this deﬁnition would need to
be reﬁned by inserting the word “measured.”

Now with Einstein relativity, we are told that measured quantities are eﬀected
by various physical processes. All theories must be operational in that the concept
of measure must be included. But, the calculus is used. Thus, unless there is an
actual physical entity that can be substituted for the Newton’s ideal velocity, then
any inﬁnitesimalizing process would contradict the actual rules of application of
the calculus to the most basic of physical measures. But, the calculus is used to
calculate the measured quantities. Hence, we are in a quandary. Either there is
no physical basis for mathematical models based upon the calculus, and hence only
selected portions can be realized while other selected portions are simple parameters
not relating to reality in any manner, or the calculus is the incorrect mathematical
structure for the calculations. Fortunately, nature has provided us with the answer
as to why the calculus, when properly interpreted, remains such a powerful tool to
calculate the measures that describe observed physical behavior.

In the 1930s, it was realized that the measured uniform velocity of the to-
and-fro velocity of electromagnetic radiation, (i.e. light) is the only known natural
entity that will satisfy the Newtonian requirements for an ideal velocity and the
concepts of space-time and from which the concept of time itself can be deﬁned.
The ﬁrst to utilize this in relativity theory was Milne. This fact I learned after
the ﬁrst draughts of this paper were written and gives historical veriﬁcation of this
paper’s conclusions. Although, it might be assumed that such a uniform velocity
concept as the speed of light in vacuo cannot be inﬁnitesimalized, this is not the
case. Such inﬁnitesimalizing comes from the simple process of “scale changing” for
a smoothed out ruler. What this means is that at its most basic level, conceptually,
ideal time or universal Newton time does have operational meaning and can be used
as a physical foundation for “time” within the calculus.

As H. Dingle states it, “The second point is that the conformability of light to
Newton mechanics . . . makes it possible to deﬁne corresponding units of space and
time in terms of light instead of Newton’s hypothetical ‘uniformly moving body.’
” [The Relativity of Time, Nature, 144(1939): 888–890.] It was Milne who ﬁrst
(1933) attempted, for the Special Theory, to use this deﬁnition for a “Kinematic
Relativity” [Kinematic Relativity, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1948] but failed
to extend it successfully to the space-time environment.
In what follows such a
universal time concept is being used and inﬁnitesimalized. It will be seen, however,
that based upon this time concept another time notion is deﬁned,and this is the
actual time notion that must be used to account for the physical changes that seem
to occur due to physical processes.
In practice, the universal time is eliminated
from the calculations and is replaced by deﬁned “Einstein time.” It is shown that
Einstein time can be inﬁnitesimalized through the use of the deﬁnable “inﬁnitesimal

5

light-clocks” and gives an exact measurement.

Our ﬁrst assumption is based entirely upon the logic of inﬁnitesimal analysis,

reasoning, modeling and subparticle theory.

(i)
“Empty” space within our universe, from the NSP-world
viewpoint, is composed of a dense-like substratum that sustains,
comprises and yields N-world Special Theory eﬀects. These sub-
stratum eﬀects are electromagnetic in character.

This substratum is the medium through which the eﬀects appear to propagate and
may comprise the objects that yield these eﬀects. The next assumption is convinc-
ingly obtained from a simple and literal translation of the concept of inﬁnitesimal
reasoning.

(ii) Any N-world position from or through which an electromag-
netic eﬀect appears to propagate, when viewed from the NSP-
world, is embedded into a disjoint “monadic cluster” of substra-
tum entities where this monadic cluster mirrors the same unusual
order properties, with respect to propagation, as the nonstandard
ordering of the nonarchimedian ﬁeld of hyperreal numbers ∗IR. [2]
A monadic cluster may be a set of substratum subparticles located
within a monad of the standard N-world position. The propagation
properties within each such monad are identical.

In what follows, consider two (local) fundamental pairs of N-world electromag-
netic propagation sources F1, F2 that are in nonzero uniform (constant) NSP-world
linear and relative motion. Our interest is in what eﬀect such nonzero velocity might
have upon such propagation. Within the NSP-world, this uniform and linear motion
is measured by the number w that is near to a standard number ω and this velocity
is measured with respect to a private NSP-world time and a stationary subparticle
ﬁeld. The same NSP-world linear ruler is used in both the NSP-world and the N-
world. The only diﬀerence is that the ruler is restricted to the N-world when such
measurements are made. N-world time is measured by only one type of machine –
the light-clock. The concept of the light-clock is to be considered as any clock-like
apparatus that utilizes either directly or indirectly electromagnetic radiation. As it
will be detailed, due to the diﬀerent propagation eﬀects of electromagnetic radiation
within the two “worlds,” measured N-world light-clock time need not be the same
as the NSP-world time. Further, the NSP-world ruler is the measure used to deﬁne
the N-world light-clock.

Experiments show that for small time intervals [a, b] the Galilean theory of
average velocities (speeds) suﬃces to give accurate information relative to the com-
positions of such velocities. Let there be an internal function q: ∗ [a, b] → ∗IR,
where q represents in the NSP-world a distance function. Also, let nonnegative and
internal ℓ: ∗[a, b] → ∗IR be a function that yields the NSP-world velocity of the
electromagnetic propagation at any t ∈ ∗ [a, b]. As usual µ(t) denotes the monad of
standard t.

6

The general and correct methods of inﬁnitesimal modeling state that, within the
internal portion of the NSP-world, two measures m1 and m2 are indistinguishable
for dt (notation m1 ∼ m2) if and only if for nonzero inﬁnitesimal dt ∈ µ(0),

m1
dt −

m2
dt ∈ µ(0).

(3.1)

Intuitively, indistinguishable in this sense means that, although within the NSP-
world the two measures are only equivalent and not necessarily equal, the ﬁrst level
(or ﬁrst-order) eﬀects these measures represent over dt are indistinguishable within
the N-world (i.e. they appear to be equal.)

In the following discussion and for convenience only, photon terminology is
used. Within the N-world our photons need not be conceived of as particles in the
sense that there is a nonzero ﬁnite N-world distance between individual photons.
Our photons may be ﬁnite combinations of intermediate subparticles that exhibit,
when the standard part operator is applied, basic electromagnetic ﬁeld properties.
They need not be discrete objects when viewed from the N-world, but rather they
could just as well give the appearance of a dense substratum. Of course, this dense
substratum is not the usual notion of an “aether” (i.e. ether) for it is not a subset of
the N-world. This dense-like substratum is called the nonstandard electromagnetic
ﬁeld – NSEM ﬁeld. [Note: It is possible that this NSEM is the subquantum region
that generates the eﬀects of the postulated zero-point (radiation) ﬁeld, the ZPF.]
Again photon can be considered as but a convenient term used to discuss electro-
magnetic propagation. Now for another of our simplistic physical assumptions.

(iii) In a N-world convex space neighborhood I traced out over the
time interval [a, b], the NSEM ﬁeld disturbances appear to propa-
gate linearly.

As we proceed through this derivation, other such assumptions will be identiﬁed.

The functions q, ℓ need to satisfy some simple mathematical characteristic.
The best known within nonstandard analysis is the concept of S-continuity [8]. So,
let q(x)/x (a velocity type expression) and ℓ be S-continuous on [a, b] and ℓ limited
(i.e. ﬁnite) on [a, b]. From compactness, q(x)/x and ℓ are S-continuous on ∗ [a, b]
and ℓ is limited on ∗ [a, b]. Obviously, both q and ℓ may have inﬁnitely many totally
diﬀerent NSP-world characteristics of which we could have no knowledge. But the
function q represents within the NSP-world the distance traveled with linear units
by an identiﬁable NSEM ﬁeld disturbance. It follows from all of this that for each
t ∈ [a, b] and t′ ∈ µ(t) ∩ ∗ [a, b],

q(t′)
t′ −

q(t)
t ∈ µ(0); ℓ(t′) − ℓ(t) ∈ µ(0).

(3.2)

Expressions (3.2) give relations between nonstandard t′ ∈ µ(t) and the standard t.
Recall that if x, y ∈ ∗IR, then x ≈ y iﬀ x − y ∈ µ(0).

7

From (3.2), it follows that for each dt ∈ µ(0) such that t + dt ∈ µ(t) ∩ ∗ [a, b]

,

t

ℓ(t + dt) +

q(t)

q(t + dt)
t + dt ≈
q(t + dt)
t + dt ≈ ℓ(t) +

q(t)

t

.

(3.3)

(3.4)

One important observation is necessary. The fact that the function ℓ has been
evaluated at t + dt is not necessary for (3.4) to hold for it will also hold for any
t′ ∈ µ(t) and ℓ(t′) substituted for ℓ(t + dt). But since we are free to choice any
value t′ ∈ µ(t), selecting particular values will allow our derivation to proceed to an
appropriate N-world conclusion. From (3.4), we have that

(cid:18)ℓ(t + dt) +

q(t + dt)

t + dt (cid:19) dt ∼(cid:18)ℓ(t) +

q(t)

t (cid:19) dt.

(3.5)

It is now that we begin our application of the concepts of classical Galilean
composition of velocities but restrict these ideas to the NSP-world monadic clus-
ters and the notion of indistinguishable eﬀects. You will notice that within the
NSP-world the transfer of the classical concept of equality of constant or average
quantities is replaced by the idea of indistinguishable. At the moment t ∈ [a, b] that
the standard part operator is applied, an eﬀect is transmitted through the ﬁeld as
follows:

(iv) For each dt ∈ µ(0) and t ∈ [a, b] such that t + dt ∈ ∗ [a, b],
the NSP-world distance q(t + dt) − q(t) (relative to dt) traveled
by the NSEM eﬀect within a monadic cluster is indistinguishable
for dt from the distance produced by the Galilean composition of
velocities.

From (iv), it follows that

And from (3.5),

q(t + dt) − q(t) ∼(cid:18)ℓ(t + dt) +

q(t + dt)

t + dt (cid:19) dt.

q(t + dt) − q(t) ∼(cid:18)ℓ(t) +

q(t)

t (cid:19) dt.

(3.6)

(3.7)

Expression (3.7) is the basic result that will lead to conclusions relative to the
Special Theory of relativity. In order to ﬁnd out exactly what standard functions will
satisfy (3.7), let arbitrary t1 ∈ [a, b] be the standard time at which electromagnetic
propagation begins from source F1. Next, let q = ∗s be an extended standard
function and s is continuously diﬀerentiable on [a, b]. Applying the deﬁnition of ∼,
yields

∗s(t + dt) − s(t)

dt

≈ ℓ(t) +

s(t)

t

.

(3.8)

8

Note that ℓ is microcontinuous on ∗ [a, b]. For each t ∈ [a, b], the value ℓ(t) is
limited. Hence, let st(ℓ(t)) = v(t) ∈ IR. From Theorem 1.1 in [3] or 7.6 in [10], v is
continuous on [a, b]. [See note 1 part a.] Now (3.8) may be rewritten as

∗(cid:18) d(s(t)/t)

dt

(cid:19) =

∗ v(t)

t

,

(3.9)

where all functions in (3.9) are *-continuous on ∗ [a, b]. Consequently, we may apply
the *-integral to both sides of (3.9). [See note 1 part b.] Now (3.9) implies that for
t ∈ [a, b]

dx,

(3.10)

s(t)

t

= ∗Z t

t1

∗ v(x)

x

where, for t1 ∈ [a, b], s(t1) has been initialized to be zero.

Expression (3.10) is of interest in that it shows that although (iv) is a simplistic
requirement for monadic clusters and the requirement that q(x)/x be S-continuous
is a customary property, they do not lead to a simplistic NSP-world function, even
when view at standard NSP-world times. It also shows that the light-clock assump-
tion was necessary in that the time represented by (3.10) is related to the distance
traveled and unknown velocity of an identiﬁable NSEM ﬁeld disturbance. It is also
obvious that for pure NSP-world times the actual path of motion of such propaga-
tion eﬀects is highly nonlinear in character, although within a monadic cluster the
distance ∗s(t + dt) − s(t) is indistinguishable from that produced by the linear-like
Galilean composition of velocities.

Further, it is the standard function in (3.10) that allows us to cross over to
other monadic clusters. Thus, substituting into (3.7) yields, since the propagation
behavior in all monadic clusters is identical,

∗s(t + dt) − s(t) ∼(cid:16) ∗v(t) +(cid:16) ∗R t

for every t ∈ [a, b], t + dt ∈ µ(t) ∩ ∗[a, b]

t1

∗ v(x)/xdx(cid:17)(cid:17) dt,

(3.11)

Consider a second standard source F2 at which electromagnetic reﬂection oc-

curs at t2 ∈ [a, b], t2 > t1, t2 + dt ∈ µ(t2) ∩ ∗[a, b]. Then (3.11) becomes

∗s(t2 + dt) − s(t) ∼(cid:16) ∗ v(t2) +(cid:16) ∗R t2

t1

∗v(x)/xdx(cid:17)(cid:17) dt.

Our ﬁnal assumption for monadic cluster behavior is that the classical ballistic

(3.12)

property holds with respect to electromagnetic propagation.

(v) From the exterior NSP-world viewpoint, at any standard time
t ∈ [a, b], the velocity ∗ v(t) partakes of the relative velocity of the
source.

Applying the classical statement (v) with the indistinguishable concept would
mean that the distance traveled ∗s(t2+dt)−s(t2) is indistinguishable from ( ∗ v(t2)+
w)dt. Hence,
( ∗ v(t2) + w)dt ∼ ∗s(t2 + dt) − s(t2) ∼(cid:18) ∗ v(t2) +(cid:18) ∗Z t2
dx(cid:19)(cid:19) dt. (3.13)

∗ v(x)

x

t1

9

Expression (3.13) implies that

∗ v(t2) + w ≈ ∗v(t2) +(cid:18) ∗Z t2

t1

∗ v(x)

x

dx(cid:19).

(3.14)

Since st(w) is a standard number, (3.14) becomes after taking the standard part
operator,

st(w) = st(cid:18) ∗Z t2

t1

∗ v(x)

x

dx(cid:19) .

(3.15)

After reﬂection, a NSEM ﬁeld disturbance returns to the ﬁrst source F1 arriving
at t3 ∈ [a, b], t1 < t2 < t3. Notice that the function s does not appear in equation
(3.15). Using the nonfavored source concept, a reciprocal argument entails that

t

s1(t)

= st(cid:18) ∗Z t3
st(w) = st(cid:18) ∗Z t3

t2

dx(cid:19) ,
dx(cid:19) ,

∗ v1(x)

x

∗v1(x)

t2

x

(3.16)

(3.17)

where it is not assumed that the function ∗ v1 = ∗ v.

We now combine (3.10), (3.15), (3.16), (3.17) and obtain an interesting non-
monadic view of the relationship between distance traveled by an NSEM ﬁeld dis-
turbance and relative velocity.

s1(t3) − s(t2) = st(w)(t3 − t2).

(3.18)

Although reﬂection has been used to determine relation (3.18) and a linear-like
interpretation involving reﬂection seems diﬃcult to express, there is a simple non-
reﬂection analogue model for this behavior.

Suppose that an NSEM ﬁeld disturbance is transmitted from a source F1, to
a position F2. Let F1 and F2 have no NSP-world relative motion. Suppose that a
NSEM ﬁeld disturbance is transmitted from F1 to F2 with a constant velocity v with
the duration of the transmission t′′ − t′, where the path of motion is considered as
linear. The disturbance continues linearly after it passes point F2 but has increased
during its travel through the monadic cluster at F2 to the velocity v + st(w). The
disturbance then travels linearly for the same duration t′′ − t′. The linear diﬀerence
in the two distances traveled is w(t′′ − t′). This in the NSP-world is to be construed
only as an analogue model and is not what has occurred.

Equations (3.10) and (3.15) show that in the NSP-world NSEM ﬁeld distur-
bances do not propagate linearly. Except for the eﬀects of material objects, it is
assumed that in the N-world the path of motion displayed by a NSEM ﬁeld dis-
turbance is linear. This includes the path of motion within an N-world light-clock.
We continue this derivation based upon what, at present, appears to be additional

10

parameters, a private NSP-world time and a NSP-world rule. Of course, the idea of
the N-world light-clock is being used as a ﬁxed means of identifying the diﬀerent ef-
fects the NSEM ﬁeld is having upon these two distinct worlds. A question yet to be
answered is how can we compensate for diﬀerences in these two time measurements,
the NSP-world private time measurement of which we can have no knowledge and
N-world light-clocks.

The weighted mean value theorem for integrals in nonstandard form, when
applied to equations (3.15) and (3.17), states that there are two NSP-world times
ta, tb ∈ ∗[a, b] such that t1 ≤ ta ≤ t2 ≤ tb ≤ t3 and

st(w) = st( ∗ v(ta))Z t2

t1

1
x

dx = st( ∗ v1(tb))Z t3

t2

1
x

dx.

(3.19)

[See note 1 part c.] Now suppose that within the local N-world any to-and-fro
light-clock styled measurement for the velocity of light using a ﬁxed instrumenta-
tion yields equal quantities. Model this by (*) st( ∗ v(ta)) = st( ∗v1(tb)) = c. I
point out that there are many nonconstant *-continuous functions that satisfy prop-
erty (*). For example, certain standard nonconstant linear functions and nonlinear
modiﬁcations of them. Property (*) yields

And solving (3.20) yields

From this one has

Z t2

t1

1
x

dx =Z t3

t2

1
x

dx.

ln(cid:18) t2

t1(cid:19) = ln(cid:18) t3
t2(cid:19) .
t1(cid:19) = c ln(cid:18) t3
t2(cid:19) .

st(w) = c ln(cid:18) t2

(3.20)

(3.21)

(3.22)

Expression (3.22) is Prokhovnik’s equation (6.3.2) in reference [7] and leads
immediately to t2 = √t1t3 which is equation (6.3.3) in reference [7]. However, the
interpretation of this result and the others that follow cannot, for the NSP-world,
be those as proposed by Prokhovnik. The times t1, t2, t3, are standard substratum
times. Further, it is not logically acceptable when considering how to measure
such time in the NSP-world or N-world to consider just any mode of measurement.
The mode of light speed measurement must be carried out within the conﬁnes of
the language used to obtain this derivation. Using this language, a method for
time calculation that is permissible in the N-world is the light-clock method. Any
other described method for time calculation should not include signiﬁcant terms
from other sources. Time as expressed in this derivation is not a mystical universal
something or other. It is a measured quantity based entirely upon some mode of
measurement.

11

They are two major diﬃculties with most derivations for expressions used in
the Special Theory. One is the above mentioned universal time concept. The other
is the ad hoc nonderived N-world relative velocity. In this case, no consideration is
given as to how such a relative velocity is to be measured so that from both F1 and
F2 the same result would be obtained. It is possible to achieve such a measurement
method because of the logical existence of the NSEM ﬁeld.

All of the “times” that we have encountered are durations. They are not the
numerical numbers at which a clock hand might point or the digits on a digital
watch. We can use linearly orientated light-clocks and a counter that indicates,
from some starting count, the number of times the light impulse has traversed back
and forth between the mirror and source of our light-clock. Since we are dealing
with relative velocities, our conclusions should be the same if we consider F1 as ﬁxed
within the NSEM ﬁeld and suppose that F1 and F2 can coincide. When they do
coincide, the F2 light-clock counter number that appears conceptionally ﬁrst after
that moment can be considered to coincide with the counter number for the F1
light-clock.

After F2 is perceived to no longer coincide with F1, a light impulse is trans-
mitted from F1 towards F2 in an assumed linear manner. The “next” F1 counter
number after this event is τ11. We do not assume that the relative velocity of F2
with respect to F1 has altered the light-clock counters for the length L used to
deﬁne a light-clock is measured by the NSP-world ruler and c, as produced by the
standard part operator, is not altered by N-world relative velocity. Further, the
N-world light-clocks are only to be observed at the two positions F1, F2. Further,
this light impulse is represented by a NSEM ﬁeld disturbance. The light impulse is
reﬂected back to F1 by a mirror similar to the light-clock itself. The ﬁrst counter
number on the F2 light-clock to appear, intuitively, “after” this reﬂection is τ21.
The F1 counter number ﬁrst perceived after the arrival of the returning light pulse
is τ31.

The NSEM ﬁeld disturbance is assumed for the N-world to be an indepen-
dent agent and is not inﬂuenced by the N-world relative velocity. From this linear
viewpoint, at the moment of reﬂection, denoted by τ21, the impulse has traveled an
operational linear light-clock distance of (τ21 − τ11)L. After reﬂection, under our
assumptions and nonfavored source concept, a NSEM ﬁeld disturbance would trace
out the same operational linear light-clock distance measured by (τ31 − τ21)L. Thus
the operational light-clock distance from F1 to F2 would be at the moment of oper-
ational reﬂection, under our linear assumptions, 1/2 the sum of these two distances
or S1 = (1/2)(τ31 − τ11)L. Now we can also determine the appropriate operational
relation between these light-clock counter numbers for S1 = (τ21 − τ11)L. Hence,
τ31 = 2τ21 − τ11.

After, measured by light-clock counts, the impulse has been received back to F1,
a second light impulse (denoted by a second subscript of 2) is immediately sent to F2.
Although τ31 ≤ τ12, it can be assumed for comprehension that τ31 = τ12. The same
analysis with new light-clock count numbers yields a diﬀerent operational distance

12

S2 = (1/2)(τ32 − τ12)L and τ32 = 2τ22 − τ12. One can determine the operational
light-clock time intervals by considering τ22 − τ21 = (1/2)((τ32 − τ31) + (τ12 − τ11))
and the operational linear light-clock distance diﬀerence S2 − S1 = (1/2)((τ32 −
τ31) − (τ12 − τ11))L. Since we can only actually measure numerical quantities as
discrete or terminating numbers, it would be empirically sound to write the N-
world time intervals for these scenarios as t1 = τ12− τ11, t3 = (τ32− τ31). This yields
the operational Einstein measure expressions in (6.3.4) of [7] as τ22 − τ21 = tE and
operational light-length rE = S2 − S1, using our speciﬁc light-clock approach. This
allows us to deﬁne, operationally, the N-world relative velocity as vE = rE/tE. Since
this is an operational deﬁnition, the fact that we do not have knowledge of the actual
NSP-world length of the light path over one light-count tick cannot invalidate this
method. [In this section, the t1, t3 are not the same Einstein measures, in form, as
described in [7]. But, in section 4, 5, 6 these operational measures are used along
with inﬁnitesimal light-clock counts to obtain the exact Einstein measure forms of
the time measure. This is: the t1 is a speciﬁc starting count and the t3 is t1 plus
an appropriate lapsed time.]

Can we theoretically turn the above approximate operational approach for
discrete N-world light-clock time into a time continuum? Light-clocks can be con-
sidered from the NSP-world viewpoint. In such a case, the actual NSP-world length
used to form the light-clock might be considered as a nonzero inﬁnitesimal. Thus, at
least, the numbers τ32, τ21, τ31, τ22 are inﬁnite hyperreal numbers, various diﬀer-
ences would be ﬁnite and, after taking the standard part operator, all of the N-world
times and lengths such as tE, rE, S1, S2 should be exact and not approximate in
character. These concepts will be fully analyzed in section 6. Indeed, as previously
indicated, for all of this to hold the velocity c cannot be measured by any means.
As indicated in section 6, the actual numerical quantity c as it appears in (3.22) is
the standard part of pure NSP-world quantities. Within the N-world, one obtains
an “apparent” constancy for the velocity of light since, for this derivation, it must
be measured by means of a to-and-fro light-clock styled procedure with a ﬁxed in-
strumentation. The apparent independence of such a measured velocity from the
N-world relative velocity of the standard observer is caused by the highly nonlinear
NSP-world character of electromagnetic propagation.

As yet, we have not discussed relations between N-world light-clock measure-
ments and N-world physical laws. It should be self-evident that the assumed linear-
ity of the light paths in the N-world can be modeled by the concept of projective
geometry. Relative to the paths of motion of a light path in the NSP-world, the
NSEM ﬁeld disturbances, the N-world path behaves as if it were a projection upon a
plane. Prokhovnik analyzes such projective behavior and comes to the conclusions
that in two or more dimensions the N-world light paths would follow the rules of
hyperbolic geometry. As shown by Prokhovnik, the equations (3.22) and the state-
ments establishing the relations between the operational or exact Einstein measures
tE, rE and vE lead to the Einstein expression relating the light-clock determined
relative velocities for three linear positions having three NSP-world relative and

13

uniform velocities w1, w2, w3.

On page 78 in [7], in terms of light-clock determined Einstein measures and
based upon the projection idea, all of the basic Special Theory coordinate transfor-
mation equations are obtain. Thus, all of the NSP-world times have been removed
from the results and even the propagation diﬀerences with respect to light-clock
measurements. Just use light-clocks in the N-world to measure all these quantities
in the required manner and the entire Special Theory is forthcoming.

I mention that it can be shown that w and c may be measured by probes
that are not N-world electromagnetic in character. Thus w need not be obtained
in the same manner as is vE except that N-world light-clocks would be used for
N-world time measurements. For this reason, st(w) = ω is not directly related to
the so-called textual expansion of the space within our universe.

4. The Time Continuum.

With respect to models that use the classical continuum approach (i.e. variables
are assumed to vary over such things as an interval of real numbers) does the
mathematics perfectly measure quantities within nature – quantities that cannot
be perfectly measured by a human being? Or is the mathematics only approximate
in some sense? Many would believe that if “nature” is no better than the human
being, then classical mathematics is incorrect as a perfect measure of natural system
behavior. However, this is often contradicted in the limit. That is when individuals
reﬁne their measurements, as best as it can done, at the present epoch, then the
discrete human measurements seem to approach the classical as a limit. Continued
exploration of this question is a philosophical problem that will not be discussed in
this paper, but it is interesting to model those ﬁnite things that can, apparently, be
accomplished by the human being, transfer these processes to the NSP-world and
see what happens. For what follows, when the term “ﬁnite” (i.e. limited) hyperreal
number is used, since it is usually near to a nonzero real number, it will usually
refer to the ordinary nonstandard notion of ﬁnite except that the inﬁnitesimals have
been removed. This allows for the existence of ﬁnite multiplicative inverses.

First, suppose that tE = st(tEa), rE = st(rEa), S1 = st(S1a), S2 = st(S2a)
and each is a nonnegative real number. Thus tEa, rEa, S1a, S2a are all nonnegative
ﬁnite hyperreal numbers. Let L = 1/ǫ > 0, ǫ ∈ IN+
∞. By transfer and the result that
S1a, S2a, are considered ﬁnite (i.e. near standard), then S1a ≈ (1/2)L(τ31 − τ11) ≈
L(τ21 − τ11) ⇒ (1/2)(τ31 − τ11), (τ21 − τ11) cannot be ﬁnite. Thus, by Theorem
11.1.1 [9], it can be assumed that there exist η, ξ ∈ IN+
∞ such that (1/2)(τ31− τ11) =
η, (τ21 − τ11) = ξ. This implies that each τ corresponds to an inﬁnite light-clock
count and that
(4.1)

τ31 = 2η + τ11, τ21 = ξ + τ11.

In like manner, it follows that

τ32 = 2λ + τ12, τ22 = δ + τ12, λ, δ ∈ IN+
∞.

(4.2)

14

Observe that the second of the double subscripts being 2 indicates the light-clock
counts for the second light transmission.

Now for tEa to be ﬁnite requires that the corresponding nonnegative t1a, t3a
be ﬁnite. Consider, c, the speed of “light” as expressed in a set of laboratory
standard units of measure. Then there is a unique p ∈ IN∞ such that st(2Lp) = c.
Let u = 1/(2p). Then st(2up) = 1. Non-zero inﬁnitesimal 2L [resp. 2u] can be
considered as an inﬁnitesimal length [resp.
time] unit of measure based upon c
and the same inﬁnitesimal light-clock can be used to measure both standard length
and time as measured by the light-clock count m.
If, as some have purposed, c
varies, then this would correspond to a varying u and not a varying L. Applications
of inﬁnitesimals as an approximating device, allow the measures 2L, 2u, in most
cases, to remain ﬁxed in the sense that they are not altered due to any real physical
process. It is the counts m that may be altered by a physical process. By transfer
of the case where these are real number counts, this yields that t3a ≈ u(τ32 − τ31) =
2u(λ − η) + u(τ12 − τ11) ≈ 2u(λ − η) + t1a and tEa ≈ u(τ22 − τ21) ≈ u(δ − ξ) + t1a.
Hence for all of this to hold in the NSP-world u(δ − ξ) must be ﬁnite or that
there exists some r ∈ IR+ such that u(δ − ξ) ∈ µ(r). Let τ12 = α, τ11 = β. Then
tEa ≈ u(δ − ξ) + u(α − β) implies that u(α − β) is also ﬁnite.

The requirement that these inﬁnite numbers exist in such a manner that the
standard part of their products with L [resp. u] exists and satisﬁes the continuum
requirements of classical mathematics is satisﬁed by Theorem 11.1.1 [9], where in
that theorem ω = 1/L [resp. 1/u]. [See note 2.] It is obvious that the nonnegative
numbers needed to satisfy this theorem are nonnegative inﬁnite numbers since the
results are to be nonnegative and ﬁnite. Theorem 11.1.1 [9] allows for the appro-
priate λ, η, δ, ξ to satisfy a bounding property in that we know two such numbers
exist such that λ, η < 1/L2, δ, ξ < 1/u2. [Note: It is important to realize that due
to this correspondence to a continuum of real numbers that the entire analysis as it
appears in section 3 is now consistent with a mode of measurement. Also the time
concept is replaced in this analysis with a “count” concept. This count concept will
be interpreted in section 8 as a count per some unit of time measure.]

Also note that the concepts are somewhat simpliﬁed if it is assumed that τ12 =
τ31. In this case, substitution into 4.1 yields that t1a ≈ u(2η). Consequently, tEa =
(1/2)(t1a + t3a) ≈ uλ. This predicts what is to be expected, that in this case, the
value of tE from the NSP-world viewpoint is not related to the ﬁrst “synchronizing”
light pulse sent.

5. Standard Light-clocks and c.

I mention that the use of subparticles or the concept of the NSEM ﬁeld is
not necessary for the derivation in section 3 to hold. One can substitute for the
NSEM ﬁeld the term “substratum” or the like and for the term “monadic cluster”
of possible subparticles just the concept of a “monadic neighborhood.” It is not
necessary that one assume that the substratum is composed of subparticles or any

15

identiﬁable entity, only that substratum transmission of such radiation behaves in
the simplistic manner stated.

It is illustrative to show by a diagram of simple light-clock counts how this
analysis actually demonstrates the two diﬀerent modes of propagation, the very
simple mode within the NSP-world and the diﬀerent mode when viewed from the
N-world. In general, L is always ﬁxed and for the following analysis and, for this
particular scenario, c does not change. This process of using N-world light-clocks to
approximate the relative velocity should only be done once due to the necessity of
“indexing” the light-clocks when F1 and F2 coincide. In the following diagram, the
numbers represent actual light-clock count numbers as perceived in the N-world.
The ﬁrst column are those recorded at F1, the second column those required at F2.
The arrows and the numbers above them represent our F1 comprehension of what
happens when the transmission is considered to take place in the N-world. Further,
F1 is assumed to be stationary in the substratum for this analysis and the paths of
motion of the light in F1s light-clock is assumed to be possibly diﬀerent from the
N-world linear path. Also the Einstein measures are only for the F1 position.

F1

τ11 = 20

τ = 40

τ31 = 60

τ12 = 80

τ32 = 140

N − world

F2

20

ց

20

ւ

30

ց

30

ւ

τ21 = 40

τ22 = 110

Certainly, the above diagram satisﬁes the required light-clock count equations.
The only light-clock counts that actually are perceivable are those at F1. And, for
the transformation equations, the scenario is altered. When the Special Theory
transformation formulas are obtained [7, p. 78], two distinct N-world observers are
used and a third N-world distinct fundamental position. All light-clock counts made
at each of these three positions are entered into the appropriate expressions for the
Einstein measures as obtained for each individual position.

6. Inﬁnitesimal Light-clock Analysis.

In the originally presented Einstein derivation, time and length are taken as
absolute (i.e. universal) time and length. It was previously pointed out that these

16

assumptions are logically in error. The scientiﬁc community extrapolated the lan-
guage used in the derivation, a language stated only in terms of light propagation
behavior, without logical reason to the “concept” of Newtonian absolute time and
length. Can the actual meaning of the “time” and “length” expressed in the Lorentz
transformations be determined?

In what follows, the inﬁnite light-clock count approach is used to analyze the
classical transformations as presented in [7]. The superscripts indicate the counts
associated with the light-clocks, the Einstein measures, and the like, at the positions
F1, F2. The 1 being the light-clock measures at F1 for the event on P, the 2 for
the light-clock measures at the F2 for the event on P, and the 3 for the light-
clock measures and its corresponding Einstein measures at F1 for the velocity of F2
relative to F1. The NSP-world measured angle, assuming linear projection due to
the constancy of the velocities, from F1 to the event on P is θ, and that from F2 to
P is φ.

E t(2)

E t(1)

E = v(2)

E = v(1)

E cos θ, x(2)

The expressions for our proposes are x(1)

E cos φ.
In all that follows, i varies from 1 to 3. We investigate what happens when the
standard model is now embedded back again into the ﬁnite NSP-world. All of
the “coordinate” transformation equations are re-established using the method of
Prokhovnik [7] which actually only involves the pure numbers ωi/c. These trans-
formations are interpreted in the NSP-world. But as far as the light-clock counts
are concerned, their appropriate diﬀerences are only inﬁnitely near to a standard
number. The appropriate expressions are altered to take this into account. For sim-
plicity in notation, it is again assumed that “immediate” in the light-clock count
process means τ (i)

31 . [See note 3.] Consequently, t(i)

12 = τ (i)

1a ≈ 2uη(i). Then

t(i)
Ea ≈ uλ(i).

(6.1)

Now from our deﬁnition r(i)

involved are nonnegative and ﬁnite, and st(v(i)

E ≈ L(λ(i) − η(i)). Hence since all of the numbers
Ea) it follows that

Ea) = st(r(i)

Ea) st(t(i)

v(i)
Ea ≈ L

(λ(i) − η(i))

uλ(i)

.

(6.2)

Now consider a set of two 4-tuples

(st(x(1)

Ea), st(y(1)

Ea), st(z(1)

Ea), st(t(1

Ea)),

(st(x(2)

Ea), st(y(2)

Ea), st(z(2)

Ea), st(t(2)

Ea)),

Ea) = st(v(1)

where they are viewed as Cartesian coordinates in the NSP-world. First, we have
st(x(1)
Ea)st( ∗cosφ). Now
suppose the local constancy of c. The N-world Lorentz transformation expressions
are

Ea)st( ∗cosθ), st(x(2)

Ea) = st(v(2)

Ea)st((t(1)

Ea)st(t(2)

st(t(1)

Ea) = β3(st(t(2)

Ea) + st(v(3)

Ea)st(x(2)

Ea)/c2),

17

Ea) = β3(st(x(2)

st(x(1)
where β3 = st((1 − (v(3)
Ea)2/c2)−1/2). Since L(λ(i) − η(i)) ≈ cu(λ(i) − η(i)), the ﬁnite
character of L(λ(i) − η(i)), u(λ(i) − η(i)) yields that c = st(L/u). When transferred
to the NSP-world with light-clock counts, substitution yields

Ea) + st(v(3)

Ea)st(t(2)

Ea)),

t(1)
Ea ≈ uλ(1) ≈ β[uλ(2) + uλ(2)K (3)K (2) ∗cosφ],

(6.3)

where K (i) = (λ(i) − η(i))/λ(i), β = (1 − (K (3))2)−1/2.

For the “distance” transformations, we have

x(1)
Ea ≈ L(λ(1) − η(1)) ∗cosθ ≈
L(λ(3) − η(3))

β(L(λ(2) − η(2)) ∗cosφ +

uλ(3)

uλ(2)).

(6.4)

Assume in the NSP-world that θ ≈ π/2, φ ≈ π. Consequently, substituting into 6.4
yields

L(λ(2) − η(2)) ≈

L(λ(3) − η(3))

uλ(3)

uλ(2).

Applying the ﬁnite property for these numbers, yields

L(λ(3) − η(3))

uλ(3)

≈

L(λ(2 − η(2))

uλ(2)

⇒ v(3)

Ea ≈ v(2)
Ea.

(6.5)

(6.6)

Ea) = st(v(2)

Hence, st(v(3)
Ea). This predicts that, in the N-world, the light-clock deter-
mined relative velocity of F2 as measured from the F1 and F1 as measured from the
F2 positions would be the same if these special inﬁnitesimal light-clocks are used. If
noninﬁnitesimal N-world light-clocks are used, then the values will be approximately
the same and equal in the limit.

the

light

it

Ea),st(y(2)

relative

By not

Ea), st(t(2)

Ea), st(z(2)

light-clock counts

Expression 6.4 relates

the to-and-fro paths of

is easily seen that x(2)

to the mea-
sure of
transmission.
substitut-
ing for x(2)
Ea ≈ LG, where G is an ex-
Ea
pression written entirely in terms of various
light-clock count numbers.
This implies that the so-called 4-tuples (st(x(1)
Ea)),
(st(x(2)
Ea)) are not the absolute Cartesian type coordi-
nates determined by Euclidean geometry and used to model Galilean dynamics.
These coordinates are dynamically determined by the behavior of electromagnetic
radiation within the N-world. Indeed, in [7], the analysis within the substratum
(outside of the monadic clusters) that leads to Prokhovnik’s conclusions is only
relative to electromagnetic propagation and is done by pure number Galilean dy-
namics. Recall that the monadic cluster analysis is also done by Galilean dynamics.
In general, when it is claimed that “length contracts” with respect to relative
velocity the “proof” is stated as follows: x′ = st(β)(x+vt); x′ = st(β)(x+vt). Then

Ea), st(y(1)

Ea), st(z(1)

Ea), st(t(1

18

these two expressions are subtracted. Supposedly, this yields x′ − x′ = st(β)(x− x)
since its assumed that vt = vt. A more complete expression would be

x(1)
E − x(1)

E = st(β)((x(2)

E − x(2)

E ) + (v(3)

E t(2)

E − v(3)

E t(2)

E )).

(6.7)

In this particular analysis, it has been assumed that all NSP-world relative
velocities ωi, ωi ≥ 0. To obtain the classical length contraction expression, let ωi =
ωi, i = 1, 2, 3. Now this implies that θ = θ, φ = φ as they appear in the velocity
ﬁgure 6.1 [7, p. 113] and that

E − x(1)
x(1)

E = st(β)(x(2)

E − x(2)
E ).

(6.8)

The diﬃculty with this expression has been its interpretation. Many modern
treatments of Special Relativity [6] argue that (6.8) has no physical meaning. But
in these arguments it is assumed that x(1)
E means “length” in the Cartesian
coordinate sense as related to Galilean dynamics. As pointed out, such a physical
meaning is not the case. Expression (6.8) is a relationship between light-clock counts
and, in general, displays properties of electromagnetic propagation within the N-
world. Is there a diﬀerence between the right and left hand sides of 6.8 when viewed
entirely from the NSP-world. First, express 6.8 as x(1)
E −st(β)x(2)
E .
In terms of light-clock counts, this expression becomes

E = st(β)x(2)

E − x(1)

E −x(1)

L(λ

(1) ∗cos θ − η(1) ∗cos θ) − L(λ(1) ∗cos θ − η(1) ∗cos θ) ≈

(6.9)

(2)

L(λ

β| ∗cos φ| − βη(2)β| ∗cos φ|) − L(λ(2)β| ∗cos φ| − η(2)β| ∗cos φ|),

where ﬁnite β = (1− (K (3))2)−1/2 and |·| is used so that the Einstein velocities are
not directed numbers and the Einstein distances are comparable. Also as long as
θ, φ satisfy the velocity ﬁgure 6.1, (6.9) is independent of the speciﬁc angles chosen
in the N-world since in the N-world expression (6.8) no angles appear relating the
relative velocities. That is the velocities are not vector quantities in the N-world,
but scalars.

(i)

(i)

(1)

(1)

/λ

Assuming the nontrivial case that θ 6≈ π/2, φ 6≈ π, we have from Theorem
∗cos θ ≈
11.1.1 that there exist Λ
/η(2)
Λ
≈ Λ(2)/λ(2) ≈ N (1)/η(2). Consequently, using the ﬁnite character of these quotients
), L(η(i)), L(λ(i)), L(η(i)), i = 1, 2, the general
and the ﬁnite character of L(λ
three body NSP-world view 6.9 is

/η(1) ≈ Λ(1)/λ(1) ≈ N (1)/η(1), β| ∗cos φ| ≈ Λ

, Λ(i), N (i) ∈ IN∞, i = 1, 2 such that

≈ N

≈ N

, N

/λ

(2)

(2)

(2)

(1)

(i)

(1)

L(Λ

(1)

− N

Lξ(2)

1 = L(Λ

) − L(Λ(1) − N (1)) = Lξ(1) ≈
) − L(Λ(2) − N (2)).

− N

(2)

(2)

19

(6.10)

The obvious interpretation of 6.10 from the simple NSP-world light propagation

viewpoint is displayed by taking the standard part of expression 6.10.

(1)

st(L(Λ

(1)

− N

st(Lξ(2)

1 ) = st(L(Λ

)) − st(L(Λ(1) − N (1))) = st(Lξ(1)) =
)) − st(L(Λ(1) − N (1))).

− N

(1)

(1)

(6.11)

This is the general view as to the equality of the standard NSP-world distance
traveled by a light impulse moving to-and-fro within a light-clock as light is used
to measure the occurrence of an event at P from F1 and F2 as viewed from the
substratum only. In order to interpret 6.9 for the N-world and a single NSP-world
relative velocity, you consider additionally that ω1 = ω2 = ω3. Hence, θ = π/3
and correspondingly φ = 2π/3. In this case, we cannot substitute for β. Since
cos π/3, cos 2π/3 are nonzero and ﬁnite, 6.9 now yields

(1)

st(L(λ

st(β)(st(L(λ

(2)

− η(1))) − st(L(λ(1) − η(1))) =
1 − η(2)
1 − η(2)

1 )) − st(L(λ(2)

1 ))) ⇒
) − st(Lη(1))) − (st(Lλ(1)) − st(Lη(1))) =
1 ) − st(Lη(2)
1 ) − st(Lη(2)

1 )) − (st(Lλ(2)

(2)

1 ))).

(1)

(st(Lλ

st(β)((st(Lλ

Or

(1)

st(L(λ

st(LΠ(1)) = st(β)st(LΠ(2)

1 ) =

(1)

st(L[(λ

(1)

st(L[(λ

st(Lβ[(λ

− η(1)) − L(λ(1) − η(1))) =
− η(1)) − (λ(1) − η(1))]) =
1 ) = st(LβΠ(2)
− η(1)) − (λ(1) − η(1))]) =
1 − η(2)
1 )]).

1 ) − (λ(2)

1 − η(2)

(2)

(6.12)

(6.13)

In order to obtain the so-called “time dilation” expressions, follow the same proce-
dure as above. Notice, however, that when you assume only that ωi = ωi, i = 1, 2, 3,
this yields

(1)

u(λ

− λ(1)) ≈ βu(λ

(2)

− λ(2)).

(6.14)

It is interesting, but not surprising, that 6.14 is not dependent upon the requirement
that ω1 = ω2 = ω3 nor upon the speciﬁc θ or φ chosen since the light-clock counts
are the fundamental constitutes for the analysis. In the NSP-world, as previously
done, 6.14 can be re-expressed as

(1)

u(λ

− λ(1)) ≈ u(λ

(2)

2 − λ(2)
2 ).

20

(6.15)

Or

(1)

st(u(λ

− λ(1))) = st(uΠ(1)
2 − λ(2)

3 ) = st(u(λ

(2)

2 ) =

2 )).

st(uΠ(2)

(6.16)

[See note 4.] From the N-world, the expression becomes, taking the standard part
operator,

Or

(1)

st(uλ

) − st(uλ(1)) =

st(β)(st(uλ

(2)

) − st(uλ(2))).

st(uΠ(1)

2 ) = st(β)st(uΠ(2)

(1)

st(u(λ

− λ(1))) = st(u[β(λ

4 ) = st(uβΠ(2)
4 ) =
− λ(2))]).

(2)

(6.17)

(6.18)

Note that using the standard part operator in the above expressions, yields contin-
uum time and space coordinates to which the calculus can now be applied. However,
the time and space measurements are not to be made with respect to a universal
clock or ruler. The measurements are relative to electromagnetic propagation. The
Einstein time and length are not the substratum time and length, but rather they
are concepts that incorporate a mode of measurement into electromagnetic ﬁeld
theory. It is this necessary incorporation that helps clarify properties of the NSEM
ﬁeld. Expressions such as (6.13), (6.18) will be interpreted in the next sections of
this paper.

7. An Interpretation.

In each of the expressions (6.i), i = 10, . . . , 18 the inﬁnitesimal numbers L, u
are not altered. Consequently the only alteration that takes place in N-world expres-
sions (6.i), i = 12, 13, 17, 18 is in the light-clock counts. This is exactly what (6.13)
and (6.18) state. Although these are external expressions and cannot be “formally”
transferred back to the N-world, the methods of inﬁnitesimal modeling require the
concepts of “constant” and “not constant” to be preserved. Now these N-world
expressions can be re-described in terms of N-world approximations. Simply substi-
.
tute
= for =, a nonzero real d [resp. µ] for L [resp. u] and real natural numbers for
each light-clock count in equations (6.i), i = 12, 17. Then for a particular d [resp. µ]
any change in the light-clock measured relative velocity vE would dictate a change
in the the light-clock counts and not a change in d [resp. µ]. Keeping the same
vE, then, as you reduce d [resp. µ], the light-clock counts would increase in such a
.
manner that
= → = . Hence, the N-world need not be concerned with the idea that
“length” contracts or time “dilates” for neither concept is being displayed by the
light-clock expressions. But, in many cases, the use of light-clocks is not intended
to be a literal use of such instruments. For certain scenarios, light-clocks are to
be considered as analog models that incorporate electromagnetic wave and energy
properties.

21

The light-clock analysis given in the section 3 is done to discover a general
property for the transmission of electromagnetic radiation. It is clear that property
(*) does not require that the measured velocity of light be a universal constant.
All that is needed is that for the two NSP-world times ta, tb that st(ℓ(ta)) =
st(ℓ1(tb)). This means that all that is required for the most basic aspects of the
Special Theory to hold is that at two NSP-world times in the to-and-fro reﬂection
process st(ℓ(ta)) = st(ℓ1(tb)), ta a time during the transmission prior to reﬂection
and tb after reﬂection.
If ℓ, ℓ1 are actually extended standard functions v, v1
continuous on [a, b], then given any ǫ ∈ IR+ there is a δ such that for each t, t′ ∈ [a, b]
such that |t − t′| < δ it follows that |v(t) − v(t′)| < ǫ/3 and |v1(t) − v1(t′)| < ǫ/3.
Letting t3 − t1 < δ, then |ta − tb| < δ. Since ∗ v(ta) = ℓ(ta) ≈ ∗v1(tb) = ℓ1(tb),
*-transfer implies | ∗ v(t2) − ∗ v1(t2)| < ǫ. [ See note 5.] Since t2 is a standard
number, |v(t2) − v1(t2)| < ǫ implies that v(t2) = v1(t2). Hence, in this case, the
two functions ℓ, ℓ1 do not diﬀerentiate between the velocity c at t2. But t2 can be
considered an arbitrary cosmic (i.e. substratum) time > 0. This does not require
c to be the same for all cosmic times only that v(t) = v1(t).

The restriction that ℓ, ℓ1 are extended standard functions appears necessary for
our derivation. Also, this analysis is not related to what ℓ may be for a stationary
laboratory. In the case of stationary F1, F2, then the integrals are zero in equation
(19) of section 3. The easiest thing to do is to simply postulate that st( ∗ v(ta)) is
a universal constant. This does not make such an assumption correct.

One of the properties that will allow the Einstein velocity transformation ex-
pression to be derived is the equilinear property. This property is weaker than
the c = constant property for light propagation. Suppose that you have
within the NSP-world three observers F1, F2, F3 that are linearly related. Further,
suppose that w1 is the NSP-world velocity of F2 relative to F1 and w2 is the NSP-
world velocity of F3 relative to F2. It is assumed that for this nonmonadic cluster
situation, that Galilean dynamics also apply and that st(w1) + st(w2) = st(w3).
Using the description for light propagation as given in section 3, let t1 be the cosmic
time when a light impulse leaves F1, t2 when it “passes” F2, and t3 the cosmic time
when it arrives at F3.

From equation (3.15), it follows that

t1

st(w1) = st( ∗ v1(t1a))st(cid:18) ∗Z t2
[st(w2) =]st( ∗ v2(t2a))st(cid:18) ∗Z t3
st(w3) = st( ∗ v3(t3a))st(cid:18) ∗Z t3

t2

t1

1
x

1
x

1
x

dx(cid:19) +
dx(cid:19) =
dx(cid:19) .

(7.1)

If st( ∗ v1(t1a)) = st( ∗ v2(t2a)) = st( ∗v3(t3a)), then we say that the velocity
functions ∗ v1, ∗v2, ∗ v3 are equilinear. The constancy of c implies equilinear, but

22

not conversely. In either case, functions such as ∗v1 and ∗ v2 need not be the same
within a stationary laboratory after interaction.

Since experimentation indicates that electromagnetic propagation does not be-
have in the N-world in the exact same manner as does sound or other types of
wave phenomena, it should be obvious that there are additional electromagnetic
factors being displayed when relative velocity is involved. The light-clock analysis
is consistent with the following speculation. Depending upon the scenario, the
uniform velocity an observer has with respect to the substratum directly
alters electromagnetic behavior. This is termed an electromagnetic
interaction with the substratum (emis).
It is possible that this (emis) is
mediated by the postulated ZPF. Recall that a “light-clock” can be considered
as an analog model for the most basic of the electromagnetic properties. On the
other hand, only those experimental methods that replicate or are equivalent to
the methods of Einstein measure would be relative to the Special Theory. This is
one of the basic logical errors in theory application. The experimental language
must be related to the language of the derivation. The concept of the light-clock,
linear paths and the like are all intended to imply electromagnetic interactions.
Any explanation for experimentally veriﬁed Special Theory eﬀects should be stated
in such a language and none other. I also point out that there are no paradoxes
in this derivation for you cannot simply “change your mind” with respect to the
substratum. For example, an observer is either in motion or not in motion, and not
both with respect to the substratum.

8. A Speculation and Ambiguous Interpretations

Suppose that the correct principles of inﬁnitesimal modeling were known prior
to the M-M (i.e. Michelson-Morley) experiment. Scientists would know that the
(mathematical) substratum is not an N-world entity. They would know that they
could have very little knowledge as to the reﬁned workings of this NSP-world sub-
stratum since ≈ is not an = . They would have been forced to accept the statement
of Max Planck that “Nature does not allow herself to be exhaustively expressed
in human thought.”[The Mechanics of Deformable Bodies, Vol. II, Introduction to
Theoretical Physics, Macmillian, N.Y. (1932),p. 2.]

Further suppose, that human comprehension was advanced enough so that all
scientiﬁc experimentation always included a theory of measurement. The M-M
experiment would then have been performed to learn, if possible, more about this
NSP-world substratum. When a null ﬁnding was obtained then a derivation such as
that in section 3 might have been forthcoming. Then the following two expressions
would have emerged from the derivation.

Let s denote “stationary” or “standard” or, sometimes, “observer” (i.e. F1)
and m “relative motion with respect to stationary, standard, or observer” (i.e. F2.)
(This can be restated in terms of two NSP-world absolute motions if necessary.) A
speciﬁc interpretation of

st(β)−1(x(s)

E − x(m)

E

E − x(s)

E ) = x(m)

(8.1)

23

and the corresponding

is necessary.

st(β)−1(t(s)

E − t(s)

E ) = t(m)

E − t(m)

E

(8.2)

E − x(s)

If, in (8.1), x(s)

E = U s is interpreted as any standard unit of length
measure in a stationary system and x(m)
E ) = U m the same “standard” unit
of length measure in a system moving with respect to the substratum (without
regard to direction), then for equality to take place the unit of measure U s “must”
contract in the moving system. Of course, it would have been immediately realized
that the error in this last statement is that U s is “any” unit of measure. The same
statement might be claimed for t(m)
E . Once again, the error in
these two statements is the term “any.”

E − x(m)

E − t(m)

E and t(s)

E − t(s)

Expressions (8.1) (8.2) only refer to an experiment that is equivalent entirely to
the light-clock count process AND to the method used to obtain Einstein measures.
Such experiments are the to-and-fro linear light-path scenarios of M-M, Kennedy-
Thorndike and many others. Moreover, when viewed from the wave state, the
interferometer measurement technique is determined completely by a light-clock
type process – the number of light waves in the linear path. We need to use Lm
sc,
sc for U s. It appears for this
a scenario associated light unit, for U m and use a Ls
particular scenario, that Ls
sc may be considered the private unit of length in the
NSP-world used to measure NSP-world light-path length. The “wavelength” λ of
any light source must also be measured in the same light units. Let λ = N sLs
sc.
Taking into consideration a unit conversion factor between the unknown NSP-world
private units with standard part k, the number of light waves in the stationary
laboratory would be kAsLs
sc = As/N s, where As is a pure number such
that AsLs
sc is the “length” using the units in the stationary system. In the moving
system, assuming that this simple aspect of light propagation holds in the NSP-
world and the N-world which we did to obtain the derivation in section 3, it is
claimed that substitution yields kAsst(β)−1Ls
sc = As/N s. Thus
there would be no diﬀerence in the number of light waves in any case where the
experimental set up involved the sum of light paths each of which corresponds to the
to-and-fro process [1, p. 24]. Further, the same conclusions would be reached using
(8.2). I point out that the derivation that appears in section 3, is not relevant to a
Sagnac type of experiment. However, this does not mean that a similar derivation
involving a polygonal propagation path cannot be obtained.

sc/kN sst(β)−1Ls

sc/kN sLs

Where is the logical error in the above argument? The error is the object upon

which the st(β)−1 operates. Speciﬁcally (6.13) states that

st(β)−1(As)

st(β)−1(N s)

(emis)

←→ β−1Π(s) and
←→ β−1Π(s)
1 .

(emis)

24

(8.3)

(8.4)

It is now rather obvious that the two (emis) aspects of the M-M experiment nullify
each other. The light-path within the NSP-world is, in actually, not linear for a
stationary NSP-world object. (This is obvious from the projection property.) Due
to the (emis), the “number” of these units or the path length LΠ(s) is reduced from
the NSP-world viewpoint with relative motion w. That is the path length in the
N-world is approximately st(β)−1(AskLs
sc). Approximately is a necessary concept
here since it would only be exact if Ls
sc is inﬁnitesimal. Since the same alteration
takes place with respect to the wavelength (i.e. wavelength increases from the NSP-
world viewpoint), then the null aspect is obtained even in the approximate mode.
Also for no ﬁnite w can β ≈ 0. There is a great diﬀerence between the propagation
properties in the NSP-world and the N-world. For example, the classical Doppler
eﬀect is an N-world eﬀect relative to linear propagation. Rather than indicating
that the substratum is not present, the M-M results indicate indirectly
that the NSP-world substratum exists.

Apparently, the well-known Ives-Stillwell, and all similar, experiments used in
an attempt to verify such things as the relativistic redshift are of such a nature
that they eliminate other eﬀects that motion is assumed to have upon the scenario
associated electromagnetic propagation. What was shown is that the frequency
ν of the canal rays vary with respect to a representation for vE measured from
electromagnetic theory in the form νm = st(β)−1νs. First, we must investigate what
the so-called time dilation statement (8.2) means. What it means is exempliﬁed by
(6.14) and how the human mind comprehends the measure of “time.” In the scenario
associated (8.2) expression, for the right and left sides to be comprehensible, the
expression should be conceived of as a measure of the “number of ticks” – a “count.”
It is the experience with a speciﬁc unit and the number of them that “passes” that
yields the intuitive concept of “time.” On the other hand, for some purposes or
as some authors assume, (8.2) might be viewed as a change in a time unit T s
rather than in the count. Both of these interpretations can be incorporated into
a frequency statement. First, relative to the frequency of light-clock counts, for a
ﬁxed stationary unit of time T s, (8.2) reads

st(β)−1Cs

sc/T s .

= Cm

sc/T s ⇒ st(β)−1Cs

sc

.
= Cm
sc.

(8.5)

sc and Cm

BUT according to (6.18), the Cs

sc correspond to the counts – the
“ticks” – produced by light-clocks and nothing more than that. Indeed, (8.5) has
nothing to do with the concept of “time” only with the usual alteration in counts
due to relative motion. That is an alteration due to (emis). Indeed, the “length
contraction” expression (8.1) and the “time dilation” expression (8.2) have nothing
to do with either length or time. These two expressions are both saying the same
thing from two diﬀerent viewpoints. There is an alteration due to the (emis). [Note
that the second

.
= in (8.5) depends upon the T s chosen.]

pretation is that νs

On the other hand, for a relativistic redshift type experiment, the usual inter-
= st(β)−1p/T s ⇒

.
= p/T m. This leads to p/T m .

.
= p/T s and νm

25

T m .
= st(β)T s. Assuming that all frequency alterations due to (emis) have been
eliminated then this is interpreted to mean that “time” is slower in the moving ex-
cited hydrogen atom than in the “stationary” laboratory. When compared to (8.5),
there is the ambiguous interpretation in that the p is considered the same for both
sides (i.e. the concept of the frequency is not altered by substratum motion). It is
consistent with all that has come before that the Ives-Stillwell result be written as
νs

.
= q/T s. This leads to the expression

.
= p/T s and that νm

st(β)−1p

.
= q [= in the limit].

(8.6)

Expression (8.6) does not correspond to a concept of “time” but rather to the
concept of alterations in emitted frequency due to (emis). It is, therefore, correct to
state that with this ambiguous interpretation of (8.2) that in an Ives-Stillwell sce-
nario the frequency of the light emitted from an atomic unit moving with velocity
ω with respect to the substratum is altered due to (emis). This (emis) alteration
depends upon K (3). It is critical that the two diﬀerent inﬁnitesimal light-clock in-
terpretations be understood. One interpretation is relative to electromagnetic prop-
agation theory. In this case, the light-clock concept is taken in its most literal form.
The second interpretation is relative to light-clock counts as an analogue model.
This means that the cause need not be related to propagation but is more probably
due to how individual constituents interact with the NSEM ﬁeld. The exact nature
of this interaction and a non-ambiguous approach needs further investigation based
upon constituent models since the analogue model speciﬁcally denies that there
is some type of absolute time dilation but, rather, signiﬁes the existences of other
possible causes. [In [11], the νm = st(β)−1νs is formally and non-ambiguously de-
rived from a special (metric) line element, a universal functional requirement and
Schr¨odinger’s equation.]

In our analysis it has been assumed that F1 is stationary in the NSP-world
substratum. It is clear, however, that under our assumption that the scalar velocities
in the NSP-world are additive with respect to linear motion, then if F1 has a velocity
ω with respect to the substratum and F2 has the velocity ω ′, then it follows that
the light-clock counts for F1 have been altered with respect to a stationary F0 due
to the (emis) and the light-clock counts for F2 have been similarly altered with
respect to a stationary F0 due to (emis). Consequently, the light-clock counts
expressed by K (3) are the result of the diﬀerence, so to speak, between these two
(emis) inﬂuences. Thus the actual numerical quantities involved correspond to the
standard velocity metric d(ω, ω ′). In the case that ω 6= 0, it follows that ω ≤ ω ′ for
ω = d(0, ω) + d(ω, ω ′) ≤ d(0, ω ′) = ω ′.

As previously stated, within the NSP-world relative to electromagnetic propa-
gation observer scalar velocities are either additive or are related by the above met-
ric. Within the N-world, this last statement need not be so. Velocities of individual
entities are modeled by either vectors or, at the least, by signed numbers. Once the
N-world expression is developed, then it can be modiﬁed in accordance with the

26

usual (emis) alterations, in which case the velocity statements are N-world Einstein
measures. For example, deriving the so-called relativistic Dopplertarian eﬀect, the
combination of the classical and the relativistic redshift, by means of a substratum
argument such as appears in [7] where it is assumed that the light propagation laws
with respect to the photon concept in the NSP-world are the same as those in the
N-world, is in logical error. Deriving the classical Doppler eﬀect expression then,
when physically justiﬁed, making the wave number alteration in accordance with
the (emis) would be the correct logic needed to obtain the relativistic Dopplertarian
eﬀect. [See note 6.]

Although I will not, as yet, re-interpreted all of the Special Relativity results
with respect to this purely electromagnetic interpretation, it is interesting to note
the following two re-interpretations. The so-called variation of “mass” was, in truth,
originally derived for imponderable matter (i.e. elementary matter.) This would
lead one to believe that the so-called rest mass and its alteration, if experimentally
veriﬁed, is really a manifestation of the electromagnetic nature of such elementary
matter. Once again the so-called mass alteration can be associated with an (emis)
concept. The µ-meson decay rate may also show the same type of alteration as
appears to be the case in an Ives-Stillwell experiment.
It does not take a great
stretch of the imagination to again attribute the apparent alteration in this rate to
an (emis) process. This would lead to the possibility that such decay is controlled
by electromagnetic properties. Indeed, in order to conserve various things, µ-meson
decay is said to lead to the generation of the neutrino and antineutrino. These
“things” behave with respect to velocity and mass as if they are a photon quanta.
They do have, at least, one additional property not shared with the photon quanta,
spin. One might assume that such “things,” if they exist, are electromagnetic in
character, but, due to the spin property, they interact in a completely diﬀerent
manner with gross matter. This yields additional evidence that µ-meson decay has
an electromagnetic basis. [After this paper was completed, a method was discovered
that establishes that predicted mass and decay time alterations are (emis) eﬀects.
The derivations are found in [11], [12].]

I note that such things as neutrinos and antineutrinos need not exist. Indeed,
the nonconservation of certain quantities for such a scenario leads to the conclusion
that subparticles exist within the NSP-world and carry oﬀ the “missing” quanti-
ties. Thus the invention of such objects may deﬁnitely be considered as only a
bookkeeping technique.

As pointed out, all such experimental veriﬁcation of the properly interpreted
transformation equations can be considered as indirect evidence that the NSP-world
substratum exists. But none of these results should be extended beyond the ex-
perimental scenarios concerned. Furthermore, I conjecture that no matter how the
human mind attempts to explain the (emis) in terms of a human language, it will
always be necessary to postulate some interaction process with the substratum with-
out being able to speciﬁcally describe this interaction in terms of more fundamental
concepts. Finally, the MA-model speciﬁcally states that the Special Theory is a

27

local theory and should not be extended beyond a local cosmic time interval [a, b].

9. Reciprocal Relations

As is common to many mathematical models, not all relations generated by the
mathematics need to correspond to physical reality. This is the modern approach to
the length contradiction controversy [6]. Since this is a mathematical model, there
is a theory of correspondence between the physical language and the mathematical
structure. This correspondence should be retained throughout any derivation. This
is a substratum theory and what is stationary or what is not stationary with respect
to the substratum must be maintained throughout any correspondence. This applies
to such reciprocal relations as

and

st(β)−1(x(m)

E − x(m)

E ) = x(s)

E − x(s)

E

st(β)−1(t(m)

E − t(m)

E ) = t(s)

E − t(s)

E

(9.1)

(9.2)

Statement (8.1) and (9.1) [resp. (8.2) and (9.2)] both hold from the substratum
viewpoint only when vE = 0 since it is not the question of the N-world viewpoint
of relative velocity but rather the viewpoint that F1 is ﬁxed and F2 is not ﬁxed
in the substratum or ω ≤ ω ′. The physical concept of the (s) and (m) must be
maintained throughout the physical correspondence. Which expression would hold
for a particular scenario depends upon laboratory conﬁrmation. This is a scenario
associated theory. All of the laboratory scenarios discussed in this paper have used
the (8.1) and (8.2). Other authors, such as Dingle [1] and Builder [7], have simply
postulated that (8.1) holds rather than (9.1). I have not taken this absolute stance
in this paper.

One of the basic controversies associated with the Special Theory is whether
(1.8) or (8.2) [resp. (9.1) or (9.2)] actually have physical meaning. The notion is
that either “length” is a fundamental concept and “time” is deﬁned in terms of it,
or “time” is a fundamental concept and length is deﬁned in terms of it. Dingle, Ives,
and many others assumed that the fundamental notion is length contraction and
not time dilation. The modern approach is the opposite of this. Length contraction
has no physical meaning, but time dilation does [6]. We know that universal time is
deﬁned in terms of length and velocities. But, the length or time being considered
here is Einstein length or Einstein time. This is never mentioned when this problem
is being considered. As discussed at the end of section 3, Einstein length is actually
deﬁned in terms of inﬁnitesimal light-clock counts or in terms of the Einstein ve-
locity and Einstein time. The only diﬀerence between the inﬁnitesimal light-clock
measures for Einstein length and Einstein time is in the use of a diﬀerent NSP-world
unit. It will be shown in article 3, that for Special Theory eﬀects the fundamental
notion is that there is an alteration in the inﬁnitesimal light-clock count numbers
for the timing light-clock only. The alteration has a physical bases and it will cause
all of the Special Theory eﬀects. [See note 7.]

28

{Remark: Karl Popper notwithstanding, it is not the sole purpose of mathemat-
ical models to predict natural system behavior. The major purpose is to maintain
logical rigor and, hopefully, when applicable to discover new properties for natu-
ral systems.
I have used in this speculation a correspondence theory that takes
the stance that any veriﬁable Special Theory eﬀect is electromagnetic in charac-
ter rather than a problem in measure. However, whether such eﬀects are simply
eﬀects relative to the propagation of electromagnetic information or whether they
are eﬀects relative to the constituents involved cannot be directly obtain from the
Special Theory. All mathematically stated eﬀects involve the Einstein measure of
relative velocity, vE – a propagation related measure. The measure of an eﬀect
should also be done in accordance with electromagnetic theory. As demonstrated,
the Special Theory should not be unnecessarily applied to the behavior of all na-
ture systems since it is related to electromagnetic interaction; unless, of course, all
natural systems are electromagnetic in character. Without strong justiﬁcation, the
assumption that one theory does apply to all scenarios is one of the greatest errors
in mathematically modeling. But, if laboratory experiments verify that alterations
are taking place in measured quantities and these variations are approximately in
accordance with the Special Theory, then this would indicate that either the al-
terations are related to electromagnetic propagation properties or the constituents
have an appropriate electromagnetic character.}

NOTES

[1] (a) Equation (3.9) is obtained as follows: since t ∈ [a, b], t ﬁnite and not

inﬁnitesimal. Thus division by t preserves ≈ . Hence,

(cid:20)t(cid:18) ∗s(t + dt) − s(t)

dt

(cid:19) − s(t)(cid:21) /t2 ≈

ℓ(t)

t

.

(1)

Since t is an arbitrary standard number and dt is assume to be an arbitrary and ap-
propriate nonzero inﬁnitesimal and the function s(t)/t is diﬀerentiable, the standard
part of the left side equals the standard part of the right side. Thus

d(s(t)/t)

dt

=

v(t)

t

,

(2)

for each t ∈ [a, b]. By *-transfer, equation (3.9) holds for each t ∈ ∗[a, b].

(b) Equation (3.10) is then obtained by use of the *-integral and the funda-
mental theorem of integral calculus *-transferred to the NSP-world. It is useful to
view the deﬁnite integral over a standard interval say [t1, t] as an operator, at least,
deﬁned on the set C([t1, t], IR) of all continuous real valued functions deﬁned on
[t1, t]. Thus, in general, the fundamental theorem of integral calculus can be viewed
t1 ⇒

. Hence ∗ (f ′, f (t) − f (t1)) ∈ ∗R t

t1

as the statement that (f ′, f (t) − f (t1)) ∈R t
( ∗f ′, ∗ (f (t) − f (t1))) ∈ ∗R t

t1 ⇒ ( ∗f ′, f (t) − f (t1)) ∈ ∗R t

t1

.

29

(c) To obtain the expressions in (3.19), consider f (x) = 1/x. Then ∗f is limited
. Hence st(( ∗f, ln t2 −

and S-continuous on ∗ [a, b]. Hence ( ∗f, ln t2 − ln t1) ∈ ∗R t2
ln t1)) = (f, ln t2 − ln t1) ∈R t2

[2] The basic theorem that allows for the entire concept of inﬁnitesimal light-
clocks and the analysis that appears in this monograph has not been stated. The
theorem, without proof, as it appears in the standard edition of “Ultralogics and
More” is as follows:

.

t1

t1

Theorem 11.1.1 Let ω ∈ IN∞. Then for each r ∈ IR there exists an x ∈ {m/ω |

(m ∈ ∗ Z) ∧ (|m| < ω2)} such that x ≈ r (i.e. x ∈ µ(r).)
We let L = 1/ǫ where ǫ is any hyperreal inﬁnite natural number (i.e. ǫ ∈ IN∞).
Hence, by this theorem, for any positive real number r there exists some m ∈ IN∞
such that st(m/ǫ) = r. I point out that for this nonzero case it is necessary that
m ∈ IN∞ for if m ∈ IN, then st(m/ǫ) = 0. What has not been shown is that the
correction factor u can also be assumed to be determined by some λ ∈ IN∞. It is
shown in section 6 that c = st(L/u) = st((1/ǫ)(1/u)). Applying theorem 11.1.1,
we know that there exists some λ ∈ IN∞ such that c = st(λ(1/ǫ)). Hence we need
simply to let u = 1/λ.

[3] At this point and on, the subscripts on the τ have a diﬀerent meaning than
previously indicated. The subscripts denote process numbers while the superscript
denotes the position numbers. For example, τ 2
12 means the light-clock count number
when the second light-pulse leaves F2 and τ 2
31 would mean the light-clock count
number when the ﬁrst light-pulse returns to position F2.

The additional piece of each subscript denoted by the a on this and the fol-
lowing pages indicates, what I thought was obvious from the lines that follow their
introduction, that these are approximating numbers that are inﬁnitesimally near to
standard NSP-world number obtained by taking the standard part.

[4] Note that such inﬁnite hyperreal numbers as Π(2)
3

(here and elsewhere)
denote the diﬀerence between two inﬁnitesimal light-clock counts and since we are
excluding the ﬁnite number inﬁnitesimally near to 0, these numbers must be inﬁnite
hyperreal. Inﬁnitesimal light-clocks can be assumed to measure this number by use
of a diﬀerential counter. BUT it is always to be conceived of as an inﬁnitesimal
light-clock “interval” (increment, diﬀerence, etc.) It is important to recall this when
the various line elements in the next article are considered.

[5] This result is obtained as follows: since ta ≤ t2 ≤ tb, it follows that |ta−t2| <
δ, |tb − t2| < δ. Hence by *-transfer, | ∗ v(t2)− ∗ v(ta)| < ǫ/3, | ∗ v1(tb)− ∗v1(t2)| <
ǫ/3. Since we assume arbitrary ǫ/3 is a standard positive number, then ∗ v(ta) =
ℓ(ta) ≈ ∗ v1(tb) = ℓ1(tb) ⇒ | ∗ v(ta)− ∗ v1(tb)| < ǫ/3. Hence | ∗ v(t2)− ∗ v1(t2)| < ǫ.
[6] In this article, I mention that all previous derivations for the complete
Dopplertarian eﬀect (the N-world and the transverse) are in logical error. Although
there are various reasons for a redshift not just the Dopplertarian, the electromag-
netic redshift based solely upon properties of the NSEM ﬁeld can be derived as
follows:

30

(i) let νs denote the “standard” laboratory frequency for radiation emitted
from an atomic system. This is usually determined by the observer. The NSP-world
alteration in emitted frequency at an atomic structure due to (emis) is β−1νs =
E/c2 and vE is the Einstein measure of the relative

νradiation, where β−1 =p1 − v2

velocity using light-clocks only.

(ii) Assuming that an observer is observing this emitted radiation in a direct line
with the propagation and the atomic structure is receding with velocity v from the
observer, the wave theory of electromagnetic propagation, within the N-world, alters
the perceived received frequency. This alteration is νradiation(1/(1+v/c)) = νreceived.
Consequently, this yields the total alteration as β−1νs(1/(1+v/c)) = νreceived. Note
that v is measured in the N-world and can be considered a directed velocity. If, due
to the fact that we are dealing with electromagnetic radiation, we can consider v
the Einstein measure of linear velocity (i.e. v = vE), then the total Dopplertarian
eﬀect can be written as

νs(cid:18) 1 − vE/c

1 + vE/c(cid:19)1/2

= νreceived.

(3)

It should always be remembered that there are other reasons, such as the grav-
itational redshift and others yet to be analyzed, that can mask this total Doppler-
tarian redshift.

[7] A question that has been asked relative to the new derivation that yields all
of the results of the special theory is why in the N-world do we have the apparent
nonballistic eﬀects associated with electromagnetic radiation? In the derivation, the
opposite was assumed for the NSP-world monadic clusters. The constancy of the
measure, by light-clocks and the like, of the to-and-fro velocity of electromagnetic
radiation was modeled by letting st(ta) = st(tb). As mentioned in the section
on the special theory, the Einstein velocity measure transformation expression can
be obtained prior to embedding the world into a hyperbolic velocity space. It is
obtained by considering three in-line standard positions F1, F2, F3 that have the
NSP-world velocities w1 for F2 relative to F1, w2 for F3 relative to F2 and the simple
composition w3 = w1 + w2 for F3 relative to F1. Then simple substitution in this
expression yields

v(3)
E = (v(1)

E + v(2)

E )/ 1 +

c2 ! .
E v(2)
v(1)

E

(4)

Note that all velocities are Einstein measures and hence correspond to inﬁnitesimal
light-clock measures. This relation is telling us something about the required be-
havior in the N-world of electromagnetic radiation. To see that within the N-world
we need to assume for electromagnetic radiation eﬀects the nonballistic property,
.
simply let v(2)
= c. Of course, the reason we
do not have a contradiction is that we have two distinctly diﬀerent views of the
behavior of electromagnetic radiation, the NSP-world view and the N-world view.

.
= c. Then v(3)

E = c or v(2)

E

E = c, or

31

Further, note how, for consistency, the velocity of electromagnetic radiation is to
be measured. It is measured by the Einstein method, or equivalent, relative to a
to-and-fro path and measures of “time” and “distance” by means of a (inﬁnitesimal)
light-clock counts.

I am convinced that the dual character of the special theory derivation requires
individual reﬂection in order to be understood fully. In the NSP-world, electromag-
netic radiation behaves in one respect, at least, like a particle in that it satisﬁes
the ballistic nature of particle motion. The reason that equation (3) is derivable
is due to the deﬁnition of Einstein time. But Einstein time, as measured by elec-
tromagnetic pulses, models the nonballistic or one and only one wave property in
that a wave front does not partake of the velocity of the source. This is the reason
why I wrote that a NSEM ﬁeld disturbance would trace the same operational linear
light-clock distance. The measuring light-clocks are in the N-world in this case. F1
is modeled as ﬁxed in the substratum and F2 has an NSP-world relative velocity.
The instant the light-pulse is reﬂected back to F1 it does not, from the N-world
viewpoint, partake of the N-world relative velocity and therefore traces out the ex-
act same apparent N-world linear path. The position F2 acts like a virtual position
having no other N-world eﬀect upon the light-pulse accept a reversal of direction.

REFERENCES

1. Dingle, H., The Special Theory of Relativity, Methuen’s Monographs on Physical
Subjects, Methuen & Co. LTD, London, 1950.

2. Herrmann, R. A., Some Applications of Nonstandard Analysis to Undergraduate
Mathematics – Inﬁnitesimal Modeling, Instructional Development Project, Mathe-
matics Dept. U. S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD 21402-5002, 1991.

3. Herrmann, R. A., Fractals and ultrasmooth microeﬀects. J. Math. Physics.,
30(1989), 805–808.

4. Herrmann, R. A., Physics is legislated by a cosmogony. Speculat. Sci. Technol.,
11(1988), 17–24.

5. Herrmann, R. A., Rigorous inﬁnitesimal modelling, Math. Japonica 26(4)(1981),
461–465.

6. Lawden, D. F., An Introduction to Tensor Calculus, Relativity and Cosmology,
John Wiley & Son, New York, 1982.

7. Prokhovnik, S. J., The Logic of Special Relativity, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1967.

8. Stroyan, K. D. and Luxemburg, W. A. J. 1976. Introduction to the Theory of
Inﬁnitesimals, Academic Press, New York.

9. Herrmann, R. A., Ultralogics and More, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/
math.GM/9903081 and math.GM/9903082, 1992.

10. Davis M., Applied Nonstandard Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1977.

32

11. Herrmann, R. A., Operator equations, separation of variables and relativistic
alterations, Internat. J. Math. & Math. Sci., 18(1995), 59–62.

12. Herrmann, R. A., An operator equation and relativistic alterations in the time
for radioactive decay, Internat. J. Math. & Math. Sci., 19(1996), 397–402.
{June 15, 1992; revised July 10, 1992, May 29, 1993 and 21 Sept 1993.}

33

