0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

5

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
0
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Nature of Relativistic Phenomena

Yong-Gwan Yi∗

October 23, 2012

Abstract

In this paper it is shown that the relativistic equations of motion follow
quite directly from the aberration of starlight. Based upon this fact, the
author not only reworks some of the established thought, but adds new in-
sights to the understanding of relativistic phenomena. Physics, rather than
mathematics, is emphasized for understanding the relativistic phenomena.

1

Introduction

The special theory of relativity is now believed to apply to all forms of interactions
except large-scale gravitational phenomena. Daily it is employed by scientists in
their consideration of precise atomic phenomena, in nuclear physics, and above all
in high-energy physics. It serves as a touchstone in modern physics for the possible
forms of interaction between fundamental particles. However, it was resisted for
many years because of the second postulate on which the theory is based. The
second postulate, which states that the speed of light is independent of the motion
of its source, destroys the concept of time as a universal variable independent of the
spatial coordinates. Because this was a revolutionary and unpalatable idea, many
attempts were made to invent theories that would explain all the observed facts
without this assumption.

This work is another such attempt. The argument begins by pointing out that
the physics of relativistic phenomena can be looked upon as having its origin in the
aberration of starlight, leading to a phenomenological derivation of the relativistic
equations of motion. It will be shown that this alternative point of view is rather
natural for describing the physics of relativistic phenomena.
It should be noted
that the proposed interpretation is based upon the Galilean concept of time and
is consistent with the observed facts of importance related to the special theory of
relativity. This paper will show how the interpretation can be ﬁtted into the frame-
work of modern physics. However, it is not intended to be a discussion concerning
the general theory of relativity.

∗Han-Shin Apt. 121-402, Dobong-dong Dobong-ku, Seoul, 132-012 Korea

1

2 Ether Drift

We consider the well-known experiments related to the speed of light in a moving
medium [1]. The Michelson-Morley experiment was undertaken to investigate the
possible existence of the ether drift. In principle, it consisted merely of observing
whether there was any shift of the fringes in the Michelson interferometer when the
instrument was turned through an angle of 90◦. The negative result shows that it
is impossible to demonstrate the existence of the ether drift. This was interpreted
as demonstrating the absence of the ether drift. However, it could have been due
to the experiment itself being incapable of demonstrating the ether drift.

Fizeau performed an important experiment to determine whether the speed
of light in a material medium is aﬀected by motion of the medium relative to
the source and observer. In the Fizeau experiment, an alteration of the speed of
light was observed, which was in reasonable agreement with the value given by
Fresnel’s dragging formula. From a comparison of the Fizeau experiment with the
Michelson-Morley experiment, we realize that the arrangement of the Michelson-
Morley experiment makes it impossible to detect the ether drift. In the Michelson-
Morley experiment, both the source and the observer are at rest while the ether is in
uniform motion through the arrangement. As viewed from the Fizeau experiment,
the ether drift cannot be deﬁned in this arrangement. The circumstances are the
same as for the Earth, whose motion cannot be deﬁned without an extraterrestrial
reference. Even if the Michelson-Morley experiment is performed, for example, in
water ﬂowing rapidly in one direction, the null result is expected since the velocity
of the water ﬂow cannot be deﬁned in this arrangement. In the case of sound under
the same circumstances, no change of pitch was observed, as it should be [2].

We should mention the Michelson-Morley experiment performed with an ex-
traterrestrial light source. Apparently, the motion of the light source relative to the
half-silvered mirror is ineﬀective in changing the interference pattern. As shown in
the Michelson interferometer, only the motion of the half-silvered mirror relative to
one of the other two mirrors can give rise to an eﬀect on the interference fringes. It
is clear that the point of splitting into two beams plays the role of an eﬀective source
in that interferometer. The experiment using sunlight diﬀers from the original in
the domain of taste rather than coverage, if any.

3 Twin Paradox

In 1905, Einstein showed that the Lorentz transformation which preserves the speed
of light in all uniformly moving systems requires revision of the usual concepts of
time and simultaneity [3]. He was thus led to the result that a moving clock runs
more slowly than a stationary clock. However, such a concept of time gives rise
to the twin paradox. In mechanics, it is impossible by means of any physical mea-
surements to label a coordinate system as intrinsically “stationary” or “uniformly
moving”; one can only infer that the two systems are moving relative to each other.
According to this fundamental postulate, like velocity and distance, time must also
be symmetric with respect to the two systems. This is what the twin paradox points
out.

2

We consider the experiments performed to verify the phenomenon of time dila-
tion. The mean lifetime of π−mesons was determined using the decay of π−mesons
at rest in a scintillator [4].
In this method, the mean lifetime of the π−mesons
was determined by a direct measurement of the time required to decay. In order
to investigate the phenomenon of time dilation, an attempt to measure the mean
lifetime of a rapidly moving π−meson beam was undertaken [5]. An experiment of
this nature was arranged to measure the attenuation in ﬂight of a π−meson beam
of known lifetime using a scintillation counter telescope of a variable length. The
measured mean free path was divided by the mean velocity to get the mean life-
time. The mean lifetime thus obtained, when the Lorentz time dilation was taken
into account, was in fair agreement with the data measured in the rest system
of π−mesons. It is generally recognized that these experiments have veriﬁed the
phenomenon of time dilation.

However, the latter experiment has an ambiguous bearing on the phenomenon
of time dilation. In that experiment, the relativistic correction was made directly
in the mean lifetime, keeping the particle velocity intact. This is otherwise without
example in high-energy physics experiment, where the relativistic correction has
been made in the form of the four-velocity.

The four-velocity is deﬁned as the rate of change of the path of a particle with
respect to its proper time. Based upon this deﬁnition, one can say that the four-
velocity results from the Lorentz time dilation, and hence they are compatible.
However, it is evident that the current deﬁnition disregarding the dilation of its
proper path is not consistent with experimental fact. Observation of the dilated
mean free path of π−meson beam with respect to its proper lifetime points out that
once the Lorentz time dilation is taken into account, there is no room for the four-
velocity formulation. Either the time dilation or the four-velocity, not both of them,
can be consistent with experimental observation. This means that the time dilation
and the four-velocity are alternatives, so that the four-velocity cannot result from
the Lorentz time dilation. In this regard, the question arises: In time and velocity,
which component would appear dilated to the observer phenomenologically? To see
the truth, the mean lifetime of a rapidly moving π−meson beam must be determined
by direct measurement. The mean lifetime so determined will be the same as the
data measured in the rest system of π−mesons if what the twin paradox points out
is correct. Although such an experiment was probably undertaken, there does not
seem to be a publication that describes the experiment of this kind. In spite of this,
we can infer the result from a comparison with astronomical observation.

In 1971, Shapiro observed that the components making up the nucleus of radio
source 3C279 were in motion. Surprisingly, the speed of the components was esti-
mated to be about ten times the speed of light [6]. The activity, which occurs on a
scale of milliseconds of arc, could not have been detected with the techniques avail-
able before the early 1970s. Special attention was immediately given to observation
of the mysterious phenomenon, from which some other quasars such as 3C273 also
turned out to be superluminal sources. From direct observations of the distances
traveled and the times required, it is reported that their nuclei contain components
apparently ﬂying apart at speeds exceeding the speed of light. The concept of the
speed of light as a limiting speed of material particles, which has been conﬁrmed in
physics, has been questioned in astrophysics.

3

The only diﬀerence would be their stages and their interpretations therein. On
the comparison of the experiment with the observation, we come to see that, phe-
nomenologically, the velocity component itself would appear dilated to the observer,
keeping the time intact. It is certain therefore without requiring explicit experiment
that the mean lifetime of a rapidly moving π−meson beam obtained by direct mea-
surement is equivalent to the mean lifetime in the π−rest system. This constitutes
a veriﬁcation of the prediction of equal ageing of the twins in relative motion and
thus resolves the twin paradox. It conﬁrms fully that the phenomenon of time di-
lation is nothing else but illusion existing only in mathematical formalism. From
a logical point of view there is no a priori reason to attach any absolute reference
of the phenomenon to one system in preference to the other system as long as it
depends only on the relative velocity between them. Ironically the relativistic expla-
nation violates the relativity of uniformly moving systems and artiﬁcially obscures
the physics of the situation they reveal.

4 Aberration of Starlight

The Bradley observation of the aberration of starlight seems to be even more impor-
tant to modern physics than previously thought. This is because the aberration of
starlight can be interpreted as expressing the covariant equations of motion leading
to the physics of relativistic phenomena. The phenomenological point of view that
the origin of relativistic phenomena lies in the physics of aberration of starlight is
discussed in this section.

In 1727, Bradley discovered an apparent motion of the star which he explained
as due to the motion of the Earth in its orbit. This eﬀect, known as aberration,
is quite distinct from the well-known displacements of the nearer stars known as
parallax. The eﬀect of parallax is to cause the stars which are observed in a direction
perpendicular to the plane of the Earth’s orbit to move in small circles, and from
their angular diameters the distances of the stars are computed. Aberration, which
depends on the Earth’s velocity, also causes the stars observed in this direction to
appear to move in circles. Here, however, the circles are the same for all stars,
whether near or distant. Bradley’s explanation of this eﬀect was that the apparent
direction of the light reaching the Earth from a star is altered by the motion of the
Earth in its orbit. The observer and his or her telescope are being carried along
with the Earth at a velocity of about 29 km/s, and if this motion is perpendicular to
the direction of the star, the telescope must be tilted slightly toward the direction
of motion from the position it would have if the Earth were at rest. The reason for
this is much the same as that involved when a little girl walking in the rain must
tilt her umbrella forward to keep the rain oﬀ her feet.

Let the vector v represent the velocity of the Earth relative to a system of
coordinates ﬁxed in the solar system, and c that of the light relative to the solar
system. Then the velocity of the light relative to the Earth has the direction of c′,
which is the vector diﬀerence between c and v. This is the direction in which the
telescope must be pointed to observe the star image on the axis of the instrument.
When the Earth’s motion is perpendicular to the direction of the star, the relation
c′2 − v2 = c2 follows from the vector diﬀerence. Setting c′ = k(v)c, this means

4

that the observation is performed at speed c′ greater than when the Earth is at
rest. Keeping in mind that the speed of light can be a measure of speed, the
altered speed of observation is conjectured to give rise to the same eﬀect as would
be the case if the velocity scale were correspondingly altered at the moment of
observation. Accordingly, the velocity of the Earth is considered to be v′ = k(v)v in
relation to the observation. Taking this velocity of the Earth, the Bradley relation
becomes c′2 − v′2 = c2, from which we can obtain in a closed form the velocity scale
k(v) = 1/(1 − v2/c2)1/2(≡ γ). The appearance of the γ−factor as the velocity scale
has nothing to do with relativity but rather is of a purely observational nature. As
a consequence of this consideration, the relations for the angle of aberration α can
be written as

sin α = β,

cos α = (1 − β 2)1/2,

tan α = β/(1 − β 2)1/2,

(1)

where β = v/c.

At this point it may be of some interest to check the diﬀerence between the
present interpretation and the relativistic explanation of the aberration of starlight.
In the present interpretation, the velocity of the Earth and the velocity of light
relative to it are respectively assumed to be γv and γc, while the velocity of light
relative to the solar system at rest is c. If the distance from the star to the solar
system is R, the distance to the Earth is given by R/ cos α = γR, and the time
required to reach the Earth is R/c. These assumptions are in contrast with those
in the relativistic explanation. In the relativistic explanation, the velocity of the
Earth and the velocity of light relative to it are v and c, whereas the velocity of the
solar system at rest is assumed to be c/γ [7]. Thus, in the relativistic explanation,
the time required to reach the Earth is given by γR/c. The diﬀerence can be seen
by noting that both the light path reaching the Earth in the aberration of starlight
and the propagation path perpendicular to the ether drift in the Michelson-Morley
experiment can be represented by the same geometric ﬁgure. When viewed from
the present interpretation, the result of the Michelson-Morley experiment depends
solely on whether the speed of light is aﬀected while traveling the path parallel to
the ether drift. This is why comparison has been made with the Fizeau experiment
in section 2.
It is interesting to note that in spite of their diﬀerence, both of
interpretations give the same relations for the angle of aberration.

Having revealed the hidden nature of the Bradley observation, we are now in a
position to discuss its eﬀect on the equation of motion. From the vector diﬀerence
between c′ and v′ for the velocity of light, a derivative with respect to time gives
the covariant equation of accelerations

dc′
dt

−

dv′
dt

=

dc
dt

= 0.

(2)

The scalar product of the accelerations in this equation with the corresponding
velocity vectors is written

c′ dc′
dt

− v′ dv′
dt

= 0,

that is,

c

d(γc)

dt

− v

d(γv)

dt

= 0.

(3)

Equation (3) can also be obtained by diﬀerentiating the Bradley relation c′2 − v′2 =
c2 with respect to time. The kinetic energy T is deﬁned in general to be such

5

that the scalar product of the force and the velocity is the time rate of change of
T . In comparing (3) with the deﬁnition of T , the relativistic expression of kinetic
energy T = mc2/(1 − β 2)1/2 is seen [8]. In the present discussion, the mass has
been treated as a constant [9]. The Bradley relation c′2 − v′2 = c2 can therefore be
expressed in terms of the kinetic energy and momentum, which is seen to be the
covariant energy-momentum equation with T 2/c2 − p2 = m2c2. This shows how the
relativistic equations of motion can be derived on Newtonian mechanical grounds.
Since the aberration eﬀect is attributed to the ﬁnite velocity of observation which
is aﬀected by motion of the Earth, it is thought that relativistic phenomena would
appear due to the measurement velocity being aﬀected by velocity of a moving body,
like a vector diﬀerence between velocities. This explains why relativistic phenomena
appear more pronounced as the velocities of particle approach the velocity of light
and why the velocity of light appears in the equations of motion of material particles.
The conjecture naturally arises: Is then the relativity eﬀect just an eﬀect due to
the measurement velocity being aﬀected by velocity of a moving body? Understood
as such, relativistic physics is identiﬁed itself as denoting the branch of physics
which takes into consideration even the measurement velocity relative to the particle
velocity for a moving particle with velocity not small compared with the velocity
of light. In this regard, a particle speed as fast as or faster than light, apart from
the possibility of existence, is unobservable in a direct way because such a particle
goes beyond the observation speed.

We suppose that the Earth is uniformly moving with velocity v with respect to
the solar system. For simplicity, let the origins of the coordinates of the Earth and
the solar system be coincident at time t = 0, at which time the star emits a pulse
of light. If this pulse of light reaches the solar system at a time t, the propagation
paths of the light to the solar system and the Earth are respectively given by R = ct
and R′ = c′t. Let x and x′ be the respective projections of R and R′ along the
direction of v. Then the geometric ﬁgure of the aberration of starlight gives

c2t2 − x2 = c′2t2 − x′2

(4)

It is straightforward to generalize the discussion to the two inertial reference frames
S and S ′ with a relative velocity v between them, instead of the solar system and
the Earth. The Bradley observation of the aberration of starlight suggests taking c′t
as a fourth coordinate in place of ct′ as used in the Lorentz relation. The fact that
the geometric ﬁgure of the aberration of starlight draws the covariant equation of
coordinates seems to me to form the physical background for the point of view that
the origin of relativistic phenomena lies in the physics of aberration of starlight.

The Bradley relation in equation (4) stands in contrast with the Lorentz relation
leading to the Lorentz transformation with respect to the concepts of time and the
speed of light. In these relations, which relation is consistent with the experimen-
tal facts? The Bradley relation describes the simultaneous arrival of light signals
starting from the star at the two points x and x′ in relative motion. In contrast,
the Lorentz relation ﬁnds a complete interpretation in a spreading spherical wave
which starts from the star and reaches the point x at time t and the point x′ at time
t′ sequentially. Figure 1 shows the diﬀerence between the Bradley relation and the
Lorentz relation. Recalling the Doppler eﬀect, there is no doubt that the velocity

6

of light is not independent of the motion of its source. The invariance of the veloc-
ity of light in all uniformly moving systems, which plays so decisive a role in the
Lorentz transformation, has an ambiguous bearing on the experimental facts. To
be consistent with observation for the aberration of starlight, the Doppler shift, and
the Michelson-Morley experiment, the current explanation should be replaced by
the restricted, but more accurate, explanation that the velocity of light appears the
same in all uniformly moving systems if and only if the source and the observer are
both in a given system. It is then apparent that the Lorentz relation has no bearing
on the two systems in relative motion. In this regard, the Lorentz transformation
turns out to be a result of an ill-conceived marriage.

The fourth component of the Lorentz transformation is worthy of mention. The
four coordinates in the Earth can be related to those in the solar system by the
Lorentz transformation using equation (4) instead of the Lorentz relation. The
fourth component of this transformation is written

c′t =

ct − vx/c
(1 − β 2)1/2

or

c′ =

c(1 − β · n)
(1 − β 2)1/2 ,

(5)

where n is a unit vector in the direction of R. Since the ratio between x and ct
is the direction cosine of the propagation path of the light with respect to v, it
can be expressed in the more familiar form of the Doppler shift formula. It is of
particular interest to note that the fourth component of this Lorentz transformation
gives a more general derivation of the relativistic formula for the Doppler shift.
Consequently it leads us to consider the transverse Doppler shift as due to the
aberration eﬀect, and thus as observed in the direction inclined at the angle of
aberration toward the direction of motion of a moving source.

We can also give a more general derivation of the expression for the angle of
aberration. The ratio between the x component and the fourth component of this
transformation can be written using the direction cosines so deﬁned as

x′
c′t

=

γ(x − vt)

γ(ct − vx/c)

or

cos θ′ =

cos θ − β
1 − β cos θ

,

(6)

which is the same expression as obtained in its most general form by Einstein.
It has been shown algebraically that two successive Lorentz transformations with
velocity parameters β1 and β2 are equivalent to a single Lorentz transformation of
parameter β = (β1 + β2)/(1 + β1β2), by multiplying the matrices of the two separate
transformations. But the ratio between the components can also be used to obtain
the law for addition of velocities. As it stands, the structure of (6) makes it obvious
that the formula for the addition of velocities is given simply by rewriting ratios of
coordinates to time in uniform velocity terms.

5 Aberration of Fields

We turn our attention to the gravitational ﬁeld of the star. One approach begins
by noting that there would be an aberration of the ﬁeld because of its ﬁnite prop-
agation velocity. If the gravitational ﬁeld propagates with the velocity of light, the
gravitational ﬁeld must suﬀer aberration, just as light does. It is then found that

7

the aberration of the starlight expresses aberration of the gravitational ﬁeld of the
star.

Let v be the velocity of the Earth with respect to the solar system and R be
the radius vector from the star to the solar system. If the star is in a direction
perpendicular to the motion of the Earth, the length of the path along which the
light propagates to the Earth is given by R/ cos α = R/(1 − β 2)1/2, where α is the
angle of aberration. The gravitational ﬁeld of the star can therefore be written in
terms of the retarded and present positions of the moving Earth as

R2 (cid:21)t−R/c
(cid:20) GM

and

(cid:20) GM (1 − β 2)

R2

(cid:21)t

,

(7)

where M is the mass of the star. In this equation, the subscript means that the
quantity in the bracket is to be evaluated at that time. The gravitational ﬁeld at
the point of observation at time t is determined by the state of motion of the Earth
at the retarded time t − R/c, for which the time of propagation of the light from
the star to the ﬁeld point just coincides with R/c. Equation (7) describes the aber-
ration of the gravitational ﬁeld occuring during the propagation. The alterations
in the direction and the magnitude of the gravitational ﬁeld are attributed to the
propagation velocity of the ﬁeld as aﬀected by the motion of the Earth during its
propagation.

We can extend this to the case where the star is not in a direction perpendicular
to the motion of the Earth. The propagation path of the light to the Earth is then
given by R′ = R(1 − β · n)/(1 − β 2)1/2, where n is a unit vector in the direction of R.
The aberration of the gravitational ﬁeld can therefore be expressed in the general
form

GM (1 − β 2)
R2(1 − β · n)2 .

(8)

If we take the path of integration to be R′, the distance from the star to the ﬁeld
point at which we determine the potential, we obtain for the gravitational potential
at the point of observation

GM (1 − β 2)1/2

R(1 − β · n)

.

(9)

Since the alteration of the gravitational ﬁeld of the star is ascribed to motion of
the Earth during its propagation, one may picture from a vector diﬀerence between
ﬁelds that the gravitational ﬁeld acting on the Earth diﬀers from that when the
Earth is at rest by acceleration which the moving Earth has during propagation.
The aberration of the gravitational ﬁeld is then described by the equation

GM
R3 R =

GM
R′3 R′ +

dv′
dt

.

(10)

The explicit form of potential energy in (9) is furnished by the scalar product
of the gravitational ﬁelds in (10) with the corresponding radius vectors. It should
be noted that the derivation of potential energy is performed in exactly the same
manner as in the covariant equation of accelerations for kinetic energy. Equations
(2) and (10) can therefore be considered as covariant formulations of Newton’s
equations of motion for describing relativistic mechanics.

8

Following the same line of reasoning, the aberration of the Coulomb ﬁeld pro-
duced by a moving electron can be expressed in the form of (8) by replacing the
gravitational charge GM by the electronic charge e.The electric ﬁeld thus obtained
is similar to the Coulomb ﬁeld of an electron in uniform motion in electrodynamics.
We now compare the Li´enard-Wiechert potential with the potential given in this
approach:

(cid:20)

e

R(1 − β · n)(cid:21)t−R/c

,

(cid:20) e(1 − β 2)1/2
R(1 − β · n)(cid:21)t

.

(11)

Since the relation of the retarded position to the present position of a moving elec-
tron is not, in general, known, the Li´enard-Wiechert potential ordinarily permits
only the evaluation of the ﬁeld in terms of retarded position and velocity of the
electron. In the present approach, the unknown eﬀect occuring during the propaga-
tion is assumed to be the aberration of the ﬁeld attributed to its ﬁnite propagation
velocity, which is aﬀected by motion of the electron. As applied to a moving source
of light, the propagation path of light to the observer, when it is written in terms
of frequency, yields an expression equal to the relativistic formula for the Doppler
shift. This favors the assumption that the unknown eﬀect occuring during the
propagation is the aberration of the Coulomb ﬁeld produced by a moving electron.
In electrodynamics, the electric ﬁeld of a moving electron divides itself into “a
velocity ﬁeld,” which is independent of acceleration, and “an acceleration ﬁeld,”
which depends linearly upon acceleration. The velocity ﬁeld is essentially static
ﬁeld, whereas the acceleration ﬁeld is typical radiation ﬁeld.
In the present ap-
proach, the Coulomb potential alone induces the velocity ﬁeld. Thus to make this
approach agree with the electric ﬁeld of a moving electron in electrodynamics, the
vector potential should be deduced solely from the radiation ﬁeld. On the assump-
tion that the relativistic correction to the velocity component of vector potential
involves the cancellation of the factor (1 − β 2)1/2 arising from the propagation path,
this deductive reasoning leads to the following forms of expression for the vector
potential:

e

c(cid:20)

v

R(1 − β · n)(cid:21)t−R/c

,

e

c(cid:20) v − (v · n)n
R(1 − β · n)(cid:21)t

.

(12)

It suggests that the component of the velocity perpendicular to n plays the role of an
eﬀective velocity in the evaluation of the vector potential. From this point of view,
we realize that the component of the velocity parallel to n has been incorporated
in the propagation path of the ﬁelds. Taking into account this geometrical image of
the velocity, it seems sensible to expect that the vector potential of (12) expresses
an eﬀect occuring during its propagation. Moreover, the vector potential describes
the transverse ﬁeld in the intuitive forms

[n · A]t = 0,

Erad = −

1

c(cid:20) ∂A
∂t (cid:21)t

=

e

c2(cid:20) n × {(n − v) × ˙v}

R(1 − β · n)2

(cid:21)t

.

(13)

When this is compared to the familiar result in electrodynamics, a factor of
(1 − β · n) is smaller than that. However, the general form of the power is given by
the time integral of radiation emitted by the charge at the retarded time and, in
the time integration, the relation between the retarded and present times dtret =

9

dt(1 − β · n) has been used [10]. Therefore, the electric ﬁeld of (13) leads to the
same form as the general expression for the energy detected at an observation point.
As a result, it is seen that this deductive scheme for the vector potential lends itself
to incorporation in the classical theory of radiation.

So far the aberration of radial ﬁelds has been discussed, nothing has been said
about the physical signiﬁcance of the aberration of uniform ﬁelds. We now consider
the motion of an electron perpendicular to a uniform magnetic ﬁeld H. Because
the motion of the electron inﬂuences the velocity of propagation of the ﬁeld, the
apparent direction of the ﬁeld acting on the electron will be tilted at an angle of
aberration toward the direction of motion of the moving electron. Thus the angle at
the ﬁeld point between the ﬁeld and the velocity of the electron would be π/2 − α,
instead of being π/2, where α is the angle of aberration. The equation of motion
under such a ﬁeld is therefore mv2/r = ev/c × H = (evH/c) sin(π/2 − α). By
using the relation in (1), we can obtain the well-known expression for the cyclotron
frequency (eH/mc)(1 − β 2)1/2, showing a new way of deriving and understanding
the cyclotron frequency.

Insight into the apparent velocity of charged particle can be provided by con-
sidering the mechanism by which the velocity of the particle is determined. An
electrostatic spectrograph to determine the velocity of an electron consists in bal-
ancing the magnetic and electric deﬂections against each other [11]. The electron
moving in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld H, perpendicularly to H, describes a circular
path of radius RH . If this electron moves in a radial electric ﬁeld E, it can describe
a circular path of radius RE. The equation of motion for the electron moving in
the ﬁelds H and E applied simultaneously is then given by balancing the centrifu-
gal force arising from the magnetic deﬂection against the centrifugal force due to
the electric deﬂection, by eERE = ev/c × HRH (= mv2). Taking into account the
aberration occuring in the form of the vector diﬀerence between v and H, the angle
at the ﬁeld point between v and H would be π/2 − α, instead of being π/2. Thus,
the equation of motion is given by cERE = vHRH sin(π/2 − α), from which the
apparent velocity of the electron is found to be cERE/HRH(1 − β 2)1/2, instead of
being cERE/HRH , where β = (ERE/HRH). In this regard, cERE/HRH , gener-
ally recognized as the velocity of the electron, is seen to be the velocity the electron
would have if the velocity of propagation of the ﬁelds were inﬁnite, thereby not
suﬀering aberration. In fact, the apparent speed of high-energy particles of γv is
frequently superluminal phenomenologically. The apparent particles’ speeds must
be a result of the ﬁelds being aﬀected by the motions of particles rather than that
of time dilation. This eﬀect, discussed as aberration of ﬁelds, furnishes physical
support for the previous conclusion that, phenomenologically, a particle velocity
itself would appear dilated to the observer, keeping its time intact. It is then only
natural that the concept of time is to be recovered.

6 Covariant Equations of Motion

One may ask whether there is a change in form of the equations of motion due to
the velocity of propagation of ﬁelds. In passing we remark that aberration of a ﬁeld
draws covariant formulation of the ﬁeld equation. We are now going to examine the

10

essential changes in physical outlook due to the velocity of propagation of ﬁelds.

Let us consider two moving systems, S and S ′, with a relative velocity between
them. From (10) we ﬁnd that the gravitational ﬁelds acting on the respective
systems can be related to each other by equating the ﬁelds on the left:

(cid:20) GM
R3 R +

dv

dt (cid:21)S

= (cid:20) GM

R3 R +

dv

dt (cid:21)S ′

.

Similarly, for electromagnetic ﬁelds,

(cid:20)eE +

ev
c

× B − F(cid:21)S

= (cid:20)eE +

ev
c

× B − F(cid:21)S ′

.

(14)

(15)

The formulations suggest an obvious generalization of the equations of motion when
the velocity of propagation of the ﬁelds is taken into consideration. Together with
the covariant energy-momentum equation [T 2/c2 − p2]S = [T 2/c2 − p2]S ′ , they show
how physical phenomena appear the same in uniformly moving systems. Consid-
ering only the motion of S ′ relative to S, Eq.
(14) goes over into the form of
(10).

In mechanics, the Lagrange equation is derived from D’Alembert’s principle. But
one may also approach the Lagrangian formulation by way of Hamilton’s principle
and attempt simply to ﬁnd a function L for which the Euler-Lagrange equations, as
obtained from the variational principle, agree with the known relativistic equations
of motion. It is usually not diﬃcult to ﬁnd a function satisfying these requirements.
However, the present approach requires in addition that the Lagrange equation
should be written in such a way as to conform to the form of (14) or (10). A
covariant formulation of the Lagrange equation should therefore have the form

(cid:20) ∂L

∂r

−

d

dt(cid:18) ∂L

∂ ˙r (cid:19)(cid:21)S

= (cid:20) ∂L

∂r

−

d

dt(cid:18) ∂L

∂ ˙r (cid:19)(cid:21)S ′

.

(16)

This means that Hamilton’s principle is written covariantly as

hδZ L dtiS

= hδZ L dtiS ′

.

(17)

If we further ask for the covariant formulation for the canonical equations of Hamil-
ton, we can predict in the same manner

(cid:20) dr

dt

−

∂H

∂p (cid:21)S

= (cid:20) dr

dt

−

∂H

∂p (cid:21)S ′

,

(cid:20) dp

dt

+

∂H

∂r (cid:21)S

= (cid:20) dp

dt

+

∂H

∂r (cid:21)S ′

.

(18)

The ﬁrst half of the Hamilton’s equations seems to be a covariant formulation in
dynamical variables of the vector diﬀerence between c and v for the velocity of light.
Continuing along these lines, in the Maxwell equations, we come to transforma-
tion equations of electromagnetic ﬁelds. As an example, we consider the ﬁelds seen
by an observer in the system S when a point charge q moves by in a straightline path
along the x direction with a velocity v. Let S ′ be the moving coordinate system of
q. The charge is at rest in this system. But when viewed from the laboratory, the

11

charge represents a current J = qv in the x direction. Amp`ere’s law can then be
written in the covariant form

(cid:20)∇ × B =

4π
c

J +

1
c

∂E

∂t (cid:21)S

= (cid:20)∇ × B =

1
c

∂E

∂t (cid:21)S ′

.

(19)

The y and z components of (19) are homogeneous equations. If we apply to these
homogeneous equations the Lorentz transformation of coordinates with [γ(ct −
βx), γ(x − vt), y, z]S = [ct, x, y, z]S ′, we obtain in the system S the equations

∂

∂x′(cid:26)γ(cid:18)Bz −

v
c

∂Bx
∂z ′ −
∂x′(cid:26)γ(cid:18)By +
∂

v
c

Ez(cid:19)(cid:27) −

Ey(cid:19)(cid:27) =
∂Bx
∂y ′ =

1
c
1
c

∂

∂t′(cid:26)γ(cid:18)Ey −
∂t′(cid:26)γ(cid:18)Ez +

∂

v
c
v
c

Bz(cid:19)(cid:27),
By(cid:19)(cid:27).

(20)

(21)

The covariance of these components of equation under the Lorentz transforma-
tion was explicitly shown by Lorentz and Einstein [12]. But it would seem that the
covariance of its x component was assumed implicitly. Its explicit transformation
can proceed as follows: “We may write the x component of this equation, using
Coulomb’s law ∇ · E = 4πq, as

∂Bz
∂y

−

∂By
∂z

=

v
c

(∇ · E) +

1
c

∂Ex
∂t

.

By multiplying this equation with γ, we are led to

∂

∂y ′(cid:26)γ(cid:18)Bz −

v
c

Ey(cid:19)(cid:27) −

∂

∂z ′(cid:26)γ(cid:18)By +

v
c

Ez(cid:19)(cid:27) =

1
c

∂Ex
∂t′

(22)

(23)

when we take into consideration the inverse Lorentz transformation of coordinates
with [ct, x, y, z]S = [γ(ct + βx), γ(x + vt), y, z]S ′.” The inverse equations diﬀer from
the Lorentz transformation equations only by a change in the sign of v, and γ−factor
is symmetric with respect to the two systems in relative motion.
In the above
equation the inverse transformation equations have been used merely as another
mathematical connection between the two sets of coordinates. Consequently, the
explicit equations of transformation are

Ex′ = Ex,

Bx′ = Bx,

Ey ′ = γ(Ey − βBz),

By ′ = γ(By + βEz),

Ez′ = γ(Ez + βBy),

Bz′ = γ(Bz − βEy).




(24)

Faraday’s law and ∇ · B = 0 can be used equivalently to obtain these equa-
tions of transformation. This completes the demonstration of the covariance of
electrodynamics.
It should be emphasized that the transformation equations of
electromagnetic ﬁeld can also be obtained in an explicitly covariant form directly
from the Maxwell equations themselves without using the transformation properties
of the ﬁeld-strength tensor of rank two.

It is remarkable that Eq. (15) is in agreement with the relation between ﬁelds
which was obtained when formulated Faraday’s law of induction. In putting Fara-
day’s law in diﬀerential form, we have found that the electric ﬁeld E′ in a coordinate

12

frame moving with a velocity v relative to the laboratory is E′ = E+v/c×B, where
E and B are the ﬁelds in the laboratory. This is consistent with what Eq. (15)
describes in a manifestly covariant form between ﬁelds in the laboratory and the
moving coordinate system of circuit.

7 Conclusion

The discussion in this paper shows that aberration of starlight is interpreted as
expressing the covariant equations of motion leading to the physics of relativis-
tic phenomena. This suggests that the origin of relativistic phenomena lies in the
physics of aberration of starlight. While the relativistic explanation is induced
by mathematical formalism, the present interpretation is deduced from physical
phenomenon. The present interpretation so deduced stands in contrast with the
relativistic explanation with regard to the concepts of time and the speed of light.
We have seen that this alternative point of view also constructs a way of deriving
familiar results. Furthermore it leads us to an understanding of relativistic phe-
nomena using a uniﬁed concept. This is obviously in contrast with the relativistic
explanation that has given rise to much controversy. In controversy, the incorrect
argument is in Einstein’s theory of relativity, which is founded upon the physically
inconsistent concepts of time and simultaneity, not in opponents’ minds pointing
them out. Paradoxically, the correct results of the theory have aggravated the situ-
ation since they led contrary to accept the physically inconsistent concepts therein
as the most consistent together with the correct mathematical results. The theory
of special relativity so developed is a result of confusion coming from mixing up the
notions, consistent and inconsistent.

References

[1] F. T. Jenkins and H. E. White, Fundamentals of Optics (McGraw-Hill, 1976)

4th ed., Chap.19.

[2] J. W. S. Rayleigh, The Theory of Sound (Dover, 1945), Vol.2, p.155.

[3] H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowsky, and H. Weyl, The Principle of Rel-

ativity (Dover, 1952), p.37.

[4] M. Jakobson, A. Shulz, and J. Steinberger, Phy. Rev. 81, 894 (1951); C. E.

Wiegand, Phy. Rev. 83, 1085 (1951).

[5] R. P. Durbin, H. H. Loar, and W. W. Havens, Jr., Phy. Rev. 88, 179 (1952).

[6] A review article in a Korean journal, “Quasar’s Jet, Faster Than Light?” Science

(1984).

[7] W. K. H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism

(Addison-Wesley, 1962), 2nd ed., p.303.

[8] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, 1950), p.202.

13

[9] C. G. Adler, Am. J. Phys. 55, 739 (1987); L. B. Okun, Physics Today (June

1989), p.31.

[10] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley & Sons, 1975), 2nd ed.,

p.668.

[11] M. M. Rogers, A. W. McReynolds, and F. T. Rogers, Jr., Phys. Rev. bf 57,

379 (1940).

[12] Reference 3, p.11; p.37.

14

star
✓
☛
✓
☛
✓
☛
☛

✓
✓
☛
☛

✓

✓

☛
☛

✓

c′t

x′

✓✓

☛
ct
☛
☛
☛
☛
x
☛☛

ct′

x′

O

star
✓
☛
✓
☛
✓
☛
☛

O

✓
✓
☛
☛

✓

✓

☛
☛

✓
✓✓

☛
ct
☛
☛
☛
☛
x
☛☛

Figure 1: Illustration of the Bradley relation and the Lorentz relation

15

