QUANTUM ENTANGLEMENT AND

QUANTUM CHROMODYNAMICS

AFSAR ABBAS

Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar-751005, India

(e-mail : afsar@iopb.res.in)

Abstract

Non-locality or entanglement is an experimentally well established prop-
erty of quantum mechanics. Here we study the role of quantum entanglement
for higher symmetry group like SU(3c), the gauge group of quantum chro-
modynamics ( QCD ). We show that the hitherto unexplained property of
conﬁnement in QCD arises as a fundamental feature of quantum entangle-
ment in SU(3c).

0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

9
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
4
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Quantum entanglement, leading to non-locality, is an experimentally well
tested aspect of quantum mechanics [1,2,3,4,5,6]. Starting with two parti-
cles, now four particle entanglement has been demonstrated [7]. Non-local
quantum entanglement forms the basis of the concept of quantum informa-
tion thereby enabling such phenomena as quantum cryptography [8], dense
coding [9], teleportation [9] and quantum computation [10].

The experimental demonstration of quantum entanglement involves po-
larization states of the photons, spin of the electrons and atoms etc. Hence
objects within U(1)em and representations of the spin SU(2) group are in-
volved. This entanglement necessarily implies non-locality. Here we would
like to study the property of quantum entanglement for representations of
higher group, in particular the group SU(3). Note that the group SU(3c)
( here the subscript c is placed to indicate color degree of freedom ) forms
the basis of the theory of strong interaction, the Quantum Chromodynam-
ics, While the electrons and photons are immune to QCD, atoms for whom
the quantum entanglement and non-locality has also been demonstrated, are
composite systems - consisting of electrons and a nucleus. A nucleus is made
up of protons and neutrons whose structure and properties are determined by
the rules of QCD. An understanding of non-locality in the quantum atomic
systems would involve an understanding of quantum entanglement in QCD.
In fact viewed in this manner, it becomes a puzzle as to why quantum non-
locality of elementary systems like the electron and the photon is the same
as in the composite systems like the atoms. How does the quantum entangle-
ment function in the QCD case to make the above possible? One should also
not forget that after all the protons and the neutrons are themselves compos-
ite systems of quarks and gluons which in turn are governed by QCD. Hence
this understanding may have implications for quantum measurements, quan-
tum cryptography, quantum teleportation and quantum computation.

As a theory of strong interaction QCD is well established both theoreti-
cally and experimentally. This is well documented in literature. ( eg. see ref.
[11] ). Herein, the protons and neutrons are made up of three constituent
quarks and the mesons are made up of a quark-antiquark pair. Note that
the quarks belong to the fundamental representation 3 of SU(3c), the gauge
group of QCD. In the colour space

3 ⊗ 3 ⊗ 3 = 1 ⊕ 8 ⊕ 8 ⊕ 10

(1)

2

3 ⊗ 3 = 1 ⊕ 8

(2)

The above coupled with the fact that single coloured quark or any other
coloured object like a gluon have not been found in nature, has led to the
hypothesis that colour is permanently conﬁned and that colour singlet ob-
jects are only found in nature. This so called colour singlet conﬁnement
hypothesis is well tested experimentally. Right from the early days of QCD
there have been intense eﬀorts to prove the conﬁnement hypothesis in QCD.
There been intriguing hints of conﬁnement in some interpretations, however
as of now there has been no deﬁnitive proof of conﬁnement in QCD. It is
widely expected that conﬁnement arises due to some non-perturbative prop-
erty of QCD. But, as to what it is, nobody knows. Hence the problem of
conﬁnement is still an open one in QCD.

When three quarks or a quark-antiquark come together only colour singlet
representations are observed. Hence in the canonical picture it is proposed
that in the colour space while the singlet has a ﬁnite mass, the octet, decuptet
( and all other higher representations arising in multiquark systems ) are
inﬁnitely heavy and hence do not contribute to the low energy spectrum.
Also the triplet representation ie. the free quark becomes inﬁnitely heavy
when free. Hence the singlets have ﬁnite mass and the coloured masses are
inﬁnitely heavy [11,12]. Thus it has been a long standing puzzle as to how
inﬁnitely heavy free objects can come together in a size of 1 fm to give ﬁnite
mass bound states.

To appreciate the point further, let us go to the hidden colour concept in
the multiquark system. When a neutron and a proton come together to form
a bound state of deuteron of approximate size of 2 fm, then at the centre in
a region less than a fm or so they should overlap to appear like a six quark
bag. As per the colour singlet hypothesis the 6-quark bag looks like,

|6q >=

1
√5|1 > |1 > +

2
√5|8 > |8 >

(3)

where |1 > represents a 3-quark cluster which is singlet in colour space
and |8 > represents the same as octet in colour space. Hence |8 > |8 > is
overall colour singlet. This part is called the hidden colour because as per
conﬁnement ideas of QCD these octets cannot be separated out asymptot-
ically and so manifest themselves only within the 6-q colour-singlet system

3

[13]. Group theoretically the author had earlier obtained the hidden colour
components in 9- and 12-quark systems [14,15]. The author found that the
hidden colour component of the 9-q system is 97.6% while the 12-q system
is 99.8% ie. practically all coloured. These 9- and 12-quark conﬁgurations
have been found to be relevant in nuclear physics for the A=3,4 nuclei 3H,
3He and 4He.

Now the problem is that three inﬁnitely heavy quarks come together
to form a ﬁnite mass colour singlet object while at the same time forming
inﬁnite mass octet and decuptet states. When two such colour singlet objects
as in eq. 3 come together both the individual singlet as well as octet parts
contribute. How come 6-q singlet arises due to two ﬁnite mass colour singlets
and two inﬁnite mass colour octet objects, both of which contribute similar
amounts to the total mass of the 6-q system? Similar problems persist for
the 9-q and the 12-q systems [14,15].

Note that what we are doing here is identical to the conﬁguration mixing
problem in quantum mechanics - in particular nuclear physics. To determine
various properties in nuclear physics one ﬁnds that one has to mix several
states with a particular quantum number to obtain agreement with the ex-
periments. The conﬁgurations which mix to give a particular state are all
degenerate or very close in energy.
It is always found that conﬁgurations
which are separated by large energy gaps do not contribute signiﬁcantly to
to a particular state.
In principle one has an inﬁnite dimensional Hilbert
space, however only a ﬁnite number of conﬁgurations are known to mix to
give a state of good quantum number which is physically relevant. Hence
in quantum mechanics if any conﬁgurations are inﬁnite apart in energy then
they are inﬁnitely suppressed in the mixed ﬁnal state. Therefore it is a puzzle
here is as to how the two 3-q states conﬁgurations the singlet and the octet,
which are inﬁnite energy apart in energy manage to mix in the 6-q system.
However this is precisely what conﬁnement means for the 6-q system. Now
looking back at eqns 1 and 2 we notice that for conﬁnement in the case of
baryons and mesons the same problem of conﬁguration mixing arises. So
how does this come about? Thus the conﬁnement problem should be viewed
as a fundamental outstanding problem in quantum mechanics.

As shown above, for the ground state hadrons at temperature T=0, the
singlet states have ﬁnite energies and the coloured states 3, 8, 10, 27 etc are
all expelled to inﬁnite energies. So far there has been no clue as to why it is
so in QCD, though there have been several model calculations indicating this

4

feature [11,12]. Let us now leave the T=0 region and proceed to some ﬁnite
temperature region and study the problem there. Though it has never been
explicitly demonstrated even in a toy model calculation, there is a common
feeling that at ﬁnite temperatures too the same inﬁnite separation between
the singlet and the coloured objects would persist.

Recently we have looked at this speciﬁc problem [16]. We looked at the
role of higher representations like 8-plet, 27-plet etc. for large hadronic sys-
tems like quark stars and objects created in high energy heavy ion collisions.
The orthogonality relation for the associated characters χ(p,q) of the (p,q)

multiplet of the group SU(3)c with the measure function ζ(φ, ψ) is [16]

ZSUC (3)

dφ dψ ζ (φ, ψ) χ⋆

(p,q) (φ, ψ) χ(p′,q′) (φ, ψ) = δpp′δqq′

Let us now introduce the generating function Z G as

Z G(T, V, φ, ψ) = Xp,q

Z(p,q)
d(p, q)

χ(p,q)(φ, ψ)

with

(4)

(5)

(6)

Z(p,q) = tr(p,q) hexp(cid:16)−β ˆH0(cid:17)i

Z(p,q) is the canonical partition function. The many-particle-states which
belong to a given multiplet (p,q) are used in the statistical trace with the
free hamiltonian ˆH0, d(p,q) is its dimensionality and β is the inverse of
the temperature T. The projected partition function Z(p,q) can be obtained
by using the orthogonality relation for the characters. Hence the projected
partition function for any representation (p,q) is

Z(p,q) = d(p, q)ZSU (3)c

dφ dψ ζ (φ, ψ) χ⋆

(p,q)(φ, ψ)Z G (T, V, φ, ψ)

(7)

Once we have the partition function for any representation Z(p, q), then
any thermodynamical quantity of interest can be calculated. For example
the energy

E(p, q) = T 2 ∂
∂T

ln Z(p, q).

(8)

In ref.

[16] we projected out diﬀerent representations like singlet (0,0),
octet (1, 1), 27-plet (2, 2) etc. on these large hadrons. The most interesting

5

result we obtained is that for large values of T V 1/3 ( where V is a measure of
the size of the composite object ) all representations ; singlet, octet, 27-plet
etc are all degenerate in energy ( ie they all have the same energy ) with
the unprojected state. There is nothing which favours the colour-singlet
representation over the colour-octet at high temperatures. At the same time
we also found that our projection technique at low temperatures is able to
discriminate between the singlet and the octet states etc by clearly favouring
the singlet state over others which are all expelled to inﬁnite energies..

This result is quite general and at high enough temperatures represents
the generic property of QCD that all representations have the same energy
[16]. Only as the temperature drops do the singlets ﬁnd themselves favoured
over the other colour states and all the coloured states are expelled to inﬁnite
energies.

What is our singlet state at ﬁnite temperature? It is degenerate in en-
ergy with respect to all coloured states. This colour singlet is made from
conﬁgurations like 1 ⊗ 1, 8 ⊗ 8, 27 ⊗ 27 etc, that is, all permitted coloured
states which can come together to give a singlet. Note that in the said paper
[16] we had looked at the chemical potential zero state. We have found that
the same holds for non-zero chemical potential as well. Since all these have
the same energy, as per the conﬁguration mixing idea in quantum mechan-
ics, at ﬁnite temperature there is nothing barring them from contributing to
the colour singlet object. How this signiﬁcant eﬀect at ﬁnite temperature
manifests itself at T=0 is what we shall discuss below.

As per the standard picture of cosmology the Universe was much hotter
at early times. Hence at high enough temperature in the Early Universe as
per our calculation in QCD [16], all the coloured states must have existed and
were degenerate with the colour singlet states. Being degenerate in energy all
kind of conﬁguration mixing giving a particular quantum states were allowed
quantum mechanically. Hence, the 6-q state as given by eq. 3 was a quantum
mechanically permitted conﬁguration mixed state.In this particular case in
the Early Universe clearly the mixing conﬁgurations were the singlet and
the octet.
It was at this stage in the Early Universe that the two states,
|1 > with another |1 > and |8 > with another |8 > got entangled quantum
mechanically. Similar things happened for all other possible states. Hence a
3-q colour singlet state was an entangled state of three diﬀerent |3 > coloured
states at that temperature. And so on.
As the Universe cooled as shown by us [16], the colour singlet states would

6

come down in energy while the coloured states would be expelled to inﬁnite
energies. And this happens to be the physical situation at present. Hence
today when the |6 − q > state has components |1 > |1 > and |8 > |8 >,
it is because the system remembers that it was entangled in this manner in
the Early Universe. It is a manifestation of quantum entanglement of these
states in the Early Universe which manifests itself as conﬁnement in QCD
at present. We can argue in the same manner for all possible colour singlet
states available at present. Hence we propose here that conﬁnement in QCD
at present arises as a result of quantum entanglement in SU(3c) at ﬁnite
temperature in the Early Universe.

Note that quantum entanglement in the case of the spin properties of
electrons and photon manifests itself as non-locality. In the case of QCD,
as shown here, quantum entanglement appears as the local colour conﬁne-
ment. It is quantum correlation which is important. Non-locality or locality
depends upon the quantum property under consideration,

Note that the signiﬁcant eﬀect of the quantum entanglement in QCD
leading to conﬁnement is that this is a local eﬀect, meaning that it is ensures
that QCD entanglement acts only within a distance of a fermi for a nucleon
and a few fermis for a nucleus. This ensures that whether you use an electron
( or a photon ) beam, the quantum entanglement eﬀects as studied in the
two slit experiments or the EPR kind of experiments, the eﬀect would be the
same if you used an atomic beam instead. Had the quantum entanglement
eﬀect in QCD been any diﬀerent than to give conﬁnement in a ﬁnite size,
the eﬀects for the Universe today would have been unimaginably diﬀerent!
Actually this fact should be seen as experimental conﬁrmation of the ideas
presented here.

In summary, we emphasize our recent result in the study of QCD at ﬁnite
temperature, that all states - coloured as well as singlet are degenerate at
ﬁnite temperatures [16]. This allows for all kind of quantum conﬁguration
mixing giving a particular state in the Early Universe. Hence these conﬁg-
urations get quantum mechanically entangled. As the Universe cooled to
reach the present status of ﬁnite mass colour singlet states and inﬁnite mass
coloured states, the colour singlet states remember as to how they were made
up of which coloured entangled states when the Universe was hot. And con-
tinues to behave that way at present. Hence conﬁnement in QCD at present,
arises as a result of quantum entanglement in QCD at ﬁnite temperature in
the Early Universe.

7

References

1. J F Clauser and A Shimony, Rep Prog Phys 41 (1978) 1881
2. A Aspect, P Grangier and G Roger, Phys Rev Lett 49 (1982) 91
3. W Tittel, J Brendel, H Zbinden and N Gisin, Phys Rev Lett 81 (

1998) 3563

4. G Weihs, T Jennewein, C Sunon, H Weinfurter and A Zeilinger, Phys

Rev Lett 81 ( 1998) 5039

5. P G Kwiat, E Waks, A G White, I Appelbaum and P H Eberhard,

Phys Rev A 60 ( 1999) R773

6. S Duerr, T Nonn and G Rempe, Nature 395 (1998) 23
7. C A Sackett, D Kielpinski, B E King, C Langer, V Meyer, C J Myatt,
M Rowe, Q A Turchette, W M Itano, D J Wineleand and C Monroe, Nature
404 (2000) 256

8. A K Ekert, Phys Rev Lett 69 (1992) 1293
9. C Bennett et al, Phys Rev Lett 70 (1993) 1895
10. Ed.- D DiVencenzo, E Knill, R LaFamme and W Zurek, Proc R Soc

Lon Ser A 1969 (1998)

11. R E Marshak, ” Conceptual foundations of modern particle physics”,

World Scientiﬁc Pub Ltd ( Singapore ) 1993

12. C Bender, Phys Rep 75 (1981) 205
13. V A Matveev and P Sorba, Lett Nuovo Cim 20 (1977) 435
14. Afsar Abbas, Phys Lett B 167 (1986) 150
15. Afsar Abbas, Prog Part Nucl Phys 20 (1988) 181
16. Afsar Abbas,Lina Paria and Samar Abbas, Eur Phys J C 14(2000)695

Journal electronic version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s100520000395

8

