0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

0
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Time and the laws of Nature

Alexey Mazur∗

Abstract

What is time? Why does it ”ﬂow” and why are we sure that it ﬂows from past
towards future? Why is there such a gigantic distinction between the Past of our world,
which we believe to be ﬁxed, and the Future, which we consider undetermined? And
this is in spite of the fact that almost all physical laws are time-symmetric! Why does
previously undetermined ”Future” acquire its steadiness as it passes the moment called
”the Present”? Perhaps, these questions are partially answered in the considerations
below.

Let us retract from our particular Universe and think about what kind of laws can
in principle govern the development of universes. As a universe, we will understand any
world, even an imaginary one, that can have diﬀerent states and has laws of transition
from one state to another as ”time” passes by. Generally speaking, such laws can be
probabilistic, i.e. they set the probabilities of transition from one particular state to
another.

Let us group these laws in categories on the basis of their respect to time.
The ﬁrst, and the most widespread in our world, category is the category of bilaterally
deterministic laws. ”Bilaterally” means that these laws determine unambiguously what
was the precursor and what will be the successor to a given state.
(For the sake of
simplicity, we will assume time discrete.)

The second possible type of law embraces bilaterally undeterministic (probabilistic)
laws. In other words, starting from a given present state, we can arrive, with a certain
probability, to a number of diﬀerent states. The present state, in its turn, can be the
result of evolution of several possible states in past, again with certain probabilities.
(The case of complete chaos falls precisely into this category.)

Laws of the third type, which we intend to discuss in detail, are unilaterally deter-
ministic laws. This means that such a law will uniquely prescribe what a given state will
evolve into. However, the present state itself can originate from diﬀerent states in past.
At the ﬁrst glance, one could think of laws of the fourth category, i.e. laws that ﬁx
the ancestor to a given state but is probabilistic in respect to its successors. However,
since the direction of time axis is subjective, this category is identical to the third one,
which will be discussed later in more detail.

An example of the universe evolving in compliance with the third type of laws is given
by the famous Conway’s Game of Life. Let me brieﬂy describe it. A 2D square grid is

∗E-mail: mazur@sol.ru

1

populated by a colony of tips, each tip living in one cell. If a tip has two or three neighbors,
it survives and proceeds to the next generation. Tips with zero or one neighbor die of
”loneliness”, while those with more than three neighbors die of ”overcrowding”. New
tips are born in cells contiguous to exactly three living tips. The laws of evolution in this
world are more than simple, with every next generation being unambiguously determined
by the previous one; the development of colonies can turn out very interesting.

However, it is plain to see that it is far from an easy task to restore the previous state
of a given one. Moreover, there can be a multitude of them. Now think of a researcher
who watches how these states turn into one another but he watches this backward in time.
He is trying to determine the laws this evolution follows but at best he can deduce only
probabilistic distributions to obtain this or that state from a given one.

What does it look similar to?

Now I proceed to my principal statement: the laws of our world are of
unilaterally deterministic nature, if we choose ”from future
to past” as the correct direction of the time axis.

Apparently, the combination of unilaterally and bilaterally deterministic laws results
in the unilaterally deterministic world, therefore the majority of the known laws does
not determine the general nature of our universe. Moreover, the majority of laws are
known to be CP-even and thus can be classiﬁed as laws of the ﬁrst or second category.
(As a matter of fact, I am deeply convinced that there are no laws of the second kind
in our universe. Otherwise, if there were several alternatives to past, how could we re-
member the only one of them, known as ”the Past”?) The only exclusion I am aware of
(I apologize for my possible ignorance) is the weak interaction. Evidently, it is the weak
interaction that possesses the unilaterally deterministic nature and, in absence of the
competitors, determines the unilateral nature of our universe. This explains the enor-
mous diﬀerence between the past and the future, which is clearly apparent to any of us.
We do remember our past, because it is uniquely determined by the present. We know
that millions of years ago the Earth was inhabited by dinosaurs but no one has even a
slightest idea who will occupy the Earth million years from now. We can ”remember”
and accumulate information because the past is strictly determined. Almost entire (see
below more on ”almost”) information about the past is contained in the present. But not
the information on the future. If the laws of nature were bilaterally deterministic, there
would be no chance of any slightest development (in our understanding of this word).
Time would be simply another dimension of the space, though quite a peculiar one.

Now - several speculative remarks on why our Universe is what it is and what con-

clusions can be drawn from the above discussion.

1. Of course, one might seem quite naive to tackle this ”why” question, but nonethe-
less I suggest doing this on the basis of assumption that the world is designed in such
a way that it ensures the existence of OBSERVERS. In other worlds, even if they exist,
there is nobody to ask this question. So, starting from universal CPT conservation,
one can conclude that in the world built of antimatter time will ﬂow in the opposite
direction.
in this world the future is ﬁxed, while the past can have alternatives.
So, the well known problem ”how to determine by means of radiowave communication
whether you are talking to a creature built of matter or antimatter” no longer arises.
Indeed, such a contact is just impossible, since the same signal will be considered emit-
ted by both parties (by an antenna - at the one end, by synchronously distinct atoms
towards the antenna - at the other). The information exchange is simply impossible.

I.e.

2

But nevermind, there seem to be no problems with antimatter creatures in our world by
the virtue of almost absolute absence of the antimatter itself. But since the antimatter
has ”time-opposite” nature, it introduces indeterminacy into our past. Obviously, it is
matter-to-antimatter relation that dictates the relation between indeterminacy in past
and future. These two forms of disproportion - between matter and antimatter content
of our universe, and between determinacy in past and future - are not only connected,
but also necessitate one another.

2. One should undertake a search for some relatively simple laws that the weak

interaction follows in the ”backward time”.

3. If there exist only ﬁnite number of states of universe, there must also exist special
states, called ”Gardens of Eden”, that have (in the backward time) successors but do
not have any precursor (if some states have more than one precursors, then there are no
precursors left for some of the other). For the usual direction of the time axis it means
that there is NO SINGLE state that our present state can evolve into. That is, ”Garden
of Eden” for us is the apocalypse in its direct and literal meaning. In the Game of Life
such ”Gardens of Eden” have been found. This problem is however removed in the case
of inﬁnite number of states. (An example: a universe, whose states are real numbers
from 0 to 1. The evolution law: take the inﬁnite decimal fraction that represents this
number and erase the ﬁrst decimal digit. The resulting number represents the next state
of the universe. It is clear that every state of this universe has ten precursors.)

4. The model of unilaterally deterministic universe removes the contradiction between
”God does not play dice” and the freedom of will, obviously given to a human being.
If one wishes, one can think that God has created a ﬁnite (ﬁnite for us) state of the
universe and the laws of universe evolution in the ”backward time”. And now He is
surprised to ﬁnd people who think that everything is evolving in the opposite time.

5. The choice of time axis direction is subjective.

If we introduce another axis, arrange all states of the universe along it, and undertake
an unbiased analysis, we will ﬁnd the following. At each moment of time t creatures
dwelling in the Universe are convinced that the moment of time t − 1 was in past. What
is the ground for this belief? Only the fact that creatures possess signiﬁcantly richer
information about this moment than about moment t + 1. And at the moment t + 1
they ”remember” that ”some time ago”, at moment t, they have just learn about this
moment t. This tempts them to think that time is directed from past to future. But
I think that as far as the physical laws are concerned, the correct choice of time axis
direction should be exactly opposite.

3

