0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

3

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
0
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

General relativity as a complete theory and its new consequences ∗†

Zahid Zakir

Institute of Noosphere, 11a Sayram,

Tashkent, 700170 Uzbekistan

zahid@in.edu.uz

Abstract

It is shown that a local extension of distances in a gravitational ﬁeld leads to a global topological
diﬀerence between the Schwarzschild coordinates and the physical coordinates of local inertial frame. In
term of a physical time and a physical radius the falling in Schwarzschild ﬁeld particles and photons
elastically reﬂect from a gravitational radius. It is shown that the Schwarzschild frame is complete, an
interior region of gravitational radius is unphysical, a horizon and a singularity not appear. As result
the general relativity really predicts an existence of heavy barionic and quark stars and quasars instead
of black holes. The high redshifts of quasars can be explained mainly as a gravitational redshift. A
model of oscillating Universe without a cosmological singularity is proposed. A new type of cosmological
redshift is predicted which can partly solve the dark matter problem.
In the theories of strings and
branes the singularities of black hole solutions disappear in term of physical variables. A renormalization
in quantum ﬁeld theory also is derived as a natural consequence of general relativity prescriptions.

1

Introduction

The modern standard treatment of general relativity leads to an intrinsic incompleteness of the theory
because of the appearance of horizons and singularities in the black holes and cosmology. Is this a necessary
consequence of ﬁrst principles or the theory can be reformulated as a complete one without changing the
ﬁrst principles?

Up to now the predicted black holes are not convincingly revealed, but at the same time more than
13200 quasars are discovered with very high red shifts (z < 5.8) which can not be explained in the standard
treatment of general relativity without assumptions about fantastic masses, luminosities and fantastically
small sizes and large distances. Why so many diﬃculties appear in an identiﬁcation of few candidates
to predicted objects, while the objects which diﬃcultly explained in the theory so easily discovered by
astronomers every week during last 35 year?

In the existing standard treatments of general relativity a main attention was drawn to the metrics and
coordinates as some formal mathematical tools and little attention is given to their physical meaning and
measurability.
In this paper it is argued, that the general relativity becomes a complete theory after an
adequate to ﬁrst principles interpretation of the results of spatial and temporal measurements.

We describe a new picture of the particle’s motion in the Schwarzschild ﬁeld with a reﬂection of falling
particles from the source. We show that the process is fully reversible in time, the Schwarzschild’s frame
becomes complete, the horizons and singularities disappear. The correctly interpreted general relativity not
predicts a collapse and black holes, but it naturally explains quasars with the arbitrary high redshifts as
relativistic stars or galaxy nucleus with ordinary masses, luminosities, sizes and distances.

It is shown that the general relativity not contains a cosmological singularity and it leads to the oscillating
cosmological models. A new type of cosmological redshift is predicted as result of ”potential diﬀerence”
between scale parameter at a time of emission and at the present time with respect to a ”center of mass”
of Universe in fourth dimension. The problem of dark matter probably can be naturally solved taking into
account this additional redshift. Another surprise of the new treatment is a derivation of renormalization
procedures in quantum ﬁeld theory from the ﬁrst principles of general relativity.

∗To be published in: ”Z.Zakir. Structure of space-time. Part II, paper 18, I.N., Tashkent, 2000.”
† c(cid:13) Institute of Noosphere, 2000.

1

2 SCALES AND CLOCKS IN A GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

2

In the paper the corrected version of the new formulation is presented, the preliminary properties of
which was published in my previous papers [3] . More detail considerations and discussions will be presented
in [4] and in the forthcoming publications.

2 Scales and clocks in a gravitational ﬁeld

(g) = gikdxidxk is invariant under the coordinate transformations dxi = (∂xi/∂xi′

In spacetime with metric gik the arbitrary curvilinear coordinate systems can be used and a spacetime
interval ds2
. But a
deﬁnite coordinate system has a meaning from a physical point of view only after describing a behavior of
scales and clocks on a physical frame, on the basis of which these coordinates can be measured. In a static
gravitational ﬁeld four types of special frames can be introduced which we describe below in a form which
we will use in this paper.

) · dxi′

2.1 Rest frame at inﬁnity (I-frame)

For the static local source it is natural to choice a Galilean frame at inﬁnity which is at rest with respect to
this source (I-frame) with ﬂat euclidean spacetime interval between two events:

ds2

(I) = c2dt2 − dR2 − R2dΩ2

(1)

where dΩ2 = dθ2 + sin2 θ · dϕ2 is the line element on 2-sphere.
At ﬁnite distances from the source the curvilinear coordinates xi with gravitationally deformed scale and
time units can be expressed in terms of the I-frame coordinates X a = (t, R, θ, ϕ) with the scale and time
units same as on I-frame: dxi = (∂xi/∂X a)dX a and we have for the spacetime interval:

ds2

(g) = g(0)

ab (X)dX adX b

Here

g(0)
ab (X) = gik

∂xi
∂X a

∂xi
∂X b

(2)

(3)

is a true remainder metric of spacetime with a nonzero curvature tensor which (on a rest frame of the
source) describes the true gravitational ﬁeld. In such consideration the gravitation represents as a diﬀerence
of the spacetime geometry with respect to the I-frame geometry. This true remainder metric can not be
transformed to the trivial ﬂat metric ηab = diag(1,−1,−1,−1) without transformation of I-frame coordinates
′a which means that the scale and time units then becomes diﬀerent from the
X a to another coordinates X
I-frame units.

2.2

Local inertial rest frame (L-frame)

Let we introduce a local inertial frame which begins free falling from a given point of the gravitational ﬁeld
at ﬁnite distance from the source (L-frame). A scale and a clock of L-frame at given point are momentary at
rest with respect to the source (and to the I-frame). On L-frame the gravitational ﬁeld absent (only locally
and during a small time interval) and the scale, clock and comoving objects are at weightlessness. By the
coordinate transformations dxi = (∂xi/∂X α)dX α with property:

we obtain L-frame line element as:

gik

∂xi
∂X α

∂xi
∂X β = ηαβ

ds2

(L) = ηαβdX αdX β

We consider a special form of this line element as:

ds2

(L) = c2dτ 2 − dr2 − R2dΩ2

(4)

(5)

(6)

where dr(R) and dτ (R) are spatial and temporal intervals which measured by L-frame scales and clocks
and a length of orbit is l = 2πR. Are the scale and time standards of the L-frame in gravitational ﬁeld

2 SCALES AND CLOCKS IN A GRAVITATIONAL FIELD

3

identical with the scale and time standards of the I-frame, and can we identify dr(R) with dR and dτ (R)
with dt? L- and I-frames are at rest with respect to each other and on both frames scales and clocks
are at weightlessness. Nevertheless we can see that the scale and time standards on L- and I-frames are
diﬀerent since they are situated at the diﬀerent points of space with diﬀerent curvatures and that moreover
ds2
(I). The L-frame coordinates have another scale and time units than I-frame with the relations:

(L) < ds2

dX b =

∂X b
∂X α dX α = hb

α(X)dX α

(7)

We have in the gravitational ﬁeld a conserved energy of the particle E which is equal to a rest energy

E0 = m0c2 at inﬁnity (R → ∞) and for the falling from inﬁnity particle can be written as:

Here v = dr/dτ is a local velocity and therefore:

E = m0c2s 1 − rg/R

1 − v2/c2 = m0c2

dr
cdτ

=

v
c

=r rg

R

(8)

(9)

where rg = 2GM/c2 is the gravitational radius, G is Newton constant, M is a mass of the source. If the
spacetime interval on L-frame we represent in term of I-frame coordinates, we get the ordinary Schwarzschild
solution with a contraction of time intervals dτ = γ1/2dt and an extension of space distances dr = γ−1/2dR,
where γ = 1 − rg/R. We have on L-frame:

ds2

(L) = γc2dt2 − γ−1dR2 − R2dΩ2

(10)

It is very important for our purposes that dr = γ−1/2dR > dR since the gravitational extension of
the radial distances on L-frame with respect to I-frame distances. The I-frame observer at inﬁnity receive
photons emitted by L-frame atom with a gravitational redshift z = ∆λ/λ0 = γ−1/2 − 1.

2.3 Freely falling from inﬁnity frame (F-frame)

The velocities of scales and clocks of this frame are increasing with respect to L-frame observers due to energy
conservation at falling and the L-frame observers really can measure the potential of the gravitational ﬁeld
by the measuring these velocities. The scales, clocks and comoving objects on F-frame are also at the
weightlessness but the space and time units of F-frame contain Lorentz contractions with respect to L-frame
standards. From a point of view of the F-frame observer the L-frame scales and temporal intervals are
Lorentz contracted:

dτ = γ−1/2(dT − vdR′/c2)

dr = γ−1/2(dR′ − vdT )

(11)

(12)

where dR′ and dT are F-frame radial distance and time interval. The spacetime interval between two
events of F-frame comoving objects can be derived from L-frame interval after the Lorentz transformation
as:

If two events occurred at the same point of the F-frame, then dR′ = dΩ = 0 and we have for a proper

ds2

(L) = c2dT 2 − dR′2 − R2dΩ2

(13)

time of F-frame object the relations:

c2dT 2 = γ · c2dτ 2 = γ2c2dt2

(14)

The proper time of F-frame atom dT has the Lorentz contraction with respect to L-frame atom’s time
interval dτ at the same point of space R and L-frame observer detects Doppler shift of the frequency of
photons emitted by the F-frame atom. The I-frame observer at inﬁnity will receive photons emitted by
F-frame atom with a combined redshift which has the gravitational and Doppler components.

3 A KINEMATICS OF RADIALLY FALLING PARTICLES

4

The length of scale dR′ on F-frame at one moment of time (dT = 0) can be represented across L- and

I-frame scales as:

dR′ = γ1/2dr = γ1/2(γ−1/2dR) = dR

(15)

Therefore, from a point of view of F-frame observer the radial distance ∆R′ between two orbits with
lengths l1 = 2πR1 and l2 = 2πR2 is equal to their lengths diﬀerence divided to 2π, i.e. (l2 − l1)/2π =
∆R = ∆R′, exactly same as in the case of ﬂat euclidean space. From the point of view of F-frame observer
the gravitational extension of distances between orbits is exactly compensated by the Lorentz contractions of
these distances. In fact, on F-frame we can consider space in the gravitational ﬁeld as a ﬂat space of I-frame.
This fact will be used below at the study of particle’s kinematics.

2.4 Rest frame in the gravitational ﬁeld (S-frame)

The scales and clocks of S-frame on ﬁxed points are at rest with respect to the source (and to I-frame). The
scales, clocks and objects (atoms) on this frame are subjected to a gravitational acceleration and they can
situated at rest only by help of some external (nongravitational) forces. As result, they have a weght weight..
The external forces exactly compensate the gravitational force and, therefore, by measuring the weights of
sample particles which situated at rest on diﬀerent points of the ﬁeld, the gravitational potential can be
exactly measured.

The general relativity based on the Einstein’s assumption (1907, 1911) that the acceleration (and external
force) not change the scale and time units on S-frame in ﬁrst order to the value of acceleration and that
they are approximately identical with scale and time units of the momentary comoving L-frames. Therefore,
in the ﬁrst order the consideration of metrics and spacetime intervals on S-frame can be replaced by the
L-frame metrics and intervals.

In the case of strong ﬁelds and the exact solutions this assumption may be inadequate to a situation. In
[4] a more general situation without Einstein’s assumption will be considered. Such modiﬁcation of general
relativity not contradicts to its ﬁrst principles and leads to the observable eﬀects as new types of redshifts.
In this case the free falling atoms (of neutral gas) as microscopic local inertial frames and the ﬁxed atoms
(solid state and plasma) as S-frames on a surface of star emits with diﬀerent redshifts. Moreover, on the
Earth a local gravitational red (blue) shift between a source and a detector can be observed if one of them
is at rest (ﬁxed S-frame) with a weight and another is at weightlessness (free falling L-frame).

In the present paper for a simplicity we not consider such modiﬁcation and we deal with the ordinary

general relativity with Einstein’s assumption, since we will consider all eﬀects on L- or F-frames only.

3 A kinematics of radially falling particles

Let we observe on L-frame the free falling from inﬁnity sample particle. We can obtain an equation of motion
for this particle as the local (physical) time τ dependence of the radial coordinate R by using the energy
conservation condition:

± cdτ = drs R

rg

= dRγ−1/2s R

rg

RdR

pR − rg
pR − rg

(16)

(17)

(18)

and:

After the integration we obtain:

± c(τ − τ0) =

1
r1/2
g

Z

cτ = ±

2(R + 2rg)

3r1/2

g

where we take τ0 = 0 at R = rg which means that τ = 0 at R = rg and then a worldline of particle is
symmetric under this moment. It is surprising, that a minimal distance, which can be reached by the falling
particle is R = rg and then it elastically reﬂects from the source.

3 A KINEMATICS OF RADIALLY FALLING PARTICLES

5

A geometric reason for such behavior of R can be understanded after an obtaining direct relationship
between I-frame radial coordinate R and the physical radial distance in the gravitational ﬁeld r(R) on
L-frame as:

where

r(R) =Z

= [Rr1 −

rg
R

+ rgF (R)]

dR

R

q1 − rg
F (R) = ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(19)

(20)

s R

rg

(1 +r1 −

rg
R

)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

with property F (rg) = 0. The lower limit of integration here may be only R0 = rg, where the physical
radius vanishes: r(R) = 0. This means that zero point of the physical radius r = 0 where the source located
from the point of view of L-frame observer, corresponds to the value of the radial coordinate R0 = rg of
I-frame observer. Therefore, the result of the local gravitational extension of radial distances between orbits
in the curved spacetime is the global topological diﬀerence between L- and I-frame coordinate systems when
to the values of physical radius r in the interval (0,∞) correspond the values of radial coordinate R in the
interval (rg,∞) and for their coincidence the interior region of gravitational radius R < rg must be excluded
as unphysical part of I-frame coordinate system.
Such topological cutting is usual in a case of plane geographic maps of the earth surface. Due to
a curvature, in the line element on the sphere dΩ2 = dθ2 + sin2 θ · dϕ2 the plane meridional angle ∆ϕ
between two meridians multiplied to a scale contraction factor sin θ and it must be replaced by true angle
∆Φ = sin θ · ∆ϕ which describe the real situation. As result at the poles θ = ±π/2 we have an angle
contraction ∆Φ = 0 at ﬁnite ∆ϕ 6= 0. At a manufacturing of globs 36 (or 24) meridional plane maps each
at the interval 100 (or 150) are prepared which can be glued to a sphere and then an adequate model of the
earth surface can be obtained. If we want to glue these meridional parts of globe not on the sphere but on
a plane surface, we obtain the plane map in form of a rake with 36 north and 36 south ﬁctive ”poles” and
with ’unphysical gaps” between meridional maps (disappearing only at the equator). In a limited case we
obtain inﬁnity number of the narrow meridional plane maps with inﬁnity number of the ﬁctive poles which
can be joined to two ”polar lines” (north and south).

Analogously, in the case of the gravitational ﬁeld the ﬂat space radial coordinate diﬀerence ∆R in the
spatial line element dl2 = γ−1dR2 + R2dΩ2 multiplied to a scale extension factor γ−1/2and only the physical
radial distance ∆r = γ−1/2∆R describe the real situation. Here we obtain ∆R → 0 at R → rg for ﬁnite ∆r
from the one side and r = 0 at R = rg from the other side. When the sample particle begins falling from an
orbit r(R1) and it reaches the centre of sphere r = 0 where it meet with point source, this particle reaches
in term of the ﬂat space coordinate R only the gravitational radius rg. As result, in ﬂat space coordinates
we obtain inﬁnity number ﬁctive ”sources” at ”sphere” R = rg instead of real one point source. We obtain
the true spatial distance after the summing of small displacements ∆R which multiplied to the scale factor
γ−1/2, as result of which after the integration we obtain r(R1).

We see that in our new picture the particle can not ”penetrate’ to an interior of region R < rg, a horizon
and singularities are disappear, the world line of particle is continuous, the frame is complete (not contains
unobservable regions) and the process is fully reversible in time.
If local inertial observers in each orbit
register the falling particle and after some time register a returning of this particle, these events are absolute
physical facts and the such character of the world line is invariant under transformations of the local inertial
frames.

We can consider this process from a point of view of the F-frame observer, where the space-time interval

(proper time) of falling particle is:

c2dT 2 = (

c2dτ 2
dr2 − 1)dr2 =

R
rg

dR2

(21)

If we directly integrate with lower limit R0 = 0 then we obtain the well known Lemaitre’s result (see
[2]) which is the basic formula for modern standard treatments of the Schwarzschild problem with horizon,
collapse and singularity.

We know from the previous considerations that the radial coordinate R is identical on F- and I-frames.
But we also know that on the I-frame radial coordinate R contains a ”physical” or ”dynamic” part Rg,

3 A KINEMATICS OF RADIALLY FALLING PARTICLES

6

coinciding with the physical radius r and the unphysical part rg and it can be represented as R = Rg + rg,
where Rg = 0 at R = rg. Therefore, we have:

and:

c(T − T0) = ±

1
r1/2
g

Z pRg + rgdRg

c(T − T0) = ±

2

3r1/2

g

(R3/2 − r3/2

g

)

(22)

(23)

This formula diﬀers from the standard black (white) hole picture because of here the falling particle
elastically reﬂects from the gravitational radius R = rg at T = T0 and it can not ”penetrating” into the
region R < rg.

From the previous energy conservation condition an equation of motion for the falling particle in term of

the local Schwarzschild observer’s time t can be obtained as:

± cdt =

dR
(1 − rg

R

and after the integration we have:

where β = rg/R and:

R
β1/2 [

2
3

± c(t − t0) =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

R )q rg
+ 4β + β3/2K(R)](cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
1 + β1/2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1 − β1/2

K(R) = ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

R1

Ra

(24)

(25)

(26)

This time interval is divergent if the lower limit Ra = rg, but this divergence is the result of the pointness
of source. The real source has a ﬁnite size a and the lower value of physical radius is not zero but is r = a.
In term of radial coordinate this means that Ra = a + rg is the minimal value of radial coordinate R which
deﬁne the value of t0. Then we obtain the ﬁnite time interval for the falling and the reﬂecting of particle in
coordinates of the observer at inﬁnity.

The space-time interval for a radially falling photon on L- frame is:

Therefore, a local time dependence of R along the world line of photon on L-frame (light cone) is:

ds2 = γc2dt − γ−1dR2 = 0

or

and in term of I-frame time:

cτ = ±r

± cτ = Rr1 −

rg
R

+ rgF (R)

± c(t − t0) = R − rg + rg ln |

R − rg

a

|

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

Here we take τ = t = 0 at R = rg. When the times τ and t are change at intervals (−∞, 0) and (0,∞), R
changes at interval (rg,∞). The trajectory of photon also is time symmetric and it elastically reﬂects from
the source at R = rg.

Thus, we can conclude, that:
1) World lines of particles and photons are continuous and timelike, at all values of T, τ and t in the
interval (−∞,∞) the radial coordinate R changes in the interval (rg,∞). Therefore, Schwarzschild’s frame
and coordinates are complete;

4 A SIMPLEST DERIVATION OF THE CLASSICAL EFFECTS

7

2) The falling particles and photons elastically reﬂect at R = rg, the processes are fully reversible in time

and all times are ﬁnite (for ﬁnite distances and ﬁnite size sources);

3) The horizon, singularity and collapse are not appear in general relativity if we deﬁne the space-time

variables adequately to the true geometry of the curved spacetime.

4 A simplest derivation of the classical eﬀects

Since the region R < rg is excluded from the space volume of general relativity, we can treat this fact as
some topological property of the relativistic gravitation, which diﬀers it from Newtonian gravity. In term of
”topologically shifted” radial coordinate Rg = R − rg the Schwarzschild’s solution can be rewritten as:

ds2 =

c2dt2
1 + rg
Rg

− (1 +

rg
Rg

)dR2

g − (Rg + rg)2dΩ2
gdΩ2, but this circumstance is not suﬃcient since

(31)

If Rg → 0, the interval on the orbital sphere tends to r2
near the gravitational radius the falling becomes pure radial and dΩ2 → 0.
The ﬁrst order corrections to the Newtonian formulas then can be obtained by a simple rule, that the
relativistic source located to rg nearer to the same orbit than Newtonian one. In other words, the relativistic
source acts to the particle at orbit R exactly same as the Newtonian source acts to the particle at orbit
R − rg. Thus, we have a ”topologically corrected” Newton potential:

ϕ = −

GM
R − rg

(32)

The perihelion shift, the light deﬂection and the time delay then can be represented in the ﬁrst order as
such ”topological” eﬀects. For a planet at the orbit R we replace in Newtonian formula R by R − rg and
then we directly obtain Einstein’s formula for the perihelion shift per period:

which for the elliptic orbit with focal parameter L leads to:

ω =s 2M γ

(R − rg)3 =

2π
T0

[1 +

3rg
2R

]

∆ϕ =

3πrg

L

=

6πγM
c2L

(33)

(34)

An angle of the deﬂection of photons according to the principle of equivalence of Newtonian gravity is:

α =

rg
R

(35)

where R is nearest distance to the source from the photon’s path. Here the gravitational ﬁeld eﬀectively
acts only on the part of the photon’s path with length R, and then photons fall near to the source to the
distance rg (αR = rg). If the relativistic source begin act to photons from the same point as Newtonian one,
then photons will fall to rg since the Newtonian gravity and will fall an additional rg since the diﬀerence
between radii of the relativistic orbit and the Newtonian orbit. Then the resulting deﬂection angle will be
two times more than in Newtonian gravity:

α =

2rg
R

(36)

5 New theory of relativistic stars

Let we consider Tolman’s solution of Einstein equations in the case of spherically symmetric dust matter
(see [2]). The line element can be chosen as:

with a solution:

ds2 = c2dτ 2 − eλ(τ,Ra)dR2

a − R2(τ, Ra)dΩ2

(37)

5 NEW THEORY OF RELATIVISTIC STARS

eλ(τ,Ra) = (

∂R
∂Ra

)2[1 + f (Ra)]−1

8

(38)

Here Ra is a radial coordinate of dust matter particle and τ is its proper time. Then an equation of

motion can be obtained as:

which has a solution:

(

∂R
c∂τ

)2 = f (Ra) +

F (Ra)

R

± c[τ0(Ra) − τ ] =Z

dR
(f + F
R )1/2

(39)

(40)

Here the three types of solutions can be obtained at f > 0, f < 0 and f = 0. In the standard treatments
a scenario of collapse is qualitatively the same for the every cases [2]. We take the simplest case f = 0 since
in other cases the pictures are qualitatively the same as in this case.

The time dependence of the radial coordinate then directly can be obtained as:

c[τ0(Ra) − τ ] = ±

2

3F 1/2 [R3/2

a − R3/2]

(41)

The radial distances on F-and I-frames have identical scale units and here R and Ra are identical with
I-frame radial coordinate, which contains the physical part (Rph) and the unphysical constant part (rg(e)) in
the form R = Rph + rg(e). Here rg(e) > 0 is an eﬀective gravitational radius which can be calculated taking
into account a radial coordinate dependence of F (Ra) and using the fact that every layer with deﬁnite Ra
falls to a center of gravity due to a gravitating of the Schwarzschild ﬁeld of the mass inside the radius Ra.
Then we come to the analogous conclusions as in the case of falling sample particle in external static ﬁeld.
Particularly, a free falling layer of dust matter with radial coordinate Ra after the time τ = τ0 reaches the
center of gravity with Rph = 0, which for the observer at inﬁnity located on the eﬀective gravitational radius
R = rg(e), the layer reﬂects at this value of R = rg(e) and then it move away. The horizon and collapse
disappear, spacetime intervals for physical objects are timelike (or lightlike).

A volume of sphere around the source is:

This integral easily can be calculated and we obtain:

V = 4πZ R2γ−1/2dR = 4πZ R2γ−1/2dRg

(42)

(43)

(44)

V (R) =

4π
3

+ 4πr3

R3γ3/2 + 3πrgR2(1 −
s R

(1 + γ1/2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

−

rg

4

3πr3
g

g ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

rg
2R

)γ1/2 + 6πr2

gRγ1/2+

ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2R
rg

(1 + γ1/2) − 1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

We see, that V (rg) = 0 and the region R < rg is excluded from the space volume of general relativity
since the lower limit of integration is R = rg or Rg = 0. This fact and the results of preceding considerations
lead to a new picture of stellar evolution including new families of compact relativistic stars with sizes near
their gravitational radii. Relativistic stars we will classify by two natural parameters - rg which ﬁx a mass
( M ) and β = rg/R which ﬁx a redshift ( z). In term of these natural parameters the volume of star is:

V (R) =

4πr3
g
3 {β−3γ1/2[1 +

5
4

β +

27
8

β2] + Q(β)}

where

A density of star with mass M in a case of homogeneous matter is:

Q(β) = 3 ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

β−1/2(1 + γ1/2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) −

9
16

2
β

ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(1 + γ1/2) − 1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(45)

(46)

6 GENERAL RELATIVITY AS THE THEORY OF QUASARS

9

ρ = M · V −1(R)

(47)
Supercompact stars with R ∼ rg, have a ﬁnite volume and a ﬁnite density. Hence, the hierarchy of
supercompact stars with ordinary and extraordinary physical matter not stop on the neutron star’s level,
but it continued to more dense physical states. For the stars with masses more than the critical mass of
neutron star’s stability M > (3 ÷ 5)M⊙ the family of stable states can appears. The ﬁrst is the family
of heavy baryon stars, containing baryonic resonances (Λ, Σ, Ξ, ∆). The multiquark hadron stars and quark
stars, which appear after quark-hadron phase transition also can be considered. Some of the observing
candidates to black holes can be one of above mentioned type stars.

The searches of the supermassive stars containing subquarks or other types of substituents of quarks
and leptons (subquark stars), heavy particles of the grand uniﬁcation also become a correct search programs
without any gravitational restrictions.

In the next section a theory of quasars as the relativistic stars or relativistic galaxy nucleus will be
presented as the direct consequence of correctly treated general relativity without any additional hypotheses.

6 General relativity as the theory of quasars

Quasi Stellar Objects (quasars) in astrophysics deﬁned as the point sources of emission with high values
of redshift of their spectral lines. Last version of Veron’s catalog [5] include more than 13200 quasars with
z < 5.8.

Since the stellar redshift was restricted at z < 0.2 in black hole treatments of general relativity with
maximal value for the neutron stars, a standard interpretation of quasar’s high redshift mechanism was only
the cosmological Doppler redshift. In this interpretation the luminosities of quasars, which sizes are very
small with respect to galaxies (< 1ps), nevertheless 103 ÷ 104 times exceed the luminosities of galaxies. The
distances then must be (0.1 ÷ 5) · 109ps. Many of quasars have broad emission lines and some of them have
also absorbtion lines with suﬃciently less values of redshifts than emission lines of the same quasar. At such
fantastic parameters some of quasars are variable and their luminosities changed 2 ÷ 3 times during of few
days, weeks or years which probably leads to the contradictions with causality.
In our treatment of relativistic stars all restrictions to superdense states and to redshifts disappear. We
can demonstrate this new situation how the redshift restriction of previous treatments disappears in our
case.

In an inequality (see §11.6 [1]):

pg00(0) ≤ γ1/2(R0) −

rg
2R3

0 Z

R′dR′
[1 − 2GMR′2

c2R3

0

]1/2

(48)

after the calculation of the integral with limits (R0, rg(e)), where rg(e) is some ”eﬀective ” gravitational

radius inside of the star, we have:

3
2

γ1/2(R0) −

1
2

[1 −

rgr2
g(e)
R3
0

]1/2

(49)

pg00(0) ≤

and then we come to the standard redshift restriction z < 2.

If rg(e) = 0 we obtain 8 − 9β ≥ 0 due to a property pg00(0) > 0 and the inequality β = rg/R0 < 8/9
But since in our treatment 0 < rg(e) ≤ rg, then in fact we have:

8 − 9β + η2β3 ≥ 0

of η > 0 and therefore, in general relativity in fact not exist any restriction for the values of z.

(50)
where η = rg(e)/rg > 0 and 0 < β ≤ 1 for the ﬁnite mass sources. This inequality is obeyed at any value
Two statements of new theory of relativistic stars, the ﬁrst that the superdense matter not collapsed but
formed new types of stars and galaxy nucleus and, the second that no restrictions for stellar and extragalactic
objects redshifts, lead to the new general relativistic theory of quasars as the relativistic galaxy nucleus and
(probably) as relativistic stars in the Milky Way.

The main mechanism of high redshift of quasars from the point of view of general relativity is the
gravitational redshift since they are supercompact objects with sizes near their gravitational radii and they

7 THE GENERAL RELATIVISTIC COSMOLOGY WITHOUT SINGULARITY

10

have β = 1 − ε, where ε ≪ 1. In the case of galaxy nucleus the cosmological Doppler redshift must be
separated from the full redshift by some astrophysical methods and then the gravitational part of redshift
can be determined, or conversely, if we can estimate independently the gravitational redshift then we can
more exactly deﬁne the Doppler part and then can determine the true distances. But in both cases the
distances, luminosities and masses of extragalactic quasars become 104−105 times less than modern standard
estimations and they become normal with respect to the analogous parameters of galaxy nucleus. This fact
show the ﬁrst normalization role of our treatment for the astrophysics of quasars.

The redshift diﬀerences between absorbtion and emission lines easily explained by an existence of ab-
sorbing layers at surface of relativistic objects since small diﬀerence of radii (few percent from rg) between
layers leads to large redshift diﬀerences (∆z ∼ 0.1 ÷ 1.0).
Up to now quasars considered only as extragalactic large distance and very massive (109 ÷ 1012M⊙)
objects since only the Doppler shift explanation of their redshift.
If we treat the redshift mainly as the
gravitational one, then it will be not wonderful from the point of view of general relativity if in the case
of some quasars the full observed redshift may be only gravitational redshift. Such quasars may be in the
local group of galaxies and here we can obtain a useful information about the dynamics and the structure
of quasars, and obviously, about the galaxies evolution.

New in principle prediction of the present version of general relativity consists in the possibility of the
ﬁnding of quasars in the Milky Way as the relativistic stars with high redshifts but with the ordinary stellar
masses, luminosities and distances. The particle content of such small quasars is not suﬃcient for our
purposes in this paper since the same value of redshift may be in the case of various relativistic stars with
diﬀerent particles (neutrons, hyperons, quarks) and masses (5 ÷ 100 M⊙). The searches of such quasars in
the Galaxy or identiﬁcation of some known quasars (in equatorial zone of the Galaxy) as relativistic stars
will be very important for veriﬁcation of the present treatment of general relativity.

The details of the proposed theory of quasars and the comparisons with observations will be published

in the special paper [6].

7 The general relativistic cosmology without singularity

Let we consider Einstein’s D = 3 sphere which embedded to D = 4 space as an orbital hypersurface. Let this
3-sphere contains a homogeneous dust matter at a radial distance a from a center of gravity in 4-dimension
with respect to which the spherical symmetry is deﬁned. The dust matter has a static gravitational ﬁeld
and the 5-dimensional line element in this case is:

where the line element on the 3-sphere is:

ds2 = eν(a)c2dt2 − eλ(a)da2 − a2dΩ2(χ, θ, ϕ)

dΩ2(χ, θ, ϕ) = dχ2 + sin2 χ(dθ2 + sin2 θ · dϕ2)

The solutions of the 5-dimensional Einstein equations can be directly obtained with the result:

eν(a) = e−λ(a) = 1 −

α2
a2 ≡ Φ(a)

(51)

(52)

(53)

where α is a gravitational radius of the static ﬁeld in 4-dimensional space. Then the ﬁnal form of the

line element is:

ds2 = Φ(a)c2dt2 −

da2
Φ(a) − a2dΩ2(χ, θ, ϕ)

(54)

A conserved energy for the free falling from inﬁnity (or moving away from the center) sample particles

on the 3D-spherical orbits is:

E =

M0c2Φ1/2

p1 − v2/c2

= M0c2s 1 − α2/a2

1 − v2/c2 = M0c2

(55)

8 STRINGS AND BRANES WITHOUT HORIZONS AND SINGULARITIES

11

Therefore, exactly same as in the case of Schwarzschild ﬁeld in the previous sections, we can use this
energy conservation condition for the determining of a proper time (dτ = Φ1/2dt) dependence of radial
coordinate a(τ ) as:

and

da

Φ1/2cdτ

=

v
c

=

α
a

The resulting equation of motion is:

cτ = ±

α
2

± cdτ =

ada
αΦ1/2 =

1
α

[β−2Φ1/2 + ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

a2da

√a2 − α2
β−1(1 + Φ1/2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(56)

(57)

(58)

]

where β = α/a, and a constant of integration taken such that τ = 0 at a = α.
The Universe can be considered as D = 3 spheric dust matter in D = 4 space which spherically falled
and then reﬂected from the own center of gravity in 4-dimension. This center of gravity in term of radial
coordinate a is locate at a = α. Then, after some time this dust matter fall again and the process repeated.
A velocity of falling and expansion of the sample particles which start falling from the inﬁnity is a critical
velocity. If the present velocity of expansion less than the critical velocity, we have a closed model and the
expansion will be stopped at ﬁnite scale parameter and then the falling will be repeated.

The physical scale parameter in this model is:

ap =Z

da

q1 − α2

a2

= ar1 −

α2
a2

(59)

We have ap = 0 at a0 = α which means the reﬂection of falling sample particles from the gravitational

radius and the picture is qualitatively same as in the case of Schwarzschild ﬁeld.

We see that our model is a new dynamical version of Einstein-Friedman cosmological models without the

problems with the singularity and with a natural mechanism of oscillations.

In this model a new type of the cosmological redshift appear due to a 4-dimensional gravitational potential

diﬀerence in moments t0 when a photon was emitted and at moment t1 when it received:

ω1
ω0

=

0

Φ1/2
Φ1/2

1

0

= p1 − β2
p1 − β2

1

(60)

This additional gravitational redshift can seriously modiﬁed the Doppler redshift value of z at large
distances and at z > 1. Particularly, taking into account this eﬀect the volume of the Universe can be
decreased and a density of matter can be increased which can leads to the partly solution of the dark matter
problem.

In the considered model the main cosmological problems can be naturally solved or can be better under-
stood on the basis of the ﬁrst principles of general relativity. More detail discussion will be presented in the
forthcoming publications.

8 Strings and branes without horizons and singularities

The standard quantum ﬁeld theory describe on a continual spacetime the local interactions of point particles,
but it leads to the inﬁnities of the values of physical observables. The attempts of exclude these inﬁnities
by an introduction of the discrete spacetime or nonlocal interactions of local objects not coincided with the
requirements of special relativistic causality.

The more successful paradigm which is very popular at last time based on an introduction of the nonlocal
fundamental objects with local interactions, such as strings and branes. But this paradigm also contains the
intrinsic contradictions since after an exclusion of one class of inﬁnities it nevertheless not leads to a ﬁnite
theory. It force introduce another type inﬁnities in form of the singularities which appear due to the black
hole type solutions.

9 THE RENORMALIZATION IN FIELD THEORY AS A GRAVITATIONAL EFFECT

12

In the standard treatment of general relativity a ﬁnite mass point particle ”live” inside of own gravitational
radius and therefore, each point particle must be really the microscopic ”black hole” with a ﬁnite size horizon.
This fact was not suﬃcient for the perturbative quantum ﬁeld theory since this theory not pretended to an
exact and correct description of gravitational degrees of freedom.

In the cases of strings and branes the situation with such ﬁnite ”gravitational thicknesses” of the funda-
mental objects is most serious because of the paradigm pretend to the exact taking into account of classical
and quantum properties of gravitation. The ﬁniteness of variables and the locality of interactions can not be
preserved in string-brane paradigm due to the ”Troyan Horse” of gravitation in form of black hole solutions
with horizons and intrinsic singularities.

Our new treatment of general relativity therefore can rescue the theories of strings and branes from
diﬃculties with new generations of inﬁnities. In our treatment no horizons, no singularities, the interactions
of point particles are local in term of physical distances and the same will be in the case of strings and
branes local interactions. As result, both starting advantages of the strings and branes, - the ﬁniteness of
observables and the local character of interactions, can be preserved.

9 The renormalization in ﬁeld theory as a gravitational eﬀect

In this section we show that the renormalizational procedures of the standard quantum ﬁeld theory have a
gravitational origin and that they can be considered as the methods which allow us taking into account a
gravitational eﬀects at small distances.

A size of localization region of quantum particle is inverse proportional to an energy ∆E of quantum
ﬂuctuations ∆x ∼ ¯hc/∆E, while ”a gravitational radius” rg = 2G∆E/c4 which coincides with such energy
concentration is proportional to the energy. These two curves intersect at Planck length lpl and at Planck
energy Epl. Before Planck scale (∆x > lp) the wave lengths of quantum ﬂuctuations of particles exceed
the ”gravitational radii” of particles (∆x > lp > rg). Here the ordinary quantum theory works successfully
without the gravitational corrections.

If we consider the quantum ﬂuctuations with the size of localization less than Planck length ∆x < lp
and with the energy ∆E > Epl, here the situation is diﬀerent since rg > lp > ∆x and we can not simply
ignore the gravitational eﬀects. Moreover, such high energy virtual particles can be considered as the virtual
microquasars.

From the point of view of the new treatment, a spatial radial distance | x1−x2 |= ρ between two points x1
and x2 in a propagator and a vertex function of a ﬁnite energy quantum point particle contains a ”physical”
part ρg and a constant ”unphysical” part rg (the gravitational radius) i.e. ρ = ρg + rg. Thus, we must shift
low limits of integration in space-time integrals from ρ = 0 to ρ = rg. As result, we have a simple cutting at
rg of the low limits of spacetime integrals of loop amplitudes which naturally excludes the divergencies in
the values of observables.

We can illustrate this procedure on a simple self energy diagram for electron in quantum electrodynamics.
Let a momentum of electron at initial time is p, at intermediate time q and a momentum of virtual photon
is k. The self energy amplitude contains integrals:

G =Z d4kd4qF (k, q, p)(Z d4ρei(p−k−q)·ρ)

If limits of spacetime integral over ρ are (0,∞), then the integral equal to momentum conservation δ-
function, which remove one of momentum integrations. The second momentum integral preserved and it is
divergent.

But after the gravitational source shift procedure and integration over physical distance ρg, low limit in

spacetime integration is rg and the self energy is ﬁnite if we take rg ∼ lp:
Gg =Z d4kd4qF (k, q, p) · |I(k, q, p)|y=∞

y=rg

Such corrections not so great in comparison with bare parameters. For example, the second order
corrections to the self energy and the charge of electron after such cutting at rg = lp are approximately 10%
from the physical mass m and the charge e of electron. Therefore, the bare mass and charge of electron are
∼ (0, 8 ÷ 0, 9) from physical ones.

(61)

(62)

10 CONCLUSION

13

If we want deal with δ-function for calculational simpliﬁcations, we can write old divergent self energy

integrals, but then we must substract a unphysical part of spacetime integral with limits (0, rg):

Gg =Z d4kd4qF (k, q, p) ·h|I|y=∞

y=0 i
y=0 − |I|y=rg

(63)

We see that this is exactly the renormalization procedure. Therefore, we can conclude, that the appearing
of divergencies is the result of ignoration of gravitational eﬀects and the renormalization the method of taking
into account the natural gravitational cutting at small distances.

10 Conclusion

In the present paper we consider a revised version of general relativity where the ”revision” consists only in
consideration of physically measurable geometric variables and in the excluding of unphysical ones.

The Schwarzschild’s world in physical variables becomes simple and normal from a point of view of
traditional physics. Falling matter normally scatters on the source. The interior of the horizon, collapse,
irreversibility and singularity are disappear, an evaporation make no sense [4]. Only methods and results
retain their validity in general relativity which work with an exterior region of the gravitational radius and
not use unphysical variables of the interior region.

The general relativity in combination with particle physics predicts new families of relativistic stars and
quasars instead of black holes. The disappearing of the cosmological singularity leads to the cosmological
models with oscillating Universe. Taking into account the gravitational requirements we obtain the solution
of the problem of inﬁnities in quantum ﬁeld theory.

New treatment of general relativity can be experimentally tested, for example, by nonredshift measure-

ments of distances to quasars.

References

[1] Weinberg S. (1972) Gravitation and cosmology. J.Wiley, N.Y.

[2] Landau L.D., Lifshitz E.M. (1988) The classical Theory of Fields. M.

[3] Zakir Z. One topological secret of gravitation and its surprises for astrophysics, cosmology and particle
physics. 7 p. In ”Structure of space-time. part II”, Tashkent, 2000, paper 16. (arXiv, physics/0005009;
see also: physics/0005016).

[4] Zakir Z. (2000) Structure of space-time. parts I and II (in preparation).

[5] Veron P. et al. (2000) Catalog of quasars (http://cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr/cgi-bin/Cat?VII/215)

[6] Zakir Z. (2000) General relativistic theory of quasars. (in preparation).

