0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

1
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
2
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

It is the ambiguity. (But only three generations)

Alejandro Rivero ∗

Dep. Economia, Univ. Carlos III Madrid

February 2, 2008

Abstract

It is suggested that generations are linked to the need of calculating
curvature of space via a deformed or discrete calculus. Quantization would
limit the deformation, building three generations, and not four, as other
interpretation could imply.

1

Introduction

It is known [8, 11] that the usual ambiguity in the deﬁnition of (partial) deriva-
tives of a function becomes a source of problems when we go to quantum theory.
The simplest example is Feynman quantum mechanics (or 0+1 dimensional ﬁeld
theory), where diﬀerent elections of discretisation for the derivative drive to dif-
ferent ordering rules in the quantized theory; Weyl corresponds to the symmetric
one, Born-Jordan to the forward derivative, and so on, and even more exotic
eﬀects could be got by gauging the ambiguity.

My paper [17] has been understood in [2] as if it were giving theoretical
support to the existence of a fourth generation. Indeed, as it is pointed in [17]
and also previously in [16], I believe that the ambiguities of a discrete curvature
only point to three generations, the extant ambiguity being absorbed in a scale
parameter which relates to Plank constant (and, to the deformation parameter
of the calculus). It is my fault that this process is just half cooked, in sparse
references at the end of [15] and, as appendix, in [14]. I apologize I can not help
with a detailed example yet, so in order to try to clear the confusion, this paper
can only to expand on the ideas of our previous [17].

So, please consider this note as a traditional conference poster, trying to put
illustrations to the previous work. The examples of the previous papers were
formulated in the context of non commutative geometry. Here we will keep
ourselves in the conceptual cloud.

2 Pictorial image

The main observation, ﬁgure (1), is that to deﬁne a vector tangent at a point
x0 we need to build two series of points approaching x0, so the limit (x2 − x1)/ǫ
will give the tangent vector. It seems that there are two ambiguities, to choose

∗rivero@wigner.unizar.es

1

x2 and to choose x1, but one of them can be absorbed into the scale parameter.
The extant ambiguity is the one we proposed to consider a mass.

x2

x0

x1

Figure 1: q-tangent vector to the point x0

Consider now, as in ﬁgure (2), a curve of which we want to know the cur-
vature at a point. This implies to give four points, so the orthogonal to two
q-tangent vectors will cross marking the position of the radius of curvature, and
giving us the inverse of the curvature when the continuous limit is approached.
Again the scale can absorb one of the ambiguities, and we have three free

parameters, that we can identify with three masses.

When going to higher dimensions, the play is not more ambiguous, but it is
more complicated (Figure 3). The curvature tensor is build from the curvatures
of the geodesic surface tangent to each 2-plane. Every direction must be con-
sidered, and dependences between the ambiguities of orthogonal directions are
not clear.

There are ways to simplify the task, for instance asking for additional re-
strictions (isotropy, homogeneity) to the space-time manifold. In any case, we
should expect now to multiply our degeneration times the number of dimension
of space time, to be able to cope with every curvature. Thus we will get four
particles (from space-time dimension) and three generations (from ambiguity).
Last, consider how the scale parameter could come into play. Every tangent
vector is deﬁned via tales theorem, ﬁgure (4), relating the time (or parameter
of the curve) with the distance. Classically each triangle is well deﬁned at each
point of the curve. Now, doubts can be raised when we make an integration
(ﬁgure 5) in the ”deformed” way, before any limit.
It seems that we should
introduce an scale parameter ǫ, to be able to add the quantities of each triangle,
and that the continuous limit should come when ǫ → 0.

The process as I see it is a little more involved, as ﬁrst one needs to use scale
invariance to go from a bare ǫ to a renormalized h, and the classical limit is
h → 0. This method is needed because the groupoid of paths given by Connes
does not add (x, y, t)(y, z, t) to (x, z, 2t) but to (x, z, t).

2

x4

x3

x2

x0

x1

Figure 2: Curvature of a curve through x0

3

Interdisciplinary work

The most popular of all the regularisation problems is the one of fermion dou-
bling, which happens when we try to quantize fermions in lattice quantum ﬁeld
theory. Here, if we use only the symmetric deﬁnition of derivative we ﬁnish
with a set of 2d fermions for each initial fermion in the theory. Wilson cures
this by incorporating the ambiguity to the theory, building each derivative as a
combination of symmetric and antisymmetric part, and then giving a high mass
to the antisymmetric combination, which controls the unwanted degrees of free-
dom. Recently [12, 9] Wilson’ approach has been resuscited and the Ginsparg-
Wilson condition is looking for a place in non commutative geometry. L¨uscher’
approach is perhaps closest to Dimakis or Majid ones, but Balachandran [1] is
already looking for a role for it near to the axiomatic of NCG manifolds.

From the point of view of non commutative geometry, it seems [10] that
naive lattice ﬁeld theory does not qualify as a diﬀerential geometry, as even
when multiple copies of elements are taken (which seems needed to cope with
NCG ﬁrst order axiom), it fails to fulﬁll Poincare duality. To get out of this
trap, the suggestion should be to act with the Dirac operator in diﬀerent points
of the space.

We will do this by introducing small ﬁnite diﬀerences between the ﬁelds at-
tached to each fermion, and relating this diﬀerence to the inverse of the mass
reasoned in the pictorial show, so that in the very low energy limit the imple-
mented diﬀerence becomes equal to the derivative it discretizes. Our goal is to
expand NCG Lagrangian to contain information about quantization ambiguity,

3

Figure 3: Two curvatures of a surface

but with this technique we also get to introduce the spectrum of masses.

Time ago in Barcelona, Alain, in a dual session with Asthekar, suggested
that the newer versions [5, 6] of the Connes-Lot approach should be seen as an
low energy approximation to a completely non commutative space only visible at
high energy. In some sense, here the methodology is reversed, betting ﬁrst of a
”very non commutative” model and trying to guess a method to go down to low
energy. At very low energy, only gravity should be seen, while at intermediate
energy, Connes-Chamseddine or Connes-Lot should be suitable approximations.
Just to visualize such approximation we want to keep ourselves using the
Dirac operator formalism. On the other hand, from the Tangent Groupoid
construction, we know that the set of functions over the tangent space T M of
a manifold can be pasted, via Weyl quantization [3, 4], to the set of kernels
k(x, y) of operators in a Hilbert space, and this formalism is very near to the
ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme proposed above. It should be nice if our candidates for
diﬀerential forms had some duality with this space of operators. Also because
the tangent groupoid seems closer to q-deformations as made by Majid and
others, and to the non-commutative formalism used by lattice theoretists in the
above referred works.

4 Mass

Basic mass, as we have seen, should be ﬁxed by the position of the vector of
ﬁgure 1 respective of the point which ”diﬀerentiation” is assigned to.

4

Figure 4: Tangent vector as a limit or ”instantaneous velocity”

Figure 5: Summation (integration) across a section of the tangent bundle.
Should a length scale be deﬁned at every point?

5

For each particle, a mass relationship can be imposed asking to the second
derivatives to give the same result as a iteration of the ﬁrst derivatives. So the
two vectors of a curvature would be given by the positions of the extreme points
of the vector giving the ﬁrst derivative.

Such relationship could be not needed if some geometrical consistency condi-
tions where imposed to the mass matrix. For instance, it is know that Poincare
Duality forces the Connes-Lott model generations to be degenerated in mass.
More restringent conditions could appear.

Finally, the mass relation between diﬀerent particles is the touchiest point.
My bet is to link it to a preferred kind of metrics, with a preferred set of
coordinate systems. Very much as it happens in a spherical set of coordinates:
a variation across δr has no additional weight, variations across δθ, δφ carry an
additional weight r, and variation across δφ carries an additional term respect
to δθ. In [16], this was stated with an obscure comparison between quarks and
angles.

5 Acknowledgements

To gauge the ambiguity is a suggestion of E. Follana, yet to explore. Cheerfully
acknowledged, as well as a lot of support to discuss other ideas. Momentum
space was seen as conﬁguration space with a ﬁeld of forces in some coﬀee talks
with J. I. Martinez, according my old notebooks. Again, yet to explore. And,
as noted elsewhere, the main thesis of this paper surfaced while a bedroom talk
with J. Guerrero at Vietri, where I was driven to think in analogies between the
four fundamental fermions and a four dimensional volume form. More about
this can be forthcoming in [18], where we wonder about the relation between
junk removal and the Pauli antisymmetrization of N fermions.

The relaxing ambiance provided by the folks of La Latina, the Madrid inner
neighborhood where I am doing a half sabbatical, should also be acknowledged.

References

[1] A. P. Balachandran et al., The Fermion Doubling Problem and Noncom-

mutative Geometry, hep-th/9911087

[2] Chao-Shang Huang et al., The B → Xsl+l− and B → Xsγ decays with the

fourth generation, hep-ph/9911203

[3] JF Cari˜nena et al., Connes’ Tangent Groupoid and Deformation Quanti-

zation, J. of Geom. and Phys, v 32 (1999). math/9802102

[4] A. Connes, Non Commutative Geometry, Academic Press 1994

[5] A. Connes, Non Commutative Geometry and Reality

[6] A. Chamseddine, A. Connes, A Universal Action Formula, preprint hep-

th/9606056

[7] A. Connes, Gravity coupled with matter and the foundation of non commu-

tative geometry, preprint hep-th/9603053

6

[8] J.S. Dowker, Path Integrals and Ordering Rules, J. Math. Phys. 17 (1976)

[9] , T. Fujikawa et al., Non-commutative Diﬀerential Calculus and the Axial

Anomaly in Abelian Lattice Gauge Theories, hep-lat/9906015

[10] M. G¨okeler and T. Sh¨uker, Does noncommutative geometry encompass lat-

tice gauge theory, hep-th/9805077

[11] Roy R. Gould, Am. J. Phys., 63, n. 2 (1995)

[12] M. L¨uscher, Chiral gauge theories on the lattice with exact gauge invariance,

hep-lat/9909150

[13] S. Majid,Advances in Quantum and Braided Geometry, q-alg/9610003 v2

[14] A. Rivero, Introduction to the tangent grupoid, dg-ga/9710026.

[15] A. Rivero, A short derivation of Feynman formula, quant-ph/9803035

[16] A. Rivero, Some conjectures looking of a NCG theory, hep-th/9804169

[17] A. Rivero, On generations, hep-th/9905021

[18] A. Rivero, Junk: the fermionic ansatz, work in course.

[19] M. Santander, Interpretacion geometrica de la gravitacion, DFTUZ/93/11

7

