0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

8
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
8
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

HOW HIGH THE TEMPERATURE OF A LIQUID

BE RAISED WITHOUT BOILING?

‡Mala Das, B. K. Chatterjee⋆, B. Roy and S. C. Roy†

‡Department of Physics, Bose Institute

‡93 / 1 A. P. C. Road, Calcutta 700009, India

‡Lines to be deleted from the manuscript for blindfold refereeing

Abstract

How high a temperature of a liquid be raised beyond its boiling point with-

out vaporizing (known as the limit of superheat) is an interesting subject of

investigation. A new method of ﬁnding the limit of superheat of liquids is pre-

sented here. The superheated liquids are taken in the form of drops suspended

in a dust free gel. The temperature of the superheated liquid is increased very

slowly from room temperature to the temperature at which the liquid nucleates

to boiling. The nucleation is detected acoustically by a sensitive piezo-electric

transducer, coupled to a multi channel scaler (MCS) and the nucleation rate is

observed as a function of time. The limit of superheat measured by the present

method supersedes other measurements and theoretical predictions in reaching

the temperature closest to the critical temperature of the liquids.

PACS numbers: 64.60.-i, 64, 64.70.Fx, 64.60.Qb, 64.60.My

1

Any ﬂuid that exists in the liquid form above its boiling temperature is said to

be superheated. These liquids are in a metastable state in the thermodynamic sense

and can be nucleated to form vapor by homogeneous nucleation or by the presence

of heterogeneous nucleation sites such as gas pockets, vapor bubbles, solid impurities

etc. or by the radiation interactions caused by charged particles, neutrons etc. Vapor

embryos of diﬀerent sizes, which are responsible for homogeneous nucleation, are

produced at thermal equilibrium in the superheated liquid. The superheated state

owes its existence to an energy barrier which causes the vapor embryo to collapse,

rather than lead to nucleation, if it is less than a critical size.

A liquid can not be superheated up to the critical temperature, there is a

limit to the maximum attainable temperature for any given liquid without boiling.

This limit is called the ‘limit of superheat of the liquid’ (Tsl), where the height of the

energy barrier which maintains the superheated state is of the order of kT and this

temperature is a characteristic of any liquid. In addition to its importance in basic

science, the knowledge of Tsl is important in a number of industrial operations where

a hot, nonvolatile liquid comes in contact with a cold volatile liquid. If the temper-

ature of the hot liquid reaches to the limit of superheat of the cold liquid, explosive

boiling would result. This explosive boiling is a potential hazard in damaging equip-

ment and injure personnel in the vicinity of the blast [1]. The study of Tsl has another

importance since the discovery of bubble chamber by Glaser[2] and superheated drop

detector[3]. The operation of this detector depends on the degree of superheat of the

2

liquid, more the liquid is superheated more sensitive is the detector to lower energy

radiations[4]. The minimum energy detectable by such detector is therefore limited

by the limit of superheat of the detecting liquid. The limit of superheat of liquids

can be estimated from the theory and can be measured experimentally. Theoretical

calculations are performed either from the pure thermodynamic considerations or us-

ing the statistical mechanics. Very good and comprehensive reviews on homogeneous

nucleation of lquid and on the limit of superheat are available in literature[5,6,7].

One has to note that theoretical calculations are performed for ’pure’ homogeneous

nucleation where the chance of heterogeneous nucleation arising out of various in-

terfaces with diﬀerent surface energies e.g. gas-liquid, liquid-liquid, solid-gas etc. is

completely excluded.

Experimental results reported so far are far below the critical temperature of

the liquids. One of the reasons being that observing ’pure’ homogeneous nucleation

experimentally, without any chance of heterogeneous nucleation is diﬃcult to achieve.

Hence, the goal is to reduce the chance of heterogeneous nucleation as far as possible

and to use an improved method of quantitative detection of nucleation to see how

close one can reach experimentally to the predicted limit of superheat. The present

experiment is designed to achieve this goal. Superheated sample used in this inves-

tigation is a homogeneous suspension of superheated drops of three liquids (R-12 :

CCl2F2, R-114 : C2Cl2F4 and R-22 : CHClF2) in a dust free, visco-elastic, degassed

gel medium. Suspending the superheated liquid in another liquid (gel) reduces the

3

chance of heterogeneous nucleation. Nucleation is detected acoustically by a piezo-

electric transducer[8] and the pulses thus received are digitized and recorded as a

function of time by a multichannel scaler. This improved method of determining Tsl

supersedes all other measured values in reaching closest to the critical temperatures.

Reviews on previous experimental techniques of measuring the limit of superheat of

liquid have been described in detail by Avedisian[6]. As has been found from this

literature, all previous experiments except one rely on the qualitative observation of

the nucleation visually and therefore the present measurement constitutes the ﬁrst

quantitative measurement of Tsl using digital electronics.

The limit of superheat can be estimated either from the thermodynamic sta-

bility theory or from the analysis of the dynamics of formation of the critical sized

vapor embryos (statistical mechanical theory). The superheated state of a liquid

is a metastable state and the limit of this metastable state is represented on the

P-V diagram by the spinodal curves. For a pure liquid, the spinodal curve or the

thermodynamic limit of superheat is deﬁned by states for which

  dP
dV !T

= 0

(1)

Temperley[9] calculated the value of maximum superheat temperature using van der

Waals’ equation of state. The maximum limit of superheat of a given liquid can be

expressed as

tm =

27Tc
32

4

(2)

where tm is the limit of superheat of the liquid . For mathematical simplicity this

has been calculated by considering the ambient pressure to be zero. At atmospheric

pressure i.e. at P=1, tm will be slightly greater than the corresponding value at

P=0. Other equations of state such as modiﬁed Bertholet equation and Redlich-

Kwong equation have also been used to calculate the limit of superheat[5]. As has

been observed by Blander and Katz[5], experimental values of thermodynamic limit

clearly exceeded the Van der Waals limit at least for ﬁve liquids.

For most of the organic liquids the thermodynamic limit of superheat can be

represented empirically[1] by

Tsl = Tc[0.11(P/Pc) + 0.89]

(3)

where Tc is the critical temperature, Pc is the critical pressure and P is the ambient

pressure.

Another method of estimating Tsl using statistical mechanics involves consid-

erations of the rate processes of nucleation to form vapor embryos in a superheated

liquid. This method does not yield an absolute value of Tsl but it allows one to esti-

mate the probable rate of formation of critical-sized vapor embryos in a superheated

liquid at a given temperature. If the rate is very low within the time scale of the

experiment, one considers no nucleation would occur, while if the rate is very high,

then one assumes that Tsl has been reached. The rate of homogeneous nucleation

5

(J) as given approximately by the Volumer-Doring formula is given by[1]

J = Nf exp −(cid:18) B
kT(cid:19)

(4)

where J is the expected rate of formation of critical sized vapor embryos per unit

volume, f is a frequency factor which in general is of the order of 1011 sec−1, N is the

number density of molecules in the superheated liquid and B is the minimum amount

of energy needed to form a vapor bubble of critical size as given by Gibbs[10] from

reversible thermodynamics is

B = 16πγ 3 (T )/3(pv − po)2

(5)

where γ(T ) is the liquid-vapor interfacial tension, Pv is vapor pressure of the super-

heated liquid and Po is the ambient pressure. It is to be noted in this connection

that which value of J is proper to calculate Tsl is not deﬁned and therefore one has

to make some ’judicious choice’ of a rate which would correspond to Tsl. A J value

of 106 nucleation/cm3.sec is often used to deﬁne the limit of superheat temperature.

It is to be noted that all the above discussions are related with the classical

theory of nucleation. Eﬀect of other factors like diﬀusion, viscosity and other hydro-

dynamical constraints are discussed by Blander and Katz [5]. As has been pointed

out by them, contributions arising out of these eﬀects in calculating Tsl of pure liquids

are not very signiﬁcant.

The experiment is carried out with superheated liquids of R12 (b.p. -29.79 oC),

R114 (b.p. 3.6oC) and R22 (b.p. -40.5oC). The superheated drops are suspended

6

in dust free, de-gassed visco-elastic gel. The gel is a mixture of ’aquasonic’ gel

available commercially and glycerine. A glass vial containing the superheated drops

homogeneously suspended in gel is placed on the top of a thin layer of degassed gel

taken in a beaker. The gel in the beaker improves the acoustic coupling between

the superheated drops in the vial and the transducer. The beaker is placed on a

piezoelectric transducer with a coupling gel. Some pure gel is placed on the top of the

sample and a thermometer was inserted in the pure gel so as to avoid any contact with

the superheated liquid sample, thus reducing the chance of heterogeneous nucleation

from the liquid-glass interface. The nucleation in superheated drops is detected by the

transducer, the output of the transducer is digitized and recorded by a multi channel

scaler. The vial was wrapped with a heating coil covering the gel and sample. The

temperature of the sample is increased slowly from room temperature and the count

rate (dN/dt) is recorded in MCS. As nucleation proceeds, the number of superheated

drops are depleted and hence the nucleation rate is normalized with respect to the

number of drops present. What we expect ideally is ( 1

N ) dN

dt is zero till the temperature

reaches the limit of superheat where there will be a sudden increase in ( 1

N ) dN

dt (entire

liquid nucleates) and will be no nucleation beyond this temperature. Considering the

experimental uncertainty, one may observe the similar behavior as presented in Fig.

1. The comparison of observed limit of superheat with other experimental results

is presented in the table below. The reduced limit of superheat deﬁned as Tsl/Tc

(taken in oK) for these liquids is also presented in the table along with theoretically

7

predicted values and other experimental results.

observed Tsl

oC

Reduced limit of superheat [Tsl(K)/Tc(K)]

Liquid

Tc

Predicted values from

Experiment

oK Present Others

(eqn.2)

(eqn.3)

(eqn.4) Present Others.

R12

384.5

80.0

72.0[1]

0.84

0.89

0.90

0.92

0.90[1]

R114

418.7

120.5

102.0[1]

0.84

0.89

0.91

0.94

0.90[1]

R22

369.0

57.5

54.0[1]

0.84

0.89

0.89

0.89

0.89[1]

0.89[6]

As could be seen from the table, the measured limit of superheat exceeded

the predicted limit of superheat and other experimental values. It is to be noted in

this connection that all theretical predictions are approximate as discussed before.

Therefore the present experimental measurements indicate the need of improved cal-

culation of limit of superheat. That the Van der Waals’ limit is exceeded was reported

before by Blander and Katz[5]. This table also gives an useful insight about the nu-

cleation process. As can be seen from the table, for liquids with lower boiling points

it is harder to reach closer to the critical temperature. This is quite expected as the

chances of heterogeneous nucleation increases in case of liquids with lower boiling

points. Whether complete elimination of heterogeneous nucleation in experimental

8

measurement is possible or not is an open question. No other measurement have been

able to reach so close to the critical temperature. It is to be noted in this connection

that the limit of superheat of only 14 liquids out of 56 liquids studied by Blander

and Katz [5] hardly exceeded 90% of the critical temperature.

Therefore, by reducing the chances of heterogeneous nucleation by suspending

the superheated sample in another ‘pure’ liquid and using precise electronic measure-

ment we have been able to reach closer to the critical temperature hitherto unattain-

able. Inspite of the fact that theoretical calculations are performed for ‘pure’ homoge-

neous nucleation, they fall below the experimental values indicate the inadequacy of

the present method of calculation discussed here and warrants improved calculations.

‡[⋆Present address : Chemistry Dept. Univ. of Utah. Salt Lake City. USA.]

‡[†Author for correspondence : Fax no. 91 33 350-6790,

email : scroy@bosemain.boseinst.ernet.in]

‡Lines to be deleted from the manuscript for blindfold refereeing

1. R. C. Reid Advances in Chemical Engineering 12, 199 (1983).

2. D. A. Glaser Phys. Rev 8, 665 (1952).

3. R. E. Apfel US Patent 4,143,274 (1979).

4. R.E. Apfel, S. C. Roy and Y.C. Lo Phys. Rev. A. 31, 3194 (1985).

5. Blander M. and Katz J. L. AIChE 21, 833 (1975).

6. Avedisian C. T. J. Phys. Chem. Data 14, 695, (1985).

9

7. Basu D. K. and Sinha D. B. Ind. J. Phys. 42, 198, (1968).

8. Apfel R. E. and Roy S. C. Rev. Sci. Inst. 54, 1397, (1983).

9. Temperley H. N. V. Proc. Phys. Soc. 59, 199, (1947).

10. Gibbs J. W. Translations of the Connecticut Academy III, p.108 (1875).

10

