0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

8
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
9
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A NOTE ON 3 + 1 DIMENSIONALITY

Centre for Applicable Mathematics & Computer Sciences

B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500063 (India)

B.G. Sidharth∗

Abstract

Recent work by Castro, Granik and El Naschie has given a ra-
tionale for the three dimensionality of our physical space within the
framework of cantorian fractal space time using similar ideas of quan-
tized fractal space time and noncommutativity. We also deduce the
same result. Interestingly this is also seen to provide a rationale for
an unproven conjecture of Poincare.

In a recent paper, Castro, Granik and El Naschie have given a rationale
for the three dimensionality of our physical space within the framework of
a Cantorian fractal space time and El Naschie’s earlier work thereon[1, 2].
An ensemble is used and the value for the average dimension involving the
golden mean is deduced close to the value of our 3 + 1 dimensions. We now
make a few remarks based on an approach which is in the spirit of the above
considerations.
Our starting point is the fact that the fractal dimension of a quantum path is
two, which, it has been argued is described by the coordinates (x, ict)[3]. In-
fact this leads to discretized space time, and a non commutative geometry as
in the approach of El Naschie, Castro and Granik, and further the Dirac equa-
tion of the spin half electron is seen to emerge from these considerations[4].
Given the spin half, it is then possible to deduce the dimensionality of an
ensemble of such particles, which turns out to be three[5, 6].
There is another way of looking at this. If we generalise from the one space

0E-mail:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in;Fax:0091-40-237266;Tel:0091-40-235081

1

dimensional case and the complex (x, t) plane to three dimensions, we infact
obtain the four dimensional case and the Theory of Quarternions, which are
based on the Pauli Spin Matrices[7]. As has been noted by Sachs, had Hamil-
ton identiﬁed the fourth coordinate in the above generalisation with time,
then he would have anticipated Special Relativity itself. It must be observed
that the Pauli Spin Matrices which denote the Quantum Mechanical spin
half form, again, a non commutative structure.
Curiously enough the above consideration in the complex plane can have
an interesting connection with an unproven nearly hundred year old conjec-
ture of Poincare. This was, the fact that closed loops could be shrunk to
points as happens on the two dimensional surface of a sphere is also valid in
three dimensions. Such closed loops deﬁning a simply connected space are
described by closed contours in complex space which have an integral value
for the index[8]. For the surface of the sphere the axes are replaced by great
circles and the coordinates by the longitude and latitude. If we now gener-
alise to three dimensions, we end up instead with the above four dimensional
Quarternion theory of Hamilton - the three dimensional case is not possible.
We have instead three space dimensions, and a fourth dimension, which as
seen above can also be recovered from the doubly connected or spinorial be-
haviour. Interestingly this also provides a rationale for Poincare’s conjecture
not being provable.

References

[1] C. Castro, A. Granin, M.S. El Naschie, hep-th/0004152.

[2] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, Vol.5, No.8, pp.1503-

1508,1995.

[3] B.G. Sidharth, ”Space Time as a Random Heap”, to appear in Chaos,

Solitons & Fractals.

[4] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 11(2000) 1269-1278.

[5] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne, and J.A. Wheeler, ”Gravitation” W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, p.1148ﬀ (1973).

2

[6] R. Penrose, ”Angular Momentum: An approach to combinational space-
time” in, ”Quantum Theory and Beyond”, Ed., Bastin, T., Cambridge
University press, Cambridge, p.151 (1971).

[7] M. Sachs, ”General Relativity and Matter” D. Reidel Publishing Com-

pany, Holland, p.45ﬀ (1982).

[8] J. B. Conway, ”Functions of One Complex Variable”, Springer Interna-

tional, New York, p.80ﬀ (1973).

3

