0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

1
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
7
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Complete Entangled Based Quantum

Communication With Security.

Arindam Mitra

V.I.P Enclave, M - 403, Calcutta- 700059. India.

February 20, 2014

Abstract

If, due to some catastrophe, our classical communication sys-
tem is destroyed but quantum entangled state survived, in
that entanglement age, it is widely believed, the whole world
would be communication less. It is discussed that complete
entangled based communication even with security is pos-
sible. In this context, the notion of cheating-free Bell’s in-
equality test is introduced.

1

Deutsch, in his foundational paper on quantum computation, suggested [1]
that quantum entanglement can be used to generate quantum key, discov-
ered by Bennett and Brassard [2] following Wiesner’s pioneering work [3]
on quantum cryptography. Bennett and Brassard used unentangled state in
their BB-84 seheme, so Deutsch’s suggestion was striking. But he did not
elaborate the operational procedure. Ekert elaborated [4] Deutsch’s idea and
pointed out that Bell’s theorem can be used to test eavesdropping. Although
practical utilization of Bell’s theorem is interesting but it has been soon clear
[5] that avoiding Bell’s inequality test, one can use EPR[6] correlation to de-
tect eavesdropping. Be that as it may, ﬁnally it has been settled that EPR
and non EPR cryptosystems are two diﬀerent type of cryptosystems, but
they have same physical property -the ability to detect eavesdropping.

Bennett, Brassard and Mermin [5] carried out a comparative study on
these two cryptosystems. They concluded that only diﬀerence is that ran-
dom data are jointly chosen by legitimate users in Non EPR cryptosystem
but in EPR protocol random data spontaneously originates due to the mea-
surements.
In EPR system key does not exist - not even in the mind of
legitimate users until measurement is performed. This seems to be always
true. So one can conjecture: entangled based pre-measurement key is impos-
sible.

Let us come to the teleportation scheme. In their famous paper Bennett
et al [7] argued successful teleportation without classical channel requires
superluminal signal. The presence of classical channel in the teleportation
process is reﬂected in the well known equation of teleportation: 1 ebit + 2
bit = 1 qubit. Recently we have shown classical channel can be replaced
by quantum channel. According to our scheme, the above equation can be
written as : 1 ebit + 2n qubit = 1 qubit. Here n qubits are equivalent to 1
bit. Now the question is: can we write the above equation in the following
manner: 1 ebit + 2n ebit = 1 qubit ? This means entangled based communi-
cation can be a substitute of classical communication. Inﬂuenced by earlier
conjecture one can make another conjecture: ”entanglement by itself can not
be used to transmit a classical message” [8]. Next we shall discuss that both
these conjectures are not true in our encoding-decoding procedure [9,10].

Let us recall the technique. The two diﬀerent sequences of quantum states

2

encode Boolean 0 or 1. These two sequences can be the sequences of random
or pseudo-random numbers and information regarding these two mother se-
quences is initially secretly shared between the legitimate users. Repeatedly
sending these two sequences arbitrarily long string of bit can be generated.
Now we shall use entangled state.

Suppose Alice has a personal database which contains meaningful data.
She wants to transmit the database to her partner Bob stationed at far oﬀ
distance only using entangled states. Suppose Alice possesses a stockpile of
EPR pairs. The n pairs (n is a medium large number) can be arranged in
two diﬀerent ways to represent bit 0 and 1. Any pair in arrangement can be
described as,

i,j=1 = 1/√2(|↑i1

i|↓i2

j − |↓i1

|ψi2n
where i and j (i 6= j) denote the position of any pair in the two arrange-
ments which are not very close to each other. The information regarding the
two arrangements (S 0 and S 1) is initially secretly shared between them.

i|↑i2
j ),

If Alice wants to send bit 0 from her database, she arranges n pairs ac-
cording to S 0 and then send that sequence to Bob. Similarly she can send
bit 1 by sending S 1. Bob can easily recover the bit values from the incoming
sequences by correlating the shared information regarding the two probable
arrangements and the outcome of his sequence of measurements. Let us il-
lustrate a simple decoding process for a single sequence. Bob ﬁrst receives
the sequence of EPR particles and store them in a quantum memory-cum-
register. He sorts out n/2 pairs assuming they belong to S 0 and keep the
n/2 pairs in (n/2) × 2 memory array marked 0. The remaining n/2 pairs
(say n is even number)are assumed to belong to S 1 and kept in (n/2) × 2
memory array marked 1. At this stage she does not know which identiﬁca-
tion is right. He measures the spin in vertical direction on EPR pairs ( each
pair kept in a row). If the sequence is S 0, then the results corresponding to
rows of the array marked 0 will be either ”↑, ↓” and ”↓, ↑”. But the results
corresponding to rows of array marked 1 will be ”↑, ↓”, ”↓, ↑”, ”↑, ↑” and
”↓, ↓”. As array marked 0 only contain EPR data so bit 0 is recovered. If
S 1 is sent then array marked 1 will contain EPR data. Complete entangled
based communication is possible. Next we shall discuss how this communi-

3

cation can be made secure.

Eavesdropper’s problem is identical to what she encountered in non- EPR
based scheme. He/she can not extract the bit values from a single copy of
any sequences [11]. As our scheme is based on repetition he/she can ex-
tract bit values and can evade detection if proper security criterion is not
imposed. The security criterion is: bit by bit security. In this criterion, next
bit will be sent after testing that the previous one has not been touched by
eavesdropper. This test needs two way communication to authenticate the
quantum channel [9]. Reverse communication can be done by the same two
arrangements. It is not necessary to send back the same arrangement what
receiver has got.

Note that, if security is not necessary, initial sharing of information is
also not needed. Bob can recover the message by correlating the results of
randomly incoming identical sequences. The concept of secret sharing was
ﬁrst introduced by Vernam in classical cryptography [12].
In our scheme
secret sharing is required to achieve bit by bit security. In that sense security
of each bit is based on Vernam principle as well as no cloning principle[11].

From Ekert’s work it is known that EPR based cryptosystem can be pro-
tected by Bell’s theorem[13]. But the problem is: violation or no-violation of
Bell’s inequality is not necessarily mean a genuine test of entanglement. Us-
ing unentangled states (BB-84 states[1]) Bell’s inequality can be tested[14].
This is a fake Bell’s inequality test. It is widely believed [15] that there is
no way to know by the two distant observers whether the test is real or fake.
If it be so, experimental falsiﬁcation of hidden variables under Einstein’s lo-
cality condition[6] is perhaps incomplete. In recent times such experiments
have already been performed[15,16]. In these experiments violation of Bell’s
inequality has been observed by space -like separated independent observers.
The standard belief is that one observer can always cheat other distant ob-
server about any outcome of the test [17]. That is, pseudo hidden variable
takes the place of hypothetical local hidden variable. Next we shall discuss
that cheating-free test is simply possible. That is, a genuine falsiﬁcation of
local hidden variables is possible.

Consider the following protocol. First Alice prepares pairs and send them

4

to Bob. Bob keeps some EPR pairs and some single EPR particles. He sends
back the partner EPR particles to Alice. Bob measures EPR correlation
on the EPR pairs in any parallel axes. Therefore, Bob can not be secretly
cheated by Alice. But Alice can be secretly cheated by Bob because he can
send back ”fake” states. Having received the states sent by Bob, Alice will
tell Bob to send some of the partner particles. Bob sends according to Alice’s
demand. Now Alice measures the EPR correlation on the pairs. Note that if
Bob sends ”fake” states in the ﬁrst round he could not create entangled state
in second feedback round. The reason is:
in advance Bob does not know
which partner particles will be sought, therefore he could not secretly cheat
Alice. They share genuine entangled states (They can use them for secure
ideal quantum coin tossing which is also believed to be impossible [18]). If
both get perfect correlation they can go ahead for the inequality test with
the remaining EPR pairs which they share.

However they can cheat each other when they reveal results of measure-
ments of diﬀerent axes as demanded by Bell’s inequality. After Alice’s dis-
closer of results and angles of measurements Bob can easily reveal ”fake”
results and the corresponding ”fake” angles of measurements with out go-
ing through any measurements in order to show violation or no violation of
Bell’s inequality to Alice. Same thing Alice can do if Bob reveal results ﬁrst.
Cheating -free test can be executed by the following manner.

After becoming sure they share genuine entangled states, Alice will ask
Bob to reveal the results and basis of measurements of half of his genuine
particles. Bob now chooses some particles to test the EPR correlation if
he gets perfect correlation then he can trust others results and proceeds for
inequality test. Alice’s is conﬁrmed that the test is a genuine test. Simi-
larly Bob can be sure the validity of the test just by asking Alice to reveal
the results and basis of measurements on the remaining shared particles. Of
course this time Bob will not reveal anything but only measure according to
the revealed data. However this is not a cryptographic protocol. To make
it cryptosystem we need two diﬀerent arrangements of entangled state as
described earlier. Note that if two secret arrangements are used then they
can not get perfectly correlated EPR data due to eavesdropping even when
they are honest.

5

Two particle entangled state can not only be used for two party protocol
but also three party protocol involving Alice (sender), Bob and Sonu (re-
ceivers). In three party protocol two receivers Bob and Sonu each of them
will get one of the EPR particles of each arranged pairs belonging to any of
the two arrangements. Let us take an example.

SBob
0 = {|φi1, |ψi1,|Pi1,|Qi1, |Xi1, |Y i1, ......}
SSonu

= {|Xi2, |φi2, |Y i2, |ψi2, |Qi2, |Pi2, .......}.

0

From each pair the particle 1 and 2 are given to Bob and Sonu respec-
tively. The above two arrangements representing bit 0 are given to Bob and
Sonu. They can construct the arrangement and recover the bit value if they
co operate each other. This is actually entangled based alternative message
splitting [19,20] protocol.

The protocol is described for two particle entangled state, although many
particles entangled state can be used. What type of entangled state should
be chosen for a sequence of n particles ? For example, two hundreds three
particle entangled states or three hundreds two particle entangled states ?
To answer this query let us see how many diﬀerent ways the particles can be
arranged. If n is the number of particles and r is the number of particles in an
entangled state, the number of distinguishable arrangements are n!/r!. Given
a single copy of any arrangement to an eavesdropper, her chance of correctly
distinguishing the arrangement is r!/n!. Two particle entangled state is the
best choice. For diﬀerent entangled arrangements, the issues like channel ca-
pacity, entropy and statistical distinguishability can be further investigated.

So far we did not consider noise in our discussion. In presence of noise
both raw EPR and non EPR protocols will be insecure since eavesdropper
can extract bit information without introducing any error. Noise is also
threat to the security of raw conventional QKD protocols. Many researchers
have attacked the problem in diﬀerent ways [see ref. 10]. To date, conven-
tional QKD can not be proved secure in practical settings. Recently noised
based completely secure practical cryptosystem has been presented[10]. The
method is applicable not only for alternative EPR and non- EPR protocols
but also for classical protocol belonging to our coding decoding procedure.
If noise has a quantum origin[21], then classical system can be thought as a

6

special case of quantum cryptosystem. In this way uniﬁcation of our classical
and quantum cryptosystem can be understood. Beneﬁcial sides of noise are
yet to be explored. In this light, the possibility of noise based (controlled)
classical computer can be investigated. Simulation of quantum computation
on noise based classical computer can not be straight forwardly ruled out
if we accept noisy classical computing state is analogous to supperposition
state of quantum mechanics.

Author is greatly inspired by the earlier development of quantum cryp-
tography. Author also acknowledges the computer facility of Variable Energy
Cyclotron Center, and library facility of Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics.

References

[1] D. Deustch Proc Roy. Soc,, 400 A , (1985).

[2] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard in Proceedings of IEEE Inter Conf. On Comp,
System and signal processing, Bangalore, India, 1984 .(IEEE, New York,
1984), pp-175-179.

[3] S.Wiesner, Signact News, 15, 1983.

[4] A. Ekert, Phy. Rev. Lett,67, 661 (1991).

[5] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard. G. & N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 557

(1992).

[6] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen, Phy Rev 47, 777, (1935).

[7] C. H. Bennett, et al, Phy. Rev. Lett, 70, 1895, (1993).

[8] C.H. Bennett and D. Divincenzo, Nature, 404, 247, 2000. See P. 251 and L.

33.

[9] A. Mitra. e-print, quant-ph/9812087 .

[10] A. Mitra. e-print, quant-ph/9912074

[11] W. K. Wootters, & W. H. Zurek, Nature, 299, 802 (1982).

[12] G. Vernam, J. Amer. Elect. Engrs, 45, 109-115 (1926).

7

[13] J.S.Bell, Physics, 1 ,195, 1994

[14] C.Fuchs, N. Gisin, P. B. Griﬀth, C.S. Niu, A. Peres 56 A, 1163(1997).

[15] G. Weihs, T. Jannewin, C. Simon, H. Weinfurter, A. Zeilinger, Phy. Rev. Lett,

81, 5039 (1998).

[16] D.S. Naik et al Phy. Rev .Lett 84, 4733 (2000).

[17] S. J.D. Phoenix and P.D. Townsend, Contem. Phys 36(3), p. 165-195,(1995).

[18] H.-K.Lo and H.F. Chau,Physica 120 D, 177 (1998). Authors’ impossibility
proof (their lemma 1. and 2.) of ideal coin tossing is based on the assumption
that shared entanglement can not be proven genuine.

[19] M. Hillery, V. Buzek, A. Berthiaume, Phy. Rev A, 59, 1829, (1999).

[20] A. Karlsson, M. Koashi, N. Imoto, Phy. Rev A, 59, 162, (1999).

[21] W.H.Zurek, October, Phy Today, p.36. (1991).

8

