0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
4
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

QUANTUM STRING FIELD THEORY AND PSYCHOPHYSICS

Denis V. Juriev

ul.Miklukho-Maklaya 20-180, Moscow 117437 Russia

(e-mail: denis@juriev.msk.ru)

physics/0008058

The quantum string ﬁeld theoretic structure of interactive phenomena is discussed.

This note continues the author’s researches on the boundary of experimental
mathematics, psychophysics and computer science, which were initiated about ten
years ago. Precisely, it is devoted to the unraveling of quantum string ﬁeld theoretic
(general aspects of this theory are discussed in the book [1] and its mathematical
formalism based on the inﬁnite dimensional geometry is exposed in [2]) structures
in the picture described in two previous notes [3]. The results may be signiﬁcant
for the constructing of a very important bridge between fundamental theoretical
high-energy physics and modern psychophysics. The interactive game theoretic sur-
rounding of the least may essentially enrich the quantum string ﬁeld theory by new
original features, which will be interesting for pure mathematicians. Such alliance
may be interesting to the theoretical physicists as supplying their sophisticated
constructions with a very simple and inexpensive experimental veriﬁcation.

I. Interactive phenomena: experimental detection and analysis [3]

1.1. Experimental detection of interactive phenomena. Let us consider a
natural, behavioral, social or economical system S. It will be described by a set
{ϕ} of quntities, which characterize it at any moment of time t (so that ϕ = ϕt).
One may suppose that the evolution of the system is described by a diﬀerential
equation

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ)

and look for the explicit form of the function Φ from the experimental data on the
system S. However, the function Φ may depend on time, it means that there are
some hidden parameters, which control the system S and its evolution is of the
form

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ, u),

where u are such parameters of unknown nature. One may suspect that such
parameters are chosen in a way to minimize some goal function K, which may be
an integrodiﬀerential functional of ϕt:

K = K([ϕτ ]τ ≤t)

Typeset by AMS-TEX

(such integrodiﬀerential dependence will be brieﬂy notated as K = K([ϕ]) below).
More generally, the parameters u may be divided on parts u = (u1, . . . , un) and each
part ui has its own goal function Ki. However, this hypothesis may be conﬁrmed
by the experiment very rarely. In the most cases the choice of parameters u will
seem accidental or even random. Nevertheless, one may suspect that the controls
ui are interactive, it means that they are the couplings of the pure controls u◦
i with
the unknown or incompletely known feedbacks:

ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ])

and each pure control has its own goal function Ki. Thus, it is suspected that the
system S realizes an interactive game. There are several ways to deﬁne the pure
controls u◦

i . One of them is the integrodiﬀerential ﬁltration of the controls ui:

u◦

i = Fi([ui], [ϕ]).

To verify the formulated hypothesis and to ﬁnd the explicit form of the convenient
ﬁltrations Fi and goal functions Ki one should use the theory of interactive games,
which supplies us by the predictions of the game, and compare the predictions with
the real history of the game for any considered Fi and Ki and choose such ﬁltrations
and goal functions, which describe the reality better. One may suspect that the
dependence of ui on ϕ is purely diﬀerential for simplicity or to introduce the so-
called intention ﬁelds, which allow to consider any interactive game as diﬀerential.
Moreover, one may suppose that

ui = ui(u◦

i , ϕ)

and apply the elaborated procedures of a posteriori analysis and predictions to the
system.

In many cases this simple algorithm eﬀectively unravels the hidden interactivity

of a complex system. However, more sophisticated procedures exist [3].

Below we shall consider the complex systems S, which have been yet represented

as the n-person interactive games by the procedure described above.

1.2. Functional analysis of interactive phenomena. To perform an analysis
of the interactive control let us note that often for the n-person interactive game
the interactive controls ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ]) may be represented in the form

ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ]; εi),

where the dependence of the interactive controls on the arguments u◦
i , [ϕ] and εi is
known but the ε-parameters εi are the unknown or incompletely known functions
of u◦
i , [ε]. Such representation is very useful in the theory of interactive games and
is called the ε-representation.

One may regard ε-parameters as new magnitudes, which characterize the system,
and apply the algorithm of the unraveling of interactivity to them. Note that ε-
parameters are of an existential nature depending as on the states ϕ of the system
S as on the controls.

The ε-parameters are useful for the functional analysis of the interactive controls

described below.

2

First of all, let us consider new integrodiﬀerential ﬁltrations Vα:

v◦
α = Vα([ε], [ϕ]),

where ε = (ε1, . . . , εn). Second, we shall suppose that the ε-parameters are ex-
pressed via the new controls v◦

α, which will be called desires:

εi = ε(v◦

1 , . . . , v◦

m, [ϕ])

and the least have the goal functions Lα. The procedure of unraveling of interac-
tivity speciﬁes as the ﬁltrations Vα as the goal functions Lα.

1.3. SD-transform and SD-pairs. The interesting feature of the proposed de-
scription (which will be called the S-picture) of an interactive system S is that it
contains as the real (usually personal) subjects with the pure controls ui as the
impersonal desires vα. The least are interpreted as certain perturbations of the
ﬁrst so the subjects act in the system by the interactive controls ui whereas the
desires are hidden in their actions.

One is able to construct the dual picture (the D-picture), where the desires act
in the system S interactively and the pure controls of the real subjects are hidden
in their actions. Precisely, the evolution of the system is governed by the equations

˙ϕ = ˜Φ(ϕ, v),

where v = (v1, . . . , vm) are the ε-represented interactive desires:

vα = vα(v◦

α, [ϕ]; ˜εα)

and the ε-parameters ˜ε are the unknown or incompletely known functions of the
states [ϕ] and the pure controls u◦
i .

D-picture is convenient for a description of systems S with a variable number
of acting persons. Addition of a new person does not make any inﬂuence on the
evolution equations, a subsidiary term to the ε-parameters should be added only.
The transition from the S-picture to the D-picture is called the SD-transform.

The SD-pair is deﬁned by the evolution equations in the system S of the form

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ, u) = ˜Φ(ϕ, v),

where u = (u1, . . . , un), v = (v1, . . . , vm),

ui =ui(u◦
vα =vα(v◦

i , [ϕ]; εi)

α, [ϕ]; ˜εα)

and the ε-parameters ε = (ε1, . . . , εn) and ˜ε = (˜ε1, . . . , ˜εm) are the unknown or
incompletely known functions of [ϕ] and v◦ = (v◦
n),
respectively.

m) or u◦ = (u◦

1, . . . , u◦

1 , . . . , v◦

Note that the S-picture and the D-picture may be regarded as complementary
in the N.Bohr sense. Both descriptions of the system S can not be applied to it
simultaneously during its analysis, however, they are compatible and the structure
of SD-pair is a manifestation of their compatibility.

3

II. Quantum string field theoretic
structure of interactive phenomena

2.1. The second quantization of desires. Intuitively it is reasonable to con-
sider systems with a variable number of desires.
It can be done via the second
quantization.

To perform the second quantization of desires let us mention that they are deﬁned
as the integrodiﬀerential functionals of ϕ and ε via the integrodiﬀerential ﬁltrations.
So one is able to deﬁne the linear space H of all ﬁltrations (regarded as classical
ﬁelds) and a submanifold M of the dual H ∗ so that H is naturally identiﬁed with a
subspace of the linear space O(M ) of smooth functions on M . The quantized ﬁelds
of desires are certain operators in the space O(M ) (one is able to regard them as
unbounded operators in its certain Hilbert completion). The creation/annihilation
operators are constructed from the operators of multiplication on an element of
H ⊂ O(M ) and their conjugates.

To deﬁne the quantum dynamics one should separate the quick and slow time.
Quick time is used to make a ﬁltration and the dynamics is realized in slow time.
Such dynamics may have a Hamiltonian form being governed by a quantum Hamil-
tonian, which is usually diﬀerential operator in O(M ).

If M coincides with the whole H ∗ then the quadratic part of a Hamiltonian de-
scribes a propagator of the quantum desire whereas the highest terms correspond
to the vertex structure of self-interaction of the quantum ﬁeld.
If the submani-
fold M is nonlinear the extraction of propagators and interaction vertices is not
straightforward.

2.2. Quantum string ﬁeld theoretic structure of the second quantization
of desires. First of all, let us mark that the functions ϕ(τ ) and ε(τ ) may be
regarded formally as an open string. The target space is a product of the spaces of
states and ε-parameters.

Second, let us consider a classical counterpart of the evolution of the integrodif-
ferential ﬁltration. It is natural to suspect that such evolution is local in time, i.e.
ﬁltrations do not enlarge their support (as a time interval) during their evolution.
For instance, if the integradiﬀerential ﬁltration depends on the values of ϕ(τ ), ε(τ )
for τ ∈ [t0 − t1, t0 − t2] at the ﬁxed moment t0 it will depend on the same values
for τ ∈ [t − t1, t − t2] at other moments t > t0. This supposition provides the
reparametrization invariance of the classical evolution. Hence, it is reasonable to
think that the quantum evolution is also reparametrization invariant.

Reparametrization invariance allows to apply the quantum string ﬁeld theoretic
models to the second quantization of desires. For instance, one may use the string
ﬁeld actions constructed from the closed string vertices (note that the phase space
for an open string coincides with the conﬁguration space of a closed string) or string
ﬁeld theoretic nonperturbative actions. In the least case the theoretic presence of
additional ”vacua” (minimums of the string ﬁeld action) is very interesting.

2.3. Additional ﬁelds and virtual subjects. Often quantum string ﬁeld the-
ory claims an introduction of additional ﬁelds (such as bosonised ghosts). Let us
consider such ﬁelds in the D-picture.

In D-picture desires have their own ε-parameters and depend on the pure con-
trols of subjects. These pure controls may be obtained from the ε-parameters of
desires via integrodiﬀerential ﬁltrations. One is able to apply such ﬁltrations to the

4

additional ﬁelds. There are two possibilities. First, the result is expressed via the
known pure controls. Second, the result is a new pure control of a virtual subject.
Certainly, any experimental detection of virtual subjects is extremely interesting.

III. Conclusions

Thus, the quantum string ﬁeld theoretic structure of interactive phenomena is
described. Possible qualitative eﬀects, which are produced by this structure and
conﬁrm its presence, are emphasized. Perspectives are brieﬂy speciﬁed.

References

[1] Green M.B., Schwarz J.H., Witten E., Superstring theory. Cambridge Univ.Press, Cam-

bridge, 1988.

[2] Juriev D., Inﬁnite dimensional geometry and quantum ﬁeld theory of strings. I-III.
AGG 11(1994) 145-179 [hep-th/9403068], RJMP 4(3) (1996) 187-314 [hep-th/9403148],
JGP 16 (1995) 275-300 [hep-th/9401026]; String ﬁeld theory and quantum groups. I:
q-alg/9708009.

[3] Juriev D., Experimental detection of

interactive phenomena and their analysis:
math.GM/0003001; New mathematical methods for psychophysical ﬁltering of experi-
mental data and their processing: math.GM/0005275.

5

