0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
6
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
9
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

the quantum vacuum, fractal geometry,

and the quest for a new theory of gravity

Edward F. Halerewicz, Jr.∗

Lincoln Land Community College†

5250 Shepherd Road

P.O. Box 19256, Springﬁeld, IL 62794-9256 USA

August 11, 2000

Abstract

In this letter recent developments are shown in experimental and theoretical physics which brings into
question the validity of General Relativity. This letter emphasizes the construction of a fractal 3 + φ3 spacetime,
in N-dimensions in order to formalize a physical and consistent theory of ‘quantum gravity.’ It is then shown
that a ‘quantum gravity’ eﬀect could arise by means of the Strong Equivalence Principle. Which is made possible
through a pressure of the form −κ(Rca
ab . Where it is seen that nuclear pressures can be added
to the gravitational ﬁeld equations by means of twistor spaces.

ab Rc) = κT cσ

b −

1

2 gcσ

Keywords: Fractal Geometry, New Relativity, quantum vacuum, EPR, zero-point ﬁeld, quantum gravity, Mach’s
Principle, Holographic Principle, Fermat’s Last Theorem, alternative gravity, Bohmian Mechanics.

PACS no. 4.50, 4.60

1

Introduction

Recently the validity of General Relativity (GR) has been brought to question by Yilmaz [1], et al. Although
such interpretations allow for gravitation to be mathematically consistent and singularity free. Such revisions fail
to describe the behavior of test particles as adequately as GR, elevating GR as the correct theory [2]. Today
certain questions about GR remain relevant, such as how does it relate to vacuum energy and quantum mechanics
in general.
It has been shown in previous works that GR remains self consistent when including the quantum
vacuum, or zero-point ﬁeld [3]. However, the search for a self consistent theory of “quantum gravity,” remains a
major theoretical challenge today. Among the theoretical arguments against the standard interpretation of GR is
the choice of mathematical coordinate systems [4]. Special Relativity (SR), is based upon the structure of a ﬂat
Minkowski spacetime given in a four-dimensional coordinate system. Recently attempts have been made describing
coordinate systems with fractal spaces as opposed to natural ones [5, 6, 7]. Such an adaptation as the case with
the Yilmaz approach eliminates singularities within the ﬁeld equations.

Recent observational and experimental data have also put into question the validity of GR. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has reported an anomalous acceleration of ±8.5 × 10−8cm, on
spacecraft on the outer edge of the solar system [8]. This data was obtained from information gathered by the
Jet Propulsion Laboratories (JPL), and the Deep Space Network (DSN). Thus far, no satisfactory conclusion has

∗email: edward@springnet1.com
†This address is given for mailing purposes only, and is not responsible for the production of work within. This work was made

possible through my own personal research prior to becoming a ﬁrst year student at the above establishment

I

been given to explain the so called “anomalous acceleration towards the sun.” Not only have spacecraft provided
some fundamental ﬂaws with gravitation, but laboratory results as well. Dr. Eugene Podkletnov, has reported
a “gravitational shielding” eﬀect with composite bulk Y Ba2Cu3O7−x ceramic plates [9]. In light of all of these
developments it is hard to consider GR as the correct theory. It is the opinion of the author that GR is a theory
that “works,” however it doesn’t necessarily make it the correct theory.

The goal of this letter is to show that GR is not the correct theory of gravitation, but just works exceptionally
well. Just as previously Newton’s law of universal gravitation worked exceptionally well. This letter is not intended
to be a replacement for GR, nor is it intended to present theoretical ﬂaws of the that theory. This letter is only
presented as an introductory work for an alternative theory of gravitation. The general theme of this letter is given
by the following postulates:

Postulate 1 (virtual gravitation). Spacetime is not a null energy ﬁeld, it consist of asymptotic vacuum ﬂuctu-
ations, and behaves as a virtual “energy-sheet.”

Postulate 2 (planckian invariance). The Planck length is a gauge invariant function for all (interacting) brane
observers. [an adaptation to the postulate of New Relativity.]

This letter is presented in the following format in section II a brief introduction into uniﬁed ﬁeld theories
are given. In section II.1 a few quantum gravity approaches are introduced.
In section III fractal geometry is
introduced and its relations to a complex system are given. In section III.1 the meaning of fractal geometry for
QED is discussed. In section III.2 the meaning of a fractal geometry is discussed for QCD. In section IV a new
theoretical particle is introduced utilizing fractal geometry. In section IV.1 a relationship between N-dimensional
and two-dimensional systems are given. In section V a philosophy of geometry is given. In section V.1 the eﬀects
of the quantum vacuum are discussed. In section V.2 a relationship between fractal geometries and the quantum
vacuum are discussed. In section V.3 the meaning of Feynman diagrams are discussed. In section V.4 the validity of
quantum mechanics is brought into question. In section V.5 an alternative description of gravity is given which may
explain the EPR paradox. In section VI an overview of a canonical non Riemannian gravitational ﬁeld is given.
In section VI.1 the planck length results as a function in canonical quantum gravity. In section VII a possible
alternative for the “anomalous acceleration” of spacecraft is given. In section VII.2 pseudo geodesic equations are
presented. In section VIII a general discussion of this work is presented. Finally in section VIII.1 a discussion of
the meaning of the planck length is given.

2 Uniﬁcation a brief history

“I am convinced that He [God] does not play dice.” –A. Einstein

“Einstein, quit telling God what to do.” –N. Bohr

The uniﬁcation of gravitation with quantum mechanics began with Einstein’s objections to the newly developed
quantum theory. Although acknowledging the successes of the new theory he believed it to be incomplete. Einstein
was convinced that there was a deeper theory involved, one which would also include GR, a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory was
christened. Soon came the work of Kaluza and Klien, giving a pseudo mathematical uniﬁcation of electromagnetism
and gravitation. The theory would soon die out and loose interest, until quantum mechanics came around. And
asked the simple question, how does gravity behave at the quantum level; the answer Kalzua-Klien gravity [10].
Research in this area soon exploded, extra dimensions were soon added to the ﬁeld equations, superstring theory
was born. Particle physics began unifying fundamental forces as well, the weak force, the strong force, the elec-
tromagnetic force. But no gravitational force, Cosmologists helped out, the big bang and nucelarsynthesis would
help to explain the problem. Soon physics became littered with Grand Uniﬁed Theories (GUTs) and Theories of
Everything (TOEs), they all have the approach of a “uniﬁed ﬁeld theory.” However, they missed the simple point
Einstein was trying to make, how do quantum mechanics and relativity relate? This is a hierarchical question, the
relevant question is how do macroscopic and microscopic worlds communicate?

II

2.1 quantum gravity

Historically there have been two models formulated for the construction of a consistent quantum gravity theory.
They are the canonical and Hamiltonian approaches [11]. These two approaches have had limited success, however
more recently the theory of loop quantum gravity [12] has been introduced into the sea. Out of the three approaches
presented loop quantum gravity is generally accepted as the correct approach. However, for a more accurate
description of the historic developments of quantum gravity see [13]. In this letter I will focus on the canonical
approach as it relates to gauge invariance.

3 Fractal Geometry

“. . . If we’re built from Spirals while living in a giant Spiral, then is it possible that everything we put our hands
to is infused with the Spiral?” –Max Cohen in the motion picture π

The presence of matter within GR disturbs the ﬁeld equations by the existence of singularities or “point-
particles.” How can one avoid this eye sore in the equations, simple fractal geometry. If matter is fractal it can
not condense into points, however this allusion can still take place above the planck energy scale. It is hard to
believe that this simple approach has only been attempted in recent times, fractal sets are more common in nature
than simple polygons. First let us begin with a simple construction of a fractal set with the simple equation
Z(n) = (Z(n−1))2 + C. One must also realize that a fractal is composed of a complex number system, i.e. a+ib.
Using this form one may wish to construct a complex averaging of the mean, which results from the golden mean

φ = (√5 − 1)/p(5 − 1). Thus we have constructed a complex mean which has two possible solutions as seen below:

;

√a+2√(a+2)
√a√(a)

√−b√(b) ⇔ a = c
√−b+2√(b+2) ⇔ a 6= c

;

(1)

Cm =

√a − 1
p(a − 1)

+

=

= i ↔ p(n)
√−n

√−b − 1
p(b − 1)
√−n
p(n)

this complex mean thus has non communcating solutions. Which from the stand point of imaginary numbers yields
the general statements:

= −i

(2)

Thus these statements would appear to be in agreement of the theory of quaternions. Which is interesting enough
in itself, a four-dimensional version of the complex number system.

With this preliminary work set we can now construct a Minkowski spacetime which that takes advantage of
fractal dimensions. First one can construct the generalized three-dimensional manifold as a three-brane, and thus
incorporating time as a fractal set. Thus the fractal construction on spacetime is presented in the form 3 + φ3
a similar approach was made in Ref.
[4]. It is here postulated the origin for this three-dimensional brane arises
from planck scaling. The reason for this postulate is seen when the golden mean is applied to N-dimensions

φn = (√N − 1)/p(N − 1), the higher n the closer the mean is to 1. Thus only when n approaches inﬁnity will we

see that 3 + φ3 will yield the standard Minkowski space of 3+1 dimensions. This is of course in agreement with any
system that we apply c=¯h=κ=K=1 more evidently this corresponds to a time dilation eﬀect in terms of special
relativity. Such that we have the following revision to the ﬂat four-dimensional Minkowski space:

(ω, z2) = ωc2 − (φ)z2

1 − (φ)z2

2 − (φ)z2

3

(3)

It is interesting to note that this pseudo metric appears to be an inverse of the standard Minkowski spacetime, this
importance is seen in section V.5. So far this method has only left intriguing consequences, however it diverges
from the point made earlier in this section.

In string theory the atomism view of matter is replaced with vibrating strings, these vibrating strings correspond
to a real geometry. However, fractal geometries are allowed to break of these strings into imaginary components.
These imaginary components thus make the string a complex function, yielding a pseudo point-like string. To

III

analyze this premise allow us to view the Nambu-Goto action S = µ0R d2ξ√g. If strings can indeed be made to

subside with fractal geometry, then they would break oﬀ into imaginary components by the empirical action:

S = ℵ0Z ω2φ√−g

(4)

where g = λ2dz2 ⊗ d¯z2 ≡ x + iy. This pseudo string forms many more string components in N-dimensions, that
is the string fragment continues in inﬁntium. However, in the physical sense the string exist a pseudo point-like
particle, do to the scaling nature of the planck length. These fractal strings then interact within a ﬁeld, known as
gravitational or zero-point ﬁelds. When the fractal strings converge with other fractals, a self organization takes
place, i.e. the production of virtual particles. This production is made possible through the non communacating
mathematics associated with quantum mechanics. As the particles are produced they destroy one another, such
that their world-sheets reverberate in a complex form. This complex reverberations in N-dimensions is responsible
for the vibration of the string, which we na¨ıvely associate with mass.

3.1 QED fractality

Electromagnetic waves are the result of four-dimensional interactions, and its real wave would correspond to the
results found in Classical Mechanics. However, it would intern have a fractal complex ﬁeld, which would cause the
ﬁeld to break periodically yielding a string fragment, a quanta. This quanta in non self regulating, i.e.
it is the
nature of the real wave which causes the string to reverberate. The above consideration may carry some controversy
in the well known theory of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED). If a quanta is just a fractal string, then what is
the proper approach for the exchange of energy between the two systems? Well, the result appears as classical
approximation, the quanta hits the string as a solid body, causing a change in geometry, which virtual particles
oppose. This causes the string to “bounce” back to its original form, emitting a real wave, but not necessarily a
quanta, remember a quanta is given by a complex ﬁeld. Since quantum mechanics is sketched out onto a point
particle-like environment, its consequences would agree with the QED model. In fact the fractal model yields a
much physical picture for non communacating relationships than the quantum theory.

3.2 QCD fractality

The above result would agree with QED, however, its deﬁnitions are quite weak, in fact one may expand these
deﬁnitions to Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). Thus a nucleon may be made to reﬂect electromagnetic radiation
as well, however, this dose not defy the documented experiments in any magnitude. It would be the interaction of the
system, i.e. what string perimeters give way to the colored, and other gauged forces, that yields its “particles”. Each
string fragment consist of its own local vibrations (gauge invariance), which attributes its mass, i.e. diﬀerentiates
between a Higgs particle and a quark. These states then have their own local statistics, their real waves would then
correspond diﬀerently than the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Which results in the production of the celebrated Yang-Mills
ﬁeld, and thus yields the production of colored particles such as the gluon.

4 Cardinal Strings

Cantor pioneered the study of inﬁnities with his new theory of Cardinal numbers, however he faced opposition
in his time for this new theory [14]. Cardinal numbers oﬀer the best insight into to the study of fractal strings
in N-dimensions, these interpretations in fact have direct physical consequences. Most notably it can explain the
situation unleashed by the infamous EPR-Bell paradox, where Faster Than Light (FTL) communication appears
possible (depending on planckian scaling). For recent theoretical implications and interpretation of the EPR-Bell
paradox see [15]. In each scaling the laws of physics would be very diﬀerent, and hence superluminal velocities
would seem to appear in lower branes. Thus the traditional interaction of strings should not be limited on a
speciﬁed dimension, but behave as a set of Cardinal numbers. Thus a slight revision of the Nambu-Goto action
should be given which yields

S = ℵ0Z ω2φp−˜g

IV

(5)

where ˜g = −dt′ ⊗ dt′ + [dr′ ⊗ dr′ + 1

4 (sin(2r′))2Ω − 2].

4.1 Fermat’s Last Theorem

“To divide a cube into two or other cubes, a fourth power, or, in general, any power whatever into two powers of
the same denomination above the second is impossible. . . ” –Fermat

Fermat’s Last Theorem can be associated with fractal geometry in one respect, there is no general real solution to
fractal geometry above dimension 2. This may be a simple coincidence and may have no deeper meaning, however,
this is contrary to the recently created Holographic Principle (HP) [16]. The HP relates that the Universe may exist
in dimensions of inﬁnitum status. However, the laws of physics are best projected onto a pseudo two-dimensional
screen, and our three-dimensional world is only a pseudo manifestation of an N-dimensional continuum. In string
theory we can view our universe as made up of two two-dimensional branes (described by type IIA D2 membranes).
Thus any other dimension outside the holographic conjecture yields no physical meaning and no solution. Just as
what is suggested by Fermat’s Last Theorem, therefore our four dimensional slice of the brane is a pseudo physical
manifestation of the holographic screen. There is only one explanation for this result, there must exist a physical
constant for speciﬁed energy scales, i.e. the planck scale. Here another coincidence appears to arrive, the two

dimensional wave equation for string theory (cid:16) ∂ 2

∂σ2 − ∂ 2

physically there is a special importance with dimension 2. This discussion is largely philosophical, however it is
interesting to note that cardinal strings are given by complex numbers. In fact a cardinal string in four-dimensions
is remarkably similar to the two-dimensional form, and seems to correspond to a torus:

∂τ 2(cid:17) χµ(σ, τ ) = 0. It seems that both mathematically and

S2 = ℵ0Z d2ξ√−g + ℵ0Z d2ξ√−g ≡ ℵ0Z d4(x

1
λ2
IIAt2

IIA M)

(6)

From this complex structuring, and properties of cardinal numbers it can be seen why quaternions were alluded to
in section III.

5

a matter of geometry

Einstein’s theory of GR transformed Newton’s theory of a gravitational force, to a direct consequence of geometry.
However, although the idea of a force was replaced with a geometry, the geometry still yields a force when explained
in Riemannian geometry. An even more radical approach to gravitation as a geometry was produced by Roger
Penrose in his theory of twistor spaces. The geometry itself is more important than physical masses, in fact masses
only come important when one expands this theory. This is true for a fractal revision of string theory, it exist a
pure geometry, the nature of the geometry in fact produces mass. This seems almost a radical stance from the
point of view of GR, however geometry remains a key factor as the ideal of a Force to GR.

5.1 the vacuum

The vacuum exist from a state of virtual particles being produced via cardinal string fragments. Since virtual
particles are a pure construction of “particles” in N-dimensions, they are not true strings (i.e. they violate the HP).
These particles thus carry no mass-energy equivalent in our universe, never the less they still posses a geometry.
This situation only holds true when the system is localized, however, when interacting with non cardinal strings
can induce an energy exchange. By the well known Casimir eﬀect the energy of the vacuum should be given by
[20]:

and when interacting with an inertial mass system we have:

ρZP (ω) =

¯hω3
2π2c3

mi =

V0

c2 Z η(ω)ρZP (ω)dω

V

. This relates the fact that as mass is accelerated it pushes the quantum vacuum energy (which is analogous to the
assumption made be postulate one). In other words it reacts in the same fashion as air molecules do when inertial
masses accelerate on earth (producing pressure on the system). Furthermore, it can be assumed that a material
body increases its rest mass by absorbing this zero-point-energy (this assumption must be given in order to satisfy
conservation laws).

Moreover, since they are cardinal strings they are uniﬁed in a manner, thus the vacuum is a geometrical
manifestation of string particles. That is the geometrical patterns formed through string interactions is what we
call a gravitational ﬁeld, i.e. a virtual gravitational ﬁeld. Since these string interactions are only virtual there is
no reason to modify the Einstein Field Equation, unless one wishes to discuss quantum string eﬀects. Furthermore
N-dimensional spacetime metrics have shown to be very similar to the structure of four-dimensional spacetimes
[17]. Therefore the classical gravitational ﬁeld is removed from quantum mechanics as it exist in a virtual sense,
thus quantum mechanics is a property of matter.

5.2 the stage

The vacuum however is not currently treated as the geometry of a fractal spacetime system, and hence is incom-
patible with other vacuum theories [18, 19]. However a fractal model for quantum mechanics appears to agree
with at least one interpretation of the quantum vacuum [20]. In fact this interpretation goes right along with loop
quantum gravity, and string theory see Ref.
[21]. The Hausdorﬀ (or fractal) dimension suggest that dimensions
maybe conﬁned to a D=3 spacetime, with fractal string scaling. This principle was postulated earlier in this letter
as the consequence of the “planckian scaling,” and is the leading postulate in New Relativity. Here the importance
now becomes what is the meaning of de-Broglie phenomenon. The Einstein de-Broglie equation ¯hωC = m0c2 can
be seen as a representation of the relativistic wave equation, i.e. mass is a quantiﬁable measure of energy. Which
can be applied directly to string theory, the vibrations of the string are given in a fractal frequency comparable to
the Compton wave length.

5.3 the Feynman stage

From the above consideration it can be equally applied the the origin of a bodies mass intern comes from the
gravitational ﬁeld itself. This requires the use of Feynman diagrams, and believe it or not this approach is indeed
correct, if strings are represented by cardinal numbers (and if quantum mechanics is considered to be correct).
Since this allows for FTL communication at the classical level it can be interpreted at least at the quantum level
that mass originates from spacetime (when measured at the planckian scale). In fact at the quantum level the
production of virtual particles may be responsible for a light paths geodesic curvature, yielding a quantum gravity
theory. More correctly it may be viewed that the quantum theory is in reality a classical approximation of string
theory.

Theorem (Brussels approximation). Quantum mechanics exist as a classical approximation of string interac-
tions which possesses an apparent time reversed symmetry.

5.4 quantum mechanics?

Deriving this theorem let us consider the following thought experiment: If mass is composed of vibrating stings,
and intern these strings produce gravitational ﬁelds in N-dimensions then space is vibrating. However, such an
approach would imply that geometrically speaking the two systems are unaware of their own vibrations under
gauge invariance. On the other hand, the interaction of fractal strings are given in a complex ﬁeld, which itself
is anti-communcating. Thus spacetime, or string space is subjected to Uncertainty Principles as shown in Ref.
[22]. Since at the classical level, the fractal space can give way to real solutions I now make the assertion that
the quantum particles are at ﬂux, and not the space itself (for argumentative purposes only). Therefore when a
quantum is observed, it is the space which becomes “fuzzy,” not the particle, and when not observed the inverse
follows. Thus the theorem leads to two possible out comes during an observation sequence. i) the fuzzy quantum
particle becomes a point particle, when time symmetries are reversed. ii) spacetime is fuzzy, however when collapsed
by a point particle elucidates to a “natural” state. Thus it is seen that only when time symmetries are reversed

VI

Figure 1: An over simpliﬁcation of the EPR statistics for a spin 1
2 system given in a binary plane with time reversed
symmetries. Where the ovals represent the probability of being observed by the apparatus. And where the positions
“on” or “oﬀ” represent the outcome of events interpreted by classical mechanics.

does one obtain the laws commonly associate with quantum mechanics. Making the only valid approximation of
quantum mechanics the Brussels Interpretation [23], this may also explain the EPR paradox. However our thought
experiment does yield one solution which interpretation i and ii are consistent.

When a particle is observed by a frame, it is in reality observed by the local states (brane) of the cardinal string,
which may be in any number of states. As a point particle (non local string) enters the system it begins to collapse
the wave function of the local state. This makes it appear that a fuzzy quantum particle has entered the system,
much as a star appears to twinkle in the night sky. This collapsing of the state I will call the observational’s frame
“present,” before the action the observational state was fuzzy. However, after the event a self organization took
place, an event occurred, producing a present state. After the quanta is observed by the observational frame, its
present state then becomes certain in the terminology of classical quantum mechanics. Therefore local brane string
interactions can not take place until a non local (cardinal) string collapses the wave function of the system.

5.5 Bohmian Mechanics, gravitation, and EPR

From the Feynman interpretation of the time reversed symmetries of the gravitational ﬁeld, new conclusions about
the nature of spacetime can be made. It is here postulated that classical mechanics is in reality a description of a
quantum system given under an approximation of a time reversed symmetry. Such that the following statements
become true:

• Reversal of Bohmian Mechanics (BM) yields Classical Mechanics
• Reversal of Brussels Interpretation (BI) yields Standard Quantum Mechanics (SQM)
With the fractalization of spacetime given in section III, we may conclude that (with the use of Bohmian
Mechanics) that inertial mass yields an expansion of spacetime. Thus as a body gains mass as it accelerates in
classical spacetime it causes the fractalization of the Bohmian system to increase (which is analogous to a Lorentz
transformation). Which thus gives the allusion that spacetime is contracting in the classical real frame. The
gravitational force, thus is an inertial acceleration which radiates a pseudo center of gravity vector in terms of
Newtonian mechanics. However, this is how we interpret the events classically, in reality it is the expansion of the
fractal Bohmian space (the φ3 term in section III, e.g. the time dimension)which yields inertial acceleration.

Therefore, it is the Brussels interpretation of quantum mechanics which yields the EPR paradoxes, the connec-
tion of the particles is created by the (incorrect) approximation of time reversed symmetries. That is to say the
EPR paradox only includes simple (non fractal) states, which by time reversal appears to yield FTL communication
(see ﬁgure 1).

This appearance of FTL communication shouldn’t be taken to seriously since recent experiments (cfr. Wang, et
al [33]) appear to yield FTL communication. However, it is the string interactions which yield quantum mechanics,
in fact it yields the same interpretations as Bohmian Mechanics [24]. Thus Bohmian Mechanics adequately describes
the behavior of “particles” while, the Brussels Interpretations yields standard quantum mechanics [meaning that
this system is only an approximation].

VII

6 quantum gravity?

Since complex spaces have been presented as a solution to the singularity problem, it is natural for a formulation
of a complex spacetime. To proceed in this manner one must neglect the cherished Einstein-Hilbert action s =

R d4x√−gR and replace it with the Tucker-Wang action:

s =Z λ2R ⋆ 1

Therefore we can now discuss a complex gravitational ﬁeld, without the traditional Riemannian geometry. The
classical Einsteinian relativity gives the generic ﬁeld for a spacetime geometry as ∇µGµν = 0. Such that I now
wish to make the generalized statement ∇ˆµGˆµˆν 6= 0, or in canonical terms ∇aGab = 0. As such a generalization of
a purely idealistic spacetime governed by perfect ﬂuid becomes:

Gab = 16πGTab

(7)

where under ideal cases one can have the geometry Ra
b , as
opposed to Rab, can be seen with the use Riemannian metrics. First, let us begin with a Ricci symmetric tensor of
the form:

4 gabR. The reason the ﬁeld takes on the term Ra

b + 1

which within a constant ﬁeld becomes Rµν = Λσ
couple to an opposing electromagnetic ﬁeld by the connection

∂Λσ
µ
∂xv = ηµνσΦvΛσ
µFσν . This ﬁeld can thus transpose to Fµν = ∂µΦν − ∂ν Φµ, and

µ

Which therefore leads to the following antisymmetric Riemannian ﬁeld

Γσ
µν = Λσ

µΦν

Rµν(cid:18) ∂Φv
∂xσ −

∂Φσ
∂xν + Cαβ

νσ ΦαΦβ(cid:19) Λσ

µ = Fσν Λσ
µ

Whence therefore means that there must be an equivocal orthonormal action taking place, such that one has
Ra

b. In which the generic geometry for a perfect ﬂuid becomes that of

b = dΛa

b + Λa

c ∧ Λc

which translates to the ﬁeld equation:

Gab = 16πGT σ
ab

Ra
b −

1
4

g(ˆe(a)), ˆe(b))R = −

16πG
c4 T σ

ab

This equation must be modiﬁed when given in an N-dimensional system such that on has:

Ra
b −

1

2(n)

g(ˆe(a), ˆe(b))R = −

8π(n)G
c2(n) T σ

ab

(8)

(9)

(10)

The above equation is in essence a canonical gravitational ﬁeld equation, which appears to be a good candidate for
a quantum gravity theory. Where the geodesic equations become

d

dˆl (cid:20)(cid:18)1 +

γab(n)

2(n) (cid:19) dxµ

dˆl (cid:21) − Γ6α

[6β6λ]

dx6β
dˆl

dx6γ

dˆl (cid:18)1 +

γab(n)

2(n) (cid:19) 6= 0

(11)

However, this interpretation suggest that spacetime is quantitized by a canonical action however, quantum particles
are given as classical particles. Hence this interpretation would be an inverse of understood quantum mechanics.
However, here a paradox opens up, when time is reversed particles remain in one quantum state, thus SQM is not
retrieved. Thus, it is seen that there exist no true “quantum gravity” theory. In fact if one applies this formulation
with the planck length it destroys the principle of planckian invariance and gives an allusion to the existence of an
Æther.

VIII

6.1 canonical approach fails

Therefore the planck length no longer remains a constant but becomes a dynamical function. First let us write the
planck length in terms of N-dimensions and apply it to the above ﬁeld equation such that we have:

p0 = ∓(pncn/c−2(n))1/n. Thereby
Momentum must be reevaluated from E = ±(pncn + mn
the planck length, and mass are actually given by a particles rest momentum. Such that the planck length is in
reality given by the function:

lp = ±(κ¯hn/γmn

p0c3(n))1/2(n) · ψ

lpκ = (κ¯hn/mn

p c3(n))1/2(n) · ψ
0 c2(n))1/n, such that mn

(12)

(13)

This thereby has major implications, that the planck length is not really a constant at all but a function of
momentum. Such that as an object increase in speed with respect to its rest momentum, its planck energy becomes
larger. That is as a material body is subjected to length contraction, its planckian energy is modiﬁed to compensate
for the eﬀect. Since the momentum is measured at rest m remains a constant, it is the velocity of the system which
changes. Thereby meaning that length contraction in special relativity is not given by Lorentz transformations, but
by the local rest momentum of the planck barrier. This results when we interpreted this action canonically however
under BM it yields expected results. Therefore it is seen that a canonical formulation fails to keep “planckian
invariance” which represents a failed attempt at a quantum gravity theory.

7

anomalous acclerations?

Finally I bring light to an alternative explanation for the acceleration of spacecraft [8]. Since the ﬁndings of the
“anomalous acceleration towards the sun,” there have been a number of possible explanations given [27, 28, 29].
With the construction of a fractal N-dimensional spacetime, I view this as a quantum gravity eﬀect. As an object
accelerates its fractal geometry changes [by means of BM], thus resulting in pressure on the system. Pressures as
the source of a gravitational ﬁeld were pioneered long ago by Einstein [30]:

gµνT )

1
Rµν = −κ(Tµν −
2
σ
2
a2 γµν = κ(
2 − p)
σ
+ p)
0 = −κ(
2

+

This method is not ad hoc, gravitational pressures for atomic gases and radiation can be given by [37]:

which lends the general results

pgas =

κ
µH

qT

and

prad =

1
3

aT 4

3
q

µH

T =(cid:18) κ
β4 #1/3
1 − β

β (cid:19)1/3
1 − β

q1/3

q4/3 = c(β)q4/3

p ="(cid:18) κ

µH(cid:19)4 3

a

and

Thus after a slight modiﬁcation of eq.(10), one can obtain the following gravitational pressure:

Rca
b = −κ(T ca
b −
Therefore the ﬂat ﬁeld equations can be given by:

1
2

gcσ
ab T ) +

2
a2 γc

ab = κ(

σ
2 − p)

Γc
ab(z) 6= 0,

Rca
b (z) 6= 0

IX

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

thus a line elements trajectory would be given by

therefore a metric in a complex fractal spacetime can be given by:

(ω, z2) = gcaωzcωza

c=i

Xab=1,2

δωzc

aωzc

b ≡ 0

(21)

(22)

Since this quantum gravity eﬀect originates from the planck length it is very unlikely that the Yukawa interaction

[31]:

V (r) = −Z dr1Z dr2

Gρ1 (r1Xr2)

r12

[r + α exp(−r12/λ)]

will take place (unless special conditions arise). However, if such an eﬀect does arise, it may yield peculiar motion
for an obejects geodesic path.

7.1 SQM pseudo geodesic paths

First let us begin with the two-dimensional Lagrangian Hamiltonian, so that we have an equation of motion from
the simple action

dqi
dt

=

∂H
∂pi

;

dpi
dt

=

∂H
qi

(23)

In canonical terms motion is given by

lending a four-vector of the form p = ˙mx + e
would be in motion according to the geodesic path:

∂H
∂pi

∂H
qi

;

pi =

qi −
c a(x). In such that a Hamiltonian wave within a gravitational ﬁeld

(24)

∂H
∂qi − Γ6α
[6β6γ]

dx6α
ds

dx6γ
ds 6= 0

(25)

This geodesic unlike the prior for a classical particle, will not diﬀerentiate and thus its motion need not transverse
through classical Euclidean space. Therefore it can be seen that complex spaces could impose unseen forces which
would eﬀect a geodesic path for a body (or wave) in motion. A proposal made in Ref. [35], made a like was case
in the relativistic sense so that one would have F µ = ˆm0

.

Although there is no direct physical evidence of this, it is still however an intriguing explanation. After all the
so called “anomalous acceleration” is only experienced by small bodies, not massive ones such as planets. Thus a
quantum interpretation of this eﬀect seems to ﬁt the observed data better than any other approach. Alternatively
Modanese has also predicted a macroscopic quantum gravity eﬀect [32], however it is limited to the Podkletnov
experiment [9].

W ′
W

dy
dˆλ

dxµ
dˆλ

8 Discussion of theory

The formulation of this theory was based on a desire for a reformulation of GR in order to describe a singularity free
theory; in which a fractal formulation of the ﬁeld equations were derived. The second desire for this theory was the
formulation of a quantum construction of GR, however the end result is a gravity theory which describes quantum
mechanics. Therefore the gravitational ﬁeld and matter can be considered to be molded into the following form.
Matter exist as a pseudo point particle whos ﬁeld of movement is restricted onto a two-dimensional (complex) frame.
This two-dimensional frame’s movement is governed by BM, and in part by the HP. Matter, is thus in reality a
fractal vibrating string fragment which continues on into N-dimensions. The fractalization of this “cardinal string”
produces virtual particles which posses a geometry, it is this (virtual) fractal geometry that is responsible for the
gravitational ﬁeld.

X

In light of future studies it is likely that an adequate formulation for an alternative to GR be given in the
following forms. One the acceptance of a fractal (even if only quasi fractal) structure of matter and space as an
adequate formulation for the geometry of spacetime. Two the acceptance of complex systems into the equations,
e.g. quaternions, octonions, C* algebras, etc. And ﬁnally three, the acceptance of physical conditions which may
not be “popular,” but yield results that are not contradictory to known data. The mathematical conditions are
the most intriguing to author because there seems to be a hidden mechanism in the mathematics. However, my
advanced mathematics skills are mediocre at best so these avenues are still left open in this letter.

8.1 what layith beyond the planck length?

Several physical arguments against the existence of singularities have been given by Loinger [25, 26], as well as
Einstein’s classic objections. Thus one may inquire what happens at the planck length, i.e. what are the laws of
physics? Here I now quote Kip Thorne, on our current understanding of singularites and ‘quantum foam.’

“How probable is that a black hole’s singularity will give birth to ‘new universes?’ We don’t know.
It might well never happen, or it might be quite common—or we might be on completly the wrong
track in believing that singularites are made of quantum foam. –Thorne (1994)”

This now leads a discussion to recent attempts to model gravity in terms of N-dimesnional spaces (Arkani-
Hamed, et al 62-69), in which the planck length varies with the number of dimensions. Of course the planck length
could be inﬁnitely small in an inﬁnite system, clearly a challenge to the principle of planck invariance. However,
we note that with Mach’s Principle (MP) the planck length must be observed by an external mechanism to remain
invariant. Thus the planck length exist as a fractalization of BM, which becomes an observational frame in classical
real mechanics. Furthermore, from this it may be seen that the laws of physics as we understand them are in direct
consequence of the planck length. We may also assume the chosen string ﬁeld is quantitized (i.e. given by BM),
because its mass is attributed to a complex pseudo oscillation (vibration). Where I now quote David Bohm (cfr.
Bohm, 22):

“We may conclude that all systems which oscillate are quantitized with E = n¯hν whether these systems
be mathematical oscillators, sound waves, or electromagnetic waves.”

So what does physics look like beyond the planck length, remember the (local) laws of physics are given by two
complex D2-branes. When we interpret these interactions we receive the traditional GR eﬀects at the macroscopic
level. However, at the planck scale singularities don’t exist such that the frame interacts via “cardinal strings”
and not classical GR. Thus interactions on local branes cease, and supersymmetry takes over. However, only
strings which are connected to a form of the D2-brane will have observable physical manifestations, this deals with
“planckian invariance”. In fact each dimension may have its own unique planck length which governs its own local
laws (explaining the limitation of classical string theory to a set number of dimensions). Which leaves open several
areas in N-dimensional black hole mechanics, and planck length physics.

9 Conclusion

I have shown that there is enough evidence at present to challenge GR as the correct theory for gravitation. I
have also introduced the study of a complex fractal spacetime system and its possible relationship to the planck
length. The given formulation for a canonical gravitational ﬁeld resulted in contradictory conclusions, thus ruling
out a canonical approach to “quantum gravity.” Finally if my hypothesizes hold valid then SQM will begin to make
invalid predictions for the behavior of particles near the planck length. Thus a fractal correction for SQM will be
needed under certain gravitational ﬁelds, which may be comparable to BM.

A Appendix A: the equivalence principle

A new Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP) for the gravitational ﬁeld can be postulated utilizing a Complex Fractal
Minkowski Spacetime (CFMS) system (see eq.(3)). Since there is no spatial acceleration for the gravitational ﬁeld

XI

(in respect to MP), it is the acceleration of the pseudo time dimension in the CFMS which produces a gravitational
curvature. Therefore a material body would have the traditional Minkowski spacetime, acting as a Lorentz frame.
Since gravitational ﬁelds extend indeﬁnitely, this should cause time to continually progress within an inertial
acceleration frame. This therefore means that as an object enters a gravitational ﬁeld it becomes less massive, in
terms of a Lorentz transformation. Equivocally it can be stated that energy is lost in curved spacetime. A similar
eﬀect is all ready known, known as a “gravitational time delay,” i.e the Shapiro Eﬀect.

“. . . according to the general theory, the speed of a light wave depends on the strength of the gravitational
potential along its path.” –Shapiro (1964)

This is however contradictory to SR, because it fails to describe inertial acceleration within a gravitational ﬁeld
correctly. However, the principle of relativity is still preserved, because the curvature of spacetime corrects for
the CFMS. Therefore the reason the equivalence principle is fundamental in GR is because it is the only priori
condition which satisﬁes the principle of relativity. Thus without an equivalence principle, there would be no
relativistic theory for the gravitational ﬁeld.

The logarithm gravitational time delay, may also be responsible for the apparent “anomalous acceleration” of
spacecraft. David Crawford has oﬀered a similar explanation, where the gravitational term arises from interplane-
tary dust [27].

A Appendix B: Yang-Mills gravity

Here I now hit upon a topic hinted upon in section III.2; converting fractal geometry in the terminology of QCD.
Let us now rewrite eq.(19), so that we have an equation of the form:

with this equation a Yang-Mills gravitational pressure can arise under the following ﬁeld:

− κ(Rca

b −

1
2

gcσ
ab Rc) =

T cσ
ab

8π

√−˜g

which must be given in a conformal ﬁeld, i.e. gab = pδab, thus we have:

SE =

1

4g2 Z ω4zF σ

µνF σ

µν +

1

αo Z K ia

b K ib

a p−˜gω2φ

S =

1

2α0 (cid:20)Z ωc2φp−1(φ)(∂2z)2 + λab(∂az∂bz − pδab)(cid:21) + ℵ0Zp

ω2φ

(26)

(27)

(28)

From this it is now seen that a “cardinal string,” is in fact an N-dimensional world line. Which can communacate
with other world lines, where we have a self-organization of the system by

v(˜s) =

1

4π Z ω2φp˜ggabǫjklm∂atab∂jklm

(29)

It is these interactions which generate a spinor space, which attributes mass to the geometry. Therefore the Yang-
Mills ﬁeld is added to the gravitational ﬁeld, by means of a gravitational pressure. Here a less restrictive form of
the Strong Equivalence Principle (SEP) can be applied:

(spinor pressure) · (energy density) = (strength of gravitational f ield) · (gravitational pressure)

Thus the interaction of two or more “cardinal strings,” produces a twistor like action, represented by Z∞ at P ∈ M.
This also means that certain gravitational anomalies may not only arise at the planck length, and may result in
experimental veriﬁcation.

XII

References

[1] Yilmaz H. Did the apple fall? In M. Barone and F. Selleri, editors, Frontiers of Fundamental Physics. 115-124

(1994)

[2] Fackerell E. Remarks on the Yilmaz and Alley papers. Proceedings of the ﬁrst australaian conference on
general relativity and gravitation, ed. D. L. Wiltshire, University of Adelaide (1996), 117 available URL:
http://www.physics.adelaide.edu.au/ASGRC/ACGRG1/fackerell.html

[3] Castro C. On M Theory, Quantum Paradoxes and the New Relativity physics/0002019

[4] Castro C. Why We Live In 3 Dimensions hep-th/0004152

[5] Ya.Kobelev L. Do Gravitational and Electromagnetic Fields Have Rest Masses in the Fractal Universe?

physics/0006043

[6] Ya.Kobelev L. The Theory of Gravitation in the Space-Time with Fractal Dimensions and Modiﬁed Lorents

Transformations physics/0006029

[7] Ansoldi S. Loop Quantum Mechanics and the Fractal Structure of Quantum Spacetime, Chaos Solitons Fractals

10 (1999) 197 hep-th/9803229

[8] Anderson J, et al. Indication from Pioneer 10/11, Galileo, and Ulysses Data, of an Apparent Anomalous,

Weak, Long-Range Acceleration, Phys.Rev.Lett. 81 (1998) 2858-2861 gr-qc/9808081

[9] Podkletnov E. Weak gravitation shielding properites of composite bulk Y Ba2Cu3O7−x superconductor below

70 K under e.m. ﬁeld cond-mat/9701074

[10] Overduin J. and Wesson P. Kalzua-Klien Gravity. Phys.Rept. 283 (1997) 303-380 gr-qc/9805018

[11] Wallace D. The Quantization of Gravity –an introduction gr-qc/0004005

[12] Rovelli C. Loop Quantum Gravity. Living Reviews in Relativity Vol 1 (1998) Max-Planck-Gesellschaft. /1998-

1rovelli available URL http://www.livingreviews.org/Articles/Volume1/1998-1rovelli

[13] Rovelli C. Notes for a brief history of quantum gravity gr-qc/0006061

[14] Motz L. and Weaver J. The Story of Mathematics, 1993 (New York: Avon Books)

[15] Szab´o L. Removing the last obstacle to the Einstein-Fine resolution of the EPR-Bell problem quant-ph/0002030

[16] ‘t Hooft G. Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity gr-qc/9310026

[17] Casadio R. and Harms B. Black Hole Evaporation and Large Extra Dimensions hep-th/0004004

[18] Krasnoholovets V. and Ivanosky D. Motion of a particle and the vacuum, Physics Essays, vol. 6, no. 4, pp.

554-563 (1993) quant-ph/9910023

[19] Jaekel M. and Reynand S. Movement and ﬂutuations of the vacuum, Rept.Prog.Phys. 60 (1997) 863-887

quant-ph/9706035

[20] Haisch B. On the relation between zero-point-ﬁeld-induced inertial eﬀect and the Einstein-de Broglie formula,

Phys.Lett. A268 (2000) 224-227 gr-qc/9906084

[21] Ansoldi S. Aurilia A. and Spallucci E. Loop Quantum Mechanics and the Fractal Structure of Quantum

Spacetime, Chaos Solitons Fractals 10 (1999) 197 hep-th/9803229

[22] Sasakura N. An Uncertainty Relation of Space-Time, Prog.Theor.Phys. 102 (1999) 169-179 hep-th/9903146

[23] Bost¨om K. Regaining time symmetry in the generalized quantum mechaincs of the Brussels School quant-

ph/0005024

XIII

[24] Berndl K, et al. A Survey of Bohmian Mechanics, Nuovo Cim. B110 (1995) 737-750 quant-ph/9504010

[25] Loinger A. On the concept of mass point in general relativity gr-qc/0006033

[26] Loninger A. On the propagation speed of wavy metric tensors gr-qc/0007048

[27] Crawford D. A possible explanation for the anomalous acceleration of Pioneer 10 astro-ph/9904150

[28] Tureyshev S, et al. The Apparent Anomalous Long-Rang Acceleration of Pioneer 10 and 11 gr-qc/9903024

[29] Østvang D. Assumption of Static Gravitational Field Resulting in an Apparently Anomalous Force gr-

qc/9910054

[30] Einstein A. The Meaning of Relativity, 1921 (New York: MJF Books)

[31] Long J. Experimental Status of Gravitational-Strength Forces in the Sub-Centimeter, Regime Nucl.Phys. B539

(1999) 23-34 hep-ph/9805217

[32] Modanese G. Theoretical Analysis of a Reported Weak Gravitational Shielding Eﬀect. hep-th/9505094

[33] Wang L. Kuxmich A. and Dogarlu A. ”Gain-assisted superluminal light propagation.” Nature 406 (2000) 277

[34] Arkani-Hamed N. Dimopoulos S. and Dvali G. ”The Universe’s Unseen Dimensions.” Scientiﬁc American 283

(2000) 62-69

[35] Youm D. Extra Force in Brane Worlds hep-th/0004144

[36] Bohm D. Quantum Theory, 1951 (Toronto: Dover Books)

[37] Tuaber G. Albert Einstein’s theory of General Relativity: 60 years of its inﬂuence on Man and the Universe,

1979 (New York: Crown Publishers, Inc.)

[38] Thorne K. Black Holes & Time Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy, 1994 (New York: Norton) pg. 478

——————————————————————————–

XIV

