0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
7
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
8
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ISSUES AND RAMIFICATIONS IN

QUANTIZED FRACTAL SPACE TIME: AN

INTERFACE WITH QUANTUM

SUPERSTRINGS

B.G. Sidharth∗

B.M. Birla Science Centre, Hyderabad 500 063 (India)

Abstract

Recently a stochastic underpinning for space time has been consid-
ered, what may be called Quantized Fractal Space Time. This leads us
to a number of very interesting consequences which are testable, and
also provides a rationale for several otherwise inexplicable features in
Particle Physics and Cosmology. These matters are investigated in
the present paper.

1 The Background ZPF

We observe that the Bohm formulation discussed in detail in Chapter 3 con-
verges to Nelson’s stochastic formulation in the context of the QMKNBH.
Indeed Bohm’s non local potential as also Nelson’s three conditions merely
describe the QMKNBH as a vortex, the mass being given by the self interac-
tion, the radius of the vortex being the Compton wavelength. [1]. We can get
a clue to the origin of Quantum Mechanical ﬂuctuations: Following Smolin
we observe that the non local stochastic theory becomes the classical local
theory in the thermodynamic limit, in which N the number of particles in
the universe becomes inﬁnitely large. However if N is ﬁnite but large, these

0 ∗E-mail:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in

1

ﬂuctuations are of the order 1/√N of the dimensions of the system, the uni-
verse in this case. Indeed as we will see in the nexr Section this provides a
holistic rationale for the ”spooky” non-locality of Quantum Theory.
We now remark that in the above formulation elementary particles, typically
electrons, can be thought of as ’twisted bits’ of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Indeed it was pointed out by Barut and co-workers that wave packet solu-
tions of the mass less scalar ﬁelds appear as massive particles, while such
solutions for the electromagnetic ﬁeld would provide a formulation of the
wave mechanics without assuming the Planck constant[2]. For example this
gives E = lω rather than E = ¯hω, l being the angular momentum and E the
energy and ω the frequency. Boudet[3], also questions the necessity of the
Planck Constant. These theories do not give a value to Planck’s constant
which merely appears as a proportionality factor, because all the equations
considered are linear. All this as also the zitterbewegung formulation of
Barut and Bracken and Hestenes described in Chapter 3, is superseded by
the QMKNBH theory and electrons appear as twisted bits of the ZPF given
by the relation, E = ¯hω, instead of Barut’s, E = lω, where l is the angular
momentum. The question, whether this characterizes the Planck constant,
will be answered at the end of Section 5.

2 Stochastic Conservation Laws

Conservation Laws, as is universally known, play an important role in Physics,
starting with the simplest such laws relating to momentum and energy. These
laws provide rigid guidelines or constraints within which physical processes
take place.
These laws are observational, though a theoretical facade can be given by
relating them to underpinning symmetries[4].
Quantum Theory, including Quantum Field Theory is in conformity with the
above picture. On the other hand the laws of Thermodynamics have a dif-
ferent connotation: They are not rigid in the sense that they are a statement
about what is most likely to occur, or is an averaged out statement.
In our formulation, the Compton wavelength represents a statistical uncer-
tainty (Cf. Chapter 6), given by

R
√N

l ∼

2

(1)

By now (1) is a familiar relation. Given the above background we consider
the following simpliﬁed EPR experiment, discussed elsewhere[5].
Two structureless and spinless particles which are initially together, for ex-
ample in a bound state get separated and move in opposite directions along
the same straight line. A measurement of the momentum of one of the par-
ticles, say A gives us immediately the momentum of the other particle B.
The latter is equal and opposite to the former owing to the conservation law
of linear momentum. It is surprising that this statement should be true in
Quantum Theory also because the momentum of particle B does not have an
apriori value, but can only be determined by a separate acausal experiment
performed on it.
This is the well known non locality inherent in Quantum Theory. It ceases
to be mysterious if we recognize the fact that the conservation of momen-
tum is itself a non local statement because it is a direct consequence of the
homogeneity of space as we will see again in the next Chapter: Infact the
displacement operator d
dx is, given the homogeneity of space, independent
of x and this leads to the conservation of momentum in Quantum Theory
(cf.ref.[6]). The displacement δx which gives rise to the above displacement
operator is an instantaneous shift of origin corresponding to an inﬁnite ve-
locity and is compatible with a closed system. It is valid if the instantaneous
displacement can also be considered to be an actual displacement in real
time δt. This happens for stationary states, when the overall energy remains
constant.
It must be borne in mind that the space and time displacement operators
are on the same footing only in this case[7]. Indeed in relativistic Quantum
Mechanics, x and t are put on the same footing - but special relativity itself
deals with inertial, that is relatively unaccelerated frames.
Any ﬁeld theory deals with diﬀerent points at the same instant of time. But
if we are to have information about diﬀerent points, then given the ﬁnite
velocity of light, we will get this information at diﬀerent times. All this in-
formation can refer to the same instant of time only in a stationary situation.
We will return to this point. Further the ﬁeld equations are obtained by a
suitable variational principle,

δI = 0

(2)

In deducing these equations, the δ operator which corresponds to an arbi-
trary variation, commutes with the space and time derivatives, that is the

3

momentum and energy operators which in our picture constitute a complete
set of observables. As such the apparently arbitrary operator δ in (2) is con-
strained to be a function of these (stationary) variables[8].
All this underscores two facts: First we implicitly consider an apriori ho-
mogenous space, that is physical space. Secondly though we consider in the
relativisitic picture the space and time coordinates to be on the same foot-
ing, infact they are not as pointed out by Wheeler[9]. Our understanding or
perception of the universe is based on ”all space (or as much of it as possible)
at one instant of time”.
However, in conventional theory this is at best an approximation. Moreover
in our formulation, the particles are ﬂuctuationally created out of a back-
ground ZPF, and, it is these N particles that deﬁne physical space, which is
no longer apriori as in the Newtonian formulation. It is only in the thermo-
dynamic limit in which N → ∞ and l → 0, in (1), that we recover the above
classical picture of a rigid homogenous space, with the conservation laws.
In other words the above conservation laws are strictly valid in the thermo-
dynamic limit, but are otherwise approximate, though very nearly correct
because N is so large.
Our formulation leads to a cosmology in which √N particles are ﬂuctuation-
ally created from the background ZPF (Cf. Chapter 7), so that the violation
of energy conservation is proportional to 1
. From (1) also we could sim-
√N
ilarly infer that the violation of momentum conservation is proportional to
1
√N
All this implies that there is a small but non-zero probability that the mea-
surement of the particle A in the above experiment will not give information
about the particle B.
This last conclusion has also been drawn by Gaeta[10] who considers a back-
ground Brownian or Nelson-Garbaczewski-Vigier noise(the ZPF referred to
above) as sustaining Nelson’s Stochastic Mechanics (and the Schrodinger
equation).
In conclusion, the conservation laws of Physics are conservation laws in the
thermodynamic sense.

(per particle).

4

3 Quantized Space Time, Time’s Arrow and

Parity Breakdown

The arrow of time has been a puzzle for a long time. As is well known, the
laws of Newtonian Mechanics, Electromagnetism or Quantum Theory do not
provide an arrow of time - they are equally valid under time reversal, with
only one exception. This is in the well known problem of Kaon decay. On the
other hand it is in Thermodynamics and Cosmology that we ﬁnd an arrow
of time [11]. Indeed it has been shown that stochastic processes are needed
for irreversibility[12].
It is also true that there has been no theoretical rationale for the Kaon puzzle
which we will touch upon shortly. We will try to ﬁnd such a theoretical
understanding in the context of our quantized space-time, ∼ ¯h/(energy),
that is the Compton time[13].
Let us start with one of the simplest quantum mechanical systems, one which
can be in either of two sates separated by a small energy[14]. The system ﬂips
from one state to another unpredictably and this ”life time” and the energy
spread satisfy the Uncertainity Principle, so that the former is a Compton
time. We have:

ı¯h

dψı
dt ≈ ı¯h[

ψı(t + nτ ) − ψı(t)

nτ

] =

2

Xı=1

Hıjψı

(3)

ψı = e

ı

¯h Etφı

where, H11 = H22 (which we set = 0 as only relative energies of the two
levels are being considered) and H12 = H21 = E, by symmetry. Unlike in the
usual theory where δt = nτ → 0, in the case of quantized space-time n is a
positive integer. So the second term of (3) reduces to

[E + ı

E2τ
¯h

]ψı = [E(1 + ı)]ψı, as

τ = ¯h/E

(4)

Interestingly, in the above analysis, in (4), the fact that the real and imagi-
nary parts are of the same order is infact borne out by experiment.
From (3) we see that the Hamiltonian is not Hermitian that is it admits
complex Eigen values indicative of decay, if the life times of the states are
∼ τ .

5

In general this would imply the exotic fact that if a state starts out as ψ1 and
decays, then there would be a non zero probability of seeing in addition the
decay products of the state ψ2. In the process it is possible that some sym-
metries which are preserved in the decay of ψ1 or ψ2 separately, are voilated.
In this context we will now consider the Kaon puzzle. As is well known
from the original work of Gellmann and Pais, the two state analysis above
is applicable here[15, 16]. In the words of Penrose[17], ”the tiny fact of an
almost completely hidden time-asymmetry seems genuinely to be present in
the K 0-decay. It is hard to believe that nature is not, so to speak, trying to
tell something through the results of this delicate and beautiful experiment.”
On the other hand as Feynman put it[18], ”if there is any place where we
have a chance to test the main principles of quantum mechanics in the purest
way.....this is it.”
What happens in this well known problem is, that given CP invariance, a
beam of K 0 masons can be considered to be in a two state system as above,
one being the short lived component K S which decays into two pions and
the other being the long lived state K L which decays into three pions. In
this case E ∼ 1010¯h[15], so that τ ∼ 10−10sec. After a lapse of time greater
than the typical decay period, no two pion decays should be seen in a beam
consisting initially of the K 0 particle. Otherwise there would be violation of
CP invariance and therefore also T invariance. However exactly this viola-
tion was observed as early as 1964[19]. This violation of time reversal has
now been conﬁrmed directly by experiments at Fermilab and CERN[20].
We would like to point out that the Kaon puzzle has a natural explanation
in the quantized time scenario discussed above. Further, we have shown that
the discreteness leads to the non commutative geometry

[x, y] = 0(l2), [x, px] = ı¯h[1 + l2]
(5)
If terms ∼ l2 are neglected we get back the usual
and similar equations.
Quantum Theory. However retaining these terms, we deduced in Chapter 6
the Dirac equation. Moreover it can be seen that given (5) space rerlection
symmetry no longer holds. This violation is an O(l2) eﬀect.
This is not surprising. It has already been pointed out that the space time
divide viz., x + ıct arises due to the zitterbewegung or double Weiner process
in the Compton wavelength - and in this derivation terms ∼ (ct)2 ∼ l2 were
neglected. However if these terms are retained, then we get a correction to
the usual theory including special relativity. (We will come back to this point

6

shortly.)
To see this more clearly let us as in Chapter 3 as a ﬁrst approximation treat
the continuum as a series of discrete points separated by a distance l, which
then leads to

Ea(xn) = E0a(xn) − Aa(xn + l) − Aa(xn − l)

(6)

When l is made to tend to zero, it was shown that from (6) we recover the
Schrodinger equation, and further, we have,

E = E0 − 2Acoskl.

(7)

The zero of energy was chosen such that E = 2A = mc2, the rest energy of
the particle, in the limit l → 0. However if we retain terms ∼ l2, then from
(7) we will have instead

E

mc2 − 1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

∼ 0(l2)

(8)

Equation (8) shows the correction to the energy mass formula, where again
we recover the usual formula in the limit O(l2) ≈ 0.
It must be mentioned that all this would be true in principle for discrete
space time, even if the minimum cut oﬀ was not at the Compton scale.
Intuitively this should be obvious: Space time reﬂection symmetries are based
on a space time continuum picture.
Let us now consider some further imprints of discrete space time[21].
First we consider the case of the neutral pion. As we saw in Chapter 4,
this pion decays into an electron and a positron. Could we think of it as an
electron-positron bound state also? In this case we have,

mv2

r

=

e2
r2

(9)

Consistently with the above formulation, if we take v = c from (9) we get
the correct Compton wavelength lπ = r of the pion.
However this appears to go against the fact that there would be pair anni-
hilation with the release of two photons. Nevertheless if we consider discrete
space time, the situation would be diﬀerent.
In this case the Schrodinger
equation

Hψ = Eψ

7

(10)

where H contains the above Coulumb interaction could be written, in terms
of the space and time separated wave function components as,

Hψ = EφT = φı¯h[

T (t − τ ) − T

τ

]

(11)

where τ is the minimum time cut oﬀ which in the above work has been taken
to be the Compton time. If, as usual we let T = exp(irt) we get

(12) shows that if,

E = −

2¯h
τ

sin

τ r
2

|E| <

2¯h
τ

(12)

(13)

holds then there are stable bound states. Indeed inequality (13) holds good
when τ is the Compton time and E is the total energy mc2. Even if inequality
(13) is reversed, there are decaying states which are relatively stable around
the cut oﬀ energy 2¯h
τ .
This is the explanation for treating the pion as a bound state of an electron
and a positron, as indeed is borne out by its decay mode. The situation is
similar to the case of Bohr orbits– there also the electrons would according
to classical ideas have collapsed into the nucleus and the atoms would have
disappeared. In this case it is the discrete nature of space time which enables
the pion to be a bound state as described by (9).

4 Magnetic Eﬀects

If as discussed in Chapter 3 and subsequently, the electron is indeed a Kerr-
Newman type charged black hole, it can be approximated by a solenoid and
we could expect an Aharonov-Bohm type of eﬀect, due to the vector potential
~A which would give rise to shift in the phase in a two slit experiment for
example[22]. This shift is given by

while the shift due to the electric charge would be

∆δ ˆB =

e

¯h I ~A. ~ds

∆δ ˆE = −

e

¯h Z A0dt

8

(14)

(15)

where A0 is the electrostatic potential. In the above formulation we would
have

~A ∼

1
c

(16)
Substitution of (16) in (14) and (15) shows that the magnetic eﬀect ∼ v
times the electric eﬀect.
Further, the magnetic component of a Kerr-Newman black hole, as we saw
in Chapter 3 is given by

A0

c

Bˆr =

2ea
r3 cosΘ + 0(

1
r4 ), B ˆΘ =

easinΘ

r3 + 0(

1
r4 ), B ˆφ = 0,

while the electrical part is

Eˆr =

e
r2 + 0(

1
r3 ), E ˆΘ = 0(

1
r4 ), E ˆφ = 0,

(17)

(18)

Equations (17) and (18) show that in addition to the usual dipole magnetic
ﬁeld, there is a shorter range magnetic ﬁeld given by terms ∼ 1
r4 . In this
context it is interesting to note that an extra so called B(3) magnetic ﬁeld
of shorter range and probably mediated by massive photons has indeed been
observed and studied over the past few years[23].

5 Stochastic Holism and the Number of Ar-

bitrary Parameters

The discrete space time or zitterbewegung has an underpinning that is stochas-
tic. The picture leads to the goal of Wheeler’s ’Law without Law’ as we saw
in Chapter 6. Furthermore the picture that emerges is Machian. This is
evident from equations like (2), (3) and (6) of Chapter 7– the micro depends
on the macro. So the ﬁnal picture that emerges is one of stochastic holism.
Another way of expressing the above point is by observing that the interac-
tions are relational. For example, in the equation leading to (7), of Chapter
7, if the number of particles in the universe tends to 1, then as we saw in
Chapter 4, the gravitational and electromagnetic interactions would be equal,
this happening at the Planck scale, where the Compton wavelength equals
the Schwarzchild radius[24].
Infact as was shown in Chapter 6, when N the number of particles in the

9

universe is 1 we have a Planck particle with a short life time ∼ 10−42secs
due to the Hawking radiation but with N ∼ 1080 particles as in the present
universe we have the pion as the typical particle with a stable life time ∼ of
the age of the universe due to the Hagedorn on radiation.
Let us now consider the following aspect[25]: It is well known that there
are 18 arbitrary parameters in contemporary physics. We on the other hand
have been working with the micro physical constants referred to earlier viz.,
the electron (or pion) mass or Compton wavelength, the Planck constant,
the fundamental unit of charge and the velocity of light. These along with
the number of particles N as the only free parameter can generate the mass,
radius and age of the universe as also the Hubble constant.
If we closely look at the equations (11) of Chapter 4 or (7) of Chapter 7,
giving the gravitational and electromagnetic strength ratios, we can actually
deduce the relation,

(19)

l =

e2
mc2

In other words we have deduced the pion mass in terms of the electron
mass, or, given the pion mass and the electron mass, we have deduced the
ﬁne structure constant. From the point of view of the order of magnitude
theory in which the distinction between the electron, pion and proton gets
blurred, what equation (19) means is, that the Planck constant itself depends
on e and c (and m). Further in the Kerr-Newman type characterisation of
the electron, in Chapter 3 the charge e is really equivalent to the spinorial
tensor density (n = 1). In this sense e also is pre determined and we are
left with a minimum length viz. the Compton length and a minumum time
viz. the Compton time (or a maximal velocity c) as the only fundamental
microphysical constants.
Let us try to further reﬁne this line of thought. We observe that a discrete
space time picture leads to the non commutative geometry alluded to earlier
(5).
Infact we would have in this case, more fully,

[x, y] = 0(l2), [x, px] = ı¯h[1 + l2], [t, E] = ı¯h[1 + τ 2]

(20)

What (20) means is that there is a higher order correction to the Heisenberg
Uncertainity Principle. Infact from (20) we can easily conclude that there is

10

an extra energy E′ given by

E′
mc2 ∼ τ 2 ∼ l4 ∼

1
√N

(21)

In (21), the appearance of
where N is the number of particles in the
universe appears at ﬁrst sight to be purely accidental: We have not deduced
it. However this is not so. Infact from the picture of the ﬂuctuational creation
of particles alluded to in section 2, we get

1
√N

E′
mc2 ∼

1
√N

(22)

It can be seen that (22) and (21), deduced from two totally diﬀerent stand-
points, are infact the same. A consequence is the following fact: We have just
seen that the micro physical constants namely an elementary particle mass,
for example the electron mass m (or Compton wavelength), a universal max-
imal velocity c together with N the number of particles in the universe were
the only free parameters or arbitrary constants. From (21) we can see that
there is a further narrowing down to just two arbitrary parameters, for ex-
ample the maximal velocity c and N. Given these two, the microphysical
constants, including the Planck constant can be characteriized, thus answer-
ing the question at the end of section 1. It must be emphasized that what is
required is a universal maximum velocity in principle - its exact value is not
important. Then, N becomes the only parameter! All this is very much in the
spirit of Feynman’s quotation in Chapter 1 as also the ancient Upanishadic
tradition of seeing nature as diﬀerent aspects of one phenomenon.

6 The Origin of a Metric

We ﬁrst make a few preliminary remarks. When we talk of a metric or the dis-
tance between two ”points” or ”particles”, a concept that is implicit is that
of topological ”nearness” - we require an underpinning of a suitably large
number of ”open” sets[26]. Let us now abandon the absolute or background
space time and consider, for simplicity, a universe (or set) that consists solely
of two particles. The question of the distance between these particles (quite
apart from the question of the observer) becomes meaningless. Indeed, this is

11

so for a universe consisting of a ﬁnite number of particles. For, we could iso-
late any two of them, and the distance between them would have no meaning.
We can intuitively appreciate that we would infact need distances of inter-
mediate points. So for a meaningful distance, the concepts of open sets,
connectedness and the like reenter in which case such an isolation would not
be possible.
More formally let us deﬁne a neighbourhood of a particle (or point) A of a
set of particles as a subset which contains A and atleast one other distinct
element. Now, given two particles (or points) A and B, let us consider a
neighbourhood containing both of them, n(A, B) say. We require a non-
empty set containing atleast one of A and B and atleast one other particle
C, such that n(A, B) ⊃ n(A, C), and so on. Strictly, this ”nested” sequence
should not terminate. For, if it does, then we end up with a set n(A, P )
consisting of two isolated ”particles” or points, and the ”distance” d(A, P )
is meaningless. For practical purposes, in the spirit of Wheeler’s approxima-
tion, this sequence has to be very large.
Such an approximation has an immediate application. Our universe consists
of some N ∼ 1080 particles (or points), each point being ”deﬁned” within the
Compton wavelength l. Inside l, space time in the usual sense breaks down -
we have the unphysical zitterbewegung eﬀects. Indeed l for a Planck particle
of mass ∼ 10−5gm is precisely the Planck scale.
We now assume the following property[27]: Given two distinct elements (or
even subsets) A and B, there is a neighbourhood NA1 such that A belongs to
NA1, B does not belong to NA1 and also given any NA1, there exists a neigh-
bourhood NA 1
2 ⊂ NA1, that is there exists an inﬁnite
sequence of neighbourhoods between A and B. In other words we introduce
topological closeness.
From here, as in the derivation of Urysohn’s lemma[26], we could deﬁne a
mapping f such that f (A) = 0 and f (B) = 1 and which takes on all inter-
mediate values. We could now deﬁne a metric, d(A, B) = |f (A) − f (B)|. We
could easily verify that this satisﬁes the properties of a metric.
It must be remarked that the metric turns out to be again, a result of a
global or a series of larger sets, unlike the usual local picture in which it is
the other way round.

such that A ⊂ NA 1

2

12

7 Kaluza-Klein Theories and Quantized Su-

per Strings

In Chapter 1, we brieﬂy alluded to string theory. Though our subsequent
considerations were in a diﬀerent class, there is a surprising interface, as we
will now see. Our starting point is the fact encountered in Chapter 6 that
the fractal dimension of a Brownian quantum path is 2. This was further
analysed and it was explained that this is symptomatic of Quantized Fractal
space time and it was shown that infact the coordinate x becomes x+ıct. The
complex coordinates or equivalently non-Hermitian position operators are
symptomatic of the unphysical zitterbewegung which is eliminated after an
averaging over the Compton scale. In this picture the ﬂuctuational creation
of particles was taken into account in a consistent cosmological scheme in
Chapter 7.
It is well known that the generalization of the complex x coordinate to three
dimensions leads to quarternions[28], and the Pauli spin matrices.
We next return to the model of an electron as a Quantum Mechanical Kerr-
Newman Black Hole. Infact in Chapter 3, we deduced electromagnetism in
two ways. The ﬁrst was by considering an imaginary shift,
xµ → xµ + ıaµ, (aµ ∼ Compton scale)

(23)

in a Quantum Mechanical context. This lead to

ı¯h

∂
∂xµ → ı¯h

∂
∂xµ +

¯h
aµ

(24)

and the second term on the right side of (24) was shown to be the electro-
magnetic vector potential Aµ,

Aµ = ¯h/aµ

(25)

The second was by taking into account the fact that at the Compton scale,
it is the so called negative energy two spinors χ of the Dirac bispinor that
dominate where,

under reﬂections. This lead to the tensor density property,

χ → −χ

∂
∂xµ to

∂
∂xµ − Γµν

ν

13

(26)

the second term on the right side of (26) being identiﬁed with Aµ,

Aµ = ¯hΓµν
ν

(27)

It was pointed out that (27) is formally and mathematically identical to
Weyl’s original formulation, except that here it arises due to the purely Quan-
tum Mechanical spinorial behaviour whereas Weyl had put it by hand.
Another early scheme for the uniﬁcation of gravitation and electromagnetism
as referred to earlier was that put forward by Kaluza and Klein[29, 30, 31]
in which an extra dimension was introduced and taken to be curled up. This
idea has resurfaced in recent years in String Theory.
We will ﬁrst show that the characterization of Aµ in (25) is identical to a
Kaluza Klein formulation. Then we will show that equations (26) and (27)
really denote the fact that the geometry around an electron is non-integrable.
Finally we will show that infact both (24) or (25) and (26) or (27) are the
same formulations (as can be guessed heuristically by comparing (24) and
(26)).
We ﬁrst observe that the transformation (23) can be written as,

xı → xı + αı5x5

(28)

where αı5 in (28) will represent a small shift from the Minkowski metric
gıj, and ı, j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, x5 being a ﬁfth coordinate introduced for purely
mathematical conversion.
Owing to (28), we will have,

gıjdxıdxj → gıjdxıdxj + (gıjαj5)dxıdx5

In Kaluza’s formulation,

Aµ ∝ gµ5

(29)

(30)

Comparison of (30), (28) and (29) with (23) and (25) shows that indeed this
is the case. That is, the formulation given in (23) and (24) could be thought
of as introducing a ﬁfth curled up dimension, as in the Kaluza-Klein theory.
To see why the Quantum Mechanical formulation (26) and (27) corresponds
to Weyl’s theory, we start with the eﬀect of an inﬁnitesimal parallel displace-
ment of a vector[32].

δaσ = −Γσ

µνaµdxν

14

(31)

As is well known, (31) represents the extra eﬀect in displacements, due to the
curvature of space - in a ﬂat space, the right side would vanish. Considering
partial derivatives with respect to the µth coordinate, this would mean that,
due to (31)

∂aσ
∂xµ →

∂aσ
∂xµ − Γσ

µνaν

(32)

The second term on the right side of (32) can be written as:

µνgν

−Γλ

λaσ = −Γν

µνaσ

where we have utilized the property that in the above formulation as seen in
Chapter 3,

gµν = ηµν + hµν,

ηµν being the Minkowski metric and hµν a small correction whose square is
neglected.
That is, (32) becomes,

∂
∂xµ →

∂
∂xµ − Γν

µν

(33)

The relation (33) is the same as the relation (26).
We will next show the correspondence between (33) or (27) or (26) and (25)
or (24). To see this simply we note that the geodesic equation is,

˙uµ ≡

duµ
ds

= Γµ

νσuνuσ

(34)

We also use the fact that in the Quantum Mechanical Kerr-Newman Black
Hole model referred to, we have as in Chapter 3

while,

So, from (34) we get,

uµ = c

for µ = 1, 2 and3,

| ˙uµ| = |uµ|

mc2
¯h

Γµ

νµ =

1
aν ,|aν| =

¯h
mc

This establishes the required identity.
We now come to the interface with Quantum Super Strings. We have al-
ready seen that the Quantized Fractal space time referred to really leads to

15

a non-commutative geometry, given by (20) It was also seen that these re-
lations directly lead to the Dirac equation: Quantized Fractal space time is
the underpinning for Quantum Mechanical spin or the Quantum Mechanical
Kerr-Newman Black Hole, that is ultimately equations like (24) or (25) and
(26) or (27).
It is also true that both the Kaluza Klein formulation and the non commu-
tative geometry (20) hold in the theory of Quantum Superstrings (QSS).
Infact we get from here a clue to the mysterious six extra curled up dimen-
sions of Quantum Superstring Theory. For this we observe that (20) gives
an additional contribution to the Heisenberg Uncertainity Principle and we
can easily deduce

Remembering that at this Compton scale

∆p∆x ∼ ¯hl2

∆p ∼ mc

It follows that

∆x ∼ l3

(35)
as l ∼ 10−11cms for the electron we recover from (35) the Planck Scale, as
well as a rationale for the peculiar fact that the Planck Scale is the cube of
the electron Compton scale.
More importantly, what (35) shows is, that at this level, the single dimension
along the x axis shows up as being three dimensional. That is there are two
extra dimensions, in the unphysical region below the Compton scale. As this
is true for the y and z coordinates also, there are a total of six curled up or
unphysical or inaccessible dimensions in the context of the preceding section.
If we start with equations (23) to (25) which are related to QFST (Quan-
tized Fractal space time) and the non-commutative relation (20) we obtain
a uniﬁcation of electromagnetism and gravitation. On the other hand if we
consider the spinorial behaviour of the Dirac wave function, we get (26) or
(27). The former has been seen to be the same as the Kaluza formulation
while the latter is formally similar to the Weyl formulation - but in this case
(27) is not put in by hand. Rather it is a Quantum Mechanical consequence.
We have thus shown that these two approaches are the same. The extra
dimensions are thus seen to be conﬁned to the unphysical Compton scale -
classically speaking they are curled up or inaccessible.

16

In a sense this is not surprising. The bridge between the two approaches
was the Kerr-Newman metric which uses, though without a clear physical
meaning in classical theory, the transformation (23). The reason why an
imaginary shift is associated with spin is to be found in the Quantum Me-
chanical zitterbewegung and the consequent QFST.
Wheeler remarked as quoted in Chapter 4 [9], ”the most evident shortcom-
ing of the geometrodynamic model as it stands is this, that it fails to supply
any completely natural place for spin 1/2 in general and for the neutrino, in
particular”, while ”it is impossible to accept any description of elementary
particles that does not have a place for spin half.” Infact the bridge between
the two is the transformation (23). It introduces spin half into general rela-
tivity and curvature to the electron theory, via the equation (27) or (32).
In this context it is interesting to note that El Naschie has given the fractal
formulation of gravitation[33].
Thus apparently disparate concepts like the Kaluza Klein and Weyl formula-
tions, Quantum Mechanical Black Holes, Quantized Fractal space time and
QSS are seen to have a harmonius overlap, in the context of QFST with its
roots in the ﬂuctuational creation of particles[34, 35].
It is worth pointing out some of the similarities between String theories and
our formulation. The former started oﬀ, by considering one dimensional
extended objects or strings, the extension being of the order of the proton
Compton wavelength, vibrating and rotating with the speed of light (Cf. refs.
given in Chapter 1). Not only could space time points and singularities be
fudged, but further the angular momenta were proportional to the squares
of the masses, deﬁning the well known Regge trajectories, as also in our for-
mulation (Cf. Chapter 12, Equation (14)). All this is not surprising.
In particular, QSS deals with Planck length phenomena, the Kaluza-Klein
curled up extra dimensions and leads to the non commutative geometry (20).
QFST on the other hand, deals with phenomena at the Compton scale, space
time being unphysical below this scale. Yet it leads us back to the Planck
scale, the same number of extra, curled up, Kaluza-Klein dimensions and
the same non- commutative geometry (20), once the meaning of (35) (or the
modiﬁcation of the Heisenberg Uncertainity Principle) is recognized. In this
interpretation, the situation is similar to the fractal one dimensioinal Brown-
ian path becoming two (or three) dimensional. The key is the transformation
(23), which we ﬁrst encountered right at the beginning, in Chapter 3 itself.
It conceals zitterbewegung, leads to the Kerr-Newman metric, QFST and

17

what not!
Finally it is worth emphasizing that both in Strings and in our formulation
the Compton wavelength extension provides a rationale for the dual reso-
nance model, which originated from the Regge trajectories and then gave
the initial motivation for String theory.

8 Resolution, Uniﬁcation and the Core of the

Electron

El Naschie[36] has referred to the fact that there is no apriori ﬁxed length
scale (the Biedenharn conjecture). Indeed it has been argued in the above
context that depending on our scale of resolution, we encounter electro-
magnetism well outside the Compton wavelength, strong interactions at the
Compton wavelength or slightly below it and only gravitation at the Planck
scale. The diﬀerences between the various interactions are a manifestation
of the resolution.
In this connection it may be noted that we can refer to the core of the elec-
tron ∼ 10−20cms, as indeed has been experimentally noticed by Dehmelt and
co-workers[37]. It is interesting that this can be deduced in the context of
the electron as a Quantum Mechanical Kerr-Newman Black Hole.
It was shown in Chapter 3 that for distances of the order of the Compton
wavelength the potential is given in its QCD form

V ≈ −

βM

r

+ 8βM(

Mc2

¯h

)2.r

For small values of r the potential (36) can be written as

It follows from (37) that

V ≈

A
r

e−µ2r2

, µ =

Mc2

¯h

1
µ ∼ 10−21cm.

r ∼

(36)

(37)

(38)

Curiously enough in (37), r appears as a time, which is to be expected be-
cause at the horizon of a black hole r and t interchange roles.

18

µr

One could reach the same conclusion, as given in equation (38) from a dif-
ferent angle. In the Schrodinger equation which is used in QCD, with the
potential given by (36), one could verify that the wave function is of the type
f (r).e−
2 , where the same µ appears in (37). Thus, once again we have a
wave packet which is negligible outside the distance given by (38).
It may be noted that Brodsky and Drell[38] had suggested from a very dif-
ferent viewpoint viz., the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, that
its size would be limited by 10−20cm. The result (38) as pointed out, was
experimentally conﬁrmed by Dehmelt and co-workers.

9 Levels of Physics

We now return to the relation (5) or (20) which expresses the underlying
non-commutative geometry of space-time. What we would like to point out
is that we are seeing here diﬀerent levels of physics. Indeed, rewriting (5) or
(20) as,

[x, ux] = ı[l + l3],

we can see that if l = 0, we have classical physics, while if 0(l3) = 0, we have
Quantum Mechanics and ﬁnally if 0(l3) 6= 0 we have the above discussed
fractal picture, and from another point of view, the superstring picture.
Interestingly, in our case the electron Compton wavelength l ∼ 10−11cm, so
that 0(l3) ∼ 10−33 as in string theory.
The expansion in terms of l given above can be continued[39], and thus one
could in principle go into deeper levels as well.

10 Gravitation and Black Holes

In our formulation we have not invoked the full non linear Theory of Gen-
eral Relativity. General Relativity itself comes up as an approximation, in
its linear version and also through the fact that while G the gravitational
constant, varies with time, over intervals small compared to the age of the
universe, it is approximately constant. (Dirac however reconciles the vari-
ation of G with General Relativity by invoking the so called gravitational
units of measurement[40], the units of our common usage being the atomic
units). The question arises, is it possible to accommodate Black Holes within

19

such a non General Relativistic formulation? We will now show that Black
Holes could also be understood without invoking General Relativity at all.
We start by deﬁning a Black Hole as an object at the surface of which, the
escape velocity equals the maximum possible velocity in the universe viz.,
the velocity of light. We next use the well known equation of Keplerian
orbits[41],

1
r

=

GM
L2 (1 + ecosθ)

(39)

where L, the so called impact parameter is given by, Rc, where R is the point
of closest approach, in our case a point on the surface of the object and c is
the velocity of approach, in our case the velocity of light.
Choosing θ = 0 and e ≈ 1, we can deduce from (39)

R =

2GM

c2

(40)

Equation (40) gives the Schwarzchild radius for a Black Hole and can be
deduced from the full General Relativistic theeory.
We will now use (40) to exhibit Black Holes at three diﬀerent scales, the
micro, the macro and the cosmic scales.
Our starting point is the observation that a Planck mass, 10−5gms at the
Planck length, 10−33cms satisﬁes (40) and, as such is a Schwarzchild Black
Hole. As pointed out Rosen has used non-relativistic Quantum Theory to
show that such a particle is a mini universe.
We next come to stellar scales. It is well known that for an electron gas in a
highly dense mass we have[42]

where

and

K  ¯M 4/3
¯R4 −

¯M 2/3
¯R2 ! = K′

¯M 2
¯R4

K′(cid:19) = (cid:18) 27π
(cid:18) K

64α(cid:19)  ¯hc

P! ≈ 1040

γm2

¯M =

9π
8

M
mP

¯R =

R

(¯h/mec)

,

(41)

(42)

M is the mass, R the radius of the body, mP and me are the proton and
electron masses and ¯h is the reduced Planck Constant. From (41) and (42)

20

it is easy to see that for ¯M < 1060, there are highly condensed planet sized
stars. (Infact these considerations lead to the Chandrasekhar limit in stellar
theory). We can also verify that for ¯M approaching 1060 corresponding to a
mass ∼ 1036gms, or roughly a hundred to a thousand times the solar mass,
the radius R gets smaller and smaller and would be ∼ 108cms, so as to
satisfy (40) and give a Black Hole in broad agreement with theory.
(On
13th Septembe, 2000, NASA announced the discovery of exactly such Black
Holes.)
Finally for the universe as a whole, using only the theory of Newtonian
gravitation, it is well known that we can deduce, as we saw in Chapter 7,

R ∼

GM
c2

(43)

where this time R ∼ 1028cms is the radius of the universe and M ∼ 1055gms
is the mass of the universe.
Equation (43) is the same as (40) and suggests that the universe itself is
a Black Hole.
It is remarkable that if we consider the universe to be a
Schwarzchild Black Hole as suggested by (43), the time taken by a ray of
light to traverse the universe equals the age of the universe ∼ 1017secs as
shown elsewhere [43].

11 Dimensionality and the Field and Particle

Approach

In a recent paper, Castro, Granik and El Naschie have given a rationale for
the three dimensionality of our physical space within the framework of a
Cantorian fractal space time and El Naschie’s earlier work thereon[44]. An
ensemble is used and the value for the average dimension involving the golden
mean is deduced close to the value of our 3 + 1 dimensions. We now make
a few remarks based on an approach which is in the spirit of the above con-
siderations.
Our starting point is the fact that the fractal dimension of a quantum path
is two, which, it has been argued in Chapter 6 is described by the coordi-
nates (x, ict). Infact this lead to the Dirac equation of the spin half electron.
Given the spin half, it was pointed out that it is then possible to deduce the
dimensionality of an ensemble of such particles, which turns out to be three.

21

There is another way of looking at this. If we generalise from the one space
dimensional case and the complex (x, ıt) plane to three dimensions, we in-
fact obtain the four dimensional case and the Theory of Quarternions, which
are based on the Pauli Spin Matrices[28]. As has been noted by Sachs, had
Hamilton identiﬁed the fourth coordinate in the above generalisation with
time, then he would have anticipated Special Relativity itself. It must be ob-
served that the Pauli Spin Matrices which denote the Quantum Mechanical
spin half form, again, a non commutative structure.
Curiously enough the above consideration in the complex plane can have an
interesting connection with an unproven nearly hundred year old conjecture
of Poincare.
Poincare had conjectured that the fact that closed loops could be shrunk to
points on a two dimensional surface topologically equivalent to the surface
of a sphere can be generalised to three dimensions also[45]. After all these
years the conjecture has remained unproven. We will now see why the three
dimensional generalisation is not possible.
We ﬁrstly observe that a two dimensional surface on which closed smooth
loops can be shrunk continuously to arbitrarily small sizes is simply con-
nected. On such a surface we can deﬁne complex coordinates following the
hydrodynamical route exploiting the well known connection between the two.
If we consider laminar motion of an incompressible ﬂuid we will have[46]

Equation (44) deﬁnes, as is well known, the stream function ψ such that

~∇ · ~V = 0

(44)

~V = ~∇ × ψ~ez
where ~ez is the unit vector in the z direction.
Further, as the ﬂow is irrotational, as well, we have

~∇ × ~V = 0

Equation (46) implies that there is a velocity potential φ such that,

~V = ~∇φ

(45)

(46)

(47)

The equations (45) and (47) show that the functions ψ and φ satisfy the
Cauchy-Reimann equations of complex analysis[47].

22

So it is possible to characterise the ﬂuid elements by a complex variable

z = x + ıy

(48)

The question is can we generalise equation (48) to three dimensions? Infact
as we saw a generalisation leads not to three but to four dimensions, with the
three Pauli spin matrices ~σ replacing ı. Further these Pauli spin matrices do
not commute, and characterise spin or vorticity. This close connection can
be established by other arguments as well[48].
This is not surprising - the reason lies in equation (45) or equivalently in the
multiplication law of complex numbers. (Infact, there is a general tendency
to loverlook this fact and this leads to the mistaken impression that complex
numbers are just an ordered pair of numbers, which latter are usually asso-
ciated with vectors.)
The above considerations give an explanation for the 3 + 1 dimensionality
of space time[49]. Moreover equations like (45) and (48) re-emphasize the
hydrodynamical model discussed earlier.
Incidentally as Barrow [50] puts
it, ”Interestingly, the number of dimensions of space which we experience in
the large plays an important role.... It also ensures that wave phenomena
behave in a coherent fashion. Were there four dimensions of space, then sim-
ple waves would not travel at one speed in free space, and hence we would
simultaneously receive waves that were emitted at diﬀerent times. Moreover,
in any world but one having three large dimensions of space, waves would
become distorted as they travelled. Such reverberation and distortion would
render any high-ﬁdelity signalling impossible. Since so much of the physical
universe, from brain waves to quantum waves, relies upon travelling waves
we appreciate the key role played by the dimensionality of our space in ren-
dering its contents intelligible to us.”
We make a ﬁnal remark. We saw in Chapters 1 and 2 that while the contem-
porary Field approach is based on guage interactions and spin 1 Bosons, these
Bosons, as seen in Chapter 9 are not the Quantuzed Vortices, but rather their
bound states - they can be thought of as, approxmately steamlines. On the
other hand, our approach has been based on Fermions, spin half particles,
which are like the Quantized Vortices encountered in Chapter 3.

References

23

[1] L. Smolin, in ”Quantum Concepts in Space and Time”, Eds., R. Penrose

and C.J. Isham, OUP, Oxford, 1986, pp.147-181.

[2] A.O. Barut, Phys.Lett.A., 171, 1992, pp.1-2.

[3] R. Boudet, in ”New Frontiers in Quantum Electrodynamics and Quan-
tum Optics”, Ed. A.O. Barut, Plenum Press, New York, 1990, pp.443ﬀ.

[4] P. Roman, ”Advanced Quantum Theory”, Addison-Wesley, Reading,

MA, 1965, p.31.

[5] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 11(2000), p.1037-1039.

[6] P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1958, p263.

[7] A.S. Davydov, ”Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1965,

p.655.

[8] B.G. Sidharth, Nonlinear World, 4 (2), 1997, pp.157-161.

[9] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, ”Gravitation”, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, 1973.

[10] G. Gaeta, Phys.Lett.A., 175, 1993, p.267-268.

[11] P.V. Coveney , Nature, 333, 1988, pp.409-415.

[12] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 7(4), 1996, pp.499-518.

[13] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 11, 2000, p.1045-1046.

[14] B.G. Sidharth, Ind.J. Pure & Appld.Phys., Vol.35, 1997, pp.456-471.

[15] T.D. Lee, ”Particle Physics and Introduction to Field Theory”, Harwood

Academic, 1981, pp.383ﬀ.

[16] L.J. Tassie, ”The Physics of Elementary Particles, Longman, New York,

1973, pp.50ﬀ.

[17] R. Penrose in ”General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary Survey”, Eds.
S. Hawking and W. Israel, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1979, pp.581ﬀ.

24

[18] R.P. Feynman, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 2, Addison-Wesley,

Mass., 1965.

[19] J.H. Christenson, J.W. Cronin, V.L. Fitch, R. Turlay, Phys.Rev.Lett.,

13, 1964, p.138.

[20] A. Angelopoulos et al., Phys.Lett.B 444, 1998, p.43.

[21] B.G. Sidharth, ”Issues in Quantized Fractal Space Time”, to appear in

Chaos, Solitons and Fractals.

[22] Y. Aharonov, ”Non-Local Phenomena and the Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect”
in Quantum Concepts in Space and Time (Eds.) R. Penrose, C.J. Isham,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986, pp.41ﬀ.

[23] M.W. Evans, ”Origin, Observation and Consequences of the B(3) Field”
in The Present Status of the Quantum Theory of Light, S. Jeﬀers et al.
(eds), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands, 1997, pp.117-125 and
several other references therein.

[24] B.G. Sidharth, ”Comment on the Paper ’On the Uniﬁcation of the Fun-

damental Forces...’”, to appear in Chaos, Solitons and Fractals.

[25] B.G. Sidharth ”Quantum Mechanical Black Holes: Issues and Ramiﬁ-
cations”, Proceedings of First International Symposium, ”Frontiers of
Fundamental Physics”, Universities Press, Hyderabad, 2000 (in press).

[26] G.F. Simmons, ”Introduction to Topology and Modern Analysis”, Mc-

Graw Hill Book Co.Inc., New York, 1965, p.135.

[27] B.G. Sidharth, and M.V. Altaiski, Special Issue of the Journal of Chaos,

Solitons and Fractals, 1998, 10(1),pp1-10.

[28] M. Sachs, ”General Relativity and Matter”, D. Reidel Publishing Com-

pany, Holland, 1982, p.45ﬀ.

[29] H.C. Lee, ”An Introduction to Kaluza-Klein Theories”, World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore, 1984.

[30] Th.Kaluza, Sitzungsber.d. Berl. Acad. 1921, p.966. (English translation

in H.C. Lee, loc.cit.).

25

[31] O. Klein in Zeitschrift fur Physik, Vol.37, 1926, p.895. (English transla-

tion in H.C. Lee, loc.cit.).

[32] P.G. Bergmann, ”Introduction to the Theory of Relativity”, Prentice-

Hall, New Delhi, 1969, p248ﬀ.

[33] M.S. El Naschie, ”On the uniﬁcation of the fundamental forces and

complex time.......”, to appear in Chaos Solitons and Fractals.

[34] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 11, 2000,p.2155-2156.

[35] B.G. Sidharth, ”Uniﬁcation of Electromagnetism in Quantized Fractal

Space Time”, to appear in Chaos, Solitons and Fractals.

[36] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 11, 2000, pp.1459-1469.

[37] H. Dehmelt, Physica Scripta T22, 1988, pp102ﬀ.

[38] S.J. Brodsky, and S.D. Drell, Phys. Rev. D 22(9), 1980, pp2236ﬀ.

[39] Y. Ne’eman,

in Proceedings of the First Internatioinal Symposium,
”Frontiers of Fundmental Physics”, Eds. B.G. Sidharth and A. Burinskii,
Universities Press, Hyderabad, 1999, pp.83ﬀ.

[40] P.A.M. Dirac, ”Directions in Physics”, Eds. H. Hora and J.R. Shepanski,

John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1978.

[41] H. Goldstein, ”Classical Mechanics”, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.,

1966, p.76ﬀ.

[42] K. Huang, Statistical Mechanics, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1975,

pp.230ﬀ.

[43] B.G. Sidharth, ”Fluctuational Cosmology” in Quantum Mechanics and
General Relativity” in Proceeding of the Eighth Marcell Grossmann
Meeting on General Relativity, Ed., T. Piran, World Scientiﬁc, Singa-
pore, 1999, pp.476ﬀ.

[44] C. Castro, A. Granin, M.S. El Naschie, hep-th/0004152.

[45] Report in Science, May 2000

26

[46] G. Joos, ”Theoretical Physics”, Blackie, London, 1951, p199ﬀ.

[47] J. B. Conway, ”Functions of One Complex Variable”, Springer Interna-

tional, New York, 1973, p.80ﬀ.

[48] S. Zakruzewski in ”Quantization, Coherent States and Complex Struc-
tures”, Eds. J.P. Antoine et al., Plenum Press, New York, 1995, pp.249-
255.

[49] B.G. Sidharth, ”A Note on 3 + 1 Dimensionality”, to appear in Chaos,

Solitons and Fractals.

[50] J.D. Barrow, ”Theories of Everything”, Vintage, London, 1992, p.195.

27

