0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
4

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
1
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ALARMING OXYGEN DEPLETION

CAUSED BY HYDROGEN COMBUSTION

AND FUEL CELLS AND THEIR

RESOLUTION BY MAGNEGAST M

Ruggero Maria Santilli

R&D Director, USMagnegas, Inc.

13100 Belcher Road, Largo, FL 33773, U.S.A.

Tel.: +1-727-507 9520, Fax: +1-727-507 8261, E-mail: ibr@gte.net

Contributed paper,

International Hydrogen Energy Forum 2000,

Munich, Germany, September 11-15, 2000

Abstract

We recall that hydrogen combustion does resolve the environmen-
tal problems of fossil fuels due to excessive emission of carcinogenic
substances and carbon dioxide. However, hydrogen combustion im-
plies the permanent removal from our atmosphere of directly usable
oxygen, a serious environmental problem called oxygen depletion, since
the combustion turns oxygen into water whose separation to restore
the original oxygen is prohibitive due to cost. We then show that
a conceivable global use of hydrogen in complete replacement of fos-
sil fuels would imply the permanent removal from our atmosphere of
2.8875×107 metric tons O2/day. Fuel cells are brieﬂy discussed to
point out similarly serious environmental problems, again, for large
uses. We propose the possibility of resolving these problems by up-
grading hydrogen to the new combustible fuel called magnegastm,

0

whose chemical structure is composed by the new chemical species
of magnecules, whose energy content and other features are beyond
the descriptive capacities of quantum chemistry.
In fact, magnegas
contains up to 50% hydrogen, while having combustion exhaust with:
1) a positive oxygen balance (releasing more oxygen in the exhaust
than that used in the combustion); 2) no appreciable carcinogenic or
toxic substances; 3) considerably reduced carbon dioxide as compared
to fossil fuels; 4) considerably reduced nitrogen oxides; and 5) gen-
eral reduction of pollutants in the exhaust up to 96% of current EPA
standards. We also discuss the possibility of further reducing carbon
dioxide via suitable disposable sponges in the exhaust system, as well
as the further reduction of nitrogen oxides with more eﬃcient engine
cooling and other means. The analysis therefore indicates that mag-
negas combustion exhaust already is dramatically below EPA stan-
dards, while the achievement of a completely clean exhaust is within
technological reach. Therefore, magnegas appears to be an excellent
upgrading of hydrogen, both, for direct combustion and for use in
fuel cells. We ﬁnally indicate that one of the best applications of the
new technology is that of processing crude oil in the magnegas reac-
tors, by yielding a fuel dramatically cleaner than gasoline, at a cost
smaller than that via reﬁneries.
In conclusion, crude oil, hydrogen
and fuel cells remain indeed fully admissible in this new era of envi-
ronmental concern, provided that they are treated via a basically new
technology whose quantitative study requires a new chemistry, called
hadronic chemistry [1-5].

1

As is well known, gasoline combustion requires atmospheric oxygen which
is then turned into CO2 and various HydroCarbon (HC). In turn, CO2 is
recycled by plants via the known reaction, H2O + CO2 + (hν) → O2 +
(-(CH2O)-), which restores oxygen in the atmosphere. Essentially this was
the scenario at the beginning of the 20-th century. The same scenario at the
beginning of the 21-st century is dramatically diﬀerent, because forests have
rapidly diminished while we have reached the following unreassuring daily
consumption of crude oil:

74.18 million of barrel per day
= (74.18 million barrels/24h)×(55 gallons/barrel)
= 4.08×109 gallons/24h
= 1.54×1013 cc/24h (using 4 quarts/gallon and 946 cc/quart)
= (4.08×109 gallons)×(4 qrt./gallon)x(946 cc/qrt.)/day
= 1.5438×1013 cc/day
= (1.5438×1013 cc/day)×(0.7028 grams/cc)
= 1.0850×1013 grams octane/day
= (1.0850×1013 grams)/(114.23 grams/mole)
= 9.4984×1010 moles n-octane/day,

(1)

(see, e.g., http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/international/energy.html) where
we have replaced, for simplicity, crude oil with a straight chain of n-octanes
CH3-(CH2)6-CH3 with the known density of 0.7028 g/cc at 20o C. It should
be indicated that data (1) do not include the additional large use of natural
gas and coals, which would bring the daily combustion of all fossil fuel to the
equivalent of about 120 million barrels of crude oil per day.

The primary environmental problems caused by the above disproportion-

ate consumption of fossil fuel per day are the following:

1) Excessive emission of carcinogenic and other toxic substances in the
combustion exhaust. It is well known by experts that gasoline combustion
releases in our atmosphere the largest percentage of carcinogenic and other
toxic substances as compared to any other source. The terms ”atmospheric
pollution” are an euphemism for very toxic breathing.

2) Excessive release of carbon dioxide. It is evident that, under the very
large daily combustion (1), plants cannot recycle the entire production of
CO2, thus resulting in an alarming increase of CO2 in our atmosphere, an
occurrence known as green house eﬀect. In fact, by using the known reaction

2

C8H18 + (25/2)O2 → 8CO2 + 9H2O, we have the following alarming daily
production of CO2 from fossil fuel combustion:

(9.4984×1010 moles C8H18)×(8/1)/day
= 7.5987×1011 moles CO2/day
= (7.5987×1011 moles)×(0.044 kg/mole)/day
= 3.3434×1010 kg/day
= (3.3434×1010 kg/day)/(1000 kg/metric ton)
= 3.3434×107 metric tons/day.

(2)

It is evident that plants cannot possibly recycle such a disproportionate
amount of daily production of CO2. This has implied a considerable increase
of CO2 in our atmosphere which can be measured by any person seriously
interested in the environment via the mere purchase of a CO2 meter, and
then compare current readings of CO2 with standard values on record, e.g.,
the percentage of CO2 in our atmosphere at sea level in 1950 was 0.033% ±
0.01% (see, e.g., Encyclopedia Britannica of that period). Along these lines,
in our laboratory in Florida we measure a thirty fold increase of CO2 in our
atmosphere over the indicated standard. We assume the reader is aware of
recent TV reports of small areas in the North Pole containing liquid water, an
occurrence which has never been observed before. Increasingly catastrophic
climactic events are known to everybody.

3) Excessive removal of directly usable oxygen from our atmosphere, an
environmental problem of fossil fuel combustion, which is lesser known than
the green house eﬀect, even among environmentalists, but potentially more
serious. The problem is called oxygen depletion, and refers to the diﬀerence
between the oxygen needed for the combustion less that expelled in the ex-
haust. By using again the reaction C8H18 +(25/2)O2 → 8CO2 + 9H2O and
data (2), it is easy to obtain the following additionally alarming daily use of
oxygen for the combustion of fossil fuel,

(9.4984×1010 moles octane/day)× (12.5 moles O2/1 mole octane)
= 1.1873×1012 moles of O2/day
= (1.1873×1012 moles of O2)×(0.032 kg/mole O2)
= 3.7994×1010 kg O2/day
= 3.7994×107 metric tons/day.

(3)

3

Again, this large volume of oxygen is turned by the combustion into CO2 of
which only an unknown part is recycled by plants into usable oxygen. Thus,
the actual and permanent oxygen depletion caused by fossil fuel combustion
in our planet is currently unknown. However, it should be indicated that the
very existence of the green house eﬀect is unquestionable evidence of oxygen
depletion, because we are dealing precisely with the quantity of CO2 which
has not been re-converted into O2 by plants.

Oxygen depletion is today measurable by any person seriously interested
in the environment via the mere purchase of an oxygen meter, measure the
local percentage of oxygen, and then compare the result to standards on
record, e.g., the oxygen percentage in our atmosphere at sea level in 1950
was 20.946% ± 0.02% (see, e.g., Encyclopedia Britannica of that period).
Along these lines, in our laboratory in Florida we measure a local oxygen
depletion of 3%-5%. Evidently, bigger oxygen depletions are expected for
densely populated areas, such as Manhattan, London, and Tokyo, or at high
elevation. We assume the reader is aware of the recent decision by U.S.
airlines to lower the altitude of their ﬂights despite the evident increase of
cost. This decision has been apparently motivated by oxygen depletion, e.g.,
fainting spells due to insuﬃcient oxygen suﬀered by passengers during ﬂights
at previous higher altitudes.

The purpose of this note is to indicate that, whether used for direct com-
bustion or in fuel cells, hydrogen combustion does not release carcinogenic
and carbon dioxide in the exhaust, but causes an alarming oxygen depletion
which is considerably bigger than that caused by fossil fuel combustion for
the same energy. This depletion is due to to the fact that gasoline combus-
tion turns oxygen into CO2 part of which is recycled by plants into O2, while
hydrogen combustion turns atmospheric oxygen into H2O. This process per-
manently removes oxygen from our planet in a directly usable form due to
the excessive cost of water separation to restore the original oxygen balance.
By assuming, for simplicity, that gasoline is solely composed of one octane
C8H18, thus ignoring other isomers, the combustion of one mole of H2 gives
68.32 Kcal, while the combustion of one mole of octane produces 1,302.7
Kcal. Thus, we need 19.07 = 1302.7/68.32 moles of H2 to produce the same
energy of one mole of octane.

In turn, the combustion of 19.07 moles of H2 requires 9.535 moles of
O2, while the combustion of one mole of octane requires 12.5 moles of O2.
Therefore, on grounds of the same energy release, the combustion of hydrogen

4

requires less oxygen than gasoline (about 76% of the oxygen consumed by
the octane).

The alarming oxygen depletion occurs, again, because of the fact that the
combustion of hydrogen turns oxygen into water, by therefore permanently
removing usable oxygen from our planet. When used in modest amounts,
the combustion of hydrogen constitutes no appreciable environmental prob-
lem. However, when used in large amounts, the combustion of hydrogen is
potentially catastrophic on environmental grounds, because oxygen is the
foundation of life.

At the limit, a global use of hydrogen as fuel in complete replacement of
fossil fuels would render our planet uninhabitable in a short period of time.
In fact, such a vast use of hydrogen would imply the permanent removal
from our atmosphere of 76% of the oxygen currently consumed to burn fossil
fuels, i.e., from Eqs. (2) and (3), we have the following permanent oxygen
depletion due to global hydrogen combustion:

76% oxygen used for fossil fuel combustion
= 2.8875×107 metric tons O2 depleted/day,

(4)

which would imply the termination of any life on Earth within a few months.
Predictably, the above feature of hydrogen combustion has alarmed envi-
ronmental groups, labor unions, and other concerned people. As an illustra-
tion, calculations show that, in the event all fuels in Manhattan were replaced
by hydrogen, the local oxygen depletion would cause heart failures, with ev-
ident large ﬁnancial liabilities and legal implications for hydrogen suppliers.
An inspection of fuel cells reveals essentially the same scenario. If hydrogen
is used as fuel we have the above indicated oxygen depletion. If, instead, we
use fossil fuels in fuel cells, we are back to essentially the original problems
caused by fossil fuel combustions. The main open issue created by the above
scenario is: since pure hydrogen is potentially catastrophic on a large scale
use whether as direct fuel or in fuel cells, how can hydrogen be upgraded to
a form avoiding the oxygen depletion? It is easy to see that this question
does not admit an industrially and environmentally acceptable answer via
the use of conventional gases. For instance, the addition of CO to H2 in a
50-50 mixture would leave the oxygen depletion unchanged. In fact, each of
the two reactions, H2 + (1/2) O2 → H2 and CO + (1/2) O2 → CO2, requires
1/2 mole of O2.Therefore, the 50-50 mixture of H2 and CO would also require

5

1/2 mole of O2, exactly as it is the case for the pure H2.

After studying the above problems for years, the only answer known to
this author is that of upgrading hydrogen into a new combustible gas, called
magnegastm [1] (international patents pending), which is produced as a by-
product in the recycling of liquid waste (such as automotive antifreeze and
oil waste, city and farm sewage, etc.) or the processing of carbon-rich liquids
(such as crude oil, etc.). The new technology, called PlasmaArcFlowtm (in-
ternational patents pending), is essentially based on ﬂowing liquids through
a submerged electric arc with at least one carbon electrode. The arc essen-
tially decomposes the liquid molecules into a plasma at 7,000o F composed
of mostly ionized H, O and C atoms, plus solid precipitates. The technology
then controls the recombination of H, O and C into a combustible gas with a
new chemical species, tentatively called magneculestm [2], which is currently
under study.

A ﬁrst peculiarity of magnegastm nonexistent in other gases, is that,
following numerous tests in analytic laboratories, its chemical structure can-
not be identiﬁed via conventional Gas Chromatographic Mass Spectromet-
ric (GC-MS) measurements, since it results to be constituted by large clus-
ters (all the way to 1,000 a.m.u.
in molecular weight) which remain com-
pletely unidentiﬁed by the MS. The chemical structure of magnegas is equally
unidentifyable via InfraRed Detectors (IRD), because the new clusters com-
posing magnegastm have no IR signature at all, thus suggesting a bond of
non-valence type (because these large clusters cannot possibly be all sym-
metric). Moreover, the IR signature of conventional molecules such as CO
and CO2 result to be mutated with the appearance of new peaks, which ev-
idently indicate new internal bonds. These features establish that magnegas
has an energy content considerably bigger than that predicted by quantum
chemistry, since it can store energy in three diﬀerent levels: magnecules,
molecules, and new internal molecular bonds. As a result, the combustion of
conventional fuels can be conceived as a singlet rocket ﬁring, while the com-
bustion of ,magnegas can be referred to the burning of a multi-stage rocket,
with intriguing new features. In vies of the above occurrences, quantitative
scientiﬁc studies of magnegas are, therefore, beyond the capabilities of quan-
tum chemistry. A broader theory suitable for scientiﬁc studies of the new
chemical species and the combustion of the new gas has been developed by
R. M. Santilli and D. D. Shillady under the name of hadronic chemistry [3,
4] (see also papers [5]).

6

Scans of the same sample of magnegas at diﬀerent times shows diﬀerent
magnecules, a phenomenon called magnecule mutation. The eﬀect is ex-
pected to be due to collisions among magnecules, resulting fragmentations
due to their large size, and their subsequent recombinations with other frag-
ments. This results in macroscopic changes of the MS peaks for the same
gas under the same GC-MS test, only conducted at diﬀerent times. These
mutations have identiﬁed the presence in the clusters of individual atoms of
H, O and C, plus ordinary molecules H2, CO, and O2 [2, 3]. The estimated
conventional composition of magnegas consists of about 40%-45% hydrogen,
55%-60% carbon monoxide, the rest being composed by traces of oxygen and
carbon dioxide. Evidently, small traces of light HC are possible in ppm, but
no heavy HC is possible in magnegas since the gas is created at 7,000o F of
the electric arc, as conﬁrmed by the lack of activation of catalytic converters
during the combustion. As a working hypothesis in the absence of a more
accurate knowledge, it is conjectured that the very intense magnetic ﬁelds in
the microscopic vicinity of 1,000-3,000 DC Amps of the submerged electric
arc (which can be as high at 1014 Gauss at distances of 10−8 cm) cause a
polarization of the orbits of at least the valence electrons from a spherical
into a toroidal conﬁguration, resulting in strong magnetic ﬁelds estimated
to be 1,415 times nuclear magnetic ﬁelds [2, 5a]. It is then expected that
strongly polarized individual atoms and molecules bond together like little
magnets, resulting in clusters which are stable at ordinary conditions. Since
the new bonds do not appear to be of valence type (or any of its variations),
they can only be of electric, magnetic, or electromagnetic nature. The new
clusters are called magnecules because of the dominance of magnetic over
other eﬀects in their creation, while electric eﬀects are generally unstable,
and often repulsive (as it is the case of ions).

Besides direct calculations [2, 5a], the magnetic polarization of the atoms
and molecules constituting magnegas is further supported by a number of in-
direct eﬀects, such as the capability of magnegastm to stick to instruments
walls, called magnecule adhesion. As an illustration, following the removal
of magnegas from a GC-MS and its conventional ﬂushing, the background
preserves all the anomalous peaks of magnegas. This occurrence can only be
interpreted numerically via adhesion due to induced magnetic polarization,
and not via electrostatic, coordination, and other eﬀects. Mutatis mutan-
dae, stable clusters can only exist under a suﬃciently strong attractive force,
which must be numerically identiﬁed for a model to have suﬃcient depth.

7

Among all possible non-valence bonds, the magnetic attraction among polar-
ized valence orbits is the only model available at this writing with a concrete
attractive bond, while all other models lack such an identiﬁcation (as it is
the case for electric eﬀects, coordination eﬀects, co-valence, etc.). Due to
the implications here at stake, the study of alternative structure of the new
clusters in magnegas is warmly recommended, provided that, again, the at-
tractive force creating the clusters is speciﬁcally and numerically identiﬁed,
and models based on pure nomenclatures are avoided.

Even though the chemical structure of magnegas escapes current quan-
tum chemical knowledge, its combustion exhaust has a conventional chemical
structure, because the exhaust temperature is beyond the Curie point of mag-
necules. As a result, all magnecules and other anomalies are removed by the
combustion. Following numerous tests, including various conversions of au-
tomobiles to run on magnegas, we have the following combustion exhaust of
magnegas measured before the catalytic converter, in percentages:

Water vapor:
Oxygen:
Carbon dioxide:
Carbon monoxide:
Hydrocarbons:
Rest atmospheric

65%-70%
9.5%-10.5%
6%-8%
0.00%-0.01%
minus 2 to minus 5 ppm

(5)

As one can see, the upgrading of hydrogen into magnegas: 1) turns the
oxygen depletion caused by hydrogen combustion into a positive oxygen bal-
ance (more oxygen in the exhaust than that used for the combustion) 2)
emits no carcinogenic or toxic substance in the exhaust; and 3) implies a
signiﬁcant reduction of carbon dioxide emission over fossil fuels. In particu-
lar, magnegas exhaust meets the most stringent governmental requirements
without a catalytic converter while having a positive oxygen balance. Pre-
liminary magnegas exhaust measurements have been recently conducted at
the EPA Certiﬁed, Vehicle Certiﬁcation Laboratory Liphardt & Associates
of Long Island, New York, via the Varied Test Procedure (VTP) as per Reg-
ulation 40-CFR, Part 86 on a Honda Civic Natural Gas Vehicle VIN number
1HGEN1649WL000160, produced in 1998 (and purchased new in 1999) to

8

operate with Compressed Natural Gas (CNG). This car was converted by US-
Magnegas, Inc., Largo, Florida, to operate on Compressed MagneGas (CMG)
via: 1) the replacement of CNG with CMG; 2) the disabling of the oxygen
sensor (because magnegas has 20 times more oxygen in the exhaust than nat-
ural gas); and 3) installing a multiple spark system (to improve combustion);
while leaving the rest of the car unchanged, including its computer.

The tests consisted of the conventional EPA routine for Regulation 40-
CFR, Part 89, consisting of three separate and sequential tests conducted on
a computerized dynamometer, the ﬁrst and the third tests using the car at
its maximal possible capability to simulate an up-hill travel at 60 mph, while
the second test consists in simulating normal city driving of the car. Three
corresponding bags with the exhaust residues are collected, jointly with a
fourth bag containing atmospheric contaminants. The ﬁnal measurements
expressed in grams/mile are given by the average of the measurements on
the three EPA test bags, less the measurements of atmospheric pollutants
in the fourth bag. The results of the above preliminary tests on magnegas
exhaust are:

Hydrocarbons:

Carbon monoxide:

Nitrogen oxides:

Carbon dioxide:

Oxygen:

0.026 gram/mile = 93.6% reduction
of the EPA standard of 0.41 gram/mile
0.262 grams/mile = 92.6% reduction
of the EPA standard of 3.40 grams/mile
0.281 gram/mile = 29.7% reduction
of the EPA standard of 0.4 gm/mile
235 grams/mile - there is no EPA standard
on CO2 at this moment
not measured because not requested
in Regulation 40-CFR, Part 86

(6)

The following comments are important for an appraisal of the above re-

sults:

1) Magnegas does not contain heavy HC since it is created at 7,000o F.
Therefore, the measured HC is expected to be due, at least in part, to com-
bustion of oil, either originating from magnegas compression pumps (thus
contaminating the gas), or from engine oil. New tests are under way in

9

which magnegas is ﬁltered after compression, and all oils of fossil fuels origin
are replaced with synthetic oils.

2) Carbon monoxide is fuel for magnegas (while being a combustion prod-
uct for gasoline). Therefore, any presence of CO in the exhaust is evidence
of insuﬃcient combustion.

3) The great majority of measurements (6) originate from the ﬁrst and
third parts of the test at extreme performance, because, during ordinary city
traﬃc, magnegas exhaust is essentially pollutant free, as shown in Figure 1.
4) Nitrogen oxides are not due, in general, to the fuel (whether magnegas
or other fuel), but to the temperature of the engine, thus being an indication
of the quality of its cooling system. Therefore, for each given fuel, including
magnegas, NOx’s can be decreased by improving the cooling system and
other means.

5) Measurements (6) do not refer to the best possible combustion of mag-
negas, but only to the combustion of magnegas in a vehicle whose carburetion
was developed for natural gas. Alternatively, the test was primarily intended
to prove the interchangeability of magnegas with natural gas without any ma-
jor automotive changes, while keeping essentially the same performance and
consumption. The measurements under combustion speciﬁcally conceived
for magnegas are under way, and will be released in the near future. The
main diﬀerence in the latter tests is a considerable reduction in the emis-
sion of carbon dioxide for certain technical reasons related to the magnegas
combustion.

In Figure 1, the ﬁrst three diagrams illustrate the very low combustion
emission of magnegas in city driving, by keeping in mind that most of mea-
surements (6) are due to the heavy duty, hill climbing part of the EPA test.
Even though 29.7% of EPA standard, the fourth diagram on nitrogen oxides
is an indication of insuﬃcient cooling of the engine. The bottom diagram
indicates the simulated speed of the car versus time, where ﬂat tracts simu-
late idle portions at traﬃc lights. By keeping in mind: 1) the lack of (heavy)
hydrocarbon in magnegas (because produced at 7,000o F of the electric arc);
2) the expectation of no appreciable carbon dioxide in the magnegas exhaust
under proper combustion (because CO is fuel for magnegas); 3) the possi-
ble further reduction of carbon dioxide via disposable sponges placed in the
exhaust systems; 4) the decrease of nitrogen oxides with a more eﬃcient en-
gine cooling and other improvements; and 5) the positive oxygen balance of
magnegas (not measured in the test because not included in current EPA

10

Figure 1: An illustration of the city part of the EPA test according to Reg-
ulation 40-CFR, Part 86, conducted at the Vehicle Certiﬁcation Laboratory
Liphardt & Associates of Long Island, New York on a Honda Civic Natural
Gas Vehicle converted to magnegas.

11

regulations); the measurements depicted in this diagram indicate that the
achievement of a truly clean fuel is indeed within technological reach.

We should also indicate considerable research eﬀorts under way to further
reduce the CO2 content via suitable cartridges of disposable chemical sponges
placed in the exhaust system. Admittedly, these catalytic means generally
implies the creation of acids harmful to the human skin, if released in the
environment. However, the ongoing research aims at the chemical and/or
technological resolution of these problems. Additional research is under way
via liqueﬁed magnegas obtained via catalytic or conventional liquefaction,
which is expected to have an anomalous energy content with respect to other
liquid fuels, and an expected, consequential decrease of pollutants. As a
result of these eﬀorts, the achievement of an exhaust essentially free of CO2
appears to be within technological reach.

As a comparison for measurements (6), a similar (but diﬀerent) Honda
car running on indolene (a version of gasoline) without aﬀecting performance
was tested in the same laboratory with the same EPA procedure, resulting
in the following data:

Hydrocarbons:
Carbon monoxide:
Nitrogen oxides:
Carbon dioxide:

0.234 gram/mile = 900% of magnegas emission
1.965 gram/mile = 750% of magnegas emission
0.247 gram/mile = 86% of magnegas emission (7)
458.655 grams/mile = 195% of magnegas emission

which illustrates the environmental superiority of magnegas over gasoline.
The improvement of emission by magnegas over the above data are evident.
Other features favoring the upgrading of pure hydrogen into magnegas

are (international patents pending):

1) magnegas is cost competitiveness with respect to fossil fuels (since it

is produced as a byproduct of an income-producing recycling);

2) magnegas increases the energy content from about 300 BTU/cf for
hydrogen to about 800-900 BTU/cf (due to the new means of energy storage);
3) magnegas is more readily availability anywhere desired (since easily
transportable PlasmaArcFlow reactors as big as a desk produce up to 1,500
cf of magnegas per hour, i.e, a production in one hour suﬃcient for about
three hours city travel by a compact car);

12

4) magnegas admits easier liquefaction, e.g., via Fischer-Tropsch cat-
alytic synthesis or conventional liquefaction (due to attractions between mag-
necules);

5) magnegas has a better penetration through membranes (due to mea-
sured decreases of average molecular sizes of magnetically polarized conven-
tional molecules);

6) magnegas can be used for any conventional fuel application, including

metal cutting, cooking, automotive use, etc.

7) Magnegas can be used in fuel cells, by preserving its environmental

advantages.

Above all, the magnegastm technology appears to permit an ultimate
merger of crude oil and hydrogen technologies. One of the best liquids usable
in the PlasmaArcFlowtm reactors is crude oil, which is then turned into a
fuel much cleaner than gasoline (plus usable heat and solid precipitates) at
a cost visibly smaller than that that via huge reﬁneries. The fuel produced
by the above new processing of crude oil is 40%-45% hydrogen.

In conclusion, crude oil, hydrogen, and fuel cells remain indeed fully ad-
missible in this new era of environmental concern, provided that they are
treated via a basically new technology whose quantitative study requires a
new chemistry, hadronic chemistry [1-5].

Acknowledgments

The author would like to thank D. D. Shillady, Chemistry Department, Vir-
ginia Commonwealth University, U.S.A., and A. K. Aringazin, Department
of Theoretical Physics, Karaganda State University, Kazakstan. Particu-
lar thanks are also due to all member of USMagnegas, Inc., for invaluable
assistance without which this paper could not have seen the light of the day.

13

References

[1] http://www.magnegas.com

[2] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic Journal 21, 789 (1998).

[3] R. M. Santilli and D. D. Shillady, Ab Initio Hadronic Chemistry, Hadronic

Press, Florida (2000).

[4] R. M. Santilli and D. D. Shillady, International Journal of Hydrogen

Energy 24, 943 (1999), and 25, 173 (2000).

[5] (a) M. G. Kucherenko and A. K. Aringazin, Hadronic Journal 21, 895
(1998). (b) M. G. Kucherenko and A. K. Aringazin, Hadronic Journal
23, 1 (2000), e-print: physics/0001056. (c) A. K. Aringazin, Hadronic
Journal 23, 57 (2000), e-print: physics/0001057.

14

