0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

What Future Expects Humanity After the Demographic Transition Time?

L.Ya.Kobelev, L.L.Nugaeva

Department of Physics, Urals State University
Lenina Ave., 51, Ekaterinburg 620083, Russia

E-mail: leonid.kobelev@usu.ru

The variant of phenomenological theory of humankind future existence after time of demographic
transition based on treating the time of demographic transition as a point of phase transition and
taking into account an appearing of the new phase of mankind is proposed. The theory based on
physical phenomenological theories of phase transitions and classical equations for system predatory-
preys for two phases of mankind, take into account assumption about a multifractal nature of the
set of number of people in temporal axis and contains control parameters. The theory includes
scenario of destroying of existent now human population by new phase of humanity and scenario of
old and new phases co-existence. In particular cases when the new phase of mankind is absent the
equations of theory may be formulated as equations of Kapitza , Foerster, Hoerner, Kobelev and
Nugaeva, Johansen and Sornette phenomenological theories of growth of mankind.

01.30.Tt, 05.45, 64.60.A; 00.89.98.02.90.+p.

I. INTRODUCTION

The problem of mankind population growth is one
of the global problems of the mankind existence and
its prosperity in the future. Will the demographic ex-
plosion existing now at the mankind population of the
whole world stops and what will be after its stopping?
Almost all the phenomenological theories of future of
mankind ( see [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]) include the time of
demographic transition t0. Before this time the growth
of mankind population is very large ( hyperbolic or ex-
ponential growth), after this time the population growth
may practically absent [3] or may be regulated by driving
parameters [4] that govern the development of mankind
(such parameters are present in non-linear open systems
(see [6]). Thus the time point t0 (the time of demographic
transition) is very essential for the future of mankind.
What is biological and physical senses of the demographic
transition time? The mankind as the whole is a very large
system and its behavior can be described by methods of
nonlinear dynamic, probability theory or statistical the-
ory of open system using the methods of fractal geometry
( [7], [8], or power laws [5]) . Now put the question: how
the demographical transition time may be treated from
these points of view? There are many diﬀerent ways to
answer on this question. In this paper we consider the
demographic transition time as a point of a phase tran-
sition, i.e. the point of transition of mankind in a new
phase ( in physiological, psychological, behaviour and so
on senses). What this phase will be if it may exist? Will
be the population of men of the new phase friendly to
the old phase of mankind or will they ﬁght with men of
the old phase and force out them from their ecological
niche? What scenario may exist and be admissible in
that case? It seems that if the driving parameters that
determine growth of the new phase ( thou it is diﬃcult

now to select the main of them, it is the tusk for many
research groups ) will the same as now the new phase
may diminish the old phase of mankind very soon. We
would remind that all phenomenological theories give for
the time t0 the time in ﬁrst part of twenty one century.
If the treating of time t0 as a point of phase transition
is correct and has relation to existence of humanity , the
embryos of the new phase must appear ( as it well known
from theory of phase transitions in physics) before the
time of demographic transition , i.e.
in very near time.
What role they will play in the life of mankind society
and what it will be like? Will the new phase consist of
international groups of islam terrorist and the ﬁght and
wars spread to the whole world? Or it will international
groups of corrupted oﬃcials that for own prosperity gov-
ern the whole world to its death? May be the groups of
sexual minorities will became the main part of mankind
and diminish it ? Will the new phase characteristics lay
in psychological (i.e. behaviour) domain or it lay in the
physiological domain ( may be it is incurable genetics
diseases or mental disorders reasoned by increasing radi-
ation in our world)? Are the Russian revolution in 1917
year or the Germany fascist state in 1933 year are the
examples of appearing of such phases? May be the vic-
tory of progressive mankind in the World War II and
collapse of socialist system in Soviet Union are results
only the fact that the demographic time transition is not
come? It seems, the search of answers on these questions
is the one of main tusks of governments and research de-
mographical gropes of developed countries in near time.

We consider in this paper only one way of mathemat-
ical analysis and description of two phases of mankind
(the old phase and the new phase) and describe time be-
haviour of these phases by system of diﬀerential equa-
tions that are Volterra-Lotka equations for system of

1

predatory-prey.

II. EQUATIONS FOR DESCRIBING TWO
PHASES MANKIND TIME BEHAVIOUR

There are two simplest ways (physical and biological)
for describing time dependence of two phases (the old
and the new) of mankind :

1. In physics the phenomenological theory of phase tran-
sitions was developed by Landau (see [9]). Theory of
phase transitions as appearing of order parameters de-
veloped by Ginzburg-Landau [10]. These theory may be
used for describing time behaviour of two phases. From
physical point of view the transition from the old phase
of mankind to the new phase may: a) take very short
time (as transition of water to ice); b) take long time
and has intermediate state when two phases of mankind
will co-existent (as in the transition to superconductive
state for superconductors of second order);c) be charac-
terized by stretched in time axes phase transition as in
some ferroelectrics. The diﬀerences of these cases de-
termined by characteristics of the small embryos gropes
of new phase and their interaction with the old phase
of mankind. If interaction between men of old and new
phases will attract the man of old phase to transition to
the new phase (we will call such interaction as ”nega-
tive” ), the transition time will be small and co-existent
of two phases of mankind for the long time period is im-
possible. Probably the evidences of such transitions are
the above examples of Russian revolution of 1917 year
and fascist Germany state of 1933 year. If result of in-
teraction of men of the old phase with gropes of men of
the new phase will neutral, i.e. men of old phase will
not be attracted by embryos of new phase ( ”positive”
interaction), amount of new the phase will increase and
co-existence of new and old phases is possible. The time
of coexistence determined by govern parameters and se-
lected mathematical models.
2. The biological point of view on behavior of mankind
allows to use many mathematical models for describing of
time behaviour of old and new mankind phases. In this
paper we see only simple predatory-prey models where
the old phase of mankind will be prey and the new phase
will be predatory.

III. EQUATIONS OF WOLTERRA-LOTKA FOR

OLD AND NEW PHASES MANKIND

POPULATION

Let us designate the old phase of mankind by N1(t)
and the new phase of mankind by N2(t) where t is cur-
rent time. Equations of Volterra-Lotka type is well re-
searched. It is well considered the time behaviour of the

predatory and the prey populations (including time be-
haviour populations near the point of demographic tran-
sition t0 where ﬂuctuations play important role). So we
only write these equations and mark the main conse-
quences of mathematical theories. Let for time dt the old
phase changes are cN ν
1 dt−γN1N2dt ( the second member
is the result of diminishing character of inﬂuences (inter-
actions) between the old and the new phases) and new
phase changes are −δN2dt + bN1N2dt. The equations for
N1(t) and N2(t) may be written in this case as

∂
∂t

N1(t) = cN ν

1 (t) − γN1(t)N2(t)

∂
∂t

N2(t) = −δN2(t) + bN1(t)N2(t)

(1)

(2)

where c, b, δ, γ are constant and deﬁned by selections of
considered models. These equations are Volterra equa-
tions for ν = 1 and are Lotka equations for ν = 0. The
humanity phases N1 and N2 in (1),(2) have links and de-
termine one another.
In the case when populations of the old phase and the
new phase are multifractal sets on the time axes (see [4])
equations (1) and (2) read

Dβ

0,tN1(t) = cN ν

1 (t) − γN1(t)N2(t)

Dµ

0,tN2(t) = −δN2(t) + bN1(t)N2(t)

(3)

(4)

0,t and Dµ

where Dβ
0,t are Riemann-Liouville fractional
derivatives or generalized Riemann-Liouville derivatives
(see [4])and β and µ are fractional numbers or functions
of govern parameters.
The equations (1) and (2) may be considered as the base
equations of rude bioligical models for describing future
population of mankind if there are exist two phases of
mankind and sets of N1 and N2 are sets of population
of old and new phases . As well known the equations
of such type ( type of Volterra-Lotka equations) may be
generalized and wrote in more general form ( form of
Kolmogorov-Fokker-Plank equations for probability den-
sity w(N1, N2, t) to ﬁnd in moment t the populations
N1 and N2 in the considered system [12], [13], or may
be considered the case when inﬂuences N2 on behaviors
of N1 included only at the bound time intervals and so
on). These generalized equations are wide spread and
give many known models have used not only in biology
( [14]), but in economics ( [15]), non linear physics, the-
oretical chemistry and so on. In the next part of paper
we write more detailed description of results of interac-
tions between two mankind phases N11 and N2 based
on well known researches of equations of such type. For
case when in above equations there are only one phase
N1, and ν = 0 and coeﬃcient c is function of time and t0
(c = c(t, t0) it is not diﬃcult to chose c(t, t0) in the sim-
ple forms and as special cases receive the base equations
of work [3], [4], [5].

2

IV. HOW WILL INTERACT OLD AND NEW

V. CONCLUSIONS

MANKIND PHASES?

The mathematical research of solutions characteristics
of equations (1)-(2) or more general equations taking into
account the ﬂuctuations is well worked out (see for ex-
ample [13]. As was pointed out these equations may be
written for mean values of N1 and N2 or in the form
of govern equations for probability w(N1, N2, t) to ﬁnd
the system in the moment t with values N1 and N2, or
in the form of Kolmogorov- Fokker-Plank equations that
are consequences of governor equations. The inﬂuences
of noises and ﬂuctuations( depending at c, b, δ, γ ) on the
behaviour of system may be taken into account too. More
complicated equations may be written for case when the
phase N2 may part of her time have ”a rest time” and
in that rest time do not interact with the phase N1. So
we omit the process of receiving of solutions for diﬀerent
systems of equations describing interaction between old-
new phases and only describe main results:
1. Possibility of co-existence between old and new phases
with periodical changing of value of N1 and N2;
2. Possibility for diminishing of one phase by other phase
that depends at the initial values;
3. Possibility for calculation of mean values of N1 and
N2 in one of system states;
4. Possibility for calculation of time existence tex for
old or new phases if take into account by including in
the main equations (or changing the main equation by
its Fokker-Plank probability analogies equations) exter-
nal or internal noises ( additive or multiplicative);
5. Possibility of description of ﬂuctuation characteristics
of kinetic variables near bifurcation points;
6. Possibility of researching of noises role in losing sta-
bility of stationary state or in diﬀerent self-excited oscil-
lations states;
7. Possibility of determination of conditions for stochas-
tic regimes appearing in system;
8. Possibility of governing by processes of ﬁghting or co-
existence between old and new phases;
9. Possibility of using more complicated models and
equations including fractal characteristics of mankind
population distribution on the time axis.
10. Possibility of selection of diﬀerent variants for govern
parameters based on experimental sociological dates and
so on.
Thus the predatory-prey models and its equations give
rich possibilities for researching of the behavior of two
phases of mankind. Has this assumption about appearing
of two mankind phases relation to problem of future prop-
agation of mankind? The future propagation of mankind
will gives answer on this question, but if it assumption is
correct it is time now to ﬁnd the new phase (or phases)
and determine (or make attempts to determine) is it one
or other phases useful for future of mankind or not useful.

As one of advantages to use the equations (1)-(2) for
describing demographic problems (with some of them the
mankind already has confronted now and may be these
problems are consequences of appearing the embryos of
new phase of mankind ) we shall stress an opportunity
of insert and account in the theory many factors (such
as, incurable illnesses, natural cataclysmic etc.) deﬁning
future of mankind as a result of inﬂuences the control pa-
rameters included in the govern parameters of predatory-
prey models and fractional dimensions .
There are three main scenario of models based on equa-
tions type of (1)-(2):
a) Two phases of mankind co-existent during long time
with periodically changes its values and with mean val-
ues N1 = δb−1 and N2 = cγ−1 conserves in bound limits
if population ﬂuctuations may be omitted;
b) Mankind population lost its stability as the result of
ﬂuctuation inﬂuences if the equations of Lotta type used;
c)The old mankind phase has bound time of existence
and this time may by calculated if parameters of theory
are deﬁned .
The main purpose of this paper was to analyze possibil-
ity of introducing of two mankind’s population phases
after demographic transition time. Driving parameters
included in the considered models (equations of Landau-
Ginzburg time theory or equations of predatory-prey
type) of the phenomenological theories of the mankind
population in the frame of physical Landau or Ginzburg-
Landau models or biological predatory-prey models. The
predatory-prey type models was chosen asan example.
The change of number of mankind (described in the
framework of phenomenological theories of the popula-
tion) can be adjusted by such choice of control param-
eters with concrete contents of dependencies of them at
which the mankind will has stability time and population
will grow so slowly, that overpopulation and the problems
connected with ﬁghting between two mankind phases will
do not arise in the foreseen future. Stress now as was
done in [5] that after demographic transition time also
the type of economical development of humankind may
be changed .

[1] Foerster, Von H. et al., Science, v.132, p.1291 (1960)
[2] Hoerner, von SJ., British Interplanetary Society, v.28,

691, (1975)

[3] Kapitza S.P., Uspehi Fizicheskih Nauk (Russia), 1996,
vol.166, No.1, pp.63-79; Kapitza S.P., How Many People
Lived, Live and are to Live in the World. An essay on
the theory of growth of humankind, Moscow, Inst. Phys.
Problem RAS, 1999,238p.(in Russian)

3

[4] Kobelev L.Ya., Nugaeva L.L. Will Humanity population

Stabilized in Future? arXiv/physics:0003035

[5] Johansen A., Sornette D. The End of growth Era?

arXiv:cond-mat/0002075

[6] Klimontovith Yu.L., Statistical Theory of Open Sys-
tems. Vol.1, Moscow, Yanus, 1995, 686p. (in Russian);
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1995; Klimon-
tovich Yu.L., Statistical Physics of Open systems. Vol.2,
Moscow, Yanus, 1999, 450p. (in Rusian).

[7] Mandelbrot B., Fractal Geometry of Nature,

W.H.Freeman, San Francisco, 1982

[8] Kobelev L.Ya, Fractal Theory of Time and Space, Ekater-
inburg, Konros, 1999, 136p. (in Russian);Kobelev L.Ya.,
What Dimensions Do the Time and Space Have: Integer
or Fractional? arXiv:physics/0001035;

[9] L.D.Landau, I.M.Livshiz, Statistical Physics, Moskow,

Nauka,1964 (in Russian

[10] V.L.Ginzburg, L.D.Landau, GETP, 1948, v.20,P.1064 (in

Russian)

[11] Samko S.G, Kilbas A.A., Marithev I.I., Integrals and
Derivatives of the Fractional Order and Their Applica-
tions, (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1993).

[12] Alekseev B.B.,Kostin I.K,Stability of simple biogeochi-
noses
to External Stochastic Inﬂuences,in ”Biologi-
cal Systems in Agriculture and Forestry”,-Moskwa,
Nauka,1974, p.105-112 ( in Russian)

[13] Vasiliev,V.A., Romanovski Yu.M. Yaxno V.G. Avtovave

processes, Moscow, Nauka,1987,p.240 (in Russian)

[14] Murray J.D. Mathematical Biology, Springer-Verlag,

Berlin New York Heidelberg, 1989

[15] Lorenz Nonlinear Dynamical Economics and Chaotic

Motion, Springer-Verlag, 1993.

4

