0
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
2
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Mass is variable

It is assumed that, for particles having rest mass, mass is equivalent to kinetic
energy with coupling constant c2. This paper examines the consequences for
Newtonian gravity, in ﬂat spacetime, when mass changes according to speed
and gravity. It is assumed that gravitational mass is the same as inertial mass.
The inertial mass increase with speed is:

m = γm0 = m0/

1 − β2

p

where m0 is the rest mass and β = v/c. Some physicists dislike this interpreta-
tion, preferring to regard rest mass as a constant and refusing to interpret ”m”
as mass. It is a matter of taste. Upon accepting (1), it is clear that diﬀerent ob-
servers will report diﬀerent masses for a given object, according to their relative
velocities. Gravity leads to changes in γ, throughout an orbital motion. In the
conventional description of a conservative gravitational system, kinetic energy
T is gained at the expense of gravitational potential energy U and the sum of
these energies is constant. Thus, when the reference point at which U = 0 is at
r = ∞, gravitational attraction leads to a hyperbolic orbit.

1/α ≡ 1 + GM/rc2

2

T = (γ − 1)m0c
U = (1 − 1/α)m0c2

and so, γ = 1/α. In a closed orbit, where the kinetic energy is insuﬃcient to
permit escape, the potential reference point is some value of r less than inﬁnity,
R. The SR gamma boost is modiﬁed in that case

γ = 1/αR

1/αR ≡ 1 + GM/rc2 − GM/Rc2

In addition to the eﬀect of gravity on speed, which aﬀects the mass, it is pos-
tulated that gravitational potential directly aﬀects rest mass. The Pound-Rebka
(ref 1) Mossbauer experiment shows that a falling photon, in a gravitational
ﬁeld, ”g”, appears to gain energy:

⋆

hν

= hν(1 + gh/c

)

2

The source is at the upper level and the absorber is at the lower level, separated
vertically by ”h”. It was found necessary to decrease the relative energy of the
source by gh/c2 in order to achieve resonance at the absorber.

Now, consider a gedanken annihilation experiment. A thermalized (low ki-
netic energy) positron-electron pair of total rest mass m0 annihilates at the
upper level, and produces two or three photons of total energy hν. These are
reﬂected, if necessary, downward so they can be compared with the results of
a similar annihilation taking place at the lower level. By energy balance, pho-
tons of somewhat larger energy are produced at the lower level, per (7), if their

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

energy is to equal that produced at the upper level plus the increase due to
gravity. This would mean that the rest mass at the lower level, m⋆
0, the source
of this larger energy, is greater than m0 by m0gh/c2 .

More generally, ”g” changes and one ﬁnds that the rest mass increases under
gravity:

m⋆

0 = m0(1 + gh/c2)

⋆
0 = m0/α

m

The ﬁnal expression for the mass, in general, is:

m⋆ = γm0/α = m0/αRα

(8)

(9)

(10)

Both factors aﬀecting mass, i.e. speed and gravity, are included in (10). The
factor 1/α accounts for the increase of rest mass, and the factor γ = 1/αR
accounts for the SR boost. The consequences of using this expression for mass
in Newton’s law of universal gravitation are explored in this paper.

However, it will subsequently be shown that there are problems with this
derivation of (9). This derivation accepted that photons really change energy,
as they fall in a gravitational ﬁeld. It will be shown in section 9 that photons
move in a gravitational ﬁeld without change of energy, meaning that any change
of energy takes place at the point of origin rather than throughout the path.
However, (9) remains valid as shown by the successes it achieves in dealing with
the three classical tests of GR.

2 Gravitational potential energy

Before investigating the changing metric implied by (10), the increase of rest
mass (9) leads to a ”factor of two” problem with conventional gravitational
potential energy. Normally, one writes this potential energy for R = ∞ as

U = −GM m/r

(11)

The gravitational force is taken as the negative gradient of U, and energy con-
servation is assumed. This yields the kinetic energy, 1/2 mv2. It disagrees with
(10) where, for a given loss of potential energy, one gains twice as much kinetic
energy, T.

T = (m − m0)c2 = m0c2(1/α2 − 1) ≈ 2GM m0/r
(12)
The kinetic energy T includes both 1/2 mv2 and c2 times the increase of rest
mass. Since energy is conserved, (11) underestimates U by a factor of two and
so the loss of potential energy is actually

U = m0c

2

2
(1 − 1/α

) ≈ −2Gm0M/r

(13)

The gravitational force is no longer the negative gradient of the entire potential
energy, but only of that part associated with velocity gain.

2

This expansion of the concepts of the kinetic and potential energy is uncon-
ventional, but is forced upon us by the recognition of the rest mass increase in a
gravitational potential. Equations (12) and (13) are critical to an understanding
of the nature of gravity. Conventionally, with potential energy written as (11),
the location of the potential energy has been vaguely attributed to ”the gravi-
tational ﬁeld”. Now, we can perhaps be more speciﬁc. In a speculative paper
proposing an EM basis of gravity, it was suggested that fractional charges (par-
tons) oscillate within elementary charged particles at the Compton frequency,
E/h. (ref 2) This oscillation both creates, and interacts with, long-range 1/r
electric ﬁelds. The interaction ”heats up” the moving partons, increasing the
rest mass of the elementary particle. These partons are thought to move in a
1/r potential, within the elementary particle, and the virial theorem requires
that hT i = −1/2 hU i. So, any increase of hT i within the elementary particle
results in a lowering of the total energy. This, then, is proposed as the storage
site for the gravitational potential energy of mass. Aside from any translational
kinetic energy gained by a falling body, the net energy of an elementary parti-
cle falls according to the strength of the long-range transient electric ﬁelds and
leads to an attractive force qualitatively resembling Newton’s law of universal
gravitation.

3 Eﬀect of mass on the metric

In the presence of a gravitational potential, the metrics of length and time are
reduced (as measured) because of the increase of mass. Recall that the length
of a meter stick is equal to some large number times the size of an atom. The
Bohr radius is a measure of the size of an atom, and is inversely proportional
to the mass of an electron, ”m”. (ref 3)

It follows that the length L* of a meter stick in a gravitational potential is
shortened, by the factor α/γ.

rn = n2h2ǫ0/(πmZe2)

L⋆ = (α/γ)L

(14)

(15)

This shortening is isotropic, and the metric of distance, as measured, is at any
point a scalar function of r.

There are several possibilities for measuring time. An atomic clock is both
meaningful and portable. The term (energy) levels of an atom are proportional
to the mass of the electron, and so the splitting of these levels increases when
the atom is immersed in a gravitational potential. In a Bohr atom, (ref 3)

En = −mZ

2

4

e

/(8ǫ

2

2
0h

n

2

)

(16)

A photon arising from a transition between two of these term levels in a gravity
environment appears to have a higher energy than when the photon is produced
in a non-gravity environment. Expressing the energy of the photon in terms of

3

frequency, and coupling this frequency to the hands of a clock, the result is that
the interval between ticks of the clock is shortened by gravity. The clock runs
faster.

τ ⋆ = (α/γ)τ

(17)

It should be emphasized that these changes of mass and of measured length and
time, referenced to a gravity-free space, are real. What, then, is the nature of
space? Without measurement, we don’t know. The problem of measurement is
that the calibration of our measuring instruments changes because the instru-
ments themselves have mass. Meter sticks shrink. It takes more meter sticks
to span a space when that space is inﬂuenced by gravity. Dynamical events
are timed diﬀerently by co-moving clocks than by a clock sited far away from
gravity. As for the curvature of space, consider a meter stick moved slowly and
”ﬂat-on” from a place of low gravitational potential to one of high gravitational
potential. Despite our assumption of ﬂat spacetime, the ends of the meter stick
trace curved paths, the ends moving towards one another. The only ”straight”
lines are radial, relative to the source of gravity, and even then the metric is
nonlinear along the line.

In summary, then, at the site of a dynamical event, mass is increased by γ/α,
from which it follows that measured lengths are contracted by α/γ and time
intervals are also contracted by α/γ. The philosophy by which these changes
occur is quite diﬀerent than what one assumes in relativity theory. The outside
(non-gravity) observer cannot observe directly these changes. He infers them.
From his space, he can only ”see” the consequences of these changes. For
example, he can send a signal through a region of gravitational potential and ﬁnd
an anomalous time delay for that passage. Or, he ﬁnds a star image deﬂected
when the light path grazes the sun. Or, he sees a precession of the perihelion of
a planetary orbit.

4 Implications of the changing mass metric

Consider velocity. What does the observer within a gravitational ﬁeld measure
for the velocity of light? He reports the velocity, as interpreted by an outside
observer, as

c⋆ = (δL⋆/δτ ⋆) = (α/γ)δL/(α/γ)δτ = c

(18)

Since each element has been contracted by α/γ, he ﬁnds v=c. What does an
outside observer conclude from this experiment? He cannot follow, in detail, the
moving light beam, since his instruments change calibration. The measurements
available to him, i.e. an anomalous time delay, tell him that the speed of light
has somehow been reduced in the region near the sun or else the distance has
increased. Despite the fact that the locally measured speed of light is everywhere
a constant, c, this theory requires that his ”outside” observations reﬂect that
the speed of light at every point along the path is less. That is, he uses a meter
stick within the gravity environment for length measurement, but uses his own
clock to measure time. Since there are no restrictions on the beam of light, it is

4

appropriate that we set γ = 1/α and we infer that, so far as the outside observer
is concerned,

c⋆ = α2c

(19)

In fact, all velocities in a gravity environment are reduced, relative to a
non-gravity environment. What about acceleration? Referenced to an outside
observer’s clock, the contraction of distance means that acceleration within grav-
ity is reduced by α/γ. This preserves for the outside observer Newton’s second
law, since the mass increases by γ/α and the product of mass times acceler-
ation remains the same. Referenced to a clock sited within gravity, however,
acceleration is increased by γ/α.

a⋆ = δL⋆/(δτ ⋆)2 = (α/γ)δL/(α/γ)2(δτ )2 = (γ/α)a

(20)

The application of the mass-metric theory goes like this. One writes the
equations of motion within gravity classically, i.e. one uses Newton’s law of
universal gravitation. He then applies the metric adjustments appropriate to
the presence of gravity. For a moving mass, he writes (γ/α)m0, for length he
writes (α/γ)r, etc. When appropriate, he chooses R = ∞ so that α/γ = α2 or,
for ﬁxed objects, sets γ = 1. If the problem involves orbital motion, one must
use (10) and deal with the complexities this introduces. The solution he obtains
includes the eﬀects of gravity, but is couched in terms of the gravity-free metric.

5 The Shapiro time-delay

A critical test for any theory of gravity is the time delay of light, when the
light passes through a space inﬂuenced by gravity. GR solves this problem by
summing, over the path, proper time less clock time. The mass-metric theory
subtracts the time of passage at c from the time of passage at c⋆. Shapiro
and others (ref 4,5) have discussed the GR basis for this time delay and its
experimental measurement. For a radar signal from earth passing the sun on its
way to a transponder on Mars, and for a return trip of the transponder radar
signal, the delay as measured is up to about 248 microseconds when the beam
grazes the sun’s surface. This conforms to the GR prediction, within 0.5 %.

Using the mass-metric formulation, one calculates the time of ﬂight over
the earth-Mars distance and back, using c⋆ as in (19) and also using c. The
diﬀerence is the delay due to gravity.

δt = −L/c +

(1/c⋆)dx

ZL

(21)

By L is meant the total round trip distance, 2L1+2L2, where L1 is the earth-sun
distance (nominally 1.496 × 1011 m) and L2 is the sun-Mars distance (nominally
2.28 × 1011 m). The radius of the sun is ”a”.

δt = −L/c + (1/c)

−2dx = −L/c + (1/c)
α

(1 + GM/rc2)2dx

(22)

ZL

ZL

5

δt ≈ (2GM/c3)

dx/(x2 + a2).5

ZL

(23)

The result may be had by numerical integration of (23).

δt = (4GM/c

)[

3

2
dx/(x

+ a

2

.5
)

+

2
dx/(x

+ a

2

.5
)

]

(24)

L1

Z
0

L2

Z

0

Or, the integration can be had analytically, yielding t1.

t1 = (4GM/c

)[ln((L1 + (L1

3

2

+ a

2

.5
)

)/a) + ln((L2 + (L2

2

+ a

2

.5
)

)/a)]

(25)

This was done both ways, as there was some confusion about the exact form of
the integral in (23). The integral (25) is from Vade Mecum. (ref 6)

In either case, the resulting delay is 247.3 microseconds, and agrees with
the measured time delay of 248 microseconds. This experimental conﬁrmation
is critically important, and conﬁrms that space itself seems to be expanded in
the presence of a gravitational potential and, of course, exhibits non-Euclidean
geometry.

The analytical form of the time delay given by Shapiro looks diﬀerent from
(25). The numerical value is the same in each case. Shapiro writes the GR time
delay as

δt = (4GM/c3)ln((L1 + L2 + L)/(L1 + L2 − L))

The GR and mass-metric results however agree analytically, to ﬁrst order, where
the time delay, in each case, becomes:

δt = (4GM/c3)ln(4L1L2/a2)

That these two diﬀerent theories of gravity should yield the same numerical value
and even the same analytical form for the correction to Newtonian gravity is
interesting. Neither theory contains adjustable parameters.

6 The rate of precession of the perihelion of

Mercury

The rate of advance, of the perihelion of Mercury, is mostly a consequence of
the motion of other planets. Corrected for these, a residual rate of advance of
43.11 seconds per century remains and requires an explanation. GR predicts
43.03 seconds per century, and this agreement is widely regarded as one of the
strongest ”proofs” of its validity. (ref 7)

Newtonian gravity, with mass constant, predicts that the orbit of a planet
about the sun will be an ellipse, an ellipse that does not precess. The equation
for an ellipse is

d2u/dθ2 + u = A

where u=1/r and A is

A = m/[µa(1 − e2)] ≈ 1/[a(1 − e2)]

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

6

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

The reduced mass µ for Mercury in the presence of the sun is essentially the mass
of Mercury itself, m. It may be useful to deﬁne the parameters of the orbital
path. The semi-major axis length is ”a” and the eccentricity is ”e”. This means
that the distance from the sun, at aphelion, is a(1+e) and at perihelion it is
a(1-e).

G = 6.672x10

−11

e = 0.2056
M (sun) = 1.99x1030 kg

a = 0.3871 A.U.
1 A.U. = 1.495x1011 meters
c = 2.997925x108 meters/sec

T = 0.2408 years is M ercury

s period

′

The solution to the linear diﬀerential equation (28) is

u = A(1 + C cos θ)

as is easily shown by substitution. ”C” is the same as ”e”, and the resulting
solution describes an orbit having natural angular frequency of ”one”. This
returns u to its perihelion value every 2π radians of rotation of the planet about
the sun. There is no precession in this case.

The calculation of the rate of precession by GR is complex. GR modiﬁes the

diﬀerential equation (28), by adding a ”u2” perturbation to A:

A → A + u2(3GM/c2)

The resulting diﬀerential equation is non-linear and its solution is diﬃcult. (ref
7) After many pages of calculations and approximations, one eventually ﬁnds
that θ must pass through (1 + φ)2π radians between returns to the perihelion.
This advance of the perihelion, for a single orbit, is

2πφ = 2π(3GM A)/c

2

Expressed in seconds of arc per century, the rate is 43.03. This agreement, with
no adjustable parameters, is impressive.

The mass-metric theory of gravity provides a much simpler way to calculate
this rate of orbital precession. It also allows one an intuitive understanding of
why there should be a precession. In essence, the reason is that the changing
mass, γm0/α, at diﬀerent distances from the sun, modulates the Newtonian
gravitational force. Since this increase of force is greatest at closest approach,
we must expect an advance of the perihelion with each orbit. We ﬁrst examine
the metric of ”u” and of ”d2u/dθ2” and of ”A”, relative to the metric of an
observer in zero gravity.

u⋆ → (γ/α)u

(40)

7

d2u⋆/dθ2 → (γ/α)(d2u/dθ2)
(41)
The constant A can also be written as A = −(m/L2u2)(−GM m/r2). Simplify-
ing,

Substituting these changes of metric,

A = GM/r2v2

⋆
A

2
= GM/[(α/γ)r(α/γ)v]

⋆
A

4
= (γ/α)

A

(γ/α)d2u/dθ2 + (γ/α)u = (γ/α)4A

d2u/dθ2 + u = (γ/α)3A

We next expand γ/α, neglecting terms higher than ﬁrst order.

γ/α = (1+(GM/c2)(1/r−1/R))(1+GM/c2r) ≈ 1+(GM/c2)(2/r−1/R) (47)

And so,

(γ/α)3 ≈ 1 + 6GM/c2r − 3GM/c2R
δ ≡ 6GM/c2

(γ/α)3A → A((1 + uδ) − 3GM/c2R)
d2u/dθ2 + (1 − Aδ)u = A(1 − 3GM/c2R)

Except for a small change in the constant term, the perturbation is ”u” times
6GM A/c2(= Aδ) and can be compared with the GR perturbation, u2 times
(3GM/c2).

The new diﬀerential equation (51) is linear, and is much easier to solve than
the nonlinear GR diﬀerential equation (28) modiﬁed by (38). Since we expect
a precession, we consider a trial solution in the form

u = A[1 − 3GM/c

R](1 + C cos(1 − φ)θ)

2

With this, u returns to its perihelion value when (1 − φ)θ = 2π.

du/dθ = −A[1 − 3GM/c2R]C(1 − φ) sin(1 − φ)θ

d2u/dθ2 = −A[1 − 3GM/c2R]C(1 − φ)2 cos(1 − φ)θ

Substituting and collecting terms,

(A[1 − 3GM/c2R]C cos(1 − φ)θ)(2φ − φ2 − Aδ) = A2[1 − 3GM/c2R]δ

(55)

To ﬁrst order, φ2 vanishes, and the advance of the perihelion each orbit is

2πφ = (Aδ/2)2π = (3GM A/c2)2π

(56)

in radians, a ﬁnding identical with the GR result, (39). As with GR, there are
no adjustable parameters.

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)

(54)

8

Of course, this trial solution requires that A2δ should vanish, which it does

not. We can modify the trial solution (52) to take care of this,

u = A[1 − 3GM/c2R](1 + Aδ)(1 + C cos(1 − φ)θ)

(57)

Substituting in the diﬀerential equation, dividing through by [1 − 3GM/c2R]
and collecting terms,

A(1 + Aδ)(C cos(1 − φ)θ)(−(1 − φ)2 + 1 − Aδ] = A − A(1 − Aδ)(1 + Aδ) (58)

Keeping only ﬁrst order terms in ”δ”, the orbital oﬀset of the perihelion remains
the same but the constant term now vanishes.
It should be noted that the
actual value of ”R” for this bound orbit is of little signiﬁcance. In an earlier
version of this paper, R was simply taken as inﬁnite and the calculated rate of
advance of the perihelion is identical with (56). The mass-metric formulation
simpliﬁes the calculation enormously, by requiring only the solution of a linear
diﬀerential equation, (51). Only one who has gone through the agony of solving
the nonlinear GR diﬀerential equation (28) modiﬁed by (38) can fully appreciate
the diﬀerence.

7 The deﬂection of starlight

As for the deﬂection of starlight, the inferred reduction of speed (19) relative to
an outside observer means that gravitationally inﬂuenced space has an index of
refraction:

n = c/c⋆ = 1/α2 ≈ 1 + 2GM/c2r

(59)

The deﬂection of starlight is entirely accounted for by refraction, using Snell’s
law. Using a small angle approximation throughout, consider two light paths
grazing the sun, parallel to the x axis. One is along the x axis and the other
is at a small height ”h” above the x axis. The origin at x=0 is a distance ”a”
above the center of the sun. The light path is −∞ to ∞, along ”x”. Over a
distance dx, the diﬀerence of optical path lengths is

δx = dx[1 + GM/c2r]2 − dx[1 + GM/c2(r + h cos θ)]2

δx ≈ dx(2GM/c2r2)h cos θ where cos θ = a/r and r =

(x2 + a2)

The wavefront of the light is tilted by dφ:

p

dφ ≈ δx/h = dx(2GM/c2r2)cosθ = dx(2GM/c2r2)a/r

On performing the integration over all ”x”, the deﬂection is

(60)

(61)

(62)

(63)

and agrees with the GR calculation. (ref 8)

φ = 4GM/c

a

2

9

8 Re-examining the eﬀect of gravity on rest mass

As mentioned at the end of section 2, the assumption that the gravitational
red shift of a photon occurs gradually seems to be in error. There can be no
gravitational force on a photon, since we can fully account for the deﬂection of
starlight by refraction. So, gravity has not the power to change the energy of
a photon. The observed gravitational red shift hence occurs abruptly, at the
moment of formation of the photon.

We regard (9) as validated by its successes in dealing with the classical tests
of GR. Consider again the gedanken annihilation experiment. A rest mass m0
at the upper level annihilates, and the EM radiation energy is m0c2. Assume
that α = 1 at the upper level. At the lower level, the rest mass (9) is m0/α but
the energy is only αm0c2. We are forced to the conclusion that annihilation of
this rest mass yields only this energy, αm0c2. So, gravity increases rest mass
but lowers the total energy (including potential energy). The literature on this
point is ambiguous. French (ref 9) says that a charged capacitor has more mass
than an uncharged capacitor.
It certainly has a greater energy content. By
the arguments given here, there should be no increase of mass upon charging
a capacitor. That is, mass is a consequence of kinetic energy and changes of
potential energy do not aﬀect mass. Annihilation energy measures total energy
contained in the particle, and is not always m0c2. Experimental veriﬁcation of
this point is badly needed.

9 The gravitational red shift

The gravitational red shift is concerned with photons, photons which are cre-
ated in a gravity environment and which emerge with less energy than might
otherwise be expected. The mass-metric contraction of time suggests that these
photons should have a higher frequency, and the ﬁnding that gravity exerts no
force on a photon means that these photons should emerge with this higher
frequency. This seems, oﬀ-hand, enigmatic.

The solution lies with a consideration of the energetics. Consider an excited
atom, perhaps a hydrogen atom in a 2s state. When this de-excites, in the
absence of gravity, a Lyman alpha photon is loosed and E = hν0.

Case I: The excited atom is released far from a massive body, M, and it
moves around M in a hyperbolic orbit. The total energy remains constant, with
the gain of kinetic energy balanced by the loss of potential energy. Somewhere
during the orbit, the Lyman alpha photon is released. When detected, away
from the gravitational environment, its energy is still E = hν0. By the mass-
metric view, the period of the photon at release is shorter, τ = (α/γ)τ0 = α2τ0.
Yet, the energy is unchanged. Since the frequency is larger, ν = ν0/α2, E =
hν0 = α2hν. Energetically, there is a gravitational red shift of α2.

Case II: The excited atom is stopped somewhere during its orbit of M, and
the kinetic energy is converted to heat and lost. γ becomes equal to one. The
released Lyman alpha photon will have less energy, when detected away from the

10

gravity environment, ˜E = αE = αhν0. By the mass-metric concept, ν = ν0/α.
Again, we ﬁnd that ˜E = α2hν.

And so, energy considerations impose a red shift on photons arising in a
gravity environment and detected without. This red shift is α2. In other words,
the energy of a photon produced in a gravity environment is less than hν, by
the factor α2. In a gravity environment, E = α2hν instead of the usual E = hν.

10 A hole of a diﬀerent color

This failure to ﬁnd a force of gravity on photons conﬂicts with one of the ﬁndings
of GR, the event horizon, generally interpreted to mean that the tug of gravity
exerted by a black hole is so great as to prevent even the escape of light. There
is a perverse symmetry in the disagreement between the GR and mass-metric
viewpoints. Although GR considers motion in a gravitational ﬁeld be force-free
along a geodesic, the concept of force on photons is suggested to explain the
behavior of a black hole. The mass-metric formulation calls for real forces to
explain the motion of a mass in a gravitational potential, yet denies that gravity
exerts a force on photons.

Although the speed of light for an outside observer seems diminished by α2,
it can never become zero or imaginary as one might expect for ”trapped light”.
It is clear that light is deﬂected by changes of the gravitational potential, and
so one might inquire, as an alternate trapping mechanism, into whether or not
a circular path of light is possible at some radius. Perhaps the easiest way to
look at this is to consider the optical length, nL, where ”n” is the index of
refraction (59) and L is the path length, 2πr. For a circular path, nL must be
an extremum, and so the derivative of nL with respect to r must vanish. Since
this derivative is positive deﬁnite, no such path is possible.

We know that an approaching photon’s path is bent towards the mass re-
sponsible for the gravitational potential. Depending on its impact parameter,
”a”, i.e. the distance it would miss the mass if it were to travel along a straight
line, the position of closest approach will be a⋆ = α2a. At closest approach,
the path is perpendicular to a radius vector. The path then proceeds outward,
unless a⋆ is less than the radius of the mass in which case the photon is absorbed
or reﬂected. The principle of optical reversibility suggests that any of these light
paths is reversible. If reﬂected, the photon takes an outward path and eventu-
ally is released by the gravity ﬁeld. If absorbed, one expects some degradation
of the energy followed by re emission of several lower energy photons. These
also will follow an outbound course and eventually escape.

This suggests that mass can be captured, permanently, but not light. A
suﬃciently massive body can store up large quantities of light for later release.
Whatever of this light is absorbed by the mass, and later emitted thermally, will
be red shifted. Any light which misses the central mass, or which is reﬂected oﬀ
the central mass, will eventually emerge with its original energy. Such a body
might be termed a red hole, but not a black hole. Depending on just ”how red”
such a body is, it might be called ”dark matter.”

11

The possible existence of black holes is an old concept. The logic seemed
reasonable, that a mass m lies in a potential like (11) and its potential energy
becomes negative without limit as ”r” approaches zero. Escape from this poten-
tial well is only possible if the kinetic energy of a particle exceeds the negative
potential energy, and 1/2 mv2 has an upper limit of 1/2 mc2. If one sets this
condition, which seemed reasonable before SR,

1/2 mc2 = GmM/r

it follows that escape is impossible for any ”r” less than the Schwarzschild radius,
2GM/c2. Even after SR, the maximum kinetic energy seemed to be m0c2, again
suggesting the possibility of black holes. In rebuttal, repeating (12) and (13),
the mass-metric formulation ﬁnds for the potential energy

and the kinetic energy

U = (1 − 1/α2)m0c2 ≈ −2Gm0M/r

T = (1/α2 − 1)m0c2 ≈ 2Gm0M/r

(64)

(65)

(66)

for a body falling freely from a far distance. This means that T+U=0 for every
radius, and there is no reason to expect ”black holes”.

11 The Fifth Force ?

A number of experiments have been conducted, in an attempt to ﬁnd either
a composition-dependent force of gravity or a deviation from inverse square
behavior. Will (10) summarizes these, and considers them disproved by the
data. The mass-metric approach of this paper suggests that inverse square is
not wholly correct.

For orbital mechanics, the gravitational force (for R large) is

3
F = −(γ/α)

Gm0M/r

≈ −(Gm0M/r

)(1 + 6GM/rc

)

(67)

2

2

2

If one measures the static force, γ = 1 and the gravitational force is

F = −(1/α)3Gm0M/r2 ≈ −(Gm0M/r2)(1 + 3GM/rc2)

(68)

Since Will concludes that the null results of ”ﬁfth force” experiments place
an upper limit on a ﬁfth force of 10−3 to 10−6 times ”g”, one can ask how
much deviation from ”inverse square” may one expect from this mass-metric
approach. The ratio of the force in (68) to the classical Newtonian force is
1 + 3GM/rc2. Evaluating this ratio at the surface of the earth, it diﬀers from
one by 2 ∗ 10−9 which is three orders of magnitude smaller than the limit of the
null experimental results. The nominal sensitivity of gravimeters is at the 10−9
g level, and continues to improve. This modiﬁcation of Newtonian gravity (68)
may soon be thought important for the interpretation of gravity surveys.

12

The precession of the perihelion of Mercury can be understood as a direct
consequence of this deviation from an inverse square law. Note that the devi-
ation is in that case twice as large (67) as one expects for the static case (68).
Although this ”ﬁfth force” seems to be real, in the sense that gravity is not
inverse square, it is in no sense a new fundamental law of nature.

12 Curvature of space

The concepts of curvature and non-Euclidean geometry of space, in the presence
of a massive body, arose from Einstein’s GR theory. The mass-metric theory
tends to support these concepts, but the explanation diﬀers.
In the present
theory, empty space near a massive body is intrinsically unknown. It is only
when one measures its properties that one can conclude whether the geome-
try is Euclidean, or not. When measured, we ﬁnd that meter sticks shrink,
mass increases, clocks run diﬀerently, and light travels along curved paths. So,
the measured space is non-Euclidean. Although we cannot physically measure
empty space, we can infer something about it. We have postulated that empty
space is Euclidean, and calculated the consequences using the mass-metric the-
ory. If these consequences were that the measured geometry is Euclidean, then
we could be sure that empty space is non-Euclidean. On the other hand, since
the measured consequences agree precisely with the calculated consequences,
we are assured that our postulate was correct and that empty space is indeed
Euclidean. It appears that empty space really is Euclidean, whether there be
gravity or not.

All this is rather disheartening for an experimental physicist. It ﬁnds that his
measuring instruments change calibration in a changing gravitational potential.
Ironically, this means that an experimental ﬁnding of non-Euclidean geometry
in the presence of a massive body can be used to conﬁrm that empty space is
indeed Euclidean.

An imperfect analogy may be useful for understanding the foregoing argu-
ments. Suppose that we conduct experiments in a room in which a temperature
gradient is maintained. The hot spot is compact, and the temperature falls oﬀ
with distance from that hot spot. An ordinary meter stick changes length, ac-
cording to temperature. L = L0(1+bT ) If we were measuring the Coulomb force
of one charge on another, we would ﬁnd that it was not quite inverse square.
The reason is obviously that the meter stick changes calibration, at diﬀerent
distances from the hot spot. However, if we recognize the eﬀect of temperature
on the length and make corrections to account for the eﬀect of temperature, we
then ﬁnd that the Coulomb law is inverse square. If we were unaware of the
temperature eﬀect on the metric as measured by the meter stick, we might easily
be led to believe that the geometry inside the room was not Euclidean. A circle
might be drawn about the hot spot, and the diameter and the circumference
measured using meter sticks. The result must be that C < πD. We might decide
that Riemannian geometry was needed to properly describe events within this
room, requiring the use of a metric tensor. Another observer, located outside

13

the room, might understand the eﬀects of temperature and how it aﬀects the
length of a meter stick. He would then adjust the measured distance for the
eﬀect of temperature, and his conclusions (from the same data) would include
that the Coulomb law is indeed inverse square and that C = πD. He would
have no reason to doubt that the space within the room was Euclidean.

In conclusion, then, it is here suggested that gravity increases the rest mass
of an object. Taken together with the SR boost of mass due to motion, the
”outside” observer concludes that mass increases with speed and with gravity.
This increase of mass shortens meter sticks and speeds up clocks, in well-deﬁned
ways. On accounting for this change of metric, he ﬁnds that Newtonian gravity
works very well indeed. He sees no need to invoke non-Euclidean geometry. He
ﬁnds no need to invoke curved space-time to account for the consequences of
experiments.

13 Discussion

One of the key elements in ﬁnding this mass-metric formulation of gravity was
the Pound-Rebka experiment, which can be interpreted to show that rest mass
increases under gravity. It grates on one’s sensibilities to recognize that the loss
of conventional potential energy, U = −GmM/r for a falling body, is only half
the gain of kinetic energy. The gain of kinetic energy is in two parts; one is
the usual 1/2 mv2 and the other is δm0c2. The latter kinetic energy lies wholly
within an elementary charged particle, and manifests itself as an increase of
rest mass. The 1/2 mv2 kinetic energy is exchangeable and can be degraded to
heat, but the δmc2 internal kinetic energy cannot. Although the Pound-Rebka
experiment is now 40 years old, its implications for a gravitational increase of
rest mass seem to have escaped notice.

The diﬀerence of clock rates in the GR and mass-metric theories is more
apparent than real. The eﬀect of gravity in the mass-metric theory is to speed
up the clock rate, which shortens the inferred time between ticks of a stationary
clock by α. The gravitational red shift, for an observer outside this gravitational
potential, reduces the energy of photons by α2. Since the rate of an atomic clock
responds to the energy of photons, this slows down slows the perceived rate of
the clock by a factor α2. The net result is that the outside observer observes
the gravitationally-inﬂuenced clock running slow, by the factor α, in agreement
with GR. (ref 11)

The Shapiro time delay experiment is extremely important. It conﬁrms the
apparent reduction of the speed of light, and supports the explanation of the
gravitational bending of light as simply a matter of refraction. Taken together,
they show that gravity exerts no force at all on photons.

The complications inherent in self-gravitational eﬀects may require attention
in some cases. The rest mass of a hydrogen atom anywhere on or within the
earth exceeds that of a hydrogen atom in outer space. So, to be consistent, we
should correct the mass of, say, the earth by giving each element a 1/α boost
because of the self-gravitational potential.

14

Some have speculated that G might be slowly changing over time. If one
insists on using the original Newtonian formulation to deﬁne G, in an expand-
ing universe, the mass-metric formulation shows that the average gravitational
potential is decreasing as masses move apart. This eﬀect could be absorbed
within G, requiring that G be slowly decreasing. I prefer to hold G constant,
and recognize that all masses in the universe are slowly decreasing, on average,
because the average gravitational potential is declining. That is, aside from
any net mass loss by radiation of EM energy, the total mass of the universe is
decreasing in consequence of the Hubble expansion.

It may be useful to reexamine the basic treatment of gravity by GR in light of
the variations of mass with velocity and especially with gravitational potential.
Duﬀey (ref 12), in discussing gravity in GR, speciﬁcally denies that rest mass
changes with gravitational potential and describes potential energy like (11)
instead of (13). The ”event horizon” in GR may turn out to disappear when
mass is treated like (10) and when the gravitational potential is correspondingly
modiﬁed.

14 Conclusions

Newtonian gravity, in its original form where mass was thought constant and
the geometry of space Euclidean, accounts for gravitational phenomena in the
limit of weak gravity. Very accurate experimental results have found small
discrepancies, fully explicable (without adjustable parameters) until now only
by GR, that indicate Newton’s law is not quite right. Scientists have had to
revise, over time, some of their most cherished ”conservation” concepts, such as
energy, to include other forms of energy such as heat and mass. The ﬂip side of
conservation of energy is that mass alone is not conserved. Once one recognizes
that mass changes according to motion and the gravitational potential in which
it sits, and uses this variable mass in Newton’s law of universal gravitation,
Newtonian gravity conforms with experiment on an equal footing with GR.
And, it is much easier to calculate the eﬀects!

Aside from the ongoing controversy about black holes, the consequences of
these two theories appear to agree. As for the ease of computation using the
mass-metric scalar formulation of Newtonian gravity, physicists have long since
discovered that scalar ﬁelds are easier to work with than vector ﬁelds.

Finally, Einstein’s concept of gravity seems to have been ”gravity causes
space to curve, and the curved space tells mass how to move.” The present paper
presents a diﬀerent interpretation. Gravity causes mass to increase, and the
increase of mass makes measured space seem curved. The nature of empty space
near a massive body is intrinsically unknown until its properties are measured,
and the mass-metric theory indicates that measurements do not correctly reﬂect
the nature of space. As measured, space seems non-Euclidean and this appears
to support ”curved spacetime”. However, since these changes are well deﬁned,
one can apply an inverse transformation to the non-Euclidean measured space
and can conclude that empty space is everywhere Euclidean.

15

GR has so insinuated itself into the way physicists think about gravity that
alternate theories of gravity are now judged in terms of GR concepts. Will (ref
13) says, ”The Einstein Equivalence Principle is the foundation of all curved
spacetime or ’metric’ theories of gravity, including general relativity.” Further,
”This (EEP) principle is at the heart of gravitation theory, for it is possible
to argue convincingly that if EEP is valid, then gravitation must be a curved-
spacetime phenomenon, i.e., must satisfy the postulates of Metric Theories of
Gravity. These postulates state: (i) spacetime is endowed with a metric g ,...”
The mass-metric theory of gravity lies outside Will’s carefully crafted language
for the comparison of theories of gravity. The fact that measured spacetime is
curved is here shown to be an artifact of the measurement, attributable to the
changing calibration of instruments according to the gravity in which they are
sited.

15 References

1. Pound, R.V. and Rebka, G.A. Jr., Phys. Rev. Letters 4, 337-41 (1960).
2. Collins, R.L., An electromagnetic basis for gravity, url:

http://publish.aps.org/eprint/gateway/eppackage/aps1999jun08 001.

3. Halliday, D. and Resnick, R., PHYSICS (John Wiley & Sons, NY 1978),

1107-8.

4. Shapiro, I.I., Phys. Rev. 141, 1219-22 (1966).
5. Shapiro, I.I., et. al., J. Geophys. Res. 82, 4329-34 (1977).
6. Anderson, H.L., ed. in chief, Physics Vade Mecum (AIP, 1981), 15.
7. Scott, T. and Madore, B., Perihelion precession rate of Mercury according

to General Relativity, url: http://www.maplesoft.com/cybermath/html/mercury.html

8. G.H. Duﬀey, THEORETICAL PHYSICS (Houghton Miﬂin Co., Boston,

9. A.P. French, SPECIAL RELATIVITY , (W.W. Norton and Company,

10. C.M. Will, THEORY AND EXPERIMENT IN GRAVITATIONAL

PHYSICS (University Press, Cambridge, 1993), 341-3.

1973), 597.

New York, 1968), 19.

11. ibid, 599.
12. ibid, 590.
13. ibid, 22.

16

