0
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
0
2
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Did 20th century physics have the means to reveal the nature of inertia
and gravitation?

Vesselin Petkov
Physics Department, Concordia University
1455 de Maisonneuve Boulevard West
Montreal, Quebec H3G 1M8
vpetkov@alcor.concordia.ca
(or vpetkov@sympatico.ca)

13 December 2000

Abstract

At the beginning of the 20th century the classical electron theory (or, perhaps more appropriately, the
classical electromagnetic mass theory) - the ﬁrst physical theory that dared ask the question of what inertia
and mass were - was gaining momentum and there were hopes that physics would be ﬁnally able to explain their
origin. It is argued in this paper that if that promising research path had not been inexplicably abandoned
after the advent of relativity and quantum mechanics, the contemporary physics would have revealed not only
the nature of inertia, mass, and gravitation, but most importantly would have outlined the ways of their
manipulation. Another goal of the paper is to try to stimulate the search for the mechanism responsible for
inertia and gravitation by outlining a research direction, which demonstrates that the classical electromagnetic
mass theory in conjunction with the principle of equivalence oﬀers such a mechanism.

NOTE: This paper presents only conceptual discussions of rigorously obtained results which are available at:
http://alcor.concordia.ca/˜vpetkov/papers/

1

Introduction

According to an eastern proverb the darkest place is beneath the lantern. The meaning of a proverb could hardly
be more profound and more suitable for fundamental concepts: Nature has given us her greatest secrets as self-
evident phenomena. Everyone ”knows” what existence, space, time, mass, inertia, gravitation, etc. are; we even
have complex theories dealing with those concepts. If, however, we want to explain their nature we ﬁnd ourselves
in the same situation in which St. Augustine found himself when tried to explain the nature of time: ”What then
is time? If no one asks me, I know; if I wish to explain it to one that asketh, I know not” [1].

We are about to enter the 21st century but our understanding of the origin of inertia, mass, and gravitation
still remains what has been for centuries - an outstanding puzzle. All theories constituting the contemporary
physics are concerned mostly (if not only) with the description of those phenomena. Even the modern theory
of gravitation, general relativity, which provides a consistent no-force explanation of gravitational interaction of
bodies following geodesic paths, is helplessly silent on the nature of the very force we identify as gravitational -
the force acting upon a body deviated from its geodesic path being at rest on the Earth’s surface.

The classical electromagnetic mass theory appears to have been gradually forgotten and now many physicists
believe that physics cannot say anything about the origin of inertia, mass, or gravitation. Even scientists directly
involved in the eﬀorts to discover the Higgs boson [2] (believed to be responsible for endowing particles with
mass) such as Claude Detraz, one of the two research directors at CERN , think that ”Mass is a very important
property of matter, and we have nothing in our current theory that says even a word about it”. In what follows
we will see whether this is really the case.

Here we shall follow the tradition established by the classical electron theory (i.e. the classical electromagnetic
mass theory) and will study the inertial and gravitational properties of the simplest charged particle - the classical
electron. There are two reasons why the classical electron is studied:

1

(i) There is no quantum mechanical model of the electron - quantum mechanics describes only its state not the
electron itself (later we will make an attempt to outline the basis of the quantum electrodynamical formulation
of the electromagnetic mass theory), and

(ii) It is quite natural to complete the classical electromagnetic mass theory ﬁrst before making the transi-
tion to a quantum description of the electron inertial properties. This has never been done since the classical
electromagnetic mass theory was virtually abandoned when the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics were
formulated. To abandon a promising theory that has never been proven wrong is an unprecedented case in physics.
This unforgivable neglect is truly beyond one’s comprehension because the electromagnetic mass theory is even
now the only theory that addresses the origin of inertia and inertial mass in accordance with the experimental
evidence of the existence of electromagnetic inertia and of the electromagnetic origin of some of the mass of
charged particles. Moreover, the classical electromagnetic mass theory predicted that the (electromagnetic) mass
increases with the increase of velocity (yielding the correct expression) and that the relationship between energy
and mass is E = mc2 - all this before the theory of relativity.

2 Classical electromagnetic mass theory

In 1881 Thomson [3] ﬁrst realized that a charged particle was more resistant to being accelerated than an otherwise
identical neutral particle and conjectured that inertia can be reduced to electromagnetism. Due mostly to the
works of Heaviside [4], Searle [5], Lorentz [6], Poincar´e [7], Abraham [8], Fermi [26], Mandel [10], Wilson [11],
Pryce [12], Kwal [13], and Rohrlich [14] this conjecture was developed into a theory (the classical electromagnetic
mass theory of the electron) in which inertia is a local phenomenon originating from the interaction of the electron
charge with itself (i.e. its own electromagnetic ﬁeld) [15].

According to the classical model of the electron its charge is uniformly distributed on a spherical shell. Such
a model, however, cannot explain why the electron is stable since the negatively charged spherical shell tends
to blow up due to the mutual repulsion of the diﬀerent ”parts” of the charge. This diﬃculty, known as the
stability problem of the electron, has two sides - computational and conceptual. In the beginning of the century it
appeared that the stability problem did lead to a computational diﬃculties with the famous 4/3 factor stubbornly
appearing in the diﬀerent expressions for the electromagnetic mass. Several authors [9]-[14] independently showed
that the 4/3 factor had been caused by incorrect calculations, not by the model itself. This implies that there is
no real problem with the stability of the electron. We do not know why. What we do know, however, is that if
there were such a problem it would inevitably show up in all calculations of the electromagnetic mass which is
not the case.

The conceptual diﬃculty with the classical model of the electron - its failure to explain what prevents the
electron charge from blowing apart - has never been satisfactory resolved by the classical electromagnetic mass
theory [17]. This is viewed as an indication that that model is not entirely correct. There are three reasons,
however, which demonstrate that the classical model of the electron works. (i) The very existence of the radiation
reaction force is evidence that there is interaction (repulsion) between the diﬀerent parts of the electron charge
since ”The radiation reaction is due to the force of the charge on itself - or, more elaborately, the net force exerted
by the ﬁelds generated by diﬀerent parts of the charge distribution acting on one another” [18] (in the case of a
single radiating electron the presence of a radiation reaction implies interaction of diﬀerent parts of the electron).
This may indicate that the charge of the real electron can indeed be modeled by a small spherical shell which,
however, may mean that the electron charge is not continuously existing as smeared out on the shell; only if
the electron charge were occupying the whole shell at every instant the stability problem would arise [19]. (ii)
The calculations of the electron electromagnetic mass (assuming a spherical distribution of its charge) yield the
correct expression for the mass. (iii) A more important indication that the classical model of the electron cannot
be discarded as inadequate is that the classical electromagnetic theory is the only theory that correctly predicts
that at least part of the electron’s inertia and mass are electromagnetic in origin; as Feynman put it: ”There
is deﬁnite experimental evidence of the existence of electromagnetic inertia - there is evidence that some of the
mass of charged particles is electromagnetic in origin” [22].

At the beginning of the century many physicists recognized ”the tremendous importance, which the concept of
electromagnetic mass possesses for all of physics: It is the basis of the electromagnetic theory of matter” (E. Fermi
[23]). Therefore, it would have been natural to develop further the theory of electromagnetic mass by taking into
account the relevant new results in physics achieved in this century. Instead, it had been inexplicably abandoned:
”The state of the classical electron theory reminds one of a house under construction that was abandoned by

2

its workmen upon receiving news of an approaching plague. The plague in this case, of course, was quantum
theory. As a result, classical electron theory stands with many interesting unsolved or partially solved problems”
(P. Pearle [24]).

It is clear that what Fermi, Feynman, and Pearle are saying is important but not crucial (one can always ﬁnd
favourable quotes). What is crucial is what the classical electromagnetic mass theory itself is saying on inertia,
mass, and gravitation when the principle of equivalence is taken into account.

The mechanism responsible for the electron’s inertia and mass according to the classical electromagnetic mass
theory is the following. The repulsion of the charge elements of an electron in uniform motion in ﬂat spacetime
cancels out exactly and there is no net force acting on the electron. If, however, the electron is accelerated the
repulsion of its volume elements becomes unbalanced and as a result it experiences a net self-force Fself which
resists its acceleration - it is precisely this resistance that we call inertia (for a detailed description of why the
repulsion of the diﬀerent parts of an accelerating electron becomes unbalanced see [22, p. 28-5]). The self-force is
opposing the external force that accelerates the electron (i.e. its direction is opposite to the electron’s acceleration
a) and turns out to be proportional to a: Fself = −ma, where the coeﬃcient of proportionality m represents the
inertial mass of the electron and is equal to E/c2 where E is the energy of the electron ﬁeld (therefore the electron
inertial mass is electromagnetic in origin). This is an amazing result for three reasons: (i) it reveals that both
inertia and mass have electromagnetic origin (the mass m in the expression for the self-force is electromagnetic
since it is simply the mass that corresponds to the energy of the electron’s electric ﬁeld through the relation
E = mc2; (ii) it demonstrates that inertia is a local phenomenon (contrary to Mach’s hypothesis that the local
property of inertia has a non-local origin [25]) and (iii) it constitutes the ﬁrst derivation of Newton’s second law
F = ma [19] - a law that is considered so fundamental that after Newton postulated it no one has attempted to
derive it.

Therefore, the classical electromagnetic mass theory does say not only a word, but oﬀers a detailed mechanism
explaining the origin of inertia and mass of charged particles: it is the unbalanced repulsion of the volume elements
of the charge of an accelerating electron that gives rise to the electron’s inertia and inertial mass.

For an observer accelerating with an electron its electric ﬁeld is distorted. Unlike uniform velocity, acceleration
is absolute and the distorted electric ﬁeld of an accelerating charge is one of the means by which the observer can
detect his acceleration. Therefore, in terms of the distorted electric ﬁeld of an accelerating charge and avoiding
the use of the controversial concept ”parts of an elementary charge”, one can equivalently say that an electron’s
inertia and inertial mass originate from the interaction of its charge with its own distorted electric ﬁeld. The
interaction of the charge of an uniformly moving electron with its own Coulomb (undistorted) ﬁeld produces
no net force acting on the electron as a whole; that is why an electron moving with constant velocity oﬀers no
resistance to its uniform motion [27].

The electromagnetic mass theory has been not only gradually forgotten; its status is now even more awkward -
those who mention it regard the electron mass as electromagnetic only in part as if the 4/3 factor in the expression
for the electromagnetic mass has not been accounted for (it is that factor that was considered an indication that
not the entire electron mass was electromagnetic).
It clearly follows from the classical electromagnetic mass
theory and special relativity that after the removal of the 4/3 factor the entire mass of the electron should be
electromagnetic in origin [28].

3 Electromagnetic mass theory and the principle of equivalence

The classical electromagnetic mass theory oﬀered a mechanism accounting for the origin of inertia and inertial
mass, but before the formulation of the equivalence principle by Einstein it appeared that that theory does not
explain the origin of the passive gravitational mass and does not aﬀect gravitation at all. The equivalence principle,
however, postulated that the inertial mass (the measure of resistance that a body oﬀers when accelerated) is equal
to the (passive) gravitational mass (the measure of resistance that a body oﬀers when being prevented from falling
in a gravitational ﬁeld); L. von E¨otv¨os’ experiments had already conﬁrmed that equality. The equivalence principle
requires that inertial and gravitational masses be equal but does not provide any insight into what is the origin
of the gravitational mass in a gravitational ﬁeld. The answer to this question is that it is a spacetime anisotropy
around massive bodies that is responsible for the force an electron on the Earth’s surface is subjected to and its
gravitational mass. It manifests itself in the anisotropy of the velocity of electromagnetic signals (for short - the
velocity of light). To explain what is the origin of the passive gravitational mass according to the electromagnetic
mass theory and to shed some light into the basis of the equivalence principle here is a brief description of what

3

happens to an electron in an accelerated reference frame and a frame of reference supported in a gravitational
ﬁeld.

3.1 An electron in an accelerated reference frame N a

For an observer at rest in an inertial reference frame I the electromagnetic ﬁeld of an accelerating electron is
distorted due to the electron’s accelerated motion. As the accelerated motion is absolute the electron’s electric
ﬁeld will be also distorted for an observer at rest in an accelerating (non-inertial) reference frame N a in which the
electron is at rest. The distortion of the electron’s ﬁeld for the inertial observer in I is caused by the electron’s
accelerated motion. For the non-inertial observer in N a, however, the electron is at rest and therefore there is no
(accelerated) motion of the electron that can account for the distortion of its ﬁeld as determined by the observer
in N a. What causes the deformation of the electron’s ﬁeld in N a is the anisotropic velocity of light there; N a
is an accelerating frame and it is the anisotropy in the propagation of light (and its manifestations such as the
distorted electron ﬁeld) which allow an observer in N a to determine from within N a that it is an accelerating
(non-inertial) frame (for a more detailed discussion why the velocity of light in a non-inertial frame is anisotropic
see [28] and [29]).

3.1.1 An electron falling in N a

Imagine that an inertial observer I is observing an electron ﬂoating inside a spacecraft which moves with a
constant velocity with respect to I (so both the spacecraft and the electron move by inertia oﬀering no resistance
to their motion). Let’s now assume the spacecraft start to accelerate with an acceleration a, i.e.
it becomes a
non-inertial frame N a (an observer in the spacecraft will be also called N a). For the inertial observer I nothing
happens to the electron - it continues to move by inertia until the spacecraft’s ﬂoor reaches it. For an observer in
the spacecraft, however, the electron is falling toward the ﬂoor with an acceleration a (for I it is the spacecraft’s
ﬂoor that approaches the electron). Obviously, there is a problem here - as the non-resistant motion by inertia
is absolute, both observers (I and N a) should agree that the electron is moving by inertia inside the spacecraft
which does not appear to be the case since for N a the electron is accelerating toward the ﬂoor (which implies
that there is force that accelerates it). Despite the fact that today’s physics regards the force accelerating the
electron in N a as ﬁctitious, it has never explained why the electron oﬀers no resistance to its accelerated motion
as viewed in N a.

When the anisotropic velocity of light in N a is taken into account in the calculation of the electric ﬁeld of the
falling in N a electron it turns out that at every instant the electron ﬁeld is the Coulomb (not distorted) ﬁeld (here
the instantaneous ﬁeld is considered in order to separate the Lorentz contraction of the ﬁeld and the distortion
due to acceleration) [28]. Therefore, for an observer in N a the motion of the falling (accelerating) electron will
not be resistant since its electric ﬁeld is not distorted. This means that the free electron in N a falls with an
acceleration a in order to compensate the anisotropy in the propagation of light in N a and to prevent its ﬁeld
from being distorted; in other words, the falling electron oﬀers no resistance to its accelerated motion in N a and
therefore moves by inertia while falling in N a. In such a way, as expected, both the inertial observer I and the
non-inertial observer N a agree that the electron in N a is moving by inertia oﬀering no resistance to its motion.

3.1.2 An electron at rest in N a

Now consider the moment when the spacecraft’s ﬂoor reaches the ﬂoating electron as seen by the inertial observer
I. The electron starts to accelerate and its motion is no longer non-resistant; its ﬁeld gets distorted and a self-
force Fself = −ma originating from the unbalanced repulsion of the electron’s charge ”elements” (caused by the
accelerated motion of the electron) starts to oppose its acceleration (i.e. the deformation of its ﬁeld); here again
m is the electromagnetic mass of the electron which is the mass corresponding to the energy of the electron ﬁeld
E (m = E/c2).

What can an observer in N a (in the spacecraft) say about the electron on the spacecraft’s ﬂoor? At ﬁrst, it
appears that the electron ﬁeld is not distorted with respect to N a since it is at rest in N a which would mean
that no force is acting on the electron. If this were the case, there would be a problem again: the inertial and
the non-inertial observers would diﬀer on whether the electron is subjected to a force; as the existence of a force
is an absolute fact all observers should recognize it. That problem disappears when the anisotropic velocity of
light is taken into account in the calculation of the electron ﬁeld in N a. Due to an unnoticed up to now Li´enard-
Wiechert-like contribution to the potential of a charge in a non-inertial reference frame [28], [29] (caused by the

4

anisotropic velocity of light in such frames) the electric ﬁeld of the electron in N a is as distorted as the ﬁeld seen
by the inertial observer I. Therefore, the non-inertial observer N a will also ﬁnd that the electron is subjected to
the purely electric self-force Fself = −ma, originating from the anisotropic velocity of light in N a which disturbs
the balance of the mutual repulsion of the ”elements” of the electron charge. As seen from the expression for the
self-force it coincides with what we call the inertial force; hence it follows that the inertial force is electromagnetic
in origin.

The non-inertial observer in N a sees that when the falling electron reaches the ﬂoor of the spacecraft it can
no longer compensate the anisotropy in the propagation of light in N a (by falling with an acceleration a), its ﬁeld
gets distorted which gives rise to the self-force Fself .

3.2 An electron in a gravitational ﬁeld

Consider now an electron at rest in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. The Newtonian theory of gravitation tells us
that the electron is subjected to a gravitational force - its weight F = mg. What does general relativity say about
that force? Nothing. The gravitational ﬁeld in general relativity is a manifestation of spacetime curvature and
(unlike the electromagnetic ﬁeld) is not a force ﬁeld (which means that ”there is no gravitational force in general
relativity” [30]). A body falling toward the Earth is represented by a geodesic worldline which means that no
force is acting on it. If a body is on the Earth’s surface, however, its worldline is no longer geodesic and it is
subjected to a force whose nature is an open question in general relativity [29]. This fact alone (not to mention
the issue of the represented by a pseudo-tensor energy and momentum of the gravitational ﬁeld [31]) is a suﬃcient
reason for a thorough re-examination of the foundations of general relativity. And this is urgently needed since,
as we shall see bellow, there are strong arguments indicating that the correct interpretation of the formalism of
general relativity should be in terms of anisotropic, not curved spacetime.

3.2.1 An electron at rest in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld

One of the formulations of the equivalence principle states that what is happening in a non-inertial reference
frame N a which accelerates with an acceleration a also happens in a non-inertial reference frame N g at rest in
a gravitational ﬁeld characterized by an acceleration g = −a. One of the results Einstein obtained by analyzing
the principle of equivalence is that in two elevators - one accelerating (frame N a) and another at rest in the
Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld (frame N g) - light bends when propagating perpendicularly to the accelerations a and
g, respectively. If one considers light propagating parallel and anti-parallel to a and g, it turns out that the
average velocity of light in N a and N g is anisotropic: the velocity of a light ray from the elevator’s ceiling toward
the ﬂoor is slightly greater that the velocity of light propagating in the opposite direction. Interestingly, that
expression for the average anisotropic velocity of light follows from the expression of the velocity of light in a
gravitational ﬁeld obtained by Einstein in 1911 but abandoned when the calculations of the deﬂection of light by
the Sun (based on that expression) predicted a wrong value for the deﬂection angle. A careful analysis of the
propagation of light in the Einstein thought experiment involving the two elevators demonstrates that his 1911
expression for the velocity of light in a gravitational ﬁeld has been prematurely discarded [28].

Due to the anisotropic velocity of light in N g the electric ﬁeld of an electron at rest in N g distorts, the balance
of the mutual repulsion of the electron charge ”elements” is disturbed which in turn gives rise to a self-force Fself
which tries to restore the balance in the mutual repulsion. The self-force turns out to be Fself = mg, where
m = E/c2 represents the passive gravitational mass of the electron and E is the energy of its ﬁeld. As the electric
self-force Fself is precisely equal to the gravitational force F = mg, the classical electromagnetic mass theory
predicts that the gravitational force acting on an electron on the Earth’s surface is purely electromagnetic in
origin which means that its passive gravitational mass is also electromagnetic in origin.

This is an important result since it demonstrates that the self-forces Fself = −ma in N a and Fself = mg in
N g have precisely the same origin: in both cases it is the anisotropic velocity of light (electromagnetic signals)
that gives rise to the electric force Fself by distorting the electric ﬁeld of the electron at rest in N a and N g which
in turn disturbs the balance in the repulsion of its charge ”elements”. What we call the inertial mass m (in Fself
= −ma) and the passive gravitational mass m (in Fself = mg) are precisely the same thing: m is the measure
of the resistance an electron oﬀers when its ﬁeld is being distorted. In the case of an accelerating electron it is
its acceleration (i) that distorts its ﬁeld as seen by an inertial observer and (ii) that causes the anisotropy in the
propagation of light in N a which in turn distorts the electron ﬁeld as observed by a non-inertial observer in N a.

5

Similarly, the distortion of the ﬁeld of an electron at rest on the Earth’s surface (i.e. at rest in N g) is caused by
the anisotropic velocity of light in N g.

3.2.2 An electron falling in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld

The self-force Fself acting on an electron at rest on the Earth’s surface arises on account of its distorted electric
ﬁeld (caused by the anisotropic velocity of light in N g) which disturbs the balance in the mutual repulsion of the
electron charge ”elements”. Fself tries to prevent the electron ﬁeld from distorting and to restore the repulsion
balance. If we allow Fself do its job by removing the obstacle beneath the electron, it will start to fall and it will
fall in such a way that the distortion of its ﬁeld is eliminated, the repulsion balance is restored and the self-force
Fself ceases to exist. The calculation of the electric ﬁeld of an electron left on itself in a gravitational ﬁeld shows
that the only way for the electron to compensate the anisotropy in the propagation of light in the gravitational
ﬁeld and to prevent its ﬁeld from being distorted is to fall with an acceleration g [28]. Therefore, a free electron
in a gravitational ﬁeld will move by inertia (without resistance) only if it falls with an acceleration g. This
result sheds light on the fact that in general relativity the motion of a body falling toward a gravitating center
is regarded as inertial (non-resistant) and is represented by a geodesic worldline. Therefore, the electromagnetic
mass theory gives an elegant answer to the question why an electron is falling in a gravitational ﬁeld and no force
is causing its acceleration.

The result that the electric ﬁeld of an electron falling in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld at any instant is the
Coulomb ﬁeld, which means that no self-force is acting on the electron, also demonstrates that a falling electron
does not radiate - its electric ﬁeld is the Coulomb ﬁeld and therefore does not contain the radiation r−1 terms
[28].

If the electron is prevented from falling its electric ﬁeld distorts, the self-force Fself appears and tries to
force the electron to move (fall) in such a way that its ﬁeld becomes the Coulomb ﬁeld; as a result the self-force
disappears.

The behaviour of the classical electron in a gravitational ﬁeld is fully accounted for by the classical electro-
magnetic mass theory and the equivalence principle: the anisotropic velocity of light in N g (in an elevator at rest
in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld)

(i) gives rise to a self-force acting on an electron at rest in N g (whose worldline, according to general relativity,
is deviated from its geodesic status) by distorting the electric ﬁeld of the electron which in turn disturbs the balance
in the mutual repulsion of its charge ”elements”, and

(ii) makes a free electron fall in N g with an acceleration g in order to preserve its Coulomb ﬁeld and therefore
to balance the repulsion of its charge ”elements”. No force is acting upon a falling electron (whose worldline is
geodesic) but if it is prevented from falling (i.e. deviated from its geodesic path) the mutual repulsion of the
”elements” of its charge becomes unbalanced which results in a self-force trying to force the electron to

fall.
General relativity does not provide an explanation of the nature of the force acting on a body at rest in a
gravitational ﬁeld whose worldline is not geodesic.
It appears that general relativity cannot provide such an
explanation at all since ”there is no gravitational force in general relativity” [30]; this fact constitutes not only an
open question but a crisis in general relativity. The classical electromagnetic mass theory in conjunction with the
principle of equivalence provides a natural answer to the questions (i) why a free electron in a gravitational ﬁeld
is falling by itself (with no force acting upon it) and why its worldline is geodesic, and (ii) why an electron at rest
in a gravitational ﬁeld is subjected to a force and why its worldline is not geodesic: the worldline of an electron
which preserves the shape of its Coulomb ﬁeld is geodesic and represents a free non-resistantly moving electron;
if the ﬁeld of an electron is distorted, its worldline is not geodesic and the electron is subjected to a self-force on
account of its own distorted ﬁeld.

In a spacetime region where the propagation of light is isotropic a free electron does not resist its motion only
if it moves with uniform velocity (which means that its electric ﬁeld is not distorted - it is the Coulomb ﬁeld
[33]); in this case the electron’s worldline is a straight geodesic line. If the electron is prevented from moving with
constant speed its ﬁeld distorts and the electron resists its acceleration (i.e. it resists the distortion of its ﬁeld);
in this case the worldline of the accelerating electron is neither geodesic nor straight. In a spacetime region where
the propagation of light is anisotropic (i.e. in an elevator on the Earth’s surface) the motion of a free electron is
non-resistant (preserving the Coulomb shape of its ﬁeld) only if it falls with an acceleration g; in this case the
electron’s worldline is geodesic but not a straight line. If the electron is prevented from falling (i.e. from moving

6

by inertia in an anisotropic region of spacetime) its ﬁeld distorts and the electron resists the deformation of its
ﬁeld; in this case its worldline is neither geodesic nor straight.

The anisotropic velocity of light in both N a and N g is responsible for the fall of a free electron and the
appearance of a self-force when the electron is prevented from falling in N a and N g. Therefore, it is the anisotropy
in the propagation of light in N a and N g that makes the two non-inertial reference frames N a and N g equivalent.
In such a way, the equivalence principle is a straightforward corollary of the anisotropic propagation of light in N a
and N g. The anisotropy in the velocity of light in the accelerating reference frame N a is caused by the frame’s
acceleration. What is the origin of the anisotropic velocity of light in the non-inertial reference N g (at rest on
the Earth’s surface) will be discussed bellow.

4 Spacetime curvature or spacetime anisotropy?

We have seen that the anisotropy in the propagation of light fully accounts for the behaviour of the classical
electron in a gravitational ﬁeld. It appears that no curvature of spacetime is needed. In order to see whether this
is really the case let us ﬁrst consider what causes the gravitational attraction of two electrons (no matter how
negligible it is).

As we have seen the electron inertial and passive gravitational masses are entirely electromagnetic in origin.
As it is believed that all three masses - inertial, passive gravitational, and active gravitational - are equal, it
follows that the electron active gravitational mass is fully electromagnetic in origin as well. And since it is only
the charge of the electron that represents it (there is no mechanical mass), it follows that the active gravitational
mass of the electron is represented by its charge. Therefore it is the electron charge that causes its gravity and the
anisotropic velocity of light in the electron’s neighborhood. The question now is: ”Is the electron’s gravitational
ﬁeld a manifestation of a spacetime curvature around the electron?” or more precisely: ”Does the electron’s charge
create a curvature which in turn causes the anisotropic velocity of light in the electron’s vicinity?” We have seen
that it is the anisotropy in the velocity of light alone that fully and consistently explains the fall of an electron
toward the Earth and the self-force acting on an electron at rest on the Earth’s surface. In addition to the electric
repulsion of two electrons (e1 and e2) in open space, they also attract each other through the anisotropy in the
velocity of light around each of them: e1 falls toward e2 in order to compensate the anisotropy caused by e2 and
vice versa. Therefore, the anisotropy in the propagation of light in the electrons’ vicinity is completely suﬃcient
to explain their (gravitational) attraction and no additional spacetime curvature hypothesis is necessary. This is
an indication that, according to the classical electromagnetic mass theory, what the electron’s charge creates is
not a spacetime curvature; it is a spacetime anisotropy which causes the anisotropic velocity of light. In such a
way, an electron’s gravitational ﬁeld according to the electromagnetic mass theory turns out to be the spacetime
anisotropy in the neighborhood of the electron originating from its charge.

An anisotropic-spacetime re-interpretation of general relativity appears more trouble-free than its current
curved-spacetime interpretation: (i) there will be no problem with the force acting on a body whose worldline
is not geodesic; (ii) the problem with the existence of gravitational energy will be solved (there is energy, but
electromagnetic); (iii) the equivalence of an accelerating frame and a frame at rest in gravitational ﬁled will be
explained along with the equivalence of inertial and passive gravitational mass; (iv) it will be also explained what
tells a body to move non-resistantly (by inertia) or to oﬀer resistance: a free body will move by inertia if the
electric ﬁelds of its charges are the Coulomb ﬁeld; if the body’s charges’ ﬁelds are distorted, the body’s motion is
with resistance - it resists the deformation of its charges’ electric ﬁelds.

5 Toward a quantum electrodynamical formulation of the electro-

magnetic mass theory

Although the lack of a quantum model of the electron makes it impossible to formulate the classical electromagnetic
mass theory in terms of quantum mechanics, it appears that its quantum electrodynamical formulation may be
possible.

According to the electromagnetic mass theory the inertial and gravitational forces acting on the classical
electron come from its self-interaction with its distorted ﬁeld. In quantum electrodynamics (QED) the electric
ﬁeld of a charge is the swarm of virtual photons that are constantly being emitted and absorbed by the charge.
The distorted ﬁeld of a non-inertial electron in QED will be represented by the anisotropy in the velocity of the

7

virtual photons comprising the electron ﬁeld. As the recoil an electron is subjected to every time it emits or
absorbs a virtual photon depends on the photon’s velocity the anisotropy in the virtual photons’ velocity will
disturb the balance of the recoils (which cancel out exactly if there is no anisotropy). This means that in QED
too the interaction of a non-inertial electron with its distorted ﬁeld also gives rise to a self-force which coincides
with the inertial force in the case of an accelerating electron and with the gravitational force in the case of an
electron supported in a gravitational ﬁeld.

It turns out that for the QED formulation of the electromagnetic mass theory it does not matter whether an
electron will be regarded as a point or a sphere - in both cases the self-force originates from the unbalanced recoils
of the virtual photons being absorbed by the electron; the recoils of the emitted virtual photons cancel out since
the photons are always emitted with speed = c.

The QED formulation of the electromagnetic mass theory makes it possible to compare the electromagnetic
mass approach to inertia with the zero-point ﬁeld (ZPF) approach according to which inertia originates from
the interaction of an electron charge with the virtual photons of the zero-point ﬂuctuation of the electromagnetic
vacuum [34]. If it can be stated with certainty that in QED the interaction of an electron with the virtual photons
comprising its own electric ﬁeld is diﬀerent from the electron’s interaction with the zero-point virtual photons
then the two approaches to inertia are also diﬀerent. There are two reasons which seem to indicate that the ZPF
inertia may be only a small contribution to an electron’s inertia caused by the unbalanced recoils from the virtual
photons of its ﬁeld:

(i) The ZPF approach cannot explain gravitation and the origin of the gravitational mass. The electromagnetic
resistance oﬀered by an accelerating charge as explained by the ZPF approach can be viewed as the Lorentz force
caused by interaction of the magnetic component of the electromagnetic ZPF with the charge. This deals with
the charge’s inertial mass. However, when the charge is at rest on the Earth’s surface there is NO magnetic
component of electromagnetic ZPF and therefore there is no contribution to the charge’s gravitational mass.
One may speculate that inertial and gravitational masses are not equal at the quantum level which is, of course,
something that should be studied. It becomes clear from here why the ZPF contribution to inertia may be a
small correction at best:
if there is no ZPF contribution to the gravitational mass, a ZPF contribution to the
inertial mass should be extremely small; otherwise, a greater diﬀerence between the two masses would have been
observed by now.

(ii) As the classical electromagnetic mass theory is the only classical theory (supported by experimental
evidence) that deals with inertia it is natural to expect that it should be the QED version of that theory that
accounts for inertia in QED. On the other hand, the ZPF approach to inertia does not have a classical analog
which seems to disqualify it as a theory describing the major contribution to inertia (this would not be so if there
were no classical theory dealing with inertia).

As inertia and gravitation have predominantly macroscopic manifestations it appears certain that these phe-
nomena should possess not only a quantum but a classical description as well. This expectation is corroborated
by the fact that such a description already exists - the electromagnetic mass theory which yields the correct
expressions for the inertial and gravitational masses of the classical electron. Therefore, the chances of any
modern theory of inertia (and gravitation) can be evaluated by seeing whether it can be considered a quantum
generalization of the classical electromagnetic mass theory.

6

Is all the mass electromagnetic?

We have seen that both the inertial and the passive gravitational masses of the classical electron are fully elec-
tromagnetic in origin. If we now ask what about the inertial and gravitational masses of the real electron? Are
they electromagnetic in origin as well?

An argument against regarding the entire mass as electromagnetic is that strong and weak interactions should
also contribute to the mass. This argument, however, does not apply to the electron for two reasons: (i) the
electron does not participate in strong interactions, and (ii) a free electron does not participate in any weak
interactions either (only the volume elements of its charge interact electromagneticly).

This argument, however, is quite relevant when the nature of mass of the other elementary charged particles is
discussed. As the issue of the strong and weak contribution to the mass is an open one and needs a separate study,
let us outline an argument demonstrating that at least the strong interaction does not contribute to the mass. As
we have seen the unbalanced repulsion of the charge ”elements” of the classical electron gives rise to a self-force
and its mass. Unbalanced attraction of opposite charges results in the reduction of the charges’ mass [28]. This

8

is true not only for electric forces. Early attempts by Poincar´e [7] to resolve the stability problem in the classical
electromagnetic mass theory resulted in the introduction of unknown attraction forces (called Poincar´e stresses)
that balance the repulsion of the charge ”elements” of the classical electron. As it turned out that those attraction
forces had a negative contribution to the mass the problematic 4/3 factor was reduced to 1. Therefore, due to
(i) the fact that the forces of strong interaction are attraction forces and (ii) the strength of strong interaction
(over two orders of magnitude greater than the electromagnetic interaction) one can expect a signiﬁcant negative
contribution to the mass of a charged particle (compared to the electromagnetic contribution). If it turns out
that the strong interaction does contribute to the mass, we will face a major crisis in physics - it will not be clear
what compensates the negative contribution to the mass that originates from the strong interaction.

On the other hand, however, the strong and weak interactions as fundamental forces should make a contribution
to the mass (as the electromagnetic interaction does) [35] and if they do not, then we might be forced to re-examine
their very nature as separate fundamental interactions.

If it turns out that the strong and weak interactions make no contribution to the mass then the mass of
all particles will prove to be entirely electromagnetic in origin. It should be noted, however, that a fully elec-
tromagnetic mass implies that there are no elementary neutral particles (with non-zero rest mass) in nature.
A direct consequence from here is that only charged particles or particles that consists of charged constituents
possess inertial and passive gravitational mass. Stated another way, it is only elementary charges that comprise
a body; there is no such fundamental quantity as mass. It is evident that in this case the electromagnetic mass
theory predicts zero neutrino mass and appears to be in conﬂict with the apparent mass of the Z 0 boson which
is involved in the weak interactions. The resolution of this apparent conﬂict could lead to either restricting the
electromagnetic mass theory (in a sense that not the entire mass is electromagnetic) or re-examining the facts
believed to prove (i) that the Z 0 boson is a fundamentally neutral particle (unlike the neutron), and (ii) that it
does possess inertial and gravitational mass if truly neutral.

Another argument that the mass of a particle is fully electromagnetic in origin comes from the velocity
dependence of the mass. It is a corollary of the classical electromagnetic mass theory that the electromagnetic
mass rises with velocity inversely as (cid:0)1 − v2/c2
[22, p. 28-3]. And instead of viewing the result that all the
mass depends on velocity discovered by the special theory of relativity as a serious indication that all the mass
is electromagnetic, inexplicably the whole issue of electromagnetic mass has been practically abandoned. If we
assume that the mass of a body consists of several kinds of masses (electromagnetic, mechanical, strong and weak)
we have to answer the question how all of them obey the same law of velocity dependence?

1/2
(cid:1)

7 Conclusions

We have seen that inertia, inertial mass, gravitation, passive gravitational mass, and the equivalence of the two
masses of the classical electron are fully accounted for by the electromagnetic mass theory. The self-force to
which a non-inertial electron is subjected on account of its own distorted electric ﬁeld unambiguously indicates
that the inertial and passive gravitational masses of the classical electron are electromagnetic in origin. This
result provides a straightforward explanation of the equivalence of inertial and gravitational mass. The inertial
and passive gravitational masses of the electron are the same thing - the mass that corresponds to the energy stored
in its electric ﬁeld. However, the inertial and passive gravitational masses of the electron manifest themselves as
such - as a measure of the electron’s resistance to being accelerated - only if it is subjected to an acceleration
(kinematic or gravitational). This resistance originates from the unbalanced mutual repulsion of the volume
elements of the electron.

According to the electromagnetic mass theory it is the electron charge that causes the anisotropy in the prop-
agation of light in the electron’s vicinity. That anisotropy completely accounts for the (gravitational) attraction
of two electrons. This is an indication that the Riemann curvature tensor should be regarded as describing an
anisotropy (not curvature) of spacetime. An important open question of the electromagnetic mass theory is how
a charge causes the anisotropy of spacetime around itself.

It should be stressed that the electromagnetic mass theory is not just a hypothesis; it is a valid physical theory
since (i) it is based on ﬁrm experimental evidence (the experimental fact that at least part of the mass of charged
particles is electromagnetic in origin; there is no other theory that accounts for this fact), and (ii) it is a further
natural development of the classical electron theory in conjunction with the principle of equivalence.

It should be speciﬁcally emphasized that even if it turns out that only part of the mass is electromagnetic in
origin it still follows from the electromagnetic mass theory that inertia, inertial mass, gravitation, and gravitational

9

mass (passive and active) are in part electromagnetic in origin.

All results outlined here could have been obtained at least eighty years ago when Fermi [9] initiated the
approach of studying the classical electromagnetic mass theory in conjunction with general relativity (more
speciﬁcally, with the equivalence principle). Unfortunately, he later turned to atomic physics and perhaps deprived
our century from solving the mystery of inertia and gravitation.

I believe that the answer to the question posed in the title is now clear - Yes, the 20th century physics did

have the means to reveal the nature of inertia and gravitation.

References

[1] St. Augustine, Confessions, Book 11(11.14.17); http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/augustine.html (see the Sec-

tion ”Texts and Translations”).

[2] See: http://press.web.cern.ch/Press/Releases00/PR08.00ELEPRundelay.html

[3] J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag., 11, 229 (1881).

[4] O. Heaviside, The Electrician, 14, 220 (1885).

[5] G. F. C. Searle, Phil. Mag., 44, 329 (1897).

[6] H. A. Lorentz, Proceedings of the Academy of Sciences of Amsterdam, 6, 809 (1904); Theory of Electrons,

2nd ed. (Dover, New York, 1952).

[7] H. Poincar´e, Compt. Rend., 140, 1504 (1905); Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo 21, 129 (1906).

[8] M. Abraham, The Classical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism, 2nd ed. (Blackie, London, 1950).

[9] E. Fermi, Nuovo Cimento, 22, 176 (1921); Phys. Zeits., 23, 340 (1922); Rend. Acc. Lincei (5), 31, 184; 306

(1922); Nuovo Cimento, 25, 159 (1923).

[10] H. Mandel, Z. Physik, 39, 40 (1926).

[11] W. Wilson, Proc. Phys. Soc., 48, 736 (1936).

[12] M. H. L. Pryce, Proc. Roy. Soc., A168, 389 (1938).

[13] B. Kwal, J. Phys. Rad., 10, 103 (1949).

[14] F. Rohrlich, Am. J. Phys., 28, 639 (1960); Classical Charged Particles, (Addison-Wesley, New York, 1990).

[15] On the historical development of the classical electromagnetic mass theory see [14] and [1].

[16] J. W. Butler, Am. J. Phys. 37, 1258 (1969).

[17] In order to account for the stability of the classical electron Poincar´e [7] assumed that part of the electron
mass (regarded as mechanical) originated from forces (known as the Poincar´e stresses) holding the electron
charge together and that it was this mechanical mass that compensated the 4/3 factor (reducing the electron
mass from 4/3m to m). However, the 4/3 factor, as discussed above, turned out to be an error in the
calculations of electromagnetic mass as shown in [9]-[14]. As there remained nothing to be compensated (in
terms of mass), if there were some unknown attraction forces (the Poincar´e stresses) responsible for holding
the electron charge together, their negative contribution to the electron mass would result in reducing it from
m to 2/3m. This made the stability problem even more puzzling - on the one hand, a spherical electron tends
to disintegrate due the repulsion of the diﬀerent parts of the spherical shell; on the other hand, however,
an assumption that there is a force that prevents the electron charge from blowing up leads to a wrong
expression for its mass. Obviously, there is an implicit assumption in the classical model of the electron that
leads to such a paradox - it is assumed that at every instant the electron charge occupies the whole spherical
shell (see [19]).

[18] D. J. Griﬃths, Introduction to Electrodynamics, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1989, p. 439.

10

[19] It is not impossible for an elementary charge to have a spherical but not continuous distribution. Such a
possibility follows from a work [20] which has received little attention so far. By bringing the idea of atomism
to its logical completion (discreteness not only in space but in time as well - 4−atomism), it is argued in
that work that a quantum-mechanical description of the electron itself (not only of its state) is possible if
the electron is represented not by its worldline (as deterministically described in special relativity) but by a
set of four-dimensional points (modeled by the energy-momentum tensor of dust - in this case a sum of delta
functions) scattered all over the spacetime region in which the wave function of the electron is diﬀerent from
zero. The 4−atomism hypothesis gives an insight into two questions: (i) how an elementary charge can have
”parts” and still remain an elementary charge, and (ii) why there is no stability problem despite that the
”parts” of an electron repel one another: since for 1 second an electron is represented by 1020 four-dimensional
points (according to the 4−atomism hypothesis) at one instant the electron exists as a single point carrying
a greater (bare) charge, but for one second, for example, there will be 1020 such points occupying a spherical
shell that manifest themselves as an electron whose eﬀective charge is equal to the elementary charge. The
4−atomistic model of the electron appears to overcome the diﬃculties of both a purely particle and a purely
wave models of the quantum object and may be a candidate for what Einstein termed ”something third”
(neither a particle nor a wave). For a brief description of why neither the purely particle nor the purely wave
models of the quantum object can be accepted see reference [21].

[20] A. H. Anastassov, ”The Theory of Relativity and the Quantum of Action (4−Atomism)”, Doctoral Thesis,
Soﬁa University, 1984 (unpublished); ”Self-Contained Phase-Space Formulation of Quantum Mechanics as
Statistics of Virtual Particles”, Annuaire de l’Universite de Soﬁa ”St. Kliment Ohridski”, Faculte de Physique,
81, 1993, pp. 135-163.

[21] Here are two of the most serious problems with a purely particle and purely wave models of the electron. (i)
If the s-electron in the hydrogen atom is regarded as a particle, i.e. as localized (its charge being localized)
somewhere above the proton, then the hydrogen atom should possess a dipole moment in its s-state. Both
quantum mechanics and the experiment show that this is not the case. One may picture the electron in the
s-state as so rapidly orbiting the proton that what is experimentally measured is the average value of the
dipole moment over the measurement time. And since there is a spherical symmetry in the s-state all dipole
moments cancel out exactly - the average value is zero. To verify that hypothesis Madelung calculated the
orbital velocity of the electron that would ensure that all dipole moments during the measurement cancel
out. It turned out that the electron orbital velocity should be several orders of magnitude greater than the
velocity of light. This shows that the electron charge should be somehow uniformly distributed around the
proton. (ii) A system of n ”particles” cannot be represented by a pure wave since that wave cannot be a real
wave in the real space - it is a wave in a space of 3n dimensions.

[22] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol. 2, Addison-Wesley,
New York, 1964, p. 28-10. The Feynman Lectures on Physics is not the only physics textbook that stresses
that experimental fact; see, for example, R. Stevenson and R. B. Moore, Theory of Physics, W. B. Saunders,
Philadelphia and London, 1967 (p. 590: ”there is experimental evidence for the existence of electromagnetic
mass”).

[23] E. Fermi, Z. Physik, 23, 340-346 (1922), quoted by P. Moylan, Amer. J. Phys., 63, 818 (1995).

[24] P. Pearle, in D. Teplitz, ed. Electromagnetism: Paths to Research, Plenum Press, New York, 1982, p. 213.

[25] E. Mach, Science of Mechanics, 9th ed., Open Court, London, 1933. Around 1883 Mach argued that inertia
was caused by all the matter in the Universe (no matter how distant it may be) thus assuming that inertia
had a non-local cause.

[26] The self-force Fself = −ma is traditionally called inertial force. According to Newton’s third law the external
force F that accelerates the electron and the self-force Fself have equal magnitudes and opposite directions:
F = − Fself . Therefore F = ma which means that Newton’s second law is derived on the basis of Maxwell’s
electrodynamics and Newton’s third law.

[27] Strictly speaking, in the framework of classical electrodynamics the explanation of the self-force acting on
an accelerating charge appears possible only in terms of repulsion of charges, not in terms of interaction of
a charge and a distorted electric ﬁeld.

11

[28] V. Petkov, Ph. D. Thesis, Concordia University, Montreal, 1997; for an account of why all arguments
against regarding the entire mass of the classical electron as electromagnetic in origin have been an-
swered see also: ”Acceleration-dependent electromagnetic self-interaction eﬀects as a basis for inertia and
gravitation”(http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9909019)

[29] V. Petkov, What is general relativity silent on? (http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/0005084).

[30] J. L. Synge, Relativity: the general theory, Nord-Holand, Amsterdam, 1960, Ch. III. Sec. 3.

[31] The formalism of general relativity refuses to yield an appropriate mathematical (tensor) expression for the
energy and momentum of gravitational ﬁeld; instead a pseudo-tensor to model gravitational energy and
momentum is used. The problem with a pseudo-tensor is that it cannot represent a real physical quantity;
this implies that there is no gravitational energy and momentum. Such a conclusion appears to be fully in line
with the way general relativity describes gravitation - as a manifestation of spacetime curvature, not as a force
ﬁeld which possesses energy and momentum; gravitational ﬁled in general relativity can be regarded as an
energy-less and momentum-less geometric ﬁeld. However, some people think that there is a real problem with
such a conclusion since the experimental evidence seems to demonstrate the existence of gravitational energy
and momentum - it is suﬃcient to mention only the tidal electric power stations converting what appears
to be gravitational energy into electric energy. That experimental evidence looks completely diﬀerently from
the viewpoint of the electromagnetic mass theory which reveals that gravitation is electromagnetic in origin
(at least in part) - the tidal electric power stations convert electric energy into electric energy (as in the cases
in which mechanical energy is converted into mechanical energy). There is an attempt to explain the fact
a pseudo-tensor is used for modeling gravitational energy and momentum: ”At issue is not the existence of
gravitational energy, but the localizability of gravitational energy. It is not localizable” [32]. That is confusion
- it is claimed that two mutually excluding things are true: (i) there is gravitational energy, and (ii) there is
no (force) gravitational ﬁeld which means that there is no gravitational energy.

[32] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation, Freeman, San Francisco, 1973, p.467.

[33] An inertial observer with respect to whom an electron moves with constant speed will see its ﬁeld deformed
(Lorentz-contracted), but this does not mean that the electron resists its motion with uniform velocity. The
observed deformation of the electron ﬁeld gives rise to the increase of the electron mass as seen by the inertial
observer.

[34] B. Haisch, A. Rueda and H. E. Puthoﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 49, 678 (1994); A. Rueda and B. Haisch, Phys. Lett.

A 240, 115 (1998); A. Rueda and B. Haisch, Found. Phys. 28, 1057 (1998).

[35] H. Stephani, General Relativity, 2nd ed., (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York, 1990), p. 69.

12

