1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Introduction

In the 1920’s, Hubble studied nebulae and discovered galaxies located far beyond
our galaxy (the milky way). He studied their optical spectra and found that,
the more distant the galaxy, the greater was its red shift. The red shift is the
relative increase of wavelength of atomic lines, by the Doppler shift, when the
source is receding. The red shift parameter Z is deﬁned by:

Z = δλ/λ

(1)

(2)

At small velocities, Z ≈ β where v = βc. The correct formula for red shift at
higher recession velocities requires attention to special relativity, and is

Z = [(1 + β)/(1 − β)]1/2 − 1

Hubble data is usually plotted as the logarithm of distance, expressed as
magnitude, vs. the logarithm of the red shift (Z). Until the recent high-Z data
became available, Hubble plots tended to be linear. This has been interpreted
to mean that we sit amidst the remnants of an ancient explosion, viewing all
the other debris (galaxies) as departing us at a speed proportional to distance.
This rate of departure is the Hubble constant, H, currently thought to be in the
range of 50-100 km/sec/megaparsec. A parsec is the distance traveled by light
in 108 seconds, or 3.26 light years. In this paper, it is assumed that the Hubble
constant is 65 km/sec/megaparsec. This deﬁnes the time since the big bang,
T=1/H, or 15 billion years.

2 Problems with the Hubble plot at extreme

distances

The essence of a Hubble plot is that fragments of an explosion, absent any
further acceleration, should depart one another at constant velocity. If we really
want to plot distance vs. recession velocity, we must replace Z by β. β is easily
found from Z, by [2]:

β = [(Z + 1)2 − 1]/[(Z + 1)2 + 1]

(3)

But, there is a further complication for observed high-Z data. The data refers
to diﬀerent times! That is, the larger the distance, the earlier is the time when
the data left its source. The observer is looking backward in time, so that each
datum refers to a time r/c ago. The problem becomes severe for the new high-Z
data. To show this, consider the consequences of β → 1. The data refers to
conditions existing at half the time since the big bang, since it takes that long
for the data to arrive at the observer. The Hubble ”constant” at that time was
twice the current value! We don’t know the place of origin of the big bang.
All places within the ﬂying remnants appear to be the source of the expansion,
since everything is observed to be departing that place. One way of looking at
the geometry is shown in Figure 1.

1

The remnant is assumed to have moved at constant velocity, βc, over the
distance r, and then emits a light signal to the observer. This light signal
encodes both the distance (dimness) and the velocity of recession (red shift),
as they were at that time. Following a path from the big bang out to a given
remnant, plus the path of the light from the remnant to the observer, the elapsed
time since the big bang is:

T = r(1/βc + 1/c) = (r/c)((β + 1)/β)

(4)

Since T is independent of the observed r, r is proportional to β/(β + 1) rather
than β.

The Hubble constant is not invariant. It is the constant of proportionality
in v ∝ r, or v=Hr. Since r increases with the passage of time, H decreases
with time unless the velocity itself changes. Each measured datum refers to an
earlier time than the present, namely T-r/c. In order that Hubble data refer to
the present time, T, one could estimate the ”present position” by multiplying
the measured r by (β + 1) and then plot this vs. β. This is a bit awkward, since
one prefers to plot the actual observed distance, r. Alternatively, we may plot
r vs. β/(β + 1).

In other words, a linear plot of r(β + 1) vs. β is equivalent to a plot of r vs.
β/(β + 1). Since we are trying to get information about the relation between red
shift and distance, these corrections are essential. Otherwise, we are comparing
apples with oranges.

In the absence of accelerations, one expects a linear plot. Any deviation from

linearity then indicates the occurrence of acceleration or other complications.

3 Application to high-Z data

A conventional Hubble plot including the new high-Z data (see Appendix) is
shown in Figure 2. The farthest data point, at Z=1.2, is not included. Mi,0
is the red shift, Z. Mi,1 is magnitude, representing the logarithm of distance.
This deviation from linearity was a huge surprise. The high-Z research eﬀort
had intended to look for reductions in recessional velocity in consequence of
the gravitational pull of all the material in the big bang. This would consti-
tute evidence for or against a closed universe. The data disagreed with their
expectation, and their interpretation was that the velocity of recession actually
increased with distance. This is sometimes described as a ”runaway universe”.
By the logic of this study, deviations from linearity in a Hubble plot are
meaningless unless the plot is corrected to r vs. β/(β + 1). When one replaces
Z with β/(β + 1), the upward deviation from a straight line is more marked.
This is shown in Figure 3, where the Z=1.2 datum is again omitted.

Plotted linearly, in Figure 4, the deviation is even more obvious. The for-
mula by which ”magnitude” is converted to distance is normalized to a Hubble
constant of 65 km/sec/megaparsec, leading to r = 23.29 ∗ (2.5)Mag/2 light years.
The Z=1.2 datum is included here and in subsequent graphs, since the distance
itself (rather than magnitude) was given.

2

In the absence of any acceleration, one expects the data in Figure 4 to
follow a straight line. Since it does not, we next consider the consequences of
acceleration. What might cause a point to appear above the Hubble line? For
a given value of β, follow it upward from r=0 and then let it decelerate just
before the measurement. This puts it to the left of the line, and above. Or,
if the recession velocity increases just before the measurement, the point will
move to the right of the line, and it will fall below. The high Z data points all
lie above the line, suggesting deceleration.

But, ﬁve of the points lie above the observation horizon and cannot have
arisen from our big bang. Why? During the presumed 15 billion years since
the big bang, the fastest fragments might move a distance of up to 15 billion
light years. In order that such a fragment send a light signal to the observer,
the signal must have been sent at 7.5 billion years after the big bang. It then
took an additional 7.5 billion years for that signal to reach the observer. This
is the basis of the ”observed distance limit” of 7.5 billion light years, displayed
in Figure 4 as a horizontal dashed line. Since ﬁve of the data points exceed
7.5 billion light years, they cannot be associated with ”our” big bang. These
sources must have already existed at the time of our big bang.

4 Multiple big bangs?

Much eﬀort is currently being expended in an attempt to determine whether
the universe is closed or is open. If closed, one expects the recession to reverse
and to eventually result in a big crunch prior to another big bang. The center
of mass then deﬁnes the position of all future big bangs, and becomes a unique
point in the universe. If open, the universe is expected to expand forever and
the sky will become dimmer and dimmer. Figure 5 shows a ﬁt of the data to
three straight lines. Interpreting these as Hubble plots, the slope measures the
time since the big bang corresponding to that line.

The geometry within a big bang is diﬃcult to visualize. All points are equal,
in a sense, and we have no notion where the big bang took place. No matter
where we stand, all matter is seen to be receding isotropically and generally with
a speed that increases with distance. However, one fact is clear. The Hubble
constant is an inverse measure of elapsed time since the big bang occurred.

The data plotted in Figure 5 displays three linear regions that are interpreted
as Hubble slopes. The Hubble constants for these straight-line ﬁts are 65, 20.3,
and 6.7, in units of km/sec/megaparsec.

R = 15 ∗ 10

9 ∗ β/(β + 1)(f its f irst 8 data points)

S = 3.2 ∗ R − 6.5 ∗ 109(f its next 8 data points)
T = 9.7 ∗ R − 39.4 ∗ 109(f its next 3 data points)

(5)

(6)

(7)

The Hubble constant is H=1/T where T is the time since the big bang. We
are forced to assume a ”Galilean” concept of time, i.e. a time that meaningfully
describes events simultaneously throughout the universe. This is distasteful, in

3

view of SR, but it is the best we can do at this time. The times since each big
bang occurred are:

T 1 = (1/65) ∗ (106 ∗ 3.26 ∗ 3 ∗ 105) = 15 ∗ 109 years

T 2 = (1/20.3) ∗ (106 ∗ 3.26 ∗ 3 ∗ 105) = 48 ∗ 109 years
T 3 = (1/6.7) ∗ (106 ∗ 3.26 ∗ 3 ∗ 105) = 146 ∗ 109 years

(8)

(9)

(10)

The solid lines in Figure 5 represent a snapshot in time, namely ”now”. We
are located at distance zero, and the Hubble plot for the current big bang (bb1)
is slowly rotating counterclockwise about the origin. It has taken 15 billion years
to rotate this line from horizontal to the present position, representing a present
Hubble constant of 65. In Figure 6, the dotted lines show the progression of
”Hubble lines” at times since the big bang (bb1) of 7.5 ∗ 109 years (dotted),
15 ∗ 109 years (solid), 30 ∗ 109 years (dotted), and 48 ∗ 109 years (dotted).

The geometry within a big bang is mind-boggling. All separations between
remnants increase with distance from the big bang, and also with time. Since
everything moves away from us, we may as well consider our big bang as centered
on us (fortunately, in the past). That is, looking back to time zero, all the
remnants of the big bang coalesce at our position. If there have been prior big
bangs, what might we expect to observe from our present observation position
and how can we diﬀerentiate between remnants of our big bang and that of
other big bangs?

All remnants of our big bang (bb1) are expected to lie on a straight line
Hubble plot (absent accelerations) which passes through the origin. Isotropy is
mandatory, when viewed from any remnant. How would these remnants appear,
viewed from a platform moving relative to such a remnant? One expects a
velocity shift, the sign depending on whether the velocity is towards or away
from the observed fragment. Figure 7 shows the extreme shifts, for a shift of
β/(β + 1) of ±0.2. Depending on the direction of the platform, the data may
lie anywhere between the dotted lines.

With this in mind, consider how fragments of bb2 appear when viewed from
a fragment of bb2. This fragment of bb2 will exhibit a radial velocity v2 relative
to the center of bb2 and an observer on that fragment will ﬁnd isotropic red
shifts for other fragments of bb2. Now let the site of the observer, on a fragment
of bb1, occupy that same space and his radial velocity is v1 relative to the center
of bb1. The center of bb1 moves with velocity v relative to the center of bb2. If
v + v1 = v2, the observer on fragment of bb1 will ﬁnd isotropic red shifts for all
fragments from bb2. If unequal, the anisotropy axis will lie along v1 + v − v2.
However, so long as the observer’s line of light is restricted to a small spot in
the sky, the Hubble plot is expected to be linear and the inverse of the Hubble
constant measures the time since bb2 occurred.

Refer again to Figure 5. The data for bb2 fragments is velocity-shifted by
β = .15. The data for bb3 fragments is velocity-shifted by β = .37. More data
is wanted, especially that from diﬀerent directions. Even so, it seems that the
center of bb3 is moving at a velocity of at least β = .22 relative to the center of

4

bb2. This would preclude that their centers coincide, and refutes the idea of a
closed universe with repetitive big bangs about the same center.

5 Conclusions

The recent high-Z red shift data is very exciting. It was planned as an attempt
to look for evidence of closure in an expanding universe derived from a single
big bang. The results were unexpected, in that far distances are larger than
one expects for a Hubble expansion without acceleration. This study rejects the
conclusion that the data imply a speeding-up of the recession velocity. At high-
Z, more care is needed in treating the data than simply repeating the Hubble
plots found useful at low Z. When Z is replaced with β, and when the data
is extrapolated to constant time by replacing β with β/(β + 1), the data ﬁts
three straight-line segments. This linearity indicates little or no acceleration,
suggesting that gravity plays an unimportant role in reconstituting the remnants
following a big bang. The presence of three segments indicates the occurrence of
three big bangs. The internal precision of the data set is remarkable. More data
is needed, especially from diﬀerent directions. If the high-Z data from prior big
bangs show anisotropy, we may be able to specify where, as well as when, they
occurred. If there is no anisotropy, the conclusions (but not the methodology
of plotting the data) of this paper are wrong.

Further, the certain knowledge from rocks and other evidence that elements
of our universe are much older than 5 billion years suggests that they may have
already been formed prior to ”the” big bang. That is, our universe may not
have arisen from a single big bang. This suggests that the process of creation
did not recycle everything at the beginning of the current epoch. The concept
that we derive from a single big bang some 15 billion years ago may prove to be
a provincial viewpoint, much like the pre-Copernican view of an earth-centric
world.

The events which lead to a big bang are not at all clear. Gravity, plus the
presence of unseen dark matter, has been the leading candidate for closure fol-
lowing a big bang. The linearity of the Hubble data, properly plotted, indicates
that gravity plays no important role in gathering up the remnants for another
try.

This paper ﬁnds that the universe is more complex than had been thought.
Instead of a single big bang, which might repeat if gravity were suﬃcient to pull
it all together, we see evidence that other big bangs have occurred. The question,
whether our universe is ”closed” or ”open”, is hence moot. Our big bang may
have recycled some of the material from prior big bangs.
It is worth noting
that nothing derived from ”our” big bang can be observed at a distance further
than 7.5 billion light years, and that the new high-Z data includes sources as
far away (at the time of the measurement) as 18 billion light years. Any object
with measured distance further than 7.5 billion light years must already have
been in existence at the time of our big bang.

This brings into question the ”Cosmological Principle”, which holds that

5

every point in the universe is essentially equivalent to every other. This could
be true, if there had been one big bang (or even if there were repetitive big
bangs about the same center of mass). With a single big bang, there is one
unique point in the universe but we have no method of ﬁnding it. The thrust
of this study is that there have been multiple big bangs. This means that there
may be at least 3 unique points in the universe, and we may be able to locate
these relative to one another. All this means that the universe is more complex
than we had thought, and consequently all the more interesting.

6 Appendix - Data used in this paper.

The 19 data points used are displayed below. They are included here for the
convenience of readers who may want to try other models. The ﬁrst column is
the red shift, Z. The second column is the distance, given in ”magnitude”. The
data derives from articles on the internet, urls:
l. http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/AJ/journal/issues/v116n3/980111/980111.fg5.html
displays a Hubble plot from Z < .01 to Z=.97.
2. http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/AJ/journal/issues/v116n3/980111/980111.tb6.html
lists numerical data for ten high-Z data points.
3. http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/AJ/journal/issues/v116n3/980111/980111.tb7.html
lists six more ”snapshot” data points.
4. http://www.lbl.gov/supernova/albinoni.html describes SN1998eq.

Since the many low-Z data points of the Hubble plot were not given numeri-
cally, the ﬁrst two points were read oﬀ the graph of the ﬁrst reference to anchor
the data at low Z. The next 16 data points are listed in tb6 and tb7 in the
second and third urls above. The 19th data point is from SN1998eq: Z=1.2,
r = 18 ∗ 109 light years.

The data points used are as follows, Z and magnitude, except for the last
point. 0.01 , 33.78, 0.09 ,38, 0.16 ,39.08, 0.17 ,39.95, 0.23 ,40.33, 0.24 ,40.68, 0.3
,40.74, 0.3 ,40.99, 0.38 ,42.21, 0.43 ,42.34, 0.43 ,42.03, 0.44 ,42.26, 0.48 ,42.49,
0.5 ,42.7, 0.57 ,42.83, 0.62 ,43.01, 0.83 ,43.67, 0.97 ,44.3, 1.2 ,*
No magnitude was given for the last point, but its distance is 18∗109 light years.

7 Figure captions:

Figure 1. Geometry for observed red shift and distance.
Figure 2. Conventional Hubble plot, including high-Z data.
Figure 3. Modiﬁed Hubble plot of high-Z data vs. log(β/(β + 1))
Figure 4. Data plotted linearly. Dashed line is ”observed distance limit”.
Figure 5. The data ﬁtted to three Hubble constants. Dashed lines are the ob-
servable limits (see text).
Figure 6. Changes over time. Solid line is ”now”.Dashed lines are before and
after ”now”.

6

Figure 7. Eﬀect of the observer moving relative to fragment of bb1.

7

This figure "red1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

This figure "red2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

This figure "red3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

This figure "red4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

This figure "red5.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

This figure "red6.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

This figure "red7.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0101033v1

