The ”True Transformations Relativity” Analy-
sis of the Michelson-Morley Experiment

Tomislav Ivezi´c
Ruder Boˇskovi´c Institute
P.O.B. 180, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia
E-mail: ivezic@rudjer.irb.hr

Abstract
In this paper we present an invariant formulation of special relativity, i.e., the
”true transformations relativity.” It deals either with true tensor quantities
(when no basis has been introduced) or equivalently with coordinate-based
geometric quantities comprising both components and a basis (when some ba-
sis has been introduced). It is shown that this invariant formulation, in which
special relativity is understood as the theory of a four-dimensional spacetime
with the pseudo-Euclidean geometry, completely explains the results of the
Michelson-Morley experiment. Two noncovariant approaches to the analy-
sis of the Michelson-Morley experiment are discussed; the coventional one
in which only the path lengths (optical or geometrical) are considered, and
Driscoll’s approach (R.B. Driscoll, Phys. Essays 10, 394 (1997)), in which
the increment of phase is determined not only by the segment of geometric
path length, but also by the wavelength in that segment. Because these anal-
yses belong to the ”apparent transformations relativity,” they do not agree
with the results of the Michelson-Morley experiment.

Key words: Michelson-Morley experiment, true transformations relativity,
apparent transformations relativity

1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1. INTRODUCTION

Recently Driscoll(1) analyzed the Michelson-Morley(2) experiment taking
into account, in the calculation of the fringe shift, the Doppler eﬀect on
wavelength in the frame in which the interferometer is moving. In contrast
to the traditional analysis the non-null fringe shift was found and the author
concluded: ”that the Maxwell-Einstein electromagnetic equations and spe-
cial relativity jointly are disproved, not conﬁrmed, by the Michelson-Morley
experiment.” In this paper we present an invariant approach to special rel-
ativity (SR) with tensor quantities (and tensor equations) to the analysis of
the Michelson-Morley experiment and ﬁnd a null fringe shift in agreement
with the experiment. We also show why the calculation from(1) leads to the
non-null result and why the traditional analysis gives an apparent (not true)
agreement with the experiment.

In Sec. 2. we brieﬂy discuss diﬀerent approaches to SR. In the ﬁrst ap-
proach SR is formulated in terms of true tensor quantities and true tensor
equations, which we call the ”true transformations (TT) relativity.” That
approach is compared with the usual covariant approach, which mainly deals
with the basis components of tensors in a speciﬁc, i.e., Einstein’s coordinatiza-
tion (3) of the chosen inertial frame of reference (IFR). The general discussion
is illustrated in Sec. 2.1 by two examples: the spacetime length for a moving
rod and the spacetime length for a moving clock. The usual, i.e., Einstein’s
formulation of SR, which is based on his two postulates, and which deals
with the Lorentz contraction and the dilatation of time, is also considered
in Sec. 2.
It is shown that the Lorentz contraction and the dilatation of
time are the apparent transformations (AT). (The notions of the TT and the
AT are introduced in Ref. 4.) Any approach to SR which uses the AT we
call the ”apparent transformations (AT) relativity.” Einstein’s formulation
of SR obviously belongs to the ”AT relativity.” The same two examples as
mentioned above are considered in the ”AT relativity” in Sec. 2.2.

Then in Sec. 3.1 we discuss the nonrelativistic analysis and in Sec. 3.2
the traditional analysis of the Michelson-Morley experiment.
In Sec. 3.3
we repeat in short Driscoll’s calculation of the fringe shift in the Michelson-
Morley experiment. Both, the traditional analysis and Driscoll’s analysis of
the Michelson-Morley experiment are shown to belong to the ”AT relativ-
ity.” In Sec. 4. we present the analysis of the Michelson-Morley experiment
in the ”TT relativity” explicitly using two very diﬀerent synchronizations of
distant clocks (they are explained in Sec. 2.) and we ﬁnd the null result in
agreement with the experiment. It is important to note that this result holds

2

in all permissible coordinatizations since the whole phase of a light wave, the
true tensor, φ = kagablb (see Eqs. (21) and (22)) is used in the calculation.
In Sec. 4.1 we explain Driscoll’s non-null fringe shift as a consequence of an
”AT relativity” calculation of the increment of phase. Driscoll’s calculation
takes into account only a part k0l0 of the above mentioned whole phase φ
and considers that part in two relatively moving IFRs S (k0l0) and S′ (k0′
l0′)
but only in the Einstein coordinatization (the S frame is the interferometer
rest frame). Finally in Sec. 4.2 we explicitly show that the agreement with
experiment obtained in the traditional ”AT relativity” calculation is actu-
ally an apparent agreement. This calculation also deals with the part k0l0
of the whole phase φ and considers that part in IFRs S and S′ but again
only in the Einstein coordinatization. In contrast to Driscoll’s calculation
the traditional analysis considers the contribution k0l0 in the interferometer
rest frame S, but in the S′ frame, in which the interferometer is moving, it
considers the contribution k0l0′; the k0 factor is taken to be the same in S and
S′ frames. This fact caused an apparent agreement of the traditional analysis
with the results of the Michelson-Morley experiment. Since only a part of
the whole phase φ is considered both results, Driscoll’s and the traditional
one, are synchronization, i.e., coordinatization, dependent results. Thus the
agreement between the traditional analysis and the experiment exists only
when Einstein’s synchronization of distant clocks is used and not for another
synchronization. This is also proved in Sec. 4.2.

2. THE COMPARISON OF THE ”TT RELATIVITY” WITH
THE USUAL COVARIANT APPROACH AND WITH THE
”AT RELATIVITY”

The above mentioned approaches to SR are partly discussed in Refs. 5-8.
Rohrlich,(4) and also Gamba,(9) emphasized the role of the concept of same-
ness of a physical quantity for diﬀerent observers. This concept determines
the diﬀerence between the mentioned approaches and also it determines what
is to be understood as a relativistic theory. Our invariant approach to SR,
i.e., the ”TT relativity,” and the concept of sameness of a physical quantity
for diﬀerent observers in that approach, diﬀers not only from the ”AT rela-
tivity” approach but also from the usual covariant approach (including Refs.
4 and 9).

We ﬁrst explain the diﬀerence between the ”TT relativity” and the usual
covariant approach to SR. In the ”TT relativity” SR is understood as the
theory of a four-dimensional (4D) spacetime with pseudo-Euclidean geome-

3

try. All physical quantities (in the case when no basis has been introduced)
are described by true tensor ﬁelds, that are deﬁned on the 4D spacetime,
and that satisfy true tensor equations representing physical laws. When the
coordinate system has been introduced the physical quantities are mathe-
matically represented by the coordinate-based geometric quantities (CBGQs)
that satisfy the coordinate-based geometric equations (CBGEs). The CBGQs
contain both the components and the basis one-forms and vectors of the cho-
sen IFR. (Speaking in mathematical language a tensor of type (k,l) is deﬁned
as a linear function of k one-forms and l vectors (in old names, k covariant
vectors and l contravariant vectors) into the real numbers, see, e.g., Refs. 10-
12. If a coordinate system is chosen in some IFR then, in general, any tensor
quantity can be reconstructed from its components and from the basis vectors
and basis 1-forms of that frame, i.e., it can be written in a coordinate-based
geometric language, see, e.g., Ref. 12.) The symmetry transformations for
the metric gab, i.e., the isometries(10), leave the pseudo-Euclidean geometry of
4D spacetime of SR unchanged. At the same time they do not change the true
tensor quantities, or equivalently the CBGQs, in physical equations. Thus
isometries are what Rohrlich(4) calls the TT. In the ”TT relativity” diﬀerent
coordinatizations of an IFR are allowed and they are all equivalent in the
description of physical phenomena. Particularly two very diﬀerent coordina-
tizations, the Einstein (”e”)(3) and ”radio” (”r”)(13) coordinatization, will be
brieﬂy exposed and exploited in the paper. In the ”e” coordinatization the
Einstein synchronization(3) of distant clocks and cartesian space coordinates
xi are used in the chosen IFR. The main features of the ”r” coordinatization
will be given below, see also.Refs. 13, 6 and 7. The CBGQs representing
some 4D physical quantity in diﬀerent relatively moving IFRs, or in diﬀerent
coordinatizations of the chosen IFR, are all mathematically equal since they
are connected by the TT (i.e., the isometries). Thus they are really the same
quantity for diﬀerent observers, or in diﬀerent coordinatizations. Hence it
is appropriate to call the ”TT relativity” approach (which deals with the
true tensors or with the CBGQs) as an invariant approach in contrast to
the usual covariant approach (which deals with the components of tensors
taken in the ”e” coordinatization). We suppose that in the ”TT relativity”
such 4D tensor quantities are well-deﬁned not only mathematically but also
experimentally, as measurable quantities with real physical meaning. The
complete and well-deﬁned measurement from the ”TT relativity” viewpoint is
such measurement in which all parts of some 4D quantity are measured.

However in the usual covariant approach one does not deal with the true

4

tensors, or equivalently with CBGQs, but with the basis components of ten-
sors (mainly in the ”e” coordinatization) and with the equations of physics
written out in the component form. Mathematically speaking the concept of
a tensor in the usual covariant approach is deﬁned entirely in terms of the
transformation properties of its components relative to some coordinate sys-
tem. The deﬁnitions of the same quantity in Refs. 4 and 9 also refer to such
component form in the ”e” coordinatization of tensor quantities and tensor
equations. It is true that the components of some tensor refer to the same
tensor quantity considered in two relatively moving IFRs S and S′ and in
the ”e” coordinatization, but they cannot be equal, since the bases are not
included.

The third approach to SR uses the AT of some quantities. In contrast
to the TT the AT are not the transformations of spacetime tensors and they
do not refer to the same quantity. Thus they are not isometries and they
refer exclusively to the component form of tensor quantities and in that form
they transform only some components of the whole tensor quantity. In fact,
depending on the used AT, only a part of a 4D tensor quantity is transformed
by the AT. Such a part of a 4D quantity, when considered in diﬀerent IFRs (or
in diﬀerent coordinatizations of some IFR) corresponds to diﬀerent quantities
in 4D spacetime. Some examples of the AT are: the AT of the synchronously
deﬁned spatial length,(3) i.e., the Lorentz contraction (4−9) and the AT of the
temporal distance, i.e., the conventional dilatation of time that is introduced
in Ref. 3 and considered in Refs. 7 and 8. The formulation of SR which
uses the AT we call the ”AT relativity.” An example of such formulation is
Einstein’s formulation of SR which is based on his two postulates and which
deals with all the mentioned AT.

The diﬀerences between the ”TT relativity,” the usual covariant approach
and the ”AT relativity” will be examined considering some speciﬁc examples.
First the spacetime lengths, corresponding in ”3+1” picture to a moving rod
and to a moving clock, will be considered in the ”TT relativity.” Furthermore
the spatial and temporal distances for the same examples will be examined
in the ”AT relativity.” The comparison with the experiments on the Lorentz
contraction and the time dilatation is performed in Ref. 8 and it shows that
all experiments can be qualitatively and quantitatively explained by the ”TT
relativity,” while some experiments cannot be adequately explained by the
”AT relativity.” This will be also shown below considering Michelson-Morley
experiment.

Before doing this exploration we discuss the notation, diﬀerent coordina-

5

AB and xa

AB = xa
A and xa

tizations and the connections between them. In this paper I use the following
convention with regard to indices. Repeated indices imply summation. Latin
indices a, b, c, d, ... are to be read according to the abstract index notation,
see Ref. 10 Sec. 2.4; they ”...should be viewed as reminders of the number
and type of variables the tensor acts on, not as basis components.” They
designate geometric objects in 4D spacetime. Thus, e.g., la
A (a dis-
tance 4-vector la
B − xa
A between two events A and B whose position
4-vectors are xa
B) are (1,0) tensors and they are deﬁned independently
of any coordinate system. Greek indices run from 0 to 3, while latin indices
i, j, k, l, ... run from 1 to 3, and they both designate the components of some
, xi′
geometric object in some coordinate system, e.g., xµ(x0, xi) and xµ′
)
are two coordinate representations of the position 4-vector xa in two diﬀerent
inertial coordinate systems S and S′. Similarly the metric tensor gab denotes
a tensor of type (0,2) (whose Riemann curvature tensor Ra
bcd is everywhere
vanishing; the spacetime of SR is a ﬂat spacetime, and this deﬁnition in-
cludes not only the IFRs but also the accelerated frames of reference). This
geometric object gab is represented in the component form in some IFR S,
and in the ”e” coordinatization, i.e., in the {eµ} basis, by the 4 × 4 diago-
nal matrix of components of gab, gµν,e = diag(−1, 1, 1, 1), and this is usually
called the Minkowski metric tensor (the subscript ′e′ stands for the Einstein
coordinatization).

(x0′

Diﬀerent coordinatizations of some reference frame can be obtained using,
e.g., diﬀerent synchronizations. On the other hand diﬀerent synchronizations
are determined by the parameter ε in the relation t2 = t1 +ε(t3 −t1), where t1
and t3 are the times of departure and arrival, respectively, of the light signal,
read by the clock at A, and t2 is the time of reﬂection at B, read by the
clock at B, that has to be synchronized with the clock at A. In Einstein’s
synchronization convention ε = 1/2. We can also choose another coordinati-
zation, the ”everyday” or ”radio” (”r”) cordinatization,(13) which diﬀers from
the ”e” coordinatization by the diﬀerent procedure for the synchronization
In the ”r” synchronization ε = 0 and thus, in contrast
of distant clocks.
to the ”e” synchronization, there is an absolute simultaneity. As explained
in Ref. 13: ”For if we turn on the radio and set our clock by the standard
announcement ”...at the sound of the last tone, it will be 12 o’clock”, then
we have synchronized our clock with the studio clock in a manner that corre-
sponds to taking ε = 0 in t2 = t1 + ε(t3 − t1).” The ”r” synchronization is an
assymetric synchronization which leads to an assymetry in the coordinate,
one-way, speed of light.(13) However from the physical point of view the ”r”

6

coordinatization is completely equivalent to the ”e” coordinatization. This
also holds for all other permissible coordinatizations. Such situation really
happens in the ”TT relativity.” As explained above the ”TT relativity” deals
with true tensors and the true tensor equations (when no basis has been cho-
sen), or equivalently (when the coordinate basis has been introduced) with
the CBGQs and CBGEs. Thus the ”TT relativity” deals on the same foot-
ing with all possible coordinatizations of the chosen reference frame. As a
consequence the second Einstein postulate referred to the constancy of the
coordinate velocity of light, in general, does not hold in the ”TT relativity.”
Namely, only in Einstein’s coordinatization the coordinate, one-way, speed
of light is isotropic and constant.

In the following we shall also need the expression for the covariant 4D
Lorentz transformations La
b, which is independent of the chosen synchro-
nization, i.e., coordinatization of reference frames, see the works.(14,6,7) It
is

La

b ≡ La

b(v) = ga

b − ((2uavb)/c2) + (ua + va)(ub + vb)/c2(1 + γ),

(1)

where ua is the proper velocity 4-vector of a frame S with respect to itself
(only u0 6= 0, see also Ref. 13) ua = cna, na is the unit 4-vector along
the x0 axis of the frame S, and va is the proper velocity 4-vector of S′
relative to S. Further u · v = uava and γ = −u · v/c2. When we use the
”e” coordinatization then La
ν,e, the usual expression
for pure Lorentz transformation, but with vi
e (the proper velocity 4-vector
e /dτ = (γec, γevi
e is vµ
vµ
e), dτ ≡ dte/γe is the scalar proper-time, and
e /c2)1/2) replacing the components of the ordinary velocity 3-vector
γe ≡ (1−v2
V. Obviously, in the usual form, the Lorentz transformations connect two
coordinate representations, basis components (in the ”e” coordinatization)
e , xµ′
xµ
e refer to two relatively moving IFRs (with the
Minkowski metric tensors) S and S′,

e of a given event; xµ

b is represented by Lµ

e ≡ dxµ

e , xµ′

xµ′
e = Lµ′
j,e = δi

ν,exν
e ,
j + (γe − 1)vi

L0′
evje/v2
e .

Li′

0,e = γe, L0′

i,e = Li′

0,e = −γevi

e/c,

Since gµν,e is a diagonal matrix the space xi
xµ
e do have their usual meaning.

e and time te (x0

e ≡ cte) parts of

The invariant spacetime length (the Lorentz scalar) between two points

(events) in 4D spacetime is deﬁned as

(2)

(3)

l = (gablalb)1/2,

7

e

B − xa

e = (li

e = (li′

elie) − (l0

in S′ is connected with lµ

where la(lb) is the distance 4-vector between two events A and B, la =
A. In the ”e” coordinatization the geometrical quantity l2 can
la
AB = xa
be written in terms of its representation l2
e, with the separated spatial and
e)2. Such separation remains valid in
temporal parts, l2 = l2
other inertial coordinate systems with the Minkowski metric tensor, and in
e li′e) − (l0′
S′ one ﬁnds l2 = l′2
e in
S by the Lorentz transformation Lµ′

e )2, where lµ′
ν,e (2).
This is not so in the ”r” cordinatization. In order to explain this statement
we now expose the ”r” cordinatization in more detail. The basis vectors
in the ”r” cordinatization are constructed as in Refs. 13, 6 and 7. The
temporal basis vector e0 is the unit vector directed along the world line
of the clock at the origin. The spatial basis vectors by deﬁnition connect
simultaneous events, the event ”clock at rest at the origin reads 0 time” with
the event ”clock at rest at unit distance from the origin reads 0 time,” and
thus they are synchronization-dependent. The spatial basis vector ei connects
two above mentioned simultaneous events when Einstein’s synchronization
(ε = 1/2) of distant clocks is used. The temporal basis vector r0 is the same
as e0. The spatial basis vector ri connects two above mentioned simultaneous
events when ”radio” clock synchronization (ε = 0) of distant clocks is used.
The spatial basis vectors, e.g., r1, r1′ , r1′′.. are parallel and directed along
an (observer-independent) light line. Hence, two events that are ”everyday”
(”r”) simultaneous in S are also ”r” simultaneous for all other IFRs.

The connection between the basis vectors in the ”r” and ”e” coordinati-

zations is given(13,6,7) as

r0 = e0, ri = e0 + ei.

The geometry of the spacetime is generally deﬁned by the metric tensor
gab, which can be expand in a coordinate basis in terms of its components
as gab = gµνdxµ ⊗ dxν, and where dxµ ⊗ dxν is an outer product of the
basis 1-forms. The metric tensor gab becomes gab = gµν,rdxµ
r in the
coordinate-based geometric language and in the ”r” coordinatization, where
the basis components of the metric tensor are

r ⊗ dxν

g00,r = g0i,r = gi0,r = gij,r(i 6= j) = −1, gii,r = 0.

r , dxν
r ⊗ dxν

dxµ
dxµ
(0,2) tensors (the subscript ′r′ stands for the ”r” coordinatization).

r are the basis 1-forms in the ”r” coordinatization and in S, and
r is an outer product of the basis 1-forms, i.e., it is the basis for

8

The transformation matrix(6,7) T µ

ν,r transforms the ”e” coordinatization

to the ”r” coordinatization. The elements that are diﬀerent from zero are

T µ

µ,r = −T 0

i,r = 1.

For the sake of completeness we also quote the Lorentz transformation Lµ′
It can be easily found from La
in the ”r” coordinatization.
known gµν,r, and the elements that are diﬀerent from zero are
r , L0′

3,r = K − 1,

2,r = L0′

ν,r
b (1) and the

0,r = K, L0′
3,r = (−βr/K), L1′

1,r = 1/K,

r = Lµ′
x′µ
0,r = L1′
2,r = L3′

ν,rxν
2,r = L1′
3,r = 1,

L1′
L2′

(4)

r/dx0

r = l2

0,r = L1′

2,r = L3′

1,r = 1/K, L2′

3,r = (−βr/K), L1′

e one ﬁnds that l2 = l2

2,r = L1′
L1′
3,r = 1,where
r is the velocity of the frame S′ as mea-
K = (1 + 2βr)1/2, and βr = dx1
sured by the frame S, βr = βe/(1 − βe) and it ranges as −1/2 ≺ βr ≺ ∞.
Since gµν,r, in contrast to gµν,e, is not a diagonal matrix, then in the spacetime
length l, i.e., l2, the spatial and temporal parts are not separated. Expressing
lµ
r in terms of lµ
e, as it must be. It can be eas-
ily proved(13) that the ”r” synchronization is an assymetric synchronization
which leads to an assymetry in the measured ”one-way” velocity of light (for
r = ∞ whereas in the opposite direction c−
one direction c+
r = −c/2). The
round trip velocity, however, does not depend on the chosen synchronization
procedure, and it is ≡ c. Although in the ”e” coordinatization the space and
time components of the position 4-vector do have their usual meaning, i.e.,
as in the prerelativistic physics, and in l2
e the spatial and temporal parts are
separated, it does not mean that the ”e” coordinatization does have some
advantage relative to other coordinatizations and that the quantities in the
”e” coordinatization are more physical.

A symmetry transformation for the metric gab is called an isometry and it
does not change gab; if we denote an isometry as Φ∗ then (Φ∗g)ab = gab. Thus
an isometry leaves the pseudo-Euclidean geometry of 4D spacetime of SR
unchanged. An example of isometry is the covariant 4D Lorentz transforma-
tion La
b (1). In our terminology the TT are nothing else but - the isometries.
When the coordinate basis is introduced then, for example, the isometry
La
b (1) will be expressed as the isometries, the coordinate Lorentz trans-
formation Lµ′
ν,r (4) in the ”r”
coordinatization. In our treatment mainly the coordinate-based geometric

ν,e (2) in the ”e” coordinatization, or as Lµ′

9

form will be used for tensors representing physical quantities and for tensor
equations representing physical laws. The basis components of the CBGQs
will be transformed, e.g., by Lµ′
ν,e while the basis vectors eµ by the inverse
transformation (Lµ′

ν,e)−1 = Lµ

ν′,e.

e eµ = lµ

e eµ and lµ

r rµ = lµ′

B − xa
B).

The above consideration enable us to better explain the diﬀerence in the
concept of sameness of a physical quantity for the ”TT relativity” approach
and the usual covariant approach. We consider a simple example the dis-
AB = xa
tance 4-vector (the (1, 0) tensor) la
A between two events A and
B (with the position 4-vectors xa
A and xa
It can be equivalently repre-
sented in the coordinate-based geometric language in diﬀerent bases, {eµ}
and {rµ} in an IFR S, and {eµ′} and {rµ′} in a relatively moving IFR S′, as
e eµ′ = lµ′
la
AB = lµ
r rµ′, where, e.g., eµ are the basis 4-vectors,
e0 = (1, 0, 0, 0) and so on, and lµ
e are the basis components when the ”e”
coordinatization is chosen in some IFR S. The decompositions lµ
r rµ
(in an IFR S, and in the ”e” and ”r” coordinatizations respectively) and
lµ′
e eµ′ and lµ′
r rµ′ (in a relatively moving IFR S′, and in the ”e” and ”r” co-
ordinatizations respectively) of the true tensor la
AB are all mathematically
equal quantities. Thus they are really the same quantity considered in dif-
ferent relatively moving IFRs and in diﬀerent coordinatizations. This is the
treatment of the distance 4-vector in the ”TT relativity.” On the other hand
the usual covariant approach does not consider the whole tensor quantity,
e and lµ′
the distance 4-vector la
e
in the ”e” coordinatization (or(6−8) lµ
in the ”r” coordinatization).
Note that, in contrast to the above equalities for the CBGQs, the sets of
components, e.g., lµ
e , and thus
they are not the same quantity from the ”TT relativity” viewpoint. From
the mathematical point of view the components of, e.g., a (1, 0) tensor are its
values (real numbers) when the basis one-form, for example, eα, is its argu-
ment (see, e.g., Ref. 11). Thus, for example, la
e (where
eα is the basis one-form in an IFR S and in the ”e” coordinatization), while
AB(eα′
(where eα′
is the basis one-form in S′ and in the
la
”e” coordinatization). Obviously lα
e are not the same real numbers
since the basis one-forms eα and eα′

AB, but only the basis components, mainly lµ
r

e and lα′
are diﬀerent bases.

e , taken alone, are not equal, lµ

e eµ(eα) = lα

AB(eα) = lµ

r and lµ′

e and lµ′

e eµ′(eα′

e 6= lµ′

) = lα′

) = lµ′

e

2.1 The TT of the Spacetime Length

In order to explore the diﬀerence between the ”TT relativity” and the
”AT relativity” we consider the spacetime length for a moving rod and then
for a moving clock. The same examples will be also examined in the ”AT

10

relativity.”. Let us take, for simplicity, to work in 2D spacetime. Then we
also take a particular choice for the 4-vector la
AB. In the usual ”3+1” picture
it corresponds to an object, a rod, that is at rest in an IFR S and situated
along the common x1
e − axes; L0 is its rest length. The decomposition
of the geometric quantity la
AB in the ”e” coordinatization and in S is la
AB =
ee1 = 0e0 + L0e1, while in S′, where the rod is moving, it becomes
l0
ee0 + l1
la
AB = −βeγeL0e0′ + γeL0e1′, and, as explained above, it holds that

e, x1′

la
AB = 0e0 + L0e1 = −βeγeL0e0′ + γeL0e1′.

(5)

e

la
AB is a tensor of type (1,0) and in (5) it is written in the coordinate-based
geometric language in terms of basis vectors e0, e1, (e0′, e1′) and the basis
components lµ

e ) of a speciﬁc IFR.

e (lµ′

e eµ = lµ

r and lµ′

r rµ = lµ′

e eµ = lµ′

AB, i.e., the CBGQs lµ

r can be easily found from the known transformation matrix T µ

We note once again that in the ”TT relativity” the basis components lµ
e
in S and lµ′
in S′, when taken alone, do not represent the same 4D quantity.
Only the geometric quantity la
e eµ′ comprising
both, components and a basis, is the same 4D quantity for diﬀerent relatively
moving IFRs; Ref. 11: ”....the components tell only part of the story. The
basis contains the rest of information.” Of course we could equivalently work
in another coordinatization, e.g., the ”r” coordinatization, as shown in Refs.
e eµ′ = lµ′
6 and 7. Then we would ﬁnd that la
AB = lµ
r rµ′, where
rµ and rµ′ are the basis 4-vectors, and lµ
r are the basis components in
the ”r” coordinatization, and in S and S′ respectively. (The expressions for
r and lµ′
lµ
ν,r.)
We see from (5) that in the ”e” coordinatization, which is commonly used in
the ”AT relativity,” there is a dilatation of the spatial part l1′
e = γeL0 with
respect to l1
e = L0 and not the Lorentz contraction as predicted in the ”AT
relativity.” Hovewer it is clear from the above discussion that comparison of
AB in S and S′ is
only spatial parts of the components of the distance 4-vector la
physically meaningless in the ”TT relativity.” When only some components
of the whole tensor quantity are taken alone, then, in the ”TT relativity,”
they do not represent some deﬁnite physical quantity in the 4D spacetime.
Also we remark that always the whole tensor quantity la
AB comprising com-
ponents and a basis is transformed by the Lorentz transformation from S
to S′. Note that if l0
in any other IFR S′ will contain the time
component l0′
e 6= 0. The spacetime length for the considered case is frame and
coordinatization independent quantity l = (lµ
e,rlµ′e,r)1/2 = L0.
In the ”e” coordinatization and in S, the rest frame of the rod, where the
temporal part of lµ
e = 0, the spacetime length l is a measure of the spatial

e,rlµe,r)1/2 = (lµ′

e = 0 then lµ′

e is l0

e

11

distance, i.e., of the rest spatial length of the rod, as in the prerelativistic
physics.

In a similar manner we can choose another particular choice for the dis-
tance 4-vector la
AB, which will correspond to the well-known ”muon experi-
ment,” and which is interpreted in the ”AT relativity” in terms of the time
dilatation. First we consider this example in the ”TT relativity.” The dis-
AB will be examined in two relatively moving IFRs S and S′,
tance 4-vector la
i.e., in the neµ o and {eµ′} bases. The S frame is chosen to be the rest frame
of the muon. Two events are considered; the event A represents the creation
of the muon and the event B represents its decay after the lifetime τ0 in S.
The position 4-vectors of the events A and B in S are taken to be on the
world line of a standard clock that is at rest in the origin of S. The distance
4-vector la
A that connects the events A and B is directed along
the e0 basis vector from the event A toward the event B. This geometric
quantity can be written in the coordinate-based geometric language. Thus
it can be decomposed in two bases {eµ} and {eµ′} as

AB = xa

B − xa

la
AB = cτ0e0 + 0e1 = γcτ0e0′ + βeγecτ0e1′.

(6)

Similarly we can easily ﬁnd(6,7) the decompositions of la
AB in the ”r” coordina-
tization. We again see that these decompositions, containing both the basis
components and the basis vectors, are the same geometric quantity la
AB
does have only temporal parts in S, while in the {eµ′} basis la
AB contains not
only the temporal part but also the spatial part. It is visible from (6) that the
comparison of only temporal parts of the representations of the distance 4-
vector is physically meaningless in the ”TT relativity.” The spacetime length
l is always a well-deﬁned quantity in the ”TT relativity” and for this exam-
ple it is l = (lµ
0 )1/2.
Since in S the spatial parts l1
e,r are zero the spacetime length l in S
is a measure of the temporal distance, as in the prerelativistic physics; one
deﬁnes that c2τ 2

e lµ′e)1/2 = (lµ
e,r of lµ

r lµ′r)1/2 = (−c2τ 2

r lµr)1/2 = (lµ′

e lµe)1/2 = (lµ′

AB. la

0 = −lµ

e lµe = −lµ

r lµr.

2.2 The AT of the Spatial and Temporal Distances

In order to better explain the diﬀerence between the TT and the AT we
now consider the same two examples as above but from the point of view of
the conventional, i.e., Einstein’s(3) interpretations of the spatial length of the
moving rod and the temporal distance for the moving clock.

The synchronous deﬁnition of the spatial length, introduced by Einstein,(3)
deﬁnes length as the spatial distance between two spatial points on the (mov-

12

ing) object measured by simultaneity in the rest frame of the observer. One
can see that the concept of sameness of a physical quantity is quite diﬀerent
in the ”AT relativity” but in the ”TT relativity.” Thus for the Einstein def-
inition of the spatial length one considers only the component l1
e eµ
(when l0
e is taken = 0, i.e., the spatial ends of the rod at rest in S are taken
simultaneously at t = 0) and performs the Lorentz transformation Lµ
ν,e of
e (but not of the basis itself) from S′ to S, which
the basis components lµ
yields

e = L0 of lµ

e = γel0′
l0
e = γel1′
l1

e + γeβel1′
e
e + γeβel0′
e .

(7)

(8)

e one takes that the temporal part in S′ l0′

Then one retains only the transformation of the spatial component l1
e (the
second equation in (7)) neglecting completely the transformation of the tem-
poral part l0
e (the ﬁrst equation in (7)). Furthermore in the transformation
for l1
e = 0, ( i.e., the spatial ends of
the rod moving in S′ are taken simultaneously at some arbitrary t′ = b). The
quantity obtained in such a way will be denoted as L1′
e (it is not equal to l1′
e
appearing in the transformation equations (7)) This quantity L1′
e deﬁnes in
the ”AT relativity” the synchronously determined spatial length of the mov-
ing rod in S′. The mentioned procedure gives l1
e , that is, the famous
formula for the Lorentz contraction,

e = γeL1′

L1′
e = l1

e/γe = L0/γe,

This quantity, L1′
e = L0/γe, is the usual Lorentz contracted spatial length,
and the quantities L0 and L1′
e = L0/γe are considered in the ”AT relativ-
ity” to be the same quantity for observers in S and S′. The comparison
with the relation (5) clearly shows that the quantities L0 and L1′
e = L0/γe
are two diﬀerent and independent quantities in 4D spacetime. Thus, in the
”TT relativity” the same quantity for diﬀerent observers is the tensor quan-
tity, the 4-vector la
r rµ′; only one quantity
in 4D spacetime. However in the ”AT relativity” diﬀerent quantities in 4D
spacetime, the spatiall distances l1
e (or similarly in the ”r”
coordinatization) are considered as the same quantity for diﬀerent observers.
The relation for the Lorentz ”contraction” of the moving rod in the ”r” co-
ordinatization can be easily obtained performing the same procedure as in
the ”e” coordinatization, and it is

e = L0 and L1′

e eµ = lµ′

r rµ = lµ′

e eµ′ = lµ

AB = lµ

L1′
r = L0/K = (1 + 2βr)−1/2L0,

(9)

13

see also Refs. 6 and 7. We see from (9) that there is a length ”dilatation” ∞ ≻
L1′
r ≻ L0 for −1/2 ≺ βr ≺ 0 and the standard length ”contraction” L0 ≻
L1′
r ≻ 0 for positive βr, which clearly shows that the Lorentz contraction is
not physically correctly deﬁned transformation. Thus the Lorentz contraction
is the transformation that connects diﬀerent quantities (in 4D spacetime) in
S and S′, or in diﬀerent coordinatizations, which implies that it is - an AT.
The same example of the ”muon decay” will be now considered in the
”AT relativity” (see also(7)). In the ”e” coordinatization the events A and B
are again on the world line of a muon that is at rest in S. We shall see once
again that the concept of sameness of a physical quantity is quite diﬀerent in
the ”AT relativity.” Thus for this example one compares the basis component
l0
e = cτ0 of lµ
e eµ with the quantity, which is obtained from the basis component
l0′
e in the following manner; ﬁrst one performs the Lorentz transformation of
the basis components lµ
e (but not of the basis itself) from the muon rest frame
S to the frame S′ in which the muon is moving. This procedure yields

l0′
e = γel0
l1′
e = γel1

e − γeβel1
e
e − γeβel0
e.

Be = x1

e = 0 (i.e., that x1

Similarly as in the Lorentz contraction one now forgets the transformation
of the spatial part l1′
e (the second equation in (10)) and considers only the
transformation of the temporal part l0′
e (the ﬁrst equation in (10)). This is,
of course, an incorrect step from the ”TT relativity” viewpoint. Then taking
that l1
e (the ﬁrst equation in
(10)) one ﬁnds the new quantity which will be denoted as L0′
e (it is not the
same as l0′
e appearing in the transformation equations (10)). The temporal
distance l0
e deﬁnes in the ”AT relativity,” and in the ”e” basis, the muon
lifetime at rest, while L0′
is considered in the ”AT relativity,” and in the
”e” coordinatization, to deﬁne the lifetime of the moving muon in S′. The
relation connecting L0′
e with l0
e, which is obtained by the above procedure, is
then the well-known relation for the time dilatation,

Ae) in the equation for l0′

e

L0′
e /c = t′

e = γel0

e/c = τ0(1 − β2

e )−1/2.

By the same procedure we can ﬁnd(7) the relation for the time ”dilatation”
in the ”r” coordinatization

(10)

(11)

(12)

L0′
r = Kl0

r = (1 + 2βr)1/2cτ0.

14

This relation shows that the new quantity L0′
r , which deﬁnes in the ”AT rel-
ativity” the temporal separation in S′, where the clock is moving, is smaller
- time ”contraction” - but the temporal separation l0
r = cτ0 in S, where the
clock is at rest, for −1/2 ≺ βr ≺ 0, and it is larger - time ”dilatation” - for
0 ≺ βr ≺ ∞. From this consideration we conclude that in the ”TT relativity”
the same quantity for diﬀerent observers is the tensor quantity, the 4-vector
la
AB = lµ
r rµ′; only one quantity in 4D spacetime. How-
ever in the ”AT relativity” diﬀerent quantities in 4D spacetime, the temporal
distances l0
r are considered as the same quantity for diﬀerent
observers. This shows that the time ”dilatation” is the transformation con-
necting diﬀerent quantities (in 4D spacetime) in S and S′, or in diﬀerent
coordinatizations, which implies that it is - an AT.

e eµ = lµ′

r rµ = lµ′

e eµ′ = lµ

r, L0′

e, L0′

e , l0

We can compare the obtained results for the determination of the space-
time length in the ”TT relativity” and the determination of the spatial and
temporal distances in the ”AT relativity” with the existing experiments. This
comparison is presented in Ref. 8. It is shown there that the ”TT relativity”
results agree with all experiments that are complete from the ”TT relativ-
ity” viewpoint, i.e., in which all parts of the considered tensor quantity are
measured in the experiment. However the ”AT relativity” results agree only
with some of examined experiments.

The diﬀerence between the ”AT relativity” and the ”TT relativity” will

be now examined considering the famous Michelson-Morley(2) experiment.

3. THE MICHELSON-MORLEY EXPERIMENT

In the Michelson-Morley(2) experiment two light beams emitted by one
source are sent, by half-silvered mirror O, in orthogonal directions. These
partial beams of light traverse the two equal (of the length L) and perpen-
dicular arms OM1 (perpendicular to the motion) and OM2 (in the line of
motion) of Michelson’s interferometer. The behaviour of the interference
fringes produced on bringing together these two beams after reﬂection on
the mirrors M1 and M2 is examined. The experiment consists of looking for
a shift of the intereference fringes as the apparatus is rotated. The expected
maximum shift in the number of fringes (the measured quantity) on a 900
rotation is

△ N = △(φ2 − φ1)/2π,

(13)

where △(φ2−φ1) is the change in the phase diﬀerence when the interferometer
is rotated through 900. φ1 and φ2 are the phases of waves moving along the

15

paths OM1O and OM2O, respectively.

3.1 The Nonrelativistic Approach

In the nonrelativistic approach the speed of light in the preferred frame is
c. Then, on the ether hypothesis, one can determine the speed of light, in the
Earth frame, i.e., in the rest frame of the interferometer (the S frame). This
speed is (c2 −v2)1/2 for the path along an arm of the Michelson interferometer
oriented perpendicular to its motion. (The motion of the interferometer is at
velocity v relative to the preferred frame (the ether); the Earth together with
the interferometer moving with velocity v through the ether is equivalent to
the interferometer at rest with the ether streaming through it with velocity
−v.) Since in S both waves are brought together to the same spatial point
the phase diﬀerence φ2 − φ1 is determined only by the time diﬀerence t2 − t1;
φ2 − φ1 = 2π(t2 − t1)/T, where t1 and t2 are the times required for the
complete trips OM1O and OM2O, respectively, and T (=λ/c) is the period
of vibration of the light. From the known speed of light one ﬁnds that t1 is
t1 = tOM1 + tM1O, where tOM1 = L/c(1 − v2/c2)1/2 = tM1O, whence

t1 = 2L/c(1 − v2/c2)1/2.

(In the following we shall denote that tOM1 = t11 and tM1O = t12.) Similarly,
the speed of light on the path OM2 is c − v, and on the return path is c + v,
giving that t2 = tOM2 + tM2O = t21 + t22 = L/(c − v) + L/(c + v). Thence

t2 = 2L/c(1 − v2/c2).

We see that according to the nonrelativistic approach the time t1 is a little
less than the time t2, even though the mirrors M1 and M2 are equidistant
from O. The time diﬀerence t2 − t1 is

t2 − t1 = (2L/c)γ(γ − 1),

(γ = (1−v2/c2)−1/2) and to order v2/c2 it is t2 −t1 ≃ (L/c)(v2/c2). The phase
diﬀerence φ2 −φ1 is determined as φ2 −φ1 = ω(t21+t22)−ω(t11 +t12) = ω(t2−
t1) and the change in the phase diﬀerence when the interferometer is rotated
through 900 is △(φ2−φ1) = 2ω(t2−t1). Inserting it into △N (13) (ω = 2πc/λ,
and the measured quantity △N is in this case △N = 2(t2 − t1)c/λ) we ﬁnd
that △N = (4L/λ)γ(γ − 1). To the same order v2/c2 this △N is

△N ≃ (2L/λ)(v2/c2).

16

This result is obtained by the classical analysis in the Earth frame (the
interferometer rest frame).

OM ′
1

OM ′
1

= t′

2 − t′

1 and t2 = t′

2, whence t2 − t1 = t′

11 the mirror M1 moves to M ′

11. From the right triangle this observer ﬁnds t′

Let us now consider the same experiment in the preferred frame (the
S′ frame).
In the nonrelativistic theory the two frames are connected by
the Galilean transformations. Consequently the corresponding times in both
frames are equal, t1 = t′
1 and, supposing
that again the phase diﬀerence is determined only by the time diﬀerence,
△N ′ = △N. However, for the further purposes, it is worth to ﬁnd explicitly
t′
1 and t′
2 considering the experiment directly in the preferred frame. Since
the speed of light in the preferred frame is c, the preferred-frame observer
considers that the light travels a distance ct′
along the hypotenuse of a
triangle; in the same time t′
1, i.e., to
the right a distance vt′
11 =
L/c(1 − v2/c2)1/2. The return trip is again along the hypotenuse of a triangle
and the return time t′
11 (the half-silvered mirror O moved
1). The total time for such a zigzag path is, as it must be, t′
to O′ in t′
1 =
t′
11 + t′
12 = t1. For the arm oriented parallel to its motion the preferred-
frame observer considers that the light, when going from O to M ′
2, must
as t′
(we denote t′
traverse a distance L + vt′
21) at the speed c, whence
2O′′ is denoted as t′
21 = L/(c − v). The time t′
L + vt′
22 (the
M ′
half-silvered mirror O moved to O′′ in t′
2). Then, in a like manner, the time
22 = L/(c + v). The total time t′
22 for the return trip is t′
t′
22 is, as
2 = t2. The phase diﬀerence in S′ is determined as
it must be, equal to t2, t′
φ′
2 − φ′
22) − ω(t′
11 + t′
1), and it is φ′
1 = ω(t2 − t1).
Consequently the expected maximum shift in the number of fringes on a 900
rotation in the S′ frame is

1O′ = t′
M ′

12) = ω(t′

12 is = t′

21 and t′

1 = ω(t′

21 = ct′

21 + t′

21 + t′

2 = t′

2 − φ′

2 − t′

OM ′
2

OM ′
2

△ N ′ = △N ≃ (2L/λ)(v2/c2).

(14)

It has to be noted here that the same ω, i.e., T, or λ, is used for all paths,
both in S and S′. This discussion shows that the nonrelativistic theory is a
consistent theory giving the same △N in both frames. However it does not
agree with the experiment. Namely Michelson and Morley found from their
experiment that was no observable fringe shift.

3.2 The Traditional ”AT Relativity” Approach

Next we examine the same experiment in the traditional ”AT relativity”
approach. We remark that the experiment is usually discussed only in the

17

”e” coordinatization, and again, as in the nonrelativistic theory, the phase
diﬀerence φ2 − φ1 is considered to be determined only by the time diﬀerence
t2 − t1. In the ”AT relativity” and in the ”e” coordinatization it is postulated
(Einstein’s second postulate), in contrast to the nonrelativistic theory, that
light always travels with speed c.

Hence in the S frame (the rest frame of the interferometer), and with the
same notation as in the preceding section, we ﬁnd t1 = t11+t12 = L/c+L/c =
2L/c and also t2 = t21 + t22 = 2L/c = t1. With the assumption that only the
time diﬀerence t2 − t1 matters, it follows that φ2 − φ1 = ω(t21 + t22) − ω(t11 +
t12) = ω(t2 − t1) = 0, whence △N = 0, in agreement with the experiment.

In the S′ frame (the preferred frame) the time t′

1 is determined in the same
way as in the nonrelativistic theory, i.e., supposing that a zigzag path is taken
by the light beam in a moving ”light clock”. Thus, the light-travel time t′
1
is exactly equal to that one in the nonrelativistic theory, t′
12 =
2L/c(1 − v2/c2)1/2. Comparing with t1 = 2L/c we see that, in contrast to
the nonrelativistic theory, it takes a longer time for light to go from end to
end in the moving clock but in the stationary clock,

11 + t′

1 = t′

t′
1 = t1/(1 − v2/c2)1/2 = γt1.

(15)

This relation is Eq. (11) for the dilatation of time in the ”e” coordinatiza-
tion that is considered in Sec. 2.2. The presented derivation is the usual
way in which it is shown how, in the ”AT relativity,” the time dilatation is
forced upon us by the constancy of the speed of light, see also, e.g., Ref. 15
p.15-6 and Ref. 16 p.359, or an often cited paper on modern tests of special
relativity.(17) However, in the ”AT relativity,” the light-travel time t′
2 is de-
termined by invoking the Lorentz contraction. It is argued that a preferred
frame observer measures the length of the arm oriented parallel to its motion
to be contracted to a length L′ = L(1 − v2/c2)1/2, Eq. (8) in Sec. 2.2. Then
2 is determined in the same way as in the nonrelativistic theory but with L′
t′
22 = (L′/(c − v)) + (L′/(c + v)), i.e.,
21 + t′
replacing the rest length L, t′
t′
2 = 2L/c(1 − v2/c2)1/2 = γt2 = t′
1.

2 = t′

(16)

Thence t′

2 − t′
1 = 0 and
2 − φ′
φ′

1 = ω(t′

21 + t′

22) − ω(t′

11 + t′

12) = ω(t′

2 − t′

1) = 0,

where again, in the same way as in the nonrelativistic theory, the same ω,
i.e., T, or λ, is used for all paths, both in S and S′. As a consequence it is

18

found in the ”AT relativity” that △N ′ in the S′ frame is the same as △N in
the S frame

△ N ′ = △N = 0.

(17)

We quoted such usual derivation in order to illustrate how the time dilatation
and the Lorentz contraction are used in the ”AT relativity” to show the
agreement between the theory and the famous Michelson-Morley experiment.
Although this procedure is generally accepted by the majority of physicists
as a correct one and quoted in all textbooks on the subject, we note that such
an explanation of the null result of the experiment is very awkward and does
not use at all the 4D symmetry of the spacetime. The derivation deals with
the temporal and spatial distances as well deﬁned quantities, i.e., in a similar
way as in the prerelativistic physics, and then in an artiﬁcial way introduces
the changes in these distances due to the motion. Our results from Secs. 2.,
2.1, and 2.2 reveal why the Lorentz contraction and the time dilatation are
not physically correctly deﬁned transformations. Consequently the approach
which uses them for the explanation of the experimental results cannot be in
agreement with the 4D symmetry of the 4D spacetime.

3.3 Driscoll’s ”AT Relativity” Approach

In Ref. 1 the above discussed ”AT relativity” calculation in the ”e” coor-
dinatization (Sec. 3.2) of the fring shift in the Michelson-Morley experiment
is repeated, and, of course, the observed null fringe shift is obtained. This
result is independent of changes of v, the relative velocity of S (the rest frame
of the interferometer) and S′ (in S′ the interferometer is moving), and/or θ,
the angle that the undivided ray from the source to the beam divider makes
with v. However, it is noticed(1) that in such a traditional calculation of
△(φ2 − φ1) only path lengths (optical or geometrical), i.e., the temporal dis-
tances (for example, the times t1 and t2 required for the complete trips OM1O
and OM2O, respectively), are considered. The Doppler eﬀect on wavelength
in the S′ frame, in which the interferometer is moving, is not taken into
account.

Then the same calculation of △(φ′

2−φ′

1) as the traditional one is performed,(1)

but determing the increment of phase along some path, e.g. OM ′
1 in S′, not
only by the segment of geometric path length (i.e., the temporal distance for
that path) but also by the wavelength in that segment (i.e., the frequency
of the wave in that segment). Accordingly, the phase diﬀerence (in our no-
2, in the S′ frame, between the ray along the vertical path
tation) φ′

1 − φ′

19

1O′ and that one along the longitudinal path OM ′

2O′′ respectively, is

OM ′
found (see(1)) to be

(φ′

1 − φ′

2)(b)/2π = 2(Lν/c)(1 + ε + β2) − 2(Lν/c)(1 + 2β2)

= 2(Lν/c)(ε − β2),

(18)

Eqs.(23-25) in Ref. 1. L is the length of the segment OM2 and L = L(1 + ε)
(ε ≪ 1) is taken in Ref. 1 to be the length of the arm OM1. As explained:(1)
”The diﬀerence L − L = εL is usually a few wavelengths (≺ 25) and is essen-
tial for obtaining useful interference fringes.” L, L and ν are determined in
S, the rest frame of the interferometer. In this expression the Doppler eﬀect
of v on the frequencies, and the Lorentz contraction of the longitudinal arm,
are taken into account. In a like manner Driscoll ﬁnds the phase diﬀerence
in the case when the interferometer is rotated through 900

(φ′

1 − φ′

2)(a)/2π = 2(Lν/c)(1 + ε + 2β2) − 2(Lν/c)(1 + β2)

= 2(Lν/c)(ε + β2),

Eqs.(19-21) in Ref. 1. Hence it is found(1) a ”surprising” non-null fringe shift

′

△ N

= △(φ

′
2 − φ
2)(b) − (φ′

′
1)/2π = 4(Lν/c)β2,
1 − φ′

2 − φ′

1 − φ′

1) = (φ′

where △(φ′
2)(a), and we see that the entire
fringe shift is due to the Doppler shift. From the non-null result (20) the au-
thor of(1) concluded: ”that the Maxwell-Einstein electromagnetic equations
and special relativity jointly are disproved, not conﬁrmed, by the Michelson-
Morley experiment.” However such a conclusion cannot be drawn from the
result (20). The origin of the appearance of △N ′ 6= 0 (20) is quite diﬀerent
than that considered in Ref. 1, and it will be explained below. While(1)
investigates those changes which are caused by the Doppler eﬀect another
work(18) considers the changes in the usual derivation of △N ′, which are
caused by the aberration of light. Both changes are examined only in the
”e” coordinatization, and both would be diﬀerent in, e.g., the ”r” coordi-
natization. This means that △N ′ in S′ will be dependent on the chosen
synchronization. Also, both works(1,18) deal with the Lorentz contraction in
the same way as in the traditional analysis. But the Lorentz contraction is
an AT, as shown in Secs. 2., 2.1, and 2.2. Consequently, the traditional
analysis and the works(1,18) belong to the ”AT relativity,” which, as found in
Ref. 8, and as follows from the dependence of the theoretical results on the

(19)

(20)

20

chosen synchronization, is not capable to explain in a satisfactory manner
the results of the Michelson-Morley experiment.

4. THE ”TT RELATIVITY” APPROACH

Next we examine the Michelson-Morley experiment from the ”TT rela-
tivity” viewpoint. The relevant quantity is the phase of a light wave, and it
is (when written in the abstract index notation)

φ = kagablb,

(21)

where ka is the propagation 4-vector, gab is the metric tensor and lb is the
distance 4-vector. All quantities in (21) are true tensor quantities. As dis-
cussed in Sec. 2. these quantities can be written in the coordinate-based
geometric language and, e.g., the decompositions of ka in S and S′ and in
the ”e” and ”r” coordinatizations are
e eµ = kµ′

r rµ = kµ′

e eµ′ = kµ

ka = kµ

r rµ′,

where the basis components kµ of the CBGQ in the ”e” coordinatization
are transformed by Lµ′
ν,e (2), while the basis vectors eµ are transformed by
the inverse transformation (Lµ′
ν′,e. Similarly holds for the ”r”
coordinatization where the Lorentz transformation Lµ′
ν,r (4) has to be used.
By the same reasoning the phase φ (21) is given in the coordinate-based
geometric language as

ν,e)−1 = Lµ

(22)

φ = kµ

e = kµ′

e gµν,e lν′

r = kµ′
r gµν,r lν′
r gµν,r lν
r ,
ν,e (2) and also Lµ′

e gµν,e lν
e = kµ
(Note that the Lorentz transformation Lµ′
ν,r (4) are the
TT, i.e., the isometries, and hence gµν,e = gµ′ν′,e, gµν,r = gµ′ν′,r, what is al-
ready taken into account in (22).) The traditional derivation of △N (Sec.
3.2) deals, as already said, only with the calculation of t1 and t2 in S and t′
and t′
2 in S′, but does not take into account either the changes in frequencies
due to the Doppler eﬀect or the aberration of light. The ”AT relativity”
calculations(1,18) improve the traditional procedure taking into account the
changes in frequencies,(1) and the aberration of light.(18) But all these ap-
proaches explain the experiments using the AT, the Lorentz contraction and
the time dilatation, and furthermore they always work only in the ”e” co-
ordinatization. None of the ”AT relativity” calculations deals with the true
tensors or with the CBGQs (comprising both components and a basis). In

1

21

this case such 4D tensor quantity is the phase (21) or (22). It will be shown
here that the non-null theoretical result obtained in Ref. 1 is a consequence
of the fact that Driscoll’s calculation also belongs to the ”AT relativity” ap-
proach. It considers only a part of the 4D tensor quantity φ (21), or (22), uses
the AT and works only in the ”e” coordinatization. In the ”TT relativity”
approach to special relativity neither the Doppler eﬀect nor the aberration of
light exist separately as well deﬁned physical phenomena. The separate con-
tributions to φ (21), or (22), of the ωt (i.e., k0l0) factor (1) and kl (i.e., kili)
factor (18) are, in general case, meaningless in the ”TT relativity.” From the
”TT relativity” viewpoint only their indivisible unity, the phase φ (21), or
(22), is a correctly deﬁned 4D quantity. All quantities in (21), i.e., ka, gab,
lb and φ, are the true tensor quantities, which means that in all relatively
moving IFRs and in all permissible coordinatizations always the same 4D
quantity, e.g., ka, or lb, or φ, is considered. (Eq. (22) shows it for φ.) This is
not the case in the ”AT relativity” where, for example, the relation t′
1 = γt1
is not the Lorentz transformation of some 4D quantity, and t′
1 and t1 do
not correspond to the same 4D quantity considered in S′ and S respectively
but to diﬀerent 4D quantities, as can be clearly seen from Sec. 2.2 (see Eq.
(11)). Only in the ”e” coordinatization the ωt and kl factors can be con-
sidered separately. Therefore, and in order to retain the similarity with the
prerelativistic and the ”AT relativity” considerations, we ﬁrst determine φ
(21), (22), in the ”e” coordinatization and in the S frame (the rest frame of
the interferometer). This means that φ will be calculated from (22) as the
CBGQ φ = kµ

e gµν,e lν
e .

Let now A, B and A1 denote the events; the departure of the transverse
ray from the half-silvered mirror O, the reﬂection of this ray on the mirror M1
and the arrival of this beam of light after the round trip on the half-silvered
mirror O, respectively. In the same way we have, for the longitudinal arm
of the inteferometer, the corresponding events A, C and A2. To simplify the
notation we omit the subscript ’e’ in all quantities. Then kµ
AB (the
basis components of ka
AB and la
AB in the ”e” coordinatization and in S) for
the wave on the trip OM1 (the events A and B) are kµ
AB = (ω/c, 0, 2π/λ, 0),
lµ
AB = (ctM1, 0, L, 0). For the wave on the return trip M1O, (the events B
BA1 = (ω/c, 0, −2π/λ, 0) and lµ
and A1) kµ
BA1 = (ctM1, 0, −L, 0). Hence the
increment of phase φ1 for the the round trip OM1O, is

AB and lµ

φ1 = kµ

AB lµAB + kµ

BA1lµBA1 = 2(−ωtM1 + (2π/λ)L),

(23)

where ω is the angular frequency and, for the sake of comparison with,(1) the

22

and lµ′

length of the arm OM1 is taken to be L = L(1 + ε), and L is the length
of the segment OM2. Using the Lorentz transformation Lµ′
ν,e (2) one can
ﬁnd kµ′
in the ”e” coordinatization and in S′ for the same trips as in
1 in S′ is the same as in S, φ′
S. Then it can be easily shown that φ′
1 = φ1.
Also using the transformation matrix T µ
ν,r (Sec. 2), which transforms the ”e”
coordinatization to the ”r” coordinatization, one can get all quantities in the
”r” coordinatization and in S, and then by the Lorentz transformation Lµ′
ν,r
(4) these quantities can be determined in the ”r” coordinatization and in S′.
φ1 will be always the same in accordance with (22). Note that gµν,r from
Sec. 2 has to be used in the calculation of φ in the ”r” coordinatization. As
AB,r: kµ
an example we quote kµ
AB,r = ((ω/c) − 2π/λ, 0, 2π/λ, 0) and
lµ
AB,r = (ctM1 − L, 0, L, 0). Hence, using gµν,r one easily ﬁnds that

AB,r and lµ

φAB,r = kµ

r gµν,r lν

r = (−ωtM1 + (2π/λ)L) = φAB,e.

For further purposes we shall also need kµ′
((γω/c)(1+β)−2π/λ, −βγω/c, 2π/λ, 0) and lµ′
which yields

AB,r and lµ′

AB,r. They are kµ′
AB,r = (γctM1(1+β)−L, −βγctM1, L, 0)

AB,r =

AB,r = φAB,r = φ′
φ′
AC and lµ

AB,e = φAB,e.

In a like manner we ﬁnd kµ
AC for the wave on the trip OM2, (the
corresponding events are A and C) as kµ
AC = (ω/c, 2π/λ, 0, 0) and lµ
AC =
(ctM2, L, 0, 0). For the wave on the return trip M2O (the corresponding events
are C and A2) kµ
CA2 = (ctM2, −L, 0, 0)), whence

CA2 = (ω/c, −2π/λ, 0, 0) and lµ

φ2 = kµ

AC lµAC + kµ

CA2lµCA2 = 2(−ωtM2 + (2π/λ)L).

(24)

Of course one ﬁnds the same φ2 in S and S′ and in the ”e” and ”r” coordi-
natizations. Hence

φ1 − φ2 = −2ω(tM1 − tM2) + 2(2π/λ)(L − L).

(25)

Particularly for L = L, and consequently tM1 = tM2, one ﬁnds φ1 − φ2 = 0.
It can be easily shown that the same diﬀerence of phase (25) is obtained in
the case when the interferometer is rotated through 900, whence we ﬁnd that
△(φ1 − φ2) = 0, and △N = 0. According to the construction φ (21), or (22),
is a frame independent quantity and it also does not depend on the chosen
coordinatization in a considered IFR. Thus we conclude that

△ Ne = △N ′

e = △Nr = △N ′

r = 0.

(26)

23

This result is in a complete agreement with the Michelson-Morley(2) experi-
ment.

4.1 Explanation of Driscoll’s Non-Null Fringe Shift

e l0′e in the calculation of the increment of phase φ′

Driscoll’s improvement of the traditional ”AT relativity” derivation of the
fringe shift can be easily obtained from our ”TT relativity” approach taking
only the product k0′
e in S′
in which the apparatus is moving. All quantities in the ”e” coordinatization
and in S′ are obtained by the Lorentz transformation Lµ′
ν,e (2) from the
corresponding ones in S. We remark once again that Driscoll’s ”AT relativity”
approach refers only to the ”e” coordinatization (of course it holds for the
traditional ”AT relativity” approach from Sec. 3.2 as well). Therefore we
again omit the subscript ′e′ in all quantities. Then we ﬁnd that in the S′
frame kµ′
AB = (γctM1, −βγctM1, L, 0), and
also kµ′
BA1 = (γctM1, −βγctM1, −L, 0),
giving that

AB = (γω/c, −βγω/c, 2π/λ, 0) and lµ′
BA1 = (γω/c, −βγω/c, −2π/λ, 0) and lµ′

(−1/2π)(k0′

ABl0′AB + k0′

BA1l0′BA1) = 2γ2νtM1 ≃ 2(Lν/c)(1 + ε + β2),

(27)

which is exactly Driscoll’s result △PHb; for our notation see (18). Similarly
one ﬁnds that

(−1/2π)(k0′

ACl0′AC + k0′

CA2l0′CA2) = 2γ2(νtM2 + β2L/λ)
≃ 2(Lν/c)(1 + 2β2),

(28)

which is Driscoll’s result △PΞb, see (18). In the same way we can ﬁnd in S′
Driscoll’s result (19) and ﬁnally the non-null fringe shift (20).

We remark that the non-null fringe shift (20) would be quite diﬀerent in
another coordinatization, e.g., in the ”r” coordinatization, since only a part
k0′
e l0′e of the whole 4D tensor quantity φ (21) or (22) is considered. The basis
components of the metric tensor in the ”r” coordinatization, i.e., gµν,r, do
not form a diagonal matrix and therefore the temporal and spatial parts of
φ = kµ
r gµν,r lν
r cannot be separated. From the above expressions we can easily
show that the part k0′
r (i.e., k0′
r l0′ r) is quite diﬀerent but the Driscoll’s
expression k0′
e g00,e l0′
e l0′ e). However the physics must not depend on
the chosen coordinatization. Thus when only a part of the whole phase φ
(21) or (22) is taken into account then it leads to an unphysical result.

r g00,r l0′
e (i.e., k0′

The same calculation of ki′

e, shows that this term exactly cancel the k0′

li′, the contribution of the spatial parts of kµ′
l0′ contribution

and lµ′ to △N ′

24

(Driscoll’s non-null fringe shift (20)), yielding that △N ′
e = △Ne = 0. Thus
the ”TT relativity”approach to SR naturally explaines the reason for the
existence of Driscoll’s non-null fringe shift (20).

4.2 Explanation of the ”Apparent” Agreement Between the Tradi-
tional Analysis and the Experiment

The results of the usual ”AT relativity” calculation, which are presented
in Sec. 3.2, can be easily explained from our true tensor formulation of SR
taking only the part k0
e l0′e of the whole phase φ (21) or (22) in the calculation
e in S′. In contrast to Driscoll’s treatment the
of the increment of phase φ′
traditional analysis considers the part k0
el0e (of the whole phase φ (21), (22))
e l0′e in S′, in which the
in S, the rest frame of the interferometer, and k0
e is not changed in transition from S to S′. Thus the
apparatus is moving. k0
increment of phase φ1 for the round trip OM1O in S, is

φ1 = k0

AB g00,el0

AB + k0

BA1g00,el0

BA1 = −2(ω/c)(ctM1) = −2ωtM1.

(29)

In the S′ frame we ﬁnd for the same trip that

φ′
1 = k0

AB l0′AB + k0

BA1l0′BA1 = −2(ω/c)(γctM1) = −2ω(γtM1).

(30)

This is exactly the result obtained in the traditional analysis in Sec. 3.2,
which is inerpreted as that there is a ”time dilatation” t′
1 = γt1. In the same
way we ﬁnd that the increment of phase φ2 for the round trip OM2O in S, is

φ2 = k0

AC l0AC + k0

CA2l0CA2 = −2ωtM2,

(31)

and φ′

2 in S′ is
φ′
2 = k0

AC l0′AC + k0

CA2l0′CA2 = −2(ω/c)(γctM2) = −2ω(γtM2).

(32)

This is again the result of the traditional analysis, the ”time dilatation,”
t′
2 = γt2. For t1 = t2, i.e., for L = L, one ﬁnally ﬁnds the null fringe shift that
is obtained in the traditional analysis △N ′
e = △Ne = 0. We see that such a
null fringe shift is obtained taking into account only a part of the whole phase
φ (21) or (22), and additionally, in that part, k0
e is not changed in transition
from S to S′. Obviously this correct result follows from a physically incorrect
treatment the phase φ (21) or (22). Furthermore it has to be noted that the
usual calculation is always done only in the ”e” coordinatization.

25

Since only the part k0

el0e of the whole phase φ (21) or (22) is taken into
account (and also k0′
e ) the results of the usual ”AT relativity” calcu-
lation are coordinatization dependent. We explicitly show it using the ”r”
coordinatization.

e = k0

In the ”r” coordinatization the increment of phase φr is calculated from
r g00,r l0′
r in S′. Hence we ﬁnd that φ1r for

r in S and from φ′

r = k0

r g00,r l0

φr = k0
the round trip OM1O in S is

and φ2r for the round trip OM2O in S is

φ1r = −2(ωtM1 + (2π/λ)L),

φ2r = −2(ωtM2 + (2π/λ)L).

For L = L, and consequently tM1 = tM2, we ﬁnd that φ1r − φ2r = 0, whence
△Nr = 0. Remark that the phases φ1r and φ2r diﬀer from the corresponding
phases φ1e and φ2e in the ”e” coordinatization. As shown above this is not
the case when the whole phase φ (21) or (22) is taken into account.

However, in S′, we ﬁnd for the same trips that

Obviously φ′

1r − φ′

2r 6= 0 and consequently it leads to the non-null fringe shift

φ′
1r = −2(γωtM1(1 + β) + (2π/λ)L),

φ′
2r = −2γ2(1 + β2)(ωtM2 + (2π/λ)L).

△ N ′

r 6= 0,

which holds even in the case when tM1 = tM2. This result clearly shows
that the agreement between the usual ”AT relativity” calculation and the
Michelson-Morley experiment is only an ”apparent” agreement. It is achieved
by an incorrect procedure and it holds only in the ”e” coordinatization.
We also remark that the traditional analysis, i.e., the ”AT relativity,” gives
diﬀerent values for the phases, e.g., φ1e, φ′
1r, since only a part
of the whole phase φ (21) or (22) is considered. These phases are frame
and coordinatization dependent quantities. When the whole phase φ (21) or
(22) is taken into account, i.e., in ”TT relativity,” all the mentioned phases
are exactly equal quantities; they are the same, frame and coordinatization
independent, quantity.

1e, φ1r and φ′

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

26

5. CONCLUSIONS

In(1) the usual ”relativistic” calculation of the fringe shift in the Michelson-
Morley experiment is objected on the grounds that it does not take into ac-
count the changes in frequencies due to the Doppler eﬀect. Our discussion
shows that Driscoll’s calculation is not free from ambiguities either. It also
does not work with the complete expression for the phase of the light waves
((21) or (22)) travelling along the arms of the Michelson-Morley interferome-
ter. Both calculations are shown to belong to the ”AT relativity,” which does
not deal with the whole 4D tensor quantities and their true transformations.
In this paper we have exposed the approach to SR that deals with true tensors
and the true tensor equations (when no basis is chosen) or equivalently with
the CBGQs and equations (when the coordinate basis is introduced), i.e.,
the ”TT relativity.” This approach uses the whole phase φ (21) or (22) and
yields in all IFRs and in all permissible coordinatizations the observed null
fringe shift. At the same time it successfully explains an apparent agreement
(it holds only in the ”e” coordinatization) of the traditional ”AT relativity”
approach and disagreement of Driscoll’s ”AT relativity” approach with the
experimental results. They are simply consequences of the use of only some
parts of the 4D tensor quantity φ (21) or (22) and the use of the AT, the
Lorentz contraction and the time dilatation, in the calculation of the incre-
ment of phase. The results of the traditional analysis are exactly obtained
taking into account only the part k0
el0′e of the whole phase φ (21) or (22) in
e in S′. Similarly the results of
the calculation of the increment of phase φ′
Driscoll’s analysis are obtained taking only the part k0′
e l0′e in the calculation
e in S′. In conclusion, the analysis performed in this paper reveals that
of φ′
the Michelson-Morley experiment does not conﬁrm either the validity of the
traditional Einstein approach or the validity of Driscoll’s approach. In other
words, the experiment does not conﬁrm the ”AT relativity” approach, but
rather an invariant ”TT relavitity” approach to SR.

27

References
1. R.B. Driscoll, Phys. Essays 10, 394 (1997).
2. A.A. Michelson and E.W. Morley, Philos. Mag. 24, 449 (1887); Am. J.
Sci. 34, 333 (1887).
3. A. Einstein, Ann. Physik 17, 891 (1905), tr. by W. Perrett and G.B.

Jeﬀery, in The principle of relativity (Dover, New York).

4. F. Rohrlich, Nuovo Cimento B 45, 76 (1966).
5. T.Ivezi´c, Found. Phys. Lett. 12, 105 (1999).
6. T.Ivezi´c, Found. Phys. Lett. 12, 507 (1999).
7. T.Ivezi´c, preprint Lanl Archives: physics/0012048; to be published

in Found. Phys.

8. T. Ivezi´c, preprint Lanl Archives: physics/0007031.
9. A. Gamba, Am. J. Phys. 35, 83 (1967).
10. R.M. Wald, General relativity (The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

11. B.F. Schutz, A ﬁrst course in general relativity (Cambridge University

12. C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation, (Freeman,

1984).

Press, Cambridge, 1985).

San Francisco, 1970).

13. C. Leubner, K. Auﬁnger and P. Krumm, Eur. J. Phys. 13, 170 (1992).
14. D.E. Fahnline, Am. J. Phys. 50, 818 (1982).
15. R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leightonn and M. Sands, The Feynman lectures on

physics, Vol.1 (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1964).

16. C. Kittel, W.D. Knight and M.A. Ruderman, Mechanics (McGraw-Hill,

New York, 1965).

17. M.P. Haugan and C.M. Will, Phys. Today 40, 69 (1987).
18. R.A. Schumacher, Am.J. Phys. 62, 609 (1994).

28

