1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
1
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On p-adic Stochastic Dynamics,
Supersymmetry and the Riemann Conjecture

Carlos Castro ∗

(dedicated to the memory of Michael Conard)

Abstract

We construct ( assuming the quantum inverse scattering problem
has a solution ) the operator that yields the zeroes of the Riemman
zeta function by deﬁning explicitly the supersymmetric quantum me-
chanical model ( SUSY QM ) associated with the p-adic stochas-
tic dynamics of a particle undergoing a Brownian random walk .
The zig-zagging occurs after collisions with an inﬁnite array of scat-
tering centers that f luctuate randomly. Since the prime numbers
are themselves randomly distributed, this physical system can be
ref ormulated as the scattering of the particle about the inﬁnite loca-
tions of the prime numbers positions. We are able then to reformulate
such p-adic stochastic process, that has an underlying hidden Parisi-
Sourlas supersymmetry, as the ef f ective motion of a particle in a
potential due to an inﬁnite collection of p-adic harmonic oscillators
with fundamental (Wick-rotated imaginary ) frequencies ωp = ilog p
(p is a prime ) and whose harmonics are ωp,n = ilog pn. The p-adic
harmonic oscillator potential allow us to determine a one-to-one cor-
respondence between the amplitudes of oscillations an ( and phases )
with the imaginary zeroes of zeta λn , after solving the inverse scat-
tering problem.

The Riemann conjecture that the nontrivial zeroes of the zeta function lie on
the vertical line z = 1/2 + iy of the complex plane remains one of the most
∗Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems,Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta,

GA. 30314; e-mail: castro@ctsps.cau.edu

1

important unsolved problems in pure Mathematics. Hilbert-Polya suggested
long ago that the zeroes of zeta could have an spectral interpretation in terms
of the eigenvalues of a suitable self adjoint trace class diﬀerential operator.
Finding such operator, if it exists, will be tantamount of proving the Riemann
conjecture. There is a related analogy with the Laplace-Beltrami operator in
the Hyperbolic plane , a surface of constant negative curvature. The motion
of a billiard in such surfaces is a typical example of classical chaotic motion.
The Selberg zeta function associated with such Laplace-Beltrami operator
admits zeroes which can be related to the energy eigenvalues of such opera-
tor. Since the zeroes of the Riemann zeta function is deeply connected with
the random distribution of primes it has been suggested by many authors
that the spectral properties of the zeroes of zeta may be associated with
the random statistical ﬂuctuations of the energy levels ( quantum chaos) of
a classical chaotic system , random matrix theory [1],...,turbulence in the
cloud formation and distribution of vortices and eddies in the form of the
logarithmic spiral with the golden mean winding number [2] , etc.
Montgomery has shown [3] that the two-level correlation function of the
imaginary parts of the zeroes of zeta is exactly the same expression found
by Wigner-Dyson using Random Matrices techniques : the two-level spec-
tral density correlation function of the Brownian-like discrete level statistical
dynamics associated with the random matrix model of a Gaussian Unitary
Ensemble ( GUE) turned out to be :

1 − [

sin(πx)
πx

]2.

(1)

πx

The function sin(πx)
appears very natural as well in the self similarity of the
iterated symbolic dynamics of the Fibonacci (rabbit) numbers sequence .
The golden mean is the n = ∞ limit of the ratio of two successive Fibonacci
numbers. Physically the relation (1) means that there is a repulsion of the
energy levels, a signal of chaos . For signals of chaos in matrix theory ( Yang-
Mills ) and its relation to the holographic properties in string and M theory
we refer to the important work of Volovich et al [4]. Since string theory
has a deep connection to the statistical properties of random surfaces, index
theory for fractal p-branes in Cantorian fractal spacetime was considered by
the author and Mahecha [16] in connection to the Riemman zeta function.
The spectrum of drums ( membranes) with fractal boundaries bears deep
relations to the zeta function. The location of the zeroes of zeta was deeply

2

related to the bidimensional energy ﬂow inherent in the cloud formation and
dissipation process studied by Amselvam [2 ]. The role of the golden mean (
chaos ) and Cantorian fractal spacetime was an essential ingredient as well.
In this letter we will combine all these ideas with the fundamental inclusion
of supersymmetry. Parisi and Sourlas [5] discovered in the late 70’s that there
is a hidden supersymmetry in classical stochastic diﬀerential equations. The
existence of stationary solutions to the Fokker-Planck equation associated
with the stochastic Langevin equation can be reformulated in terms of an
unbroken supersymmetric (SUSY) Quantum Mechanical Model . More pre-
cisely, with an imaginary time Schroedinger equation : a diﬀusion equation
involving a dual diﬀusion process forward and backward in time. Nagasawa
, Chapline [6,7] have used these ideas to reformulate QM as information fu-
sion. Ord and Nottale [8, 9] following the path pioneered by Feynman path’s
integral formulation of QM, have shown that the QM equations can be under-
stood from an underlying fractal dynamics of a particle zig-zagging back and
forth in spacetime spanning a fractal trajectory ; i.e. a particle undergoing
a Random walk or Brownian Motion. El Naschie [ 10 ] suggested that this
dual diﬀusion process could be the clue to prove the Riemann conjecture.
We will propose here the physical dynamical model that furnishes , in prin-
ciple, once a solution of the quantum inverse scattering problem exists, the
sought-after Hilbert-Polya operator which yields the zeroes of zeta . If a so-
lution to this quantum inverse scattering problem exists this could be instru-
mental in proving the Riemann Conjecture. We will borrow all these ideas of
random matrix theory , Brownian motion, random walk, fractals, quantum
chaos, stochastic dynamics ...within the framework of the supersymmetric
QM model associated with the Langevin dynamics and the Fokker-Planck
equation of a particle moving in a randomly ﬂuctuating medium; i.e. noise
due to the random ﬂuctuations of the inﬁnite array of particles (atoms )
located along the one dimensional quasi periodic crystal.
By random ﬂuctuations we mean those ﬂuctuations with respect to their
equilibrium conﬁgurations which, for example, could be assumed to be the
locations of the integers numbers. Because the prime numbers themselves
are randomly distributed, the main idea of this work is to recast this physical
problem in terms of the scattering of the particle by the randomly distributed
scattering centers ( prime numbers ) and in this fashion we have eﬀectively
a random process with an underlying Parisi-Sourlas hidden supersymmetry
, and hence , a well deﬁned SUSY QM problem.
Watkins [11 ] has also suggested that an inﬁnite array of (charged ) particles

3

located at the positions of the prime numbers could be relevant in describing
the physical system which provides the evolution dynamics linked to the
zeroes of zeta. Pitkannnen [12] has reﬁned Riemann’s conjecture within the
language of p-Adic numbers by constraining the imaginary parts of the zeros
of zeta to be members of complex rational Pythagorean phases and Berry
and Keat [ 13 ] have proposed that the SUSY QM Hamiltonian :

H = xp − i = Q2

(2)

(3)

is relevant to generate the imaginary parts of the zeroes.
The imaginary time Schroedinger equation (diﬀusion equation ) that we pro-
pose is :

−D

K±(x, t) = H±K(x, t).

∂
∂t

where D is the diﬀusion constant which can be set to unity , in the same
way that one can set ¯h = m = 1 where m is the particle’s mass subject to
the random walk .
The isospectral partner Hamiltonians, H+, H− are respectively :

H± = −

∂2
∂x2 +
the transition- probability density solution of the Fokker-Plank equation ,
m±(x, xo, t) , for the particle arriving at x , in a given time t , after having
started at xo is :

D2
2

∂
∂x

Φ2 ±

D
2

(4)

1
2

Φ.

m±(x, xo, t) = exp [−

(U±(x) − U±(xo))] K±(x, t).

(5)

1
D

The Fokker-Planck equation obeyed by the transition- probability density is
:

∂
∂x
and the associated Langevin dynamical equation :

∂2
∂x2 m(x, xo, t) +

m(x, xo, t) =

∂
∂t

D
2

Φ(x)m(x, xo, t).

(6a)

∂x
dt

= F (x) + ξ(t).

(6b)

F = Φ(x) is the drift momentum experienced by the particle . The quantity
ξ(t) is the noise term due to the random ﬂuctuations of the medium where the

4

x

0

∂
∂x

∂
∂x

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

particle is immersed. The drift potential U(x) associated wit the stochastic
Langevin equation is deﬁned to be :

U±(x) = −(±) Z

dzΦ(z)

Φ(x) is precisely the SUSY QM potential as we shall see below. The two
partners isospectral ( same eigenvalues ) Hamiltonians can be f actorized :

H+ ==

(D

+ Φ(x))(D

− Φ(x)) = L−L+.

H− =

(D

− Φ(x))(D

+ Φ(x)) = L+L−

1
2

1
2

∂
∂x

∂
∂x

If SUSY is unbroken there is a zero eigenvalue λo = 0 whose eigenfunction
corresponding to the H− Hamiltonian is the ground state :

Ψ−

0 (x) = Ce

− 1
D

x

0 dzΦ(z).
R

C is a normalization constant.
Notice that the random ” momentum” term ξ(t) appearing in Langevin’s
equation can be simply recast in terms of the other quantities as :

∂x
dt

∂x
dt

= F (x) + ξ(t) ⇒

− F (x) = ξ(t).

(11)

which in essence means that the random potential term (in units of ¯h = m =
1) is :

ξ(t) = p − F (x) = p + Φ(x).
(12)
which is just the L− operator used to factorize the Hamiltonian H−. One
has two random potential terms : ξ±(t) corresponding to the two operators
L−, L+ associated with the two isospectral Hamiltonian partners H±.
An immediate question soon arises. Since the imaginary parts of the zeroes of
zeta do not start at zero , the ﬁrst zero begins at y = 14.1347..... , how can we
reconcile the fact that the ground state eigenfunction has zero for eigenvalue
( by virtue of SUSY) ? . The answer to this question was provided by
Pitkannen [ 12]. Using p−adic numbers theoretical arguments, he was able
to construct the fermionic version of the zeta function. Both the bosonic
and fermionic zeta can be recast as partition function of a system of p-
adic bosonic/fermionic oscillators in a thermal bath of temperature T . The

5

frequencies of those oscillators is log p, for p = 2, 3, 5... a prime number and
the inverse temperature 1/T corresponds to the z coordinate present in the
ζ(z) where real z > 1. The pole at z = 1 naturally corresponds to the
limiting Hagedom temperature.
By virtue of SUSY the zeroes of the fermionic zeta function coincided pre-
cisely with the zeroes of the bosonic zeta with the fundamental diﬀerence that
the fermionic zeta had an additional zero precisely at z = 1/2 = 1/2 + iO ;
i.e the imaginary part of the ﬁrst zero of the fermionic partition function is
precisely zero !.
Therefore, in this SUSY QM model we naturally should expect to have a zero
eigenvalue associated with the supersymmetric ground state. Such ground
state does not break SUSY and ensures that the associated Fokker-Planck
equation has a stationary solution in the limit t = ∞ limit ( equilibrium
conﬁguration is attained at t = ∞ ). Such stationary solution is given
precisely by the modulo-squared of the ground state solution to the SUSY
QM model [5]:

lim m−

t→∞(x, xo = 0, t) = P (x) = |Ψ−

0 (x)|2 = C 2exp [−

U−(x)].

(13)

2
D

Notice that the ground state solution is explicitly given in terms of the po-
tential functionU−(x) given by the integral of the SUSY potential Φ(x) ; i.e
. ∂
∂x (−U±(x)) = ±Φ(x).
One should notice that the ordinary harmonic oscillator corresponds roughly
speaking to the case : Φ ∼ x so the operators L+, L− match the raising and
lowering operators in this restricted case. However this is a very special
case and not the SUSY QM model studied here. The physical model we
are studying is not an ordinary real harmonic oscillator but instead it is a
p-Adic one related to Pitkannen’s original p-adic bosonic/fermionic harmonic
oscillator formulation of the zeta function as p-adic partition functions.
In principle, if one has the list of the imaginary parts of all the zeroes of zeta
one can equate them to the inﬁnite number of eigenvalues:

λo = 0, λn = λ−

n = λ+

n n = 1, 2, 3.....

(14)

The main problem then is to ﬁnd the SUSY potential Φ(x) associated with
the zeroes of the bosonic/fermionic zeta. This would require solving the in-
verse quantum scattering method (that gave rise to quantum groups). To do
this is a formidable task since it requires to have the list of the inf inite num-
ber of zeroes to begin with and then to solve the inverse scattering method

6

problem. Wavelet analysis is very suitable to solve inverse scattering meth-
ods. Not surprisingly, Kozyrev has given convincing arguments that Wavelet
analysis is nothing but p-adic harmonic analysis [17].
What type of SUSY potential do we expect to get ? Is it related to the
scattering of the particle by an inﬁnite array of atoms located at the prime
numbers ? Is it related to the Coulomb potential felt by the particle due to
the inﬁnite array of charges located at the prime numbers ? Is it related to a
chaotic one-dimensional billiard ball where the bouncing (scattering ) back
and forth from an inﬁnite array of obstacles located at the prime numbers ?
Is it just the p-adic stochastic Brownian motion modeled by Pitkannen’s p-
adic bosonic/fermionic oscillators ? Since the properties of the zeta function
are associated with the distribution of primes numbers it is sensible to pose
the latter questions. We will try to answer these questions shortly.
The ordinary QM potential associated with the SUSY Φ(x) potential is de-
ﬁned as

V±(x) =

Φ2(x) ±

Φ(x).

1
2

D
2

∂
∂x

(15)

The potential V (x) should be symmetric (to preserve supersymmetry) under
the exchange x → −x and this entails that the SUSY potential Φ(x) has to
be an odd function : Φ(−x) = −Φ(x).
Clearly since we do not have at hand the algorithm to generate all the zeros of
zeta ( nor the prime numbers ) one cannot write explicitly the ansatz for the
potential nor solve the inverse scattering problem (which would yield the form
of the potential). Nevertheless , Euler was confronted with a similar problem
of ﬁnding out all the prime numbers when he wrote the adelic product formula
of the Riemman zeta which relates an inﬁnite summation over the integers
to an inﬁnite product over the primes :

F or Real z > 1 ζ(z) ≡

(1 − p−z)−1.

(16)

∞

X

1
nz =

Yp

Euler’s formula can be derived simply by writing any integer as a product of
powers of primes and using the summation formula for a geometric series with
growth parameter p−z. Euler’s formula is a simple proof of why the prime
numbers are inﬁnite. The product is an inﬁnite product over all primes.
Despite the fact that we do not have the list of all the prime numbers nor
an algorithm to generate them , due to their intrinsic randomness, this does
nor prevent us from evaluating such inﬁnite product; i.e in computing the

7

value of the zeta function by performing the sum of the Dirichlet series over
all integers!
This will provide us with the fundamental clue for writing an ansatz for the
SUSY potential Φ(x) and its associated potentials V±(x) giving us the SUSY
QM model which yields all the imaginary zeroes of the zeta function as the
eigenvalues of such SUSY QM model. The reader could ask why go through
all this trouble and take a tortuous route of writing down the SUSY QM
model instead of solving directly the ordinary QM inverse scattering problem
; i.e . ﬁnding the ordinary potential V±(x) of an ordinary QM problem ?
If one followed such procedure one would loose the deep underlying stochas-
tic dynamics of the problem. One would have not discovered the underlying
hidden supersymmetry associated with the stochastic Langevin dynamics;
nor its associated Fokker-Planck equation; nor be able to notice that the
ground state is supersymmetric and its eigenvalue is precise zero ; nor to
construct the ground state solution explicitly in terms of the SUSY poten-
tial Φ(x) as shown in Eq.(13 ). Also one would fail to notice the crucial
f actorization properties of the Hamiltonian, and that the potential V±(x)
must be symmetric with respect to the origin while the SUSY potential Φ(x)
is antisymmetric,etc. The SUSY QM is very restricted that narrows down
the inverse scattering problem. The simplest analogy one can give is that of
a person who fails to recognize the sine function because instead there is the
inﬁnite Taylor expansion of the sine function.
The crux of this work is to write down the ansatz for the potential associated
with the SUSY QM model. The ansatz is based in writing an inﬁnite summa-
tion in terms of an inﬁnite product, similar to the Euler Adelic product form
of the zeta and to well known relation between the sums of gamma functions
in terms of products of zeta functions present in the scattering formulae of
p-adic open strings [4, 14 ]. We proceed as follows.

Φ(x) ≡

V (|x − xn|) =

W (xp)

Xn

Yp

(17)

where xp ≡ p−x and W = W (xp) is a function to be determined. This is our
ansatz for the SUSY potential. We shall call this ansatz for the potential the
adelic condition since the product is taken over all the primes.
The zeta function has a similar form ( although it is not symmetric with
respect to the origin ): one has an inﬁnite summation over all the integers
of the series n−z ( playing the role of the potential) expressed as an inﬁnite
product over all the primes of functions of p−z. We are just recasting the

8

potential felt by the particle due to the inﬁnite interactions with the objects
situated at xn , an inﬁnite sum of terms, in terms of the inﬁnite product over
all the primes of functions of xp ≡ p−x. We emphasize that what is equal to
the imaginary parts of the zeroes of zeta are the eigenvalues λn of the SUSY
QM model. We have just recast the inﬁnite numerical input parameters xn
of the potential in terms of the location of the inﬁnite number of primes .
For example, based on the Euler adelic formula for the zeta function, one
could have chosen the ansatz for the potential to be precisely of the zeta
function form :

F or x > 0. Φ(x) =

W (xp) =

(1 − xp)−1.

(18)

Yp

Yp

xp ≡ p−x, Φ(x) = −Φ(−x)

where x is the location of the particle executing the p-adic stochastic Brown-
ian motion . For applications of p-adic numbers in physics we refer to [4,14].
Due to the antisymmetry requirement of Φ(x) , the SUSY potential for x < 0
must be taken to be an exact mirror copy of the x > 0 region to ensure that
supersymmetry is unbroken. As a result, the partner potentials V± are 1:

V±(x) =

Φ2 ±

Φ(x).

1
2

D
2

∂
∂x

(19)

But how can we be so sure that the eigenvalues will be precisely equal to the
imaginary zeroes of zeta ? This would have been an amazing coincidence
! For this reason we must have an unknown function W = W (xp) to be
determined by solving the quantum inverse scattering method. Assuming
that the eigenvalues are precisely the imaginary parts of the zeroes of zeta
, in principle , we have deﬁned the quantum inverse scattering problem .
Using wavelet analysis or p-adic harmonic analysis one could ﬁnd the SUSY
p W (xp) where xp ≡ p−x , where x is the location of the
potential Φ(x) =
particle. How does on achieve such a numerical feat ? One could expand the
function W (xp) in Taylor series assuming that the potential is analytic, ex-
cept at some points representing the location of the inﬁnite array of particles,
obstacles of the chaotic one-dimensional billiard, or the atoms ( scattering
centers ) of the one dimensional quasi periodic crystal . The adelic condition

Q

1To ensure that Φ(−x) = −Φ(x) one must add a constant such that Φ(0) = 0

9

for the SUSY potential becomes then :

F or x > 0 Φ(x) =

p W (xp) =

n an(xp)n

Q
n an[p−x]n =

p

Q

P

=

p
Q

P

p
Q
n anp−nx.

P

(20a)

where Φ(x) = −Φ(−x). Recasting the Taylor series as a Dirichelt series by
simply rewriting :

p−nx = e−xnlogp = ei2xnlog p →
Φ(x) =

n ancos [ix(log pn)] + iansin [ix(log pn)].

(20b)

p
Q

P

(where once again Φ(x) = −Φ(−x))allows us to recast the adelic potential
as an inf inite collection of p-adic harmonic oscillators with fundamental
imaginary frequencies ωp = ilog p and whose harmonics are suitable powers
of the fundamental frequencies : ωp,n = ilog pn = in log p.
We have then recast the quantum inverse scattering problem as the problem
of solving the amplitudes an (and phases ) of the (imaginary frequencies )
p-adic harmonic oscillators by simply writing the adelic potential in terms
of p-adic Fourier expansion (p-adic harmonic analysis ) . This is attained
by means of performing the usual Wick rotation in Euclidean QFT : ω →
iω. One could Wick rotate the imaginary Schroedinger equation (a diﬀusion
equation ) to an ordinary Schroedinger equation by the usual Wick rotation
trick t → it . Our adelic potential ansatz coincides with Pitkannen’s ideas
on the zeta function being the partition function of the adelic ensemble of an
inﬁnite system of p-adic oscillators with fundamental frequencies ωp = log p,
with the only diﬀerence that in our case we are performing the Wick rotation
of those frequencies.
The inﬁnite unknown amplitude coeﬃcients an will be determined numer-
ically by solving the inverse quantum scattering problem in terms of the
eigenvalues of the SUSY QM model = imaginary parts of the zeroes of zeta.
A. Odlyzko [15] has computed the ﬁrst 1020 (or more) zeroes of zeta. Hav-
ing a list of 1020 zeroes should be enough data points to ﬁnd the ﬁrst 1020
numerical coeﬃcients an appearing in the Taylor expansion of the potential
p W (xp) that is being determined via inverse quantum
function Φ(x) =
scattering methods associated with this SUSY QM model that links stochas-
tic dynamics , supersymmetry,chaos,etc. to the zeroes of the Riemann zeta
function.
To summarize, if one can ﬁnd a solution of the inverse scattering problem
that determines the (symmetric) potential V±(x) then one can

Q

10

1) propose the Hilbert-Polya operator in the following form:

H = 1/2(H−H+ + H+H−) + 1/4.

(21)

and
2) postulate that the eigenfunctions Ψn of the Hamiltonian containing quartic
derivative H is the f usion ( or convolution) of two eigenfuncrions Ψ+
n−1 and
Ψ−
n . The ordinary product will not be suitable, as can be veriﬁed by simple
inspection. The fusion rules of this type have been widely used in conformal
ﬁeld theories and in string theory.
The fused Hamiltonian operator is automatically self-adjoint as a result of
the f usion of the self − adjoint isospectral Hamiltonians H+, H− which
characterize the two ” dual ” Nagasawa’s diﬀusion equations [10] and its
real eigenvalues are the product of the nontrivial zeroes of the Riemann zeta
function and their complex conjugates :

HΨn = (1/4 + λ2

n)Ψn = (1/2 + iλn)(1/2 − iλn)Ψn.

(22)

. Notice that the value n = 0 is not included since Ψ+
−1 is not deﬁned and the
operator H is quartic in derivatives. Could this candidate for Hilbert-Polya
operator be instrumental in proving the Riemann conjecture ?
The fusion or convolution product of the two eigenfunctions of H± can be
found by referring to the Fourier transform: the Fourier transform of an
ordinary product equals the convolution product of their Fourier transforms
. Hence the eigenfunctions of H can be written, by denoting F, F −1 the
Fourier transform and its inverse :

Ψn(x) = F −1[F (Ψ+

n−1 ∗ F (Ψ−

n )]. n = 1, 2, 3, ...

(23)

As expected, the eigenfunction of the fused Hamiltonian is not the naive
product of the eigenfunctions of their constituents.
The 1/4 coeﬃcient present in the eigenvalues of the fused-Hamiltonian op-
erator is intrinsically related to the real part of the zeroes of zeta (1/2 +
iλn)(1/2 + iλn). The interpretation of the 1/4 coeﬃcient appearing in the
fused-Hamiltonan is as an additive constant,like a zero point energy of the
ordinary Harmonic oscillator. From the conformat ﬁeld theory and string
theory point of view one constructs unitary irreducible highest-weight repre-
sentations of the Virasoro algebra for suitable values of the central charges
and weights associated with the ground sates , c and h respectively. It is very

11

plausible that supersymmetry and representation theory may select and ﬁx
uniquely the value of 1/4 which then would be an elegant proof of the Riem-
man conjecture. Pitkannen [12] has used conformal ﬁeld theory arguments to
reﬁne the Riemman conjecture : the imaginary parts of the zeroes correspond
to complex rational Pytagorean phases : piy .
Fractal p-branes in Cantorian-fractal spacetime and its relation to the zeta
function were considered by the author and Mahecha [ 16], and most recently
the role of fractal strings and the zeroes of zeta has appeared in the book
by Lapidus and van Frankenhuysen [ 18] . Combining p-adic numbers and
fractals we arrive at the notion of p-adic fractal strings. The fundamental
question to ask would be how to establish a one-to-one correspondence be-
tween the zeroes of zeta and the spectrum of p-adic fractal strings. This
would mean an establishment of a relation between the exact location of the
poles of the scattering amplitues of p-adic fractal strings (a generalization
of the Veneziano formula in terms of Euler gamma functions) to the exact
location of the zeroes of zeta, i.e. a one -to-one correspondence between the
Regge trajectories in the complex angular momentum plane and the spec-
trum of the p-adic fractal strings with the zeroes of zeta .
Since p-adic topology is the topology of Cantonan-fractal spacetime it is not
surprising that the Golden Mean will play a fundamental role [2, 10, 16].
p-adic fractals have been discussed in full detail by Pitkannen [12]. p-Adic
Fractals are roughly speaking just f uzzy fractals [19], as they should be,
since Cantorian-fractal spacetime involves a von Neumann’s noncommutative
pointless geometry . Wavelet analysis = p-adic Harmonic analysis must play
a fundamental role [17] in the classiﬁcation of such spectrum. After all, the
scattering of a particle oﬀ a p-adic fractal string should be another way to
look at the p-adic stochastic motion discussed in this work.

Conclusion

We have been able to construct (assuming the quantum inverse scattering
problem has a solution) the operator that yields the zeroes of the Riemman
zeta function by deﬁning explicitly the SUSY QM model associated with
the p-adic stochastic dynamics of a particle undergoing a Brownian random
walk. We have been able to construct (assuming the quantum inverse scat-
tering problem has a solution ) the operator that yields the zeroes of the
Riemman zeta function by deﬁning explicitly the SUSY QM model associ-
ated with the p-adic stochastic dynamics of a particle undergoing a Brownian

12

random walk . The zig-zagging occurs after collisions with an inﬁnite array
of scattering centers that ﬂuctuate randomly . Since the prime numbers are
themselves randomly distributed, this physical system can be ref ormulated
as the scatterings of the particle about the inﬁnite locations of the prime
numbers positions. Therefore, we have reformulated such p-adic stochastic
process which has an underlying hidden Parisi-Sourlas supersymmetry sim-
ilar to the eﬀective motion of a particle subjected to an inﬁnite collection
of p-adic harmonic oscillators with fundamental imaginary frequencies given
by ωp = ilog p and whose harmonics are ωp,n = ilog pn. This adelic ansatz
for the SUSY potential allow us to determine a one-to-one correspondence
between the amplitudes of oscillations an ( and phases ) with the imaginary
zeroes of zeta λn , after solving the inverse scattering problem. p-adic frac-
tal strings and their spectrum may establish a one-to-one correspondence
between the poles of their scattering amplitudes and the zeroes of zeta.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to A. Granik for his help in preparing this manuscript
and for many discussions. We also wish to thank M. Pitkannen, M. S. El
Naschie, J. Mahecha, M. Watkins for their correspondence and insights.

References

1- M. L Metha : ”Random Matrices” Academic Press , New York 1991.
A. Bandey :” Brownian motion of Discrete Spectra ” J. Chaos, Solitons and
Fractals vol 5, no.7( 1995) 1275.
2- M. Amselvam :”Wave-Particle Duality in Cloud Formation” and ”Uni-
versal Quantiﬁcation for Self Organized Criticality in Atmospherical Flows”.
http://www.geocities.com/amselvam /pns97.html
3- H. Montogomery :”Distribution of the Zeroes of the Riemann Zeta Func-
tion” Proceedings Int. Cong. Math, Vancouver 1974, Vol 1, 379-381.
4. I. Aref’eva, P. Medvedev, 0. Rythchkov, I. Volovich : ”Chaos in Matrix)
Theory” J. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals vol. 10 , nos 2-3 (1999 );
V. Vladimorov, I. Volovich, E. Zelenov : ”p-Adic Analysis in Mathematical
Physics” World Scientiﬁc , Singapore 1994.
5- J.Parisi and N.Sourlas, ”Supersymmetric ﬁeld theories and stochastic dif-
ferential equations”, Nucl.Phys B 206 (1982) 321;
K. Efetov,”Supersymmetry in Disorder and Chaos” Cambridge University
Press , 1999;

13

K. Nakamura,”Quantum Chaos” Cambridge University Press 1995;
G.Junker, ”Supersymmetric methods in quantum and statistical mechanics”,
Springer-Verlag 1996
6-G. Chapline,”Quantum Mechanics as Information Fusion ”,quant-ph/9912019
7-M. Nagasawa, Special issue of the J. of Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, vol.
7 ,no. 5 (1996 ) on ”Chaos, Information and Diﬀusion in Quantum Physics”.
8- L. Nottale , ”The Scale Relativity Program ” J. of Chaos, Solitons and
Fractals10, nos 2-3 (1999) 459;
L. Nottale, ”La Relativite dans Tous ses Etats”, Hachette Literature Paris,1998.
9- G. Ord, ” The Spiral Gravity Model” J. of Chaos, Solitons and Fractals
vol. 10 , nos 2-3 (1999 ) 499.
10- M. S. El Naschie, ”Remarks on Superstrings, Fractal Gravity, Nagasawa’s
Diﬀusion and Cantorian Fractal Spacetime”, J. of Chaos, Solitons and Frac-
tals vol.8, no. 11 (1997)1873
11- M. Watkins,”Prime Evolution Notes” http://Www.maths.ex.ac.uk/∼mwatkins
/zeta/evolutionnotes.htm
12- M/ Pitkannen, ”Topological Geometrodynamics ” Book on line : http:
//www.physics.helsinki.ﬁ/ matpitka/ tgd.htmf
13-M. Berry and J. Keating, ”The Riemman zeroes and eigenvalue asymp-
totics” SIAM Review 41 no. 2 (1999 ) 236-266.
14- L. Brekke and P. G.O. Freund,”p-Adic Numbers in Physics” Phys. Re-
ports vol. 233 no. 1 (1993).
15-. A. Odlyzko,”Supercomputers and the Riemann zeta function” Proc. of
the fourth Int. conference on Supercomputing. L P Kartashev and S. I.
Kartashev (eds). International Supercomputer Institute 1989, 348-352.
16- C. Castro, J. Mahecha, ”Comments on the Riemman Conjecture and
Index Theory on Cantorian Fractal Spacetime” hep-th/0009014 v2, to be
published in the J. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals.
17- S. Kozyrev,”Wavelets Analysis as p-Adic Harmonic Analysis” math.ph /
0012019
18- Lapidus and van Frankenheusen, ”Fractal geometry and Number theory:
fractal strings and zeroes of zeta functions”.
19- A.Granik, Private communication

14

