1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
7
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Astronomical Link Betweeen India and
the Mayans

B.G. Sidharth∗
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

We argue that there was a link between Indus Valley India and
the Mayans of Central America which is brought out by astronom-
ical references. The former used a Jovian calendar while the latter
had perfected a calendar based on Venus. This will be shown to be a
signiﬁcant clue. This also provides an explanation for the as yet un-
explained fact that the Indus script has been found on Easter Islands.

Over the past several decades, the Indian, more accurately Hindu inﬂuence
on the Mayan civilization of Central America has been noted by many schol-
ars [1]. It is unanimously agreed that there was direct or indirect contact
over the centuries, through South East Asia, China and the Far East, though
exactly when and how this took place is not as yet clear. As is well known,
the Mayan civilization which goes back to about 2600 B.C., or earlier, had
an advanced astronomy and calendar tradition[2].
We mention some of the Hindu inﬂuences [1, 3]:
1. Figures of the Hindu cosmic myth known popularly as the churning of the
ocean are found in the Mayan documents. The astronomical signiﬁcance of
the myth has been explained in reference[4]. Infact a very early depiction of
this myth is to be found in the Angkor Vat temple in present day Cambodia.
2. The Swastika symbol, interpreted by some as representing the cosmic cy-
cle, was also present there.
3. Motifs of the lotus, elephant, sea goat and the like, unmistakably paint to

0∗Email:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in; birlard@ap.nic.in

1

a Hindu inﬂuence.
4. Unmistakable architectural similarities and parallels exist, though, accord-
ing to Hindu references, in this case it might well be the Mayan inﬂuence on
Hindu architecture.
It is also interesting to note that the Mayan calendar began with a date
around 3112 B.C., very close to the Hindu traditional beginning of the Kali
age viz., 3102 B.C.[5, 6]. This period in India corresponds to the Indus val-
ley or Harappan civilization which lasted for a few thousand years, atleast
up to the ﬁrst millennium B.C., or even later. The period around the ﬁrst
millennium B.C. is also the period of the epic Mahabharata. Marine archae-
ological researches in the Dwaraka region of Western India put this period
near 1500 B.C. [7]. Infact the Mahabharata period of India overlapped the
Indus valley period[8]. Arjuna one of the heroes of the Mahabharata was a
friend of Maya, an expert architect and he had also married a Naga princess,
two facts, which, as will be seen now could be of signiﬁcance. Maya himself
is described as an Asura, as contrasted with Devas (literally bright ones), an
other fact of signiﬁcance.
The vast body of what are called Puranas, a combination of obscure history
and mythology are clear on the point that the Devas or the bright ones and
the Asuras, literally those who are deprived of the draught (of sun light), are
really anti podal inhabitants on the earth, or more precisely those, whose
longitude is separated by 180 degrees [9]. This is also explicitly spelt out
by Varaha Mihira[10]. Around 500, Varaha Mihira compiled some of the
then surviving ancient astronomical systems, and he mentions that when it
is noon for the Devas, it is mid night for the Asuras, and that they stand
with their heads down as compared to us, but that for them, we stand with
our heads down and so on.
Signiﬁcantly, according to the Puranas the Asuras were dictated to by the
Planet Venus while the Devas were following the Planet Jupiter. Indeed the
Indus valley calendar, as is well known was dictated by the Jovian cycles[11],
a tradition which continues in India even today. The well known Kumbha
Mela begins with the entry of Jupiter into Aquarius (Kumbha), and inter-
estingly around 3000 B.C. and the beginning of the traditional Indian calen-
dar, this event took place when in addition the Winter Solstice was also in
Aquarius, a circumstance which could have contributed to the beginning of
the calendaric epoch of that time.
On the other hand it is equally remarkable that the Central American Mayan

2

civilization was indeed anti podal, that is they would be Asuras, and moreover
unlike any other known civilization they had a meticulous calendar dictated
by the Planet Venus, as is documented in the Dresden Codex[2].
The Naga tribes alluded to above, have been associated with the Mayans and
the netherworld or the Asuras or shorn of allegory, the anti podal world. In-
deed the surviving Naga tribes of North Eastern India do share the mongloid
Interestingly the names and symbols for
features along with the Mayans.
numerals of the Mayans and the ancient Naga tribes seem to be practically
identical: Hun (1), denoted by a ., ca (2), denoted by .., Ox (3) denoted by
..., can/san (4) denoted by ...., ho (5) denoted by a horizontal bar and so
on. It is also reported[12] that the ancient Mayas chronicled an invader from
far oﬀ who was ambidextrous in his warrior skills, a description that exactly
describes the hero Arjuna of Mahabharata -one of his epithets is Savya Sachi,
or one who is equally adept with both hands. The signiﬁcance of the liason
between Arjuna and the Nagas can now be seen.
Thus the above arguments make a case for a contact between Indus valley
India and the Mayan or a pre Mayan civilization (for example Olmec) of Cen-
tral America sometime around 1400 B.C. Incidentally this would also give
the answer to a long standing puzzle, namely evidence of the Indus script in
the Easter islands which are enroute[13].

References

[1] D.P. Singhal, in ”India’s Contribution to World Thought and Culture”,
Vivekananda Rock Memorial Committee, Madras, Ed., L. Chandra,
1970.

[2] E.C. Krupp, ”Echoes of the Ancient Skies”, E.C. Krupp, Harper and

Row, New York, 1983.

Boston, 1977.

53(4), April 1989, p.10.

[3] G. De Santillana, H. Von Dechend, ”Hamlet’s Mill”, David R. Godime,

[4] B.G. Sidharth, ”The Unmythical Puranas”, Griﬃth Observer, Vol.

[5] A.K. Chakravarty, ”Origin and Development of Indian Calendrical Sci-

ence”, R.K. Maitra, Calcutta, 1975.

3

[6] A. Zapata, Una Vision del Mundo, Alonzo, Resida, Mexico, 1994.

[7] S.R. Rao, ”Dawn and Devolution of the Indus Civilization”, Aditya

Prakashan, New Delhi, 1991.

[8] B.G. Sidharth, ”The Celestial Key to the Vedas”, Inner Traditions,

Rochester, Vermont, 1999.

[9] H.H. Wilson ed., ”The Vishnu Purana”, Punthi Pustak, Calcutta, 1979.

[10] T.S.K. Sastry, ”Panchasiddhantika of Varahamihira”, (Critically Edited

by K.V. Sarma), P.P.S.T. Foundation, Adyar, Madras, 1993.

[11] D. Bongard-Levin and A. Viogasin, ”The Image of India” , Progress

Publishers, Moscow, 1984.

sity, Bombay, 1970.

[12] Bharati Krishna Teertha ”Sanatana Dharma”, Bhavan’s Book Univer-

[13] T. Heyerdahl, ”Aku-Aku”, Rand Mc Nally, New York, 1958.

4

