1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Ultralogic Uniﬁcation for All Physical Theories

Robert A. Herrmann

Mathematics Department
U. S. Naval Academy
572C Holloway Rd.
Annapolis, MD 21402-5002
31 DEC 2000

Abstract: In this paper, the set of all physical theories is represented by
Nj | j ∈ IN} deﬁned
a countable collection of consequence operators {SV
upon a language Σ. It is established that in the Grundlegend Structure,
a nonstandard structure, there exists a function S such that for any
natural-system representation W ⊂ Σ, S selects an ultralogic S such
that S{SV

Nj(W) | j ∈ IN} = S( ∗W) ∩ Σ.

1. Introduction.

Seventy years ago, Tarski (1956, pp. 60-109) introduced the mathematical
object called a consequence operator as a model for various aspects of deductive
thought. There are two such mathematical theories investigated, the general and the
ﬁnite consequence operators (Herrmann, 1987). The ﬁnite consequence operators
are usually the operators that model human thought processes that use but ﬁnite
arguments and a ﬁnite collection of premises to arrive at a speciﬁc conclusion. Let
L be a nonempty language, P be the power set operator and F the ﬁnite power set
operator.

Deﬁnition 1.1. A mapping C: P(L) → P(L) is a general consequence operator

(or closure operator) if for each X, Y ∈ P(L)
(i) X ⊂ C(X) = C(C(X)) ⊂ L; and if
(ii) X ⊂ Y, then C(X) ⊂ C(Y).

A consequence operator C deﬁned on L is said to be ﬁnite (ﬁnitary, or algebraic) if
it satisﬁes

(iii) C(X) = S{C(A) | A ∈ F (X)}.

Remark 1.2. The above axioms (i), (ii), (iii) are not independent. Indeed,
(i), (iii) imply (ii). Hence, the ﬁnite consequence operators deﬁned on a speciﬁc
language form a subset of the general operators.

Natural-systems are named and deﬁned by scientiﬁc disciplines. Each is an
arrangement of named physical objects that are so related or connected as to form
an identiﬁable unity. Except for the most basic, natural-systems always require the
existence of accepted natural laws or processes for, at least, two events to occur.
It is required that a natural-system either be constructed by application of natural
laws or processes from more fundamental physical objects (natural-systems); or that

1

the natural-system is altered in its development by such natural laws or processes,
in which case the natural-system itself may be considered as a more fundamental
physical object.

Explicit statements for a natural law or process and the theories they yield
are human inventions that imitate, in the words of Ferris (1979, p. 152), intrinsic
natural laws or processes that govern the workings of those portions of our universe
that are comprehensible.
Individuals apply various mental processes to a set of
hypotheses that include a set of natural laws or processes and predict behavior for
a natural-system. Mental processes are also applied to natural laws or processes
in to order construct our material “man made universe.” Consequence operators
model such mental behavior. Indeed, these operators model many general mental
processes not merely the standard notion termed “deduction.”

2. Axiomatic consequence operators.

Prior to simpliﬁcation, we need to assume that our consequence operators are
axiomatic, where the axioms include appropriate natural laws or processes. Also,
we need the fundamental philosophy of modern science that, with the exception of
the accepted and most fundamental of physical objects, all named natural-systems
are obtained by application of natural laws or processes to physical objects that
are deﬁned as more fundamental in character than the natural-systems of which
they are constituents. Obviously, speciﬁed natural laws or processes alter speciﬁc
natural-system behavior. As mentioned, the results in this paper are not restricted
to what is usually termed as deduction. As done in Herrmann (1999, p. 12), we
only consider equivalent representatives as the members of L. (This is not the same
notion as consequence operator logical equivalence.) Let C [resp. Cf ] be the set of
all general [resp. ﬁnite] consequence operators deﬁned on L, where A ⊂ L is the set
of logical axioms for F ∈ C [resp. Cf ].

Although, usually, such consequence operators are considered as axiomatic, in
this application the use of axiomless operators (Herrmann 1987, p. 3) leads to a
signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation. For F ∈ C [resp. Cf ], let A ∪ N ⊂ L and suppose that
F(∅) ⊃ A ∪ N. (Note: N does not denote the natural numbers). Then, ∅ ⊂ A ∪ N
yields F(∅) ⊂ F(A ∪ N), and A ∪ N ⊂ F(∅) yields that F(A ∪ N) ⊂ F(F(∅)) = F(∅).
Hence, F(∅) = F(A∪N). Further, note that if B ⊂ A∪N, then since ∅ ⊂ B, it follows
that F(∅) = F(A ∪ N) ⊂ F(B) ⊂ F(F(A ∪ N)) = F(A ∪ N) and F(B) = F(A ∪ N). The
objects in F(A ∪ N) behave as if they are axioms for F. Can we use this axiomatic
behavior to generate formally a speciﬁc consequence operator C, where C(∅) = ∅ and
the only results displayed by this model are conclusions not members of F(A ∪ N)?
If such a meaningful consequence operator exists, then this approach is acceptable
since if natural laws or processes, as represented by N, are stated correctly, such as
always including any physical circumstances that might restrict their application,
then they behave like physical “tautologies” for our universe. For such a basic
consequence operator F, the set F(∅) is composed of all of the restatements of N
that are considered as “logically” equivalent, and all of the pure “logical” theorems.
In general, various forms of scientiﬁc argument are modeled by consequence

2

operators, where the use of axioms is a general process not dependent upon the
axioms used. The axioms are but inserted into an argument after which the actual
rules of inference are applied that might yield some x ∈ L − F(∅). It is this x that
may yield something not trivial. In the physical case, this x may represent some
aspect of an actual physical object distinct from the natural laws or processes.

3. Rules that generate consequence operators.

In this investigation, the term “deduction” is broadly deﬁned. Informally, the
pre-axioms A ∪ N is a subset of our language L, where N represent natural laws or
processes, and there exists a ﬁxed ﬁnite set RI = {R1, . . . , Rp} of n-ary relations
(n ≥ 1) in L. It is possible that some of these Ri are N dependent.
It can be
eﬀectively decided when an x ∈ L is a member of A ∪ N or a member of any of the
ﬁxed 1-ary relations. Further, for any ﬁnite B ⊂ L and an (j +1)-ary Ri ∈ RI, j > 1
and any f ∈ Ri, it is always assumed that it can be eﬀectively decided whether the
k-th coordinate value f(k) ∈ B, k = 1, . . . , j. It is always assumed that a mental or
equivalent activity called deduction from a set of hypotheses can be represented by a
ﬁnite (partial) sequence of numbered (in order) steps b1, . . . , bm with the ﬁnal step
bm the conclusion of the deduction. All of these steps are considered as represented
by objects from the language L. Any such representation is composed either of the
zero step, indicating that there are no steps in the representation, or one or more
steps with the last numbered step being some m > 0. In this inductive step-by-step
construction, a basic rule used to construct this representation is the insertion rule.
If the construction is at the step number m ≥ 0, then the insertion rule, I, is the
“insertion of an hypothesis from X ⊂ L, or insertion of a member from the set A∪N,
or the insertion of any member of any 1-ary relation, and denoting this insertion by
the next step number.” If the construction is at the step number m > 0, then the
rules of inference, RI, are used to allow for an insertion of a member from L as a
step number m + 1, in the following manner. For any (j + 1)-ary Ri ∈ RI, 1 ≤ j,
and any f ∈ Ri, if f(k) ∈ {b1, . . . , bm}, k = 1, . . . , j, then f(j + 1) can be inserted as
a step number m + 1. Note in particular how speciﬁc “choices” are an essential part
of the process here termed as deduction. The deduction is constructed only from
the rule of insertion or the rules of inference as here described.

It is not diﬃcult to show that if you apply these procedures to obtain the ﬁnal
step as your deduction, then these procedures are modeled by a ﬁnite consequence
operator. For the language L, a set of pre-axioms A ∪ N, a set RI and any X ⊂ L,
deﬁne the set map CN, by letting CN(X) be the set of all members of L that
can be obtained from X by “deduction.” Clearly, by insertion X ⊂ CN(X). Since
CN(X) ⊂ L, then we need to consider the result CN(CN(X)). Let x ∈ CN(CN(X)).
By deﬁnition, x is the ﬁnal step in a ﬁnite list {bi} of members from L. The steps in
this ﬁnite “deduction” from which x ∈ L is obtained are the I steps, where we only
added to this insertion members of CN(X), and the ﬁxed RI. Suppose that bi ∈
CN(X) is any of these additional insertions. Simply construct a new ﬁnite sequence
of steps by substituting for each such bi the ﬁnite sequence of steps from which
bi is the ﬁnal step in deducing that bi ∈ CN(X). The resulting ﬁnite collections

3

of steps are then renumbered. The ﬁnal step in this new ﬁnite deduction is x.
Since the reasons for all of the steps is either the original I or RI, and RI contains
predetermined n-ary relations that are not dependent upon any deduction, then
the ﬁnite sequence obtained in this manner is a deduction for a member of CN(X).
Hence, x ∈ CN(X). Consequently, CN(CN(X)) = CN(X). The ﬁnite requirement is
obvious since there are only a ﬁnite number of steps in any deduction. Note that
CN(∅) ⊃ B, where B is the set of all x ∈ L such that x is a step obtained only by the
rule I. Throughout the remainder of this paper, it is assumed that all “deductions”
follow these procedures and the corresponding consequence operator is deﬁned as
in this paragraph.

4. Intrinsic natural laws or processes.

For “scientiﬁc deduction” for a speciﬁc science-community, (i), we need to
consider as our rules of inference a collection Ri = RI of all of the “rules of
inference used by this speciﬁc scientiﬁc-community and allowed by their scientiﬁc
method” as they are applied to a speciﬁed language Σi, the language for “their
science.” At present, this deﬁnition for Ri is rather vague. Hence, the existence of
such an Ri is an assumption. Of course, as Σi changes, so might the Ri be altered.
The Ri can also change for other valid reasons. From this a speciﬁc “science”
consequence operator SNi is generated for each set of pre-axioms Ai ∪ Ni, where
Ai are the basic logical axioms and Ni the natural laws or processes. For proper
application, the science consequence operator is applied to speciﬁc natural-systems,
not those generally described. Thus SNi has physical meaning only when SNi is
applied to an X where every member of X and SNi(X) is a “tagged” statement that
identiﬁes a speciﬁc natural-system (Herrmann, 1999). In all that follows, we are
working in a particular Ui ⊂ Σi of natural laws or processes that are accepted by a
particular science-community at this particular moment of time and that are stated
using the language Σi.

The axiomatic consequence operator SNi : P(Σi)) → P(Σi), where SNi (∅) ⊃
(Ai ∪ Ni), can be reduced, formally, to an axiomless consequence operator on the
language Σi − SNi (Ai ∪ Ni) as shown by Tarski (1930, p. 67). Let V = {Ai, Ni.} For
each X ⊂ Σi − SNi(Ai ∪ Ni), let SV
Ni(X) = (Σi − SNi(Ai ∪ Ni)) ∩ SNi(X). For this SNi,
the operator SV
Ni is a consequence operator on Σi −SNi(Ai ∪Ni) and has the property
that SV
Ni(∅) = ∅. Thus using SNi (Ai ∪ Ni) as a set of axioms, logical and physical,
SV
Ni behaves as if it is axiomless, where the explicit natural laws or processes Ni
behave as if they are implicit. Since, in general, SNi(Ai ∪ Ni) ⊂ SNi(X), the only
consequences that are not but speciﬁc deductions from the pre-axioms Ai ∪ Ni are
members of SNi (X) − SNi(Ai ∪ Ni), where the explicit X should not include the
axioms SNi(Ai ∪ Ni). Physically, SV
Ni is the exact operator that, using implicitly
such axioms as SNi(Ai ∪ Ni), characterizes the coalescing of a given fundamental
collection of named and tagged objects in X and that creates a diﬀerent natural-
system or that alters natural-system behavior. The use of axiomless consequence
operators is a deﬁnite and useful simpliﬁcation.

For any speciﬁcally stated nonempty sequentially represented collection V =

4

{Ai, {Nij | j ∈ IN}}, Ui = S{Nij | j ∈ IN} and for any Nij ∈ V, the set map SV
Nij
deﬁned for each X ⊂ (Σi − SUi(S V)) by SV
Nij (X) = (Σi − SUi(S V)) ∩ SNij (X) is
a consequence operator deﬁned on Σi − SUi(S V) by the same Tarski Theorem 6
(1956, p. 67). (The set IN is the natural numbers not including 0.) The family V
may or may not be ﬁnite. In many cases, it is denumerably since to apply SV
Nij to
a speciﬁcally tagged description X certain parameters within the appropriate set
of natural laws or processes must be speciﬁed so as to correspond to the speciﬁc
X. We assume that the applicable set of natural laws or process {Nij} is the range
of a sequence. This will not aﬀect the conclusions since this yields that V can be
ﬁnite or denumerable. Note that for some of the Nnm and some tagged X ⊂ L
to which the Nnm either does not apply or does not alter, we would have that
SV
Nnm (X) = X. For logical consistency, it is signiﬁcant if there exists some type of
unifying consequence operator that will unify the separate theories not only applied
by a speciﬁc science-community (i), but within all of science.

5. An ultralogic uniﬁcation for all physical theories.

Although all that follows can be restricted to a speciﬁc science-community,
rather than consider such distinct science-communities, consider but one science
community. Thus assume that we have one language for science Σ and one sequen-
tially represented countable family of natural laws or processes Nj. Further, there
is one set of logical axioms A comprised of those logical axioms from each science-
community and a combined collection of rules of inference that is used to generate
a consequence operator for science. It is, of course, assumed that “science,” in gen-
eral, is a rational and logically consistent discipline, and that the theories predict
j ∈ IN}}. This yields the se-
correctly. Let sequential represented V = {A, {Nj |
quentially represented countable set of all physical theories {SNi | j ∈ IN} and the
Ni | j ∈ IN} of intrinsic sequentially represented consequence opera-
countable set {SV
tors. In what follows, we consider all of the previously deﬁned notions but only with
respect to this informal V and the language Σ. Now embed all of these informal re-
sults into the formal superstructure M = hN , ∈, =i as done in Herrmann (1987, p.
5; 1993, pp. 9-11). Further, consider the usual ∗M = h ∗ N , ∈, =i nonstandard and
elementary extension of M which may be assumed for consistency with previous
applications and possible further investigation to be a 2|M|-saturated enlargement.
Finally, consider the superstructure Y, the Grundlegend Structure (Herrmann, 1993,
pp. 22-24). We note that such a structure based upon the natural numbers appears
adequate for our analysis since this investigation is only concerned with members
of a denumerable language. However, if one wishes to include additional analysis,
say with respect to the real numbers, then the Extended Grundlegend Structure
(Herrmann, 1993, p. 70) can be utilized. The approach seems at ﬁrst to be rather
Nj (W) | j ∈ IN} is most
obvious. Simply consider an W ⊂ Σ. Then the result S{SV
certainly a uniﬁcation for all of the physical science theories where each theory
is represented by a SNj . However, in general, this union process does not yield a
consequence operator (Herrmann, 1987, p. 4). What is sought is a uniﬁcation
that generates each of the results SNj (W) and this generation is by means of a

5

consequence operator.

Theorem 5.1. Given the language Σ, and the sequentially represented set of
Nj | j ∈ IN}. Then there exists a function S with domain
consequence operators {SV
D such that for each W ∈ P(Σ) there is a z ∈ D and a nonstandard consequence
operator S(z) = S, an ultralogic, such that S{SV
Nj ( ∗W) |
Nj(W) | j ∈ IN} =
j ∈ IN} = S{ ∗ (SV
S( ∗W) ∩ Σ.

Nj(W)) | j ∈ IN} ⊂ S( ∗W) and, hence, S{SV

Nj(W) | j ∈ IN} ⊂ S{ ∗ SV

Consider the entire set of intrinsic consequence operators {SV

Proof. In Herrmann (1987, p. 4), a very special set of consequence operators is
deﬁned and shown to be closed under the union operator. For this application and
for a given X ⊂ Σ, the set is HX = {C(Y, X) | Y ⊂ Σ}. Each of the consequence
operators in HX is deﬁned as follows: for each Z ⊂ Σ, C(Y, X)(Z) = Z∪Y, if Z∩X 6=
∅; and C(Y, X)(Z) = Z otherwise. The set HX is closed under the union operator in
the following sense. Consider {C(Y1, X), . . . C(Yn, X)}, n > 1; Yk ⊂ Σ, 1 ≤ k ≤ n.
Then C(Y1 ∪ · · · ∪ Yn, X)(Z) = S{C(Y1, X)(Z), . . . , C(Yn, X)(Z)} = F(Z), F ∈ HX.
Nj | j ∈ IN}. Deﬁne
Ni | j ∈ IN}, C1(Z) =
by induction, with respect to the sequentially represented {SV
C(SV
N1(X) ∪
Nn (X), X)(Z). From this deﬁnition, it follows that for any n ∈ IN the equation
· · · ∪ SV
(*) Cn(X) = SV
Nn (X) holds for each X ⊂ Σ. All of the above is
now embedded into M and then considered as embedded into the superstructure
Y. Since {SV
Ni} is sequentially represented, there is a ﬁxed sequence g such that
Ni | j ∈ IN} and g(i)(X) = SV
, g[IN] = {SV
g(i) = SV
Ni(X). Hence for arbitrary
Ni
X ⊂ Σ, utilizing g, the above inductive deﬁnition yields a sequence fX: IN → HX
such that fX(j) = Cj and fX(j)(X) = Cj(X) and, as embedded into M, equation
(*) holds.

N2 (X), X)(Z), . . . , Cn(Z) = C(SV

N1 (X), X)(Z), C2(Z) = C(SV

N1 (X) ∪ · · · ∪ SV

N1(X) ∪ SV

Let X ⊂ Σ. Then the following sentence holds in M.

∀x∀i((x ∈ Σ) ∧ (i ∈ IN) → ((x ∈ fX(i)(X) ↔

∃j((j ∈ IN) ∧ (1 ≤ j ≤ i) ∧ (x ∈ g(j)(X)))))

By *-transfer, the sentence

∀x∀i((x ∈ ∗ Σ) ∧ (i ∈ ∗IN) → ((x ∈ ∗(fX(i)(X)) ↔

∃j((j ∈ ∗IN) ∧ (1 ≤ j ≤ i) ∧ (x ∈ ∗ (g(j)(X))))))

(1)

(2)

holds in ∗M. Due to our method of embedding and identiﬁcation, expressions (2)
can be re-expressed as

∀x∀i((x ∈ ∗ Σ) ∧ (i ∈ ∗IN) → ((x ∈ ∗fX(i)( ∗X) ↔

∃j((j ∈ ∗IN) ∧ (1 ≤ j ≤ i) ∧ (x ∈ ∗g(j)( ∗ X)))))

(3)

6

Nj(X)) ⊂ ∗(SV

Nj (X), for an arbitrary X ⊂ Σ.

∗fX: ∗IN → ∗ HX and a ﬁxed λ ∈ ∗IN − IN. Thus internal
Next consider
∗fX(λ) ∈ ∗HX is a nonstandard consequence operator, an ultralogic, that satisﬁes
statement (3). Hence, arbitrary j ∈ IN and w ∈ ∗g(j)( ∗ X) = ∗ SV
Nj( ∗ X) =
∗ (SV
Nj(X)) ⊂ ∗ Σ imply that w ∈ ∗fX(λ)( ∗ X) since 1 ≤ j < λ. Observe
that σ(SV
Nj(X)). However, under our special method for embedding
σ(SV

Nj(X)) = SV
The ﬁnal step is to vary the X ⊂ Σ and use the Axiom of Choice for the general
set theory (Herrmann, 1993, p. 2) used to construct our Y. Since the X ⊂ Σ used
above is arbitrary, the set of all such sequences fW, W ⊂ Σ, that satisfy statement
(1) and, hence, the statements (2) and (3) when embedded into ∗M exists. Using
the same type of notation for these sequences, the set D = {{ ∗fX (λ)} | X ⊂ Σ}
exists. Then there exists a choice function S that, for the ﬁxed λ, and any W ⊂ Σ
selects the ∗fW(λ) = S. The conclusions follow by combining the above results and
the proof is complete.

. However, SV

Note that usually W is a ﬁnite set. Assuming this case, then again due to our
method of embedding ∗W = W. In statement (3), ∗g(i) = ∗ SV
Ni has
Ni
had removed all of the steps that usually yield an inﬁnite collection of results when
SNi is applied to W. Thus, in most cases, SNi(W) is a ﬁnite set. Hence, if one assumes
these two ﬁnite cases, then we further have that SV
Nj(W)). The choice
function and the equation in Theorem 5.1 correspond to an ultralogic uniﬁcation
for all physical theories that describe natural world behavior when description W
represents a natural-system. Such operators as S can be interpreted in distinct ways.
If they are interpreted in a physical-like sense, then they operator in a region called
the nonstandard physical world (Herrmann, 1989), where W corresponds physically
to the natural-system it describes. The restriction S( ∗W) ∩ Σ then represents a
natural world entity. Indeed, S represents an intrinsic process that appears to guide
the development of our universe and tends to verify the Louis de Broglie statement.
“[T]he structure of the material universe has something in common with the laws
that govern the workings of the human mind” (March, 1963, p. 143).

Nj(W) = ∗ (SV

6. Probability models.

In Herrmann (1999, 2001), it is shown that given a speciﬁc probability theory
for a speciﬁc source or natural-system described by a single sentence {G} that
predicts that an event E will occur with probability p that there is an ultralogic
Pp that generates an exact sequence of such events the relative frequency of which
will converge to p. It is also shown that the patterns produced by the frequency
functions for statistical distributions that model natural-system behavior are also
the results of applications of ultralogics. Although the main results in these papers
state as part of the hypothesis that p is theory predicted, the results also hold if p or
the distribution is obtained from but empirical evidence. Theorem 2 in Herrmann
(1999, 2001) actually corresponds to Theorem 5.1. Notice that throughout Theorem
2 in Herrmann (1999,2001), the singleton set {G} can be replaced by any nonempty
ﬁnite W ⊂ Σ and not only does this theorem still hold but so do the results on

7

distributions.

Are these results for probability models consistent with Theorem 5.1? If prob-
ability models predict natural-system behavior, in any manner, then, in general, the
natural laws or processes N that are assumed to lead to such behavior only include
a statement that claims that the event sequences or distributions appear in the
natural world to be “randomly” generated. It is precisely the results in Herrmann
(1999, 2001) that show that in the nonstandard physical world such behavior need
not be randomly obtained but can be speciﬁcally generated by ultralogics. These
results are thus consistent since the ultralogics obtained from Theorem 2 neither
correspond to nor apply to any nonstandard extension of the notion of standard
“randomness.”

References

Ferris, Timothy. (1977), The Red Limit. New York: Bantam Books.
Herrmann, Robert A. (2001), “Ultralogics and probability models,” International
Journal of Mathematics and Mathematical Sciences (To appear).
Herrmann, Robert A. (1999), “The wondrous design and non-random character

of ‘chance’ events,” http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/9903038

Herrmann, Robert A. (1993), The Theory of Ultralogics.

http://www.arXiv.org/abs/math.GM/9903081 and/9903082

Herrmann, Robert A. (1989), “Fractals and ultrasmooth microeﬀects.” Journal

of Mathematical Physics 30(4):805-808.

Herrmann, Robert A. (1987), “Nonstandard consequence operators”. Kobe Jour-
nal of Mathematics 4:1-14. http://www.arXiv.org/abs/math.LO/9911204
March, Arthur and Ira M. Freeman. (1963), The New World of Physics. New

York: Vintage Books.

Tarski, Alfred. (1956), Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics; papers from 1923 -

1938, Translated by J. H. Woodger. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

8

