1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mechanism of antifreeze proteins action, based on
Hierarchic theory of water and new ”clusterphilic”
interaction

Alex Kaivarainen

H2o@karelia.ru
http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk

A basically new Hierarchic theory, general for solids and liquids (Kaivarainen,
2001, 2000, 1995, 1992), has been brieﬂy described and illustrated by computer
simulations on examples of water and ice. Full description of theory and its nu-
merous applications are presented in series of articles at the arXiv of Los-Alamos
(see http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/01022086).

New clusterphilic interactions, intermediate between hydrophilic and
hydrphobic, are introduced. They can be subdivided into: intramolecular -
when water cluster is localized in the ”open” states of big interdomain or inter-
subunit cavities and intermolecular clusterphilic interactions. Intermolecular
clusterphilic interactions can be induced by very diﬀerent macromolecules. The
latter displays themselves in bordering of water cluster by macromolecules and
forming so-called ”clustrons”.

Clusterphilic interactions can play an important role in self-organization
of biosystems, especially multiglobular allosteric enzymes, microtubules and
the actin ﬁlaments. Cooperative properties of the cytoplasm, formation of
thixotropic structures, signal transmission in biopolymers, membranes and dis-
tant interactions between diﬀerent macromolecules may be mediated by both
types of clusterphilic interactions.

The selected review of literature, devoted to antifreeze proteins (AFP) and
ice-nucleation proteins (INP) interaction with water is presented. Correspond-
ing experimental results were analyzed on the base of Hierarchic theory. The
possible mechanism of cryoproteins inﬂuence on water, changing its freezing
point has been proposed. The consequences of new model of AFP action and
ways of its experimental veriﬁcation are described also.

I. INTRODUCTION

A quantum and quantitative theory of liquid state, as well as a general
theory of condensed matter, was absent till now. This fundamental problem
is crucial for diﬀerent brunches of science and technology. The existing solid
states theories did not allow to extrapolate them successfully to liquids.

Widely used molecular dynamics method is based on classical approach and
corresponding computer simulations. It cannot be considered as a general one.

1

The understanding of hierarchic organization of matter and developing of gen-
eral theory include a mesoscopic bridge between microscopic and macroscopic
properties of condensed matter. The biggest part of molecules of solids and liq-
uids did not follow classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. This means that
only quantum approach is valid for elaboration of general theory of condensed
matter.

Our theoretical study of water and aqueous systems was initiated in
1986.
It was stimulated by necessity to explain the nontrivial phenomena,
obtained by diﬀerent physical methods in our investigations of water-protein
solutions. For example, the temperature anomalies in water physical proper-
ties, correlating with changes in large scale protein dynamics were found in our
group by specially elaborated experimental approaches (Kaivarainen, 1985). It
becomes evident, that the water clusters and water hierarchical cooperative
properties are dominating factors in self-organization, function and evolution of
biosystems. The living organisms are strongly dependent on water properties,
representing about 70% of the body mass.

Due to its numerous anomalies, water is an ideal system for testing a new
theory of condensed matter. If the theory works well with respect to water and
ice, it is very probable, that it is valid for other liquids, glasses or crystals as
well. For this reason we have made the quantitative veriﬁcation of our hierarchic
concept (Kaivarainen, 1989, 1992, 1995, 1996, 2000, 2001) on examples of water
and ice.

Our theory considers two main types of molecular heat motion: translational
(tr) and librational (lb) anharmonic oscillations, which are characterized by cer-
tain distributions in three- dimensional (3D) impulse space. The most probable
impulse or momentum (p) determine the most probable de Broglie wave (wave
B) length (λB = h/p = vph/νB) and phase velocity (vph). Conformational in-
tramolecular dynamics is taken into account indirectly, as far it has an inﬂuence
on the intermolecular dynamics and parameters of waves B in condensed matter.
Solids and liquids are considered as a hierarchical system of collective excita-
tions - metastable quasiparticles of the four new type: eﬀectons, transitons,
convertons and deformons, strongly interrelated with each other.

When the length of standing waves B of molecules exceed the distances be-
tween them, then the coherent molecular clusters may appear as a result of high
temperature molecular Bose-condensation (BC). The possibility of BC in liquids
and solids at the ambient temperatures is one of the most important results of
our model, conﬁrmed by computer simulations. Such BC is mesoscopic one, in
contrast to macroscopic BC, responsible for superﬂuidity and superconductivity.
The interaction between atoms and molecules in condensed matter is much
stronger and thermal mobility/impulse much lesser, than in gas phase. It means
that the temperature of Bose condensation can be much higher in solids and
liquids than in the gas phase. The lesser is interaction between molecules
or atoms the lower temperature is necessary for initiation of Bose
condensation.

This is conﬁrmed in 1995 by Ketterle’s group in MIT and later by few
other groups, showing the Bose-Einstein condensation in gas of neutral atoms,

2

like sodium (MIT), rubidium (JILA) and lithium (Rice University) at very low
temperatures, less than 10K. However, at this temperatures the number of atoms
in the primary eﬀectons (Bose condensate) was about 20,000 and the dimensions
were almost macroscopic: about 15 micrometers.

For comparison, the number of water molecules in primary librational eﬀec-
ton (coherent cluster), resulting from mesoscopic BC at freezing point 273 0K
is only 280 and the edge length about 20 ˚A (see Fig. 7).

Our Hierarchic theory of matter unites and extends strongly two earlier

existing most general models of solid state (Ashkroft and Mermin, 1976):

a) the Einstein model of condensed matter as a system of independent quan-

tum oscillators;

b) the Debye model, taking into account only collective phenomena - phonons

in a solid body as in continuous medium.

Among earlier models of liquid state the model of ﬂickering clusters by Frank
and Wen (1957) is closest of all to our model. In our days the quantum ﬁeld
theoretical approach to description of biosystems with some ideas, close to our
ones has been developed intensively by Umesawa’s group (Umezawa, et. al.,
1982; Umezawa, 1993) and Italian group (Del Giudice, et al., 1983; 1988, 1989).
introduced in 1998 the notion of Coherence Domains (CD),
where molecules are orchestrated by the internal electromagnetic waves (IR
photons) of matter. This idea is close to our notion of collective excitations of
condensed matter in the volumes of 3D translational and librational IR photons,
named primary electromagnetic deformons (see next section).

Arani et al.

The new physical ideas require a new terminology. It is a reason
why one can feel certain discomfort at the beginning of this work reading. To
facilitate this process, we present below a description of a new quasiparticles,
notions and terminology, introduced in our Hierarchic Theory of matter (see
Table 1). Most of notions and excitation properties, presented below are not
postulated, but are the result of our computer simulations.

II. THE NEW NOTIONS AND DEFINITIONS, INTRODUCED

IN
HIERARCHIC THEORY OF MATTER

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B).
In composition of condensed matter the dynamics of particles could be char-
acterized by the thermal anharmonic oscillations of two types: translational (tr)
and librational (lb).

The length of the most probable wave B of thermally activated molecule,
atom or atoms group in condensed matter can be estimated by two following
ways:

(λ1,2,3 = h/mv1,2,3

gr = v1,2,3

ph /ν1,2,3

B )tr,lb

(2.1)

3

where the most probable impulse p1,2,3 = mv1,2,3
is equal to product of the
particle mass (m) and most probable group velocity (v1,2,3
). The wave B length
also could be evaluated as the ratio of its most probable phase velocity (v1,2,3
ph )
to most probable frequency (ν1,2,3

gr

gr

B ).

The indices (1,2,3) correspond to selected directions of motion in 3D space,
related to the main axes of the molecules symmetry and their tensor of po-
larizability.
In the case when molecular motion is anisotropic one, we have
inequalities:

λ1
B 6= λ2

B 6= λ3

B

(2.2)

Due to anharmonicity of oscillations: (mv2/2) < (kT /2) - the most probable
kinetic energy of molecules (Tkin)tr,lb is lesser than potential one (V )tr,lb. Con-
sequently, the most probable wave B length may be bigger than space, occupied
by one molecule in condensed matter:

(V0/N0)1/3 < λ1,2,3

B > h/(mkBT )1/2

(2.2a)

where V0 and N0 are molar volume and Avogadro number correspondingly. The
left part of this inequality represents condition of mesoscopic Bose condensation.
The most probable (primary) eﬀectons (tr and lb). Such a new type
of quasiparticles (excitations) is represented by 3D superposition of three most
probable standing waves B of molecules. The shape of primary eﬀectons in a
general case can be approximated by a parallelepiped, with the length of its 3
edges determined by 3 most probable waves B length. The volume of primary
eﬀectons is equal to:

The number of molecules or atoms forming eﬀectons is:

Vef = (9/4π)λ1λ2λ3.

nm = (Vef )/(V0/N0),

(2.3)

(2.4)

where V0 and N0 are molar volume and Avogadro number, correspondingly.
The nm increases with temperature decreasing and may reach hundreds or even
thousands of molecules.

In liquids, primary eﬀectons may be checked as a clusters and in solids as

domains or microcrystalline.

The thermal oscillations in the volume of corresponding eﬀectons are syn-
chronized. It means the coherence of the most probable wave B of molecules
and their wave functions. We consider the primary eﬀectons as a result of
partial Bose condensation of molecules of condensed matter. Primary eﬀec-
tons correspond to the main state of Bose-condensate with the packing number
np = 0, i.e. with the resulting impulse equal to zero.

4

Primary eﬀectons, as a coherent clusters, represent self-organization of con-
densed matter on mesoscopic level, like I. Prigogin dissipative structures. How-
ever, it is a quantum phenomenon.

The volume of primary translational eﬀectons in liquids is less than the vol-
ume, occupied by one molecule (V0/N0), this points to the classical behavior of
molecules.

”Acoustic” (a) and ”optical” (b) states of primary eﬀectons.
The ”acoustic” a-state of the eﬀectons is such a dynamic state when molecules
or other particles composing the eﬀectons, oscillate in the same phase (i.e. with-
out changing the distance between them).

The ”optic” b-state of the eﬀectons is such dynamic state when particles
oscillate in the counterphase manner (i.e. with periodical change of the distance
between particles). This state of primary eﬀectons has a common features with
Fr¨olich’s mode (Fr¨olich, 1988).

The kinetic energies of ”acoustic” (a) and ”optical” (b) states are equal
kin] in contrast to potential energies [V a < V b]. It means that the
kin = T b
[T a
most probable impulses in (a) and (b) states and, consequently, the wave B
length and spatial dimensions of the eﬀectons in the both states are
equal. The energy of intermolecular interaction (Van der Waals, Coulomb,
hydrogen bonds etc.) in a-state are bigger than that in b-state. Consequently,
the molecular polarizability in a-state also could be bigger than in b-state. It
means that dielectric properties of matter may change as a result of shift of the
(a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium of the eﬀectons.
Primary transitons (tr and lb).
Primary transitons represent intermediate transition states between (a) and
(b) modes of primary eﬀectons - translational and librational. Primary transi-
tons (tr and lb) - are radiating or absorbing photons corresponding to trans-
lational and librational bands in oscillatory spectra. The volumes of primary
transitons and primary eﬀectons coincides (see Table 1).

Primary electromagnetic and acoustic deformons (tr, lb).
Electromagnetic primary deformons are a new type of quasiparticles (excita-
tions) representing a 3D superposition of three standing electromagnetic waves.
The IR photons originate and annihilate as a result of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb transitions of
primary eﬀectons, i.e. corresponding primary transitons. Such quantum transi-
tions are not accompanied by the ﬂuctuation of density but with the change of
polarizability and dipole moment of molecules only. Electromagnetic deformons
appear as a result of interception - superposition of 3 pairs of IR photons, pen-
etrating in matter in diﬀerent selected directions (1,2,3). We assume, that each
of these 3 pairs of photons form a standing wave in the volume of condensed
matter.

The linear dimension of each of three edges of primary deformon is deter-

mined by the wave length of 3 intercepting standing photons:

λ1,2,3 = [(n˜ν)

−1]1,2,3
tr,lb

(2.5)

5

where: n is the refraction index and (˜ν)tr,lb - the wave number of transla-
tional or librational band. These quasiparticles as the biggest ones, are respon-
sible for the long-range space-time correlation in liquids and solids.

In the case when (b → a)tr,lb transitions of primary eﬀectons are accom-
panied by ﬂuctuation of density they may be followed by emission of phonons
instead of photons. It happened when primary eﬀectons are involved in the vol-
ume of macro- and supereﬀectons (see below). Primary acoustic deformons may
originate or annihilate in such a way. But for primary eﬀectons the probability
of collective spontaneous emission of photons during (b → a)tr,lb transition is
much higher than that of phonons.

The coherent electromagnetic radiation as a result of self- correlation of
many dipole moments in composition of coherent cluster, like primary eﬀectons,
containing N ≫ 1 molecules is already known as superradiance (Dicke, 1954).

Secondary eﬀectons (tr and lb).
In contrast to primary eﬀectons, this type of quasiparticles is conventional.
They are the result of averaging of the frequencies and energies of the ”acoustic”
(a) and ”optical” (b) states of eﬀectons with packing numbers nP > 0, having
the resulting impulse more than zero.

For averaging the energies of such states the Bose-Einstein distribution was
used under the condition when T < T0 (T0 is temperature of degeneration and,
simultaneously, temperature of ﬁrst order phase transition). Under this con-
dition the chemical potential: µ = 0 and distribution has a form of Plank
equation.

Secondary transitons (tr and lb).
Secondary transitons, like primary ones are intermediate transition state
between (¯a) and (¯b) states of secondary eﬀecton - translational and librational.
Secondary transitons are responsible for radiation and absorption of phonons.
As well as secondary eﬀectons, these quasiparticles are conventional, i.e. a
result of averaging. The eﬀective volumes of secondary transitons and secondary
eﬀectons - coincides.

Secondary ”acoustic” deformons (tr and lb).
This type of quasiparticles is also conventional as a result of 3D superposi-
tion of averaged thermal phonons. These conventional phonons originate and
annihilate in a process of ( ¯a ⇔ ¯b)1,2,3 thermoactivated transitions of secondary
conventional eﬀectons (translational and librational transitons). In the case of
secondary transitons ( ¯a ⇔ ¯b)tr,lb transitions are accompanied by the ﬂuctuation
of density.

Convertons (tr ⇔ lb).
These important excitations are introduced in our model as interconversions
between translational and librational primary eﬀectons. The (acon) convertons
correspond to transitions between the (a) states of these eﬀectons and (bcon)
convertons - to that between their (b)-states. As far the dimensions of trans-
lational primary eﬀectons are much less than that of librational ones, the con-
vertons could be considered as the dissociation and association of the primary
librational eﬀectons (coherent clusters). Both of convertons: (acon) and (bcon)

6

are accompanied by density ﬂuctuation, inducing phonons with corresponding
frequency in the surrounding medium.

The ca- and cb- deformons, induced by convertons.
Three-dimensional (3D) superposition of phonons, irradiated by two types
of convertons: acon and bcon, represent in our model the acoustic ca- and cb-
deformons. They have the properties, similar to that of secondary deformons,
discussed above.

The c-Macrotransitons (Macroconvertons) and c-Macrodeformons.

Simultaneous excitation of the acon and bcon types of convertons in the
volume of primary librational eﬀectons lead to origination of big ﬂuctuation, like
cavitational one, termed c-Macrotransitons or Macroconvertons. In turn, such
ﬂuctuations induce in surrounding medium high frequency thermal phonons.
The 3D-superposition these phonons forms c- Macrodeformons.

Macroeﬀectons (tr and lb).
Macroeﬀectons (A and B) are collective simultaneous excitations of the pri-
mary and secondary eﬀectons in the [A ∼ (a, ¯a)]tr,lb and [B ∼ (b, ¯b)]tr,lb states
in the volume of primary electromagnetic translational and librational defor-
mons, respectively. This correlation of similar primary and secondary states
results in signiﬁcant deviations from thermal equilibrium. The A and B states
of macroeﬀectons (tr and lb) may be considered as the most probable volume-
orchestrated thermal ﬂuctuations of condensed matter.

Macrodeformons or macrotransitons (tr and lb).
This type of conventional quasiparticles is considered in our model as an
intermediate transition state of macroeﬀectons. The (A → B)tr,lb and (B →
A)tr,lb transitions are represented by the coherent transitions of primary and
secondary eﬀectons in the volume of primary electromagnetic deformons - trans-
lational and librational. The (A → B)tr,lb transition of macroeﬀecton is accom-
panied by simultaneous absorption of 3 pairs of photons and that of phonons in
the form of electromagnetic deformons. If (B → A)tr,lb transition occur without
emission of photons, then all the energy of the excited B-state is transmitted into
the energy of ﬂuctuation of density and entropy of Macroeﬀecton as an isolated
mesosystem. It is a dissipative process: transition from the more ordered struc-
ture of matter to the less one, termed Macrodeformons. The big ﬂuctuations
of density during (A ⇔ B)tr,lb transitions of macroeﬀectons, i.e. macrodefor-
mons are responsible for the Raleigh central component in Brillouin spectra
of light scattering (http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003070). Translational and
librational macrodeformons are also related to the corresponding types of vis-
cosity (http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003074). The volumes of macrotransi-
tons/macrodeformons (tr or lb) and macroeﬀectons coincide with that of tr or
lb primary electromagnetic deformons correspondingly.

Supereﬀectons.
This mixed type of conventional quasiparticles is composed of translational
and librational macroeﬀectons correlated in space and time in the volumes of
superimposed electromagnetic primary deformons (translational and librational
- simultaneously). Like macroeﬀectons, supereﬀectons may exist in the ground

7

S) and excited (B∗

(A∗
librium state.

S) states representing strong deviations from thermal equi-

Superdeformons or supertransitons.
This collective excitations have the lowest probability as compared to other
quasiparticles of our model. Like macrodeformons, superdeformons represent
the intermediate (A∗
S) transition state of supereﬀectons. In the course
of these transitions the translational and librational macroeﬀectons undergo
simultaneous

S ⇔ B∗

[(A ⇔ B)tr and (A ⇔ B)lb]

transitions.

S → B∗

The (A∗
S) transition of supereﬀecton may be accompanied by the absorp-
tion of two electromagnetic deformons - translational and librational simultane-
ously. The reverse (B∗
S) relaxation may occur without photon radiation.
In this case the big cavitational ﬂuctuation originates.

S → A∗

Such a process plays an important role in the processes of sublimation, evap-

oration and boiling.

The equilibrium dissociation constant of the reaction:

H2O ⇋ H + + HO

−

(2.6)

should be related with equilibrium constant of supertransitons: KB∗
A∗
S → B∗
activation of reversible dissociation of part of water molecules.

S . The
S cavitational ﬂuctuation of supereﬀectons can be accompanied by the

S⇋A∗

In contrast to primary and secondary transitons and deformons,
the notions of [macro- and supertransitons] and [macro- and superde-
formons] coincide. Such types of transitons and deformons represent the dy-
namic processes in the same volumes of corresponding primary electromagnetic
deformons.

Considering the transitions of all types of translational deformons (primary,
secondary and macrodeformons), one must keep in mind that the librational
type of modes remains the same. And vice versa, in case of librational defor-
mons, translational modes remain unchanged. Only the realization of a con-
vertons and supereﬀectons are accompanied by the interconversions between the
translational and librational modes, between translational and librational eﬀec-
tons.

Interrelation between quasiparticles forming solids and liquids.
Our model includes 24 types of quasiparticles (Table. 1):

4 - Eﬀectons
4 - Transitons
4 - Deformons









translational and librational, including
primary and secondary

(I)

8

2 - Convertons
2 − C-deformons
1 − M c-transiton
1 − M c-deformon













the set of interconvertions
between translational and librational
primary eﬀectons

2 - Macroeﬀectons
2 - Macrodeformons (cid:21)

(cid:20)

translational and librational
(spatially separated)

1 - Supereﬀectons
1 - Superdeformons (cid:21)

(cid:20)

translational ⇋ librational
(superposition of tr and lb eﬀectons
and deformons in the same volume)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

Each level in the hierarchy of quasiparticles (I - IV) introduced in our
model is based on the principle of correlation of corresponding type of a dynamic
process in space and time. All of these quasiparticles are constructed on the
same physical principles as 3D -superposition (interception) of diﬀerent types
of standing waves.

Such a system can be handled as an ideal gas of quasiparticles of

24 types.

As far each of the eﬀecton’s types: tr and lb, macroeﬀectons [tr + lb] and
supereﬀectons [tr/lb] has two states (acoustic and optic) the total number of
excitations is equal to:

Nex = 31

Three types of standing waves are included in our model:
- de Broglie waves of particles (waves B);
- acoustic waves (phonons);
- electromagnetic waves (IR photons).
This classiﬁcation reﬂects the duality of matter and ﬁeld and represent their

self-organization and interplay on mesoscopic and macroscopic levels.

Our hierarchical system includes a gradual transition from the Order (pri-
mary eﬀectons, transitons and deformons) to the Chaos (macro- and superdefor-
mons). It is important, however, that in accordance with the model proposed,
this thermal Chaos is ”organized” by hierarchical superposition of deﬁnite types
of the ordered quantum excitations. It means that the ﬁnal dynamics condensed
matter only ”looks” as chaotic one. Our approach makes it possible to take into
account the Hidden Order of Condensed Matter.

The increasing or decreasing in the concentration of primary deformons is
directly related to the shift of (a ⇔ b)tr,lb equilibrium of the primary eﬀectons
leftward or rightward, respectively. This shift, in turn, leads also to correspond-
ing changes in the energies and concentrations of secondary eﬀectons, deformons
and, consequently, to that of super- and macro-deformons. It means the ex-
isting of feedback reaction between subsystems of the eﬀectons and
deformons, necessary for long-range self-organization in macroscopic
volumes of condensed matter.

9

Table 1. Schematic representation of the 18 types of quasiparticles
of condensed matter as a hierarchical dynamic system, based on the
eﬀectons, transitons and deformons. Total number of quasiparticles,
introduced in Hierarchic concept is 24. Six collective excitations,
related to convertons- interconversions between primary librational
and translational eﬀectons and their derivatives are not represented
here for the end of simplicity.

The total internal energy of substance is determined by the contributions of
all types of quasiparticles with due regard for their own energy, concentration
and probability of excitation. Contributions of super - and macroeﬀectons and
corresponding super - and macrodeformons as well as polyeﬀectons and coherent
superclusters to the internal energy of matter normally are small, due to their
low probability of excitation, big volume and, consequently, low concentration.

The sizes of primary eﬀectons determine the mesoscopic scale of the con-
densed matter organization. According to our model, the domains, nods,
crystallites, and clusters observed in solid bodies and in liquid crys-

10

tals, polymers and biopolymers - can be a consequence of primary
translational or librational eﬀectons.

III. HIERARCHIC THERMODYNAMICS

3.1. The internal energy of matter as a hierarchical system of
collective excitations

The quantum theory of crystal heat capacity leads to the following equation

for the density of thermal internal energy (Ashkroft, Mermin 1976):

ǫ =

1
V P

Ei exp(−Ei/kT )
exp(−Ei/kT )

(3.1)

P
where V - the crystal volume; Ei - the energy of the i-stationary state.

According to our Hierarchic theory, the internal energy of matter is deter-
mined by the concentration (ni) of each type of quasiparticles, probabilities of
excitation of each of their states (Pi) and the energies of corresponding states
(Ei). The condensed matter is considered as an ”ideal gas” of 3D standing
waves of diﬀerent types (quasiparticles and collective excitations). However,
the dynamic equilibrium between types of quasiparticles is very sensitive to the
external and internal perturbations.

The total partition function - the sum of the relative probabilities of exci-
tation of all states of quasiparticles (the resulting thermoaccessibility) is equal
to:

+

Z =

ef + Pd
(cid:17)
ef + ¯Pd

ef + P b
P a
ef + ¯P b
¯P a
(cid:16)
M + P B
P A
M
(cid:1)
(cid:2)(cid:0)
+ (Pac + Pbc + PcMd) +





(cid:16)
+
+

Xtr,lb

+


+

(cid:17)
+ P M
D
tr,lb

(cid:3)
S + P s
S + P B
P A
D∗
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(3.2)

Here we take into account that the probabilities of excitation of primary and
¯Pd = ¯Pt) and
secondary transitons and deformons are the same (Pd = Pt;
related to the same processes:

(a ⇔ b)tr,lb

and (¯a ⇔ ¯b)tr,lb transitions.

The analogous situation is with probabilities of a, b and cM convertons and
corresponding acoustic deformons excitations: Pac, Pbc and PcMd = PcMt. So
it is a reason for taking them into account in the partition function only ones.
The ﬁnal formula for the total internal energy of (Utot) of one mole of matter
leading from mesoscopic model, considering the system of 3D standing waves as
an ideal gas is:

11

Utot = V0

1
Z Xtr,lb

(cid:26)(cid:20)

nef

ef Ea
P a

ef Eb
ef + P b
+ndPdEd

(cid:0)

ef + PtEt

+

(cid:1)

(cid:21)

+

¯nef
(cid:2)

(cid:0)

+

nM
(cid:2)

(cid:0)

¯P a
ef

¯Ea

ef + ¯P b

ef

¯Eb

ef + ¯Pt ¯Et

+ ¯nd ¯Pd ¯Ed

+

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

M EA
P A

M + P B

M EB
M

+ nDP D

M ED
M

tr,lb +

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

+V0

ncon

PacEac + PbcEbc + PcMtEcMt

+

1
Z

(cid:2)

(cid:0)

+ (ncdaPacEac + ncdbPbcEbc + ncMdPcMdEcMd)

+

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

+V0

ns

1
Z

(cid:2) (cid:0)

∗

∗

P A
S EA

S + P B

S EB
S

∗

∗

+ nD∗ P D

S ED
S

∗

∗

(3.3)

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

The contributions of the all types the eﬀecton’s, transitons, convertons and
deformons in total internal energy may be calculated separately as a parts of
(3.3). It is shown, that all similar contributions to the total kinetic energy can
be also simulated. The corresponding potential energy of quantum excitations
is a result of diﬀerence between total and kinetic energies.

The small contribution of intramolecular dynamics (Uin) to Utot, related to
p), may be estimated using Plank

energy of fundamental molecular modes (νi
distribution.

It has been shown by our computer simulations for the case of water and ice

that Uin ≪ Utot. It should be general condition for any condensed matter.

For the meaning of the variables in formulae (3.2 - 3.4), necessary
for the internal energy calculations, see full version of paper, pre-
sented at the Archives of Los -Alamos: http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003044

IV. QUANTITATIVE VERIFICATION OF HIERARCHIC
THEORY
ON EXAMPLES OF ICE AND WATER

All the calculations, based on Hierarchic mesoscopic concept, were per-
formed on the personal computers. The special software: ”Comprehen-
sive analyzer of matter properties” was elaborated (copyright, 1997,
Kaivarainen). The program allows to evaluate more than three hun-
dred parameters of any condensed matter if the following data are
available in the temperature interval of interest:

12

1. Positions of translational and librational bands in oscillatory

spectra;

2. Sound velocity;
3. Molar volume or density;
4. Refraction index.
The temperature dependences of diﬀerent parameters for ice and water, com-
puted using the formulas of our mesoscopic theory, are presented in Figs.(1-4).
It is only a small part of available information. In principle, it is possible to
calculate about 300 diﬀerent parameters for liquid and solid state of any con-
densed matter (Kaivarainen, 1995 and http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003044).

4.1. Discussion of theoretical temperature dependences and
comparison with experiment

It will be shown below that our hierarchic theory makes it possible to calcu-
late a lot of parameters for water and ice. Those of them that could be measured
experimentally are in excellent correspondence with results of theory.

On lowering down the temperature the total internal energy of ice (Fig. 1a)
and its components decreases nonlinearly with temperature coming closer to
absolute zero. The same parameters for water are decreasing almost linearly
within the interval (100 − 0)0C (Fig. 1b).

In computer calculations, the values of Cp(t) can be determined by diﬀeren-

tiating Utot numerically at any of temperature interval.

Fig. 1.

(a,b). Temperature dependences of the total internal
energy (Utot) and diﬀerent contributions for ice (a) and water (b)
(eqs. 4.3 - 4.5). Following contributions to Utot are presented:

(Uef + ¯Uef ) is the contribution of primary and secondary eﬀec-

tons;

13

(Ud + ¯Ud) is the contribution of primary and secondary defor-

(Uef +Ud) is the contribution of primary eﬀectons and deformons;
( ¯Uef + ¯Ud) is the contribution of secondary eﬀectons and defor-

mons;

mons.

The contributions of macro- and supereﬀectons to the total in-
ternal energy and corresponding macro- and superdeformons, as well
as all types of convertons, are much smaller than those of primary
and secondary eﬀectons and deformons.

It follows from Fig. 2a that the mean value of heat capacity for ice in the

interval from -75 to 0oC is equal to:

¯Cice

p =

∆Utot
∆T

≈ 39 J/M · K = 9.3 cal/M · K

(4.1)

For water within the whole range ∆T = 1000C, the change in the internal
energy is: ∆U = 17 − 9.7 = 7.3 kJ/M (Fig.2b). This corresponds to mean value
of heat capacity of water:

Cwater
p

=

∆Utot
∆T

= 73 J/M · K = 17.5 cal/M · K

(4.2)

These results of our theory agree well with the experimental mean values

Cp = 18 Cal/M · K for water and Cp = 9 cal/M · K for ice.

4.2. Temperature dependence of properties of primary librational
eﬀectons

The number of H2O molecules within the primary libration eﬀectons
of water, which could be approximated by a cube, decreases from nM = 280
at 00 to nM ≃ 3 at 1000 (Fig. 2a). It should be noted that at physiological
temperatures (35 − 400) such quasiparticles contain nearly 40 water molecules.
This number is close to that of water molecules that can be enclosed in the open
interdomain protein cavities judging from X-ray data. The ﬂickering of these
clusters, i.e. their (dissociation ⇋ association) due to [lb ⇔ tr] conversions
in accordance with our model is directly related to the large-scale dynamics of
proteins.

14

Fig. 2. (a) : The temperature dependencies of the number of

H2O molecules in the volume of primary librational eﬀecton (nlb
axis) and the number of H2O per length of this eﬀecton edge (κ,
the temperature dependence of the water pri-
right axis);
mary librational eﬀecton (approximated by cube) edge length [llib
ef =
κ(V0/N0)1/3].

(b):

M )ef , left

It is very important that the linear dimensions of such water clusters (11˚A)
at physiological temperature are close to common ones for protein domains (Fig.
2b).

Such spatial correlations indicate that the properties of water ex-
erted a strong inﬂuence on the biological evolution of macromolecules,
namely, their dimensions and allosteric properties due to cooperative-
ness of intersubunit water clusters.

We assume here that integer and half-integer values of number of water
molecules per eﬀecton’s edge [κ] (Fig. 2a) reﬂect the conditions of increased and
decreased stabilities of water structure correspondingly. It is apparently related
to the stability of primary librational eﬀectons as cooperative and coherent
water clusters.

Nonmonotonic behavior of water properties with temperature is widely known
and well conﬁrmed experimental fact (Drost-Hansen, 1976, 1992; Clegg and
Drost-Hansen, 1991; Etzler, 1991; Roberts and Wang, 1993; Roberts and Wang,
1993; Roberts, et al., 1993, 1994; Wang et al., 1994).

We can explain this interesting and important for biological functions phe-
nomenon because of competition between two factors: quantum and
structural ones in stability of primary librational eﬀectons. The quan-
tum factor such as wave B length, determining the value of the eﬀecton edge:

lef = κ(V0/N0)1/3 ˜ λB
h

ilb

(4.3)

15

decreases monotonously with temperature increasing. The structural factor is a
discrete parameter depending on the water molecules eﬀective length:
lH2O =
(V0/N0)1/3 and their number [κ] in the eﬀecton’s edge.

In accordance with our model, the shape of primary librational
eﬀectons in liquids and of primary translational eﬀectons in solids
could be approximated by parallelepiped in general case or by cube,
when corresponding thermal movements of molecules (lb and/or tr)
and are isotropic.

We suggest that when (lef ) corresponds to integer number of H2O, i.e.

[κ = (lef /lH2O) = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6...]lb

(4.4)

the competition between quantum and structural factors is minimum and pri-
mary librational eﬀectons are most stable. On the other hand, when (lef /lH2O)lb
is half-integer, the librational eﬀectons are less stable (the competition is maxi-
mum). In the latter case (a ⇔ b)lb equilibrium of the eﬀectons must be shifted
rightward - to less stable state of these coherent water clusters. Consequently,
the probability of dissociation of librational eﬀectons to a number of much
smaller translational eﬀecton, i.e. probability of [lb/tr] convertons increases
and concentration of primary librational eﬀectons decreases. Experimentally
the nonmonotonic change of this probability with temperature could be reg-
istered by dielectric permittivity, refraction index measurements and by that
of average density of water. The refraction index change should lead to corre-
sponding variations of surface tension, vapor pressure, viscosity, self-diﬀusion in
accordance to our hierarchic theory (Kaivarainen, 1995).

4.3. Mechanism of ﬁrst order phase transition in terms of hierarchic
theory

The mechanism of 1st order phase transition - water freezing, leading from
our Hierarchic theory, is important for understanding the mechanism of an-
tifreeze molecules action.

The abrupt increase of the total internal energy (U) as a result of ice melt-
ing (Fig. 3a), equal to 6.27 kJ/M, calculated from our theory is close to the
experimental data (6 kJ/M) (Eisenberg, 1969). The resulting thermoaccessibil-
ity or partition function (Z, eq.3.2) during [ice → water] transition decreases
abruptly, while potential and kinetic energies increase (Fig. 3b).

16

Fig. 3. The total internal energy (U = Tkin +Vp) change during
ice-water phase transition and change of the resulting thermoacces-
sibility (Z) - (a); changes in kinetic (Tkin) and potential (Vp) energies
(b) as a result of the same transition.

It is important that at the melting point the H2O molecules number in a
primary translational eﬀecton (ntr
M )ef decreases from 1 to ≃ 0.4 (Fig. 4a). It
means that the volume of this quasiparticle type gets smaller than the volume
occupied by H2O molecule. According to our model, under such conditions the
individual water molecules get the independent translation mobility, increasing
the number of tr degrees of freedom. The number of water molecules forming
a primary libration eﬀecton decreases abruptly from about 3000 to 280, as a
result of melting. This also increases the number of molecules, participating in
translations. The number of H2O in the secondary librational eﬀecton decreases
correspondingly from ∼ 1.25 to 0.5 (Fig. 4b).

Fig. 5 a,b contains more detailed information on changes in primary libra-

tional eﬀecton parameters in the course of ice melting.

The theoretical dependences obtained allow us to give a clear interpretation
of the ﬁrst order phase transitions. The condition of melting at T = Tcr is
realized in the course of heating when the number of molecules in the volume
of primary translational eﬀectons nM decreases:

nM ≥ 1(T ≤ Tcr)

Tc→ nM ≤ 1(T ≥ Tcr)

(4.5)

17

M )ef and secondary (¯ntr

Fig. 4. Changes of the number of H2O molecules forming pri-
mary (ntr
M )ef translational eﬀectons during
ice-water phase transition (a). Changes in the number of H2O
molecules forming primary (nlb
M )ef librational
eﬀectons (b) as a result of phase transitions.

M )ef and secondary (¯nlb

The process of boiling, i.e. [liquid → gas] transition, as seen from Fig. 4a,
is also determined by condition (4.5), but in this case it is realized for primary
librational eﬀectons.

In other words this means that [gas → liquid] transition is related to orig-
ination (condensation) of the primary librational eﬀectons which contain more
than one molecule of substance.

In a liquid as compared to gas, the quantity of rotational degrees
of freedom is decreased due to librational coherent eﬀectons forma-
tion, but the number of translational degrees of freedom remains the
same. The latter, in turn also decreases during [liquid → solid] phase
transition, when the wave B length of molecules corresponding to
their translations begins to exceed the mean distances between the
centers of molecules (Fig. 4a). This process is accompanied by partial Bose-
condensation (BC) of translational waves B and by the formation of coherent
primary translational eﬀectons, including more than one molecule. The size
of librational eﬀectons grows up strongly during this [water → ice] transition.
This enlarged lb-eﬀectons and their associates may fulﬁll the role of nucleation
centers, necessary for [liquid → solid] transition. Interaction and adsorption of
individual water molecules with such big structures damp the translational mo-
bility of water molecules and increase their corresponding kind of de Broglie
wave length till critical value, allowing mesoscopic molecular BC.

Consequently, it follows from the theory, that all factors, preventing the
enlargement of primary [lb] eﬀectons in the range of molecular numbers: 280-
3000 and their possible polymerization will serve as an antifreeze factors.

18

Fig. 5. Changes of the number of H2O molecules forming a
primary librational eﬀecton (nlb
M )ef , the number of H2O molecules
(κ) in the edge of this eﬀecton (a) and the length of the eﬀecton
ef = κ(V0/N0)1/3 (b) during the ice-water phase transition.
edge: llb

Our results do not contradict to conventional interpretation of ﬁrst order
phase transitions and give them clear quantum explanation. The number of
molecules in volumes of primary eﬀectons: translational and librational can be
considered as the ”parameters of order”, characterizing the condition of ﬁrst
order phase transition.

The results of computer simulations, conﬁrms the correctness of
new theory of condensed matter, as a hierarchic system of 3D stand-
It
ing waves of diﬀerent nature and demonstrate its possibilities.
may be applied for understanding the mechanism of antifreeze pro-
teins action.

V. PROPERTIES OF ANTIFREEZE PROTEINS

5.1. Properties of the antifreeze (AFP) and ice-nucleation proteins
(INP)

The antifreeze proteins (AFP), discovered in arctic ﬁsh by P. Scholander 1957
and studied later profoundly by group, led by Garth Fletcher and Choy Hew are
widely spread in the nature. AFP are used for surviving at low temperatures
not only by Arctic and Antarctic ﬁsh, but also by frogs, insects, plants, crops,
microbes, etc.

The interest to AFP is substantial ﬁrst of all because of undergoing large
research programs on the development of genetically manipulated crop plants
adapted to cold climate. Quite recently, the importance of AFP has been even
intensiﬁed by a range of more straightforward technical applications. For ex-
ample, AFP can be used for:

- preservation of blood substances;
- protection of human organs for transplantation at low temperatures;

19

- preservation of texture of frozen food after melting.
All these applications exploit AFP´ability to inhibit formation of big ice
crystals, damaging the cytoplasmic supramolecular structure of cells, cell mem-
branes and tissues. However, the mechanism of speciﬁc inﬂuence of AFP on
primary hydrated shell, vicinal water and bulk water is still obscure. On the
other hand, this understanding is very important for the full exploitation of
AFP .

At the 216th American Chemical Society Meeting in Boston (autumn 1998)
possible mechanisms of action of AFP, including the role of hydrogen bonding in
the interaction of the protein structure with ice, and contribution of hydropho-
bic interaction between the protein and water was discussed. The summary
by Dr. Fletcher, president of A/F Protein Inc., was not optimistic: ”We are
less certain of how it works now than we were 10 years ago”. Peter Davies
supposed, that speciﬁc hydrogen bonds on the surface of protein inhibit crystal
growth. The interesting observation is that AFP accumulates at the interface
between ice and water. A. Haymet (University of Houston) hypothesized that a
hydrophobic reaction between the protein and the neighboring water prevents
water from forming ice crystals. To test this idea Harding (University of Syd-
ney) synthesized several mutant ﬂounder proteins and compared them with wild
type proteins. Two mutants lacking all threonine residues - the hydroxyl groups
necessary for hydrogen bonding - behaved exactly like the wild type proteins
without hydroxyls. These results mean that hydrogen [protein-water] bonding
does not play the main role in antifreeze activity (Haymet et al., 1998).

In a series of experiments, Davies and colleagues compared antifreeze pro-
teins found in ﬁsh with much stronger ones produced in some moths and bee-
tles. The insect proteins inhibited ice growth up to -6 degrees Celsius-about
four times the eﬃcacy of known ﬁsh proteins. The results point out, in turn,
that threonine with its hydroxyl groups plays an important role in AFP activity,
since this amino acid is more abundant in insect proteins than in ﬁsh proteins.
AFP found in the winter ﬂounder, is structurally long and thin, while the
other three types of AFP are more circular. Therefore, it may be misleading to
use that protein as a model for how all the other types work.

The fact that all antifreeze proteins studied are rich in hydrogen-bonding
amino acid groups cannot be ignored, especially since many other structural
and sequential aspects of antifreeze proteins diﬀer drastically from type to type.
The understanding of general principles of how the diﬀerent types of antifreeze
mechanisms work could help to build up eﬀective synthetic molecules for diﬀer-
ent practical purposes.

AFPs lower the non-equilibrium freezing point of water (in the presence
of ice) below the melting point, thereby producing a diﬀerence between the
freezing and melting points that has been termed thermal hysteresis. In gen-
eral, the magnitude of the thermal hysteresis depends upon the speciﬁc activity
and concentration of AFP. The study of (Li et al., 1998) describes several low-
molecular-mass solutes that enhance the thermal hysteresis activity of an AFP
from overwintering larvae of the beetle Dendroides canadensis. The most active
of these is citrate, which increases the thermal hysteresis nearly sixfold from 1.2

20

◦C in its absence to 6.8 ◦C. Solutes which increase activity approximately four-
fold are succinate, malate, aspartate, glutamate and ammonium sulfate. Glyc-
erol, sorbitol, alanine and ammonium bicarbonate increase thermal hysteresis
approximately threefold. Sodium sulfate at high concentration (0.5 mol/l) elim-
inated activity of all listed solutes. Solute concentrations between 0.25 and 1
mol/1 were generally required to elicit optimal thermal hysteresis activity. Glyc-
erol is the only one of these enhancing solutes that is known to be present at
these concentrations in overwintering D. Canadensis. The mechanism of this en-
hancement of AFP activity by low molecular solutes is unknown. The AFP used
in this study was (DAFP-4) type. The mature protein consists of 71 amino acid
residues arranged in six 12- or 13-mer repeats with a consensus sequence con-
sisting of Cys-Thr-X3-Ser-X5-X6-Cys-X8-X9-Ala-X11-Thr-X13, where X3 and
X11 tend to be charged residues.

For understanding the mechanisms of AFP, it is important to compare them
with ice nucleation proteins (INP) with the opposite eﬀect on water structure.
INP are responsible for another strategy to survive freezing temperature -
to make the animals and plants freeze tolerant. Such organisms secrete INP to
the extracellular environment. INP eﬀects that ice-formation outside the cells
decreases since it minimizes the extent of supercooling, so that freezing becomes
less destructive to cells, making a time for cells to the cold acclimation. Such
adaptation should be accompanied by dehydration of cells due to decreasing
of water activity in the space out of cells and corresponding passive osmotic
diﬀusion of water from cells.

The tertiary structure of the ice-nucleation protein is likely to be regular,
consistent with the expectation of its forming a template for ice-matching. INP
stimulates the formation of ”ice embryo” - a region with some characteristics of
macroscopic ice.

INP catalyze ice formation at temperatures much higher than most organic
or inorganic substances (Gurian-Sherman and Lindow, 1993). Models of INPs
predict that they form a planar array of hydrogen bonding groups that are
closely complementary to the ice crystal. The circular dichroism spectra of
the INP indicate the presence of large beta-sheet folds. This may explain the
tendency of INPs to aggregate (Schmid, et al., 1997).

Bacterial ice-nucleation proteins are among the most active nucleants. The
three-dimensional theoretical model of such proteins, based on molecular mod-
eling, predicts a largely planar extended molecule, with one side serving as a
template for ice-like spatial orientation of water molecules and the other side in-
teracting with the membrane (Kajava and Lindow, 1993). This model predicts
also that INPs can form big aggregates by interdigitation.

In contrast to INPs, AFPs do not display any tendency to aggregation at
physiological concentrations. Moreover, the hydroxyl groups on the surface of
AFPs, combined with hydrophobic properties looks to be important for their
inhibition of the process of ice formation.

5.2. X-ray and other experimental data on AFP

21

The X-ray analysis with resolution of 1.25 ˚A for crystals of globular type
III AFP with molecular mass of 7 kD was reported by Jia et al.
(1996).
It reveals a remarkably ﬂat aphipathic ice-binding site where ﬁve hydrogen-
bonding atoms match two ranks of oxygens on the [1010] ice prism plane in the
<0001>direction, giving high ice-binding aﬃnity and speciﬁcity. It looks that
type III AFP occupies a niche in the ice surface in which it covers the basal
plane while binding to the prism face.

The ice-binding mechanism of the long linear alpha-helical type I AFP (33
kD as been attributed to their regularly spaced polar residues matching into the
ice lattice along a pyramidal plane (Sicheri and Yang, 1995).

The AFP of type III was linked through its N-terminals to thiodoxin (12
kD) or maltose-binding protein (42 kD). The resultant 20-kD and 50-kD fusion
proteins were larger in diameter than free AFP and thus precluded any extensive
[AFP - AFP] contacts on the ice surface. Both fusion proteins had the same
activity as free AFP (III) at diﬀerent concentration tested. This points out that
AFP do not require speciﬁc intermolecular interaction to bind to ice in a way,
inhibiting crystal growth (DeLuca et al., 1998).

AFP are structurally diverse molecules that share an ability to bind to ice
crystals and inhibit their growth. The type II ﬁsh AFP of Atlantic herring
and smelt are unique among known AFPs in their requirement of a cofactor
for antifreeze activity. These AFPs are homologous with the carbohydrate-
recognition domains of Ca2+-dependent (C-type) lectins and require Ca2+ for
their activity. To investigate the role of metal ions in the structure and function
of type II AFP, binding of Ca2+ and other divalent cations to herring AFP was
investigated (Ewart et al., 1996). The studies showed that AFP has a single
Ca2+-binding site.

Proteolytic protection studies and measurement of antifreeze activity re-
vealed a conformational change from a protease-sensitive and inactive apoAFP
to a protease-resistant active AFP upon Ca2+ binding. Other divalent metal
ions including Mn2+, Ba2+, and Zn2+ bind at the Ca2+-binding site and in-
duce a similar change.

An increase in tryptophan emission intensity at 340 nm also occurred upon
Ca2+ addition. Whereas antifreeze activity appeared normal when Ca2+ or
Mn2+ were bound, it was much lower in the presence of other metal ions.
When Ba2+ was bound to the AFP, ice crystals showed a distinct diﬀerence
in morphology. These studies demonstrate that herring AFP speciﬁcally binds
Ca2+ and, consequently, adopts a conformation that is essential for its ice-
binding activity.

The ability to control extracellular ice formation during freezing is critical
to the survival of freezing-tolerant plants. AFPs, having the ability to retard
ice crystal growth, were recently identiﬁed as the most abundant apoplastic
proteins in cold-acclimated winter rye (Secale cereale L.) leaves.

The thermodynamics of intracellular ice nucleation are important in low-
temperature biology for understanding and controlling the process of cell de-

22

struction by freezing. A new apparatus and technique for studying the physics
of intracellular ice nucleation was developed (Tatsutani, Rubinsky, 1998). Em-
ploying the principle of directional solidiﬁcation in conjunction with light mi-
croscopy, one can generate information on the temperature at which ice nu-
cleates intracellularly as a function of the thermal history which the cells are
encountered. The methods were introduced, and results with primary prostatic
cancer cells were described.

AFPs depress the freezing temperature of a solution in a non-colligative
manner, by arresting the growth of ice crystals. The kinetics of this eﬀect, as
studied using a new technique called temperature gradient thermometry, are
consistent with an adsorption-mediated inhibitory mechanism (Chapsky, Ru-
binsky, 1997). The results provided a new experimental basis for understanding
AFP interactions with ice.

A new microsensor that can analyze microliter volume samples was used
to measure the viscosity of aqueous solutions of antifreeze glycoproteins as a
function of temperature and concentration (Eto, Rubinsky, 1993). The results
showed that at physiological concentrations which naturally occur in ﬁsh, AFPs
signiﬁcantly increased viscosity of aqueous solution. The probability for ice nu-
cleation is inversely proportional to viscosity. Therefore, the increased viscosity
could explain, in part, reports on the beneﬁcial eﬀects of antifreeze glycopro-
teins during cryopreservation by vitriﬁcation. Reducing the probability for ice
nucleation could be also beneﬁcial for the survival of cold-water ﬁsh in their
natural habitat. Millimolar concentrations of AFPs increase viscosity of aque-
ous solution to values comparable with those of conventional cryoprotectants in
molar concentrations.

5.3 Molecular dynamics approach to the mechanism of AFP activity
and its biomimetics

Computer assisted approach to design of biomimetic inhibitors controlling
crystal growth was used by Wierzbicki and Madura from University of South
Alabama, USA. Other eﬀorts alike are the new drug development and the en-
tirely new methods of organ cryopreservation. The focus was on biomimetics
that modify crystal growth via stereospeciﬁc crystal surface inhibition.

Research eﬀorts since the late 1960s have determined that the antifreeze ac-
tivity occurs through a unique non-colligative mechanism (DeVries et al.,1984;
Feeney et al., 1986). This non-colligative activity is evidenced by a lowering of
the freezing point without aﬀecting the osmotic pressure (i.e. water activity)
or the melting temperature (Feeney et al.,1973; Tomchaney et al., 1982). Al-
though the antifreeze polypeptides do not function through a colligative mode
for dissolved solutes, they must act in some speciﬁc way to alter the physical
properties and interactions of the ice-water system. Several possible mechanistic
explanations for this observed phenomenon of antifreeze activity may involve the
solution phase itself, formation of solid solutions, and/or the inhibition of ice-
crystal growth at the ice solution interface (Feeney et al., 1986). It is, however,

23

this latter explanation that has received the main attention. Accommodation
of antifreeze molecules onto the ice surface leads to perturbations in both the
thermodynamics of the surface interactions and the activation energy of the
process. Ice propagation becomes disrupted forcing ice growth to be limited to
discrete areas lacking the antifreeze molecules (Raymond and DeVries , 1972;
1977). This eﬀect, known as the Kelvin eﬀect, has been recently accepted as an
explanation of the non-colligative freezing point depression mechanism of AFPs
(Knight et al., 1991).

Three diﬀerent types of AFPs, namely of Type I, Type II, and Type III, in-
teracting stereospeciﬁcally with appropriate faces of ice crystal, induce the mod-
iﬁcation of ice crystal shape and cessation of crystal growth within well-deﬁned
temperature. For the alpha-helical Type I antifreeze protein, the polypeptide-
crystal interaction leads to hexagonal bipyramidal shape of ice crystal.

In a recent reviews by Feeney and Yeh (1993, 1996) several viable practical
applications of both native and/or synthetic antifreeze peptides were discussed.
These include such areas of application as recrystallization inhibition, protection
for non-polar ﬁsh, agricultural crops, as well as many foodstuﬀs that require
reduced temperatures or freezing conditions for long term storage.

Since ice crystal growth is responsible for cellular/tissue damages within bi-
ological materials, the inhibitors or modiﬁers of ice crystal growth, analogous to
the functional behavior of native antifreeze polypeptides, need to be developed
for the reduction of this damage.

Notwithstanding the big eﬀorts, directed to elucidation of AFP mechanisms,
they are still quite obscure. Especially poorly understood is the AFPs´inﬂuence
on vicinal water: 3-60 ˚A from biopolymer surface and even more distant from
surface water medium. The main diﬃculty of this problem was the absence
of right theoretical approach to analysis of distant water-protein interaction,
which is directly interrelated with the absence of general theory of water and
ice, including the mechanism of 1st order phase transition.

It is evident from the literature data presented, that the mecha-
nism of action of AFPs cannot be understood by existing methods.
The innovative, principally new approaches must be applied for solv-
ing this problem.

The advantage of our approach is that one of us (A. K.) during last 12
years has elaborated the new Hierarchic Theory of Condensed Matter, gen-
eral for liquids and solids, published in a few books. This theory was veri-
ﬁed quantitatively on examples of water ice, using theory-based computer pro-
gram: ”Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP)” [copyright,
1997, Kaivarainen] as it was partially illustrated at Sections 1- 4 of this arti-
cle. The full description of theory is located at the Archives of Los-Alamos:
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/01022086.

It will be illustrated below, how our Hierarchic theory can be applied to

explanation of mechanism of AFP action.

24

VI. HIERARCHIC APPROACH TO THEORY OF SOLUTIONS
AND COLLOID SYSTEMS

The action of the dissolved molecules can lead to the shift of equilibrium to
the right or to the left for eﬀectons (tr and lb) of solvent. In the former case the
lifetime of unstable state for primary eﬀectons increases, and in the latter case
the stabilization of molecular associates (clusters) takes place. The same is true
for convertons´equilibrium: [lb\tr], reﬂecting [association\dissociation] of water
clusters (primary librational eﬀectons). If the wave B length of the dissolved
molecule or atoms exceeds the dimensions of primary eﬀectons, then it must
increase the degree of liquid association due to MESOSCOPIC molecular Bose
condensation. In the opposite case the ordering of liquid structure decreases.

In host-guest systems a following situations are possible:
1) guest molecules stabilize (a)-states of host eﬀectons ( tr and lb) and

increases their dimensions.

As a result, the (a ⇋ b) equilibrium of the eﬀectons and [lb ⇋ tr] equi-
librium of convertons (see section II) becomes shifted leftward decreasing po-
tential energy of a system, corresponding to its stabilization eﬀect;

2) guest molecules destabilize (a)-states of host eﬀectons. The (a - b) and
[lb - tr] equilibrium of the primary eﬀectons and convertons correspondingly are
shifted rightward, inducing general destabilization eﬀect of the system;

3) guest and host molecules form separate individual eﬀectons (mesophase)

without separation in two macrophases.

The interaction of a solute (guest) molecule with librational sol-
vent eﬀectons can be subdivided into two cases: when the rotational
correlation time of a guest molecule is less (A) and more (B) than
the rotational correlation time of librational eﬀectons-coherent water
clusters. This time is proportional to the mass and volume of the [lb] eﬀec-
ton. The number of molecules in a librational primary eﬀecton, depending on
temperature: in water it decreases from 280 till to 3 in the temperature interval
0-100 degrees of C (Fig.2). This means that the mass of primary [lb] eﬀecton
of liquid water near freezing point is about 5000 D.

When the condition (A) is realized, small and neutral guest molecules aﬀect
presumably only the translational eﬀectons. In the second case (B) the guest
macromolecules can change the properties of both types of eﬀectons: transla-
tional and librational and shift the equilibrium [lb\tr] of convertons to the left,
stimulating the cluster formation. In accordance with our model, the hydrophilic
interaction is related to the shift of the (a - b) equilibrium of translational ef-
fectons to the left. As far the potential energy of the (a) state is less than that
in the (b) state (Table 1), it means that such solvent-solute (host- guest) inter-
action will decrease the potential and free energy of the solution. Hydrophilic
interaction does not need the realization of condition (II).

Hydrophobic interaction can be explained by the shift of the (a ⇋ b) equi-
librium of librational eﬀectons to the right. Such a shift results in the increased

25

potential energy of the system. The dimensions of coherent water clusters, rep-
resenting librational eﬀectons under condition (II) may even increase. However,
the decrease in of entropy (S) in this case is more than that in enthalpy (H)
and, consequently, free energy will increase:

∆G = ∆H − T ∆S > 0

(6.1)

This is a source of hydrophobic interaction, leading to aggregation of hydropho-
bic particles.

6.1. The new Clusterphilic Interaction of water with macromolecules

A new kind of Clusterphilic Interaction was introduced (Kaivarainen,
1985, 1995; 2000) to describe the cooperative water cluster interaction with
nonpolar protein cavities. This idea has got support in the framework of our
hierarchic theory.

Clusterphilic interactions are related to:
1) the leftward shift of (a ⇋ b) equilibrium of primary librational eﬀectons

under condition (B);

2) to the similar shift of the equilibrium of [lb ⇋ tr] of convertons; and
3) increasing of primary [lb] eﬀectons dimensions due to water molecules

immobilization near the surface of macromolecules.

The latter eﬀect is a result of decreasing of the rotational correlation time
of librational eﬀectons and decreasing of the most probable impulses of water
molecules, related to librations under the eﬀect of big enough guest particles.

Clusterphilic interactions can be subdivided into:

1. Intramolecular - when water cluster is localized in the ”open” states of

big interdomain or intersubunit cavities;

2. Intermolecular clusterphilic interactions. Intermolecular clusterphilic in-

teractions can be induced by very diﬀerent suﬃciently big macromolecules.

Clusterphilic interactions can play an important role in the self-organization
of biosystems, especially multiglobular allosteric enzymes, microtubules and
the actin ﬁlaments. Cooperative properties of the cytoplasm, formation of
thixotropic structures, signal transmission in biopolymers, membranes and dis-
tant interactions between diﬀerent macromolecules can be mediated by both
types of clusterphilic interactions.

Clusterphilic interactions and possible self-organization in colloid systems -
thixotropic structure formation, are promoted mainly by decreasing of contribu-
tion to potential energy, related to librations in the presence of macromolecules.
Hydrophilic interactions are the result of decreasing of the contribution of poten-
tial energy related to translations of water molecules. Hydrophobic interaction
is a consequence of increasing of potential energy of system, related to rightward
[a ⇋ b] equilibrium shift of both kind of the eﬀectons: librational and transla-
tional under the inﬂuence of guest molecules, as far Va < Vb. Macromolecules

26

or polymers with molecular mass less than 2 kD do not satisfy the condition
(B) at the ambient and cannot stimulate the growth of librational eﬀectons.

6.2. The multi-fractional nature and properties of interfacial water

We can present here a classiﬁcation and description of FOUR interfacial

water fraction properties, based on the hierarchic model:

1. First fraction - primary hydration shell with maximum energy of interac-

tion with surface.

The structure and dynamics of this 1st fraction can diﬀer strongly from those

of bulk water. Its thickness (3-10 ˚A) corresponds to 1-3 solvent molecules;

2. Second fraction - vicinal water (VW) is formed by elongated primary lb
eﬀectons with saturated hydrogen bonds. It is a result of lb eﬀecton adsorption
on the primary hydration shell from the bulk volume. The thickness of this
fraction of interfacial water: (30-75 ˚A) corresponds to 10-25 molecules and is
dependent on the temperature, dimensions of colloid particles and their surface
mobility. VW can exist in rigid pores of corresponding dimensions;

3. Third fraction of interfacial water - the surface-stimulated Bose-condensate
(SSBC), represented by 3D network of primary librational eﬀectons has a thick-
ness of (50-300 ˚A ). It is a next hierarchical level of interfacial water self-
organization on the surface of second fraction (VW). The time of gradual forma-
tion of this 3D net of linked to each other coherent clusters (strings of polyeﬀec-
tons), is much longer than that of VW and it is more sensitive to temperature
and other perturbations. The second and third fractions of interfacial water can
play an important role activity of biological cells activity;

4. The biggest and most fragile fourth fraction of interfacial water can be a
result of slow orchestration of bulk primary eﬀectons in the volume of primary
(electromagnetic) lb deformons. The primary deformons appears as a result of
three standing IR photons (lb) interception. Corresponding IR photons are su-
perradiated by the enlarged lb eﬀectons of vicinal water. The linear dimension
of primary IR deformons is about half of librational IR photons, i.e. 5 microns
(5*10ˆ4 ˚A). This ”superradiation orchestrated water (SOW)” fraction easily
can be destroyed not only by temperature increasing, ultrasound and Brownian
movement, but even by mechanical shaking. The time of spontaneous reassem-
bly of this fraction after destruction has an order of hours and is dependent
strongly on temperature, viscosity and dimensions of colloid particles. The pro-
cesses of self-organization of third (SSBC) and forth (SOW) fractions can be
interrelated by feedback interaction.

VII. Theoretical model of the antifreeze proteins (AFP) action

Hierarchic model of the formation of ”clustron” structures by AFP and their
possible inﬂuence on water and ice-formation. We will proceed from our model
of 1st order phase transition, described above and experimental data available.

27

The preliminary model, we are going to elaborate should be able to explain the
following results:

a) decreasing of freezing point of water at relatively small concentrations of
puriﬁed AFP of about (0.5-1) mg/ml at weak buﬀers at physiological pH (7.0 -
7.5). At these concentrations the water activity and osmotic pressure practically
do not change thus explaining the hysteresis between freezing and melting;

b) changing of shape of ice crystals from hexagonal, pertinent for pure water,

to elongated bipyramidal one;

c) accumulation of AFPs at the interface between ice and water;
d) ”controversy” of AFPs´surface properties, i.e.

the presence of regular
hydroxyl groups necessary for hydrogen bonding, like threonine residues and
their ability to inhibit the ice microcrystal growth;

e) signiﬁcant increase of viscosity of water in presence of AFPs, directly

correlated with their antifreezing activity.

Our mechanism of AFP action, is related to speciﬁc inﬂuence of
these proteins on the properties of primary librational eﬀectons and
translational mobility of water molecules.

Our model includes the following stages:
1. Tendency of AFP to surround the primary [lb] eﬀectons with their four-
coordinated ideal ice structure, resulted from certain stereo-chemical comple-
mentary between distribution of side group on the surface of AFP and ice;

2. Increasing the dimensions of this coherent clusters due to water molecules
librations immobilization near the surface and vicinal water, corresponding de-
creasing of the most probable [lb] impulse (momentum) and increasing of de
Broglie wave (wave B) length. Such enlarged water clusters (primary [lb] eﬀec-
ton) surrounded by macromolecules we named ”clustron” (Kaivarainen 1995,
1998);

3. Changing the symmetry of librational water molecules, thermal oscilla-
tions, from almost isotropic to anisotropic ones. Thus it means redistribution of
thermal energy between three librational degrees of freedom again due to special
spatial/dynamic properties of AFP surface. The consequence of this eﬀect can
be the change of ice-nucleation centers shape from hexagonal to bipyramidal,
making the process of freezing less favorable. It should result in corresponding
change in ice microcrystal form;

4. Bordering of the enlarged primary [lb] eﬀectons by AFP provides the
”insulation eﬀect”, preventing the association of these eﬀectons to big enough
nucleation centers, which normally accompany the water-ice transition, judging
from our computer simulations;

5. Increasing the number of defects in the process of ice lattice formation
in presence of AFP, as far the freezing temperature of water inside clustron can
be much lower than in free bulk water. It is known experimental fact that the
freezing point of water in pores or cavities with dimensions of about nanometers
is much lower, than in bulk water (Kaivarainen, 1985). Such the interface eﬀect
may explain accumulation of AFP between solid and liquid phase;

28

6. Shifting the equilibrium between the ground - acoustic (a) state of en-
larged primary [lb] eﬀectons and optic (b) state to the latter one. This shift
increases the potential energy of the aﬀected [lb] eﬀecton because the potential
energy of (b) state is higher that of (a) and the kinetic energy of both states
are the same in accordance to our model;

7. Increasing the probability and frequency of excitation of [lb-tr] conver-
tons, i.e. [association - dissociation] of water molecules in the volume of clus-
tron, accompanied by water density ﬂuctuations and corresponding pulsation
of the clustron’s volume;

8. Radiation of the ultrasound (US) waves by clustrons, pulsing with fre-
quency of convertons (106-107) s−1. These US waves destroy the ice-nucleation
centers and activate the translational mobility (impulse) of water molecules,
In accordance
decreasing the translational wave B length (λtr = h/mvtr).
to condition of the 1st order phase transition (4.5) this eﬀect decreases the
freezing point of water. The melting point remains unchanged, explaining the
T-hysteresis provided by AFP, because the clustron pulsation in solid phase of
system are inhibited;

9. Tendency to association of pulsing clustrons to form thixotropic-like
structures in liquid phase, could be a consequence of Bjorkness hydrodynamic
attractive forces, existing between pulsing particles, which radiate the acoustic
density waves and dipole-dipole interaction between clustrons. The formation
of thixotropic structures, resulting from clustron association, explains the in-
creasing of viscosity in AFP solutions.

This preliminary model of AFP action, based on hierarchic theory (Kaivarainen,

2001), includes the mechanism of interfacial water formation and theory of solu-
tions, described above. The goal of our future experimental work is to conﬁrm
the main idea of proposed mechanism and evaluate the role of all contributions,
listed above.

The self-organization of thixotropic- like structures in aqueous so-
lutions of macromolecules was experimentally shown by Giordano et al.,
(1981).
It seems to be very general phenomena. The results obtained from
viscosity, acoustic and light-scattering measurements showed the existence of
long-range structures that exhibit a thixotropic behavior. This was shown for
solutions of lysozyme, bovine serum albumin (BSA), hemoglobin and DNA.
Ordered structure builds up gradually in the course of time to become fully
developed after more than 10-15 hours. When a sample is mechanically shaken
this type of self-organization is destroyed. The ”preferred distance” between
macromolecules in such an ordered system is about 50 ˚A as revealed by small
angle neutron scattering (Giordano et al., 1991). It is important that this dis-
tance can be much less than the average statistical distance between proteins
at low molar concentrations.

7.1. Consequences and predictions of proposed model of AFP
action

29

1. The radius of clustrons enlarged primary [lb] eﬀectons, surrounded by
AFP can be about 30-50 ˚A, depending on properties of surface (geometry, po-
larity), temperature, pressure and presence the perturbing solvent structural
agents.

2. Water, involved in clustron formation should diﬀer by number of physical

parameters from the bulk water. It should be characterized by:

a) lower density;
b) bigger heat capacity;
c) bigger sound velocity
d) bigger viscosity;
e) smaller dielectric relaxation frequency, etc.

The formation of thixotropic structure in AFP-water systems should be ac-
companied by non-monotonic spatial distribution of AFP in the volume due to
interaction between clustrons.

The compressibility of primary [lb] eﬀectons should be lower and sound ve-
locity higher than that of bulk water. It is conﬁrmed by results of Teixeira et.
al. (1985), obtained by coherent- inelastic-neutron scattering. This was proved
in heavy water at 25 C with solid-like collective excitations with bigger sound
velocity than in bulk water. These experimental data can be considered as a
direct conﬁrmation of primary librational eﬀectons existence.

The largest decrease of water density occurs in pores, containing enlarged
primary librational eﬀectons, due to stronger immobilization of water molecules.
The existing experimental data point, that the freezing of water inside pores
occurs much below 0 0C.

We can conclude, that most of consequences of proposed model of
AFP action is in a good accordance with available experimental data
and the veriﬁcation of the rest ones is a matter of future work.

References:

Aksnes G., Libnau O. (1991) Acta Chem.Scand., 45, 463.
Ashkroft N., Mermin N. (1976). Solid state physics. N.Y. (Helt,

Rinehart and Winston).

Babloyantz A. (1986), Molecules, Dynamics and Life. An intro-
duction to self-organization of matter. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New
York, pp.320.

Chapsky L, Rubinsky B., Kinetics of antifreeze protein-induced

ice growth inhibition.

FEBS Lett 1997, 412:1, 241-244.
Chernikov F.R. (1990), Bioﬁzika (Russia), 35, 711.
Clegg J.S. and Drost-Hansen W. (1991) Elsevier Science Publ.

vol.1, Ch.1, pp.1-23.

DeLuca C.I., Comley R., Davies P.L. Antifreeze proteins bind

independently to ice. Biophys. J. 1998, Mar 74:3, 1502-1508.

30

Del Giudice E., Doglia S., Milani M. and Vitello G. (1983) Nucl.

Phys. B275 [Fs 17], 185.

Del Giudice E., Doglia S., Milani M. (1988), Physica Scripta. 38,

505.

Lett. , 61,1085.

Del Guidice E., Preparata G., Vitello G. (1989) Phys. Rev.

DeVries, A.L. Role of glycopeptides and peptides in inhibition of
crystallization of water in polar ﬁshes. Philos.Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B 304, 575-588. 1984.

Dicke R.H. (1954) Phys.Rev. 93, 99-110.
Drost-Hansen W. In: Colloid and Interface Science. Ed. Kerker

M. (Academic Press, New York, 1976), p.267-280.

Duman J.G, Li N, Verleye D, Goetz F.W, Wu D.W, Andorfer

C.A, Benjamin T,

Parmelee D.C. Molecular characterization and sequencing of an-
tifreeze proteins from larvae of the beetle Dendroides canadensis. J.
Comp. Physiol. [B] 1998, Apr 168:3 225-232.

Eisenberg D., Kauzmann W. The structure and properties of

water. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969.

Etzler F.M., Conners J.J. (1991) Langmuir , 7, 2293.
Etzler F.M., White P.J. J. (1987) Colloid and Interface Sci., 120,

Eto T.K, Rubinsky B. Antifreeze glycoproteins increase solution

Ewart K.V, Yang D.S. , Ananthanarayanan V.S, Fletcher G.L,

94.

viscosity.

Hew C.L.

Ca2+-dependent antifreeze proteins. Modulation of conforma-
tion and activity by divalent metal ions. J Biol Chem 1996, v. 271,
N:28, 16627-16632.

Feeney, R.E., T.S. Burcham, and Y.Yeh. Antifreeze glycopep-
tides from polar ﬁsh blood. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Chem. 15, 59-78.
1986.

Feeney, R.E. and R. Huﬀman. Depression of freezing point by

glycoprotein from an Ant-arctic ﬁsh. Nature 243, 357-359. 1973.

Feeney, R.E. and Y.Yeh. Antifreeze proteins: properties, mecha-
nism of action, possible applications. Food Technology, 82-89, 1993.

Fine R.A., Millero F.J. (1973) J.Chem.Phys. , 59, 5529.
Frontas’ev V.P., Schreiber L.S. (1966) J. Struct. Chem. (USSR) 6,

Fr¨ohlich H. (ed.) (1988) Biological coherence and response to

external stimuli. Springer, Berlin.

Grawford F.S. (1973) Waves. Berkley Physics Course. Vol.3.

McGraw- Hill Book Co., N.Y.

Haken H. (1990), Synergetics, computers and cognition. Springer,

512.

Berlin.

31

Haymet A.D. et al., 1998, FEBS Letters, , 1998, 430:301-306,

Hon W.C, Griﬃth M, Mlynarz A, Kwok Y.C, Yang D.S.,
Antifreeze proteins in winter rye are similar to pathogenesis-

July 3.

related proteins.

Plant Physiol. 1995, Nov, 109:3 879-889.
Jia Z., DeLuca CI., Chao H., Davies P.L. Structural basis for the
binding of globular antifreeze protein to ice. Nature 1996, Nov.21,
v. 384:6606, 285-288.

Johri G.K., Roberts J.A. (1990) J. Phys. Chem. , 94, 7386.
Kaivarainen A. (2001) Series of articles at the Archives of Los-
Alamos: http://arXiv.org/ﬁnd/physics/1/au:+Kaivarainen A/0/1/0/all
Kaivarainen A. (1995) Book: Hierarchic concept of matter anf
ﬁeld. Water, biosystems and elementary particles. New York, NY,
ISBN 0-9642557-0-7.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A. (1996). Paper in Proc.of 2nd. Ann Adv. Water

Sci. Symp. October 4-6, Dallas, Texas.

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A., Fradkova L., Korpela T. (1993) , Acta Chem.Scand.

47, 456.

Moscow.

Kaiv¨ar¨ainen A. (1989) , J. Mol. Liq. 41, 53.
Kaivarainen A.I. (1985) Solvent-dependent ﬂexibility of proteins
and principles of their function. D.Reidel Publ.Co., Dordrecht, Boston,
Lancaster, 290 p.

Kell G.S. (1975) , J.Chem.Eng. Data 20, 97.
Kikoin I.K. (Ed.) (1976), Tables of physical values. Atomizdat,

Knight, C. A., C. C. Cheng. and A. L. DeVries. 1991. Adsorp-
tion of a-helical antifreeze peptides on speciﬁc ice crystal surface
planes. Biophysical Journal. 59, 409- 418.

Li N., Andorfer Cathy A. and Duman J. G. Enhancement of
insect antifreeze protein activity by solutes of low molecular mass.
J. Exp. Biol. 1998, v.201, 15, 2243-2251.

Prokhorov A.M. (Ed) (1988). Physical encyclopedia. Soviet en-

cyclopedia. Moscow.

Raymond, J.A. and A.L. DeVries. Cryobiology 9, 541-547. 1972.
Raymond, J.A. and A.L. DeVries. Adsorption inhibition as a
mechanism of freezing resistance in polar ﬁshes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA. 74, 2589-2593. 1977.

Roberts J. and Wang F. J. (1993) , Microwave Power and Elec-

tromagnetic Energy, 28, 196.

Roberts J., Zhang X. & Zheng Y. J. (1994), J. Chem. Phys.
Determination of hydrogen bonding in water clusters through con-
ductivity (d.c.) measurements of aqueous solutions of NaCl.

Sicheri F. and Yang D.S., Ice-binding structure and mechanism
of an antifreeze protein from winter ﬂounder, Nature 1995, v.375, N
6530, 427-431.

32

Tatsutani K., Rubinsky B. A method to study intracellular ice

nucleation.

J Biomech Eng 1998, 20:1, 27-31.
Tomchaney, A.P., J.P. Morris, S.H. Kang, and J.G. Duman. Pu-
riﬁcation, composition and physical properties of a thermal hystere-
sis of antifreeze protein from larvae of the beetle, Tenebrio molitor,
Biochemistry 21, 716-721. 1982.

Yeh, Y. and R.E Feeney. Antifreeze Proteins: Structures and

Mechanisms of Function. Chemical Reviews, 96, 601-617, 1996.

Umezava H., Matsumoto H. and Tachiki L. (1982). Thermo-ﬁeld

dynamics and condensate states (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

Umezawa H. (1993). Advanced Field Theory: Micro, Macro and

Thermal Physics. American Institute of Physics, New York.

Wang H., Lu B. & Roberts J.A. (1994) Molecular materials.
Watterson J. (1988), Mol.Cell.Biochem. 79, 101-105.
Watterson J. (1988), BioSystems 22, 51.

33

