1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Distinquishing of indistinquishable. Coarse
graining of relationships. 1

Oleg Gorsky
Transmag Research Institute, Dnepropetrovsk, Pisarjevsky 5, Ukraine
e-mail:gorsky@npkista.dp.ua

Abstract

At present many of endeavours in physics are made to recognize in
quantum substance classical reality, time, subjectivity, consciousness and
many other physical and nonphysical features. The purpose of these re-
marks is to draw attention to a fact that perplex situations are to be
understood in ’unteared oﬀ’ manner of fundamental and relative ’mix-
ture’.

The crucial point in mind-matter division is coarse-graining of relationships.
From the beginning I do intend to distinquish coarse-graining of consistent his-
tories as approach to quantum theory, coarse graining of observables in thermo-
dynamics and fractal approach and coarse graining of relationships. In quantum
theory one does suppose some notion of a coarse grained conﬁguration space,
whose observables correspond to suitable averages of observables of the physical
conﬁguration space [2]. As compare to coarse graining of consistent histories
I do name mind-matter coarse graining as coarse graining of relationships. To
understand what I am speaking about I do recall ’the experiment’ well-known
to most of the people.

Let I do remind two trains moving along one another.In some speciﬁc regimes
of motion (rectilinear uniform motion) mind does lost stability in distinqushing
of its state.This means that in the same train some observers will ’stand’, some
will ’move’ and some will ’jump’ from stand to move. A relationships of the
observers to the situation will be ambiguous and there are no ways to change
the situation. The situation may be described as relativism ( and fundamental
relativism) of Galileo as next:None of the physical devices does distinquish stasis
from rectilinear uniform motion. All this is well known. But peculiarity of the
situation is at hand. Mind does declare indistinquishability of the states
only when mind does distinquish the both ( stasis and rectilinear uni-
form motion)! That is what I do name as coarse graining of relationships.This
is my only task to show that as far as I know coarse graining of relationships
is inherent to mind in most of its work. I do give some more examples on the
subject.

Suppose I am considering two abstract objects which are equal. Something
I may say about the situation, but what? To be understood I denote one of
an object as A and the second one as B the objects become equal but distin-
quishable (I write A=B).If I write A=A or B=B than I have no possibility to
1Remarks to the missing science of mind. Most of the present topic were published in

quantum-mind digest [1]

1

continue ’something to say’. So A and B are ’and’ physically distinctive ( ’A’
diﬀers from ’B’) and may be only because I may continue ’something to say’ (for
example, if A=B then B=A). So I may say that ’A’ and ’B’ are ’markers’ too,
along many other relationships to the situation. This situation may be treated
too as ’distinquishing of indistinquishable’ as in two trains experiment.The same
discourse one might succeed if distinquishability is marked by words.There is
very subtle moment,I think, is not to be ignored. So denotions ( or words) give
rise to ’and’ physical diﬀerentiations of abstract objects and may be because
abstract discourses are possible. If someone will disagree then I ask ’to tear oﬀ’
previous remarks and show the ’place’ where it will be always done.I would like
to underline that numbers ( say, one, two, three...) one does distinquish in the
words too. That means that one does distinquish say three from two ’and’ as
informational (symbols) ’and’ as physical objects.

Let us take the situation with tossing of classical coin. In a physical coin two
sides are unavoidable physical diﬀerent ( that is to distinguish two sides).If one
does take a coin with, say, two heads on both sides then situation does become
perplex. Indeed, in the case an observer in her/his mind does distinquish both
sides but experiment does show the indistinquishing. Possibilities are lost,one
has strong deterministic situation but mind ’whispers’ that it is false. Of course
diﬀerent observers will speak diﬀerent about the situation but nothing does help.
Situation will be perplex and there is no ways to ’untie’ the situation. So if one
is considering abstract coin one needs to justify how this physical diﬀerence of
the sides of the coin will be neglected and this justiﬁcation must be very subtle
( it is clear that ’and’ physical diﬀerence may play a role in futher explanation
of behavior as far as dynamical behavior of the coin). And then: How will one
distinguish the sides of abstract coin? If there are 2 sides then how one may
count them if they are not marked this means how one may know the number
of sides if they are similar? How does one know that in abstract coin there are
heads and tails ( the essential is not the names or ’colours’ or ’markers’ but
diﬀerence of names or ’colours’ or ’markers’)? ’Markers’( symbols,words) begin
their life because they are not ’worse’ then real heads and tails. How does one
distinquish real heads and tails? For present it is suﬃce to say that both sides in
the coin are distinquishable physically and informatively. So are any ’markers’.
The situation for mind to some degree doesn’t change because it is very hard
to justify that real heads and tails are ’better’ then real symbols or words such
as ’heads’ and ’tails’. Distinquishing of indistinquishable one may see in many
ﬁelds.

Now I will try to show how coarse graining of relationships does play the
’game’ within physics. Of course, there are a lot of to show but at present
I’ll take the example frequently discussed in thermodynamics literature. We
often see coﬀee cup breaking accidently into pieces but never a cup reform from
the pieces. The question is ”Why?” ( let us denote this as Q1). The most
conventional answer is ”Because the probability of the event in practice is very
small”. But let us get a view as next. Suppose one have seen a cup never before

2

but now do meet a lot of pieces. The question Q2 may be now as ”Is it that Q1
is possible?” Yet once more suppose that one does meet a lot of white pieces. Is
the question Q3 ” Why we never have seen papalupu reform from the pieces?”
possible? 2 I don’t know what is papalupu. But the question is not so absurd as it
seems. Why does one not distinquish papalupu in pieces contrary to the cup? I doubt
that Q1, Q2, Q3 may be compatible and answers A1, A2, A3 will be consistent within
any space-time localization of distinquishing. The situation is perplex but might be
coarse grained. May be this is the straight way to tear Q1, Q2, Q3 oﬀ by saying of
standard thermodynamics answer ( as above) and ignoring all other.

Coarse graining of relationships does reveal the relative ’gap’ where causality does
fail.There is no physical cause of being ’standing’, ’moving’ or ’jumping’ in two trains
experiment.There is no cause of saying that abstract objects do reveal themselves
through things,symbols, words and else.

Indeed, acausality does reveal itself as possibilities in perplex ’unteared oﬀ ’ situation
through coarse graining.
I am not aware of any situation where coarse graining of
relationships would not appear into strange form in future by saying ” We didn’t see
this before but now it is obvious”.

In the light of previous remarks the task of creation of artiﬁcial mind may be
formulated as follow:How has one to perform physical device which does dis-
tinquish stasis and rectilinear uniform motion? This sounds a bit like paradox.

References

[1] http://www.consciousness.arizona.edu/quantum-mind.html

[2] L.Smolin, The present moment in quantum cosmology: challenges to the argu-

ments for elimination of time gr-qc/0104097

2Any question is possible simply because I am not restricted in asking question in the
present remarks. It is very hard if possible to show how asking question in advance is diﬀerent
from asking question in situations described above.

3

