1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

QUANTUM STRING FIELD

PSYCHOPHYSICS OF NASTROENIE

Denis V. Juriev

ul.Miklukho-Maklaya 20-180 Moscow 117437 Russia
(e-mail: denis@juriev.msk.ru)

The goal of this article is to expose some of results, which were obtained by the
author last year and which may be interesting to a general reader. So the technical
details (such as experimental data processing and their analysis) are omitted or
reduced whereas the conceptual aspect is inforced and clariﬁed.

I. What is known [1]

1.1. Experimental detection of interactive phenomena. Let us consider a
natural, behavioral, social or economical system S. It will be described by a set
{ϕ} of quntities, which characterize it at any moment of time t (so that ϕ = ϕt).
One may suppose that the evolution of the system is described by a diﬀerential
equation

and look for the explicit form of the function Φ from the experimental data on the
system S. However, the function Φ may depend on time, it means that there are
some hidden parameters, which control the system S and its evolution is of the
form

where u are such parameters of unknown nature. One may suspect that such
parameters are chosen in a way to minimize some goal function K, which may be
an integrodiﬀerential functional of ϕt:

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ)

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ, u),

K = K([ϕτ ]τ ≤t)

(such integrodiﬀerential dependence will be brieﬂy notated as K = K([ϕ]) below).
More generally, the parameters u may be divided on parts u = (u1, . . . , un) and each
part ui has its own goal function Ki. However, this hypothesis may be conﬁrmed
by the experiment very rarely. In the most cases the choice of parameters u will
seem accidental or even random. Nevertheless, one may suspect that the controls
ui are interactive, it means that they are the couplings of the pure controls u◦
i with
the unknown or incompletely known feedbacks:

ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ])

Typeset by AMS-TEX

and each pure control has its own goal function Ki. Thus, it is suspected that the
system S realizes an interactive game. There are several ways to deﬁne the pure
controls u◦

i . One of them is the integrodiﬀerential ﬁltration of the controls ui:

u◦
i = Fi([ui], [ϕ]).

To verify the formulated hypothesis and to ﬁnd the explicit form of the convenient
ﬁltrations Fi and goal functions Ki one should use the theory of interactive games,
which supplies us by the predictions of the game, and compare the predictions with
the real history of the game for any considered Fi and Ki and choose such ﬁltrations
and goal functions, which describe the reality better. One may suspect that the
dependence of ui on ϕ is purely diﬀerential for simplicity or to introduce the so-
called intention ﬁelds, which allow to consider any interactive game as diﬀerential.
Moreover, one may suppose that

ui = ui(u◦

i , ϕ)

and apply the elaborated procedures of a posteriori analysis and predictions to the
system.

In many cases this simple algorithm eﬀectively unravels the hidden interactivity
of a complex system. However, more sophisticated psychophysical procedures exist.
Below we shall consider the complex systems S, which have been yet represented

as the n-person interactive games by the procedure described above.

1.2. Functional analysis of interactive phenomena. To perform an analysis
of the interactive control let us note that often for the n-person interactive game
the interactive controls ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ]) may be represented in the form

ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ]; εi),

where the dependence of the interactive controls on the arguments u◦
i , [ϕ] and εi is
known but the ε-parameters εi are the unknown or incompletely known functions
of u◦
i , [ε]. Such representation is very useful in the theory of interactive games and
is called the ε-representation.

One may regard ε-parameters as new magnitudes, which characterize the system,
and apply the algorithm of the unraveling of interactivity to them. Note that ε-
parameters are of an existential nature depending as on the states ϕ of the system
S as on the controls.

The ε-parameters are useful for the functional analysis of the interactive controls

described below.

First of all, let us consider new integrodiﬀerential ﬁltrations Vα:

where ε = (ε1, . . . , εn). Second, we shall suppose that the ε-parameters are ex-
pressed via the new controls v◦

α, which will be called desires:

v◦
α = Vα([ε], [ϕ]),

εi = εi(v◦

1 , . . . , v◦

m, [ϕ])

and the least have the goal functions Lα. The procedure of unraveling of interac-
tivity speciﬁes as the ﬁltrations Vα as the goal functions Lα.

2

1.3. SD-transform and SD-pairs. The interesting feature of the proposed de-
scription (which will be called the S-picture) of an interactive system S is that it
contains as the real (usually personal) subjects with the pure controls ui as the
impersonal desires vα. The least are interpreted as certain perturbations of the
ﬁrst so the subjects act in the system by the interactive controls ui whereas the
desires are hidden in their actions.

One is able to construct the dual picture (the D-picture), where the desires act
in the system S interactively and the pure controls of the real subjects are hidden
in their actions. Precisely, the evolution of the system is governed by the equations

where v = (v1, . . . , vm) are the ε-represented interactive desires:

˙ϕ = ˜Φ(ϕ, v),

vα = vα(v◦

α, [ϕ]; ˜εα)

and the ε-parameters ˜ε are the unknown or incompletely known functions of the
states [ϕ] and the pure controls u◦
i .

D-picture is convenient for a description of systems S with a variable number
of acting persons. Addition of a new person does not make any inﬂuence on the
evolution equations, a subsidiary term to the ε-parameters should be added only.
The transition from the S-picture to the D-picture is called the SD-transform.

The SD-pair is deﬁned by the evolution equations in the system S of the form

where u = (u1, . . . , un), v = (v1, . . . , vm),

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ, u) = ˜Φ(ϕ, v),

ui =ui(u◦
vα =vα(v◦

i , [ϕ]; εi)
α, [ϕ]; ˜εα)

and the ε-parameters ε = (ε1, . . . , εn) and ˜ε = (˜ε1, . . . , ˜εm) are the unknown or
incompletely known functions of [ϕ] and v◦ = (v◦
n),
respectively.

m) or u◦ = (u◦

1, . . . , u◦

1, . . . , v◦

Note that the S-picture and the D-picture may be regarded as complementary
in the N.Bohr sense. Both descriptions of the system S can not be applied to it
simultaneously during its analysis, however, they are compatible and the structure
of SD-pair is a manifestation of their compatibility. The choice of a picture is an
it is concentrated on the personal subjects in S-picture
action of our attention:
(the self-conscious attention) whereas it is concentrated on the impersonal desires
in D-picture (the creative attention).

1.4. Verbalization of SD-pairs and the transpersonal synlinguism. Nas-
troenie. The main problem is to interrelate the S- and D-pictures of the system S.
One way is a verbalization of SD-pairs. Let us remind a deﬁnition of the verbalizable
interactive game.

An interactive game of the form

˙ϕ = Φ(ϕ, u)
3

with ε–represented couplings of feedbacks

ui = ui(u◦

i , [ϕ]; εi)

is called verbalizable if there exist a posteriori partition t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tn < . . .
and the integrodiﬀerential functionals

ωn(~ε(τ ), ϕ(τ )|tn−1 6 τ 6 tn),
n(u◦(τ ), ϕ(τ )|tn−1 6 τ 6 tn)
u∗

such that

ωn = Ω(ωn−1, u∗

n; ϕ(τ )|tn−1 6 τ 6 tn),

quantities ωn are called the words.

Let us now consider the SD-pair and suppose that both S- and D-pictures are
verbalizable with the same ωn. The fact that ωn are the same for both S- and
D-pictures is called the transpersonal synlinguism. One may characterize it poet-
ically by the phrase that “the speech of real subjects is resulted in the same text
as a whisper of the impersonal desires”. The existential character of the transper-
sonal synlinguism should be stressed. Really it is not derived from the fact that
the objective states ϕ of the system S are the same in the S- and D-pictures.
The transpersonal synlinguism interrelates the diﬀerent ε-parameters of existential
nature in both pictures.

The transpersonal synlinguism is involved into psychophysical nature of mutual
understanding of the independent subjects of a dialogue communication. In this
situation it allows to identify the personal interpretations with the impersonal ones,
unraveling the role of impersonal desires as bearers of the objective sense and its
dynamics.

The words ωn in the transpersonal synlinguism are interrelated by the recurrent

formulas

ωn = Ω(ωn−1, w∗

n; ϕ(τ )|tn−1 6 τ 6 tn),

the parameter w∗
n will be called nastroenie*. The sequence {wn} may be correlated
as with u(t) as with v(t), the ﬁrst type of correlations will be called the impression
correlations and the second type will be called the inspiration correlations.

There is a lot of various, sometimes technically very sophisticated procedures to

verbalize interactive game or SD-pair.

1.5. The second quantization of desires. Intuitively it is reasonable to con-
sider systems with a variable number of desires.
It can be done via the second
quantization.

To perform the second quantization of desires let us mention that they are deﬁned
as the integrodiﬀerential functionals of ϕ and ε via the integrodiﬀerential ﬁltrations.

*“Nastroenie” is the Russian for English “mood” or “humour” and for French “humeur” or
“disposition”, however, its meaning has some nuances. First, its root is associated with Russian
verb, which may be translated into English as “to build” and “to create”, thus, expressing the
active character of “nastroenie” in contrast to completely passive “disposition”. Second, the
nearest Russian word of the same root (“nastroˇıka”) should be translated as “tuning” into English,
thus, introducing some harmonic, melodious overtones into the meaning. These facts expain the
choice of the Russian term.

4

So one is able to deﬁne the linear space H of all ﬁltrations (regarded as classical
ﬁelds) and a submanifold M of the dual H ∗ so that H is naturally identiﬁed with a
subspace of the linear space O(M ) of smooth functions on M . The quantized ﬁelds
of desires are certain operators in the space O(M ) (one is able to regard them as
unbounded operators in its certain Hilbert completion). The creation/annihilation
operators are constructed from the operators of multiplication on an element of
H ⊂ O(M ) and their conjugates.

To deﬁne the quantum dynamics one should separate the quick and slow time.
Quick time is used to make a ﬁltration and the dynamics is realized in slow time.
Such dynamics may have a Hamiltonian form being governed by a quantum Hamil-
tonian, which is usually diﬀerential operator in O(M ).

If M coincides with the whole H ∗ then the quadratic part of a Hamiltonian de-
scribes a propagator of the quantum desire whereas the highest terms correspond
to the vertex structure of self-interaction of the quantum ﬁeld.
If the submani-
fold M is nonlinear, the extraction of propagators and interaction vertices is not
straightforward.

1.6. Quantum string ﬁeld theoretic structure of the second quantization
of desires. First of all, let us mark that the functions ϕ(τ ) and ε(τ ) may be
regarded formally as an open string. The target space is a product of the spaces of
states and ε-parameters.

Second, let us consider a classical counterpart of the evolution of the integrodif-
ferential ﬁltration. It is natural to suspect that such evolution is local in time, i.e.
ﬁltrations do not enlarge their support (as a time interval) during their evolution.
For instance, if the integrodiﬀerential ﬁltration depends on the values of ϕ(τ ), ε(τ )
for τ ∈ [t0 − t1, t0 − t2] at the ﬁxed moment t0, it will depend on the same values
for τ ∈ [t − t1, t − t2] at other moments t > t0. This supposition provides the
reparametrization invariance of the classical evolution. Hence, it is reasonable to
think that the quantum evolution is also reparametrization invariant.

Reparametrization invariance allows to apply the quantum string ﬁeld theoretic
models to the second quantization of desires. For instance, one may use the string
ﬁeld actions constructed from the closed string vertices (note that the phase space
for an open string coincides with the conﬁguration space of a closed string) or string
ﬁeld theoretic nonperturbative actions. In the least case the theoretic presence of
additional “vacua” (minimums of the string ﬁeld action) as well as their structure
is very interesting (see below).

II. Questions and answers

The described picture contains some moments, which should be clariﬁed:

- What is the origin of the complementarity of S- and D-pictures ? Can it be

- What is the nature of nastroenie ? Is it possible to describe its dynamics

described precisely ?

and teleology ?

- What is the attention ? What is its role ?

We shall try to answer these questions below.

3.1. Subjects as massive particles of the universal psychophysical string
ﬁeld at alternative vacuum. Quantized desires may be treated as interacting
particles at the main vacuum of the universal psychophysical string ﬁeld. However,
5

this ﬁeld may possess an additional vacuum of very massive (and, hence, almost
classical) and almost free particles. We shall identify subjects with such particles.
Because the spectrum of particles at diﬀerent vacua is a dynamical property of
the quantum ﬁeld, it depends on the manner of observation. The diﬀerent choice
of vacua corresponds to the complementary observations. This fact explains why
S- and D-pictures are complementary and allows to describe the complementarity
precisely if the structure of universal psychophysical string ﬁeld is known.

3.2. The universal psychophysical string ﬁeld as perturbed free ﬁeld of
nastroenie. One may suspect that the universal psychophysical string ﬁeld may
be treated as a perturbed free ﬁeld so that its action is represented as a free ﬁeld
action perturbed by a potential of self-interaction, which exponentially tends to zero
at inﬁnity. The initial vacuum of free ﬁeld disappears and perturbation creates two
new vacua (of subjects and of desires). It is reasonable to think this initial free ﬁeld
as a ﬁeld of nastroenie. It means that instead of the discrete quantities w∗
n we shall
consider the quantized ﬁeld w(t), whose dynamics is described by the perturbed
free ﬁeld action. However, the problem of its teleology is more diﬃcult, claims a
well-elaborated technique to be deﬁned, which, therefore, will not be exposed in
this article.

Note that there are no arguments to suppose that the initial free ﬁeld has a

string nature, in particular, is a free string ﬁeld.

3.3. Three types of attention as three forms of internal observations in
the quantum string ﬁeld psychophysics. Three forms to represent the univer-
sal psychophysical string ﬁeld, namely, as series in the main or the alternative vacua
or as a perturbed free ﬁeld, corresponds to three forms of observation. They were
deﬁned as attentions. Two of them are self-conscious and creative attention. The
form of attention speciﬁes the dynamical properties of the universal psychophysical
string ﬁeld that is expressed as a choice of picture. One should mention that the
attention is attributed to any subject and should be treated as a form of intention.
Therefore, we have deal with the internal observations.

References

[1] Juriev D., Experimental detection of

interactive phenomena and their analysis:
math.GM/0003001; New mathematical methods for psychophysical ﬁltering of experi-
mental data and their processing: math.GM/0005275; Quantum string ﬁeld theory and
psychophysics: physics/0008058.

6

