1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Franck-Hertz experiment re-considered

S. L. Vesely1, A. A. Vesely

February 2, 2008

1I.T.B., C.N.R., via Fratelli Cervi 93, I-20090 Segrate(MI)
Italy

email: vesely@itba.mi.cnr.it
Keywords: quantum mechanics, Maxwell-Hertz electromagnetic theory, detected sig-
nal
PACS: 34.10.+x, 03.50.Kk, 84.47.+w,

Abstract

The celebrated Franck-Hertz experiment is reinterpreted by analogy with
the Glimmentladung experiment, formerly performed by Heinrich Hertz.

Introduction

The experiment of James Franck and Gustav Hertz in 1913 is considered crucial
in quantum theory.
In facts, it is said to bring evidence of the existence of
discrete energy levels in the matter in the gas state. In 1949, Heisenberg still
deemed it a fundamental experiment [1]. However, that experiment and its
successive improvements have been interpreted in the framework of the atomic
model by Bohr and Sommerfeld. Those models deﬁnitively fell on the anomalous
Zeeman eﬀect, which the Heisenberg theory explained. At this point, we address
to this speciﬁc issue a question that Schr¨odinger put in general [2]: Do we mean
this experiment to validate the Kopenhagener Geist of quantum theory or else
do we just admit that the interpretation of its experimental result is surviving
the model that inspired it? For sure, the atomic model played a key role in
Heisenberg formulation. However, the Franck-Hertz experiment itself is not a
Gedankenexperiment. In this sense, it is not necessarily bound to interpretations
leading to discrete energy levels.

Nowadays, there is a multitude of experiments that go under the Franck-
Hertz suit. Even commercial devices exist, projected, built, and marketed for
the sole purpose of performing the Franck-Hertz experiment. In this paper we
present two cardinal experiments of those, developed by Goucher and Einsporn,
respectively. They were performed at a time when the model to validate, the
Bohr’s atom, was still being tested. Those experiments, besides being interesting
by themselves, abound of insights, more than enough with respect to the needs

1

2

of the model. Nevertheless, they are not bullet-proof on critical points, as we’ll
see.

The Bohr’s models and their subsequent transformations may work until
they provide a way to grasp peculiar traits of the underlying natural phe-
nomenon and successfully interpret experimental results. Our point is that,
right now, the quantum theoretical background does not enhance the compre-
hension of the Franck-Hertz experiment. For comparison, we propose a rather
classical electromagnetic interpretation of the phenomenon, based on a hertzian
(after H. Hertz) kind of model-design.

We present historical facts, without getting much involved into historical
questions. Rather, we extrapolate the hertzian train of thought enlightening it
with latter-day concepts and knowledge.

On cathode rays nature

The discovery of cathode rays was followed by a diatribe about their nature.
In Poincar´e’s words [3], “We see [...] on cathode rays the continuation of that
same quarrel that took place during the Restoration on the light beams.” The
quarrel was the same. However, about phenomena associated with cathode rays,
the theories that contended for the best explanation were diﬀerent. Rather
than the mechanical theories by Newton and Huygens, the clash involved two
electromagnetic theories: one by Lorentz and one by Maxwell.

As Poincar´e aimed at a mechanistic reduction of electromagnetism, distin-
guishing between that kind of theories was not much relevant to him. On one
hand electric phenomenology cannot leave out of consideration the matter con-
stituting the source or the probe. To that extent, electricity and magnetism
must be material phenomena. On the other hand, there are aspects in electric-
ity that we are interested in and that have no mechanical correspondent. That’s
why no mechanical interpretation of electromagnetism is satisfactory. In other
words, the rheologic behaviour of a viscoelastic ﬂuid will never fully explain
cathode rays propagation in a low pressure gas, nor radio waves at atmospheric
pressure or in empty ether. As a concession to historical topics, it is interesting
to observe that while theorists were still considering the possibility of mecha-
nistic interpretations, experimentalists already agreed on the electric nature of
cathode rays.

Those two electromagnetic theories, Lorentz’s and Maxwell’s, are diﬀerent
from each other [4]. Let’s consider the latter ﬁrst. Maxwell’s purpose is to
frame Faraday’s concepts and experiences within a mathematical model. He
attributes an essential signiﬁcance to the shielded cage experience. That is, he
assumes the electrostatic charge to be a quantity with null algebraic sum. (That
assumption is known as complete electrostatic induction). Thus, as the total
free charge is invariably zero, hypothesising no mathematical limitation on the
absolute length of dipoles, Maxwell formally handles the electric displacement
ﬁeld D by analogy with magnetic induction B in Farady’s Law. In facts, he
also refers to ﬁeld D as electric induction [5]. This concept allows him to add

3

a (supposedly small) displacement current term to Amp`ere’s equation. Such a
formal amendment accounts for electromagnetic ﬁeld propagation in the empty
ether, and therefore it is not in contrast with Faraday’s own concepts about
ﬁelds. At those times, the ether was considered as a mechanical support for
the propagation. It was the concept of propagation that called for the ether
hypothesis: Maxwell’s electromagnetic equations by themselves contain no dy-
namic variable.

Now about Lorentz’s theory. He introduces a force to account for the me-
chanic eﬀect of these ﬁelds on the matter. His expression for the ponderomotive
force is inferred from electromechanical applications. However, Lorentz has to
further state that electricity is inseparably coupled with elementary particles,
the electrons. They are subject to a current continuity equation. The Maxwell’s
equations are carried over as-is into the new theory, although stressing their
derivation from potentials. Hence, Lorentz reinterprets electrostatic induction,
by attributing a mechanical mobility to the substantial electrical charge, and by
giving conditions for its static equilibrium. Piling up of charges is not forbidden
any more. Since Maxwell’s mathematical ﬁeld theory assumes zero total charge
(a statement quite diﬀerent from charge conservation) Lorentz’s revision con-
trasts a postulate of the host mathematical theory [6]. Really, that only aﬀects
further developments of the underlying mathematics.

As for a physical interpretation, we remark that each one of both scientists
formally introduces a ﬁctitious quantity in order to mathematically handle elec-
tric phenomena. The electric displacement the former, the electron the latter.
For that reason, their theories won’t support mechanical explanations.

Apparently, Heinrich Hertz is the last relevant experimentalist who opposes
against Lorentz’s theory. Indeed, he accepts the original Maxwell’s equations
and shows that his own experiments with cathode rays prove them. However, his
detractors ﬁnd Lorentz’s theory to be conceptually simpler, and they interpret
H. Hertz’s observations after assuming the physical existence of electrons.

We repropose in an actual vein the interpretation of his experiment on the
discharge in rareﬁed gases, because H. Hertz himself step by step builds a model
for the Maxwell-Hertz theory. For an historical account of his writing and its
impact, we redirect to J. Z. Buchwald [7]. A newer publication by the same
Author [8] may give further insights.

Luminescence eﬀects in gases as elicited by elec-
tric currents

The paper by H. Hertz where cathode rays are considered as electromagnetic
radiation, in accordance with Maxwell’s theory is “Versuche ¨uber die Glimment-
ladung.” [9]

It gives a clear account of experimental facts.
Our purpose in the following is to report the essential scheme of that paper

with some comments.

4

H. Hertz asked himself three questions.
1)

Is an electric discharge through low-pressure gases continuous or dis-

continuous?

Let’s explain this question. A gas, at a pressure ranging between 1.5 and
0.01 mm Hg, is contained in a tube inside which two electrodes are sealed. These
either consist of a pure high-melting metal or of an oxide coated one. Outside,
they are connected through leading conductors and resistors to a battery or
some other source of electric power. Experimentally, one shows that, even if the
metallic circuit is not closed, current can ﬂow through it. If the tube is thought
of as a condenser ﬁlled with a dielectric mean, the ﬂow of current is explained
by Maxwell’s equations, but the displacement current must be a function of
time. On the other hand, if the ﬂow of current is constant in time, then the
tube operates in a non-linear manner. In such case, Maxwell’s linear equations
don’t apply to its functioning.

H. Hertz answered question (1) on one hand by looking for alternate current
(a.c.) components in the circuit, with diﬀerent arrangements. On the other
hand, he measured the Glimmlicht stroboscopically. That is a modiﬁcation of
the dielectric on the cathode side of the tube, which is observed during the time
when current is ﬂowing, and is similar in appearance to the glowing air before or
during a spark breakdown of electrostatic generators. The Townsend discharge
alone is a stable phenomenon up to the boosting power, where sparks shoot out.
In a similar way, a tube containing a low pressure gas slowly discharges a battery,
provided that it lights without breaking into pieces when the switch is closed,
and that the power supplied is less than the one that starts and maintains the
electric arc.

By hypothesis, a battery should supply a constant continuous current. How-
ever, the ﬁrst researchers who experimented with batteries happened to draw
an exceeding amount of power with respect to what the battery could deliver.
Hence, they observed discontinuous glares, similar to Duddel’s arc. H. Hertz in-
creased the number of battery elements up to an open circuit potential of about
1.8 kV, and veriﬁed that the ﬁeld-emission tube would not sustain possible os-
cillations of the circuit. In other words, he veriﬁed the absence of modulations
at acoustic frequencies and up to intermediate frequencies.

This limit is imposed to him by the necessity of transducing the electrical
signal directly, i.e. without superheterodyne [10], into mechanical vibration.
Neither moving-coil or needle electrical instruments, nor common microphones
are loads matching electrical vibrations directly at frequencies higher than those
considered by H. Hertz.

Because of the limits imposed by measuring devices, observable frequencies
might arise from emf modulation, as mentioned above, and also from arcing
drop of potential for the tube (this is the modulation technique used by ancient
radiotelegraph Poulsen arc transmitters.) Receiving audio frequencies through
the ether would have required an exceedingly long antenna.

H. Hertz concluded that, under his experimental conditions, there was no
evidence of discontinuity, i.e. pulsation. That conclusion is enforced by current
use of diodes as rectiﬁers. Strictly speaking, that means that Maxwell’s equa-

5

tions do not account for continuous current through the tube, nor for cathode
rays, nor for the bluish light wrapped around the cathode.

In facts, when we say that the bluish light or the Glimmlicht, are elec-
tromagnetic radiations, we are extending the applicability of Maxwell’s theory
signiﬁcantly beyond intermediate frequencies. That is, beyond the zone that H.
Hertz experimentally proved free from discontinuous currents.

Is that extension correct?
That extension invalidates the linear circuits theory: we know that no metal
circuit conducts violet light. Furthermore, we know that many metals show
resonance lines in the violet, that is, they emit without antenna. However,
if the extension of the frequency range in Maxwell’s theory is acceptable, the
corresponding discontinuity of current might be identiﬁed with Schottky’s noise.
In that sense, the deﬁnition of noise looses somewhat its absolute meaning.
The noise becomes that part of the signal that, for whatever reason, we don’t
interpret.

2) Do cathode rays follow the electric lines of force?
Let’s put one consideration beforehand. If H. Hertz had a standard source of
cathode rays at his disposal, he would already have mentioned them in the title
of this paper. That’s what he did in 1892 with the paper ˝Uber den Durchgang
der Kathodenstrahlen durch d¨unne Metallschichten [11]. Rather, in 1883, the
experimental diﬃculty was to establish what should be meant to be cathode
rays, avoiding tautologies. In facts, those who discovered cathode rays did not
go much further than ascribing a great deal of eﬀects to that sole cause, without
minding to distinguish between intrinsic properties and collateral eﬀects.

Therefore, H. Hertz considered the tube as an element in the electrical circuit
it belongs to, and assumed electromagnetic ﬁeld equations to apply to it at
steady conditions. The same hypothesis is being used today to avoid graphical
methods when analysing electrical circuits: one draws the wiring diagram and
replaces the diode symbol with its equivalent form. H. Hertz used linear analysis
to interpolate inside the tube the measurements he took just outside it using a
small magnet. He traced the lines of current of the static ﬁeld, after Maxwell.
He found that neither the cathode nor the anode luminescence follow those lines.
The result he found calls for two separate explanations: one for the current

in the circuit and one for the cathode rays.

In primis, we have to interpret the lumped elements wiring diagram: the emf
supplied is shared between the load resistance and the tube resistance at the
operating conditions. The tube resistance is determined according to the static
volt-ampere characteristic. In such a diagram, the ﬁgurative place where the
ﬂow tube of Maxwell’s ﬁeld lays is ﬁlled with the symbol of a lumped resistor,
so in no place the current goes through the empty ether.

Then, there is the Glimmlicht. It is a collateral eﬀect with respect to the use
of the tube in the circuit. Indeed, thermoelectric valves that really took root
make no use of it. Furthermore, the electric agent associated to the Glimm-
licht in low pressure gases (and possibly to their enhanced conductivity) does
not contribute to the electric current in the circuit, both visually and after
Maxwell’s theory, but dissipates all around. Is it possible that this agent, which

6

is the active emission of a fed valve, behaves as an electromagnetic radiation
in Maxwell’s sense without being described by the circuit equations? Yes it is.
The branch of electromagnetism devoted to it is known as radiotelegraphy. In
the circuit, that emission accounts for small ﬂuctuations, i.e. mathematically
higher order terms. You may consider that as H. Hertz deﬁnitive answer, if you
like to. However, it might not be deduced from this experiment, since a diode
is no transmitter. As he himself acknowledged in 1894: “In the beginning, I
thought that electric motions were too harsh and too rough to be useful”[12].

3) Do cathode rays exhibit electrostatic properties?
In the preceding question (2), H. Hertz ruled out the investigated electric
agent to contribute to the mean circuit current. That does not mean that
current and emission are not related to each other. In a much similar way, in
question (3) H. Hertz asks himself whether cathode rays charge the matter they
strike, since they consist of an electrically charged ﬂow. He does not ask himself
if cathode rays could be received, demodulated and detected as a faint current.
Nor he puts up with electric wind.

Let’s explain better the implications of the possible answers. In Lorentz’s
case, one conjectures that the neat negative charge radiates or, if you prefer
a hydrodynamic analogy, that it slowly ﬂows through space as time goes by.
Then, charges may accumulate on dielectric media, according to the continuity
equation, and the time integral measures the piled up ponderable or imponder-
able charges. In the other case, Maxwell’s theory does not explain how to bring
in any static electricity [13]. That’s because electromagnetism formally meets
the elder Coulomb’s theory of static “action at a distance” whilst it is rather
obvious that contact, rubbing, and similar ill-theorised operations play a key
role in electriﬁcation. Also recall that the elder theory “at a distance” for sure
didn’t mean displacements of material points subject to static applied forces to
take place instantaneously.

Nowadays we still say, about friction electrical machines, that the electricity
of a sign is being conduced to ground, and we imagine that the other “tank”, of
less capacity, gets charged with the opposite sign. However, when both tanks
have the same capacity, as e.g. in Nairne electrical machine, we consider charges
of opposite sign being just separated, and we represent the pads charged at equal
and opposed voltages. This non-mechanical duality of electric displacement
doesn’t change from the old to the new ﬁeld theory.

Faraday, rather than reckoning the amount of electric charges already sep-
arated on the conductors pads, considered the polarisation of the interposed
dielectric mean. In other words, he prevented the charges from arousing directly
in the locations corresponding to the physical surfaces, by imposing continuity
by spatial contiguity [14]. Thus far, we cannot deduce that, by the end of the
process, something that wasn’t there before has accumulated on the plates or
in between them. That way, the results of the electrostatic experiments are
preserved in the new ﬁeld representation. Hence, it is the accumulation of net
charge that makes the diﬀerence between the two theories, keeping in mind that
Maxwell’s equations provide for net charge as a boundary condition.

H. Hertz decided to consider the negative charges on the glass walls as if they

7

were given steady conditions. He measured them after transient, on starting the
ﬁrst experiment of each day. He recorded the cathode ray emission by detecting
its ﬂuorescence. More precisely, he detected the ﬂuorescent signal of the glass
surface on the bottom of the tube, which was completely shielded from the
electrodes.

His generator incorporated a Ruhmkorﬀ coil, so current was alternate. H.
Hertz was forced to the choice of that generator, and therefore he had to check
that Maxwell’s term for the displacement current, whatever it physically means,
didn’t impair cathode rays. Basing on his own experiments, he excluded that the
glass, besides ﬂuorescing, also got charged. More precisely, he wrote that near
to the cathode, upstream of the shielding, the glass envelope got at a negative
potential in a durable way. He didn’t relate that fact directly with cathode
radiation. He also observed that, by applying an additional electrostatic ﬁeld,
the breakdown threshold was lowered, and neither that he considered to be a
ﬁrst order eﬀect.

The missing detection of the alternate current has been puzzling the inter-

preters of his experiment subsequent to himself.

Heating the cathode was an innovative technique at the time. As H. Hertz
doesn’t mention it, we presume he used no hot-cathode device in this experi-
ment.

We are suggesting that H. Hertz’s diode didn’t detect alternate current be-

cause cold-cathode diodes do not rectify it [27].

His negative answer to the third question is remarkable, but for the time
being, we just like to pinpoint consequences of H. Hertz’s (and J. Maxwell’s)
choice that are under everybody’s nose.

The superposition principle applies to (homogeneous) solutions of wave equa-
tions, not to a ﬂow of charge. For the same reason, frequency spectra analysis
can characterise waves, not ﬂow of charge. A phenomenology requiring an ex-
tensive development of the ﬂow of charge theory would not have lead to telecom-
munication technology as we know it today.

We don’t mean that hertzian experiments were aiming at telecommunica-
tions development, as the latter technology didn’t exist as a project, before H.
Hertz. His discovery is diﬀerent: to whom who stops considering electromag-
netic induction as just a property of the magnetic ﬂow, which induces an emf in
the relevant circuit [15], electromagnetic far-ﬁeld theory may appear as a new
(linear) physical theory. Otherwise, it is just bare mathematics, without the
multiplicity of electrical displays on the matter [16]. In his own words [12]: “It
was the distance at which I could perceive the action, getting larger and larger,
what aroused my utter astonishment. Until then I was used to see electric forces
diminishing with Newton’s law, i.e. rapidly vanishing as distance increased.”

8

(1)

The electric measurement of excitation and ioni-
sation potential of gases

Besides the so-called silent electric discharge, luminous emission from gases can
be obtained by heating or with sparks. As techniques became ﬁner and ﬁner,
an empirical rule for emission was stated as

1234 = wavelength × voltagedrop (nmV)

Indeed, without a systematic approach, the phenomenology looked more
puzzling. On one hand, the experiments with enough gas pressure to make the
Glimmlicht visible agreed that there should be a relation between the electrical
parameters of the gas valves and its (cold) emission spectrum. This very fact
was expressed by the simple relation written above. On the other hand, the
electrical functioning of the valves themselves satisﬁed no linear relationship.

Truly, electric ionisation experiments were sophisticated ones. Furthermore,
at those times it was believed that natural laws, being concerned with material
bodies as sensible objects, could eventually be expressed as dynamical laws.
(That is, e.g., after, reducing phenomena from a thermodynamic description to
a statistical mechanics formulation.)

As there is no easy mechanical way to lead a gas into emitting light, we
may say that valves of the De Forest type, i.e. triodes, tetrodes, etc., were used
because they were supposed to emit electronic particles endowed with mass [17].
The experiments were devised in order to accelerate those particles by applying
an electrostatic potential, measuring the values at which the impulse would have
been transferred to an atomic gas by means of inelastic conservative collisions.
As it is still currently being taught, at the potentials where inelastic collisions
take place an electron-bullet wouldn’t have enough kinetic energy to hit the
anode. At the same time, after a gas atom target has absorbed its impulse, it
would transfer it on a higher energy Coulombian/Newtonian orbit of its optical
electron.

Those measurements were not quite mechanical, but they rather involved
electric quantities – the small variation in the continuous anode current. Nev-
ertheless, researchers could readily imagine electrons escaping the cathode ma-
terial toward the interspace. They imagined the electrons and/or the positive
ions produced in the collisions would have been gathered on the anode. To wit,
they thought of the electrical feeding essentially as a mean for boiling electrons
oﬀ the cathode.

The researchers who carried out those experiments deemed them funda-
mental, that is oriented toward understanding nature at a most basic level, in
contrast to other contributions to electronics, more aimed at applications and
technology.

That way, H. Hertz’s basic idea that a cold-cathode diode fed with power
from electric batteries behaves as an electrical lamp1, and that its emission

1See T. A. Edison 1883, for thermoionic type of lamps.

9

could, in ﬁrst approximation, be described by Maxwell’s equations, seemed to
be missing an essential aspect of electrical phenomena.

Stemming from the lack of familiarity with bare electrical explanations, Bohr
and Sommerfeld’s atomic models aim at rationalising relation (1) above, i.e.
bringing it down to mechanics. The experiments, controlling temperature, pu-
rity and concentration of gases, and also polarisation and oxidation of electrodes,
etceteras, aim at verifying the numerical correspondence between the frequency
values computed after law (1) of the model and the optical spectra recorded
directly.

With respect to that veriﬁcation, Franck and Einsporn expressed themselves
with words like the following [18]. “We ask ourselves why the lines corresponding
to the transitions 1.5S – mp1 (wave length 2656 ˚A) and 1.5S – mp2 (wave
length 2270 ˚A) of mercury vapour, that should stay in some easily accessible
ultraviolet zone, have never been observed up to date in neither emission nor
absorption optical spectroscopy. In particular, our measurements suggest that
the line corresponding to 1.5S – mp2, that we clearly see on our graph as a
sudden increase in current at about 5.43V, should be allowed.”

Since 1926, the Franck-Hertz experiment has been dealt with using the math-
ematics of self-consistent ﬁeld theory [19]. If that is its explanation, the Franck-
Hertz experiment ceases to be fundamental in that it isolates a distinct natural
phenomenon and lays it bare for comprehension by a physical theory. It may
be considered a fundamental experiment for some other reason, such as, e.g.,
supporting the aforementioned mathematical theory. The point is that its con-
ceptual binding to quantum mechanics becomes somewhat loose [20]. It appears
as if one could not deduce any failure of the probabilistic quantum theory from
experimental results of experiments like this.

Now observe that quantum mechanics assumes a unique “mechanical equiv-
alent of electricity.” A concept that Lord Kelvin traces back to Aepinus [21].
It is manifest in the Lorentz force, which represents a sort of electromechanical
transduction. That law cannot be easily extended from atomic behaviour to the
eﬃciency of a working engine. Anyway, if it held true for electrical circuits, then
impedance matching would be an option even when designing high frequency
transmission lines. On the opposite, experience suggests that a signiﬁcant mis-
match is not compatible with gain and high power levels already at higher audio
frequencies.

From a modern point of view, the H. Hertz experiment described above can
be seen as an unusual diode application. In facts, diodes are used as rectiﬁers
more often than not. Likewise, experiments of the Franck-Hertz type can be
considered unusual applications of triodes and tetrods. Are they fundamental
only because they can be explained theoretically? Then, one may ask, why
doesn’t the underlying theory rely on widespread applications of those valves?
Consider Maxwell-Hertz theory. Although it is not founded on widespread
applications of valves, in practice it has been supporting their implementation
ever since. Perhaps unusual applications are more diﬃcult to interpret within
that theory simply because the experimental design is just not aimed at that.

10

P

+

RG

G

VGG

-

+

K

vG

+

-

RL

VPP

vP

+

-

-

P is the plate
G is the grid
K is the cathode
VGG is the grid supply voltage
RG is the grid static resistance, if this electrode is drawing a current iG
VP P is the plate-to-cathode voltage bias
RL is the load resistance
if vG is the input potential, iP is the output current
Cathode-heating circuitry is omitted

Figure 1: A basic grounded-cathode circuit

F. S. Goucher and the Barkhausen-Kurz genera-
tor

Goucher [22] has been one of the researchers who contributed methodological im-
provements to the original Franck-Hertz experiment. With respect to H. Hertz
time, feeding, thermostatation, and vacuum technique have improved. The pu-
rity of the mercury certainly has a higher standard. Most importantly, there is
one more electrode in the tube: a grid (that Goucher called gauze). That’s an
important innovation, as the third electrode can modulate the electromagnetic
response of the valve.

Better on that concept. H. Hertz measured only one curve of current cor-
responding to potential drops across the diode, given load and battery. In the
triode, the non-linear relation F(V, I) depends on two more parameters, as one
may vary potential and current through the third electrode too.

In electronics, the superior versatility of that component leaded to the stan-
dardisation of a few families, depending on applications. Let’s examine two
usual applications of vacuum tubes.

As a ﬁrst example, consider high ﬁdelity ampliﬁcation of weak electromag-
netic signals at audio frequencies. We restrict to the essential, omitting even
the transduction step into audible sound. Fig. 1 shows the basic schema of
a triode conﬁgured as a common-cathode wide band ampliﬁer, with grid and

11

G(cid:13)

+(cid:13)

vgk(cid:13)

-(cid:13)

P(cid:13)

ip

rp

µvgk

-(cid:13)

+(cid:13)

K(cid:13)

vpk(cid:13)

+(cid:13)

-(cid:13)

(cid:0)

∆vP
∆iP

IP
(cid:1)

VG
(cid:1)
∆vP
∆vG

is the plate resistance

is the ampliﬁcation factor

rp ≡
(cid:0)
µ ≡ −
vgk = vG + VGG = ∆vG is the input voltage drop
vpk = vP + VP P = ∆vP is the output signal
across load resistance RL, i.e. vpk = − µvkg RL
RL+vP
Conﬁguration is grounded-cathode. Quiescent point
values on a static plate characteristic
VGG = const, IP = IP (VP P ) are not stressed

Figure 2: Thevenin’s linear model for the updated range over which µ and rp
are substantially constant.

plate supply batteries.

Ampliﬁcation being untuned, the output signal, i.e. the plate current on
an external resistive load, at the operating conditions is the linearly ampliﬁed
input signal, i.e. the variation of the grid potential. Then, the circuit can be
represented as a two-port network having a lumped output impedance in series
with a generator, equal to the open circuit voltage.

Fig. 2 shows the schematic voltage-source model where supply batteries are

no more included, as usual.

As a second example let’s consider the generation of a carrier for radio broad-
casting (without radiation step “coupling” to the ether channel). The basic
scheme of Fig. 1 for the triode may be kept valid if we substitute a parallel cir-
cuit LC for the resistive load RL. The new element plays the role of a passband
ﬁlter at the carrier frequency. However, the simple scheme in Fig. 2 doesn’t
apply any more, because now ampliﬁcation is tuned. Furthemore, the input has
to be obtained feeding back part of the output. If the feeding back keeps the
correct input-output phase relationship an oscillation starts and builds up as
the biased ampliﬁer is matched at the correct frequency and tracks it. Tech-
nical improvements allow to get a steady carrier with low harmonic content,
low levels of sideband noise and low thermal drift rate. At variance to the ﬁrst
example, the output is typically on/oﬀ. It is not linear, nor it can be obtained
from linear ampliﬁcation by a perturbative approach.

The quirk in using a triode as in Franck-Hertz experiments doesn’t lay in

12

ip(cid:13)
(mA)

50

I(cid:9)

II

III

vp(V)

200

Figure 3: Shape of a volt-ampere diod’s characteristic for a high-vacuum tube
with pure tungsten cathode at T ≃ 2200 K

any dissimilarity from the scheme in Fig. 1, but rather in its atypical circuitry,
with respect to usual applications.

Really, Goucher used the third electrode to control the valve, but he didn’t
bother about “tube characteristics.” The reason is that he was interpreting his
observations after hypothesising a slow ﬂow of particles. By that hypothesis,
the investigation became concerned with the distribution of velocities of those
particles. The non-linearity of the characteristics was considered “experimen-
tally uninﬂuential” until it didn’t increase the dispersion around the mean value
of that distribution.

Now, let’s substitute those thermo-emitted particles accelerated via an ap-
plied d.p., which ionise the gas because of collisions, with the alternative picture.
Let’s say that, since the casing and contents behave as a triode, the signal dis-
tortion arising because of the non-linear characteristics explains the presence of
an output without external input.

We show that Fig. 3 of Goucher’s paper (which we number as Fig. 4) is a
characteristic curve of that valve, and that its non-linearity justiﬁes the onset of
persistent autogenous oscillations of his thermoelectronic tube at the expenses
of the plate feeding power.

We like to start by telling about characteristics of vacuum tubes. As we
said above, about H. Hertz experiment, if we consider a diode as a planar
equipotential-surfaces condenser, then, according to electrostatics, the potential
between the electrodes is a linear function of their distance, and to a good
approximation there is no current ﬂow. In disagreement with electrostatics, a
thermoelectronic diode can conduct, and, although to a far lesser extent, also a
cold-cathode diode can. The relation between the continuous current through
it and the potential drop, its static characteristic, is non-linear.

As shown in Fig. 3, qualitatively, we distinguish three ranges of a commercial
thermoelectronic diode’s characteristic. There is a lower saturation range (I) at
negative potential, where the diode approximately doesn’t conduct. There is
an upper saturation range (III), where the maximal current essentially depends
on the cathode’s hot ﬁlament supply. Then, there is an intermediate range (II)

(cid:13)
13

where the relation between iP and vP is considered to depend on the surface
conditions of the cathode, on the way it’s feeded, on the material of the elec-
trodes, on their geometry, and on the residual gases in the tube. The trend may
seem quadratic, but probably it is even more complicated.

In the following few paragraphs, we describe the curve for a vacuum tube

having three electrodes.

We already mentioned that the grid control introduces a further parameteri-
sation of every isothermal characteristic function. In facts, the common cathode
triode may be considered as composed of two interlaced diodes: an input diode,
consisting of the cathode and the grid, and an output one, consisting of the
same cathode and the anode.

Consider the static parameters vG, vP, iG and iP of the triode, where G
(for grid) indexes the values pertaining to the input diode while P (for plate)
those of the output one. By a careful design, the ampliﬁcation can be made
quite linear, with an ampliﬁcation factor between 102 and 104 at the clamps, in
a certain range of the static parameters. In that range, the parameterisation of
the static characteristic is a repetition of the same curve at diﬀerent oﬀsets. To
wit, a given output characteristic (vP, iP) generates regularly repeated graphs
for a set of ﬁxed vG‘s that diﬀer from one another by a constant amount.

We have vG = vG(iG), and the input diode characteristic (vG, iG) is non-
linear as a whole. That’s why ampliﬁcation without distortion typically implies
iG∼0, that is this diode is cutoﬀ. In turn, this means that the grid’s potential
has to be negative w.r.t. the cathode. Hence, we see that the purpose of using a
positive grid potential to accelerate electrons may become incompatible with a
nicely linear response of the triode. This terminates the digression about tube’s
characteristics.

Back to the aforementioned Goucher’s paper. The stated aim of Fig. 4 is
to show that the triode being used is more suitable for measuring ionisation
potentials than Pawlow’s one. So we may compare two performances and check
what’s the technical improvement.

Goucher’s tube featured an indirectly heated pure metal cathode (Pt). The
vacuum obtained from hydrogen was better than 0.005mm Hg (which is still
about 103 times worse than high vacuum in 1949.) Measurements were carried
out maintaining the grid potential vG at +7.5V, varying the static grid-plate de-
celerating potential vGP between 0 and 10V point by point, and registering the
corresponding plate electrical current by means of an auxiliary ﬁeld electrometer
when stationary conditions were attained.

In Fig. 4, on the ordinate axis he plotted the calculated slope of the ex-
perimentally measured iP as a velocity distribution. The calibration was the
percentage of the graph area, between 0% and 70%. On the abscissa, he plotted
the values of vGP between 0 and 10V.

Since vPG = vP – vG, and vG = 7.5V,

vPG = 0 implies vP = 7.5V
vPG = -10 implies vP = -2.5V.

On the other hand, we have

14

(2)

i

50

60

n 70%
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v

30

40

20

l

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

7.5

9
Volts

Tracing according to Goucher’s Fig. 3 of [22]

Figure 4: Goucher’s and Pawlow’s experiments

∂iP
∂vP G (cid:19)vG

(cid:18)

=

(cid:18)

∂iP
∂vP (cid:19)vG

′

= g

P =

1
r′

P

Therefore, the graph he plotted may also show a plate static diﬀerential
conductance as a function of the plate potential. The apex indicates that, if
ampliﬁcation is not linear, conductance diﬀers from that one for small swings
around the chosen working condition. We’ll now argue that Goucher’s project
aimed at enhancing the non-linear functioning.

When the common cathode triode is used as a voltage ampliﬁer, that is it
exploits the linear characteristic range, it exhibits a high plate resistance, which
contributes to the remarkable value of the linear gain factor µ ∝ rP .

That might hold for both Goucher and Pawlow tubes, up to about half of
the abscissa range. Thereafter vP tends toward 0, while the input diode is not
cutoﬀ. That implies iG > 0: Goucher doesn’t say it for this triode, but for the
one on page 570 of his paper. This current ﬂows in the input diode, generating
a voltage drop, and hence it supplies to the output an additional voltage “in
phase” with vP.

According to commercial data sheets, the positively polarised grid draws
more and more current as the plate potential tends toward zero.In the same
conditions, according to Fig. 4, Goucher’s tube conductance climbs showing
a much narrower “gaussian” peak than Pawlow’s. Moreover, it grows in spite
of there being no external user requiring the current to increase. Finally, it
abruptly hits the abscissa axis with a distinctively not horizontal slope. For the
remaining 2V, only the slow descent of Pawlow’s tube is reported in Fig. 4.
Perhaps Goucher got negative conductance?

As far as the area under the graph is concerned, a very steep tract with
negative conductance wouldn’t contribute much, and hence any correction bears
no importance. However, for the sake of the triode electromagnetic response,

15

to exhibit a negative conductance implies an instability of ampliﬁcation. To
be precise, for those bias conditions the triode performance looks like that of
a generator. In facts, the Barkhausen-Kurz generator for U.H.F. is connected
and polarised nearly the same way [23]. Obviously, an oscillator circuit usually
contains also ﬁlters and provides for a matching at the desired frequency of
oscillation. Goucher’s circuit consisted of just the tube. That notwithstanding,
according to this interpretation, it oscillated.

So, this is the big diﬀerence between the diodes that H. Hertz used to work
with and these ﬁne workmanship pure metal cathode triodes. The former
couldn’t generate any radiotelegraphic carrier. The latter typically resonate
in certain frequency ranges. Indeed, between 1928 and 1929 commercial triodes
and tetrods have been substituted with pentods for linear ampliﬁers, or they
have been cascode conﬁgured.

As a further look inside the technological development trend of those ex-
periments, we also report an improvement suggested by G. Hertz for noble gas,
helium-neon or metal vapour, triodes: “The heated cathode [...], with a drop of
barium oxide on its surface, is at about half a millimetre from the close-meshed
[...] The space between the grid and the plate is an enclosed metallic
grid.
cavity, except for a small slit [...]”[24].

We conclude that Goucher’s eﬀorts were directed toward improving the grid-
plate coupling of his tube, in order to increase its positive feedback and quality
factor, by keeping losses as low as possible.

E. Einsporn and the voltage controlled oscillator

Einsporn [25], one of Franck’s co-workers, considered a common-cathode con-
ﬁgured thermoionic tube of four electrodes.

He made two diﬀerent series of measurements: in the ﬁrst one, he measured
mercury excitation potentials, using the tetrod as a triode. In the second se-
ries, he measured ionisation potentials, for comparison with Goucher, using the
tetrod as a diode.

In the ﬁrst series, the Author applied the “accelerating” positive potential
between the cathode and the second grid, that is the one near to the plate.
Now, when the ﬁrst grid is earthed, the tetrod works as a triode. Furthermore,
as the ampliﬁcation gain is related to the ratio between the geometrical plate-
to-grid and grid-to-cathode distances, we may consider it small, except at those
working conditions where the input couples with the output.

During the experiments, the grid potential was set at a chosen value between
0 and 25V, whilst the plate one was held slightly positive w.r.t. the grid (max.
1V). The corresponding measure of current was taken. The whole procedure
was to be repeated for each value of the grid potential.

The curve reported in his Fig. 2 and redrawn in our Fig. 5 to interpolate
his data for the plate current as a function of the grid potential, is not a mutual
characteristic in the prevailing sense of this term. In facts, it consists of points
from a set of data that we can regard as plate characteristics. Now, if the whole

16

l

g
a
v
a
n
o
m
e
t
e
r
 
d
e
v
a
t
i
o
n

i

9.4

13.9

4.3

15.5

17.4

18.8

0

5

10

15

20

Accelerating Potential (V)

Figure 5: Tracing of Fig. 3 according to Einsporn [25]

valve, i.e. outer casing, electrodes, wiring and gas, only ampliﬁed more or less
linearly the static input potential in the considered biasing range, then the
slope of that curve should exhibit no irregular climbing, or at least it shouldn’t
change sign. Instead, Einsporn himself calculated interpolations as if the curve
had several narrow local maxima. These are well distinguished at the grid
potential values A, 2A, 3A and their products with another potential B. As
usual, he related those peaks to the UV spectrum of the gas inside the casing,
by means of the simple law (1) rewritten as eV = hν. In facts, he believed the
UV radiation to arise owing to jumps between discrete energy levels, which he
deemed to exist and to be gas’ property.

Such picture originates on the sole basis of the electric measurements. The
low-pressure gas is inside the tube, and departures from linearity of the mean

17

anodic current as a function of the potentials are ascribed to the gas only. If
that were true, then it should be possible to schematically decompose the circuit
into two non-interacting parts: a triode that works as a linear ampliﬁer and a
variable resistance, say an external RCL load having complex impedance. The
hypothesis is that the low pressure gas in the classical electromagnetic theory
can be schematised as if it behaved linearly in the circuit. That is to say, we
attribute to the gas an attenuation constant equal to the real coeﬃcient of the
impedance, and a phase constant equal to the imaginary coeﬃcient [26].
If
the circuit is supposed to resonate at the cascaded RCL mode of the gas, the
current maximum (achieved at the expenses of the plate battery) corresponds
to the load driven to resonance.

If the circuit behaved like an ampliﬁer plus a lumped RCL load, as measured
from the signal detected with a moving-coil mirror galvanometer, the input cir-
cuit of the amplifying triode should provide for a frequency sweep to drive the
gas RCL to resonance. On the contrary, Einsporn’s input supplied static poten-
tial diﬀerences. In order to interpret the experiment according to Einsporn, we
should substitute the ampliﬁer with a ﬂuorescence spectrometer.

Analysing Goucher’s Fig. 3 (our Fig. 4 above), we just saw that a tube
devoid of gas may perform as a generator at well chosen operating conditions.
If the frequency of the generator were a linear function of the grid potential,
then there would be no need to project VCOs (voltage-controlled oscillators.)
A simple potential-to-frequency conversion formula of the kind of law (1) would
already ﬁt the macroscopic triode object.
In facts, characteristic curves are
already non-linear at low frequencies, and at high frequencies the lumped pa-
rameter wiring diagrams fail altogether.

Fortunately, valves of the kind used by Einsporn, containing low pressure
mercury vapours, are not really uncommon products. They have been imple-
mented in various ways during the last decades. They are known in the literature
with the name of tiratron. They are used as switches in circuits, as alternatives
to the ignitron [27]. When the valve is on, it tends to radiate like a resonator
rather than like a linear antenna. According to the present interpretation of the
Maxwell-Hertz theory, the metal making up the body of the cathode is the mat-
ter being directly electrically strained. It becomes hot. It becomes saturated by
the power it cannot convert into emission, and radiates everything else. After a
transient, the metallic surface of the catode is electrically coupled to anything
that can resonate in the valve, in particular to the mercury vapours.

Visually, a bluish emission surrounds the cathode, and all other luminescence
eﬀects which are more easily spectroscopically analysed, take place in the tube
[28]. Truly, we have included the globally non-linear performance of the valve
in the term “saturation”. Nevertheless, that doesn’t mean one cannot measure
“intermodulation products” in lower frequency ranges by means of a suitable
analyser. Nor does it mean that linear waves theory cannot be proﬁtably used
to interpret those measurements. The only prohibition involves the kind of
spectral analysis implied by law (1). Such prohibition is prominently related to
the paradoxes arising from the subdivision of the continuum into discrete parts,
and it is purely of mathematical nature.

18

The second series of measures in Einsporn’s paper was intended for compar-
ison to the new ionisation potentials that Goucher had been measuring mean-
while. They have been carried out on the tetrod with corrections for taking
into account the photoelectric eﬀect. As stated in theoretical prescriptions, a
strongly negative cutoﬀ potential has been applied to the plate, or, with the
aforementioned corrections, to the screen-grid.

The current vs. potential curve becomes similar to that of a diode, exhibiting
moderate climbing at the potentials where ionisation is expected. That curve
indicates it’s impossible for the triode in those operating conditions to oscillate
(oﬀ-condition). It does not mean that its behaviour becomes linear.

To summarise, the original Franck-Hertz experiment, rather than quantita-
tively conﬁrming a simple law, suggests that physical transduction of electrical,
thermal or acoustical quantities in radiative phenomena is a non-linear perfor-
mance.

Not that the alternative suggested here, to describe the electric interaction
between a biased triod and the gas therein as a modulation of electromagnetic
radiation due to electrical coupling, is easier or more convenient to deal with.
Nevertheless, if the cavity inside triodes could be made selective enough, as
wished by many of the authors mentioned above, then the modulation could
be simpliﬁed by applying sum and product trigonometric formulas, and some
additional insight into frequency relationships could be gained by comparison
with experiments.

Conclusions

On reinterpreting those fundamental experiments, the weakness of the current
concepts about telecommunication theory seems to be that it is not based on a
signal theory, by which we mean an enhanced interpretation of Maxwell’s equa-
tions. Rather, it’s based on many communications and information theories,
accompanied with Lorentz’s interpretation of electromagnetic ﬁelds.

We have reported the mentioned paper by H. Hertz on the Glimmlicht. We
have interpreted it with the hindsight given by current advancements in the
telecommunication ﬁeld. H. Hertz’s experiment appears to adhere closely to
that interpretation based on Maxwell’s equations. The reason is precisely that
the Author perceived the validation of Maxwell’s equations as a task separate
from, and prevalent on, the explanation of speciﬁc transduction mechanisms.
That approach was a good start for founding a detected-signal theory. However,
the pivotal beliefs around which the research was wandering at the time are the
same for all the Authors we mentioned. They concern the discrete nature of
matter and the dynamical model of electromagnetism.

Are those beliefs still current?
In practice, the molecular model of the matter has always been agreed upon
universally. Except for E. Mach, who criticised it basing on his own results
in optoacoustic experiments. He didn’t accept it because he couldn’t ﬁgure out

REFERENCES

19

just how statistical movements of particles would propagate as nearly monochro-
matic waves [29] or elicit them.

After H. Hertz’s time, the relationships among the world out there, the
sensitive experience, and its interpretation, have been the subjects of much
writings and discussions. Today, a few people believe that Bohr’s atom is a
faithful description of something that really exists in the physical world. Most
consider it a useful intuitive guide. A model, that is.

In this respect, atomism in general may be thought of as a linear model of
those relationships with the external world. Working on the resulting repre-
sentation, we can take advantage of its simpliﬁcations. However, we’ll also be
hindered by its limitations: no further approximation can be easily obtained by
introducing small perturbations. In facts, it is not possible to use a linear model
to represent an interaction, be it dynamic, energetic or whatever.

As far as a purely mechanical explanation of electromagnetism is concerned,
we know that Maxwell himself discarded it. After the success story of telecom-
munications, if we accept that electromagnetism just explains itself, we don’t
see any special reason to model the current by analogy with convective move-
ment. Moreover, as we avoided the previous analogy, we should have no reason
to bind the charge to a mechanical entity either.

In order to sketch a detected-signal theory, let’s reconsider the diode for a
moment. By varying the potential diﬀerence between the electrodes, the valve,
as it rectiﬁes the current, allows its detection. If we don’t interpret that current
as a ﬂow of particles, we may consider it as just the way a diode detects varying
potentials.
In radiotechniques, people talk of rectiﬁcation of electromagnetic
oscillations: of a signal, that is.

References

[1] W. Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory, Dover

Publ., Inc., New York 1949

[2] E. Schr¨odinger, Quantum Theory and Measurement, p. 152, J. A. Wheeler,

Wit Zurek Eds., Princeton University Press, Princeton 1983

[3] H. Poincar´e, Scritti di ﬁsica-matematica, U.T.E.T., Torino 1993, trans. from:
Les rayons cathodiques et les rayons R¨ontgen, Rev. generale des Sci. pures
et appliqu´ees, 7, 1896

[4] J.Roche, Eur.J.Phys.19 (1998) 155

[5] J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity & Magnetism, Vol. 1, nr 54, 75,

III, Dover Publications, Inc., New York 1954

[6] H.Poincar´e, Scritti di ﬁsica-matematica, U.T.E.T., Torino 1993, trans. from:
A propos des exp´eriences de M.Cr´emieu. - Rev.gen. des Sci. pures et ap-
pliqu´ees. 12 (1901)

REFERENCES

20

[7] Jed Z. Buchwald, The Creation of Scientiﬁc Eﬀects, The University of

Chicago Press, London 1994

[8] Jed. Z. Buchwald, Why Hertz was right about cathode rays, in Scientiﬁc

Practice, The University of Chicago Press, 1995

[9] H.Hertz, Gesammelte Werke, Vol.1, S¨andig Repring Verlag Vaduz 1993, from

Wiedemann Ann.Phys.Chem. (1883) 19

[10] D.E. Ravalico, La moderna supereterodina, chap.XVI, Ulrico Hoepli, Mi-

lano 1943

[11] H. Hertz, Gesammelte Werke, Vol.1, S¨andig Repring Verlag Vaduz 1993,

from Wiedemann Ann.Phys.Chem. (1892) 45

[12] H. Hertz, Untersuchengen ¨uber die Ausbreitung der elektrischen Kraft,

S¨andig Reprint Verlag 1993, p.2

[13] O. Darrigol, Electrodynamics from Amp`ere to Einstein, N. 4.48, Oxford

University Press, 2000

[14] J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity & Magnetism, Vol. 1, nr 61,

Dover Publications, Inc., New York 1954

[15] J. C. Slater, N. H. Frank, Electromagnetism, Appendix II Dover Publica-

tions, Inc., New York 1969

[16] M. Planck, Jahresber. der D. Math. Ver. 7 (1899) 77

[17] F. Hund, Geschichte der Quantentheorie, Cap. III, Bibl. Inst. Mannheim,

3rd Ed. 1984

[18] J. Franck, E. Einsporn, Zeitschr. f. Physik, 2 (1920) 18

[19] M. Born, Atomic Physics, Dover Publications, Inc., New York 1969

[20] A. Cassinello, J.L. Sanchez-Gomez, Found. of Phys., 26 (1996) 1357

[21] W. Thomson, Opere di Kelvin, U.T.E.T., Torino 1971, trans. from: Phil.

Mag. 3 (1902) 257

[22] F. S. Goucher, Roy. Proc. 8 (1916) 561

[23] K. Henney ed., Radio Engineering Handbook, IV Ed., Cap. X by R. I.

Sarbacher, D.C.Fielder, Mc Graw-Hill Book Co., NewYork 1950

[24] G. Hertz, Zeitschr. f. Physik, 22 (1924) 18

[25] E. Einsporn, Zeitschr. f. Physik 5 (1921) 208

[26] J. D. Kraus, D. A. Fleisch, Electromagnetics with applications, 5th Ed.,

Chap.4, McGraw-Hill, New York 1999

REFERENCES

1949

[27] A. V. Eastman, Fundamentals of vacuum tubes, Mc Graw-Hill, New York

[28] R. Seeliger, G. Mierdel, Zeitschr. f. Physik, 21 (1923) 230

[29] E. Mach, Optisch-akustische Versuche, Orig. Ausgabe 1873, S¨andig Reprint

Verlag, Vaduz 1988

21

