1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE EARLY UNIVERSE AND THE
STANDARD MODEL OF PARTICLE
PHYSICS

AFSAR ABBAS
Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar-751005, India
(e-mail : afsar@iopb.res.in)

Abstract

The most well tested and successful model of particle physics is the Stan-
dard Model (SM). It is shown here that the restoration of the full SM sym-
metry ( as in the Early Universe ) leads to the result that the electric charge
loses all physical meaning and hence does not exist above this scale, As a
direct consequence of this we show that ‘time’, ‘light’ along with its veloc-
ity c and therefore the theory of relativity, all lose any physical meaning.
The space-time structure as known to us, disappears in this phase transi-
tion. Thus it is hypothesized that the Universe came into existence when
the SM symmetry SU(3)c ⊗ SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)Y was spontaneously broken to
SU(3)c ⊗ U(1)em. This does not require any spurious extensions of the SM
and in a natural and consistent manner explains the origin of the Universe
within the framework of the SM itself. Thus the SM, in addition to all its
successes, has within itself, the capablity of giving a consistent decription of
the origin of the Universe.

1

As the universe expands, it is predicted that it undergoes a series of
phase transitions [1] during which the appropriate symmetry breakes down in
various stages until it reaches the stage of the electro-weak (EW) symmetry.
This is given by the group structure SU(3)c ⊗ SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)Y . After
t ∼ 10−10 seconds ( at T ∼ 102 GeV ) the electro-weak phase transition
to SU(3)c ⊗ U(1)em through the Higgs Mechanism takes place.
It is the
strucure of this phase transition that I look into in this paper.

Note that the structure SU(3)c ⊗ SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)em forms the basis of
the Standard Model ( SM ) of particle physics. This model has been well
studied in the laboratory. It is the best tested model of particle physics [2].
However because of subjectively aesthetic reasons some people feel that this
may not be the ultimate model of physics and hence there have been several
propsals to go beyond the SM like the GUTs, the Superstring theories etc
[2]. One has to however remember that none of these have been shown to
be correct by any empirical test in the laboratory. Some of these models are
perhaps not even testable.

c

The idea of the electro-weak phase transition [1,2] is that above some crit-
the full electro -weak symmetry SU(3)c ⊗ SU(2)L⊗
ical temperature T EW
U(1)Y is restored. This restoration implies that now the SU(2)L gauge par-
ticles W +,−, W 0 and the U(1)Y gauge particle Bµ becomes massless.
In
addition all matter particles e, µ, τ , u-quark etc becomes massless too. All
the proposed extensions presumably become operative above this scale. As
all these extensions are trying to go beyond the SM and as the SM is the
most established and tested model of particle physics, one expects that all
these extensions should be fully consistent with the requirements of the SM.
Indeed this was so in the early 70’s when most of the attempts to go beyond
the SM were originating [2]. It was believed then that one of the weaknesses
of the SM was that the electric charge was not quantized in it. It was seen
as a success of the GUTs concept that the electric charge was found to be
automatically quantized therein. Hence as per popular perception the GUTs
had all that the SM had plus some more [2].

However, it was as late as 1990 that this was shown to be wrong. Against
all expectations, the electric charge was shown to be fully and consistently
quantized in the SM [3]. In fact this turns out to be its fundamental property,
no less signiﬁcant than the generation of masses for the gauge particles [3,4].
It had immediate implications for all extensions beyond the SM [5,6,7]. If
electric charge quantization in the SM has consequences for other models,

2

does it have more to say about the nature of things. Here in this paper this
is what shall be looked into, and we shall ﬁnd surprising and basic eﬀects,
giving us insight into fundamental aspects of Nature. It is heartening that
all this shall arise within the SM, which as of today, has withstood closest
scrutiny, both experimental and theoretical.

Let us start by looking at the ﬁrst generation of quarks and leptons (u, d,
e,ν ) and assign them to SU(3)c ⊗ SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)Y representation as follows
[3]

qL =

, (3, 2, Yq)

u
d (cid:19)L

(cid:18)

uR; (3, 1, Yu)

dR; (3, 1, Yd)

lL =

ν
e (cid:19)

(cid:18)

; (1, 2, Yl)

eR; (1, 1, Ye)

Q′ = a′I3 + b′Y

Q = I3 + bY

Q = I3 + (

1
2Yφ

)Y

3

To keep things as general as possible this brings in ﬁve unknown hyper-

charges.

Let us now deﬁne the electric charge in the most general way in terms of

the diagonal generators of SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)Y as

We can always scale the electric charge once as Q = Q′

a′ and hence (b = b′
a′ )

In the SM SU(3)c ⊗ SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)Y is spontaniously broken through
the Higgs mechanism to the group SU(3)c ⊗ U(1)em .
In this model the
Higgs is assumed to be doublet φ with arbitrary hypercharge Yφ. The isospin
I3 = − 1
2 component of the Higgs develops a nonzero vacuum expectation
value < φ >o. Since we want the U(1)em generator Q to be unbroken we
require Q < φ >o= 0. This right away ﬁxes b in (3) and we get

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Next one requires that the L-handed and the R-handed charges be iden-
tical in U(1)em which is a fundamental property of electrodynamics. Also
by demanding that the triangular anomaly cancels (to ensure renormaliga-
bility of the theory) [3] one obtaines all the unknown hypercharge in terms
of the unknown Higgs hypercharge Yφ. Ultimately Yφ is cancelled out and
one obtain the correct charge quantization as follows.

qL =

, Yq =

u
d (cid:19)L

(cid:18)

Q(u) =

, Q(d) =

Yφ
3

,

−1
3

uR, Yu =

Yφ, Q(uR) =

2
3
3
4
−2
3

dR, Yd =

Yφ, Q(dR) =

2
3
−1
3

lL =

(cid:18)

, Yl = −Yφ, Q(ν) = 0, Q(e) = −1

ν
e (cid:19)
eR, Ye = −2Yφ, Q(eR) = −1

Q(u) =

(1 +

1
2

1
2

1
Nc

)

1
Nc

)

Q(d) =

(−1 +

(5)

(6)

It has been shown [3,4] that for arbitrary Nc the colour dependence of

the electric charge as demanded by the SM is

One should note that equations (5) and (6) show that the electric charge
is quantized in SM. The complete structure of the SM as is, is required to
obtain this result on very general grounds. The SM is the best tested model
of particle physics. What has this to say about the early universe scenarios
available today ?

Clearly the U(1)em symmetry which arose due to spontaneous symmetry
breaking due to a Higgs doublet in the EW symmetry will be lost above T EW
whence SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)em symmetry would be restored. As is obvious, above
T EW
all the fermions and gauge bosons becomes massless . This properly is
c

c

4

well-known and has been incorporated in cosmological models. Here I point
out a new phenomenon arising from the restoring of the full EW symmetry .
Note that to start with the parameter b and Y in equation (3) in the
deﬁnition of electric charge were completely unknown. We could lay a handle
on ’b’ entirely on the basis of the presence of spontaneous symmetry breaking
and on ensuring that photon was massless b = 1
where the
2Yφ
EW symmetry is restored there is no spontaneous symmetry breaking and
hence the parameter b is completely undetermined. Together ’bY’ could be
any arbitrary number whatsoever even an irrational number. Within the
framework of this model above T EW
we just cannot deﬁne electric charges
at all.
It may be a number which is zero or inﬁnite or an irrational etc.
Hence the electric charge given by equation (3) loses any physical meaning
all together.This is the new amazing result.

. Above T EW

c

c

So above T EW

all the particles have not only become massless, they have
c
forgotten their charges also.
It just does not make sense to talk of their
charges. The concept of electric charge has been lost. There is no such
thing as charge anymore. The photon (which was a linear combination of
W 0 and Bµ after spontaneous symmetry breaking ) with it’s deﬁning vector
characterteristic does not exist either. So the conclusion is that there is no
electrodynamics above T EW

.

c

Note that the electric charge in the SM was not an elementary or funda-
mental object at all. In fact it was a secondary quantity deﬁned in terms of
the elementary objects I3 and Y ( see equation(3)). So it should not be really
surprising to see it loose it’s meaning under special circumstances. The same
is true of the photon of U(1)em . In short U(1)em owes its existence to SSB
and looses it’s meaning when the full EW symmetry is restored [8,9].

I have demostrated that actually electric charge is quantised in SM and
when at high temperature the EW symmetry is unbroken, the concept of
electric charge does not arise. At those and still higher temperatures ie
at still earlier universe [1] extensions like GUTs, Supergravity, Superstrings
are believed to be relevant. Note that in all these models, as a generic
property charge is always believed to exist and is quantized [8,9]. Quite
clearly the existence of electric charge demanded by these models in the very
early universe is in conﬂict with what I have shown that there was no elctric
charge before about 10−10 seconds. Hence all these extensins can not give a
valid description of the very early universe [8,9].

5

All this misunderstanding and confusion arose because we had not un-
derstood the electro-weak phase transition correctly. We have already seen
that the restoration of the full SM symmetry leads to the result that there
is no electric charge above it and also that there was no photon. All the so
called hypothetical extenions beyond the SM are already ruled out as shown
above. So what remains?

The above result shows that above the electro-weak phase transition there
was no electromagnetism. Maxwells equations of electrodynamics show that
light is an electromagnetic phenomenon. Hence above the electro-weak phase
transition there was no light and no Maxwells equations. And surprisingly
we are led to conclude that there was no velocity of light c as well. One
knows that the velocity of light c is given as

c2 =

1
ǫ0µ0
where ǫ0 and µ0 are permittivity and permeability of the free space. These
electromagnetic properties disappear along with the electric charge and hence
the velocity of light also disappears above the electro-weak phase transition.
The premise on which the theory of relativity is based is that c, the veloc-
ity of light is always the same, no matter from which frame of reference it is
measured. Relativity theory also asserts that there is no absolute standard of
motion in the Universe. Of fundamental signiﬁcance is the invariant interval

(7)

s2 = (ct)

2 − x2 − y2 − z2

(8)

Here the constant c provides us with a means of deﬁning time in terms
of spatial separation and vice versa through l = c t.
this enables one to
visualize time as the fourth dimension. Hence time gets deﬁned due to the
constant c. Therefore when there were no c as in the early universe ,there
was no time as well. Hence above the electro-weak breaking scale there was
no time. As the special theory of relativity depends upon c and time, above
the electro-weak breaking scale there was no special theory of relativity. As
the General Theory of relativity also requires the concept of a physical space-
time, it collapses too above the electro-weak breaking scale. Hence the whole
physical universe collapses above this scale.

Therefore it is hypothesized here that the Universe came into existence
when the electro-weak symmetry was broken spontaneously. Before it there

6

was no ’time’, no ’light’, no maximum and constant velocity like ’c’, no
gravity or space-time structure on which objective physical laws as we know
it could exist.

Note that this new picture of the origin of the Universe arises naturally
within the best studied and the best veriﬁed model of particle physics. It does
not require any ad-hoc or arbitrary models or principles. One only has to do
a consistent and careful analysis of the hitherto misunderstood electro-weak
spontaneous symmetry breaking.

In short we ﬁnd that the SM of particle physics is not only good to
explain all known facts, it is also capable of giving a natural and consistent
description of the origin of the Universe. It is beautiful as it is so simple.
This work should be seen as further strengthening the SM.

7

REFERENCES

1. E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner, ” The Early Universe ” Edison Wesley,

New York ( 1990 )

2. T. P. Cheng and L. F. Lee, ” Gauge Theory of Elementary Particle

Physics ”, Clarendon Press, Oxford ( 1988 )

3. A. Abbas, Phys. Lett. , B 238 ( 1990) 344
4. A. Abbas, J. Phys. G. , 16 ( 1990 ) L163
5. A. Abbas, Nuovo Cimento , A 106 ( 1993 ) 985
6. A. Abbas, Hadronic J., 15 ( 1992 ) 475
7. A. Abbas, Ind. J. Phys., A 67 ( 1993 ) 541
8. A. Abbas, Physics Today ( July 1999 ) p.81-82
9. A. Abbas, ‘On standard model Higgs and superstring theories’ ”Parti-
cles, Strings and Cosmology PASCOS99”, Ed K Cheung, J F Gunion and S
Mrenna, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore ( 2000) 123

8

