1
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
8
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Impulse Gravity Generator Based on Charged

Y Ba2Cu3O7

y Superconductor with Composite Crystal

−

Structure
Evgeny Podkletnov1, Giovanni Modanese2

1 Moscow Chemical Scientiﬁc Research Centre
113452 Moscow - Russia
E-mail: epodkletnov@hotmail.com

2 California Institute for Physics and Astrophysics
366 Cambridge Ave., Palo Alto, CA 94306
and
University of Bolzano – Industrial Engineering
Via Sernesi 1, 39100 Bolzano, Italy
E-mail: giovanni.modanese@unibz.it

Abstract

The detection of apparent anomalous forces in the vicinity of high-Tc supercon-
ductors under non equilibrium conditions has stimulated an experimental research in
which the operating parameters of the experiment have been pushed to values higher
than those employed in previous attempts. The results conﬁrm the existence of an
unexpected physical interaction. An apparatus has been constructed and tested in
which the superconductor is subjected to peak currents in excess of 104 A, surface
potentials in excess of 1 M V , trapped magnetic ﬁeld up to 1 T , and temperature
down to 40 K. In order to produce the required currents a high voltage discharge
technique has been employed. Discharges originating from a superconducting ceramic
electrode are accompanied by the emission of radiation which propagates in a focused
beam without noticeable attenuation through diﬀerent materials and exerts a short
repulsive force on small movable objects along the propagation axis. Within the
measurement error (5 to 7 %) the impulse is proportional to the mass of the objects
and independent on their composition. It therefore resembles a gravitational impulse.
The observed phenomenon appears to be absolutely new and unprecedented in the
literature. It cannot be understood in the framework of general relativity. A theory
is proposed which combines a quantum gravity approach with anomalous vacuum
ﬂuctuations.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Experimental

2.1 General description of the installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Superconducting emitter, fabrication methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Organization of the discharge and measurements of the eﬀect.

. . . . . . .

1

2

2

2

4

6

4.1 A possible theoretical explanation. Basic concepts.

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Possible interpretation of the gravitational-like impulse at the discharge . .

4.3 Known eﬀects which could be connected to the observed phenomenon. . . .

3 Results

4 Discussion

5 Conclusions

1 Introduction

7

10

12

19

21

26

Experiments showing possible anomalous forces between high-Tc ceramic superconductors
under non equilibrium conditions and test objects have been reported by several inves-
tigators since 1992 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The observed phenomenology was diﬃcult to explain
and has been attributed to a so called “gravity modiﬁcation”, because the reported eﬀects
mimic well the properties of the gravitational interaction, although their nature has never
been clearly understood. In fact several alternative explanations of these results have been
proposed [6, 7, 8, 9, 42] in the attempt to bring the observed anomalies into the realm of
known eﬀects.

Because of the great importance of any possible technical application of the reported
eﬀects, research activities have started in many laboratories since the ﬁrst observation of
the phenomenon [1]. Our recent research work focused on the improvement of the structure
of the high-Tc ceramic superconductors which have demonstrated capabilities of creating
anomalous forces. Moreover a high-voltage discharge apparatus has been designed and
constructed in order to easily reach those non equilibrium electromagnetic conditions that
seem required to produce the force eﬀects in HTCs.

The results described in this report should be regarded as preliminary. An improved
version of the experiment is currently being planned. Nevertheless, the body of results, as
well as the complexity of the experimental procedures and of the theoretical interpretation
are such that a detailed description and diﬀusion could not be further delayed. All mea-
surements were done by E. Podkletnov in Moscow, while G. Modanese provided theoretical
advice.

2 Experimental

2.1 General description of the installation

The initial variant of the experimental set-up was based on a high-voltage generator placed
in a closed cylinder chamber with a controlled gas atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 1. Two
metal spheres inside the chamber were supported by hollow ceramic insulators and had
electrical connections that allowed to organize a discharge between them, with voltage

2

up to 500 kV . One of the spheres had a thin superconducting coating of Y Ba2Cu3O7−y
obtained by plasma spraying using a “Plasmatech 3000S” installation. This sphere could
be charged to high voltage using a high voltage generator similar to that of Van de Graaf.
The second sphere could be moved along the axis of the chamber, the distance between
the spheres varying from 250 to 2000 mm. Spheres with a diameter from 250 to 500 mm
were used in the experiment. It was possible to ﬁll the chamber with helium vapours or to
create rough vacuum using a rotary pump. The walls of the chamber were made of non-
conducting plastic composite material, with a big quartz glass window along one of the
walls which allowed to observe the shape, the trajectory and the colour of the discharge.
In order to protect the environment and the computer network from static electricity and
powerful electromagnetic pulses, the chamber could be shielded by a Faraday cage with
cell dimensions of 2.0
2.0 cm and a rubber-plastic ﬁlm material absorbing ultra high
frequency (UHF) radiation.

×

The superconducting sphere was kept at a temperature between 40 and 80 K, which
was achieved by injecting liquid helium or liquid nitrogen through a quartz tube inside the
volume of the superconducting sphere before the charging began. The inside volume of the
chamber was evacuated or ﬁlled with helium in order to avoid the condensation of moisture
and diﬀerent gases on the superconducting sphere. The temperature of the superconductor
was measured using a standard thermocouple for low temperature measurements and was
typically around 55-60 K. Given the good heat conductivity of the superconductor, we
estimated that the temperature diﬀerence in the ceramic did not exceed 1 K.

An improved variant of the discharge chamber is shown in Fig. 2. The charged
electrode was changed to a toroid attached to a metal plate and a superconducting emitter
which had the shape of a disk with round corners. The non-superconducting part of the
emitter was ﬁxed to a metal plate using metal Indium or Wood’s metal, the superconducting
part of the emitter faced the opposite electrode. The second electrode was a metal toroid
of smaller diameter, connected to a target. The target was a metal disk with the diameter
of 100 mm and the height of 15 mm. The target was attached to a metal plate welded to
the toroid.

This improved design of the generator was able to create a well-formed discharge
between the emitter and the target, still the trajectory was not always repeatable and it
was diﬃcult to maintain constant values of current and voltage. The chamber was also not
rigid enough to obtain high vacuum and some moisture was condensing on the emitter,
damaging the superconducting material and aﬀecting the discharge characteristics. The
large distance between the electrodes also caused considerable dissipation of energy during
discharge. In order to improve the eﬃciency of operation, the measuring system and the
reproducibility of the discharge, an entirely new design of the vacuum chamber and the
charging system was created.

The ﬁnal variant of the discharge chamber is presented in Fig. 3 (the apparatus is
shown in a vertical position though actually it is situated parallel to the ﬂoor). This set-up
allowed to reduce the dimensions of the installation and to increase the eﬃciency of the
process. The chamber has the form of a cylinder with the approximate diameter of 1 m
and the length of 1.5 m and is made of quartz glass. The chamber has two connecting
sections with ﬂanges which allow to change the emitter easily. The design permits to

3

create high vacuum inside or to ﬁll the whole volume with any gas that is required. The
distance of the discharge has been decreased considerably giving the possibility to reduce
energy dissipation and to organize the discharge in a better way. The distance between
the electrodes can vary from 0.15 to 0.40 m in order to ﬁnd the optimum length for each
type of the emitter.

The discharge can be concentrated on a smaller target area using a big solenoid with
the diameter of 1.05 m that is wound around the chamber using copper wire with the
diameter of 0.5 cm. The magnetic ﬂux density is 0.9 T . A small solenoid is also wound
around the emitter (Fig. 3) so that the magnetic ﬁeld can be frozen inside a superconductor
when it is cooled down below the critical temperature.

The refrigeration system for the superconducting emitter provides a suﬃcient amount
of liquid nitrogen or liquid helium for the long-term operation and the losses of gas due to
evaporation are minimized because of the high vacuum inside the chamber and thus of a
better thermal insulation.

A photodiode is placed on the transparent wall of the chamber and is connected to
an oscilloscope, in order to provide information on the light parameters of the discharge.
Given the low pressure and the high applied voltage, emission of X-rays from the metallic
electrode cannot be excluded, but the short duration of the discharge makes their detection
diﬃcult. Use of a Geiger counter and of X-rays sensitive photographic plates did not yield
any clear signature of X-rays.

A precise measurement of the voltage of the discharge is achieved using a capacitive
sensor that is connected to an oscilloscope with a memory option as shown in the upper
part of Fig. 3. Electrical current measurements are carried out using a Rogowski belt,
which is a single loop of a coaxial cable placed around the target electrode and connected
to the oscilloscope.

The old fashioned Van de Graaf generator used in the previous stage of this work
was replaced by a high voltage pulse generator as shown in Fig. 4. This pulse generator
is executed according to the scheme of Arkadjev-Marx and consists of twenty capacitors
(25 nF each) connected in parallel and charged to a voltage up to 50-100 kV using a high
voltage transformer and a diode bridge. The capacitors are separated by resistive elements
of about 100 kΩ. The scheme allows to charge the capacitors up to the needed voltage
and then to change the connection from a parallel to a serial one. The required voltage is
achieved by changing the length of the air gap between the contact spheres C and D. A
syncro pulse is then sent to the contacts C and D which causes an overall discharge and
serial connection of the capacitors and provides a powerful impulse up to 2 MV which is
sent to the discharge chamber. The use of such an impulse generator allows for a precisely
controlled voltage, much shorter charging time and good reproducibility of the process.

2.2 Superconducting emitter, fabrication methods

The superconducting emitter has the shape of a disk with the diameter of 80-120 mm
and the thickness of 7-15 mm. This disk consists of two layers: a superconducting layer
with chemical composition Y Ba2Cu3O7−y (containing small amounts of Ce and Ag) and

4

a normal conducting layer with chemical composition Y1−xRexBa2Cu3O7−y, where Re
represents Ce, P r, Sm, P m, T b or other rare earth elements. The materials of both
layers were synthesized using a solid state reaction under low oxygen pressure (stage 1),
then the powder was subjected to a melt texture growth (MTG) procedure (stage 2). Dense
material after MTG was crushed, ground and put through sieves in order to separate the
particles with the required size. A bi-layered disk was prepared by powder compaction
in a stainless steel die and sintering using seeded oxygen controlled melt texture growth
(OCMTG) (stage 3). For the emitters with the diameter of 120 mm usual sintering was
applied instead of seeded OCMTG (stage 4). After mechanical treatment the ceramic
emitter was attached to the surface of the cooling tank in the discharge chamber using
Indium based alloy.

Stage 1 - Micron-size powders of Y2O3 and CuO, BaCO3 were mixed in alcohol
for 2 hours, then dried and put in zirconia boats in a tube furnace for heat treatment.
The mixture of powders was heated to 830 oC and kept at this temperature for 8 hours at
102 P a (or 2-4 mBar) according to [10, 11]. The material
oxygen partial pressure of 2.7
·
of the normal conducting layer was sintered in a similar way.

Stage 2 - Micron-size powder of Y Ba2Cu3Ox was pressed into pellets using a metal
die and low pressure. The pellets were heated in air to 1050 oC (100 oC per hour) then
cooled to 1010 oC (10 oC per hour) then cooled to 960 oC (2 oC per hour) then cooled
to room temperature (100 oC per hour) according to a standard MTG technique [12, 13].
The quantity of 211 phase during heating was considerably reduced and the temperature
was changed correspondingly. ReBa2Cu3O7−x was also prepared using MTG, but the
temperature was slightly changed according to the properties of the corresponding rare
earth oxide.

Stage 3 - Bulk material after MTG processing was crushed and ground in a ball
mill. The particles with the size less than 30 µm were used for both layers of the ceramic
disk. The particles were mixed with polyvinyl alcohol binder. The material of the ﬁrst
layer was put into a die, ﬂattened and then the material of the second layer was placed over
it. The disk was formed using a pressure of 50 MP a. The single crystal seeds of Sm123
(about 1 mm3) were placed on the surface of the bi-layered disk so that the distance
between them was about 15 mm and the disk was subjected to a OCMTG treatment in
1% oxygen atmosphere. The growth kinetics of YBCO superconductor were controlled
during isothermal melt texturing. A modiﬁed melt texturing process was applied, where
instead of slow cooling following melting, isothermal hold was employed in the temperature
range where the growth is isotropic. By this modiﬁcation, the time required to texture the
disk was reduced to 7 hours which is about 10 times faster than a typical slow cooling melt
texturing process. The crystallization depth was controlled by applying the corresponding
temperature and time parameters. Cubic Sm123 seeds were obtained using the nucleation
and growth procedure as described in [16, 17]. A thin layer of the material was removed
from the top surface of the disk to a depth of 0.3 mm and the edges of the upper surface
were rounded using diamond tools.

Stage 4 - For the emitters with the diameter of 120 mm it is technically diﬃcult
to apply seeded MTG method, therefore normal sintering was carried out. Bulk material
after MTG processing (after stage 2) was crushed and sieved and the following size particles

5

were used for both layers of the ceramic disk, the amount is given in weight percent:

500-400 µm
120-60 µm
< 20 µm

50-60%
25-35%
15-25%

The particles were mixed according to the ratio listed above using polyvinyl alcohol
as a binder. The material of the ﬁrst layer was put into a die, ﬂattened and the material
of the second layer was placed over it. The disk was formed using the pressure of 120
MP a and sintered in oxygen at 930 oC for 12 hours followed by slow cooling down to room
temperature. The edges of the upper surface were rounded using diamond tools.

X-ray diﬀraction, transition temperature, electrical conductivity and critical current

density were measured for both layers of various emitters using standard techniques.

2.3 Organization of the discharge and measurements of the ef-

fect.

The discharge chamber is evacuated to 1.0 P a using ﬁrst a rotary pump and then a cryo-
genic pump. When this level of vacuum is reached, liquid nitrogen is pumped into a tank
inside the chamber that contacts the superconducting emitter. Simultaneously a current
is sent to the solenoid that is wound around the emitter, in order to create a magnetic ﬂux
inside the superconducting ceramic disk. When the temperature of the disk falls below
the transition temperature (usually 90 K) the solenoid is switched oﬀ. The experiment
can be carried out at liquid nitrogen temperatures or at liquid helium temperatures. If
low temperatures are required, the tank is ﬁlled with liquid helium and in that case the
temperature of the emitter reaches 40-50 K.

The high voltage pulse generator is switched on and the capacitors are charged to
the required voltage. It takes about 120 s to charge the capacitors. A syncro pulse is sent
to a pair of small metal spheres marked as C and D in Fig. 5. A discharge with voltage up
to 2 MV occurs between the emitter and the target. Half a second before the discharge,
a short pulse of direct current is sent for 1 s to the big solenoid that is wound around the
chamber, in order to concentrate the discharge on the target. This pulse lasts for only 1 s
not to cause the overheating of the big solenoid.

The eﬀects are measured along the projection of the axis line which connects the
center of the emitter with the center of the target. Laser pointers were used to deﬁne the
projection of the axis line and impulse sensitive devices were situated at the distance of 6
m and 150 m from the installation (in another building across the area).

Normal pendulums were used to measure the pulses of gravity radiation coming from
the emitter. The pendulums consisted of spheres of diﬀerent materials hanging on cotton
strings inside glass cylinders under vacuum. One end of the string was ﬁxed to the upper
cap of the cylinder, the other one was connected to a sphere. The spheres had typically
a diameter from 10 to 25 mm and had a small pointer in the bottom part. A ruler was
placed in the bottom part of the cylinder, 2 mm lower than the pointer. The deﬂection
was observed visually using a ruler inside the cylinder (Fig. 5). The length of the string

6

was typically 800 mm, though we also used a string 500 mm long. Various materials
were used as spheres in the pendulum: metal, glass, ceramics, wood, rubber, plastic. The
tests were carried out when the installation was covered with a Faraday cage and UHF
radiation absorbing material and also without them. The installation was separated from
the impulse measuring devices situated 6 m away by a brick wall of 0.3 m thickness and a
list of steel with the dimensions 1 m
0.025 m. The measuring systems that were
1.2 m
situated 150 m away were additionally shielded by a brick wall of 0.8 m thickness.

×

×

In order to deﬁne some other characteristics of the gravity impulse - in particular
its frequency spectrum - a condenser microphone was placed along the impact line just
after the glass cylinders. The microphone was connected to a computer and placed in a
plastic spherical box ﬁlled with porous rubber. The microphone was ﬁrst oriented with a
membrane facing the direction of the discharge, then it was turned 22.5 degrees to the left,
then 45 degrees to the left, then 67.5 degrees and ﬁnally 90 degrees. Several discharges
were recorded in all these positions at equal discharge voltage.

3 Results

Several unexpected phenomena were observed during the experiments. The discharge in
the installation corresponding to the initial set-up (Fig. 1) at room temperature in the
voltage range from 100 kV to 450 kV was similar to a discharge with non-coated metal
spheres and consisted of a single spark between the closest points on the spheres. When
the superconductor coated sphere was cooled down below the transition temperature, the
shape of the discharge changed in such a way that it did not form a direct spark between two
spheres, but the sparks appeared from many points on the superconducting sphere and then
moved to the corresponding electrode. When the voltage was over 500 kV the discharge at
the initial stage had a tendency to cause some glow with the shape of a hemisphere. This
glow separated from the sphere and then broke into multiple sparks which combined into
more narrow bundle and ﬁnally hit the surface of the target electrode.

Repeated discharges at high voltages caused damage to the superconducting coating
and partial separation of the ceramic material from the metal sphere, as the refrigeration
system was not eﬃcient enough. Also the direction of the discharge was not always re-
peatable. The experiments were continued with the improved variant of the installation
as shown in Fig. 2 and then with the ﬁnal variant of the installation as shown in Fig. 3.
This new conﬁguration allowed to increase the reproducibility of the discharge and the
superconducting emitter was not damaged with high voltage. With voltage lower than 400
kV the discharge had the shape of a spark but when the voltage was increased to 500 kV
the front of the moving discharge became ﬂat with diameter corresponding to that of the
emitter. This ﬂat glowing discharge separated from the emitter and moved to the target
electrode with great speed. The whole time of the discharge as deﬁned by the photo diode
was between 10−5 and 10−4 s. The peak value of the current at the discharge for the
maximum voltage (2

106 V ) is of the order of 104 A.

It was found that high voltages discharges organized through the superconducting
emitter kept at the temperature of 50-70 K were accompanied by a very short pulse of

·

7

Table 1: Emitter N. 1. Inﬂuence of high voltage discharges on the deﬂection of the pendu-
lum. Experimental data are the average of 12 measurements. The standard deviation of
the single data is between 5 and 7 %.

Voltage (kV ) ∆l (mm) ∆h (mm) Estimated ∆E (J

10−4)

·

500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000

500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000

56.5
91.3
110.4
123.0
131.6
137.6
142.0

40.0
70.9
85.3
94.6
100.8
104.7
107.1

2.0
5.2
7.7
9.5
10.9
11.9
12.7

1.0
3.2
4.6
5.6
6.4
6.9
7.2

3.6
9.5
13.9
17.3
19.8
21.7
23.1

1.8
5.7
8.3
10.2
11.6
12.5
13.1

Table 2: Same for Emitter N. 2.

Voltage (kV ) ∆l (mm) ∆h (mm) Estimated ∆E (J

10−4)

·

radiation coming from the superconductor and propagating along the axis line connecting
the center of the emitter and the center of the target electrode in the same direction as
the discharge. The radiation appeared to penetrate through diﬀerent bodies without any
noticeable loss of energy.
It acted on small interposed mobile objects like a repulsive
force ﬁeld, with a force proportional to the mass of the objects. As the properties of this
radiation are similar to the properties of the gravity force, the observed phenomenon was
called a gravity impulse.

In order to investigate the interaction of this gravity impulse with various materials,
several tests were carried out, with pendulums and microphones, as described in the ex-
perimental part. The deﬂection of the pendulum was observed visually (see Fig. 5) and
the corresponding ∆l value was measured as a function of the discharge voltage. The cor-
relation between the discharge voltage and the corresponding deﬂection of the pendulum
as measured for two diﬀerent emitters is listed in Tables 1, 2. Each value of ∆l that is
given in the table represents the average ﬁgure calculated from 12 discharges. A rubber
sphere with a weight of 18.5 grams was used as material of the pendulum for the data
listed in Tables 1, 2. The deﬂection caused an alteration in the potential energy of the
pendulum which was proportional to ∆h as shown in the table. A graphic illustration of
this dependence for two diﬀerent emitters is given in Fig. 6.

8

Both emitters, N. 1 and N. 2, were manufactured using the same OCMTG technology,
but the thickness of the superconducting layer was equal to 4 mm for the emitter N. 1 and
8 mm for the emitter N. 2. Emitter N. 2 could be magnetized to a much higher value. The
thickness of the normal conducting layer has a smaller inﬂuence on the force of the gravity
impulse, but for better results the thickness should be bigger than 5 mm.

It was found that the force of the impact on pendulums made of diﬀerent materials
does not depend on the material but is only proportional to the mass of the sample.
Pendulums of diﬀerent mass demonstrated equal deﬂection at constant voltage. This was
proved by a large number of measurements using spherical samples of diﬀerent mass and
diameter. The range of the employed test masses was between 10 and 50 grams. It was
also found that there exist certain deviations in the force of the gravity impulse within the
area of the projection of the emitter. These deviations (up to 12-15% max) were found to
be connected with the inhomogenities of the emitter material and various imperfections of
the crystals of the ceramic superconductor, and with the thickness of the interface between
superconducting and normal conducting layers.

Measurements of the impulse taken at close distance (3-6 m) from the installation
and at the distance of 150 m gave identical results, within the experimental errors. As
these two points of measurements were separated by a thick brick wall and by air, it is
possible to admit that the gravity impulse was not absorbed by the media, or the losses
were negligible.

The force “beam” obtained with the latest experimental set-up does not appear
to diverge and its borders are clear-cut. However, considerable eﬀorts were necessary
in order to concentrate the radiation and reach a good reproducibility. As mentioned
above, the direction emission always coincides with the direction of the discharge. In the
initial experiments (with the Van den Graaf generator), the direction of the beam varied,
depending on the direction of the discharge, as the sparks moved to diﬀerent points on the
superconducting sphere. Later it was found that the magnetic ﬁeld created by the solenoid
wound around the chamber is able to concentrate the discharge and to direct it to the same
area on the superconducting electrode.

The bi-layered emitters used in this experiment were mainly of two types. The ﬁrst
one was obtained after Stage 3 and had a structure typical for multiple-domain levitators
with well crystallized and oriented grains of the superconducting layer. The second type
was made by the material obtained after Stage 4 and consisted of densely packed non
oriented polycrystalline structure in both layers. The superconducting layer in both types
of emitters consisted of Y Ba2Cu3O7−y orthorhombic superconductor with lattice param-
eters a = 3.89˚A, b = 11.69˚A, c = 3.82˚A. The addition of small amounts of CeO2 led
to an improvement in the magnetic ﬂux pinning properties of the Y123 compound. The
emitter obtained by seeded MTG process had a superconducting layer with a maximum
104 A/cm2. The
trapped ﬁeld of 0.5 T at 77 K and a critical current density in excess of 5
transition temperature varied from 87 to 90 K with a transition width of about 2 degrees.
The normal conducting layer had crystal lattice parameters close to those of the super-
conductor: a = 3.88˚A, b = 11.79˚A, c = 3.82˚A. Both layers demonstrated high electrical
conductivity (over 1.5 Sm) at room temperature and the Y1−xRexBa2Cu3O7−y layer was
a normal conductor above 20 K.

·

9

In general the emitters obtained by seeded OCMTG were much more eﬃcient than
the sintered bi-layered emitters and allowed to obtain a much stronger radiation impulse,
contained by the projection of the emitter. The sintered bi-layered emitters had much lower
values of the trapped magnetic ﬁeld and this yielded bigger energy dissipation and a weaker
gravity impulse. The only advantage of the sintered emitters is that a weak impulse eﬀect is
always present, probably because the diﬀusion between the layers is limited. The emitters
with oriented crystal structure (after seeded MTG) can be easily spoiled if the interface
thickness between the two layers reaches a certain value, therefore the temperature and
time parameters should be monitored carefully in order to limit the interaction between
the two layers. It was found that the seeded crystal growth should be stopped before it
reaches the interface region.

It was also found that the gravity impulse was to some extent proportional to the
magnetic ﬁeld inside the superconductor, which was created using a small solenoid during
cooling down to liquid nitrogen temperature. Therefore, at recent stages of the experiment
the solenoid was replaced by a powerful permanent NdFeB magnet (50 MOe) with a
diameter corresponding to the diameter of the emitter and a thickness of 20 mm. This
disk-shaped magnet was attached with one surface to the cooling tank and with another
surface to the ceramic emitter.

The response recorded by the microphone has the typical behavior of an ideal pulse
ﬁltered by the impulse response of a physical low pass system with a bandwidth of about
16 kHz, attributed to the microphone (Fig. 7). In spite of the ﬁltering, the relative energy
of the pulses can be measured as a function of the angle of the normal to the diaphragm
respect to the axis of propagation of the force.

Relative pulse amplitude with energies averaged over four pulses per angle are shown
in Fig. 8 and are in agreement with a possible manifestation of a vector force acting directly
on the membrane. No signal has been detected outside the impact region.

4 Discussion

(a) Capacitance of the emitter. Current at the discharge.

High voltage discharges like those described in Sections 2, 3 are well known in the
literature. They do not require pre-ionisation, provided the electric ﬁeld between the
electrodes is suﬃcient to cause avalanche ionisation. However, the presence of a supercon-
ducting electrode causes some diﬀerence in the form and colour of the crown and of the
sparkle, with respect to discharges between normal electrodes.

We recall that for the maximum voltage (2

106 V ) the peak value of the current is
of the order of 104 A, and the duration of the discharge varies between 10−5 and 10−4 s.
This implies a total negative charge Q on the emitter, just before the discharge, up to 0.1
C. The associated electrostatic energy is U = QV /2

105 J.

·

If the emitter was made of a normal conductor, its capacitance could be at most
R

10−10 F (for an estimate one can consider the capacitance of a sphere, namely C

10−10

∼

·

∼

10

in SI units, where R is the radius). The above value for Q implies a much higher eﬀective
capacitance, of the order of 10−7 F .

During the discharge an intense super-current ﬂows from the superconducting elec-
trode towards the ionised gas. After the superconducting charge carriers leave the negative
electrode, pairs are broken and electrons are captured by the helium ions which are striking
the electrode. We thus have a peculiar kind of superconductor-normal junction. Another
junction is that between the superconducting emitter and the normal metallic plate.

From the theoretical point of view, these junctions can be described by Ginzburg-
Landau models without speciﬁc reference to the microscopic theory. A typical time scale
for the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation in YBCO is of the order of 10−8 s [42],
much smaller than the discharge time. This suggests that a quasi-stationary approximation
could be adequate. The situation is however complicated by the following circumstances:

(1) In anisotropic materials like HTCs the Ginzburg-Landau equation involves an
order parameter with non-trivial symmetry and the pairs are thought to possess intrinsic
angular momentum.

(2) The transport current is very intense.

In type-II superconductors, transport
currents are associated to non-reversible displacement of ﬂux lines, and this eﬀect in turn
depends strongly on the pinning properties of the material.

(3) The emitter is subjected to a strong external magnetic ﬁeld during the discharge.

More eﬀorts are therefore necessary, both on the experimental and theoretical side, for
a complete understanding of the state of the superconducting emitter during the discharge.

(b) Evidence of the gravitational-like nature of the eﬀect.

The gravitational-like nature of the eﬀect is best demonstrated by its independence
on the mass and composition of the targets (see Section 3). We are aware, of course, that
gravitational interactions of this kind are absolutely unusual (see Sections 4.1, 4.3). For
this reason, several details of the experimental apparatus were designed with the explicit
purpose of reducing spurious eﬀects like mechanical and acoustic vibrations much below
the magnitude order of the observed anomalous forces.

Indirect evidence for a gravitational eﬀect comes from the fact that any kind of
electromagnetic shielding is ineﬀective. Note that if one can explain in some way the
anomalous generation of a gravitational ﬁeld in the superconductor, its undisturbed prop-
agation follows as a well-known property of gravity (see Section 4.2). Indirect support for
the gravitational hypothesis also comes from the partial similarity of this apparatus to that
employed by Podkletnov for the stationary weak gravitational shielding experiment [1].

If the eﬀect is truly gravitational, then the acceleration of any test body on which
the impulse acts should be in principle independent on the mass of the body. Suppose that
l is the length of a detection pendulum and g is the local gravitational acceleration. Let
d be the half-amplitude of the oscillation. Let t be the duration of the impulse, and F its
strength. F has the dimensions of an acceleration (m/s2) and can be compared with g.
One easily computes that the product of the strength of the impulse by its duration is

F t = r2gl[1

1
− q

−

(d/l)2]

11

(1)

∼

≪

l, this formula can be simpliﬁed, and we have approximately F t

If d
(g/l)d = 2πd/T ,
where T is the period of the pendulum. With the data of Table 1, taking t = 10−4 s, one
ﬁnds F

103g.

∼ q

Here, however, we encounter a conceptual diﬃculty. Suppose to place on the trajec-
tory of the beam a very massive pendulum (say, 103 Kg). If the eﬀect is gravitational, then
the acceleration of a test mass should not depend on its mass. However, it is clear that in
order to give this mass the same oscillation amplitude of the small masses employed in the
experiment, a huge energy amount is necessary, which cannot be provided by the device.
Therefore the eﬀect would seem to violate the equivalence principle. Considering the back-
reaction is probably necessary, namely the fact that the test mass exerts a reaction on the
source of the impulse. This reaction is negligible as long as we use small test masses.

(c) Anomalous features of the observed “radiation”.

Independently from any interpretation, the abnormal character of this radiation ap-
pears immediately clear. It appears to propagate through walls and metal plates without
noticeable absorption, but this is not due to a weak coupling with matter, because the
radiation acts with signiﬁcant strength on the test masses free to move. Furthermore, this
radiation conveys an impulse which is certainly not related to the carried energy by the
usual dispersion relation E = p/c. A corresponding energy transfer to the test masses
is not in fact observed (unless one admits perfect reﬂection, which seems however very
unlikely).

The denomination “radiation” is actually unsuitable, and one could possibly envisage
an unknown quasi-static force ﬁeld.
In this way one could explain why an impulse is
transmitted to the test masses. However, it is hard to understand how such a ﬁeld could
be so well focused.

4.1 A possible theoretical explanation. Basic concepts.

The following Sections contain an informal introduction to a theoretical model originally
developed by one of the authors [18, 19, 20, 21, 22] in order to explain the weak gravitational
shielding eﬀect by HTC superconductors [1, 2]. We suggest that this theory may be a
starting point for the explanation of the impulsive gravitational-like forces described in the
present paper.

The quantum properties of the gravitational ﬁeld play an essential role in this model.
These properties are not adequately known yet, therefore the proposed model is still in a
preliminary development phase and its predictive capabilities are quite limited. Its primary
merit is to envisage a new dynamic mechanism which could account for the eﬀect. However,
a full theory which justiﬁes the model does not exist so far. This should be, in fact, a theory
of the interaction between gravity (including its quantum aspects), and a particular state
of matter - that of a HTC superconductor - which in turn is not completely known.

The glossary below 1 collects some keywords and their equivalent, also for a better

orientation in the cited works.

1Cosmological term = vacuum energy density: see (b).

12

(a) Weakness of the standard coupling with gravity. Anomalous coupling.

The standard coupling of matter to gravity is obtained from the Einstein equations by
including the material part of the system into the energy-impulse tensor. Since the coupling
constant is G/c4, very large amounts of matter/energy, or at least large densities, are always
necessary in order to obtain gravitational eﬀects of some importance. This holds also at
the quantum level, in weak ﬁeld approximation. It is possible to quantize the gravitational
ﬁeld by introducing quantum ﬂuctuations with respect to a classical background, and then
calculate the graviton emission probabilities associated to transitions in atomic systems.
These always turn out to be extremely small, still because of the weakness of the coupling.

What we proved in our cited works is that a peculiar “anomalous” coupling mech-
anism exists, between gravity and matter in a macroscopic quantum state. In this state
matter is described by a collective wave function. Also in this state the energy-impulse of
matter couples to the gravitational ﬁeld in the standard way prescribed by the equivalence
principle. However, the new idea is that besides this standard coupling there is another
eﬀect, due to the interference of the Lagrangian L of coherent matter with the “natural”
vacuum energy term Λ/8πG which is present in the Einstein equations. The two quantities
have in fact the same tensorial form but possibly diﬀerent sign, and it turns out that their
interference can lead to a dramatic enhancement of vacuum ﬂuctuations.

(b) Contribution of a quantum condensate to the vacuum energy density.

It is well known that the “natural” vacuum energy, or cosmological term, is very
small. Until recently, it was thought to be exactly null. The most recent observations give
a value diﬀerent from zero, but in any case very tiny [23, 47], of the order of 0.1 J/m3.
This is usually supposed to be relevant at cosmological level, in determining the curvature
and expansion rate of the universe on very large scales.

The observed value can be regarded as the residual of a complex interplay, in a still
unknown high energy sector of particle physics, between positive and negative vacuum
energy densities. According to [24], the observed residual should also be scale-dependent
and this dependence could appear most clearly at length scales corresponding to the mass
of the lightest particles like neutrinos or unidentiﬁed scalars.

In certain conditions, the action density of a Bose condensate in condensed matter
can be greater than the cosmological term, but it is nonetheless very small. Its eﬀect on
the local space curvature is absolutely negligible.

Lagrangian L = action density. Minimization of the action of a system gives its dynamical equations.
Quantum condensate in a superconductor: ensemble of the Cooper pairs, with collective wave function
ψGL (also called an “order parameter”) supposed to obey the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) equation. In the
non-relativistic limit, the Lagrangian density of the condensate is just the opposite of the GL free energy
density.

Zero-modes of the Einstein action = gravitational dipolar ﬂuctuations: see (c).
Critical region: region of the condensate with positive Lagrangian density. According to the GL theory,
it can only exist for constant solutions of the GL equation or in the neighbourhood of a local relative
maximum of the Cooper pair density

Noise source = density matrix: a formal way to express the fact that inside a critical region the grav-
i with

itational ﬁeld undergoes strong dipolar ﬂuctuations and therefore takes on at random values h2
probability ξi. See (h), (i).

ψGL
|

2. See (f).
|

13

(c) The gravitational zero modes and the polarization of the gravitational vac-
uum.

Why so do we think that the interference of these two terms, which are in any
case very small, can lead to some observable gravitational eﬀect? Because we proved the
existence of gravitational ﬁeld conﬁgurations in vacuum, for which the value of the pure
Einstein action (without the cosmological term) is exactly null, like for ﬂat space. We called
these conﬁgurations “zero modes of the Einstein action”. At the quantum level, where
ﬂuctuations are admitted with respect to ﬂat space, they are free to grow unrestrained.
In a certain sense, the quantum space-time is unstable and has a natural tendency not to
stay in the ﬂat state, but to fall into these conﬁgurations, with a deﬁnite probability. They
are virtual conﬁgurations, in the sense that they are permitted in the Feynman integral
describing the quantum theory. In the Feynman integral all the possible conﬁgurations are
admitted - not only those satisfying the ﬁeld equations - each weighed with probability
equal to the exponential of its action divided by ¯h. All these conﬁgurations (ﬂuctuations)
take part in deﬁning the state of the system.

The zero-modes of the Einstein action are in all the same as ﬁelds produced by
In nature, mass dipoles do not exist as real sources. Nevertheless, the
mass dipoles.
dipolar ﬂuctuations mathematically have such a form. Being vacuum ﬂuctuations, they
are invariant under translations and Lorentz transformations, they are homogeneously
allocated in space and at all length scales. That is, the dipolar ﬂuctuations correspond
to the ﬁelds produced by dipoles of various sizes, distributed in a uniform way. They can
only show their presence if, in some way, their homogeneity and uniformity are broken. We
are in presence of an analogue of the vacuum polarization in quantum electrodynamics. In
that case, virtual couples of electrons/positrons pop up in the vacuum, and then quickly
annihilate, generating uniform ﬂuctuations. It is well known that these virtual processes
must be taken into account, because they aﬀect, for instance, the bare charge of the particles
and their couplings. However, quantum corrections are, as a rule, very small in quantum
electrodynamics.

It is important to be aware that the gravitational dipolar ﬂuctuations we are talking
about are neither the ordinary ﬂuctuations of perturbation theory nor the well known
“spacetime foam” ﬂuctuations, which appear in quantum gravity at very short distances.
Their nature is completely diﬀerent. Although their intensity can be very large, they have
null action, thanks to the compensation of positive and negative curvature between adjacent
zones of space-time. The dipolar ﬂuctuations are not zero-modes of the Lagrangian, but of
the action. Their existence is possible thanks to the fact that the gravitational Lagrangian
is not deﬁned positive, unlike the Lagrangian of electromagnetic and gauge ﬁelds.

(d) The vacuum energy cuts the gravitational zero-modes to a certain level.

Let us go back to the cosmological term. One ﬁnds that it is related to the dipolar
ﬂuctuations, because it sets an upper limit on their amplitude. The contribution of a
dipolar ﬂuctuation to the cosmological term is typically of the form [21]

∆S = Λτ Mr2Q

(2)

where natural units are used (¯h = c = 1); τ is the duration of the ﬂuctuation, M is the
order of magnitude of the virtual +/- masses, r their distance and Q is an adimensional

14

function which depends on the detailed form of the dipole. If ∆S
is suppressed.

≫

1, then the ﬂuctuation

With an electromagnetic analogy (not to be pushed too far) we could then say that
the cosmological term sets the gravitational polarizability of free space. One expects that
in a full non-perturbative theory of quantum gravity the bare value of the gravitational
constant G should be renormalized by this eﬀect. However, as long as the cosmological
term is uniform in space and time, there are no observable consequences. On the other
hand, if the vacuum energy density changes locally, this can have observable eﬀects. In
particular, if there are positive local contributions which subtract from the natural density,
the result can be a local increase in the gravitational polarizability.

(e) The anomalous coupling is only active when the condensate is in certain
particular states.

Our model can also explain why only certain superconductors in certain conditions
show evidence of anomalous coupling with the gravitational ﬁeld. The key point is not
simply the presence of a quantum condensate, nor the density of this condensate.
In
fact, if this was the case, anomalous gravitational eﬀects would be observed also with
low temperature superconductors, or with superﬂuids. But even in the static Podkletnov
experiment, only in certain conditions observable eﬀects are obtained, and their intensity
is variable.

Therefore the presence of the condensate is not suﬃcient to cause the eﬀect. What
are the necessary conditions? The anomalous contribution to the cosmological term is
given by the Lagrangian density of the condensate, according to the following equations.
Consider a scalar ﬁeld φ interacting with gravity (we use units ¯h = c = 1; SI units will
be restored in eq. (12)). The interaction action is obtained from the energy-momentum
tensor:

L =

1
2
Tµν = Πµ∂νφ
−
1
2 Z

Sinteraction =

(∂αφ∂αφ

m2

2)

φ

−
|
gµνL = ∂µφ∗∂νφ

|

gµνL

−

d4x

q

g(x)T µν(x)hµν(x)

To lowest order in hµν the interaction action can be rewritten as

Sinteraction =

d4x (hµν∂µφ∗∂ν φ

TrhL)

−

1
2 Z

On the other hand, the cosmological term is (still to lowest order in hµν and expanding
√g = 1 + 1

2Trh + ...)

Therefore the sum of the two terms can be rewritten as

SΛ =

Λ
8πG Z

d4x

(cid:18)

1 +

Trh

(cid:19)

1
2

Sinteraction + SΛ =

d4xhµν∂µφ∗∂ν φ +

d4xTrh

1
2 Z

Λ

(cid:18)

8πG −

L

(cid:19)

1
2 Z

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

15

We see that to leading order the coupling of gravity to φ gives a typical source
term (hµν∂µφ∗∂νφ) and subtracts from Λ the local density 8πGL(x). This separation is
arbitrary, but useful and reasonable if the Lagrangian density is such to aﬀect locally the
“natural” cosmological term and change the spectrum of gravitational vacuum ﬂuctuations
corresponding to virtual mass densities much larger than the real density of φ.

∼

1 g/cm3). At the scale r

For example, suppose that φ represents a condensate with the density of ordinary
10−4 s, with the observed value of
10−4 cm, τ
matter (
1017 g/cm3, which is much larger
Λ, the upper bound on the virtual source density is
than the real density. If L is comparable to Λ/8πG in some region, an inhomogeneity in
the cut-oﬀ mechanism of the dipolar ﬂuctuations will follow, and this eﬀect could exceed
by far the eﬀects of the coupling (hµν∂µφ∗∂νφ) to real matter.

∼

∼

∼

The value of the Lagrangian depends on the state the condensate is in, and more
exactly on the macroscopic wave function ψGL of the Cooper pairs. The problem of ﬁnding
the wave function in given experimental conditions is still open. From the wave function
one can compute the Lagrangian, and then the local contribution of the superconductor
to the vacuum energy, and its ability to produce anomalous gravitational coupling.

(f) L subtracts from Λ only where the density

2 has a local maximum.

ψGL|

|

The Lagrangian L in eq. (3) is the Klein-Gordon Lagrangian which describes a rel-
ativistic free scalar ﬁeld. In order to relate it, in the low energy limit, to the Ginzburg-
Landau (GL) free energy of superconductors [25] one makes the standard transformation

ψKG(x) = eimtφ(x)

(9)

where m is the Cooper pair mass. Then one turns to the GL wave function by re-
normalizing ψKG as follows

ψKG(x) = √mψGL(x)

(10)
2 = ρ(x), where ρ is the
This normalization corresponds to the standard relation
density of Cooper pairs. Finally, the free Lagrangian is generalized by adding a quadratic
and a quartic interaction term and the minimal electromagnetic coupling. In this way one
ﬁnds

ψGL(x)

|

|

L =

1
2m| −

−

i
∇

ψ + 2eAψ

αψ∗ψ

2

|

−

1
2

−

β(ψ∗ψ)2

This is the Lagrangian density to be inserted into eq. (8) as contribution to the vacuum
energy density. It is the opposite of the GL free energy density [?], as expected. For wave
functions which satisfy the wave equation derived from (11), the expression of L simpliﬁes
to

(11)

(12)

L =

1
2m h

−

2
¯h

(

2
ρ)2 + ¯h

ρ

2ρ

mβρ2

∇

−

i

∇

where ¯h has been re-introduced to allow for a better numerical estimate.

We recall [26] that the α and β coeﬃcients depend on the absolute temperature T .
The coeﬃcient β is always positive and approximately constant near Tc; α is negative for
T < Tc and near Tc behaves like const.(T
Tc). The ratio between α and β is given
by the relation np =
α/β, where np is the average density of pairs in the material.
Finally, β is linked to the value of the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = λ/ξ by the relation

−

−

16

2

κ2 = m2β/(2µ0¯h
e2). Two further important points which should be taken into account
are (i) the boundary conditions on ψGL at the superconductor/ normal conductor and
superconductor/ionized gas interfaces; (ii) the intrinsic anisotropy of HTC materials, which
actually also aﬀects the form of the GL free energy.

The relative importance in eq. (12) of the terms with the gradients and the term
proportional to β depends on the length scale at which the variations of ψGL can occur.
If, as usual for Type II and HTC superconductors, this scale is of the order of 10−8 m or
less, the terms with the gradient dominate.

It is straightforward to check that the sign of L is negative, except for two types of

conﬁgurations:

(1) For the constant solutions of the Ginzburg-Landau equation in the absence of
external ﬁeld, namely ρ(x) = np. The corresponding constant Lagrangian density is L1 =
1
2βn2
p.

∇

(2) For regions of the condensate where ρ

2ρ is negative and greater, in absolute
ρ)2. It is straightforward to check that these are regions located around
value, than (
local density maximums, or more generally about lines and surfaces where the ﬁrst partial
derivatives of ρ are zero and the second derivatives are negative or null. The Lagrangian
density at a maximum is L2
. If the maximum is sharp, L can be much larger
than for constant solutions. Conﬁgurations of this kind are characteristic of solutions of
the Ginzburg-Landau equation with strong magnetic ﬂux penetration [27].

1
2mρ
|

ρ′′

∇

∼

|

Now we make some numerical estimates of L. Assuming for YBCO ρ
10−9 m, κ
102, we obtain for the conﬁgurations (1) and (2) densities L1

1027m−3,
104J/m3
ξ
∼
107J/m3, respectively. With reference to our experiment we must explain, on
and L2
the basis of these ﬁgures, why anomalous coupling at the emitter takes place, but only at
the moment of the discharge and in presence of strong magnetic ﬂux penetration.

∼
∼

∼

∼

We remind that the vacuum energy density acts as cut-oﬀ for the dipolars ﬂuctuations,
so that their maximum amplitude A is inversely proportional to Λ. Therefore in presence
of a local contribution by the superconductor we have

1
Λ/8πG

A

∝

|

L
|

−

(13)

So an ampliﬁcation of the ﬂuctuations is possible when L has the same sign as Λ. From
the experimental observations it is clear that a negative value of L does not give the
necessary conditions. In fact, in that case anomalous coupling would be observed every
time there are strong density gradients in the superconducting material - which occurs
almost always. From this we obtain a ﬁrst piece of information about the value of Λ at
atomic scale (otherwise unknown): it must be positive. Λ/8πG must furthermore be much
larger than L1, because a constant density does not give observable anomalous eﬀects
either. In conclusion, Λ/8πG must be larger than L2, and the amplitude A of the dipolar
ﬂuctuations increases as the local value of L approaches it from below. 2

2The density L2 can be compared with that obtainable for an electromagnetic ﬁeld alone - which can
also be regarded as “coherent matter” in this context. The electromagnetic energy density is proportional

17

This can happen in presence of strong magnetic ﬂux penetration (Point 2 above), but
that requisite is not suﬃcient: the presence of a strong transport current is also necessary.
In fact, with strong ﬂux penetration, the density ρ is depressed. The current appears like
a means to obtain at once a large ρ and a large value of ρ′′ in correspondence of the max-
imums. Indeed, in inhomogeneous materials like HTCs, a very intense transport current
inevitably forces a large density in certain regions. In the case of the weak gravitational
shielding [1] the transport current is mostly due to the accelerated rotation of the disk [28].
In the present case it is due to the discharge.

(g) The anomalous coupling inside the condensate modiﬁes the ﬁeld also out-
side.

Summarizing, we can say that in particular conditions a quantum condensate is able
to modify locally the cosmological term of the gravitational action. In turn, the cosmologi-
cal term ﬁxes the cut level of the dipolar ﬂuctuations, and so the local gravitational vacuum
polarizability. Therefore an anomalous coupling of the condensate with the gravitational
ﬁeld is observed. This coupling can be abnormally strong, due to the large amplitude of
the vacuum ﬂuctuations. It is a kind of coupling that completely eludes the standard form
and so is not proportional, through the G/c4 constant, to the energy-impulse content of
the condensate.

The next question is: how is the gravitational ﬁeld modiﬁed inside the condensate and
in its neighbourhood? In other words, let us suppose that the gravitational ﬁeld displays
a much higher level of dipolar ﬂuctuations in some regions of the condensate. What is
the consequence for the global behaviour of the ﬁeld? For instance, with reference to the
static experiment, why is there a noticeable reduction of the terrestrial ﬁeld above the disc?
We can say that in that case there is a big gravitational source - the earth - producing a
uniform ﬁeld in the region of interest, according to the usual classical ﬁeld equations. Into
these equations, however, we must also introduce a kind of “random source” located in the
condensate. This aﬀects the ﬁeld also outside.

(h) The modiﬁed ﬁeld equation contains an arbitrary constant.

We have proposed to introduce into the gravitational ﬁeld equations a term repre-
senting a random source located in the condensate. This procedure has some intrinsic
arbitrariness. The intensity of the source is arbitrary, too, and cannot be obtained from
the ratio between the energy density of the condensate and the “natural” vacuum energy
density. In fact, it is true that this ratio allows us to determine the maximum amplitude
of the dipolar ﬂuctuations. However, the probability of these ﬂuctuations, and so their
weight with respect to the external conﬁgurations, is still an unknown element of the the-
ory. We know that certain ﬁeld conﬁgurations give a null contribution to the pure Einstein
action and can grow up without limit, and we can determine the cut-oﬀ amplitude due to
the intervention of the cosmological term; however, the probability that these ﬂuctuations
really happen is a feature of the quantum theory, which is not known yet. In principle, it
would be possible to write a functional integral containing all the involved ﬁelds, the test
to (E2 + B2), but the action density is proportional to (E2
B2), therefore only an electrostatic ﬁeld has
106 V /m, one obtains a density of 100 J/m3, deﬁnitely
the right sign. But even with a ﬁeld strength of 3
lower.

−

·

18

masses etc., evaluate it and obtain everything. In practice, what we can do with such an
integral is only a weak ﬁeld expansion about the minimum of the action.

In conclusion, if we represent the gravitational ﬂuctuations in the quantum conden-
sate as a random source, the intensity of this source must be inserted as a parameter which
is ﬁxed “a posteriori” from the experimental data. This should not be unexpected. The
experimental observations described in this work are absolutely new and unprecedented.
They inform us about a sector of the theory which is otherwise unknown. The validity of
our model consists of suggesting a new interaction process, while avoiding contradictions
with known facts, and while giving the freedom to ﬁx a new coupling constant.

(i) The modiﬁed ﬁeld equation must be able to describe the observed phe-
nomenology.

After modelling the eﬀect of the ﬂuctuations on the external ﬁeld (for instance, as
random source with a certain strength), we are able to verify the consistency and correctness
of the procedure by calculating this ﬁeld and comparing the result to the data - not only as
intensity but also as shape. For instance, we know that in the static experiment a “shielding
cylinder” was observed which extended far above the superconducting disc and showed net
borders, without diﬀraction. Obtaining this characteristic from the ﬁeld equations modiﬁed
by the anomalous coupling is all but trivial. The observed ﬁeld conﬁguration is furthermore
clearly not conservative. (This can be understood remembering that there is a source term
in the equation.) Nonetheless, we succeeded in [20] in obtaining a result of this kind (see
also [29]).

(j) Euclidean and Lorentzian formulation of the anomalous coupling and of the
modiﬁed action.

From the technical point of view, the general program outlined above has been im-
plemented in the Euclidean (or imaginary-time) version of quantum gravity [18, 19, 20],
and more recently in the standard Lorentzian version [21].

The occurrence of the dipolar ﬂuctuations and the cut-oﬀ role of the vacuum energy
density are most clearly and safely exhibited in the Lorentzian formalism. On the other
hand, the Euclidean formulation is reliable and more suitable for perturbative calculations
of the modiﬁed ﬁeld equations.

The Lorentzian formulation is indispensable for the latest developments (calculation

of the low-energy limit of L and determination of its sign as a function of ρ).

4.2 Possible interpretation of the gravitational-like impulse at

the discharge

We focus now our attention on the new, puzzling eﬀects described in the experimental part
of this paper, and partially analysed at the beginning of this Section. We cannot oﬀer any
quantitative interpretation of these eﬀects yet, so we shall limit ourselves to an hypothesis
based on our previous work on the static eﬀect.

19

(a) From the static to the transient eﬀect: the virtual dipoles emit virtual
radiation.

We have seen that the observed impulse can neither be described as a real radia-
tion, nor as a quasi-static ﬁeld. These are the two types of ﬁeld conﬁgurations which are
predicted by any classical theory.

However, we also saw that the weak gravitational shielding eﬀect can be explained
introducing the concept of anomalous dipolar quantum ﬂuctuations induced by the con-
densate. These ﬂuctuations locally increase to observable levels the gravitational vacuum
polarizability.

In the transient case, the virtual dipolar ﬁelds are rapidly varying in time, because
the critical conditions in the quantum condensate are produced only for a short time at
the discharge. Therefore it is natural to expect that in this case the formation of virtual
dipoles is accompanied by the emission of virtual dipolar radiation.

(b) In quantum mechanics every interaction is equivalent to an exchange of
virtual radiation.

Let us recall the concept of “virtual radiation” as intermediate state of a quantum
process.
In quantum mechanics, every interaction is thought to take place through the
exchange of virtual particles - photons, gauge bosons, gravitons. This is especially clear in
scattering processes, but also the static interaction potential can be written as an integral
over time and four-momentum of the propagator of a mediating virtual particle [30]. In
this integral, all values of energy-momentum are included, not only the “on-shell” values
satisfying the condition E = p/c which is typical of real photons and gravitons. This
is possible just because the mediating particles are virtual, i.e. so short-living that the
Heisenberg principle allows for a large indetermination in their energy. In fact, the static
force obtained as a sum of virtual processes is very diﬀerent from the eﬀect of a collection
of free photons or gravitons.

It is also possible to compute along these lines the quantum corrections to the classical
force. To this end, one includes in the sum some less probable processes, involving the
exchange of several mediating particles at the same time, or the creation-annihilation of
virtual pairs, and so on.

(c) The impulse at the discharge is made of oﬀ-shell gravitons.

In order to explain the weak gravitational shielding eﬀect we hypothesised an anoma-
lous strong quantum correction to the ﬁeld of the earth. In the transient case, on the other
hand, all the emitted “radiation” should be regarded as a quantum eﬀect. The observed
impulsive force could be the eﬀect of virtual processes in which:

1. The intense supercurrent ﬂowing across the superconducting cathode produces
critical gravitational regions, with strong dipolar vacuum ﬂuctuations. The necessary con-
ditions are those discussed in Section (4.1-f).

2. These ﬂuctuations emit a beam of virtual oﬀ-shell gravitons with E

p/c. The
direction of the beam is sharply deﬁned by momentum conservation. Whatever the exact
microscopic mechanism, the momentum carried by the virtual radiation can only originate

≪

20

from that of the Cooper pairs entering the critical regions, i.e. from the momentum of the
supercurrent. This is in agreement with the fact that if the impact direction of the discharge
changes (like in the earlier set-up, see 3), also the direction of the emitted radiation changes.

3. When the beam hits a mobile target, it conveys an impulse to this target. Like
for usual gravitational forces (which can also be interpretated as graviton exchange, as
mentioned), interposed bodies do not aﬀect transmission.

4.3 Known eﬀects which could be connected to the observed

phenomenon.

The following concepts are often quoted to explain anomalous gravitational eﬀects. So
we summarise them quickly, even though in our case they do not ﬁt to the observed
phenomenology.

We recall that several alternative theories were proposed, in the last decades, in the
attempt to “explain” and give a physical basis to spacetime and vacuum. Every one of
these, to be credible, must ﬁrst of all reproduce the known results of general relativity and
quantum ﬁeld theory. Notable examples are theories of “induced” gravity according to
Sakharov’s idea [31], and string theory. It is not easy to judge if anyone of these theories
can also predict, in addition, unusual eﬀects in the presence of superconductors. Some are
not developed enough to give a deﬁnite answer. Many have been proposed recently, still
their authors did not envisage any anomalous coupling to matter in a macroscopic quantum
state. In general, if the coupling of gravity to matter conforms to the classical Einstein
equations, then the intensity of any generated gravitational ﬁeld will depend only on the
energy-momentum of the source multiplied by G/c4, so there is no chance for anomalous
eﬀects. A notable exception could be torsion theory, which predicts a coupling to quantum
spin not allowed in the Einstein equations; however, as we shall see below, there are strict
experimental limits on the coupling of matter to torsion. Another possibility is to consider
strong quantum eﬀects, as done in Section 4.2; in that case, we chose to start from the
standard form of the classical theory.

(a) The gravitomagnetic ﬁeld

Could the observed anomalous forces be due to the fact that the superconductor
produces during the discharge a strong gravitomagnetic ﬁeld? It is well known from general
relativity that the gravitational ﬁeld contains components of magnetic type, called the
gravitomagnetic ﬁeld. These components have the property to be produced by moving
objects and to act on objects in movement.
It is possible to write the Einstein ﬁeld
equations in weak ﬁeld approximation in a form very similar to that of Maxwell equations.
The important diﬀerence, with respect to the Maxwell equations for electromagnetism, is
that gravitomagnetic eﬀects are suppressed by factors 1/c or 1/c2. So they are always
very small with respect to “gravitoelectric” eﬀects - those which have a Newtonian limit.
See for instance [32, 33];
in these references an analysis of the Maxwell equations for
gravity and also of the “Gravity Probe B gyroscope experiment” for detecting the Earth’s
gravitomagnetic ﬁeld is given.

21

In certain conditions the gravitomagnetic ﬁeld can be repulsive. In neutrons stars it
can produce a gravitational analogue of the Meissner eﬀect. As one would expect, however,
the “gravitational Meissner eﬀect” is exceedingly weak: for instance, it has been computed
that in a neutron star with a density of the order of 1014 g/cm3, the London penetration
depth is ca. 12 km [34]. In the 1970s experiments were done to detect possible weight
decreases of a rotor while it was rotating at very high speed [35], but conclusive results
were never obtained.

(b) Gravitomagnetism and quantum spin

The aspects of the theory of quantum gravity concerning the spin are summarized,
for instance, in [36]. In previous work [37] O’Connell examined the implications arising
from the fact that spin contributions to the gravitational potential are as large as the spin-
independent contributions for interparticle separations of the order of Compton length and
also that such spin-dependent forces could be repulsive for certain spin orientations. An
analysis was also carried out of the possibility of measuring gravitational spin-dependent
forces in the laboratory [38]. An idea of one such experiment, as proposed in [39], is to
observe a breaking of the equilibrium of a polarized body, hanging in the gravitational
ﬁeld, when its polarized state is destroyed. This eﬀect, if present, is predicted to be
extremely small. (See also the results by Ritter et al. [40].) Claims like those by Wallace of
“antigravity” forces produced by spin orientation in nuclei [41] appear as totally unreliable
today.

(c) The works by Ning Li and Torr

In a series of articles Ning Li and Torr [6] calculated the gravitomagnetic ﬁeld which
would be produced by a superconductor containing circulating supercorrents. According
to them, in this case also the movement of the ions, which produce a current of mass, has
particular importance. Also the fact that spin alignment is present would be very impor-
tant. The alignment of the spin of the lattice ions would be a source of gravitomagnetic
ﬁeld. The objections to this model are of two types. First, the total spin amount that
is possible to obtain in normal condensed matter is always very small, also in presence of
alignment. Therefore, given the weak coupling with the gravitomagnetic ﬁeld, one does not
understand how it could reach detectable intensity. Another objection is of more technical
nature. Ning Li and Torr use the Maxwell equations for gravity, which hold in weak ﬁeld
approximation. However, when they ﬁnd that some terms of these equations “explode”,
they keep this result even if it is inconsistent with the initial approximation.

Previously to the ﬁrst Podkletnov experiment [1] and without reference to it, Ning
Li and Torr determined another consequence of their model [7]. Not only the alignment of
the spin of the lattice ions would produce a gravitomagnetic ﬁeld, but in the presence of an
outside applied time-dependent vector potential, this would be converted into a perceptible
gravitoelectric ﬁeld. Such a conversion is necessary, if one wants to apply this theory to
the weak gravitational shielding, because in that case the test bodies are at rest, and so
they would not respond to a gravitomagnetic ﬁeld. However, this is in contrast with the
short-lived permanence of the eﬀect also after all the outside ﬁelds are turned oﬀ. At last,
we notice that Ning Li and Torr never published a work in which they try to interpret the

22

phenomenology of the eﬀect in terms of their model nor to explain why it is observed only
with certain types of superconductors.

(d) Other models connected to gravitomagnetism

There have been proposals of alternative interpretations of gravitomagnetism in con-
nection with the Mach principle [45].
In this context, the gravitomagnetic phenomena
would achieve a greater importance. Still with reference to a Machian theory, Woodard
claims to have experimentally obtained some transient ﬂuctuations in the inertial mass of
a capacitor [46]. However we will not be concerned here with these approaches, which to
a large extent remained at a subjective level.

Recently Ummarino [42] tried to establish a link between the Podkletnov eﬀect and
the gravitomagnetic and gravitoelectric ﬁeld, following a more standard approach, con-
nected with the Ginzburg-Landau theory for superconductors.

(e) Theories with torsion

We now come to the theories of gravity with torsion. Could the observed phenomenol-
ogy, not understandable in general relativity, be related to the existence of a torsion ﬁeld?
Let us ﬁrst recall how the concept of torsion was born: from the idea of considering the
connection (which in the metric formalism is simply a quantity derived from the metric
and is symmetric with respect to a couple of indexes) like an independent quantity, with
its own dynamics and, generally, not symmetric. Torsion theory is an extension of general
relativity, which was investigated in great detail in the past. It is necessary in fact in order
to introduce the interaction of the gravitational ﬁeld with the quantum spin, and allows to
connect general relativity to the usual gauge theories. After admitting the possibility of the
existence of torsion, its features (for instance, its propagation), do not descend from ﬁrst
principles or from the geometrical structure of the theory, but from the form of the various
possible terms in the action and from coupling constants ﬁxed on the basis of experimental
observations. Over the years a large amount of experimental data have been accumulated,
which place strong limits on the couplings.

A picture of the current situation is for instance presented by Carroll and Field [43].
What is concluded is that the possible existence of the torsion can be of interest at the
level of gravitational interactions at very short distances (Planck scale), but not at the
level of laboratory experiments.

In their work Carroll and Field discuss possible actions for torsion and its interaction
with matter ﬁelds like those of the standard model of particle physics. They construct
a free Lagrangian from powers and derivatives of the torsion, and couple it “minimally”
to matter through the covariant derivative. They ﬁnd that there is only a small range of
models possible without placing arbitrary restrictions on the dynamics. In these models
only a single mode interacts with matter, either a massive scalar or a massive spin-1
ﬁeld, and each mode is parameterised by two constants with the dimension of mass. They
concentrate on the scalar theory, which is related to several proposals found in the literature
and discuss what regions of parameter space are excluded by laboratory and astrophysical
data. Carroll and Field ﬁnd that a reasonable expectation would be for each of the two
mass parameters to be of the order of the Planck scale; such a choice is a safe distance away

23

from the regions excluded by experiment. They conclude that, while there are reasons to
expect that the torsion degrees of freedom exist as propagating ﬁelds, there is no reason
to expect any observable signature from torsion.

Other “not orthodox” points of view are represented in literature [44]. But even
though theories of torsion exist since a long time, no attempts to explain the phenomenology
of the Podkletnov eﬀect were ever presented.

(f) The value of G and the measurements at short distances

The fundamental characteristics of the gravitational interaction keep on being a very
alive and interesting research ﬁeld. We do not mean by this the consequences of gravity on
the structure of the universe, and so the applications of general relativity to black holes, as-
trophysics etc.; we mean the basic features of the force, including the issue whether general
relativity is an adequate and complete description of it. We recall that only two predictions
of general relativity have not been veriﬁed yet, namely the existence of gravitational waves
and of gravitomagnetic ﬁelds. There are furthermore several current experiments to detect
possible violations of the equivalence principle. Up to now no contradiction has ever been
observed with respect to the predictions of general relativity [47].

The precision with which the value of G is known is clearly unsatisfactory compared
to the precision with which the other fundamental physical constants are known. This
is also due to the fact that while the deﬁnition of the other fundamental constants relies
on microscopic experiments performed with high precision devices, for the G constant it
is necessary to use more or less sophisticated versions of the Cavendish experiment.
In
particular, we do not know the behaviour of gravity at short distances (millimeters or
less). According to Gillies [48], in the second half of 1900 more measurements of G were
made than ever before. Some discrepancies were observed in recent times with respect to
the best oﬃcial value ﬁxed in 1982.

The value of G has been called into question by new measurements from respected
research teams in Germany, New Zealand, and Russia [49]. The new values disagree wildly.
For example, a team from the German Institute of Standards obtained a value for G that is
0.6% larger than the accepted value; a group from the University of Wuppertal in Germany
found a value that is 0.06% lower and one at the Measurement Standards Laboratory of
New Zealand measured a value that is 0.1% lower. The Russian group found a space
and time variation of G of up to 0.7%. The collection of these new results suggests that
the uncertainty in G could be much larger than originally thought. This controversy has
spurred several eﬀorts to make a more reliable measurement of G.

A recent theoretical prediction suggests that gravity penetrates extra, compact di-
mensions so that the gravitational inverse square law must be modiﬁed at short ranges
(less than 1 mm). Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos, and Dvali [50], have oﬀered this as an
explanation of the hierarchy problem. A team at the university of Washington is doing
new measurements in order to check this, but results are negative up to now [51].

(g) The anomalous acceleration of the Pioneer and scalar-tensor theories

Let us now pass from the shortest distances at which it is possible to observe grav-
itational interactions in the laboratory, to the largest. Surprising results were obtained

24

recently by the observation of the motion of the Pioneer space probes [53]. Direct mea-
surements are possible thanks to the radio signals transmitted by the spacecrafts, which
give precise information about their position, speed and acceleration. From the analysis of
the data a residual acceleration was found, not explainable through the usual orbit tracking
models. Some proposals for a theoretical explanation of the phenomenon were presented.
One of these [54] calls for the existence, in addition to Einstein’s gravitational ﬁeld, of a
scalar ﬁeld which, supposed it has certain properties, could lead to the observed eﬀect.
This ﬁeld could also be responsible for the rotation anomalies observed in the galaxies,
because it gives a modiﬁcation of the behaviour of gravity at large distances. The cited
model belongs in practice to a wide group of extensions of the standard theory of gravi-
tation [52], which originate from the Brans-Dicke model and in more recent times refer to
string theory and to the so-called dilaton ﬁeld.

(h) Gravitational anomalies at solar eclipses

There is a long history of claims of possible anomalous changes of gravity during sun
eclipses. These would be diﬀerent from tidal changes, which are well known and calculable
with precision, and could show that some kind of shielding of the solar attraction by the
moon exists, at the moment when it steps in between the earth and the sun. The data,
however, are quite contradictory [55].

The original experiments by Allais, in which the change of the oscillation period of
a pendulum was observed, seemed to imply a decrease in g of about 1/100 of the solar
gravity. The consequence would be an apparent increase of the terrestrial attraction of
about one part in a million. During the eclipse of 2000 a net of observers with pendulums
and gravimeters was organised by initiative of the NASA, in order to observe possible
changes; the deﬁnitive results are not available yet. A work was published in 2000 by a
Chinese team, with reference to the eclipse of 1997 [56], in which data measured with a
high precision gravimeter are reported. Also in this case, some anomalies were observed
at the eclipse, but with features very diﬀerent from those reported before. There is a
noticeable decrease of the terrestrial attraction, that is, an apparent anti-screening of the
solar gravity. The shielding factor is much smaller than the one declared by Allais, and the
time sequence rather strange, with maxima at the beginning and the end of the darkness
period.

It is important to remember that other experiments clearly exclude any shielding of
gravitation of the so-called “Majorana” type (these phenomena were ﬁrst investigate by
Majorana at the beginning of 1900) [57]. Besides, one would expect a possible shielding
eﬀect by the moon to have an analogue for artiﬁcial satellites, namely a shielding of solar
gravity when the satellite enters the shadow of the earth. Anomalies of this type were
actually reported [58], though they are very diﬃcult to conﬁrm, because the irregularities
which aﬀects the motion of the artiﬁcial satellites are numerous, especially when they are
close to the surface of the earth.

(i) Weak gravitational shielding by superconductors

In this variegated ﬁeld of investigations on possible gravitational anomalies, the work
by E. Podkletnov stands out, originally appeared in 1992 [1], then in improved version in

25

1995 [2]. It describes possible gravitational anomalies caused by HTC superconductors.
The observed anomalies reached a maximum of about 2% of g, in transient situations,
and 0.3-0.5% of g in almost stationary form. These anomalies were produced by means of
discs with multiple layers, rotating at high speed, in very particular conditions, which still
have not been completely duplicated. A NASA team already produced a ﬁrst simpliﬁed
reproduction of the experiment in 1997 [3], and a new version should start giving some
data this year. Besides the remarkable experimental diﬃculties, the results are puzzling
under the theoretical point of view. In fact, the strength of the anomalies is very large with
respect to what has been previously observed, and no suﬃciently complete theory exists,
which can explain this kind of phenomena (see Section 4.1). Here in fact both gravitation
is called into play, of which a complete quantum theory does not exist, and typically
quantum phenomena (behaviour of the macroscopic wave functions in superconductors).
Furthermore, not conventional superconductors are involved, but HTC superconductors,
for which several issues are still unsettled, like the pairing mechanism etc.

(j) Terahertz radiation emission by HTC superconductors

A new type of terahertz radiation was discovered by Japanese scientists by irradi-
ating HTC superconductive ﬁlms with femtosecond laser pulses [59, 60]. The radiation
mechanism is thought to be connected with the ultrafast supercurrent modulation by the
laser pulses, which induces nonequilibrium superconductivity. The principal design of the
experimental installation has some common features with our gravity impulse generator
and the behavior of the superconducting crystallized materials might have a similar origin.

5 Conclusions

The experimental apparatus has shown that an impulse of gravitational-like force freely
propagating through diﬀerent physical media can be generated by a dual layered YBCO
HTSC under pulsed electric current. The impulse propagates parallel to the direction of
the discharge and orthogonal to the surface of the HTSC. The intensity of the impulse has
been found to increase with increasing discharge energy, and to depend on the chemical
composition and structure of the HTSC and on its internal magnetic state. In a typical
measurement, the mechanical energy imparted by the impulse to a pendulum of mass 18.5 g
was between 4

10−4 J (Table 1).

10−4 J and 23

·

·

From the theoretical point of view, we understand the eﬀect as the result of an
anomalous interaction between a special class of gravitational vacuum ﬂuctuations and
the macroscopic wave function of the superconductor. This interaction is locally activated
when the product of the pairs density ρ and its second derivative ρ′′ is suﬃciently large.
The sign of ρ′′ must furthermore be positive. These conditions can be satisﬁed in the
presence of intense transport current and magnetic ﬂux penetration.

Attempts of scientists to control gravity have been present for a long time and in the
future these eﬀorts will almost certainly become more prominent. Albert Einstein spent the
last years of his life trying to integrate gravity with the other laws of physics and the entire
scientiﬁc community remains intrigued with the problem of gravity ever since. However,

26

since our knowledge of gravity is poor in comparison to that of the other fundamental
forces, we are unable to control it in any fundamental way. We are therefore left with
the option of carrying out experiments based on new theories, on scientiﬁc intuition and
careful analysis of previous results. This work indicates that a kind of artiﬁcial gravity
can be generated using the unique properties of superconducting ceramic materials and a
combination of electric and magnetic forces.

Acknowledgment - G.M. was supported in part by the California Institute for Physics
and Astrophysics via grant CIPA-MG7099.

References

[1] E. Podkletnov and R. Nieminen, A Possibility of Gravitational Force Shielding by Bulk

Y Ba2Cu3O7−x Superconductor, Physica C Vol. 203 p. 441 (1992).

[2] E. Podkletnov, Weak Gravitational Shielding Properties of Composite Bulk
Y Ba2Cu3O7−x Superconductor Below 70 K Under EM Field, LANL Physics
Preprint Server, preprint cond-mat/9701074, January 1997. Available on the net:
http://www.gravity.org/msu.html.

[3] N. Li, D. Noever, T. Robertson, R. Koczor and W. Brantley, Static Test for a
Gravitational Force Coupled to Type II YBCO Superconductors, Physica C 281, 260-
267. R. Koczor and D. Noever, Fabrication of Large Bulk Ceramic Superconductor
Disks for Gravity Modiﬁcation Experiments and Performance of YBCO Disks Un-
der e.m. Field Excitation, NASA Marshall, Huntsville, AL, AIAA 99-2147, 35th
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, 20-24 June 1999, Los An-
geles, CA.

[4] Frederic N. Rounds, Anomalous Weight Behavior in Y Ba2Cu3O7−x Compounds at
Low Temperature, NASA Ames Research Center. Preprint cond-mat/9705317, avail-
able at http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cond-mat/9705317.

[5] Harald Reiss, A Possible Interaction Between Gravity and High Temperature
Superconductivity-By a Materials Property, Submitted to the 15th. European Conf.
Thermophys. Properties, Wrzburg, Germany, Sept. 5-9, 1999.

[6] Ning Li and D. Torr, Eﬀects of a gravitomagnetic ﬁeld on pure superconductors, Phys.
Rev. D 43 (1991) 457; Gravitational eﬀects on the magnetic attenuation of supercon-
ductors, Phys. Rev. B 64 (1992) 5489.

[7] Ning Li and D. Torr, Gravitoelectric-electric coupling via superconductivity, Found.

Phys. Lett. 6 (1993) 371.

[8] G. Fontana, A possibility of emission of high frequency gravitational radiation from
junctions between d-wave and s-wave superconductors, report cond-mat/9812070;

27

Gravitational radiation and its application to space travel, in CP504, Space Tech-
nology and Applications International Forum-2000, edited by M.S. El-Genk, AiP, p.
1085.

[9] M. Agop, C. Gh. Buzea and P. Nica, Gravitational shielding in an electromagnetic
ﬁeld. Local gravitoelectromagnetic eﬀects on a superconductor, Physica C: Supercon-
ductivity, 339 (2) (2000) pp. 120-128

[10] U. Balachandran, R.B. Poeppel, J.E. Emerson, S.A. Johnson, M.T. Lanagan, C.A.
Youngdahl, Donglu Shi, K.C. Goretta, N.G. Eror, Synthesis of Phase-Pure Or-
thorhombic Y Ba2Cu3O7−x under Low Oxygen Pressure, Materials Letters 8 (1989)
454-456.

[11] T.B. Lindemer, F.A. Washburn, C.S. MacDougall, O.B. Cavin, Synthesis of Y-Ba-
Cu-O superconductors in subatmospheric oxygen, Physica C 174 (1991) 135-143.

[12] M. Murakami, Processing of bulk YBaCuO, Supercond. Sci. Technol. vol. 5, pp 185-

203, 1992.

[13] S. Nariki, N. Sakai and M. Murakami, Fabrication of large melt-textured Gd-Ba-Cu-O
superconductor with Ag addition, Physica C: Superconductivity, 341-348 (1-4) (2000)
pp. 2409-2412.

[14] M. Muralidhar, S. Koishikawa, M.R. Koblischka and M. Murakami, Study of super-
conducting properties of OCMG processed (Nd, Eu, Gd)-Ba-Cu-O with Pr doping,
Physica C: Superconductivity, 314 (3-4) (1999) pp. 277-284.

[15] S.I. Yoo, N. Sakai, T. Higuchi and M. Murakami, Melt processing for obtaining
NdBa2Cu3Oy superconductors with high Tc and large Jc, Appl. Phys. Lett. 65 (1994)
pp. 633-635.

[16] V.R. Todt, X.F. Zhang and D.J. Miller, Nucleation and growth of single- and multiple-
domain Y Ba2Cu3O7−x Levitators: Inﬂuence of Seed Crystallofraphy, IEEE Trans. on
Appl. Super., vol. 7(2), pp. 1801-1804, June 1997.

[17] Chan-Joong Kim, Young A. Jee, Gye-Won Hong, Tae-Hyun Sung, Young-Hee Han,
Sang-Chul Han, Sang-Joon Kim, W. Bieger, G. Fuchs, Eﬀects of the seed dimension
on the top surface growth mode and the magnetic properties of top-seeded melt growth
processed YBCO superconductors, Physica C 331 (2000) pp. 274-284.

[18] G. Modanese, Theoretical analysis of a reported weak gravitational shielding eﬀect,

Europhys. Lett. 35 (1996) 413-418.

[19] G. Modanese, Role of a “local” cosmological constant in euclidean quantum gravity,

Phys. Rev. D 54 (1996) 5002.

Math. Phys. 40 (1999) 3300.

[20] G. Modanese, Tunneling of a massless scalar ﬁeld through a 3D gaussian barrier, J.

28

[21] G. Modanese, Virtual dipoles and large ﬂuctuations in quantum gravity, Phys. Lett.
B 460 (1999) 276; Large “dipolar” ﬂuctuations in quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 588
(2000) 419-435; Paradox of virtual dipoles in the Einstein action, Phys. Rev. D 62
(2000) 087502;

[22] G. Modanese, The dipolar zero-modes of Einstein action: An informal summary with
some new issues, in Proceedings of the Vigier III Symp. (Aug. 21-25, 2000, U. Cali-
fornia Berkeley), Kluwer Acad. Press.

[23] A.G. Riess et al., Astronom. J. 116 (1998) 1009; S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J.

517 (1999) 565.

[24] I.L. Shapiro and J. Sol`a, On the scaling behavior of the cosmological constant and the
possible existence of new forces and new light degrees of freedom, Phys. Lett. B 475
(2000) 236; Scaling behavior of the cosmological constant: interface between quantum
ﬁeld theory and cosmology, report UAB-FT-490, hep-th/0012227.

[25] G. Modanese, Local contribution of a quantum condensate to the vacuum energy den-

sity, report gr-qc/0107073.

[26] J. Waldram, “Superconductivity of metals and cuprates”, IoP, London, 1996.

[27] D.R. Tilley and J. Tilley, “Superﬂuidity and superconductivity”, IoP, Bristol, 1990.

[28] G. Modanese, The London ﬁeld in bulk layered superconductors, report cond-

mat/9909441.

[29] G. Modanese, Gravitational anomalies by HTC superconductors: a 1999 theoretical

status report, report physics/9901011.

[30] For the gravitational case: G. Modanese, Potential energy in quantum gravity, Nucl.
Phys. B 434 (1995) 697. For the other cases: K. Symanzik, Comm. Math. Phys. 16
(1970) 48.

[31] For a recent account and references see C. Barcelo, S. Liberati and M. Visser, Analog

gravity from ﬁeld theory normal modes?, report gr-qc/0104001.

[32] B. Mashhoon, H. Young Paik and C. Will, Detection of the gravitomagnetic ﬁeld using
an orbiting superconducting gradiometer; theoretical principles, Phys. Rev. D 39, 2825
(1989).

[33] I. Ciufolini and J. Wheeler, “Gravitation and Inertia”, Princeton Series in Physics,

Princeton university press, 1995, Cap. 6.

[34] R.P. Lano, Gravitational Meissner eﬀect, report U.ofIowa 96-4, March 1996.

[35] H. Hayasaka and S. Takeuchi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 2701.

[36] B. M. Barker and R. F. O’Connell, The gravitational interaction: spin, rotation and

quantum eﬀects - A review, Gen. Rel. Grav. 11 (1979) 149.

29

[37] R. F. O’Connell, Phys. Lett. A 32 (1970) 402.

[38] R. F. O’Connell and S. N. Rasband, Nature Phys. Sci. 232 (1971) 193.

[39] A. Peres, Phys. Rev. D 18 (1978) 2739. See also Y. N. Obukhov, Spin, gravity, and

inertia, report gr-qc/0012102.

[40] R. C. Ritter, L. I. Winkler, and G. T. Gillies, Search for anomalous spin-dependent
forces with a polarized-mass torsion pendulum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 701.

[41] H. Wallace, Method and apparatus for generating a secondary gravitational force ﬁeld,

US Patent N. 3626605 (1971).

report cond-mat/0010399.

[42] G. A. Ummarino, Possible alterations of the gravitational ﬁeld in a superconductor,

[43] S. M. Carroll and G. B. Field, Consequences of propagating torsion in connection-

dynamic theories of gravity, Phys. Rev. D 50 (1994) 3867.

[44] A. Ye. Akimov and V. Ya. Tarasenko, Models of polarization states of the physical
vacuum and torsion ﬁelds, Izd. Vuzov. Fizika, 1992, Nov. 3, pp. 13-23. See also on the
Web: http://www.amasci.com/freenrg/tors/doc17.html.

[45] K. Nordtvedt, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 27 (1988) 1395.

[46] J. F. Woodward, Laboratory test of Mach’s principle and strong-ﬁeld relativistic grav-

ity, Found. Phys. Lett. 9 (1996) 247, and references.

[47] D.E. Groom et al. (Particle Data Group), Review of particle physics, Eur. Phys. J. C

15 (2000); http://pdg.lbl.gov.

[48] G. T. Gillies, The Newtonian gravitational constant: recent measurements and related

studies, Rep. Prog. Phys. 60 (1997) 151-225.

[49] W. Michaelis, H. Haars, and R. Augustin, Metrologia 32, 267 (1995). M. Fitzgerald
and T. R. Armstrong, IEEE Trans. on Inst. and Meas. 44, 494 (1995). H. Walesch,
H. Meyer, H. Piehl, and J. Schurr, IEEE Trans. on Inst. and Meas. 44, 491 (1995).
V.P. Izmailov, O.V. Karagioz, V.A. Kuznetsov, V.N. Mel’nikov, and A.E. Roslyakov,
Measurement Techniques 36, 1065 (1993).

[50] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, G. Dvali, The Hierarchy Problem and New Dimen-

sions at a Millimeter, Phys.Lett. B429 (1998) 263-272.

[51] C.D. Hoyle, U. Schmidt, B.R. Heckel, E.G. Adelberger, J.H. Gundlach, D.J. Kapner,
and H.E. Swanson, Submillimeter Tests of the Gravitational Inverse-Square Law: A
Search for “Large” Extra Dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. (to be published).

[52] D. La and P. J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62 (1989) 376 for status and references
on scalar-tensor gravitational theories. See also S. Calchi Novati, S. Capozziello and
G. Lambiase, Newtonian limit of induced gravity, report astro-ph/0005104.

30

[53] J.D. Anderson at al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 2858; Study of the anomalous accel-

eration of Pioneer 10 and 11, report gr-qc/0104064.

[54] J.P. Mbelek and M. Lachieze-Rey, report gr-qc/9910105.

[55] T. Kuusela, New measurements with a torsion pendulum during the solar eclipse, Gen-
eral Relativity and Gravitation, 4, 543-550, 1992. D. C. Mishra, M. B. S. Vyaghreswara
Rao, Temporal variation in gravity ﬁeld during solar eclipse on 24 October 1995, Cur-
rent Science, 72(11), 782-783, 1997. L. A. Savrov, Experiment with paraconic pendu-
lums during the November 3, 1994 solar eclipse in Brazil, Measurement Techniques,
40 (6), 511-516, 1997. And references.

[56] Qian-shen Wang et al., Precise measurement of gravity variations during a total solar
eclipse, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 041101. C.S. Unnikrishnan, A. K. Mohapatra, G.T.
Gillies, Anomalous gravity data during the 1997 total solar eclipse do not support the
hypothesis of gravitational shielding, Phys. Rev. D 63 (2001) 062002.

[57] New limits on the gravitational Majorana screening from the Zurich G experiment,

C.S. Unnikrishnan, G.T. Gillies, Phys. Rev. D61 (2000) 101101

[58] T. Van Flandern, Possible new properties of gravity, Astrophys. Space Sci. 244 (1996)

249, and ref.s.

[59] M. Tonouchi, M. Tani, Z. Wang, K. Sakai, N. Wada, M. Hangyo, Novel Terahertz
Radiation from Flux-Trapped Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ thin Films Excited by Femtosecond Laser
Pulses, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Vol. 36 (1997) pp. L93-L95.

[60] M. Hangyo, S. Tomozawa, Y. Murakami, M. Tonouchi, M. Tani, Z. Wang, K. Sakai, S.
Nakashima, Terahertz radiation from superconducting Y Ba2Cu3O7−δ thin ﬁlms excited
by femtosecond optical pulses, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69 (14), (1996), pp. 2122-2124

31

Figure Captions

Fig.1 Initial setup of the impulse gravity generator.

Fig.2 Improved variant of the impulse gravity generator.

Fig.3 Discharge chamber of the impulse gravity generator.

Fig.4 Arkadjev-Marx high-voltage pulse generator.

Fig.5 Pendulum in a glass cylinder under vacuum.

Fig.6 Correlation between the voltage discharge and the deﬂection of the pendulum.

impact angle. Time scale is
Fig.7 Impulse recorded by the microphone at a 67 deg.
sampling periods at fs = 44.1 kHz. There is a 50 Hz noise due to power grid. The signal
is unﬁltered.

Fig.8. Relative pulse impulse versus impact angle.

32

This figure "figure1and2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

This figure "figure3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

This figure "figure4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

This figure "figure5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

This figure "figure6.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

This figure "figure7.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

This figure "figure8.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0108005v1

