1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

REALITY OF TIME

S. C. Tiwari
Institute of Natural Philosophy
c/o 1 Kusum Kutir, Mahamanapuri, Varanasi-221 005, India.

The meaning of instantaneous action at a distance is elucidated. It is shown that the
absence of a medium to transmit action (usually referred to as AAD in the literature) and
instantaneous action are not identical. Since the term “instantaneous” is incompatible
with relativity and ﬁeld theory, a critique is presented on the concept of time in relativity.
It is argued that relativity does not deal with the nature of time. Physical reality of
the absolute time is envisaged, and instantaneous action is proposed to be a natural
consequence of it. Possibly gravity is such kind of a force, however the electromagnetic
force, though envisaged as direct particle interaction (i.e. without intermediary ﬁelds)
can not be instantaneous.

1. Introduction

Sense impressions or empirical observations seem to suggest a dichotomy of the
physical world into isolated independently existing objects and a physical mecha-
nism to relate observed mutual inﬂuences between them. In modern perspective one
ﬁnds expression of this dichotomy in terms of elementary particles and their inter-
actions(believed to be the four fundamental forces of nature). Philosophical urge to
seek connectedness with the separation, and wholeness within the parts have led to
the conception of physical reality with intrinsic duality. Primarily due to this, both
action-at-a-distance (AAD) and ﬁeld theory possess a sort of indistinguishable char-
acter as far as the veriﬁable experimental consequences are concerned. The main
aim of this article is to elucidate the proposition that the nature of time might
play a fundamental role to throw light on the meaning of instantaneous AAD. To
delineate the basic problems a brief commentary on AAD is presented in the next
section. The concept of time is discussed in section 3. In the ﬁnal section the idea
of the absolute time is presented, and its implications on AAD versus ﬁeld theory
are outlined.

184

Reality of time . . .

185

2. Review of Action-At-A-Distance

The idea of AAD is commonly attributed to Newton, however, Cajori in the
appendix to Newton’s Principia [1] argues that the doctrine of AAD belongs to
Cotes, not to Newton. He quotes Maxwell to support his claim,and refers to a
letter from Newton:

“That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter, so
that one body may act upon another at a distance through a vacuum,
without the mediation of anything else, by and through which their
action and force may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great
an absurdity, that I believe no man,who has in philosophical matters
a competent faculty of thinking,can ever fall into it. Gravity must be
caused by an agent according to certain laws,but whether this agent is
material or immaterial, I have left to the consideration of my readers.”

The transition from ‘absence of a medium’ to ‘instantaneous action’ is not
straightforward, in fact the discoveries of force laws in electricity and magnetism,
and analogy with Newton’s gravitational force law led to a subtle change in the in-
terpretation. Newtonian interpretation suggests that a medium to transmit force is
necessary, but it can happen instantaneously. Maxwell ﬁeld equations, on the other
hand give rise to wave equations such that the ﬁelds have ﬁnite velocity of propa-
gation. For an electrostatic ﬁeld of a charged body an additional feature emerges:
the longitudinal waves. To see this, the electrostatic potential Φ(r) is expanded in
a Fourier integral, and the Poisson equation is used to obtain the following relation
for a point charge

here Φk is the Fourier component of a zero frequency wave with wave vector k.
Fourier components of electric ﬁeld vector can be calculated using equation (1) to
give

Φk =

4πe
k2 ,

Ek = −i

4πek
k2 .

Since Ek is parallel to k, the Coulomb ﬁeld has longitudinal waves, and the time
independence is interpreted to imply instantaneous AAD. Generalizing the Poisson
equation to in-homogeneous wave equation the action propagating with the velocity
of light is obtained. One can formulate a theory without introducing the ﬁelds using
the interaction action integral:

LI =

1
2

n

eiej Z

dzµ
i
dλi

dzj
µ
dλj

Xi,j=1(i6=j)

δ

(zi − zj)2
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

dλidλj .

This type of theory is called AAD because no mediating agency is required to carry
the interaction [2]. Here λi is a parameter used to label the worldline zµ
i of i-th

(1)

(2)

(3)

186 S. C. Tiwari

charged particle ei of the n-particle system. Delta-function in (3) ensures that
for LI to be non-vanishing the “worldlines” are connected by light signal, and self
interaction is absent as i 6= j. The statement in [3] “strictly, the phrase ‘action at
a distance’ should be changed to ‘action at no distance’” shows that such theories
are not genuine AAD. Moreover, direct particle ﬁelds introduced in this approach,
and the perfect absorption by the rest of the universe postulated by Wheeler and
Feynmann [4] though explain the existence of radiation overcoming the diﬃculties
faced by the Schwarzschild-Tetrode-Fokker theory, the resulting scheme is more
akin to ﬁeld theory than the AAD. Ironically the delta-functions in ﬁeld theories
serve the purpose of bringing in particulate aspect as ﬁeld singularities while in this
version of the AAD they incorporate ﬁelds. The simplest way to recognize this fact
is to aﬀect the variation on LI , and deﬁne the direct potential as

Aµ

i (zk) = ei

δ

(zk − zi)2

dλi.

(4)

+∞

Z
−∞

(cid:2)

dzµ
i
dλi

(cid:3)

These potentials satisfy the inhomogeneous wave equation, and depend on the
sources more like deﬁning relations without independent degrees of freedom. The
details can be seen in [2]. The application of this approach to derive the equation of
motion of electron has been extensively discussed in the literature. An important
critique by Havas [5] deserves attention comparing Dirac’s theory with this theory
arriving at the conclusion that experimentally the two theories are “indistinguish-
able”.

An important problem which has a bearing on this discussion, the essence of
which was perceived by Planck studying the matter-radiation interaction arises in
the quantum electrodynamics. Einstein’s light quantum hypothesis and ﬁeld theory
seemed irreconcilable to him, and led to his second and third theories [6]. In 1911
he proposed that while emission of radiation occurs discontinuously in quanta, ab-
sorption is a continuous process. In this second theory, a remarkable result followed,
namely the appearance of zero-point energy of the oscillator. In 1914 he revised
his ideas and proposed his third theory: the emission and absorption are both con-
tinuous, the discrete energy exchange takes place only during collisions between
the oscillators and free particles. In the language of quantum electrodynamics, the
interaction is described in terms of the exchange of photons i.e. the carriers of the
interaction. Following Planck we may ask if the photon acquires continuous ﬁeld
property once emitted from the charged body. Or is it possible to formulate a com-
plete particle theory totally dispensing with the continuous electromagnetic ﬁelds,
and employing only photons?

Present brief commentary shows that the role of time, the nature of sources and
the understanding of continuum are fundamental issues to be addressed for making

Reality of time . . .

187

further decisive progress in resolving the debate on the mechanism of interaction(s),
and that one must be careful as regards to the version of AAD one is referring to.

3. The Concept of Time: A Critique

Relativist’s world-view is claimed to have revolutionized our thinking on space
and time, radically altering the classical Newtonian system. Is it true? To answer
this question, ﬁrst I will base my discussion on Einstein’s own exposition of his
theory of relativity[7]. Special theory of relativity (STR) asserts the following: (1)
The laws of nature are in concordance for all inertial frames, (2) the hypothesis of the
absolute character of time is discarded, (3) simultaneity has no objective meaning,
and (4) four dimensional space-time has absolute character, and has physical reality.
Einstein does not deﬁne motion, and assuming uniform motion postulates inertial
frames (K). Absolute time, according to him has the meaning: “the time of an
event in K ′ is the same as the time in K”. This absolute time makes physical sense
if instantaneous signals exist, and the state of motion of a clock has no eﬀect on
its rate. Since no such signals exist, a scheme for time measurement is suggested
postulating the constancy of the velocity of light in vacuum. In a frame K, clocks
Un relatively at rest are placed at all points of space. A light signal from one of
the clocks Uk sent at the instant tk travels in vacuum to Ul placed at a distance dkl
which is now set to indicate the time

tl = tk +

dkl
c

.

(5)

(6)

In all inertial systems the clocks are regulated in this manner. Simultaneity
becomes relative, and time speciﬁcation depends on the space of reference. The
constancy of the velocity of light in all inertial frames leads to a geometrical invariant
4-dimensional length

ds2 = dr2 − c2dt2 = 0.

The step from (6) to arbitrary non-zero ds2 being invariant invokes the assumption
of the directional independence in space. In analogy with the Euclidean geometry,
the world-geometry in STR is postulated to be 4-dimensional space-time continuum.
In contrast to Einstein, Newton is careful to distinguish two kinds of space, time
and motion: absolute and relative. Absolute (relative) motion is the translation of
a body from one absolute (relative) place into another. Absolute time, by its own
nature ﬂows equably without relation to anything external. Relative or common
time is some sensible and external measure of duration by means of motion [1].
Einstein is concerned with this relative time, and the process of its measurement.
What is the meaning of the instant tk recorded by the clock Uk? Obviously it is
implicit assumption that there is something called time, and that there exists earlier
and later ordering of time.

188 S. C. Tiwari

Criticisms/analyses by other authors have been presented in some of my earlier
papers [8], however, a brief discussion may be pertinent at this point. Reichenbach
using light and matter axioms oﬀers an axiomatization of STR with space, time and
motion as presupposed concepts [9]. He says that modern epistemology has shown
that Kant’s intuitive time is untenable, and attempts to deﬁne time at a point P
without invoking the direct perception of time ﬂow. First a signal is deﬁned as a
physical process which can be marked at a real point P , and can be transmitted
to another point P ′ where the mark can be recognized. A signal marked at P is
sent to some other point P ′, again marked at P ′ returns to P . The detection of
two marks ascertains the temporal sequence at P . It is logically unsatisfactory to
consider another distant point P ′ in order to deﬁne the time order at P . Not only
this, Reichenbach ignores the interaction duration for the marking process, and the
memory and logical decision making capability of the detection device.

Bunge’s aim is to free STR from misinterpretations [10]. Time, Euclidean space
and inertial frames belong to proto-physics, and the role of electromagnetic ﬁelds is
stressed by him. Newtonian absolute time is criticized as being metaphorical and
hanging in the midst of nothingness. ‘Flows equably’ implies constant rate which in
turn involves the notion of time, and hence there is a circularity in this deﬁnition.
However, Bunge’s analysis does not provide any new insight into the meaning of
time, and temporal order as well as protophysics remain unexplained.

Thus relativity is founded on motion, inertial system and relative time of Newton
with a new measurement convention using light signal, see also Dingle’s interpre-
tation[11]. It does not deal with the absolute time and its nature. I have argued
earlier [8] that it is not merely a question of philosophical taste or pure reasoning,
the life-time of an unstable particle changing with velocity poses a paradox if rela-
tivistic time dilation is identiﬁed with this. The decay being an irreversible process,
life-time corresponds to a unidirectional lapse of time;on the other hand time dila-
tion is based on time inversion symmetrical kinematics. Therefore, the question of
the physical reality of time is not an empty issue; we address this problem in the
next section.

4. Absolute Time: Physical Reality

The basic idea put forward in late 1970s [12] is very simple: time is the primeval
cause of the manifest universe, and time ﬂow is regulated by a Cosmic principle. To
make physical sense out of it, and to relate it with the contemporary understand-
ing and the language of discourse is, however not easy. We postulate an inert and
unobservable source space which is continuously being changed to observable active
space(or manifest universe) by the action of time. The possible active states are
proposed to be those of rotation and expansion. An alternative deﬁnition of source

Reality of time . . .

189

space is the rest of the space other than the universe. The universe spins with
reference to the source space and expands into it. The cause of rotation and expan-
sion is the absolute time, the duration of which is determined by cosmic motion.
Universality of the absolute time ﬂow entails space continuum for the whole of the
universe. The rotation determines periodicity of the cosmic clock, and expansion
makes the time to be inherently unidirectional. Time reversal is non-existent, and
space-time continuum has no meaning for this absolute time. Though the spatial
changes within the universe are correlated with the absolute time frame as far as
earlier and later ordering is concerned, one is free to setup convenient deﬁnition and
measurement setup for relative or common time to describe such spatial relations.

In a somewhat abstract construction following[8] the absolute and common time
can be explained noting that any measurement in physics ultimately reduces to a
counting of spatial relations in terms of a reference standard unit, D. For unchang-
ing spatial relations between any two points in the space (a rigid structure) one
can use a standard scale, but this method has to be modiﬁed once changing spatial
relations are allowed. A reference unit C possessing intrinsic uniform spatial rela-
tion, if it exists may replace the scale for calibrating changing spatial relations. Let
us imagine a space S within which occur continuous ﬂow of space points thereby
leading to changing spatial relations. Note that this description endows the space
S an active role i.e. moving points. One can classify sets of uniform changing rela-
tions, I, and admit the possibility of reversible changes. To reduce the complexity
of the description an order parameter, t may be introduced, and calibrated using
the device C. Let us now suppose some ‘external’ change on the whole of the space
S such that this regulates the changes within S i.e. there is a harmony between
the two, and this change, denoted by T takes place uniformly and unidirectionally
without relation to anything ’inside’ S. Translating this description to physical
situation, S is the universe, t is common time, I is the inertial frames, C is the light
signal, and T is the absolute time. The parameter t merely represents a convenient
mathematical deﬁnition to coordinate the changes in spatial relations, and admits
the transformation t → −t, but it is unphysical. The parameter t acquires physical
meaning only when it is related with unidirectional ﬂow T .

Inadvertently identity of mathematical parameter and physical common time
has been assumed since the time of Newton resulting into unexplainable possible
physical situations. In STR the light cone and its future and past division illustrates
one of the problems: equation (6) is valid for mathematical time t, but to relate
it with T one invokes causality and impossibility of any material particle attaining
or exceeding the velocity of light. In general relativity the things are not so simple
since the metric in

ds2 = gµνdxµdxν

(7)

190 S. C. Tiwari

will change the light cone from one space-time point to another. Usually one deﬁnes
locally special relativistic time in the GR, but near massive bodies this procedure is
not applicable. Singularities as space-time edge appear to be distinct at the begin-
ning (e.g. big-bang creation) and end (collapse of a massive object to a black hole),
see [13]. Does it indicate arrow of time? The question itself becomes meaningless
as shown by Godel’s solution [14]. He points out that relativity of simultaneity
implies that lapse of time has no objective meaning [15]. In cosmological models
based on GR which appear to be consistent with the observations, a time common
to the whole universe can be deﬁned. Jeans took it as supporting the idea of an
absolute lapse of time, but Godel argues that there do exist cosmological solutions
which allow one to travel in the past, present and future. The assumed metric is a
solution of the ﬁeld equation

Rµν −

gµνR = 8πk̺uµuν + λgµν .

1
2

Besides the matter energy-momentum tensor, it has the cosmological constant

term ﬁrst introduced by Einstein for static universe, but with opposite sign

(8)

(9)

λ = −

(= −4πk̺).

R
2

Using time-like and null vectors a reasonable deﬁnition of time direction is in-
troduced, but it is found that no time coordinate at each space-time point exists
which increases as one moves in a positive time-like direction. Einstein in his reply
[15] very clearly recognizes the diﬃculty of incorporating time ordering in relativity,
but insists on the necessity of a signal to deﬁne time. Regarding Godel’s solution
he asks whether these are acceptable on physical grounds. Unfortunately there is
no physical or mathematical criterion to choose a ﬁeld equation like (8) amongst
many possible ﬁeld equations;and even if one settles down to a deﬁnite ﬁeld equa-
tion there exist arbitrary large number of solutions of the ﬁeld equation. In view of
the idea of the absolute time T we conclude that time in GR is not physical time.
Newtonian absolute time is regarded as a metaphysical concept by Cajori [1] but T
discussed here has physical reality. Profound consequences follow from this idea as
shown in a recent monograph [16]. Here we limit our discussion to its implications
in the context of AAD. By its very nature universality of time T in the whole of
the universe implies space continuum, and instantaneous action. Thus the space
could be viewed as a medium in Newtonian sense, and if the meaning of AAD is
understood to be the absence of a medium then this action is instantaneous but
not AAD. In what form does this action manifest in the universe? In [12] it was
suggested that gravitation as an apparent force originates due to inhomogeneous
distribution of spatial structures and the expansion of the universe. Therefore,
identifying gravitation with this action, we arrive at the conclusion that gravitation

Reality of time . . .

191

is an instantaneous action. Let us now consider the electromagnetic force. The
ﬁrst signiﬁcant out-come of our space-time analysis is that the nature of source i.e.
electric charge can be understood in mechanical terms. This becomes possible with
the belief that cosmic process is replicated at sub-atomic level, and the observa-
tion that the electric charge occurs as e2 once the ﬁeld quanti- ties are expressed
in geometrical units(for example electric ﬁeld in the unit of length−2). That large
scale structure of universe has some deep connection with the atomic structure is
a belief shared by many physicists, notably by Eddington as pointed out by Infeld
in [15]. Einstein rejected it but recent uniﬁed theories also seem to indicate this
connection. A space-time model is envisaged such that “spatio-temporal” bounded
structures posses spinning motion and translation in space (corresponding to rota-
tion and expansion of the universe respectively). Noting that the dimension of e2/c
is that of angular momentum, we can formulate a direct particle interaction theory
for electromagnetism. The localized space-time structures approximated as isolated
objects are deﬁned to be the particles, e.g. electron and photon. Electron-electron
or electron-photon interaction is a direct particle contact interaction(collision) not
action-at-a-distance, and there is no self ﬁeld associated with them. External elec-
tric or magnetic ﬁelds represent a kind of photon ﬂuid. Two electrons immersed
in such a photon ﬂuid placed a distance apart transmit the disturbance caused by
their spinning motion through the ﬂuid, and inﬂuence each other. This interaction is
therefore not instantaneous. Since this approach is radically diﬀerent than the stan-
dard electromagnetism, there are many open problems in it though some progress
has been made and we refer the reader to[16]. I believe alternative paradigm for
fundamental physics propounded here deserves attention to resolve the debatable
issues such as instantaneous AAD versus ﬁeld theory.

I am gratefull to Dr. R. Smirnov-Rueda for inviting me to write this essay
which proved to be a rewarding experience. Library facility at the Banaras Hindu
University is acknowledged.

Acknowledgments

References

1. Sir Issac Newton, Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and his system
of the world [English translation by A. Motte 1729; Revised translation by F.Cajori]
(C.U.P. 1934).

2. Rohrlich F., Classical Charged Particles (Addison-Wesley 1965).
3. Hoyle F. and Narlikar J.V., “A New Theory of Gravitation”, Proc. R. Soc. A282,

191 (1964).

4. Wheeler J.A. and Feynmann R.P., “Classical Electrodynamics interms of direct Inter-

Particle action”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 425 (1949).

192 S. C. Tiwari

456 (1948).

Vol. 2, 1953).

5. Havas P., “On the Classical Equations of Motion of Point Charges”, Phys. Rev. 74,

6. Whittaker E., A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity (Thomas Nelson

7. Einstein A., The Meaning of Relativity (Methuen & Co. 1956).
8. Tiwari S.C., “Fresh look on Relativistic Time and Life time of an Unstable Parti-
cle”, Proc.of the International Conference on Physical Interpretation of Relativity
Theory (British Society for Philosophy of Science, London 1988); “Reality, Natural Ge-
ometry and Empiricism”, Phys. Essays 2, 313 (1989); “Philosophy of Unobservables
Time and Mind”, Proc. PIRT (BSPS London 1992); “The Nature of Time”, Apeiron
No.12, 17 (1992).

9. Reichenbach H., Axiomatization of the Teory of Relativity, [Translated and Edited

by M. Reichenbach] (Univ. California Press 1969).

10. Bunge M., Foundation of Physics (Springer-Verlag 1967).
11. Dingle H., The Special Theory of Relativity (Methuen & Co. 1959).
12. Tiwari S.C., “On the Origin of Universe”,Proc. Einstein Centenary Symposium,

(Edited by K.Kondo and T.M.Karade (1980).

13. Penrose R., The Emperor’s New Mind (O.U.P. 1989).
14. Godel K., “An Example of A New Type of Cosmological Solutions of Einstein’s Field

Equations of Gravitation” Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 447 (1949).

15. it Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, Edited by P.A. Schilpp (The library of living

Philosophers 1949).

16. Tiwari S.C., Rebirth of the Electron: Electromagnetism (Monograph 1997).

