1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Reconciliation of Electromagnetism and
Gravitation

B.G.Sidharth
Centr for Applicable Mathematics and Computer Sciences
B.M.Birla Science Centre,Hyderabad, 500063,India

Abstract

It is argued that once we consider the underpinning of a Non Com-
mutative geometry, itself symptomatic of extended particles, for ex-
ample in Quantum Superstring theory, then a reconciliation between
gravitation and electromagnetism is possible.

1 Introduction

Despite nearly a century of work, it has not been possible to achieve a uni-
ﬁcation of gravitation and electromagnetism. It must be borne in mind that
the tools used, be it Quantum Theory or General Relativity are deeply en-
trenched in diﬀerentiable space time manifolds (and point particles) - the
former with Minkowski space time and the latter with curved space time.
The challenge has been, as Wheeler noted[1], the introduction of Quantum
Mechanical spin half into General Relativity on the one hand and the intro-
duction of curvature into Quantum Mechanics on the other.
More recent models including Quantum Superstrings on the contrary deal
with extended and not point particles and lead to a non-diﬀerentiable space-
time and a non commutative geometry (NCG)[2, 3, 4, 5].
Indeed way back in the 1930s, Einstein himself observed[6] ”...it has ben
pointed out that the introduction of a space-time continuum may be consid-
ered as contrary to nature in view of the molecular structure of everything
which happens on a small scale. It is maintained that perhaps the success of

1

the Heisenberg method points to a purely algebraic method of description of
nature that is to the elimination of continuous functions from physics. Then
however, we must also give up, by principle the space-time continuum. It is
not unimaginable that human ingenuity will some day ﬁnd methods which
will make it possible to proceed along such a path.”
Even at the beginning of the twentieth century several Physicists including
Poincare and Abraham amongst others were working unsuccessfully with the
problem of the extended electron[7, 8]. The problem was that an extended
electron appeared to contradict Special Relativity, while on the other hand,
the limit of a point particle lead to inexplicable inﬁnities. These inﬁnities
dogged physics for many decades. Infact the Heisenberg Uncertainity Prin-
ciple straightaway leads to inﬁnities in the limit of spacetime points. It was
only through the artiﬁce of renormalization that ’t Hooft could ﬁnally cir-
cumvent this vexing problem, in the 1970s[9].
Nevertheless it has been realized that the concept of spacetime points is only
approximate. We are beginning to realize that it may be more meaningful to
speak in terms of spacetime foam, strings, branes, non commutative geome-
try, fuzzy spacetime and so on[10].
Indeed non commutativity arises if there is a minimum space time length as
shown a long time ago by Snyder[11]. What we will argue below is that once
the underlying non commutative nature of the geometry is recognized then
it is possible to reconcile electromagnetism and gravitation.

2 NCG

It is well known that once we consider non zero minimum space time intervals
or equivalently extended particles as in Quantum Superstrings, then we have
the following non commutative geometry (Cf.refs.[2]-[5],[11]):

[x, y] = 0(l2), [px, py]

2
¯h

0(1)
l2

≈

(1)

(and similar equations) where l, τ are the extensions of the space time coor-
dinates.
In conventional theory the space time coordinates as also the momenta com-
mute amongst themselves unlike in equation (1). It must be observed that
the non commutative relations are self evident, in the sense that xy or yx is

2

each of the order of l2, and so is their diﬀerence because of the non commu-
tativity.
The non commutative or in Witten’s words, Fermionic feature is symptomatic
of the breakdown of the concept of the spacetime points and point particles
at small scales or high energies. As has been noted by Snyder, Witten, and
several other scholars, the divergences encountered in Quantum Field Theory
are symptomatic of precisely such an extrapolation to spacetime points and
which necessitates devices like renormalization. As Witten points out[12],
”in developing relativity, Einstein assumed that the space time coordinates
were Bosonic; Fermions had not yet been discovered!... The structure of
space time is enriched by Fermionic as well as Bosonic coordinates.”
Interestingly it has been shown that the commutative relations (1) lead di-
rectly to the Dirac equation, on the one hand[13]. On the other hand, it
is interesting that a diﬀerential calculus over a non commutative algebra
uniquely determines a gravitational ﬁeld in the commutative limit and that
there is a unique metric which remains as a classical ”shadow” as shown by
Madore[14].
Let us now introduce this eﬀect into the usual distance formula in ﬂat space
ds2 = gµνdxµdxν

(2)

Rewriting the product of the two coordinate diﬀerentials in (2) in terms of
the symmetric and non symmetric combinations, we get

gµν = ηµν + khµν

(3)

0 then equations (1) and also (3) reduce to

where the ﬁrst term on the right side of (3) denotes the usual ﬂat space time
and the second term denotes the eﬀect of the non commutativity, k being a
suitable constant.
It must be noted that if l, τ
the usual formulation.
The eﬀect of the non commutative geometry is therefore to introduce a de-
parture from ﬂat space time, as can be seen from (3).
Infact remembering that the second term of the right side of (3) is small,
this can straightaway be seen to lead to a linearized theory of General
Relativity[15]. Exactly as in this reference we could now deduce the General
Relativistic relation

→

∂λ∂λhµν

(∂λ∂νhµλ + ∂λ∂µhνλ)

−

3

ηµν∂λ∂λh + ηµν∂λ∂σhλσ =

kT µν

−

−

Let us now consider the non commutative relation (1) for the momentum
components. Then, it can be shown using (1) and (3) that[16],

∂
∂xλ

∂
∂xµ −

∂
∂xµ

∂
∂xλ

goes over

to

∂
∂xλ Γν

µν −

∂
∂xµ Γν

λν

Normally in conventional theory the right side of (5) would vanish. Let us
designate this nonvanishing part on the right by

e
c¯h

F µλ

Bl2

¯hc
e

(6) can be written as

∼
where B is the magnetic ﬁeld, if we are to identify F µν with the electromag-
netic tensor[16]. It will be recognized that (7) gives the celebrated expression
for the magnetic monopole, and indeed it has also being shown that a non
commutative space time at the extreme scale throws up the monopole[17, 18].
We have shown here that the non commutativity in momentum components
leads to an eﬀect that can be identiﬁed with electromagnetism and infact
from expression (6) we have

Aµ = ¯hΓµν
ν

where Aµ is the electromagnetic four potential.
Thus non commutativity as expressed in equations (1) generates both grav-
itation and electromagnetism.
We can see this in greater detail as follows. The gravitational ﬁeld equations
can be written as[15]

where

It also follows, if we use the usual gauge and equation (8) that

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

in this linearised theory.
Whence, remembering that we have (3), operating on both sides of equation

2φµν =

kT µν

−

1
2

−

φµν = hµν

ηµνh

∂µhµν = Aν

4

(9) with ∂µ we get Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism.
Indeed this is not surprising because, as is well known equation (8) is math-
ematically identical to the formulation of Weyl[19]. However in Weyl’s for-
mulation, the electromagnetic potential was put in by hand. In the above
case it is a consequeence of the non commutative geometry at small scales,
which again is symptomatic of the spinorial behaviour of the electron, as has
been discussed in detail elsewhere and infact (8) deduced from an alterna-
tive viewpoint[5, 16]. It is also well known that if equation (8) holds then
in the absence of matter th general relativistic ﬁeld equations (4) reduce to
Maxwell equations[20]. In any case, all this provides a rationale for the fact
that from (9) we get the equation for spin 2 gravitons (Cf.ref.[15]) while from
the Maxwell equations, we have Spin 1 (vector) photons.

3 Discussion

1. The characterization of the metric in equations (2) and (3) in terms of sym-
metric and non symmetric components is similar to the torsional formulation
of General Relativity[21]. However in this latter case, there is no contribu-
tion to the diﬀerential interval from the torsional (that is non-commutative)
eﬀects. The non-commutative contribution is given by (1) and herein comes
the extended, rather than point like particle.
In any case the above attempt at uniﬁcation of electromagnetism and grav-
itation had made part headway, but unless the underpinning of a non com-
mutative geometry is recognised, the full signiﬁcance does not manifest itself.
2. We now make the following remarks:
It can be seen from the transition to (3) from (2), that the curvature arises
from the non commutativity of the coordinates. Indeed this is the classical
analogue of a Quantum Mechanical result deduced earlier that the origin
of mass is in the minimum space intervals and the non local Quantum Me-
chanical amplitudes within them as has been discussed in detail in references
cited[22, 23]. In Quantum Superstring theory also, the mass arises out of the
tension of the string in this minimum interval. We see here the convergence
of the Quantum Mechanical and classical approaches once the extension of
particles is recognized.
We also know that the minimum space time intervals are at the Compton
10−5gms, this
scale where the momentum p equals mc. For a Planck mass

∼

5

is also the Planck scale, as in Quantum Superstring theory.
In Snyder’s original work, the commutation relations like (1) hold good out-
side the minimum space time intervals, and are Lorentz invariant. This is
quite pleasing because in any case, even in Quantum Field Theory, we use
Minkowski space time.
3. The above non commutative geometry also holds the key to the mysteri-
ous extra dimensions of Quantum Superstrings. This has been discussed in
detail in references[5, 18]. But to see in a simple way, we note that equation
(1) shows that the coordinates y and z show up as some sort of a momenta,
though with a diﬀerent multiplying constant as the analogue of the Planck
constant. That is instead of the single x momentum, px, we have two extra
momenta, this being the same for the y and z momenta also. This leads to
the well known 9 + 1 dimensions of Quantum superstrings, though because
for all these extra ”momenta”, the multiplying factor, the analogue of the
Planck constant is diﬀerent, so these extra dimensions are supressed or curled
up in the Kaluza-Klein sense.
4. A concept which one encounters in Quantum SuperString theory and more
generally in the presence of the Non commutative geometry (1) is that of Du-
ality. We will brieﬂy examine this now and see its signiﬁcance in relation to
electrodynamic theory. Infact the relation (1) leads to[18],

∆x

∼

¯h
∆p

+ α′ ∆p
¯h

(12)

where α′ = l2, which in Quantum SuperStrings Theory
expression of the duality relation,

∼

10−66. This is an

This is symptomatic of the fact that we cannot go down to arbitrarily small
spacetime intervals, below the Planck scale in this case (Cf.ref.[24]).
There is an interesting meaning to the duality relation arising from (12).
While it appears that the ultra small is a gateway to the macro cosmos, we
could look at it in the following manner. The ﬁrst term of the relation (12)
which is the usual Heisenberg Uncertainity relation is supplemented by the
second term which refers to the macro cosmos.
Let us consider the second term in (12). We write ∆p = ∆Nmc, where
∆N is the Uncertainity in the number of particles, N, in the universe. Also

α′/R

R

→

6

√Nl, the famous Eddington
∆x = R, the radius of the universe which
relationship. It should be stressed that the otherwise emperical Eddington
formula, arises quite naturally in a Brownian characterisation of the universe
as has been pointed out earlier (Cf. for example ref.[25]).
We now get,

∼

Substituting this in the time analogue of the second term of (12), we imme-
diately get, T being the age of the universe,

∆N = √N

T = √N τ

In the above analysis, including the Eddington formula, l and τ are the
Compton wavelength and Compton time of a typical elementary particle,
namely the pion. The equation for the age of the universe is also correctly
given above. Infact in the closely related model of ﬂuctuational cosmology
(Cf. for example ref.[23]) all of the Dirac large number coincidences including
the above Eddington formula as also the mysterious Weinberg formula relat-
ing the mass of the pion to the Hubble constant, follow as a consequence,
and are not emperical. All these relations relating large scale parameters
to microphysical constants were shown to be symptomatic of what has been
called, stochastic holism (Cf. also ref.[5]), that is a micro-macro connection
with a Brownian or stochastic underpinning. Duality, or equivalently, rela-
tion (12) is really an expression of this micro-macro link.
We will now see a curious connection between the foregoing analysis with the
apparently disparate concept of the Feynman-Wheeler action at a distance
theory, which had been quite successful.
Our starting point is the so called Lorentz-Dirac equation[8]:

maµ = F µ

in + F µ

ext + Γµ

where

e
c
and Γµ is the Abraham radiation reaction four vector related to the self force
and, given by

in vv

in =

F µv

F µ

(13)

(14)

Γµ =

e2
c3 ( ˙aµ

2
3

1
c2 aλaλvµ)

−

7

Equation (13) is the relativistic generalisation for a point electron of an
earlier equation proposed by Lorentz, while equation (14) is the relativisitic
generalisation of the original radiation reaction term due to energy loss by
radiation. It must be mentioned that the mass m in equation (13) consists of
a neutral mass and the original electromagnetic mass of Lorentz, which latter
does tend to inﬁnity as the electron shrinks to a point, but, this is absorbed
into the neutral mass. Thus we have the forerunner of renormalisation in
quantum theory.
There are three unsatisfactory features of the Lorentz-Dirac equation (13).
Firstly the third derivative of the position coordinate in (13) through Γµ gives
a whole family of solutions. Except one, the rest of the solutions are run away
- that is the velocity of the electron increases with time to the velocity of
light, even in the absence of any forces. This energy can be thought to come
from the inﬁnite self energy we get when the size of the electron shrinks to
zero. If we assume adhoc an asymptotically vanishing acceleration then we
get a physically meaningful solution, though this leads to a second diﬃculty,
that of violation of causality of even the physically meaningful solutions.
It has been shown in detail elsewhere[7] that these acausal, non local eﬀects
take place within the Compton time.
We now come to the Feynman-Wheeler action at a distance theory[26, 27].
They showed that the apparent acausality of the theory would disappear if
the interaction of a charge with all other charges in the universe, such that
the remaining charges would absorb all local electromagnetic inﬂuences was
considered. The rationale behind this was that in an action at a distance
context, the motion of a charge would instantaneously aﬀect other charges,
whose motion in turn would instantaneously aﬀect the original charge. Thus
considering a small interval in the neighbourhood of the point charge, they
deduced,

F µ

ret =

ret + F µ
F µ

1
2{

+

1
2 {

F µ
ret −

F µ

adv}

adv}
The left side of (15) is the usual causal ﬁeld, while the right side has two
terms. The ﬁrst of these is the time symmetric ﬁeld while the second can
easily be identiﬁed with the Dirac ﬁeld above and represents the sum of
the responses of the remaining charges calculated in the vicinity of the said
charge. Also here we encounter eﬀects within the Compton scale (Cf. ref.[7])
of the rest of the universe. We thus return to the concept from Quantum
Superstring theory, or more generally a theory based on relations like (1) of

(15)

8

extended particles and duality, a manifestation of holism.
5. One could argue that the non commutative relations (1) are an expression
of Quantum Mechanical spin. To put it brieﬂy, for a spinning particle the
non commutativity arises when we go from canonical to covariant position
variables. Zakrzewsk[28] has shown that we have the Poisson bracket relation

xj, xk

=

}

{

1
m2 Rjk, (c = 1),

where Rjk is the spin. The passage to Quantum Theory then leads us back
to the relation (1).
Conversely it was shown that the relations (1) imply Quantum Mechanical
spin[25]. Another way of seeing this is to observe that (1) implies that y =
αˆpy, where α is a dimensional constant viz [T /M] and ˆpy is the analogue of
the momentum, but with the Planck constant replaced by l2. So the spin is
given by

~r
|

×

~p
| ≈

2xpy ∼

2α−1l2 =

−1

1
2  

¯h
m2c2

!

×

h2
m2c2 =

¯h
2

as required.

References

[1] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, ”Gravitation”, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, 1973, pp.819ﬀ.

[2] Y. Ne’eman,

in Proceedings of the First Internatioinal Symposium,
”Frontiers of Fundmental Physics”, Eds. B.G. Sidharth and A. Burinskii,
Universities Press, Hyderabad, 1999, pp.83ﬀ.

[3] E. Witten, Physics Today, April 1996, pp.24-30.

[4] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 11(8), 2000, 1269-1278.

[5] B.G. Sidharth, ”The Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science Publishers, New York, 2001.

[6] A. Einstein in an article in Journal of the Franklin Institute, quoted by
M.S. El Naschie in Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, Vol.10 (2/3), 1999, p.163.

9

[7] B.G. Sidharth, in Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern Physics:
”Pro and Contra” , Eds., A.E. Chubykalo et. al., Nova Science Publish-
ing, New York, 1999.

[8] F. Rohrlich, ”Classical Charged Particles”, Addison-Wesley, Reading,

Mass., 1965.

[9] Gerard ’t Hooft, Proceedings of Fourth Frontiers of Fundamental

Physics, Kluwer Academic, New York, 2001.

[10] A. Kempf, in ”From the Planck Length to the Hubble Radius”, Ed. A.

Zichichi, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2000, p.613-622.

[11] H.S. Snyder, Physical Review, Vol.72, No.1, July 1 1947, p.68-71.

[12] J. Schwarz, M.B. Green and E. Witten, ”SuperString Theory”, Vol.I,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987.

[13] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 11 (2000), p.1269-1278.

[14] J. Madore, IJMPB, 14 (22 & 23), 2000, pp.2419-2425.

[15] C.H. Ohanian, and R. Ruﬃni, ”Gravitation and Spacetime”, New York,

1994, pp.64ﬀ.

Cimento.

[16] B.G Sidharth, ”Gravitation and Electromagnetism”, to appear in Nuovo

[17] T. Saito, Gravitation and Cosmology, 6 (2000), No.22, pp.130-136.

[18] B.G. Sidharth, Proceedings of Fourth Frontiers of Fundamental Physics,

Kluwer Academic, New York, 2001.

[19] B.G. Sidharth, Gravitation and Cosmology, 4 (2) (14), 1998, p.158ﬀ.

[20] P.G. Bergmann, ”Introduction to the Theory of Relativity”, Prentice-

Hall (New Delhi), 1969, p248ﬀ.

[21] P.G. Bergmann, ”Cosmology and Gravitation”, V. De Sabbata (Ed),
NATO ADVANCED STUDY INSTITUTES SERIES (B), Plenum
Press, New York, 1980.

10

[22] B.G. Sidharth, Ind.J.Pure and Appl.Phys., Vol.35, July 1997, pp.456-

471.

[23] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Mod.Phys.A, 13 (15), 1998, p.2599ﬀ.

[24] W. Witten, Physics Today, April 1996, pp.24-30.

[25] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 12(2001), 173-178.

[26] F. Hoyle and J.V. Narlikar, ”Lectures on Cosmology and Action at a

Distance Electrodynamics”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996.

[27] J.A. Wheeler and R.P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys., 17, 157, 1945.

[28] S. Zakrzewski, ”Quantization, Coherent States, and Complex Struc-
tures”, Ed. J.P. Antoine et al., Plenum Press, New York, 1995, p.249ﬀ.

11

