1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

POTENTIAL CONNECTION BETWEEN GRAVITY AND
NUCLEAR FORCE

Shantilal G. Goradia
Graduate student, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46565
e-mail:Shantilalg@juno.com

Abstract

The electromagnetic and gravitational inverse square laws are microscopic approxima-
tions. I suggest that they should be modiﬁed for elementary particles to use the surface-to-
surface separation of the particles rather than the center-to-center separations. For small
particles at macroscopic separations, the ratio between the center-to-center distance D and
the surface-to-surface distance d, D/d, approaches unity. At microscopic separations, this
ratio grows very large. Here I apply this ratio to several microscopic situations and derive the
nuclear coupling constants. I will also discuss some of the implications of this modiﬁcation
to the inverse square law.

1

Introduction

Newtonian gravity encounters issues for microscopic dimensions. As the sizes of two adjoining
identical particles of uniform density tend to zero, the numerator of the force equation
(F = Gm1m2/r2) falls oﬀ as r6. Since the denominator falls oﬀ as r2, the force goes to zero
in the limit of small particles with microscopic separations. Newtonian gravity in this form,
therefore, cannot explain the nuclear binding force.

Physicists have attempted to explain the nuclear force in terms of perturbations to clas-
sical gravity [1]. However, in the end they concluded that a new force, the strong force,
is responsible for nuclear binding. Quantum Chromodynamics was developed, following the
form of Quantum Electrodynamics, to quantify the strong force. Experimentalists and string
theorists faced a yet incomplete task of detecting and incorporating the spin 2 graviton into
a fully quantized and renormalized theory.

We can follow the lead of those who have tried to explain the strong force in terms of
gravity by attempting to modify the classical Newtonian theory of gravity in the case of small
particles. If we use the surface-to-surface separation between these particles to quantify the
gravitational attraction instead of the center-to-center separation, we ﬁnd that the force
between these microscopic particles is the same as before in the limit of large separations
relative to the particle radii. At small separations relative to the particle radii the force
between these same particles grows much larger than classical gravity. We can look at the
eﬀects of making this change in several speciﬁc situations.

2 Modiﬁcation of the inverse square law

For two coupled nucleons (Fig. 1a), I choose the Planck length L = (Gh/c3)0.5 as the surface
separation, as it is the minimum possible spatial distance that makes any sense in physics.
Assuming zero separation distance would imply that the two particles are joined to form one
particle, losing their distinction as separate particles. The diameter of a nucleon is about 1
fm (10−15 meters). The Newtonian gravitatinal force is then FN = Gm2/D2, where D is the
center-to-center distance, ∼ 1 fm. If we select the surface-to-surface separation instead, the
force would become FP = Gm2/d2, with d = L = 10−20 fm. The ratio of these two forces is
D2/d2 = 1040, which is also the strength of the nuclear force relative to gravitation. Strictly

a

b

Nucleon

Nucleon

1 fm

L

.001 fm

Quark

Lepton

L

Figure 1: Pictorial view of gravitational interaction, showing surface and center sepa-
rations (not to scale). L is the Planck length, 10−20 fm. a, Two nucleons at minimum
separation; b, A quark and a lepton, also at minimum separation. The standard
inverse-square law would use the center-to-center distances to calculate the force be-
tween the particles; using the surface-to-surface distance yields a much stonger force
for these separations, equal to the relative strengths of the strong and weak nuclear
forces, respectively.

speaking, the strong force is not purely short range decreasing to a precise zero beyond a
boundary, as illustrated by Rutherford’s scattering experiments, which showed eﬀects from
the strong force at separations of at least 10 fm [2]. As the nucleons are separated, D/d
shrinks, and FP rapidly approaches FN (Fig. 2). At 1000 fm (about the radius of an
atom) the modiﬁed law yields the same results as standard Newtonian gravitation. This
modiﬁcation yields a force with high intensity at short range, rapidly falling oﬀ to a very
low intensity at long range. It meets the boundary values of both gravitation and the strong
force, and suggests that they could be the same interaction. My hypothesis would unify
gravity with the prevailing view that the nuclear force is a scondary eﬀect of the color force.
Einstein also tried to explain nuclear force in terms of gravity [3], but did not use the Planck
length in this way.

For a coupled quark-lepton pair (Fig. 1b), the center separation can be taken to be
∼ 10−3 fm. If we modify Newton’s equation as above, we ﬁnd that the ratio between the
standard and modiﬁed force is 1034. This is the relative strength of the weak nuclear force
compared to gravitation. The weak nuclear force diminishes to standard Newtonian gravity
at a distance of 1 fm, the diameter of the nucleon (Fig. 2). As the surface separation
increases, the weak nuclear force diminishes just like the strong nuclear force. It becomes
immeasurable more rapidly as it is much weaker to start with. It is understandably described
as a contact force. We can also note that for a pair of leptons, which are point-like, there is
no distinction between D and d, and the ratio FP /FN is unity.

We can examine the case of light passing by a nucleon in this manner as well. Einstein
found that the deﬂection of a photon passing by the surface of the sun is θ = 4g′R/c3, where
g′
sun = 28g (g is the acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the earth, 9.8 m/s2) and
R is the radius of the sun. If we ﬁnd g′
nucleon for which θ = θsun(8.5 × 10−6) radians),
we get g′ = 1040g. This is the same as the strength of the strong nuclear force relative to
gravitation, again indicating a qualitative conjectural connection between the strong nuclear
force and gravitation.

In the above calculation nucleon deformation was neglected, and nucleons were treated as
spheres of material. Deformation eﬀects should be small, as they would consist of relatively
small changes in the particle diameters, and the order of magnitude of the ratio should

Figure 2: Ratio of modiﬁed force to Newtonian gravitation as a function of surface
separation for nucleon-nucleon and quark-lepton interactions. The ratio approaches
unity at large surface separations in both cases. Also, for both interactions the ratio
becomes quite large for short separations, reaching 1040 for the nucleon-nucleon inter-
action and 1034 for the quark-lepton interaction in the Planck length separation limit
of 10−20 fm.

stay the same. Quark-to-quark interactions were ignored, because forces between quarks are
qualitatively diﬀerent. Neither quarks nor gluons are observed in isolation. The modiﬁcation
remains consistent with general relativity, although it is not derived from the ﬁeld equations
in conventional mathematical form and ignores time dilation (time dilation eﬀects should be
small in this case). String theory uniﬁed all forces with the exception of gravity in the last
century. The angle of deﬂection for light that was used above is arbitrarily chosen as the
same angle used to predict general relativity, but small changes in the angle will not yield
changes in the order of magnitude of g′
nucleon. The angle was kept conservatively small
because the accuracy of the deﬂection equation at large angles is questionable.

3 Historical perspective

There is reason to believe that Newton had masterminded the insight I am bringing on the
surface, as it is evident from his delay in the publication of his theory of graviation for 20
years. Newton published his theory under pressure from the Royal society. His struggle with
his formula is evident from the following statement in the Principia (Book III, Proposition
8): “After I had found that the force of gravity towards a whole planet did arise from, and
was compounded of the forces of gravity towards all its parts, and towards every one part,
was in the reciprocal proportion of the squares of the distances from the part: I was yet in
doubt, whether that reciprocal duplicate proportion did accurately hold, or but nearly so, in
the total froce compunded of so many partial ones.” [4].

When Rutherford discovered the strong nuclear force in 1919, he proposed this high in-
tensity force to be gravitation [1]. Not being able to describe the force in terms of gravity,
it was decided that high intensity force was due to eﬀects other than gravitation. Gravity’s
weakness is described as the main reason why the strong nuclear force is considered a sep-
arate force. I suggest the strong nuclear force can be explained in terms of modiﬁcation to
Newtonian gravity to the microscopic scale.

4 Conclusion

The inverse-square relationship of the classical Newtonian gravity can be modiﬁed for the
microscopic case. These modiﬁcations lead to the derivation of the nuclear coupling con-
stants as the relative strength of the modiﬁed inverse-square force when the appropriate
particles are in contact (i.e. their separation is minimized). The nuclear coupling constants,
therefore, are expressible as the squares of the sum of the diameters of the involved particles
expressed in Planck lengths. This implies a close connection between gravity and nuclear
forces. The classical description of particles in terms of their diameters is justiﬁed based
on the consistency of the results in deriving coupling constants. My suggestion, that grav-
ity is the cumulative eﬀect of long-range nuclear forces from a large number of particles as
predicted by my modiﬁed equation, has profound potential implications. At least one of
these implications, the possibility that the inverse-square Coulomb’s law should be similarly
modiﬁed, needs to be investigated too.

Combining my hypothesis with the prevailing view that the nuclear force is a secondary
eﬀect of the color force raises a question about the existence of gravitons within the nucleons.

Acknowledgement
I thank F.Weber (http://www.nd.edu/∼fweber) for his comments.

References

[1] Pais, A, Inward Bound, 239–240 (1986).

[2] Elton, L. R. B, Introductory Nuclear Theory, 17 (1966).

[3] Cao, T. Y, The conceptual foundation of quantum ﬁeld theory, 85 (1999).

[4] History of Science Society. Sir Isaac Newton 1727-1927, 184 (1928).

