1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comment on “Multiple scattering in a reﬂecting cavity: Application to ﬁsh counting
in a tank [J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 109, 2587-2597 (2001)]”

Zhen Ye1 and Dezhang Chu2
1Wave Phenomena Laboratory, Department of Physics, National Central University, Chung-li, Taiwan 32054
2Department of Applied Ocean Physics and Engineering, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, Woods Hole, MA 02543
(January 9, 2014)

This paper presents a comment on the recent work on ﬁsh counting in a tank (J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
109, 2587-2597 (2001)). It is pointed out that there are ambiguities with the counting method.

PACS numbers: 43.30.Gv, 43.80.Ev

In a recent paper [1], de Rosny and Roux proposed a
method for counting ﬁsh in a tank, an important issue for
the ﬁsheries community. As far as we know, this is the
ﬁrst published report on counting ﬁsh in a tank. We rec-
ognize that the ﬁsh information may have been detected
by the method. However, in its present form of data
analysis, we believe that the foundations for the analysis
are questionable. As a matter of fact, their approach has
failed to provide reasonable scattering properties of ﬁsh.
The reasons are elaborated below.

(1) The multiple scattering in a reﬂecting cavity. The
basis for the ﬁsh counting method in [1] is described by
Fig. 1 of [1]. The analysis relies on the treatment of
the multiple scattering picture in this ﬁgure. In the con-
text, the authors argued that the eﬀect of the reﬂect-
ing boundaries of a tank can be regarded as mirrors,
and thus acoustic scattering in such a system is regarded
as a medium of scatterers and their images without the
boundaries. The multiple reﬂections make the system
equivalent to a system of inﬁnite size.

The ﬁrst ambiguity in the later development is that
eﬀects from the images of the acoustic sources are not
considered in [1]. Although the images of the sources are
shown in Fig. 1, their possible eﬀects are not discussed
anywhere in [1]. In addition, the reﬂection from the water
surface is not taken into account either. The presence
of the water surface also acts as a mirror, giving rise
to interactions between the scatterers and their images
due to this mirror.
It is worth pointing out that the
water surface acts as a pressure release plane, which has
diﬀerent eﬀects from the presumably total-reﬂecting side
boundaries of the tank.

The second ambiguity lies in the way how the multiple
scattering among the scatterers and the images in Fig. 1
is accounted for, a crucial problem in the analysis. In [1],
the authors wrote down two formulas in Eqs. (1) and (2)
for total and coherent intensity as a result of the multi-
ple scattering; here we note that in [1] Eqs. (1) and (2)
have been mistakenly regarded as the coherent intensity
and incoherent intensity respectively - the detailed infor-
mation about the deﬁnitions of these quantities can be
referred to [2]. With reference to [2], it is ready to ver-
ify that both Eqs. (1) and (2) are actually the results of
the multiple scattering when wave propagates in a cloud
of completely independent random scatterers (Refer to,

e. g. Chapter 14 in [2]).
In the system such as many
scatterers in a reﬂecting cavity, the scatterers and their
images are not independent scatterers. Thus Eqs. (1)
and (2) are not applicable to the present case. There is
a rich body of literature on acoustic scattering by bodies
in the presence of boundaries (e. g. [3–6]). Correlated
scatterers can give rise to interference between multiply
scattered waves that is absent in a group of independent
scatterers. Take the simplest case of an object near a
boundary as example. The multiple scattering from a
scatterer and its image diﬀers from the scattering from
two actual scatterers. This can be easily inferred from,
for example, Ref. [6].

(2) The mathematical derivation. The results of
Ref. [1] rely mainly on its Eq. (4). In writing down this
equation, the authors made the assertion “Eq. (3) can be
written (as Eq. (4)) by changing from a space variable
to a time variable”, then Eq. (4) is obtained. But no de-
tails were given. The derivation from Eq. (3) to Eq. (4)
is mathematically unclear. Eq. (3) denotes how wave is
attenuated after travelling a distance, but Eq. (4) rep-
resents the time evolution of backscattered signals. The
former is a forward propagating process, while the later
is a backscattering process. The link between the two
is not obvious. In fact, the time evolution of backscat-
It
tered signals has been detailed in Chapter 5 of [2].
is not evident how the time series of the ratio between
the coherent and the total backscattered signals can be
represented by a simple equation like Eq. (4).

(3) The experimental results. The method of [1] yields
doubtful scattering properties of ﬁsh. The main goal
of [1] is to obtain accurate total scattering cross section
of ﬁsh. Two ﬁsh species are measured: zebra ﬁsh with
length about 1 cm at 400 kHz and 35 cm long striped bass
at 12.8 kHz. Take the bass ﬁsh as the example. Accord-
ing to [1], the total scattering cross section of the strip
bass is 4πR2 with R ∼ 3.8 cm, leading to σs ∼ 181 cm2.
This value is much larger than what would be expected
for a ﬁsh of 35 cm length. The reasons follow.

First, the total scattering cross section is a computable
quantity. According to the optical theorem [2], the total
cross section can be calculated from the imaginary part
of the forward scattering function of a scatterer

σt = σs + σa =

Im[f (0)],

(1)

4π
k

1

σs ≈ σt =

Im[f (0)].

4π
k

(2)

demic Press, New York, 1997).

[3] J. C. Bertrand and J. W. Young, “Scattering between a
cylinder and a plane”, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 60, 1265-1269
(1976).

[4] G. C. Bishop and J. Smith, “Scattering from an elastic
shell and a rough ﬂuid-elastic interface”, J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 101, 767-788 (1997)

[5] J. A. Fawcett, W. L. J. Fox, and A. Maguer, J. Acoust.

Soc. Am. 104, 3296-3304 (1998).

[6] I. Tolstoy, “Superresonant systems of scatterers. I”, J.

Acoust. Soc. Am. 80, 282-294 (1986).

[7] H. Medwin and C. S. Clay, Acoustical Oceanography, (Aca-

[8] Z. Ye, “On acoustic attenuation by swimblader ﬁsh”, J.

Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 669-672 (1996)

[9] K. G. Foote, “Analysis of empirical observations on the
scattering of sound by encaged aggregations of ﬁsh”, Fish-
eridir. Skr. Ser. Havunders. 16, 422-455 (1978).

where f (0) is the scattering function in the forward scat-
tering direction, σs and σa are the total scattering cross
section and the absorption cross section respectively; the
absorption can be caused by such eﬀects as thermal ex-
change or viscosity of the scatterer. For frequencies above
the resonance of the ﬁsh swimbladder like the cases con-
sidered in [1], the absorption due to the swimbladder is
negligible. Furthermore the acoustic absorption due to
ﬁsh bodies is also negligible. Therefore we have

This applies to scattering by both ﬁsh swimbladders and
ﬁsh bodies. The advances in modelling acoustic scatter-
ing by ﬁsh allow for reasonable estimates of ﬁsh scatter-
ing cross sections. Fish scattering models can be referred
to, e. g., the textbook [7]. Indeed, the optical theorem
has been applied to existing experimental measurements
of various ﬁsh scattering cross sections, yielding encour-
aging agreements [8]. Applying the method in [8], we
estimate that the total scattering cross section for a 35
cm long ﬁsh at 12.8 kHz is around 30 - 40 cm2, depending
on the aspect ratio used in the modelling. This is much
smaller than the value obtained in [1]. It is our experi-
ence that the scattering properties vary only slightly for
diﬀerent ﬁsh species with the same length.

Second, there exist experimental data on acoustic scat-
tering on ﬁsh of similar length. For example, the previous
experiment data on Saithe ﬁsh of 35.1 cm length yields
a total scattering cross section around 30 cm2 [9], in the
same order as the theoretical value [8]. This experiment
was carried out at a frequency higher than 12.8 kHz used
in [1]. From the modelling, this would lead to a slightly
higher value in the total scattering cross section than
that at 12.8 kHz. It is therefore reasonable to conclude
that the total scattering cross section for a 35 cm long
ﬁsh at 12.8 kHz would be in the order of a few tens of
square centimeters, which is considerably smaller than
that obtained in [1].

In conclusion, the method in [1] requires further de-
velopment and elaboration in order to be applicable to
counting ﬁsh in an aquatic tank.

Acknowledgments Dr. P.-G. Luan is thanked for
bringing Ref. [1] to our attention. We thank Dr. Tim
Stanton (WHOI) for useful correspondence. The work
received support from the National Science Council
through a grant to ZY.

[1] J. de Rosny and P. Roux, “Multiple scattering in a re-
ﬂecting cavity: Application to ﬁsh counting in a tank”, J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 109, 2587-2597 (2001).

[2] A. Ishimaru, Wave propagation and scattering in random
media, (Academic Press, New York, 1978), Vols. I and II.

2

