1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

P.S.Isaev

”On New Physical Reality”
(on Ψ–ether)

It is shown that there exists a new physical reality – the Ψ–ether. All the achievements
of quantum mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory are due to the fact that both the theories
include the inﬂuence of Ψ–ether on the physical processes occurring in the Universe.

Physics of the XXth century was ﬁrst of all the physics of Ψ–ether.

Introduction

”. . . When you follow any of our physics too far,
you ﬁnd that it always gets in some kind of trouble. . . ”
(R.Feynman, R.Leighton, M.Sanders ”Feynman lectures
on physics”, vol. II, p.28–1, Addison–Wesley Publish-
ing Company, INC. Reading, Massachusetts. Palo Alto.
London, 1964)
”. . . There are so many things about elementary particles
that we still don’t understand. . . ” (ibid, p.28–5).

As soon as the Einstein special theory of relativity was created, the existence of the
Maxwell–Lorentz ether was no longer discussed. The world scientiﬁc community accepted
the Einstein point of view: ”There is no room for the ether in the special relativity”. At
school lessons and university courses of physics departments, children and students were
taught during the XXth century that the Maxwell–Lorentz ether does not exist, and there
exist only ”ﬁelds” in vacuum. However, many physicists including the world famous ones
(Dirac, Schwinger) have not eliminated the possibility for ether to exist.

Dirac in the paper ”The evolution of the physicist’s picture of nature” [1] makes a series
of critical remarks concerning the modern physics. He considers that : 1) The requirement
of four-dimensional symmetry of the world is not obligatory. ”A few decades ago, it seemed
quite certain that one had to express the whole of physics in four-dimensional form. But
now it seems, that four-dimensional symmetry is not of such overriding importance, since
the description of nature sometimes gets simpliﬁed when one departs from it”; 2) ”We are
led to a theory that does not predict with certainty what is going to happen in the future
but gives us information only about the probability of occurrence of various events. This
giving up of determinacy has been a very controversial subject, and some people do not
like it at all. Einstein in particular never liked it. Although Einstein was one of the great
contributors to the development of quantum mechanics, he still was rather hostile to the
form that quantum mechanics evolved into during his lifetime and that it still retains”; 3)
”Everyone is agreed on the formalism. It works so well that nobody can aﬀord to disagree
with it. But still the picture that we are to set up behind this formalism is a subject of
controversy” 4) ”The physics of the future, of course, cannot have the three quantities ¯h,
e and c all as fundamental quantities. Only two of them can be fundamental, and the
third must be derived from those two”. In Dirac’s opinion, the quantities e and c will
remain fundamental quantities, and the quantity ¯h will be expressed via e and c; 5) ”I am

1

inclined to suspect that the renormalization theory is something that will not survive in
the future, and that the remarkable agreement between its results and experiment should
be looked on as a ﬂuke”.

Further Dirac writes: ”I might perhaps discuss some ideas I have had about how one
can possibly attack some of these problems. None of these ideas has been worked out
very far, and I do not have much hope for anyone of them . . . ”.

I) ”. . . One of these ideas is to introduce something corresponding to the luminiferous
ether which was so popular among the physicists of the 19th century . . . When I talk
about reintroducing the ether, I do not mean to go back to the picture of the ether that
one had in the 19th century, but I do mean to introduce a new picture of the ether that
will conform to our present ideas of quantum theory” . . .

II) ”The picture I propose goes back to the idea of Faraday lines . . . We can suppose
that the continuous distribution of Faraday lines o forces that we have in the classical
picture is replaces by just a few discrete lines of force with no lines of force between them
. . . We can picture the lines of force as strings” . . .

III)”I might mention a third picture with which I have been dealing lately. It involves
departing from the picture of the electron as a point and thinking of it as a kind of sphere
with a ﬁnite size”. . .

Schwinger also tries to revive the idea of the ether. As an epigraph to the paper
”A Magnetic model of matter”[2], Schwinger takes a quotation from ”The Mathemati-
cal Principles of Natural Philosophe” by Newton: ”And now we might add something
concerning a certain most subtle spirit, which pervades and lies hid in all gross bodies”.
Schwinger assumes dual-charged particles as a basis of the magnetic model of matter.
And, perhaps, Schwinger considered it possible to construct the Newton ether mentioned
in the epigraph to his paper from ”dyons”—elementary constituents of magnetic matter.
This attempt by Schwinger demonstrates him being dissatisﬁed with the state of physical
theory at his time.

How was the ether conceived at the end of the XIXth century? A rather complete idea
of it was given by Maxwell. He said [3]: ”The vast interplanetary and interstellar regions
will no longer be regarded as waste places in the universe, which the Creator has not seen
ﬁt to ﬁll with the symbols of the manifold order of His kingdom. We shall ﬁnd them
to be already full of this wonderful medium; so full that no human power can remove it
from the smallest portion of space, or produce the slightest ﬂaw in its inﬁnite continuity.
It extends unbroken from star to star; and when a molecule of hydrogen vibrates in the
dog-star, the medium receives the impulses of these vibrations; and after carrying them
in its immense bosom for three years , delivers them in due course, regular order, and full
tale into the spectroscope of Mr. Huggins, at Tulse Hill.

But the medium has other functions and operations besides bearing light from man
to man, and from world to world, and giving evidence of the absolute unity of the metric
system of the universe. Its minute parts may have rotatory as well as vibratory motions,
and the axes of rotation form those lines of magnetic force which extend in unbroken
continuity into regions which no eye has seen, and which, by their action on our magnets,
are telling us in language not yet interpreted, what is going on in the hidden underworld
from minute to minute and from century to century”.

In the paper ”Ether” [4], Maxwell wrote: ”. . . Ether is a material substance of a
more subtle kind than visible bodies, supposed to exist in those parts of space which are
apparently empty . . . Newton himself, however, endeavoured to account for gravitation by

2

diﬀerences of pressure in an ether (see Art. Attraction*, Vol. III, p. 64); but he did not
publish his theory, ”because he was not able from experiment and observation to give a
satisfactory account of this medium, and the manner of its operation in producing the
chief phenomena of nature.” . . . We therefore conclude that light is not a substance but
a process going on in a substance, the process going on in the ﬁrst portion of light being
always the exact opposite of the process going on in the other at the same instant, so that
when the two portions are combined no process goes on at all”.

In the Maxwell opinion, the ether possesses elasticity, hardness, ﬁnite density, but it
is diﬀerent from the usual matter. The vibrations of light are transverse. ”. . . We know
that the ether transmits transverse vibrations to very great distances without sensible
loss of energy by dissipation . . . If there is any motion of rotation, it must be a rotation
of very small portions of the medium each about its own axis, so that the medium must
be broken up into a number of molecular vortices . . . ” [5].

So, according to Maxwell, ”the unity of the metric system of the universe” is insepara-
ble from the idea of the ether he has introduced: the ether is functioned as a carrier of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld, and possibly, of the gravitational ﬁeld, and light is not a substance
but a process going on in a substance. . . and if there is any motion of rotationin the ether
it must be a rotation of very small portions of the medium each about its own axis, so
that the medium must be broken up into a number of molecular vortices.

However, the Michelson experiments (1881) and the Michelson–Morli experiments
(1885–1887) [M; M–M] have shown that there is no ”ether wind” when the Earth moves
through the ether, and it turned out to be impossible to reveal the motion of the Earth
through the ether with an accuracy up to terms V 2
c2 where V is the velocity of the Earth,
and c is the velocity of light. A poetic picture of the ether presented by Maxwell was
either a failure or required a serious theoretical substantiation.
In order to make the
hypothesis of stationary ether be consistent with the negative result of the experiments
[M; M–M] Fitzgerald and Lorentz put forward the hypothesis of contraction of bodies in
the direction of their motion by a factor

1 − V 2
c2 .
In 1895 [6], Lorentz said that this hypothesis is not so strange may if we assume that
molecular forces are also transferred through the ether. The form and sizes of a solid
body are ultimately conditioned by the strength of molecular interactions, so the sizes be
changed in this case; therefore, from a theoretical point of view, there are no objections
against this hypothesis.

q

In 1905, Poincare wrote that Lorentz considered it necessary to supplement his hy-
pothesis so that the postulate of relativity hold valid also in the presence of other forces in
addition to magnetic ones. According to Lorentz, all the forces irrespective of their origin,
owing to the Lorentz transformation (and, consequently, owing to translational motion),
It turned out necessary to
behave just in the same way as electromagnetic forces do.
examine this hypothesis more carefully and to investigate which changes are introduced
by it in the laws of gravity.

If propagation of the gravitational forces occurs with the velocity of light, this cannot
be a result of any random circumstances, this should rather be conditioned by one of the
functions of the ether, and then, there arises the problem of a deeper investigation of the
nature of that function and to connect it with other properties of the either [7].

Poincare also wrote that the Fitzgerald–Lorentz hypothesis seem strange at ﬁrst sight.
All we can say at present in favor of it is that it is an immediate expression of the Michelson
experimental results if we determine distances by the time necessary for light for them

3

being covered.

It is impossible to get out of impression that the relativity principle is a universal law
of the nature. We can never discover anything except for relative velocities. By this I
mean not only the velocities of bodies with respect to the ether, but also the velocities of
bodies with respect to each other [8].

In 1912, in the paper ”Hypothesis of quanta”, Poincare wrote that none of experiments
can reveal whether a body is at rest or in absolute motion with respect to the absolute
space or with respect to the ether [9].

So, Newton, Faraday, Fizeau, Maxwell, Lorentz, Poincare, Plank, and others (I cannot
cite all the names, of course) considered the ether to be a real substance in their studies.
Poincare proved the group properties of Lorentz transformations; Minkowski intro-
duced the 4-dimensional space–time. In this way, there arose the relativistic representa-
tion of basic laws, Lagrangians, and equations of motion (and even the relativistic form
of calculations) in modern theory. Relativity arose and was substantiated on the basis of
existence of the ether.

The Einstein special theory of relativity disclaims the existence of the ether. In 1905,
Einstein in the paper ” On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies” wrote [10]: ”. . . the un-
successful attempts to discover any motion of the earth relatively to the ”light medium,”
suggest that the phenomena of electrodynamics as well as of mechanics possess no prop-
erties corresponding to the idea of absolute rest. They suggest rather that, as has already
been shown to the ﬁrst order of small quantities, the same laws of electrodynamics and
optics will be valid for all frames of reference for which the equations of mechanics hold
good. (The precading memoir by Lorentz was not at this time known to the author.) We
will raise this conjecture (the purport of which will hereafter be called the ”Principle of
Relativity”) to the status of a postulate, and also introduce another postulate, which is
only apparently irreconcilable with the former, namely, that light is always propagated in
empty space with a diﬁnite velocity c which is independent of the state of motion of the
emitting body. These two postulates suﬃce for the attainment of a simple and consistent
theory of the electrodynamics of moving bodies based on Maxwell’s theory for stationary
bodies. The introduction of a ”luminiferous ether” will prove to be superﬂuous inasmuch
as the view here to be developed will not require an ”absolutely stationary space” provided
with special properties. . . ”

It is appropriate to accompany this statement with the question: How one can con-
struct the dynamics of moving bodies on the basis of the Maxwell theory for bodies at
rest if in special theory of relativity there is no deﬁnition of a body at rest?

At the same time, Einstein said that the absolute space in the Newton mechanics is
just the ether and that only by introducing the conception of ether as absolute space, one
can distinguish the uniform linear motion from the accelerated, rotational motion.

Then, one more question arises: The relativistic mechanics in the limit of small ve-
locities reduces to the Newton mechanics. Which is the origin of the ether recognized by
Einstein in the Newton theory if special theory of relativity disclaims its existence?

Einstein said the inﬂuence of the ether in the Newton theory is included into the
formulation of laws of the Newton dynamics,and therefore, the space according to Newton
turned out to be absolute and empty. Analogous situation arose with including the ether
into the second postulate of special relativity about constancy of the ”velocity c which is
independent of the state of motion of a emitting body”, and the ether turned out to be
unnecessary , and the space became empty.

4

It is to be stressed that Einstein was not an opponent of the ether.

In his speech
”Ether and relativity theory” at the Leiden university on May 5, 1920, on the occasion
of his election as honorary Professor, he said that the recognition of the fact that the
empty space is not uniform and isotropic in physical aspects forces us to describe its state
with ten functions— gravitational potentials qµν. However in doing so, the notion of the
ether again acquires a deﬁnite content that is completely diﬀerent from the content of the
concept of the mechanical theory of light. The ether of general relativity is a medium
that is deprived of all mechanical and kinematic properties, but at the same time, deﬁnes
mechanical (and electromagnetic) processes. Also, he said that we know that it deﬁnes
metric relations in the space–time continuum (see ref. [11]).

So, we are faced with two points of view:
1) Lorentz and Poincare think that the Lorentz transformations are an immediate
expression of the Michelson experimental results if distances are deﬁned by the time
necessary for light to cover them. So, the Lorentz transformations reﬂect the properties
of a medium in which light propagates and include the inﬂuence of the medium (ether)
on physical properties occurring in the Universe.

2) In special theory of relativity it is considered that there is no ether, but there is
an empty space, and that light in vacuum always propagates with a deﬁnite velocity c
independent of the state of motion of a emitting body. As we see, this postulate of special
theory of relativity expresses in words the physical content of the Lorentz transformations
published earlier.

From comparison of these points of view it follows that the relativistic form of writing
all the laws and equations of elementary particle physics can be considered, on the one
hand, as a way of including the inﬂuence of the ether on physical processes occurring in
microcosm, but, on the other hand, since the inﬂuence of the ether is taken into account
in the process of relativization of formulae, then it is as though the ether is absent, it does
not exist , as special theory of relativity states.

In this paper, I advocate the thesis that the ether as a physical reality does exist, show
how the inﬂuence of the ether entered into formulae of quantum mechanics and quantum
ﬁeld theory, and construct a model of the real Ψ–ether.

The model of the Ψ–ether I proposed here satisﬁes modern requirements of quantum
ﬁeld theory, as was said by Dirac. The Ψ–ether is deﬁned as the Bose–Einstein condensate
of neutrino–antineutrino pairs of the Copper type.

How can one arrive at this deﬁnition? The Klein–Gordon relativistic equations for a
scalar particle with mass m without interaction (or, as it is written in books at present,
in vacuum - emptiness) are of the form:

where

¯h2∇2 −
(cid:16)

¯h2
c2

∂2
∂t2 − m2c2

Ψ(x, t) = 0 ,

∇2 =

∂2
∂x2 +

∂2
∂y2 +

∂2
∂z2 ; ✷ ≡

∂2
∂y2 +

∂2
∂z2 −

∂2
c2∂t2

(cid:17)
∂2
∂x2 +

The equation for a vector ﬁeld for a particle with mass m is written in the same form,

but Ψ(x, t) is now a multicomponent function.

Since I assert that any relativistic equation for a free particle with mass m should be
understood not as an equation in vacuum but as an equation for a particle with mass m

5

in the ether, then setting the mass m equal to zero, we obtain the simplest equation for
the ether described by the scalar function Ψ(x, t):

¯h2
"

 

∂2
∂x2 +

∂2
∂y2 +

∂2
∂z2 !

−

¯h2
c2

∂2
∂t2 #

Ψ(x, t) = 0.

(1)

Hence, it is clear why I call my model of the ether the model of Ψ –ether: ﬁrst,
in a language conventional for physicists, the ether is described by the Ψ(x, t) -function;
second, as we will see below, the Ψ–ether diﬀers in its properties from the Lorentz–Maxwell
ether, and it is necessary to supply it with a special name.

Consider the case of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. We denote the strengths of electric and
magnetic ﬁelds, respectively, by ~E and ~H[12]. If we introduce the vector ~A and scalar ϕ
potentials with the use of the relations:

and make use of the Lorentz condition

then the potentials ~A and ~ϕ, as it is known, obey the equations

~H = rot ~A

~E = −

− qradϕ,

∂ ~A
∂t

1
c

div ~A +

1
c

∂ϕ
∂t

= 0,

✷ ~A = ∇2 ~A −

✷ϕ = ∇2ϕ −

1
c2
1
c2

∂2 ~A
∂t2 = 0
∂2ϕ
∂t2 = 0 .

✷ ~A = 0;

~E = −

div ~A = 0; ϕ = 0;
∂ ~A
∂t

~H = rot ~A.

;

1
c

In limits of the Lorentz gauge (3), the scalar potential can be taken zero. Then the
charge-independent part of the potentials ~A and ϕ is determined by the equation:

The system of equations (5) turns out to be completely equivalent to the Maxwell–
Lorentz equations. In this case, the general solution of equations (5) is given by a super-
position of transverse waves [12].

The vector ~A and scalar ϕ potentials for a more symmetric representation can be
combined into one four-dimensional vector Ψi. Then equations (4) are written in the
form:

I deﬁne these equations as equations for the real Ψ–ether.

✷Ψi(x, t) = 0.

6

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

I would like to emphasize something unusual in the transition from the Maxwell equa-
tions to the equations for electromagnetic potentials ~A and ϕ, i.e., to equation (6) for the
Ψ–ether.

No attention is paid in any textbook or monograph to the fact that introducing auxil-
iary electromagnetic potentials ~A and ϕ by formulae (2), we equate physical observables
~H and ~E to nonphysical auxiliary functions ~A and ϕ. This is impermissible in physics! If
one hand-side of an equation contains a physical observable, the other should also contain
a physical observable.

As a matter of fact, the potentials ~A and ϕ in relation (2) describe a physical reality—it

is the Ψ–ether, and this physical reality is observable.

The Klein–Gordon operator can be represented as a product of two commuting matrix

operators

− m
(cid:17)
and in order that the ﬁeld function obey the Klein–Gordon equation

+ m
(cid:17)

Xδ (cid:16)

Iαβ(✷ − m2) =

αδ

(cid:16)

δβ

iγn ∂
∂xn

iγk ∂
∂xk

(✷ − m2)Ψ = 0,

we can require that it satisfy also one of the ﬁrst-order equations

iγn ∂
∂xn

 

+ m

Ψ = 0

or

!

iγn ∂
∂xn

 

− m

Ψ = 0.

!

(a)

(b)

Equations (b) are less general than equation (a), and though any solution of one of
equations (b) satisﬁes equation (a), the reverse does not hold.

A common property of all solutions of the Klein–Gordon equation corresponding to
single-valued representations of the Lorentz group is that the corresponding particles
possess integer spins (0 1, ...). Particles with a half-integer spin are described by a
spinor representation [13]. Putting m = 0 in equations (b), we derive equations for the
neutrino–antineutrino ﬁeld. So, returning to relations (2) and (6), we can assert that the
electromagnetic potentials are not merely auxiliary functions, but they are connected by
deﬁnite relations with the physical reality - Ψ–ether–by neutrino-antineutrino pairs.

The Ψ–ether forms a superconducting medium ﬁlling the whole world space, does not
manifest itself in the heat capacity of bodies, permits propagation of transverse waves (it
is a carrier of electromagnetic waves) and of spinor and boson waves (it is their carrier),
does not prevent the motion of elementary particles,nuclei, and cosmic bodies including
stars in the world space. We are fairly aware of that the neutrino (a neutrino wave)
penetrates the thicknesses of stars, the Sun, and the Earth without essential change of
It can be assumed that the scalar component of the
the direction and energy losses.
Ψ–ether serves as a transmitter of gravitational forces. We can add to all said above that
a continuous oscillating system is dynamically equivalent to a set of harmonic oscillators.
There is the Weyl–Kurant theorem: If the wavelength is small as compared to linear sizes
of an oscillating system, and limiting conditions are uniform, the frequency spectrum does
not depend on a particular form of limiting conditions and on the shape of a cavity.

The model of Ψ–ether as a continuous oscillating system obey the conditions of the
Weyl–Kurant theorem, and the Ψ–ether can, in principle, be considered as a set of har-
monic oscillators.

7

Now, let us point to an indissoluble connection of the Ψ–ether with quantum mechan-

ics.

Let us recall how the problem of a hydrogen atom is solved in quantum mechanics.
When the potential energy V (~r) is time-independent and spherically symmetric, so that
V (~r) depends only on the absolute value r of vector ~r the solution to the schr¨oedinger
wave equation

− i¯h

= −

∇2Ψ + V (~r, t)Ψ

∂Ψ
∂t

¯h2
2m

is derived by separating the variables

Ψ(~r, t) = u(~r)f (t)

u(~r) = u(r, θ, ϕ) = R(r)Y (θ, ϕ).

Since the problem of a hydrogen atom is considered as the problem of two-body interaction
(a proton and an electron) and is solved with the purpose to ﬁnd out stationary states
with a constant value of energy E, so that Ψ(x, t) = Ce−i Et
¯h , where C is a normalization
constant, then for the functions R(r) and Y (θ, ϕ) from equation (7) we derive the following
equations [14]:

1
sin θ

1
r2

d
dr

∂
∂θ
r2 dR
dr

(cid:16)

sin θ

+

∂Y
∂θ

1
sin2 θ

∂2Y
∂ϕ2

+λY = 0

(cid:17)

+

2µ
¯h2 [E − V (r)] −

λ
r2

R = 0

o

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

n

where λ is the constant of separation of variables in the functions R(r) and Y (θ, ϕ), µ is

the reduced mass of the system of proton (p) + electron (e); E is the energy of a level for
the bound state p + e (E < 0), V (r) is the potential energy of proton–electron interaction
equal to e2

r . Equation (9) is also solved by separating the variables

as a result of which, we arrive at the equations

Y (θ, ϕ) = Θ(θ)Φ(ϕ),

∂2Φ(ϕ)
∂ϕ2 + νΦ(ϕ) = 0

1
sin θ

d
dθ

sin θ

∂Θ(θ)
∂θ

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

ν
sin2 θ

(cid:17)

+

λ −

Θ(θ) = 0

The solution for Φ(ϕ) is of the form

Φm(ϕ) =

eimϕ;

ν = m2

1
2π

(the value of ”m” can be any integer positive or negative number); and physically admis-
sible solutions to the equation for the function Θ(θ) are those that satisfy the conditions

λ = l(l + 1)

8

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

|m| ≤ l.

These solutions are expressed through Θ(θ) the associated Legendre polynomials. In the
end, the radial part R(r) of the Schr¨oedinger equation obeys the following equation:

1
r2

d
dr

r2 dR
dr

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

+

2µ
¯h2

e2
r

R(r) +

2µ
¯h2 ER(r) −

l(l + 1)

r2 R = 0

(13)

Here, I draw attention to one of the critical moments of quantum mechanics.

The radial equation (13) is one-dimensional in which the potential energy V (r) is

dependent on two parts

e2
r

2µ
¯h2

V (r) = +

l(l + 1)
r2
If the term ∼ e2
r is responsible for the Coulomb interaction of a proton with an electron in
a hydrogen atom, the second term l(l+1)
r2 does not depend on any physical interaction. The
latter term originates from angular variables of the wave function. Nevertheless, Schiﬀ
wrote: ”The additional ”potential energy” can be seen physically to be connected with
the angular momentum” [14].

(14)

−

.

However, if one puts the Coulomb interaction e2

so that there is no interaction between a proton and an electron, the term l(l+1)
disappear, and it makes no sense to relate its origin with the angular momentum.

r in the radial equation (13) to be zero,
r2 does not

In fact, the term l(l+1)

r2

appears in equation (13) because of its Ψ–ether origin. To

verify this, let us turn to the theory of wave guides.

Let us consider the problem of ﬁnding the natural electromagnetic vibrations of a

hollow sphere resonator [15].

For the Borgnis function U(r, θ, ϕ), we can write the equation

∂2U
∂r2 +

1
r2 sin θ "

∂
∂θ

sin θ

+

∂U
∂θ

∂
∂ϕ

1
sin ϕ

∂U
∂ϕ #

+ k2U = 0.

(15)

The Borgnis function is connected by deﬁnite relations with the electric ~E and magnetic
~M ﬁelds, and when it obeys equation (15), the Maxwell equations hold also valid. On the
other hand, the function U is connected by deﬁnite relations with the potentials ~A and
ϕ, i.e. with the Ψ–ether. Solution to equation (15) is derived like in quantum mechanics
by the method of separation of variables:

U(r, θ, ϕ) = F1(r)F2(θ, ϕ)

(I keep the notation from the monograph by de Broglie deliberately.) The functions

F1(r) and F2(θ, ϕ) satisfy the equations

1
sin θ

∂
∂θ

sin θ

∂F2
∂θ

+

1
sin2 θ

∂2F2
∂ϕ2 + γF2 = 0

r2 ∂2F1

∂r2 + k2r2F1 − γF1 = 0

(16a)

(16b)

9

In the problem, we consider electromagnetic waves harmonic in time and characterized

either by the frequency ν

or by the wave vector

ν =

kc
2π

k =

2πν
c

,

[k] =

1
cm

Equation (16b) contains the quantity k2, the quantity γ in equation (16a)—the con-

stant of separation of variables.

Equation (16a) completely coincides with equation (9), and solutions of eq. (16a) are
spherical functions. The regular solution of equation (16b) for all Θ and ϕ exists only
when γ = n(n + 1). Thus, equation (16b) assumes the form

d2F1
dr2 +

k2 −
h

n(n + 1)
r2

F1 = 0
i

If we set F1(r) = rf (r), equation (17) is written in the form

d2f
dr2 +

2
r

df
dr

+

k2 −
h

n(n + 1)
r2

i

f (r) = 0.

Upon simple computations, equation (13) from quantum mechanics can be written as
follows:

d2R
dr2 +

2
r

dR
dr

+

2µE
¯h2 +

2µe2
¯h2r

 

−

l(l + 1)

r2 !

R = 0.

If we put the term in (19) responsible for the Coulomb interaction of a proton with an

= 2µe2
 

¯h2r !

electron

the form

equal to zero and replace E by E = p2

2µ, equation (19) is rewritten in

2
r

d2R
dr2 +
2µp2
2µ¯h2 =

 

+

k2 −

l(l + 1)

dR
dr
k2¯h2
¯h2 = k2, k − wave vektor

r2 !

R = 0

.
!

 

Equations (18) and (20) are identical and are solved under the same boundary condi-
tions: like in quantum mechanics, a solution to eq. (18) is sought for f (r) such that f (r)
be a ﬁnite function as r → 0, and when r → ∞ the function f (r) → 0 (on the boundary
of a sphere). The corresponding solutions to equation (18) describe standing waves inside
the sphere at values

n = 0, 1, 2...,

m ≤ n.

Since electromagnetic waves are nothing else than oscillations of the Ψ–ether, the
in equation (18) is responsible for standing waves of the Ψ–ether in a sphere

term n(n+1)
r2
resonator.

10

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

Thus, we conclude that the problem of ﬁnding the energy levels in a hydrogen atom
with the use of the Schr¨oedinger equation is in physical content equivalent to the problem
of ﬁnding natural electromagnetic oscillations inside a sphere resonator; one of the basic
postulates of quantum mechanics—quantization of orbits in a hydrogen atom (the Bohr
postulate mvr = nh
2π )—is equivalent to the determination of conditions for existence of
standing waves of the Ψ–ether in a sphere resonator.

We see that quantum mechanics is equivalent to ”mechanics” of the Ψ–ether. The
equation for the Ψ–ether is directly connected with the Maxwell equations. The relativistic
form of the equation for Ψ–ether is in all the equations of elementary particle physics and
in all the Lagrangians of quantum ﬁeld theory. So, the physics of XXth century has been
physics of the Ψ–ether. The genius of Maxwell anticipated almost all properties of the
ether but that the ether consists of neutrino–antineutrino pairs (ν ˜ν– pairs). However, we
know that the neutrino was discovered experimentally only in 1953–1956 by Raines and
Coen. Especially surprising is the Maxwell genius prevision in the following aspects:

1) Smallest parts of this medium can have not only oscillatory motions but also rota-
tional ones, the axes of rotation being the corresponding magnetic lines of force. If there
exists the rotational motion, it should be the rotation of very small parts of the medium,
each around its own axis, so that the medium should disintegrate into a great number of
molecular vortices. At present, we know that the neutrino has spin ¯h
2 , so that the Maxwell
prediction is justiﬁed.

2) ”. . . We therefore conclude that light is not a substance but a process going on
in a substance, the process going on in the ﬁrst portion of light being always the exact
opposite of the process going on in the other at the same instant, so that when the
two portions are combined no process goes on at all”. Indeed, the decay of a ”Ψ–ether
molecule” consisting of a Cooper ν ¯ν-pair in the simplest case completely corresponds to
the Maxwell description in which, instead of light, one should mean physical properties
of the ν ¯ν-pair.

Schwinger in paper [2] called the fundamental dual-charged particle introduced by him
the ”dyon”. By analogy, I propose to call the neutrino–antineutrino pair the ”psyon” and
use it in what follows.

3) The Ψ–ether being a homogeneous medium ensures the unity of measure and num-

ber in the Universe, which cannot be done by various ﬁelds of quantum ﬁeld theory.

Now, we need not develop the picture of the world constructed in the framework of the
Standard Model. We construct another picture of the world. The whole visible known
Universe is immersed in the all-embracing and all-penetrating Ψ–ether and lives, and
develops according to its laws. The Ψ–ether is an abyss in which the known physical world
negligible as compared to the ether is immersed. Which are the relations between these
two worlds—our physical world and the Ψ-ether—and which is the interaction between
them are still open questions to be solved in the new century or new millenium.

The world consisting of protons, electrons and neutrinos is stable, we see it and study
it. In particular, we study the neutrino with the help of the neutron and unstable particles.
We do not see the world composed only of neutrinos, but it can be supposed that it is
inﬁnite and diverse.

Until now, only a small part of the Ψ–ether properties is observed;

in particular,
they can be seen in the phenomena of superﬂuidity and superconductivity. The Ψ–ether
takes part in formation of all the chemical elements in the Universe, in production of all
unstable elementary particles, in the formation and possibly spontaneous appearance of

11

life on the Earth, brings back the energy, momentum, angular momentum that it obtains
from our physical world—we do not observe violation of the conservation laws of these
quantities.
If the state of the ether surrounding us changes, then our physical world
immersed in it should also change so that to remain in a certain ”equilibrium” state with
the ether. If parts, maybe giant, of the Ψ–ether possess various energy states, and our
Solar system can pass from one layer of the Ψ–ether to another, then in the vicinity of
the Solar system including the Earth, there can occur dramatic phenomena of global rise
or fall of temperature of the climate, which can result in the change of forms of life on
the Earth, in heating or cooling the Earth itself, etc.

Restoration of the Ψ–ether to its rights after its ”expulsion” from physics in special
theory of relativity allows us to answer some critical question posed earlier by Einstein
and de Broglie:

1. The dualism ”wave–particle” vanishes. The function Ψ that describes, in modern
language, a ”free” particle is actually a wave function of the particle with take into account
its motion through the ether; wave processes in the ether accompanying a moving particle
determine ”wave properties” of the particle, and when the particle collides, for instance
with a thin metallic ﬁlm, they generate a diﬀraction pattern. It is not surprising that
the probability of ﬁnding a particle (an electron, a proton, etc.) after a collision with a
metallic ﬁlm is deﬁned by the square of the ether wave function Ψ–ether (i.e. |Ψ(x, t)|2),
by analogy with light whose intensity is given by the amplitude squared.

2. The very essence of all world processes is now deﬁned by the Ψ–ether interaction.
All electromagnetic processes are proportional to an integer value of the Planck constant ¯h,
since an electromagnetic wave in the Ψ–ether theory is described by the vector component
of the Ψ–ether.

3. The plane–wave solution

Ψ ∼ e

i
¯h (Et−~k~x)

should not be interpreted within the Born statistical approach, as it was said in p.1.
The particle remains localized in the wave, as de Broglie supposed, and thus, the princi-
ple of determinism is restored on what insist Einstein. Theoretical physics returns to the
possibility of the Einstein description of a single system rather than an artiﬁcial ensem-
ble of single systems. De Broglie wrote that prominent scientists Planck, Einstein, and
Schroedinger, who belong to founders and pioneers of quantum theory from the moment of
its creation, always rejected the purely probabilistic interpretation that was subsequently
acquired by quantum physics.

De Broglie said that he was disappointed with the reaction, to his theory, of other
physicists–theorists seduced by the purely probabilistic interpretation of Born, Bohr, and
Heisenberg, refused his attempt, and in subsequent years adhered to the generally accepted
interpretation [16].

4. One more prediction by Einstein was realized: The Nature does not require our
choice between quantum and wave theory, it only requires the synthesis of these theories,
In the proposed model of the Ψ–ether this
which is not yet achieved by physicists.
synthesis is obtained.

Acknowledgment of the Ψ–ether allows a new look onto a series of physical phenomena
in microcosm and astrophysics, extends the understanding of physical, chemical, and
biological processes in the Nature, and points to some limits of our cognition.

1. The relict radiation can now be interpreted as age–long luminescence of a weakly

12

excited world Ψ–ether, or in other words, as eternal oscillations of psyons forming the
ether.

2. Equations of the type ✷Ψi = 0 (a) and (✷ − µ2)ϕi = 0 (b) are today determining
equations in elementary particle physics. It would be desirable to elucidate how the mass
of elementary particle arises. One of the answers can be found in the monograph by de
Broglie ”Electromagnetic waves in wave guides and hollow resonators”. He said that all
the considered waves are characterized by the ”propagation factor”

P = ei(kct−kzt), where k2 = k2

z + α2

(see f ormula 2.75 [17])

Every possible wave is characterized by one of the eigenvalues of constant α corre-
sponding to the type of considered wave guides. The photon wave should correspond to
k = kz, i.e. to the propagation with velocity c. This corresponds to the propagation of
an electromagnetic wave in vacuum. But if the electromagnetic wave is conﬁned inside
a wave guide, then k and kz are connected by the relation (2.75) where α diﬀers from
zero and equals one of its eigenvalues corresponding to the form of the wave guide under
consideration. From the point of view of wave mechanics, in this case, all occurs as if the
photon had a proper mass determined by the form of a wave guide and a given eigenvalue
αi. So, it can be said that in a given wave guide, the photon can possess a number of
possible proper masses. [17].

Thus, if we assume that in the process of collision of protons and electrons with other
protons and electrons, in an excited ether, there arise ”wave guide” conditions of prop-
agation of the Ψ–ether waves, then under certain conditions, there appears the whole
spectrum of masses of unstable particles. The particles will consist only of protons, elec-
trons, and neutrinos— there are no other constituents in the Nature. It is not surprising
(this is an experimental fact!) that all the unstable particles and resonances detected
till now decay only into protons, electrons, and neutrinos (and their antiparticles). It is
natural that all the ”wave guide” particles can be classiﬁed according to the parameters
of Ψ–ether wave guides. A great number of elementary particles is no longer exotic and
becomes a trivial consequence of the properties of the Ψ–ether. This notion of the origin
of the mass spectrum of elementary particles and resonances suggests that, ﬁrst, their
number can be arbitrarily large, much larger than the number discovered until now, and,
second, their search can hardly be of the scientiﬁc interest that is attached to it at present
in connection with the ideology of the standard model (this naturally concerns the search
of the Higgs boson).

We have considered one of the possible models of origin of masses of elementary par-
ticles. It seems that it is diﬃcult to explain in this way the process of production of pairs
of particles e+e−, p¯p and all other pairs fermions that occurs in processes of multiparticle
production, though the nature of psyons consisting of ν ¯ν–pairs suggests to relate their
decay with the production of e+e−, p¯p pairs and others.

Clearly, the origin of symmetries in the world of elementary particles (for instance,
SU(3)-symmetries) is also determined by the symmetry properties of the Ψ–ether. Estab-
lishment of the SU(3)-symmetry was not simple. I recall that in the ﬁfties when the mass
of the Λ0–particle was thoroughly measured, experimenters assured that there exist two
values rather than one of the Λ0–particle mass, i.e. it was assumed that there exist two
diﬀerent Λ0–particles, which was inconsistent with the SU(3)-symmetry model.

People told about the so-called ”Eastern–Western eﬀect”. However, theorists who
believed in ”sanctity” of SU(3)-symmetry insisted upon that there should be only one

13

Λ0–particle. Nevertheless in booklets ”Review of Particle Properties” (especially in earlier
publications), one can clearly see a double-humped curve for the measured mass of the
Λ0–particle.

The KARMEN collaboration published data [18] which were interpreted by Gninenko
and Krasnikov [19] as the presence of two diﬀerent modes of the µ+–meson decay: the
conventional mode:

µ+ → e+ + ˜νe + νµ
and an additional rarely encountered mode: µ+ → e+ + X, where X is a new boson with
mass 103.9 MeV /c2.

In the Ψ–ether model, these two decay modes can be explained in a natural way.
Representing spins of µ, e and ν by arrows, we can show the following two schemes of
the µ+–structure:

↑

µ+

→ ↑

+

↑↓

or

→ ↓

+

↑↑

νµ ˜νe

e+

(a)

νµ ˜νe

e+

(b)

↑

µ+

In the scheme (a), the helicities of νµ and ˜νe coincide, and the pair νµ ˜νe forms a
more stable system with a possible more delayed decay τµ ∼ 3.6µs, than in the scheme
(b), in which νµ and ˜νe have opposite helicities, and the pair νµ ˜νe decays more rapidly
with the lifetime of a three-body decay of µ+–meson τµ ∼ 2.6µs. This is only qualitative
considerations, and they can be used for a qualitative analysis of the schemes of production
and decay of other unstable particles.

From this example it is seen that from the standpoint of the Ψ–ether model, modern
ideas of the structure components of matter should look diﬀerently than it is postulated
in the standard model.

In the standard model, structure components of matter are families of quarks and

leptons (fermions):

u
d!  

c
s!  

t
b!  

e
νe!  

µ
νµ!  

τ
ντ !

 

Interaction carriers are bosons: gluons, γ–quanta, W - and Z 0–bosons.
The ”pressure” of physicists-theorists on the development of the modern elementary
particle physics turned out to be so large, and the admiration for the statement: ”To
be correct, a theory should be slightly mad” appeared to be so great that the physical
interpretation of phenomena within the framework of the standard model went far beyond
the limits of natural understanding of the observed phenomena. Elementary particle
physics becomes more and more a hostage of mathematics.
It is suﬃcient to point to
the fact that quarks ”nonobservable in essence” and rapidly decaying µ–and τ - -leptons
are, on equal status with stable electrons and neutrinos, elevated to the class of structure
components of matter. Is this really that ” mad spot” of the standard theory which we
intend to raise to the rank of ”theory” after the discovery of the Higgs boson?

As one of the most important properties of the Ψ–ether, we point out the limits of
validity of relativization of all formulae and calculations in modern physics following from

14

the structure of Ψ–ether. The principle of relativization is essentially connected with
the wave properties of the Ψ–ether. Where the wave properties of the Ψ–ether come to
an end, there end electromagnetic waves, and this puts an end to our comprehension of
secrets of the Universe with the help of optical instruments and radiotelescopes. The
length of electromagnetic waves in the Ψ–ether is limited from the side of both short and
long waves.

From the side of short wavelengths, this limitation sets in when the ”mean free path”
of psyons becomes smaller than the distance between psyons. So, the density of psyons
in 1cm3 becomes decisive in the determination of this critical limit. This density also
determines the reliability of information accepted and transferred by the Ψ–ether. If two
or more impulses come to a psyon, the gained information will be distorted in further
transmission.

From the side of large wave lengths, the limitations of relativization set in when large
wavelengths of the Ψ–ether lose their wave conﬁguration becoming a chaotic motion of
huge masses of the Ψ–ether (”noises”).

So, where the wave properties of the Ψ–ether come to an end, there ends our cognition
of secrets of the Universe through the electromagnetic interaction. Man becomes blind
and deaf. Evidently, there exist phenomena whose description requires studies of the
microscopic properties of constituents of the Ψ–ether, psyons.

It is not clear which are the velocities of propagation of signals in the Ψ–ether. If psyons
can be arranged as strings, lattices, pyramidal formations, cubes and parallelepipeds and
so on and in the form of long chains, the velocities of propagation of perturbations in them
can be both larger and smaller than the velocity of light. It is known that a neutrino
signal from the Supernova 1987 A came to the Earth several hours earlier that the signal
of light. In ”Physics today” (April 1999, p. 9 and July 1999, p.17–18), it was informed
that the velocity of the light impulse passing through the Bose–Einstein condensate lowers
down to 17 m/sec, which is millions of times lower than the light velocity in the ether.
This slowing down of the velocity of a light impulse can be produced not only by possible
optical eﬀects but also by eﬀects of the change of the ether structure in the experiments.
The above-assumed forms of combinations of neutrinos and antineutrinos in various
geometrical forms do not go beyond the scope of 3-dimensional space. We will assume
this picture of the space surrounding us.

Any changes of the state of the Ψ-ether in the Universe reach the Earth, and conse-
quently, the man from the moment of his conception up to his death. Such sentences as
”a man was born under the Jupiter star”, or ”yesterday I had a dream, but today...”, or
”I foresaw this...” can now be substantiated not only psychologically, but also physically.
It becomes obvious that in the Nature, there can exist physical objects which cannot be
detected with the help of our ﬁve organs of sense, no matter how we strengthen them. The
man is a child of the Nature immersed into the Ψ–ether, and it seems that he should pos-
sess the possibilities, yet not discovered by science, of detecting the ether oscillations and
of their analysis. But it is very likely that the man is not perfect. Then, science is faced
with a honored responsibility to render assistance in the discovery of new possibilities of
the man up to his more full merging with the Universe surrounding him.

Of course, in this way, the road opens towards occultism. But we should temporarily
reconcile ourselves to this, till scientiﬁc knowledge of the Ψ–ether propeties establishes
new data on the man’s nature.

So, I assert that the Ψ–ether does exist! Further negation of it will only hamper the

15

development of physical, chemical, biological, and philosophical knowledge.

Conclusion

To summarize:
1. A historical review of the problem is given, from which it follows that the Ψ–ether
exists and its elimination from physical reality is impossible, since without it, one cannot
introduce the unity of measure and number in the Universe, cannot physically substantiate
the term l(l+1)
in the radial part of the equation in the problem of a hydrogen atom,
and cannot physically explain the necessary requirement of invariance of the equations
of the Maxwell classical electrodynamics and equations of the modern quantum ﬁeld
theory under the Lorentz transformations. Just as the Galilei transformations (the Galilei
principle of relativity) are based on experimental data, so the Lorentz transformations are
based on the Michelson–Morly experimental data.

r

2. The model of Ψ–ether is deﬁned as the Bose–Einstein condensate of neutrino–
antineutrino pairs of the Cooper type; the physical grounds for the model are given. The
equation for the state of Ψ–ether as a continuous medium is of the form

✷Ψi = 0,

where Ψi is a 4-dimensional vector.

The model provides propagation of transverse electromagnetic waves in the Ψ–ether
and waves of other types. It is not obligatory that the velocities of propagation of diﬀerent
waves of the Ψ–ether would all be equal to the light velocity.
A list of some properties of the Ψ–ether is presented.
3. The limit of applicability of equations of classical and quantum electrodynamics is
formulated. These equations are valid as long as the Ψ–ether is considered as a continuous
medium where oscillations of the Ψ–ether can propagate. However, when the wavelength
of the Ψ–ether becomes comparable with or smaller than sizes of the psyon, a molecule
of the Ψ–ether, or when in the region of long wavelengths, a wave-shaped character of
motions of the Ψ-ether is broken and transforms into a chaotic motion of its large masses,
the formation of electromagnetic waves ceased, the man stops to register them with the
optical instruments and radio installations. The man does not ”hear” the full voice of the
Universe, becomes ”blind” and ”deaf” in the Universe.

4. The contribution of the Ψ-ether can be detected, in particular, in precision mea-
surements of masses and lifetimes of a number of unstable particles (hyperons, muons,
pions, and other mesons) aimed at searching for the ”exact structure” of masses and life-
times of those particles. These experiments could shed new light upon the composition
of particles from protons, electrons, and neutrinos (and the corresponding antiparticles)
into which unstable particles ultimately decay. In this connection, the conﬁrmation of
data obtained by the collaboration ”KARMEN” is important.

5. The next step in cognition of secrets of the Universe and the secret of life on the
Earth is to study the properties of the Ψ–ether and its constituents, psyons. This is
evidently a task of physics of the XXIth century.

16

References

1. P.A.M.Dirac. ”The Evolution of the Physicist’s Picture of Nature”. Scientiﬁc Amer-

ican, May 1963, v.208, N 5, p.45–53.

2. J.Schwinger. A Magnetic Model of Matter. Science, 165 (No.3895), 757 (1969).
3. J.C.Maxwell. The scientiﬁc Papers. v.II. p.322. Cambridge University Press, 1890.

4. J.C.Maxwell. The scientiﬁc Papers. v.II. p.763-765. Cambridge University Press,

5. J.C.Maxwell. The scientiﬁc Papers. v.II. p.773-774. Cambridge University Press,

1890.

1890.

6. Versuch einer Theorie der elektrischen und optischen Erscheinungen in bewegten

k¨orper. Leiden, 1895. H.A.Lorentz, §89-92.

7. Henri Poincar´e. Sur la dynamique de l’electron- C.R.Acad. Sci., 1905, 140, p.1504-
1508; Oeuvres, t.IX.,p.489-493. Sur la dynamique de l’electron.- Rendiconti Circolo
mat. Palermo, 1906, 21, 129-176.

8. Henri Poincar´e. La dynamique de l’electron- Revue g´en. Sci. pures et appl., 1908,

19, 386-402; Oeuvres, t.IX, p.551-586.

9. Henri Poincar´e. L’hypoth´ese des quanta. Revue scient., 40 S´er., 1912, 17, 225-232.

Oeuvres, t.IX, p.654-668

10. ”The principle of relativity” A collection of original memoirs on the special and
general theory of relativity by H.A.Lorentz, A.Einstein, H.Minkowski and H.Weyl.
Dover publications, inc.; p.37-38. (Translated from ”Zur Electrodynamik bewegter
K¨orper”, Annalen der Physik, 17, 1905).

11. A.Enstein. Ather and Relativit¨atstheorie. Verlag von Julius Springer. Berlin, 1920.

12. W.Heitler. The Quantum theory of radiation. Third edition. Oxford. At the

Clarendon PRESS. 1954. §1,6.

13. N.N.Bogolubov, D.V.Shirkov. Infroduction to the theory of Quantized Fields.

Interscience publishers, INC, New York, Interscience Puplishers Ltd., London, 1959,
§6, p.59.

14. L.I.Schiﬀ. Quantum Mechanics. Mc Graw-Hill Book Company, INC, New York,

15. Louis de Brogle ”Problemes de propagations guidees des ondes electromagnetiques”.

16. Louis de Brogle. Henri Poincar´e et les th´eories de la physique. Livre du Centenaire.

17. Louis de Brogle ”Problems de propagations guidees des ondes electromagnetiques”,

Toronto, London, 1955, §14, p.74

Paris, 1941, ch.III, §6.

Paris. Gauthier-Villars, 1956.

Paris, 1941. ch.III, §6.

18. Phys. Lett., B348(1995), p.19.
19. S.N.Gninenko and N.V.Krasnikov. ”Exotic muon decays and the KARMEN

anomaly”, Phys. Lett. B434 (1998) 163; hep-ph/9804364.

17

