1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
1
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Space-time encoding

Arindam Mitra
Lakurdhi, Tikarhat Road, Burdwan, 713102,
West Bengal, India.

February 2, 2008

Abstract

It is widely believed that one signal can carry maximum
one bit of information, and minimum KTlog2 energy is re-
quired to transmit or to erase a bit. Here it is shown four
bits of information can be transmitted by one signal in four
dimensional space-time. It implies space-time cannot be ig-
nored to determine the minimal energy cost of information
processing.

1

Before the turn of the 19th century, Bell’s invention of telephone
and J. C. Bose’s ﬁrst demonstration of radiowave transmission her-
In the following years,
alded a new era of information transfer.
although these new techniques of almost instantaneous information
transmission were rapidly developed and widely implemented, but
it was not known how to quantify information. In 1940s, Shannon
[1] proposed entropy as a measure of information, which has been
accepted by all. So, information is not an abstract thing, it can be
expressed in terms of entropy which is basically a thermodynamical
quantity. Moreover, information is carried by electromagnetic sig-
nal. Due to these reasons many authors conjectured that the laws
of physics would determine the fundamental issues of information
processing. In favor of this belief, one can say information cannot
be transmitted faster than the velocity of light. But for other issues,
the connection between physics and information theory is yet to be
understood. As for example, we don’t know how to incorporate
space-time with information processing. In the existing encoding
space-time has no explicit role. As information is processed within
the space-time, one can look for a direct connection between the
two. In this paper we shall try to establish such connection.

In information theory, the basic unit of information is called
bit, which is represented by an electromagnetic signal. Now, the
question is : How many bits can be transmitted by a signal ? The
general wisdom is that not more than one bit can be transmitted by
a signal, however there is no fundamental reason why it would be so.

Let us judge a signal according to special theory of relativity.
According to special theory of relativity, an event needs four di-
mensions for its complete speciﬁcation - of which three are space
dimensions and one is time dimension. As information carrying
signal represents an event, so we can tell that a signal requires four
bits of information for its complete speciﬁcation. So, it is natural to

2

think that four bits of information can be transmitted by a signal.
Next we shall describe how it is possible.

Suppose a three dimensional picture is transmitted, which car-
ries the bit values. As a naive method of transmission, we can think
that this three dimensional signal is projected on a screen of the
receiver, who by measuring /observing the picture can recover the
bit values. Suppose δxi, δyi and δzi are length, breadth and height
of the picture. Now δxi can take any of the two values δxo and
δx1 which represent bit 0 and 1 respectively. Similarly δyi can be
δy0 or δy1 and δzi can be δz0 or δz1. So each ﬁgure contains three
bits simultaneously. The probable sets of three bits are: (0,0,0),
(0,0,1), ( 0,1,0), (0,1,1), (1,0,0), (1,0,1) (1,1,0) and (1,1,1). These
triple bits are generated due to three dimensional space. We can
call these bits as space-bits. Let us see how time dimension can be
incorporated to generate another bit from the same picture. Sup-
pose sender transmits the picture over the time period δti, where
δti can take any two diﬀerent values δt0 and δt1. Let us call them
time bits. The two values of time duration can represent bit 0 and
1 respectively. So each ﬁgure contains 4 bits of which three are
space bits and one is time bit. Therefore information can be en-
coded into the 16 possible sets of 4 bits. The probable sets are:
( 0,0,0,0), (0,0,1,0), (0,1,0,0), (0,1,1,0), (1,0,0,0)(1,0,1,0),(1,1,0,0),
(1,1,1,0),(0,0,0,1), (0,0,1,1), (0,1,0,1),(0,1,1,1), (1,0,0,1), (1,0,1,1),
(1,1,0,1), (1,1,0,1). These bits can be called as space-time bits.

Is it possible to transmit four spec-time bits by the existing
information processing technique ? In the existing technique, an
electromagnetic/voltage pulse carries the bit value.
In three di-
mensional conﬁguration, voltage pulse v can be expressed as v =
(vxi + vyj + vzk)1/2 where i, j and k are three unit vectors along x, y
and z axis. To recover the bit values receiver measures the magni-
z )1/2 of the voltage pulse. Note that he measures the
tude (v2

x+v2

y +v2

3

resultant of three components of voltage pulse as they have no in-
dependent existence. Therefore receiver can extract only one bit of
information by measuring the voltage of the voltage pulse. It means
sender can dump only one bit of information into three dimensional
voltage pulse. But time bit can be sent along with the voltage pulse.
Let voltage v0 and v1 represent two bit values. Suppose the time
width of the pulse can be either δt0 and δt1 respectively 0 and 1.
Therefore, receiver can recover two pulses by measuring the voltage
and time duration of the pulse provided v0 6= 0 and v1 6= 1. The
probable sets of two bits are :(0,0), (0,1), (1,0) and (1,1). In this
way, two bits can be transmitted by one voltage pulse.

The presented space-time encoding is perhaps a classical encod-
ing since space-time has no quantum analogue. Over the last few
years the quantum information has been a major area of research
[3, 4]. In quantum information, quantum state is the carrier of in-
formation where a single quantum state or a sequence of quantum
states [3,4] can represent a bit value. So the same question can be
put: Is it possible to realize our space-time encoding in quantum
information ? Suppose eigen values of spin state are used to rep-
resent bit 0 and 1. The state have three eigen values in the x, y
and z axis, but they cannot be simultaneously measured. Therefore
it is not possible to encode more than one bit by a spin state. In
this sense, three dimensional space has no advantage in quantum
encoding. So voltage pulse and quantum state are equivalent in
this sense. Still they have a diﬀerence. We have seen one voltage
pulse can transmit 2 bits. But one quantum state cannot transmit
more than one bit. The reason is simple. In quantum encoding we
can use either two orthogonal states or two nonorthogonal states to
represent two bit values. But nonorthogonal states cannot generate
bit for each state (the probability of recovery of a bit value is less
than one), only orthogonal states can do so, . So we are interested
to know whether two bits per quantum state can be generated by

4

two orthogonal states. For clarity, suppose | li and | ↔i are two
orthogonal polarization states, which represent 0 and 1. Receiver
uses 0◦ or 90◦ analyzer to recover bit values. Therefore, receiver
could recover 100% transmitted bits if time of transmission is a
prior known. Note that 50% bit will be recovered completely from
null results. These 50% null results cannot provide more than 50%
bit values. It means 2 bits per quantum state cannot be generated.
Four dimensional space-time has no advantage in quantum encod-
ing.

Throughout the development of classical information theory,
many authors tried to establish a relation between thermodynamics
and information theory. In particula, they tried to know the min-
imal energy cost of information processing. von Neumann [3] and
Brillouin [4] argued that KT log 2 energy is required to process a bit.
Gabor argued [5] transmission of one bit of information by electro-
magnetic waves of radio frequency requires a minimum energy KT.
On the other hand Shannon formula of channel capacity [1] states
that average energy requirement of one bit transmission is KTlog 2.
Gabor’s and Shannon’s results are not identical because Shannon
formula is not applicable to the transmission of one-bit of informa-
tion. At present it is widely believed that KTlog2 is required to
transmit a bit. But from the earlier work it is not clear whether
this energy is dissipative in nature or not. On the question of dis-
sipation, Landauer argued [6] that KTlog2 would dissipate when-
ever a bit will be erased, otherwise not. Erasure of information is
frequently done in computation. Following Landauer’s argument
Bennett argued [7] that computation can be done without spending
any energy when computation does not require any erasure of in-
formation. This new model of computation is known as reversible
computation. From these works one may think dissipation-less in-
formation processing is possible only when it is processed reversibly.
In a separate work Landauer proposed an alternative encoding [8]

5

and argued that one bit of information could be transmitted with-
out any energy dissipation. It means reversibility is not a necessary
condition for dissipation-less information processing. But, accord-
ing to Landauer’s statement [9] his work created little attention.
In true sense, Landauer’s scheme is not a bit transmission scheme,
rather it is a bit transportation scheme. Therefore one can think
KTlog2 result is valid for erasure of bit and transmission of bit.

Many authors [10] cast doubt either on dissipation-less compu-
tation or on the issue of energy requirement of erasing a bit because
of the lack of mathematical proof. Apart from the lack of proof,
KTlog 2 result is based on the assumption that a signal contains
only one bit of information. We have seen a signal can contain four
bits of information. The transmission of this signal or erasing the
signal requires KTlog2 energy (assuming the result is valid). The
energy cost of transmission of four bits or erasing the four bits is
It means encoding cannot be overlooked to determine
KTlog 2.
the energy requirement of bit processing. It also implies space-time
will have a role on the fundamental limit’s of energy cost of classical
information processing. But for quantum information, space-time
will not have such similar role because it is not possible to send
more than one bit by a quantum state.

In conclusion, information bearing capacity of space-time has
been demonstrated.
In this encoding space and time have been
used on equal footing. On the other hand this encoding qualita-
tively supports the notion of four dimensional space-time. We hope
connection between space-time and information theory might be an
interesting topics of research.

References

6

[1] C. Shannon, Bell System Technical Jour, (1948).

[2] A. Mitra. quant-ph/9812087; physics/0007079 ; See reference.

[3] von Neumann Theory of Self Reproducing Automata ( Univ.

Illiuonis Press, Urbana , 1960).

[4] L. Brillouin In science and information Theory Chap. 13, p.

162,

[5] D. Gabor, Phil. Mag 41, 1161 (1950).

[6] R. Landauer, IBM. J. Res. Dev 5, 183 (1961).

[7] C. H. Bennett, IBM J. Res. Dev, 17, 525 (1973)

[8] R. Landauer , Appl. Phy. Lett, 51, 2056 (1987)

[9] R. Landauer, Phy. Lett A. 217, 188 (1996)

[10] W. Porod, O. R. Grondin, K. D. Ferry, G. Porod, Phy. Rev
Lett, 52, 232, (1984); D. Wolpart, Phy. Today 45 (3), 98,
1992; E. Goto, W. Hioe, M. Hosoya, Physica, C, 385 (1991);
K. Shizume phy. Rev. E 52, 3495 (1995).

7

