1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

STRUCTURE AND COMBUSTION OF

MAGNEGASES

tm

R. M. Santilli1 and A. K. Aringazin1,2

1Institute for Basic Research,
P.O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 64382, USA

ibr@gte.net
2Department of Physics, Eurasian National University,
Astana 473021 Kazakstan

June 3, 2000; Revised August 15, 2001
Final version December 9, 2001

Abstract

tm

In this paper, we study the structure and combustion of magne-
gasesT M (Patented and International Patents Pending), new clean fu-
els developed by one of us (R.M.S.) [1], which are produced as byprod-
ucts of recycling nonradioactive liquid feedstock such as antifreeze
waste, engine oil waste, town sewage, crude oil, etc., and generally
vary with the liquid used for their production. A new technology,
called PlasmaArcFlow
, ﬂows the waste through a submerged elec-
tric arc between conventional electrodes. The arc decomposes the
liquid molecules into their atomic constituents, and forms a plasma in
the immediate vicinity of the electrodes at about 10,000o F. The tech-
nology then moves the plasma away from the electrodes, and controls
its recombination into environmentally acceptable fuels. In fact. the
exhaust of magnegases show: absence of carcinogenic or other toxic
substances; breathable oxygen up 14%; and carbon dioxide down to
0.01%. The new fuels possess a new chemical structure ﬁrst identiﬁed
by one of us (R.M.S.), which is characterized by clusters of ordinary

0

molecules and atoms under a new bond of electromagnetic nature.
These clusters constitute a new chemical species diﬀerent than the
conventional molecules, since they are stable at ordinary conditions
while exhibiting no infrared signature (other than those of conven-
tional molecular constituents), thus conﬁrming that the bond is not of
valence type. In particular, the bonding due to the magnetic polariza-
tion of the orbitals, from space to toroidal distributions, have resulted
to be dominant over electric eﬀects. For this reason the new chemical
species is called ”Santilli’s electromagnecules” or ”magnecules”.

In this paper we study the novel magnecular structure of magne-
gasesT M , and conﬁrm that, when the original waste is of fossil or
organic type, magnecules are essentially constituted by conventional
molecules H2, CO, CO2,H2O, plus individual atoms of H, O, and
C, as well as radicals such as HO, CH and C-O in single valence
bond, all these constituents being bonded together by strong mag-
netic ﬁelds originating from the toroidal polarization of the orbits
of valence and other electrons. We then present, apparently for the
ﬁrst time, an estimate of the binding energy of magnecules. We
also study the combustion of magnegases produced from liquid feed-
stock of fossil origin , and show that it is fundamentally diﬀerent
than the combustion of any other fuel. Conventional fuels are con-
stituted by conventional molecules, and generally burn according to
only one dominant thermochemical reaction. In this sense, the com-
bustion of conventional fuels can be conceived as the ﬁring of a ”single
stage rocket”. Magnegases
are instead constituted by conventional
molecules bonded into the new magneclusters, thus having a multi-
stage structure, and they generally have a sequence of dominant ther-
mochemical reactions.
In this sense, the combustion of magnegases
can be referred to the ﬁring of a ”multi-stage rocket”, with diﬀerent
fuels in diﬀerent stages. In this paper we study, apparently for the ﬁrst
time, the primary chemical reactions in the combustion of magnegases
of fossil origin. Our main conclusion is that fuels synthesized under in-
tense electric and magnetic ﬁelds can indeed release energy in amounts
much bigger than those predicted by conventional chemical reactions.
Since, in addition, the new fuels can be produced everywhere, and
have environmentally acceptable exhausts, magnegases oﬀer serious
possibilities to satisfy our ever increasing energy needs, as well as to
contain the alarming environmental problems caused by fossil fuels.

tm

1

1 Introduction

According to oﬃcial data by recent U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) re-
lease, about 74 billions barrels of fossil oil, corresponding to about four
trillions gallons of gasoline, are consumed in our planet per day in an es-
timated number of half a billion cars, one million trucks, one hundred thou-
sand planes, plus industrial, agricultural, and military uses. The combustion
of such an enormous amount of fossil fuel per day has caused increasingly
alarming environmental problems, such as:

1) Measurable emission in our atmosphere of the largest amount of car-

cinogenic and other toxic substances;

2) Measurable oxygen depletion in our planet due to the fact that the sum
of the oxygen emitted in the combustion exhaust and that recycled by plants
from the emitted CO2 is smaller than the oxygen used in the combustion
(negative oxygen balance);

3) Measurable increase of carbon dioxide of dramatic proportions, with

potentially catastrophic climactic changes;
and other environmental problems, such as the production of poisonous NOx.
As a result of studies initiated in the early 1980’s at Harvard University
under DOE support (see review [1]), one of us (R.M.S.) has recently devel-
[1c] (Patented and Inter-
oped a new technology, called PlasmaArcFlow
national Patents Pending), for the production of environmentally acceptable
tm
combustible gases, called magnegases
(see the industrial web site [2a] and
the scientiﬁc web site [2b]).

tm

The new technology is primarily conceived to recycle nonradioactive liq-
uid feedstock, such as antifreeze waste, engine oil waste, town sewage, as well
as crude oil, etc., by ﬂowing the liquid through a submerged electric arc be-
tween submerged electrodes within a metal vessel. The arc decomposes the
liquid into its atomic constituents, ionizes the atoms, and forms a plasma
in the immediate vicinity of the tip of the electrodes at about 10,000o F.
The new technology then moves the plasma away from the arc, and controls
its recombination into magnegases which bubble to the liquid surface where
they are collected with various means, are pumped into conventional, low or
high pressure, gas storage tanks, and then used for metal cutting, heating,
cooking, automotive, and any other other fuel application [2].

It is evident that magnegases vary with the liquid used for their produc-
tion. However, magnegases produced from diﬀerent liquid of fossil fuel origin

2

have a similar composition, thus admitting a uniﬁed treatment. They also
constitute magnegases with the highest energy content, thus constituting the
most interesting class.

In fact, the plasma originating from the recycling of fossil waste is essen-
tially composed of mostly ionized H, O, and C atoms (plus traces of other ele-
ments which generally precipitate as solids and, as such, are ignored hereon).
Due to the known aﬃnity of C and O, abundance of carbon in the plasmas
assures the removal of oxygen via the formation of CO, thus preventing an
explosive mixture of H and O. The PlasmaArcFlow then prevents the subse-
quent oxydation of CO, thus eliminating unwanted percentages of CO2. The
resulting gases are stable at ordinary temperature, do not self-ignite even at
high temperature, and need a ﬂame or a spark to ignite.

Therefore, magnegases of fossil waste origin are essentially constituted by
H2 and CO, with traces of O2, H2O, CO2. The full combustion of such a
mixture is manifestly without any possible carcinogenic or other toxic sub-
stance, thus resolving the environmental problem 1) of fossil fuels recalled
above.

Since magnegases are fabricated, they can be produced in such a way
that there still remains a signiﬁcant percentage of oxygen in the exhaust. In
this way, magnegases have a positive oxygen balance, and resolve the second
environmental problem of fossil fuels.

Under a proper combustion studied in detail in this paper, carbon is
mostly released in its solid form, resulting in small percentages of CO2, thus
resolving the third environmental problem of fossil fuel.

The exhaust of magnegases produced from fossil waste is constituted by:
50% to 60% H2O (as water vapor); 10% O2; 3% to 7% of CO2; the remaining
components being inert atmospheric gases.

Other features of the new technology important for this study are the
following. Since magnegases are internally rich in oxygen, their combustion
requires 30% to 40% of the air intake needed for fuels of fossil origin. This
implies a large reduction of nitrogen participating in the combustion, with
consequential reduction of toxic NOx; for details on combustion exhaust one
can inspect [2c].

All types of magnegases can be used in all existing internal combustion
(IC) engines, via the sole change of external components, essentially dealing
with the carburation, coil voltage, and timing [2].

The equipment for the production of magnegases, known under the name

3

of Santilli’s hadronic reactors (Patented and Patents Pending), are com-
mercially over-unity. In fact, independently certiﬁed measurements one can
inspect at the USMG laboratory in Florida, have established that, for the
reactor operating at atmospheric pressure, one unit of electric energy cali-
brated at the panel produces at least three units of energy in the gas, plus at
least one unit of energy as heat in the liquid to be recycled, resulting in the
over-unity of 4 (bigger over-unities are possible for the reactor operating at
bigger pressures, due to the decrease of the gas bubbles, although they will
be ignored in this paper).

As a consequence, hadronic reactors producing magnegases are essen-
tially capable of tapping energy from liquid feedstock and from the carbon
electrodes, in essentially the same way as Fermi’s nuclear reactors tap energy
from nuclei, with the diﬀerence that the former have been certiﬁed [2] to have
no harmful radiations and leave no harmful waste, while the latter release
harmful radiations and wastes.

Moreover, nuclear reactors are notoriously large and require large protec-
tions due to the harmful radiations, thus being solely usable in large plants
far away from inhabited areas. By comparison, since they need no shield for
radiations, hadronic reactors are small, typically having the dimensions of a
desk [2a]. As a result, magnegases can be produced everywhere needed, thus
avoiding the costs of transportation over large distance which are typical for
fossil fuels.

Since magnegases are produced as byproducts of the recycling of liq-
uid waste or crude oil, since their production equipment is commercially
over-unity, and since they do not require transportation of fuels over large
distances, the cost of magnegases is competitive over that of fossil fuels, of
course, when produced in suﬃciently large volume. In fact, the two incomes
from the recycling of liquid waste and from the utilization of the heat, plus
the high eﬃciency of the reactors imply very low operating costs.

The resolution of the alarming environmental problems caused by fos-
sil fuels, their possible use in any existing engine, burner, or furnace, and
their competitive cost over existing fuels, render magnegases serious alter-
native sources of clean fuels, thus deserving a serious study by the scientiﬁc
community.

The reader should be also aware that, contrary to popular beliefs, large
uses of hydrogen are potentially catastrophic for our planet, unless the hydro-
gen is produced via ecologically acceptable ways. Gasoline produces trillions

4

of cubic foot of CO2 per day which is at least in part recycled by plants into
O2. By comparison, hydrogen has one tenth the energy content of gasoline,
thus requiring at least ten times oxygen for the same performance (say, the
same m.p.h.). Moreover, all atmospheric oxygen in the combustion of pure
hydrogen is turned into water, thus being permanently removed from our
planet due to the notoriously high cost of water separation.

A similar fate also holds for fuel cells, since they also operate by burning
hydrogen or similar environmentally unacceptable fuel. Besides, fuel cells
cannot be used in existing IC engines. Therefore, their uses leaves completely
unchanged the current deterioration of our environment (since fuel cells are
expected to be used only for new cars, thus leaving unchanged existing cars).
On similar grounds, electric cars can admittedly improve local urban
environments, although they globally increase, rather than decrease, envi-
ronmental problems, since electric power plants are known to be much more
polluting than automobiles, whenever they are of fossil or nuclear type.

In conclusion, the new combustible fuels magnegases constitute a serious
and real source of new clean fuels that are environmentally preferable, not
only with respect to fuels of fossil origin, but also with respect to alternatives
currently under study, such as hydrogen, fuel cells, and electric cars.

It should be mentioned that entropy increases in the transition from a
solid state to a liquid or gas state. Therefore,the high eﬃciency of hadronic
reactors does not violate conventional thermodynamics laws.

The study of this paper is hereon restricted, speciﬁcally, to the single
magnegas produced from the recycling of antifreeze waste, since this is the
gas subjected to the largest number of experimental measurements until now
[1c]. However, our results are easily extendable to other types of magnegases.
The reader should be aware that other types of magnegases, such as those
produced from the recycling of oil waste or crude oil, have an energy content
bigger than the magnegas produced from antifreeze waste.

2 The novel chemical structure of magnegases

All types of magnegases (again referred to combustible gases produced under
an electric arc) possess a new chemical structure ﬁrst identiﬁed by one of us
[1b], which is characterized by clusters of ordinary molecules, radicals and
atoms bonded together by attractive forces of primary magnetic origin (see

5

Ref. [1c], Chapter 8, for a comprehensive presentation).

As established by numerous Gas Chromatographic, Mass Spectrometric
(GC-MS) tests under joint InfraRed Detectors (IRD), these clusters consti-
tute a new chemical species diﬀerent than that characterized by conventional
molecules (i.e., clusters with a valence bond), since the magnegas clusters
are stable at ordinary conditions which remain unidentiﬁed among known
molecules while exhibiting no infrared signatures (other than those of con-
ventional molecular constituents), thus conﬁrming that the bond is not of
valence type.

As well known in physics (although less emphasized in contemporary
chemistry), whether conventional or novel, stable clusters detected by GC-MS
equipment cannot exist without an attractive force. The speciﬁc and concrete
identiﬁcation of the attractive bond of electromagneclusters constitutes a
central aspect in the study of magnegas, with implications similar to those
of the valence for conventional molecules.

Extensive studies of this aspect have established that the primary attrac-
tive force responsible for the electromagnecules is expected to be due to the
magnetic polarization of the orbitals of valence and other electrons, from
space to toroidal distributions. Conventional quantum electrodynamics es-
tablishes the existence of such a polarization whenever atoms and molecules
are exposed to intense magnetic ﬁelds, as it is the case in the vicinity of
the electric arc. Such a magnetic polarization creates magnetic North-South
polarities along the symmetry axis of the toroid, which permit the stacking
of atoms and molecules one after the other [1c].

The above analysis has permitted a quantitative interpretation of the
detection via GC-MS/IRD of clusters possessing molecular weight all the
way to 1,000 a.m.u. in a light gas, such as magnegas from antifreeze waste,
whose highest molecular weight should be 44 a.m.u for CO2.

Electric contributions are expected to exist but their study has not been
conducted to date. Conventional molecules are mostly preserved in the new
clusters (as established by the preservation of their IR signature). Therefore,
valence electrons cannot contribute to the bonding force of the new clusters.
Ionic contributions, even though unquestionably present, are notoriously un-
acceptable for a bond, because they carry the same charge, thus resulting in
a repulsive, rather than attractive force. Electric polarization (essentially due
to a deformation of the charge distribution of atoms) are also unquestion-
ably present, although they are notoriously unstable and weak, while their

6

geometry does not lend to large clustering when acting alone.

As a result of the expected dominance of magnetic over electric contribu-
tions, the new chemical species composing magnegas is called ”magnecules”
or ”magneclusters” [1b]. The same terminology will be adopted in this paper
hereon.

When originating from fossil or organic waste, numerous GC-MS/IRD
scans [1c] have established that gas magnecules are essentially constituted
by conventional molecules H2, CO, CO2, H2O, plus individual atoms of H,
O, and C, as well as radicals such as HO.

It is evident that the bonding of atoms and molecules into new clusters
constitutes new means for storing energy in a combustible gas, in addition
to the conventional valence means in ordinary fuels. Therefore, magnecules
have a primary relevance for the study of the combustion of magnegas. It is
also evident that a deeper understanding of the magnetic origin of the new
clusters in magnegas will permit an increase of their energy content, since
the size and strength of magnecules is directly proportional to the magnetic
ﬁeld used for its formation.

Magnegases have additional new means for storing energy deep into the
structure of conventional molecules. Recall that any peak in the IR signa-
ture of conventional molecules denotes a corresponding valence bond. For
instance, an IR signature with two peaks for CO denotes the existence of a
valence bond of the type C=O.

Numerous independent measurements on magnegas [1c, 2a] have estab-
lished that the IR of conventional molecules is ”mutated” with the presence
of new additional peaks. Since all valence electrons are generally used in the
molecules, the new IR peaks can only be explained via the creation of new
internal bonds of non-valence type. Again, the magnetic origin of these new
bonds has resulted to be plausible, and essentially consists in the toroidal po-
larization of the orbitals of internal electrons under external, strong magnetic
ﬁelds. For the case of C=O, these internal toroidal polarizations imply the
creation of the pair of magnetic polarities (North−South)×(North−South).
The creation of internal magnetic bonds then alters the entire thermochem-
ical horizon, beginning with new values of binding energies for conventional
molecules.

It is evident that a deeper understanding of the new internal bonds in
conventional molecules may permit a corresponding increase of energy storage
in fuels, since, again, their number and strength depends on the intensity of

7

the external magnetic ﬁeld used for their creation.

A technical understanding of this paper also requires a knowledge of var-
ious additional anomalous features of magnegas, such as their anomalous
adhesion (which occludes feeding lines with small sectional areas usually
acceptable for conventional gases, thus preventing the passage of large mag-
necules to be detected); mutations (generally referred to macroscopic alter-
ations in time of magnecules under the same conditions following break-down
due to collisions and subsequent recombinations); alteration of physical char-
acteristics (such as macroscopic changes in average molecular sizes, density,
viscosity, etc.); and other anomalies.

In this paper we study the above anomalous new means for storing energy
in magnegas and introduce, apparently for the ﬁrst time, an estimate of the
binding energy of magnecules.

3 The novel combustion of magnegases

Predictably, the new chemical structure of magnegases implies that its com-
bustion is fundamentally diﬀerent than the combustion of conventional fuels,
possessing a conventional chemical structure. A conventional fuel is consti-
tuted by a given conventional molecule, and generally burns according to
thermochemical reactions. In this sense, the combustion of a conventional
fuel can be referred to the ﬁring of a ”single stage rocket”.

Magnegases are instead constituted by conventional molecules bonded
into the new magneclusters, thus having a multi-stage chemical structure. In
addition, as we shall see, magnegases generally have a sequence of dominant
thermochemical reactions.
In this sense, the combustion of magnegases is
here referred to the ﬁring of a ”multi-stage rocket”, with diﬀerent fuels in
diﬀerent stages.

In this paper we study, apparently for the ﬁrst time, the primary chem-
ical reactions in the combustion of magnegases of fossil origin. Our main
conclusion is that fuels synthesized under intense electric and magnetic ﬁelds
can indeed release energy in amounts much bigger than those predicted by
conventional chemical reactions.

To initiate this study, consider the simplest possible magnegas, that pro-
duced from ordinary tap water and a carbon electrode via an electric arc
having 1,000 A, 40 V DC, and the PlasmaArcFlow set to produce a gas with

8

about 45% H2 and 45% CO, the remaining percentages being composed of
H2O, CO2, and O2. The primary eﬀect of the arc is the dissociation, H2O
→ 2H + O. Owing to the excess of carbon in the plasma we then have the
known reaction, 2H + O + C → H2 + CO, which explains in part the reason
why H2 and CO are observed in essentially equal percentages.

Consider then the elementary sequence of reactions

H2O + C → 2H + O + C → H2 + CO.

(1)

Let us calculate the energy balance for the reaction channel. Irrespective of
possible intermediate reactions, the minimal energy needed will be the same,
and it can be calculated via to the energy balance:

E[producing] = E[H2] + E[CO] − E[H2O] − E[C],

(2)

where E[H2], E[CO], E[H2O], and E[C] denote ground state energies.

Since the main channel is (1) one can suppose that, microscopically, the
production of H2 and CO occurs as follows. Immediately after a given H2O
molecule has been bombarded by the electrons of the arc, it dissociates.
Then, near to the arc (in a lower temperature region, to which the atoms are
moved by ﬂow), when the C atom occurs near the H+O+H complex, the O
atom captures the C atom while the two H atoms composes the H2 molecule.
Processes of ionization of H, O, C, H2O, OH, and CO, under the eﬀect of
the arc, as well as excited states and radiation, are not considered here, for
simplicity.

The process of creation of H2 and CO are thus running in parallel, with
several similar processes occurring in neighborhood of a given H2O molecule.
So, these elementary processes occur at the same conditions (temperature,
pressure, external electromagnetic ﬁeld produced by the arc and neighbor
electrons, ions and atoms).

This is the point where and when the production of magnecules in a
gaseous phase takes place in part. The magnecules may, therefore, consist of
several H2 and/or CO molecules, plus individual H, O and C atoms and OH
radicals, as well as C-C and C-H dimers, bonded to each other by chains of
North-South polarities created by the toroidal polarization of the orbits of
valence and other electrons [1b].

As the PlasmaArcFlow moves the magnecules away from the high tem-
perature region, magnegas cools down, and bubbles to the surface of the
liquid, where it is collected, for storage and use.

9

Due to the detected rather big mass of magnecules (up to 1000 a.m.u.)
at ordinary temperature, it seems that CO (with mass 28 a.m.u) is the heav-
iest molecular constituents in large percentage, followed by the heavier CO2
molecule (with mass 44 a.m.u.), although in much smaller percentage.

Indeed, it is hard to imagine that, the peak with 416 a.m.u detected in
magnegas by GC-MS/IRD tests can be due to a magnecule consisting of 208
H2 molecules. Such a cluster can probably not survive at room temperature
due to its huge size, as well as linear character of its bond. In fact, a mag-
necule of 208 bond lengths of H2 has the linear length 208 × 1.4 ≈ 300 bohrs,
thus being excessively long for stability.

The same weight of 416 a.m.u. can be better represented by only 15 CO
molecules, in which case the linear size is 15 × 2 = 30 bohrs. In addition,
CO has plenty of electrons (some of which are unpaired), in contrast to H2.
These electrons might be responsible for magnetic polarizations as needed in
the magnecule, in accord to the observed infrared spectrum of CO [1c].

However, the magnecules consisting solely of CO molecules can not prob-
ably explain why magnegas possesses an anomalously high energy release
since H2 is a combustible component too, which can make a great contribu-
tion to the total energy released. Thus, most likely, the magnecules of 416
a.m.u. consists of both CO and H2, e.g., with 14 CO and 12 H2 molecules.
The latter assumption explains the magnecule mutation of two a.m.u.

In summary, the elementary reaction channel (1) for producing H2 and

CO, can be extended to

nH2O + nC → 2nH + nO + nC → n(H2 + CO) =

(3)

= H2×CO×· · ·×H2×CO = magnecule,

where the ﬁnal system is a type of magnecule consisting of equal number n
of bonded H2 and CO molecules (not n separate molecules H2 and n separate
molecules CO), where ”×” denotes the magnetic bond.

The further assumption of 14 CO, 11 H2 and 2 isolated H atoms then
explains the magnecule mutation of only one a.m.u. This latter assumption
is not considered in these introductory remarks for simplicity.

The following remark is in order. We should note that the magnetic
origin of the bond is not critical here, so ”×” can be thought of as some
kind of bond which is weaker than the bonds H-H and C=O. So, the model,
which we use here, is in essence rather general, and can be used for other

10

possible interpretation of the attractive force permitting the existence of the
anomalous clusters.

Under the above assumptions, the energy needed for production of mag-

necules is

E[production] = E[magnecule] − nE[H2O] − nE[C],

(4)

where E[magnecule], E[H2O], and E[C] are ground state energies, and we
assume, again for simplicity, the magnecule as consisting of equal number n
of CO and H2 molecules.

The above amount of energy may be indeed diﬀerent from (2) because
the ground state energy of the magnecule, E[magnecule], is evidently not
equal to nE[H2] + nE[CO] due to the binding energy of magnecule, eventual
deformation of orbitals, and other internal electronic eﬀects. This is the
ﬁrst case where the anomalous eﬃciency of the PlasmaArcFlow reactor may
originate.

4 Combustion of H2 and CO in equal per-

centage

In this section we present elementary calculations of reaction heats, for the
combustion of H2, CO in a 50%+50% mixture. The binding energies of
interest are presented in Table 1 [4], where the complete dissociation of gas
states of reagents to gas states of product atoms is assumed at temperature
T = 25 C.

Combustion of H2: H2 + O2/2 → H2O.

The reactions are:

H2 → H + H − 104.2,
O2/2 → (O + O)/2 − 119.1/2,
O + 2H → H2O + 2 × 110.6.

So, the energy balance is 2 × 110.6 − 119.1/2 − 104.2 = 57.5. Thus,

H2 + O2/2 → H2O + 57.5 kcal.

Combustion of CO: CO + O2/2 → CO2.

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

11

Diatomic molecules
H−H
O=O
Manyatomic molecules
C−O
C=O in CO2
C=O in formaldegide
C=O in aldegides
C=O in ketons
C=N

104.2
119.1

85.5
192.0
166
176
179
147

Diatomic molecules
C=O
N≡N
Manyatomic molecules
O−H
O−O
C−H
C−C
C=C
C≡C

255.8
192.0

110.6
35
98.7
82.6
145.8
199.6

Table 1: Binding energies, kcal/mole. T = 25C.

The reactions are:

CO → C + O − 255.8,
O2/2 → (O + O)/2 − 119.1/2,
C + 2O → CO2 + 2 × 192.

So, the balance is 2 × 192 − 119.1/2 − 255.8 = 68.7. Thus,

CO + O2/2 → CO2 + 68.7 kcal.

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Combustion of the 50%+50% mixture of H2 and CO.

The balance is 2 × 110.6 + 2 × 192 − 119.1 − 255.8 − 104.2 = 126.1 kcal per 2
moles (1 mole of H2 and 1 mole of CO). For 1 mole of the mixture, we then
have 126.1/2 = 63 kcal. Thus,

(H2 + CO) + O2 → H2O + CO2 + 63 kcal.

(13)

So, the mixture of H2 and CO gives bigger reaction heat than 100% H2 gas.
Note that, since 57.5 kcal/mole is equal to 300 BTU/cf, the 50%+50%

mixture of H2 and CO gives about 63 kcal/mole = 330 BTU/cf.

12

5 Combustion of acetylen

In this section we study the thermochemical properties of acetylene because
useful for the study of magnegas when used for metal cutting [2a].

Pure acetylene (which is not the acetylene used in the metal cutting
industry) is a liquid with the linear molecule C2H2 = H-C≡C-H, boiling
temperature of T = −84C, and melting temperature of T = −81C. The heat
released in the combustion of acetylene is 311 kcal/mole, at temperature
T = 25C.

The combustion of acetylene in pure oxygen occurs via the reaction

C2H2 + (5/2)O2 = 2CO2(gas) + H2O(liquid) + 311 kcal/mole,

(14)

holding at the ﬂame temperature of about T = 2800C.

It is interesting to note that, e.g., ethane, C2H6, has a bigger reaction heat
of 373 kcal/mole, but it holds at the smaller ﬂame temperature T ≪ 2800 C
due to the reaction,

C2H6 + (7/2)O2 = 2CO2(gas) + 3H2O(liquid) + 373 kcal/mole,

(15)

producing three times water of the preceding reaction. A bigger part of the
total released energy is spent in water evaporation, by decreasing the ﬂame
temperature. It follows that ethane is a combustible gas less eﬃcient than
acetylene for metal cutting.

Magnegas is currently in regular production and sales for metal cutting
[2a]. Its daily uses in this ﬁeld has established that magnegas is more ef-
fective than acetylene in metal cutting, because: 1) the pre-heating time is
about half; 2) the cutting speed is almost double; and 3) the combustion ex-
hausts are dramatically cleaner than those of commercially sold acetylene; 4)
there is no ”back-ﬂash” (reﬂection of ﬂame in rusty surfaces); and 5) the cut
is manifestly cleaner. Magnegas is also much safer because stable, as com-
pared to the notoriously unstable commercial acetylene; it can be produced
anywhere needed with a desk-size equipment, thus avoiding transportation
altogether; and it is cheaper than acetylene.

The better eﬃciency of magnegas compared to acetylene is primarily due
to the combination of a bigger ﬂame temperature and energy density, which
reduce the pre-heat time and increase the cutting speed.

13

In fact, the ﬂame temperature for pure H2 is about T = 3100 C, so that
50% of H2 and 50% of CO in magnegas could provide a ﬂame temperature
bigger than that of acetylene.

An additional reason for the bigger eﬃciency of magnegas in metal cutting
is due to the fact that only a portion of oxygen is of atmospheric origin, while
the remaining portion originates from: 1) free O-atoms in magnecules; 2)
the presence in magnecules of HO-dimers; and 3) a possible dissociation of
C≡O, C=O, and C–O groups, which we expect to be present in magnegas.
These features are conﬁrmed by the dramatic decrease of air or oxygen for
the burning of magnegas as compared to acetylene, as well as by observed
carbon residues.

It should be noted that the value of the reaction heat of 311 kcal/mole,
has been measured for the water in liquid state (see Eq. (14)), while the
combustion heat of magnegas has been studied until now only for water pro-
duced at the vapor state. Therefore, the comparison of combustion heat of
magnegas with that of acetylene should require both combustion heat mea-
sured under the same conditions, i.e., both combustions being measured for
water produced either at the liquid or at the gas state, since the evaporation
heat of water is considerable (10.4 kcal/mole at T = 25 C). This occurrence
is an additional reason for the diﬃculties encountered until now in achieving
a scientiﬁc measurement of the energy content of magnegas [2a].

Additional diﬃculties in measuring the energy content of magnegas are
due to diﬃculties in achieving its complete combustion in air. This is due
to the anomalous means of storing energy, some of which is stored deep
into the structure of conventional molecules, which evidently requires special
conditions for complete combustion.

The Konovalov’s equation permits an estimate of the combustion heat,

∆H = −(47.02m + 10.5n + x) kcal/mol,

(16)

where m is number of O atoms used for complete combustion, n is number
of moles of the water produced, and x is the correction coeﬃcient, which
is a characteristic constant for each gas. Therefore, ﬁnal measurements on
the magnegas combustion will permit the identiﬁcation of its characteristic
constant x.

14

6 Combustion of magnegas

It is evident that the combustion of magnegas requires the oxidation, ﬁrst,
of magnecules, and then that of conventional molecules H2 and CO. There-
fore, the preceding energy calculations for a gas with 50% H2 and 50% CO
do not apply for a magnegas with the same conventional chemical composi-
tion. Additional novelties occur for other types of magnegases, such as that
produced from the recycling of antifreeze waste, whose energy content has
been conservatively estimated to be of the order of 900 BTU/cf [2a].then,
the bonding structure of magnecules plays a key role in understanding the
energy content of magnegas.

To begin, the known reactions H2 + O2/2 → H2O and CO + O2/2 →

CO2, should be replaced by the reaction

magnecule + nO2 → mH2O + kO2 + lCO2 + ... + ∆ kcal,

(17)

which may give increased energy released per each H2 molecule. Here, n, m,
k, l, ... are numbers, and the original magnecule is assumed to consist of
both H2 and CO molecules.

The energy balance for the combustion of magnecule is then given by:

E[combustion] = mE[H2O] + kE[O2] + lE[CO2] + ... − E[magnecule], (18)

where E[H2O], E[O2], E[CO2], ... are ground state energies of the molecular
constituents, and E[magnecule] is ground state energy of the the original
magnecule.

A way to calculate this energy balance is to use dissociation energy of the
magnecule, D[magnecule]. However, we should note that D[magnecule] is
diﬀerent for magnecules of diﬀerent mass and composition.

For chemical reactions, one should take into account the value of the
reaction constant K. For example, for the reaction H2+O2/2 → H2O (∆H =
−57.5 kcal), the reaction constant is very big, K = 1040 at T = 25 C, thus
indicating an almost total combustion of H2 gas at T = 25 C.

The general rule is that, for all highly exothermic reactions (typically, with
∆H < −15 kcal/mol), the reaction constant is of high value. The opposite
direction of the reaction, H2 + O2/2 ← H2O, is realized only at very high
temperatures, at which K < 1. The value K = 1 means equilibrium of
a reaction, while K < 1 means that a reaction runs in opposite direction.

15

In general, the relation between the reaction heat, ∆H, and the reaction
constant, K, is as follows:

− 2.303RT logK = ∆G,

(19)

where

∆G ≡ ∆H − T ∆S,
(20)
R = 1.986 cal·K−1·mol−1, T is temperature in Kelvins, and ∆S is the entropy
of the reaction. The latter is numerically big if the initial reagents have
molecular structures more ordered than the end products, i.e. there is an
increase of entropy S during the reaction.

The above outline on the reaction constant and reaction entropy helps
us to conclude that the combustion of magnegas is characterized by a very
high value of the reaction constant (perhaps even bigger than K = 1040
at T = 25C). In fact, the combustion of magnegas is a highly exothermic
reaction, and the magnecules have a structure much more ordered than the
product of the combustion. Therefore, during the combustion of magnegas
we have a large increase of the entropy ∆S > 0. These two factors lead to
very high value of the reaction constant K for the combustion of magnegas.
The table values of ∆H and ∆G are given at normal conditions (T = 25C,
p = 1 atm). However, ∆G is a function of the temperature. For most ele-
ments, ∆G of oxidation reactions (linearly) increases with the increase of the
temperature. Thus, the resulting oxides are less stable at high temperatures
than at low temperatures (typical example is H2O which dissociates at very
high temperatures).

It is interesting to note that the oxidation of carbon to carbon monox-
ide, e.g., C + CO2 → 2CO, is almost the only oxidation reaction for which
∆G decreases with the increase of the temperature. Here, the number of
moles increases about twice during the reaction. As a result, the entropy
greatly increases, ∆S > 0. Therefore, the CO molecule is more stable at
high temperatures than at low temperatures (for example, it is about twice
more stable at 3000C than at 1000C).

Another ecologically very important aspect in the combustion of mag-
negas is therefore the reduction of CO2 via the oxidation of carbon atoms
present in magnecules, and its subsequent dissociation as in Eq. (9) to release
the oxygen needed for the burning of H.

16

Since the stability of CO increases with the temperature, a better quality
of the exhaust is reached at lower original temperatures of magnegas. This
result should be compared with the opposite occurrence for natural gas and
for other fuels, which are generally pre-heated prior to combustion.

Another important characteristics of a reaction is the reaction rate. Var-
ious tests [2a] have show that the combustion of magnecules is faster than
the combustion of their molecular constituents. Santilli-Shillady isochemical
models of molecular structures permits the following understanding of this
additional anomaly.

In their natural conventional, and non-polarized states, H2 and O2 molecules

have the usual (spherical) shape due to rotations. However, an inspection of
the isochemical model of the water shows that such conﬁgurations are not
suited for the reaction of H and O into H2O. In particular, the orbitals of
H2 require a toroidal conﬁguration as a condition for their bonding to the
oxygen, a similar occurrence holding for the oxygen too.

It then follows that magnetically polarized molecules of hydrogen and
oxygen have a bigger reaction rate than the same molecules in un-polarized
conditions, since they have a distribution of the valence electrons more suit-
able for the reaction itself. Evidently, a bigger reaction rate implies a bigger
power.

Moreover, the combustion of a magnecule consisting of H2 and CO, does
not require the necessary previous dissociation of the O2 molecule (O2 → 2O
− 119.1 kcal), because each O-atom in a magnetically polarized O2 molecule
is ready for the combustion. Therefore, the magnecular structure acts as a
kind of catalysis, in which both O-atoms of the O2 molecule start to react
with the nearest pair H2× H2, or H2× CO, or CO×CO almost simultaneously;
see Fig. 1.

This occurrence also implies that less amounts of external energy is needed
to activate the reaction, resulting, again, in an anomalous energy release in
combustion. Usually, the activation energy is supplied by heat. Therefore,
we can conclude by saying that the combustion of magnegas can be initi-
ated at smaller temperature, in comparison to that of the simple mixture of
H2 and CO gases. The reduction of pre-heating time of about one-half by
magnegas as compared to that for acetylene, is in agreement with the above
interpretation.

Due to the presence of magnecules viewed as heavy complexes of H2 and
CO, one cubic foot of magnegas contains in fact bigger number of H2 and

17

O

O

-

CO

-

CO

Figure 1: Collision of O2 and a pair of correlated CO molecules.

CO molecules than it is for the respective simple mixture (i.e., without the
clusters) of these two gases, at the same temperature and pressure. Clearly,
magnegas is far from being an ideal gas. For example, for ideal gases the
number of molecules is NA = 6.02 · 1023 per 22.414 liters of volume, at
normal conditions (T = 0 C, p = 1 atm). This is not the case for real gases
(e.g. CO2), and especially for the gases containing macroscopic percentage
of particles of huge mass, 400...800 a.m.u., (and therefore big eﬀective size)
which are interacting with each other. Thus, the bigger number of H2 and
CO molecules per cubic foot of magnegas can be considered as one of the
simple reasons of high energy content of magnegas which has been measured
and calculated per cubic foot.

The above note implies that more experimental study of the thermody-
namics of magnegas, viewed as a real gas, is needed. For example, measure-
ment of the critical parameters —pressure pk, volume Vk, and temperature
Tk— and the Jole-Tomson eﬀect is of primary interest here. Also, we need in
measurement of the energy released of magnegas combustion not per cubic
foot but per mole, to obtain a value of the reaction heat, which we then can
compare to the standard values of the reaction heats, given in kcal/mol, at
T = 25 C and normal pressure.

Note that oxidation of C can result in various compounds, CO, CO2,
C3O2, C5O2, and even C12O9. The reaction constant K varies with the re-
action temperature so that at T = 600...700 K the product is almost only
CO2 while at about T = 1300 K the product is almost only CO. At low tem-
peratures, the resulting carbon monoxide does not oxidize further to carbon
dioxide CO2 despite the fact that this is thermodynamically much preferable
since the activation energy of the reaction CO + O2/2 → CO2 is high. Also,
a lack of air (oxygen) supports producing of CO.

Below, we consider the reaction,

CO + H2O → CO2 + H2 + 9.7 kcal,
(21)
(low exothermic, experimental value is ∆H = −9.7 kcal/mol, K = 105, at

18

T = 25 C, gaseous states, constant pressure), which also can take place.
The theoretical value of the reaction heat is due to CO → C + O − 255.8,
H2O → O+2H−2×110.6, C+2O → CO2 +2×192, and H+H → H2 +104.2.
So, the balance is 104.2 + 2 × 192 − 2 × 110.6 − 255.8 = 11.2. Thus,

CO + H2O → CO2 + H2 + 11.2 kcal.

(22)

The obtained theoretical value, 11.2 kcal, is a bit bigger than the above ex-
perimental value, 9.7 kcal, but it is acceptable within the provided accuracy.
The reaction constant of this reaction decreases with the increase of tem-
perature and is about K = 1 at temperature T = 830 C so that at higher
temperatures the reaction goes in opposite direction,

CO + H2O ← CO2 + H2,

T > 830C.

(23)

At lower temperatures, T = 700...830 C, we should expect that magnegas
exothermically reacts with water due to (21), thus decreasing percentage
of CO and increasing percentage of CO2 and H2 in magnegas. At room
temperatures, CO does not react with water because of the lack of activation
energy needed to initiate the reaction.

Using the reactions

we obtain the endothermic reaction,

C + O2 → CO2 + 94.5 kcal/mol,

2C + O2 → 2CO + 53.3 kcal/mol,

C + CO2 → 2CO − 40.8 kcal/mol,

(24)

(25)

(26)

which runs from left to right at high temperatures and/or high pressures, and
it runs from right to left at low temperatures. This reaction is important in
optimization of the PlasmaArcFlow reactor to produce magnegas with low
percentage of CO2, and also to cool down the liquid. Also, competition of
the reactions (25) and (26) is important in optimizing the magnegas com-
bustion. More studies are needed to identify optimal range of temperatures
and pressures, for the reactions (12), (21), (24)-(26), to get desired content
of magnegas, content of the exhaust, and its energy characteristics.

It is worthwhile to note that the mixture of CO and H2, used as a gas fuel
and in a synthesis of hydrocarbons, can be produced by the reaction of water

19

vapor ﬂow with overheated carbon (coal). The PlasmaArcFlow reactor can be
considered as an alternative method to produce such a mixture, which is used
in very important process of the catalytic synthesis of various hydrocarbons.
Also, it is known that the mixture of 25% (volume) of CO, 70% of N2
(nitrogen), and 4% of CO2 is used as a gas fuel, with the energy released
about 1000 kcal per cubic meter.

7 Structure of magnecules

In this section, we discuss on possible structures of magnecules and the origin
of the bonds in magnecule.

Currently, not much is known on the physical-chemical characteristics of
magnegas besides the basic chemical content, energy released, infrared spec-
troscopy and gas-chromatography mass-spectroscopy data, and some labora-
tory and industrial tests certifying its anomalous energy characteristics and
combustion properties [1, 2, 3]. Particularly, the IR/GC-MS data of mag-
negas at room temperatures, T = 10...20C, show that the (fragments of)
magnecules have masses up to 1000 a.m.u., (typically, 400...800 a.m.u.
for
the biggest mass in macroscopic percentage), and by the mass-spectra they
are not recognized as known molecules by computer search among more than
100,000 known species. Also, the infrared spectra reveal sharp peaks iden-
tiﬁed as CO and CO2 spectra, and a big number of very small peaks, for
the IR/GC-MS scanned masses 40...1000 a.m.u. Here, the presence of CO
infrared peaks is of somewhat strange character since M[CO] = 28 a.m.u.
is out of the scanned mass range, M > 40 a.m.u., so that none of separate
CO molecules have been analyzed by the infrared spectrometer. This can be
interpreted as that CO molecules are inside the magnecules, or some other
eﬀects simulating appearance of the CO peaks take place.

The presence of CO2 infrared peak, M[CO2] = 44 a.m.u., is not unex-
pected and can be interpreted as that there are some percentage of CO2 in
magnegas (as it is indeed the case due to chemical analysis), and/or CO2
molecules are also inside the magnecules. The small infrared peaks have not
been recognized by computer search as the peaks corresponding to known
molecules. They could be interpreted as the vibrational-rotational spectrum
of the magnecules. We refer the reader to Refs.[1, 2] for the other interesting
information on magnegas, and its applications.

20

Conduction of precise tests on the basic characteristics of magnegas and

the detected magnecules is much important. Typically, they are:
(Averaged) Molecular mass;
Density;
Boiling temperature;
Melting temperature;
Critical temperature at which the detected magnecules of magnegas are com-
pletely destroyed (temperature stability of the combustion properties);
Oxidation states;
Electronegativity;
Electrical conductivity;
Thermal conductivity;
Heat of vaporization;
Speciﬁc heat capacity;
First ionization potential;
Crystal structure;
Acid/Base properties;
Molecular volume;
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum;
Raman spectrum;
Magnetic susceptibility;
Dissociation energy of magnecules;
Electric charge of magnecules;
Magnetic moment of magnecules;
Roentgen-structural analysis of magnecules.

The NMR spectrum of magnegas is one of the best ways to see experi-
mentally that there is a kind of magnetic bonds in magnecules if H atoms are
present in magnecules. NMR test will give us information on the strength
of magnetic ﬁeld inside the H-atoms, to an extremally high accuracy. So,
if H2 molecule is polarized in magnecule, even to a very small degree, then
NMR spectrum would show this clearly due to high sensitivity provided by
modern NMR facilities. Also, this would give some experimental grounds, at
a microscopic level, to develop a realistic model for magnecules.

The NMR chemical shift, δ, is an entity characterizing intensity of mag-
netic ﬁeld experienced by the nucleus of H-atom (proton). It is measured in
ppm, in respect to the shift of thetramethilsilane (TMS), (CH3)4Si, which

21

is taken as the standard zero chemical shift, δ[TMS] = 0 ppm. For exam-
ple, δ[bare proton] = 31 ppm, δ[H-atom] = 13 ppm, δ[H2 gas] = 4.4 ppm,
δ[H2O at T=0 C] = 5.4 ppm, δ[H2O vapor] = 0.7 ppm. δ[HBr] = −4.2 ppm.
The above diﬀerences in values of δ are due to diﬀerent degrees of diamag-
netic screening of the proton caused by electrons; less value of δ means that
bigger diamagnetic screening takes place.

For the case if H2 is not in magnecules of magnegas, we would see the
NMR peak at about δ[H2 gas] = 4.4 ppm. For the case if H2 is in magnecules
of magnegas, we would see the NMR peak at some other value of δ.
In
addition, we would see the number of H-atoms in magnecule, and, if these
H-atoms are characterized by diﬀerent electronic (magnetic) environment
inside the magnecule, we would see several peaks each of which is splitted due
to eventual spin-spin interaction of the H nuclei provided by the molecular
(magnecular) bonds.

The possible types of bonds and mechanisms of creation and stability of

the magnecules are:

1. Valence bonds (for substructures);

2. Hydrogen bonds (for substructures);

3. Polymerization (for substructures);

4. Magnetic bonds due to polarized electronic orbits;

5. Electric polarization;

6. Van der Waals bonds;

7. Three-center bonds;

8. Two-dimensional quantum tunnel eﬀect;

9. Delocalized electrons; etc.

Below, we consider, in a more detail, some of the possible types of bonds

in magnecule.

1. Valence bonds?
In Fig. 2, we present chemical structure of a compound which simulates
presence of six CO molecules and ﬁve H2 molecules. This compound can be
thought of as one of the candidates to magnecules if we adopt the hypothesis
that magnecule is due to valence bonds between H, C, and O elements.

22

Indeed, here all the valence bonds of the H, C, and O have been used thus
giving support to a stability of the compound, and, this structure can be
extended by inserting additional vertical H-O-C-C-O-H lines thus providing
bigger mass of the resulting compound, up to the 1000 a.m.u. Moreover,
H-H (104.2 kcal/mol) and C=O (255.8 kcal/mol) binding energies are bigger
or comparable to the binding energies of the valence bonds presented in
Fig. 2 (see Table 1), with the weakest bond being C-C (82.6 kcal/mol), thus
partially explaining why such a compound, when it is destroyed, could give
the detected H2 and CO molecules of magnegas.

H

O

100

H

H

C

C

83

86

111

O

H

H

O

C

C

O

H

H

O

C

C

O

H

H

H

Figure 2: Compound simulating by its content six CO and ﬁve H2. The num-
bers near bonds indicate corresponding average binding energies, kcal/mol.

However, such a compound appears to be not relevant as a model of
real magnecules. Usually, at temperatures T < 100C, heat excitations of
molecules are not capable to destroy the bonds with the binding energies
bigger than 30...35 kcal/mol.

At room temperature, magnegas is stable, so we can conclude that the

binding energy of the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule is estimated to be

B[magnecule] > 25...30 kcal.

(27)

Due to the observed diﬀerence of the GC-MS spectra for the same magnegas
at diﬀerent time of measurement [1], we conclude that the magnecules are
metastable at T = 300K so that the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule are partially

23

destroyed by heat excitations at T = 300K. Therefore, in (27) we should make
correction to lower permitted values by taking, conservatively,

B[magnecule] > 20...25 kcal.

(28)

The distribution of peaks in the GC-MS spectra of magnegas tells us
that the charged fragments of magnecules are distributed densely, with no
evident order, and almost linearly increased mass, up to some highest value
of mass (e.g., 416 a.m.u.), which can be interpreted as a mass of single-
ionized magnecule. So, it seems that that all the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule
are characterized by approximately the same value of the binding energy.
Therefore, the magnecule does not have something like a hard core which
could be detected at a soft electron beam in mass-spectrometer.

The infrared spectrum of magnegas [1, 3] does reveal presence of the
valence bonds C-H (high intensity IR), O-H (sharp IR), C-C (weak intensity
IR), and/or C-O (high intensity IR), as well as C=O and O=C=O. However,
GC-MS/IR analysis, based on about 138,000 compound data library, does
not show presence of ordinary compounds except for the associated IR peaks
of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. In addition, big number of strong
bonds (like valence bonds) in magnecule would require much energy to be
destroyed while, e.g., the measured anomalously high value of the energy
released at magnegas combustion leads us to supposition that the speciﬁc
bonds in magnecule are not strong. Thus, in general we can rule out the
hypothesis that the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule are due to standard valence
bonds.

It is worthwhile to note that, e.g., cobalt hydrocarbonyl, HCo(CO)4, con-
taining both H and CO, is a gas, at room temperatures. Such type of a
compound is known as somewhat unusual because neutral metal is bonded
to carbon monoxide CO, which mostly conserves its own properties.
In a
strict sense, this type of bond is not a standard valence bond. Another ex-
ample is magnesium carbonyl, (CO)5-Mn-Mn-(CO)5 (melting point is 66 C),
where the bond Mn-Mn is of about 40 kcal strength.

Also, it is interesting to note that nickel carbonyl, Ni(CO)4, formed at
T = 80C, is a gas at room temperatures, and dissociates, Ni(CO)4 → Ni +
4CO, at T = 200C. Thus, the binding energy of the bond between Ni and
CO is of about 30 kcal. We could expect that the magnecules have a kind of
hydrocarbonyl structure like C(CO)n.

24

It is remarkable to note that one can try to destroy magnecules by ultra-
violet light, which supplies energy of about 70 kcal/mol for each absorbed
mole of photons. However, this is the case only if magnegas eﬀectively ab-
sorbs the UV light.

2. Hydrogen bonds?
Since magnegas contains hydrogen the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule could
be due to the hydrogen bonds. This bond originates from H atom medi-
ating two other atoms by sharing its electron with one atom and its pro-
ton shifted to the other one. The binding energy of the hydrogen bond
is about BH = 5 kcal/mol. Examples are HF (liquid), with the chain
· · · H · · · F · · · H · · · F · · ·, and H2O (liquid), where the hydrogen bonds are
responsible for peculiar properties of water. We see that the hydrogen bonds
are also too weak, to meet the above estimated value (27) of the binding
energy of the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule. However, we should to note that
in the case of several hydrogen bonds in parallel between two molecules the
overall binding energy is evidently increased.

Even if we assume that the speciﬁc bonds in magnecule are a kind of
”composite” bonds, Van der Waals bonds plus hydrogen bonds, the esti-
mated upper total value, BV dW + BH = 10 kcal/mol, still does not ﬁt
B[magnecule] > 20...25 kcal.
It follows from the energy estimation (27)
that the speciﬁc bond in magnecule are weaker than typical valence bonds
and stronger than typical Van der Waals and/or hydrogen bonds, for a struc-
ture consisting of H, C, and O atoms.

3. Polymerization?
It is quite interesting to note that there is the reaction producing an
explosive compound, potassium carbonyl, 6CO + 6K → K6(CO)6, which is
used to obtain unusual carbon monoxide (carbon monoxide complex), (CO)6.
This structure is believed to exist due to polymerization. For example,
a typical polymerization (e.g., of propylene, CH(CH3)CH2) is owing to C-C
bond, which is characterized by the binding energy about 72...83 kcal/mol,
with the reaction heat of about ∆H = −20 kcal/mol per each molecule of the
linear chain of polypropylene. We see that the typical value of the binding
energy is much bigger than 30...35 kcal/mol. However, some mechanisms of
interaction between CO molecules can also make a contribution here because
of the speciﬁc electronic structure of CO molecule. So, we could expect lower

25

values of the binding energy between two neighbor CO molecules in (CO)6
complex. It is a consequence of the existence of (CO)6 that there may exist
higher mass carbon monoxide complexes, (CO)n, with n > 6.

In any case, the known type of carbon monoxide complex, (CO)6, is a
direct conﬁrmation that the above conjectured CO×CO bond really
exists, as it is known in practical chemistry. So the existing complex

CO × CO × · · · × CO × CO,

(29)

where ”×” denote a bond, is the best known real candidate to be a kind
of magnecule. We should calculate whether the binding energy of this bond
satisﬁes the condition (27).

The complex of type (29) would give mass-spectrum which exhibits pe-
riodicity in molecular masses of its fragments. Indeed, the weakest bonds in
(29) are evident so that the complex (29), under the inﬂuence of the elec-
tronic beam in mass-spectrometer, would dissociate by separating integer
number of (ionized) CO molecules. However, the mass-spectra of magnegas
does not reveal periodicity with mass 28 a.m.u. as the smallest step. Instead,
we observe almost randomly distributed masses of the fragments, with the
minimal mass diﬀerence being 1 a.m.u.

Thus, we are led to the assumption that there are some other types of
magnecules in magnegas, in addition to (29). We expect presence of H atoms
in magnecules which could provide (multiple) hydrogen bonds. The -O-O-
group serving, for example, as a peroxide bridge, could be present here as
well.

4. Magnetic bonds?
To start with, study of the eﬀect of external strong homogeneous constant
magnetic ﬁeld, in order to see what happens with electronic structure of
(diatomic) molecule, is much important in view of the supposed magnetic
origin of the bonds.

The most interesting is to investigate the electronic structure of many-
electron diatomic molecules, especially CO (255.8 kcal/mol). A peculiar
property of the electronic structure of carbon monoxide CO is that each of
the atoms, C (1s22s22p2) and O (1s22s22p4), has free (lone) pair of elec-
trons. So, only six electrons among ten 2s and 2p electrons, namely, two
electrons from C and four electrons from O, are used to form two standard

26

valence π-bonds and one standard valence σ-bond, within the framework of
the molecular orbitals method. All these π- and σ-orbitals are very close to
O while the lone pair of C is far from O. This lone pair has high energy,
and can easily react with an element that accepts electrons. So, CO reveals
electronic donor properties. This model of the CO bonds is approximate
because of the use of pure 2s and 2p orbitals; more detailed picture can be
obtained by hybridization of 2s and 2p orbitals.

5. Van der Waals bonds?
Three basic types of Van der Waals bonds are:
The orientational bond, which is due to the interaction of constant dipole

moments, pe, of molecules,

The molecules tend to direct their dipole moments ~pe along one line to provide
lower value of the total energy while heat makes a disorder. The above
expression for the potential energy is valid for high temperature region.

The inductional bond, which is due to the induced electric polarization

of molecules, is characterized by the potential energy,

Uori = −

p4
e
24π2ε2

0kT

1
r6 .

Uind = − αp2
e
8π2ε2
0

1
r6 ,

(30)

(31)

where α is polarization constant. For neighbor molecules ”A” and ”B”, the
induced dipole moment of the molecule ”A” is ~pe = ε0α ~E, where ~E is electric
ﬁeld of the molecule ”B”. The polarization property of the molecule ”A”,
characterized by a numeric value of the parameter α, depends mostly on the
molecular volume of the molecule ”A”; for nonpolar molecules, α does not
depend on the temperature.

The dispersional bond, which is due to the interaction caused by corre-
lated zero mode oscillations of two neighbor molecules, is characterized, in a
linear approximation, by the potential energy,
Udisp = − e4¯hω0
32π2ε2
0a

1
r6 ,

(32)

where ω0 = qa/m is frequency of zero mode harmonic oscillations, and a is
coeﬃcient of elasticity.

27

The above three formulas are in SI units, where ε0 = 8.85·10−12C·N−1·m−2
is the fundamental dielectric constant, k = 1.38·10−23J·K−1 is Boltzman con-
stant, e = 1.6 · 10−19C is charge of electron, ¯h = 1.06 · 10−34J·sec, and r is a
distance; 1 erg = 10−7J; 1 kcal = 4.1868 · 103J. Usually, the eﬀective distance
of the Van der Waals attraction is about 10−9m = 10˚A ≃ 20 bohrs, between
centers of molecules. For the molecules having considerable constant dielec-
tric moment (like H2O and HCl), the orientational VdW interaction (30) is
dominating while for the other molecules the dispersional VdW interaction
(32) is a leading term. The Van der Waals bond, as a sum of the above three
types of bonds, UV dW = Uori + Uind + Udisp, is usually characterized by the
binding energy BV dW = 0.1...10 kcal/mol.

An example is BV dW = 2.4 kcal/mol for methane (CH4) molecular crystal
which has the melting temperature T = −183C. For the higher mass alkanes
(ethane, propane, buthane, etc.) the melting temperature increases almost
linearly, up to T = 66C for triaconthane (number of C atoms in triaconthane
molecule is 30). So, the Van der Waals binding energy for triaconthane
molecular crystal is estimated to be about 2.4 × (273 + 66)/(273 − 183) = 9
kcal/mol.

¿From this point of view, measurement of the melting temperature of mag-
negas and precise measurement of the temperature range at which magnecules
in magnegas begin to dissociate, at normal pressure, are of much interest, and
could give us experimental grounds for independent estimation of the value
of B[magnecule], in addition to (28).

The values BV dW = 0.1...10 kcal/mol are too small, in comparison with
B[magnecule] > 20...25 kcal/mol, to conclude that the speciﬁc bonds in
magnecule are due to the Van der Waals bonds alone. However, in general the
Van der Waals bonds can be strong enough in some cases, e.g., for fullerene
(C60) molecular crystal and the above mentioned triaconthane, to survive
room (and higher) temperatures. That is, BV dW can be of the order of 20
kcal/mol, as it is the case for fullerene crystals. So, in general we can not
rule out the possibility that the origin of the speciﬁc bonds in magnecules
are due to Van der Waals bonds.

Nevertheless, while for the molecules like C60 or triaconthane it is more
or less justiﬁed that they provide strong VdW bonds (about 9...20 kcal/mol)
since they are molecules of big size with big number of atoms, for H2 and CO
diatomic molecules it is hardly the case; we expect the values BV dW = 0.1...5
kcal/mol for H2 and CO (magnegas). So, it seems that the speciﬁc bonds in

28

magnecule are not Van der Waals ones alone since they alone are too weak
to ﬁt the currently available experimental data.

Below, we consider brieﬂy some aspects of the processes in PlasmaAr-
cFlow reactor, in order to give a preliminary analysis of the conditions at
which magnecules of magnegas are produced.

Strong external (electro)magnetic ﬁeld may cause a deep rearrangement
of the electronic structure of many-electron diatomic molecules, thus leading
to capability to form additional and/or rearranged bonds. On the other hand,
the inﬂuence of the external (electro)magnetic ﬁeld might be a driving force
in producing of (CO)n, and other gaseous molecular complexes, in the Plas-
maArcFlow reactor; notice that the constant dipole moment of CO is about
0.12 Debay, and for H2 it is zero. Indeed, the presence of high molecular mass
complexes with the speciﬁc bonds estimated due to (27) indicates that in the
reactor there are speciﬁc conditions for ordering of elementary molecules to
the complexes despite the eﬀect of high temperatures. Temperature of liquid
in the reactor is kept at about T ≃ 70C, and therefore characteristic tem-
peratures of gas in big bubbles are T ≃ 70...100C. Very small bubbles are of
high pressure and temperature which decreases as they expand and try to
reach thermodynamical equilibrium with the liquid until they leave it. These
very small bubbles have temperature higher than T = 100C, and the gas in
them is of high pressure. It seems that the complexes are formed after this
stage. Indeed, very high temperatures (T > 1500C) caused by the arc serve
to dissociate molecules while in the lower temperature region, close to the
arc, association of molecules (H2, CO, etc.) takes place.

So, we indicate six characteristic temperature ranges and associated re-

gions:

1. Temperature of the underwater arc (DC, 30...40V, 500...1000A), T >
1500C. Dissociation of H2O molecules (∼ 110 kcal/mol), association of
CO (∼ 255 kcal/mol) and CO2 molecules;

2. Temperature in the region close to arc, 800 < T < 1500C. Association

of H2 (∼ 104 kcal/mol) and H2O molecules, the reaction (22);

3. Temperature in the region near the arc, 700 < T < 800C. Very small

bubbles of CO, H2, CO2, and H2O gases, the reaction (23);

4. Temperature in the region near the arc, 150 < T < 700C. Very small

bubbles of CO, H2, CO2, and H2O gases;

29

5. Temperature in the region near the arc, 100 < T < 150C. Association
of O2 molecules and complexes (∼ 30 kcal/mol due to (27)), small and
big bubbles of CO, H2, CO2, O2, and H2O gases;

6. Temperature in the region far from the arc, 70 < T < 100C. Associa-
tion of complexes (∼ 30 kcal/mol due to (27), water condensation, big
bubbles of CO, H2, CO2, and O2 gases leaving the liquid.

Here, we have not indicated C atoms which can also be present and make

an essential contribution at some of the above stages.

Microscopically, forming of the high mass metastable complexes requires
collision, or series of collisions, of several CO (and may be H2 and O2)
molecules, at temperatures T < 150C. Otherwise, the complex would be
dissociated back by heat excitations. However, we should to note that high
pressure in bubbles can admit higher temperatures, T < 200C, or so, instead
of T < 150C.

8 Conclusions

Magnegases are essentially composed of metastable clusters, called Santilli’s
magnecules [1c], containing isolated H, C, and O atoms plus OH, CH dimers,
plus H2 molecules, single, double, and triple CO bonds.

The initiation of the combustion breaks down those clusters after which
some of H atoms form H2 molecules while other form H2O without forming
H2 molecules. It is important to note that prior to combustion, only a small
number of C and O atoms are combined into carbon monoxide. As estab-
lished by experimental evidence, CO2 is contained in the exhaust in about
5%. This evidence is particularly intriguing in view of the fact that 50% of
magnegas produced from pure water and carbon electrodes must be com-
posed of C and O atoms. The fact that the combustion exhaust of the same
gas contains about 5% CO2 therefore establishes beyond doubt that only a
small percentage of C and O atoms are bonded into carbon monoxide. Still
in turn this evidence establishes magnecular structure of magnegas.

In view of all the above results the combustion of magnegas can be opti-

mized by the following means:

1) Magnegas combustion should run at lower temperatures as compared

to other fuels. In particular, this implies automatical reduction of NOx’s;

30

2) Combustion of magnegas should be triggered by spark operating at

the highest possible voltage with a minimum of the order of 50,000 V;

3) Energy content of magnegases can be increased with increase of oper-

ating pressure and electric power.

In closing, we should indicate that the number of open problems on the
creation, structure and combustion of magnegas has increased, rather than
decreased, following this study. This outcome should have been expected in
view of the novelty, extreme complexities, as well as insuﬃcient experimental
data at this writting on the magnegas technology.

It is hoped that this study will stimulate additional research by interested
colleagues in view of the important environmental implications of this new
fuel.

31

References

[1] R. M. Santilli, J. New Energy 4, issue 1 (1999) [1a]; Hadronic J. 21,
789 (1998) [1b]; Foundations of hadronic chemistry. With application
to new clean energies and fuels (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston-
Dordrecht-London, 2001) [1c].

[2] Magnegas Technology websitee: http://www.magnegas.com [2a]; Insti-

tute for Basic Research web site: http://www.i-b-r.org [2b].

[3] R. M. Santilli and D. D. Shillady, Intern. J. Hydr. Energy 24, 943 (1999)

[3a]; and Intern. J. Hydrogen Energy 25, 173 (2000) [3b]

[4] T.L.Cottrell, The strengths of chemical bonds (Butterworth, London,

1958);
L. Pauling, The nature of the chemical bonds (Cornell Univ. Press, N.Y.,
1960);
F.D.Rossini et al., Circular of the National Bureau of Standards 500
(Washington, DC, 1952);
F.D.Rossini et al., Selected values of physical and thermodynamical prop-
erties of hydrocarbon and related compounds (American Petroleum In-
stitute Research Project 44) (Carnegie Press, Pittsburgh, 1953).

[5] M. G. Kucherenko and A. K. Aringazin, Hadronic J. 21, 895 (1998) [5a];
A.K.Aringazin and M. G. Kucherenko, Hadronic J. 23, 1 (2000); e-print
http://www.arXive.org: physics/0001056 [5b];
A. K. Aringazin,
http://www.arXive.org: physics/0001057 [5c].

Hadronic

(2000);

e-print

23,

57

J.

32

