1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CAUSALITY, SYMMETRIES AND QUANTUM MECHANICS

Jeeva Anandan

Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford

Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK

and

Department of Physics and Astronomy

University of South Carolina

Columbia, SC 29208, USA

E-mail: jeeva@sc.edu

December 8 , 2001

Abstract

It is argued that there is no evidence for causality as a metaphysi-

cal relation in quantum phenomena. The assumption that there are no

causal laws, but only probabilities for physical processes constrained by

symmetries, leads naturally to quantum mechanics. In particular an argu-

ment is made for why there are probability amplitudes that are complex

numbers. This argument generalizes the Feynman path integral formula-

tion of quantum mechanics to include all possible actions that are allowed

by symmetries, but only the lowest order terms are observable at the

presently accessible energy scales.

1

1

Introduction: Causal Laws and Wave-Particle

Duality

The world-view that the universe is governed by precise causal or dynamical

laws, which was called the paradigm of laws [1], was due to Galileo, Descartes,

Newton and others. The ﬁrst indications that this paradigm may not be valid

already appeared during Newton’s study of light. Newton had formulated a

highly successful set of laws for material particles, known today as Newton’s

laws of motion and gravitation. Contrary to Newton’s famous statement, “hy-

potheses non ﬁngo”, the assumption that the material particles should obey

these laws, or any laws, was a hypothesis. It was natural for Newton to then try

to bring the behavior of light into this paradigm, which he has helped to create

more than anyone else. So, he made the hypothesis that light consisted of ma-

terial particles, called corpuscles. This was convenient for Newton because then

these corpuscles are subject to the same laws of motion which he has already

‘perfected’.

However, Newton’s theory of light ran into problems almost immediately. It

could not explain partial reﬂection, as Newton himself recognized. Why is that

when a corpuscle encountered a slab of glass, it was sometimes transmitted and

sometimes reﬂected? To explain this using the deterministic laws of motion of

Newton, it was supposed at ﬁrst that there are ‘holes’ and ‘spots’ in the glass, so

that if the corpuscle encountered a hole it went through and if it struck a spot

it was reﬂected. This is perhaps the ﬁrst of the patchwork theories of physics

that were proposed in order for physicists to remain within the paradigm of

laws, which will be done all the way to the 21st century. But Newton himself

realized that this theory does not work. This was because, as Feynman [?] has

mentioned, Newton made his own lenses and mirrors by polishing glass. And

he knew that the small scratches that he made with powder as he polished glass

had no appreciable eﬀect on the partial reﬂection of light.

2

Newton’s hypotheses, in addition to not explaining partial reﬂection, could

not explain also interference and diﬀraction, as is well known. Physicists tried

to solve these problems by abandoning Newton’s ontology of corpuscles, while

keeping his basic assumption that light obeyed deterministic laws. They should

have done the reverse! But I shall ﬁrst follow the historical route before dis-

cussing the logical alternative. Historically, physicists replaced Newton’s cor-

puscles with a wave. What made this appealing to them was that Huygens

had formulated a law for the propagation of a wave, called Huygens’ principle,

according to which every point on a wave front acted as a source of secondary

wavelets whose interference was suﬃcient to reconstruct the subsequent wave-

fronts. This was the ﬁrst dynamical or causal law to govern the propgation of

a wave, as opposed to Newton’s laws that governed the propagation of material

particles. And using these laws and the new ontology that light is a wave it was

easy to explain all phenomena of light known at that time, including partial

reﬂection, interference and diﬀraction.

But today we know additional phenomena that would make Newton’s on-

tology of light consisting of corpuscles appear to be fundamentally valid. For

example, if we make the intensity of light falling on a photographic plate low

enough we see spots appearing, which is interpreted as due to the corpuscles

of light, or photons as they are now called, striking the plate. Newton could

have saved his ontology for light by giving up his hypothesis that the corpuscles

should obey causal deterministic laws. Suppose in the above example of the

glass slab, 30% of the light is reﬂected and 70% is transmitted. Newton could

have postulated that a corpuscle has a 30% probability of being reﬂected and

detected in a detector and 70% probability of it being transmitted and detected

in a diﬀerent detector. But Newton and other physicists were unwilling to give

up causal deterministic laws until the twentieth century when observed physical

phenomena made physicists question their cherished beliefs. I shall therefore re-

turn to the historical development of physics and consider Huygens wave theory

3

of light, which kept physicists within the paradigm of laws.

The wave theory received a tremendous boost in the nineteenth century with

the introduction of electric and magnetic ﬁelds by Faraday and Maxwell. These

ﬁelds obeyed causal deterministic laws that were mathematically formulated by

Maxwell. Moreover light waves were recognized as special cases of this electro-

magnetic ﬁeld, and Maxwell’s laws justiﬁed Huygens’ principle. The price paid

now for staying within the paradigm of laws was only that the universe had to be

regarded as a strange mixture of material particles and ﬁelds. Physicists lived

with this dual ontology even when an inconsistency was found between the two

sets of laws that governed material particles and ﬁelds. This inconsistency, ﬁrst

clearly recognized by Einstein, was that the symmetries of the laws of mechanics

that governed material particles were not the same as the symmetries of the laws

of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Einstein required that both symmetries should be

the same, and asserted the primacy of ﬁelds over particles by requiring that the

laws of mechanics should be modiﬁed so that they have the same symmetries as

the laws of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. This was the ﬁrst time in the history of

physics that symmetries took priority over laws in the sense that the laws were

modiﬁed to conform to the symmetries. Moreover, the existence of universal

symmetries for all the laws of physics enabled the construction of a physical

geometry having the same symmetries, namely the Minkowski space-time.

2 Role of Symmetries in Eliminating Metaphys-

ical Relations

The Lorentz group of symmetries also eliminated the following three metaphys-

ical relations that existed prior to Einstein’s paper on relativity. 1) Newton’s

postulated “absolute space” (on the basis of his rotating bucket argument) or

the “ether” in which light waves propagated implied an absolute relation be-

tween two time- like separated events that have the same absolute position in

4

this “absolute space”. 2) Newtonian physics assumed that two events have the

relation of absolute simultaneity if they are at the same “absolute time”. 3)

Newtonian physics allowed for causal relations to exist between absolutely si-

multaneous events. For Newton’s gravitational interaction, these were the only

causal relations. But since these three relations are not Lorentz invariant (rela-

tion (1) is not even Galilei invariant), and therefore not an objective property

of the world, they were discarded. The overthrow of (3), which Newton himself

regarded as unnatural, meant that, since any pair of space-like events is simul-

taneous in an appropriately chosen inertial frame, and all inertial frames are

related by the Lorentz group of symmetries, the resulting acausality needed to

be extended to all space-like separated events.

In order to eliminate such metaphysical relations in general, I now formulate

a principle, called M : A necessary condition for a relation to be admissible as

an objective relation in a physical theory is that it should be invariant under the

symmetries of the theory. This condition would also be suﬃcient condition in a

purely mathematical theory. However, for a physical relation to be admissible in

a physical theory, some empirical evidence in support of this relation would be

needed. On the basis of M , the metaphysical relation (1) of absolute position,

and hence absolute space, was not admissible even in Newtonian physics because

this relation is not invariant under the Galilei boosts that are symmetries of

this theory. But the other two metaphysical relations mentioned above were

invariant under the Galilei group of symmetries and therefore excluded only

because of the Galilei group was superseded by the Lorentz group of symmetries

as a result of the work of Lorentz, Poincare and Einstein.

However, there still remained the following metaphysical relation: 4) The

causal relation between two events that are time- like separated. But this re-

lation is asymmetric in time because while an earlier event a may inﬂuence a

later event b, it is not possible for the later event to inﬂuence the earlier event.

Even in a deterministic theory like classical electrodynamics, time asymmet-

5

ric causality is introduced by the choice of retarded Green’s functions. This is

unlike Newton’s causal relation between simultaneous events, which is a sym-

metric relation because of Newton’s third law of motion, and invariant under the

Galilei group of symmetries. The physical theories we have today are invariant

under time reversal symmetry T, apart from weak interaction which is irrele-

vant to the problem at hand because causality is posited even in the absence

of weak interaction. Moreover, all theories of physics today, including weak

interactions, have CPT symmetry. Hence, the principle M , and time reversal

symmetry in the absence of weak interactions or CPT symmetry in the presence

of weak interactions imply that the metaphysical relation (4) of causality should

be discarded. Alternatively, if causality is to be kept then CPT symmetry or T

symmetry in the absence of weak interactions should be discarded. But while

people would agree that b cannot inﬂuence a, they would not accept the reverse

even though the intervening space-time region between a and b has the same

structure for both relations!

3

Indeterminism and the EPR Paradox

Eliminating causality means that a given event is not uniquely determined by

the ‘earlier’ events. Then there must be indeterminism in our physical theory.

But historically, physicists seriously entertained indeterminism, only after the

wave-particle duality was forced upon them. The work of Planck and Einstein

showed that it was necessary to associate particles with the electromagnetic ﬁeld,

vindicating the ontology of Newton. But at the same time, the ﬁeld included

the wave aspect. This wave-particle duality was recognized as characteristic of

all particles by De Broglie, and Schr¨odinger introduced the wave function that

obeyed Schr¨odinger’s equation to represent the wave properties. It appeared

then that this quantum wave obeyed a causal deterministic law. The relation

between the wave and the particle was given in probabilistic terms by Born:

6

The probability density of observing a particle at x is

2, where ψ is the
ψ(x)
|
|

wave function of the particle representing its state. More generally, the prob-
2. This Born rule
|

ability of observing this particle in a state φ is

φ >
|

< ψ

|

may be generalized further by replacing the particle with any quantum system.

This rule is very well conﬁrmed by experiment and is largely responsible for

the tremendous empirical success of quantum theory. Originally, this rule was

associated with an assumed indeterministic change from the state ψ to φ. Sub-

sequently, two diﬀerent deterministic descriptions of quantum phenomena were

given by Bohm [5] (also called the causal interpretation of quantum mechan-

ics) and Everett [6]. But for these descriptions to be empirically relevant, they

need to give the experimentally very well conﬁrmed Born rule. In the latter

two descriptions, however, probabilities are introduced ad hoc, which amount

to bringing the indeterminism of quantum mechanics through the back door.

I shall now show that, owing to this indeterminism, the correlation between

two entangled states, between which there is no causal relation, is metaphysically

similar to the correlation between two states that are related by Schr¨odinger

evolution. Consider two spin-half particles 1 and 2, which interacted sometime

ago but no longer interacting, and whose spin states are now EPR correlated:

ψ =

(ψ↑(1)ψ↓(2)

ψ↓(1)ψ↑(2))

(1)

1
√2

−

where ψ↑(1) is the spin-up state of particle 1 and ψ↓(2) is the spin-down state

of particle 2 etc. The state (1) is spherically symmetric because its total spin is

zero; therefore the ‘spin-up’ and ‘spin-down’ basis states may be with respect to

any direction in space. As is also well known, it is not possible to communicate

using the entanglement between the two particles in (1) because they are non

interacting. Suppose Alice and Bob make measurements on particles 1 and 2,

respectively, and try to use their outcomes to communicate. If Alice observes

1 to have spin- up (spin-down) along the x

direction, she can predict with

certainty that 2 has spin-down (spin-up). Therefore, Bob by measuring the spin

along the the x

direction for 2 can verify the outcome of Alice’s measurement,

−

−

7

provided Alice has informed Bob beforehand that she will measure spin in the

x

direction. But it is impossible for Alice to send a signal this way because

−

of the indeterminacy of the outcome of her own measurement. Suppose now

that Alice and Bob have decided before hand that if Alice measures spin along

the x

direction (y

direction) the signal she sends to Bob is ‘yes’ (‘no’). But

−

−

it is impossible for Bob to know which observable Alice has actually measured

because of the indeterminacy of the outcome of his own measurement. Thus the

indeterminacy of quantum mechanics prevents Alice communicating with Bob

using the entanglement in (1).

The inability to communicate signals faster than the speed of light c, and the

ability to communicate signals with speed less or equal to c is called Einstein

causality. We saw above that since quantum mechanics allows for entanglement,

the indeterminism in the outcome of measurements is essential to preserve Ein-

stein causality in quantum phenomena. People often wonder why non relativistic

quantum mechanics should preserve Einstein causality, which was obtained from

relativistic physics. However, the above argument that Alice cannot communi-

cate with Bob through entanglement without interaction applies to any two

degrees of freedom that are entangled. Alice’s and Bob’s measurements need

not be space-like separated events; Bob could make his measurement to the fu-

ture of Alice. And the two entangled degrees of freedom need not be separated

in space like the two particles above; they could be right on top of each other.

To prove this, it is suﬃcient to note that the evolution of the reduced density

matrix ρ2 of particle 2 is governed entirely by the Hamiltonian of particle 2

because there is no interaction between particles 1 and 2. Therefore, whatever

measurement Alice makes on particle 1 would aﬀect ρ1 but not ρ2. Hence, the

outcomes of Bob’s measurements on particle 2 that are determined by ρ2 are

unaﬀected by Alice’s measurements.

Thus Alice’s inability to send a signal from event a to event b by means of

entanglement between two non- interacting systems is independent of whether

8

a and b is space-like, time-like or null separated. However, Alice may send a

signal using the time-evolution of the wave function when a and b are time-like

or null separated. For example, Alice and Bob may agree beforehand to measure

a particular component of spin, say Sz, and that if Alice sends a spin-up (spin-

down) particle to Bob then Alice means yes (no). Suppose Alice wishes to send

the signal ‘yes’. She then measures a spin component on the wave function ψ

of a spin-half particle at time 0 in the neighborhood of a. If the outcome is

spin-up she does nothing, but if the outcome is spin-down she rotates it by π

radians to make it spin-up or she keeps measuring other spin-half particles until

she gets one in the spin-up state. Then she sends ψ(0) = ψ↑ to Bob. During

the subsequent time evolution, no torques act on the particle. Therefore, due

to conservation of angular momentum, at time t, ψ(t) will have spin up. Bob

then measures Sz in the neighborhood of b that is in the future of a. He ﬁnds

it be in the state ψ↑ with 100% proabability, and feels elated because Alice has

said ‘yes’.

However, if Alice had not communicated to Bob beforehand which spin-

component she will measure, Bob cannot determine the signal she had sent.

This is because the outcome of Bob’s measurement of the spin-component in

a general direction is indeterminate. Alice then would have to send a large

number of particles in the state ψ(0) at time t = 0 to Bob so that Bob may

statistically determine by means of his own measurements the signal that Alice

has sent. Even this would not be possible if Alice is not allowed to get around

the indeterminacy of her measurements and put her particle(s) in the state

ψ(0) = ψ↑ as in the case of trying to communicate via entanglement mentioned

above. Hence the metaphysical connection, due to entanglement, between ψ↑

and ψ↓ is no diﬀerent from the metaphysical connection, due to Schr¨odinger

evolution, between ψ(0) and ψ(t), because of the indeterminacy in the outcomes

of measurements of Alice and Bob.

9

4 Physical and Metaphysical Causalities

It is necessary to distinguish between two types of “causality” at this point.

By metaphysical or deterministic causality will be meant the the relation be-

tween occurrences α and β that exists if the occurrence α always produces,

determines or necessitates the occurrence β. But the ability to communicate

information, albeit probabilistically, may be called physical causality. More

precisely, physical or probabilistic causality is the relation between the occur-

rence α and occurrences β1, β2, β3, .... that holds if given the occurrence of α

we can predict the probabilities of β1, β2, β3, ..... In the examples in section 3,

if Alice and Bob do not agree beforehand to measure the same component of

spin, then Alice’s measurement, call it α, does not necessitate the result β of

Bob’s measurement, whether or not these two measurements are separated by

a space-like, time-like or null intervals. So, there is no metaphysical causality

in all these cases. However, Alice can inﬂuence the probability of the outcome

of Bob’s measurements if Bob makes his measurements to the future of Alice,

but not when the two sets of measurements are space-like separated. This is an

example of physical causality.

Einstein causality states that there can be physical causality between time-

like or null separated events but not between space-like separated events. As

mentioned above, this is realized only probabilistically in quantum phenomena.

But Einstein himself was deeply attached to metaphysical causality, as shown

from his following statement: [7]

“... I should not want to be forced into abandoning strict causality without de-

fending it more strongly than I have so far. I ﬁnd the idea quite intolerable that an

electron exposed to radiation should choose of its own free will, not only its moment

to jump oﬀ, but also its direction. In that case I would rather be a cobbler, or even

an employee in a gaming-house, than a physicist.”

It is ironical that Einstein who overthrew three of the four metaphysical

relations mentioned in section 2, could never give up the fourth metaphysical

10

relation, namely causality.

The only way to experimentally test physical causality if by means of a large

number of trials of the form (α, β1), (α, β2), (αβ3), ..... The relative frequency of

each distinct pair in this experiment, as the number of trials tend to inﬁnity, is

the probability of occurrence of this pair. However, in a given trial, say (α, β3),

we may ask, as Einstein does implicitly in the above statement, why is it that

α was followed by β3 and not β1, β2 or β4, ..? This absence of metaphysical

causality, due to the indeterminism in quantum phenomena, should make us re-

examine the meaning and validity of physical causality as well. Suppose Alice

sends a large number of spin-half particles in state α, say the spin-up state, to

Bob. By doing experiments of the above form with a large number of trials,

Bob determines to a very high probability the state α. This is possible in this

instance because of conservation of angular momentum that ensures that all the

particles are in the same spin state when they reach Bob. But this conservation

of angular momentum is due to rotational symmetry.

In general, conservation laws are due to symmetries. And if the state is not

an eigenstate of the conserved quantity then the conservation is realized only

statistically, i.e. the expectation value of the conserved quantity is preserved

in time. The equality of the expectation values of the conserved quantity at

two diﬀerent times is therefore like physical causality, because of because of the

probabilistic manner in which they are both determined, and does not imply

metaphysical causality. But the symmetries are not probabilistic as far as we

know. Since causality is associated with dynamical laws, which give conservation

laws, this suggests that symmetries may be more basic than dynamical laws that

may actually be eﬀective laws arising from symmetries.

It is often stated that Einstein causality is incorporated in quantum ﬁeld

theory by the requirement that ﬁeld operators at events that are space-like

separated are independent in the sense that they must commute if they are

Bosonic ﬁelds and anti-commute if they are Fermionic ﬁelds.

I.e.

if φm(x)

11

are the components of the various ﬁelds in the theory, where x stands for the

space-time coordinate (x, t), then

[φm(x), φn(y)]± = 0

(2)

whenever x and y are space-like separated. The

in (2) refers to anti-

±

commutator if the ﬁelds are Fermionic and commutator if the ﬁelds are Bosonic.

However, (2) does not require Einstein causality and may be introduced in

order that quantum ﬁeld theory is Lorentz invariant [8]. To see this, consider

the time evolution operator U for quantum states that is generated by the

Hamiltonian H(t) in a canonically quantized ﬁeld theory. Since H(t) represents

the total energy, and the locality assumption requires that this energy is the

sum of energies in all the diﬀerent regions of space,

H(t) =

d3x

(x),

H

Z

where

(x) is the Hamiltonian density. It follows that

H

U = T exp(

H(t)dt) = 1 +

4
d

4
x1d

4
x2....d

xn T

i
¯h Z

−

(x1)

(x2)....

{H

H

(xn)
}

H

∞

Xn=1

where T denotes the time ordering operation meaning that it orders the opera-

tors from left to right in the monotonically decreasing order of the values of their

argument t. This ordering is independent of the chosen Lorentz frame if every

pair

(xr),

(xs) commute whenever xr, xs are space-like separated. This is

H

H

guaranteed by the independence of ﬁelds at space-like separated events given by

(2). Thus ‘Einstein causality’ in quantum ﬁeld theory may be regarded as due

to the Lorentz group of symmetries. This is analogous to how the same sym-

metries discarded the metaphysical relation (2) of absolute simultaneity during

the creation of special relativity, as mentioned in section 2.

12

5 What if there are no Causal Laws?

The metaphysical causality, mentioned above, was associated with the meta-

physical necessity of causal dynamical laws [1]. Therefore, since this meta-

physical causality was discarded above, it is no longer necessary to assume the

metaphysical necessity that is responsible for causal laws. An advantage of

discarding metaphysical causality is that the indeterminism of quantum phe-

nomena may then be deduced, instead of postulating it a priori. This solves

the statistical aspect of the measurement problem, mentioned in the statement

quoted from Einstein in section 4. The only causality which now remains is the

physical causality that is determined by the operator U , and which is realized

only probabilistically.

The above arguments suggest, however, that symmetries are more funda-

mental than physical causality. I shall therefore, from now on, assume A) there

are no causal dynamical laws. This implies that physical processes cannot be

deterministic, because there is nothing compelling a physical system to evolve

in a deﬁnite manner. It follows that we can only assign probabilities for phys-

ical processes, which is consistent with the experimentally observed intrinsic

indeterminism of quantum phenomena, as mentioned above. I shall assume also

that B) the probabilities of physical processes are invariant under a group of

symmetries.

According to classical physics, a particle goes from an event a to an event

b along a deﬁnite path that is determined by the laws of classical physics. If

we discard causal dynamical laws, in accordance with assumption (A), then the

particle need not take a deﬁnite path and all paths between a and b are equally

probable.

If we suppose that the probability of the particle to go from a to

b, denoted P (b, a), is the sum of all these probabilities then, since there are

an inﬁnite number of equally probable paths, the probability of each path is

zero, and multiplying zero by inﬁnity will not give a sensible result. It is clear

therefore that there must be cancellation between diﬀerent paths in order to

13

obtain a sensible result for P (a, b). This may be achieved by introducing the

probability amplitude for each path that is a complex number. Adding these

complex numbers would then give the required cancellation.

It is perfectly

possible a priori to have a physical theory that uses only real numbers, e.g.

classical physics. But such a theory would not satisfy assumption (A) above.

The question arises as to how we may obtain P (b, a) from the sum of prob-

ability amplitudes, denoted K(b, a). To answer this, consider the double slit

experiment and, for simplicity, suppose that there are just two paths, γ1 and

γ2 for a particle to go from an event a at the source to an event b at the screen

through slit 1 and slit 2, respectively. Then K(b, a) = ψ1 + ψ2 where ψ1 and ψ2

are the probability amplitudes for the paths γ1 and γ2, respectively. Now if we

observe through which slit the particle went through then

P (b, a) = P1(b, a) + P2(b, a),

(3)

where P1(b, a) and P2(b, a) are the probabilities for the paths γ1 and γ2. But

if we do not observe which slit the particle went through then (3) need not

be satisﬁed, according to the above assumption.

Indeed, experimentally, the

interference pattern on the screen conﬁrms this. Hence, the observations on the

particle to determine which slit it went through should change ψ1 and ψ2 in

order that (3) is satisﬁed. Now

2 =
K(b, a)
|
|

ψ1
|

2 +
|

ψ2
|

2 + ψ∗
|

1ψ2 + ψ∗

2ψ1

(4)

If we take P (b, a) =

2 , P1(b, a) =
K(b, a)
|
|

ψ1
|

2, P2(b, a) =
|

ψ2
|

2 and if the
|

measurements change the phases of ψ1 and ψ2 then (3) would be satisﬁed in

the special case that measurements are made on the particles going through

the double slit. This is because these phases are diﬀerent for diﬀerent particles

and therefore the last two terms of (4) would be zero on the average. We shall

therefore take the probability to be the square of the absolute value of the

probability amplitude.

14

Since all paths are equally probable, in accordance with assumption (1), it

follows that the probability amplitude assigned to an arbitrary path γ joining

a and b should be N exp[i

(γ)], where N is independent of γ. Hence,

S

K(b, a) =

N exp[i

(γ)],

Xγ

S

(5)

Assumption (2) then implies that the probability

the symmetry group. A suﬃcient condition for this is that

is invariant under

the symmetry group. The highly successful Feynman path integral formulation

of quantum mechanics assumes (5) with

(γ) = Sγ/¯h, where Sγ is the classical

S

action for the path γ. Under this assumption it is easy to understand why

2 is invariant under
K(b, a)
|
|

S

the classical limit corresponds to the particle taking the trajectory for which

S is an extremum: In the classical limit Sγ >> ¯h for all possible trajectories,

but the amplitudes for trajectories far away from the trajectories cancel out

each other, while those in the neighborhood of the extremal trajectory add

constructively. Also, the above mentioned uncertainty in the phase when the

path which the particle takes is observed represents a way of treating, in the

Feynman formulation, decoherence which is usually treated in the Schr¨odinger

formulation by means of entanglement.

However, according to the principles (1) and (2) above, Sγ need not be re-

stricted to the classical action. Principle (2) may be satisﬁed if S has terms

in addition to the classical action that are also invariant under the symme-

tries. But the corrections to the amplitudes arising from these additional terms

should cancel each other except in extreme circumstances in order to be approxi-

mately in agreement with quantum mechanics that uses only the classical action.

Quantum mechanics maximally violates the laws of classical physics because the

classical laws constrains the particle to move along the classical trajectory for

which the classical action is an extremum, whereas quantum mechanics gives

equal probability to all possible trajectories. The present hypothesis maximally

violates the laws of quantum mechanics, as formulated by Feynman, by allowing

15

S to contain all possible terms that are invariant under the symmetries.

An advantage of this hypothesis is that, as shown by Weinberg [8],it is pos-

sible for the divergences in the Feynman diagrams in ﬁeld theory to cancel

because we are including every term that is consistent with the symmetries in

the action. It is the lowest order terms that we directly observe at presently

accessible energies, which gives the illusion that the action contains only a ﬁnite

number of terms, as assumed in the paradigm of laws. The standard model, for

example, was formulated with a ﬁnite number of terms in the Lagrangian that

are invariant under the symmetries. But this Lagrangian, or any Lagrangian

that contains only a ﬁnite number of terms, deﬁnes an eﬀective ﬁeld theory,

according to the present view.

From the present point of view the action is more fundamental than the ‘laws’

derived by extremizing the action, which has important physical consequences.

It implies that a given ﬁeld that obeys some law cannot be regarded as complete

unless this law can be obtained from an action principle, which may require

introducing other ﬁelds. For example, the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength Fµν

obeys the Maxwell’s equations and the Lorentz force classically. But to obtain

these laws from an action principle, we need to introduce the potential Aµ. And

the action that is a function of Aµ then gave rise to new eﬀects, such as the

Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect. While the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect may be expressed non

locally in terms of the ﬁeld strength Fµν , its generalizations to non Abelian

gauge ﬁelds cannot be expressed in terms of the Yang-Mills ﬁeld strength F i
µν

even non locally.

The present approach appears to solve the riddle of why nature should choose

particular Lagrangians and not others for the laws. This is because, according

to the present view, all lagrangians consistent with a given set of symmetries

are allowed. Einstein famously said that laws are to the external world what

clothes are to the human body. This means that these laws or “clothes” may

be made to ﬁt the objective reality more and more closely but there is an

16

unbridgeable gap between them. The purpose of this letter was to say that these

“clothes” are like the emperor’s new clothes. However, in the present approach,

symmetries replace the fundamental role previously played by laws. And the

‘laws’ are obtained from the symmetries, as eﬀective laws, instead of the other

way around.

I thank Yakir Aharonov for useful discussions.

References

ph/9808045.

[1] J. Anandan, Foundations of Physics, 29, no. 11, 1647- 1672 (1999), quant-

[2] Feynman R. P. (1985) The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton

Univ. Press), chapter 1.

[3] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).

[4] Feynman R.P. (1948) Rev. Mod. Phys. 20, 367-87; Feynman R. P.and Hibbs

A. R. (1965) Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals, (McGraw-Hill, New

York).

[5] Bohm D. 1952, Phys. Rev., 85, 166-193.

[6] Everett H. 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454-462.

[7] Born-Einstein Letters, 29 April 1924.

[8] Steven Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields I (Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge 1995), pp.144, 145, 198.

17

