1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
5
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Are the electron spin and magnetic moment
parallel or antiparallel vectors?

Mart´ın Rivas∗
Dpto. de F´ısica Te´orica,
The University of the Basque Country,
Apdo. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain

February 20, 2014

Abstract

The kinematical theory of elementary particles developed by the author predicts
that, contrary to the usual assumption, spin and magnetic moment of electrons and
positrons might be parallel vectors. Two direct and indirect experiments for their
relative orientation measurement are proposed.

Keywords: Semiclassical theories; Electron; Electric and magnetic moments
PACS: 03.65.S; 14.60.C; 13.40.Em

1

Introduction

The usual assumption concerning the magnetic dipole structure of the electron, states
that if the electron is a spinning particle of negative charge which rotates along the spin
direction then this motion will produce a magnetic moment opposite to the spin. In the
case of the positron both magnitudes, spin and magnetic moment, will therefore have the
same direction. But this interpretation is not supported by a classical analysis of spin, but
rather by the guess that presumably spin and angular velocity are directly related.

Dirac’s analysis [1] of the relativistic electron obtains that the spin and magnetic mo-
ment are antiparallel vectors. Nevertheless Dirac’s theory involves an arbitrary ± sign,
because it must be decided whether the positive or negative charged object is the particle
or the antiparticle, i.e., the positive or negative energy solution, and therefore this produces
and indeﬁniteness on the relative orientation of both magnitudes. Dirac’s Hamiltonian in
the center of mass frame reduces to H = mc2β in terms of Dirac’s β = γ0 matrix.
In
mathematical terms there is a sign in the election of the γ0 matrix compatible with the
matrix representation of the spin operators Sj = iγkγl/2, j, k, l = 1, 2, 3, cyclic.

∗wtpripem@lg.ehu.es

1

However, no explicit direct measurement of the relative orientation between spin and
magnetic moment of the free electron, known to the author, can be found in the literature
although very high precision experiments are performed to obtain the absolute value of
g, the gyromagnetic ratio.
In the review article by Rich and Wesley [2] the two main
methods for measuring the anomaly factor of leptons a = |g|/2 − 1, are analysed: one
kind involves precession methods which measure the diﬀerence between the spin precession
frequency and its cyclotron frequency in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld. The other are resonance
experiments, like the ones developed by Dehmelt on a single electron in a Penning trap
[3] where the cyclotron motion, magnetron motion and axial oscillation are monitored. All
these measurements are in fact independent of whether spin and magnetic moment are
indeed parallel or antiparallel, because they involve measurements of the spin precession
frequencies in external magnetic ﬁelds.

All attempts of Stern-Gerlach type on unpolarised beams to separate electrons in inho-
mogeneous magnetic ﬁelds have failed and Bohr and Pauli claimed that this failure was a
consequence of the Lorentz force on charged particles which blurred the splitting. Never-
theless Seattle experiments on a single electron [4] show a “continuous Stern-Gerlach type”
of interaction producing an “axial” oscillation of the particle in the direction orthogonal to
its cyclotron motion. But these experiments are not able to determine the relative orien-
tation between these magnitudes. Batelaan et al. [5], propose an alternative device which
according to Dehmelt’s suggestions minimize the Lorentz force by using an external mag-
netic ﬁeld along the electron velocity but maximize the spin force by using large magnetic
ﬁeld gradients in that direction. They obtain numerically a polarization of the electron
beam along the direction of motion. Perhaps an experimental setup in these terms will be
able to clarify the relative orientation between these two vector magnitudes.

After giving in the next section a short review to the kinematical formalism of spinning
particles developed by the author, in section 3 a direct experiment and in 4 an indirect
experiment will be suggested to check the relative orientation of spin and magnetic moment.

2 Clasical spinning particles

The kinematical theory of elementary particles [6] makes a prediction for the direction
of the magnetic moment of the electron and positron with respect to its spin direction.
This theory produces a classical interpretation of spin and, once the spin direction is ﬁxed,
If we consider as the particle
the motion of the point charge is completely determined.
the positive energy solution and of negative electric charge, then the spin and magnetic
moment for both the electron and positron are described by parallel vectors. If we consider
that the particle has positive charge we get the opposite orientation.
Let us review the main highlights of the mentioned approach:

• The classical variables that characterise the initial and ﬁnal state of a classical ele-
mentary spinning particle in a Lagrangian approach are precisely the variables used
as parameters of the kinematical group of space-time symmetries or of any of its ho-
mogeneous spaces. Any element of the Poincar´e group can be parametrised in terms
of the time and space translation and the relative velocity and orientation among
inertial observers. Therefore, a relativistic spinning particle is described by the vari-
ables time t, position r, velocity v and orientation α. We shall call to these variables
the kinematical variables and the manifold they span the kinematical space of the
system.

2

• A classical spinning particle is thus described as a point with orientation. The particle
moves and rotates in space. Point r describes its position in space while α describes
its spatial orientation. But what point r describes is the position of the charge, which
is in general a diﬀerent point than its center of mass q, and in general r describes a
harmonic motion around q, usually called this motion the zitterbewegung.

• When expressed the Lagrangian in terms of the kinematical variables it becomes a
homogeneous function of ﬁrst degree of the derivatives of the kinematical variables
and consequently it also depends on ˙v, the acceleration of point r, and on ˙α or
equivalently on the angular velocity ω. It turns out that it can be written as

L = T ˙t + R · ˙r + V · ˙v + W · ω,

(1)

where T = ∂L/∂ ˙t, R = ∂L/∂ ˙r, V = ∂L/∂ ˙v and W = ∂L/∂ω.

• For a free relativistic particle, when analyzing the invariance under the diﬀerent
one-parameter subgroups of the Poincar´e group, Noether’s theorem determines the
usual constants of the motion which take the following form in terms of the above
magnitudes: Energy,

linear momentum,

kinematical momentum

and angular momentum

where the observable S, takes the form

H = −T − v ·

dV
dt

,

P = R −

dV
dt

,

K =

H
c2 r − P t −

1
c2 S × v,

J = r × P + S,

S = v × V + W .

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

• The linear momentum (2) is not lying along the velocity v of point r. Point r does
not represent the center of mass position. If in terms of the last term in (3) we deﬁne
the position vector

then the center of mass position can be deﬁned as q = r−k, such that the kinematical
momentum can be written as

Taking the time derivative of this expression leads for the linear momentum to

which is the usual relativistic expression of the linear momentum in terms of the
center of mass velocity. Observable k is the relative position of point r with respect
to the center of mass q.

k =

S × v,

1
H

K =

H
c2 q − P t.

P =

H
c2

dq
dt

,

3

• The observable S is the classical equivalent of Dirac’s spin operator, because it sat-

isﬁes the free dynamical equation

dS
dt

= P × v,

which does not vanish because P and v are not parallel vectors and where the velocity
operator in Dirac’s theory becomes v = cα in terms of Dirac’s α matrices.

• The structure of the spin observable is twofold. One, v × V , is related to the zitter-
bewegung or charge motion around its center of mass and another W to the rotation
of the particle.

• The magnetic moment is produced by the charge motion and is thus related only to
the zitterbewegung part of the spin. It is because the spin has another contribution
coming from the rotation that a pure kinematical interpretation of the gyromagnetic
ratio [7] has been given.

• The classical system that when quantised satisﬁes Dirac’s equation [8] corresponds
to a particle whose charge is moving at the speed of light, and therefore if v = c is
constant, the acceleration is always orthogonal to the velocity.

• If we take in (3) the time derivative of this expression and afterwards its scalar product

with vector v, since v = c we get the relationship

H − P · v −

S ×

· v = 0

1
c2 (cid:18)

dv
dt (cid:19)

which is the classical equivalent of Dirac’s equation.

• The center of mass observer is deﬁned by the conditions P = 0 and K = 0. For this
observer we see from (4) that the spin S is a constant of the motion. If the system
has positive energy H = +mc2, from (3) we get

mr =

1
c2 S × v,

so that the charge of the particle is describing circles in a plane orthogonal to S as
depicted in part a) of ﬁgure 1. Part b) is the time reversed motion of this particle
which corresponds to its antiparticle or to a particle that in the center of mass frame
has energy H = −mc2. If the particle is negatively charged then particle and an-
tiparticle have their magnetic moment along the spin direction. If we consider as the
particle the positively charged one we obtain the opposite orientation for the mag-
netic moment. In any case the magnetic moment of the particle and antiparticle have
the same relative orientation with respect to the spin.

The radius of this motion is

Ro =

S
mc

=

¯h
2mc

1
2

=

λC = 3.8 × 10

cm.

−11

The frequency of this motion is

ωo =

mc2
S

=

2mc2
¯h

= 1.55 × 10

s

.

21

−1

4

Figure 1: Charge motion of the electron a) and positron b) in the center of mass frame.

• It turns out that although the particle is pointlike, because of the zitterbewegung
the charge has a localized region of inﬂuence of size 2Ro, which is Compton’s wave
length. The latest LEP experiments at CERN establish an upper bound of 10−17cm
for the radius of the charge of the electron, which is consistent with this pointlike
interpretation, while its quantum mechanical behaviour is produced for distances of
its Compton wave length, six orders of magnitude larger.

• Properly speaking what this formalism shows is that the magnetic moment µ of the
electron is not an intrinsic property like the charge. It is produced by the motion of
the charge and therefore is orthogonal to the zitterbewegung plane. But at the same
time, in the center of mass frame, the electron has an oscillating electric dipole of
magnitude eRo lying on the zitterbewegung plane. Its time average value vanishes
and in low energy interactions the eﬀect of this electric dipole is negligible but in
high energy physics we have to take into account the detailed position of the charge
and thus the electric dipole contribution is not negligible. This electric dipole is
not related to a loss of spherical symmetry of some charge distribution. The charge
distribution is spherically symmetric because it is just a point. This dipole is just
the instantaneous electric dipole moment of the charge with respect to the center of
mass.

As an approximation we can consider the classical electron as a point, its center of
mass, where we also locate the charge. But at the same time we have to assign to this
point two electromagnetic properties, a magnetic moment lying along or opposite to the
spin direction and an oscillating electric dipole, of frequency ωo, on a plane orthogonal to
the spin.

A more detailed analysis of the dynamics gives rise to the dynamical equations for the
center of mass q and center of charge r in an external electromagnetic ﬁeld as given by [9]:

m¨q =

[E + ˙r × B − ˙q ([E + ˙r × B] · ˙q)] ,

e
γ( ˙q)
1 − ˙q · ˙r
(q − r)2 (q − r) .

¨r =

(6)

(7)

Here, an over dot means a time derivative and the external ﬁelds are deﬁned at the charge

5

position r, and it is the velocity of the charge that produces the magnetic force term.

3 A direct measurement

The proposed experiment is to send a beam of transversally polarised electrons or positrons
and check the interaction of their magnetic moment with an external magnetic ﬁeld. As
suggested by Batelaan et al.
[5] we shall consider a region of low or negligible magnetic
ﬁeld but with a non-negligible ﬁeld gradient.

We consider a beam moving along the positive direction of the OY axis and with the
transversal spin pointing along the positive OZ axis. The external magnetic ﬁeld will be
produced by two conducting wires parallel to the OY axis, separated by a distance 2b and
contained in the Y OZ plane of a cartesian frame (see ﬁgure 2). If they carry a current
in the same direction, then the magnetic ﬁeld vanishes along the OY axis and is very low
in its neighborhood. The square depicted in the ﬁgure represents the region, using for
computation, where the initial position of the center of mass of the electrons in the beam
is contained.

Figure 2: A transversally polarised electron beam of square cross section is sent along the OY axis
into the magnetic ﬁeld created by two conducting wires, separated a distance 2b, perpendicular to
the ﬁgure and carrying a current I in the same direction.

The magnetic ﬁeld produced by the current takes the form:

Bx =

Bz = −

k(z + b)
x2 + (z + b)2 +
kx
x2 + (z + b)2 −

k(z − b)

x2 + (z − b)2 , By = 0,

kx
x2 + (z − b)2 ,

where k = I/2πǫ0c2, I is the intensity of the current and ǫ0 the permittivity of the vacuum.
To compute numerically the motion of a polarised electron beam in an external magnetic
ﬁeld, we shall use the above dynamical equations (6) and (7) with initial conditions such
that the zitterbewegung plane of each electron is the XOY plane and the charge motion
produces a magnetic moment pointing along the positive OZ axis. For the center of mass
position we shall consider the electrons uniformly distributed in the mentioned square
region.

6

Figure 3: Position of the beam after travelling a distance d, 1.5d and 1.6d along the OY direction
in the magnetic ﬁeld created by the two parallel currents. The separation between the wires is
200λC, the velocity of the center of mass of electrons is 0.003c and the current I = 3A.

In ﬁgure 3 we depict the situation of the polarised electron beam after travelling some
distance inside the magnetic ﬁeld region. The dots represent the center of mass position of
a sample of particles which in the incoming beam are distributed uniformly in the shown
square region. With the magnetic moment of the electrons pointing upwards we see a
deﬂection (and also a focusing eﬀect) to the left. The deﬂection is of the same amount
It is checked that
to the right for electrons with the magnetic moment pointing down.
the deﬂection is independent of the initial position of the electron charge compatible with
the initial center of mass position. We also obtain an equivalent deﬂection for many other
values of the separation between wires, current and initial beam velocity.

We thus expect from this experiment that if the beam is deﬂected to the left then spin
and magnetic moment are parallel vectors, while they are antiparallel for right deﬂection.
The interaction does not modify the spin orientation so that we can check the polarization
of the beam at the exit by some direct method of electron absorption like the one devised
for measuring the spin of the photon in circularly polarised light beams [10].

4 An indirect measurement

As an indirect experiment we shall measure the relative orientation of spin and magnetic
moment of electrons bounded in atoms.

Let us consider a material system formed by atoms of some speciﬁc substance. Let us
send a beam of circularly polarised light of such an energy to produce electron transitions on
these atoms from an S-state (l = 0 orbital angular momentum) into another S-state. Let us
assume that the photons of the circularly polarised beam have their spins pointing forward.
In this case the transition only aﬀects to the electrons with the spin pointing backwards such
that after the transition the excited electrons have their spins in the forward direction. If
we now introduce a magnetic ﬁeld in the forward direction to observe the Zeeman splitting
then the measurement of the additional interaction energy −µ · B will give us only one of
the two expected transition lines of the emission spectrum from which we determine the
relative orientation between µ and B and therefore between µ and S.

7

Acknowledgments

I like to acknowledge the use of the computer program Dynamics Solver developed by
Aguirregabiria [11] with which all the numerical computations contained in this paper have
been done. I am very much indebted to Aguirregabiria’s help.

I also acknowledge the suggestion by Prof. Dieter Trines of DESY, Hamburg, during the
Prague SPIN-2001 congress, that leads to the proposed indirect measurement experiment.
This work has been partially supported by the Universidad del Pa´ıs Vasco/Euskal Her-
riko Unibertsitatea under contract UPV/EHU 172.310 EB150/98 and by General Research
Grant UPV 172.310-G02/99.

References

[1] P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed. (Oxford U. P. 1958).

[2] A. Rich and J.C. Wesley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 44 (1972) 250.

[3] H. Dehmelt, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62 (1990) 525.

[4] H. Dehmelt, Z. Phys. D10 (1988) 127.

[5] H. Batelaan, T.J. Gay and J.J. Schwendiman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 (1997) 4517.

[6] M. Rivas, J. Math. Phys., 30 (1989) 318; 35 (1994) 3380. For a more detailed ex-
position see M. Rivas, Kinematical theory of spinning particles, (Kluwer, Dordrecht
2001).

[7] M. Rivas, J.M. Aguirregabiria and A. Hern´andez, Phys. Lett. A 257 (1999) 21.

[8] M. Rivas, J. Math. Phys., 35 (1994) 3380.

[9] M. Rivas, Phys. Lett. A Sent for publication. (physics/0112005).

[10] R. A. Beth, Phys. Rev. 50 (1936) 115.

[11] J.M. Aguirregabiria, Dynamics Solver, computer program for solving diﬀerent kinds
of dynamical systems, which is available from his author through the web site
<http://tp.lc.ehu.es/jma.html> at the server of the Theoretical Physics Dept.
of The University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain.

8

