1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
6
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A STUDY OF POLYCARBONYL COMPOUNDS IN
MAGNEGASES

A.K. Aringazin1,2 and R.M. Santilli2

1Institute for Basic Research, Department of Theoretical Physics, Eurasian
National University, Astana 473021 Kazakstan

2Institute for Basic Research, P.O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor,
FL 34682, USA
ibr@gte.net

June 5, 2000; Revised October 10, 2001
Final version December 9, 2001

Abstract

In this paper we study the structure and thermochemical proper-
ties of some new polycarbonyl compounds, with particular attention
devoted to the study of (CO)n complexes, which are expected to be
present in magnegasesT M . The latter are anomalous gases produced
by Hadronic ReactorsT M of molecular type [2] (Patented and Interna-
tional Patents Pending) which expose atoms to the extremely intense
electronmagnetic ﬁelds existing at atomic distances from electric arcs
in such a way to create a toroidal distribution of the orbitals of indi-
vidual atoms, whether isolated or part of a valence bond. Polarized
atoms, dimers and molecules then attract each other via opposing
magnetic polarities resulting into stable clusters which constitute a
new chemical species called Santilli’s magnecules [2]. Some of the nu-
merous open problems in the study of this intriguing new chemical
species are pointed out.

0

1 Introduction

In a recent paper [1], we overview the new chemical species of Santilli’s
magnecules [2, 3] which has been observed in magnegasesT M , the new gas
produced by Hadronic ReactorsT M of Molecular type, also called Plasma-
ArcFlow ReactorsT M (Patented and International Patents pending).

One of the hypotheses on the origin of bonds between diatomic molecules
in magnecules is that atomic orbitals are polarized into a toroidal distribu-
tion when under the inﬂuence of very strong external electromagnetic ﬁelds
as available at atomic distances in PlasmaArcFlowT M reactors. In this way,
individual polarized atoms attract each other via opposing magnetic polari-
ties. Therefore, the magnetic polarization and related bond here considered
exist even for diamagnetic molecules such as H2 [2].

The isochemical approach developed by Santilli and Shillady [2, 3] has
been used to study diatomic molecules [4, 5, 6, 7], in order to extend the
standard quantum chemical framework, and to achieve better numerical re-
sults on their ground state energies and bond lengths. This Santilli-Shillady
isochemical model of diatomic molecules uses additional short-range attrac-
tive two-parametric Hulten potential interactions between valence electron
pairs which is assumed to be due to nonlinear, and other eﬀects originating
in the deep overlapping of wavepackets of atomic electrons in their singlet
valence bond at short distances. The attractive Hulten potential leads to a
speciﬁc correlation between two electrons called isoelectronium [2, 3]. The
isoelectronium correlations may be responsible for the anomalous magnetic
moments of the molecules, and thus for the speciﬁc bonds in magnecules.

Recent results on two-dimensional two-electron quantum tunnel eﬀects
with dissipation applied to diatomic H-H system [8] support the isoelectronium-
like correlation between two electrons, in the two-dimensional case. Conse-
quently, we expect that isoelectronium-like correlations between the electrons
due to the isochemical approach and to the tunnel eﬀects can give an impor-
tant contribution to the bonds between molecules in magnecules.

In addition to the main hypothesis of magnecules, it is instructive to an-
alyze some other possible compounds which may be present in magnegases
that could have a kind of conventional polycarbonyl structure. Since the
mass-spectra of magnegasesT M have not been identiﬁed as known compounds
among about 130,000 chemical species, we conclude that the detected high
mass species might be of some unusual types of polycarbonyl compounds,

1

which are absent in computer database of the mass-spectrometer. Noting
that most of extensively studied aldehydes and ketons (hydrocarbonates con-
taining C=O group) are liquids at room temperatures it is quite natural that
they are not present in magnegasesT M in a big percentage. So, we are led to
consider those carbonyl compounds which are expected to be gases at room
temperatures.

In the present paper, we focus on some polycarbonyl compounds and
their complexes which may be present in magnegas. An important note is
that we do not study the origin of the speciﬁc bonds in magnecules that can
be made elsewhere. Instead, we study some compounds formed by typical
bonds. Consequently, our consideration is an attempt to identify chemical
structures of some components of magnegas within the framework of typical
chemical bonds. Clearly, such a consideration is helpful in identifying real
structures of magnegas, since one can compare properties of the polycarbonyl
compounds to currently available experimental data on magnegasesT M . We
believe that such a consideration is a necessary step toward the unraveling
of the intriguing features of magnegas.

Moreover, the structure of the polycarbonyl compounds studied in this
paper can be taken as a basis for the study of more general magnecules. The
fact that one of the suggested structures of magnecules, CO×CO× · · · ×CO
[2], where × denotes a (magnetic) bond and CO is carbon monoxide, is
known in practical chemistry, carbon monoxide complex (CO)6, serves us
as a strong experimental ground to focus on the polycarbonyl compounds.
Another interesting experimental fact is that some polycarbonyl compounds
are known to be gases, at room temperatures, so that they can be present in
magnegasesT M .

In Sec. 2 we present some examples of polycarbonyl compounds. In Sec. 3,
In Sec. 4, we
we study the structure and combustion of (CO)n complex.
consider possible hydrogen bonds between (CO)n complexes. In Sec. 5, we
consider some other possible types of polycarbonyl compounds. In Sec. 6,
we brieﬂy outline the properties of the carbonyl C=O bond which are help-
ful in understanding of the behavior of polycarbonyl compounds under the
inﬂuence of external electromagnetic ﬁeld.

Our general remark is that the term ”polycarbonyl compound” can be
treated in a rather general form, without specifying the character of some
bonds (conventional, or unconventional), but stressing only the presence of
several C=O groups. Indeed, even the bond between C and O in the mag-

2

necules CO×CO× · · · ×CO [2], could not be of a conventional type, with
some electronic eﬀects playing an important role with interesting properties.

2 Some examples of polycarbonyl compounds

We start by some characteristic examples of polycarbonyl compounds, i.e.
the compounds containing several carbonyl groups C=O.

Cobalt hydrocarbonyl, HCo(CO)4, containing both H and CO, is a gas,
at room temperatures. Such type of a compound is known as somewhat
unusual because a neutral metal is bonded to carbon monoxide CO, which
mostly conserves its own properties. Another example is magnesium car-
bonyl, (CO)5−Mn−Mn−(CO)5 (melting point is 66oC), where the bond
Mn−Mn is about 40 kcal/mol. Also, it is interesting to note that nickel
carbonyl, Ni(CO)4, shown in Fig. 1, formed from Ni and CO at T = 80C,
is a gas at room temperatures, and dissociates, Ni(CO)4 → Ni + 4CO, at
T = 200C.

C

O

Ni

O

C

C

O

O

C

3

Figure 1: Ni(CO)4. Dissociation of this gas, Ni(CO)4 → Ni + 4CO, occurs
at temperature T = 200oC.

Thus, the binding energy of the bond between Ni and each CO is about

30 kcal/mol, which is within the range given by the estimation [1],

B[magnecule] > 25...30 kcal/mol,

(1)

of the average binding energy between the molecules in magnecule. In gen-
eral, various carbonyl compounds can be produced from, e.g., some glicoles

(containing the group -C-OH).

As mentioned in ref. [1] there is a case in which an explosive compound,
potassium carbonyl, 6CO + 6K→ K6(CO)6, is produced. Such a compound is
used to obtain unusual carbon monoxide (carbon monoxide complex), (CO)6.
This compound is believed to exist due to a polymerization, namely, the
structure (CO)6 is thought as being given by a sequential joining of separate
CO (monomers) to a linear chain of CO molecules (polymer) owing to the
C-C bonds.

3 (CO)n complex

3.1 Structure

In Fig. 2 we present a linear chain of CO molecules (polymer) as a possible
structure of (CO)6.

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

Figure 2: Possible polymer structure of (CO)6 complexes.

Owing to C-C bonds, a typical polymerization, e.g., of propylene,

CH(CH3)CH2, is characterized by binding energies of about 73...83 kcal/mol,
with the reaction heat of about ∆H = −20 kcal/mol per each molecule of
the linear chain of polypropylene.

We see that the typical value of the binding energy of C−C is much
bigger than 30...35 kcal/mol. However, some other types of intermolecular
interaction between CO can also make a contribution here because of the
speciﬁc electronic structure of CO molecule, and the real structure of (CO)6
may be diﬀerent from that shown in Fig. 2. So, we could expect lower values
of the binding energy between CO molecules in (CO)6, recalling that the
above mentioned Ni(CO)4 dissociates at T = 200C.

Also, it is known that in tricarbonyl compounds (see Fig. 3), the central
carbonyl group C=O is highly reactional since it is weakly bonded to the two

4

neighbor C=O groups, and it can be easily decarbonylized (releasing of the
central C=O group as carbon monoxide gas) by using catalysis with, e.g.,
AlCl3. For the same reason the central carbonyl group C=O in tricarbonyl
compounds easily reacts with water, becoming the HO-C-OH group due to
the reaction C=O + H2O → HO-C-OH.

R

C

O

C

O

C

O

R′

Figure 3: A view of Tricarbonyl compounds.

It is important to note that there may be also cyclic polycarbonyl struc-
tures (with all C atoms single bonded to each other to form a circle) which
are characterized by higher stability than the linear ones so they could be
either gas or liquid, at room temperatures.

3.2 Combustion

We should note that the bond C=O in (CO)6 evidently is weaker than its
counterpart in a single carbon monoxide C=O. Moreover, some energy is
related to a dissociation of (CO)6 to 6CO.

In general, this could lead to a diﬀerent value of the combustion reaction

heat of (CO)6 per CO molecule. Namely, the reaction

could give a diﬀerent value of the reaction heat ∆H than that of the reaction

(CO)6 + 3O2 → 6CO2

6CO + 3O2 → 6CO2.

(2)

(3)

Below, we make a crude estimate by taking the average value of the
binding energy of C=O bond in Fig. 2 equal to that in ketons, 179 kcal/mol
(see Table 1), since most ketons are characterized by carbonyl group bonded
to two C atoms as schematically shown in Fig. 4.

We assume also that each C-C bond in Fig. 2 requires 82.6 kcal/mol (see
Table 1). There are ﬁve bonds C-C in Fig. 2 so we have 5×82.6=413 kcal/mol.

5

Diatomic molecules
H–H
O=O
Manyatomic molecules
C–O
C=O in CO2
C=O in formaldegide
C=O in aldehydes
C=O in ketons
C=N

104.2
119.1

85.5
192.0
166
176
179
147

Diatomic molecules
C=O
N ≡ N
Manyatomic molecules
O–H
O–O
C–H
C–C
C=C
C≡C

255.8
225.8

110.6
35
98.7
82.6
145.8
199.6

Table 1: Average binding energies, kcal/mol [9]. T = 25C.

❏❏
✡✡

C

C

✡✡
❏❏

C

O

179

Figure 4: Carbonyl group C=O in ketons.

There are six C=O bonds in Fig. 2 so we have 6×179 = 1074 kcal/mol. On
the other hand, six separate C = O molecules have in total 6×255.8 = 1534.8
kcal/mol due to their bonds. Hence, the balance is 415+1074-1534.8=-47.8
kcal/mol, and the dissociation

(CO)6 → 6CO + 47.8 kcal/mol

appears to be an exothermic reaction, with about 47.8/6 ≃ 8 kcal/mol per
each CO. This conservative estimate shows that carbon monoxide gas con-
sisting of (CO)6 complexes might give bigger energy release than that of the
carbon monoxide gas consisting of separate CO molecules. Namely, instead
of the reaction

CO + O2/2 → CO2 + 68.7 kcal/mol,

for the case of (CO)6, we consider the sequence

(CO)6 → 6CO + 47.8 kcal/mol,

(4)

(5)

(6)

6

CO + O2/2 → CO2 + 68.7 kcal/mol,

(7)

which eﬀectively could give 68.7 + 8 = 76.8 kcal/mol per CO, instead of 68.7
kcal/mol, i.e. about 12% bigger heat released.

It is a consequence of the existence of (CO)6 that there might exist lower
and higher mass carbon monoxide complexes, (CO)n, with n = 2, 3, 4, . . .
For the general case of dissociation of conceivable (CO)n complexes of linear
type depicted in Fig. 2,

(CO)n → nCO,

(8)

the dissociation energy per produced CO molecule thus is

∆H =

(82.6(n − 1) + 179n − 255.8n) = 5.8 −

kcal/mol.

(9)

82.6
n

It is interesting to note that this energy is about zero for n = 14, i.e. there ap-
pears to be no considerable diﬀerence in calculated combustion heat between
the conceivable (CO)14 gas and usual CO gas.

The above estimate can be formulated in terms of the binding energies
B[C-C] and B[C=O], to get a general expression of the average dissociation
energy of linear (CO)n (n ≥ 2) per each CO,

∆H =

(B[C − C](n − 1) + B[C = O]n − 255.8n) kcal/mol,

(10)

where presently unknown precise values of B[C-C] and B[C=O] in the linear
(CO)n complex can be evaluated from theory or experiment.

In fact, in the presence of one C = O group the above C-C bond is known
to be much weaker than the above used average value 82.6 kcal/mol, namely,
B[C-C] = 73 kcal/mol. So the estimations (4) and (9) must be corrected.
Inserting B[C-C] = 73 kcal/mol and B[C=O] = 179 kcal/mol into (10), we
get the average dissociation energy of (CO)n (n ≥ 2) per each CO,

∆H =

(73(n − 1) + 179n − 255.8n) = −3.8 −

kcal/mol.

(11)

73
n

This estimate shows that dissociation of (CO)n complex (8) is always exother-
mic (at any value of n ≥ 2).

Returning to our example (CO)6, the dissociation energy (11) gives the
value 96/6 = 16 kcal/mol per each CO produced. The reaction (4) now reads

(CO)6 → 6CO + 96 kcal/mol,

(12)

1
n

1
n

1
n

7

and appears to be highly exothermic, with about 16 kcal released per each
CO. Therefore,
in contrast to the combustion (5), this eﬀectively yields
68.7+16=84.7 kcal/mol, as compared to 68.7 kcal/mol, i.e. about 23% bigger
heat released, due to the dissociation of (CO)6 to 6CO.
In the general case of combustion of (CO)n, we get

3.8 + 72/n
68.7

100 %

(13)

increase of the energy release per CO, as compared to the usual CO gas.

On the other hand, we see that one mole of (CO)6 gives 6 moles of CO,
thus the reaction entropy ∆S is expected to be of high value. As we men-
[1], for carbon monoxide CO the reaction constant K of its
tioned in ref.
formation increases at higher temperatures (it is harder to dissociate CO at
high temperatures than at low temperatures) because of high value of the
reaction entropy. Similarly, we might conclude that it is harder to disso-
ciate (CO)6 at high temperatures than at low temperatures. Thus, (CO)n
complexes could survive high temperatures, being metastable at room tem-
peratures. We expect that the dissociation, (CO)n → nCO occurs most
eﬀectively only at some small ﬁxed temperature range depending on n.

In the general case, for one mole of (CO)n gas, we have the sequence of

reactions,

(CO)n → nCO + n3.8 + 73 kcal/mol,
O2 → nCO2 + n68.7 kcal/mol,

nCO +

n
2

(14)

(15)

so that the total heat released is

∆H = −n72.5 − 73 ≃ −(n + 1)73 kcal/mol.

(16)

We see that the combustion of one mole of (CO)n gas gives much bigger
heat, ∆H = −511 kcal for the case of (CO)6 gas, than one mole of CO gas
characterized by ∆H = −68.7 kcal/mol, i.e. 511/68.7= 7.4 times bigger heat
release per mole. This is not only a mere consequence of the fact that one
mole of (CO)n dissociates to n moles of CO but also due to the dissociation
heat presented in Eq. (14).

In any case, the above carbon monoxide complex, (CO)6, is a direct con-
ﬁrmation that the conjectured CO×CO bond [2] really exists, as it is known

8

in practical chemistry. So the complex

CO × CO × · · · × CO × CO,

(17)

where ”×” denotes a bond, is a good candidate of a magnecule.

4 Hydrogen bridges

The complex of type (17) would give a mass-spectrum which exhibits a pe-
riodicity in molecular masses. Indeed, the weakest bonds in (17) are evident
(namely, those denoted by ×) so that the complex (17), under the inﬂuence of
electronic beam in mass-spectrometer, should dissociate to an integer num-
ber of (ionized) CO molecules. However, the mass-spectra of magnegases
does not reveal periodicity 28 a.m.u. as the smallest step. Instead, we ob-
serve almost randomly distributed masses of the charged fragments, with the
minimal mass diﬀerence being 1 a.m.u. Thus, we are led to the assumption
that there are some other types of magnecules in magnegases, in addition to
(17). We expect the presence of H atoms in magnecules which could provide
(multiple) hydrogen bonds.

As a possibility of hydrogen binding between polycarbonyl compounds,
we conjecture a double hydrogen bond between two linear (CO)6 as shown
in Fig. 5.

δ⊕

C

δ⊖

O

δ⊕

C

δ⊖

O

C

O

H

C

O

C

O

H

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

C

O

9

Figure 5: Conjectured hydrogen bonds between two linear (CO)6.

This association could survive room temperatures, and can exist in a gas
state since each of the hydrogen bond provides about 5...10 kcal/mol, leading

to metastability of the compound. Here, we use the fact that the carbonyl
C=O bond in ketons is highly polarized, as it is shown in Fig. 8.

It is remarkable to note that such an association would have total dipole
moment as a vector sum of two big dipole moments; schematically, some
three C=O bonds (e.g., 1, 3, and 5) in each (CO)6 are directed up, and the
other three (e.g., 2, 4, and 6) are directed down. Thus, it would attract more
number of H atoms (by induced polarization) and CO molecules which are
close to one of these two big dipoles. Also, this association would reveal a
big adhesion to some solid surfaces by inducing a polarization of the surface
molecules. Linear growth of this association is terminated by heat excitations
and collisions of the complexes so bigger number of high mass structures are
expected to appear automatically at lower temperatures.

More detailed studies on the geometry and total dipole moments of the
(CO)6 complex, and its possible associations via hydrogen bridges, are needed
to make accurate estimates. It should be noted that C-C bonds in (CO)6
are mostly symmetric so that they give low intensity infrared peaks. Raman
spectrum would show presence of such symmetric bonds.

On the other hand, experimental measurements of the dielectric constant
of magnegasesT M could give us valuable information on the averaged total
polarization of magnegas components (see Eq. (21) below).

In general, it is natural to expect various combinations of hydrogen bonds
between several (CO)n complexes. The example shown in Fig. 5 illustrates
only one possibility. Another simple example is given by two carbon monox-
ide CO molecules bonded by hydrogen bridge,

C = O · · · H— C = O,

(18)

or two carbon monoxide (CO)2 complexes bonded to each other by hydrogen
bridge, and several H atoms (weakly) bonded to (CO)n complex at O atoms.
We note that the presence of hydrogen bonds could be detected in a
gas state NMR spectral analysis of magnegases. We note also that the usual
contribution of hydrogen bonds makes some infrared peaks wider. The higher
combustion energy release of the association shown in Fig. 5 could be also
due to an internal tension of this structure.

10

5 C(CO)n complex

Another possible type of polycarbonyl compound of interest is the following.
In Ni(CO)4 shown in Fig. 1, we can replace the Ni atom with C atom, con-
vert the C=O bonds and conjecture the existence of the compound C(CO)4
depicted in Fig. 6. Note that infrared spectra of such a compound would
reveal only the C=O bonds because of the almost symmetric character of
all the C-C bonds. One can extend this compound by noting that the C
atoms in each of four C=O could give further bonds with additional C=O
molecules, thus providing more complicated structure, C(CO)n, having high
molecular mass. One can easily estimate the dissociation heat of C(CO)n by
using the simple technique applied to (CO)n in Sec. 3. Namely, it equals

∆H = kB[C − C] + nB[C = O] − n255.8 kcal/mol,

(19)

where k is number of C-C bonds, and B[C=O] and B[C-C] are average bind-
ing energy of C=O and C-C bonds in C(CO)n complex, respectively. Note
that C(CO)n dissociates to carbon monoxide CO and pure carbon C.

It is interesting to analyze such a kind of compounds in order to make
accurate estimations of binding energies of the bonds.
In particular, we
expect that the energy B[C-C] in C(CO)4 is smaller than B[C-C] in (CO)6,
hence we would have bigger combustion energy released per CO.

O

C

C

O

O

C

C

C

O

11

Figure 6: A possible compound C(CO)4.

The -O-O- group serving as a peroxide bridge could be present in (CO)n

and C(CO)n as well, as shown in Fig. 7.

C

O

O

O

C

O

Figure 7: Possible peroxide group, -O-O-, in a linear chain of CO monomers.

In accordance with the mostly symmetric character of such bonds, they
give low intensity infrared peaks. Thus, such bonds could not be observed
in infrared spectra [2] of magnegasesT M . Again, Raman spectra would be of
much help here as they allow to identify all symmetric bonds in compounds.

6 C=O bond

In order to analyze C=O bond as a group in compounds, we outline below
properties of this bond in ketons. The structures of ketons is shown in Fig. 4.
These properties are also characteristic of carbon monoxide and some other
polycarbonyl compounds, as a consequence of high strength of the C=O
bond, as compared to the bonds C-C, C=C, C-O, O-H, H-H, and O-O. In
fact, only C≡C bond has a higher strength (see Table 1).

The bond C=O in ketons is known both as very strong and very reactive
(high reaction rate). It should be noted that the energy of this bond (179
kcal/mol in ketons) is bigger than the sum of two single C-O bonds (2×85.5
= 171). This is in contrast with the double bond C = C (145.8 kcal/mol)
which is weaker than a sum of two single bonds C-C (2×82.6 = 165.2). Also,
the bond C=O in ketons is of about 40...50% ionic character due to big
resonance bipolar contributions, with oxygen O being charged negative and
carbon C being charged positive, as shown in Fig. 8. This is due to diﬀerent
electronegativities of C and O (2.55 and 3.44, respectively). The infrared
spectra of the carbonyl group in ketons is known to be at 1705...1740 cm−1.
Dipole moments of most ketons are about 2.7 D.

The above outline allows us to conclude that carbonyl bond C=O in car-
bon monoxide CO, ketons, and polycarbonyl compounds, is highly polarized
and, therefore, this bond and its electron structure are highly sensitive to an
external electromagnetic ﬁeld. Note also that four electrons (two of C and

12

❅❅
(cid:0)(cid:0)

C

O

✲✛

⊕
❅❅
C
(cid:0)(cid:0)

⊖..
..
O
..

∼

δ⊕
C

❅❅
(cid:0)(cid:0)

δ⊖
O

Figure 8: Bipolar structure of the bond C=O in ketons.

two of O), among ten electrons, are available to provide conventional bonds,
and do not contribute the double bond C=O.

Note also that the constant dipole moment of the carbon monoxide C=O
molecule is µ = 3.2 Debay; for C-O bond it is µ = 1.5 D, and for symmetrical
H-H, O=O, and C-C bonds it is zero. A considerable numerical value of µ for
C=O implies that CO molecules, as highly polarized molecules, tend to have
a strong order in the presence of an external electromagnetic ﬁeld despite a
heat disordering.

In general, the total polarization of one mole of a gas is the sum of induced,

Pα, and constant, Pµ, polarizations,

which can be estimated from the experimental value of the dielectric constant
ε of a gas,

P =

4πNA
3

α +

4πNA
3

µ2
3kT

,

P =

ε − 1
ε + 2

M
d

,

(20)

(21)

where M is molecular mass, and d is density of a gas.

We expect the presence of about 2...20 carbonyl groups C=O in a cluster
so the total electric polarization of magnecule can be roughly estimated by
vector sum of individual polarizations of CO if one identiﬁes structure of the
magnecule.

The observed high adhesive property of magnegasesT M [2] could be in-
terpreted due to high value of the electric dipole moment of the clusters
containing several CO molecules acting in parallel.

13

7 Conclusions

In this paper, an attempt has been made to identify the structure of mag-
necules by analyzing the structure and properties of some polycarbonyl com-
pounds. We stress that we have not tried to identify the origin of the speciﬁc
bonds in magnecules. Therefore, the numerical values of the binding energies
used in this paper are approximate, and should be estimated more precisely
in accord to speciﬁc models of magnecules. Nevertheless, we have shown pos-
sible reasons of increased combustion energy content of some polycarbonyl
compounds viewed as candidates to magnecules, as compared to that of usual
carbon monoxide CO and hydrogen H2 gases. More experimental data and
further theoretical study are needed to identify the structure of magnegases
and analyze their combustion.

It is intriguing to note that, despite measurements of magnegases con-
ducted over a two years period by using most of available detection methods
and equipment (such as IRD, GC, MS, GC-MS, GC-MS/IRD, FTIR, and
other methods), the true and detailed chemical composition of magnegas
remains wastly unknown at this writing, thus stimulating new research [2].
In fact, according to conventional infrared spectroscopy, magnegasT M pro-
duced from water as liquid feedstock is essentially composed of H2 and CO
in about equal volume percentages, plus traces of O2, H2O, and CO2. Its
exhaust from internal combustion engine) is essentially composed of: 50% to
60% of H2O (as water vapor); 10% to 15% of O2; 10% to 15% of C (estimate);
3% to 7% of CO2; the remaining components being inert atmospheric gases.
These data can be naively interpreted as follows. 50% to 60% of H2O
in the exhaust means that there were 50% to 60% of 2H in magnegas; 10%
to 15% of C in the exhaust means that there was incomplete combustion of
magnegas (otherwise, we would not have pure carbon in the exhaust), and
that C is released from magnecules; 10% to 15% of O2 in the exhaust means,
again, that there was incomplete combustion of magnegas; 3% to 7% of CO2
in the exhaust disproves the expectation according to conventional quantum
chemistry that about 50% of magnegas from water is constituted by CO2,
because in this case the CO2 percentage in the exhaust should have been of
the order of ten times bigger.

By putting all available information together, including the anomalous
energy content of magnegas, and as sated in ref. [2], available data establish
that magnegas produced from water as a feedstock is indeed composed 50%

14

H atoms, 25% C atoms and 25% O atoms, although these atoms are clustered
into magnecules composed of individual and unbounded H, C and O atoms,
radicals OH and CH, single and double bonds C-O, as well as conventional
molecules H2, CO, O2, CO2, H2O, and other molecules in relative percentages
unknown at this time. The erroneous reading of 50% CO in magnegas can
be readily explained by the fact that the detecting frequency can trigger the
creation of CO by the instrument, e.g., via the conversion of all single and
double C-O bonds, which are notoriously unstable, into the triple valence
and stable CO bond.

Stated in diﬀerent terms, the study of gases created under extreme mag-
netic ﬁelds establishes that any detection of a conventional molecular com-
ponent by infrared or other currently available spectrometers, by no means,
implies that such a molecular component actually exists in the original gas,
because said molecular component can be created by the instrument itself at
the time of the detection and not be present in the original gas.

More generally, measurements of magnegases are intriguing inasmuch as
they reminds us that available analytic methods and equipment were con-
ceived to detect conventional stable molecules. As such, the same methods
and equipment are basically insuﬃcient for true experimental measurements
of magnecules beyond the level of personal beliefs, because magnecules are
not as stable as molecules and they can experience decomposition as well
as mutation into conventional molecules triggered by the available detecting
means themselves, whether the latter are given by photons or electron beams.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to A.V. Nikolaev, M.I. Mazhitov, V.V. Arkhipov,
and A. Zhumashev for discussions.

15

References

[1] R.M. Santilli and A.K. Aringazin, ”Structure and combustion of

magnegasesT M”, submitted for publication.

[2] R.M. Santilli, Foundations of Hadronic Chemistry with Applications to
New Clean Energies and Fuels, Kluwer Academic Publisher, Boston-
Dordrecht-London, 2001; R.M. Santilli, ”The Physics of New Clean En-
ergies and Fuels According to Hadronic Mechanics”, J. New Energy 4
(1999) 5-314.

[3] Website of the magnegas technology: http://www.usmagnegas.com; In-

stitute for Basic Research, FL, USA: http://www.i-b-r.org.

[4] R.M. Santilli and D.D. Shillady, ”A new iso-chemical model of the hydro-

gen molecule”, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 24 (1999) 943-956.

[5] R.M. Santilli and D.D. Shillady, ”A new isochemical model of the water

molecule”, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 25 (2000) 173-183.

[6] A.K. Aringazin and M.G. Kucherenko, ”Exact solution of the restricted
three-body Santilli-Shillady model of H2 molecule”, Hadronic J. 23 (2000)
1. physics/0001056.

[7] A.K. Aringazin, ”On variational solution of the four-body Santilli-Shillady
model of H2 molecule”, Hadronic J. 23 (2000) 57. physics/0001057.

[8] A.K. Aringazin and M.B. Semenov, ”Isoelectronium correlations as a
nonlinear two-dimensional two-particle tunnel eﬀect”, to be published.

[9] T.L. Cottrell, The strengths of chemical bonds (Butterworth, London,
1958); L. Pauling, The nature of the chemical bonds (Cornell Univ. Press,
N.Y., 1960); F.D. Rossini et al., Circular of the National Bureau of Stan-
dards 500 (Washington, DC, 1952); F.D. Rossini et al., Selected values of
physical and thermodynamical properties of hydrocarbon and related com-
pounds (American Petroleum Institute Research Project 44) (Carnegie
Press, Pittsburgh, 1953).

16

