Associative delusions and problem of their
overcoming

Yuri A. Rylov

Institute for Problems in Mechanics, Russian Academy of Sciences
101-1 ,Vernadskii Ave., Moscow, 117526, Russia
email: rylov@ipmnet.ru
Web site: http : //rsf q1.physics.sunysb.edu/˜rylov/yrylov.htm
or mirror Web site: http : //194.190.131.172/˜rylov/yrylov.htm

Abstract

Inﬂuence of associative delusions (AD) onto development of physics and
mathematics is investigated. The associative delusion (AD) means a mis-
take, appearing from incorrect associations, when a property of one object is
attributed to another one. Examples of most ancient delusions are: (1) con-
nection of the gravitation ﬁeld direction with a preferred direction in space
(instead of the direction to the Earth centre), that had lead to the antipode
paradox, (2) statement that the Earth (not the Sun) is the centre of the plan-
etary system, that had lead to the Ptolemaic doctrine. Now these AD have
been overcame. In the paper one considers four modern and not yet got over
ADs, whose corollaries are false space-time geometry in the micro world and
most of problems and diﬃculties of the quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT). One
shows that ADs have a series of interesting properties: (1) ADs appear to
be long-living delusions, because they are compensated partly by means of
introduction of compensating (Ptolemaic) conceptions, (2) ADs inﬂuence on
scientiﬁc investigations, generating a special pragmatic style (P-style) of in-
vestigations resembling experimental trial and error method , (3) acting on
investigations directly and via P-style, ADs direct the science development
into a blind alley. One considers concrete properties of modern ADs and the
methods of their overcoming. From viewpoint of application the paper is an
analysis of mistakes, made in the quantum theory development. One analyses
reasons of these mistakes and suggests methods of their correction.

2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1 Introduction

The present paper is devoted to a study of associative delusions, their role in the
natural science development and to problems of their overcoming. The associative
delusion means such a situation, when associative properties of human thinking
actuate incorrectly, and the natural phenomenon is attributed by properties alien to
it. Usually one physical phenomenon is attributed by properties of other physical
phenomenon, or properties of the physical phenomenon description are attributed
to the physical phenomenon in itself. Let us illustrate this in a simple example,
which is perceived now as a grotesque.

It is known that ancient Egyptians believed that all rivers ﬂow towards the
North. This delusion seems now to be nonsense. But many years ago it had weighty
foundation. The ancient Egyptians lived on a vast ﬂat plane and knew only one
river the Nile, which ﬂowed exactly towards the North and had no tributaries on
the Egyptian territory. The North direction was a preferred direction for ancient
Egyptians who observed motion of heavenly bodies regularly. It was direction toward
the ﬁxed North star. They did not connect direction of the river ﬂow with the plane
slope, as we do now. They connected the direction of the river ﬂow with the preferred
spatial direction towards the North. We are interested now what kind of mistake
made ancient Egyptians, believing that all rivers ﬂow towards the North, and how
could they to overcome their delusion.

Their delusion was not a logical mistake, because the logic has no relation to this
mistake. The delusion was connected with associative property of human thinking,
when the property P is attributed to the object O on the basis that in all known cases
the property P accompanies the object O. Such an association may be correct or
not. If it is erroneous, as in the given case, it is very diﬃcult to discover the mistake.
At any rate it is diﬃcult to discover the mistake by means of logic, because such
associations appear before the logical analysis, and the subsequent logical analysis
is carried out on the basis of the existing associations. Let us imagine that in the
course of a travel an ancient Egyptian scientist arrived the Tigris, which is the
nearest to Egypt river. He discovers a water stream which ﬂows, ﬁrst, not directly
and, second, not towards the North. Does he discover his delusion? Most likely not.
At any rate not at once. He starts to think that the water stream, ﬂowing before
him, is not a river. A ground for such a conclusion is his primordial belief that
”real” river is to ﬂow, ﬁrst, directly and, second, towards the North. Besides, the
Nile was very important in the life of ancient Egyptians, and they were often apt to
idolize the Nile. The delusion about direction of the river ﬂow could be overcame
only after that, when one has discovered suﬃciently many diﬀerent rivers, ﬂowing
towards diﬀerent directions, and the proper analysis of this circumstance has been
carried out.

Thus, to overcome the associating delusion, it is not suﬃcient to present an-
other object O, which has not the property P , because one may doubt of whether
the presented object is to be classiﬁed really as the object O. Another attendant
circumstances are also possible.

2

If the established association between the object and its property is erroneous,
one can speak on associative delusion or on associative prejudice. The usual method
of the associative delusions overcoming is a consideration of a wider set of phenom-
ena, where the established association between the property P and the object O
may appear to be violated, and the associative delusion is discovered.

In this paper the associative delusions in natural sciences, mainly in physics
are discussed. The associative delusions (AD) are very stable. If they have been
established, they are overcame very diﬃcultly, because they cannot be disproved
logically. But there is an additional complication. The usual mistake is overcame
easily by the scientiﬁc community, as soon as it has been overcame by one of its
members. The corresponding article is published, and the scientiﬁc community
takes it into account, and the mistake is considered to be corrected.

A diﬀerent situation arises with the associative delusions (AD). Discovery of the
associative delusion (AD), and publication of corresponding article do not lead to
acknowledgment of AD as a delusion or mistake. The scientiﬁc community continue
to insist on the statement, that the considered in the article AD is not a mistake
in reality, and that the author of this paper himself makes a mistake. A long
controversy arises. Sometimes it leads to a conﬂict, as in the case of conﬂict between
the Ptolemaic doctrine and that of Copernicus. Finally, the truth celebrates victory,
but the way to this victory appears to be long and diﬃcult.

Apparently, the reason of the AD stability lies in obviousness and habitualness
of those statements, which appear to be associative delusions afterwards. On the
ground of these statements one constructs scientiﬁc conceptions, which agree with
experimental data and observations. Declaring these habitual statements to be a
delusions, one destroys existing scientiﬁc conceptions and tries to construct new
conceptions. It is always very diﬃcult for the scientiﬁc community.

In the science history a series of associative delusions is known. Let us list them

in the chronological order.

AD.1. The antipodes paradox, generated by that the gravitational ﬁeld direction
is connected with a preferred direction in the space, but not with the direction
towards the Earth centre.

AD.2. The Ptolemaic doctrine in the celestial mechanics, where the property of
being the ”universe” centre was attributed to the Earth, whereas the Sun is such a
centre.

AD.3. Prejudices against the Riemannian geometry in the second half of the XIX
century are connected with that the Cartesian coordinate system was considered to
be an attribute of any geometry, whereas it was only a method of the Euclidean
geometry description.

AD.4. Impossibility of employment of the pure metrical conception of geometry,
connected with the associative delusion, that the concept of the curve is considered
to be a fundamental concept of any geometry, whereas the curve is only a geometrical
object, used in the Euclidean and Riemannian geometry.

AD.5. Impossibility of construction of dynamical conception of statistical de-
scription (DCSD), connected with the associative delusion, that any statistical de-

3

scription is considered to be produced in terms of the probability theory, and the
probability concept is a fundamental concept of any statistical description.

hSi

AD.6. Identiﬁcation of individual particle

with the statistically averaged par-
S
ticle
, used at the conventional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Such an
identiﬁcation is a kind of associative delusion, when the individual particle proper-
and vice versa. The
ties
Schr¨odinger cat paradox and some other quantum mechanics paradoxes, connected
with the wave function reduction, are corollaries of this identiﬁcation.

are attributed to the statistically averaged particle

hSi

S

AD.7. The forced identiﬁcation of energy and Hamiltonian, used in relativistic
quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT), is also an associative delusion. As any associative
delusion this identiﬁcation is connected with attributing properties of one object to
another one. In the given case the coincidence of energy and Hamiltonian for a free
nonrelativistic particle is considered to be a fundamental property of any particle
without suﬃcient foundations. We shall denote this delusion symbolically by means
of E = H, where E is the energy, and H is the Hamiltonian.

The ﬁrst three of the seven listed delusions (AD.1 – AD.3) had been overcame
to the beginning of XX century, though a detailed analysis of these overcoming is,
maybe, absent in the literature. As to AD.4 – AD.7, the scientiﬁc community is yet
destined to overcome them. Besides these ADs exist simultaneously, and the order
of their listing corresponds basically to their importance rather than to chronology.
The purely metric conception of geometry (CG), where all information on ge-
ometry is given by means a distance between to space points, is the most general
conception of geometry (CG). It generates the most complete list of geometries, suit-
able for the space-time description. AD.4 discriminates the purely metric CG. As a
result instead of it one uses Riemannian CG, generating incomplete list of possible
geometries. The true space-time geometry is absent in this list, and we are doomed
to use the Minkowski geometry for the space-time description. The Minkowski ge-
ometry is incorrect geometry for small space-time scales, i.e.
in the micro world.
In the true space-time geometry the micro particle motion is primordially stochas-
tic, and the properties of the geometry are an origin of this stochasticity. In the
Minkowski geometry the motion of any particle is deterministic, and incorrectness
of the Minkowski geometry lies in this fact.

AD.5 leads to impossibility of a construction of a consecutive statistical de-
scription of the stochastically moving micro particles (electrons, positrons, etc.) ,
although it is doubtless that quantum mechanics, describing the regular component
of this motion, is a statistical theory. AD.4 and AD.5 establish such a situation,
when one is forced to use a series of additional hypotheses (quantum mechanics prin-
ciples) for a correct description of observed quantum phenomena. It is much as the
Ptolemeus used a series of additional construction (epicycles, diﬀerents) for expla-
nation of observed motion of heavenly bodies. They were needed for compensation
of AD.2.

Overcoming of AD.4 and AD.5 admits one to eliminate the quantum mechanics
principles and to construct the quantum phenomena theory as a consecutive sta-
tistical description of stochastic micro particle motion. At such a description the

4

micro particle stochasticity has a geometric origin, i.e. it is generated by the space-
time geometry. The consecutive statistical description of the micro particles appears
as a result of a construction of the dynamical conception of statistical description
(DCSD), that becomes to be possible after overcoming of AD.5. The elimination of
the quantum mechanics principles after overcoming of AD.4 and AD.5 resembles the
eliminating of Ptolemaic epicycles, when they stopped to be necessary after over-
coming AD.2 and the subsequent transition from the Ptolemaic doctrine to that of
Copernicus.

AD.6 has not such a global character as AD.4 and AD.5. It concerns mainly the

interpretation of the measurement concept in quantum mechanics.

AD.7 has not the global character also. It acts only in the scope of the relativis-
tic quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT). QFT in itself is only a section of the Ptolemaic
conception, i.e. a conception, which uses additional hypotheses (quantum mechanics
principles), compensating incorrect choice of the space-time model. AD.7 (identiﬁ-
cation of energy and Hamiltonian E = H) generates a series of diﬃculties in QFT
(non-stationary vacuum, necessity of the perturbation theory and some other). In
fact, there is no necessity the energy – Hamiltonian identiﬁcation E = H. The sec-
ondary quantization can be carried out without imposing this constraint [1, 2]. The
condition E = H appears to be inconsistent with dynamic equations. Imposition of
this constraint makes QFT to be inconsistent. On one hand, such an inconsistency
leads to above mentioned diﬃculties, but on the other hand, such an inconsistency
admits one to explain the pair production eﬀect, because any inconsistent theory
admits one to explain all what you want. One needs only to show suﬃcient ingenu-
ity. On one hand, elimination of the constraint E = H leads to a theory which is
consequent in the scope of quantum theory and free from the above mentioned diﬃ-
culties, but on the other hand, it leads to that the theory stops to describe the pair
production eﬀect. This deplorable fact means only, that the undertaken attempt
of the FTP construction on the basis of uniﬁcation of the relativity principles with
those of quantum mechanics failed, and one should search for alternative conception.
Let us take into account that the quantum mechanics is a compensating (Ptole-
maic) conception, i.e. just as the quantum mechanics principles have been invented
for compensation of AD.4 and AD.5, as the Ptolemaic epicycles have been invented
for compensation of AD.2. Then an attempt of uniﬁcation of quantum mechanics
principles with the relativity ones is as useless, as an attempt of introduction of
Ptolemaic epicycles in Newtonian mechanics.

Apparently, the conception, appeared after overcoming of AD.4 and AD.5, is
a reasonable alternative to QFT. Such a conception is consistently relativistic and
quantum (in the sense that it contains the quantum constant ~, contained explicitly
in the space-time metric). It does not contain the quantum mechanics principles,
and one does not need to unite them with the relativity principles. We shall refer to
this conception as the model conception of quantum phenomena, distinguishing it
from conventional quantum mechanics, which will be referred to as axiomatic con-
ception of quantum phenomena. The diﬀerence between axiomatic conception and
model one is much as the diﬀerence between the thermodynamics and the statisti-

5

cal physics. The thermodynamics may be qualiﬁed as the axiomatic conception of
thermal phenomena, whereas the statistical physics may be qualiﬁed as the model
conception of thermal phenomena. The transition from the axiomatic conception
to the model one was carried out after a construction of the ”caloriﬁc ﬂuid” model
(chaotic motion of molecules) the thermodynamics axioms, describing properties of
the fundamental thermodynamical object – ”caloriﬁc ﬂuid”, stopped to be neces-
sary. Concept of ”caloriﬁc ﬂuid” is not used usually in the statistical physics, but
if it is introduced, its properties are determined from its model (chaotic molecular
motion).

Similar situation takes place in the interrelations between the axiomatic and
model conception of quantum phenomena. In the axiomatic conception there is an
fundamental object, called the wave function. Its properties are determined by the
quantum mechanics principles. The wave function is that which diﬀers the quantum
mechanics from the classical one, where the wave function is absent. In the model
conception one constructs a ”model of the wave function” [3]. Thereafter the wave
function properties are obtained from this model, one does not need the quantum
mechanics principles. Axiomatic and model conceptions lead to the same result
in the nonrelativistic case, but in the relativistic case the results are diﬀerent, in
general. For instance, application of the model conception to investigation of the
SD, described by the Dirac equation, leads to another result [4],
dynamic system
than investigation, produced by conventional methods in the scope of the axiomatic
conception. In the ﬁrst case the classical analog of the Dirac particle
SD is a rela-
tivistic rotator, consisting of two charged particles, rotating around their common
center of mass. In the second case the classical analog is a pointlike particle, having
spin and magnetic moment.

An existence of the associative delusion does not permit one to construct a rig-
orous scientiﬁc conception. The constructed building appears to be a compensating
(Ptolemaic) conception, where an incorrect statement is compensated by means of
additional suppositions. In general, the Ptolemaic conception is not true. But there
are such ﬁelds of its application, where its employment leads to correct results, which
agree with observations and experimental data. For instance, in the scope of the
Ptolemaic doctrine one can choose such epicycles and diﬀerents for any planet, that
one can calculate its motion in a suﬃcient long time so, that predictions agree with
observations. But there is a class of the celestial mechanics problems, which could
not be solved in the scope of the Ptolemaic doctrine. For instance, in the scope of
this doctrine one cannot solve such a problem: when and with what velocity should
one throw a stone from the Earth’s surface, in order that it could drop on the
Moon. In the scope of the Ptolemaic doctrine one cannot discover the gravitation
law and construct the Newtonian mechanics. The associative delusion, embedded
in the ground of the Ptolemaic doctrine and disguised by means of compensating
hypotheses, hindered the progress of celestial mechanics. As far as in that time
the celestial mechanics was the only exact natural science, AD hindered the normal
development of natural sciences at all. The development of natural sciences went
to a blind alley. After overcoming of AD.2 the natural sciences development was

6

accelerated strongly.

The same situation takes place with the quantum mechanics. Although at the
ﬁrst acquaintance the quantum mechanics seems to be a disordered collection of
rules for calculation of mathematical expectations, nevertheless, in the nonrelativis-
tic case an employment of these rules leads to results which agree with experiments.
Accepting the quantum mechanical principles, the nonrelativistic quantum mechan-
ics as a whole is a consistent conception, which describes excellently a wide class
of physical phenomena. But at the transition to the ﬁeld of relativistic phenomena
(pair production, elementary particles theory) the quantum principles stop to be
suﬃcient. One is forced to introduce new suppositions. The further the quantum
theory advances in the ﬁeld of relativistic phenomena, the more new suppositions
are to be introduced for descriptions of observed phenomena. This is an indirect
indication, that the conventional way of the quantum theory development comes to
a blind alley.

Investigation of possible methods of the associative delusions overcoming is a
subject of this paper. On one hand, overcoming of any special associative delusion
needs a knowledge of the subject of investigation and a professional approach to the
investigation of the phenomenon. On the other hand, the Ptolemaic conceptions
have some common properties, and a work with them has some speciﬁc character,
which should be known, if we want to overcome corresponding ADs eﬀectively.

First, it is very diﬃcult to discover the associative delusion. Indirect indications
of AD are an increasing complexity of the theory and a necessity of new additional
suppositions. These indications show that the associative delusion does exist, but
they do not permit one to determine, what is this AD.

Second, the work with Ptolemaic conceptions, i.e. with conceptions, contain-
ing AD, generates a special pragmatic style (P-style) of investigations. the P-style
lies in the fact that one searches all possible ways of explanation and calculation
of the considered phenomenon. Of course, diﬀerent versions, considered at such an
approach, are restricted by the existing mathematical technique and by the possibil-
ities of the researcher’s imagination. But these restrictions are essentially slighter,
than the restrictions imposed by the classical style (C-style) of investigations. The
classical style (C-style) is the style of investigations, fully developed in the natural
sciences to the end of the XIX century.

Unprejudiced reader will agree that the delusions AD.1 – AD.3, having been
overcame, are delusions indeed, and that it was worth to overcame them. But it
is rather doubtless that he agrees at once that AD.4 – AD.7 are also delusions
If it were so, then AD.4 – AD.7 have been
and that they are to be overcame.
overcame many years ago. Of course, ADs are undesirable as any other delusions.
One should eliminate them, if it is possible. But one should not consider them as
misunderstandings, or manifestations of researcher’s stupidity. ADs are inevitable
attributes of the cognitive processes, as far as they are conditioned by the restriction
of the ﬁeld of investigated phenomena at the initial stage of investigations. ADs were
in the past, they exist now, and apparently, they will exist in the future. We should
know, how to live with them and to make investigation. The situation resembles

7

the situation with a noise. We transmit information at presence of a noise, and
we know that the noise is undesirable, that the noise should be removed, and that,
unfortunately, it cannot be removed completely.

One should study associative delusions, their properties and the inﬂuence on the
style of thinking and investigations of researchers, which are forced to work under
Investigation of ADs properties
conditions of the associative delusions presence.
and possibilities of their overcoming is a goal of this paper. We begin with detailed
investigations of AD.4 – AD.7, to make sure that they are delusions indeed and
to understand how to overcome them. It is very important, because experience of
overcoming of AD.2 (Ptolemaic doctrine) shows that the overcoming process is very
diﬃcult for scientiﬁc community.

Usually these diﬃculties are connected with a negative role of the Catholic
church. B.V. Raushenbach [5] considers that the position of the Catholic church
is not the case. It was incompetent in problems of celestial mechanics. It agreed
simply with opinion of the most of that time researchers. Most of scientists of that
time were priests, and B.V. Raushenbach considers that they used the Catholic
church simply as a tool for a ﬁght against proponents of the Copernicus doctrine.
Experience of the author in attempts of overcoming of AD.4 – AD.7 shows, that
this is B.V. Raushenbach, who is right.

In sections 2 – 5 one considers properties of AD.4 – AD.7. In the sixth section
inﬂuence of associative delusions on the style of investigations is considered.
In
sections from seventh to twelfth the details of history of the AD.4 – AD.7 overcoming
are presented in the form, as the author of this paper saw it.

2 Conception of geometry and a correct choice of

the space-time geometry

The conception of geometry (CG) is considered to be the method (a set of rules),
by means of which the geometry is constructed. The proper Euclidean1 geometry
can be constructed on the basis of diﬀerent geometric conceptions.

For instance, one can use the Euclidean axiomatic conception (Euclidean ax-
ioms), or the Riemannian conception of geometry (dimension, manifold, metric ten-
sor, curve). One can use the topology-metric conception of geometry (topological
space, metric, curve). In any case one obtains the same proper Euclidean geome-
try. From point of view of this geometry it is of no importance which of possible
geometric conceptions is used for the geometry construction.

But if we are going to choose a geometry for the real space-time, it is very impor-
tant, that the list of all possible geometries, suitable for the space-time description,
would be complete. If the true space-time geometry is absent in this list, we are
doomed to a choice of a false geometry independently of the method which is used
1We use the term ”Euclidean geometry” as a collective concept with respect to terms ”proper
In the ﬁrst case the eigenvalues of the

Euclidean geometry” and ”pseudoeuclidean geometry”.
metric tensor matrix have similar signs, in the second case they have diﬀerent signs.

8

for a choice of the space-time geometry. Thus, a determination of the complete list
of all possible geometries is a necessary condition of a correct choice of the space-
time geometry. In turn the determination of the possible geometries list depends
on the conception of geometry (CG), which is used for determination of the list of
possible geometries. Any of possible CG contains information of two sorts: (1) non-
numerical information in the form of concepts, axioms and propositions, formulated
verbally, (2) numerical information in the form of numbers and numerical functions
of space points. In diﬀerent CG this information is presented diﬀerently.

title of CG

non-numerical
information

numerical information

Euclidean CG

Riemannian CG

topology-
metric CG

purely
metric CG

Euclidean axioms
Manifold, curve
coordinate system

topological space,
curve

∅

∅
n, gik (x)

ρ (P, Q)

0,

ρ (P, Q) = 0,
ρ (P, Q) + ρ (Q, R)

≥
iﬀ P = Q

ρ (P, R)

≥

σ (P, Q) = 1

2ρ2 (P, Q)

R

∈

Varying the numerical information at ﬁxed the non-numerical one, we obtain
diﬀerent geometries in the scope of the same conception of geometry. Varying con-
tinuously numbers and functions, constituting numerical information of CG, one
obtains a continuous set of geometries, each of them diﬀers slightly from the narrow
one. Any admissible value of numerical information is attributed some geometry
in the scope of the given CG. One can also change non-numerical information, re-
placing one axiom by another. But at such a replacement the geometry changes
step-wise, and one should monitor that replacements of one axiom by another does
not lead to inconsistencies. It is complicated and inconvenient. It is easier to ob-
tain new geometries in the scope of the same conception, changing only numerical
information.

One can see from this table, that diﬀerent CG have diﬀerent capacity of the
numerical information and generate the geometry classes of diﬀerent power. The
Euclidean CG does not contain the numerical information at all. Vice versa, the
purely metric CG contains only numerical information and generates the most pow-
erful class of geometries which will be referred to as tubular geometries (or brieﬂy
T-geometries).

The T-geometry has many attractive features. Firstly, it is very simple and
realizes the simple attractive idea, that for determination of a geometry on a set Ω
of points P it is suﬃcient to give the distance ρ(P, Q) between all pairs
of
points of the set Ω. In fact, the distance ρ(P, Q) is determined by means of the world
function σ = 1
Ω. In spite of simplicity and attractiveness of this

P, Q
}
{

2ρ2 on the set Ω

×

9

idea the existence possibility in itself of the purely metric CG was being problematic
for a long time. K. Menger [6] and J.L. Blumenthal [7] tried to construct so called
distance geometry, which was founded on the concept of distance in a larger degree,
than it is made in the topology-metric CG. But they failed to construct the purely
metric CG. The reason of the failure was AD.4. The statement of necessary and
suﬃcient conditions of the geometry Euclideness in terms of the world function σ,
given on the set Ω
Ω, was a crucial step in construction of the purely metric CG.
The prove [8, 9, 10] of the fact, that the Euclidean geometry can be constructed in
terms of only σ meant a possibility of construction of any T-geometry in terms of
σ. It meant existence of the purely metric CG.

×

In the scope of purely metric CG all information on geometry is derived from the
world function. In particular, if one can introduce a dimension of the space
,
}
this information can be derived from the world function. From the world function
one can derive information on continuity, or discontinuity of the space
. In
the case of continuous geometry the information on the coordinate systems and
metric tensor can be also derived from the world function. In T-geometry there is
an absolute parallelism (which is absent in Riemannian geometries). Besides the
T-geometry has a new property – nondegeneracy.

Ω, σ

Ω, σ

{

}

{

The geometry is called a nondegenerate, if there are many vectors −−→P0Q of ﬁxed
, parallel to the vector −−→P0P1. In the degenerate geometry there is only

−−→P0Q
length
|
one such a vector −−→P0Q.

|

Nondegeneracy of T-geometry may be conceived as follows. Any T-geometry
can be obtained from the Euclidean geometry by means of its deformation (i.e.
a change of distance ρ(P, Q) between the space points). At such a deformation
the geometrical objects of Euclidean geometry change their shape. If the obtained
T-geometry is degenerate, the Euclidean straights transform to lines, which are
curved lines, in general. But it is possible such a deformation, that the straight
of n-dimensional Euclidean space converts into (n
1)-dimensional tube. For it
would be a possible, the straight is to be deﬁned as a set of points, possessing some
property of the Euclidean straight. Deﬁnition of the straight as a curve, possessing
some property of the Euclidean straight prohibits automatically deformation of the
Euclidean straight into (n
1)-dimensional tube and discriminates nondegenerate
geometries.

−

−

If one considers nondegenerate T-geometry of the space-time, the motion of free
particles in such a space-time appears to be stochastic, although the geometry in
itself (i.e. the world function σ) is deterministic. In other words, nondegeneracy of
the space-time geometry generates an indeterminism.

In the Riemannian CG the deformation, converting a line into a tube, is for-
bidden. It is connected with AD.4, according to which the curve is a fundamental
object of geometry, and there are not to be such geometries, where the curve would
be replaced by a surface. It is in this point, where AD.4 discriminate purely met-
ric CG and T-geometries, generated by this CG. As a corollary the list of possible
geometries reduces strongly. The true space-time geometry fall out of the list of
possible geometries, one chooses a false model for the space-time.

10

In the present time one uses the Riemannian conception for obtaining the space-
time geometry. In the simplest case, when one can neglect gravitation, the space-
time is uniform, isotropic and ﬂat. In the scope of the Riemannian geometry there
is only one ﬂat uniform isotropic geometry. It is the Minkowski geometry, for which
the world function has the form:

σM (x, x′) = σM (t, x, t′, x′) =

where c is the speed of the light, and x =
two arbitrary points in the space-time.

1
2 (cid:16)
t, x
}
{

c2 (t

t′)2

−

(x

−

−

x′)2

(cid:17)

(2.1)

and x′ =

t′, x′

are coordinates of

{

}

Thus, in the case of Riemannian CG the problem of choosing space-time geom-

etry does not appear. It is determined uniquely.

The topology-metric CG cannot be applied to the space-time, because it sup-
0, whereas in the space-time there are spacelike

poses that σ (P, Q) = 1
2ρ2 (P, Q)
intervals, for which σ (P, Q) < 0.

≥

The purely metric CG generates a whole class of ﬂat uniform isotropic T-geometries,

labelled by a function of one argument. In this case the world function has the form

σ (x, x′) = σM (x, x′) + D (σM (x, x′)) ,

(2.2)

where σM is the world function for the Minkowski space (2.1), and the function D
is an arbitrary function, labelling possible ﬂat uniform isotropic geometries. These
geometries diﬀer one from another in the shape of tubes, obtained as a result of the
Euclidean straight deformation. Hence, they diﬀer in the stochasticity character of
the free particles motion. For the purely metric CG the problem of choice of the
space-time geometry is very important, because there are many uniform isotropic
geometries. To set D
0 in (2.2) and choose the Minkowski geometry would be in-
correct, because in the Minkowski geometry the motion of particles is deterministic.
But it is well known that the motion of real micro particles (electrons, positrons, etc.)
is stochastic. In other words, experiments with single particles are irreproducible.
Only distributions of results, i.e. results of mass experiments with many similarly
prepared particles are reproducible. These distributions of results are described by
quantum mechanics, constructed on the basis of some additional hypotheses, known
as principles of quantum mechanics.

≡

When there are such space-time geometries, where the motion of particles is pri-
mordially stochastic, one cannot consider as reasonable such an approach, where at
ﬁrst one chooses the Minkowski geometry with deterministic motion of particles, and
thereafter one introduces additional suppositions (quantum mechanics principles),
providing a description of the stochastic motion of micro particles. It would be more
correct to choose the space-time geometry in such a way, that a statistical descrip-
tion of stochastic motion of micro particles would describe correctly experimental
data. As far as the quantum mechanics describes all nonrelativistic experiments
very well, it is suﬃcient to choose the space-time so, that the statistical description
of stochastic motion of micro particles would agree with predictions of quantum
mechanics.

11

At ﬁrst sight, it seems that the quantum eﬀects cannot be explained by peculiar-
ities of geometry, because intensity of quantum eﬀects depends on the particle mass
essentially, and the mass is such a characteristic of a particle, which is not connected
with geometry. It seems that inﬂuence of a geometry on the particle motion is to
be similar for particles of any mass. In reality the inﬂuence of geometry does not
depend on particle motion only in the nondegenerate geometry (Minkowski geome-
try). In the space-time with the nondegenerate geometry the particle mass, as well
as its momentum are geometrical characteristics.

1,

world tube
i = 0,
±
±
by a segment

The world tube of the particle with the mass m is described by the broken
Pi}
Tbr, which is determined by a sequence of the break points
2, . . .. The adjacent points Pi, Pi+1 are connected between themselves
T[PiPi+1] of the straight. This segment is determined by the relation
S (Pi, R) + S (R, Pi+1) = S (Pi, Pi+1)
T[PiPi+1] =
}

(2.3)

R

{

{

|

,

{

1,

±

i = 0,

Pi}
,
p

2σ (Pi, Pi+1) is the distance between the points Pi and Pi+1.
2, . . . will be referred to as the skeleton of the

where S (Pi, Pi+1) =
The set of points
Tbr.
tube
In the proper Euclidean geometry as well in the Minkowski geometry (for timelike
interval S2 (Pi, Pi+1) > 0) the set of points (2.3) forms a segment of the straight line,
connecting points Pi, Pi+1. In the nondegenerate geometry the set
T[PiPi+1] forms a
three-dimensional cigar-shaped surface with the ends at the points Pi, Pi+1.
is interpreted as the particle 4-momentum on the

The vector −−−→PiPi+1 =

±

segment

{
T[PiPi+1] of the particle world tube

Pi, Pi+1}

Tbr
T[PiPi+1].

Tbr =

[i

(2.4)

2σ (Pi, Pi+1) of the vector −−−→PiPi+1 is the
The length
p
geometrical mass µ of the particle, expressed in units of length. The universal
constant b connects the geometrical mass µ with the usual mass m of the particle.

−−−→PiPi+1
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

= S (Pi, Pi+1) =

m = bµ = bS (Pi, Pi+1) ,

i = 0,

1,

2, ...

[b] = g/cm

(2.5)

±

±

1,

±

±

All segments

T[PiPi+1], i = 0,

2, ... has the same length µ = m/b. Thus,
in general, m is a geometrical characteristic of the particle, but in the case of the
Minkowski geometry one cannot determine the particle mass, using the world line
shape, because one cannot determine points Pi of the world line
Tbr skeleton on the
basis of the world line shape.
In the case of nondegenerate space-time geometry
the points Pi of the skeleton are end points of the cigar-shaped segments
T[PiPi+1].
They can be determined via intakes of the broken tube (2.4). Interval S (Pi, Pi+1)
between adjacent points Pi of the skeleton determines the geometrical mass µ of the
particle.

T[PiPi+1] and

For a free particle the 4-momenta −−−→PiPi+1 and −−−−−→
T[Pi+1Pi+2] are parallel −−−→PiPi+1 ↑↑
12

Pi+1Pi+2 of two adjacent segments
Pi+1Pi+2. In the Minkowski geometry
−−−−−→

Pi+1Pi+2 of the length µ, parallel to timelike vector −−−→PiPi+1.
there is only one vector −−−−−→
Hence, if the vector −−→P0P1 is ﬁxed, all other vectors −−−→PiPi+1
i = 1, 2, ... are determined
uniquely.
Tbr is
determined uniquely, provided one of its segments is ﬁxed. It means that the motion
of a free particle in the space-time with Minkowski geometry is deterministic.

In other words, in the Minkowski geometry the total world line

In the space-time with nondegenerate geometry there are many vectors −−−−−→Pi+1Pi+2
of the length µ, parallel to the timelike vector −−−→PiPi+1. It means that the end Pi+2
Pi+1Pi+2 is not determined uniquely, even if the vector −−−→PiPi+1 is ﬁxed.
of the vector −−−−−→
Other points Pi+3, Pi+4,... are not determined uniquely also.
It means that the
broken tube
Tbr is stochastic. Thus, the motion of a free particle in the space-
time with nondegenerate geometry is stochastic. The character and intensity of the
stochasticity depend on the form of the function D (σM) in the relation (2.2).

Supposing that the statistical description of stochastic world tubes gives the same
result, as the quantum-mechanical description in terms of the Schr¨odinger equation,
one can calculate the distortion function D (σM). The calculation gives [11]

D = D (σM) =

d =

= const

~

2bc

(cid:26)

d if σM > σ0
0 if σM ≤
0
10−21cm,

≈

σ0 = const

d

≈

(2.6)

Here ~ is the quantum constant, and b
Inside the interval (0, σ0) values of the function D (σM) are not yet determined.

10−17g/cm is a new universal constant.

≈

From the tree-dimensional viewpoint the micro particle is a pulsating sphere.
Period T of pulsations depends on the particle mass m.
It is determined by the
relation T = m/(bc), where b is the universal constant. The maximal sphere radius
√d does not depend on the particle mass. Approximately one can assume
Rmax ≈
that in the period T the sphere radius increases from zero up to maximal value
Rmax, and then it reduces to zero. In the period T the sphere centre moves along
the straight line uniformly. At the collapse moment a random jump-like change
of velocity takes place. In the coordinate system, where the sphere is at rest the
m−1(~bc/2)1/2. The lesser is the
velocity jump is equal approximately to Rmax/T
particle mass the larger is the velocity jump. Besides, the period T depends on the
particle mass. As a result for the particle of small mass the random velocity jumps
are happens more often and have the larger magnitude. Thus, choosing the space-
time geometry in the form (2.2), (2.6), one can explain all nonrelativistic quantum
eﬀects without referring to quantum principles. Such a space-time geometry is
more correct, than the Minkowski geometry, because in this case one does not need
additional hypotheses in the form of quantum principles. In such a geometry the
quantum constant appears in the theory together with the distortion function (2.6).
It is an attribute of the space-time, that agrees with the universal character of the
quantum constant ~.

≈

13

3 Dynamical conception of statistical description

As we have mentioned, the choice of the space-time geometry is determined by the
condition that the statistical description of the stochastic motion of particles is to
coincide with the norelativistic quantum-mechanical description. It means that the
quantum mechanics is to be represented as a statistical description of randomly
moving particles. In the end of XIX century the thermodynamics was presented as
a statistical description of chaotically moving molecules. After this representation
many researchers thought that something like that can be made with the quantum
mechanics.
It is a common practice to think that any statistical description is
produced in terms of the probability theory. In this point we meet AD.5, where it
is supposed that there is no statistical description without the probability theory.
Attempts [12, 13] of formulating the quantum mechanics in terms of the probability
theory failed. The fact is that, attempting to represent the quantum mechanics as a
statistical description of stochastic particle motion, one overlooks usually, that the
random component of the particle motion can be relativistic, whereas the regular
component remains to be nonrelativistic.

The probability theory, applied successfully to the statistical physics for sta-
tistical description of chaotic molecule motion, is not suitable for a description of
the stochastic motion of relativistic particles. The fact is that, the employment
of the probability density supposes splitting of all possible system states into sets
of simultaneous independent events.
In the relativistic theory it cannot be made
for continuous dynamic system, as far as there is no absolute simultaneity in the
special relativity. The simultaneity at some coordinate system cannot be used also,
because the coordinate system is a method of description. Application of the prob-
ability theory and of the conditional simultaneity (simultaneity at some coordinate
system) means an application of the statistics to the description methods instead of
the necessary calculation of the dynamic system states.

One can overcome the appeared obstacle, rejecting employment of the probability
theory at the statistical description. Indeed, the term ”statistical description” means
only that one considers many identical, or almost identical objects. Application
of the probability theory in the statistical description is not necessary, because it
imposes some constraints on the method of the description, that is undesirable. For
instance, the probability density must be nonnegative, and sometimes this constraint
cannot be satisﬁed.

In the nonrelativistic physics the physical object to be statistically described
is a particle, i.e. a point in the usual space or in the phase one. The density of
points (particles) in the space is nonnegative, it is a ground for introduction of
the probability density concept. In the relativistic theory the physical object to be
statistically described is a world-line in the space-time. The density of world lines in
the vicinity of some point x is a 4-vector, which cannot be a ground for introduction
of the probability density. The alternative version, when any world line is considered
, admits one to introduce the concept of the probability
to be a point in some space
of world lines. But such a description is non-local, as far as two
density in the space

V

V

14

:

AhSi [d

X
{

hSi

world lines, coinciding everywhere except for some remote regions, are represented
, and this points are not close, in general. In other words,
by diﬀerent points in
such an introduction of the probability is very inconvenient.

V

E

To get out of this situation, one needs to reject from employment of the prob-
ability theory at the statistical description. Instead of the probabilistic conception
the dynamical conception of statistical description (DCSD) should be used. Instead
of the stochastic system
Sst, for which there are no dynamic equations, one should
Sst], consisting of large number N of identical independent systems
[N,
use a set
Sst. The statistical ensemble
Sst and known as the statistical ensemble of systems
[N,
Sst] forms a deterministic dynamical system, for which there are dynamic equa-
E
tions, although they do not exist for elements
Sst of the statistical ensemble. The
statistical description lies in the fact that one investigates properties of
Sst] as
a deterministic dynamic system, and on the basis of this investigation one makes
some conclusions on properties of its elements (stochastic systems
Sst)). As far as
one investigates a dynamic system (statistical ensemble) and its properties, there is
no necessity to use the concept of probability.

[N,

E

Along with the statistical ensemble

S
one can introduce the statistically averaged dynamic system
formally as a statistical ensemble
Mathematically it means that, if

→ ∞
] is the action for

, or even instead of it,
, which is deﬁned
), normalized to one system.
[N,

] of systems

], then

hSi

[N,

S

E

], (N
[N,
E
S
X
AE [N, dN {
1
X
N AE [N, dN {
, where X is a state of a single system

] = lim
}
N→∞

X
{

] ,

d

}

}

E

S

}

X

}

= lim
N→∞

dN {
X
, and dN {

E

S

.

hSi

is the action for
hSi
distribution, describing in the limit N

is the
both the state of the statistical ensemble

S

}

[N,

] and the state of the statistically averaged system

→ ∞

E

S

[N,

hSi

Replacement of the statistical ensemble

] by the statistically averaged
system
is founded on the insensibility of the statistical ensemble to the number
N of its elements, under condition that N is large enough. The statistically averaged
is a kind of a statistical ensemble. Formally it is displayed in the fact
system
hSi
that the state of
] is
, as well as the state of the statistical ensemble
described by the distribution dN {
, whereas the state of a single system
→ ∞
is described by the quantities X, but not by their distribution. Using this formal
S
criterion, one can distinguish between the individual dynamic system
and the
statistically averaged system

hSi

[N,

, N

X

S

S

E

}

.

To obtain the quantum mechanics as a statistical description of stochastic motion
of micro particles, one needs to make one important step more. It is necessary to
introduce the wave function ψ, which is the main object of quantum mechanics.
Usually the wave function is introduced axiomatically, i.e. as an object, satisfying a
system of axioms (principles of quantum mechanics). for this reason the meaning of
the wave function is obscure. To clarify it, one has to introduce the wave function
as an attribute of some model.

hSi

If

is a particle (deterministic or random), then the statistical ensemble

]
S
are continuous dynamic systems

[N,

E

, or statistically averaged particle

S
of particles

S

hSi

15

of the ﬂuid type. It is well known [14], that the Schr¨odinger equation can be rep-
resented as an equation, describing irrotational ﬂow of some ideal ﬂuid. In other
words, the wave function can be considered to be an attribute of irrotational ﬂuid
ﬂow. One can show [3], that the reciprocal statement (any ﬂuid ﬂow can be de-
scribed in terms of a wave function) is also valid. The rotational ﬂow is described
by a many-component wave function. In other words, at the rotational ﬂow the spin
appears.

S

is a ﬂuid, the wave function
As far as the statistically averaged particle
hSi
. For the statistical description
appears to be a description method of this ﬂuid
hSi
would coincide with the quantum mechanical description, it is
of the particle
necessary to ﬁnd the state equation of the ﬂuid
, which is determined in turn by
the form of the distortion function D. Corresponding calculation was made in the
paper [11]. This calculation determines the form (2.6) of the distortion function.
Then one obtain the conception, which will be referred to as the model conception
of quantum phenomena (MCQP). For the conventional presentation of quantum
mechanics the term ”the axiomatic conception of quantum phenomena” (ACQP)
will be used.

hSi

Dynamical conception of statistical description (DCSD) generates a less infor-
mative description, than the probabilistic statistical description in the sense that
some conclusions and estimations, which can be made at the probabilistic descrip-
tion, cannot be made in the scope of DCSD. One is forced to accept this, because
one cannot obtain a more informative description. The fact that the quantum me-
chanics is perceived as a dynamical (but not as a statistical, i.e. probabilistic) con-
ception is connected with the employment of DCSD. In turn application of DCSD
is conditioned by ”relativistic roots” of the nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. The
”dynamic perception” of quantum mechanics takes place in the scope of both con-
ceptions MCQP and ACQP. Let us note that DCSD is an universal conception in
the sense that it can by used in both relativistic and nonrelativistic cases.

4 Identiﬁcation of individual particle with the

statistically averaged one

S

hSi

”Dynamical perception” of quantum mechanics leads to the fact that the statis-
, described by the wave function, is considered to be
tically averaged particle
simply a real particle
is described by the
. The question, why the real particle
wave function ψ, i.e. by the continuous set of variables (but not by position and
momentum as an usual particle), is answered usually, that it is conditioned by the
quantum character of the particle. One refers usually to the quantum mechanics
principles, according to which the quantum particle state is described by the wave
function ψ, whereas the classical one is described by a position and momentum. At
this point we meet AD.6, when one does not diﬀer between the statistically averaged
.
particle

and the individual particle

S

As a corollary of such an identiﬁcation the properties of

and

are confused,

hSi

hSi

S

S

16

S

hSi

hSi

and

and an object with inconsistent properties appears. As long as we work with math-
, no contradictions
ematical technique of quantum mechanics, dealing only with
and no paradoxes appear. But as soon as the measurement process is described,
where both objects
appear, the ground for inconsistencies and paradoxes
come into existence. Combinations of contradictory properties may be very exotic.
There are at least two diﬀerent measurement processes. The measurement (S-
measurement), produced under an individual system
, leads always to a deﬁnite
result and does not inﬂuence the wave function, which is an attribute of the statis-
. The measurement (M-measurement), produced under
tically averaged system
, is a set of many S-measurements, produced
the statistically averaged system
under individual systems
. The
N-measurement changes the wave function of the system
and does not lead to
a deﬁnite result. It leads to a distribution of results.

, constituting the statistically averaged system

hSi

hSi

hSi

hSi

S

S

The following situation takes place the most frequently. One considers that
the wave function describes the state of an individual system, and a measurement,
produced under individual system, changes the state (wave function) at this system.
As a result a paradox, connected with the wave function reduction and known as the
Schr¨odinger cat, appears. A corollary of such an approach is so called many-world
interpretation of quantum mechanics [15, 16].

5 Identiﬁcation of Hamiltonian and energy at the
secondary quantization of relativistic ﬁeld

The energy of a closed dynamic system is deﬁned as the integral from the time
component T 00 of the energy-momentum tensor

E =

T 00dx

Z

(5.1)

The energy is a very important conservative quantity. The Hamilton function
(Hamiltonian) of the system is a quantity canonically conjugate to the time, i.e.
the quantity, determining the time evolution of the system. By their deﬁnitions
the Hamiltonian H and the energy E are quite diﬀerent quantities. But in the
nonrelativistic physics (classical and quantum) these quantities coincide in many
cases. For instance, the energy of a particle in a given potential ﬁeld U (x) has the
form E = p2/2m + U (x). The Hamiltonian of the particle has the same form. On
the ground of this coincidence an illusion appears, that the energy E of dynami-
cal system plays a role of the quantity, determining its evolution, i.e. the role of
its Hamiltonian H. An illusion appears that the energy and the Hamiltonian are
synonyms, i.e. two diﬀerent names of the same quantity.

This identiﬁcation of energy and Hamiltonian is used in the relativistic quantum
theory, where such an identiﬁcation cannot be used. For instance, it is common
SKG, described by the Klein-
practice to consider [17], that in the dynamic system
Gordon equation, the particle energy may be both positive and negative. A ground

17

(5.2)

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

for such an statement is the fact that the ﬂat wave in

SKG has the form

ψ = Aeik0t−ikx

where the quantity k0 = √m2 + k2 is interpreted as an energy.
It may be both
positive and negative. The statement that the energy may be negative is made in
spite of the fact that the energy-momentum tensor component

T 00 = m2ψ∗ψ + ∇ψ∗∇ψ

which enters in the expression (5.1), takes only nonnegative values. In reality, the
quantity k0 is a time component of the canonical momentum, which can have any
sign. But the particle energy is always nonnegative.

Thus, in the given case one has the associative delusion (AD.7), which lies in
the fact that the properties of Hamiltonian are attributed to the energy. As long as
such an identiﬁcation is produced on the verbal level, it leads only to a confusion in
interpretation and nothing more. But in the quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) such an
identiﬁcation has a mathematical form, and it has far-reaching consequences for the
secondary quantization of the scalar ﬁeld ψ. In the relation

i~ ∂ψ
∂t

= Hψ

ψH,

−

i~ ∂ψ
∂t

= Eψ

ψE

−

describing evolution of the dynamic variable ψ in the Heisenberg representation, the
Hamiltonian H is replaced by the energy (5.1), i.e. the relation (5.4) is written in
the form

The relation (5.5) is an additional constraint which is not necessary for carrying out
the secondary quantization. (The secondary quantization may be produced without
imposing the condition (5.5)). If the additional condition is imposed, one should test
its compatibility with dynamic equations. Unfortunately, there is no understanding
of such a test necessity. The condition (5.5) appears to be compatible with the
dynamic equations only in the trivial case of the linear ﬁeld ψ. For the nonlinear
ﬁeld the condition (5.5) appears to be incompatible with dynamic equations that
manifests itself as the form of nonstationary vacuum state.

Theory of the scalar ﬁeld ψ, quantized in accord with the condition (5.5), is an
inconsistent conception, which is convenient in the relation that it (as any incon-
sistent conception) admits one to explain some facts, which cannot be explained in
the scope of a consistent conception, which does not use the constraint (5.5).

The identiﬁcation of the energy and Hamiltonian E = H (condition (5.5)) has
been used in QFT during the second half of XX century, i.e. about 50 years. This
condition is not necessary for the secondary quantization, and its incompatibility
with dynamic equations is rather evident. Why was this condition not come under
a storm of criticism in this long time? In QFT there are many diﬃculties and
problems, and the QFT consistency was open to question many times. But the

18

condition (5.5) had not to be in doubt. The author had discussed this question with
experts in QFT, but any time the their reaction was similar. The author opponents
did not adduce counter-arguments and agreed that the condition (5.5) is not too
well, but they rejected to make conclusions, concerning the second quantization
procedure. Put very simply, they searched reasons of the QFT diﬃculties on its
surface, giving up to analyze the QFT foundations.

6 On styles of investigation

Their considerations look approximately as follows. Let us introduce an additional
supposition and study its consequences for theory and experiment.
If the conse-
quences are positive, the additional supposition is accepted and introduced into
the theory. If the consequences are negative, the additional supposition is removed
and a new additional supposition is considered. Such additional suppositions were:
normal ordering, renormalizations, increase of the space-time dimension with the
subsequent compactiﬁcation, strings, etc. This style of investigation: additional
supposition with subsequent test of its consequences will be referred to as P-style
(pragmatic style) of investigation. Such a style is characteristic not only for the QFT
development. In the beginning of XX century the quantum mechanics development
was carried out also by means of P-style. The quantum mechanics developed, ﬁght-
ing against the classical style (C-style) of investigations, established to the end of
XIX century. In this ﬁght the P-style gained a victory over the C-style, which played
a role of representative of classical (nonquantum) physics. Successors of Ptolemeus
used the P-style, whereas successors of Copernicus used the C-style. The competi-
tion of successors of Ptolemeus with the successors of Copernicus was at the same
time a competition between P-style and C-style. Then the C-style gained the victory.
C-style reached its fullest ﬂower to the end of XIX century. At the investigations of
quantum phenomena in the XX century C-style gave the way to P-style.

Why do two diﬀerent styles of investigation exist? Why does the investigation
C-style or the investigation P-style gain alternatively the competition? The answer
is as follows.

C-style is a style of investigations in the scope of a consistent theory. It puts in
the forefront the consistency of a theory. C-style restricts suggestion of additional
suppositions (hypotheses), insisting, that additional suppositions be consistent with
primary principles of a theory. (Let us recall the Newton’s words: ”I do not invent
In virtue of its requirement rigidity the C-style has the more pre-
hypotheses”).
dictable force, than the P-style, where these requirements are not so rigid. Among
the C-style requirements there are ethic requirements to researchers. For instance, an
researcher, which publishes insuﬃciently founded paper, containing arbitrary (i.e.
not following from the primary principles) suppositions, risks losing his scientiﬁc
face.

Adherents of the C-style pay attention to fundamental problems of a theory, and,
in particular, to results and predictions of the theory, which are important for its

19

further development. Solutions of concrete practical problems are considered to be
not so important, because a solution of any special problem is a formal application
of primary principles and mathematical technique to conditions of the new problem,
and nothing beyond this. Such a relation of the researcher, using the C-style, to a
solution of special problems is founded on his conﬁdence that the primary principles
are valid and the theory is consistent.

The predictability of the C-style, rigidity of its requirements and its self-reliance
are true, provided the primary principles of a theory are true. If the primary prin-
ciples contain a mistake, some predictions of the theory appears to be false. They
force onto searching for a mistake, which may occurs in the primary principles or in
the conclusion of corollaries from them. The most frequently a mistake is discovered
in incorrect application of the primary principles.

But if the mistake in conclusions of a theory (discrepancy between predictions
of the theory and experiment) has not been discovered for a long time, the ne-
cessity of the cognition progress and necessity of improvement of the terminology
for the experimental data description generate a more pragmatic style (P-style) of
investigations.

The P-style puts in the forefront a possibility of the experimental data expla-
nation, what is obtained usually by introduction of additional suppositions. The
theory consistency is considered to be not so important. although the representa-
tives of the P-style declare, that they tend to elimination of inconsistencies, but it
does not succeeded always, and is considered to be a less defect, than impossibility
of the experiment explanation. The P-style admits an introduction of additional
suppositions, even if they appear to be inconsistent with primary principles. It is
important only, that they were useful and led to explanation of experimental data.
The P-style imposes essentially more slight requirements to researchers. For in-
stance, the scientiﬁc reputation of a researcher does not lack or lacks slightly, if
he, writing a very good paper, writes thereafter several mediocre or even incorrect
papers. Predictability of the P-style is essentially less, than that of the C-style, as
far as P-style admits only a”short logic” (short logical chain of considerations). For
instance, it is widely believed among researchers dealing with quantum theory that
essentially new result can be obtained, only suggesting some essentially new suppo-
sition in the scope of quantum theory. The idea that a novelty may be found in the
primary principles (i.e. outside the scope of quantum theory) and the new result is
a corollary of a long logical chain of considerations is perceived as something unreal.
Pragmatism of the P-style manifests itself in setting in the forefront a solution of
concrete practical problems. It is supposed that a young talent gifted researcher is
to solve concrete problems, whereas solution of fundamental problems is supposed
to be a work for elderly experienced researchers. According to such a viewpoint
usually one ignores and does not discuss facts and results which are important for
further development of a theory, but which do not deal directly with its practical
applications. Behind such a relation one can see an uncertainty of the P-style
representatives in the primary principles of a theory and in its consistency.
If a
practical problem fails to be solved, the P-style representatives are ready to suggest

20

additional suppositions and even to revise the primary principles.

The P-style appears to be more eﬀective, only if the C-style appears to be in-
eﬀective. The last takes place, if the primary principles contain either mistake or
defect. In other words, the C-style is more eﬀective, than the P-style only at ab-
sence of obstacles (systematic noise). The P-style is noise-resistant, under presence
In
of the ”systematical noise” it appears to be more eﬀective, than the C-style.
the period of a long P-style dominance a theory degenerates. Accumulating many
additional supposition, contradicting each other, the theory gives up step-by-step
its predictable force and capacity of valid development. Situation was such in the
time of dominance of the Ptolemaic doctrine. The same situation takes place now
in the quantum ﬁeld theory.

In general, the C-style is more eﬀective and predictable, provided the primary
principles are valid. The P-style is useful in the relation, that it works even in the
case, when there is a mistake in the primary principles, and C-style cannot work. In
this case the P-style admits one to introduce new adequate concepts and terminology
for descriptions of experiments that cannot be explained by the theory, based on the
primary principles. Finally, investigations, realized by means of the P-style, help
one to discover mistake in the choice of primary principles and produce a necessary
revision.

Any style of investigations is conservative. It is worked out by a researcher in
the course of all his research activity. If the researcher used the P-style, i.e. he uses
essentially the trial and error method, he gets accustomed hardly to rigid restric-
tions of the C-style. Vice versa, a researcher, using the C-style in his work, gets
accustomed to work with consistent conceptions. It is very diﬃcult for him to pass
to more free P-style and to invent new additional supposition which are necessary
for explanations of new experiments. Conservatism of the investigation style leads
to a conﬂict, when the dominating investigation style changes. For instance, in the
time of Ptolemeus the P-style dominated. Discovery of AD.2 needed to construct a
consistent conception of the celestial mechanics which would be free of arbitrary sup-
positions. The conﬂict between the successors of Ptolemeus and those of Copernicus
was in the same time a conﬂict between the investigation styles.

Now practically all researchers dealing with relativistic QFT use P-style. They
perceive diﬃcultly arguments of the C-style proponents, having found inconsistencies
and mistakes in primary principles of the quantum theory.

7 History of the associative delusions overcoming

Associative delusions have rather unusual properties. Usually they are overcame
unintentionally. As a rule, the associative delusions are discovered and realized
only after they have been overcame. Overcoming of AD.2 (conﬂict between the
Copernicus doctrine and the Ptolemaic one) continues for several decades. Both
sides of the conﬂict understood very well the reason of disagreement, but the fact,
that this reason was an associative delusion, was interesting for nobody.

21

The following associative delusion AD.3 (the Cartesian coordinate system as a
fundamental object of geometry) had been overcame in the course of the second half
of XIX century. Its overcoming appeared to be not noticed in the sense that the
reason of conﬂicts in the scientiﬁc community remained to be obscure. In the case
of AD.2 it was clear, what was a subject of disagreement. In the case of AD.3 the
reason of the conﬂict remained to be not clear. The mathematical community did
not accept non-Euclidean geometry. There is the evidence of Felix Klein [18]. It
is known also that the Russian mathematical community related with a prejudice
to works of N.I. Lobachevski on the geometry of negative curvature and to N.I.
Lobachevski himself as an author of these works [19]. Unfortunately, the reasons of
this prejudice had not been analyzed (at any case such an analysis is not known for
us), and this episode remained in the history of mathematics as an unclear ﬂash of
conservatism.

Associative delusions AD.4 – AD.7 are found at the stage of overcoming. On
one hand, an objective analysis of methods of AD overcomings is very diﬃcult. On
the other hand, such an analysis is necessary, because it would make overcoming of
AD.4 – AD.7 easier. Besides AD.4 – AD.7 are not the last associative delusions on
the way of the cognition process. Investigation of properties of associative delusions
could help one to overcome the next AD.

AD.4 – AD.7 were discovered and overcame by one person – the author of this
paper. Discovery and overcoming of ADs is rather rare processes. In this connection
it is very diﬃcult to answer the questions of the type. With what is a discovery of
ADs connected? What are the circumstances, at which the discovery of ADs takes
place? Why do some researchers succeed in overcoming of ADs, whereas other do
fail?

Motives and attendant circumstances are known usually only for those researchers,
who participated directly in overcoming of AD (in the given case this is the author of
the paper). The process of overcoming was rather long (about 40 years). The diary
was not kept, and one is forced to entrust to recollections. But the human memory is
not enough reliable. The human beings are apt to forget events and circumstances,
especially, if they are unpleasant for them. A subconscious mythologization of the
investigation process takes place. But recollections of the only direct participant
of the process of the ADs discovery and overcoming are of certain interest for fur-
ther investigations of associative delusions, even if they are subjective and strongly
mythologized. Such recollections are of interest for subsequent investigators even in
the case, if their author had not understood, or had understood incorrectly, what
he had done in reality. The recollections are unique and are of interest, even if their
author had described instead of important circumstances some unessential details,
which he remembers for some reasons.

Experience of overcoming of AD.4 – AD.7 evidences that in some case the over-
coming of associative delusion happens to be accidental, or it is an accessory result
of investigations, carried out with other goal.
In other cases ADs appear to be
connected with insuﬃcient understanding of the existing theory (in particular, the
relativity theory), and overcoming of AD is carried out consciously. However, tak-

22

ing part in the process of the AD overcoming, it is very diﬃcult one to analyze
objectively this process. Apparently, the objective analysis will be possible only,
when the process of the AD overcoming has been over. The author can make his
contribution to this analysis only by one way – he should tell, how from his view-
point the process of this overcoming passed. Of course, one can produce this analyze
on the ground of published papers. But in this case one cannot take into account
motives of the paper writing and the important circumstance, that sometimes the
obtained results diﬀer from those ones that the author wanted to obtain. Motives
and goals of the author are unessential for estimation of his contribution, but they
are essential for investigation of the cognition process (analyses of the process of the
AD overcoming).

In general, recollection should be printed in the memoirs, but not in the scientiﬁc
paper. In the given case there is the excuse that the question is connected not only
with recollections, but with recollections accompanied by formulae. Besides the
question is about evidences (maybe, very subjective), concerning very rare cognition
process, which is the AD overcoming.

Thus, evidences of the participant will be presented. They are presented from
the ﬁrst person singular, in order to underline subjective character of recollection
and separate them from other part of presentation, which pretends to objectivity.
The evidences of participant do pretend by no means to a review of investigations,
connected with overcoming of AD.4 – AD.7, and all references to other researchers
are cited so far as they inﬂuenced the participant investigations and remained in his
memory.

8 Beginning of AD.4 overcoming. Evidence of

participant.

The idea that the space-time is described completely by interval (distance) between
pairs of events appeared at once after my acquaintance with the relativity theory. (It
took place in 1955, when I was a second-year student). I supposed that all experts
thought the same and did not see nothing new and surprising in such a point of view.
(Some physicists told me many years ago, that they hold the same viewpoint). I
was somewhat surprised that the inﬁnitesimal interval was used (but not ﬁnite). I
explained this fact to myself that it was easier to work with inﬁnitesimal interval,
because it contained less information (functions of one space-time point), than the
ﬁnite interval (function of two space-time points). At ﬁrst, I did not understand the
circumstance, that an introduction of an inﬁnitesimal interval is impossible without
introduction of the dimension and manifold. I considered the dimension and the
manifold to be natural attributes of the space-time.

Some years later I undertook a study of that, to what extent the space-time
could be described in terms of a ﬁnite interval. The ﬁnite interval was attractive
by the fact, that it contains more information, than the inﬁnitesimal one. For
instance, a geodesic, described usually by a system of four ordinary second order

23

diﬀerential equations, is described in terms of the ﬁnite interval S (x, x′) as a solution
x′ = xi (τ ) ,

i = 0, 1, 2, 3 of a system of four algebraic equations

∂G (x, x′)
∂x′i′

= bi′τ,

bi′ = const,

G (x, x′) =

S2 (x, x′)

(8.1)

1
2

The quantity, which is denoted now via σ and known as the world function, I
denoted by G. For me this designation associated with gravitation. The quantities,
depending on two space-time points, I denoted by capital letters.

It should note that I had worked out somewhat unusual and, as I am understand-
ing now, unpleasant for my colleagues style of work. The style of my work was such
a kind, that before undertaking an investigation I had not studied or had studied
very slightly works of my predecessors. I connect appearance of such a style with
the fact, that in the course of my studying at the university I had practically no
scientiﬁc advisor, who could give me a deﬁnite theme for investigations and press on
so that I investigated it. Of course, I had an oﬃcial scientiﬁc advisor. He suggested
me a theme for a diploma work and for the Ph.D. thesis. But I was a self-willed
student. I ignored recommendations of my scientiﬁc advisor and investigated those
subjects, which I considered to be interesting and necessary. My scientiﬁc advisor,
qualifying me as a ”non-controlled student” did not insist on his choice of the subject
of investigation and does not hinder my self-will in the choice of the investigation
subject. Moreover, he supported me by all means in my work.

Usually the scientiﬁc advisor suggests the subject for investigation and related
literature. Doing so he guarantees that this work will not be a rediscovery of known
results. I began my investigation of the ﬁnite interval properties (world function),
as if such investigations had not been produced earlier. I knew nothing about them,
and nobody of my colleagues could tell me anything about such investigations.
Investigation was made in spring and in summer of 1958, when I was ﬁve-year
student of the physical faculty of Lomonosov university.

Understanding possibility of rediscovery of known results, I tended subcon-
sciously to prevent such a rediscovery. To eliminate the rediscovery, I must bring
my investigation to obtaining of certainly new and interesting result. The possi-
bility that my intermediate results appeared to overlap already known results, has
not agitated me2. I ignored the evident way of investigation of the world function
G (x, x′) – expansion into a series over powers of x
x′ and paid attention on the
Gkl,s′ is a scalar at the point x′ and
circumstance that the quantity Γi
the Christoﬀel symbol at the point x. Here the following designations are used

kl (x, x′)

Gis′

≡

−

Gkl′

≡

∂2G
∂xk∂x′l′ ,

Gkl,s′

∂3G
∂xk∂xl∂x′s′

≡

(8.2)

and Gis′

is the matrix reciprocal to the matrix Gkl′.

2I guessed that it is not very ethically not to refer to my predecessors and tried not to admit
this. But the fact that absence of references to predecessors disoriented the readers, which are
acquainted at ﬁrst with this subject, did not come to my mind. I knew about this a bit later.

24

Moreover, it appeared that Γi

kl (x, x′) is the Christoﬀel symbol for a ﬂat space, i.e.
kl (x, x′) is equal to zero identically.
the Riemann – Christoﬀel curvature tensor for Γi
As a result it appeared that one could introduce such a covariant derivative with
respect to xi, which is a covariant derivative in some ﬂat space and which depends
on a parameter – the point x′.

All this meant, that the world function and the Riemannian space V , which was
described by it, are associated with a set of ﬂat spaces Ex′, labelled by the point x′ of
the Riemannian space V . Investigation of this question showed that the spaces Ex′
are ﬂat spaces tangent to the Riemannian space V at the point x′. It appeared that
the world function generates automatically some two-metric technique, realizing a
geodesic mapping of the Riemannian space V onto Ex′. Moreover, it was discovered
later on [20], that such a mapping is realized by any symmetric scalar function
G (x, x′) of two points, for which one can determine the tensor Gis′
. But in that
time I had not known this result and did not think about a possibility of coming
outside the scope of Riemannian geometry.

By the way, results of the work admitted one to make this already then. The
most evident result of the work was a construction of the two-metric technique on
the basis of the world function.
It was the result that impressed my colleagues
mostly. I myself considered that the main result of the paper was an obtaining of
a system of diﬀerential equations for the world function of Riemannian space. The
equation, which is satisﬁed by the world function σ of the Riemannian space is well
known [21].

∂σ
∂xi gik (x)

∂σ
∂xk = 2σ

(8.3)

It contains the metric tensor of the Riemannian space in an explicit form, and it
cannot serve as an equation, splitting all symmetric functions G (x, x′) into two sets:
one set contains the functions, which could be a world function of a Riemannian
space, another set contains functions G (x, x′), which cannot play this role.

Using two-metric technique, one succeeded to eliminate the metric tensor from
the equation (8.3) and obtain a system of diﬀerential equations for the world func-
tion, which did not contain metric tensor explicitly but in return it contained deriva-
tives of the world function with respect to both arguments x and x′ [22]. The world
function of any Riemannian space satisﬁed this system of equations.

The system of equations put the question. What is described by the world
function, which does not satisfy this system? Does it describe non-Riemannian
geometry, or no geometry at all? In that time (in the beginning of sixtieths) I
did not put this question, but I considered derivation of this system of equations
as a main result of my work. My attempts to call attention of my colleagues to
this result did not lead to a success. Agreeing that the development of two-metric
technique was a progress, they were indiﬀerent to the system of equations for the
world function of a Riemannian space, that was considered by me as the main result.
The paper was published in slightly known journal [22] in 1962, almost three years
after it had been submitted. In the time between the submission and publication
some very important for me event happened. The book by J.L. Synge [21], where

25

at ﬁrst the general relativity was presented in terms of the world function, appeared
in Moscow. I had learned from it that the world function was introduced at ﬁrst by
H.S. Ruse [23] and J.L Synge [24] practically simultaneously, and that its properties
had been investigated.

But the book by J.L. Synge did not contain any information on two-metric
technique and geodesic mapping on tangent spaces Ex′. My misgivings that results
of my investigations would appear to be a rediscovery of known results were not
justiﬁed. Moreover, my study of the book by J.L. Synge led to increase of my
self-reliance. If being a student, I could without a help make an investigation and
obtained the results, which had not been obtained by so experienced researcher as
J.L. Synge, it meant that I was able to compete with any researchers. Further this
increase of my self-reliance will help me in my investigations. This case validated
my style of working, when I did not troubled myself with study of the literature,
postponing this to the time, when the ﬁrst results deserving publication would be
obtained. I used such a style of work, because I preferred to develop a new direction,
but not to continue investigations of my predecessors. At ﬁrst, it was easier, and,
second, an attentive study of literature inﬂuenced me very strongly.
It pushed
me to a beaten way and prevented from a choice of directions of investigations,
natural from my viewpoint. These directions appeared sometimes to be alternative
to conventional directions of investigations.

Until 1964 I had written several papers about the two-metric technique appli-
cations to gravitation and several papers on the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Dealing with
the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, I was led to conclusion that all universal phenomena and
universal constants were a manifestation of the space-time properties. For instance,
I was sure (and I am sure now) that multiplicity of any electric charge to elementary
one was conditioned by the space-time properties, as well as the quantum constant
~ was the space-time attribute. Besides to the end of 1964 I was convinced that
one cannot succeed in the study of the space-time properties without understanding
what was the quantization. This (and other circumstances) forced me to leave the
Moscow Lomonosov university and to change a subject of my investigations.

9 Relativistic statistics and overcoming of AD.5,

AD.6. Evidence of participant.

Since 1964 I stopped to deal with geometry, gravitation, and uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. In
several years I was dealing with applied physics, and in the beginning of seventieths I
started to develop the direction, which I called ”quantum mechanics as a relativistic
statistics”. It is this direction, whose development is connected with overcoming of
AD.5. Then I assumed that the quantum mechanics was a result of statistical de-
scription of randomly moving particles. It seemed to me very reasonable in the light
of the fact that in the end of XIX century the thermal phenomena were explained
successfully as a result of statistical description of chaotically moving molecules. I
assumed that the quantum phenomena could be explained in the same way. This

26

idea was not new, but numerous attempts to realize this program did not led to a
success. As far as know, most of researchers considered this program to be wrong.
They assumed that the quantum properties reﬂect ”quantum nature” of the world
and that they could not be reduced to other ”classical” properties.

I did assume that failure of the statistical description was connected with the
nonrelativistic character of the statistical description. I assumed that although the
quantum mechanics was nonrelativistic, but nevertheless, the statistical description
was to be relativistic. In my opinion, the fact that the regular component of the
particle motion was relativistic did not mean that the stochastic component was
nonrelativistic also. To be on the safe side, one was to use a relativistic statistical
description, which should be valid independently of the case, whether the stochastic
component of motion be relativistic or not.

Being a student, I studied the relativity theory, reading the book by V.A. Fock
[25], and shared his viewpoint that the relativistic theory diﬀered from the nonrel-
ativistic one not only in relativistic invariance of their dynamic equations. As it is
well known, the main diﬀerence between the special relativity theory (SRT) and the
nonrelativistic physics lies in the fact that in the nonrelativistic physics there are the
concept of simultaneity in remote points, whereas in SRT there is no such a simul-
taneity. It means essentially that the nonrelativistic physics is incompatible with
the relativistic physics. But a compromise between the relativity and nonrelativistic
physics was strongly necessary, as far as the physics remained to be mainly nonrel-
ativistic. Presentation of the whole nonrelativistic physics in the relativistic form,
only to take into account small relativistic corrections, seemed to be unacceptable.
One found a compromise. A concept of the relative simultaneity (simultaneity on a
given coordinate system) was introduced. Thus, on one hand, the simultaneity was
considered as though it were, and nonrelativists were satisﬁed. On the other hand
It was considered as though it was not exist, and
the simultaneity was relative.
relativists were satisﬁed also. On one hand, for nonrelativists this compromise facil-
itated a transition to relativistic physics, admitting them to conserve nonrelativistic
style of thinking at description of relativistic processes. But on the other hand, it
was this style of thinking that hindered investigation of physical phenomena, whose
relativistic character was not evident.

Unfortunately, this restricted character of the compromise, connected with appli-
cation of relative simultaneity, was understood only by a few physicists. Practically
all textbooks on the relativity theory were written on the ground of this compromise.
Apparently, it is this compromise that is a reason why most of researches ignored
application of space-time diagram in their investigations. Usually description was
produced in terms of coordinate systems and relativistic invariance of dynamic equa-
tions. In other words, most of researchers thought in terms of Newtonian mechanics
with corrections for relativistic invariance. Such an approach did not help to in-
vestigate relativistic phenomena, and J.L. Synge wrote about this in the preface to
his book [21]. As for me, as well as J.L. Synge I thought in terms of space-time
diagrams, i.e. in terms of space-time geometry.

I assumed that the probability theory could not be used for statistical description

27

of relativistic stochastic particles, as far as concept of the particle state is diﬀerent
in SRT and in the nonrelativistic physics. In SRT the physical object, connected
with the particle is WL (world line). The fundamental concept, connected with
the particle, is WL. The WL is primary, and a particle is an attribute of WL. The
particle is a section of WL by the hypersurface t =const. These sections are diﬀerent
in diﬀerent coordinate systems, especially if there are several WLs.

In the nonrelativistic physics a particle is a physical object, and world line is its
attribute (history). Description of a physical object is divided into two parts: (1) the
object state and (2) dynamic equations, describing the state evolution. Dynamics is
insensitive to the method of decomposition into state and dynamic equations. For
dynamics it is of no importance what is a physical object: WL, or a particle. Vice
versa, the statistical description is a calculus of states, and it is very important for
it, what is the physical object and what is a state of this object. Diﬀerent choice of
the physical object and diﬀerent decomposition into state and dynamic equations
lead to diﬀerent results.

The probability theory is suitable for calculus of the particle states, but not
for states of WLs. But, it is a long way from understanding, that the probability
theory is incompatible with the statistical description of relativistic particles, up to
a construction of statistical description without probability.

Understanding that the density of states of world lines is described by the 4-
vector ji, I tried to formulate the quantum mechanics in terms of 4-vector ji, i.e. to
obtain that which is called hydrodynamical interpretation of quantum mechanics. I
tried to develop a mathematical technique, which could convert the state density ji
into a fundamental object of a theory, making the wave function to be an attribute of
this object. I succeeded to state the statistical principle, determining construction of
the statistical description [26]. Essentially, the statistical description was formulated
as follows. At the statistical description one considers many independent stochastic
particles. They form something like a gas or a ﬂuid, whose state is described by the
mean 4-ﬂux of particles ji,
i = 0, 1, 2, 3. Thus, one overcame AD.5 (consisting in
the statement that a use of the probability theory is a necessary condition of the
statistical description). To derive the quantum mechanics it was necessary to pass
from ji to the wave function ψ. At this point a purely mathematical problem arose.
The fact is that the transition from the wave function to a hydrodynamics with
the vector ji, was well known [14]. But it leads to a irrotational ﬂow, i.e. to a
very special case of the ﬂow. It was known how to construct the wave function for
the irrotational ﬂow. But how to make this in the case of arbitrary ﬂow? It was a
complicated mathematical problem, which had taken a long time and many eﬀorts.
But ﬁnally it had been solved. It appeared that it was necessary to integrate the
complete system of hydrodynamic equations, i.e. the system, consisting of the Euler
equations and dynamic equations, describing displacement of the ﬂuid particles in
the given velocity ﬁeld (so called Lin constraints). As a result of this integration
the order of the system reduced, arbitrary integration functions appeared, and the
system became to be described in terms of Clebsch potentials. Thereafter one could
introduce many-component wave function, which appeared as an attribute of the

28

ﬂuid description.

This result was obtained in the middle of eightieths, and was applied at ﬁrst to
hydrodynamics [27]. Thereafter the mathematical technique of dynamical concep-
tion of statistical description (DCSD) appeared. The wave functions turned to an
attribute of the statistical description, and many unsolved problems became solv-
able.

It should note here, that there were numerous attempts to revise and to interpret
the quantum mechanics in other way (see. [14, 28, 30, 31, 32] and references therein).
All authors of these papers started from the wave function and Schr¨odinger equation,
trying to give another more acceptable meaning to quantum quantities. As a result
they obtained diﬀerent interpretations of the quantum mechanics and nothing more,
because the wave function remained to be a fundamental object of a theory. Turning
the wave function to an attribute of statistical description, I deprived it the status
of a fundamental object. As a result another conception, but not simply another
interpretation of quantum mechanics appeared.

The solved problem was a problem of the hydrodynamics (mechanics of contin-
uous medium) The hydrodynamics was such a ﬁeld of physics, where I was not an
expert. In that time I was working at the laboratory, where practically all researchers
were hydrodynamicists. I reported my work on hydrodynamics at the session of a
seminar of our laboratory. Hearing my report, hydrodynamicists of our laboratory
were puzzled, because they did not see a result in my report. There, where I saw in-
tegration with appearance of three arbitrary functions, they saw only a complicated
change of variables. There was a reason for such a viewpoint. I present brieﬂy an
essence of the problem, because it seems to me very important for understanding,
what is the delusion and how it have been overcame.

Motion of ideal compressible ﬂuid is described usually by ﬁve Euler equations

for ﬁve dependent variables velocity v, density ρ and entropy S

∂v
∂t

+ (v∇)v =

∇p,

1
ρ

−

p = ρ2 ∂E
∂ρ

∂ρ
∂t

∂S
∂t

+ ∇(ρv) = 0

+ (v∇)S = 0

Here p is the pressure, and E = E(ρ, S) is the internal energy per unit mass,
considered to be a function of density ρ and entropy S. The internal energy E =
E(ρ, S) is a unique characteristic of the ideal ﬂuid.

On one hand, the Euler equations form a closed system of dynamic equations,
but on the other hand, they do not form a complete system of dynamic equations,
Sﬂ, called ideal ﬂuid. To obtain a complete description,
describing dynamic system
one needs to add more three equations, describing displacement of the ﬂuid particles
in the given ﬁeld of velocity v(t, x). It can be made, adding so called Lin constraints
[33]

∂ξ
∂t

+ (v∇)ξ = 0,

29

(9.1)

(9.2)

(9.3)

(9.4)

where Lagrangian variables ξ = ξ(t, x) =
{
be functions of independent variables t, x.
determine ξ as functions of (t, x), the ﬁnite relations

ξα(t, x)
, α = 1, 2, 3 are considered to
If one solves the equations (9.4) and

}

ξ(t, x) = ξin = const

(9.5)

describe implicitly the particle trajectories and motion of particles along them.

The Lagrangian coordinates ξ label the ﬂuid particles, as far as they represent

three independent integrals of the system of ordinary diﬀerential equations.

dx
dt

= v(t, x),

x = x(t, ξ),

(9.6)

If they are solved, i.e.

describing the particle displacement in the given velocity ﬁeld. The Lin constraints
(9.4) are equivalent to the system (9.6) of three ordinary diﬀerential equations, and
hydrodynamicists do not consider them seriously, supposing that the main problem
if the system of ﬁve
is a solution of the Euler equations.
partial diﬀerential equations has been solved, the subsequent solution of the system
of three ordinary diﬀerential equations is essentially much easier problem. Essen-
tially, there is no necessity to solve equations (9.6), as far as the system of Euler
equations is closed, and one can ﬁnd the ﬂuid ﬂow independently of equations (9.6).
The displacement of ﬂuid particles in itself, described by the equations (9.6), is not
interesting for hydrodynamicists. All this led to that situation, when hydrodynam-
icists ignore the Lin constraints both in the form (9.4) and in the form (9.6). In
action it led to the fact, that one tried to write the variational principle for the
closed system of equations (9.1) – (9.3), but not for the dynamic system
Sﬂ. It is
impossible to write the variational principle for the closed system of equations (9.1)
– (9.3). One succeeded to make this only after adding the Lin constraints (9.4) [34].
The complete system of dynamic equations (9.1) – (9.4) is invariant with respect
to the relabelling of the ﬂuid particles. It means, that the relabelling transformation
of the ﬂuid particles

α, β = 1, 2, 3

(9.7)

˜ξα = ˜ξα(ξ),

D

det

ξα →

∂ ˜ξα/∂ξβ k6

= 0,

≡

k
does not change the form of the system of equations (9.1) – (9.4), i.e. the relabelling
group (9.7) is a symmetry group of the complete system of equations (9.1) – (9.4).
Application of the curtailed system of equations (9.1) – (9.3) admits one to ignore
labelling ξ of the ﬂuid particles and carry out the description in terms of relabelling-
invariant variables ρ, v, S.

There is another method of simplifying the complete system of dynamic equa-
tions (9.1) – (9.4), other, than ignoring the variables ξ and description in terms of
relabelling-invariant variables ρ, v, S. Using the fact that the relabelling group (9.7)
is a symmetry group of dynamic equations, one can integrate the complete system
of dynamic equations (9.1) – (9.4) in the form

S(t, x) = S0(ξ)

(9.8)

30

ρ(t, x) = ρ0(ξ)

∂(ξ)
∂(x)
∇ϕ + gα(ξ)∇ξα −
where S0(ξ), ρ0(ξ) and g(ξ) =
, α = 1, 2, 3 are arbitrary functions of the
argument ξ, and ϕ, η are new dependent variables, satisfying the dynamic equations

∂(ξ1, ξ2, ξ3)
∂(x1, x2, x3) ≡

v(t, x) = u(ϕ, ξ, η, S)

η∇S,

gα(ξ)

(9.10)

ρ0(ξ)

(9.9)

≡

{

}

∂ϕ
∂t

+ u(ϕ, ξ, η, S)∇ϕ

[u(ϕ, ξ, η, S)]2 +

1
2

−

∂(ρE)
∂ρ

= 0

∂η
∂t

+ u(ϕ, ξ, η, S)∇η =

∂E
∂S

.

−

(9.11)

(9.12)

If ﬁve dependent variables ϕ, ξ, η satisfy the system of equations (9.4), (9.11),
(9.12), the ﬁve dynamic variables S, ρ, v (9.8)–(9.10) satisfy the dynamic equations
(9.1)–(9.3). The indeﬁnite functions S0(ξ), ρ0(ξ), and gα(ξ) can be determined
from initial and boundary conditions in such a way, that the initial and boundary
conditions for variables ϕ, ξ, η would be universal in the sense that they do not
depend on the ﬂuid ﬂow.

The last condition means that at the description in terms of hydrodynamic po-
tentials the total information on the ﬂuid ﬂow is contained in dynamic equations,
and there is no necessity in giving the initial and boundary conditions, as soon as
they may be universal. At the description in terms of relabelling-invariant variables
S, ρ, v one needs to add initial and boundary conditions to dynamic equations
to obtain all information on the ﬂuid ﬂow. The circumstance that dynamic equa-
tions (9.11), (9.12) contain initial and boundary conditions, introduced by means
In accord with (9.9), (9.10) the physical quantities ρ, v are
of (9.10), is unique.
obtained as a result of diﬀerentiation of variables ϕ, ξ, S, and the variables ϕ, ξ,
η may be interpreted as hydrodynamic potentials. This way of description can be
called as description in terms of hydrodynamic potentials. These potentials asso-
ciate with the name of Clebsch [35, 36], who has introduced them for a description
of incompressible ﬂuid.

Thus, ignoring the potentials ξ, one came to a description in terms of relabelling-
invariant variables ρ, v, S by means of ﬁve equations (9.1)–(9.3). Description in
terms of hydrodynamic potentials ϕ, ξ, η led to a description by means of ﬁve equa-
tions (9.4), (9.11), (9.12). It seems that the system of equations (9.1)–(9.3) on one
hand, and equations (9.4), (9.11), (9.12) on the other hand, can be derived one
from other by means of a change of variables. The circumstance that the change of
variables is diﬀerential in one direction, and it is integral in other direction, was not
taken into account.

However, it is very important circumstance. Diﬀerentiation of potentials ϕ, ξ, η
at the change of variables leads to a loss of information on the ﬂuid particle dis-
placements, described by the equations (9.4). The wave function contains complete
information on motion and displacement of the ﬂuid particles, and it can be built
only of potentials ϕ, ξ, η, and it cannot be built of relabelling-invariant variables
ρ, v, S. Understanding of this circumstance appeared to be diﬃcult for me and for

31

other researchers. The last manifested itself in the fact that, when (in 1998) my
paper on integration of hydrodynamic equations was submitted to Journal of Fluid
Dynamics. It was declined on the ground that in the reviewer’s opinion the tran-
sition from the curtailed system of dynamic equations (9.1)–(9.3) to the complete
system (9.4), (9.11), (9.12) does not contain an integration, but only a change of
variables.

Why did I succeeded to construct a ﬂuid description in terms of the wave function
and to solve the problem of hydrodynamics, where I was an undoubted amateur?
I reﬂected on this question and came to the following conclusion. At ﬁrst, I knew
what I do search for and had made many unsuccessful attempts.
In the course
of these attempts I developed and improved the mathematical technique of work
with Jacobians (Jacobian technique). Looking some years ago through papers of
Clebsch [35, 36], I have discovered that he also used the Jacobian technique and had
discovered hydrodynamic potentials. He wrote down Jacobians in the expanded
form, as it was usual in that time. Due to this the formalism was rather bulky, but
I think, that Clebsch was able to discover description in terms of wave functions, if
there were a necessity for this. Second, I investigated the ﬂuid simply as a dynamic
system, as far as I did not know hydrodynamics.
In return, I was not burdened
with prejudices, connected with a knowledge of hydrodynamics. In particular, in
hydrodynamics the variables ξ are well known as Lagrangian coordinates, which
are used only as independent variables. I had met the Lagrangian coordinates as
dependent variables only once in the book by V.A. Fock [25], when I studied the
I remember very well, that I was
relativity theory, being a second-year student.
surprised by capacities, included in such a description.

Returning to the problem of overcoming of AD.5 and AD.6, I should like to
note, that both delusions were overcame practically in the beginning of seventieths.
Having perceived, that the statistical description can and must be constructed on
a dynamical basis (without a use of the probability theory) meant overcoming of
AD.5. Overcoming of AD.6 was a corollary of the fact, that the quantum mechanics
is a statistical conception (statistical description of randomly moving particles).

10 Forced identiﬁcation E = H. Evidence of
participant on overcoming of AD.7

Overcoming of AD.7 (Forced identiﬁcation E = H) was the ﬁrst of my overcomings
of AD. It took place in 1970. It was carried out consciously on basis of understanding
that in the relativistic theory a physical object is WL (world line), but not a pointlike
particle in the three-dimensional space. I took this truth from the book of V. A. Fock.
[25]. Later I found conﬁrmation of this viewpoint in papers of Stueckelberg [37]
and Feynman [38].
In general such a viewpoint was in keeping with my style of
geometrical thinking. This brought up the question: ”Is it possible to describe pair
production in terms of classical relativistic mechanics?” The pair production process
is described by a turn of a world line in the time direction. It was well known. It

32

was necessary to invent such an external ﬁeld which could carry out this turn. It
was clear, that adding an arbitrary ﬁeld to the action of charged particle in a given
electromagnetic ﬁeld Ai

[q] =

A

Z n−

p

mc

gik ˙qi ˙qk +

Ai ˙qi

dτ,

e
c

o

d ˙q
dτ

˙q

≡

(10.1)

one could not carry out such a turn. The fact is that at the turn in time the world
line becomes to be spacelike near the turning point. On the other hand, under the
sign of radical in (10.1) must be a nonnegative quantity. It means, that gik ˙qi ˙qk
0
and, hence the world line is to be timelike (or null). In order the world line might
be spacelike, the external ﬁeld is to be introduced under sign of radical in (10.1).
Then the expression under sign of radical may be positive even in the case, when
gik ˙qi ˙qk < 0. I introduced the external ﬁeld under the sign of radical, writing the
action in the form

≥

[q] =

A

Z n−

p

−

mc

gik ˙qi ˙qk

αf (q) +

Ai ˙qi

dτ,

(10.2)

e
c

o

→

where f is an external scalar ﬁeld, and α is a small parameter, which tends to zero
at the end of calculations. At the properly chosen ﬁeld f the expression under the
radical can be positive at gik ˙qi ˙qk < 0. It appeared that at the properly chosen ﬁeld
f , the world line turns in time indeed. This turn is conserved at α
0. The direct
calculations showed that at such a description the particle energy was positive al-
ways, but the time component p0 of the canonical momentum and the particle charge
Q = esgn( ˙q0) depended on sign of derivative ˙q0, i.e. they were diﬀerent for particle
and antiparticle. It was rather sudden that the WL3 charge Q, deﬁned as a source of
/δA0(x)dx, did not coincide with
the electromagnetic ﬁeld by the relation Q =
the constant e, incoming to the action, although at the correct description this was
to be just so, because the particle and antiparticle had opposite sign of the charge.
One can obtain coincidence of energy E and p0, if one cuts the whole world line
into segments, responsible for particles and antiparticles, and changes direction of
the parameter τ increase on the segments, responsible for antiparticles, remaining
τ without a change on segments, responsible for particles. But any change of the
sign of ˙q0 is to be accompanied by a change of the sign of the constant e. But the
constant e is a parameter of the dynamic system, and a change of the sign of e
on the segments, describing antiparticles means that particles and antiparticles are
considered to be described in terms of diﬀerent dynamic systems.

A

R

δ

This simple example shows, that there are two possibilities of description

(1) To consider the world line (WL) to be a physical object. Then particle and
antiparticle are two diﬀerent states of WL, distinguishing by signs of the charge Q
and those of the canonical momentum component p0. The energy is positive in both
cases, so E
(2) To consider the particle and the antiparticle to be diﬀerent physical objects,
described by two diﬀerent dynamic systems. The parameter e is the particle charge,

= H, in general.

3designations WL is used for the world line, considered as a fundamental object

33

6
which is simultaneously a parameter of the dynamic system.
It is diﬀerent for a
particle and for an antiparticle. At such a description the evolution parameter τ
can be chosen in such a way, to provide fulﬁllment of the constraint E = H.

Imposition of the constraint E = H provided automatically fragmentation of
the world line into particles and antiparticles, describing them as diﬀerent physical
in terms of diﬀerent dynamic systems. This was valid in classical
objects, i.e.
physics. This must be valid in the quantum theory.

It was unclear for me, what was a use of the identiﬁcation of energy with Hamilto-
nian. Why does one cut WL to obtain indeﬁnite nonconservative number of particles
and antiparticles instead of ﬁxed number of physical objects (WL)? From the formal
viewpoint it is more convenient to work with constant number of object, than with
alternating number of them. It was evident for me, that impossibility of working
in QFT without the perturbation theory was connected directly with the fact that
numbers of particles and antiparticles were not conserved separately. What for does
one need to impose the condition E = H and to restrict one’s capacity, if one could
impose no constraints? (Then I did not consider, that the condition E = H might
appear to be incompatible with dynamic equations).

It was necessary to discuss the paper with colleagues dealing with QFT, and
I submitted my report to seminar of the theoretical department of the Lebedev
Physical Institute, where there were many good theorists. At my report at the
session I was surprised by the following circumstance. Nobody believed that the
pair production eﬀect could be described in terms of classical mechanics. Although
my calculations were very simple, they casted doubt on their validity. It was de-
cided to transfer my report to next session. One of participants of the seminar
(V.Ya. Fainberg) was asked to verify my calculations and to report on the next
session together with continuation of my report. Mistakes in my calculations were
not found, and I completed successfully my report on the next session. After the
session I seemed that the attention of participants of the seminar was attracted to
the problem of possibility of pair production description in terms of classical physics,
whereas the main problem, i.e. application the constraint E = H in QFT, remained
outside the scope. Corresponding my paper was published [39], but, as far as know,
nobody payed any attention to it.

It was necessary to quantize nonlinear relativistic ﬁeld without a use of the
condition E = H and to verify, if such a way of quantization had advantages over
the conventional way, using this condition. It happened that such a quantization
could be carried out without a use of normal ordering and perturbation theory [1].
The vacuum state appeared to be stationary. A possibility of quantization without
the perturbation theory impressed. But I shall not be cunning and say directly, that
I had no illusions about results of my work. In that time (beginning of seventieths) I
assumed that the problem of the quantum mechanics relativization (i.e. uniﬁcation
of quantum theory with the relativity theory) had no solution.
I assumed that
the quantum mechanics was something like relativistic Brownian motion, and the
relativistic quantum theory should be developed in direction of statistical description
of this relativistic motion [40].

34

My work on the secondary quantization of the nonlinear relativistic ﬁeld was
undertaken with the goal to manifest that the conventional way of the QFT de-
velopment was a way to blind alley. The logic of my action was as follows. One
quantizes the nonlinear ﬁeld, using only principles of nonrelativistic quantum me-
chanics and ignoring any additional suppositions. One advances as far as possible.
There were a hope that the quantization without the perturbation theory admitted
one to clarify real problems of QFT and, maybe, to solve some of them.

The fact is that the use of the perturbation theory did not permit one both to
state exactly problems of QFT and to solve them. The problems of collisions were the
main problems of QFT. To state the collision problem, it was necessary to formulate
exactly what was a particle and what was an antiparticle. According to quantum
mechanics principles it is necessary for this to deﬁne the operator N i
p of the 4-ﬂux of
particles and the operator N i
a of the 4-ﬂux of antiparticles. After such a deﬁnition
one can state the problem of collisions. Surprisingly, it appeared that nobody tried
to introduce these operators. Instead of this there were cloudy consideration about
the interaction cut oﬀ at large time t
. Thereafter these consideration about
→ ±∞
cut oﬀ were substituted by manipulations with in- and out-operators, that did not
clarify the statement of the collision problem.

Even in the excellent mathematically rigorous book by F.A. Berezin [41] the
collision problem was stated in terms of perturbed H and nonperturbed H0 Hamil-
tonians of the system, that corresponds to interaction cut oﬀ at t
. Of course,
all this was only a reﬂection of the whole situation in QFT. I asked my colleagues
dealing with QFT, how could one think in terms of the perturbation theory. They
answered obscurely. I understood, that not any problem could be solved exactly.
I was ready to use any methods of approximation (including the perturbation the-
ory) by the indispensable condition, that the problem be stated exactly, but not
in approximate terms. To state a problem in approximate concepts and terms was
beyond my understanding.

→ ±∞

As soon as the nonlinear ﬁeld was quantized [1], results of my paper were re-
ported on a session of the seminar of the theoretical department of Lebedev Physical
Institute. Although the secondary quantization was produced without the pertur-
bation theory, most of participants considered my results to be unsatisfactory on
the ground that at the quantization one violated the condition

[ϕ (x) , ϕ∗ (x′)]− = 0,

x′)2 < 0

(x

−

(10.3)

which was interpreted usually as the causality condition. Indeed, if at the quanti-
zation the condition E = H is not imposed, the commutator between the dynamic
x′ cannot (and in some
variables at the points, separated by a spacelike interval x
cases must not) vanish. Let me explain this in the example of pair production,
described in terms of classical physics, where the pair production is described by
time zigzag of the world line. In this case the commutator (10.3) associates with
If the condition E = H is imposed and the quantization is
the Poisson bracket.
carried out in terms of particles and antiparticles, the dynamic variables X and X ′
x′, relate to diﬀerent dynamic
at the points, separated by a spacelike interval x

−

−

35

X, X ′

{

systems always. The corresponding Poisson bracket
between any dynamic
variables X and X ′ at these points vanishes. In the case of quantization in terms of
world lines the dynamic variables X and X ′ at the points, separated by a spacelike
x′, can belong to the same world line, i.e. to the same dynamic system.
interval x
Then the variables X and X ′ correspond to diﬀerent values τ and τ ′ of evolution
parameter τ . In this case the dynamic variables X at the point x are expressed via
dynamic variables X ′ at the point x′, and there exist such a dynamic variables X1
at x and X ′
does not vanish. The condition
(10.3) is violated with a necessity.

2 at x′, that the Poison bracket

X1, X ′

2}

−

}

{

Thus, a fulﬁllment or a violation of the condition (10.3) is an attribute of a
description.
It coincides with the causality condition (i.e. with the objectively
existing relation) only at imposition of the condition E = H. Unfortunately, I
failed to convince my opponents of dependence the relation (10.3) on the way of
description, although I tried to do this at the session and in discussions thereafter.
Later on I had understood, that in this case one met associative delusion, when
the properties of description are attributed to the object in itself. Unfortunately,
it happens that many researchers meet diﬃculties at overcoming of AD, and as
I am understanding now, the P-style used by the most researchers of QFT is a
reason of these diﬃculties. Besides, formulating the condition (10.3) in terms of
quantum theory, it is very diﬃcult to discover that this condition is an attribute of
a description, but not a causality condition.

Thus, I had overcame AD.7, but the scientiﬁc community as whole had not over-
came it. I did not see a necessity in further convincing my colleagues to refuse from
imposition of the condition E = H at quantization. At ﬁrst, I was convinced that
the refusal from E = H itself did not solve main problems of QFT. My belief, that
QFT did not enable to solve the uniﬁcation problem of quantum theory with rela-
tivity and that the statement of this problem was false in itself, became stronger.
Secondly, I myself did not know exactly what must replace this problem of uniﬁca-
tion. I had only a guess on this account. I could not to convince a person, dealing
with QFT and devoting essential part of his life to this, that he had chosen a wrong
way. Without pointing a right way, such a convincing was useless and even cruel.

There were once more an important circumstance which inﬂuenced strongly on
my interrelations with colleagues dealing with QFT. The fact is that, since I had
discovered incorrectness of imposition the condition E = H, I met diﬃculties at
reading papers on QFT. When I began to read any paper and discovered that the
condition E = H was used there (this was practically in all papers on QFT), my
attention was cut oﬀ subconsciously, and I could not continue conscious reading.
My reading became absent-minded, and I needed to bend my every eﬀort to turn
on my attention and continue a conscious reading. I do not know to what extent
such a reaction is my individual property, but tearing oﬀ the papers using E = H
led gradually to my allergy to reading of papers on QFT. I stopped to read them,
although I was interesting QFT always, and questioned my colleagues about QFT
development at any suitable case.

Why did I overcome associative delusions comparatively easy? Apparently, it

36

was connected with that I was an adherent of the C-style and ignored instinctively
approaches, which were used by the P-style. It is diﬃcult for me to say, whether
this adherence to the C-style was innate, or it was a result of my education. But
such an adherence took place undoubtedly, and the following case justiﬁes this.

In the beginning of seventieths I had a position of the scientiﬁc secretary of the
Space Research Institute. At this position I had a possibility to investigate all those
problems which I wanted, and I dealt with problems of quantum mechanics and
QFT. Thereafter I left this position and passed to the position of a senior scientiﬁc
researcher in the department of G.I. Petrov, who was a director of the institute.
Then I should deal with problems connected to some extent with space research.
I had a possibility of choosing a ﬁeld of investigations with one constraint. In the
course of a half a year I was to study literature on the subject, chosen by me and read
a report on the seminar of G.I. Petrov to manifest my readiness for investigations
in the new ﬁeld.

Any ﬁeld of physics, connected with the space research, was new for me, and I
had chosen the problem of the pulsar magnetosphere model and investigation of the
pulsar mechanism. In seventieths it was a slightly developed and perspective ﬁeld of
astrophysics. The pulsar phenomenon was discovered recently (in 1967), and there
were the ﬁrst considerations, concerning pulsar emanation formation. Studying the
recent literature on pulsars, I had read a report on the session of the seminar. Despite
the fact that I was a novice and amateur in this ﬁeld, my report was very critical.
It was accompanied by a suggestion of my own investigation program.

My pretensions to the authors of reviewed papers were in that they invented
diﬀerent hypotheses to avoid diﬃcult calculations and attempted to guess a con-
struction of the pulsar magnetosphere.
In my opinion, they should to state the
problem of the pulsar magnetosphere and to solve it by means of well known meth-
ods of classical physics. I considered that hypotheses might be suggested either on
the ﬁrst (heuristic) stage of investigations (but it was passed), or after all known
methods had been used already. The problem was in the scope of the classical
physics, and conceptual obstacles for its statement were absent. But most of au-
thors did not want or was not able to state the problem correctly. Instead of this
they advanced their hypotheses, attempting to explain the pulsar phenomenon at
once, and argued, whose hypothesis is better. In other words, they used the P-style
at the condition, when it was not eﬀective, and it was no necessity of using it.

I did state simply the problem on the pulsar magnetosphere in such a way, as
any researcher, using the C-style in his investigations, should do.
I was working
according this program in the course of 1976 – 1987. (see my concluding paper on
the pulsar model [42]). In that time I did not think on styles of investigations. I
assumed simply, that one needed to investigate a physical phenomenon honestly,
but not to dodge, substituting calculations by conjectures. Maybe, my instinctive
adherence to the C-style was so large, that penetrated to my subconsciousness and
generated allergy to reading papers on QFT.

Maybe, me successes in overcoming of diﬀerent ADs was conditioned by consec-
utive application of C-style, essence of which could be expressed by the Newton’s

37

words: ”I do not invent hypotheses”.

11 Can a curve be a fundamental object
of geometry? Evidence of participant
on completion of the AD.4 overcoming

My work with technique, based on the world function, showed, that such a descrip-
tion of geometry was insensitive to topological properties of the space. For instance,
the metric tensor was the same for the Euclidean plane and for the cylinder, ob-
tained from a band of this plane as a result of gluing its edges. But the world
functions were diﬀerent. This showed that the world function describes both local
and global properties of geometry. Further I had discovered, that if all points of the
space except for points with integer value of coordinates removed, the remaining
points formed a discrete geometry, which could be described in terms of the world
function.

I understood also, that the world function contained complete information on
geometry. In particular, in the case of the Euclidean space I could obtain information
on the space dimension and construct the Cartesian coordinate system in the space,
even in the case, when the space was an abstract set of points (but not a manifold).
At such a construction one used a concept of the straight segment between points
P and P ′, deﬁned as set of points R, satisfying the equation

S (P, R) + S (R, P ′) = S (P, P ′)

(11.1)

where S(P, P ′) denotes a distance between the points P and P ′. I understood, that
the world function of the Euclidean space possessed special extremal properties. It is
these extremal properties that the equation (11.1) describes a one-dimensional line
even in n-dimensional space, although at an arbitrary function S(P, P ′) the equation
(11.1) describes, in general a (n
1)-dimensional surface. However, then I did not
understood, how important was this deﬁnition, where segment of the straight was
deﬁned without a reference to the concept of a curve.

−

In my representation of that time the world function was a result of integration
of some expression, determined by the metric tensor. This integration provided a
connection between diﬀerent points of the space. This connection was conserved,
even if the most of space points were removed.

The property of the world function to provide a connection between points and
its extremal properties seemed to me important. Realization of this fact took place
in the middle of sixtieths. I wanted to write a paper about this properties, but it
was not clear, where I could to publish such a paper. The fact is that this result in
itself without applications seemed to me insuﬃciently important for its publication.
Opportunity for publication appeared only in the end of eightieths. I succeeded
to publish two my articles, having no relation to geometry [43, 27], in Journal of
Mathematical Physics. At the publication of these articles I was pleasantly surprised

38

by the kind relation of editors. Then I got an idea of publishing a paper on extremal
properties of world function which reﬂected my increasing understanding of the
world function role in geometry.

The paper was entitled ”Extremal properties of Synge’s world function and dis-
crete geometry.” It was accepted to publication, but I was asked, ﬁrst, to add
references to contemporary papers and, second, to replace designation ”G”, which
was used for the world function, by conventional designation σ. Addition of reference
to more recent papers did not change the paper practically. The world function was
applied in papers on quantization of gravitation, where ”long-range properties” of
the world function were important. But nothing except for expansion over degrees
of x

x′ was used in these papers.

−
But the formal replacement of designation G by another designation σ led sud-
denly to essential revision of the paper. The fact is that there were practically no
personal computers in USSR, and my paper was written by means of typewriter.
To change designations I was forced to rewrite the whole paper. As far as the paper
should be retyped, I decided to include all corrections and additions which appeared
in the time, when the paper was reviewed. In the course of revision I realized the
importance of the deﬁnition (11.1) of the straight segment and revised the character
of presentation. Essentially a paper on a construction of a new geometry appeared,
although the term T-geometry was not used in the paper. I began to think about
a change of the title, because the title of the paper did not reﬂect its content. The
title should be changed.

In that time (1989) it was not simple. To submit a paper in a foreign journal one
needed a permission of ”Glavlit”, where the title of the paper was mentioned. To
obtain a permission for forwarding a manuscript with other title, it was necessary
to translate the new version to Russian and submit to ”Glavlit”. The procedure of
obtaining a new permission would need one-two months. Besides the paper was to
be translated to Russian and typed. To avoid lack of time, I decided not to change
the title. The paper was printed with the previous title [8].

At the transition from the Riemannian geometry to T-geometry it was very
important to overcome inertia of thinking and realize, that a tube could play a role
of the straight. Apparently, physical models of elementary particles helped me in
overcoming of the inertia of thinking. In some models the particle was substituted
by a string or by a membrane, and their world tubes were respectively two- and
three-dimensional surfaces.
It meant that in the real world a tube could play a
role of a straight. Psychologically it was a very important step in construction of
T-geometry. Another important circumstance was the fact that the straight (i.e.
a natural geometrical object, determined by two diﬀerent points) was deﬁned as a
set of points determined by the metrical property (11.1), i.e. without a reference
to the concept of a curve. In Riemannian geometry the geodesic is deﬁned as the
shortest curve. At such a deﬁnition of geodesic, it cannot be a tube, and a use of
the concept of a curve at the geometry construction discriminates nondegenerate
geometries, i.e. geometries, where a tube plays a role of a straight. Note that the
paper [8] had a transient character in the sense, that it described rather a transit

39

from the Riemannian geometry to T-geometry, than the T-geometry as such.

The T-geometry appeared at ﬁrst as a generalization of the Riemannian geometry
and was applied as a possible space-time geometry [11]. Advantages of the space-
time model based on T-geometry were evident. First, it appeared that the geometry
depended only on interval between events and was insensitive to the space-time
continuity, which cannot be tested. Second, in such a geometry the particle mass was
geometrized, that was impossible in the Minkowski geometry. Finally, the stochastic
particle motion, depending on the particle mass (i.e. on geometry), appeared in a
natural way. All this testiﬁed that T-geometry was suitable for the space-time
description.

The two-metric technique, developed for the Riemannian space worked very well
in T-geometry, admitting to investigate it in the small [20]. But from the practical
viewpoint it was unessential, because the behavior of world lines of particles with
a ﬁnite mass depended on behavior of the world function at ﬁnite (but not at
inﬁnitesimal) intervals.

Although together with construction of T-geometry AD.4 was overcame in real-
ity, realization of this fact was absent. At ﬁrst, the T-geometry was derived as a gen-
eralization of Riemannian geometry, and the Riemannian geometry was considered
to be a special case of T-geometry. In particular, in the paper [8] one investigated
the question, what world function must be, for degeneration of world tubes into
one-dimensional curves would take place and one could construct a manifold.

At ﬁrst, I assumed that if the world function was given on a manifold and
satisﬁed diﬀerential equations, which should be satisﬁed by the world function of
a Riemannian space, then the T-geometry constructed on the base of this world
function be a Riemannian geometry. In reality it was not so, because the role of
the concept of a curve at the construction of the Riemannian geometry was not
exhausted by a construction of geodesics. In the Riemannian geometry the parallel
transport of a vector is founded also on the concept of a curve.

My interest to geometry was always of an applied character.

I interested in
geometry as a method of description of the space-time properties. I did not thought
on a geometry as such, it was for me only a tool, and I troubled only with eﬃciency of
this tool. In accord with my style of investigations I did not read papers on geometry,
and I troubled only one question whether I rediscovered any known results. Before
publication of the paper [8] I had consulted by a well known mathematician, who
said that nobody in USSR deal with problems close to problems of T-geometry.
After publication of the paper I took several attempts to discuss T-geometry with
mathematicians. The mathematicians, interested in geometry in a large, discussed
readily problems of T-geometry, and I had read several successful reports on T-
geometry. As an ”inventor” of T-geometry I was very glad, that the T-geometry
was not built before, and I became gradually to understand, what was a reason
of this circumstance. AD.4, i.e. belief of mathematicians that the curve was a
fundamental object of geometry, was a reason of impossibility of the T-geometry
construction.

My reports on seminars of mathematicians were very valuable for me. Firstly,

40

I had reduced my geometrical ignorance. Secondly, I became gradually to under-
stand, that T-geometry was rather a generalization of metric geometry, than that of
Riemannian. I discovered that in contemporary mathematics the geometries did not
classiﬁed practically, or such a classiﬁcation was produced over accidental features.
Moreover, there were a lack of coordination even in the deﬁnition, what is the geom-
etry. For instance, well known mathematician Felix Klein [18] deﬁned a geometry as
a conception, containing some symmetry group. The Riemannian geometry did not
fall deﬁnitely under Klein’s deﬁnition. According to Klein the Riemannian geometry
should be called the Riemannian topography (or geography). A.D. Alexandrov [44]
used another deﬁnition of geometry.

The problem of classiﬁcation is one of the most important problems in any sci-
ence, and in mathematics especially. But I did not interested in this problem,
because of my applied approach to geometry. I met this problem at the following
circumstances. On one hand, T-geometry was a very general geometrical construc-
tion, founded only on the world function. Topological properties appeared to be
derivative ones with respect to metric properties of geometry. From viewpoint of
T-geometry one cannot set topological properties of the space independently. On
the other hand, in the generalized Riemannian geometry [45, 46, 47] the topological
properties are introduced at ﬁrst, and thereafter one introduces metrical properties,
what one cannot make from the viewpoint of T-geometry. In general, as far as I
could understand, in present time the topology is considered to be the most promis-
ing direction of the geometry development. In support of this statement one can
mention the following fact. In the faculty of mechanics and mathematics of Moscow
Lomonosov university there are three diﬀerent chairs, whose titles contain words
”geometry” and ”topology” in diﬀerent combinations.

As far as I saw a contradiction between the existence of T-geometry and the
topology as the most promising direction in geometry, the situation should be clar-
iﬁed in the process of discussions. My attempts to report T-geometry on seminars
of the ”most geometrical” chairs failed. Corresponding suggestions were declined
on the ground that such a report would not be interesting for researchers of these
chairs, who were interested in other problems. Then I prepared a report, entitled
”Geometry without topology” and submitted it to Moscow Mathematical Society
(MMS) with a request to hear it on one of sessions.

MMS (a very respectable organization) heard on its sessions only very important
report (preliminary reviewed by experts). Review of my paper was negative. My
work on T-geometry was recognized by the reviewer as insuﬃciently fundamental
and unworthy of hearing on a session of MMS. This was not quite that, what I
needed, because I needed a public discussion. Nevertheless, my goal was attained,
although only by half. I obtained opinion of the expert, who was mostly competent
in this problem. I had clariﬁed from his review, that there are no classiﬁcations of
geometries in mathematics, and the problem of ”fundamental nature” of geometry
in question is determined entirely by opinion of a reviewer.

My argued appeal was not taken into account, but the other appeared to be
important. It was important, that the negative review and reviewer’s argumenta-

41

tion forced me to think about the problem of ”fundamental nature” of a geometry.
As a result I came to a necessity of classiﬁcation of geometries, and a key to the
classiﬁcation was the concept of CG (conception of geometry) as a method of a con-
struction of a standard (Euclidean) geometry. A criterion of generality of CG was
the amount of numerical information, which the given CG used for construction of
the standard geometry. Such a classiﬁcation of CG is presented on p. 9. It follows
from this classiﬁcation that purely metric CG generates a class of the most general
geometries (T-geometries), whereas perspectives of topology-metric conception are
unfavourable in this respect. The review was dated by the seventh November 2000.
A result of my work over this review was a revision of my report, which turned
to the article ”Geometry without topology as a new conception of geometry” [48].
The paper was ready to the end of 2000th year. This paper was a corollary of my
complete overcoming of AD.4.

Now I am presenting chronology of my overcomings of AD.4 – AD.7 and trying
to ﬁnd the reasons, why I have succeeded to overcame these associative delusions.
AD.5 – AD.7 were overcame practically in the same time in the beginning of seven-
tieths of XX century. This overcoming was a corollary of my understanding of the
simple statement, that in the relativistic physics the physical object is WL (world
line), but not a particle. Overcoming of AD.5 and AD.7 followed directly from this
circumstance. Overcoming of AD.6 was a simple corollary of the fact, that the quan-
tum mechanics is a statistical description of stochastic relativistic particles motion.
Thus, ﬁnally, overcoming of AD.5 – AD.7 was a corollary of my understanding of
the relativity theory. Overcoming of AD.4 was happening in the course of a long
time. It was ﬁnished in the end of eightieths of XX century. Then it appeared in
the form of a guess. This overcoming in the form of a logical corollary happened
in the end of 2000 year, when the conception of geometry was introduced and the
table, presented on p. 9 was obtained..

What is a reason of these overcoming? What properties did I have and did not

have other researchers? I believe that these properties were as follows:
I thought in terms of space-time
(1) My understanding of the relativity theory.
diagrams, i.e. geometrically, but not in terms of relativistic invariance as most of
researchers. I am connecting such a way of thinking with that, I had studied the
relativity theory on the book of V.A. Fock [25].
(2) In my investigations I used the C-style and was consecutive in my research. The
logical consistence of a theory was more important for me, than its practical results.
(3) In all time of my investigation activity I had not in reality any scientiﬁc divisor,
i.e. there were no suﬃciently authoritative for me person, who would say me, that
I should use the more pragmatic P-style instead of C-style, that I used.
(4) I was suﬃciently self-reliant, to follow the way, that I was led by the logic. I did
not pay attention to other researchers, ignored all authorities and the circumstance,
so that some researchers considered me as a scientiﬁc dissident.

I present the peculiarities, which seems for me to be necessary for overcoming of
associative delusions. Each of this peculiarities appears rather rare. Collection of
all these peculiarities at one person is the more rarity.

42

To describe my research activity brieﬂy, one should say, that using C-style, I
put consecutively into eﬀect the idea of geometrization of physics. and this agreed
completely with the general line of the physics development in XIX – XX centuries.

12 Concluding remarks

Thus, the associative delusions (AD) accompanied the cognition process. Although
one should tend to eliminate ADs, but, apparently, the complete elimination of
In the case of impossibility of this elimination of ADs, AD
them is impossible.
leads to appearance of additional compensating hypotheses and to a construction
of compensating (Ptolemaic) conceptions. Appearance of Ptolemaic conceptions
leads to a generation of a special P-style of investigations, suitable for work with
Ptolemaic conceptions. The P-style is simultaneously a style of investigations and
a style of thinking. On one hand, the P-style is ”noise-resistant” (suitable for work
with Ptolemaic constructions, containing false suppositions), but on the other hand,
In the course of some time one can pursue
it is less predictable, than C-style.
investigations, using P-style. But, thereafter the Ptolemaic conceptions stops to be
eﬀective. It becomes necessary to ﬁnd and to overcome corresponding AD, returning
If the P-style was existing for a long time and several generations of
to C-style.
researchers had educated on its application, the overcoming of AD and returning to
the C-style will be a diﬃcult process. One needs to be ready to this.

After discovering AD the subsequent revision of existing theory may appear to be
very essential. If it concerns the space-time geometry, the revision may lead even to
a change of a world outlook. Transition from the space-time with the primordially
deterministic particle motion to the space-time with the primordially stochastic
If earlier it was
motion is already a ground for a change of the world outlook.
necessary to explain the stochasticity, starting from the determinism of the world,
then now one should explain deterministic phenomena on the basis of primordial
stochasticity of the world.

43

References

[1] Yu. A. Rylov, ”On quantization of non-linear relativistic ﬁeld without recourse

to perturbation theory”.Int. J. Theor. Phys., 6, 181-204, (1972).

[2] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Pair production problem and canonical quantization of nonlinear

scalar ﬁeld in terms of world lines”, eprint hep-th/0106169.

[3] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Spin and wave function as attributes of ideal ﬂuid”, J. Math.

Phys. 40, 256-278, (1999).

ph/0104060.

[4] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Dynamic disquantization of Dirac equation”, eprint quant-

[5] B. V. Raushenbach, ”Let experts dispute”, Christianity and science, IX Interna-
tional Christmas educative readings. Collection of conference reports. Moscow,
2001, pp. 153-170. (in Russian)

[6] K. Menger, Untersuchen ¨uber allgemeine Metrik, Mathematische Annalen, 100,

75-113, (1928).

Clarendon Press, 1953.

[7] L. M. Blumenthal, Theory and Applications of Distance Geometry, Oxford,

[8] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Extremal properties of Synge’s world function and discrete

geometry.” J. Math. Phys. 31, 2876-2890, (1990).

[9] Yu.A. Rylov ”Metric space: classiﬁcation of ﬁnite subspaces instead of con-
straints on metric.” Proceedings on analysis and geometry, Novosibirsk, Pub-
lishing House of Mathematical institute, 2000. pp. 481-504, (in Russian)

[10] Yu.A. Rylov, ”Description of metric space as a classiﬁcation of its ﬁnite sub-
spaces”, Fundamental and Applied Mathematics, (in print), (in Russian) .

[11] Yu. A. Rylov, Non-Riemannian model of space-time responsible for quantum

eﬀects. J. Math. Phys. 32, 2092-2098, (1991).

[12] J. E. Moyal, Quantum mechanics as a statistical theory. Proc. Cambr. Phil.

Soc., 45, 99,

326, (1926).

[13] I. F´enyes, Probability-theoretical foundations and interpretation of quantum

theory. Zs. f. Phys., 132, 81, (1952).

[14] E. Madelung, ”Quanten theorie in hydrodynamischer Form Z.Phys. 40, 322-

[15] H. Everett Rev. Mod. Phys 29 454 (1957); Reprinted in Quantum Theory and
Measurement (Eds J A Wheeler, W H Zurek) (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. 1983)

44

[16] B. S. DeWitt, N. Graham (Eds) The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum

Mechanics (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1973)

[17] S. S. Schweber, An introduction to relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory. Row, Pe-

terson and Co. N.Y. 1961.

teil 1, Berlin, Springer 1926.

[18] F. Klein, Vorlesungen ¨uber die Entwicklung die Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert

[19] Mathematics of XIX century, Editors F.P. Yushkewich and A.N. Kolmogorov,

Nauka, Moscow, 1987, p. 57. (in Russian).

[20] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Distorted Riemannian space and technique of diﬀerential geom-

etry”. J. Math. Phys. 33, 4220, (1992).

[21] J. L. Synge, Relativity: The General Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1960.

[22] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Description of Riemannian space by means a ﬁnite interval”,
Izvestiya Vysshich Uchebnych Zavedeniyi, ser. Math. issue 3, 132, (1962).

[23] H.S. Ruse, ”Taylor’s theorems in the tensor calculus”, Proc. London Math. Soc.

32, 87, (1931).

[24] J. L. Synge, ”A characteristic function in Riemannian space and its applications
to the solution of geodesic triangles” Proc. London Math. Soc. 32, 241, (1931).

[25] V. A. Fock, Theory of space, time and gravitation. GITTL, Moscow, 1955.

[26] Yu. A. Rylov ,”Quantum mechanics as relativistic statistics. III: A relativistic
particle in two-dimensional space-time”. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 19, 645, (1980).

[27] Yu. A. Rylov, ”The equations for isentropic motion of inviscid ﬂuid in terms of

wave function”, JMP, 30, 2516-2520, (1989).

[28] L. de Broglie, ”Sur la possibilit´e de relier les ph´enomenes d’interference et de
diﬀraction ´e la th´eorie des quanta de lumiere.” Comptes Rendus 183, 447-448,
(1926).

[29] D. Bohm, A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ’hidden

variables’.” Phys.Rev. 85, 166-179, 180-193, (1952).

[30] F. J. Belinfante, A Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories, (Pergamon, Oxford,

1973) and references therein.

[31] D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, Phys. Rep. 172, 93-112, (1989) and references therein.

[32] P. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion, (Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1993) and references therein.

45

[33] C .C. Lin, ”Hydrodynamics of Helium II.” Proc. Int. Sch. Phys. Course XXI,

pp. 93-146, New York, Academic, 1963.

[34] R. Salmon, ”Hamilton ﬂuid mechanics”. Ann Rev. Fluid Mech. 20, 225-256,

(1988).

[35] A. Clebsch, ” ¨Uber eine allgemaine Transformation der hydrodynamischen Gle-

ichungen”, J. reine angew. Math. 54 , 293-312, (1857).

[36] A. Clebsch, ”Ueber die Integration der hydrodynamischen Gleichungen”, J.

reine angew. Math. 56 , 1-10, (1859).

[37] E. C. G. Stueckelberg, Helv. phys. Acta, 15, (1942).

[38] R. P. Feynman , Phys. Rev. 76, 749-759, (1949).

[39] Yu. A. Rylov ”On connection between the energy-momentum vector and
canonical momentum in relativistic mechanics”. Teoretischeskaya i Matema-
tischeskaya Fizika. 2, 333-337.(in Russian). Theor. and Math. Phys. (USA) 5,
333, (1970) (trnslated from Russian)

[40] Yu. A. Rylov ”Quantum Mechanics as a theory of relativistic Brownian motion”

Ann. Phys. (Leipzig). 27, 1-11, (1971).

[41] F. A. Berezin, Method of secondary quantization. Nauka, Moscow, 1965. (in

Russian).

[42] Rylov, ”Self-consistent model of the global structure of axially symmetric pul-
sar magnetosphere in massless approximation”. Astrophys. Sp. Sci. 143, 269,
(1988).

[43] Yu. A. Rylov, ”The algebraical structure of the electromagnetic tensor and
description of charged particles, moving in the strong electromagnetic ﬁeld”,
JMP, 30, 521, (1989).

[44] A. D. Alexandrov Internal geometry of convex surfaces, GITTL, Moscow, 1948.

(in Russian).

[45] V. A. Toponogov, ”Riemannian spaces of curvature, restricted below”, Uspekhi

Matematicheskich Nauk, 14, 87, (1959). (in Russian).

[46] A. D. Alexandrov, V. N. Berestovsky, I. G. Nikolayev, ”Generalized Riemannian

spaces”, Uspekhi Matematicheskich Nauk, 41, 1, (1986). (in Russian).

[47] Yu. Burago, M. Gromov, G. Perelman ”Alexandrov spaces, restricted be-

low”,Uspekhi Matematicheskich Nauk, 47, 3, (1992). (in Russian).

[48] Yu. A. Rylov, ”Geometry without topology as a new conception of geometry”,

IJMMS (in print), e-print math.MG/0103002.

46

