2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Concerning Hertz’ photoelectric eﬀect

S. L. Vesely1, A. A. Vesely

February 2, 2008

1

I.T.B., C.N.R., via Fratelli Cervi 93, I-20090 Segrate(MI)
Italy

email: vesely@itba.mi.cnr.it, vesely@tana.it
Keywords: photoelectric eﬀect, Maxwell-Hertz electromagnetic theory, detected sig-
nal
PACS: 34.10.+x, 03.50.Kk, 84.47.+w,

Abstract

Experimental evidence of the photoelectric eﬀect goes back to H. Hertz. It
occurred during the famous conﬁrmation experiments of the Maxwellian
theory. It is commonly held however that it cannot be explained in the
framework of that theory. We are calling attention to some aspects linked
with the interpretation of that eﬀect on which, in our opinion, it is worth-
while reﬂecting.

Introduction

As known, in 1905, in addition to the theory of relativity and a kinetic treatment
of Brownian movement, A. Einstein proposed a heuristic explanation of the
photoelectric eﬀect [3]. We see in this proposal at least two original choices.

In the ﬁrst place, in the 1905 work Einstein takes up a hypothesis of M.
Planck, new and anything but accepted; it is he who will elucidate the innova-
tive content thereof [4]. The hypothesis reproposed admits that upon thermo-
dynamic equilibrium light be emitted and absorbed by matter only in discrete
quantities, the so-called quanta. The innovative content of the hypothesis con-
cerns energetically corpuscular constitution of light if we may express ourselves
thus.

In the second place, he applies this hypothesis, and hence the theory in
whose framework it is formulated, to a curious behaviour of metals and gives a
simple explanation thereof. The experimental analysis of the eﬀect on which he
bases himself is P. Lenard’s.

Today, the experiments of R. Millikan are taken as conﬁrmation beyond a
doubt of that theoretical hypothesis [20]. It seems that, at the most, physics will
try to improve the ﬁts of foresight of the numerical values sanctioned therewith.

1

Here we would like to draw attention to the fact that no experiment verifying
equations necessarily proves the correctness of a general theory. Admitted that
a theory is suﬃciently general and logically coherent, it suggests but does not
guarantee a relationship between observed facts. Another theory, based on
equally rigorous mathematics, could lend itself to connecting very similar facts in
a manner at all diﬀerent. We shall seek to show how this takes place in a speciﬁc
case. That is to say we see how electromagnetism explains the photoelectric
eﬀect. We believe indeed that just this eﬀect supplied H. Hertz with the key for
testing Maxwell’s theory experimentally.

Relationship of photoelectricity to electromagnetism

The photoelectricity explained by Einstein pertains to the electrical behaviour
of speciﬁcally irradiated metallic bodies. This is a physical fact, i.e. an ob-
served fact, of which an objective description can be given. Under well deﬁned
experimental conditions it is reproducible.

Electromagnetism is a theory. Several theories have been proposed to ac-
count for electrical and magnetic phenomenology and Maxwell debates it in his
treatise [1]. The theory which we understand is his, i.e. the one summarized
in the equations which bear his name. According to his intentions this theory
accounts for the electrical facts observed by M. Faraday. Electromagnetism is
notoriously also one of the theories of light phenomena.

Electromagnetism is a good theory if it is coherent and if it accounts for the

physical facts for which it was written.

Veriﬁcation of coherence is the duty of mathematical logic. As an alternative,
especially in physics, coherence has been proven by recourse to a model or
construction of one. In this case the model places the observed facts in a certain
relationship. In addition to substituting (partially) the logical reduction, it can
act as a link for the physical explanation.

In this work we take for granted that Maxwell’s linear equations allow de-
velopment of a coherent general theory and we concern ourselves with the elec-
tromagnetic explanation of the photoelectric eﬀect. Disregarding interpretative
preferences, those who believe the electromagnetic theory insuﬃcient or inad-
equate for explanation rule out this eﬀect’s being related to those allowed for
by Maxwell or even repute that the incorporation of one more law formulated
in such a manner as to characterize the phenomenon would make the theory
incoherent.

Our point of view on the question being stated, we propose to trace the
phenomenon most similar to the photoelectric eﬀect which Maxwell surely con-
sidered again. For this purpose we state speciﬁcally that the paternity of the
photoelectric eﬀect is not attributed to P. Lenard but to H. Hertz.

Lenard [14] writes, “the action of ultraviolet light [on metallic surfaces] was
discovered by Hertz. Hallwachs was the ﬁrst to show that there is a simple
relationship [of UV lighting] with extraction of negative electricity [from the
volume] of bodies. Today that relationship is well studied”. The experiment

2

concerns current through a phototube when the cathode is irradiated.

Hertz writes [9], “Fast electrical movement excitation experiments being ini-
tiated I noticed an interaction [between emitting RLC and receiving RLC] which
caused simultaneous release of sparks [between the facing capacitor spheres. . . . ]
For some time I asked myself if I hadn’t run into a new form of electricity capa-
ble of interacting at a distance. [. . . ] The phenomenon was later investigated by
Righi, Hallwachs, Elster and Geitel; a satisfactory explanation of the mechanism
is still lacking”. The experiment concerns metallic reﬂection in the UV.

Since by scientiﬁc convention the same eﬀect is concerned [11], to say the
least it is not characterized by detection with the electrometer of the convection
current emitted. In Hertz’ work indeed all mention of measurement of a current
is lacking. So let us leave aside consideration of the mathematical expression
for the electrical responsivity of the irradiated metallic surface and let us ob-
serve that photoelectricity is enumerated among electrical oscillation resonance
phenomena. Those experiments were designed to prove or confute Maxwell’s
theory and they proved it.

It seems to us that the circumstance of conﬁrmation presupposes some con-

vergence of the observations of Hertz and those made previously by Faraday.

Faraday’s electrical research was centered on transmission. Moreover, it is
rich with insights into phenomenology, even spectacular, of metallic surfaces; His
work also contains a crop of observations on the behaviour of dielectric materials
called theretofore electrical insulators. When the author concerns himself with
transmission through the air he distinguishes the spark release before closing
of the electrical contact in the mercury switch from the one released when the
contact is broken. The second fact was called by him ‘self-induction’. The
ﬁrst [6], described as a fast conduction trigger without metallic contact and
without arc formation, is attributed by him to a tension state dependant on the
chemical-physical conditions of the metallic surfaces involved. Both mean that
the purple part of the band is transmitted between the metals in the ‘tension
state’ without the need of an antenna. Naturally Faraday knew nothing about
antennas.

After Hertz, Lenard and especially Millikan, tended to exclude the contribu-
tion of reﬂection to the current, treating the metallic surfaces of the electrodes
in such a manner as to make them nonspecular. They can, for example, be
blackened and in this case it again depends on to what degree of blackening one
wishes to refer the photoelectric eﬀect on the underlying metal. Lenard speaks
almost immediately of the photoelectric eﬀect of retort carbon irradiated with
the carbon arc [15].

Although the application capacity varies considerably, the diﬀerence between
pulse propagation in a dispersive medium and transmission of a modulated
carrier in a range of frequencies such that the behaviour of the air approaches
vacuum does not aﬀect the possibility of electromagnetic representation. Thus
it seems that Maxwell’s theory should lend itself to some linear schematization
of the photoelectric eﬀect.

3

Modeling interpretation of the radiation-matter
interaction

In the previous paragraph we separated the problems of mathematical coherence
from those linked to the plausibility of interpretation. We mentioned that in
a physics theory the model serves to facilitate mathematical veriﬁcation and
we sought to make it plausible that with or without the photoelectric eﬀect
electromagnetism has to admit the same model.

But given the mathematics with which it is intended to face the problem the
model is a more functional structure for explanation than is logical veriﬁcation.
One model can facilitate the interpretation of certain facts and another can
better justify others.

The model adopted by Maxwell is hydrodynamic [2]; for him the horizon
of physics stops with matter and motion. Therefore, from his viewpoint, the
model chosen does not prejudice understanding of the phenomena described.
His successors were unable to endorse it because in the ﬁrst place it forced him
to disseminate his treatise with caveats against analogies with the behaviour of
ﬂuids, then because he let himself be led into a misunderstanding, believing he
could attribute to ﬁeld variables a direct dynamic content.

After him, all attempts to include electrical and magnetic phenomena en
bloc among those explainable by mechanics being exhausted, the problem of
understanding the relationship between the ﬁeld variables E(x,y,z,t), D(x,y,z,t),
B(x,y,z,t), and H(x,y,z,t) and matter and therefore mechanics was posed.

This is a problem of interpretation. It cannot be solved by use of an ad hoc
ether. It clearly shows the limit of Maxwell’s model but does not give indica-
tions that the mathematical basis is insuﬃcient. Thus H. Lorentz corrects the
existing theory [16] by postulating that the kinematic behaviour of electrically
charged ponderable bodies gives the only measurable proof of the presence of
electromagnetic ﬁelds. He adjusts the kinematic behaviour of test bodies in the
ﬁelds by adding to Maxwell’s equations the dynamic law which bears his name.
Hereinafter we consider his work with exclusive reference to the problem set
here.

According to us, this author’s main purpose was to credit the Maxwell equa-
tions no matter how by establishing conventions acceptable to the majority of
the scientiﬁc community. Just because the burden of proof of the electrical
ﬁelds is conceived according to gravitation it is not a matter of an explana-
tion of a speciﬁc electrical experiment but of the interpretation of mathematical
formulas. If it is remembered that retarded potentials are an excellent mathe-
matical artiﬁce it can be concluded that the model proposed as an alternative
to hydrodynamics does not seek to be innovative.

If Lorentz set himself the above mentioned purposes the interpretative capac-
ity of his model was distorted. Further analyzing other implications of Lorentz’
model is beyond the scope at hand.

In this paragraph we are not discussing the experimental evidence in favor of
the electron but rather the appropriateness of modeling the radiation-matter in-

4

teraction in electromagnetism with its help. From this point of view the electron
hypothesis was judged insuﬃcient at least by all the ‘founding fathers’ of quan-
tum mechanics to account for the experiments. Among these A. Sommerfeld
observes that in classical wave theory the electrons are considered in continuous
interaction with the ether and that every variation of their movement involves
irradiation of waves. After which he says [19], “One imagines an electron in
the source point of every spherical wave which generates the electromagnetic
ﬁeld of the spherical wave according to the rhythm of its movement. [. . . ] In-
stead of speaking of an electron we should speak of a solution of Maxwell’s
equations which would express the conditions of atom-ether coupling in force
upon irradiation”. Although he viewed the interpretation in the framework of a
mathematical construction diﬀerent from Maxwell’s, we believe the color change
pointed out is of a more general interest. It means that to have sense physically
the electromagnetic ﬁelds need not represent substance or energy. They can rep-
resent a relationship between objects, for example an electrical coupling. The
necessity of representing this relationship by means of a model arises because
of the generality and abstractness of the theory.

In eﬀect, the number of material manifestations which we can trace back to
electrical phenomenology is not small. In addition to the movement of indices or
movable galvanometer elements, to detect electrical phenomena we use sounds,
photochemical and electrolytic reactions, and even calorimetry. Tracing back
all these manifestations to a single type of abstract mechanical movement does
not mean that we have accounted for the mechanism of the manifestations but
rather that we intend to adopt a kinetic model for electromagnetism.

We do the contrary of that when we seek to relate all the above mentioned
material manifestations to electromagnetism in a unitary manner. As everyone
knows Faraday believed electricity to be connatural with the structure of matter.
This hypothesis is faithfully reproduced in Maxwell’s equations with the result of
oﬀering a theory with a very new conception and diﬀerent from all the preceding
mechanical ones.

Accepting interpretation of the ﬁelds as a relation and implementing Maxwell’s

equations with a non-mechanical model, electromagnetism appears as a physical
theory explaining the body of Faraday’s experiments without attributing any
dynamic meaning to the variables. Mathematics describes the electrical and
lighting relationship and the explanation of what we have to represent with the
relationship depends on the model.

The object of electromagnetism is established by
analogy

In the previous paragraph we saw that the electromagnetic theory is diﬃcult
to interpret because Maxwell did not allow for anything but electricity and
light. But the only experimental manner of acceding to these magnitudes is
to transduce them. To clarify, we do not observe light with the eyes but its

5

manifestation, i.e. luminous or illuminated objects.

As electromagnetism is not a theory of electrical transduction, it would read-
ily be abandoned today if the interpretative problem had not had an experimen-
tal solution. The experimental solution is due to Hertz but H. Helmholtz had
a primary role therein. The latter author, as usual for his time, felt that all
electromagnetism, and not only the single eﬀect, could be veriﬁed by analogy
with an appropriate mechanism. He decided to draw a parallel with the world
of sounds by comparing resemblances and diﬀerences at the propagation level.
The acoustic analogy was heuristic in the sense that Einstein wished for
his own interpretation of the photoelectric eﬀect. Before Hertz carried out the
ﬁrst of the demonstrative experiments of the propagation of electrical force in
the ether, his teacher, Helmholtz, had laid down for acoustics an experimental
methodology which has deﬁed time; to evaluate sound ﬁelds around acoustic
sources he introduced test bodies which he called resonators. As we shall see in
paragraph 6 below, Hertz transposed the investigation method exactly as it was
from musical acoustics and adapted both ﬁeld generators and test bodies to the
technical requirements of electricity. Since not even Hertz knew anything about
antennas, we cannot assert that we would judge his ﬁeld probes according to
present day parameters. We can only observe that Hertz’ so-called dipoles are
not the experimental equivalent of the test body prescribed by Lorentz.

We warned that it is possible to doubt the functionality of Lorentz’ electron
as a ﬁeld probe without detriment to the validity of Maxwell’s equations. The
experimental conﬁrmation given by Hertz independently of the particular probe
(provided it were suitable) used by him can be considered also.

In the paper, ¨uber die Beziehungen zwischen Licht und Elektrizit¨at [8] Hertz
explains what the experimental conﬁrmation of electromagnetism consists of.
“[. . . between light and electricity there is] a succession of delicate interactions
like rotation of the polarization plane with the current, or variation of con-
duction resistance with light.
In these [examples] however there is no direct
transduction between light and electricity but the ponderable matter mediates
between these two manifestations. We shall not concern ourselves with this
group of phenomena [i.e. those of transduction]. There are stricter relation-
ships between light and electricity.
I shall defend this statement before you:
light is an electrical phenomenon”.

We must not understand identiﬁcation of light with electricity as an im-
position of Hertz on nature. Rather it concerns the solution given by him to
the problem of establishing what physical object electromagnetism is concerned
with. Today we might say that, with this identiﬁcation, he inaugurated the
radiotelephony era for the purposes of human telecommunications.

The possibility of obtaining and giving information without having to estab-
lish direct contact is given naturally and is absolutely not limited to electrical
phenomena or to human beings. On the contrary, the possibility of neglecting
the peculiarities of the detector or probe for the purposes of electromagnetic
telecommunications is postulated by Maxwell and proven experimentally by
Hertz.

We mentioned that an eﬀect very similar to Hertz’ photoelectric eﬀect be-

6

longs to the experimental basis of Maxwell’s equations. Hertz himself, in de-
scribing the fact, considers it marginal in comparison with the veriﬁcation of
electromagnetism which he has in mind. And yet the photoelectric eﬀect is the
ﬁrst fact he detected with the experimental arrangement suited to that veriﬁ-
cation. According to the theory, the photoelectric eﬀect gives rise to a signal.
Neither the technology for reception thereof nor its decoding nor attribution
thereto of a meaning are prescribed in electromagnetism.

Inconsistency of Einstein’s heuristic approach with
Millikan’s veriﬁcation

If we understand, the energetic interpretation given by Einstein to the photo-
electric eﬀect is heuristic in the sense that he asks if it would not be possible to
formulate a general theory of transformation of light in something else in place
of the theory of Maxwellian conception. The theory in the making would be
oriented towards the transduction process and in this case would distinguish the
spark from the negative electricity extracted. At least in this respect the new
theory diverges from the Hertzian basis of telecommunications. But it could be
a theory of electrical phenomena for the same reason. Indeed, even Faraday’s
original experimenting is much richer with facts and leaves a broad margin for
schematization of electrical phenomena beyond theories of light.

Since the theory conceived by Einstein imposes an energy balance of trans-
duction it must postulate the principle of conservation of energy and therefore is
bound to be a linear theory. In accordance therewith the modality hypothesized
for transformation of light in something else must be theoretically represented by
simple processes such as absorption and emission [5]. The tolerance with which
the linearity requirement is transferred to the experiment is not prescribed.

Today a coherent general theory alternative to electromagnetism exits. We

shall not touch here on the question intrinsic to its ﬁeld of application.

On the other hand the experimental solution given by Millikan does not rep-
resent for the new theory what the Hertz veriﬁcation represents for the classical
one.
In eﬀect, in the era of this author the theory of electrical circuits was
universally accepted and the photodiode was considered a circuitry component
with full rights. Einstein’s linear equation being reproduced experimentally he
himself observes that he can agree with any linear theory that manages to justify
it.

As mentioned above, metallic surfaces can display the photoelectric eﬀect.
However Einstein does not specify any surface characteristic when he gets the
following heuristic law.

eV = N hν − P

(1)

in the very broad context of light production and transformation energetics.
In the formula, e is the charge per gram-equivalent weight of monovalent ions, V

7

is the potential to which the surface of the irradiated solid body is brought, N is
the number of real molecules thereof, P is the potential with which electricity is
held therein and is termed work function, and hν is the quantized light energy
corresponding to incident radiation with frequency ν.

It seems to us that in the Einstein formulation two misunderstandings are

introduced.

1.

Faraday’s electrolytic ions, for each reagent, met the speciﬁed chem-
ical composition to the electrolytic purity grade. Today we can obtain them
chemically more or less pure than this and verify their properties. The degree
of purity of the electron on the other hand has always been associated with
metallic conduction.

2.

If, as we are led to think, in 1905 Einstein was not predicting L.A.S.E.R.,
he attributes to natural light model characteristics taken entirely from Maxwell’s
theory. Today, on the contrary, one should decide either that L.A.S.E.R. is not
a black radiator or to which black bodies Planck’s theory applies.

If the experimenter does not cautiously appraise the challenge placed on
measurement he will have the alternative of an interpretation in agreement with
electromagnetism also or a mistaken one. Obviously to discuss transformation
or transduction of light in something else it is necessary to attack experimentally
the question upstream of the place where the photoelectric eﬀect pertains to an
electromagnetic radiation and to a metallic electric current. Since concomitantly
with electromagnetism it is established that electric phenomena can be referred
objectively (i.e. measured) the upstream place where the question should be
faced is the one in which the electrical eﬀects are separated from their material
manifestations.

We found no evidence that Millikan had tried to distinguish the so-called
work function P from the Volta eﬀect. He merely subtracts the second value in
volts from the ﬁrst. But the justiﬁcation of the validity of the Einstein equation
[17] not only ignores transduction at the measurement level but even neglects to
include in the energy balance concomitant chemical transformations which have
nothing to do with the measurement procedure chosen. The most considerable
of these transformations is the formation of a patina on the cathode but it is
not the only one.

If he were to reduce the non electrical side eﬀects by lowering the radiant
power and/or using less inﬂammable cathodes and/or improving the vacuum in
the cathode ray tube, he would verify Einstein’s heuristic equation under the
hypothesis of Maxwell’s theory (i.e. regardless of the reception modality).

But Millikan might have reached the conclusion that, under the measurement
conditions in which none of the ‘excess’ side eﬀects were still perceptible, neither
would he have been able to conﬁrm Einstein’s equation numerically beyond all
doubt. Thus he undoubtedly veriﬁed it but in the framework of what general
theory?

8

The photoelectric eﬀect mechanism

Up to this point we have sought to say that the Maxwell-Hertz theory explicitly
disregards the characteristics of transduction and in addition that even the
theory proposed by Einstein, although it intends to appraise the transduction
energy balance, must disregard the speciﬁcation of a particular mechanism.

We are now proposing a mechanism which accounts for the photoelectric

eﬀect and saying that it is the one presently suggested in electromagnetism.

We shall proceed as follows. First we shall review Helmholtz’ mechanical
analogy, then we shall explain which function has the photoelectric eﬀect in
Hertz’ experiment. Lastly we shall transfer to the UV excitation the same re-
ceiving and transmission modality observed for Hertzian waves. This is possible
under the Maxwellian radiation hypotheses.

Helmholtz’ intellectual contribution to Hertz

Many mechanical systems can be made to vibrate under appropriate conditions.
Oscillations are determined of such an entity as to endanger the integrity of the
structure only in a few.

For example, if the wheels of the vehicle are not balanced, at certain speeds
the steering wheel vibrates in an annoying manner around its axis. On the
In an
contrary, if they are balanced this does not occur at normal speeds.
analogous manner a ship cannot exceed a certain cruising speed without the
planking beginning to tremble. In addition to the creaking, the sailing ship’s
structure, diﬀerently from the vehicle, emits in creaking a sound similar to a
note. In navigation it is believed that the wave represents a suﬃcient stress and
other singing eﬀects are not sought. In the construction of musical instruments,
on the contrary, the aim is to obtain some eﬀect of this kind from the soundbox
while the vibration is sustained.

A hammer blow given to a shroud stretched between two steel girders, even
if it is perceptible, does not correspond to a musical sound. In addition, without
a soundbox there is no intensity of force capable of stressing the rope in such
a manner as to give rise to a musical sound. So apparently the function of the
soundbox is to give sonority to the movement of a plucked, rubbed or struck
tight chord.

Going a bit further, we can attribute to this the property of amplifying the
vibration of the chord, possibly with distortion. Now the ampliﬁcation consists
of pulling the mass of contained air and the immediately surrounding mass in
some movement. We can imagine that the soundbox has the faculty of adapting
the movement of the chord to that of the air.

This experimental base does not allow enunciation of a physical law putting
the vibration frequency of the chord in correspondence with the perceived note.
In the meantime if the chord is represented ’with distributed mass’ it is a

simple pendulum only in a ﬁrst approximation.

But let us hypothesize that the chord vibrations are stationary and the
isochronism is controlled stroboscopically. Secondarily the soundbox necessary

9

for perception of the sound does not develop pendular motion.
organ pipes it doesn’t have even by far a one-dimension structure.

If we except

In the third place the air ﬁlling the space behaves in general as an even worse

oscillator.

We might even hazard the hypothesis that the air does not at all enter into
oscillation during the sound. In particular, it seems to us illusory to think that
smoke or fog or a ﬂame would help demonstrating the movement more instantly
or faithfully than does the soundbox.

Instead it is certain that the air behaves as a channel of transmission in rela-
tion to sound and consequently the individual without hearing defects perceives
sounds and noises. We can agree to call both of them ‘signals’ as long as the
movement of the air itself does not become perceptible, which is what takes
place for example during explosions. The signals are transduced into sounds
by the ear. Under loose conditions we can ignore transduction. But a theory
independent of the modality of transduction is a signal theory. Only in this
kind of theory is it unimportant to call signals ‘sounds’ or ‘noises’. Obviously
Helmholtz implicitly makes this assumption [7].

Now let us summarize the work of Helmholtz in relation to the experiment
of Hertz. He considers the siren as an instrument capable of sustaining a certain
note as long as desired. He associates with the pitch of tones perceived in the
air the linear speed of rotation of the siren disk holes which produce them.
These speeds are constant in modulus. It is understood at this stage that the
frequency of rotation which equals the pitch of the tone supplies an objective
measurement after disregarding the attacking and releasing transients. But it
is the mere instrumental recording of a fact which, if we are musicians, we
are capable of evaluating independently and equally objectively by ear. In a
subsequent stage, making use of the instrument, we can ‘educate’ the ear to
hearing without being musicians.

In eﬀect, having chosen 440Hz for the reference frequency a’ attributed to
the tuning fork, Helmholtz is able to reduce the musical chords to simple fre-
quency relationships. In this manner it is seen that the quality of sound of the
soundboxes as obtained by spectral analysis in accordance with Fourier is not
simple and that the consonance or dissonance of a chord concerns the musical
tone more than the pitch of a single partial tone, commonly the prime tone.

Studying the phenomenon better it is seen that as loudness increases, non-
linear eﬀects can occur. The non-linearity consists of the fact that we hear
tones which the instrument did not produce. These tones which Helmholtz calls
combinatorial tones are sums and diﬀerences of the tones emitted provided they
are perceptible.

The linear case of these eﬀects is perceived as beats. During the beats,
sounds of similar pitch emitted by diﬀerent instruments interfere temporally.
Today beats can be used for tuning; the slower they are the more similar is the
pitch of the sound of the two instruments compared.

It should be said that -
1. Helmholtz evaluates the spectral sound distribution in the space around
the siren by measuring with tuned sensors invented by himself the intensity of

10

several persistent simple tones. Therefore he seems to locate the sounds in the
room.
2.

Even though he calls these sensors ‘resonators’ they cannot be excited
until they oscillate freely when the external stress is broken. They cannot be
thought of as sound sources. Therefore, in the same manner as the ear or other
soundboxes, they amplify selectively by coupling with the air.

Acoustic analogy due to the Hertz photoelectric eﬀect

Hertz possessed a battery-powered RCL secondary electrical circuit which he
used as a transmitter and also an RCL with receiver function. For the purpose
of emphasizing the photoelectric eﬀect he fed the receiver in series with the same
battery as the transmitter. A mercury switch was part of the primary circuit.
Hertz didn’t feed the transmitter persistently during the experiment nor
did he use the charge transient but the discharge transient. Upon opening
the switch, a spark went oﬀ at the spark gap between the transmitter capaci-
tor plates, two small polished, perfectly clean metal balls. Simultaneously the
spark went oﬀ at the receiving RCL spark gap provided the latter was less than
approximately 3 meters away. The two spark gaps also had to be facing each
other and any object placed between them could prevent the spark to the re-
ceiver from going oﬀ, provided it completely hid a band beyond extreme violet.
Hertz determined the frequency of this band by dispersion through a quartz
prism. He named this phenomenon the photoelectric eﬀect.

A good quality factor Q was an essential requisite on the receiver. If the
transmitter also had a good Q, a mutual reinforcement of the spark could be
noted.

Let us consider the interpretation. Hertz thought that his secondary cir-
cuits were equipollent with soundboxes. But the acoustic box serves to both
selectively amplify and broadcast music. On the contrary, modern broadcasting
makes use of antennas distinct from oscillating circuits.

If in addition to tuning resonators in frequency with each other Hertz had
adapted both to the transmission channel, he could have avoided consuming the
power necessary to produce sparks and would have received a less noisy signal.
In reality he needed to receive and transmit sparks because he had no lower
frequency reception techniques available.

From the point of view of reception the spark transduces an electric signal
and represents it so to speak. The spark produced by an electrical circuit on
the other hand is not analogous to a simple tone nor to a musical sound. It can
be said that having neglected the last consideration was fatal to the Hertzian
interpretation. We shall attempt to repropose it while allowing for it.

Hertz precisely ‘is not concerned’ with adapting the impedance. This is
equivalent of believing a priori the inductive coupling to be weak or even be-
lieving it to be of the order of magnitude of the acoustic one.

If the assumption were true the Hertzian radiofrequency (r.f.) receiver would
function as a wavemeter, recording amplitude maxima or, more correctly, in-
tensity maxima of a continuous wave (CW) emitted at the resonance frequency.

11

A wavemeter is Helmholtz’ resonator. When it is placed in the trough of a sta-
tionary wave, i.e. in a zone where interference does not produce cancellation, it
ampliﬁes a persistent sound, possibly introducing distortions. By analogy, Hertz
preﬁgures to himself receiving a sequence of sparks timed at radiofrequency as
long as wanted. In truth, Hertz’ transmitter does not broadcast a continuous
wave but a free induction decay (FID) [18]. Hertz nevertheless preﬁgures to
himself that the r.f. FID of a transmitting resonator gives rise to a goodly
number of discharge sparks when fed at the highest power. On the other hand
he observes a single spark from the spark gap of the transmitter and, at the
same time, the reception signal (a spark). So he concludes that the electric
emission is really oscillating at radiofrequency but even more damped than that
of a common diapason.

The assumption is reasonable and the consequences plausible.

Its falsiﬁ-
cation depends on the existence in trade of klystrons.
In comparison with
klystrons, any mechanical vibration is damped, even that of the diapason, de-
spite the fact that it is the only musical instrument able to transmit a FID and
which transmits it on condition it be adapted correctly to the air.

If Hertz had considered this point and had adapted the impedance in addi-
tion to tuning the receiver to the transmitter, he would have noticed that not
only the transmitter but the receiver also radiates when excited. In addition,
under coupling conditions phase relationships are determined.

The symmetry of behaviour between electrical transmitter and receiver can
be such as to make them indistinguishable as regards function. On the contrary,
only diapasons at the same nominal frequency can be acoustically coupled during
transients and in this case the beat phenomenon is recorded.

By analogy Hertz would have received a voltage or current signal correspond-
ing to the envelope of interference working at low power and low frequency (am-
plitude demodulation). Since this procedure does not give rise to a spark he
would have had to develop the reception circuit further.

The need to detect sparks arises from the absence of this circuit. So Hertz
adjusts the transmitting circuit so that the overvoltage at the spark gap would
produce them. According to Faraday the excess current corresponds to the extra
current of opening of the switch but the sudden trigger of the light discharge
depends on disconnection of the mercury from the circuit. The analogy given
to the diapason would be a hammer blow which produces a clang even in the
disadapted diapason. According to Helmholtz, to this clang must be attributed
an origin diﬀerent from the note a’ due to the fact that it is emitted isotropically
and is audible. According to him these are frequency combination tones typical
of the metallic structure.

The mechanism identiﬁed by Helmholtz explains the emission of the spark
by an electrical circuit by analogy. The resonance coupling in the UV on the
other hand is explained the same way electrical oscillations of coupled circuits
are explained, when the behaviour of linear electrical circuits is the model of
electromagnetism. This allows the statement that the photoelectric eﬀect is an
inductive coupling in the UV. It is very selective, hence strong and in addition
the requisites of adaptation for transmission in vacuum are met. This interpre-

12

tation would not be possible if Hertz had made use of a coherer or a photodiode
for reception of the spark.

Conclusion

It seems to us that Einstein’s proposal to develop formal structures capable of
giving a simple description of the basic phenomena hasn’t lost its appeal. It even
seems to us that the photoelectric eﬀect could be fairly considered a typical and
fundamental phenomenon. It should not be surprising that in its experimental
characterization according to Hertz it appears basic for electromagnetism.

Its interpretation is not elementary because it is given in the framework of
In this case,

a model which assumes simple behaviour of electrical circuits.
indeed, its observation is associated with the non-linear behaviour of circuits.

We have showed that the photoelectric eﬀect can be interpreted with the
help of the analogy with sounds, and that it can be explained in the framework
of Maxwell theory.

We believe however that the explanation of the photoelectric eﬀect might be
simpliﬁed starting from a diﬀerent model of Maxwell-Hertz electromagnetism.

References

[1] Clerk Maxwell J., A Treatise on Electricity & Magnetism (Dover Publica-

tions Inc., New York, 1954) Ed. 1891

[2] Clerk Maxwell J., Theory of Heat (Dover Publications, Inc. New York 2001)

[3] Einstein A., Ann. Phys. 17, 132-148 (1905)

[4] Einstein A., Phys. Z. 10, 817-825 (1909)

[5] Einstein A., Deutsche Phys. Gesell. Verh. 18, 318-323 (1916)

[6] Faraday M., Experimentaluntersuchungen ¨uber Elektrizit¨at, VIII Reihe (Wis-

senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft Darmstadt, Leipzig, 1985) Ed.1834

[7] Helmholtz H., On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the

Theory of Music (Dover Publications, inc. New York, 1954) Ed. 1877

[8] Hertz H., Schriften vermischten Inhalts herausgegeben von P. Lenard

(S¨andig Reprints Verlag, Vaduz, 1993) Ed.1889

[9] Hertz H., Untersuchungen ¨uber die Ausbreitung der elektrischen Kraft Ein-

leitung (S¨andig Reprint Verlag, Vaduz, 1993) Ed. 1894

[10] Hertz H., Untersuchungen ¨uber die Ausbreitung der elektrischen Kraft

(S¨andig Reprint Verlag, Vaduz, 1993) p. 184-198

13

[11] Houstoun R. A., A Treatise on Light (Longmans, Green and Co., London

1938, VII Ed.)

[12] Kraus J. D., Antennas (McGraw Hill, Boston, 1988, II Ed.)

[13] Kraus J. D., Fleisch D.A., Electromagnetics with Applications (McGraw

Hill, Boston 1999, V Ed.)

[14] Lenard P., Ann. Phys. 2, 359-375 (1900)

[15] Lenard P., Ann.Phys. 8, 149-198 (1902)

[16] Lorentz H. A., The Theory of Electrons and its Applications to the Phe-
nomena of Light and radiant Heat (Dover Publications Inc., New York IIEd.,
1952) Ed. 1915

[17] Millikan R.A., Phys. Rev. 7, 355-388 (1916)

[18] Skeldon K.D., Grant A.I., Mac Lellan G., McArthur C., Eur: J. Phys. 21,

125-143 (2000)

Braunschweig 1919)

[19] Sommerfeld A., Atombau und Spektralinien, Kap. 6. (Vieweg & Sohn,

[20] Stuewer R. H., Ann.Phys. 9(11-12), 975-989 (2000)

14

