2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reported at the NATO Advanced Study Institute on Physics and Materi-
als Science of Vortex States, Flux Pinning and Dynamics, Kusadasi, Turkey,
July 26 - August 8, 1998, published by Kluwer Academic Publishers, R.
Kossowski at al., eds. p.609-629, 1999

WHAT IS THE VORTEX LATTICE MELTING, REALITY OR

FICTION?

A.V.NIKULOV
Institute of Microelectronics Technology and High Purity Materials, Rus-
sian Academy of Sciences, 142432 Chernogolovka, Moscow Region, Russia.

Abstract

The concept of the transition into the Abrikosov state as the appearance
of long-range phase coherence is considered.
It is shown that the famous
Abrikosov solution gives qualitatively incorrect result. The transition into
the Abrikosov state should be ﬁrst order in ideal (without disorder) super-
conductor. Such a transition is observed only in bulk superconductors with
weak disorders. The absence of a sharp transition in thin ﬁlms with weak
disorder is interpreted as the absence of long-range phase coherence down to
a very low magnetic ﬁeld. The observed smooth phase coherence appearance
in superconductors with strong disorder is explained by the increase of the
eﬀective dimensionality. It is claimed that no experimental evidence of the
vortex lattice melting exists now. It is shown that this popular concept has
appeared on a consequence of incorrect conception about the Abrikosov state
and incorrect deﬁnition of the phase coherence.

1. Introduction

The concept of vortex lattice melting has become very popular after the
discovery of high-Tc superconductors (HTSC). Hundreds of papers have ap-
peared in the last ten years in which the vortex lattice melting is considered.
Some papers with titles ”Evidence of the vortex lattice melting ....” were
published in last years. Diﬀerent features in diﬀerent superconductors were
interpreted as the vortex lattice melting. But the reality of the vortex lattice
melting is not evident at present.

A feature can be interpreted as a universal transition if it is observed
in all superconductors. The vortex lattice melting is a universal transition.

1

No peculiarity of HTSC or low-Tc (conventional) superconductors (LTSC) is
considered in the theories of the vortex lattice melting [1]. Therefore, if this
transition exist it must be observed both in HTSC and in LTSC. The position
diﬀerence of the transition in HTSC and in LTSC should correspond to the
scaling law [2]. Three-dimensional (bulk) and two-dimensional superconduc-
tors ought to be distinguish at the comparison of the investigation results of
HTSC and LTSC. Layered superconductors (both HTSC and LTSC) ought
to be considered as an intermediate case between three- and two-dimensional
superconductors.

The comparison of the investigation results of HTSC and LTSC shows
that the sharp change of the resistive properties observed in bulk supercon-
ductors with weak disorder only can be interpreted as an universal transi-
tion. This feature is observed both in conventional superconductors [3] and
in YBa2Cu3O7−x [4]. The position diﬀerence of this transition in these super-
conductors conforms to the scaling law [2,5]. I have denoted [5] the position
of this transition as Hc4.

This transition was interpreted in the paper [4] as the vortex lattice melt-
ing, but in the work [3], in which it was observed ﬁrst, it was interpreted as
a transition from the mixed state without phase coherence (called as ”one-
dimensional” state in this paper) into the Abrikosov state, considered as the
mixed state with long-range phase coherence. It is contended in the present
paper that the interpretation [3] is right and the interpretation [4] can not
be right.

The concept of vortex lattice melting has become popular in consequence
of some no enough correct conception about the Abrikosov state. Therefore
this knowledge is deﬁned more exactly in the Section 2. The knowledge
about the mixed state of most scientists was formed by the inﬂuence of
results of the mean ﬁeld approximation. Results obtained in the mean ﬁeld
approximation and in the ﬂuctuation theory are compared in the Section
3. It is shown that according to the ﬂuctuation theory the transition into
the Abrikosov state of an ideal superconductor must be ﬁrst order. Results
of experimental investigation of the transition into the Abrikosov state in
bulk superconductors with weak disorders, in thin ﬁlms (two-dimensional
superconductors) and in superconductors with strong disorder are considered
in the Section 4. Theories of the vortex lattice melting and of the vortex
liquid solidiﬁcation are reviewed brieﬂy in the Section 5.

2

2. The Abrikosov State is the Mixed State with Long-Range

Phase Coherence.

According to a popular point of view [6] the pinning eﬀect can be in the
vortex lattice only. The process of the vortex pinning is very diﬀerent for
vortex liquids or solids. In the case of a vortex solid, a few pinning centers
can hold the entire lattice because it is stiﬀ. But it is impossible to hold
a vortex liquid in place with the help of a few pinning centers. Under the
inﬂuence of this point of view the absence of the vortex pinning in wide region
below Hc2 in HTSC was interpreted by many researchers as consequence of
the vortex lattice melting.

The point of view [6] became popular in a consequence of the wide spread
opinion that the Abrikosov state is the ﬂux line lattice (FLL) [1] like an
atom lattice, or a lattice of long molecules [7] and the Abrikosov vortex is
magnetic ﬂux. The transport properties were connected with the motion of
the magnetic ﬂux structures (or FLL) induced by the Lorentz force [8].

Therefore it is important to emphasize that the Abrikosov state is the
mixed state with long-range phase coherence, vortices are singularities in
this state but no magnetic ﬂux and that the resistivity in the Abrikosov
state is caused by the vortex ﬂow but not by the magnetic ﬂux ﬂow.

2.1. THE ABRIKOSOV VORTICES ARE SINGULARITIES IN THE

MIXED STATE WITH LONG-RANGE PHASE COHERENCE

Superconductivity is a macroscopic quantum eﬀect. The phase ϕ of the
wave function Ψ= |Ψ|exp(iϕ) of superconducting electrons can cohere all over
the volume of a superconductor. According to the relation for the velocity
of the superconducting electrons (see for example [8]) the relation for the
superconducting current js = nsevs

dlλ2

Ljs =

dl∇ϕ − Φ

Φ0
2π I
l

I
l

(1)

is valid in the region where the phase coherence exists. Here A is the vector
potential; Φ0 = hc/2e is the ﬂux quantum; ns is the superconducting electron
density; λL = (mc/e2ns)0.5 is the London penetration depth; l is a closed path
dlA is the magnetic ﬂux contained within the closed
of integration; Φ =

Hl
path of integration l.

3

If a singularity is absent, then

dl∇ϕ = 0. In this case the relation (1)

Hl

is the equation postulated by F. and H.London for the explanation of the
Meissner eﬀect (see [8]). The magnetic ﬂux can not penetrate in this case
inside a superconductor with long-rang phase coherence.

Consequently, a magnetic ﬁeld can penetrate into a superconductor only
if: 1) superconductivity is destroyed, or 2) singularities appears, or 3) the
phase coherence is absent. The ﬁrst is observed in type I superconductors.
The second case is observed in the Abrikosov state of type II superconduc-
dl∇ϕ = n
tors. The singularities are the Abrikosov vortices in this case.

is the number of the Abrikosov vortices contained within the closed path
of integration; n = Φ/Φ0 if l is large. These two cases are widely known.
The third case is not so well known. It is observed in ﬂuctuation supercon-
ductivity region, for example above the second critical ﬁeld, Hc2, in type II
superconductors (see below).

Consequently, the Abrikosov vortices are no ﬂux lines but are singulari-
ties in the mixed state with phase coherence. These singularities allow the
magnetic ﬂux to penetrate into a superconductor. A singularity can not exist
without a medium. Consequently the existence of the vortices is an evidence
of the existence of the phase coherence.

1
2π

Hl

2.2. THE VORTEX FLOW RESISTIVITY

According to the Josephson relation (see for example [9]), a electric volt-
age in the Abrikosov state is caused by the vortex ﬂow. The phase diﬀerence
ϕ between two points changes by 2π when it crosses a line connecting these
points. Consequently, the macroscopic voltage in the Abrikosov state is equal
to E = (vvor × nvorΦ0)/c. Where vvor is the velocity of the vortex ﬂow, nvor
is the density of the vortices.

This result coincides nominally with the one obtained by the Faraday’s
law E = −(vvor × B)/c, because B = nvorΦ0 in the Abrikosov state. There-
fore, it became possible that the resistivity in the Abrikosov state is consid-
ered as a consequence of ﬂux ﬂow in all textbooks (see for example [8,9]) and
majority of papers, although it is obvious that the magnetic ﬂux does not
ﬂow in a superconductors in this case. It is obvious also that the Lorentz
force can not be the driving force on an Abrikosov vortex [10]. The notation
”ﬂux ﬂow resistance” is not quite correct. I will use the more correct notation
”vortex ﬂow resistivity” instead of ”ﬂux ﬂow resistivity”.

4

2.3. THE VORTEX PINNING

The resistivity can be equal zero in the Abrikosov state if the pinning
force prevents from the vortex ﬂow [8]. The vortex pinning is a consequence
of superconductor disorders. Because the vortexes are singularities in the
mixed state with the long-rang phase coherence, the vortex pinning is a
consequence of the phase coherence also. The vortex pinning can not exist
in a state without the phase coherence.

Thus, the Abrikosov state is the mixed state with long-range phase co-
herence. Changes of the resistive properties should be observed ﬁrst of all at
the transition into the Abrikosov state, because a transition from the para-
conductivity regime to the vortex ﬂow regime must occur and the vortex
pinning can appear at the appearance of the long-range phase coherence.

3. Transition into the Abrikosov State in the Mean Field Ap-

proximation and in the Fluctuation Theory.

Thermodynamic average values are calculated in the ﬂuctuation theory.
The thermodynamic average of any quality, for example superconducting
electron density

< |Ψ|2 >= P

|Ψ|2 exp(−FGL/kBT )
exp(−FGL/kBT )

P

(2)

can be calculated in diﬀerent approximation in diﬀerent real cases. We can
write the relation of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy to kBT in a dimen-
sionless unit system [2]

=

Xk

k1Ψ∗

FGL
kBT

(εn + q2

k2Ψk3Ψk4

z )|Ψk|2 +

Vk1k2k3k4Ψ∗

1
2V Xki
Here the wave function Ψ(r) of superconducting electrons is expanded by
Ψkϕk(r); k = (n, l, qz); n is the

the eigen functions ϕk(r): Ψ(r) = V −1/2
number of the Landau level; l is the index of the Landau level functions; qz is
the longitudinal (along magnetic ﬁeld) wavevector; V is the superconductor
volume; εn = (t−1+h+2nh)/GiH = (h−hc2 +2nh)/GiH; GiH = Gi1/3(th)2/3
is the Ginzburg number in magnetic ﬁeld; Gi = (kBTc/Hc(0)ξ3(0))2 is the
Ginzburg number; t = T /Tc; h = H/Hc2(0); Vk1k2k3k4 = V −1
RV

d3rϕ∗

k1ϕ∗

(3)

Pk

k2ϕk3ϕk4.

3.1. THE ABRIKOSOV SOLUTION

5

States corresponded to minimum value of the free-energy (3) are con-
sidered only in the mean ﬁeld approximation. At Hc2/3 < H < Hc2 a
contribution by the lowest (n=0) Landau level (LLL) only can decrease the
free energy value because εn=0 < 0 and εn=1 > 0 in this region. The states
with qz = 0 correspond to the minimum value of the free energy. Therefore
the lowest Landau level and zero-dimensional case is considered in the mean
ﬁeld approximation. The Ginzburg-Landau free energy can be written as

FGL
kBT

= V (ε|Ψ|2 +

2

|Ψ|2

)

βa
2

(4)

2

in this case. Here ε = εn=0 = (h − hc2)/GiH; |Ψ|2 = V −1
RV

d3r|Ψ(r)|2 is

the spatial average density of superconducting electrons; βa = |Ψ|4/|Ψ|2
is
the Abrikosov parameter; |Ψ|4 = V −1
d3r|Ψ(r)|4. The values βa = βA and
RV
|Ψ|2 = ε/βA correspond to the minimum of the Ginzburg-Landau free-energy,
where βA is a minimum possible value of βa. The minimum value βA ≈ 1.16
corresponds to the triangular vortex lattice [11] if Ψ(r) are the functions of the
lowest Landau level. This state is known as the Abrikosov state, although
he considered the square vortex lattice with βA ≈ 1.18 [12]. According
to the Abrikosov solution [12] a ﬁnite density of superconducting electrons,
long-rang phase coherence and the vortex lattice appear simultaneously at
H = Hc2. This transition was considered as second order phase transition
[13].

3.2. THE MIXED STATE WITHOUT PHASE COHERENCE.

The long-rang phase coherence is not connected directly with the density
of the superconducting electrons in the ﬂuctuation theory. Therefore a mixed
state without phase coherence can exist according to this theory. Because
the Abrikosov state is the mixed state with long-range phase coherence the
transition into the Abrikosov state is an appearance of long-range phase
coherence.

This transition is not connected with Hc2 where a crossover from low to
high density of the superconducting electrons occurs. This means that the
”jump” of the speciﬁc heat and the fracture of the magnetization dependence
at Hc2 are not connected with the transition into the Abrikosov state because
these thermodynamic properties depend on the spatial average density of the
superconducting electrons only.

6

Figure 1:
ξ(0)(T /Tc − 1)−1/2; h = ξz = (Φ0/2π(H − Hc2))1/2; d = ξR ≈ (Φ0/H)1/2

Superconducting drops above Tc and above Hc2. D = ξ(T ) =

3.3. REDACTION OF THE EFFECTIVE DIMENSIONALITY OF THE

FLUCTUATION ON TWO IN A MAGNETIC FIELD

The mixed state without the phase coherence diﬀers qualitatively from
the ﬂuctuation state above Tc because the eﬀective dimensionality of the ﬂuc-
tuation decreases on two near Hc2 [14]. This means that only an longitudinal
(along magnetic ﬁeld direction) component, ξz, of the length of the phase co-
herence increases near Hc2. Whereas all components of the coherence length,
i.e. ξx, ξy, ξz, increase up to the inﬁnity at Tc (see Fig.1). Therefore the
second order phase transition takes place at Tc and an phase transition at
Hc2 is absent. The second order phase transition can not take place in the
one-dimensional system. Thus, the transition into the Abrikosov state dif-
fers qualitatively from the transition into the superconducting state in zero
magnetic ﬁeld.

3.4. TRANSITION INTO THE ABRIKOSOV STATE OF IDEAL SU-

PERCONDUCTOR MUST BE FIRST ORDER

The length of the phase coherence in the mixed state without long-range
phase coherence can be deﬁned from the correlation function (see [9]). In a

7

high magnetic ﬁeld (in the LLL region) in the linear approximation the longi-
tudinal component is equal ξz = (Φ0/2π(H −Hc2))1/2 and transversal compo-
nent is equal ξR = (2Φ0/πH)1/2. The relation ξz = (Φ0/2π(H − Hc2))1/2can
be valid in the linear approximation only and must be renormalized near Hc2.
Whereas the transversal component changes little near Hc2 and ξR value is
close to (Φ0/H)1/2 in the whole LLL region.

Thus, if we deﬁne the phase coherence by the correlation function we can
conclude that the long-rang phase coherence can not be in the mixed state
of type II superconductors. On other hand we know that the Abrikosov
state is the mixed state with long-rang phase coherence. Consequently, the
deﬁnition of the phase coherence by the correlation function is unsuited for
the mixed state. It must follow from a right deﬁnition that the existence of
the singularities (the Abrikosov vortexes) is evidence of the phase coherence.
We can use the relation (1) for the deﬁnition of the phase coherence:
the phase coherence exists in some region if the relation (1) is valid for any
closed path in this region. It is obvious that according to this deﬁnition the
long-rang phase coherence exists both in the Meissner and Abrikosov states.
Because in the mixed state without the phase coherence the transversal
length of the phase coherence ξR = (Φ0/H)1/2 changes little near Hc2 two
characteristic lengths only ((Φ0/H)1/2 and sample size L) are across mag-
netic ﬁeld direction in a superconductor without disorder. Consequently,
the length of the phase coherence changes by jump from (Φ0/H)1/2 to L at
the transition into the Abrikosov state. Thus, the result obtained in the
ﬂuctuation theory diﬀers qualitatively from the one obtained in the mean
ﬁeld approximation. The transition into the Abrikosov state can not be sec-
ond order phase transition. It must be ﬁrst order phase transition in ideal
superconductors without disorder.

3.5 MAKI-TAKAYAMA RESULT

According to the mean ﬁeld approximation [12] the Abrikosov state is the
mixed state with long-range order and the vortex lattice. Consequently, if the
mean ﬁeld approximation is valid in the thermodynamic limit, then two long-
range orders exist in the Abrikosov state: phase coherence and crystalline
long-range order of the vortex lattice. The mean ﬁeld approximation is valid
if the ﬂuctuation correction is small.

Eilenberger [15] has proposed a method of the calculation of the ﬂuc-
tuation correction to the Abrikosov solution. Using this method Maki and

8

Takayama [16] have shown that the ﬂuctuation correction ∆ns,ﬂ to the Abrikosov
solution calculated in the linear approximation depends on superconduc-
tor size L across magnetic ﬁeld direction: ∆ns,ﬂ is proportional ln(L/ξ) in
three-dimensional superconductor and ∆ns,ﬂ is proportiona (L/ξ)2 in two-
dimensional superconductor.

The Maki-Takayama result [16] seems very queer for most scientists, be-
cause they think that it contradicts to the direct observation [17] of the vortex
lattice. But the direct observation [17] of the vortex lattice is not evidence
of the crystalline long-range order. If we lay along a ﬁshing net with help of
stakes it will look as a lattice. But from this direct observation we can not
draw a conclusion that the ﬁshing net is a lattice which can melt. Larkin
[18] has shown that the crystalline long-rang order of the vortex lattice is
unstable against the introduction of random pinning. Consequently, we can
not contend on base of direct observation [17] that the Abrikosov state is the
vortex lattice which can melt because it can be a structure like the ﬁshing
net.

Almost nobody has believed in a reality of the Maki-Takayama result,
even author. Maki (with Thompson) attempted to correct this result in [19].
In spite of the opinion of many scientists (see [1]) I claim that the Maki-
Takayama result [16] is right because it is conﬁrmed by experimental results
[20,21].

3.6. SCALING LAW IN LOWEST LANDAU LEVEL APPROXIMA-

TION

According to (2) and (3), in the lowest Landau level (LLL) approximation
the thermodynamic average value of superconducting electron density, ns,
is function of temperature, magnetic ﬁeld and superconductor parameters
through the ε value only. Consequently, a quantity depended on the ns
value only, for example speciﬁc heat and magnetization, must be a universal
function of ε = (t−1+h)/GiH in the region h ≫ Gi, h−hc2 ≪ 2h, h > hc2/3,
where the LLL approximation is valid. Transport properties, for example the
resistivity, depend not only on the ns value but also on the length of phase
coherence. Therefore they can follow to the scaling law in the mixed state
without phase coherence only.

If a transition takes place at εc4 its position hc2 − hc4 must be a universal
function of the temperature and superconductor parameters. The scaling
law is general consequence of the ﬂuctuation Ginzburg-Landau theory. Con-

9

sequently, all theories obtained on base of the ﬂuctuation Ginzburg-Landau
theory must predict the same hc2 − hc4 dependence on the temperature and
superconductor parameters in the LLL approximation region.

3.7. CHANGE OF THE RESISTIVE PROPERTIES AT THE TRANSI-

TION INTO THE ABRIKOSOV STATE

According to the mean ﬁeld approximation the transition to the vortex
ﬂow regime occurs at Hc2. According to this approximation the vortex ﬂow
resistivity, ρf, near Hc2 can be described by the relation

ρf
ρn

= γ(1 −

H
Hc2

)

(5)

ρn is the resistivity in the normal state. The coeﬃcient γ was calculated in
many works (see [22]).

According to (4) the resistivity of ideal superconductor does not change
at the long-rang phase coherence appearance in Hc2. But it takes place in real
(with disorders) superconductors in the consequence of the vortex pinning.
The resistivity changes from ρn down to zero at enough low measuring current
(at j < jc) at Hc2 according to the mean ﬁeld approximation.

The ﬂuctuations change qualitatively the resistivity dependence. The
ﬂuctuation decreases the vortex ﬂow resistivity as well as the resistivity above
the transition into the Abrikosov state [16]. The ﬂuctuation value increases
near the transition. Therefore, a feature ought be expected at the transition
from the paraconducting regime to the vortex ﬂow regime. Because the
appearance of phase coherence is not connected with the change of the ns
value, a position of this feature (and the pinning appearance) diﬀers from
the Hc2.

4. Results of Experimental Investigation of Transition into the

Abrikosov State

According to the ﬂuctuation theory the sharp changes of the resistive
properties should be observed at the transition into the Abrikosov state of
an ideal superconductor. But the sharp change of the resistive properties is
observed in few bulk samples with weak disorder [3,4] only. No sharp change
is observed both in thin ﬁlms with weak disorder [21] and in all samples with
strong disorder. The transition into the Abrikosov state becomes smooth

10

Figure 2: Sharp change of the resistive properties at the transition into the
Abrikosov state of V3Ge and YBa2Cu3O7−x

with increasing of disorder amount [23]. The absence of the sharp change
of the resistive properties means that the transition into the Abrikosov state
in thin ﬁlms and in superconductors with strong disorder is absent or diﬀers
from the ideal case.

4.1. TRANSITION INTO THE ABRIKOSOV STATE IN BULK SU-

PERCONDUCTORS WITH WEAK DISORDERS.

The sharp change of the resistive properties was observed ﬁrst in the
paper [3]. This sharp change, observed at Hc4 < Hc2, was interpreted in [3]
as the transition into the Abrikosov state. The result of [3] means that this
transition in bulk superconductors with weak disorder can be close to the
one in a ideal superconductor. The length of the phase coherence changes
abruptly from (Φ0/H)1/2 = 10−5 − 10−6 cm to a sample size L = 0.01 − 1 cm
in real cases.

The appearance of the vortex pinning (the current-voltage characteristics
become non-Ohmic) [3] and the sharp decrease of the vortex ﬂow resistivity
[3,20] (Fig.2) are observed in enough homogeneous bulk superconductors at
Hc4. Below the transition the resistivity can be equal zero at j < jc and
the ρf(H) dependence has a minimum [20] or a step (see Fig.3). Such ρf(H)
dependence diﬀers qualitatively from the one (4) predicted by the mean-ﬁeld

11

approximation [22].

Some authors [24] state that the feature of the ρf(H) dependencies coin-
cide with the peak eﬀect in the critical current. But this is not right. Our
investigations [25] have shown that this feature is observed in all enough ho-
mogeneous bulk samples both with and without the peak eﬀect (see Fig.3).
And only in no enough homogeneous samples the ”classical” ﬂux ﬂow resis-
tivity dependence (see [8]) is observed. Therefore this feature ought be con-
sidered as universal for homogeneous bulk superconductors. It is explained
in [20] by ﬂuctuation inﬂuence.

The sharp change of the resistive properties was observed in YBa2Cu3O7−x
also [4] (see.Fig2). The diﬀerence of the Hc2 − Hc4 values in these super-
conductors corresponds to the LLL scaling law [2]. According to the LLL
scaling law [2]: Hc2 −Hc4 = εc4Hc2(0)Gi1/3(Hc2/Hc2(0))2/3(T /Tc)2/3. The ex-
perimental value εc4 ≈ 1 for superconductors with diﬀerent Gi and Hc2(0)
values: Nb94.3Mo5.7, Gi = 10−9, Hc2(0) = 0.8 T; V3Ge, Gi = 10−6, Hc2(0)
= 12 T; YBa2Cu3O7−x, Gi = 10−2, Hc2(0) = 200 T. Consequently, the tran-
sition from the mixed state without the phase coherence into the Abrikosov
state is observed both in [3] and in [4]. Result of [26] shows that this transi-
tion in bulk superconductors with weak disorder can be ﬁrst order indeed.

4.2. ABSENCE OF THE TRANSITION INTO THE ABRIKOSOV
STATE IN TWO-DIMENSIONAL SUPERCONDUCTORS WITH WEAK
DISORDER DOWN TO VERY LOW MAGNETIC FIELD.

The absence of any features of the resistive dependence of amorphous
Nb1−xOx ﬁlms was interpreted in our paper [21] as the absence of the tran-
sition into the Abrikosov state down to very low magnetic ﬁelds. The vortex
pinning appearance can not be observed if the measuring current is extremely
high in comparison to the critical current. But the feature of the vortex ﬂow
resistivity can be observed at a high measuring current. The absence of
the long-rang phase coherence below Hc2 in these ﬁlms is conﬁrmed by a
investigation of the nonlocal resistivity [27].

The feature of the vortex ﬂow resistivity are observed in the a − NbGe
ﬁlms with an intermediate strength of disorder [24]. This feature are observed
below the ﬁeld value where the vortex pinning appears, as well as in bulk
superconductors [20]. Consequently, the phase coherence appearance occurs
in ﬁlms with an intermediate strength of disorder. Comparison of the results
of [21] and [24] shows that the phase coherence appearance in thin ﬁlm is not

12

Figure 3: Magnetic dependence of the vortex ﬂow resistivity of T i84Mo16
alloy. The peak eﬀect in the critical current is absent in this sample. Lines
are mean ﬁeld approximation theoretical dependencies.

universal, but that it depends on the amount of disorder. The dependence
of the position of the transition into the Abrikosov state of two-dimensional
superconductors on the amount of disorder is predicted by results of the work
[28].

4.3 PHASE COHERENCE APPEARANCE IN SUPERCONDUCTORS
WITH STRONG DISORDERS. RETURN TO THE MENDELSSOHN MODEL

It is obvious that the long-rang phase coherence is appeared in super-
conductors with strong and intermediate strength of disorder, because the
pinning eﬀect is observed in these cases. But the phase coherence appearance
in these cases diﬀers from the ideal case. The length of the phase coherence
does not change by jump but increases gradually with the magnetic ﬁeld (or
the temperature) decreasing.

The smooth transition observed in most samples can be connected with
an increase of the eﬀective dimensionality of the ﬂuctuation (from zero to one
in ﬁlm) in samples with strong disorder. The limit case of strong disorder
is the Mendelssohn’s ”sponge” (see [29]). The Mendelssohn’s ”sponge” is a
model proposed in 1935 year for explanation of the magnetic properties of

13

some superconductors (now we call these superconductors as type II super-
conductors). Mendelssohn has assumed that the magnetic ﬁeld can penetrate
inside superconducting region because this region is superconducting sponge.

The Abrikosov state in thin ﬁlm is similar to the two-dimensional Mendelssohn

sponge. The main diﬀerence is that the Abrikosov vortex destroys supercon-
ductivity near itself (in a region with r < ξ) in the Abrikosov model whereas
in the Mendelssohn model it occupies a nonsuperconducting region. We may
consider real superconductors with disorder as intermediate cases between
the Mendelssohn’s and Abrikosov’s models. A thin ﬁlm with strong disor-
der can be considered as a Mendelssohn sponge with a variable width of
superconducting threads [30].

The length of phase coherence increases smoothly with temperature de-
creasing in a Mendelssohn sponge as well as a one-dimensional superconduc-
tor [31]. In consequence of this the resistive dependence is smooth also both
in a Mendelssohn sponge and in a one-dimensional superconductor.

The length on the phase coherence in superconductor with strong disor-
ders can begin to increase already above Hc2 [30]. At a value of the magnetic
ﬁeld < Hc2 a crossover to the vortex creep regime takes place. This crossover
can be interpreted as a consequence of the increasing of the phase coherence
length up to sample size.

5.Theories of the Vortex Lattice Melting and Theories of the

Vortex Liquid Solidiﬁcation

It is proposed in vortex lattice melting theories (see [1,32]) that the
Abrikosov state is the vortex lattice. This opinion is based on the Abrikosov
solution [12]. But according to the Maki-Takayama result [16] this solution
is not valid in thermodynamic limit. Consequently, the vortex lattice melt-
ing theories are unsatisfactory in principle, since they start from the state in
which the translation symmetry has been broken by hand [33]. Therefore,
some theorists consider no the vortex lattice melting but the solidiﬁcation
transition of vortexes (see for example [34,35]). They do not propose the
Abrikosov state existence, but try to ﬁnd the transition to it.

The phase coherence is deﬁned by the correlation function in the solid-
iﬁcation theory. This deﬁnition is logical contradictory because according
to this deﬁnition the long-rang phase coherence can not exist without the
crystalline long-rang order of the vortex lattice. It is claimed in some works
[36] that the phase coherence can remain short-ranged even in the vortex

14

solid phase. Therefore the solidiﬁcation theories try to ﬁnd the transition
into the Abrikosov state as the vortex lattice but no as the mixed state with
long-rang phase coherence. Most authors ﬁnd this transition (see for example
[34]). And few authors (see for example [35]) only state that this transition
is absent. I agree with few authors [35]. But the absence of the solidiﬁca-
tion transition does not mean that the transition into the Abrikosov state
is absent, because the deﬁnition of the phase coherence by the correlation
function is unsuited for the mixed state. According to the right deﬁnition of
the phase coherence the Abrikosov state is the mixed state with long-rang
phase coherence but no the vortex lattice.

6. Conclusions

Because the appearance of the vortex pinning and the feature of the
vortex ﬂow resistivity should be observed at the appearance of long-rang
phase coherence it is obvious that the interpretation proposed in [3] is right.
The sharp change of the resistive observed in bulk superconductors with weak
disorders at a ﬁeld Hc4 < Hc2 is the transition from the mixed state without
phase coherence into the Abrikosov state.

But this transition observed in YBa2Cu3O7−x was interpreted in [4,26]
and other papers as the vortex lattice melting. This interpretation is very
popular, but it can not be right. The vortex liquid is the mixed state with
long-rang phase coherence, because the existence of the vortexes is evidence
of the long-rang phase coherence. Consequently, the ﬁrst order phase transi-
tion from the vortex liquid into the mixed state without the phase coherence
must be observed above the vortex lattice melting in superconductors with
weak disorders. The sharp change of the resistive properties must be ob-
served at this transition. But no sharp change is observed above Hc4 both in
conventional superconductors [3] and in YBa2Cu3O7−x [4].

The sharp transition into the Abrikosov state predicted by the ﬂuctuation
theory in ideal case is observed in bulk superconductors with weak disorder
[3,4] only. No sharp transition is observed in thin ﬁlms with weak disorder
[21]. This diﬀerence from bulk superconductor can be explained by diﬀerence
of the ﬂuctuation value in three- and two-dimensional superconductors [16].
The nature of the step in the magnetization dependence of layered HTSC
[37] is some questionable because no sharp transition is observed in thin
ﬁlm of conventional superconductors [21]. This step can not be interpreted
as a universal transition in three- or two-dimensional superconductor. It is

15

most probably a consequence of a transition from two- to three dimensional
behavior in layered HTSC. Such interpretation was proposed in some papers.
The second critical ﬁeld Hc2 is not a critical point not only in supercon-
ductors with weak disorder but also in superconductors with strong disorder.
The phase coherence appears below Hc2 in superconductors with weak dis-
order [3,4] and above Hc2 in superconductors with strong disorder [30].

The smooth phase coherence appearance in superconductors with strong
disorder can be explained qualitatively by the increasing of the eﬀective di-
mensionality of the ﬂuctuation.

Acknowledgement

I thank the International Association for the Promotion of Co-operation
with Scientists from the New Independent States (Project INTAS-96-0452)
and the National Scientiﬁc Council on ”Superconductivity” of SSTP ”AD-
PCM” (Project 98013) for ﬁnancial support.

References

58, 1465-1594.

1. Brandt, E.H. (1995) The ﬂux-line lattice in superconductors, Rep.Progr.Phys.

2. Nikulov, A.V. (1997) Fluctuation eﬀects in mixed state of type II
superconductors, in M.Aussloos and A.A.Varlamov (eds.), Fluctuation Phe-
nomena in High Temperature Superconductors, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, pp.271-277.

3. Marchenko, V.A. and Nikulov, A.V. (1981) Magnetic ﬁeld depen-
dence of the electrical conductivity in V3Ge in the vicinity of Hc2, Pisma
Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 34, 19-21 (JETP Lett. 34, 17-19).

4. Safar, H., Gammel, P.L., Huse, D.A., Bishop, D.J., Rice, J.P., and
Ginzberg, D.M. (1992) Experimental evidence for a ﬁrst-order vortex-lattice-
melting transition in untwinned single crystal YBa2Cu3O7, Phys.Rev.Lett.
69, 824-827.

5. Nikulov, A.V., (1990) On phase transition of type-II superconductors

into the mixed state, Supercond.Sci.Technol. 3, 377-380.

6. Bishop, D. (1996) Has the fat lady sung? Nature 382, 760-761.
7. Nelson, D.R. (1995) Vortex lattice melts like ice, Nature 375, 356-357.
8. Huebener, R.P. (1979) Magnetic Flux Structures in Superconductors,

Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

16

9. Tinkham, M. (1975) Introduction to Superconductivity, McGraw-Hill

Book Company, New-York.

10. Chen, D.-X. et al., (1998) Nature of the driving force on an Abrikosov

vortex, Phys.Rev. B 57, 5059-5062.

11. Kleiner, W.H., Roth, L.M., and Autler S.H. (1964) Bulk solution of
Ginzburg-Landaw equations for type II superconductors: Upper critical ﬁeld
region, Phys.Rev. A 133, 1226-1227.

12. Abrikosov, A.A. (1957) On the magnetic properties of superconduc-
tors of the second group, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 32, 1442-1452 (Sov.Phys.-JETP
5, 1174-1184).

13. De Gennes, P.G. (1966) Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys, Perg-

amon Press.

14. Lee, P.A. and Shenoy, S.R. (1972) Eﬀective dimensionality change
of ﬂuctuation in superconductors in a magnetic ﬁeld, Phys.Rev.Lett. 28,
1025-1028.

15. Eilenberger, G. (1967) Thermodynamic ﬂuctuations of the order pa-
rameter in type II superconductors near the upper critical ﬁeld Hc2, Phys.Rev.
164, 628-635.

16. Maki, K. and Takayama,H. (1971) Thermodynamic ﬂuctuation of the
order parameter in the vortex state of type II superconductors, Prog.Theor.Phys.
46, 1651-1665.

17. Essmann, U. and Trauble, H. (1967) Direct observation of a triangular
ﬂux-line lattice in type II superconductors by a Bitter method, Phys.Lett. A
24, 526-532.

18. Larkin, A.I. (1970) Eﬀect of inhomogeneities on the structure of the
mixed state of superconductors, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 58, 1466-1470 (Sov.Phys.-
JETP 31, 784-788).

19. Maki, K. and Thompson, R.S. (1989) Fluctuation contribution to

ﬂux-ﬂow conductivity, Physica C 162-164, 275-279.

20. Marchenko, V.A. and Nikulov, A.V. (1981) Fluctuation conductiv-
ity in V3Ge near the second critical ﬁeld, Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz. 80, 745-750
(Sov.Phys.-JETP 53, 377-381).

21. Nikulov, A.V., Remisov, D.Yu., and Oboznov, V.A. (1995) Absence
of the transition into Abrikosov vortex state of two-dimensional type-II su-
percondutor with weak pinning, Phys.Rev.Lett. 75, 2586-2589.

22. Gor’kov, L.P. and Kopnin, N.B. (1975) Flux ﬂow and electrical re-
sistivity of type II superconductors in a magnetic ﬁeld, Usp.Fiz.Nauk 116,
413-448 (Sov. Phys.Usp. 18, 496-531.)

17

ﬁlm with strong disorders. The return to the Mendelssohn model. http://publish.aps.org/eprint/gatew

23. Fendrich, J.A. et al., (1995) Vortex liquid state in an electron irradi-

ated untwinned YBa2Cu3O7 crystal, Phys.Rev.Lett. 74, 1210-1213.

24. Theunissen, M.H. and Kes, P.H. (1997) Resistive transitiond of thin

ﬁlm superconductors in a magnetic ﬁeld, Phys.Rev.B 55, 15183-15190.

25. Nikulov, A.V. (1985) Fluctuation phenomena in bulk type-II super-
conductors near second critical ﬁeld, Thesis (Inst. of Solid State Physics,
USSR Academy of Sciences, Chernogolovka).

26. Schilling, A. et al., (1996) Calorimetric measurement of the latent
heat of vortex-lattice melting in untwinned YBa2Cu3O7, Nature 382, 791-
793.

27. Nikulov, A.V., Dubonos, S.V. and Koval,Y.I. (1997) Destruction
of the phase coherence by magnetic ﬁeld in the ﬂuctuation region of thin
superconducting ﬁlms, J.Low Temp.Phys. 109, 643-652.

28. Nikulov, A.V. (1995) Existence of Abrikosov vortex state in two-
dimensional type-II superconductors without pinning, Phys.Rev. B 52, 10429-
10432.

29. Shoenberg, D. (1952) Superconductivity, Cambrige.
30. Nikulov, A.V. Phase coherence appearence in thin superconducting

31. Grunberg, L.W. and Gunther, L. (1972) Critical behavior of one-
dimensional superconductors: an exact solution, Phys.Lett. A 38, 463-464.
32. Blatter, G., Feigel’man, M.V., Geshkenbein, V.B., Larkin, A.I., and
Vinokur V.M. (1994) Vortex in High-Tc Superconductors, Rev.Mod.Phys.
66, 1125-1388.

33. Tesanovic,Z. (1991) Nature of the superconducting transition in the

presence of a magnetic ﬁeld, Phys.Rev. B 44, 12635-12638.

34. Hu,J. and MacDonald,A.H. (1995) Participation-ratio entropy and
critical ﬂuctuations in the thermodynamics of pancake vortices, Phys.Rev. B
52, 1286-1289.

35. Lee,H.H. and Moore,M.A. (1994) Monte Carlo studies of the two-
dimensional vortex liquid: absence of transition and dynamical properties,
Phys. Rev. B 49, 9240-9243.

36. Ikeda,R. (1996) Superconducting ordering in vortex states of clean

type II superconductors with pinnings, J. Phys.Soc.Jpn. 65, 3998-4017.

37. Zeldov, E. et al., (1995) Thermodynamic observation of ﬁrst-order

vortex- lattice melting transition in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8, Nature 375, 373-376.

18

