2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symposium on Cosmology and Astrophysics

29-30 January 2002

Department of Physics
Jamia Millia Islamia

Keynote Address

The Relativistic World: A Common Sense Perspective

Naresh Dadhich
Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Pune, India.

The Relativistic World: A common sense perspective

First of all I thank the organizers of the workshop for asking me to give the
keynote address. What is expected of it is perhaps to say something profound
and interesting which should be accessible to anyone who ventures to step
into the lecture hall. This is of very tall order for a person like me. Since my
good friends have posed some conﬁdence in me, I shall try my best to live
up to their expectations and the occasion.

I would attempt to present to you a new way of looking at things - a farmer’s
perspective. What I mean by that is to get to the basic root of concepts
with a minimal degree of mathematical and technical sophistication, com-
mon sense being the sole guide and torch bearer. That means what I am
going to talk should in principle be accessible and hence satisfying one of the
key criteria for a key note address.

1

The concepts of space, time and matter are universal and fundamental. A
view consistent with the contemporary understanding of these basic concepts
should permeate a rational and truthful world view. By world view I would
mean a broad enough framework to probe and understand the world around
us, the Universe. For this a correct and proper understanding of space, time
and matter is therefore of primary importance. In this lecture, I shall es-
sentially address to these concepts and shall attempt to thread a profound
synthesis, which is given the name, Relativistic World.

1. The Newtonian World

In the Newtonian world, space, time and matter are independent and exter-
nally provided entities. That is, the question of their creation and existence
is not admitted. Motion is described by the three laws of motion governing
motion of all that moves. The interaction between bodies in the Universe
is described by the law of gravitation which prescribes universal attraction
between all bodies and its measure is proportional to their masses and in-
versely proportional to square of the distance separating them.

The ﬁrst law of motion makes an equivalence statement that Uniform Motion
(motion with a constant speed in a straight line) is equivalent to No Motion
(rest). That is, it is impossible to distinguish between these two states by
performing any physical experiment. Any deviation from this would signal
presence or application of an external ﬁeld or force. In a force free region,
a particle would either be at rest or in uniform motion depending upon the
initial condition. It would continue in this state until a force acts on it. The
only way force makes its presence felt is by changing the velocity of the par-
ticle it is acting on.

Conversely if something is moving in a straight line, either there acts no
force on it or it acts in the same direction of motion. If something moves
in a straight line in all directions, that means no force is acting on it unless
there exists in Nature a force which is isotropic - acting in all directions at
the same time. If there doesn’t exist such a force in Nature and yet there
exists something that moves in a straight line in all directions, its velocity
must be a universal constant. So long as everyone agrees on its straight line
motion, its velocity must be the same constant for everyone.

2

Now the question arises, does the Newtonian mechanics permit such a uni-
versal velocity which is the same for all observers irrespective of their rela-
tive motion? Obviously not because the law of addition of velocity reads as
w = u + v where u is the velocity of a particle relative to an observer who
is moving with velocity v relative to you. According to this law w can never
be equal to u unless v = 0.

If there exists in Nature a physical entity which propagates in a straight line
in all directions, it cannot be accommodated in the Newtonian mechanics
and we will have to seek a new mechanics.

Inertial frame (IF) is a frame which is free of all forces.
It is a measure
It is
of zero force. All interactions/forces will be measured relative to it.
therefore of fundamental importance to actually realise such a frame. There
are four basic forces in Nature, two of which are short range nuclear forces
while electromagnetic and gravitation are long range. One doesn’t have to
worry about nuclear forces, while it is possible to shield electromagnetic force
by proper prescription of charges and currents but it is impossible to shield
gravity. Any rearrangement of matter distribution will not be able to remove
gravity because unlike electromagnetic ﬁeld which is both attractive as well
as repulsive, it is always attractive. That means it is impossible to realise IF
in practice.

Not quite so. Galileo made a fundamental discovery by dropping two unequal
mass bodies of diﬀerent composition that gravity is a truly democratic force
it pulls everything equally irrespective of its mass and composition. This
gives a remarkable message that gravity can be removed locally by letting
the frame fall freely along with everything else. Two freely falling particles
will have uniform relative motion between them which is the indication of
absence of force between them. This region could only be local, freely falling
lift, because all particles fall towards a point, the centre of force. The extent
of the force free region is determined by the degree of accuracy required for
force freeness.

We thus come to the conclusion that IF could exist only locally. We can
only obtain LIFS (local IFs) in actuality and there can exist no global IF.

3

With this the ﬁrst law of motion would state that all LIFs are equivalent for
investigation of any physical phenomenon.

Let us once again bring back the thing which has universal constant velocity
relative to all observers. Gravitation is also universal force and hence it must
act on everything. The only measure of action of any force is the change it
produces in velocity of the particle being acted upon.

The key question is how to make the thing that has universal constant ve-
locity feel the gravitational force, because its velocity cannot change. The
incorporation of the universal constant velocity in mechanics asked for new
mechanics, and now the incorporation of such a particle’s interaction with
gravitation asks for a new theory of gravitation.

We have thus argued that the Newtonian world is unsustainable if a particle
of universal constant velocity does exist in Nature, and we have to seek new
world which we call Relativistic.

2. Living with Light

Light is in fact that thing which is, even in the Newtonian world, supposed to
move in a straight line in all directions. Hence its velocity must be constant
for all observers. It is important to note that we have reached this important
inference of constancy of velocity of light within the Newtonian framework
without reference to light being an electromagnetic wave propagating in an
all pervading medium called vacuum. And this fact is in direct conﬂict with
the Newtonian mechanics. This logical inconsistency had lived with the the-
ory over 300 years until the beginning of the previous century.

2.1 Special Relativity

The incorporation of universal constant velocity of light gives rise to the rela-
tivistic mechanics, known as the theory of special relativity. It approximates
to the Newtonian mechanics when velocities involved are small compared to
the velocity of light. This was the reason that we could live with the in-
consistency of principle for so long because we did not encounter velocities
comparable to velocity of light which could expose the inconsistency in obser-

4

vation. Since the velocity of light is a universal constant, it binds space and
time into a synthetic entity spacetime. That is, we cannot conﬁne anything
solely to space or to time, and all physical happenings happen in spacetime.
For instance, distance could be measured in seconds, distance traveled by
light in so many seconds, and conversely time in metres, time taken by light
to travel so many metres.

The immediate consequence of this synthesis is the path dependence of time.
It is common knowledge that the distance between two points depends upon
the path you take to go from one point to the other. Since there now exists
the equivalence between space and time, whatever happens to space mea-
surements must happen to time measurements. Consider the time interval
between taking oﬀ a spaceship and its landing back after a space voyage.
The time interval between these two events would be diﬀerent in the ground
based clock and the spaceship borne clock. Since the two clocks take dif-
ferent paths between the two events, they must read diﬀerently because like
distance time interval is also path dependent. There is nothing unusual in
it except that such a situation does not occur in our daily living. That is
why it is not so familiar. An immediate corollary follows, the absolute simul-
taneity is untenable for spatially separated events because the signal of their
occurrence would in general reach diﬀerent observers at diﬀerent times. The
events would be simultaneous only for an observer who is equidistant from
the two events.

Further it leads to the equivalence of mass and energy indicated by the fa-
mous equation, E = Mc2, whose practical and devastating power has been
demonstrated by the atomic bomb. The name of Einstein, the creator of the
relativistic mechanics, has become synonymous with this equation and to his
horror and discomfort inseparable from atom bomb.

At the basic paradigm level we move from 3-dimensional space and 1-dimensional
time to the 4-dimensional spacetime. That is, we live in a 4- dimensional Uni-
verse. This is a major step forward.

2.2 General Relativity

Gravitation is universal and hence it must interact with everything including

5

light. The question is how to make it interact with light because its velocity
cannot change. Here we are faced with a contradiction in principle. Light
must feel gravity yet its velocity must not change. In the conventional frame-
work, one can’t feel force without its velocity changing. What is required of
light is that it should bend as it grazes close to a massive body. Could it be
achieved without changing its velocity?

Consider a piece of wood ﬂoating in a river.
It bends as the river snakes
along. Could a similar happen to light. It propagates in space, and the only
way light can bend is that space bends. That means gravity must bend/curve
space around a massive body so that light could automatically bend. We have
now made another very profound discovery that gravitational ﬁeld must curve
space, and since space and time have already been synthesized, it must curve
spacetime. That is the only way to describe gravitation honestly is through
the curvature of spacetime. A very radical and revolutionary conclusion. The
study of gravitation through the curvature of spacetime is known as general
relativity. Once again, this contradiction in principle was not appreciated
until 1916. There has emerged no signiﬁcant new fact about gravitation that
has asked for a new theory. It was only a matter of principle which was true
even in Newton’s time. Had it not been for Einstein’s unﬂinching adherence
to principle it would have perhaps been not addressed until much later. This
gives a good measure of Einstein’s character and priority in science.

Note that what the British astronomer, Eddington measured at the time of
total solar eclipse in 1919 was not the bending of light but rather bending
of space around the Sun by its own gravity. It is like we see the Sun going
round the Earth but in fact it is the other way round. Similarly we though
see the light bending but it is in fact the space bending. Gravity produces
curvature in spacetime and motion under gravity is simply free motion (of
both particles and light) relative to the curved spacetime.

We have now achieved a grander and profounder synthesis of spacetime with
gravitation which is produced by matter, and hence of spacetime and matter.
This is something new for physics. No other force makes such a demand on
spacetime. For all other forces spacetime background is given and it is nei-
ther aﬀected by nor does it aﬀect. Gravity radically changes this paradigm,
it works through spacetime curvature. Spacetime no longer remains an inert

6

background but becomes dynamic which is essentially the dynamics of grav-
itational ﬁeld.

3. Relativistic World

First the universal character of light velocity led us to binding of space and
time into spacetime and to the relativistic mechanics called special relativity.
Next light’s interaction with gravity could only be mediated through curved
space. We can say that light bends space. Gravitation can hence only be
described by the spacetime curvature and this description is called general
relativity (GR). It ceases to be an external force but instead becomes the
property of spacetime geometry.

Relativistic world is characterized by the synthesis of universal entities of
space, time, velocity of light and gravitation (matter). The important lesson
we learn from this is that all that which is universal must be synthesized.
Never mind even if it requires endowing space and time with curvature, a
very unusual phenomenon. Spacetime encompasses everything in the Uni-
verse. That is the nature of spacetime structure is determined by the matter
energy distribution in the Universe. It is therefore no surprise that GR, which
is a theory of gravitation as well as of spacetime, should admit the question
of beginning of time;i.e. beginning or birth of the Universe (spacetime). It
is a perfectly physics question which of course has philosophical overtones.

The Universe becomes a natural arena for application of GR and the study
of the Universe of as a whole is called cosmology, which what is the subject
matter of discussion for this workshop. The two most remarkable predictions
of the Relativistic World are the beginning of the Universe in an explosive
Big Bang and the death of a massive star in a black hole. A black hole is a
highly compact object producing very high ﬁeld which in turn curves space
around it so conﬁningly that even light cannot propagate out of it (Recall
that light can only move along the space curvature). Since light cannot come
out of black hole, nothing else could as well. It is an object whose boundary
surface has turned one way, things can go into it but nothing can come out.
No information can come out from inside of it.

When a massive enough star has exhausted its nuclear fuel so that its own

7

gravity could not be checked, it shrinks without limit to form a black hole.
It would contain inside it a singular state where physical parameters become
inﬁnite. Similar is the case at the big bang.

4. End of everything

The breakdown of theory is called by the beautiful name of singularity. It
indicates a situation where physical parameters of the theory become unten-
able by attaining inﬁnite values. For singularity in GR would mean spacetime
curvature along with energy density becoming inﬁnite. It would mark break-
down of spacetime curvature. The singularity in GR not only marks the end
of GR, but also of everything else. No other physical theory or structure can
survive in absence of the proper spacetime background. Thus like gravity its
singularity is also universal.

5. Looking ahead

Gravity is a universal interaction and it is therefore not a force like other
forces but is a property of spacetime structure of the Universe. The question
is how do we address the singularity in the structure of spacetime, indicating
its breakdown not only for description of gravity but also as background for
all physical phenomena. It indicates the end of everything, and should the
answer of it be the Theory of Everything? So do the proponents of the string
theory claim. The string theory is one of the proposals for a covering theory
to GR which is vigorously being pursued. It proposes in principle a grand
vision of synthesis of all forces, quantization of gravity and origin of matter
in the Universe. All this is supposed to happen in 10 dimensions. The extra
space dimensions are supposed to be compact and manifest only at a very
high energies. GR would be the low energy limit of the theory. There is
however no natural and unique way to come from 10 to 4 dimensions.

The other approach is that of canonical quantum gravity a la Abhay Ashtekar
et al. How to tailor spacetime geometry so that it becomes amenable to
quantization? It is essentially the quantization of spacetime geometry. New
mathematical tools and constructs as well as new concepts are being de-
veloped so as to handle discretization of inherently continuum structure of
spacetime. They are in fact evolving quantum geometry. This proposal re-

8

mains conﬁned to the familiar 4-dimensions.

Both the approaches have about equal share of success, for instance in under-
standing black hole entropy to some extent. Yet they have both long way to
go. The string theory has a strong backup of the large particle physics com-
munity while the canonical quantization is pursued mainly by a small group
of relativists. The two approaches are quite diﬀerent, the former relies on
the ﬁeld theoretic techniques and concepts while the latter on the geometric
constructs. The two will have to converge as they asymptotically approach
the ultimate theory of spacetime, which may or may not be a theory of ev-
erything! At any rate, one thing is certain that we do need a new theory
which could be string theory or canonical quantum gravity, or something else!

Let us try to see into the unknown on the basis of wisdom gained from our
past experience. From Newton to Einstein, the guiding force was light, its
constant speed and its interaction with gravity. The latter required space to
be curved. On the basis of these simple facts, we could argue that gravita-
tional potential should not only give the acceleration to ordinary particles
but also curve space for photons to feel gravity. Since acceleration is given
by gradient, constant potential has no dynamical eﬀect. Photons through
space curvature directly feel the potential and hence they are sensitive to
its value. Therefore constant potential is not ignorable as it does produce
non-zero curvature. The Einstein theory has thus to determine in contrast
to the Newtonian theory potential absolutely. The journey from old to new
theory is always of synthesis. It is the good old Newtonian potential with its
zero ﬁxed at inﬁnity. This is a new synthesis.

Further, as there exists the escape velocity threshold for timelike particles,
there should also exist a similar threshold for photons. Photons cannot turn
back like ordinary particles, the only way they could be kept bound to a grav-
itating body is that they are not let to propagate out of a compact surface.
Since photons deﬁne the limiting threshold for propagation of any physical
information, from such a surface nothing can come out. It then becomes a
oneway surface deﬁning the horizon of a black hole. The existence of black
hole then becomes a natural requirement the moment we have photons to
contain.

9

Such profound and distinguishing features of GR could be deduced in prin-
ciple without reference to the full theory.

The point I wish to make is that it should always be possible to anticipate
and deduce some of the features of the new theory. Now when we wish to go
beyond Einstein in the high energy regime, what kind of new features could
one expect? Unfortunately, there does not seem to be anything like light
showing us the path. One possible entity for synthesis is gravitational ﬁeld
energy like the gravitational potential in the Newton-Einstein synergy. In
GR, it only manifests through the space curvature. In the high energy limit,
could it happen that it becomes concrete like other matter ﬁelds. Perhaps it
may be the right direction to look for.

The measure of a theory is the kind of questions it admits. New theory ad-
mits questions that were not admissible in the earlier theory. For instance, it
is a valid question to ask in GR, when did the spacetime (the Universe) be-
gin? And the answer is that it had its explosive birth in hot big-bang about
15-20 billion years ago. The next question in this series for the new theory to
answer would be, what is the spacetime made of? That is the fundamental
question which should be answered by the new theory.

A fundamental theory also has an impact on the world view. The view that
has gained acceptance amongst people at large. For instance, the fact that
the earth is not ﬂat but is a curved surface like a ball has been internal-
ized and assimilated in the knowledge base of the present day society. At
a slightly higher degree of abstraction, the fact that material bodies attract
each-other by an invisible force of gravity has also descended down to the
common knowledge culture. The next step of advancement in the similar
vein would be the assimilation of the fact that massive bodies curve the
space around them. That is the abstract spacetime manifold (the Universe)
we live in is not ﬂat but is curved. One of the ways to measure this cur-
vature is by measuring bending of light when it grazes a massive body like
a star. Thus the geometry of spacetime should be of as general a concern
as the geometry of the planet earth we live on. The only diﬀerence is that
the former is an abstract entity while the latter is the concrete rock and sand.

Like gravity social interaction is also universal and of great consequence for

10

our existence and well being. It should thus also attract collective concern
and attention of all of us with utmost seriousness and commitment. We
should never forget the fellow citizens who have been contributing from their
honest earnings for our upkeep as well as for the facilities we use for our
work. Apart from contributing to the knowledge base by our work in our
speciﬁc discipline, as persons of learning and more importantly practitioners
of scientiﬁc method we also owe to the society a studied and responsible par-
ticipation in the discourses on the issues of wider social relevance.

Let us try to emulate the basic gravitational property of interaction with
one and all, and come closer.
If this is realised in the true spirit of both
science and society, there is a good reason for hope for harmony, peace and
an enlightened world community. This is a matter of gravity for one and all,
once again a universal pronouncement of profound signiﬁcance and value.

I close by quoting Ghalib, the great Urdu poet of the 18th century.

11

