2
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE POSSIBLE ROLE OF SALAM’S EFFECT IN
FUNDAMENTAL INTERACTIONS UNIFICATION

R.G. Ragachurin

Institute of Nuclear Physics, Tashkent, Uzbekistan

1 SALAM’S RANGE

The eﬀect of the rest mass compensation (Salam’s eﬀect [1]) can play an important role in the
uniﬁcation of the fundamental interactions if one adresses to the ﬁeld equation of the energy
conservation. According to [2], this equation is

∂
∂t

{

Z

W dv + Er} = −

~f d~s,

I

(1)

where W is the density of the ﬁeld energy, Er is the relativistic kinetic energy of particles, ~f is
Pointing’s vector, dv and d~s are the elements of volume and surface respectively.

One of the important features of Salam’s eﬀect is connected with the formation of a potential
barrier around the particle whose rest mass is spent on the barrier formation. This barrier is
important for the consideration of stationary solutions of equation (1), when in the left hand
side the time derivative from the sum should be zero. This condition is satisﬁed if the surface
integral in the right hand side is equal to zero too that is possible in the case when ingoing
and outgoing energy ﬂuxes are equal in the absolute quantity. The ingoing ﬂux is arising from
an external ﬁeld and outgoing - from Salam’s barrier. Due to their equality the stationary
interaction of a particle with an external ﬁeld becomes possible. Thus, one of Salam’s eﬀect
features is connected with the maintenance of this stationary condition.

The inﬂuence of the eﬀect can be performed in some range which is determined by variations
of the external ﬁeld and the relativistic kinetic energy Er. The presence of the range borders is
caused by the limited rest mass of the particle. One of the borders arises at zero inﬂuence of the
external ﬁeld (the particle inﬁnitely far from a ﬁeld source) and minimum possible relativistic
kinetic energy Er (rest energy). There is no necessity for the barrier formation in this case.
The second border arises in the case when all rest mass is spent on the maintenance of the
stationary condition and further increase of the external ﬁeld and relativistic kinetic energy

1

Er cannot results in the formation of the stationary states. The range of the eﬀect action is
deﬁned as Salam’s range.

2 RELATIVITY AND GEOMETRIZATION PRINCI-

PLE

The choice of the geometrization principle plays the important role too. The choice is deﬁned
by the presence of the relativistic kinetic energy Er in equation (1),

Er = mv2[1 − (v/c)2]−1/2,

(2)

where m is the rest mass of the particle, v is its speed and c is the speed of light in vacuum.
The expansion of the relativistic kinetic energy Er in McLoren’s series on speed v = 0 is
Er = mc2 + (1/2)mv2 + (3/8)mv4/c2 + (5/16)mv6/c4 + ...

(3)

There are only terms with even degrees of the ratio (v2/c2)n in the equation (3). The
absence of the odd terms is connected with the equality of relevant derivatives in McLoren’s
series to zero.

The interesting feature of the equation (3) is connected with the second term which deﬁnes
the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek. Higher degrees terms also have physical meaning of an
energy but diﬀer from the nonrelativistic energy Ek. Their presence allows to use the potential
geometrization principle according to which changes of the ﬁeld potential energy should be
equal to changes of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek. Then the sum

Er3 = (3/8)mv4/c2 + (5/16)mv6/c4 + ...

(4)

has the important physical meaning. Our task is to show that the sum (4) deﬁnes the energy
of the gravitational interaction under special circumstances to be speciﬁed.

3 THE EFFECTIVE VOLUME OF SALAM’S BAR-

RIER

The role of Salam’s barrier eﬀective volume (which is deﬁned by the eﬀective radius ref f in the
spherical approximation) is important at the consideration of the stationary solutions of the
equation (1).

Let us assume, that the interaction of the particle with the ﬁeld is executed inside Salam’s

range. Then the left hand side of the equation (1) must be zero or

W dv + Er = Const.

Z

2

(5)

It is necessary to consider interaction conditions at the case of the particle inﬁnitely far from
a source of the ﬁeld, minimal possible value of the relativistic kinetic energy Er and zero
considered volume. If the distance of the particle from the ﬁeld source is determined by the
generalized coordinate R, the minimal value of the relativistic kinetic energy Er - by mc2 (the
rest energy), then it follows from the expression (5) that at the inﬁnity R∞ and at zero volume

and therefore

The equation (6) is deﬁned as the stationary one which area of the solutions is inside
Salam’s range. It is assumed that the variations of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek are
only connected with the central interaction and do not depend on the integration volume.

It follows from the equation (6) that

Const = mc2

W dv + Er = mc2.

Z

Er = mc2

at the coordinate R∞ and the zero volume. The last is the ﬁrst border of Salam’s range.

Let the volume increases at the same value of the coordinate R∞. The contribution to the
space integral from the central interaction remains is being equal to zero in this case. However,
this integral increases due to the non-central interaction. The area of the ﬁeld which is included
in the space integral is deﬁned as the eﬀective volume of Salam’s barrier. The increase of the
eﬀective volume (increase of ref f ) should be accompanied by the equivalent decrease of the
relativistic kinetic energy Er for the execution of the equation (6). The limit is reached in the
case when all rest mass is transformed into the energy of the barrier. This case deﬁnes the
second border of the range.

The limiting states of the particle are represented by points a and b in the ﬁgure 1. The
energy stationary states are presented there at various coordinates R and ref f . The longitu-
dinal variations are deﬁned by R, and the lateral ones- by ref f . The smooth curve represents
the ﬁeld energy variations which are connected to the potential energy Ep with the negative
sign. The ﬁeld energy has a positive value, and the potential energy Ep has the negative value
in the connected systems. Therefore, the value −Ep deﬁnes the ﬁeld energy variations corre-
sponding to the variations of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek in the connected systems.
The connected systems are considered below.

The limiting states a and b are deﬁned by the conditions

and

Er = mc2 ,
W dv = 0 ,

ref f = 0 ;
R

(8a)

Er = 0 ,

W dv = mc2 ,
ref f = ref f m ,
R

3

(8b)











(6)

(7)

(8)

where the value ref f m corresponds to the transformation of all rest mass into the barrier energy.
The borders of the range, similar to (8), exist at any value of the coordinate R. Particular
values Er,
W dv and ref f vary in dependence on the sum of the series (3) but the physical
meaning of the borders is the same. The type (8a) borders deﬁne the maximal mass for the
concrete R, and the type (8b) borders - a state in which this mass is completely transformed
into the energy of the barrier.

R

The above mentioned discussion shows that the inﬂuence of Salam’s eﬀect results in the
additional coordinate ref f account. The coordinate ref f is connected to the energy lateral
variations as against to the generalized coordinate R which determines longitudinal ones.

4 THE PHYSICAL MEANING OF THE POTENTIAL

ENERGY

R

W dv and Ek grow with the decrease R < R∞. The integrated ﬁeld energy grows
The energies
due to the density W increase. All terms of the series (3) with higher degrees should grow too
because of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek increase. Therefore, the particle has to spend
the whole rest mass for the increase eﬀects compensation because the series (3) and (4) are
inﬁnite ones. As result, the exclusion of these series terms arises because of limiting m. The
sequence of the terms exception is essential during this process.

The process of the exclusion is illustrated in the ﬁgure 1 by any state corresponding to
the coordinate Ro. The various segments deﬁne the variations of the energy connecting to the
diﬀerent members of the equation (6).

The segment Roa′ is equal (relative to the value R∞) to the variation of the ﬁeld energy due
to the central interaction. It should be equal to the variation of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy
Ek due to the geometrization principle action. This part is connected with the contribution
of the space integral into the equation (6) and deﬁnes the scalar part of the interaction. This
part should be taken into account twice due to independent entry of the space integral and
the relativistic kinetic energy Er (due to the second term of the expansion (3)). The repeated
account is represented by the segment b′c which should be equal to the segment Roa′ on energy
value but diﬀers from it on the physical meaning. The diﬀerence is connected with the fact
that the quantity Roa′ is deﬁned by the variation of the longitudinal coordinate R, and the
quantity b′c - by the variation of the lateral coordinate ref f . This part is connected with the
vector interaction.

The particle should compensate the variations which are caused by the terms of the inﬁnite
series (4) in addition to the compensation of the energy variations which are connected to
segments Roa′ and b′c. But, according to the equation (6), it only has an energy part which is
equal to the segment a′b′. The necessity of the exclusion of the terms quantity arises there.

The part of the interaction connected with the sum of the series (4) is deﬁned as the tensor

part of the interaction.

distinction in their functional role.

The division of the interaction on the scalar, vector and tensor parts is connected with

The scalar part is connected to the change of the ﬁeld energy relative to the coordinate R∞

4

and consequently deﬁnes that event which have taken place during decrease of the coordinate
R before appearance of the particle in the considered point of the space (Ro is in the ﬁgure 1).
The vector part is connected to the lateral changes of the eﬀective radius ref f . Analogously
to the scalar part, it is connected with the event which has happened before appearance in the
considered point. However, it limits Salam’s range on the part of the smaller values of the rest
mass on the contrary to the scalar part.

The functional role of the tensor part is connected with the cross changes of the eﬀective
radius ref f . The meaning of its allocation in the separate part is connected with its potential
inﬂuence. One can easily see that the following expression

is true for any value of the coordinate R.

It follows from the expression (9) that the increase of the quantity mv2 occurs due to the

decrease of the tensor part Er3. Therefore, the quantity Epl deﬁned from the equality

mv2 = mc2 − Er3.

Epl = −Er3

(9)

(10)

is responsible in fact for the potential energy of the ﬁeld. In any space point Ro this energy
has the meaning of the energy stock which will be transformed into the nonrelativistic kinetic
energy at the decrease R < Ro. Thus, the functional division of the interaction on three parts
in the lateral direction leads to the division of the space in the longitudinal one.

The action of the potential energy Epl has an unexplicit character. It leads to the compen-
sation of all members of the series (4). Therefore, the particle has only the scalar and vector
explicit components of the energy.

All terms of the energy Er3 increase at the decrease R < R∞. Therefore, the summary
decrease of this energy [which is necessary for the increase of the energy mv2 in the expression
(8)] can be executed only due to the decrease (relative to R∞) of the terms quantity in the series
(4). The process of the decrease is connected with the formal part of the series (3). This series
is obtained as a result of the expansion in McLoren’s series which is connected to the deﬁnition
of the derivatives f (0), f ′(o), f ′′(0) and etc. One can easily see that the double mechanism of
the series terms exclusion arises at the calculations of the derivatives f 2k(0). It is connected
with the fact that the series (3) is power series in which the terms are located on the growing
degrees of (v2/c2)n. When k < n, the terms in f 2k(0) are excluded on the part of the small
degrees (because all of them are equal to zero) due to this property. When k > n, the terms
are excluded on the part of the high degrees due to the presence of the terms ∼ v2k. In result,
there is only one term (for which k = n) in f 2k(0). The action of this double mechanism results
in the strict order of a position of the series terms in the segment a′b′ - the ﬁrst segment has
to represent the ﬁrst term of the series (4), the second one - the second term and so one. This
feature is represented by the points 1 and 2 at the coordinate Ro in the ﬁgure 1. The segment
a′1 represents the ﬁrst term of the series (4), 12 - the second one and so on.

One can see that the whole segment a′b′ represents the discrete sum of the segments with
the strictly certain length for each term and with the strict order of the position of all terms.
This order can not be changed without the special external inﬂuence on the closed system (for

5

example, to present a segment a′1 as the sum of the several terms with higher degrees). The
strict order of the position leads to the integer number of the derivatives which enter into the
segment a′b′. The stationary equation (6) is satisﬁed only in this case.

One can wait that the process of the decrease of the terms of the series (4) is connected
with the curvature of the space representation of the Salam’s barrier due to the strict order
and integer number of the derivatives. Then, the ﬁrst stationary state is connected with the
exclusion of the ﬁrst derivative (relative to R∞), the second one - with the second derivative
and so on.

5 A CYCLE OF GAUGE TRANSFORMATIONS

Some results presented here after can be obtained with the analysis of the parallel displacement
of the unit vector (ﬁrst considered by Weyl [3]). However, our results deﬁnitely show that the
length of the vector is meaning full. The correlation between pseudo-euclidean and riemannian
spaces (ﬁrst mentioned in works [4-7]) has the important meaning too. Besides, the model gives
the clear physical understanding of the phenomenon.

In the model the length of the vector is connected to the quantity of the derivatives which
are excluded from the series (4) at the transition between two adjacent stationary states. The
curvature characteristics of Salam’s barrier and the variation of the angular momentum do not
depend on the length of the vector. However, the functional completeness of the stationary
states is violated at such transition.

The model gauge transformations are based on the representation of one cycle. This cycle
is connected with the transition from scalar to tensor spaces and back. The model gauge
transformations are similar to Weyl’s ones.

The understanding of the physical meaning of the rest mass is necessary for the elucidation
of the role of the model gauge cycle. One has to come back to consideration of the borders of
Salam’s range at the coordinate R∞ (the section 3). This consideration shows that the meaning
of the ﬁeld compressed in some curvilinear volume can be attributed to the rest energy. The
rest mass deﬁnes the energy compression in the lateral direction at R∞. Such object is retained
in the stationary state by the equality of the external ﬁeld energy to internal one in its volume.
At the decrease R < R∞ the volumes of the Salam’s barriers are decreased. Therefore, the
part of the internal energy become free due to the volumes decrease. According to the previous
section, this part must be deﬁned by the corresponding derivative of the series (4). The energy
of this part, which is deﬁned by the lateral coordinate ref f , is transformed into the energy
of variation of the longitudinal coordinate R (nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek) at one gauge
cycle. Three various space areas (scalar, vector and tensor ones) correlate at such cycle. The
scalar area is represented by symbol I, the vector - by symbol II and the tensor - by symbol III
in the ﬁgure 1.

The model cycle is deﬁned by one elementary segment which is excluded in the process
of the decrease of the terms quantity of the series (4). One elementary lateral segment is
transformated in a longitudinal one with help of such cycle. The scale of such transformation is
deﬁned by the functional dependence −Ep(R). The consequtive recurrence of such cycles leads

6

to the strict sequence of the longitudinal elementary segments ∆Ri due to the strict sequence of
the lateral ones. In this sequence each segment in the scale −Ep(R) reproduces the appropriate
term of the series (4).

The considered mechanism has the important property - the curve −Ep plays a role of a

string connecting all possible stationary states inside Salam’s range.

Some common conclusions can be received by the consideration of one elementary cycle.
Such cycle is represented by the dush line aRoa′1d′ in the ﬁgure 1. This line is formed as a
result of three transitions. The ﬁrst transition occurs from the point a which is located on
the curve −Ep (the border between the scalar and tensor areas) to a point Ro. The second
transition occurs from the point Ro to the state 1 and is connected with motion from the scalar
to the tensor area. At last, the third transition occurs from the point 1 to the point d′ before the
crossing with the curve −Ep. One can see that the ﬁrst transition images on the longitudinal
direction in the scale −Ep an interval ∆R corresponding to the second term of the series (3) -
mv2/2. The second transition reproduces before the crossing with the curve −Ep value mv2/2,
and after crossing up to the point 1 - the value of the ﬁrst term of the series (4). At last, the
third transition images this term on the axis R in the appropriate scale. One can see that the
consequtive reccurence of the gauge cycles results in consequtive projection of all terms of the
series (4).

All gauge cycles have three topological features which are important for the further discus-

sion:
1. All gauge cycles are formed with help of three transition connected with three movements
between scalar and tensor areas;
2. Considered values have the phase shift on an angle π at the tensor area (For example, the
rest mass has a maximal value at the bottom border; the spacing of the segments which deﬁne
the value of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek [relative to the segments which deﬁne the
corresponding variation of the coordinate R) has the phase shift on the same angle relative to
the scalar area etc.]. An input from the scalar area to tensor one on the lateral part of the
cycle and then the output on the longitudinal part can be treated as rotation of the system on
an angle 2π due to this feature;
3. The point of the crossing with the curve −Ep deﬁnes the begining or end of an elementary
segment on any transition. The states which are located on the edges of the transition (for
example, Ro and 1 in the ﬁgure 1) can be considered as the states having the common point
on the curve −Ep due to this property.

6 THE ROLE OF THE MASSIVE PARTICLE UNLO-
CAL STRUCTURE IN TWO-PARTICLES INTER-
ACTION

Three common properties which were considered in the previous section are important in the
consideration of two-particles interaction. Such consideration requires explicit dependence of

7

W (R). According to [2],

W =

E2 + H 2
8π

,

E = ±e/R2.

where E and H are the intensity of electrical and magnetic ﬁelds, respectively.

The magnetic ﬁeld is assumed to be zero in our research, and E is deﬁned by Coulomb

interaction of two particles with electrical charge ±e (hydrogen atom)

The expressions (11) and (12) are used in the volume integral of the equation (6). The inte-
gration will be carried out on the eﬀective volume of Salam’s barrier which is deﬁned by the
eﬀective radius ref f . The account of the independence of the coordinates R and ref f results in

(m − mcc)c2 = (1/6)(ref f /R)3e2/R.

The right hand side of the last equation grows up due to account of the central interaction.
The term mcc in the left hand side of (13) is the varying quantity and implicitly characterizes
the rest mass which has been left at the particle after the compensation of the central and
non-central interactions.

The expression (13) shows that the location of a state with respect to the curve e2/R (in
the considered system it represents the curve -Ep) is deﬁned by the ratio ref f /R. The double
physical meaning is attributed to this value in the model. On the one hand, it is connected with
the curvature of the spatial representation of Salam’s barrier. On the other hand, it character-
izes the distribution of the barrier along the generalized coordinate R (interaction radius) and
consequently can be connected with the wave function in its probability interpretation. The
gauge transformations arise in this aspect as a result of the periodic reccurence of the states
with the same value of the ratio ref f /R. The characteristic properties of the variations of this
quantity along the gauge cycles are considered below for the conﬁrmation of this statement.

It was mentioned in the section 6 that one cycle begins and ends by the states which are

located on the curve −Ep. It is

in the considered system. It follows from the expressions (13) and (14) that the beginning and
end of the cycle correspond to the same value

− Ep = e2/R.

ref f /R = 61/3

The numerical values of the ratio ref f /R in other states can be determined with the account
of the properties 1-3 of the section 6. The states which are located bellow e2/R are marked by
the subscript e (re/R), and the states higher - by the subscript p (rp/R). The system from two
equations arises in this case

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(m − mcc)c2 = (1/6)(re/R)3e2/R ;
(M − Mcc)c2 = (1/6)(rp/R)3e2/R .

(

8

The division of the second equation on the ﬁrst one results in the expression

M − Mcc
m − mcc

=

(rp/R)3
(re/R)3 ,

which connects the eﬀective values of the rest masses to the appropriate values of the ratios
re/R and rp/R. The expression (17) deﬁnes the ratio of the rest masses M/m in the limiting
borders of Salam’s range.

Two cycles aRo1d′ and d′d′′b′′f represent the ﬁrst and second cycles of the gauge transfor-

mations in the ﬁgure 1.

The state Ro in the ﬁrst cycle is located on the longitudinal axis that is zero value of barrier
volume should be attributed to it. However, it is necessary to note that it is connected with
the conventional location of the quantity e2/R on inﬁnity. Actually the nonvanishing value of
this quantity should be attributed to this state.

The values re/R and rp/R are not arbitrary. The connection between them is deﬁned by
the condition of the location of the point a′ on the curve e2/R. This point corresponds to the
termination of the term mv2/2 in the series (3) and the begining of the term (3/8)mv4/c2 in
the series (4). The point a′ is the common point of these two segments in this aspect.

It follows from the ﬁrst and second equation (16) that the common point should satisfy to

the condition

By multiplying of the ﬁrst equation (16) into the coordinate rp, one can get equation con-

necting the ratios re/R and rp/R for any state

re/R = rp/R = 61/3.

(re/R)3rp/R = A,

A ≡

6(m − mcc)c2rp
e2

.

re/R = rp/R

where

One can see from the equation (19) that the condition of the equality

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

is satisﬁed for diﬀerent values of A but the condition (18) is satisﬁed only in one case when
the common point belong also to the curve e2/R. In other cases the common point lays above
or below this curve.
It follows from here that the considered values are connected among
themselves by the relation

(re/R)3(rp/R) = 64/3.

(21)
One has to note that any state has two points of the crossing with the curve e2/R - in the
longitudinal and lateral directions. The parity (21) connects events both in one cycle (lateral
transitions) and in consequtive cycles (longitudinal transitions) due to this fact. Analogous
relation for the longitudinal transitions is

(r/Re)3(r/Rp) = 64/3,

(22)

9

where Re refer to area I and Rp - to area II in the ﬁgure 1.

It follows from (21) and (22) that

re/R = r/Re ;
rp/R = r/Rp

(

(23)

for all gauge cycles. Two layers are formed in Salam’s range side by side with the layer −Ep
due to the relation (23). One of them deﬁnes the movement of the particle p in the range and
the other - of the particle e. These layers are distinguished by the various values of r/R.

One can deﬁne the values re/R and rp/R at the unlocal representation of the barrier of the
particle which is placed in the layer rp/R. Such representation is based on the distinction of
the physical properties of three layers forming the gauge cycle. The distinction arises at the
point particle approximation.

The location of the point particle in the layer −Ep is connected with the geometrization
principle. Since the terms quantity of the series (4) deﬁnes the variation of the nonrelativistic
kinetic energy Ek relative to R∞, the beginning and end of any transition have to belong to
the curve −Ep. In the considered system re/R + rp/R both particles are not located on −Ep.
Therefore, the geometrization principle can not be satisﬁed at the transitions of the point
particle between layers re and rp. At the same time, the location in this layers has the property
which is important too. This property can be deﬁned at the unlocal consideration which is
connected with the model role of the electrical charge.

The role of the charge is connected with the transformation of the lateral segments into the
longitudinal ones. The scale of this transformation is deﬁned by the quantity −Ep depending
on the value of the charge. Therefore, the charge deﬁnes the compression of the ﬁeld energy
on the longitudinal direction on the contrary to the rest mass which deﬁnes the compression of
the energy on the lateral one.

The deﬁnition of the charge role allows to deﬁne such transitions at which both the ge-
ometrization principle and property of the layers re/R and rp/R are valid. The satisfaction of
the both properties can be completed in this case when the particle has the part of the whole
charge +e in the state rp/R. Then the state re/R + rp/R can be considered as the interaction
of the particle which has the charge −e with another particle having fractional charge. If the
value of the fractional charge is agreed with the structure of the gauge cycle in the longitudinal
direction, the whole charge +e corresponds to one gauge cycle. Therefore, the interaction of
two point particles with charges ±e can be considered as the interaction of the particle which
localized at the beginning of the cycle with another particle which is located at the end of one.
Such unlocal representation arises due to the space structure of the Salam’s barrier. This struc-
ture has being agreed with gauge cycle one. Therefore, the summary structure of the transition
between adjacent states is the superposition of the gauge cycle and the structure corresponding
to the transitions between the layers re/R and rp/R. The quantity of such transitions in one
gauge cycle has to correspond to the whole charge +e. Then the fractional charge q can be
represented as

(24)

due to the functional role of the charge (l is the transitions quantity in one cycle). The last

q = +e/l

10

relation represents average charge connecting to quantity of the transitions between the layers
re/R and rp/R in one cycle.

The transitions quantity l takes the integer values. The case of three transitions is of special
interest. It is connected with quantity of the transitions which is equal to three according to
the results of the previous section. If the quantity of the transitions between the layers re/R
and rp/R is also equal to three, then the sequence of the stationary states has the harmonic
character connecting with the periodical reiteration of the all values of r/R in one cycle.

Two states Ro1 and d′′b′′ represent two adjacent states of the system re/R + rp/R in the
ﬁgure 1. The state Ro corresponds to re/R and the state 1 - to rp/R in the ﬁrst gauge cycle.
Analogously, the state d′′ corresponds to re/R and the state b′′ - to rp/R in the second one. One
can see from the ﬁgure 1 that the quantity of the gauge transitions (connected with the crossing
of the curve −Ep) between these states is equal to two (Ro1 → 1d′′ → d′′b′′). According to the
results of the previous section, such quantity is equivalent to the rotation of the system on the
angle 2π. The double transition can not lead to the harmonic sequence. It has to be equal
to three (l = 3) in order to satisfy to this condition. However, it is impossible to pass from
the space with index e (or p) to the space with the same index with help of three transitions
between layers re/R and rp/R. This property is connected with the general property of the
spinor objects - the rotation of the system on an angle 2π does not lead to the initial state [8].
The additional rotation on the same angle 2π is necessary due to this reason. The additional
rotation on the same angle means the transition to the position of the end of the second gauge
cycle. Finally, one can see that the system re/R + rp/R comes into the initial state with help
of two gauge cycles. Therefore, the value of l in the relation (24) is equal to six and the mean
charge

Thus, the system re/R + rp/R can be treated as the interaction of the particle −e with
the particle +e/6 in the aspect of the gauge cycles. Then, the state of the ﬁrst particle has to
be decreased into six time in comparison with the state predicted by the curve −Ep. Then, it
follows from the ﬁrst equation of the system (16) that

By using of the last expression in the equation (21), one can obtain

(25)

(26)

(27)

It is necessary to pay attention to the physical meaning of the relation (26). The interaction
area is a sphere with the radius R at the central interaction. Then, the equality of the radii R
and r means that the inﬂuence of the external ﬁeld is compensated by Salam’s barrier in the
interaction area. Therefore, the surface integral in the equation (1) is equal to zero and the
stationary equation (6) is satisﬁed. If the quantity l is not equal to six, the value of re/R is
changed. Then the inﬂuence of the external ﬁeld is not compensated by Salam’s barrier and
the equation (6) is not satisﬁed. Thus, the harmonic sequence of the stationary states, which
is connected with the periodical reiteration of the all values of r/R in one gauge cycle, can be
executed at one value l = 6.

q = +e/6.

re/R = 1.

rp/R = 64/3.

11

The relation (27) has the important meaning together with (26). The mutual action of these
relations allows to understand the role of the unlocal interaction of two particles. It is connected
with two conditions of the gauge cycles - the geometrization principle and the necessity of the
compensation of the external ﬁed inﬂuence in the interaction area. The ﬁrst one is executed
at location of the point particle on the curve −Ep. The second one is satisﬁed in the case
of the location of such particle in the system re/R + rp/R. The mutual execution of these
conditions is possible only if Salam’s barrier of the particle p is unlocal. At such representation
it possesses the both necessary conditions. One can see that this fact is connected with dualistic
representation ”wave-corpuscle” of the elementary particle.

The unlocal structure of the barrier deﬁnes the internal area of the coordinate R in any
stationary state. The interaction of the fractional electrical charge with charge −e is essential
in this area. Therefore, it corresponds to the strong interaction. Thus, the whole area of the
coordinate R variations is divided into three parts in two-particles interaction. The external
part corresponds to the variation of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek (relative to R∞) in the
right hand side from the ﬁxed value Ri. The spacing of the double gauge cycles is important
in this part. The second part is connected with the quantity (relative to R∞) of the terms
of the series (4) at Ri. It deﬁnes the energy stock which will be transformed into Ek when
the coordinate R decreases relative to Ri in the one-particle approximation. The space of
the transformation deﬁnes the third part of the area. The last one is the area of the strong
interaction in the two-particles approximation.

The quantity of the terms of the series (4) decreases as R decreases. The limit is the case
when the quantity of the terms is equal to zero and the whole stock of the potential energy
of the series (4) is exhausted. This limit is represented by the state Rc in the ﬁgure 1. The
presence of this limit is important property of the model. Its calculated value is about 5 Fm
which is in agreement with the radius of nucleus. Since the point particle p is located at the
end of the gauge cycle and the particle e - at its beginning, zero value of the quantity of the
terms for the particle p corresponds to unity value for the particle e. This property leads to
unity value of the main quantum number for the particle e in the end.

In fact the limiting state corresponds to the core of nucleus. Since the particle p is located
at the end of any gauge cycle, the core is presented in any one. The value of the coordinate
R (corresponding to the core) decreases as R decreases. Thus any state deﬁnes two volumes
of Salam’s barrier. The ﬁrst one, corresponding to the location of the particle e, deﬁnes the
maximal volume. The second one, corresponding to the localization of the particle p, deﬁnes
the minimal volume. Therefore, the process of the coordinate R decrease can be considered as
consecutive process of the transitions between maximal and minimal values of Salam’s barrier.
The unlocal structure of the Salam’s barrier leads to variation of the mass in the lateral
direction analogously to the longitudinal variation of the charge. Such variation is connected
with the correction factor in the relation (17). The value of this factor is connected with the
variation of the angular momentum.

It follows from the (16)

(m − mcc)cR = (1/6)(re/R)3e2/c;
(M − Mcc)cR = (1/6)(rp/R)3e2/c,

(

(28)

12

which shows that the angular moments (m − mcc)cR and (M − Mcc)cR do not depend on the
value R and are constant in the all range of changes of R. The variation of these moments
∆P only occurs with transition between layers re/R and rp/R. It is necessary to distinguish
the transitions between full gauge cycles (which correspond to two gauge cycles and full charge
+e) and the transitions in the inner area of the gauge cycles (which correspond to fractional
charge q).

The interior transitions are connected with the variation of the charge in the longitudinal
direction and with the quantity of the ratio (M − Mcc/(m − mcc) in the lateral one. Since
the values of re/R and rp/R do not change in whole Salam’s range, the variation ∆P at one
transition between layers is constant and the total variation ∆Pl at l transitions is

∆Pl = l∆P.

The total quantity of the number interior transitions l correspond to net charge +e. Then the
relation (29) shows that ∆P is compared to the some value of the elementary fractional charge
which is repeated in all interior transitions at the longitudinal direction. The some elementary
value of the ratio (M − Mcc)e/(m − mcc) (which is repeated at the lateral direction) is present
analogously to the fractional charge. Then the summary variation (M − Mcc)l/(m − mcc) is

(M − Mcc)l/(m − mcc) = l(M − Mcc)e/(m − mcc).

If one does not take into account the unlocal structure of Salam’s barrier, the quantity of
the transitions between states re/R + rp in full gauge cycle ( two gauge cycles) is equal to four.
In this case

(M − Mcc)l/(m − mcc) = 4(M − Mcc)/(m − mcc),

where (M − Mcc)/(m − mcc) corresponds to the value which is predicted by the relation (17).

It follows from (30) and (31)

(M − Mcc)/(m − mcc) = (l/4)(M − Mcc)e/(m − mcc).

The relation (32) shows that the correction factor in the ratio (17) is equal to l/4 and this

one is

(M − Mcc)/(m − mcc) = (l/4)(rp/R)3/(re/R)3.

The substitution of l = 6, the values (26) and (27) into the last relation leads to

(M − Mcc)/(m − mcc) = 1944

which will be satisfactory coordinated with the ratio of proton and electron rest masses. The
agreement can be even better if one takes into account that the diﬀerence ∼50 MeV can be
treated as total mass defect which can be spent on connection energy between nucleons.

Since the quantity (34) corresponds to the only value of l satisfying to (26) and (27), the
ratio of masses (34) deﬁnes the only particle p which can form the stationary pair with the
particle e. If the ratio is diﬀerent from (34), the geometrization principle is satisﬁed but the
condition (26) is violated. Therefore, such pairs can only form the quasi-stationary states which
have not the harmonic reiteration (for example, the systems µ+ + e− and e+ + e−).

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

13

The important conﬁrmation of the model correctness gives numerical deﬁnition of the varia-
tion of the angular momentum ∆P at one transition between layers re/R and rp/R. It is equal
to

∆P = (1/6)[(rp/R)3 − (re/R)3]e2/c
Inserting of the numbers of fundamental constants e = 4.803
according to relation (28).
·10−10CGSE, c = 2.998 ·1010cm/sec, the relations (26) and (27) into the last expression gives

(35)

The last value coincides accurate up to second sign after point with

∆P = 1.661 · 10−27erg/sec.

where ¯h is Plank’s constant (¯h = 1.054·10−27erg/sec). If one takes into account that two gauge
cycles correspond to four transitions between the layers (26) and (27) in the external area of R
variations, then the summary variation ∆Pgc is

∆P = (π/2)¯h,

∆Pgc = 2π¯h

in this area. The last expression shows good agreement not only in value of ¯h, but also in
angular correlations.

It is necessary to underline that the equality (38) takes place for the stationary pair of the

particles with the ratio of the rest masses being in agreement with the relation (34).

The important conﬁrmation of model correctness gives also numerical deﬁnition of the rest
mass variation at transition between the adjacent pairs of the gauge cycles.
It is necessary
to take into account the correction factor l/4 in the expression (33) in such procedure. The
constant of the gravitational interaction arises at the deﬁnition.

One can obtain with help of the expressions (21) and (22) the variation of the coordinate

R corresponding to two gauge cycles

Rk =

(rp/R)6
(re/R)6 Rk+2,

Rk+2 < Rk < R∞

where

and Rk → Rk+2 means the transition at two gauge cycles.

The ﬁrst equation (16) leads to the expression

(m − mcc)kc2 = (1/6)(4/l)(re/R)3e2/Rk.

for the state k (with account of the correction factor l/4 in the expression (33)) relative to the
state k + 2. The substitution of the relation (39) into the expression (41) with account of the
equality (26) gives

(m − mcc)kc2 =

γe2
Rk+2

,

14

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

where

1

γ =

6 · 1.5 · 68 = 6.61 · 10−8.

The value (43) coincides accurate up to second sign after point with the constant of the
gravitational interaction. It deﬁnes value (m−mcc)kc2 with decreasing R on value corresponding
to two gauge cycles. The coincidence shows that the potential stock of the energy Epl at
any space point can be considered as the stock of the energy of the gravitational interaction.
According to relations (4) and (10), it is deﬁned by

Epl = −(3/8)mv4/c2 − (5/16)mv6/c4 − ...

Such deﬁnition means that the relation (9) corresponds to

mv2 = mc2 + Epl,

(43)

(44)

(45)

which shows that the growth of the double quantity Ek occurs due to the decrease of the
potential energy Epl of the gravitational interaction.

Thus, the interaction with the potential energy Epl deﬁnes three fundamental interactions
- gravitational, electromagnetic and strong ones. It divides the whole area of the variations of
the coordinate R changes into three parts. The external part (in the right hand side from the
considered value Ri) corresponds to the electromagnetic interaction. It is connected with the
variation of the nonrelativistic kinetic energy of the particle e in the longitudinal direction. The
second part corresponds to the stock of the gravitational energy in the lateral direction. The
third part corresponds to the internal area of Salam’s barrier of the particle p. The interaction
of the fractional electrical charge with charge −e is signiﬁcant in this area. Therefore, it
corresponds to the strong interaction.

It is necessary to underline, that the value (43) is obtained by use of the value of re/R = 1
in the relation (41). The last one, only, corresponds to the interaction of the particle e with
the particle p, rest mass of which is determined by the ratio (34). If the rest mass of the one
is diﬀerent (the quasi-stationary pairs), the value of γ diﬀers from the experimental value of
the constant of the gravitatational interaction. It means, that the experimental value of the
gravitational constant corresponds to the gravitational ﬁeld which is formed in the interaction
of the electron with the proton. This conclusion can be of large interest. When quasi-stationary
particles (which can form the quasi-stationary pairs with the electrons) hit earthly atmosphere
(for example, the positrons at the higher sun activity) the areas of local infringements of the
gravitational ﬁeld with accompanying physical eﬀects can arise. This areas can serve as the
sources of the gravitational waves.

It is also necessary to underline another role of the particle e. The interaction with it deﬁnes
the stationary and quasi-stationary pairs of the particles for Salam’s range which is deﬁned by
the rest mass of the particle e. These pairs diﬀer by values of the quantum number l which is
deﬁned with the quantity of the transitions between layers re/R and rp/R. The possibility of
the classiﬁcation of the elementary particles, belonging to such range, arises there.

15

7 CONCLUSION

1. The gauge model of the fundamental interactions uniﬁcation is oﬀered. The model takes into
account the inﬂuence of the eﬀect of the rest mass compensation (Salam’s eﬀect) in the ﬁeld
equation of the energy conservation. The stationary solutions of this equation are considered.
The condition of the stationarity is ensured by the Salam’s barrier which is formed due to
the transformation of the rest mass of the particle into it’s energy. The barrier compensates
the inﬂuence of the external ﬁeld in the considered volume. The formal condition of the
compensation is the equality of the radii R and r in the spherical approximation. The radius R
deﬁnes the area of the interaction. This area is a sphere at the central interaction. The radius r
deﬁnes the eﬀective volume of Salam’s barrier which compensates the inﬂuence of the external
ﬁeld. The condition of the equality of the radii is the ﬁrst from two considered conditions.

2. The second condition is connected with the expansion of the relativistic kinetic energy
into McLoren’s series. The nonrelativistic kinetic energy Ek is the second term of this expan-
sion. The geometrization principle (variations of the ﬁeld potential energy should be equal to
variations of the Ek) is used for the separation of the inﬂuence of Ek from the inﬂuence of the
sum of the terms of Er3 with higher degrees. The execution of the geometrization principle is
the second condition of the model. It is shown, that the action of Salam’s eﬀect results in the
separation of the inﬂuence of the coordinates R and r. The inﬂuence of R is connected with
the longitudinal direction and the inﬂuence of r - with the lateral one. The sum Er3 deﬁnes,
at the lateral one, the stock of the ﬁeld energy which is transformated into Ek at the decrease
of R at the longitudinal one. The area of the variations of R is divided into three parts due to
this property. These parts are connected with the arrangement of the considered value of Ri
relative to R∞. The ﬁrst part is connected with the value of Ek relative to R∞. It is formed
due to the decrease of the terms quantity (relative to R∞) in Er3. The second part corresponds
to the quantity of this terms remaining in Er3 (relative to R∞) in the lateral direction. The
third part corresponds to the transformation of the remaining quantity of the terms into Ek in
the process of the decrease R < Ri.

3. Three parts of the variation of R lead to the gauge cycle consisting of three gauge
transitions. Two of them correspond to the longitudinal segments deﬁning the transformation
of Er3 to Ek in the right and left hand sides from Ri. The third transition corresponds to the
quantity of the transformated parts of Er3 in the lateral direction. The quantities of the gauge
transitions are connected with three functional dependences from the generalized coordinate
R. The ﬁrst one represents the dependence of the ﬁeld energy −Ep which is equal to the
potential energy on the absolute quantity, but has diﬀerent sign in the connected systems.
According to the geometrization principle, it deﬁnes the beginning and end of the gauge cycle.
The second and third dependences are similar to the curve −Ep and diﬀer from it by the
similarity coeﬃcient. They deﬁne beginning and end of the lateral segment corresponding to
the transformated parts of Er3.

4. Three mentioned above curves diﬀer from each other by the similarity coeﬃcient. It is
shown, that this one is deﬁned by the ratio r/R at Coulomb interaction of two particles with
electrical charge ±e. The double physical meaning is attributed to this ratio in the model.
On the one hand, it is connected with the curvature of the spatial representation of Salam’s

16

barrier. On the other hand, it characterizes the distribution of the barrier along the generalized
coordinate R (interaction radius) and consequently can be connected with the wave function
in its probability interpretation. The gauge transformations arise in this aspect as a result of
the periodic reccurence of the states with the same values of the ratio r/R. Three dependences
which were discussed above correspond to three layers with diﬀerent values of r/R.

5. The character of the reiteration of all values of r/R is important at the transitions between
adjacent gauge cycles. The beginning and end of the gauge cycle always correspond to the same
value of r/R = 61/3. This value corresponds to the curve −Ep and is connected with the second
condition of the model (execution of the geometrization principle). The quantities re/R and
rp/R, corresponding to two other functional dependences of the gauge cycle, are connected with
the ﬁrst condition of the model (the necessity of the compensation of the external ﬁeld inﬂuence
by the Salam’s barrier in the area of the interaction). These quantities are connected with the
internal structure of the gauge cycle. The beginning and end of the cycle are connected with
each other by three gauge transitions. At the same time, the quantity of such transitions is
equal to two at transitions between adjacent states re/R + rp/R. Therefore, such transition
can not be harmonic. The quantity of the gauge transitions have also to be equal to three
at the transitions between adjacent states re/R + rp/R. Then, the sequence of the stationary
states have the harmonic character. The variation of the quantity of the gauge transitions in
the interior of the gauge cycle divides the area of the coordinate R variation into the internal
and external parts. The variations of the angular momentum [m − mcc]cR and ([M − McccR])
correspond to whole charge +e at the interaction ±e in the external area. The variations of
these momenta correspond to the interaction of the charge −e with fractional charge +e/l in
the internal area (l - the quantity of the gauge transitions between adjacent states re/R+rp/R).
The variations of the charge occur on the longitudinal direction. The variations of the ratio
(M − Mcc)/(m − mcc) occur on the lateral one. The variations of this ratio and of the charge
correspond to the complex structure of Salam’s barrier around the particle which is become
localized in the layer p.

It is shown that the harmonic reiteration of all values r/R (in one gauge cycle) corresponds to
values of re/R = 1 and rp/R = 64/3. The ﬁrst relation shows that Salam’s barrier compensates
the inﬂuence of the external ﬁeld in the area of the interaction (the sphere with the radius R)
of the particle e (which become localized in the layer re/R) with the particle p (which become
localized in the layer rp/R). Therefore, the ﬁrst condition of the model is only executed in
case of the harmonic reiteration of all values of r/R. If the reiteration at transitions between
adjacent states re/R + rp/R is not harmonic, this condition is broken.

The whole charge +e of the particle p corresponds to execution of both conditions in case
of the harmonic reiteration. The states of the particle −e are stationary at the interaction
with the whole charge +e (external area of the gauge cycle) due to this property. The external
area corresponds to the electromagnetic interaction. As the internal area of the gauge cycle
corresponds to the interaction of the charge −e with fractional charge +e/l, this one corresponds
to the strong interaction.

The agreement between calculated values of the variations of the angular momentum and
the ratio of the rest masses of the proton and electron with their experimental values conﬁrms
the important role of two gauge conditions in the uniﬁcation of the fundamental interactions.

17

6. The potential energy Epl deﬁned by the relations (44) plays the special role in the
uniﬁcation mechanism. The agreement of the numerical deﬁnition of the variation of the rest
mass at the transition between adjacent stationary states with the constant of the graviational
interaction shows that this energy has the meaning of the potential energy of the gravitational
interaction.

The energy Epl divides the whole space of the variations of the coordinate R to external and
internal parts at any value of Ri. The electromagnetic interaction is predominant in the external
part. The internal part is the area of the strong interaction. The gravitational interaction raises
the electromagnetic and strong interactions in this aspect.

The energy Epl has the important property in the model. Since the quantity of the terms
in the series (4) decrease at the consecutive decrease of the coordinate R, the lower limit (of
the stationary interaction of the particle −e with the particle +e) exists. This formal limit
corresponds to one term (relative to R∞) in the series (4).

The preliminary results of this work are submitted in [9-11].

8 REFERENCES

1. A. Salam, Proc. XVIII Int. Conf. on Nucl. Phys., Tbilisy (1976), D1-2-10400, Dubna, v.2,
(1977), 91
2. L.D. Landau, E.M. Livshitz, Field Theory, Moscow, (1962), 97
3. H. Weyl, I.Z.Phys., v.56, (1929), 330-352
4. N. Rozen, J.Phys.Rev.,v.57,(1940), 147-153
5. A. Papapetrou, Proc.Roy.Irish Acad.,v.A52, (1948), 11-23
6. S. Gupta, Proc.Phys.Soc.,v.A65, (1952), 608-619
7. W. Thirring, Ann.of Phys.,v.16, (1961), 96-117
8. R. Penrose, W. Rindler, Spinors and space-time, Moscow,”World”, v. 1,(1987), 62
9. R. Ragachurin, ”Non-linear relativistic model charged elementary particle”, Preprints INP
(Tashkent), P7-208, v.1, (1986), 3-14; P7-243, v.2, (1986), 3-24; P7-293, v.3, (1987), 3-38; P7-
352, v.4, (1988), 3-46
10. R. Ragachurin, FB16 Book of Abstract, ed. by Chi-Yee Cheung and Shin-Nan Yang, Taipei
(2000), 241-242
11. R.G. Ragachurin, The Book of Abstracts of LI Meeting on Nuclear Spectroskopy and
Nuclear Structure, Sarov, (2001), 65-66

18

