2
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Field Theory Revisited

C. Piron

D´epartement de Physique Th´eorique, 24 quai Ernest-Ansermet, CH-1211 Gen`eve 4

Abstract: Following P. A. M. Dirac’s critique in “Lectures on Quantum Field Theory”
of the usual formalism, I will discuss the role of the time parameter to solve R. Haag’s
no-go theorem on the non-equivalence of the conventional Schr¨odinger picture and the
Heisenberg picture. This is possible by ﬁrst deﬁning in a correct way the concept of the
vacuum state at a given time in relativity. I will also discuss some consequences such as
the spectral condition.

We will take as our basic considerations P. A. M. Dirac’s beautiful lectures on Quan-
tum Field Theory delivered at the Yeshiva University during the academic year 1963 –
1964 and published by Academic Press in 1966(1). We will also suppose that the reader
knows the abstract Fock space construction as developed along the line introduced by D.
Kastler(2). In his lectures cited above Dirac writes [p.6]:

We have the kets at one particular time and we may picture them as corresponding
to physical states at that time, so we retain the concept of a physical state at a
certain time. We do not have the concept of a physical state throughout all time.
The latter concept, which lies at the basis of the Schr¨odinger picture, will not
occur in the present formulation.

This expresses exactly or point of view, where states are states at the actual time, and
the time is a c-number taking a well deﬁned value in any possible state. This is in marked
contrast to q-numbers, which have in general no values in any state. In spite of appearances,
the noncommutativity of the q-numbers is not the very essence of such physical objects.
In fact this depends on the mathematical formalism that you choose and its corresponding
interpretation. This can be seen very well in the Wigner representation of p and q . The
two objects commute with each other but the usual rules of quantum mechanics are here
completely modiﬁed and nevertheless in any given physical state p and q have no values.

The concept of a physical state throughout all time, a relativistic concept, is not a
state at all, it is a trajectory of states labeled by the time, and a solution of a Schr¨odinger
equation(3). But as Dirac demonstrates, such solutions do not exist for the physically
justiﬁed Hamiltonian for which the interaction is too violent at high frequencies.

To exhibit the diﬃculties and explain Dirac’s preference for the Heisenberg picture,
let us take the very simple example of a fermionic ﬁeld (non-self-interacting and non-
relativistic). Consider a one-particle problem is non-relativistic quantum mechanics. As
we know, such a system is described by a family of Hilbert spaces labeled by some c-number
α . In the most simple case α is just the time, which is as Dirac insists a c-number(4). In
the general formalism(5), each physical observable is described by a family of self adjoint

1

operators or better by a the corresponding spectral families. According to G. W. Mackey,
the observables p, q, t are solutions of the imprimitivity systems based on the kinematic
group of rotations and translations of ~p, ~q and t and we have the following representation :

I

q :

p :

t :

{qt = x}

{ pt = −i¯h∂x }

{tt = tI}

This representation is called the Schr¨odinger representation since the time t does not
appear explicitly in the operators describing p and q and more precisely it is the represen-
tation in the ~q variable (with diagonal q).

As we have said, the state is the state at a given time t and it is described by a ray
ϕt(x) in the Hilbert space Ht , the isomorphism which corresponds to the translation of
time in the imprimitivity relations is a passive translation which allows the comparison
between ϕt(x) in Ht and ϕt+τ (x) in Ht+τ , it is not the evolution which is an active
translation from t to t + τ . But such passive translations give meaning to the Schr¨odinger
equation

idtϕt(x) = Htϕt(x)

(1)

where Ht is the Schr¨odinger operator which is self adjoint when the evolution is induced
by a unitary transformation. In this particular case we can change from the Schr¨odinger
representation to the corresponding Heisenberg representation. For example:

The Heisenberg representation for the free particle

{ qt = x + 1

m (−i¯h∂x)t }

{ pt = −i¯h∂x}

{tt = tI}

II

III

q :

p :

t :

q :

p :

t :

The Heisenberg representation for the harmonic oscillator

{qt = cos ωt x + 1

mω sin ωt(−i¯h∂x) }
{ pt = cos ωt(−i¯h∂x) − mω sin ωt x }

{tt = t I}

We go from the Schr¨odinger to the Heisenberg representation by a unitary transformation
labeled by t but acting in each Hilbert space separately :

i

¯h ( 1

2m p2

)t

e

i

¯h ( 1

2m p2

+ mω

2 q2

)t

e

(I)−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→(II)

(I)−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→(III)

To be able to apply the resources of functional analysis we have to restrict ϕt(x) for
each t to be in S(R3) , the subspace of smooth functions of rapid decrease. But this is

2

not enough, we have to consider also a bigger space H = R⊕ Htdt and restrict ourselves to
ϕ(t, x) ∈ S(R4) . In this context, the solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation (1) are in fact
in S′(R4) and the operator K = i∂t − Ht acting on such H has continuous spectrum from
−∞ to ∞ . The Schr¨odinger solution must be interpreted as a generalised eigenvector for
the eigenvalue 0:

Kϕ(t, x) = 0

(2)

Consequently, in H the operator K is unitarily equivalent to the ‘trivial one’ i∂t . It is
only in this bigger space H that we can give a meaning to relativistic covariance, but we
have to interpret everything at a given time t0 and as Dirac explains [p.6]:

For example, take the equation α(t0)|A > = a|A > where a is a number. If we had
that equation, we could say that |A > represents the state at time t0 for which
the dynamical variable α at time t0 certainly has the value a.

Such an interpretation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors is exactly the one that we have
always given.

Knowing the description of the one-particle states, we can deﬁne the N -particle states
by the Fock construction, for each value of the c-number t we can build the Fock space
F (Ht), the space ⊕n(Ht)⊗n after symmetrisation or antisymmetrisation, and the cor-
responding creation and annihilation operators a†(ϕt) and a(ϕt) . By taking the direct
integral you can then construct a bigger Fock space, once again the good space in which
to implement the relativistic covariance. This gives the beginnings of a new ﬁeld theory.

Let us conclude with some remarks on such a revisited ﬁeld theory.

• In complete analogy with the notion introduced by Dirac [p.147], at each time t we can
deﬁne the vacuum |0t > by the condition that a(ϕt)|0t > = 0 for any a(ϕt) . Obviously
such a family |0t > is not unique (any e⊂α(t) |0t > is another solution), it is even not
normalisable being in fact in S′(R) . Such a vacuum diﬀers very drastically from the
usual concept and here in may cases (in particular the examples given above) the
Heisenberg and Schr¨odinger representations are unitarily equivalent.

• The usual spectral condition must be modiﬁed. Here the operator of the generator
corresponding to the time-translation evolution is unbounded in both directions but
degenerate starting from some lower bound in energy.

• The q-number parts of the ﬁeld are not just q-number Schwartz distributions but q-
number de Rham currents(6), which means, among other things, that that the test
functions must be replaced by the one-particle state functions in S(R4) .

• The usual relativistic dynamical covariance of the Poincar´e group deﬁnes isomor-
phisms of the Hilbertian structure of the global property lattice which, in general, are
implemented by non-unitary and non-irreducible representations due to the fact that
the Poincar´e group acts also on the c-number part of the ﬁeld(7).

3

REFERENCES

(1) P. A. M. Dirac “Lectures of Quantum Field Theory” Academic Press, New York, 1966

(2) D. Kastler “Introduction `a l’´electrodynamique quantique” Dunod, Paris, 1961

and also “Superquantiﬁcation et alg`ebre multilin´eaire” in Application de la th´eorie
des champs `a la physique du solide Association Vaudoise des Chercheurs en Physique,
Lausanne, 1964

(3) C. Piron “M´ecanique quantique bases et applications” Presses polytechniques et uni-

versitaires romandes, Lausanne, 1998, ch.6

(4) See also W. Pauli “General Principles of Quantum Mechanics” Springer-Verlag, New

York, 1980, p.63

(5) C. Piron “M´ecanique quantique bases et applications” Presses polytechniques et uni-

versitaires romandes, Lausanne, 1998, ch.3

(6) G. de Rham “Vari´et´es diﬀ´erentiables” Hermann, Paris, 1960, §§8 and 31– 32

(7) G. C. D’Emma “On quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld” Helvetica Physica Acta

53 (1980) 535-551

4

