2
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
4
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Nature of Space Time

B.G. Sidharth
Centre for Applicable Mathematics & Computer Sciences
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

We ﬁrst examine the approximation involved in the conventional
diﬀerentiable spacetime manifold. We then analyse how, going be-
yond this approximation, we reach the non commutative spacetime
of recent approaches. It is shown that this provides the rationale for
El Naschie’s transﬁnite Cantorian spacetime. The nature and form
of the consequent Generalized Uncertainity Principle is also brieﬂy
investigated.

1 Introduction

All of Classical Physics and Quantum Theory, is based on the Minkowski
spacetime, as for example in the case of Quantum Field Theory, or Reiman-
nian spacetime as in the case of General Relativity. In the non relativistic the-
ories, Newtonian spacetime, is used, which is a special case of Minkowskian
spacetime. But in all these cases the common denominator is that we are
dealing with a diﬀerentiable manifold.
This breaks down however in Quantum Gravity, String Theory and more re-
cent approaches, be it at the Planck scale, or at the Compton scale[1, 2, 3, 4].
The underlying reason for this breakdown of a diﬀerentiable spacetime man-
ifold is the Uncertainty Principle– as we go down to arbitrarily small space-
time intervals, we encounter arbitrarily large energy momenta. As Wheeler
put it[5], ”no prediction of spacetime, therefore no meaning for spacetime is

0Email:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in

1

the verdict of the Quantum Principle. That object which is central to all of
Classical General Relativity, the four dimensional spacetime geometry, sim-
ply does not exist, except in a classical approximation.” Before proceeding
to analyse the nature of spacetime beyond the classical approximation, let
us ﬁrst analyse brieﬂy the nature of classical spacetime itself.

2 The ”Classical” Approximation

We can get an insight into the nature of the usual spacetime by considering
the well known formulation of Quantum Theory in terms of stochastic pro-
cesses [6, 7, 8, 9]. This will also facilitate subsequent considerations.
In the stochastic or Nelsonian theory, we deal with a double Weiner process
ıU. It is this complex velocity that
which leads to a complex velocity V
−
leads to Quantum Theory from the usual diﬀusion theory (Cf.[7] for details).
To see this in a simple way, let us write the usual diﬀusion equation as

Equation (1) can be rewritten as the usual Quantum Mechanical relation,

∆x

∆x =

∆t

ν∆t

h
m

≡

·

m

∆x
∆t ·

∆x = h = ∆p

∆x

·

(1)

(2)

We are dealing here, with phenomena within the Compton or de Broglie
wavelength.
We now treat the diﬀusion constant ν to be very small, but non vanishing.
That is, we consider the semi classical case. This is because, a purely classical
description, does not provide any insight.
It is well known that in this situation we can use the WKB approximation.
In this case the right hand side of the representation of the Nelsonian wave
function,

goes over to, in the one dimensional case, for simplicity,

ψ = √ρeı/¯hS

(px)− 1
2 e

1
h

p(x)dx

Z

2

so that we have, on comparison,

ρ =

1
px

ν

ln(√ρ)

· ∇

0

≈

ρ being the probability density. In this case the condition U
velocity potential becoming real, implies

≈

0, that is, the

This semi classical analysis suggests that √ρ is a slowly varying function
of x, infact each of the factors on the left side of (4) would be
0(h), so
0(h2) (which is being neglected). Then from (3) we
that the left side is
conclude that px is independent of x, or is a slowly varying function of x.
The equation of continuity now gives

∼

∼

∂ρ
∂t

+ ~
∇

(ρ~v) =

= 0

∂ρ
∂t

That is the probability density ρ is independent or nearly so, not only of x,
but also of t. We are thus in a stationary and homogenous scenario. This
is strictly speaking, possible only in a single particle universe, or for a com-
pletely isolated particle, without any eﬀect of the environment. Under these
circumstances we have the various conservation laws and the time reversible
theory, all this taken over into Quantum Mechanics as well. This is an ap-
proximation valid for small, incremental changes, as indeed is implicit in the
concept of a diﬀerentiable space time manifold.
Infact the well known displacement operators of Quantum Theory which de-
ﬁne the energy momentum operators are legitimate and further the energy
and momenta are on the same footing only under this approximation[10].
We would now like to point out the well known close similarity between the
Nelsonian formulation mentioned above (Cf.(1) and (2) and the hydrody-
namical formulation for Quantum Mechanics, which also leads to identical
equations on writing the wave function as above. These two approaches were
reconciled by considering quantized vortices at the Compton scale (Cf.[11, 9]).
To proceed further, we start with the Schrodinger equation

(3)

(4)

(5)

ı¯h

∂ψ
∂t

=

¯h2
2m ∇

−

2ψ + V ψ

3

Remembering that for momentum eigen states we have, for simplicity, for
one dimension

¯h
ı

∂
∂x

ψ = pψ

where p is the momentum or p/m is the velocity v, we take the derivative
with respect to x (or ~x) of both sides of (5) to obtain, on using (6),

ı¯h

∂(vψ)
∂t

=

¯h2
2m∇

−

2(vψ) +

ψ + V vψ

∂V
∂x

We would like to compare (7) with the well known equation for the velocity
in hydrodynamics[12], following from the Navier-Stokes equation,

(6)

(7)

(8)

ρ

∂v
∂t

=

p
−∇

−

ραT g + µ

2v

∇

In (8) v is a small perturbational velocity in otherwise stationary ﬂow between
parallel plates separated by a distance d, p is a small pressure, ρ is the density
of the ﬂuid T is the temperature proportional to Q(z)v, µ is the Navier-stokes
coeﬃcient and α is the coeﬃcient of volume expansion with temperature.
Also required would be

v itself is given by

vz = W (z)exp(σt + ıkxx + ıkyy),

(9)

z being the coordinate perpendicular to the ﬂuid ﬂow.
We can now see the parallel between equations (7) and (8). To verify the
identiﬁcation we would require that the dimensionless Rayleigh number

should have an analogue in (7) which is dimensionless, κ, ν being the ther-
mometric conductivity and viscocity.
Remembering that

∆T
d

.

β

≡

R =

αβgd4
κν

h
m

ν

∼

4

and

∼
where λ is the Compton wavelength in the above theory (Cf.[9] for details)
and further we have

d

λ

for the identiﬁcation between the hydrostatic energy and the energy V of
Quantum Mechanics, it is easy using (10) and earlier relations to show that
the analogue of R is

ρ

f (z)g = V

∝

(c2/λ2)

λ4

(m/h)2

·

·

(10)

(11)

The expression (11) indeed is dimensionless and of order 1. Thus the math-
ematical identiﬁcation is complete.
Before proceeding, let us look at the physical signiﬁcance of the above con-
siderations (Cf.[13] for a graphic description.) Under conditions of stationery
ﬂow, when the diiﬀerence in the temperature between the two plates is negli-
gible there is total translational symmetry, as in the case of the displacement
operators of Quantum Theory. But when there is a small perturbation in
the velocity (or equivalently the temperature diﬀerence), then beyond a crit-
ical value the stationarity and homogeneity of the ﬂuid is disrupted, or the
symmetry is broken and we have the phenomena of the formation of Benard
cells, which are convective vortices and can be counted. This infact is the
”birth” of space (Cf.[13] for a detailed description).
In the context of the above identiﬁcation, the Benard cells would correspond
to the formation of quantized vortices, which latter had been discussed in
detail in the literature (Cf.[9] and [14]). This transition would correspond
to the ”formation” of spacetime. As discussed in detail in [9] these quan-
tized vortices can be identiﬁed with elementary particles, in particular the
electrons. Interestingly, Einstein himself considered electrons as condensates
from a background electromagnetic ﬁeld[15].
However in order to demonstrate that the above quantized vortex formation
is not a mere mathematical analogy, we have to show that the critical value of
the wave number k in the expression for the velocity in the hydrodynamical
ﬂow (9) is the same as the critical value of the quantized vortex length. In
terms of the dimensionless wave number k′ = k/d, this critical value is given
by[12]

k′
c ∼

1

5

In the case of the quantized vortices at the Compton scale l, remembering
that d is identiﬁed with l itself we have,

l′
c(

)k′

≡

c ∼

1,

exactly as required.
In this connection it may be mentioned that due to ﬂuctuations in the Zero
Point Field or the Quantum vaccuum, there would be ﬂuctuations in the
metric given by[5]

∆g
10−33cms and l is a small interval under
where lP is the Planck length
consideration. At the same time the ﬂuctuation in the curvature of space
would be given by

lP /l

∼

∼

∆R

lP /l3

∼
Normally these ﬂuctuations are extremely small but as discussed in detail
elsewhere[16], this would imply that at the Compton scale of a typical el-
10−11cms, the ﬂuctuation in the curvature would be
ementary particle l
1. This is symptomatic of the formation of what we have termed above as

∼
quantized vortices.
Further if a typical time interval between the formation of such quantized
vortices which are the analogues of the Benard cells is τ , in this case the
Compton time, then as in the theory of the Brownian Random Walk[17], the
mean time extent would be given by

∼

where N is the number of such quantized vortices or elementary particles
(Cf.also [9, 11]). It is quite remarkable that the equation (12) holds good
1017secs and
for the universe itself because T the age of the universe
∼
1080, τ being the Compton time
N the number of elementary particles
10−23secs. Interestingly, this nature of time would automatically make it

∼
irreversible, unlike the conventional model in which time is reversible.
It may be mentioned that an equation similar to (12) can be deduced by the
same arguments for space extension also and this time we get the well known
Eddington formula viz.,

∼

(12)

(13)

√N τ

T

∼

√N l

R

∼

6

where R is the radius of the universe and l is the Compton wavelength.
Further starting from (12) one can work out a whole scheme of what may be
called ﬂuctuational cosmology, in which not just the Eddington formula (13)
above, but also all the other supposedly mysterious and inexplicable large
number relations of Dirac and the Weinberg formula relating the mass of the
pion to the Hubble Constant can be deduced theoretically. Furthermore, this
cosmology predicts an ever expanding and accelerating universe, as is now
recognised to be the case (Cf.[18, 9] for details).
Once we recognize the minimum space time extensions, then we immediately
are lead to an underlying non commutative geometry given by[9],

[x, y] = 0(l2), [x, px] = ı¯h[1 + 0(l2)], [t, E] = ı¯h[1 + 0(τ 2)

(14)

As was shown a long time ago, relations like (14) are Lorentz invariant. At
this stage we recognise the nature of spacetime as given by (14) in contrast to
the stationary and homogeneous spacetime discussed earlier. Witten[19] has
called this Fermionic spacetime as contrasted to the usual spacetime, which
he terms Bosonic. Indeed one could show the origins of the Dirac equation
of the electron from (14). We could also argue that (14) provides the long
sought after reconciliation between electromagnetism and gravitation[20, 21].
The usual diﬀerentiable spacetime geometry can be obtained from (14) if l2
is neglected, and this is the approximation that has been implicit.

3 Cantorian Spacetime and Metric

Thus spacetime is a collection of such cells or elementary particles very much
in the spirit of El Naschie’s Cantorian spacetime[22, 23, 24]. As pointed out
earlier, this spacetime emerges from a homogeneous stationary non spacetime
when the symmetry is broken, through random processes. The question that
comes up then is, what is the metric which we use? This has been touched
upon earlier, and we will examine it again.
We ﬁrst makes a few preliminary remarks. When we talk of a metric or
the distance between two ”points” or ”particles”, a concept that is implicit
is that of topological ”nearness” - we require an underpinning of a suit-
ably large number of ”open” sets[25]. Let us now abandon the absolute or
background space time and consider, for simplicity, a universe (or set) that
consists solely of two particles. The question of the distance between these

7

particles (quite apart from the question of the observer) becomes meaning-
less. Indeed, this is so for a universe consisting of a ﬁnite number of particles.
For, we could isolate any two of them, and the distance between them would
have no meaning. We can intuitiively appreciate that we would infact need
distances of intermediate or more generally, other points.
In earlier work[26], motivated by physical considerations we had considered a
series of nested sets or neighbourhoods which were countable and also whose
union was a complete Hausdorﬀ space. The Urysohn Theorem was then in-
voked and it was shown that the space of the subsets was metrizable. The
argument went something like this.
In the light of the above remarks, the concepts of open sets, connectedness
and the like reenter in which case such an isolation of two points would not
be possible.
More formally let us deﬁne a neighbourhood of a particle (or point or ele-
ment) A of a set of particles as a subset which contains A and atleast one
other distinct element. Now, given two particles (or points) or sets of points
A and B, let us consider a neighbourhood containing both of them, n(A, B)
say. We require a non empty set containing atleast one of A and B and atleast
one other particle C, such that n(A, B)
n(A, C), and so on. Strictly, this
”nested” sequence should not terminate. For, if it does, then we end up
with a set n(A, P ) consisting of two isolated ”particles” or points, and the
”distance” d(A, P ) is meaningless.
We now assume the following property[26]: Given two distinct elements (or
even subsets) A and B, there is a neighbourhood NA1 such that A belongs
to NA1, B does not belong to NA1 and also given any NA1, there exists a
neighbourhood NA 1
NA1, that is there exists an inﬁ-
NA 1
nite topological closeness.
From here, as in the derivation of Urysohn’s lemma[25], we could deﬁne a
mapping f such that f (A) = 0 and f (B) = 1 and which takes on all inter-
mediate values. We could now deﬁne a metric, d(A, B) =
f (A)
. We
could easily verify that this satisﬁes the properties of a metric.
With the same motivation we will now deduce a similar result, but with dif-
ferent conditions. In the sequel, by a subset we will mean a proper subset,
which is also non null, unless speciﬁcally mentioned to be so. We will also
consider Borel sets, that is the set itself (and its subsets) has a countable
covering with subsets. We then follow a pattern similar to that of a Cantor

such that A

f (B)

2 ⊂

⊂

−

⊂

|

|

2

8

→ ∞

an element of the set N as m

ternary set [25, 27]. So starting with the set N we consider a subset N1 which
is one of the members of the covering of N and iterate this process so that
N12 denotes a subset belonging to the covering of N1 and so on.
We note that each element of N would be contained in one of the series of
subsets of a sub cover. For, if we consider the case where the element p be-
longs to some N12···m but not to N1,2,3···m+1, this would be impossible because
the latter form a cover of the former. In any case as in the derivation of the
Cantor set, we can put the above countable series of sub sets of sub covers
in a one to one correspondence with suitable sub intervals of a real interval
(a, b).
Case I
If N1,2,3···m →
, that is if the set is closed,
we would be establishing a one to one relationship with points on the interval
(a, b) and hence could use the metric of this latter interval, as seen earlier.
Case II
It is interesting to consider the case where in the above iterative countable
process, the limit does not tend to an element of the set N, that is set N is
not closed and has what we may call singular points. We could still truncate
the process at N1,2,3···m for some m > L arbitrary and establish a one to one
relationship between such truncated subsets and arbitrarily small intervals
in a, b. We could still speak of a metric or distance between two such arbi-
itrarily small intervals.
This case is of interest because of recent work which describes elementary
particles as, what may be called Quantum Mechanical Kerr-Newman Black
Holes or vortices, where we have a length of the order of the Compton wave-
length as seen in the previous section, within which spacetime as we know it
breaksdown. Such cut oﬀs as seen lead to a non commutative geometry (14)
and what may be called fuzzy spaces[28, 29, 4].(We note that the centre of
the vortex is a singular point). In any case, the number of particles in the
universe is of the order 1080, which approxiimates inﬁnity from a physicist’s
point of view.
Interestingly, we usually consider two types of inﬁnite sets - those with cardi-
nal number n corresponding to countable inﬁnities, and those with cardinal
number c corresponding to a continuum, there being nothing inbetween. This
is the well known but unproven Continuum Hypotheses.
What we have shown with the above process is that it is possible to concieve
an intermediate possibility with a cardinal number np, p > 1.

9

We also note again the similarity with El Naschie’s transﬁnite Cantor sets.
In the above considerations three properties are important: the set must be
closed i.e. it must contain all its limit points, perfect i.e. in addition each of
its points must be a limit point and disconnected i.e. it contains no nonnull
open intervals. Only the ﬁrst was invoked in Case I.

4 The Generalized Uncertainity Principle

In theories of Quantum Gravity and also String Theory we encounter what
may be called the Generalized Uncertainity Principle

∆x

≥

¯h
∆p

+ α

∆p
¯h

·

This is symptomatic of the non zero spacetime extension, and indeed also
follows from (14). This could be construed to imply a correction to the
velocity of light as has been noted in the literature. It could also be taken
0(l2) (Cf.ref.[9] for
to be a correction to the Einstein mass-energy formula
details).
A more complete picture emerges from the following simple model of a one
dimensional lattice, the points being spaced a length l apart. In this case the
energy, as is known, can be shown to be given by

∼

mc2cos(αl)

E

∼

where α is proportional to the wave number.
A comparison with results following from (14) or (15) shows that the latter
are truncated versions of (16), truncated

0(l2).

∼

(15)

(16)

References

[1] D. Ameti in ”Sakharov Memorial Lectures”, Eds., L.V. Kaddysh and

N.Y. Feinberg, Nova Science, New York, 1992, pp.455ﬀ.

[2] A. Kempf, ”From the Planck Length to the Hubble Radius”, Ed. A.

Zichichi, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2000, pp.613ﬀ.

10

[3] B.G. Sidharth, ”Spin and Non Commutativity” to appear in Chaos,

Solitons and Fractals.

[4] J. Madore, Class.Quantum Grav. 9, 1992, p.69-87.

[5] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, ”Gravitation”, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, 1973, pp.819ﬀ.

[6] E. Nelson, Physical Review, Vol.150, No.4, October 1966, p.1079-1085.

[7] L. Nottale, ”Fractal Space-Time and Microphysics: Towards a Theory

of Scale Relativity”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1993, p.312.

[8] B.G. Sidharth, ”Concise Encyclopaedia of Super Symmetry and Non
Commutative Structures in Mathematics and Physics”, Eds. J. Bagger,
S. Dupliz and W. Siegel, Kluwer Academic, New York, 2001.

[9] B.G. Sidharth, ”Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science Publishers, New York, 2001, p.20.

[10] A.S. Davydov, ”Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1965,

p.655.

[11] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 12(2001), p.173-178.

[12] A. Rai Choudhuri, ”The Physics of Fluids and Plasma”, Cambridge

University Press, 1999, pp.137.

[13] G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, ”Exploring Complexity”, W.H. Freeman,

New York, 1989, p.10.

[14] R. Vasudevan, ”Hydrodynamical Formulation of Quantum Mechanics”,
in ”Perspectives in Theoretical Nuclear Physics”, Ed.Srinivas Rao, K.,
and Satpathy, L., Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1994, pp.216ﬀ.

[15] L. Castell, in ”Quantum Theory and Gravitation”, Ed., Marlow, A.R.,

Academic Press, New York, 1980, pp.147ﬀ.

[16] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J. of Mod.Phys.A 13(15), 1998, pp2599ﬀ.

[17] F. Reif, ”Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics”, McGraw

Hill, Singapore, 1965.

11

[18] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Th.Phys., 37 (4), 1998, p.1307ﬀ.

[19] W. Witten, Physics Today, April 1996, pp.24-30.

[20] B.G. Sidharth, Il Nuovo Cimento, 116B (6), 2001, pg.4 ﬀ.

[21] B.G Sidharth, ”A Reconciliation of Electromagnetism and Gravitation”,

to appear in Annales de Fondation De Broglie, in press.

[22] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, Vol.10, No.11, 1999,

pp.1947-1954.

518.

[23] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, Vol.7, No.4, 1996, pp.499-

[24] M.S. El Naschie, Int.J.Th.Phys., Vol.37, No.12, 1998, pp.2935-2951.

[25] G.F. Simmons, ”Introduction to Topology and Modern Analysis”, Mc-

Graw Hill Book Co. Inc., New York, 1965, p.135.

[26] M.V. Altaisky and B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, Vol. 10,

No.2-3, 1999, pp.167-176.

[27] D. Gullick, ”Encounters With Chaos”, McGraw Hill, New York, 1997,

p.114ﬀ.

[28] B.G. Sidharth, Gravitation and Cosmology, 4 (2) (14), 1998, p.158ﬀ.

[29] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 11(2000), p.1269-1278.

12

