2
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
0
5
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Origin of Life in the Universe

B.G. Sidharth∗
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

We brieﬂy examine the question of the origin of life, both terrestrial
and extraterrestrial, in the light of latest ﬁndings and point out that
the data is consistent with a dual mode origin: Some of the ingredients
including possibly sugars being brought to earth from outer space
which together with other ingredients for example proteins already
present on the earth would lead to the formation of life.

1 Introduction

We all know broadly what life is, but even today it is diﬃcult to give a precise
deﬁnition. An extreme example from the inanimate world of something which
resembles life is the case of certain crystals which can replicate or reproduce.
But life means a lot more - for example growth and metabolism and all
this within the context of an interaction with the environment. An extreme
example from the low end of the animate world is that of a virus. As of today
it is very diﬃcult to precisely bridge the apparently narrow gap between the
inanimate and the animate. Apart from these nuances a question that arises
is, how did life originate in the ﬁrst place?

2 The Origins of Life

In the above context, the discovery of Friedrich Wohler in the nineteenth
Century that Urea which is so interlinked with living creatures could be

0∗Email:birlasc@hd1.vsnl.net.in; birlard@ap.nic.in

1

made in the laboratory with inanimate chemical reactions was a crucial ﬁrst
step. Was it then possible that life itself could have evolved on the earth,
through a fortuitous combination of circumstances combined with ordinary
chemical reactions?
Actually, broadly three substances are crucial for living creatures. These are
carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Carbohydrates are basically carbon com-
pounds with water. These include sugars which can be found for example in
fruits, honey and even certain vegetables. They play a role in the storage of
energy. Fats are long chain molecules, which include waxes and oils. They
form (nearly insoluble) suspensions in water and coalesce to form distinct
units. This helps in the formation of cells[1]. Finally, proteins are highly
complex molecules containing linked amino-acids, containing compounds of
Nitrogen and Hydrogen. The three together form the cells of living creatures,
including plants and micro organisms.
More speciﬁcally living organisms consist of cells. Each cell has a small nu-
cleus surrounded by a larger block of material, the Cytoplasm. The nucleus
consists of long molecular threads or chromosomes, which issue instructions
to the Cytoplasm to produce other complex organic molecules required for life
processes like growth and survival. The chromosomes themselves are made
up of long molecular chains or nucleic acids, which themselves are made up
of four diﬀerent kinds of smaller units called nucleotides, for example the
DNA. The Cytoplasm on the other hand consists of long molecular chains,
proteins, which themselves are made up of twenty diﬀerent combinations of
smaller molecular chains called the amino acids. The nucleotides and the
amino acids are the basic building blocks. They are made up of about thirty
electrically bound atoms of Hydrogen, Carbon, Nitrogen and Oxygen.
Scientists realised that for life to form on the earth, ﬁrst amino acids, sugars
and other complex molecules needed to be present. These are born out of
various chemical reactions. Next these materials had to become proteins, and
what we call today nucleic acids. It was believed that the relatively warm
seas and oceans of the earth were the container for this chemistry, in which
living cells ﬁnally developed. These in turn would use sun light to split water
molecules, and would also capture carbon dioxide to synthesise glucose. In
the process they would release Oxygen into the atmosphere.
The all important question was, could the amino acids and sugars have been
formed on the earth? The answer came in the 1950s when Harold Urey
and Stanley Miller of the University of Chicago subjected various gases such

2

as Ammonia, Methane, Hydrogen and Water vapour to lightning ﬂashes[2].
This resulted in the building up of four of the twenty common amino acids
in proteins. These experiments have since been reﬁned and conﬁrmed. So it
is generally accepted that a few billion years ago given the right conditions,
life evolved from the seas and oceans on the earth.
However, in the nineteenth Century itself, there was speculation that ready
made life came down to earth from outer space. There were a few variants of
this theme. For example life could have been brought down to earth by radio
waves. This theory was called Radiopanspermia. Another line of thinking
was that life could have been transported from outer space by Meteorites, a
theory that went by the name, lithopanspermia.
In more recent times the extraterrestrial origin of life has received some sup-
port, though it remains a minority view. One interesting rationale for this
view is that evidence from fossilised rocks in Greenland points to microscopic
forms of life as early as about a billion years after the formation of the earth.
It could be argued that this time span is much too short to provide the rather
special circumstances for the formation of living organisms.
On the other hand it is interesting that complex molecules have been found
in interstellar space, for example in the cool dust clouds of the Orion Nebula
and in the constellation of Sagittarius. Observations with telescopes, spec-
trascopes, radio telescopes and even orbiting observatories have conﬁrmed
the presence of molecules like Methyl Cyanide, Water vapour, Formal De-
hyde, Methyl Alcohol and even the potable Ethyl Alcohol. Clearly there are
certain organic molecules in the cool dust clouds spread across outer space.
In any case the vast life span of the universe and its great variety in diﬀerent
parts provides a stage where it is plausible that primitive life forms could
have been synthesised.
Based on these considerations Sir Fred Hoyle and Prof. Chandra Wickra-
masinghe have proposed[3] that life has been transported to the earth from
outer space. Such life forms could have been delivered to the earth through
debris of comets. These comets which inhabit the cool and dark regions of
the Solar System do contain the building blocks of life. There is increasing
evidence through spectroscopic, space craft and even laboratory examina-
tions of debris fallen on the earth, that the frozen dirty ice balls, as comets
have been characterised contain not just molecular compounds of Carbon,
Hydrogen, Nitrogen and Oxygen, but also even more complicated sugar re-
lated substances. Latest studies at NASA’s Ames Research Centre point to

3

the presence of polyhydroxilated compounds.
Interestingly a few years ago samples of a Meteorite, found in Antarctica
and believed to have been ejected from Mars some 3.5 billion years ago, were
independently examined by NASA and a team from England. Traces of fos-
silised micro organisms were reported.
This conclusion if ﬁnally reconﬁrmed and accepted would have exciting im-
plications: there would have been life on Mars some 3.5 billion years ago, at
about the same time that life is believed to have surfaced on the earth. This
would then point to a common origin - for example through transportation
by cometary debris.
In any case, the latest ﬁndings of sugar related compounds and other complex
molecules in meteoritic and cometary objects would also support a sugges-
tion by the author some years ago, that infact the formation of life on the
earth could have been triggered by a dual process: some of these molecules
possibly sugars, but not yet living organisms being transported to the earth,
and then further biochemical reactions taking place on the earth itself with
for example proteins [4]. Such a hybrid view for the origin of life is consistent
with observation and experiment.

3 Life Elsewhere

Going beyond the question of life on earth itself, it is generally accepted that
there could be millions, if not billions of other candidates in the universe for
harbouring life. Life as we know it can survive not in the hot interior of
stars, nor in the frozen outer reaches of interstellar space, but more likely on
planet like objects attached to stars. Such objects would be neither too hot
nor too cold, and they could have gaseous atmospheres, all of which could
support life. In recent years there has been direct and indirect evidence for
such planetary systems, and most recently it appears that atleast one of these
extra solar planets even has an atmosphere. We are severely handicapped
with the very limited reach of our observations. Hopefully the European
Space Agency’s spacecraft GAIA[5], which could be launched in 2010-11
would scan hundreds of samples and would provide more deﬁnitive answers.

References

4

[1] J. Brooks, ”Origins of Life”, Lion, Michigan, 1985.

[2] C.A. Ronan, ”Deep Space”, Macmillan, London, 1982.

[3] F. Hoyle, ”The Intelligent Universe”, Mermaid Books, London, 1983.

[4] B.G. Sidharth, in ”News Time”, March 29, 1996.

[5] G. Gilmore, ”Astronomy and Geophysics”, 42(g), October, 2001.

5

