TO QUANTIZE OR NOT TO QUANTIZE
GRAVITY ?

AFSAR ABBAS
Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar-751005, India
(e-mail : afsar@iopb.res.in)

Abstract

It is shown here that the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics sup-
ports the view that gravity need not be quantized. It is shown that the SM
gives a consistent description of the origin of the universe. It is guggested
that the universe came into existence when the SM symmetry was broken
spontaneously. This brings out a complete and consistent model of the phys-
ical universe in the framework of a ”semiclassical quantum gravity” theory.

2
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
0
5
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

To quantize or not to quantize gravity, is one of the outstanding ques-
tions facing physics today. Though there is still no compelling empirical ev-
idence supporting quantization, the current theoretical prejudice is strongly
in favour of the latter possibilty. Here it shall however be shown that the
most succesful model of particle physics, the so-called Standard Model ( SM
), supports the former view and infact gives a consistent and complete basis
for the ” semiclassical quantum gravity ” idea of Rosenfeld [1].

As the universe expands, it is predicted that it undergoes a series of
phase transitions [2] during which the appropriate symmetry breakes down
in various stages until it reaches the stage of the SM symmetry SU(3)c ⊗
SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)Y . After t ∼ 10−10 seconds ( at T ∼ 102 GeV ) the SM phase
transition to SU(3)c ⊗ U(1)em through the Higgs Mechanism takes place.

The SM has been well studied in the laboratory. It is the best tested model
of particle physics [3]. It was however believed earlier that a weaknesses of
the SM was that the electric charge was not quantized in it. However, it was
as late as 1990 that this was shown to be wrong. Against all expectations,
the electric charge was shown to be fully and consistently quantized in the
SM [4].

It was shown by the author [4,5] that in SM SU(NC) ⊗ SU(2)L × U(1)Y
for NC = 3, spontaneous symmetry breaking by a Higgs isospin doublet
of weak hypercharge Yφ, the isospin -1/2 component develops the vacuum
expectation value < φ >0. This ﬁxes ‘b’ in the electric charge deﬁnition
Q = T3 + bY to give

where Y is the hypercharge for doublets and singlets for a single gen-
eration. For each generation renormalizability through triangular anomaly
cancellation and the requirement of the identity of L- and R-handed charges
in U(1)em one ﬁnds that all unknown hypercharges are proportional to Yφ.
Hence correct charges (for NC = 3 ) fall through as below [4-8]

Q = T3 +

1
2Yφ

Y

Q(u) =

(1 +

Q(d) =

(−1 +

1
NC
1
NC

)

)

1
2

1
2

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

Q(e) = −1
Q(ν) = 0

(4)
(5)

Hence the electric charge is quantized in SM. The complete structure of

the SM as is, is required to obtain this result on very general grounds.

Clearly the U(1)em symmetry which arose due to spontaneous symmetry
breaking due to a Higgs doublet in the SM symmetry will be lost above T SM
whence SU(2)L ⊗ U(1)em symmetry would be restored. As is obvious, above
T SM
all the fermions and gauge bosons becomes massless. Here I point out
c
a new phenomenon arising from the restoring of the full SM symmetry .

c

c

. Above T SM

Note that to start with the parameter b and Y in the deﬁnition of electric
charge were completely unknown. We could lay a handle on ’b’ entirely on
the basis of the presence of spontaneous symmetry breaking and on ensuring
that photon was massless b = 1
where the SM symmetry is
2Yφ
restored there is no spontaneous symmetry breaking and hence the param-
eter b is completely undetermined. Together ’bY’ could be any arbitrary
number whatsoever even an irrational number. Within the framework of
this model above T SM
we just cannot deﬁne electric charges at all. Hence
the electric charge loses any physical meaning all together. There is no such
thing as charge anymore. The photon (which was a linear combination of
W 0 and Bµ after spontaneous symmetry breaking ), with it’s deﬁning vector
characterteristic, does not exist either. So the conclusion is that there is no
electrodynamics above T SM
. Maxwells equations of electrodynamics show
that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon. Hence above the SM phase
transition there was no light and no Maxwells equations. And surprisingly
we are led to conclude that there was no velocity of light c as well. One
knows that the velocity of light c is given as

c

c

1
ǫ0µ0
where ǫ0 and µ0 are permittivity and permeability of the free space. These
electromagnetic properties disappear along with the electric charge and hence
the velocity of light also disappears above the SM phase transition.

c2 =

(6)

The premise on which the theory of relativity is based is that c, the
velocity of light is always the same, no matter from which frame of reference
it is measured. Of fundamental signiﬁcance is the invariant interval

3

s2 = (ct)

2

− x2 − y2 − z2

(7)

Here the constant c provides us with a means of deﬁning time in terms
of spatial separation and vice versa through l = c t.
this enables one to
visualize time as the fourth dimension. Hence time gets deﬁned due to the
constant c. Therefore when there were no c as in the early universe ,there
was no time as well. As the special theory of relativity depends upon c and
time, above the SM breaking scale there was no special theory of relativity.
As the General Theory of relativity also requires the concept of a physical
space-time, it collapses too above the SM breaking scale. Hence the whole
physical universe collapses above this scale.

Therefore it was hypothesized that the Universe came into existence when
the SM symmetry was broken spontaneously [11]. Before it there was no
’time’, no ’light’, no maximum velocity like ’c’, no gravity or space-time
structure on which objective physical laws as we know it could exist [11].

In short we ﬁnd that the SM of particle physics is not only good to
explain all known facts, it is also capable of giving a natural and consistent
description of the origin of the Universe [11].

So matter (which is quantizd) and the space-time ( and so gravity ) are
bound together holistically. In this picture one cannot talk of matter without
spacetime and neither can we talk of space-time without matter. They are
two sides of the same coin and hence the Einstein’s equation as per the SM
should read as follows:

Gµν = 8πGhφ|Tµν|φi

(8)

This is the ” semiclassical quantum gravity ” approach of Rosenfeld [1].
However here φ represents the complete matter degrees of freedom incorpo-
rated in the SM in terms of the three generations of matter particles plus the
gauge particle of the SM ( no other spurious model is needed [9,10] ). Grav-
ity, a property of the spacetime arises as a result of the quantum mechanical
SM phase transtion and is not quantized. Hence as per the SM origin of
the universe scenario presented here we get a complete and consistent pic-
ture of the origin and the existence of space-time and matter. The two are
inseparably connected.

It seems that the reason that inspite of rigourous eﬀorts we have not seen
graviton so far is because as shown here it does not exist. This need not shock

4

some modern adherents of quantization of gravity as many a scientists have
been warning against an urge to quantize gravity. Long ago Rosenfeld [1] had
pointed out that empirical evidence and not logic forces us to quantize ﬁelds.
He said that in the absence of such evidence the temptation to quantize ﬁelds
must be resisted [1]. Indeed this is what the SM of particle physics is telling
us. And this is within the framework of the most successful model of particle
physics. Not only can the SM of particle physics provide a good description
of all known particles, it also has the capacity to give a consistent picture of
the origin of the universe and also of settling the issue of whether to quantize
gravity or not.

5

REFERENCES m

1. L. Rosenfeld, Nucl. Phys. , 40 (1963) 353
2. E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner, ” The Early Universe ” Edison Wesley,

New York ( 1990 )

3. T. P. Cheng and L. F. Lee, ” Gauge Theory of Elementary Particle

Physics ”, Clarendon Press, Oxford ( 1988 )

4. A. Abbas, Phys. Lett. , B 238 ( 1990) 344
5. A. Abbas, J. Phys. G. , 16 ( 1990 ) L163
6. A. Abbas, Nuovo Cimento , A 106 ( 1993 ) 985
7. A. Abbas, Hadronic J., 15 ( 1992 ) 475
8. A. Abbas, Ind. J. Phys., A 67 ( 1993 ) 541
9. A. Abbas, Physics Today ( July 1999 ) p.81-82
10. A. Abbas, ‘On standard model Higgs and superstring theories’ ”Par-
ticles, Strings and Cosmology PASCOS99”, Ed K Cheung, J F Gunion and
S Mrenna, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore ( 2000) 123

11. A. Abbas, ” On the Origin of the Universe ”, Spacetime & Substance,
Int Phys Journal, 2 (7) ( 2001 ) 49 ; Website: spacetime.narod.ru/2-7-
2001.html

6

