2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

COMPUTERIZED VERIFICATION OF NEW
HIERARCHIC THEORY
OF CONDENSED MATTER ON EXAMPLES OF
WATER & ICE.
NEW OPTOACOUSTIC DEVICE:
Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP)
and its applications
Alex Kaivarainen
H2o@karelia.ru
URL: http://www.karelia.ru/˜alexk

The short version of new quantum and quantitative Hierarchic the-
ory, general for solids and liquids (Kaivarainen, 1989, 1995, 2001)
is presented. Condensed matter is considered as a system of 3D
standing waves (collective excitations) of diﬀerent nature: thermal
de Broglie waves (waves B), IR photons, related to intermolecu-
lar oscillations and thermal phonons. Theory is veriﬁed by com-
puter simulations on examples of pure water and ice, using created
computer program (copyright, 1997, Kaivarainen). Good agreement
between theoretical and available experimental data of heat capac-
ity, total internal energy, vapor pressure, surface tension, thermal
conductivity, viscosity, self-diﬀusion has been demonstrated for wa-
ter and ice. Total number of physical parameters of liquids and
solids in wide temperature interval, including that of phase tran-
sitions, accessible for computer evaluation, is about 300. The ev-
idence of high-T mesoscopic molecular Bose condensation (BC) in
water and ice in form of coherent clusters is obtained. Theory uni-
ﬁes dynamics and thermodynamics on microscopic, mesoscopic and
macroscopic scales. The idea of new optoacoustic device: Compre-
hensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP) with huge informa-
tional possibilities, including its various conﬁgurations and appli-
cations is described. The strong advantage of new device is that
only small part of 300 parameters, yielding by CAMP system, is
possible to get, using separate experimental methods, like IR spec-
troscopy, sound velocimetry, densitometry and refractometry. The
most of parameters, available using CAMP - computer program,
are ”hidden”, i.e.
inaccessible for direct experimental registration.
The big amount of basically new information means, that CAMP
may provide a real breakthrough in condensed matter and applied
physics. Possible applications of CAMP to diﬀerent technologies
and research programs are presented in the last section of this ar-
ticle. This work may be considered as a background of project,
involving CAMP-prototype building and testing. The full version
of this paper is located at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0102086.
The series of articles, devoted to diﬀerent aspects of new theory
are placed in the electronic journal ”Archive of Los-Alamos”: see
http://arXiv.org/ﬁnd/physics/1/au:+Kaivarainen A/0/1/all/0/1

1

INTRODUCTION

A quantum based new hierarchic quantitative theory, general for solids and
liquids, has been developed.
It is assumed, that anharmonic oscillations of
particles in any condensed matter lead to emergence of three-dimensional (3D)
superposition of standing de Broglie waves of molecules, electromagnetic and
acoustic waves. Consequently, any condensed matter could be considered as a
gas of 3D standing waves of corresponding nature. Our approach uniﬁes and
develops strongly the Einstein’s and Debye’s models.

Collective excitations, like 3D standing de Broglie waves of molecules, rep-
resenting at certain conditions the molecular Bose condensate, were analyzed,
as a background of hierarchic model of condensed matter.

The most probable de Broglie wave (wave B) length is determined by the
ratio of Plank constant to the most probable impulse of molecules, or by ratio
of its most probable phase velocity to frequency. The waves B of molecules are
related to their translations (tr) and librations (lb).

As the quantum dynamics of condensed matter is anharmonic and does not
follow the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, the real most probable de
Broglie wave length can exceed the classical thermal de Broglie wave length and
the distance between centers of molecules many times.

This makes possible the atomic and molecular mesoscopic Bose condensa-
tion in solids and liquids at temperatures, below boiling point. It is one of the
most important results of new theory, which we have conﬁrmed by computer
simulations on examples of water and ice and applying to Virial theorem.

Four strongly interrelated new types of quasiparticles (collective excita-

tions) were introduced in our hierarchic model:

1. Eﬀectons (tr and lb), existing in ”acoustic” (a) and ”optic” (b) states

represent the coherent clusters in general case;

2. Convertons, corresponding to interconversions between tr and lb types of

the eﬀectons (ﬂickering clusters);

3. Transitons are the intermediate [a ⇋ b] transition states of the tr and lb

eﬀectons;

4. Deformons are the 3D superposition of IR electromagnetic or acoustic

waves, activated by transitons and convertons.

Primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are formed by 3D superposition of the most
probable standing de Broglie waves of the oscillating ions, atoms or molecules.
The volume of eﬀectons (tr and lb) may contain from less than one, to tens
and even thousands of molecules. The ﬁrst condition means validity of classical
approximation in description of the subsystems of the eﬀectons. The second
one points to quantum properties of coherent clusters due to mesoscopic Bose
condensation (BC), in contrast to macroscopic BC, pertinent for superﬂuidity
and superconductivity.

The liquids are semiclassical systems because their primary (tr) eﬀectons
contain less than one molecule and primary (lb) eﬀectons - more than one
molecule. The solids are quantum systems totally because both kind of their
primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) are mesoscopic molecular Bose condensates. These
consequences of our theory are conﬁrmed by computer calculations.

The 1st order [gas → liquid] transition is accompanied by strong decreas-
ing of number of rotational (librational) degrees of freedom due to emergence of

2

primary (lb) eﬀectons and [liquid → solid] transition - by decreasing of trans-
lational degrees of freedom due to Bose-condensation of primary (tr) eﬀectons.
In the general case the eﬀecton can be approximated by parallelepiped with
edges determined by de Broglie waves length in three selected directions (1, 2, 3),
related to symmetry of molecular dynamics. In the case of isotropic molecular
motion the eﬀectons’ shape is approximated by cube.

The edge-length of primary eﬀectons (tr and lb) is considered as the ”pa-

rameter of order” in our theory of phase transitions.

The in-phase oscillations of molecules in the eﬀectons correspond to the
eﬀecton’s (a) - acoustic state and the counterphase oscillations correspond to
their (b) - optic state. States (a) and (b) of the eﬀectons diﬀer in potential
energy only, however, their kinetic energies, impulses and spatial dimensions -
are the same. The b-state of the eﬀectons has a common feature with Fr¨olich’s
polar mode.

The (a → b) or (b → a) transition states of the primary eﬀectons (tr and
lb), deﬁned as primary transitons, are accompanied by a change in molecule
polarizability and dipole moment without density ﬂuctuations. At this case
they lead to absorption or radiation of IR photons, respectively.

Superposition of three internal standing IR photons of diﬀerent directions
of propagation (1,2,3) - forms primary electromagnetic deformons (tr and lb).
On the other hand, the [lb ⇋ tr] convertons and secondary transitons are
accompanied by the density ﬂuctuations, leading to absorption or radiation of
phonons.

Superposition of standing phonons in three directions (1,2,3), forms sec-

ondary acoustic deformons (tr and lb).

Correlated collective excitations of primary and secondary eﬀectons and de-
formons (tr and lb), localized in the volume of primary tr and lb electromag-
netic deformons, lead to origination of macroeﬀectons, macrotransitons
and macrodeformons (tr and lb respectively).

Correlated simultaneous excitations of tr and lb macroeﬀectons in the vol-
ume of superimposed tr and lb electromagnetic deformons lead to origination
of supereﬀectons.

In turn, the simultaneous excitation of both: tr and lb macrodeformons
and macroconvertons in the same volume means origination of superdefor-
mons. Superdeformons are the biggest (cavitational) ﬂuctuations, leading to
microbubbles in liquids and to local defects in solids.

Total number of quasiparticles of condensed matter equal to 4!=24, reﬂects
all of possible combinations of the four basic ones [1-4], introduced above (Ta-
ble). This set of collective excitations in the form of ”gas” of 3D standing waves
of three types: de Broglie, acoustic and electromagnetic - is shown to be able
to explain virtually all the properties of all condensed matter.

3

Table. Schematic representation of the 18 types of quasiparticles
of condensed matter as a hierarchical dynamic system, based on the
eﬀectons, transitons and deformons. Total number of quasiparticles,
introduced in Hierarchic concept is 24. Six collective excitations,
related to convertons- interconversions between primary librational
and translational eﬀectons and their derivatives are not represented
here for the end of simplicity.

The important positive feature of our hierarchic model of matter is that
it does not need the semi-empirical intermolecular potentials for calculations,
which are unavoidable in existing theories of many body systems. The potential
energy of intermolecular interaction is involved indirectly in dimensions and
stability of quasiparticles, introduced in our model.

The main formulae of theory are the same for liquids and solids
and include following experimental parameters, which take into ac-
count their diﬀerent properties:

[1]- Positions of (tr) and (lb) bands in oscillatory spectra;
[2]- Sound velocity;
[3]- Density;
[4]- Refraction index (extrapolated to the inﬁnitive wave length of photon).
The knowledge of these four basic parameters at the same temperature and
pressure makes it possible using our computer program, to evaluate more than
300 important characteristics of any condensed matter. Among them are such
as: total internal energy, kinetic and potential energies, heat-capacity and ther-
mal conductivity, surface tension, vapor pressure, viscosity, coeﬃcient of self-

4

diﬀusion, osmotic pressure, solvent activity, etc. Most of calculated parameters
are hidden, i.e. inaccessible to direct experimental measurement.

This is the ﬁrst theory able to predict all known experimental temperature
anomalies for water and ice. The conformity between theory and experiment is
very good even without adjustable parameters.

The hierarchic concept creates a bridge between micro- and macro-
liquids and solids in

phenomena, dynamics and thermodynamics,
terms of quantum physics.

TOTAL INTERNAL ENERGY OF CONDENSED MATTER

The ﬁnal formula for the total internal energy of (Utot) of one mole of matter,
leading from Hierarchic theory, considering condensed matter as a system of 3D
standing waves is (see http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0102086):

Utot = V0

1
Z

nef

ef Ea
P a

ef Eb
ef + P b
+ndPdEd

ef + PtEt

Xtr,lb (cid:26)(cid:20)

(cid:0)

+

(cid:1)

(cid:21)

+

¯nef

¯P a
ef

¯Ea

ef + ¯P b

ef

¯Eb

ef + ¯Pt ¯Et

+ ¯nd ¯Pd ¯Ed

+

(cid:2)
+

(cid:0)
nM

(cid:2)

(cid:0)

1
Z

M EA
P A

M + P B

M EB
M

+ nDP D

M ED
M

(cid:1)

(cid:3)
tr,lb +
(cid:3)

(cid:1)

+V0

ncon

PacEac + PbcEbc + PcMtEcMt

+

(cid:2)

(cid:1)
+ (ncdaPacEac + ncdbPbcEbc + ncMdPcMdEcMd)

(cid:0)

+

+V0

ns

1
Z

(cid:2) (cid:0)

∗

∗

S EA
P A

S + P B

S EB
S

∗

∗

(cid:3)
S ED
S

∗

∗

+ nD∗ P D

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

(1)

The meaning of the variables in formulae (1), necessary for the internal en-
ergy calculations, are presented in our paper (Kaivarainen, 2001). Total poten-
tial energy of one mole of condensed matter is deﬁned by the diﬀerence between
corresponding total internal energy and total kinetic energy: V tot = U tot −T tot.
It is important to stress, that the same equations are valid for liquids and

solids in our theory.

A lot of characteristics of condensed matter, composed from 24 quasiparticles
- about 300, may be calculated, using hierarchic theory and CAMP computer
program [copyright 1997, Kaivarainen]. For this end we need four basic in-
put experimental parameters (Kaivarainen, 2001) at the same temperature and
pressure:

1) positions of translational and librational bands in middle/far IR spectrum

of condensed matter;
2) sound velocity;
3) density or molar volume;
4) refraction index.

5

QUANTITATIVE VERIFICATION OF HIERARCHIC THEORY
ON EXAMPLES OF ICE AND WATER

Comparison of theoretical temperature dependences of diﬀerent
parameters
with experimental data

1. The coincidence of theoretical and experimental data for ice

structure stability

Our hierarchic theory makes it possible to calculate unprecedented big amount
of parameters for liquids and solids. Part of them, accessible experimentally and
taken from literature, are in good correspondence with CAMP - computer sim-
ulations.

For example, the calculated minimum of partition function for ice (Z) (Fig.
1a) corresponds to temperature of about -1700C. For the other hand, the interval
from -198 to -1730C is known, indeed, as T- anomalies one due to the fact that
the heat equilibrium of ice establishes very slowly in this range (Maeno, 1988).
This fact is a consequence of the less probable ice structure (minimum value of
partition function Z) near −1700C.

Fig. 1. (a, b, c). Temperature dependences of the total partition
function (Z) and contributions related to primary and secondary
eﬀectons and deformons for ice (a,b) and water (c).

2. The coincidence of theoretical and experimental heat capacity of
ice and water

6

It follows from Fig. 2a that the mean theoretical value of heat capacity for

ice in the interval from -75 to 0oC is equal to:

¯Cice

p =

∆Utot
∆T

≈ 39J/M K = 9.3 cal/M K

(2)

For water within the whole range ∆T = 1000C, the theoretical change in the
internal energy is: ∆U = 17 − 9.7 = 7.3kJ/M (Fig.2b). This corresponds to
mean value of heat capacity of water:

Cwater
p

=

∆Utot
∆T

= 73 J/M K = 17.5 cal/M K

(3)

These results of calculation agree well with the experimental mean values
Cp = 18 Cal/M K for water and Cp = 9cal/M K for ice (Eisenberg and
Kauzmann, 1969).

Fig. 2.

(a,b). Temperature dependences of the total internal
energy (Utot) and diﬀerent contributions for ice (a) and water (b).
Following contributions to Utot are presented: (Uef + ¯Uef ) is the
contribution of primary and secondary eﬀectons; (Ud + ¯Ud) is the
contribution of primary and secondary deformons; (Uef + Ud) is the
contribution of primary eﬀectons and deformons; ( ¯Uef + ¯Ud) is the
contribution of secondary eﬀectons and deformons.

3. Coincidence between calculated and experimental dimensions of
water clusters

7

Fig. 3. (a) : The temperature dependencies of the number of

H2O molecules in the volume of primary librational eﬀecton (nlb
axis) and the number of H2O per length of this eﬀecton edge (κ,
the temperature dependence of the water pri-
right axis);
mary librational eﬀecton (approximated by cube) edge length [llib
ef =
κ(V0/N0)1/3].

(b):

M )ef , left

The number of H2O molecules within the primary libration eﬀectons
of water, which could be approximated by a cube, decreases from nM = 280
at 00 to nM ≃ 3 at 1000 (Fig. 3a). It should be noted that at physiological
temperatures (35 − 400) such quasiparticles contain nearly 40 water molecules.
Similar by order dimensions of heavy water clusters (about 10 ˚A) with saturated
hydrogen bonds were revealed by inelastic neutron scattering method (Texeira
et al., 1987).

The dimensions of water clusters are close to dimensions of the open interdo-
main protein cavities judging from X-ray data. The ﬂickering of these clusters,
i.e. their (dissociation ⇋ association) due to [lb ⇔ tr] conversions, in accor-
dance with our model, is directly related to the large-scale dynamics of proteins
(Kaivarainen, 1985).

New State Equation for Condensed Matter

It was Van der Waals who choosed the ﬁrst way more than a hundred years

ago and derived the equation:

P +

a
V 2

(cid:16)

(cid:17) (cid:0)

(cid:1)

V − b

= RT

(4)

where the attraction forces are accounted for by the amending term (a/V 2),
while the repulsion forces and the eﬀects of the excluded volume accounted for
the term (b).

Equation (4) correctly describes changes in P,V and T related to liquid-gas
transitions on the qualitative level. However, the quantitative analysis of (4) is

8

(5)

(6)

(7)

approximate and needs the ﬁtting parameters. The parameters (a) and (b) are
not constant for the given substance and depend on temperature. Hence, the
Van der Waals equation is only some approximation describing the state of a
real gas.

Using our eq. 4.3 (from Kaivarainen, 2001) for the total internal energy
of condensed matter (Utot), we can present state equation in a more general
form than (4). For this end we introduce the notions of internal pressure (Pin),
including all type of interactions between particles of matter and excluded molar
volume (Vexc):

Vexc =

∗
πα

N0 = V0

4
3

n2 − 1
n2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where α∗ is the acting polarizability of molecules in condensed matter (see
section...);

N0 is Avogadro number, and V0 is molar volume.
The new general state equation can be expressed in the following form:

PtotVf r = (Pext + Pin)(V0 − Vexc) = Uef

where: Uef = Utot(1 + V /T t

kin) = U 2

tot/Tkin

is the eﬀective internal energy and:

(1 + V /Tkin) = Utot/Tkin = S

−1

is the reciprocal value of the total structural factor; Ptot = Pext + Pin is total
pressure, Pext and Pin are external and internal pressures; Vf r = V0 − Vexc =
V0/n2 (see eq.5) is a free molar volume; Utot = V + Tkin is the total internal
energy, V and Tkin are total potential and kinetic energies of one mole of matter.
For the limit case of ideal gas, when Pin = 0; Vexc = 0; and the potential

energy V = 0, we get from (6) the Clapeyrone - Mendeleyev equation:

PextV0 = Tkin = RT

One can use equation of state (6) for estimation of sum of all types of internal

matter interactions, which determines the internal pressure Pin:

Pin =

− Pext =

− Pext

(8)

Uef
Vf r

n2U 2
tot
V0Tkin

where: the molar free volume: Vf r = V0 − Vexc = V0/n2;
and the eﬀective total energy: Uef = U 2

tot/Tkin = Utot/S; where S =

Tkin/Utot is a total structural factor.

4. Coincidence between calculated and experimental vapor pressure
for ice and water

9

There was not earlier the satisfactory quantitative theory for vapor pressure

calculation.

We can suggest such a theory using our notion of collective excitations:
superdeformons, representing the biggest thermal ﬂuctuations (see Kaivarainen,
2001). The basic idea is that the external equilibrium vapor pressure is related to
internal one (P S
in) with coeﬃcient determined by the probability of cavitational
ﬂuctuations (superdeformons) in the surface layer of liquids or solids.

In other words due to excitation of superdeformons with probability (P S

D),
the internal pressure (P S
in) in surface layers, determined by the total contribu-
tions of all intramolecular interactions turns to external one - vapor pressure
(PV ). It is something like a compressed spring energy realization due to trigger
switching oﬀ.

For taking into account the diﬀerence between the surface and bulk internal
pressure (Pin) we introduce the semi-empirical surface pressure factor (qS) as:

in = qSPin = qS
P S

n2Utot
V0S

(cid:18)

− Pext

(cid:19)

(9)

where: Pin corresponds to eq.(8); S = Tkin/Utot is a total structure factor.

Fig. 4. a) Theoretical (−) and experimental (··) temperature
dependences of vapor pressure (Pvap) for ice (a) and water (b), in-
cluding phase transition region. The experimental data where taken
from Handbook of Chem. & Phys. 67 ed., CRC press, 1986-1987.

Multiplying (9) to probability of superdeformons excitation we obtain for
vapor pressure, resulting from evaporation or sublimation, the following formu-
lae:

Pvap = P S

in · P S

D = qS

n2U 2
tot
V0Tkin

(cid:18)

ES
D
kT

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

− Pext

exp

−

(10)

where:

P S

D = exp

−

ES
D
kT

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

10

(11)

is a probability of superdeformons excitation (see eqs. 3.37, 3.32 and 3.33 from
Kaivarainen, 2001 ).

The pressure surface factor (qS) could be presented as:

qS = P S

in/Pin

Theoretical calculated temperature dependences of vapor pressure, described
liq = 3.1 and

by (10) coincide very well with experimental ones for water at qS
for ice at qS

sol = 18 (Fig. 4).

The almost ﬁve-times diﬀerence between qS

sol and qS

liq means that the surface

properties of ice diﬀer from bulk ones much more than for liquid water.

5. Coincidence between calculated and experimental surface tension

The resulting surface tension is introduced in our mesoscopic model as a

sum:

σ = (σtr + σlb)

(12)

where: σtr and σlb are translational and librational contributions to surface
tension. Each of these components can be expressed using our mesoscopic state
equation (6), taking into account the diﬀerence between surface and bulk total
energies (qS), introduced in previous section:

σtr, =

1
π (V lbef )2/3

1

tr,lb (cid:20)

qSPtot(Pef Vef )tr,lb − Ptot(Pef Vef )tr,lb
(Pef + Pt)tr + (Pef + Pt)lb + (Pcon + PcMt)

(13)

(cid:21)

where (Vef )tr,lb are volumes of primary tr and lib eﬀectons, related to their
concentration (nef )tr,lb as:

is an eﬀective radius of the primary translational and librational eﬀectons, lo-
calized on the surface of condensed matter; qS is the surface factor, equal to that
used in vapor pressure calculations;
is a total probability of primary eﬀecton excitations in the (a) and (b) states:

[Ptot = Pin + Pext] is a total pressure; (Pef )tr,lb

(Pt)tr and (Pt)lb in (13) are the probabilities of corresponding transiton excita-
tion;

(Vef )tr,lb = (1/nef )tr,lb;

rtr,lb =

(Vef )2/3

tr,lb

1
π

(Pef )tr = (P a

ef + P b

ef )tr

(Pef )lb = (P a

ef + P b

ef )lb

11

Pcon = Pac +Pbc is the sum of probabilities of [a] and [b] convertons; PcMt =

Pac Pbc is a probability of Macroconvertons excitation (see Introduction).

The eq. (13) contains the ratio:

(Vef /V 2/3

ef )tr,lb = ltr,lb

(14)

and llb = (1/nef )1/3
where:
primary translational and librational eﬀectons, approximated by cube.

ltr = (1/nef )1/3

are the length of the ribs of the

lib

tr

The resulting surface tension can be presented as:

σ = σtr + σlb = π

Ptot(qS − 1) ·

(Pef )trltr + (Pef )llb

(Pef + Pt)tr + (Pef + Pt)lb + (Pcon + PcMt)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(15)

The results of computer calculations of σ (eq. 15) for water and experimental

data are presented at Fig.5.

Fig. 5. Experimental (

) and theoretical (- - -) temperature
dependences of the surface tension for water. The experimental data
where taken from Handbook of Chem. & Phys., 67 ed., CRC press,
1986-1987.

It is obvious, that the correspondence between theory and experiment is
very good, conﬁrming in such a way the correctness of our model and Hierarchic
concept in general.

6. Coincidence between calculated and experimental thermal
conductivity

Thermal conductivity may be related to phonons, photons, free electrons,
holes and [electron-hole] pairs movement. We will discuss here only the main
type of thermal conductivity in condensed matter, related to phonons.

Hierarchic theory introduce two contributions to thermal conductivity: re-
lated to phonons, irradiated by secondary eﬀectons and forming secondary
translational and librational deformons (κsd)tr,lb and to phonons, irradiated by
a and b convertons [tr/lb], forming the convertons-induced deformons (κcd)ac.bc:

12

κ = (κsd)tr,lb + (κcd)ac.bc =

Cvvs[(Λsd)tr,lb + (Λcd)ac,bc]

(16)

1
3

where: free runs of secondary phonons (tr and lb) are represented as:

1/(Λsd)tr,lb = 1/(Λtr) + 1/(Λlb) = (ν d)tr/vs + (ν d)lb/vs

consequently:

1/(Λsd)tr,lb =

vs
(νd)tr + (νd)lb

(17)

and free runs of convertons-induced phonons:

1/(Λcd)ac,bc = 1/(Λac) + 1/(Λbc) = (νac)/vs + (νbc)/vs

The heat capacity: CV = ∂Utot/∂T can be calculated also from our theory.

Fig. 6. Temperature dependences of total thermal conductiv-
ity for water and contributions, related to acoustic deformons and
[lb/tr]convertons. The experimental data were taken from Hand-
book of Chem. & Phys., 67 ed., CRC press, 1986-1987.

7. Coincidence between calculated and experimental viscosity for
liquids and solids

The viscosity is determined by the energy dissipation as a result of medium
(liquid or solid) structure deformation. Viscosity corresponding to the shift
deformation is named shear viscosity. So- called bulk viscosity is related to

13

deformation of volume parameters and corresponding dissipation. These types
of viscosity have not the same values and nature.

The new hierarchic/mesoscopic theory of viscosity has been devel-

oped.

The dissipation processes, related to (A ⇋ B)tr.lb cycles of translational and

librational macroeﬀectons and (a,b)-convertons excitations were analyzed.

In contrast to liquid state, the viscosity of solids is determined by the biggest
ﬂuctuations: supereﬀectons and superdeformons, resulting from simultane-
ous excitations of translational and librational macroeﬀectons and macrodefor-
mons in the same volume (see Kaivarainen, 2001).

The contributions of translational and librational macrodeformons to result-

ing viscosity are present in following way:

ηM
tr,lb =

EM
D
∆v0
f

"

τ M

3

Tk
Utot (cid:19)

(cid:18)

#tr,lb

where: (∆v0

f ) is the reduced ﬂuctuating volume; the energy of macrodefor-

mons: [EM

D = −kT (ln P M

D )]tr,lb.

The cycle-periods of the tr and lib macroeﬀectons has been introduced as:

τ M = τA + τB + τD

tr,lb

(cid:3)

where: characteristic life-times of macroeﬀectons in A, B-states and that of
transition state in the volume of primary electromagnetic deformons can be
presented, correspondingly, as follows:

(cid:2)

τA = (τa τa)1/2
h

tr,lb
i

and

τA = (τa τa)1/2
h

tr,lb
i

τD = |(1/τA) − (1/τB)|

h

−1

tr,lb

i

Using (18 - 21) it is possible to calculate the contributions of (A ⇋ B) cycles

of translational and librational macroeﬀectons to viscosity separately.

The averaged contribution of Macroexcitations (tr and lb) in viscosity is:

The resulting theoretical viscosity (Fig.8) was calculated as a sum of the

(cid:2)

averaged contributions of macrodeformons and convertons:

ηM =

(η)M

tr (η)M
lb

1/2

(cid:3)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

η = ηM + ηc

14

Fig. 7. Theoretical and experimental temperature dependences
of water viscosity. The experimental data where taken from Hand-
book of Chem. & Phys. 67 ed., CRC press, 1986-1987.

The theoretical results are in a good accordance with available experimental

data.

8. Coincidence between calculated and experimental coeﬃcients of
self-diﬀusion in liquids and solids

Molecular theory of self-diﬀusion, as well as general concept of transfer phe-

nomena in condensed matter also was absent before Hierarchic theory.

The resulting coeﬃcient of self-diﬀusion in liquids (D) is a sum of the distant
(DM ) and local (Dc, DMc) eﬀects contributions (see eqs.6.64 and 6.67 from
Kaivarainen, 2001):

D = DM + Dc + DMc

(24)

15

Fig. 8. Theoretical and experimental temperature dependences

of self-diﬀusion coeﬃcients in water.

The experimental data where taken from Handbook of Chem. &

Phys. 77 ed., CRC press, 1996-1997.

Like in the cases of thermal conductivity, viscosity and vapor pressure, the
results of theoretical calculations of self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient coincide well with
experimental data for water (Fig. 8) in temperature interval (0 − 1000C).

The self-diﬀusion in solids also may be evaluated using the same approach

and CAMP computer program.

The important conclusion, leading from the examples presented above, is that
as far the ﬁnal results of calculations are in a good accordance with experiment,
it means that a lot of intermediate parameters, hidden from direct experiment,
characterizing the spatial and dynamic properties of number of collective exci-
tations of condensed matter - also correctly describe the matter properties.

The ability of our Hierarchic model to describe quantitatively a lot of param-

eters of liquids and solids points, that it is valid and general indeed.

9. NEW OPTOACOUSTIC DEVICE, BASED ON HIERARCHIC
THEORY:
Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP)
[see: www.karelia.ru/˜alexk ]

The set of formulae obtained in our theory allows to calculate about 300
physical parameters of any condensed matter (liquid or solid). Most of them
are hidden, i.e. inaccessible for direct experimental measurements.

Simulations evaluation of these parameters can be done using our computer
program: CAMP (copyright 1997, Kaivarainen) and the following experimental
methods:

1. Far-middle FT-IR or FT-Raman spectroscopy for determination the po-

sitions of translational or librational bands: (50-2500) cm-1;

2. Sound velocimetry;
3. Densitometry;
4. Refractometry.
Corresponding data may be obtained at the same temperature and pressure
from the SAME SAMPLE (liquid or solid), located in more than one cell and
from the same cell for study of nonequilibrium dynamics or kinetic processes.

This leads to idea of new optoacoustic device: Comprehensive Analyzer of
Matter Properties (CAMP), which may provide a huge amount of data of any
condensed system under study.

The most complicated and expensive component of CAMP is FT-IR or FT-
Raman spectrometer or even better their combination for registration of spectra
in far and middle region.

The most sensitive parameter is sound velocity.
One of possible CAMP conﬁguration should include special attachment to
FT-IR spectrometer (Harrick Scientiﬁc Co.), making it possible registration of
reﬂection spectra in far/middle IR region and the refraction index dispersion.

16

Such approach allows to study the properties of samples with strong IR absorp-
tion (i.e. aqueous systems) and non transparent mediums. For the other hand,
the equipment, provided by Anton-Paar Co., makes it possible a simultaneous
measurement of sound velocity and density.

The uniﬁed system of modiﬁed FT-IR and/or Raman spectrometer, densito-
meter, sound velocimeter, refractometer, measuring the same sample at similar
conditions is necessary to design. Simulation of corresponding parameters, us-
ing the interface of such system with personal computer will provide CAMP
function.

The another conﬁguration of CAMP may include the FT-Brillouin light scat-
tering spectrometer, based on Fabry-Perrot interferometer. It makes possible
simultaneous measurement of hypersound velocity (from the Doppler shift of
side bands of Brillouin spectra) and positions of intermolecular bands [tr and
lb] from the Stokes/antiStokes satellite components on the central peak of Bril-
louin spectra. This means combination of possibilities of Raman spectroscopy
and sound velocimetry.

CAMP may allow monitoring of perturbation of very diﬀerent physical prop-
erties of condensed matter under the inﬂuence of solute molecules in dilute so-
lutions and external electromagnetic or acoustic ﬁelds.

9.1. Possible Applications for Comprehensive
Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP)

Applications to aqueous systems

1. Monitoring of drinking water and water based beverage (nonalcoholic and
alcohol-containing) physical properties, related to taste and biological activity.
Modulation of taste by electromagnetic ﬁeld and vitamins;

2.

In pharmaceutical technology - for monitoring of water perturbations,
induced by vitamins and drugs at low physiologic concentrations. Correlation
of water structure perturbations, induced by vitamins and drugs with biological
activity of their aqueous solutions. Such test as the rate of biocells and microbes
colony growth may be used for this goal. Regulation of drug-induced eﬀects by
electromagnetic and/or acoustic ﬁelds;

3. In petrol industry - ﬁnding the key physical parameters of benzine, re-

sponsible for it octane number.

Searching the ways of cheap treatment of benzine by physical ﬁelds or chem-

icals in low concentrations, increasing the benzine eﬀectiveness;

4. In paper technology - for study of primary colloid systems, containing
paper ingredients. Monitoring of inﬂuence of electromagnetic and acoustic ﬁelds
on physical parameters of the bulk and hydrated water, necessary for regulation
of [coagulation - peptization] equilibrium of colloids, increasing the quality of
paper and coating process;

5. In biotechnology and biochemistry: a wide range of problems, related to
role of water in biosystems and water biopolymers interaction (i.e. mechanism
of cryoproteins action, detection of speciﬁc reactions, like antibody + antigen,
enzyme + substrate or inhibitor);

6. In cement technology - for regulation of aqueous colloid systems properties

by physical ﬁelds, leading to increasing the hardness of cement and bricks;

17

7. Monitoring of electromagnetic and acoustic pollution, analyzing a phys-
ical properties of water in rivers, lakes and sea, as a test system (the ecology
problem);

8. Mechanism of transition of ﬂow from the laminar to turbulent one in
petroleum pipe-lines and the ways of this process regulation by means of elec-
tromagnetic and acoustic ﬁelds;

9. Evaluation of frequencies of cavitational ﬂuctuations of water, making it
possible their eﬀective resonant stimulation by external physical ﬁelds. It may be
useful for: a) de-infection of drinking water; b) stimulation of sonoluminescence;
c) development of pure energy technology; d) cold fusion stimulation.

Application to nonaqueous systems

1. Fundamental research in all branches of condensed matter physics: ther-
modynamics, dynamics, phase transitions, transport process, surface tension,
self-diﬀusion, viscosity, vapor pressure, etc.

2. Monitoring of new materials technology (semiconductors, superconduc-
tors, polymeric materials) for searching the optimal conditions (T, P, physical
ﬁelds) for providing the needed parameters on mesoscopic and macroscopic scale;

3. Study of mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity;
4. Study of mechanism of superﬂuidity.

Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP) represents a basi-
cally new type of scientiﬁc equipment, allowing to get incomparable big amount
of information concerning physics of liquids or solids. It can be very useful for
investigation of dynamics and mesoscopic structure of pure matter as well as
solid and liquid solutions, the colloid systems and host-guest systems.

The competitive ability of companies, involved in listed above technologies,
could be increased strongly, as a result of CAMP application, improving their
technology.

The market for Comprehensive Analyzer of Matter Properties (CAMP) is
free and due to its unique informational potential could be much bigger than
that for IR, Raman or Brillouin spectrometers. It means that the manufacturing
of CAMP of diﬀerent conﬁgurations and its marketing also has a big prospects.
The demo-version of CAMP-computer program (CAMP, copyright, 1997,
Kaivarainen) is available and may be ordered from the author or directly down-
loaded from the front page of web site: www.karelia.ru/˜alexk [see also ’Looking
for partners’].

This program demonstrates potential possibilities of basically new optoacous-

tic device on examples of water and ice.

REFERENCES

Arani R., Bono I., Del Giudice E., Preparata G., Int. J. Mod. Phys.
B9, 1813 (1995).

Ashkroft N., Mermin N., Solid state physics. Helt, Rinehart and
Winston, N.Y., (1976).

18

Babloyantz A., Molecules, Dynamics and Life. An introduction to
self-organization of matter.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York,
1986, pp.320.

Baym G., Pethick C., Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 6 (1996).

Bradley C.C., Sacket C.A., Hulet R.G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 78, 985
(1997).

Chernikov F.R., Bioﬁzika (Russia), 35, 711-717 (1990) .

Clegg J.S. and Drost-Hansen W. Elsevier Science Publ. vol.1, Ch.1,
(1991) , pp.1-23.

Del Giudice E., Doglia S., Milani M., Physica Scripta. 38, 505
(1988).

Del Guidice E., Preparata G., Vitello G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 61,1085
(1989) .

Dicke R.H., Phys.Rev. 93, 99-110 (1954) .

Drost-Hansen W., In: Colloid and Interface Science. Ed. Kerker M.
(Academic Press, New York.

Etzler F.M., Conners J.J., Langmuir , 7, 2293 (1991).

Etzler F.M., White P.J. J., Colloid and Interface Sci., 120, 94 (1987).

Eisenberg D., Kauzmann W., The structure and properties of water.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969.

Fine R.A., Millero F.J., J.Chem.Phys., 59, 5529 (1973) .

Frontas’ev V.P., Schreiber L.S., J. Struct. Chem. (USSR) 6, 512
(1966).

Kaivarainen A.I., Solvent-dependent ﬂexibility of proteins and prin-
ciples of their function. D.Reidel Publ.Co., Dordrecht, Boston, Lan-
caster, 1985.

Kaiv¨ar¨ainen A., J.Mol.Liq. 41, 53 (1989).

Kaivarainen A., Book: Hierarchic concept of matter and ﬁeld. Wa-
ter, biosystems and elementary particles. New York, NY, 1995, pp.
482, ISBN 0-9642557-0-7.

Kaivarainen A., Archives of Los-Alamos (2001): http://arXiv.org/0102086

Kaivarainen A., Archives of Los-Alamos (2000): http://arXiv.org/0003070

Kaivarainen A., Archives of Los-Alamos (2000): http://arXiv.org/0003074

Kaivarainen A., Archives of Los-Alamos (2000): http://arXiv.org/0003107

K¨aiv¨ar¨ainen A., Fradkova L., Korpela T., Acta Chem.Scand. 47, 456 (1993).

Ketterle W., von Drunten N.J., Phys. Rev., A54, 656 (1996).

Kell G.S., J.Chem.Eng. Data 20, 97 (1975).

Kikoin I.K. (Ed.), Tables of physical values. Atomizdat, Moscow,
1976.

Landau L.D., Lifchitz E.M., Theoretical Physics, v.1, Nauka, Moscow,
1973.

19

Prokhorov A.M. (Ed), Physical encyclopedia. Soviet encyclopedia.
Moscow, 1988.

Roberts J. and Wang F. J. (1993) , Microwave Power and Electro-
magnetic Energy, 28, 196.

Roberts J. A., Zhang X. and Zheng Y. ”Determination of Hydrogen
Bonding in Water Cluster Through Conductivity (dc)”, J. Chem.
Phys., 100, 1503-151.

Umezawa H., Advanced Field Theory: Micro, Macro and Thermal
Physics. Springer Verlag, 1995.

20

