2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reinterpretation of Matter-Wave Interference Experiments
Based on the Local-Ether Wave Equation

Ching-Chuan Su
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Tsinghua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan

Abstract – Based on the local-ether wave equation for free particle, the dispersion of mat-
ter wave is examined. From the dispersion relation, the angular frequency and wavelength
of matter wave are derived. These formulas look like the postulates of de Broglie in conjunc-
tion with the Lorentz mass-variation law. However, the fundamental diﬀerence is that for
terrestrial particles their speeds are referred speciﬁcally to a geocentric inertial frame and
hence incorporate the speed due to earth’s rotation. Thus the local-ether model predicts
an east-west directional anisotropy both in mass and wavelength. Meanwhile, in spite of
the restriction on reference frame, the local-ether model can account for the matter-wave
interference experiments of the Bragg reﬂection and the Sagnac eﬀect. For electron wave,
the eﬀects of earth’s rotation are negligible and the derived Bragg angle is actually in accord
with the Davisson-Germer experiment, as examined within the present precision. On the
other hand, the local-ether model leads to a directional anisotropy in the Bragg angle in
neutron diﬀraction. The predicted anisotropy due to earth’s rotation then provide a means
to test the local-ether wave equation.

1. Introduction

The wave nature of particle has been initiated by de Broglie in 1924 by postulating that a
particle is associated with a matter wave of which the angular frequency and the wavelength
are related to the energy and the momentum of the particle, respectively [1]. The energy and
momentum in turn are associated with the speed-dependent mass which was ﬁrst introduced
by Lorentz in 1904 [2]. Shortly, the matter wavelength has been demonstrated in the Bragg
reﬂection of electron beam from a crystal by Davisson and Germer in 1927 [1]. Furthermore,
based on the phase diﬀerence between two coherent beams of electron, neutron, or atom,
various matter-wave interference experiments have been reported to demonstrate the Bragg
reﬂection, the double-slit diﬀraction, the gravitational eﬀect, and the Sagnac eﬀect.

Recently, we have presented the local-ether model of wave propagation [3]. That is,
electromagnetic wave can be viewed as to propagate via a medium like the ether. However,
the ether is not universal. It is supposed that in the region under suﬃcient inﬂuence of the
gravity due to the Earth, the Sun, or another celestial body, there forms a local ether which
in turn moves with the gravitational potential of the respective body. For earthbound waves,
the medium is the earth local ether which as well as earth’s gravitational potential is station-
ary in an ECI (earth-centered inertial) frame, while the sun local ether for interplanetary
waves is stationary in a heliocentric inertial frame. It has been shown elaborately that the
propagation of earthbound electromagnetic waves is referred speciﬁcally to an ECI frame,
as demonstrated in the high-precision experiments of GPS (global positioning system), the
intercontinental microwave link, and of the Sagnac loop interferometry [3].

Further, matter wave is supposed to follow the local-ether model. Thereby, we have
presented a wave equation for a particle of charge q and natural frequency ω0 in the presence
of the gravitational and the electrical scalar potentials [4-6]. Under the ordinary condition
of low particle speed, the local-ether wave equation has been shown to lead to a uniﬁed
quantum theory of gravitational and electromagnetic forces [5, 6]. Furthermore, it is found
that the gravitational mass associated with the gravitational force and the inertial mass
under the inﬂuence of the electromagnetic force are identical to the natural frequency, aside
from a common scaling factor. Thereby, the local-ether wave equation leads to the important

1

consequence of the identity of gravitational and inertial mass and their physical origin. When
the restriction on the particle speed is removed, the local-ether wave equation leads to the
east-west directional anisotropy in mass, quantum state energy, and hence in clock rate which
in turn has been demonstrated in the Hafele-Keating experiment with circumnavigation
atomic clocks [4].

In this investigation, we explore more consequences of the local-ether wave equation.
From the wave equation for a free particle, the dispersion of matter wave is derived. Then,
from the dispersion relation, the angular frequency and wavelength of matter wave and the
associated speed-dependent mass of particle are derived. According to the local-ether model,
the velocity of earthbound particles that determines the mass and the wave properties is
referred speciﬁcally to an ECI frame and hence incorporates the linear velocity due to earth’s
rotation. Accordingly, the matter-wave interference experiments of the Bragg reﬂection, the
double-slit diﬀraction, and of the Sagnac eﬀect are reexamined, particularly the eﬀects of
earth’s rotational and orbital motions.

2. Local-Ether Wave Equation for Free Particle

It is supposed that a free particle is represented by a wavefunction Ψ which in turn is

governed by the nonhomogeneous wave equation proposed to be

∇2 −

(cid:26)

1
c2

∂2
∂t2 (cid:27)

Ψ(r, t) =

ω2
0
c2 Ψ(r, t),

(1)

(2)

where c is the speed of light and ω0 is the natural frequency associated with the particle. This
equation is a simpliﬁed form of the local-ether wave equation presented in [4-6] by dropping
the gravitational and the electric scalar potentials. For the case where the natural frequency
is zero, the equation reduces to the homogeneous wave equation governing electromagnetic
wave in free space. Further, by replacing c with another speed, the equation reduces to the
wave equation governing a mechanical wave.

The natural frequency is a constant and has been found to be the origin of the rest
mass of the particle associated with wavefunction Ψ. It has been shown from the local-ether
wave equation under the gravitational and the electric potential potentials that the natural
frequency ω0 is related to the gravitational and the inertial mass m0 of a low-speed particle
by the familiar form of [4-6]

m0 =

¯h
c2 ω0,

where ¯h is Planck’s constant divided by 2π. This relation states that the rest mass of a
particle is just its natural frequency, aside from the scaling factor ¯h/c2.

Since matter wave is supposed to follow the local-ether model, the time derivative in the
proposed wave equation is referred speciﬁcally to an ECI frame for earthbound particles.
As the time derivative is referred to a particular frame, its value remains unchanged when
observed in diﬀerent reference frames. This feature is identical to that in a mechanical wave
motion. The proposed wave equation looks like the free-space Klein-Gordan equation [7, 8]
and like the equation dealing with spin given in [9], except the fundamental diﬀerence in
the reference frame of the time derivative.

From the wave equation, it is seen that the wavefunction Ψ oscillates at the natural
frequency when its spatial variations vanish. As the wavefunction starts to vary spatially,
its temporal variation will increase accordingly. The spatial and the temporal variations
of a wavefunction are important characteristics of wave motion and are expected to play
an important role in determining the physical properties of the particle associated with the
wavefunction.

3. Dispersion of Matter Wave

Suppose that the wavefunction Ψ is a wave packet composed of plane waves of a narrow
bandwidth. Each component of the plane waves is of the form ψ0eikxe−iωt, where ω is the

2

angular frequency, k the propagation constant, and ψ0 an arbitrary constant. Then, for
each of the plane waves, the wave equation leads to an algebraic equation

2

ω

− c

2

2

k

= ω

2
0.

It is seen that the angular frequency and the propagation constant are related to each other.
Further, owing to the presence of the natural frequency ω0, the relation between ω and k
becomes nonlinear and hence the matter wave is dispersive. For electromagnetic wave with
a zero natural frequency, the dispersion then vanishes. On the other hand, the dispersion
relation is important in determining the properties of matter wave.

It is known that the peak of a wave packet moves at its group velocity. Thus the speed
v of a particle can be given by the group speed vg of the associated wave packet, that is,
v = vg = dω/dk. Then, from the preceding dispersion relation, one has ωdω = c2kdk which
in turn yields the propagation constant-speed relation

It is noted that the propagation constant k is proportional to the speed v with the angular
frequency ω as a ratio.

On substituting this relation back into the dispersion relation, it is seen that the fre-

quency ω in turn depends on the speed v as

p
In terms of the natural frequency ω0, the propagation constant-speed relation becomes

Since wavelength is inversely proportional to propagation constant, the wavelength of a
harmonic-like matter wave packet also depends on the particle speed.

In terms of the rest mass m0, the angular frequency and the propagation constant take

the form of

and

respectively. It is of essence to note that the preceding two formulas look like the postulates
of de Broglie. However, the fundamental diﬀerence is that the particle speed here is referred
speciﬁcally to the local-ether frame, which is an ECI frame for earthbound particles. Ignoring
this diﬀerence in reference frame, the famous postulates of de Broglie are then consequences
derived from the dispersion of matter wave.

From the frequency-speed relation (5), one immediately has

It is seen that the particle speed v increases monotonically with the angular frequency
ω. Further, the speed of a free particle is then limited to c, as referred to the local-ether
frame. For this limiting case, the propagation constant k and hence the angular frequency
ω are large enough, such that the natural frequency ω0 in the dispersion relation (3) can be
neglected. As a result, the propagation characteristics of such a matter wave are close to
those of electromagnetic wave. For terrestrial high-energy electrons emitted spontaneously
from radiative elements or accelerated in a synchrotron, the limiting speed is expected to be

k =

ω
c2 v.

ω =

ω0
1 − v2/c2 .

k =

ω0
c2

1

1 − v2/c2 v.

p

¯hω =

¯hk =

m0c2
1 − v2/c2

p
m0v
1 − v2/c2 ,

p

v = c

1 − ω2

0/ω2.

q

3

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

referred to an ECI frame. However, as the linear speed due to earth’s rotation is relatively
low, it makes no substantial diﬀerence in measurement if the speed is referred instead to a
geostationary laboratory frame, as done tacitly in common practice.

A dispersion relation quite similar to (3) can be found in the plane wave propagating
in a plasma, with the natural frequency ω0 being replaced with the plasma frequency [10].
Another similar dispersion can be found in the guided mode propagating in a waveguide, with
the natural frequency ω0 being replaced with the cutoﬀ frequency [10]. Hence a frequency-
speed relation similar to (5) or (9) can be found in a plasma or a waveguide.

4. Mass, Energy, and Momentum

The formulas of angular frequency and propagation constant can be written in a more
compact way by introducing the speed-dependent mass m deﬁned in terms of the rest mass
m0 in a familiar form of

Then we have the frequency-mass relation

and the propagation vector-velocity relation

m = m0

1
1 − v2/c2 .

p

¯hω = mc2

¯hk = mv.

(10)

(11)

(12)

This speed-dependent mass looks like the famous Lorentz mass-variation law. However,
the fundamental diﬀerence is that the particle speed v in (10) is referred speciﬁcally to
the local-ether frame, rather than a laboratory frame or any other. Thus the speeds of
terrestrial particles incorporate the one due to earth’s rotation, while the corresponding
wave properties are entirely independent of earth’s orbital motion around the Sun or others.
From the preceding relations, it is seen that the rest mass m0 and the speed-dependent
mass m of a particle are just the natural frequency and the angular frequency of the associ-
ated matter wave, respectively, aside from the common scaling factor ¯h/c2. Thereby, based
on the local-ether wave equation, the mass originates from the temporal variation of matter
wave. And the mass variation originates from the dispersion of matter wave, which in turn
is due to the natural frequency. On the other hand, it is noticed that the standard derivation
of the mass variation is through a quite indirect way by dealing with a case associated with
an elastic or inelastic collision between two identical particles [11-13].

For a high-speed terrestrial particle, it may make no substantial diﬀerence whether the
particle speed is referred to an ECI frame or to the ground. Nevertheless, one consequence of
the local-ether model is that the speed-dependent mass m as well as the matter wavelength
is expected to possess an east-west directional anisotropy due to earth’s rotation. That
is, for a given ground speed, the earthbound particles moving eastward have the highest
speed with respect to an ECI frame and hence have the heaviest mass, while those moving
westward, the lightest. This anisotropy in mass in conjunction with the mass-dependence of
quantum energy of the matter wave bounded in atoms has been adopted to account for the
east-west directional anisotropy in the clock rate observed in the Hafele-Keating experiment
with circumnavigation atomic clocks [4].

Similar to those in quantum mechanics, the momentum and the energy of a particle
are deﬁned as the expectation values of the spatial and the temporal derivatives, h−i¯h∇i
and hi¯h∂/∂ti, respectively, where the expectation value of an operator O is evaluated in
Ψ∗OΨdr. Thus, for a space-harmonic wave, the
terms of the wavefunction Ψ as hOi =
momentum is given by p = ¯hk. Then, according to the propagation vector-velocity relation
(12), the momentum becomes a familiar form of p = mv. However, the particle velocity v
is referred speciﬁcally to the local-ether frame. From the local-ether wave equation, a ﬁrst-
order time evolution equation, similar to Schr¨odinger’s equation, has been derived. From
this equation it has been shown that the velocity of a particle deﬁned as the time derivative

R

4

of expectation value of the position vector corresponds to the expectation value of a spatial
derivative as v = h−i¯h∇i /m0, where the velocity is referred to the local-ether frame and the
corresponding speed is supposed to be much lower than c [4-6]. It is of interesting to note
that for a wave packet, the particle speed derived from the evolution equation is identical
to the aforementioned group velocity derived from the dispersion relation.

Furthermore, for a time-harmonic wave, the energy is given by E = ¯hω. Then, according

to the frequency-mass relation (11), the energy becomes a familiar form of

E = mc2.

Ignoring the diﬀerence in reference frame of the particle speed, this is just the famous
energy-mass relation ﬁrst introduced by Poincar´e in 1900 [14]. For a low-speed particle, the
mass-variation law (10) leads to

¯hω − ¯hω0 = mc2 − m0c2 =

m0v2.

1
2

Thus, due to the dispersion of matter wave, the variation in the angular frequency or in the
mass corresponds to the kinetic energy for a low-speed particle. When the spatial variation
of Ψ is weak, the temporal variation of Ψ is close to the harmonic e−iω0t and then the
wavefunction can be given as Ψ(r, t) = ψ(r, t)e−iω0t, where the temporal variation of the
wavefunction ψ is weak. The aforementioned evolution equation derived from the wave
equation is expressed in terms of this reduced wavefunction ψ. It is seen that the energy
and the kinetic energy are associated with the expectation values of the time derivative
i¯h∂/∂t evaluated in terms of wavefunctions Ψ and ψ, respectively.

As the particle velocity is referred to a speciﬁc frame, all the values of the angular
frequency, the propagation vector, the energy, the kinetic energy, and of the momentum
remain unchanged when observed in diﬀerent reference frames. For earthbound particles, the
momentum and the kinetic energy are then referred speciﬁcally to an ECI frame. This diﬀers
from the common understanding, since the conventional momentum and kinetic energy are
not attached to a speciﬁc frame and hence are diﬀerent in diﬀerent frames. However, in
what follows we show that the local-ether momentum and kinetic energy indeed comply
with the conservation laws of the conventional momentum and kinetic energy.

Consider the collision between two low-speed particles of rest masses m1 and m2. It is
supposed that the sum of the propagation constants and the one of the angular frequencies
of the two particles remain ﬁxed during the collision. Thus

and

m1v1 + m2v2 = m1v3 + m2v4

m1v

2
1 + m2v

2
2 = m1v

2
3 + m2v

2
4,

where v1 and v3 are the velocities of the particle of m1 before and after the collision,
respectively, v2 and v4 are those of the particle of m2, and all the velocities are referred to
the local-ether frame.

Then, for an arbitrary velocity v0, one immediately has

m1(v1 − v0) + m2(v2 − v0) = m1(v3 − v0) + m2(v4 − v0).

(17)

This relation can be interpreted in the way that based on Galilean transformations the
conventional momentum conserves as observed in a laboratory frame moving at the velocity
v0 with respect to the local-ether frame. Further, by a direct expansion and by a use of
(15), one has

m1(v1 − v0)2 + m2(v2 − v0)2 = m1(v3 − v0)2 + m2(v4 − v0)2.

(18)

Therefore, it is seen that the conventional momentum and kinetic energy conserve in any
laboratory frame, in spite of the situation that their values of respective particles are dif-
ferent in diﬀerent frames. That is, the conservation laws of conventional momentum and

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

5

kinetic energy are invariant under Galilean transformations and have no preferred frame, as
expected in classical mechanics. Thus the local-ether model leads to consequences in accord
with the conservation laws in classical mechanics and with Galilean relativity.

For the case with m2 ≫ m1 and v2 = v0, it is seen that v4 ≃ v0 and then (v3 − v0)2 =
(v1−v0)2. Thus the particle speed, the magnitude of momentum, and the kinetic energy of a
particle remain substantially unchanged before and after its collision with a rigid plane, when
observed in the laboratory frame with respect to which the reﬂecting plane is stationary.
Meanwhile, these two particle speeds in general are diﬀerent when referred to the local-ether
frame. Thus the wavelength of the reﬂected matter wave is diﬀerent from that of the incident
one. Since the diﬀerence between v3 and v1 is parallel to the normal ˆn of the reﬂecting
plane, it can be shown that

v3 = v1 − 2(v1 − v0) · ˆnˆn.

(19)

Moreover, one has ˆn·(v3 − v0) = −ˆn·(v1 − v0). When the reﬂecting point is ﬁxed on a
rigid plane, the directions of the beams formed by the incident and the reﬂected particles
are determined by the particle velocities with respect to the plane. Then the preceding
relations lead to that the angle of reﬂection of a particle beam from the plane is equal to
the angle of incidence, as observed in the laboratory frame. This consequence is simply in
accord with the famous Snell’s law of reﬂection.

5. Reexamination of Matter-Wave Interference Experiments

In this section, we discuss the matter-wave interferometry, where two matter waves are
coherently split from a particle beam, propagate respectively along two separate paths, and
then are combined to cause an interference depending on the phase diﬀerence. It is supposed
that the phase variation φ of a matter wave over a diﬀerential path of directed length dl
along the particle beam is given by

φ = k · dl,

(20)

where the particle velocity v associated with the propagation vector k (= mv/¯h) is referred
speciﬁcally to the local-ether frame, while the directed length dl is invariant in diﬀerent
reference frames. This expression is identical to the one adopted in [15, 16], except the ref-
erence frame of the particle velocity v. Thereby, we reexamine the matter-wave interference
experiments reported in the literature demonstrating the Bragg reﬂection, the double-slit
diﬀraction, and the Sagnac eﬀect, particularly the reference frame of particle velocity and
the eﬀects of earth’s motions.

5.1. Bragg reﬂection and Young’s slit diﬀraction of matter wave

The Bragg reﬂection from a crystal is due to the constructive interference among various
reﬂected waves from successive lattice planes in parallel. Analogous to the Bragg reﬂection
of x-ray from a crystal, the wavelength and the propagation constant of a matter wave can
be determined from the scattering from the surface of lattice planes of a known spacing
by measuring the Bragg angle θB, the reﬂection angle corresponding to the constructive
interference.

For a crystal of lattice spacing d, the path-length diﬀerence between two waves either
incident upon or reﬂected from two consecutive lattice planes is d cos θ′, where θ′ is the
angle of incidence and reﬂection measured from the normal ˆn of the reﬂecting lattice plane
when observed in the laboratory frame in which the crystal is stationary. Then, according
to the aforementioned Snell’s law of reﬂection, the Bragg condition of constructive reﬂection
is given by

m(vp + v0 · t)d cos θ

= nπ¯h,

′

(21)

where vp (= v − v0) represents the particle velocity with respect to the laboratory frame
which in turn moves at the velocity v0 with respect to the local-ether frame, t is one half of
the sum of the unit vectors ˆvp representing the directions of the incident and the reﬂected
It is noted that the direction of t is parallel to the
beams, and n is a positive integer.
lattice planes and its magnitude t = sin θ′. It is seen that the Bragg angle depends on the

6

laboratory speed and the orientation of the lattice planes with respect to the laboratory
velocity.

Consider the ordinary case where the particle speed v is much lower than the speed of
light and hence the particle mass is substantially identical to its rest mass m0. In the mean
time, the particle speed is supposed to be high enough such that v0 ≪ vp ≪ c. Thus the
Bragg condition reduces to

m0vpd cos θ

= nπ¯h.

′

(22)

As the laboratory speed v0 is omitted, this formula becomes invariant under Galilean trans-
formations. The preceding formula is identical to the one given in [1], if the matter wave-
length therein is understood to be associated with the particle speed referred to the labora-
tory frame.

The matter wavelength has been demonstrated in the Davisson-Germer experiment,
where the scattering of accelerated electron beams from the surface of a metal crystal was
measured. Similarly, the matter wavelength has also been demonstrated in the diﬀraction
ring pattern of a high-speed electron beam passing through a thin foil of polycrystalline
gold [1]. More direct evidence for matter wavelength can be provided by the diﬀraction
from macroscopic objects, such as Young’s double slit. It is well known in optics that the
period in the interference fringe pattern is proportional to the wavelength and to the inverse
of the slit separation. Single-, double-, or multiple-slit diﬀraction of matter wave has been
demonstrated for electron [17], neutron [18], and atom [19].

In these various experiments demonstrating the matter wavelength, the reference frame
of the particle velocity is not explicitly speciﬁed and is supposed to be a geostationary
laboratory frame. In what follows, we discuss the issue of reference frame and the eﬀects of
earth’s rotation. Consider the isotropic case where the speed of the particles with respect
to the ground is independent of the beam direction, such as the root-mean-square speed in
thermal equilibrium at a given temperature. However, it is expected that for a given ground
speed, the earthbound particles moving eastward will have the highest speed with respect
to an ECI frame and hence have the shortest wavelength, while those moving westward,
the longest. Thus the matter wavelength is expected to possess an east-west directional
anisotropy due to earth’s rotation, aside from the speed-dependence in the mass. In order
to acquire a matter wavelength of one angstrom (the order of lattice spacing), the speed
for electrons is 7.4 × 106 m/sec. This speed is much higher than the linear speed due to
earth’s rotation. Obviously, it makes no substantial diﬀerence whether the speed is referred
to an ECI frame or to the ground. Therefore, the local-ether model is actually in accord
with the Davisson-Germer experiment and others dealing with electron wave, as examined
within the present precision.

On the other hand, for heavier particles, such as neutron and atoms, the eﬀects of earth’s
rotation would be more appreciable. For example, in order to acquire a matter wavelength
of one angstrom, the speed for neutrons is 4 × 103 m/sec, which is higher than the linear
speed due to earth’s rotation merely by a factor of about 10.
In the Bragg reﬂection
by a geostationary crystal, the ground speed of the reﬂected particles is identical to that
of the incident ones. However, the wavelength of the reﬂected matter wave is expected
to be diﬀerent from that of the incident one, except when the Bragg angle is very small
as measured from the crystal plane. Moreover, the Bragg angle and the fringe period in
Young’s slit diﬀraction are expected to depend on the orientation of the experimental setup
with respect to the ground, even when the ground speed of the incident particles is identical.

5.2. Predicted anisotropy in Bragg angle due to earth’s rotation

We then proceed to examine the minute eﬀect due to the laboratory velocity. Suppose
the Bragg angle θB is measured from the lattice plane (represented by the vector t) to the
reﬂected beam. Then the deﬂection angle of the particle beam measured from incidence to
reﬂection is 2θB. For a given incident beam with an incident angle θ′, there are two values for
the Bragg angle θB, one positive and one negative, which are associated with two orientations
of the crystal symmetric with respect to the incident beam, where θB = ±(π/2 − θ′) and

7

0 < θ′ < π/2. Consider the case where the direction of the laboratory velocity v0 lies in
the plane of incidence. Suppose the incident beam makes an angle α as measured from the
direction of v0. Thus the vector t makes an angle α + θB from that direction. Then the
Bragg condition is given by

m0[vp + v0 cos(α + θB) cos θB]d| sin θB| = nπ¯h.

(23)

It is seen that the laboratory velocity complicates the dependence on angle θB.

Consider the Bragg reﬂection of neutron wave from a pyrolytic graphite crystal brieﬂy
reported in [15], where the laboratory is geostationary and the incident neutron beam is
directed due south (α = 90◦). Then the Bragg condition becomes

| sin θB| {1 − (v0/vp) sin θB cos θB} = nπ¯h/m0vpd.

(24)

The lattice constant is reported to be d = 6.708 angstrom with n = 4; the neutron wave-
length is estimated to be λ = 1.134 angstrom and hence it is understood that vp = 3490
m/sec; and the laboratory is located at a latitude of 38.63◦ and hence v0 = 362 m/sec [15].
Then, according to the preceding formula, the predicted Bragg angles are θa = 20.48◦ and
θb = −19.11◦. A positive or negative Bragg angle corresponds to the situation that the beam
is reﬂected toward west or east, respectively. It is noted that the beam reﬂected toward west
deﬂects more in magnitude than the one toward east. The diﬀerence in magnitude between
the two Bragg angles is associated with the speed ratio v0/vp and presents an anisotropy
due to earth’s rotation.

The constructive reﬂection at the Bragg angle results in a minimum transmission which
in turn can be detected by a counter. The measured results of the crystal rotation angle
for minimum transmission are θ1 = 19.14◦ and θ2 = 159.63◦ [15], where the orientation
corresponding to the starting value of the crystal rotation angle is not speciﬁed explicitly. It
is understood to correspond to the orientation at which the normal of the reﬂecting crystal
surface is directed due west. Thus θ1 and θ3 (= θ2−180◦ = −20.37◦) should be identical to θa
and θb, respectively. It is seen that the two Bragg reﬂections are asymmetric, as predicted by
the local-ether model. However, the agreement is not good quantitatively. The discrepancies
in the Bragg angles might be due to that the incident beam is not exactly directed due south
or that the crystal rotation angle should be understood otherwise. Anyway, the predicted
directional anisotropy in the Bragg angle due to earth’s rotation provides a means to test
the local-ether wave equation.

5.3. Matter-wave Sagnac eﬀect in rotating loop

By using the Bragg reﬂection from multiple crystals to form a closed path for the particle
beam, the loop interferometry of matter wave can be achieved. We discuss the Sagnac eﬀect
of matter wave associated with the rotation of an interferometer which has a closed path
formed by a series of reﬂecting planes of suitable orientations. Consider two coherently split
particle beams form two paths L1 and L2 which in turn form a coplanar closed contour L of
arbitrary shape. Suppose the loop L is rotating about an axis at an arbitrary location with
an arbitrary directed rotation rate ¯ωI with respect to the laboratory frame which in turn
is rotating in an ECI frame. Thus the velocity vl of the various reﬂecting planes forming
the path is not uniform and is given by vl = v0 + (¯ωI + ¯ωE) × (r − r0) with respect to the
local-ether frame, where r and r0 denote the position vectors of the planes and of a suitable
reference point at which the laboratory velocity v0 is deﬁned, respectively, and ¯ωE is the
directed rate of earth’s rotation.

The direction of the particle beam around the loop is determined by the propagation
vector kp (= mvp/¯h), where vp (= v − vl) is the particle velocity with respect to the asso-
ciated reﬂecting plane. For the trivial case with ωI = 0, the path velocity vl is substantially
uniform among the planes, as ωE is quite small. Thus the particle velocity vp, the propaga-
tion vector kp, and the particle beam traveling between two consecutive planes are all along
the directed linear segment l joining the reﬂecting point on one of the two planes to that on

8

the other. Consequently, the term kp · l incorporated in the phase variation k · l over the
path segment l is then equal to the scalar product kpl. Furthermore, the particle speed vp
and the propagation constant kp are always ﬁxed while the particle beam is traveling around
the loop. On the other hand, for the case with ωI 6= 0, the path velocity vl is varying among
the planes. Thus the direction of the particle beam, as well as those of the particle velocity
vp and of the propagation vector kp, tends to deviate from the path segment l. However,
the eﬀect of these deviations on the phase variation is small if the rotation rate ωI times the
segment length l is much smaller than the particle speed vp. Actually, it is merely of the
second order of the speed ratio ωIl/vp, since the velocity diﬀerence between two consecutive
planes under rotation is perpendicular to the segment l. Similarly, the fractional variation
in the magnitude kp around the loop is also of this order.

Thereby, for a loop formed by closely spaced reﬂecting planes or undergoing a slow
rotation such that the condition ωI l ≪ vp is met for every segment, the phase diﬀerence
between the coherent beams along the two paths can be given by the path integral

△φ = −

k · ˆl1dl +

k · ˆl2dl =

k · dl,

ZL1

ZL2

IL

(25)

where dl = −ˆl1dl and ˆl2dl on paths L1 and L2, respectively. Further, as the diﬀerential
phase variation kp·dl can be given by the scalar product kpdl in conjunction with kp being
a constant value around the loop, the phase diﬀerence becomes

△φ = kp(l2 − l1) +

vl · dl,

(26)

m0
¯h IL

where l1 and l2 are the lengths of paths L1 and L2, respectively. In deriving the preceding
formula, the ordinary condition v ≪ c is assumed such that the speed-dependent mass m is
substantially identical to the rest mass m0.

For the case where the path is suitably structured such that l1 = l2, the phase diﬀerence

then takes the form of

△φ =

2ω0
c2 (¯ωI + ¯ωE) · S,

(27)

where S (= 1
L r × dl) is the directed area enclosed by the loop L and we have made use
2
of a vector identity, the relation ¯hω0 = m0c2, and of the result that the integration of a
H
constant vector v0 or r0 around an arbitrary loop is zero. It is seen that earth’s rotation
as well as the rotation of the loop with respect to the ground contributes to the phase
diﬀerence, as the path velocity vl is referred to an ECI frame for terrestrial experiments
and hence incorporates the linear velocity due to earth’s rotation. The phase-diﬀerence
formula (27) with either ¯ωI or ¯ωE looks like the matter-wave Sagnac eﬀect derived in [15,
20-22] from various diﬀerent approaches. The matter-wave Sagnac eﬀect associated with
the rotation-induced quantum interference has been demonstrated with a particle beam of
electron [22], neutron [15, 16], or of atom [23, 24]. In these experiments, the loop can be
rotating on a turntable [22, 23] or simply be geostationary with variable orientation [15,
16]. For a geostationary loop with a speciﬁc structure, the phase diﬀerence due to earth’s
rotation together with that due to earth’s gravity has also been derived from the local-ether
model [25], which agrees with the experimental results with neutron beam reported in [15,
16].

It is noted that the phase diﬀerence (27) is identical to the one for optical wave when
the natural frequency ω0 is replaced with the angular frequency of an optical wave, aside
from a factor of 2 due to a diﬀerence in the path structure [3]. As the natural frequency of
matter wave is much higher than an optical frequency, the loop area required for the matter-
wave interference can be much smaller. By using the geostationary loop interferometer with
neutron wave, the phase diﬀerence (27) due to earth’s rotation alone has been demonstrated
with a high precision. It is noticed that the loop area employed for the detection of earth’s
rotation with neutron wave is about 10−3 m2 in [15, 16], which is much smaller than 2 × 105

9

m2 in the Michelson-Gale experiment for the same purpose with optical wave [26]. By
using cesium atomic beam, earth’s rotation has also been detected with the Sagnac loop
interferometry [24].

Meanwhile, in as early as 1904 Michelson supposed that the Sagnac eﬀect due to the
orbital motion of the Earth around the Sun might be detectable [26], although the angular
speed of the orbital motion is about 1/365 times that of the rotation. If this orbital eﬀect
does exist, it could be demonstrated with matter wave of neutron or atom by constructing
a path of area of 0.2 m2 or smaller. However, the orbital eﬀect is never observed in ter-
restrial interferometers either with electromagnetic or matter wave, to our knowledge. In
some earthbound experiments with electromagnetic wave, this eﬀect has been assumed to
be null by resorting to the principle of local Lorentz invariance (see [3] for a discussion).
Anyway, according to the local-ether propagation model, the particle velocity which deter-
mines the propagation vector k of matter wave is referred uniquely to an ECI frame, rather
than to a heliocentric inertial, the ECEF (earth-centered earth-ﬁxed), or any other frame.
Thus earthbound experiments can depend on earth’s rotation but are entirely independent
of earth’s orbital motion around the Sun or whatever. Thereby, the local-ether model un-
ambiguously predicts a discrepancy between the eﬀects of the rotational and the orbital
motions of the Earth in the Sagnac loop interferometry as well as in many other earthbound
experiments discussed in [3, 4], which provides a means to test its validity. Moreover, the
phase-diﬀerence formula (27) is not expected to hold for an interferometer with a high ro-
tation rate, especially when the particle speed vp is low. This restriction provides another
means to test the local-ether wave equation.

6. Conclusion

The local-ether wave equation for a free particle looks like the free-space Klein-Gordan
equation, except the reference frame of the time derivative. By virtue of the natural fre-
quency, the wave equation leads to a dispersion relation for a harmonic-like wave packet.
From the dispersion relation, the angular frequency and wavelength of matter wave and the
speed-dependent mass of particle are derived, which look like the postulates of de Broglie
and the Lorentz mass-variation law, respectively, except the reference frame of the particle
velocity. For a harmonic matter wave, the angular frequency and the propagation vector are
associated with the energy and the momentum of the particle, respectively, as the energy
and the momentum are given by the expectation values of the temporal and the spatial
derivatives evaluated in the wavefunction, respectively. As the phase variation of a particle
beam is given by the propagation vector and the path length along the beam, a shift in these
quantities leads to a phase diﬀerence between two coherent beams. From the diﬀerence in
the path length, the Bragg condition of constructive reﬂection from a crystal is derived.
Moreover, from the shift in the propagation vector due to earth’s rotation, the rotation of
the interferometer, or to the gravity, the phase diﬀerences in the loop interferometry are
derived.

As the velocity of earthbound particles is referred uniquely to an ECI frame, rather
than a laboratory frame or any other, it is predicted that earth’s rotation leads to an east-
west directional anisotropy both in mass and wavelength. Moreover, the particle velocity
involved in the matter-wave interferometry incorporates the laboratory velocity with respect
to an ECI frame for terrestrial experiments. For electrons, the mass is light and the speed
is normally high. The anisotropy due to earth’s rotation or the eﬀect due to the laboratory
velocity is then negligibly small. Thereby, the local-ether model for electron wave is actually
in accord with the Davisson-Germer experiment and Young’s slit diﬀraction as examined
within the present precision. Further, the eﬀect of the laboratory velocity can cancel out
in a loop interferometer. Consequently, in spite of the restriction on the reference frame of
particle velocity, the derived interference formulas for the Bragg reﬂection or for the loop
interferometry can be independent of the laboratory velocity and then comply with Galilean
relativity.

On the other hand, for heavier particles of neutron or atom, the eﬀects of earth’s rotation

10

on matter wavelength are expected to be more appreciable. It is predicted that the Bragg
angle and the fringe period in Young’s slit diﬀraction depend on the orientation of the
experimental setup with respect to the ground. For a given incident neutron beam, it
is analyzed that the Bragg angle can deviate by an amount of about one degree between
two symmetric orientations of the crystal. The predicted directional anisotropy in the Bragg
angle and in the fringe period, the slow-rotation restriction on the famous formula of matter-
wave Sagnac eﬀect, and the discrepancy between the eﬀects of earth’s rotational and orbital
motions provide diﬀerent approaches to test the local-ether wave equation.

References

1961), chs. 3 and 6.

[1] See, for example, R.M. Eisberg, Fundamentals of Modern Physics (Wiley, New York,

[2] H.A. Lorentz, in The Principle of Relativity (Dover, New York, 1952), p. 11.

[3] C.C. Su, Eur. Phys. J. C 21, 701 (2001); Europhys. Lett. 56, 170 (2001).

[4] C.C. Su, Eur. Phys. J. B 24, 231 (2001).

[5] C.C. Su, J. Electromagnetic Waves Applicat. 16, 403 (2002).

[6] C.C. Su, “A local-ether wave equation and the consequent electromagnetic force law,”
J. Electromagnetic Waves Applicat. (in press); in IEEE Antennas Propagat. Soc. Int.
Symp. Dig. (2001), vol. 1, p. 216; in Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. (Mar. 2001), p. 1144.

[7] J.D. Bjorken and S.D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1964); A.A. Sokolov, I.M. Ternov, and V. Ch. Zhukovskii, Quantum Mechanics
(Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1984), sect. 17; F. Gross, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
and Field Theory (Wiley, New York, 1993), ch. 4.

[8] H. Kragh, Am. J. Phys. 52, 1024 (1984).

[9] E.P. Battey-Pratt and T.J. Racey, Int. J. Theoret. Phys. 19, 437 (1980). (In this

paper, the mass of a particle is ascribed to the spin.)

[10] See, for example, S. Ramo, J.R. Whinnery, and T. Van Duzer, Fields and Waves in

Communication Electronics (Wiley, New York, 1965), pp. 341 and 384.

[11] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York, 1975), ch. 11.

[12] P. Lorrain and D.R. Corson, Electromagnetic Fields and Waves (Freeman, San Fran-

cisco, 1972), ch. 5.

[13] L.C. Baird, Am. J. Phys. 48, 779 (1980); P.D. Gupta, Am. J. Phys. 49, 890 (1981).

[14] L.B. Okun, Phys. Today 42, 31 (1989).

[15] J.-L. Staudenmann, S.A. Werner, R. Colella, and A.W. Overhauser, Phys. Rev. A

21, 1419 (1980).

[16] K.C. Littrell, B.E. Allman, and S.A. Werner, Phys. Rev. A 56, 1767 (1997).

[17] C. J¨onsson, Am. J. Phys. 42, 4 (1974).

[18] A. Zeilinger, R. G¨ahler, C.G. Shull, W. Treimer, and W. Mampe, Rev. Mod. Phys.

60, 1067 (1988).

[19] O. Carnal and J. Mlynek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2689 (1991).

11

[20] M. Dresden and C.N. Yang, Phys. Rev. D 20, 1846 (1979).

[21] L.A. Page, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 543 (1975).

[22] F. Hasselbach and M. Nicklaus, Phys. Rev. A 49, 143 (1993).

[23] A. Lenef, T.D. Hammond, E.T. Smith, M.S. Chapman, R.A. Rubenstein, and D.E.

Pritchard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 760 (1997).

[24] T.L. Gustavson, P. Bouyer, and M.A. Kasevich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2046 (1997).

[25] C.C. Su, “Reinterpretation of the eﬀects of earth’s rotation and gravity on the neutron-

interferometry experiment,” Europhys. Lett. (in press).

[26] R. Anderson, H.R. Bilger, and G.E. Stedman, Am. J. Phys. 62, 975 (1994).

12

