2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Resonant Absorption between Moving Atoms
due to Doppler Frequency Shift and Quantum Energy Variation

Ching-Chuan Su
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Tsinghua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan

Abstract – By taking both the Doppler frequency shift for electromagnetic wave and the
quantum energy variation of matter wave into consideration, a resonant-absorption condition
based on the local-ether wave equation is presented to account for a variety of phenomena
consistently, including the Ives-Stilwell experiment, the output frequency from ammonia
masers, and the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment. It is found that in the resonant-absorption
condition, the major term associated with the laboratory velocity is a dot-product term
between this velocity and that of the emitting or absorbing atom. This term appears
both in the Doppler frequency shift and the transition frequency variation and then cancels
out. Thereby, the experimental results can be independent of the laboratory velocity and
hence comply with Galilean relativity, despite the restriction that the involved velocities are
referred speciﬁcally to the local-ether frame. However, by examining the resonant-absorption
condition in the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment to a higher order, it is found that Galilean
relativity breaks down.

1. Introduction

p

It is well known that the Doppler eﬀect due to the relative motion between a transmitter
and a receiver causes a shift in the received frequency of electromagnetic or acoustic wave.
The Doppler eﬀect has been applied by Ives and Stilwell to deal with the frequency shift
in the light emitted from a fast-moving hydrogen atomic beam [1]. However, it was found
that the observed frequency shift agrees with the Doppler eﬀect only to the ﬁrst order of
the atom speed normalized to the speed of light c. In order to account for the observed shift
correctly to the second order, a hypothesis of Larmor and Lorentz was adopted, which states
that the frequency of a wave radiated from a moving source of speed v is altered by a factor
1 − v2/c2 [1]. It is noted that this speed-dependent factor is identical to the one in the
of
famous Lorentz mass-variation law. Presently, an almost unanimously accepted explanation
of this additional frequency shift is provided by Einstein’s special relativity, whereby a
second-order Doppler eﬀect has been derived based on the Lorentz transformation of space
and time [2]. Thus it seems to imply that the frequency shift to the second order between a
transmitter and a receiver in relative motion is purely a kinematical property. And, for the
case of resonant absorption between moving atoms or ions, it seems to assume tacitly that the
transition frequencies of the emitting or the absorbing atoms in motion remain unchanged,
in spite of the well-known fact that the electronic quantum states in atoms depend on the
mass of electron, which in turn depends on the particle speed. Furthermore, in the common
understanding the speed v which determines the second-order Doppler frequency shift by
the mass-variation factor is the relative speed between the transmitter and the receiver.
However, in the Hafele-Keating experiment with circumnavigating atomic clocks and in the
GPS (global positioning system) with atomic clocks onboard the orbiting satellites, it has
been demonstrated with a high precision that the speed which determines the transition
frequency and clock rate by the mass-variation factor is referred uniquely to an ECI (earth-
centered inertial) frame [3]. Thus there seems to exist a discrepancy in the reference frame
for the speed in the mass-variation factor.

Recently, we have presented the local-ether model of propagation of electromagnetic
wave [4]. It is supposed that electromagnetic wave propagates via a medium like the ether.
However, the ether is not universal. Speciﬁcally, it is supposed that in the region under

1

suﬃcient inﬂuence of the gravity due to the Earth, the Sun, or another celestial body, there
forms a local ether which as well as the associated gravitational potential moves with the
respective body. Within each local ether, it is proposed that as in the classical propagation
model, electromagnetic wave propagates at the speed of light c with respect to the associated
local ether, independent of the motions of source and receiver. Thereby, for earthbound or
interplanetary waves, the propagation is referred speciﬁcally to a geocentric or a heliocentric
inertial frame, respectively. This local-ether model has been adopted to account for the
eﬀects of earth’s motions in a wide variety of propagation phenomena, particularly the
Sagnac correction in GPS, the time comparison via intercontinental microwave link, and
the echo time in interplanetary radar. As examined within the present accuracy, the local-
ether model is still in accord with the Michelson-Morley experiment which is known to
make the classical ether notion obsolete. Furthermore, by modifying the speed of light in a
gravitational potential, this simple propagation model leads to the deﬂection of light by the
Sun and the increment in the interplanetary radar echo time which are important phenomena
supporting the general theory of relativity. Moreover, based on this new classical model,
the ﬁrst-order Doppler frequency shift has been derived to account for the anisotropy in
antenna temperature of CMBR (cosmic microwave background radiation), the shift in the
spectrum of light radiated from a moving star, and the seasonal variation of eclipse intervals
in Roemer’s observations of Jupiter’s moons [4].

Further, the matter wave associated with a particle has been supposed to follow the
local-ether model and be governed by a wave equation incorporating a natural frequency
and the electric scalar potential [3]. From the local-ether wave equation, a ﬁrst-order time
evolution equation similar to Schr¨odinger’s equation is derived. From the electrostatic force
derived from this evolution equation, it has been found that the rest mass of a particle
is just the natural frequency, aside from a scaling factor. That is, the inertial mass of a
particle originates from the natural frequency and hence from the temporal variation of
the associated matter wave. Furthermore, due to the dispersion of matter wave, it has
been derived that the mass of the particle and the angular frequency of the matter wave
increase with the particle speed by the famous Lorentz mass-variation factor, except that
the speed is referred speciﬁcally to the associated local-ether frame. A feature diﬀerent
from Schr¨odinger’s equation is that the time derivative in the local-ether evolution equation
incorporates an extra multiplying term of the ratio of the speed-dependent angular frequency
to the natural frequency. As a consequence, it has been found that the energies of quantum
states of the matter wave bounded in an atom decrease with the inverse of the speed-
dependent mass [3]. Thus the transition frequency and the atomic clock rate decrease with
the atom speed by the mass-variation factor. Thereby, the frequency variation associated
with the speed-dependent mass-variation factor has been derived as an intrinsic quantum
property of the matter wave bounded in atom. Similarly, the gravitational redshift has been
derived as an eﬀect of the gravitational potential on the quantum energy. Anyway, the
dependence of quantum energy on speed can be expected at least for hydrogen-like atoms.
Since it is well known in standard textbooks on quantum mechanics that the electronic
quantum states in such an atom depend on the mass of electron, which in turn has been
known to depend on speed. However, according to the local-ether model, the atom speed
that determines the mass variation is referred uniquely to an ECI (earth-centered inertial)
frame for earthbound atoms. Thus the quantum energy and hence the atomic clock rate tend
to depend on earth’s rotation, but is entirely independent of earth’s orbital motion around
the Sun or others. This consequence has been used to account for the east-west directional
anisotropy in the Hafele-Keating experiment, the synchronism among GPS atomic clocks,
and for the spatial isotropy in the Hughes-Drever experiment [3].

In this investigation, based on the local-ether propagation model, a higher-order Doppler
frequency shift for electromagnetic wave is derived. Further, by taking the speed-dependent
variation of quantum energy of matter wave into account, we present a resonant-absorption
condition between moving emitting and absorbing atoms. Then this frequency relation is
applied to deal with various experiments consistently, including the Ives-Stilwell experiment,

2

the output frequency from ammonia masers, and the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment. More-
over, we examine the spatial isotropy, Galilean relativity, and their breakdowns in these
experiments.

2. Higher-Order Doppler Frequency Shift

In this section, based on the local-ether model of wave propagation, the Doppler fre-
quency shift is given to higher orders. Consider the case where both the source and the
receiver are located within the same local ether and are moving at velocities vs and ve
with respect to this local-ether frame, respectively. According to the classical propagation
model, the propagation time τ is the propagation range R divided by the isotropic speed
c as τ = R/c. It is important to note that the propagation range is the distance from the
position of the source at the instant of wave emission to the one of the receiver at the instant
of reception, as viewed in the local-ether frame. Thus the propagation range and hence the
propagation time depend on the velocity ve and the acceleration ae of the receiver with
respect to the local-ether frame. Quantitatively, when τ is short, the propagation range is
given implicitly by

where Rt is the directed propagation-path length from the source to the receiver both at
the instant of emission. It can be shown that to the second order of normalized speed, the
propagation range can be given explicitly in terms of the path length Rt by [4]

R =

Rt + ve

+ ae

R
c

,

R2
2c2 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1
c

R = Rt

1 +

ue +

(cid:26)

1
2c2

e + v2
u2
(cid:0)

e + ae · Rt

,

(cid:27)
(cid:1)

where radial speed u (= v · ˆRt) is the component of velocity v along Rt and the unit vector
ˆRt = Rt/Rt.

Consider the Doppler eﬀect for the case where the source is emitting wave periodically
and is moving with respect to the receiver. Due to the motions of the transmitter and
receiver, the rate of reception tends to be diﬀerent from the one of emission. As discussed
in [4], the received time diﬀerence △t between two signals transmitted with a diﬀerential
time diﬀerence △t′ can be given in terms of the diﬀerence in the propagation range by

where R(t) denotes the propagation range for the wave emitted at an arbitrary instant t.
Then the received frequency fr and the transmitted frequency ft are related by

where the time derivative of the propagation range is evaluated at the instant of wave
emission.

The second-order Doppler eﬀect can be given if the ﬁrst-order formula of the propagation

range is used. By so doing, the Doppler frequency relation becomes

△t = △t′ +

R(t′ + △t′)
c

−

R(t′)
c

,

ft
fr

=

△t
△t′ = 1 +

dR
cdt

,

ft
fr

= 1 +

dRt
cdt

+

d
c2dt

(ve · Rt).

ft
fr

= 1 +

ues
c

+

ve · ves

c2 +

ae · Rt
c2

.

3

Due to the relative motion between source and receiver, dRt/dt = ves and hence dRt/dt =
ues, where ves (= ve − vs) is the Newtonian relative velocity between receiver and source at
the instant of emission and ues (= ue − us) is the radial speed of the receiver with respect
to the source. Thus, as given in [4], the second-order Doppler frequency relation becomes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

It is noted that the transverse components of velocities are also involved in the second-order
Doppler shift. To the second order of normalized speed, the inverse frequency ratio reads

fr
ft

= 1 −

ues
c

−

ve · ves

c2 −

ae · Rt

c2 +

u2
es
c2 .

(7)

When the third-order Doppler eﬀect needs to be considered, the second-order formula of
the propagation range should be used, as discussed later.

3. Quantum Energy Variation and Resonant-Absorption Condition
Based on the local-ether wave equation, it has been found that the mass of a particle in-
creases with its speed by the famous Lorentz mass-variation factor, except that the speed is
referred speciﬁcally to an ECI frame for earthbound particles [3]. From this wave equation a
ﬁrst-order time evolution equation is derived, which is similar to Schr¨odinger’s equation ex-
cept that the time derivative is referred speciﬁcally to the local-ether frame and incorporates
an extra multiplying term of the mass-variation factor. Thereby, a quantum-mechanical ap-
proach has been presented to show that the energies of quantum states of the matter wave
bounded in an atom or a molecule decrease with the inverse of the speed-dependent mass.
It is known that the frequency of light emitted from or absorbed by an atom is equal to
the transition frequency, which in turn corresponds to the diﬀerence in energy between two
involved quantum states. Thus the state transition frequency f of a moving atom decreases
with its speed by the speed-dependent mass-variation factor as [3]

f = f0

1 − v2/c2,

p

(8)

where v is the atom speed referred to the local-ether frame which is an ECI frame for
earthbound atoms, f0 is the rest transition frequency of an identical atom stationary in the
local-ether frame, and the frequency f is observed in the atom frame (with respect to which
the atom is stationary) such that no Doppler shift is involved.

The atomic clock rate depends on the transition frequency of the associated atom and
hence decreases with the atom speed by the mass-variation factor. The preceding speed-
dependent frequency-variation formula has been adopted in [3] to account for the east-west
directional anisotropy in the clock rate demonstrated in the Hafele-Keating experiment
with cesium atomic clocks onboard an aircraft undergoing circumnavigation [5].
In this
experiment the observed clock rate is determined from the number of the atomic clock ticks
which in turn are detected and counted by a device which is comoving with the clock without
relative motion. Thus the clock rate is associated with the quantum energy variation, but
has nothing to do with the Doppler frequency shift. Moreover, it has been used to account
for the synchronism and the clock-rate adjustment in GPS atomic clocks onboard earth’s
satellites in circular orbits.

A speed-dependent frequency of the form of (8) (but of diﬀerent physical origin and
reference frame of speed) was ﬁrst introduced by Fitzgerald, Lorentz, and Larmor before the
advent of the special relativity [6] and was later derived by assuming the length contraction
[7] or the time dilation [2]. In the local-ether model, the frequency-variation formula due to
the quantum eﬀect is not expected to hold in all energy states in all atoms and other forms
of the speed-dependence are not precluded. This is in view of the complication that the
interactions which aﬀect energy states are versatile, such as electronic or nuclear, electric or
magnetic, spin or orbital, and intrinsic or external. In [3], the frequency-variation formula
is veriﬁed only for electronic states due to the electric scalar potential in an atom or a
molecule. Nevertheless, it is assumed that this formula holds in the experiments examined
in this investigation.

Then we proceed to consider the case where the source atom s and the receiver atom
e are located within the same local ether but are moving respectively at velocities vs and
ve with respect to the local-ether frame. Due to the motions of the source and receiver,
the Doppler eﬀect also causes a frequency shift. Suppose f0s and f0e are the rest transition

4

frequencies of atoms s and e, respectively. The transmitted frequency ft of the wave emitted
from the moving atom s is related to the rest transition frequency f0s as

p
On the other hand, in order for the wave being resonantly absorbed by the moving atom e,
the rest transition frequency f0e should be related to the received frequency fr as

ft = f0s

1 − v2

s /c2.

fr = f0e

1 − v2

e /c2.

p
The received frequency fr and the transmitted frequency ft in turn are related to each other
by the Doppler eﬀect as shown in (6) or (7).

Thus, by taking both the Doppler frequency shift for electromagnetic wave and the quan-
tum energy variation of matter wave into account, we arrive at the resonant-absorption
condition in terms of the rest transition frequencies f0s and f0e, which to the second order
of normalized speed is given by

f0e

1 − v2

e /c2 = f0s

1 − v2

s /c2

1 − ues/c − (ve · ves + ae · Rt − u2

es)/c2

.

(11)

p

p

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

For the case where the receiver is comoving with the source (ve = vs) without acceleration,
the resonant-absorption condition becomes trivially as f0e = f0s. This resonant-absorption
condition made its debut in [8].

When the resonant-absorption condition is not met, the oﬀ-resonance absorption tends
to be much weaker. The deviation in frequency from the resonant-absorption condition is
given by the diﬀerence between the received frequency and the transition frequencies of the
absorbing atoms in motion. That is,

By using (9), the frequency deviation can be written as

δf = fr − f0e

1 − v2

e /c2.

p

δf = △fD − △fQ,

where △fD and △fQ denote the frequency shifts due to the Doppler and the quantum
eﬀects and are given by

△fD = fr − ft

and

△fQ = f0e

1 − v2

e /c2 − f0s

1 − v2

s /c2,

p

p

respectively. In words, △fQ is the diﬀerence in the speed-dependent transition frequency
between the receiver and source atoms in motion. From (4) it is seen that the fractional
Doppler frequency shift is given by

(9)

(10)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

The resonant-absorption condition corresponds to the deviation δf = 0, which means that
the frequency shift due to the Doppler eﬀect for electromagnetic wave propagating in free
space exactly cancels the one due to the quantum eﬀect of matter wave bounded in atom.

4. Reexamination of Resonant-Absorption Experiments

Based on the local-ether model, we reexamine the resonant-absorption experiments re-
ported in the literature. Thereby, we present reinterpretations of the Ives-Stilwell experi-
ment, the output frequency from ammonia masers, and of the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment
and explore the associated spatial isotropy, Galilean relativity, and their breakdowns. The
ﬁrst experiment is associated with a radial relative motion (ues ≃ ±ves) and the last two
are with a transverse relative motion (ues = 0).

△fD
fr

= −

dR
cdt

.

5

4.1. Ives-Stilwell experiment

Consider the case where the source is moving at a velocity vs and the receiver is sta-
tionary, both with respect to the local-ether frame. Thus ae = 0, ve = 0, and ues = −us.
Then the second-order resonant-absorption condition becomes a simpler form of

f0e = f0s p

s /c2

1 − v2
1 − us/c

.

(17)

For this case fr = f0e and thus this formula is identical to that derived in diﬀerent ways based
on the transformation of four-vectors [9] or on the time dilation [2], except the diﬀerence in
reference frame of velocity vs. According to the local-ether model, the term (1 − us/c) in
the preceding formula is due to the Doppler frequency shift to the second order, while the
term

s /c2 is due to the quantum energy variation.

1 − v2

p

A similar frequency shift has been demonstrated in the Ives-Stilwell experiment, where
light is emitted from fast-moving hydrogen atoms in an excited state and is absorbed by a
spectrograph used to measure the received frequency [1, 10]. The radiation from the moving
atoms is reﬂected from two mirrors and then the two reﬂected light beams are guided to
a photographic plate where the frequencies are recorded for measurement and comparison.
The two mirrors are arranged in such a way that the atoms are moving toward one of them
and away from the other [10]. Due to the Doppler eﬀect with the relative motions between
the emitting atoms and the mirrors, the light beams reﬂected from the mirrors tend to shift
in frequency. However, by virtue of no relative motions among the mirrors, the spectrograph,
and the other components of experimental setup, no further Doppler eﬀect is introduced
after the reﬂection.

Note that even for a geostationary experimental setup, the receiver is not stationary with
respect to the associated local-ether frame due to earth’s rotation. Consider the laboratory
frame in which the setup and the receiver are stationary. Suppose that the emitting atoms
are moving at a velocity vt with respect to the laboratory frame, which in turn moves at
a velocity v0 with respect to an ECI frame. Thus ve = v0, vs = vt + v0, and ves = −vt.
In the experiment the atoms move nearly in the radial direction and the directions of the
two propagation paths are antiparallel. Thus ues = ∓vt cos θ, where θ denotes the small
angle of vt from ˆRt, ± ˆRt represents the direction from the emitting atoms to the reﬂecting
point on either mirror, and the upper or the lower sign applies for the light beam reﬂected
from the mirror which the atoms approach or recede from, respectively. Then the resonant-
absorption condition (11) leads to that the received frequencies for the two reﬂected light
beams are

(18)

If the

(19)

fr± = f0s

1 − (vt + v0)2/c2

p

1 ± vt cos θ/c + (v0 · vt + v2
(cid:8)

t cos2 θ)/c2

.

(cid:9)

It is noted that the ﬁrst-order term is independent of the laboratory velocity v0.
velocity v0 is neglected, the preceding formula reduces to (17).

To the second order of normalized speed, the received frequencies become

fr± = f0s

1 ∓ vt cos θ/c + (v2
(cid:8)

t + v2

0)/2c2

−1

.

(cid:9)

Both the Doppler and the quantum eﬀects contribute to the second-order terms. It is noted
that the dot-product term v0·vt appears both in the Doppler and the quantum eﬀects and
then cancels out. In the Ives-Stilwell experiment the speed vt of hydrogen atoms is of the
order of 106 m/sec, which is achieved by electrostatically accelerating hydrogen ions with
a voltage of tens of kV. Thus the atom speed vt is much higher than the laboratory speed
v0 which is due to earth’s rotation and, perhaps, to the motion of a vehicle carrying the
experimental setup. Thus the preceding frequency formula can be substantially independent
of the laboratory velocity v0.

The ﬁrst- and the second-order fractional frequency shifts are associated with the dif-
ference between and with the sum of the two received frequencies, respectively. Thus, in

6

terms of wavelengths, the normalized speed and its square can be given by

and

vt
c

=

1
2 cos θ

λR − λB
λ0

v2
t
c2 =

λR + λB
λ0

(cid:18)

− 2 −

v2
0
c2 (cid:19)

,

where λB = c/fr+, λR = c/fr−, and λ0 = c/f0s. By measuring λR and λB, the ﬁrst- and
the second-order fractional shifts can be calculated and compared, with a knowledge of θ,
λ0, and v0. This provides a crucial means to test the minor second-order frequency shift. It
can be expected that the deviation of the sum λR + λB from 2λ0 is quite small. By using
a high-precision spectrograph, it has been measured that λR = 6618.808 (in angstrom) and
λB = 6507.253 [10]. Meanwhile, it is known that λ0 = 6562.793 and θ = 0.075 (in rad).
t /c2 = 7.26 × 10−5 and 7.24×10−5, respectively,
Then formulas (20) and (21) lead to v2
0/c2 is as small as 10−12 and hence is omitted. The agreement between the
where the term v2
two data is quite good, since the discrepancy is as small as the round-oﬀ in the calculation.
According to the local-ether model, the wavelength λ0 corresponds to a transition frequency
of a hydrogen atom stationary with respect to an ECI frame. This seems to be in accord
with the description that λ0 is the wavelength of the Hα line of the Balmer series observed
in a reference frame at rest with respect to the radiating atom [10]. However, the value of λ0
could be actually measured from geostationary atoms in a geostationary laboratory. Even
so, the fractional discrepancy in λ0 due to the diﬀerence in reference frame is also of the
0/c2. Thus the local-ether model is in accord with the self-consistency between the
order of v2
ﬁrst- and the second-order frequency shifts demonstrated in the Ives-Stilwell experiment.

4.2. Output frequency from ammonia masers

Next, we consider the case where the source is moving transverse to the propagation
path. In the ammonia maser, the molecular beam is injected into a resonant cavity and
emits microwave due to quantum state transition [11, 2]. The output of the microwave comes
through a waveguide coupled to the cavity via a small aperture. Suppose that the cavity
and the receiver are stationary in the laboratory frame of velocity v0 and that the emitting
ammonia molecular beam moves at a velocity vt with respect to the cavity. Moreover,
suppose that the output waveguide is thin and long and is positioned with its longitudinal
axis being perpendicular to the direction of molecular beam represented by vt. Thus the
direction of the propagation path of the microwave is virtually parallel to the longitudinal
axis of the output waveguide and hence is transverse to the molecule velocity, that is,
vt· ˆRt = 0.

Thus ve = v0, ae = 0, vs = vt + v0, ves = −vt, and ues = 0. Then the resonant-

absorption condition (11) leads to the received frequency

fr = f0s

1 − (vt + v0)2/c2

p

1 + v0 · vt/c2
(cid:8)

(cid:9)

.

The Doppler eﬀect is presented by the dot-product term v0·vt. Thus, by taking both the
Doppler and the quantum eﬀects into account, the resonant-absorption condition leads to
that the received frequency at the output waveguide of the maser is given by

It is noted again that the dot-product term v0·vt appears both in the Doppler and the
quantum eﬀects and then cancels out. Consequently, the output frequency from the maser
is independent of the directions of velocities vt and v0. Moreover, the resonant-absorption
condition leads to

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

fr
f0s

= 1 −

t + v2
v2
0
2c2

.

f0e
f0s

= 1 −

v2
t
2c2 .

7

It is seen that this frequency relation is even independent of the laboratory velocity v0.

It is noticed that a term quite similar to the second-order Doppler eﬀect in (22) has
been derived alternatively from a classical approach, aside from the reference frame of the
laboratory velocity [11, 2]. Further, a similar cancellation of the terms associated with v0 has
been accounted for by an alternative approach, where a speed-dependent frequency based
on the time dilation is used [12]. Anyway, it has been demonstrated experimentally that the
beat frequency between two masers with molecular beams moving in opposite directions is
substantially zero and is almost independent of earth’s motions [11]. Thus the local-ether
model is in accord with the experiments with ammonia masers.

4.3. M¨ossbauer rotor experiment

Then we consider the case where both the source and the absorber are moving in the
laboratory frame. The M¨ossbauer rotor experiment is based on the recoilless gamma-ray
nuclear resonance absorption known as the M¨ossbauer eﬀect [13-17]. The source and the
absorber of gamma ray are placed separately on a rotating rod. Both the quantum energy
variation of nuclear states and the Doppler frequency shift of wave propagation cause the
frequency shift. A frequency deviation from the resonant-absorption condition exhibits itself
with an increase in the scattering of gamma ray, which in turn can be measured by counters
ﬁxed at the laboratory or at the rod.

Suppose that the absorber and the source atoms in the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment
rotate about an axis with linear velocities vr and vt, respectively, where the axis is stationary
in a laboratory frame which in turn moves at a velocity v0 with respect to the local-ether
frame. In the rotor experiment, the directed path length Rt from the source to the absorber
is always perpendicular both to vr and vt. Moreover, the path length Rt is ﬁxed, while the
direction ˆRt is changing with time. Thus dRt/dt = 0 and dRt/dt = vrt, where vrt = vr −vt.
To the second order of normalized speed, the fractional Doppler frequency shift (16) due

to the motions of the source and receiver becomes

△fD
fr

= −

d
cdt (cid:18)

Rt +

v0 · Rt

= −

(cid:19)

1
c

v0 · vrt
c2

,

(25)

where the orthogonality vr·Rt = 0 has been made use of and the derivative dv0/dt is
omitted. It is seen that this frequency shift depends on the laboratory velocity v0. It is
noted that due to the path length Rt being a constant, the ﬁrst-order term of normalized
speed vanishes in the preceding formula. Thus, to the third order of normalized speed, the
fractional shift △fD/f0e is identical to the preceding formula of △fD/fr.

Consider the case where the source and the absorber have the identical rest transition

frequency f0. Thus the fractional frequency shift due to the quantum eﬀect is

△fQ
f0

p

=

1 − (vr + v0)2/c2 −

1 − (vt + v0)2/c2 ≃

p

1
2c2 (−2vrt · v0 − v2

r + v2

t ).

(26)

It is noted that the dot-product term vrt·v0 appears again. Consequently, by taking both
the Doppler and the quantum eﬀects into account to the second order of normalized speed,
the fractional frequency deviation from the resonant absorption is

δf
f0

=

r − v2
v2
t
2c2

.

(27)

It is noted that the dot-product term v0 ·vrt cancels out and hence the frequency deviation is
independent of the directions of velocities vr and vt. Furthermore, this frequency deviation
is independent of the laboratory velocity v0.

It is noticed again that a term quite similar to the second-order Doppler eﬀect in (25)
has been derived alternatively from a classical approach, aside from the reference frame
of the laboratory velocity [14, 16, 17]. Further, a similar cancellation of the terms with
v0 has been accounted for by an alternative approach, where a speed-dependent frequency

8

based on the length contraction is used [16]. Anyway, this fractional frequency deviation has
been demonstrated in experiments with various rotation rates and various positions of the
source and the absorber at the rod [13-15]. Moreover, it has been found that between the two
geostationary counters oriented to detect the gamma rays propagating south- and northward,
respectively, there is no substantial diﬀerence in the measured frequency deviation [14]. Thus
the frequency deviation can be independent of the orientation of counter. Based on these,
the local-ether model is also in accord with the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment.

4.4. Spatial isotropy, Galilean relativity, and their breakdowns

According to the local-ether model, the speed of an earthbound atom is referred to
an ECI frame. Thus the quantum energy in an atom is entirely independent of earth’s
orbital motion around the Sun or whatever. Further, the quantum energy can even be
independent of earth’s rotation, if the atom speed remains a constant during the rotation.
Such a constant-speed condition is met by a geostationary atom, by an atom moving at a
ﬁxed velocity with respect to ground at a substantially ﬁxed latitude, or by an atom moving
in a circular satellite orbit around the Earth. For an atom satisfying the constant-speed
condition, the energies of quantum states and hence the transition frequency between two
states are independent of the orientation and position of the Earth in space, whatever the
dependence of quantum energy on the speed. This spatial isotropy of transition frequency
with respect to earth’s motions has been adopted in [3] to account for the hourly and daily
frequency stability in geostationary atoms in the Hughes-Drever experiment [18] and for the
high synchronism among the various GPS atomic clocks moving in circular orbits [19]. On
the other hand, for two atomic clocks moving even at an identical speed but in diﬀerent
directions with respect to the ground, their speeds with respect to an ECI frame tend to be
diﬀerent. Thereby, this isotropy breaks down, as demonstrated in the east-west directional
anisotropy in atomic clock rate in the Hafele-Keating experiment [5].

The applicability of the aforementioned spatial isotropy can be extended to the cases
where electromagnetic wave as well as matter wave is involved. According to the local-ether
model, the results of an earthbound experiment are entirely independent of earth’s orbital
motion. Further, the results can be independent of earth’s rotation, so long as the atom
speeds ve, vs, ue, and us along with the terms ve·vs and ae·Rt are invariant under earth’s
rotation. Thereby, the frequency-variation formula (8), the propagation-range formula (2),
and the resonant-absorption condition (11) remain unchanged under earth’s rotation and
hence the associated phenomena exhibit the spatial isotropy. In the Ives-Stilwell experiment
and the ammonia maser, it is seen that the speeds ve and vs are invariant under earth’s
rotation and the acceleration ae is zero. Moreover, the terms ue, us, and ve·vs are invariant
under earth’s rotation, since ve, vs, and Rt all change in a coordinated way with earth’s
rotation. Thus the spatial isotropy can be expected in these experiments and has been
demonstrated in the hourly and daily stability of the output frequency from ammonia masers
[11].

The spatial isotropy with respect to earth’s motions can be generalized with a step
forward. As the velocities ve and vs are written in the laboratory frame of velocity v0, the
terms vr·v0, vt·v0, and v2
0 emerge in the relevant formulas. It has been indicated that the
dot-product term vr·v0 or vt·v0 can be common in the Doppler and the quantum eﬀects
and then cancels out. Consequently, the results of the experiment are independent of the
orientation of the setup with respect to the ground. Thus the experiment possesses a spatial
isotropy with respect to the setup orientation as well as to earth’s motions. This kind of
spatial isotropy is observed in the three experiments examined so far. Thereby, the output
frequency from the ammonia maser is independent of the direction of the molecule velocity
and hence no observable beat frequency between masers with diﬀerent orientations can
be expected, as demonstrated experimentally in [11]. Moreover, the frequency deviation
from the resonant absorption in the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment can be expected to be
stable under earth’s rotation and be identical for counters with diﬀerent orientations, as
demonstrated experimentally in [14].

9

Further, the squared term v2

0/c2 in some frequency formulas cancels out or is too small
to detect. As a consequence, the experimental results become independent of the labora-
tory velocity v0 and hence comply with Galilean relativity, in spite of the restriction on
the reference frame of the particle and the propagation velocities. Thus, when the whole
experimental setup is put on a vehicle moving smoothly with respect to the ground, the
measurement results can be independent of the ground velocity of the vehicle, as well as
of the setup orientation and earth’s motions. Thereby, the spatial isotropy is generalized
to the compliance with Galilean relativity. In this way, it is seen that the M¨ossbauer rotor
experiment complies with Galilean relativity. Moreover, Galilean relativity can also be ob-
served in the Ives-Stilwell experiment and in the output frequency from the ammonia maser,
as the minute squared term is diﬃcult to detect. Anyway, these experiments preserve the
spatial isotropy with respect to the setup orientation and earth’s motions.

However, when the measurement precision is improved such that higher-order eﬀects can
be detected, some minute terms may emerge to make Galilean relativity or even the spatial
isotropy break down. The just-mentioned squared term v2
0/c2 in the Ives-Stilwell experiment
and the ammonia maser is an example. For another, we reexamine the M¨ossbauer rotor
experiment to a higher order. In order to derive the Doppler eﬀect to the third order of
normalized speed, the second-order propagation-range formula (2) is needed, which for the
M¨ossbauer rotor experiment becomes

R(t) = Rt

1 +

u0 +

1
c

(cid:26)

1
2c2 [u2

0 + (v2

r + v2

0 + 2vr · v0) + ae · Rt]

.

(cid:27)

(28)

For a rotation at a ﬁxed angular velocity, the terms of vr and ae·Rt as well as v0 are
constants during rotation. Thus the time rate of change of the propagation range R is given
by

dR(t)
dt

= Rt

u0 +

d
dt (cid:26)

1
c

1
2c2 [u2

0 + 2vr · v0]

.

(cid:27)

Then, to the third order of normalized speed, the fractional Doppler frequency shift due to
wave propagation can be given from (16) as

△fD
f0

= −

= −

dR
cdt

1
c2 vrt · v0 −

1
c3 [(vrt · v0)u0 − vrvrtu0],

where we have made use of dvr/dt = − ˆRtvrvrt/Rt and of △fD/f0 = △fD/fr to the third
order. It is seen that △fD = 0 when v0 = 0.

By taking both the Doppler and the quantum eﬀects into account to the third order of

normalized speed, the fractional frequency deviation from the resonant absorption is

(29)

(30)

(31)

δf
f0

=

1
2c2 (v2

r − v2

t ) −

1
c3 (vrt · v0 − vrvrt)u0.

It is noted that the dot-product term vrt·v0 survives in the third-order eﬀect, although
it cancels out in the second-order one. The presence of this term then makes the spatial
isotropy with respect to the setup orientation and hence Galilean relativity break down,
although it is quite small in magnitude. Accordingly, the frequency deviations tend to be
diﬀerent as measured in counters with diﬀerent orientations with respect to the ground,
when they can be measured to the third order. Thereby, a directional anisotropy in the
frequency deviation is predicted. On the other hand, the spatial isotropy with respect to
earth’s rotational and orbital motions is preserved.

5. Conclusion

Based on the local-ether wave equation for matter wave, the energies of quantum states
and hence the state transition frequency in an atom decrease with the atom speed by the
mass-variation factor, where the speed is referred to the associated local-ether frame. Fur-
ther, for the situation where the source and the receiver atoms move at diﬀerent velocities,

10

the local-ether resonant-absorption condition is presented by taking both the Doppler fre-
quency shift for electromagnetic wave and the quantum energy variation of matter wave into
account. It is shown that the resonant-absorption condition accounts for the Ives-Stilwell ex-
periment, the output frequency from ammonia masers, and the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment
in a consistent way.

Based on the local-ether model, it is evident that the phenomena due both to electro-
magnetic and matter waves do not at all depend on earth’s orbital motion around the Sun
or others. This immediately accounts for the null eﬀect of earth’s orbital motion in various
earthbound phenomena. Further, for a geostationary experimental setup, the results can be
independent of earth’s rotation. This accounts for the spatial isotropy found in the stability
of frequency in the Hughes-Drever experiment and the ammonia maser. The spatial isotropy
also holds for the atomic clocks onboard earth’s satellites moving in circular orbits and hence
accounts for the high synchronism among the various GPS atomic clocks. Further, in the
formula of the Doppler or the quantum eﬀect, it is seen that the major term associated with
the laboratory velocity is a dot product between this velocity and that of the emitting or
absorbing atom. This term appears both in the Doppler frequency shift and the transition
frequency variation and then cancels out. Thus the experimental results become invariant
with respect to the setup orientation, as well as to earth’s motions. This spatial isotropy
has been demonstrated in the ammonia maser where the output frequency is independent
of the direction of the molecule velocity and in the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment where the
frequency deviation from the resonant absorption is independent of the orientation of the
counter. Further, the frequency deviation is independent of the laboratory velocity and
hence the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment complies with Galilean relativity.

However, the aforementioned dot-product term with the laboratory velocity may survive
in some formulas. Thus the spatial isotropy with respect to the setup orientation and
hence Galilean relativity break down. This breakdown is in accord with the east-west
directional anisotropy in atomic clock rate demonstrated in the Hafele-Keating experiment.
By examining the resonant-absorption condition in the M¨ossbauer rotor experiment to the
third order, such a breakdown is also found. Thereby, it is expected that the frequency
deviation tends to be diﬀerent as measured in counters with diﬀerent orientations. This
predicted directional anisotropy in the frequency deviation may provide a mean to test the
local-ether model, if the measurement precision can be raised to the third order of normalized
speed.

References

369 (1941).

[1] H.E. Ives and G.R. Stilwell, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 28, 215 (1938); J. Opt. Soc. Am. 31,

[2] A.P. French, Special Relativity (Chapman & Hall, New York, 1968), ch. 5.

[3] C.C. Su, Eur. Phys. J. B 24, 231 (2001).

[4] C.C. Su, Eur. Phys. J. C 21, 701 (2001); Europhys. Lett. 56, 170 (2001).

[5] J.C. Hafele and R.E. Keating, Science 177, 166 (1972); 177, 168 (1972).

[6] H.E. Ives, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 27, 263 (1937).

[7] R.J. Kennedy and E.M. Thorndike, Phys. Rev. 42, 400 (1932).

[8] C.C. Su, in Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. (Apr. 2001), p. 99.

[9] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Pergamon, New York,

1975), sect. 48.

[10] H.I. Mandelberg and L. Witten, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 52, 529 (1962).

11

[11] J.P. Cedarholm, G.F. Bland, B.L. Havens, and C.H. Townes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1, 342

[12] J.P. Cedarholm and C.H. Townes, Nature 181, 1350 (1959).

[13] H.J. Hay, J.P. Schiﬀer, T.E. Cranshaw, and P.A. Egelstaﬀ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4, 165

(1958).

(1960).

[14] D.C. Champeney, G.R. Isaak, and A.M. Khan, Phys. Lett. 7, 241 (1963).

[15] K.C. Turner and H.A. Hill, Phys. Rev. 134, B252 (1964).

[16] M. Ruderfer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 191 (1960); 7, 361 (1961).

[17] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York, 1975), ch. 11.

[18] M.P. Haugan and C.M. Will, Phys. Today 40, 69 (1987).

[19] T. Logsdon, The NAVSTAR Global Positioning System (Van Nostrand Reinhold, New

York, 1992), chs. 2 and 11.

12

