2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Gravity and the Nuclear Forces: A potential link

Shantilal G. Goradia

e-mail:Shantilalg@aol.com

Abstract

The gravitational inverse square law is macroscopic approximation. I investigate the con-

sequences of its modiﬁcation for small particles by using the surface-to-surface separation of

the particles rather than the center-to-center separations. For small particles at macroscopic

separations, the ratio between the center-to-center distance D and the surface-to-surface dis-

tance d, D/d, approaches unity. At microscopic separations, this ratio grows very large. Here

I apply this ratio to several microscopic situations and derive the nuclear coupling constants.

I use the quantum wormholes as bridges to support my theory.

1

Introduction

Newtonian gravity encounters issues for microscopic dimensions. As the sizes of two adjoining

identical particles of uniform density tend to zero, the numerator of the force equation

(F = Gm1m2/r2) falls oﬀ as r6. Since the denominator falls oﬀ as r2, the force goes to zero

in the limit of small particles with microscopic separations. Newtonian gravity in this form,

therefore, cannot explain the nuclear binding force.

Physicists have attempted to explain the nuclear force in terms of perturbations to clas-

sical gravity [1]. However, in the end they concluded that a new force, the strong force,

is responsible for nuclear binding. Quantum Chromodynamics was developed, following the

form of Quantum Electrodynamics, to quantify the strong force. Experimentalists and string

1

theorists faced a yet incomplete task of detecting and incorporating the spin 2 graviton into

a fully quantized and renormalized theory.

We can follow the lead of those who have tried to explain the strong force in terms of

gravity by attempting to modify the classical Newtonian theory of gravity in the case of small

particles. If we use the surface-to-surface separation between these particles to quantify the

gravitational attraction instead of the center-to-center separation, we ﬁnd that the force

between these microscopic particles is the same as before in the limit of large separations

relative to the particle radii. At small separations relative to the particle radii the force

between these same particles grows much larger than classical gravity. We can look at the

eﬀects of making this change in several speciﬁc situations.

2 Modiﬁcation of the inverse square law

For two coupled nucleons (Fig. 1a), I choose the Planck lengthL = (Gh/c3)0.5 as the surface

separation, as it is the minimum possible spatial distance that makes any sense in physics.

Assuming zero separation distance would imply that the two particles are joined to form one

particle, losing their distinctions as separate particles. The diameter of a nucleon is about 1

fm (10−15 meters). The Newtonian gravitational force is then FN = Gm2/D2, where D is the

center-to-center distance, ∼ 1 fm. If we select the surface-to-surface separation instead, the

force would become FP = Gm2/d2, with d = L = 10−20 fm. The ratio of these two forces is

D2/d2 = 1040, which is also the strength of the nuclear force relative to gravitation. Strictly

speaking, the strong force is not purely short range (decreasing to a precise zero beyond a

boundary) as illustrated by Rutherford’s scattering experiments, which showed eﬀects from

the strong force at separations of at least 10 fm [2]. As the nucleons are separated, D/d

shrinks, and FP rapidly approaches FN (Fig. 2). At 1000 fm (about the radius of an

atom) the modiﬁed law yields the same results as standard Newtonian gravitation. This

modiﬁcation yields a force with high intensity at short range, rapidly falling oﬀ to a very

low intensity at long range. It meets the boundary values of both gravitation and the strong

force, and suggests that they could be the same interaction. My hypothesis would unify

2

gravity with the prevailing view that the nuclear force is a secondary eﬀect of the color force.

Einstein also tried to explain nuclear force in terms of gravity [3], but did not use the Planck

length in this way.

For a coupled quark-lepton pair (Fig. 1b), the center separation can be taken to be

∼ 10−3 fm. If we modify Newton’s equation as above, we ﬁnd that the ratio between the

standard and modiﬁed force is 1034. This is the relative strength of the weak nuclear force

compared to gravitation. The weak nuclear force diminishes to standard Newtonian gravity

at a distance of 1 fm, the diameter of the nucleon (Fig. 2). As the surface separation

increases, the weak nuclear force diminishes just like the strong nuclear force. It becomes

immeasurable more rapidly as it is much weaker to start with. It is understandably described

as a contact force. We can also note that for a pair of leptons, which are point-like, there

is no distinction betweenD and d, and the ratio FP /FN is unity. We can examine the case

of light passing by a nucleon in this manner as well. Einstein found that the deﬂection of

a photon passing by the surface of the sun is θ = 4g′R/c3, where g′

sun = 28g (g is the

acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the earth, 9.8 m/s2)and R is the radius of the

sun. If we ﬁnd g′

nucleon for which θ = θsun(8.5 × 10−6) radians), we get g′ = 1040g. This is

the same as the strength of the strong nuclear force relative to gravitation, again indicating

a qualitative connection between the strong nuclear force and gravitation. The bending of

light is an illustration of the equivalency principle, the corner stone of general relativity.

The nuclear forces are weakened at long range by a high order of magnitude. When

nucleons are 1 centimeter apart, the strong nuclear force goes down by a factor of 1040 ×

1066 = 10106 compared to the force when they are Planck length apart, taking into account

the inverse square eﬀect. This makes other attributes of the color force, such as isospin

inﬁnitesimal at long range.

My hypothesis characterizes gravity as long range nuclear force. The prevailing view is

that nuclear force is a secondary eﬀect of the color force, raising a question about the existence

of gravitons within nucleons. It has been proposed that the Gravitational Constant inside

a hadron is very large, ∼ 1038 times the Newtonian G [4]. This ”Strong gravity” inside the

3

hadron is similar to my proposed modiﬁcation, but in my modiﬁcation, instead of needing

to change G itself, I change the distance measurement and get the same result.

I am treating nuleons as spherical objects. This is not unprecedented; de-Sitter’s hadron

model is spherical [4]. Superimposing the uncertainty of the surfaces to the Planck length

separation, if needed, does not aﬀect the order of magnitude of coupling constants found

by using “average” surface. I hypothesize a surface. Surface is inherent in MIT bag model

and a 2-brane in M-theory. This becomes a moot point in light of the following wormhole

connection.

Einstein, in a paper written in 1919, attempted to demonstrate that his gravitational ﬁelds

play an important role in the structure and stability of elementary particles. His hypothesis

was not accepted because of gravity’s extreme weakness[4]. A 1935 pioneering work by

Einstein and Rosen laid the foundation of the current wormhole theory. In a seminar titled

“A Layman’s Guide to M-theory” on September 25, 2002, Michael Duﬀ of the University

of Michigan described, per my understanding, strong gravity as consistent with M-theory. I

understand that M-theory does not rule out exotic material.

3 Wormhole Linkage

The consistent picture drawn by my theory clearly provides a compelling reason to investigate

its validity per some successful physicists. It would be made mathematically accurate if a

Plank length size source of gravitation adjacent to a particle were to represent the entire

mass of a particle and propagate its 1/r potential to the universe. Abundance of Plank size

wormholes evolved from the initial big band density perturbations, consistent with the big

band theory could provide such sources of gravitation.

The above picture potentially ﬁts with wormholes with one mouth absorbing all the en-

ergy radiated by the particle and the other mouth near the particle emitting it in the form of

gravitation. For a sketch of a wormhole, see the recent colorful book available in almost all

libraries [5]. Reference [6] shows more details. I am proposing Planck size wormholes, unsuit-

able for human time-travel. My picture is consistent with Hawking’s chronology protection

4

conjecture. Diﬃcult problems are simple in retrospect [6]. My proposal is consistent with

the existence of exotic material by Thorne. The proposed wormholes are Lorentzian. “...the

theoretical analysis of Lorentzian wormholes is “merely” an extension of known physics–no

new physical principles or fundamentally new physical theories are involved” [7]. The non-

visibility of masses of wormholes may be explained in terms of the exotic material (negative

energy). The concept of negative energy touches gravitation, quantum theory and thermo-

dynamics. The inﬁnity-like spacetime intervals implicitly proposed between the two mouths

of the wormholes may explain why the laws of physics resulting into quark conﬁnement at

one mouth are diﬀerent from the laws of gravitation at the other mouth. They are breaking

down as expected.

My theory expressed in terms of the geometrical sizes can be expressed in terms of the

masses of the particles by neglecting density variations, the larger particles would be more

massive and the order of magnitude of their coupling constants would be larger.

4 Astrophysical Implications

My theory could have an interesting implication for Dirac’s Large Number Hypothesis (LNH).

The LNH comes from the fact that the number 1040occurs in several important places in

physics, such as the strong force coupling constant and the Hubble time. Dirac suggested

that there was some connection between these numbers. One implication of the LNH is that

G was about 10% higher for every one billion years in the past. If G was higher, however,

the earth should have been close enough to the sun to boil oﬀ all the surface water at that

time, preventing life from evolving here.

This eﬀect has caused Dirac’s Hypothesis to be put on the shelf. However, in my modiﬁed

theory, the strong coupling constant is inversely proportional to G, and the longer Planck

length resulting from an increase in G would cause the strong coupling constant to be smaller.

This would slow down nuclear reaction rates. Lower coupling constants could have reduced

the binding energies of fusion nuclei, reducing the power output of the sun per reaction. This

might compensate for the diﬀerence in the distance to the sun. There is some experimental

5

evidence in favor of the LNH, quoted by physical cosmologist Jayant Narlikar, based on an

assessment of data on the moon’s motions made by Thomas Van Flandern of the U.S. Naval

Observatory [8]. According to this work, G may be decreasing by a few parts per billion per

century!If this is so, my theory provides an explanation for life being able to evolve.

Another implication of my theory combined with the LNH is that radioactive dating data

are wrong. A change in the rate of nuclear reactions over time nulliﬁes a central assumption

of radioactive dating, i.e., constant half-lives. If this rate is changing in a known way, as is

suggested by the LNH, adjustments could be made. In the case of radiocarbon dating for

example, the change would be negligible over the time period in question. However, other

dating methods using longer-lived isotopes could see signiﬁcant changes from their currently

assumed ages from a slowly changing G.

5 Historical perspective

There is reason to believe that Newton had masterminded the insight I am bringing on the

surface, as it is evident from his delay in the publication of his theory of gravitation for 20

years. Newton published his theory under pressure from the Royal society. His struggle with

his formula is evident from the following statement in the Principia (Book III, Proposition

8):“After I had found that the force of gravity towards a whole planet did arise from, and

was compounded of the forces of gravity towards all its parts, and towards every one part,

was in the reciprocal proportion of the squares of the distances from the part: I was yet in

doubt, whether that reciprocal duplicate proportion did accurately hold, or but nearly so, in

the total force compounded of so many partial ones.” [9].

When Rutherford discovered the strong nuclear force in 1919, he proposed this high in-

tensity force to be gravitation [1]. Not being able to describe the force in terms of gravity,

it was decided that high intensity force was due to eﬀects other than gravitation. Gravity’s

weakness is described as the main reason why the strong nuclear force is considered a sep-

arate force. I suggest the strong nuclear force can be explained in terms of modiﬁcation to

Newtonian gravity to the microscopic scale.

6

6 Prediction

My theory provides a consistent, intuitive and simplistic, but mathematical explanation of

the relative values of the strong, weak and gravitational coupling constants, something no

other single theory has done. If, as has been suggested, G is decreasing with time, the Planck

length shortens, aﬀecting the values of coupling constants, past nuclear reaction rates and

the accuracy of radio-dating. Experimentally, my theory can be explored through close

investigation of the nuclear force at ≈ 1-10 fm.

Recently published test results veriﬁed the inverse square law of separation down to 218

micrometer [10]. The test results do not verify the higher dimensional theories that motivated

the test. The results are not in conﬂict with my theory.

7 Conclusion

The inverse-square relationship of the classical Newtonian gravity can be modiﬁed for the

microscopic case. These modiﬁcations lead to the derivation of the nuclear coupling con-

stants as the relative strength of the modiﬁed inverse-square force when the appropriate

particles are in contact (i.e. their separation is minimized). The nuclear coupling constants,

therefore, are expressible as the squares of the sum of the diameters of the involved particles

expressed in Planck lengths. This implies a close connection between gravity and nuclear

forces. The classical description of particles in terms of their diameters is justiﬁed based

on the consistency of the results in deriving coupling constants. My suggestion, that grav-

ity is the cumulative eﬀect of long-range nuclear forces from a large number of particles as

predicted by my modiﬁed equation, has profound potential implications.

Acknowledgment

comments on section 2.

I thank Dr. F.Weber (http://www.nd.edu/∼fweber) and Dr. C. Kolda for their earlier

7

References

[1] Pais, A, Inward Bound, 239–240 (1986).

[2] Elton, L. R. B, Introductory Nuclear Theory, 17 (1966).

[3] Cao, T. Y, The conceptual foundation of quantum ﬁeld theory, 85 (1999).

[4] Shrivastava, S. K., Aspects of Gravitational Interactions, 90, 91, 93 (1998).

[5] Stephen Hawkings, The universe in a nutshell, 133 (2001).

[6] Thorne Kips, Black Holes & Time Warps, Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy, 488 (1993).

[7] Matt Visser, Lorentzian Wormholes, From Einstein to Hawking, 369 (1995).

[8] John Leslie, Physical Cosmology and Philosophy, 90 (1990).

[9] History of Science Society. Sir Isaac Newton 1727-1927, 184 (1928).

[10] C. D. Hoyle et al., Physics Review Letters, 86, 1418 (2001).

8

a

b

Nucleon

Nucleon

1 fm

L

.001 fm

Quark

Lepton

L

Figure 1: Pictorial view of gravitational interaction, showing surface and center separations (not to scale). L

is the Planck length, 10−20 fm. a, Two nucleons at minimum separation; b, A quark and a lepton, also at

minimum separation. The standard inverse-square law would use the center-to-center distances to calculate

the force between the particles; using the surface-to-surface distance yields a much stronger force for these

separations, equal to the relative strengths of the strong and weak nuclear forces, respectively.

Figure 2: Ratio of modiﬁed force to Newtonian gravitation as a function of surface separation for nucleon-

nucleon and quark-lepton interactions. The ratio approaches unity at large surface separations in both cases.

Also, for both interactions the ratio becomes quite large for short separations, reaching 1040 for the nucleon-

nucleon interaction and 1034 for the quark-lepton interaction in the Planck length separation limit of 10−20

fm.

9

