2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A CRITICAL APPROACH TO TOTAL AND
PARTIAL DERIVATIVES

Andrew E. Chubykalo and Rolando Alvarado Flores

February 2, 2008

Escuela de F´ısica, Universidad Aut´onoma de Zacatecas
Apartado Postal C-580,
Zacatecas 98068, ZAC., M´exico
e-mails: andrew@logicnet.com.mx and andrew@ahobon.reduaz.mx

Received January 10, 2002

Abstract

In this brief note we critically examine the process of partial and of
total diﬀerentiation, showing some of the problems that arise when we
relate both concepts. A way to solve all the problems is proposed.

PACS: 02.30.-f, 02.30.Sa

1

1 Introduction

Our article is devoted to the discussion of the total derivative concept, a general

and frequently applied concept of mathematical analysis. Indeed, the derivatives

play a signiﬁcant role in modern physical theories and are present in many basic

physical laws.

Considering some of the basic statements of classical electrodynamics, one of

the authors (A.E.Ch) paid attention to the fact of some inaccuracy of applying

in physics the concept of the partial derivative of the many variable function

(see [1,2]). L. Schwartz [3] warned prudently against this inaccuracy (the text

after Eq.(I,2;5) in [3]): “In a short narrative one identiﬁes sometimes f1 and f ,

saying, that is the same function (sic.!), represented with the help of the variable

x1 instead of x. Such a simpliﬁcation is very dangerous and may result in very

serious contradictions.”1

Such an inaccuracy and its consequences in some problems of physics inspired

our interest to the total derivative concept in the classical analysis under the

condition of double dependence from a time variable t:

implicit and explicit

ones. Such a situation is characteristic of many physical problems, ﬁrst of all

of classical mechanics (see for example, [4], where the author even introduces

a new special term as “whole-partial derivative”) and classical electrodynamics

(see, for instance, Section. 4 in [2] where it was considered in detail).

As a matter of fact, a concept of the partial derivative is habitually associated

with a concept of the function of many variables, but a concept of the total

derivative must be associated with another function, which is some restriction

of the function of many variables. L.Schwartz did not introduce an additional

co-term though he denoted repeatedly [3] the corresponding moment connected
1Here f = f (x) is the function determined in a set E with the values in a set F , f1 = f ◦ u,
where u is the mapping of some set E1 into the set E : x = u(x1). L.Schwartz calls the function
f1 a foretype of the function f under a variable substitution.

2

with applying of the total derivative concept.

We are interested in the most important point, namely, in an origination of

the total derivative concept.

Thus, let us consider functions E which are determined as

E[x1(t), . . . , xn−1(t), t] = defE[x(t), t],

E(x1, . . . , xn−1, t) = defE(x, t),

(1)

(2)

thereby emphasizing the need to distinguish the diﬀerent functions: E[ ] of one

variable, E( ) is the function of n variables.

These functions evaluated at diﬀerent points of the globally deﬁned manifold

O = Rn−1 × R are a source of confusion when we try to calculate total or partial

derivatives, and can lead us to write down something meaningless. We shall

explain this in detail in the next sections, using, to save writing, the notation

introduced in (1) and (2) and a theoretical framework that will show that the

problems and distinctions treated in this note have been not treated before.

Usually the functions E[ ] and E( ) represent the same physical value, being

diﬀerent functions in their mathematical origination.

Note that the authors neither in [2] nor in [4] do not distinguish this kind

of function2. Ambiguities in the “notation” for partial diﬀerentiation also have

been remarked by Arnold [6] p. 226 (p. 258 in English translation) without

further development.

pens quite often.

Therefore, an unallowable identiﬁcation of the functions E[ ] and E( ) hap-

For instance, in the well-known physical formulae

2as well as G.M.Fichtengoltz, who considers the case of double (explicit and implicit)

dependence of functions on two variables, see [5], p. 388.

d
dt

E = (V · ∇)E +

∂
∂t

E

3

(here V = dx

dt ) and

df
dt

= (H, f ) +

∂f
∂t

,

where f is some dynamical value, (H, f ) is the Poisson bracket, H is the Hamil-

ton function, the full derivatives in the lhs and the partial derivative in the rhs

are applied to the diﬀerent functions: there are the functions E[ ] and f [ ] in

the lhs, and there are the functions E( ) and f ( ) in the rhs of the equation.

The diﬀerence between the functions:

E[x1(t), . . . , xn−1(t), t] = defE[x(t), t], E(x1, . . . , xn−1, t) = def E(x, t)

is usually not remarked in the literature, and for this reason we can often write

down meaningless symbols like:

(3)

(4)

(5)

and

∂
∂t

E[x(t), t],

d
dt

E(x, t).

The symbols (3) and (4) are meaningless, because the process denoted by

the operator of partial diﬀerentiation can be applied only to functions of several

independent variables and E[x(t), t] is not such a function. Meanwhile, the

operator of total diﬀerentiation with respect to a given variable can be formally

applied to functions of one variable only. However, we have a well-known formula

to relate both concepts:

d
dt

E = (V · ∇)E +

∂
∂t

E

(here V = dx

dt ).

Let us show that, in this form, Eq. (5) cannot be correct. What is the correct

argument for the symbol E on both sides? If we say that the correct argument

for both sides is [x(t), t] we get the chain of symbols (3), but in this case, the

4

operator of a partial diﬀerentiation would indicate that we must construct a

new function in the form (∂E/∂t), hence we use the following procedure:

E

x(t) + ∆t dx(t)
h

dt

∆t

i

, t + ∆t

− E[x(t), t]

.






lim
∆t→0 




But this is the deﬁnition of total diﬀerentiation! Thus, the symbols of total and

of partial diﬀerentiation denote the same process, therefore, because E is the

same function on both sides of the equation, we get:

(V · ∇)E[x(t), t] = 0

always. But even if the procedure which we followed were correct (which it is not,

of course!), this equation is not correct for E as a function of the functions x(t),

because the partial diﬀerentiation would involve increments of the functions

x(t) in the form x(t) + ∆x(t) and we do not know how we must interpret

this increment because we have two options: either ∆x(t) = x(t) − x∗(t), or

∆x(t) = x(t) − x(t∗). Both are diﬀerent processes because the ﬁrst one involves

changes in the functional form of the functions x(t), while the second involves

changes in the position along the path deﬁned by x = x(t) but preserving the

same functional form. Hence, it is clear that we have here diﬀerent concepts.

If we remember the deﬁnition of partial diﬀerentiation, we can see where the

mistake is: “the symbol: ∂

∂t E(x, t) means that we take the variations of t when

the values of x are constant”. It means that we make the only change t + ∆t in

the function. But this is only possible if the coordinates x are independent from

t. Hence, we can see that the correct argument cannot be [x(t), t], because,

as we have shown, this supposition leads to the incorrect result (5).

If we

make the other supposition, that the correct argument is (x, t) we can get the

same conclusion, i.e., equation (5). Hence, none of these suppositions is correct.

What is the solution, then? Actually, in the equation (5) we have two diﬀerent

functions: on the left hand side we have the function E[x(t), t] deﬁned on a

5

curve in a n-surface and on the right hand side we have the function E(x, t)

deﬁned on the all n-surface, which obviously are quite diﬀerent functions, while

we have a limiting procedure to get a uniﬁcation of concepts in the realm of

functions of one variable.

2 Theoretical framework

We shall begin describing the elements that we shall use in the development

of the problem’s explanation. The globally deﬁned coordinates of our manifold

O are given by hx, ti, we deﬁne a function E : O → ℜ where ℜ is the real

line. Hence the values of the function E on any point O are given as E(x, t).

However, we shall be interested in the 1-dimensional subsets of O, hence we

denote any of them by T . To describe this set (a path) we must introduce a

function of the form:

Otherwise we can introduce this function in the form:

p(t) = hx(t), ti

p(s) = hx(s), t(s)i

(6)

(7)

Parametrization (6) for the path is a special case of (7) when we choose the

function: t(s) = s = t. We suppose that T ⊂ O is 1-dimensional, hence a path in

O. This path can be the integral curve of a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations

(ODE’s), we mean, it deﬁnes the orbit of a 1-parametric group action over O.

If this action is a free action we get that for any pair p, q ∈ O there exists an

integral curve joining them when we deﬁne one of them as an initial value. In

this way the paths cover the manifold O deﬁning a foliation by 1-dimensional

sheets. The whole previous construction is better understood if we introduce

the tangent vector space at each point of O. If the tangent vector ﬁeld is deﬁned

6

(8)

(9)

at all the points of O by the equation:

n−1

i=1
X

fi(x, t)

∂
∂xi

+

∂
∂t

,

we can deﬁne the tangent vectors at each point of the path with the help of the

set of ODE’s:

dxi(t)
dt

= fi[x(t), t];

i = 1, . . . , n − 1,

whose integral curves allow us to construct the 1-dimensional foliation sheets.

The system (5) is the answer to a very important question that we must keep

in mind all along the work. The question is:

(AA) How can we construct sheets T such that its tangent vectors

are given by the vector ﬁeld with components fi?

We cannot overestimate the question. Hence our starting point is a situation

of total lack of knowledge regarding the form of the 1-dimensional sheet T . We

just have the form of the vector ﬁeld fi, that is, we know the distribution of

vector ﬁelds in the space. In [7] we have called this situation the {f }-case. In any

usual treatment of the subject of diﬀerential geometry any distribution of vector

spaces if the system (9) is solvable is called “integrable”. Substantially the same

is done to construct foliation in more dimensions, the obvious change is that

we don’t want 1-dimensional sheets, instead, we want to construct m < n − 1

dimensional submanifolds at each point. The basic question is, again (AA). We

must remark something very important, when we pass from (8) to (9) we have

changed the functions fi(x, t) evaluated at any point on the manifold O, by the

functions fi(x(t), t) which are evaluated on the sheets of the foliation. We have

supposed, to do this operation, that the sheets exist. To prove this supposition,

it is usual to impose a Holder condition on the vector ﬁelds, this is sometimes

enough to prove the existence of solutions by ﬁxed point arguments. However,

when we can construct solutions for the system, a formal proof may be avoided.

7

This change from the globally deﬁned manifold to the local integral sheets of

the foliation is done noncritically. This criticism is what we shall carry out in

the next sections inside the framework described in this section.

3 The problem

We give the curve T using the parametrization (6) but we write down:

g(t) = E ◦ p(t)

(10)

where g(t) is 1-variable function, E and p denote an n-variable function

deﬁned on O and a curve on O, respectively. This way of writing down the

functions involved is more precise than the usual notations (1) and (2). For

this reason only the use of notations like (1) and (2) should be suppressed. The

really important task becomes apparent when we try to diﬀerentiate totally or

partially the functions (1) and (2). If we want to partially diﬀerentiate (2) we

have no problem, because the usual deﬁnition of a partial derivative requires

that we must change one of the variables while keeping the rest constant. In the

same way, if we want to derive with respect to t the expression (1) we should

not have any problem, because it is a diﬀerentiation of a one variable function

when we know the forms of E and p. Let’s show now the problems.

(A) If we want to diﬀerentiate totally (2) in any variable without

using, for the moment, any path, a moment of reﬂection shows us

that we really employ the deﬁnition of a partial derivative. Hence our

use of the symbol dE(x, t)/dt is wrong. It is so because the function

is an n-variable function and our conventions for the use of symbols

(the syntactical rules) tell us that for n-variable functions the correct

notation is ∂. Hence, the symbol dE(x, t)/dt is not correct, but it is

very easy to write down the right symbols.

8

(B) Now, if we want to partially diﬀerentiate (1) with respect

to t, a moment of reﬂection shows us that when we try to give an

increment to t, while keeping constant the other set of variables,

this last condition cannot be fulﬁlled because if t is incremented by

an amount ∆t the other variables are incremented by an amount

(dx(t)/dt)∆t. Hence we cannot keep them constant and we have a

problem here, because we cannot apply the usual deﬁnition of partial

diﬀerentiation to expression (1).

To our knowledge, this situation has not been pointed out before in the

usual treatises. However, a brief search in the corresponding literature gives us

the paper by K. Brownstein [4] where the concept of so called “whole partial

derivative” is introduced. Let’s see if it gives us some light. We shall use the

framework outlined in section 2. Brownstein starts with a function of the form:

G[Φ(q1, q2, q3, q4), q1, q2, q3, q4],

(11)

which falls within the scope of our general framework. To see this we write

down the following coordinate cover:

hΦ1(q1, q2, q3, q4), Φ2(q1, q2, q3, q4), Φ3(q1, q2, q3, q4), q1, q2, q3, q4i,

(12)

which is more general than the one used by Brownstein in function (11). In

this case we are over a 4-dimensional manifold represented on a 7-dimensional

manifold. We can generate 4-dimensional sheets such that the manifold be

covered by them if we can integrate the following system of ﬁrst order coupled

partial diﬀerential equations:

∂Φ(q)
∂qj

= Fi(Φ1(q), Φ2(q), Φ3(q), q1, q2, q3, q4);

i = 1, . . . , 3, j = 1, . . . , 4.

(13)

9

The generated group of transformations is a 4-parametric group. Just like

before, the functions Fi are the components of a known vector ﬁeld over the

manifold. And of course, here the same noncritical change has been realized,

because we have started at the manifold, and we have ﬁnalized at its sub-

manifold. A very important feature, which we shall express later in the 1-

dimensional case, appears here. The partial diﬀerential equations (13) must be

compatible diﬀerential equations, that is: their cross derivatives must coincide.

However, to establish the conditions we must partially diﬀerentiate the functions

at the right of (13), but this is not possible because of the argument already

used (B). The cross diﬀerentiation condition leads us to the usual condition of

commutativity of vector ﬁelds, or in general grounds to the generators of a Lie

algebra, basic to the Frobenius’ theory of integrability. However, we see that

we don’t know how to calculate this condition because of the argument (B).

Coming back to Brownstein’s case let’s discover again the same diﬃculties as

in the 1-dimensional. If we suppose, as Brownstein does, that we can partially

diﬀerentiate the function G in (11) with respect to any q variable, we fall again

within the argument (B): the deﬁnition of the partial derivative requires that

we must change one of the qs only. But if we change any q by an amount ∆q we

change the variable Φ by an amount (∂Φ/∂q)∆q. Hence, Brownstein’s concept

is arguable because we believe he makes the same mistakes that we are pointing

out here. Brownstein’s mistake is as follows: he must ﬁrst deﬁne the partial

derivatives which appear in his formula (10) [4]3, derivatives which are in doubt

because of the argument (B). So we can conclude that he achieves his goal: to

introduce a new symbol and a new name, but based on noncritical concepts.

3Eq. (10) in [4]:

¯∂G
¯∂q3 =

∂G
∂Φ

∂Φ
∂q3 +

∂G
∂q3

10

4 A solution

Let’s continue with our critical analysis. For this we shall write down a highly

incorrect (because of the argument (B)), but nonetheless, very popular, expres-

dE[x(t), t]
dt

=

dxi
dt

∂E[x(t), t]
∂xi

+

∂E[x(t), t]
∂t

.

(14)

n−1

i=1
X

One of the ﬁrst mistakes is the following:

it is supposed that the function

E[x(t), t] is the same on both sides of the equation. Let’s apply the (B) argument

sion:

to (14):

1. At the right of the equation we see formations like ∂E[x(t), t]/∂t,

which by the use of the argument (B), have been shown to be wrongly

deﬁned.

2. At the left we see the symbol dE[x(t), t]/dt which is not de-

ﬁned because its “deﬁnition”, the right side, is wrongly deﬁned, and

we have no other deﬁnition for dE[x(t), t]/dt. Hence, we don’t know

how to calculate it.

Thus, a solution is required. This can be obtained with the help of equation

(10) and some distinctions based upon it. The ﬁrst and most important thing

is to suppose that g(t) = E ◦ p(t) is a 1-variable function only and that it is

known. Hence, the usual deﬁnition of 1-variable derivation is available. This

supposition implies that we must know the path p and the functional form of

E. We have analyzed this supposition in detail in another paper [7], and so we

shall not repeat it. Hence, it is the case that on the left side of (14) dg(t)/dt

must appear and not the function E deﬁned along the path. On the right

side the function E[x, t] must appear to get a partial derivative using the usual

deﬁnition. Finally, as it is the case that the function dx(t)/dt is deﬁned on one

common point of a class of paths and not all over the space O, as is the case for

11

E(x, t) we shall write instead of dx(t)/dt the functions fi(x, t) deﬁned all over

O to get on the right hand side the expression:

n−1

i=1
X

fi(x, t)

∂E(x, t)
∂xi

+

∂E(x, t)
∂t

.

(15)

But what is the relation between dg(t)/dt with the expression (15)? We

cannot make them equal all over the space O, because this is not correct, we

shall fall in previous mistakes again. However both expressions must be the

same over a path, hence we approximate the expression (15) to the points of

one path with the help of a limiting procedure:

dg(t)
dt

= lim

x→p  

fi(x, t)

∂E(x, t)
∂xi

+

∂E(x, t)

∂t !

(16)

n−1

i=1
X

We have discussed in detail several ways to use this expression in [7] using

the supposition that, in fact, we have integrability. Here we shall just discuss

the uses in the non-integrable case. But ﬁrst let’s remark the advantages of

(16):

1.- On the left hand side we have a function of just one variable,

hence the deﬁnition of derivative is clear.

2.- On the right hand side we have only usual partial deriva-

tives and n-variable functions, hence the usual deﬁnition of partial

derivative is clear.

The meaning of the limiting procedure is very simple: on the globally deﬁned

manifold O we shall make that the variables that describe it tend to the point

of the path in some speciﬁed way. Of course this can be done in many ways and

depends on the topological properties of the manifold. In any simple connected

manifold the way in which we get the points of the path should be not important.

The most common case of this approximation procedure is the one which answer

the question (AA), that is, we approximate the tangent vectors of the path to

the vectors given by the vector ﬁeld of components fi.

12

5 Some uses of the formula (16)

.

Let’s show how the formula (16) can be used in diﬀerential geometry. For

the sake of completeness we shall expose what is commonly considered as the

right procedure, and then we shall show that it can be done with our methods,

too. Take an abstract manifold M of dimension N and deﬁne over it a path p.

Hence its coordinate representatives are given by:

hx1[p(t)], . . . , xN [p(t)]i.

(17)

The usual goal is to deﬁne in an intrinsic manner the tangent vectors, that

is, in such a way that they depend on the points of M only and not in the space

in which M is contained. This can be done by deﬁning the tangent vectors in

terms of the path p in the following way: we deﬁne the equivalence class of p as

(p) = def

∗

|

dxi[p(t)]
dt

p
(cid:26)

|t=0 =

dxi[p∗(t)]
dt

|t=0

,

(cid:27)

(18)

in words: a path p is equivalent to a path p∗ if and only if at the common

point p(0) = p∗(0) they have the same tangent vector. With this deﬁnition it

is a usual matter to prove that the directional derivative of the path, directed

along the tangent vectors is independent of the selected path. To do this it is

necessary to use the chain rule to write down the following two expressions:

df [p(t)]
dt

=

∂f
∂xi

dxi[p(t)]
dt

and

df [p∗(t)]
dt

=

∂f
∂xi

dxi[p∗(t)]
dt

.

(19)

N

i=1
X

N

i=1
X

We can see that in the limit t → 0 both expressions are the same, hence the

derivative is independent of the underlying path. If we remember the argument

(B) we cannot write equations (19), hence, we must use the correct expressions.

For that, we take two paths which have only one common point, hence we have

two functions g and g∗ equal in at least one point. The expression at the right

13

of (16) under the sign of limit does not depend on the path, and thus remains

the same, however the limit change because the process of approximation must

be done considering two diﬀerent paths, hence we write:

dg(t)
dt

= lim
x→p

Vi

∂f
∂xi

N

i=1
X

and

dg∗(t)
dt

= lim
x→p∗

Vi

∂f
∂xi

.

N

i=1
X

(20)

If we suppose that the tangents to the paths tend to the vector ﬁeld V we

can write down the right hand sides of (20) as the right hand sides of (19). But

this is equivalent to writing down:

dxi[p(t)]
dt

= Vi{x[p(t)]}

and

= Vi{x[p

(t)]}.

∗

(21)

dxi[p∗(t)]
dt

Now, if we suppose that as our initial value we have p(0) = p∗(0) = p0 we

shall get the same path by invoking the usual theorems. Hence the underlying

paths are not important and our process is well deﬁned over the equivalence

classes. But we have a bonus, when we cannot use the equations (21), which is

the case when our limiting procedure does not converge to the tangent vectors,

that is, when we cannot ﬁnd a 1-dimensional foliation of the manifold by 1-

dimensional integral paths of the vector ﬁeld, we can express this condition in

a quite simple manner

lim
x→p

Vi(x1, . . . , xN ) 6=

dxi
dt

(22)

Which, of course, makes the integrability a part of the topological properties

of the manifold.

6 On the integrability concept

The notion of integrability which we have reached in the previous section must

be compared with the most usual notion based on cross diﬀerentiation, that is,

the generation of a Lie algebra structure for the generators of a distribution E

of vector spaces along any manifold. For the case of diﬀerential 1-forms the

14

conclusions about integrability can be obtained with the use of its associated

complex, the De Rham complex, where the integrability condition of a diﬀeren-

tial 1-form w can be expressed with the notation: dw 6= 0 because if it is zero,

by the use of the usual local Poincare’s lemma we get a local integral f of the

form w = df . Another way to express the same condition is with the use of the

integral invariants of Cartan. For the case of diﬀerential 1-forms we have that,

if f is such a scalar invariant, hence the distribution of vector ﬁelds E along

the space is such that: E ⊆ Ker(df ) [8]. If we use n-forms, ϕ, the condition is

E ⊆ Ker(ϕ) ∩ Ker(dϕ) (Hence the n-form is an integral invariant of Cartan).

However this notion is based on one idea: the cross diﬀerentiation of expres-

sions like the functions at the right hand side of (13) process which we have

showed to be meaningless because we don’t have a way to compute it. But

with the development of the free coordinate tensor formalism many things were

left aside, and it was possible to express the conditions in free coordinate terms

which avoid the explicit use of operations like the usual total diﬀerentiation. In

this sense, we believe that in the free coordinate tensor formalism such problems

like the one treated in this note cannot be found, except in the cases in which

the total derivatives appear. Coming back to the notion of integrability, even

in the tensor formalism it is based on the idea of Lie algebra, which is a formal

reconstruction of the idea of cross diﬀerentiation, but the notion of integrability

given by the equation (22) is not based on this notion as a primitive notion,

instead it is based on the idea of appropriation to a given curve as a primitive

concept.

7 Summary and discussion

The brief treatment given here suggests that a profound, case by case, investiga-

tion of the uses of the formalism introduced in diﬀerential geometry and topology

15

is necessary. However, probably the usual tools must be complemented with a

critical view of the subject involved, because our representations of the underly-

ing processes may not be the same and this is the origin of the ignorance of the

problem. Really, the problem arises in the language, not in the usual formalism,

because we take seriously the idea that a partial derivative can be deﬁned only

when all the variables are constants except one. Trying to respect this deﬁnition

is the source of everything. This deﬁnition deﬁnes two syntactical rules of the

form:

d/dt : C(ℜ, ℜm) → C(ℜ, ℜm);

∂/∂q : C(ℜn, ℜm) → C(ℜn, ℜm)

(23)

one for each operator. The functor C should be taken as adequate for each

case. The syntactical rules are, of course, that the symbol d/dt can only operate

when the set represented by ℜ doesn’t appear as a cartesian product, that is,

its exponent can be only 1, which means 1-variable function. For the operator

of partial diﬀerentiation, the set must have a cartesian exponent diﬀerent from

0 and 1, that is, we consider only n-variable functions (n 6= 0, 1). Hence, if we

look more closely at the equation g = E ◦ p we can write down the sequence:

ℜ → ℜn → ℜn which shows that any derivative of the function g must be a

d/dt. The composition operation is of the syntactical form:

◦ : C(ℜn, ℜm) × C(ℜ, ℜn) → C(ℜ, ℜm),

(24)

which shows that its action produces a 1-variable function. Usually this kind

of rule is not taken into account, and people proceed with heuristic arguments

based on one or other representation of the subject, of even without represen-

tation just by operating on the symbols. This is not really wrong, or at least

that is our opinion. However, if one tries to take the propositions seriously a

moment of reﬂection over our own concepts and the use which we made of them

is necessary. This is the heart of our attempt in this note.

16

The consistency of mathematical analysis it is the mayor problem which

motivated the new approaches. See, for example, very interesting paper by K.

Brownstein [4], although we criticize some aspects of this work. After our paper

has been already submitted to this Journal we have discovered a brilliant work

by R.M. Santilli “Nonlocal-integral isotopies of diﬀerential calculus, mechanics

and geometries” [9] where the author settles a new approach to diﬀerential

calculus (see, e.g., [9] p. 19, 1.5“Isodiﬀerential calculus”).

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to express their gratitude to Prof. Valeri Dvoeglazov

for his discussions and critical comments. We would also like to thank An-

namaria D’Amore for revising the manuscript. One of the authors (RAF) is

in debt with the Centro de Estudios Multidisciplinarios and specially with its

director Ing. Rogelio Cardenas Hernandez for his constant support.

References

(1999).

p. 1 (1997).

[1] A. E. Chubykalo and S. Vlaev, Int. J. of Modern Physics A 14(24), p. 3789

[2] A. E. Chubykalo and R. Smirnov-Rueda, Modern Physics Letters A 12(1),

[3] L. Schwartz, Analyse Math´ematique, Vol 1 (HERMANN, Paris 1967).

[4] K.R. Brownstein, Amer.J. Phys. 67(7), p.639, July (1999).

[5] G.M. Fichtengoltz, Kurs diﬀeretzialnogo i integralnogo ischislenia, Vol 1

(GIFML, Moscow 1958) (in Russian).

[6] V. Y. Arnold, Matematicheskie Metody Classicheskoi Mehaniki (Nauka,

Moscow, 1989) [English translation: Mathematical Methods of Classical Me-

chanics (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989)].

17

[7] A.E. Chubykalo, R.A. Flores, J.A. P´erez, “On ambiguity in the concept of

partial and total derivatives” in The Lorentz group, CPT, and Neutrinos

(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2000). p. 384.

[8] J.M. Soriau, Structure of dynamical systems (Birkhauser, Boston 1997).

[9] R.M. Santilli, Suppl. ai Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Serie

II, N 42, p. 7 (1996).

18

