2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
1
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE NEW COSMOS

B.G. Sidharth
Centre for Applicable Mathematics & Computer Sciences
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063, India

Abstract

We review the broad status of cosmology and discuss a model of
ﬂuctuational cosmology in which the universe is created in a phase
transition like phenomenon mimicking inﬂation, and which further
consistently explains latest observations like the ever expanding and
accelerating feature.

1 Introduction

The Newtonian Universe was one in which there was an absolute background
space in which the basic building blocks of the universe were situated-these
were stars. This view was a quantum jump from the earlier view, based on
the Greek model in which stars and other celestial objects were attached to
transparent material spheres, which prevented them from falling down.
When Einstein proposed his General Theory of Relativity some eighty ﬁve
years ago, the accepted picture of the universe was one where all major
constituents were stationery. This had puzzled Einstein, because the grav-
itational pull of these constituents should make the universe collapse. So
Einstein introduced his famous cosmological constant, essentially a repulsive
force that would counterbalance the attractive gravitational force. Shortly
thereafter there were two dramatic discoveries which completely altered that
picture. The ﬁrst was due to Astronomer Edwin Hubble, who discovered
that the basic constituents or building blocks of the universe were not stars,
but rather huge conglomerations of stars called galaxies. The second dis-
covery was the fact that these galaxies are rushing away from each other-far

1

from being static the universe was exploding. There was no need for the
counterbalancing cosmic repulsion any more and Einstein dismissed this as
his greatest blunder.
Over the next forty odd years, these observations evolved into the Big Bang
theory, according to which all the matter in the universe possibly some ﬁfteen
billion years ago, was concentrated in a speck, at the birth of the universe,
which was characterized by an inconceivable explosion or bang. This lead to
the matter being ﬂung outwards, and that is what keeps the galaxies rushing
outwards even today. In the mid sixties conﬁrmation for the Big Bang model
of the universe came from the detection of a cosmic footprint. The energy
of the initial Big Bang would today still be available in the form of cosmic
microwaves, which accidentally were discovered [1, 2, 3].
Over the next three decades and more, the Big Bang theory was reﬁned fur-
ther and further. A n important question was, would the universe continue
to expand for ever, though slowing down, or would the expansion halt one
day and the universe collapse back again. Much depended on the material
If there was enough matter, then the
content or density of the universe.
expansion would halt and reverse. If not the universe would expand for ever.
However the observed material content of the universe appeared to be insuf-
ﬁcient to halt the expansion.
At the same time there were a few other intriguing observations. For ex-
ample the velocities along the radius of a galaxy, instead of sharply falling
oﬀ, ﬂattened out. All this led astronomers to invoke dark matter, that is
undetected matter. This matter could be in the form of black holes within
galaxies, or brown dwarf stars which were too faint to be detected, or even
massive neutrinos which were otherwise thought to be massless. With dark
matter thrown in, it appeared that the universe had suﬃcient material con-
tent to halt, and even reverse the expansion. That is, the universe would
expand up to a point and then collapse.
There still were several subtler problems to be addressed. One was the fa-
mous horizon problem. To put it simply the Big Bang was an uncontrolled
or random event and so diﬀerent parts of the universe in diﬀerent directions
were disconnected in the earliest stage and so today need not be the same,
just as people in diﬀerent parts of the world need not wear the same type
of dress. Observation however shows that the universe is by and large uni-
form, like people in diﬀerent countries wearing the same dress-that would not
be possible without some form of intercommunication which would violate

2

Einstein’s earlier Special Theory of Relativity, according to which no signal
can travel faster than light. The next problem was, that according to Ein-
stein, due to the material content in the universe, space should be curved or
roughly speaking bent, whereas the universe appears to be ﬂat. There were
other problems as well. For example astronomers predicted that there should
be monopoles that is, simply put, either only North magnetic poles or only
South magnetic poles, unlike the North South combined magnetic poles we
encounter. Such monopoles have failed to show up.
Some of these problems were sought to be explained by what has been called
inﬂationary cosmology whereby, early on, just after the Big Bang the explo-
sion was a super fast [4, 5].
What would happen in this case is, that diﬀerent parts of the universe, which
could not be accessible by light, would now get connected. At the same time,
the super fast expansion in the initial stages would smoothen out any distor-
tion or curvature eﬀects in space, leading to a ﬂat universe and in the process
also eliminate the monopoles.
One other feature that has been studied in detail over the past few decades
is that of structure formation in the universe. To put it simply, why is the
universe not a uniform spread of matter and radiation? On the contrary it
is very lumpy with planets, stars, galaxies and so on, with a lot of space
separating these objects. This has been explained in terms of ﬂuctuations
in density, that is accidentally more matter being present in a given region.
Gravitation would then draw in even more matter and so on. Such ﬂuctua-
tions would also cause the cosmic background radiation to be non uniform
or anisotropic. Such ﬂuctuations are in fact being observed.

2 Latest Observation

Everything seemed to have fallen into place. The universe appeared to be
well behaved. However from early 1998 the conventional wisdom of cosmol-
ogy that had developed over the past three to four decades, began to be
challenged. The work of Perlmutter and co-workers, as also of Schmidt and
co-workers was announced in 1998 and it told a sensational if diﬀerent story.
They had observed carefully very distant supernovae or exploding stars and
to the disbelief of everyone, it turned out that not only was the universe not
slowing down, but was actually accelerating, which also means that it would

3

keep on expanding eternally [6, 7, 8]. This was nothing short of an upheaval,
and theorists are under great pressure to explain all this.
Suddenly astronomers were talking about dark energy instead of dark matter.
Dark energy is an unknown and mysterious form of energy that brings into
play repulsion, in addition to the attractive force of gravitation. All this is
reminiscent of Einstein’s greatest blunder namely the cosmic repulsion itself.
However there is a problem. What is dark energy? Physicists speak of such
an energy from what is called the Quantum Vacuum. The idea here is that
there cannot be a background vacuum with exactly zero energy as exact val-
ues of energy are forbidden by Quantum Theory. Only the average energy
could be zero. In other words energy would be ﬂuctuating about a zero value.
This is called a Zero Point Field. As a consequence what happens in the vac-
uum is that electrons and positrons are continuously created, out of nothing
as it were, but these pairs are very shortlived. Almost instantaneously they
annihilate each other and release energy, which in turn again manifests itself
as electron-positron pairs. These eﬀects could lead to a cosmic repulsion,
but the only problem is that the value of the cosmological constant, in other
words the strength of the cosmic repulsion would be much too high. This
would go against observation. The problem has been known for long as the
cosmological constant problem. So astronomers are also talking about the
dark energy, now christened Quintessence, leading to a mysterious new force
of repulsion.
Yet another dramatic discovery since 1998 has been made with the help of
the SuperKamiokande experiment in Japan [9]. This facility observed solar
radiation, in particular for the very strange, maverick supposedly massless
particles, neutrinos. It turns out that these particles now possess a miniscule
mass, about a billionth that of an electron. The discovery explains one puz-
zle, what has been commonly called the solar neutrino problem. The point
is that we seem to receive much less than the theoretically expected number
of neutrinos from solar radiation. But the theoretical prediction was made
on the basis of the assumption that neutrinos were massless. Even with the
tiniest of masses, the problem disappears. However these observations chal-
lenge what has come to be known as the Standard Model of Particle Physics,
which takes the masslessness of the neutrino for granted. Could these mas-
sive neutrinos be the elusive dark matter? The answer is no– this matter is
still much too small to stop the expansion, which is very well in view of the
latest ever expanding scenario.

4

Another iconoclastic dramatic observation which is gaining conﬁrmation is
that, what is called the ﬁne structure constant, which scientists have con-
sidered to be a sacrosanct constant of the universe, has infact been slowly
decreasing over billions of years [10, 11]. Webb and co-workers have con-
ﬁrmed this by observing the spectrum of light from the distant Quasars and
comparing this with spectra in the vicinity. As the ﬁne structure constant
is made up of the electric charge of the electron, the speed of light, and the
Planck constant, this would mean that one or some or even all of them are
not the sacred constants they have been taken for, but are slowly changing
with time. The consequences of this are quite dramatic. For instance this
would mean that atoms and molecules in the past were not the same as their
counterparts today - this will be true in future also. This again would have
dramatic implications. According to present thinking, life as we know it de-
pends on a delicate balance between the diﬀerent fundamental constants of
nature-otherwise life itself could neither evolve nor sustain. If the values of
these constants change, so would atoms and molecules and the narrow limits
for life get narrower in time.
While attempts are being made to modify the successful inﬂation theory and
other theories also to try to explain these latest discoveries there are at least
two alternative approaches also being considered. The ﬁrst is a theory that
has been put forward in the past few years by Moﬀat, Albrecht, Magueijo,
Barrow and others that contrary to Einstein’s Special Relativity the speed
of light is not a universal constant, but rather it has decreased over billions
of years [12].

3 An Alternative Model

Another approach was proposed by the author in 1997, in which matter is
created at random from a background Quantum Vacuum or dark energy [13,
14, 15]. Interestingly the random nature of creation of the particles take place
in a fashion similar to inﬂation, though this eﬀect would be pronounced in
the earliest stages of the birth of the universe, as in the inﬂation model. This
model successfully predicted an ever expanding and accelerating universe.
It explains a number of mysterious relations between diﬀerent physical and
astronomical quantities, for example the radius of the universe, the number
of particles in the universe, the mass and size of a typical elementary particle,

5

the universal gravitational constant, the speed of light and so on. Many of
these puzzling relations had been known for a long time, but in the absence
In the
of an explanation, they had been dismissed as freak coincidences.
present model, all these relations follow from the theory, rather than being
accidental. Apart from the fact that this model provides an explanation
for the puzzling time variation of the ﬁne structure constant, it also gives a
mechanism for reconciling the two great irreconcible theories of the twentieth
century, namely Einstein’s General Relativity and Quantum Theory. The key
to this is the fact that, in both these theories, space and time were taken
to be continuous and smooth, whereas in this model this is no longer true,
though these subtler eﬀects can only be detected at very very tiny scales.
Let us now examine this model in a little more detail [16]. Let us ﬁrst
consider the usual Compton scale, l, τ to be the lower limit for physics in the
sense that within this scale we encounter unphysical zitterbewegung eﬀects.
The Planck scale itself is a special case of the Compton scale. Remembering
now, that given N particles in the universe, the ﬂuctuation in their number
is

√N , which takes place within the Compton scale, we have,

∼

On integration we get,

which can be easily seen to be valid if T is the age of the universe.
We next invoke the well known equation

where R is the radius of the universe and M its mass, given by

where m is the mass of a typical elementary particle, the pion.
Diﬀerentiating equation (2) we get

dN
dt

=

√N
τ

T =

¯h
mc2

√N

R

≈

GM
c2

Nm = M

dR
dt ≈

HR

6

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

where H in (4) can be identiﬁed with the Hubble Constant, and using (2) is
given by,

Equation (1), (2) and (3) show that in this formulation, the correct mass, ra-
dius and age of the universe can be deduced given N as the sole cosmological
or large scale parameter. Equation (5) can be written as

H =

Gm3c
¯h2

1
3

H¯h2
Gc !

m

≈  

(5)

(6)

Equation (6) is quite remarkable: it has been empirically known as an ”ac-
cidental” or ”mysterious” relation. As observed by Weinberg, [17], this is
unexplained; it relates a single cosmological parameter H to constants from
microphysics. In our formulation, equation (6) is no longer a mysterious co-
incidence but rather a consequence.
If we use (5) and (4) as exact equations we can conclude that there is no cos-
mological constant Λ. However, as they are not exact equations but rather,
order of magnitude relations, it follows that a small cosmological constant Λ
is allowed such that

0(H 2)

Λ

≤

This is consistent with observation and shows that Λ is very very small - this
is the so called cosmological constant problem [18]. But it is explained here.
We will not go into further detail, but merely observe that this is a varying
G cosmology which can explain such eﬀects as dark matter, precession of the
perihelion of mercury and so on (Cf.refs.[15, 16]for details).
We would now like to comment upon the Compton scale and the ﬂuctuational
creation of particles alluded to above. Firstly we observe that the creation
of particles can be deduced within the context of the Nelsonian Stochastic
Theory as the formations of the analogues of Benard convective cells [19].
This again is very much in the spirit of El Naschie’s Cantorian space time [20,
21, 22, 23, 24]. In this case particles are being produced out of a background
Quantum Vacuum or Zero Point Field which is a pre space time. First a
Nelsonian-Brownian process alluded to above deﬁnes the Planck length while
a Brownian random process with the Planck scale is the fundamental interval
leads to the Compton scale (Cf.ref.[25] for details).

7

This process is a phase transition, a critical phenomenon. To see this brieﬂy,
let us start with the Landau-Ginsburg equation [26]

¯h2
2m∇

−

2ψ + β

ψ

2ψ =

|

|

αψ

−

(7)

Here ¯h and m have the same meaning as in usual Quantum Theory. It is
remarkable that the above equation (7) is identical with a similar Schrodinger
2 is proportional to the
like equation based on amplitudes, where moreover
mass (or density) of the particle (Cf. ref.[16] for details). The equation in
question is,

ψ

|

|

ı¯h

∂ψ
∂t

= −

¯h2
2m′

∂2ψ
∂x2 +

Z

ψ∗(x′)ψ(x)ψ(x′)U(x′)dx′,

(8)

In (8), ψ(x) is the probability of a particle being at the point x and the
integral is over a region of the order of the Compton wavelength. From this
point of view, the similarity of (8) with (7) need not be surprising considering
also that near critical points, due to universality diverse phenomena like
magnetism or ﬂuids share similar mathematical equations. Equation (8) is
shown to lead to the Schrodinger equation with the particle acquiring a mass
(Cf.also ref.[27]).
Infact in the Landau-Ginsburg case the coherence length is given by

1
2

(cid:18)

=

(9)

ξ =

hνF
∆

γ
α (cid:19)
which can be easily shown to reduce to the Compton wavelength (Cf. also
ref.[28].
Thus the emergence of Benard cell like elementary particles from the Quan-
tum Vacuum mimics the Landau-Ginsburg phase transition. In this case we
have a non local growth of correlations reminiscent of the standard inﬂation
theory.
The above model apart from mimicking inﬂation also explains the so called
miraculous large number coincidences for example (1) or (5) hitherto inex-
plicable, and further successfully predicted an ever expanding accelerating
universe amongst other things (Cf.ref.[29]).

8

References

[1] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, ”Gravitation”, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, 1973, pp.819ﬀ.

[2] R. Ruﬃni and Li Zhi Fang, ”Basic Concepts in Relativistic Astro-

physics”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1983, p.111ﬀ.

[3] C.H. Ohanian, and R. Ruﬃni, ”Gravitation and Spacetime”, New York,

1994, p.397.

gapore, 1982, p.40ﬀ.

[4] A. Zee, ”Unity of Forces in the Universe”, Vol.II, World Scientiﬁc, Sin-

[5] A.D. Linde, Phys.Lett., 108B, 389, 1982.

[6] S. Perlmutter, et al., Nature, Vol.391, 1 January 1998, p.51-59.

[7] R.P. Kirshner, Proc. Natl.Acad.Sci. USA, Vol.96, April 1999, pp.4224-

4227.

[8] W. Freedman, Astronomy and Geophysics, 42, 2002, pp.1.10ﬀ.

[9] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 12, 2001, 1101-1104.

[10] J.K. Webb, et al., Phys.Rev.Lett., 87 (9), 2001, pp.091301-1 ﬀ.

[11] J.K. Webb, et al., Phys.Rev.Lett., 82, 1999, pp884ﬀ.

[12] M. Maggiore, Phys.Rev.D., Vol.49, No.10, 1994, p.5182-5187.

[13] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Mod.Phys.A., 13 (15), 1998, p.2599ﬀ.

[14] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Th.Phys., 37 (4), 1998, p.1307ﬀ.

[15] B.G. Sidharth, Nuovo Cimento, 115B (12), (2), 2000, pp.151ﬀ.

[16] B.G. Sidharth, ”Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science Publishers, New York, 2001.

[17] S. Weinberg, ”Gravitation and Cosmology”, John Wiley & Sons, New

York, 1972, pp.619ﬀ.

9

[18] S. Weinberg, Phys.Rev.Lett., 43, 1979, p.1566.

[19] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 14, 2002, 1325-1330.

[20] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 1999, 10(11), 1947-54.

[21] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 1996, 7(4), 499-518.

[22] M.S. El Naschie, Int.J.Th.Phys., 1998, 37(12), 2935-51.

[23] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractaals, 2002, 14, 649-68.

[24] M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 2002, 14, 369-76.

[25] B.G. Sidharth, ”Planck Scale Phenomena”, to appear in Foundation of

Physics Letters.

1975, p.462ﬀ.

[26] D.L. Goodstein, ”States of Matter”, Dover Publications, Inc., New York,

[27] B.G. Sidharth, Nonlinear World 1, 1994, 403-408.

[28] B.G. Sidharth, J.Stat.Phys., 95 (3/4), 1999, pp.775-784.

[29] B.G. Sidharth, ”The Cosmology of Fluctuations”, to appear in Chaos,

Solitons and Fractals, Special Issue on the ”New Cosmology”.

10

