UNIVERSALITY

Emil Marinchev

Technical University of Soﬁa
Physics Department
8, Kliment Ohridski St.
Soﬁa-1000, BG
e-mail: emar@tu-soﬁa.acad.bg

Abstract. This article is an attempt for a new vision of the basics of Physics, and
of Relativity, in particular. A new generalized principle of inertia is proposed, as an
universal principle, based on universality of the law of conservation. The second and
the third principles of Newton’s mechanics are interpreted as logical consequences. The
generalization of the classical principle of relativity made by Einstein as the most basic
postulate in the Relativity is criticized as logically not well-founded. A new theoretical
scheme is proposed based on two basic principles:

1.The principle of universality of the conservation laws, and
2.The principle of the universal speed. It is well- founded with examples of diﬀerent

ﬁelds of physics.

2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
1
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New Insight in Physics

1. Introduction

2

Theoretical physics describes geometrically the motion of matter, substituting real
physical objects by geometrical objects (models). The geometry that is usually used
depends on the distribution of matter and its motion.
In small velocities Euclidian
geometry is used (Newtonian mechanics). In velocities comparable to the speed of light
pseudo-Euclidian geometry is used. Pseudo-Riemannian geometry is used in General
Relativity when material structures with high energy-momentum density are considered.
The following geometrical objects are used for the quantitative description of physical
phenomena:
scalars, vectors (poly-vectors), tensors etc. Since the essential nature
of the physical phenomena do not depend on the reference frame, the corresponding
geometrical objects should be absolute in the sense, that they do not depend on the
choice of the coordinate system and frame used, although that they may have diﬀerent
presentation in the various ones. By their very nature the physical laws are universal,
so their geometrical equivalents should be absolute too.

A full description of any physical phenomenon includes kinematical and dynamical
(in particular, statical) parts. There is relation between these two parts because they
deal with the same physical phenomenon. The kinematics describes the motion of
the system considered making use of concepts like trajectory, velocity, acceleration,
or with their graphical presentation. The main feature of the dynamical description
is making use of conservative quantities like momentum, angular momentum, energy,
etc. In presence of interaction the universal conserved quantities momentum, angular
momentum and energy are exchanged with or without exchange of mass (particles) and
other physical quantities like electrical charge and/or other charges.

If a physical system does not interact with other (external) objects it is a closed
system and it is natural to describe its motion with conservative quantities. The idea
of a closed (isolated) system is a very useful one because the dynamical part of the
description is very simple. As we know, Newton built his mechanics on three principles.
But aren’t they more than necessary? The most signiﬁcant principle, in my view, is
the ﬁrst one, the principle of inertia. The idea of this paper is that a possible and
appropriate generalization of this principle might incorporate the other two, so that the
latter may be logically obtained as consequences of it.

2. Universality - Generalized Principle of Inertia

Our generalized principle of inertia may be formulated as follows:

Reference frames in which the physical systems conserve their state of

motion, if they do not interact with other objects, are universal.

Let’s give some clarifying comments. The quality of ”conservation of state of
motion” we call inertia, and we characterize it by a set of conservative quantities -
momentum, angular momentum, energy and mass. The generalized principle of inertia
automatically includes the inertial rotation. Traditionally, in physics, it is accepted that

New Insight in Physics

inertia is determined only by the scalar quantity mass. The ﬁrst principle of Newton
says that the state of uniform motion along a straight line is conserved. Obviously the
direction of motion is conserved and it could not be described by a scalar quantity.
The inertial motion is with constant values of the conservation quantities. Clearly, the
universal reference frames include as a particular case the inertial frames of Newton’s
mechanics.

If there is interaction the state of motion is changed and the conservation quantities are
changed too. The rate of change of the conservation quantities deﬁnes quantitatively the
interaction with the surrounding objects, i.e. physical quantities: force, torque, work
and reactive force.

3

(1)

(2)

p = const

L = const

E = const

m = const

˙p = F
˙L = M = r × F
∆E = A

˙mu = FR

In exchange of momentum between two bodies one of them recoils and the other one
accepts momentum, and as a result action and reaction are equal in magnitude and
opposite in direction. According to the Newton’s third principle the horse and the cart
are pulling each other, but the leading part of the horse is obvious. In our approach to
dynamics the laws of conservation are the leading ones, not the forces of interaction.

3. Examples

1. It is not by chance that the ﬁrst principle of thermodynamics is an application of the
law of energy conservation in thermodynamic systems and the transport phenomena
(the viscosity, thermal conductivity and diﬀusion) are associated with exchange of
momentum, energy and particles in micro level. The main equation of the molecular
kinetic theory and the consequences of it are easily deﬁned if we look at the pressure as
mean energy density ¯ε and in the same time as bidirectional exchange of momentum in
arbitrary direction (degree of freedom) :

p = 2n¯ε/i = 2n¯ε1 = nkT ⇒ ¯ε1 =

kT,

1
2

n is the number of molecules in unit volume, i is the number of degrees of freedom.
2. A typical reactive force is the lift force in aerodynamics FR, Figure 1:

FR = ˙mu = −F.

(3)

New Insight in Physics

4

(4)

(5)

Figure 1. Lift

FR = ˙mu = ˙m(v + u) − ˙mv = −F

3.

In the theory of relativity the laws of conservation are united in a general
law of conservation by the four-vector of the momentum p. In the general theory of
relativity the curvature of time-space is used instead of gravitational interaction. The
gravitational interaction in the Newtonian sense is missing. The motion of cosmic
objects is in harmony with the conservation laws and is along the geodesics:

p = (E, ~p) = mu,

|p| = E0 = m, c = 1

˙p = F

˙p = (∇p).u = ∇up = ∇.(pu) = 0,
The local motion is in a straight line and the time-space is ﬂat.

if F = 0.

The principle of relativity is the ﬁrst postulate in the special and in the general
theory of relativity which probably has given their names. From our point of view
the development of these theories could be done without the principle of relativity, as
it is in Newtonian mechanics. The second postulate of Einstein can be generalized
into the following universal principle: there exists maximal possible universal velocity
common for all reference frames c = 3.108 m/s (c = 1). The velocity of light in vacuum
is equivalent to it. As for the usage of the concept of relativity, in our opinion the
concept of UNIVERSALITY is much more adequate because of the universality of the
conservation laws, of the principle of the universal velocity, and the universality of
gravitation.
4.

In electromagnetism, the rate of change of the momentum of the q-charged
particle deﬁnes quantitatively the interaction with the external electromagnetic ﬁeld,
i.e. the Lorentz force FL.

˙p = FL = q(E + v × B)

˙p = (∇p).u = qF.u = q(∇ ∧ A).u

F = ∇ ∧ A,

where F is the tensor of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.

5.

In the microworld, the universality of conservation laws and the principle of
universal velocity demonstrate their universality even more substantially, and most
frequently they give the only possibility to explain these microphenomena.

We would like to note that this approach of using conservation laws as dynamics
generating rules has been used constructively in [1,2] where a nonlinear generalization of
Maxwell equations giving more realistic description of the electromagnetic phenomena
is achieved.

New Insight in Physics

4. Universality applied to Gravitation

The time-space tells the matter how to move by inertia according to the laws of
conservation.

˙p = (∇p).u = ∇up = ∇.(pu) = 0,

if F = 0 .

Obviously between time-space and matter there is no exchange of energy-momentum.
The changes of time-space should be characterized in a similar way to the motion of
matter by a symmetric tensor of second rank with covariant divergence equal to zero,
e.g. the tensor G of Hilbert-Einstein:

5

(6)

(7)

∇.G = ∇.(R −

Rg) = 0 = ∇.T ⇒

G = R −

Rg = 0 = κT, κ = 8πγ,

1
2

1
2

where T is the tensor of the density and the ﬂux of energy-momentum.

Finally, I’d like to note that this vision on physics is inspired by discussions
I kindly acknowledge his critical views during the discussions, which

with S.Donev.
contributed greatly to clarify some diﬃcult issues in the subject.

References

[1]. Donev, S., Tashkova, M., Energy-momentum Directed Nonlinearization of
Maxwell’s Equations in the Case of Continuous Media, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 443
(1995), 281-291

[2]. Donev, S., Parallel Objects and Field Equations, LANL e-print: math-

ph/0205046

