2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modiﬁcations of the Lorentz Force Law Complying with
Galilean Transformations and the Local-Ether Propagation Model

Ching-Chuan Su
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Tsinghua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan

Abstract – It is generally expected from intuition that the electromagnetic force exerted
on a charged particle should remain unchanged when observed in diﬀerent reference frames
In the special relativity, this invariance is achieved by
in uniform translational motion.
invoking the Lorentz transformation of space and time.
In this investigation an entirely
diﬀerent interpretation of the invariance of force is presented. We propose a new model
of the electromagnetic force given in terms of the augmented potentials, which are derived
from the electric scalar potential by incorporating a velocity diﬀerence between involved
particles. The propagation of the potentials is supposed to follow the local-ether model. All
of the position vectors, time derivatives, and velocities involved in the proposed potentials
and force law are referred speciﬁcally to their respective frames. By virtue of this feature,
the electromagnetic force is independent of reference frame simply based on Galilean trans-
formations. The proposed model looks quite diﬀerent from the Lorentz force law, except
the electrostatic force. However, under the common low-speed condition where the mobile
charged particles forming the current drift very slowly in a neutralizing matrix, it is shown
that the proposed model reduces to the Lorentz force law, if the latter is observed in the
matrix frame as done tacitly in common practice.

1. Introduction

It is widely accepted that the electromagnetic force exerted on a particle of charge q
and velocity v is given by the Lorentz force law in terms of electric and magnetic ﬁelds as
F = q(E + v × B). According to this famous law, the force consists of the electric and
the magnetic forces. The magnetic force is associated with magnetic ﬁeld and depends on
the velocity v of the aﬀected particle, while the electric force is with electric ﬁeld and is
independent of the particle motion. Moreover, it is well known that the current density,
which generates the magnetic ﬁeld, is given by the charge density times the velocity of the
source particles, as those adopted in the formulations presented by Maxwell [1], Heaviside
[2], Lorentz [3], and Einstein [4].

It is generally expected from intuition that a force exerted on a particle should remain
unchanged when observed in diﬀerent reference frames in uniform translational motion.
That is, the observed force is independent of reference frame. Thus it was widely presumed
that the velocities of the aﬀected and the source particles associated with the magnetic force
should have a preferred reference frame. Otherwise, the Lorentz force law is obviously not
invariant under Galilean transformations, while Galilean invariance is common in classical
mechanics, such as in Newton’s laws of motion and in the conservation laws of momentum
and kinetic energy. Historically, there were some disagreements about the reference frame of
the particle velocity among Maxwell, Thomson, Lorentz, and Einstein who pioneered in the
development of this important force law. In Maxwell’s treatise on electricity and magnetism,
the velocity seems to mean the relative velocity, since it was noticed that it is the relative
motion between one coil and another that determines the induction in Faraday’s experiments
[1]. And the electric current is attributed to be associated with “the velocity with which the
electricity passes through the body”. In analyzing the experiments of magnetic deﬂection
with cathode rays, which led to the discovery of electron, Thomson supposed that the
electromagnetic force depends both on the relative velocities and the actual velocities of the
involved particles, where the actual velocity is referred to the magnetic medium through

1

which the particle is moving [5]. In Lorentz’s theory of electrons, the velocity seems to be
referred to the ether, since it is supposed that the charges move through the ether, which
occupies all space between particles and pervades the particles [3].

However, in the past century, an almost unanimously accepted explanation is provided
by Einstein’s special relativity whereby the velocity is referred to an arbitrary inertial frame.
When observed in another reference frame, the relevant electromagnetic quantities of charge
density, current density, potentials, and ﬁelds will change with the relative velocity between
the two frames according to the Lorentz transformation of space and time. Meanwhile, the
kinematical quantities of velocity, momentum, and force will also change under the Lorentz
transformation.
It can be shown that the transformation of the time rate of change of
kinematical momentum of a charged particle is exactly identical to the Lorentz force given
in terms of the transformed ﬁelds and velocity [6]. In other words, the Lorentz force law is
invariant under the Lorentz transformation.

While the Lorentz transformation solves the problem associated with the changes of
particle velocities and current density with reference frame, it is noticed that the electric
current generating the magnetic force in the magnetic deﬂection or in motors is commonly
electrically neutralized. That is, the mobile source particles which form the current are
actually embedded in a matrix and the ions which constitute the matrix tend to electrically
neutralize the mobile particles, such as electrons in a metal wire. It is expected that the
ions as well as the mobile source particles form an electric current and contribute to a
magnetic ﬁeld if the matrix is moving. Thus the velocity which determines the neutralized
current density is the drift velocity of the mobile particles with respect to the neutralizing
matrix, regardless of the motion of the matrix. The neutralized current density then remains
unchanged when observed in diﬀerent reference frames. Further, it is noticed that the mobile
source particles commonly drift very slowly with respect to the matrix. For conduction
electrons in a metal, the drift speed is normally lower than 1 mm/sec. Thereby, if the
magnetic force is associated with the squared velocity diﬀerence between the aﬀected and
the source particles, then, by virtue of the compensation due to the neutralizing matrix,
the magnetic force can be associated with the velocities of the aﬀected and the source
particles with respect to the matrix. This situation is somewhat similar to the relation
(v − vs)2 − (v − vm)2 ≃ −2(v − vm)·(vs − vm) if vs ≃ vm. Thus the magnetic force as
well as the neutralized current density can be frame-independent simply based on Galilean
transformations.

Recently, we have presented a local-ether model of wave propagation whereby electro-
magnetic wave is supposed to propagate via a medium like the ether [7]. However, the ether
is not universal. Speciﬁcally, it is proposed that in the region under suﬃcient inﬂuence
of the gravity due to the Earth, the Sun, or another celestial body, there forms a local
ether which in turn moves with the gravitational potential of the respective body. Thus,
as well as earth’s gravitational potential, the earth local ether for earthbound propagation
is stationary in an ECI (earth-centered inertial) frame. Consequently, earthbound wave
phenomena can depend on earth’s rotation but are entirely independent of earth’s orbital
motion around the Sun or whatever. Meanwhile, the sun local ether for interplanetary
propagation is stationary in a heliocentric inertial frame. This local-ether model has been
adopted to account for the eﬀects of earth’s motions in a wide variety of propagation phe-
nomena, particularly the Sagnac correction in GPS (global positioning system), the time
comparison via intercontinental microwave link, and the echo time in interplanetary radar.
Moreover, as examined within the present accuracy, the local-ether model is still in accord
with the Michelson-Morley experiment which is known to make the classical ether notion
obsolete. Further, by modifying the speed of light in a gravitational potential, this simple
propagation model leads to the deﬂection of light by the Sun and the increment in the inter-
planetary radar echo time which are important phenomena supporting the general theory
of relativity [7].

As a consequence, the propagation mechanism of the potentials associated with the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds and force is expected to follow the local-ether model. Thus the potentials

2

propagate away from the location of source isotropically at the speed of light c with respect
to an ECI frame for earthbound phenomena. This propagation model also implies that the
position vectors of the source and the aﬀected particles involved in the potentials should be
referred speciﬁcally to the associated local-ether frame in calculating the propagation delay
time in terms of the isotropic propagation speed c. A further consequence is that this re-
striction on reference frame necessitates the construction of a new model of electromagnetic
force which complies with the frame-independence of magnetic force, Galilean transforma-
tions, and with the local-ether propagation model, and is still in accord quantitatively with
the well-studied phenomena known to follow the Lorentz force law.

Accordingly, we propose in this investigation the augmented potential, which is derived
from the electric scalar potential by additionally incorporating a squared velocity diﬀerence
between involved particles. Then, in terms of the spatial and time derivatives of the aug-
mented potential, we propose a new model of electromagnetic force. Each of the position
vectors, time derivatives, propagation velocity, particle velocities, and current density in-
volved in the proposed theory will be imposed with a deliberately chosen reference frame.
By virtue of this simple feature, the augmented potential and the electromagnetic force are
independent of reference frame, as expected intuitively. Thereby, an entirely diﬀerent ex-
planation of the invariance of electromagnetic force is presented. The proposed force law in
terms of the local-ether potentials looks quite diﬀerent from the Lorentz force law. However,
it will be shown elaborately that in spite of the dissimilarity and the restriction on reference
frame, this new classical model can reduce to a form quite similar to the famous Lorentz
force law under some ordinary conditions.

2. Lorentz Force Law in Lorenz Potentials

The famous Lorentz force law for a charged particle can be written in terms of the

Lorenz retarded potentials. That is,

F(r, t) = q

−∇Φ(r, t) −

A(r, t) + v × ∇ × A(r, t)

,

(1)

(cid:26)

(cid:27)

∂
∂t

where the scalar potential Φ and the vector potential A in turn are given explicitly in terms
of the charge density ρ and the corresponding current density J respectively as

Φ(r, t) =

ρ(r′, t − R/c)
4πR

′

dv

A(r, t) =

J(r′, t − R/c)
4πR

′

dv

,

1
ǫ0

Z

1
ǫ0c2

Z

where R = |r − r′|, R/c represents the propagation delay time, and c is the speed of light.
These retarded potentials were ﬁrst introduced by L. V. Lorenz (rather than H. A. Lorentz)
in as early as 1867 [8]. It is known that the current density J is related to the charge density
ρ as

J(r, t) = ρ(r, t)vc,

where vc is the velocity of the mobile charged particles forming the current. In terms of
the Lorenz retarded potentials Φ and A, the electric ﬁeld intensity E and the magnetic ﬂux
density B can be given explicitly by

and

and

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

The divergences and the curls of ﬁelds E and B given above have been derived, which are
just Maxwell’s equations [9].

E(r, t) = −∇Φ(r, t) −

A(r, t)

∂
∂t

B(r, t) = ∇ × A(r, t).

3

It is noted that in the preceding formulas, three velocities and one time derivative which
can depend on reference frame are involved. That is, the particle velocity v connecting to
the curl of potential A, the particle velocity vc associated with the current density J, the
propagation velocity associated with the delay time R/c, and the time derivative applied to
A. In the special relativity, time derivatives as well as velocities are referred to an arbitrary
inertial frame. And the wave equation, the continuity equation, and the Lorenz gauge which
are important equations involving time derivative can be shown to be Lorentz invariant [6].
On the other hand, based on Galilean transformations, the time derivative ∂/∂t observed
in the chosen frame can be expressed in terms of the derivative (∂/∂t)k observed in another
reference frame which moves at a velocity vk with respect to the chosen frame. It is known
that the two time derivatives are related to each other as [10]

∂f
∂t

(cid:18)

(cid:19)k

=

∂f
∂t

+ vk · ∇f,

(7)

(8)

where the time derivatives ∂/∂t and (∂/∂t)k are understood to be taken under constant
r and (r − vkt), respectively, as r is referred to the chosen frame. As the proposed force
law is supposed to comply with Galilean transformations and the local-ether propagation
model, the reference frame of each of the position vectors, velocities, and time derivatives
encountered hereafter will be given speciﬁcally.

3. Augmented Potentials and Electromagnetic Force Law

Now we present the new electromagnetic force law given in terms of a single scalar poten-
tial ˘Φ, which is a modiﬁcation of the electric scalar potential by additionally incorporating
a velocity-dependent part and hence is called the augmented scalar potential. Consider an
ensemble of mobile source particles of volume charge density ρv. The various source parti-
cles contribute collectively to the potential which in turn will propagate to and then aﬀect
another charged particle under consideration called the eﬀector.

It is proposed that the augmented scalar potential ˘Φ experienced by an eﬀector particle

is given explicitly by

˘Φ(r, t) =

1
4πǫ0

1 +

Z (cid:18)

v2
es
2c2

(cid:19)

ρv(r′, t − R/c)
R

′

dv

,

where ves = |ves|, the velocity diﬀerence ves = ve − vs, ve and r are respectively the
velocity and position vector of the eﬀector particle at the instant t, vs and r′ are those of
the source particle at an earlier instant t′ = t − R/c, R/c is the propagation delay time
from the source point r′ to the ﬁeld point r, and the propagation range R (= |r − r′|)
denotes the distance from the source at the instant t′ to the eﬀector at the ﬁeld point at the
instant t. Note that ves denotes the diﬀerence between the velocities of the eﬀector and the
source at two distinct instants. For quasi-static case where the propagation delay time R/c
can be neglected or for the case where velocities ve and vs are ﬁxed, the non-simultaneous
velocity diﬀerence ves then becomes the Newtonian relative velocity between the eﬀector
and the source. It is supposed that speeds ve, vs, and hence ves are much lower than c, as
they are ordinarily. Thus the augmentation in the scalar potential is of the second order of
normalized speed (with respect to c) and is actually quite small in magnitude. It is noted
that the augmented scalar potential depends on the eﬀector velocity and tends to be slightly
diﬀerent for diﬀerent eﬀectors.

Next, we address ourselves to the issue of the reference frames of the position vectors,
the particle velocities, and the propagation velocity. According to the evidence supporting
the local-ether model, the propagation range for an earthbound electromagnetic wave is
referred speciﬁcally to an ECI frame, if the propagation delay time is understood to be the
propagation range R divided by the constant speed c. Accordingly, the position vectors r and
r′, which determine the propagation range, are also referred speciﬁcally to that frame. Thus,
when observed in the associated local-ether frame, the potential propagates isotropically at

4

(9)

(10)

(11)

the speed c away from the emission position, regardless of the motion of the source and
eﬀector. Moreover, in order to comply with the reference frame of the corresponding position
vectors, the eﬀector velocity ve and the source velocity vs are also referred speciﬁcally to the
local-ether frame. Thereby, all the position vectors and velocities involved in the proposed
augmented scalar potential are referred uniquely to the local-ether frame.

Under the inﬂuence of the augmented scalar potential ˘Φ originating from an ensemble
of mobile source particles, the electromagnetic force exerted on an eﬀector particle of charge
q and located at r at the instant t is hereby postulated to be

F(r, t) = q

−∇ ˘Φ(r, t) +

(

∂
∂t

 

i
X

ˆi

∂
∂vei

˘Φ(r, t)

,

!e)

where vei = ve · ˆi, ˆi is a unit vector, index i = x, y, z, and the time derivative (∂/∂t)e
is referred speciﬁcally to the eﬀector frame with respect to which the eﬀector of velocity
ve is stationary. Physically, the time derivative (∂/∂t)e represents the time rate of change
in some quantity experienced by the eﬀector.
It is noticed that the proposed force law
resembles Lagrange’s equations in classical mechanics adopted by Thomson in exploring
magnetic force [5].

The proposed electromagnetic force law can be rewritten in the form of

where the augmented vector potential ˘A experienced by the eﬀector is then deﬁned explicitly
in terms of the charge density ρv as

F(r, t) = q

−∇ ˘Φ(r, t) −

˘A(r, t)

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

,

(cid:19)e(cid:27)

(cid:26)

˘A(r, t) =

−1
4πǫ0c2

Z

vesρv(r′, t − R/c)
R

′

dv

.

It is seen that the potential ˘A is associated with minus the derivative of potential ˘Φ with
respect to the eﬀector speed ve. It is noted that both of the augmented potentials depend
on the velocity diﬀerence ves and hence tend to be diﬀerent for diﬀerent eﬀectors. As all the
position vectors, the particle velocities, the propagation velocity, and the time derivative
are referred speciﬁcally to their respective reference frame, the values of the local-ether
augmented potentials and their derivatives are indeed frame-independent. Moreover, the
corresponding electromagnetic force remains unchanged in diﬀerent frames, as expected
intuitively.

Recently, based on the local-ether model, we have presented a wave equation which incor-
porates the electric scalar potential and an operator associated with the velocity diﬀerence.
From this local-ether wave equation, the proposed force law together with the augmented
potentials and the inertial mass of the eﬀector can be derived from a quantum-mechanical
approach [11, 12]. Anyway, in this investigation, formulas (8)–(11) serve as our fundamental
postulates for the electromagnetic force law complying with Galilean transformations and
the local-ether model of wave propagation. This local-ether electromagnetic force law made
its debut in [13].

Note that in the proposed model the force term associated with the major part of ∇ ˘Φ
is independent of particle velocities, while the other terms depend on them. The velocity-
dependent force terms are expected to be much weaker than the velocity-independent one
by nature, since they incorporate the factor of 1/c2. The velocity-independent term is
identical to the conventional electrostatic force when the propagation delay in the potentials
is not considered. However, the velocity-dependent force terms look quite diﬀerent from the
corresponding ones in the Lorentz force law. The similarity will emerge under the common
low-speed condition where the source particles drift very slowly in a neutralizing matrix, as
discussed in the following sections.

5

4. Augmented Potentials under Neutralization

Consider the common case where the ensemble of mobile charged particles are embedded
in a matrix. There are various types of the matrix, such as metal in antenna, semiconductor
in light-emitting diode, dielectric in lens, or magnet in motor. Ordinarily, the ions which
constitute the matrix tend to electrically neutralize the mobile charged particles. Without
the neutralizing matrix, the electrostatic force will be overwhelmingly dominant over the
velocity-dependent ones. Thus the velocity-dependent forces are observable only under
suﬃcient neutralization. Anyway, the charge density ρm of the matrix is supposed to be
arbitrary for generality. The neutralizing matrix can be not really in existence, for which
case ρm = 0.

Ordinarily, the matrix is ﬁxed in shape and moves as a whole at a substantially ﬁxed
velocity vm with respect to the local-ether frame. Thus the various ions forming the matrix
also move at this velocity. Then, due to the ensemble of mobile source particles and the
matrix, the total electromagnetic force exerted on an eﬀector is given by superposition. A
little algebra leads to that the augmented potentials under neutralization take the forms of

˘Φ(r, t) = Φ(r, t)

1 +

− vem · A(r, t) +

v2
em
2c2

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

1
2ǫ0c2

Z

smρv(r′, t − R/c)
v2
4πR

′

dv

where vem = ve − vm and vsm = vs − vm. The electric scalar potential Φ and the magnetic
vector potential A in turn are redeﬁned respectively as

and

and

˘A(r, t) = A(r, t) −

1
c2 vemΦ(r, t),

Φ(r, t) =

ρn(r′, t − R/c)
4πR

′

dv

A(r, t) =

Jn(r′, t − R/c)
4πR

′

dv

,

1
ǫ0

Z

1
ǫ0c2

Z

Jn(r, t) = vsmρv(r, t).

where the potential Φ is due to the net charge density ρn = ρv + ρm and the potential A is
due to the neutralized current density Jn given by

It is noted that the velocity of the mobile source particles forming the neutralized current
density is referred to the matrix frame with respect to which the matrix is stationary. The
velocity vsm is a Newtonian relative velocity representing the drift velocity of the source
particles with respect to the matrix. Thus the neutralized current density is independent
of reference frame. Moreover, the values of the local-ether potentials Φ and A redeﬁned in
the preceding formulas are also frame-independent. It is noted that unlike the augmented
potentials ˘Φ and ˘A, the potentials Φ and A do not depend on the eﬀector velocity and
hence their distributions apply to diﬀerent eﬀectors. Thus it can be more convenient to
express electromagnetic force in terms of Φ and A when possible.

5. Force Law under Low-Speed Condition

Ordinarily, the mobile source particles drift very slowly with respect to the matrix.
Besides, the speeds of terrestrial particles with respect to an ECI frame are normally of the
order of the linear speed due to earth’s rotation, which in turn is much lower than c. Thus
the various particle speeds are supposed to satisfy the low-speed condition given by

vsm ≪ c and vem, vm ≪ c.

(17)

In words, this ordinary condition states that the eﬀector, sources, and matrix move some-
what slowly with respect to the local-ether frame and the sources drift very slowly with

6

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

respect to the matrix frame. Thereby, the augmented scalar potential becomes a simpler
form of

˘Φ(r, t) = Φ(r, t) − vem · A(r, t).

(18)

It is noted that under the low-speed condition, the augmented scalar potential as well as
the augmented vector potential can be determined from Φ, A, and vem. It is owing to the
drift speed vsm being very low that the matrix frame becomes the most convenient reference
frame in dealing with the electromagnetic force.

The forces due to the velocity-dependent parts of the potentials are much weaker than
the electrostatic force by nature and hence will substantially emerge only under suﬃcient
neutralization. That is, ρv and ρm are of opposite signs and nearly the same amount, and
hence |ρn| ≪ |ρv|. Under complete neutralization ρn = 0, the augmented vector potential
˘A becomes identical to the potential A. Suppose for the moment that the density ρn in
˘A can be neglected. Then the augmented vector potential reduces to the magnetic vector
potential

˘A(r, t) = A(r, t).

(19)

The roles of the omitted parts in the preceding two relations of the potentials will be
discussed in a later section.

Furthermore, from the Galilean transformation (7), the time derivative (∂A/∂t)e re-
ferred to the eﬀector frame can be given in terms of the time derivative (∂A/∂t)m referred
to the matrix frame. That is,

A(r, t)

=

A(r, t)

+ vem · ∇A(r, t).

(20)

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

∂
∂t

(cid:19)e

(cid:18)

(cid:19)m

Thereby, the proposed force law (10) based on the augmented potentials can be expressed
in terms of the local-ether potentials Φ and A as

F(r, t) = q

−∇Φ(r, t) + ∇[vem · A(r, t)] −

A(r, t)

− vem · ∇A(r, t)

.

(21)

(cid:26)

(cid:19)m

(cid:27)

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

It is noted that there are two force terms connected both with the relative velocity vem and
the potential A. Then, by using a vector identity, the electromagnetic force law becomes a
more familiar form of

F(r, t) = q

−∇Φ(r, t) −

A(r, t)

+ vem × ∇ × A(r, t)

.

(22)

(cid:26)

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

(cid:19)m

(cid:27)

According to the dependence of force terms on the eﬀector velocity, one is led to express
the force law in terms of ﬁelds E and B in the form of

where the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are then redeﬁned explicitly in terms of the local-ether
potentials Φ and A as

F(r, t) = q {E(r, t) + vem × B(r, t)} ,

E(r, t) = −∇Φ(r, t) −

A(r, t)

∂
∂t

(cid:18)

(cid:19)m

B(r, t) = ∇ × A(r, t).

(23)

(24)

(25)

and

The electromagnetic force law (22) or (23) under the ordinary low-speed condition represents
modiﬁcations of the Lorentz force law, which comply with Galilean transformations and the
local-ether propagation model. The fundamental modiﬁcations are that the current density
generating the potential A, the time derivative applied to A in the electric induction force,
and the eﬀector velocity connecting to ∇×A in the magnetic force are all referred speciﬁcally
to the matrix frame and that the propagation velocity of the potentials is referred speciﬁcally

7

to the local-ether frame. Thereupon, the values of the current density, the potentials, the
ﬁelds, and of the force are independent of reference frame. The divergence and the curl
relations of electric and magnetic ﬁelds together with the local-ether wave equations of the
potentials and ﬁelds are discussed in [14].

6. Sagnac Eﬀect and Galilean Relativity

In many cases it can be more convenient to deal with the propagation of the potentials
in a laboratory frame (such as the matrix frame), instead of the local-ether frame. We then
go on to consider the consequence due to the motion of the laboratory frame. According
to the local-ether model, the propagation range R in the deﬁnitions of the potentials is the
distance from the source point r′ at which the potentials are emitted to the ﬁeld point r at
which the potentials propagate to the eﬀector, where both r′ and r are referred uniquely
to the local-ether frame. A quantity closely related to the propagation range R is the
propagation-path length Rt, which represents the geometric distance from the source to the
eﬀector right at the instant of wave emission. The diﬀerence between the propagation range
R and the path length Rt is known as the Sagnac eﬀect, which is due to the movement of the
eﬀector with respect to the local-ether frame during wave propagation. To the ﬁrst order of
normalized speed, it is known that R = Rt(1 + ˆRt · ve/c), where the unit vector ˆRt points
from the source to the eﬀector at the instant of emission [7]. When the wave propagation
is observed in a laboratory frame moving at a velocity v0 with respect to the local-ether
frame, the apparent propagation range Rl observed in the laboratory frame is not actually
equal to the propagation range R. It is seen that R − Rl = Rt ˆRt · v0/c. This diﬀerence
represents the deviation in the Sagnac eﬀect due to the motion of the laboratory frame with
respect to the local-ether frame during wave propagation. The corresponding fractional
deviation in the propagation range and time is at most of the order of the normalized speed
v0/c, which is mainly due to earth’s rotation and is as small as about 10−6 for ordinary
terrestrial laboratory frames. If this small term of the normalized laboratory speed can be
neglected, then the apparent propagation range is substantially identical to the propagation
range. Thus, when formulated in a laboratory frame with the corresponding Sagnac-eﬀect
deviation being omitted, the propagation range R, the propagation time R/c, and hence
the velocity diﬀerences ves and vem (which are associated with R/c in general) become
independent of the laboratory velocity.

Therefore, the augmented potentials ˘Φ and ˘A, the local-ether potentials Φ and A, the
local-ether ﬁelds E and B, and the electromagnetic force law formulated in a laboratory
frame also become independent of the laboratory velocity and hence comply with Galilean
relativity, when the Sagnac-eﬀect deviation due to the motion of the laboratory frame is
omitted. As an example, consider the familiar case of a cathode-ray tube, where an electron
beam is accelerated electrostatically by applying a voltage to a pair of electrode plates and
then the beam direction is adjusted by using a magnetic deﬂection yoke to form an image on
a screen. The yoke is a current-carrying winding which results in a magnetic ﬁeld and hence
a magnetic force exerted on the electron beam. Thus the yoke forms the matrix of this case.
According to the local-ether electromagnetic force law, the magnetic force is associated with
the velocity of electrons with respect to the laboratory frame in which the matrix together
with other components of the CRT is stationary.

As the Sagnac-eﬀect deviation associated with the laboratory velocity is neglected, the
magnetic ﬁeld and the magnetic force in a geostationary CRT are independent of earth’s
rotation and latitude of the device, let alone earth’s orbital motion. Further, when the
CRT is put on a vehicle moving smoothly with respect to the ground, the ﬁeld and the
force are also independent of the ground velocity of the vehicle. Thus operation of the
CRT complies with Galilean relativity. This invariance of magnetic deﬂection keeps the
image on a moving CRT unaﬀected, which is in accord with common experience with the
CRT. A similar argument of the invariance of magnetic force can be applied to a motor,
where the current in the stator winding or magnet results in a magnetic force exerted on
the current-carrying rotor.

8

Meanwhile, in the conventional analysis of the magnetic deﬂection with the Lorentz force
law, the electron speed is commonly given by the square root of the accelerating voltage,
aside from a scaling factor associated with the charge and mass. By so doing, the adopted
reference frame is actually the one with respect to which the electrode plates is stationary.
In practical designs, the plates are commonly stationary with respect to the deﬂection yoke,
although this restriction is not necessary in principle. By virtue of this seemingly trivial
coincidence, the matrix frame has been adopted tacitly in the conventional practice dealing
with the eﬀector speed. Besides, as the current in the yoke is neutralized, the drift speed
associated with this current is actually referred to the matrix frame tacitly in common
practice. Therefore, based on the local-ether electromagnetic force law (22) or (23) with
the Sagnac-eﬀect deviation being omitted, the proposed Galilean model is identical
to the Lorentz force law, if the latter is observed in the matrix frame as done
tacitly in common practice. In other words, the Lorentz force law is only valid under hidden
restrictions. That is, the eﬀector and the matrix speeds are low, the drift speed is very
low, the laboratory frame is actually the matrix frame, and the corresponding Sagnac-eﬀect
deviation is omitted. However, these conditions are so common as to be ignored easily.

Further, if the propagation delay time R/c and then the Sagnac eﬀect due to the eﬀector
movement can be neglected, the term 1/R in the augmented potentials reduces to 1/Rt.
Moreover, the velocity diﬀerence ves becomes Newtonian relative and then, as well as Rt,
possesses symmetry between a pair of source and eﬀector. Consequently, the electromagnetic
force between two charged particles given directly from (10) complies with Newton’s third
law of motion: action is equal to reaction in magnitude.

7. Extra Force Terms

To complete the proposed force law, we proceed to estimate the magnitudes of the
extra forces which are omitted in the low-speed condition. From the general forms of the
augmented potentials (12) and (13), the electromagnetic force law is given by

F = q

−∇Φ −

+ vem × ∇ × A

+ F1 + F2 + F3,

(26)

∂
∂t

A

(cid:18)

(cid:19)m

(cid:26)

(cid:27)

where the extra force terms

F1 = −

v2
em∇Φ,

1
2

q
c2
1
2ǫ0

∇

Z

q
c2

v2
smρv
4πR

′

dv

,

F2 = −

and

q
c2
All of these extra terms are velocity-dependent and incorporate the factor of 1/c2.

vemΦ

F3 =

∂
∂t

(cid:19)e

(cid:18)

.

The extra force terms F1 and F3 are associated both with the eﬀector velocity vem and
the scalar potential Φ. These two terms will vanish either if Φ = 0 or if vem = 0. In the cases
where only the magnetic force is involved, such as in the aforementioned deﬂection yoke or
stator magnet, the complete neutralization Φ = 0 holds. Meanwhile, in the cases where the
eﬀector is bounded to the matrix, such as the conduction electron or the polarization charge
in antennas, waveguides, or scattering, the stationary eﬀector vem = 0 holds substantially.
Anyway, whenever the extra force term F1 does not vanish, it will be much weaker than
the accompanying electrostatic force Fes by a factor of as small as (vem/c)2 in magnitude,
which in turn is much less than unity ordinarily. That is,

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

In other words, even when the neutralization is not suﬃcient, the extra force F1 will be
relatively too weak to observe.

|F1|
|Fes|

∼

v2
em
c2 ≪ 1.

9

In addition to the situation of complete neutralization or stationary eﬀector, the extra
force term F3 can vanish in a static potential. Even for the case where Φ 6= 0, vem 6= 0,
and their time derivatives also do not vanish, such as in the communication between mobile
antennas, the extra force F3 is also negligible as compared to the accompanying electrostatic
It is noted that |qΦ|/m0c2 ≪ 1 ordinarily, where m0 is the mass of the eﬀector.
force.
Besides, for a potential even rapidly varying with time (say, of the form of a plane wave
Φ(x − ct) or a spherical wave Φ(r − ct)/r), the order of magnitude of its time derivative
divided by c is not expected to exceed the one of its gradient. Physically, this is owing to
wave motion whereby a temporal variation in a potential tends to cause a spatial variation.
Thus |(∂Φ/c∂t)e| . |∇Φ| and hence the extra force F3 will be much weaker than the
accompanying electrostatic force at least by a factor of vem/c. That is,

|F3|
|Fes|

.

vem
c

≪ 1.

(31)

Thus, even when the neutralization is not suﬃcient and the term vemΦ/c2 in the augmented
vector potential is not negligible, the extra force F3 will be relatively too weak to observe.
Again, this is because that the accompanying electrostatic force will overwhelmingly dom-
inate, so long as the low-speed condition holds. Thereby, the suﬃcient neutralization that
leads to the approximation (19) is not necessary and the validity of the force law (23) is
independent of the extent of neutralization.

The extra force term F2 is due to a current and emerges even in the situation of complete
neutralization, stationary eﬀector, and static potential. Thus an eﬀector stationary with
respect to a loop carrying a direct current will experience this extra force. However, it may
be diﬃcult to observe. Like the electrostatic force this extra force is conservative. Thus, for
an eﬀector bounded in a conducting wire, the induced electromotive force around a closed
wire is zero. On the other hand, an unbounded eﬀector tends to have a speed vem ≫ vsm,
due to thermal ﬂuctuation or whatever. Note that the drift speed vsm of the mobile source
particles with respect to the matrix is very low ordinarily. Even for a copper wire carrying a
current of density of as high as 10 amp/mm2, the drift speed of the conduction electrons is
merely as low as 7.4×10−4 m/sec. Thus the very low drift speed (vsm ≪ c) holds ordinarily.
Then the extra force F2 is ordinarily much weaker than the accompanying magnetic force
Fm by a factor of vsm/vem. That is,

|F2|
|Fm|

∼

vsm
vem

≪ 1.

(32)

Even in the case where the eﬀector speed vem happens to be quite low and hence the
preceding relation does not hold, the extra force F2 as well as Fm will be too weak to
observe.
In the worst case where the drift speed vsm is no longer quite low (such as in
a plasma), the neutralization tends to be diﬃcult to maintain and then the electrostatic
force dominates again. Consequently, all the three extra force terms can be neglected as
compared to the accompanying electrostatic or magnetic force, under the ordinary low-speed
condition where the eﬀector, sources, and matrix move somewhat slowly with respect to the
local-ether frame and the sources drift very slowly with respect to the matrix frame.

Although the electromagnetic force law proposed in this investigation is merely for
low-speed particles, it may be extended to the case where the eﬀector speed is high. To
make an attempt for this, we tentatively assume the force law (26) remains unaltered and
then examine the extra force terms in some high-energy experiments. For this purpose we
consider the familiar cyclotron experiment, where the high-energy particles are accelerated
by an electrostatic force and are deﬂected by a magnetic force to move circularly. As the
eﬀector speed vem is high, the extra force F2 is relatively weak. The relation among the
magnetic ﬁeld, the radius of circulation, and the particle momentum can be measured with
a high precision. It has been demonstrated that when the dependence of mass on particle
speed is taken into account, the radius is linearly proportional to the momentum, even when

10

the particle speed is quite close to c [15]. (The local-ether theory is in accord with the speed-
dependent mass, since this mass together with its eﬀect on the quantum state energies in
atoms has been derived from an associated wave equation [11, 14].) Correspondingly, the
local-ether force law is in accord with the magnetic force when the eﬀector speed is thus
high. Then the restriction on the eﬀector speed can be removed for the case of complete
neutralization where the electrostatic force is not involved. On the other hand, the extra
forces F1 and F3 could present a problem. However, it is noted that the acceleration in
the cyclotron is actually implemented by making the particle enter the ﬁeld due to a lower
voltage repeatedly by a large number of passages. To our knowledge, no direct measurements
of the acceleration of a high-energy particle in each individual passage are reported. Thus
the presented force law is not in immediate conﬂict with the cyclotron experiment or the
like. Anyway, as the speed-dependent mass has been found to aﬀect the inﬂuence of the
electric scalar potential on quantum energies, the electrostatic force for a high-speed particle
deserves a further study experimentally and theoretically.

8. Conclusion

In order to comply with Galilean transformations and the local-ether model of wave
propagation, a new classical model of electromagnetic force is presented in terms of the
augmented potentials, which are derived from the electric scalar potential by incorporating
the velocity diﬀerence between the eﬀector and source. The propagation of the potentials
is proposed to follow the local-ether model and hence the propagation range is referred
speciﬁcally to an ECI frame for earthbound phenomena. Thus the position vectors and hence
the velocities of the eﬀector and the sources are referred to this frame. As a consequence, the
values of the augmented potentials are independent of reference frame. Furthermore, in the
proposed force law, the time derivative of the augmented vector potential is associated with
the change in the potential experienced by the eﬀector and hence is referred to the eﬀector
frame. Consequently, the electromagnetic force exerted on an eﬀector is frame-independent,
as expected intuitively. The dominant part of the force based on the augmented potentials
does not depend on particle velocities and is identical to the conventional electrostatic force,
as the propagation delay time is not considered. On the other hand, the velocity-dependent
force terms look quite diﬀerent from the corresponding ones in the Lorentz force law.

However, a situation commonly encountered in the magnetic force is that the mobile
source particles are embedded in a neutralizing matrix. Then the augmented potentials
are expressed in terms of the local-ether potentials which are associated with the net charge
density and the neutralized current density. Further, under the ordinary low-speed condition
where the eﬀector, sources, and matrix move slowly with respect to the local-ether frame and
the sources drift very slowly in the neutralizing matrix, the proposed force law reduces to
a form similar to the Lorentz force law, aside from three extra force terms. This represents
modiﬁcations of the Lorentz force law which comply with the frame-independence of force,
Galilean transformations, and with the local-ether propagation model. The fundamental
modiﬁcations are that the current density generating the vector potential, the time derivative
applied to this potential in the electric induction force, and the eﬀector velocity connecting
to the curl of this potential in the magnetic force are all referred speciﬁcally to the matrix
frame and that the propagation velocity of the potentials is referred to the local-ether frame.
It is shown quantitatively that all these extra terms are much weaker than the accompanying
electrostatic or magnetic force under the low-speed condition. Then the proposed Galilean
model is identical to the Lorentz force law, if the latter is observed in the matrix frame and
the Sagnac-eﬀect deviation due to the motion of this frame is neglected. Thereby, hidden
restrictions for the Lorentz force law imposed tacitly on particle speeds and reference frame
are unveiled.

11

References

[1] J.C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Oxford, New York, 1998, 3rd.

ed. of 1891), Arts. 295, 530, and 607.

[2] O. Heaviside, Philos. Mag. 27, 324 (1889).

[3] H.A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons (Dover, New York, 1952, 2nd. ed. of 1915),

Arts. 7 and 8 and Note 2.

[4] A. Einstein, in The Principle of Relativity (Dover, New York, 1952), p. 37.

[5] J.J. Thomson, Philos. Mag. 11, 229 (1881).

[6] P. Lorrain and D.R. Corson, Electromagnetic Fields and Waves (Freeman, San Fran-
cisco, 1972), chs. 5 and 6; J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York,
1975), ch. 11.

[7] C.C. Su, Eur. Phys. J. C 21, 701 (2001); Europhys. Lett. 56, 170 (2001).

[8] E. Wittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity (Amer. Inst. Phys.,

1987), vol. I, ch. VIII.

[9] C.C. Su, Eur. J. Phys. 22, L5 (2001).

Cliﬀs, 1990), sect. 4-3.

[11] C.C. Su, Eur. Phys. J. B 24, 231 (2001).

[10] See, for example, L.E. Ballentine, Quantum Mechanics (Prentice-Hall, Englewood

[12] C.C. Su, J. Electromagnetic Waves Applicat. 16, 1275 (2002).

[13] C.C. Su, in IEEE Antennas Propagat. Soc. Int. Symp. Dig. (2001), vol. 1, p. 208; in

Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. (Mar. 2001), p. 1144.

[14] C.C. Su, Quantum Electromagnetics (http://qem.ee.nthu.edu.tw).

[15] See, for example, M. Alonso and E.J. Finn, Physics (Wesley, New York, 1992), ch. 22.

12

