2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kybernetes (The Int. J. for Systems & Cybernetics), ... (2002): Special Issue on New Theories on
Space and Time

Scanning the structure of ill-known spaces: Part 2.
Principles of construction of physical space

Michel Bounias(1) and Volodymyr Krasnoholovets(2)

(1) BioMathematics Unit (University/INRA, France, and IHS, New York, USA),
Domain of Sagne-Soulier, 07470 Le Lac d’Issarles, France;
fax: (33) 466 46 0906
(2) Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences, Prospect Nauky 46,

UA-03028, Ky¨ıv, Ukraine; http://inerton.cjb.net

Abstract. An abstract lattice of empty set cells is shown to be able to account
for a primary substrate in a physical space. Spacetime is represented by ordered
sequences of topologically closed Poincar´e sections of this primary space. These
mappings are constrained to provide homeomorphic structures serving as frames of
reference in order to account for the successive positions of any objects present in the
system. Mappings from one to the next section involve morphisms of the general
structures, standing for a continuous reference frame, and morphisms of objects
present in the various parts of this structure. The combination of these morphisms
provides spacetime with the features of a nonlinear generalized convolution. Discrete
properties of the lattice allow the prediction of scales at which microscopic to cosmic
structures should occur. Deformations of primary cells by exchange of empty set cells
allow a cell to be mapped into an image cell in the next section as far as mapped cells
remain homeomorphic. However, if a deformation involves a fractal transformation
to objects, there occurs a change in the dimension of the cell and the homeomorphism
is not conserved. Then the fractal kernel stands for a ”particle” and the reduction
of its volume (together with an increase of its area up to inﬁnity) is compensated
by morphic changes of a ﬁnite number of surrounding cells. Quanta of distances
and quanta of fractality are demonstrated. The interaction of a moving particle-like
deformation with the surrounding lattice involves a fractal decomposition process
that supports the existence and properties of previously postulated inerton clouds
as associated to particles. Experimental evidence of the existence of inertons are
reviewed and further possibilities of experimental proofs are proposed.

Key words: origin of particles; origin of quantum property; origin of gravita-

tion; cosmic features from microscale properties; nothingness singleton.

PACS classiﬁcation: 02.10.Cz; – set theory; 02.40.Pc – general topology;

03.65.Bz – foundations, theory of measurement, miscellaneous theories.

1

Introduction

Former parts of this study were dealing with some founding principles about
how to assess in the more accurate though general way possible how one can deﬁne
the space of magmas (that is, the sets, combination rules and structures) in which
a given proposition can be demonstrably shown to be valid (Bounias, 2001; Bounias
and Krasnoholovets, 2001). Such a space, when identiﬁed, is called a probationary
space (Bounias, 1997; 2001). Here, it will be presented the formalism which leads
from existence of abstract (e.g. purely mathematical) spaces to the justiﬁcation of
a distinction between parts of a physical space that can be said empty and parts
which can be considered as ﬁlled with particles. This question is thus dealing with
a possible origin of matter and its distribution, and changes in this distribution
gives raise with motion, that is with physics, in the sense pointed by de Broglie and
by Dirac (see Rothwarf, 1998). Experimental evidence and propositions for further
veriﬁcations will then be presented and discussed.

Recent ﬁndings (Krasnoholovets and Ivanovsky, 1993; Krasnoholovets 1997) in
the realm of fundamental physics supports the prediction that an abstract lattice
whose existence originates in the existence of the empty set, is able to correctly
account for various properties of our observed spacetime at both microscopic and
cosmic scales. The model of Krasnoholovets and Byckov (2000), Krasnoholovets
(2000), proposed a new research methodology based on some practical standpoints.
Speciﬁcally (see e.g. Okun, 1988), the values of the constants of electromagnetic,
weak and strong interactions as functions of distances between interacting particles
converge to the same at a scale about 10−28 cm. This suggests that a violation of
space homogeneity took place at this size. The model proceeds from the assumption
that all quantum theories (quantum mechanics, electrodynamics, chromodynamics
and others) are in fact only phenomenological: accordingly, for the understanding of
real processes occurring in the real microworld, one needs a submicroscopic approach
which, in turn, should be available for all peculiarities of the microstructures of real
space. In other terms, gauges for the analysis of all components of the observable
universe should belong to an ultraﬁlter, as argued in Part 1 of this study. The
investigations about the model of inertons (Krasnoholovets, 1997, 2000; 2001a,b)
has suggested that a founding cellular structure of space shares discrete and con-
tinuous properties, which is also shown to be consistent with the abstract theory of
foundations of existence of a physical space (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997).

1. Preliminaries

1.1. About gaps in former assessment of probationary spaces

1.1.1. Quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanicsis founded on the calculation of
the probability that a particle is present in a given volume of space. This theoretical
approach postulates the existence of undeﬁned objects called corpuscles, and does
not state about the structure and properties of any embedding medium, which is
even considered as forbidden (Blokhintsev, 1981). Only recently, however, was raised
the need that this medium, sometimes called the void, should be a space allowing the
formation of pairs of particles and antiparticles (see Boyer, 2000, for review), so as

2

to justify for the existence of a material world. However, this postulate just displace
the question of the corresponding embedding medium, which is supposed not to exist
independently from the photons but is often considered as if it was independent from
at least large matter masses. Parameter time is not basically but implicitly present
in the foundations of quantum physics. The concept of velocity of wave propagation
and its expressions in the uncertainty principle, the Bell’s inequalities, etc. emerge
from further developments of the theory.

1.1.2. Relativity. The relativistic theory postulates the existence of frames of
references and of the validity of some particular cases of measure, used as classical
metrics, still without consideration for the embedding medium (Blokhintsev, 1976).
It also postulates the primary existence of parameter time and the consistency of the
possibility of motion in an undeﬁned space, sometimes identiﬁed with ’void’, with
the properties of this ”void”. However, the limitation found for the velocity of light
up to the cosmological constant through electromagnetism, and the proposition of
curvature of space implicitly impose some conditions on some relevant embedding
medium (Einstein, 1920; Marinov, 1996; Keilman, 1998, and many others).

1.2. Assessment of existence of a spacetime-like structure

A former conjecture (Bonaly, 1992) stated that a characteristic of a physical
space is that it should be in some way observable. This implies that an object
called the ”observer” should be able to interact with other objects said ”observed”.
In order to make no confusion with the usual vocabulary of systems theory, we
will instead refer to the ”perceiver” and the ”perceived” objects. The conjecture
implied that perceived objects should be topologically closed, otherwise they would
oﬀer no frontier to allow a probe to reﬂect their shape. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of
the work was to assess the existence of closed topological structures, and a proof
was given that the intersection of two spaces having nonequal dimensions owns its
accumulation points and is therefore closed. We propose here a shorter alternative
proof.

Theorem 1.2. The intersection of two connected spaces with nonequal dimension
is topologically closed.

Alternative proof. Let En and Em be two spaces with topological dimensions n, m
(m > n) embedded in W∞, a compact connected space. Call Sn the intersection
En ∩ E m and call Xn the complementary of S in En. Consider the continuity of
mappings in W∞ inducing continuity to E n and Em: the neighborhood of any point
in Em is the mapping of a neighborhood of a point in Xn. Suppose Sn is open: then,
since the union of open sets is open, then the entire Em is neighborhood of any
point in Sn. Thus, there would exist a bijective mapping of opens of X m on opens
of Sn. In particular, a open subset of (n + 2) points in Sn could be homeomorphic
to a (n + l)-simplex in Em. This is impossible because two spaces with nonequal
dimensions cannot be homeomorphic. Therefore, S n is closed.

The closed 3-D intersections of parts of a n-space (with n ≤ 3) own the properties
of Poincar´e sections (Bonaly and Bounias, 1995). Then, given a manifold of such
sections, the mappings of one into another section provide an ordered sequence
of corresponding spaces in which closed topological structures are to be found: this

3

accounts for a time-like arrow. Since the Jordan-Veblen theorem states that any path
connecting the interior of a closed to an outside point has a nonempty intersection
with the frontier of the closed, interactions between closed objects are allowed: this
accounts for physical interactions. Furthermore, if such a path is connected to a
converging sequence of mappings, the ﬁxed points (of Banach type, here) will stand
for perceptions of the outside. Moreover, since the Brouwer’s theorem states that in
a closed, all continuous mappings have a ﬁxed point, and that the brain represents a
compact complete space in which mappings from a topological into a discrete space
are continuous, there exists an associate set of ﬁxed points (of the Brouwer’s type)
standing for the self (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997). Finally, spaces of topologically
closed parts account for interaction and for perception, thus they meet the properties
of physical spaces.

In a former conjecture, Bonaly and Bounias (1993) proposed that the fundamen-
tal metrics of our spacetime should be represented by a convolution product where
the embedding part U4 would be described by the following relation:

U4 =

(d~x · d~y · d~z) ∗ dΨ(w)

Z (cid:16) ZdS

(cid:17)

(1)

where dS is an element of spacetime, and dΨ(w) a function accounting for the
extension of 3-D coordinates to the 4th dimension through convolution (∗) with the
volume of space. Formal proofs of this structure will be provided below.

2. On foundations of spacetime

2.1. Spacetime as a topologically discrete structure

How two Poincar´e sections are mapped is assessed by using a natural metrics
of topological spaces: the set-distance, ﬁrst established for two sets (Bounias and
Bonaly, 1996) and further generalized to manifolds of sets (Bounias, 1997), Figure
1a. In brief: let ∆(A, B, C, ...) the generalized set distance as the extended symmetric
diﬀerence of a family of closed spaces:

∆(Ai) i ∈ N = ∁

(Ai ∩ Aj).

∪
i6=j

∪{Ai}

(2.1)

The complementary of ∆, that is ∪ i6=j(Ai ∩ Aj) in a closed space is closed. It
is also closed even if it involves open components with nonequal dimensions. Thus,
in this system, mh{Ai}i = ∪ i6=j(Ai ∩ Aj) has been called the ”instans”, that is the
state of objects in a timeless Poincar´e section (Bounias, 1997). Since distances ∆
are the complementaries of objects, the system stands as a manifold of open and
closed subparts.

Mappings of these manifolds from one into another section which preserve the
topology stand for a reference frame in which the ”analysis situ” (the original name
for ”topology”) will allow to characterize the eventual changes in the conﬁguration
of some components: if morphisms are observed, then this will be interpretable as a
motion-like phenomenon when comparing the state of a section to the state of the
mapped section.

4

Figure 1: The mappings of a Poincar´e section S(i) into a section S(i+1) imposes the
conservation of the topologies of the general structure of the mapped spaces, so that
changes in the position of objects situated inside these structures can be characterized.
A closed should be mapped into an equivalent closed, an open into an equivalent open.
The situation of points (x, y, ...) with respect to these reference structures (A, B, ...) are
described by indicatrix functions 1A(x), 1B(x), ...

It should be noted that the spaces refered above can exist upon acceptance of
the existence of the empty set as a primary axiom (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997), with
consequences which will be addressed below.

Lemma 2.1. The set-distance provides a set with the ﬁner topology and the set-
distance of nonidentical parts provides a set with an ultraﬁlter.

Proof. The set-distance is founded on {∩∪ ∈} and it suﬃces to deﬁne a topology
since union and intersection of set-distances are distances, including ∆(A, A) = Ø.
The latter case must be excluded from a ﬁlter, which is nonempty. Then, since any
ﬁlter and any topology is founded on {∩ ∪ ∈ /∈⊃}, it is provided with ∆. Conversely,
regarding a topology or a ﬁlter founded on any additional property (⊥), this property
is not necessarily provided to a ∆-ﬁlter. The topology and ﬁlter induced by ∆ are
thus respectively the ﬁner topology and an ultraﬁlter.

The mappings of both distances and instans from one to another section can
be described by a function called the ”moment of junction”, since it has the global
structure of a momentum. Consider the particular case of the homeomorphic se-
quence of mappings of the general topology of the system: this provides a kind of
reference frame, in which it will become possible to assess the changes in the situ-
ation of points and sets of points eventually present within these structures. The
origin of such points will be addressed in the next section. Here, just consider point
(x, y, z, ...) belonging to either of closed and open parts. For any x belonging to a
set Ei in a section S(i), an indicatrix function 1(x) is deﬁned by the correspondence

5

Figure 2: The composition of indicative functions of the position of points within the
topological structures used as frames of references provides an extended indicative func-
tion. The composition of pairs of indicative functions provides a new function (f ) in-
dicating the changes occurring in the situation of objects. The composition of the
topological distances ∆(A, B, ...) = ∁A∪B...(A ∩ B ∩ ...) or the topological ”instans”
(mh(A, B, C, ...)i = (A ∩ B) ∪ (A ∩ C) ∪ (B ∩ C) with function f over the populations
of objects in the considered sets leads to a momentum-like structure called ”Moment of
Junction” and accounting for elements of the diﬀerential geometry of space.

6

of x with some c(x) in S(i+1):

x ∈ E(i), 1Ei(x) = 1 iﬀ x ∈ Ei; 1Ei(x) = 0 iﬀ x /∈ Ei;

c(x) ∈ E(i + 1), 1(Ei+1)(x) = l iﬀ c(x) ∈ E(i + l);

1(Ei+1)(x) = 0 iﬀ c(x) /∈ E(i + 1).

Then, a function f (Ei, Ei+1) (more shortly noted f E(E)) is deﬁned as:

fE = 1 iﬀ : 1(Ei) = 1(Ei+1),

fE = 0 iﬀ : 1(Ei) 6= 1(Ei+1).

(2.2)

(2.3)

Summing over all points x in the whole of {E} provides f E(E) that accounts for
a distribution of the indicatrix functions of all points out of the maximum number
of possibilities, which would be 2 E for the set of parts of set E. This ﬁnally leads
to the expression of the proportion of points involved in the mappings of parts of
E(i + 1) into

E = f E
f E

E (E)/2 E,

0 < f E

E (E) < 1.

(2.4)

Two species of the moment of junction are represented by the composition (⊥)
E with either the set-distance of the instans, since E ⊇ ∆(E) ∪ mhEi and the
of f E
distribution of points in the complementary structures is not the complementary of
their distributions. Hence:

MJ∆ = ∆(E) ⊥ f E

E (E),

MJm = mhEi ⊥ f E

E (E).

(2.5a)

(2.5b)

Generally, one will have MJ∆ 6= MJm.
As a composition of variables with their distribution, relations (2.5a,b) actually

represent a form of momentum.

2.2. Spacetime as fulﬁlling a nonlinear convolution relation

The ”moments of junctions” (MJ) mapping an instans (a 3-D section of the
embedding 4-space) to the next one apply to both the open (the distances) and
their complementaries the closed (the reference objects) in the embedding spaces.
But points standing for physical objects able to move in a physical space may be
contained in both of there reference structures. Then, it appears that two kinds of
mappings are composed with one another.

Theorem 2.2. A spacetime-like sequence of Poincar´e sections is a nonlinear con-
volution of morphisms.

Proof. The demonstration involves the following four steps.

(i) One kind of mapping M connects a frame of reference to the next one: here, the
same organization of the reference frame-spaces must be found in two consecutive
instants of our spacetime, otherwise, no change in the position of the contained
objects could be correctly characterized.

However, there may be some deformations of the sequence of reference frames,
on the condition that the general topology is conserved, and that each frame is

7

homeoporphic to the previous one. Mappings M will thus denote the corresponding
category of morphisms.

(ii) The other kind of mapping (J ) connects the objects of one reference cell to
the corresponding next one. Mappings (J ) thus behave as indicatrix functions of
the situation of objects within the frames, and therefore, they are typically relevant
from the ”Analysis situs”, that is the former name for topology, originally used by
Poincar´e himself (Bottazzini, 2000). These morphisms thus belong to a complemen-
tary category.

Then, each section, or timeless instant (that is, a form of the above more general
”instans”) of our spacetime, is described by a composition ((cid:13)) of these two kinds
of morphisms:

Spacetime instant = (M (cid:13) J ).

(2.6)

(iii) Stepping from one to the next instant is ﬁnally represented by a mapping T,
such that the composition (M (cid:13) J ) at iterate (k) is mapped into a composition
(M ⊥ J ) at iterate (k+i):

(M ⊥ J ) k+i = T⊥(M (cid:13) J ) k.

Hence, mapping (T⊥) appears like a relation of the type R k+i similar to that

denoted below by R k+j that maps a function Fi+k into Fj+k:

F′

j+k = R (k+j)F i+k.

(iv) The above relation represents a case of the generalized convolution, that is a
nonlinear and multidimensional form of the convolution product, which has been ﬁrst
described by Bolivar-Toledo et al. (1985). The authors have proposed this concept
as a tool for computing the behavior of visual perception. The demonstration that
relation (2.8) is a form of a convolution is achievable by taking the following example.

Let α (j−k) a particular form of R (k+j); then equation (2.8) becomes:

X
that is, for the case of an integrable space

F′

k =

α (j−k)Fj,

F′(X) =

α(X′ − X)F(X′)d(X′).

Z

So the relation exhibits a great similarity with a distribution of functions, in the
Schwartz sense (Schwartz, 1966):

or a convolution product

hf, ϕi =

ϕ(x)f (x)dx

X

f (X − u)F(u)d(u) = (f ∗ F)(X).

(2.12)

ZE

Thus, the connection from the abstract universe of mathematical spaces and
the physical universe of our observable spacetime is provided by a convolution of
morphisms, which supports the conjecture of relation (1).

8

(2.7)

(2.8)

(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

Interestingly, the distributions were primarily considered by Schwartz as an in-
vention, in contrast with other concepts which he considered as the discovery of
preexisting foundations of the total universe (Schwartz, 1997). Now, the present
work could provide the distributions with the status of a discovery.

Remarks 2.2. Our observable spacetime should possess nonlinear properties which
necessarily involve speciﬁc features (Lin and Wu, 1998): therefore, peculiar ap-
proaches are needed through appropriate mathematical concepts, otherwise incor-
rect descriptions of the real world result as a consequence of approximate treatment
of nonlinear model resolution (Wu and Lin, 2002).

3. Relative scales in the empty-set lattice

It has been demonstrated in Bounias and Krasnoholovets (2001) that the an-
tifounded properties of the empty set provide existence to a lattice involving a
tessellattion of the corresponding abstract space with empty balls. This structure
has thus been called a ”tessellattice”. Its formalism will be completed in section 3.2
up to Corollary 3.2.5.

3.1. Quantum levels at relative scales

Inside any of the above spaces, properties at micro-scale are provided by prop-
erties of the spaces whose members are empty set units. It will be shown here that
particular levels of a measure of these units can be discerned.

Lemma 3.1.2. The Cartesian product of a ﬁnite beginning section of the integer
numbers provides a variety of nonequal empty intervals.

Proof. Let A(N+1) = {0, 1, 2, ..., N} denote a beginning section, that is the set of
all members of a part (M, (cid:22)) of the natural integers (N) provided with an order
relation ((cid:22)), which are lower than (N+1). A set {Ø, a,b,...} is equipotent with {0,
1,2,...,n} and will be denoted by (E n). Then, since any set contains Ø, one has
(E n) ≡ A(N+1).

Consider now (E n)2 = (E n) × (E n). The resulting set contains ordered pairs
including the diagonal (aa, bb, ...) and the heterologous pairs (ab, ac, bd, ...)
accounting for rational numbers (aa 7→ 1, ab 7→ a/b, dc 7→ d/c, etc.). Since all
members of the diagonal are mapped into 1, there remains n2 − (n − l) distinct
pairs. A rational can be represented by a 2-simplex or facet, whose small sides are
the corresponding integers. Jumping to three dimensional conditions with (E n)3 =
(E n)2 × (E n), each new rational is represented by a 3-simplex. This representation
oﬀers the advantage over the usual square to cube representation of avoiding several
squares or cubes to share common edges or facets. Then, the number of 3-simplexes
reﬂects the number R(E n)3 of rational numbers available from any initial beginning
segment A N+1.

Consider now the cuttings or segments, represented by intervals between any two
of these rational numbers. These segments represent the whole of available distances
in the corresponding subpart of a 3-space. Remind that such a subpart is involved
in some part of a ordered sequence, that is in a segment of an observable spacetime.

9

Let [0, n] be the larger interval of (E n). Denote by mE]0, n[ a measure of the
open part or interior ]0, n[ of this interval in space (E n): if E is a segment of N, one
has:

mE]0, n[= ØN.
This is also encountered in the Cartesian product (E n)3 when it includes (Ø).
Consider now any of the smaller intervals (σ) in (E n)3 and denote by mE[(σ(E n)3]

(3.1)

its measure. By deﬁnition:

Call ØQ any of the open or interior ](σ(E n)3[, then since G ⊂ H ⇒ (g ⊂ G) ⊂ (H)
and that the distance of the interior of a set to its frontier is naught (Tricot, 1999):

mE[(σ(E n)3] < mE[0, n].

ØQ ⊂ ØN.

This imposes an order relation holding on empty sets constructed on various
segments of a ﬁnite product of ﬁnite beginning sections of the set of natural integers
or equipotent to such a section.

(Q.E.D.)

Corollary 3.1.2. A ﬁnite set of rational numbers infering from a cartesian product
of a ﬁnite beginning section of integer numbers establishes a discrete scale of relative
sizes.

Proof. (i) Intervals are constructed from mappings G: ND 7→ Q of (N × N × N ×
N × ...) in Q. For example, with D = 2, the smaller ratios available are 1/n and
1/(n − l), so that their distance is the smaller interval: 1/
. Consider now
the few smaller intervals (σ) in (E n)3. One can observe, in the following order of
(cid:1)
increasing sizes:

n(n − 1)
(cid:0)

∀n > 1 :

(σ(i)) =

1
n2(n − 1)

< (σ(ii)) =

n(n − 1)2 < (σ(iii)) =

1

(n − 1)
n2(n − l)2 .

Let us consider maximal of the ratios of larger (n) to smaller

1/n2(n − l)

segments; then one gets

(cid:0)

max(σ)
min(σ)

= n3(n − l).

One possibility of a scaling progression covering integer subdivisions (n) consists
in dividing a fundamental segment (n = l) by 2, then each subsegment by 3, etc.
Thus the size of structures is a function of iterations (n). At each step (νj) the ratio
of the size in the dimension D will be (Πνj)D, so that the maximal ratio will be,
following (3.5),

̺ ∝

(Πνj)D

Πνj − 1

n

(cid:0)

.

(cid:1)o j=1 → n

The manifold (Πνj) is a commutative Bourbaki-multipliable indexed on the in-
In practice, values can be written as ̺j = aj.10xj where
teger section I = [1, n].
in the base 10 one will take aj. belonging to the (always existing) neighborhood of
unity, i.e. aj. ∈]1[, and look at the corresponding integer exponents xj as the order
of sizes of structures constructed from the lattice L = (Πνj)D. Regarding distances

10

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

(cid:1)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(D = 1) to areas and volumes (D = 2 and 3) equation (3.6) consistently provides the
predicted orders of scales listed in Table 1. The latter represent quantic-like levels
of clusters of objects sharing successive orders of sizes while constructed one from
the others.

(ii) There is a ﬁnite number of segments or intervals, since their supremum is the
number of 3-simplexes, which is ﬁnite, and contains redundant terms. This number
is the number of pairwise combinations of distinct rationals. Therefore:

supN (E n)3 = C 2

1
2
A general formula for exactly (N (E n)3) is not readily available since it involves
prime numbers occurring in (E n), but this does not change the meaning of the
reasoning.

n(n − l)(n2 − n + 1).

n2−n+1 =

(3.7)

Finally, there is a ﬁnite number of ratios of segment sizes imposing on a subpart

of a spacetime sequence a limited number of relative scales for any of the objects
represented by closed subspaces in (En)3.

(Q.E.D.)

Corollary. The axiom of availability (stating that a rule provided to a set must be
considered as explicitly applying to the set’s members and parts) is necessary to an
exploration of an unknown space, either mathematical or physical.

The simple following counter-example provides the proof. Suppose the axiom of
availability is not stated: then, a complete subset of the rational numbers may not
be provided in all bases by the Cartesian product of a segment of natural numbers.
Let En = {1, 2, ..., n} with n < 9, and let two integers, p, q ∈ En. Then, the
pair (p, q) ∈ (E2
n) = En × En. Usually, (p, q) accounts for the ratio p/q, so that the
set of pairs (p, q) is equipotent to the set of rational numbers noted as fractions:
(ei.d1d2...di) where ei. stands for the entire part and d1d2d...di ... for the decimal
part.

Let n = 4, and take p = 1, q = 4. Then the ordered pair (1,4) stands for the
ratio 1/4. However, writing 1/4 = 0.25 needs digit 5 to be available, whereas one has
just 1, 2, 3, 4 available, not 5. Therefore, in this system, since digit 5 does not exist
unless the additional axiom of the addition is introduced, the mapping of ordered
pairs to the writing in base 10 of the corresponding rational numbers is not valid.
The availability of the power set of parts, i.e. the inﬁnitely iterated sets of parts of
the sets of parts (Bounias, 2001) is enough to break this barrier.

Table 1. Range and intermediate levels of the scale of size of objects composing a
universe constructed as described in relation (3.6). Intervals constructed with powers
of 10 on the neighborhood of unity (a]1[) are confronted through dimensions: (i)
D = 1 with the simple multipliable set Πj(νj); (ii) D = 2 involving intervals l/n(n−l);
(iii) D = 3 involving intervals 1/n2(n − l). Here the choice ]0.7, 1.3[ just reﬂects the
case of a normal distribution quantile suﬃciently close to unity as the mean.

Here in Table 1: (*) and (**) suggest further levels of higher scale universes; (***)
a continued cluster from 10142 to 10171, suggesting a quite diﬀerent organization of
matter. Predictable orders of size, from the Planck scale, roughly comply with
quark-like size (1010−11), particle to atoms (1011−17), molecules (1021), human size
(1028), stars and solar systems (1040−42), up to the estimated upper limit (1056)
which could be bounded by a ”anti-Planck” scale at (1060−61).

11

ρ = Πj (νj)

x

(1 ± 0.3)
×10 x

(ν)

ρ =
Πj (νj) × (Πj (νj − 1))

(cid:8)
(1 ± 0.3)
×10 x

(cid:9)

(ν)

ρ =
2 × (Πj (νj − 1))
(cid:9)

(ν)

Πj(νj)

(cid:1)

(cid:8)(cid:0)
(1 ± 0.3)
×10 x

0

(1)

0

0
2
10
11
17
21
28
29
31
33
40
42
56
59
61
*
82
84
99
100
112
115
117
120
* *
139
* * *
142
150
163
171

1 × 100
1.20 × 102
0.87 × 1010

1.22 × 1017
1.12 × 1021
1.09 × 1028

0.88 × 1031
0.87 × 1033
1.03 × 1040

(1)
(5)
(14)

(19)
(21)
(27)

(29)
(33)
(35)

1.20 × 1056

(45)

1.24 × 1061
*
0.83 × 1082

*

*
(60)

1.20×10100

(70)

1.13×10115
0.89×10117

(79)

1.27 × 1029

(17)

1.26 × 1042
1.18 × 1056
0.93 × 1059

(22)
(27)
(28)

*

1.12 × 1099

1.25 × 10112

(45)

* *

* *

* *

* * *
1.25×10142
1.00×10150
1.00×10163
1.24×10171

* * *

* * *
(92)
(96)
(103)
(107) 0.92 × 10171

* *

* * *

(62)

1.28 × 1011

(7)

0.91 × 1040

(16)

1.33 × 1059

(21)

*

*

1.29 × 1084

(27)

1.10 × 10120
* *
0.85 × 10139
* * *

(35)
* *
(39)
* * *

3.2. About boundaries

Converging sequences of rational numbers are known to provide the set of real
numbers. However in a space of ﬁnite dimension, real numbers cannot infer by this
way. In contrast, inﬁnitely descending sequences (in the Mirimanoﬀ sense) of pairs
of the ØQ and ØN types can be found inside each part {Ø}. Therefore, inﬁnitely

12

smaller intervals could always be found in the lower range of scales. These inﬁnitely
decreasing sizes are of a diﬀerent nature in that they ﬁll each discrete part {Ø}.
However, this does not mean that these structures necessarily are the ultimate ones.
Besides the empty set as the set with no members, one has :

Proposition 3.2.1. There exists a set with no parts.

Preliminary proof. The space of (Ø) provided with the complementarity property
gives raise to abstract sets equipotent to sets of numbers, so that for instance (Wm)
owns parts equipotent to Rm. Consider the union U = ∪(W) of all possible Wm
spaces, and its structural complementary in the resulting fundamental space F(U):
the structural complementary of a space with parts is a space with no parts. Since
it has no parts it cannot have members. In eﬀect, if its members were nonempty,
this would be a nonempty space, which is excluded by deﬁnition, while if it had
empty parts, it would just be Ø. Thus, there exists a set denoted here by (6 c) that
has neither members nor parts. Furthermore, is 6 c contained in none of existing sets:
otherwise it would be the complementary of Borel sets and therefore it would include
parts of itself. This provides the set of possible structures with a lower boundary.

The fundamental set embedding space U can thus be written:

F(U) = {∪(W)} ∪ (6 c).

(3.8)

In particular, given a partition of ∪(W) into WX and WY, the separating distance
between WX and WY in ∪(W) is naught iﬀ it does not belong to the ﬁlter F holding
on W, that is since 6 c and only 6 c ∈ F :

∆ ∪ (W)(WX, WY) = (6 c).

(3.9)

The empty hyperset can no longer be treated as was formerly considered the

wellfounded empty set: in particular Ø /∈ F whereas ØØ has not the same status.

Corollary 3.2.1. The set with neither member nor parts is strictly unique.

Proof. Let two universes F(Ui) = {∪ (Wi)} ∪ (6 ci) and F(Uj) = {∪ (Wj)} ∪ (6 cj) as in
(3.8). Then, (6 ci) ∪ (6 cj) = (6 c) since the reunion of no parts and no member is just
identical with (0). However this would also allow one to write: (6 c) = {(6 cj), (6 cj)}
and (6 cj) would be composed of two parts, which is contradiction.

Set (6 c) can thus be denoted as the ”nothingness singleton” {6 c}.

Corollary 3.2.2. A set equipotent to the set of natural integers N is intrinsically of
nonzero measure, and a segment E of N cannot be of measure naught even relatively
to the correspondingly available segment of Q. A member of Nx is never of measure
naught.

Preliminary proof. (i) given N and only N as the fundamental set, one cannot insert
each member in an interval as small as needed, since there exists no segment available
with size lower than 2 units, able to contain each point. For this to be achieved it
is necessary to provide the system with at least N × N so as to generate Q. The
former case is called the intrinsic measure on N, while the latter is the measure on
N relatively to Q.

(ii) Let E(Ø) be equipotent to a beginning section of (N): the result presented
above states that there exists a ﬁnite number of rational infering from the cartesian

13

product of this space. Therefore it is not possible to insert the members of E in a
sum of intervals of E × E as small as needed. Thus E(Ø) can be of neither intrinsic
nor Q-relative measure naught.
(iii) Let ﬁnally Ex = (N×N×...×N) ﬁnitely x times, x<1: each member of the equipotent
set is an ordered pair. Even if an unordered N-uple {a,b, ...}, whatever the nature
of a and b, could be eventually of measure zero, excepted intrinsically, an ordered
N-uple (ab...) owns a dimension ≥ 1 and cannot be inserted in an interval as small
as needed.

(Q.E.D.)

Corollary 3.2.3. A ﬁnite set is not of measure zero if its contains members and
parts that are representative of a space of dimension D > 1.

Corollary 3.2.5. Due to uniqueness of (6 c), the ”tessellattice” is correctly tessel-
latted since no gap can subsist between any two or more of its empty tessellattion
balls. Furthermore, 6 c provides the tessellattice with a inﬁmum, and thus with a
partial order.

4. Particles in a lattice universe

4.1. Introduction

Let space be represented by the lattice F(U) = ∪ (W) ∪ 6 c as from relation (9.1)
in Bounias and Krasnoholovets (2002), where 6 c is the set with neither members
nor parts. This accounts for both relativistic space and quantic void, since: (i) the
concept of distance and the concept of time have been deﬁned on it, and (ii) this
space holds for a quantum void since on one hand, it provides a discrete topology,
with quantum scales, and on the other hand it contains no ”solid” object that would
stand for a given provision of physical matter.

The above relation (2.2) involves the mapping of a frame of reference into its
image frame of reference in the next section of spacetime. Without such a continuity
there would be no possibility of assessing the motion of any object in the perceived
universe. This is exactly a case of ”analysis situs”, in the original meaning used
by Poincar´e. Now, continuity in the perception of a spacetime is provided iﬀ the
frames of references are conserved through homeomorphic mappings. This means
that there is no need for exact replication:
just topological structures should be
conserved. Hence, the realization of varieties if allowed, even in a space of diﬀerent
dimension. This supports the following:

Proposition 4. The sequence of mappings of one into another structure of reference
(e.g. elementary cells) represents an oscillation of any cell volume along the arrow
of physical time.

However, there is a case in which a threshold may exist, precluding the conser-
vation of homeomorphisms:
let a transformation of a cell involving some iterated
internal similarity (see Figure 2 for simpliﬁed example). Then, if N similar ﬁgures
with similarity ratios 1/r are obtained, the Bouligand exponent (e) is given by

N(1/r) e = 1

(4.1)

and the image cell gets a dimensional change from d to d′ = ln(N)/ ln(r) = e > l.

14

Then, the putatively homeomorphic part of the image cell is no longer a continued

ﬁgure and the transformed cell no longer owns the property of a reference cell.

This transformation stands for the formation of a ”particle” also called ”particled
cell” or more appropriately ”particled ball”, since it is a kind of topological ball
B[Ø, r(Ø)]. Thus the following:

Statement 4. A particled ball is represented by a nonhomeomorphic transforma-
tion in a continuous deformation of space elementary cells.

4.2. On quanta of fractality and fractal decomposition

Before examining the interactions of particled balls with the degenerate space
lattice and further with other particled balls, it is necessary to demonstrate some
mathematical preliminaries.

4.2.1. Quanta of fractality

A minimum fractal structure is provided by a self-similar ﬁgure whose combina-
tion rule includes a initiator and a generator, and for which the similarity dimension
exponent is higher than unity.

(i) Initiator. Due to self-similarity of ≥ Ø, each time one considers the comple-
mentary of itself in itself, one gains: Ø 7→ {(Ø), Ø}. That is, one ball gives two
identical balls. This is continued into a sequence of {1/2, 1/4, ..., 1/2n} numbers
at the nth iteration. Thus, the series (I) =
i=1→∞{1/2 i} stands for the initiator,
providing the needed iteration process. The terms of (I) are indexed on the set of
natural numbers, and thus provide an inﬁnitely countable number of members.
Interestingly, 2 n also denotes the number of parts from a set of n members,

P

(ii) Generator. Let an initial ﬁgure (A) be subdivided into r subﬁgures at the ﬁrst
iteration. The similarity ration is thus ̺ = 1/r. Let N = (r + a) be the number of
subﬁgures constructed on the original one. Then, one has e = Ln(r + a)/LnN. The
value of e is bounded by unity if r is extended to inﬁnity. For any r ﬁnite (likely the
case in a physical world), the exponent e is above unity. Then:

/Ln
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
This completes the description of a quantum of fractality.

{min (e)|e > l} = Ln
(cid:0)

max (r) + 1

.
max(r)
(cid:1)

(4.2)

4.2.2. The fractal decomposition principle. Let a fractal system be denoted by Γ,
such as Γ = {(Ø), (r + a)}. More complex systems just need to be incorporated
several diﬀerent subﬁgures to which the following reasoning could be extended. At
the nth iteration, the number of additional subﬁgures is Nn = (r+a)n. The similarity
ration becomes ̺n = l/r n. Owing to subvolumes (vi constituted at each iteration, in
the simplest case vi = vi−1 (1/r) 3. Since at the ith iteration as many as Ni = (r + a) i
such subvolumes are created, the total volume occupied by the subvolumes formed
by the fractal iteration to inﬁnity is the sum of the series:

vf =

{(r + a) i · vi−1 (1/r) 3}

(4.3a)

X(i=1→∞)

15

Figure 3: The continuity of homeomorphic mappings of structures is broken if once a
deformation involves an iterated transformation with internal self-similarity, which involves
a change in the dimension of the mapped structure. Here, various the ﬁrst 2 or 3 steps of
the iteration are sketched, with basically the new ﬁgure jumping from (D) to approximately
(D + 1.45). The mediator of transformations is provided in all cases by empty set units.

that can be developed into

vf =

{[Π(i=1→n](r + a)i−1/(r)3i}.

(4.3b)

X(i=1→∞)

This leads to the following deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 4.2. A fractal decomposition consists in the distribution of the members
of the set of fractal subﬁgures: Γ ⊃
constructed
on one ﬁgure, among a number of connected ﬁgures (C1, C2, ..., Ck) similar to the
initial ﬁgure (A). If k reaches inﬁnity, then all subﬁgures of A are distributed and
(A) is no longer a fractal.

i=1→∞{(r + a) i · vi−1 (l/r)3}

(cid:8) P

(cid:9)

Figure 3 illustrates in a very schematic way the fractal decomposition process.
Corollary 4.2. Reciprocally, a fractal ﬁgure can be recomposed from an inﬁnitely
enumerable set of self-similar ﬁgures whose numbers and sizes are distributed as in
relation (4.2.2a).

4.3. Interactions involving exchanges of structures

4.3.1. Scattering from friction. Let a ball (A) containing a fractal subpart on
it, as shown in Figs. 2 and 3. Deformations can be transferred from one to another
ball with conservation of the total volume of the full lattice (which is constituted
If a fractal deformation is subjected to motion, it
by a higher scale empty set).
will collide with surrounding degenerate balls. Such collisions will result in fractal

16

Figure 4: A canonical ball is represented as a triangle, ﬁguring 3 dimensions,
in a
metaphorical form. A degenerate ball keeps the same dimension, in contrast with a parti-
cled ball endowed with a fractal substructure. A complete decomposition into one single
ball (k = 1) conserves the volume without keeping the fractal dimension. The von Koch-
like fractal has been simpliﬁed to 3 iterates for clarity.

decompositions at the expense of (A) whose exponent (eA) will decrease, and to the
proﬁt of degenerate cells: if k is ﬁnite, one will have (e i) > l, (e 2) > l, ..., (e k) > 1.
A fractal decomposition gives raise to a distribution of coeﬃcients f (e k), whose most
ordered form is a sequence of decreasing values:

f (e k) = {(e i) (i ∈ ]k, 1])}.

(4.4)

4.3.2. Boundary conditions. From relation (4.4), it follows that the remaining of
fractality decreases from the kernel (i.e. the area adjacent to the original particled
deformation) to the edge of the inerton cloud. At the edge, it can be conjectured
that, depending on the local resistance of the lattice, the last decomposition (denoted
as the nth iteration) can result in (e n) = 1. Since in all cases one has (e n−1 > l,
eventhough the corresponding remaining deformation is a fragment of the original
fractal structure, then the resulting nonfractal deformations can be theoretically
distributed up to inﬁnite distance.

Therefore, while central inertons exhibit decreasing higher boundaries, edge in-

ertons are bounded by a rupture of the remaining fractality.

4.4. Discussion and alternative hypothesis

4.1. About inﬁnitesimal elements. One could wonder whether an inﬁnite
iteration could not physically take a inﬁnite time and thus would be non-physical,
(i) One answer is that all from the ﬁrst iteration would take a time decreasing to

17

inﬁnitely small values to occur, (ii) Another would state that a quantum of fractality
with the simplest geometrical generator and initiator would also stand for a quantum
of time corresponding with the maximum velocity for the corresponding particle, and
that the velocity of a nonfractal deformation would stand for the maximum velocity
of nonmassive corpuscles.

4.2.
Incomplete fractality hypothesis. However, one could also conjecture
that mass could be in some way proportional to the number of iterations on the way
to a fractal whose completion would be only a theoretical (likely hyperbolic) limit.
Here again, the number of iterations provide an alternative kind of qualitative jump,
where n = 1 iteration would stand for nonmassive corpuscle, and n > 2 for massive
particles.

4.3. Topological alternatives. Some other features about massive versus non-
massive properties remain to be explored. Among other candidates, one could list
dense versus nondense, compact versus not compact, complete versus not complete
subspaces. Conjecturally, one could envision that the space of particles could be
everywhere dense in that of superparticles while nondense in the total space, and
the space of superparticles could be dense in the total space. This is matter of work
in progress.

5. Practical predictions from the inertons theory

5.1. Preliminaries

A particled ball as described above provides a formalism describing the elemen-
tary particles proposed by Krasnoholovets and Ivanovsky (1993), Krasnoholovets
(1997; 2000). In this respect, mass is represented by a fractal reduction of volume
of a ball, while just a reduction of volume as in degenerate cells is not suﬃcient to
provide mass. Accordingly, if vo is the volume of an absolutely free cell, then the re-
duction of volume resulting from a fractal concavity is the following: Vpart = vo −vf ,
that is, according to relation (4.3b):

,

(cid:17)

ν(cid:17)

(cid:1)

Vpart = vo ·

1 −

{[Π(i=1→n) (r + a) i−1]/(r) 3i}

(5.1a)

(cid:16)

X(i=1→∞)

that is, since (r + a) = (r) e, we have instead of (5.1a)

Vpart = vo ·

1 −

{[Π(i=1→n) (rν) eν (i−1)]/(rν) 3i}

(5.1b)

(cid:16)

X(ν) (cid:0) X(i=1→∞)

where (ν) denotes the possibly several fractal concavities aﬀecting the particled ball.
This point will be the matter of an examination of the various kinds of particles
predicted by the model in Part 3 of this study.

Relation (5.1b) relates the volume of particled balls to the fractal dimensional

change (e), which can be expressed as the following:

Proposition 5.1. The mass Ma of a particled ball A is a function of the fractal-
related decrease of the volume of the ball:

Ma ∝ (1/Vpart) · (ev − 1) ev>1

(5.2)

18

where (e) is the Bouligand exponent, and (e − 1) the gain in dimensionality given
by the fractal iteration.

Just a volume decrease is not suﬃcient for providing a ball with mass, since a

dimensional increase is a necessary condition.

5.2. Foundations of the inertons theory

Two interaction phenomena are considered: ﬁrst, the elasticity (γ) of the lattice
favours an exchange of fragments of the fractal structure between the particled ball
and the surrounding degenerate balls. In a ﬁrst approach, the resulting oscillation
has been considered homogeneous. Second, if the particled ball has been given a ve-
locity, its fractal deformations collide with neighbour degenerate balls and exchanges
of fractal fragments occur.

Proposition 5.2. The velocity of the transfer of deformations is faster for non
fractal deformations and slower for fractal ones, at slowering rates varying as the
residual fractal exponent (e i).
Justiﬁcations. A fractal subvolume owns an inﬁnite surface, which imposes a more
important transfer than the progression of a non fractal volume, which involves
a ﬁnite surface. More generally each iteration step involves a proper quantum of
transfer time.

Proposition 5.3. The motion of the system constituted by a particled ball and its
inerton cloud provides the basis for de Broglie and Compton wavelengthes.

Justiﬁcations. During the progression of a particled ball, its mass is progressively
transferred to a cloud of surrounding balls which get fragments of the particle mass.
These new quasi-particles are called ”inertons”. The inertons velocity is faster due
to lower fractal dimension, and the cloud migrates forwards up to the state where the
residual mass of the particle is low enough. At this step, the particle has progresively
lost its velocity due to the collisions: then, since collision with the degenerate lattice
balls stop, no more inertons are produced. At this time, the elasticity of the lattice
starts to reinject the fragments of deformations and progressively restore the initial
fractal in the particled ball, which is reconstructed. Similarly, the equivalent in
momentum (that is (hmi·hvi), where hmi and hvi respectively denote the average
mass and velocity of the system composed with {particle + inertons} and further
denoted (Ξ) is progressively retransfered to the particled ball, which gets back its
initial velocity.

Then, the trajectory of a particle is represented by a complex oscillating system
which drives from a state (denoted as initial) where the particle owns its full mass
and velocity to a state where its velocity is minimal (eventually null) and part of its
mass has been transfered to the inerton cloud (Table 2).

This represents a cycle with a period λ of the path, such that min{M, Vpart}
occurs at λ/2: this deﬁnes a parameter identiﬁed with the de Broglie wavelength.
Then, the system (Ξ) which exhibits similarities with a crystallite has an oscillating
λ v0 and identiﬁed with the Compton wavelength (Krasnoholovets, 1997,
size called
2000, 2001). The inertons cloud itself is characterized by a speciﬁc amplitude Λ that
has been related with the other two ones by the following relations:

e

Λ = λ ˆc/vo =

λ vo · ˆc2/v 2
o
e

19

(5.3)

where vo is the initial velocity of the particled ball and ˆc is the velocity of emitted
inertons.

Table 2 summarizes the main steps and features of the particle to inertons cycle.

Remark 5.1. The center of mass of the system (Ξ) permanently oscillates between
the original particle and the inerton cloud. This introduces an additional parameter
whose various forms provide a solid support to the concept of spin (Krasnoholovets,
2000).

Remark 5.2. The system composed with the particle and its inertons cloud is not
likely to be of homogeneous shape. Therefore, their relative motion will expectably
exhibit an eddy-like form (Wu and Lin, 2002). This property will be accounted for
in spin-related properties of observable matter.

Table 2. The sequence of events occurring during a cycle of the behavior of
the system composed of a moving particled deformation and its inertons cloud. The
velocity of transmission of the deformations from the particled ball to the degenerate
balls is a nonlinear function of the following variables: V = F(γ, K, τ, ω, R; f (e))
where γ is the elasticity factor; K is the tenseness of the lattice; τ is the transmittivity
of deformations; ω is the resistance of the lattice; R is the reaction to the emission
of deformations; f (e) is the fractal characteristic.

Phase
state

particled
ball

inertons
cloud

Start point

]0, λ/2[

λ/2

]λ/2, λ[

λ

max velocity vo;
max mass Mo;
max tenseness;
max fractal (e)

mass loss;
velocity loss;
tenseness de-
crease

mass

min
mo=0;
resis-
not yet
tance to the mo-
tion of particled
deformation

collisions with
emis-
lattice:
iner-
sion of
tons with high
speed (low lat-
tice tenseness)

min mass;
min velocity;
min tenseness;
balance with
cloud

max mass;
max reaction;
max tenseness
as opposed to
particle motion;
max dispersion
inertons by
of
the degenerate
lattice

reincrease of
mass and ve-
locity

reaction decre-
ase;
return of mass;
decrease of
tenseness

return to
initial state
with max
mass and
velocity

dissappea-
rance of
the inerton
cloud

whole
system

no inerton re-
action;
resistance from
degenerate lat-
tice;

tenseness ba-
lance and ﬂe-
xibility of lat-
tice inertons
reaction

balance in the
respective
tense-
ness and center
of mass

reverse change
in localization
of
the center
of mass

de Broglie
period
reached

Proposition 5.4. The fractality of particle-giving deformations gathers its space
parameters (ϕi)i and velocities (v) into a self-similarity expression, which provides

20

a space-to-time connection.
Justiﬁcations. Let (ϕo) and vo be the reference values. Then the similarity ratios
are ̺(ϕ) = (ϕi/ϕo) and ̺(v) = (v/vo). Therefore

̺(ϕ) e + ̺(v) e = 1.

Since (ϕi)i =

distances (L) and masses (m)

that

(cid:8)

, one can write: mo/m = L/Lo, so
(cid:9)

(mo/m) e + (v/v o) e = 1.

While coeﬃcient (e) gets a value above unity, the geometry outside e = 1 escapes
the usual (3 − D + t) spacetime and, owing to the previously demonstrated necessity
of an embedding 4-D (timeles) space, the coeﬃcient (e) must reach e = 2. Hence,
the boundary conditions provide the following results:

(mo/m)2 + (v/vo)2 = 1 ⇔ m = mo/(1 − (v/vo)2)1/2

(L/Lo)2 + (v/vo)2 = 1 ⇔ L = Lo · (l − (v/vo)2)1/2.

(5.4a)

(5.4b)

(5.4c),

(5.4d)

Remark 5.2. The Lagrangian (L) should obey a similar law and (L/Lo) should ful-
ﬁll relation (5.4b) as a form of ̺(ϕ)e. Then, (L/Lo)e + (v/vo)2 = 1 and analogically
one could take Lo = −mv 2

o . Thus ﬁnally L = −mv 2

1 − (v/vo) 2

By analogy with special relativity, L, m, v are the parameters of a moving object,
while vo = c where c is the celerity of light. This supports some requirements pointed
by Krasnoholovets (2001).

1/2

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

.

o

5.3. Wave mechanics analysis

Work (Krasnoholovets, 2002) has provided the derivation of wave equations
In short, given a set {π} of two parameters describing
from the inerton system.
the behavior of respectively the mass of the particle and the total inertons cloud
(called the ”rugosity” of the surrounding space, due to the distribution of scattered
fragments of fractal deformations), the equations take the following general form:

¨π − c2

π∇π = 0

(5.5)

Solutions of (5.5) provide a real macroscopic wave function, allowing to ﬁnd back

the equivalent of the Schr¨odinger equation.

The same works ﬁnally derive also a mass ﬁeld accounting for gravitation, and
proves that the inert mass and the gravitational mass are the same. Hence, cosmic
scale properties are inferring from particle scale characteristics.

In Part 3 of this work, further corollaries will be derived about the origin and
classiﬁcation of families of particled balls, and in connection with the former, it will
be deduced an explanation on the mechanics underlying the origins of our observable
spacetime.

To which extent the motion of the {particle + inertons} system should follow the
eddy-like motion that nonhomogeneous systems should follow (Lin and Wu, 1998)
is matter of further investigations.

21

6. Experimental assessment of the inertons exis-
tence

Some preliminary experimental veriﬁcations have already been achieved, and

some protocols for further proofs can be proposed.

6.1. Former evidence

The prediction of collective behaviour of atoms in solid matter from the existence
of the {particle + inertons} system has been tested on both physical and chemical
systems.

6.1.1. Moving electrons emit inerton clouds which can be detected in the form of
anomalous photoelectric eﬀects (Krasnoholovets, 2001b).

6.1.2. The impact of inertons on the collective behaviour of atoms in various metals
has been evaluated and then experimentally observed by high resolution electron
microscopy scanning (Krasnoholovets, and Byckov, 2000).

6.1.3. The existence of inerton clouds has been calculated for hydrogen atoms
clustering in the δ-KH(IO3)2 crystal and the proton dynamic study has veriﬁed the
theory (Krasnoholovets, 2001c).

6.2. Further experimental protocols

Former experiments have confronted the recording of signals from informational
ﬁelds other than electromagnetic ones, like the Kozyrev eﬀect and others (Kozyrev
and Nazonov, 1978). Now, Krasnoholovets et al. (2001) have proposed a series of
protocols for testing the emission of ”inerton radiation” in various conditions. The
measurements will be performed by using pyroelectric sensors constructed for this
purpose. The project includes the following three cases:

6.2.1. Prediction of inerton emission by the sun, and observation of ﬂuctuations of
their ﬁeld.

6.2.2. Prediction and measurement of the velocity of inerton waves emitted from
distant stars whose parameters are suﬃciently well known.

6.2.3. Prediction and measurement of inerton ﬂows emitted from satellites of solar
planets.

Discussion and conclusions

The most important problem faced by most of physical theories is that they
pose some assumptions which are founded on observations and speculations whose
validity can hardly be supported excepted by indirect testing. About speculations,
for instance classical theories pose the existence of elementary particles, string theory
supposes the existence of free strings and of masses whose linear density gives the
tension of the strings (Maldacena, 2000), while the rolling up of a membrane into a
cylinder of inﬁnitesimal diameter has been identiﬁed with a 1-D line (Duﬀ, 1998),

22

which is topologically wrong; lower boundaries are hypothesized for a Hamiltonian,
if any, to account for a still ill-deﬁned void state, while upper limits are required for
the number of quantum states which are not postulated but resulting from statistical
developments, and should be smoothed at large scales so as to let a discrete system
be replaced by a continuous limit (’t Hooft, 1999). The latter point implicitly
suggests that the observable universe is inﬁnite, which remains an open question.

At observational levels, it remains diﬃcult to get decisive answers for essentially
two reasons. First, experimental data can often be interpreted in several ways:
de Broglie noted that the same mathematical equations can have several [physical]
explanations (Rothwarf, 1998), and Maldacena (2000) points that an inconsistent
theory could agree with experiment. Second, even the measures of physical phe-
nomena returns uncertain data: while the homogeneity and the isotropy of universe
is required around each point for applicability of the FRW metrics (Smoller and
Temple), the uniformity od universes appears as paradoxical (Bucher and Spergel,
1999) and the claim for anisotropy-supporting data (Ralston, Jain and Nodland,
1997) consistently raises polemic reactions (Ralston and Nodland, 1997).

Between these extreme positions, there unfortunately lies the situation in which
no appropriate measure can decide between alternative hypothesis: this is the case
for whether the expansion works for nearby galaxies only, or for the whole universe
(Smoller and Temple, 2000), and what would be expanding between two independent
objects (Walker, 1996; Bucher and Spergel, 1999). That objects can be independent,
and why the expansion of ”space” would not aﬀect at all the microscopic world
remain as many postulates, since the measuring devices may not be independent
from the measured phenomena.

Our approach aimed at trying to pose as few postulates as possible, and to
rather examine which kind of probationary space(s) and mathematical properties
would fulﬁll the conditions required to support a proposition such as: there exists
a physical universe embedding a self-perceived phenomenon that we use to call life.
This drove to the identiﬁcation of a primary axiom as the existence of the empty
set, in turn providing existence of abstract mathematical spaces. Then, spaces of
topologically closed objects gives raise to physical-like spaces, up to the function of
self-conscious perception (Bounias, 2000). Several main aspects of this model will
now be examined with respect to usual requirements for spacetime structures and
properties.

(i) Spacetime continuity and quantum structures

Such a physical-like space is therefore composed of discrete cells endowed with
quantumwise deﬁned relative scales and whose interior is potentially provided with
the power of continuum. An important consequence is that this property lays a
bridge exactly on the gap separating the so-far discrete nature of microscopic world
and the apparent continuity of the macroscopic universe.

The moments of junction map a timeless Poincar´e section representing a state
of the involved spaces into another state. Each Poincar´e section may present some
relationship with what t’Hooft (1999) called Cauchy surfaces of equal time The mo-
ments of junction represent the interval between two successive states (each timeless)
of a universe. Let E(i) be a Poincar´e section like S(i) deﬁned above: if it is an iden-
tity mapping, MJ = Id(S), then there is no time interval from S(i) to S(i + 1). In
all other cases, the MJ represents two important parameters: ﬁrst, it accounts for a

23

diﬀerential time interval, and then for a diﬀerential element of the geometry of the
corresponding space. In this sense, it has neither ”thickness” nor duration. There is
no ”distance” in the Hausdorﬀ sense between S(i) and S(i + 1), just a change in the
topological situation. Since the step from S(i) to S(i + 1) is a discrete one, it follows
that: (i) the corresponding space owns discrete that is likely quantum properties and
(ii) these discrete properties are valid whatever the scales, since they are founded
on the set diﬀerence that is not dependent on any scale nor size of phenomena. It is
noteworthy that these properties meet some requirement for space, time and matter,
as suggested by t’Hooft (1999).

(ii) Spacetime and motion

The moment of junction formalizes the topological characteristics of what is
called motion, in a physical universe, that is what has been considered as needed
for the understanding of physics (Rothwarf, 1998). While an identity mapping
denotes an absence of motion, that is a null interval of time, a nonempty moment
of junction stands for the minimal of any time interval: this meets a proposition of
Sidhart (1999), stating that there should exist a minimum spacetime interval and
that ”one cannot go to arbitrarily small spacetime intervals or points”. In our sense,
there is no such ”point”: only instants which per se do not reﬂect timely features.
The need for morphisms of the topological structures as frame of reference as
combined with the morphisms of objects interestingly meets with a requirement
hypothesized by t’Hooft (1999): ”beables” as commutable operators might be rep-
resented in morphisms of frames and the moments of junction, while ”changeables”
as non commutable components might be related to morphisms of objects, up to
the not commutative biological components, which makes the transition to the next
points.

Furthermore, morphisms are compatible with rotations that are to be expected
in eddy-motion which stands at the basis of physical motion in a nonlinear uni-
verse (Wu and Li, 2002). It should be noted that discontinuities may occur from
changes occuring when a structure partly escapes the observable spacetime through
dimensional plunging into the embedding 4-space and re-emerges in the perceived
3-space.

(iii) Spacetime reversibility properties

It is noteworthy that the moment of junction is provided with reversibility, which
accounts for the temporal reversibility of physical phenomena, as postulated by cos-
In contrast, the biological arrow of time
mologists (Smaller and Temple, 2000).
exhibits some irreversible features, since the sequence of brain mental images is
founded on surjective mappings, which do not have the same ﬁxed points in the re-
verse sense (Bounias, 2000b): this means that even if a biological system is physically
reversible, the correspondence of mental images associated to outside perceptions
with the the self of the perceiver would be changed.

(iv) Topological constraints on spacetime

Seriu (2000) proposed a very interesting study on metric properties of a space
of spaces. The author reaches the conclusion that physical constraints suggest the
existence of drastic topological ﬂuctuations at Planck scales. These observations
would result in two correlative hypothesis: ﬁrst, there would be sets of spaces with

24

various topologies, and second, there would be scale-dependent topologies. Seriu
acknowledges the risk that such considerations depart from the very foundations
of topology as a mathematical concept. However, a mathematical space can give
raise to several topologies, which range from coarser to ﬁner forms, in an order
relation (Bourbaki, 1990). In contrast with the smoothing at large scale recalled
by t’Hooft (1999), here a smoothing of topologies at low scale would be needed.
These apparent contradictions vanish with the properties of the empty hyperset
providing discrete features at all scales, but also own the power of continuum, that
is physical ”continuity” inside each fundamental cell. Note that continuity in the
mathematical sense does not require smoothing. Concerning the problem of scale-
related topological changes, it should be pointed that the set-distance is a scale-
independent measure, and would thus fulﬁll a requirement formerly raised in Part 1
of this study (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2002), in the form of an ultraﬁlter of the
topologies required by Seriu. No contradiction seems to lurk in these approaches.

The spectra ∆∞ proposed by Seriu should be invariant by spatial diﬀeomor-
phism: this implies continued diﬀerentiability, a property which is fulﬁlled by the
convolution structure derived from our model.
In addition, while the Laplacian
used by Seriu as a probe for the geometry of the explored universe accounts for
linear properties, the nonlinear convolution provides a generalization to nonlinear
properties. While scale-dependent topologies may appear contradictory with fractal
properties, our approach instead is consistent with such a structure

(v) Fractal spacetime features

Following the pioneer remarks of Mandelbrot (1989), some fractal properties
have been found for the distribution of galaxies at rather small scales. However, the
existence of a lower cut-oﬀ, as shared by the an spectra of Seriu (2000) seen above,
precludes that the observed autocorrelations reﬂect a general fractality of the entire
universe. In our model, the lattice which provides space and matter with their prop-
erties has been shown to meet the properties of a true fractal. This means that some
fractal features should be shared by objects at all scales of our spacetime. The con-
tradiction of uniformity of Hubble law of isotropy of the background waves with the
heterogeneity of a fractal geometry exhibiting voids and structures is just apparent.
When Mandelbrot drew fractal galaxies on a sheet of paper, the ”void” parts were
represented by some lines connecting groups of points on the sheets. This would
pose a problem only if an absolute void would be postulated between objects in the
universe. In contrast, our approach suggests that a common fractal structure may
hold on the whole of space as an embedding (nonmaterial) medium. It has been
sketched here how this fractal geometry can account for the formation of matter
corpuscles: due to all-scales self-similarity ratios, the same property should be ex-
tended to large scale formations. This would predict that similar fractal parameters
should be found for both particle scales and cosmic scales. Lastly, that objects are
constructed in and from a fractal lattice suggests that fractality if provided by the
embedding medium: this answers a question raised by Cherbit (1987) and supports
a former proposition of Feynman (1965) that the quantum trajectory of a particle
is continued but not derivable.

(vi) predictions of fundamental physical parameters

In the absence of ”given” knowledge of what an object could be, Krasnoholovets

25

and Ivanovsly (1993), Krasnoholovets (1997, 2000a,b, 2001a,b) and Krasnoholovets
and Byckov (2000) proposed that a corpuscle could be represented by a local change
in the geometry of a lattice. Independently, Bounias and Bonaly (1995, 1996, 1997)
studied why a mathematical space could exist and how it could provide existence
It came that the results support both the hypothesis of
to a physical-like space.
existence of a founding lattice of Krasnoholovets et al., and the prediction of emer-
gence of the phenomenon of self-conscious perception, which could stand for a major
characteristic of life (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997b, Bounias, 2000). Since the model
makes useless the discrimination between relativistic and quantum approaches, we
modestly expect that it might be fruitfully thought-provoking to the community,
with emphasis on the fact that many various theories harbour correct elements that
presently are diluted in a complex network of scattered hypothesis.

The next part of this study (Part 3) will provide a formal description of the con-
struction and structures of the various fundamental particles allowed by the model
and examine some implications up to cosmic scales and the origins and behavior of
universes.

References

Blokhintsev, D., 1976. Principles of quantum mechanics. Mir, Moscow (In

Russian, French edition 1981), 683 pp.

Bolivar-Toledo, O., Candela Sola, S., Munoz Blanco, J.A., 1985. Nonlinear data

transforms in perceptual systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences, 410, 1-9.

Bonaly, A., 1992. Personal communication to M. Bounias.
Bonaly, A., Bounias, M., 1995. The trace of time in Poincare sections of topo-

logical spaces. Physics Essays, 8(2), 236-244.

Bounias, M., 1997. Deﬁnition and some properties of set-diﬀerences, instans
and their momentum, in the search for probationary spaces. J. Ultra Scientist of
Physical Sciences, 9(2), 139-145.

Bounias, M., 2000a. The theory of something: a theorem supporting the con-
ditions for existence of a physical universe, from the empty set to the biological
self. In: CASYS’99 Int. Math. Conf. (Daniel M. Dubois, ed.): Int. J. Comput.
Anticipatory Systems, 5, 11-24.

Bounias, 2000b. A theorem proving the irreversibility of the biological arrow of
time, based on ﬁxed points in the brain as a compact or delta-complete space. Am.
Inst. Phys. Conf. Proc. CP517, 233-243.

Bounias, M., 2001. Indecidability and Incompleteness In Formal Axiomatics as
Questioned by Anticipatory Processes. In: CASYS’2000 Int. Math. Conf. (Daniel
M. Dubois, ed.): Int. J. Comput. Anticipatory Systems (accepted Aug. 2000, in
press).

Bounias, M., Bonaly, A., 1994. On mathematical links between physical exis-
tence, observability and information: towards a ”theorem of something”. J. Ultra
Scientist of Physical Sciences, 6(2), 251-259.

Bounias, M., Bonaly, A., 1996. On metrics and scaling : physical coordinates in

topological spaces. Indian Journal of Theoretical Physics, 44(4), 303-321.

Bounias, M., Bonaly, A., 1997a. The topology of perceptive functions as a

corollary of the theorem of existence in closed spaces. BioSystems, 42,191-205.

26

Bounias, M., Bonaly, A., 1997b. Some theorems on the empty set as necessary
and suﬃcient for the primary topological axioms of physical exostence. Physics
Essays, 10(4), 633-643.

Bounias, M., Krasnoholovets, V., 2002. Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces: Part 1. Founding principles about mathematical constitution of space. Ky-
bernetes: The Int. J. for Systems & Cybernetics), in press.

Bourbaki, N., 1990a. Theorie des ensembles, Chap. 1-4. Masson, Paris, 352 pp.
Bourbaki, N., 1990b. Topologie Gendrale, Chap. 1-4. Masson, Paris, 376 pp.
Boyer, T., 2000. The inﬁnitely empty does not exist. Pour La Science (French

ed. of Scientiﬁc American), 278, 128-137.

Bucher, M., Spergel, D., 1999. L’inﬂation de 1’ univers. Pour La Science (Sci-

entiﬁc American, french edition), 257, 50-57.

Cherbit, 1987. Dimension locale, quantite de mouvement et trajectoires.

In:

Fractals, Masson, Paris, 340-352.

Scientiﬁc American), 246, p. 68.

Duﬀ, M., 1998. The new string theory. Pour La Science (French edition of

Einstein, A., 1920. Aether and the theory of relativity. Leyde University Lecture.

French translation: Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1-12 (1992).

Feynman, R., Hibbs, A., 1965. Quantum mechanics and path integrals. McGraw

Hales, T.C., 2000. Cannonballs and honeycombs. Notices of the AMS, 47(4),

Hill, NY, p. 176.

440-449.

Hannon, R.J., 1998. An alternative explanation of the cosmological redshift.

Physics Essays, 11(4), 576-578.

Havard, G., Zinsmeister, M., 2000. Thermodynamic formalism and variations
of the Hausdorﬀ dimension of quadratic Julia sets. Commun. Math. Phys., 210,
225-247.

Joyce, M., Anderson, P.W., Montuori, M., Pietronero, L., Sylos Labini, F., 2000.

Fractal cosmology in an open universe. Europhysics Letters, 49, 416-422.

Keilman, Y., 1998. On the breakdown of the principle of relativity. Physics

Essays, 11(2), 325-329.

Kozyrev, N.A., Nasonov, V.V., 1978. In: Astronometry and celestian mechanics,

Akademia Nauk SSSR, Moscow, Leningrad, 168-179 (in Russian).

Krasnoholovets, V., Ivanovsky, D., 1993. Motion of a particle and the vacuum.
Physics Essays, 6(4), 554-563. (Also arXiv.org e-print archive quant-ph/9910023).
Krasnoholovets, V., 1997. Motion of a relativistic particle and the vacuum.

Physics Essays, 10(3), 407-416. (Also quant-ph/9903077).

Krasnoholovets, V., Byckov, V., 2000. Real inertons against hypothetical gravi-
tons. Experimental proof of the existence of inertons. Ind. J. Theor. Phys., 48(1),
1-23. (Also quant-ph/0007027).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2000a. On the nature of spin, inertia and gravity of a moving

canonical particle. Ind. J. Theor. Phys., 48(2), 97-132. (Also quant-ph/0103110).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2001a. Space structure and quantum mechanics. Spacetime

& Substance, 1(4), 172-175. (Also quant-ph/0106106).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2001b. On the theory of anomalous photoelectric eﬀect
stemming from a substructure of matter waves. Ind. J. Theor. Phys., 49(1), 1-32.
(Also quant-ph/9906091).

27

Krasnoholovets, V., 2001b. On the way to submicroscopic description of nature.

Ind. J. Theor. Phys., 49(2), 81-95. (Also quant-ph/9908042).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2001c. Collective dynamics of hydrogen atoms in the
KIO3·HIO3 crystal dictated by a substructure of the hydrogen atoms’ matter waves
(cond-mat/0108417).

Krasnoholovets, V., Strokach, O., Skliarenko, Akimov, L. (2001). Inerton astron-

omy: Facility for measuring the inerton radiation from stars and planets, project.

Lavrentiev, M.M., Eganova, I.A., Lutset, M.K., Fominykh, S.F., 1990. About
distance inﬂuence of stars on resistor. Proc. Acad. Sci. USSR, 314(2), 352-355 (in
Russian).

Lin, Y., Wu, Y., 1998. Blown-ups and the concept of whole evolutions in systems

science. Problems of Nonlinear Analysis in Engineering Systems, 4, 16-31.
Maldacena, J., 2000. Gravity, particle physics and their uniﬁcation.

eConf

C990809, pp. 840-852 (Also hep-th/0002092).

Marinov, S., 1996. Cosmological aspects of the absolute spacetime theory.

Physics Essays, 9(3), 357-367.

Okun, L.B., 1988. Physics of elementary particles, Nauka, Moscow (in Russian),

p. 92.

816, 26-29.

Ralston, J., Jain, P., Nodland, B., 1997. The corscrew eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett.,

Ralston, J.P., Nodland, B., 1997. An update on cosmological anisotropy in
electromagnetic propagation. Proc. 7th Internat. Conf. on the Intersection of
Particle and Nuclear Physics (Big Sky, Montana, 1997), T. W. Donnelly ed.: Amer.
Inst. Phys. CP (Also astro-ph/978114).

Sidhart, B.C., 1999. The fractal universe: from the Planck scale to the Hubble

scale. (Also quant-ph/9907024).

Seriu, M., 2000. Space of spaces as a metric space. Commun. Math. Phys., 209,

393-405.

Smoller, J., Temple, B., 2000. Cosmology with a shock-wave. Commun. Math.

Phys., 210, 275-308.
t’Hooft, G., 1999. Quantum gravity as a dissipative deterministic system. Class.
Quantum Grav., 16, 3263-3279.

Walker, F.L., 1996. The expanding space paradox: can the galaxies really recede?

Physics Essays, 9(2), 209-215.

Wu, Y., Li, Y., (2002). Beyond nonstructural quantitative analysis. Blown ups,
spinning currents and modern science. World Scientiﬁc, New Jersey, London, 324
pp.

28

