Magnetic resonance as a channel of directed
transmission of electromagnetic energy in
animate nature.

E.Ya. Fursa

Belarusian State University
Bobryiskaya 4, 220050, Minsk, Republic of Belarus

Abstract

The phenomenon of magnetic resonance (either NMR or ESR) is a responce of
atomic (molecular) system to the external electromagnetic eﬀect. Electrons and nu-
clei, which possess magnetic moment, are the ”magnetic antennas” in the biosystem
”human being”. They are able to receive (radiate) electromagnetic energy selectively
in coordinates H (magnetic ﬁeld), ν (frequency) and γ (gyromagnetic ratio). Tun-
ing of these antennas mirrors the state of an atomic system and its environment.
The sea of electromagnetic waves of both natural and artiﬁcial origin surrounds a
”human being”. It contains the set of frequencies, which fulﬁll the resonance condi-
tion in the geomagnetic ﬁeld. This phenomenon is universal for a lot of nuclei and
electrons, which participate in many vital biochemical reactions and processes. The
above allows one to speak about the existence of a natural channel for energy (infor-
mation) transfer using the radio-frequency range. This channel exists both inside a
biosystem and for communication outside. The possible ways of realization of such
a channel and trends of its application are discussed.

2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

Contents

Introduction

Zeeman splitting of the levels. Magnetic resonance

Magnetic resonance from the other point of view

Principal concept

Value of resonance parameters for natural conditions

Resonance frequency

Energy of resonant interaction

Electromagnetic compatibility as a feature of environment

Connection of the observed phenomena with the magnetic resonance

Possible implementation mechanisms

About water and hydrogen bonds

Biophysics and cybernetics

Quantum-mechanical tunneling

Enzymatic catalysis

Symmetry in nature

Conclusion

3

3

3

5

5

5

7

8

13

14

14

16

17

19

20

23

2

1 Introduction

1.1 Zeeman splitting of the levels. Magnetic resonance

In the simplest case the eigenstates of either a nucleus or electron, correspond-
ing to the diﬀerent alignments of magnetic moment, are degenerated. Magnetic
ﬁeld causes splitting of these levels. Similar electron levels, the set of magnetic
(Zeeman) those allows population inversion, ampliﬁcation and generation.

Let us consider an object placed to a magnetostatic ﬁeld H and irradiated
by an electromagnetic ﬁeld with the frequency ν. (Here ν corresponds to the
condition

hν = gβH,

(1)

where g and β are the constants, describing the object.) In these conditions
the atomic system (containing either electrons or nuclei, which possess mag-
netic moment) resonantly absorbs the energy of electromagnetic ﬁeld. The
above phenomenon is called magnetic resonance, there are nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and electron spin resonance.

The magnetic resonance is used as a ﬁne technique for study of matter struc-
ture, diagnostics and so on [1].

Modern NMR-imagers let one to observe resonant absorption of electromag-
netic energy by every part of human body.

1.2 Magnetic resonance from the other point of view

Let us consider the magnetic resonance from the other point of view. The
objects we are using to observe either nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) or
electron spin resonance phenomenon possess natural permanent channel for
electromagnetic energy absorption (radiation). We observe it without consid-
ering it’s destination, purpose and manifestation in diﬀerent phenomena and
processes, ﬁrst of all, in biological systems. To realize such a channel the fol-
lowing conditions are necessary:

1. Biosystem (or it’s part) contains nuclei or electrons, possessing magnetic
moment due to unpaired or free electrons, radicals, paramagnetic or ferromag-
netic substances

2. External magnetic ﬁeld, splitting energy levels.

3

3. Electromagnetic radiation with the frequency corresponding to resonant
condition (1).

Our environment possesses al the necessary conditions for operation of such
energy channel:

1. A human body includes 70% of water. Concentration of nuclear spins (pro-
tons) in water is about 5.1022−3. Nuclei 19F, 13C, 31P, 11, 17, 15N, 59 also
possess magnetic moment. They are contained in a human body in diﬀerent
amounts. Besides, electron and proton transfer supports all vital biochemical
reactions, namely: redox reactions, free radical reactions, catalysis and so on.

2. Constant geomagnetic ﬁeld of the Earth (0.7 gauss ± ﬂuctuations caused
by internal and external sources).

3. Natural electromagnetic background (lightnings, synchrotron radiation, elec-
tromagnetic waves radiated by cells of living organisms and so on) and artiﬁcial
electromagnetic background (tele and radio communication, power engineer-
ing etc.)

Thus, conclusion issues: biosystem ”HUMAN BEING” can not avoid imme-
diate energy exchange with environment. The frequency of such exchange is
determined by the magnetic resonance frequency.

1.3 Principal concept

A person can measure out the radiation eﬀect upon organism or it’s parts
and systems and utilize it in medical practice. Practically, the full range of
electromagnetic waves is used: radio-frequency, visible, X-ray and γ radiation.
Usually, it means the integral action upon either organism as a whole or it’s
part by heating. Conventional methods and facilities do not allow selective
controlling of biochemical processes in human body by the direct action on the
deﬁnite molecules and nuclei, which are responsible for pathologic processes.

In certain conditions, one can consider electrons and nuclei, possessing mag-
netic moment, as ”magnetic phased receiving arrays” in ”HUMAN”-biosystem.
Such arrays can receive (radiate) electromagnetic energy selectively in coor-
dinates H, ν, γ (where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio). Tuning of such an array
mirrors the state of the atomic system and its environment.

Ocean of electromagnetic waves surrounds and permeates a person. It includes
frequencies from 0.001 to 1000 MHz, which meet the condition of magnetic
resonance in the magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth for several nuclei and electrons,
participating in all vital biochemical reactions and processes. The principal

4

concept is: both nuclear magnetic resonance(NMR) for protons (and other
nuclei) and electron spin resonance (ESR) for free electrons provide physically
true correlation between a human being and environment. It is power, aura
with high selectivity. It is true channel of energy interaction, which controls
biochemical processes: speed and direction of response, which can be measured
and checked by physical means.

2 Value of resonance parameters for natural conditions.

2.1 Resonance frequency.

ν =

E1 − E2
h

=

γ
2π

H

Frequencies corresponding the transitions between magnetic levels are in a
wide range from audio frequencies to long-wave microwaves:

2π is the proportionality factor. For H nucleus γ

2π = 4.26 kHz per gauss

where γ
and for electron spin γ

2π = 2.8 kHz per gauss

Nuclear magnetic resonance between Zeeman levels can be easily observed in
the range 1-100 MHz. Intense NMR signals (as well as spin echo signals) can
be obtained for hydrogen nuclei in ordinary water. In the magnetic ﬁeld of the
Earth (0.5 gauss) the NMR frequency for protons is

νN M R = 4.26 kHz/gauss ˙0.5 gauss = 2.13 kHz

The ESR frequency in the magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth for free electrons is

νESR = 2.8 MHz/gauss ˙0.5 gauss = 1.4 MHz

In an actual case nuclei and electrons are contained in atoms and molecules,
thus the interaction picture is more complicated [2]. The spin of a nucleus can
undergo the action of internal local ﬁelds, which are produced by the spins
of either neighbor atoms or unpaired electrons. In turn, these ﬁelds can be
modulated by the rotation of molecules and so on. If taking into considera-
tion both the internal magnetic ﬁelds and phenomena of chemical insulation,
one can obtain very complicated spectrum for both NMR and ESR. Nuclei
possessing quadrupole moment are aligned by the electrical ﬁelds, produced
by the valence electrons in a molecule. This also causes variations in magnetic

5

resonance spectrum and demonstrates the possibility of interaction with ex-
ternal magnetic ﬁelds over this channel. Though, very weak magneto-optical
interactions are possible over either direct or inverse Faraday eﬀect.

Life-time for the certain state of the system and the amount of the accepted
energy are determined by its environment. The observed phenomena of cross-
relaxation, dynamical polarization of nuclei and others demonstrate complex-
ity of interaction of magnetic spin states. Saturation of electron spin resonance
of proper paramagnetic material at high frequency increases the intensity of
low frequency NMR signal several hundred times. And in some cases it can
even change the sign of absorption i.e. radio-frequency radiation appears.

Water with paramagnetic additions can be used as an actuating ﬂuid for para-
magnetic ampliﬁcation and generation of electromagnetic waves. For example,
as far as 1960 it was developed the maser with the actuating ﬂuid, including
water and paramagnetic salt (SO3)2 NOK2 The maser is easily self-excited
at room temperature in the magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth and radiates with the
frequency 2000 Hz at pumping frequency 55MHz [3].

In the absence of magnetic ﬁeld the contact interaction (isotropic hyperﬁne
interaction of electron and proton) mostly contributes to the energy of a hy-
drogen atom. The energy of a nuclear moment in the magnetic ﬁeld, produced
by the electron spin, corresponds this type of interaction. ESR spectra includes
only one spectral line(1420 MHz).This frequency slightly diﬀers from that for
free electron. NMR of the hydrogen atom become complicated by the inﬂuence
of electron spin. It is caused by the fact that the time of spin relaxation of
electron in some cases is small. Hyperﬁne interaction yields anomalous shift
of NMR frequency and also can cause NMR line spreading. The transition
probability for NMR is 10 times less, than the transition probability for ESR.
The magnetic ﬁeld of nuclear spins can strongly aﬀect valence electron. As a
result the barrier of chemical reaction decreases. All the above indicates that
this phenomenon could be used to control the speed of radical processes.

It should be particularly emphasized, that magnetic resonance as a natural
phenomenon can not be identiﬁed with the spectrometer output, because every
spectrometer has sensitivity and resolution limits.

A lot of resonance lines can not be observed due to either considerable spread of
electrophysical properties of the samples or high speed of resonance processes.
Actual spectra is much more rich in the absorption lines and dynamics, it also
includes emission lines.

It should be supposed the presence of local magnetic resonance phenomena on
the boundary of biomolecules, cells and membranes, which act as regulators
or codes (key + lock) due to the coherent action of wave functions of pro-
tons, electrons,... Picture of resonance phenomena (spectra) for any biological

6

object can be extremely complicated and dynamic. Using the cybernetics lan-
guage, this picture is data-capacious and can be used as a code system for
communication, control, action and so on.

2.2 Energy of resonant interaction

Orbital energy levels diﬀer by tens of eV, while for Zeeman those the in-
terlevel distance is about 5-10 eV. The energy of magnetic resonance for
H = 3000 gauss is: E = 4 ˙10−3 kJ/gram-molecule For comparison, the en-
ergy of covalent bonds is 170-630 kJ/gram-molecule, the energy of hydrogen
bonds is 12.6-33.6 kJ/gram-molecule, the energy of Van der Waals interaction
is 4-13 kJ/gram-molecule and the thermal energy of a molecule (kT) at 300◦K
is 2.52 kJ/gram-molecule. It means that the energy of resonance interaction
is negligibly small for the energy scale of chemical reactions. The latter fact
is, apparently, the main reason why magnetic resonance is not considered as
an active agent for biochemical reactions.

Electrical forces between neighbor atoms are usually exceed magnetic those,
because charges inside an atom move with the speed, which is signiﬁcantly
less than the speed of light. Presence of either ion or asymmetric charge dis-
tribution inside a molecule yield the electric ﬁeld, which is mainly responsible
for attractive forces in many materials. This ﬁeld is more intensive then the
external ﬁeld usually feasible in the laboratory. While the internal magnetic
ﬁelds, caused by the motion of charges inside the matter, are usually weaker
in comparison with the external those. The action of internal and external
ﬁelds can be compared only in ferromagnetics. The higher the external ﬁeld
is, the more the magnetic levels are splitted and, therefore, the more energy
the sample absorbs from the outside. The question arises whether it is to good
of living organism or to it’s detriment. Transitions between the levels occur at
simultaneous action of a uniform magnetic ﬁeld and the magnetic component
of an oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld on atoms. Interaction of an atom with
the oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld is realized through oscillation of mean
magnetic moment of atoms (nuclei) rather than electric dipole moment. Such
magnetic interaction is less intensive than electric that, but for microwave or
less frequencies, the more intensive (several oders higher) oscillating ﬁelds can
be applied, then for visible range frequencies. Moreover, frequencies in radio-
and microwave ranges can be tuned with high accuracy.

7

3 Electromagnetic compatibility as a feature of environment

Human being is the child of the Earth. Environment accompanies his existence
from birthday to death. The energy of space is his food, obtained indirectly
from the organic food and directly as electromagnetic energy through heat
and light.

Every physical object (including biological ones) continuously radiates and ab-
sorbs the energy of electromagnetic waves in wide frequency range in the form
of rigorously dosated quanta with deﬁnite (resonance) frequencies for radiating
and absorbing atomic (molecular) system. Any violation in the transmitter-
receiver system yields consequences for organism. Let us consider two phys-
ical realities characterizing environment of human being, they are: quasista-
tionary geomagnetic ﬁeld and endogenous and man-caused electromagnetic
background. A lot of natural phenomena in biosphere with parameters of our
interest are not explained yet, besides they are supposed to be caused by the
presence of magnetic ﬁelds and electromagnetic radiation in environment.

The magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth. It’s magnitude is small (0.7 gauss) and
it does not give apparent concern for inhabitants. What is it’s role in the
planet life? A beam of charged particles coming from the space is deﬂected
and braked by the Earth ﬁeld. Synchrotron radiation, which appears here,
reaches the Earth surface and brings some changes in the life of biosphere.
Magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth undergoes perturbations about 0.01 gauss, also
there are day-to-day variations of magnetizing force of the Earth due to lu-
nar (10-4 gauss) and solar (2.10-3 gauss) ﬂuxes. The response of all alive to
these perturbations is also well known: oscillations of birth and death rates,
mental disorders, changes of crop capacity and so on [4]. Geomagnetic ﬁeld
inﬂuences the symmetry of biological objects and their functional properties.
Change of geomagnetic ﬁeld (GMF) changes rhythm of diﬀerent variations
in biological objects: day-to-day variations, seasonal behavior, annual oscilla-
tions. Universality of GMF action on living organisms with diﬀerent levels of
arrangement has been noted by many authors [5]. There are some proofs that
orientation of a body with respect to magnetic poles of the Earth can inﬂu-
ence the behavior and physiology of people, animals and bacteria. On the one
hand, the GMF protect all the living from the baneful space radiation, but,
on the other hand experimental data shows that full shielding from the mag-
netic ﬁeld yields degeneracy of some kinds of animals as early as in the fourth
generation. The long-term stay in hypo-magnetic conditions arouses delay in
cell diﬀerentiation and appearance of mutant cells. Magnetic ﬁeld changes the
speed of chemical reactions in systems with free radicals, for example, in liquid
crystals (the basis of intracellular structure). Therefore, it inﬂuences on the
biologic permeability of membranes.

8

There is paradoxical situation: human senses do not respond to constant ﬁeld
of the Earth, while it’s absence yields degeneracy and death. ”The life it-
self comes into an organism and evolves over geomagnetic ﬁeld.” Common
sense suggests that weak magnetic ﬁeld can not change something in bio-
processes essentially. It provides something similar action of ”inner grid of
triode”, when small change of voltage drive causes big eﬀect, multiply ampli-
ﬁed through resonance (!) ... or sets the direction of a process (rotation) as a
whole i.e. symmetry. Constant magnetic ﬁelds penetrate organism structures
”dissembling” them. There are no losses in constant magnetic ﬁeld. Energy
dissipation appears only at presence of variable (changing with time) magnetic
ﬁelds. From this is often erroneously conclude that permanent magnet does
not provide ill eﬀect, because it produces stationary, static magnetic ﬁelds,
which have not electric component. Actually, considering the fact, that in
constant magnetic ﬁeld there are no losses, logical reasoning does not allow
one to suppose direct action of the ﬁeld on an object. The magnetic ﬁeld bring
the system out of a ”neutral” state, removes degeneration and splits levels.
Being coupled with an electromagnetic wave of certain frequency it can act
on the object through resonance absorption. This action is, probably, essential
for living matter, may be even global. ”The geomagnetic ﬁeld, just as gravita-
tional that, is all-penetrating and in-depth fact, which, owing to its properties,
inevitably ought to inﬂuence on processes on the Earth and its environment.”
One can suppose that just the small addition to the magnetic ﬁeld of the
Earth, provided by the Moon (Sun), sets (disrupts) the rhythm of biological
clocks. Sun bursts are the main source of interplanetary disturbances and in-
tense beams of charged particles, principally, electrons with the energy 10-100
keV and protons with the energy higher than hundreds of MeV. In 40 or 50
minutes after the Sun burst the horizontal component the magnetic ﬁeld of the
Earth ∆B increases tens and hundreds of γ (1γ = 1nanotesla). Ionospheric
violations and breaking of radio communication occur. After 0.5-5 hours ∆B
decreases sharply by 40-400γ. It continues from several hours to two or three
days. Dimensions and shape of magnetosphere of the Earth occur essentially
changed. How many biological triggers became turned on after such burst?
Unicellular organism possesses biological clock with endogenous rhythm. It is
supposed that self-sustained oscillation system of biochemical reactions inside
the cell can produces such a clock. Change of any parameter of environment
can indirectly manage the process due to feedback ( without direct action on
processes in organism). For example, the sex of a chrysalis of the silkworm
can be determined by proper temperature. In this case the change of a pa-
rameter is important rather than its absolute value. The sensitivity of living
organisms to the external excitation is very high. This fact is experimentally
ascertained. Electrophysical processes in human nervous system occur at sig-
nal amplitude 10 V, eye responds single light quantum and limit of acoustic
perception is comparable with thermal noise. But there no experiments con-
sidering inﬂuence of the Earth ﬁeld on living organisms. All the theories of
magneto-biological eﬀects, based on the processes of paramagnetic and dia-

9

magnetic magnetization are useless in principle. The orienting possibility of
magnetic atoms of the living organism in the magnetic ﬁeld with the ﬁeld
strength 10 oersted (by Dorfman estimation) is two orders less then thermal
action, i.e. negligible [18]. Therefore, to summarize, the experiments study-
ing inﬂuence of magnetic ﬁeld action on living organisms and plants requires
strong theoretical ideas and scientiﬁc suppositions.

Electromagnetic background. The Sun and the Galaxy are the sources
of electromagnetic radiation of wide spectra incident the Earth. It includes
radiation of diﬀerent types: synchrotron and relic radiation (Fig.1). Cosmic
rays (protons, nuclei of heavy atoms, electrons) are the source of synchrotron
radiation. Electrons of initial cosmic rays moving in interstellar magnetic ﬁelds
radiate radio-waves. Synchrotron radio-wave radiation of metagalaxy sources
is linearly polarized and polarization level usually does not exceed several
percents.

I

a

b

10 m

1 m

10 cm

1 cm

λ

Fig. 1. a). Synchrotron radiation of galaxy, b). relic radiation [6].

In interstellar conditions the neutral hydrogen atoms radiate spectral line with
the wavelength 21 cm, hydroxyl, water vapor and oxide of carbon radiate 21
cm, 1.35 cm and 2.64 cm, respectively. Process of intense radiation in spectral
lines of hydroxyl and water vapor is similar to operation of powerful natural
maser.

Relic radiation was discovered in 1965. It is isotropic with spectrum, corre-
sponding the radiation of the blackbody heated to 3 K. Density of radiation
is 10 erg per cm. This is the highest energy density in Galaxy.

A lot of Earth phenomena displays connection with solar activity.

Lightnings, being the sources of wide spectra of electromagnetic waves, played
an important part in transformation of life on the Earth.

The web of powerful transmission systems, operating in wide frequency range,
winds around the globe. This is one more source of man-caused radio-wave
radiation background. Every pocket radio-receiver can ﬁnd out and detect the
huge discrete set of radio-waves.

10

Human activity changes parameters of the Earth on the space scale. I.S.
Shklovsky evaluated that brightness temperature of the Earth as a planet
was increased during last 2 or 3 tens of years millions times more due to op-
eration of television, radars, broadcasting in metric wave-length range. Now
it is about several hundreds of million degrees, which exceeds brightness tem-
perature of the Sun for this frequency range in the periods of the absence of
sun-spots [6].

This fact should put us on guard. What is the reaction of living? What have
changed around us due to this?

It is very diﬃcult to discover inﬂuence of electromagnetic ﬁeld with small
density on biological processes in the cells ”in vivo”, particularly considering
changes in ecological conditions. Extensive and long-term observations are
necessary. Let us start from the simplest and consider electric processes in
living organisms, which are described by the perceptible and well-detected
parameters: currents, potentials and so on.

Here there is a curious observation. Such prolate disease as arrhythmia (ﬁbril-
lation) was a rare event as recently as 70 years ago [7]. Scientists are speaking
about epidemic. Sharp growth of the density of electromagnetic energy in the
environment causes the reaction of conductive system of the heart. It seems
there are no other explanations. But what is the action mechanism? From
this point of view one should draw attention to the neural and cerebrum dis-
eases, because nerve cells are most sensitive to the action of electromagnetic
ﬁelds in radio-frequency range. A cell phone radiates high density of electro-
magnetic radiation in radio-frequency range (some systems use frequency less
than 900 MHz) in the immediate vicinity of brain. What safety is expected? It
is curious (at least I am curious) in what generation of people the hereditary
moronity or something similar become apparent? Cell potential, conductiv-
ity of membranes and metabolism as a whole become strained. Space ﬂights
make studies of the inﬂuence of the above factors on a human being more
active. Huge amount of experimental facts, which describe this action on bi-
ological objects depending on radiation frequency and intensity, is stored [8].
However, there is no agreement in explanations of a diversity of the observed
phenomena. Attempts to explain injurious eﬀect of electromagnetic ﬁelds on
the vital functions of a human being yield to the necessity of consideration of
electromagnetic compatibility for biosystems and environment [9,10,11]

Actual environment is the net of cross-cut signals, where synergetic eﬀects and
new interference low-frequency ”constructions” can appear from two signals
with higher frequencies [12].

The inﬂuence of electromagnetic waves with mains frequencies (50, 60) Hz has
been studied. Prof. Volfgang Ludwig considers that ﬁelds oscillating with fre-

11

quencies 3, 7.8 and 20 Hz resound with organism structures and can activate
them. We have already known that weak electromagnetic ﬁelds can strongly af-
fect cell’s growth and performance that, however, can not be caused by some
thermal exchange, because elsewise thermodynamics laws are violated. Dr.
Ross Edie shown in his investigations that physiological reaction can be pro-
vided only at certain parameters of electromagnetic ﬁeld, such as: amplitude,
frequency modulation and so on. Here there are recent results of Dr. Fabien
Mamone: the impact by tone of the certain frequency during 15-20 minutes
could activate healthy cells, while cancer cells are extended and breaked [13].

Presence of biorhythms is proven for many biosystems. They are explained by
the self-oscillating processes (hysteresis in cell structures), but no one has been
realized how these processes are coupled with external factors and what could
synchronize them. There is no scientiﬁc explanation for unique abilities of ex-
trasensory and telepathic individuals. At the same time the existing scientiﬁc
and experimental basis provides to simulate human organism as a whole (or in
part) as either generator (wave source) or receiver with tunable frequency and
high selectivity. Tuning could be realized by volitional action, for example.
On the one hand it can explain distant information exchange. Such exchange
can be easily realized between twins or close relatives, because their individual
oscillations are close by their parameters. It often can be observed in life. On
the other hand this exchange supposes the existence of biological ﬁeld or aura
as a shield of a biological object produced by evolution. Why a lot of human
diseases become more intense at night? What is the mysterious inﬂuence of
moon-light? Here one should draw attention to the diﬀerence in day and night
radio-spectra. It is well-known that magnetic ﬁelds of the Earth on the day
and night sides diﬀer by the ﬂux density (action of the solar wind). The fre-
quency of the light incident on the Moon determines Moon transparency as a
body, which possesses ﬁnite electroconductivity. At fast change of interplan-
etary magnetic ﬁeld it appears a delay of reﬂected wave phase in ”magnetic
shadow” of the Moon. It is possible that after reﬂection by the Moon the part
of polarized radio-radiation grows and it’s resonance actions increases. Or, may
be, the interference of forward and backward (reﬂected by the Moon) waves
excites holographic pictures and hallucinations in the brain of sleeping per-
son. Simultaneous consideration (comparison) of several factors, joined by the
resonance condition can appear the key for understanding of many questions.
Analysis of spectra of magnetic resonance frequencies for the molecules and
compound, which frequently occur in biological objects, and it’s comparison
with the background spectra including lines of space radiation of , , and relic
radiation can help to answer these questions. The presence of polarized syn-
chrotron radio-radiation and magnetic resonance in geomagnetic ﬁeld requires
particular attention.

Interaction is provided by coherent, phased and directed action of particle en-
semble, ﬁrst of all interaction of protons by hydrogen bonds and interaction

12

of electrons by free radical reactions. These ﬁne eﬀects are much more impor-
tant in consideration of interaction mechanism than the quantity of activating
energy. One should look for contribution of magnetic resonance processes in
self-oscillation processes in biosystems as well as in trigger and tunneling ef-
fects. I am speaking about motion (transfer) of electrons and protons, but
one should also consider currents, which are produced by this motion, and,
therefore, other velocities and collective eﬀect. I am speaking about activating
energy, whereas one should consider resonance, phased phenomena, for which
small action causes eﬀect (1/0), tunneling eﬀect, ampliﬁcation and generation.
For biological system the possibility of existence of a phenomenon similar to
superconductivity at room temperature can not be excluded.

4 Connection of the observed phenomena with the magnetic reso-

nance

Let us consider several biophysical phenomena from this point of view. There
are some of them, which can not be explained by modern theories and which
can indicate (either directly or indirectly) connection with magnetic resonance
for radio-frequencies.

And everywhere there are protons, paramagnetic atoms, free electrons and
radicals i.e. systems, which possess magnetic moment.

The magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth is highly uniform and universal it determines
the direction of magnetic biasing for all biochemical processes in living matter
on the Earth. Magnetic moments of electrons and nuclei sensitively respond
the slightest ﬂuctuations of this ﬁeld (similar compass needle).

Electromagnetic radiation, which participates in magnetic resonance interac-
tions, propagates and scatters in the Earth conditions well, it also provides
minimal losses in biological structures.

Almost all radiation sources near the Earth surface (both natural and artiﬁ-
cial) operates in the above range.

Probability of spontaneous transitions is this range is small, therefore, only in-
duced absorption and radiation are signiﬁcant; Einstein coeﬃcients are about
4 orders less then those for electric dipole transitions.

The magnetic interaction is less intensive then electric that, but for low fre-
quencies much more intensive oscillating magnetic ﬁelds can be used than for
visible range.

The natural linewidth for magnetic resonance is very small and can be mea-

13

sured with high accuracy, just as the phase. Electromagnetic ﬁeld is considered
in classical representation that allows to speak about exact phasing (tuning)
of large ensemble of particles.

A lot of processes in living matter (and abiocoen), being the processes in
condensed nonequilibrium systems, for example, enzymic catalysis, can not be
explained by the well-known kinetic and static laws, based on the primitive
heating and compression of material, disordered thermal collisions i.e. statistic
disorder. To all appearance, both the cooperative action of particles with ﬁne
adjustment of phases of wave functions and long range ordering are necessary
for such phenomena. This results in condition AND-AND rather than OR-OR,
i.e. product rather than sum. Cold nuclear fusion, which caused a sensation
ten years ago, is also pertinent to the above, in my opinion. Nature is rich
in unique solutions, passing obstacles around by elegant methods with the
smallest energy consumption and entropy decreasing. There are some samples:
covalent bonds in animate nature, quantum-mechanical tunneling and so on.

In many cases the activating energy is not the main factor in chemical trans-
formations and the explicable energy balance is absent. Quantum-mechanical
tunneling is the principal theoretical explanation. The presence and inﬂuence
of low-frequency modes of oscillations, which cause smearing and swinging of
electron levels can contribute the above.

Findings of inﬂuence of electromagnetic radiation on a human being (it is
discussed above) force to conclude the necessity of consideration of electro-
magnetic compatibility of the human being and its environment. The lack of
electromagnetic energy in an organism is a sign of homeostasis violation.

Physical processes in microcosm are the objects for directed physiological and
biochemical control, in other words they depend on conditions of their passing
in organism and environment. Biological mechanisms of development become
apparent even for the lowest levels of life organization.

Magneto-optical eﬀects and so on.

5 Possible implementation mechanisms

5.1 About water and hydrogen bonds

Diﬀerent types of forces participate in molecules interaction with each other.
The particular type of intermolecular interaction, being of our interest, is the
hydrogen bond (H-bond). It is weak, the energy, which releases at H-bond

14

forming is about 0.1 eV. For example, the change of strong covalent bond
requires the energy higher by a factor of 20. It means that suﬃcient energy
should be directed to the molecule for its activation. The living organism can
not solve this problem by the increase of temperature, because the disordered
thermal motion could change something unrequired. The chemical reactions,
either producing or destroying the covalent bonds in a cell, occur due to par-
ticipation of the speciﬁc catalyst, which are called enzymes.

In particular, the H-bond plays the key role in biochemistry due to its weak-
ness. Suﬃce it to say that the bond between two links in a DNA molecule and
a secondary structure (conformation) of proteins are formed by the H-bond.
Since NMR directly acts on a proton, so the chemical processes using H-bonds
should be considered.

Speaking about the global synchronizing action of the geomagnetic ﬁeld on
biological and physical-chemical reactions, one should put a question about
the reason of such versatile action. The change of water properties under the
action of the geomagnetic ﬁeld can be the reason. Because water, which is the
common component in the reactions in living and abiocoen systems, is the
only substance, which can determine the versatility of the geomagnetic ﬁeld
action on the living organisms.

At the room temperature water should become gas, but the presence of hydro-
gen bonds displaces the boiling-point of water to the anomalously high value
373.15 at the atmosphere pressure. The activation energy (for H-bond break)
is about 20 kJ per gram-molecule at the temperature 298K. Molecules of wa-
ter undergo oscillatory motion near the equilibrium position with the typical
oscillation period about 2.7 · 10−12 s. The major properties of water are not
quite clear [14].

Water directly participates in forming of structure of the most important
biomolecules, as well as in processes of self-assembly of complicated permolec-
ular structures. Small changes in quantity and state of relatively small fraction
of water molecules, which form hydrated layer of macromolecule, yield sharp
changes in thermodynamic and relaxation parameters of the liquor as a whole.
Fast process involves all fractions of water, including molecules lying in the
internal layers of protein. The above makes the system ”biopolymer-water” a
uniform cooperative system, in which all changes in the state of either solvent
or macromolecule are interconnected and correlated. The huge and irreplace-
able role of water in animate nature suggests that the main destination of
water is more important. It is informational basis of biological life in the Uni-
verse.

H-bonds stabilize the secondary structure of polypeptide chains. Bond is real-
ized between hydrogen atom, which is connected to one molecule by chemical

15

bond, and electronegative atoms O, N, F, Cl, which are usually pertinent to
the other molecule. The nature of hydrogen bond is very complicated and can
not be explained by the electrostatic attraction only, while it contributes the
most in the bonding energy. Studies showed that potential function of H-bond
can be represented by a curve with two minima localized near electronegative
atoms. Proton tunneling is possible between them.

5.2 Biophysics and cybernetics

Biosystems can operate in several stable stationary states. The main pecu-
liarity of biosystems is their ability to switch between operation regimes. The
ability of biosystems to switching (trigger eﬀect) becomes a precondition to
the tissue diﬀerentiation (genetic trigger). Trigger switching is possible by two
ways:

1. the speciﬁc manner - by the sharp change of the variable quantity itself

or

2. the nonspeciﬁc (parametric) manner - the parameters of a system (for ex-
ample, change of T, pH and so on) are aﬀected instead of variables.

Transition from one stable state to another can be realized by diﬀerent ways
according to the direction of parameter change. Here we can see nothing else
than hysteresis, which, in its part, can explain the presence of dynamic store
inherent in all biological objects.

The geomagnetic ﬁeld inﬂuences on the rhythm of all the processes in the living
organism and biosphere as a whole. Daily rhythm of radiation sensitivity (i.e.
change of eﬃciency of radiating by ionizing radiation within a day) is marked
by radio-biologists. It is not clear yet, what is the timing element (the trigger)
[15]

The trigger properties of enzymatic systems play the key role in control of
intracellular processes of metabolism. The trigger properties of transport sys-
tems (for example, transport of liquor trough the porous membrane) are well
known. The conformational state of an enzyme changes (switches over) at
some critical concentration of a substrate (or reaction product). This yields
the sharp reduction of enzyme activity and, therefore, slows down of the chem-
ical process.

Nonlinear kinetics of the most important biochemical processes causes the
presence of continuous periodic oscillations (self-oscillations) in biosystems
along with trigger regimes and hysteresis. The amplitude of the above oscil-

16

lations is determined by the properties of the system itself rather than the
initial conditions. An illustrative example of such reaction is the reaction of
Belousov-Zhabotinsky.

Real biosystems are exposed to the inﬁnite number of the accidental external
and internal impacts, but in the stable operation range the dynamic character
of the system is retained.

There is a cybernetics approach to the life problem (Lyapunov’s theory). Lya-
punov describes the life as ”the highly stable state of a matter”, which uses
the information coded by the state of single molecules for the development of
”the retaining reactions”. To change the state of such a molecule the energy
of the disordered thermal motion of a biosystem is insuﬃcient. The theory
supposes the presence of a channel for communication with the outer world.
Information about external action is perceived by matter as coded signals. A
physical process can be the substantial realization of this signal. But nobody
have disclosed this process except for hard radiation, which is suspect of all
the faults of mutations and natural selection.

Finally, it should be mentioned that one of four conditions necessary for ap-
pearance of the processes of spatially-temporal self-organization is the coop-
erativity of microscopical processes in the system. The thermodynamically
opened medium, nonlinear system and minimal amplitude of interaction are
also required. Modern thermodynamic theories describing active molecule-
carriers (”molecular cars”) state that the speed of transport processes and en-
ergy transformation in the system depends on the particular molecular-kinetic
mechanisms of cooperative interactions.

5.3 Quantum-mechanical tunneling

In a number of cases the biochemical reactions go even when the necessary
content of activation energy is absent. Electron can be transported at relatively
large distances independently of translational motion of molecules of electron
donor and acceptor. This distinguishes the above processes from oxidation-
reduction reactions in liquor. It is supposed that quantum-mechanical tunnel-
ing (QMT) takes place here.

The idea of tunneling transport of electron between single protein molecule-
carriers separated by the energy barrier can be applied to explain a lot of
important phenomena in chemistry and biology.

As far back as in 1965 Levdin [16] suggested that genetic defects, ageing
and tumor growth can appear due to QMT. Genetic information is coded
in molecules, which have hydrogen bonds between bases in the speciﬁc pairs

17

of nucleotides. The normal pairs of bases can undergo tautomeric transfor-
mations by tunneling of proton from one base to another in the replication
process, which results in the appearance of faults in genetic code. The detailed
calculations show that the potential barrier between two minima in the system
founded by the pair of bases is not too high and wide to make tunneling the
rare event. To argue for electron tunneling is the fact, that tunneling can occur
even at low temperature (77K and lower). In these conditions the translational
motion of large protein molecules is slowed down and, therefore, conventional
physical and mechanical mechanism of reaction (colliding particles with the
excess of kinetic energy) can not be realized with high speed. In a number
of cases the activationless tunneling prevails at T < 100K and the tempera-
ture dependences of such reactions displays the pronounced biphase character.
Electron transition includes either transport of electron or migration of the
energy of electron excitation between two states in the system of two discrete
levels; it can be realized only in the presence of dissipative processes in accep-
tor. The implication is as follows: the energy of electron excitation (its part)
should be scattered by the acceptor during the time of electron being there.
This yields to the ”detuning” of levels resonance in acceptor and donor during
the deﬁned time (very short time) and back transition from acceptor to donor
becomes impossible. The states D (donor) and A (acceptor) are separated by
the potential barrier and in the absence of dissipation the quantum-mechanical
oscillations between the above states happen. If the ﬁnal state (A) is quasi-
stationary (the level is metastable) due to certain dissipative processes and is
described by the complex energy, then the process of transition from the initial
to the ﬁnal state is one-way i.e. tunneling takes place. Dissipation of a part
of the energy can occur either due to further tunneling of electron through
the barrier walls to the acceptor neighborhood or under the action of the en-
vironment, which interacts with electrons. These yield the ”bouncing” of the
energy level and loss of coherence of wavefunction states due to the shift of
the oscillation phase. And the most interesting is that spreading of electron
levels in complex molecules can be reached due to the motion of nuclei and
vibronic interactions, which result in the loss of electron energy through the
oscillatory degrees of freedom.

Then the summary is as follows: consideration of electron tunneling in real
molecules requires to take into account the state of nuclei, which motion
changes the energy levels of electrons. Quantum character of nucleus mo-
tion causes the uneven change of oscillation energy of a molecule. Oscillatory
quanta correspond the oscillatory sublevels. There are some indications that
electron transport in proteins in real processes is described both by the quan-
tum accepting modes and the set of low-frequency modes inherent in protein
molecule. Coupling of the low-frequency modes can inﬂuence the forming of
the accepted mode and the complex A-D as a whole. Just the case, which, in
particular, demonstrates the active role of protein environment, explains the
great diﬀerence in temperature dependence for electron transport to diﬀerent

18

objects in photosynthesis reaction centers [17].

Quantum-chemical investigations let us to display some new peculiarities in
the motion of nuclei of particles containing in a molecule. Thus, a lot of min-
ima were discovered on the potential surfaces, which are separated by the
relatively low potential barriers. Moreover, very high sensitivity of electron
structure of molecules in excited state to the change of nucleus conﬁguration
and small external excitations was discovered two. To investigate the inter-
molecular interactions, quantum chemistry should consider the potential of
interaction and develop the models, which can let us to take the inﬂuence
of environment into account by studying the properties of a molecule and
mechanisms of elementary processes.

5.4 Enzymatic catalysis

Chemical catalysts and enzymes directly concerns the considered question.
The transport of electrons and protons is a basis of activity of many of cata-
lyst systems. In the ﬁrst case the typical catalysts are transition metals and
their compounds. A free radical is formed at single-electron transition. In the
second case the substances, which can accept and deliver a proton are used as
catalysts. Amasing reactivity of the enzymes has no convincing theoretical ex-
planation. There is lack of some ties, coordination, speed and energy balance
and so on.

In biochemistry there are known such models as Fisher’s ”key-lock”, Kochland’s
”hand-glove”, ”protein-machine” and so on. The thermodynamic essence of
the above models is as follows: the free potential energy of binding of a sub-
stratum (sorbtion) by an enzyme should be used for lowering of a barrier of
free activation energy in the following chemical reaction. But it is not clear
yet, in what forms and by what mechanism the sorption energy can be stored
in protein globule and concentrated to attack the bond. To explain catalysis
mechanism it is supposed that enzyme’s structure provides coherent propa-
gation of ﬂuctuating changes of conformation from the protein surface to its
active center. This provides free energy change between macromolecule and
its environment. The multi-step transformation of a substratum in enzymatic
catalysis is provided by the synchronous and cooperative transformations in a
uniform polyfunctional system. Assumption of the appearance of a coherent
state with a single mode of oscillation and dissipativeless energy transport
over the certain degrees of freedom of a protein globule to the active center
is a base for all dynamic models. But no one of the mentioned models can be
considered as standard. The question about energy transport concentration
and balance remains pressing. Proton (proton pump)is mentioned in increas-
ing frequency. Proton is the strongest catalyst. Moderate excess of protons in

19

blood plasma (pH parameter) signiﬁes a lot in pathophysiology and clinical
practice. The ability of protonated hydrogen to come close to electronegative
atoms is its advantage.

Hydrogen atom lacking in electron environment does not meet electromag-
netic resistance during approach to other atoms, which have an electronegative
cloud. It transports the excitation energy or angular momentum to molecule.
It remains only to phase-in the system of enzyme-substratum (to set the key
into the lock) at minimal action energy. In NMR conditions all the wave-
functions of protons can be phased-in, but this implies the other features and
other speed.

6 Symmetry in nature

Let us consider one more interesting fact. Some media possess an amazing
property: while a light beam with plane polarization passes through it, the
plane of light polarization rotates. Such media are called optically active (or
gyrotropic). There are media providing right (clockwise) and left (counter-
clockwise) rotation (for an observer located near the light source). Optical
activity is explicated by both the medium and molecule structure. From this
appears ”right” and ”left” molecules. Spatial structure of such molecules has
no mirror symmetry. They are enantiomers. The absence of mirror symmetry
is also called chirality. In abiocoen ”left” and ”right” molecules are found with
equal frequency, whereas the molecules without mirror symmetry are usually
present in living organisms in only one enantiomer type. Pasteur supposed
that this is the boundary between abiocoen and animate nature.

Alpha-spiral, which determines the structure of protein molecules, is usually
the right screw, while the aminoacid molecules forming a protein are usually
left ones. The DNA duplex is also right molecule. All the DNA turns are right,
similar ordinary corkscrew. In nature there are no mirror reﬂections with gene
spirals counter swirling. Due to the absolute symmetry and absence of mir-
ror reﬂections the whole information contained in genes can not be confused.
Viruses are the protein compounds. They also rotate to the right. Exclusions
are antibiotics - they rotate to the left. Maybe this causes their action. Diﬀerent
molecules devoided of mirror symmetry are usually presented only by either
right or left stereoisomers. All the above testiﬁes that a living organism is
described by full-blown left-right asymmetry. Plants, like other organisms, are
separated to ”left” and ”right” and symmetrical ( D-, L-,S- ) enantiomorphs.
Nature (plants and animals) produces and assimilates the aminoacides of only
one isomer and can not assimilate the synthesized imitations. A human being
feeds on the stereomers, which correspond his asymmetry. Pasteur mentioned
that ”asymmetric synthesis can occur in the presence of some natural asym-

20

metric factor”. In laboratory conditions depending on the direction of rotation
of light polarization vector mainly either ”left” or ”right” form of some synthe-
sizing organic compound appears under the action of light with the circular po-
larization. As Sun radiation has no appreciable circular polarized component,
then such explanation for the asymmetry of ”living” molecules is considered
improper. 16 types of aminoacides, which was discovered in the Australian
meteorite (1969) equally had ”left” and ”right” asymmetry. equally. It is ev-
ident that space aminoacides have nonbiological (or rather unearthly) origin.
This signify that the solution of the above phenomena should be ﬁnd on the
Earth. The reasons of the asymmetry in nature are not clear yet. It is still a
question, why some of symmetries are violated, while others are not. It is not
even clear what of two questions is more important: why some of symmetries
are violated or why certain of them are ideal? There are assumptions that
the latter is only a chance during life incipience. However, one should always
remember that any symmetry is a property of certain laws of motion, rather
than abstract space.

Discovery of parity violation in elementary particle physics exhibited that
nature distinguishes ”left” and ”right” and the choice between them is not
accidental. B.Ya. Zeldovich et al. paid their attention that parity violation
should cause the diﬀerence in internal energies for a pair of optical isomers.
In 1983 S. Mazon and J. Trenter demonstrated that weak interactions, which
violate parity, stabilize L-isomer in comparison with D-isomer. It is important
that stabilization energy is negligibly small and depends on the angles of
internal rotation. But in normal conditions it can provide about 10 additional
L-macromolecules per 1 gram-molecule of racemate. It has not been clear yet,
whether such weak eﬀect could lead to wide-ranging results or not.

Nowadays, it is stated that the trend of physical-chemical reactions in protein
molecules depends on its orientation and this eﬀect, by some way, is deter-
mined by the object asymmetry (either left or right), the phase of Sun cycle
in the moment of study and the geomagnetic ﬁeld. The inﬂuence of the geo-
magnetic ﬁeld is clearly recognized and not impeachable. It is supposed that
variability in bi-symmetrical forms of plants is also caused by the geomagnetic
ﬁeld and through it by the Sun activity in the Earth conditions. In the place,
where pigmies live, there are many nanoid animals and plants. The Japanese,
who grow up in USA (especially in the west part), diﬀer drastically by their
height, ratio of both face and body from the parents in Asia. Two twins were
in the navy in diﬀerent places: the ﬁrst was in Baltic region and the second
was in the Far East. As a result they have got the height diﬀerence about
4 cm. And famous acceleration ... Maybe there is a prompt in the fact that
prolate allergy for exotic fruits, is caused by the conditions of their growth
(diﬀerent geographic latitude and climatic zone) characterized by other ratio
in asymmetry molecules.

21

Symmetry problems play determinative role in modern physics and can be a
guiding thread to unknowable.

The extremely mysterious fact is the gyrotropy of the most important tissues
of living organisms. Namely, they are formed by the chiral molecules, which
predominantly are in one of two mirror forms. The numbers of the right and
left molecules in nature are usually equal on average (racemate). On my view
the magnetic resonance concerns with the question of asymmetry in nature.
Physicists know the eﬀect of magnetic circular dichroism (the Faraday eﬀect).
The right and left components of light with plane polarization interact with
matter in diﬀerent ways in the presence of magnetic ﬁeld, which direction
coincides with the direction of light propagation. All the substances are active
in terms of magnetic circular dichroism. This testiﬁes that magnetic ﬁelds
signiﬁcantly change the structure of electron transitions and cause asymmetry.
The energy of a particle does not depend on its orientation in space. Invariance
with respect to spatial rotations is determined by the conserved quantity the
angular momentum.

Appearance of the preferential direction (along the magnetic ﬁeld) violates the
initial symmetry with respect to arbitrary rotations around any direction in
space. Thus, the angular momentum J can no longer be conserved. Before the
ﬁeld appearance the energy levels of a system are (2j+1)-fold degenerated. The
ﬁeld turning removes this degeneration (Zeeman splitting). The constant ﬁeld
of the Earth determines such direction in space, so nobody can expect to ﬁnd
pure symmetry in ”sublunary world”. Therefore, all the biochemical processes
and life in the Earth pass in asymmetry conditions caused by the magnetic
ﬁeld from their beginning to the end. And only ﬂuctuations (ﬂuctuations over
value and directions) of the geomagnetic ﬁeld periodically violate the normal
practice.

Let us consider the classical model of the magnetic resonance. The imposed
−→
H induces the angular momentum −→τ , which acts on the mag-
magnetic ﬁeld
netic moment of either a nucleus or an electron −→µ . This angular momentum
can be expressed by the crossproduct

The magnetic ﬁeld
around the direction

−→
H makes the magnetic moment −→µ to rotate (precess)
−→
H with the frequency ω

−→τ = −→µ ×

−→
H .

ω = |γ| H.

Direction of rotation is determined by the sign of γ; γ = µ/τ = gβ/h is the ra-
tio, which is ﬁxed for certain nucleus or atomic system. In contrast to the most

22

τ

µ

H

Fig. 2.

of nuclei, γ for electrons is negative and their spins precess counterclockwise
around the ﬁeld

−→
H .

It should be especially emphasized that transitions for NMR and ESR are
induced by the magnetic component of circularly polarized radiofrequency
radiation and the direction of precession coincides with the direction of polar-
ization rotation.

As one can see, the resonance binds rigidly both the frequency and direction
of rotation. Maybe the tie of these phenomena hides here? There are common
”characters in the play”. It could be supposed that just the magnetic resonance
determines the direction of biochemical reactions depending on orientation
with respect to geomagnetic ﬁeld, its value and stereoisomerism (either left or
right).

7 Conclusion

During a century scientists have been considered chemical model of organiza-
tion and operation of molecules, tissues and organs of a body. This biochemi-
cal model should be expanded. Both electromagnetic and quantum processes
should be included in it as they play a very important role in nature self-
organization.

Investigation of magnetic resonance participation in these processes could help
to answer many of the above questions. Even if magnetic resonance is not a
reason of a lot of phenomena, it is an intermediary. Just this side of the
magnetic resonance eﬀect I’d like to underline.

Study and application of the magnetic resonance as a channel for electromag-
netic energy transport allow to do the following:

1. To compare the spectra of magnetic resonance of the Earth for the most
important (from the biological point of view) molecules and compounds with

23

the spectrum of electromagnetic background of biosphere. To calculate the
spectral picture of interaction of a human organism with the environment in
the radio frequency range. First of all, to check whether there is anomalous
eﬀect of frequencies 3Hz; 7.8Hz; 20 Hz, 3kHz, 2MHz, 1420MHz, 1700MHz,
22000 MHz;

2. To control the biochemical reactions in a human organism at atomic-
molecular level selectively in coordinates H, ν, g. To rehabilitate (to correct)
homeostasis violation in the exchange of electromagnetic energy with the en-
vironment by the pumping of the magnetic resonance energy to the required
place, organ or system for medical treatment; to activate healthy cells and
inhibit ill those. Localization of the resonance conditions can be provided by
several methods. The internal localization can be done by g-factor, by applica-
tion of spin sones or contrasting substances. The external one can be provided
by hardware (for example, the NMR-T code, which allows to distinguish T1
and T2 for healthy and ill cells).

3. To simulate and test biological possibility of a human organism (organs)
as a generator of electromagnetic radiation (maser); to ﬁnd possible antennas
(points, chakras) in the body to explain mechanism of telepathic connections,
telekinesis, aura and so on.

4. Considering NMR ability to phase the wavefunctions of particle ensemble,
to ﬁnd out its role in enzymatic catalysis, tunneling, molecule’s asymmetry
and mutations of DNA with H-bonds during the replications and reparations
in the operation of ”proton pump” (as well as other reactions and compounds
with H-bonds);

5. To explain the inﬂuence of ﬂuctuations of the geomagnetic ﬁeld and Sun
activity on the phenomena in biosphere (including biorhythms) in terms of
magnetic resonance (MR);

6. To indicate the day and night diﬀerence in MR conditions for the Earth in-
habitants due to the changes in the geomagnetic ﬁeld value, radio-background
and its polarization as a possible reason of worsening of the state of health
of the most sensitive people. Magnetic resonance possibly could be a trans-
fer chain to realize the inﬂuence of the radiowaves reﬂected from the Moon
on a human being by creating holographic pictures in the brain of a sleeping
person;

7. To prove the connection between the epidemic of heart arrhythmia in recent
50 years with the signiﬁcant growth of radio brightness of the Earth in this
period;

8. To ﬁnd out the mechanism of inﬂuence of static electricity, which is accu-
mulated on a body due to synthetic clothes, cell phones and so on, on human

24

organism;

9. To apply spine sones for ”repairing” or destruction of cells (peculiar pole-
hole digger) in ESR regime;

10. To examine the experiments and to develop a procedure for treatment
of oncological deceases with electromagnetic radiation by the reversed NMR-
T (NMR imagers can be used for treatment: to localize the pathology in
conventional regime and then to radiate localized parts (nuclei));

11. To activate an organism by either application of the water ”magnetized
by NMR” or hemosorption (NMR for water-containing systems and ESR for
paramagnetic those).

References

[1] A. Carrington, A.D. McLachlan, Introduction to Magnetic Resonance with
Applications to Chemistry and Chemical Physics, Harper&Row Publishers,
1967.

[2] C.P. Slichter, Principles of Magnetic Resonance, Springer-Verlag, 1980.

[3] A.E. Siegman, Microwave Solid-state Masers, McGraw-Hill Book Company,

1964.

[4] A.L. Chizhevsky, Earth’s echo of Sun storms (Mysl, 1976, in Russian).

[5] U.A. Kholodov, Magnetic ﬁelds of biological objects (Nauka, 1987, in Russian).

[6] Shklovsky I.S. Universe, life, mind (Nauka, 1987, in Russian).

[7] M.S. Pushakovsky, Auricular ﬁbrillation (Foliant, 1999, in Russian).

[8] Space biology and medicine (joint sov.-amer. articles) v.1-5 (Nauka, 1997).

[9] A.N. Kuznetsov, Biophysics of electromagnetic impacts (Energoatomizdat,

1994, in Russian)

[10] U.A. Dumansky, A.M. Serduk, Ch.P. Los, Inﬂuence of radio-frequency ﬁelds on

human beings (Zdorov’e, 1975, in Russian).

[11] T.M. Philippova, S.I. Alexeev, Bioﬁsica 40 (1995) 624 (in Russian).

[12] Electromagnetic ﬁelds in biosphere (edited by N.V. Krasnogorskaya) v.1-2

(Nauka, 1984, in Russian).

Alternative, 1997.

[13] R. Lawrence, P.J. Rosch, J. Plowden, Magnet Therapy. The Pain Cure

25

[14] N.A. Askochenskaya, N.S. Petrov, Uspehi sovremennoy biologii 73 (1972) 288

[15] V.S. Troitsky, Cybernetics of living. Biology and information, p.131-139 (Nauka,

[16] Lowdin P. Advances in Quantum Chemistry. v.2. Academic Press Inc. New

[17] A.B. Rubin, Biophysics, v.1-2 (Vys’shaya shkola, 1987, in Russian).

[18] K.P. Belov, N.G. Bochkarev, Magnetism in the Earth and space (Nauka, 1983,

(in Russian).

1984, in Russian).

York, 1965. . 216.

in Russian).

26

