3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SCIENCE: A Solid Whole

Bhag C. Chauhan∗
Centro de F´isica das Interacc¸ ˜oes Fundamentais (CFIF)
Departmento de Fisica, Instituto Superior T´ecnico
Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001, Lisboa-PORTUGAL

February 2, 2008

Abstract

However, the observations encompassed by classical physics excludes
the observer from the physical reality, yet the deep-down understandung of
nature –the quantum theory– can not avoid the intrusion of observer into
the measurement process. Indeed, the quantum physics experiments have
knocked the door of a new paradigm: in which science of consciousness is
an important axiom. In the present work, it is argued –by taking into account
of the views of learned scientists and philosophers– that modern science is
incomplete and lacking something in the basic understanding of nature [1].
Classical physics has failed to explain the dynamics of the microscopic par-
ticles, eventhough modern scientiﬁc researches are based upon the prejudice
posed by classical physics: keeping the outer physical universe as a separate
entity, that is something quite independent of the observer –human mind.
One should not forget that human-being is a part of nature and human mind
is an essential component of our observations. Basically, it is the observer
–the consciousness– which makes perception possible. The working of hu-
man mind must be included in our scientiﬁc theories. In fact, human free
will is an illusion and nothing in the entire universe (with life) lies outside
the domain of science and determinism.

∗chauhan@cﬁf.ist.utl.pt

1

1 Human Perception

All the physical objects seem to have ﬁnite dimensions and some other measurable
properties. The human body is physical material having a limited ability of per-
ception of the outside material world. It has ﬁve senses of perception: vision, hear-
ing, taste, smell and touch. To make perception possible, the “electromagnetic-
wave” connects the observables to the observer. Nature has granted a narrow band
of the electromagnetic spectrum to our body for perception: a visible band of light
and a part of the infra-red region. The window is being broadened by our scien-
tiﬁc knowledge: the scientiﬁcally detected (known) part of the spectrum extends
from a low frequency of power induction to a high frequencies of cosmic rays
(λ ≈ 105 cm − 10−13 cm). We are not aware of, what lies beyond on either side
of the band.

It seems that the electromagnetic spectrum is “eternal and inﬁnite”, and no-
body can deny its inﬁnite extensions on the both sides of the known part –large
wavelength region and small wavelength region. The scientiﬁc knowledge is just
uncovering a region of its inﬁnite extensions, step-by-step, and consequently, un-
derstanding nature better. It is only the total knowledge of the inﬁnite spectrum
which can touch the “ultimate truth” sitting at the heart of nature. The under-
standing and uncovering of this spectrum up to any ﬁnite extension will always be
inﬁnitely small as compaired to the inﬁnite whole of it. In this way the efforts of
understanding the whole extension of this eternal spectrum, and thereby, to gain
the knowledge of universe with life and entire existence are never going to be
fulﬁlled.

The human body –a frame with the ﬁve sense organs and a brain– is called
by some philosophers as “a limited instrument,” because of its above discussed
limitations. So, doing science with such a blemish instrument, one can never
discover the inﬁnite whole; the “ultimate reality”. For the systems like weather,
earthquakes, rolling dices etc... and human behaviour, of course, it has proved sci-
entiﬁcally impossible to describe a state of system accurately for a long time into
the future. Instead, probabilities can be derived to describe a state which might
happen in future. Science is “unpredictable” [2]. The claim of determinism is a
failure in science [3]. In quantum mechanics, the unpredictability of the science
has been accepted by postulating “principle of uncertainty”. Albert Einstein, a
pioneer scientist of the last century, bothered much with this principle and said:
“God does not play dice”. According to this principle, it is impossible to measure
every physical variable of a microscopic particle with full accuracy. And the ex-

2

perimental results have proved it. So, recognizing “uncertainty” as a principle, has
infered the inability of science to discover the ultimate reality; which is “absolute”
and demands the exactness/ perfectness of measurements.

No doubt, the main goal of modern science is to discover the ultimate truth
and develop a “Theory Of Everything (TOE)” but there is an essential question,
at this difﬁcult stage of science, which every wise man should ask: “Can science
explain everything?”... and I have a beautiful answer of a learned scientist –Steven
Weinberg [4]: “Clearly not! There certainly always will be accidents that no one
will explain, not because they could not be explained if we knew all the precise
conditions that led up to them, but because we NEVER will know all these con-
ditions”. It would be better to add here some comments of Albert Einstein, in his
old age: “I used to think when I was young that sooner or later all the mysteries of
existence would be solved, and I worked hard. But now I can say that the more we
know, the more our existence turns out to be mysterious. The more we know, the
less we know and the more we become aware of the vastness... Science has failed
in de-mystifying existence, on the contrary it has mystiﬁed things even more”. It
seems that as we are extending the radius of our scientiﬁc knowledge, so too have
been increasing the circumference of our ignorance.

2 Superstitions and Superpositions

Superstitions have been developed through the personal experiences, observa-
tions, and beliefs of the people in the olden times. Interestingly, most of them
survived for a long time because they worked. If we think rationally and review
all the superstitions without any prejudice, we can say that there have been al-
ways a probability for each event to happen in a certain way: according to the
beliefs of people. This probability have been found higher if a larger number of
observers (people) supported happening of the event in that way because there
existed a larger conﬁdence level of the observers. In case the event occured in an-
other, way not according to their wishes, they found other solution –make happy
their gods– and their wishes have been found to be fulﬁlled. In other words, ﬁ-
nally, the event happened according to their beliefs and wishes. Certainly, this
had been something very important to do with the state-of-mind of the people. In
fact, the superstition doctrine is still working well among more than 50% people
of the globe: through many religions, sects and other practices etc... Predictions
of a person of true heart with strong beliefs; strong will power; elation and a sidh-

3

purush have been found to be true most of the times. There is a famous saying
that if you pray true to the heart, God will listen you.

Quantum theory is a new paradigm in search of the ultimate reality but playing
with the old dices of superstitious human civilizations. The only difference is, the
more objectivity in the predictions of the events with a beautiful use of mathemat-
ics. In fact, there is no mechanism in theory to select a particular actuality from
the multiplicity of superposed possibilities. The superposition, of all the possible
states of system, is supposed to represent the ﬁnal possibility of the event which
can appear as a reality. This is nicely explained by the tools of mathematics and
the axioms of probability theory. It might have led us further near to the reality
but certainly not going to connect with the absolute truth, as the results are proba-
bilistic –a matter of chance– again. We are again at a predicament situation. One
cannot say for sure about the ﬁnal state of the system; then, what we have gained
is just a mathematical cleverness to convince ourselves that the mathematics sup-
ports the happening of a particular event with such and such chances. Yet, it is not
necessary that any sets of laws which are completely consistent mathematically,
can surely describe nature as we observe it [4].

There has been a paradigm shift from superstitions of human beliefs to super-
positions of quantum mechanics; from an abstractness to the concrete mathemati-
cal equations; from a matter of luck to a matter of chance. The superstitions have
been found based on a belief that a supernatural power works, and the superpo-
sition is based on a belief that the mathematical power works. In superstitions,
one have has no mean how to explain; only the personal belief was enough to tell
people and it worked well in that period of history and still working well among
most of the common mass. On the other hand, about superposition/ probability
theory one can write a book, one can furnish a library; because there is some-
thing concrete to show. Now, the reality is being accepted as an objective thing,
which can be explained on a plane paper; it is nothing to do with the subjective
experience. But, either one of the two is not a complete in itself. They are totally
opposite poles of the same magnet (one should say), which certainly has a joint
at center. We are talking either about its north pole or about its south pole, which
alone does not constitute a total whole of it. Basically, truth does not exist at either
of the two poles (superstition or superposition) but at the center; at the union of
two pseudo-realities. Now, another paradigm shift is essential; which can unite
and dissolve these two schools of thoughts. Indeed, the quantum physics experi-
ments have knocked the door of a new paradigm: At the union, both the apparent
realities dissolve into the ultimate one.

4

3 Cosmology: An Interface

As far as the origin and evolution of this universe –cosmology– is concerned, the
most popular theory among the scientists is the “big bang theory”. Although this
theory has passed some scientiﬁc tests, there are still many more trials which it
must undergo successfully. Scientiﬁc evidence strongly supports that the universe
had a deﬁnite beginning a ﬁnite amount of time ago. According the big bang
theory there was nothing before the big bang and all the space-time must have
originated there and then. No matter/energy could exist before this bang as there
was no space and time for it to be in. In the context of a recent test of this theory,
John Bahcall (a learned astrophysicist) says [5]: “I am happy that the big bang
theory passed this test, but it would have been more exciting if the theory had
failed and we had to start looking for a new model of the evolution of universe”.
In fact, there are many domains of mainstream cosmology that are far from being
settled.

The biggest problem of the big bang theory of the origin of the universe is
philosophical –perhaps even theological– what was there before the bang? [6].
This stands as an embarrassing situation for the scientists. Robert Jastrow –the
ﬁrst chairman of NASA’s Lunar Exploration Committee– himself admitted [7]:
“Astonomers try not to be inﬂuenced by philosophical considerations. However,
the idea of a universe that has both a beginning and an end is distasteful to the
scientiﬁc mind”.

To avoid this initial difﬁculty the idea of singularity was introduced in which
the universe expands from a singular point (a point of inﬁnite density at which the
laws of physics break down) and collapses back to the singular point and repeats
the cycle indeﬁnitely [6]. The idea was appreciated to avoid the theistic base
of the theory but the experimental evidence seems to indicate that this type of
oscillating universe is a physical impossibility and facts supports that the universe
will expand for ever [8]. The attempts behind this idea to avoid theistic beginning
of the universe all fail [9]. The philosophical origin of the big bang cannot be
denied.

It has been known for some time that the fundamental constants of physics
(particle masses, coupling constants of the various forces etc...) are within a nar-
row range and ﬁne-tunned for life to exist. In the words of Steven Weinberg [10]:
“It is almost irresistible for humans to believe that we have some special relation
to the universe, that human life is not just a more-or-less farcial outcome of the
chain of accidents reaching back to the ﬁrst three minutes, but that we were some-

5

how built in from beginning”. Indeed, the reality that physics addresses is only a
part of the total interacting reality which holds the key of the philosophical ori-
gin of big bang theory. Arthur S. Eddington –a brilliant astronomer– once said:
“The universe no longer looks like a thing but like a thought”. In fact, modern
cosmology has an interface with a subtle science: the science of consciousness.

4 Modern Science & Human Consciousness

However, the observations encompassed by classical physics excludes the ob-
server from the physical reality; yet, the deep-down understandung of nature –the
quantum theory– can not avoid the intrusion of observer into the measurement
process. It is well acknowledged that the classical physics is an incomplete un-
derstanding of nature. Eventhough, our scientiﬁc researches are based upon the
prejudice posed by classical physics: keeping the outer physical universe as a sep-
arate entity, that is something quite independent of the observer. A serious ﬂaw
is existing in the grass-root level working of science [1]. It will be wise to un-
derstand fully the working of this objective method of scientiﬁc studies which is
only relying upon the limited sense perception of human body. Basically , we are
separating the real observer from the observation. To make a perception possible,
there must be a subject –consciousness– who can observe a phenomenon or an
event with the help of a connecting principle. It is not the physical part of human
brain which acts as the observer (the knower) and make the perception possible
but there is a subtle playback entity “Mind”, which we donot consider in our sci-
entiﬁc theories. The human mind is the doer, the observer which interprets the
messages collected from outside by brain with the help of sense organs and in-
struments. It makes a scientist to recognize or refute the existence of an object
or a phenomenon. “Nothing in current science can account for consciousness, yet
consciousness is the one thing we can not deny”: a revolutionary futurist, Peter
Russell, says [11].

According to Eugene Wigner –American Physicist, nobel laureate: “The next
revolution in physics will occur when the properties of mind will be included in the
equations of quantum theory”. The most creative physicists have always empha-
sized that human consciousness is at the foundation of the scientiﬁc method be-
hind physics [12]. Erwin Schrodinger –one of the founders of quantum mechanics–
felt deeply that human mind is a sole constructor of all the observations and quoted
as: “Our picture of the world is, and always will be, a construct of the mind”. This

6

is the biggest challenge for the scientists, namely to include the human conscious-
ness in their theories. However, it can be proved hard for the scientiﬁc community
to consider the great importance of human element in doing science but it’s worth-
doing and enjoyable. Science is “fun” [2]. The fun starts happening in doing sci-
ence or any work of day-to-day life, when one accepts the full co-operation of his
inner-being. And the climax of fun can be achieved when one accepts this inner-
being as an essential part of scientiﬁc observations and practice it in the objective
world (real life).

A man who has developed a big scientiﬁc panorama, it is unbelievable that
he himself is non-scientiﬁc. Never! He is scientiﬁc from his inner-being and only
then he could discover science which is always there, the ultimate. Study of inner-
being is also called “spirituality”. Spirituality is a pure form of religion –free from
sectarian, orthodox and dogmatic idealogy. This is not an utopian theory but a
scientiﬁc and practical philosophy which can be practised and realised in day-to-
day life. A study in the latest edition of “The Medical Journal of Australia” asserts
that those who consider the spiritual dimension essential to their lives not only live
longer, they are also healthier –with lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol and
lower rates of some cancers– and less likely to abuse drugs and alcohol. More than
500 scientiﬁc studies conducted at 200 independent universities and institutions
in 33 countries and published in over 100 leading scientiﬁc journals have been
documented, which beneﬁts every sphere of life: physiological, psychological,
sociological, and ecological [12].

5 Determinism and Free Will

“Science is determinist; it is so a piori; it postulates determinism, because with-
out this postulate science could not exist”, stated by Henri Poincare – a great
mathematician and physicist.
If there is a scientiﬁc law working anywhere in
the universe, determinism must be there. According to Pierre Simon Laplace –a
French astronomer and mathematician– the entire future course of the universe is
laid out as a consequence of two deterministic factors: 1) the laws of nature, and
2) the state of universe at any moment of time. Universe is nothing but a collec-
tion of numerous phenomena. Anything happening around us, in the universe, is
controlled by a certain set of physical laws. These laws determine the birth, life
and death of all the events of universe. So, with the total understanding of these
physical laws one can predict the future of an event very well in advance. This is

7

the beauty of science, as Henri Poincare quoted. Everything is deterministic and
there is no place for a “free will” to exist.

The principle of determinism may disappear for some time because of our in-
complete understanding of the scientiﬁc laws; yet, it does not imply that the free
will is prevailing. There must be certain hidden variables which are defusing the
realisation of the principle of determinism. The conscious mind receives infor-
mation from the physical world only through eyes and other sense organs that are
presumably understandable deterministically. Determinism also implies the ob-
jectivity of the phenomena. In principle, there can be nothing subjective in the
entire existence. Even the true observer –human mind– is objective in nature. It
keeps subjectivity only at its superﬁcial layers. However, the deep-down part of
it, is purely objective in nature. This shallow subjectivity is a natural consequence
of the inherit genetic codes (informations recorded through the long process of
evolution) and the inﬂuence of environment; which can be scientiﬁcally decoded
and understood. So, in this way, human behaviour –which we suppose as the most
complex system– is also deterministic. In fact, everything in the entire existence
is objective and within the domain of science and the principle of determinism is
prevalent everywhere.

A free will can exist only if there is not at all anything else existing in the entire
whole. Only a source totally detached from nature (matter) which is the origin and
cause of everything –options, thoughts, feelings, etc... that is the existence of an
“autonomous mind”, i.e. a principium individuationis [13]... the entity which is
“Only One and Supereme” has the privilege to enjoy the glory of free will. As
soon as the “One becomes Two”, a boundary appears, laws hold and the free will
concept is lost; as now there exists another entity which introduced the physical
laws in order to justify its identity– as the number “Two”. As a consequence, the
free will is automatically disappeared. As soon as the “One becomes Many”, of
coarse, the more complex laws hold and the individual conscious will becomes
more constrained. Now the will of the every conscious object is guided by the
resultant force of all the natural laws.

Universe is at the stage of “One to Many”, where the complex physical laws
hold and the determinism is prevailing everywhere. The free will seems to be pre-
vailing in human behaviour, but this is an illusion. There exists a will, which is
not free but constrained – a “constrained will”. Basically, there is always a win-
dow of priorities with in which the human-will has to work. This conscious will
is manifest through deterministically understandable science. All the thoughts,
values, volitions, decisions, acts, are the product of physical, chemical, or physi-

8

ological and psychological processes going on in the human body. Our will is a
result of our past life experiences, the innate genetic codes which have been ac-
quired through the struggle of long time in the process of evolution and the present
physiological and psychological states of our body. By the way, it is an essential
feature of the constrained will, which makes life interesting and struggleful. A
life with a free will is not at all, logically possible. But if somehow it happened to
be so, can never be worth-living but all boring and suicidal.

6 Conclusions

The observer problem can be evaded in classical physics by excluding the consid-
eration of the mind of observer but this option is certainly unavailable for quantum
mechanics. The intrusion problem of observer occurs at the level of the quantum
mechanical experiment clearly shows that modern science is incomplete under-
standing of nature. Our scientiﬁc researches are based upon the prejudice posed
by classical physics: keeping the outer physical universe as a separate entity, that
is something quite independent of the observer –human mind. One should not for-
get that human-being is a part of nature and human mind is an essential component
of our observations. Indeed, it is the observer –the knower– which makes percep-
tion possible. The working of human mind must be included in our scientiﬁc
theories. Moreover, limits of human perception (excluding mind) and philosoph-
ical base of modern cosmology have disclosed another physical evidence for the
existence of a bigger reality and a new paradigm which can encompass the human
consciousness and solve all the difﬁculties that modern science is waging with.

In practice, human behaviour appears un-deterministic and the free will seems
to be working there. But this is our ignorance about the scientiﬁc laws that holds
the key of the subtle dynamics of our inner-being. Basically, there are two kinds
of sciences: one, the objective science –“modern science”– that studies the outer
–material nature; and two: subjective science, a study of inner-being, super nature
If both are joined for completeness, only “SCI-
–“science of consciousness”.
ENCE” remains as the ultimate knowledge (wisdom); which can explain every-
thing. Scientist should accept the challenge and start searching for the possibili-
ties to include the human consciousness in the observations and theory. Only this
path could explore the real potential of the human being and create a man in the
plenitude of wisdom; who can solve the mystery of quantum theory, and thereby,
reabilitate the principle of determinism. In principle, that would fulﬁl his candida-

9

ture to uncover the vastness of the electromagnetic spectrum and enjoy the ecstasy
of the ultimate reality. So, it is only the completeness of science –“SCIENCE”–
which is capable of uttering the ultimate answer to the human quest: enabling man
to develop the “TOE” and thereby, bringing upon him benign grace of the ultimate
truth.

References

[1] Bhag C. Chauhan, “Science In Trauma”; physics/0210088.

[2] John Bahcall, “Two Secrets”; http://www.sns.ias.edu∼jnb/.

[3] Deborah Haarsma and Loren Haarsma, “Green-Tree Lecture Notes”;

http://www.calvin.edu∼lhaarsma/GreentreeLectures.txt.

[4] Steven Weinberg, New York Review of Books; May 31, 2001.

[5] John Bahcall, “The Big Bang is Bang On”; Nature vol. 408, 2000.

[6] John Gribbin, “Oscillating Universe Bounces Back”; Nature vol. 259, 1976.

[7] Robert Jastrow, “Until the Sun Dies”; New York: W.W. Norton, p.31, 1977.

[8] Joseph Silk, “The Big Bang”, San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman, p.309,
1980; John Gribbin, “Genesis: The Origins of Man and the Universe”, New
York: Delacorte, p.316, 1981; Robert Jastrow, “God and the Astronomers”,
New York: W.W. Norton, p.123, 1978; E.J. Chaisson, “Early Results from
the Hubble Space Telescope”, Scientiﬁc American vol. 266[6], 1992.

[9] Hugh Ross, “The Fingerprint of God”; Orange, CA: Promise Publishing,

[10] Steven Weinberg, “First Three Minutes”; London: ANDRE DEUTSCH,

p.105, 1991.

1977.

[11] Peter Russell, http://www.peterussell.com/pete.html.

[12] Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Univ.; http://www.alltm.org/.

[13] Mart´in L´opez-Corredoira; quant-ph/0208104.

10

