3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pacs 04.50. + h

To the problem of modeling of the gravitation and time.

P.Kondratenko1

Abstract

Five-dimensional model of space-time (anti-de-Sitter space), de-
scribed within the dodecahedron symmetry is oﬀered in the article.
According to the oﬀered model graviton is the double ﬁve-dimensional
vortex (soliton) that provides its stability and allows it to unite the
Universe. The interaction between graviton and particles of the Uni-
verse stipulates the discrete current of time. The size of a quantum of
time ∆t ≈ 10−103 seconds has been evaluated. Wave properties of the
mass particles follow from the model.

Key word: graviton, discrete, time, anti-de-Sitter space, symmetry,

and dodecahedron.

The history of physics progress in the 20-th century shows that its rapid
development always began with appearance of revolutionary ideas (hypothe-
sis). For example, it was so with quantum physics. Similarly, the elementary
particle physics, investigating only external displays of particles, has received
a powerful impulse of the development with appearance of the M.Gell-Mann
and G.Zweig ideas on their internal constitution (idea of quarks) [1].

The similar situation is observed in the theory of gravitational ﬁeld. There
are a great number of theories concerning external displays of a ﬁeld. The
requirements for development of hypotheses touching models of gravitons
and their physics have ripened. The given investigation is just devoted to
this problem.

While building the model, the author has paid attention to that fact that
main laws of the nature are the laws of symmetry, and at the same time, our
world, on the ﬁrst view, appears to be asymmetric.

1National Taras Shevchenko University of Kyiv , Supreme Certifying Commission. 34,

Khreshchatyk str., Kyiv, 01001, Ukraine. E-mail: pkondrat@unicyb.kiev.ua

1

First of all, it concerns the mass of free particle, energy and tempera-
ture (eﬀective temperature which can be assigned to the system of excited
particles in the state of the universe density of population and which is not
true temperature will not be considered here). All of us have got used that
a particle mass, energy and temperature are always positive that disorders
symmetry of the Universe. Deﬁciency of symmetry also concerns the current
of time. We consider by default, that time is a characteristic of space, which
has a constant value of its vector. Nobody studied physics of time.

It is important to introduce several postulates for the further considera-

tion:

1. The modern theories of creation suppose that for the description of
natural phenomena it is necessary to bring in many coordinates, from which
only three are responsible for macroscopic space, and the rest are enclosed
in a ring with extremely small radius. Since indicated three coordinates
were created because of a primary explosion, which led to creation of the
Universe, it is understandable, that before the explosion, these coordinates
were similar to others. After the explosion, which had a certain force, they
remained enclosed in a ring with big radius. So, all coordinates without
exception are enclosed.

2. Numerous historical and geological data pointed out in the literature
(beginning from Plato and Pyphagoras up to the modern theories of civiliza-
tions origin and of lithologic plates) testify that the Earth is in the ﬁeld, which
is characterised by the symmetry of a dodecahedron (regular icosahedron).
So, the symmetry of a dodecahedron (in a local approximation)
should characterise physics of the Universe.

3. Common for us four-dimensional space corresponds to the symme-
try of a cube, which three edges at the apex correspond to three spatial
co-ordinates and quadrangular facet belongs to four measurements. Accord-
ingly, the dodecahedron symmetry testiﬁes availability of three spa-
tial co-ordinates (three edges at apex) and ﬁve measurements (pentag-
onal facet).

Having used the dodecahedron symmetry is, as indication of the global
symmetry, predetermining the law of the Universe, it is possible with the
help of a group theories to ascertain the types and dimensions of subspace,
responsible for time, mass, gravitational waves and so on.

It was proved, that the group of a dodecahedron (Y) supposes the ex-
istence of two one-dimensional (Γ1g, Γ1u), four three-dimensional (Γ2g, Γ2u,
Γ3g, Γ3u), two four- dimensional (Γ4g, Γ4u) and two ﬁve- dimensional (Γ5g,

2

Γ5u) representations (subspaces). All indicated representations appear by
pairs, one of which is symmetric and the second one is asymmetric compar-
atively with operation of inverse, which responds to the actual property of
the space. An attempt to consider these subspaces through the symmetry
of a cube (group Oh) has shown, that the four-measuring subspace of group
Y is parted thus on one and three-dimensional spaces, and ﬁve-dimensional
- on two and three-dimensional spaces of group Oh. Such transformation of
subspaces leads to impossibility of the real processes describing in Oh group.
These processes are described by four-measuring and ﬁve-measuring repre-
sentations of the groups Y and being responsible for unity of the Universe.

Table 1. Rules of transformation of the representations in the transition

from group Y to group Oh.

Γ1g → A1g Γ2g → T1g Γ3g → T1g Γ4g → A1g + T1g Γ5g → Eg + T2g
Γ1u → A1u Γ2u → T1u Γ3u → T1u Γ4u → A1u + T1u Γ5u → Eu + T2u

Quantity and symmetry of the representations of the group Y gives the
foundation to presume that there are four sorts of matter: matter (mass m),
antimatter (antimass ˜m), minus - matter (minus-mass ¯m) and anti-minus-
matter (anti-minus-mass ˜¯m). Thus, the magnitudes m and ˜m are positive,
and ¯m and ˜¯m is negative. This will provide a complete symmetry of the
Universe concerning mass. As negative energy of free particles corresponds
to the negative mass of these particles, this ensures symmetry of the World
concerning both the energy and temperature. As follows from Table 1, the
subspaces Γ2g,u and Γ3g,u of the group Y correspond to the same subspace
T 1g,u of group Oh that hindered to bring a pair of negative masses within the
framework of the four-dimensional space.

The world must be integrated; otherwise, it has no right to ex-
ist. So, there is a parameter (ﬁeld, interaction), responsible for wholeness
of the world. Such interaction must be spread instantaneously in our usual
time; otherwise the wholeness is lost. For the spread description of such in-
teraction the additional temporary dimension it is oﬀered to bring in (besides
usual time t we shall bring in orthogonal to it time coordinate τ ). The gravi-
tation ﬁeld with its quantum - graviton is logically considered a carrier. The
introduction in consideration of two time co-ordinates testiﬁes that we have
space de-Sitter II of (anti-de-Sitter space [2]) kind. Naturally, such space,
with the availability of spherical symmetry is unlocked that contradicts to

3

the ﬁrst postulate. The decrease in the space symmetry this paper makes
space enclosed again [3].

The symmetry of a graviton must correspond to the representation of
maximal dimensionality inas- much as the role of the World combining is
assigned to it. The provision of the interaction demands that the graviton
description must be performed by three spatial co-ordinates and two times (t
and τ ). The instantaneity (in time t) of the interaction transfer superimposes
an additional demand to graviton: it must have zero mass. So, it cannot be
a source of the secondary gravitational radiation. The requirement of zero
mass for graviton may be provided depicting the graviton as the two-particle
soliton in the structure of which there is the mass m and minus-mass ¯m, so,
the sum of masses making up the soliton is equal zero. As the graviton must
have properties of a wave (in time τ ), the graviton components should be
ﬁgured of as a stable pair of the vortexes of cyclone - anticyclone type. Such
pair of the vortexes always has ﬁnite excitation energy (unlike of a single
vortex, the energy of which in an equilibrium state is inﬁnite), just what
stabilises it [4]. It is known, that an anticyclone twisting in the surface of
the Earth as the right screw, success up the air, due to what the increased
pressure is always in its centre. Similarly, the cyclone creates airﬂow along
its axis downwards that results in pressure drop in its activity region. So, the
pair cyclone - anticyclone will be compulsorily combined by the third vortex,
which raises its stability and makes it a multidimensional soliton.

We assume the material Universe consisting of three components (m, ¯m
and m), disjointed by time intervals ∆t/2, where ∆t is quantum of time
(state A) to model of discrete current of time (quantum of time). In such
case, the complete mass equals m. The graviton, which is in the past as
to the matter, interacts with mass, which responds to time t=0, adsorbs it
(naturally the vortex ¯m is adsorbed, and the vortex m blurs the function
of element mass m in time). The movement of the graviton along closed
time co-ordinate t ensures its total absorption of mass m. This adsorption
transfers the system in state B, in which the ﬁrst element m, blurred in time,
is overlapped with the second device ¯m. The structure instability arises, in
which this pair (m, ¯m) disappears, and instead of it a new pair ( ¯m, m) with
time co-ordinates 3∆t/2 ( ¯m) and 2∆t (m) (state C = A + ∆t), appears
symmetrically relatively to the third element m as well as a new graviton,
displaced relatively to the ﬁrst graviton in time by ∆t. The process will
repeat inﬁnitely.

For current of time t in an opposite direction the mass must have structure

4

( ¯m, m, ¯m). In such case (state B), the graviton must be above upper element
of the mass ¯m (that is, hereafter from the point of view of substance). Then
this element will adsorb a vortex m of a graviton. Further process will run
as above described, with formation of a new state, displaced by -∆t, that
is, for negative masses the time from the point of view of positive masses
will move to the past. Similarly, from the viewpoint of positive masses, for
negative masses the processes of the radiation will be change by the processes
of adsorption and vice verse, as the signs of energies connected with matter,
during the transition to minus - material will be changed. The special role is
assigned to a quantum, which from the viewpoint of the world of substance
and the world of minus-material moves in opposite directions of time and
space that ensures its identical perception from both points of reference.

The quantity of time quantum ∆t can be estimated, starting from the
formula ∆t = h/MU · c2, where MU is mass of the Universe. Here, the
supposition is made that Plank constant is also attributed to discreteness of
time. Considering it in a rough approximation the Universe to be spherical
(such approximation contradicts to the ﬁrst postulate, mentioned above)
with radius RU ≈ 1010 light year = 1028 cm, and average density of a matter
equal to critical ρm = ρc = 2 · 10−29 g/cm3, we ﬁned MU = 4πρcR3
U /3 = 1053
kg [5]. Hence, ∆t ≈ 10−103 seconds. This quantity really will be quantum of
time combining and synchronising the Universe.

It is known, that from a gravitational constant G, the speed of light c
and the Plank constant h it is possible to form the length lg = qGh/c3 =
1, 6 · 10−33 cm, which is named “fundamental” and “gravitational” [6] in
literature. Time tg = lg/c = 5·10−44 s, the value of which exceeds by 60 orders
the value of time quantum corresponds to this length. So, “gravitational
length” does not relate to the structure of time-space.

At the same time, each material particle of the Universe will have its time
interval ∆ti = h/mic2, responsible for wave properties of elementary parti-
cles. For an electron (me = 9, 1085 · 10−31 kg) the value ∆te = 0, 809 · 10−20
s, that by 83 orders exceeds the value of the time quantum. Let’s note,
that the value ∆te on its origin has nothing common with the period of the
de-Broyl wave, though it will be close to its relativistic velocities. It is under-
standable, that for the synchronisation of the Universe it is necessary that
∆ti = Ni∆t where Ni = MU /mi should be whole number. From the latter
ratio follows that the ratio of two particle mass mi/mj = Nj/Ni is rational
number. This also will concern the identical particles moving with diﬀerent

5

velocities, that is, the travelling particle speed can vary only discretely. It is
truth, the discreteness step will be miserable and unnoticeable, that ensures
quasi-continuous dependence of the particle mass on its motion velocity.

If the unity of the world could be absent then the graviton radiated by an
elementary particle would interact only with the same particle, inasmuch as
other elementary particles could exist in other time points. This could result
in the absence of the gravitation interaction and, as the consequence, in the
disappearance of the material world. So, the unity is absolutely necessary and
it is ensured in the whole Universal by the mutual sensation of all identical
elementary particles. And this, in its turn, will lead to that each elementary
particle with a particular phase of its existence function will be represented in
every moment of the discrete time (e.g., the function of the particle existence
may be described by the expression ψi = a · exp(−iωit), where ωi = 2π/∆ti,
a = c ·

qmi/h - normalised factor).

Thus, the used symmetry of a dodecahedron as local symmetry of the
Universe, in this paper, has allowed to bring to the symmetry of the structure
of a substance, scale of energy and time as well as to proposal of the graviton
model of providing unity of the Universe and discrete current of time. The
model becomes the basis of wave properties of elementary particles, that is,
expostulates of their wave nature.

Inasmuch as for the creation of the gravitation model and time the do-
decahedron symmetry of the Universe ﬁeld is used in which the Earth exists
the opposite conclusion corresponding to the reality: the dodecahedron sym-
metry of the Earth surface must follows from the proposed model.

6

References.

[1]. F.J.Yndurain. Quantum Chromodynamics. An Introduction to the
Theory of Quarks and Gluons. Springer-Verlag. New York - Berlin - Heidel-
berg - Tokyo. 1983, 288 pp.

[2]. S.W.Hawking, G.F.R.Ellis. The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time.

Cambridge Univ. Press, 1973. 431 pp.

[3]. L¨obell F. Beispiele geschlossener drei-dimensionaler Cliﬀord-Kleinsche
R¨aume negativer Kr¨ummung. / Ber. Verhandl. Schs. Akad. Wiss. Leipzig,
Math., Phys. K1., 1931. B.83, S.167-174.

[4]. V.V.Meleshko, M.Yu.Konstantinov. Dynamics of vortex structures.

Kyiv: ¡Naukova dumka¿, 1993, 278 pp.

[5]. The tables of physical quantities. The manual by I.K.Kikoin. Moscow:

Atomizdat, 1976, 1006 pp.

1980, 156 pp.

[6]. V.L.Ginzburg. About physics and astrophysics. Moscow: “Nauka”,

7

