Kybernetes (The Int. J. for Systems & Cybernetics), ... (2002): Special Issue on New Theories on
Space and Time

Scanning the structure of ill-known spaces: Part 3.
Distribution of topological structures at elemen-
tary and cosmic scales

Michel Bounias(1) and Volodymyr Krasnoholovets(2)

(1) BioMathematics Unit (University/INRA, France, and IHS, New York, USA),
Domain of Sagne-Soulier, 07470 Le Lac d’Issarles, France;
fax: (33) 466 46 0906
(2) Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences, Prospect Nauky 46,

UA-03028, Ky¨ıv, Ukraine; http://inerton.cjb.net

Abstract. The distribution of the deformations of elementary cells is studied
in an abstract lattice constructed from the existence of the empty set. One combi-
nation rule determining oriented sequences with continuity of set-distance function
in such spaces provides a particular kind of spacetime-like structure that favors the
aggregation of such deformations into fractal forms standing for massive objects. A
correlative dilatation of space appears outside the aggregates. At the large scale,
this dilatation results in an apparent expansion, while at the submicroscopic scale
the families of fractal deformations give raise to families of particle-like structure.
The theory predicts the existence of classes of spin, charges and magnetic proper-
ties, while quantum properties associated to mass have previously been shown to
determine the inert mass and the gravitational eﬀects. When applied to our ob-
servable spacetime, the model would provide the justiﬁcations for the existence of
the creation of mass in a speciﬁed kind of ”void”, and the fractal properties of the
embedding lattice extend the phenomenon to formal justiﬁcations of Big-Bang-like
events without need for any supply of an extemporaneous energy.

Key words: continuity, distributions, fractal quanta, mass creation, particle

families

PACS classiﬁcation: 02.10.Cz – set theory, 02.40.Pc – general topology,

03.65.Bz – foundation theory of measuement, miscellaneous theories

3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

Despite the striking progress in present-day research, from corpuscle physics
(Fritzsh, 2000) to astrophysics (Borner, 2000), many fundamental questions remain
unsolved and often contradictory (Krasnoholovets, 2001, 2002).

In previous papers (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2001a,b) formal demonstra-
tions have identiﬁed mass with a disruption in homeomorphic mappings of reference
medium, from one to the next Poincare section whose ordered sequence stands for
a spacetime-like structure (Bonaly and Bounias, 1995). In an attempt to identify
forlam conditions of existence of a physical-like world, the existence of the empty
set as the founding space alongwith theory of sets and topology, extended to non-
wellfounded sets as the combination rules, was found as necessary and suﬃcient
conditions (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997; Bounias, 2000).

This paper starts from the lattice of empty elements which are balls constituted
from the empty set and its successive complementaries, all exhibiting self-similarity
and fractal properties (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2001a,b). Elementary balls
within a given range of size were attributed a virtual volume at the free state.
These volumes in fact are reference frames in which the position of objects is as-
sessed by an operator called the ”moment of junction”, since it connects one to the
next Poincare sections and owns the structure of a moment (Bounias, 1997). These
volumes belong to the space of distances (topologically open), as a topological com-
plementary of the space of objects (topological closed), and they remain belonging to
this class as far as their morphisms are homeomorphic. In contrasts, balls exhibiting
dimensional changes (here through fractal shaping) no longer fulﬁl this condition,
and they have been attributed to the class of objects (Bounias and Krasnoholovets,
2001b). However, at this stage, no rationale was yet provided for the justiﬁcation
of existence of such structures: this point will therefore be addressed in ﬁrst in this
paper.

Preliminaries

The distribution of variables X, Y is a density function h(x,y) which admits for

margin densities for each variable the following (R¨uegg, 1985):

f(x) =

h(x, y)dx and g(y) =

h(x, y)dy.

(1.1)

Z

Z

If E is a probabilized space, which is the case of the topological spaces in which
we are working (Bonaly and Bounias, 1995, Bounias, 2000), and the variables are
continued, then the probability that x, y belong to E is:

P(x, y ∈ E) = P(E) =

h(x, y)dxdy.

(1.2)

For discrete variables, the integral is replaced by a union or a sum. The reparti-
tion function is represented by a summation (again in either sense) with boundaries:

H(x, y) = P{(X ≤ x) ∩ (Y ≤ y)}

(1.3)

Z Z
E

2

More generally, one may consider x ∈ [u, v] within a domain [a, b] of E. Then the
probability of ﬁnding x in the closed segment [u, v] is P(u < x < v) = (v−u)/(b−a)
if E is totally ordered.
In other cases, alternative solutions have been examined
in Bounias and Krasnoholovets, (2001a). Then the process will be extended to
y ∈ [q, r], and so on. In a discrete space, probabilities are multiplicative, while in
a continued space the repartition functions are multiplicative: H(x, y, ...) = F(x) ·
G(y) · (...).

Now, let X, Y,... be random objects deﬁned on the same probabilized space,
and Z = O(X, Y, ...) a real function in E. Then the moment, including the expected
value, wears the form: E(Z) =

...O(X, Y, ...) · h(x, y, ...) · dxdy(...).

Whatever the form of a distribution, it owns a family of moments m0

RR

1 of order k
1, and the variance Var = mE
2 .

and centered on c: the expected value is E = m0

One particular case is the covariance Cov(X, Y) = E(X, Y) −E(X) · E(Y), so that

if one has O(X, Y, ...) = X + Y, then:

Var(X + Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y) + 2Cov(X, Y)

(1.4)

This brings the question of the dependence of variables X and Y: Cov(X, Y) is
bounded by zero for X,Y independent and by a maximum if X and Y are completely
self-similar, like in any subpart of a fractal structure.

Finally, the distribution K(z) as the probability to get the sum (X + Y + ...) ≤ z

is given by the derivative of the repartition:

P(X + Y + ... ≤ z) =

...h(x, y, ...) · dxdy(...).

(2.1a)

The summation on one variable, e.g. y, is bounded by z − (x + ...)

P(X + Y + ... ≤ z) = K(z) =

f(x)...

g(y) · dy

· dx,

z−(x+...)

(cid:1)(cid:16)

Z
−∞

(cid:17)

Z Z
x+y+...≤z

+∞

...
(cid:0)

Z
−∞

that is, in terms of distribution:
+∞

k(z) =

f(x)...

g(z − (x + ...))

...
(cid:0)

Z
−∞

(cid:1)(cid:0)

dx
(cid:1)

(2.2a)

that is a convolution function.

Remark 1. We have shown in Part 2 of this study that the morphisms of distances
and objects already fulﬁl a nonlinear form of generalized convolution:

(M ⊥ J ) k+i = T⊥(M (cid:13) J ) k
where M and J are morphisms of distances and objects, respectively, and T an
operator mapping a Poincar´e section (Si) into (Si+1), on the basis of the moment
of junction MJ, that is a composition function of either the set distances or their
complementaries (the ”instans”) with a distribution function (Bounias, 1997). The
operator T translates a composition rule (here: (cid:13)) into (⊥).

(2.2b)

Redundancy will be considered in either active or with commutation forms. The

latter involves multiple convolution of densities:

f n∗

= f 1 ∗ f 2 ∗ ... ∗ f i ∗ ... ∗ f n.

(2.3)

3

Main results

1. On the law determining the sequence of Poincar´e sections

Let Si be a closed intersection of topological dimension n produced by the
intersection of a n-subspace with a m subspace (m > n) belonging to the set of
parts of the embedding ω-space (W ω).

A universe will thus be constructed in a space (W ω) = {X, ⊥} with X ∈ {X3∩X4}

a set and (⊥) a combination rule determining the choice of Si+1 from Si.

Remark 2.1. It has been argued (Bonaly and Bounias, 1995) that ω = 4 and n = 3
provide an optimal situation, in terms of mathematical organizational properties,
which would place our spacetime among the most eﬃcient universe conﬁgurations.
Thus, throughout this study, it will be suﬃcient to consider n = 3 coming from
ω = 4.

Remark 2.2. There exists as many universes as there are laws (⊥). However, one
particular case deserves particular attention.

Proposition 1. Let Si denote a 3-D Poincar´e section of W4. Continuity in mappings
of members of Si in the sequence {Si}i is favoured if the successors Si+1 are such
that:

{Si}i = (∀Si, Si ∩ Si + 1 = max{Si ∩ Si + k}k>i).

Proof. Some lemmas of continuity of set-distance functions will ﬁrst be demon-
strated, and the proposition will then be deduced.

1.1. Continuity of set distance functions

The following deﬁnition recalls the generalized distance provided by topologies

as it has been presented in Part 1 (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 200la).

Deﬁnition 1. Let E be a topological space E = {X, T}, and A, B, C, ..., G,
... subspaces constituted from the set of parts of set X composing E. Then, the
separating set-distance between A and B within E is denoted by ΛE(A, B) and
identiﬁed by:

ΛE(A, B) = min

(G ∈ E), (A ∈ G 6= 0, B ∈ G 6= 0) : ∆(A, G) ∩ ∆(B, G)

(3.1)

n

where Λ denotes the simple set-distance as the symmetric diﬀerence:

o

(3.2)

∆(A, B) = ∁

(A ∩ B).

A ∪ B

The generalized set-distance if given by the following relation:

∆E(A, B) = min

(G ∈ E), (A ∩ G 6= Ø, B ∩ G 6= Ø) : ∆(A, B, G)}

(3.3)

with

n

∆(A, B, G) = ∁

(A ∩ B) ∩ (A ∩ G) ∩ (B ∩ G)

(3.4)

A∪ B ∪ G(cid:16)

.
(cid:17)

If G 6=Ø, then relation (3.3) reduces to (3.2) and ∆E reduces to ∆.

4

Lemma 1. The mapping f : ∆ 7→ R of the set distance (∆) on the set of real
numbers (R) is continuous.

Proof. Let A, B in E be mapped into f (A) = a and f (B) = b in R. If a and
b are cuttings, the proof is trivial.
If a and b are initial segments (like simple
numbers) then, take the case where a < b, and consider e as small as needed, such
that a′ = a + e. For any e, there exists x in E such that e = f (x). When the
distance δ{∆(A, B), (A′, B)} is decreased by x, then the diﬀerence (b − a) becomes
((b − a) − e), i.e. it is decreased by e.

(Q.E.D.)

Lemma 2. Let A, B, G in E and f (A) = a, f (B) = b and f (G) = g in R.
(i) The mapping L- : ΛE 7→ R of the separating distance on the set of real numbers
is continuous if a, b, g are cuttings.
(ii) If a, b, g are initial segments, the mapping remains continuous if E is totally
ordered, while if E is only partly ordered by inclusion or intersection, then the
mapping L- is continuous for any e < a or e > b.

Proof. The ﬁrst case is trivially infering from the continuity of A. In the second case,
if a < e < b, then dist(a, g) and dist(b, g) have a null diference only if g = ha, bi
or if they were to be considered as adjacent cuttings: then their intersection would
always be null. However, in these two particular cases, the mapping remains correct
if E is totally ordered, so that A ⊂ G ⊂ B and ΛE = Ø. Then continuity is proved
for any (g).

1.2. Continuity in ordered Poincar´e sections of space

Let (S i) be one 3-D timeless section in W4, ai be a member or a part of (Si) and
V(ai) a neighborhood of (ai) in (Si). Call (ai) i+k and V(ai)i+k the homeomorphic
projections of ai and V(ai) on (Si+k). Proposition 1 states that ∆
must
(cid:0)
be minimal and that for the same reason, ∆
(cid:16)(cid:0)
which is consistent with the clause of continuity.
section (S i+h) whose distance with (S i) is smaller than ∆
(cid:0)
neighborhood

(cid:1)
is minimal,
(cid:1)(cid:17)
(cid:0)
If, in contrast, there exists a
(S i), (S i+1)
, then the

(S i) ∩ (S i+h), (S i+1)

(Si, (Si+1)

i+1,
(cid:1)

V(a i+1)

V(a i+1)

V(a i)

(cid:1)

.

In particular, one may have

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

may be contained in ∆
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

∆E

V(a i)

V(a i+1)

∆ ⊃

(cid:16)(cid:0)

i+1,

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

V(a i)

i+h,

(cid:1)(cid:17)

(cid:16)(cid:0)

(cid:1)

V(a i+h)
(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:17)

and the condition of continuity is no longer necessarily fulﬁlled. This achieves the
justiﬁcation.

Distribution of the deformations of lattice balls

Introduction

Sections {S i}i are composed as pointed in Part 1 of distance (∆ and Λ) and
objects (mh i). The former are open and the second are closed. The space of dis-
tances provides the reference frame from which the topological changes of objects
localization will be observed. This space has been shown in Part 2 to be basically

5

constituted of elementary cells represented by free forms C free and degenerate forms
C deg. A putative volume Vfree = V◦ is attributed to free cells which are devoid
of any deformations and thus described by the identity mapping (Id) from (Si) to
(Si + 1). In contrast, degenerate cells result from homeomorphic transformations,
which involve some change in their volumes (in 3-D sections) without dimensional
alteration. Then, if δV◦ canonically denotes such a change in the volumes, then
Vdeg = V◦ ± δV◦). From sections (Si) to (Si + 1) one has δV◦ (i) mapped into
δV◦(i+1). Within each section, the set of all such deformations will be ∪ i {C deg
i }i and
∪ i+1 {C deg
Remark 3. The distribution of these cells within each section will concern as many
variables and will be decribed by a multiple convolution as in relation (2.3).

}i+1 respectively.

i

2.2. Distribution of deformations

Now, consider the fate of the homeomorphic projections (C deg

) i+1 and (C deg

i+1).

i

According to relation (1.4), one has respectively:

) i+1 +(δ deg
i+1)

= Var

(δ deg
i

) i+1

+Var(δ deg

i+1)+2Cov

(δ deg
i

) i+1, (δ deg
i+1)

(4.1)

Var

(δ deg
i
(cid:0)

(cid:1)
and with N deg the cardinal (Card) of set {Cdeg

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

i }:

(cid:1)

Var

∪ i (δ deg
i

)

(δ deg
= ∪ i Var
i
(cid:0)

)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

+ N deg · Cov

{δ deg

i } i

(4.2)

.
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
2.3. Boundaries

Gather relations (4.1) and (4.2) in:

Var(∪(δ)) = ∪ Var(δ) + Card(∪) · Cov({δ, }).

(4.3)

i

These variances are subjected to boundary conditions, depending on the level of
dependence or independence of (δ deg
) and (δ deg
1st kind. If the variables are totally independent, like in a completely random space,
one will get Cov({δ, }) = 0. Thus, the variance of the sum is minimal.
2nd kind. In contrast, maxCov({δ, }) is attained if the components (δ V◦(i)} exhibit
the maximum of similarity. This condition is achieved through fractal properties
of the lattice, whose cells are self-similar balls composed with the empty hyperset
{ØØ}.

).

i

2.4. Theorem of the distribution of volumes

Then, owing to Proposition 1, the selection of (Si+1) from (Si) will preferably

retain a ﬁrst kind distribution.

Lemma 3. The degenerate lattice contains a non denumerable inﬁnity of subdefor-
mations.

Proof. It has been previously proved that the empty hyperset provides existence of
a n-space, n as great as needed, endowed with the power of continuum (Bounias and
Bonaly, 1997). Each empty set unit gives a empty complementary in itself, so that

6

each unit provides a sequence of structures ﬁtted one into the other, which can be
indexed on a sequence of the {l/2 ni}i type (Part 2). Thus, the distribution of volumes
{δV◦(i)} in the degenerate space contains inﬁnitely many times the collections of
deformations required for constituting a quantum of fractality. Hence, each time
these quanta are available in the topological neighborhood of a cell in (Si), the law
of selection of the next section will select (Si+1) in (W4) such that the same set of
deformation is organized into one single structure, that is a fractal.

This now allows the following founding statement:

Corollary 1. The combination rule of a continued spacetime-like sequence of
Poincar´e sections fulﬁlling the option stated in Proposition 1 exhibits a trends to
collapsing random distributions of degenerate cells into massive objects.

Justiﬁcation. Continuity associated with the condition of maximum intersection
(Proposition 1) favour the collapse of scattered deformations into one single ag-
gregate forming a fractal structure: this results in a change of dimensionality of the
aﬀected cells. The latter are no longer homeomorphic images, and therefore, they
get a mass, in the sense deﬁned in Part 2. Therefore these cells escape the class of
”reference frame” or distances, and fall into the class of ”objects”. They become
”particled balls”, denoted and their volumes are Vpart as described in Part 2.

3. Predicted structural classes of particled cells

3.1. Predicted particle-like components

P

3.1.1. Mass-equivalent nonmassive corpuscles. Denote by ϑ = {̺, a, I} a
i=1→∞{1/2 i} is the initiator, ̺ the self-similarity
quantum of fractality where I =
ratio and a the additional number of subﬁgures inserted in the (1/̺) fragments
of the initial ﬁgure. The corresponding fractal structure is denoted (Γ).
It has
been shown in Part 2 that (Γ) can be decomposed in a sequence of elementary
components {C1, C2,..., Ck,...}. If all these elementary deformations are gathered
on one single ball, then this ball contains all the quantum of fractality, though its
dimension is not changed. It is therefore nonmassive as it stands and its motion
is determined by the velocity of transfer of nonmassive deformations, that is the
maximum permitted by the elasticity of the space lattice. Since the deformations
are ordered and distributed in one particular structure, it owns a stability through
mappings of Poincar´e sections. Such particles are likely to correspond to bosons,
that is to pseudoparticles representing just transfer of packs of deformations in a
isolated form.

Hence, photon-like corpuscles will carry the equivalent of various quanta of frac-
tality {ϑ i}i, that is, their equivalent in mass in a decomposed form. This represents
as many deformations of the lattice, and ﬁnally of equivalent in energy.

3.1.2. Families of massive particles. Any single ball carrying a group {Γ i}i of
quantum fractals will represent a class of massive particles. Depending on both the
number and the mode of association of these fractal quanta, various symmetries will
result and provide these classes with speciﬁc properties.

Hadron-like families will thus be represented by the following common structures:

H i,k =

{a i, ̺ i, e i}i,k

(cid:0)

7

(cid:1)

(5.1)

Simpler particles made from one single quantum of fractality {̺, a} would likely

correspond with lepton-like structures, such that:

L i =

{N i · (̺ i) ei}

(cid:0)

.
(cid:1)

(5.2)

3.2. Spins for hadron-like balls

3.2.1. Fermion-like cases. Moving massive balls have been shown to carry a
cloud of deformations transfered to degenerate balls of the surrounding space, with
periodic exchange between this ”inertons” cloud and the original particle (Part 2).
The period of this pulse has been identiﬁed with the de Broglie wavelength. Hence,
the center of mass (y) of the system composed of the particle and the inerton cloud
permanently undergoes a movement forwards and backwards along the trajectory of
the system. Two canonical positions are possible, with respect to the particle: (i) y
is centered on the particled ball, and (ii) t is no longer centered.

The probability of state of x is thus P(y) = 1/2.

3.2.2. Boson-like cases. Consider a ball carrying quanta of masses in the de-
composed form: then, such a system is opposed the minimum resistance by the
surrounding degenerate balls, which are of the same nature, excepted that their in-
dividual densities of deformation are much smaller. Therefore, boson-like particles
do not generate a cloud similar to that of a massive particle, and their center of
mass (y) owns only one main state: thus P(y) = 1.

3.2.3. Spin module. The state of the center of mass is assessed by the expected
moment of junction hMJi of its components, so that the spin-like system is described
by P(x, y) · hMi, standing for s · ~/2, that is, the classical spin module expression.
This parameter would likely be summable over an association of particles into a

more complex system, which is consistent with the additivity of spins.

In all cases eddy-like components of the motion concern the relative behavior of
the particle and of its inertons cloud, respectively. These relative rotation move-
ments could likely be of opposite sense, and at least in some cases under current
investigation, the whole {particle + inertons} system may either escape rotation, or
get a resulting rotation axis and speed, depending on the rotation parameters of the
most massive part of the system. Then, a rotation pulse with reversion of direction
can be expected in some conditions.

3.3. Charges

3.3.1. Opposite kinds of particle deformations. When a quantum of fractal
deformations collapses into one single ball, two adjacent balls exhibit opposite forms:
one in the sense of convexity and the other in the sense of concavity. Hence, there
occurs a pair instead of a single object. The paired structures hold the same fractal
dimension, and they will retain the same masses if they get the same volumes. This
is realized if the member of the pair whose deformation is in the convex sense looses
an equivalent volume in a nonfractal form, as schematically depicted in Figure 1.

The progression of such structures in the degenerate space will generate several
kinds of inerton cloud equivalent, depending on convexity trends (Ξ) and symmetry
properties (Ψ) of the corresponding structures.

8

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the paired deformations produced by the collapse
of a quantum of fractal deformations into a ball. One of the two complementary topologies
could be called a positive charge and the other a negative one.

The properties generated by Q = {Ξ, Ψ} will be called ”charge eﬀects”.

3.3.2. Electric and magnetic charges. The motion of a particled ball in the
space lattice exhibits some similarity with a cutwave which would be produced by a
boat made with water. The shape of the waves depend on the shape of the moving
object, as shown in Figure 2.

Component {Ξ} of Q produces two kinds of inerton clouds (Fig. 2), which can
be identiﬁed with electric ﬁelds, since they depart from the ”neutral” inerton cloud
by a symmetric kind of deformation. These shapes are complementary and can be
associated in a oriented ﬁeld, providing the corresponding area of the lattice with
vectorial properties.

Component {Ψ} appears when the fractal clusters are no longer symmetric in
a massive particle. This case corresponds to well characterizable parametrizations.
For instance, a suﬃcient condition is that the fractal quanta of masses have the
following form, where at least some N i are odd numbers:

(Γ) =

{N i, a i, ̺ i} :

(cid:16)

N i · (̺ i)ei = 1

(cid:17)

Xi

(5.3)

In such cases, illustrated by Figure 3, the asymmetry will provide the cloud of

inertons with an additional deformation represented by a torsion.

Neutrality may not be so simple. In a strict sense, it can be reﬂected by the
absence of deformation. However, it can also be represented by symmetry and
homogeneity of the distribution of convex and concave components simultaneously
present on the same edges of particles, while the volume reduction associated to mass
would remain fulﬁlled. The latter case would stand for a pseudo-neutrality worth to

9

Figure 2: Changes imprinted in the shape of the inerton clouds by the shape of the
particles deformations of symmetric type.

Figure 3: An asymmetric component in the deformation of a particle induces a torsion
of the inerton cloud. Here, the ﬁgure illustrates a initiator ﬁgure composed of seven
subsegments of ratio (1/7) and two subsegments of ratio (2/7) of the modiﬁed side. Thus,
the fractal is roughly depicted by 7 · (l/7) e + 2 · (2/7) e = 1.

10

Figure 4: Illustration of canonical particles diﬀering only by their charge. A strictly neu-
tral edge would have no deformation. A charged edge can show cavities or protuberances.
A pseudo-neutral interface would have the same quantity of cavities and protuberances
and it would be in theory dissociable into two opposite charges.

be taken in consideration. Figure 4 illustrates these features in a quasi-metaphoric
sense.

4.1. Predicted expansion and the ”quintessence”

4.1.1. Introduction. Each time the distribution of degenerate deformations col-
lapses into particled balls, there occurs a corresponding increase of volume of the
surrounding balls, which compensates the reduction of volume in the particled cell.
The motion of the particle can likely be provided by the reaction to the creation of
this kind of ”anti-inerton cloud, which behaves in a opposite way than the resistance
of the inerton cloud to the motion of the particle.

These increases of volume are then progressively scattered by transfer of the
corresponding deformations to an expanding cloud of ”dilatation” quanta. This
phenomenon operates a gain of space volume away of the particles: therefore, it
represents a kind of force acting in a way opposite to the gravitation. This suggests
two main corollaries.

4.2.2. Quintessence. The existence of a ”ﬁfth cosmic element”, somewhat related
with Einstein’s ”cosmological constant” has been thoroughly discussed (see Krauss,
1999; B¨orner, 2000; Ostriker and Steinhardt, 2001, etc. for review). In our model,
this factor appears strictly in connection with the creation of matter from the de-
generate lattice, which may stand for the cosmic form of a void. Its quantitative
expression is directly correlated with the density of fractal deformations, that is of
energy, and its range will be shown below to be of the long type. Basically, the
above theorem of distribution shows that it appears independently of any previous

11

presence of matter nor radiations. Last, it seems not to be braked by gravitational
forces, since it appears as a by-product of the same event which produces gravity.
All these points make this compensatory dilatation phenomenon a candidate for the
”quintessence”.

4.2.3. Space expansion. The transfer of elementary volumes released by the
formation of massic particles occurs within the frame of the degenerate space, since
it is processed in a nonfractal state, just for the compensation of lost volumes,
without need for dimensional change. Call (a) such a element of volume: ﬁrst, it is
ﬁnite.

While the area of the iterated self-similar transform is theoretically inﬁnite, its
volume in 3-D sections is not. Therefore, while a part of the volume of the trans-
formed cell is reduced by a ﬁnite value, the volume of surrounding cells is increased
by a corresponding ﬁnite value. The homogeneity of the lattice is partly restored
through progressive transfer of the additional volume to neighbor cells.

Remark 4.1. A degenerate ball constitutes a ”superparticle”.

Proof. The oscillations of an elementary cell have been considered by Krasnoholovets
(1997; 2000) as the ”degenerate” state of space. It is a state without formation of a
particle, though potentially able to provide particles upon proposition 3 and state-
ment 3. One elementary ball thus constitutes the putative generator of particles,
what has been called a ”superparticle” in previous attempts for uniﬁcation of theo-
ries.

Remark 4.2. In any one Poincar´e section, representing a timeless instantaneous
state (an instans) of universe, the lattice of space is represented by a stacking of
balls with nonidentical shape.

Conjecture 4. Elementary balls exhibit increasing volumes from the center to the
periphery of a 3-D stacking.

Justiﬁcations. Three arguments concur to the same proposition.
(i) Oscillating deformations in excess in one cell can be partly compensated by
transfer to neighboring balls, like an equivalent to the inerton cloud surrounding a
particled ball. However, in central parts, the volume available is limited by the den-
sity of the stacking, and this limit is likely decreasing while going to the outer coats
of the lattice. In a simple estimation, we denote by (a) the radius of the canonical
(smallest) volume which can be transferred from a ball to another. Assuming that
each cell forwards a volume (a) to another situated closer to the periphery, in the
stacking, then the radius of a ball in the nth coat is approximated by:

r n = r i + (n − 1)a

(5.4)

(ii) While the above considerations are valid for a particleless lattice, if the lattice
is ﬁlled with particled balls, then there results a kind of pressure due to the inerton
clouds. Hence, relation (4.2) is aﬀected a corrective quantitative term to (a) and
its distribution is determined by the distribution of particled balls in the considered
space.
(iii) In contrast with the ﬁniteness of volume to be compensatively distributed in the

12

surrounding cells, the area of a particled cell is inﬁnite, and the needed area cannot
be compensated by a ﬁnite number of the surrounding cells. Thus an inﬂuence of
any particle is likely to be found up to the most remote parts of the lattice.

The last two points will be further examined more in details in the third part of
this study, through involvement of the concept of quantum of fractality in relation
with mass of particled cells.

Corollary 4.3. Since elementary balls can be found at various scales, due to the
quantic ratios which characterize the lattice, as shown above, this means that ele-
mentary particles are not of one unique size.

Corollary 4.4. Transfers of non fractal elementary volumes between balls are
operated without dimensional increase.

In eﬀect:

Proof. At each given scale, the corresponding increments (a) are represented by
similar topological features.
following relation (3), we have for n = 2:
r2 = r1 + a, and for n = 1: r1 = r0 + (n − 1)a = r0. Since then r0 = r2 − a, r0
stands for a founding ball. Let r0 = Ø, an empty set. Then, r2 = r0 + a can be
represented by (Ø, {Ø}) where {Ø} is the frontier of ball r2. The element {Ø} is
what is exchangeable, and since it is a frontier, it has a dimension lower than the
dimension of the interior, that is: dim(a) < dim(r). Thus exchanges do not modify
the dimensionality of involved balls.

However, mass transfers from a particled cell to its surrounding degenerate balls
involves a distribution of quanta of fractality through the concept of fractal decom-
position described above.

Remark 4.3. Consequently, it may be considered that these exchanges apply to
the frontiers of the balls, which will result in changes in the density of their internal
structures. It is noteworthy that the density has been used as a probe for the iden-
tiﬁcation of the packing of balls, though in this case only solid balls are considered
(Hales, 2000). Otherwise, the adjunction of (a) to (r) may result in the reunion
of two spaces having nonequal dimensions, which can result in a structure of the
”beaver space” type as described in Part 1.

Corollary 4.5. A measure on such a lattice space by using a scanning function as
described in Part 1 will not scan the same components in elementary balls situated
at various distances from its origin. Since there likely occurs an increase of the
composition of balls from this origin, then the gauge will decrease with increasing
distances: in eﬀect, a larger set of scanned structures will appear at farther distances.
Then, remote distances will be overestimated by a measure using a local gauge. This
might account for the phenomenon known as the Doppler eﬀect, in turn usually
involving the Hubble constant. It should be noted here that the interpretation of
the redshift has been matter of diverging treatments (e.g.: Hannon, 1998).

4.2. Towards a formalism to Big-Bang(s)

In Part 1 of this study, it has been proved (i) that the lattice existing from empty
hyperset units provide a manifold of quantic scales represented by a set of deﬁned
integer ratios (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2002a) and (ii) that there exists empty
set units of various size, with integer vs.rational similarity ratios. One universe

13

Uj = {{S i}i, ⊥}j, represented by one particular sequence of Poincar´e sections selected
through a particular combination rule is nothing but a manifold of organized empty
set units, and since the lattice in which it is embedded is strictly fractal, the reunion
of these empty set units is a higher scale empty set. Thus, Uj =Øj.

Now, consider the part of the embedding lattice in which Ø j owns just the size
of a free ball. This ”over universe” denoted Ø+j will behave like described through
Proposition 1. The distribution collapse of degenerate balls of Ø+j will result in
the formation of a particle whose subparts contain potentially as many quanta of
fractality as Uj contains massive objects. Thus, what represents a creation of a
particle inside Uj is a primordial condensation of a ball into Uj inside U+j.

This suggests that such kinds of ”Big-Bangs” may have occurred, occur and will
occur in at least denumerably many balls of the embedding lattice, without need for
a ”outside” provision of energy.

However, these ”Big-Bangs” fulﬁll some conditions. In eﬀect, it has been spec-
iﬁed in Part 1 of this study that universe is deﬁnitely constructed in a speciﬁed
space (Wω) = {X, ⊥} with set X ∈ {X3 ∩ X4) and combination rule (⊥) determin-
ing the choice of Si+1 from Si. Hence, relations between diﬀerent universes and
past-to-present successive universes can exist only through the same law (⊥).

Discussion and Conclusions

The law (⊥) proposed as the operator of the selection of successive Poincar´e
sections constituting a spacetime presents the interest, besides providing continuity
of this spacetime, of keeping inert or low-moving structures (like mountains, land-
scapes, etc.) stable. Furthermore, it brings as a corollary that events will basically
follow the shorter path between two steps, which is consistent with both the least
action principle and the geodesic trajectory principle. This suggests that the kind
of universe that we have described is consistent with our observable spacetime, even
if our description of submicroscopic events, through the formalism of set theory ex-
tended to nonwellfounded sets (a consistent extension) may be considered in some
sort as a metaphoric description.

their coexistence

The components of the {particle + inertons} system are likely inhomogeneous
as topological balls do not need to be strictly spherical (the latter case is just a
particular one).
Therefore,

in a single system representing the dual
{wave/particle} system deserves special attention, since spin-related properties
could reﬂect the eddy-like motion that inhomogeneity should impulse to the compo-
nents and ﬁnally, in a resulting manner, to the system. Such properties have been
described by Lin and OuYang (1980; 1998), Wu and Lin (2002), while Lin (1988) ex-
plored the compatibility of world exploration with the theoretical study of systems:
these goals are well converging with our objective of mathematical exploration of an
unknown world, as developed in Part 1 of this study.

The theoretical reasoning presented in this study, following the basis developed
in Parts 1 and 2, sheds some light on the question of the hypothetic ”origins” of uni-
verse. In fact, there is no need for beginning nor for end. Even the expansion might
not induce the consequences expressed through other approaches in terms of forever

14

expansion and progressive immobilization, nor cyclic contraction and collapse. Our
approach, basically founded on a formal justiﬁcation of existence of ”something”,
and then on corpuscular description and properties, turns to introduce some insights
about cosmic scales and cosmic-size properties. Interestingly, Andre¨ı Linde pioneer-
ingly suggested that a ”Grand-Universe” could be composed of bubbles of universes
that could form and disappear in various parts in an independent fashion. Though it
was not primarily our aim to treat these questions, it turns out that the development
of our model from deﬁned startpoints comes to support Linde’s hypothesis.

Furthermore, the former hypothesis raised long ago by Feynman about parti-
cle trajectories which would be inﬁnite and not derivable is consistent with our
proposition that particles are distinguished from the degenerate space by a shift of
dimensional properties, that is with a fractal organization.

The next part of this study will aim to examine more in detail what are the

peculiarities of the various kinds of corpuscles predicted by our approach.

References

Bonaly, A., Bounias, M., 1995. The trace of time in Poincar´e sections of topo-

logical spaces. Physics Essays, 8(2), 236-244.

B¨orner, G., 2000. The inﬁnitely large. Pour La Science (Scientiﬁc American,

French edition), 278, 120-127.

Bounias, M., Bonaly, A., 1997. Some theorems on the empty set as necessary and
suﬃcient for the primary topological axioms of physical existence. Physics Essays,
10(4), 633-643

Bounias, M., Krasnoholovets, V., 2002a. Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces: Part 1. Founding principles about mathematical constitution of space. Ky-
bernetes: Int. J. for Systems and Cybernetics, in press. (Also physics/0211096.)

Bounias, M., Krasnoholovets, V., 2002b. Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces: Part 2. Principles of construction of physical space. Kybernetes: Int. J. for
Systems and Cybernetics, in press. (Also physics/0212004.)

Caldwell, R., Dave, R., Steinhardt, P., 1998. Cosmological imprint of an energy

component with general equation of state. Phys. Rev. Lett., 80(8), 1582-1585.

Frizsh, H., 2000. The inﬁnitely small in physics. Pour La Science (Scientiﬁc

American, French edition), 278, 112-119.

Krasnoholovets, 200la. On the way to submicroscopic description of nature. Ind.

J. of Theor. Phys., 49, 81-95. (Also quant-ph/9908042).

Krauss, L., 1998. The end of age problem, and the case for a cosmological

constant revisited. Astrophysical Journal, 501(2), 461-466.

Krauss, L., 1999. Antigravity. Pour La Science (Scientiﬁc American, French

edition), 42-49.

Lin, Y., OuYang, S.C., 1996. Exploration of the mystery of nonlinearity. Re-

search of Natural Dialectics, 12-13, 34-37.

Lin, Y., 1988. Can the world be studied in the viewpoint of systems? Math.

Comput. Modeling, 11, 738-742.

15

Lin, Y., OuYang, S.C., 1998.

Invisible Tao and realistic nonlinearity propo-
sitions. Kybernetes: The International Journal for Systems and Cybernetics, 27,
809-822.

Ostriker, J., Steinhardt, P., 2001. The ﬁfth cosmic element. Pour La Science

(Scientiﬁc American, French edition), 281, 44-53.

R¨uegg A., 1985. Probabilities and Statistics. Presses Polytechniques Romandes,

Mausanne, Switzerland, 52-87.

Paris, p. 250.

Schwartz, L., 1997. Un math´ematicien aux prises avec le si`ecle. Odile Jacob,

Wang, L., Caldwell, R., Ostriker, J., Steinhardt, P., 2000. Cosmic concordance

and quintessence. Astrophysical Journal, 530(1), 17-35.

Wu, Y., Li, Y., (2002). Beyond nonstructural quantitative analysis. Blown ups,
spinning currents and modern science. World Scientiﬁc, New Jersey, London, 324 p.

16

