3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Are There “Neutrino Flavors”? : More on the
Equation H = mv2

Ezzat G. Bakhoum

New Jersey Institute of Technology
P.O. Box 305, Marlton, NJ. 08053 USA

Email: bakhoum@modernphysics.org

(This work has been copyrighted with the Library of Congress)
Copyright c(cid:13)2003 by Ezzat G. Bakhoum

Feb. 26, 2003

Abstract:

1. Introduction:

In a recent work by the author[1]
it was
demonstrated that the “neutrino” that is cur-
rently being detected in solar reactions (and
possibly in other high energy nuclear reac-
tions) is not Pauli’s particle; as it became clear
that such a particle is an unnecessary propo-
sition in explaining the beta-decay reaction.
In addition, it became obvious that concepts
such as “ﬂavor oscillations” of the solar neu-
trinos are superﬂuous. In this paper it is fur-
ther demonstrated that if certain key experi-
ments of the past are reinterpreted in view of
the total energy equation H = mv2, then the
principle of the existence of diﬀerent neutrino
“ﬂavors” is itself very questionable.

In an entertaining book by the title “The
God Particle” [2], distinguished experimental
physicist Leon Lederman describes the ﬁrst ex-
periment in which the diﬀerent “neutrino ﬂa-
vors” were detected. He wrote: “In almost
all of our events, however, the product of the
neutrino collision was a muon. Our neutrinos
refused to produce electrons. Why? ...some-
In
how “muon” was imprinted on them”.
that 1962 experiment[3], Lederman and his co-
experimenters demonstrated, by using a spark
chamber, that a number of muon events that
originated inside the chamber were very pos-
sibly due to the neutrino that was thought to
be generated in the decay reaction

π± → µ± + ν.

(1)

That reaction was postulated by Lattes et
al.[4]
in 1947 in order to satisfy Einstein’s
equation H = mc2, since it was observed that

1

the pion(π) and the muon(µ) are particles with
diﬀerent masses. Since the neutrino generated
in that reaction was considered to be the prime
candidate for the events observed by Leder-
man and his colleagues, a number of other im-
portant explanations for the 1962 experiment
were unfortunately overlooked1 (this is partic-
ularly true in view of recent knowledge[7] that
wasn’t available in 1962).

In an earlier paper by the author[1] it was
demonstrated that a total energy equation
that will satisfy the theory of special relativ-
ity as well as the fundamental postulates of
the wave mechanics introduced by Compton
and de Broglie will be the equation H = mv2,
where m is the relativistic mass of a parti-
cle and v is its velocity.
It was shown that
while the traditional quantity H = mc2 does
emerge in certain experimental cases (such as
in electron-positron annihilation), it fails to
emerge in many other cases (such as in modern
nuclear ﬁssion experiments; beta-decay; etc).
The conclusion that emerged from that work
was that the expression H = mc2 is to be un-
derstood as a special case of the broader ex-
pression H = mv2, which does explain all the
observed experimental facts. The total energy
as given by the quantity mc2 is of course ob-
tained only when the velocity of a particle in
a given reaction is close to c.

In this paper we will discuss Lederman’s ex-
periment in view of the total energy equa-
tion H = mv2 and in connection with three
earlier key experiments[4],[5],[6] in which the
decay of neutral and charged pions was dis-
covered. This paper is organized as follows:
in Sec.2 we will discuss ﬁrst the 1950 experi-
ments of Bjorklund et al.[5] and of Steinberger

1The author regrets that numerous attempts to
communicate with professor Lederman before the pub-
lication of this paper were unsuccessful.

et al.[6] that dealt with the decay of neutral pi-
ons. It will be demonstrated that the results
of those two experiments very strongly sup-
port the equation H = mv2, not H = mc2.
In Sec.3, the experiment of Lattes et al.[4]
in which the decay of charged pions was dis-
It will be shown
covered will be discussed.
that the data presented by the authors, if in-
terpreted within the framework of the theory
of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), it rules
out the possibility of the emission of a neu-
trino and further supports the total energy
equation H = mv2. Hence, it will be proven
once again that the neutrino is an unneces-
sary proposition in explaining the decay of a
pion into a muon. Finally, Lederman’s 1962
experiment[3] will be discussed. Given the ab-
sence of a neutrino in π± decay, and given re-
cent experimental ﬁndings[7] that were likely
unknown in 1962, a very plausible interpreta-
tion of the result of that experiment will be
given. Accordingly, the principle of the exis-
tence of a “muon neutrino” becomes very ques-
tionable. Sec.4 summarizes the conclusions of
this paper, along with an explanation of why
a reaction such as µ+ → e+ + γ has never been
observed.

2. The neutral pion (π0) decay
experiments and further veriﬁca-
tion of the equation H = mv2:

In a series of two key experiments performed
in the period of 1949-1950 at the radiation lab-
oratory at Berkeley, neutral pions were gener-
ated and studied for the ﬁrst time in the lab-
oratory. Bjorklund et al. performed the ﬁrst
experiment. The second experiment was per-
formed by Steinberger et al. and used an im-
proved experimental technique. Both experi-
ments show results from which we can with-
draw some very important conclusions about

2

the principle of mass-energy equivalence.

2.1. The experiment of Bjorklund et
al.[5]:

In the ﬁrst experiment by Bjorklund et al.,
a carbon target was placed inside a cyclotron
chamber and bombarded with protons accel-
erated to diﬀerent energies. The authors ob-
served the emission of high-energy photons
from the target, the spectrum of which does
not ﬁt that of a bremsstrahlung. The explana-
tion was that a neutral meson must be decay-
ing into two photons, as predicted by Lewis,
Oppenheimer and Wouthuysen a few years
earlier. The results of that experiment were
summarized in one ﬁgure that was given by the
authors (Fig.4a in the authors’ manuscript):

Angle of view:

A: 178
B: 159
C: 139
D: 133

 

d
l
e
i
Y
n
o
t
o
h
P
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

8

6

4

2

D

C

B

A

30

0

60

90

Photon Energy (Mev)

Figure 1: Distribution of the photon energies de-
tected in the decay of neutral pions as given by
Bjorklund et al. (the dotted portions of the curves
are not shown in the authors’ ﬁgure). The diﬃ-
culty of detecting photons at an angle of precisely
180 degrees indicate the impossibility of the decay

3

of a stationary pion. The very wide distribution of
the energies of the pions support the total energy
equation H = mv2, not H = mc2 (see discussion).

This ﬁgure shows the yield of the observed
γ photons versus the measured energy of the
photons. Curve A shows the results when the
incident proton energy was 180Mev. Curves B
through D correspond to higher proton ener-
gies. For each curve, the authors showed the
angle at which the photon detector was able
to detect the emitted photons (the angles are
as indicated on the ﬁgure). The curves show
some remarkable facts:

• Observation of the decay photons did not
start at an angle of precisely 180◦, but
at an angle of 178◦ instead (curve A).
This indicates the impossibility of detect-
ing the decay of a stationary pion (a sta-
tionary pion decays into two back-to-back
photons emitted at angles of exactly 0◦
and 180◦). The impossibility of detecting
the decay of stationary pions, is, of course,
in agreement with the prediction of the
equation H = mv2 (since H = 0 at rest).
We must note here that the energy used
to obtain curve A was 180Mev, which was
just above the production threshold of the
pion (which the authors estimated to be
about 175Mev or higher). Therefore it is
not inconceivable that some of the pions
so produced must be almost stationary;
yet the decay of those almost stationary
pions wasn’t of course observed.

 

• The estimated mass of the π0 in those
early experiments was about 150Mev/c2.
The modern estimate (based on a rela-
tivistic calculation) is 135Mev/c2.
If we
take the modern estimate, then we would
expect that the energy of each emitted
photon to be always higher than 1
2m0c2,
or 67.5Mev. Yet, as the curves show, pho-

tons of energies as low as 30Mev were
observed. The authors argued in their
manuscript that this eﬀect is just due to
Doppler shift, as a result of the high ve-
locities of the pions. However, it is diﬃ-
cult to make a case for a Doppler shift for
two reasons: ﬁrst, the photon is obviously
emitted after the decay of the particle, not
before. Hence, a measure of the total en-
ergy of the particle should be expected.
Secondly, it is actually a very simple prob-
lem of kinematics to prove that if the pho-
ton is observed, then the momentum of
the decaying particle with respect to the
observer must be positive, not negative.
Hence, a negative Doppler shift as argued
by the authors must be ruled out. The
plausible explanation, therefore,
is that
the total energy equation H = mv2 must
be valid. Note that we have showed the
“missing” portions of the curves as dot-
ted lines, since, of course, those portions
weren’t obtained experimentally (detect-
ing the decay of a slow pion would require
a narrower observation angle).

From these experimental facts it is clear that,
just as in the case of beta-decay, the spectrum
of pion decay is obviously a continuous spec-
trum. This does not support the mathemati-
cal expression H = mc2 (since it has a mini-
mum limit of m0c2), but rather the expression
H = mv2.

2.2. The experiment of Steinberger et
al.[6]:

is very
The experiment by Steinberger et al.
similar to the one by Bjorklund et al.
It is
mentioned here, however, because the exper-
imenters attempted a measurement that was
not attempted by the ﬁrst group: they directly
attempted to detect the decay of stationary

4

pions. In that experiment, a target was bom-
barded with photons instead of protons. A
pair of telescopes positioned at variable angles
around the target detected the photon pairs
resulting from the decay of the neutral pions.
In their paper, the authors indicated that they
intentionally adjusted the energy of the inci-
dent beam to 175Mev, which was just above
the production threshold of the pions, and po-
sitioned the telescopes at angles of 0◦ and 180◦.
Of course, they reported that the observed
photon yield was 50 times smaller than the
yield at higher energies. They then concluded
that coincidences at 180◦ are “rare”. This con-
clusion, again, is unquestionable proof that the
decay of a stationary pion is impossible.

3.
the
charged pion (π±) experiments:

Reinterpretation of

3.1. The experiment of Lattes et al.[4]
and the questionability of the presence
of a neutrino in charged pion decay:

In the 1947 experiment of Lattes et al., the
decay of a charged pion into a lighter parti-
cle, the muon, was observed for the ﬁrst time.
The authors demonstrated that a highly ener-
getic positive pion from a cosmic shower will
be scattered by a nucleus in the photographic
emulsion that was exposed to that shower,
and, in the process, its mass decreases con-
siderably. The lighter particle was called a “µ
meson” by the authors. To satisfy Einstein’s
equation H = mc2, they postulated that a
neutrino or another neutral particle must be
emitted along with the muon, since the total
energy of the muon was obviously considerably
less than that of the pion. We shall now pro-
ceed to examine this experiment and reach an
important conclusion: the data presented by
the authors, together with the theory of QCD,

do in fact rule out the possibility of the emis-
sion of a second particle and further support
the total energy equation H = mv2.

¯d → ¯u + µ+ + ν
(u + ¯u) + µ+ + ν →

When we consider a problem such as the one
presented in that experiment, the ﬁrst ques-
tion that we must ask is whether the scatter-
ing of the incoming pion was an elastic or in-
elastic process. The crucial fact that was pre-
sented by the authors was that the resulting
muon was always emitted with a constant ki-
netic energy (about 4Mev), while the incom-
ing pion seemed to have widely diﬀerent ki-
netic energies. This fact (whether we accept
the idea of the emission of a second particle
or not) undoubtedly point to an inelastic col-
lision of the incoming pion, since it indicates
that a mass-energy transformation (but no ki-
netic energy transformation) gives rise to the
muon. In other words, this fact indicates that
the pion likely loses its kinetic energy almost
entirely upon collision with a nucleus in the
emulsion, and then a mass-energy transforma-
tion process gives rise to another particle with
a lower mass and constant kinetic energy: the
muon. There are two questions that must now
be answered: ﬁrst, how such a process can be
understood within the framework of the QCD
theory?; secondly:
if the incoming pion loses
its kinetic energy entirely (and hence its total
energy Hπ = 0), how the muon is then gener-
ated. We shall answer these two questions in
order, and, in the process, we shall reach some
very surprising conclusions.

According to QCD, the transformation π+ →
µ+ can be understood in the following
manner[8] (note that the positive pion is a
quark doublet composed of an up quark and
an anti-down quark):

Kinetic Energy + µ+ + ν

(2)

In the ﬁrst reaction, the anti-down quark ¯d
decays into an anti-up quark ¯u, a muon µ+
and a neutrino ν (we shall shortly demonstrate
that the generation of a neutrino is impos-
sible). Note that, generally, this reaction is
possible if the mass of the ¯d quark is taken
to be the relativistic mass, not the rest mass
(which is known to be about 5Mev to 8Mev
[9]). In the second reaction, the up quark an-
nihilates with its anti-particle (¯u) and the re-
sulting energy appears as kinetic energy of the
particles that were generated in the ﬁrst re-
action. In the earlier paper by the author[1]
it was demonstrated that in the case of the
annihilation of a particle with its anti-particle
it is reasonable to assume that a quantity of
energy equal to 2m0c2 will be obtained. We
now note that the quantity 2m0c2, where m0
is the rest mass of the up quark, is approxi-
mately 3 to 9Mev according to the latest the-
oretical estimates[9]. This ﬁgure, of course,
agrees very well with the muon kinetic energy
! This result
of 4Mev given by Lattes et al.
suggests that it is very doubtful that a neu-
trino is generated along with the muon in the
process of pion decay, especially since the au-
thors estimated that the neutrino must carry
away an energy of approximately 29Mev in or-
der to balance the relativistic mass-energy of
the pion! Quite clearly, the expected Q-value
of the reaction is in agreement with the mea-
sured kinetic energy of the muon, without the
need for the neutrino hypothesis.

We next consider the question of how the
muon is generated and why this data does in
fact support the total energy equation H =
mv2.
If we calculate the velocity v of the
resulting muon, using its known rest mass

5

(105.66Mev/c2), and based on a kinetic energy
of 4Mev, we ﬁnd that v ≈ 0.27c (i.e., sub-
relativistic). At sub-relativistic velocities, the
total energy H = mv2 is twice the kinetic en-
ergy; hence Hµ ≈ 8 Mev. But if we reach the
conclusion that Hπ = 0, then how the muon
is generated? This process obviously occurs in
the vicinity of a nucleus in the emulsion, as
a result of the interaction of the electrostatic
ﬁeld of the nucleus with the constituent quarks
If we look at the overall mass-
in the pion.
energy transformation equation, this equation
can be written as follows

u ¯d → Hµ (= 8Mev)

(3)

The two quarks, of course, being charged, will
acquire kinetic and potential energy terms as a
result of the presence of a nearby electrostatic
ﬁeld. As we indicated, since we expect the an-
nihilation of a particle and an antiparticle in
this process, then it is reasonable to assume
that an amount of energy equal to m0c2 will
be obtained for each of the particles involved
in the reaction (see the discussion in ref.[1]).
The expected mass-energy of the two quarks
in Eq.(3) will be therefore given by the sum
m0c2(u) + m0c2(d). This quantity is approxi-
mately 6.5 to 13Mev, according to the latest
estimates[9].
It is now clear that this result
supports the prediction of a total muon energy
(Hµ) of 8Mev, in agreement with the total en-
ergy equation H = mv2! Of course, it is also
clear from this discussion that one must pro-
ceed with great caution in interpreting particle
reactions, since the traditional quantity of en-
ergy mc2 may indeed appear in certain cases
as we have seen.

To summarize the above discussion: the the-
ory of QCD, together with the data presented
by Lattes et al., rule out the possibility of the
emission of a neutrino and further support the

total energy equation H = mv2. On the other
hand, the application of the total energy equa-
tion H = mc2 results in an energy deﬁcit of
29Mev (or 34Mev according to the modern es-
timates) that cannot be accounted for.

3.2. The experiment of Danby et al.[3]
and the questionability of the existence
of a “muon neutrino”:

The 1962 experiment of Danby et al. (which
Lederman described in his book “The God
Particle”) was designed to detect the presence
of neutrinos in the decay of pions and kaons.
In that experiment, pions, kaons and neutrons
(products of the collision of 15Gev protons
with a beryllium target) traveled through an
unshielded distance of 21 meters, followed by
another distance of 13.5 meters through a steel
shield. Any particle that survived the path
through the steel shield ﬁnally entered a care-
fully designed spark chamber. The essential
requirement in the experiment (designed to
detect the neutrinos only) was that a mean-
ingful “event” must be one that originates in-
side the chamber.
In other words, to reject
muons or other charged particles that survive
the steel shield, it was necessary that an event
that counts must be one that is initiated by a
neutral particle that penetrates the chamber.
Such a neutral particle would then impact the
aluminum plates inside the chamber, generat-
ing an energetic electron or muon. This ob-
jective was achieved by counting only those
events in which the ﬁrst two spark gaps in the
chamber did not ignite,
indicating that the
event was induced by a neutral particle. Of
course, the primary candidate for the cause of
those observed events was the neutrino. How-
ever, since most of those events resulted in an
energetic muon, Lederman and his colleagues
reached the conclusion that the neutrino in
this case must be a neutrino of a diﬀerent

6

“ﬂavor”: a “muon neutrino”.

but recent evidence suggests otherwise[7].

In view of the above discussion of the Lattes
et al. experiment, how can we interpret Led-
erman’s experiment if we reach the conclusion
that pion decay does not result in a neutrino?
There are two potential explanations for the
events that were observed in that experiment
(regrettably, these were not considered by the
experimenters):

2. Danby et al. convincingly ruled out the
possibility that the cause of the events is the
neutrons that originated from the target; they
also convincingly demonstrated that the cause
must be the pions and the kaons. However, the
possibility of “delayed” neutrons was not con-
sidered. Delayed neutrons can be generated
along the ﬂight path of the pions, by means of
the reaction[8]

1. A decay sequence such as[7]

K + → π+π0
π0 → µ−e+

In that decay sequence, a charged kaon decays
into a charged pion and a neutral pion. Since
the mean lifetime of the charged kaon is on
the order of 10−8 sec., and since relativistic
time dilation should be expected (given the
relativistic velocities of the particles as they
emerge from the target), we can see that the
charged kaon can very reasonably be expected
to travel a major distance through the steel
shield before it decays. In the second reaction
one of the decay products, the neutral pion,
penetrates the chamber, but decays only af-
ter it passes the ﬁrst two spark gaps. The re-
sulting positron is then immediately absorbed
in the aluminum plates, while the muon con-
tinues through the gaps and hence gets de-
tected as an “event”. Now we note that the
ﬁrst decay reaction has a branching ratio of
about 21%. The second reaction, however, has
a branching ratio on the order of 10−8; but
this is actually much higher than the percent-
age of events observed in the experiment and
attributed to the neutrino. Understandably,
the 1962 experimenters believed that reactions
that violate the empirical law of lepton number
conservation (such as this one) cannot occur;

π+ + p → π+ + π+ + n

(5)

(4)

In this reaction, a charged pion travels a cer-
tain distance through the steel shield, strikes
a proton and gives rise to a delayed neutron.
Those delayed neutrons can then cause the
events observed in the spark chamber.

In summary, if we rule out the possibility of
the existence of a “muon neutrino”, then there
are other potentially plausible explanations for
the events observed by Lederman and his col-
leagues in the famous 1962 experiment.

4. Summary and additional con-
clusions:

Since the introduction of the neutrino hy-
pothesis by Pauli in 1930, the neutrino be-
came the standard vehicle that is relied upon
to compensate for the failure of the equation
H = mc2 to explain the majority of the ex-
perimental facts.
In view of this paper and
the earlier paper by the author[1], the neu-
trino must be understood within a very limited
context:
it is likely a highly penetrating par-
ticle that emerges in certain high-energy nu-
clear reactions, such as solar reactions, but it
is not Pauli’s particle and it should not be used
as the standard “solution” when the equation

7

s
t
n
e
v
E

 
 
f
o
 
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

9

6

3

H = mc2 fails to explain the experimental re-
sults. As we have seen, such failure has led to
a path of enormous diﬃculties and has neces-
sitated the introduction of exotic concepts like
“neutrino ﬂavors” and “ﬂavor oscillations”. It
is indeed regrettable that particle physics has
reached such a sad state of aﬀairs.

To terminate our discussion, we show in Fig.2
below the spectrum of the electron’s kinetic
energy that is typically obtained in muon de-
cay experiments[10],[11]:

tion can be understood as follows: the prin-
ciple of conservation of energy implies that
mv2(muon) = mv2(electron). But since the
electron emerges with a relativistic velocity,
then mv2(electron) is approximately equal to
its kinetic energy Ek (since the mass-energy
of 0.511Mev is negligible). Moreover, given
the fact that the muon usually decays while
traveling at sub-relativistic velocities, then we
have

Ek ≈ mµv2
µ,

(6)

where mµ is the rest mass of the muon. Since
the velocity of the decaying muon can vary
widely, we can now clearly see that this ex-
pression explains perfectly the distribution in
Fig.2.
In addition, it is now obvious why a
reaction such as

2cmm

µ+ → e+ + γ

(7)

0

53

105.6

Kinetic Energy, Ek (Mev)

Figure 2: Typical plot of the distribution of the
electron’s (or positron’s) kinetic energy in muon
decay experiments. Like many other cases in
particle physics, the expected quantity of energy
mµc2 (105.6Mev) fails to emerge. The distribu-
tion can be understood in terms of the quantity
µ, rather than the hypothesis of mµc2 minus
mµv2
two neutrinos.

As we can observe from Fig.2, the spectrum of
the kinetic energy of the electron or positron
that emerges from the decay of a muon is
a continuous spectrum, just like many other
In view of the to-
cases in particle physics.
tal energy equation H = mv2, this distribu-

has never been observed experimentally.
There is simply no “lost energy” in muon de-
cay that must appear in the form of a photon
or a neutrino. Wouldn’t the total energy equa-
 
tion H = mv2 be a simpler explanation than
the hypothesis of “a muon decays into an elec-
tron plus a neutrino plus an anti-neutrino”?
One only has to look at a ﬁgure like Fig.2
and wonder why it took more than 70 years
to reach the conclusion that H = mc2 is an
inaccurate physical law.

References

[1] E. Bakhoum, Fundamental Disagree-
ment of Wave Mechanics with Relativity,
Physics Essays, 15, 1, 2002. Online e-print
archive: physics/0206061.

8

[2] L. Lederman, The God Particle, (Hought-
on Miﬄin, New York, NY, 1993), p.293.

[3] G. Danby et al., Observation of High En-
ergy Neutrino Reactions and the Exis-
tence of Two Kinds of Neutrinos, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 9, 1, p.36 (1962). Reprinted
in ref.[11].

[4] C.M.G. Lattes et al., Observations on the
Tracks of Slow Mesons in Photographic
Emulsions, Nature, 160, p.453 (1947).
Reprinted in ref.[11].

[5] R. Bjorklund et al., High Energy Photons
from Proton-Nucleus Collisions, Phys.
Rev., 77, 2, p.213 (1950).

[6] J. Steinberger et al., Evidence for the Pro-
duction of Neutral Mesons by Photons,
Phys. Rev., 78, p.802 (1950). Reprinted
in ref.[11].

[7] R. Appel et al., An Improved Limit on
the Rate of the Decay K + → π+µ+e−,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, p.2450 (2000).

[8] W.S.C. Williams, Nuclear and Particle
Physics (Oxford Univ. Press, 1991).

[9] Particle Data Group, http://pdg.lbl.gov,

2002.

[10] D.H. Perkins, Introduction to High En-
ergy Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1987).

[11] R.N. Cahn and G. Goldhaber, The
Experimental Foundations of Particle
Physics (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1989).

9

