3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Model conception of quantum phenomena and its
capacities.

Yuri A. Rylov

Institute for Problems in Mechanics, Russian Academy of Sciences
101, bld. 1, Vernadski Ave. Moscow, 119526, Russia
email: rylov@ipmnet.ru
Web site: http : //rsf q1.physics.sunysb.edu/˜rylov/yrylov.htm
or mirror Web site: http : //izmod.ipmnet.ru/˜rylov/yrylov.htm

Abstract

One can construct the model conception of quantum phenomena (MCQP)
which relates to the axiomatic conception of quantum phenomena (ACQP),
(i.e. to the conventional quantum mechanics) in the same way, as the statis-
tical physics relates to thermodynamics. Such a possibility is based on a new
conception of geometry, admitting to construct such a deterministic space-
time geometry, where motion of free particles is primordially stochastic. The
space-time geometry can be chosen in such a way that statistical description
of random particle motion coincides with the quantum description. Capacities
of MCQP for investigation of physical phenomena of microcosm are discussed.
Methods of investigations in MCQP appear to be more subtle. For instance,
investigation of the free Dirac equation in framework of MCQP shows that
the Dirac particle is in reality a rotator, i.e. two particles rotating around
their common center of inertia. In the framework of MCQP one can discover
the force ﬁeld, responsible for pair production.

1 Introduction

Sometimes investigation of a new class of physical phenomena is carried out by two
stages. At ﬁrst, the simpler axiomatic conception based on simple empiric consid-
erations arises. Next, the axiomatic conception is replaced by the more developed
model conception, where axioms of the ﬁrst stage are obtained as properties of the
model. Theory of thermal phenomena was developed according to this scheme. At
ﬁrst, the thermodynamics (axiomatic conception) appeared. Next, the statistical
physics (model conception) appeared. Axioms of thermodynamics where obtained
as properties of the chaotic molecule motion. This natural process of the physical

1

theory development is connected with another characteristic property of the human
cognition. Unfortunately, peoples make mistakes, which should be overcame.

There are two ways of the mistake overcoming: (1) compensation of the mistake
and (2) correction of the mistake. Compensation of the mistake is a simpler pro-
cess, than its correction. To compensate the mistake, there is no necessity to know,
whether the mistake takes place and what it consists in. It is suﬃcient to invent
some additional hypotheses, which would explain a class of considered physical phe-
nomena. Unfortunately, at further expansion of the class of considered phenomena
one needs to invent new hypotheses. As the theory is developed, the new hypotheses
are accumulated, and the theory takes a tangly form.

To correct the mistake, one needs to concise that the mistake takes place and
what does it consist in. It is much more diﬃcult, than to compensate the mistake.
But after correction of the mistake there is no necessity to invent new hypotheses.
After correction of the mistake the theory becomes to be more perfect, than the
theory appearing as a result of its compensation. In the Ptolemaic doctrine the mis-
take in our conception on the planetary system was only compensated. Copernicus
had corrected this mistake. Inﬂuence of this correction on the science development
is well known.

The contemporary quantum theory is the ﬁrst (axiomatic) stage in the develop-
ment of the microcosm physics. Formal evidences of this is an existence of quantum
principles. Appearance of the next (model) stage, where the quantum principles
are consequences of the model, seems to be unavoidable. The model conception is
attractive also, because it gives boundaries of the quantum principles application.
(Statistical physics determined, where thermodynamics stopped to be applicable.)
Besides, the contemporary quantum theory is a compensating (Ptolemaic) theory,
i.e. it is a theory constructed as a result of compensation of some ingrain mistakes.
Formal criterion of this circumstance is existence of many additional hypotheses in
the elementary particle theory. The number of these hypotheses is so large, that the
quantum principles do not work essentially in the elementary particle theory.

What kind of mistakes do appear in the microcosm physics? There are two mis-
takes (1) inadequate space-time model, which is approximately valid in the macro-
cosm and essentially false in the microcosm and (2) inadequate statistical description
of relativistic stochastic processes.

The true space-time geometry is such a geometry, where motion of microparticles
is primordially stochastic, although the geometry in itself is not random (intervals
between the events in such a geometry are deterministic, but not random). To
construct such a geometry (T-geometry), one needs to go outside the framework of
Riemannian geometry, which is the most general contemporary geometry ﬁtting for
the space-time description. Being ﬂat, uniform and isotropic, the true geometry of
the absolute space-time distinguishes from the Minkowski geometry only in some
correction containing the quantum constant ~. This correction is essential only for
short space-time intervals, i.e. only in microcosm.

Statistical description of the particle random motion generated by the space-
time geometry leads to the quantum mechanical description (the quantum constant

2

~ appears in the theory via geometry), in the same way as the statistical description
of chaotic molecule motion leads to thermodynamics. Essential diﬀerence between
the two statistical descriptions lies in the diﬀerence between the statistical descrip-
tion for relativistic and nonrelativistic cases. In the case of the statistical physics
both regular and random components of the velocity are nonrelativistic, whereas in
the case of geometric stochasticity the random velocity component is relativistic,
although the nonrelativistic component may be nonrelativistic. As a result even the
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics appears to be a hidden relativistic theory. There
is essential diﬀerence between the relativistic and nonrelativistic statistical descrip-
tions. The fact is that the nonrelativistic statistical description may be probabilistic,
i.e. it can be carried out in terms of the probability density, whereas the relativis-
tic statistical description cannot be produced in terms of the probability theory. The
problem lies in the fact that physical objects to be statistically described are diﬀerent
in the relativistic and nonrelativistic theories.

In the nonrelativistic theory the physical object is a point, i.e. a pointlike (zero-
dimensional) object in three-dimensional space, and the particle world line describes
a history of in the pointlike object. In other words, the particle is primary and its
world line is secondary. In the consequent relativistic theory the situation is inverse.
The physical object is the world line, i.e. the one-dimensional line in the space-time,
whereas the particle and the antiparticle are derivative objects (intersections of the
world line with the surface t =const). In other words, in the consequent relativistic
theory the world line is primary, whereas the particle and antiparticle are secondary.
The term ’WL’ will be used for the world line considered to be a primary physical
object. The diﬀerence in the choice of the primary physical object is conditioned
by diﬀerent relation to the existence of absolute simultaneity in relativistic and
nonrelativistic physics. Statistical description must be a description of primary
physical objects. Foundation for such a description is the density of physical objects
in the three-dimensional space (for particles) or in the space-time (for WLs). Density
ρ (x) of particles at the point x is deﬁned by the relation

(1.1)

(1.2)

where dN is the number of particles in the 3-volume dV . The particle density is
deﬁned as a proportionality coeﬃcient between dN and dV . The density jk(x) of
WLs is deﬁned by the relation

where dN is the ﬂux of WLs through three-dimensional area dSk in the space-time in
vicinity of the point x. The quantity jk(x) is the proportionality coeﬃcient between
dN and dSk in vicinity of the point x. The quantity ρ (x) is a 3-scalar. It can serve
as a basis for introduction of the probability density, whereas the 4-vector jk(x) is
not a nonnegative quantity, and it cannot serve as a basis for introduction of the
probability density, which must be nonnegative quantity.

It is a common practice to think that terms ”probabilistic description” and ”sta-
It is a delusion, because the probabilistic de-

tistical description” are synonyms.

dN = ρ(x)dV

dN = jk (x) dSk

3

scription is a description, founded on a use of the probability theory, whereas the
statistical description is a description dealing with many similar or almost simi-
lar objects. Such a set of similar objects is called statistical ensemble. Statistical
description is an investigation of the statistical ensemble properties. Statistical de-
scription without a use of the probability density is possible. It is necessary only
to investigate the statistical ensemble without a use of the probability theory. We
shall consider statistical ensembles of dynamic or stochastic systems and use essen-
tially the circumstance, that the statistical ensemble is a dynamic system, even if its
elements are stochastic systems. Such an approach may be qualiﬁed as the dynamic
conception of statistical description (DCSD). It is appropriate in any case (rela-
tivistic and nonrelativistic). Statistical ensemble of discrete dynamic or stochastic
systems is a continuous dynamic system, i.e. some ﬂuid. Wave function is a way of
description of an ideal ﬂuid [1]. In other words, the wave function appears as a prop-
erty of some model (but not as a fundamental object whose properties are deﬁned
by axiomatics). Under some conditions the irrotational ﬂow of the ﬂuid is described
by the Schr¨odinger equation [2, 3]. The model conception of quantum phenomena
(MCQP) appears. In its foundation MCQP diﬀers from the conventional quantum
mechanics, which may be qualiﬁed as axiomatic conception of quantum phenomena
(ACQP). The model conception is developed according to other laws, than the ax-
iomatic one. This circumstance can be seen easily at comparison of development of
thermodynamics and statistical physics, which can be qualiﬁed respectively as ax-
iomatic conception of thermal phenomena (ACTP) and model conception of thermal
phenomena (MCTP).

Before consideration of the new geometry conception and MCQP we make an
important note concerning relation of the community of microcosm researchers to
the idea of change ACQP by MCQP. Existing during the XXth century ACQP was
It was also a Ptolemaic conception, which used
not only axiomatic conception.
inadequate space-time geometry, compensating it by means of quantum principles
and refuse of the classical physics principles for a set of physical phenomena. The
secular application of such an eclecticism had serious consequences which displayed
in the investigation style of the microcosm researchers. As far as in many cases it
was unknown in advance which principles (quantum or classical) and in what ratio
between them should be applied, the special style of investigations was elaborated.
Disregard of the logical structure of the theory and hypertrophic attention to exper-
iment are characteristic for this style. The microcosm researchers worked according
to the principle: hypothesis – experiment. The role of theory was negligible due to
its weak capacity of prediction in application to new experiments concerning new
physical phenomena. Essentially an excursive set of rules for description of physical
phenomena was considered as a physical theory. If the rules were true, the theory
was considered to be satisfactory. If not all rules were valid, the theory is considered
to be imperfect, and one needs to replace invalid rules by more perfect ones. If a
new hypothesis was suggested for improvement of the existing theory, the author
of the hypothesis was suggested to answer the following question: ”Are there such
a physical phenomena, which could be explained by means of the new hypothesis

4

and cannot be explained by existing theory?” In the case of negative answer the
suggested hypothesis was rejected. This question was invented especially for a test
of quality of scenarios, i.e. hypotheses, invented for explanation of new physical phe-
nomena. To evaluate the quality of such a test, let us imagine that this question was
asked to Copernicus, who suggested his doctrine. Copernicus could not answer this
question positively. Moreover, in hundred years after appearance of the Copernicus
doctrine there were no positive answer for this question. Only beginning since Isaac
Newton one could answer this question positively. By the way, beneﬁcial inﬂuence of
the Copernicus doctrine on the further science development is unchallengeable. Ad-
vantage of the Copernicus doctrine was simplicity, disengagement and consistency,
but not the formal utility. The considered test is not eﬀective for a quick check of
fundamental modiﬁcation of the existing theory.

2 Geometry

There are two diﬀerent approaches to geometry: mathematical and physical ones.
In the mathematical approach a geometry is a construction founded on a system
of axioms about points and straights. Practically any system of axioms, containing
concepts of a point and a straight, may be called a geometry. Well known mathe-
matician Felix Klein [4] supposed that only such a construction on a point set is a
geometry, where all points of the set have the same properties (uniform geometry).
For instance, Felix Klein insisted that Euclidean geometry and Lobachevsky geom-
etry are geometries, because they are uniform, whereas the Riemannian geometries
are not geometries at all. As a rule the Riemannian geometries are not uniform, and
their points have diﬀerent properties. According to the Felix Klein viewpoint, they
should be called as ”Riemannian topographies” or as ”Riemannian geographies”. It
is a matter of habit and taste how to call the geometry. But Felix Klein was quite
right in the relation, that he suggested to diﬀer between the Euclidean geometry
and Riemannian one. The fact is that the principle of the Riemannian geometry
construction is quite diﬀerent from that of the Euclidean geometry construction.

The Riemannian geometry is obtained as a result of the proper Euclidean ge-
ometry deformation, when the inﬁnitesimal Euclidean interval ds2
E is replaced by
the Riemannian interval ds2 = gikdxidxk. Such a change is a deformation of the
Euclidean space. Such an approach to geometry, when a geometry is a result of the
proper Euclidean geometry deformation will be referred to as a physical approach
to geometry. The obtained geometry will be referred to as a physical geometry. The
physical geometry has no own axiomatics. It uses ”deformed” Euclidean axiomatics.
The physical geometry describes mutual disposition of events in the space-time (or
space). It is described by setting the distance between any two points. The metric
ρ (distance between points) is the only characteristic of a physical geometry. The
world function σ = 1
2 ρ2 [5] is more convenient for description of the physical geom-
etry, because it is real even for the space-time, where ρ = √2σ may be imaginary.
Construction of any physical geometry is determined by the deformation princi-

5

ple [6]. It works as follows. The proper Euclidean geometry
GE can be described in
terms and only in terms of the world function σE, provided σE satisﬁes some con-
straints formulated in terms of σE [6]. It means that all geometric objects
OE can be
OE (σE). Relations
described σ-immanently (i.e. in terms of σE and only of σE)
RE (σE). Any
RE =
between geometric objects are described by some expressions
GA can be obtained from the proper Euclidean geometry by means
physical geometry
of a deformation, when the Euclidean world function σE is replaced by some other
world function σA in all deﬁnitions of Euclidean geometric objects
OE (σE)
RE (σE) between them. As a result we have the
RE =
and in all Euclidean relations
following change

OE =

OE =

OE =

RE =

RE (σE)

RE (σA)

→ OA =

→ RA =

OE (σA) ,

OA and all relations

OE (σE)
The set of all geometric objects
RA between them forms a
physical geometry, described by the world function σA. Index ’E’ in the relations of
GA means that axiomatics of the proper Euclidean geometry was
physical geometry
OE (σE) and of relations between
used for construction of geometric objects
OE =
RE (σE). The same axiomatics is used for all geometric objects
them
OA =
OE (σA) and relations between them
RE (σA) in the geometry
GA. But now
σA. It means that
this axiomatics has another form, because of deformation σE →
GE is the basic geometry for all physical geometries
the proper Euclidean geometry
obtained by means of a deformation of the proper Euclidean geometry. If basic
G
geometry is ﬁxed (it is this case that will be considered further), the geometry on the
arbitrary set Ω of points is called T-geometry (tubular geometry). The T-geometry
is determined [7, 8] by setting the world function σ:

RA =

RE =

σ : Ω

Ω

×

→

R,

σ (P, P ) = 0,

P

∀

∈

Ω

In general, no other constraints are imposed, although one can impose any additional
constraints to obtain a special class of T-geometries. T-geometry is symmetric, if in
addition

σ (P, Q) = σ (Q, P ) ,

P, Q

Ω

∈

∀

Consequent application of only deformation principle admits one to obtain any
physical geometry (T-geometry), which appears to be automatically as consistent as
the Euclidean geometry, which lies in its foundation. The Riemannian geometries
form a special class of T-geometries, determined by the constraint, imposed on the
world function

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

σR (x, x′) =

2

1
2




L


Z
[xx′]

p

gikdxidxk



where σR is the world function of the Riemannian space, and
L[xx′] means a geodesic
segment between the points x and x′. Riemannian geometry is determined by the
dimension n and n (n + 1) /2 functions gik of one point x, whereas the class of all

6

possible T-geometries is essentially more powerful, because it is determined by one
function σ of two points x and x′.

In general, the deformation principle admits one to obtain such geometries, where
non-one-dimensional tubes play the role of the straight lines. The real space-time
geometry is such a kind. But creators of the Riemannian geometry supposed that
a geometry with tubes instead of straights was impossible. The restriction (2.3)
on Riemannian geometries was introduced to forbid deformation transforming one-
dimensional Euclidean straights to many-dimensional tubes. But in nonuniform
physical geometry one fails to suppress the tubular character of straights. In the
Riemannian geometry one succeeds to make this, only refusing from the consequent
application of the deformation principle and using additional means of the geometry
construction. As a result the Riemannian geometry appears to be not quite conse-
quent construction. This is displayed, in particular, in lack of absolute parallelism,
whereas in any physical geometry constructed in accordance with the deformation
principle the absolute parallelism takes place.(see details in [6]).

The tubular character of timelike straights in the real space-time is connected
with the stochastic character of the free particles motion in such a space-time, be-
P0P1, passing through the points P0 and P1, is determined
cause the straight (tube)
by the relation

T

P0P1 =

T

R

−−→P0P1||

|

−−→P0R

n

o

P0P1 is a set of such points R, that vectors −−→P0P1 and
according to which the tube
−−→P0R are parallel. The tubular character of the straight (thick straight) means that
there are many directions −−→P0R, parallel to the vector −−→P0P1. On the other hand, the
motion of a free particle in the curved space-time is described by the equation of a
geodesic

T

d ˙xi =

kl ˙xkdxl,
Γi

dxl = ˙xidτ

−

(2.4)

where Γi
kl is the Christoﬀel symbol. Equation (2.4) describes the parallel transport
of the velocity vector ˙xi of the particle along the direction dxi = ˙xidτ , determined
by the velocity vector ˙xi. If there are many vectors parallel to the velocity vector
˙xi, the parallel transport (2.4) appears to be not single-valued, and the world line
becomes to be random.

The ﬂat uniform isotropic space-time is described by the world function [9]

σ = σM + D (σM) ,

D (σM) =

10−21cm2,

if σM >

(2.5)

~

2bc ≥

~

2bc

where σM is the world function of the Minkowski space, c is the speed of the light.
The distortion function D (σM) describes the character of quantum stochasticity. In
the space with unvanishing distortion D (σM) the particle mass is geometrized [9],
10−17g/cm is the constant, describing connection between the geometric
and b
mass µ and usual mass m by means of the relation m = bµ. Form of the distortion
function D (σM) is determined by the demand that the stochasticity generated by
distortion is the quantum stochasticity, i.e. the statistical description of the free

≤

7

stochastic particle motion is equivalent to the quantum description in terms of the
Schr¨odinger equation [9].

3 Statistical description

A

Ed [

Ed[Sd(P )], where P are parameters describing

Sd] of deterministic classical particles

Let the statistical ensemble
by the action
charge). Let under inﬂuence of some stochastic agent the deterministic particle
turn to a stochastic particle
Sst. The action
A
Sred[Sd] =
Sst] is reduced to the action
Est [
A
A
interacting deterministic particles
Sd. The action
the form
particle
interaction of particles

Sd be described
Sd (for instance, mass,
Sd
Est[Sst] for the statistical ensemble
Sd] of identical
Sred [
Sd has
Ed[Sd(Peﬀ )], where parameters Peﬀ are parameters P of the deterministic
A
Sd, averaged over the statistical ensemble, and this averaging describes

Sred[Sd] as a functional of

Est[Sst] for some set

A

Sd] [12, 11]. It means that

Sd in the set
Est[Sst] =

Sred [
Sred[Sd(P )] =

Ed[Sd(Peﬀ )]

In other words, stochasticity of particles
interaction of

Sd in

Sred [

A

A

A
Sst in the ensemble
Sd], and this interaction is described by a change

Est [

Sst] is replaced by

P

Peﬀ

→

in the action

Ed[Sd(P )].

A

Action for the statistical ensemble of free deterministic particles has the form

[x] =

A

− Z

mc

gik ˙xi ˙xkdξ0dξ,

p

˙xi

≡

dxi
dξ0

where x =

xi

{

, i = 0, 1, 2, 3 is a function of ξ =
}

{

ξ0, ξ

=

}

ξi

{

}

The only parameter for the free particle is its mass m, and the change (3.2) in

, i = 0, 1, 2, 3.

the nonrelativistic case has the form

(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

m

meﬀ = m

1

→

(cid:18)

−

u2
2c2 +

~

∇u

2mc2

(cid:19)

where u = u (t, x) is the mean value of the stochastic velocity component. Quan-
tum constant ~ appears here as coupling constant between the regular and stochastic
components of the particle velocity. The velocity u is considered to be a new de-
pendent variable, and dynamic equation for u is obtained as a result of the action
variation with respect to u [11]. The velocity u is supposed to be small as compared
with the speed of the light c.

In the relativistic case the change (3.2) takes the form

m2

→

m2

eﬀ = m2

1 + ulul + λ∂lul

,

λ =

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

~

mc

(3.5)

8

where ul =

u0, u
}

{

. Then the action (3.4) is transformed to the form

[x, κ] =

A

− Z

mcK

gik ˙xi ˙xkdξ0dξ,

p

K=

1 +

r

~2
m2c2 (κlκl + ∂lκl)

(3.6)

ξ0, ξ

where dependent variables x =
ξi
ξ =
are functions of x. The metric tensor gik =diag
connected with ul by means of the relation

=

{

}

{

}

{

}

,

xi

, i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are a function of variables
κi
i = 0, 1, 2, 3
. Variables κl are

1,

1,

}

,

c2,
{

−

−

{
1
}
−

i = 0, 1, 2, 3. Dependent variables κ =

ul =

κl,

l = 0, 1, 2, 3

(3.7)

~

m

On one hand, the action (3.6) describes a set of deterministic particles interacting
between themselves via self-consistent vector ﬁeld κl. On the other hand, the action
(3.6) describes a quantum ﬂuid. Rotational ﬂow of this ﬂuid is described by one-
component wave function ψ, satisfying the Klein-Gordon equation [10, 11].

In general case the ﬂuid ﬂow is described by two-component wave function,

satisfying the dynamic equation [11]

~2∂k∂kψ

m2c2 +

(∂lsα)

−

− (cid:18)

~2

4

ψ = ~2 ∂l

ρ∂lsα
(cid:0)
2ρ

(cid:1)

∂lsα
(cid:0)

(cid:19)
(cid:1)

where 3-vector s =

is determined by the relations

(σα

sα) ψ

(3.8)

−

s1, s2, s3,

{
ψ∗ = (ψ∗

}
1, ψ∗
2) ,

ψ =

ψ1
ψ2

,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

ρ = ψ∗ψ,

sα =

ψ∗σαψ
ρ

,

α = 1, 2, 3

(3.9)

Here σ =

σ1, σ2, σ3}

{

are Pauli matrices.

From physical viewpoint the quantization procedure (3.5), when the mass m
is replaced by its mean value meﬀ, looks rather reasonable.
Indeed, the value of
meﬀ depends on the state of the stochastic velocity component. Stochastic velocity
component has inﬁnite number of the freedom degrees and consideration of inﬂuence
of the mean value ul on the regular component of the particle velocity appears to be
very complicated. It is described by partial diﬀerential equations, whereas in absence
of this inﬂuence the regular particle motion is described by the ordinary diﬀerential
equations. From physical viewpoint such an interpretation of the quantization looks
more reasonable, than conventional interpretation in terms of wave function and
operators.

The wave function and spin appear here as a way of description of the ideal ﬂuid
[1], i.e. as ﬂuid attributes. In other words, statistical description and hydrodynamic
interpretation of the world function are primary, and wave function is secondary.
Hierarchy of concepts is described by the following two schemes.

ACQP:

quantum
principles

wave

⇒

function ⇒

hydrodynamic
interpretation

MCQP:

statistical
description ⇒

ﬂuid

dynamics ⇒

wave
function

9

Note that transition from ACQP to MCQP became possible only after solution
of such a pure mathematical problem as integration of complete system of dynamic
equations for ideal ﬂuid.

Connection between the ﬂuid and the Schr¨odinger equation is known since the
beginning of the quantum mechanics construction [13, 14].
In after years many
authors developed this interplay known as hydrodynamic interpretation of quantum
mechanics [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. But this interpretation was founded
ultimately on the wave function as a fundamental object of dynamics. It cannot go
outside the framework of quantum principles, because the connection between the
hydrodynamic interpretation and the quantum mechanics was one-way connection.
One could obtain the irrotational ﬂuid ﬂow from the dynamic equation for the wave
function (Schr¨odinger equation), but one did not know how to transform dynamic
equations for a ﬂuid to the dynamic equation for a wave function. In other words,
we did not know how to describe rotational ﬂuid ﬂow in terms of the wave function.
In terms of the wave function we could describe only irrotational ﬂuid ﬂow.

To describe arbitrary ﬂuid ﬂow in terms of a wave function, one needs to in-
tegrate conventional dynamic equations for a ﬂuid (Euler equations). Indeed, the
Schr¨odinger equation

~2

i~ ∂ψ
∂t

+

∇2ψ = 0

(3.10)

2m
may be reduced to the hydrodynamic equations for the variables ρ, v, describing the
ﬂuid state. Substituting ψ = √ρ exp (i~ϕ) in (3.10) and separating real and imagi-
nary parts of the equation, we obtain expressions for time derivatives ∂0ρ and ∂0ϕ.
To obtain expression for the time derivative ∂0v of the velocity v = ~
∇ϕ, we need to
diﬀerentiate dynamic equation for ∂0ϕ, forming combination ∂0v = ∇
. The
reverse transition from hydrodynamic equations to dynamic equations for the wave
function needs a general integration of hydrodynamic equations. This integration is
simple in the partial case of irrotational ﬂow, but it is a rather complicated math-
ematical problem in the general case, when a result of integration has to contain
three arbitrary functions of three arguments. Without producing this integration,
one cannot derive description of a ﬂuid in terms of the wave function, and one can-
not manipulate dynamic equations, transforming them from representation in terms
of ρ, v to representation in terms of wave function and back. This problem has
not been solved for years. It had been solved in the end of eighties, and the ﬁrst
application of this integration can be found in [24]. Systematical application of this
integration for description of quantum phenomena began in 1995 [2, 25].

~
m ∂0ϕ

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

m

4 Capacities of model conception of quantum

phenomena

To evaluate comparative capacities of axiomatic and model approaches, let us imag-
ine that we know only thermodynamic and know nothing on statistical physics and
molecular structure of the matter. The question arises whether it is possible to

10

investigate the crystal structure and nature of crystal symmetry in the framework
of the axiomatic approach (thermodynamics). Such a possibility seems to be rather
problematic, because this problem is rather diﬃcult even in the framework of the
model approach (statistical physics). Researchers trying to understand the structure
and interaction of elementary particles in the framework of the axiomatic approach
(ACQP) are in the position of persons investigating the crystal structure by the ther-
modynamic methods. They has no other possibility, as to invent exotic hypotheses
and to test their validity in experiment.

MCQP as any model conception possesses more subtle and ﬂexile methods of
investigation. For instance, the change (3.5) carries out essentially the quantization
procedure, i.e. transition from classical description to the quantum one. Let us
imagine that the quantization (3.5) is not exactly true, and one needs to correct
it slightly. In the framework of MCQP one needs only to change the form of the
expression (3.5). How to realize such a modiﬁcation in the framework of ACQP is
not clear, because ACQP is connected closely with linearity of dynamic equations
in terms of the wave function.

The hydrodynamic interpretation having a long history [13, 14] should rank
among new methods of investigation. But in the framework of ACQP the hydrody-
namic interpretation is secondary as it follows from the above mentioned schemes. In
the framework of MCQP the hydrodynamic interpretation is primary, and possesses
more subtle methods of investigation. In the framework of ACQP a transition to
semiclassical approximation is carried out by means of transition to the limit ~
0
with some additional conditions. In MCQP this transition is realized by means of
dynamic disquantization [26], which is a relativistic dynamic procedure. At the dy-
−1 ∂l
namic disquantization one removes transversal components ∂⊥k = ∂k
of derivative ∂k, which are orthogonal to the ﬂux 4-vector jk. As a result of dynamic
disquantization the system of partial diﬀerential equations turns to a system of or-
dinary diﬀerential equations. The continuous system can be interpreted in terms
of a discrete dynamic system (with ﬁnite number of the freedom degrees). In the
nonrelativistic case the dynamic disquantization is equivalent to ~
0. In the rel-
ativistic case the quantum constant ~ remains in the discrete dynamic system. It
admits one to obtain a more subtle interpretation.

jkjl (jsjs)

→

→

−

This method was applied for investigation of dynamic system

SD, described by
the Dirac equation [26]. It appears that the classical analog of the Dirac particle
SD is a rotator (but not a single particle), i.e. two particles rotating around their
common center of inertia. This explains freely angular and magnetic momenta of the
Dirac particle. Besides, it appears (quite unexpectedly) that the internal (rotational)
SD are described in nonrelativistic manner
degrees of freedom of the dynamic system
[26, 25, 27].
SD was produced without any
additional supposition. It was investigated simply as a dynamic system by means
of relativistically covariant methods.

Investigation of the dynamic system

As another example, we refer to the problem of the pair production, which is
the central problem in the high energy physics. ACQP cannot say anything on the
pair production mechanism and on the agents, responsible for this process, whereas

11

MCQP can say something pithy on this problem. MCQP vests responsibility for the
pair production on the κ-ﬁeld (3.7), describing stochastic component of the parti-
cle motion. In MCQP the pair production is taken into account on the descriptive
(before-dynamic) level, i.e. the pair production is taken in to account by consider-
ation of ML as a primary physical object, whereas in ACQP the pair production is
taken into account only on the dynamic level, i.e. by means of dynamic equations.
Let us imagine that the particle world line is turns in the time direction. Depending
on situation, such a turn describes either pair production, or pair annihilation. The
κ-ﬁeld creates conditions for such a turn and the pair production. The fact is that
at such a turn in time direction the world line becomes spacelike (m2 < 0) in the
vicinity of the turning point. If one forbids the world line to be spacelike, the pair
production becomes to be impossible. Such a possibility to change the particle mass
and to make it imaginary is rather rare property among the force ﬁelds. For in-
stance, the electromagnetic ﬁeld of any magnitude cannot change the particle mass,
and hence, to produce pairs. According to relation (3.5) the expression containing
κ-ﬁeld enter in the eﬀective squared mass as a factor. If this expression is negative,
the mass becomes imaginary, and the pair production (annihilation) becomes to be
possible [11]. These examples show that MCQP and its subtle investigation methods
can be useful at investigation of the microcosm phenomena properties.

Thus, MCQP makes the ﬁrst successes, but not in the sense that it explains
some new experiments, which could not be explained before. MCQP uses the more
subtle dynamic methods of investigation (hydrodynamic interpretation of relativistic
processes [10, 11], dynamic quantization and disquantization [26]), which cannot be
used by ACQP because of its axiomatic character.

MCQP is essentially more ﬂexible conception, than ACQP, as far as all in MCQP
is determined by the space-time geometry, and the set of all possible geometries is
described by a function of two arguments. The world function (2.5), determining
the microcosm structure is only the ﬁrst rough approximation. If it is necessary, the
expression (2.5) can be modiﬁed in such a way, to take into account inﬂuence of the
matter distribution in the space-time (curvature) and existence of new metric ﬁelds,
generated by the possible asymmetry of the world function [28, 29]. Asymmetric
world function describes the space-time, where the past and the future are unequal
geometrically. One cannot imagine such a thing in the framework of Riemannian
geometry. Expansion of the symmetric world function σ (x, x′) over powers of ηi =
xi

x′i has the form

−

σ (x, x′) =

gik (x′) ηiηk +

σikl (x′) ηiηkηl + ...

(4.1)

1
2

1
6

where gik (x′) describes the gravitational ﬁeld, and σikl (x′) is expressed via deriva-
tives of metric tensor gik (x′). For asymmetric world function the same expansion
has the form [28, 29]

σ (x, x′) = σi (x′) ηi +

σik (x′) ηiηk +

σikl (x′) ηiηkηl + ...

(4.2)

1
2

1
6

12

where three coeﬃcients σi (x′), σik (x′) and σikl (x′) are independent, and each of
them is connected with some metric (geometric) ﬁeld. Coeﬃcient σi (x′) describes a
”vector ﬁeld” which is strong and eﬀective at small space-time intervals. Coeﬃcient
σik (x′) describes the second rank tensor ﬁeld (gravitational ﬁeld) which is strong
and eﬀective at middle space-time intervals. Finally, σikl (x′) is connected with the
third rank tensor ﬁeld, which is strong and eﬀective at large space-time intervals.
Maybe, this ﬁeld is connected with astrophysical problem of dark matter, when one
fails to explain observed motion of stars and galaxies by means of only gravitational
ﬁeld.

At construction of MCQP one did not use any new hypotheses. On the contrary,
ﬂexibility and subtlety of MCQP methods are connected with remove of unwarranted
constraints and correction of mistakes in the approach to geometry and to statistical
description. In other words, MCQP satisﬁes the Newton’s criterion: ”Hypothesis
non ﬁngo.” Only choice of true space-time geometry is determined properties of
physical phenomena in microcosm. This choice must be done in any case. But this
choice may be true, or not completely true.

References

40, 256-278, (1999).

1086, (1995).

[1] Yu. A. Rylov, Spin and wave function as attributes of ideal ﬂuid, J. Math. Phys.

[2] Yu. A. Rylov, Pauli’s electron as a dynamic system Found. Phys. 25, No.7.1055-

[3] Yu. A. Rylov, Hamilton variational principle for statistical ensemble of deter-
ministic systems and its application for ensemble of stochastic systems. Rus. J.
Math. Phys., 9, iss. 3, 335-348, (2002), e-print: math-ph/0011017.

[4] F. Klein, Vorlesungen ¨uber die Entwicklung die Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert

teil 1, Berlin, Springer 1926.

[5] J. L. Synge, Relativity: The General Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1960.

[6] Yu. A. Rylov, Problem of parallelism in geometry and physics. e-print

math.GM/0210413.

[7] Yu. A. Rylov, Extremal properties of Synge’s world function and discrete ge-

ometry. J. Math. Phys. 31, 2876-2890, (1990).

[8] Yu. A. Rylov, Geometry without topology as a new conception of geometry. Int.
Jour. Mat. Mat. Sci. 30, iss. 12, 733-760, (2002), e-print math.MG/0103002.

[9] Yu. A. Rylov, Non-Riemannian model of space-time responsible for quantum

eﬀects. J. Math. Phys. 32, 2092-2098, (1991).

13

[10] Yu. A. Rylov, Quantum mechanics as a dynamic construction. Found. Phys.

28, No.2, 245-271, (1998).

[11] Yu. A. Rylov, Classical description of pair production. e-print physics/0301020.

[12] Yu. A. Rylov, Dynamics of stochastic systems and peculiarities of measurements

in them. E-print physics/0210003.

[13] E. Madelung, Quanten theorie in hydrodynamischer Form. Z.Phys. 40, 322-326,

(1926).

[14] L. de Broglie, Sur la possibilit´e de relier les ph´enomenes d’interference et de
diﬀraction ´e la th´eorie des quanta de lumiere. Comptes Rendus 183, 447-448,
(1926).

[15] D. Bohm, Phys.Rev. 85, 166, 180, (1952).

[16] T. Takabayasi, Progr. Theor. Phys., 8, 143, (1952).

[17] T. Takabayasi, Progr. Theor. Phys., 9, 187, (1953).

[18] L. Janosssy and M.Ziegler, Acta Phys. Hung., 16, 37, (1963).

[19] L. Janosssy and M.Ziegler, Acta Phys. Hung., 16, 345, (1964).

[20] M. Husar and M. Ziegler-Naray, Acta Phys. Acad. Scien. Hung., 26, 223, (1969).

[21] F.J. Belinfante, A Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories, (Pergamon, Oxford,

1973) and references therein.

[22] D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Phys. Rep. 172 (1989) 93 and references therein.

[23] P. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion, (Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1993) and references therein.

[24] Yu.A. Rylov, The equation for isentropic motion of inviscid ﬂuid in terms of

wave function J. Math. Phys. 30, 2516-2520, (1989).

[25] Yu. A. Rylov, Dirac equation in terms of hydrodynamic variables, Advances

Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras 5, No. 1, 1-40.

[26] Yu. A. Rylov, Dynamic disquantization of Dirac equation, eprint quant-

ph/0104060.

[27] Yu. A. Rylov, Anderson’s absolute objects and constant timelike vector hidden

in Dirac matrices. e-print quant-ph/0112091.

[28] Yu. A. Rylov, The Euclidean geometry deformations and capacities of their
application to microcosm space-time geometry. e-print physics/0206017.

[29] Yu. A. Rylov, Asymmetric nondegenerate geometry. e-print math.MG/0205061.

14

