A Gedanken spacecraft that operates using the quantum vacuum
(Dynamic Casimir eﬀect)

quant/ph

Quantum Fields LLC, Richland Center WI 53581

G. Jordan Maclay∗

Robert. L. Forward

Forward Unlimited LLC, Clinton WA 98236
(Dated: February 22,2003; Received textdate; Revised textdate; Accepted textdate;
Published textdate)
Abstract
Conventional rockets are not a suitable technology for deep space missions. Chemical rockets
require a very large weight of propellant, travel very slowly compared to light speed, and require
signiﬁcant energy to maintain operation over periods of years. For example, the 722 kg Voyager
spacecraft required 13,600 kg of propellant to launch and would take about 80,000 years to reach the
nearest star, Proxima Centauri, about 4.3 light years away. There have been various attempts at
developing ideas on which one might base a spacecraft that would permit deep space travel, such as
spacewarps.
In this paper we consider another suggestion from science ﬁction and explore how the
quantum vacuum might be utilized in the creation of a novel spacecraft. The spacecraft is based
on the dynamic Casimir eﬀect, in which electromagnetic radiation is emitted when an uncharged
mirror is properly accelerated in the vacuum. The radiative reaction produces a dissipative force
on the mirror that tends to resist the acceleration of the mirror. This force can be used to
accelerate a spacecraft attached to the mirror. We also show that, in principal, one could obtain
the power to operate the accelerated mirror in such a spacecraft using energy extracted from the
quantum vacuum using the standard Casimir eﬀect with a parallel plate geometry. Unfortunately
the method as currently conceived generates a miniscule thrust, and is no more practical than a
spacewarp, yet it does provide an interesting demonstration of our current understanding of the
physics of the quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld in vacuum.

3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: jordanmaclay@quantumﬁelds.com

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Our objective in this paper is to explore how one might make use of the properties
of the quantum vacuum in the creation of a spacecraft. Rockets employing chemical or
If
ionic propellants require the transport of prohibitively large quantities of propellant.
the properties of the quantum vacuum could somehow be utilized in the production of
thrust, that would provide a decided advantage since the vacuum is everywhere. The three
milestones for deep space or interstellar travel in the NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics
(BPP) Project are: 1) the development of propellantless propulsion; 2) the development of
methods that reduce travel time by orders of magnitude; and 3) new methods of providing
the energy to operate the spacecraft[1]. At this embryonic stage in the exceedingly brief
history of interstellar spacecraft, we are attempting in this paper to distinguish between
what is possible and what is not possible within the context of our current understanding
of the relevant physics. Science ﬁction writers have written about the use of the quantum
vacuum for spacecraft for decades but no research has validated this suggestion. Arthur C.
Clark, who proposed geosynchonous communications satellites in 1945, described a”quantum
ramjet drive” in 1985 in ”Songs of Distant Earth”, and observed in the Acknowledgement,
”If vacuum ﬂuctuations can be harnessed for propulsion by anyone besides science-ﬁction
writers, the purely engineering problems of interstellar ﬂight would be solved[2].”

Since we do not know how to harness the energy of vacuum ﬂuctuations, we have focused
on a slightly diﬀerent approach in this paper, and have considered how we might transfer
momentum to the vacuum from the spacecraft. The spacecraft proposed in this paper,
which addresses the ﬁrst and last BPP milestones, is described as a ”gedanken spacecraft”
since its design is not intended as an engineering guide, but just to illustrate possibilities.
Indeed based on our current understanding of quantum vacuum physics, one could reason-
ably argue that a better gedanken spacecraft could be propelled by oscillating a charged
mirror or simply using a ﬂashlight or laser to generate photons. Although the performance
of the gedanken spacecraft as presented is disappointing and is no more practical than a
spacewarp[3], it illustrates many current notions about the quanum vacuum, and it is in-
teresting to understand the potential role of quantum vacuum phenomena in a macroscopic
system like space travel. Obviously, we need some major breakthroughs in our understand-
ing if we are to realized the dream of space travel as presented in science ﬁction works.

In 1948, when physicists were developing new ideas in quantum ﬁeld theory, Lamb made a
seminal measurement showing a shift in the energy levels of the hydrogen atom that was in-
terpreted as due to the interaction of the atom with the quantum ﬂuctuations of the vacuum
state of the quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld[4]. Theory showed this ﬁeld produced a complex
Independently, Casimir
radiative shift that shifted both the energy level and its lifetime[5].
made a prediction of an attractive quantum vacuum force that would exist between two
parallel, uncharged, metal plates due to the boundary conditions the quantized ﬂuctuating
vacuum electromagnetic ﬁeld must meet on the surface of the plates[6]. About twelve years
later, Lifshitz provided another explanation of the Casimir eﬀect based on ﬂuctuations in the
very long range behavior of the intermolecular potentials. Five decades passed before there
was experimental veriﬁcation in the landmark experiments of Lamoroux [7]using a torsion
pendulum, and Mohideen[8] using an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). In the AFM mea-
surements a 200 µm sphere, metallized with gold, is attached to the end of a cantilever, and
moved near a ﬂat surface. The deﬂection of the cantilever is measured optically, allowing
the detection of nN forces. The AFM measurements have become increasingly precise and

2

corrections due to conductivity, temperature, and surface roughness have been developed,
giving agreement between theory and experiment at about the 1 % level[9]. Current eﬀorts
are designed to explore the temperature dependence of the Casimir force[10]. Proposals
regarding the appearance of and the use of Casimir forces in micromechanical devices are
being realized in microelectromechanical systems [11][12]. Buks et al have measured ad-
hesion energies due to Casimir forces using gold ﬁlms[13].
Casimir forces have recently
been used to actuate a microelectromechanical torsion device[14]. The inverse fourth power
behavior of the parallel plate Casimir force has been exploited to make this device operate
as an anharmonic oscillator which serves as a sensitive position sensor[15]. The concept of
a vacuum force that arises from the application of boundary condition has been generalized
to various geometries and topologies, and has been reviewed[16][17][18].

The experimental veriﬁcation of Casimir’s prediction is often cited as proof of the reality
of the vacuum energy density of quantum ﬁeld theory. Yet, as Casimir himself observed,
other interpretations are possible:

The action of this force [between parallel plates] has been shown by clever
experiments and I think we can claim the existence of the electromagnetic zero-
point energy without a doubt. But one can also take a more modest point of
view. Inside a metal there are forces of cohesion and if you take two metal plates
and press them together these forces of cohesion begin to act. On the other
hand you can start with one piece and split it. Then you have ﬁrst to break
chemical bonds and next to overcome van der Waals forces of classical type and
if you separate the two pieces even further there remains a curious little tail.
The Casimir force, sit venia verbo, is the last but also the most elegant trace of
cohesion energy [19].

The nearly inﬁnite zero-point ﬁeld energy density is a simple and inexorable consequence
of quantum theory, but it brings puzzling inconsistencies with another well veriﬁed theory,
general relativity. Casimir eﬀects have also been derived and interpreted in terms of source
ﬁelds arising from ﬂuctuations within matter in both conventional [16] and nonconventional
[20] quantum electrodynamics. These interpretations have spawned the evolution of two
views which have proved to be equivalent in the limited systems considered to date.
In
one view the energy in the quantum vacuum is seen as a consequence of the ﬂuctuations
in the electrical potential from nearby matter;
in the other view the energy in space is
seen as due to the ground state of the quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld. No experiment
yet proposed has been shown to clearly distinguish between these two viewpoints, but to
date only experiments on ﬂat or nearly ﬂat surfaces have been done. Experiments with
resonant cavities may resolve some of these questions[21]. Theoretical calculations are often
done using the simplest approach or the one of personal preference.
In this paper, we will
perform computations using the quantized vacuum ﬁeld model at zero Kelvin and refer to
the properties of the quantum vacuum, with the current understanding that an equivalvent
derivation could probably be based on eﬀects which arise from the tails of van der Waals
forces between molecules.
Intuitively one might conjecture that space travel based on the
properties of the quantum vacuum is more likely to become a reality if there is actually
ﬂuctuating energy within all space, and we are not just dealing with the tails of molecular
potentials of matter nearby.

Casimir eﬀects result from changes in the ground-state ﬂuctuations of a quantized ﬁeld
that occur because of the particular boundary conditions. Casimir eﬀects occur for all

3

quantum ﬁelds and can also arise from the choice of topology. In the special case of the
vacuum electromagnetic ﬁeld with dielectric or conductive boundaries, various approaches
suggest that Casimir forces can be regarded as macroscopic manifestations of many-body
retarded van der Waals forces [16], [22].

In 1970, Moore considered the eﬀect of an uncharged one dimensional boundary surface
that moved, with the very interesting prediction that it should be possible to generate real
photons from this motion[23]. Energy conservation requires the existence of a radiation
reaction force working against the motion of the mirror[24]. The energy expended moving
the mirror against the radiative force goes into electromagnetic radiation. This eﬀect, gen-
erally referred to as the dynamic or adiabatic Casimir eﬀect, has been reviewed [17][18][25].
The vacuum ﬁeld exerts a force on the moving mirror that tends to damp the motion. This
dissipative force may be understood as the mechanical eﬀect of the emission of radiation
induced by the motion of the mirror. The Hamiltonian is quadratic in the ﬁeld operators,
and formally analogous to the Hamiltonian describing photon pair creation by parametric
interaction of a classical pump wave of frequency ωo with a nonlinear medium[26]. Pairs of
photons with frequencies ω1 + ω2 = ωo are created out of the vacuum state. Furthermore
the photons have the same polarization, and the components of the corresponding wave vec-
−→
−→
k2 taken along the mirror surface must add to zero because of the translational
k1 and
tors
symmetry:

−→
k1 ·

−→
k2 ·

x +

x = ω1 sin θ1 + ω2 sin θ2 = 0

(1)

This last equation relates the angles of emission of the photon pairs with respect to the
x, which is normal to the surface. It is interesting that the photons emitted by
unit vector
the dynamic Casimir eﬀect are entangled photons. This analysis in terms of the eﬀective
Hamiltonian is illuminating but not complete for perfect mirrors, because no consistent
eﬀective Hamiltonian can be constructed in this case.

b

b

b

The dynamic Casimir eﬀect was studied for a single, perfectly reﬂecting mirror with arbi-
trary non-relativistic motion and a scalar ﬁeld in three dimensions by Ford and Vilenkin[27].
They obtained expressions for the vacuum radiation pressure on the mirror. Barton and
Eberlein extended the analysis using a 1 dimensional scalar ﬁeld to a moving body with
a ﬁnite refractive index[28]. The vacuum radiation pressure and the radiated spectrum
for a non-relativistic, perfectly reﬂecting,
inﬁnite, plane mirror was computed by Neto
and Machado for the electromagnetic ﬁeld in three dimensions, and shown to obey the
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem from linear response theory[29][24]. This theorem shows
the ﬂuctuations for a stationary body yield information about the mean force experienced
by the body in nonuniform motion. Jaekel computed shifts in the mass of the mirror for a
scalar ﬁeld in two dimension[30]. The mirror mass is not constant, but rightfully a quan-
tum variable because of the coupling of the mirror to the ﬁelds by the radiation pressure.
A detailed analysis was done by Barton and Calogeracos for a dispersive mirror in 1 di-
mension, that includes radiative shift in the mass of the mirror and the radiative reaction
force[31]. This model can be generalized to an inﬁnitesimally thin mirror with ﬁnite surface
conductivity and a normally incident electromagnetic ﬁeld.

It might be of some interest to indicate why we analyze this spacecraft in terms of
the dynamic Casimir eﬀect and not the Unruh Davies radiation. Historically, Unruh and
Davies made the seminal investigations into the thermal eﬀects of acceleration on vacuum
ﬂuctuations[32][33]. They derived that a detector with constant acceleration a for all
time (-inﬁnity to +inﬁnity) would observe black body radiation at temperature ~a/2πck,
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. However, the renormalized vacuum expectation value

4

of the stress energy momentum tensor vanishes for the ﬁeld with the zero velocity detector,
and by the transformation properties of tensors, it must also vanish for the accelerated
state. Hence the thermal quanta that excite the accelerated detector have been described
as ’ﬁctitious’ or ’quasi’ thermal quanta, although this conundrum may be more a reﬂection of
the limited meaning of the term ’particle’ in accelerated reference frames or curved spaces[25].
It has been suggested that the thermal spectrum appears to arise not from the ”creation of
particles” but the distortion of the zero-point ﬁeld[34]. Barton has observed that unresolved
diﬃculties still obstruct any clear understanding of accounts of radiative processes referred
to uniformly accelerated frames, and cites the unphysical nature of uniform acceleration
for all time[28]. Hence we have adopted the language and the methods of analysis that
characterize the dynamic Casimir eﬀect in our analysis of the gedanken spacecraft.

All calculations of electromagnetic ﬁelds and radiative forces to date on moving plates
have been for inﬁnite plates. The contribution to the radiative force on a vibrating inﬁnite
plate due to electromagnetic radiation is the same for both sides of the plate[29]. From
the perspective of making a numerical estimate for a ﬁnite plate, this means the theoretical
results need to be adapted.
To do this we assume that the plate is large enough with
respect to the wavelengths of the Fourier components of the motion so that diﬀraction
eﬀects are small, and that the force/area for the inﬁnite plate is approximately the result for
a ﬁnite plate. Eberlein has made the very interesting suggestion that one could calculate
the force for a ﬁnite two sided plate as the zero eccentricity limit of the force on an oblate
spheroid[35][36].

Recently suggestions have been made to measure the motion induced radiation escaping
from a cavity in which one partially transmitting wall is vibrating[37]. The rate of photon
emission is enhanced by the ﬁnesse of the cavity and therefore may be orders of magnitude
greater than for a plate. Plunien and his collaborators showed that the rate of photon
emission by a vibrating cavity can be further enhanced by several orders of magnitude if
the temperature is several hundred degrees above zero Kelvin[38]. The enhancement is
proportional to the ground state photon population at the given temperature.

In Section II, we present a simpliﬁed analysis for the use of the dynamic Casimir eﬀect to
accelerate a spacecraft. Also discussed is the possibility of powering the accelerating mirror
with energy extracted from the quantum vacuum using the parallel plate Casimir force. In
Section III a detailed description is given of a mirror trajectory that produces a net impulse
during each cycle of operation. After a discussion of some possible methods to increase the
thrust and impulse, the conclusion follows.

II. A SIMPLE MODEL FOR A QUANTUM VACUUM SPACECRAFT

The important physical features of using the dynamic Casimir eﬀect to accelerate a
spacecraft can be seen in a simpliﬁed, heuristic model. Assume that the spacecraft has an
energy source, such as a battery, that powers a motor that vibrates a mirror or a system
of mirrors in a suitable manner to generate radiation. We will assume that there are no
internal losses in the motor or energy source. We assume that at the initial time ti, the
mirrors are at rest. Then the mirrors are accelerated by the motor in a suitable manner to
generate a net radiative reaction on the mirror, and at the ﬁnal time tf , the mirrors are no
longer vibrating, and the spacecraft has attained a non-zero momentum. We can apply
the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics to the system of the energy source, motor, and mirror at

5

times ti and tf :

∆Q = ∆U + ∆W

where ∆U represents the change in the internal energy in the energy source, −∆W represents
the work done on the mirrors moving against the vacuum, and ∆Q represents any heat
transferred between the system and the environment. We will assume that we have a
thermally isolated system and ∆Q = 0 so

0 = ∆U + ∆W

By the conservation of energy, the energy ∆U extracted from the battery goes into work
done on the moving mirror −∆W. Since the mirror has zero vibrational kinetic energy and
zero potential energy at the beginning and the end of the acceleration period, and is assumed
to operate with no mechanical friction, all work done on the mirror goes into the energy of
the emitted radiation and the kinetic energy of the spacecraft of mass M :

Thus the energy of the radiation emitted due to the dynamic Casimir eﬀect equals

∆W = ∆R + M (∆V )

/2

2

∆R = −∆U − M (∆V )

/2 > 0

2

The frequency of the emitted photons depends on the Fourier components of the motion
of the mirror. We assume that the radiant energy can be expressed as a sum of energies of
ni photons each with frequency ωi :

Let us assume that all photons are emitted normally from one side of the accelerating surface.
This assumption is not valid, as Eq.1 and the work of Neto and Machado [24] clearly show,
If
but it allows us to obtain a best case scenario and illustrates the main physical features.
all photons are emitted normally from one surface, then the total momentum transfer ∆P
is :

where c is the speed of light. Using Eq. 4, we obtain the result:

In a non-relativistic approximation ∆P = M∆V and the change in velocity ∆V of the

spacecraft is to second order in ∆U/Mc2:

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

∆R =

niℏωi

Xi

∆P =

Xi

ni

ℏωi
c

=

∆R
c

∆P =

−∆U
c

−

M (∆V )
2c

∆V
c

=

−∆U
Mc2 +

∆U
Mc2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

2

6

This represents a maximum change in velocity attainable by use of the dynamic Casimir ef-
fect (or by the emission of electromagnetic radiation generated by more conventional means)
when the energy ∆U is expended. The ratio ∆U/Mc2is expected to be a small number,

for a chemical fuel
and we can neglect the second term in Eq. 8. (As a point of reference,
the ratio of the heat of formation to the mass energy is approximately 10−10 .) With this
approximation, we ﬁnd the maximum value of ∆V /c equals ∆U/Mc2, the energy obtained
from the energy source divided by the rest mass energy of the spacecraft.
It follows that
the kinetic energy of the motion of the spacecraft Eke can be expressed as

Eke =

M(∆V )2
2

= ∆U

∆U
2Mc2

(9)

This result shows that the conversion of potential energy ∆U from the battery into kinetic
energy of the spacecraft is an ineﬃcient process since ∆U/Mc2 is a small factor. Almost
all of the energy ∆U has gone into photon energy. This ineﬃciency follows since the ratio
of momentum to energy for the photon is 1/c.

In our derivation, no massive particles are ejected from the space craft (propellantless
propulsion ) and we have neglected: 1. the change in the mass of the spacecraft as the stored
energy is converted into radiation, 2. radiative mass shifts, 3. complexities related to high
energy vacuum ﬂuctuations and divergences, 4. all dissipative forces in the system used to
make the mirror vibrate. These assumptions are consistent with a heuristic non-relativistic
approximation.

In this simpliﬁed model, we have not made any estimates about the rate of photon
emission and how long it would take to reach the maximum velocity. Rates are typically
very low, typically 10−5 photons/sec [24].

A. Use of the static Casimir eﬀect as an energy source

In order to explore the possibility of a spacecraft that is based completely on quantum
vacuum properties, consider the use of an arrangement of perfectly conducting, uncharged,
parallel plates in vacuum as an energy source. The Casimir energy UC(x) at zero degrees
Kelvin between plates of area A, separated by a distance x is:

If we allow the plates to move from a large initial separation a to a very small ﬁnal sepa-
ration b then the change in the vacuum energy energy between the plates is approximately:

The attractive Casimir force has done work on the plates, and, in principal, we can build
a device to extract this energy with a suitable, reversible, isothermal process, and use it to
accelerate the mirrors. We neglect any dissipative forces in this device, and assume all of
the energy ∆UC can be utilized. Thus the maximum value of ∆VC
obtainable using the
energy from the Casimir force ”battery” is

c

UC(x) = −

π2
720

~cA
x3

∆UC = UC(b) − UC(a)
π2
720

~cA
b3

≈ −

∆VC
c

=

π2
720

1
Mc2

~cA
b3

7

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

We can make an upper bound for this velocity by making further assumptions about the
composition of the plates. Assume that the plate of thickness L is made of a material with
a rectangular lattice that has a mean spacing of d, and that the mass associated with each
lattice site is m. Then the mass of one plate is:

MP = AL

m
d3

In principal, it is possible to make one of the plates in the battery the same as the plate
accelerated to produce radiation by the dynamic Casimir eﬀect. As the average distance
between the plates is decreased, the extracted energy is used to accelerate the plates over
very small amplitudes.
If we assume we need to employ two plates in our spacecraft, and
that the assembly to vibrate the plates has negligible mass, then the total mass of the
spacecraft is M = 2MP and we obtain an upper limit on the increase in velocity:

~

=

∆VC
c

π2
1440
The ﬁnal velocity is proportional to the Compton wavelength (~/mc) of the lattice mass
m divided by the plate thickness L. Assume that the ﬁnal spacing between the plates is
one lattice constant (d = b), that the lattice mass m equals the mass of a proton mp, and
that the plate thickness L is one Bohr radius ao = ~2/mee2, then we obtain (α is the ﬁne
structure constant with approximate value of 1/137):

d3
b3

Lmc

(15)

(14)

(16)

∆VC
c

=

π2
1440

αme
mp

Substituting numerical values we ﬁnd:

π2
1440

=

1
137

∆VC
c

1
1800
This corresponds to a disappointing ﬁnal velocity of about 8 m / s, about 103 times smaller
than for a large chemical rocket. As anticipated, the gedanken spacecraft is very slow despite
the unrealistically favorable assumptions made in the calculation, yet it does demonstrate
that it is possible to base the operation of a spacecraft entirely on the properties of the
quantum vacuum.

= 2. 78 × 10

(17)

−8

B. Comments on the possible use of vacuum ﬂuctuations as an energy source

Let us brieﬂy comment on the long range possibility of extracting larger amounts of energy
If, for example, it were possible to make a structure equivalent
from vacuum ﬂuctuations.
to a parallel plate structure that could have a ﬁnal state with a separation 100 or 1000
times smaller than as assumed above, then we would have the suggestion of a spacecraft
operating in the relativistic regime. Without a new approach, such a development is
probably not possible since the Casimir force decreases for separations less than the plasma
wavelength.
(Several new approaches are discussed in Section III A.) The reﬂectivity
of a metal plate depends on the applied frequency, and for frequencies above the plasma
frequency the reﬂectivity drops, causing the Casimir force to decrease. Alternatively, if there

8

were a device that could continuously extract energy from the quantum ﬂuctuations of the
vacuum ﬁeld, then this vacuum powered spacecraft, and a lot of other unusual things, might
become practical.

It is important to note that utilizing energy of the quantum ﬂuctuations of the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld does not appear to directly violate known laws of physics, based on the work
of Forward and Cole and Puthoﬀ, however improbable or impossible such a development
might seem [39][40]. Forward showed that it is possible to conceive of a device, a foliated
capacitor, in which one could extract electrical energy from the quantum vacuum to do
work. The energy is extracted as the portions of the capacitor that repel each other due
to electrostatic forces come together under the inﬂuence of the Casimir force[39]. Cole and
Puthoﬀ used stochastic electrodynamics to examine the process of removing energy from the
vacuum ﬂuctuations at zero temperature from the viewpoint of thermodynamics and showed
there is no violation of the laws of thermodynamics[40].
In the same spirit, Rueda has
suggested that very high energy particles observed in space may derive their kinetic energy
In a careful analysis,
from a long term acceleration due to the stochastic vacuum ﬁeld[41].
Cole has shown that this process of energy transfer from the vacuum ﬁeld to kinetic energy
of the particles does not violate the laws of thermodynamics[42].
In stochastic electrody-
namics one treats the vacuum ﬂuctuations as a universal random classical electromagnetic
ﬁeld. A formal analogy exists between stochastic electrodynamics and quantum electrody-
namics: the ﬁeld correlation functions in one theory are related to the Wightman functions
in the other theory[43]. Pinto has done a calculation of a solid state Casimir device which
is described as a transducer of vacuum energy which can operate in a repetitive cycle [44].
It is our opinion that further research is needed to gain a greater understanding of what
is possible and what are the fundamental limitations and restrictions in processes involving
energy transfer with the quantum vacuum. One can take an alternative viewpoint here, that
we are just extracting energy from the tails of the molecular potentials, and that much more
energy would be available if we utilized the entire potential, for example, by burning the
material. However, this approach just leads us back to the known limitations of chemical
fuels.

III. DETAILED MODEL FOR PROPULSION USING DYNAMIC CASIMIR EF-
FECT

Assume we have a ﬂat, perfectly reﬂecting, mirror whose equilibrium position is
x = 0. At a time t where ti < t < tf the location of the mirror is given by x(t). Neto has
given an expression for the force per unit area F (t) on such a mirror[29]:

F (t) = lim
δx→0

~c
30π2 (cid:20)

1
δx

d4x(t)
c4dt4 −

d5x(t)
c5dt5 (cid:21)

(18)

where δx represents the distance above the mirror at which the stress-energy tensor is
evaluated. The second term represents the dissipative force that is related to the creation
of travelling wave photons, in agreement with its interpretation as a radiative reaction.
In
computing the force due to the radiation from the mirror’s motion, the eﬀect of the radiative
reaction on x(t) is neglected in the nonrelativistic approximation. The divergent ﬁrst term
can be understood in several ways. Physically it is a dispersive force that arises from
the scattering of low frequency evanescent waves. The divergence can be related to the

9

unphysical nature of the perfect conductor boundary conditions. Forcing the ﬁeld to vanish
on the surface requires its conjugate momentum to be unbounded. Thus the average of
the stress-energy tensor hTµνi is singular at the surface for the same reason that single-
particle quantum mechanics would require a position eigenstate to have inﬁnite energy[27].
This divergent term can be lumped into a mass renormalization, and therefore disappears
from the dynamical equations when they are expressed in terms of the observed mass of
the body[28][30]. We will not discuss this term further. We will assume that diﬀractions
eﬀects are small for our ﬁnite plates.

The total energy radiated per unit plate area E can be expressed as

Substituting Eq. 18 for F (t) we ﬁnd

E = −

dtF (t)

dx(t)
dt

t2

Z
t1

E =

~
30π2c4

d3x(t)

2

(cid:18)

dt3 (cid:19)

dt

t2

Z
t1

The total impulse I per unit plate area can also be computed as the integral of the force
per unit area over time:

I =

dtF (t) = −

~
30π2

1
c4 (cid:18)

d4x(t)
dt4

|t2 −

d4x(t)
dt4

|t1(cid:19)

t2

Z
t1

The total impulse I equals the mass of the system M per unit area times the change in
velocity ∆V in a non-relativistic approximation:

I = M∆V

We want to specify a trajectory for the mirror that will give a net impulse. One of the
trajectories that has been analyzed is that of the harmonic oscillator[37][27].
In this case,
the mirror motion is in a cycle and we can compute the energy radiated per cycle per unit
area and the impulse per cycle per unit area. For a harmonic oscillator of frequency Ω and
period T = 2π/Ω, there is only one Fourier component of the motion, so the total energy of
each pair of photons emitted is ~Ω = ~(ω1 + ω2). For a harmonically oscillating mirror the
displacement is

xho(t) = Xo sin Ωt

(23)

A computation based on Eqs. 20 and 21 shows there will be a net power radiated in a cycle,
however, the dissipative force for the harmonic oscillator Fho will average to zero over the
entire cycle as shown in Fig. 1, so there will be no net impulse.

In order to secure a net impulse, we need a modiﬁed mirror cycle. One such model
cycle can be readily constructed by using the harmonic function xho(t) over the ﬁrst and
last quadrants of the cycle, where the force Fho is positive, and a cubic function xc(t) over
the middle two quadrants where Fho is negative:
(Ωt − π)3
(π/2)3 −

(Ωt − π)
π/2

3Xo
2

xc(t) =

Xo
2

(24)

10

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

FIG. 1: The displacement xho and the radiative reaction force Fho, bold line, for a harmonically
oscillating mirror plotted as a function of the time. For convenience Fho and xho are normalized
to unity amplitude.

FIG. 2: The normalized displacement for a harmonically oscillating mirror xho(t), solid line, and
the cubic function xc(t), shown by the bold dots.

The coeﬃcients for the cubic polynomial are chosen so that at Ωt = π/2, 3π/2 the displace-
ment and the ﬁrst derivatives of xc(t) and xho(t) are equal. As can be seen from Fig. 2,the
cubic function xc(t) matches xho(t) quite closely for t in the interval .25 < t/T < .75. Of
course the higher order derivatives do not match, and that is precisely why the force diﬀers.
The similarity in displacement and the diﬀerence in the resulting force is striking. For the
mirror displacement xm(t) in our model we choose:

xm(t) = xho(t)
xm(t) = xc(t)

for 0 ≤ t/T ≤ 0.25; 0.75 ≤ t/T ≤ 1
for 0.25 < t/T < 0.75

Fig. 3 shows xm(t) plotted with the corresponding force per unit area Fm(t) obtained from
Eq. 18. The force Fm(t) is positive in the ﬁrst and last quarter of the cycle, and vanishes
in the middle, where the trajectory is described by the cubic. The energy radiated per area
per cycle for our model trajectory can be obtained from Eq. 20:

The total impulse per area per cycle for our model Im trajectory is

(25)
(26)

(27)

(28)

Em = −

~c
60π

X 2
o (

)5

Ω
c

Im = −

~
15π2 Xo(

Ω
c

)4

11

FIG. 3: The normalized displacement xm(t) and the corresponding normalized radiative force
Fm(t), bold solid line, are shown as functions of the time. The force is positive in the ﬁrst and
last quarters, and zero in the middle half of the cycle.

The impulse is ﬁrst order in ~, and is therefore typically a small quantum eﬀect. Thus for
our model cycle, the change in velocity per second is ∆Vm/dt :

∆Vm/dt =

ImΩ
M

(29)

where M is the mass per unit plate area of the spacecraft, and we assume the plate is the
In order to estimate ∆Vm, we can make
only signiﬁcant mass in the gedanken spacecraft.
some further assumptions regarding the mass of the plate per unit area. As before, we can
make a very favorable assumption regarding the mass per unit area of the plates M = mp/a2
o,
which yields the change in velocity per second:
~
15π2 Xo(

∆Vm/dt = −

)4Ω

(30)

Ω
c

a2
o
mp

If we substitute reasonable numerical values[21][37], a frequency of Ω = 3x1010 s−1 and an
oscillation amplitude of Xo = 10−9 m, we ﬁnd that ∆Vm/dt is approximately 3x10−20 m / s2
Physically, one would imagine the
per unit area, not a very impressive acceleration.
surface of the mirror vibrating with an amplitude of one nanometer. The limitation in
the amplitude arises because the maximum velocity of the boundary is proportional to the
elastic deformation, which cannot exceed about 10−2 for typical materials. The energy
radiated per area EmΩ is about 10−25
W / m2 There are a number of methods to increase
these value by many orders of magnitude, as discussed below.

The eﬃciency of the conversion of energy expended per cycle in our model Em into
2M(∆Vm)2 = I 2
m/2M is given in the nonrelativistic

kinetic energy of the spacecraft Eke = 1
approximation by the ratio:

Mc
With our assumptions, the approximate value of this ratio is 10−26, making this conversion
an incredibly ineﬃcient process.

(31)

Eke
Em

=

~

1
π

(

Ω
c

)3

A. Methods to Increase Acceleration

The dynamic Casimir eﬀect has yet to be veriﬁed experimentally. Hence there have
been a number of interesting proposals describing methods designed to maximize the eﬀect

12

In 1994, Law predicted a resonant response of the vacuum to an
so it can be measured.
oscillating mirror in a one-dimensional cavity[45]. The behavior of cavities formed from two
parallel mirrors that can move relative to each other is qualitatively diﬀerent from that of
single plates. For example it is possible to create particles in a cavity with plates separating
at constant velocity[46]. The very interesting proposal by Lambrecht et al concludes that if
the mechanical oscillation frequency is equal to an odd integer multiple of the fundamental
optical resonance frequency, then the rate of photon emission from a vibrating cavity formed
with walls that are partially transmitting with reﬂectivity r1 and r2, is enhanced by a factor
equal to the ﬁnesse f = 1/ ln(1/r) of the cavity[37][21]. For semiconducting cavities with
frequencies in the Ghz range, the ﬁnesse, which equals can be 109, giving our gedanken
spacecraft an acceleration of 3x10−11 m / s2 based on Eq. 30. Plunien et al have shown that
the resonant photon emission from a vibrating cavity is further increased in the temperature
is raised[38]. Assume that one has a gedanken spacecraft with a vibrating cavity operating
at a elevated temperature providing a 1010 total increase in the emission rate. This would
result in an acceleration per unit area of the plates of 3x10−10 m / s2, a radiated power of
W / m2,and an eﬃciency Eke/Em of about 10−16. After 10 years of operation,
about 10−15
the gedanken spacecraft velocity would be approximately 0.1 m / s , which is about 5 orders
of magnitude less than the current speed of Voyager, 17 km / s, obtained after a gravity
assist maneuver around Jupiter to increase the velocity. The burn-out velocity for Voyager
at launch in 1977 was 7.1 km / s[47]. The numerical results for the model obviously depend
very strongly on the assumptions made. For example, if a material could sustain an elastic
strain greater than about 10−2 then a larger amplitude would be possible. Perhaps the use
of nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes would allow a much larger eﬀective deformation.
If the amplitude was 1mm instead of 1 nm, the gedanken spacecraft would warrant practical
consideration.

Eberlein has shown that density ﬂuctuations in a dielectric medium would also result in
the emission of photons by the dynamic Casimir eﬀect[48]. This approach may ultimately be
more practical with large area dielectric surfaces driven electrically at high frequencies. More
theoretical development is needed to evaluate the utility of this method. Other solid state
approaches may also be of value with further technological developments. For example,
one can envision making sheets of charge that are accelerated in MOS type structures.
Yablonovitch has pointed out that the zero-point electromagnetic ﬁeld transmitted through
a window whose index of refraction is falling with time shows the same phase shift as if it
were reﬂected from an accelerating mirror[49]. He suggested utilizing the sudden change in
refractive index that occurs when a gas is photoionized or the sudden creation of electron-hole
pairs in a semiconductor, which can reduce the index of refraction from ∼ 3.5 to 0 in a very
short time. Using subpicosecond optical pulses, the phase modulation can suddenly sweep
up low-frequency waves by many octaves. By lateral synchronization, the moving plasma
front can act as a moving mirror exceeding the speed of light. Therefore one can regard
such a gas or semiconductor slab as an observational window on accelerating ﬁelds, with
accelerations as high as ∼ 1020 m / sec[49]. Accelerations of this magnitude will have very
high frequency Fourier components. Eq. 30 shows that the impulse goes as the fourth power
and the eﬃciency as the third power of the Fourier component for an harmonic oscillator
which suggests that with superhigh accelerations, and the optimum time dependence of
the ﬁeld, and optimum shape of the wavefronts, one might be able to secure much higher
ﬂuxes of photons and a much higher impulse/second, with a higher conversion eﬃciency. A
calculation by Lozovik et al suggests that by itself the accelerated plasma method is not as

13

eﬀective as a resonant cavity in producing photons.[50]

Ford and Svaiter have shown that it may be possible to focus the ﬂuctuating vacuum
electromagnetic ﬁeld[51]. This capability might be utilized to create regions of higher energy
density. This might be of use in a cavity in order to increase the ﬂux of radiated photons.
There may be also enhancements due to nature of the index of refraction for real materials.
For example, Ford has computed the force between a dielectric sphere, whose dielectric
function is described by the Drude model, and a perfectly reﬂecting wall, with the conclusion
that certain large components of the Casimir force no longer cancel. He predicts a dominant
oscillatory contribution to the force, in eﬀect developing a model for the ampliﬁcation of
vacuum ﬂuctuations. Barton and Eberlein have shown that for materials with a ﬁxed index
2
of refraction, the force for a one dimensional scalar ﬁeld goes as [(n − 1)/n]
, which suggest
the possibility that one might be able to enhance the force by selection of a material with a
small index[28]. An improbable approach would be based on reducing the spacecraft mass
by tuning the radiative mass shift[37][31].

IV. CONCLUSION

One of the objectives in this paper is to illustrate some of the unique properties of the
quantum vacuum and how they might be utilized in the practical application of a gedanken
spacecraft. We have demonstrated that it is possible in principal to cause a spacecraft to
accelerate due to the dissipative force an accelerated mirror experiences when photons are
generated from the quantum vacuum. Further we have shown that one could in principal
utilize energy from the vacuum ﬂuctuations to operate such a vibrating mirror assembly.
The application of the dynamic Casimir eﬀect and the static Casimir eﬀect may be regarded
as a proof of principal, with the hope that the proven feasibility will stimulate more practical
approaches exploiting known or as yet unknown features of the quantum vacuum.
In
any event, the physics of quantum ﬂuctuations and its application has been explored. A
model gedanken spacecraft with a single vibrating mirror was proposed which showed a
very unimpressive acceleration due to the dynamic Casimir eﬀect of about 3x10−20 m / s2
with a very ineﬃcient conversion of total energy expended into spacecraft kinetic energy.
Employing a set of vibrating mirrors to form a parallel plate cavity increases the output by
a factor of the ﬁnesse of the cavity yielding an acceleration of about 3x10−10 m / s2 and a
conversion eﬃciency of about 10−16. After 10 years at this acceleration, the spacecraft would
be traveling at 0.1 m / s . Although these results are very unimpressive, it is important to
not take our conclusions regarding the ﬁnal velocity in our simpliﬁed models too seriously.
The choice of numerical parameters is a best guess based on current knowledge and can easily
aﬀect the ﬁnal result by 5 orders of magnitude.
In about 1900 an article was published
in Scientiﬁc American proving that it was impossible to send a rocket, using a conventional
propellant, to the moon. The result was based on the seemingly innocuous assumption of
a single stage rocket.

From the status of current research in Casimir forces, it is clear that we understand little
of the properties of the quantum vacuum for real systems with real material properties. For
example, there is no general agreement with regard to the calculations of static vacuum
forces for geometries other than inﬁnite parallel plates of ideal or real metals at a tem-
perature of absolute zero. For non-zero temperatures corrections for ﬂat, real metals are
uncertain[52][53]. There are fundamental disagreements about the computation of vacuum
forces for spheres or rectangular cavities, about how to handle real material properties and

14

Indeed, it is very diﬃcult to calculate Casimir
curvature in these and other geometries[54].
forces for these simple geometries geometries and to relate the calculations to an experiment.
Calculations have yet to be done for more complex, and potentially interesting geometries.
The usual problems in QED, such as divergences due to unrealistic boundary conditions, to
curvature, to interfaces with diﬀerent dielectric coeﬃcients, etc. abound[55].

The vacuum eﬀects which we computed scale with Planck’s constant and so are very
small.
In order to have a practical spacecraft based on quantum vacuum properties, it
would probably have to be based on phenomena that scale as ~0. By itself this requirement
does not guarantee a large enough magnitude, but it helps[37]. New methods of modifying
the quantum vacuum boundary conditions may be needed to generate the large changes in
energy or momentum required if ”vacuum engineering” as proposed in this paper is ever to
be practical. For example, the vacuum energy density between parallel plates is simply not
large enough for our engineering purposes. Energy densities that are orders of magnitude
greater are required. Such high energy density regions may be possible, at least in some
cases. For example, a region appeared in the 1 dimensional dynamic system in which the
energy density was below that of the Casimir parallel plate region[45]. More eﬀective ways
of transferring momentum to the quantum vacuum than the adiabatic Casimir eﬀect are
probably necessary if a spacecraft is to be propelled using the vacuum.

A proposal was made recently to measure the inertial mass shift in a multilayer Casimir
cavity, which consists of 106 layers of metal 100 nm thick, 35 cm in diameter, alternating
with ﬁlms of silicon dioxide 5 nm thick[56]. The mass shift is anticipated to arise from the
decrease in the vacuum energy between the parallel plates. A calculation shows that the
It
mass shift for the proposed cavity is at or just beyond the current limit of detectability.
appears that if quantum vacuum engineering of spacecraft is to become practical, and the
dreams of science ﬁction writers are to be realized, we may need to develop new methods to
be able to manipulate changes in vacuum energy densities that are near to the same order of
magnitude as mass energy densities. Then we would anticipate being able to shift inertial
masses by a signiﬁcant amount.
Since mass shifts in computations are often formally
inﬁnite, perhaps such developments are not forbidden. With large mass shifts one might
be able to build a structure that had a small or zero inertial mass, which could be readily
accelerated. Further, one could alter the curvature of space-time is mesoscopic ways.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Dan Cole, and thank
Gabriel Barton, Carlos Villarreal Lujan, Claudia Eberlein, and Paulo Neto for answering
questions about their work relavent to this paper. We would like to express our appreciation
to the NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Program and Marc Millis for the support of
this work. We are sad to report that Robert L Forward died during the process of preparing
this paper.

[1] Breakthrought Propulsion Physics Program of NASA, http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/bpp/.
[2] Arthur C. Clarke, personal communication. See the acknowledgements in ”The Songs of
Distant Earth.” Numerous science ﬁction writers, including Clarke, Asimov, and Sheﬃeld

15

have based spacecraft on the quantum vacuum.

[3] Morris M S and Thorne K S, ”Wormholes in spacetime and their use for interstellar travel: a

tool for teaching general relativity,” Am. J. Phys. 56, 395-412 (1988).

[4] W. Lamb and R. Retherford, “Fine structure of the hydrogen atom by a microwave method,”

Phys. Rev. 72, 241 (1947).

[5] H. Bethe, “The Electromagnetic Shift of Energy Levels,” Phys. Rev. 72, 339 (1948).
[6] H. B. G. Casimir, ”On the attraction between two perfectly conducting plates”Proc. K. Ned.

[7] S. Lamoreaux, “ Measurement of the Casimir force between conducting plates,” Phys. Rev.

[8] U. Mohideen and A. Roy,“Precision Measurement of the Casimir Force from 0.1 to 0.9 micron”,

Akad. Wet. 51 793-5 (1948).

Lett. 78, 5 (1997).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4549 (1998).

[9] G. L. Klimchitskaya, A. Roy, U. Mohideen, and V. M. Mostepanenko, ”Complete roughness
and conductivity corrections for Casimir force measurement.” Phys. Rev A60 3487 (1999).

[10] U. Mohideen, personal communication, 11/2002.
[11] F. Serry , D. Walliser, and J. Maclay, ”The anharmonic Casimir oscillator,” J. Microelec-

tromechanical Syst. 4, 193 (1995).

[12] M. Serry, D. Walliser, J. Maclay,”The role of the casimir eﬀect in the static deﬂection and
stiction of membrane strips in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),” J. App. Phys. 84,
2501 (1998).

[13] E. Buks and M. L. Roukes, ”Stiction, adhesion, and the Casimir eﬀect in micromechanical

systems,” Phys. Rev. B 63, 033402 (2001)

[14] H. Chan, V. Aksyuk, R. Kleiman, D. Bishop, and F. Capasso, ”Quantum Mechanical Actua-
tion of Microelectromechanical Systems by the Casimir Force,” Science 291, 1941 (2001)
[15] H. B. Chan, V. A. Aksyuk, R. N. Kleiman, D. J. Bishop, and F. Capasso, ”Nonlinear Mi-

cromechanical Casimir Oscillator,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 211801 (2001)

[16] P. Milonni, The Quantum Vacuum. An Introduction to Quantum Electrodynamics (San Diego:

Academic) 1994.

[17] G. Plunien, B. M¨uller, W. Greiner, ”The Casimir Eﬀect,” Physics Reports 134, 87 (1986).
[18] M. Bordag, U. Mohideen, V. Mostepanenko, ”New Developments in the Casimir Eﬀect,”

Physics Reports 353, 1 (2001).

[19] Casimir H B G, Some remarks on the history of the so-called Casimir eﬀect The Casimir

Eﬀect 50 Years Later ed M Bordag (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1999), pp 3-9.

[20] J. Schwinger J, L., DeRaad Jr L , and K. A. Milton, ”Casimir eﬀect in dielectrics,” Ann Phys

(NY) 115 1-23 (1978).

[21] V. Dodonov and A. Klimov, ”Generation and detection of photons in a cavity with a resonantly

oscillating boundary,” Phys.Rev. A 53, 2664 (1996).

[22] E. A. Power E A and T. Thirunamachandran, ”Zero-point energy diﬀerences and many-body

dispersion forces,” Phys. Rev. A50, 3929-39 (1994).

[23] G. Moore, ”Quantum theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a variable-length one-dimensional

[24] P. A. Maia Neto and L. A. S. Machado, ”Quantum radiation generated by a moving miror in

[25] N. Birrell and P. Davies, Quantum ﬁelds in curved space, (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

cavity,”J. Math. Phys. 11, 2679 (1970).

free space,” Phys. Rev. A 54, 3420 (1996).

bridge, England, 1984), p. 48; p. 102.

[26] M. Jaekel and S. Reynaud, Quantum Opt. 4, 39 (1992); J. Phys. (France) I 2, 149 (1992).

16

A 8, 609 (1975);

D 32, 914 (1985).

2772 (1996).

[27] L. Ford and A. Vilenkin, ”Quantum radiation by moving mirrors,” Phy. Rev. D, 25, 2569

(1982).

(1994).

[28] G. Barton and C. Eberlein, ”On quantum radiation from a moving body with ﬁnite refractive

index,” Ann. Phys. 227, 222 (1993).

[29] P. Neto, ”Vacuum radiation pressure on moving mirrors,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 27, 2167

[30] M. Jaekel and S. Reynaud, ”Quantum ﬂuctuations of mass for a mirror in vacuum,” Phys.

Lett. A 180, 9 (1993).

[31] G. Barton and A. Calogeracos, ”On the quantum dynamics of a dispersive miror. I. Radiative

shifts, radiation, and radiative reaction,”Ann. Phys. 238, 227 (1995).
[32] W. Unruh, ”Notes on black-hole evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D 14, 870 (1976)
[33] P. Davies, ”Scalar particle particle production in Schwartzchild and Rindler metrics,”J. Phys.

[34] S. Hacyan, A. Sarmiento, G. Cocho, F. Soto, ”Zero-point ﬁeld in curved spaces,” Phys. Rev.

[35] Personal communication from Claudia Eberlein. Prof. Eberlein also points out the need to

consider the compressibility of the mirror for the frequencies likely to be excited.

[36] C. Eberlein, ”Theory of quantum radiation observed as sonoluminescence,” Phys.Rev. A 53,

[37] A. Lambrecht, M. Jaekel, and S. Reynaud, ”Motion induces radiation from a vibrating cav-

[38] G. Plunien, R. Sch¨utzhold, and G. Soﬀ, ”Dynamical Casimir eﬀect at ﬁnite temperature,”

ity,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 615 (1996).

Phys. Rev. Let. 84, 1882 (2000).

[39] R. L. Forward, Extracting electrical energy from the vacuum by cohesion of charged foliated

conductors,” Phys. Rev. B30, 1700 (1984).

[40] D. C. Cole and H. E. Puthoﬀ, ”Extracting energy and heat from the vacuum,” Phys. Rev. E

[41] A. Rueda, Space Science 53, 223 (1990).
[42] D. C. Cole, ”Possible thermodynamic violations and astrophysical issues for secular accelera-

tion of electrodynamic particles in the vacuum,” Phys. Rev. E, 51 , 1663 (1995).

[43] T. H. Boyer, ”Thermal eﬀects of acceleration through random classical radiation,”Phys. Rev.

[44] F. Pinto, ”Engine cycle of an optically controlled vacuum energy transducer,” Phys. Rev. B

[45] C. K. Law, ”Resonance response of the vacuum to an oscillating boundary,”Phys. Rev. Lett.

48, 1562 (1993).

D 21, 2137 (1980).

60, 14740 (1999).

73, 1931 (1994).

[46] C. Villarreal, S. Hacyan, R. Jauregui, ”Creation of particles and squeezed states between

moving conductors,” Phys. Rev. A 52, 594 (1995).

[47] M. Boston, ”Simplistic propulsion analysis of a breakthrough space drive for Voyager,” Proc.
STAIF-00(Space Technology and Applications International Forum, January 2000, Albu-
querque, NM, ed. M. El-Genk American Institute of Physics, New York, 2000).

[48] C. Eberlein, ”Quantum radiation from density variations in dielectrics,” J. Phys. A: Math.

Gen. 32, 2583 (1999).

[49] E. Yablonovitch, ”Accelerating reference frame for electromagnetic waves in a rapidly growing
plasma: Unruh-Davies-Fulling-DeWitt radiation and the nonadiabatic casimir eﬀect,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 62, 1742 (1989).

17

[50] Y. Lozovovik, V. Tsvetus, E. Vinogradovc, JEPT Lett. 61, 723 (1995).
[51] L. H. Ford and N. F. Svaiter, ”Focusing vacuum ﬂuctuations,” Phys. Rev. A 62, 062105

(2000).

Rev. A 65, 012111 (2001).

[52] V. Bezerra, G. Klimchitskaya, C. Romero, ”Surface impedance and the Casimir force,” Phys.

[53] C. Genet, A. Lambrecht, S. Reynaud, ”Temperature dependence of the Csimir force between

metallic mirrors,” Phys. Rev. A 62, 012110 (2000).

[54] G. Barton, ”Perturbative Casimir energies of dispersive spheres, cubes, and cylinders,” J.

[55] B. DeWitt in Physics in the Making, pp 247-272, ed. A. Sarlemijn and M. Sparnaay (Elsevier,

Phys. A.: Math. Gen. 34, 4083 (2001).

Netherlands) 1989.

[56] E. Calonni, L.DiFiore, G. Esposito, L. Milano, L. Rosa, ”Vacuum ﬂuctuation force on a rigid

Casimir cavity in a gravitational ﬁeld,” in press Physics Letters A .

18

Fh o

Xh o

1

0.5

-0.5

-1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

t
T

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)

Xh Xc
1

0.5

-0.5

-1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

t
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)T

Xm

Fm
1

0.5

-0.5

-1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

t
(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)T

