3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diﬀraction to De-Diﬀraction

Vladimir F. Tamari∗
4-2-8-C26 Komazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan 154-0012
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

De-diﬀraction (DD), a new procedure to totally cancel diﬀraction eﬀects from wave-ﬁelds is pre-
sented, whereby the full ﬁeld from an aperture is utilized and a truncated geometrical ﬁeld is
obtained, allowing inﬁnitely sharp focusing and non-diverging beams. This is done by reversing a
diﬀracted wave-ﬁelds’ direction. The method is derived from the wave equation and demonstrated
in the case of Kirchhoﬀ’s integral. An elementary bow-wavelet is described and the DD process is
related to quantum and relativity theories.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The minimization of diﬀraction eﬀects from wave ﬁelds
in the focal plane has been proposed for microwaves by
Schelkunoﬀ [1] and for light by Toraldo di Francia [2] but
with little practical advantage, since the non-diﬀracting
portion of the ﬁeld was very faint, surrounded by giant
side lobes, apart from the enormous practical diﬃcul-
ties of creating the phase and amplitude changes in the
aperture plane [3]. More recently Durnin [4] has demon-
strated that a J0 ﬁeld will have a non-diﬀracting compo-
nent, but again the beam, originally emitted by an annu-
lar aperture, is faint and of limited extension, with most
of the radiation dissipated in the side lobes. Tamari [5, 6]
has qualitatively described a method to totally cancel
diﬀraction eﬀects (de-diﬀraction, or DD) from any wave
ﬁeld utilizing the radiation from the full aperture which
can be focused to a sharp point, or non-diverging beam.
In this paper DD will be derived from ﬁrst principles in
terms of the wave equation and the concept of the rever-
sal of the ﬁeld.

While DD ﬁelds are of most interest in electromag-
netic or acoustic applications such as in super-resolving
imaging or in non-divergent beams, the method is quite
general and can be adopted to any ﬂow-ﬁeld whether it is
a wave ﬁeld or not, and even to electrostatic and gravita-
tional potential ﬁelds if the concept of streamline concen-
tration is used instead of DD. However, for the purposes
or this paper the language of monochromatic electromag-
netic ﬁelds will be used, since it is in such cases that
diﬀraction eﬀects have been studied most thoroughly in
optical and microwave applications.

In section II, DD ﬁelds will be deﬁned and shown to
be theoretically possible solutions to the diﬀerential wave
equation. Although it is possible to proceed directly to
de-diﬀraction theory by ﬁeld reversal in section V, the
related concepts of streamlined ﬂow and vorticity will be
used in section III to describe the transformation of a ge-
ometrical ﬁeld to a diﬀracted ﬁeld, illustrated by Kirch-

∗Electronic address: vftamari@zak.att.ne.jp; This paper is pre-
sented in its original 1993 form, except for some minor revisions in
some sentences, and was not presented for publication. The help of
D. de Lang in putting this paper online is gratefully acknowledged.

hoﬀ’s derivation of the diﬀraction integral. In section IV
a ‘bow wavelet’ or dipole model will be examined, sup-
planting that of the Fresnel-Huygens wavelet, the better
to describe the ﬁeld in the immediate vicinity of the aper-
ture, the crucial area where the diﬀraction process is both
initiated and from which it could be cancelled. Some
DD experimental results will be described in section VI
and practical applications of the method discussed in sec-
tion VII. The surprising implications of DD theory as far
as both quantum and general relativity theories are con-
cerned will be discussed in section VIII and the paper is
summarized in section IX.

II. DD: TRUNCATED GEOMETRICAL FIELDS

Let S be the propagation (velocity, or Poynting) vec-
tors of G(x, y, z, t), a general solution to the wave equa-
tion

In an inﬁnite homogeneous medium free from obstacles

or current sources,

∇2G =

1
v2

∂2G
∂t2

curl S = 0

(1)

(2)

and hence the energy streamline S (found by solving the
diﬀerential equation Gy/Gx = ∂y/∂x) and which are the
loci of S , will be straight lines. The ﬁeld is said to have
normal rectilinear congruence and for our purposes here
such a ﬁeld can be termed a geometrical [7] ﬁeld but with-
out the usual restriction that the wavelength λ = 0, usu-
ally understood by the term. This duplication of terms
has been made on purpose since apart from the wave-
length the ﬁelds above obey all the laws of optics and are
inﬁnite waves which ﬁll all of space. Current ﬂows in open
water are examples of such smooth ﬁelds. If the ﬁeld’s
intensity varies in time, some examples would be an inﬁ-
nite acoustic or electromagnetic plane wave or a spheri-
cal wave emitted by a point source P0 when the ﬁelds are
characterized by an even intensity function across equipo-
tential surfaces (the wavefronts) to which S are always
normal.

2

 

 

(3)

FIG. 1:
Various geometrical waves G truncated within
diﬀraction-free regions ΣD , bound by propagation vectors
S ; Within ΣO the intensity is zero.

FIG. 2: (a) Truncated plane wave super-focused at F, and
its spike-like intensity function. (b) An inﬁnite plane wave
focused and diﬀracted an extended Airy intensity function.

Referring to Fig. 1, a geometrical wave G(x, y, z, t) is

truncated according to conditions:

G = G on ΣD
G = 0

on Σ0

Where ΣD is any limited and well-deﬁned region of
space bounded by a ‘wall’ of S, and ΣO is its comple-
mentary region, ﬁlling the rest of space outside. Such
a wave is, theoretically also a solution because in ΣO
the wave G(x, y, z, t) = 0 is also a solution of Eq. 1.
This trivial mathematical truth will have great signiﬁ-
cance when translated to DD physics.
In this ﬁeld, S
are straight lines and so within ΣD , G(x, y, z, t) consti-
tutes a well-deﬁned geometrical wave. Since energy, by
deﬁnition, does not cross streamlines, ΣD constitutes a
‘ﬂux tube’ [8] carrying the ﬁeld’s total energy without
any loss whatsoever. ΣD is a non-diﬀracting ﬁeld. It is
important to stress that the border between ΣD and ΣO
does not form a physical barrier to restrain or reﬂect the
waves, such as the walls of a waveguide [20] nor is there
any discontinuity in the medium between ΣD and ΣO
such as a change in the index of refraction: quite simply
the amplitude of the waves just drops to zero in certain
regions ΣO .

Although mathematically possible, such truncated
non-diﬀracting ﬁelds do not ordinarily exist in nature [9]:
the moment any attempt is made to truncate an inﬁnite
ﬁeld by placing in its path an opaque screen with an
open aperture forming a cross-section of ΣD , the ﬁeld
streamlines S automatically swerve behind the screen,
slow down near the edge and cause interference eﬀects
with regions of zero and maximum intensities, and trans-
form the whole ﬁeld topologically in a typical diﬀraction
pattern. The ﬁeld now spreads to ﬁll all of space anew,
but now no longer as a geometrical ﬁeld. Similarly, if the
ﬁeld is emitted from an inﬁnite number of point sources
arrayed in an aperture ΣD , it diﬀracts as if a plane wave
had passed normally through an open aperture ΣD .

Were truncated geometrical ﬁelds to exist, they would
be very useful indeed. As shown in Fig. 2(a) if a ﬁeld

is passed through a focusing system whose every aper-
ture and ﬁeld stop is larger than ΣD and so does not
disturb the edges of the ﬁeld, it continues to act as a
geometrical ﬁeld and can be theoretically focused to a
point with inﬁnite intensity and resolution in imaging
systems. Similarly, when the S are parallel, the con-
ceptual ﬂux tube carries a beam of inﬁnite length and
uniform cross-section ΣD with no loss of intensity. The
“diﬀraction limits” now used as a measure of quality in
focusing instruments and beams, and which depend on
the wavelength, and inversely on the aperture diameter,
would cease to have any signiﬁcance.

III. GEOMETRICAL FIELDS DIFFRACT

In hydrodynamics,

Ω = curl S

(4)

is known as the vorticity of the ﬁeld: it is the measure of
how much the ﬁeld curves around during its ﬂow. When
Ω = 0 as in Eq. 2, the ﬁeld is then said to be irrota-
tional [10] and the vorticity is the same on all of S. When
such geometrical ﬁelds are interrupted or disturbed by
a physical obstacle, however, the ﬁeld acquires vorticity
around the edges of the aperture, with S curving into the
shadow regions. This is easy to understand by consid-
ering sound waves ‘turning’ and being heard behind the
corner of a building. Similarly, in hydro- and aerodynam-
ics, obstacles such as the aperture edge can create wakes,
vortices and other deviations from geometrical ﬂow [11].
In wave ﬁelds where λ 6= 0 it is more common to de-
scribe these changes as diﬀraction eﬀects, but in fact I
have attempted to show that the two classes of phenom-
ena are closely linked [5, 6]. An extensive description of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld’s angular momentum, using hy-
drodynamical concepts has been made by D. Ximing [12].
Why do these transformations occur? There is always
matter at the edge of a source or an obstacle, where
diﬀraction starts forming. As shown in Fig. 4, the an-
gle φ which S makes with the normal (the original direc-

 

 

3

tion of a geometrical ﬁeld into a diﬀracted one and then,
as shown below, back to a de-diﬀracted ﬁeld. A point
source P0 on the −z axis in Fig. 4 emits a geometrical
spherical wave [18] whose S coincide with the radii cen-
tered on P0. This wave then passes through an aperture
AA in an inﬁnite opaque screen and centered on the x−y
plane, and spreads throughout the +z portion of space,
creating the typical maxima and minima observed on a
screen M placed normal to the z-axis at some distance
from the aperture. Kirchhoﬀ’s method is based on po-
tential theory and is both inaccurate in the vicinity of
the edges A and noncommittal on the path the ﬁeld’s en-
ergy takes from P0 to M . However, the bending of the
streamlines into the shadow regions and the transforma-
tion of the geometrical wavefront DA into the elliptical
wavefronts D1, D2, . . . is also quite clear in the rigorous
solutions mentioned above [13].

A typical ﬂux tube C carries energy from P0 to PA in
the aperture plane along a straight line. But in the +z
region it curves towards the shadow regions behind the
obstacle, crossing a typical wavefront D3 at P3 and cre-
ating point PM in the diﬀraction pattern on M . C acts
like a channel of a given capacity [19], carrying energy
from P0PA to PM . This idea is conﬁrmed by Helmholtz’
reciprocity (or reversion) theorem [20] whereby “a point
source at P0 will produce at PM the same eﬀect as a
point source of equal intensity placed at PM will pro-
duce at P0”. When P0 is moved down on the axis to
z = −∞ the geometrical ﬁeld in the −z regions becomes
an inﬁnite plane wave arriving normally at AA. The as-
pect of Kirchhoﬀ’s integral that is of interest here is that
the diﬀracted ﬁeld reduces to an integration of Huygens-
Fresnel (HF) [21] wavelets emitted by point sources on
AA. It will be axiomatic to extend this idea to say that
a ray from P0 reaches the aperture plane at a point O
(a source anywhere on the aperture) and is transformed
into the ‘exploding’ diﬀracted pattern of the HF wavelet
of Fig. 3 with its inclination factor adjusting the ampli-
tude by X = (1 + cos φ)/2; but this is known to be only
an approximation.

Since the precise determination of the wavefronts near
the aperture is an essential ﬁrst step in the implemen-
tation of DD theory, an attempt will now be made to
examine the wavelet more closely.

IV. THE BOW WAVELET

A pebble is dropped in a pond and a circular ripple re-
sults. But when an atom emits a photon, or when a point
element of a ﬁeld is examined, there is radial momentum
but no backward momentum such as in the HF wavelet.
Recently Miller [22] starting out with the wave equation
derived a “spatio-temporal dipole” ﬁeld for the funda-
mental electromagnetic wavelet. This conﬁrmed my in-
dependent intuitive derivation [23] adapting the model of
a bow wave such as that made by a boat [24]: a stationary
atom releases a photon having both radial and foreword

FIG. 3:
(Left) A dipole or ‘bow-wave’ model of an elemen-
tary point ﬁeld emitted from the origin. (Right) A Huygens-
Fresnel wavelet.

FIG. 4: A geometrical ﬁeld diﬀracts.

tion of propagation rotates by π/2 or more at the edge.
Adjoining S follow suit in a domino eﬀect of decreas-
ing φ until the mainstream S at the center of a sym-
metrical aperture is reached, where φ = 0. This curva-
ture of S around an edge is clearly illustrated by plots
of the streamlines and the ellipsoidal wavefronts normal
to them, made by Braunbeck and Laukien[13] based on
Sommerfeld’s [14] rigorous solution of the inﬁnite half-
plane diﬀraction problem. This solution also provides
another way of visualizing vorticity around the aperture
edge: the concept of a cylindrical wave ’emitted’ by the
edge, and interfering with the geometrical ﬁeld to create
the diﬀracted ﬁeld.

This analysis alternatively gives the diﬀracted ﬁeld as
an integration of an inﬁnite spectrum of plane waves
emitted from the aperture at angles φ rotating through
π [15]. This lends itself naturally to the following physi-
cal interpretation: an inﬁnite number of streamlines nor-
mal to the aperture make up the original zero-order ge-
ometrical ﬁeld approaching from the −z region. Diﬀrac-
tion bends these S into an inﬁnite number of stream-
lines each at a diﬀerent φ, to make up the Fourier orders
(−π ≤ φ ≤ π) of the ﬁeld in the +z region [16].

Kirchhoﬀ’s theory of diﬀraction [17], although less rig-
orous than that of Sommerfeld [14] provides the perfect
theoretical framework for demonstrating the transforma-

velocities r and f and the bow wave or dipole pattern
of Fig. 3 emerges. That some such process is at work
is suggested by the case of Cerenkov radiation, where a
fast-moving electron in glass creates a V-shaped wake of
light [25]. In free space, however, since r = f = c/2 the
center W of the bow waves’ circular wavefronts D, trav-
els up the +z axis at the same rate as the radius W P
expands, and the V-shaped ‘shock-wave’ now opens up to
become a straight line along the x-axis. This pattern is
also conﬁrmed in the literature, where the streamlines of
a dipole [26] are similar to such circles centered along the
x-axis. But on this axis, apart from the origin, the ﬁeld is
zero since the contributing wavefronts there would have
an inﬁnite radius. The circular streamlines of the bow
wavelet provide a natural explanation for the vorticity of
the ﬁeld at the edge of the aperture. In addition the bow
wave’s wavelength λ(φ) is λ0 only in the propagation di-
rection (unlike the HF wavelet which has only amplitude
changes with φ. λ(φ) explains the very rapid ﬂuctuations
of the diﬀracted ﬁeld very near the edge [13]. This dis-
cussion of the primary wavelets of a ﬁeld is to establish
a method to derive the mathematically exact form of the
extended wavefronts near the aperture, in order to make
DD precise. In section VI experiments will be described
that show that the bow wave and the ray that creates it
can also have a real physical existence of their own.

V. DD: REVERSAL OF THE DIFFRACTED
FIELD

It has been long known that electromagnetic ﬁelds
are time invariant [27]: any solution G(x, y, z, +t) of
Maxwell’s equations will have an equivalent solution
G(x, y, z, −t) since replacing t with −t, and hence v
with −v will lead to the same wave equation Eq. 1.
Examples of this are spherical waves and plane waves
whose complete solutions show identical waves travelling
with opposite velocities ±v, for example the plane wave
G(x, y, z, t) = m(wx + vt) + n(wx − vt) [28]. Time invari-
ance here need not involve any philosophical considera-
tions of the arrow of time, merely that the ﬁeld retains all
its point values when the velocity direction is reversed by
rotating all its S by π. The principle of reversibility along
rays has also been derived from Fermat’s principle [29].
In optics this principle of reversibility is implicit in
any imaging situation where a point object and its im-
age can be interchanged, and in the theory of hologra-
phy [30]. With this in mind consider two typical situ-
ations where diﬀraction occurs: First the isolated bow
wavelet of Fig. 3. A straight ray is scattered at a point
O and then branches into streamlines, creating any of
the diﬀracted wave fronts D1, D2, D3, . . . Now imagine
that a curved mirror shaped as one of the wavefronts say
D2, is placed to overlap that wavefront exactly. Since
all the diﬀracted streamlines are then normal to the mir-
ror the S vectors are reﬂected back on themselves, and
since amplitude and phase are preserved (phase changes

4

upon reﬂection will be uniform across D) then the ﬁeld
will reverse itself along the same streamlines, and pass-
ing point O on the return trip, ends up as a single ray in
the −z direction (but without the original source of the
ray there) . Alternately, instead of a mirror think that
D2 now consists of an inﬁnite array of point sources with
an identical amplitude function to that of the original
diﬀracted pattern on D2. In the +z direction the ﬁeld
will continue to diﬀract exactly as before. But below D2
in the −z direction the sources on D2 will recombine to
create a reversing ray. The second case is that of an ex-
tended ﬁeld passing through an aperture, for example the
diﬀraction situation of Fig. 5.

 

FIG. 5: De-diﬀraction (DD) by reversal of a diﬀracted wave-
front.

Here again any one of the wavefronts D of Fig. 4 can
serve as a source for the reverse DD ﬁeld, or to reﬂect
an already diﬀracted ﬁeld. As a result of these proce-
dures, the curved streamlines 1, 2, 3, . . . of the reversing
ﬁeld emerge from the aperture AA normally as a part of
a dediﬀracted truncated geometrical ﬁeld. If diﬀraction
is to be likened to a topological distortion of an ordi-
nary ﬁeld, the reverse process can be said to start with a
purposely distorted ﬁeld to produce an ordinary one. It
might be argued that the presence of an opaque screen
BA, AB reﬂecting or absorbing portions of the original
−z ﬁeld will necessitate the placement of a similar screen
when DD is attempted. Such a screen is not needed
for DD however, because the diﬀracted ﬁeld immediately
touching the screen from the +z side will be negligible
or zero; indeed that the ﬁeld is zero on the screen is one
of the boundary conditions in Kirchhoﬀ’s derivation [17].
Moreover, when the original source is an inﬁnite array
of point sources along AA, no screen BA, AB need be
present in the diﬀracting ﬁeld, and none will be needed
in the reversing ﬁeld, only the conceptual removal of the
original sources on AA to allow the DD ﬁeld to emerge.
Choosing the wavefronts as the source for a DD ﬁeld
insures that the phase is the same there, simplifying the
design of the lenses or antennas to be used to create a
DD ﬁeld. However in principle any linear (or surface in
the 3D case) array M of sources spanning the diﬀracted
ﬁeld and mimicking its local phase and amplitude can be

used to create the DD ﬁeld. For example an inﬁnite array
of sources having the ring-shaped phase and amplitude
pattern of the electric ﬁeld of the Airy function [31], and
placed in the focal plane of a lens will cause a reverse
DD ﬁeld to emerge from the lens. This method greatly
resembles the zone-plate-type ﬁlter described by Toraldo
di Francia to achieve superresolution [2, 3]. Of course, in
any practical application, such a ﬁlter will have a limited
size, and the imitation of the whole diﬀracted ﬁeld, and
hence of DD, will fail. A more practical ﬁltering DD
method would be to wrap a rigid curved holographic ﬁlm
to roughly encircle an aperture, and illuminate both its
z sides, in the presence of the aperture, with coherent
plane waves. The developed illuminated plate will then
recreate the DD ﬁeld when illuminated from the +z side.
In practice a DD ﬁeld can be accomplished by any one
of ﬁve general procedures: 1) An array of sources mim-
icking the local phase and amplitude values along an en-
tire continuous random cross-section M of the original
ﬁeld. 2) By reﬂecting a diﬀracted ﬁeld normally upon
itself. 3) The creation of the wavefronts D by suitably
focusing a plane or spherical wave. 4) Holographic meth-
ods or 5) A ﬁlter illuminated normally by a plane wave
(hence the phase is uniform on the ﬁlter) having only
amplitude changes. Finally, it must be cautioned that
when performing DD ﬁeld calculations, using elementary
wavelets, or the Kirchhoﬀ integral, these must be used
in the correct orientation. The wavelets always ’point’
from the geometrical rays 5,6,7 of Fig. 5 to the circular
diﬀracted patterns. An integration of bow wavelets on
AA will give D, but integrating wavelets on D will not
give the ﬁeld on AA or the DD ﬁeld in −z, since on D
the ﬁeld is already diﬀracted. A rule of thumb is that
the Kirchhoﬀ integral should not be used to evaluate the
ﬁeld of wavefronts such as D, whose normals S rotate
rapidly through π/2 at the aperture edge.

VI. DE-DIFFRACTION EXPERIMENTS

Simple experiments to prove the DD methods outlined
in this paper were performed as follows, but a more so-
phisticated experimental veriﬁcation of DD using electro-
magnetic radiation is still needed.

DD OF ULTRASOUND WAVES: The ﬁeld of a 40 kHz
ultrasound source as reﬂected from a plane antenna and
one with curved edges were compared as in Fig. 6. The
curved edges, roughly approximating the curvature of a
DD wavefront, concentrated the ﬁeld appreciably.

WATER RIPPLES: Water ripple experiments are
shown in Fig. 7: a) a vibrating ﬂat plate produced ripples
of a wavelength one third its width spreading out in the
typical oval diﬀracted wavefronts (b) roughly curving the
edges through a quarter-circular arc of about one λ radius
produced a dramatic concentration of the waves mainly
in the forward direction. Note the absence of waves from
either side of the axis in (b): the waves in the bottom
right of (b) are spurious, since they are emitted from the

5

 

 

FIG. 6: Ultrasound wave ﬁeld measured after reﬂection from
(a) DD plane reﬂector, and (b) From a plane reﬂector of the
same size.

FIG. 7: Photographs of waves emitted in a ripple tank from
(a) A vibrating plate reﬂector three wavelengths wide, and
(b) From its DD equivalent.

back of the plate.

GRAVITATIONAL MODEL. It is known that a thin
ﬂexible rubber sheet stretched over a solid two dimen-
sional horizontal model of a certain function G(x, y) sat-
isﬁes Laplace’s equation of G: Freezing a wave in time
reduces the right hand term of Eq. 1 to zero, and the
wave equation becomes ∇2G = 0. The surface of the
sheet represents both the gravitational and electrostatic
potentials of this Laplacian [32]. For our purposes, the
potential of the ﬁelds we are studying was represented by
a ﬂat model G(x, z) of the wavefront in question. The
model was lifted a distance Gmax representing the initial
potential of the wave and the sheet stretched over the
model as in Fig. 8.

The gravity-wave-potential equivalence mentioned
above (and which might not be coincidental, as discussed
below) allows a study of the streamlines S of the ﬁeld
since they will be the path taken by a marble rolling
down the sheet’s surface. The equipotential horizontal
contours of the sheet’s surface (G1, G2, G3, . . . the ‘ele-
vation’) are then the wavefronts. Gmax is proportional
to the energy of the source (inversely proportional to the

small antenna, since a truncated geometrical ﬁeld can
be focused to a point regardless of the ﬁeld’s wavelength
or the aperture size. An optical laser passing through a
DD lens with curved edges pointed towards the moon
should proceed with no divergence (apart from atmo-
spheric degradation), reaching its target with its origi-
nal proﬁle relatively intact. Normally diﬀraction would
spread a 10 cm. diameter laser beam to some two kilo-
meters in diameter by the time it arrives there.

 

VIII. DIFFRACTION, QUANTUM AND
RELATIVISTIC FIELDS

Diﬀraction has been cited by Heisenberg himself (33)
as an example of uncertainty relations. The product of
a photon’s momentum and position cannot be less than
Planck’s constant h. The question now arises: are uncer-
tainty and hence quantum eﬀects cancelled together with
the cancellation of diﬀraction? The inescapable conclu-
sion is that they are, since both momentum and posi-
tion would be uniquely known in a DD geometrical ﬁeld.
The vectors S of a plane DD ﬁeld all point in the same
direction, and the position is always known within ΣD
especially in the case of a single ray. In the bow wavelet
itself the change from a ray (position and momentum pre-
cisely known) to the spread-out diﬀracted wavelet, with
its momentum vectors fanning out at all angles is a model
of this transformation from a classical ﬁeld (the ray) to
a quantum ﬁeld (the fan) and vice versa. Are elemen-
tary particles emitting bow wavelets the physical ma-
chinery [34] behind quantum eﬀects? Two particles P1
and P2 emit bow waves which meet at a random angle
(φ1 − φ2) and the resulting interference pattern is taken
for that of quantum probability functions. Here then is
the physical ‘cause’ of quantum eﬀects: it is the variable
energy content transmitted by streamlines or ﬂux tubes
from P1 and P2 to a nearby point T , which can be con-
sidered as the probability amplitudes [35] < P1|T > and
< T |P2 >.

6

 

FIG. 9: Bow wave and probability functions.

Fig. 9 shows the similarity between a Gaussian proba-
bility function [36] and the normal of the electric ﬁeld
of a bow wavelet around the propagation axis. Dis-

FIG. 8: Diagrams of gravity potential ﬁeld experiments. The
path taken by a marble rolling down a ﬂexible sheet stretched
over elevated forms, simulates the streamlines S of (a) A
diﬀracted plane wave, (b) DD plane wave, (c) Diﬀracted fo-
cused wave, (d) Focused wave, (e) DD (reversed) bow wave
and (f) Bow wave.

wavelength) and it is interesting to see how increasing
the height of the model reduces the diﬀraction spread-
ing, according to theory. This method though not too
quantitatively exact if the membrane slope is larger than
around 18◦, gives an excellent idea of the physical situa-
tion. As shown in the streamline sketches of Fig. 8, such a
gravitational model was used to prove that DD proceeds
exactly as theoretically predicted for a diﬀracted and de-
diﬀracted plane (a,b) and focused (c,d) waves. The con-
centration of the streamlines at a single point-focus in
case (d) was a dramatic demonstration of superresolu-
tion. The bow wavelet pattern both in the emission (f)
and the DD reversing (a) modes (a lone ray) was also
veriﬁed. In the case of the point source (f) the sheet was
also clamped down (G = 0) along x except for a spike at
the origin, because the source was assumed to be located
on a ﬂat non-conducting plane. The paths of the rolling
marble in (f) were very similar to the streamlines of the
bow-wavelet S of Fig. 3.

VII. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF DD

The cancellation of diﬀraction improves the perfor-
mance of a wide range of instruments in many ﬁelds.
These can be roughly categorized according to whether
the truncated ﬁeld is to be focused or allowed to prop-
agate as a beam. And also according to the type of
ﬁeld such as optical, microwave, acoustic etc. Examples
are too numerous to list, but focused ﬁeld applications
include cameras, telescopes (optical and radio) micro-
scopes (optical and electron), imaging radar, and sonar.
Beam applications include lasers and tele-communication
parabolic antennas. In the case of imaging radar, for ex-
ample, DD methods [5, 6], applied through refocusing the
ﬁeld by reshaping the antenna by curving its rim, will al-
low ﬁne resolution even with a large wavelength and a

7

analysis, the intriguing possibility exists that sub-atomic
bow waves propagated into space can be considered the
source of a uniﬁed ﬁeld combining quantum, relativistic-
gravitational and electromagnetic eﬀects.
In that case
ﬁeld reversal methods such as DD can provide a way to
transform quantum-relativistic ﬁelds in space into clas-
sical ones, and vice versa, as in Fig. 10. But all such
speculation must ﬁrst await acceptance and further ex-
perimental proof of DD.

IX. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

A method was presented, starting from the wave equa-
tion, and a truncated version of a geometrical ﬁeld,
and the principle of reversal of wave ﬁelds, whereby de-
diﬀracted geometrical wave ﬁelds can be created. To clar-
ify the process, the conversion of a ray into the diﬀracted
primary wavelet and back to a ray was studied as a
model of such a DD transformation. DD methods al-
low superresolution in imaging instruments and for inﬁ-
nite beams with no divergence. The simple experiments
performed to prove DD could be repeated and reﬁned.
Rigorous computer simulation of the ﬁeld can ﬁnd the
precise waves D for a given device and thus provide the
exact design of a DD lens, antenna or other instrument.
The similarity of the ﬁeld equations of ﬂow ﬁelds, grav-
ity and electrostatics suggest that methods equivalent to
DD might also be used to modify those ﬁelds too. For
example a boomerang-shaped object would have its grav-
itational ﬁeld lines ’focused’ on the concave side. Finally
it was speculated whether diﬀraction could be just one
manifestation of a united quantum-relativistic ﬁeld sur-
rounding an atom, and conversely whether DD means
that it is possible to create classical-ﬁeld regions of space
free from such eﬀects.

Acknowledgments

are

due

Prof.

Thanks

Shepherd,
to
Dr. D.A.B. Miller, and Mr. V. Alexander for correspon-
dence clarifying some questions. And to Capt. N. Kobori
for building the ultrasound equipment used for the DD
experiments and to Mrs. K. Tamari for help in the
design and performance of the gravity ﬁeld experiments.

C.

 

FIG. 10: The transformation of a classical ﬁeld through
diﬀraction into a ﬁeld with quantum and general-relativistic
characteristics.

cussions following Toraldo di Francia’s paper on super-
resolving ﬁlters [2] also raised the question of quantum
uncertainty in diﬀracted ﬁelds, and included this remark:
“the only correct quantum electrodynamical version of
Heisenberg’s principle imposes no relevant restrictions on
resolving power to begin with.” One can speculate even
further. The emerging circular streamlines of the bow
wavelet ﬁrst propagate foreword and then ‘fall’ towards
the source like a fountain, as if attracted towards the ori-
gin. Can the streamlines and equipotential surfaces of
the primary wavelet then be interpreted as curved Gaus-
sian coordinates (S being the geodesics [37]) of a rela-
tivistic gravitational distortion of the ﬁeld surrounding
the atom emitting the photons? This would be a minia-
ture version of Einstein’s results concerning the bending
of light in the vicinity of a massive star [38]. Considering
the proportionally smaller atomic masses and distances
involved, this might not be too improbable. The distor-
tion of space in the vicinity of an obstacle can be easily
observed by moving a pinhole or slit with an aperture of
about 1 mm in front of the eye. The aperture seems to
act like a concave lens distorting the view, according to
the divergence of the diﬀracted streamlines [39]. Thomas
Young had also combined gravitational and optical con-
cepts to explain diﬀraction. He hypothesized that the
rays refract through a lens-like, increasingly dense ethe-
real ﬂuid surrounding the obstacle, “attracted to par-
In view of the preceding
ticles of gross matter” [40].

[1] S. Schelkunoﬀ, Bell Syst. Techn.Journ. 22, 80 (1943).
[2] G. Toraldo Di Francia, Nouvo Cimento Suppl. IX, 391-

[3] I. Cox, C. Sheppard, and T. Wilson, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

Hill, 174, (1974).

438 (1952).

72, 1287-1291 (1982).

[4] J. Durnin, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 4, 651-654 (1987).
[5] V. Tamari, Optoelectronics-Devices and Tech. 2, 59-81

(1987).

[6] V. Tamari, U.S. Patents No. 5,148,315, Sept. 15, 1992

and No. 5,392,155, Feb.21, 1995.

[7] M. Born and E Wolf, Principles of Optics, 6th.ed. Perg-

amon, 109-132, (1980).

[8] W. Hayt, Jr., Engineering Electronics, 3d. Ed., McGraw-

[9] But occasionally, a truncated ripple pattern, similar to
the experimental one in Figure 7(b) has been observed
in a stream, ’focused’ by a chance arrangement of peb-
bles and leaves. Also a primitive attempt to create DD
sound waves is when a person instinctively cups his or
her hands around the mouth to concentrate the emerg-

ing waves when shouting to a distant hearer.

[10] R. Feynman, R Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman
Lectures on Physics II 40-5 Addison-Wesley (1965).
[11] S. Goldstein, ed., Modern Developments in Fluid Dynam-

ics, Dover, 61-65 (1965).

[12] D. Ximing, Laser & Particle Beams 10, 117-134 (1992).
[13] W. Braunbek and G. Laukien, Optik 9, 174-179 (1952);
see also M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics,
op.cit., 575-77.

[14] Sommerfeld, Math.Ann. 47, 317 (1896); see also M. Born
and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op.cit., 556-77.
[15] E. T. Whittaker and G. N. Watson, A Course of Modern
Analysis, Camb. Univ., 397 (1927); see also M. Born and
E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op.cit.,562.

[16] J. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics, McGraw-

Hill, (1968).

[17] G. Kirchhoﬀ, Ann. Physik. 18,663 (1883);

see also
M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op.cit., 375-
382.

[18] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op.cit., 15.
[19] I. Cox and C. Sheppard, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 3, 1152-1158

[20] L. H. Huxley , The Principles and Practice of Waveg-
uides, Camb. Univ. Press, 7.17, (1947); see also M. Born
and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op. cit.,381,584.
[21] C. Huygens, Traite de la Lumiere, Leyden (1690); see
also M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op.cit.,
370.

[22] D.A.B. Miller, Optics Lett. 16, 1370-1372 (1991).
[23] V. Tamari ”Bow Wave Geometry” postdeadline paper,
”Huygens’ Principle 1690-1990” Conference. Schevenin-
gen, The Netherlands (1990).

[24] F. Crawford, Am. J. Phys. 52, 782-785, (1984).
[25] N. Feather, Vibrations and Waves, Pelican, 252-3 (1961).

8

[26] W. Hayt, Jr., Engineering Electronics, op. cit., 116.
[27] J. Coveney and R. Highﬁeld, The Arrow of Time, W.H.

Allen, 58-62 (1990).

[28] M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op. cit., 14,15.
[29] E. Hecht and A. Zajac, Optics, Addison-Wesley, 70

(1974).

[30] D. Gabor, Nature 161, 777 (1948).
[31] G. Airy, Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 5, 283 (1835); see also
M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, op.cit., 396.

[32] W. Hayt, Jr., Engineering Electronics, op. cit., 181.
[33] W. Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum

Theory, U. of Chicago Press (1930).

[34] R. Feynman, R. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman
Lectures on Physics III, op. cit., 1-10; Dr. Feynman said
quantum eﬀects in the double slit experiment cannot be
explained by any ’machinery’ within the electron.
[35] R. Feynman, R. Leighton , and M. Sands, The Feynman

Lectures on Physics III, op. cit., 3-2.

[36] R. Feynman, R. Leighton , and M. Sands, The Feynman

Lectures on Physics I, op. cit., 6-9.

[37] W. Rindler, Essential Relativity, Springer-Verlag, 182

[38] A. Einstein, Relativity, The Special and General Theory,

Bonanza, 126-132 (1961).

[39] Pinholes and slits have been routinely used by op-
tometrists in place of lenses to test for myopia and astig-
matism. See H. Kumagai (ed.) Lectures on Eyeglasses,
Vol.II, Koryu Shuppansha, 33 (1985) (In Japanese);
Striking parallax eﬀects of nearby objects can also be
seen through these devices.

[40] T. Young, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 92, facing p.48
(1802); see also G. Cantor, Am. J. Phys. 52, 305-308
(1984).

(1986).

(1977).

