3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE SUPERMASSIVE CENTRE OF OUR GALAXY
ET CETERA

ANGELO LOINGER AND TIZIANA MARSICO

Abstract. We show that the supermassive celestial body at the centre
of the Milky Way and the two supermassive celestial bodies at the centre
of the distant galaxy NGC 6240 cannot be black holes.

Introduction

Sophisticated observations made by a team of astrophysicists of the M.P.I.
for Extraterrestrial Physics have allowed to determine the positions of the
star denoted with the symbol S2 in its motion around the Milky-Way’s centre
[1]. It has come out that the S2 orbit is a Keplerian ellipse with a period of
15.2 years.

We acknowledge the accuracy of the above research, but we are rather
sceptical about the conclusion of the authors according to which the centre
around which S2 revolves is a black hole. As far as an “explanation” is an
explanation, it is necessary that what is explained is a logical consequence
of the premiss and of what is used for explaining. As a matter of fact, the
existence of the observed Keplerian orbit can only explain the presence of a
punctual supermassive body at the centre of the Milky Way – and not of a
supermassive black hole. This conclusion will be corroborated in a detailed
way in the following sections.

1.– Theoretical considerations

If r, θ, φ are spherical polar coordinates, the solution of the problem of
the Einsteinian gravitational ﬁeld generated by a point mass M at rest is
given by the following spacetime interval [2]:

2

ds

= [1 − 2m
f (r)

2
]c

dt

2 − [1 − 2m
f (r)

]−1

[df (r)]

2 − f

2

2

(r)[dθ

+ sin

2

2
θdφ

],

(1)

where: m ≡ M G/c2; G is the gravitational constant and c the speed of light
in vacuo; f (r) is any regular function of r.

If one chooses f (r) ≡ r, one obtains the so-called standard form of solu-
tion, erroneously named “by Schwarzschild”, but in reality due to Hilbert,
Droste and Weyl [2].

One has the original form of solution given by Schwarzschild in 1916 if
one chooses f (r) ≡ [r3 + (2m)3]1/3; Schwarzschild’s ds2 holds in the entire
it is “maximally
spacetime, with the only exception of the origin r = 0:

to be published on Spacetime & Substance.
1

2

ANGELO LOINGER AND TIZIANA MARSICO

extended”. Remark that Schwarzschild’s form of solution is diﬀeomorphic
to the part r > 2m of the standard form. For r < 2m this part loses any
mathematical and physical meaning - as it was repeateadly emphasized by
Einstein and by all the Great Men who developed the general relativity –
because the solution becomes non-static, the radial coordinate r becomes
a time coordinates, and the ds2 loses its physical “appropriateness”. Now,
the invention of the senseless notion of black hole was originated by an odd
reﬂection on the region r < 2m. If the treatises had expounded the original
form of Schwarzschild in lieu of the standard form, the notion of black hole
would not have come forth.

In conclusion, the physical results are those and only those that are inde-
pendent of the particular choice of the function f (r). But the ﬁctive notion
of black hole owes its origin to a misinterpretation of the part r < 2m of a
particular form: the standard form.

2.– Experimental results and conclusions

Some months ago Sch¨odel and other 22 authors published a paper [1] in
which they report “ten years of high-resolution astrometric imaging” that
have allowed “to trace two-thirds of the orbit of the star, [denoted with
S2], currently closest to the compact radio-source Sagittarius A∗ [SgrA∗].”
They write: “The observations, which include both pericentre and apocentre
passages, show that the star is on a bound, highly elliptical keplerian orbit
around SgrA∗, with an orbital period of 15.2 years and a pericentre distance
of only 17 light hours. The orbit with the best ﬁt to the observations requires
a central point mass of (3.7 ± 1.5) × 106 solar masses (M⊙). The data no
longer allow for a central mass composed of a dense cluster of dark stellar
objects or a ball of massive, degenerate fermions.”

Sch¨odel et alii [1] interpret their results as an experimental proof of the
existence of a supermassive black hole at the centre of our galaxy. Evidently,
they are victims of the very diﬀuse, but erroneous opinion (see sect.1) that
the gravitational collapse of a massive celestial body must generate a black
hole. On the other hand, the experimentally observed orbit is Keplerian,
that is described by the (nonrelativistic) Newtonian theory. From the stand-
point of logic and experience, one can only aﬃrm that at the centre of Milky
Way there is a punctual object with a huge mass. (It is interesting to remark
that the ﬁctitious event horizon for a point mass ≈ 4 × 106M⊙ would be
situated at a distance of ≈ 26 light seconds!).

APPENDIX

In a NASA Press Release, dated November 20th, 2002, entitled “A Super
Galactic Discovery”, we read: “For the ﬁrst time, scientists have found proof
of two supermassive black holes together in the same galaxy. These black
holes are orbiting each other and will merge several hundred million years
from now. The event will unleash intense radiation and gravitational waves
[....] and leave behind an even larger black hole than before.

THE SUPERMASSIVE CENTRE OF OUR GALAXY

ET CETERA

3

NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory spotted the two black holes in the
galaxy NGC 6240. The observatory was able to “see” them because the
black holes are surrounded by hot swirling vortices af matter called accretion
disks. Such disks are strong sources of X-rays.”

This is pure science ﬁction! Demostration. In primis, as we have seen
in sect.1, the very notion of black hole is a nonsense. In secundis, even if
we believed in the existence of the black holes, there would be “no way of
asserting through some analogy with Newtonian gravitational theory that
a black hole could be a component of a close binary system or that two
black holes could collide. An existence theorem could ﬁrst be needed to
show that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations contained solutions which described such
conﬁgurations.” [3]. In tertiis, the eventual formation of an accretion disk,
strong source of X-rays, is not linked to a particular choice of the arbitrary
function f (r) (see sect.1) – in particular to the standard choice f (r) ≡ r.

In conclusion, no black hole has been detected by Chandra X-ray obser-
vatory. And never gravitational waves will travel over the world, because
they are pure mathematical undulations, completely devoid of any physical
reality [2],[4],[5].

“La v´erit´e, l’ˆapre v´erit´e.”
Danton

References

[1] R. Sch¨odel et alii, Nature, 419 (2002) 694; see also of the same authors: ESO Press
Release 17/02 (October 16th, 2002); arXiv: astro-ph/0210426 v1 (October 18th,
2002). See also: T. Ott et alii, ESO/The Messenger, No.111-March 2003.

[2] A. Loinger, Spacetime and Substance, 3 (2002) 145.
[3] G. C. Mc Vittie, The Observatory, 78 (1972) 272.
[4] T. Levi-Civita, Rend. Acc. Lincei, 26 (1917) 381; an English version in arXiv:
) (1930) 3 and

a
physics/9906004 (June 2nd, 1999); Idem, Rend. Acc. Lincei, 11 (s.6
113.

[5] A. Loinger, Spacetime and Substance, 3 (2002) 129.

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Milano, Via Celoria, 16 - 20133 Milano

(Italy)

E-mail address: angelo.loinger@mi.infn.it

Liceo Classico “G. Berchet”, Via della Commenda, 26 - 20122 Milano (Italy)
E-mail address: martiz64@libero.it

