3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
0
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Remarks on the Compatibility
of Opposite Arrows of Time1

H. D. Zeh

Universit¨at Heidelberg
www.zeh-hd.de

Abstract: I argue that opposite arrows of time, while being logically
possible, cannot realistically be assumed to exist during one and the same
epoch of this universe.

1

Introduction

If, according to the assumptions of statistical physics, the second law is
regarded as a “fact” rather than a dynamical law, it could conceivably not
hold at all, hold only occasionally, or even apply in varying directions of
time. Larry Schulman demonstrated very nicely and convincingly in his
oral contribution to this conference how this may happen in principle (see
also [1, 2, 3]). The major remaining question is whether his examples can
be regarded as realistic in our universe.

In particular, we may understand from Schulman’s examples how a cer-
tain time arrow depends on “improbable” (low entropy) initial or ﬁnal condi-
tions – regardless of the direction in which we perform our calculation. The
latter (apparently trivial) remark may be in place, since many derivations of
the second law tacitly assume in a crucial way that the calculation is used to
predict. That is, it is assumed to follow a “physical” direction of time (from
an initially given present towards an unknown future). However, precisely
this physical arrow, or the fact that only the past can be remembered and
appears “ﬁxed”, is a major explanandum.

1

Reply to L. Schulman’s oral contribution at the conference on the ”Direction of

Time”, Bielefeld (2002).

1

While, for a given dynamical theory, we know in general precisely what
freedom of choice remains for initial or ﬁnal conditions, mixed ones (such
as two-time boundary conditions) are subject to dynamical consistency re-
quirements – similar to an eigenvalue problem with given eigenvalue. This
problem remains relevant even for incomplete (for example, macroscopic)
initial and ﬁnal conditions. It is usually diﬃcult to construct an individual
solution that is in accord with both of them. In Schulman’s examples, indi-
vidual solutions were mostly found by “trial and error”, that is, by exploiting
a suﬃcient number of solutions with given initial conditions and selecting
those which happen to fulﬁll the ﬁnal ones (or vice versa). However, in a
realistic situation it would be absolutely hopeless in practice ever to end up
with the required low entropy because of the exponential growth of prob-
ability with entropy. Only an exponentially small fraction of all solutions
satisﬁes one or the other low entropy boundary conditions. In the case of
complete mixing, it is the square of this very small number that measures
the fraction of solutions with two-time boundary conditions.

Being able to ﬁnd solutions by trial and error thus demonstrates already
the unrealistic case. This diﬃculty in ﬁnding solutions does not present
any problem for their existence on a classical continuum of states if mixing
is suﬃciently complete: any set of solutions with ﬁnite measure can be
further partitioned at will, since entropy has no lower bound in this classical
situation. This conclusion is changed in quantum theory, which would in
a classical picture require the existence of elementary phase space cells of
Planck size h3N . The product of initial and ﬁnal probabilities characterizing
the required low-entropy may then represent a phase space volume smaller
than a Planck cell – thus indicating the absence of any solution.

2 Retarded and Advanced Fields

The consistency problem in a classical setting (though without mixing) is
discussed in Schulman’s “wet carpet” example, intended to prove the com-
patibility of two interacting systems with diﬀerent, retarded and advanced,
It is similar to an example studied by Wheeler and
electrodynamics [2].
Feynman [4], where a charged particle, bound to pass an open trap door, is
assumed to shut it before the particle’s arrival by means of advanced ﬁelds if
it ever enters the space behind that door. In both examples, there is but a
very narrow band of consistent solutions, in Schulman’s example represented
by a partly opened window. This narrow band may exist for systems which
are far from thermodynamical mixing (cf. the following sections), and they

2

In reality,
may be consistent only if the model is considered in isolation.
macroscopic objects always interact with their surroundings.
In a causal
world, this would produce “consistent documents” (not only usable ones)
In this way, information may classically
in the thermodynamical future.
spread without limit, thus leading to inconsistencies with an opposite arrow
In quantum description, classical concepts even require
of other systems.
the presence of irreversible decoherence, while microscopic systems would
remain in quantum superpositions of all their histories (see Sect. 6).

Philosophers are using the term “overdetermination of the past” to char-
acterize this aspect of causality [5, 6]. (Note that the conventional additive
physical entropy neglects such nonlocal correlations, which would describe
the consistency of documents, for being dynamically irrelevant in the future
[7].) In a deterministic world, one would thus have to change all future ef-
fects in a consistent way in order to change the past. For example, classical
light would even preserve its in principle usable memory forever in a trans-
parent universe. In classical electrodynamics, there is but one real Maxwell
ﬁeld, while the retarded and advanced ﬁelds of certain sources are merely
auxiliary theoretical concepts. The same real ﬁeld can be viewed as a sum
of incoming and retarded, or of outgoing and advanced ﬁelds, for example
(see Chap. 2 of [7]). Retarded and advanced ﬁelds (of diﬀerent sources) thus
do not add. Observing retarded ﬁelds (as our sensorium and other registra-
tion devices evidently do) means that incoming ﬁelds related to unspeciﬁed
past sources (“noise”) are negligible – incompatible with the presence of
distinctive advanced radiation.

Problems similar to those with opposite arrows occur with closed time-
like curves (CTCs), which are known to exist mathematically in certain
solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations of general relativity. This existence
means that local initial and ﬁnal conditions for the geometry, deﬁned with
respect to these closed time-like curves, are identical and thus dynamically
consistent. However, CTCs are incompatible with an arrow of time, such
as an electrodynamic or thermodynamic one. Those clever science ﬁction
stories about time travel, which are constructed to circumvent paradoxes,
and thus seem to allow CTCs for human adventurers, simply neglect all ir-
reversible eﬀects which must arise and would destroy dynamical consistency.
Since geometry and matter are dynamically coupled, boundary conditions
which lead to an arrow of time must also protect chronology (whatever the
precise dynamical model). Wet carpet stories belong to the same category
as science ﬁction stories: they do not resolve the unmentioned paradoxes
that would necessarily arise from opposite arrows.

3

3 Cat Maps

Borel demonstrated long ago [8] that microscopic states of classically de-
scribed gases are dynamically strongly coupled even over astronomical dis-
tances. This is a time-symmetric consequence of their extremely eﬃcient
chaotic behavior, caused by deterministic molecular collisions. Of course,
this does not mean that macroscopic properties are similarly sensitive to
small perturbations, although their ﬂuctuations (such as Brownian motion)
must be aﬀected.

Macroscopic properties characterize the microscopic state of a physi-
cal system incompletely, for example by representing a coarse graining in
phase space (or, more generally, a Zwanzig projection – Chap. 3 of [7]). The
deterministic dynamics of initially given coarse grains is often described
by measure-preserving dynamical maps. In contrast to deformations of ex-
tended individual objects in space (such as Gibbs’ ink drop), and even in con-
trast to the N discrete points in single-particle phase space which represent
a molecular gas, Kac’s symbolic “cats” (areas in phase space) [11] represent
ensembles, or sets, of possible physical states of a given system. Therefore,
Schulman’s entropy [2] as a function of deformed cats (“cat maps”) is an
ensemble (or average) entropy – not the entropy of an individual physical
state. The entropy of this ensemble is deﬁned to depend on its distribution
in phase space, obtained after coarse graining with respect to given and ﬁxed
grains as a macroscopic reference system, while the entropy of an individual
state (point in phase space) would be given solely by the size of the speciﬁc
grain that happens to contain it at a certain time.

This is essential (and suﬃcient) for Schulman’s argument that the inter-
section of two sets representing speciﬁc initial or ﬁnal conditions is not empty
if mixing is complete. In our universe, however, some variables participate
in very strong mixing, while others (“robust” ones, such as electromagnetic
waves or atomic nuclei) may remain stable for very long times. They are
the ones that may store usable information.

Since cat maps describe sets of states for rather simple dynamical sys-
tems, their dynamics is far less sensitive to weak interactions than that of
individual Borel type systems. For this reason, two systems described by cat
maps with opposite arrows of time may even be consistent for mild interac-
tions [2]. However, these cat maps do not form a realistic model appropriate
to discuss thermodynamical arrows in our universe.

4

4

(Anti-)Causality

In order to deﬁne causality without presuming a direction of time, one has to
refer to the internal structure of the evolving dynamical states. The above-
mentioned over-determination of the past (in other words, the existence and
consistency of multiple documents) is a typical example. Another one is
given by the concentric waves emitted from a local source. In our world,
both are empirically (not logically) related to a time direction.

While one may expect that all such internal structures can be shown to
evolve in time from appropriate initial conditions, they are too complex to be
investigated in terms of Schulman’s simple models. For example, retarded
(concentrically outgoing) waves exist in the presence of sources precisely
when incoming ﬁelds are negligible. This can be the case “because” of an
initial condition for the ﬁelds, or because of the presence of thermodynamic
absorbers [7].

Instead of these speciﬁc structures in the states, Schulman studied the
“eﬀect” (in both directions of time) of “perturbations” deﬁned by small
terms changing the Hamiltonian at a certain time only [3]. This eﬀect is not
easily deﬁned in a time-symmetric way, since an “unperturbed solution” de-
ﬁned on one temporal side of the perturbation would be exclusively changed
on the other one (no matter which is the future or past). If the unperturbed
solution obeyed a two-time boundary condition, the perturbed one would
in general violate it on this “other” temporal side. In contrast to the above
mentioned internal structures, our conventional concept of perturbations is
based on the time direction used in the deﬁnition of external operations.

Therefore, in a ﬁrst step, Schulman considered sets of solutions again.
The set of all solutions obeying the “left” boundary condition (in time)
remains unchanged on the left of the perturbation, while the opposite state-
ment is true on the right. However, individual solutions found in the inter-
section of these two sets (consisting of those ones which fulﬁll both boundary
conditions) in the case of a perturbation are generically diﬀerent from the
unperturbed ones on both sides of the perturbation. Now, if mixing is es-
sentially complete on the right of the perturbation (that is, for a suﬃciently
distant right boundary), the right boundary condition does not aﬀect the
solutions which form the intersection (considered as a set) on the left. This
means that mean values of macroscopic variables in the set of all solutions
that are compatible with both boundary conditions may only diﬀer on the
right (a consequence regarded as causality by Schulman) [3]. This is true,
in particular, for the mean entropy (if the latter is deﬁned as a function of
macroscopic, that is coarse-grained, variables). Individual solutions can not

5

be compared in this way, since there is no individual relation between them.
In the case of complete mixing on the right, there is even a small but non-
empty subset of solutions of the original two-time boundary value problem
which keep obeying the right boundary condition without being changed on
the left. However, using them for the argument would mean that only very
speciﬁc solutions can be perturbed in this speciﬁc sense.

In a second approach, Schulman studies the “eﬀect” of macroscopic per-
turbations on individual solutions of an integrable system. This system is
deﬁned as consisting of a ﬁnite number of independent oscillators with diﬀer-
ent frequencies. Although solutions which fulﬁll both boundary conditions
can be found with and without an appropriate perturbation, they are again
not individually related. Therefore, the causal interpretation of the pertur-
bation remains obscure. (For closed deterministic systems, any perturbation
would itself have to be determined from microscopic boundary conditions,
and the consistency problem becomes even more restrictive than for just two
boundary conditions.)

Nonetheless, I was pleased to discover that Schulman’s model is formally
identical with a model of particles freely moving on a periodic interval (a
“ring”) that I had used in an appendix of [7] for much larger numbers of
constituents than used by him (such that ﬁnding two-time boundary solu-
tions by trial and error would be hopeless). Particle positions on the ring
have merely to be re-interpreted as oscillator amplitudes in order to arrive
at Schulman’s picture. I used this opportunity to search by trial and er-
ror among analytically constructed two-time boundary solutions for those
ones which happen to possess slightly lower entropy than the mean at some
given “perturbation time” t0 (see Fig. 1). Unfortunately, the results do not
conﬁrm Schulman’s claim that these solutions are “aﬀected” by the pertur-
bation only in the direction away from the relevant low entropy boundary
(that is, towards the “physical future”) [3]. Evidently, this concept of causal-
ity, deﬁned by means of perturbations, is insuﬃcient. The very concept of
a “perturbation” seems to be ill-deﬁned for two-time boundary conditions.
As another example, I calculated the eﬀect on the solution in both di-
rections of time that results from a microscopic perturbation of the state (in
this case simply deﬁned by an interchange of velocities between particles at
some time t0). Both boundary conditions are then violated by the new so-
lution arising from this perturbed state, used as an “initial” condition. The
results (shown in Fig. 2) are now most dramatic towards the former “past”,
demonstrating the relevance of ﬁne-grained information for correctly calcu-
lating “backwards in time”. Deviations from the original two-time boundary
solution close to t0 also on the right are due to the fact that the coarse grain-

6

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

-500

0

500

1000

1500

Figure 1: Four random two-time boundary solutions (forming a narrow
bundle in the diagram) are compared with two special ones, selected by trial
and error for their slightly lower entropy values at t0 = 200 or t0 = −200.
Values for t < 0 are identical with those at tf − t = 200.000 − t, although the
ﬁnal condition is actually irrelevant in the range shown. Entropy scattering
around t = 1300 is accidental. (See Appendix of [7] for details of the model
and an elementary Mathematica program for your convenience.)

ing assumed in this model does not deﬁne a very good master equation (as
discussed in [7]).

5 Cosmology and Gravitation

It appears evident from the above discussion that opposite arrows of time
would in general require almost complete thermalization between initial and
ﬁnal conditions, which is hard to accomplish even in a cosmological setting.
In its present stage, this universe is very far from equilibrium. A reversal of
the thermodynamical arrow of time together with that of cosmic expansion,
as suggested by Gold [12], would therefore require a total life time of the
universe vastly larger than its present age. Weakly interacting ﬁelds may
never thermodynamically “mix” with the rest of matter [13].

7

2.5

1.5

2

1

0.5

0

500

1000

1500

2000

Figure 2: Time-symmetric “eﬀect” on a solution “caused” by a perturbation
of the microscopic state at time t0 = 200, deﬁned by an accidental entropy
minimum at this time. The perturbed solution drastically violates both
boundary conditions that were valid for the unperturbed solution.

In particular, Davies and Twamley demonstrated [9] that an expanding
and recontracting universe would remain essentially transparent to electro-
magnetic waves between the two radiation eras. This means that advanced
radiation resulting from all stars which will exist during the recontraction
of our universe would be present now, apparently unrelated to any individ-
ual future sources because of their distance, but red- or blue-shifted, de-
pending on the size of the universe at the time of (time-reversed) emission.
According to Craig [10], this radiation would show up as a non-Planckian
high-frequency tail of the cosmic background radiation resulting from the
past radiation era (where it would be absorbed in time-reverse description).
This leads to the consistency problems described in Sect. 2.

While neutrinos from the future would presumably remain unobserved,
gravity, despite its weakness, dominates the entropy capacity of this world,
and leads to consequences which are the most diﬃcult ones to reverse. Black
holes are expected to harbor event horizons which would not be able ever to
disappear in classical relativity, while in quantum ﬁeld theory they are pre-
dicted to disappear into Hawking radiation in the distant future in an irre-
versible manner. However, contraction of gravitating objects, including the
formation of black holes, requires that higher multipoles are radiated away.
This radiation arrow is the basis of the “no hair theorem”, which would

8

characterize the asymptotic ﬁnal states of black holes in an asymptotically
ﬂat and time-directed universe. Because of the diverging time dilation close
to a horizon, any coherent advanced radiation (with the future black hole as
its retarded cause) would be able to arrive in time to prevent the formation
of an horizon [14]. This solution of the “information loss paradox” may save
a deterministic universe (without leading to inhomogeneous singularities).

While the required initial and ﬁnal conditions are not obviously consis-
tent in this classical scenario, this problem is relaxed in quantum cosmology.

6 Quantum Aspects

Realistic models of physical systems require quantum theory to be taken into
account. Since quantum entropy is calculated from the density matrix (that
may result from a wave function by means of generalized “coarse graining”),
its time dependence has in principle to include a collapse of the wave func-
tion during measurements or other “measurement-like” situations (such as
ﬂuctuations or phase transitions). If the collapse represents a fundamental
irreversible process, it deﬁnes an arrow of time that is never reversed. Only a
universal Schr¨odinger equation (leading to an Everett interpretation) could
be time (or CPT) symmetric. A reversal of the time arrow would then re-
quire decoherence to be replaced by recoherence: advanced Everett branches
must combine with our world branch in order to produce local coherence.
Although being far more complex than a classical model (since relying on
those infamous “many worlds”) this would still allow us to conceive of a
two-time boundary condition for a global wave function (see Sect. 4.6 of [7]).
Note that Boltzmann’s statistical correlations (deﬁned only for ensembles)
now become quantum correlations (or entanglement, deﬁned for individual
quantum states). For example, re-expanding black holes, mentioned in the
previous section, would in an essential way require (and possibly be facili-
tated by) recoherence.

In quantum gravity (or any other “reparametrization-invariant” theory),
the Schr¨odinger equation is reduced to the Wheeler-DeWitt equation, HΨ =
0, which does not explicitly depend on time at all. However, because of its
hyperbolic form, this equation deﬁnes an “intrinsic initial value problem”
with respect to the expansion parameter a. In a classical (time-dependent)
picture, the initial and ﬁnal states would have to be identiﬁed in order to de-
ﬁne one boundary condition, while the formal ﬁnal condition (with respect
to a) for recontracting universes is reduced to the usual normalizability of
the wave function for a → ∞. Big bang and big crunch (distinguished by

9

means of a WKB time, for example) could not even conceivably be diﬀerent
as (complete) quantum states (Chap. 6 of [7]), while forever expanding uni-
verses might be said to deﬁne an arrow of time that never changes direction
during a WKB history. All arrows thus seem to be strongly entangled.

References

[1] Schulman, L.S., “Time’s arrows and quantum mechanics” (Cambridge

University Press, 1997).

[2] Schulman, L.S., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5419 (1999).

,

in:

[3] Schulman, L.S.

“Time’s Arrow, Quantum Measurements
and Superluminal Behavior”, Edts. D. Mugnai, A. Ranfagni and
L.S. Schulman (Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Roma 2001) –
cond-mat/0102071.

[4] Wheeler, J.A., and Feynman, R.P., Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 425 (1949).

[5] Lewis, D., Philosophical Papers, Vol. II (Oxford University Press,

[6] Price, H., “Time’s Arrow & Archimedes’ Point: A View from Nowhen”

(Oxford University Press, 1996).

[7] Zeh, H.D., “The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time” (Springer,

[8] Borel, E., “Le hasard” (Alcan, Paris 1924).

[9] Davies, P.C.W., and Twamley, J., Class. Quantum Grav. 10, 931

[10] Craig, D.A., Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 251, 384 (1996).

[11] Kac, M., “Probability and Related Topics in Physical Sciences” (Inter-

1986).

Berlin 2001).

(1993).

science 1959).

[12] Gold, T., Am. J. Phys. 30, 403 (1962).

[13] Dyson, F., Phys. Rev. 75, 1736 (1949).

[14] Kiefer, C., and Zeh, H.D., Phys. Rev. D51, 4145 (1995).

10

