3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The spin of the µ mesons

E.L. Koschmieder

Center for Statistical Mechanics, The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
e-mail: koschmieder@mail.utexas.edu

We can determine the intrinsic angular momentum of the µ mesons from the sum
of the angular momentum vectors of the lattice oscillations and the sum of the spin
vectors of the neutrinos in the lattice and the spin vector of the electric charge
which the µ mesons carry. We used this neutrino lattice before to calculate the
rest mass of the µ mesons. Here we learn how the apparent discrepancy between
the concept of a point particle and the ﬁnite size of a neutrino lattice is resolved.
We also learn that the spin of the µ mesons originates exclusively from the spin of
the electric charge of the µ± mesons.

1 Introduction

We have shown earlier [1] that the spin of the “stable” mesons and baryons
can be explained with the standing wave model [2]. In [3] we have determined
the rest mass of the µ mesons with the concepts used in the standing wave
model and explained why m(µ±) is ∼= 3/4 · m(π±). According to [3] the
µ± mesons consist of a lattice of νµ (respectively ¯νµ), νe and ¯νe neutrinos
which remain from the cubic neutrino lattice of the π± mesons after their
decay, plus an electric charge. It has been argued that our explanation of
the mass of the µ mesons cannot be correct because in our model the µ
meson lattice has a diameter of 0.88·10−13 cm, whereas the µ mesons are
commonly said to be point particles. However, since in our model the µ
mesons consist of neutrinos, but for the electric charge, and since neutrinos
do not, in a ﬁrst approximation, interact with electric charge or with mass,
it will not be possible to establish the size of the µ meson lattice, i.e. of
the µ mesons, through conventional scattering experiments. Therefore the
µ mesons will appear to be point particles. We will now show that the
neutrino lattice does not only determine the mass of the µ± mesons but also
provides an explanation of the spin of the µ mesons which has, so far, not
been explained.

1

2 The spin of the µ± mesons
The spin s = 1/2 or the intrinsic angular momentum ¯h/2 of the µ± mesons
can, theoretically, be the sum of the angular momentum vectors of all neu-
trino lattice oscillations of frequency νi in the µ mesons, plus the sum of all
spin vectors of the ni neutrinos in the lattice, plus the spin vector of the
electric charge which each µ meson carries. In a formula

j(µ±) = X

j(νi) + X
i

i

j(ni) + j(e±)

0 ≤ i ≤ Nµ,

(1)

where Nµ is the number of all neutrinos in the µ meson lattice, Nµ = 2.14·109.
This procedure is completely analogous to the way how the spin of the π±
mesons is determined, only that then a cubic neutrino lattice is considered
consisting of νµ, ¯νµ, νe and ¯νe neutrinos with N = 2.854·109 neutrinos.

The lattice oscillations in the µ mesons are longitudinal and hence do not
have an angular momentum because for each oscillation ~r × ~p = 0. So the
lattice oscillations do not contribute to the intrinsic angular momentum of
the µ mesons, or Pi j(νi) = 0. Each of the O(109) neutrinos in the µ meson
lattice has, however, an angular momentum ¯h/2. The sum of the spin vectors
of all neutrinos in the lattice of the µ mesons must be zero; otherwise the
sum of the spin vectors of all neutrinos in the lattice plus the spin vector of
the electric charge of a µ± meson could not be ¯h/2, as it must be.

In order to show that the angular momentum vectors around a central
axis of the lattice caused by the spin vectors of all neutrinos in the µ meson
lattice is zero we have to consider this lattice in detail, Fig. 1. As we have
learned in [3] the, say, µ+ meson lattice is obtained from the cubic neutrino
lattice of the π+ meson through the removal of all νµ neutrinos. That means
that in the µ+ meson lattice are then N/4 = (2.854·109)/4 vacancies at the
location where originally νµ neutrinos were. Each vacancy is surrounded in
the xy plane by combinations of four electron neutrinos. In the z-direction
there is on top as well as below each vacancy another electron neutrino.
The same applies for the electron neutrinos around each antimuon neutrino,
which are the centers of the cells of a µ+ meson lattice. The cells of the µ
meson lattice are octahedrons, two pyramids joint at their square base. As
can be seen on Fig. 1 each lattice point in the upper right quadrant has at
the opposite position in the lower left quadrant the same type of neutrino.
The same applies in the upper left and lower right quadrant.

2

Fig. 1. The µ+ meson lattice. The dotted rectangle marks the
front-side of the π± meson lattice in Fig. 5 of [2].

As is well-known it appears that only left-handed neutrinos and right-
handed antineutrinos exist, at least as long as the neutrinos are massless.
Suppose this also holds in the case of neutrinos with a rest mass. The angular
momentum vectors originating from the spin of the neutrinos would then not
cancel on a diagonal through the center of the lattice. The spin vectors on
either side of the same length on the diagonal are then from the same type of
neutrino (Fig. 1) and therefore point in the same direction and do not cancel.
However, the polarization vector of the spin of a neutrino depends on the
direction of the velocity of the neutrino, because the helicity H is given by

H = ~P · ~v/P v,
(2)
where ~P is the polarization vector. If only left-handed neutrinos (H = −β)
and right-handed antineutrinos (H = +β) exist, the direction of ~P must be
reversed if the direction of motion of the neutrinos during their oscillation
in the µ meson lattice is, in the lower left quadrant of Fig. 1, opposite to the
direction of motion in the upper right quadrant. This change of the direction
of motion follows from the equation of motion for the displacements un of

3

the lattice points in Eq.(7) of [2]

from which follows that ˙un = vn = iωun. The frequencies are given by

un = Aei(ωt + nφ),

νn = ν0φn,

(3)

(4)

as in Eq.(19) of [2]. Since nφ = kx, φn is proportional to x with x = na,
where a is the lattice constant. It follows that the direction of motion of the
neutrinos in the upper right quadrant (φ > 0) is opposite to the direction
of motion of the neutrinos in the lower left (φ < 0) quadrant. Consequently
the angular momentum vectors around the center of the lattice caused by
the spin of the neutrinos in the µ meson lattice are opposite and of the same
magnitude, they cancel. The only point without an opposite is the point at
the center of the lattice, at which there is no neutrino, so the center does
not contribute a spin vector. The sum of the angular momentum vectors
caused by the spin of all neutrinos in the µ meson lattice is zero, Pi j(ni) =
0. Together with Pi j(νi) = 0, as shown above, we arrive from Eq.(1) at

j(µ±) = j(e±).
(5)
The spin s = 1/2 of the µ± mesons is caused exclusively by the spin of the
electric charge that a µ meson carries. Crucial for this point is the absence
of a neutrino at the center of the µ meson lattice.

The cubic lattice of the π± mesons is easily recovered from the µ meson
lattice by ﬁlling all vacancies with either νµ (or ¯νµ) neutrinos. The π± mesons
do not have spin. As in the µ meson lattice all neutrino spin vectors around
the center of the cubic π± lattice cancel, but for the angular momentum ¯h/2
of the center neutrino. This angular momentum is canceled by the spin of
the electric charge which the π± mesons carry, so s(π±) = 0, as it must be.
This explanation supercedes the explanation given in [1] for the spin of the
particles of the neutrino branch which applies only for a static lattice.

3 Conclusions

If the µ± mesons consist of a lattice of ¯νµ (respectively νµ), νe and ¯νe neutri-
nos, as is suggested by the decay of the π± mesons, then it can be shown [3]

4

that the theoretical mass of the µ± mesons is, within 1%, equal to the mea-
sured mass of the µ± mesons. Using the octahedronal lattice structure of the
µ± mesons suggested by the determination of the mass of the µ± mesons it
follows that the angular momentum vectors of all longitudinal lattice oscilla-
tions are zero and that the sum of the angular momentum vectors caused by
the spin of the neutrinos of the lattice, taken around the center of the lattice,
is also zero. The only contribution to the intrinsic angular momentum of the
µ mesons comes from the spin of the electric charge which the µ± mesons
carry. Consequently the spin of the µ mesons is s(µ±) = 1/2, as it must
be. We note that the spin of the µ mesons can be explained, without any
additional assumption, from the structure of the µ mesons which we have
used for the explanation of the mass of the µ mesons.

Both the π± mesons and the µ± mesons carry an electric charge. The
π± mesons do not have spin, whereas the µ± mesons have spin 1/2. The
presence or absence of a neutrino at the center of the lattice makes the
diﬀerence. The spin of the electric charge in π± is canceled by the spin of
the central neutrino, whereas the spin of the electric charge in µ± remains
because there is no central neutrino to cancel the spin of the electric charge.

REFERENCES

[1] E.L.Koschmieder, arXiv: physics/0301060 (2003), Hadr.J. (to appear).
[2] E.L.Koschmieder, arXiv: physics/0211100 (2002), Chaos, Solitons and

Fractals 18,1129 (2003).

[3] E.L.Koschmieder, arXiv: physics/0110005 (2001).

5

