3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

“QUANTUM GRAVITY”: AN OXYMORON

ANGELO LOINGER

Abstract. I prove that “quantum” and “Einsteinian gravity” are in-
compatible concepts. Accordingly, the graviton is a mere object of scien-
ce ﬁction.

1.– Introduction

The innumerable and learned eﬀorts during seventy years to create a
quantum formulation of general relativity have only beaten the air – et pour
cause, as we shall see. On the other hand, it is evident to any unprejudiced
scientist that deﬁnite reasons must be at the root of this failure.

First of all, whereas “particles and ﬁelds exist within space-time, gra-
vity is, in essence, space-time” [1]. This implies, in particular, that the
physical meaning of the so-called critical (or “Planckian”) quantities M0 ≡
(~c/G)1/2 ≈ 10−5 g, L0 ≡ (~/M0c) ≈ 10−33 cm and T0 ≡ L0/c is rather un-
certain (“unsicher”), as it was emphasized by Rosenfeld many years ago [2].
Rosenfeld was specially qualiﬁed to formulate a judgment of that kind be-
cause the above constants came forth through an extension to the quantized
linear approximation of general relativity (whose substrate is Minkowski
spacetime – and this is an essential point) of a deep method, created by
Bohr and Rosenfeld for the quantum electromagnetic ﬁeld [3].

The current belief that below time T0, length L0, and mass M0 the Ein-
steinian theory of gravitation loses its validity is fully unfounded. Indeed,
its justiﬁcation by means of a bold application of more or less sophisticated
quantum techniques does not possess any sound basis. General relativity
has nothing to do with the classical ﬁeld theories in Minkowski spacetime,
or in “rigid” Riemann-Einstein spacetimes.

Further, “there is no experiment that tells us that the quantization of

gravity is necessary” [1].

Finally, the ﬁctive nature of the so-called gravitational waves [4] is suﬃ-
cient to render meaningless any quantization program of general relativity.
(The physical inconclusiveness of the theoretical approaches that make
use of supplementary dimensions of spacetime curled up with a radius com-
parable to the “Planckian” length L0, does not need to be emphasized. The
opinion according to which the superstring theory provides a possibility for
a consistent quantum theory of gravity is destitute of a rational foundation).
the References of the

For a bibliography on quantum gravity see e.g.

papers [5] and [6].

To be published on Spacetime & Substance.

1

2

ANGELO LOINGER

2.– Two observational results

Two recent papers of observational nature (see [5] and [6]) raise serious
doubts on the existence of the quantum ﬂuctuations of the metric tensor of
general relativity at the “Planckian” scales, i.e. at the scales of the constants
L0, M0, T0 (see sect.1).

Lieu and Hillman [5] remark that if the above ﬂuctuations really existed,
the instant t of an event could not be determined more accurately than
a standard deviation σt/t = a0(T0/t)α, where a0 and α are positive con-
stants ∼ 1. (Analogously, the distances should be subject to an ultimate
uncertainty cστ .) As a consequence of a cumulative eﬀect of this “Planck-
scale phenomenology”, we should have a complete loss of phase of the e.m.
radiation emitted at large distances from the observer. The conclusion of
the abstract of paper [5] runs as follows: “Since, at optical frequencies, the
phase coherence of light from a distant point source is a necessary condition
for the presence of diﬀraction patterns when the source is viewed through
a telescope, such observations oﬀer by far the most sensitive and uncontro-
versial test. We show that the HST [Hubble Space Telescope] detection of
Airy rings from the active galaxy PKS1413+135, located at the distance
of 1.2 Gpc secures the exclusion of all ﬁrst order (α = 1) quantum gravity
ﬂuctuations with an amplitude a0 > 0.003. [. . . ]”

Ragazzoni, Turatto and Gaessler [6] write: “[. . . ] We elaborate on such
an approach [i.e., the approach of [6], which was subject to some criticism]
and demonstrate that such an eﬀect would lead to an apparent blurring of
distant point sources. Evidence of the diﬀraction pattern from the HST
observations of SN1994D and the unresolved appearance of a Hubble Deep
Field galaxy at z = 5.34 lead us to put stringent limits on the eﬀects of
Planck-scale phenomenology.”

I shall now prove rigorously that, from a sound theoretical standpoint,
there are no quantum ﬂuctuations of the fundamental tensor of general
relativity.

3.– The oxymoron

As is was explicitly pointed out by Pauli [7], in quantum mechanics the
time t is a “gew¨ohnliche Zahl (“c-Zahl”)”, i.e. it coincides with the time of
classical physics. Thus, time t is not a dynamical variable represented by an
operator of the Hilbert space of the physical states. Analogously, also the co-
ordinates of the points of three-dimensional physical space are parameters,
and not dynamical variables; only the co-ordinates qr, (r = 1, 2, . . . , n) of
the n degrees of freedom of a holonomic system are dynamical variables
represented by Hilbert operators.

In the customary (Lorentzian) quantum ﬁeld theory, a given ﬁeld is de-
scribed by a set of m, say, operators ϕs, (s = 1, 2, . . . , m), that are functions
of the spatial points and of the instants of time.

In general relativity the fundamental spacetime interval ds is given by

(1)

2

ds

= gjk(x

0

1
, x

2
, x

3
, x

)dxjdxk, (j, k = 0, 1, 2, 3) ,

“QUANTUM GRAVITY”: AN OXYMORON

3

where the coeﬃcients gjk of the metric do not represent a classical ﬁeld
in the conventional meaning, but characterize directly the spatiotemporal
structure – in other terms, they “are” the spacetime itself. (The co-ordinates
x0, x1, x2, x3 are mere labels of the spacetime points, fully devoid of any
metrical meaning).

If we write the Minkowskian ds2 of a Lorentzian quantum theory making
use of a system of general co-ordinates x0, x1, x2, x3, we obtain obviously
an expression of the following kind:
3
, x

)dxjdxk, (j, k = 0, 1, 2, 3) ,

0
= hjk(x

1
, x

2
, x

(2)

ds

2

and we see that, according to the basic axiom previously emphasized [7],
the functions hjk(x) = hkj(x) are non-operators, i.e. they are (necessarily!)
customary functions (“c-numbers”) of the co-ordinates x0, x1, x2, x3.

We realize now that the project of a theory such that the gik’s of the
exact (non-approximate) formulation of general relativity are promoted to
the role of operators of a function space implies a blatant contradiction with
the above axiom of quantum theory.

“Quantum” and “[Einsteinian] gravity” are incompatible concepts, and

thus the expression “quantum gravity” is actually an oxymoron.

4.- Recapitulation

The classic spacetimes of quantum theories are the following:

i) the
Euclidean-Newtonian substrate of Galilean group of transformations; ii)
the Minkowskian substrate of Lorentzian group of transformations; iii) any
given, “rigid” Riemann-Einstein spacetime.

We have correspondingly:

i) the nonrelativistic quantum mechanics of
the systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom; ii) the Lorentzian
quantum theories – and the quantized linear approximation of GR (Pauli,
Rosenfeld); iii) Dirac’s equation for a particle in a ﬁxed Riemann-Einstein
spacetime.

The known quantum formalisms can have a deﬁnite physical sense only
under the condition that the above spacetimes are described by the custo-
mary non-operator entities. Consequently, the meaning of any quantization
program of GR is doomed to a whimsical arbitrariness, because it implies
necessarily some operator characterization of spacetime itself.

APPENDIX
A puﬃng operation

As it has been recalled in sect.1, the constants L0, M0, T0 pertain, ri-
gorously speaking, only to the quantum linearized version of GR. In the
current astrophysical literature they are denominated “Planck constants”.
Why? The reason is simple. In 1899 Planck [8] remarked that with suitable
combinations of the fundamental constants G, c, h, it is possible to obtain
the following four “natural” units of measure:
unit of length: q
ch
unit of mass: q
G ,

Gh
c3 ,

4

ANGELO LOINGER

Gh
c5 ,

unit of time: q
unit of temperature: 1
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. (Actually, in the paper of 1899 Planck
wrote b in lieu of h, and a in lieu of h/k.)

c3h
G ,

k q

Clearly, “measure units” and “physical constants” are distinct concepts.
I suppose that the astrophysical community is perfectly aware of this trivial
diﬀerence.

To qualify with Planck’s name the constants L0, M0, T0 has been a trick-
ing operation with the aim to dignify with a great name three constants
having a very dubious meaning.

“ –Warum willst du dich von uns allen
Und unsrer Meinung entfernen?–
Ich schreibe nicht euch zu gefallen,
Ihr sollt was lernen!”
J.W.v. Goethe

References

[1] F.I. Cooperstock, Ann.Phys., 282 (2000) 115.
[2] L. Rosenfeld, in Einstein-Symposium, 2.-5. November 1965, herausgegeben von H.J.

Treder (Akademie-Verlag, Berlin) 1966, p.185.

[3] N. Bohr und L. Rosenfeld, Dan.Mat.Fys.Medd., 12 (1933) Nr.8. See also L. Rosenfeld,
Physica, 19 (1953) 859, and E. Corinaldesi, Suppl.Nuovo Cimento, 10 (1953) 83.
[4] A. Loinger, Nuovo Cimento B, 115 (2000) 679; Idem, Spacetime & Substance, 3
(2002) 129; Idem, ibidem, 3 (2002) 145. See also A. Loinger, On Black Holes and
Gravitational Waves, (La Goliardica Pavese, Pavia) 2002, Part II.
[5] R. Lieu and L.W. Hillman, Astrophys.J.Letters, 585 (2003) L77-L80.
[6] R. Ragazzoni, M. Turatto and W. Gaessler, Astrophys.J.Letters, 587 (2003) L1-L4.
in Handb.d.Physik,
[7] W. Pauli, “Die allgemeinen Prinzipien der Wellenmechanik”,
Band V, Teil 1 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, etc) 1958, p.60, footnote1. See also P. Car-
ruthers and M. M. Nieto, Revs.Mod.Phys., 40 (1968) 411.

[8] M. Planck, Berl.Ber., (1899) 440. See also Planck’s book Vorlesungen ¨uber die Theorie
der W¨armestrahlung (J. A. Barth, Leipzig) – ﬁrst edition 1906, ﬁfth edition 1923.

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Milano, Via Celoria, 16 - 20133 Milano

(Italy)

E-mail address: angelo.loinger@mi.infn.it

