3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A new insight into the negative-mass paradox of gravity and the accelerating universe

Guang-Jiong Ni
Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China
Department of Physics, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97207 USA∗

The discovery of acceleration of the universe expansion in recent astrophysics research prompts the
author to propose that Newton’s gravitation law can be generalized to accommodate the antimatter:
While the force between matters (antimatters) is attractive, the force between matter and antimatter
is a repulsive one. A paradox of negative-mass in gravity versus a basic symmetry (m → −m) based
on quantum mechanics is discussed in suﬃcient detail so that the new postulate could be established
quite naturally. Corresponding modiﬁcation of the theory of general relativity is also suggested. If
we believe in the symmetry of particle and antiparticle as well as the antigravity between them, it
might be possible to consider a new scenario of the expansion of universe which might provide some
new insight into the interpretation of cosmological phenomena including the accelerating universe
observed.

PACS numbers: 95.30.Sf

I.

INTRODUCTION

Let us begin with a “paradox of negative-mass” in the
theory of gravity. As is well known, the Newton’s gravi-
tation law reads:

F (r) = −Gm1m2/r

2

,

(1)

where m1 or m2 is the gravitational mass of a particle
or a macroscopic body with spherical symmetry, r is the
distance between them and G is the gravitational con-
stant. The minus sign in (1) means that the force F
between them is always an attractive one, which in turn
implies that the gravitational potential energy of them is
negative:

U (r) = −Gm1m2/r.

(2)

On the other hand, all experiments and the theory of
special relativity (SR) have been verifying the equiva-
lence of mass m and energy E, i.e., the Einstein’s equa-
tion:

where m is the inertial mass.
Newton’s law of dynamics:

It is deﬁned by another

E = mc

2

,

F = m a,

(3)

(4)

where a is the acceleration of the particle (body).

Consider a system (body) being composed of many
particles, the gravitational binding energy shown by (2)
would render the total mass of the body decreasing. Then
an acute problem arises: can this body have a negative
mass? If so, a very bizarre phenomenon would occur as
discussed by Bondi, Schiﬀ and Will respectively [1]: Sup-
pose that such a body (with mass m1 < 0) is brought

∗E-mail address: pdx01018@pdx.edu

close to a normal body (with mass m2 > 0). Accord-
(1) and (4), the positive-mass body (m2)
ing to Eqs.
would attract the negative-mass body(m1) whereas the
negative-mass body(m1) would repel the positive-mass
body (m2). The pair ( a “gravitational dipole” ) would
accelerate itself oﬀ, without any outside help or use of
propulsion! The conservation law of momentum and that
of energy would all be violated.

Incredible! No one can believe in that. Hence we may
name the above problem a “negative-mass paradox” in
gravity. There are a number of paradoxes in physics,
aiming at pushing the contradiction hidden in the theory
to a situation that enables one to clarify what was wrong
or missing in the basic concept.

To get rid of this “negative-mass paradox”, a “positive-
energy theorem” was posed in the middle of 1960s, say-
ing that the total asymptotically determined mass of any
isolated body in general relativity(GR) must be non-
negative. This theorem had been proved since 1979 in
a variety of ways and is in total conformity with Ein-
stein’s equation (3) because the observed inertial mass
and energy are always positive deﬁnite.

However, being a paradox as acute as that hidden in
Eq.
(1), it does provide a much stronger hint than a
negation of negative mass. Remembering that the ap-
pearance of negative energy is inevitable in relativistic
quantum mechanics (RQM) and is intimately related to
the existence of antiparticles, I will manage to claim that
the whole solution to the “negative-mass paradox” must
be a generalization of Newton’s gravitation law into the
following form:

F (r) = ±Gm1m2/r

2

,

(5)

where the minus sign holds for m1 and m2 (both positive)
being both matters or both antimatters whereas the plus
sign holds for one of them being antimatter, which means
that matter and antimatter repel each other.

II. SYMMETRY OF SPACE-TIME INVERSION

Starting from RQM, we consider the wavefunction

(WF) of a freely moving (along x axis) particle:

ψ ∼ exp [i(p x − E t)/~],

(6)

where p is the momentum and E(> 0) the total energy.
But what is the WF ψc of an antiparticle? Before 1956,
it was assumed to be a consequence of the operation of
a so-called charge-conjugate transformation C which can
bring a charged particle ( say an electron with charge −e)
to its antiparticle (say the positron with charge e) [2]:

ψc = Cψ ∼ ψ

∗

∼ exp [i(−p x + E t)/~].

(7)

We see that the negative-energy −E < 0 emerges im-
mediately due to the basic operators in quantum mechan-
ics(QM):

ˆp = −i~ ∂
∂x

,

ˆE = i~ ∂
∂t

.

(8)

The negative-energy diﬃculty at the level of QM was
remedied to some extent by the so-called “hole theory
for positron” (which is obviously impossible for the Klein-
Gordon particle) and solved formally at the level of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory (QFT) by the redeﬁnition of creation
(annihilation) operators.

Since the discovery of parity violation ,i.e., the viola-
tion of space-inversion P (x → −x) symmetry in 1956-
1957, physicists realize that not only P but also C trans-
formations are not conserved in the weak-interaction pro-
cesses. So Eq. (7) is not applicable in general and the
WF of antiparticle should be redeﬁned as :

ψc = CP T ψ ∼ exp [−i(p x − E t)/~],

(9)

where the so-called “time-reversal transformation” T is
deﬁned as:

ψ → T ψ = ψ

(x, −t) ∼ exp [i(−p x − E t)/~].

(10)

∗

Note that: First, the name “time-reversal” is actually
a misnomer[3, 4]. What the transformation (10) means
is merely a reversal of motion (p → −p). Second, the
correctness of deﬁnition of antiparticle WF (9) depends
on the validity of the CPT theorem which in turn is
ensured by basic principles of SR and QFT. Third, as
the complex-conjugate operations in C and T cancel
each other, what a combined CPT transformation in (9)
means is merely a sign change of coordinates (x, t) in
(6) [2]. But the original mean-
comparison with Eq.
ing of C, P and T implies that Eq. (9) should describe
an antiparticle with the same p and E(> 0) as that of
the particle described by (6). Hence for antiparticles,
we should forget the “hole theory” and use the following
operators instead of (8):

ˆp c = i~ ∂
∂x

,

ˆEc = − i ~ ∂
∂t

.

(11)

2

In fact, Eq. (11) had been proven to be the direct and
unique outcome of the full solutions to the EPR paradox
and Klein Paradox [5,4,6].

Fourth, once we accept Eqs.(9) and (11), the CPT the-
orem becomes a new fundamental postulate, i.e., a basic
symmetry which can be stated in the following form:

Under the (newly deﬁned) space-time inversion de-
noted by PT , meaning merely x → −x, t → −t, the
theory of RQM remains invariant with its concrete solu-
tion, e.g., a particle WF transforming to its antiparticle
WF (denoted by C) automatically.
It means that our
postulate reads:

PT = C.

(12)

For example, the Schr¨odinger equation is nonrelativistic.
But the following coupled Schr¨odingerlike equation

ϕ = mc2ϕ −

~2
i~ ∂
2m ∇2 (ϕ + χ),
∂t
~2
i~ ∂
2m ∇2 (χ + ϕ),
∂t χ = −mc2χ +
is just the relativistic Klein-Gordon equation






(13)

(i~ ∂
∂t

)2 ψ = − c2~2∇2 ψ + m2c4ψ,

(14)

with relation ﬁrst pointed out by Feshbach and Villars in
1958:

ϕ = (ψ + i ~ ˙ψ/mc2)/2,
χ = (ψ − i ~ ˙ψ/mc2)/2.

(

(15)

Now we see that under the space-time inversion (x →
−x, t → −t) and the transformation:

ϕ(−x, −t) → χ(x, t), χ(−x, −t) → ϕ(x, t),

(16)

the Eq. (13) does remain invariant while a particle WF
(6) with |ϕ| > |χ| (due to E > 0, see (15)) turning to its
antiparticle WF (9) with |χc| > |ϕc| (due to E < 0, Ec =
−E > 0, see (16)).

III. SYMMETRY OF MASS INVERSION

Alternatively, we can restate the above basic symmetry

in the following way: Under the mass inversion:

m → −m, ϕ(x, t) → χ(x, t), χ(x, t) → ϕ(x, t), (17)

the theory, e.g., Eq. (13), remains invariant. Although
transformation (16) is equivalent to transformation (17),
they share diﬀerent advantages. The former is relevant to
unobservable coordinates (x, t) and so is more essential
in RQM and equivalent to even more abstract symmetry
of i versus −i (see Eq.(6) versus (9)), while the latter
is relevant to observable mass m and so is easily to be
generalized to the case of classical theory.

For example, as is well known, the motion equation for

an electron is given by the Lorentz-force law:

F = ma = −e (E + v × B/c).

(18)

Before 1956, its counterpart for positron is obtained via
a C transformation (−e → e) , yielding:

Fc = mac = e (E + v × B/c),

(19)

which is still allowed since C is conserved in the elec-
tromagnetic interaction. However, we’d better use the
following working rule: to deal with particle (matter)
and antiparticle(antimatter) on an equal footing, a clas-
sical theory must be invariant under the mass-inversion
transformation m → −m. Using this rule to Eq. (18),
we get (19) immediately. Note that: First, m is always
positive. Second, being the external ﬁeld, the electric-
(magnetic) ﬁeld strength E(B) undergoes no change in
the transformation. Third, in RQM like (13) or (14), the
motion equation for antiparticle is the same one as that
for particle. This is because each particle state like (6)
contains its hidden antiparticle ﬁeld under the condition
|ϕ| > |χ| whereas an antiparticle state like (9) contains
its hidden particle ﬁeld under the condition |χc| > |ϕc|.
By contrast, in classical theory, the equation for particle
is separated from that for antiparticle as shown by (18)
versus (19). We just complement (18) with (19) so that
the theory becomes invariant under the mass inversion
transformation. In other words, a new equation must be
added before it can be complete in the sense of treating
the particle and antiparticle equally.

Fourth, to clarify further why we prefer the new pos-
tulate (12) instead of C transformation and CPT theo-
rem, we wish to emphasize an important diﬀerence be-
tween a postulate (law) and a theorem. All quantities
in a theorem must be deﬁned in advance separately and
unambiguously and the outcome of the theorem is actu-
ally contained in its premise implicitly. For example, the
deﬁnitions of C, P and T are all clear in mathematics
and the validity of CPT theorem is ensured by the ba-
sic principles of SR and QFT. Once C, P and T are not
conserved in experiments, they cease to be meaningful
as physical transformations. In this situation, the CPT
theorem immediately exhibits itself as a new postulate
(12) in which the deﬁnition of transformation of particle
to antiparticle is just contained in the same equation. In
general, a postulate or law can often (not always) accom-
modate a deﬁnition of physical quantity, and the validity
of the postulate (law) together with the deﬁnition must
be veriﬁed by experiments. Hence the establishment of a
law is a process “from particular to general” or an out-
come of “analysis and induction method”. By contrast,
to prove a theorem from well-established theories is a
process “from general to particular” or a consequence of
“deduction method”.

For example, the deﬁnition of gravitational mass m is
contained in the gravitational law, Eq. (1). The deﬁni-
tion of inertial mass m is contained in Newton’s law , Eq.

3

(4). The deﬁnition of electric-magnetic ﬁeld strength, E
and B, is contained in the Lorentz force law, Eq. (18).
What we have done is a similar thing—the deﬁnition of
particle-antiparticle transformation C is contained natu-
rally in a new postulate (12) —- not one that comes from
elsewhere.

IV. GENERALIZATION OF NEWTON’S
GRAVITATION LAW TO ANTIMATTER AND
ANTIGRAVITY

We are now in a position to establish Eq.

(5), per-
forming the rule of mass-inversion on Eq. (1) together
with Eq. (4). Note that, however, both m1 and m2 be-
long to a closed system under consideration. When one
of them, say m1, is an antimatter, we just perform a
transformation m1 → −m1 once, regardless of whether
it is a source (m1 appears only at one side of equation)
or a detected body (m1 appears at both sides of equa-
tion). This simple procedure brings Eq. (1) to Eq. (5)
with a plus sign, implying that m1 and m2 repel each
other. Furthermore, if m2 is also an antimatter, one more
transformation m2 → −m2 recovers the minus sign, im-
plying that two antimatters attract each other. Now the
whole Eq. (5) is invariant with respect to transformation
mi → −mi(i = 1, 2).

The reason we can get rid of the “negative-energy para-
dox” is as follows. If one thought that the detected body
m1 is really a negative mass (m1 < 0 while m2 > 0) se-
riously, the paradox was inevitable. But here every mass
is positive regardless of whether it is matter or antimat-
ter. Even if we make a careless mistake of performing
transformation m1 → −m1 twice, it is still not a seri-
ous mistake—we merely do a trivial thing to return back
to the minus sign. Yet by another transformation on ei-
ther m1 or m2 will the other equation with plus sign be
supplemented. Eventually, the correct interpretation of
whole Eq. (5) is independent of the procedures used to
reach it. The bizarre phenomenon which occurred in the
paradox will never happen again.

In some sense, the paradox stemmed from the incor-
rect conception that the diﬀerence between positive and
negative masses is absolute, whereas now we regard the
diﬀerence between m and −m merely relative. We merely
perform a symmetry transformation m → −m to show
the equal existence of matter versus antimatter, but even-
tually there is no negative mass at all. This reminds us
of the experience (i.e., lesson) of Einstein. He struggled
for eight years before inventing the theory of GR. What
Einstein eventually realized is that space and time have
no absolute meaning but systems of relations (as stressed
by Smolin [7]).

V. GENERALIZATION OF EINSTEIN FIELD
EQUATION IN GENERAL RELATIVITY

Consider a positronium and an atom of matter.
If
Eq. (5) is correct, there will be no gravitational force
between them. This means that the gravitational mass
m(grav.) of positronium is zero! However, the energy
or the relevant inertial mass m(inert.) (see Eq. (3)) of
positronium is deﬁnitely nonzero. Hence we see that in
the case of coexistence of particles and antiparticles, the
equivalence principle (EP) in the (weak) sense that [8]

m (grav.) = m (inert.)

(20)

cannot be valid.

As is well known, the EP served as a starting point
in establishing the theory of general relativity(GR). The
possible invalidity of EP in the presence of antimatter
implies that GR is dealing with the gravitation of pure
Indeed,
matter without the coexistence of antimatter.
let us look at the Einstein ﬁeld equation [9]:

Rµν −

gµν R = −8πGTµν

(21)

1
2

On the left side, the Ricci tensor Rµν , curvature scalar
R and the metric tensor gµν are all functions of coordi-
nates xµ. While on the right side, the energy-momentum
tensor Tµν is introduced to describe the existence of mat-
ter in the vicinity (a marcroscopic small volume) of xµ.
Then under a transformation of mass inversion m → −m
to reﬂect that of matter to antimatter, Tµν should change
its sign due to its proportionality to the mass m. Hence
Eq. (21) changes sign on the right side whereas not on the
left side. This reﬂects the fact that GR is a classical ﬁeld
theory and so cannot treat the matter and antimatter on
an equal footing.

To keep Eq. (21) invariant under the mass inversion,
we manage to modify its right side by a generalization
as:

Tµν → T ef f

µν = Tµν − T c

µν,

(22)

(where the superscript c means antimatter,) since under
the mass inversion, Tµν → −T c
µν → −Tµν. No-
tice that the form of the energy-momentum tensor is the
same for both matter and antimatter. We stress once
again that the distinction between m and −m is merely
relative, not absolute.

µν and T c

VI. ANTIGRAVITY AND COSMOLOGY

Evidently, Eq. (5) cannot be tested by experiments on
earth. We can only await and see new developments in
astrophysical research. Surprisingly, in recent years, the
careful observation of some distant Type Ia supernovae
with redshift z = 0.39 − 0.9 reveals that the expansion
of the universe is accelerating rather than decelerating

4

as physicists pondered several years ago (see the excel-
lent papers [10,11,12]). Many physicists tend to explain
the acceleration by resorting to the cosmological con-
stant (with dimension (length)−2) originally introduced
by Einstein, unsuccessfully trying to interpret it as a type
of “vacuum zero-point energy” in QFT. It is often called
“dark energy”, which may account for up to 70% of the
entire matter and energy in the universe. Actually, no-
body understands what the dark energy really is.

Although I have no research experience in the ﬁeld of
GR and astrophysics, I do share the opinion of Davies
[13] that ”if we want to keep inﬂation and account for
today’s accelerating expansion, we need a theory that
explains why antigravity was once tense, then dropped
and hovered at just above zero,.... One possibility is that
the force fades with time. Another is that it varies in
space, so that far beyond the limit of our telescopes it
may be much bigger,.... What we need is a theory that
derives the strength of the antigravity force as part of
a uniﬁed description of all the forces of nature.” I am
trying to pose some conjecture as follows.

(a). During the inﬂation era right after the big bang,
once particles and antiparticles were created, they began
to repel each other according to Eq. (5). I don’t believe
the interpretation that the present baryon asymmetry
stemmed from the small CP violation (which is equiva-
lent to T violation, as discussed above, it has nothing to
do with the basic symmetry in time or that in particle
and antiparticle). I prefer to think that the total number
of particles is equal to that of antiparticles in the entire
expanding universe. But antiparticles had a head start
during the inﬂationary expansion and ﬂew away faster
than particles did. The latter lagged behind to some ex-
tent and our galaxies gradually evolved out of them. On
the other hand, some distant stellar objects (quasars?)
might be evolved from antiparticles and some of them
may be just those observed Type Ia supernovae undergo-
ing acceleration caused by the repulsive force exerted by
inner galaxies composed mainly of matters.

(b). Based on the above picture and solving Eq. (21)
with modiﬁcation (22) in the Friedmann model as dis-
cussed in [9], we can see that in a large part of universe
where the densities of matter and antimatter are nearly
equal, the acceleration of the expansion tends to zero. In
other words, the ﬂatness of our universe as shown by the
recent careful measurement of the ﬂuctuation of cosmic
microwave background radiation (see [14]) is critically de-
pending on two factors: ﬁrst, the inﬂationary expansion
triggered by the repulsive force between matter and anti-
matter; second, the nearly equal densities of matter and
antimatter in a large part of universe after the inﬂation-
ary expansion. So a careful measurement of the variation
of the Hubble constant [11] with distance may reveal the
subtle diﬀerence in diﬀerent regions.

(c). Among all particles, neutrinos are of particular
interest [15]. After the big bang, superluminal neutrinos
and antineutrinos are equally created in three ﬂavors and
distributed everywhere isotropically. Their number den-

sity may be 108 times that of protons. However, because
the forces between neutrinos and matter just cancel that
between antineutrinos and matter, all neutrinos and an-
tineutrinos (even they all have positive tachyon mass, see
VII,(d)) scape from the analysis of so-called dark matter.
(d). As the next conjecture, I guess that in the inter-
mediate region where matter and antimatter are overlap-
ping, there may be some probability of collisions between
matter and antimatter. Because of the long range repul-
sive force between them, these collisions may be grazing
and so the annihilation process occurs at short distance
would have some special character. Is it possible to relate
the above conjecture with the mechanism of gamma-ray-
bursts(GRBs)? It has been noticed for years that GRBs
are distributed at a remote distance on the cosmological
scale and they tend to have a roughly constant explo-
sive energy (see [16]and references therein). So the care-
ful study of the GRB-Hubble diagram as conducted by
Schaefer[16] is very important because the spatial distri-
bution of GRB may provide further evidence of nonuni-
form distribution of matter and antimatter in the uni-
verse.

(e). Furthermore, I think that the properties of cosmic
matter composed of pure matter and that of a mixture of
matter with antimatter are certainly diﬀerent. The latter
bears some resemblance to plasma (not quite the same)
with a “screening length”. The ﬂuctuations in plasma
with length scale larger than the screening length should
be strongly suppressed. In fact, the star formation rate is
rising steadily from remote distance with redshift z ∼ 2
to z ∼ 6 [16] which seems to me an reﬂection that the
domination of antimatter is increasing steadily there.

VII. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

(a). I was pleasantly surprised to read the wonderful
paper by Sch¨odel et al [17]. Their delicate observation
over ten years and convincing analysis veriﬁed the exis-
tence of a huge black hole at the center of the Milky way.
This should be viewed as a triumph of experimental sci-
ence, also a triumph of the theory of GR , which was ﬁrst
veriﬁed by its successful explanation on the precession
of Mercury’s perihelion. However, despite all of these,
GR is still a classical theory dealing with the gravitation
of pure matter as shown by its noninvariance under the
transformation of mass inversion.

(b). Based on the rule of mass-inversion invariance,
the Newton’s gravitation law is generalized to Eq. (5)
and the Einstein ﬁeld equation in GR, Eq. (21), is also
modiﬁed by (22) such that they can treat matter and an-
timatter equally and explicitly. The antigravity between
matter and antimatter may be important to account for
many cosmological phenomena including the acceleration
of expansion of the universe.

(c). Eq. (5) should be derived from Eq. (21) with (22)
in a weak-ﬁeld approximation. We follow the standard
procedure as discussed in [9] and notice that in the case

5

of one of the bodies being antimatter (the other matter),
an extra minus sign will appear in front of the product
of their energy-momentum tensors due to Eq. (22). This
means antigravity in Eq. (5).

(d). We are dealing with three kinds of symmetries, the
particle-antiparticle symmetry, the space-time inversion
symmetry, and the mass inversion symmetry. They are
essentially equivalent to each other. This can also be seen
from the two Casimir invariants in the Poincar´e group,
which is a group generated by the inhomogeneous Lorentz
transformation [18]:

xµ = Λµ

ν xν + aµ

(23)

ν | = 1 and Λ0

Usually, the conditions: det |Λµ
0 ≥ 1 are im-
posed. So one is dealing with a proper and orthochronous
Poincar´e transformation. There are two Casimir in-
variants [commuting with all ten generators Mµν (the
six generators of the Lorentz group) and Pµν (the four
generators of the space-time translation group)] being:
Pµν P µν with eigenvalues m2, (m is the particle mass)
and WσW σ (Wσ = − 1
2 ǫµνρσM µνP ρ, the Pauli-Lubanski
operator) with eigenvalues −m2s(s + 1), (s is the par-
ticle spin). Now we know that the physical essence of
the Lorentz group is that of SR. The latter can be de-
rived from any one of the three discrete symmetries men-
tioned above based on QM. Hence we can generalize the
Poincar´e group beyond the proper and orthochronous one
to incorporate the antiparticle explicitly, i.e., we may per-
form the inversion of Pµ and M µν so that Pµ → −Pµ,
Wσ → −Wσ which means the transformation of a particle
to its antiparticle. The invariance of PµP µ and WσW σ
implies that their eigenvalues remain invariant under the
In other
corresponding inversion of mass: m → −m.
words, either the Lorentz group or the Poincar´e group
is relativistic in essence which is nothing but the equal
existence of particle and antiparticle. Moreover, a nega-
tive eigenvalue of PµP µ = m2 < 0 is also allowed. This
implies an analytical continuation of mass: m → ims
or −ims with ms real (the tachyon mass) to describe
a superluminal neutrino or antineutrino [15]. Here the
symmetry between i and -i reﬂects even more deeply the
symmetry of mass inversion which is really a relative one
rather than an absolute one.

(e). The “photon” with m2 = 0 in the representation
of Poincar´e group is by no means an ordinary particle.
Usually, a photon with linear polarization (γx or γy) can
be viewed as a linear superposition of a photon with left-
handed polarization (γL ) and that with right-handed po-
larization (γR). But in our uniﬁed theoretical scheme of
space-time inversion, γL and γR could be viewed as the
“particle” and “antiparticle” (or vice versa). So I guess
that a photon has no gravitational mass. Alternatively,
we may say that a photon exerts no gravitational force
on other matter (antimatter).
It just moves along the
geodesic line in the space-time which is determined by
all matter and antimatter in the entire universe. By the
way, according to our understanding of so-called “wave-
particle duality”[4], a “photon” should be treated theo-

retically as an electromagnetic wave in propagation until
detected then it appears as a ”particle”. To speak of a
photon’s position before it is detected is meaningless.

(f). The possible violation of the equivalence princi-
ple in the case of coexistence of matter and antimatter
has far-reaching implication. The energy or inertial mass
[linked by Eq. (3)] obeys the conservation law and thus
is observable. By contrast, the gravitational mass is not
conserved and thus is not observable in the strict sense.
It merely obtains its deﬁnition from Newton’s gravitation
law, which, of course, is a classical and approximate one.
(g). I dare not discuss the quantization of GR because
I have little knowledge about the theory of quantum grav-
ity (see the excellent introduction by Smolin [7]). How-
ever, according to our understanding about SR based on
QM [4, 6], a possible “fourth road” to quantize GR might
be a localization of the space-time inversion symmetry

6

mentioned above (just like GR being the localization of
the Lorentz symmetry in SR) so that both matter and
antimatter can be treated explicitly and equally. Regret-
tably, I have been pondering this problem for many years
with nearly no progress. So I hope that more physicists
will join this diﬃcult but interesting pursuit.

Acknowledgments

I thank S. Q. Chen, P. Leung, D. Lu and Z. Q. Shi
for helpful discussions and bringing relevant references
to my attention. I am greatly indebted to three referees
for their kind comments leading to much improvement
on this paper.

[1] Bondi, H. Negative mass in general relativity, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 29, 423-428 (1957); Schiﬀ, L. I. Sign of the grav-
itational mass of a positron, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1, 254-
255(1958); Will, C., The renaissance of general relativity,
in The new Physics, Ch.2 (Edited by Davies, P., Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1989)p.31.

[2] Bjorken, J. D. and Drell, S. D., Relativistic Quantum

Mechanics (Mcgraw-Hill Book Company, 1964).

[3] Sakurai, J. J., Modern Quantum Mechanics (Revised

Ed.)(John Wiley & Sons, Inc.1994).

[4] Ni, G. J. and Chen, S. Q., Advanced Quantum Mechanics
(Chinese Ed., Press of Fudan University, 2000), (English
Ed., Rinton Press, 2002).

[5] Ni, G. J., Guan, H., Zhou, W. M. and Yan, J., Antipar-
ticle in the light of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox
and Klien paradox, Chin. Phys. Lett. 17, 393-395(2000),
quant-ph/0001016.

[6] Ni, G. J., Ten arguments for the essence of special rel-
ativity, in Proceedings of the 23rd Workshop on High-
energy Physics and Field Theory, (Protvino, Russia, June
2000, Edit: Filimonova, I. V. and Petrov, V. A.) 275-
292; hep-th/0206250. An modiﬁed version will appear in
Progress of Physics (Nanjing, China).

[8] Will, C. W., Theory and experiment in gravitational
physics, Revised Edition (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993).
[9] Weinberg, S., Gravitation and cosmology (John Wiley,

1972).

[10] Bahcall, N. A., Ostriker, J. P., Perimutter, S. and Stein-
hardt, P. J., The cosmic triangle: revealing the state of
the universe, Science, 284, 28 May, 1481-1488(1999).
[11] Freedman, W., The Hubble constant and the expanding
universe, American Scientist, 91, Jan-Fe. 36-43(2003).
[12] Livio, M., Moving right along, Astronomy, July, 34-

[13] Davies, P., Seven wonders, New Scientist, 21 Sept. 28-

39(2002).

33(2002).

[14] New Scientist, 2003, 15 Feb., 12-13;2003, 5 April, 22-23.
[15] Ni, G. J., A minimal three-ﬂavor model for neutrino
oscillation based on superluminal property, preprint,
hep-ph/0306028.

[16] Schaefer, B. E., Gamma-ray burst Hubble diagram to

z=4.5, The Astrophysical journal, 583: L67-L70(2003).

[17] Sch¨odel, R., et al. A star in a 15.2-year orbit around the
supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way,
Nature, 419, 17 Oct. 694-696 (2002).

[18] Marshak, R. E., Conceptual foundations of modern par-

[7] Smolin, L., Three Roads to Quantum Gravity (Basic

ticle physics (World Scientiﬁc,1993).

Books, 2001) p.149.

