3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations
of the gravitational potential: footprints in the solar
system

D.L. Khokhlov
Sumy State University, R.-Korsakov St. 2,
Sumy 40007, Ukraine
E-mail: khokhlov@cafe.sumy.ua

Abstract

The conjecture is considered that every body induces the wave ﬁeld which im-
poses oscillations on the gravitational potential of a body. The function for oscil-
lations is chosen to prevent the gravitational collapse of the matter at the nucleus
energy density. The conjecture leads to modiﬁcation of the Newtonian gravity. The
eﬀect is too small to be seen in observations in the solar system. Oscillations of
the gravitational potential of a body produce eﬀective inertial outward acceleration
for a particle orbiting around the body. Footprints of the eﬀective inertial accel-
eration due to oscillations of the gravitational potentials of the Sun and Earth are
investigated. The conjecture allows to explain the anomalous shift of the perihe-
lion of Mercury and Icarus, the anomalous shift of the perigee of LAGEOS II, the
anomalous acceleration acting on Pioneer 10, 11, the anomalous increase in the
lunar semi-major axis. The advance of the Keplerian orbit for Earth, Jupiter, Nep-
tune, Uranus caused by the eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the
gravitational potential of the Sun is in agreement with the observational bounds
from the planetary ephemeris.

The theory of gravity [1] faces the problem of singularities. In particular, singularities
may arise as a result of the gravitational collapse of massive stars. A body contracted
to the nucleus energy density resembles the neutron star [2]. There is a maximum mass
m⊙. For the neutron star
for the neutron star of order of the mass of the Sun mmax ∼
with the mass less than the maximum mass, the pressure due to the degenerated neutron
Fermi gas balances the gravity of the star. For the neutron star with the mass more than
the maximum mass, the gravity of the star overcomes the pressure due to the degenerated
neutron Fermi gas, and the star goes to the singularity.

The radius of the ﬁrst Bohr’s orbit of the Hydrogen atom a0 and the classical radius

of electron re are related as

where α is the ﬁne structure constant. The velocity of the electron at the ﬁrst Bohr’s
orbit is given by

where c is the velocity of light. The radius of the nucleus of the Hydrogen atom rn is of
order of the classical radius of electron

(1)

(2)

(3)

If to contract the Hydrogen atom to the radius of the nucleus, rH →
constant tends to unity, α

rn, the ﬁne structure
1, and the velocity of the electron tends to the velocity of

→

re
a0

= α2

ve = αc

rn ∼

re.

1

c. Since the velocity of light is a limiting one, it is reasonable to think that the
light, ve →
radius of the nucleus is a limiting one, and hence the nucleus energy density is a limiting
one.

It is reasonable to assume that there is some mechanism which allows to switch oﬀ the
gravity at a limiting scale thus preventing appearance of singularities in the gravitational
collapse of the matter. Below we shall consider such a mechanism, with the nucleus energy
density being chosen as a limiting scale.

Assume that every body induces the wave ﬁeld which carries scalar perturbation of
the gravitational potential. Thus the wave ﬁeld imposes oscillations on the gravitational
potential of a body

Φ =

Gm
r

−

+ ∆Φ sin ωgrt

where G is the Newtonian constant, m is the mass of the body, ωgr is the frequency of
oscillations. On the average oscillations do not change the gravitational potential of a
body. When a particle orbits around a body, oscillations of the gravitational potential of
the body produce the radial oscillations around the Keplerian orbit of a particle.

Assume that the value of oscillations of the gravitational potential is a function of the
matter density such that the value of oscillations of the gravitational potential is equal to
the Newtonian potential at the radius of neutron star

where r0 is the radius of a body, rN S is its radius of neutron star. Suppose that the
frequency of oscillations is given by

The frequency of oscillations is large, ωgr ≫
ment around the Keplerian orbit of a particle is small [3],

1/T = (Gm/r3)1/2. Then the radial displace-

Kinetic energy due to oscillation motion is given by

Eosc =

∆Φ2
grr2 =
4ω2

Gmr7
r6
0r2

N S

.

The Newtonian potential of a body ΦN decreases by the kinetic energy due to oscillation
motion

r7
N S
r6
0r !
Thus we arrive at the modiﬁcation of Newtonian gravity.

Φ = ΦN + Eosc = ΦN

1
 

−

.

The value of oscillations of the gravitational potential grows under the contraction of a
rN S, oscillations
→
Gm/rN S. The radial displacement

body. When the radius of a body reaches the radius of neutron star, r0
of the gravitational potential tends to the value, ∆Φ

→

2

∆Φ =

Gmr2
r3
0

N S

ωgr =

1/2

.

Gm
4r3

N S !

 

δr =

∆Φ
ω2
grr

.

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

→

due to oscillations of the gravitational potential tends to the radius of neutron star,
rN S, and the kinetic energy due to oscillations of the gravitational potential tends
δr
Gm/rN S. Then oscillations of the gravitational potential switches
to the value, Eosc →
oﬀ the gravity of a body contracted to the radius of neutron star. Thus the radius of
neutron star is a limiting one. Oscillations of the gravitational potential prevent the
gravitational collapse of the matter to singularity. Thus the conjecture proposed may
resolve the problem of singularities in the theory of gravity.

Let a particle orbit around a body. Oscillations of the gravitational potential of the

body produce eﬀective oscillations of the circular velocity of the particle

As a result eﬀective inertial acceleration directed outward the body arises

∆v = (∆Φ sin ωgrt)1/2.

wef f =

∆Φ
r

.

The eﬀective inertial acceleration does not modify the Newtonian gravity. Therefore
displacement of the radius of the Keplerian orbit of a particle due to the eﬀective inertial
acceleration cannot be detected in the measurement of the orbit’s radius.

The eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of
a body should lead to the precession of the Keplerian orbit of a particle under its motion
in the gravitational ﬁeld of a body. A small addition δΦ to the potential of a body causes
the shift of the perihelion of particle’s orbit per revolution by the value [3]

δϕ =

∂
∂M

2m′ 2
M

π

Z0

r2δΦdϕ

r =

p
1 + e cos ϕ

p =

M 2
Gm′ 2m

p = a(1

e2)

−

where m′ is the mass of the particle, M is the angular momentum of the particle. The
non-perturbed orbit is given by

with

where p is the orbit’s latus rectum, e is the eccentricity, a is the semi-major axis. Let the
eﬀective potential due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of a body give a small
addition to the potential of a body, δΦ = ∆Φ. Then integration of eq. (12) with the use
of eqs. (13,14) gives the shift (advance) of the perihelion of a particle due to oscillations
of the gravitational potential of a body per revolution

Here we omit the terms containing cos2 ϕ since an addition δΦ leads to the deviation from
the Keplerian orbit in this order.

Investigate footprints of the eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the
gravitational potential in the solar system. Suppose that the Sun induces the wave ﬁeld

6πa(1

e2)∆Φ

−
Gm

.

δϕ

≈

3

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

×

N S/r3

which imposes oscillations on the gravitational potential of the Sun. Estimate the value
of oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun adopting the density of neutron
1014 g/cm3. Then the radius of neutron star for the Sun is equal to rN S =
star, ρN S ∼
106 cm. The value of oscillations of the gravitational potential
(3m⊙/4πρN S)1/3 = 1.7
106 cm2/s2.
of the Sun is equal to ∆Φ⊙ = Gm⊙r2

⊙ = 1.1
Observations [4] give the value, 43 arcseconds per century, for the anomalous shift
(advance) of the perihelion of Mercury. This anomalous shift is now explained within the
framework of the Einstein general relativity [4]. Suppose that the value, 43 arcseconds, is
brought about by the eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the gravitational
potential of the Sun. Determine the value of oscillations of the gravitational potential of
the Sun from the data on the anomalous shift of the perihelion of Mercury with the use
of the Mercury data, the semi-major axis a = 0.387 AU, the eccentricity e = 0.206, the
period of revolution T = 0.241 yr. Then from eq. (15) we obtain the value of oscillations
of the gravitational potential of the Sun, ∆Φ⊙ = 6.4

105 cm2/s2.

×

Determine the shift of the perihelion of the asteroid Icarus due to oscillations of the
gravitational potential of the Sun with the use of the Icarus data, the semi-major axis
a = 1.076 AU, the eccentricity e = 0.827, the period of revolution T = 1.116 yr.
In
accordance with eq. (15) the value of oscillation of the gravitational potential of the
105 cm2/s2, gives the shift (advance) of the perihelion of Icarus, 8.5
Sun, ∆Φ⊙ = 6.4
arcseconds per century. The observed anomalous shift (advance) is 9.8
0.8 arcseconds
per century [4]. Thus the calculated value lies below the uncertainty margin by around
5% of the observed eﬀect.

×

±

Oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun yield the eﬀective outward ac-
celeration of the Earth. This eﬀective outward acceleration may be seen in laser ranging
of distant spacecraft. The eﬀective outward acceleration due to oscillations of the gravi-
tational potential of the Sun should give the blue shift into the frequency of light at the
Earth

×

∆ω
ω

=

∆Φ⊙t
crSE

(16)

where rSE is the distance between the Earth and Sun, t is the time of two-leg light travel.
In laser ranging of distant spacecraft, the acceleration of the Earth outward the Sun
looks like the acceleration of the spacecraft inward the Sun. Then one may interpret the
shift of the reference frequency given by eq. (16) as a shift of the observed re-transmitted
frequency due to the acceleration of the spacecraft inward the Sun. The acceleration of the
Earth gives contribution into the shift of the reference frequency during the time of two-
leg light travel, while the acceleration of the spacecraft gives contribution into the shift
of the observed re-transmitted frequency during the time of one-leg light travel. Then,
if to interpret the observed anomalous shift of frequency as the anomalous acceleration
of the spacecraft inward the Sun, its value is doubled in comparison with the eﬀective
outward acceleration of the Earth. Thus the eﬀective outward acceleration of the Earth
105 cm2/s2,
due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun, ∆Φ⊙ = 6.4
may be interpreted as the inward acceleration of the spacecraft, w = 2∆Φ⊙/rSE = 8.5
×
10−8 cm/s2. Analyses of radio Doppler and ranging data from distant spacecraft in the
solar system indicated that an apparent anomalous acceleration is acting on Pioneer
10−8 cm/s2, directed towards the
10 and 11, with a magnitude wP = (8.74
±
Sun [5]. Thus the eﬀective outward acceleration of the Earth due to oscillations of the

1.25)

×

×

4

gravitational potential of the Sun mimics the anomalous acceleration acting on Pioneer 10
and 11. Thus the value of oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun explaining
the anomalous shift of the perihelion of Mercury may explain the anomalous acceleration
acting on Pioneer 10 and 11.

Oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun yields the radial displacement
around the Keplerian orbit of a planet. In view of eq. (7), the radial displacement around
10−15 cm. This value is too small to be
the Keplerian orbit of the Earth is of order δr
seen in observations. The Viking laser ranging data [6] determines the Earth-Mars radius
to around a 100 m accuracy.

∼

In view of eq. (9), the modiﬁcation of the Newtonian potential of the Sun at the radius
10−35. This value is too small to be seen in observations. The
of the Earth is of order
Viking laser ranging data allow to determine modiﬁcation of the Newtonian potential of
the Sun with an accuracy of

10−9.

∼

The eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the gravitational potential
6π∆Φ⊙/ΦN , where ΦN is
of the Sun yields the advance of the Keplerian orbit, δϕ
the Newtonian potential of the Sun at the radius r. The dark matter restricted within
the radius r yields the advance of the Keplerian orbit, δϕ
2πΦDM /ΦN , where ΦDM
is the potential of the dark matter restricted within the radius r. Hence the eﬀective
inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun mimics
the eﬀective mass restricted within the radius r

∼

∼

∼

mef f =

∆Φ⊙r
3G

.

(17)

×

Compare the eﬀective mass due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun,
105 cm2/s2, with the observational bounds for the dark matter from the
∆Φ⊙ = 6.4
10−8m⊙
planetary ephemeris. Within the Earth’s orbit the eﬀective mass is mef f = 2.4
10−8m⊙ [7]. Within Jupiter’s orbit the
while the observational bound is mDM ≤
eﬀective mass is mef f = 1.2
±
10−7m⊙ while
0.027)
10−6m⊙ [8]. Within Neptune’s orbit the eﬀective
the observational bound is mDM ≤
10−6m⊙ [8].
mass is mef f = 7.3
Thus the eﬀective mass due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun is
in agreement with the observational bounds for the Earth’s, Jupiter’s, Neptune’s, and
Uranus’s orbits.

10−7m⊙ while the observational bound is mDM ≤

10−6m⊙ [8]. Within Uranus’s orbit the eﬀective mass is mef f = 4.7

10−7m⊙ while the observational bound is mDM = (0.12

0.5

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

7

3

∆Φ⊙rEM sin Ωt/r2

Oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun yield the eﬀective inertial ac-
celeration of the Moon with respect to the Earth, w
SE, where rEM
is the distance between the Earth and Moon, Ω is the angular velocity of the Moon.
This leads to the polarization of the Moon’s orbit in the direction of the Sun, with
the Earth-Moon distance decreasing. As a result the Moon’s circular velocity increases
by the value, ∆v = (√2∆Φ⊙rEM /2rSE)1/2, average for the period of revolution of the
Moon. Then inertial acceleration of the Moon outwards the Earth increases by the value,
w = √2∆Φ⊙/2rSE, average for the period of revolution of the Moon. Oscillations of the
105 cm2/s2, yield the eﬀective inertial
gravitational potential of the Sun, ∆Φ⊙ = 6.4
acceleration of the Moon outwards the Earth, w = 3.0

10−8 cm/s2.

×

≈

As follows from telescopic observations of the Earth’s rotation collected for the last 300
10−5 s/yr. As
years, e.g. [10], the rate of deceleration of the Earth’s rotation is ˙TE = 1.4
a result the lunar semi-major axis increases with a rate, ˙atel = 2.53 cm/yr. Measurement

×

×

5

of the Earth-Moon distance in lunar laser ranging [11] gives the value, ˙aLLR = 3.82 cm/yr,
hence points to the anomalous increase in the lunar semi-major axis with an excessive rate,
0.2 cm/yr. This corresponds to the anomalous outward acceleration
˙aLLR −
˙atel = 1.29
10−8 cm/s2. Thus the eﬀective
of the Moon, w = ( ˙aLLR −
inertial acceleration of the Moon due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of the
Sun explains the main part (around 94%) of the anomalous outward acceleration of the
Moon.

˙atel)c/rEM = (3.2

0.5)

±

×

±

×

Suppose that the Earth induces the wave ﬁeld which imposes oscillations on the
gravitational potential of the Earth. Estimate the value of oscillations of the gravi-
tational potential of the Earth. The radius of neutron star for the Earth is equal to
rN S = (3m⊕/4πρN S)1/3 = 2.4
104 cm. The value of oscillations of the gravitational
potential of the Earth is equal to ∆Φ⊕ = Gm⊕r2

102 cm2/s2.

×

⊕ = 9

N S/r3

Observations of the Earth’s satellite LAGEOS II [9] give the value, 3.4 arcseconds
per year, for the anomalous shift (advance) of the perigee of LAGEOS II. This anomalous
shift is now explained within the framework of the Einstein general relativity [9]. Suppose
that the value, 3.4 arcseconds, is brought about by the eﬀective inertial acceleration
due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Earth. Determine the value of
oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Earth from the data on the anomalous
shift of the perigee of LAGEOS II with the use of the LAGEOS II data, the semi-major
109 cm, the eccentricity e = 0.014, the period of revolution T = 3.758
axis a = 1.2163
hr, the inclination I = 52.650. Then from eq. (15) we obtain the value of oscillations of
102 cm2/s2. Estimate the eﬀect
the gravitational potential of the Earth, ∆Φ⊕ = 1.2
of oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun on the motion of LAGEOS II,
102 cm2/s2. In view of this eﬀect, we obtain the value
∆Φ = √2∆Φ⊙a cos I/2rSE = 0.3
×
of oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Earth, ∆Φ⊕ = 0.9

102 cm2/s2.

×

×

×

102 cm2/s2,

×

Oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Earth, ∆Φ⊕ = 0.9

yield the eﬀective inertial outward acceleration of the Moon, w = ∆Φ⊕/rEM = 0.2
×
10−8 cm/s2. This acceleration explains around 6% of the anomalous outward acceleration
of the Moon. The overall eﬀective inertial acceleration of the Moon due to oscillations of
10−8 cm/s2 and
the gravitational potential of the Sun and Earth is w = 3.0 + 0.2 = 3.2
thus completely explains the anomalous outward acceleration of the Moon.

×

We have considered the conjecture that every body induces the wave ﬁeld which im-
poses oscillations on the gravitational potential of a body. The function for oscillations is
chosen to prevent the gravitational collapse of the matter at the nucleus energy density.
The radial displacement around the Keplerian orbit of a planet due to oscillations of the
gravitational potential of the Sun is too small to be seen in observations. Oscillations of
the gravitational potential leads to modiﬁcation of the Newtonian gravity. The eﬀect is
too small to be seen in observations in the solar system. Oscillations of the gravitational
potential produce eﬀective inertial outward acceleration for a particle orbiting around the
body. Footprints of the eﬀective inertial acceleration due to oscillations of the gravita-
tional potential of the Sun may be revealed as an anomalous shift of the perihelion of
the Keplerian orbit of a planet or as an anomalous shift of the frequency of light seen
in laser ranging. Although we have rough estimation of the value of oscillations of the
gravitational potential of the Sun it is possible to perform the accurate testing of the
conjecture by comparing the results of diﬀerent observations. The value of oscillations of
the gravitational potential of the Sun obtained from the anomalous shift of the perihelion

6

of Mercury is consistent with that obtained from the anomalous shift of the frequency of
light at the Earth now interpreted as the anomalous acceleration acting on Pioneer 10, 11.
Also the value of oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun approximately ex-
plains the anomalous shift (advance) of the perihelion of Icarus, with the calculated value
lies below the uncertainty margin by around 5% of the observed eﬀect. Also the value
of oscillations of the gravitational potential of the Sun explains the main part (around
94%) of the anomalous outward acceleration of the Moon. The value of oscillations of the
gravitational potential of the Earth obtained from the anomalous shift of the perigee of
LAGEOS II explains the retaining part (around 6%) of the anomalous outward accelera-
tion of the Moon. The advance of the Keplerian orbit for Earth, Jupiter, Neptune, Uranus
caused by the eﬀective inertial force due to oscillations of the gravitational potential of
the Sun is in agreement with the observational bounds from the planetary ephemeris.

The conjecture considered provides an explanation of the anomalous precession (ad-
vance) of the Keplerian orbit alternative to the general relativity. So from the point of
view of the conjecture considered the general relativity is questioned. Note that excluded
the anomalous precession (advance) of the Keplerian orbit we may describe the planetary
motion in the solar system within the Newtonian mechanics. Note also that we may
describe the delay of light in the gravitational ﬁeld and hence laser ranging within the
special relativity.

References

1973).

[1] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne, J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation (Freeman, San Francisco,

[2] S.L. Shapiro and S.A. Teucolsky, Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars

(Jhon Wiley and Sons, New York, 1983).

[3] L. Landau and Ye. Lifshitz, Mechanics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1960).

[4] S. Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (Jhon Wiley and Sons, New York, 1972).

[5] J.D. Anderson et al., Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 082004.

[6] L.D. Reasenberg et al., Astrophys. J. 234 (1979) L219.

[7] D.R. Mikkelsen and M.J. Newman, Phys. Rev. D16 (1977) 919.

[8] J.D. Anderson et al., Astrophys. J. 448 (1995) 885.

[9] L. Iorio, J. Geodetic Soc. Japan 48(1) (2002) 13.

[10] B.P. Pertsev, Izvestiya: Phys. Solid Earth 36 (2000) 218.

[11] J.O. Dickey et al., Science 265 (1994) 482.

7

