3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

physics/0309055

A Tip of the TOE

P. P. Marvol1

January 17, 2014

Institute for Applied Quantum Acoustics,
Pyramid College Cacania, Hatetepe Boulevard 12,
CC-12000 Cacania City, CACANIA

In memoriam E. F. Dr¨acker

Abstract. Using standard methods from string theory, this paper
presents a comprehensive survey about the most important aspects of
the theory of sand. Special interest is put on the examination of the
sand-wind duality and the interaction of ordinary (non-supersymmetric)
sand with the heat ﬁeld of the earth, as solution of the ﬁeld inequalities
of a stone. This will lead us, in a natural way, to completely new insights
into the theory of sandstorms.

Keywords: many particle systems; string theory; ﬁeld theory; quantum
chaos; GRT; SUSY; thermal QFT; GRB; quantum cosmology; noncom-
mutative QT;

1

Introduction

The matter of sand has ever since fascinated mankind. Already twenty
thousand years ago attempts to classify the grainy zoo have been made,
[1]. In the Cretacious Age many advances with respect to sand have been
undertaken, especially it has been proved by [2] that chalk and sand are—at
a fundamental level—two manifestations of the same thing. Unfortunately,
since the end of the Cretatious Age, sand research activities suﬀered from a
considerable lack of ﬁnancial resources, a time period which is called the Big
Sand Crisis (BSC). This led to the the well-known revolutionary movement
“Every Scientist Needs a Camel”, [3]. After all, at least a few new concepts
have been invented, among them the so-called wheel, which then, however,
has been discarded due to its impracticability, [4]. (However, there are some

1marvol@salzamt.at

1

unteachable fanatics who still try to demonstrate the usefulness of wheels
on sand in the annual Paris-Dakar competition.)

Some centuries after the BSC a completely new impulse came from an-
cient Lei Li Ga, [5], who was the ﬁrst to put special interest in the dynamics
of sand.

The so far highly disordered eﬀorts in sand have been ﬁbre bundled
by the famous philosoph Goe-The, who formulated the central question of
today’s complex theory of sand, [6]:

Herauszuﬁnden, was den Sand im Innersten zusammenband.2

Starting from this point, many interesting theories about sand dynamics
have been developed. One of the most ambitious (and ambiguous) models
was the well-known sandstring theory developed by the old Egyptian priest
Edua ’Wit X [7]. With the postulate of the non-existence of inﬁnitely small
grains of sand, several severe problems of ordinary sand-theory (e.g. in-
curable sand-divergencies, causality problems etc.) seemed to be repaired.
However, over the millennia, this model did not bear any fruits in sand. (Af-
ter all, there have been some interesting side results for weavers, in particular
new techniques for knotting.) This led to a complete restart of research in
the ﬁeld of sand. Fortunately, at least some interesting questions have been
solved independently of sandstring theory, [8], [9], [10].

In
Modern, post-string sand theories have also their origin in Egypt.
particular, a comprehensive quantum theory of the dynamics of sand dunes
has been developed, [11], [12]. Piles of stones (so called “pyramides”) have
been constructed for a macroscopic test of the dynamic theory, especially
for the prominent dune-tunnel eﬀect. However, the pyramid-models emerged
as too roughly textured, so there could not be proven anything with these
(although they are still very impressive). Indeed, experimental clues for the
correctness of the Egyptian Theory of Quantum Sand Dynamics (ETQSD)
has been found only recently by Swedish Inger Zeil, [13]. Of course, to people
living in North-Africa, his results have always been obvious. However, as
they aroused some interest outside the Big Desert, he eventually will receive
the prize without any bells.

Presently, research in sand dynamics came to an interlocutory end with

a stone’s3 ﬁeld inequalities, [14], which form the basis of our approach.

The paper is organized as follows. In section two, the main aspects of
the standard sand-wind duality are recapitulated. In section three a stone’s
ﬁeld inequalities (specialized for the heat kernel of the earth) are presented.
From these fundamental considerations, section four will lead us in a natural
way to a completely new and attractive theory of sandstorms. In section ﬁve

2to be translated maybe as: To ﬁnd out, what sand bound together in its inner.
3Unfortunately, the authorship of this work is still unclear.

2

follows a brief conclusion and outlook with respect to some recent aspects
of sand theory will be given.

2 Sand-Wind Duality

This section is devoted to a brief recapitulation of the sand-wind duality
of grain dynamics. Since sand is quantized (’grained’), one has to use the
well-known cat-equation, which reads (in natural units)

(W + VH)|sandi = −i

|sandi.

(1)

∂
∂t

W is the wind operator, VH stands for the heat ﬁeld operator. We use the
idempotency of sand dunes (two sand dunes thrown upon each other give
again a sand dune, since the superﬂuous grains merely drain in the sea of
sand, as introduced by the great wizard Pamdirac) and W VH = VHW =
0 (heat and wind never occur at the same time). Now, multiplying this
equation by its complex conjugate and dressing the cat with its bra leads
immediately to

hsand|W |sandi = hsand|(

(2)

∂
∂t

2
)

|sandi.

Due to the quadratic time derivative on the right hand side of this equation,
by interpreting the operators as states and the states as operators we can
immediately read oﬀ the duality between sand and wind. Most interesting
consequences of this phenomenon follow from the fact that a (sand theo-
retical) distinction between the sand-ﬁeld and the wind-ﬁeld is impossible.
This is the basis of our modern understanding of sandstorms.

In classical sand theory, it has been believed that the genesis of sand-
storms lies merely in the wind ﬁeld, interacting with the grains of sand,
pushing them up and around. Modern understanding of sandstorms using
the sand-wind duality of grain dynamics, however, has taught that the wind
is a mere manifestation of the sand ﬁeld dynamics. Thus, the usual theory of
sandstorms is simply that the interaction of the sand-wind-ﬁeld with itself is
suﬃcient to create a sandstorm. Indeed, it has been shown by [15] that the
movement of the grains of sand functions as source term for the wind ﬁeld,
not the other way as suggested by classical theory: It’s the grains generating
the wind.

So far, this is somwhat awkward but, after all, well understood. Unfor-
tunately, combinig the principles of grain dynamics with the Relative Gen-
erality Theory of a stone, we will ﬁnd that this simple, non-general model
is not suﬃcient to a full understanding of sandstorms.

3

3 The Heatﬁeld

In the preceding section we have deliberately assumed that the reader is
familiar with some of the basic notions describing the coupling of wind to
sand. However, in order to fully exploit the origin of the breakdown of sand-
wind-duality in sandstorms, we shall need a more thorough understanding
of the generalistic physics of sand with respect to the heat ﬁeld, i.e. of a
stone’s theory and its grainization. An excellent recent introduction can be
found in [16] – in chapter 42, of course.

Let’s begin with a brief historical survey. As it is well known, the experi-
ments of Michael’s son (an ethiopian sprinter) and a cheetah [17] have given
a ﬁrst evidence that nothing moves faster than sand and that all grains (in a
sandstorm) have the same speed, at least within the experimental accuracy
of that time. This led to a relatively special view of matters. However, it
still remained unclear how such a theory could be combined with the inter-
action of wind, sand and heat in the spirit of the old ton theory [18]. Only
a few millennia later, this problem has been solved in an ingeniously simple
manner by a stone.

Obviously, the sand in the desert is rather hot, in fact even hotter than
the air surrounding it. Up to a stone’s era many scientists desperately tried
to understand this phenomenon. A stone turned it into a new paradigm
In brief, his idea can be stated as follows: The heat moves the
instead.
grains, but the grains are the source for the heatﬁeld at the same time. (If
we could switch oﬀ the dynamics and wait long enough then the air would
be as hot as the sand.) More quantitatively, a stone’s inequalities read

T µν
≥ T µν
w
g
Gµν ≈ T µν
?

,

(3)

(4)

from which one immediately derives his famous saying “E=m ceh ceh”.
(The ancient letter = has no analogue nowadays.) Note that the sand is
still treated as a classical (in the sense of continuous) ﬁeld (of characteristic
zero) here. The coupling of the spin-2-heatﬁeld to wind, which is spin-1,
i.e. a vector-ﬁeld, is described by the force F µ = hµν Wν acting on the wind
quanta.

Due to its many nontrivial predictions, the success of a stone’s theory was
overwhelming. Among these predictions were the delay of the time shown
by a sandglass in an external heatﬁeld and, most striking, the deﬂection of
light in heatﬁelds, often referred to as “Fata Morgana”. (By the way, this
eﬀect is also the origin of the common misbelief that dromedars have two
hunches.)

Even more so, it turned out that the grainization of this theory was no

4

great deal 4. A typical eﬀect that can only be understood in the framework
of the full theory of grain dynamics, as it is a typical grain eﬀect of the
sand-wind-interaction, is the movement of sandpiles [12]. We have already
given a detailed account of this application in the preceding section. We
have also shown therein that the resulting sand-wind duality leads to our
present understanding of the genesis of sandstorms.

But we also mentioned, that this model has some drawbacks to which

we shall turn our attention now.

First of all and honestly speaking, the above described mechanism for
the genesis of sandstorms is only of limited theoretical value. In fact, no one
has ever been able to prove that such extreme states of the sand-wind-ﬁeld
like sandstorms really do exist. (Actually, it is not even clear, whether this
theory describes anything realistic at all.) A modern researcher can hardly
take a “problem”of this kind serious, of course, but unfortunately it is not
the end of the story:

Evidently, there is only a ﬁnite amount of energy in the heatﬁeld of the
earth. It came as a big surprise, when it has been discovered that certain
kinds of sandstorm, so called grain ray bursts (GRB) had energies seemingly
exceeding this upper bound, if a stone’s (grainized) theory was valid in this
regime.

For a few hundred years this discovery aroused a lot of confusion and
many scientists even started to doubt the spherical shape of the earth, until

Re-Ez [19] remembered the forgotten singularity theorems of

and

, [20], for the heatﬁeld . The former,
such singularities will “radiate” large amounts of sand.

, has also shown that

Assuming that the GRBs stem from the creation of sand due to the pres-
ence of a singularity of the heatﬁeld he overcame all problems and eventually
caused the (long overlooked) second revolution in the ﬁeld of sand.

In fact, it soon became clear that there do exist many visible singularities
of the heatﬁeld. For instance, the sun is nothing but such a singularity,
arising periodically and then moving at the sky. Due to the emittance of
sand5 , it disappears again after a certain time, depending on the state of
the heatﬁeld, i.e. the temperature. (In summer it will last longer than in
winter.)

Quite recently, even the existence of a very massive heat-kernel in the

center of earth has been established.

Most importantly and even more surprisingly, however, it turned out
that many ordinary (non-GBR) sandstorms can be traced back to such sin-
gularities. This motivates our conjecture that all sandstorms are caused by
4since a spin-2 grain, i.e. the heat quanta, appears without saying in the grainized

5Amusingly, this mechanism resulted in the ancient misbelief that the sun is made out

theory

of yellow sand.

5

such singularities.

Finally, the interpretation of the genesis of sandstorms as caused by

singularities also resolved another puzzle:

Since sand is fermionic (it obviously respects the exclusion principle and,
of course, the grains have spin 1
2 ) and interacts only via heat-interactions,
the system should be stable, seemingly in contradiction to the existence of
sandstorms. However, sandstorms are only a local instability in the super-
ﬁeld, just like oases [10]. (For this reason, the energy stored in a sandstorm
does not exceed the maximal available energy.) Globally, the system is in
equilibrium! This fact might be of some importance.

4 Sandstorms Revisited

So let’s assume that in the center of each sandstorm a singularity of the
heatﬁeld is sitting.6 As it is well known, in the eye of a (sand)storm the
wind vanishes, and thus it is commonly believed that W VH = VHW = 0
holds even there. But that is wrong, since VH is inﬁnite in the center of a
sandstorm. Accordingly, the sand-wind-duality breaks down in this region,
and “that is the poodle’s core ”[6].

Before we can explore this fact and its consequences in detail we should
describe the mechanism of the emergence of these singularities, however.
This mechanism is quite similar to the mechanism discovered by Msw the
Elder [21], when he tried to understand the so-called solar-new-tiro puz-
zle.
(The problem why the sun emits so few sand, which is solved by a
resonance mechanism. At the same time the Msw-resonance explains why
the sun emerges only periodically and why it is red around the times of its
appearance, respectively disappearance.)

Thus, we immediately infer that small ﬂuctuations in the heatﬁeld will
eventually lead, by a similar resonance, to the emergence of a singularity if
we apply the following well-established result [22]:

Theorem 1. Under the above assumptions, there exists a point x ∈ R3 in
which the degree of singularity of the heatﬁeld-distribution hsand|hµν |sandi
is strictly larger than Cstorm.

Thus, the genesis of a sandstorm will be inevitable. Moreover, it is now

evident, that the standard sand-wind duality is broken, viz.

lim
r→x

hsand|VH W |sandi(r) 6= 0.

(5)

6The objection that such a singularity has never been observed in experiments with
non-GRBs can be ignored: People entering a sandstorm voluntarily should not be taken
serious.

6

Hence, the grains in a sandstorm are driven by the wind! This is
the most nontrivial and surprising result of this paper. It can and should
be veriﬁed empirically.

5 Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper we presented in a highly suggestive and self-explaining way
a new idea about the emergence of sandstorms. We have shown that the
movement of the grainized sand is caused by the wind ﬁeld. This result seems
to be in consistency with the predictions of the original (but wrong) classical
sand-theory. Note, however, that this “accordance” is not even qualitative:
There are no similarities of the classical theory with our completely new and
astonishing result (5).

Of course, this paper has only sketched some basic features of the new
sand theory. A complete review is in preparation. There furthergoing ques-
tions about noncommutative sand, the super-connection between quicksand
and worme holes and some quite interesting (although avantgardistic) new
features in sand theory will be presented [23]. Moreover, we will overcome
some of the ﬂaws this paper is suﬀering from, e.g. a renormalization of the
infantilities due to the self-citation [22] will be done. This works the follow-
ing way: Assuming that the problem is already removed at the ﬁrst order.
Then it follows from an inductive proof that no infantilities will arise at any
higher order due to recursive citations. Now, curing the problem at the ﬁrst
loop level is rather simple. This completes the proof of renormalizability of
this work.

We should also admit that this work suﬀers from a considerable lack of
computer assistance. Unfortunately, the current generation of the abacus
(used here at the Pyramid College) seems unable to perform simulations of
such complexity. Not to speak of resolving a heart-tree in the fog.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my colleagues Mario Paschke and Volkmar Putz who
made me aware of the reference [22]. Without their support and friendship I
would not exist. Furthermore I have to thank my namesake P.P. Longstock-
ings, from whom much inspiration has been drawn in making this paper:
“No one really knows...”

References

[1] see ﬁg.1, facsimile taken from Sand in our times 15, 199985 BC .

7

[2]

.

[3] K. Murx, “Proletariat and Sand,” work in regress.

[4] Abou Tsa Id, “The Wheel and its Possible Applications,” Tuareg
Journal of Modern Physics A 8000 BC, stone tables 12-12.5.

[5] Lei Li Ga, “But still it moves,” Crackpot Rev. Let. of Common

Sand Vol. MCMDXXXIII.

[6] Goe-The, “Fist I,” Reclam excavations, edited by the police depart-

ment of Leipzig.

[7] Edua ’Wit X, “M-, F-, Sand-Strings and all that”, Pyramide of
Cheops, corridor 6B (periodically under water), table 1267.

[8] Shrinkhead No. 7, “Some least interesting questions of sand”, Came-

roon Jungle Drums 6000 BC.

[9] “The Grand Uniﬁcation of Sand and Migraine,” reference unknown,

but widely distributed.

[10] He, who drank too much of the muddy water (if the hyroglyphes are
translated correctly), “Do oases really exist? IV : The unreasonable ef-
fectiveness of washing clothes with sand.”, Acta Mesopotamica Vol.
4.8 %.

[11] Pamdirac, “Spells on Grain mechanics”, Beduin Acad. Press.

[12] A most recent review – though written in a somewhat old-fashioned

language – can be found under:

www.marxist.com/science/dialecticalmaterialism.html

[13] I. Zeil [innumerable references], Comm. in Priv. Mat. Vol. 12 - 400.

[14] [Author unknown], “The Relative Generality Theory of the Heat Field,”

found on a large stone near the Sahara.

[15] Probably going back to Apu, who had told this to H. Simpson, who

had told it to his wife, who had told it to her hair-cutter...

[16] Feynman’s Lectures on Physics, Vol. II, section 42.1.

[17] “The ultimate the-looser-looses-the-head race, ﬁnal results,” Proc.

Emp. Soc. of Sand, around breakfast.

[18] 1237 anonymous authors, “On Temperature and Evaporation of apples
stored in new and old tons,” Clear and Evident Research of Nubia,
reprint of sheepskins 11-27.

8

[19] Re-Ez, “I don’t get the problem ” contribution to the 2. Masai-

meeting of heat and wind 2000 BC.

[20]

&

“The large grain structure of sand”, Severe Lectures

in Sand, Knight, 12 AD.

[21] Msw the Elder “What the great god Fe y Nman told me,” Annals of

Nil-Pollution, Thebia-Series, pp. 387-402.

[22] P.P.Marvol “A Tip of the TOE,” physics/0309055.

[23] X. Inachos & Y. Theseus, “A Brief Introduction to Brain Theory,”
Artemis-Temple-Library of Athens, destroyed by the Spanish In-
quisition.

Figure 1 (The so-called Ω−−-facsimile).

9

