Paper prepared for CASYS’2003 (The Conference on Anticipatory Computing Systems, Institute
of Mathematics, Liege, Belgium, 11-16 August 2003). To appear in International Journal of
Anticipatory Computing Systems (2004), ed. D. Dubois

The Universe from Nothing:
A Mathematical Lattice of Empty Sets

Michel BOUNIAS1

and Volodymyr KRASNOHOLOVETS2

1BioMathematics Unit, d’Avignon University and INRA, France
2Institute for Basic Research, 90 East Winds Court, Palm Harbor, FL 34683, USA

Abstract. In this work, major principles of the mathematical constitution of
space and the principles of construction of the physical space are presented. Gener-
alized conceptions of distances and dimensionality evaluation are proposed, together
with their conditions of validity and range of application to topological spaces. The
existence of a Boolean lattice with fractal properties originating from nonwellfounded
properties of the empty set is demonstrated. Space-time emerges as an ordered se-
quence of mappings of closed 3-D Poincar´e sections of a topological 4-space-time
provided by the lattice of primary empty cells. The fractal kernel stands for a
particle and the reduction of its volume is compensated by morphic changes of a
ﬁnite number of surrounding cells. Quanta of distances and quanta of fractality are
demonstrated. It is shown that the families of fractal deformations give rise to fami-
lies of particle-like structures. Deformation attributes associated to mass determine
the inert mass and the gravitational eﬀects, as has previously been shown, but frac-
tal deformations of cells are responsible for the other fundamental characteristics,
namely: spin, charges, and electric and magnetic properties.

Key words:

space structure, topological distances, nothingness singleton,

space-time diﬀerential element, fractality, particles, charge

3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
1
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

In the area of sub atomic physics experimental sciences can only outline general
peculiarities of hidden features of the observable world. That is why basic diﬃculties
in the construction of a uniﬁed pattern of the physical world fall on theoreticians’
shoulders. A great number of approaches to the description of the microworld have
been proposed and a majority of the approaches have established a new branch in
mathematical physics, so-called “physical mathematics”. Nevertheless, despite the
striking progress in present-day research, from particle physics to cosmology, many
fundamental questions remain unsolved and often contradictory (Krasnoholovets,
2003a). A principal characteristic feature of modern theories remains an exceptional
abstraction: They are still based on notions, which themselves must be clariﬁed.
For instance: What is the wave ψ-function in quantum mechanics, what is the
nature of quantum ﬁelds used in quantum ﬁeld theories, how can one understand 10
dimensions in string theories, are there Higgs bosons in the real physical space or
they exist only in abstract physical constructions, what is the electric charge?, etc.
Contrary to physical mathematics, Bounias (2000a), starting from pure mathe-
matics, namely, the mathematical theory of demonstration, showed that any prop-
erty of any given object should be consistent with the characteristics of the cor-
responding embedding space.
In other words, the study of any object requires a
preliminary knowledge of its properties, or its structure. M. Bounias (Bounias and
Krasnoholovets, 2003a, b, c) carried out a tremendous work reconsidering fundamen-
tal concepts regarding such fundamental notions as measure, distance, dimension
and fractality, which were developing in classical mathematics within the whole 20th
century. Bounias (2001) showed that using the biological brain’s system, due to its
property of self-decided anticipatory mental imaging, one could overpass mathemat-
ical limits in computed systems. It will be shown below how this makes eventually
possible a scanning of an unknown universe by a part of itself represented by an
internal observer.

Our approach is aimed at searching for distances that would be compatible with
both the involved topologies and the scanning of objects not yet known in the studied
spaces. No such conﬁguration is believed to be an exception in a general case.
Generalized conceptions of distances and dimensionality evaluation are introduced,
together with their conditions of validity and range of application to topological
spaces. It is argued (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2003a) that the empty set forms a
Boolean lattice with fractal properties and that the lattice provides a substrate with
both discrete and continuous properties. Space-time emerges as an ordered sequence
of mappings of closed 3-D Poincar´e sections of a topological 4-space-time ensured
by the lattice of primary empty cells. A combination rule determining oriented
sequences with continuity of set-distance function produces a particular kind of
’space-time’-like structure that favors the aggregation of such deformations into
fractal forms standing for massive objects. The role of the fractality in deformations
of cells, which generates such fundamental characteristics as charges and electric
and magnetic properties, is investigated in detail.

2

1. Preliminaries

1.1. Measure, Distances and Dimensions

One of the problems faced by modelling unknown worlds could be called ”the
syndrome of polynomial adjustment”. In eﬀect, given an experimental curve rep-
resenting the behavior of a system whose real mechanism is unknown, one can
generally perform a statistical adjustment with using a polynomial system like
( i = 0 →N ) ai · xi. Then, using a tool to test for the ﬁtting of the N + 1
M =
parameters to observational data will require increasingly accurate adjustment, so
as to convincingly reﬂect the natural phenomenon within some boundaries. How-
ever, if the real equation is mathematically incompatible with the polynomial, there
will remain some irreducible parts in the ﬁtting attempts.

P

2.1.1. Measure

The concept of measure usually involves such particular features as the exis-
tence of mappings and the indexation of collections of subsets on natural integers.
Classically, a measure is a comparison of the measured object with some unit taken
as a standard.

The ”unit used as a standard”, this is the part played by a gauge (J). Again,
a gauge is a function deﬁned on all bounded sets of the considered space, usually
having non-zero real values, such that (Tricot, 1999): (i) a singleton has measure
naught: ∀ x, J ({x}) = 0; (ii) (J) is continued with respect to the Hausdorﬀ distance;
(iii) (J) is growing: E ⊂ F ⇒ J (E) ⊂ J (F) ; (iv) (J) is linear: F (r · E) : r · J (E) .
This implies that the concept of distance is deﬁned: usually, a diameter, a size, or
a deviation are currently used, and it should be pointed that such distances need to
be applied on totally ordered sets. Even the Caratheodory measure (µ∗) poses some
conditions that again involve a common gauge to be used: (i) A ⊂ B ⇒ µ∗ (A) 6
µ∗ (B) ; (ii) for a sequence of subsets (Ei) : µ∗ ∪ (Ri) 6
µ∗ (Ri) ; (iii) ∠ (A, B) , A ∩
B = Ø : µ∗ (A ∪ B) = µ∗ (A) + µ∗ (B) ; (iv) µ∗ (E) = µ∗ (A ∩ E) + µ∗

∁EA ∩ E

P

.

The Jordan and Lebesgue measures involve respective mappings (I) and (m*)
on spaces, which must be provided with ∩, ∪ and ∁. In spaces of the Rn type,
tessellation by balls are involved (Bounias and Bonaly, 1996), which again demands
a distance to be available for the measure of diameters of intervals.

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

A set of measure naught has been deﬁned by Borel (1912) ﬁrst as a linear set (E)
such that, given a number (e) as small as needed, all points of E can be contained
in intervals whose sum is lower than (e). Applying Borel intervals imposes that
appropriate embedding spaces are available for allowing these intervals to exist

2.1.2. Distances

Following Borel, the length of an interval F = [a,b] is :

L(F) = (b − a) −

L (Cn)

(1)

Xn

3

where Cn are the adjoined, i.e.
the open intervals inserted in the fundamental
segment. Since the Hausdorﬀ distances, as well as most of classical ones, is not
necessarily compatible with topological properties of the concerned spaces, Borel
provided an alternative deﬁnition of a set with measure naught: the set (E) should
be Vitali-covered by a sequence of intervals (Un) such that: (i) each point of E
belongs to a inﬁnite number of these intervals; (ii) the sum of the diameters of these
intervals is ﬁnite.

The intervals can be replaced by topological balls and therefore the evaluation

of their diameter still needs an appropriate general deﬁnition of a distance.

A more general approach (Weisstein, 1999) involves a path ϕ (x, y) such that
ϕ (0) = x and ϕ (1) = y. For the case of sets A and B in a partly ordered space,
the symmetric diﬀerence ∆ (A, B) = CA∪B (A ∩ B) has been proved to be a true
distance also holding for more than two sets (Bounias and Bonaly, 1996; Bounias
1999). However, if A ∩ B = Ø, this distance remains ∆ = A ∪ B, regardless of the
situation of A and B within an embedding space E such that (A, B) ⊂ E. A solution
to this problem has been derived in (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2003a).

2.1.3. Space dimensions

One important point is the following: in a given set of which members structure
is not previously known, a major problem is the distinction between unordered
N-uples and ordered N-uples. This is essential for the assessment of the actual
dimension of a space.

2.1.3.1. Fractal to topological dimension

Given a fundamental segment (AB) and intervals Li = [Ai, A (i + 1)],
a generator
such intervals: G =
the union of
∪ ( i ∈ [1,n] ) (Li) . Let the similarity coeﬃcients be deﬁned for each interval by ρi =
dist(Ai, A(i + 1))/dist (AB) .

is composed of

several

The similarity exponent of Bouligand is (e) such that for a generator with n parts

When all intervals have (at least nearly) the same size, then the various dimen-
sion approaches according to Bouligand, Minkowsky, Hausdorﬀ and Besicovitch are
reﬂected in the resulting relation :

that is,

When e is an integer, it reﬂects a topological dimension, since this means that a
fundamental space E can be tessellated with an entire number of identical balls B
exhibiting a similarity with E, upon coeﬃcient ρ.

(2)

(3a)

(3b)

(ρi)e = 1.

X (i ∈ [1, n])

n · (ρ)e = 1,

e = Log n/Log ρ.

4

2.1.3.2. Parts, ordered N-uples and simplexes

The following structure is called a ”descent”

E(n) =

e(n), (E(n+1))

n

o

(4)

where (E) denotes a set or part of set, and (e) is a nucleus. A descent is ﬁnite if
none of its parts is inﬁnitely iterated. A second kind set, F = {a, (b, (c, (Z)))}, is
ordinary if its descent is ﬁnite and extraordinary if its descents include some inﬁnite
part. A fractal feature in an extraordinary second kind set is recognizable.

Let the members of the above set E be ordered into a structure of the type of F,
e.g. F′ = {a, (b, (c, (d, e, f)))}. Usually, a part (a,b) or {a,b} is not ordered until it
can be written in the form (ab) = {{a}, {a,b}}. Stepping from a part (a,b,c,) to a
N-uple (abc) needs that singletons are available in replicates.

A simplex is the smaller collection of points that allows the set to reach a maxi-
mum dimension. In a general acceptation, it should be noted that the singletons of
the set are called vertices and ordered N-uples are (N-1)-faces AN−1.

One question emerging now with respect to the purpose of this study is the
following: given a set of N points, how to evaluate the dimension of the space
embedding these points?

3. Distances and dimensions revisited

3.1. The relativity of a general form of measure and distance

Our approach aims at searching for distances that would be compatible with
both the involved topologies and the scanning of objects not yet known in the studied
spaces. No such conﬁguration is believed to be an exception in a general case.

3.1.1. General case of a not necessarily ordered topological distance

Proposition. A generalized distance between spaces A,B within their common
embedding space E is provided by the intersection of a path-set ϕ(A, B) joining each
member of A to each member of B with the complementary of A and B in E, such
that ϕ(A, B) is a continued sequence of a function f of a gauge (J) belonging to the
ultraﬁlter of topologies on {E, A, B,...}.

The path ϕ (A, B) is a set composed as follows:
(i) ϕ(A, B) =

ϕ (a, b), all deﬁned on a sequence interval [0, f n (x)] , x ∈

E. The relative distance of A and B in E, noted ΛE (A, B) is contained in ϕ(A, B):

Sa∈ A, b ∈B

ΛE (A, B) ⊆ ϕ (A, B) .

(5)

Denote by E◦ the interior of E, then

min{ϕ (A, B) ∩ E◦} is a geodesic of space E connecting A to B,

(6)

5

max{ϕ (A, B) ∩ C E◦ (A ∪ B)} is a tessellation of E out of A and B.

(7)

It is noteworthy that relation (6) refers to dim Λ = dimϕ, while in relation (7) the
dimension of the probe is that of the scanned sets;

(ii) ϕ (A, B) ∩ E◦ is a growing function deﬁned for any Jordan point, which is
a characteristic of a Gauge. In addition, the operator Λ E (A, B) meets the char-
acteristics of a Frechet metrics, since the proximity of two points a and b can be
mapped into the set of natural integers and even to the set of rational numbers:
for that, it suﬃces that two members ϕ (f n (x) , f n (y)) are identiﬁed with a ordered
pair {ϕ (f n (x)) , {ϕ (f n (x) , f n (y))}};

(iii) suppose that one path ϕ(A, B) meets an empty space {Ø}. Then a disconti-
nuity occurs and there exists some i, such that If all ϕ(A, B) meets {Ø}, then no dis-
tance is measurable. As a corollary, for any singleton {x}, one has ϕ (f ({x})) = Ø.
The above properties meet other characteristics of a gauge: ﬁrst, given closed sets
{A,B,C, ...}= E, then a path set ϕ (E, EŒ) exploring the distance of E to the clo-
sure (Œ) of E meets only open subsets, so that ϕ (E, EŒ) = Ø; second, this is
consistent with a property of the Hausdorﬀ distance:

max{(A, B) ⊂ E|ΛE (A, B) |} 7→ diam Hausdorﬀ (E)

(8)

in all cases;

(iv) ΛE (A, B) = ΛE (B, A) and ΛE ({x, y}) = Ø ⇔ x = y. If the triangular
inequality condition is fulﬁlled, then ΛE (A, B) will meet all of the properties of a
mathematical distance.

3.1.2. The case of topological spaces

Proposition. A space can be subdivided in two main classes: objects and

distances.

The set-distance is the symmetric diﬀerence between sets:

it has been proved
that it owns all the properties of a true distance (Bounias and Bonaly, 1996) and that
it can be extended to manifolds of sets (Bounias, 1997). In a topologically closed
space, these distances are the open complementary of closed intersections called
the ”instant”. Since the intersection of closed sets is closed and the intersection
of sets with nonequal dimensions is always closed, as was shown previously, the
instants rather stand for closed structures. Since the latter have been shown to
reﬂect physical-like properties, they denote objects. Then, the distances as being
their complementaries will constitute the alternative class:
thus, a physical-like
space may be globally subdivided into objects and distances as full components.
The properties of the set-distance allow an important theorem to be now stated.

Theorem. Any topological space is metrizable as provided with the set-distance
(∆) as a natural metrics. All topological spaces are kinds of metric spaces called
”delta-metric spaces”.

The symmetric distance fulﬁlls the triangular inequality, including in its gen-
It

eralized form, it is empty if A = B = ..., and it is always positive otherwise.

6

is symmetric for two sets and commutative for more than two sets.
provided by the following relation ||∆ (A) || = ∆ (A, Ø) .

Its norm is

Therefore, any topology provides the set-distance which can be called a topo-
logical distance and a topological space is always provided with a self mapping of
any of its parts into any one metrics: thus any topological space is metrizable. Re-
ciprocally, given the set-distance, since it is constructed on the complementary of
the intersection of sets in their union, it is compatible with existence of a topology.
Thus, a topological space is always a ”delta-metric” space.

Distance ∆ (A, B) is a kind of an intrinsic case

of ΛE (A, B) , while
ΛE (A, B) is called a ”separating distance”. The separating distance also stands for
a topological metrics. Hence, if a physical space is a topological space, it will always
be measurable.

Λ(A,B) (A, B)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

3.1.3. Dimensionality

A collection of scientiﬁc observation through experimental devices produce im-
ages of some reality, and these images are further mapped into mental images into
the experimentalist’s brain (Bounias, 2000a). The information from the explored
space thus stands like parts of an apparatus being spread on the worker’s table, in
view of a further reconstitution of the original object. We propose to call this sit-
uation an informational display, likely composed of elements with dimension lower
than or equal to the dimension of the real object.

In the construction of the set N of natural integers, von Neumann provided an

equipotent from using replicates of Ø :

0 = Ø, 1 = {Ø}, 2 = {Ø, {Ø}}, 3 = {Ø, {Ø}, {Ø, {Ø}}}, ...

A von Neumann set is Mirimanoﬀ-ﬁrst kind since it is isomorphic with none of
its parts. However this construction, associated with the application of Morgan’s
laws to (Ø) , allowed the empty set to be attributed an inﬁnite descent of inﬁnite
descents and thus to be classiﬁed as a member of the hypersets family (Bounias and
Bonaly, 1997).

The following propositions can be proved:
(i) in an ordered pair {{x}, {x, y}}, the paired part {x, y} is unordered;
(ii) an abstract set can be provided with at least two kinds of orders: one with
respect to identiﬁcation of a max or a min, and one with respect to ordered N-
uples. These two order relations become equivalent upon additional conditions on
the nature of involved singletons. Thus a fully information measure should provide
a picture of a space allowing its set component to be depicted in terms of ordered
N-uples (N = 0 → n, n ⊂ N) .

Regarding the deﬁnition of diameter (8), the following relation can be proposed:

diamf (E) = {(x, y) ∈ E : maxf i (Id (x)) ∩ maxf i (Id (y))}

(9)

that gives a (N-2) members parameter (here E is a non-ordered set, Id the identity
self map of E, and f the diﬀerence self map of E).

7

A set distance ∆ is provided by the symmetric diﬀerence or by a n-D Borel

measure. A diameter is evaluated on E as the following limit:

diam (E)

= {inf A → inf E, supA → minE, inf B → maxE, supB → supE

}.(10)

lim distE (A,B)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

These approaches allow the measure of the size of tessellating balls as well as
that of tessellated spaces. A diagonal-like part of an abstract space can be identiﬁed
with and logically derived as, a diameter.

Each time a measure if obtained from a system, this means that no absolutely
empty part is present as an adjoined segment on the trajectory of the exploring
path. Thus, no space accessible to some sort of measure is strictly empty in a
both mathematical and physical sense, which supports the validity of the quest of
quantum mechanics for a structure of the void.

3.1.4. The dimension of an abstract space: tessellating with
simplex k-faces

A major goal in physical exploration will be to discern among detected objects
which ones are equivalent with abstract ordered N-uples within their embedding
space. A ﬁrst of further coming problems is that in a space composed of members
identiﬁed with such abstract components, it may not be found tessellating balls
all having identical diameter. Thus a measure should be used as a probe for the
evaluation of the coeﬃcient of size ratio (ρ) needed for the calculation of a dimension.

The following principles should be hold:
(i) a 3-object has dimension 2 iﬀ given A1

max its longer side fulﬁlls the condition,

for the triangular strict inequality, where M denotes an appropriate measure

M

A1

max

< M

A1
2

+ M

A1
3

;

(11)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)
(ii) let space X be decomposed in into the union of balls represented by D-faces
= D by relation (11) and size M (A1) for
AD proved to have dimension dim
a 1-face. Such a D-face is a D-simplex Sj whose size, as a ball, is evaluated by
max)D = SjD. Let N the number of such balls that can be ﬁlled in a space H,
M (A1
so that

AD

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

N

[i =1

{SD

j } ⊆

H ≈ Ld

max

(cid:0)
with H being identiﬁed with a ball whose size would be evaluated by Ld, L the size
of a 1-face of H, and d the dimension of H. Then, if ∀ Sj, Sj ≈ So, the dimension of
H is:

(cid:1)

d (H) ≈ (D · Log So + Log N ) /Log L1

max.

In
Relation (13) stands for a kind of interior measure in the Jordan’s sense.
contrast, if one poses that the reunion of balls covers the space H, then, d(H) rather
represents the capacity dimension, which remains an evaluation of a fractal property.

(12)

(13)

8

In the analysis of a abstract space H = Lx, of which dimension x is unknown,
the identiﬁcation of which members can be identiﬁed with N-uples supposedly com-
ing from a putative Cartesian product of members of H, e.g. G ⊂ H : ∠ a ∈
G,

(aaa...a)h ∈ Gh, is allowed by an anticipatory process.

4. A Universe as a mathematical lattice

4.1. Deﬁning a probationary space

The universe from nothing. How is it possible? The question is in the center of
attention of Mercer at al. (2003). On the other hand, we have looked at the problem
starting from an idea of a probationary space. The probationary space (Bounias,
2001) is deﬁned as a space fulﬁlling exactly the conditions required for a property to
hold, in terms of: (i) identiﬁcation of set components (ii) identiﬁcation of combina-
tions of rules (iii) identiﬁcation of the reasoning system. All these components are
necessary to provide the whole system with decidability. Since lack of mathematical
decidability inevitably ﬂaws also any physical model derived from a mathematical
background, our aim is to access as close as possible to these imposed conditions
in a description of both a possible and a knowable universe, in order to reﬁne in
consequence some current physical postulates.

The above considerations have raised a set of conditions needed for some knowl-
edge to be gettable about a previously unknown space, upon pathwise exploration
from a perceiving system A to a target space B within an embedding space B. In the
absence of preliminary postulate about existence of so-called ”matter” and related
concepts, it has been demonstrated that the existence of the empty set is a neces-
sary and suﬃcient condition for the existence of abstract mathematical spaces (Wn)
endowed with topological dimensions (n) as great as needed (Bounias and Bonaly,
1997). Hence, the empty set appears as a set without members though containing
empty parts.

4.2. The founding element

It is generally assumed that some set does exist. This strong postulate has been
reduced to a weaker form reduced to the axiom of the existence of the empty set
(Bounias and Bonaly, 1997). It has been shown that providing the empty set (Ø)
with (∈, ⊂) as the combination rules, that is also with the property of complemen-
tarity (∁), results in the deﬁnition of a magma allowing a consistent application of
the ﬁrst Morgan’s law without violating the axiom of foundation iﬀ the empty set is
seen as a hyperset, that is a nonwellfounded set. A further support of this conclusion
emerges from the fact that several paradoxes or inconsistencies about the empty set
properties are solved (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997).

9

4.3. The founding lattice

Theorem and Lemmas. The magma Ø Ø = {Ø, ∁} constructed with the
empty hyperset and the axiom of availability is a fractal lattice (writing Ø Ø denotes
that the magma reﬂects the set of all self-mappings of (Ø) , which emphasizes the
forthcoming results).

The space constructed with the empty set cells of EØ is a Boolean lattice. Indeed,
let ∪ (Ø) = S denote a simple partition of (Ø) . The combination rules ∪ and ∩
provided with commutativity, associativity and absorption are holding. In eﬀect:
Ø ∪ Ø = Ø, Ø ∩ Ø = Ø and thus necessarily Ø ∪ (Ø ∩ Ø) = Ø, Ø ∩ (Ø ∪ Ø) = Ø.
Thus space P{(Ø) , (∪, ∩)} is a lattice. The null member is Ø and the universal
member is 2Ø that should be denoted by ℵ Ø. Since in addition, by founding property
∁ Ø (Ø) = Ø, and the space of (Ø) is distributive, then S (Ø) is a Boolean lattice.

S (Ø) is provided with a topology of discrete space. The lattice S (Ø) owns a
topology. The space S (Ø) is Hausdorﬀ separated. Units (Ø) formed with parts thus
constitute a topology (TØ) of discrete space.

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

QØ

QØ

and

The magma of empty hyperset is endowed with self-similar ratios. The von Neu-
mann notation associated with the axiom of availability, applying on (Ø) , provides
NØ
equipotent to the natural and the rational num-
existence of sets
(cid:0)
bers (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997). Let us consider a Cartesian product En × En of a
of n integers. The amplitude of the available intervals range from
section of
(cid:1)
0 to n, with two particular cases:
interval [0, 1] and any of the minimal intervals
Interval [0, 1/n(n - 1)] is contained in [0, 1]. Hence, since empty
[1/n-1, 1/n].
sets constitute the founding cells of the lattice S (Ø) , the lattice is tessellated with
cells (or balls) with homothetic-like ratios of at least r= n(n - 1). The absence of
unﬁlled areas is supported by introduction of the ”set with no parts” (Bounias and
Krasnoholovets, 2003b).

(cid:0)

Such a lattice of tessellation balls has been called the ”tessellattice” (Bounias

and Krasnoholovets, 2003a).

The magma of empty hyperset is a fractal tessellattice. Indeed, (Ø) ∪ (Ø) =
= {Ø, ∁} represents the
(Ø, Ø) and (Ø) ∩ (Ø) = Ø, moreover, the magma
generator of the ﬁnal structure, since (Ø) acts as the ”initiator polygon”, and com-
plementarity as the rule of construction. These three properties stand for the major
features that characterize a fractal object. Finally, the axiom of the existence of the
empty set, added with the axiom of availability in turn provide existence to a lattice
S (Ø) , which constitutes a discrete fractal Hausdorﬀ space.

ØØ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

4.4. Existence and nature of space-time

A lattice of empty sets can provide existence to at least a physical-like space.
Let Ø denote the empty set as a case of the whole structure and {Ø} denotes
some of its parts. The set of parts of Ø contains parts equipotent to sets of integers,
of rational and of real numbers, and owns the power of continuum. Then, looking
at the infering spaces (Wn) , (Wm) , ..., we obtain

{(Wn) ∩ (Wm)}m > n = (Θn) , which is a closed space.

(14)

10

These spaces provide collections of discrete manifolds whose interior is endowed
with the power of continuum. Consider a particular case (Θ4) and the set of its
parts P (Θn) ; then any of intersections of subspaces
d < 4 provides a d-space in
which the Jordan-Veblen theorem allows closed members to get the status of both
observable objects and perceiving objects. This stands for observability, which is a
condition for a space to be in some sort observable, i.e., physical-like.

Ed
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

In any (Θ4) space, the ordered sequences of closed intersections {

Ed
d < 4},
(cid:0)
Ed
d < 4}j, provides an
with respect to mappings of members of {
(cid:0)
orientation accounting for the physical arrow of time (Bounias, 2000). Thus the
following proposition: A manifold of potential physical universes is provided by the
(Θn) category of closed spaces.

d < 4}i into {

Ed

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Our space-time is one of the mathematically optimum ones, together with the

alternative series of {(W3) ∩ (Wm)}m > 3.

5. Principles of construction of physical space

Is space independent from matter or matter is deformation of space? These
discrepancies essentially come from the fact that probationary spaces supporting a
number of explicit or implicit assessments have not been clearly identiﬁed.

At cosmological scales, the relativity theory places referential in an undeﬁned
space, with undeﬁned gauges for substrate for the transfer of information and the
support of interactions. Here, distances are postulated without reference to objects.
At quantum scales, a probability that objects are present in a certain volume is
calculated. But again, nothing is assessed about what are these objects, and what
is their embedding medium in which such “volumes” can be found. Furthermore,
whether these objects are of a nature similar or diﬀerent to the nature of their
embedding medium has not been addressed.
In this case, objects are postulated
without reference to distances.

We have treated some founding principles about the deﬁnition of the space of
magmas (i.e., the sets, combination rules and structures) in which a given propo-
sition can be valid. Such a space, when identiﬁed, is called a probationary space
(Bounias, 2001). Here, it will be presented the formalism which leads from existence
of abstract (e.g. purely mathematical) spaces to the justiﬁcation of a distinction be-
tween parts of a physical space, which can be said empty, and parts that can be
considered as ﬁlled with particles. This question is thus dealing with a possible ori-
gin of matter and its distribution, and changes in this distribution gives raise with
motion, i.e., with physics.

The values of the constants of electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions
as functions of distances between interacting particles converge to the same at a
scale about 10−30 m. This means that a violation of space homogeneity took place
at this size. The model proceeds from the assumption that all quantum theories
(quantum mechanics, electrodynamics, chromodynamics, etc.) are in fact only phe-
nomenological. Accordingly, for the understanding processes occurring in the real
microworld, one needs a submicroscopic approach that in turn should be available

11

for all peculiarities of the microstructures of the real space. In other terms, gauges
for the analysis of all components of the observable universe should belong to an
ultraﬁlter (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2003a). The study about the model of
inertons (Krasnoholovets, 1997, 2002, 2004) has suggested that a founding cellular
structure of space shares discrete and continuous properties, which is also shown to
be consistent with the abstract theory of the foundations of existence of a physical
space (Bounias and Bonaly, 1997).

5.1. Foundations of space-time

A possible application of fractal geometry to the description of space-time has
already been demonstrated by Nottale (2003). Our approach follows a hypothesis
(Bonaly, 1992) that a characteristic of a physical space is that it should be in some
way observable. This implies that an object called the ”observer” should be able to
interact with other objects, ”observed”. We will call them the ”perceiver” and the
”perceived” objects, respectively. Bonaly’s conjecture implied that perceived objects
should be topologically closed, otherwise they would oﬀer no frontier to allow a probe
to reﬂect their shape. The existence of closed topological structures and a proof
was given that the intersection of two spaces having nonequal dimensions owns its
accumulation points and is therefore closed. In other words, the intersection of two
connected spaces with nonequal dimensions is topologically closed. This allowed the
representation of the fundamental metrics of space-time by a convolution product
where the embedding part

U4 =

(d~x d~y d~z )

∗ dψ(w)

Z (cid:16) ZdS

(cid:17)

(15)

where dS is the element of space-time and dψ (w) the function accounting for the
extension of 3-D coordinates to the 4th dimension through convolution (∗) with the
volume of space.

5.1.1. Space-time as a topologically discrete structure

The mapping of two Poincar´e sections is assessed by using a natural metrics of
topological spaces. Let ∆ (A, B, C, ...) the generalized set distance as the extended
symmetric diﬀerence of a family of closed spaces,

∆(Ai) i ∈ N = ∁

(Ai ∩ Aj).

∪
i6=j

∪{Ai}

(16)

The complementary of ∆in a closed space is closed. It is also closed even if it
involves open components with nonequal dimensions. In this system mh{Ai}i = ∆
has been associated with the instant, i.e., the state of objects in a timeless Poincar´e
section (Bounias, 1997). Since distances ∆ are the complementaries of objects, the
system stands as a manifold of open and closed subparts.

12

The set-distance provides a set with the ﬁner topology and the set-distance of
nonidentical parts provides a set with an ultraﬁlter. Regarding a topology or a ﬁlter
founded on any additional property (⊥) , this property is not necessarily provided
to a ∆-ﬁlter. The topology and ﬁlter induced by ∆ are thus respectively the ﬁner
topology and an ultraﬁlter.

The mappings of both distances and instants from one to another section can
be described by a function called the ”moment of junction”, since it has the global
structure of a momentum. Let an indicatrix function 1(x) be deﬁned by the cor-
respondence of x with some c (x) in S (i + 1) , i.e. 1(x) = 0 or 1. Then a function
f (Ei, Ei+1), or shortly fE accounts for a distribution of the indicatrix functions of all
points out of the maximum number of possibilities, which would be 2E for the set
of pairs of set E. The proportion of points involved in the mappings of parts of Ei
into E (i + 1) equals f E

E (E) = f E (E) /2E,

E (E) < 1.

0 < f E

Two species of the moment of junction are represented by the composition (⊥)
E (E) with either the set-distance of the instant. Hence

of f E

MJ∆ = ∆ (E) ⊥f E

E (E) ,

MJm = m hEi⊥f E

E (E) .

(17a)

(17b)

Generally, MJ∆ 6= MJm. As a composition of variables with their distribution,

(17a,b) actually represent a form of momentum.

5.1.2. Space-time as fulﬁlling a nonlinear convolution relation

The ”moments of junctions” (MJ) mapping an instant (a 3-D section of the
embedding 4-space) to the next one apply to both the open (the distances) and
their complementaries the closed (the reference objects) in the embedding spaces.
But points standing for physical objects able to move in a physical space may be
contained in both of there reference structures. Then, it appears that two kinds of
mappings are composed with one another.

A ’space-time’-like sequence of Poincar´e sections is a nonlinear convolution of

morphisms. The demonstration involves two kinds of mappings:

(i) mapping (M) connects a frame of reference to the next one: here, the same
organization of the reference frame-spaces must be found in two consecutive instants
of our spacetime, otherwise, no change in the position of the contained objects
could be correctly characterized. However, there may be some deformations of the
sequence of reference frames. Mappings (M) denote the corresponding category of
morphisms;

(ii) mapping (J ) connects the objects of one reference cell to the corresponding
next one. Mappings (J ) thus behave as indicatrix functions of the situation of
objects within the frames.

Each section, or timeless instant of our space-time, is described by a composition
(◦) of these two kinds of morphisms: ”space-time instant” = (M ◦ J ) . Besides,
stepping from one to the next instant is ﬁnally represented by a mapping T , such
that the composition (M ◦ J ) at iterate (k) is mapped into a composition (M⊥J )

13

at iterate (k+i): (M⊥J )k+i = T⊥ (M ◦ J )k . Hence, mapping
T⊥
appears like
a relation that maps a function Fi+k into F′
(cid:0)
j+k. Such a relation represent a case
of the general convolution, which is a nonlinear and multidimensional form of the
convolution product. Mapping for the case of a integrable space gives

(cid:1)

F′ (X) =

α (X′ − X) F (X) dX′.

Z

(18)

This relation exhibits a great similarity with a distribution of functions in the

Schwartz sense or a convolution product

f (X − u)F(u)d(u) = (f ∗ F)(X).

(19)

ZE

Thus the connection from the abstract universe of mathematical spaces and
the physical universe of our observable space-time is provided by a convolution of
morphisms, which supports the conjecture of relation (15).

5.2. Relative scales in the empty-set lattice

5.2.1. Quantum levels at relative scales

Inside any of the above spaces, properties at microscale are provided by prop-

erties of the spaces whose members are empty set units.

Particular levels of a measure of these units can be discerned.

It has been
demonstrated (Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2003b) that the Cartesian product of a
ﬁnite beginning section of the integer numbers provides a variety of nonequal empty
intervals. This means that a ﬁnite set of rational numbers inferring from a Cartesian
product of a ﬁnite beginning section of integer numbers establishes a discrete scale
of relative sizes. Indeed, intervals are constructed from the corresponding mappings.
For example, with D=2, the smaller ratios available are 1/n and 1/(n − 1), so that
their distance is the smaller interval is 1/n(n − 1). Smaller intervals (σ) in (En)3
obey the order of increasing sizes :

∀n > 1 :
(σ(i)) = 1/n2(n − 1) < (σ(ii)) = 1/n(n − 1)2 < (σ(iii)) = n − 1)/n2(n − 1).

(20)

The maximal of the ratios of larger (n) to smaller (1/n2 (n − 1)) segments is

max (σ) /min (σ) = n3 (n − 1) .

(21)

A scaling progression covering integer subdivisions (n) divides a fundamental
segment (n = 1) by 2, then each subsegment by 3, etc. Therefore the size of
structures is a function of iterations (n). At each step (νj) the ratio of size in
dimension D is (Πνj)D , so that the maximal, as follows from (21), is

ρ ∝ {(Πνj)D((Πνj) − 1}j = 1→ n.

(22)

14

Values (22) can be written as ρj = aj.10xj where in base 10 one takes aj. belonging
to the neighborhood of unity, i.e., aj. ∈ ]1[, and look at the corresponding integer
exponents xj as the order of sizes of structures constructed from the lattice ℓ =
(Πνj)D . Regarding distances (D = 1) to areas and volumes (D = 2 and 3), Eq.
(22) consistently provides the orders of physical scales, from microscopic to comic,
as has been demonstrated by Bounias and Krasnoholovets (2003b).

6. Matter generated in a lattice universe

Space represented by the lattice F (U) ∪ (W) ∪ (6 c), where (6 c) is the set with
neither members nor parts, accounts for relativistic space and quantic void, because
(i) the concept of distance and the concept of time have been deﬁned on it and (ii)
this space holds for a quantum void since it provides a discrete topology, with quan-
tum scales and it contains no ”solid” object that would stand for a given provision
of physical matter.

The sequence of mappings of one into another structure of reference (e.g. ele-
mentary cells) represents an oscillation of any cell volume along the arrow of physical
time.

However, there is a transformation of a cell involving some iterated internal
similarity, which precludes the conservation of homeomorphisms. If N similar ﬁgures
with similarity ratios 1/r are obtained, the Bouligand exponent (e) is given by

N · (1/r) e = 1

(23)

and the image cell gets a dimensional change from d to d′ = ln(N) / ln(r) = e > 1.
In this case the putatively homeomorphic part of the image cell is no longer a
continued ﬁgure and the transformed cell no longer owns the property of a reference
cell.

This transformation stands for the formation of a ”particle” also called ”parti-
cled cell”, or more appropriately ”particled ball”, because it is a kind of topological
ball B [Ø, r (Ø)] . Thus a particled ball is represented by a nonhomeomorphic trans-
formation in a continuous deformation of space elementary cells.

6.1. Quanta of fractality

A minimum fractal structure is provided by a self-similar ﬁgure whose com-
bination rule includes an initiator and a generator, and for which the similarity
dimension exponent is higher than unity.

A fractal decomposition consists in the distribution of the members of the set
( i=1 → ∞) {(r + a)i · vi −1 · (1/r)3}} constructed on one
of fractal subﬁgures Γ ⊃ {
ﬁgure, among a number of connected ﬁgures (C1, C2, ..., Ck) similar to the initial
ﬁgure (A). If k reaches inﬁnity, then all subﬁgures of A are distributed and (A) is
no longer a fractal.

P

15

6.2. Interactions involving exchanges of structures

The motion of any particle must be accompanied by the corresponding cloud
of space excitations, this is the major thesis of submicroscopic mechanics (Kras-
noholovets, 1997, 2002, 2003). It is friction that generates these excitations called
”inertons”.

Let a ball (A) containing a fractal subpart on it. Deformations can be trans-
ferred from one to another ball with conservation of the total volume of the full
lattice (which is constituted by a higher scale empty set). If a fractal deformation
is subjected to motion, it will collide with surrounding degenerate balls. Such col-
lisions will result in fractal decompositions at the expense of (A) whose exponent
(eA) will decrease, and to the proﬁt of degenerate cells. This is a typical scattering
from friction.

The remaining of fractality decreases from the kernel (i.e. the area adjacent to
the original particled deformation) to the edge of the inerton cloud. At the edge,
depending on the local resistance of the lattice, the decomposition (denoted as the
nth iteration) can result in (en) = 1. Therefore, while central inertons exhibit de-
creasing higher boundaries, edge inertons are bounded by a rupture of the remaining
fractality.

6.3. Mass

A particled ball as described above provides formalism describing the elemen-
tary particles proposed by Krasnoholovets (1997; 2000).
In this respect, mass is
represented by a fractal reduction of volume of a ball, while just a reduction of
volume as in degenerate cells is not suﬃcient to provide mass. The mass mA of a
particled ball A is a function of the fractal-related decrease of the volume of the ball

mA ∝

1/Vpart

· (eν − 1) eν >1

(24)

(cid:1)
where (e) is the Bouligand exponent, and (e-1) the gain in dimensionality given by
the fractal iteration. Just a volume decrease is not suﬃcient for providing a ball
with mass, since a dimensional increase is a necessary condition.

(cid:0)

6.4. Particles and inertons

Two interaction phenomena have been considered (Bounias and Krasnoholovets,
2003b): ﬁrst, the elasticity (γ) of the lattice favours an exchange of fragments of the
fractal structure between the particled ball and the surrounding degenerate balls. In
a ﬁrst approach, the resulting oscillation has been considered homogeneous. Second,
if the particled ball has been given a velocity, its fractal deformations collide with
neighbour degenerate balls and exchanges of fractal fragments occur.

The velocity of the transfer of deformations is faster for non-fractal deformations
and slower for fractal ones, at slowering rates varying as the residual fractal exponent

16

(ei) . The motion of the system constituted by a particled ball and its inerton cloud
provides the basis for the de Broglie and Compton wavelength.

The system composed with the particle and its inertons cloud is not likely to be
of homogeneous shape. This property will be accounted for in spin-related properties
of observable matter (see also Krasnoholovets, 2000).

The fractality of particle-giving deformations gathers its space parameters (ϕ i)i
and velocities (v) into a self-similarity expression that provides a space-to-time con-
nection. Indeed, let (ϕ◦) and (v◦) be the reference values. Then the similarity ratios
are ρ(ϕ) = (ϕ i)/(ϕ◦) and ρ(v) = v/v◦, therefore,

ρ (ϕ)e + ρ (v)e = 1.

(25)

(26)

(27)

Then for distances (l) and masses (m) we obtain using equation (25)

(l/l ◦)2 + (v/v◦)2 = 1 ⇔ l = l ◦ ·

1 − (v/v◦)2,

p
(m ◦/m)2 + (v/v◦)2 = 1 ⇔ m = m ◦/

1 − (v/v◦)2),

p

The Lagrangian (L) should obey a similar law and (L/L ◦) should fulﬁll relation
(25) as a form of ρ (ϕ)e. Then, (L/L◦)2 + (v/v◦)2 = 1 and analogously we can take
L ◦ = −m v2

◦, thus ﬁnally L = −m ◦v2
◦ ·

1 − (v/v◦)2

1/2

.

By analogy with special relativity, m, l and v, are the parameters of a moving

(cid:1)

(cid:0)
object, while v◦ ≡ c is the speed of light.

The existence of inertons was successfully veriﬁed experimentally (see, e.g. Kras-
noholovets, 2002, 2003; Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2003b). Thus inertons are ba-
sic excitations of the tessellattice, or in other words, they are ﬁeld particles, which
provide for the quantum mechanical interaction, the gravitational interaction and
the inertial interaction (this one is caused by so-called forces of inertia and the cen-
trifugal force, i.e., in this case inertons appear due to resistance to the motion of
any object on the side of the space).

7. Structural classes of particled cells

7.1. Particle-like components

Denote by θ = {ρ, a, I} a quantum of fractality where I =

i =1 → ∞ {1/2i} is
the initiator, ρ is the self-similarity ratio and a is the additional number of subﬁg-
ures inserted in the (1/ρ) fragments of the initial ﬁgure. The corresponding fractal
structure is denoted as (Γ) that can be decomposed in a sequence of elementary
components {C1, C2,
..., Ck, ...}. If all these elementary deformations are gathered
on one single ball, then this ball contains all the quantum of fractality, though its
dimension is not changed. It is therefore non-massive as it stands and its motion
is determined by the velocity of transfer of non-massive deformations, that is the
maximum permitted by the elasticity of the space lattice. Since the deformations
are ordered and distributed in one particular structure, it owns a stability through

P

17

mappings of Poincar´e sections. Such particles are likely to correspond to bosons,
i.e., to pseudo particles representing transfer of packs of deformations in an isolated
form.

Hence, photon-like corpuscles will carry the equivalent of various quanta of frac-
tality {ϑi}i, i.e., their equivalent in mass in a decomposed form. This represents as
many deformations of the lattice, and ﬁnally of equivalent in energy.

7.2. Charges

These are opposite kinds of particle deformations. When a quantum of fractal
deformations collapses into one single ball, two adjacent balls exhibit opposite forms:
one in the sense of convexity and the other in the sense of concavity. Hence, there
occurs a pair instead of a single object. The paired structures hold the same fractal
dimension, and they will retain the same masses if they get the same volumes. This
is realized if the member of the pair whose deformation is in the convex sense looses
an equivalent volume in a nonfractal form.

The progression of such structures in the degenerate space will generate several
kinds of inerton cloud equivalent, depending on convexity trends (Ξ) and symme-
try properties (Ψ) of the corresponding structures. The properties generated by
Q = {Ξ, Ψ} can be called ”charge eﬀects” (regarding further eﬀects including the
magnetic properties see Bounias and Krasnoholovets, 2003a; Krasnoholovets, 2003).

7.3. Families of massive particles

Any single ball carrying a group {Γi}i of quantum fractals will represent a class
of massive particles. Depending on both the number and the mode of association of
these fractal quanta, various symmetries will result and provide these classes with
speciﬁc properties.

Simpler particles made from one single quantum of fractality {ρ, a} would likely
correspond with lepton-like structures, such that (here N i are odd numbers) inequa-
tion

Hadron-like families will thus be represented by the following common structures

L i = ({N i · (ρ i)ei}) .

Hi, k = ({a i, ρ i, e i}i, k).

(28)

(29)

7.4. Spins for balls

Fermion-like cases. Moving massive balls have been shown to carry a cloud of
deformations transferred to degenerate balls of the surrounding space, with periodic
exchange between this inertons cloud and the original particle. The spatial period of
this pulse has been identiﬁed with the de Broglie wavelength. Hence, the center of

18

mass (y) of the system composed of the particle and the inerton cloud permanently
undergoes a movement forwards and backwards along the trajectory of the system.
Two canonical positions are possible, with respect to the particle: (i) (y) is centered
on the particled ball, and (ii) y is no longer centered. The probability of state of is
thus P (y) = 1/2.

Boson-like cases. Consider a ball carrying quanta of masses in the decomposed
form: then, such a system is opposed the minimum resistance by the surrounding
degenerate balls, which are of the same nature, excepted that their individual densi-
ties of deformation are much smaller. Therefore, boson-like particles do not generate
a cloud similar to that of a massive particle, and their center of mass (y) owns only
one main state: thus P (y) = 1.

Spin module. The state of the center of mass is assessed by the expected moment
of junction hMJi of its components, so that the spin-like system is described by
P (x, y) hmi, standing for s~/2, i.e., is the classical spin module expression (see also
Krasnoholovets, 2000).

8. Expansion of the universe

In any one Poincar´e section, representing a timeless instantaneous state (an
instant) of universe, the lattice of space is represented by a stacking of balls with
nonidentical shape.

Proposition. Elementary balls exhibit increasing volumes from the center to

the periphery of a 3-D stacking.

Three arguments concur to the same proposition:
(i) oscillating deformations in excess in one cell can be partly compensated by
transfer to neighboring balls, like an equivalent to the inerton cloud surrounding a
particled ball. However, in central parts, the volume available is limited by the den-
sity of the stacking, and this limit is likely decreasing while going to the outer coats
of the lattice. In a simple estimation, we denote by (a) the radius of the canonical
(smallest) volume that can be transferred from a ball to another. Assuming that
each cell forwards a volume (a) to another situated closer to the periphery, in the
stacking, then the radius of a ball in the nth coat is approximated by:

r n = r1 + (n − 1) a;

(ii) while the above considerations a valid for a particless lattice, if the lattice is
ﬁlled with particled balls, then there results a kind of pressure due to the inerton
clouds;

(iii) in contrast with the ﬁniteness of volume to be compensatively distributed in
the surrounding cells, the area of a particled cell is virtually inﬁnite, and the needed
area cannot be compensated by a ﬁnite number of the surrounding cells. Thus an
inﬂuence of any particle is likely to be found up to the most remote parts of the
lattice.

19

Conclusion

In this study, we have tried to pose as few postulates as possible examining
principles of constitution of space. Generalized concepts of distances and dimen-
sionality evaluation are proposed, together with their conditions of validity and
range of application to topological space. The mathematical lattice of empty sets
(the tessellattice) provides a substratum with both discrete and continuous proper-
ties, from which the existence of a physical universe is derived. This is a new theory
of space whose physical predictions easily suppress the opposition of both quantum
and relativistic approaches. Discrete properties of the lattice allow the prediction
of scales on which microscopic to comic structures should occur. Deformations of
primarily cells by exchange of empty set cells allow a cell to be mapped into an
image cell in the next section as far as mapped cells remain homeomorphic. If a
deformation involves a fractal deformation to objects, the change in the deforma-
tion of the cell takes place and the homeomorphism is not conserved. The fractal
kernel stands for a particle and the reduction of its volume, which is associated
with the appearance of mass, is compensated by morphic changes of a ﬁnite num-
ber of surrounding cells. Quanta of distances and quanta of fractality have been
demonstrated. It is shown that the interaction of a particle-like deformation with
the surrounding lattice results in a fractal decomposition process, which strongly
supports previously postulated clouds of inertons as associated to moving particles.
Families of actual particles and ﬁeld particles have been analyzed.

The theoretical reasoning presented sheds light on the general problem of hy-
pothetical ”origin” of the universe. The research conducted brings out the sheer
inconsistency of the Big Bang concept that is still treated today as the only one
possible for cosmology. There was no any Big Bang in the remote past. The uni-
verse is not an empty space or a vague vacuum, but it is a substrate that eternally
exists in the form of the tessellattice and this is the simple truth, because the plain
evidence of facts is superior to all declarations.

References

Borel, E., 1912. Les ensembles de mesure nulle. In: Oeuvres completes. Editions
du CNRS, Paris, Vol. 3, 1912.

Bounias, M., 2000. The theory of something: a theorem supporting the conditions
for existence of a physical universe, from the empty set to the biological self. In:
CASYS’99 Int. Math. Conf. (Daniel M. Dubois, ed.): Int. J. Comput. Anticipatory
Systems, 5, 11-24.

Bounias, M., 2001. Undecidability and Incompleteness In Formal Axiomatics as
Questioned by Anticipatory Processes. In: CASYS’2000 Int. Math. Conf. (Daniel
M. Dubois, ed.): Int. J. Comput. Anticipatory Systems , 8, 259-274.

Bounias, M., Bonaly, A., 1996. On metrics and scaling: physical coordinates in
topological spaces. Indian Journal of Theoretical Physics, 44(4), 303-321.

20

Bounias, M., and Bonaly, A., 1997. Some theorems on the empty set as necessary
and suﬃcient for the primary topological axioms of physical existence. Physics
Essays, 10 (4), 633-643.

Bounias, M., and Krasnoholovets, V., 2003a. Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces: Part 1. Founding principles about mathematical constitution of space.
Kybernetes:
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0211096).

International Journal of Systems and Cybernetics,

in press (also

Bounias, M., and Krasnoholovets, V., 2003b.
known spaces: Part 2. Principles of construction of physical space,
bernetes:
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0212004).

International Journal of Systems and Cybernetics,

ill-
in Ky-
in press (also

Scanning the structure of

Bounias, M., and Krasnoholovets, V., 2003c. Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces. Part 3. Distribution of topological structures at elementary and cosmic
scales, to appear in Kybernetes: International Journal of Systems and Cybernetics,
in press (also http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0301049).

Krasnoholovets, V., 1997. Motion of a relativistic particle and the vacuum. Physics
Essays 10(3), 407-416 (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9903077).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2000. On the nature of spin, inertia and gravity of a mov-
ing canonical particle. Indian Journal of Theoretical Physics 48 (2) 97-132 (also
http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0103110).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2002. Submicroscopic deterministic quantum mechanics, Inter-
national Journal on Computing Anticipatory Systems 11, 164-179 (CASYS’2001,
Liege, ed. D. Dubois) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0109012).

Krasnoholovets, V., 2003 (or 2004). On the nature of the electric charge. Hadronic
Journal, in press.

Krasnoholovets, V., 2004. On the origin of conceptual diﬃculties of quantum me-
chanics. In: Progress in Quantum Physics Research, ed. V. Krasnoholovets. Nova
Science Publishers Inc., New York, 2004, to be published.

Mercer, P. Mitchell, E., and Schempp, W. Self-reference, the dimensionality and
scale of quantum mechanical oﬀers, critical phenomena, and qualia. International
Journal on Computing Anticipatory Systems (CASYS’2003, ed. D. Dubois), to be
published.

Nottale, L. 2003. Fractal space-time, nondiﬀerentiable geometry and scale relativ-
ity. Proc. Symposia in Pure Mathematics, Special Volume ”ractal Geometry and
Applications: A Jubilee of Benoit Mandelbrot”, in press.

Tricot, C., 1999. Courbes et dimension fractale. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,
240-260.

21

