3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Psychopathological Fabric of Time (and Space) and Its
Underpinning Pencil-Borne Geometries

Metod Saniga1 and Rosolino Buccheri2
1Astronomical Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 05960 Tatransk´a Lomnica, Slovak Republic
2Istituto di Astroﬁsica Spaziale e Fisica Cosmica, CNR, Via Ugo La Malfa 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy

Abstract
The paper presents, to our knowledge, a ﬁrst fairly comprehensive and mathematically well-underpinned classi-
ﬁcation of the psychopathology of time (and space). After reviewing the most illustrative ﬁrst-person accounts
of ‘anomalous/peculiar’ experiences of time (and, to a lesser degree, also space) we introduce and describe in
detail their algebraic geometrical model. The model features six qualitatively diﬀerent types of the internal
structure of time dimension and four types of that of space. As for time, the most pronounced are the ordinary
‘past-present-future,’ ‘present-only’ (‘eternal/everlasting now’) and ‘no-present’ (time ‘standing still’) patterns;
the remaining types represent an intriguing superposition of the three. Concerning space, the most elementary
are the ordinary, i.e. ‘here-and-there,’ mode and the ‘here-only’ one (‘omnipresence’); the remaining two cases
are again a speciﬁc mixture of the former two. We then show what the admissible combinations of temporal
and spatial psycho-patterns are and give a rigorous algebraic geometrical classiﬁcation of them. The paper
ends with a brief account of important epistemological/ontological questions stemming from the approach.

1. Introduction
Time is undoubtedly one of the deepest mysteries science has ever faced. Indeed, one would hardly
ﬁnd something that is, on the one hand, so intimately connected with our experience and yet, on
the other, so diﬃcult to come to grips with. Nothing, perhaps, can better illustrate this point than
a large group of phenomena that are collectively referred to as the psychopathology of time, that
is, all ‘anomalous/peculiar’ experiences of time as invariably encountered and reported in various
mental psychoses, drug-induced states, deep meditative and mystical states as well as in many other
‘altered’ states of consciousness (see, e.g., Jaspers, 1923; Minkowski, 1933; Melges, 1982; Hartocollis,
1983; Cutting and Silzer, 1990; Saniga, 2000; and references therein). For this peculiar fabric of
psychological time comprises, as we shall soon see in more detail, such bizarre, paradoxical and mind-
boggling forms as ‘eternity, everlasting now,’ ‘arrested/suspended’ time, time ‘going backward,’ and
even ‘disordered/fragmented’ time, to mention the most pronounced of them.

Up to date, there exists no acceptable psychological/neurological model capable of properly dealing
with these fascinating time constructs and underpinning any logical classiﬁcation of them. The reason
why this is so rests, in our opinion, upon the following two facts. First, these extraordinary experiences
of time (and, of course, space as well) are inherently participatory, non-reproducible and subjective and,
so, seriously at odds with current methodologies/paradigms of science, which strives for reproducibility
and objectivity. Second, the most pronounced departures from the ‘consensus’ reality are so foreign
to our ‘waking’ mind that their properties defy our common sense logic and cannot be adequately
communicated in words; an interested scholar has to go through a large number of relevant ﬁrst-hand
accounts/narratives and acquire the ability to read between the lines in order to spot an(y) underlying
conceptual pattern. We are therefore convinced that further progress in our understanding of these
phenomena will inevitably entail a serious shift in the corresponding scientiﬁc paradigms to reveal
their true epistemological/ontological status and be accompanied by the increasing use of suﬃciently
abstract mathematical concepts to properly grasp their qualitative properties.

Our study of psychopathological (space-)times has, from the very beginning, been pursued in
accordance with this strategy (Saniga, 1998b; 1999; 2000). The model discussed in the sequel thus
features not only a fairly high level of abstraction, but it also poses a serious challenge to some generally
accepted dogmas in natural sciences. Formally, it employs advanced geometrical concepts, like a
projective space and/or Cremona transformations. Conceptually, it relies on a daring and far-reaching
assumption that the anecdotal, ﬁrst-person descriptions of extraordinary states of consciousness are
on a par with standard observational/experimental evidence in natural sciences. It is this ‘abstract
geometrization of the ﬁrst-person perspective’ that gives our approach a remarkable unifying and
predictive power and makes it a very promising conceptual step towards the ultimate unveiling of the
riddle of time. The purpose of the paper is to demonstrate this. The presentation is focussed on
conceptual issues rather than mathematical technicalities, the latter being reduced to the extent that
also the reader with a comparatively slight mathematical background can easily follow the main line
of reasoning.

1

2. Psychopathological (Space)Times: Most Illustrative Cases
We shall start with a compact, yet comprehensive enough, review of the most distinguished forms
of ‘anomalous’ experience of time. This review is unique in that it consists solely of ﬁrst-person
accounts/narratives, three or four per each mode. We decided for this way of the exposition of the
subject so that even the uninitiated reader can get a fairly clear idea about the nature of experiences
involved and realize the source and character of possible diﬃculties one is likely to face when attempting
to mathematically model these experiences.

2.1. ‘Eternity,’ alias ‘Eternal/Everlasting Now’
This is perhaps the most pronounced and in the literature best-documented kind of profoundly ‘dis-
torted’ sense of time.
It is a sort of compressing, telescoping of past, present and future into the
present moment that is experienced as ‘eternal/everlasting now.’ One of the best portrayals of what
this experience looks like is found in the following account (Huber, 1955): 1
I woke up in a whole diﬀerent world in which the puzzle of the world was solved extremely easily in a form
I was amazed at the wonder of this diﬀerent space and this amazement concealed my
of a diﬀerent space.
judgement, this space is totally distinct from the one we all know.
It had diﬀerent dimensions, everything
contained everything else. I was this space and this space was me. The outer space was part of this space, I
was in the outer space and the outer space was in me...

Anyway, I didn’t experience time, time of the outer space and aeons until the second phase of this dream.
In the cosmic ﬂow of time you saw worlds coming into existence, blooming like ﬂowers, actually existing and
then disappearing.
It was an endless game. If you looked back into the past, you saw aeons, if you looked
forward into the future there were aeons stretching into the eternity, and this eternity was contained in the
point of the present. One was situated in a state of being in which the ‘will-be’ and the ‘vanishing’ were already
included, and this ‘being’ was my consciousness. It contained it all. This ‘being-contained’ was presented very
vividly in a geometric way in form of circles of diﬀerent size which again were all part of a unity since all of
the circles formed exactly one circle. The biggest circle was part of the smallest one and vice versa. As far as
the diﬀerences of size are concerned, I could not give any accurate information later on...

This narrative is remarkable in a couple of aspects. Not only does the subject try to understand his
uncanny experience of time in terms of a simple geometrical model, but he also pays particular attention
to the spatial fabric of his extraordinary state, which also diﬀers utterly from what is regarded as a
normal/ordinary perception of space; in fact, the subject ﬁnds himself to be one/fused with space!

Another impressive description of the same kind of psycho-spacetime is taken from Atwater (1988).
It is based on one of many author’s near-death experiences, which was also accompanied by a fascinating
archetypal imaginery:

This time, I moved, not my environment, and I moved rapidly... My speed accelerated until I noticed a wide
but thin-edged expanse of bright light ahead, like a ‘parting’ in space or a ‘lip,’ with a brightness so brilliant
it was beyond light yet I could look upon it without pain or discomfort... The closer I came the larger the
parting in space appeared until... I was absorbed by it as if engulfed by a force ﬁeld...

Further movement on my part ceased because of the shock of what happened next. Before me there
loomed two gigantic, impossibly huge masses spinning at great speed, looking for all the world like cyclones.
One was inverted over the other, forming an hourglass shape, but where the spouts should have touched there
was instead incredible rays of power shooting out in all directions... I stared at the spectacle before me in
disbelief...

As I stared, I came to recognize my former Phyllis self in the midupperleft of the top cyclone. Even though
only a speck, I could see my Phyllis clearly, and superimposed over her were all her past lives and all her future
lives happening at the same time in the same place as her present life. Everything was happening at once!
Around Phyllis was everyone else she had known and around them many others... The same phenomenon was
happening to each and all. Past, present, and future were not separated but, instead, interpenetrated like a
multiple hologram combined with its own reﬂection.

The only physical movement anyone or anything made was to contract and expand. There was no up or
down, right or left, forward or backward. There was only in and out, like breathing, like the universe and all
creation were breathing – inhale/exhale, contraction/expansion, in/out, oﬀ/on.

The last, but by no means less astounding than the former two, example of this subsection, borrowed
from Braud (1995), depicts in great detail and clarity a gradual transformation of our ordinary, waking
sense of time (and space) into that of ‘eternity’ (and ‘omnipresence’):

...I get up and walk to the kitchen, thinking about what a timeless experience would be like.
I direct my
attention to everything that is happening at the present moment – what is happening here, locally, inside of
1In this and all the subsequent excerpts/quotations we italicise those parts of the narratives that most directly relate

to the topic of the given subsection.

2

me and near me, but non-locally as well, at ever increasing distances from me. I am imagining everything that
is going on in a slice of the present – throughout the country, the planet, the universe. It’s all happening at
once.

I begin to collapse time, expanding the slice of the present, ﬁlling it with what has occurred in the immediate
‘past.’ I call my attention to what I just did and experienced, what led up to this moment, locally, but keep these
events within a slowly expanding present moment. The present slice of time slowly enlarges, encompassing,
still holding, what has gone just before, locally, but increasingly non-locally as well. By now, I am standing
near the kitchen sink. The present moment continues to grow, expand. Now it expands into the ‘future’ as
well. Events are gradually piling up in this increasingly larger moment. What began as a thin, moving slice
of time, is becoming thicker and thicker, increasingly ﬁlled with events from the ‘present,’‘past,’ and ‘future.’
The moving window of the present becomes wider and wider, and moves increasingly outwardly in two temporal
directions at once. It is as though things are piling up in an ever-widening present.

The ‘now’ is becoming very thick and crowded!

‘Past’ events do not fall away and cease to be; rather,
they continue and occupy this ever-widening present. ‘Future’ events already are, and they, too, are ﬁlling this
increasingly thick and full present moment. The moment continues to grow, expand, ﬁll, until it contains all
things, all events. It is so full, so crowded, so thick, that everything begins to blend together. Distinctions blur.
Boundaries melt away. Everything becomes increasingly homogeneous, like an inﬁnite expanse of gelatine. My
own boundaries dissolve. My individuality melts away. The moment is so full that there no longer are separate
things. There is no-thing here. There are no distinctions.

A very strong emotion overtakes me. Tears of wonder-joy ﬁll my eyes. This is a profoundly moving
experience. Somehow, I have moved away from the sink and am now several feet away, facing in the opposite
direction, standing near the dining room table. I am out of time and in an eternal present. In this present
is everything and no-thing. I, myself, am no longer here. Images fade away. Words and thoughts fade away.
Awareness remains, but it is a diﬀerent sort of awareness. Since distinctions have vanished, there is nothing
to know and no one to do the knowing. ‘I’ am no longer localized, but no longer ‘conscious’ in the usual sense.
There is no-thing to be witnessed, and yet there is still a witnesser.

The experience begins to fade. I am ‘myself’ again. I am profoundly moved. I feel awe and great gratitude

for this experience with which I have been blessed...

2.2. Time ‘Standing Still,’ alias ‘Arrested/Suspended’ Time
Another well-documented and quite abundant anomalous temporal mode. A couple of spectacular
examples are found in Tellenbach (1956; p. 13):

I sure do notice the passing of time but couldn’t experience it. I know that tomorrow will be another day again
but don’t feel it approaching. I can estimate the past in terms of years but I don’t have any connection to it
anymore. The time standstill is inﬁnite, I live in a constant eternity. I see the clocks turn but for me time
does not ﬂow... Everything lies in one line, there are no diﬀerences of depth anymore... Everything is like a
ﬁrm plane...

and (ibid; p. 14):

Everything is very diﬀerent in my case, time is passing very slowly. Nights last so long, one hour is as long as
usually a whole day... Sometimes time had totally stood still, it would have been horrifying. Even space had
changed: Everything is so empty and dark, everything is so far away from me...

I don’t see space as usual, I see everything as if it were just a background. It all seems to me like a wall,

everything is ﬂat. Everything presses down, everything looks away from me and laughs...

Both reports are by depressive (melancholic) patients. It is worth noticing here that when time comes
to a stillstand, perceived space seems to lose one dimension, becoming thus two-dimensional. A slightly
more detailed description of this time pattern we succeeded in ﬁnding in a nicelly written paper by
Muscatello and Giovanardi Rossi (1967; p. 784):

Time is standing still for me, I believe. It is perhaps only a few moments that I have been so bad. I look at a
clock and I have the impression, if I look at it again, that an enormous period of time has passed, as if hours
would have passed instead only a few minutes. It seems to me that a duration of time is enormous. Time does
not pass any longer, I look at the clock but its hands are always at the same position, they no longer move,
they no longer go on; then I check if the clock came to a halt, I see that it works, but the hands are standing
still. I do not think about my past, I remember it but I do not think about it too much. When I am so bad, I
never think about my past. Nothing enters my mind, nothing... I did not manage to think about anything. I
did not manage to see anything in my future. The present does not exist for me when I am so bad... the past
does not exist, the future does not exist.

The following vignette, taken form a treatise on mescaline-induced experimental psychoses by Beringer
(1969; p. 311), is also impressive:

...The strangest thing was that every once in a while my normal time-awareness, as far as these ﬁgures were
concerned, got totally lost; time was no longer a stream, which ﬂew away and whose ﬂux could have been

3

measured, but it was rather similar to a sea, which as a whole stood still and which was in itself only a chaotic
and utter jumble. I was no longer able to understand the continuous becoming of the ﬁgures as a sequence
in a certain time direction, but sometimes the colours and forms ﬂew into an indescribable jumble, as if the
previously alternating ﬁgures were now experienced all simultaneously. Had I previously seen these ﬁgures in
a constant motion, so now it was only a colorful and inexpressible manifold there in which I was not able to
perceive any motion anymore. When I totally sank into the show of the ﬁgures, it happened every now and
then that I also sank into this time-still-standing, where the succession was transformed into a still standing
present. Not only am I now not able to formulate these interruptions of the normal time experience, I am
also almost unable to imagine my experience of them any more. When I tore myself away from these ﬁgures
and violently turned myself to the outer world, this anomalous time experience was no longer here, but this
disturbance of the sense of time found its expression in a form of illusion that an immense long time must have
passed since my last waking-up.

2.3. Time ‘Going/Flowing Backward’
This kind of time pathology is very often found in mental psychoses. Here is a very illuminating and
particularly representative case, communicated by a schizophrenic patient (Fischer, 1929; p. 556):

Yesterday at noon, when the meal was being served, I looked at the clock: why did no one else? But there
was something strange about it. For the clock did not help me any more and did not have anything to say
to me any more. How was I going to relate to the clock? I felt as if I had been put back, as if something of
the past returned, so to speak, toward me, as if I were going on a journey. It was as if at 11:30 a.m. it was
11:00 a.m. again, but not only time repeated itself again, but all that had happened for me during that time as
well. In fact, all of this is much too profound for me to express. In the middle of all this something happened
which did not seem to belong here. Suddenly, it was not only 11:00 a.m. again, but a time which passed a
long time before was there and there inside – have I already told you about a nut in a great, hard shell? It
was like that again: in the middle of time I was coming from the past towards myself. It was dreadful. I told
myself that perhaps the clock had been set back, the orderlies wanted to play a stupid trick with the clock. I
tried to envisage time as usual, but I could not do it; and then came a feeling of horrible expectation that I
could be sucked up into the past, or that the past would overcome me and ﬂow over me. It was disquieting
that someone could play with time like that, somewhat daemonic...

A brief and concise description of ‘psycho-time-reversal’ is found in Laing (1968):

... I got the impression that time was ﬂowing backward; I felt that time proceeded in the opposite direction, I
had just this extraordinary sensation, indeed... the most important sensation at that moment was, time in the
opposite direction... The perception was so real that I looked at a clock and, I do not know how, I had the
impression that the clock conﬁrmed this feeling, although I was not able to discern the motion of its hands...

A strikingly similar, but much more articulated, depiction is also furnished by a depressive patient of
Kloos (1938; p. 237):

As I suddenly broke down I had this feeling inside me that time had completely ﬂown away. After those three
weeks in a sick-camp, I had this feeling that the clock hands run idle, that they do not have any hold. This
was my sudden feeling. I did not ﬁnd, so to speak, any hold of a clock and of life anymore, I experienced a
dreadful psychological breakdown. I do not know the reason why I especially became conscious of the clock.
At the same time, I had this feeling that the clock hands run backward... There is only one piece left, so to
speak, and that stands still. I could not believe that time really did advance, and that is why I thought that
the clock hands did not have any hold and ran idle... As I worked and worked again, and worried and did not
manage anything, I simply had this feeling that everything around us (including us) goes back... In my sickness
I simply did not come along and then I had this delusion inside me that time runs backward... I did not know
what was what anymore, and I always thought that I was losing my mind. I always thought that the clock
hands run the wrong way round, that they are without any meaning. I just stood-up in the sick-camp and
looked at the clock – and it came to me then at once: well, what is this, time runs the wrong way round?!... I
saw, of course, that the hands moved forward, but, as I could not believe it, I kept thinking that in reality the
clock runs backward...

2.4. ‘Disordered/Fragmented’ Time
The following experience, voluntarily induced by mescaline, is the most representative one we have
been able to ﬁnd in the literature available (Ebin, 1961):

For half an hour nothing happened. Then I began feeling sick; and various nerves and muscles started twitch-
ing unpleasantly. Then, as this wore oﬀ, my body became more or less anaesthetized, and I became ‘de-
personalized’, i.e., I felt completely detached from my body and the world...

This experience alone would have fully justiﬁed the entire experiment for me..., but at about 1.30 all interest
in these visual phenomena was abruptly swept aside when I found that time was behaving even more strangely
than color. Though perfectly rational and wide-awake... I was not experiencing events in the normal sequence

4

Figure 1: Two distinct conics (ellipses) in the real plane (left) deﬁne a unique pencil (right). This
pencil, which is the most general one, features four simple base points and three distinct composite
conics of the same type (a pair of distinct lines).

of time. I was experiencing the events of 3.30 before the events of 3.0; the events of 2.0 after the events of 2.45,
and so on. Several events I experienced with an equal degree of reality more than once. I am not suggesting,
of course, that the events of 3.30 happened before the events of 3.0, or that any event happened more than
once. All I am saying is that I experienced them, not in the familiar sequence of clock time, but in a diﬀerent,
apparently capricious sequence which was outside my control.

By ‘I’ in this context I mean, of course, my disembodied self, and by ‘experienced’ I mean learned by a
special kind of awareness which seemed to comprehend yet be diﬀerent from seeing, hearing, etc.... I count
this experience, which occurred when, as I say, I was wide awake and intelligent, sitting in my own armchair
at home, as the most astounding and thought-provoking of my life...

And here is another intriguing mescaline-borne episode of a very similar time’s sense (Beringer, 1969;
p. 148):

...While walking upstairs, a sudden and as if nailed-down picture of this moment, the momentary view of Dr.
M., Dr. St. and myself in space, attracted my attention. This repeated itself on diﬀerent stairs. At the top
of the stairway there seemed to be no continutity of time at all, the whole course of events was only a mess of
separate situations without any connection. And these situations, in case of active work, could later have been
connected in the same way in which one can observe a celluloid ﬁlm. Yet at the same time these situations
– in both experiencing and a direct reproduction of the happening afterwards – carried the character of the
independent and disconnected. A strange next-to-each-other-ness, not a one-after-the-other-ness; they have no
position in time, time has no sense here...

3. Pencil-Borne Dimensions of Time (and Space) and Psychopathology
From the accounts sampled in the previous section it is quite obvious that the fabric of psychological
time is so intricate, complex and multifarious that, at ﬁrst sight, it may seem to lie completely beyond
grasp of any mathematical framework. Yet, the contrary is true. In what follows we shall introduce
and describe in detail a simple algebraic geometrical model that not only is capable of qualitatively
accounting for all the ‘peculiar’ time structures mentioned above, but also predicts some novel forms
of these.

3.1. Time Dimension as a Pencil of Conics and its (Psychopathological) Patterns
A cornerstone of our model are conics, in particular their simplest, i.e. linear and single-parametric,
aggregates, usually called pencils (see, e.g., Levy, 1964; Saniga, 1998a). Here, linearity means that
only two distinct conics are needed to deﬁne a pencil (see Fig. 1), whereas single-parametricity signiﬁes
that the aggregate is a one-dimensional geometrical structure. A point of intersection of two conics
is clearly incident with all conics of their pencil; this point is called a base point of the pencil. A
pencil of conics features, as easily discernible from Fig. 1, up to four base points. These, of course,
need not be all distinct. It then follows that there exist diﬀerent kinds of a pencil. In the case of four
base points, we ﬁnd as many as ﬁve diﬀerent types, namely: all the four points simple; one double
point and two simple points; two double points; one triple and one simple point; and a single point
of multiplicity four. A conic is analytically deﬁned by a second order (quadratic) equation and it is
composite (singular) or proper according as the equation is factorable or not. A hyperbola, a parabola
and an ellipse are all (and the only) examples of proper conics; a composite conic consists of either a

5

Figure 2: The three qualitatively diﬀerent patterns of the pencil-borne temporal dimension according
as the reference point (a small circle) is (a) incident with a proper conic, (b) coincides with one of the
base points, or (c) falls on a composite conic of the generating pencil. The pencil is, as in Fig. 1, of
the most general type.

pair of lines, which can be distinct or coinciding, or a single point. Any pencil of conics in the real
plane contains at least one composite conic, and maximum three (not necessarily distinct and/or of
the same type). Given a pencil of conics, a point of the plane that is not a base point of the pencil
is incident with exactly one (possibly composite) conic of the pencil. Any other proper conic of the
pencil then necessarily belongs into one of two qualitatively diﬀerent, disjoint families according as the
point (henceforth referred to as the reference point) lies in its interior or exterior; 2 in what follows we
shall call such proper conics, respectively, in-conics or ex-conics, and the unique conic incident with
the reference point, if being proper, will be denoted as the on-conic.

At this point it should already be obvious that it is this a-pencil-of-conics-and-a-point conﬁguration
that is of greatest interest and importance to us, because, in the case where the reference point falls
on a proper conic (see Fig. 2a), it lends itself as a natural, elegant and remarkably simple explanation
of our ordinary experience/sense of time. The only assumption to be made to see this is, following
Saniga (2003), to conceive each proper conic of the pencil as a single event/moment of time, with the
understanding that the set of ex-conics represent events of the past, that of in-conics stand for events
of the future and the unique on-conic generates the present moment, the ‘now.’

Apart from this noteworthy ‘past-present-future’ pattern, mimicking everyone’s common sense of
time, our model gives rise to other two prominent, in a sense dual to each other, structures. These
correspond, as the attentive reader may have already noticed, to the cases where the reference point
coincides with a base point of the pencil (Fig. 2b), or falls on one of its composite conics (Fig. 2c).
In the former case, clearly, all the proper conics are on-conics, whereas in the latter case the pattern
is lacking any such conic, being endowed with ex- and in-conics only. Hence, the corresponding time
dimension, in the former case, consists solely of the present moments (the ‘present-only’ mode), whilst,
in the latter case, it comprises only the past and future, being devoid of the moment of the present
(the ‘no-present’ mode). Now, it is the right point to return to the previous section and try to rephrase
these two unusual temporal arrangements in terms of pathological temporal constructs listed there. In
doing so, we readily ﬁnd out that the present-only pattern nicely accounts for nothing but experiences
of ‘eternity,’ ‘everlasting now’ (Sect. 2.1). Concerning the no-present design, here a little thought
suggests that this is a proper ﬁt for the time ‘standing still’ mode (Sect. 2.2); for our feeling that time
‘ﬂows,’ ‘proceeds’ is unequivocally tied to the notion of the present moment, the ‘now,’ as the linking
element between the past and future and so it is only too natural to assume that the absence of this
element in the pattern should correspond to a complete suspension/cessation of the (sense of) time’s
ﬂow.

Before we proceed to examine other intriguing structures of pencil-time, and attempt geometrization
of the remaining two queer forms of time’s experiences dealt with in Section 2, it is instructive to make
a slight digression to discuss a very interesting feature of our approach that has a serious bearing on
the very meaning of the term ‘pathological’ when it comes to the concept of time. This feature tells
us about a relative ‘probability’ of the occurrence of the above-discussed three patterns of time in
the realm of psychopathology. This probability should not, however, be understood in a strict sense
2Given a proper conic, a point, not on the conic, is its exterior or interior point depending on whether or not it lies

on a line tangent to the conic. The exterior/interior of the conic is the set of all its exterior/interior points.

6

Figure 3: The three distinct types of ‘line-related’ pencil-patterns of time in dependence on whether
the reference line is incident with (a) zero, (b) one, or (c) two base points of the pencil. In each case,
every illustrated point (a small circle) of the line is accompanied by a drawing of a small portion of
the conic incident with this particular point.

of the word, but rather in a looser, algebraic geometrical sense. The reasoning goes as follows. The
conics of any pencil sweep up the whole plane and as the latter contains ∞2 (double inﬁnity) of points,
there are ∞2 of potential past-present-future patterns. Next, as our pencil features three composite
conics, each of these is a pair of distinct lines, and a line possesses ∞1 (single inﬁnity) of points,
we have 3 × 2 × ∞1 = 6 × ∞1 ≈ ∞1 of no-present modes. And, ﬁnally, as our pencil features four
base points, there are just four present-only structures. We see a clear predominance of the past-
present-future mode within the group; no wonder that it corresponds to our ‘ordinary,’ ‘consensus’
experience of time. Equivalently, this explains why experiences of ‘eternity’ and/or time ‘standing
still’ are regarded/referred to as ‘anomalous/peculiar;’ for the relative probability of their occurrence
with respect to our ‘ordinary’ experience of time is truly negligible.

Let us next turn, as promised, to examine other conceivable forms of our generic pencil-time.
We shall assume that instead of a single reference point there is a whole inﬁnity of them, and these
are, for simplicity, taken to form a line. What diﬀerent kinds of time dimension do we ﬁnd in this
case? Remarkably, there are, like in the previous case, three of them. They diﬀer from each other, as
depicted in Fig. 3, in the position of this line with respect to the base points of the generating pencil
of conics, being in the sequel labelled, respectively, as a zero-, one- and two-point pattern according
as the reference line hits no, one or two of the base points. Obviously, these line-related temporal
structures can each be regarded as composed of an inﬁnite number of basic, point-related patterns.
This composition reads:

type of pattern
zero-point
one-point
two-point

past-present-future
inﬁnity
inﬁnity
none

present-only
none
one
two

no-present
six
three
inﬁnity

The numbers in the ﬁrst two columns are readily discernible from Fig. 3 and the deﬁnition of the
corresponding elementary modes.
It is only the last (no-present) column that requires a word of
explanation. Thus, the number in the ﬁrst line (six) is the number of intersections of the reference
line with the composite conics of the pencil; it follows from the facts that our pencil features three
composite conics, each of these is a pair of distinct lines, and in a projective plane every line is incident
with any other line. The number in the second line (three) answers to the fact that if the reference
line passes through a single base point, the latter absorbs three of these six points. Finally, when the
reference line joins two base points, it becomes a component of a composite conic, i.e. every point
of it lies on the composite conic in question. We further see that, among the composites, only one,
the one-point mode (Fig. 3b), features all the three types of elementary patterns, and, similarly, only
one, the two-point mode (Fig. 3c), lacks the most familiar of them. On the other hand, there is only
one elementary pattern, the no-present one, that enters all the three kinds of composites, and only
one, the present-only mode, whose number is always ﬁnite. It is very intriguing to see that there is no
homogeneous, i.e. featuring just one elementary pattern, composite.

7

Figure 4: An elementary explanation of the phenomenon of a psychological time-reversal in terms of
our pencil-borne model of time dimension. The heavy curve(s) is (are) the on-conic(s), while those
drawn as dotted/dashed represent the in-/out-conics. A little arrow indicates the direction of the
motion of the reference point (a small circle).

What are the phenomenological counterparts of these composite temporal patterns? Clearly, each
of them must be a mixture/superposition of the time’s experiences we have found to correspond to the
elementary patterns involved. And these are strange constructs indeed. Thus, the zero-point mode
corresponds to such an uncanny state of consciousness where the subject encounters an inﬁnite tangle
of ‘ordinary’ experiences of time, diﬀering from each other in the location of the moment of the present
and, consequently, in the spans of the regions of past/future, this perception being accompanied by the
sense of time ‘standing still.’ The one-point case is even weirder, as it includes, on top of the above, also
the feeling of ‘eternity.’ And these experiences are very much like those of ‘disordered/fragmented’ time
given in Sect. 2.4 (but see also the last account of Sect. 2.2)! But what about the two-point structure,
an intricate blend of the sense of ‘eternity/everlasting now’ and that of time ‘standing still’ ? This kind
of experience was privately communicated to one of us by Linda Howe, an instructor in the ‘akashic
records’ (Howe, 1999):

One common scenario is when the sense of the self is so expanded, beyond any physical boundary... In this
aspect, the awareness of being one with, or a part of, all that is can be profound. The illusion of separation can
be perceived as dissolving and, at the same time, the awareness of the oneness, or unity,... becomes heightened,
sometimes acutely so...

In this the experience of time is dramatic in its expansion and simultaneous contraction. There is a sense
that there is only one moment, that all of time/eternity is held in that instant, very compressed and as powerful
as one’s imagination can conceive. Simultaneously, there is a sense that there is no time in the expansion. That
all is holding still. Not even slow motion, but no motion. A total suspension of time is experienced. This is
the all time/no time paradox.

At this point, we have already succeeded in elucidating three out of the four principal types of
the pathology of time’s sense enumerated in the previous section. The only mode that is left to be
explained is the experience/sense of time ‘going/ﬂowing backward’ (Sect. 2.3). To this end, we shall
return to our ordinary, past-present-future pattern (Fig. 2a) and examine what happens to this pattern
as the reference point starts ‘moving’ away from its original position. This ‘motion,’ as delineated in
Fig. 4a-c, is assumed to take place in such a way that the point always remains incident with one
and the same conic. As it is quite obvious from this ﬁgure, the qualitative structure of the original
pattern (Fig. 4a) is preserved until the reference point, en route, hits a base point (Fig. 4b), in which
case the pattern acquires its present-only type. Further motion of the reference point clearly leads to
re-establishment of the original type, but with one remarkable diﬀerence – with the in-conics and ex-
conics having swapped their roles (Fig. 4c)! This means nothing but that the time’s arrows generated by
the two past-present-future patterns, although sharing the same present moment, point in the opposite
directions! One could hardly ﬁnd a more elementary explanation of time-reversal...

3.2. Space Dimension as a Pencil of Lines and its (Psychopathological) Patterns
It is evident that that the concept of a pencil, with conics as its constituting elements, turns out to
be an extremely fertile framework for getting a deeper qualitative insight into the ﬁne structure of
psychological time dimension. Motivated by this ﬁnding, it is only too natural to address also the
structure of psychological space in a similar fashion, i.e.
retaining the concept, replacing only its
constituting elements. As to our senses space appears to have a less complex structure than time,

8

Figure 5: The two qualitatively diﬀerent elementary patterns of the pencil-borne space dimension
depending on whether the reference point is diﬀerent (a) or not (b) from the vertex of the generating
pencil of lines. Compare with Figs. 2a and 2b, respectively.

and a line is a simpler geometrical object than a proper conic, we shall take a spatial dimension to be
represented by a pencil of lines (Saniga, 1998a; 2003). Our reasoning will parallel that of the previous
(sub)section, which will enable us to see how our approach gets to grips with the fundamental diﬀerence
between time and space at the perceptual level.

Two distinct lines in a plane suﬃce to deﬁne a unique pencil, i.e. the set of all lines of the plane that
pass through the point shared by the two (the latter being called the vertex of the pencil). As any two
lines in a projective plane have always one, and only one, point in common, there exists only one type
of a pencil of lines; this is the ﬁrst fundamental diﬀerence from the case of conics. Given a pencil of
lines, a point of the plane (the reference point) that is diﬀerent from the vertex of the pencil is incident
with exactly one line of the pencil (Fig. 5a); this line will henceforth be called the on-line, the remaining
lines of the pencil being termed oﬀ-lines. This particular a-pencil-of-lines-and-a-point conﬁguration
qualitatively mimics our ‘ordinary,’ ‘here-and-there’ sense of space, with the on-line standing for ‘here’
It is a spatial counterpart of the ‘ordinary,’ past-present-future pattern of
and oﬀ-lines for ‘there.’
time (Fig. 2a). However, it must be pointed out here that, unlike oﬀ-conics, oﬀ-lines have all the same
footing with respect to the reference point; this feature thus serves as a nice explanation why, in our
‘ordinary’ state of consciousness, perceived space has a rather trivial structure when compared to
that of perceived time. Another point-related spatial pattern is the one where the reference point is
identical with the vertex of the pencil (Fig. 5b); as now all the lines of the pencils are on-lines, we get
the ‘here-only’ structure. Being a twin of the ‘eternity,’ ‘everlasting now’ mode (Fig. 2b), this structure
must necessarily be inherent to those ‘non-ordinary’ states of consciousness that are characterized by
feelings of ‘omnipresence,’ or ‘fusion/oneness’ with the universe (see the ﬁrst and last accounts in Sect.
2.1, as well as the account in Sect. 3.1). These here-and-there and here-only modes are obviously the
only elementary patterns of pencil-space; for a line is so simple an object that there exist no singular
forms of it and, so, there does not exist any spatial analogue of the no-present pattern. And as there
are ∞2 potential here-and-there modes, but just a single here-only one, it is only natural that it is the
former that underlies our ‘consensus’ perception of space.

The cases with the reference line are also structurally simpler than those of time dimension. There
are, as the analogy suggests, a couple of them according as the line avoids the vertex (Fig. 6a) or is
incident with it (Fig. 6b). As it can easily be recognized from Fig. 6, the former case is a compound

Figure 6: The two composite modes of space pencil-borne dimension, diﬀering from each other in the
position of the reference line (illustrated as a range of small circles) with respect to the vertex of the
generating pencil of lines. Similarly to Fig. 3, every illustrated reference point goes with a drawing of
a small part of the line incident with this particular point.

9

Figure 7: A particular geometrical conﬁguration comprising three pencils of lines and a single pencil of
conics, the latter being located in the plane deﬁned by the vertices of the pencils of lines. The symbols
are explained in the text.

of a single inﬁnity of sole here-and-there modes, whereas the latter features a combination of both
the elementary modes, with the preponderance of the more familiar of them. Accordingly, a subject
experiencing the ‘avoiding-vertex’ mode feels to be localized at every point (‘multipresent’) along the
particular space dimension, while that in a state backed by the ‘hitting-vertex’ mode should feel to
be both localized at a particular position of and simultaneously stretched out along the dimension in
question.

4. Pencil-Borne Space-Time and the Varieties of its Internal Structure
So far we have treated time and space as two completely unrelated dimensions, which is of course in
marked contrast to how the two aspects of reality are perceived to exist. Moreover, we have dealt with
a single space dimension only, while our senses tell us that there are (at least) three of them. So we
have accordingly to reﬁne our model to comply with these ‘constraints.’

To furnish this task, it is necessary to move from the (projective) plane into the (projective) space
and – following and extending of what we did in Saniga (2001; 2003) – consider a speciﬁc geometrical
conﬁguration comprising three distinct, non-coplanar pencils of lines (generating spatial dimensions)
and a single pencil of conics (time). The planes carrying the pencils of lines are taken to be collinear,
i.e. having a line in common, and none of the vertices of the pencils (denoted as Bi, i=1, 2, 3) is
assumed to lie on this shared line (LB). The pencil of conics is, naturally, situated in the plane deﬁned
by the three vertices, and its base points are these vertices and the point (L) of incidence of the plane
and the line LB, as portrayed in Fig. 7.3 The uninitiated reader may get an impression that our option
for this conﬁguration is completely arbitrary. This is, however, not the case, for this conﬁguration plays
a prominent role in the theory of so-called Cremona transformations between two projective spaces
of dimension three. A proper explanation of what a Cremona transformation is and what kind(s)
of distinguished structures it entails would, however, take us too far aﬁeld from the main topic of
this paper: the interested reader is therefore referred to consult our above-mentioned papers (Saniga,
2001; 2003) and/or a – though for ﬁrst reading a bit diﬃcult – book by Hudson (1927). For what
follows it suﬃces that the reader shares our intuitive belief that there is indeed something special to
the above-described four-pencil conﬁguration so that Nature found it worth making use of.

It is evident that this remarkable conﬁguration, as it stands, can represent only a bare space-time,
i.e. the space-time devoid of any subject/observer. So, in order to introduce the latter into our model,
the conﬁguration has to be endowed with an additional geometrical object. This can, of course, be
done in a number of ways, one of the simplest being in terms of a single line (denoted as L∗ in Fig. 7).
Armed with this premise and the postulates and ﬁndings of the previous section, we are able to ﬁnd
3In a projective space, every line is incident with every plane, and also every two planes have a line in common.

10

out which kinds of spatial and temporal patterns discussed above are mutually compatible (i.e., can
form and ‘live together’ on a single manifold) and thereby arrive at a ﬁrst fairly comprehensive and
mathematically well-underpinned classiﬁcation of the psychopathology of time and space. It is not
hard to see that this task simply boils down to examining all possible positions of the reference line L∗
within this conﬁguration that lead to qualitatively diﬀerent arrangements of pencil-patterns induced
by the point(s) of intersection of the line with the four pencil-carrying planes.

We shall, of course, start with the case when the reference line is in a generic position with respect
to the four planes. As it is obvious from Fig. 7, in this case the line cuts each of these planes in a
unique point. As this point is clearly diﬀerent from any of the three vertices and from the point L as
well, it speciﬁes in each of the three planes BiLB (henceforth simply l-planes) a unique line, and in
the B1B2B3-plane (c-plane) a unique, in general proper, conic. Each of the three pencils of lines thus
generates the here-and-there mode, and the pencil of conics features the past-present-future pattern.
So, our generic pencil-borne space-time is, as expected, the space-time as perceived in our ordinary
state of consciousness.

In order to facilitate our subsequent discussion, we shall compactify our notation for diﬀerent
kinds of pencil-borne patterns. For each elementary pattern we shall reserve one letter, uppercase for
time and lowercase for space; a composite mode will then bear several letters, corresponding to the
elementary modes it consists of. As for time pencil-patterns, we shall adopt the following symbols: ‘A’
for the ordinary, past-present-future mode (the ‘arrow’ of time); ‘E’ for the present-only (‘eternity’)
mode; and ‘S’ for the no-present (time ‘standing still’) mode. The composite modes will then have the
following abbreviations: ‘µA·S’ for the zero-point mode; ‘µA·S·E’ for the one-point mode; and ‘S·E’
for the two-point mode, with µ standing for ‘multi-’. Concerning space patterns, we shall use ‘h’ for
the ordinary, here-and-there mode and ‘o’ for the here-only (‘omnipresence’) mode. Its composites will
accordingly be denoted as ‘µh’ (vertex-avoiding) and ‘h·o’ (vertex-hitting).

So what are possible kinds of our pencil-borne, ‘Cremonian’ psycho-space-times? From an algebraic
geometrical point of view, there are altogether 19 diﬀerent types of them, as depicted in Fig. 8. And
they are seen to form a truly remarkable sequence, once being grouped into distinict rows according
to their number/abundance (the ﬁrst column) and into distinct columns according to the number of
dimensions of localizability (the lowermost row) and/or the character of the Cremonian image of the
reference line in the second projective space (the uppermost row). As easily discernible from the ﬁgure,
the individual sub-ﬁgures diﬀer from each other in the position of the reference line and each of them is
accompanied by four of the above-introduced labels/acronyms so that the reader can readily ﬁnd out
the corresponding internal pattern of each spatial dimension and time as well. The number/abundance
of a particular type within the structure is, as above, of a geometrical origin. Thus, there are (see, e.g.,
Sommerville, 1951) ∞4 (quadruple inﬁnity) of lines in a three dimensional projective space and out of
them ∞3 are incident with a given line, ∞2 with two diﬀerent (possibly incident) lines, and ∞1 pass
through a given point and simultaneously lie in a given plane; a line is uniquely deﬁned by two distinct
points (their joint) or two diﬀerent planes (their meet). Non-localizability in a particular dimension
means that the reference line does not deﬁne a unique line in the corresponding l-plane, or a unique
conic in the c-plane. Hence, ‘o’, ‘µh’ and ‘h·o’ are non-local patterns of a space dimension, while ‘E’,
‘µA·S’, ‘µA·S·E’ and ‘S·E’ are those of time; in Fig. 8, the former/latter are illustrated by drawing
several lines/conics in the corresponding l-planes/c-plane so that they can readily be recognized.

Just a passing look at the ﬁgure in question reveals a number of intriguing facts. First, and perhaps
the most crucial one, is that our consensus space-time (represented by the sub-ﬁgure in the top left-
hand corner; this sub-ﬁgure is a fully equivalent version of Fig. 7) is, as expected, by far the most
abundant type in the hierarchy, as there are ∞4 of its potential cases. On the other hand, there is
just one potential case of space-time where the subject is completely non-localized (the sub-ﬁgure in
the bottom right-hand corner; the reference line is here identical with the line LB). Next, it is fairly
obvious that the most numerous patterns are those where the subject is completely localized (the ‘all’
column); as the number of dimensions of non-localizability increases (i.e., as we move in the ﬁgure
from left to right), the number of potential cases decreases (i.e., we move from the top to the bottom
of the ﬁgure). Further, we notice that if there are at least two dimensions of non-localizability (the last
three columns), one of them is always time. It is also intriguing to observe that as for two non-ordinary
elementary patterns of time, the S-mode prevails over the E-mode. The most variegated row is seen to
be the ∞2-one (featuring six diﬀerent types of space-time patterns and spanning three diﬀerent levels
of non-localizability), the least variegated being the top and bottom ones. It is also worth stressing
that out of the spatial modes it is the h-one that occurs most frequently, while amongst the temporal
patterns it is the S- and E-modes that enjoy this property. Also, there exists no pencil-borne space-
time whose space dimensions would be all of the o- or h·o-type.
Interestingly, the least frequently

11

Figure 8: A diagrammatic sketch of an algebraic geometrical classiﬁcation of pencil-borne space-times.
All the symbols and notation are explained in the text.

encountered patterns are the h·o (space) and S·E (time) ones. Finally, there are pairs of patterns
which are incompatible with each other: the o-mode with the µh-one, the S·E-mode with the µh-one
and the S-pattern with the o-one.

From the information gathered in Fig. 8 and the ﬁndings of the previous section(s) it will represent
no diﬃculty for the reader to infer and analyze the ‘experiential contents’ for each type of space-
time. We only add the following note. One of the most distinguished features of a great majority of
extraordinary states of consciousness is a seriously altered sense of individuality, ego, or self-hood. In
particular, the greater the departure from our consensus reality, the lesser the sense of ego; ultimately,
in the most abstract states, the subject feels to completely transcend/surpass his/her sense of ego,
and, so, the dichotomy between subject and object as well (see the last account in Sect. 2.1). This
important feature, too, has a proper place in our model, once we identify the ‘degree’ of the sense of
ego with the level of localization of the subject in our pencil-borne space-times. From Fig. 8 we then
readily discern that our consensus experience of space-time is characterized by the strongest sense of
the self. As we move across the ﬁgure from left to right, the sense of ego accompanying the individual
types of space-times (or, better, the corresponding states of consciousness) gradually ‘melts/dissolves,’
until it completely vanishes in the state represented by the sub-ﬁgure located at the very bottom of the
ﬁgure. Here is a recently found ﬁrst-person account (Anonym, 2003) that describes in great detail not
only this transformation of the sense of ‘I’, but also accompanying profound changes in the perception
of both time and space, and which dovetails very nicely with the implications of our model:

. . . For twelve hours I moved in and out of dimensions of both space and time. The incomprehensible became
comprehensible. Realities within realities blossomed and faded. From the inﬁnitely large to the inﬁnitely small,
unbounded and unfettered mind ﬂashed across landscapes of incredible depth and beauty. . . I was looking into
the source of my very being, and without question, my creator. And then I came to realize too that I was at
the interface between individual mind and absolute mind.

Entheogens, or in my case psilocybes, provide the pivotal role of interfacing between individual conscious-
ness and universal consciousness. It is the crucial link or conduit that bridge the two at a single point. That
point then begins to widen, and both entities slowly merge. As the interface grows, what were initially two now
opens into one. It’s not just a random happening though, an alignment process between the two takes place.
Actually it’s more a matter of one aligning itself to the other. This is not a conscious operation, although
consciousness is witness to it. . . To experience this phase of the psychic event was an absolute revelation with
all the glory and beauty imaginable. With my minds eye I was able to see the outline of the interface where

12

the two became the One, where duality merged into unity. . . I had the pleasant ability at the center of the
interface to merge in and out at will. In one moment I was myself, a separate thinking entity with all my
individual thoughts; as I merged out my self-hood ceased to exist; my individuality gone; my thoughts as unique
things ceased to be, given way to absolute thought. Time and space played an interesting part in this experience.
While in myself time existed, time ﬂowed, there was past and future, but while merged in unity time ceased,
there was no past or future. Everything was in a single instant; what Plotinus called the ‘Eternal Now.’ In
myself space had dimension, there was up and down, limitations existed. Merged in the other, there was no
up, no down, no limitation, all was inﬁnite and absolute. This gave rise to another incredible phenomenon;
with time suspended and space without boundary omniscience came into full awareness; yes, all things known;
no limitations to knowledge. . . Omnipotence, and omnipresence also became an awesome recognition, but not
related to me personally since the I had ceased to be; they were aspects of that great Oneness that was the
universe of consciousness. Merging back into my own ego left me with only a memory of being present to it
all. . .

5. Conclusion
A few weeks before his death, in a letter of condolence to the family of his life-time friend Michele Besso,
Albert Einstein wrote (Dukas and Hoﬀmann, 1972): ‘For us believing physicists the distinction between
past, present, and future is only an illusion, even if a stubborn one.’ We have, however, rigorously
demonstrated that this ‘illusion’ and its most pronounced ‘peculiarities/anomalies’ are underlaid by
a deﬁnite algebraic geometrical pattern. Does it mean that our math is a sort of illusion, too? Or,
rather, is it physics that falls short of grasping the true nature of time? There is ever growing evidence
for the latter to be the case (see, e.g., Elitzur and Dolev, 2003). But be it this way or that, cracking
this dilemma will certainly be not only a great leap forward in our knowledge of time, but it will also
entail radical shifts in many (currently regarded as well-established) paradigms of natural sciences.
And we are convinced that our algebraic geometrical approach will be recognized as an important step
towards furnishing this exciting, though formidable, task.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Mr. Pavol Bend´ık for painstaking drawing of the ﬁgures and Dr. Richard Komˇz´ık for the
help with conversion of the latter into postscript form. We would also like to express our cordial thanks to Miss
Daniela Veverkov´a and Mr. Peter Hahman for translating into English all the excerpts taken from journals
written in German. This work was supported in part by the 2001/2002 NATO/FNRS Advanced Research
Fellowship ‘Algebraic Geometrical Structure of Spacetime,’ the 2000–2002 NATO Collaborative Linkage Grant
PST.CLG.976850 ‘Structure of Time and Quantum Computing’ and the joint 2001–2003 research project
between the Italian Research Council and the Slovak Academy of Sciences ‘The Subjective Time and Its
Underlying Mathematical Structure.’

References

dex/par/22809.

Anonym (2003) Mystical mushrooms, an anonymous account posted at http://www.shroomery.org/in-

Atwater, P.M.H. (1988) Coming Back to Life. The After-Eﬀects of the Near-Death Experience, Dodd, Mead

and Company, New York, Chapter 2.

Heidelberg–New York.

Beringer, K. (1969), Der Meskalinrausch, Seine Geschichte und Erscheinungsweise, Springer-Verlag, Berlin–

Braud, W.G. (1995) An experience of timelessness, Exceptional Human Experience 13(1), 64–66.
Cutting, J. and Silzer, H. (1990) Psychopathology of time in brain disease and schizophrenia, Behav. Neurol.

3, 197–215.

p. 258.

Dukas, H. and Hoﬀmann, B. (1972) Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, Hart-Davis and MacGibbon, London,

Ebin, D. (ed.) (1961) The Drug Experience, Orion Press, New York, p. 295.
Elitzur, A.C. and Dolev, S. (2003) Is there more to t? Why time’s description in modern physics is still
incomplete, in R. Buccheri, M. Saniga and W.M. Stuckey (eds.), The Nature of Time: Geometry, Physics
and Perception (NATO ARW), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht–Boston–London, pp. 297–306.

Fischer, F. (1929) Zeitstruktur und Schizophrenie, Zeitschr. ges. Neurol. Psychiat. 121, 544–574.
Hartocollis, P. (1983) Time and Timelessness, or the Varieties of Temporal Experience, International Univer-

sities Press, New York.

Howe, L. (1999) Time and space relationships in non-ordinary states of consciousness, private communication.
Huber, G. (1955) Akasa, der Mystische Raum, Origo-Verlag, Z¨urich, pp. 45–46.
Hudson H.P. (1927) Cremona transformations in plane and space, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Jaspers, K. (1923) Allgemeine Psychopathologie, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Kloos, G. (1938) St¨orungen des Zeiterlebens in der endogenen Depression, Nervenarzt 11, 225–244.

13

Laing, R.D. (1968) La Politica dell’Esperienza, Feltrinelli, Milano, p. 148.
Levy, H. (1964) Projective and Related Geometries, The Macmillan Company, New York, pp. 251–269.
Melges, E.T. (1982) Time and the Inner Future: A Temporal Approach to Psychiatric Disorders, John Wiley

and Sons, New York.

Minkowski, E. (1933) Le Temps V´ecu – ´Etudes Ph´enom´enologiques et Psychopathologiques, Gauthier, Paris.
Muscatello, C.F. and Giovanardi Rossi, P. (1967) Perdita della visione mentale e patologia dell’esperienza

temporale, Giorn. Psichiatr. Neuropatol. 95, 765–788.

Saniga, M. (1998a) Pencils of conics: a means towards a deeper understanding of the arrow of time?, Chaos,

Solitons & Fractals 9, 1071-1086.

Saniga, M. (1998b) Unveiling the nature of time: altered states of consciousness and pencil-generated space-

times, International Journal of Transdisciplinary Studies 2, 8–17.

Saniga, M. (1999) Geometry of psycho(patho)logical space-times: a clue to resolving the enigma of time?,

Noetic Journal 2, 265–273.

Saniga, M. (2000) Algebraic geometry: a tool for resolving the enigma of time?, in R. Buccheri, V. Di Ges`u
and M. Saniga (eds.), Studies on the Structure of Time: From Physics to Psycho(patho)logy, Kluwer Aca-
demic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 137–166.

Saniga, M. (2001) Cremona transformations and the conundrum of dimensionality and signature of macro-

spacetime, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 12, 2127–2142.

Saniga, M. (2003) Geometry of time and dimensionality of space, in R. Buccheri, M. Saniga and W.M. Stuckey
(eds.), The Nature of Time: Geometry, Physics and Perception (NATO ARW), Kluwer Academic Publish-
ers, Dordrecht–Boston–London, pp. 131–143; also physics/0301003.

Sommerville, D.M.Y. (1951) Analytical Geometry of Three Dimensions, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge.

Tellenbach, H. (1956) Die Raumlichkeit der Melancholischen. I. Mitteilung, Nervenarzt 27, 12–18.

14

