3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Investigation methods in model conception of
quantum phenomena.

Yuri A. Rylov

Institute for Problems in Mechanics, Russian Academy of Sciences
101, bld. 1, Vernadski Ave. Moscow, 119526, Russia
email: rylov@ipmnet.ru
Web site: http://rsfq1.physics.sunysb.edu/˜rylov/yrylov.htm

Abstract

One can construct the model conception of quantum phenomena (MCQP)
which relates to the axiomatic conception of quantum phenomena (ACQP),
(i.e. to the conventional quantum mechanics) in the same way, as the statis-
tical physics relates to thermodynamics. Such a possibility is based on a new
conception of geometry, which admits one to construct such a deterministic
space-time geometry, where motion of free particles is primordially stochas-
tic. The space-time geometry can be chosen in such a way that statistical
description of random particle motion coincides with the quantum descrip-
tion. Methods of MCQP in investigation of quantum phenomena appear to
be more subtle and eﬀective than, that of ACQP. For instance, investigation
of the free Dirac equation in framework of MCQP shows that the Dirac par-
ticle is in reality a rotator, i.e. two particles rotating around their common
center of inertia. In the framework of MCQP one can discover the force ﬁeld,
responsible for pair production, that is impossible in the framework of ACQP.

1 Introduction

Sometimes investigation of a new class of physical phenomena is carried out by two
stages. At ﬁrst, the simpler axiomatic conception based on simple empiric consid-
erations arises. Next, the axiomatic conception is replaced by the more developed
model conception, where axioms of the ﬁrst stage are obtained as properties of the
model. Theory of thermal phenomena was developed according to this scheme. At
ﬁrst, the thermodynamics (axiomatic conception of thermal phenomena, or ACTP)
appeared. Next, the statistical physics (model conception of thermal phenomena,
or MCTP) appeared. Axioms of thermodynamics were obtained as properties of the
chaotic molecule motion.

1

The contemporary quantum theory is the ﬁrst (axiomatic) stage in the develop-
ment of the microcosm physics. Formal evidences of this is an existence of quantum
principles. Appearance of the next (model) stage, where the quantum principles
are consequences of the model, seems to be unavoidable. The model conception is
attractive, because it uses more subtle and eﬀective mathematical methods of inves-
tigation. Besides it gives boundaries of the axiomatic conception application. We
can see this in example of statistical physics and thermodynamics.

The main diﬀerence between the axiomatic and model stages of a theory lies
in mathematical methods of description and investigation. Methods of axiomatic
conception are more rough are rigid. They can be changed only by a change of
axiomatics. This is produced mainly by introduction of additional suppositions.
Mathematical methods of model conception are more ﬂexible and adequate, because
the model parameters are usually numbers and functions, which can be changed
ﬂuently.

Let us imagine, that we do not know methods of statistical physics and try
to investigate nature of crystal anisotropy, using only thermodynamical methods.
Using experimental date we can calculate thermodynamical potentials and describe
macroscopic properties of crystal, but we hardly can calculate anything theoretically.
For description of the next crystal we are forced to use experimental data again. By
means of methods of statistical physics we can explain and calculate parameters of
crystal anisotropy theoretically. At any rate, methods of model conception appears
to be more eﬀective in the given case.

Something like that we observe in the theory elementary particles, when theorists
use rough and rigid methods of axiomatic conception (quantum theory), which do
not admit to construct a perfect theory. There is a hope that mathematical meth-
ods of the model conception of quantum phenomena (MCQP) appear to be more
eﬀective, because MCQP does not use the rigid principles of quantum mechanics.
Instead quantum principles MCQP uses parameters of space-time geometry which
can be changed ﬂuently.

According to MCQP quantum phenomena is a result of stochastic behavior of
microparticles. Statistical description of this stochastic motion leads to description
of quantum phenomena. This idea is very old and very reasonable after the thermal
phenomena have been explained by chaotic motion of molecules. There were many
attempts of this idea realization, but all these attempts had failed. As a result a
sceptic relation to this idea appeared. Now most of physicists believe that quantum
principles describe correctly the origin of physical phenomena in microcosm.

There are three obstacles on the way of creation MCQP: (1) inadequate space-
time geometry, which describes the particle motion in microcosm as a deterministic,
although experiments show that this motion is random in reality, (2) inadequate
statistical description, when particles and antiparticles are considered to be objects
of statistical description, whereas objects of statistical description are to be world
lines, which are primary physical objects in relativistic theory, (3) integration of
dynamic equations for ideal ﬂuid, which is necessary for transformation of wave
function and spin (which are fundamental objects of quantum theory) in a method

2

of description of ideal ﬂuid, i.e. in attributes of the physical object description.

Model conception of quantum phenomena (MCQP) could be constructed only
after overcoming of these three obstacles. But each of the said obstacles was a very
diﬃcult problem. Besides, it was necessary to realize that on the way to creation
of MCQP there are these obstacles. To overcome the ﬁrst obstacle it was necessary
to construct a new conception of geometry (T-geometry), which contains such a
space-time geometry, where the particle motion be random.

The true space-time geometry is such a geometry, where motion of microparticles
is primordially stochastic, although the geometry in itself is not random (intervals
between the events in such a geometry are deterministic, but not random). To
construct such a geometry (T-geometry), one needs to go outside the framework of
Riemannian geometry, which is the most general contemporary geometry ﬁtting for
the space-time description. Being ﬂat, uniform and isotropic, the true geometry of
the absolute space-time distinguishes from the Minkowski geometry only in some
correction containing the quantum constant ~. This correction is essential only
for short space-time intervals, i.e. only in microcosm. Formally, introduction of
this correction is equivalent to introduction of some fundamental length, but it is a
transverse length (thickness of world line).

Statistical description of random motion of particles generated by the space-time
geometry leads to the quantum mechanical description (the quantum constant ~ ap-
pears in the theory via geometry), in the same way as the statistical description of
chaotic molecule motion leads to thermodynamics. Essential diﬀerence between the
two statistical descriptions lies in the diﬀerence between the statistical description for
relativistic and nonrelativistic cases. In the case of the statistical physics both reg-
ular and random components of the velocity are nonrelativistic, whereas in the case
of geometric stochasticity the random velocity component is relativistic, although
the regular component may be nonrelativistic. As a result even the nonrelativistic
quantum mechanics appears to be a hidden relativistic theory. There is essential
diﬀerence between the relativistic and nonrelativistic statistical descriptions. The
fact is that the nonrelativistic statistical description may be probabilistic, i.e. it can
be carried out in terms of the probability density, whereas the relativistic statistical
description cannot be produced in terms of the probability theory. The problem lies
in the fact that physical objects to be statistically described are diﬀerent in the
relativistic and nonrelativistic theories.

In the nonrelativistic theory the physical object is a point, i.e. a pointlike (zero-
dimensional) object in three-dimensional space, and the particle world line describes
a history of the pointlike object. In other words, the particle is primary and its world
line is secondary. In the consequent relativistic theory the situation is inverse. The
physical object is the world line, i.e. the one-dimensional line in the space-time,
whereas the particle and the antiparticle are derivative objects (intersections of the
world line with the surface t =const). In other words, in the consequent relativistic
theory the world line is primary, whereas the particle and antiparticle are secondary.
The term ’WL’ will be used for the world line considered to be the primary physical
object. The diﬀerence in the choice of the primary physical object is conditioned

3

by diﬀerent relation to the existence of absolute simultaneity in relativistic and
nonrelativistic physics. Statistical description must be a description of primary
physical objects. Foundation for such a description is the density of physical objects
in the three-dimensional space (for particles) or in the space-time (for WLs). Density
ρ (x) of particles at the point x is deﬁned by the relation

where dN is the number of particles in the 3-volume dV . The particle density is
deﬁned as a proportionality coeﬃcient between dN and dV . The density jk(x) of
WLs is deﬁned by the relation

dN = ρ(x)dV

dN = jk (x) dSk

(1.1)

(1.2)

where dN is the ﬂux of WLs through three-dimensional area dSk in the space-time
in vicinity of the point x. The quantity jk(x) is the proportionality coeﬃcient
between dN and dSk in vicinity of the point x. The quantity ρ (x) is a nonnegative
3-scalar. It can serve as a basis for introduction of the probability density, whereas
the 4-vector jk(x) is not a nonnegative quantity, and it cannot serve as a basis for
introduction of the probability density, which must be nonnegative quantity.

It is a common practice to think that terms ”probabilistic description” and ”sta-
tistical description” are synonyms.
It is a delusion, because the probabilistic de-
scription is a description, founded on a use of the probability theory, whereas the
statistical description is a description, dealing with many similar or almost similar
objects. Such a set of similar objects is called statistical ensemble. Statistical de-
scription is an investigation and description of the statistical ensemble properties.
Statistical description without a use of the probability density is possible. It is nec-
essary only to investigate the statistical ensemble without a use of the probability
theory. We shall consider statistical ensembles of dynamic or stochastic systems and
use essentially the circumstance, that the statistical ensemble is a dynamic system,
even if its elements are stochastic systems. Use of the statistical ensemble as some
means for calculation of statistical averages is not necessary. Such an approach may
be qualiﬁed as the dynamic conception of statistical description (DCSD). It is ap-
propriate in any case (relativistic and nonrelativistic). Interpretation of DCSD is
carried out in terms of the ideal ﬂuid and world lines of its particles. Construction
of DCSD is a result of overcoming of the second obstacle.

Between DCSD and axiomatic conception of quantum phenomena (ACQP), i.e.
conventional quantum mechanics, there is a connection. To obtain this connection it
was necessary to obtain fundamental objects of ACQP (wave function and spin) as
attributes of ideal ﬂuid, which appears in DCSD. Connection between the ﬂuid and
the Schr¨odinger equation is known since the beginning of the quantum mechanics
construction [1, 2]. In after years many authors developed this interplay known as
hydrodynamic interpretation of quantum mechanics [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. But
this interpretation was founded ultimately on the wave function as a fundamental
It cannot go outside the framework of quantum principles,
object of dynamics.

4

because the connection between the hydrodynamic interpretation and the quantum
mechanics was one-way connection. One could obtain the irrotational ﬂuid ﬂow from
the dynamic equation for the wave function (Schr¨odinger equation), but one did not
know how to transform dynamic equations for a ﬂuid to the dynamic equation for
a wave function. In other words, we did not know how to describe rotational ﬂuid
ﬂow in terms of the wave function. In terms of the wave function we could describe
only irrotational ﬂuid ﬂow.

To describe arbitrary ﬂuid ﬂow in terms of a wave function, one needs to in-
tegrate conventional dynamic equations for a ﬂuid (Euler equations). Indeed, the
Schr¨odinger equation

~2

i~ ∂ψ
∂t

+

∇2ψ = 0

(1.3)

2m
may be reduced to the hydrodynamic equations for the variables ρ, v, describing the
ﬂuid state. Substituting ψ = √ρ exp (i~ϕ) in (1.3) and separating real and imaginary
parts of the equation, we obtain expressions for time derivatives ∂0ρ and ∂0ϕ. To
obtain expression for the time derivative ∂0v of the velocity v = ~
∇ϕ, we need to
~
diﬀerentiate dynamic equation for ∂0ϕ, forming combination ∂0v = ∇
m ∂0ϕ
. The
reverse transition from hydrodynamic equations to dynamic equations for the wave
function needs a general integration of hydrodynamic equations. This integration
is simple in the partial case of irrotational ﬂow, but it is a rather complicated
mathematical problem in the general case, when a result of integration has to contain
three arbitrary functions of three arguments. Without producing this integration,
one cannot derive description of a ﬂuid in terms of the wave function, and one
cannot manipulate dynamic equations, transforming them from representation in
terms of ρ, v to representation in terms of wave function and back. This problem
has not been solved for years. It had been solved in the end of eighties, and the ﬁrst
application of this integration can be found in [12]

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

m

Statistical ensemble of discrete dynamic or stochastic systems is a continuous
dynamic system, i.e. some ideal ﬂuid. Integration of hydrodynamic equations admits
one to show that the wave function and spin is a way of description of an ideal
ﬂuid [13]. This was overcoming of the third obstacle.
In other words, the wave
function appears as a property of some model (but not as a fundamental object
whose properties are deﬁned by axiomatics). Under some conditions the irrotational
ﬂow of the statistical ensemble (ﬂuid) is described by the Schr¨odinger equation
[14, 15]. Thus, one can connect MCQP with the conventional quantum description
and show that in the nonrelativistic case the description in terms of MCQP agrees
with description in terms of conventional quantum mechanics.

Note that the said obstacles were overcame in other order, than they are listed
above. It took about thirty years for overcoming the ﬁrst obstacle and construc-
tion of T-geometry. In the ﬁrst paper [16] the system of diﬀerential equations for
world function of Riemannian geometry was obtained. These equations do not con-
tain metric tensor. They contain only world function and their derivatives with
respect to both arguments. These equations put the following question. Let the
world function do not satisfy these equations. What is then? Do we obtain non-

5

Riemannian geometry, or does no geometry exist? Then we could not answer this
question, because as well as other scientists, we believed that the straight line must
be one-dimensional geometrical object (curve) in any geometry. Only thirty years
later we succeeded to answer this question and to construct non-Riemannian geom-
etry (T-geometry) [17]. It appeared to be possible, because we had realized that
in some geometries the straight line can be a non-one-dimensional object (surface).
Moreover, it is the general case of geometry, whereas the Riemannian geometry with
one-dimensional straight lines (geodesic) is a special (degenerate) case. The string
theory suggests this idea of non-one-dimensional straight line. The second obstacle
was overcame the ﬁrst [18, 19, 20, 21]. The third obstacle was overcame only in the
end of eighties. Finally the ﬁrst obstacle was overcame last [22].

It is worth to note that all obstacles had been ovecame on the strictly logical
foundation, i.e. only logical constructions based on already known principles of
classical physics. New hypotheses and principles were not used, and this is not
characteristic for the microcosm physics, developed in XXth century. In other words,
the possibility of the MCQP construction was contained in principles of classical
physics.
It was necessary only to use them consistently. Unfortunately, it was
unwarranted additional suppositions and absence of logical consistency, that was
the stumbling block for construction of MCQP.

In the next two sections we consider modiﬁcation of the quantum phenomena

theory, generated by overcoming of the said obstacles.

2 Geometry

There are two diﬀerent approaches to geometry: mathematical and physical ones.
In the mathematical approach a geometry is a construction founded on a system
of axioms about points and straights. Practically any system of axioms, containing
concepts of a point and of a straight, may be called a geometry. Well known mathe-
matician Felix Klein [23] supposed that only such a construction on a point set is a
geometry, where all points of the set have the same properties (uniform geometry).
For instance, Felix Klein insisted that Euclidean geometry and Lobachevsky geom-
etry are geometries, because they are uniform, whereas the Riemannian geometries
are not geometries at all. As a rule the Riemannian geometries are not uniform, and
their points have diﬀerent properties. According to the Felix Klein viewpoint, they
should be called as ”Riemannian topographies” or as ”Riemannian geographies”. It
is a matter of habit and taste how to call the geometry. But Felix Klein was quite
right in the relation, that he suggested to diﬀer between the Euclidean geometry and
Riemannian one. The fact is that the principle of the Riemannian geometry con-
struction is quite diﬀerent from that of the Euclidean geometry construction. The
Euclidean geometry is constructed on the basis of axioms, whereas the Riemannian
geometry is constructed as a deformation of the Euclidean geometry.

At the physical approach the geometry is the science on mutual disposition of
points and geometric objects in the space, or events in the space-time. The mutual

6

disposition is described by the metric ρ (distance between two points), or by the
world function σ = 1
2ρ2 [24]. It is question of the secondary importance, whether all
points have the same properties or not, and what axioms are satisﬁed by the metric.
The Riemannian geometry is obtained as a result of the proper Euclidean ge-
ometry deformation, when the inﬁnitesimal Euclidean interval ds2
E is replaced by
the Riemannian interval ds2 = gikdxidxk. Such a change is a deformation of the
Euclidean space. Such an approach to geometry, when a geometry is a result of the
proper Euclidean geometry deformation will be referred to as a physical approach
to geometry. The obtained geometry will be referred to as a physical geometry. The
physical geometry has no own axiomatics. It uses ”deformed” Euclidean axiomat-
ics. The physical geometry describes mutual disposition of points in the space, or
of events in the space-time.
It is described by setting the distance between any
two points. The metric ρ is the only characteristic of a physical geometry. The
world function σ = 1
2ρ2 is more convenient for description of the physical geometry,
because it is real even for the space-time, where ρ = √2σ may be imaginary.

Construction of any physical geometry is determined by the deformation princi-
ple [25]. It works as follows. The proper Euclidean geometry
GE can be described
in terms and only in terms of the world function σE, provided σE satisﬁes some
constraints formulated in terms of σE [25]. It means that all geometric objects
OE
can be described σ-immanently (i.e. in terms of σE and only of σE)
OE (σE).
Relations between geometric objects are described σ-immanently by some expres-
sions
GA can be obtained from the proper
Euclidean geometry by means of a deformation, when the Euclidean world function
σE is replaced by some other world function σA in all deﬁnitions of Euclidean geo-
RE (σE) between
OE (σE) and in all Euclidean relations
metric objects
them. As a result we have the following change

RE (σE). Any physical geometry

RE =

RE =

OE =

OE =

OE =

RE =

RE =

RE (σE)

RE (σA)

→ OA =

→ RA =

OE (σA) ,

OA and all relations

OE (σE)
The set of all geometric objects
RA between them forms a
physical geometry, described by the world function σA. Index ’E’ in the relations of
GA means that axiomatics of the proper Euclidean geometry was
physical geometry
OE (σE) and of relations between
used for construction of geometric objects
OE =
RE (σE). The same axiomatics is used for all geometric objects
them
OA =
OE (σA) and relations between them
RE (σA) in the geometry
GA. But now
σA. It means that
this axiomatics has another form, because of deformation σE →
GE is the basic geometry for all physical geometries
the proper Euclidean geometry
obtained by means of a deformation of the proper Euclidean geometry. If the basic
G
geometry is ﬁxed (it is this case that will be considered further), the geometry on the
arbitrary set Ω of points is called T-geometry (tubular geometry). The T-geometry
is determined [17, 26] by setting the world function σ:

RA =

σ : Ω

Ω

×

→

R,

σ (P, P ) = 0,

P

∀

∈

Ω

(2.1)

In general, no other constraints are imposed, although one can impose any additional
constraints to obtain a special class of T-geometries. T-geometry is symmetric, if in

7

addition

σ (P, Q) = σ (Q, P ) ,

P, Q

Ω

∈

∀

(2.2)

Consequent application of only deformation principle admits one to obtain any
physical geometry (T-geometry), which appears to be automatically as consistent as
the Euclidean geometry, which lies in its foundation. The Riemannian geometries
form a special class of T-geometries, determined by the constraint, imposed on the
world function

σR (x, x′) =

2

1
2




L


Z
[xx′]

p

gikdxidxk



(2.3)

where σR is the world function of the Riemannian space, and
L[xx′] means a geodesic
segment between the points x and x′. Riemannian geometry is determined by the
dimension n and n (n + 1) /2 functions gik of one point x, whereas the class of all
possible T-geometries is essentially more powerful, because it is determined by one
function σ of two points x and x′.

In general, the deformation principle admits one to obtain such geometries, where
non-one-dimensional tubes play the role of the straight lines. The real space-time
geometry is of such a kind. But creators of the Riemannian geometry supposed
that a geometry with tubes instead of straights was impossible. The restriction
(2.3) on Riemannian geometries was introduced to forbid deformation transforming
one-dimensional Euclidean straights to many-dimensional tubes. But in nonuniform
physical geometry one fails to suppress the tubular character of straights. In the
Riemannian geometry one succeeds to make this, only refusing from the consequent
application of the deformation principle and using additional means of the geometry
construction. As a result the Riemannian geometry appears to be not quite conse-
quent construction. This is displayed, in particular, in lack of absolute parallelism,
whereas in any physical geometry constructed in accordance with the deformation
principle the absolute parallelism takes place.(see details in [25]).

The tubular character of timelike straights in the real space-time generates the
stochastic character of the free particles motion in such a space-time, because the
P0P1, passing through the points P0 and P1, is determined by the
straight (tube)
relation

T

P0P1 =

T

R

−−→P0P1||

|

−−→P0R

n

o

=

R

SP0P1R = 0

{

|

}

(2.4)

−−→P0R means that vectors −−→P0P1 and −−→P0R are collinear.

where −−→P0P1||
In the proper
Euclidean space the vectors −−→P0P1 and −−→P0R are linear dependent (collinear), if and
only if the second order Gram determinant F2 (P0, P1, R) vanishes.

F2 (P0, P1, R) = (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

−−→P0P1.−−→P0P1

−−→P0P1.−−→P0R

−−→P0R.−−→P0P1

−−→P0R.−−→P0R

(cid:17) (cid:16)

(cid:17) (cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

= 0

(2.5)

Here

−−→P0P1.−−→P0R

denotes the scalar product of two vectors −−→P0P1 and −−→P0R, which

−−→P0P1||

−−→P0R :

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

8

is deﬁned by the relation

−−→P0P1.−−→P0R

σ (P0, P1) + σ (P0, R)

σ (P1, R)

(2.6)

(cid:16)

(cid:17) ≡

−

Relations (2.5), (2.6) express the collinearity condition via the world function σ of
the proper Euclidean space. In other words, the collinearity of −−→P0P1 , −−→P0R is deﬁned
σ-immanently. By deﬁnition this relation can be used in arbitrary T-geometry, i.e.
for any world function σ. The quantity SP0P1R is the area of Euclidean triangle
with vertices at points P0, P1, R. It is connected with the Gram determinant by the
relation

F2 (P0, P1, R) = (2SP0P1R)2

(2.7)

Thus, two relations (2.4) contain two equivalent conditions of collinearity.

It is worth to note that conventionally the concept of linear dependence (collinear-
ity) is introduced in the framework of linear space. To introduce the linear space,
one needs a set of restrictions (ﬁxed dimension, continuity, coordinate system, etc.).
It appears unexpectedly that all these restrictions are not necessary. The concept of
linear dependence can be introduced on arbitrary set of points, where the world func-
tion (metric) is given. The concept of linear dependence appears to be independent
of whether or not the linear space can be introduced on this set.

According to this deﬁnition the tube

P0P1 is a set of such points R, that vectors
T
−−→P0P1 and −−→P0R are collinear. The tubular character of the straight (thick straight)
means that there are many directions −−→P0R, parallel to the vector −−→P0P1. On the
other hand, the motion of a free particle in the curved space-time is described by
the equation of a geodesic

d ˙xi =

kl ˙xkdxl,
Γi

−

dxl = ˙xidτ

(2.8)

where Γi
kl is the Christoﬀel symbol. Equation (2.8) describes the parallel transport
of the velocity vector ˙xi of the particle along the direction dxi = ˙xidτ , determined
by the velocity vector ˙xi. If there are many vectors parallel to the velocity vector
˙xi, the parallel transport (2.8) appears to be not single-valued, and the world line
becomes to be random.

The ﬂat uniform isotropic space-time is described by the world function [22]
~

~

σ = σM + D (σM) ,

D (σM) =

10−21cm2,

if σM >

(2.9)

2bc

2bc ≥

≤

where σM is the world function of the Minkowski space, c is the speed of the light.
The distortion function D (σM) describes the character of quantum stochasticity. In
the space with nonvanishing distortion D (σM) the particle mass is geometrized [22],
10−17g/cm is the constant, describing connection between the geometric
and b
mass µ and usual mass m by means of the relation m = bµ. Form of the distortion
function D (σM) is determined by the demand that the stochasticity generated by
distortion is the quantum stochasticity, i.e. the statistical description of the free
stochastic particle motion is equivalent to the quantum description in terms of the
Schr¨odinger equation [22].

9

3 Statistical description

A

Ed [

Sst is reduced to the action

Ed[Sd(P )], where P are parameters describing

Sd] of deterministic classical particles

Let the statistical ensemble
Sd be described
by the action
Sd (for instance, mass,
A
charge). Let under inﬂuence of some stochastic agent the deterministic particle
Sd turn to a stochastic particle
Est[Sst] for the statistical ensemble
Sst. The action
Est[Sst] for some
Sst] of stochastic particles
Est [
set
Sred [
Sred[Sd]
Ed[Sd(Peﬀ )], where parameters Peﬀ are parameters
as a functional of
P of the deterministic particle
Sd, averaged over the statistical ensemble, and this
averaging describes interaction of particles
Sd] [27, 28]. It means
Sred [
that
(3.1)
Sst] is replaced by

A
Sd] of identical interacting deterministic particles
A

A
Sst in the ensemble
Sd], and this interaction is described by a change

In other words, stochasticity of particles
interaction of

Sred[Sd] =
A
Sd. The action

Sd has the form

Sd in the set

Sred[Sd(P )] =

Sd in

Est[Sst] =

Sred [

Ed[Sd(Peﬀ )]

Est [

A

A

A

in the action

Ed[Sd(P )].~ξ

A

Action for the statistical ensemble of free deterministic particles has the form

P

Peﬀ

→

[x] =

A

− Z

mc

gik ˙xi ˙xkdξ0d~ξ,

p

˙xi

≡

dxi
dξ0

where x =

xi

{

, i = 0, 1, 2, 3 is a function of ξ =
}

ξ0,~ξ

n

o

=

ξi}

{

, i = 0, 1, 2, 3.

The only parameter for the free particle is its mass m, and the change (3.2) in

the nonrelativistic case has the form

m

meﬀ = m

→

1
(cid:18)

−

u2
2c2 +

~

∇u

(cid:19)

2mc2

where u = u (t, x) is the mean value of the stochastic velocity component. Quan-
tum constant ~ appears here as coupling constant between the regular and stochastic
components of the particle velocity. The velocity u is considered to be a new de-
pendent variable, and dynamic equation for u is obtained as a result of the action
variation with respect to u [28]. The velocity u is supposed to be small as compared
with the speed of the light c.

In the relativistic case the change (3.2) takes the form

m2

→

m2

eﬀ = m2

1 + ulul + λ∂lul

,

λ =

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

. Then the action (3.3) is transformed to the form

~

mc

where ul =

u0, u
}

{

[x, κ] =

mcK

A

− Z

p

gik ˙xi ˙xkdξ0d~ξ,

K =

1 +

r

~2
m2c2 (κlκl + ∂lκl)

(3.6)

10

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

where dependent variables x =
ξi}
ξ =

ξ0,~ξ
n

=

o

{

,

i = 0, 1, 2, 3. Dependent variables κ =

xi

{

}

, i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are a function of variables
κi
i = 0, 1, 2, 3
. Variables κl are

1,

1,

}

,

are functions of x. The metric tensor gik =diag
connected with ul by means of the relation

c2,
{

−

−

{
1
−

}

ul =

κl,

l = 0, 1, 2, 3

(3.7)

~

m

On one hand, the action (3.6) describes a set of deterministic particles interacting
between themselves via self-consistent vector ﬁeld κl. On the other hand, the action
(3.6) describes a quantum ﬂuid. Rotational ﬂow of this ﬂuid is described by one-
component wave function ψ, satisfying the Klein-Gordon equation [29, 28].

In general case the ﬂuid ﬂow is described by two-component wave function,

satisfying the dynamic equation [28]

~2∂k∂kψ

m2c2 +

(∂lsα)

∂lsα

−

− (cid:18)

(cid:0)

(cid:19)

(cid:1)

~2

4

ψ = ~2 ∂l

ρ∂lsα
2ρ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(σα

sα) ψ

(3.8)

−

where 3-vector s =

s1, s2, s3,

is determined by the relations

{
∗

ψ

}
∗
2) ,

= (ψ

∗
1, ψ

∗

ρ = ψ

ψ,

sα =

∗

ψ

σαψ
ρ

,

ψ =

ψ1
ψ2

,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

α = 1, 2, 3

(3.9)

Here ~σ =

σ1, σ2, σ3}

{

are Pauli matrices.

From physical viewpoint the quantization procedure (3.5), when the mass m
is replaced by its mean value meﬀ, looks rather reasonable.
Indeed, the value of
meﬀ depends on the state of the stochastic velocity component. Stochastic velocity
component has inﬁnite number of the freedom degrees and consideration of inﬂuence
of the mean value ul on the regular component of the particle velocity appears to be
very complicated. It is described by partial diﬀerential equations, whereas in absence
of this inﬂuence the regular particle motion is described by the ordinary diﬀerential
equations. From physical viewpoint such an interpretation of the quantization looks
more reasonable, than conventional interpretation in terms of wave function and
operators.

The wave function and spin appear here as a way of description of the ideal ﬂuid
[13], i.e. as ﬂuid attributes. In other words, statistical description and hydrodynamic
interpretation of the world function are primary, and wave function is secondary.
Hierarchy of concepts is described by the following two schemes.

ACQP:

quantum
principles

wave

⇒

function ⇒

hydrodynamic
interpretation

MCQP:

statistical
description ⇒

ﬂuid

dynamics ⇒

wave
function

Note that transition from ACQP to MCQP became possible only after solution
of such a pure mathematical problem as integration of complete system of dynamic

11

equations for ideal ﬂuid. Systematical application of this integration for description
of quantum phenomena began in 1995 [14, 30].

4 Methods and capacities of MCQP

and

hSsti

Let us formulate the ﬁrst diﬀerence between ACQP and MCQP. As any statistical
theory MCQP contains two sorts of investigated objects: stochastic system
Sst and
statistically averaged system
, whereas ACQP investigates only one sort of
hSsti
Sq are continuous dynamic
Sq. Systems
objects: so called quantum systems
systems. They have dynamic equations and coincide practically always. The system
Sst is a discrete stochastic system, for which dynamic equations are absent. Dynamic
Sst (consideration of
system
appears as a result of statistical description of
hSsti
statistical ensemble
is the statistical
Sst]). The statistically averaged system
[
hSsti
ensemble
as a continuous dynamic system
Sst], normalized to one system, and
[
have practically all properties of statistical ensemble. Normalization to one system
Sst] do not depend
is possible, because properties of the statistical ensemble
on number N elements in it, if N is large enough. Then one can set formally N = 1,
and
remains to be continuous dynamic system
hSsti
and conserves all properties of the statistical ensemble

Sst] turns to

hSsti

hSsti

. But

[N,

[N,

E

E

E

E

,

[

E
∞
Sst and

hSsti

Two kinds of measurement in MCQP (S-measurement and M-measurement)
is another side of existence of two sorts of objects
. Single measure-
ment (S-measurement) is produced over single stochastic system
Sst. Result of
S-measurement is random. It means that the result of S-measurement is not re-
produced, in general, in other S-measurements on other
Sst, prepared in the same
way. S-measurement always leads to one deﬁnite value R′ of the measured quantity
. This result does not inﬂuence on the wave function ψ, because wave function
R
Sst. The massive measurement (M-
describes the state of
measurement) is produced over many single dynamic systems
.
Sst, constituting
hSsti
M-measurement is a set of many S-measurements, produced over diﬀerent elements
leads always to a distribution
of
F (R′) of possible values R′, because S-measurements in diﬀerent elements of
hSsti
give diﬀerent results, in general. Result of M-measurement is always a distribution,
even in the case, when all S-measurements, constituting the M-measurement, give
the same result. In the last case the distribution is a δ-function. Distribution F (R′)
is reproducible. It is reproduced in other M-measurements, carried out in the same
state ψ.

. M-measurement of the quantity

and has no relation to

Sst] or of
[

hSsti

hSsti

R

E

Sst] [27].

Thus, S-measurement is irreproducible, in general, and gives a deﬁnite result.
The M-measurement is reproducible and, in general, does not give a deﬁnite result
(but only a distribution of results). Nevertheless, formally the M-measurement of
may be considered to be a single act of measurement of the quantity
the quantity
R′ distribution, which is produced over the dynamic system

R

Theory can predict only results of M-measurement, which leads to a reproducible
distribution except for the case, when the measured system is an element of the

.
hSsti

12

statistical ensemble, which is found in such a state, where the distribution of the
measured quantity is a δ-function. In this case the result of S-measurement can be
predicted, because it is determined single-valuedly by the distribution, which is a
result of M-measurement and can be predicted by the theory.

R

Is it possible that M-measurement of the quantity

in the state ψ lead to
a deﬁnite result R′? Yes, it is possible, if M-measurement is accompanied by a
selection of those S-measurements, constituting the M-measurement, which give
the result R′. Such a measurement is called selective M-measurement (or SM-
measurement). SM-measurement has properties of S-measurement (deﬁnite result
R′) and those of M-measurement (it is produced in
, and inﬂuences on the state
). SM-measurement is accompanied by a selection, and the quaestion about
of
its reproducibility is meaningless, because it depends on the kind of selection, which
depetermines the result of the SM-measurement.

hSsti

hSsti

R

In ACQP there is only one type of objects (quantum systems

Sq) and only
one type of measurement (Q-measurement). The Q-measurement is essentially M-
. Re-
measurement, because it always gives distribution of the measured quantity
sult of Q-measurement is determined by the rule of von Neumann. All predictions in
ACQP as well as in MCQP concern only with results of M-measurement. In ACQP
there is only one object and only one type of measurement. Nobody distinguishes
in ACQP between S

measurement and M-measurement.

In ACQP the statistically averaged system

−
hSsti
Sq and single measurement on

is considered to be individ-
ual quantum system
is considered to be
Sq =
a measurement with properties of both M-measurement and S-measurement (i.e.
SM-measurement). In classical physics a single physical system is described as a
discrete dynamic system, whereas a continuous dynamic system describes statistical
In ACQP the question, why the continuous
ensemble of single physical systems.
Sq describes a single physical object (for instance, a single parti-
dynamic system
cle), is not raised usually.
If nevertheless such a question is raised, one answers
that quantum system is a special kind of physical system which distinguishes from
classical system and whose state is described by such a misterious quantity as wave
function, or something like this. The fact that the wave function is a method of the
statistical ensemble description is unknown practically.

hSsti

In ACQP there is only one object, and for description of a single measurement one
useses SM-measurement (but not S-measurement), because S-measurement does
not exist in framework of ACQP. SM-measurement is produced on the dynamic
system
and inﬂuences on the wave function, describing the state of
Sq. The S-measurement is produced on the system
Sst. It does not inﬂuence on
the wave function, describing the state of
. Character of inﬂuence on
the wave function is the main formal diﬀerence between S-measurement and SM-
measurement.

Sq =

Sq =

hSsti

hSsti

Replacement of S-measurement by SM-measurement in ACQP leads to such
paradoxes, as the Schr¨odinger cat paradox, or the EPR-paradox, which are based
on the belief that a single measurement changes the wave function (i.e. that a single
measurement is a SM-measurement). Paradoxes are eliminated, if one take into

13

account that a single measurement is S-measurement, which does not change the
wave function). See detail discussion in [27].

hSsti

Some properties of

appear as a result of properties of

Sst. Another ones
appear as a result of statistical averaging. The last are interpreted as collective prop-
erties. For instance, in statistical physics (MCTP) the temperature is a collective
property, because one molecule has no temperature. Only collective of molecules
has a temperature in statistical physics. In thermodynamics (ACTP) there is no
concept of collective properties, and temperature is a property of any amount of
matter (one molecule, or even a half of molecule). In MCQP wave function ψ is
. If we say that individual
a collective quantity, which describes the state of
Sst is found in the state ψ, it means only that
stochastic system
Sst is taken from
Sst], whose state is described by the wave function ψ. In MCQP
the ensemble
[
Sst, and it may be a
the spin of a particle may be a property of individual particle
. In diﬀerent cases we have diﬀerent results.
collective property of
SP described by the Pauli equation the electron
In the case of dynamic system
It means, in particular, that the dynamic
spin is the collective properties [14].
SP consist
system
Sst. The diﬀerence between them is described by the
of similar individual systems
SS the ﬂuid ﬂow is irrotational, whereas in
type of the ﬂuid ﬂow. In the case of
SP the electron spin is
the case of
conditioned by collective property (vortical ﬂow). In the given case the electron spin
is a result of the ﬂuid ﬂow vorticity. (Let us remember that the statistical ensemble
is a ﬂuidlike dynamic system.)

SS, described by the Schr¨odinger equation, and dynamic system

SP the ﬂuid ﬂow is rotational. In other words, in

hSsti

hSsti

E

SD shows that

In the case of dynamic system

SD spin is a property of individual stochastic system.

SD, described by the Dirac equation, the electron
spin is the property of individual stochastic particle [31]. In this case the dynamic
SDcl of the Dirac
disquatization of Dirac equation, i.e. determination of classic analog
SDcl is a dynamic system, having ten degrees of freedom. It
particle
may be interpreted as two classical particles, rotating around their common center
of inertia. Angular momentum of this rotation forms spin of
SDcl. Thus, in the case
of the Dirac electron
In ACQP there are no collective properties, because there is only one object:
quantum system
Sq. The statement of the question whether spin of the particle is
a collective property is meaningless in the framework of ACQP. Is it important for
investigations to distinguish between individual and collective properties? Some-
times it is of no importance, but sometimes it is important. We can investigate this
question in the example of temperature in the statistical physics. Collective prop-
erties of temperature are of no importance, provided we deal with the mean values
of it. If we deal with ﬂuctuations of temperature and those of other quantities, the
collective properties of temperature become to be important. In any case, method of
investigation of MCQP appears to be more subtle and eﬀective, than that of ACQP.
In general, MCQP as any model conception possesses more subtle and ﬂexile
methods of investigation. For instance, the change (3.5) carries out essentially the
quantization procedure, i.e. transition from classical description to the quantum
one. Let us imagine that the quantization (3.5) is not exactly true, and one needs

14

to correct it slightly.
In the framework of MCQP one needs only to change the
form of the expression (3.5). It is not clear how such a modiﬁcation can be realized
in the framework of ACQP, because ACQP is connected closely with linearity of
dynamic equations in terms of the wave function. One cannot imagine quantum
mechanics which is nonlinear in terms of wave function, because in this case the
quantum principles are violated.

→

0 with some additional conditions.

Having a long history [1, 2], the hydrodynamic interpretation should rank among
new methods of investigation. But in the framework of ACQP the hydrodynamic
interpretation is secondary as it follows from the above mentioned schemes. In the
framework of MCQP the hydrodynamic interpretation is primary, and possesses
more subtle methods of investigation.
In the framework of ACQP a transition
to semiclassical approximation is carried out by means of transition to the limit
~
In MCQP this transition is realized by
means of dynamic disquantization [31], which is a relativistic dynamic procedure.
At the dynamic disquantization one removes transversal components ∂⊥k = ∂k
−
−1 ∂l of derivative ∂k, which are orthogonal to the ﬂux 4-vector jk. After
jkjl (jsjs)
this transformation the dynamic equations contain derivatives only in direction of
vector jk. Such a system of partial diﬀerential equations can be reduced to a system
of ordinary dynamic equations. As a result of dynamic disquantization the system
of partial diﬀerential equations turns to a system of ordinary diﬀerential equations.
In other words, the statistical ensemble of stochastic systems turns to a statistical
ensemble of dynamic systems. As a result the continuous system can be interpreted
in terms of a discrete dynamic system (with ﬁnite number of the freedom degrees).
In the nonrelativistic case the dynamic disquantization is equivalent to ~
0. In
the relativistic case the quantum constant ~ remains in the discrete dynamic system
[31]. It admits one to obtain a more subtle interpretation.

→

→

This method was applied for investigation of dynamic system

SD, described by
the Dirac equation [31]. It appears that the classical analog of the Dirac particle
SD is
a rotator (but not a single particle), i.e. two particles rotating around their common
center of inertia. This explains freely angular and magnetic momenta of the Dirac
particle. Dynamic variables describing rotation contain the quantum constant ~. If
~
0, degrees of freedom, connected with rotation are suppressed. Radius of rotator
tends to 0, and instead of rotator we obtain pointlike particle with spin and magnetic
moment. This result with ~
0 agrees with the results, obtained in the framework
of ACQP. More soft result of rotator, when ~
= 0, cannot be obtained by methods of
ACQP. These methods are too rough. Besides, it appears (quite unexpectedly) that
SD are described
the internal (rotational) degrees of freedom of the dynamic system
in nonrelativistic manner [31, 30, 32].
SD
was produced without any additional supposition. It was investigated simply as a
dynamic system by means of relativistically covariant methods. These results cannot
be obtained in the framework of conventional quantum mechanics (ACQP).

Investigation of the dynamic system

→

Methods of MCQP are consistent relativistic ones. For description of relativistic
quantum phenomena ACQP uses the program of uniting of nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics technique with the relativity principles. Unfortunately, this program

15

6
failed. At any rate, it works unsuccessfully last ﬁfty years, trying to construct
relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory and theory of elementary particles. It seems that
uniting of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics technique with the relativity principles
is impossible.

As another example of the MCQP methods application, we refer to the problem
of the pair production, which is the central problem in the high energy physics.
ACQP cannot say anything on the pair production mechanism and on the agents,
responsible for this process, whereas MCQP can say something pithy on this prob-
lem. MCQP vests responsibility for the pair production on the κ-ﬁeld (3.7), which
is conditioned by the stochastic component of the particle motion. In MCQP the
pair production is taken into account on the descriptive (before-dynamic) level, i.e.
the pair production is taken in to account by consideration of WL as a primary
physical object, whereas in ACQP the pair production is taken into account only
on the dynamic level, i.e. by means of dynamic equations. In ACQP particles may
be produced not only by pairs. The number of particles produced in an elementary
act may be arbitrary. The number of produced particles depends on the form of
corresponding term in Lagrangian. In MCQP the particles are produced only by
pairs particle - antiparticle. This fact is ﬁxed on the descriptive (conceptual) level,
and cannot be changed on dynamical level (by a choice of Lagrangian). All this
shows that the source of pair production is diﬀerent in MCQP and ACQP.

Let us imagine that the particle world line turns in the time direction. Depending
on situation, such a turn describes either pair production, or pair annihilation. The
κ-ﬁeld creates conditions for such a turn and for the pair production. The fact is
that at such a turn in time the world line direction becomes spacelike (m2 < 0)
in the vicinity of the turning point. If one forbids the world line to be spacelike,
the pair production becomes to be impossible. Such a possibility to change the
particle mass and to make it imaginary is rather rare property among the force
ﬁelds. For instance, the electromagnetic ﬁeld of any magnitude cannot change the
particle mass, and hence, to produce pairs. Pair production is a prerogative of the
κ-ﬁeld. According to relation (3.5) the expression containing κ-ﬁeld enter in the
eﬀective squared mass as a factor. If this expression is negative, the mass becomes
imaginary, and the pair production (annihilation) becomes to be possible [28].

Furthermore, pair production, obtained in ACQP at canonical quantization of
nonlinear relativistic ﬁeld, does not take place in reality. It was shown at canonical
quantization of nonlinear complex scalar ﬁeld [33], described by Lagrangian density

L =: ϕ∗

i ϕi

m2ϕ∗ϕ +

ϕ∗ϕ∗ϕϕ :

−

(4.1)

ϕ = ϕ(x),

ϕi ≡

∂iϕ,

,

∂iϕ,

≡

x = (t, x).

At canonical quantization of (4.1) the W L-scheme of quantization was used, when
the object of quantization is WL, i.e. world line considered as the primary physical
object. In the W L-scheme the canonical quantization is produced without imposi-
tion of additional constraint

λ
2

ϕi

16

[u, P0]− =

i~ ∂u
∂x0 ,
−

E = P 0 =

T 00dx

Z

(4.2)

where [...]− denotes commutator and T ik is the energy-momentum tensor. The con-
dition (4.2) identiﬁes the energy with the evolution operator (Hamiltonian). This
identiﬁcation is possible in the case, when there are only particles, or only antiparti-
cles. It is possible also in the case, when particles and antiparticles are considered as
diﬀerent physical objects (but not as attributes of WL). In W L-scheme of quantiza-
tion the number of primary physical objects (WLs) is conserved, and quantization
is produced exactly (without the perturbation theory methods). In such a quantiza-
tion the pair production is absent, that agrees with demands to the ﬁeld producing
pairs.

But then the question arises. Why does pair production appear at quantiza-
tion according to P A-scheme [34, 35, 36, 37], when particle and antiparticle are
considered as primary objects? The answer is as follows. Canonical quantization
(according to W L-scheme) is possible without imposition of constraint (4.2).
It
means that the constraint (4.2) is an additional condition, and one should to ver-
ify its compatibility with dynamic equations. Unfortunately, nobody had veriﬁed
this, supposing that (4.2) is a necessary condition of the second quantization and
there is no necessity to verify its compatibility with dynamic equations. This test
was produced in [33]. It appears that (4.2) is compatible with dynamic equations,
provided λ = 0, i.e. the ﬁeld is linear. In the nonlinear case λ
= 0 imposition of the
constraint (4.2) leads to overdetermination of the problem. In the overdetermined
(and hence, inconsistent) problem one can obtain practically any results, which one
wishes. So, authors of [34, 35, 36, 37] wanted to obtain pair production, and they
had obtained it.

These examples show that MCQP and its subtle investigation methods can be

useful at investigation of the microcosm phenomena properties.

Thus, MCQP makes the ﬁrst successes, but not in the sense that it explains
some new experiments, which could not be explained before. MCQP uses the more
subtle dynamic methods of investigation (consideration of two objects
,
hSsti
hydrodynamic interpretation of relativistic processes [29, 28], dynamic quantization
and disquantization [31]), which cannot be used by ACQP because of its axiomatic
character. Diﬀerence between the methods of MCQP and ACQP is described by
the following scheme

Sst and

17

6
ACQP
Combination of nonrelativistic
quantum technique with
principles of relativity
1. Additional hypotheses are used
(QM principles)
2. One kind of measurement, as
far as only one statistical average

hSi

is considered. It is
object
referred to as quantum system
3. Quantization: procedure on
the conceptual level:

p

→ −

i~∇ etc.

4. Transition to classical description:
procedure on conceptual level
ψ

(x, p)

~

0

→

→

5. Interpretation in terms of wave
function ψ

MCQP

Consequent relativistic description
at all stages

1. No additional hypotheses are used

2. Two kinds of measurement, because

two kinds of objects (individual

Sst
) are

hSi

and statistical average
considered
3. Dynamic quantization: relativistic
procedure on the dynamic level
κlκl + ∂lκl

eﬀ = m2 + ~2
m2
c2
4. Dynamic disquantization: relativistic
(cid:1)
procedure on dynamic level

m2

→

(cid:0)

∂k

→

jkjl
jsjs ∂l

5. Interpretation in terms of statistical
average world lines (WL)
dxi
dτ = ji (x) ,
i~
∂kψ
2
−

jk =

∂kψ

−

ψ

·

∗

∗

ψ
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

MCQP is essentially more ﬂexible conception, than ACQP, as far as all in MCQP
is determined by the space-time geometry, and the set of all possible geometries is
described by a function of two arguments. This is a great reserve for corrections
and modiﬁcations of MCQP. At the same time all modiﬁcations of MCQP are re-
stricted by a change of the world function, and possible modiﬁcations do not concern
the structure of MCQP, which is founded on several principles, connected logically
between themselves.

On the contrary ACQP is founded on a set of rigid rules, considered as princi-
ples, although there is no logical connection between them. The only foundation for
application of quantum principles is the fact that they explain nonrelativistic quan-
tum phenomena very well. They explain also relativistic quantum phenomena, when
they may be considered as small correction to nonrelativistic phenomena. ACQP
fails in explanation of essentially relativistic quantum phenomena (for instance, pair
production). Possibility of modiﬁcation of ACQP is connected mainly with applica-
tion of additional principles and suppositions, which change the structure of ACQP.
Possibility of dynamical modiﬁcation (consideration of new dynamic systems) is also
take place, but in each special case one needs to use some new ideas. ACQP in itself
does not give foundation for such ideas, and this makes the further development of
ACQP to be diﬃcult.

MCQP admits one to obtain new physical object without any additional suppo-
sitions. It is suﬃcient to remove some constraints, imposed on the world function.
The world function (2.9), determining the microcosm structure is only the ﬁrst rough
approximation. If it is necessary, the expression (2.9) can be modiﬁed in such a way,

18

to take into account inﬂuence of the matter distribution in the space-time (curva-
ture) and existence of new metric ﬁelds, generated by the possible asymmetry of the
world function [38, 39].

Asymmetric world function describes the space-time, where the past and the
future are unequal geometrically. One cannot imagine such a thing in the framework
of Riemannian geometry. Expansion of the symmetric world function σ (x, x′) over
powers of ηi = xi

x′i has the form

−
σ (x, x′) =

1
2

1
6

gik (x′) ηiηk +

σikl (x′) ηiηkηl + ...

(4.3)

where gik (x′) describes the gravitational ﬁeld, and σikl (x′) is expressed via deriva-
tives of metric tensor gik (x′). For asymmetric world function the same expansion
has the form [38, 39]

σ (x, x′) = σi (x′) ηi +

σik (x′) ηiηk +

σikl (x′) ηiηkηl + ...

(4.4)

1
2

1
6

where three coeﬃcients σi (x′), σik (x′) and σikl (x′) are independent, and each of
them is connected with some metric (geometric) ﬁeld. Coeﬃcient σi (x′) describes a
”vector ﬁeld” which is strong and eﬀective at small space-time intervals. Coeﬃcient
σik (x′) describes the second rank tensor ﬁeld (gravitational ﬁeld) which is strong
and eﬀective at middle space-time intervals. Finally, σikl (x′) is connected with the
third rank tensor ﬁeld, which is strong and eﬀective at large space-time intervals.
Maybe, this ﬁeld is connected with astrophysical problem of dark matter, when one
fails to explain observed motion of stars and galaxies by means of only gravitational
ﬁeld.

At construction of MCQP one did not use any new hypotheses. On the contrary,
ﬂexibility and subtlety of MCQP methods are connected with remove of unwarranted
constraints and correction of mistakes in the approach to geometry and to statistical
description. In other words, MCQP satisﬁes the Newton’s criterion: ”Hypothesis
non ﬁngo.” Only choice of true space-time geometry is determined properties of
physical phenomena in microcosm. This choice must be done in any case. But this
choice may be true, or not completely true.

References

(1926).

[1] E. Madelung, Quanten theorie in hydrodynamischer Form. Z.Phys. 40, 322-326,

[2] L. de Broglie, Sur la possibilit´e de relier les ph´enomenes d’interference et de
diﬀraction ´e la th´eorie des quanta de lumiere. Comptes Rendus 183, 447-448,
(1926).

[3] D. Bohm, Phys.Rev. 85, 166, 180, (1952).

[4] T. Takabayasi, Progr. Theor. Phys., 8, 143, (1952).

19

[5] T. Takabayasi, Progr. Theor. Phys., 9, 187, (1953).

[6] L. Janosssy and M.Ziegler, Acta Phys. Hung., 16, 37, (1963).

[7] L. Janosssy and M.Ziegler, Acta Phys. Hung., 16, 345, (1964).

[8] M. Husar and M. Ziegler-Naray, Acta Phys. Acad. Scien. Hung., 26, 223, (1969).

[9] F.J. Belinfante, A Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories, (Pergamon, Oxford,

1973) and references therein.

[10] D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Phys. Rep. 172 (1989) 93 and references therein.

[11] P. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion, (Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1993) and references therein.

[12] Yu.A. Rylov, The equation for isentropic motion of inviscid ﬂuid in terms of

wave function J. Math. Phys. 30, 2516-2520, (1989).

[13] Yu. A. Rylov, Spin and wave function as attributes of ideal ﬂuid, J. Math. Phys.

[14] Yu. A. Rylov, Pauli’s electron as a dynamic system Found. Phys. 25, No.7.1055-

40, 256-278, (1999).

1086, (1995).

[15] Yu. A. Rylov, Hamilton variational principle for statistical ensemble of deter-
ministic systems and its application for ensemble of stochastic systems. Rus. J.
Math. Phys., 9, iss. 3, 335-348, (2002), e-print: math-ph/0011017.

[16] Yu.A. Rylov, On a possibility of the Riemannian space description in terms of a
ﬁnite interval. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnych Zavedenii, Matematika. No.3(28),
131-142, (1962), (in Russian).

[17] Yu. A. Rylov, Extremal properties of Synge’s world function and discrete ge-

ometry. J. Math. Phys. 31, 2876-2890, (1990).

[18] Yu.A.Rylov, Quantum Mechanics as a theory of relativistic Brownian motion.

Ann. Phys. (Leipzig). 27, 1-11, (1971).

[19] Yu.A. Rylov, On quantization of non-linear relativistic ﬁeld without recourse

to perturbation theory. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 6, 181-204, (1972).

[20] Yu.A. Rylov, Quantum mechanics as relativistic statistics.I: The two-particle

case. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 8, 65-83, (1973).

[21] Yu.A. Rylov, Quantum mechanics as relativistic statistics.II: The case of two

interacting particles. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 8, 123-139, (1973)

[22] Yu. A. Rylov, Non-Riemannian model of space-time responsible for quantum

eﬀects. J. Math. Phys. 32, 2092-2098, (1991).

20

[23] F. Klein, Vorlesungen ¨uber die Entwicklung die Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert

teil 1, Berlin, Springer 1926.

[24] J. L. Synge, Relativity: The General Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1960.

[25] Yu. A. Rylov, Problem of parallelism in geometry and physics. e-print

math.GM/0210413.

[26] Yu. A. Rylov, Geometry without topology as a new conception of geometry. Int.

Jour. Mat. Mat. Sci. 30, iss. 12, 733-760, (2002), e-print math.MG/0103002.

[27] Yu. A. Rylov, Dynamics of stochastic systems and peculiarities of measurements

in them. E-print physics/0210003.

[28] Yu. A. Rylov, Classical description of pair production. e-print physics/0301020.

[29] Yu. A. Rylov, Quantum mechanics as a dynamic construction. Found. Phys.

28, No.2, 245-271, (1998).

[30] Yu. A. Rylov, Dirac equation in terms of hydrodynamic variables, Advances

Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras 5, No. 1, 1-40.

[31] Yu. A. Rylov, Dynamic disquantization of Dirac equation, eprint quant-

ph/0104060.

[32] Yu. A. Rylov, Anderson’s absolute objects and constant timelike vector hidden

in Dirac matrices. e-print quant-ph/0112091.

[33] Yu.A. Rylov, Pair production problem and canonical quantization of nonlinear

scalar ﬁeld in terms of world lines. e-print hep-th/0106169.

[34] J. Glimm and A. Jaﬀe, Phys. Rev. 176 (1968) 1945.

[35] J. Glimm and A. Jaﬀe, Ann. Math. 91 (1970) 362.

[36] J. Glimm and A. Jaﬀe, Acta Math. 125 (1970) 203.

[37] J. Glimm and A. Jaﬀe, J. Math. Phys. 13 (1972) 1568.

[38] Yu. A. Rylov, The Euclidean geometry deformations and capacities of their
application to microcosm space-time geometry. e-print physics/0206017.

[39] Yu. A. Rylov, Asymmetric nondegenerate geometry. e-print math.MG/0205061.

21

