3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A thought experiment on
consciousness

Germano D’Abramo
Istituto di Astroﬁsica Spaziale e Fisica Cosmica,

Area di Ricerca CNR Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy

E–mail: dabramo@rm.iasf.cnr.it

First draft: August 2003

Abstract

The Mind–Body Problem, which constitutes the starting point for
a large part of the speculations about consciousness and conscious
experience, can be re-stated in an equivalent way, using the ‘brain
duplication’ argument described in this paper. If we assume that con-
sciousness follows from a peculiar organization of physical matter and
energy, namely that it does not transcend physical reality, then the
brain duplication argument gives a possible interesting physical char-
acterization of the mind: namely, a sort of extensive interdependence
of the brain with the whole surrounding physical world in giving rise
to consciousness.

To the memory of my grandfather Giulio-Fiore.

1 Introduction

One of the most fundamental problem in conscious experiences and con-
sciousness is the following: if I am able to completely describe the physical
state1 of my brain, may I safely say to have completely described my mental

1Conceding that all the physics necessary to such description is already known.

1

state, my subjective experience too? The point is that my subjective expe-
riences, like for example those of pain, joy or smell (generally referred to as
qualia), seem not to get exhausted in a physical-functional description of my
cerebral states, even in the most complete description we are able to imagine
to. Actually, the description of the physical processes which take place in
my brain, when I experience pain for example, seem not to be a complete
description of my subjective experience of pain. Rather, at the most they
seem to be only a complete description of the cerebral states of my brain
during my pain experience.

In other words, it seems that a barrier, impassable to every physical the-
ory, forbids any complete objective description of subjective experience, or,
at least, every complete objective description of a subjective experience sim-
ply does not include the subjective experience itself. Namely, the objective
description and the subjective experience seem to belong to diﬀerent and
‘orthogonal’ dimensions, the outside and the inside.

What I have described above brieﬂy summarizes the well-known Mind–
Body Problem, the main ingredient of the philosophical investigations of the
mind and a thorn in the side of physicalism, namely of those who believe in
a complete reduction of consciousness to peculiar physical processes of the
brain (for an accessible and exhaustive review of the Mind–Body Problem
see, for example, Nagel [1] and Chalmers [2]).

In this paper I provide an equivalent formulation of the Mind–Body Prob-
lem, which I will call the ‘brain duplication’ argument, and I will show that
if we assume that consciousness is in any case a physical process which takes
place in the physical world, in the most general sense of these terms, namely
that it does not transcend physical reality, then the human brain, in giving
rise to the mind, might be characterized by the astonishing property of an
extensive interdependence with the whole surrounding physical world.

2 The ‘brain duplication’ argument

For the sake of thought experiment, let us suppose that we manage to create
an exact, physically identical, duplicate of my brain, as it is in this precise
moment. Actually, it does not matter whether we do not known operatively
how to do it. The point is that since at least a brain exists physically, then
nothing forbids us to imagine an identical physical duplicate of it, as well as
nothing forbids us to imagine an identical physical duplicate, atom by atom,

2

of the sheet of paper on which these words are written, just for the fact that
such sheet of paper exists, even if probably we will never be able to do the
actual duplicate.

Now, just after the creation of this duplicate, how would my own con-
sciousness react? As everyone of you can experience directly, one of the
leading characteristics of consciousness is the perception of its own unique-
ness, the uniqueness of oneself and of its own conscious experience, and, in
addition, the perception of the persistence of such uniqueness (I feel to be
myself also in diﬀerent periods and diﬀerent places). Therefore, if I was able
to exactly duplicate my brain, would my own consciousness change? And if
it changes, how does it change? Would I feel to be here, where I was before
the duplication, but at the same time would I feel to be there, where my
brain duplicate is now?

I believe that the most natural answer for everyone is that I will continue
to be myself as I was before the duplication. But then, who or what is
my exact physical duplicate? If the two brains are physically identical and
their consciousnesses are diﬀerent, in what do they diﬀer? Here two possible
approaches to the problem are presented.

2.1 Non-physical explanation

Consciousness is not physically reproducible in the reality. Namely it does
not depend on physical reality and it is in some sense ‘outside’ it: thus,
distinct conscious experiences and consciousnesses may even be attached to
two physically identical brains, or only one of these brains may be conscious
(and the other one may not; the duplicate brain, for example, might be a
so-called zombie). If it is so, there is not much to do; as a matter of fact,
consciousness would constitute a prime and alien property, to be added to
the rest of the physical properties of the brain.

However, such hypothesis seems to be scientiﬁcally frustrating and, after
all, not particularly reasonable.
I guess that not many researchers would
honestly feel up to deny any link between consciousness and the physical
world (even if such link is not completely clear from a scientiﬁc point of
view).

Moreover, even if we assume that the existence of the brain is a necessary
but not suﬃcient condition to the presence of consciousness, the latter must
necessarily have a physical interaction with the brain (otherwise it would not
even make sense to talk about brain as necessary condition, without speaking

3

about the substantial amount of data achieved nowadays in the neurosciences
on the neural correlates of consciousness) and therefore consciousness must be
a physically characterizable, a physically tractable agent. Such physical agent
might be completely internal or external (partially or totally) to the brain.
In the ﬁrst case we just would have that the exact physical reproduction
of one’s brain would give tout court the consciousness of that person (and
hence, the brain duplication dilemma). If, on the contrary, this agent was
external, it might be one and unique, or there might be many, one of them
corresponding to each consciousness currently existing in the world. Yet,
this further distinction is not important in our case: plausibly, two physically
identical brains would always interact in the same way with the same external
physical agent (like two equally tuned radio receivers ‘interact’ always with
the same radio station, although there are a lot of diﬀerent radio frequencies
in the air), and again the brain duplication dilemma would be left untouched.
However, I believe that now this dilemma is ready to be faced with the
possible physical explanation described in the next section.

If you are willing to know more about the issue of the relation between
brain and consciousness, you can see Chalmers [3] who provides, through a
series of simple thought experiments, an interesting support in favor of the
thesis that conscious experiences depend on a peculiar functional organiza-
tion of the physical constituents of the brain and that every physical system
(every physical substrate) which reproduces such functional organization will
have the same conscious experiences. Chalmers named this thesis the prin-
ciple of organizational invariance.

2.2 A possible physical explanation

Let us suppose instead that consciousness depends on physical reality, namely
on the peculiar organization of physical matter and energy, in the most gen-
eral sense of these terms, and also let us do not exclude the possibility,
suggested in the previous section, that consciousness originates not only in
the physics of the brain but also through the interaction with an external
physical agent.

A possible explanation of the seemingly paradoxical picture originated
in the brain duplication argument is that (the evolution of) the cerebral
processes involved in the rise of consciousness might physically depend not
only on the physics of the brain itself but actually also on all the things
which physically surround such brain, in the sense that it depends on the

4

Figure 1: A na¨ıve sketch of the argument described in the text.

organization of all the surrounding physical matter and energy. Thus, the
brain might be far from being a semi-closed box, opened only to the ﬁve
senses, and the common perception that our brain does not continuously
interact at a deeper physical level with the rest of the physical world might
be simply wrong2.

In such framework, the physically exact copy of my brain, which is in the
region of the space B(xc, yc, zc, tc), interacts with all the surrounding phys-
ical world, and thus also with my original brain which is in the region of
space B(xo, yo, zo, to) (with to 6= tc, if the brain duplication is not instan-
taneous). Similarly, my own original brain, which is in the region of space
B(xo, yo, zo, to), interacts with all the surrounding physical world, and thus
also with the physically exact copy of my brain, which is in B(xc, yc, zc, tc).
Therefore, it is clear (see ﬁg. 1) that the boundary conditions for the two
identical brains are not identical, and the evolution of cerebral states, as
well as consciousness, might not be identical (although the memory of all
the past experiences might be the same in every details for both brains). A
similar conclusion on the possibility of an extensive physical interdependence
of the human brain with the whole surrounding physical world in giving rise
to the mind has been drawn in another thought experiment (D’Abramo [4])
but through a diﬀerent approach, which included the notion of algorithmic
2As a loose analogy, if the physical reality was the water of a sea, our brain would not

be like a submarine guided by sonar, rather it would be more like a soaked sponge.

5

complexity.

So far, we have never made mention to how consciousness rises, or to which
are the speciﬁc physical ‘mechanisms’ at the basis of consciousness, but this
was not the topic of our paper, other than being a very complicated and long-
standing issue (irresolvable at the moment, I think). On the contrary, we have
proposed an interesting physical characterization of consciousness and mind:
the uniqueness of conscious experience and consciousness might depend also
on the whole surrounding physical world (in the sense of the organization of
such physical matter and energy) and therefore, if this was the case, it would
be very strange if the rise itself of consciousness and mind did not depend on
the extensive interaction of the brain with whole surrounding physical world.
We believe that talking about the necessary physical mechanisms respon-
sible for the suggested extensive interaction, and actually talking about the
detailed physical dynamics and evolution of such interaction, is premature
at the moment. It might be said (and it was actually said already) that the
human brain may be assimilated to a complex dynamical system, extremely
sensitive to all the surrounding physical conditions (in such case we should
mention the so-called deterministic chaos; see for example Newman [5]), or
that quantum mechanics may be deeply involved (many people have proposed
various quantum mechanisms to explain consciousness, so to compile a com-
plete list of references on this topic is hopeless; see for example Bohm [6] and
references therein), or, most probably, that a new kind of physics is needed.
However, although such aspect of the problem is obviously essential in the
study of the origin of consciousness, it is secondary in this context.

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank Alessandro Silvestrini for having brought to my attention the
‘brain duplication’ argument, during a conversation around a coﬀee table. By
the way, the name of the Caf`e was ‘Mir´o’, thus for the sake of joke, I suggest
to call the argument of this paper ‘the Mir´o hypothesis’.

References

[1] Nagel, T., 1987. What Does It All Mean? A Very Short Introduction to

Philosophy. Oxford University Press.

6

[2] Chalmers, D.J., (December 1995). The Puzzle of Conscious Experience.

Scientiﬁc American, pp 62–68.

[3] Chalmers, D.J., 1995. Absent Qualia, Fading Qualia, Dancing Qualia.
Published in Conscious Experience, edited by Thomas Metzinger. Im-
print Academic.

[4] Germano D’Abramo, 2002. Odd thoughts on algorithmic complexity,

http://arxiv.org/abs/math.HO/0211222. [See in particular the second
section]

[5] Newman, D.V., 1997. Chaos, Emergence, and the Mind–Body Problem.

Australian Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 180–196.

[6] Bohm, D., 1990. A new theory of the relationship of mind and matter.

Philosophical Psychology, Vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 271–286.

7

