3
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
1
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Fuzzy Space Time Paradigm

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute of Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarshnagar, Hyderabad - 500 063, India

Abstract

We brieﬂy review theories of fuzzy spacetime or with a spacetime
cut oﬀ, particularising on the author’s own model which correctloy
predicted the present cosmological model of an accelerating universe
and dark energy, and which points to a uniﬁcation of electromagnetism
and gravitation and which has several ramiﬁcations including the pre-
diction of deviations from Special Relativity at Ultra High Energies,
as observations of Ultra High Energy Cosmic Rays seem to conﬁrm,
amongst other issues.

1 Introduction

It is well known that Quantum Theory and General Relativity have been
called the twin pillars of Physics of the twentieth Century. On the one hand,
while each in its own right explained aspects of the universe to a certain
extent, there are still many unanswered questions. For example space-time
singularities, termed by John Wheeler as the Greatest Crisis of Physics, some
eighteen arbitrary parameters in the standard model, elusive monopoles,
gravitational waves and dark matter and so on.
On the other hand, both these ﬁelds have resisted a uniﬁed description, in-
spite of several decades of eﬀort. Such a uniﬁed description has rightly been
called the Holy Grail of Physics, but appears to be a distant goal even today.
After fruitless decades, it would be reasonable to explore alternative ap-
proaches. Such a revolution is under way.
It must be observed that, be
it Quantum Field Theory and the standard model or General Relativity,

1

the space time used is a diﬀerentiable manifold-this is the common platform
on which the two irreconcible pillars stand. Perhaps this is an approxima-
tion? Infact Mandelbroit’s work on Fractals has clearly brought out that the
smooth curves of Classical Mathematics are to be replaced in real life, by
fractal structures, previously dismissed as pathological cases.
Indeed a few current approaches, already share this philosophy. For exam-
ple, Quantum Gravity and Quantum SuperString Theory. Here, there is
a minimum space-time interval, the Planck scale, which breaks the point
space-time of diﬀerentiable manifolds. However both these new approaches,
though promising, operate at energy scales, which are beyond present day
veriﬁcation. For this and other reasons, a few other approaches are being con-
sidered, which rely on an underlying non-commutative geometrical structure
of space-time, as do the above two approaches. For example the approach of
Connes, Madore and others using the apparatus of non-commutative geom-
etry.
We on the other hand consider a similar approach, but this is a more physical
model. For example the Kerr-Newman Black Hole of Classical Physics and
General Relativity describes the electron’s purely Quantum Mechanical g=2
factor. But the price one has to pay is the naked singularity, or equivalently,
the complex space coordinate. Curiously enough, the space coordinate of the
Dirac electron has precisely the same non Hermitian or complex coordinate.
In Quantum Theory, this is due to zitterbewegung eﬀects, which are elimi-
nated, as Dirac pointed out, by averaging out the Compton scale: Space-time
points have no physical meaning. Compton scale intervals, complex coordi-
nates, spin and non-commutative geometry, are all symptomatic or indicative
of the underlying fuzzy spacetime. It must be stressed that the spacetime of
Classical Physics was either Galilean in which space and time were distinct
(as brought out by the absolute status enjoyed by the concept of simultane-
ity) or Lorentzian which was a modiﬁcation of Galilean spacetime with the
introduction of the physical postulates of Special Relativity, or ﬁnally it was
Reimannian as in General Relativity. Quantum Field Theory also rests on
Lorentzian spacetime. In all these cases, the concept is Newtonian, in that
spacetime was a container or stage within which the actors of matter, energy
and interactions played their parts, even modifying the stage. However, the
new concept of spacetime is Liebnitzian, in that, the actors create or deﬁne
the stage itself. It is now possible to circumvent space-time singularities and
even divergences.

2

This approach gives rise to a Cosmology, which correctly predicted an ever
expanding and accelerating universe, as also dark energy at the expense of
dark matter. This also paves the way for reconciliation between General
Relativity and Quantum Theory. One way to understand this is to recall
Wheeler’s analysis of the divide-the absence of spin half in General Relativ-
ity and curvature in Quantum Theory. Both these are achieved and a Weyl
like theory results. These ideas are in harmony with recent observations,
which indicate a neutrino mass and time varying ”constants” of Physics.
The laws of the universe are ”thermodynamic”, rather than rigid and iron
cast.

2 Further Considerations

To see all this in greater detail, we observed that if we treat an electron as
a Kerr-Newman Black Hole, then even though we get the correct Quantum
Mechanical g = 2 factor, the horizon of the Black Hole becomes complex
[1, 2].

G2M 2
GM
c2 + ıb, b
c4
L/Mc, L being the
G being the gravitational constant, M the mass and a
angular momentum. While (1) exhibits a naked singularity, and as such has
no physical meaning, the position coordinate for a Dirac particle is given by

G2Q2
c8 + a2

r+ =

)1/2

(1)

−

≡

≡

(

x = (c2p1H

−1t) +

c¯h(α1

cp1H

−1)H

−1

ı
2

−

(2)

an expression that is very similar to (1). Infact the imaginary parts of both
(1) and (2) are the same, being of the order of the Compton wavelength.
It is at this stage that a proper physical interpretation begins to emerge.
Dirac himself observed that to interpret (2) meaningfully, it must be remem-
bered that Quantum Mechanical measurements are really averaged over the
Compton scale: Within the scale there are the unphysical zitterbewegung
eﬀects.
Once such a minimum space time scale is invoked, then we have a non com-
mutative geometry as shown by Snyder some ﬁfty years ago:

[x, y] = (ıa2/¯h)Lz, [t, x] = (ıa2/¯hc)Mx, etc.

3

[x, px] = ı¯h[1 + (a/¯h)2p2
x];

(3)

The relations (3) are compatible with Special Relativity. Indeed such mini-
mum space time models were studied for several decades, precisely to over-
come the divergences encountered in Quantum Field Theory.
Before proceeding further, it may be remarked that when the square of the
Compton wavelength can be neglected, then we return to point Quantum
Theory.
It is interesting that starting from the Dirac coordinate in (2), we can deduce
the non commutative geometry (3), independently. This is because when we
generalise the complex coordinate (2) to three dimensions, then (ı, 1 goes
over to ~σ, I), where σs are the Pauli matrices. We at once deduce spin and
Special Relativity and the geometry (3). This is a transition that has been
long overlooked [3]. Conversely it must be mentioned that spin half itself is
relational and refers to three dimensions.
Equally interesting is the fact that starting from the geometry (3) we can
deduce the Dirac equation itself. Infact if we consider a time shift transfor-
mation of the wave function

ψ′ >= U(R)

ψ >

|

|

we get,

ψ′(xj) = [1 + ıǫ(ıxj

) + 0(ǫ2)]ψ(xj)

∂
∂xj

on using the Lorentz covaraint relations (3), which has been shown to lead
to the Dirac equation, ǫ being the Compton time [1].
We started with the Kerr-Newman Black Hole. Infact the derivation of the
Kerr-Newman Black Hole itselof begins with a complex shift, which Newman
has found inexplicable even after several decades [4]. The unanswered ques-
tion has been, why does a complex shift somehow represent spin about that
axis? The answer to this question lies in the above considerations. Complex-
iﬁed space time is symptomatic of fuzzy space time and a non commutative
geometry and Quantum Mechanical spin [5]. Indeed Zakrzewsky has shown
in a classical context that non commutativity implies spin.

4

3 The Compton wavelength and Phase Tran-

sition Consideration

In earlier work, it was shown how one could consider elementary particles as
forming out of a background Zero Point Field echoing the ideas of Einstein
that particles were condensates of an electromagnetic ﬁeld [6]. The starting
point was a Schrodinger like equation, allowing non local amplitudes within
the Compton wavelength:

ı¯h

∂ψ
∂t

= −

¯h2
2m′

∂2ψ
∂x2 +

Z

∗

′
(x

′
)ψ(x)ψ(x

′
)U(x

′
)dx

,

ψ

(4)

The integralk in (4) is over a Compton wavelength outside which the function
U vanishes, this function being introduced merely for convenience. (4) then
becomes identical to the Landau-Ginzburg equation,

¯h2
2m ∇

−

2ψ + β

ψ

2ψ =

|

|

αψ

−

(5)

The coherence length of the Landau-Ginzburg-Schrodinger equation (5) turns
out to be precisely the Compton wavelength [7]. In other words the elemen-
tary particles are created in a phase transition type of a phenomena, resem-
bling inﬂationary scenarios. One could equivalently look upon the creation of
particles in a ﬂuid mechanics context as the formation of Benard cells [8]. In
this case we could compare the Schrodinger equation with the Navier-Stokes
equation and the Compton wavelength condition becomes identical to the
critical value of the Quantized vortex length.
It must be mentioned that in the above considerations, there is a ZPF dom-
inated pre space time which is similar to the uniform ﬂuid near the critical
point. This is pre space time because, the total homogeneity does not allow
a meaningful deﬁnition of coordinates or a metric. It is only at the critical
point when Benard cells or elementary particles are formed that space time
becomes meaningful in a relational sense (Cf. also [9]).

5

4 The Uniﬁcation of Gravitation and Elec-

tromagnetism

The identiﬁcation of the Kerr-Newman Black Hole of classical physics with
the Quantum Mechanical electron already points to a uniﬁed description of
gravitation and electromagnetism. This can be seen directly from the non
commutative geometry [10]. Indeed let us start with the expression for the
metric

ds2 = gµνdxµdxν
Rewriting the product of the two coordinate diﬀerentials in (6) in terms of
the symmetric and non symmetric combinations, we get for the right side
1
2gµν[(dxµdxν + dxνdxµ) + (dxµdxν

dxνdxµ)], so that, we can write

(6)

−

gµν = ηµν + khµν

(7)

→

where the ﬁrst term on the right side of (7) denotes the usual ﬂat space time
and the second term denotes the eﬀect of the non commutativity, k being a
suitable constant.
It must be noted that if l, τ
0 then equation (7) reduce to the usual for-
mulation. From a physical point of view, if we are dealing with time and
length scales much greater than the Compton wavelength, so that the order
0(l2) terms can be neglected, then the usual commutative geometry works,
with the usual derivates and more generally diﬀerential geometry. In that
sense, and at such scales we can attribute the same meaning to coordinate
diﬀerentials like dxµ. However this formulation breaks down at and inside
the scale (l, τ ). In what follows, in order to see the eﬀect of the non commu-
tative geometry, we will consider scales, near the minimum (l, τ ) scale, and
continue to use the concept of derivatives and diﬀerentials, incorporating the
eﬀects of departure from the commutative geometry.
The eﬀect of the non commutative geometry is therefore to introduce a de-
Indeed, as is well
parture from ﬂat space time, as can be seen from (7).
known (Cf.ref.[11]), this is exactly as in the case of General Relativity and
the second term on the right of (7) playing the role of the usual energy mo-
mentum tensor. However it must be borne in mind that we are now dealing
with elementary particles. For an elementary particle, the material density
vanishes outside its Compton wavelength and therefore also the minimum
scale. On the other hand it shold be borne in mind that at and near the

6

minimum scale itself we have the departure from the usual commutative ge-
ometry, as can be seen.
Infact remembering that the second term of the right side of (7) is small, this
can straightaway be seen to lead to a linearized theory of General Relativity
[11]. Exactly as in this reference we could now decue the General Relativistic
relation

(∂λ∂νhµλ + ∂λ∂µhνλ)

∂λ∂λhµν
ηµν∂λ∂λh + ηµν∂λ∂σhλσ =

−

k ¯T µν

−

−

It must be mentioned that the energy momentum type term on the right side
of (8) arises due to the fact that the derivatives ∂λ and ∂µ no longer commute
and this leads to an additional contribution as can be veriﬁed from the left
side of (8). To show this special origin of the right side term, we have used
¯T instead of the usual T . More explicitely, it follows from the foregoing that
(Cf.ref.[12])

∂
∂xλ

∂
∂xµ −

∂
∂xλ goes over to
Normally in conventional theory the right side of (9) would vanish. Let us
designate this nonvanishing part on the right by

∂
∂xµ Γν

∂
∂xλ Γν

∂
∂xµ

µν −

(9)

λν

We have shown here that the non commutativity in momentum components
leads to an eﬀect that can be identiﬁed with electromagnetism and infact
from expression (10) we have

where Aµ can be identiﬁed with the electromagnetic four potential (Cf.also
ref.[12]). To see this in the light of the usual guage invariant minimum
coupling (Cf.ref.[1]), we start with the eﬀect of an inﬁnitessimal parallel
displacement of a vector in this non commutative geometry,

As is well known, (12) represents the eﬀect due to the curvature and non
integrable nature of space - in a ﬂat space, the right side would vanish.

e
c¯h

F µλ

Aµ = ¯hΓµν
ν

δaσ =

Γσ
µνaµdxν

−

7

(8)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Considering the partial derivates with respect to the µth coordinate, this
would mean that, due to (12)

The second term on the right side can be written as:

where we have utilised equation (7). That is we have

∂aσ
∂xµ →

∂aσ
∂xµ −

µνaν
Γσ

µνgν
Γλ

λaσ =

µνaσ
Γν

−

−

∂
∂xµ →

∂
∂xµ −

Γν
µν

Comparison with (11) establishes the required identiﬁcation.
It is quite remarkable that equation (11) is mathematically identical to Weyl’s
uniﬁed formulation, though this was not originally acceptable because of the
adhoc insertion of the electromagnetic potential. Here in our case it is a
consequence of the non commutative geometry (Cf.refs.[1] and [12] for a
detailed discussion).
We can see this in greater detail as follows. The gravitational ﬁeld equations
can be written as [11]

where

It also follows, if we use the usual guage and equation (11) that

Dφµν =

k ¯T µν

−

−

1
2

φµν = hµν

ηµνh

∂µhµν = Aν

(13)

(14)

(15)

in this linearised theory.
Whence, remembering that we have (7), operating on both sides of equation
(13) with ∂µ we get Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism.
This is not surprising because as is well known if equation (11) holds as in
the Weyl formulation, then in the absence of matter the general relativistic
ﬁeld equations (8) reduce to Maxwell equations [13]. In any case, all this
provides a rationale for the fact that from (13) we get the equation for spin
2 gravitons (Cf.ref.[11]) while from the Maxwell equations, we have Spin 1
(vector) photons.

8

5 Cosmology

Based on the above model of fuzzy space time, we can deduce a cosmology,
which infact correctly predicted against the tide an accelerating ever expand-
ing universe. We use the fact that the Compton scale l, τ deﬁne minimum
space time intervals as also the fact that particles are created out of the Zero
Infact in such
Point Field or background Quantum Vaccum as discussed.
ﬂuctuations, as is well known, given N particles √N particles are ﬂuctua-
tionally crated [14, 7]. We consider as in the literature the pion to be a typical
elementary particle, there being, as is well known 1080 such particlesin the
universe.
In the following we will use N as the sole cosmological parameter.
Equating the gravitational potential energy of the pion in a three dimensional
isotropic sphere of pions of radius R, the radius of the universe, with the rest
energy of the pion, we can deduce the well known relation [15, 16]

R

GM
c2
where M can be obtained from the above.
We now use the fact that given N particles, the ﬂuctuation in the particle
number is of the order √N [16, 17, 6, 14, 18, 19] while a typical time interval
h/mc2, the Compton time. We will come back to
for the ﬂuctuations is
this point later. So we have

(16)

∼

≈

whence on integration we get,

¯h
mc2
We can easily verify that equation (17) is indeed satisﬁed where T is the age
of the universe. Next by diﬀerentiating (16) with respect to t we get

√N

T =

(17)

where H in (18) can be identiﬁed with the Hubble Constant, and using (16)
is given by,

(18)

(19)

dN
dt

=

√N
τ

dR
dt ≈

HR

H =

Gm3c
¯h2

9

Equation (16) and (17) show that that in this formulation, the correct mass,
radius and age of the universe can be deduced given N as the sole cosmolog-
ical or large scale parameter Equation (19) can be written as

1
2

H¯h2
Gc !

m

≈  

(20)

Equation (20) has been empirically known as an “accidental” or “mysterious”
relation. As observed by Weinberg [20], this is unexplained: it relates a single
cosmological parameter H to constants from microphysics. We will touch
upon this micro-macro nexus again. In our formulation, equation (20) is no
longer a mysterious coincidence but rather a consequence.
As (19) and (18) are not exact equations but rather, order of magnitude
is allowed such that
relations, it follows that a small cosmological constant

∧

0(H 2)

∧ ≤

is very very small -
This is consistent with observatioins and shows that
this has been a puzzle, the so called cosmological constant problem [21]. But
it is explained here.
√N (due to the
To proceed we observe that because of the ﬂuctuation of
ZPF), there is an excess electrical potential energy of the electron, which
infact we have identiﬁed as its inertial energy. That is [14, 16],

∼

∧

√N ǫ2/R

mc2

≈
On using (16) in the above, we recover the well known Gravitation-electromagnetism
ratio viz.,

or without using (16), we get, instead, the well known so called Eddington
formula,

Infact (22) is the spatial counterpart of (17). If we combine (22) and (16),
we get,

(21)

(22)

(23)

e2/Gm2

√N

1040

∼

≈

R = √Nl

1

Gm
lc2 =

√N ∝

−1

T

10

where in (23), we have used (17). Following Dirac (cf. also [22] we get G
as the variable, rather than the quantities m, l, c and ¯h (which we will call
microphysical constants) because of their central role in atomic (and sub
atomic) physics.
Next if we use G from (23) in (19), we can see that

Thus apart from the fact that H has the same inverse time dependance on
T as G, (24) shows that given the microphysical constants, and N, we can
deduce the Hubble Constant also as from (24) or (19).
Using (16), we can now deduce that

Next (22) and (17) give,

(25) and (26) are consistent with observation.
Finally, we observe that using M, GandH from the above, we get

The relation (27) is required in the Friedman model of the expanding uni-
verse (and the Steady State model also).
The above model predicts an ever expanding and possibly accelerating uni-
verse whose density keeps decreasing. This seemed to go against the accepted
idea that the density of the universe equalled the critical density required for
closure.

6 Issues and Ramiﬁcations

i) The above cosmology exhibits a time variation of the gravitational constant
of the form

H =

c
l

1
√N

ρ

≈

m
l3

1
√N

R = cT

M =

c3
GH

G =

β
T

11

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

Indeed this is true in a few other schemes also, including Dirac’s cosmology
(Cf.
[23, 24, 1]). Interestingly it can be shown that such a time variation
can explain the precession of the perihelion of Mercury (Cf.[25]). It can also
provide an alternative explanation for dark matter and the bending of light
while the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation is also explained (Cf.[1]).
It is also possible to deduce the existence of gravitational waves given (28).
To see this quickly let us consider the Poisson equation for the metric gµν

2gµν = Gρuµuν

(29)

∇
The solution of (29) is given by

gµν = G

ρuµuν
~r′
~r
|
Indeed equations similar to (29) and (30) hold for the Newtonian gravita-
tional potential also. If we use the second time derivative of G from (28)
in (30), along with (29), we can immediately obtain the D’alembertian wave
equation for gravitational waves, instead of the Poisson equation:

(30)

d3~r

−

Z

|

Dgµν ≈
ii) Recently a small variation with time of the ﬁne structure constant has been
detected and reconﬁrmed by Webb and coworkers [26, 27]. This observation
is consistent with the above cosmology. We can see this as follows. We use
an equation due to Kuhne [28]

0

If we now use the fact that the cosmological constant

is given by

∧

as can be seen from (18), in (31), we get using (32),

10−2.
where β <
Equation (33) can be shown to be the same as

αz <

−

−

˙αz
αz

= αz

˙Hz
Hz

,

0(H 2)

∧ ≤

˙αz
αz

= βHz

˙αz
1
αz ≈ −

×

10−5Hz,

12

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

which is the same as Webb’s result.
We give another derivation of (34) in the above context wherein, as the num-
ber of particles in the universe increases with time, we go from the Planck
scale to the Compton scale.
This can be seen as follows: In equation (21), if the number of particles in
the universe, N = 1, then the mass m would be the Planck mass. In this
case the classical Schwarzschild radius of the Planck mass would equal its
Quantum Mechanical Compton wavelength. To put it another way, all the
energy would be gravitational (Cf.[1] for details). However as the number of
particles N increases with time, according to (17), gravitation and electro-
magnetism get diﬀerentiated and we get (21) and the Compton scale.
It is known that the Compton length, due to zitterbewegung causes a cor-
rection to the electrostatic potential which an orbiting electron experiences,
rather like the Darwin term [29].
Infact we have

V (~r + δ~r)

δV

h

=

δr

h

=

i
∂V
∂r

h

+

1
2

i −

δr, δrj

i

V
(~r)
h
∂2V
∂rı∂rj i

Xıj
0(1)δr2

≈

2V

(35)
∇
10−8cm, from (35) it follows that if

∆α
α ∼

10−5

(36)

Remembering that V = e2/r where r
l, the Compton wavelength then
δr

∼

∼

where ∆α is the change in the ﬁne structure constant from the early universe.
(36) is an equivalent form of (34) (Cf.ref.[28]), and is the result originally
obtained by Webb et al (Cf.refs.[26, 27]).
iii) The latest observations of distaant supernovae referred to above indicate
that the closure parameter Ω
Remembering that Ω is given by [11]

≤

1.

we get therefrom on using

Ω =

8πG
3H 2 ρ

H 2
2G

R3 = mN

13

which immediately leads to the mysterious Weinberg formula (20). Thus this
is the balance between the cosmos at large and the micro cosmos.
iv) In General Relativity as well as in the Newtonian Theory, we have, with-
out a cosmological constant

We remember that there is an uncertainity in time to the extent of the
Compton time τ , and also if we now use the fact that G varies with time,
37) becomes on using (28),

¨R =

4
3

−

πGρR

¨R =

4
3

−

πG(t

τ )ρR

−

=

4
3

−

πGρR +

πρR

4
3

τ
t (cid:19)

(cid:18)

G

Remembering that at any point of time, the age of the universe, that is t
itself is given by (17), we can see from (38) that this eﬀect of time variation
of G; which again is due to the background Zero Point Field is the same as
an additional density, the vacuum density given by

This term in (38) is also equivalent to the presence of a cosmological constant
as discussed above. On the other hand, we know independently that the
∧
presence of a vacuum ﬁeld leads to a cosmological constant given by (Cf.ref.[1]
and references therein)

Equation (40) is pleasingly in agreement with (38) and (39) that is, to the
density of the ﬂuctautionally created particles in the vacuum. In other words
quantitatively we have reconﬁrmed that it is the background Zero Point Field
that manifests itself as the cosmological constant described. This also gives
as pointed out an explanation for the so called cosmological constant problem
[21] viz., why is the cosmological constant so small?
v) In the above cosmology of ﬂuctuations, our starting point was the creation
of √N particles within the minimum time interval, a typical elementary
particle Compton time τ . A rationale for this, very much in the spirit of the

ρvac =

ρ
√N

= Gρvac

∧

14

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

condensation of particles from a background Zero Point Field as discussed at
the beginning has also been obtained recently in terms of a broken symmetry
phase transition from the Zero Point Field or Quantum Vacuum. In this case,
particles are like the Benard cells which form in ﬂuids, as a result of a phase
transition. While some of the particles or cells may revert to the Zero Point
Field, on the whole there is a creation of these particles. If the average time
for the creation of one of these particles or cells is τ , then at any point of
time where there are N such particles, the time elapsed, in our case the age
of the universe, would be given by (17) (Cf.[8]). While this is not exactly the
Big Bang scenario, there is nevertheless a rapid creation of matter from the
background Quantum Vacuum or Zero Point Field. Thus half the matter of
the universe would have been created within a fraction of a second.
In any case when τ
0, we recover the Big Bang scenario with a singular
creation of matter, while when τ
Planck time we recover the Prigogine
Cosmology (Cf.[1] for details). However in neither of these two limits we can
deduce all the above consistent with observation relations.
vi) The discrete spacetime eﬀects, it was argued, lead to a deviation from the
relativistic energy-momentum formula [30, 1], which again is an 0(l2) eﬀect.
This can be seen if we invoke Wilson’s Lattice theory to get [31],

→

→

E2 = m2 + p2 + λl2,

λ =

(41)

1
3

−

p4,

Eﬀectively, this is a correction on the velocity of light, c2
c2(1 + ǫ). Us-
ing (41), the correction term ǫ is in agreement wlith the phenomenological
constraint on it given by Glashow and Coleman [32]. It also agrees with the
empirical form of Lorentz Symmetry Violation [33]. All this explains the
High Energy Cosmic Ray puzzle, viz., the observed violation of the relativis-
tic GZK cut oﬀ for these Ultra High Energy Cosmic Rays [34, 35, 36].
vii) The fuzzy spacetime considerations, lead to a short range force (or mas-
sive photon force) [1, 37, 38], some evidence for which seems to be available
already, as described in the references.

→

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author is thankful to Prof. H. Kr¨oger of the University of Laval, Canada,
for his hospitality and useful discussions.

15

References

[1] B.G. Sidharth, “The Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., New York, 2001.

[2] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, “Gravitation”, W.H. Free-

man, San Francisco, 1973, p.819ﬀ.

[3] B.G. Sidharth, Foundation of Physics Letters, August (2002).

[4] E.T. Newman, J.Math.Phys., 14 (1), 1973, p.102.

[5] B.G. Sidharth, Foundation of Physics Letters, 16 (1), 91-97 (February

2003).

[6] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Mod.Phys.A., 13 (15), 1993,pp.2599ﬀ.

[7] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 18, 2003, 197-201.

[8] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 14, 2002, 1325-1330.

[9] G. Nicolis and G. Prigogine in “Exploring Complexity”, W.H. Freeman,

New York, 1989, p.10.

[10] B.G. Sidharth, Annales de la Fondation Lois de Broglie, Volume 27 No.2,

[11] C.H. Ohanian, and R. Ruﬃni, “Gravitation and Spacetime”, New York,

2002, 333-342.

1994, pp.130ﬀ.

[12] B.G. Sidharth, Nuovo Cimento, 116B (6), 2001, p.4ﬀ.

[13] P.G. Bergmann, “Introduction to the Theory of Relativity”, Prentice-

Hall, New Delhi, 1969, p.248ﬀ.

[14] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Th.Phys., Vol.37, No.4, 1998, 1307-1312.

[15] L. Nottale, “Fractal Space-Time and Microphysics:Towards a Theory of

Scale Relativity”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1993, p.312.

[16] S. Hayakawa, Suppl of PTP Commemmorative Issue, 1965, 532-541.

16

[17] K. Huang, “Statistical Mechanics”, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi, 1975,

pp.75ﬀ.

[18] B.G. Sidharth in “Frontiers of Quantum Physics”, Eds., Lim, S.C., et

al, Springer Verlag, Singapore, 1998.

[19] B.G. Sidharth, Proc. of the Eighth Marcell Grossmann Meeting on Gen-
eral Relativity, Ed. T. Piran, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999, p.476-
479.

[20] S. Weinberg, “Gravitation and Cosmology”, John Wiley & Sons, New

York, 1972, p.62.

[21] S. Weinberg, Phys.Rev.Lett., 43, 1979, p.1566.

[22] V.N. Melnikov, Int.J.Th.Phys., 33 (7), 1994, 1569-1579.

[23] J.V. Narlikar, Foundations of Physics, Vol.13, No.3, 1983, p.311-323.

[24] J.D. Barrow and P. Parsons, Phys.Rev.D., Vol.55, No.4, 15 February

1997, p.1906ﬀ.

[25] B.G. Sidharth, Il Nuovo Cimento, 115B (12), (2), 2000, pg.151.

[26] J.K. Webb, et al., Phys.Rev.Lett., 87(9), 2001, pp.091301-1 ﬀ.

[27] J.K. Webb, et al., Phys.Rev.Lett., 82, 1999, pp.884ﬀ.

[28] R.W. Kuhne, Mod.Phys.Lett.A., Vol.14, No.27, 1999, pp.1917-1922.

[29] J.D. Bjorken, and S.D. Drell, “Relativistic Quantum Mechanics”, Mc-

Graw Hill, New York, 1964, p.39.

[30] B.G. Sidharth, xxx.physics/0004070.

[31] I. Montvay and G. Miinster, “Quantum Fields on a Lattice”, Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1994, pp.164ﬀ.

[32] S. Coleman and S.L. Glashow, PRD, 59, 116008, 1999.

[33] T. Jacobson, xxx.astro-ph/0212190.

17

[34] A.V. Olinto, Phys.Rev., 333-334, 2000, pp.329ﬀ.

[35] S.M. Carroll, Phys.Rev.Lett., 87, 2001, pp.141601ﬀ.

[36] M. Nagano, Rev.Mod.Phys., 72, 2000, pp.689ﬀ.

[37] B.G. Sidharth, xxx.physics/0301015.

[38] B.G. Sidharth, “A Short Range Force” tgo appear in Int.J.Th.Phys.

18

