3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The beginning of the Universe

Stanis law Bajtlik 1

1 Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center, Bartycka 18, 00-716 Warszawa, Poland
bajtlik@camk.edu.pl

ABSTRACT

In this brief essay we consider the concept of beginning in cosmology. It can
be applied to the Universe as a whole, as well as to various epochs in the cosmic
history and major structures as we can see them today.

One of the most astonishing discoveries of the 20th Century was Hubble’s discovery of
the expansion of the Universe. Since time immemorial, people had shared a view of space
and time as unchanging and independent of matter. Such a ﬁxed space with a river of time,
both unaﬀected by physical bodies, had been the stage for Newtonian mechanics. However,
Hubble’s discovery in the nineteen-twenties had come at the right time. In 1916, Einstein
had published his General Theory of Relativity, and few years later Friedmann had found
solutions of Einstein’s equations corresponding to an expanding Universe. Cosmic space
and time became related to matter; the geometrical properties of space and its temporal
evolution became inseparable from the material content of the Universe and its large scale
structure.

Cosmic expansion is of tremendous importance for studies of the BEGINNING of the
Universe and the formation of the bodies and structures we observe. Since cosmic space ex-
pands, it follows that everything was closer together many epochs ago. As all cosmic objects
have some ﬁxed physical size, it is clear that there must have been some epoch in cosmic
history, eons ago, when it was not possible for galaxies to exist as independent, individual
structures. At earlier epochs, not even stars could exist; earlier still, even individual atoms
would not ﬁt into the much smaller spatial volumes; before that, even atomic nuclei would
have been too large, and so on.

The concept of the BEGINNING of the Universe as a speciﬁc event in the past is deeply
rooted in many religions and was discussed by the ancient philosophers. However, Hubble’s
discovery suggested something profoundly diﬀerent. In mythology, the BEGINNING of the
Universe was a one-time event, resulting in a world ”ready to use”, similar to what we

– 2 –

see today. The expansion of space, however, proves that the Universe must have evolved,
since it was impossible for organised structures (such as atoms, molecules, planets, stars and
galaxies) to exist from the very BEGINNING.

Another profound consequence of the Universe having a BEGINNING is that, due to its
ﬁnite age and the ﬁnite maximum speed at which energy, information or interaction can be
transferred, (i.e., the speed of light), the observable, causally-connected part of the Universe
must be ﬁnite, regardless of the overall structure or geometry of space. This ﬁnite volume
is surrounded by the cosmic horizon. Nothing from behind the horizon can have inﬂuenced
anything which we can see or experience.

Reversing (as a thought experiment) cosmic expansion and extrapolating backward in
time, we can estimate the age of the Cosmos from its current expansion rate. The age of the
Universe is the time which has passed since space and matter started to expand as a result
of the Big Bang the BEGINNING. It is not an easy task, as the expansion is constantly
being slowed by the combined self-gravity of all matter in the Universe. To know the rate
of this deceleration we need to know the amount and form of matter in the Cosmos. The
best present-day estimate for the age of the Universe is 13.7 × 109years. How far back in
time we extrapolate is really a matter of taste. As we go closer and closer to the Big Bang,
the physical conditions in the Universe were more and more extreme. It is clear that, at
some point, the physical theories we know must break down. However, we can safely discuss
processes in the primeval cosmic plasma a few seconds after the Big Bang. The conditions
there were not that diﬀerent from what we can study in nuclear reactors today. Even a mere
fraction of a second after the BEGINNING, the physical conditions in the Universe (i.e. the
density and temperature) are still familiar, as they are similar to what we can produce in
particle accelerators.

There is, however, a deﬁnite limit to the extrapolation of known physics back to the
BEGINNING of the cosmic history. Approximately 10-43 seconds after the Big Bang, at
the so-called Planck time, the mass density of the Universe is thought to approach roughly
1093 g cm−3. Contained within the causally connected part of the Universe is then a Planck
mass, roughly 10−5 g. An object of such mass would be a quantum black hole, with an event
horizon close to both its own Compton length (the distance over which a particle is quantum
mechanically ”fuzzy”) and the size of the cosmic horizon at the Planck time. Under such
extreme conditions, space-time cannot be treated as a classical continuum and must be given
a quantum interpretation.

We still do not understand the properties of the Universe at the very BEGINNING. No
existing theory can describe the initial singularity and no theory can explain why the Big
Bang had to happen. Many researchers put much hope in the formulation of a so called ﬁnal

– 3 –

theory or theory of everything . Some of them believe that string theory may be the best
starting point for the formulation of such a theory.

The BEGINNING of the Universe is only the ultimate starting point in the history of
cosmic ”beginnings”. A series of early phase transitions created the initial density ﬂuctua-
tions, which later served as the seeds of cosmic structure-superclusters, clusters and galaxies.
It was the BEGINNING of structure formation. In inﬂationary models, the universe starts
with very close to zero nett baryon number; at the BEGINNING, there was as much matter
as antimatter. An excess of matter can only be generated from this initial situation after
inﬂation under the following conditions: the baryon number is violated; the C (charge) and
CP (charge-parity) symmetries are violated; the universe was not in thermal equilibrium
for a period during bariogenesis. As the CP symmetry violation is known from laboratory
physics, we believe that we understand why the Universe is made of matter rather then a
mixture of matter and antimatter. All this happened in a tiny fraction of a second after the
Big Bang.

We are made of chemical elements. Our bodies and everything around us is made of
baryonic ”stuﬀ”, organized in molecules which are themselves composed of atoms. The
atomic form of matter was created in several processes during cosmic evolution. The lightest
isotopes, those of hydrogen, helium and lithium, were created during the ﬁrst three minutes
after the BEGINNING. Later it was too cold and the density was too low for hierarchical
build up of more complex atomic nuclei. The process of primordial nucleosynthesis was
interrupted and resumed only after the ﬁrst stars had formed. To explain the observed
abundances of the light elements in the Universe, it was postulated that, at the BEGINNING,
the Universe must have been hot. Matter and radiation were in thermal equilibrium. The
existence of the remnant radiation, which today has cooled to just 2.7 Kelvin, was predicted.
The discovery of this relict radiation in the microwave domain in the nineteen-sixties was
a major turning point in the history of cosmology. The expansion of the Universe, the
abundances of the light elements, and the existence and properties of the microwave relict
radiation are the fundamental observational facts supporting the Big Bang scenario.

The BEGINNING of the formation of heavier chemical elements started in stars just
few hundred million years after the Big Bang. This process has been continuing throughout
the whole of cosmic history, altering the chemical content of galaxies. Because looking deep
into space we are looking into the remote past (due to the ﬁnite speed of light), we can
actually observe the process of structure formation and the chemical evolution of galaxies.

Galaxies and clusters of galaxies formed from the initial density ﬂuctuations as a result
of gravitational instability. They came into existence in the Universe soon after the Big
Bang, less than 109 years after the BEGINNING. Most stars were formed when the Universe

– 4 –

was ﬁve times younger then today.

In the last ten years we have discovered planets beyond our Solar System. Today we
know of more than one hundred extrasolar planets. We observe protoplanetary disks and we
are becoming increasingly convinced that planet formation is a natural part of the process of
stellar formation, and that planets should not be uncommon in the Universe. The estimated
age of the Earth is only slightly less than the age of the Sun. Our planet, as well as the Sun
and other planets in the Solar System, was formed from the same protostellar nebula, some
4.5 × 109 years ago. Thus the BEGINNING of our planetary system and our own planet
took place when the Universe was approximately three times younger than it is today.

Life started on the Earth soon after the planet cooled enough for complex molecules to

form. The BEGINNING of life is estimated to have occurred about 3.5 × 109 years ago.

Scientists from the Copernicus Astronomical Center in Warsaw have taken an active role
in this process of revealing cosmic evolution. The process of stellar evolution was studied
(among others) by Professors Bohdan Paczy´nski (now at Princeton University) and J´ozef
Smak. Recently, Professor Janusz Kaluzny measured the age of the one of oldest known
stars in the Universe. Professor Roman Juszkiewicz has contributed to the understanding of
the ﬂuctuations in the relict microwave background, galaxy formation and created original
methods of measuring the mean density of matter in the Universe. The author of this article
has studied clouds of intergalactic matter and has estimated the intensity of the ionising
ultraviolet background radiation, which played an important role in the structure formation
epoch. Krzysztof G´orski (now at JPL, Pasadena) and Rados law Stompor (now at UC,
Berkeley) have made important contributions into the investigation of the relict microwave
radiation. Ewa  Lokas and Micha l Chodorowski contributed to the theory of the galaxy
formation. Aleksander Wolszczan, who discovered the ﬁrst extrasolar planets, started his
career at the Copernicus Center in the nineteen-eighties. Professor Miroslaw Giersz studied
the structure and stability of the globular clusters systems hosting the oldest stars. Currently,
Professor Michal Rozyczka and his group are developing numerical simulations to study in
detail the process of planet formation.

Physical cosmology is a relatively young science. It only started after Hubble’s discov-
ery of the expansion of the Universe, Einstein’s formulation of General Relativity and the
discovery of the microwave background. Yet within only a few decades, people were able to
measure the size of the Universe, its age, chemical composition and put into chronological
order major events in cosmic history. This process of discovery still continues. In the last
few years, observations of distant supernovae (exploding stars which for a couple of days
outshine their host galaxy) at the edge of the observable Universe, and measurements of the
temperature ﬂuctuations of the microwave relict radiation have proved that the Universe is

– 5 –

ﬁlled with some strange, nonbarionic forms of matter and energy. About one third of the
whole material content of the Cosmos is in the form of dark matter-nonbarionic particles
forming massive halos around galaxies and clusters of galaxies. About two thirds is in the
form of dark energy even more mysterious than dark matter causing the acceleration of
cosmic expansion.

Many physicists consider dark energy, acting against gravity to accelerate the expansion
of space, the biggest unsolved problem in physics. It is being speculated that dark energy
is related to the properties of the physical vacuum. Solutions to this problem will most
probably require a new, deeper physical theory of the fundamental properties of matter.
Quite unexpectedly, studies of the largest accessible scales the Universe as a whole have
revealed something of extreme importance about the nature of fundamental processes. The
presence of dark energy in Cosmos may be the result of processes which took place almost
at the very BEGINNING of the Universe.

