3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

NON-EXISTENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVES
THE STAGES OF THE THEORETICAL DISCOVERY
(1917-2003)

ANGELO LOINGER

Abstract. A short history of the theoretical discovery that the gravi-
tational waves of general relativity do not have a physical reality.

Introduction

I shall recall here the main stages of an important theoretical discovery:
the general theory of relativity (GR) does not allow the physical existence
of gravitational waves. The solutions of the Einstein ﬁeld equations which
have a wave character describe only formal undulations, quite destitute of a
physical reality.

1917

In this year Tullio Levi-Civita published a very fundamental memoir “On
the analytic expression that must be given to the gravitational tensor in Ein-
stein’s theory” [1]. The conclusion of the paper is straightforward: the Ein-
stein ﬁeld equations tell us that when the mass tensor Tjk vanishes the same
occurrence must happen to the gravitational tensor (1/κ) (cid:0)Rjk − 1
2 gjkR(cid:1).
“This fact entails total lack of stresses, of energy ﬂow, and also of a simple
localisation of energy”.

This result has an unquestionable logical soundness, as it was ﬁnally
admitted by Einstein himself. Of course, it implies the rejection of the
various pseudo (false) energy tensors of the gravitational ﬁeld proposed by
Einstein and by other authors: a false tensor cannot have a true physical
meaning!

Einstein objected that in such a way the total energy-momentum of a
closed system would always be equal to zero – and this fact would not
imply the further existence of the system under whatever form. However,
from the standpoint of the coherence of the formalism, Levi-Civita – and
Lorentz – [1] were undoubtedly right. It is indeed suﬃcient to remember
that in the action principle of any physical theory referred to general co-
ordinates, the coeﬃcients of the variations δhjk of the metric tensor hjk are
the components, say Ejk, of the energy tensor of the considered ﬁeld. But
in GR this property is just possessed, in vacuo, by the tensor Rjk − 1
2 gjkR.
The gravitational waves, as objects without a true energy-momentum,

are only ghost undulations.

1

2

1930

(1)

1953

1960

ANGELO LOINGER

In this year Tullio Levi-Civita published an original study on the charac-

teristic hypersurfaces of Einstein ﬁeld equations [2].

He discovered that the functions z(x), (cid:2)x ≡ (cid:0)x0, x1, x2, x3

(cid:1)(cid:3), of the cha-
racteristic hypersurfaces z(x) = 0 of Einstein ﬁeld equations are solutions
of the Hamiltionian equation

H :=

gjk(x)

1
2

∂z(x)
∂xj

∂z(x)
∂xk = 0

According to Levi-Civita, the equation z(x) = 0 gives the law of motion
of an electromagnetic wave front – or of the wave front of any ﬁeld, capable
of transmitting signals, diﬀerent from the gravitational ﬁeld. This interpre-
tation is quite obvious when gjk(x) has a non-undulatory form. If gjk(x)
has a wavy form, there is no reason to repudiate the above interpretation
because the undulatory character of gjk(x) depends on the chosen system of
co-ordinates [3].

Remark that Levi-Civita’s conception is the reasonable extension of that
valid for the null lines of special relativity. Thus, also GR contains the basic
law of geometric optics – and independently of Maxwell equations.

By means of perturbative computations, Scheidegger [4] could aﬃrm that
“. . . having explicitly shown that all the radiation terms [of the gravitational
ﬁeld] whatsoever can be destroyed by coordinate transformations, one ob-
serves that the terms that have been found by straightforward calculations
must be entirely due to the particular choice of the coordinate system. Thus
there is no radiation damping of gravitational motion”. But no damping
means no emission of gravitational waves.

In 1960 it was published an interesting book by Infeld and Plebanski
[4]. At pages 200 and 201 we read: “. . . it is hardly possible to connect any
physical meaning with the ﬂux of energy and momentum tensor deﬁned with
the help of the pseudo-energy-momentum tensor. Indeed, the [gravitational]
radiation can be annihilated by a proper choice of the coordinate system.
On the other hand, if we use a coordinate system in which the ﬂux of
energy may exist, then it can be made whatsoever we like by the addition of
proper harmonic functions . . . – In the linear theory we were faced with the
choice between the retarded and advanced potential. Here in the theory of
gravitation the choice is not so simple. Using the approximation procedure,
we are faced with the choice between single and double jumps. We can speak
only about [gravitational] radiation in the case of single jumps. However,
its existence or non-existence or its value will depend upon the choice of
arbitrary harmonic functions.” We see that also Infeld and Plebanski were
quite sceptical about the real existence of the gravitational waves.

NON-EXISTENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL WAVES ETC.

3

1998-2003

In these years I have published several proofs of the non-existence of the
I recall here only two

GW’s; they are exact, non-perturbative proofs [5].
demonstrations, which are particularly simple.

i) let us assume that at a given instant t of its motion a given point
mass M begins to send forth a GW, and let us suppose that we know the
kinematical characteristics of the motion between t and t + |dt|. Then, we
can reproduce these characteristics in a purely gravitational motion of M
in a suitable “external”, “rigid” gravitational ﬁeld, within a time interval
equal to |dt|, conveniently chosen. But in this case the mass M moves
along a geodesic – and therefore it cannot emit any gravitational radiation:
indeed, the geodesic motions are “free” motions; they are the analogues of
the rectilinear and uniform motions of an electric charge of the customary
Maxwell-Lorentz theory.

Thus we see that no “mechanism” exists for the generation of gravita-
tional waves – the above restriction to motions of mass points is conceptu-
ally inessential. All the solutions of the Einsteinian ﬁeld equations having
an undulatory character do not describe physical waves [6].

ii) As it is well known, in GR only the concepts and the results that
are independent of the choice of the system of general co-ordinates have
a physical meaning. Consider a solution of the Einstein ﬁeld equations
which has – in a given co-ordinate system – a wavy character. Through
a ﬁnite sequence of co-ordinate transformations, endowed with convenient
undulatory properties, the primary undulating character of our solution can
be completely destroyed. Thus, this character is only a property of the
original co-ordinate system, and therefore it has no physical meaning.

I remark further that the propagation velocity of any metric tensor de-
pends on the reference system: with a suitable choice of general co-ordinates,
this velocity can take any value between zero and inﬁnite.

APPENDIX
On the linear approximation of GR

If we restrict ourselves to the linear approximation of GR – as the expe-
rimentalists generally do –, which has Minkowski spacetime as its substrate,
the physical existence of the GW’s seems, at ﬁrst sight, a theoretical possi-
bility. But the energy-momentum of such GW’s has a tensor character only
under Lorentz transformations, not under general transformations. There-
fore, it is always possible to ﬁnd – and we remain, of course, in the ambit
of the linearized version of GR – a general system of co-ordinates for which
the above energy-momentum is equal to zero.

In 1944 Weyl published a remarkable article entitled “How far can one
get with a linear ﬁeld theory of gravitation in ﬂat space-time?” [7]. He re-
marked, in particular, that Einstein’s theory of weak gravitational ﬁelds (i.e.,
the linear approximation of GR) resembles very closely Maxwell’s theory of
the e.m. ﬁelds, and satisﬁes a principle of gauge invariance involving four
arbitrary functions, but its gravitational ﬁeld exerts no force on matter, i.e.
it remains “a powerless shadow”. From the standpoint of the exact GR, this

4

ANGELO LOINGER

is as it should be, because “the gravitational force arises only when one con-
tinues the approximation beyond the linear stage”. Clearly, Weyl alludes
here a fundamental result of the EIH-method [8]. Thus, we ﬁnd another
argument – and a strong argument – against the physical adequacy of the
linearized version of GR insofar as the question of the GW’s is concerned.
I am very grateful to Prof. A. Gsponer, who has called my attention to

Weyl’s paper.

“The king is naked! – cried a child”.
(From an Andersen’s tale)

References

[1] T. Levi-Civita, Rend. Acc. Lincei, 26 (1917) 381. An English translation in
arXiv:physics/9906004 (June 2nd, 1999). See also H.A. Lorentz, Amst. Versl., 25
(1916) 468.

[2] T. Levi-Civita, Rend. Acc. Lincei, 11 (s.6a) (1930) 3 and 113.
[3] A. Loinger, arXiv:astro-ph/9906058 (June 3rd, 1999), Idem, Spacetime & Substance,
in course of publication; title of this Note: “Again on the non-existence of GW’s and
of BH’s”; also in arXiv:physics/0311075 v1 (Nov. 16th, 2003).

[4] L. Infeld and J. Plebanski, Motion and relativity, (Pergamon Press, Oxford, etc.)

1960. see in particular Chapt.VI.

[5] A. Loinger, Nuovo Cimento B, 115 (2000) 679; Idem, Spacetime & Substance, 3
(2002) 129; Idem, ibidem 3 (2002) 145; Idem, On Black Holes and Gravitational
Waves, (La Goliardica Pavese, Pavia) 2002, Part II. See also Idem, arXiv:gr-qc,
arXiv:astro-ph, arXiv:physics (1998-2003).

[6] For a bibliography on the GW’s see, e.g., the review article by B.F. Schutz, Class.
Quantum Grav., 16 (1999) A131. This paper is a summa of all the current (and
erroneous) opinions about the GW’s.
[7] H. Weyl, Amer. J. Math., 66 (1944) 591.
[8] Cf. e.g. L. Infeld, Acta Phys. Polonica, 13 (1954) 187 and the book by Infeld and

Plebanski cited in [4].

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Milano, Via Celoria, 16 - 20133 Milano

(Italy)

E-mail address: angelo.loinger@mi.infn.it

