4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
1
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Matter and Light in Flatland

Omar Y´epez
Department of Chemistry, Memorial University of Newfoundland,
St. Johns, NF, A1B 3X7 Canada.

February 2, 2008

Abstract

In order to explain self-interference phenomenon, a new particle model, based on
the intersection of a higher dimensional object with a lower dimensional world, as the
source of classical and quantum properties, is proposed. This model suggests that
particles are made with a non-material signed current, which travels at the speed of
light, through three new curved dimensions. These dimensions occur at atomic scale-
lengths (10−15 m) rather than at the Planck length (10−33 m). Thanks to this, the old
problem of equal sign walls huge electric repulsion force, in the electric sphere model is
solved, since these curved dimensions conﬁne these walls, preventing them from coming
apart. Moreover, this model also suggests that real fermions are not 3D spheres but 4D
toroidal particles, which, by their own nature, print a sinusoidal electric ﬁeld pattern
that occupies all the dimensions of the 3D space when moving (matter wave), and
takes a toroidal shape at rest. According to the model, ﬂat fermions present two
non-superimposable mirror images (enantiomers) with diﬀerent 2D magnetic dipole
moment orientations. And these 2D magnetic dipole moments appear as the temporal
intersection of its 3D toroidal dipole moments (anapole moment). As a consequence,
a separation of these enantiomers occurs under a magnetic ﬁeld in ﬂatland, which is
consistent with the Stern-Gerlach results. Since femtometer toroidal structures have
been found in nuclei, at its ground state (Mz = 0), this model is consistent with the
probable shape of real fermions at such state. As a bonus, the model also suggests
the probable structure of real photon, which is a 4D toroid also, but contrarily to
real fermions, this object prints a sinusoidal electric ﬁeld pattern that occupies one
dimension less from the three available in 3D space when moving (electromagnetic
wave) and it will not rest. As a consequence of the comparison between how the 2D
space is intersected by ﬂat fermions and ﬂat photon, mass has been identiﬁed as the way
in which the lower dimensional world is intersected: if the higher dimensional object
intersection uses all the dimensions of the lower dimensional world, the object presents
mass, whereas if that intersection uses one dimension less from the dimensions available
in the lower dimensional world, which is the case of ﬂat photon, the object presents no

1

mass. Self-interference and the number of turns before being identical are explained for
ﬂat fermions and ﬂat photon in 2D space, placing in the same footing those two rather
diﬀerent objects. Probable Fermions geometric properties as well as densities and the
magnetic dipole moments are also deduced. Correlations experiments are described for
ﬂat electrons, therefore, uncertainty principle appears as a consequence of stochastic
interchange between diﬀerent ways of intersecting the plane by ﬂat fermions and it is
an intrinsic space-particle property. Finally, as the number of very diﬀerent phenomena
can be explained with the same model, the intersection of a higher dimensional object
in a lower dimensional world is proven to be a powerful concept to explain matter and
light.
PACS: 03.65.Ta; 03.65.Ud;03.65.-w

1 Introduction

At this moment, and with the most conservative proposal, string theory is applying ten di-
mensions to explain matter and gravity. Since space-time uses four dimensions, the move of
theoretical physic has been to reduce the other six to a tiny and undetectable dimensional-
ball, at the size of the Planck length (10−33 m)[2]. However, those extra dimensions can
be used as the source of a real fermion and photon model, because it presents a way to
understand how the huge electric repulsion force that should occur at those tiny distances
(10−15 m) does not throw apart the fermion in pieces. On the other hand, ”particle-wave”
duality could be understood if the particle has more dimensions than the space where it
is. By this way, the higher dimensional ”particle” leaves a ”wave” pattern on the lower
dimensional space (vacuum) as it travels through it. The deep relation between matter and
space has been demonstrated through general theory of relativity, even though, that theory
does not explain why matter bends the space to produce the gravitational ﬁeld. The higher
dimensionality proposed[2], would be very productive if fermions and photon use, in any
way, those extra dimensions to exist and interact with the space. Nonetheless all the eﬀorts
and due to a lack of a model, which could explain wave and particles behavior; how are real
Fermions and real Photon, what produces mass and how many dimensions constitute each
object, are open or not even formulated questions! For instance, it is believed that mass
is due to the presence of a Higg boson [3], which impairs mass to objects which need it.
However, impairing the property of mass will not explain why mass bends the space. All
these problems will have a solution if one ﬁnds the internal structure and dimensionality of
quantum objects and their relationship with the vacuum.
One of the most signiﬁcant experiments, which strongly suggest that quantum objects have
more than three dimensions, is self-interference. Single photon interference experiment is a
well established but, also an unexplained phenomenon. In describing it, Feynman wondered,
there must be some sneaky way that the photon divides in two and then comes back together
again [4]. In this paper, it will be shown how this sneaky way could be. He also said that
this experiment encapsulate the central mystery of quantum mechanics. It is a phenomenon
which is impossible, absolutely impossible, to explain in any classical way, and which has in
it, the heart of quantum mechanics. In reality, it contains the only mystery...the basic pecu-

2

liarities of all quantum mechanics. Therefore, the explanation of self-interference is crucial
in the understanding of this theory.
Since self-interference is a common phenomenon for photons[5, 6], electrons [5, 7], neutrons
Its explanation is of a paramount importance to understand the
[6] and even atoms [7].
quantum world. For instance, if one assumes that the quantum particle could be in two
places at the same time, this quantum particle should have, at least, more than three dimen-
sions. This feature introduces the possibility that a quantum particle may have a complex
structure in space-time. Assuming that such structure is possible, one can arrive to the shape
of a higher dimensional winding spiral current twisted toroid, because this object will have
construction and destruction components in the same body, and therefore its intersection
with a lower dimensional world would explain self-interference, as will be described. The
results presented in this paper suggest that real fermion should be a 4 D torus, which has
two ways of intersecting 3D space: 1) in which the object intersects 3D space in two diﬀerent
places at the same time, producing a waving pattern and 2) a toroidal structure when at
rest. Recently[1], femtometer toroidal structures have been detected in nuclei at rest, which
corroborates the model, presented here.
In this paper, a particle-space model that describes the quantum behavior for ﬂat fermions
(2D electron, proton and neutron) and ﬂat photon (2D photon) is derived. The same visu-
alizes at least 5 diﬀerent dimensions for ﬂat quantum particles in ﬂatland (2D space) and
contains the following features:

1. An intrinsic phase shift, which produces construction and destruction electric ﬁeld

vectors upon intersection with ﬂatland, which explains self-interference.

2. Diﬀerent symmetries, which explains the number of turns before being identical for

ﬂat quantum particles.

3. Leaves a wavelike electric ﬁeld in ﬂatland when the object travels through it.

4. The probable origin of inertia and mass.

5. The appearance of two equivalent ﬂat fermions enantiomers with diﬀerent magnetic
dipole moment orientations, which undergoes a separation while traveling in an external
magnetic ﬁeld.

6. The probable shape of a real fermion as a toroidal winding current, the appearance of
a toroidal dipole moment (anapole moment) and its time dependant (intersection with
2D space) detection as a magnetic dipole moment in ﬂatland. As well as real Fermion
radius, volume, density and magnetic dipole moment values.

7. The probable origin of uncertainty principle as an intrinsic property of the quantum

object.

3

2 Model

The quantum world is strange, because it involves a more than three dimensions problem.
One is constrained to look at the intersection of a higher dimensional object in a three-
dimensional world, therefore one is very limited to imagine how this higher dimensional
object could be, because is only able to observe its intersection with 3D space. In order to
probe in that world, one just has to observe the higher dimensional object itself, and deduces
what features of its intersection with the space coincides with the experimental observations.
To accomplish this, in the following ﬁgures, one component of our familiar three-dimensions
is reduced as minimum as possible, therefore our familiar three dimensional vacuum become
a paper sheet, a plane, i.e. ﬂatland (2D space). Under these conditions, our detectable third
dimension is actually the fourth one (time). In this 2D space, matter and light particles
(which will be described) are symmetrically embedded and leave in the plane what one can
measure.
To make the ﬂat fermion model, take two metal slinkies, place pieces of masking tape on
each metal spire of each slinky, in a way that each piece of masking tape is going in a straight
line through the slinky. Following the line of masking tape pieces, trace a mark with ink
on one side of all the masking tape marks already done; it will produce arrows. Since the
ﬁnal geometric object one is constructing is a toroid, the internal toroids angle (which is in
the metal spire or circle) is deﬁned as θ and the external one (which is around the toroids
equator) as φ. Take one slinky and twist it a full turn (360◦) clockwise in the θ direction. Do
the same with the other, but in the counterclockwise direction. Join the spiral head mark
with the spiral tail one in each slinky, this produces two twisted toroids. Place the clockwise
toroid already made on the right hand and the counterclockwise on the left hand. On Fig. 1
it is shown the result of this procedure. As one moves these toroids like their arrows indicate,
it is observed that in the φ axis, the toroids go in a relative counter direction.
To make the ﬂat photon model, do same procedure as before but with a double θ turn (720◦).
On Fig. 2 the result is shown, as one moves these toroids like their arrows indicate, it is
observed that in the φ axis, both toroids go in the same direction.

3 Structure description and interaction with ﬂatland

Several spatial dimensions form the twisted toroidal structure. One of those dimensions runs
along the slinkies’ spiral (θ axis), which contains a non-material signed current that travels
at the speed of light, c. Another one is a spiral dimension that produces the turns in the
θ axis (one full turn for ﬂat fermions and two for ﬂat photon). The third extra dimension
detected is where the slinky’s spiral makes the full turn in the φ axis. All these plus the
two dimensions of ﬂatland makes a total of 5 dimensions for ﬂat quantum particles. On Fig.
1 it is seen the sequence of intersections with the plane, performed by the ﬂat fermion, as
it travels through it (downward the page). This sequence begins with a zero electric ﬁeld
state, followed by a maximum, another zero state and a minimum (maximum and minimum

4

Figure 1: Flat fermion intersection with 2D space (ﬂatland) sequence, propagation is down-
ward the page.

5

Figure 2: Flat photon intersection with 2D space (ﬂatland) sequence, propagation is down-
ward the page.

6

assignment is arbitrary). As it can be noticed, the plane symmetrically divides both toroids,
through the θ axis, leaving half of it structure up and the other half down it. Taking this
third dimension as time, the toroids parts up the plane are in its immediate future and the
toroids parts down the plane are in its immediate past, i.e. the toroid has a complex 2D
space-time structure referring to ﬂatland. In this ﬁgure also, one can see that all toroids
located at the left are the mirror images (using the plane as a mirror) of the right ones. Flat
fermion φ rotation is deeply associated with θs. Each φ = 90◦ produces a θ displacement
equal to 90◦. When this object travels through the plane, they do it with a rotation in the φ
axis and a correspondent rotation in the θ axis as well. Their current spirals cross the plane
in and out with a helix movement, at a certain intersection speed, Vφ, and at four places
in that space. This intersection process will spend some time; therefore, it will leave four
time-dependant current vectors in the plane, i.e. electric ﬁeld vectors. The phase shift in the
θ axis makes that these four electric ﬁeld vectors have diﬀerent orientations, which produces
a resultant after vector summing. This resultant change in magnitude and direction as the
toroids travel, ﬁnally producing a sinusoidal electric ﬁeld printed in the plane, SEFPP (see
Fig. 3 and 4). As it is clear from this explanation, the plane is where the measurement
is done and therefore, it is at t = 0 (present). For clarity purposes, both toroids are shown
separated although they occupy the same place. On Fig. 1 it is also observed that, in
the φ axis, ﬂat fermions toroids rotate one against the other. As a consequence of this, its
movement through the plane will depend on external forces. In this sense, the wavelength
of the SEFPP made by this object depends solely on its traveling speed through the plane
(see Fig. 3). The φ rotational speed, Vφ is the same as the traveling speed, in order to leave
the electric ﬁeld vectors in the plane on time. Finally, another consequence of this structure
is that the θ perimeter length is independent of the ﬂat fermions SEFPP wavelength, which
is the De Broglie wavelength[8],

λ =

h
m0v

(1)

Where λ is the object wavelength, h is the Plank constant, m0 is the inertial mass and v is
the speed of the object (see Fig. 1 and 3). As it can be noticed, this SEFPP is described
by the particle wave function. On Fig. 2 the ﬂat photon is presented, it begins with a
maximum, followed by a zero electric ﬁeld vector state; a minimum and another zero state
(downward the page). The same features as in the case of ﬂat fermion are detected. However,
all toroids located at the left are oriented at φ = 90◦ with respect to the right ones. As a
consequence of this structure, there are symmetry relations between given states, i.e. the
maximum is equivalent to its minimum after a C2 perpendicular to the plane (180◦ edge)
and a mirror image (using the plane as a mirror, see Fig. 2). The same applies for both zero
states. This means that they are equivalents, i.e. undistinguishables. In this case also, φ
rotation is also deeply associated with θs. However, due to symmetry, ﬂat photon produces
undistinguishable states each φ = 90◦, having two equivalents maximums and minimums in
a full φ round. Due to its symmetry, each φ = 180◦ occurs a complete θ round. Since Vφ =
c, Vθ = 0.5 c in order to leave the electric ﬁeld vectors in the plane on time. In this case,
both toroids rotate in the same direction in the φ axis, therefore the object is not resistant
to be moved and its movement does not depend on external forces. As it can be inferred,
inertia is a consequence of the ﬂat fermion internal structure and it is a property that ﬂat
photon does not have. On Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, the SEFPP for ﬂat fermion and ﬂat photon

7

Figure 3: Sinusoidal Electric Filed Printed in the Plane by ﬂat fermion. Maximum and
minimum go perpendicular to the direction of movement, which is downward the page.

8

Figure 4: Sinusoidal Electric Field Printed in the Plane by ﬂat photon. Maximum and
minimum go in the direction of movement, which is downward the page.

9

can be observed respectively. It is clear from these ﬁgures that ﬂat fermions SEFPP looks
like a transversal wave, whereas ﬂat photons looks like a longitudinal one.

4 Self-Interference

The proposed structures for ﬂat fermions and ﬂat photon easily explain why a single ﬂat
fermion or a single ﬂat photon could arrive as a maximum or as a minimum, depending
on the angle measured from the interference slits. The already known requirement that
the distance between slits should be an integer number of the particle wavelength, λ; to
observe an interference pattern, just satisfy an internal structure requirement, which is that
the quantum object has to be in a maximum state just at the interference slits. Since
upon intersection with the space, ﬂat fermion and ﬂat photon produces construction and
destruction electric ﬁeld vector states and that just depends on its internal structures, they
will be able to produce a maximum or a minimum upon arrival to the detector screen. This
will only depends on the optical path for both branches of the toroid intersection. Therefore,
the maximums and minimums of a single quantum particle will follow the same equations
for maximums and minimums already known respectively[9],

d sin α = pλ

d sin α = (p +

)λ

1
2

(2)

(3)

Where d is the separation between slits, α is the angle of the maximums or minimums
measured from the slits, λ is the wavelength of the ﬂat photon and/or ﬂat fermion (De
Broglie wavelength) and p is an integral number. Diﬀerent angles from the slits will produce
diﬀerent optical paths = diﬀerent phase interference, thus producing the complete sinusoidal
interference pattern observed [5, 6, 7]. On Figs. 5-6, the self-interference graphics to produce
a minimum and maximum for ﬂat fermions and ﬂat photon respectively are shown. When
one of the slit holes is blocked, there is no possibility for the ﬂat fermion and ﬂat photon to
be in both slits (two places at the same time) and therefore, there will not be an interference
pattern.

5 Number of Rounds before being Identical

A very intriguing aspect, which diﬀerentiates real fermions from photon is that 3D fermions
make two rounds before arriving to its initial state, whereas 3D photon just makes one
[10, 11]. As one can see on Fig. 1-2, however, a toroid, not a sphere, is what is doing such
rounds. Since the toroid intersects symmetrically the plane through its θ axis. On Figs. 3
and 4, both branches of the toroid, sums 2πrθ radians when they arrive to θ = 180◦, where
rθ is the θ intersection radius. Thus, half a toroidal θ round can be interpreted as a particle

10

Figure 5: Maximum and Minimum in the ﬂat fermions self-interference experiment.

11

Figure 6: Maximum and Minimum in the ﬂat photon self-interference experiment.

12

round. Given this explanation, it is easy to observe that on Fig. 3, there is a round between
both zero electric ﬁeld states (θ = 0◦ and 180◦). However, these two zero electric ﬁeld states
are not equivalent from the point of view of the 3D object (c.f. Fig. 1); as a matter of fact,
they are not equivalent with any symmetry operation. A ﬂatlander observes that the object
did a complete round, but it is not the same. Then it observes that after another round, the
ﬂat fermion arrives to its original state. As a consequence, its complete SEFPP wavelength
is made after two nonequivalent and complete rounds. In the case of ﬂat photon, on Fig. 4,
there is a round between its maximum and its minimum (θ = 0◦ and 180◦). However, both
states are equivalent after a C2 and a mirror image (using the plane as a mirror, see Fig. 2).
Therefore, a ﬂatlander observes that after a complete round, the object is the same. As a
consequence, the ﬂat photon complete SEFPP wavelength is made after two equivalent and
complete rounds.

6 Flat Fermion Properties

6.1 Flat Fermion Radiuses, Volumes and Densities

As it was described, in the case of ﬂat fermion, there is no relation between its SEFPP
wavelength and its θ perimeter. The ﬂat fermion SEFPP wavelength is related only with
its speed (see Fig. 3). To look at the ﬂat fermion θ perimeter, the quantum particle should
be collided by a high-energy ﬂat photon (2D X ray photon) in a frontal collision (180◦)[12].
By this way, the Compton shift of the dispersed 2D Xray photon will be equal to the θ
perimeter, i.e.

This wavelength is the measure of the ﬂat fermion θ perimeter. By using this distance, the
θ circle radius for the ﬂat fermion toroid would be,

λC180◦ =

2h
m0c

2πr = λC180◦ => rθ =

h
πm0c

Assuming that the ﬂat fermion toroid, at rest, is a horn torus, which seems reasonable from
ref. 1, its area will be,

its volume,

and the density D will be,

S =

4h2
m2
0c2

V =

D =

2h3
πm3
0c3

0c3
πm4
2h3

13

the radius, diameter, toroid surface, volume and densities of real fermions are shown on
Table I.

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Table 1: Flat particles geometric data

6.2 Flat Fermion Magnetic Dipole Moment and Charge

From Fig. 1, it can be observed that ﬂat fermions are sets of 3D winding current toroids,
which are in the same place. Because of this arrangement, these toroids present a 3D toroidal
dipole moment (anapole moment)[13]. However, as described before, the toroid intersection
with the plane spends some time; thus, its 3D anapole moment would be detected in the
In the following paragraphs, the derivation of
plane as a 2D magnetic dipole moment.
such 3D anapole moment and its temporal projection in the plane, to produce a magnetic
dipole moment are developed, Assuming that the fundamental electric charge, e, is uniformly
distributed on the surface area of a horn torus in 3D space (see Table I) and if the 2D charge
(the charge in the θ circle) is, in the same way, proportional to the area of the θ circle, the
θ current, iθ, can be estimated. First, the time to cross the θ perimeter, tθ, is,

the 2D charge will be,

c =

=> tθ =

2h
m0c
tθ

2h
m0c2

therefore, the following surface to charge relation can be established,

thus,

the number of 3D toroids spires can be obtained multiplying this current by the time needed
to have the charge, e; converting this time to a distance and dividing this result by the θ
perimeter, i.e.,

iθ =

=

=> t =

em0c2
8πh

e
t

8πh

m0c2 => d = c · 8πh

m0c2 =

8πh
m0c

=> n =

= 4π

(13)

8πh
m0c
2h
m0c

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Q2D = iθtθ

4h2
m2
0c2
e

=

h2
πm2
0c2
2iθh
m2
0c2

iθ =

em0c2
8πh

14

(14)

(15)

(16)

Finally, the 3D space toroidal moment (anapole moment) can be obtained through[13],

where I is the current in its coil, which is,

T =

1
4πc

· IV

I = niθ

and V is the toroid volume. By combining (7), (12), (13) and (15) in (14), one has,
· em0c2
8πh

· 2h3
πm2

4π
4πc

0c3 = (

T =

m0c

)2e

~

However, as it was discussed, this toroidal dipole moment is made with spiral currents that
spend some time intersecting the plane, and producing a 2D time dependant toroidal dipole
moment, i.e. a magnetic dipole moment. On Fig. 7, the magnetic dipole moment produced
by this process can be observed, if one uses as a intersection time,
πm0c2 as shown in that
ﬁgure, one obtains for the electron,
( ~
m0c )2e
h
πm0c2

= 9.28 · 10

−24A · m2

~e
2m0

µe =

(17)

=

h

in the case of the neutron,

µn =

m0c )2e

2( ~
h
πm0c2

= 2

~e
2m0

= 9.66 · 10−27A · m2

(18)

In the case of proton, however, the value still gives 2.79 ~e/2m0.
The 2D electric charge would be related to the current, iθ, multiply by the period of time
which this current spends to travel the θ perimeter and by two toroid intersections, this will
be,

2 · Q2D = 2 · em0c2
8πh
As could be observed on Fig. 8, this θ current should have a sign, in order to produce a
signed charge and thus an electric ﬁeld in ﬂatland, as shown. And this has no connection
with the direction of the current in the spires. On the other hand, in the case of ﬂat photon,
it should have opposite sign currents between both toroids, in order to have no electric ﬁeld
outside the particle, as it is expected.

· 2h
m0c2 =

e
2π

(19)

6.3 Matter and Light Wave Amplitude

As it was stated in the previous section, the spiral current spends some time intersecting the
plane. This process leaves electric ﬁeld vectors, which magnitude can be derived as follow,
−→
E
ε = −d
−→
dr

−→
iθ
= −Rd
cdt

(20)

15

Figure 7: Temporal intersection in ﬂatland by the ﬂat fermion 3D anapole moment, produc-
ing the magnetic dipole moment, µ.

16

Figure 8: Electric Field produced by positive signed current ﬂat fermion, the magnetic dipole
moment is also shown between both circles.

17

Where R is the spiral resistance in the distance and or time dr = cdt and diθ is the θ
perimeter current in the period of time, λ
πm0c (for ﬂat fermion), which
is 1/6 of the spiral current iθ. Taking into account that the intensity of the wave is related
with the wave electric ﬁeld amplitude through [14],

πc (for ﬂat photon) or

h

In = Nhν =

1
µ0c

ε2
m
2

Where In is the wave intensity, N is the number of particles per square meter per second,
which in this case is 1 m−2s−1, µ0 is the vacuum magnetic permeability and εm is the wave
electric ﬁeld amplitude. Also, according to the model, regardless being a ﬂat fermion or a
−→
ε , is the wave electric ﬁeld amplitude, εm.
ﬂat photon, the sum of four electric ﬁeld vectors,
Therefore, the spiral resistance and the wave electric ﬁeld amplitude for the ﬂat photon and
the ﬂat fermion are, respectively,

R(Ω) =

2Nµ0hλ3 => εm(V /m) = −

2Nµ0chν

12
e

p
2

R(Ω) =

12
e (cid:20)

h
m0c (cid:21)

p

2Nµ0m0c => εm(V /m) = −c

2Nµ0m0c

p

p

(21)

(22)

(23)

7 Parity, Stern-Gerlach result and Correlation experi-

ment

On Fig. 9a, the cross section of a ﬂat fermion toroid and its enantiomer (mirror image =
parity transformation, P) produced with a mirror perpendicular to the plane1 and the eﬀect
It is clear from this ﬁgure
on the orientation of its magnetic dipole moment are shown.
that, there are two non-superimposable enantiomers; notice that the current vectors will
not ﬁt after a C2 (180◦ edge perpendicular to the plane) and, as a consequence, a change
in the orientation of its magnetic dipole moment is produced. Also, in Fig. 9b, the parity
transformation for the ﬂat photon is shown. It is clear that the ﬂat photon has an internal
zero magnetic dipole moment, and contrarily to ﬂat fermion, this particle is invariant after
a P transformation (all the current vectors ﬁts after the C2 operation).
On Fig. 10, two ﬂat fermion enantiomers are traveling through an external magnetic ﬁeld
B, which is perpendicular and coming out of the plane (depicted by the dots). This external
magnetic ﬁeld interacts with the magnetic dipole moment (and/or the internal magnetic
ﬁeld) in each enantiomer separating them as shown (use vectors product where the ﬁrst
−→
µ ). This was checked experimentally with little
vector is the magnetic dipole moment,
magnets arranged and passed through an external magnetic ﬁeld as shown in the ﬁgure.
Finally, a separation to right and left occurs, which is consistent with the Stern-Gerlach
1Actually, this can be appreciated in Fig. 1 because the right one toroid is the mirror image of the left
one, just the direction of the current in one of those have to be changed, to produce a mirror image with a
mirror perpendicular to the plane.

18

Figure 9: Parity transformation of a ﬂat fermion a and ﬂat photon b.

19

Figure 10: Stern-Gerlach experiment in ﬂatland.

20

results. In the case of ﬂat photon, Fig. 9b shows that that object will not produce such
results, since this object have a zero magnetic dipole moment.
On Fig. 11, 32 electrons pass through a magnetic ﬁlter, which consisted in blocking the
electrons deviated to the right, the other leftist ones passed through such ﬁlter (right ﬁlter).
Later, the orientation of the external magnetic ﬁeld is changed to 90◦ to the left. Due
to the change in the external magnetic ﬁeld orientation, the electron intersection with the
plane changes also, from the θ like intersection, shown in all previous ﬁgures, to a φ like
intersection. This is a 50:50 process, thus half of the electron magnetic dipole moments aim
above and perpendicular to the plane and the other half aim in the counter direction. In this
form, the electrons are retarded or accelerated through this particular magnetic ﬁeld, but
non-is blocked because the blocking device is out of the plane. As a result of this process,
8 electrons passed through this particular ﬁlter. Upon going back to a θ like orientation, a
new rearrangement of the φ electrons occur, again by chance, dividing the ﬁltered electrons
in the two possible orientation θ electrons can have. Thus, from the 8 electrons that passed
the φ oriented magnetic ﬁlter, 4 are blocked to the left and 4 are passed to the right. Finally
a 50 ◦/◦ correlation appears very clearly, each ﬁlter divides the amount of electrons in two,
but a particular magnetic ﬁeld orientation produces the elimination of the previous ﬁltering
process, because switching between θ and φ like electron intersection with the plane. Also,
it can be appreciated that the electrons which passes the right ﬁlter will be stopped by a left
ﬁlter (0 ◦/◦ correlation) and that they will pass another right ﬁlter (100 ◦/◦ correlation).
On Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, Einstein-Podolski-Rosen (EPR) [25, 26] like correlation experiments
It is believed that Fig. 12 is the case for equal oriented
with ﬂat electrons can be observed.
ﬁlters, because both ﬁlters allow the passing of the same kind of magnetic dipole moment
orientation in the ﬂat electron. It is very easy to realize that if the up going ﬂat electron does
pass through the ﬁlter, then its down going companion (which will have, always, an opposite
magnetic dipole moment) does not pass its ﬁlter, whereas, if the up going ﬂat electron does
not pass through the ﬁlter, then its down going companion always emerges from its ﬁlter.
It is believed that Fig.13 is the case for counter oriented ﬁlters, because both ﬁlters allow
the passing of opposite kind of magnetic dipole moment orientation in the ﬂat electron. if a
particular up going ﬂat electron passes its ﬁlter, then its companion down going always passes
its ﬁlter, whereas, if the up going electron does not pass its ﬁlter, its companion electron
doesn’t pass through its ﬁlter either. Fig. 14, is ﬁgure 13 but changing the orientation of
one of the ﬁlters to 90◦. Again, the change in the orientation of a magnetic ﬁlter from θ to φ
like intersection, opens the possibility of the reorientation of the magnetic dipole moments
at random. As a consequence, if a particular down going electron passes its ﬁlter, one-half of
the time its companion up going electron will emerge with the same magnetic dipole moment
orientation, one-half of the time with the counter orientation.

21

Figure 11: Flat electrons through magnetic ﬁlters with diﬀerent orientations

22

Figure 12: EPR experiment with zero correlation

23

Figure 13: EPR experiment with 100 ◦/◦ correlation

24

Figure 14: EPR experiment with perpendicular magnetic ﬁlters

25

8 Discussion

8.1 Flat Fermion

The new dimensions already described come to solve one of the early mysteries in fermion
It was that the charged sphere model should not exist, because the
model development.
enormous electric repulsion forces, which will occur at those tiny distances, necessarily, will
throw apart the sphere’s equal sign electric walls, in pieces [15]. This way of thinking drives
Dirac (without the actual possibility of higher dimensionality) to propose his point particle.
As currents exist in these new curved dimensions, equal sign electric walls built in them, ac-
tually exist and they can not go anywhere, because the curved dimensions described conﬁne
them. As a matter of fact, femtometer toroidal structures, not sphere ones, has been found
in nuclei [1], and these structures can only exist, if their charged walls are shaped by those
curved dimensions.
On the other hand, as the problem of fermion stability is solved with the new dimensions
found, and toroidal shapes have been detected for fermions. The interpretation of Stern-
Gerlach results, drives one again to imagine a two ways of spinning charged spheres, which
will produce two diﬀerent oriented magnetic dipole moments, depending on the way they
spin, and will undergo a separation under an external magnetic ﬁeld. However, as it was
described, the 3D toroidal dipole moment temporal intersection with the plane, produces a
magnetic dipole moment also (see Fig. 7), which change its orientation under a parity trans-
formation, producing non-superimposable enantiomers (see Fig. 9a), therefore a ﬂatland
version of Stern-Gerlach results was found experimentally (see Fig. 10). By this way, the
new model is consistence with Stern-Gerlach results also, with no need to imagine something
spinning, but a toroid spending time in intersecting the plane.
One advantage of this model is that its hyper-part (the ﬂat particle is in 2D space, its hyper-
part is the 3D toroid) is, actually, the 3D intersection of the real model, which would be a
4D toroidal structure. Therefore, one can treat the 3D toroid as the measurable part of the
real fermion, which is also corroborated after ref. 1. If this toroid rotates, at rest through
its equator edge (an edge through its φ perimeter), it can be confused with a sphere, which
radius will be the toroid internal diameter, two times the θ radius, dθ, shown on Table I. As
a matter of fact, using dispersion-elation ﬁtting, Mainz reports 0.847 fm, as the radius of the
proton [21], and this value is deviated within 1 ◦/◦ from the theoretical result given in Table
I. Hofstadter et al. obtained 0.80 fm as the proton radius and concluded that the neutron
radius should be very similar to this value [22]. This located this neutron radius value at 5
◦/◦ from the theoretical value given in the same table.
Regarding the electron, electron-electron and electron-positron scattering experiments have
been correctly predicted by the Dirac theory of the electron, which implies that the elec-
tron is a point and/or that its extension is not bigger than 0.001 fm. This fact is in direct
contradiction with the Lamb shift results, which reveals that the electron’s electric charge is
smeared out over a region of space that is comparable to the electron Compton radius, i.e.
386 fm [16].
As described before, when the ﬂat electron is traveling (see Fig. 3). It is spending some

26

time to leave its electric ﬁeld vectors (this is the time used in equations 17 and 20). The
intersection time for a ﬂat electron is 2.6 10−21 s to travel 772 fm from a total θ perimeter
of 4852 fm, in each θ circle branch of its toroid. In this interval of time, the ﬂat electron
is touching the plane in four places, separated 1544 fm at least, to leave four electric ﬁeld
vectors and 1/6 of its e/2π 2D charge. Thus, in order to have a collision with the whole ﬂat
electron θ intersection circles, the time spent in the collision, should be 1.5 10−20 s or more.
If the time spent in a collision is less than this time slot, the collision will happen between
point-like structures (sections of the ﬂat electron θ circles). Thus Møller and Bhabba scatter-
ing equations (constricted to 2D space) would predict that behavior, which is in agreement
with the experimental evidence [17].
In the case of the ﬂat proton, the time to completely show its structure is 8.4 10−24 s (prob-
ably 2.79 times even lower) to travel its 2.6 fm of total θ perimeter. Thus, the ﬂat proton
needs 1835 times less time in 1835 times less length, in comparison with the ﬂat electron to
show its whole structure in a collision event. Just for a comparison, a typical collision time in
a nuclear reaction is ∼ 10−22 s [18], which is enough for the ﬂat proton to show up completely,
but it would allow just 29 fm from the 4852 fm of the ﬂat electron θ perimeter, 0.6 ◦/◦ of its
structure, to show up. Increasing the energy of the collision would diminish the time of the
collision event, showing a point-like behavior even further. For example, If the collision time
is 8.4 10−24 s. The ﬂat electron would show only 2.5 fm, 0.05 ◦/◦ of its structure. Certainly,
increasing the energy of the collision will go against the collision time required for the ﬂat
electron to show up. This would be also the case for the ﬂat proton at very high energies,
if it would not get destroyed in pieces before showing such behavior. Hence a lower energy
technique should be used to search another aspects of the ﬂat electron structure. For more
or less the same reasons, this has been suggested in other electron model [20]. Coming back
to the electron radius, the present model adopts Compton lengths in the toroidal structure,
because the ﬂat proton and neutron gave a very accurate result in its radiuses, therefore the
ﬂat electron should follow the same trend (eq. 4). Also, the ﬂat electron will have a lower
spiral current, iθ (eq.12) in comparison with the ﬂat proton, thus it has to occupy a bigger
space (run a longer time) in order to produce the same charge as the later, and ﬁnally being
lighter implies that the ﬂat electron should occupy a higher area than the ﬂat proton in the
plane, in order to exert a lower tension on it. As it will be discussed, this is the origin of its
mass.
As one can see, the density values in Table I for the proton and neutron are in the order of
magnitude of current estimates ∼ 10+18 Kg m−3 [23]. Moreover, taking the diameter given
in ref. 1, for the deuteron, which is ∼ 1 fm and using the horn toroid volume (which was
used to derivate eq.7), one has

V = 2π2r3 = 2.510−45m3
(24)
The deuteron density is ﬁnally 1.36 10+18 Kg m−3, which is a little bit higher than the proton
and or neutron’s density reported in Table I, as it would be expected. In the case of the
electron, if one uses the corrected Quantum Electrodynamics radius for the electron, which
is 670 fm [19] in equation 24 and using the electron mass, one arrives to a density of 1.5 105
Kg m−3, for the electron, which is in good agreement with the result presented in Table I.
Since the ﬂat fermion 3D toroid has a toroidal dipole moment. The ﬂat fermion 2D magnetic
dipole moment was identiﬁed as the temporal intersection of this 3D anapole moment, in the

27

plane. By using e as the charge of the 3D toroid, the module value of the ﬂat electron and
neutron ﬁtted the known values, 1.0012 and 1.91315 ~e/2m0 [24] very well (within 1 and 5
◦/◦ respectively, c.f. equations 17 and 18). However, the ﬂat proton deviated considerably,
being its magnetic dipole moment three times bigger than the experimental value. This could
be explained if the intersection time for the ﬂat proton, which is supposed to be h/πm0c2, is
for some reason, 2.79 times shorter than the same for the other two particles (in each particle
time scale). Since ﬂat neutron ﬁts the magnetic dipole value, when using 2 e, it looks like
the ﬂat proton gets a slower intersection time when it traps a ﬂat electron and becomes a
ﬂat neutron.
Charge appears as a quality of the current; therefore positive or negative currents will produce
the respective signed charge. By this way an electric ﬁeld, which is independent from the
SEFPP and the magnetic dipole moment, can be produced as shown in Fig. 8.
One of the most diﬃcult properties to imagine is a magnetic dipole moment coming from a
zero charge object, which is the case of the neutron. However, since the charge is a quality of
the current, one can has two same circulating direction but opposite sign toroidal currents,
which: will add as the same anapole moment, will produce the magnetic dipole moment
upon intersection with the plane, will have the same internal magnetic ﬁeld orientation and
it will only change direction upon parity transformation (see Fig. 9 a). Therefore, one can
have a magnetic dipole moment built with 2 e, but a zero charge object and, this object,
still has its enantiomer, i.e. it will produce Stern-Gerlach results.
On Fig. 10, the ﬂatland equivalence of the Stern-Gerlach experiment for saying, ﬂat electrons,
is observed. Since that universe has only two dimensions, a moving particle can go just to the
right or left, or can be accelerated or retarded. In the case of Fig. 10, a very clear separation
between up and down oriented magnetic dipole moments to the left and to the right is
observed. This was veriﬁed with magnets arranged as described in the ﬁgure. Therefore,
it is believed that the separation occurs as consequence of the interaction of the internal
magnetic ﬁeld and not the magnetic dipole moment of a given electron with the external
magnetic ﬁeld.
Fig. 11 is an example of the travel of ﬂat electrons through diﬀerent oriented magnetic
ﬁlters in ﬂatland. After passing the ﬁrst right-ﬁlter, the change in orientation of the second
ﬁlter to 90◦, made the electron to intersect ﬂatland through its φ axis. This process is at
random, therefore, the orientation produced by the ﬁrst ﬁlter is lost. However, the number of
electrons is reduced to a half, because in this orientation half of the electrons are accelerated
and the other half are retarded (the blocking device is out of the plane). Also, this orientation
produces a lost in the identiﬁcation of the particle because its magnetic dipole moment is
out of the plane. Finally, upon another random rearrangement of the 8 accelerated electrons
in a left-ﬁlter, 4 electrons with their magnetic dipole moment completely opposed to the
direction of the magnetic dipole moment of the 16 electrons which passes the ﬁrst ﬁlter,
occurs. And this behavior is consistent with the 3D experimental fact [25].
The diameter of the φ oriented electron is 2λ/π, its perimeter is 4λ, which is the same as the
sum of the perimeters of the two circles in the θ orientation. If one assumes that the same
θ current occurs in the φ intersection, the charge is the same in either kind of intersection
with the plane.
The change in the orientation of the intersection from θ to φ like, accompanied with the 50:50
stochastic process is reveling in regard with the uncertainty principle. The θ orientation is

28

what produces the sinusoidal electric ﬁeld pattern printed in the plane and it is the way
to know the momentum of the particle with precision. However, to do so the particle is in
two places of the plane at the same time, therefore, the measurement of its exact position
is even nonsensical. It is pure non-local to produce the wave that leaves in the plane. The
stochastic change to the φ intersection stops the particle being non-local, to occupy just one
place in ﬂatland, thus its position can be measured very precisely but in doing so, it stops
also to produce the sinusoidal pattern, ergo its momentum is completely unknown and there
is no way to avoid this, because it is a particle-space intrinsic property.
Fig. 12 and 13 show, clearly, that simple symmetry will explain zero and 100 ◦/◦ correlation
experiments, respectively. On Fig.14, however, it is clear that knowing the position, i.e. φ
like intersection with the plane of the up-going accelerated, retained or even stopped electron
makes a lost in its identiﬁcation in 2D space, as well as the information about its momentum,
as discussed before. Therefore, the act of measuring the position of the up-going particle,
aﬀects the original entanglement and the precision in the measurement of the system total
momentum; making it impossible to deduce, with precision, the momentum of the up-going
particle by subtracting the momentum of the down-going particle from the system total
momentum. Ergo, the EPR paradox is solved without the ”spooky action at a distance”
[26], i.e., uncertainty prevails no matter the arrangement of the experiment,
because it accompanies the particle wherever it goes.
With the increment of one dimension in the model presented, it suggests that the real fermion
is a 4D torus, with two ways of intersecting 3D world: one is when it travels and intersects 3D
space in two separated places, leaving a sinusoidal electric ﬁeld that uses all the dimensions
of the 3D space and the other when it is at rest, adopting the shape of a torus (in the ground
state). It also will have a 4D anapole moment, which temporal intersection with the 3D
space will produce a 3D magnetic dipole moment. Self-interference occurs in all quantum
objects and it has been probed even in atoms [27]. Therefore, diﬀerent atoms should be
a 4D torus in the ground state also. As a matter of fact, femtometer toroidal structures
have been detected for 2H,3,4 He,6,7 Li and 16O [1]. Although it is beyond the scope of this
paper, it is not so diﬃcult to imagine a toroid with all the proton currents alternate with
neutron-ones. This line of thoughts would increase the application of this self-interference
model to understand nuclear properties.

8.2 Flat Photon

As one makes two turns in the θ axis, all the features observed in the ﬂat fermion’s SEFPP
change, and another kind of SEFPP appear. In this case, one obtains a sinusoidal pattern
also, but it uses one dimension less from the two available in the plane (see Fig. 2 and 4).
The double turn in the θ axis also produces that both toroids move in the same direction in
the φ axis, which was interpreted, as a property of no resistant to be moved by the particle,
i.e. no inertia. Contrarily to the case of ﬂat fermion, the double turn in the θ axis produces
that each toroid has opposite orientation in its magnetic dipole moment, therefore, it has
an internal zero magnetic dipole moment (see Fig. 9 b) and does not produce Stern-Gerlach
results, i.e. ﬂat photon will not change the direction of movement under a magnetic ﬁeld. In

29

this sense, also occurs opposite sign currents between each ﬂat photons toroids, producing a
zero external electric ﬁeld object. Since ﬂat photon is made with two toroids with opposite
charges and each toroid has two θ turns, it is not so diﬃcult to produce two opposite charged
ﬂat fermions upon ﬂat photon dissociation [28], since all the components for a ﬂat and anti
ﬂat fermion are in the ﬂat photon.
Actually, there is no clue about the internal structure of a real photon. The present model
indicates the ﬁrst possible looks to a real photon, albeit it is constricted to a 2D space and
it is not a 4D model. It is believed that in Fig. 2 one is looking to a polarized ﬂat photon,
because there is no room to allow another plane to wave. In the case of real photon, there
will be multiple planes in 3D space and, therefore, one could have photons with diﬀerent
polarization planes. However, in order to observe this; again, one would need to make the
intersection of a 4D torus, with the characteristic suggested by the present model, in a 3D
space. By this way, it would be possible to observe the real photon sinusoidal current printed
in the 3D space picture, which was deduced from Maxwells laws, and which actually occupies
two dimensions (its sinusoidal electric and magnetic ﬁelds oscillate in perpendicular planes)
from the 3 available [29].
Given that the ﬂat photon does not change direction in its movement when it pass through
a magnetic ﬁeld and that there is just one plane in ﬂatland, this ﬂat photon model is not
suitable to explain its correlation experiments.
From the description of the ﬂat fermion and photon structures, the duality wave-particle
appears manifest: Fermions and Photon are hyper-dimensional particles, which
leaves diﬀerent kinds of electromagnetic waves in the vacuum.

8.3 Origin of Inertia and Mass

As ﬂat fermions and photon cross ﬂatland, a sinusoidal electric ﬁeld is leaved in that world
(2D space); the same explains the wave behavior that those diﬀerent particles show. The
De Broglie wavelength is produced as a consequence of the intrinsic resistant to be moved,
showed by ﬂat fermions. Also ﬂat fermions use the two coordinates of ﬂatland to travel (see
Fig. 3). Flat photon is not resistant to be moved and its SEFPP uses one dimension less
from the two available in that space to travel (see Fig. 4). Since real photon has no mass
but real fermions do have it: The dimensional condition to have mass is that the object
intersection in a given space, should use the same number of dimensions that
has such a space. As mass occurs when all the dimensions of a given space are used, it
exerts a tension on that space, bending it, just as a light metal ring bends the surface of
the water when ﬂoats on it. Furthermore, if the area of the object is bigger, it will exert
less tension on the water surface (2D space), which will tolerate it better. This supports
also that the ﬂat electron (less mass but bigger Compton wavelength) is bigger than the ﬂat
proton as it has been discussed. In the case of objects that occupy n-1 dimensions from the
space they intersect, such tension does not occur and the bending eﬀect is not produced,
which is the case of the ﬂat photon. As one can see this concept of mass is consistent with
what is proposed by the general theory of relativity [30], and it is kinetic independent [31].

30

8.4 Self-interference and the Interpretation of Quantum Mechan-

ics

As it is very clear from Fig. 1 and 2, that ﬂat fermion and ﬂat photon are objects, which
intersection process with the plane leaves a SEFPP as they travel through it. Therefore, the
ad hoc particle-wave duality concept and the principle of complementarity begin to be clari-
ﬁed. Flat fermion and ﬂat photon are higher dimensional particles, which leaves a sinusoidal
electric ﬁeld printed in the plane as they travel through it and therefore, the wave equa-
tion applies to describe both kind of particles behavior. Furthermore, since the intersection
process leaves this electric ﬁeld vectors in the plane, ﬂatlander witness the appearing and
disappearing of those electric ﬁeld vectors, coming from nowhere! And this happens with
both objects. Therefore, the ad hoc use of creation and destruction operators [6] begins also
to make sense.
According to the model, self-interference is a natural consequence of the internal structure
of the ﬂat quantum particle, which because its higher dimensionality can be in two places
at the same time and leaves electric ﬁeld vectors with diﬀerent phases in the world they are
intersecting, and therefore could interfere with themselves. Also, the uncertainty principle
appears as an intrinsic property of the quantum object, which is completely non-local (it is
in two places at the same time) to provide information about its momentum and when it is
localized in only one place, it stops to provide such information.
Self-interference and the uncertainty principle are central for the understanding of any in-
terpretation of Quantum Mechanics (QM). For instance, those properties have been used as
evidence for the parallel universes interpretation [32, 33] However, the higher dimensionality
of ﬂat quantum objects, requires the use of just one universe (the plane), to explain quantum
properties.
Since one has to deal with the intersection of higher dimensional object, which can be in
two places at the same time, leaves a sinusoidal pattern and obeys the uncertainty princi-
ple. The Copenhagen interpretation, based on probabilities derived from the wave equation
(the electric ﬁeld sinusoidal pattern) and uses the principle of complementarity, appears as
a good approximation. Albeit, the quantum object inner structure was abandoned by this
interpretation. In this sense, the present model is consistent with that interpretation of QM.
Therefore, it is highly probable for the electron and/or the photon to be in two places (both
holes of the interference slit) at the same time. And this just reﬂexes a property of the
intersection of a higher dimensional object in a lower dimensional space. Finally, the new
three dimensions described, help to understand why string theory proposes 10 to explain
matter, light and gravity (everything). It would be possible that sub-atomic particles show
others extra dimensions. However, with these new three, their quantum-optic behavior can
be understood. Another interesting point is that these dimensions are curved, not at the
Plank length (10−33 m) as it has been established [2], but as it has been shown, it happens
at atomic lengths (10−15 m). As a consequence of the number of phenomena that can be
explained with the same model, the intersection of a higher dimensional object in
a space with lower dimensions has proven to be a powerful concept to explain
quantum properties.

31

9 Conclusions

In explaining self-interference a
A new perspective to matter and light has been oﬀered.
number of new dimensions and symmetries appears. Inertia and mass found its origin in the
structure and kind of interaction with the space, done by the ﬂat quantum object. The new
concept of mass found with this model, joins quantum mechanics and the general theory of
relativity. Nonetheless the dimensional constrain found by working with a lower than real
dimensional model, consistency with the actual knowledge is found either by ﬂat fermions
and ﬂat photon.

10 Acknowledgement

The author is deeply thankful to Dr. Humberto Figueroa, whose inspiration and discussions
were crucial for this work and to Mr. Victor Blanco and Mr. Jos´e Bergoya for the drawings.

References

[1] J.L. Forest, V.R. Pandharipande, S.C. Pieper, R.B. Wiringa, R. Schiavilla and A. Ar-

riaga, Phys. Rev. C, 54 (1996) 646.

[2] M. Kaku, Hyperspace, A Scientiﬁc Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps,
and the Tenth Dimension, (New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, 1994),
16.

[3] J. Gribbin, Q is for quantum, an Encyclopedia of Particle Physics, (New York: The Free

Press, 1999), 177.

Science Library, 1985), 80.

[4] R. Feynman, QED, The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, (New Jersey: Princeton

[5] X.Y. Zou, L.J. Wang and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. Let., 3, 67 (1991) 318.

[6] K. Awaya and M. Tomita, Phys. Rev. A, 56 (1997) 4106.

[7] J. Gribbin, Q is for quantum, an Encyclopedia of Particle Physics (New York: The Free

Press, 1999), 112.

[8] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), 79.
Spanish version of Quantum Physics of atoms, molecules, solids, nuclei and particles,
(New York: John Wiley and Sons).

32

[9] D. Halliday and R. Resnik, ”Physics” parts I and II, (New York: John Wiley and sons,

1966), 1072.

Free Press, 1999), 371.

[10] J. Gribbin, Q is for quantum, an Encyclopedia of Particle Physics, (New York: The

[11] E.P. Battey-Pratt and T.J. Racey, Int. J. Theor. Phys., 19 (1980) 437.

[12] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), 59.

[13] V.M. Dubovic and V.V. Tugushev, Phys. Rep., 187 (1990) 145.

[14] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), 89.

[15] R. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, Feynman Lectures on Physics, (Reading,

Massachuset: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1963-65), vol. 2, chapter 28.

[16] M. H. Mac Gregor, The Enigmatic Electron, (Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer Academic

Publisher,1992), 6.

[17] Ibid, 49.

Publisher,1992), 5.

[20] Ibid, 132.

[18] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), 676.

[19] M. H. Mac Gregor, The Enigmatic Electron, (Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer Academic

[21] Karshenboim S.G., Can. J. Phys., 77 (1999) 241.

[22] R. Hofstadter, F. Bumiller and M.R. Yearian, Rev. Mod. Physics., 30 (1958) 482.

[23] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), 595.

[24] R. Weast and M. J. Astle Editors, CRC HandBook of Chemistry and Physics 63rd

edition, (Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 1982-1983), 66.

[25] R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, (Read-

ing, Massachusetts: Addison Wesley Pub. Co., 1963-65), vol 3, Chapter 5.

[26] J. Gribbin, Q is for quantum, an Encyclopedia of Particle Physics, (New York: The

Free Press, 1999), 127.

[27] Ibid, 113.

33

[28] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), 65.

[29] M. Alonso and E. Finn, FISICA, Volumen II: Campos y Ondas (Mexico: Fondo Ed-

ucativo Interamericano, 1976), 746.
Spanish version of Fundamental University Physics, Volume I, Mechanics, (Reading,
Massachusetts: Addison Wesley Pub. Co.)

[30] C. Will, The Renaissance of General Relativity in The New Physics, edited by P. Davies,

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 7.

[31] M. Jammer, Concepts of Mass in Contemporary Physics and Philosophy, (Princeton,

New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1999), 26.

[32] P.C.W. Davies and J.R. Brown, The Ghost in the Atom, (Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1999) 87.

[33] A. Shimony, Conceptual Fundation of Quantum Mechanics in The New Physics, edited

by P. Davies, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 392.

34

