4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Elimination of High-Energy Divergence in
Relativistic Lagrangean Formulation of
Gravitating Particle Dynamics

Anatoli Vankov

vankova@bethanylb.edu; anatolivankov@hotmail.com

1 Introduction

Diﬀerent aspects of the gravitational problem are discussed, for example, in [1]
with further references. There is a statement that Newton’s formulation of the
gravitational law in 3-space (i=1, 2, 3)

with the ﬁeld equation

d2xi
dt2 = −

∂Φ
∂xi

∇2Φ = 4πGρ

(1)

(2)

cannot be incorporated into Special Relativity Theory (SRT). The Newtonian
ﬁeld propagates with inﬁnite velocity, and one might expect that this assumption
would be automatically corrected in the relativistic generalization of the gravi-
tational law. However, numerous attempts to do this led to inherent contradic-
tions or apparent inconsistence with experiments; for example, new relativistic
gravitational ﬁeld concepts resulted in the absence of bending of light in the
gravitational ﬁeld of Sun unless the General Relativity Theory (GRT) concept
of curved space-time metric was introduced. At the quantum level, the grav-
itational problem remains unresolved; it discussed, for example, in [2, 3]. We
think that such problems as the alleged incompatibility of gravity phenomenon
with SRT, the nonremovable divergence in GRT ﬁeld concept, the need of arti-
ﬁcial renormalization procedure in current ﬁeld theories, and a general problem
of gravitational ﬁeld quantization point to the same root: the assumption of
proper mass constancy in current ﬁeld theories. In the present paper the prob-
lem of 1/r singularity of gravitational potential is investigated in the framework
of Lagrangean formulation of Relativistic Dynamics of point particle with the
proper mass dependent on ﬁeld strength. We start with the introduction of the
new mass concept.

1

2 The proper mass as a dynamical variable in
the 4-coordinate and 4-momentum space

Assuming the proper mass being ﬁeld-dependent, let us consider the Larangian
L = m − W characterizing a point particle motion along the world line s. The
Lagrangian consists of the two parts corresponding to proper kinetic and poten-
tial energy change; in other words, the change of the proper mass of a moving
particle is due to the force ﬁeld action. The Lagrangian may be considered in
both 4-coordinate xµ = (c0t, xi) (µ = 0, 1, 2, 3), and 4-momentum pµ = muµ,
where the proper velocity is uµdxµ/ds. The zero component of any 4-vector is
called a time part of the vector, while the space part is given by µ = i = 1, 2, 3.
The scalar product is deﬁned xµxµ = (x0)2 − (xixi) and similarly for any pair of
4-vectors. The world line element ds relates to the proper time τ of the particle:
ds = c0dτ where c0 is the speed of light at inﬁnity. One should take into account
that a massive particle travels along the time-like world line characterized by
the independent equation:

= −1

dxµ
ds
Thus, in the above formulation of dynamical problem we deal with proper phys-
ical quantities in the 4-coordinate space, such as the proper mass, the proper
time, the proper velocity, the proper momentum, the proper force, and so forth;
they are measured in a comoving reference frame. Further, the particular case of
the Lagrangian independent of the proper velocity is considered. Consequently,
the equation of motion along the world line from the Hamilton Principle is

(3)

dxµ
ds

There should be a relationship between the potential energy term and the tan-
gent component of the force 4-vector K s = −dW /ds. The proper velocity
4-vector uµ is a unit vector tangent to the world line; therefore, K s = K µuµ =
K · u, and the equation (4) becomes

Taking into account (3) and following from it identity u · (du/ds) = 0, it can be
transformed into

dm
ds
or with the 4-momentum p = mu

u · u

+ mu ·

= K · u

du
ds

Finally, the equations of motion in 4-coordinate form are

dm
ds

−

dW
ds

= 0

dm
ds

= −K · u

u ·

= u · K

dp
ds

d
ds

(muµ) = K µ

2

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

This is quite understandable because the tangent component of p is p · u =
−m(s). Thus, we have a relativistic analog of the second Newton’s law, in which
the ordinary force is replaced by the Minkowski force K µ. The equations of mo-
tion (8) are formulated in a covariant form in the 4-coordinate space. Similar
ones are known in Relativistic Mechanics with the assumption of proper mass
constancy. The assumption is discussed in [4]); it is tacitly accepted in current
relativistic ﬁeld theories and is widely believed to be physically true, though
the alternative was actually never investigated. The statement of this work is
that Relativistic Gravitational Mechanics of point particle with the proper mass
being a dynamical variable (the Alternative Relativistic Mechanics) is a natu-
ral relativistic generalization of corresponding Newton’s gravitational dynamics.
The usual way of deriving (8) with the proper mass being ﬁeld independent is to
consider the relativistic Lagrangian in (xi, t) coordinate system for a single par-
ticle acted on by a conservative force independent of velocity [5]; the goal is not
to ﬁnd equations of motion but rather chose a function L for which the Euler-
t2
Lagrange equations, as obtained from the variational principal δ R
t1 L dt = 0,
“agree” with the known relativistic equations. The following Lagrangian seems
to satisfy this requirement: L = −mc2
0 is a
squared magnitude of a coordinate 3-velocity vi = dxi/dt, and V is the potential
depending only on position; a space part of the corresponding Minkowski force
follows from the above form. Clearly, the factor p1 − β2 in L appeared as a
result of a coordinate transformation in action R Lds → R Lc0dt/γ. The equa-
tions of motion mγdvi/dt = F i derived from the above Lagrangian are the ones
following from the space part of the equations (8) with the proper mass ﬁxed.
However, the role of time part of the Minkowski force here is not clear. Our
view of the problem is, as follows. The variational principle, if applied to the
problem of motion in 3-space and time, is not equivalent to that in the originally
covariant form describing a motion along the world line in terms of “running”
proper time τ . These are diﬀerent physical problem formulations having diﬀer-
ent solutions: the proper mass constancy in conventional Relativistic Mechanics
should be considered a weak-ﬁeld approximation of a general covariant solution,
which includes ﬁve unknown functions xµ(s), m(s) obtained from ﬁve equations
(8) and (3), as discussed in ([4]). For example, in the conventional formulation
the Minkowski force and momentum (or velocity) 4-vectors are always orthogo-
nal. In the alternative solution, as is seen from (5), the orthogonality may take
place in a particular case when the term dm/ds vanishes; the conditions can be
found from the following equation equivalent to (6):

0p1 − β2 − V , where β2 = vivi/c2

u

+ m

= K

dm
ds

du
ds
Let us consider now the Lagrangian L = m − W in the 4-momentum space
pµ = muµ, which is a complementary space, having space and time parts pµ =
(m, γmvi/co). Here, the proper mass m plays the same role as the proper arc
length s = c0τ in the coordinate space; the proper 4-velocity should be obtained
as uµ(p) = dpµ/dm, where the argument p indicates that the velocity is deﬁned
in the momentum space; not surprisingly, the velocity uµ(p) coincides with the

(9)

3

expression for 4-velocity in the 4-coordinate space uµ(p) = dxµ/ds. Thus, we
have L = m − W (m) and want to ﬁnd the trajectory of particle motion in
the 4-momentum space; the solution should describe the potential energy as a
function of the proper mass change under force action. Under earlier formulated
conditions, we have a general solution dL/dm = 0, or dm = dW . Taking the
potential energy being zero and the proper mass being constant m = m0 at
inﬁnity, we conclude that the proper mass should be connected to the potential
energy in the following way:

m = m0 − W (m).

(10)

The concrete dependence of mass on the strength ﬁeld m(xi) should be found by
solving equations (8). It is important to note that the alternative Lagrangean
problem formulation leads to a generalization of the conventional Relativistic
Mechanics; therefore, the property of proper mass variability in the force ﬁeld
follows from the ﬁrst principle independent of the type of force, and it is falsi-
ﬁable. The variable proper mass plays a decisive role in the elimination of the
so-called gravitational self-energy divergence problem; it will be illustrated by
using the equation (10) in the case of scalar potential 1/r.

3 The gravitational divergence problem and new

symmetries

For the practical use of the above results, one should express the trajectory
of particle motion (8) in terms of 3-space coordinates depending on time xi(t)
taking into account that ds = c0dt/γ, and the 4-vector velocity and momentum
x(t), t can be presented in the form uµ = (γ, γvi/c0) and pµ = (γm, γmvi/c0).
The space part of the equations is

with the relationship between Minkowski and ordinary forces in 3-space

while the time part contains the time component of Minkowski force K 0:

The equation (13) reﬂects the energy balance and can be expressed in terms of
space part of Minkowski force from (5):

d
dt

(γmvi) = F i

F i =

K i

c2
0
γ

d
dt

(γm) =

K 0

c0
γ

d
dt

(γmc2

0) = F iui +

c2
0
γ

dm
dt

4

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

In (14) the term c2
γ dm/dt describing the role of the proper mass variation in
relativistic dynamical process is recovered (probably, for the ﬁrst time in practice
of Relativistic Mechanics applications).

0

To investigate a free fall problem, we have to solve the equations (11) and
(14) in the case of static spherical symmetric gravitational ﬁeld due to a point
source of mass M . The gravitational force acting on a test particle of variable
proper mass m(r) at a distance r from the center is Fg(r)dr = c2
0m(r)d(rg/r),
where rg = GM/c2
0 is “the gravitational radius”. For simplicity, the case of the
test particle having zero total energy at inﬁnity is considered. The following
denotations are used: dr = vdt, 1/γ = p1 − β2, β = v/c0, 1/γr = 1 − rg/r.
The total energy conservation requires that the time component of Minkowski
force K 0 and the corresponding left-hand part of (14) is zero, E = γmc2
0 = m0c2
0,
and the energy balance is described by the equation

where the momentum is p(r) = m0v(r) and m(r)/m0 = 1−rg/r; it is convenient
to present the equation in the form

p(r)2 + m(r)2c2

0 = m2

0c2
0

m2

0β2 + m(r)2 = m2
0

(15)

(16)

It is seen that γr = γ that means that the gain of kinetic energy is due to the
change of potential energy W = m(r)c2
0(rg/r). Because the proper mass cannot
be negative, the above equations have physical sense within the range r ≥ rg.
At r = rg the proper mass and the baryon charge should vanish; this does not
look physically possible, that is why we consider the results in the range r > rg.
It is interesting to note that in the case of static potential when the particle
is moved by some transporting device with a small constant speed, the proper
mass changes exponentially, as is seen from (14):

m(r)/m0 = exp(−rg/r)

(17)

and a particle theoretically can approach the center within a limit r/rg → 0.
The dependence of a relative velocity in a central fall from rest at inﬁnity is
found from (16):

β = [1 − (m/m0)2]1/2 = [1 − (1 − rg/r)2]1/2

(18)

As was emphasized, it is valid in the range r > rg.

The result of fundamental importance is that the problem of 1/r gravita-
tional potential divergence is eliminated in the SRT Mechanics framework due to
the eﬀect of “proper mass exhaustion”. The eﬀect can be treated as a test par-
ticle back-reaction on the source action; in the conservative force ﬁeld the total
energy of the particle is limited to the maximal value stored in the proper mass
(plus kinetic energy, if any) at inﬁnity. Consequently, potential energy is pro-
portional to the variable proper mass convertible to kinetic energy. In the case
of particle-particle interaction, the total energy of the system include the energy

5

stored in variable proper masses of both particles. Thus, this is the assumed
constant proper mass that causes the “self-energy” divergence rather than the
1/r potential. The variable proper mass concept is justiﬁed by considering the
Lagrangean formulation of Relativistic Mechanics in both coordinate and mo-
mentum complementary spaces similarly to Quantum Mechanics methodology.
The scalar product of vectors dx = (dx/ds)ds and p is

dx · p = −c0m(s)dτ (s)

(19)

Recalling a relationship between the proper energy to the quantum frequency
(or to the proper time interval) m(s)c2
0 = h/dτ , one can conclude that the
known observed eﬀect of gravitational time dilation is caused by the roper mass
dependence on ﬁeld strength. The product is invariant in the gravitational ﬁeld
dx = (dx/ds)ds = −h/c0; it shows the intimate relationship between the Plank’s
constant in a quantum theory and the ultimate speed of light in a relativistic
theory, and a necessity of a relativistic quantum theory of gravitational ﬁeld.

Our gaining into insight of the problem formulation in both coordinate and
complementary (momentum) space reveals ﬁeld conservation properties under-
standable only at the new relativistic level. As is seen from (15), the total energy
conservation law means the constancy of the improper mass γ(r)m(r) = m0
of a particle in free fall (from rest at inﬁnity) and reﬂects the symmetry of
a momentum real rotation in the (pi, m) momentum space. The same rota-
tional symmetry takes place in the (xi, t) coordinate space due to constancy
of the improper time interval c0dt(r) = γ(r)dτ (r) = τ0. This is seen from
the metric form of the world line interval of the particle motion in the above
case ds2 = c2
Instead of conserved improper total mass
γ(r)m(r) = m0 we have the corresponding conserved improper time interval
c0dt(r) = γ(r)dτ (r) = τ0 (as measured at inﬁnity in a source-centered frame).
The conservation is justiﬁed by the quantum connection γmc2
0 = hγ/dt = h/dτ ,
from which it follows m(r) → m0 and τ (r) → τ0 at r → ∞. In addition to (15),
we have

0dt2 − dr2.

0dτ 2 = c2

dr2 + dτ 2c2

0 = dτ 2

0 c2
0

(20)

Thus, measurements of the improper mass and the improper time of a particle
in free fall does not reveal the presence of ﬁeld unless the corresponding proper
quantities are measured and compared.

4 Discussions and conclusion

We challenge a general opinion, discussed, for example, in [1], that the gravity
phenomenon is incompatible with the SRT framework. In our alternative SRT-
based approach, the current mass-energy concept and, correspondingly, the ﬁeld
concept is subject to revision. Looking at the equations (1), one can realize that
a relativistic generalization of Newton’s formulation of the gravitational law is
indeed impossible within the concept of constant proper mass. A probing a ﬁeld
means the introduction of a test particle; the mass of the test particle is not

6

present in (1). Our ﬁnding is that the 1/r gravitational potential singularity
in a ﬁeld source is not removable by itself: this is the potential energy that is
physically free of divergence provided the proper mass is a dynamical variable
consistently deﬁned in the Lagrangean (alternative) formulation of Relativistic
Mechanics. The equation of ﬁeld due to a system of interacting particle (the
source) in (2) becomes nonlinear because the ﬁeld causes a proper mass defect
characterizing a binding energy of the system. Similarly, the test particle is
aﬀected by the ﬁeld: its proper mass reduction characterizes ﬁeld strength. In
In this
other words, the standard proper mass at a given point is the ﬁeld.
theory, the solution of dynamical equation of test particle motion (as shown in
the example of free central fall) is free of divergence.

0 ) and the equivalent electric (Coulomb) energy We = m0c2
0 ): both ultimately are m0C2

The question arises: why a renormalization procedure of divergence elimi-
nation occured to be successful in electromagnetic theory but does not work in
a gravitational theory? To answer this question, one should compare the gravi-
tational potential energy Wg = m0C2
0 (rg/r) (with the gravitational radius rg =
GM/m0C2
0(ra/r)
(with the annihilation radius ra = kQq/m0C2
0 . It is
seen that the Coulomb potential can be “exhausted” at a distance r = ra >> rg
characterizing a particle “electric” size while the release of gravitational energy
is physically impossible in particle interactions: relativistic gravitational physics
is subjected to astrophysical conditions of big mass objects. This explains why
some artiﬁcial procedure of “cutting oﬀ” high momentum harmonics arising
from distances less than ra might solve (but not resolve) the problem of elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld divergence. We think that the need for “renormalization” in
a ﬁeld theory is a manifestation of problem to be resolved at the fundamental
level.

The scope of this work does not allow us to discus perspectives of the alterna-
tive approach for the development of relativistic electromagnetic divergence-free
theory, neither we are able to discuss here in detail issues related to the consis-
tency of the alternative approach with experiments: these topics need special
works. For further our materials, a reader is referred to electronic preprints:
gr-qc/0311063, “On the problem of mass origin and self-energy divergence in
relativistic mechanics and gravitational physics”; gr-qc/0105057, “Proposal of
experimental test of general relativity theory”; PhilSci Archive “On the possi-
bility of motion with the speed greater then the speed of light” (February, 2003).
The main purpose of the present work is to discuss the idea of the alternative ap-
proach to the relativistic ﬁeld theory development. The central claim is that the
variable proper mass concept is a natural generalization of the current concept
of a constant proper mass (as assumed in GRT, Relativistic Electrodynamics
and quantum ﬁeld theories); the alternative concept seems to be perspective for
the principle elimination of the ﬁeld divergence problem. Let us brieﬂy sum up
some preliminary results concerning experimental tests.

Obviously, the alternative approach is falsiﬁable and needs to be veriﬁed by
relativistic gravitational experiments, such as measurements of Mercury orbit
precession, gravitational red shift, time dilation, and radar echo time delay. It
should be emphasized that reliable experimental data relevant to the problem

7

were obtained under weak-ﬁeld conditions. Our rigor metric analysis showed
that the Schwarzschild metric form in GRT and the one in the alternative ap-
proach coincide under weak-ﬁeld and low-energy conditions; the diﬀerence is in
physical interpretations of calculated results. Consequently, the predictions are
numerically the same in a leading (linear) term, what means that one cannot
distinguish between the two theories by the criterion of the above mentioned
and similar experiments. Gravitational properties of photon were tested in some
of them. In our mass-energy concept, the total energy conservation requires the
constancy of photon frequency along with a momentum change for the photon
in gravitational ﬁeld: the ﬁeld acts on the photon as a refracting medium does.
Thus, the proper mass dependence on ﬁeld strength together with our photon
concept gives a physical explanation of the experiments involving the photon in
terms of gravitational potential, as opposed to the GRT treatment in terms of
space-time curvature. There was a suggestion ([6]) to introduce a dependence of
atomic frequency on static gravitational potential together with a conservation
of the photon total energy in the GRT interpretation of the gravitational red
shift; however, the eﬀect is consistently treated in GRT in terms of space-time
curvature, and the suggestion is in contradiction with the GRT foundations: the
proper mass constancy is clearly embedded in the GRT ﬁeld equations, while
such notions as a force, kinetic and potential energy are not relevant there.
As was mentioned before, there were unsuccessful attempts to develop a grav-
itational theory within the SRT framework in some post-Newtonian model of
photon being “attracted” by a gravitational force; the model was supposed to
explain the deﬂection of light grazing the Sun. One of the arguments for an
exclusion of the gravity phenomenon from the SRT domain came after realizing
that a requirement of coupling the photon to a gravitational scalar ﬁeld con-
tradicts to the fact that the stress-energy tensor for the electromagnetic ﬁeld in
Minkowski space is traceless (that is, not allowing the coupling). Our ﬁnding
that the photon deﬂection is due to the gravitational refraction rather than the
force attraction resolves this issue. It is interesting to note that the gravitational
refraction eﬀect was discussed in ([7]) from a diﬀerent viewpoint.

A diﬀerence in our and GRT predictions of strong-ﬁeld eﬀects rises with ﬁeld
strength. As an instructive example, let us compare our and GRT predictions of
radial motion of a photon and a massive particle in a spherical symmetric gravi-
tational ﬁeld outside a massive sphere (Earth, for example), ﬁeld strength being
characterized by the gravitational radius rg. In both theories, an observer “at
inﬁnity” in a sphere-centered reference frame should detect the photon slowing
down when approaching Earth. As for the particle, predictions are diﬀerent.
According to GRT, the particle also should slow down so that its speed could
not exceed the photon speed no matter how great the initial kinetic energy (or
initial Lorentz factor γ0 at inﬁnity was. The point is that for γ0 exceeding the
“critical” value γ0 ≥ 3/2, the particle would only decelerate (as if some “resist-
ing” force overcoming the gravitational one was exerted on it). In our approach,
the particle in this example would only accelerate (regardless of initial speed)
consistently with the conservation law of potential-to-kinetic energy transfor-
mation; the gravitational properties of the photon were above explained within

8

the same concept. From this, it follows that the particle having initial energy
above some threshold γthr should become superluminal what is impossible in
GRT. This prediction of a new physical phenomenon does not depend on a met-
ric consideration: the question whether the gravitational superluminocity exists
can be experimentally veriﬁed. Our calculations show that ultra-high energy
particles falling onto Earth with γthr > 2 · 104 are superluminal. Such particles
are present in cosmic rays; therefore, their superluminocity could be tracked by
Cherenkov radiation. The latter has to be very speciﬁc: photons are emitted
backward in a narrow cone (photon ﬂashes seem coming from Earth), while ﬂash
durations should be statistically distributed in ms range (typical time of photon
ﬂight upward to a detector aboard an experimental satellite); count statistics
should ﬁt cosmic rays ﬂux above the threshold for given geometrical and phys-
ical detection eﬃciency. Our proposal of the new gravitational test is the topic
of another work.

The main conclusion of this work can be formulated in the statement that the
so-called self-energy divergence due to 1/r gravitational potential is shown to be
eliminated in the concept of ﬁeld-dependent proper mass. Further investigations
of the problem are needed to understand a perspective of the concept for the
development of divergence-free relativistic ﬁeld theories.

References

[1] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, J. A. Wheeler. “Gravitation”. W. H. Freedman

and Company, San Francisco (1973).

[2] C. J. Isham. “Structural problems facing quantum gravity theory”, Pro-
ceedings of the 14th International Conference on General Relativity and
Gravitation. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1997), 167-209.

[3] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin. “The physical Hamiltonian in nonperturbative

quantum gravity”. Phys. Rev. Lett., 72, (4), (1994), 446-449.

[4] J.L.Synge. “Relativity: The Special Theory”. North Holland Publishing

Company, Amsterdam (1965).

[5] H. Goldstein. “Classical Mechanics”. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company;

series in Advanced Physics (1950).

[6] L.B.Okun, K.G.Selivanov, and V.L.Telegdi. “On the interpretation of the
redshift in a static gravitational ﬁeld”. Am.J.Phys. 68, (2), 115-119. Febru-
ary 2000.

[7] C. Moller. “The theory of relativity”. The international series of mono-

graphs on physics. Delhi, Oxford University Press (1972).

9

