4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Einsteinian Field Theory as a Program in Fundamental Physics

CIRI/03-smw04

Sanjay M. Wagh
Central India Research Institute,
Post Box 606, Laxminagar,
Nagpur 440 022, India
E-mail:cirinag ngp@sancharnet.in
(Dated: April 18, 2004)

I summarize here the logic that leads us to a program for the Theory of the Total Field in Einstein’s
sense. The purpose is to show that this theory is a logical culmination of the developments of
(fundamental) physical concepts and, hence, to initiate a discussion of these issues.

PACS numbers: 01.55+b; 01.65+g; 01.70+w

I.

INTRODUCTION

Our purpose is to analyze in one place Einstein’s
reasoning that led him to the program of a ﬁeld-
theory that, in his own words, is: Continuous func-
tions in the four-dimensional [continuum] as basic
concepts of the theory [1].

Einstein had summarized these reasons in [1].
However, we reconsider these from a diﬀerent per-
spective, particularly, of [2]. Then, we also modify
Einstein’s program suitably.

Furthermore, von Laue summarized in [3] the
developments related to conservation postulates in
Physics. In the present article, we shall often use
this excellent, historically as well as scientiﬁcally
important [13], article to illustrate and substanti-
ate our physical arguments.

II.

INERTIA, ENERGY AND

CONSERVATION LAWS

To begin with, and following von Laue, consider
Galileo’s famous analysis leading to the concept of
an inertia of a physical body.

Galileo observed that a body falling on the sur-
face of the earth from a certain altitude must ob-
tain precisely that velocity which it requires to re-
turn to its former level. Any deviation from this
law would but be able to furnish us a method for
making the body ascend by means of its own grav-
ity, a conceivable perpetuum mobile. We consider
this to be impossible.

Now, following Galileo, let a body ascend, after
it has fallen downwards a certain distance, on an
inclined plane. The lower the inclination of the
inclined plane toward the horizontal, the longer the
path the body requires to obtain its former level
on the plane. Galileo veriﬁed this experimentally.
Then, if the inclined plane were made horizontal,
we may conclude that the body will keep moving
on it to inﬁnity with undiminished velocity.

This last conclusion is not any experimental re-
sult but an inference to be drawn by imagining an
inﬁnite horizontal plane tangential to the surface
of the earth, an obvious impossibility.

Now, continuing with the earlier analysis, the
simplest form of the law of inertia was obtained by
Galileo, that the velocity of each (force-free) body
is maintained in direction and magnitude, both.
Here, the word inertia refers to the tendency of a
physical body to oppose a change in its state of
motion. An inertial mass is then a measure of the
inertia of a physical body.

Further, in those times, collisions were consid-
ered as the simplest form of interaction of physical
bodies. For m as the inertial mass and v as the ve-
locity of a body relative to an observer, Descartes
formed the quantity of motion, m v, the linear mo-
mentum, and asserted that it is conserved in a colli-
sion. He, however, considered velocity and, hence,
also the linear momentum as scalar quantities, for
us today, an erroneous notion.

Huygens, on the other hand, realized correctly
that the sum (formed with correct signs) of m v
has the same value before and after a perfectly
elastic collision, and that the sum of m v2 is also
conserved in such a collision.

Here entered Newton. He adopted the geometric
approach in deﬁning appropriate physical quan-
tities for physical bodies. Newton therefore con-
ceptualized velocity and, hence, linear momentum
also, as vector quantities. From this, Newton de-
veloped (diﬀerence) calculus needed to deal with
the notion of velocity of a body as a tangent to
its path. On this basis, Newton then proposed his
famous three laws of motion.

The concept of a mass point was introduced by
Newton as it was needed in his geometric approach.
(If not mass point, then what would move with
the tangential velocity along the one-dimensional
path?) We note, however, that, for Galileo, the
notion of an inertial mass was that of the measure
of the inertia of a physical body.

In Newton’s Principia, two pronouncements ap-
pear: ﬁrst, the rate of change of vector of (linear)
momentum of a mass point per unit time equals
vector of the force acting on it, and the second,
the forces between two mass points are equal and
opposite. Consequently, the interaction of an ar-
bitrary number of mass points never changes their
total momentum, it remains constant for any sys-
tem not subject to external forces.

Then was formulated the law of conservation of
angular momentum which is one of the important
consequences of the law of conservation of linear
In Newton’s formulation, it is also
momentum.
based on the concept of a mass point because the
angular momentum is a vector quantity: ~ℓ = ~r × ~p
where ~r is the radius vector of the mass point rela-
tive to a given ﬁxed point, ~p = m~v is the vector of
its linear momentum and we use the cross product
of vectors ~r and ~p to obtain the angular momentum
vector ~ℓ of the mass point.

Simultaneously, Newton also formulated his fa-
mous (inverse square) law of gravitation, furnish-
ing us the gravitational force of attraction between
two mass points. Here, Newton introduced a new
notion of the source properties of a particle. Pre-
cisely, if M is the source or gravitational mass of
one particle and m is the inertial mass of another
particle located at distance d from the ﬁrst parti-
cle, then the gravitational force of attraction (pro-
duced by M and acting on m) is given by the fa-
mous expression:

~Fg = − G

m M
d2

ˆd

where G is Newton’s constant of gravitation and ˆd
is a unit vector along the line joining the two par-
ticles with origin of the coordinates at the location
of the gravitational mass M .

It is essential to distinguish between the inertial
mass and the gravitational mass of the newtonian
particle. These two are conceptions of very diﬀer-
ent physical origins.

However, as ﬁrst shown by Galileo’s experiments
at the leaning tower of Pisa, the inertial and the
gravitational mass of a physical body are equal to
a high degree of accuracy. That is an experimental
result. But, the fact that these two quantities are
equal is to be recognized as an assumption of the
newtonian theory. (This recognition played a cru-
cial role in the formulation of the General Theory
of Relativity.)

Newton’s three laws of motion and his law of
gravitation then provided us a complete solution
to the problem of motions (mechanics) of physi-
cal bodies as mechanical systems, as collections of
newtonian particles.

2

Here, the newtonian third law of motion, the law
of equality of action-reaction pair, and his law of
gravitation show very distinctly that his mechanics
assumes action at a distance. Of course, there is
nothing objectionable in this and it is beside the
point as to whether Newton himself considered his
law of gravitation as some sort of approximation
to be replaced eventually by a law incorporating
ﬁnite speeds of propagation.

On the basis of the mathematical formulation
developed by him, Newton could then calculate
the planetary motions. Newtonian mechanics ob-
tained its major conﬁrmation from Kepler’s as-
tronomical observations. Moreover, all the other
great achievements of Newton’s work, the theory
of tides, the equilibrium conﬁgurations of rotating
bodies, the calculation of the speed of sound etc.
lent credence to various laws of conservation, of lin-
ear momentum, of angular momentum and, hence,
also to this monumental newtonian formulation of
mechanics of physical bodies.

There however existed one problem with the
newtonian framework, that of optics - the theory
of light. Newton’s corpuscular theory for light did
not explain every phenomenon of light, and New-
ton recognized this. In particular, the existence of
umbra and penumbra indicated that the light cor-
puscles penetrated “forbidden” region in the shad-
ows behind objects illuminated by light. Forbidden
region exists as Newton’s laws show that a particle
of light should not move there.

These problems of optical phenomena got ne-
glected and did not hinder in any way with the
scientiﬁc developments of mathematical character,
of those times, in newtonian mechanics. Some, in
particular, Huygens, however considered these and
developed the wave theory of light which could ex-
plain the optical phenomena.

Primarily, one of the simplest forms of a gen-
eral law of Nature is to assert the conservation of
some particular physical quantity. That a given
physical quantity is really subject to a conservation
principle is, however, to be decided only by exper-
imentations. Diﬀerent experimentations then con-
ﬁrmed the conservation principles obtainable from
the newtonian mechanics.

That is why the impact of the newtonian formu-
lation of mechanics completely overshadowed the
developments in Physics for the next few centuries.
That the mathematical structure of the newtonian
mechanics, erected by many others after Newton,
required no new experiments or observations is tes-
timony enough to say that the physical foundation
laid by Newton was completely suﬃcient to sup-
port it. This led the physicists of those times to
(erroneous) conviction that all of physics could be
reduced to newtonian mechanics.

Of course, the newtonian concept of a mass point
had been the basis of these developments because
Newton’s laws of motion presuppose it. As we have
already noted, this mass point is a notion derived
from the (point-wise) geometric approach to (one-
dimensional) paths of physical bodies. Then, we
have also noted earlier that the galilean notion of
inertial mass is simply that of the measure of the
inertia of a physical body.

The concept of kinetic energy, 1

2 m v2, was then
proposed and developed by Bernoulli (who gave
us the word “energy”) and Euler. That a change
in this quantity in a closed mechanical system did
not at all result in a reduction in its “capacity of
action” was emphasized by them.

The stimulus for a generalization of the concept
of energy to include other forms of “energy” existed
from the experiences with the thermal processes.
That the kinetic energy or mechanical work could
be lost while the temperature of the bodies under
consideration increased was known. Thus, the fact
that kinetic energy could be transformed to heat
was known and that led to thermodynamical con-
siderations of conservation postulates.

J R Mayer provided the reasonably accurate the-
oretical value for the mechanical equivalent of heat
and L A Colding obtained almost the same value
in his experiments involving friction.

Independently of Mayer, Helmholtz developed
the principle of conservation of energy and its im-
plications. Helmholtz derived his expressions for
energy directly from the impossibility of the per-
petuum mobile. He, then, reached the concept of
potential energy for mechanical systems, of the po-
tential energy of a body experiencing gravitational
force, of a charged body experiencing electric force,
of a magnetized body experiencing magnetic force
etc. His energy considerations applied to the pro-
duction of currents in galvanic cells, thermocouple,
electromagnetic induction etc.

Historically, Helmholtz’s considerations were not
generally accepted in the beginning. However, G
J Jacobi emphasized that in them we essentially
obtain the logical continuation of the earlier ideas
behind the science of newtonian mechanics. The
initial opposition to Helmholtz’s ideas gradually
disappeared and “energy considerations” became
important in Physics.

In the words of William Thomson (Lord Kelvin
of Largs), we ﬁnally had: We denote as energy of
a material system in a certain state the contribu-
tion of all eﬀects (measured in mechanical units of
work) produced outside the system when it passes
in an arbitrary manner from its state to a reference
state which has been deﬁned ad hoc. The words “in
an arbitrary manner” embody the physical law of
the conservation of energy.

3

Thus, the law of conservation of energy was,
gradually, found to hold beyond the sphere of new-
tonian mechanics. The same could also be called
the situation with the law of conservation of linear
momentum, to begin with. It took a gradual while
for this law to emerge out of the sphere of newto-
nian mechanics but that needed new conceptions
in the form of locality of actions.

Although Newton’s laws involved action at a dis-
tance, the collisions of a speciﬁc mass point with
the others in its immediate vicinity in a mechanical
system (of closely packed mass points) are think-
able as local phenomena. A local disturbance could
then propagate in such a mechanical system to
other regions from the region of its origin. These
considerations lead us to the calculation of the
speed of sound in such ﬂuid conﬁgurations. This
is exactly how ﬁnite speeds of propagation obtain
in Newton’s theory, although all its basic laws are
based on the action at a distance.

Concept of locality of action and related ideas
developed from those of ﬂuid properties of matter.
Considerations of closely packed newtonian par-
ticles led to development of concepts of density,
pressure, ﬂuxes, stresses etc.

We deﬁne density of newtonian particles (iner-
tial masses) as a function of space coordinates and
integrate it over the volume under consideration
to obtain the inertial mass contained within that
volume. Motions of newtonian particles lead us
to concepts of momentum transfer, pressure, etc.
Here, the mathematical procedure for switching
from the particle picture to the ﬂuid picture is a
well-deﬁned one, we note.

From the viewpoint of present mathematics, dif-
ferent physical quantities are measurable functions
deﬁned over the underlying [continuum] space.
Measure Theory tells us as to how to perform then
the integration (averaging) procedures involved in
above mentioned considerations.

The principle of local action (as opposed to ac-
tion at a distance) and that of ﬁnite velocity of
propagation of disturbances of physical quantities,
even in a vacuum, meaning a region with no (new-
tonian) particles present in it, ﬁrst gained promi-
nence in electromagnetism. (It is this connotation
of the word vacuum that is generally taken to be
implied by it and will be used here.)

Considerations of static electricity prompted
Coulomb to propose the (inverse square) law of
electrostatic force between two charged bodies.
Similar to the occurrence of inertial/gravitational
masses in Newton’s law of gravitation, Coulomb
introduced the electric charge as a measure/source
of the quantity of electricity in his law of force be-
tween electrically charged bodies. Similar consid-
erations were also used in magnetism.

The motion of a charged physical body along a
(point-wise) geometric path was again the pivotal
concept behind these laws. Therefore, of necessity,
the electric charge became the intrinsic property
of a newtonian point-particle.

At this point, we therefore note that the new-
tonian particle is then endowed with two distinct
source attributes or properties, gravitational mass
and electric charge. The gravitational mass acts
as a source of its gravitational force (deﬁned as
per Newton’s law of gravitation) while the electric
charge acts as a source of its electric force (deﬁned
as per Coulomb’s law).

It then gradually emerged that the motion of a
charged body results into the (simultaneous) exis-
tence of its magnetic force along with its electric
force. Ampere’s experiments and his laws of mag-
netism associated with current (of charges) were
the reasons behind this realization.

J C Maxwell then connected all these empiri-
cal laws to provide a sound mathematical founda-
tion to the theory of electromagnetism. Maxwell’s
theory then provided us the prediction of elec-
tromagnetic radiation, an electromagnetic distur-
bance propagating from the region of the source to
other regions at the speed of light.

Predictions of Maxwell’s theory of electromag-
netism were conﬁrmed in numerous experiments.
In particular, contributions of Faraday were note-
worthy. Also, Hertz’s spectacular conﬁrmation of
the existence of electromagnetic radiation lent due
credence to Maxwell’s theory.

For electromagnetic processes, Helmholtz’s en-
ergy methods yield merely a formula for the total
energy. This is as long as one believed in action at
a distance without a transmitting medium. But,
the question of localization of action or disturbance
then lacked meaning.

It is against this background that Michael Fara-
day developed the concept of ﬁeld as the medium
transmitting such localized action or disturbance.
The ﬁeld was considered as a change in the physi-
cal state of a system which was essentially located
in the dielectric. It is equally necessary to invoke
the same conceptions for even the empty space be-
tween the carriers of electric charge, electric cur-
rents and magnets.

Note that Maxwell’s theory does provide the
energy density (of the ﬁeld) which is composed
additively of an electric and a magnetic term:
1
8 π (E2 + B2), where E is the electric ﬁeld strength
and B is the magnetic ﬁeld strength. It is a nec-
essary supplement of the ﬁeld concept, ﬁeld has
energy associated with, and inseparable from, it.
The question therefore arose of the nature of phys-
ical processes involving this energy of the ﬁeld of
Faraday’s conception.

4

J H Poynting then introduced the notion of a ﬂux
of electromagnetic energy entirely on the basis of
the mathematical formalism of Maxwell’s theory.
He showed that there is a ﬂux of electromagnetic
energy whenever an electric and a magnetic ﬁeld
are present at the same time.

With this recognition, it is now possible to de-
termine the route by which the chemical energy,
which in the galvanic cell is transformed into elec-
tromagnetic energy, gets to wire that completes the
circuit, where that energy gets converted into heat.
Similarly, we can also trace the energy ﬂow in a cir-
cuit involving an electric motor that transforms it
to mechanical work.

It was then recognized that the electromagnetic
energy must also exist in the space intervening its
emitter and its absorber. Emitter looses energy
while the absorber gains energy only on the ab-
sorbtion of radiation. Then, during the transit of
the electromagnetic radiation from the time of its
emission to the time of its absorbtion, the sum to-
tal of all energies can be constant only if we take
into account the energy of radiation.

Similar considerations also apply for the law of
momentum. The emitter of electromagnetic radia-
tion experiences the opposite force of the absorber
of radiation. But, during the transit of radiation,
the electromagnetic radiation must carry the mo-
mentum with it and “deposit” that momentum at
the absorber. In fact, Maxwell showed that a body
which absorbs a light ray experiences a force in the
direction of that ray. This must also hold for all
electromagnetic ﬁelds.

Henri Poincar´e showed that, if S denotes the
magnitude of the ﬂux of electromagnetic energy,
then the ﬁeld must contain momentum of the mag-
nitude S/c2 per unit volume where c is the speed of
light. Electromagnetic momentum was then shown
to be observable not only in phenomena with light
and heat but also with static ﬁelds.

As a matter of historical interest, this approach
was the cause of considerable diﬃculties and took
a long time to gain acceptance. The chief reasons
behind the diﬃculties were the required general-
izations of the laws of conservation of energy and
of momentum.

Of certain importance is the conclusion of the
inertia of electromagnetic energy that follows from
Poincar´e’s expression S/c2. If we displace a car-
rier of electric charge, then the motion of the cor-
responding electric ﬁeld gives rise to a magnetic
ﬁeld, and their coexistence leads both to a current
of energy and momentum. This additional mo-
mentum represents an additional inertial mass in
the system under consideration. For an electron,
this electromagnetic mass is of the same order of
magnitude as the observed mass.

The newtonian picture of a mechanical system
of closely packed mass points had always been at
the background of these electromagnetic consider-
ations. Then, the question arises: what consti-
tutes ﬁeld. It must be newtonian particles, each
one of some electromagnetic inertia, making up
the medium or the ﬁeld. This medium was the
ether. Interactions of these ethereal particles would
then provide us the mechanical interpretation of
Maxwell’s equations.

Also, the ether was required to be incompress-
ible since the electromagnetic radiation was only
of transverse type. But, if a body moved through
ether there must be observable eﬀects of the pres-
ence of ether on its motion. Such observational
eﬀects were fruitlessly sought.

Ultimately, one got used to the concept of the
“ﬁeld” existing independently of newtonian parti-
cles. Thus emerged the ﬁeld-particle dualism. A
material particle in Newton’s sense and the (elec-
tromagnetic) ﬁeld as a continuum existed side by
side with the material particle acting as a source of
its ﬁeld. The newtonian (source) particle appeared
here as a singularity of the (electromagnetic) ﬁeld
it generated around it.

We owe this clear formulation of the ﬁeld and the
particle dualism to H A Lorentz. In this formula-
tion of Lorentz, the newtonian action at a distance
gets replaced by that of the ﬁeld which also repre-
sented radiation.

Disturbing here are two facts: ﬁrstly, kinetic en-
ergy (of a newtonian particle) and the energy of
the ﬁeld appear as physically unrelated entities,
and secondly, the ﬁeld energy carried inertia but
not that of a newtonian particle.

An obvious question is then of the nature of the
inertia of the ﬁeld energy. But, it is thinkable that
the inertia of ﬁeld energy is the same as the inertia
of a newtonian particle. Then, the concept of a
newtonian particle would be simply that of a re-
gion of special density of ﬁeld energy. In that case
one could hope to deduce the concept of a particle
and its equations of motion from that of only the
equations of the ﬁeld.

Einstein then comments [1] about these ideas
as: H A Lorentz knew this very well. However,
Maxwell’s equations did not permit the derivations
of the equilibrium of the electricity which consti-
tutes a particle. Only other, non-linear ﬁeld equa-
tions could possibly accomplish such a thing. But
no method existed by which this kind of ﬁeld equa-
tions could be discovered without deteriorating into
adventurous arbitrariness.

In other words, Lorentz was aware of the above
mentioned disturbing facts and clearly recognized
that the total inertia of a newtonian particle could
possess origin in the ﬁeld conception.

5

However, the problem Lorentz faced was that
of the linearity of Maxwell’s equations. Solutions
of (linear) Maxwell’s equations obey superposition
principle. Then, one could always superpose re-
quired number of solutions to obtain the solution
of any assumed ﬁeld conﬁguration. The newtonian
particle would still continue to be the singularity of
the ﬁnal ﬁeld conﬁguration. Therefore, there were
no means here of removing all together the newto-
nian particle that had the nature of the singularity
of the ﬁeld it generated.

Some non-linear ﬁeld equations could conceiv-
ably possess singularity-free solutions for the ﬁeld.
Solutions of such (non-linear) ﬁeld equations would
also not obey the superposition principle. Then,
one could hope that these (intrinsically non-linear)
equations for the (total) ﬁeld would permit some
appropriate treatment of newtonian particles as
singularity-free regions of concentrated ﬁeld en-
ergy. But, an obviously vexing question was now
that of the appropriate (non-linear) ﬁeld equations
of this type. There did not exist (with Lorentz) any
physical guidelines (principles) for getting to these
(non-linear) ﬁeld equations.

This however does not mean that such an ap-
proach is an impossibility. In fact, it is a logical
continuation of the newtonian framework in a def-
inite sense. This is what led Einstein to express
the following optimism.

Einstein remarks [1] that: In any case one could
believe that it would be possible by and by to ﬁnd a
new and secure foundation for all of physics upon
the path which had been so successfully begun by
Faraday and Maxwell. —

Then, we recall here that the galilean notion of
(inertial) mass of a physical body is that of the
measure of the tendency of a physical body to op-
pose a change in its state of motion.
It is the
(point-wise) geometric approach of Newton that
actually gave us the concept of a mass point or a
newtonian particle in Physics.

By giving up the point-wise geometric picture
of Newton as basic approach (but retaining it in
some appropriate form), one may still hope to treat
inertia in the galilean sense of it being a measure
of the tendency of a physical body, an extended
region of the ﬁeld energy, to oppose a change in
its state of motion. This is then the meaning of
Einstein’s above mentioned optimism.

The question is, of course, of reaching the (non-
linear) ﬁeld equations of appropriate nature with-
out venturing into meaningless arbitrariness. We
then need some deﬁnite physical principles to reach
to the non-linear ﬁeld equations of the desired
type. This is what we turn to. However, we note
that the route to appropriate ﬁeld equations had
been long and diﬃcult.

Now, as separate remarks, we ﬁrstly recall that
the equality of the inertial mass and the gravita-
tional mass is certainly an assumption of the new-
tonian mechanics. Newton’s theory then does not
oﬀer any explanation of this experimental result.
This is apart from the fact that Newton’s theory
does not provide satisfactory explanations of the
optical phenomena. Huygens’s wave theory of light
then has existence separate, meaning independent,
from that of Newton’s theory.

Secondly, from a geometric point of view, all co-
ordinate systems are among themselves logically
equivalent. But, Newton himself had realized (the
bucket experiment) that the validity of his laws
of motion (for example, the law of inertia) is re-
stricted to only certain types of such reference sys-
tems, the inertial frames of reference. Why this
special status to inertial frames of reference among
all the possible others? This fact therefore needed
an explanation.

Newton’s analysis (of the bucket experiment)
then showed, quite to his own dislike, that this
explanation required the introduction of absolute
space as an omnipresent active participant in all
mechanical events, but the one which is not af-
fected by the masses and their motions. Else, his
laws, in particular, the law of inertia, could not
have any physical content.

Newton himself could not resolve this impasse
and nor could any one else in his own times. Later
on, it was also thought for some while that the
ether provided this absolute space of Newton’s the-
ory. But, the ether, as a mechanical system made
up of newtonian mass points, must get aﬀected by
motions of masses.

It was then soon realized that, since the masses
and their motions did not aﬀect the absolute space,
there could not be any way of establishing the ex-
istence of the absolute space. The absolute space
then came to possess the ghostly existence in the
newtonian framework.

Furthermore, in Newton’s theory, there are es-
sentially two distinct concepts: ﬁrstly, that of the
law of motion and, secondly, that of the law of
force. The law of motion is then empty of content
without the law of force. One may then be tempted
to ask if any (arbitrary) law of force could work.
But, Newton’s law of gravitation and Coulomb’s
law of electrostatic attraction possess, both, only a
speciﬁc form: that of the inverse-square type. The
newtonian theoretical framework but provided no
explanation of this fact.

In essence, we therefore gradually came to rec-
ognize that various of the basic concepts of the
newtonian theoretical framework needed to be re-
placed by suitable others.

6

III. SPECIAL RELATIVITY AND
SPACETIME

It is then History that Einstein realized: many
of the simultaneous problems of electromagnetism
and galilean principle of relativity of newtonian
mechanics could be resolved by invoking a prin-
ciple of the constancy of the speed of light in all
the (inertial) frames of reference.

Maxwell’s equations do not permit a situation
of spatially oscillatory electromagnetic wave, the
“standing” electromagnetic wave. An electromag-
netic wave always travels and, in vacuum, with
the speed of light. Moreover, various experiments
did not indicate the existence of any such stand-
ing electromagnetic wave. Then, Maxwell’s equa-
tions had experimental veriﬁcation of certain im-
portance. Therefore, the galilean principle of rel-
ativity (the galilean coordinate transformations)
needed to be modiﬁed suitably so that no stand-
ing electromagnetic wave could be observed by any
inertial observer.

That is to say, what are needed here are some
“new” transformation laws (of coordinates) which
keep Maxwell’s equations invariant. Then, no
standing electromagnetic wave would be obtained
in all the (inertial) frames of reference if it can-
not be obtained in one frame of reference, that of
Maxwell’s standard equations.

The coordinate transformations needed for this
purpose were already available to Einstein in the
form of the Lorentz transformations. This situa-
tion then led him to understand in a clear manner
what the spatial coordinates and the temporal du-
ration of events meant in the (new) formulation
with the Lorentz transformations.

Einstein’s analysis led him to abandon the no-
tion of the absolute simultaneity of events and to
the demand that the Laws of Physics remain in-
variant under the Lorentz transformations. This
is similar in spirit to the demand of the newtonian
theory that the Laws of Physics be invariant under
the galilean transformations.

Minkowski’s important contributions then made
it possible to write the Laws of Physics in a math-
ematical form that ensured their invariance under
the Lorentz transformations.

Now, to the criticism of the basis of the Special

Theory of Relativity.

Firstly, this theory provides us a (point-wise)
geometric description of physical bodies as mass
points. This is evident from the laws of motion in
Special Relativity.

Secondly, the law of the force is also to be sep-
arately stated and, hence, the relevant criticism of
the newtonian mechanics also applies.

Thirdly, as Einstein himself recognized [1], the
special theory of relativity treats, essentially inde-
pendently, two kinds of physical things, (1) mea-
suring rods and clocks and (2) all other things, like
the electro-magnetic ﬁeld, the material point etc.
This is unsatisfactory.

Surely, measuring rods and even clocks must be
made up of material points. Then, measuring ap-
paratuses would also have to be represented as ob-
jects consisting of moving material conﬁgurations.
Their treatment in Special Relativity is then not a
consistent one.

Next, the special status of the inertial frames of
reference among all the possible others remains un-
explained in Special Relativity. Therefore, the cor-
responding criticism of the newtonian theory (ab-
solute space) also applies to the theory of special
relativity as well.

Next, this theory does not explain the (observed)
equality of the inertial mass and the gravitational
mass, although optical phenomena are explained
by way of Maxwell’s equations in a consistent man-
ner in this theory.

Clearly, then, the theory of special relativity is
not an entirely satisfactory one since it leaves so
much completely unexplained.

This, however, does not mean that it is not a
step forward in the direction of some satisfactory
theory. There are certain noteworthy and impor-
tant achievements of Special Relativity.

In this theory, the inertial mass m of a closed
system is identical with its energy E, ie, E = m c2
where c is the speed of light in vacuum. Further,
the inertial mass m is dependent not only on the
rest mass of the particle but also on its velocity:

m = mo/

1 − v2/c2

p
where mo is the rest mass of the particle. This
variation of m with velocity is a direct consequence
of the Lorentz transformations.

Conceptually, if a physical body were to “move”
in a “ﬁeld” surrounding it, that body should “dis-
play” opposition to a change in its state of motion
and this opposition may be expected to depend on
its “state of motion” - the velocity that body pos-
sesses. Recall that the inertial mass of a body is a
measure of its tendency to oppose a change in its
state of motion.

As a consequence, the principles of conservation
of linear momentum and the conservation of energy
are here fused into one thing.

It also clearly recognizes that the coordinates
have no absolute physical meaning. This recogni-
tion is a very signiﬁcant and important step away
from that of Newton’s theory.

7

Anyway, it was very clear to Einstein [1] that
the Theory of Special Relativity was only a tran-
sition from the newtonian framework to incorpo-
rate electromagnetism in a consistent way. That
the special relativistic laws are linear laws obey-
ing superposition principle for their solutions was
indication enough for him that it is only a tran-
sitory phase in the formulation of an appropriate
(non-linear) theory of the ﬁeld.

However, what emerged in the special theory
of relativity is the Minkowskian four-dimensional
continuum indicating clearly that the coordinates
have no absolute physical meaning. But, diﬀer-
ences of coordinates had some deﬁnite physical
meaning in this theory, that of physical length and
of duration of physical time.

It then gradually became clear to Einstein [1]
that even the diﬀerences of coordinates need not
possess any absolute physical meaning. It was not
any “easy to come by” realization. This is what
we turn to next.

IV. GENERAL RELATIVITY AND
CURVED SPACETIME

There were many problems with the theory of
special relativity and one could easily have chosen
to rectify them individually starting from diﬀerent
possible perspectives. However, as is well known,
Einstein chose to concentrate only on one of them:
the problem of the equality of the inertial and the
gravitational mass.

This fact is not just mere luck. Einstein’s line
of argument has been clearly stated [1] by him as
the following one. Firstly, one can see very clearly
that, in the special theory of relativity, if the in-
ertial mass depended on the velocity of a material
point, then its gravitational mass would also de-
pend on its velocity (kinetic energy) in exactly the
same manner if, of course, the equality of the iner-
tial and the gravitational mass holds. This equality
is but known experimentally to be true to a high
degree of accuracy.

Then, the weight of a physical body would de-
pend on its total energy in a precise manner since
the inertial mass now includes also the kinetic en-
ergy of the body. In essence, the acceleration of
a material system falling freely in a given gravita-
tional ﬁeld is then independent of the nature (total
energy) of the falling system.

It then occurred to Einstein [1] that: In a gravi-
tational ﬁeld (of small spatial extent) things behave
as they do in a space free of gravitation, if one in-
troduces in it, in place of an “inertial system,” a
reference system which is accelerated relative to an
inertial system.

The above is a statement of the equivalence prin-
ciple, that represents the equality of the inertial
and the gravitational mass. Then, in a real gravi-
tational ﬁeld, it is therefore possible to regard an
appropriate reference frame, the frame of reference
of a falling body, as an “inertial” frame of refer-
ence. The concept of the inertial frame becomes
completely vacuous, then.

The equivalence principle then implies that the
demand of the Lorentz invariance of physical laws
is too narrow. Therefore, it is necessary to demand
that the physical laws be invariant relative to non-
linear transformations of coordinates in the four-
dimensional continuum. This is then the principle
of general covariance.

Locally, meaning in a small region of the four-
dimensional continuum, the laws of special relativ-
ity must, however, hold in an approximation. In
the context of modern terminology, a general four-
dimensional spacetime manifold is then required to
be locally Lorentzian. The Lorentz group is there-
fore a subgroup of the group of general coordinate
transformations.

Einstein then raised [1] the following two ques-
tions: Of which mathematical type are the variables
(functions of the coordinates) which permit the
expression of the physical properties of the space
(“structure”)? Only after that: Which equations
are satisﬁed by those variables?

Interestingly, he writes below these questions in
[1] that: The answer to these questions is today
by no means certain.
(That was in 1949, some
decades after the (standard) ﬁeld equations of gen-
eral relativity were given by him!)

We now trace here the path [1] that Einstein
chose to reach the standard (Einstein) ﬁeld equa-
tions of general relativity.

Although we do not, to begin with, know which
mathematical type are the variables of the theory,
we do know with certainty one special case, the
case of “no gravitational ﬁeld” - the spacetime of
the special theory of relativity.

The line element of the Minkowski space is
1 + dx2

ds2 = − dx2

3 + dx2
4

2 + dx2

for a properly chosen coordinate system.
measurable distance between events.

It is a

Now, referring to an arbitrary coordinate sys-
tem, the same (Minkowski) line element (metric)
is expressible as

ds2 = gij dxidxj

where gij are the (real) metric coeﬃcients forming
a symmetric tensor of rank two and i, j take values
from 1 to 4. (Here, we have also used the (Einstein)
summation convention.)

8

If the ﬁrst derivatives of gij do not vanish after
the coordinate transformation, then there exists a
special gravitational ﬁeld in the (new) coordinate
system in the sense that it is “accelerated” with
respect to the earlier coordinate system.

Detailed mathematical investigations of metric
spaces were carried out by Riemann and various
relevant conceptions existed before Einstein began
his search for the variables of the physical proper-
ties of the space structure.

From Riemann’s investigations of metric spaces,
the Minkowski spacetime can be uniquely charac-
terized as the one for which the Riemann curvature
tensor vanishes. That is, the Minkowski spacetime
is a ﬂat manifold. Then, it can also be seen easily
that the path of a mass point (not acted upon by
any force) in the Minkowski spacetime is a straight
line and also a geodesic of the Minkowski space-
time. A geodesic (straight line) is then already a
characterization of the Law of Motion in the (ﬂat)
Minkowski spacetime.

In Einstein’s words [1]: ”The universal law of
physical space must now be a generalization of the
law just characterized.”

He then assumes that there are two steps of gen-

eralization, namely,

(a) pure gravitational ﬁeld

(b) general ﬁeld (in which quantities correspond-
ing somehow to the electromagnetic ﬁeld oc-
cur, too).

The situation of (a), that of the pure gravita-
tional ﬁeld, then is characterized by a symmet-
ric (Riemannian) metric (tensor of rank two) for
which the Riemann curvature tensor does not van-
ish. Now, if the universal ﬁeld law is required to
be of the second order of diﬀerentiation and also
linear in the second derivatives of the metric co-
eﬃcients gij , then only the vanishing of the Ricci
tensor comes under consideration as an equation
for the (vacuum) ﬁeld.

It may also be noted that the geodesics of the
metric can then be taken to represent the law of
motion of the material point. Therefore, the law
of motion (of a mass point) is already incorporated
in that for the ﬁeld.

Einstein [1] then goes on elaborating further: It
seemed hopeless to me at that time to venture the
attempt of representing the total ﬁeld (b) and to
I preferred, therefore,
ascertain ﬁeld-laws for it.
to set up a preliminary formal frame for the rep-
resentation of the entire physical reality; this was
necessary in order to be able to investigate, at least
preliminarily, the usefulness of the basic ideas of
general relativity.

Now, let us therefore consider, following Einstein
[1], this preliminary (formal) formulation of the
(non-linear) ﬁeld theory based on the principle of
general covariance.

Then, in Newton’s theory, the gravitational ﬁeld

obeys the law (Poisson’s equation):

∇2Φ = 4π G ρ

where Φ denotes the gravitational potential and ρ
denotes the density of the sources generating that
gravitational potential.

In general relativity, it is the Ricci tensor which
takes the place of ∇2Φ. Therefore, Einstein pro-
posed that the preliminary formulation of general
relativity be based on the equations

Rij −

R gij = − κ Tij

1
2

where Rij denotes the Ricci tensor, R denotes
the Ricci scalar, κ denotes a proportionality con-
stant and,
importantly, Tij denotes the energy-
In so far as these
momentum tensor of matter.
equations are concerned, the energy-momentum
tensor does not contain the energy (or inertia) of
the pure gravitational ﬁeld.

The form of the left hand side of these equa-
tions (geometric part) is chosen to be such that
its divergence in the sense of absolute diﬀerential
calculus vanishes since a similar divergence of the
right hand side (matter part) must vanish from
conservation principles.

In this connection, Einstein expresses [1] his
judgement and concerns about these preliminary
equations as: The right side is a formal condensa-
tion of all things whose comprehension in the sense
of a ﬁeld theory is still problematic. Not for a mo-
ment, of course, did I doubt that this formulation
was merely a makeshift in order to give the general
principle of relativity a preliminary closed expres-
sion. For it was essentially not anything more than
a theory of the gravitational ﬁeld, which was some-
what artiﬁcially isolated from a total ﬁeld of as yet
unknown structure.

Then, keeping in mind these important remarks,
let us consider these two preliminary formulations
of the above ﬁeld equations.

It is then History that within a few months
of Einstein’s publication of these ﬁeld equations,
K Schwarzschild obtained (under heroic circum-
stances) the ﬁrst solution of these highly non-linear
diﬀerential equations in a spherically symmetric
case of pure gravitational ﬁeld. The Schwarzschild
solution, a spherically symmetric spacetime geom-
etry, represents the exterior or the vacuum gravi-
tational ﬁeld of a point mass.

Further solutions of these ﬁeld equations (and

history of some) can be found in [4].

9

However, noteworthy for us here are also the
Kerr-Newman spacetimes which represent a mass
point with electric charge and spin. Of course,
when the electric charge and the spin are vanish-
ing, the Kerr-Newman spacetimes reduce to the
Schwarzschild spacetime.

We shall refer to this “preliminary formulation”
as the “standard general relativity” since, over the
decades, it has indeed become one of the standard
formulations of general relativity.

Since our purpose here is not to consider the
history of these developments but rather that of
considering, partially, the history of the develop-
ment of associated ideas, we shall now turn to the
criticism of this “preliminary formulation” or the
standard general relativity.

V. CRITICISM OF STANDARD
GENERAL RELATIVITY

We recall that Einstein himself was never at ease
with this standard general relativity.
In [1], he
says: If anything in the theory as sketched - apart
from the demand of the invariance of the equations
under the group of the continuous coordinate trans-
formations - can possibly make the claim to ﬁnal
signiﬁcance, then it is the theory of the limiting
case of the pure gravitational ﬁeld and its relation
to the metric structure of space.

However, “matter” is not any part of the theory
of the “vacuum” or pure gravitational ﬁeld. Ein-
stein, of course, recognized this but hinted only
that it is the relation of the metric structure with
the ﬁeld which holds in this case can possibly make
the claim to ﬁnal signiﬁcance.

Since physical objects must be made up of ma-
terial particles, there simply cannot be physical
objects, hence, measuring rods and clocks, in this
case of the pure gravitational ﬁeld. Therefore, the
criticism that Einstein himself levelled against the
special relativity applies here.

It also does not therefore make “real sense” to
say that the geodesics of the ﬁeld provide the law of
motion for the material points since these are not
the part of the equations of the pure gravitational
ﬁeld. However, such a relation may be expected in
the “ﬁnal theory” of the general ﬁeld, the case (b)
referred to earlier.

Because of this problem, we also cannot claim
that the equivalence principle has been incorpo-
rated in the theory of the pure gravitational ﬁeld.
That is, the equality of the inertial and the gravi-
tational mass is not explainable on the basis of the
theory of the pure gravitational ﬁeld. This fact
then invites the same criticism as that of the spe-
cial theory of relativity.

Furthermore, because of the same problem, it
also cannot be claimed that the formalism incor-
porates the law of force, which must be separately
stated. Then, again, this fact invites the same crit-
icism as that of the special theory of relativity and
of the newtonian theory.

Next, the inertia associated with the ﬁeld energy
is also not the inertia of the material particle in this
framework. This is then very similar to the case of
Maxwell’s electromagnetism. Therefore, the rele-
vant criticism of the ﬁeld-particle dualism in that
theory also applies to this case of the pure gravi-
tational ﬁeld.

But, what is more oﬀending here is that, in this
case of the pure gravitational ﬁeld, there deﬁnitely
are the laws for the ﬁeld, but there simply cannot
be laws for the material particles generating that
gravitational ﬁeld.

To see this, notice that a mass point in this case
is, necessarily, a curvature singularity of the space-
time manifold.

A point-particle has existence only at one spatial
location and everywhere else, except at this special
location, it is the non-singular gravitational ﬁeld of
the particle that “exists”. In its spherically sym-
metric spacetime geometry, Schwarzschild or the
Reissner-Nordstrom geometry, all the points, ex-
cept for the location of the mass-point, are then
“equivalent” to each other in the sense of matter.
That is, there does not exist a material particle at
any of these points.

This gravitational ﬁeld only diverges at the loca-
tion of the mass-point unless, perhaps, we include
the self-ﬁeld in some way, which, of course, is not
the case with the equations of the pure gravita-
tional ﬁeld. Hence, this geometry should not “in-
clude” the location of the mass-point.

Then, any mass-point is a curvature singularity
of the manifold describing its “exterior” gravita-
tional ﬁeld which, like in the newtonian case, di-
verges at the mass point.

Addition of other source attributes of a physical
body, like charge, spin etc., does not change this
situation. The Kerr-Newman family is obtainable
(in the case of the pure gravitational ﬁeld) and
the point-mass with charge and spin is a spacetime
singularity in it.

The issue of the inadequacy of such a descrip-
tion of a physical body would have arisen if the
Kerr-Newman family of spacetimes were not ob-
tainable for the case (a) of the pure gravitational
ﬁeld. We could then have said that the pure mass-
point is an inadequate description of a “physical
body” and the addition of other attributes “takes
us away from the case (a)” to some new situation,
the case (b) of the general ﬁeld, with some new
description of a physical body.

10

Restricting to the case (a) of the pure gravita-
tional ﬁeld, we then note that, strictly speaking,
a path of a mass point is not a geodesic since the
mathematical structure deﬁning a geodesic breaks
down at every point along the path of the singu-
larity. We may try to circumvent this problem in
the following ways.

We may surround the singular trajectory of a
point-particle by an appropriately “small” world-
tube, remove the singular trajectory and call this
tube the “geodesic” of the particle. But, the new
spacetime is not the original spacetime and, by the
physical basis of general relativity, it corresponds
to diﬀerent gravitational source. Therefore, this
procedure is not at all satisfactory.

We may, along a geodesic, change the spatial co-
ordinate label(s), by which we “identify the singu-
larity”, with respect to the time label of the space-
time geometry and may term this change the “mo-
tion” of a particle along a geodesic. However, this
is only some “special” simultaneous relabelling of
the coordinates. But, a singularity in the space-
time does not “move” at all.

In the case (a) of the pure gravitational ﬁeld,
the motion of a particle must be a “singular tra-
jectory” in the spacetime if a particle, the singular-
ity, “moves” at all. It is also equally clear that any
singular trajectory is not a geodesic in the space-
time since such a trajectory is not the part of the
smooth spacetime geometry.

Then, strictly speaking, geodesics of a space-
time do not provide the law of motion of particles.
Thus, strictly speaking, we have to specify sepa-
rately the law of motion for the particles. It is also
clear that the equations of pure gravitational ﬁeld
do not (strictly speaking, cannot) specify this law
of motion for the particles.

But, mathematically speaking, there simply can-
not be any laws for the motion of a geometric sin-
gularity! That is why, in the case (a) of the pure
gravitational ﬁeld, we have only the (non-linear)
equations for the ﬁeld but no equations of motion
for the sources of that ﬁeld.

In Newton’s theory, the laws of motion for the
particles were Newton’s laws of motion, but there
were none for the ﬁeld. The ﬁeld laws had to be
postulated separately in the newtonian framework
and it was possible to formulate such laws for the
ﬁeld independently. This is what Maxwell’s elec-
tromagnetism achieved.

Then, the case (a) of the pure gravitational ﬁeld
leads us to a situation which is the other extreme
of that of Newton’s theory. We have the laws for
the ﬁeld in this case and there are none for the
particles. But, it is more oﬀending that, with it, we
cannot even formulate separate laws for the motion
of the mass points or particles.

To further clarify this situation, let us consider
a mass point executing a simple harmonic motion
along a straight line, the X-axis, say, in relation to
two other mass points located some distance away
from the ﬁrst one along the X-axis. At t = 0, let
the ﬁrst mass point be located at, say, x = 0 and
the second one at, say, x = x2 and the third one
at, say, x = x3.

To be able to describe the simple harmonic mo-
tion of the ﬁrst mass point in relation to other
mass points under consideration, we need a space-
time having two singular curves at x = x2 and at
x = x3 which run parallel to the time axis (in the
Minkowski-type diagram) and having another sin-
gular curve, of sinusoidal character, running along
the time axis.

It is then thinkable that such a solution of the
ﬁeld equations of the pure gravitational ﬁeld exists
and is obtainable explicitly. This is however not
the issue under consideration here.

The issue is of the “cause” behind the harmonic
motion of a curvature singularity, and there cannot
be any laws providing us this cause of the motion.
The solution to the ﬁeld equations of pure gravi-
tational ﬁeld is then “ghostly.”

That is why, if we continue to consider, with
complete disregard to this fundamental diﬃculty,
the case (a) of the pure gravitational ﬁeld, we are
bound to face inconsistencies. That this is indeed
the case can be seen as under.

Further, if there existed other particles, then the
spacetime geometry would be diﬀerent from that
of a single point-particle, now having singularities
at every location of particles in it. Then, a physi-
cal body is, for our considerations, a collection of
curvature singularities.

Now, we may want to replace a collection of par-
ticles by that of their smooth (ﬂuid) distribution.
To achieve this, let us attach a “weight function”
to each mass-point in our collection. Each of these
weight-functions must “diverge at a suitable rate”
at its mass-point to balance the ﬁeld-singularity at
that location. Then, the resulting “weighted-sum”
should provide a smooth “volume-measure” as well
as a smooth source density.

Mathematically, dµ = ρ(x) dµo, where µ is the
volume-measure of the smooth geometry, µo that
of the geometry with singularities and ρ(x) is the
required source density.

But, any smooth ρ(x) is impossible if the geom-
etry of µo-measure has curvature singularities. To
keep µ smooth, ρ(x) must diverge at the singu-
larities. Thus, associated diﬃculties arise for con-
structing a smooth spacetime here.

Now, ignore also these diﬃculties and consider a
spherical star, using the ﬂuid approximation, with
a smooth spherical spacetime.

11

Consider two copies of such a star separated by
a very large distance today. Now, the spacetime
of two stars taken together is not globally spheri-
cally symmetric even though the spacetimes of sin-
gle stars are globally spherically symmetric. How-
ever, the evolution of each star would be “weakly”
aﬀected by the other distant star, an expectation
justiﬁable on general considerations.

Let stars collapse. Then, if we had some deﬁnite
outcome in the collapse of the star, exactly the
same outcome is observable at locations of each
star in the above (symmetric) situation.

We may add further copies of the same star, sep-
arated by the same large distance from original
stars and from each other.
If stars collapse, the
same end-result will be seen for each of the stars
in this, arbitrary, situation too.

Now, if gravitational collapse leads to a naked
singularity for the spherical spacetime, two totally
inequivalent descriptions obtain for a particle, that
it is sometimes naked and is sometimes covered by
a horizon, an inconsistency.

There are then enough indications for us here
that the case of the pure gravitational ﬁeld is an
internally inconsistent one to consider.

We then note that Einstein, in recognition of
some of these problems, wrote in ([1], p. 675) that:
Maxwell’s theory of the electric ﬁeld remained a
torso, because it was unable to set up laws for the
behavior of electric density, without which there
can, of course, be no such thing as an electromag-
netic ﬁeld. Analogously the general theory of rel-
ativity furnished then a ﬁeld theory of gravitation,
but no theory of the ﬁeld-creating masses. (These
remarks presuppose it as self-evident that a ﬁeld-
theory may not contain any singularities, i.e., any
positions or parts in space in which the ﬁeld-laws
are not valid.)

However, any considerations of the pure gravi-
tational ﬁeld in general relativity provide us the
equations for the ﬁeld but, in complete contrast to
Maxwell’s theory, there clearly can never be any,
not even faintest, possibility of our formulating
any dynamical laws for the sources of that ﬁeld,
may those be even independent of these ﬁeld laws.
These considerations provide us, similar to that of
Newton’s absolute space, not just a mere torso but
a ghost [14] for us to deal with.

Recall that, since the masses and their mo-
tions did not aﬀect Newton’s absolute space, no
means are possible of establishing the existence of
the absolute space. Then, the absolute space has
the ghostly existence in the newtonian framework.
Similarly, the ﬁeld equations of the pure gravita-
tional ﬁeld also posses a ghostly existence since the
laws of motions of the sources of the pure gravita-
tional ﬁeld are an impossibility here.

Without the laws for the motion of sources (gen-
erating the ﬁeld under consideration), there is no
meaning to the equations of the pure gravitational
ﬁeld because these equations for the ﬁeld do not
permit any understanding of the physical situa-
tions, as the above example shows.

Now, we may be tempted to imagine that the
solutions of the equations of the pure gravitational
ﬁeld will be able to approximate the “true” situa-
tion in some useful way.

Unfortunately, this optimism ignores some very
important aspects of the general theory of rela-
tivity, those related to the fact that its solutions
do not follow any superposition principle. It may
then be noticed that the geometry with (smooth)
matter ﬁelds cannot be approximated by the col-
lection of those representing the pure gravitational
ﬁeld since the latter would possess the curvature
singularities at the locations of sources in it while
the former geometry would not.

Some (apparently) physically reasonable results
could also be obtained using some solutions of the
equations of the pure gravitational ﬁeld. For ex-
ample, the bending of light, the perihelion preces-
sion, the prediction of gravitational radiation etc.
The observations may also “agree” with such re-
sults. However, such cases are the “pathological
situations” of deﬁnite kind.

Just as we cannot conclude the correctness of the
newtonian corpuscular theory of light on the ba-
sis of the explanation it provides for the existence
of penumbra on the assumption of “some suitable
hypothetical force” acting on the light corpuscles
making them enter the shadow of an object illumi-
nated by light, we also cannot conclude that the
solutions of the equations of the pure gravitational
ﬁeld provide us physically reasonable explanations
of the observed phenomena.

The meaning of the phrase “the equations of the
pure gravitational ﬁeld are ghostly” is then this
above. Clearly, any such physical explanations of
observed phenomena must, therefore, be based on
the case (b) mentioned earlier.

Of course, it may happen in some situations that
the mathematical expression for some phenomena
obtained on the basis of case (b) is “identical” with
that of the case of some solution of the equations
of the pure gravitational ﬁeld. But, that is for the
case (b) to tell us.

However, this does not mean that such solu-
tions of the pure gravitational ﬁeld are some “good
approximation” to the corresponding situation of
case (b). Just as the explanation of the formation
of penumbra on the basis of some suitable force act-
ing on light corpuscles is “ghostly,” the solutions
of the equations of the pure gravitational ﬁeld also
remain “ghostly.”

12

In essence, one must then wait for the case (b) to
provide us such physically acceptable explanations
of various observed phenomena.

Such considerations of fundamental diﬃculties
then prompt us to abandon the case (a) of the pure
gravitational ﬁeld or of the ﬁeld-particle dualism in
General Relativity, ie, the notion of a (curvature)
singularity as a mass point or particle. This is as
far as the case (a) of the pure gravitational ﬁeld is
concerned, then.

(We must therefore, unassumingly, seek the par-
don of all those whose sincere as well as herculean
eﬀorts gave us the many solutions of these highly
non-linear equations of the pure gravitational ﬁeld.
Unfortunately, being ghostly, these equations can-
not, however, further our understanding of the Na-
ture for the above reasons.)

At this place, we may also note that any (open or
concealed) increasing of the number of dimensions
from four does not change this situation. Clearly,
all of the above fundamental problems associated
with a (curvature) singularity will arise in higher
dimensions in exactly the same manner as holds
for the case of the pure gravitational ﬁeld which
we have considered above.

Therefore, unless there are some other speciﬁc
reasons, it does not appear compelling to consider
higher dimensional situations.

Restricting to four dimensions, we then consider
next the situation of Einstein’s “preliminary equa-
tions” containing matter in the form of the energy-
momentum tensor.

We then recall here the concern expressed by
Einstein regarding these equations. The point of
Einstein’s concern [1] is that of the comprehension
of the concept of an energy-momentum tensor in
the sense of a ﬁeld theory.

In this connection, we then note that the energy-
momentum tensor is (usually) obtained on the ba-
sis of only the particle considerations. Recall that
to obtain the related basic physical quantities we
consider a collection of particles. By deﬁning var-
ious physical quantities (such as, for example, the
ﬂux of particles across a surface), we average these
quantities over this collection of particles. These
related (averaged) quantities then help us deﬁne
the energy-momentum tensor.

(For a mass point as a singularity of the space-
time, the notion of its motion is not mathemati-
cally available. Therefore, it is clear that we would
not be able to deﬁne, for example, the ﬂux of
singularities across a surface. Hence, the energy-
momentum tensor is not obtainable by considering
particles as spacetime singularities.)

Since there cannot be any point-particle, it is not
clear what we mean by a particle in General Rela-
tivity. It is only after we have speciﬁed this concept

that the question of deﬁning physical quantities
and averaging them over a collection of particles
can be tackled.

Clearly, diﬃculties arise with the comprehen-
sion of the energy-momentum tensor because it is
not clearly speciﬁed in the “ﬁeld theoretical frame-
work” of general relativity what exactly we mean
by a “particle” (which, of course, cannot be a
singular-particle now). Moreover, it is also not
clear as to how one can unambiguously deﬁne the
concept of a particle in this “ﬁeld-theoretic frame-
work” of geometric character, except perhaps as
an extended region of energy.

Then, the energy-momentum tensor of the Ein-
stein ﬁeld equations is not a well-deﬁned concept
to begin with. Therefore, it is unclear whether the
Einstein ﬁeld equations can be formulated without
ﬁrst specifying what we mean by a particle. It is
then equally unclear as to what the solutions of
these equations mean in the absence of a clear for-
mulation of the concept of a particle (which, now,
cannot be a singular-particle).

However, it should be clear by now that only
smooth (singularity-free) spacetime geometries in
General Relativity need to be considered since
the energy density should be non-vanishing every-
where in a spacetime. Many such solutions of Ein-
stein’s makeshift equations, spacetime geometries,
are available in the literature [4].

The issue therefore arises of extracting physical
results out of these spacetimes, in particular, in
the absence of the availability of the notion of par-
ticle. Then, which of these smooth geometries are
to be considered relevant to this Physics without
the ﬁeld-particle dualism?

It may, however, be noted at this stage that
there simply cannot be any considerations of
“singular-particles” and “appropriate ﬂuid de-
scription approximating some collection of parti-
cles” in all these spacetimes because of the reasons
already considered by us earlier.

It may be stressed once again that such consider-
ations are not justiﬁable in any manner. To stress
the same thing again, we note that the concept of
energy-momentum tensor is itself not yet deﬁned
by us because we do not have any well-deﬁned no-
tion of what a particle is in this framework. This
is the primary reason behind the current situation
of the above kind.

However, the makeshift equations, the Einstein
ﬁeld equations, may provide us a useful starting
point. This is true provided we use other physical
principles to some advantage. We therefore need
to explore this issue further.

We will, for the time being, postpone these con-

siderations of smooth spacetimes.

13

VI. QUANTUM AND ITS THEORY

Historically, the theory of the quantum owes its
origin to the dualism of a particle and a wave. It
can be traced to Newton’s times.

As seen earlier, Newton’s geometric considera-
tions led him to postulate a mass point and his
laws (of mechanics and gravitation) are primarily
based on this conception of physical bodies. If ev-
ery physical body were to follow these laws, then
it must be possible to treat it using the concept of
a mass point.

Therefore, Newton proposed the corpuscular
theory for light. That a ray of light propagates
in a straight line, that it is reﬂected from a surface
(of a mirror) etc. are then explainable on the basis
of the corpuscular hypothesis.

However, in Newton’s own experiments in op-
tics, it emerged that the corpuscular hypothesis
does not explain, in a natural manner, all the phe-
nomena displayed by light.

As an example, in the situation of an object illu-
minated by light, umbra and penumbra form. As
a corpuscle, light is not expected to penetrate the
region forming the shadow of the object. Then,
the existence of penumbra needed some corpuscu-
lar explanation.

In another experiment, Newton observed “New-
ton’s rings”. This experiment shows that corpus-
cles of light gather in some regions forming the
(bright) rings while they do not at all gather in
other (dark) regions. This fact also needed some
corpuscular explanation.

On the basis of Newton’s laws, it then follows
that some force (acting on light) is causing this be-
havior of the light corpuscles. However, this force
then acts on only “some” corpuscles to pull them
to the bright regions but not on some other light
corpuscles (which escape in a straight path behind
the object, for example).

Furthermore, in the case of Newton’s rings, there
are more than one bright/dark such regions. Then,
the force acting on the light must be (compara-
tively) “larger” for some corpuscles and “smaller”
for some other corpuscles.

Such an explanation is deﬁnitely thinkable. But,
an important question is now that of the simplic-
ity of this explanation. The simplicity of a theory
has always been the driving impetus behind the
scientiﬁc investigations.

It was clear to Newton that this explanation
is not appealing.
It requires us to postulate the
“switching on and oﬀ” of the force whose strength
is also diﬀerent for diﬀerent corpuscles. What
causes such a behavior of this force? Is there some
universal rational explanation for this?

There did not exist in the newtonian framework
any conceivable explanations of such behavior of
the force under consideration here.

Huygens, on the other hand, considered these
phenomena from an entirely diﬀerent perspective.
His wave theory of light postulated undulatory be-
havior for light on the basis of the continuum pos-
tulate. Similar to waves on the surface of ocean,
he imagined light as a wave phenomenon in some
(unknown) medium.

Huygens’s wave theory of light then provided
satisfactory explanations of the optical phenomena
on the basis of constructive and destructive inter-
ference of the waves. The wave theory of light then
gained wide acceptance.

This situation persisted till almost the end of
the nineteenth century. Newton’s corpuscular the-
ory for light was then forgotten or, at least, not
considered seriously.

Incorporation of various optical phenomena in
Maxwell’s electromagnetism was a climactic stage
for the wave theory. It showed that light consists
of oscillations of electric and magnetic ﬁelds trans-
verse to the direction of a propagating light ray.
The polarization of light then received an explana-
tion here. (We also note that Newton’s corpuscu-
lar theory had no explanation whatsoever for this
peculiar behavior of light.)

It then came as a real surprise that the corpuscu-
lar behavior of light surfaced in some experiments
again, of special signiﬁcance is the photo-electric
eﬀect discovered by Hertz in 1887.

In Hertz’s experiments, a metal is subjected to
an incident radiation. Such a metal ejects elec-
trons if the frequency of incident radiation is above
a certain threshold which depends on the metal
properties. The kinetic energy of ejected electrons
does not, however, depend upon the intensity of
incident radiation but only on the diﬀerence of the
frequency of incident radiation and the threshold
frequency of the metal.

In the beginning, it was not at all clear as to
how one could explain this Hertzian photo-electric
eﬀect in any manner. G Kirchhoﬀ’s investigations
into radiation had also provided us various laws
regarding the behavior of heat radiation interact-
ing with matter. Eﬀorts then began of providing
explanations of these empirical laws on the basis
of Maxwell’s theory.

No one realized that a stage was slowly getting
prepared for a fundamental crisis with Maxwell’s
theory of electromagnetism in this era of hectic
experimental activities.

In 1900, Max Planck’s remarkable intuition
in dealing with deep physical problems suddenly
brought into focus the seriousness of this crisis with
classical theories.

14

These investigations are all the more remarkable
in that they were based primarily on only the the-
ories regarding the behavior of heat radiation in-
teracting with matter.

In what follows, we (partly) adopt Einstein’s
(method of) exposition [1] of these theoretical
developments, because his exposition remarkably
clearly describes the (theoretical) nature of this
fundamental crisis.

Then, let us ﬁrst note that Kirchhoﬀ had con-
cluded, on thermodynamical grounds, that the en-
ergy density and the spectral composition of radi-
ation in a cavity (Hohlraum) with impenetrable
walls of absolute temperature T is independent
of the material of the walls. That is to say, the
monochromatic density, ̺, of radiation is some uni-
versal function of the frequency ν of radiation and
of the absolute temperature T .

Thus arose the problem of determining this uni-

versal function ̺(ν, T ).

As per Maxwell’s theory, radiation exerts pres-
sure on the walls of the cavity and this pressure is
determined by the total energy density. From this,
Boltzmann then concluded that the entire energy
̺ dν, is proportional to T 4
density of radiation,
and thereby provided a theoretical explanation of
Stefan’s empirical law on the basis of Maxwell’s
theory. W Wien then used ingenious thermody-
namical arguments, also using Maxwell’s theory,
to deduce that

R

̺ ∼ ν3 f

ν
T (cid:17)

(cid:16)

Clearly, f is a universal function of only one vari-
able ν/T and its theoretical determination is of
deﬁnite importance.

Basing his faith on the empirical form of the
function f , Planck ﬁrstly succeeded in reaching the
following form for ̺

̺ =

8π h ν3
c3

1
ehν/kT − 1

whereby he had two universal constants k and h
in the expression for the monochromatic energy
density ̺ of the radiation.

If this formula were correct, it permitted the cal-
culation of the average energy E of an oscillator
interacting with the radiation in the cavity:

E =

h ν
ehν/kT − 1

For ﬁxed ν but high temperature, this gives E =
kT - an expression obtainable from the kinetic
theory of gases. From this theory, we have E =
(R/N )T where R is the gas constant and N is the
famous Avogadro’s number.

Then, N = R/k and its numerical value agreed
reasonably well with that of the kinetic theory of
gases. Therefore, Planck’s investigations were in
agreement with the size of the atom since Avo-
gadro’s number tells us about it.

Using Boltzmann’s (and Gibbs’s) entropy meth-
ods, Planck then partitioned the total energy into
a large but ﬁnite number of identical bins of size
ǫ and asked in how many diﬀerent ways can ǫ be
divided among the oscillators. This number would
then furnish the entropy and, hence, the tempera-
ture of the cavity-radiation system.

As is well known, Planck obtained the aforemen-
tioned radiation formula if ǫ = h ν. His expres-
sion then yields correctly the Rayleigh-Jeans, the
Stefan-Boltzmann, the Wien laws.

However, Planck’s reasoning camouﬂaged the
fact that his derivation demands that energy can
be emitted and absorbed by an oscillator only in
quanta of energy ǫ = h ν.

Planck’s formula implies that the energy of any
arbitrary mechanical system capable of oscilla-
tions can be transferred only in “packets” or these
quanta. The same is also the situation with the en-
ergy of radiation. This contradicts fundamentally
the laws of Newton’s mechanics as well as those of
Maxwell’s electrodynamics.

Then, we note that Planck’s formula is compat-
ible with Maxwell’s electrodynamics, although it
is not a necessary consequence of its equations.
Therefore, the contradiction with Newton’s me-
chanics is (more) fundamental here than that with
the electrodynamics.

This was clear to Einstein soon after the ap-
pearance of Planck’s fundamental work. Although
he had no ideas on what framework(s) should
substitute Newton’s and Maxwell’s theories, Ein-
stein’s intuition nonetheless permitted him to ap-
ply Planck’s formula to explain the photo-electric
eﬀect in a remarkably simple fashion.

If the implication of Planck’s reasoning were cor-
rect, then an electron can absorb the energy of ra-
diation only in quanta. An electron (bound to an
atom) could then be set free (ejected) on absorp-
tion of energy of the incident radiation only if the
frequency of incident radiation were larger than
certain minimum corresponding to the binding en-
ergy of the electron. There is a threshold then for
the frequency of incident radiation below which
electron ejection does not occur in this hertzian
photo-electric eﬀect.

N Bohr’s remarkable insights developed the
quantum theoretical explanations for the empirical
laws of atomic spectra. Sommerfeld then also in-
cluded special relativistic considerations in Bohr’s
theory of the atom. These inputs were of radical
theoretical nature indeed.

15

Einstein followed with interest these works and,
in his own turn, revealed the deep connection be-
tween Planck’s formula and Bohr’s law of frequen-
cies, thereby introducing the probabilities of quan-
tum transitions of atomic systems. This is where
the Einstein coeﬃcients for induced and sponta-
neous transitions made their inroad.

This is the return, in a sense, of Newton’s cor-
puscle - a particle of light and, hence, of the wave-
particle dualism (for light). We will however not
go into details of other developments here. Instead,
we turn to the next important step that was taken
for the concept of a quantum.

Next, L de Broglie proposed that if light, pri-
marily an electromagnetic wave in Maxwell’s the-
ory, displays particle-like phenomena, then parti-
cles (of Newton’s type) should display wave-like
phenomena in order that the basic symmetry of
wave versus particle is maintained.

This radical proposition, of course, needed ex-
perimental conﬁrmation and it was soon obtained
in diﬀraction experiments.

Einstein then generalized S N Bose’s statistical
methods (for light particles) to particles indistin-
guishable from each other. This goes in the name
of the Bose-Einstein statistics and the particles
obeying these statistical methods are now called
as the Bosons.

The fundamental diﬀerence between the statis-
tical properties of like and unlike particles is inti-
mately connected with the circumstance that, due
to Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations, the possi-
bility of distinguishing between like particles, with
the help of the continuity of their motion in space
and time, is getting lost. Pauli’s analytical mind
grasped this fundamental issue immediately and
that is what led him to (Pauli’s) exclusion princi-
ple for electrons.

Fermi and Dirac then showed that electrons,
in particular, follow a diﬀerent statistical method
since they obey Pauli’s exclusion principle. This
goes in the name of the Fermi-Dirac statistics and
the particles obeying these statistical methods are
now called as the Fermions.

It is still a deep mystery as to whether the parti-
cles of Nature are only of these two types, Bosons
and Fermions. If yes, why.

The need for replacement(s) of Newton’s and of

Maxwell’s theories became urgent.

E Schr¨odinger then formulated the Wave Me-
chanics and, almost simultaneously, W Heisenberg
formulated the Matrix Mechanics for the quantum.
These works provided the bridge between the par-
ticle and wave conceptions. M Born then provided
the “probability interpretation” of Schr¨odinger’s
Wave Mechanics and Bohr supported it with his
complementarity arguments.

The phenomenon of barrier penetration (tun-
nelling) was also discovered in such considerations.
Special relativistic considerations were taken up by
P A M Dirac and others. These provided us the
concept of particle and anti-particle pair. The im-
plications of such considerations were “conﬁrmed”
in numerous experiments. Today, these considera-
tions are the basis of numerous technological equip-
ments and also of their theories.

The method of second or ﬁeld quantization was
subsequently developed. The primary thesis of this
method is that we should be able to count the num-
ber of quanta, if these are really the packets of en-
ergy. It is this (second quantization) method that
has come to be recognized as the genuine theory
of the quantum.

The theory of the quantum that developed as
a result was mathematically satisfactory but ex-
tremely counter-intuitive. We then note here that
many vigorous discussions and eﬀorts were needed
to reconcile the results, in particular, those con-
cerning Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations, with
the physical intuition. Rather than entering these
historical details, we then refer to various excellent
essays, in particular, Bohr’s article and Einstein’s
Reply to Criticisms in [1].

VII. CRITICISM OF THE THEORY OF
THE QUANTUM

Let us ﬁrst recollect that Einstein, in spite of his
initial resistance as reported in Bohr’s essay in [1],
ﬁnally agreed [5] to the correctness of Heisenberg’s
indeterminacy relations. However, he diﬀered from
most other of his contemporary physicists on the
issue of probability being the only basis of under-
standing the entire physical world.

In Einstein’s own words [5] (my curly brackets):
... On the strength of the successes of this theory
they {Born, Pauli, Heitler, Bohr, and Margenau}
consider it proved that a theoretically complete
description of a system can, in essence, involve
only statistical assertions concerning the measur-
able quantities of this system. They are apparently
all of the opinion that Heisenberg’s indeterminacy
relation (the correctness of which is, from my own
point of view, rightfully regarded as ﬁnally demon-
strated) is essentially prejudicial in favor of the
character of all thinkable reasonable physical theo-
ries in the mentioned sense. ...

He further hastened to add to the above that:
... I am, in fact, ﬁrmly convinced that the essen-
tially statistical character of contemporary quan-
tum theory is solely to be ascribed to the fact that
this [theory] operates with an incomplete descrip-
tion of physical systems.

16

Still, it is undoubtable that the self-consistent
formalism of the Quantum Theory provides us the
theoretical explanations of variety of experimental
results. In fact, the amount of experimental data it
supports is so enormous, so unparalleled in the his-
tory of Physics, that there must be some element
of the ﬁnality in its formalism.

Einstein did not want to leave behind any doubts
that he did not recognize the importance of the
contributions from the Quantum Theory. So, he
added further: ... This theory is until now the only
one which unites the corpuscular and undulatory
dual character of matter in a logically satisfactory
fashion; and the (testable) relations, which are con-
tained in it, are, within the natural limits ﬁxed by
the indeterminacy relation, complete. The formal
relations which are given in this theory - i.e., its
entire mathematical formalism - will probably have
to be contained, in the form of logical inference, in
every useful future theory.

Then, Einstein went on to tell us what exactly
it is that does not satisfy him with this Theory of
the Quantum: What does not satisfy me in that
theory, from the standpoint of principle, is its at-
titude towards that which appears to me to be the
programmatic aim of all of physics: the complete
description of any (individual) real situation (as it
supposedly exists irrespective of any act of obser-
vation or substantiation).

In what follow we recall (although not in a ver-
batim manner) Einstein’s arguments in support of
his above statement [1].

Let us then consider a radioactive atom as a
physical system. For practical purposes, we can
consider that it is located exactly at a point of
the coordinate system. We may also neglect the
motion of the residual atom after its radioactive
disintegration process in which a (comparatively
light) particle is emitted by the atom. Then, fol-
lowing Gamow’s theory, we may replace the rest
of the atom by a potential barrier which surrounds
the particle to be emitted. The radioactive disin-
tegration process is then the “tunnelling” of the
particle out of this potential barrier.

We then solve Schr¨odinger’s equation and obtain
Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function which is initially nonzero
only inside the potential barrier, but which, with
time, becomes non-vanishing outside the barrier.
Essentially, the Ψ-function yields the probability of
ﬁnding the initially “trapped” particle to be out-
side of the trapping barrier, at some later time, in
some speciﬁc portion of the space outside of that
potential barrier or the atom.

However, this does not imply any assertion of the
time-instant of the disintegration of the radioactive
atom. That is, no observable exists in the quantum
theory for this time-instant.

Einstein then raised the question: Can this the-
oretical description be taken as the complete de-
scription of the disintegration of a single individual
atom? The immediately plausible answer is: No,
he wrote. For we are inclined to assume the exis-
tence of an instant of the disintegration and such
a deﬁnite value of the time-instant is not implied
by the Ψ-function.

Einstein then answered for a quantum theorist:
This alleged diﬃculty arises from the fact that
one postulates something not observable as “real.”
That is to say, this diﬃculty arises because one is
assuming the (reality of) time-instant of the dis-
integration of an individual atom that is not an
observable of its (quantum) theory.

Einstein then phrased the question as:

Is it,
within the framework of our theoretical total con-
struction, reasonable to assume the existence of a
deﬁnite time-instant of the disintegration of an in-
dividual atom?

Then, if one takes the viewpoint that the de-
scription in terms of a Ψ-function refers only to an
ideal systematic totality (ensemble) but not to an
individual system, then one may assume the ex-
istence of the time-instant of disintegration of an
individual atom.

But, if one represents the assumption that the
description in terms of the Ψ-function is a com-
plete description of an individual system, then one
must reject the existence of the time-instant of an
individual atom and can justiﬁably point to the
fact that a determination of the exact time-instant
of disintegration is not possible for an individual
atom. Any such attempt would mean disturbances
(of the atom) of such nature which would then de-
stroy the very phenomenon whose time-instant we
are trying to determine.

Now, following Schr¨odinger’s reasoning, one may
construct a contraption which kills a cat (macro-
scopic object) sitting close to the radioactive atom
only if the decay particle is emitted by the atom.
One may then ask: Is the cat alive or dead at some
later instant of time? Here, one would expect to
get an answer with certainty since a beam of torch-
light falling on the cat cannot be expected to dis-
turb (kill it, if alive) its state. But, the theory of
the quantum can only tell us the probability of the
cat being alive or dead.

Then, to begin with we have the Ψ-function for
an alive cat. With time, the Ψ-function is a super-
position of two components, one for the alive cat
and one for the dead cat. It is only when an ob-
server makes an observation (of the cat) that the
Ψ-function reduces or collapses to one of (these
two of) its components. This collapse of the Ψ-
function represents the interference of an observer
with the system under observation.

17

Surely, the quantum theory as represented by
Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function is self-consistent. Now,
if this probabilistic theory of the quantum is of
universal character, that is to say, if the basic laws
of nature are intrinsically probabilistic in charac-
ter, then this formalism applies to microscopic as
well as macroscopic systems.

Some of the macroscopic systems constitute ex-
perimental equipments and, hence, their behavior
is also probabilistic in character then. By associ-
ating Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function with every physi-
cal system, the theory of the quantum treats then
measuring apparatuses and all other things on an
equal footing in its formalism.

But, a question can then be asked as to when,
within this formalism of the quantum theory, can
we say that the “measuring apparatus” has made
its observation.

It is evident that this question is related to the
collapse of the Ψ-function because there is no an-
other way of answering it within the realm of the
quantum theory. Therefore, we have to say that
the system makes an observation only when the
collapse of the Ψ-function takes place to one of its
various components, to that which uniquely corre-
sponds to the value of the observable measured by
the macroscopic apparatus.

Then, we can consider an apparatus which has
been “suitably prepared” to measure a speciﬁc
physical observable of a certain physical system.
But, let us not interfere with this apparatus in any
manner whatsoever and let us even not attempt to
‘look” at the reading of the apparatus. But, now,
let us ask a question as to whether the apparatus
has “performed” the measurement of that quantity
it were prepared to measure by “prearrangement of
some special kind.”

For example, we prepare the apparatus to locate
the position of an electron in Heisenberg’s micro-
scope and place a charge-coupled device (CCD) at
the eyepiece so that a photon, reﬂected after the
collision with an electron, makes a mark on it. This
action in Heisenberg’s microscope takes place, but,
we choose not to look at that mark made by that
photon on the CCD plate.

Then, the question is: whether this apparatus
has performed the measurement of the position of
an electron, particularly when we have not looked
at the CCD plate.

Evidently, if the formalism of the quantum the-
ory were to tell us that the above apparatus has
“never” performed any observation, then the result
of the observation is not known to any observer,
that is to say, the collapse of the Ψ-function has
not occurred for any observer. This is indicative
of the importance of an observer in the framework
of the quantum theory.

On the other hand, if we say that an observation
has been performed in the above prearrangement
with Heisenberg’s microscope, then the Ψ-function
will always be in some collapsed state because the
phenomenon occurring in Heisenberg’s microscope
(for that matter, any other apparatus) occurs ev-
erywhere in the space. This then results in an ob-
vious absurdity with the entire formalism of the
quantum theory.

Therefore, we are forced to assume here that no
observation is made in the concerned prearrange-
ment with Heisenberg’s microscope or with any
other prearranged apparatus. An observer is there-
fore of deﬁnite importance in this interpretation of
the quantum theory.

Now, an observer is also made up of the same
thing (matter) that an apparatus is made up of.
Hence, the above situation also applies to an ob-
server (as a measuring apparatus, may be of special
kind). It is therefore not speciﬁed by the quantum
theory as to what it means by an observer and,
hence, what precisely constitutes an act of obser-
vation within its formalism.

Surely, although complicated constructs, as is
an apparatus or an observer, are not explicitly de-
scribable, one can ascribe a corresponding total Ψ-
function to them, thereby rendering the phenom-
ena of the macroscopic world also probabilistic in
character. Surely, the measuring apparatuses are
then at par with everything the quantum theory
treats. However, some questions of serious scien-
tiﬁc concern then arise.

Clearly, an observer is then given an exceptional
importance in the theory of the quantum but this
theory does not tell us what constitutes an ob-
server and how does an observer act to collapse
the Ψ-function on having made an observation of
some (quantum) system.

Then, the issue arises as to where,

in some
appropriate sense, does the collapse (of the Ψ-
function) occur? How is it to be described in some
understandable language? Many such questions
can be raised.

In response to such questions, we may, for exam-
ple, then propose that the collapse occurs in the
mind of a conscious observer. Such an approach
but transgresses the obvious limits of the scientiﬁc
inquiry and, hence, invites the corresponding crit-
icism. This is then the problem of the collapse of
the Ψ-function.

To this date, there do not appear to exist any
genuinely satisfactory resolutions [15] of such para-
doxes of the quantum theory.

Schr¨odinger’s Cat Paradox and other paradoxes
therefore highlight such problematic issues of the
quantum theory if this theory were assumed to be
universal of character.

18

This is surely then a problematic issue for the
quantum theory (description using Schr¨odinger’s
Ψ-function) if it is to be of universal character,
that is, if its laws are to be universally applicable
to all the physical systems.

Hence, from the point of view of a complete the-
ory forming the basis of the totality of physical
phenomena, in a sense similar to that of Newton’s
theory (supposedly) forming the basis for the to-
tality of physical phenomena, we therefore note the
following important lacunae with the theory of the
quantum described above.

Firstly, the theory of the quantum, as it stands
even today, does not incorporate the explanations
needed for the equality of the inertial and the grav-
itational mass of a physical body, which is to be
taken as an experimental result.

Secondly, this theory separates artiﬁcially “an
observer” (as deﬁnable in the theory of the quan-
tum) and all other things that it treats since there
is no consistent demarkation line between what
constitutes “an act of observation” in this theo-
retical framework. The considered example of the
“prearranged” Heisenberg’s microscope highlights
precisely this issue.

In this connection, it cannot be forgotten that
the measuring apparatuses are also made up of the
same things that the formalism of the theory is
supposed to treat. Therefore, their treatment in a
theory must be at par with everything else that the
theory intends to treat, this is if the theory claims
universality of its formalism. Then, we would not
expect to ﬁnd any serious paradoxical situations
raised in the theory.

Then, we note that, in relation to the standard
viewpoint regarding the probabilistic interpreta-
tion of the laws of the quantum theory, serious
paradoxical situations have been constructed and
the resolutions of these paradoxical situations have
not been achieved. Clearly, the emphasis of these
paradoxes is on whether the quantum theory is of
universal character, whether the basic laws of na-
ture are probabilistic of character.

If we assume that the quantum theory is of uni-
versal character, then we end up with the paradox-
ical situations of serious character, with the quan-
tum theory not oﬀering us any satisfactory resolu-
tions of these paradoxes.

On the other hand, if we assume that it is not
of universal character, then we must search for an
alternative formulation which evidently cannot be
based on the (probabilistic) formalism of the quan-
tum theory. That is to say, the laws as are appli-
cable to all the physical systems cannot then be
probabilistic of character. Question is then of such
an alternative formulation for the description of
the totality of physical phenomena.

It may therefore be noted here that various para-
doxes of the quantum theory then indicate that [1]:
The attempt to conceive the quantum-theoretical
description as the complete description of the indi-
vidual systems leads to unnatural theoretical inter-
pretations, which become immediately unnecessary
if one accepts the interpretation that the descrip-
tion refers to ensembles of systems and not to in-
dividual systems.

Einstein [1] then continued: There exists, how-
ever, a simple psychological reason for the fact
that this most nearly obvious interpretation is being
shunned. For if the statistical quantum theory does
not pretend to describe the individual system (and
its development in time) completely, it appears un-
avoidable to look elsewhere for a complete descrip-
tion of the individual system; in doing so it would
be clear from the very beginning that the elements
of such a description are not contained within the
conceptual scheme of the statistical quantum the-
ory. With this one would admit that, in principle,
this scheme could not serve as the basis of the-
oretical physics. Assuming the success of eﬀorts
to accomplish a complete physical description, the
statistical quantum theory would, within the frame-
work of future physics, take an approximately anal-
ogous position to the statistical mechanics within
the framework of classical mechanics. ...

Perhaps, there is an element of truth in these
(last quoted) Einstein’s opinions. Next, we shall
see that a general relativistic theory of the total
ﬁeld does oﬀer such a possibility.

VIII. A THEORY OF THE TOTAL FIELD

Let us then return to the considerations of the
smooth spacetime geometries in general relativ-
ity that are obtainable on the basis of Einstein’s
makeshift ﬁeld equations.

As noted before, in this case, to extract physical
results in the absence of any conception of a par-
ticle, which cannot be a point-particle, we need to
employ other physical principles to some advan-
tage. That this is indeed possible is what is the
subject of the present section.

It is of course not very clear to begin with as to
which physical principles to use to extract mean-
ingful results in this situation. However, we must
look for some hints here.

To begin with, as we have seen before, consider-
ations of the “pure or vacuum gravitational ﬁeld”
lead us to an internal inconsistency in the formal-
ism. Then, we note that the energy density of
“matter” must be non-vanishing at every spatial
location in any such (smooth) spacetime.

19

Also, the volume-form, in Cartan’s sense, is well-
deﬁned at every location in this (smooth) space-
time. Consequently, just as it was permissible to
attribute the concept of inertia to a point of space
in the newtonian situation, we should also be able
to deﬁne the concept of inertia for (every) spatial
location of the (smooth) spacetime, of course, in
only some non-singular sense.

Then, a well-behaved (Cartan’s) volume-form
can be expected to allow us appropriate deﬁni-
tions of non-vanishing “gravitational,” “inertial”
and also “total” mass for (every) point of the space
in such a spacetime. (See later.)

Next, the case (b) under consideration is, clearly,
that of the general ﬁeld in which quantities corre-
sponding somehow to an electric ﬁeld occur as well.
Therefore, a point of the space in such a spacetime
can also be prescribed an electric charge as a source
attribute of a physical body in a manner similar to
the case of the total mass attribute.

This must also be the case with all the permis-
sible source attributes of a physical body since the
same procedure can be expected to work for each
of such source attributes.

Thus, it must be possible to incorporate all the
source attributes of a physical body in it. Then,
in this spacetime, physical bodies are concentrated
total energy [1] and would everywhere in space be
describable as singularity-free. We may also look
at a physical body in the newtonian, now non-
singular, sense of a point particle possessing the
source attributes as outlined above.

Next, any local motion of a physical body can,
clearly, be a change in the local energy distribution
in this spacetime.

However, the global properties of the spacetime
must not change with any “local” motions of a
physical body in it. Otherwise, inﬁnite speeds of
communication exist in the spacetime. This is,
physically speaking, undesirable.

A spacetime for which all the spatial properties
(See

are arbitrary has these desired properties.
below.) The required spacetime is given by [6]:

ds2 = − P 2Q2R2dt2 + P

Q2R2B2dx2

′2

+ P 2 ¯Q2R2C2dy2 + P 2Q2 ˜R2D2 dz2 (1)

where P ≡ P (x), Q ≡ Q(y), R ≡ R(z), B ≡ B(t),
C ≡ C(t), D ≡ D(t). We also use P ′ = dP/dx,
¯Q = dQ/dy and ˜R = dR/dz.

Now, consider an energy-momentum tensor
(with heat ﬂux) for the ﬂuid in the spacetime and
Einstein’s (makeshift) ﬁeld equations using it. The
energy-density in the spacetime of (1) then varies
as ρ ∝ 1/P 2Q2R2 and is seen [6] to be arbitrary
because the ﬁeld equations do not determine the
spatial functions P , Q, R.

But, we must remember that we do not know
whether the energy-momentum tensor is abinitio
deﬁnable one for this spacetime under considera-
tion. (However, see later.) Thus, it is not truly jus-
tiﬁable to use it to obtain the Einstein makeshift
ﬁeld equations for (1).

However, what we realize here is that it is also
the 3-space, any constant-time section of (1), that
is endowed with various properties such as curva-
ture, pseudo-metric nature etc.

Let us recall here that the characteristic of New-
tonian Physics is that it ascribes independent and
real existence to space and time as well as to mat-
ter. In this newtonian formulation, space and time
play a dual role.

Firstly, they play the role of a background for
things happening physically. Secondly, they also
provide us the inertial systems which happen to be
advantageous to describe the law of inertia. There-
fore, if matter were to be somehow removed com-
pletely, the space and time of the newtonian frame-
work would “remain” behind.

Let us also recall Descartes’s opposition to con-
sider space as independent of material objects [7]:
space is identical with extension, but extension is
connected with physical bodies; thus there should
be no space without physical bodies and hence no
empty space [16].

We then notice that this expectation is indeed
true of the spatial sections of (1). Physical bodies
are “extended regions of space” in it.

The issue, however, remains of incorporating
time in the framework of (1),
in
the absence of a well-deﬁned concept of a parti-
cle. Here, Einstein’s makeshift equations provide
us the required clue to this issue.

in particular,

The makeshift equations essentially provide the
laws for the temporal evolution of physical bod-
ies in (1). Then, the makeshift equations can, in
turn, be determined on the basis of the temporal
evolution of physical bodies in (1).

It may now be stressed that the makeshift equa-
tions are based on the as-yet undeﬁned concept of
the energy-momentum tensor for matter ﬁelds, un-
deﬁned because it is not clear as to how to deﬁne
the concept of a physical particle in this theoretical
framework as yet.

It is therefore logically compelling to investigate
whether the second alternative, that of determin-
ing the makeshift equations on the basis of the tem-
poral evolution of physical bodies, extended space
in (1), is the realizable one.

In fact, this last approach is really the (logically)
appropriate one since the temporal evolution of
“physical bodies” in (1) is a mathematically well-
deﬁnable concept (dynamical systems) while the
makeshift equations are not.

20

(2)

We therefore abandon [2] the four-dimensional
spacetime in favor of a three-dimensional pseudo-
Riemannian manifold admitting a pseudo-metric,
called the Einstein pseudo-metric, given as:

dℓ2 = P

′2

Q2R2 dx2
2
2
2 ¯Q
R
+ P 2Q2 ˜R2 dz2

dy

2

+ P

where, as before, P ≡ P (x), Q ≡ Q(y), R ≡ R(z)
and P ′ = dP/dx, ¯Q = dQ/dy, ˜R = dR/dz. We
denote the space of (2) by the symbol B. The
three spatial functions P , Q, R are initial data for
the space B. The vanishing of any of these spatial
functions is a curvature singularity, and constancy
(over a range) is a degeneracy of (2).

A particular choice of functions, say, Po, Qo,
Ro is a speciﬁc spatial distribution of energy in
the space of (2). As some “concentrated” energy
“moves” in the space, we have the original set of
functions changing to the “new” set of correspond-
ing functions, say, P1, Q1, R1.

Then, “motion” as described above is, basically,
a change of one set of initial data to another set
of initial data with “time”.

Clearly, we are considering the isometries of (2)
while considering “motion” of this kind. Then, we
will remain within the group of the isometries of (2)
by restricting to the triplets of nowhere-vanishing
functions P , Q, R. We also do not consider any
degenerate situations for (2).

If we denote by d, a metric function canonically
[8] obtainable [17] from the pseudo-metric (2), then
the space (B, d) is an uncountable, separable, com-
plete metric space. If Γ denotes the metric topol-
ogy induced by d on B, then (B, Γ) is a Polish topo-
logical space. Further, we also obtain a Standard
Borel Space (B, B) where B denotes the Borel σ-
algebra of the subsets of B, the smallest one con-
taining all the open subsets of (B, Γ) [9].

But, the Einstein pseudo-metric (2) is a metric
function on certain “open” sets, to be called the P-
sets, of its Polish topology Γ. A P-set of (B, d) is
therefore never a singleton subset, {{x} : x ∈ B},
of the space B. Note also that every open set of
(B, Γ) is not a P-set of (B, d).

Now, the diﬀerential of the volume-measure on

B, deﬁned by (2), is

dµ = P 2Q2R2

dP
dx

dQ
dy

dR
dz (cid:19)

(cid:18)

dx dy dz

(3)

This diﬀerential of the volume-measure vanishes
when any of the derivatives, of P , Q, R with re-
spect to their arguments, vanishes. (Functions P ,
Q, R are non-vanishing over B.)

A P-set of the space B is then also thinkable as
the interior of a region of B for which the diﬀer-
ential of the volume-measure, (3), is vanishing on
its boundary while it being non-vanishing at any
of its interior points.

Any two P-sets, Pi and Pj, i, j ∈ N, i 6= j,
are, consequently, pairwise disjoint sets of B. Also,
each P-set is, in its own right, an uncountable,
complete, separable, metric space.

A P-set is the mathematically simplest form of
“localized” total energy in the space B. This sug-
gests that we should use set-theoretic concepts for
it. One such concept is of a suitable (Lebesgue)
measure deﬁnable on sets.

We then recall that the Galilean concept of the
(inertial) mass of a physical body is that of the
measure of its inertia. Therefore, some appropriate
measure deﬁnable for a P-set is the property of
inertia of a physical body, a P-set in question. So
also should be the case with the gravitational mass
of a physical body. Such should also be the case
with other relevant properties of physical bodies,
for example, its electric charge.

Thus, we associate with every attribute of a
physical body, a suitable class of (Lebesgue) mea-
sures on such P-sets. Therefore, a P-set is a physi-
cal particle, always an extended body, since a P-set
cannot be a singleton set of (B, d).

Now, in the absence of the ﬁeld-particle dualism,
the ﬁeld and the source-particle are indistinguish-
able. The source-properties are then also the ﬁeld-
properties. Thus, a P-set (the total ﬁeld) and the
measures on P-sets (sources) are, then, are amalga-
mated into one thing here, ie, are indistinguishable
from each other, in a sense.

Therefore, various source-properties (measures)
change only when the ﬁeld (P-set) changes. This
union of the ﬁeld and the source-properties is then
clearly perceptible here.

Moreover, a given measure can be (Haar) inte-
grated over the underlying P-set in question. The
integration procedure is always a well-deﬁned one
here as a P-set, being an “open” subset of a con-
tinuum, is a non-empty locally compact Hausdorﬀ
group in an obvious sense.

The (Haar) integral provides then an “averaged
quantity characteristic of a P-set” under question.
Of course, this is a property of the entire P-set
under consideration.

For example, let us deﬁne an almost-everywhere
ﬁnite-valued positive-deﬁnite measurable function,
ρ, on (B, B) and call it the energy density. Inte-
grating it over the volume of a P-set, the resultant
quantity can be called a total mass, mT , of that
P-set under consideration. The total mass, mT , is
a property of that entire P-set and, hence, of every
point of that P-set.

21

(Clearly, to deﬁne the notions of “gravitational
mass” and of “inertial mass” of a P-set, we need to
consider the “motion” of a P-set and also an appro-
priate notion of the “force” acting on that P-set.
Since we are yet to deﬁne any of these associated
notions, we call the integrated energy density as,
simply, the total mass of the P-set.)

We note that every point of the P-set is then
thinkable as having these averaged properties of
the P-set and, in this precise mathematically non-
singular sense, is thinkable as a point-particle pos-
sessing those averaged properties. It is in this non-
singular sense that we can recover the notion of a
point particle in the present framework. That this
is indeed permissible in a mathematically precise
sense is then an indication of the internal consis-
tency of the present approach.

Clearly, the “location” of the mass mT will be
intrinsically indeterminate over the size of that P-
set because the averaged property is also the prop-
erty of every point of the set under consideration.
We may then associate a Dirac δ-distribution with
the mass mT over that P-set.

Thus, “averaging a given measure” over any P-
set and associating a Dirac δ-distribution with that
averaged measure, an intrinsic indeterminacy of
location over the size of that P-set is obtained for
that averaged measure.

Now, any two P-sets of the same cardinality, be-
longing either to the same metric-space (B, d) or
to two diﬀerent metric-spaces (B, d1) and (B, d2),
are Borel-isomorphic [10]. Then, copies (P-sets) of
a physical particle are indistinguishable from each
other except for their spatial locations.

Let us reserve the word particle for a P-set since
it is the simplest form of “localized” energy in the
present framework.

Then, in a precise mathematical sense [8], sets
can be touching and that describes our intuitive
notion of touching physical bodies. Of course, the
corresponding point particles are then “touching”
within the limits of the sizes of the corresponding
P-sets. (The size of a P-set then acts in the manner
of the de Broglie wavelength for a point particle, a
point of the P-set.)

Further, if a P-set splits into two or more P-
sets, we have the process of creation of particles
since the measures are now deﬁnable individually
over the split parts, two or more P-sets. On the
other hand, if two or more P-sets unite to become
a single P-set, we have the process of annihilation
of particles since the measures are now deﬁnable
over a single P-set.

Clearly, the laws of creation and annihilation of
particles will require of us to specify the corre-
sponding transformations causing the splitting and
the merger of the P-sets.

Now, we call as an object a region of B bounded
by the vanishing of (3) but containing interior
points for which it vanishes (so such a region is
not a P-set). Such a region of B is then a collec-
tion of P-sets. But, a P-set is a particle. Therefore,
an object is a collection of particles.

Objects may also unite to become a single object
or an object may also split into two or more than
two objects under transformations of P-sets. We
may then also think of the corresponding laws for
these processes involving objects.

Obviously, various concepts such as the density
of particles, a ﬂux of particles across some surface
etc. are then well deﬁnable in terms of the transfor-
mations of P-sets and the eﬀects of these transfor-
mations on the measures deﬁnable over the P-sets
under consideration.

Then, such “averaging procedures” are well-
deﬁned over any collection of P-sets and, also, of
objects. Thus, we may, in a mathematically mean-
ingful way, deﬁne a suitable “energy-momentum
tensor” [18] and some relation between the aver-
aged quantities, an “equation of state” deﬁning
appropriately the “state of the ﬂuid matter” un-
der consideration.

(Such conceptions require however the notion of
transformations of P-sets and objects. Moreover,
this averaging is a “sum total” of the eﬀects of
various such transformations of P-sets and objects
and, hence, will require corresponding mathemat-
ical machinery. This is, then, the premise of the
ergodic theory. Recall that (B, B) is a Standard
Borel Space.)

Einstein’s makeshift ﬁeld equations are then de-
ﬁnable in the sense (only) of these averages. There-
fore, Einstein’s makeshift equations are “obtain-
able” on the basis of the temporal evolution of
points of the space B, physical particles as elements
of the 3-space of B. This is also the sense in which
Descartes’s conceptions are then realizable in the
present formalism. However, we will not pursue
this obvious issue of details here.

Now, we can “count” P-sets and, also, objects.
This precise mathematical notion of countability of
P-sets and objects here then agrees well with our
very general experience that arbitrary physical ob-
jects (chairs, stones, persons etc.) are “countable”
in Nature in an obvious sense.

Moreover, the metric of (B, d) allows us the pre-
cise deﬁnition of the sizes of P-sets and objects.
Then, given an object of speciﬁc size, we may use
it as a measuring rod to measure “distance” be-
tween two other objects.

A measurable, one-one map of B onto itself is
a Borel automorphism. Now, the Borel automor-
phisms of (B, B), forming a group, are natural for
us to consider here.

22

Let a Borel automorphism φ of B act to take a
point x1 7→ y1 and point x2 7→ y2 where x1 ∈ P1
and x2 ∈ P2; P1, P2 being P-sets. Let y1 ∈ P ′
1
1 and P ′
and y2 ∈ P ′
2 being the images of
P1 and P2 under φ. Then, the canonical distance
“d” between P1 and P2 can evidently change under
the action of φ continuously (with respect to the
corresponding Polish topologies).

2 with P ′

A Borel automorphism of (B, B) then induces an
associated transformation of (B, d), say, to (B, d′),
and that “moves” P-sets about in B, since (suitably
deﬁned) distance between the P-sets can change
under that Borel automorphism.

We call this the “physical” distance separating
P-sets (as extended bodies). We also (naturally)
deﬁne distance separating objects.

Now, the Borel automorphisms of B can be clas-

siﬁed as follows:

(1) those which preserve measures deﬁned on a

speciﬁc P-set and

(2) those which do not preserve measures deﬁned

on a speciﬁc P-set

Note that we are restricting our attention to only
a speciﬁc P-set/Object and not every P-set/Object
is under consideration here.

Measure-preserving Borel automorphisms then
“transform” a P-set maintaining its characteristic
classes of (Lebesgue) measures on a P-set, its phys-
ical properties.

Non-measure-preserving Borel automorphisms
change the characteristic classes of Lebesgue mea-
sures (physical properties) of a P-set while “trans-
forming” it. Evidently, such considerations also
apply to objects.

It is therefore permissible that a particular pe-
riodic Borel automorphism leads to an oscillatory
motion of a P-set or an object while preserving its
class of characteristic measures.

We can then think of an object undergoing pe-
riodic motion as a (physically realizable) time-
measuring clock. Such an object undergoing oscil-
latory motion then “measures” the time-parameter
of the corresponding (periodic) Borel automor-
phism since the period of the motion of such an
object is precisely the period of the corresponding
Borel automorphism.

Then, within the present formalism, a measuring
clock is therefore any P-set or an object undergoing
periodic motion.

In the physical world, we do measure distances
and construct clocks in this manner. Then, cru-
cially, the present formalism represents measuring
apparatuses, measuring rods and measuring clocks,
on par with every other thing that the formalism
intends to treat.

Such considerations then suggest an appropriate
distance function, physical distance, on the fam-
ily of all P-sets/objects of the space (B, d). More
than one such distance function will be deﬁnable,
depending obviously on the collection of P-sets or
objects that we may be considering in the form of
a measuring rod or measuring clock.

This above is permissible since we are dealing
here with a continuum which is a standard Borel
space with Polish topology. Relevant mathemati-
cal results can be found in [9].

A Borel automorphism of (B, B) may change the
physical distance resulting into “relative motion”
of objects. We also note here that the sets invariant
under the speciﬁc Borel automorphism are charac-
teristic of that automorphism. Hence, such sets
will then have their distance “ﬁxed” under that
Borel automorphism and will be stationary rela-
tive to each other.

On a diﬀerent note, an automorphism, keeping
invariant a chain of objects separating two other
objects, can describe the situation of two or more
relatively stationary objects.

Eﬀects of the Borel automorphisms of (B, B) on
the physical distance are then motions of physical
bodies. Furthermore, various physical phenomena
will then be manifestations of relevant properties
of such automorphisms.

As an example, a joint manifestation of Borel
automorphisms of the space (B, B) and the associa-
tion of a Dirac δ-distribution of an integrated mea-
sure with the points of a P-set is a candidate reason
behind Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations in the
present continuum formulation [19]. However, de-
tails regarding these considerations are outside the
limits of the present article.
intuitively,

let it suﬃce to say that as
the size of the P-set gets smaller and smaller we
“know” the position of the point-particle (of inte-
grated characteristics of a P-set) more and more
accurately.
(But, recall that a P-set is never a
singleton subset of B. So, complete positional lo-
calization is not permissible.)

But,

Now, that P-set “transforms” as a result of our
eﬀorts to “determine any of its characteristic mea-
sures” since these “eﬀorts or experimental arrange-
ments” are also Borel automorphisms, not neces-
sarily the members of the class of Borel automor-
phisms keeping invariant that P-set (as well as the
class of its characteristic measures).

Hence, any Borel automorphism (as an exper-
imental arrangement) purporting to “determine”
a characteristic measure of that P-set changes, in
eﬀect, the very quantity that it is trying to deter-
mine. This peculiarity of the present continuum
description then leads to Heisenberg’s (correspond-
ing) indeterminacy relation.

23

Then, in the present continuum description, it
is indeed possible to explain the origin of Heisen-
berg’s indeterminacy relations. The present con-
tinuum description provides us therefore an origin
of indeterminacy relations, an alternative to their
probabilistic origin.

This circumstance is then extremely encourag-
ing indeed. Essentially, it tells us that one of the
fundamental characteristics, Heisenberg’s indeter-
minacy relations, of the theory of the quantum has
an, indeed plausible, explanation in a general rel-
ativistic theory of the continuum!

Notice then that, in the present considerations,
we began with none of the fundamental consid-
erations of the concept of a quantum. But, the
present continuum formalism unfolds itself before
us in such a manner that one of the basic charac-
teristics of the conception of a quantum emerges
out of the present formalism.

Notice also that, in the present continuum de-
scription, we have essentially done away with the
“singular nature” of the particles and, hence, also
with the unsatisfactory dualism of the ﬁeld and
the source particle. Furthermore, we have, simul-
taneously, well-deﬁned laws of motion (Borel au-
tomorphisms) for the ﬁeld and also for the well-
deﬁned conception of a particle (of integrated mea-
sure characteristics).

Any particulate character or undulatory char-
acter perceptible in a given physical phenomenon
is then attributable to properties of Borel auto-
morphisms of the space B, more precisely to an
interplay of Borel automorphisms simultaneously
acting on the space B.

We refrain here from elaborating further on this
issue. However, intuitively, the particulate nature
would be perceptible in a phenomenon if the clas-
sical newtonian concepts (eg., momentum) hold in
some useful way. Otherwise, the undulatory na-
ture of the (total) ﬁeld would be perceptible in
that phenomenon. Any phenomenon is, of course,
a result of the simultaneous interplay of Borel au-
tomorphisms of B here.

All these achievements of the present general rel-
ativistic (continuum) formulation cannot be with-
out any element of the ﬁnality then.

The contention here is then the following: that
the set of classes of (Lebesgue) measures on P-
sets of (B, d) (as various attributes of a physical
particle) and the group of Borel automorphisms
of (B, B) (resulting into dynamics of P-sets) are,
both, suﬃciently large as to encompass the entire
diversity of physical phenomena.

In a deﬁnite sense, this approach then provides
the theory of the total ﬁeld of Einstein’s concep-
tion [1]. It is therefore also a continuum theory of
everything in that sense.

The question naturally arises as to where, in
the present formulation, are the various constants
of Nature such as Newton’s constant of gravita-
tion, Planck’s constant, constant speed of light
etc. Here, we only note that these constants arise
from relations of physical conceptions deﬁnable
in this formulation.
In some deﬁnite sense, this
present situation is describable as obtaining Con-
stants without Constants.

As an example, we need to analyze here as to
how one obtains Newton’s law of gravitation in
the present formalism in order to obtain Newton’s
constant of gravitation. For this, we will need to
consider the “gravitational mass” measure of P-
sets, and also analyze the tendency of this P-set to
oppose a change in its state of motion, its inertia
as per the conception of Galileo.

Any such analysis is, of course, based on the
appropriate subgroup of the group of Borel auto-
morphisms of (B, B) as well as the association of
a Dirac δ-distribution (of an “averaged measure”)
with a P-set. Such considerations are, of course,
beyond the scope of the present article.

However,

some deﬁnite conclusions are ob-
tainable from very general considerations of the
present formalism and, we now turn to a few such
considerations.

Now, a Borel automorphism of (B, B) cannot
lead to a singularity of B and, hence, to any kind
of “naked singularities” from which some null tra-
jectory would reach other points of the manifold.
Since the present formalism is logically compelling,
this would then mean that the naked singularities
would not be obtainable in the Physics without a
ﬁeld-particle dualism.

Evidently, the Universe also does not originate
or end in any singularity as there also cannot be
any such singularity of the space B in this frame-
work. But, an Expanding Universe or a portion
of B thereof, that may be hotter in the past than
today but having no origin, singular or otherwise,
is thinkable in it.

This can be seen from the fact that certain Borel
automorphisms may move the P-sets about in the
space B in such a manner that these P-sets may
move away from each other, while simultaneously
pushing some other P-sets closer to each other.
This is a very complicated picture but deﬁnitely
thinkable nonetheless.

Moreover, Borel automorphisms of (B, B) form
a group. Thus, we can always cross any 2-surface
both ways. To see this intuitively, let a Borel au-
tomorphism of (B, B) produce motion of an ob-
ject “into” the given 2-surface. However, the in-
verse of that Borel automorphism, producing mo-
tion pulling that object “out” of that 2-surface,
exists always is the point here.

24

Therefore, there does not arise any one-way
membrane in the present formalism. It therefore
does not seem that the concept of a black hole
is any relevant to this Physics without the ﬁeld-
particle dualism. As noted earlier, the concept of
a black hole is a child of the “ghostly” equations
of the pure gravitational ﬁeld.

Now, a P-set, evidently, can be of any size and,
hence, objects can also be of any size. Therefore, a
one-way membrane (black hole) is not but, ultra-
compact objects are of relevance to this Physics
without ﬁeld-particle dualism.

As one more example, we consider Schr¨odinger’s
cat paradox. In the present formalism, some Borel
automorphism of base space B “causes” the dis-
integration of the atom while the “measurement”
of this time-instant can take place using the “suit-
able structure” on the family of the P-sets of B.
Therefore, the time-instant of disintegration of a
radioactive atom is “well-deﬁned as a parameter”
of that Borel automorphism and, simultaneously,
there is also the Heisenberg-type indeterminacy in-
volved in its measurement.

There is then some kind of Two-Time formalism
in consideration here. The time of disintegration
of a radioactive atom as the parameter of a Borel
automorphism of B can then be diﬀerent than that
which is determinable.

Recall that we began with no considerations
of the quantum conceptions. The disintegration
of a radioactive atom is a quantum consideration
and the probabilistic interpretation leads us to a
“fuzzy” description of macroscopic system - a cat.
That a possible resolution naturally arises here is
then remarkable indeed.

We now turn to some other aspects which were
so beautifully explained and elucidated by von
Laue [3] - those related to conservation principles
in physical theories.

As von Laue expressed [3] it: Mass is nothing but
a form of energy which can occasionally be changed
into another form. Up to now our entire concep-
tion of the nature of matter depended on mass.
Whatever has mass, - so we thought -, has indi-
viduality; hypothetically at least we can follow its
fate throughout time. But, this does not hold for
the elementary particles.

These remarks are then understandable in the
present formalism since the individuality of parti-
cles is that of the P-sets.

In the present formalism, a particle is a point
of the P-set of the space B with associated inte-
grated measures deﬁned on that P-set. As a Borel
automorphism of the space B changes that P-set,
the integrated properties also change and, hence,
the initial particle changes into another particle(s),
since integrated measures change.

Of course, we then need to discover various laws
of such transformations of particles into one an-
other in the present formalism. But, it is clear at
the outset that these will crucially depend on the
structure of the group of Borel automorphisms of
the space B.

Von Laue concluded [3] his article with the fol-
lowing relevant remarks:
... Can the notions of
momentum and energy be transferred into every
physics of the future? The uncertainty relations of
W. Heisenberg according to which we cannot pre-
cisely determine location and momentum of a par-
ticle at the same time - a law of nature precludes
this -, can, for every physicist who believes in the
relation of cause and eﬀect, only have the mean-
ing that at least one of the two notions, location
and momentum, is deﬁcient for a description of
the facts. Modern physics, however, does not yet
know any substitute for them.

We may then conclude the present section with

the following remarks.

Here, the notion of energy is then that of the
integrated measure deﬁned on a P-set of the space
B. The notion of the momentum of a particle (as a
point of the P-set of B with associated integrated
measures on that P-set) is then that of the appro-
priately deﬁned notion of the rate of change of the
physical distance under the action of a Borel au-
tomorphism of B, including evidently any changes
that may occur to measures deﬁnable on that P-
set. Therefore, the notions of energy and momen-
tum of a particle are certainly (well-) deﬁnable in
the present formalism.

Further, none of these two notions is any deﬁ-
cient for a description of the facts since Heisen-
berg’s indeterminacy relations are also “explain-
able” within the present formalism. This expla-
nation crucially hinges on the fact that the points
of the space B can never be particles since these,
as singleton subsets of the space B, are never the
P-sets.
It is only in the sense of associating the
measures integrated over a P-set that the points of
the space B are particles.

The measurable location of a particle is essen-
tially a diﬀerent conception and that depends on
the physical distance deﬁnable on the class of all
P-sets of the space B. The measurable momentum
of a particle is also dependent on the notion of the
physical distance changing under the action of a
Borel automorphism of B.

Therefore, it does seem possible to combine the
virtues of the theory of the quantum and of the
general theory of relativity in a formalism that
does possess the notions of energy and momen-
tum, both. Then, this formalism will further unite
more number of conservation laws than those al-
ready united in special relativity.

25

Now, as seen earlier, physical processes occur
as a result of the (combined eﬀects of) the Borel
automorphisms of the space B and these include
the processes of quantum character. Then, it is
thinkable that “some suitable statistical descrip-
tion” is obtainable by “approximating” the eﬀects
of these Borel automorphisms acting on B to pro-
duce the concerned physical processes of quantum
character. This, intuitively speaking, can be con-
sidered as the probabilistic description of the in-
volved physical processes.

Hence, at this point, we also note that, in re-
lation to the present formalism, the theory of
the quantum as represented by Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-
function can be expected to assume a place which
is similar to that of the usual statistical mechanics
within the realm of the classical newtonian theory.
(Details of these considerations are, once again,
outside the scope of the present article.)

Provided that the description of physical sys-
tems of Nature based on a continuum is permissi-
ble, the approach [2] followed here in Section VIII
is also a logically compelling approach as this ar-
ticle discussed.

Of course, many mathematical, physical details
and their implications need to be worked out be-
fore we can “test” the above described theoretical
framework vis-a-vis experimentation or astronom-
ical observations. But, conﬁdence may be voiced
that it will stand tests of experimentations and/or
observations since it is a logically compelling ap-
proach as discussed here.

A comment on the mathematical methods would
not be out of place here. Then, we note that the
mathematical formalism of the ergodic theory is
what is of immediate use for the physical frame-
work of the present section. This much is already
clear from the present considerations.

However, it is not entirely satisfactory to use the
present methods of ergodic theory. One of the pri-
mary reasons for this state of aﬀairs is the inability
of the present methods in ergodic theory to let us
handle, in a physical sense, the P-sets. Some newer
methods are then required here.

IX. CONCLUDING REMARKS

In the present article, we outlined the reasons
behind the logically compelling character of the
approach adopted in Section VIII.

In doing so, we also critically examined the rea-
sons behind the “failures” of other approaches to
General Relativity based on the equations of the
pure gravitational ﬁeld and Einstein’s makeshift
equations for the matter ﬁelds.

In particular, the equations of the pure gravita-
tional ﬁeld are “ghostly” in the sense of Newton’s
Absolute Space or in the sense of this approach
providing only the equations for the ﬁeld without
any possibility for the equations of motion for the
sources of the ﬁeld. These equations cannot there-
fore provide the means to verify or test predictions
in any manner whatsoever.

Then, any solution of these ﬁeld equations of
the pure gravitational ﬁeld is “ghostly” as well.
Any conclusion of a physical nature obtained using
these equations is therefore dubious.

Further, Einstein’s makeshift equations for gen-
eral ﬁeld are based on an ill-deﬁned concept of the
energy-momentum tensor. This is mainly because
various concepts leading us to the notion of the
energy-momentum tensor are based primarily on
the concept of a point-particle which is not deﬁned
abinitio in a (dynamical) geometric approach such
as the one postulated and adopted by general rela-
tivity. Clearly, a point-particle as a spacetime sin-
gularity leads to the impossibility of the deﬁnition
of the energy-momentum tensor.

The pivotal problem with the solutions of the
makeshift ﬁeld equations is then that of their phys-
ical interpretation in view of some continuum de-
scription of physical systems. We cannot consider
these solutions as describing some “ﬂuid” matter
since the conceptions of ﬂuid properties are ill-
deﬁned to begin with. Therefore, it follows that
not all the solutions of Einstein’s makeshift ﬁeld
equations are necessarily useful for the continuum
description of physical bodies. Of particular men-
tion is the Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker
(FLRW) geometry of the standard model of the
big bang cosmology.

(Therefore, we must, unassumingly, also seek
the pardon of all those whose sincere and her-
culean eﬀorts provided us the many solutions [4]
of Einstein’s makeshift ﬁeld equations. Clearly,
these equations are based on ill-deﬁned considera-
tions. Furthermore, the solutions of these highly
non-linear partial diﬀerential equations do not fol-
low any superposition principle. Therefore, it also
follows that even if there existed some particular
spacetime geometry useful for some speciﬁc contin-
uum description of physical systems, it would not
be a superposition of other spacetime geometries.
Other spacetime geometries are then rendered un-
physical in this sense.)

However, it also follows that only the smooth
spacetime geometries are the ones that need to be
considered if the description of physical systems is
permissible on the basis of a continuum. The ques-
tion then arises of choosing some particular space-
time geometry that can provide us this continuum
description of physical systems.

26

Clearly, the answer to this question requires use
of some physical principles, not contained within
the framework of standard general relativity (the
framework of Einstein’s makeshift equations) since
this theory permits many diﬀerent smooth space-
time geometries containing matter ﬁelds. This is
what we considered in Section VIII.

In Section VI, somewhat separated section from
the earlier considerations, we then considered de-
velopments related to the theory of the quantum
conception. In this section, we recalled Einstein’s
exposition of the relevant developments of the con-
cept of a quantum. In particular, we noted the pre-
cise nature of problems with the (classical) newto-
nian theories. We also noted that the contradic-
tion with the laws of newtonian mechanics is of
more fundamental nature than that with the laws
of Maxwell’s electromagnetism.

The theory of the quantum is based primarily
on the probabilistic conceptions. Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-
function then provides us only the probability of
any physical event. As is well known, this then
leads to an indeterminacy in the simultaneous mea-
surement of canonically conjugate (classical) vari-
ables. This is the probabilistic origin of Heisen-
berg’s indeterminacy relations.

This probabilistic nature of the theory of the
quantum leads to paradoxical situations of serious
concern if every physical system, microscopic or
macroscopic notwithstanding, obeyed probabilistic
laws. We then also considered, in Section VII, var-
ious objections of such serious nature related to
this interpretation of the theory of the quantum.
In particular, some of the serious objections raised
by Einstein [1] were quoted in details.

In view of the considerations of these objections,
it is then possible to adopt the view that the the-
ory of the quantum, Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function, rep-
resents an ensemble(s) of systems.

With this above point of view, the theory of the
quantum may then be expected to assume, in re-
lation to an appropriate general relativistic the-
ory, one based on the principle of general covari-
ance, for the case (b) of general ﬁelds, a place sim-
ilar to that of the statistical mechanics within the
realm of the classical newtonian framework. Then,
various paradoxical situations arising in the the-
ory of the quantum as embodied in Schr¨odinger’s
Ψ-function evidently disappear. Einstein [1] had,
very clearly, perceived this situation with the the-
ory of the quantum.

With this view point, within the theory of the
quantum as embodied in Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function,
there is obviously no possibility of obtaining any
non-probabilistic theoretical framework for the de-
scription of physical phenomena. Einstein had also
clearly recognized this aspect.

Therefore, we had to look “elsewhere” for the
theoretical framework (obeying the principle of
general covariance) that would provide us the the-
ory of the case (b) of general ﬁelds. This is what
Einstein meant in his remarks which were quoted
in the context of the relevant discussions.

Therefore, on the basis of some few (physically
reasonable) principles (observed to hold in Na-
ture), we developed the approach [2] outlined in
Section VIII. This theoretical framework then
obeys the principle of general covariance,
in a
round about manner, since the group of Borel au-
tomorphisms of the space B is very large.

We then saw that this formalism provides us a
clear possibility of explaining the laws of the quan-
tum realm while simultaneously treating the con-
cept of a particle in a non-singular manner.
It
also shows us the possibility of visualizing the the-
ory of the quantum as embodied in Schr¨odinger’s
Ψ-function to be of similar character to the usual
statistical mechanics.

In particular, the (continuum) formalism of Sec-
tion VIII provides [11] a non-probabilistic expla-
nation for Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations.
Furthermore, it also allows us satisfactory resolu-
tions of diﬀerent (serious) paradoxical situations
faced by the theory of the quantum as embodied
in Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function.

Moreover, it is then also clear that many of the
current ideas in theoretical cosmology need drastic
modiﬁcations. Notably, there is no singularity of
the space(time) in the past as well as in the future
in the present framework.

The physical matter in the universe can only be
“rearranged” in the present framework (of Section
VIII) that is a complete ﬁeld theory. This fact
can be expected to have important implications
and consequences [12] for our understanding of the
cosmological phenomena.

So also our models of some (galactic as well
as extragalactic) high energy sources need dras-
tic changes. There does not arise a black hole or a
naked singularity in the present framework. There-
fore, our models of astronomical sources cannot be
based on these conceptions.

27

In summary, Einstein had been one of the propo-
nents of the ensemble interpretation of the quan-
tum theory. We then recall here that, to em-
phasize Einstein’s contributions to developments
in the theory of the quantum, Max Born wrote
[1] about Einstein that: He has seen more clearly
than anyone before him the statistical background
of the laws of physics, and he was a pioneer in the
struggle for conquering the wilderness of quantum
phenomena. Yet later, when out of his own work,
a synthesis of statistical and quantum principles
emerged which seemed to be acceptable to almost
all physicists, he kept himself aloof and sceptical.
Many of us regard this as a tragedy - for him, as he
gropes his way in loneliness, and for us who miss
our leader and standard-bearer.

However, as a result of our combined eﬀorts,
with so many in the past wrestling with and weak-
ening to a large extent the diﬃcult problems of
grasping the Nature, we have been able to see a
little beyond their vision.

It was, of course, extremely diﬃcult for the
physicists of earlier times, Einstein and others in-
cluded, to imagine the current path [2], the formal-
ism of the Section VIII, in those times, turbulent
times of vigorous theoretical and experimental ac-
tivities. In fact, many of the mathematical concep-
tions of Section VIII, speciﬁcally those of the er-
godic theory, were not even available to them. But,
from our present considerations, it then should be
clear that Born’s leader, Einstein, had indeed the
right intuition all along.

The physically complete framework of the Sec-
tion VIII is also in conformity with the relevant
ideas of Descartes [7, 11]. Clearly, this ﬁeld-
theoretic program of Section VIII is then also: the
complete description of any (individual) real situa-
tion (as it supposedly exists irrespective of any act
of observation or substantiation).

Then, a stage can be said to have been certainly
reached in the history of Physics, once again since
Newton’s times, in that we have a physically com-
plete framework in the formalism of Section VIII
for describing the totality of physical phenomena
in Einstein’s sense.

[1] Einstein A (1970) in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-
Scientist (Ed. P A Schlipp, La Salle: Open Court
Publishing Company - The Library of Living
Philosophers, Vol. VII). See, in particular, Auto-
biographical Notes, Reply to Criticisms and other
relevant essays.
Pais A (1982) Subtle is the Lord ... The science
and the life of Albert Einstein (Oxford: Claren-

don Press) and references therein

[2] See, for details, Wagh S M (2004) Some fundamen-
tal issues in General Relativity and their resolu-
tion Database: gr-qc/0402003 and references
therein
See also, Wagh S M (2004) A Theory of the Total
Field, to be submitted.

[3] von Laue M (1970) essay in Albert Einstein:

Philosopher-Scientist (Ed. P A Schlipp, La Salle:
Open Court Publishing Company - The Library
of Living Philosophers, Vol. VII).

[4] Kramer D, Stephani H, MacCallum M A H and
Herlt E (1980) Exact Solutions of Einstein’s Field
Equations (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge) and references therein
C W Misner, K S Thorne and J A Wheeler (1973)
Gravitation (W H Freeman) and references therein
[5] Einstein A (1970) in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-
Scientist
(Ed. P A Schlipp, La Salle: Open
Court Publishing Company - The Library of Liv-
ing Philosophers, Vol. VII) (Remarks concerning
the essays brought together in this co-operative vol-
ume) p. 666

[6] Wagh S M (2002) Classical formulation of Cosmic
Censorship Hypothesis, Database: gr-qc/0201041.
[7] Einstein A (1968) Relativity: The Special and the
General Theory (Methuen & Co. Ltd, London)
(See, in particular, Appendix V: Relativity and
the Problem of Space.)
See, also, Lorentz H A, Einstein A, Minkowski H,
Weyl W (1952) The Principle of Relativity: A col-
lection of original papers on the special and gen-
eral theory of relativity. Notes by A Sommerfeld
(Dover, New York)

[8] Joshi K D (1983) Introduction to General Topology
(Wiley Eastern, New Delhi) and references therein
[9] Nadkarni M G (1995) Basic Ergodic Theory (Texts
and Readings in Mathematics - 6: Hindustan
Book Agency, New Delhi) and references therein
[10] Parthasarathy K R (1967) Probability measures of
Metric spaces (Academic Press, New York) and
references therein

[11] Wagh S M (2004) On the continuum origin of
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations Database:
physics/0404066

[12] Wagh S M (2004) On cosmological considerations
in a theory of the total ﬁeld (in preparation)
[13] Einstein commented [1] on this essay as: Max von
Laue: An historical investigation of the develop-
ment of the conservation postulates, which, in my
opinion, is of lasting value. I think it would be
worth while to make this essay easily accessible to
students by way of independent publication. —
[14] Therefore, just as various theoretical conclusions
based on the existence of the absolute space of

28

Newton’s theory were unjustiﬁed, destined to be
failure from the very beginning, the solutions to
the equations of the pure gravitational ﬁeld are
similarly not justiﬁable. Clearly, a black hole is
one of the many “children” of the “ghost” of the
ﬁeld equations of the pure gravitational ﬁeld and,
hence, is itself a ghost. Similar is the case with a
“naked singularity.”
Then, anything done employing such “children of
the ghost” is dubious. For example, the works
of the author in “The energetics of black holes
in electromagnetic ﬁelds by the Penrose process”
(Wagh, S.M. and Dadhich, N.) Physics Reports,
vol. 183, p. 137 (1989) (and references therein)
are, simply, dubious, since these works use this
“ghost” of the equations of the pure gravitational
ﬁeld in every possible manner. A naked singular-
ity, it too being dubious, is then not useful for any
astrophysical purposes.
It is then evident that eﬀorts (for example, see,
McClintock J E, Narayan R, Rybicki G B (2004)
Database: astro-ph/0403251 and references
therein) to establish the existence of a black hole
horizon on the basis of observations of astronom-
ical sources are not justiﬁable. The correspond-
ing observations must then admit explanations of
some entirely diﬀerent nature.

[15] See also Section VIII.
[16] There certainly are (philosophical) weaknesses of
such an argument. However, we shall not enter the
relevant issues here. It suﬃces for our purpose here
to say that “the space must be indistinguishable
from physical bodies.”

[17] We deﬁne an equivalence relation “∼” such that
x ∼ y iﬀ ℓ(x, y) = 0 where ℓ is the pseudo-metric
distance deﬁned on the space X. Denote by Y the
set of all equivalence classes of X under the equiv-
alence relation ∼. If A, B ∈ Y are two equivalence
classes, then let e(A, B) = ℓ(x, y) where x ∈ A
and y ∈ B. The (metric) function e on Y is the
canonical distance.

[18] This is a ﬁeld-theoretic comprehension, in a deﬁ-
nite sense, of the energy-momentum tensor.
[19] Recall that Einstein [1] regarded the correctness
of Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations as being
“ﬁnally demonstrated”.

