4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Noncommutative Gauge Fields and Mass
Generation

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute for Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
Hyderabad (India) & Udine (Italy)
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

It is well known that a typical Yang-Mills Gauge Field is mediated
by massless Bosons. It is only through a symmetry breaking mech-
anism, as in the Salam-Weinberg model that the quanta of such an
interaction ﬁeld acquire a mass in the usual theory. Here we demon-
strate that without taking recourse to the usual symmetry breaking
mechanism, it is possible to have massive Gauge Fields, given a non-
commutative geometrical underpinning for spacetime.

1 Introduction

For nearly seventy ﬁve years there have been fruitless attempts at unifying
electromagnetism and gravitation, starting with the very early attempt of
Hermann Weyl and his gauge invariant geometry [1]. These attempts later
evolved into Quantum Gravity schemes on the one hand, while independently
Quantum Super String theory also has shown promise in this direction [2,
3, 4, 5, 6]. Curiously enough Weyl’s original ideas in Classical Physics were
developed decades later in a Quantum Mechanical context to evolve into the
Yang-Mills gauge theory and subsequent developments [7, 8, 9].
It is of course well known that the gauge theory approach has proved most
fruitful in the case of the electroweak interactions and has also made inroads
into the domain of strong interactions. But it has fallen short of gravitation.
A notable feature of the modern non-Abelian Gauge theories is the mass

1

generation, for which recourse has to be taken through a symmetry breaking
mechanism.
Returning to the case of gravitation, a notable feature of the recent schemes
Indeed as t’ Hooft has
is the existence of a minimum spacetime cut oﬀ.
remarked[10]: “It is some what puzzling to the present author why the lattice
structure of space and time has escaped attention from other investigators
up till now.” One of the consequences of such a minimum cut oﬀ is that there
is an underlying noncommutative geometric structure of spacetime (Cf.refs.
[6, 11] and other references therein). This is also symptomatic of the fact that
the underlying spacetime is no longer a diﬀerenciable manifold. We will now
argue that the noncommutative geometry is a mechanism which generates
mass in a non-Abelian Gauge Field theory.

2 Noncommutative Non Abelian Gauge Fields

Let us now consider the Gauge Field itself. As is well known, this could be
obtained as a generalization of the above phase function λ to include ﬁelds
with internal degrees of freedom. For example λ could be replaced by Aµ
given by

Aµ =

Aı

µ(x)Lı,

Xı

The Gauge Field itself would be obtained by using Stoke’s Theorem and (1).
This is a very well known procedure: considering a circuit, which for simplic-
ity we can take to be a parallellogram of side dx and dy in two dimensions,
we can easily deduce the equation for the ﬁeld, viz.,

Fµν = ∂µAν −

∂νAµ −
q being the Gauge Field coupling constant.
In (2), the second term on the right side is typical of a non Abelian Gauge
Field. In the case of the U(1) electromagnetic ﬁeld, this latter term vanishes.
Infact as is well known, in a typical Lagrangian like

ıq[Aµ, Aν],

(2)

(1)

(3)

L = ı ¯ψγµDµψ

1
4

−

F µνFµν −

m ¯ψψ

D denoting the Gauge covariant derivative, there is no mass term for the
ﬁeld Bosons. Such a mass term in (3) must have the form m2AµAµ which
unfortunately is not Gauge invariant.

2

This was the shortcoming of the original Yang-Mills Gauge Theory: The
Gauge Bosons would be massless and hence the need for a symmetry break-
ing, mass generating mechanism.
The well known remedy for the above situation has been to consider, in anal-
ogy with superconductivity theory, an extra phase of a self coherent system
(Cf.ref.[12] for a simple and elegant treatment). Thus instead of the Gauge
Field Aµ, we consider a new phase adjusted Gauge Field after the symmetry
is broken

The ﬁeld Wµ now generates the mass in a self consistent manner via a Higgs
mechanism. Infact the kinetic energy term

Wµ = Aµ −

1
q

∂µφ

1
2|

Dµφ

,

2

|

Dµφ0

2 = q2

|

|

2

φ0

2 ,

Wµ|

|

|

|

where Dµ in (5)denotes the Gauge covariant derivative, now becomes

Equation (6) gives the mass in terms of the ground state φ0.
Let us now consider in the Gauge Field transformation, an additional phase
term, f (x), this being a scalar. In the usual theory such a term can always be
gauged away in the U(1) electromagnetic group. However we now consider
the new situation of a noncommutative geometry referred to above,

where l denotes the minimum spacetime cut oﬀ. (Cf. also ref.[13, 14]). Then
the f phase factor gives a contribution to the second order in coordinate
diﬀerentials,

[dxµ, dxν] = Θµνβ, β

0(l2)

∼

1
2

[∂µBν −

∂νBµ] [dxµ, dxν]

+

[∂µBν + ∂νBµ] [dxµdxν + dxνdxµ]

(8)

1
2

∂µf .

where Bµ ≡
As can be seen from (8) and (7), the new contribution is in the term which
contains the commutator of the coordinate diﬀerentials, and not in the sym-
metric second term. Eﬀectively, remembering that Bµ arises from the scalar

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

phase factor, and not from the non-Abelian Gauge Field, in equation (2) Aµ
is replaced by

Aµ →

Aµ + Bµ = Aµ + ∂µf

(9)

Comparing (9) with (4) we can immediately see that the eﬀect of noncom-
mutativity is precisely that of providing a Gauge invariant mass term to the
Gauge Field.
l2, then there is no extra
On the other hand if we neglect in (7) terms
contribution coming from (8) or (9), so that we are in the usual non-Abelian
Gauge Field theory, requiring a broken symmetry to obtain an equation like
l2 in (7) then we are
(9). This is not surprising because if we neglect term
back with the usual commutative theory and the usual Quantum Mechanics.
Let us now consider the symmetric term in (8). This is equivalent to retain-
l2, that is squares of the coordinate diﬀerentials. Thus the phase
ing terms
transformation with f gives a term like

∼

∼

∼

∂µf
{

}

dxµ + (∂µ∂ν + ∂ν∂µ) f

dxµdxν

·

(10)

We must remember that neither the derivatives nor the products of coordi-
nate diﬀerentials now commute.
As in the usual theory the coeﬃcient of dxµ in the ﬁrst term of (10) represents
now, not the gauge term but the electromagnetic potential itself: Infact, in
this noncommutative geometry, it can be shown that this electromagnetic
potential reduces to the potential in Weyl’s original gauge theory.
Without the noncommutativity, the potential ∂µf would lead to a vanishing
electromagnetic ﬁeld. However Dirac pointed out in his famous monopole
paper in 1930 that a non integrable phase f (x, y, z) leads as above directly
to the electromagnetic potential, and moreover this was an alternative for-
mulation of the original Weyl theory.
Returning to (10) we identify the next coeﬃcient with the metric tensor
giving the gravitational ﬁeld:

ds2 = gµνdxµdxν = (∂µ∂ν + ∂ν∂µ) f dxµdxν

(11)

Infact one can easily verify that ds2 of (11) is an invariant. We now specialize
to the case of the linear theory in which squares and higher powers of hαβ
can be neglected. In this case it can easily be shown that

2Γβ

µν = hβµ,ν + hνβ,µ −

hµν,β

(12)

4

(13)

(14)

where in (12), the Γs denote Christofell symbols. From (12) by a contraction
we have

If we use the well known gauge condition

2Γµ

µν = hµν,µ = hµµ,ν

hµν

∂µ (cid:18)

1
2

−

ηµνhµν (cid:19)

= 0, where h = hµ
µ

then we get

∂µhµν = ∂νhµ

µ = ∂νh

(14) shows that we can take the f in (10) as f = h, both for the electromag-
netic potential Aµ and the metric tensor hµν. (13) further shows that the Aµ
so deﬁned becomes identical to Weyl’s gauge invariant potential.
However it is worth reiterating that in the present formulation, we have a
noncommutative geometry, that is the derivatives do not commute and more-
over we are working to the order where l2 cannot be neglected. Given this
condition both the electromagnetic potential and the gravitational potential
are seen to follow from the gauge like theory. By retaining coordinate diﬀer-
ential squares, we are even able to accommodate apart from the usual spin 1
gauge particles, also the spin 2 graviton which otherwise cannot be accom-
modated in the usual gauge theory. If however O(l2) = 0, then we are back
with commutative spacetime, that is a usual point spacetime and the usual
gauge theory describing spin 1 particles.

3 Noncommutativity and the Modiﬁed Un-

certainty Principle

It is well known that the noncommutativity in (7) leads to a modiﬁcation of
the usual Uncertainty Principle, which now becomes

∆x

∼

¯h
∆p

+ α′ ∆p
¯h

(15)

where α′ = l2. This is an expression of a duality relation

and is symptomatic of the fact that we cannot go down to arbitrarily small
spacetime intervals, but that the macro universe is connected with the micro

α′/R,

R

→

5

universe. As Witten put it [15], “when one accelerates past the string scale -
instead of probing short distances, one just watches the propagation of large
strings.”
To see in greater detail, this connection between the small and large scales,
we now use the fact that √N is the ﬂuctuation in the number of particles,
N

1080, in the universe. So

∼

∆p = √Nmpc

is the ﬂuctuation in the momentum, m being the mass of a typical elementary
particle. Using this in the second or extra Uncertainty term on the right side
of (15) we get,

R = √N l

(16)

This is the well known so called Eddington relation giving the radius of the
universe in terms of a typical Compton wavelength l. One could now invert
the picture and start, not with the modiﬁed Uncertainty relation, but rather
It is well known that in a gas containing N
with the universe at large.
particles and of extension R, the Uncertainty in the position of the particle, l
is given precisely by (16), through the Brownian Motion of the constituents.
Infact this dependence of Quantum Mechanics on cosmic ﬂuctuations has
been discussed earlier [16]. All this goes to show that the many supposedly
miraculous and inexplicable large number coincidences which we encounter
in cosmology are infact consequences of this deeper principle in action. Such
a cosmology was worked out and successfully predicted as accelerating ever
expanding universe with dark energy content [17].

References

282ﬀ.

[1] H. Weyl, Space-Time Matter (Denver Publications Inc.,New York, 1962),

[2] L.J. Garay, Int.J.Mod.Phys. A, Vol.10, No.2, 1995, p.145-165.

[3] D. Amati in Sakharov Memorial Lectures, Eds. L.V. Kaddysh and N.Y.

Feinberg, (Nova Science, New York, 1992), pp.455ﬀ.

[4] G. Veneziano in ”The Geometric Universe”, Ed. by S.A. Huggett, et al.,

Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998, p.235ﬀ.

6

[5] B.G. Sidharth, Gravitation and Cosmology, 4 (2) (14), 1998, p.158ﬀ.

[6] B.G. Sidharth, ”Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., New York, 2001.

[7] B. Lee and W. Abers in “Gauge Theory and Neutrino Physics”, Ed., M.

Jacob, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1978.

[8] J.C. Taylor, “Gauge Theories of Weak Interactions”, Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, London, 1976.

[9] M. Creutz, “Quarks, Glucons and Lattices”, Cambridge University

Press, London, 1983.

[10] G. ’t Hooft, ArXiv:gr-qc/9601014.

[11] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 15, 2003, 593-595.

[12] K. Moriyasu, “An Elementary Primer for Gauge Theory”, World Scien-

tiﬁc, Singapore, 1983.

[13] B.G. Sidharth, Il Nuovo Cimento, 117B (6), 2002, 703ﬀ.

[14] B.G Sidharth, Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie, 27 (2), 2002,

pp.333ﬀ.

[15] W. Witten, Physics Today, April 1996, pp.24-30.

[16] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 15 (1), 2003, pp.25-28.

[17] B.G. Sidharth, Int.J.Mod.Phys.A, 13 (15), 1998, p.2599ﬀ.

7

