4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Proceedings of Institute of Mathematics of NAS of Ukraine

2004, Vol. ??, Part ?, 1–8

Universal Symmetry of Complexity
and Its Manifestations at Diﬀerent Levels
of World Dynamics

Andrei P. KIRILYUK

Institute of Metal Physics, pr. Vernadskogo 36, Kyiv 03142, Ukraine
E-mail: kiril@ metﬁz.freenet.kiev.ua

The unreduced, universally nonperturbative analysis of arbitrary interaction process, de-
scribed by a quite general equation, provides the truly complete, “dynamically multivalued”
general solution that leads to dynamically derived, universal deﬁnitions of randomness, prob-
ability, chaoticity, complexity, fractality, self-organisation, and other properties, extending
their axiomatic introduction in the conventional, dynamically single-valued theory. Any
real system emergence, structure, and behaviour can be expressed now by the universal
law of conservation, or symmetry, of complexity that uniﬁes extended versions of any (cor-
rect) symmetry, law, or “principle”. Particular applications of the universal symmetry of
complexity, from fundamental physics to biology and theory of consciousness, provide old
mysteries solutions and new research perspectives.

1

Introduction: The unreduced symmetry of nature

The conventional symmetry idea used in physics and mathematics (see e. g. [1, 2, 3]) assumes
the existence of previously determined (eventually postulated) structures and properties that
appear as dynamical laws relating “variables” X and “parameters” P: C(X ; P) = 0. A formal
symmetry, or “invariance” of the law, is introduced usually through the symmetry transfor-
mation “operator”, ˆS, whose action is compatible with the law in question, ˆS[C(X ; P)] = 0.
This fact can be used to reduce the law expression to a desired particular form, including the
explicit, functional relation between separated variables and parameters, or “(exact) solution”
of a problem: X = f (P). However, application of this symmetry concept to the real world
dynamics reveals irreducible ruptures between various known symmetries and systematic viola-
tions of almost every exact symmetry, accounting for the real world irregularity, which leads to
the “(spontaneously) broken symmetry” concept with quite fundamental consequences.

A much more general interpretation of symmetry is possible [4, 5], within which the real
world structure explicitly emerges as inevitable realisation of the universal dynamic symmetry,
or “conservation law”, C = const, where all observed entities, properties, and measured quan-
tities are derived as forms or manifestations of that universal symmetry, remaining thus always
exact (unbroken), but producing all the observed irregularities. Any (correct) dynamical law,
C(X ; P) = C0, as well as the unreduced problem solution, X = F(P), is also obtained now, in its
essentially extended, causally complete form, as a rigorously derived (rather than postulated),
totally realistic manifestation of that single, intrinsically uniﬁed symmetry. We show that the
role of such uniﬁed symmetry belongs uniquely to the universal symmetry (conservation) of
dynamic complexity, where the latter quantity is rigorously derived from the unreduced (non-
perturbative) analysis of arbitrary (real) interaction process [4, 5]. This unreduced complexity,
giving rise to the uniﬁed dynamical “order of the universe”, is essentially diﬀerent from con-
ventional complexity versions which do not originate from the unreduced problem solution, but
reﬂect a strongly reduced (zero-dimensional) projection of real system dynamics.

2

A.P. Kirilyuk

2 Unreduced dynamic complexity of arbitrary interaction
process, its conservation and internal transformation

Mathematical expression of dynamics of a vast variety of interaction processes can be generalised
in the form of “existence equation” [4, 5, 6, 7] that actually only ﬁxes the fact of interaction
within a system of a given conﬁguration:

[hg (ξ) + Veg (q, ξ) + he (q)] Ψ (q, ξ) = EΨ (q, ξ) ,

(1)

where Ψ (q, ξ) is the system “state-function”, which totally determines its conﬁguration and
depends on the degrees of freedom, ξ and q, of the system components, hg(ξ) and he(q) are
“generalised Hamiltonians” of the free (non-interacting) components (i. e. measurable functions
eventually expressing dynamic complexity, deﬁned below), Veg(q, ξ) is (arbitrary) interaction
potential, E is the generalised Hamiltonian eigenvalue for the whole system, and any number of
interacting components can actually be implied behind equation (1), leading to the same results
below [5].

It will be convenient to express the problem in terms of the internal system states by perform-
ing expansion of the state-function Ψ (q, ξ) over the complete system of eigenfunctions, {φn(q)},
for all free-state degrees of freedom but one (described here by the ξ variable and usually rep-
resenting the global system conﬁguration, such as spatial coordinates of its structure):

Ψ (q, ξ) =

ψn (ξ)φn (q) ,

he (q) φn (q) = εnφn (q) .

(2)

n
X

Substituting expansion (2) into the existence equation (1), multiplying it by φ∗
n(q), integrating
over q variables (or using other “scalar product” deﬁnition), and assuming the orthonormality of
eigenfunctions {φn(q)}, we get a system of equations, which is equivalent to the starting existence
equation and includes all its particular cases (e. g. nonlinear or time-dependent forms):

[hg (ξ) + V00 (ξ)] ψ0 (ξ) +

V0n (ξ) ψn (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

[hg (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ) ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) − Vn0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) ,

(3)

n
X

Xn′6=n

where ηn ≡ E − εn,

Vnn′ (ξ) =

dqφ∗

n (q) Veg (q, ξ) φn′ (q) ,

ZΩq

and we have separated the equation with n = 0 from the system (3), so that other n 6= 0 (also
below) and η ≡ η0.

Expressing ψn(ξ) from equations (3) through ψ0(ξ) by the standard Green function technique
[8, 9] and inserting the result into the equation for ψ0(ξ), we restate the problem in terms of
eﬀective existence equation, formally involving only the selected degrees of freedom ξ:

[hg (ξ) + Veﬀ (ξ; η)] ψ0 (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

(4)

where the eﬀective (interaction) potential (EP), Veﬀ (ξ; η), is given by

Veﬀ (ξ; η) = V00 (ξ) + ˆV (ξ; η) ,

ˆV (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) =

dξ′V

ξ, ξ′; η

ψ0

ξ′

,

V

ξ, ξ′; η

=

(cid:0)

n,i
X

(cid:1)

V0n (ξ) ψ0

ni (ξ) Vn0 (ξ′) ψ0∗
η − η0
ni − εn0

ni (ξ′)

,

ZΩξ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

εn0 ≡ εn − ε0 ,

(5)

Universal Symmetry of Complexity

ni(ξ)}, {η0

and {ψ0
cated system of equations (where n, n′ 6= 0):

ni} is the complete set of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for an auxiliary, trun-

[hg (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) .

Xn′6=n

The general solution of the initial existence equation (1) is then obtained as [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]:

Ψ (q, ξ) =

ci

φ0 (q) +

φn (q) ˆgni (ξ)

ψ0i (ξ) ,

"

i
X
ψni (ξ) = ˆgni (ξ) ψ0i (ξ) ≡

n
X

dξ′gni

ξ, ξ′

ψ0i

ξ′

,

#

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

ZΩξ
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
ni′ (ξ) ψ0∗
ψ0
ni′ (ξ′)
ηi − η0
ni′ − εn0

,

gni

ξ, ξ′

= Vn0

ξ′

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:1) Xi′

(cid:0)

where {ψ0i(ξ)} are the eigenfunctions and {ηi} the eigenvalues found from equation (4), while
the coeﬃcients ci should be determined by state-function matching on the boundary where the
eﬀective interaction vanishes. The observed system density, ρ(q, ξ), is given by the squared
modulus of the state-function, ρ(q, ξ) = |Ψ (q, ξ)| 2 (for “quantum” and other “wave-like” levels
of complexity), or by the state-function itself, ρ(q, ξ) = Ψ (q, ξ) (for “particle-like” levels) [4].

Although the “eﬀective” problem formulation of equations (4)-(7) forms the basis of the well-
known optical, or eﬀective, potential method (see e. g.
[9]), it is actually used in its reduced,
perturbative versions, where the “nonintegrable”, nonlinear links in the above EP and state-
function expressions are cut in exchange to the closed, “exact” solution. However, this reduction
kills the essential, dynamic nonlinearity of the real system, together with its intrinsic complexity
and chaoticity, and thus replaces the natural symmetry of complexity by an artiﬁcial, simpliﬁed
symmetry of perturbative solutions [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Indeed, it is not diﬃcult to show that the
unreduced “eﬀective” problem has many locally complete and therefore incompatible solutions,
each of them being equivalent to the single, “complete” solution of the reduced problem, usually
attributed also to the initial formulation of equations (1), (3). If Nξ and Nq are the numbers
of terms in sums over i and n in equation (5), then the total number of eigenvalues of equation
(4) is Nmax = Nξ(NξNq + 1) = (Nξ)2Nq + Nξ, which gives the Nξ-fold redundance of the usual
“complete” set of NξNq eigen-solutions of equations (3) plus an additional, “incomplete” set of
Nξ solutions. Each redundant solution, intrinsically unstable with respect to system transitions
to other solutions, can be called system realisation, since it represents a completely determined
system conﬁguration. The total number of “regular”, complete system realisations is Nℜ = Nξ,
whereas the mentioned additional set of solutions forms a special, “intermediate” realisation
that plays the role of transitional state during system jumps between the regular realisations
and provides thus the universal, causally complete extension of the quantum wavefunction and
classical (probability) distribution function [4, 5].

Thus rigorously derived, qualitatively new property of dynamic multivaluedness of the unre-
duced problem solution is conﬁrmed by its “geometric” analysis and particular applications
[4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. It provides the intrinsic, omnipresent, and irreducible source of purely dynamic,
or causal, randomness: the incompatible system realisations, being equally real, should perma-
nently replace one another, in a causally random order, so that the observed density of any real
system should be presented as the dynamically probabilistic sum of the individual realisation
densities, {ρr(ξ, q)}, obtained by solution of the eﬀective existence equation (4):

ρ (ξ, Q) =

⊕ρr (ξ, Q),

Nℜ

r=1
X

3

(6)

(7)

(8)

4

A.P. Kirilyuk

where summation is performed over all (observable) system realisations, numbered by r, and
the sign ⊕ serves to designate the special, dynamically probabilistic meaning of the sum de-
rived above and consisting in permanent change of regular realisations in dynamically random
(chaotic) order by transition through the intermediate realisation. The dynamically obtained, a
priori probability of the r-th realisation emergence, αr, is determined, in general, by the number,
Nr, of elementary, experimentally unresolved realisations it contains:

αr (Nr) =

Nr = 1, . . . , Nℜ;

Nr = Nℜ

,

αr = 1 .

(9)

Nr
Nℜ  

r
X

!

r
X

According to the “generalised Born’s rule”, obtained by dynamical matching in the interme-
diate realisation (wavefunction) phase, the dynamic probability values are determined by the
generalised wavefunction obeying the causally derived, universal Schr¨odinger equation [4, 5] (see
below).

Another important property of the unreduced solution, closely related to the above dynamic
multivaluedness, is dynamic entanglement between the interacting entities (degrees of freedom)
within each realisation, which appears as dynamically weighted products of functions of ξ and
q in equations (7) and determines the tangible new quality of the emerging interaction results.
It leads to the dynamical system squeeze, or reduction, or collapse, to the emerging conﬁgura-
tion of each realisation, alternating with the reverse dynamic disentanglement, or extension, of
interacting entities to a quasi-free state in the intermediate realisation (wavefunction), during
transitions between realisations [4, 5, 6, 7]. The dynamically multivalued entanglement is a to-
tally autonomous process, driven only by the system interaction and characterised by the intrinsic
nonseparability and irreversible direction. Nonseparable component entanglement gives rise to
the explicitly emerging, physically real space (in the form of the squeezed, ﬁnal realisation con-
ﬁguration, or generalised space “point”), while the irreversible, unceasing and spatially chaotic
realisation change determines the causal time ﬂow [4, 5]. These properties of the dynamically
multivalued entanglement between the interacting components are hierarchically reproduced and
ampliﬁed within the dynamically fractal structure of the unreduced problem solution, which can
be obtained by application of the same EP method to the truncated system of equations (6)
whose solutions are used in the expressions of the ﬁrst level of solution, equations (5), (7). We
obtain thus the causally complete extension of the conventional, dynamically single-valued frac-
tality and the true meaning of (any real) system nonintegrability, which takes the form of the
permanently changing, dynamically probabilistic (“living”) fractal hierarchy of the unreduced
problem solution, possessing the rigorously obtained properties of explicit structure emergence
(creativity) and dynamic adaptability (self-consistent conﬁguration of the “eﬀective” solution of
equations (4)-(7)) [4, 5, 7].

Now that the dynamically multivalued structure of the unreduced interaction process has been
explicitly revealed, we can provide the unrestricted, universally applicable deﬁnition of dynamic
complexity, C, as any growing function of realisation number, C = C(Nℜ), dC/dNℜ > 0, or the
rate of their change, equal to zero for the (unrealistic) case of only one realisation, C(1) = 0. It
is just the latter, unrealistically simpliﬁed “model” (zero-dimensional, point-like projection) of
reality which is exclusively considered in the conventional, dynamically single-valued, or unitary,
theory, including its concepts of “complexity”, “chaoticity”, “self-organisation”, etc., which
explains all its persisting “mysteries” and “diﬃcult” problems, easily ﬁnding their dynamically
multivalued, causally complete solution within the unreduced complexity concept [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
that emerges thus as the direct, qualitative extension of the unitary knowledge model to the
dynamically multivalued reality. In particular, the properties of dynamic multivaluedness and
entanglement show that chaoticity is synonymous to complexity, in their unreduced, omnipresent
versions.

Universal Symmetry of Complexity

5

In that way the regular and separated symmetries of the unitary model, always (fortunately!)
violated in the real world (cf. the concept of “spontaneously” broken symmetry), are replaced,
in the unreduced description, by the single, intrinsically uniﬁed, but diverse in manifestations,
irregular, but exact (never broken) symmetry of complexity [4, 5]. Moreover, contrary to the
artiﬁcially imposed, external origin of the conventional symmetries, mechanistically added to
the postulated structures, properties, and “principles”, the universal symmetry of complexity
emerges as the unique source of existence giving rise, through the explicitly obtained relations,
to all real entities and (correct) laws, in their causally extended, complex-dynamical (multival-
ued) version. At a given level of system complexity (described by the above solution (4)-(9)),
this irreducibly dynamic symmetry appears as equivalence between all (elementary) system re-
alisations meaning their “equal chances” to emerge and permanent actual change, as reﬂected in
the probability expression (9) (also in its relation to the wavefunction values) and dynamically
probabilistic sum of the general solution, equation (8). All realisations diﬀer in their detailed
structure and are taken by the system in a truly random order (equations (4)-(9)), thus repro-
ducing the real world irregularity, but the resulting internally irregular symmetry between them
is exact as such (unbroken) and can be expressed simply as ﬁxed realisation number for any
given system (interaction process).

However, the universal symmetry of complexity does not stop there:

it involves a qualita-
tive change of the form of complexity that preserves its total quantity. Namely, the potential,
or “hidden” (latent) form of complexity, called dynamic information (and generalising “poten-
tial energy”), is transformed into the explicit, “unfolded” form of dynamic entropy (extending
entropy concept to any process), so that their sum, the total system complexity remains un-
changed, which gives rise to all emerging entities, their properties and behaviour (reﬂected in
particular “laws” and “principles”) [4, 5]. The basic origin of that complexity transformation
is revealed by the same, unreduced interaction description, containing the explicit emergence of
always internally chaotic entities and their interactions (given by higher, ﬁne levels of the fractal
hierarchy of unreduced interaction development).

The length element, ∆x, of a complexity level is obtained from solution of the unreduced
“eﬀective” equation (4)-(5) as the distance between the centres of the neighbouring realisation
eigenvalues, ∆x = ∆ηr
i , while the time ﬂow rate emerges as intensity (speciﬁed as frequency,
ν) of realisation change. Since the emerging space and time represent the two basic, universal
forms of complexity, its universal, natural measure should be independently proportional to
measures of space and time.
It is easy to see that such complexity measure is provided by
action quantity acquiring thus its extended, essentially nonlinear, meaning: ∆A = −E∆t +
p∆x, where ∆x, and ∆t = 1/ν are the above dynamic space and time increments, ∆A is
the corresponding complexity-action increment, while the coeﬃcients, E and p, are identiﬁed
as energy and momentum. The action value always decreases (∆A < 0) and represents the
dynamic information, whereas complexity-entropy change is the quantity opposite in sign, ∆S =
−∆A > 0, leaving their sum, the total complexity, unchanged, C = A + S = const. Dividing
the diﬀerential expression of conservation (symmetry) of complexity by ∆t |x=const , we get the
generalised Hamilton-Jacobi equation [4, 5]:

∆A
∆t

|x=const + H

x,

|t=const, t

= 0,

∆A
∆x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(10)

where the Hamiltonian, H = H(x, p, t), considered as a function of emerging space-structure
coordinate x, momentum p = (∆A/∆x) |t=const , and time t, expresses the implemented, entropy-
like form of diﬀerential complexity, H = (∆S/∆t) |x=const . Because of a dynamically random
order of emerging system realisations, the total time derivative of action, or Lagrangian, L =
∆A/∆t = pv − H, should be negative (where v = ∆x/∆t is the global-motion velocity), which
provides the rigorously derived, dynamic expression of the “arrow of time” orientation to growing

6

entropy:

A.P. Kirilyuk

L < 0 ⇒ E, H

x,

|t=const, t

> pv ≥ 0 .

∆A
∆x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Realisation change process can be considered also as two adjacent complexity sublevels whose
conserved total complexity, C, equals to the product of complexity-entropy of localised (regu-
lar) realisations and “potential” wavefunction complexity, C = SΨ = const, meaning that
AΨ = −SΨ = const, where Ψ is the wavefunction. The total complexity change between two
transitional states equals to zero, ∆(AΨ ) = 0, which expresses the physically evident perma-
nence of the unique state of wavefunction, and gives the generalised causal quantization rule:

where A0 is a characteristic action value (A0 may contain also a numerical constant reﬂecting
speciﬁc features of a given complexity level). Using equation (11) in equation (10) we obtain
the generalised Schr¨odinger equation for Ψ in the form [4, 5]:

∆A = −A0

∆Ψ
Ψ

,

A0

∂Ψ
∂t

= ˆH

x,

, t

Ψ ,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

∂
∂x

(11)

(12)

where the Hamiltonian operator, ˆH, is obtained from the Hamiltonian function H = H(x, p, t)
of equation (10) with the help of the causal quantization relation of equation (11).

The generalised Hamilton-Schr¨odinger formalism, equations (10)-(12), is a universal expres-
sion of the symmetry of complexity. Expanding the Hamiltonian in equation (10) in a power
series of momentum and action, one obtains a form of the universal Hamilton-Schr¨odinger for-
malism that can be reduced to any usual, “model” equation by series truncation [4, 5],

∂Ψ
∂t

+

∞

m=0
X
n=1

hmn (x, t) [Ψ (x, t)]m ∂nΨ

∂xn +

∞

m=0
X

hm0 (x, t) [Ψ (x, t)]m+1 = 0 ,

(here the expansion coeﬃcients, hmn(x, t), can be arbitrary functions), which conﬁrms its uni-
versality and shows the genuine, uniﬁed origin of model equations, semi-empirically guessed and
postulated in the unitary theory. All fundamental laws and “principles” of the conventional
science, such as relativity (special and general), principle of entropy increase, principle of least
action, other “variational” principles, can now be obtained, in their causally extended, complex-
dynamical versions, from the same uniﬁed law of conservation, or symmetry, of complexity
[4, 5]. Note, in particular, that the universal complexity conservation, realised by its unceasing
transformation from decreasing dynamic information (action) to increasing entropy, provides a
remarkable uniﬁcation of the universal, extended versions of least action principle (conventional
mechanics) and entropy increase principle (“second law” of thermodynamics), which reveals the
true meaning and origin of those “well-known” laws. In a similar way, the “quantum”, “classi-
cal”, and “relativistic” eﬀects and types of behaviour are causally explained now as inevitable,
and thus universally extendible, manifestations of the uniﬁed symmetry of unreduced complex-
ity [4, 5, 11]. The underlying complex (multivalued) dynamics speciﬁes the essential diﬀerence
of the symmetry of complexity from its conventional imitations: the formal “operators” of the
latter are replaced in the former by actual realisation change and complexity unfolding, just
forming the real, creative world dynamics (cf. section 1).

One should emphasize the importance of genuine, dynamically emerging, or “essential” non-
linearity, deﬁned above and closely related to the dynamic multivaluedness, for the universal

Universal Symmetry of Complexity

7

symmetry of complexity, as well as its fundamental diﬀerence from the conventional, mechanis-
tically deﬁned (non-dynamic) “nonlinearity”. The essential nonlinearity inevitably emerges as a
result of unreduced interaction development, even starting from a formally “linear” initial prob-
lem formulation (see equations (1)-(7) and the following analysis). On the other hand, formally
“nonlinear” equations of the standard approach, being analysed within its reduced, unitary pro-
jection, cannot produce any truly new structure that would not be actually postulated within
the starting formulation, and therefore they remain always basically linear, as it is conﬁrmed
by their invariably perturbative, or exact, solutions. The real nonlinearity appears as a dynam-
ically fractal network of self-developing interaction feedback loops, explicitly revealed just in
the “eﬀective” problem expression of the generalised EP method [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. This emerging
nonlinear structure forces the system to take, or “collapse” to, one of its multiple possible real-
isations, which means that those realisations, actually and unceasingly replacing one another in
a dynamically random, or “chaotic”, order, are dynamically symmetric among them, while they
always diﬀer in their detailed, partially irregular structure. However, the same system in the
phase of transition between its normal, “localised” realisations is forced, by the same driving
interaction, to transiently disentangle its components up to their quasi-free state of “generalised
wavefunction” (see above), and that’s why the system in this state temporarily behaves as a
weekly interacting, quasi-linear one. This remarkable, “intermittent” structure of unreduced
interaction process, remaining totally hidden in the dynamically single-valued projection of the
conventional theory, explains why and how the real system dynamics naturally uniﬁes the op-
posed, complementary properties of quasi-linear and highly nonlinear behaviour and symmetry.
The realistic, causal explanation of “wave-particle duality” and “complementarity” in quantum
systems (and classical “distributed” systems as well) is only one particular consequence of that
omnipresent structure of the unreduced symmetry of complexity [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].

It would be worthwhile to note ﬁnally that the described conceptual transition from the con-
ventional, dynamically single-valued (unitary) to the proposed dynamically multivalued (unre-
duced) description of system dynamics and the related upgrade of the separated and broken
unitary symmetries to the intrinsically uniﬁed and exact symmetry of complexity involves im-
portant progress in mathematical description of reality, standing as the main, universal tool of
science. We have seen that the proposed advance in that description, which practically totally
eliminates the existing gap between real phenomena and their unitary “models”, is realised sim-
ply due to the unreduced, or really exact mathematical analysis using quite ordinary particular
tools. This is certainly good news for mathematics, which can thus preserve and develop its
status as a universal method and basis of objective knowledge about reality, the image that has
considerably faded in the last period of growing “uncertainty” [10], separations, and untractable
technical sophistication. On the other hand, the price that is clearly to be paid for that essential
and intrinsically sustainable progress consists in the corresponding considerable, fundamentally
rooted upgrade of the scholar framework, which tends traditionally to hide its real diﬃculties
behind the externally “solid” fa¸cade of the formally ﬁxed “existence and uniqueness” theorems
and other postulated constructions. This report presents a brief account of the means and results
of elementary realisation of that qualitative transition demonstrating, in our opinion, both its
feasibility and inevitability in the future progress of science.

3 Particular manifestations of the uniﬁed symmetry

of complexity

We can only brieﬂy outline here other manifestations of the universal symmetry of complexity
obtained for particular or arbitrary levels of complexity and systems. One of them is universal
classiﬁcation of all possible types of real system behaviour which can vary continuously between

8

A.P. Kirilyuk

the limiting cases of uniform, or global, chaos (quasi-homogeneous distribution of probability for
suﬃciently diﬀerent realisations) and multivalued self-organisation, or self-organised criticality
(inhomogeneous realisation probability distribution, close elementary realisations) [4, 5].
It
is this latter case that can be more successfully approximated by conventional, dynamically
single-valued (intrinsically regular) models, though with irreducible fundamental losses (such
as absence of irreversible time ﬂow). The universal criterion of transition from self-organised
(generally ordered) dynamics to the global chaos, in both quantum and classical systems, is
obtained in the form of frequency resonance between interacting modes (such as intra- and
inter-component dynamics), which extends considerably the concepts of both chaoticity and
resonance [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The observed alternation of globally chaotic and self-organised levels in
the hierarchy of complexity is another manifestation of the universal symmetry of complexity.
Application of the unreduced existence equation solution to the simplest system of two at-
tracting, initially homogeneous protoﬁelds gives explicitly emerging ﬁeld-particles, in the form
of spatially chaotic quantum beat processes, endowed with the rigorously derived, realistic and
uniﬁed versions of all “mysterious” quantum features, “relativistic” eﬀects and intrinsic proper-
ties (mass, electric charge, spin), obtained as standard, inevitable manifestations of unreduced
complexity [4, 5, 11]. The number (four), dynamic origin, properties and intrinsic uniﬁcation
of fundamental interaction forces between particles are obtained within the same picture. The
true quantum chaos, passing to classical chaos by the usual semiclassical transition, intrinsi-
cally indeterminate quantum measurement, and dynamic emergence of classical, permanently
localised behaviour within a closed, bound system (like atom) are obtained as naturally emerging
complexity levels, with important practical conclusions for such popular applications as quan-
tum computers, nanotechnology, and quantum many-body systems with “strong” interaction
[4, 5, 6, 11]. The obtained “emergent” and causal world picture includes also natural solution
of the problems of cosmology. Finally, symmetry of complexity manifestations for biological
and intelligent systems reveal the causal essence of life, intelligence, and consciousness as high
enough levels of unreduced complexity, which leads to practically important conclusions [4, 5, 7]
and proves once more the universal applicability of the unreduced symmetry of complexity.

[1] Bluman G.W. and Kumei S., Symmetries and diﬀerential equations, New York, Springer, 1989.

[2] Fushchich V.I., Shtelen V.M. and Serov N.I., Symmetry analysis and exact solutions of equations of nonlinear

mathematical physics, Dortrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.

[3] Elliott J.P. and Dawber P.G., Symmetry in physics, London, Macmillan Press, 1979.

[4] Kirilyuk A.P., Universal concept of complexity by the dynamic redundance paradigm: Causal randomness,
complete wave mechanics, and the ultimate uniﬁcation of knowledge, Kyiv, Naukova Dumka, 1997; For a
non-technical review see physics/9806002.

[5] Kirilyuk A.P., Dynamically multivalued, not unitary or stochastic, operation of real quantum, classical and

hybrid micro-machines, physics/0211071.

[6] Kirilyuk A.P., Quantum chaos and fundamental multivaluedness of dynamical functions, Annales de la Fon-

dation Louis de Broglie, 1996, V.21, N 4, 455–480; quant-ph/9511034–36.

[7] Kirilyuk A.P., The universal dynamic complexity as extended dynamic fractality: Causally complete un-
derstanding of living systems emergence and operation,
in Fractals in biology and medicine, Vol. III,
Editors G.A. Losa, D. Merlini, T.F. Nonnenmacher and E.R. Weibel, Basel, Birkh¨auser, 2002, 271–284;
physics/0305119.

[8] Kirilyuk A.P., Theory of charged particle scattering in crystals by the generalized optical potential method,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B, 1992, V.69, N 1, 200–231.

[9] Dederichs P.H., Dynamical diﬀraction theory by optical potential methods, in Solid state physics: Advances
in research and applications, Editors H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz and D. Turnbull, New York, Academic Press,
1972, V.27, 136–237.

[10] Kline M., Mathematics: The loss of certainty, New York, Oxford University Press, 1980.

[11] Kirilyuk A.P., 100 Years of quanta: Complex-dynamical origin of Planck’s constant and causally complete

extension of quantum mechanics, quant-ph/0012069.

