4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A REGULAR THEORY OF MAGNETIC MONOPOLES
AND ITS IMPLICATIONS

School of Physics and Astronomy Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

E. Comay

A regular charge-monopole theory is derived from simple and self-evident postulates. It
is shown that this theory provides explanations for eﬀects of strong and nuclear inter-
actions. The theory is compared with Dirac’s monopole theory. Applications to strong
and nuclear interactions are compared with quantum chromodynamics. The results fa-
vor the regular charge-monopole theory and indicate diﬃculties of the other ones. An
experiment that may provide further evidence helping to decide between the regular
charge-monopole theory and quantum chromodynamics is suggested.

1. Introduction

Classical electrodynamics is regarded as a well established part of physics. The
equations of Maxwell and the Lorentz law of force are the equations of motion of
a system of electromagnetic ﬁelds and electrically charged matter. The ﬁelds part
of these equations consists of two kinds of entities - namely, the electric and the
magnetic ﬁelds. On the other hand, the massive matter part contains a single kind
of electromagnetic entity - the electric charge.

The idea of magnetic monopoles (called just monopoles in the literature) aims
to restore the symmetry between electricity and magnetism. Let us examine the
electromagnetic ﬁelds tensor[1,2]

F µν

(e) =

0 −Ex −Ey −Ez
−Bz By
Ex
0
−Bx
Ey Bz
0
0
Ez −By Bx







.







(1)

In this work subscripts (e) and (m) denote quantities related to charges and
monopoles, respectively. Units where the speed of light c = 1 are used. The Lorentz

82

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

83

metric is diagonal and its entries are (1, −1, −1, −1). Greek indices run from 0 to
3. The symbol ,µ denotes the partial diﬀerentiation with respect to xµ. i, j and k
denote unit vectors in the x, y and z directions, respectively.

Duality transformations cast a system of ﬁelds and charges into a system of

ﬁelds and monopoles. These transformations are (see [2], pp. 252, 551)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

and

E → B, B → −E

e → g,

g → −e,

where g denotes the monopole strength. (In this work, duality is used in its re-
stricted form of a duality rotation by π/2.) Eq. (3) represents relations between
Lorentz scalars (see a discussion of this issue in Section 4) whereas ( 2) takes a
relativistic tensorial form

F

∗µν
(m) =

1
2

εµναβF(e)αβ .

Here εµναβ is the completely antisymmetric unit tensor of the fourth rank. Entries
of the monopole dependent ﬁelds tensors of (4) are

F

∗µν
(m) =

0

0 −Bx −By −Bz
Ez −Ey
Bx
Ex
By −Ez
0
0
Bz

Ey −Ex







.







Historically, classical electrodynamics of charges and ﬁelds has been formulated
after a lot of experimental data have been accumulated. Results of these exper-
iments have guided physicists how to construct the theory. Thus, in the case of
electrodynamics of charges and ﬁelds, development has taken the inductive way.
(The addition of the Maxwell term makes an exception.) Unfortunately, monopoles
have not been detected in laboratories. Hence, one cannot follow the historical
course of classical electrodynamics of charges and ﬁelds. Therefore, the deductive
course must be adopted and the theory should be derive from an appropriate set of
postulates.

Consider two postulates pertaining to this topic:

(A) The theory of monopoles and ﬁelds takes a form which is completely dual to

the theory of charges and ﬁelds.

(B) Electromagnetic ﬁelds of a system of monopoles and those of a system of

charges have identical dynamical properties.

84 E. Comay

Hereafter, these postulates are called postulate (A) and (B), respectively. Upper

case letters denote postulates and numbers denote other kinds of items.

One may be tempted to use both postulates (A) and (B) as fundamental elements
of the theory. However, it turns out that this goal is unattainable because diﬀerent
sets of equations of motion are obtained from postulate (A) (without (B)) and from
postulate (B) (without (A)). Section 4 contains a discussion of this topic.

In Section 2, a regular charge-monopole theory is derived from postulate (A).
The relevance of this theory to strongly interacting particles (called hadrons) and to
nuclear interactions is discussed in Section 3. A comparison of results obtained in
Sections 2 with the Dirac monopole theory (which is consistent with postulate (B))
is presented in Section 4. A comparison of the results of Section 3 with quantum
chromodynamics (QCD) is shown in Section 5. Concluding remarks are the contents
of the last Section.

2. A Regular Charge-Monopole Theory

Postulate (A) means that classical electrodynamics of charges and their asso-
ciated ﬁelds is a cornerstone of the charge-monopole theory developed here. For
this reason, let us examine the equations of motion of classical electrodynamics of
charges and ﬁelds as well as some of its fundamental relations. The equations of
motion of the ﬁelds are Maxwell equations. Their tensorial form is (see [1], pp. 74,
67 or [2], pp. 551)

and

(e) ,ν = −4πjµ
F µν

(e)

F

∗µν
(e) ,ν = 0.

(6)

(7)

∗µν
(e)

where F
Lorentz law of force is the equation of motion of charges (see [2], p. 572)

takes the same form as (5) but here it represents ﬁelds of charges. The

(e) = eF µν
where vµ denotes the particle’s 4-velocity, m is its rest mass and e is its charge.
The ﬁelds used in (6) and in (7) can be derived from a regular 4-potential

(e) vν,

maµ

(8)

F(e)µν = A(e)ν,µ − A(e)µ,ν .

(9)

(Point inﬁnities associated with the introduction of elementary classical point charges
are beyond the scope of this work. A regular solution of point inﬁnity problems is
presented in [3].)

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

85

The 4-potential is an important quantity of the system’s dynamics, because it
is used in the charge-ﬁelds interaction term of the Lagrangian density (see [1], p.
71 or [2], p. 596)

Lint = −jµ

(e)A(e)µ.

(10)

The reader should note the diﬀerence between the inhomogeneous Maxwell equa-
tions (6) and the homogeneous ones (7). As a matter of fact, the homogeneous
equation (7) represents internal mathematical relations between ﬁeld components
(see [1], pp. 66,67). On the other hand, the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations (6)
are associated with charge-ﬁelds interaction and are derived from the Lagrangian
density (see [1], pp. 73-75 or [2], pp 597).

Let us now use postulate (A) and obtain the equations of motion of a system
of monopoles and their associated ﬁelds (namely, a system that does not contain
electric charges). This goal is achieved from the application of the duality relations
(2) - (4) to (6) - (8). The results are

∗µν
(m) ,ν = −4πjµ
F

(m),

−F µν

(m) ,ν = 0.

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

and

maµ

(m) = gF

∗µν
(m) vν .
∗µν
(m) of (11) takes the form of (5) and F µν

One should note that F

(m) of (12) takes
the form of (1). Like in the case of charges, the ﬁelds of monopoles can be derived
from an appropriate 4-potential

For this system, the interaction part of the Lagrangian density is analogous to (10)

F

∗
(m)µν = A(m)ν,µ − A(m)µ,ν .

Lint = −jµ

(m)A(m)µ.

The reader should note that in the monopole case, the ﬁelds tensors take the
∗µν
(m) of ( 11) is related to
opposite role, with respect to that of charges. Thus, F
the interaction term (15) whereas F µν
(m) of (12) represents mathematical relations.
At this point we have the equations of motion of two noninteracting systems: a
system of charges and their associated ﬁelds and another system which consists of
monopoles and their associated ﬁelds. The rest of this Section is devoted to the

86 E. Comay

equations of motion of a combined system containing charges, monopoles and their
ﬁelds.

Due to the linearity of electrodynamics, one may split the electromagnetic ﬁelds
into a sum of ﬁeld quantities and examine their eﬀects separately. An important
kind of split is the one which examines bound ﬁelds and radiation ﬁelds separately.
(A decomposition of the electromagnetic ﬁelds of a system of charges into these
components can be found in [3].) The ﬁrst kind of ﬁelds is signiﬁcant near the
charges and decays rapidly at larger distances. Radiation ﬁelds decay slower at
larger distances and become dominant there. They represent an entity which is
distinguished from charges.
In classical physics they take the form of radiation
energy and in quantum mechanics they appear as real photons.

Radiation ﬁelds emitted from a speciﬁc source have the following properties

and

and

B2 − E2 = 0

E · B = 0.

F µν

(e) ,ν = 0

(These relations are obtained from eq. (66.8) of [1], p. 172 and from eqs. (9.4)
and (9.5) of [2], p. 392.) Relations (16) and (17) are just a reformulation of the
Lorentz scalar F µν Fµν and the pseudoscalar F ∗µν Fµν , respectively. An observation
of these quantities proves that in the case of radiation ﬁelds, they remain invariant
under the duality transformation (2). This result indicates that radiation ﬁelds of
charges and radiation ﬁelds of monopoles may be regarded as one and the same
entity. This result is also obtained from the equations of motion of radiation ﬁelds.
These equations are the homogeneous Maxwell equations

∗µν
(e) ,ν = 0.
Let us examine the simple example of linearly polarized monochromatic plane
wave (see [1], pp. 114-117 or [2], pp. 273-278) which propagates in the z-direction.
Taking the electric charge point of view, a vector potential of the ﬁelds is

(19)

F

Thus, we have

A(e) = −iAeiω(z−t)i.

E = −

∂A(e)
∂t

= ωAeiω(z−t)i

(16)

(17)

(18)

(20)

(21)

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

87

and

and

B = ∇ × A(e) = ωAeiω(z−t)j.

(22)

(Obviously, the real part of these equations represents the quantities that should be
accounted for.) The direction of the linear polarization is that of the electric ﬁeld
(21).

Let us now take the monopole point of view. Here one examines a vector po-

tential which is parallel to the y-axis

A(m) = −iAeiω(z−t)j.

Using the duality relations (2) as well as (14), one ﬁnds

B = −

∂A(m)
∂t

= ωAeiω(z−t)j

E = −∇ × A(m) = ωAeiω(z−t)i.

(23)

(24)

(25)

It follows that (21) equals (25) and (22) equals (24).
These results indicate explicitly that one may identify radiation ﬁelds of charges
with radiation ﬁelds of monopoles without arriving at any contradiction. Hence-
forth, radiation ﬁelds of charges and radiation ﬁelds of monopoles are regarded as
one and the same entity and are denoted by the subscript (w). Thus, for example,
F µν
(e,w) denotes the tensor of bound and radiation ﬁelds of charges and the radiation
ﬁelds of monopoles. The symbol F µν

(m,w) is analogous.
Let us examine bound ﬁelds of charges and bound ﬁelds of monopoles. A simple
example is the system which consists of one charge and one monopole. The inter-
action term of the Lagrangian density is required. Again, due to the linearity of
electrodynamics, one may write the interaction part of a system which consists of
many charges and many monopoles as a sum of two body interactions. There are
several restrictions imposed on the form of the required quantity:

I. Since the action is a Lorentz scalar, all terms of the Lagrangian density must

be Lorentz scalars too.

II. Due to the linearity of electrodynamics, the charge-monopole interaction term
must be a sum of bilinear quantities containing two factors, one is related to
charges and the other is related to monopoles.

III. Due to the notion of a charge and of a monopole, a system of one motionless

charge and one motionless monopole does not change in time.

88 E. Comay

The charge-charge interaction term (10) satisﬁes requirements I and the appro-
priate analogue of II. Relation (15) is the monopole version of (10). An observation
of a system of one motionless charge and one motionless monopole proves that,
unlike the case of radiation ﬁelds, bound ﬁelds of these objects diﬀer substantially.
Thus, the Lorentz scalar (16) B2 − E2 < 0 for the case of a charge and B2 − E2 > 0
for the case of a monopole.

A simple analysis[4] proves that in the case of bound ﬁelds, one cannot create
an interaction term that satisﬁes I, II and III as well as some other self-evident
postulates. Thus, the following conclusion is obtained:

1. Charges do not interact with bound ﬁelds of monopoles and monopoles do
not interact with bound ﬁelds of charges. Charges interact with all ﬁelds of
charges and with radiation ﬁelds emitted from monopoles. Monopoles interact
with all ﬁelds of monopoles and with radiation ﬁelds emitted from charges.

Henceforth, this conclusion is referred to as conclusion 1. Conclusion 1 yields

the following form of the Lorentz force exerted on charges

The corresponding force exerted on monopoles is

maµ

(e) = eF µν

(e,w)v(e)ν .

maµ

(m) = gF

∗µν
(m,w)v(m)ν .

(26)

(27)

Explicit expressions of the Lagrangian of the system and of the energy-momentum
tensor can be found in [4]. Since ﬁelds of charges and ﬁelds of monopoles have
diﬀerent dynamical properties, it is suggested that ﬁelds of monopoles be called
magnetoelectric ﬁelds[4].

It is interesting to note that conclusion 1 can be obtained even without the
requirement of having a regular interaction term of the charge-monopole Lagrangian
density. It can be shown[5] that the same result is obtained if one uses the postulate
that, like the electric charge, the magnetic monopole is a Lorentz scalar and not a
pseudoscalar (see [2], p. 253).

Conclusion 1 is the main result of the theoretical analysis carried out in this
section. It explains why postulates (A) and (B) which are written in the introduc-
tion, cannot be used together as elements of a charge-monopole theory.
Indeed,
if postulate (B) is adopted (like in Dirac’s charge-monopole theory[6-8]) then the
Lorentz force exerted on a charge must be eF µν
(e,m,w)v(e)ν , contrary to (26). Physical
implications of conclusion 1 are discussed in the next section. In what follows, the
monopole theory outlined here is called the regular charge-monopole theory.

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

89

3. A Discussion of Experimental Data

Consider the 4 diﬀerent kinds of interactions known in physics: strong, electro-
magnetic, weak and gravitational. The gravitational interaction is practically blind
to many features of matter and “sees” only the matter’s energy-momentum tensor
and that of electromagnetic ﬁelds. For this reason, it is not mentioned here any
more. Table 1 shows 2 conservation properties of the other interactions,

parity
ﬂavor

strong
yes
yes

electromagnetic weak

yes
yes

no
no

Table 1:
Validity of parity and ﬂavor conservation
under three kinds of interactions

The meaning of parity conservation is that if, for example, a theory of the
speciﬁc kind of force contains a Hamiltonian then this Hamiltonian commutes with
the parity operator. Parity conservation indicates similarity between strong and
electromagnetic interactions. Flavor is a property of elementary constituents of
matter: each one of the 3 kinds of charged leptons (electrons, muons and tau mesons)
and each one of the 6 kinds of quarks has its own ﬂavor. Hereafter, the symbol q
is sometimes used as a notation of a quark. All these objects are spin 1/2 Dirac
particles and each one of them has its own antiparticle (generally, an antiparticle
is denoted by a bar over the particle’s symbol). Table 1 shows that strong and
electromagnetic interactions cannot alter ﬂavor properties of matter. Moreover,
experiments show that these interactions “see” quarks and leptons as very small
objects whose radius is less than 10−16cm. As a matter of fact, it is a common belief
that leptons and quarks are pointlike (see [9], pp. 264, 276, 277). Experiments also
show that strong and electromagnetic interactions can perform a process called pair
production. This process results in the creation of a particle and an antiparticle of
the same kind, thereby obeying ﬂavor conservation. Pair production is seen in the
creation of separate charged leptons, like an electron and a positron or, for example,
in the creation of mesons which are q ¯q bound systems. Table 1 indicates that strong
and electromagnetic interactions are similar with respect to ﬂavor conservation too.

On the basis of these results it is postulated here that

(C) Strong interactions are interactions between magnetic monopoles. Thus, all
charged leptons have a unit of electric charge ±e and no magnetic monopole,
whereas quarks have both electric charge and a magnetic monopole unit −g.

Applications of the regular charge-monopole theory and of postulate (C) to

90 E. Comay

experimental data are discussed brieﬂy in this Section. As shown below, several
fundamental properties of the relevant data can be explained in a qualitative man-
ner. This point can be put in a diﬀerent way. Postulate (C) can be refuted if it fails
to explain qualitative properties of experimental data.

It is obvious that a classical theory cannot go far in explaining properties of
matter. Thus, additional postulates are used below, where required. These postu-
lates look natural and rely on fundamental properties of matter. Putting them in
the status of postulates does not negate the possibility of proving them by means
of a more profound theory. Up to now, only postulates (A) and (C) are used.

1. The regular charge-monopole theory of Section 2 predicts that electromagnetic-
like forces come in pairs, one is charge related and the other pertains to
monopoles. If, for example, 3 diﬀerent kinds of such interactions are found in
Nature then the regular monopole theory is refuted (or has to ﬁnd rescue in
an additional postulate which is analogous to the one stating that “monopoles
do not exist”).

Up to now, nothing is said on speciﬁc properties of magnetic charges. The

following postulate ﬁlls this gap.

(D) Like the case of electric charge, the elementary unit g of magnetic charge is
quantized. Moreover, the size of g is rather big g2 ≫ e2 ≃ 1/137. Experimen-
tal data indicate that g2 ≃ 1 (see [9], p. 20).

The reader should note that in Dirac’s charge-monopole theory which is derived
in accordance with postulate (B) of the introduction, there is a numerical relation
between the size of the elementary electric charge and of its magnetic counterpart
and g2 = 137/4[6-8]. This relation, which imposes a restriction on the size of the
elementary magnetic charge, does not hold in the regular charge-monopole the-
ory derived in Section 2. Here the size of the elementary magnetic unit is a free
parameter.

Let us proceed further, using postulate (D).

2. Experiments show that elementary particles that have just electric charges,
like the electron, do not participate in strong interactions[10]. Moreover, the
electric charge of proton’s quarks is not identical to the corresponding quantity
of the neutron. It turns out that energetic electrons interact diﬀerently with
quark constituents of protons and neutrons (see [10], p. 200 and [11]). On
the other hand, energetic real photons interact strongly with quark targets of
protons and neutrons and, in these interactions, protons and neutrons look
very much alike[12]. These properties of Nature ﬁt like a glove Conclusion 1

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

91

of the regular charge-monopole theory outlined in Section 2. Indeed, one has
just to replace the terms ’electric charge’ by ’electron’, ’magnetic charge’ by
’quark’ and use Postulate (D) which means that the monopole charge of quarks
dominates the process. The reader should note that Conclusion 1 is obtained
from a pure theoretical analysis that relies on simple postulates which have
(at least apparently) no relevance to the experimental data mentioned here.
Further aspects of this issue are discussed in Section 5.

In order to proceed further, we need the following postulate, which relies on well

established experimental data (see [9], pp. 275-277)

(E) Quarks are spin 1/2 Dirac particles.

This postulate enables us to make further deductions.

3. Theory predicts and experiments show bound states of an electron and a
positron, called positronium. Now, by the postulates which we already have
at hand, one predicts strongly bound q ¯q states whose total spin and parity
are analogous to the states of the positronium. The fact that there are 6
diﬀerent kinds of quarks, all of which are assumed to have the same elemen-
tary magnetic charge, indicates that mesonic states are much richer than the
positronium ones, because the quarks of a q ¯q pair may or may not have the
same type of ﬂavor. This prediction is supported by experimental data of
mesons[13].

4. Mesons whose quantum states cannot be created by a q ¯q system are called
exotic. Binding forces between 2 mesons, namely a qq ¯q ¯q system, are expected
to be much weaker than the q ¯q bond. This conclusion is analogous to the
relation between the value of the binding energy of electrons in atoms and
that of the molecular (or van der Waals) forces between neutral atoms (and
neutral molecules). In particular, the lowest q ¯q state (called π meson) has a
total spin=0 and is analogous to an atom of a noble gas. Thus, one expects
that if bound states of a π meson and another hadron exist at all then their
binding energy must be very small. Also in this case, predictions are supported
by experimental data[13].

A set of particles called baryons is found in Nature. Proton and neutron are the
lowest energy states of baryons. Quantum states of baryons are characterized by
means of 3 quarks, called valence quarks. In order to explain bound states of this
kind by means of magnetic monopole forces, one makes another postulate. Thus,
by analogy of atoms, it is assumed that

(F) Baryons have a core whose magnetic charge is +3g.

92 E. Comay

This assumption provides an explanation of baryons, using the baryonic core and
3 quarks attracted to it by the dual Coulomb force which exists between magnetic
monopoles. The sign of the monopole charge of the core and that of quarks is
deﬁned here in order to keep an analogy with the sign of the electric charge of
nuclei and electrons, respectively.

The structure of the baryonic core is beyond the scope of the present work. It
may be an elementary object or, more probably, a complex system of closed shells
of strongly interacting objects whose overall magnetic charge is +3g (see a remark
on this issue in the last Section).

Experiments show that baryons do have a core. Thus, it is found that in an
appropriate Lorentz frame, quarks and antiquarks carry only about one half of the
nucleon’s momentum (see [9], p. 282). Hence, something else exists in a nucleon
and here it is called a core.

Postulate (F) leads to further predictions.

5. Like in the case of mesons, bound states of baryons that cannot be created
by 3 quarks are called exotic. Arguments that correspond to those of point 4
above lead to the claim that strongly bound states that make exotic baryons
do not exist.

This prediction is conﬁrmed experimentally. The lowest bound state of a baryon
and another hadron is the deuteron which consists of one proton and one neutron.
The binding energy of the deuteron is about 2.2 MeV, whereas gaps between bary-
onic energy levels are measured by hundreds of MeV. Other bound states of baryons
are nuclei. Here the binding energy is generally about 8 MeV per nucleon. Another
aspect of this point is the similarity between the form of the nuclear forces and the
van-der-Waals ones. This is the reason for the success of the nuclear liquid drop
model[14].

Another issue is the existence of antiparticles in the system. This is a relativistic
eﬀect which may be found more easily in a system where interaction energies are very
high. Thus, experiments show that, beside the 3 valence quarks, antiquarks exist
in nucleons, too. Here antiquarks are associated with the existence of additional q ¯q
pairs in the baryonic wave function (see [9] pp. 282). It turns out that antiquarks
occupy a rather narrow region of the variable x used for characterizing relations
between Lorentz invariant quantities of experiments (see [9], p. 281).

Now, a narrow x pertains to a small Fermi motion in the volume occupied by
the baryon. Thus, due to the uncertainty principle, one concludes that antiquarks
occupy a larger volume than quarks do (see [9], pp. 266-271).

The magnetic monopole theory discussed here explains this point very easily:

6. If q ¯q pairs are found in a baryonic wave function then quarks are attracted

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

93

to the core and antiquarks are pushed away from it. This result is related to
the fact that near the center, the ﬁeld of the core’s magnetic charge is not
completely screened by quarks. Hence, antiquarks, whose magnetic charge
takes the same sign as that of the core, are pushed away to outer regions.

Let us examine the interaction between quarks in a baryon. Like the interac-
tion between electrons in an atom, this interaction is repulsive and increases the
energy of baryonic states. Hence, if in certain quantum states, this interaction is
reduced then these states should have a higher binding energy. Since electrons and
quarks are spin-1/2 Dirac particles, their total quantum state is antisymmetric.
Now, electronic states whose total spin is symmetric have a spatial state which is
completely antisymmetric. These states yield a smaller repulsive energy between
electrons than corresponding states where the spatial part is symmetric. Indeed,
let us examine 2 electrons and r12 = r1 − r2 be chosen as a dynamical coordinate.
Hence, for r12 = 0, an antisymmetric wave function must vanish. This property
indicates that at a region where r12 is very small and the repulsive interaction is
highest, spatially antisymmetric wave functions yield a smaller contribution. This
eﬀect is related to the Hund rule in atomic states[15,16]. Antisymmetric spatial
wave function of 3 quarks must be created from 3 diﬀerent single particle wave
functions. Hence, excited single particle wave functions are used and the system’s
kinetic energy increases. Let us have a very rough estimate of this quantity. For
this purpose, consider 2 terms of the state J P = 3/2+, where the spin and isospin
are symmetric

ψ = ψ1 + ψ2.

(28)

Here ψ1 is the obvious state ψ1 = φ1φ2φ3, where the φi are single particle S-
waves, φ1 is the ground state and the other ones are the ﬁrst and the second radial
excitations, respectively. ψ2 = φ1(χ1χ2, L = 1). χi are single particle P-waves
which are coupled to the antisymmetric state[17] L = 1. For each of these χi, one
ﬁnds from the spatial angular momentum

1 = l =| r × p |=⇒ pT =

f m

−1 ≃ 250M eV,

(29)

1
0.8

where pT is the momentum component which is perpendicular to r and 0.8f m is
an estimate of the eﬀective radius. Using the relation between momentum and
kinetic energy, ∆P > ∆Ek, one ﬁnds from (29) that the increase of the kinetic
energy of ψ2 is about 500 MeV. Here the Hamiltonian is evaluated for J P = 3/2+
functions. As is well known, the lowest state obtained after diagonalization of the
Hamiltonian matrix, is lower than the diagonal entry of each of the basis functions.
To this reduction one has to add the expected contribution of the magnetic monopole
analogue of the Hund eﬀect.

94 E. Comay

Hence,

7. The mass of the ∆1232 baryon, which is higher than the nucleonic mass by

about 300 MeV, is understood.

Conclusion 1 and the related equations of motion (26) and (27) indicate that
static electric ﬁeld of a charge and electric ﬁeld of a moving monopole have diﬀerent
dynamical properties. The same conclusion holds for the corresponding magnetic
ﬁelds. A special case of this distinction is found in the electric ﬁeld of a polar dipole
(which is made of two displaced electric charges having equal strength and opposite
sign) and that of an axial electric dipole of a spinning monopole. The axial electric
dipole of spinning monopoles is discussed here.

The neutron is known to be a spin-1/2 electrically neutral composite particle. Its
nonvanishing magnetic dipole moment demonstrates that not all eﬀects of its elec-
trically charged constituents vanish. The duality relations between electric charges
and magnetic monopoles provide the basis for the following statement. If quarks are
dyons (namely, particles that have both electric and magnetic charge) and strong in-
teractions are interactions between magnetic monopoles then, it is highly reasonable
that neutrons (and protons) should have a large axial electric dipole moment which
is associated with spinning monopoles.
Indeed, it is extremely unlikely that the
overall electric dipole moment of a system of spinning monopoles vanishes whereas
the total spin is nonzero. This discussion indicates that the very low upper bound
measured for the electric dipole moment of the neutron[18,19] should not be re-
garded as a major argument against a hadronic theory where quarks are magnetic
monopoles obeying (26) and (27). Indeed, all experiments carried out for the mea-
surement of the electric dipole moment of the neutron are eventually based on the
interaction of electric ﬁeld of charge with the searched electric dipole moment of
the neutron[18,19].

Thus, the very low upper bound measured for the electric dipole moment of neu-
trons is, as a matter of fact, an upper bound for its polar electric dipole moment.
These measurements provide no information on the magnitude of the neutron’s
axial electric dipole moment. Hence, results of measurements of the neutron’s elec-
tric dipole moment are not incompatible with the regular charge-monopole theory
presented in this work whose main results are (26) and (27).

As pointed out above, a nucleon is expected to have a nonvanishing axial electric
dipole moment, due to its spinning quarks. In this way, one ﬁnds an explanation
for the tensor interaction between nucleons[20,21]

VT = {3(σ1·r)(σ2·r) − r2σ1·σ2}U (r),

(30)

where r=r2-r1 and σ is the spin operator. This expression is a generalization of

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

95

the dipole-dipole interaction between two static point dipoles µ1 and µ2 (see [2], p
143).

VDIP OLE = −{3(µ1

·r)(µ2

·r) − r2µ1

·µ2}/r5.

(31)

Evidently, the nuclear tensor interaction cannot be exactly a dipole-dipole one,
because nucleons are not point dipoles but composite particles whose size is not
much smaller than the distance between nucleons in a nucleus. For this reason the
form of the function U (r) of (30) is determined phenomenologically. It is interesting
to note that the sign of U (r) of (30) is negative (see [21], p. 103), like the sign of
(31). It can be concluded that

8. The origin of the nuclear tensor force is understood.

The size of the nucleonic volume inside a nucleus can be deduced from the
nucleonic quarks’ momentum. It is found that the larger the number of nucleons
A in a nucleus, the larger is the mean self volume of nucleons of this nucleus. In
other words, as the nucleus becomes heavier its nucleons swell. This property is
compatible with the EMC eﬀect[22,23].

On the other hand, the success of the nuclear liquid drop models is an indica-
tion that nuclear density is practically constant (see [14] and [20], pp. 6,7). The
swelling of the mean volume occupied by quarks of a nucleon with the increase of
the number A of nucleons in nuclei, is compatible with screening properties of elec-
trodynamics. Consider a nucleon Ni in a nucleus. A part of the wave function of
quarks of neighboring nucleons penetrates into the volume occupied by Ni. Thus,
the attracting ﬁeld of the core of Ni is partially screened by quarks belonging to
neighboring nucleons. It follows that, in this case, quarks of Ni “see” a weaker ﬁeld
attracting them to the core of Ni and settle in a larger volume. As the number
of nucleons of a nucleus, A, increases, the average number of neighbors of a typi-
cal nucleon increases too and the screening eﬀect becomes more signiﬁcant. This
situation explains the EMC eﬀect. Thus,

9. screening eﬀects cause self volume of quarks of each nucleon to increase inside

rather large nuclei.

The 3 valence quarks of the proton are uud. Thus, one may write a truncated

sum of terms of the proton’s full wave function as follows:

ψproton = λ0φ0(uud) + λ1φ1(uudu¯u) + λ2φ2(uudd ¯d).

(32)

Here φ0 of (32) denotes a wave function of the 3 valence quarks (and the completely
full “sea” of negative energy states of quarks). In φ1, one u quark is excited from

96 E. Comay

the “sea” into a positive energy state. φ2 is analogous. Every φi is normalized
and each of the λi is a numerical coeﬃcients. Obviously, each of these terms has
the proton’s quantum numbers. Since the valence quarks of the proton contain 2 u
quarks and only one d quark, it is obvious that the additional d quark of φ2 ﬁnds
a lower energy state than the additional u quark of φ1. Hence, the absolute value
of the coeﬃcient λ2 should be greater than that of λ1. It can be concluded that

10. the regular charge-monopole theory provides an explanation for the extra ¯d

found in a proton, called ﬂavor asymmetry[24].

The 10 issues pointed out in this Section should be considered as an illustration
of the ability of the regular charge-monopole theory to explain phenomena related
to strong interaction.

4. A Comparison of Magnetic Monopole Theories

This Section contains a discussion of the Dirac monopole theory and its compari-
son with the regular charge-monopole theory outlined in Section 2. An introductory
part is needed for clarifying some general aspects. A physical theory is a mathe-
matical structure that has a physical domain of validity [25]. Hence, in principle,
a theory can be refuted if its mathematical structure leads to a contradiction. Its
physical meaning can be rejected if it fails to explain results of physical measure-
ments carried out within its domain of validity. It should be pointed out that in the
latter case, the theory cannot be saved by an attempt to gerrymander its validity
domain[25]. The foregoing arguments indicate that one cannot refute a theory by
means of another theory. Indeed, assume that theories A and B yield contradictory
predictions within a common validity domain.
In this case it may be concluded
that at least one of these theories is wrong but it is still unknown which theory is
the wrong one. Thus, a comparison with experimental data is required.

There is another aspect of a theory which is not directly connected to its correct-
ness and has also a subjective personal side. It is generally accustomed to regard a
theory as a neat one if it relies on a minimal set of postulates which are based on
general properties of Nature. One also generally expects that a neat theory is more
likely to be correct when compared to another theory which does not look neat. For
this reason, the speciﬁc postulates used by theories are mentioned too.

The origin of problems of the Dirac charge-monopole theory is that it does not
start with the simple case of a system of monopoles without charges. As shown
in Section 2, an examination of this case together with postulate (A) leads to the
regular charge-monopole theory where the Lorentz force takes the form of ( 26)
and (27). Let us turn to some problematic points of the Dirac charge-monopole
theory. These points show that Dirac’s charge-monopole theory diﬀers drastically
from electrodynamics.

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

97

1. The Dirac theory yields a kind of irregularity which is not found in other
parts of classical electrodynamics. Indeed, let us examine a magnetic charge
density ρm and the Dirac’s vector potential, which is used for ﬁelds of charges
and for ﬁelds of monopoles

4πρm = ∇ · B = ∇ · (∇ × A) = 0.

(33)

This relation states that monopoles do not exist if the vector potential A
is regular. Hence, in Dirac’s monopole theory the vector potential must be
singular. For this reason, Dirac has introduced the notion of a string that
extends from a monopole g to inﬁnity or ends at another monopole having a
magnetic charge −g. Moreover, the system should obey what is called Dirac’s
veto which forbids charges from entering regions of space occupied by strings
(see [6], p. 1374). Strings are a new notion introduced into the theory. Thus,
the following postulate enables their acceptability.

(A’) Strings connected to monopoles account for the irregularities of the theory.
Charges are not allowed to enter regions of space occupied by strings.

2. Unlike ordinary classical electrodynamics and the regular charge-monopole
theory outlined in Section 2, Dirac’s charge-monopole theory cannot be de-
rived from a regular Lagrangian[4,26]. Hence, the deﬁnition of canonical vari-
ables is unclear and the ordinary method of constructing the Hamiltonian
cannot be used. For this reason, the form of quantum mechanics of Dirac’s
charge-monopole theory is not self-evident. Analogous conclusions have al-
ready been published[27-29].

Let us examine the angular momentum of a Dirac charge-monopole system. A
ring made of an insulating material is placed in the (x, y) plane and its center
coincides with the origin. The ring is covered uniformly with charge density ρ
and it can rotate around the z-axis. A monopole g moves along the z-axis from
−∞ towards ∞ (see ﬁg. 1) and carries its string along its path. The motion is
legitimate according to Dirac’s veto, because charges of the ring do not touch the
z-axis. Now, the motion of the monopole is accompanied with a circular electric
ﬁeld which is dual to the circular magnetic ﬁeld of a uniformly moving charge. Due
to Dirac’s monopole theory, this ﬁeld accelerates charges along the ring. Hence, the
value of the angular momentum of the ring at the ﬁnal time diﬀers from its value
at the initial time. It turns out that this variation of the angular momentum is
compensated by the interaction part of a charge-monopole system (see [2], p. 256
and [6], pp. 1365, 1366. Note the diﬀerent units used in [2] and [6]). Thus, in

98 E. Comay

Dirac’s monopole theory, the angular momentum of a static system of a charge and
a monopole is

j = egr/r

(34)

where r denotes the radius vector from the charge to the monopole. This angular
momentum depends on the direction of the line connecting the charge and the
monopole but is independent of the distance between the particles. It follows that

3. in Dirac’s charge-monopole theory there is an interaction dependent quantity
whose value does not vanish even if the particles are inﬁnitely far apart. This
result is strange and unconvincing.

4. Eq. (34) as well as other arguments yield the results that in Dirac’s monopole
theory, a magnetic charge g transforms not like a scalar but like a pseudoscalar
In
(see [2], p. 253).
particular, by analogy with charges (see [1], p. 70, [2], p. 549), one expects
that the monopole 4-current is ρmvµ/γ, where ρm is the monopole density
and γ = (1 − v2)−1/2. Now, one expects that the 4-current behaves like a
4-vector, contrary to the pseudoscalar property assigned to monopoles.

It is not clear how this outcome aﬀects the theory.

Assume that, in spite of what is said in item 2 of this section, one ﬁnds a way for
introducing monopoles into quantum mechanics. In this case, the self consistency of
the theory is doubtful because the theory is not derived from a regular Lagrangian.
The following example illustrates this issue. Let us examine a spin 1/2 charged
particle which is attracted to a center of force by a non-electromagnetic interaction
(henceforth denoted by NEMI). NEMI is much stronger than all electromagnetic
forces and the latter are evaluated by perturbation calculations. A peculiar feature
of NEMI is that its spin-orbit interaction is very strong and its l = 3 j = 7/2 state
is its ground state. An external ﬁeld of the NEMI performs a split of the m states,

g

Figure 1: A monopole g moves through a ring (see text).

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

99

which is analogous to the Zeeman eﬀect. Thus, the state l = 3, j = 7/2, mj = 7/2
is the ground state. This is a quantum mechanical analogue of the ring of ﬁg. 1. A
magnetic monopole g moves along the z-axis from z = −Z0 to z = Z0 and returns
back along a semicircle whose center is at the origin (Z0 is very large). Evidently,
the ﬁnal state equals the initial one, except for the energy gained by the monopole
while moving along the z-axis. (Energy involved with the motion along the arc can
be ignored because on this line the magnetic ﬁeld of the magnetic dipole of the
j = 7/2 charge behaves like r−3.) Hence,

5. quantum mechanics of the Dirac monopole theory does not conserve energy.

6. Another aspect related to the Dirac monopole theory is the usage of mea-
surement of ﬁelds by charges and by monopoles. It can be shown that if the
laboratory is located in a noninertial frame of reference (like a rotating labo-
ratory) then ﬁelds measured by charges and ﬁelds measured by monopoles are
diﬀerent entities [30]. Hence, it is not clear why, in Dirac’s charge-monopole
theory, these diﬀerent entities are derived from the same 4-potential.

7. Beside the foregoing theoretical diﬃculties, there is the experimental situation
stating that, in spite of prolonged eﬀorts, Dirac monopoles have not been
detected[13,31]. This outcome has been predicted on the basis of S-matrix
considerations[27] and by using the regular charge-monopole theory outlined
in Section 2[32]. This is probably the only monopole related prediction that
still holds till now.

8. It should be mentioned that, in addition to the problematic points of the Dirac
monopole theory, this theory explains a basic phenomenon of Nature which is
charge quantization. However, Dirac’s value of the elementary monopole unit
g2 ≃ 34 appears to be very high.

Charge quantization clearly cannot be derived from the regular monopole theory
of Section 2. However, it can be argued that it is very far from being self-evident
that a proof of charge quantization is an inseparable part of the validity domain of
an acceptable charge-monopole theory.

5. Problems of Quantum Chrodynamics

At present, quantum chrodynamics (QCD) is regarded as the theory of strong
interactions (see [9], p. 20).
It relies on several postulates that have not been
used previously. By analogy with the discussion in Section 3, these postulates are
described below.

100 E. Comay

A”. It uses the Young-Mills idea which extends the gauge procedure and enables
the replacement of complex numbers of the phase by matrices belonging to a
certain group. In the case of QCD, the group is SU3.

B”. It relies on a certain procedure called after Higgs, which enables the theory
to take an acceptable form. The Higgs procedure requires the existence of
particles called Higgs mesons.

C”. It assigns to each quark a new kind of charge called color. There are 3 kinds
of color, called red, green and blue, each of which has its own anticolor. The
theory further assumes that particles found in laboratories must be white,
namely, they should have equal amount of positive and negative values of
each color or equal amount of all the 3 colors.

Let us make a list of problematic points of QCD. The list has a certain resem-
blance to some of the points discussed in Section 3, where the utilization of the
regular charge-monopole theory to strong interactions is described.

1. In spite of a long experimental search, the Higgs mesons have not been found

[13].

2. QCD provides no explanation to the participation of real photons in strong
interactions. It should be pointed out that the approach called Vector Meson
Dominance as well as similar ideas have been discussed recently. It is proved
that these approaches have no theoretical basis[33].

3. QCD does not rule out the existence of exotic states (see, e.g. [13] pp. 754,
755, [34]). However, the validity of these states is not established by experi-
ments.

4. The fact that quarks carry only about one half of the nucleon’s momentum
is explained in Section 3 by the introduction of the baryonic core (see the
discussion that follows postulate (F)). In QCD, this is explained by the claim
that gluons (the QCD analogue of electromagnetic bound ﬁelds) carry the rest
of the momentum. These diﬀerent explanations can be tested by an analysis
of suﬃcient data obtained from colliding beams of π mesons and electrons.
Here, the monopole theory used in Section 3 predicts that quarks of a π meson
should carry all momentum whereas QCD expects that gluons of the q ¯q pair
of the π meson should take a portion of the momentum.

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

101

6. Concluding Remarks

This work shows how a regular charge-monopole theory can be derived from the
self-evident duality postulate. It is also shown that this theory can be applied to the
ﬁeld of strongly interacting particles. This application relies on very simple and self-
evident postulates and explains several qualitative properties of strong and nuclear
interaction. Thus, it removes the asymmetry between electricity and magnetism in
contemporary electrodynamics.

The idea that baryons contain a magnetic charge has already been published.
Even before the discovery of quarks, it has been suggested by Dirac that nucleon
constituents contain monopoles [8]. Schwinger has proposed a model of hadrons
where quarks are dyons[35,36]. This course has been examined by other authors,
too [37,38]. However, since all these authors have used the Dirac charge-monopole
theory, they could not overcome diﬃculties. For example, the Dirac monopole the-
ory cannot explain why electrons do not “see” the monopole ﬁeld but real photons
do “see” it (see item 2 of Section 3). Similarly, it cannot explain why the axial elec-
tric dipole moment associated with spinning monopoles is not detected in neutron
measurements (see the discussion that follows item 7 of section 3).

Problems and diﬃculties of the Dirac monopole theory are discussed in Section
4. These diﬃculties and the failure of the experimental quest for Dirac monopoles,
indicate that it is unlikely that the Dirac charge-monopole theory is correct. Several
kinds of experimental data which are not explained by QCD are discussed in Section
5. The data certainly belongs to the domain of validity of QCD or to the wider
theory called the Standard Model. Thus, the interaction of a real photon with
a hadron belongs to the combined domain of electrodynamics and QCD, both of
which are elements of the Standard Model. As proved elsewhere [33], QCD does
not provide an acceptable explanation for this phenomenon.

Other points, like the failure to detect the Higgs mesons as well as exotic states
of hadrons belong to the validity domain of QCD. Moreover, QCD has not predicted
the EMC eﬀect [22]. It is shown in Section 3 how easily the monopole theory of
hadrons explains the similarity between the van der Waals forces and the nuclear
ones, as well as the nuclear tensor force, including its sign. On the other hand, in
spite of intensive work carried out during more than 30 years, standard textbooks
on QCD[9,10] do not discuss these topics.

Similarly, if the baryonic core is assumed to consist of a magnetic monopole
central object and closed shells of inner quarks then the enhancement found in
the cross section of very high energy collisions[39,40] is understood. These experi-
ments indicate the existence of an energy threshold above which additional quarks
at the nucleonic target begin to participate in the interaction with the projectile.
The analysis of deep inelastic scattering of electrons on π mesons may provide new

102 E. Comay

evidence concerning the diﬀerent interpretations of the portion of momentum car-
ried by nucleonic quarks. In QCD the rest of the momentum is ascribed to gluons
whereas in the monopole theory outlined here, it is ascribed to the baryonic core
that carries also 3 units of monopole charge. In the case of mesons, there is no
core and the monopole theory predicts that all momentum is carried by quarks and
antiquarks. On the other hand, according to the QCD approach, a portion of the
π meson’s momentum is expected to be carried by gluons.

A theory diﬀers from a model by the fact that a theory is expected to ﬁt accu-
rately results of experiments carried out within its validity domain. For this reason,
it can be concluded that QCD’s inability to describe correctly well established ex-
perimental data casts doubts on its correctness.

References

1975). p. 61.

1. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Pergamon, Oxford,

2. J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley, New York, 1975). p. 550.
3. E. Comay, Am. J. Phys. 65, 862 (1997).
4. E. Comay, Nuovo Cimento, 80B, 159 (1984).
5. E. Comay, Nuovo Cimento, 110B, 1347 (1995).
6. P. Goddard and D. I. Olive, Rep. Prog. Phys., 41, 1357 (1978).
7. P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Royal Soc. A133, 60 (1931). (Dirac’s charge-monopole theory

should not be confused with the Dirac equation for spin 1/2 particles.)

8. P. A. M. Dirac, Phys. Rev., 74, 817 (1948).
9. D. H. Perkins, Introduction to High Energy Physics (Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park CA,

1987).

226.

P. 515.

10. F. Halzen and A. D. Martin, Quarks and Leptons, An Introductory Course in Modern

Particle Physics (John Wiley, New York,1984) p. 2.

11. J. I. Friedman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 63, 615 (1991).
12. T. H. Bauer, R. D. Spital, D. R. Yennie and F. M. Pipkin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 50 261

(1978). (see pp. 269, 293).

13. K. Hagiwara et al. Phys. Rev. D66, 010001 (2002).
14. R. D. Evans, The Atomic Nucleus (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955) p. 365.
15. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics (Pergamon, London, 1959). p.

16. A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1965). p. 702.
17. A. de-Shalit and I. Talmi, Nuclear Shell Theory (Academic Press, New York, 1963).

18. N. F. Ramsey, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 32, 211 (1982); Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci.

19. D. Dubbers in Progress in Particle and Nuclear Physics, ed. A. Faessler (Pergamon,

20. A. deShalit and H. Feshbach, Theoretical Nuclear Physics (John Wiley, New York,

21. J. M. Blatt and V. F. Weisskopf, Theoretical Nuclear Physics (John Wiley, New York,

40, 1 (1990).

Oxford, 1991) p. 173.

1974). Vol 1, pp. 3-14.

1952). pp. 94-103.

22. J. J. Aubert et al. (EMC), Phys. Lett. 123B, 275 (1983).
23. A. Bodek et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1431 (1983).

24. F. Sciulli, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A359, 241 (2001). See section 6.
25. F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles, (Addison-wesley, Reading mass, 1965) pp.

A Regular Theory of Magnetic . . .

103

1-6..

26. F. Rohrlich, Phys. Rev. 150, 1104 (1966).
27. D. Zwanziger, Phys. Rev., B137, 647 (1965).
28. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev., B138, 988 (1965).
29. C. R. Hagen, Phys. Rev., B140, 804 (1965).
30. E. Comay, Phys. Lett B187, 111 (1987).
31. G. Giacomelli, Riv. Nuovo Cimento 7, 1 (1984). (N. 12).
32. E. Comay: Lett. Nuovo Cimento 43, 150 (1985).
33. E. Comay, Apeiron, 10, 87 (2003).
34. H. J. Lipkin, Nuc. Phys. A625, 207 (1997) and references therein.
35. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 173, 1536 (1968).
36. J. Schwinger, Science, 165, 757 (1969).
37. A. O. Barut, Phys. Rev., D3, 1747 (1971).
38. T. Sawada, Phys. Lett., B100, 50 (1981) and referenced therein.
39. C. Adloﬀ et al., Z. Phys C74, 191 (1997)
40. J. Breitweg et al, Z. Phys C74, 207 (1997)

