4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum Brains: The NuRules

Richard Mould∗

Abstract

Quantum mechanics traditionally places the observer ‘outside’ of the
system being studied and employs the Born interpretation. In this and
related papers the observer is placed ‘inside’ the system. To accomplish
this, special rules are required to engage and interpret the Schr¨odinger
solutions in individual measurements. The rules in this paper (called
the nuRules) do not include the Born rule that connects probability with
square modulus.

It is required that the rules allow conscious observers to exist inside
the system without empirical ambiguity – reﬂecting our own unambiguous
experience in the universe. This requirement is satisﬁed by the nuRules.
They allow both objective and observer measurements, so state reduction
can occur with or without an observer being present.

Introduction

The method of this paper diﬀers from the traditional quantum mechanical the-
ory of measurement (Copenhagen, von Neumann, etc.) in that it sees the ob-
server in an ontological rather than an epistemological context. Traditional
quantum theory places the observer outside of the system where operators
and/or operations are used to obtain information about the system. This is
the epistemological model shown in ﬁg. 1.

The large OP in ﬁg. 1 might be a mathematical ‘operator’ or a corresponding
physical ‘operation’. The observer makes a measurement by choosing a formal
operator that is associated with a chosen laboratory operation. As a result,
the observer is forever outside of the observed system – making operational
choices. The observer is forced to act apart from the system as one who poses
∗Department of Physics and Astronomy, State University of New York, Stony Brook,

New York 11794-3800; http://ms.cc.sunysb.edu/˜rmould

1

The
Observer

OP

The system

Figure 1: Epistemological Model (Copenhagen)

theoretical and experimental questions to the system. This model is both useful
and epistemologically sound.

However, the special rules developed in this paper apply to the system by
itself, independent of the possibility that an observer may be inside, and dis-
regarding everything on the outside. This is the ontological model shown in
ﬁg. 2.

The system

May or may not include observer

Figure 2: Ontological Model (requires special rules)

A measurement occurring inside this system is not represented by a formal
operator. Rather, it is represented by a measuring device that is itself part of
the system. If the sub-system being measured is S and a detector is D, then a
measurement interaction is given by the entanglement Φ = SD. If an observer
joins the system in order to look at the detector, then the system state becomes
Φ = SDB, where B is the brain state of the observer.

The ontological model is able to place the observer inside the universe of
things and give a full account of his conscious experience there. It is a more
realistic view of the relationship between the observer and the rest of the uni-
verse inasmuch as a conscious observer is always ‘in principle’ includable in a
wider system. The ontological approach taken here represents a considerable
departure from the traditional theory of measurement; for among other things,
it rejects the Born interpretation of quantum mechanics. In place of the Born
rule, special rules like the nuRules of this paper allow physics to unambiguously
predict the sequential experience of an observer in the system.

It is valid to use either the epistemological model or the ontological model

when the observer is not in the system.

2

Quantum mechanical measurement is sometimes said to refer to ensembles
of observations but not to individual observations. In this paper we propose a
set of four special rules that apply to individual measurements in the ontologi-
cal model. They are called nuRules (1-4), and do not include the long-standing
Born interpretation of quantum mechanics. Instead, probability is introduced
(only) through the notion of probability current. These rules can describe a
quantum mechanical state reduction (i.e., stochastic reduction or collapse) that
is associated with either an ‘observer’ type measurement, or an ‘objective’ type
measurement. The former occurs only in the presence of an observer, whereas
the latter takes place independent of an observer. The nuRules are demon-
strated below in several diﬀerent physical situations. I claim that they are a
consistent and complete set of rules that can give an ontological description
of any individual measurement or interaction in quantum mechanics. NuRules
also appear in a previous paper [1].

These rules are not themselves a formal theory of measurement. I make no
attempt to understand why they work, but strive only to insure that they do
work. They accurately describe one’s conscious experience of measuring instru-
ments in an ontological setting, while preserving the essentials of Schr¨odinger’s
mechanics. Presumably, a formal theory can one day be found to explain these
rules in the same way that atomic theory explains the empirically discovered
rules of atomic spectra, or in the way that current theories of measurement
aspire to merge with standard quantum mechanics or to make the neurological
connection with observers.

Another Rule-Set

Other papers [2, 3] propose another rule-set called the onuRules (1-4). The
“o” means that they are the same as the nuRules except that the basis states
of a reduction are conﬁned to observer states.
In ref. 3 they are called sim-
ply rules (1-4).
I have changed their name to onuRules in order to clarify
their relationship to the nuRules. Like the nuRules, they introduce probability
through the notion of ‘probability current’ rather than ‘square modulus’; how-
ever, onuRule measurements are possible only when an observer is present. In
addition, both rule-sets introduce ready states that deﬁne the basis states of
reduction. The properties of the nuRule ready states are described below.

3

We consider two sets of rules in the ontological model. They both use ‘ready’
states. In the onuRule case these are limited to ready brain states. Only the
ﬁrst rule-set supports the idea that measurement depends on the presence of an
observer.

nuRules (1-4): No Born Rule. Ready states that are most generally

deﬁned. Observer and Objective basis states (this paper).

onuRules (1-4): No Born Rule. Ready ‘brain’ states only. Observer

basis states only (refs. 2, 3).

These rule-sets are distinguished by the properties listed above, and by the
placement of observers inside of an ontological system for the purpose of making
continuous observations. Observations are not restricted to a ‘given moment of
time’ as when one uses the epistemological model and the Born rule.

Purpose of Rule-Sets

It is possible to have an empirical science using the epistemological model with-
out explicitly talking about consciousness. This is because it is always assumed
that the outside observer is conscious, so there is no need to make a theoretical
point of it.

However, in the ontological model, everything that exists is in principle
included in the system. So if quantum mechanics is to be an empirical science,
then the system must provide for the existence of conscious brains that can
make empirical observations. This means that the theory must be told when
and how conscious brain states appear so that an empirical science is possible
within the model. Special rules like one of the above rule-sets are required for
this purpose.

I emphasize again that these rule-sets are not alternative theories that seek
to replace the formalism of von Neumann. Each is more like an empirical for-
mula that requires a wider theoretical framework in order to be understood
– a framework that is presently unknown. I do not ﬁnally choose one of the
rule-sets or propose an explanatory theory. I am only concerned here with the
ways in which an individual state reduction might work in an ontological model,
consistent with various possible assumptions.

The Interaction: Particle and Detector

Before introducing an observer into this ontological model, consider an inter-
acting particle and detector system by itself. These two objects are assumed to

4

be initially independent and given by the equation

Φ(t) = exp(−iHt)ψi ⊗ di

(1)

where ψi is the initial particle state and di is the initial detector state. The
particle is then allowed to pass over the detector, where the two interact with
a cross section that may or may not result in a capture. After the interaction
begins at a time t0, the state is an entanglement in which the particle variables
and the detector variables are not separable.

However, we let Φ(t ≥ t0) be in a representation whose components can be
grouped so that the ﬁrst includes the detector d0 in its ground state prior to
capture, and subsequent components include the detector in various states of
capture given by dw, dint, and dd.

Φ(t) = ψ(t)d0 + dw(t) → dint(t) → dd(t)

(2)

where dw(t) represents the detector immediately after a capture when only the
window side of the detector is aﬀected by the event, and dd(t) represents the
detector when the result of a capture has worked its way through to the display
side of the detector. The intermediate state dint(t) represents the detector
during stages in between, when the eﬀects of the capture have found their way
into the interior of the detector but not as far as the display.

There is a clear discontinuity or “quantum jump” between the two com-
ponents d0 and dw at the detector’s window interface. This discontinuity is
represented by a “plus” sign and involves a stochastic choice. The remaining
evolution from dw to dd(t) is represented by arrows, and is continuous and classi-
cal. This continuous change is contained in a single component that develops in
time, and may be represented by the d1(t) = dw(t) → dint(t) → dd(t), thereby
giving

Φ(t) = ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)

(3)

Since the detector is macroscopic, we may approximate d0 in the ﬁrst compo-
nent to be a constant that is factored out of its entanglement with the particle.
The capture state d1(t) in eq. 3 is equal to zero at t0 and increases with time1.
ψ(t) is a free particle as a function of time, including all the incoming and
scattered components. It does no harm and it is convenient to let ψ(t) carry
1Each component in eq. 2 has an attached environmental term E0 and E1. These are
orthogonal, insuring local decoherence. The equation appears to be a mixture because these
terms are not shown. However, eq. 2 (including the environmental terms) and others like it
are fully coherent superpositions. In the following we will call them ‘superpositions’, reﬂecting
their global rather than their local properties.

5

the total time dependence of the ﬁrst component, and to let d0 be normalized
throughout2.

The ﬁrst component in eq. 3 is a superposition of all possible scattered
waves of ψ(t) in product with all possible recoil states of the ground state
detector, so d0 is a spread of states including all the recoil possibilities. The
second component is also a superposition of this kind.
It includes all of the
recoil components of the detector that have captured the particle. In addition,
there are other components of these states arising from the quantum mechanical
uncertainties that exist within the detector. These are ignored in this treatment
because of the macroscopic nature of the detector.

Add an Observer

Assume that an observer is looking at the detector in eq. 1 from the beginning.

Φ(t) = exp(−iHt)ψi ⊗ DiBi

where Bi is the observer’s initial brain state which is entangled with the detector
Di. The detector is understood to include only higher order brain parts – that
is, the physiology that is directly associated with consciousness after all image
processing is complete. All lower order physiology leading to Bi is assumed to be
part of the detector. The detector is now represented by a capital D, indicating
that it includes the bare detector by itself plus the low-level physiology of the
observer.

Following the interaction between the particle and the detector, we have

Φ(t ≥ t0) = ψ(t)D0B0 + Dw(t)B0 → Dint(t)B0 → Dd(t)B1

(4)

or Φ(t ≥ t0) = ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(t)B1

where B0 is the observer’s brain when the detector is observed to be in its
ground state D0, and B1 is the brain when the detector is observed (at the
display end) to be in its capture state D1. Since the detector now includes the
low-level physiology of the observer’s brain, the display end of the detector Dd
is the interface between the low-level and upper-level physiology. As before, a
discontinuous quantum jump is represented by a plus sign, and a continuous
classical evolution is represented by an arrow. If the interaction is long lived
2Equation 3 can be written with coeﬃcients c0(t) and c1(t) giving Φ(t ≥ t0) = c0(t)ψ(t)d0 +
c1(t)d1, where the states ψ(t), d0, and d1 are normalized throughout. We let c0(t)ψ(t) in this
expression be equal to ψ(t) in eq. 3, and let c1(t)d1 be equal to d1(t) in eq. 3.

6

compared to the time it takes for the signal to travel through the detector in
eq. 4, then the superposition in that equation will generally exist for some time
before a stochastic choice causes a state reduction.

This means that there can be two active brain states of this observer in su-
perposition, where one sees the detector in its ground state and the other sees
the detector in its capture state. Equation 4 therefore invites a paradoxical in-
terpretation like that associated with Schr¨odinger’s cat. This ambiguity cannot
be allowed. The nuRules of this paper must not only provide for a stochastic
trigger that gives rise to a state reduction, and describe that reduction, they
must also insure than an empirical ambiguity of this kind will not occur.

The First Three NuRules

The ﬁrst rule establishes the existence of a stochastic trigger. This is a property
of the system that has nothing to do with the kind of interaction taking place
or its representation. Apart from making a choice, the trigger by itself has no
eﬀect on anything. It initiates a state reduction only when it is combined with
nuRules 2 and 3.

nuRule (1): For any subsystem of n components in an isolated system having a
square modulus equal to s, the probability per unit time of a stochastic choice of
one of those components at time t is given by (ΣnJn)/s, where the net probability
current Jn going into the nth component at that time is positive.

The second rule speciﬁes the conditions under which ready states appear in
solutions of Schr¨odinger’s equation. These are understood to be the basis states
of a state reduction.

nuRule (2): If an interaction gives rise to decoherent components that are
discontinuous with the old components or with each other, then all newly created
states in these new components will be ready states
[note: Although solutions to Schr¨odinger equation change continuously in time,
they can be “discontinuous” in other variables – e.g., the separation between
the nth and the (n + 1)th orbit of an atom with no orbits in between. Of course,
atomic states are coherent, but a discontinuity can also exist between macro-
scopic states that are decoherent3. For instance, the displaced detector states
3Decoherence is admittedly an approximate idea, so it would appear to be unsuitable
as a mechanism for qualifying the appearance of ready states. However, these nuRules are
empirically determined rules that lack theoretical explanation as has been said. Presumably,

7

d0 (ground state) and d1 (capture state) appearing in eq. 2 are discontinuous
with respect to detector variables. There is no state d1/2. These detector states
are a ‘quantum jump’ apart.]

NuRule (3) provides for a collapse of a wave function and the change of a
ready state to a realized state. If a state is not ready, it will be called a real-
ized state. We therefore introduce dual state categories ‘realized’ and ‘ready’.
Realized states may be thought of as being more real than ready states. Ready
states are the basis states of a collapse. They are on stand-by, ready to be
stochastically chosen and converted by nuRule (3) to realized states.
In the
following, ready states are underlined and realized states are not.

nuRule (3): If a component containing ready states is stochastically chosen,
then all those states will become realized, and all other components in the su-
perposition will be immediately reduced to zero.
[note: The claim of an immediate (i.e., discontinuous) reduction is the simplest
possible way of describing the collapse of the state function. The collapse is
brought about by an instantaneous change in the boundary conditions of the
Schr¨odinger equation, rather than by the introduction of a new ‘continuous’
mechanism of some kind. A continuous modiﬁcation can be added later (with
a modiﬁcation of nuRule 3) if that is seen to be necessary4.]
[note: This collapse does not generally preserve normalization. That does not
alter probability in subsequent reductions because of the way probability per
unit time is deﬁned in nuRule (1) – that is, divided by the total square modulus.]

If an interaction does not produce decoherent components that are discon-
tinuous with the old ones or with each other, then the Hamiltonian will develop
the state in the usual way, independent of these rules. If the stochastic trigger
selects a component that does not contain ready states, then there will be no
nuRule (3) state reduction.

when a covering theory is found, it will provide a more deﬁnite qualiﬁer for the appearance
of ready states.

4The new boundary comes from a stochastic hit on one of the available eigenvalues, which
is the new boundary. The stochastic trigger is intrinsically discontinuous, and imposes that
discontinuity on the developing wave function. This is the simplest way to account for the
sudden change that takes place, and it spares our having to explain where a collapse producing
continuous mechanism ‘comes from’.

8

NuRule (4)

NuRule (4) is a selection rule that forbids transitions between ready states.
Ready states disable transitions to ready states in other components, and tran-
sitions that produce a continuous evolution of the same component.

nuRule (4): Probability current may not ﬂow between entanglements that con-
tain ready states of the same object.

Apply to Interaction

When these rules are applied to the ﬁrst row of eq. 4, we have just the ﬁrst two
components

Φ(t ≥ t0) = ψ(t)D0B0 + Dw(t)B0

(5)

where the second component Dw(t)B0 contains ready states (underlined) by
virtue of nuRule (2), so it cannot pass current along to Dint(t)B0 because of
nuRule (4). Since there is only one brain state in this superposition, a cat-like
ambiguity is avoided. Equation 5 now replaces eq. 4.

Equation 5 is the state of the system before there is a stochastic hit that pro-
duces a state reduction. The observer is here consciously aware of the detector
in its ground state D0, for the associated brain state is correlated with both D0
and Dw. If there is a capture, then there will be a stochastic hit on the second
component in eq. 5 at a time tsc. This will reduce the ﬁrst component to zero
according to nuRule (3), and convert the ready states in the second component
to realized states.

Φ(t = tsc > t0) = Dw(t)B0

The observer is still conscious of the ground state in this equation because
the capture has only aﬀected the window end of the detector. But after tsc a
continuous evolution will produce

Φ(t ≥ tsc > t0) = Dw(t)B0 → Dint(t)B0 → Dd(t)B1

(6)

The states associated with the second and third components in eq. 6 are not
ready states because they are not discontinuous with Dw(t)B0 or with each
other as required by nuRule (2). Therefore, the subsequent classical evolution
will carry the system into a conscious awareness of the capture because of B1 in
the third component. Since eq. 6 represents a single component that evolves in
time as shown, there is no time at which both B0 and B1 appear simultaneously
in that equation. There is therefore no cat-like ambiguity in eq. 6.

9

Standard quantum mechanics (without these rules) gives us eq. 4 by the
same logic that it gives us Schr¨odinger’s cat and Everett’s many worlds. Equa-
tion 4 (top or bottom row) is a single equation that simultaneously presents two
diﬀerent conscious brain states, resulting in an unacceptable ambiguity. How-
ever with these nuRules in eﬀect the Schr¨odinger solution is properly grounded
in observation, allowing the rules to correctly and unambiguously predict the
experience of the observer. This is accomplished by replacing ‘one’ equation in
eq. 4 with ‘two’ equations in eqs. 5 and 6. Equation 5 describes the state of the
system before capture, and eq. 6 describes the state of the system after capture.
Before and after are two diﬀerent solutions to Schr¨odinger’s equation, speciﬁed
by diﬀerent boundary conditions. Remember, we said that the stochastic trigger
selects the (additional) boundary that applies to the reduced state. So it is the
stochastic event that separates the two solutions - deﬁning before and after.

A Terminal Observation

An observer who is inside a system must be able to conﬁrm the validity of the
Born Rule that is normally applied from the outside. To show this, suppose our
observer is not aware of the detector during the interaction with the particle in
eq. 3, but he looks at the detector after the interaction is complete. He observes
at a time tob > tf , where tf is the time of completion. During the interaction
we have

Φ(tf > t ≥ t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)] ⊗ X

where X is the unknown brain state of the observer prior to the physiological
interaction5.

Assume there has not been a capture. Then after the interaction is complete

and before the observer looks at the detector we have

Φ(t ≥ tf > t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(tf )] ⊗ X

where there is no longer a probability current ﬂow inside the brackets. When
the observer ﬁnally looks at the detector at tlook we will have

Φ(t ≥ tlook > tf > t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(tf )] ⊗ X
→ [ψ(t)D0 + D1(tf )]Bb

(7)

where the physiological process (represented by the arrow) carries ⊗X into
Bb, d0 into D0, and d1 into D1 by a continuous classical progression leading
5The “decision” of the observer to look at the detector is assumed to be deterministically
internal in the ontological model. In this respect, the ontological model is like classical physics.

10

from independence to entanglement. The brain state Bb is understood to be
an inactive state at the brink of becoming active. Inactive with respect to the
detector means: That the higher level brain state has no direct connection with
the detector, so it cannot as yet distinguish between the detector states D0
and D1.

Although the observer cannot distinguish between the D0 and D1 in eq. 7,
at some moment tob he will resolve the diﬀerence between them, and when that
happens a continuous ‘classical’ evolution will no longer be possible. The solu-
tion will then apparently branch into two components that separately recognize
D0B0 and D1B1.

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > tf > t0) = ψ(t)D0Bb + D1(tf )Bb

(8)

′

+ ψ

(t)D0B0 + D

′
1(tf )B1

However, current cannot ﬂow into the fourth component from the second com-
ponents because of nuRule (4), and current does not ﬂow horizontally. Further-
more, current cannot ﬂow into the fourth component from the ﬁrst component
because the Hamiltonian does not provide for it. This means that the fourth
component in eq. 8 remains equal to zero. But then nuRule (2) does not re-
quire the third component to include ready states. Failing that requirement, the
Hamiltonian will carry the component ψ′(t)D0Bb into ψ(t)D0B0 by a continu-
ous classical process. In addition, the second component in eq. 8 can be ignored
at this point since current cannot ﬂow into it or out of it, and since it does
not contain a conscious brain state. In these circumstances D1(tf )Bb is called
a phantom component and is ignorable6. Therefore, the solution generated by
the physiological interaction is really

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > t0) = ψ(t)D0[Bb → B0]

instead of eq. 8, so the observer comes on board to witness the detector in its
ground state as he should. The probability of that happening is proportional
to the square modulus of ψ(t)d0 ⊗ X in eq. 7.

If the particle is captured during the primary interaction, then after the in-
teraction is complete and before the observer looks, we will have Φ(t ≥ tf > t0) =
d1 ⊗ X. When the observer does ﬁnally look

Φ(t ≥ tlook > tf > t0) = d1 ⊗ X → D1Bb
6Phantom components serve no physical purpose since square modulus has no physical
signiﬁcance in this treatment. Phantoms are reduced to zero whenever another component is
stochastically chosen.

11

and when the observation is complete

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > tf > t0) = D1Bb → D1B1

So the observer comes on board to witness the detector in its capture state with
a probability equal to the square modulus of d1(tf ) ⊗ X in eq. 7. The nuRules
therefore conﬁrm the Born Rule.

An Intermediate Case

In eq. 5 the observer is assumed to interact with the detector from the beginning.
Suppose that the incoming particle results from a long half-life decay, and that
the observer’s physiological interactions begins in the middle of that interaction.
We have

Φ(t ≥ t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)] ⊗ X

where again X is the unknown brain state of the observer prior to the phys-
iological interaction. Primary probability current ﬂows between the detector
components (inside the brackets) as in eq. 3.

Let the observer interact with the detector at some time tlook giving

Φ(t ≥ tlook > tf > t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)] ⊗ X
(t)D0 + D1(t)]Bb

→ [ψ

′

where the physiological process (represented by the arrow) carries ⊗X into Bb,
d0 into D0, and d1 into D1 by a continuous classical progression leading from
independence to entanglement. Again, the state Bb is understood to be an
inactive brain state on the brink of becoming active.

As before, a resolution occurs at time tob apparently leading to

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > t0) = ψ(t)D0Bb + D1(t)Bb

(9)

+ ψ(t)D0B0 + D

′
1(t)B1

However, current cannot ﬂow into the fourth component from the second or
third components because of nuRule(4), and current cannot ﬂow into the fourth
component from the ﬁrst component because the Hamiltonian does not provide
for it. This means that the fourth component in eq. 9 remains equal to zero. But
then nuRule (2) does not require the third component to include ready states.
As before, failing that requirement, the Hamiltonian will carry the ﬁrst compo-
nent ψ(t)D0Bb into ψ(t)D0B0 by a continuous classical process. Therefore, the

12

solution generated by the physiological interaction is really

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > t0) = ψ(t)D0[Bb → B0] + D1(t)B1

(10)

+ D

′
1(t)Bb

instead of eq. 9. The second component D1(t)B1 is not the fourth component
of eq. 9. It is a result of the primary interaction, and only rises above zero when
ψ(t)D0B0 in the bracket has been reached.

During the time between tlook and tob, a stochastic hit on the third compo-

nent D

′
1(t)Bb of eq. 10 is possible at a time tsc3, yielding

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tlook > t0) = D1(tsc3)[Bi → Bb → B1]

where Bi is whatever inactive brain state exists at the time tsc3 of the stochas-
tic hit. The brain then executes the classical progression to consciousness
(Bi → Bb → B1) as required by the Hamiltonian, giving ﬁnally

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tlook > t0) → D1(tsc3)B1

(11)

After tob in eq. 10 there are two possible stochastic hits that may occur, one on
′
1(t)Bb.
the second component D1(t)B1, and the other on the third component D
The ﬁrst possibility can only occur after B0 appears in the bracket of eq. 10.
At that point D1(t)B1 might be stochastically chosen at tsc2 giving

Φ(t ≥ tsc2 > tob > t0) = D1(tsc2)B1

(12)

skipping tlook. This corresponds to the observer coming on board (classically)
before the capture, and then witnessing the capture at tsc2.

If the third component in eq. 10 is stochastically chosen at a time tsc3′ > tob,
then because the collapse reduces all other components to zero, the surviving
brain state Bb will classically become B1 without going ﬁrst to ready states.

Φ(t ≥ tsc3′ > tob > t0) = D1(tsc3′ )[Bb → B1]
or Φ(t ≥ tsc3′ ) → D1(tsc3′ )B1

(13)

This corresponds to the unlikely possibility that a capture occurs after the active
physiological interaction has begun, but before it is complete.

If there is no capture resulting from a stochastic hit in eq. 10, then the
observer will remain conscious of D0, and every other component will become
a phantom. This eﬀectively leaves

Φ(t ≥ tf > tob > t0) = ψ(t)D0B0

13

Equation 11 is the result of a particle capture between tlook and tob. After
tob the two possibilities are eqs. 12 and 13. All these captures yield the same
ﬁnal state D1B1 arrived at by a diﬀerent route.

A Second Observer

If a second observer is standing by while the ﬁrst observer interacts with the
detector during the primary interaction, the state function will be

Φ(t ≥ t0) = [ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(t)B1] ⊗ X

where X is an unknown state of the second observer prior to his interacting with
the system. The detector D here includes the low-level physiology of the ﬁrst
observer. A further expansion of the detector will include the second observer’s
low-level physiology when he comes on board. When a product of brain states
appears in the form BB or B ⊗ X, the ﬁrst term will refer to the ﬁrst observer
and the second to the second observer.

The result of the second observer looking at the detector will be the same
as that found for the ﬁrst observer in the previous section, except that the ﬁrst
observer will be present in each case. In particular, the equations similar to eqs.
11, 12, and 13 are now

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tlook > t0) → D1(tsc3)B1B1
Φ(t ≥ tsc2 > tob > t0) = D1(tsc2)B1B1
Φ(t ≥ tsc3′ > tob > t0) → D1(tsc3′ )B1B1

These captures all yield the same result. In no case will the nuRules produce a
result like B1B2 or B2B1.

Anomaly Avoided

NuRule (4) avoids a catastrophic anomaly if the primary interaction is complete
at tf without a capture, before the second observer looks at the detector.

Φ(t ≥ tf > t0) = [ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(tf )B1] ⊗ X

Assume that nuRule (4) is not in eﬀect. Then when the second observer has
observed the detector at tob we will have

Φ(t ≥ tob > tf > t0) = ψ(t)D0B0Bb + D1(tf )B1Bb
′

+ ψ

(t)D0B0B0 + D

′
1(tf )B1B1

(14)

14

where the second row is zero at tob and increases in time. The primary inter-
action is already complete in this equation, so there is no horizontal current
ﬂow.

Without nuRule (4) the fourth component D

′
1(tf )B1B1 in eq. 14 will be
accessible to current from the second component. A stochastic hit at some time
tsc4 would then be possible, yielding

Φ(t ≥ tsc4 > tob > tf > t0) = D1(tf )B1B1

This says that even though the ﬁrst observer can testify that the interaction
has been completed without a capture, both observers will experience a capture
when the second observer comes on board – some time after the interaction
is completed. That is absurd. NuRule (4) therefore plays the essential role in
preventing absurdities of this kind.

In the previous sections we have seen how the nuRules go about including
observers inside a system in an ontological model. The rules describe when and
how the observer becomes conscious of measuring instruments; and furthermore,
they replicate common empirical experience in these situations. In the next few
sections we turn attention to another problem – the requirement that observed
macroscopic states must appear in their normal sequence. This sequencing chore
represents a major application of nuRule (4) that is illustrated in the case of a
macroscopic counter.

A Counter

If a beta counter that is exposed to a radioactive source is turned on at time t0,
its state function will be given by

Φ(t ≥ t0) = C0(t) + C1(t) (+) C 2(t) (+) C3(t) (+) .. etc.

where the components following C0(t) are zero at t0. C0 is a counter that reads
zero counts, C1 reads one count, and C2 reads two counts, etc. The underlined
states are the ready states required by nuRule (2). A parenthesis around a
plus sign means that probability current cannot ﬂow between those components
because of nuRule (4); so the 0th and the 1st components are the only ones that
are actively involved before there is a stochastic hit of any kind. Before that
time, the only current ﬂow will be J01 from the 0th to the 1st component. The
resulting distribution at some time t < tsc is shown in ﬁg. 3, where tsc is the
time of a stochastic hit on the second component.

15

Square moduli at time t 
before t

sc

Realized

0

J01

Ready

1
1

Ready
2

Ready
3

Figure 3

This means that because of nuRule (4), the 1st component will be chosen
because all of the current from the (say, normalized) 0th component will pore
into the 1st component making R J01dt = 1.0. Following the stochastic hit
on the 1st component, there will be a collapse to that component because of
nuRule (3). The ﬁrst two dial readings will therefore be sequential, going from
0 to 1 without skipping a step such as going from 0 to 2.
It is nuRule (4)
that enforces the no-skip behavior of macroscopic objects. Macroscopic things
should always follow their familiar sequences without skipping a step.

With the stochastic choice of the 1st component at tsc, the process will begin
again as shown in the middle diagram of ﬁg. 4. This also leads with certainty to
a stochastic choice of the 2nd component. That certainty is accomplished by the
wording of nuRule (1) that requires that the probability per unit time is given
by the current ﬂow J12 divided by the total square modulus at that moment.
The total integral R J12 is less than 1.0 in the middle diagram of ﬁg. 4, but it is
restored to 1.0 when divided by the total square modulus. It is therefore certain
that the 2nd component will be chosen.

Square moduli following the first and the second collapse

Realized

Ready

Realized

0

J01

1

Ready

Realized

1

J12

2

2

J23

Ready
3

Figure 4

16

And ﬁnally, with the choice of the 2nd component, the process will resume
again as shown in the last diagram of ﬁg. 4. This leads with certainty to a
stochastic choice of the 3rd component.

The Parallel Case

Now imagine a parallel sequence of states in which the process may go either
clockwise or counterclockwise as shown in ﬁg. 5. Each component includes a
macroscopic piece of laboratory apparatus A, where the Hamiltonian provides
for a clockwise interaction going from the 0th to the rth state and from there to
the ﬁnal state f ; as well as a counterclockwise interaction from the 0th to the
lth state and from there to the ﬁnal state f . The Hamiltonian does not provide
a direct route from the 0th to the ﬁnal state.

Ready

Al

Ar

Ready

With nuRule (4) in place, probability current cannot initially ﬂow from either
of the intermediate states to the ﬁnal state, for that would carry a ready state
into another ready state of the same object. The dashed lines in ﬁg. 5 indicate
the forbidden transitions. But once the state Al (or Ar) has been stochastically
chosen, it will become a realized state Al (or Ar) and a subsequent transition to
Af can occur that realizes Af . The result of nuRule (4) is therefore to force the
system into the familiar sequence that goes either clockwise or counterclockwise.

Grounding the Schr¨odinger Solutions

Standard quantum mechanics is not completely grounded in observation inas-
much as it does not include an observer. The epistemological approach of Copen-
hagen (formalized by von Neumann) does not give the observer a role that is

Realized
A 0

Af
Ready

Figure 5

17

suﬃcient for him to realize the full empirical potential of the theory; and as
a result, this model encourages bizarre speculations such as the many-world
interpretation of Everett or the cat paradox of Schr¨odinger. However, when
the rules are written to allow a conscious observer to be given an ontologically
complete role in the system, these empirical distortions disappear. It is only
because of the incompleteness of the epistemological model by itself that these
fanciful excursions seem plausible.

The nuRules avoid these paradoxical multi-conscious systems, for when a
system collapses, the single surviving component may include a conscious brain
state. If it does, then any components containing brain states that follow in
a subsequent interaction will ﬁrst involve a detector’s ready state that cannot
pass current along to the brain state until it is itself stochastically chosen. This
guarantees that there can only be one conscious brain state at a time, so all
paradoxical multi-conscious solutions are avoided.

Status of the Rules

No attempt has been made to relate conscious brain states or ready brain states
to particular neurological conﬁgurations. The nuRules are an empirically discov-
ered set of macro-relationships that exist on another level than micro-physiology,
and there is no need to connect these two domains. These rules preside over
physiological detail in the same way that thermodynamics presides over molec-
ular detail. It is desirable to eventually connect these domains as thermody-
namics is now connected to molecular motion; and hopefully, this is what a
covering theory will do. But for the present we are left to investigate the rules
by themselves without the beneﬁt of a wider theoretical understanding. There
are two rule-sets of this kind, the nuRules of this paper plus the onuRules in
refs. 2 and 3.

There are four features that distinguish the two rule-sets from standard

quantum mechanics.
1. They both work inside the ontological model. The epistemological format of
standard quantum mechanics is too limited a view of the universe, and places
a wrong emphasis on the role of the observer in physics.
2. Both rule-sets disavow the Born interpretation. Standard quantum mechan-
ics has conﬁned itself to the Born interpretation. These rule-sets open up an-
other possibility that ought to be considered.
3. Consciousness is included. Standard quantum mechanics does not include
consciousness in the universe. It can describe physiological systems in as much

18

detail as desired, but it stops there. It makes no statement about consciousness
itself because it does not have the language for it.
4. The onuRules give observers a job to do. Not only do the onuRules include
consciousness in the universe, but they also give the observer the job of estab-
lishing boundary conditions. When making a measurement, the presence of an
observer realizes a single eigenvalue and drives the rest to zero, thus selecting
a new boundary for the collapsed solution of Schr¨odinger’s equation. The con-
scous observer therefore plays a dynamic role like everything else in physics, and
does not just occupy a passive viewer’s platform outside of nature.

The question is, which of these two rule-sets is correct (or most correct)?
Without the availability of a wider theoretical structure or a discriminating ob-
servation, there is no way to tell. Current reduction theories may accommodate
a conscious observer, but none are fully accepted. So the search goes on for
an extension of quantum mechanics that is suﬃciently comprehensive to cover
both Processes I and II of von Neumann. I expect that any such theory will
support one of the ontological rule-sets, so these rules might serve as a guide
for the construction of a wider theory.

References

quant-ph/0309124

[1] R. A. Mould, “NuRules and Objective/Observer Measurement”,

[2] R. A. Mould, “Quantum Brains: The OnuRules”, physics/0406016

[3] R. A. Mould, “Quantum Brain States”, Found. Phys. 33 (4) 591-612 (2003),

quant-ph/0303064

19

