Quantum Entanglement, Cognition & The Processes of
Inference

physics/0406012

R. Chakraborty1,a I. Mitra2,b

a Rashmandir Vidyalaya,

BK -61,Salt Lake City, Kolkata-91
bDepartment of Physics, New Alipore College

L Block, Kolkata 700 053, India

Abstract

Church’s hypothesis and Godel’s theorem may provide constraints on mental processes.As a relief

quantum entanglement may lead to a deﬁnite proposal as regards the nature of reality and how

much of it we are able to know and how do we know it.We deal with these questions and have

devised a Gedanken Experiment showing the redundancy of principle of reality. We thereby propose a

model describing the processes of making conclusions from a given set of premises though without the

reference of neurobiological processes at present.We argue thereafter that the physical laws of nature

may not be universal as it seems, being dependent on some physical processes namely computation

and the states of neural cognitive states which may be governed yet by some other rule.

4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1mitrarc@yahoo.com
2indranil@theory.saha.ernet.in

1 Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to investigate in general terms the observed phenomena,nature

of reality and the way we reach conclusions from a set of premises.For the development of

any scientiﬁc discovery the initial set of patterns account for most of the observations and

experiments which are fundamental to its realizations.Furthur development can be achieved by

the construction of elaborate equipment,techniques,esoteric vocabulary and skills. The scientiﬁc

method encompasses both the mathematical and empirical sciences, and we brieﬂy discuss why

it is necessity that drives science and determines what we mean by the scientiﬁc method. By

necessity we mean laws of nature and of human thought that scientiﬁc theories have to try and

explain. By the statement that science is driven by necessity, we mean that the discipline of

science as such addresses aspects of reality that are governed by necessity. Scientiﬁc research is

open ended and exploratory, and ﬁnding new and unexplained phenomena is the main objective.

Mathematical sciences - which include mathematics, computer science, simulations and so on -

consist of purely symbolic structures that are freely produced by the human mind. Of course

all of language consists of signs and words as well, in that the word is not a thing but can only

signify to what it represents. A mathematical theorem necessarily follows from the axioms of the

subject. It does not depend on the subjectivity of any mathematician, since all mathematicians

will be able to reproduce the same (universal) result. Evidence in mathematics consists of the

derivation of the result. There are instances when there are plausible theorems for which no such

evidence is available, and such theorems are called conjectures. Only when a proof is oﬀered

is the matter resolved. Mathematics is that component of human thought that is entirely and

completely determined by necessity. Mathematical theorems are unconditionally valid - in all

circumstances and for all time. Empirical sciences - which include physics, chemistry, biology,

astronomy, geology and so on - are theories and explanations of nature based on empirical

veriﬁcation. Such veriﬁcation entails producing evidence - for or against the theory - in the

form of data which is presented to sense perception, and is external to the mind. Scientiﬁc data

cannot be something that is produced by the human mind. Once empirical evidence - namely,

data - has been procured, the mind can then analyze such data to interpret, verify or falsify

various scientiﬁc theories.

The methodology of science, it’s so called mode of inquiry, is determined by necessity.The

most powerful aspect of the sciences is its ability to predict how nature will behave in the future,

or in new and unknown circumstances. Technology is rooted on devices and instruments that

are made based on scientiﬁc principles, which can then successfully manipulate nature. Science

can even predict the existence of phenomena that were hitherto unknown. For example, the

mathematics of quantum physics predicted in 1929 [1] that an electron would have an anti-

particle as its counterpart. Anti-particles had never even been thought of until then, let alone

1

having been detected. And sure enough, when guided by this theoretical prediction, anti-

electrons were experimentally found in 1935. There are numerous such examples in science.

The question naturally arises, are there mathematical structures essential for theory that do

not have any measurable manifestation? Richard Feynman has the following to say. “It is not

true that we can pursue science completely by using only those concepts which are directly

subject to experiment.

In quantum mechanics itself there is a probability amplitude, there

is a potential, and there are many constructs that we cannot directly measure.”[2] Are there

theoretical constructs in physical theories that have absolutely no physical consequence, but

are nevertheless required by the mathematical structure of the theory? One can only make

some conjectures. In quantum mechanics, the answer to this question, in principle, seems to be

yes. The predictive power of science is completely based on the universality and “objectivity”

of mathematics. The result of mathematical calculations yield new symbols and structures

that are then identiﬁed, by a leap of imagination, with physical objects and processes. As we

proceed we will be tackling in detail the terms ”imagination” etc. The route essentially depends

on a suitable process of computation.[3] So as a whole we see if we can link the discovery of

physical theories to be synthetic truths, then the process of computation may be the crucial

component for the theory of knowledge.

As it can very well be understood that at this stage of development the analysis will be

mainly speculative and we will be considering a mechanism from a purely kinematical point of

view. The question merely rests on the age old question raised by Kant as to the eﬃcacy of

pure mathematics and its methodology. The answer by pure empiricists that our mathematical

knowledge is derived by induction from particular instances seems to be inadequate as the

validity of of the inductive hypothesis itself cannot be proved by induction. As we all would

possibly agree that mathematical knowledge is general. It seems strange that that we should

be able to know some truths in advance about particular things of which we yet have no

experience. Again the observable world around us which are in general our experiences based

on perceptions which gives rise to knowledge which is particular. But the amazing fact which has

remained is that the application of mathematics to the observable world has produced general

statements regarding it. We are avoiding at present more general questions regarding the status

of statements and their relation to the world of universals. Now it is a obvious observation as

we have already stated that the scientiﬁc theories do heavily rely on mathematics.The mode of

operation of mathematics and its progress has been on the other hand entirely dependent on

the process of computation.

At this point we are led into several viewpoints as regards its functionality. The so called

proponents of strong AI [4] which claim that any sort of thinking is computation. Apart from

dealing with the questions of awareness and consciousness which we don’t intend to address at

2

present (we would mention some of its implication on our theory in the conclusions 3) we have

a feeling that essentially any conceivable idea of reaching conclusions is apparently through a

set of rules and methods which is essentially a computation. Though as has been proposed by

Penrose [6] that appropriate physical action of the brain may not be simulated computationally.

We are not yet sure about the proposal yet, the Godel [7] Turing arguments as regards the

incompleteness of mathematical reasoning does’not quite guarantee that some sort of process

which is completely non computational may make it complete.May be incompleteness is the

truth itself. Penrose’s hypothesis regarding quantum gravity making a route to solve the riddles

seems an attractive proposal nonetheless seems to be driven by a sole motivation to bind the

nature into a single whole.

One of the important aspects of scientiﬁc research is to ask reasonable questions. In the con-

text of analysing physical theories the fundamental objects under scrutiny is the meausurement

procedure and algorithm themselves. So as a matter of fact whether some computational pro-

cess is stoppable or not as has been advocated in [8] is mainly a technical problem. Analysing

meausurement processes immediately leads us to the world of quantum mechanics. As we all

know the paths of quantum mechanics tries to see nature in terms of of the observer and the ob-

served the construction of physical theories is inevitably linked to both the segments as we will

look in due course. The next object under analysis is the corresponding computational process

and algorithms. Surprisingly devising algorithms will bear new fruits rather than generating

them.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the Church’s Thesis and Godel

Turing arguments applied to the mental processes. In Section 3 we will discuss a short review of

Quantum entanglement and the basic idea which we will require in the last section-the central

theme of the paper. Section 4 deals in devising a Gedanken Experiment demonstrating nature

of reality and it’s relation to our Observed world. The last section is concerned with a proposal

of a model as regards the description of the physical universe and the way we reach various

conclusions, which in turn give rise to physical theories.

2 Church Turing hypothesis & Godel’s Theorem

Whenever we are into the arena of discussing theories of processing information we are inevitably

led to discuss Church’s thesis.We mainly follow [9],[10].

3A good reference for all these ideas may be in [5]

3

2.1 Church’s Thesis :

(a) A function f is semicomputable iﬀ it is partial recursive.
(b) A function f is computable 4iﬀ both f and χD(f )
Deﬁnition :

5 are partial recursive.

(a) A sequence of partial functions f1, f2....fnis called partial recursive description of the func-
tion

fN = f

if

f1,
fi,






belongs to family of basic functions;

i ≥ 2 either belong to family of basic functions or obtained by recursion






(b) A function is called partial recursive if it admits a partial recursive description.

Church’s thesis is used for a deﬁnition of algorithmic undecidability. Suppose we have a

countable sequence of mathematical problems P1, P2...... Furthermore suppose that such a
problem has a yes or no answer and that the conditions on Pn are written eﬀectively as a

function of n. We associate to such a problem a mapping,

f : Z + −→ Z +

D(f ) = {i ∈ Z + | Pi has yes for an answer }

f (i) = 1

if

i ∈ D(f )

The problem P is called algorithmically decidable if the functions f and χD(f ) are partial
recursive. Otherwise P is called algorithmically undecidable. Church’s thesis alows us to solve

such equations in two stages: (1) ﬁnding an informal solution using any intuitive algorithms

we need. (2) formalising the solution. The Church-Turing thesis concerns the notion of an

eﬀective or mechanical method in logic and mathematics. A method, or procedure, M, for

achieving some desired result is called eﬀective or mechanical just in case M is set out in terms

of a ﬁnite number of exact instructions,M will, if carried out without error, produce the desired

result in a ﬁnite number of steps; M can be carried out by a human being unaided by any

machinery. M demands no insight or ingenuity on the part of the human being carrying it out.

Statements that there is an eﬀective method for achieving such-and-such a result are commonly

expressed by saying that there is an eﬀective method for obtaining the values of such-and-such a

as input gives f(x) as output if x ∈ D(f ) or 0 otherwise. Computational functions are semi

4x ∈ Z +m

computable

5Characteristic function of X ⊂ Y ⇒χX : Y → Z + s.t χX (x) = 1 if x ∈ X and 2 otherwise.

4

mathematical function. For example, that there is an eﬀective method for determining whether

or not any given formula of the propositional calculus is a tautology e.g.

the truth table

method is expressed in function-speak by saying that there is an eﬀective method for obtaining

the values of a function, call it T, whose domain is the set of formulae of the propositional

calculus and whose value for any given formula x, written T(x), is 1 or 0 according to whether

x is, or is not, a tautology.

2.2 Turing’s Hypothesis :

The notion of an eﬀective method is an informal one, and attempts to characterise eﬀectiveness,

such as the above, lack rigour, for the key requirement that the method demand no insight or

ingenuity is left unexplicated. One of Turing’s achievements in his paper of 1936 [11] was to

present a formally exact predicate with which the informal predicate can be calculated by means

of an eﬀective method may be replaced. Church did the same (1936a)[12] . The replacement

predicates that Turing and Church proposed were, on the face of it, very diﬀerent from one

another, but they turned out to be equivalent, in the sense that each picks out the same set of

mathematical functions. The Church-Turing thesis is the assertion that this set contains every

function whose values can be obtained by a method satisfying the above conditions.

The formal concept proposed by Turing is that of computability by Turing machine. He

argued that whenever there is an eﬀective method for obtaining the values of a mathematical

function, the function can be computed by a Turing machine. The converse claim is easily es-

tablished, for a Turing machine program is itself a speciﬁcation of an eﬀective method: without

exercising any ingenuity or insight, a human being can work through the instructions in the

program and carry out the required operations. If Turing’s thesis is correct, then talk about

the existence and non-existence of eﬀective methods can be replaced throughout mathematics

and logic by talk about the existence or non-existence of Turing machine programs.

2.3 Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem :

Let T ⊂ S(A) be the set of true expressions where A is the ﬁnite or countable alphabet and let

S(A) be the set of expressions in A. D⊂ S(A) is the set of provable or deducible expressions.

The incompleteness principles of Godel are enumerated as follows: (i) The set D is enumerable.

(ii) The set T is not enumerable if the semantics of truth is rich enough to include elementary

arithmetic.

So as we see Godel’s Theorem can be succinctly be stated as:

All formal theories of mathematics satisfy the above incomplete principles of (i) & (ii). There-

fore if a theory be suﬃciently rich, it always contains true expressions which are not provable.

The above methodology may be now turned on to see how the process may be applied to

5

mental processes. The conclusion of Godel’s argument implies that there are allowed brain

process P that can never stop in spite of the fact that no system operating according to the

rules by which the brain operates could ever reach the conclusion that P can never stop. As a

matter of fact that there exists a k such that C(k, k) stops iﬀ C(k, k) can never stop is knowable

cannot be proved within the ﬁntistic type of model described above.The ﬁnite type computer X

which can in principle simulate the mechanical activity of the human brain can be imbedded in

a computer Y whose rules of operation included implementation of the concept for ∀’n’, and to

which the Godel/Turing argument can be applied. Then the mind M that could comprehend

both the rules of operation of C and also the logic of the Godel/Turing proof would be able

to compute a value k such that the proposition that ”C(k, k) stops iﬀ C(k, k) can never stop

is knowable”,where knowable means information by virtue of the outputs of Y. The mind M

knows that Pk is true can know also that X is knowable entails that X is true,and can therefore

conclude that C(k, k) can never stop. Thus M can know more than what is knowable. This

is the analog of Godel’s theorem and is not a contradiction. On the other hand the human

mathematician can know only the output of X. He will be able to reason on the basis of what

hypothetical, M is able to know, that there exists some k, such that C(k, k) can never stop.

However it has not been proved that the only way that he could know this is by virtue of the

stopping of C(k, k). The stopping of C(k, k) may be the unique process which gives the strong

result that C(k, k) can never stop is knowable.

3 Quantum Entanglement, A Short review:

One of the key issue in the foundations of quantum mechanics for all these years has been

the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen argument [13] regarding the incompleteness of a quantum theory

though mainly the Copenhagen interpretation.The basic argument can be stated as

Every element of the physical reality must have a counterpart in the physical theory

The proposal has been analysed from various contexts and the notable among them been the

Bohmian mechanics,[14] Bell’s Theorem [15] and Gleason’s Theorem [16]. We will not go into

the details here but mainly discuss the most notable feature which the argument has led us

into, the idea of Quantum Entanglement. As we will see in Section 5 our main construction is

very much related to the argument and the idea of entangled states. Our discussion mainly is

on the same lines with [17]

A simple description of the essential non-classical nature of quantum entanglement is given

in Entangled Choices. For a more detailed and technical analysis, consider the quantum spin of

an electron (or any spin-1/2 particle), which is always found to have either the value +h/2 or

-h/2 in the direction of measurement, regardless of the direction we choose to measure. Thus

an electron manifests one of only two possible spin states, which we may call spin up and

6

spin down. It’s convenient to represent these states as orthogonal unit vectors In general an

electron’s spin state, Y, at any instant can be represented by a linear combination of those two

possible observable states. The choice of a measurement direction is equivalent to choosing a

basis for expressing the spin components of the state Y. For any particular basis we can express

the state in the form

where c1and c2 are complex constants. These constants encode the probability that the cho-
sen measurement will yield either result. The probability is simply the norm of the respective

|Ψi = c1|+i + c2|−i

coeﬃcient.We have

2c2 = 1
In quantum mechanics, each possible measurement basis is associated with an operator

1c1 + c⋆
c⋆

whose eigenvalues are the possible results of the respective measurement. For a given xyz basis

of orthogonal space coordinates we can represent the three principle measurements (i.e., mea-

surements along the three axes) by the Pauli spin matrices σx, σy, σz. The eigenvalues of the

measurement operator corresponding to whichever measurement direction we choose determine

the coeﬃcients c1 and c2, which represent the probabilities of the possible outcomes. To see
how this works, suppose |θi is the initial state vector of the electron, and we decide to perform

a spin measurement corresponding to a particular operator . The result is given by applying

to |θi, using ordinary matrix multiplication, to give the new state vector |βi as shown below:

If |βi is either pure spin up or pure spin down(basis states) in the direction of measurement

represented by , it follows that a subsequent measurement in the same direction must yield the

same result, so |βi must be such that

for some constant q(since state vectors are equivalent up to length). Thus the constant q is

an eigenvalue of the measurement operator,and |βiis the corresponding eigen-vector.

Since the arbitrary initial state |θiis not in general an eigenvector of U, it can yield either of

the eigenvectors of the basis states. This reveals the probabilistic aspect of quantum mechanics.

The eigenvectors constitute a basis for the space of possible state vectors, so |θican be ex-

pressed as a linear combination of those eigenvectors. If we let |βi & |δi denote the eigenvectors,

then we can express |θias

U|θi = |βi

U|βi = q|βi

7

c1|βi + c2|δi = |θi

Again, the norm of each complex coeﬃcient gives the probability that applied to |θi will

lead to the respective eigenstate.

The same analysis can be extended to three or more principle direction spin operators as

presented above. Each pair of eigenvectors constitutes a basis for the state space, so we can

express the electron’s state vector as a linear combination of the basis vectors for the desired

measurement, and the coeﬃcients give the probability of that measurement yielding either spin

up or spin down. We can think of these probabilities as the projections of the initial state vector

onto the orthogonal axes of the chosen measurement basis. Of course, we aren’t restricted to

measurements along one of the principle axes. We can measure the spin of the electron along

any spatial axis, and each such measurement is represented by an operator. We also note that

these directions are purely relative to the state of the particle in question.

These quantum mechanical predictions have some remarkable implications. An experiment

can be performed by examining the spins of two spin-1/2 particles emitted in opposite directions

from the decay of a singlet state with zero total spin. In such a case conservation of angular

momentum requires that the spin state vectors of the individual particles are precisely opposite,

so if we measure the spin of one of these particles along a certain direction and ﬁnd spin up in

that direction, then the other particle must have pure spin down in that direction. Thus, by

measuring the spin of one particle and reducing its state vector to one of the eigenvectors of

the chosen measurement basis, we automatically collapse the wavefunction of the other particle

onto this same basis.

At ﬁrst sight this process may not seem very mysterious, since it’s easy to imagine that

the two coupled particles are programmed with opposite spins, such that they will always give

opposite results when measured along any given direction. However, a detailed analysis of the

quantum mechanical predictions for all possible combinations of measurement angles reveals

the need for a profound change in the classical view of the world.

If the measurement of one particle along a ﬁxed direction (in the xz plane) yields spin

down, then the other particle is purely spin up in that direction. Consequently if we perform a

measurement on the other particle along a direction at an angle of α from the ﬁrst measurement,
we will see that the probability of spin up is 1
2cos(α/2) and the probability of spin down in
1
2 sin(α/2). In a similar way we can show that if the measurement of the ﬁrst particle yields
spin up, then the other particle is purely spin down along that direction, and a measurement

of that other particle along a direction at an angle α relative to the ﬁrst will yield spin up with
probability 1

2sin(α/2)and spin down with probability 1

2cos(α/2).

Hence the probability that the measurements of these two particles at angles diﬀering by α
2 sin(α/2) , and the probability that

will both give the same result (both up or both down) is 1

8

they will yield opposite results (one up and one down) is 1
2cos(α/2) . The angle αbetween the
two measurements can be expressed as x - y where x is the angle of the measurement performed

on one of the particles and y is the angle of the measurement performed on the other. The two

particles emitted from a singlet state are said to be entangled, because regardless of how far

apart they travel before the spin measurements are made, the joint results will exhibit these

joint probabilities.

From a classical standpoint we would imagine that each particle emerges from the singlet

state with, in eﬀect, a set of programmed instructions for what spin to exhibit at each possible

angle of measurement, or at least what the probability of each result should be. The usual

approach to analyzing these phenomena classically is to stipulate that a particle’s programmed

instructions for responding to a measurement at a given angle must be deﬁnite and unambigu-

ous (rather than probabilistic) because we classically regard the two measurement angles as

independent, which implies that the measurement on the other particle could be at the same

angle as our measurement of this particle, and the particles must give opposite results in that

case. Likewise the measurement on the other particle could be 180 degrees away from our mea-

surement of this particle, and the particles must give equal results in that case. Of course, the

individual measurements can each be either spin up or spin down in both of these cases, so in

principle they could still be probabilistic tendencies, but classically we have no way of ensuring

perfect correlation (or perfect anti-correlation) of the joint results of spacelike separated events

other than by deﬁnitely programming the spins of each particle for each possible measurement

angle.

From this assumption it follows that the instructions to one particle are just an inverted

copy of the instructions to the coupled particle. In other words, for each measurement angle

from 0 to 2p the programmed response to a spin measurement for one particle is the opposite

of the programmed response of the other particle at that angle. Furthermore, since we have

perfect correlation if our measurements are at angles that diﬀer by 180 degrees, it follows that

the programmed instructions for each particle are individually anti-symmetric at a phase angle

of 180 degrees. For example, if a particle’s programmed response for a measurement at angle a

is spin up, then the programmed response of that same particle for a measurement at angle x

+ p must be spin down. Hence we can fully specify the instructions to both particles by simply

specifying the instructions to one of the particles for measurement angles ranging from 0 to p .

For the sake of completeness it will be worthwhile to state in brief some of the resolutions

of the problem. Numerous discussions of quantum entanglement discuss hidden variables,[18]

[19]and they derive inequalities involving the correlations as functions of these so called vari-

ables.

In a sense, these variables are redundant, because the essence of the so-called local

realistic premise is that each particle emerges from the singlet state with deﬁnite instructions

for the spin it will exhibit for each possible measurement angle. This implies that the only

9

relevant free variable is the reference orientation, since the instruction proﬁle can be oriented in

any direction relative to the measurements with uniformly distributed probability. Integrating

the product of spins over the entire angular range with a ﬁxed diﬀerence angle must yield the

correlation of the two spin measurements.

It might be argued that we need not assume any single particle exhibits the quantum me-

chanical probabilities, because these probabilities can only be evaluated by performing multiple

measurements, so we might imagine that it’s necessary to evaluate the results over a sequence of

particle pairs, rather than just a single pair. Moreover, we might think that this sequence could

possess memory,[20] making the results of successive pairs dependent. However, in principle a

large number of particle pairs can be prepared in an identical way, in spacelike-separated loca-

tions, and perform measurements on the pairs independently. According to quantum mechanics

we would still expect the combined results to satisfy the same correlations. This implies that

each particle pair must embody the overall propensities that we expect to ﬁnd manifested in

multiple trials.

4 A Gedanken Experiment

Figure 1: Observed & Real Worlds

The ﬁgures depicted above is a diagram for the simple thought experiment which we de-

scribe below.In both Fig A and Fig B Part Y are identical,as shown enclosed within a dashed

10

box are to be taken inaccessible to any observer which we term as reality in a sense that the

phenomena of the observable part X and X’ of world will be dependent on them.So X & X’are

the only parts which the observers are aware of. So part Y of both the diagrams do not exist

in relation to the observer. The experiment is designed as follows.

Let us ﬁrst describe Part Y of the diagrams. As we have stated earlier part Y is a hypothetical

entity which are non existent to any observer. It consists of an enclosure which contain two

massive balls, which may move or collide in the enclosure producing observable eﬀects on part

X & X’ of the systems. Some readers may be sceptical about the dynamics of the motion of

the balls etc, but we are not interested in it as the observer will only observe Part A.

In Fig A the part X of the diagram describes a simple container containing a liquid. As

it is clear from the previous consideration the eﬀect of part Y on part X is to produce some

disturbance in the liquid and the motion of the surface of the liquid,inside the container. But

the observer being unaware of the part B of the apparatus has to interpret the motion. One

of the possible explanation of the motion may be given by the assumption of an existence of a

density function ρ(x, y, z)inside the liquid. To describe a deﬁnite model to explain the eﬀective

motion of the liquid it may be assumed a non uniform distribution of particles along the length

of the enclosure as to say

ρ(x, y, z) = 1
z

This implies that there are large number of the particles at the surface of liquid which

continually decrease as one goes along the liquid upwards till the liquid surface. So the large

number of particles at the bottom may inﬂuence some pressure and thereby force on the next

layer of particles which continually goes on to produce an appreciable motion of the liquid

So essentially the success of the model essentially depends on a suitable choice of the density

function which will correctly describe the motion of the surface of the liquid as has been ob-

surface.

served.

In Fig B Part X’ of the diagram denotes again a simple box which has a charged particle

placed on the ﬂoor of the box. That the particle is a charged one has been tested previously in a

lab by suitable electrical experiments(say). Now again as in the previous case the Part Y of the

ﬁgure will inﬂuence the Part X’ and will in turn eﬀect the motion of the charged particle. So

as it is clear by now that the observer will have to describe the motion of the charged particle.,

though the observer is absolutely unaware of Part Y. The charged particle may be undergoing

arbitrary motions and the observer accounts for it by ascribing an existence of an electric ﬁeld

11

E(x, y, z) inside the container. The correct description of the charged particle will eventually

depend on the suitable choice of the electric ﬁeld.

So now the two gedanken experiments give rise to some interesting consequences. First of all

it is not necessary that the observed world may match with the real world. The most important

fact related to this is that a single real world may give rise to many observable situations and

thereby to many descriptions of the observable world. and the same reality. Now at this stage

a question may be asked that so what the big deal is this, as in any case we cannot observe the

real world and may be cannot really aspire to know about it why not rename the observable

world as the real one. Well as far naming is concerned it may not be a big problem, but can

we sure whether it will not induce any eﬀects on the observable world, perhaps not.This is the

line of attack we will take up in the next section where we argue that the real world though

absolutely unobservable and inaccessible yet may be crucial as far development of physical

theories and thereby knowledge is concerned. We will be giving an example to illucidate our

point.

5 A proposed model for the mechanism of generating

physical theories:

The basic aim of this section is not the the content of knowledge or it’s one of the manifestations,

physical theories. On the contrary we are interested in ﬁnding whether there are any schemes

about which we infer conclusions or to be speciﬁc enough to go on to discover physical theories,

mathematical theorems etc. The Godel Turing argument analysed in Section 2 clearly shows

that computational processes may be insuﬃcient to bear all fruits. Penrose claims that there

may be noncomputational [21] [22] [23]process linked with brain activities. The model we

want to describe here though satisﬁes the Godel’s incompleteness theorem, yet we invoke some

diﬀerent methods which do not need that the brain activities need to be noncomputational

in principle. the arguments are furthur enhanced by the Gedanken experiment performed in

Section 4.

So in order to describe the model, the observed world is essentially demarcated from the

real world which is completely inaccesible to the observer. The only role the real world has is in

producing observable eﬀects to the observed world as we have seen in the thought experiment

described in section 4.

The information content corresponding to the observed world is encaspulated in the seman-

tics, mathematical tools, symbols and logical & semantic connectives. [24]
Let a be the set of alphabets and the rule of syntax, m corresponds to the sets of mathematical

12

symbols and the rules of inference, q denotes the set of logical and semantic connectives.

Now,

L = {s(l)|l ∈ a, s(l) ≡ statements and propositions of linguistics}

M = {s(m)|m ∈ m, s(m) ≡ statements and propositions of mathematics}

C = {s(cl, cm)|cl, cm ∈ q, s(cl, cm) ≡ statements of the connectives}

(1)

(2)

(3)

So as we can all understand that the full information of the observable world is encoded

in the above constructed sets. To be more speciﬁc any information regarding the observable

world is nothing but a statement or proposition obeying the formal rules of mathematics and

linguistics.

So if we construct the direct product of sets [25]

we can be assured that any statement regarding the observable world is contained as a true

L

M

N

N

C

statement p(z) contained in a set

P = {p(z)|z ∈ L

M

C s.t p(z) is true}

N

N

So the maximum information accessible to any observer is encoded in the set P. It is the
set of objects which are knowable to any observer. Hence in order to discuss the discovery of

physical theories it is quite necessary to study the possible evolutions of the set . How can

such a possible evolution be achieved is a dynamical question also completely dependent on
the structures of the set P, which at this stage is pretty diﬃcult to answer. We on the other
hand will be mainly concerned with the mechanical model of what may be the possible sorts

Borrowing our notations from Dirac’s notation. we claim that the set P corresponding to
the observable world is associated a state |Pi. The state |Pi encodes the information about
the observed world. Now as we have got a glimpse of the basic scheme we now state our basic

of evolution.

propositions.

Proposition 1:

The observed states is the eﬀect of the interaction between the observer (brain states) [26]and

the real world states. The interaction is in particular a form of entanglement,in a sense that
the real world states may inﬂuence the observer (brain) states and therefore correlated .6

6For notational convenience we term the Observer + apparatus as the brain states. The symbolism should

not be misunderstood with the connotation of associated consciousness.

13

So symbolically,

Proposition 2:

Proposition 3:

|Pi ≡

Pk ck|B

ki|R

ki 7

Corresponding to i ∈ I where I is an indexing set,there exists a class of states |Bii|Rii which
correspond to diﬀerent class of observed states given by |Pλi where λ ∈ ∆ where ∆ is a diﬀerent
indexing set.

Reaching Conclusions from a given state |P

ii will be induced by at most two inequivalent
processes , which are marked as X and O. The process X denotes a computational process

and the process O which is not computational. At this stage the terms computational and non

computational are deﬁned ostensively.

Proposition 4:

The brain states|Bi are associated to the observer and do correspond to the brain functions

which is essentially the seat for undergoing computational processes.

Now to describe the evolution of the state |Pλi = |Bii|Rii to a completely diﬀerent non

trivial state |

ii|

ii is denoted schematically by

Pλi = |
e

B
e

R
e

Proposition 5:

|Pλi

X & O
−→ |

Pλi
e

The Gedanken experiment which we performed gives rise to another conclusion which we

state as a proposition. Same set of real world states may give rise to diﬀerent observable states

for the same brain states. Diﬀerent sets of real world states may also correspond to diﬀerent

observed states for the same set of brain states.

Symbolically,

|Pλi = |Bii|Rii

|P′

λi = |Bii|R′
ii

This is a consequence of the third proposition which entails that any conclusion whatsoever

from a deﬁnite information state corresponding to the observed world evolves into any other

7For simplicity of notations from now onwards we don’t include the sum though we represent an entangled

state.

14

information state by 2 fundamental inequivalent processes. At this point it is imperative to

attend to the basic problem of measurement as it is in quantum mechanics.As it is clear that

we have associated the basic knowledge about the observed world as a class of entangled infor-

mation states. So essentially any gain in information is but an evolution of the associated state.

Though we will propose a model for the evolution but the nature is not yet clear. If it is a state

collapse then the role of observer is pretty ambiguous.For some alternative proposals London

& Bauer [27] has an interesting suggestion,though they unlike us do not have a construction

of the real world states. According to their proposals that states of the observer satisfy vec-

torial relations required by ordinary quantum mechanics,but do not evolve temporally in the

quantum mechanical sense.Though in a sense it is a strange proposal,extending quantum the-

ory somewhat into the domain of psychology,nevertheless a consistent theory.In other words

the proposal claims an inclusion of the observer to be somewhat essential for the state vector

collapse.

Another pretty diﬀerent but interesting idea stems from Von Neumann [28]

the so-called principle of psycho-physical parallelism -that it must be possible so

to describe the extra physical process of the subjective perception as it were in reality

in the physical world-i.e, to assign to its parts equivalent processes in the objective

environment,in physical space.

In accordance with this argument whenever there is a measurement, the world is divided

into two parts, one part comprising the system being observed and the other the observer. The

boundary between these parts is arbitrary. According to Von Neumann if the formalism of

quantum mechanics is applied to the observed part of the world, the predictions obtained are

independent of the location of the boundary.

At present we will not analyze the above issues any furthur. Our point has been to state

how to model an observer in our context and we argue that there may be various alternative

approaches which may be undertaken but the issue is very well unsettled at present.

Equipped with these propositions let us now try to ﬁnd out in detail how to obtain con-

clusions from a set of premises. As it is obvious the set of premises do form a deﬁnite state

obtained from the set P.

Any conclusion is thereby deﬁned to be the implementation of a series of states

P1
e
Now say we start with an information which corresponds to an observed state

|Pλi−→|

λi−→ · · ·

λi−→|

P2
e

|Pλi = |Bii|Rii

15

By Proposition 4,the |B

ii states transform by the computational process X through a series

(the accessible states)

This may in turn give rise to a new observed state

|Bii

X
−→ |B′
ii

|P′

λi = |B′

ii|Rii

So preceding as above we may get a series of states

|Pλi−→|P1

λi−→|P2

λi−→ · · · |Pn
λi

which are connected with each other by the transformation of the brain states via a com-

putational process.

At this stage we link th other process which is fundamentally diﬀerent from the compu-

tational one in a sense that they are nonlocal and stochastic in nature and denote a jump of

the states which may not be determined.

In this context it will be interesting to point out

the question of the quantum jumps has been previously being considered by [29].The process

is marked by the special property that the real world states may inﬂuence the brain states to

deliver a jump.

|Pλi ≡ |Bii|Rii

X
−→ |B′

ii|Rii−→|B′

ii|R′
ii

The last step of the transformation has been in accordance with the Fifth Proposition which

entails that there exists states for the same brain states but diﬀerent real world states.

The next process which we show is another assumption on the basis of Proposition 3 where

we give a concrete scheme for non-computational process.

|Bii|R′
ii

O
−→ | ¨Bo

i i|R′
ii

Thereby the | ¨B o
So now we conclude that any sort of nontrivial conclusions is being generated by the following

i i are not accessible from the |Bii state by any computational process.

sequence

|Pλi ≡ |Bii|Rii

X
→ |B1

i i|Rii

X
→ |B2

i i|Rii ≡ |B2

i i|R′
ii

O
→ | ¨Bii|R′
ii

X
→ | ¨B1

i i|R′

ii→| ¨B1

i i|R′′
i i

So the state | ¨B1

i i can be identiﬁed with the non trivial ﬁnal state |¨Pλi. The states are
generated by a series of computational & non-computational processes. We propose that for

i i|R′′

gaining information which is not encoded in the initial state the computational processes are

not enough, though we have assumed that he brain states are connected by those only.

16

Now we give an example from computational geometry [30]illustrating our scheme. We took

this particular example in particular to show that though we may be inclined to think that this

is wholly a computational problem but essentially we show here that how can our scheme may

be implemented in this case and this in turn also shows how noncomputational processes play

pivotal role in the theory of inferences.

In essence computational geometry is the study of designing and analysis of algorithms

in the context of problems from geometry.In view of the above analysis we would like to see

how the above mechanism of generating conclusions translate to the case of closest pair problem.

Let there are given points in a plane. What are conclusions which we can reach from these set

The Premise:

of data.

The Analysis:

We will be mainly concerned with the simplest solution for the above problem in accordance

with the model proposed by us.

As the premise consists of given points on a plane it is the concerned observed state |Pλi.
As we have already discussed this state is an entangled state of the corresponding real world

and brain states. So,

|Pλi =

Pi ci|Bii|Rii8

So qualitatively the points are designated as an entangled state corresponding to some real

world which cannot be determined and the brain world states.

So to get some non trivial conclusions from the initial state |Pλi we get at ﬁrst the following

sequence.

|Pλi ≡ |Bii|Rii

O
→ | ¨Bii|R′

ii ≡ |Pλi

So here a non computational process which transforms the brain state |Bii into a brain state
| ¨Bii which is the state which registers the concept of a distance between the points in the plane
or may be also the number of points in the plane. It should be noted here that this is already

a complex process which has other parameters too. In order to give a simpliﬁed model for the

aforesaid scheme we keep the complexities to a minimum. So in brief the noncomputational

process gives rise to a state which may now eﬀectively give rise to some non trivial conclusions

which are not encoded in the initial state which may be described as follows.

The transformed brain state | ¨Bii in this case of the simpliﬁed model is the seat for gener-

ating nontrivial computational processes which we may depict as

8We made an exception here with respect to our earlier remarks. Again we state that for simplicity from

now onwards we don’t include the sum though we represent an entangled state.

17

|Pλi ≡ | ¨Bii|R′
ii

X
=⇒ |P′
λi

So essentially as with the closest pair problem,state which has been obtained by a noncom-

putational process now gives rise to a state which via some computational processes only give

rise to some entangled real and brain world states which corresponds to some observed state.

The computational process as it can be guessed can be generated by an algorithm. We are not

interested here to analyze the eﬃciency of the algorithm

6 Conclusion

So as a matter of fact the main objective of this paper has been to go through in detail

the process by which we may make deﬁnite conclusions which has been speculative and we

proposed a model as regards to it. The accuracy of the model will nevertheless be dependent

on correct theories of computation, quantum aspects and neural networks. The theory of

cognitive neuroscience [31]and computational neurobiology [32]will be immensely helpful in

deciphering neural network models which may be in turn be focused to predict a model for

cognitive function. The problem which we feel here is that in computational correlates of brain

function and associated aspects models may be constructed at various stages which may be

consistent with each other. For example the Hopﬁeld [33]neural network model along with back

propagation and classical theory of computation may be used to give rise a speciﬁc model for

perception. In the context of information-processing approaches mental or cognitive events are

abstract and cannot be reduced to neurological phenomena. Perception, memory learning etc

may be mapped in terms of their functions and processes without concern for their neurological

causes. Though at this point it will be worthwhile to ask whether neural activities of brain can

be modeled by quantum mechanics but some recent arguments more or less tries to answer the

scepticism in the negative [34][35][36][37] .As far as the computational viewpoint is concerned a

logical theory machine [38]has been constructed for the ﬁrst mathematical proof conducted by a

machine,there are also claims of General Problem Solver to study and simulate human problem

solving. On the extreme of these viewpoints there has been connectionist [39]approaches which

has close ties to the neurological perspective that the mind is powered by the brain where

a serial processing of information sequential, or in parallel, processes in the reception and

transformation of information signals. In this context it will be interesting to remark at this

stage that for a speciﬁc model of memory we believe that there exists some optimal physical

process, though we feel it will be quite remarkable if something like Grover’s algorithm [40] has

any role to play there. We hope to construct a category based model of perception and thought

in our next endeavor.

The model we have proposed here essentially underpinnes a noncomputational process which

18

we at this stage have deﬁned ostensively. But we believe that some appropriate neurobiological

process should be accounted for that. As a remark it is felt that the sacred laws of physics which

govern nature may not be universal but relative to the cognitive system. As an example two

diﬀerent neural models may give rise to completely diﬀerent perception and modes of inference

processing on account which they both may diﬀer in their corresponding world views.

Acknowledgements:

I.Mitra would like to acknowledge the hospitality of Theory Group,Saha Institute Of Nuclear

Physics, and Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata for this work.

References

[1] P.A.M.Dirac “Quantum Mechanics (1958) Clarendon Press

[2] F. Schwabl “Quantum Mechanics” (1992) Springer Verlag

[3] R. M. Karp “Reducibility among Combinatorial Problems” In Complexity of Computer

Computations (1972) Plenum Press 85

[4] M. L. Minsky “Computation: Finite and Inﬁnite Machines” (1967) Prentice-Hall

[5] M. Lockwood “Mind, Brain and the Quantum: Compound I” (1992) Oxford Blackwell

[6] R. Penrose “Shadows of The Mind” (1994b) Oxford University Press

[7] R. M. Smullyan “Godel’s Incompleteness Theorems” (1992) Oxford University Press

[8] H. P. Stapp “Are Superluminal Connections Necessary” Il Nuovo Cimento 40B (1977)

191

345

[9] J. Malitz “Introduction to Mathematical logic” (1979) Springer Verlag

[10] P. Suppes “Logic and Probability in Quantum Mechanics” (1971) Riedel

[11] A. M. Turing “On Computable numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsprob-

lem”Proc. Lond. math. Soc.2 42 (1936) 230

[12] A. Church “An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory”Am. J. Math 58 (1936)

[13] A. Einstein, N. Rosen and B. Podolosky “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Phys-

ical Reality be Considered Complete”Physical Review 47 (1935) 777

19

[14] D. Bohm “Quantum Theory as an Indication of New Order in Physics”in B. d” Espagnat

[15] J. S. Bell “On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics” Reviews of Modern

[16] A. M Gleason “ Measures on the Closed Subspaces of Hilbert Spaces” Journal of Mathe-

matics and Mechanics 6 (1957) 885

[17] G. Mackey “ Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics” (1963) New York: Ben-

[18] N. D. Mermin “Hiddden Variables and the Two Theorems of John Bell” Reviews of Modern

(1971) 412

Physics 38 (1966) 447

jamin

Physics 65 (1993) 803

[19] S. Kochen and E. P. Specker “The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics”

Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics 17 (1967) 59

[20] G. Scheler “Memorization in a Neural Network with Adjustable Transfer Function and

Conditional Gating” q-bio.NC/0403011

[21] R. Penrose “The Large, the Small and the Human Mind” (1999) Cambridge University

Press

[22] T. Rado “On Non-Computable Functions”Bell System Tech. J 41 (1962) 877

[23] M. Davis “Computability and Unsolvability” (1982) Dover

[24] H. B. Enderton “A Mathematical Introduction To Logic” (1972) Academic Press

[25] P. R. Halmos “Naive Set Theory” (1974) Springer Verlag

[26] I. Nemenman “How is Sensory Information processed” q-bio.NC/0402029

[27] F. London and E. Bauer “La Theorie de l’Observation en Mecanique Quantique” (1939)

[28] J. von Neumann ”Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics” (1955) Princeton

Hermann

University Press

[29] Ghirardi, G.C., Rimini, A., and Weber, T. “Uniﬁed Dynamics for Microscopic and Macro-

scopic Systems” Phys Rev D 34 (1986) 470

[30] M. Minsky and S. Papert “Perceptrons: an Introduction to Computational Geometry”

(1968) MIT Press

20

[31] L. K. Samuelson, and L. B. Smith “ Early noun vocabularies: Do Ontology, Category

Structure and Syntax Correspond?” Cognition 73 (1999) 1

[32] W. Bialek “Thinking about the Brain” physics/0205030

[33] J. J. Hopﬁeld “Neural Networks and Physical Systems with Emergent Collective Compu-

tational Abilities” Proceedings of the national Academy of Sciences 79 (1982) 2554

[34] A. A. Samoletov “A Biological Junction with Quantum Like Characterstics”

physics/9910045

[35] C. A. Trugenberger “Quantum Pattern Recognition” quant-ph/0210176

[36] J. Faber, R. Portugal and L. P. Rosa “Information Processing in Brain Microtubles” q.bio-

SC /0404007

ph/9907009

ph/9706033

[37] M. Tegmark “The Importance of Quantum Decoherence in Brain Process” quant-

[38] L. M. Adleman “Computing with DNA” Sci. Am 279 (1998) 54

[39] D. O. Hebb “The Organization of Behavior” (1949) John Wiley & Sons

[40] L. K. Grover “Quantum Mechanics helps in searching for needle in a haystack” quant-

21

