Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
email: Mark.Hadley@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract. The symmetry of Nature under a Space Inversion is described by a Parity
operator. Contrary to popular belief, the Parity operator is not unique. The choice of
the Parity operator requires several arbitrary decisions to be made. It is shown that
alternative, equally plausible, choices leads to the deﬁnition of a Parity operator that
is conserved by the Weak Interactions. The operator commonly known as CP is a
more appropriate choice for a Parity operator.

Pacs 11.30.Er, Charge conjugation, parity, time reversal, and other discrete symmetries

Mark J Hadley

4 A conserved parity operator
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A conserved parity operator

1. Introduction

All the classical laws of Nature are symmetric under a Parity operation. However, in
particle physics the weak interactions seemed to show some asymmetry between left
and right. The experiments, and the theory that described the interactions, were taken
as clear evidence of an inexplicable asymmetry in Nature. The ramiﬁcations of the
experiments extend far beyond the weak interactions and particle physics; they color
our view of the Universe and are widely referred to in textbooks that discuss the nature
of space and time.

This paper shows that parity violation, is simply a consequence of the arbitrary

assumptions that are made in the choice of Parity operator.

Symmetry under space inversion is described by a Parity operator P . Under space

inversion we have by deﬁnition:

2

(1)

x → −x
y → −y
z → −z
t → t






r → −r

It follows from the deﬁnition of P that velocity and acceleration vectors also change
sign. Given a mathematical object deﬁned in terms of co-ordinates and derivatives, the
transformation properties can be determined (eg angular velocity r × ˙r is unchanged).
However this is not suﬃcient to deﬁne the parity operator because we do not know
the transformation properties of other entities that appear in the equations of Physics.
In most cases there is a choice of mathematical representations and the most obvious
choice is not necessarily the most appropriate.

2. Electrodynamics

Electrodynamics oﬀers a neat illustration of the choices that need to be made when
deﬁning a Parity operation - and the importance of making the best choice. Choosing a
parity operator is equivalent to choosing mathematical representations for the physical
quantities that appear in the equations.

Maxwell’s equations have an Electric Field, E, and a Magnetic ﬁeld, B. A simple
mathematical representation would be to treat them both as vectors. Both E and B
would then change sign under a parity operation. Maxwell’s equation would not be
invariant under this parity operation. The Lorentz equation:

¨r = q(E + ˙r × B)/m

(2)

Would be composed of a parity violating term q ˙r × B/m and a parity conserving term
qE.

Electrodynamics would be inherently lefthanded. A symmetrical experimental
arrangement such as an electron beam moving forward in the x-direction and a magnetic

A conserved parity operator

3

ﬁeld pointing in the z-direction would result in electrons moving to the left. The mirror
image would be contrary to experimental observations.

The predictions of electromagnetism would be unchanged by the choice of parity
operator. Since a parity operation cannot be performed in the laboratory, there could
be no direct test of the transformation properties of E and B. The most that experiment
could do is conﬁrm the two diﬀerent parts of the Lorentz equation. Particle motions
would still be correctly described regardless of the transformation properties (under
parity) of E and B.

Although the choice of operator is of no experimental signiﬁcance, it is certainly
of philosophical interest for it describes, an asymmetric Universe. But the choice of
operator is far more signiﬁcant than just philosophical. The choice of operator clariﬁes
(or confuses) a theoretical understanding of the Physics, which is vital for progress. It
is particularly important when relating electrodynamics to relativity.

Either E or B, or both, can be axial vectors that do not change sign under a parity
operation. If they are both axial vectors then electrodynamics does not conserve Parity.
But if only B is an axial vector then the parity operator transforms E to -E and leaves
B unchanged. With this deﬁnition Electrodynamics conserves parity.

The diﬀerent transformation properties of the Electric and Magnetic ﬁelds seems
puzzling and arbitrary. However if Maxwell’s equations are described using the Faraday
two-form (antisymmetric second rank tensor) the Magnetic ﬁeld is seen as the space-
space components while the Electric ﬁeld is the space-time components of the same
mathematical entity.

F =

0

0 −Ex −Ey −Ez
Bz −By
Ex
Ey −Bz
Bx
0
EZ By −Bx
0

















The dual of the Faraday two form is the Maxwell two form deﬁned by M = *F. The dual
interchanges the position of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds. The source-free Maxwell’s
equations can then be written in the most elegant form dF = 0 and dM = 0

The diﬀerent nature of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds is also evident if they are

described using a four-vector potential Aµ with:

E = − ∇At − ∂t(Ax, Ay, Az)
B = ∇ × (Ax, Ay, Az)

From which it is clear that E is a vector and B is an axial vector.

The deﬁnition of the Parity operator assumed that mass, m, in the Lorentz equation
(2) was unchanged. The charge q is unchanged but this is not a separate assumption
because the charge, q, in a volume can be deﬁned from the surface integral of electric
ﬁeld evaluated over a spherical surface that encloses the volume:

P : q =

E.ˆn dS →

(-E).(−ˆn) dS = q

H

H

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

4

(7)

A conserved parity operator

A similar deﬁnition of magnetic charge Qm is:

P : Qm =

B.ˆn dS →

B.(−ˆn) dS = −Qm

H

H

From which it is clear that a Parity operation will change the sign of a magnetic charge.
Under a reﬂection a North pole changes to a South pole and vice versa. The intimate
relation between charges and ﬁelds is such that the Parity operator can equally well be
deﬁned through the eﬀect on the charges (magnetic and electric). Conventionally electric
charge is represented as a scalar quantity and the magnetic charge as pseudoscalar.

It is convention to choose the magnetic ﬁeld to be an axial vector, but it is
well known [1, 3] that the equations of electrodynamics are invariant under a duality
rotation that interchanges the role of the E and B ﬁelds. With this unconventional
representation, Parity is still conserved because the sign of the electric charge also
changes:

P : ¨r = q(E + ˙r × B)/m → (−q)(E + ˙-r × -B)/m = ¨-r

(8)

Classical electrodynamics cannot determine the transformation of the physical
quantities that appear in the equations. Under a parity operation four possible options
exist corresponding to scalar or pseudoscalar character for the electric and/or magnetic
charges. Two options conserve parity and two violate parity. For aesthetic reasons we
may favor the options that conserve parity. However the strongest reason for parity
conservation in electromagnetism is that it is a consequence of a uniﬁed mathematical
representation of the ﬁelds (3) - that gives two possible options both of which conserve
parity.

3. A conserved Parity operator in Weak Interactions

Returning to particle physics. The deﬁnition of a Parity transformation has to include
the transformations of mass, m, Lepton numbers, Li, Baryon number, B, Strangeness, s,
charm, c, top, t, and bottom, b. The origin of all these quantum numbers is unknown and
hence the appropriate transformation properties can only be guessed at. The convention
is to deﬁne an operator which has no eﬀect on all these properties. Mathematically, these
quantum numbers are represented by scalars. The result is Parity violation in the Weak
Interactions and the puzzle of an asymmetric Universe.

Text books that introduce the Parity operator treat it as a uniquely deﬁned operator
without mentioning the arbitrary choices that have been made (see for example [2, 5]).
The experimental evidence requires a more careful interpretation than is received in
most texts. Ballentine [4] is one of the few authors who notes that the inference of
parity violation from experimental evidence requires additional non-trivial assumptions
about the symmetry of the initial state - assumptions which he justiﬁes.

An alternative deﬁnition of the Parity operator is to have m unchanged as before but
all the other quantum numbers, Li, B, s, c, t, b negated (mathematically they are pseudo-
scalars) and q is also negated. Note that this deﬁnition requires the electric rather than

A conserved parity operator

5

the magnetic ﬁeld to be represented by an axial vector, which is unconventional but
consistent with electrodynamics as described above. Within the Weinberg and Salaam
model of the weak interaction, such an operator is well-known. It is commonly called
CP . It is conserved by the weak and strong interactions. If this is recognized as being
the appropriate operator for space inversion then the mystery of left-right asymmetry
in Weak Interactions is removed.

The requirement for Parity conservation in the model of the weak interactions also
leads to a unique parity conserving operator for the electrodynamics. The Electric
and magnetic ﬁelds must have transformation properties opposite to the conventional
assignments so that magnetic ﬁelds and not electric ﬁelds change sign under the Parity
operator.

Without a deeper model of the elementary particles and their quantum numbers,
the assignment of their transformation properties is only a matter of aesthetics. However
the motivation for this analysis came from just such models. The author is working on
geometric models of elementary particles and quantum theory using classical general
relativity [6, 7]. Some exciting results have been achieved (see for example [8]), but a
clear prediction of such models is that parity is conserved. General relativity conserves
parity. For every structure that displays handedness the opposite structure is also a
valid solution. General relativity combined with symmetric boundary conditions must
lead to a parity conserving model of elementary particles. Far from being a contradiction
with experiment the analysis throws new light on the deﬁnition of parity and challenges
the conventions that are universally and uncritically adopted.

4. Conclusion

The operator corresponding to space inversion is not unique. Making diﬀerent, but
equally valid assumptions leads to a Parity operator conserved in the weak and
electromagnetic interactions. It is the operator normally denoted CP .

When making calculations using the weak interactions the new identiﬁcation for
the Parity operator is irrelevant and inconsequential. But the Parity operator and the
supposed violation of Parity are used far more widely ([9, 10] are examples). The correct
choice of operator is vital to our understanding of Nature. Countless textbooks published
each year make statements about the asymmetry of Nature based on the assumption
that the conventional parity operator is the unique representation of a space inversion.
Philosophers are left puzzling over the meaning of the asymmetry and theoreticians
looking for a unifying theory and have the doubly diﬃcult task of creating an asymmetric
theory and explaining why the mirror image theory is not seen.

Accepting that a few quantum numbers can be pseudo-scalars rather than scalars

is suﬃcient to restore symmetry.

The violation of CP in the neutral Kaon system remains perplexing. But with the
new deﬁnition of Parity, it is clear that the Universe itself has left-right asymmetry due
to the predominance of positive Lepton and Baryon number. While such a fact is a long

A conserved parity operator

6

way short of being an explanation, the observation of an asymmetry in the presence
of asymmetric boundary conditions is rather less surprising than Parity violation in a
symmetric Universe.

References

[1] Jackson J D 1998 Classical Electrodynamics John Wiley and Sons Inc, NY
[2] Rolnick W B 1994 The Fundamental Particles and Their Interactions Addison Wesley, Reading
[3] Misner C W, Thorne K S, and Wheeler J A 1973 Gravitation. W H Freedman and Sons
[4] Ballentine L E 1998 Quantum Mechanics. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
[5] Branco C G, Lavoura L. and Silva J P 1998 CP Violation Clarendon Press, Oxford
[6] Hadley M J 1997 Found. Phys. Lett. 10 43–60
[7] Hadley M J 1999 Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 1481–1492
[8] Hadley M J 1999 Clas. Quant. Gravity 17 4187–4194
[9] Hawking S W and Ellis G F R 1973 The Large Scale Structure of Spacetime Cambridge University

Press

[10] Visser M 1995 Lorentzian Wormholes Springer-Verlag, NY

