4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum Brains: The OnuRules

Richard Mould∗

Abstract

Quantum mechanics traditionally places the observer ‘outside’ of the
system being studied and employs the Born interpretation. In this and
a related paper the observer is placed ‘inside’ the system. To accomplish
this, special rules are required to engage and interpret the Schr¨odinger
solutions in individual measurements. The rules in this paper (called the
onuRules) do not include the Born rule that connects probability with
square modulus.

It is required that the rules allow conscious observers to exist inside
the system without empirical ambiguity – reﬂecting our own unambiguous
experience in the universe. This requirement is satisﬁed by the onuRules.
These rules are restricted to observer measurements, so state reduction
can only occur when an observer is present.

Introduction

The method of this paper diﬀers from the traditional quantum mechanical the-
ory of measurement (Copenhagen, von Neumann, etc.) in that it sees the ob-
server in an ontological rather than an epistemological context. Traditional
quantum theory places the observer outside of the system where operators
and/or operations are used to obtain information about the system. This is
the epistemological model shown in ﬁg. 1.

The large OP in ﬁg. 1 might be a mathematical ‘operator’ or a corresponding
physical ‘operation’. The observer makes a measurement by choosing a formal
operator that is associated with a chosen laboratory operation. As a result,
the observer is forever outside of the observed system – making operational
choices. The observer is forced to act apart from the system as one who poses
∗Department of Physics and Astronomy, State University of New York, Stony Brook,

New York 11794-3800; http://ms.cc.sunysb.edu/˜rmould

1

The
Observer

OP

The system

Figure 1: Epistemological Model (Copenhagen)

theoretical and experimental questions to the system. This model is both useful
and epistemologically sound.

However, the special rules developed in this paper apply to the system by
itself, independent of the possibility that an observer may be inside, and dis-
regarding everything on the outside. This is the ontological model shown in
ﬁg. 2.

The system

May or may not include observer

Figure 2: Ontological Model (requires special rules)

A measurement occurring inside this system is not represented by a formal
operator. Rather, it is represented by a physical device that is itself part of
the system. If the sub-system being measured is S and a detector is D, then a
measurement interaction is given by the entanglement Φ = SD. If an observer
joins the system in order to look at the detector, then the system state becomes
Φ = SDB, where B is the brain state of the observer.

The ontological model is able to place the observer inside the universe of
things and give a full account of his conscious experience there. It is a more
realistic view of the relationship between the observer and the rest of the uni-
verse inasmuch as a conscious observer is always ‘in principle’ includable in a
wider system. The ontological approach taken here represents a considerable
departure from the traditional theory of measurement; for among other things,
it rejects the Born interpretation of quantum mechanics. In place of the Born
rule, special rules like the onuRules of this paper allow physics to unambiguously
predict the sequential experience of an observer in the system.

It is valid to use either the epistemological model or the ontological model

when the observer is not in the system.

Quantum mechanical measurement is sometimes said to refer to ensembles
of observations but not to individual observations. In this paper we propose a

2

set of four special rules that apply to individual measurements in the ontological
model. They are called onuRules (1-4), and do not include the long-standing
Born interpretation of quantum mechanics. Instead, probability is introduced
(only) through the notion of probability current. Furthermore, these rules de-
scribe state reductions (i.e., stochastic reductions or collapses) that are asso-
ciated with an ‘observer’ type measurement – that is, they occur only in the
presence of an observer. To this extent, they reﬂect the early views of Wigner [1]
and von Neumann [2]. The onuRules are demonstrated below in several diﬀer-
ent physical situations.
I claim that they are a consistent and complete set
of rules that are capable of giving an ontological description of any individual
measurement or interaction in quantum mechanics.

OnuRules (1-4) are also to be found under the name “rules (1-4)” in an earlier
paper [3], where they are developed somewhat diﬀerently. I have changed their
name to onuRules in order to clarify their relationship to the nuRules described
in the next section.

These rules are not themselves a formal theory of measurement. I make no
attempt to understand why they work, but strive only to insure that they do
work. They accurately describe one’s conscious experience of measuring instru-
ments in an ontological setting, while preserving the essentials of Schr¨odinger’s
mechanics. Presumably, a formal theory can one day be found to explain these
rules in the same way that atomic theory explains the empirically discovered
rules of atomic spectra, or in the way that current theories of measurement as-
pire to merge with standard quantum mechanics and to make the neurological
connection with observers.

Another Rule-Set

Another set of four nuRules (1-4) are given in detail in another paper [4]. These
are the same as the onuRules except that they allow both an observer type mea-
surement and an objective type measurement. The former type occurs only in
the presence of an observer, whereas the latter takes place independent of an
observer. These rules therefore come closer to the spirit of traditional measure-
ment theory than do the onuRules, but they are still a signiﬁcant departure
because they also introduce probability through the notion of ‘probability cur-
rent’ rather than ‘square modulus’ and because they introduce another kind of
state called a ready state. These appear to be necessary in each of the above
rule-sets. Their properties are explained below.

3

We consider two sets of rules in the ontological model. They both use ‘ready’
states. In the onuRule case these are limited to ready brain states. Only the
ﬁrst rule-set supports the idea that measurement depends on the presence of an
observer.

onuRules (1-4): No Born Rule. Ready ‘brain’ states. Observer basis

states only (this paper).

nuRules (1-4): No Born Rule. Ready states more generally deﬁned.

Observer and Objective basis states (ref. 4).

These rule-sets are distinguished by the properties listed above, and by the
placement of observers inside of an ontological system for the purpose of making
continuous observations. Observations are not restricted to a ‘given moment of
time’ as when one uses the epistemological model and the Born rule.

Purpose of Rule-Sets

It is possible to have an empirical science using the epistemological model with-
out explicitly talking about consciousness. This is because it is always assumed
that the outside observer is conscious, so there is no need to make a theoretical
point of it.

However, in the ontological model, everything that exists is in principle
included in the system. So if quantum mechanics is to be an empirical science,
then the system must provide for the existence of conscious brains that can
make empirical observations. This means that the theory must be told when
and how conscious brain states appear so that an empirical science is possible
within the model. Special rules like those of the above rule-sets are required for
this purpose.

I emphasize again that these rule-sets are not alternative theories that seek
to replace the formalism of von Neumann. Each is more like an empirical for-
mula that requires a wider theoretical framework in order to be understood
– a framework that is presently unknown. I do not ﬁnally choose one of the
rule-sets or propose an explanatory theory. I am only concerned here with the
ways in which an individual state reduction might work in an ontological model,
consistent with the indicated assumptions.

The Interaction: Particle and Detector

Before introducing an observer into this ontological model, consider an inter-
acting particle and detector system by itself. These two objects are assumed to

4

be initially independent and given by the equation

Φ(t) = exp(−iHt)ψi ⊗ di

(1)

where ψi is the initial particle state and di is the initial detector state. The
particle is then allowed to pass over the detector, where the two interact with a
cross section that may or may not result in the capture. After the interaction
begins at a time t0, the state is an entanglement in which the particle variables
and the detector variables are not separable.

However, we let Φ(t ≥ t0) be in a representation whose components can
be grouped so that the ﬁrst component includes the detector d0 in its ground
state prior to capture, and the second component includes the detector d1 in its
capture state. There is then a clear discontinuity or “quantum jump” between
the two components. Since the detector is macroscopic, we may approximate d0
in the ﬁrst component to be a constant that is factored out of its entanglement
with the particle. The captured particle is included in the detector state in the
second component, giving

Φ(t ≥ t0) = ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)

(2)

where d1(t) is equal to zero at t0 and increases with time1. ψ(t) is a free particle
as a function of time, including all the incoming and scattered components. It
does no harm and it is convenient to let ψ(t) carry the total time dependence
of the ﬁrst component, and to let d0 be normalized throughout2.

The ﬁrst component in eq. 2 is a superposition of all possible scattered waves
of ψ(t) in product with all possible recoil states of the ground state detector,
so d0 is a spread of states including all the recoil possibilities. The second
component is also a superposition. This one includes all the recoil components
of the detector that have captured the particle.
In addition, there are other
components of d0 and d1 arising from the quantum mechanical uncertainties
that exist within the detector. These are ignored in this treatment because of
the macroscopic nature of d0 and d1.

There may be any number of stochastic hits on d1 during this interaction, but
there will be no state reduction in this treatment because there is no observer
1Each component in eq. 2 has an attached environmental term E0 and E1. These are
orthogonal, insuring local decoherence. The equation appears to be a mixture because these
terms are not shown. However, eq. 2 (including the environmental terms) and others like
it are fully coherent superpositions, and in the following we will call them ‘superpositions’,
reﬂecting their global rather than their local properties.

2Equation 2 can be written with coeﬃcients c0(t) and c1(t) giving Φ(t ≥ t0) = c0(t)ψ(t)d0 +
c1(t)d1, where all three states ψ(t), d0, and d1 are normalized throughout. We let c0(t)ψ(t)
in this expression be equal to ψ(t) in eq. 2, and let c1(t)d1 be equal to d1(t) in eq. 2.

5

present. The interaction will continue until it is complete at a time tf , after
which time

Φ(t ≥ tf > t0) = ψ(t)d0 + d1(tf )

Add an Observer

Assume that an observer is looking at the detector in eq. 1 from the beginning.

Φ(t) = exp(−iHt)ψi ⊗ DiBi

where Bi is the initial brain state of the observer that is entangled with the
detector. This is understood to include only higher order brain parts – that
is, the physiology that is directly associated with consciousness after all image
processing is complete. All lower order physiology leading to Bi is assumed to be
part of the detector. The detector is now represented by a capital D, indicating
that it includes the bare detector by itself plus the low-level physiology of the
observer.

Following the interaction between the particle and the detector, we have

Φ(t ≥ t0) = ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(t)B1

(3)

where B0 is the observer’s brain when the detector is observed to be in its
ground state D0, and B1 is the brain state when the detector is observed to be
in its capture state D1. If the interaction is long lived compared to the time it
takes for the detector to record the changes in eq. 3, then the superposition in
that equation will generally exist for some time before a stochastic choice causes
a state reduction.

This suggests that there are two active brain states of this observer that are
simultaneously observing the detector, where one sees the detector in its ground
state and the other sees it in its capture state. The equation therefore invites
a paradoxical interpretation like that associated with Schr¨odinger’s cat. This
ambiguity cannot be allowed. The onuRules of this paper must not only provide
for a stochastic trigger that gives rise to a state reduction, and describe that
reduction, they must also insure than an empirical ambiguity of this kind does
not exist.

To this end we introduce dual brain state categories ‘conscious’ and ‘ready’,
where conscious brain states may be thought of as more “real” than ready brain
states. The latter are not conscious. They are only on stand-by, ready to be
stochastically chosen and converted to conscious states after state reduction.

6

Ready Brains

A realized brain state B (not underlined) is assumed to be conscious of something
that is speciﬁed in context – like B0 is aware of D0 in eq. 3. The corresponding
ready brain state B (underlined) has the same content as its partner B except
that it is not conscious. That is not to say that B is unconscious. It is more
like a ‘potential’ state of the conscious state B. In the following, an active brain
state is deﬁned to be one that is actively engaged in an observation – i.e., it is
realized or ready but not unconscious of the object in question. There are four
symbols that may be used to represent brain states.

B realized brain state – an active brain state that is understood to

be conscious.

B ready brain state – an active brain state with the same content
as B, except that it is not conscious. Ready brain states are
always underlined.

Bb brink state – an inactive brain state that is on the brink of
Inactive with respect to B

becoming an active brain state.
means: neither B nor B.

X unknown brain state

The First Three OnuRules

The ﬁrst rule establishes the existence of a stochastic trigger. This is a property
of the system that has nothing to do with the kind of interaction taking place
or its representation. Apart from making a choice, the trigger by itself has no
eﬀect on anything. It initiates a state reduction only when it is combined with
onuRules 2 and 3.

onuRule (1): For any subsystem of n components in an isolated system having
a square modulus equal to s, the probability per unit time of a stochastic choice of
one of those components at time t is given by (ΣnJn)/s, where the net probability
current Jn going into the nth component at that time is positive.

The second rule speciﬁes the conditions under which ready brain states ap-
pear in solutions of Schr¨odinger’s equation. These are understood to be the
basis states of a state reduction3.

3The wording of onuRule (2) and onuRule (3) is slightly diﬀerent from the published

wording of rule (2) and rule (3) in ref. 1.

7

onuRule (2): If an interaction gives rise to new components that are discon-
tinuous with the old components or with each other, then all newly created active
brain states in the new components will be ready brain states.
[note: Although solutions to Schr¨odinger equation change continuously in time,
they can be “discontinuous” in other variables – e.g., the separation between
the nth and the (n + 1)th orbit of an atom with no orbits in between. Of course,
atomic states are coherent, but a discontinuity of this kind can also exist between
macroscopic states that are decoherent. For instance, the displaced detector
states D0 (ground state) and D1 (capture state) are discontinuous with respect
to detector variables. There is no eigenstate D1/2 in-between. These detector
states are a ‘quantum jump’ apart.]

onuRule (3): If a component containing ready brain states is stochastically
chosen, then those states will become conscious brain states, and all other com-
ponents in the superposition will be immediately reduced to zero.
[note: The claim of an immediate (i.e., discontinuous) reduction is the simplest
way of describing the collapse of the state function. The collapse is brought
about by an instantaneous change in the boundary conditions of the Schr¨odinger
equation, rather than by the introduction of a new ‘continuous’ mechanism of
some kind. A continuous modiﬁcation can be added later (with a modiﬁcation
of onuRule 3) if that is seen to be necessary4.]
[note: This collapse does not generally preserve normalization. That does not
alter the probability in subsequent reductions because of the way probability
per unit time is deﬁned in onuRule (1) – that is, divided by the total square
modulus.]

If an interaction does not produce ready brain components that are discon-
tinuous with the old ones or with each other, then the Hamiltonian will develop
the state in the usual way, independent of these rules. If the stochastic trigger
selects a component that does not contain ready brain states, then there will be
no onuRule (3) state reduction.

4The new boundary comes from a stochastic hit on one of the available eigenvalues, which
is the new boundary. In this treatment the stochastic trigger is intrinsically discontinuous
and imposes that discontinuity on the developing wave function. This is the simplest way to
account for the sudden change that takes place, and it spares our having to explain where a
change producing continuous mechanism ‘comes from’.

8

OnuRule (4)

OnuRule (4) is a selection rule that forbids transitions between ready states.
Ready states disable transitions to ready states in other components, and tran-
sitions that produce a continuous evolution of the same component.

0nuRule (4): Probability current may not ﬂow between entanglements that
contain ready states of the same object.

Apply to Interaction

When these rules are applied to eq. 3, we have

Φ(t ≥ t0) = ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(t)B1

(4)

where the brain state in D1(t)B1 is a ready state by virtue of onuRule (2),
so it is not conscious. Since there is only one conscious brain state in this
superposition, a cat-like ambiguity is avoided. Equation 4 (with underline) now
replaces eq. 3.

Equation 4 is the state of the system before there is a stochastic hit that
produces a state reduction. The observer is here consciously aware of the de-
tector in its ground state D0, for the brain state B0 is correlated with D0. If
there is a capture, then there will be a stochastic hit on the second component
in eq. 4 at a time tsc. This will reduce the ﬁrst component to zero according to
onuRule (3), and convert the ready state in eq. 4 into a conscious brain state.

Φ(t ≥ tsc > t0) = D1(t)B1

(5)

Standard quantum mechanics (without these rules) gives us eq. 3 by the
same logic that it gives us Schr¨odinger’s cat and Everett’s many worlds. Equa-
tion 3 is a single equation that simultaneously presents two diﬀerent conscious
brain states, thus assuring an unacceptable ambiguity. However with these
onuRules in eﬀect, the Schr¨odinger solution is properly grounded in observa-
tion, allowing the rules to correctly and unambiguously predict the experience
of the observer. This replaces ‘one’ equation eq. 3 with ‘two’ equations in eqs. 4
and 5. Equation 4 describes the state of the system before capture, and eq. 5 de-
scribes the state of the system after capture. Before and after are two diﬀerent
solutions to Schr¨odinger’s equation, speciﬁed by diﬀerent boundary conditions.
Remember, we said that the stochastic trigger selects the (additional) boundary
that applies to the reduced state. So it is the stochastic event that separates
the two solutions – deﬁning before and after.

9

A Terminal Observation

An observer who is inside a system must be able to conﬁrm the validity of the
Born Rule that is normally applied from the outside. To show this, suppose our
observer is not aware of the detector during the interaction with the particle as
in eq. 2, but he looks at the detector after the interaction is complete. During
the interaction we then have

Φ(tf > t ≥ t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)] ⊗ X

where tf is the time of completion, and X is the unknown brain state of the
observer prior to the physiological interaction5.

After the interaction is complete and before the observer looks at the detector

Φ(t ≥ tf > t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(tf )] ⊗ X

where there is no longer a probability current ﬂow inside the brackets. When
the observer ﬁnally looks at the detector at time tlook, we have

Φ(t ≥ tlook > tf > t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(tf )] ⊗ X
→ [ψ(t)D0 + D1(tf )]Bb

(6)

where the physiological process (represented by the arrow) carries ⊗X into Bb,
d0 into D0, and d1 into D1 by a continuous classical progression leading from
independence to entanglement. The brain state Bb is understood to be an
inactive state at the brink of becoming active. There are as yet no conscious
states in eq. 6 because the process has not gotten beyond the brink state – i.e.,
all the brain states in eq. 6 are inactive with respect to the detector.

During this process the observer will be unable to distinguish between the
two detector states D0 and D1, which is why his brain is called inactive at this
time. However, at some moment tob he will resolve the diﬀerence between these
states, and when that happens a continuous ‘classical’ evolution will no longer
be possible. The solution will then branch “quantum mechanically” into two
components that separately recognize D0 and D1.

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > tf > t0) = ψ(t)D0Bb + D1(tf )Bb

(7)

′

+ ψ

(t)D0B0 + D

′
1(tf )B1

where the components in the second row are zero at tob and increase in time, for
current ﬂows vertically during this active phase of the physiological interaction.
5The “decision” of the observer to look at the detector is assumed to be deterministically
internal in the ontological model. In this respect, the ontological model is like classical physics.

10

The states in the second row are discontinuous from each other (i.e., D0 and D1
are discontinuous) and contain active brain states. They are therefore required
by onuRule (2) to be ready states. It is here that the non-conscious nature of
ready states is important. Otherwise, eq. 7 would give us an ambiguous dual
conscious (cat-like) result.

With probability current ﬂowing into the second row of eq. 7, there is a
probability equal to 1.0 that one of those components will be stochastically
chosen. If the third component is chosen at a time tsc3, then onuRule (3) will
give

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tob > tlook > tf > t0) = ψ(t)D0B0

(8)

indicating that the terminal observer ﬁnds that the particle was not captured
during the primary interaction.

If the fourth component is chosen at a time tsc4, then onuRule (3) will give

Φ(t ≥ tsc4 > tob > tlook > tf > t0) = D1(tsc4)B1

(9)

indicating that the terminal observer ﬁnds that the particle was captured during
the primary interaction. Again, the probability of eq. 8 plus eq. 9 is equal to
1.0, thereby conﬁrming the Born interpretation.

An Intermediate Case

In eq. 4 the observer is assumed to interact with the detector from the beginning.
Suppose that the incoming particle results from a long half-life decay, and that
the observer’s physiological interactions begins in the middle of that interaction.
We then have

Φ(t ≥ t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(tf )] ⊗ X

where again X is the unknown brain state of the observer prior to the physio-
logical interaction. In this case, the primary probability current ﬂows between
the detector components (inside the brackets) as in eq. 2.

Let the observer interact with the detector at some time tlook giving

Φ(t ≥ tlook > tf > t0) = [ψ(t)d0 + d1(t)] ⊗ X
→ [ψ(t)D0 + D1(t)]Bb

where the physiological process (represented by the arrow) carries ⊗X into Bb,
d0 into D0, and d1 into D1 by a continuous classical progression leading from
independence to entanglement. The state Bb is again understood to be an

11

inactive brain state on the brink of becoming active. As before, the observer
will be unable to distinguish between the two detector states D0 and D1 during
this process. A resolution occurs at time tob leading to

Φ(t ≥ tob > tlook > t0) = ψ(t)D0Bb + D1(t)Bb

(10)

′

+ ψ

(t)D0B0 + D

′
1(t)B1

where the ready brain components in the second row are zero at tob and increase
in time. Probability current ﬂows vertically into those components during the
active phase of the physiological interaction. Primary current ﬂows horizontally
in the ﬁrst row but not between the ready components in the second row, for the
ready brain states B0 and B1 cannot exchange current according to onuRule (4).
All of the current from the ﬁrst component in eq. 10 will either collect in the
third component or in the fourth component via the second component. The
signiﬁcance of onuRule (4) in this case is that once probability is assigned to
the third component, it cannot be passed along to the fourth component. The
signiﬁcance of the non-conscious nature of the ready states is the same as it is
in eq. 7 – i.e., that the second row in eq. 10 will not give ambiguous results.

If the vertical current going into the fourth component D′

1(t)B1 of eq. 10

results in a stochastic hit at time tsc4, the resulting state reduction will be

Φ(t ≥ tsc4 > tob > tlook > t0) = D1(tsc4)B1

(11)

indicating that the capture had already occurred by the time of the observation.
We said that the primary interaction is still in progress when the observer looks
at the detector. This means that an observation may reveal a prior stochastic
event, even though the actual reduction does not occur (in these onuRules) until
the observer makes an observation.

If the current going into the third component ψ′(t)D0B0 of eq. 10 gives rise

to a stochastic hit at time tsc3, the resulting state reduction will be

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tob > tlook > t0) = ψ

(t)D0B0 + D1(t)B1

(12)

′

where the second component is zero at tsc3 and increases in time because the
primary interaction is still going on. If there is stochastic hit on this second
component at a later time tsc32 > tsc3, then there will be a further reduction
giving

Φ(t ≥ tsc32 > tsc3 > tob > tlook > t0) = D1(tsc3)B1

(13)

indicating that the observer ﬁrst came on board at tsc3 and found that the
capture had not yet occurred. Then he witnessed the capture at tsc32.

12

If the primary interaction in eq. 12 runs out before there is a stochastic
hit on the second component, then this equation will go unchanged, except
that the time dependence of D1(t) will be removed when the interaction is
complete at time tf giving D1(tf ). The observer will then remain conscious of
D0 through the brain state B0, and there will be no conﬂict from the second
component in eq. 12 because B1 is an non-conscious ready state. In this case, the
second component D1(tf )B1 will become a phantom in that it no longer serves
a purpose, although it can become operational again if the primary interaction
between the particle and the detector is somehow revived.
Inasmuch as the
square modulus of a component has no physical signiﬁcance in these onuRules,
the phantom’s lingering (and benign) presence has no physical signiﬁcance. A
phantom will be reduced to zero as soon as there is a collapse that favors another
component.

A Second Observer

If a second observer is standing by while the ﬁrst observer interacts with the
detector during the primary interaction, the state function will be

Φ(t ≥ t0) = [ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(t)B1] ⊗ X

where X is an unknown state of the second observer prior to his interacting with
the system. The detector D here includes the low-level physiology of the ﬁrst
observer. When a product of brain states appears in the form BB or B ⊗ X, the
ﬁrst term will refer to the ﬁrst observer and the second to the second observer.
If the second observer interacts with the detector at time tob (skipping tlook)

the result of the physiological interaction would seem to be

Φ(t ≥ tob > t0) = ψ(t)D0B0Bb + D1(t)B1Bb
′

+ ψ

(t)D0B0B0 + D

′
1(t)B1B1

(14)

where the second row follows from the active physiological interaction and
onuRule (2). A further expansion of the detector is assumed to include the
low-level physiology of the second observer.

However, onuRule (4) forbids the fourth component from gaining an am-
plitude beyond zero, for that would require a current ﬂow from a ready brain
state of the ﬁrst observer (in the second or third components) to the ﬁrst B1
in the last component. Therefore, D′
1(t)B1B1 in eq. 14 equals zero. But then
onuRule (2) does not require B0 (in the third component) to be a ready brain

13

state. Failing that requirement, the Hamiltonian will carry the ﬁrst component
ψ(t)D0B0Bb into ψ(t)D0B0B0 by a continuous classical process, resulting in
a conscious rather than a ready state of the second observer. So the solution
generated by the physiological interaction is really

Φ(t ≥ tob > t0) = ψ(t)D0B0[Bb → B0] + D1(t)B1B1
′
1(t)B1Bb

+ D

(15)

instead of eq. 14. The second component D′
1(t)B1B1 of eq. 15 is not the fourth
component of eq. 14. It is a result of the primary interaction, and only rises
above zero when the component ψ(t)D0B0B0 (in the bracket) has been reached.

During the time between tlook and tob, a stochastic hit on the third compo-

nent D1(t)B1Bb of eq. 15 is possible at a time tsc3, yielding

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tlook > t0) = D1(tsc3)B1[Bi → Bb → B1]

where Bi is whatever inactive brain state exists at the time tsc3 of the stochastic
hit. The brain then executes the classical progression to consciousness (Bi →
Bb → B1) as required by the Hamiltonian, ﬁnally giving

Φ(t ≥ tsc3 > tlook > t0) → D1(tsc3)B1B1

(16)

After tob in eq. 15 there are two possible stochastic hits that may occur,
one on the second component D1(t)B1B1, and the other on the third compo-
nent D′
1(t)B1Bb. The ﬁrst possibility can occur only after B0 of the second
observer appears in the bracket of eq. 15. At that point D1(t)B1B1 might be
stochastically chosen at tsc2 giving

Φ(t ≥ tsc2 > tob > t0) = D1(tsc2)B1B1

(17)

This corresponds to the observer coming on board before the capture and di-
rectly witnessing the capture.

If the third component in eq. 15 is stochastically chosen at a time tsc3′ > tob,
then because the collapse reduces all other components to zero, the surviving
brain state Bb will classically become B1 without going ﬁrst to ready brain
states.

Φ(t ≥ tsc3′ > tob > t0) = D1(tsc3′ )B1[Bb → B1]

(18)

or

Φ(t ≥ tsc3′ ) → D1(tsc3′ )B1B1

This corresponds to the unlikely possibility that a capture occurs after the active
physiological interaction has begun, but before it is complete.

14

Equation 16 is the result of a particle capture between tlook and tob. After
tob the two possibilities are eqs. 17 and 18. All these captures yield the same
ﬁnal state D1B1B1 by a diﬀerent route.

Anomaly Avoided

OnuRule (4) avoids a catastrophic anomaly if the primary interaction is com-
plete at tf without a capture, before the second observer looks at the detector.

Φ(t ≥ tf > t0) = [ψ(t)D0B0 + D1(tf )B1] ⊗ X

After the second observer has observed the detector at tob we will have

Φ(t ≥ tob > tf > t0) = ψ(t)D0B0Bb + D1(tf )B1Bb
′

+ ψ

(t)D0B0B0 + D

′
1(tf )B1B1

(19)

where the second row is zero at tob and increases in time. This diﬀers from
eq. 14 only in that the primary interaction is already complete. There is no
horizontal current ﬂow.

Assume that onuRule (4) is not in eﬀect. In that case the fourth component
1(tf )B1B1 in eq. 19 would be accessible to current from the second component.

D′
A stochastic hit at some time tsc4 would then be possible, yielding

Φ(t ≥ tsc4 > tob > tf > t0) = D1(tf )B1B1

This says that even though the ﬁrst observer can testify that the interaction
has been completed without a capture, both observers will experience a capture
when the second observer comes on board – some time after the interaction is
completed. That is absurd. OnuRule (4) therefore plays the essential role in
preventing absurdities of this kind.

In the previous sections we have seen how the onuRules go about including
observers inside a system in an ontological model. The rules describe when and
how the observer becomes conscious of measuring instruments; and furthermore,
they replicate common empirical experience in these situations. In the next few
sections we turn attention to another problem – the requirement that observed
macroscopic states must appear in their normal sequence. This sequencing chore
represents a major application of onuRule (4) that is illustrated in the case of
a macroscopic counter.

15

A Counter

Consider a beta counter in the ontological model where an observer interacts
with the counter. If the counter is turned on at time t0, its state function will
be given by

Φ(t ≥ t0) = C0(t)B0 + C1(t)B1 (+) C2(t)B2 (+) C3(t)B3 (+) ... etc.

(20)

where the components following C0(t)B0 are zero at t0. C0 is a counter that
reads zero counts, and B0 is an entangled conscious brain state that experiences
the counter reading zero counts. C1 reads one count, and C2 reads two counts,
etc. The ready brain states appear as required by onuRule (2).

A parenthesis around a plus sign means that probability current cannot
ﬂow between those components because of onuRule (4); so the 0th and the
1st components are the only ones that are actively involved before there is a
stochastic hit of any kind. Before that time, the only current ﬂow will be J01
from the 0th to the 1st component. The resulting distribution at some time
t < tsc is shown in ﬁg. 3, where tsc is the time of a stochastic hit on the second
component.

Square moduli at time t 
before t

sc

Conscious

0

J01

Ready

1
1

Ready
2

Ready
3

Figure 3

This means that because of onuRule (4), the 1st component will be cho-
sen because all of the current from the (say, normalized) 0th component will
pore into that component making R J01dt = 1.0. Following the stochastic hit
on the 1st component, there will be a collapse to that component because of
onuRule (3). The ﬁrst two dial readings will therefore be sequential, going from
0 to 1 without skipping a step such as going from 0 to 2. It is onuRule (4) that
enforces the no-skip behavior of macroscopic objects. Observed macroscopic
things will always follow their familiar sequences without skipping a step.

16

With the stochastic choice of the 1st component at tsc, the process will begin
again as shown in the middle diagram of ﬁg. 4. This also leads with certainty to
a stochastic choice of the 2nd component. That certainty is accomplished by the
wording of onuRule (1) that requires that the probability per unit time is given
by the current ﬂow J12 divided by the total square modulus at that moment.
The total integral R J12dt is less than 1.0 in the middle diagram of ﬁg. 4, but
it is restored to 1.0 when divided by the total square modulus. It is therefore
certain that the 2nd component will be chosen.

Square moduli following the first and the second collapse

Conscious

Ready

Conscious

0

J01

1

Ready

Conscious

2

J23

Ready
3

1

J12

2

Figure 4

And ﬁnally, with the choice of the 2nd component, the process will resume
again as shown in the last diagram of ﬁg. 4. This leads with certainty to a
stochastic choice of the 3nd component.

The Counter with Delayed Observation

When the observer is not observing the counter, eq. 20 is written

Φ(t ≥ t0) = [C0(t) + C1(t) + C2(t) + C3(t) + ... etc.] ⊗ X

(21)

where again the components following C0 are zero at t0. X is the unknown
state of the independent observer. Immediately after t0, current J01 ﬂows from
the 0th component to the 1st component, but not to higher order components
because the Hamiltonian only connects the 0th with the 1st. However, current
J12 will begin to ﬂow into the 2nd component as soon as the 1st acquires a
non-zero amplitude. The 3rd component will also receive current J23 when the
2nd acquires amplitude; so after a time t, the distribution might look like ﬁg. 5.
Without an observer the macroscopic detector behaves like a familiar quan-
tum mechanical object. It will be a superposition of many possibilities. If the

17

Square moduli at time t - no observer

0

J01

1

J12

2

J23

3

Figure 5

observer interacts with the counter at time tob, onuRule (2) requires that eq. 20
becomes

Φ(t ≥ tob) = C0(t)Bb + C1(t)Bb + C2(t)Bb + C3(t)Bb + ... etc.

(22)

+ C0(t)B0 (+) C1(t)B1 (+) C2(t)B2 (+) C3(t)B3 (+) ... etc.

where the second row is zero at tob. Again, physiological current ﬂows down.
Horizontal current cannot ﬂow in the second row because of onuRule (4). If a
stochastic hit occurs at time tsc4 on the fourth component in the second row,
we will have

Φ(t = tsc4 > tob) = C3(tsc4)B3

(23)

The state reduction in eq. 23 occurs with a probability that reﬂects the square
modulus of the component C3 in eq. 21. The Born rule is therefore veriﬁed in
this application of the onuRules. Both the non-conscious property of a ready
brain state and its onuRule (4) property are put to use in eq. 22.

Suppose the observer looks at the counter at the initial time t0 and then
leaves the room. While he waits in the hall outside his lab, the counter will
evolve as a quantum mechanical superposition of states like those in ﬁg. 5. When
he returns to look at the counter, he will see just one result as in eq. 23. So far
as he is concerned, the counter behaved in an entirely familiar way while he was
in the hall. He will not know if the system follows the onuRules or the Born
rule of standard quantum mechanics. Furthermore, there is no experiment that
he can perform that will tell the diﬀerence.

A Film Record

Suppose we try to determine what happened in the absence of the observer by
taking a motion picture of the counter during that time. In that case the ﬁlm in
the camera would also evolve quantum mechanically, so every component Cm(t)

18

will have a ﬁlm-strip correlated with it that is made up of separate frames. Each
frame is designated by the letter F , so the state equation after t0 will be

Φ(t > t0) = F0F.F.F.F.C0(t) + F0F1F.F.F.C1(t)

+ F0F1F2F.F.C2(t) + F0F1F2F3F.C3(t) + ...

where only the ﬁrst component is non-zero at t0. The symbol F .(with a dot)
refers to a ﬁlm frame that is not yet exposed. In the ﬁrst component, only the
ﬁrst frame is exposed to the counter state C0 and the remaining frames are as
yet unexposed. The camera is arranged so that a new frame is exposed as soon
as a new count is registered. So in the second component the ﬁrst and second
frames are exposed, where the second is exposed to the counter state C1. The
remaining frames in that component are unexposed.

To simplify the notation, let F0F1F2F3F.C3(t) be written F−3..C3(t) where
the sub-dash represents all the numbers before the number 3. The equation is
then

Φ(t ≥ t0) = [F0..C0(t) + F−1..C1(t) + F−2..C2(t) + F−3..C3(t) + ...] ⊗ X

where the observer is shown waiting in the hall. When the observer enters the
room and observes the counter at time tob, the interaction will yield

Φ(t ≥ tob > t0) = F0..C0(t)Bb + F−1..C1(t)Bb + F−2..C2(t)Bb + ...

+ F0..C0(t)B0(+)F−1..C1(t)B1(+)F−2..C2(t)B2(+)..

where the second row is zero at tob and increases in time. A stochastic hit on
the sixth component B2 at time tsc6 gives a reduction similar to eq. 23

Φ(t = tsc6 > tob) = F−2..C2(tsc6)B2

This could mean that the observer has become directly aware of either the
counter reading C2, or the third frame of the ﬁlm strip. It doesnt matter since
the two are correlated.

Let’s suppose that after his observation of F−2..C2(tsc6)B2, the observer
looks at the ﬁrst frame at time tob1 to insure that it still reads 0 as he observed
before leaving the room. This will not require a stochastic trigger, for it involves
a purely classical inspection of the ﬁlm strip that leads to

Φ(t ≥ tob1 > tsc6 > tob) = F−2..C2(t)B2 → F0−2..C

′
2(t)B02

where the realized brain state B02 is now conscious of both the 0 reading on the
ﬁrst frame and the 2 reading in the third frame. Continuing the investigation,

19

the observer checks the second frame at time tob2. This also involves a classical
progression.

Φ(t ≥ tob2 > tob1 > tsc6 > tob) = F−2..C

′
2(t)B02 → F−2..C

′′
2 (t)B012

where the realized brain state B012 is conscious of the 0 reading on the ﬁrst
frame, the 1 reading on the second frame, and the 2 reading in the third frame.
There is only one stochastic occurrence in this problem, assuming the counter
was turned oﬀ when the observer came back into the room.

Even though the state reduction can only be accomplished in the presence of
an observer, the results can be veriﬁed by other means (the ﬁlm strip) that may
or may not be immediately observed following the reduction. Non-local corre-
lations insure that there will be complete consistency with all post-reduction
investigations. So far as the observer is concerned, these results are the same
as though the detector and camera behaved like classical instruments in his ab-
sence. As a result of his observation and subsequent investigation, the observer
is justiﬁed in believing that the apparatus did not develop as a superposition
when he was in the hall.

The Parallel Case

Now imagine a parallel sequence of states in which the process may go either
clockwise or counterclockwise as shown in ﬁg. 6. Each component includes a
macroscopic piece of laboratory apparatus A, where the Hamiltonian provides
for a clockwise interaction going from the 0th to the rth state and from there to
the ﬁnal state f ; as well as a counterclockwise interaction from the 0th to the
lth state and from there to the ﬁnal state f . The Hamiltonian does not provide
a direct route from the 0th to the ﬁnal state.

A

l

A

r

A

A f

20

Figure 6

After being turned on at time t0, the apparatus becomes a superposition

Φ(t > t0) = A0(y) + Al(t) + Ar(t) + Af (t)

where the components following A0 are zero at t0. The state A0 will then send
current into Al and Ar, which in turn send current to Af . A superposition will
develop along these lines until the interaction ends. There will be no stochastic
choice or state reduction because there is no observer present.
When the apparatus is being observed, the state will be

Φ(t > t0) = A0(t)B0 + Al(t)Bl + Ar(t)Br(+)Af (t)Bf

where both the second and third components receive current directly from A0B0.
However, probability current cannot initially ﬂow from either of the intermediate
states to the ﬁnal state, for that would carry a ready brain state into another
ready brain state of the same observer – in violation of OnuRule (4). The dashed
lines in ﬁg. 7 indicate the forbidden transitions.

Ready

Al

Ar

Ready

The result of OnuRule (4) is therefore to force the system into a familiar
sequence that goes either clockwise or counterclockwise. Without it, the system
might make a direct second order transition through one of the intermediate
states to the ﬁnal state, without the intermediate states being realized. The
observer would then see the initial state followed by the ﬁnal state, without
knowing which pathway was followed. That is familiar behavior when the system
is microscopic, but it should not be the case when the system is macroscopic.
Here again, because of OnuRule (4) this macroscopic system cannot skip a step.
It will complete a normal sequence over one or the other pathway.

Realized
A 0

Af
Ready

Figure 7

21

A Continuous Variable

In the above examples an observer plus onuRule (4) guarantees that none of
the ﬁnitely separated intermediate steps is passed over. On the other hand,
if the variable itself is classical and continuous, then continuous observation is
possible without the necessity of stochastic jumps. In that case we do not need
onuRule (4) or any of the onuRules (1-4), for they do not prevent or in any way
qualify the motion.

However, a classical variable may require a quantum mechanical jump-start.
For instance, the mechanical device that is used to seal the fate of Schr¨odinger’s
cat (e.g., a falling hammer) begins its motion with a stochastic hit. That is,
the decision to begin the motion (or not) is left to a beta-decay. In this case,
the presence of an observer (looking at the hammer) forces the motion to be-
gin at the beginning, insuring that no value of the classical variable is passed
over. So the hammer will fall from its initial angle with the horizontal. Without
onuRule (4), the hammer might begin its fall at some other angle because prob-
ability current will ﬂow into angles other than the initial one. With an observer
plus onuRule (4) in place, no angle will be passed over.

Grounding the Schr¨odinger Solutions

Standard quantum mechanics is not completely grounded in observation inas-
much as it does not include an observer. The epistemological approach of Copen-
hagen (formalized by von Neumann) does not give the observer a role that is
suﬃcient for him to realize the full empirical potential of the theory; and as
a result, this model encourages bizarre speculations such as the many-world
interpretation of Everett or the cat paradox of Schr¨odinger. However, when a
conscious observer is given an ontologically complete role in the state of the
system, these empirical distortions disappear. It is only because of the incom-
pleteness of the epistemological model by itself that these fanciful excursions
seem plausible. Theories that deal separately with von Neumann’s Process I
may or may not be put in an ontological context.

The onuRules avoid the above paradoxical multi-conscious systems; for when
a system collapses, the single surviving component will include a conscious brain
state. Furthermore, any components containing brain states that follow in a
subsequent interaction will be ready brain states – hence not conscious. This
guarantees that there can only be one conscious brain state at a time, so all
paradoxical multi-conscious solutions are avoided.

22

Status of the Rules

No attempt has been made to relate conscious brain states or ready brain states
to particular neurological conﬁgurations. The onuRules are an empirically
discovered set of macro-relationships that exist on another level than micro-
physiology, and there is no need to connect these two domains. These rules
preside over physiological detail in the same way that thermodynamics presides
It is desirable to eventually connect these domains as
over molecular detail.
thermodynamics is now connected to molecular motion; and hopefully, this is
what a covering theory will do. But for the present we are left to investigate the
rules by themselves without the beneﬁt of a wider theoretical understanding.
There are two rule-sets of this kind, the onuRules of this paper plus the nuRules
in ref. 4.

There are four features that distinguish the two rule-sets from standard

quantum mechanics.

1. They both work inside the ontological model. The epistemological for-
mat of standard quantum mechanics is too limited a view of the universe, and
places a wrong emphasis on the role of the observer in physics.

2. Both rule-sets reject the Born interpretation. Standard quantum me-
chanics has conﬁned itself to the Born interpretation. These rule-sets open
up another possibility that ought to be considered.

3. Consciousness is included. Standard quantum mechanics does not include
consciousness in the universe. It can describe physiological systems in as much
detail as desired, but it stops there. It makes no statement about consciousness
itself because it does not have the language for it.

4. The onuRules give observers a job to do. Not only do the onuRules in-
clude consciousness in the universe, but they also give the observer the job of
establishing boundary conditions. When making a measurement, the presence
of an observer realizes a single eigenvalue and drives the rest to zero, thus select-
ing a new boundary for the collapsed solution of Schr¨odinger’s equation. The
observer therefore plays a dynamic role like everything else in physics, and does
not just occupy a passive viewer’s platform outside of nature.

The question is, which of these two rule-sets is correct (or more correct)?
Without the availability of a wider theoretical structure or a discriminating ob-
servation, there is no way to tell. Current reduction theories may accommodate
a conscious observer, but none are fully accepted. So the search goes on for
an extension of quantum mechanics that is suﬃciently comprehensive to cover
both Processes I and II of von Neumann. I expect that any such theory will

23

support one of the ontological rule-sets, so these rules might serve as a guide
for the construction of a wider theory.

References

[1] E. Wigner,“Remarks on the Mind-Body Question”, in Scientist Speculates,

I. J. Good (ed.), Basic Books, N.Y. (1962)

[2] J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,

Princeton university Press, Princeton N.J. (1955)

[3] R. A. Mould, “Quantum Brain States”, Found. Phys. 33 (4) 591-612 (2003)

quant-ph/0303064

[4] R. A. Mould, “Quantum Brains: The NuRules”, physics/0406014

24

