4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Massless Eletron and Frational Spin as Eletroni Charge

S.C. Tiwari

Institute of Natural Philosophy

1, Kusum Kutir, Mahamanapuri, Varanasi - 221 005, India

email: vns_stiwariyahoo.om

Abstrat

The standard model (SM) of partile physis has been supported by several experi-

mental (cid:28)ndings, the most remarkable of them being the disovery of the weak gauge

bosons , W and Z. It is expeted that the Higgs boson ould show up by 2007 at

LHC, CERN. In spite of this, the unsatisfatory features of the SM at oneptual

level, and exlusion of gravity from the uni(cid:28)ation sheme have led to explore 'the

physis beyond the SM'.

A ritique and omprehensive review of the ontemporary fundamental physis was

presented in a monograph ompleted in the entenary year,1997 of the disovery

of the eletron. A radially new approah to address foundational problems was

outlined: masslessness of bare eletron ,interpretation of the squared eletroni harge

in terms of the frational spin, e2/c; new physial signi(cid:28)ane of the eletromagneti

potentials, 2+1 dimensional internal struture of eletron and neutrino, and omposite

photon are some of the ideas proposed. Though the monograph was reviewed by E. J.

Post(Physis Essays, June1999), it has remained largely inaessible. I believe some

of these unonventional ideas have a potential to throw light on the fundamental

questions in physis, and therefore deserve a wider dissemination.

The reader may (cid:28)nd illuminating to supplement Se. 3 on the weak gauge bosons

with a andid,graeful and personal reolletion by Pierre Darriulat(CERN Courier,

April 2004, p.13).

1

Introdution

Reality is simple and omprehensible to the human mind. Or is it omplex and beyond

intellet? It would seem that if it is simple then it is not interesting, and the laim of

1

the pereption of the reality would be viewed with disbelief. Paradoxially, however, it

is the searh of the ultimate reality whether in the form of the elementary onstituents

of the matter or a uni(cid:28)ed theory of nature whih has been the prime goal of siene. Is

this goal attainable? I think a sientist an glimpse the reality as a personal sub jetive

experiene, however, a fundamental sienti(cid:28) theory for the ultimate reality or its

representation in a physial form will never be possible. Quite often, the most intense

and fruitful debate in siene has ourred due to the on(cid:29)iting beliefs of the original

minds. Certitude in their beliefs may have some relationship with their transendental

experienes to pereive the reality. Pathways to suh experienes in(cid:29)uene one's mind

so strongly that one is led to view everything within that framework. Doubts and

reexamination of suh beliefs dispassionately are neessary to free them from the

transendental elements. Rarely do we (cid:28)nd also the liberated minds who are not

attahed to their ideas. The writings of Henry Poinare give an impression of his

being suh a liberated thinker [1℄. It may be pointed out that detahment should

not be viewed as sterile and inative mind; a passionate enquirer may a(cid:27)ord to be

a liberated mind. Exessive attahment may hamper reativity and originality of an

individual, and may harm sienti(cid:28) disourses on the fundamental problems. The

role of unobservables and metaphysial elements in a physial theory seem to be

related; the Bohr-Einstein debate on the interpretation and foundations of quantum

mehanis, and the nature of time are disussed in [2℄ from this viewpoint. In this

monograph I will adopt thus outlook both for the ritiisms of the established theories

and for alternative propositions.

The sub jet matter of this study, the eletron, disovered a hundred years ago, may

appear obsolete, and give the impression of moving bakward in time. In the light

of the vast knowledge aumulated sine the disovery of the eletron, announed

on 29 April, 1897 in a Friday Evening Disourse at the Royal Institution by J.J.

Thomson, my aim is to analyze the fundamental problems related with the eletron

in a modern perspetive, and to propound a radially new alternative approah. This

book is, therefore, not a historial treatise or a popular aount of the disovery of

the eletron. It is worth explaining the neessity and the signi(cid:28)ane of this work.

In the Review of Partile Physis [3℄, the eletron is listed as just one amongst hun-

dreds of elementary partiles, and preise measured values of its physial properties

2

are given. So, what else is there to disuss? A disomforting feature is immediately

obvious: the periodi table of the elements has 112 entries, while the number of the

elementary partiles is very large as ompared to this. Not only this, the muh a-

laimed uni(cid:28)ed gauge theory does not explain the physial meaning of the elementary

properties like harge, mass, and spin of, let us say the eletron, while at the same time

many more new quantum numbers are introdued. A brief non-tehnial disussion

on the elementary partile physis may be helpful to appreiate these remarks.

From the extrat of M. Ampere's proposition given in the Soure Book by Magie

(M. p.114) we learn that the name partile is given to an in(cid:28)nitely small portion

of a body of the same nature as the body; the partiles are made up of moleules,

and a moleule is an assemblage of atoms. In ontrast to this the modern treatment

postulates elementary partiles as the onstituents of atoms. Initially the idea that

atoms are omposite strutures of elementary partiles was indeed quite attrative

as there were very few suh onstituent partiles, e.g. eletron, proton and neutron.

As for the interation between them, amongst the four fundamental fores of nature,

the gravitational fore and the eletromagneti fore have been known sine long,

and both are long range fores. The gravitational fore is so weak that it does not

seem to be important in elementary partile interations, to be preise at the pra-

tial energy sales. The other two fores are short range fores with highly di(cid:27)erent

strengths, termed as weak and strong fores. The advent of quantum theory led to a

new language and desription for the fores: (cid:28)eld quanta and their exhange during

interations. For quite some time there were only the eletromagneti (cid:28)eld quantum:

photon, and Yukawa's hypothesized strong (cid:28)eld quanta : mesons. Binding of nuleons

(neutron and proton) in the nulei of atoms is explained by postulating strong fore,

and the beta-deay by the weak fore. Later disoveries of new partiles neessitated

the lassi(cid:28)ation of them as leptons whih are not sensitive to the strong fore, and

rest of them as hadrons. The sheme that atoms and nulei are omposite ob jets

of the elementary building bloks i.e. neutron, proton and eletron was extended

to the newly disovered hadrons. Fermi and Yang suggested pion (π -meson) as a

bound nuleon-antinuleon state. Sakata aounted for strange hadrons in terms of

the triplet of proton, neutron and lambda partiles with the symmetry group SU(3).

Baryon is a hadron obeying the Fermi-Dira statistis i.e. a fermion, and meson is a

3

hadron obeying the Bose-Einstein statistis i.e. a boson.

G. Zweig and M. Gell-Mann in 1964 independently proposed the quark model for

hadrons.

In the earliest version of the triplet model, three types of basi building

bloks alled quarks are postulated possessing spin half, and frational eletri harge

and baryon numbers The mesons are quark-antiquark bound states, and baryons

have three quarks as their onstituents. Now we have quarks haraterized by six

(cid:29)avors, and eah (cid:29)avor omes in three olors. The olor is strong interation harge,

analogous to the eletri harge in eletromagneti interations. There is a di(cid:27)erene,

however, the strong (cid:28)eld quanta alled gluons arry olor unlike the photon whih is

neutral. The hadrons are postulated to be olorless omposite partiles. Even the

quarks and leptons as elementary partiles are not small in number. Speulating sub-

leptons and sub-quarks exoti models also exist in the literature. The question arises:

Is this philosophy satisfatory? I do not think in this way we may know the ultimate

onstituents of the matter. An alternative view-point ould be that the spae-time

struture itself is the most elementary entity, and the matter is a manifestation of

the geometry of the spae-time. This idea makes physial sense if there is a viable

sheme for the elementary partile model. Amongst the known elementary partiles

the stable ones are eletron (positron), neutrinos, photon and proton. Exluding the

heavy partile proton, it is possible that massless partiles and eletron ould be the

elementary onstituents of matter. To explore this idea we need to understand them

at a basi level, and diret our attention on the eletron beause it is distint from

neutrinos and photon sine it has harge and mass.

Related to the elementary onstituents, there is the question of fundamental inter-

ations and their uni(cid:28)ation. The interation between the quarks and the leptons

is believed to be desribed by the Standard Model (SM) whih is a gauge theory

of strong, weak and eletromagneti interations. The priniple of gauge symme-

try, and formal struture of quantum eletrodynamis have played pivotal role in

the development of the SM. The gauge group in QED is U(1) while the SM has the

gauge group SU(3)

SU(2)

U(1). The gauge theory of strong interation in olor

spae is alled quantum hromodynamis (QCD) with the gauge group SU(3). The

×

×

e(cid:27)etive oupling onstant in QCD is energy dependent dereasing with inreasing

energy. This phenomenon is known as asymptoti freedom. Uni(cid:28)ed theory of weak

4

and eletromagneti interations i.e. the eletroweak theory is desribed by the gauge

group SU(2)

U(1). Besides photon, there are weak vetor gauge bosons, W +

, W

and Z in this theory. Both QCD and the eletroweak theory have been proved to

be renormalisable theories. Wider symmetry groups like SU(5) for grand uni(cid:28)ation

×

in view of the opposite energy dependene of the oupling onstants of QCD and

eletroweak theory have been proposed. Supersymmetri generalizations of the SM

using the supersymmetry whih relates bosons and fermions have also been made.

Disovery of neutral weak urrent, weak gauge bosons and quarks signatures in high

energy ollisions, and preision measurements in partile physis give on(cid:28)dene in

the SM. Weaknesses of the SM have also been noted by the physiists, and inorpo-

ration of gravitational fore is onsidered as one of the most outstanding problems

in the uni(cid:28)ation sheme. In the next hapter, we will disuss some of the questions

related with the Standard Model, here we point out the most unsatisfatory aspet

of the SM: it does not explain the meaning of harge and mass (of the eletron). The

eletroweak theory is hailed as a great synthesis in the spirit of the Maxwell theory

of eletromagnetism. Unfortunately, none of the foundational problems are solved:

struture of the eletron, duality of the soure and the (cid:28)eld, inurable in(cid:28)nities in

point (cid:28)eld theory, the meaning of harge, mass and spin.

Postulating unobservable partiles like quarks and gluons, and introduing many more

quantum numbers or harges in abstrat internal spaes in a theory aimed at uni(cid:28)-

ation indiate fundamental (cid:29)aw in the approah. Most of the elementary partiles

are inferred from the expeted indiret signatures (like deay modes). T.D. Lee has

remarked [4℄ that (cid:16)The progress of partile physis is losely tied to the disovery of

resonanes, whih started at the Chiago Cylotron. Yet even the great Enrio Fermi,

when he proposed the mahine, did not envisage this at all. After the disovery of

the (cid:28)rst nuleon resonane, for almost a year Fermi expressed doubts whether it was

genuine(cid:17). Proliferation of new partiles in the laboratory, and the remote methods

of their observations whih inlude arbitrariness in the (cid:28)tting parameters at least

all for a autious approah in attributing them the physial reality. The words of

William Crookes [5℄ are probably quite relevant today : (cid:16)I hope I may be allowed to

reord some theoretial speulations whih have gradually formed in my mind during

the progress of these experiments. I put them forward only as working hypotheses,

5

useful, perhaps neessary, in (cid:28)rst dawn of new knowledge, but only to be retained

as long as they are of assistane; for experimental researh is neessarily and slowly

progressive, and one's early provisional hypotheses have to be modi(cid:28)ed, adjusted,

perhaps altogether abandoned in deferene to later observations(cid:17). It is true that the

quark model whih is now one of the basi ingredients of the Standard Model, was not

aeptable to the physiists when it was (cid:28)rst proposed. Kendall mentions the story

how Zweig's paper ould not be published until the mid 1970s [6℄. But the urrent

dogmati faith in the SM is also unwarranted; the dissatisfation with the trends in

partile physis is best summed up by Dira [7℄: (cid:16)Still, that was the situation in those

days; people were very relutant to postulate a new partile. The situation is quite

di(cid:27)erent nowadays, when people are only too willing to postulate a new partile on

the slightest evidene, either theoretial or experimental(cid:17).

Experiene in partile physis so far has unambiguously shown that understanding

the ultimate onstituents of matter by performing high energy sattering experiments

and the urrent paradigm for developing a (cid:16)theory of everything(cid:17) are proving to be

mirages. There is, therefore, a need to look for an alternative approah to deal with

the fundamental problems in physis.

I think understanding the eletron and the

eletromagnetism may throw light in this diretion. We know that the gauge the-

ories in various forms have underlying guiding theory that of the eletromagneti

(cid:28)elds, and the development of quantum theory was inspired by the (cid:16)radial revision

of lassial dynamis for the eletron(cid:17). The existing reviews or disussions adopt the

viewpoint dividing the problems at lassial or quantum level. But the theories are

the desriptions of the phenomena, not the phenomena, therefore, this separation is

arti(cid:28)ial obsuring the physial origin of the problems. In this monograph, an in-

tegrated and onstrutive ritique on the struture and dynamis of the eletron is

presented. The lassial eletromagnetism was developed based on the marosopi

experimental laws, and the disovery of the eletron and the postulate of light quan-

tum (or photon) historially took plae at a later time. It is by tradition that eletri

and magneti (cid:28)elds are assoiated with the eletron and the photon. Could this be

the soure of the foundational problems? The answer in a(cid:30)rmative is provided in

the present work. Similarly, it is argued that endowing rest mass (nonzero) to the

eletron is by de(cid:28)nition; one an aount for the eletron dynamis assuming it to

6

be massless. Thus the proposed elementary ob jets or partiles are massless ele-

tron and neutrino, and the photon is onsidered a omposite struture with neutrinos

as its onstituents. The fundamental entity is postulated to be spae-time bounded

struture. The harge and interation should be explained in terms of spaed-time

symmetries. Pondering over the meaning of eletroni harge, e and the (cid:28)ne struture

onstant,α = e2/¯hc = 1/137 (where ¯h = h/2π , h is the Plank's onstant, and c is
the veloity of light) it ourred to me that e2/c has the dimension of the angular

momentum. Does this indiate a relationship between harge and spin or rotation?

Explaining harge in this way also brings us loser to our goal of reduing everything

to the spae-time. Here it must be mentioned that reently I disovered that the u-

rious dimension of e2/c was notied by Einstein as early as 1907 [8℄. This monograph

thus deals with very unonventional ideas, and suggests radial paradigm shift for

the fundamental physis [9℄. Photon-(cid:29)uid, two dimensional spae + one dimensional

time physis and knot theory are identi(cid:28)ed deserving serious attention of the experts

with a new perspetive presented here.

2 Speulation and experimental philosophy

Speulation is the lifestream of the experimental siene, without speulation and

hypotheses the empirial data is merely an information diretory. Speulative ideas

serve the purpose of bringing deeper serets on the horizon, and quite often stimulate

meaningful experimentation and theoretial investigations. The quote above from

the Bakerian Leture of Crookes [5℄, hypotheses proposed by Issa Newton despite

his laim `hypotheses non (cid:28)ngo' [10℄ and Poinare's in(cid:29)uential work `La Siene et l'

Hypothese' [1℄ quite onviningly illustrate the importane of speulation in siene.

However, it is also an equally important fat that almost always new ideas have

been rejeted or resisted by the sientists who themselves have been responsible for

original work. G.P. Thomson, son of J.J. Thomson notes [11℄ : (cid:16)In looking bak at

it, one is impressed by the extent to whih a theory long held an blind even (cid:28)rst-

rate minds to new ideas and by how easy it is to explain almost anything in terms

of a favorite theory(cid:17). J.J. Thomson himself reollets [12℄: (cid:16)At (cid:28)rst there were very

few who believed in the existene of these bodies smaller than atoms.

I was even

7

told long afterwards by a distinguished physiist who had been present at my leture

at the Royal Institution that he thought I had been `pulling their legs'. I was not

surprised at this, as I had myself ome to this explanation of my experiments with

great relutane . . .(cid:17). The Thomsons are referring to the ontroversy regarding the

nature of the athode rays whether they were some form of aetherial waves or material

partiles. New arguments and experiments were put forward to support one belief or

the other. The famous debate on the interpretation of quantum mehanis between

Einstein and Bohr shows that to support one's beliefs sientists ontinue to invent

newer arguments.

I have attempted to understand this psyhology of sientists or

rather original minds in terms of subtle transendental experienes whih lead them

to form quite often a rigid world outlook [2℄.

It is only unequivoal experiments

whih fore them to dilute their beliefs arising from their transendental experienes.

In the absene of suh experiments if the philosophial or the logial arguments are the

deiding fators they are most likely to stik to their beliefs. In the ase of the athode

rays, experiments linhed the issue in favour of material partile interpretation, while

the debate on the quantum mehanis has not eased due to the undeidable nature

of the outome of the most sophistiated experiments performed till date.

I think resistane to new ideas inspired by the philosophial beliefs based on ertain

experienes is natural, unavoidable, and most of the time proves fruitful in the quest

for the knowledge. Sine late 1970s, an unfortunate trend has gained prominene :

it is not so muh the sienti(cid:28) beliefs as the nonsienti(cid:28) fators like marketism and

emergene of `big siene' that unonventional simple alternatives are bloked. Do

the words like `Theory of Everything' or the `Standard Model' re(cid:29)et humility and

openness expeted with the ever expanding knowledge? Superstring theory, termed

as the `theory of everything' by John Ellis [13℄, has remained unonneted with the

physial world; Frank Wilzek has rightly remarked that `I don't like that term (the-

ory of everything), It's very, very arrogant and misleading'. Not only this, the high

energy experimental results are also presented in suh a manner that they have a-

quired an aura of the ultimate knowledge. Suh a faith in a spei(cid:28) world-view is

ertainly not good for the endeavour of sienti(cid:28) truth, I believe the basi philosophy

of experimental siene demands serious rethinking on the diretion and the value of

ontemporary siene.

8

3 Wherefore high energy physis?

The partile aelerators and the ollision experiments have ertainly led to landmark

disoveries, and have stimulated new and interesting physis. The question arises :

should we build the aelerators for higher and higher energies? It would be illumi-

nating to begin the disussion with a quotation from an artile written in 1970 by

Freeman J. Dyson [14℄, (cid:16)there are two main ways of doing high energy physis. The

rih man's way is to build aelerators, whih give high-intensity beams of partiles

with aurately ontrolled energy. The poor man's way is to use the osmi rays,

whih desend like the rain from heaven upon poor and rih alike, but have very

low intensity and ompletely unontrolled energy. I think there is a better-than-even

hane that the ma jor disoveries of the next 30 years in high energy physis will

be made with osmi rays. That is why I venture to say that it may be good for

us, sienti(cid:28)ally speaking to be poor.(cid:17) Though Dyson's foreast proved wrong, it is

worth asking: Will it be true for the next 30 years i.e. (cid:28)rst three deades of 21st

entury? I think, if we leave aside the hope for new disoveries with osmi rays, it

is fairly reasonable to expet that going for higher energies in laboratory will not be

sienti(cid:28)ally produtive.

Historial importane of Rutherford sattering is well doumented; in 1909 H. Geiger

and E. Marsden performed alpha ray sattering experiments [15℄ in Rutherford's lab-

oratory. Thin foils of gold, approximately 0.5 miron thik were used as targets for

the α-partile beams whih as we know today are positively harged helium nulei.

Experimental results showed that most of the α-partiles were de(cid:29)eted within an
o

angle of 1 or 2 degree, while oasionally sattering at large angles of more than 45

and bakward sattering also took plae. Rutherford in 1911 proposed an atomi

model using these experiments [15℄ in whih the positively harged nuleus is on-

entrated in a radius of about 10

m surrounded by negatively harged eletrons.

−12

The earlier theoretial ontributions for a planetary model of atom inlude those of

Johnstone Stoney, J.P. Perrin and H. Nagaoka [16℄. To probe deep into the stru-

ture of matter using sattering proesses has been the basi approah sine then

in eletron-atom ollisions and elementary partile physis.

I will disuss two im-

portant experiments in high energy physis and ontrast their signi(cid:28)ane : deep

9

inelasti eletron-proton sattering (MIT-SLAC experiment) and high energy proton-

antiproton ollision (CERN SPS UA1 and UA2 experiment).

Let us (cid:28)rst disuss the meaning of high energy in partile physis. The total energy

available for the prodution of new or additional partiles in the sattering proess is

the enter of mass energy. If the four-momenta of two partiles in the ollision are

p1 and p2 (four-vetor p = (E, p) with masses m1 and m2 then the Lorentz-invariant

salar

s = (p1 + p2)2 = (E1 + E2)2

(p1 + p2)2

−

determines the enter of mass energy.

In the laboratory frame, let partile 2 be

stationary, and the laboratory frame energy of partile 1 be E1 lab then Eq. (1) gives

In the enter of mass frame, let (E1cm , p1cm ) and (E2cm , p2cm ) be the four momenta

of the partiles then p1cm = - p2cm , and Eq. (1) redues to

s = m2

1 + m2

2 + 2E1 labm2

s = (E1cm + E2cm)2

In the onventional aelerators, a beam of partiles is sattered from a (cid:28)xed target;

Eq. (2) shows that the enter of mass energy √s inreases roughly proportional to
√E1 lab . The beam olliders employ olliding beams of equal but opposite momenta,

thus aording to Eq. (3) higher values of s an be ahieved in this ase. The high

energy region is determined by the mass sale of the partiles of interest or the energy

sale of the interation. In mid 1950s the High Energy Physis Laboratory at Stanford

utilized eletron beam energy of 0.55 GeV to study the proton struture in the elasti

sattering proess

e− + p

e− + p

→

These experiments showed that proton is not a point partile, but an extended stru-

ture. Compare the high energy region four deades later for the disovery of the sixth

quark, top t. The top quark mass is a free parameter in the SM, and is believed to be

200 times the mass of proton though the reason for this is not known. The e+ e−
2
91 GeV, but Mt > 45 GeV/

∼
aelerators at CERN and SLAC operate at √s

∼

10

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

therefore the top quark annot be observed in these aelerators. The top quark was

(cid:28)nally disovered in 1994 [3℄ at the Fermilab Tevatron p¯p ollider with √s = 1800

GeV = 1.8 TeV; the measured mass Mt = 175

2

. The new p¯p ollider LHC

± 8 GeV/

at CERN with √s = 14 TeV is expeted to be operational within next few years.

3.1 The MIT-SLAC Experiment

The deep inelasti eletron-proton sattering experiment has the same signi(cid:28)ane

for the nuleons as the Geiger-Marsden-Rutherford α-partile sattering had for the

atomi struture [15℄. Inelasti sattering of eletrons with liquid hydrogen and liq-

uid deuterium targets was started in 1967 as MIT-SLAC ollaborative pro jet using

eletron beams with the highest energy of ∼

21 GeV in an underground two miles

long aelerator. An idea of the tremendous amount of ingenuity, dediation and

team-work required for building the mahine and the high energy spetrometer an

be had from the aount given by Taylor [6℄. For detailed theoretial treatment, we

refer to a monograph exlusively on the deep inelasti sattering [17℄, and also [6℄.

Inelasti sattering is the proess

where X denotes one or more hadrons in the (cid:28)nal state. This is an example of an

inlusive reation in whih only the sattered eletron is deteted. For the ollision

proess (5) one an de(cid:28)ne the following kinemati variables

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Here p and p′
are the 4-momentum and mass of the proton respetively, q , is the 4-momentum of

are the 4-momenta of the inoming and sattered eletron, P and M

the virtual photon, and MX is the total mass of the hadron(s) X . In the laboratory

e− + p

e− + X

→

)2

′

p

−

q2 = (p
p.q
ν =
M
X = (p + q)2

M 2

11

frame, negleting the mass of the eletron, we have

Q2 =
E′

q2 =

−
ν = E
−
X = M 2

M 2

−

4EE′ sin2 θ
2
−

Q2 + 2Mν

x =

Q2
2Mν

where E , E′
θ is the sattering angle. A dimensionless variable x is often used, de(cid:28)ned by

are the energies of the inident and sattered eletron respetively and

It an be shown that the di(cid:27)erential ross setion for the proess (5) may be alu-

lated using the Feyman diagram for this reation to the lowest order eletromagneti

eletron-proton-oupling via the exhange of a virtual photon, and expressed in terms

of the struture funtions W1 and W2 as follows

Here σM is the Mott ross setion

d2σ
dΩdE′ = σM [W2 + 2W1 tan2 θ

2

]

σM =

α2 cos2 θ/2
4E2 sin4 θ/2

Both W1 and W2 are funtions of momentum transfer, Q2

and energy loss, ν . In order

to determine the struture funtions, the di(cid:27)erential ross setion at several values

of the angle θ for (cid:28)xed ν and Q2

has to be measured. The early experimental data

showed two unexpeted features: (1) the inelasti ross setion was found to have

weak dependene on the momentum transfer for large Q2
region where both ν and Q2

beome very large → ∞ keeping x to be (cid:28)nite, the

, and (2) in the asymptoti

struture funtions showed the saling behaviour

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

νW2(Q2, ν) = F2(x)
2MW1(Q2, ν) = F1(x)

12

In view of the existing ontemporary interpretation of the elasti sattering data, both

results appeared rather puzzling. The ross setion for the proess (4) was known

to fall rapidly with the inreasing momentum transfer as ompared to that from a

point harge. The eletri and magneti form fators in the ross setion satis(cid:28)ed the

dipole form for Q2

10 GeV

2

.

≤

G(Q)2 =

1 +

 

−2

Q2
0.71GeV2

!

(17)

The aepted interpretation of these results was that the proton is not a point partile,

but has a di(cid:27)used extended struture with a size of ∼

0.8 Fermi. The deep (large Q2

)

or ontinuum inelasti sattering experiments, on the other hand, seemed to indiate

eletron sattering from point partiles. The question arose whether proton had

internal struture with more elementary onstituents. If yes, what are they? Though

already quark model for hadron spetrum was there, it was thought more like a

book keeping framework than a possible dynamial theory for strong interation at

that time. Bjorken's onjeture for saling behavior using urrent algebra sum rules

in 1967 prior to the MIT-SLAC data did not attrat immediate attention.

It has

been point out [6℄ that Feynman's interpretation of the data in terms of the parton

model in 1969 gave impetus to the model of the internal struture of the nuleons.

For a ritial evaluation of the parton model in the deep inelasti proess, see [18℄.

Assuming partons to be point partiles, and to be noninterating with eah other

during virtual photon absorption one an alulate the ross setion for the proess

(5). The variable x de(cid:28)ned by Eq.

(12) turns out to orrespond to the ratio of

the parton's momentum to the proton's momentum i.e.

proton, then the momentum Pi of the ith
given by Pi = xiP , where xi lies between 0 and 1. The in(cid:28)nite momentum frame is

parton in the in(cid:28)nite momentum frame is

if N partons onstitute a

another way of looking at free partons. Let us assume that in the rest frame partons

interat with eah other hanging their momenta during (cid:28)nite time intervals. As the

momentum inreases, the Lorentz transformation to the in(cid:28)nite momentum frame

gives time dilation suh that the hanges our so slow that the partons appear to

be free. In this approximation sattering from a point harge ei of a parton an be

13

alulated to give

W i

2(Q2, ν) = e2
i δ

Q2
2Mxi !

ν

 

−

and the struture funtion

W2(Q2, ν) =

1

fi(xi)W i

2dxi

0
i Z

X

Here fi(xi) is the probability of (cid:28)nding the ith
Substituting W i

we get

2 from Eq. (18) and arrying our the integration in Eq. (19) (cid:28)nally

parton with the momentum fration xi .

νW2(Q2, ν) =

e2
i fi(x)x

i
X

Comparing this equation with (15), we reognize that parton piture leads to Bjorken

saling. The alulation of sattering amplitude for salar and spinor parton shows

that while W2 is unhanged, W1 is zero for the former. In fat, for spin 1/2 partons

and for spin zero partons

F2(x) = xF1(x)

F1(x) = 0

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

in the Bjorken limit. Experiments show the behaviour expressed by Eq. (21), there-

fore, it an be onluded that partons are spin 1/2 partiles. Are they quarks? This

identi(cid:28)ation is not straightforward, however, a dynamial theory of quark-quark in-

teration with gluons as strong gauge (cid:28)elds, namely, the quantum hromodynamis

was soon developed. The predition of the logarithmi deviations from the Bjorken

saling on(cid:28)rmed in muon and neutrino sattering from nuleons gave on(cid:28)dene

in the QCD. The theory was shown to be asymptotially free, whih explained the

assumption of free partons mentioned earlier.

3.2 The disovery of the weak gauge bosons

The disovery of the weak gauge bosons in the Super Proton Synhrotron p¯p ollider at

CERN is onsidered a great milestone in the quest for uni(cid:28)ed theory. The prodution

14

of W, Z with masses about 80 and 90 times the proton mass respetively was expeted

in the proton-antiproton ollision at √s = 540 GeV ahieved in the SPS ollider. The

idea of stohasti ooling pioneered by S. van der Meer, and sophistiated advaned

eletronis made it possible to aelerate and aumulate the p¯p beams to suh a high

energy range. In the SPS ring, 2.2 Km in diameter, the proton and artiproton beams

aelerated to 26 GeV/ in the PS mahine are injeted in the opposite diretions, and

aelerated to high energy of 270 GeV. They are bunhed for ollisions to take plae

at well de(cid:28)ned loations in the SPS ring. Antiprotons are reated bombarding 26

GeV/ protons on Cu target in the PS. An aumulator ring in one day aumulates

about 10

antiprotons, whih are aelerated to 26 GeV/ in the PS.

11

In the generation of intense antiproton beams the stohasti ooling has a key role.

Randon motion of partiles in the beam is observed by pik-up sensors, and the signal

is used in a kiker to push the partiles towards a desired position [19℄. Sine the

spread of the momenta of the partiles is redued in this proess, it is referred to

as beam ooling. The stohasti ooling is used in the antiproton storage ring, the

Antiproton Aumulator of the SPS. The (cid:28)rst pro jet on p¯p ollision was ode-named

UA1 (Underground Area), and was led by Carlo Rubbia, and the seond experiment

UA2 was led by Pierre Darriulat.

In the searh for Ws, the reation is

and from the deay mode

p + p

→

W ± + X

W ±

e± + νe

→

detetion of eletrons and missing energy in the form of neutrinos provide hints for

the Ws. Here X denotes other partiles `the sum of the debris from the interations

of the other protons' [19℄. The proess

is a fator of 10 less probable than (23), however, the leptoni deay modes are easier

to detet.

e+ + e−

or

µ+ + µ−

Z

→

15

(23)

(24)

(25)

In January, 1983 six possible W events by UA1 and four by UA2 were announed;

observing high energy eletrons in the detetors looking for them at relatively large

angles to the beam diretion. High energy partile traks in opposite diretions as a

signature for Z neutral gauge boson were observed in both UA1 and UA2 detetors.

The disovery was announed in June, 1983 based on 2 or 4 Z events [19℄. Sine then

Fermi lab. in 1985, and the Stanford Linear Collider later deteted the weak gauge

boson events in large numbers.

3.3 Contrasting the two : alternatives

The (cid:28)rst important di(cid:27)erene in the two experiments is regarding the motivation. The

MIT-SLAC experiment was planned to study the eletro-prodution of resonanes as

a funtion of momentum transfer, and to probe the inelasti ontinuum in the high

energy region. The unexpeted results led to the disovery of the internal onstituent

model of the nuleons. On the other hand, in the SPS ollider, the experiment

was set to see the W and Z events almost with ertainty. Equally important point

distinguishing the two is the role of skeptiism in analyzing the data. The (cid:28)rst hint

for the W events, few in number in millions of ollisions, ame in the beginning of

January, 1983; and on 25 January, 1983 the disovery was announed in a Press

Conferene at CERN, more like a dramati event.

In ontrast to this, the deep

inelasti sattering experiments were arried out with thorough analysis. To quote

from Kendall [6℄, (cid:16)The ollaboration was aware from the outset of the program that

there were no aelerators in operation, or planned, that would be able to on(cid:28)rm

the entire range of the results. The group arried out independent data analyses at

MIT and at SLAC to minimize the hane of error. One onsequene of the absene

of omparable sattering failities was that the ollaboration was never pressed to

onlude either data taking or analysis in ompetitive irumstanes. It was possible

throughout the program to take the time neessary to omplete work thoroughly(cid:17).

Finally, the approah for theoretial interpretation is markedly di(cid:27)erent. The weak

gauge bosons' signatures were immediately identi(cid:28)ed on(cid:28)rming the SM. The results

from the MIT-SLAC experiment led to intense debate omparing the parton model

with other ompeting non-onstituent models like the vetor-dominane model and

16

Regge exhange mehanisms.

To onlude, more than the disoveries of tau-lepton in 1975 and b-quark (b¯b bound

state) in 1977, it is the disovery of W and Z that gave big boost for building the

aelerators at still higher energies. Most of the partile physiists believe that TeV

energy range is absolutely essential for new physis. Suh an approah seems unsat-

isfatory for at least two reasons: the maximum energy in the laboratory with best

possible resoures and funding is unlikely to reah 10

GeV (the Grand Uni(cid:28)ation

15

Sale), and seondly the indiret rare signatures in the TeV range will be extremely

di(cid:30)ult to interpret, more so in view of many speulative models in between the SM

and the GUT. Thus the need for alternative strategy is fored on us for down to earth

pratial reasons.

A logial approah in the best of the sienti(cid:28) traditions is to do preision experiments

using the existing failities. This program has already started [20℄, and deserves more

attention and importane. It would be less expensive, and has a potential to probe

new physis, if any. Exploring low energy physis afresh in the light of rih empirial

data obtained in high energy experiments may also prove fruitful. For example,

study of protonium (p¯p bound state) spetrosopy seems feasible in view of the reent
remarkable suess in reating anti-hydrogen (¯pe+

bound state) at CERN. Interesting

results on the strong fore may be expeted from this. Low energy sattering for quark

ionization suh that sattered partile beomes frationally harged seems another

possible idea. Innovative ideas in this diretion need to be enouraged.

In the present work, rethinking on the entire approah towards uni(cid:28)ation and ul-

timate reality is suggested: the priniple of simpliity and parsimony guides us for

searhing the alternative. Would it not be the simplest idea if the spae-time is the

fundamental physial entity? Without postulating any new elementary onstituents,

the proposition that eletron and neutrino are the elementary onstituents of matter,

is put forward to stimulate further investigations, and revision of the urrent fous

on high energy physis.

17

4 Plan of the book

I have explained that this book is written with a radially new viewpoint on the

foundational problems, however, tehnial rigour and sienti(cid:28) auray of the sub-

jet matter under disussion have been maintained. The reader with a bakground in

(cid:28)eld theory (both lassial and quantum) should be able to appreiate the arguments

presented. Quotations from the original writings are used to onvey signi(cid:28)ant and

unorthodox views of the writers, and sometimes just beause I found them exeption-

ally luid and e(cid:27)etive. Exhaustive and omplete review iting the work of all ative

researhers is not laimed, but the important ontributions relevant for our arguments

have been inluded. The Soure Book by Magie and Whittaker's two volumes are

referred to in the text by (M page number) and W (W vol page number) respetively

due to frequent itations.

The organization of the text is suh that one may lassify it into four ategories:

1. seond Chapter reviews the Standard Model for uni(cid:28)ed strong, weak and ele-

tromagneti fores with a ritial ommentary,

2. next three Chapters are devoted to the physial properties of the eletron, neu-

trino and photon; their present understanding, outstanding problems and alter-

native ideas,

the Weyl spae, and

3. Chapters six to eight deal with the lassial eletrodynamis with emphasis on

the foundational problems, attempts for the modi(cid:28)ations, and (cid:28)eld theory in

4. the last Chapter propounds a tentative model of the eletron and outlines sig-

ni(cid:28)ane of three (2+1) dimensional (cid:28)eld theories and knot theory for building

an alternative model for the elementary partiles and their interations.

Referenes

[1℄ H. Poinare, The Foundations of Siene (The Siene Press,1946)

18

[2℄ S. C. Tiwari, Phys. Essays 7, 22, 1994; in Proeedings Conferene on Physial

Interpretation of Relativity Theory(PIRT), British Soiety for the Philosophy of

Siene, London (September 1992 pp375-386)

[3℄ Review of Partile Physis, Phys. Rev. D54 Part-I,1996

[4℄ T. D. Lee, CERN Courier 27,7,1987

[5℄ W. Crookes, Phil. Trans., Part-I,135,1879

[6℄ R.E. Taylor, H.W. Kendall and J.I. Friedman, Rev. Mod. Phys.63,573-629,1991

[7℄ P.A.M. Dira,Diretions in Physis (John Wiley 1978)

[8℄ H.Woolf, ed. Some Strangeness in the Proportion (Addison-Wesley 1980)

[9℄ S. C. Tiwari, in Global Conferene on Mathematial Physis (Einstein Founda-

tion International Nagpur,India 1987)

[10℄ S.C. Tiwari, Phys. Essays 2,313,1989

[11℄ G.P. Thomson, Phys. Today 20(5),55,1967

[13℄ F. Flam, Siene 256,1518,1992

[14℄ F. J. Dyson, Phys. Today, 23(9),23,1970

[12℄ J.J. Thomson, Reolletions and Re(cid:29)etions (Bell & Sons Ltd. London 1936)

[15℄ H. Geiger and E. Marsden, Pro. Roy. So. (London) 82,495,1909; E. Rutherford,

Phil. Mag. 21,669,1911

[16℄ D. L. Anderson, The Disovery of the Eletron (D. van Nostrand Co. In. 1964)

[17℄ R.G. Roberts, The Struture of the Proton (C.U.P. 1990)

[18℄ R.P. Feynman, Photon-Hadron Interations (Reading, Mass, 1972)

[19℄ S. van der Meer, C. Rubbia , Rev. Mod. Phys. 57.689-722.1985

[20℄ P. Langaker, M.Luo, A.K. Mann, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64,87,1992

19

