4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Two Problems in Classical Mechanics

Elem´er E Rosinger

Department of Mathematics
and Applied Mathematics
University of Pretoria
Pretoria
0002 South Africa
eerosinger@hotmail.com

Abstract

A problem about the present structure of dimensional analysis, and
another one about the diﬀerences between solids and ﬂuids are sug-
gested. Both problems appear to have certain foundational aspects.

1. Why Scaling, and why the given Groups ?

Dimensional Analysis, Bluman & Kumei, is one of those fundamental
aspects of Classical Physics which, nevertheless, is often left outside
of one’s awareness, since it is taken so much for granted. What it says
is that every measurable quantity, say X, in Classical Physics has the
dimension, denoted by [X], given by a monomial

(1.1)

[X] = LαM βT γ

where L, M and T are, respectively, length, mass and time, and they
are the three Fundamental Mechanical Dimensions, while α, β, γ ∈ R
are suitable exponents.
For instance, in the case of velocity V , acceleration A, or energy E,
we have, respectively, [V ] = LT −1, [A] = LT −2 and [E] = L2MT −2.

It may, in view of its rather disregarded status, be surprising to see
the extent to which the above concept of dimension is not trivial.

1

A good example in this respect is the computation by Sir Geoﬀrey Tay-
lor of the amount of energy released by the ﬁrst ever atomic explosion
in New Mexico, USA, in the summer of 1944. All the respective data
were, needless to say, classiﬁed, and the only information available to
Sir Geoﬀrey was a motion picture of a few seconds, showing the mo-
ment of the explosion and the consequent expansion of the spherical
ﬁreball, see Bluman & Kumei [pp.9-11].

For a simpler, yet no less surprising example, we recall here a dimen-
sional analysis based proof of the celebrated theorem of Pythagoras.
Let be given the triangle ABC

B
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPP

(cid:3)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

A

D

C

with a right angle at B, and let us denote the length of its respective
sides by AB = a, BC = b and AC = c. Further, let us denote by ψ
the angle at A.
Clearly, the area S(A, B, C) of the triangle ABC is perfectly well de-
termined by c and ψ, and it is given by a certain two variable function

The point in the above is that, in view of obvious geometric reasons,
the function f must be quadratic in c, namely

S(A, B, C) = f (c, ψ)

f (c, ψ) = c2 g(ψ)

Now, assuming that AD is perpendicular on AC, we obtain two right
angle triangles ABD and BDC which are similar with the initial tri-
angle ABC. And then adding the areas of the two smaller triangles,
we obtain

S(A, B, C) = S(A, B, D) + S(B, D, C)

2

thus in terms of the above function f , it follows that

f (c, ψ) = f (a, ψ) + f (b, ψ)

c2 g(ψ) = a2 g(ψ) + b2 g(ψ)

which means that

in other words

that is, the celebrated theorem of Pythagoras.

c2 = a2 + b2

One of the most impressive applications of Dimensional Analysis can
be found in the setting up of a model for three dimensional turbulence
by A Kolmogorov, in 1941.

Let us return now to the general assumption in Classical Physics for-
mulated in (1.1) above. Clearly, that relation is equivalent to saying
that

(1.2)

[X] ∈ G3

where we denoted by G3 the multiplicative group of all monomials
LαM βT γ in (1.1), with the obvious commutative group operation of
multiplication

(LαM βT γ) . (Lα′

T γ′
In this way, the group G3 is isomorphic with the usual commutative
additive group R3, according to

) = Lα+α′

M β+β′

T γ+γ′

M β′

G3 ∋ LαM βT γ ↔ (α, β, γ) ∈ R3
and the neutral element in G3 is 1 = L0M 0T 0 which corresponds
to the so called dimensionless measurable quantities X of Classical
Mechanics, namely, for which we have

[X] = 1

3

The customary reason which is given for the assumption in (1.1) is
based on scaling. Namely, it is assumed that the units in which one
measures quantities in Classical Physics are arbitrary and do not in-
ﬂuence the mathematical models which express physical laws. This is
why one can simply talk about length, mass and time, and need not
specify the respective units in which they are measured.

This, however, clearly conﬂicts with Quantum Mechanics, where one
can no longer consider arbitrarily small quantities.

A second issue related to (1.1) is why precisely those three fundamen-
tal mechanical dimensions of length, mass and time ? Why not other
ones ? And if yes, then which other ones ?

A third issue one can also raise is the monomial form of the dimensions,
as given in (1.1). After all, with the three fundamental mechanical di-
mensions L, M and T , one could as well construct other groups.

In this way, we are led to

Problem 1

Find answers to the above questions.

2. What are other diﬀerences between Fluids and Solids ?

A long recognized way to classify the various states of matter is to do
it according to two criteria, Mandelbrot [p. 123], namely

• ﬂowing versus non-ﬂowing

• ﬁxed versus variable volume

Consequently, we are led to three possible states. Solids have states
which are non-ﬂowing and with ﬁxed volume. Liquids have states
which are ﬂowing and have ﬁxed volumes. And gases have states
which are ﬂowing and with variable volume.
The fourth logical possibility, namely, non-ﬂowing and with variable

4

volume is considered not to be a possible state of usual matter.

Here, we shall divide the states of matter only in two categories,
namely

• solids

• ﬂuids, which consist of liquids or gases

Clearly, therefore, in the above terms, we are led to the following :

First Diﬀerence between solids and ﬂuids : solids are non-ﬂowing,
while ﬂuids are ﬂowing.

In Continuum Mechanics one of the long practiced main diﬀerences
between the mathematical modelling of solids and ﬂuids is the follow-
ing.
In the respective balance or conservation equations describing
them, the unknowns which model the state of the solid are typically
displacements, while in the case of ﬂuids are velocities. Two simple
examples illustrate that diﬀerence.

The vibrating string, under usual conditions, has the equation

T ∂2

xxU(t, x) = m(x) ∂2

ttU(t, x) + w(t, x),

t ≥ 0,

0 ≤ x ≤ L

where L > 0 is the length of the string placed along the x-axis, U(t, x)
is the lateral displacement along the perpendicular y-axis, m(x) is the
density of the string at the point x, while w(t, x) is the lateral load at
time t and at the point x.

On the other hand, the shock wave equation is

∂tU(t, x) + U(t, x)∂xU(t, x) = 0,

t ≥ 0,

x ∈ R

where U(t, x) is the velocity in the gas at time t and at the point x.

The usual motivation for this diﬀerent approach in modelling which
prefers displacement in the case of solids and velocity for ﬂuids is that

5

in ﬂuids displacements can be very large, and then it is more conve-
nient to consider velocities.

In this way we are led to the :

Second diﬀerence between solids and ﬂuids : solids have equations
in displacements, while liquids have equations in velocities.

However, it is obvious that solids and ﬂuids can have signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent properties and behaviour. And it may appear as quite likely
that the respective diﬀerences are not taken into account to a suﬃ-
cient extent when their usual mathematical modelling is performed.
Indeed, in Continuum Mechanics typically three kind of relations con-
tribute to the making of the

Usual Mathematical Model given by

• balance or conservation equations

• stress and strain assumptions

• constitutive relations

However, none of these appear to express clearly and signiﬁcantly
enough the First Diﬀerence above. Furthermore, one also is lacking
a deeper motivation for the Second Diﬀerence.

In this way, we arrive at the following :

Problem 2

Give a simple and precise mathematical formulation of the diﬀerence
between solids and ﬂuids and add it to the Usual mathematical
Model.

Note

It may turn out that such an augmented mathematical model may
be more relevant in the case of ﬂuids. And to the extent that such

6

would indeed be the case, it may possibly help in a better modelling
of turbulence.

References

[1] Bluman G W, Kumei S : Symmetries and Diﬀerential Equations.

Springer, New York, 1989

[2] Fung Y C : A First Course in Continuum Mechanics.Prentice

Hall, Englewood, 1969

[3] Kolmogorov A N, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 30, 4, 1941, p. 3201.
Translated by Levin V : The local structure of turbulence in in-
compressible viscous ﬂuid for very large Reynolds numbers. Proc.
R. Soc. London A, 434, 1991, 9-13

[4] Mandelbrot B B : Fractals and Scaling in Finance, Discontinuity,

Concentration, Rosk. Springer, New York, 1997

7

