4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
1
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LABORATORY PHYSICS AND
COSMOLOGY1

Antonio Alfonso-Faus

E.U.I.T. Aeron´autica, Spain
Plaza Cardenal Cisneros s/n
MADRID 28040, SPAIN

Abstract

Following four diﬀerent fundamental principles, in addition to Weinberg’s uni-
versal relation, we ﬁnd ﬁve reasons demanding that any gravitational mass m,
and the speed of light c, vary with cosmological time (the masses increasing
linearly with time and the speed of light decreasing with time, in such a way
that the product mc remains constant). This is required by the universal con-
dition of conservation of momentum in a Universe with spatial homogeneity: a
consequence of the Milne-Einstein COSMOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE. We prove
that this is consistent with Einstein’s Theory of General Relativity (through the
application of the Action Principle). We call this eﬀect a “MASS BOOM”. At
the LAB system no such time variations can be detected, unless we make com-
parisons with cosmological observations (i.e. using diﬀerent references far away
from the LAB, e.g. measuring the red shift from distant galaxies in terms of the
LAB standards). We have to stress that the physical conditions implied by a
time varying mass, like the Mass Boom establishes, together with a time vary-
ing speed of light, preserving the constancy of momentum, are compatible with
Einstein’s ﬁeld equations. We then integrate his cosmological equations and
ﬁnd the solution for the cosmological scale factor as a(t) = constant · t2, imply-
ing an apparent accelerated expansion for the Universe, as seen from the LAB
frame. This is the interpretation given to recent observations obtained from the
Supernova Type Ia. The determination of the scale factor as a(t) = constant·t2
is based upon a LAB interpretation and therefore is an apparent eﬀect. On the
other hand we note that the product ct being a constant determines the real
Universe as a static one, of constant size, in accordance with Einsteins ﬁrst
proposal. The observed red shift at the LAB system is due to a real shrinkage
of the quantum world, due to the decrease in size of the quantum particles
determined by a decreasing Planck’s “constant” ~ (quantum sizes are of order
~
mc , where mc remains constant).

Key words: Cosmology, Action Principle, fundamental physical constants, grav-
ity quanta, supernova, Mach’s principle, General Relativity.

1Accepted for publication in Physics Essays in 2004.

1

2

R´esum´e

Antonio Alfonso-Faus

On se base en quatre principes fondamentaux diﬀ´erents, et en plus la rela-
tion universelle de Weinberg, on trouve cinq raisons qui exigent que n’importe
quelle masse de la gravit´e m, et la vitesse de la lumi`ere c, changent avec le
temps cosmologique (les masses augmentant lin´eairement avec le temps et la
vitesse de la lumi`ere diminuant avec le temps, de telle mani`ere que le produit
mc reste constant). Ceci est exig´e par la condition universelle de la conserva-
tion du moment dans un univers avec homog´en´eit´e spatiale: une cons´equence
du PRINCIPE COSMOLOGIQUE de Milne-Einstein. On montre que c’est
d’accord avec la th´eorie de relativit´e g´en´erale d’Einstein (par l’application du
Principe d’Action). On appelle cet eﬀet “MASS BOOM”. Au syst`eme de
LABORATOIRE aucune de ces changements du temps ne peuvent pas ˆetre
d´etect´es, `a moins que nous fassions des comparaisons avec des observations cos-
mologiques (c.--d. en utilisant diﬀ´erentes r´ef´erences loin du LABORATOIRE,
par exemple mesurant le d´ecalage rouge des galaxies ´eloign´ees en termes de
normes de LABORATOIRE). On doit souligner que les conditions physiques
implicites par une masse variable avec le temps, comme la MASS BOOM
´etablit, ainsi qu’une vitesse de lumi`ere variable avec le temps, pr´eservant la
constance du moment, sont compatibles avec les ´equations d’Einstein. On
int`egre alors ses ´equations cosmologiques et on trouve la solution pour le fac-
teur d’´echelle cosmologique a(t) = constant · t2
, ceci implique une expansion
acc´el´er´ee apparente pour l’Univers, comme celui qui est vu depuis le LAB-
ORATOIRE. C’est l’interpr´etation donn´ee aux observations r´ecentes obtenues
partir de la Supernova Type Ia. La dtermination du facteur de d’´echelle comme
a(t) = constant · t2 est bas´ee sur une interpr´etation de LABORATOIRE et est
donc un eﬀet apparent. D’autre part nous notons que le produit ct ´etant une
constante d´etermine l’univers vrai comme un univers statique, de mesure con-
stante, selon la premi`ere proposition d’Einstein. Le d´ecalage rouge observ´e au
syst`eme de LABORATOIRE est d un vrai r´etr´ecissement du monde de quan-
tum, d la diminution de la taille des particules de quantum d´etermin´ees par la
d´ecroissante “constant” de Planck ~ (l’importance des quantum sont de l’ordre
~
mc , o`u le mc reste constant).

Mots cl´es: Cosmologie, principe d’action, constantes physiques fondamentaux,
quanta de gravit´e, supernova, le principe du Mach, Relativit Gnrale.

1 INTRODUCTION

The question of the possibility of existence of time-varying physical constants in
Nature has been very much addressed in the literature. In particular much work has
been done on the possibility that the gravitational constant G may be varying with
time. No signiﬁcant experimental evidence exists in support of such time variations

LABORATORY PHYSICS AND COSMOLOGY

3

in the fundamental physical constants. In this work we ﬁnd that the gravitational
masses, and the speed of light c, consistent with Einstein’s Theory of general Rela-
tivity, vary with time. Their product mc is constant, as required by the constancy of
momentum (the most preserved principle in Nature). We prove that a time-varying
c implies a time varying G and viceversa. We apply the Action Principle, Mach’s
principle, what we call the Total Interaction principle, and the emission rate of grav-
ity quanta, to ﬁnd a universal eﬀect that we call “Mass Boom”, a linear increase of
mass with cosmological time and therefore a cosmological eﬀect. Weinberg’s rela-
tion also supports this conclusion. The increase of mass with time (the Mass Boom)
is “compensated” by a universal negative energy boom present in the background
gravitational ﬁeld. This is a result, already present in the scientiﬁc work, implied in
a “free lunch” idea of creation of the Universe. Polarization of the vacuum in the
form of positive (Mass Boom) and negative energy (the gravitational ﬁeld) is the
explanation for the gravity quanta emission from particles3 producing the universal
gravitational attraction introduced by Newton.

The Mass Boom1 implies that the speed of light decreases with time, as required
by the constancy of momentum. We then integrate Einstein’s cosmological equations
under the assumption of a cosmological scale factor a(t) varying as tx (and for the ﬂat
case, k = 0). With the solution Ωm = 1/3 and ΩΛ = 2/3, i.e. a ratio Ωm/ΩΛ = L = 2
we ﬁnd the value of x to be 2, which implies an apparent (from the LAB) accelerated
expansion for the Universe. The ratio L may have varied through the history of the
Universe implying deceleration or acceleration depending on its value at each time.
But the “real” Universe is of constant size, ct = constant, the red shift being a result
of the “real” contraction of the quantum world.

2 THE ACTION INTEGRAL

Einstein’s ﬁeld equations can be derived from an action integral following the
Least Action Principle. In standard General Relativity one has for the action integral2:

A = IG + IM

A = −c3/ (16πG)

R(g)1/2 d4x + IM

Z

(1)

where IM is the matter action and IG the gravitational term. Then one obtains the
ﬁeld equations

G/c4
(cid:0)
We assume a space-time metric and use the Robertson-Walker model that satisﬁes
the Weyl postulate and the cosmological principle, i.e.

Gµν = 8π

· T µν

(2)

(cid:1)

ds2 = c(t)2 dt2 − R(t)2

dr2/
(cid:8)

1 − kr2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

+ r2

dθ2 + sin2θ dφ2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:9)

(3)

4

Antonio Alfonso-Faus

Einstein’s equations (2) follow from the Action (1) provided that the variation of the
coeﬃcient in the integral in equation (1) be zero. Then

c3/(16πG) = constant

We see that the assumption of a time varying G must include a time varying c to
preserve the form of the ﬁeld equations.

On the other hand, the action for a free material point is

A = −mc

ds

Z

mc = constant

To preserve standard mechanics we make the momentum mc constant, independent
from the expansion of the Universe, then

This condition implies that any time variation in m requires a time variation in c.
With the constancies expressed in (4) and (6), General Relativity is preserved and of
course the Newtonian mechanics too. Within these limits time variations of some of
the fundamental constants, G, c and masses, are allowed in the sense of preserving
the laws of physics, as we know them today. Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are therefore
compatible with this time variations provided that both (4) and (6) hold.

3 MACH’S PRINCIPLE

One way to have a mathematical expression for Mach’s principle is to say that
the gravitational potential energy of any mass m, with respect to the mass Mu of
the rest of the seeable Universe with size ct, is of the order of the relativistic energy
of the mass mc2 i.e.

Hence, using the relation (4) we get in a certain system of units

and therefore substituting G in (7) we ﬁnally have

GMum
ct

≈ mc2

G = c3

Mu = t

This is what we call the Mass Boom1.
It implies that the mass of the Universe
increases linearly with time.
If the number of particles in the seeable Universe is
constant, then their mass must be increasing linearly with time too, in accordance

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

LABORATORY PHYSICS AND COSMOLOGY

5

with the idea of the particles emitting gravity quanta of negative mass3. The resultant
model for the Universe is then a static one full of positive energy particles, increasing
their mass with time (not the number of particles that is a constant), together with
the negative energy background of gravitational potential that becomes more and
more negative with time. This is a polarization picture, a “free lunch” model for the
Universe. From (6) we see that the speed of light must be decreasing with time. It
is proportional to 1/t , an idea already advanced in many works. Also an increase of
the mass of the Universe with cosmological time has been postulated in the past4,5 by
some authors like Dirac (1937) and Arnot (1941). However, their postulated increase
of mass for the Universe is due to particle creation. In our case particle creation
is not present. It is the mass m of each particle that increases linearly with time,
giving the ﬁnal result of a Mass Boom. Also, in our case this increase is responsible
for the gravitational force, through the emission of gravity quanta of negative mass3
. And the Mass Boom is compensated by the decreasing negative energy of the
gravitational ﬁeld due to the addition of more and more negative gravity quanta.
This result is in contrast with the assumption made by Milne6 in 1937 (and earlier
papers). He derived the same relation (7) and took the mass Mu as well as the
speed of light c as constants. Then he obtained G proportional to t. Obviously
this approach of Milne does not satisfy the condition in (4) for G to be proportional
to c3, a condition necessary to derive the Einstein’s ﬁeld equations from the Action
Principle. The diﬀerence between Milne’s approach and ours is that he postulated his
own relativistic theory, diﬀerent from the General Theory of Relativity of Einstein.
By contrast we keep Einstein’s ﬁeld equations as the valid ones for cosmology.

We present now what we call the Total Interaction Principle. It is a mathematical
expression that follows the requirement that all the gravitational interactions in the
Universe must have a mean free path, under a Newtonian point of view, of the order
of the size of the Universe. Then,

where n is the number density of particles in the Universe and σg their gravitational
cross section as deﬁned elsewhere3 and given by

ct ≈

1
nσg

σg = 4π

Gm
c2 · ct

ct ≈

(ct)3
GMu
c2

ct

GMu
c2 ≈ ct

Substituting the above into (10) one has

i.e.

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

6

Antonio Alfonso-Faus

which is the same as (7), Mach’s Principle.

We therefore have 3 principles, Action Integral, Mach’s and the Total Interaction,
that converge into the same conclusion. This is a strong theoretical drive to conclude
that the mass of the Universe, and therefore the mass of any fundamental particle,
increases linearly with time: the Mass Boom that we have proposed elsewhere1.

as

Furthermore, by using the mass of the quantum of gravity mg deﬁned elsewhere3
~
c2t

|mg| =

(14)

Let us call m the mass of a typical quantum particle. The time τ for one quantum of
gravity of mass mg to be emitted by the particle of mass m must be of the order of
the time taken for light to travel a Compton size ~/mc2. Calculating the mass rate
of change dm/dt as given by the ratio mg/t, one has:

(15)

(16)

(17)

dm
dt

≈

~
c2t

mc2
~ =

m
t

dm
m

≈

dt
t

m = const · t

~2

1/3

m =

(cid:18)

Gct (cid:19)

and equivalently we obtain from this

This equation is immediately integrated to give the solution

and therefore we obtain again the Mass Boom eﬀect.

To increase the evidence in favor of the Mass Boom concept we refer now to

Weinberg’s relation2:

One can see that this relation, that gives an order of magnitude for quantum masses
m in terms of quantum mechanical, gravitational and relativity quantities (~, G and
c), as well as the cosmological time t, implies from (4), (and ~ = constant at the LAB),
m3c3
· ct= constant. Using now (6) we ﬁnally get the fundamental relation ct =
constant. Since from (6) we have mc = constant we also have the other fundamental
(cid:0)
relation of this theory m ∝ t, the Mass Boom again. We can also see that Weinberg’s
relation (17) can be derived by equating the square of the Compton wavelength of
the mass m to the gravitational cross section (11).

(cid:1)

4 LABORATORY PHYSICS AND COSMOLOGY

The key point when measurements of fundamental physical constants are made
at the LAB, with no reference to cosmological observation and/or cosmological pa-

LABORATORY PHYSICS AND COSMOLOGY

7

rameters, is that we can not escape of making relative comparisons, ratios of the same
dimensional properties. Then there is no way to detect any possible time variation
of this “constants” because all measurements are relative ones, lengths to lengths,
mass-to-mass etc. If there is any time variation with the same law for example for
lengths, or for masses, the relative comparison makes the time variation undetectable.
This is a clear and well-known fact.

However, the well known theorem of the conservation of energy has to be reinter-
preted now. Energy, in our approach, varies with time as mc2 = mc·c = const·c ∝ 1/t
i.e. energy decreases with time. By Noether’s theorem there would be no invariance
under time displacements, or equivalently the time coordinate would not be homo-
geneous (in a similar way the homogeneity of space implies the conservation of mo-
mentum). Then, from a quantum mechanical point of view, based upon Heisenberg’s
relation, energy x time should be constant at the LAB (equal to Plancks constant).
We conclude that the time measured at the LAB is not homogeneous, i.e., the tics
from the clocks we use must be proportional to the cosmological time t.

We can check this result. The atomic clocks have a tic proportional to ~/mc2.
Since ~ is constant (LAB) and mc is also constant (always) then the tic is inversely
proportional to c, i.e., directly proportional to time t. And the same happens if we use
gravitational clocks (periods of revolution T ): by Kepler’s third law T 2 is proportional
to the cube of the sizer of the orbit divided by GM , that is c3·M = constant·c2 (using
again our relations in (4) and (6)). In fact the size of the orbits is constant in our
theory: v2 ≈ GM/r ∝ c2/r. From Special Relativity v/c = constant and therefore
r = constant. The conservation of angular momentum, mvr = constant, gives the
same result. And this is a very important one: the sizes of the Newtonian orbits are
constant. And so is the size of the Universe. Kepler’s third law gives then the result
we have envisaged: periods are proportinal to the cosmological time t. Planck’s unit
of time is also porportional to t at the LAB, with a constant ~. We have proved
that masses increase linearly with time, and the speed of light decreases accordingly.
However, the experiments to measure the time variations of these “constants” will
not succeed in seeing them. For example, the lunar ranging experiments based upon
lunar dynamics, that considers the relations:

concludes that G is practically constant. Now, the elimination of the speed v implies
the following relation used in the analysis of lunar ranging data:

This last relation gives, using G = c3 and the masses M and m ∝ t, c ∝ 1/t, the ﬁnal
result of r =constant. This is what is observed: no time variation in G because this

(18)

(19)

v2 =

GM
r

mvr = const.

GM m2r = const

8

Antonio Alfonso-Faus

“constant” combines with the masses to give a real constant. The product GM m2
is obviously a constant in this theory. If we take the masses as constant, then G is
obviously a constant. It is impossible to measure any time variation in G in his way.

5 COSMOLOGICAL EQUATIONS

The Einstein cosmological equations derived from his General Theory of Rela-

tivity are

2

˙a
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2¨a
a

+

+ 8π G

p
c2 +

2

˙a
a (cid:19)

(cid:18)

−

Gρ +

8π
3

kc2
a2 = Λ c2
Λ c2
kc2
a2 =
3

Using a ﬂat Universe (k = 0), consistent with recent observations, and a zero pressure
Universe as given by an average zero thermal speed for galaxies (the atoms of the
Universe) one has

where

Let us assume a law for the cosmological scale factor a of the form

where A and x are constants and t the age of the Universe. Deﬁning a parameter L
as

one derives from (21), (23) and (24)

Present numerical values for the parameters are very close to

1 +

2¨aa
˙a2 = 3ΩΛ
1 = Ωm + ΩΛ

Ωm =

ΩΛ =

8π
3
Λc2
3

Gρa2
˙a2
a2
˙a2

a(t) = A tx

L =

Ωm
ΩΛ

x =

(1 + L)

2
3

ΩΛ =

Ωm =

2
3
1
3

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

LABORATORY PHYSICS AND COSMOLOGY

9

(27)

i.e. L = 2, consistent with many observations. Then one has from (28) x = 2
and therefore a(t) = At2. The Universe is now accelerated, as observed from the
Supernova Type Ia7, 8 results, with an acceleration parameter given by

q0 = −

¨a a
˙a2 = −

1
2

The result is an apparent expansion of the Universe as a(t) = At2. Since the “real”
Universe is of constant size, ct =constant, the interpretation of the red shift is now
that the constant wavelengths of the photons coming from distant galaxies when
compared with the LAB reference we get the alternative result that it is the LAB
wavelength that shrinks (~/mc is proportional to ~ and therefore the red shift ob-
served, proportional to 1/t2, gives ~ proportional to 1/t2). Hence de De Broglie
wavelengths (sizes of quantum particles) shrink like ~. And now we conclude that
the “natural or universal” units of time and mass are the Planck’s units of time and
mass with the precise value h = c2 . The “natural or universal” unit of length is of
course the size of the Universe, ct = constant ≈ 1028 cm.

6 CONCLUSIONS

We have presented here strong theoretical reasons, based upon fundamental
principles, pointing towards a “Mass Boom”, a linear increase of all gravitational
masses with cosmological time. Correspondingly the speed of light decreases lin-
early with time. Hence the momentum is conserved. The Einstein’s cosmological
equations, with the present values of the cosmological parameters (ﬂatness, mass,
dark energy) predict an accelerated expansion of the Universe as seen from the Lab
system, in agreement with present day observations. One can not expect to detect
the increase of masses, or the decrease of the speed of light, from laboratory exper-
iments: the natural references used preclude the observation of these cosmological
eﬀects. But the coherence of the approach presented here strongly suggests that the
gravity quanta emission mechanism, presented elsewhere3, has a sound theoretical
basis to be considered as a link between General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics.
Then, reinterpretation of the red shift is necessary.

Since the product ct is a constant, the immediate interpretation is that the model
of the Universe we are getting at is of constant size: no expansion is present at large
scales. However, at the Lab system we see a red shift from distant galaxies. We
have to reinterpret this red shift: there is no real expansion of the Universe, but
there is a real contraction of the quantum world as given by the decrease in Planck’s
constant. The constancy of the size of the Universe obviously implies a constant
wavelength for the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation. And the apparent
expansion of the Universe follows a t2 law, an accelerated expansion (a constant

10

Antonio Alfonso-Faus

one). Correspondingly, the quantum world is shrinking as 1/t22 due to the relation
~ = c2 = 1/t2.

7 REFERENCES

[1 ] A. Alfonso-Faus, 2001. Frontiers of Fundamental Physics 4 page 309, Kluwer

Academic. “FFP 4” Hyderabad, India, 2003 arXiv:physics/0302058 v1.

[2 ] S. Weinberg, 1972, Grav. and Cosm., (NY, John Wiley & Sons).

[3 ] A. Alfonso-Faus, 1999, Physics Essays, Vol. 12 N4 December, and ArXiv:gr-qc/0002065

v1.

[4 ] Dirac, P., Nature, 139, 323 (1937).

[5 ] Arnot, F.L., Time and the Universe, Aust. Med. Pub. Sidney, 1941.

[6 ] Milne, E.A., Proc. Roy, Soc. m A, 158, 324 (1937).

[7 ] S. Perlmutter, et al., astro-ph/9812133, 1999, Ap J , 517, 565.

[8 ] A. Riess et al. 1998, A J , 116, 1009.

