4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physical Interpretations of
Relativity Theory Conference IX
London, Imperial College, September, 2004
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mach’s Principle II

by

James G. Gilson∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Queen Mary College
University of London

February 2, 2008

Abstract

1

Introduction

The meaning and signiﬁcance of Mach’s Principle
and its dependence on ideas about relativistic rotat-
ing frame theory and the celestial sphere is explained
and discussed. Two new relativistic rotation trans-
formations are introduced by using a linear simula-
tion for the rotating disc situation. The accepted
formula for centrifugal acceleration in general rela-
tivity is then analysed with the use of one of these
transformations. It is shown that for this general rel-
ativity formula to be valid throughout all space-time
there has to be everywhere a local standard of ab-
solutely zero rotation. It is then concluded that the
ﬁeld oﬀ all possible space-time null geodesics or pho-
ton paths unify the absolute local non-rotation stan-
dard throughout space-time. Thus it is suggested
that Mach’s principle holds in the restricted sense
that there is a universal standard of absolute local
rotation rate related to the apparent rotation of the
celestial sphere. However this apparent rotation is
actually the earth’s rotation relative to a local map-
ping of null geodesic endpoints from that time and
space distant sphere to the local time in the local
zero-rotation environment. A connection of local in-
ertia with the celestial sphere is not found.

∗j.g.gilson@qmul.ac.uk

The question of the validity or otherwise of Mach’s
Principle[5] has been with us for almost a century and
has been vigorously analysed and discussed for all of
that time and is, up to date, still not resolved. One
contentious issue is, does general[7] relativity theory
imply that Mach’s Principle is operative in that theo-
retical structure or does it not? A deduction[4] from
general relativity that the classical Newtonian cen-
trifugal acceleration formula should be modiﬁed by
an additional relativistic γ2(v) factor, see equations
(2.11) and (2.27), will help us in the analysis of that
question. Here I shall attempt to throw some light
on the nature and technical basis of the collection of
technical and philosophical problems generated from
Mach’s Principle and give some suggestions about
how it can, at the very least, be clariﬁed techni-
cally and philosophically. Firstly, let us review the
physical issues involved and try to give a clear deﬁ-
nition of exactly what the problem is. It is usually
explained in terms of what is called Newton’s bucket
experiment[6]. A bucket containing water is spun
about a vertical axis through its centre. The con-
tained water picks up motion because of frictional
drag by the bucket wall and then assumes a concave
downwards surface form as a result of the outward
centrifugal force causing the rise in level from the cen-
tre towards the wall. This is a very simple sequence
of physical events which each of us can or has experi-
enced in some form or other but it prompts a philo-

1

INTRODUCTION

2

sophical question which is diﬃcult to answer. That
such a fundamental physical-philosophical dilemma
as exposed by this simple experiment is so immedi-
ately accessible to everyone’s understanding makes it
unique among scientiﬁc problems. The question is
how does the water in the bucket get the information
that it is rotating so as to respond with the concave
surface? Certainly the wall of the bucket has caused
the rotation via friction but it has not caused the
centrifugal force response. The situation is further
confused when one asks what is the water rotation
relative to? Certainly there is the rotation relative
to the room in which the experiment takes place but
what if that room is itself rotating so slowly as not
to have caused a noticeable concavity initially. Is the
water responding to just that initially induced room
relative rotation or to some combination of the two
conceivable contribution to the water angular veloc-
ity? It is usually taken to be the case that the water
rotation and the induced centrifugal force are conse-
quential upon a totality of any rotational motions of
the body about the direction involved.

Another much discussed example and the one
which seems most impressive to me is that of the
inﬂuence of the rotating state on a physical elastic
sphere.
It is certainly true that such a sphere set
into rotation will expand in girth about the equa-
tor of its rotary axis and to a degree dependent on
its angular velocity. Then the question is how does it
acquire the information of the magnitude of its angu-
lar velocity unless there is some local standard of zero
rotation? From astronomy technology, we know that
a telescope can be locked on to a distant galaxy for
some ﬁnite time in order to photograph it. This re-
quires mechanical and computer equipment to negate
the eﬀect of the earth’s rotation so that the axis of the
telescope can be kept on a ﬁxed line direction point-
ing towards the galaxy so that it remains in view
at a central ﬁxed position for the ﬁnite time neces-
sary. All such viewable galaxies are part of what
is called the celestial sphere and a speciﬁc known
galaxy can be used to indicate a deﬁnite coordinate
position on that sphere. The mechanisms and sys-
tems required to construct such a viewing system for
studying the celestial sphere is a commonplace avail-
able technology of the present day. This telescopic
viewing system can be regarded as giving an identiﬁ-
cation and measuring device for the geometry of the
celestial sphere. There is another way to lock a local
line axis onto an object on the celestial spheres and
that is by using a property of angular momentum.
An extended body which is of material construction
so that it is composed of some distribution of mass
within its physical boundaries will acquire angular

momentum if it is rotated about an axis. If further
the body is not subjected to any additional external
couples, the axis of rotation of the body then main-
tains a ﬁxed direction with respect to the celestial
sphere, with an axis of rotation aligned with respect
to a speciﬁc galaxy of choice. This line axis locking
system is an available gyroscopic device which is also
well within existing modern technology and its equiv-
alent is to be found in all space vehicular guidance
systems. It is important to realise two things about
this coupling of local angular momentum to a distant
object. One is that the locking can be disturbed by
applying couples to the object and the other is that
the strength of the lock does depends on the magni-
tude of the angular momentum and only reduces to
zero that is it becomes unlocked if the magnitude of
the angular momentum is reduced to zero. It is this
gyroscopic type of set up which is usually quoted to
explain one of the aspects of Mach’s Principle. This
can be expressed as the following question. How is it
that a locally rotating object can for some substan-
tial ﬁnite length of time hook onto a distant galaxy
to which it is obviously not connected? This exper-
imental fact is the source of the idea that inertia or
mass controlled inﬂuences locally are determined by
the mass space fabric of the rest of the universe. An-
other manifestations of the mystery link between here
and the distant universe should be mentioned. The
Foucault Pendulum swings in a moving plane with a
motion that is locked onto the apparent motion of the
celestial sphere. This gives the impression that the
celestial sphere determines the local state of no rota-
tion against which the earth actually rotates. This
device can be seen in museums and indeed can be
easily constructed by ordinary people.

The two main answers given to these questions are
what would be Newton’s that there is an absolute
space background everywhere and this deﬁnes the lo-
cal angular velocity condition for any physical body.
There is then what would be Mach’s explanation that
the angular velocity of a body anywhere should be re-
ferred to a frame of reference attached to the celestial
sphere of so called ﬁxed stars. This is a rather con-
densed translation of the two points of view, not ex-
actly as expressed by either Newton or Mach. In fact,
what these two researchers actually meant by their
theoretic constructs is also a matter of much debate.
One can see this interpretational type of diﬃculty by
reading the following quotation from Mach’s writings
given by Soshichi Uchii [1] on his website.

The comportment of terrestrial bodies with respect
to the earth is reducible to the comportment of the
earth with respect to the remote heavenly bodies. If we
were to assert that we knew more of moving objects

1

INTRODUCTION

3

than this their last-mentioned, experimentally-given
comportment with respect to the celestial bodies, we
should render ourselves culpable of a falsity. When,
accordingly, we say, that a body preserves unchanged
its direction and velocity in space, our assertion is
nothing more or less than an abbreviated reference to
the entire universe. (ch.2, vi-6, 285-6)

The considerations just presented show, that it is
not necessary to refer the law of inertia to a spa-
cial absolute space. On the contrary, it is perceived
that the masses that in the common phraseology exert
forces on each other as well as those that exert none,
stand with respect to acceleration in quite similar re-
lations. We may, indeed, regard all masses as related
to each other. That accelerations play a prominent
part in the relations of the masses, must be accepted
as a fact of experience; which does not, however, ex-
clude attempts to elucidate this fact by a comparison
of it with other facts, involving the discovery of new
points of view. (ch.2, vi-8, 288)

However,

in spite of these interpretation uncer-
tainties, the description of the two points of view,
as I have expressed them above, do encapsulate the
essence of the problem. The conceptual diﬃculties
in both points of view become clearer when one tries
to update them in terms of relativity theory ideas.
Newton’s point of view seems to fail because abso-
lute space, as far as velocity is concerned, is ruled
out and Mach’s view seems untenable because it is
diﬃcult to see how objects in deep space can deter-
mine local properties. To prove which view is correct
in modern relativity terms is diﬃcult because up to
date there is not a satisfactory relativity theory[15]
for the rotating rigid body and indeed such concep-
tual areas are controversial and not ﬁnally settled.
Another diﬃculty that immediately emerges when
one thinks about a rotating body in relativistic terms
arises from the length contraction eﬀect[4] that is in-
trinsic to special relativity. For a small radius disk
rotating at high angular velocity or a large radius
disk rotating at small angular velocity there can be
a radius on the disk that is moving transversally at
the speed of light. Thus it seems that special relativ-
ity length contraction implies that the circumference
at this radius will be of zero length on the basis of
measurements made by a stationary observer. Geo-
metrically one can try to explain this happening by
asserting that the originally ﬂat disc will have to curl
up or down from centre toward edge to form a closed
sphere. However, it is diﬃcult to imagine what such
an occurrence would look like from the point of view
of a non-rotating observer. From his point of view
a two dimensional ﬂat object would have become a
three dimension object. This type of diﬃculty has

led some authors[15] to remark that the change of
geometry that would seem to occur as a result of
relativity theory when a ﬂat object rotates cannot
realistically physically be seen as embedded in the
space of three dimensional Euclidean geometry. Here
then, is a working statement of Mach’s Principle, not
as expressed by Mach but, in two sentences covering
the two aspects of the principle and in a form as it
impinges on the subject matter of this article:-

Observers ﬁxed in local non-rotating reference
frames see the distant celestial sphere as having zero
rotation relative to themselves. The inertial proper-
ties of local particles are somehow determined by all
the rest of the particles of the universe with the very
distant masses greatly involved.

This can also be taken as the deﬁnition for such a

non-rotating frame according to Mach.

I have found a relativistic generalization of the
usual formula that is used in both classical and rela-
tivistic theory to explain the eﬀect of a rotating body
on observations from such a platform as opposed to
the view from a non-rotating body. Usually the clas-
sical formula has to be adapted by some sort of ad
hock addition of a second time variables to make it
have some conformity with the two times that are
involved in the Lorentz transformation between two
inertial frames in linear relative motion. The inade-
quacy in attempts at relativistic analyses of rotating
systems is of course due to a full relativistic rotation
transformation formula having not to date been ob-
tained. The relativistic rotation transformation for-
mula that I am intending to use here will be detailed
in the following pages. However, I do not wish to
claim that this formula is the last word in explain-
ing the relativistic rotating state. One reason for not
making such a claim is that there appear to be a
number of possibilities with slightly diﬀerent physi-
cal meanings which I suspect will have applications to
slightly diﬀerent physical situations. So I shall take
the rather cautious course of introducing this new
formula within a mathematical model of the physi-
cal philosophical situation that the Mach Principle
dilemma seems to be describing. This model shows
that the Mach-Newton-Einstein[10] conundrum can
be greatly clariﬁed. Hopefully it will be possible to
go further and show that our physical universe con-
forms to the pattern of mathematical-physical quan-
tities uncovered in this model. Whether or not Ein-
stein’s general[6] relativity conforms to this principle
still seems to be an open question and indeed as we
have seen it is far from clear just what the Princi-
ple is actually about in any precise sense. Einstein is
said to have been guided by Mach’s principal but it
is unlikely Mach and Einstein would be able to agree

1

INTRODUCTION

4

path from a position L(0) on S at time t = 0. Let
us choose the ˜X ′
1 coordinate axis of ˜S′ to lie along
the direction of the normal to the circle at P (t) with
its origin coinciding with the origins of S and S′ so
that its second axis ˜X ′
2 lies perpendicular to the ﬁrst
axis as indicated in the diagram. ˜S′ is an inertial
frame moving in a ﬁxed direction with a constant ve-
locity relative to the inertial frame S. Thus at time t,
it simulates the velocity of the rotating disc both in
magnitude and direction relative to the frame S. It
can be used to give a local time variable t′(t) to the
disc at the point P (t) at time t. The inertial frame ˜S′
can acquire it own time keeping by being paired with
another inertial frame ˜S rigidly attached to S with its
˜X1 axis parallel with that of ˜X ′
1 and separated from
it by the distance P (t)L(0) = v(t)t = r(t)ωt, the
distance that the frame ˜S′ has separated from the
frame ˜S in the time interval 0 → t, assuming that
the angle of frame rotation separation over the same
time is given by φ(t) = ωt. This same distance is
represented on the diagram by the arc P (t)D(0). So
far the construction has installed a local time keep-
ing from the inertial frame S to the rotating frame
S′ at the simulation point P (t) which is in eﬀect any
point along the path P (t). This is the basis of the
formulae (2.14) and (2.23). The lorentz transforma-
tion connecting the two inertial frames of reference
frames ˜S and ˜S′ has the form

′
˜x
1(t) = ˜x1(t)
′
2(t) = γ(v(t))(˜x2(t) − v(t)t)
˜x
′
t
(t) = γ(v(t))(t − v(t)˜x2(t))/c
γ(v) = (1 − (v/c)2)
v(t) = r(t)ω

−1/2

2

)

(1.1)
(1.2)

(1.3)
(1.4)

(1.5)

because the relative motion of these two frames is
along the ˜X ′
2 direction with magnitude v(t) = r(t)ω.
As the frame ˜S′ was chosen so that P (t) always lies
on the ˜X ′
1 axis (1.3) reduces to (2.14). Equation (1.1)
is the hidden assumption in special relativity that the
space contraction factor γ(v) applies in full and only
to the dimension of the direction of the velocity vec-
tor which here is the ˜x′
2(t) direction. I shall drop this
assumption in the second possible rotation transfor-
mation (2.16 → 2.24).

Material related to this general area of ideas can

be found in references ([8], [9], [11], [12], [13], [14])

on its meaning. I shall not attempt to reference the
vast literary archives on this subject but for those in
need of ﬁnding out more, I suggest reading the intro-
ductory article by Soshichi Uchii [1] and follow back
references from there.

In analysing the collection of problems that arise in
the quest for an understanding of Mach’s Principle,
I shall here make use of a new relativistic rotation
transformation, (2.9 → 2.15) which is one of four or
more possibilities that I have found based on a simple
rotation simulation idea. The transformation I place
most emphasis on is the ﬁrst of the pair displayed in
the next section This formula can be derived rigor-
ously from special relativity under a simple assump-
tion about rotation. The second relativistic rotation
transformation, (2.16 → 2.24) has a number of very
attractive mathematical aspects and I suspect that
it could have physical signiﬁcance under some cir-
cumstance. It is not directly derivable from special
relativity and will not be used in this article.

1.1 Possible Rotation

Transformations

The two relativistic rotation transformation given by
equations (2.9 → 2.15) and equations (2.16 → 2.24)
below are constructed with reference to a mathemat-
ical simulation process that generates the equivalent
of a rotating body from the relative linear motions
of Lorentz frames of reference ˜S and ˜S′ depicted in
The Relativistic Rotating Frame Diagram by coordi-
nates with the top ∼ symbol. The construction is
a follows. The basic reference frame S is taken to
be rectangular, rigorously inertial and to have a syn-
chronised time keeping system throughout its space
extent. That is importantly, it is not linearly accel-
erating and it is not rotating. To logically continue
explaining the construction we have to now introduce
a space time path P (t) in S which will be denoted in
polar coordinates by (r(t), θ(t), t) and a second frame
of reference S′ which has a common origin with S and
is rotating with an angular velocity ω with respect to
S about that common origin. Let us now imagine a
disc shaped region of the frame S′ centred at the com-
mon origin of S and S′. If the path P (t) is at position
P (t) in the diagram at time t this deﬁnes a radius of
the disc r(t) at time t and also the circle shown in
the diagram. It follows that the path P (t) coincides
with a point on the disc that is moving tangentially
with velocity v(t) = r(t)ω anti-clockwise. Now, we
can conjure up a special relativity inertia frame ˜S′
moving with this velocity and in the same tangen-
tial direction as the motion at P (t) which has come
up to coincidence at P (t) at time t along a straight

2 RELATIVISTIC ROTATION SIMULATION

5

2 Relativistic Rotation Simulation

Relativistic Rotating F rame Diagram

ω

X ′
2

X2

R3 ∗

˜X ′
1

v(t)

v(t)cos(χ(t))

N2

U+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

˜X2 e

N ′
2

∗

˜X1

N ′
1

r(t)

θ(t)

φ(t)

χ(t)

R4 ∗

D(0)

P(t)

∗ L(0)

χ(t) K

v(t)sin(χ(t))

V--------
D(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)
u jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj
jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
6lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

φ(t)

N1

˜0

0

X ′
1
L1

X1

−e′
2

−e2

−e1 o

vlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll

−e′
1

The transformation (1.1 → 1.5) can be used to complete the explanation of the simulation construction
as follows. The point L1 has coordinates (r(t), −(r(t) tan(χ(t)) − v(t)t) in ˜S and in ˜S′ it has coordinates
(r′(t), −r′(t) tan(χ′(t)), denoting the view of the angle χ in S′ as χ′. If we substitute the second components
of these into (1.2), we obtain, −r′(t) tan(χ′(t)) = γ(v(t))(−(r(t)(tan(χ(t)). However from equation (1.1)
and the diagram r′(t) = ˜x′
It follows that tan(χ′(t)) = γ(v(t)) tan(χ(t) which re-
expressed is equation (2.12) of the rotation equation set. We now only need note from the diagram that
x′
2(t) = r(t) sin(χ′(t)). Thus all the parts of the ﬁrst transformation have been
1(t) = r(t) cos(χ′(t)) and x′
derived from the rotation linear simulation idea.

1(t) = ˜x1(t) = r(t).

O
O
(cid:15)
(cid:15)
(cid:21)
(cid:21)
v
U
D
D
D
6
/
/
o
e
D
D
d
d
D
D
u
V
(cid:10)
(cid:10)
\
\
^
^
c
c
K
g
g
2 RELATIVISTIC ROTATION SIMULATION

6

2.1 Relativistic Rotation

Contraction P rojections Diagram

v(t)

R5

R′
5

v(t)sin(χ′(t))
R4

l4

R′
4

O∗

l′
1

eKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKK
h QQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQ

π/2

d′
4

d4

l3

v(t)cos(χ′(t))
R3

d′
3

χ(t)

χ′(t)

F(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:5)

d3

R′
3

O∗

l1

R1 o

L(0)

R2

l2

The second rotation equation is obtained with the same simulation process so that the transformed time
t′(t) comes out the same as with the ﬁrst equation but the dilatation factor, γ(v(t)), is distributed over the
two directions diﬀerently. This scheme can be described using the second diagram Contraction Projections
Diagram. This scheme is not derived directly from the usual Lorentz transformation but using the ﬁrst
diagram which is non-speciﬁc it can be assumed that the transformed geometry can be expected to involve
changes of the radial distance r′(t) so that the equality (r′(t) = r(t)) does not hold. Such a situation could
reasonable hold in the case of the rotating elastic sphere for example. The second formula can be found by
using the second diagram which is an enlarged representation of a rectangular region of the rotating plane.
To see this in place, the diagram should be thought of as reduced in size and then the common points R4, R3
and L(0) of the two diagrams should be brought into coincidence. Thus we have a rectangular region of S′
instantaneously in motion in the direction given by the velocity vector v(t) so that the Lorentz contraction of
the width rest length l′
1 is given by equation (2.6) and, as can be read oﬀ the diagram, the length contraction
in the two perpendicular directions of the rectangular coordinates in the frame S′ are given by equations (2.7)
and (2.8) below, Thus if we distribute the contractions over the dimensions according to this prescription,
we obtain the second set of rotation transformation equations (2.16 → 2.24).

′
1/2
2
1(1 − (v/c)
)
l1 = l
′
4(1 − (v sin(χ
d4 = d
′
3(1 − (v cos(χ
d3 = d

′

′
)/c)2)1/2 = d
4γ(vs)
′
′
1/2
2
3γ(vc)
= d
)
)/c)

−1

−1

.

(2.6)
(2.7)

(2.8)

F
e
O
O
o
/
/
B
B
h
/
/
o
o
/
/
o
o
O
O
O
O
O
O
(cid:31)
(cid:31)
(cid:31)
(cid:31)
$
$
2 RELATIVISTIC ROTATION SIMULATION

7

The relativistic transformation I shall use in
analysing the centrifugal force problem has the form,

′

′
1(t) = r(t) cos(χ
x
(t))
′
′
x
2(t) = r(t) sin(χ
(t))
2
γ(v) = (1 − (v/c)
′
χ

(t) = tan

−1/2
)
−1(tan(χ(t))γ(r(t)ω))

(2.9)
(2.10)

(2.11)
(2.12)

χ(t) = θ(t) − ωt
′
t

(2.13)
−1(r(t)ω)t
(2.14)
′
′
2(t)2)1/2 = r(t). (2.15)
1(t)2 + x
(t) = (x

(t) = γ

′

r

The second relativistic transformation mentioned
above but not to be used in this article has the form,

′
1(t) = r(t) cos(χ(t))γ(vs(t))
x
′
x
2(t) = r(t) sin(χ(t))γ(vc(t))
γ(v) = (1 − (v/c)2)
vs(t) = r(t)ω sin(χ(t))
vc(t) = r(t)ω cos(χ(t))
−1(tan(χ(t))

(t) = tan

−1/2

χ

′

χ(t) = θ(t) − ωt
′
t
′

−1(r(t)ω)t
′
′
2
2
(t) = (x
+ x
1(t)
2(t)

(t) = γ

r

1/2
)

.

γ(vc(t))
γ(vs(t))

)

(2.16)
(2.17)

(2.18)
(2.19)

(2.20)

(2.21)

(2.22)
(2.23)

(2.24)

The two transformations above (2.9 → 2.15) and
(2.16 → 2.24) are constructed so as to be from an
inertial frame S to a frame S′ rotating with an an-
gular velocity ω relative to the inertial frame S. The
transformations are not just expressed in terms of
the coordinate change from one frame of reference
to another because their expression requires the in-
put of some deﬁnite path (r(t), θ(t)) which is usually
to be taken to be a straight line in space traced out
at a constant speed against time. In other words, a
path that any free particle should follow according
to Newton’s ﬁrst law in the inertial frame S. If any
other path not conforming to this condition in S is
encountered it would imply that the particle is either
not free or the inertial character of the frame S is
somehow compromised by being in a state of rota-
tion itself, for example. The representation of the
two transformations may strike the reader as number
redundant but there are so many equations because
both collections of formulae include the transformed
version in rectangular Cartesian and polar forms and,
of course, the extra time variable t′ relation to t for
the transformed system.

I shall make use of a speciﬁc straight space-line test

path in S deﬁned by,

r(t) = (b2 + (vbt)2)1/2
θ(t) = tan

−1(vbt/b).

(2.25)
(2.26)

The formula for centrifugal acceleration can be de-
rived from general relativity in a number of diﬀerent
ways, see for example Rindler’s book [4], and has the
form,

′

2
d

r

′

(t

)/dt

′2

= v

2

2
trγ

′

′

(vtr)/r

(t

).

(2.27)

I shall take it that this formula is a very reliable result
from general relativity theory and use it as an inter-
pretational guide. The centrifugal acceleration given
by equation (2.27) only diﬀers from the classical ex-
pression by the relativity factor γ2(vtr) where vtr is
the polar transverse component of the vector veloc-
ity dr′(t′)/dt′. The primes on the various quantities
indicate that they are measured by an observer ﬁxed
on the rotating frame S′ as also is the un-primed vtr.
We can make a very signiﬁcant point about centrifu-
gal force by using the linear test path (2.25), (2.26)
alone and without any reference to relativity as fol-
lows. To that end we recall that the polar radial and
transverse components, (ara, atr), of acceleration a(t)
in two dimensional motion are given by

(¨r − r ˙θ2, r ¨θ + 2 ˙r ˙θ).

(2.28)

It follows from the form (2.28) that, if a particle is
in motion at a constant speed and in a straight line
perpendicular to the radius vector at any instant so
that its radial acceleration, ara(t), is zero, the quan-
tity ¨r(t) takes the place of radial acceleration in the
rotating frame and, further, it is equal to r(t) ˙θ(t)2.
Thus forgetting relativity for the moment, we can cal-
culate the value of ¨r(t) directly using the straight line
test path (2.25), (2.26) and evaluate its value at time
t = 0. We ﬁnd that by giving the velocity parameter
vp the value ωb and direct calculation that

(¨r(0) = r(0) ˙θ(0)2 = bω2.

(2.29)

This is the usual formula for the centrifugal accel-
eration experience by a particle ﬁxed to a disc at a
distance b from its centre and which is rotating at an-
gular velocity ω. However, the particle on this path
is moving in a straight line with no connection to
any rotating reference frame. All that has been done
here is to give the constant velocity test path a dis-
tance b from the origin at time t = 0 the same value
that the rotating disc has at the radial distance b
from its centre of rotation. Thus a straight line non-
accelerating path passing perpendicularly to a radius
of the disc and instantaneously having the velocity

3 RELATIVISTIC CENTRIFUGAL

ACCELERATION

8

of the disc at the point of least distance from the
origin appears from the disc view to have a centrifu-
gal acceleration of the exactly correct classical form.
This certainly means that the form of the centrifugal
acceleration formula is determined only by kinemat-
ics, there is no dynamics involved and so classically
we must conclude that there is no obvious link be-
tween centrifugal acceleration and inertia. This re-
inforces the generally held idea that centrifugal force
is a ﬁctitious force. It seems to me that force only
comes into this story when a deﬁnite valued mass m
is to be held attached at a ﬁxed radial distance from
the origin of a rotating object. The true force then
needed arises at least classically as the centripetal
force fcp = −mara(t) = −fcf , the negative of the
centrifugal force discussed above. Clearly, for a par-
ticle to be held in a circular orbit, the free particle
tendency to travel in a straight line at constant speed
must be overcome. Of course this is just the ortho-
doxy and it appears from the point of view taken here
to be correct. fcp = −ara(t) is measured in the ro-
tating frame but here the force is determined by the
mass rather than the inertial mass being determined
by some mysterious inﬂuence of other masses in the
vicinity or far away. We can use the new transforma-
tion ((2.9 → 2.15)) to check whether relativity gives
the same conclusion. However, the last few sentences
above do seem to leave some small uncertainty about
the relation between distant and local mass values.
Perhaps someone can produce a more deﬁnitive case
one way or the other.

3 Relativistic Centrifugal

Acceleration

It is thus imperative that we should check out
whether or not the same conclusion follows from a
relativistic version of the above argument. In order
to carry forward this analysis we need to look at what
happens if the base frame S, originally assumed to
be inertial, is some way compromised and actually
contains particle tracks that would indicate that it
is actually rotating. We can achieve this by reading
from the transformation how the rotating frame S′
assumed rotation at some angular velocity value ω0,
say, would see our linear test path. This is achieved
by substituting the original test path (2.25), (2.26)
into the transformation and obtaining its image as
seen in S′. This gives us a new test path called
P ′ ≡ (r′(t), χ′(t), t′(t)), say, which can now be sub-
stituted back as an input into the transformation.
Then the centrifugal acceleration can be calculated
as before but using the non-linear questionable path

planted on the assumed inertial frame S. This cal-
culated centrifugal acceleration can then be used to
see how it has to be changed so as to be consistent
with or exactly equal to the known correct formula
for centrifugal acceleration from general relativity.

The question that arises is how dependent is the
form of the relativistic centrifugal acceleration on the
linearity of our test path formula P ′. On carrying out
the calculation which involves a full use of the rela-
tivistic rotation transformation and consequent re-
expressing the transformed variables into their form
of dependence on the t′ variable we need the results
from equations (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3). The calculation
is much simpliﬁed by evaluating all the quantities at
time t = 0 which is implied by using the |0 symbol.
We ﬁnd that the formula involves the ω0 associated
with the questionable path and is the last of,

′

d2r
dθ

′

′2|0 = r(0)(dθ
′
|0 = (dθ

(t)/dt
(t)/dt
′
(t)/dt
(t)/dt|0)/(dt
′
(t)/dt|0 = (1 − (bω/c)2)1/2

′

′

|0)2|
′

dt

(3.1)
(t)/dt|0) (3.2)

′

2
d

r

′2

(t)/dt

|0 =

b(ω0 − vb/b)2
(1 − (bω/c)2)(1 − (bω0/c)2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

and if this is to be consistent with the form that
comes from general relativity considerations then tak-
ing the moving particle as ﬁxed instantaneously to
the x′
1 at time t = 0 at a distance b from the ori-
gin of rotation so that vb = bω and also denoting
vtr = bω′ it is necessary that

ω′2

1 − (bω′/c)2 =

(ω0 − ω)2
(1 − (bω/c)2)(1 − (bω0/c)2)

.

(3.5)

Suppose now that the angular velocity ω′ is the
apparent angular velocity of of the celestial sphere
as observed from a ﬂat disk with its centre rigidly
attached to the earth’s surface in a tangent plane
conﬁguration centred on the earth’s axis of rotation.
Earth here, can be replaced by any solid rotating
platform anywhere. There are two identiﬁcations
for ω′ that preserves the simple factor form on both
sides of equation (3.5) and simultaneously identify a
local frame of reference that is in a state of abso-
lute zero rotation itself. These two local frames are
the S and S′ of the transformation formulae (2.9) →
(2.15). The identiﬁcations are ω′ = ω ⇒ ω0 = 0 or
ω′ = ω0 ⇒ ω = 0. It is easy to check that any other
identiﬁcations for ω′ destroy this simple factor struc-
ture and further are complicated and aesthetically

4 CONCLUSIONS

9

unattractive. Thus can we can make the following
interpretation of this result.
If the general relativ-
ity formula for centrifugal acceleration is accepted
as correct throughout the universe then it must be
used against and relative to a local background refer-
ence frame that is in a local deﬁnite absolute state of
non-rotation coincident with the state of non-rotation
that can be determined by observation of the celes-
tial sphere. Expressed otherwise, there is in general
relativity everywhere to be found a local reference
frame in a state with absolutely no rotation relative
to which any local rotating state will have a deﬁ-
nite absolute value of angular velocity. However, this
seems to have nothing very directly to do with iner-
tia. The further very important consequence follows
from this section. If a rigid physical object with a di-
rectional arrow marked on it invariably placed with
respect to its geometrical form moves through space
time either by propulsion or freefall its directional ar-
row can be kept un-rotating with respect to a local
absolute non-rotating local reference frame which is
the same thing as keeping it pointing to a ﬁxed iden-
tiﬁed object on the celestial sphere. Of course this
navigation process can be helped by having an ac-
tive gyroscope with rotation axis coincident with the
telescope so as to hold the telescope on its object and
here again the gyroscope keeps its constant orienta-
tion by reference to the local non-rotating frame. In
fact, this is just stating the physical basis for space
navigation in practice. We note also in this context
that keeping a distant object in the line of sight of
such a marked arrow involves locking a local tele-
scope in line with the local space part of the null
geodesic which is the channel along which the infor-
mation from the distant object is coming.
In gen-
eral relativity, the passage through space-time of a
free photon is considered to take place along a null
geodesic and in quantum theory such a photon is
also considered to carry a unique quantum of vec-
tor angular momentum of magnitude ~ lying exactly
in its direction of propagation. Thus the photon in
its journey through space-time will always be locked
onto the local state of absolute non-rotation. Alter-
natively expressed, this can be regarded as a process
in which the free photon ﬁeld connects all the local
non-rotation states throughout the whole electromag-
netic connected universe. A photon exists on the null
geodesic between its creation and destruction events
because there is zero proper time between these two
events.

4 Conclusions

It seems that Mach’s principle is true in the limited
sense of the existence of a universal standard of abso-
lute local rotation relating the celestial sphere to local
conditions. This does not, of course, preclude the ex-
istence of relatively rotating systems with a relative
angular velocity. Thus this limited Mach’s Princi-
ple partially restores Newton’s absolute space back-
ground in terms of absolute angular velocity while
leaving the relative relativistic status of linear veloc-
ity unchanged. Thus it is the universal network of ac-
tual or potential null geodesics that unite all the local
states of absolute rotation. When we observe the ap-
parent rotation of the celestial sphere, we are actually
looking at some local mapping of the celestial sphere
on some local present time two dimensional represen-
tation of the terminal points of null geodesics that
originated in the greatly distant past from greatly
distant objects. The two dimensional representation
at one level could be a telescopic viewing screen at
another level, the retina of the eye or at a deeper level
it is an image in the human brain. Always though,
we are actually seeing local movement against the lo-
cal standard of no rotation, actually just the earth’s
rotation against this local standard.

Finally, I would like to mention my motivation for
this study which was work([2], [3]) in quantum me-
chanics on the ﬁne structure constant problem. I had
long been puzzled by the fact that calculations on hy-
drogen like atom electronic orbits seemed to assume
that the nucleus or a centre of gravity was ﬁxed on
a true inertial frame and one could get from theory
the values of two perfectly deﬁnite quantized quan-
tities, the Bohr radii, ¯λC /(Zα), and the velocities,
Zαc, of the electrons on such orbits. This implies
that in such orbits the electron moves with a deﬁnite
angular velocity, me(Zαc)2/~. It seemed to me that
this only made sense if these angular velocities were
absolute as we have been discussing above. Further
more, I had managed to derive a very accurate value
for the ﬁne structure constant using the equation of
centrifugal force. This implies that centrifugal force is
true even under condition when the coupling is large,
137α approximately unity, as in the case of hydrogen-
137, way outside the quantum electrodynamics realm
of the small expansion parameter, α ≈ 1/137. The
work described in this article seems to reinforce my
view that there is a local standard of zero rotation
everywhere.

REFERENCES

10

5 Acknowledgements

I am greatly indebted to Professors Clive Kilmister
and Wolfgang Rindler for help, encouragement and
inspiration over many years.

References

[1] Soshichi

Uchii

at

http://www.bun.kyoto-u.ac.jp/%7Esuchii/mach.pr.html

[2] Gilson, J.G. 1996, Calculating the ﬁne structure
constant , Physics Essays, 9 , 2 June, 342-353

[3] Gilson, J.G. 1999, The ﬁne structure constant,

http://www.ﬁne-structure-constant.org/

[4] Rindler, W. 2001, Relativity: Special, General
and Cosmological, Oxford University Press

[5] Mach, H. 1893, The Science of Mechanics,

Chicago, IL: Open Court

[6] Barbour, J. and Pﬁster, H. 1995, Mach’s Princi-
ple: From Newton’s Bucket to Quantum Grav-
ity. Boston, MA: Birkhuser

[7] Misner, C. W.; Thorne, K. S.; and Wheeler, J. A.
1973, Gravitation. Boston, San Francisco, CA:
W. H. Freeman

[8] Wolfgang Pauli 1958, Theory of Relativity, 130–

134, Pergamon Press

[9] Abraham Pais, 1990, Subtle is the Lord: the

Science and Life of Albert Einstein, p 214

[10] J. S. Bell 1987, Speakable and Unspeakable in
Quantum Mechanics, p 67, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press

[11] Dover 1980, The Principle of Relativity, Dover

[12] G. Cavalleri 1987, Nuovo Cimento 53B, p 415

[13] O. Gron 1975, AJP, Vol. 43, No. 10, p 869

[14] C. Berenda 1942, Phys. Rev. 62, p 280

[15] M. Weiss 1988,

http://www.physics.adelaide.edu.au/∼
dkoks/Faq/Relativity/SR/rigid disk.html

