4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
9
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Wholeness as a Conceptual Foundation of Physical Theories

Barbara Piechocinska
Uppsala University, Box 534, 751 21 Uppsala, Sweden
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A description of physical reality in which wholeness is the foundation is discussed along with the
motivation for such an attempt. As a possible mathematical framework within which a physical
theory based on wholeness may be expressed, elementary embeddings along with the Wholeness
Axiom are suggested. It is shown how features of wholeness such as wholeness being indescribable,
more than the sum of parts, locally accessible and giving rise to a self-similar, or holographic, type
of order are reﬂected in the mathematics. It is also shown how all the sets in the mathematical
universe may be expressed as emerging from the dynamics of wholeness. Moreover, it is indicated
how the mathematics may be further developed so as to connect up with a physical interpretation.

Keywords: wholeness, Wholeness Axiom, Laver sequence, implicate order, braids, left-distributivity

I. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

The purely reductionist approach to physics, in which
the world is modelled as being made up of separate iden-
tiﬁable parts that interact, has proven successful over the
centuries. It was not until the beginning of the twenti-
eth century that experimental data demanded a drasti-
cally new theory. To accommodate the new results the
quantum theory was invented. Despite the deeply rooted
reductionist tradition scientists discovered early on that
the quantum theory was not purely reductionistic, and
yet it was approached and formed from the classical side.
It is for instance normal procedure to attempt to quan-
tize classical systems, while it could be argued that the
quantum theory, being more fundamental than classical
theories, should be the starting point.

The new aspects, not reducible to a purely reduction-
ist perspective, were intimately related to what Bohr
called wholeness. From the invention of the quantum
theory Bohr has been clear to point out the key role that
wholeness plays [1]. When two quantum systems inter-
act, or have interacted, we can in general no longer view
the system of interaction as being made up of two sep-
arately existent parts. Instead an inseparable totality is
formed. The wave function of such an interacting sys-
tem can, in general, not be expressed as a product of the
wave functions of the two previously separated systems.
And so a reductionist picture based on the interactions
of static identiﬁable parts with deﬁnite properties cannot
be maintained. The details of how a nonlocal, indivisible,
and dynamical form of wholeness plays a central role are
presented in the Ontological Interpretation of Quantum
Theory [2] and a short summary of them will be given
in the Section 2. The eﬀects of a correlation related to
the indivisible wholeness of quantum systems that tran-
scends space and time (entanglement) have been objec-
tively demonstrated through experiments [3]. Failing to
conform to reductionism and being essential in the foun-
dations of the quantum theory, it would be both intel-
lectually satisfactory and of instrumental value in future
research to have an understanding of what philosophical
ideas wholeness entails.

Since the advent of the quantum theory severe prob-
lems have arisen when attempting to form a consistent,
uniﬁed description through physics. There appear to be
incompatibilities between fundamental physical theories
such as the quantum theory and the theory of general rel-
ativity. In attempting to ﬁnd a common ground for both
of them various physicists have suggested wholeness [4]
(chapters 5-6), [2] (chapter 15), [5]. The prospect of be-
ing a common factor in both the quantum theory and
the theory of general relativity hints at the possibility of
leading to a theory that transcends and includes the both
of them.

In view of the present incompatibilities, the diﬃ-
culty to ﬁt contemporary physics into a reductionist
framework, and the indications that a non-reductionistic
wholeness is essential in physics, it is suggestive that we
attempt a scientiﬁc description that starts from whole-
ness. However, in order to engage in such an attempt we
are in considerable need of new ways of thinking (fun-
damental concepts) as well as new mathematical tools,
all due to the particularly elusive nature of wholeness.
This paper addresses that need and presents a proposi-
tion for new foundations of physics with the fundamental
concepts and a mathematical theory capable of repre-
senting them. In particular it proposes a concrete math-
ematical description of Bohm’s implicate order1 that is
based on a new axiom in Set Theory.
It further pro-
poses that the connection from the mathematically de-
scribed implicate order to physics be made through the
left-distributive algebra that this axiom generates, and
in particular through braids.

The paper is set up in the following way. We shall
start, in Section 2, by summarizing the work of Bohm
and Hiley in order to give a speciﬁc example of how
wholeness comes into the quantum theory. Then we shall
continue, in Section 3, by taking a closer look at the con-
cept of wholeness in general and at the particular feature
of wholeness that will serve as the fundamental concept

1 see Section 2.B for implicate order

which will be represented mathematically. We will then
proceed to Section 4 in which an example of a mathe-
matical framework capable of expressing the fundamen-
tal concept and key features of wholeness will be given.
After that we shall, in Section 5, look at some examples
of how we expect the approach based on starting from
wholeness to be useful. In particular, we shall see how
wholeness facilitates the understanding of the properties
of the quantum theory, and indicate what mathematical
structures (used in physics) naturally arise from the pro-
posed mathematics. Finally, in Section 6, we shall sum
up the conclusions.

II. EXAMPLE OF WHOLENESS IN THE
QUANTUM THEORY

When attempting to study physics in search of the un-
derlying concepts we ﬁnd ourselves to be quite fortunate
because there are scientists who have already done a sub-
stantial amount of work in this direction. Of particular
interest is the work of Bohm, Hiley, and collaborators. A
large part of their work originates in intuitions deduced
from Bohm’s interpretation of the quantum theory [6],
[2], [7]. One of the great advantages of this interpretation
is that it allows for an imaginative and intuitive under-
standing of quantum phenomena and thereby opens up
the door to further insights that may become crucial for
an extension of the quantum theory, possibly moving into
a new theoretical framework. In particular, through the
quantum potential, which as we shall see can be derived
from the Schr¨odinger equation, this interpretation explic-
itly accentuates the essential role of a dynamical, unbro-
ken wholeness. We shall now go into slightly greater de-
tail in order to better see the holistic aspect of physics
and how they are suggestive of Bohm’s implicate order.
The starting point will be Bohm’s interpretation of the
quantum theory.

A. Bohm’s interpretation of the quantum theory

From being a statistical theory about the outcomes of
measurements in which the actual phenomena involved
cannot be analyzed [8](p. 72), Bohm developed an es-
sentially ontological interpretation of the quantum the-
ory that provides intuitive understanding and further in-
sight into the actuality of systems. In particular, by us-
ing the Hamilton-Jacobi theory, it provides a framework
within which classical and quantum eﬀects can be con-
trasted. Such comparisons oﬀer a richer understanding
of what Niels Bohr called the unanalyzable wholeness [1]
and lead to the development of Bohm’s implicate order

2

2. It should also be mentioned that aside from providing
an ontology for, and an intuitive understanding of the
quantum theory, Bohm’s interpretation also gives an ac-
count for each individual quantum process and accounts
for measurements.

In Bohm’s view, the wave function is not regarded as
Its in-
a complete representation of a quantum state.
terpretation is not only probabilistic, such as the square
root of the probability of ﬁnding a particle in a particular
region. Instead the wave function is an actual quantum
ﬁeld (ψ-ﬁeld) that provides a partial description of the
formative cause, as well as a function from which actual
probabilities can be derived [10]. This treatment of the
wave function is what eventually leads to an account of
measurement.

In the original interpretation of Bohm [6], a particle
is assumed to exist with a well deﬁned position and mo-
mentum. One can therefore say that the particle in fact
moves along a deﬁnite trajectory. The particle has a
quantum ﬁeld (ψ-ﬁeld) associated with it. They are phys-
ically inseparable. On a deeper level of the ontology the
quantum ﬁeld and the particle are considered by Bohm
to be diﬀerent aspects of the same process [2](sec.15.8).
Now Bohm resorts to Hamilton-Jacobi theory, which
can be seen as a theory of the interrelationships of rays
and waves [7](chapter 2). This treatment produces a pic-
ture in which one can see how both classical and quantum
eﬀects arise. In order to see this in the non-relativistic
case, one starts with the wave function written in its po-
lar form

ψ = R(x, t)eiS(x,t)/¯h,

(1)

where both S, the phase of ψ, and R, its amplitude,
are real ﬁelds that are dependent on the position, x,
and the time parameter t, and where ¯h = h/(2π),
h being Planck’s constant. The next step is to de-
rive the Quantum Hamilton-Jacobi equation from the
Schr¨odinger equation. Doing this for one quantum par-
ticle one goes through the following steps. We start with
the Schr¨odinger equation, which describes the time evo-
lution of the quantum system,

i¯h

= −

∂ψ
∂t

∇2ψ + U ψ,

¯h2
2m
where m is the mass of the particle and U = U (x, t) is a
(real) classical potential. We now substitute (1) into (2),
work out the Laplacian, rearrange the terms and divide
them up into two equations, one for the real part and the
other for the imaginary part. The real part then yields

(2)

∂S
∂t

+

(∇S)2
2m

+ U + Q = 0,

(3)

2 Consequently, the implicate order can be seen as providing a kind
of understanding of the wholeness found in the quantum theory
that has the capability of going beyond the quantum theory [9].

(4)

(5)

(6)

where U is still a classical potential and Q is the quantum
potential. More explicitly, we see that

Q = −

¯h2
2m

∇2R
R

.

When Q → 0 we move from the quantum domain towards
the classical limit [7](p. 225) and for Q = 0 equation (3)
becomes the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation.
If we
see the quantum potential as a type of potential energy
we can view (3) as an extended version of the conserva-
tion of energy, valid in the quantum domain. In order to
calculate the momentum of the quantum particle we use
the guidance condition 3

p = ∇S

The imaginary part of (1) in (2) is

∂R2
∂t

= −∇(R2 ∇S
m

)

This can be seen as an equation for the conservation of
probability.

The above approach grants us the unique opportunity
of studying the quantum potential, which is responsible
for the non-classical eﬀects of the quantum theory. If we
can understand its nature and physical relevance, we will
come one step closer to intuitively understanding quan-
tum phenomena and possibly going beyond them.

In order to pursue this we shall now stress how rad-
ically diﬀerent the quantum potential is from classical
potentials. Its dynamics goes beyond what can be seen
as a mechanical interaction of external parts. To start
with, we note that the quantum potential has no exter-
nal source from which it can be seen to emanate, such as
for instance the gravitational potential could be seen to
emanate from a massive body in space. This is basically
due to the fact that the quantum potential is constructed
from the ψ-ﬁeld, which itself depends on the whole sys-
tem and lacks an external source. And so, the quantum
potential’s dependence on the ψ-ﬁeld introduces an ir-
reducible dependence on the entire environment. When
more particles are involved it becomes even more clear
that the wave function depends on the whole system.
Here we encounter a holistic aspect in which wholeness
is more than just all the parts and their interactions.

Moreover we note from equation (4) that the quan-
tum potential has a diﬀerent form than classical poten-
tials. We ﬁnd R both in the numerator and denominator,

3 It should be mentioned that an approach based on this condition
was introduced by other authors as “Bohmian Mechanics”[11]
[12]. The mathematics of it is in accordance with Bohm’s own
approach. However, several parts, originally existing in Bohm’s
interpretation and crucial to its philosophy (such as the quantum
potential), have been omitted. For a short comparison between
the two approaches, see [13].

3

which means that the quantum potential does not in gen-
eral necessarily diminish with distance. Even though the
ψ-ﬁeld may go to zero as the distance increases, the quan-
tum potential does not have to diminish. This means that
remote features may have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on particle
movement. When more particles are involved, this can
give rise to the phenomenon of non-locality. The quan-
tum potential will in general depend on the positions of
all N particles,

Q = −

¯h2
2m

∇2R(x1, x2, ..., xN )
R(x1, x2, ..., xN )

,

(7)

so that the quantum force − ▽k Q on some particle k
depends on all particles.

Furthermore we note that it is not the intensity of the
ψ-ﬁeld that regulates the eﬀect it has on the movement of
a particle but its form. This again is due to the presence
of R in the denominator. An increase in the amplitude,
by some factor c, has no bearing on the quantum poten-
tial, as c divides out. This in turn suggests that the ac-
tion of ψ on the particle, through Q, is of a diﬀerent kind
than classical pushing or pulling (a mechanical transfer
of momentum and energy), and is thoroughly discussed
by Bohm and Hiley [2]. They suggest that the quantum
ﬁeld be treated as an information potential. The usage of
the word information is diﬀerent [13] from Shannon’s in-
formation [14], which refers to our ignorance or certainty
about a system. Instead, Bohm and Hiley’s information
“in-forms,” actively puts form into. The information in
the quantum potential guides a particle along its way.
It is information relevant to the objective movement of
a particle, information that has meaning to the particle.
When it guides a particle it is referred to as “active infor-
mation.” Bohm and Hiley have suggested the metaphor
of a boat being guided by the radar. The actual waves of
the radar do not push or pull the boat, as do the waves of
the sea. In a similar way the quantum potential guides
through information that is meaningful to the particle,
by putting form into the motion and not by pushing it.

B. Dynamical unfoldment and enfoldment and the
implicate order

The dynamics suggested by the quantum potential
clearly indicates a radical change from the classical
framework. The quantum potential appears to suggest a
dynamics where the irreducible totality of a system and
its environment acts (from beyond any particular spatial
source) and forms the explicit movement of some particle.
In other words, the lack of an external local source for
the quantum potential along with its irreducible depen-
dence on the whole system and, in general the existence
of non-locality, suggests that it operates from an irre-
ducible order beyond space and time. Bohm called this
the implicate order. The implicate order is dominated by
its holistic aspects and can be seen as a dynamical total-
ity where things cannot be distinguished from each other

and are instead inseparably intertwined. In other words,
despite a lack of crystallization, or deﬁnite boarders and
distinguishability (that we are used to seeing in space),
all the relationships are intact and preserved.

Operating from the implicate order the quantum po-
tential gives explicit form to the movement of a particle.
Here we can talk about the explicate order. The expli-
cate order is the order where things can be distinguished
from each other, or seen to exist outside of each other,
and approximated as independent.

An important fact here is that in order to form the
movement of the particle the ψ-ﬁeld needs information
from the whole environment that is processed as a total-
ity. We see how the implicate order, which is beyond the
visible (explicate), plays an essential, formative role in
the dynamics. And so, the movement of the part comes
out of the totality, not the other way around. Since the
totality is irreducible we cannot reduce it to parts. This
is how wholeness is greater than the sum of its parts and
needs to be considered in any serious attempt to go be-
yond the quantum theory. This is the fundamental idea
upon which we will continue to build and why we shall
try to derive the movement of parts from the dynamics of
wholeness instead of starting with parts and letting their
sum describe a reductionistic wholeness.

To do this we shall need to discuss the nature of the
process of going from the implicate order to the expli-
cate order and the other way around. This will be done
in terms of unfoldment and enfoldment. The dynami-
cal concepts of unfoldment and enfoldment were intro-
duced and developed by Bohm [4] in an eﬀort to provide
a common basis capable of accounting for both quan-
tum and relativistic eﬀects. The implicate order is the
enfolded order while the explicate order is the unfolded
order. To explain these aspects Bohm proposes an illus-
trative metaphor. One places a cylinder container with a
smaller radius inside of a ﬁxed one with a larger radius.
Then one pours glycerine between them. On top of the
glycerine one then places a drop of ink.
If one at this
point starts turning the inner cylinder the ink-drop will
smear out and become a line. After a while no ink will be
visible. This is analogous to the enfoldment process. The
ink-drop was ﬁrst explicit and has now become enfolded
into the order of the molecules and is implicit. Though
the drop cannot be seen explicitly it is still there, implic-
itly in the order. If we now start turning the inner cylin-
der in the other direction the ink-drop will appear again.
This is then analogous to the unfoldment process. The
ink-drop becomes explicit again. This example descrip-
tively expounds the ideas of unfoldment and enfoldment
but should not be taken literally.

The idea that Bohm tried to convey was that every
thing is in some sense enfolded into the whole and that
the whole is unfolded into every thing. Bohm called this
dynamics the holomovement which is a holistic pulsation
in which orders unfold and enfold. Emphasis should be
put on the fact that this fundamental process is not a
movement within space-time (like in the example of the

4

ink-drop) but rather a process in which ultimately space-
time and its contents are created4. Recall that the quan-
tum potential does not operate from any particular part
in space but originates in an irreducible totality, and yet
is locally accessible from any point within space where it
puts explicit form into the movement. Likewise, the fun-
damental process originates in the implicate order which
unfolds into an explicate order and forms it through the
unfoldment. Because of the wording one might be in-
clined to think that there exists an implicate order and
an explicate order and that they interact through un-
foldment and enfoldment. This, however, is not what is
being proposed here. Instead, focus should be put on the
process, or movement. It is the nature of the unfoldment
and enfoldment that is such that one can see it as giving
rise to the explicate from the implicate. The explicate
order does not have a permanent and independent exis-
tence. It is continually being created and dissolved. And
the existence of the implicate order is of a subtle kind,
it cannot be said to exist explicitly because it is implicit
and beyond space and time. Therefore, it is suggested,
movement is fundamental and can be expressed in terms
of the enfoldment and unfoldment.

It has further been argued by Bohm and Hiley, in [2]
(chapter 15.3), that essentially all the quantum mechan-
ical laws of movement can already be seen as unfoldment
and enfoldment. The value of a wave function at a partic-
ular time and point in space depends on the whole space
at previous moments. Consequently a particular region
can be said to enfold contributions from the whole space.
Then, as it evolves, it unfolds into the whole space. The
authors also show how Huygen’s principle and Feynman
diagrams can be understood in terms of enfoldment and
unfoldment. Huygen’s principle tells us that the propa-
gation of a wavefront can be seen as each point on the
In
wavefront acting as a wave-emitting source point.
other words, each point enfolds contributions from all
other points on the wavefront and then unfolds, giving
rise to a new wavefront. Since Feynman diagrams can
be considered as based on Huygen’s principle [2](p. 355),
enfoldment and unfoldment can be considered as funda-
mental for them as well.

Summarizing Section 2 we may say that the essential
concept that can be extracted from Bohm and Hiley’s
work is that there is a dynamical, unbroken wholeness.
The dynamics seems to consist of unfoldments and en-
foldments of explicate and implicate orders.

4 To see how the contents are created one extends Bohm’s inter-
pretation to the quantum ﬁeld theory where a super-quantum
potential aﬀects the ﬁeld equations in a non-local and non-linear
way. There, it is not only the motion of a particle that is formed
but the very existence of the particle itself.

III. DESCRIPTION FROM WHOLENESS

A. The concept of wholeness

Starting with wholeness presents a particular challenge
for a physical description of reality. This is due to its in-
deﬁnable and elusive nature. Therefore, the approach
taken here will be to assume the existence of an inde-
ﬁnable wholeness and investigate what conclusions this
assumption may lead to in terms of physical theories.
However, before making such an assumption some fea-
tures of wholeness will be highlighted.

Wholeness is taken to be the ontological basis for the
physically measurable reality. It is viewed as the totality
that implicitly unites and gives rise to everything observ-
able, but is more than the observable. In particular we
will be dealing with a wholeness that is larger than the
sum of its parts. Working with parts towards wholeness
not only leaves us with an insuﬃcient [15] and severely
limited picture of wholeness, but also with one that is in-
consistent5. Furthermore, we do not wish to conﬁne our-
selves to working with parts because we are interested in
describing a wholeness that is similar to, or at least not
more limited than, the wholeness found in the quantum
theory (see Sections 1 and 2).

Another central aspect of wholeness is that it is inde-
ﬁnable. This can be intuitively understood in the fol-
lowing way. Being whole is not in opposition to any-
thing, not even to part.
If wholeness were opposed to
part and thereby excluded part it would not be whole.
And so, it is not possible to gain a true understanding of
wholeness based on division, or diﬀerentiation, and op-
position. Consequently a description of wholeness is not
possible in terms of our language because it is based on
opposition and diﬀerentiation [17], [4] (chapter 3), [18].
Diﬀerentiation and opposition lead to deﬁnitions and to
information that is based on the concept of lack of knowl-
edge. To deﬁne something is to delimit it and say that
it is that which is found within the limit and not that
which is found outside of the limit. Such a delimitation
cannot be performed on wholeness and one can there-
fore say that wholeness is not deﬁnable. In fact, trying
to describe wholeness may be likened to attempting to
reach inﬁnity by, say, counting all the natural numbers,
1,2,3,... No matter what number we reach it will not be
inﬁnity. Just like inﬁnity is not a number, wholeness is
not a part, or reducible to a description. As a conse-
quence we see that any description is a limitation. This
must also hold for a strictly holistic view of wholeness
where it is seen as undivided and forever non-separable
into individual modes. In what follows we shall therefore
take the broader view that the holistic perspective and
the reductionistic perspective are complementary in the

5 Publications regarding the whole being more and diﬀerent from

the parts can be found in [16], [15].

5

sense that both are required in a description of reality
based on the assumption that there is wholeness.

The relationship between the holistic and reductionis-
tic aspects can be described as according to a self-similar,
or holographic type of order (the order of Bohm’s impli-
cate order as described in the previous section). To see
the self-similarity and holography we must ﬁrst recog-
nize that the ontological basis of each part is the holistic
wholeness. In other words, one part implicitly contains
all parts at its ground and all parts implicitly contain
that one part, at their ground. Wholeness is in each ex-
plicit part, as that parts innermost nature or ontological
ground, while from the implicate (holistic) perspective
each part is inseparable from wholeness. And so, whole-
ness is (in) each part and each part is (in) wholeness.
This can be seen as self-similar because through whole-
ness there is a similarity between a part and all parts,
and holographic, because each part implicitly contains
information from all parts. This kind of order is a conse-
quence of the holistic properties and is already found in
the quantum theory, where we see how the dynamics of a
quantum system has an irreducible (holistic) dependence
on its surroundings [2].

One should bear in mind that wholeness is not some
physically measurable quantity and its existence can
therefore not be directly, physically, veriﬁed through ob-
jective experiments. Instead it is the source of the phys-
ically measurable quantities. An analogy can be made
to superposition in the quantum theory, which can never
be explicitly measured. As described above, wholeness is
qualitatively diﬀerent from part or thing for instance in
that it cannot be explicitly deﬁned. However, we shall
see that if wholeness is assumed a consistent picture of
reality will take form in which wholeness, through its na-
ture, may be seen as the source of physical reality. Per-
haps just like the acceptance of inﬁnities in mathematics
provides a rigorous foundation for and deﬁnition of real
numbers, an assumption of wholeness might account for
the existence of the physical universe.

In order to provide a rigorous mathematical descrip-
tion for a physical theory that assumes the existence of
wholeness we will need to ﬁnd and specify what we con-
sider to be fundamental concepts. Then, we will need to
ﬁnd a way of mathematically expressing them. Since the
existence of wholeness is assumed, it is vital that this be
reﬂected in the mathematical description on a fundamen-
tal level. We will now quickly review our understanding
of a dynamical wholeness in order to provide the funda-
mental concept.

B. The fundamental concept

The fundamental concept, upon which we shall base
our description of the physical universe is movement, or
as suggested by Bohm [4], process. Besides the moti-
vation provided by Bohm’s approach (in Section 2) this
can be motivated in the following way. In our descrip-

tion of the physical universe we wish to take wholeness
as fundamental. This requires our description to be com-
plementary. We need both the holistic perspective and
the reductionistic perspective. Although a description
in terms of parts is certainly possible in the reductionist
spirit, it cannot be a fundamental base for a description
from wholeness that includes the holistic perspective.

Here is a slightly diﬀerent way of seeing why parts may
not be the best way of describing physical reality from
wholeness. For a long time physicists have been trying
to ﬁnd a fundamental building block, entity, or part. Let
us assume that such a thing exists and see what proper-
ties it should possess. However, let us not limit ourselves
to building blocks that have positions or extensions in
space or time. Suppose we ﬁnd two such fundamental
building blocks, then we will ﬁnd that, the blocks being
truly fundamental, we cannot make any kind of distinc-
tion between them.
If no such distinction exists (not
even a distinction in time or space) we conclude that the
two fundamental building blocks are one. Consequently,
we can say that there is only one fundamental building
block for everything. This can be interpreted in two ways.
The fundamental building block is either nothing or it is
wholeness. Neither of these cases is consistent with a re-
ductionist framework where identiﬁable parts are taken
as fundamental. One reason is that neither nothing nor
wholeness have outer limits which would allow us to de-
ﬁne or identify them. Instead they are thing-less. And
so, they may not be considered as parts.

As parts do not meet our expectations in terms of fun-
damental concepts for a description from wholeness we
turn to movement or process as a plausible alternative.
This movement or process should in its totality not be
viewed as conﬁned to physical space and time and is not
reducible to a description of some parts that move in a
sequential manner. Instead it is the fundamental dynam-
ics of wholeness, and that which through self-limitation
gives rise to physical space and time along with parts
which may be viewed as properties of, or invariances in,
the movement. And so, the dynamics is such that any
part, and the change of any part, may be traced back
to the fundamental movement. Such a dynamics needs
to be wholeness preserving. Here follows an explanation.
Wholeness may be said to be a totality implicitly con-
taining everything. This in turn appears to imply that
for it to be truly whole it cannot change. If it were to
change and become diﬀerent, then this would imply that
it was not truly whole in the ﬁrst place because it did not
contain itself after the change. At the same time we know
that change, at least in our physical world, exists. There-
fore, we are looking for a dynamical description that al-
lows wholeness to remain essentially unchanged though
moving, from the perspective of parts, and thereby allow-
ing for change. We plan to capture this dynamical fea-
ture of wholeness, the wholeness preserving movement,
mathematically in a fundamental way. This will be the
fundamental concept. And so essentially, the proposition
here is to describe our physical reality as an expression

6

of the dynamics of wholeness.

Furthermore, we should like to have a way of express-
ing diversiﬁcation, preferably as a result of the whole-
ness preserving movement. We also expect to have the
possibility of expressing time, space, physical objects as
properties of or invariances in the movement.

IV. MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK

In order to provide a mathematical foundation that is
capable of expressing features of wholeness at the very
fundamental level, it is suggested that we start with set
theory, since most of mathematics can be expressed in
terms of it, and add the Wholeness Axiom introduced by
Corazza [19] to the normal axioms of set theory. The nor-
mal axioms of set theory are the Zermelo-Fraenkel set of
axioms and the Axiom of Choice, abbreviated ZFC [20],
[21], [22]. For approximatively eighty years it has been
known that most of mathematics is derivable from them.
These axioms refer to sets and are formulated in the for-
mal language {∈}. This means that the only relation
used in the formulation of the axioms is the membership
relation, ∈.

The mathematical theory within which we shall at-
tempt to describe a theory from wholeness will contain
the ZFC set of axioms together with the Wholeness Ax-
iom and will be referred to as ZFC+WA. We will now
proceed to see what the Wholeness Axiom is and what
features of wholeness ZFC+WA is capable of expressing.

A. The mathematical universe V

An important concept for our purposes is the math-
ematical universe. The mathematical universe, V , is a
proper class and can be expressed as:

V = V0 [ V1 [ V2 [ ...,

(8)

where the diﬀerent stages are V0 = ∅, V1 = P (V0),V2 =
P (V1)..., with P () denoting the power set (the set of all
subsets). It is interesting to note that there is a salient
analogy between the mathematical universe V and whole-
ness. As previously mentioned, wholeness implicitly con-
tains everything but is more than the sum of the parts,
and is itself not an explicitly existent entity (a part). The
nature of its existence is implicit. In a similar way V may
be said to contain all the mathematically existent parts
and yet be more than their sum and not itself an explic-
itly, mathematically existent entity. Saying that V is the
union of V0, V1, V2, ... is like saying that wholeness is, or
contains, all the parts. The existence of each stage, Vx for
any ordinal x in V , follows from the ZFC set of axioms.
It is interesting to note, however, that the existence of V
itself cannot be shown from the ZFC set of axioms, since
V is not a set. In other words, V in its totality cannot be
shown to be an explicitly existing mathematical object.

The fact that all its stages can be shown to exist seems to
imply that V should exist as well, however, its existence
cannot be explicitly shown.

It should be stressed that our description of V is but
a description of a feature of wholeness and far from a
complete description of wholeness. Such a description
cannot be expressed in explicit terms because the nature
of wholeness is not reducible to the explicit. Our descrip-
tion in terms of V only refers to the explicit parts and
states that it contains all parts but is more than that.
This way of referring to wholeness is employed because
the aim of this theory is to account for the existence and
dynamics of all explicitly existent parts of reality.

B. The wholeness preserving movement, j

As argued earlier, one of the fundamental concepts
upon which we wish to base a theory from wholeness is
the wholeness preserving movement. This means that we
wish to postulate the existence of such a movement in or-
der to enable a prediction of quantiﬁable characters of an
experimentally veriﬁable entity in terms of the wholeness
preserving movement. It turns out that the Wholeness
Axiom can be seen as expressing the wholeness preserving
movement. The Wholeness Axiom [19] is the assumption
that there is a nontrivial elementary embedding, j, from
the mathematical universe, V , to itself:

j : V → V

(9)

For j to be an elementary embedding means that if some
formula, φ(X) holds true in the domain, which for j is
V , then φ(j(X)) must hold true in the codomain, which
In other words, j is reﬂective
is also V in this case.
and truth preserving.
It can be said to be wholeness
preserving because due to its non-triviality it actually
changes parts while preserving all structures in V .

Deﬁnition (9) can be axiomatized in a consistent man-
ner6 so that ZFC+WA is obtained. This is done by
adding j to the language {∈}, so that we have {∈, j}
and saying that the ZFC set of axioms is valid with the
addition that all instances of Separation and no instance
of Replacement7 are valid for j, and the addition of ax-
ioms that express j as a nontrivial elementary embedding
from V to itself (Nontriviality axiom and Elementarity
axioms). The meaning of this in terms of wholeness will
be discussed in the succeeding sections.

The Wholeness Axiom was developed to prove the ex-
istence of all large cardinals, in mathematics. And so,
elementary embeddings, such as j, are closely connected
with inﬁnities. One of the aspects they have in com-
mon with inﬁnities is that they disclose precisely the

6 despite Kunen’s theorem[23]
7 The Separation and Replacement schema are axioms contained

in the ZFC set of axioms.

7

self-similar, or holographic, type of order we attribute
to wholeness and ﬁnd in the quantum theory. An exam-
ple of self-similarity for the real numbers is that there
are as many real numbers in, say, the interval between 0
and 1, as there are on the whole line. Elementary em-
beddings can be seen as displaying perhaps the ultimate
form of self-similarity because one cannot distinguish a
part from the whole with any deﬁnable formula.

C. The critical point κ

The introduction of the wholeness preserving move-
ment, mathematically formulated as the Wholeness Ax-
iom, brings about some interesting consequences. Of pri-
mary importance is the arising of a critical point. This
happens because the axioms for j ensure that there is a
least ordinal moved by j. This ordinal is denoted κ and
is called the critical point of j. In particular, we see that
Nontriviality for j asserts that there has to be some set
X for which j(X) 6= X, and so, there has to be some
smallest ordinal for which this condition holds true. The
restriction of j to any set of a rank less than κ is the
identity. In other words, for any set Y , of rank less than
κ, j(Y ) = Y . Being an elementary embedding, j is truth
preserving. This means that properties, operations, and
relations that hold true for some sets X1, X2, ... ∈ V also
hold true for j(X1), j(X2), ... ∈ V . This property of the
elementary embedding makes it possible for us to say
more about κ. It turns out, for instance, that j(κ) > κ
(see the Appendix) and that κ is an inﬁnite cardinal with
all the large cardinal properties [19]. In can be mentioned
that, as described in Section 4.E, thanks to κ, j contains
a lot of creative or generative power. This might become
useful for physical theories.

D. Separation and no Replacement for j

Recalling and recapitulating some features of whole-
ness we can say that wholeness is indescribable, it is
more than the sum of parts, and yet it is locally acces-
sible and that through which every part emerges. All
of these features are represented in ZFC+WA. In order
to see this, it is of interest to note that ZFC+WA does
not restrict wholeness, or the wholeness preserving move-
ment, to some explicitly existent mathematical object.
All it does along those lines is to assume the existence of
a wholeness preserving movement. The wholeness pre-
serving movement is itself never deﬁned by some speciﬁc
formula. In fact, it cannot be deﬁned within set theory.
j is neither a set nor a proper class. The fact that j is
not a set follows from j being deﬁned on all of V . To see
why it is not a proper class either we need to take a look
at the axioms of Separation and Replacement.

When axiomatizing the wholeness preserving move-
ment, j, it is said that all instances of Separation and
no instance of Replacement are valid for j. Given a set,

A ∈ V , Separation allows us to talk of a subset of A in
which some property is true for all the elements of that
subset. So, j having all instances of Separation means
that for all properties, P , depending on j, we can take
any set, A, and look at the subset of A containing all
elements for which P is true. That subset of A is itself a
set. Separation for j makes j interesting, powerful, and
promising for a further development in terms of a phys-
ical theory, because it allows j to act locally, meaning
on any particular set. This allows us to use j in local
descriptions. What j does on the entire mathematical
universe, it also does locally on any set.

Replacement, on the other hand tells us that for any
set A and any rule that associates with each element x
of A a set Yx there is a set B that consists precisely of
all Yx, where x ∈ A. Replacement is useful for class
functions. Class functions are functions that are not sets
but proper classes deﬁned on some proper class, such
as for instance on V . Replacement guarantees that the
range of a class function being restricted to some set is
also a set. The range being a set makes its rank limited.
So, we can say that Replacement makes sure that there
can be no deﬁnable way of going through the top of V in
a certain amount of steps (indicated by the rank of the
domain). No instances of Replacement for j tells us that
for all functions, F , depending on j, there may be no set
consisting of all the Y ′
xs associated with the elements x of
a given set. Indeed, Separation for j can be used8 to show
that if F is deﬁned by letting F (0) = κ, F (1) = j(κ),
F (2) = j(j(κ)), etc., and letting F (x) = ∅ for any x
that is not a natural number, then the restriction of F to
the set of natural numbers has a range that goes all the
way through V . More simply, the sequence κ < j(κ) <
j(j(κ)) < ... extends above every rank in the universe.
One says that the ’critical sequence for j is coﬁnal in
the mathematical universe’. Hence F ′s depending on j
do not exist as sets or proper classes in V and may be
capable of going through the top of V . No Replacement
for j assures us that j is not a proper class because it is
not deﬁnable by a formula within set theory. If it were
deﬁnable in set theory, then by ordinary Replacement in
set theory, the F deﬁned above would have the property
that the range of F restricted to the natural numbers
would be a set. As observed above, this is not the case.

Going back to our previously mentioned features of
wholeness, j is indescribable and more than “the sum of
the parts”. At the same time it acts locally and is present
in every part of V.

8 The proof makes essential use of Kunen’s theorem, see Proposi-

tion 3.6 in [19], and [23]

8

E. Laver sequences–emergence of all sets in V

Taking the wholeness preserving movement to be fun-
damental it is desirable to have a way of seeing how the
movement gives rise to every part. Is there a way of de-
scribing the emergence of all sets in the mathematical
universe through the wholeness preserving movement?
Although, strictly speaking, mathematics is in general
not viewed as emerging from anything, it is possible to
see all the sets in the mathematical universe as an ex-
pression of the dynamics of wholeness. In order to see
how this can be done we can use Laver sequences [24].
The deﬁnition of a Laver sequence given here is general-
ized by, and due to, Corazza. A Laver sequence is a set
S of length κ, κ being the critical point of j, that has
the property that for any set X in V there is an elemen-
tary embedding i : Vα → Vβ such that the κ:th term of
i(S) is X. In other words, every set in the mathematical
universe can be located as the κ:th term of an image of
the Laver sequence S by some elementary embedding i.
Moreover, all such i’s are derived directly from j itself.
Therefore, every set exists as if in seed form in the single
point S; its existence as a set becomes apparent when
the appropriately derived embedding i is applied to S.
So, given κ we can construct a sequence such that every
set in the mathematical universe can be seen to emerge
from it through movement. The existence of such se-
quences can be shown assuming the Wholeness Axiom.
Another way of looking at Laver sequences is to see them
as functions f : κ → Vκ such that for any set X ∈ V
there is an elementary embedding, i : Vα → Vβ, such
that i(f )(κ) = X. As functions, Laver sequences live in
the mathematical universe and may be said to be made
out of parts. However, a detailed understanding of the
parts does not facilitate the understanding of them. It is
not until one “shines” an elementary embedding on them
that they become “active” and one realizes their power
to give rise to all sets. These global properties, not per-
ceptible from the details but visible through movement,
are what make them interesting. These properties may
come to play a key role in ﬁnding new formative causal
structures [26] for physical theories from wholeness.

In short, the Wholeness Axiom provides wholeness pre-
serving movement. As a consequence there is a κ with
which we can form a Laver sequence from which all sets
in V can be seen to emerge through the movement.

V. FROM THE WHOLENESS AXIOM
TOWARDS PHYSICS

We shall now sketch out a possible way of elaborating
on and developing the approach of starting from whole-
ness and its here introduced mathematical formalism.
However, before going into the further development of
the mathematics, we note that this approach already pro-
vides us with a conceptual structure that makes it possi-
ble to evolve our intuitive understanding of the theories

we already have, such as the quantum theory. Let us
take a look at such an example.

B. Connection of the mathematical framework
with physics

9

A.

Insights into Heisenberg’s principle of

indeterminacy

Here we argue that if an undivided wholeness is as-
sumed, then the holistic view can provide insights into
features of the quantum theory along with intuitive un-
derstanding. In order to better understand what a holis-
tic view entails and adds, we shall, at this point, ex-
amine some fundamental diﬀerences in the concepts and
requirements for reductionism and holism. A good de-
scription of these diﬀerences may be found in [27].

Reductionism presupposes the possibility of decompo-
sition into identiﬁable parts. This means that we view
the system that we study as essentially being made up of
separate, identiﬁable parts, that interact with each other
as described by laws. The description of the whole sys-
tem is reducible to a description of its parts. In order to
be able to have identiﬁable parts we need to have both
strict causality and strict locality (or space-time conti-
nuity). And having both means that we can in principle
always ﬁnd identiﬁable parts.
In other words, identiﬁ-
able parts are equivalent to strict locality together with
strict causality. Should either of these fail, then we will
no longer be able to identify parts.

Let us now examine the holistic view. This involves
using indivisible wholeness as most basic and fundamen-
tal. The holistic view assumes that there are no separate
parts. Although there may be distinguishable modes on
some level, on a deeper level we will see that separation
and precise distinction are not possible. In other words,
on that level we would not be able to ﬁnd identiﬁable
parts. As a consequence we could not have both strict
causality and strict locality. We could have one of them,
but that would imply that we would not be able to have
the other. As we saw in the second paragraph, having
both implies identiﬁable parts. Another alternative is
that we could have neither strict causality nor strict lo-
cality. It is interesting to note that this is exactly what
happens in the quantum theory [28], and can there be
seen as an expression of Heisenberg’s principle of indeter-
minacy. One can intuitively think of position and time
as expressing the local aspects, while energy and momen-
tum can be considered to express the causal aspects [27].
Assuming wholeness, the appearance of a principle such
as Heisenberg’s principle of indeterminacy can hereby be
seen as a necessary consequence of the undivided whole-
ness itself. We can see why strict causality and strict
locality are not simultaneously possible.

Let us now continue by outlining, step by step, a pos-
sible way of further developing the mathematics so as to
establish a correspondence with physical phenomena. A
detailed exposition of the following presentation will be
published elsewhere by the author.

Since physics is about describing how diﬀerent pro-
cesses relate to each other we are interested in seeing the
kinds of processes that the wholeness preserving move-
ment can generate and what relational structure this
gives rise to. A way of generating diﬀerent processes
is to have j interact with itself. To describe this mathe-
matically we deﬁne the binary operation of application,
·, [29](page 54), and apply j to itself. In doing so repeat-
edly, we end up with a universal algebra Aj comprised of
elements such that each element is obtained by ﬁnitely
many applications of j. Thus j, j · j, j · (j · j), (j · j) · j
are some of the elements found in Aj . Aj together with
application is a free left-distributive algebra with a linear
ordering on it [30]. Left-distributivity means that if a, b,
and c are elements of Aj then a · (b · c) = (a · b) · (a · c).
These kinds of algebras on elementary embeddings have
originally been studied by Laver [30] and an introduction
to them can be found in [31].

With Aj we now have a process algebra where the pro-
cesses can act on each other through application and ev-
ery process is obtained from the wholeness preserving
movement. We note that conceptually, this algebra ﬁts
exceptionally well into the process algebra approach ad-
vocated by Bohm and Hiley [2], [4]. Their goal is to
describe nature in terms of process that originates in the
dynamical holomovement of the implicate order [4]. The
algebra Aj on the elementary embeddings is precisely
that. It is a process algebra, where all the elements are
elements of movement generated by the wholeness pre-
serving movement.

The next step is to note that the process algebra Aj
is, through its left-distributive structure, directly tied to
braids. Left-distributivity can be said to be behind the
It turns out that the process
geometry of braids [31].
algebra Aj is isomorphic to special braids [31](p 103).
Special braids are obtained by letting the unit braid, 1,
act on itself through braid exponentiation [31](p 28). Ev-
ery braid in the braid group can be decomposed into
shifted products of special braids. By looking at Aj as
the algebra of special braids we focus our attention on
the structural aspect, that is, how processes are related
to processes (as is usually done in physics), while steering
away from the insight of what these processes really are,
elementary embeddings representing the wholeness pre-
serving movement whose innermost nature is wholeness.
In physics braids do not only turn up in certain ap-
plications like the experimentally veriﬁed statistics of
anyons in the Quantum Hall eﬀect [32] or more theoreti-
cally as Yang-Baxter operators providing useful solutions
for low dimensional quantum ﬁeld theory [33] or lattice

statistical physics [34], but also in the very fundamental
structure of physics itself as in, for instance, the form of
braided commutativity [35]. In fact, some mathematical
physicists are studying braids and Hopf algebras are do-
ing so in the hope of unifying the quantum theory with
general relativity [35].

Just to give a bit more insight into how braids can
be related to physics in the aforementioned approaches
we follow with a few comments. One particular connec-
tion between braids and statistical mechanics [36] is usu-
ally described in terms of knots, or more generally links.
However, a link can always be written in terms of braids,
as the closure of a braid. Links that may be transformed
into each other without the tearing of any strings, that is
using the so called Reidemeister moves [37], are said to
be equivalent. It turns out that a link can be seen as a
lattice on which we might, for instance, place spins either
at the lattice sites (spin models) or at the edges (vertex
models). The procedure is then to construct models such
that all lattices corresponding to equivalent links give us
the same partition function. This way the partition func-
tion is a link invariant.

However, as already mentioned the connection is not
limited to statistical mechanics. Depending on features
such as global properties and discreteness, the topology
of braids can also be connected with quantum features.
In fact, the connection between statistical mechanics and
knot theory was ﬁrst discovered by Jones [38] by noting
the similarities between von Neumann algebras and the
braid relations. A von Neumann algebra is a C∗-algebra,
used in algebraic approaches to the quantum theory such
as [39]. Jones derived a link invariant, called the Jones
polynomial, which through the connection with von Neu-
mann algebras can be seen as providing expectation val-
ues.

The connection between knots and physics has been
further explored by Kauﬀman [40]. And here we wish
to especially point to a certain bracket polynomial [40](p
97), which can be deﬁned for links or braids. The ap-
proach taken by Kauﬀman in general is to start with a
braid (or link) and with the help of his bracket arrive at
an algebraic structure, a link invariant, which can take
on physical interpretations such as expectation values.
What is proposed here is an approach more along the
lines of Dehorony [31] where we not only look at the al-
gebraic structure associated with a particular braid, but
the structure associated with all possible braids, and in
fact from where they can be seen to originate (a struc-
ture like the process algebra Aj). Applying structures
such as the bracket to Aj would then provide a physi-
cal interpretation. Hence the idea is that in so doing,
this approach would be able to provide a background for
the many already discovered connections between braids
(links and knots) and physics, as well as possibly lead to
new discoveries.

The outlined proposition is schematically depicted in

ﬁgure 1.

10

FIG. 1: Schematic picture summarizing a possible develop-
ment of the approach from Wholeness. The Wholeness Ax-
iom (WA) gives us j, which generates the universal algebra
Aj, which is left-distributive (LD) and behind the geometry of
braids, which through Kauﬀman’s bracket can be connected
to statistical mechanics and the quantum theory. The names
on the right refer to mathematicians who in their work (see
References) in detail describe the alluded connections.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, it is suggested that a dynamical whole-
ness may be capable of providing a conceptual foundation
for the development of physical theories. By starting out
from a broader perspective, primarily motivated by the
quantum theory, it provides the guidelines for the cre-
ation of a theory that may be valid where other currently
existing theories reach their limits. As a fundamental
concept upon which to build a theory from wholeness we
suggest a wholeness preserving movement. Such a move-
ment may be mathematically expressed in a fundamental
way if the Wholeness Axiom is added to the currently
established axioms of Set Theory. Such a mathematical
foundation naturally allows for a description of the emer-
gence of all parts of the mathematical universe. It also
contains holistic features as indescribability, more than
the sum of parts, local accessibility and the holographic
type of order that we ﬁnd in the quantum theory.

We have seen an example of how starting from whole-
ness facilitates the understanding of seemingly paradox-
ical features of existing theories. We have also indicated
how the approach may be further developed mathemat-
ically, through a left-distributive algebra and braids, so
as to connect up with physics.

11

APPENDIX: Proof that j(κ) > κ

conclude that j(κ) < κ, is not consistent. Therefore it
must be so that j(κ) > κ.

Let j : V → V be a non-trivial elementary embedding
from the mathematical universe to itself, with κ as its
critical point. Since j is by deﬁnition non-trivial j(κ) 6=
κ. Let us assume j(κ) < κ, and say that j(κ) = y. Then
since κ is the smallest ordinal moved by j and y < κ
it must mean that j(y) = y. Because of elementarity
ordinal order is preserved, meaning that if y < κ then
j(y) < j(κ). But from the above we see that j(y) cannot
be lesser than j(κ) because j(y) = y = j(κ). And so we

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Paul Corazza for his guidance
as well as B.J. Hiley, E. Sj¨oqvist, D. Abbott, C-G.
Granqvist, P. Nadel-Turo´nski, P. Hammerstein, E. Palm-
gren, J. L. Garcia-Palacios, E.D. Avenda˜no Soto, S.
Mirbt, and D. H´erisson for discussions or comments.

[1] N. Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p 11, 1934).
[2] D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe An On-
tological Interpretation of Quantum Theory, (Routledge,
London and New York, 1993).

[3] A. Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett.

49, 91-94, (1982).

6, 308-355, 1981).

[16] P. W. Anderson, Science 177, no 4047, (1972).
[17] G. W. F. Hegel, Hegel’s Logic : Being part one of the
Encyclopedia of the philosophical sciences (1830) / with
foreword by J. N. Findlay ; transl. by William Wallace
(Oxford University Press, Oxford 1975).

[18] D. Bohm and F. D. Peat, Science, order, and creativity

[4] D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (Rout-

(Routledge, London and New York 2000).

ledge, London and New York 1980).

[19] P. Corazza, Ann. Pure App. Logic, October, 157-260,

[5] M. Sachs, From atomism to Holism in 21st century
physics,Annales de la Foundation de Luis de Broglie, 26,
no special, 389-397, (2001).

[6] D. Bohm, A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum
Theory in Terms of ”Hidden Variables, I and II, Phys.
Rev. vol 85 (1952), p 166-193.

[7] P. R. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion-An ac-
count of the de Broglie-Bohm causal interpretation of
quantum mechanics, Cambridge University Press (1993).
[8] N. Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge, Science

Editions, New York (1965).

[9] D. Bohm, Hidden variables and the implicate order, pub-
lished in Quantum Implications: Essays in Honur of
David Bohm ed. by B.J. Hiley, F.D. Peat, Routledge and
Kegan Paul Ltd, London (1987).

[10] D. Bohm, Meaning as being in the implicate order philos-
ophy of David Bohm: a conversation, published in Quan-
tum Implications: Essays in Honur of David Bohm ed.
by B.J. Hiley, F.D. Peat, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd,
London , (1987).

[11] D. D¨urr, S. Goldstein, N. Zanghi, Quantum Mechanics,
Randomness, and Deterministic Reality. Physics Letters
A 172 (1992) 6-12.

[12] D. D¨urr, S. Goldstein, N. Zanghi, Quantum Equilibrium
and the Origin of Absolute Uncertainty. Journal of Sta-
tistical Physics, Vol 67 (1992), p. 843-907.

[13] B. J. Hiley, From the Heisenberg Picture to Bohm: a
New Perspective on Active Information and its rela-
tion to Shanon Information, published in Proc. Conf.
Quantum Theory: reconsiderations of foundations, ed. A.
Khrennikov, p. 141-162, V¨axj¨o University Press, Sweden
(2002).

[14] C. E. Shannon, A Mathematical Theory of Communica-
tion, The Bell System Technical Journal, vol 27, p 379-
423, 623-656, July, October, (1948).

[15] Primas Hans, Chemistry, Quantum Mechanics and
Reductionism-Perpectives
in Theoretical Chemistry
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York, chapter

(2000).

[20] E. Zermelo, I. Math. Annalen, 65, 261-281, (1908), (En-
glish translation by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg in J. van
Heijenoort, From Frege to G¨odel (Cambridge Harvard
University Press 1967))

[21] A. Fraenkel, Math. Annalen, 86, 230-237, (1922).
[22] http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Zermelo-

FraenkelAxioms.html

[23] K. Kunen, J. Symbolic Logic, 36, no 3, 407-413, (1971).
[24] R. Laver, Israel J. Math, 29, no 4, 385-388, (1978).
[25] A. Lerda, Anyons: Quantum Mechanics of Particles with
Fractional Statistics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-
New York, 1992).

[26] A. Baracca, D. J. Bohm, B. J. Hiley, A. E. G. Stuart On
Some New Notions Concerning Locality and Nonlocality
in the Quantum Theory Il Nuovo Cimento, Vol 28 B, N.
2, August 11th 1975, p 453-466.

[27] D. Bohm, Quantum Theory (Second Edition, Prentice-

Hall Inc, chapter 8, 144-172, 1952).

[28] J. S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Me-
chanics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge chapter
2, 1987).

[29] P. Corazza, Submitted to Annals Of Pure And Applied

Logic (July 15, 2002).

[30] R. Laver, Adv. Math 91, 209-231, (1992).
[31] P. Dehornoy, Braids and Self-Distributivity (Birkh¨auser

Verlag, Basel-Boston-Berlin, 2000).

[32] R. E. Prague and S. M. Girvin, The Quantum Hall Eﬀect

(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990).

[33] C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1312 (1967).
[34] R. J. Baxter, 70, no 1, 193-228 (1972).
[35] S. Majid, Foundations of quantum group theory (Cam-

bridge Univ. Press, Cambridge 1995).

[36] F. Y. Wu, Knot theory and statistical mechanics, Reviews
of Modern Physics, 64, No. 4, October 1992, 1099-1131.
[37] K. Reidemeister, Knotentheorie, Chelsea, New York,
1948; English translation, ed. by L.F. Boron, C.D. Chris-
tenson and B.A. Smith, Knot Theory, BCS Associates,

Moscow, Idaho, 1983.

[38] V.F.R. Jones, A polynomial invariant for links via von
Neumann algebras, Bull.Am.Math.Soc. 12, 103-112.
[39] Rudolf Haag, Local Quantum Physics–Fields, Prticles,
Algebras, 2nd revised edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-

Heidelberg-New York, 1996.

[40] L. H. Kauﬀman, Knots and Physics (World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore, 1991).

12

