4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Aleph Cosmological Principle1

D.S.L. Soares
Departamento de F´ısica, ICEx, UFMG — C.P. 702
30161-970, Belo Horizonte — Brazil

February 20, 2013

‘I saw the Aleph from every point and angle,
and in the Aleph I saw the earth and in the earth the Aleph.’
The Aleph, Jorge Luis Borges, 1945

Abstract

A general cosmological principle — Aleph — is proposed as a sub-
stitute to the Anthropic principle. Furthermore, the universe, con-
ceived as a world ensemble, is characterized by many (possibly inﬁ-
nite) X-Life world principles. The only known X-Life world principle
recovers much of the Anthropic conjecture. The inescapable ﬁnal con-
clusion is the formulation of the Strong Copernicus principle.

1 Introduction

The Anthropic cosmological principle (Carter 1974, Barrow & Tipler 1986)
has been criticized, and eventually rejected as inadequate by some authors,
1For more short comments on modern cosmology check at the following address:

http://www.ﬁsica.ufmg.br/∼dsoares/notices.htm

1

for being heavily inspired on unproved cosmological models, namely, those
known as Hot Big Bang models (Soares 2004a).

Carter presented his Anthropic principle in two versions, weak and strong,
whilst Barrow & Tipler described other versions. The great novelty lies in
the weak version. The discussion that is done here focuses, therefore, upon
the weak version of the principle.

In fact — and it is worth-stressing —, the diﬀerent versions of the An-
thropic Principle are not diﬀerent versions of the same principle but rather
are independent principles by themselves, which is totally opposed to the view
expressed mainly by Barrow & Tipler. Such a thesis is further elaborated
elsewhere (Soares 2004b).

Towards a broader and unprejudiced view, one can depart from the idea
of a universe as a world ensemble (e.g., Carter 1974), except that in a diﬀerent
perspective from what is usually found in the literature, namely, that of a
multiverse (see details in Stoeger et al. 2004 and references therein). Let
each world vector — i.e., each element in the ensemble —, in fact, belong
to the same universe, not being a universe by itself, with its own cosmology,
as assumed in the usual world-ensemble approach. That is to say, the total
mass-energy content of the universe is given by adding up the mass-energy
content of each world vector. Furthermore, each world vector is assumed as
potentially suitable for the existence — or development — of life. In other
words, the overall conditions in that — and all — world element are such
that live organisms are bound to emerge. It is thus characterized by a X-
Life world principle, which simply states that world is as it is because of
restrictions imposed by X-Life being the way it is. These are essentially the
same words in Carter’s formulation of his Anthropic principle. Here they
are used in the context of a much broader cosmological view as it will be
apparent below.

The Anthropic principle has been used in many ways since its proposition.
A sort of strange devotion sometimes characterizes those dealing with the
principle. This resulted into an exaggerated bending of the bow towards one
direction. The situation, comprehensibly, led Soares (2004a) to use irony on
the whole issue, in an attempt to bend the bow to the opposite direction,
eventually reaching a state of reasonable equilibrium. That is also the spirit
pervading the present essay, except that now with a grave approach.

2

2 The E-Life world principle

Ours — the only presently applicable X-Life world principle —, conveniently,
could be termed E-Life world principle, where ”E” stands obviously for
”Earth”. Since the DNA-molecule is the unifying feature of terrestrial life,
the principle is thus stated as constraints derived from DNA-based life upon
the world vector properties. Very much so, it is the present general idea
pervading the Anthropic principle.

Except for the cosmological implications, much of the conclusions derived
from the Anthropic principle (Barrow & Tipler 1986) surely still holds. For
example, the prediction by Fred Hoyle concerning the 7.7 MeV excited state
of 12C, which was necessary in order to increase the probability of the reac-
tion between helium and beryllium to produce carbon, might be considered
In 1952, from the evident
as a genuine E-Life world principle prediction.
abundance of carbon — namely, E-Life —, Hoyle predicted the existence of
a resonance of 12C, in nuclear reactions, at around 7.7 MeV, and almost im-
mediately, in 1953, D.N.F. Dunbar, R.F. Pixley, W.A. Wenzel & W. Whaling
(1953), at Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, Caltech, discovered a state with the
correct properties, at 7.68±0.03 MeV excitation energy. E-Life would not ex-
ist without the 7.7-MeV excited state of 12C. Such a prediction is, of course,
often mentioned in classic Anthropic discussions (see Barrow & Tipler, p.
252).

The reason why general cosmological implications are not valid is that a
given cosmology must be applied to the whole world ensemble and not to a
sole element of it. Aleph is the applicable principle here (see below). Cosmo-
logical predictions are always biased when based in a X-Life world principle.
Intelligent life is always an issue whenever one speaks of life. Intelligence,
another variable in the general cosmological equation, is not considered in the
present discussion. Irrespective of its prevalence, communications between
world-ensemble elements, e.g., between a particular X-based organism and a
DNA-based one, may or may not be possible. In any case, whether or not
two elements of the world ensemble are or may be connected in one or other
way — communication being one of them — is entirely irrelevant here.

3

3 A hypothetical X-Life world principle

Sagan & Salpeter (1976) discuss many aspects of a possible Jovian biology,
an investigation motivated mainly by the fact that contemporary Jovian
atmosphere has many similarities to the primitive terrestrial atmosphere.
They hypothesized the characteristics of Jovian live organisms — in the
form of sinkers and ﬂoaters, understandable in a gaseous environment —
departing from chemical composition, temperature, density, pressure and
other known features of the planet atmosphere. Fundamental for the origin
of life in Jupiter is the time-scale taken by synthesized complex molecules to
move towards large depths, as a result of convective streaming. The time-
scale should be short enough to avoid reaching pyrolytic depths, which would
severe restrict the possibility of biological evolution.

Now, take the Sagan-Salpeter problem in the reverse order. Assume
sinkers and ﬂoaters are abundant in the Jovian atmosphere. One may then
formulate the J-Life world principle — ”J” for ”Jupiter”. With such a life
principle, properties of the Jovian atmosphere might be obtained in the same
way E-Life — Anthropic — predictions are made.

Incidentally, Jovian live balloons would be, in principle, totally discon-
In other words, J-Life world and

nected from DNA-based terrestrial life.
E-Life world would be disconnected from each other.

I am assuming here that Jovian organisms are not DNA-based, which

may not be true. But that does not invalidate the example.

4 Aleph and Copernicus principles

The Aleph Cosmological Principle is the underlying principle to the world en-
semble, i.e., to the universe. Predictions about the formation, evolution and
structure of the universe — cosmology — are related to the Aleph principle.
It is much more general in scope than each X-Life world principle.

Strictly speaking, X-Life world principles do not need intelligent life to
hold. In particular, E-Life world principle would still hold even in the absence
of mankind, of human beings. This is the essence of what could be termed
the Strong Copernicus principle. As long as any sort of DNA-based life do
exist, the E-Life principle would still be there. Useless, due to the absence
of intelligent life. But still there. The Strong Copernicus principle does not

4

require the existence of human beings. Man is not central in the universe,
it may even not exist. Putting it in another form, amongst all DNA-based
forms of life, man is not special. Consciousness makes mankind diﬀerent —
not special — from other E-life organisms, in the sense that mankind is dotted
with moral and ethical values. These are fundamental aspects of human life
but do not change the biological status of human life.
In conclusion, the
Strong Copernicus principle is an imperative scientiﬁc principle.

The philosophical implications herein are innumerable and will not be

treated here.

5 Conclusion

At this point in time there is only one X-Life principle known. Conceivably,
the Aleph cosmological principle is a matter of speculation. Conceptually,
however, it leads to a broader scenario for the knowledge of the universe we
live.

Soares (2001) suggests that the arrow of time is given by the prominence
of life, that is, the universe evolves towards life. In an eternal universe, that
would lead to the startling conclusion that the universe itself is alive! The
Aleph principle is, then, at a certain point, vindicated.

The Aleph cosmological principle is the Aleph-Life principle.

It is of
course prompted to speculation what is the nature of Aleph-Life, in a way
or other, the live universe. Highly speculative matter, on the other hand,
scientiﬁcally unavoidable.

6 References

Barrow, J.D. & Tipler, F.J. 1986, The Anthropic cosmological principle

(Oxford University Press, Oxford)

Carter, B. 1974, Large number coincidences and the Anthropic principle in
cosmology, in Confrontation of cosmological theories with observational
data, IAU Symposium No. 63, Krakow, Poland, September 10-12, 1973.
ed. M.S. Longair, D. Reidel Publishing, Dordrecht, p. 291-298

5

Dunbar, D.N.F., Pixley, R.E., Wenzel, W.A. & Whaling, W. 1953, The

7.68-Mev State in C12. Phys. Rev., 92, 649-650

Sagan, C. & Salpeter, E.E. 1976, Particles, environments, and possible
ecologies in the Jovian atmosphere. Astrophys. J. Supp., 32, 737-755.

Soares, D.S.L. 2001, Time is life, http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0108180

Soares, D.S.L. 2004a, The Anthropic Fake Principle,

http://www.ﬁsica.ufmg.br/˝dsoares/antr/fake.htm

Soares, D.S.L. 2004b, In preparation

Stoeger, W.R., Ellis, G.F.R. & Kirchner, U. 2004, Multiverses and Cosmol-
ogy: Philosophical Issues, http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0407329

6

