4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Quantum Aspects of Geophysics

F. Darabi∗
Department of Physics, Azarbaijan University of Tarbiat Moallem, 53714-161, Tabriz, Iran .

We introduce a simple quantum mechanical justiﬁcation for the formation of folded
mountains. It is very appealing to develop this idea to a theory of Quantum Geophysics

Abstract

PACS: 03.65.Ca, 91.45.Dh.

Quantum mechanics is the basis of our knowledge about the microscopic world. The basic
element in this theory is the wave function Ψ(~r, t) which, in principle, is assumed to include all
the physical information about a quantum mechanical system, and its dynamics is governed by
the Schr¨odinger equation. However, the domain to which one may apply the rules of quantum
mechanics is not limited to the microscopic world. Quantum cosmology is an outstanding
indication of this claim. In this theory, the whole universe, as a single system, is described
by a wave function Ψ(hij, φ) which is believed to incorporate all possible three geometries and
matter ﬁeld conﬁgurations. This wave function satisﬁes a constraint called Wheeler-DeWitt
equation which plays the role of Schr¨odinger equation. One of the major tasks in quantum
cosmology is to look for a good correspondence between the quantum cosmological predictions
and the classical solutions for the geometry and matter ﬁeld conﬁgurations. This is called the
classical limit of quantum cosmology. In both quantum mechanics and quantum cosmology the
quantity |Ψ|2 plays a key important role in the sense that it provides us with the probability
of ﬁnding a deﬁnite conﬁguration. Especially, in the quantum cosmology |Ψ|2 may be used
to investigate the correspondence between the solutions of Wheeler-DeWittt equation, in one
hand, and the classical paths, on the other hand. One is then tempted to try to test the
applicability of quantum mechanics to other macroscopic systems.
In this regard, one may
pay attention to the Earth, as a single system, and consider the formation of mountains on its
crust.

Plate tectonics is a relatively new theory that has revolutionized the way geologists think
about the Earth. Since the mid-1960s, the plate tectonic theory has been rigorously and
successfully tested. According to this theory, the surface of the Earth is broken into a series of
relatively thin, but large plates. The size and position of these plates change over time. The
fastest plates e.g. Paciﬁc Plates, move at over 10cm a year. The African plate moves about
25 mm per year, whereas the Australian plate moves about 60 mm per year. The edges of
these plates, where they move against each other, are sites of intense geologic activities, such

∗e-mail: f.darabi@azaruniv.edu

1

as earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain building. Folded mountains are the most common
type of mountain. They are created by tectonic plates pushing against each other. This
creates intense pressure. Therefore, the only direction for these mountains to move is up. The
formation of folded mountains on Earth’s surface can be compared to the process of wrinkling
a ﬂexible rug on a ﬂoor. As horizontal pressure is applied along the edge of a rug, folds appear
perpendicular to the direction of pressure. On Earth, as horizontal pressure is applied to rocks,
ridges and valleys form perpendicular to the direction of the pressure.

According to quantum theory, every mass m, with momentum p has a wavelength λ = h
p ,
where h is the planck constant. In quantum cosmology the universe is simply assumed to be a
particle in a deﬁnite potential and one usually takes the units so that h = 1. This is because
people are usually interested in quantum cosmology to describe the birth of the universe and
ﬁnd the correct boundary conditions to investigate properly the singularity problems in general
relativity, and the value of h is not of prime importance. In other words, to the extent we are
dealing with the characteristic behavior of the wave function of the universe, namely |Ψ|2, we
may ignore h.

It is therefore appealing to assume a relation λ ∼ p−1 to describe the formation of folded
mountains on the basis of wave-particle interpretation of quantum mechanics. Suppose a
particle with total energy E = mgy0 is subjected to the following one-dimensional gravitational
potential

V (x) = 


∞

ax



x ≤ 0

x > 0

where a = E
L is a constant and L is a length over which the particle is limited to its classical
motion. Without solving the Schr¨odinger equation one may obtain the characteristic features
of the particle’s wave function. At x = 0, the wave function is zero due to the inﬁnite potential.
At x ≈ 0, the wavelength is small due to the high velocity of the particle and the amplitude
is small, as well, due to the fact that the probability of observing this fast particle at x ≈ 0 is
small. As x becomes larger the wavelength and the amplitude of the particle’s wave gets larger,
as well, due to the fact that the velocity of the particle decreases with x. At x = L, the wave
has its maximum wavelength and amplitude, because the region x > L is classically forbidden
for the particle, so the associated wave will lose the oscillating behavior and the amplitude
starts decreasing. If we now evaluate Ψ(x) and plot |Ψ(x)|2 in the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ L, as in
Fig.1, we then surprisingly obtain almost the same general pattern of a folded mountain as
viewed from its transverse cross section, starting from its ﬂat point and ending at the top.
We believe this similarity is not a coincidence. One may think that when two plates collide
each other the velocity of their front boundaries decreases considerably whereas the whole
plates keep their motion, as before. Therefore, as we move from inside the plates towards
colliding boundaries the velocity of interior boundary layers decreases smoothly down to the
velocity of the front boundaries. We now associate a wavelength to each layer which may be
interpreted as a particle with varying velocity in the above potential. The wavelength of the
interior boundary layers will be shorter and that of front boundaries will be longer due to
the faster and slower motions of these layers, respectively. On the other hand, the amplitude
|Ψ| for the interior boundary layers are smaller and that of front boundaries are larger due to
the same reason. We may now interpret the whole interior part of each plate as an inﬁnite

2

potential and the boundary layers as a particle, with varying velocity, obeying the above linear
potential. Each front boundary layer then represents a particle with total energy E = mgy0 at
a distance L from the inﬁnite potential. The associated wave of this layer will have the longest
wavelength and the biggest amplitude; see the last wavelength at the right side in Fig.1, for a
typical value L = 200. Combining these behaviors of two colliding front boundaries and taking
into account |Ψ|2 leads to a pattern which resembles the central wide and top portion of the
folded mountain, see the central portion in Fig.2.

On the contrary, the last interior boundary layer of each plate represents a particle with
total energy E = p2
2m approaching the inﬁnite potential. The associated wave of these layers
will have the shortest wavelength and vanishing amplitude; see the ﬁrst wavelength at the left
side in Fig.1. One may correspond this behavior, by taking |Ψ|2, to the ﬂat sides of the folded
mountain, see Fig.2. In general, if we associate these wave properties, to each two-dimensional
plate, as Ψ1 and Ψ2, then the folded mountains will be nothing but the manifestation of a
wave interference phenomena, namely |Ψ1 + Ψ2|2, which resembles the general pattern of these
mountains. In this way, one may correspond |Ψ|2 to the height of the mountain at a given
point, provided we interpret |Ψ|2 as the probability of ﬁnding the geologic matter at that
point. The top point of a mountain is then a point for which |Ψ|2 is maximum, namely, the
probability of matter accumulation at this point is maximum.

In this regard, one may assume that all types of mountains, hills and valleys are produced
due to the very complicate wave interference phenomena originating from the interior dynamics
of hot mantle. This is an interesting realization of wave-particle duality at this large scale
phenomena.

It seems, as in quantum mechanics ( or quantum cosmology ), that one may go beyond
and look for a Schr¨odinger-like equation, in Geophysics, whose solution in principle may have
complete information about the formation of all types of mountains, hills and valleys. If we
deﬁne the state ket |α > to represent the whole crust of the Earth, one may then write

< α|α >= Z

d2X| < X|α > |2 = 1,

where | < X|α > |2 determines the shape of the crust at position X, on the two dimensional
surface of the Earth.

References

[1] J. M. Bird, Plate tectonics, Washington. DC, American Geophysical Union, 986 (1980).

3

Figure captions

Fig. 1. |Ψ|2 for a particle in the potential V (x), 0 ≤ x ≤ L.

Fig. 2. |Ψ|2 for two particles in the piecewise potentials V (x), 0 ≤ x ≤ L and V (2L − x), L ≤
x ≤ 2L.

4

This figure "1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0410060v1

This figure "2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0410060v1

