4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
1
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Proof that the Standard Transformations of E and B
are not the Lorentz Transformations. Application to
Motional EMF

Tomislav Ivezi´c
Ruder Boˇskovi´c Institute, P.O.B. 180, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia
ivezic@irb.hr

In this paper it is proved by using the Cliﬀord algebra formalism that the
standard transformations (ST) of the three-dimensional (3D) vectors of the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds E and B are not the Lorentz transformations
(LT) of well-deﬁned quantities from the 4D spacetime. This diﬀerence be-
tween the ST and the LT is obtained regardless of the used algebraic objects
(1-vectors or bivectors) for the representation of the electric and magnetic
ﬁelds in the usual observer dependent decompositions of F . The LT correctly
transform the whole 4D quantity, e.g., Ef = F · γ0, whereas the ST are the
result of the application of the LT only to the part of Ef , i.e., to F , but
leaving γ0 unchanged. The new decompositions of F in terms of 4D quan-
tities that are deﬁned without reference frames, i.e., the absolute quantities,
are introduced and discussed. It is shown that the LT of the 4D quantities
representing electric and magnetic ﬁelds correctly describe the motional elec-
tromotive force (emf) for all relatively moving inertial observers, whereas it
is not the case with the ST of the 3D E and B.

KEY WORDS: standard and Lorentz transformations od the 3D E and B,

motional emf

1. INTRODUCTION

It is generally accepted by physics community that there is an agreement
between the classical electromagnetism and the special relativity (SR). Such
opinion is prevailing in physics already from the Einstein ﬁrst paper(1) on
SR. The standard transformations (ST) of the 3D vectors of the electric and
magnetic ﬁelds, E and B respectively, are ﬁrst derived by Lorentz(2), and
independently by Einstein,(1) and subsequently quoted in almost every text-
book and paper on relativistic electrodynamics. They are considered to be
the Lorentz transformations (LT) of these vectors (see, e.g., Refs. 1,2,3). The

1

same opinion holds in all usual Cliﬀord algebra formulations of the classical
electromagnetism, e.g., the formulations with Cliﬀord multivectors.(4,5,6) In
this paper it is proved that the above mentioned ST of E and B Sec. 3.2 Eq.
(14) (or Sec. 3.3 Eqs. (19), (20) and (22)) are not the LT of the 3D E and
B. The LT (the active ones) of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are given by
the relations (9) and (10) Sec. 3.1 (or Eqs. (17), (18) and (21) Sec. 3.3) and
they are quite diﬀerent than the ST. The LT always transform the whole 4D
quantity representing the electric or magnetic ﬁeld, e.g., Ef = F · γ0, see Eq.
(9) Sec. 3.1, whereas the ST are the result of the application of the LT only
to the part of Ef , i.e., to F , but leaving γ0 unchanged, see Eqs. (12) and (14)
Sec. 3.2. Further in this paper we have presented the new decompositions
of F in terms of well-deﬁned geometric 4D quantities, the 1-vectors of the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds E and B, as in Eq. (23) Sec. 4, see also Ref. 7,
then with the bivectors EHv and BHv as in Eq. (24) Sec. 4, and with the
1-vector EJv and the bivector BJv, Eq. (25), Sec. 4, which are all deﬁned
without reference frames, i.e., they are absolute quantities (AQs).

In the Cliﬀord algebra formalism (as in the tensor formalism) one deals
either with 4D quantities that are deﬁned without reference frames, the AQs,
e.g., the Cliﬀord multivector F (the abstract tensor F ab) or, when some basis
has been introduced, with coordinate-based geometric quantities (CBGQs)
that comprise both components and a basis. The SR that exclusively deals
with AQs or, equivalently, with CBGQs, can be called the invariant SR. The
reason for this name is that upon the passive LT any CBGQ remains un-
changed. The invariance of some 4D CBGQ upon the passive LT reﬂects
the fact that such mathematical, invariant, geometric 4D quantity repre-
sents the same physical object for relatively moving observers. It is taken
in the invariant SR that such 4D geometric quantities are well-deﬁned not
only mathematically but also experimentally, as measurable quantities with
real physical meaning. Thus they have an independent physical reality. The
invariant SR is discussed in Ref. 8 in the Cliﬀord algebra formalism and in
Refs. 9, 10 in the tensor formalism. It is explicitly shown in Ref. 10 that the
true agreement with experiments that test SR exists when the theory deals
with well-deﬁned 4D quantities, i.e., the quantities that are invariant upon
the passive LT. The usual ST of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, the trans-
formations (12), (13) and (14), i.e., Eq. (11), Sec. 3.2 (or Eqs. (19), (20) and
(22) Sec. 3.3) are typical examples of the “apparent” transformations that
are ﬁrst discussed in Refs. 11,12. The “apparent” transformations of the
spatial distances (the Lorentz contraction) and the temporal distances (the

2

dilatation of time) are elaborated in detail in Refs. 9,10, see also Ref. 13.
The “apparent” transformations relate, in fact, the quantities from “3+1”
space and time (spatial, or temporal distances taken separately) and not
well-deﬁned 4D quantities. But, in contrast to the LT of well-deﬁned 4D
quantities, the “apparent” transformations do not refer to the same physical
object for relatively moving observers.

In Secs. 5.1 and 5.2 we have considered the motional emf in two relatively
moving 4D inertial frames of reference using the 3D quantities E and B and
their ST and the geometric 4D quantities and their LT. It is shown that the
emf obtained by the application of the ST is diﬀerent for relatively moving
4D observers. When the geometric 4D quantities and their LT are used then
the emf is always the same; it is independent of the chosen reference frame
and of the chosen system of coordinates in it.

The same proof as here is also presented in the tensor formalism in Ref.
14. The disagreement between the LT and the ST of the electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds, that is proved in the Cliﬀord algebra formalism in this paper, and
in the tensor formalism in Ref. 14, is used in Ref. 7 to prove in a mathemati-
cally rigorous manner that, contrary to the general belief, the usual Maxwell
equations with the 3D E and B are not covariant upon the LT but upon the
ST. Furthermore, in Ref. 7, the new Lorentz invariant ﬁeld equations are
presented with well-deﬁned 4D quantities, the AQs.

2. THE γ0 - SPLIT AND THE USUAL EXPRESSIONS FOR

E AND B IN THE γ0 - FRAME

2.1. A Brief Summary of Geometric Algebra

First we provide a brief summary of Cliﬀord algebra with multivectors,
see, e.g., Refs. 4,5,6. We write Cliﬀord vectors in lower case (a) and general
multivectors (Cliﬀord aggregate) in upper case (A). The space of multi-
vectors is graded and multivectors containing elements of a single grade,
r, are termed homogeneous and written Ar. The geometric (Cliﬀord) prod-
uct is written by simply juxtaposing multivectors AB. A basic operation
on multivectors is the degree projection hAir which selects from the mul-
tivector A its r− vector part (0 = scalar, 1 = vector, 2 = bivector, ....).
We write the scalar (grade-0) part simply as hAi . The geometric product
of a grade-r multivector Ar with a grade-s multivector Bs decomposes into

3

e

e

B

A,

g

AB =

ArBs = hABi r+s + hABi r+s−2 ...+ hABi |r−s| . The inner and outer (or exte-
rior) products are the lowest-grade and the highest-grade terms respectively
of the above series Ar · Bs ≡ hABi |r−s| , and Ar ∧ Bs ≡ hABi r+s . For vec-
tors a and b we have ab = a · b + a ∧ b, where a · b ≡ (1/2)(ab + ba), and
a ∧ b ≡ (1/2)(ab − ba). Reversion is an invariant kind of conjugation, which
a = a, for any vector a, and it reverses the order of
is deﬁned by
vectors in any given expression. Any multivector A is a geometric 4D quan-
tity deﬁned without reference frame, i.e., an AQ. When some basis has been
introduced A can be written as a CBGQ comprising both components and a
basis. Usually, Refs. 4,5,6, one introduces the standard basis. The generators
of the spacetime algebra are taken to be four basis vectors {γµ} , µ = 0, ...3
(the standard basis) satisfying γµ · γν = ηµν = diag(+ − −−). This basis
is a right-handed orthonormal frame of vectors in the Minkowski spacetime
M 4 with γ0 in the forward light cone. The γk (k = 1, 2, 3) are spacelike
vectors. The basis vectors γµ generate by multiplication a complete basis for
the spacetime algebra: 1, γµ, γµ ∧ γν, γµγ5,γ5 (16 independent elements). γ5
is the pseudoscalar for the frame {γµ} .

e

We remark that the standard basis corresponds, in fact, to the speciﬁc
system of coordinates, i.e., to Einstein’s system of coordinates. In the Ein-
stein system of coordinates the Einstein synchronization(1) of distant clocks
and Cartesian space coordinates xi are used in the chosen inertial frame of
reference. However diﬀerent systems of coordinates of an inertial frame of
reference are allowed and they are all equivalent in the description of physical
phenomena. For example, in Ref. 9 two very diﬀerent, but completely equiv-
alent systems of coordinates, the Einstein system of coordinates and “radio”
(“r”) system of coordinates, are exposed and exploited throughout the paper.
The CBGQs representing some 4D physical quantity in diﬀerent relatively
moving inertial frames of reference, or in diﬀerent systems of coordinates in
the chosen inertial frame of reference, are all mathematically equal and thus
they are the same quantity for diﬀerent observers, or in diﬀerent systems of
coordinates. Then, e.g., the position 1-vector x (a geometric quantity) can
be decomposed in the S and S′ frames and in the standard basis {γµ} as
x = xµγµ = x′µγ′
µ. The primed quantities are the Lorentz transforms of the
unprimed ones. In such interpretation the LT are considered as passive trans-
formations; both the components and the basis vectors are transformed but
the whole geometric quantity remains unchanged. Thus we see that under
the passive LT a well-deﬁned quantity on the 4D spacetime, i.e., a CBGQ, is

4

an invariant quantity.

In the usual Cliﬀord algebra formalism(4,5,6) instead of working only with
such observer independent quantities one introduces a space-time split and
the relative vectors. By singling out a particular time-like direction γ0 we
can get a unique mapping of spacetime into the even subalgebra of spacetime
algebra. For each event x this mapping is speciﬁed by xγ0 = ct + x, ct =
x · γ0, x = x ∧ γ0. The set of all position vectors x is the 3D position space
of the observer γ0 and it is designated by P 3. The elements of P 3 are called
the relative vectors (relative to γ0) and they will be designated in boldface.
The explicit appearance of γ0 implies that the space-time split is observer
dependent. If we consider the position 1-vector x in another relatively moving
inertial frame of reference S′ (characterized by γ′
0) then the space-time split
in S′ and in the Einstein system of coordinates is xγ′
0 = ct′ + x′. This xγ′
0
is not obtained by the LT from xγ0. (The hypersurface t′ = const. is not
connected in any way with the hypersurface t = const.) Thence the spatial
and the temporal components (x, t) of some geometric 4D quantity (x) (and
thus the relative vectors as well) are not physically well-deﬁned quantities.
Only their union is physically well-deﬁned quantity in the 4D spacetime from
the invariant SR viewpoint.

2.2. The Usual Expressions for E and B in the γ0 - Frame

Let us now see how the space-time split is introduced in the usual Cliﬀord
algebra formalism(4,5) of electromagnetism. The bivector ﬁeld F is expressed
in terms of the sum of a relative vector E and a relative bivector γ5B by
making a space-time split in the γ0 - frame

F = EH + cγ5BH, EH = (F · γ0)γ0 = (1/2)(F − γ0F γ0),

γ5BH = (1/c)(F ∧ γ0)γ0 = (1/2c)(F + γ0F γ0).

(1)

(The subscript H is for “Hestenes.”) Both EH and BH are, in fact, bivectors.
Similarly in Ref. 6 F is decomposed in terms of 1-vector EJ and a bivector
BJ (the subscript J is for “Jancewicz”) as

F = γ0 ∧ EJ − cBJ , EJ = F · γ0, BJ = −(1/c)(F ∧ γ0)γ0.

(2)

Instead of to use EH, BH or EJ, BJ we shall mainly deal (except in Secs. 3.3
and 4) with simpler but completely equivalent expressions in the γ0 - frame,

5

(3)

(5)

(6)

i.e., with 1-vectors that will be denoted as Ef and Bf . Then

F = Ef ∧ γ0 + c(γ5Bf ) · γ0,
Ef = F · γ0, Bf = −(1/c)γ5(F ∧ γ0).

All these quantities can be written as CBGQs in the standard basis {γµ} .
Thus

F = (1/2)F µνγµ ∧ γν = F 0kγ0 ∧ γk + (1/2)F klγk ∧ γl,

k, l = 1, 2, 3.

(4)

Ef = Eµ
Bf = Bµ

f γµ = 0γ0 + F k0γk,
f γµ = 0γ0 + (−1/2c)ε0kliFklγi.

We see from Eqs. (4) and (5) that the components of F in the {γµ} basis (i.e.,
in the Einstein system of coordinates) give rise to the tensor (components) F µν =
γν · (γµ · F ) = (γν ∧ γµ) · F, which, written out as a matrix, has entries

Ei

f = F i0, Bi

f = (−1/2c)ε0kliFkl.

The relation (6) is nothing else than the standard identiﬁcation of the com-
ponents F µν with the components of the 3D vectors E and B, see, e.g., Ref.
3. It is worth noting that all expressions with γ0, Eq. (3), actually refer to
the 3D subspace orthogonal to the speciﬁc timelike direction γ0. Really it can
be easily checked that Ef ·γ0 = Bf ·γ0 = 0, which means that they are orthog-
onal to γ0; Ef and Bf do not have the temporal components E0
f = 0.
These results, Eq. (6), are quoted in numerous textbooks and papers treating
relativistic electrodynamics, see, e.g., Ref. 3.

f = B0

Actually in the usual covariant approaches one forgets about temporal
components E0
f and simply makes the identiﬁcation of six indepen-
dent components of F µν with three components Ei and three components Bi
according to the relations

f and B0

Ei = F i0, Bi = (−1/2c)εiklFkl.
(The components of the 3D ﬁelds E and B are written with lowered (generic)
subscripts, since they are not the spatial components of the 4D quantities.
This refers to the third-rank antisymmetric ε tensor too. The super- and
subscripts are used only on the components of the 4D quantities.) Then in
the usual covariant approaches, e.g., Ref. 3, the 3D E and B, as geometric

(7)

6

f and Bi

f and Bi

quantities in the 3D space, are constructed from these six independent com-
ponents of F µν and the unit 3D vectors i, j, k, e.g., E =F 10i + F 20j + F 30k.
(We note that Einstein’s fundamental work(15) is the earliest reference on
covariant electrodynamics and on the identiﬁcation of some components of
F αβ with the components of the 3D E and B.) There is an important dif-
ference between the relations (6) and (7). As seen from Eqs. (3)-(7) Ef and
Bf and their components Ei
f are obtained by a correct mathemati-
cal procedure from the geometric 4D quantities F and γ0. The components
Ei
f are multiplied by the unit 1-vectors γi (4D quantities) to form
the geometric 4D quantities Ef and Bf . In such a treatment the unit 3D
vectors i, j, k, (geometric quantities in the 3D space) do not appear at any
point. On the other hand the mapping, i.e., the simple identiﬁcation, Eq.
(7), of the components Ei and Bi with some components of F µν (deﬁned
on the 4D spacetime) is not a permissible tensor operation, i.e., it is not a
mathematically correct procedure. The same holds for the construction of
the 3D vectors E and B in which the components of the 4D quantity F µν
are combined with the unit 3D vectors, see the second paper in Ref. 7 for
the more detailed discussion. Thus it is the relation (6) that is obtained in
a mathematically correct way and not the relation (7).

It has to be noted that the whole procedure that gives Eq. (6) is made
in an inertial frame of reference with the Einstein system of coordinates.
In another system of coordinates that is diﬀerent than the Einstein system
of coordinates, e.g., diﬀering in the chosen synchronization (as it is the “r”
f with F i0, as in
synchronization considered in Ref. 9) the identiﬁcation of Ei
Eq. (6) (and also for Bi
f ), is impossible and meaningless. In Sec. 4 we shall
present a coordinate-free decomposition of F .

3. THE PROOF THAT THE ST OF E AND B ARE NOT

THE LT

3.1. The Active LT of the Electric and Magnetic Fields

Let us now explicitly show that the usual transformations of the 3D E
and B are not the LT of quantities that are well-deﬁned on the 4D spacetime.
First we ﬁnd the correct expressions for the LT (the active ones) of Ef and Bf .
In the usual Cliﬀord algebra formalism(4,5,6) the LT are considered as active
transformations; the components of, e.g., some 1-vector relative to a given
inertial frame of reference (with the standard basis {γµ}) are transformed into

7

the components of a new 1-vector relative to the same frame (the basis {γµ}
is not changed). Furthermore the LT are described with rotors R, R
R = 1,
in the usual way as p → p′ = Rp
µγµ. But every rotor in spacetime
R = p′
can be written in terms of a bivector as R = eθ/2. For boosts in arbitrary
direction

e

e

R = eθ/2 = (1 + γ + γβγ0n)/(2(1 + γ))1/2,
θ = αγ0n, β is the scalar velocity in units of c, γ = (1 − β2)−1/2, or in
terms of an ‘angle’ α we have tanh α = β, cosh α = γ, sinh α = βγ, and
n is not the basis vector but any unit space-like vector orthogonal to γ0;
eθ = cosh α + γ0n sinh α. One can also express the relationship between the
two relatively moving frames S and S′ in terms of rotor as γ′
R.
For boosts in the direction γ1 the rotor R is given by the relation (8) with
e
γ1 replacing n (all in the standard basis {γµ}). Then using Eq.
(5) the
transformed E′

µ = Rγµ

f can be written as

(8)

E′

f = R(F · γ0)
= −βγE1

R = E′µ
R = R(F k0γk)
f γ2 + E3
f γ1 + E2
e

f γ0 + γE1
e

f γµ =
f γ3,

(9)

what is the usual form for the active LT of the 1-vector Ef = Eµ
we ﬁnd for B′
f

f γµ. Similarly

B′

f = R [−(1/c)γ5(F ∧ γ0)]
f γµ = −βγB1

= B′µ

f γ0 + γB1

e

R = R

(cid:2)
f γ1 + B2

(−1/2c)ε0kliFklγi
f γ2 + B3

f γ3,

(cid:3)

e

R =

(10)

what is the familiar form for the active LT of the 1-vector Bf = Bµ
f γµ. It
is important to note that E′
f and B′
f are not orthogonal to γ0, i.e., they
have the temporal components 6= 0. They do not belong to the same 3D
subspace as Ef and Bf , but they are in the 4D spacetime spanned by the
whole standard basis {γµ}. The relations (9) and (10) imply that the space-
time split in the γ0 - system is not possible for the transformed F ′ = RF
R,
i.e., F ′ cannot be decomposed into E′
f as F is decomposed in the
e
relation (3), F ′
6= E′
f ) · γ0. Notice, what is very important,
that the components Eµ
f (Bµ
f ) from Eq. (5) transform upon the active LT
f (B′µ
again to the components E′µ
f ) from Eqs. (9) ((10)); there is no mixing
of components. Thus by the active LT Ef transforms to E′
f and Bf to B′
f .
Actually, as we said, this is the way in which every 1-vector transforms upon
the active LT.

f ∧ γ0 + c(γ5B′

f and B′

8

3.2. The ST of the Electric and Magnetic Fields

It is assumed in all standard derivations, e.g., Refs. 15, 3, that one can
again perform the same identiﬁcation of the transformed components F ′µν
with the components of the 3D E′ and B′ as in Eq. (7), i.e.,

E′

i = F ′i0, B′

i = (−1/2c)εiklF ′
kl,

(11)

where the same remark about the (generic) subscripts holds also here. As
we said before such simple identiﬁcation is not a mathematically correct pro-
cedure. However a similar identiﬁcation is performed in all usual geometric
approaches. Namely instead of making the correct LT of Ef and Bf as in
Sec. 3.1 it is assumed in all Cliﬀord algebra formalisms, e.g., Refs. 4,5,6,
that the relation (6) with the primed quantities replacing the unprimed ones,
has to be valid for the transformed components as well. This means that the
ST for E′
st (the subscript st is for standard) are derived assuming
that the quantities obtained by the active LT of Ef and Bf are again in the
3D subspace of the γ0 - observer. Thus for the transformed E′
st again
hold that E′0
st · γ0 = 0 as for Ef and Bf .
Thence, in contrast to the correct LT of Ef and Bf , (9) and (10) respectively,
it is supposed in the usual derivations(4,5,6) that

st = 0, i.e., that E′

st · γ0 = B′

st and B′

st and B′

st = B′0

E′

st = (RF
= E1

R) · γ0 = F ′ · γ0 = F ′k0γk = E′k

f γ1 + (γE2

f − βγcB3

f )γ2 + (γE3

e

stγk =
f + βγcB2

f )γ3,

where F ′ = RF

R. Similarly we ﬁnd for B′
st

e

B′

st = −(1/c)γ5(F ′ ∧ γ0) = −(1/2c)ε0kliF ′
B1

f /c)γ2 + (γB3

f γ1 + (γB2

f + βγE3

klγi = B′i
f /c)γ3.

f − βγE2

stγi =

From the transformations (12) and (13) one simply ﬁnds the transformations
of the spatial components E′i

st and B′i
st

E′i

st = F ′i0, B′i

st = (−1/2c)ε0kliF ′
kl,

which is the relation (6) with the primed quantities. As can be seen from
Eqs. (12), (13) and (14) the transformations for E′i
st. correspond
to the ST of components of the 3D vectors E and B, Eq. (11), which are
quoted in almost every textbook and paper on relativistic electrodynamics

st. and B′i

(12)

(13)

(14)

9

including Refs. 1 and 3. These relations (12), (13) and (14) are explicitly
derived and given in the Cliﬀord algebra formalism, e.g., in Ref. 4, Space-
Time Algebra (Eq. (18.22)), New Foundations for Classical Mechanics (Ch.
9 Eqs. (3.51a,b)) and in Ref. 6 (Ch. 7 Eqs. (20a,b)). Notice that, in contrast
to the active LT (9) and (10), according to the ST (12) and (13) (i.e., (14))
the transformed components E′i
st are expressed by the mixture of components
Ei
st. In all previous treatments of SR, e.g.,
st. and B′i
Refs. 4,5,6 (and Refs. 1,2,3, Ref. 15) the transformations for E′i
st.
are considered to be the LT of the 3D electric and magnetic ﬁelds. However
our analysis shows that the transformations for E′i
st., Eq. (14), are
derived from the transformations (12) and (13), which are not the LT; the
LT are given by the relations (9) and (10).

f , and the same holds for B′i

st. and B′i

f and Bi

The same results can be obtained with the passive LT, either by using
a coordinate-free form of the LT (such one as in Ref. 9), or by using the
standard expressions for the LT in the Einstein system of coordinates from
Ref. 3. The passive LT transform always the whole 4D quantity, basis and
components, leaving the whole quantity unchanged. Thus under the passive
LT the ﬁeld bivector F as a well-deﬁned 4D quantity remains unchanged,
i.e., F = (1/2)F µνγµ ∧ γν = (1/2)F ′µνγ′
ν (all primed quantities are the
Lorentz transforms of the unprimed ones). In the same way it holds that,
e.g., Eµ
µ. The invariance of some 4D CBGQ upon the passive
LT is the crucial requirement that must be satisﬁed by any well-deﬁned 4D
quantity.
It reﬂects the fact that such mathematical, invariant, geometric
4D quantity represents the same physical object for relatively moving ob-
servers. The use of CBGQs enables us to have clearly and correctly deﬁned
concept of sameness of a physical system for diﬀerent observers. Thus in the
invariant SR such quantity that does not change upon the passive LT has an
independent physical reality, both theoretically and experimentally.

f γµ = E′µ

µ ∧ γ′

f γ′

st γ′

st.γ′

f γµ and E′µ

However it can be easily shown that Eµ

f γµ 6= E′µ
µ. This means that, e.g.,
Eµ
µ are not the same quantity for observers in S and S′. As far as
relativity is concerned the quantities, e.g., Eµ
µ, are not related to
one another. Their identiﬁcation is the typical case of mistaken identity. The
fact that they are measured by two observers (γ0 - and γ′
0 - observers) does
not mean that relativity has something to do with the problem. The reason
is that observers in the γ0 - system and in the γ′
0 - system are not looking at
the same physical object but at two diﬀerent objects. Every observer makes
measurement on its own object and such measurements are not related by the

f γµ and E′µ

st.γ′

10

st. and B′i

LT. Thus from the point of view of the invariant SR the transformations for
E′i
st., Eq. (14), are not the LT of some well-deﬁned 4D quantities.
(This is also exactly proved in the tensor formalism in Ref. 14.) Therefore,
contrary to the general belief, it is not true from the invariant SR viewpoint
that, e.g., Ref. 3, Jackson’s Classical Electrodynamics, Sec. 11.10: ”A purely
electric or magnetic ﬁeld in one coordinate system will appear as a mixture
of electric and magnetic ﬁelds in another coordinate frame.”

Let us now examine some derivations of the ST that directly deal with
the 3D E and B. Such derivation is also presented in Einstein’s fundamental
paper(1) and it is discussed in detail in Ref. 9, Sec. 5.3. In Ref. 1 Einstein
explicitly worked with the Maxwell equations written in terms of the 3D E
and B. The main point in his derivation, that is later taken over in numerous
papers and textbooks, e.g., Ref. 16, Sec. 6.2., is the use of the principle of
relativity for the equations with the 3D quantities. Thus Einstein(1) declares:
”Now the principle of relativity requires that if the Maxwell-Hertz equations
for empty space hold good in system K, they also hold good in system k, .. .”
The requirement that the usual Maxwell equations with the 3D E and B have
the same form in relatively moving inertial frames led him to the ST for the
components of the 3D E and B, Eq. (11). From the invariant SR viewpoint
the objection to such type of the derivation of the ST is that the relatively
moving inertial frames are the 4D frames connected by the LT acting on the
4D spacetime. Accordingly the principle of relativity necessarily refers to
the laws formulated in the 4D spacetimes. Therefore this principle cannot
be taken as the requirement for the form of the laws written in terms of the
3D quantities E and B. As a consequence the derivation of such type as in
Ref. 1 is not in accordance with the symmetry of the 4D spacetime.

Another type of the derivation of the ST that also uses the 3D quantities is
given, e.g., in Ref. 16, Sec. 6.3. In that derivation(16) it is supposed that the
usual expression for the Lorentz force as a 3D vector (geometric quantity in
the 3D space) must be of the same form in two relatively moving 4D inertial
frames of reference, F = qE + qV × B and F′ = qE′ + qV′ × B′, Eqs. (6.42)
and (6.43) in Ref. 16. It is stated in Ref. 16, p. 159: ”It will be assumed that
eqns (6.42) and (6.43) refer to the same act of measurements of the ﬁelds, ...”
The ST for the 3D E and B are then obtained using the LT of the 4-force
and taking from them only the transformations of the components of the 3D
force F. The objections to such derivation, from the invariant SR viewpoint,
are that (i) the form invariance of the 3D Lorentz force doesn’t follow from
any physical law; the principle of relativity doesn’t say anything about the

11

form invariance of the 3D quantities, (ii) F is not invariant upon the passive
LT which means, according to the above discussion, that, contrary to the
quoted statement from Ref. 16, F and F′ do not refer to the same quantity
in the 4D spacetime. In addition it will be shown here in Sec. 5 that the
form invariance of the 3D Lorentz force doesn’t agree with the experiments.
Yet another derivation of the ST of the 3D E and B is given in the well-
known Purcell’s textbook,(17) Sec. 6.7., and it also discussed in detail in Ref.
9. That derivation uses as an essential part the Lorentz contraction. But, as
already said, it is exactly shown in Ref. 9 and in the comparison with the
standard experiments that test SR, Ref. 10, that the Lorentz contraction is
an ”apparent” transformation which has nothing to do with the LT.

These results (both with the active and the passive LT) entail that the ST
of the 3D vectors E and B are the ”apparent” transformations and not the
LT. Consequently, from the invariant SR viewpoint, the 3D vectors E and
B themselves are not well-deﬁned quantities in the 4D spacetime. The same
conclusion is achieved in the tensor formalism in Ref. 14.

3.3. The LT and the ST of EH, BH and EJ , BJ

In this section, for the completness, we shall repeat the proof from Secs.
3.1 and 3.2 but using EH, BH from Refs. 4, 5 and EJ , BJ from Ref. 6. In
Ref. 4,5, as explained in Sec. 2.2, F is decomposed in terms of bivectors EH
and BH, whereas in Ref. 6 F is decomposed in terms of 1-vector EJ and
a bivector BJ . Our aim is to show that the diﬀerence between the ST of
the 3D vectors E and B and the LT will be obtained regardless of the used
algebraic objects for the representation of the electric and magnetic parts in
the decomposition of F . The correct transformations from the invariant SR
viewpoint will be always, as in Sec. 3.1, simply obtained by applying the
LT to the whole considered 4D algebraic objects. Thus it is unimportant
which algebraic objects represent the electric and magnetic ﬁelds. What is
important is the way in which their transformations are derived.

First we present this proof for EH, BH. In Ref. 4,5, as already said in
Sec. 2.2, the bivector ﬁeld F is expressed in terms of the sum of a relative
vector EH and a relative bivector γ5BH making a space-time split in the γ0
- frame, Eq. (1); EH = (F · γ0)γ0 and γ5BH = (1/c)(F ∧ γ0)γ0. All these
quantities can be written as CBGQs in the standard basis {γµ}. Thus

EH = F i0γi ∧ γ0, BH = (1/2c)εkli0Fklγi ∧ γ0.

(15)

12

It is seen from Eq. (15) that both bivectors EH and BH are parallel to γ0,
that is, it holds that EH ∧ γ0 = BH ∧ γ0 = 0. Further we see from Eq. (15)
that the components of EH, BH in the {γµ} basis (i.e., in the Einstein system
of coordinates) give rise to the tensor (components) (EH)µν = γν ·(γµ ·EH) =
(γν ∧ γµ) · EH, (and the same for (BH)µν) which, written out as a matrix,
have entries

(EH)i0 = F i0 = −(EH)0i = Ei,
(BH)i0 = (1/2c)εkli0Fkl = −(BH)0i = Bi,

(EH)ij = 0,

(BH)ij = 0.

(16)

Using the results from Sec. 3.1 we now apply the active LT to EH and
BH from Eq. (15). For simplicity, as in Secs. 3.1 and 3.2, we again consider
boosts in the direction γ1 for which the rotor R is given by the relation (8)
with γ1 replacing n. Then using Eq. (15) the Lorentz transformed E′
H can
be written as

E′

H = R[(F · γ0)γ0]

R = E1γ1 ∧ γ0 + γ(E2γ2 ∧ γ0+

E3γ3 ∧ γ0) − βγ(E2γ2 ∧ γ1 + E3γ3 ∧ γ1).

e

(17)

The components (E′
(E′
H)20 = γE2, (E′
is antisymmetric, i.e., (E′
Ei = F i0. Similarly we ﬁnd for B′
H

H)30 = γE3, (E′

H)νµ = −(E′

H)µν that are diﬀerent from zero are (E′

H)12 = βγE2, (E′

H)10 = E1,
H)µν
H)µν and we denoted, as in Eq. (16),

H)13 = βγE3. (E′

B′

H = R[(−1/c)γ5((F ∧ γ0)γ0)]

R = B1γ1 ∧ γ0+

γ(B2γ2 ∧ γ0 + B3γ3 ∧ γ0) − βγ(B2γ2 ∧ γ1 + B3γ3 ∧ γ1).
e

(18)

H)νµ = −(B′

H)30 = γB3, (B′

H)12 = βγB2, (B′

H)13 = βγB3. (B′

H)µν that are diﬀerent from zero are (B′

H)10 = B1,
The components (B′
H)µν
H)20 = γB2, (B′
(B′
is antisymmetric, i.e., (B′
H)µν and we denoted, as in Eq. (16),
Bi = (1/2c)εkli0Fkl. Both equations (17) and (18) are the familiar forms for
the active LT of bivectors, here EH and BH. It is important to note that E′
H
and B′
H, in contrast to EH and BH, are not parallel to γ0, i.e., it does not hold
that E′
H)ij 6= 0.
H ∧ γ0 = B′
Further, as in Sec. 3.1, the components (EH)µν ((BH)µν) transform upon the
H)µν); there is no mixing of
active LT again to the components (E′
components. Thus by the active LT EH transforms to E′
H.
Actually, as we said, this is the way in which every bivector transforms upon
the active LT.

H ∧ γ0 = 0 and thus there are (E′

H and BH to B′

H)ij 6= 0 and (B′

H)µν ((B′

13

In contrast to the correct LT of EH and BH, Eqs.

(17) and (18) re-
spectively, it is assumed in the usual Cliﬀord algebra formalism (Ref. 4,
Space-Time Algebra (Eq. (18.22)), New Foundations for Classical Mechan-
(7.33))) that the
(3.51a,b) and Ref. 5, (Ch. 7.1.2 Eq.
ics (Ch. 9 Eqs.
relation (16), but with the primed quantities replacing the unprimed ones,
has to be valid for the transformed components as well. This means that the
ST for E′
H,st are derived assuming that the quantities obtained by
the active LT of EH and BH are again parallel to γ0, i.e., that again holds
E′
H,st)ij = 0.
Thence

H ∧ γ0 = 0 and consequently that (E′

H ∧ γ0 = B′

H,st)ij = (B′

H,st and B′

E′

H,st = [(RF

R) · γ0]γ0 = (F ′ · γ0)γ0 = E1γ1 ∧ γ0+

(γE2 − βγcB3)γ2 ∧ γ0 + (γE3 + βγcB2)γ3 ∧ γ0,

e

(19)

where F ′ = RF

R. Similarly we ﬁnd for B′

H,st

e

B′

H,st = (−1/c)γ5[(F ′ ∧ γ0)γ0)] = B1γ1 ∧ γ0+

(γB2 + βγE3/c)γ2 ∧ γ0 + (γB3 − βγE2/c)γ3 ∧ γ0.

(20)

The relations (19) and (20) give the familiar expressions for the ST of the
3D vectors E and B. Now, in contrast to the correct LT of EH and BH,
Eqs. (17) and (18) respectively, the components of the transformed E′
H,st are
expressed by the mixture of components Ei and Bi, and the same holds for
B′

H,st.

The same procedure can be easily applied to the transformations of EJ ,
BJ from Ref. 6 and it will lead to the same fundamental diﬀerence between
the ST of EJ, BJ obtained in Ref. 6 and their correct LT. Again the active
LT of EJ, BJ will be given by

E′

J = R(F · γ0)

R, B′

J = R[−(1/c)(F ∧ γ0)γ0]

R,

(21)

whereas the ST from Ref. 6 will follow from

e

e

E′

J,st = (RF

R) · γ0, B′

J,st = −(1/c)[((RF

R) ∧ γ0)γ0].

(22)

For brevity the whole discussion will not be done here. Of course the discus-
sion from Sec. 3.2 regarding the passive LT applies in the same measure to
the results of this section.

e

e

14

It is generally argued in all standard treatments, Refs. 3-6, Ref. 15, of
electromagnetism that the components of the 3D vectors E and B are the
components of F (according to the standard identiﬁcation Eq. (6), i.e., Eq.
(7), or Eq. (16)) and that they must transform as such (thus as in Eq. (14),
i.e., Eq. (11), or in Eqs. (19) and (20)) upon the LT. The above results
explicitly show that it is not true. In addition we remark that the compo-
nents of F in the chosen system of coordinates are actually determined by
the sources and not by the components of the 3D E and B. In the recent
work(18) I have presented the formulation of the relativistic electrodynamics
(independent of the reference frame and of the chosen system of coordinates
in it) that uses only the bivector ﬁeld F. This formulation with F ﬁeld is a
self-contained, complete and consistent formulation that dispenses with ei-
ther electric and magnetic ﬁelds or the electromagnetic potentials. Thence
the F ﬁeld is the primary 4D, geometric, quantity for the whole electromag-
netism and not the 3D E and B. Although it is possible to identify the
components of the 3D E and B with the components of F (according to Eq.
(6) or Eq. (16)) in an arbitrary chosen γ0 - frame with the {γµ} basis such
identiﬁcation is meaningless for the Lorentz transformed F ′. Namely F is a
geometric quantity in the 4D spacetime and when it is written as a CBGQ
it contains both components and a basis. The components are coordinate
dependent quantities depending on the chosen basis and, as explained at the
end of Sec 2.2, the standard identiﬁcation is possible only in the Einstein
system of coordinates. Further it is important to note that the LT always
act to the whole geometric quantity, and thus not to some parts of it (e.g.,
some components of F µν). These facts taken together show in another way
too that, contrary to the general belief, it is physically meaningless to make
simple identiﬁcation of the components of the 3D E′ and B′ with the com-
ponents of the Lorentz transformed F ′ (as in Eq. (14), or in Eqs. (19) and
(20), see also the second paper in Ref. 7).

4. THE LORENTZ INVARIANT REPRESENTATIONS
OF THE ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELDS

In order to have the electric and magnetic ﬁelds deﬁned without reference
frames, i.e., independent of the chosen reference frame and of the chosen
system of coordinates in it, thus as AQs, one has to replace γ0 (the velocity
in units of c of an observer at rest in the γ0-system) in the relation (3)
(and Eqs. (1), (2) as well) with v. The velocity v, that replaces γ0, and all

15

other quantities entering into the relations (3) (and Eqs. (1), (2) as well)
are all AQs. That velocity v characterizes some general observer. We can
say, as in tensor formalism,(19) that v is the velocity (1-vector) of a family of
observers who measures E and B ﬁelds. With such replacement the relation
(3) becomes

F = (1/c)E ∧ v + (IB) · v,
E = (1/c)F · v, B = −(1/c2)I(F ∧ v),

(23)

f (of Eµ

f and Bµ

f and Bµ

where I is the unit pseudoscalar. (I is deﬁned algebraically without introduc-
ing any reference frame, as in Ref. 20 Sec. 1.2.) It holds that E ·v = B·v = 0.
Of course the relations for E and B, Eq. (23), are coordinate-free relations
and thus they hold for any observer. When some reference frame is chosen
with the Einstein system of coordinates in it and when v is speciﬁed to be in
the time direction in that frame, i.e., v = cγ0, then all results of the classical
electromagnetism are recovered in that frame. Namely we can always select
a particular, but otherwise arbitrary, inertial frame of reference S, the frame
of our “ﬁducial” observers in which v = cγ0 and consequently the temporal
components of Eµ
f are zero (the subscript f is for “ﬁducial” and
for this name see Ref. 21). Then in that frame the usual Maxwell equa-
f and Bi
tions for the spatial components Ei
f ) will be fulﬁlled,
see Ref. 7. As a consequence the usual Maxwell equations can explain all
experiments that are performed in one reference frame. Thus the correspon-
dence principle is simply and naturally satisﬁed. However as shown above
the temporal components of E′µ
f and B′µ
f are not zero; Eqs. (9) and (10)
are the correct LT, but it is not the case with Eqs. (12) and (13). This
means that the usual Maxwell equations cannot be used for the explanation
of any experiment that tests SR, i.e., in which relatively moving observers
have to compare their data obtained by measurements on the same physi-
cal object. However, in contrast to the description of the electromagnetism
with the 3D E and B, the description with E and B is correct not only in
that frame but in all other relatively moving frames and it holds for any
permissible choice of coordinates. It is worth noting that the relations (23)
are not the deﬁnitions of E and B but they are the relations that connect
two equivalent formulations of electrodynamics, the formulation with the F
ﬁeld(18) and a new one with the E and B ﬁelds. Every of these formulations
is an independent, complete and consistent formulation. For more detail see
Ref. 8 where four equivalent formulations are presented, the F and E, B -

16

formulations and two new formulations with real and complex combinations
of E and B ﬁelds. All four formulations are given in terms of quantities that
are deﬁned without reference frames, i.e., the AQs. Note however that in
the E, B - formulation of electrodynamics in Ref. 8 the expression for the
stress-energy vector T (v) and all quantities derived from T (v) are written
for the special case when v, the velocity of observers who measure E and B
ﬁelds is v = cn, where n is the unit normal to a hypersurface through which
the ﬂow of energy-momentum (T (n)) is calculated. The more general case
with v 6= n will be reported elsewhere.

In addition, as we have already said, the replacement of γ0 with v in
the relations (1) and (2) also yields the electric and magnetic ﬁelds deﬁned
without reference frames, i.e., as AQs. For completness, we brieﬂy discuss
these cases as well. As explained above the observer independent F ﬁeld
(1) in terms of the observer dependent
is decomposed, Refs. 4,5, in Eq.
quantities, that is, as the sum of a relative vector EH and a relative bivector
γ5BH, making the space-time split in the γ0 - frame. But, similarly as in Eq.
(23) we present here a new decomposition of F into the bivectors EHv and
BHv, which are independent of the chosen reference frame and of the chosen
system of coordinates in it; they are AQs. We deﬁne

F = EHv + cIBHv, EHv = (1/c2)(F · v) ∧ v

BHv = −(1/c3)I[(F ∧ v) · v],

IBHv = (1/c3)(F ∧ v) · v

(24)

(The subscript Hv is for “Hestenes” with v and not, as usual, Refs. 4, 5,
with γ0.) Of course, as in Eq. (23), the velocity v and all other quantities
entering into Eq. (24) are deﬁned without reference frames, i.e., they are
AQs. Consequently Eq. (24) holds for any observer. Similarly when γ0 is
replaced with v the observer dependent decomposition of F in the relation
(2) transforms to the new decomposition of F in terms of 1-vector EJv and
a bivector BJv that are all AQs

F = (1/c)v ∧ EJv − cBJv, EJv = (1/c)F · v, BJv = −(1/c3)(F ∧ v) · v. (25)

However, it is worth noting that it is much simpler and, in fact, closer to the
classical formulation of the electromagnetism with the 3D E and B to work
with the decomposition of F into 1-vectors E and B, as in Eq. (23), instead
of decomposing F into bivectors EHv and BHv (24), or into the 1-vector EJv
and the bivector BJv, Eq.(25).

17

We have not mentioned some other references that refer to the Cliﬀord
algebra formalism and its application to the electrodynamics as are, e.g., Ref.
22. The reason is that they use the Cliﬀord algebra formalism with spinors
but, of course, they also consider that the ST of the 3D E and B, Eq. (14),
are the LT of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds. Thus they also did not notice
the fundamental diﬀerence between the LT of the 4D quantities, e.g., E′
f and
B′
f , Eqs. (9) and (10), and the ST of the 3D quantities E and B, Eq. (14).

5. COMPARISON OF THE ST AND THE LT FOR THE

MOTIONAL ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE

In this section we shall compare the ST and the LT of the electric and

magnetic ﬁelds considering motional electromotive force.

5.1. Motional Electromotive Force with 3D Quantities

Let us start with the determination of the electromotive force (emf) using
the 3D quantities, the 3D Lorentz force F = qE + qV × B, the 3D E and B
and their ST. The motional emf is produced in an electrical circuit when a
circuit or part of a circuit moves in a magnetic ﬁeld. The example which will
be examined is from Ref. 16 Sec. 6.4. (see Fig. 6.1. in Ref. 16). We shall
also discuss the problem considered in Ref. 17 Sec. 7.2 (see Figs. 7.2, 7.3 and
7.4 in Ref. 17). These examples are very characteristic for the traditional
use of the ST in the explanation of the electromagnetic phenoma from the
point of view of two relatively moving inertial frames of reference. Diﬀerent
variants of these examples appear in many standard textbooks (e.g., Ref. 23
Sec. 9-5) and papers in the educational journals (e.g., Ref. 24).

In Ref. 16 the following problem is considered. In the laboratory system
S there is a curved stationary conducting rail and a conducting bar that is
moving through a steady uniform magnetic ﬁeld B = −Bzk with velocity V
parallel to the x axis. There is no external applied electric ﬁeld in S, E =0.
Purcell(17) considers the same problem but without the rail, only a conducting
bar is moving in a steady uniform magnetic ﬁeld B. Any charge in the bar
moves together with the conductor through the B ﬁeld. Since the electrons
are the mobile charge carriers they experience a sideways deﬂecting force
of magnetic origin given by the expression qV × B. The motion of charge
relative to the bar ceases when a steady state is settled down. In that state

18

the displaced charges give rise to an electric ﬁeld such that, everywhere in
the interior of the bar, the electric force on any charge is equal and opposite
to the magnetic force qV × B. The displaced charges also cause an electric
ﬁeld outside the bar. Both Rosser(16) (Fig. 6.1. (a)) and Purcell(17) (Figs.
7.3 (a) and (b)) sketch the ﬁeld lines for that external electric ﬁeld and they
look something like the ﬁeld lines of separated positive and negative charges.
In order to examine the emf Rosser(16) consider the situation in which the
moving conductor slides on the curved stationary conducting rail making
electrical contact with the rail.
(A very similar problem is considered in
Ref. 23 Sec. 9-5 where in S there is a conducting bar, inﬁnitely long and of
rectangular cross section, that is moving through the B ﬁeld and a stationary
galvanometer with two sliding contacts that touch the bar on opposite sides.)
In the usual approaches the emf ε of a complete circuit is deﬁned by means
of the Lorentz force F that acts on a charge q which is at rest relative to the
section dl of the circuit

In the considered case the emf ε is determined by the contribution of the
magnetic part of F, i.e., qV × B, as

ε =

(F/q) · dl.

I

ε =

V Bdy = V Bl,

l

Z
o

(26)

(27)

where l is the length of the bar and the bar moves parallel to the y axis.

Some remarks to such usual determination of ε are at place already here.
The important remark is that it is implicitly assumed in Eqs. (26) and (27)
that the integral is taken over the whole circuit at the same moment of time
in S, say t = 0. Further both F and dl are the 3D vectors that do not
transform properly upon the LT and the emf ε deﬁned by Eq. (26) is not
a Lorentz scalar. The less important remark is that the ﬁeld lines are not
physical and the pictures with them actually do not help in understanding
physical phenomena when they are looked from relatively moving frames.

How this ”experiment” is described in the S′ frame. In S′ the conducting
bar is at rest and the conducting rail moves with velocity −V. (In order to
avoid some possible ambiguities in the determination of the emf in S′ we shall
slightly modify Rosser’s picture. Namely instead of to take that the whole
conducting rail is in the region of the B ﬁeld we suppose that the curved part
of the rail is far outside from the region of the B ﬁeld.) The displacement

19

of charge in the isolated conducting bar must exist in both S and S′. The
usual explanation, e.g., Refs. 16 and 17, is the following. If in S E =0 and
the components of B are (0, 0, −B) then, according to the ST the observer
in the S′ frame sees

E′
B′

x = E′
x = B′

z = 0, E′
y = 0, B′

y = −βγcBz = γV B
z = −γB,

(28)

where β = (V /c)i and γ = (1 − β2)−1/2 (compare with, e.g., Eqs. (12) and
(13)). Thence in S′ there is not only the magnetic ﬁeld but an electric ﬁeld
y in Σ′ (our
as well. Then, as stated in Ref. 16 p. 165: ”The electric ﬁeld E′
S′) gives rise to the separation of charges in the ”stationary” conductor.”
Purcell(17) again sketch the ﬁeld lines (see Figs. 7.4 (a) and (b)) which
resulted from the induced electric ﬁeld E′, uniform throughout the space, and
the ﬁeld of the surface charge distribution. Rosser asked the reader (Problem
6.13) to interpret the origin of the electric ﬁeld present in S′. Let us assume
that the external magnetic ﬁeld in S is due to a permanent magnet at rest in
S. Then, as discussed in Ref. 16 Sec. 6.8., Unipolar induction (see also Fig.
6.7. in Ref. 16), a moving magnet has an electric polarization P that gives
an electric ﬁeld outside the moving magnet. In all standard approaches the
polarization P and the magnetization M in two relatively moving frames are
connected by the same ST as are the E and B ﬁelds, see, e.g., Ref. 16 Eqs.
(6.78) and (6.81), or Ref. 24 Eqs. (18-70) and (18-71). Both in Ref. 16 and
Ref. 24 it is argued that when a permanent magnetization is viewed from a
moving frame it produces an electric moment P = V × M/c2 which, Ref. 24
p. 337: ”..... is a consequence of the relativistic deﬁnition of simultaneity, ..”
It has to be noted already here that the relativity of simultaneity is not
an intristic relativistic eﬀect but an eﬀect that depends on the chosen syn-
chronization and every permissible synchronization is only a convention, see
Refs. 9 and 10. The physics must not depend on conventions which means
that, contrary to the general belief, the above usual explanation for the ST
of P and M cannot be physically correct. The discussion of electrodynam-
ics of moving media and the ST of P and M together with the comparison
with experiments, e.g., the Wilson and Wilson experiment, will be reported
elsewhere.

Let us proceed to the calculation of ε′ in S′. The contribution of B′

the emf ε, Eq. (26), is zero and only the contribution of E′

z to
y remains, which

20

is

ε′ =

γV Bdy = γV Bl.

(29)

l

Z

o

Obviously the emf ε′, Eq. (29), in S′ is not equal to the emf ε, Eq. (27),
determined in S; ε′ is not much diﬀerent from ε only if V ≪ c.

We see that the emf obtained by the application of the ST is diﬀerent for
relatively moving 4D observers which indicates in another way that the ST
are not the correct relativistic transformations, i.e., the LT.

5.2. Motional Electromotive Force with Geometric 4D Quantities

Let us now consider the same example as in preceding section but using

the 4D geometric quantities.

In the usual Cliﬀord algebra approach to SR(4,5) one makes the space-
time split and writes the Lorentz force K (1-vector) in the Pauli algebra of
γ0. Since, as we said, this procedure is observer dependent we express K in
terms of AQs, 1-vectors E and B, that are considered in Sec. 4, as

K = (q/c) [(1/c)E ∧ v + (IB) · v] · u,

(30)

see also Ref. 8. (Of course the whole consideration could be equivalently
made using EHv and BHv or EJv and BJv from Sec. 4.) The notation is as
in Sec. 4 and u is the velocity 1-vector of a charge q (it is deﬁned to be the
tangent to its world line). In the general case when charge and observer have
distinct worldlines the Lorentz force K (30) can be written as a sum of the
v− ⊥ part K⊥ and the v− k part Kk, K = K⊥ + Kk, where

K⊥ = (q/c2)(v · u)E + (q/c)((IB) · v) · u,

Kk = (−q/c2)(E · u)v,

(31)

(32)

respectively. Of course K, K⊥ and Kk are all 4D quantities deﬁned with-
out reference frames, the AQs, and the decomposition of K is an observer
independent decomposition. It can be easily veriﬁed that K⊥ · v = 0 and
Kk ∧ v = 0. Both parts can be written in the standard basis {γµ} as CBGQs

K⊥ = (q/c2)(vνuν)Eµγµ + (q/c)

εµ

νρuνBργµ,

(33)

e

21

εµνρ ≡ ελµνρvλ is the totally skew-symmetric Levi-Civita pseudotensor

where
induced on the hypersurface orthogonal to v, and

e

Kk = (−q/c2)(Eνuν)vµγµ.

(34)

Speaking in terms of the prerelativistic notions one can say that in the ap-
proach with the 1-vectors E and B K⊥ plays the role of the usual Lorentz
force lying on the 3D hypersurface orthogonal to v, while Kk is related to
the work done by the ﬁeld on the charge. However in our invariant for-
mulation of SR only both components together, Eqs.
(31) and (32), have
physical meaning and they deﬁne the Lorentz force both in the theory and in
experiments.

Then we deﬁne the emf also as an invariant 4D quantity, the Lorentz

scalar,

emf =

(K/q) · dl,

(35)

ZΓ
where dl (1-vector) is the inﬁnitesimal spacetime length and Γ is the space-
time curve. (Note that in Eq. (35) we deal with the scalar term of the directed
integral and dl is a vector-valued measure and not as usual a scalar.) Let the
observers are at rest in the S frame, vµ = (c, 0, 0, 0) whence E0 = B0 = 0;
the S frame is the rest frame of the “ﬁducial” observers, the γ0 - frame with
the {γµ} basis. Thus the components of the 1-vectors in the {γµ} basis are
Eµ
f = (0, 0, 0, −B). As it is said in Sec. 5.1, in the labora-
tory system S there is a curved stationary conducting rail and a conducting
bar that is moving with the velocity 1-vector u. The components of u and
dl in the {γµ} basis are uµ = (γc, γV, 0, 0), dlµ = (0, 0, dl2 = dy, 0). Thence
K a
⊥ = γqV B. When all quantities in Eq. (35)
are written as CBGQs in the S frame with the {γµ} basis we ﬁnd

f = (0, 0, 0, 0), Bµ

k = 0, K 0

⊥ = 0, K 2

⊥ = K 1

⊥ = K 3

emf =

γV Bdy = γV Bl.

(36)

l

Z

0

Since the expression (35) is independent of the chosen reference frame and
of the chosen system of coordinates in it we shall get the same result in the
relatively moving S′ frame as well;

emf =

(K µ/q)dlµ =

ZΓ(in S)

ZΓ(in S′)

(K ′µ/q)dl′

µ = γV Bl.

(37)

22

⊥ = K 2

⊥ = K ′1

⊥ = 0, K ′2

k = 0, K ′0

This can be checked directly performing the LT of all 1-vectors as CBGQs
from S to S′ including the transformation of vµγµ. (u′µ = (c, 0, 0, 0), v′µ =
⊥ = γqV B, dl′µ =
⊥ = K ′3
(γc, −γV, 0, 0), K ′a
(0, 0, dy, 0).) Notice that in S′ the velocity 1-vector u of the conducting bar is
diﬀerent from zero since it does have the temporal component, which is = c.
Further from the viewpoint of the observers in S′ the velocity 1-vector v of
the ”ﬁducial” observers contains not only the temporal component but also
the spatial component. In S′ the components E′µ
f of the 1-vectors E
and B respectively are obtained by the LT (compare with the transformation
of the components in Eqs. (9) and (10)) and in this particular case they are
f and also Bµ
the same as Eµ
f
to B′µ
f . We see that, in contrast to the usual approach with the ST, the LT
do not produce the mixing of the components of the electric and magnetic
ﬁelds as the 4D quantities.

f transforms by the LT to E′µ

f in S; Eµ

f and B′µ

f and Bµ

Comparing the result, Eq. (36), that is obtained by the use of the geomet-
ric 4D quantities and their LT with the result, Eq. (27), which is obtained
by the use of the 3D quantities E and B and their ST, we reveal that Eq.
(36) becomes Eq. (27) in the classical limit, i.e., for V ≪ c. But there is a
fundamental diﬀerence between the two approaches: Eq. (37) shows that Eq.
(36) holds in all relatively moving 4D inertial frames of reference, whereas
the comparison of Eq. (29) and Eq. (27) shows that Eq. (27) holds only in
the laboratory frame S. From the viewpoint of the geometric approach the
agreement with the usual approach exists only in the frame of the “ﬁducial”
observers and when V ≪ c.

There are many similar examples in the literature and always will be
obtained that there is a fundamental diﬀerence between the ST of the 3D E
and B and the LT of the geometric 4D quantities representing the electric
and magnetic ﬁelds and that the geometric 4D approach correctly describes
the electromagnetic phenomena in all relatively moving 4D inertial frames of
reference. One important experiment, the Faraday disk, which leads to the
same conclusions, is considered in detail in Ref. 7.

6. CONCLUSIONS

The whole consideration explicitly shows that the 3D quantities E and
B, their transformations and the equations with them are not well-deﬁned
in the 4D spacetime. More generally, we can conclude that the 3D quantities
do not have an independent physical reality in the 4D spacetime. Contrary to

23

the general belief we ﬁnd that it is not true from the invariant SR viewpoint
that observers in relative motion see diﬀerent ﬁelds; the transformations, Eqs.
(12), (13) and (14), i.e., Eq. (11) (or Eqs. (19), (20) and (22)) are not the
correct LT. According to the correct LT; Eqs. (9) and (10) (or Eqs. (17),
(18) and (21)) the electric ﬁeld transforms only to the electric ﬁeld and the
same holds for the magnetic ﬁeld. The consideration of the motional emf in
two relatively moving 4D inertial frames of reference in Secs. 5.1 and 5.2
completely justiﬁes the relativistic validity of the geometric approach with
the 4D geometric quantities and with their LT. Thence from the invariant
SR viewpoint the physics must be formulated with 4D AQs as in Eqs. (23),
(24) and (25), Eqs. (30), (31), (32) and (35), or equivalently with the cor-
responding 4D CBGQs. For such formulations of electromagnetism see also
Ref. 8, where the Cliﬀord algebra formalism with multivectors is used, or
Refs. 9,10 with the tensor formalism. The principle of relativity is auto-
matically included in such theory with well-deﬁned geometric 4D quantities,
whereas in the standard approach to SR(1) the principle of relativity is pos-
tulated outside the mathematical formulation of the theory. The comparison
with experiments from Ref. 10 (and Ref. 7) reveals that the true agreement
with experiments that test SR is achieved when such well-deﬁned geometric
4D quantities are considered.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to Professor Larry Horwitz for his continuos interest, support
and useful comments.

REFERENCES

1. A. Einstein, Ann. Physik. 17, 891 (1905), tr. by W. Perrett and G.B.

Jeﬀery, in The Principle of Relativity (Dover, New York).

2. H.A. Lorentz, Proceedings of the Academy of Sciences of Amsterdam,

6 (1904), in W. Perrett and G.B. Jeﬀery, in The Principle of Relativity
(Dover, New York).

3. J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York, 1977) 2nd
edn.; L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields,
(Pergamon, Oxford, 1979) 4th edn.; C.W. Misner, K.S.Thorne, and J.A.
Wheeler, Gravitation (Freeman, San Francisco, 1970).

4. D. Hestenes, Space-Time Algebra (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1966);

24

Space-Time Calculus; available at: http://modelingnts.la. asu.edu/evolution.
html; New Foundations for Classical Mechanics (Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, 1999) 2nd. edn.; Am. J Phys. 71, 691 (2003).
5. C. Doran, and A. Lasenby, Geometric algebra for physicists (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 2003).

6. B. Jancewicz, Multivectors and Cliﬀord Algebra in Electrodynamics (World

Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1989).

7. T. Ivezi´c, physics/0311043; physics/0409118.
8. T. Ivezi´c, hep-th/0207250; hep-ph/0205277.
9. T. Ivezi´c, Found. Phys. 31, 1139 (2001).
10. T. Ivezi´c, Found. Phys. Lett. 15, 27 (2002); physics/0103026; physics/0101091.
11. F. Rohrlich, Nuovo Cimento B 45, 76 (1966).
12. A. Gamba, Am. J. Phys. 35, 83 (1967).
13. T. Ivezi´c, Found. Phys. Lett. 12, 105 (1999); Found. Phys. Lett. 12,

14. T. Ivezi´c, Found. Phys. 33 1339 (2003); hep-th/0302188.
15. A. Einstein, Ann. Physik 49, 769 (1916), tr. by W. Perrett and G.B.

Jeﬀery, in The Principle of Relativity (Dover, New York).

16. W.G.W. Rosser, Classical Electromagnetism via Relativity (Plenum Press,
New

17. E.M. Purcell, Electricity and Magnetism ( McGraw-Hill, New York, 1985)

507 (1999).

York, 1968)

2nd. edn.

18. T. Ivezi´c, physics/0305092.
19. R.M. Wald, General Relativity (The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

1984); M. Ludvigsen, General Relativity, A Geometric Approach
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999); S. Sonego and
M.A. Abramowicz, J. Math. Phys. 39, 3158 (1998); D.A. T. Vanzella,
G.E.A. Matsas, H.W. Crater, Am. J. Phys. 64, 1075 (1996).

20. D. Hestenes and G. Sobczyk, Cliﬀord Algebra to Geometric Calculus

(Reidel, Dordrecht, 1984).

22. H.N. N´u˜nez Y´epez, A.L. Salas Brito, and C.A. Vargas, Revista

Mexicana de F´isica 34, 636 (1988).

23. W.E. Baylis, Electrodynamics, a Modern Geometric Approach (Birkh¨auser,
Boston, 1998); P. Lounesto, Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinors (Cambridge
University, Cambridge, 1997).

24. W.K.H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical electricity and magnetism,

(Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1962) 2nd edn.

25

