4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Complex Dynamics
of Autonomous Communication Networks
and the Intelligent Communication Paradigm

Andrei P. Kirilyuk

Institute of Metal Physics of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine
36 Vernadsky Bd, Kiev-142, Ukraine 03142
kiril@metfiz.freenet.kiev.ua

Abstract. Dynamics of arbitrary communication system is analysed
as unreduced interaction process. The applied generalised, universally
nonperturbative method of eﬀective potential reveals the phenomenon
of dynamic multivaluedness of competing system conﬁgurations forced
to permanently replace each other in a causally random order, which
leads to universally deﬁned dynamical chaos, complexity, fractality, self-
organisation, and adaptability. We demonstrate the origin of huge, ex-
ponentially high eﬃciency of the unreduced, complex network dynamics
and specify the universal symmetry of complexity as the fundamental
guiding principle for creation and control of such qualitatively new kind
of networks and devices.

1 Introduction

Any communication system can be considered as a particular case of general
dynamical system formed by many interacting units. If the system components
are permitted to freely interact without strict external control, then such unre-
duced interaction process leads inevitably to complex-dynamical, essentially non-
linear and chaotic structure emergence, or generalised (dynamically multival-
ued) self-organisation [1,2,3], extending the conventional, basically regular self-
organisation concept. The usual technology and communication practice and
paradigm rely, however, on very strong human control and totally regular, pre-
dictable dynamics of controlled systems and environment, where unpredictable
events can only take the form of undesirable failures or noise.

Growing volumes and complication of communication system links and func-
tions lead inevitably to increasing probability of undesirable deviations from the
pre-programmed regular behaviour, largely compromising its supposed advan-
tages. On the other hand, such increasingly useful properties as intrinsic system
creativity and autonomous adaptability to changing environment and individ-
ual user demands should certainly involve another, much less regular and more
diverse kind of behaviour. In this paper we analyse these issues in a rigorous
way by presenting the unreduced, nonperturbative analysis of an arbitrary sys-
tem of interacting entities and show that such unreduced interaction process

2 WAC 2004, http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/program.html

possesses the natural, dynamically derived properties of chaoticity, creativity
(autonomous structure formation ability), adaptability, and exponentially high
eﬃciency, which can be consistently uniﬁed into the totally universal concept of
dynamic complexity [1]. This concept and particular notions it uniﬁes represent
essential extension with respect to respective results of the usual theory always
using one or another version of perturbation theory that strongly reduces real
interaction processes and leads inevitably to regular kind of dynamics (even in
its versions of chaoticity). We shall specify these diﬀerences in our analysis and
demonstrate the key role of unreduced, interaction-driven complexity, chaoticity
and self-organisation in the superior operation properties, as it has already been
demonstrated for a large scope of applications [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8].

We start, in Sect. 2, with a mathematical demonstration of the fact that the
unreduced interaction process within any real system leads to intrinsic, genuine,
and omnipresent randomness in the system behaviour, which can be realised in
a few characteristic regimes and leads to the universally deﬁned dynamic com-
plexity. We outline the change in strategy and practice of communication system
construction and use, which follows from such unreduced analysis of system in-
teractions. The universality of our analysis is of special importance here, since
the results can be applied at various naturally entangled levels of communication
system operation. In particular, we demonstrate the complex-dynamic origin of
the huge, exponentially high eﬃciency growth of the unreduced, causally ran-
dom system dynamics, with respect to the standard, basically regular system
operation (Sect. 3). Finally, the dynamically derived, universal symmetry, or
conservation, of complexity is introduced as the new guiding principle and tool
of complex system dynamics that should replace usual, regular programming.
The paradigm of intelligent communication systems is thus speciﬁed, since we
show also [1,5] that the property of intelligence can be consistently described as
high enough levels of the unreduced dynamic complexity. This “intelligent com-
munication” is the most complete, inevitable realisation, and in fact a synonym,
of the truly autonomous communication dynamics and its expected properties.

2 Complex Dynamics of Unreduced Interaction Process

We begin with a general expression of multi-component system dynamics (or
many-body problem), called here existence equation, ﬁxing the fact of interaction
between the system components, and generalising various model equations:

N

(

k=0 "
X

N

l>k
X

#)

hk (qk) +

Vkl (qk, ql)

Ψ (Q) = EΨ (Q) ,

(1)

where hk (qk) is the “generalised Hamiltonian” of the k-th system component
in the absence of interaction, qk is the degree(s) of freedom of the k-th compo-
nent (expressing its “physical nature”), Vkl (qk, ql) is the (generally arbitrary)
interaction potential between the k-th and l-th components, Ψ (Q) is the system
state-function, Q
, E is the eigenvalue of the generalised Hamil-
tonian, and summations are performed over all (N ) system components. The

q0, q1, ..., qN

≡ {

}

A.P. Kirilyuk: Complex Dynamics of Intelligent Communication Networks

3

generalised Hamiltonian, eigenvalues, and interaction potential represent a suit-
able measure of dynamic complexity deﬁned below and encompassing practically
all “observable” quantities (action, energy, momentum, current, etc.) at any level
of dynamics. Therefore (1) can express the unreduced interaction conﬁguration
at any level of communication network of arbitrary initial structure. It can also
be presented in a particular form of time-dependent equation by replacing the
generalised Hamiltonian eigenvalue E with the partial time derivative operator
(for the case of explicit interaction potential dependence on time).
One can separate one of the degrees of freedom, e.g. q0

ξ, correspond-
ing to a naturally selected, usually “system-wide” entity, such as “embedding”
conﬁguration (system of coordinates) or common “transmitting agent”:

≡

h0 (ξ) +

[hk (qk) + V0k (ξ, qk)] +

Vkl (qk, ql)

Ψ (ξ, Q) = EΨ (ξ, Q) ,

(

N

k=1
X

N

l>k
X

)

where now Q

q1, ..., qN

and k, l

1.

≡ {

}

≥

We then express the problem in terms of known free-component solutions for

the “functional”, internal degrees of freedom of system elements (k

1):

≥

hk (qk) ϕknk (qk) = εnk ϕknk (qk) ,

Ψ (ξ, Q) =

ψn (ξ)ϕ1n1 (q1) ϕ2n2 (q2) ...ϕN nN (qN )

ψn (ξ)Φn (Q) ,

(4)

n
X
are the eigenvalues and

εnk }
{

eigenfunctions of the k-th
ϕknk (qk)
where
}
{
component Hamiltonian hk (qk), forming the complete set of orthonormal func-
tions, n
runs through all possible eigenstate combinations, and
≡ {
ϕ1n1 (q1) ϕ2n2 (q2) ...ϕN nN (qN ) by deﬁnition. The system of equations
Φn (Q)
for
is obtained then in a standard way, using the eigen-solution or-
thonormality (e.g. by multiplication by Φ∗

n (Q) and integration over Q):

≡
ψn (ξ)
}
{

n1, ..., nN

}

≡

n
X

[h0 (ξ) + V00 (ξ)] ψ0 (ξ) +

V0n (ξ)ψn (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ)

[h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ)

n
P
n′6=n
P
= 0 (also below), η

where n, n′

Vn0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) , (5)

−

η0 = E

ε0, ηn = E

εn, εn =

εnk ,

≡

−

−

k
P

Vnn′ (ξ) =

V nn′
k0

(ξ) +

k "
X

V nn′
kl

,

#

l>k
X

V nn′
k0

(ξ) =

dQΦ∗

n (Q)Vk0 (qk, ξ) Φn′ (Q) ,

V nn′
kl

(ξ) =

dQΦ∗

n (Q)Vkl (qk, ql) Φn′ (Q) ,

ZΩQ

ZΩQ

(2)

(3)

(6)

(7)

(8)

6
4 WAC 2004, http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/program.html

and we have separated the equation for ψ0 (ξ) describing the generalised “ground
state” of the system elements, i. e. the state with minimum complexity. The
obtained system of equations expresses the same problem as the starting equation
(2), but now in terms of “natural”, dynamic variables, and therefore it can be
obtained for various starting models, including time-dependent and formally
“nonlinear” ones (see below for a rigorous deﬁnition of essential nonlinearity).
We try now to approach the solution of the “nonintegrable” system of equa-
tions (5) with the help of the generalised eﬀective, or optical, potential method
[9], where one expresses ψn (ξ) through ψ0 (ξ) from the equations for ψn (ξ) us-
ing the standard Green function technique and then inserts the result into the
equation for ψ0 (ξ), obtaining thus the eﬀective existence equation that contains
explicitly only “integrable” degrees of freedom (ξ) [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8]:

h0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) + Veﬀ (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

(9)

where the operator of eﬀective potential (EP), Veﬀ (ξ; η), is given by

Veﬀ (ξ; η) = V00 (ξ) + ˆV (ξ; η) , ˆV (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) =

dξ′V (ξ, ξ′; η)ψ0 (ξ′) ,

(10)

ZΩξ

V (ξ, ξ′; η) =

n,i
X
η0
ni

ψ0

ni (ξ)

and
,
truncated system of equations:
(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

V0n (ξ) ψ0
ni (ξ) Vn0 (ξ′) ψ0∗
η

εn0

ni (ξ′)

η0
ni −

−

,

εn0

εn

ε0 ,

≡

−

(11)

are complete sets of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of a

[h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) .

(12)

One should use now the eigenfunctions,

ψ0i (ξ)
{

, and eigenvalues,
}

ηi
{

, of the
}

formally “integrable” equation (9) to obtain other state-function components:

ψni (ξ) = ˆgni (ξ) ψ0i (ξ)

dξ′gni (ξ, ξ′) ψ0i (ξ′) ,

gni (ξ, ξ′) = Vn0 (ξ′)

ψ0
ni′ (ξ) ψ0∗
η0
ηi
ni′

ni′ (ξ′)
εn0

,

−

−

and the total system state-function, Ψ (q0, q1, ..., qN ) = Ψ (ξ, Q) (see (4)):

Ψ (ξ, Q) =

ci

Φ0 (Q) +

Φn (Q) ˆgni (ξ)

ψ0i (ξ) ,

(15)

"

i
X

n
X

#

where the coeﬃcients ci should be found from the state-function matching condi-
tions at the boundary where interaction eﬀectively vanishes. The measured quan-
tity, generalised as structure density ρ (ξ, Q), is obtained as the state-function

n′6=n
X

≡

ZΩξ

i′
X

(13)

(14)

A.P. Kirilyuk: Complex Dynamics of Intelligent Communication Networks

5

squared modulus, ρ (ξ, Q) =
the state-function itself, ρ (ξ, Q) = Ψ (ξ, Q) (for “particle-like” structures) [1].

2 (for “wave-like” complexity levels), or as

Ψ (ξ, Q)
|
|

Since the EP expression in the eﬀective problem formulation (9)-(11) depends
essentially on the eigen-solutions to be found, the problem remains “noninte-
grable” and formally equivalent to the initial formulation (1), (2), (5). However,
it is the eﬀective version of a problem that leads to its unreduced solution and re-
veals the nontrivial properties of the latter [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8]. The most important
property of the unreduced interaction result (9)-(15) is its dynamic multival-
uedness meaning that one has a redundant number of diﬀerent but individu-
ally complete, and therefore mutually incompatible, problem solutions, each of
them describing an equally real system conﬁguration. We call each such locally
complete solution (and real system conﬁguration) realisation of the system and
problem. Plurality of system realisations follows from the unreduced EP expres-
sions due to the nonlinear and self-consistent dependence on the solutions to be
found, reﬂecting the physically real and evident plurality of possible combina-
tions of interacting eigen-modes [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8]. It is important that dynamic
multivaluedness emerges only in the unreduced problem formulation, whereas
the standard theory, including EP method applications (see e.g. [9]) and the
scholar “science of complexity” (theory of chaos, self-organisation, etc.), resorts
invariably to one or another version of perturbation theory, whose approxima-
tion, used to obtain an “exact”, closed-form solution, totally “kills” redundant
solutions by eliminating just those nonlinear dynamical links and retains only
one, “averaged” solution, usually expressing only small deviations from initial,
pre-interaction conﬁguration. This dynamically single-valued, or unitary, prob-
lem reduction forms the basis of the whole canonical science paradigm.

Since we have many incompatible system realisations that tend to appear
from the same, driving interaction, we obtain the key property of causal, or
dynamic, randomness in the form of permanently changing realisations that re-
place each other in the truly random order. Therefore dynamic multivaluedness,
rigorously derived simply by unreduced, correct solution of a real many-body
(interaction) problem, provides the universal dynamic origin and meaning of
the omnipresent, unceasing randomness in the system behaviour, also called
(dynamical) chaos (it is essentially diﬀerent from any its unitary version, re-
duced to an “involved regularity” or postulated external “noise”). This means
that the genuine, truly complete general solution of an arbitrary problem (de-
scribing a real system behaviour) has the form of dynamically probabilistic sum
of measured quantities for particular system realisations:

Nℜ

⊕

ρ (ξ, Q) =

ρr (ξ, Q) ,

(16)

r=1
X
where summation is performed over all system realisations, Nℜ is their number
(its maximum value is equal to the number of system components, Nℜ = N ),
designates the special, dynamically probabilistic meaning of the
and the sign
sum described above. It implies that any measured quantity (16) is intrinsically
unstable and its current value will unpredictably change to another one, cor-

⊕

6 WAC 2004, http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/program.html

responding to another, randomly chosen realisation. Such kind of behaviour is
readily observed in nature and actually explains the living organism behaviour
[1,4,5], but is thoroughly avoided in the unitary theory and technological systems
(including communication networks), where it is correctly associated with linear
“noncomputability” and technical failure (we shall consider below this limiting
regime of real system dynamics). Therefore the universal dynamic multivalued-
ness thus revealed by the rigorous problem solution forms the fundamental basis
for the transition to “bio-inspired” and “intelligent” kind of operation in arti-
ﬁcial, technological and communication systems, where causal randomness can
be transformed from an obstacle to a qualitative advantage (Sect. 3).

The rigorously derived randomness of the generalised EP formalism (9)-(16)
is accompanied by the dynamic deﬁnition of probability. Because the elementary
realisations are equivalent in their “right to appear”, the dynamically obtained,
a priori probability, αr, of an elementary realisation emergence is given by

αr =

1
Nℜ

,

αr = 1 .

r
X

(17)

However, a real observation may ﬁx uneven groups of elementary realisations
because of their multivalued self-organisation (see below). Therefore the dynamic
probability of observation of such general, compound realisation is determined
by the number, Nr, of elementary realisations it contains:

αr (Nr) =

Nr = 1, ..., Nℜ;

Nr = Nℜ

,

αr = 1 .

(18)

r
X

!

r
X

Nr
Nℜ  

An expression for expectation value, ρexp (ξ, Q), can easily be constructed from
(16)-(18) for statistically long observation periods:

ρexp (ξ, Q) =

αrρr (ξ, Q) .

(19)

r
X
It is important, however, that our dynamically derived randomness and proba-
bility need not rely on such “statistical”, empirically based result, so that the
basic expressions (16)-(18) remain valid even for a single event of realisation
emergence and before any event happens at all.

The realisation probability distribution can be obtained in another way, in-
volving generalised wavefunction and Born’s probability rule [1,3,5,8,10]. The
wavefunction describes the system state during its transition between “regular”,
“concentrated” realisations and constitutes a particular, “intermediate” realisa-
tion with spatially extended and “loose” (chaotically changing) structure, where
the system components transiently disentangle before forming the next “regu-
lar” realisation. The intermediate, or “main”, realisation is explicitly obtained in
the unreduced EP formalism [1,3,5,8,10] and provides, in particular, the causal,
totally realistic version of the quantum-mechanical wavefunction at the lowest,
“quantum” levels of complexity. The “Born probability rule”, now also causally
derived and extended to any level of world dynamics, states that the realisation

A.P. Kirilyuk: Complex Dynamics of Intelligent Communication Networks

7

probability distribution is determined by the wavefunction values (their squared
modulus for the “wave-like” complexity levels) for the respective system con-
ﬁgurations. The generalised wavefunction (or distribution function) satisﬁes the
universal Schr¨odinger equation (Sect. 3), rigorously derived from the dynamic
quantization of complex dynamics [1,3,5,8,10], while Born’s probability rule fol-
lows from the dynamic “boundary conditions” mentioned in connection to the
state-function expression (15) and actually satisﬁed just during each system
transition between a “regular” realisation and the extended wavefunction state.
Note also that it is this “averaged”, weak-interaction state of the wavefunction,
or “main” realisation, that actually remains in the dynamically single-valued,
one-realisation “model” and “exact-solution” paradigm of the unitary theory,
which explains both its partial success and fundamental limitations.

Closely related to the dynamic multivaluedness is the property of dynamic
entanglement between the interacting components, described in (15) by the dy-
namically weighted products of state-function components depending on vari-
ous degrees of freedom (ξ, Q). It provides a rigorous expression of the tangible
quality of the emerging system structure and is absent in unitary models. The
obtained dynamically multivalued entanglement describes a “living” structure,
permanently changing and probabilistically adapting its conﬁguration, which
provides a well-speciﬁed basis for “bio-inspired” technological solutions. The
properties of dynamically multivalued entanglement and adaptability are further
ampliﬁed due to the extended probabilistic fractality of the unreduced general
solution [1,4,5], obtained by application of the same EP method to solution of
the truncated system of equations (12) used in the ﬁrst-level EP expression (11).

We can now consistently and universally deﬁne the unreduced dynamic com-
plexity, C, of any real system (or interaction process) as arbitrary growing
function of the total number of explicitly obtained system realisations, C =
C (Nℜ) , dC/dNℜ > 0, or the rate of their change, equal to zero for the un-
realistic case of only one system realisation, C (1) = 0. Suitable examples are
provided by C (Nℜ) = C0 ln Nℜ, generalised energy/mass (proportional to the
temporal rate of realisation change), and momentum (proportional to the spatial
rate of realisation emergence) [1,5,8,10]. It becomes clear now that the whole dy-
namically single-valued paradigm and results of the canonical theory (including
its versions of “complexity” and imitations of “multi-stability” in abstract, math-
ematical “spaces”) correspond to exactly zero value of the unreduced dynamic
complexity, which is equivalent to the eﬀectively zero-dimensional, point-like
projection of reality in the “exact-solution” perspective.

Correspondingly, any dynamically single-valued “model” is strictly regular
and cannot possess any true, intrinsic randomness (chaoticity), which should in-
stead be introduced artiﬁcially (and inconsistently), e.g. as a regular “ampliﬁca-
tion” of a “random” (by convention) external “noise” or “measurement error”.
By contrast, our unreduced dynamic complexity is practically synonymous to
the equally universally deﬁned and genuine chaoticity (see above), since multi-
ple system realisations, appearing and disappearing only in the real space (and
forming thus its tangible, changing structure [1,3,5,8]), are redundant (mutually

8 WAC 2004, http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/program.html

incompatible), which is the origin of both complexity and chaoticity. The genuine
dynamical chaos thus obtained has its complicated internal structure (contrary
to the ill-deﬁned unitary “stochasticity”) and always contains partial regularity,
which is dynamically, inseparably entangled with truly random elements.

The universal dynamic complexity, chaoticity, and related properties involve
the essential, or dynamic, nonlinearity of the unreduced problem solution and
corresponding system behaviour. It is provided by the naturally formed dynam-
ical links of the developing interaction process, as they are expressed in the
(eventually fractal) EP dependence on the problem solutions to be found (see
(9)-(11)). It is the dynamically emerging nonlinearity, since it appears even for
a formally “linear” initial problem expression (1)-(2), (5), whereas the usual,
mechanistic “nonlinearity” is but a perturbative approximation to the essential
nonlinearity of the unreduced EP expressions. The essential nonlinearity leads to
the irreducible dynamic instability of any system state (realisation), since both
are determined by the same dynamic feedback mechanism.

≈

≈

Universality of our description leads, in particular, to the uniﬁed understand-
ing of the whole diversity of existing dynamical regimes and types of system
behaviour [1,2,5]. One standard, limiting case of complex (multivalued) dynam-
ics, called uniform, or global, chaos, is characterised by suﬃciently diﬀerent
realisations with a homogeneous distribution of probabilities (i.e. Nr
1) and
αr
1/Nℜ for all r in (18)) and is obtained when the major parameters of
interacting entities (suitably represented by frequencies) are similar to each
other (which leads to a “strong conﬂict of interests” and resulting “deep dis-
order”). The complementary limiting regime of multivalued self-organisation, or
self-organised criticality (SOC) emerges for suﬃciently diﬀerent parameters of
interacting components, so that a small number of relatively rigid, low-frequency
components “enslave” a hierarchy of high-frequency and rapidly changing, but
conﬁgurationally similar, realisations (i.e. Nr
Nℜ and realisation probability
distribution is highly inhomogeneous). The diﬀerence of this extended, multi-
valued self-organisation (and SOC) from the usual, unitary version is essential:
despite the rigid external shape of the system conﬁguration in this regime, it con-
tains the intense “internal life” and chaos of permanently changing “enslaved”
realisations (which are not superposable unitary “modes”). Another important
advance with respect to the unitary “science of complexity” is that the unre-
duced, multivalued self-organisation uniﬁes the extended versions of a whole
series of separated unitary “models”, including SOC, various versions of “syn-
chronisation”, “control of chaos”, “attractors”, and “mode locking”. All the in-
termediate dynamic regimes between those two limiting cases of uniform chaos
and multivalued SOC (as well as their multi-level, fractal combinations) are ob-
tained for intermediate values of interaction parameters. The point of transition
to the strong chaos is expressed by the universal criterion of global chaos onset:

∼

κ

≡

∆ηi
∆ηn

=

ωξ
ωq ∼= 1 ,

(20)

where κ is the introduced chaoticity parameter, ∆ηi, ωξ and ∆ηn
∆ε, ωq
are energy-level separations and frequencies for the inter-component and intra-

∼

A.P. Kirilyuk: Complex Dynamics of Intelligent Communication Networks

9

≈

≫

component motions, respectively. At κ
1 one has the externally regular multi-
≪
valued SOC regime, which degenerates into global chaos as κ grows from 0 to 1,
and the maximum irregularity at κ
1 is again transformed into a multivalued
SOC kind of structure at κ

1 (but with a “reversed” system conﬁguration).
One can compare this transparent and universal picture with the existing di-
versity of separated and incomplete unitary criteria of chaos and regularity. Only
the former provide a real possibility of understanding and control of communi-
cation tools of arbitrary complexity, where more regular regimes can serve for
desirable direction of communication dynamics, while less regular ones will play
the role of eﬃcient search and adaptation means. This combination forms the
basis of any “biological” and “intelligent” kind of behaviour [1,4,5] and therefore
can constitute the essence of the intelligent communication paradigm supposed
to extend the now realised (quasi-) regular kind of communication, which corre-
sponds to the uttermost limit of SOC (κ
0). While the latter inevitably be-
comes ineﬃcient with growing network sophistication (where the chaos-bringing
resonances of (20) cannot be avoided any more), it deﬁnitely lacks the “intelli-
gent power” of unreduced complex dynamics to generate meaning and adaptable
structure development.

→

3 Huge eﬃciency of complex communication dynamics

and the guiding role of the symmetry of complexity

The dynamically probabilistic fractality of the system structure emerges naturally
by the unreduced interaction development itself [1,4,5]. It is obtained mathemati-
cally by application of the same EP method (9)-(14) to solution of the truncated
system of equations (12), then to solution of the next truncated system, etc.,
which gives the irregular and probabilistically moving hierarchy of realisations,
containing the intermittent mixture of global chaos and multivalued SOC, which
constitute together a sort of conﬁned chaos. The total realisation number Nℜ,
and thus the power, of this autonomously branching interaction process with
a dynamically parallel structure grows exponentially within any time period. It
can be estimated in the following way [5].

If our system of inter-connected elements contains Nunit “processing units”,
or “junctions”, and if each of them has nconn real or “virtual” (possible) links,
then the total number of interaction links is N = nconnNunit. In most important
cases N is a huge number: for both human brain and genome interactions N is
greater than 1012, and being much more variable for communication systems, it
will typically scale in similar “astronomical” ranges. The key property of unre-
duced, complex interaction dynamics, distinguishing it from any unitary version,
is that the maximum number Nℜ of realisations actually taken by the system
(also per time unit) and determining its real “power” Preal (of search, memory,
cognition, etc.) is given by the number of all possible combinations of links, i.e.

Preal

Nℜ = N !

√2πN

∝

→

N N

∼

≫≫

N .

(21)

N

N
e

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

10 WAC 2004, http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/program.html

Any unitary, sequential model of the same system (including its mechanistically
“parallel” and “complex” modes) would give Preg

N β, with β

1, so that

Preal

(Preg)N

∼

∼
N β .

∼
101012

Preg

≫≫
101013

∼

(22)

∼

∼

≫

≫

10N

→ ∞

1012 we have Preal

Thus, for N
indeed a “practical inﬁnity”, also with respect to the unitary power of N β

, which is
1012.
These estimates demonstrate the true power of complex (multivalued) com-
munication dynamics that remains suppressed within the unitary, quasi-regular
operation mode dominating now in man-made technologies. The huge power val-
ues for complex-dynamical interaction correlate with the new quality emergence,
such as intelligence and consciousness (at higher levels of complexity) [5], which
has a direct relation to our intelligent communication paradigm, meaning that
such properties as sensible, context-related information processing, personalised
understanding and autonomous creativity (useful self-development), desired for
the new generation networks, are inevitable qualitative manifestations of the
above “inﬁnite” power.

∼

Everything comes at a price, however, and a price to pay for the above quali-
tative advantages is rigorously speciﬁed now as irreducible dynamic randomness,
and thus unpredictability of operation details in complex information-processing
systems. We only rigorously conﬁrm here an evident conclusion that autonomous
adaptability and genuine creativity exclude any detailed, regular, predictable
pre-programming in principle. But what then can serve as a guiding principle
and practical strategy of construction of those qualitatively new types of com-
munications networks and their “intelligent” elements? We show in our further
analysis of complex-dynamic interaction process that those guiding rules and
strategy are determined by a general law of complex (multivalued) dynamics,
in the form of universal symmetry, or conservation, of complexity [1,3,5]. This
universal “order of nature” and evolution law uniﬁes the extended versions of
all (correct) conservation laws, symmetries, and postulated principles (which
are causally derived and realistically interpreted now). Contrary to any unitary
symmetry, the universal symmetry of complexity is irregular in its structure, but
always exact (never “broken”). Its “horizontal” manifestation (at a given level of
complexity) implies the actual, dynamic symmetry between realisations, which
are really taken by the system, constituting the system dynamics (and evolution)
and replacing the abstract “symmetry operators”. Therefore the conservation, or
symmetry, of system complexity totally determines its dynamics and explains the
deep “equivalence” between the emerging, often quite dissimilar and chaotically
changing system conﬁgurations [3].

Another, “vertical” manifestation of the universal symmetry of complexity is
somewhat more involved and determines emergence and development of diﬀerent
levels of complexity within a real interaction process. System “potentialities”, or
(real) power to create new structure at the very beginning of interaction process
(before any actual structure emergence) can be universally characterised by a
form of complexity called dynamic information and generalising the usual “po-
tential energy” [1,3,5]. During the interaction process development, or structure

A.P. Kirilyuk: Complex Dynamics of Intelligent Communication Networks

11

creation, this potential, latent form of complexity is progressively transformed
into its explicit, “unfolded” form called dynamic entropy (it generalises kinetic,
or heat, energy). The universal conservation of complexity means that this im-
portant transformation, determining every system dynamics and evolution, hap-
pens so that the sum of dynamic information and dynamic entropy, or total
complexity, remains unchanged (for a given system or process). This is the ab-
solutely universal formulation of the symmetry of complexity, that includes the
above “horizontal” manifestation and, for example, extended and uniﬁed ver-
sions of the ﬁrst and second laws of thermodynamics (i.e. conservation of energy
and its permanent degradation). It also helps to eliminate the persisting (and
inevitable) series of confusions around the notions of information, entropy, com-
plexity, and their relation to real system dynamics in the unitary theory (thus,
really expressed and processed “information” corresponds rather to a particular
case of our generalised dynamic entropy, see [1,5] for further details).

It is not diﬃcult to show [1,3,5,8] that the natural, universal measure of dy-
namic information is provided by the (generalised) action
known from classical
mechanics, but now acquiring a much wider, essentially nonlinear and causally
complete meaning applicable at any level of complexity. One obtains then the
universal diﬀerential expression of complexity conservation law in the form of
generalised Hamilton-Jacobi equation for action

(x, t):

A

=

∆
A
∆t |

∆
A
∆x |

(cid:18)

A

A

(cid:19)

x=const + H

x,

t=const, t

= 0 ,

(23)

A

/∆x)

where the Hamiltonian, H = H(x, p, t), considered as a function of emerging
space coordinate x, momentum p = (∆
t=const , and time t, expresses
|
the unfolded, entropy-like form of diﬀerential complexity, H = (∆S/∆t)
x=const
|
(note that the discrete, rather than usual continuous, versions of derivatives and
variable increments here reﬂect the naturally quantized character of unreduced
complex dynamics [1,3,5,8]). Taking into account the dual character of multi-
valued dynamics, where every structural element contains permanent transfor-
mation from the localised, “regular” realisation to the extended conﬁguration
of the intermediate realisation of generalised wavefunction and back (Sect. 2),
we obtain the universal Schr¨odinger equation for the wavefunction (or distribu-
tion function) Ψ (x, t) by applying the causal, dynamically derived quantization
procedure [1,3,5,8,10] to the generalised Hamilton-Jacobi equation (23):

∂Ψ
∂t

= ˆH

x,

, t

Ψ ,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

∂
∂x

(24)

A

where
0 is a characteristic action value (equal to Planck’s constant at quantum
levels of complexity) and the Hamiltonian operator, ˆH, is obtained from the
Hamiltonian function H = H(x, p, t) of equation (23) with the help of causal
quantization (we also put here continuous derivatives for simplicity).

Equations (23)-(24) represent the universal diﬀerential expression of the sym-
metry of complexity showing how it directly determines dynamics and evolution
of any system or interaction process (they justify also our use of the Hamiltonian

12 WAC 2004, http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/program.html

form for the starting existence equation, Sect. 2). This universally applicable
Hamilton-Schr¨odinger formalism can be useful for rigorous description of any
complex network and its separate devices, provided we ﬁnd the truly complete
(dynamically multivalued) general solution to particular versions of equations
(23)-(24) with the help of unreduced EP method (Sect. 2).

We have demonstrated in that way the fundamental, analytical basis of de-
scription and understanding of complex (multivalued) dynamics of real commu-
nication networks and related systems, which can be further developed in par-
ticular applications in combination with other approaches. The main practical
proposition of the emerging intelligent communication paradigm is to open the
way for the free, self-developing structure creation in communication networks
and tools with strong interaction (including self-developing internet structure,
intelligent search engines, and distributed knowledge bases). The liberated, au-
tonomous system dynamics and structure creation, “loosely” governed by the
hierarchy of system interactions as described in this report, should essentially
exceed the possibilities of usual, deterministic programming and control.

References

1. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance
Paradigm: Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate Uni-
ﬁcation of Knowledge. Naukova Dumka, Kyiv (1997). For a non-technical overview
see also e-print physics/9806002 at http://arXiv.org

2. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Dynamically multivalued self-organisation and probabilistic struc-
ture formation processes. Solid State Phenomena 97–98 (2004) 21–26; e-print
physics/0405063

3. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Universal symmetry of complexity and its manifestations at diﬀer-
ent levels of world dynamics. Proceedings of Institute of Mathematics of NAS of
Ukraine 50 (2004) 821–828; e-print physics/0404006

4. Kirilyuk, A.P.: The universal dynamic complexity as extended dynamic fractality:
Causally complete understanding of living systems emergence and operation. In:
Losa, G.A., Merlini, D., Nonnenmacher, T.F., and Weibel, E.R. (eds.): Fractals in
Biology and Medicine. Vol. III. Birkh¨auser, Basel Boston Berlin (2002) 271–284;
e-print physics/0305119

5. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Emerging consciousness as a result of complex-dynamical interac-

tion process. E-print physics/0409140

6. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Theory of charged particle scattering in crystals by the generalized

optical potential method. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 69 (1992) 200–231

7. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Quantum chaos and fundamental multivaluedness of dynamical
functions. Annales Fond. L. de Broglie 21 (1996) 455–480; quant-ph/9511034–36
8. Kirilyuk, A.P.: Quantum ﬁeld mechanics: Complex-dynamical completion of fun-
damental physics and its experimental implications. Nova Science, New York (ac-
cepted for publication). E-print physics/0401164

9. Dederichs, P.H.: Dynamical diﬀraction theory by optical potential methods. In:
Ehrenreich, H., Seitz, F., and Turnbull, D. (eds.): Solid state physics: Advances in
research and applications, Vol. 27. Academic Press, New York (1972) 136–237
10. Kirilyuk, A.P.: 75 years of the wavefunction: Complex-dynamical extension
of the original wave realism and the universal Schr¨odinger equation. E-print
quant-ph/0101129

