4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On a connection between gravitation and
quantum chromodynamics.

J. A. Martins Sim˜oes,∗
Instituto de F´ısica,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil

December 30, 2013

Abstract

In this paper we point out a remarkable numerical relation between
the large scale parameters of gravitation GN and H0 and the two fun-
damental parameters of quantum cromodynamics αQCD and ΛQCD.
With this remark we make the conjecture that Newton’s gravitational
constant could show an energy dependence analogous to αQCD.

PACS:04.20.Ha, 04.90.+e

∗E-mail: simoes@.if.ufrj.br

1

In 1938 Dirac found a numerical relation between the large scale parame-
ters of gravitation, Newton’s gravitational constant and Hubble’s constant,GN
and H0 respectively, and some of the small scale parameters of elementary
particles, the Planck constant, the proton mass and the electron charge. This
relation is given by

GN
H0
h3ǫ0
pe2
m3

= 1.3

(1)

(2)

and is numerically satisﬁed at a high degree of precision.

The cosmology that followed this relation suggested that the gravitational
parameter GN had a time dependence. As no such eﬀect was experimentally
found [1], this connection between large and small scale parameters was aban-
doned.

However, Dirac’s original argument has a physical point that deserves
more attention. Any connection between parameters at diﬀerent scales is an
indication of a deeper physical relation of some fundamental principles. So
we have taken Dirac’s program from a more modern point of view.

Our ﬁrst modiﬁcation in Dirac’s argument is that the proton mass is no
longer a fundamental mass scale. According to the standard model of ele-
mentary particles, the fundamental mass scales are the vacuum symmetry
breaking parameter vF ermi and the QCD scale ΛQCD. The second modiﬁ-
cation is that as GN is a coupling constant, it must be proportional to g2
x,
where ”x” means some of the standard model couplings, and not to the
inverse power of the electron charge, as in Eq. 1.

If we now add Planck’s constant and the speed of light, then a pure

dimensional analysis leads us to the equation

GN
H0

=

h2
c

g2
QCD
Λ3

QCD

Using the last 2004 Particle Data Group [2] numerical values for physi-
cal constants and h = 0.71 in Hubble’s constant, αQCD = 0.12 and ΛQCD =
220MeV /c2, we have the result that the two terms diﬀer by a factor 0.8, which
is very close to one. The large diﬀerence on the scales of physical phenom-
ena involved in this new version of Dirac’s relation strongly suggests some
fundamental connection between gravitation and QCD. Any other numerical
relation between the standard model couplings and fundamental mass scales
will not satisfy relations like Eq. 2. The consequences of this equation can
be pursued in at least three ways.

There is an experimental evidence [3] that the electromagnetic ﬁne-structure

constant has a small variation from the value it had some billions of years

2

ago. After this result, Calmet and Fritzsch [4] proposed that the QCD pa-
rameters could also have changed during this cosmic time scale. Our Eq.
2 predicts that any time variation in the QCD parameters will imply time
variations in the cosmological parameters and vice-versa.

The other important consequence of Eq. 2 concerns the energy depen-
dence of GN and αQCD. In the QCD case, the behavior of αQCD(Q2) is well
known and leads to asymptotic freedom. A Q2 dependence of GN is not a
surprise in ﬁeld theory. However, the non-renormalization of gravitation pre-
vents an analysis similar to the QCD case. In more recent years the eﬀective
ﬁeld theory method has shown [5] interesting results in calculating correc-
tions for some cases of gravitational interactions. For example, the leading
long distance quantum corrections of a system of two interacting charged
masses can be computed. But the general small distance behavior of GN is
not known. If we admit that the connection given by Eq. 2 is to be valid in
some energy range and that the energy dependence is only in the coupling
terms, then we would have the relation

GN (Q2) ∝ αQCD(Q2)

(3)

This relation must be viewed as a conjecture following from Eq. 2 and not
as a demonstration. We call it the ” Leme conjecture” [6]. We expect that
this conjecture holds in the energy range of validity of Eq. 2 and that it
will imply in logarithm corrections to gravitational phenomena at diﬀerent
energy scales. But as the formal proof of this conjecture is still lacking , we
can’t fully justify its extention to the asymptotic small distance region.

Finally, the main question that Eq. 2 raises is on the possible physical
scenario from which one could naturally derive this relation. The answer to
this question could clarify the small and large scale behavior of gravitation
and QCD. In particular, if our conjecture is conﬁrmed, it would mean that
the hadrons and the universe are related systems.

Acknowledgments: We thanks T.J. Martins Sim˜oes for suggestions con-
cerning reference 5. This work was partially supported by the following
Brazilian agencies: CNPq and FAPERJ.

References

[1] M.V. Berry, Principles of Cosmology and Gravitation, Cambridge

University Press.

3

[2] Particle Data Group, Phys. Lett. B 592 1 (2004)

[3] J.K. Webb et al., Phys.Rev. Lett. 87 091301 (2001)

[4] H. Fritzsch hep-ph/0411391; X. Calmet and H. Fritzsch Eur.Phys. J.

C 24 639 (2002)

[5] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, J. F. Donoghue and B. R. Holstein, Phys.
Rev. D 67, 084033 (2003); B. R. Holstein and J. F. Donoghue, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 201602 (2004); N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr,hep-th/0410097.

[6] The name is after a famous beach in Rio, where the author lives.

4

