4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

in Developments in Quantum Physics, eds. F. Columbus and V. Krasnoholovets (Nova
Science Publishers Inc., New York, 2004), pp. 85-109

On the Origin of Conceptual Diﬃculties of
Quantum Mechanics

Volodymyr Krasnoholovets

Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences
Prospect Nauky 46, UA-03028 Ky¨ıv, Ukraine

23 January 2003

Abstract

It is the matter of fact that quantum mechanics operates with notions that are
not determined in the frame of the mechanics’ formalism. Among them we can
call the notion of ”wave-particle” (that, however, does not appear in both classical
and high energy physics), the probabilistic interpretation of the Schr¨odinger wave
ψ-function and hence the probability amplitude and its phase, long-range action,
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, the passage to the so-called operators of physical
values, etc. Orthodox quantum mechanics was constructed as a physical theory
developed in the phase space of the mentioned notions. That is why the formalism
of quantum mechanics is aimed only at detailed calculations of the stationary states
of the energy of the quantum system studied and is not able to describe a real path
running by the system in the real space; instead, the formalism gives an averaged
probabilistic prediction. Thus, if we are able to develop quantum mechanics in the
real space, an option to clarify all the diﬃculties associated with the above notions
would appear. Such a theory of quantum mechanics developed in the real space in
fact has recently been constructed by the author. The theory started from deeper
ﬁrst principles, namely, from the consideration of the notion of a 4D space-time. So,
the notion of fundamental particle, the principles of the motion of a particle and
other characteristics have been made clear. The theory, rather a submicroscopic one,
is characterized by short-range action that automatically means the introduction of
a new kind of carriers, i.e. carriers of the quantum mechanical force. The existence
of the carriers called ”inertons” (because they carry inert properties of matter) has
indeed been veriﬁed in a number of experiments.

Key words:

quantum mechanics, space, matter waves, inertons

PACS:

03.65.Bz Foundations, theory of measurement, miscellaneous theo-
ries; 03.65.w Quantum mechanics; 03.75.-b Matter waves; 14.80.-j Other particles
(including hypothetical)

1

1 Dominant views on the foundations of quan-

tum mechanics

The founders of quantum mechanics raised some problems regarding its
conceptual diﬃculties such as the description of particles by using a proba-
bilistic wave ψ-function, the ψ-function collapsing at the measuring, Bohr’s
notion of ”complementary” [1], Schr¨odinger’s cat (i.e., the problem of trans-
forming a set of microscopic states into a particular macroscopic state) and
entanglement [2], Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) paradox [3], etc. Since that
the subject still continue to disturbance inquiring minds of researchers and
nowadays they put the study on nonlocality of quantum mechanics, quantum
paradoxes, entanglement and decoherence, and quantum teleportation in the
forefront of the fundamental science.

Among recent research on misconceptions regarding quantum mechanics
one can mention the paper by Bush [4] in which he touches a number of
conceptual and mathematical problems in the fundamentals and the study by
Styer [5] in which he lists a series of commonly held misconceptions such as
”energy eigenstates are the only allowed states”, ”the wave is dimensionless”,
etc.
It seems that the literature on the so-called Bell inequality [6] and its
validity or violation is the most extensive. Evidently that such an interest to
the Bell inequality is caused by the fact that Bell’s inequality is based on other
postulates of the physical world than orthodox quantum mechanics prescribes.
Let us touch studies regarding the Bell theory in some detail. Muynck [7]
noted that the Bell inequality was ﬁrst derived for hidden-variables theories,
rather stochastic theories (see, e.g. Refs. [8,7] on the hidden-variables theories)
and only after that the inequality was obtained for conventional quantum
mechanics. Many years ago Wigner [9] considering the problem of hidden
variables also noted that we could not obtain directly their magnitudes. He
noticed that the measuring the distribution of magnitudes of hidden variables
still remained undetermined, or fuzzy. Therefore, hidden variables as such
severe suﬀer from a statistical nature.

Let us write the Bell inequality following Muynck’s designations [7]. In the
Bell experiment either standard observable A1 or B1 of particle 1 is measured
jointly with standard observable A2 or B2 of particle 2. It is assumed that
observables A1 and B1 are incompatible, i.e. commutator [Ai, Bj]
= 0, though
= j. Let all observables
[Ai, Bi] = [Aj, Bj] = 0 where i = 1, 2, j = 1, 2, and i
AiAj
have only values +1 and
of the correlation observables AiAj the Bell inequality becomes

1. Then in terms of the expectation values

−

i

h

A1A2i − h

A1B2i(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
h
(cid:12)

2 +

B1A2i

h

+

B1B2i

.

h

≤

(1)

Mensky [10] emphasized such major peculiarities of the objective local the-
ory by Bell as: (i) each particle is characterized by a number of variables (in
expression (1) two variables are analysed) which are possibly correlated for
the two particles; (ii) the results of measurement of one particle do not depend

2

6
6
on whether the other particle is measured or not, and if it is, they do not
depend on the result of such a measurement. Thus the Bell experiment does
not suggest any quantum mechanical nonlocality.

Experimental data by Aspect and co-workers [11,12], Zeilinger’s team [13]
and others showed the violation of Bell’s inequality (1). Many researchers were
astonished at such a result. In particular, Evdokimov et al.
[14] noted that
the violation of Bell’s inequality in quantum world was a true paradox.

Muynck [7] accounts for the Aspect’s experiments by a local disturbance
of the measurement results due to incompatibility of observables of the same
particle, rather than of a nonlocal disturbance of one particle due to a mea-
surement of a observable of the other particle. Muynck analyzes also the
generalized inequalities and their violation by the experiments in connection
with the experiments. He reasonable notes that we do not have any reason to
expect that the standard Aspect experiments should satisfy the Bell inequali-
ties, because of Heisenberg disturbance of a complicated probability. In other
words, the violation of Bell’s inequality is a consequence of the observables,
which deﬁnitely should be caused by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle that
occurred in the arms of the interferometer. So, there is no need to suppose
any extension nonlocality, i.e. the inﬂuence of the measurement in one arm of
the interferometer on the measurement in the other one.

Nakhmanson [15,16] directly shows weak points in the experiments by
Aspect’s and Zeilinger’s teams. He notes that the actual experiments were
far from the thought experiment by EPR and Bell, which the experimenters
washed to test. Namely, in the Aspect’s case the switching of conditions of
registration of photons was not adiabatic and therefore it prevented any real-
istic connection between photons in the EPR pair. Nakhmanson wrote: ”This
gave rise to the legend of nonlocality of quantum mechanics, of the ’instan-
taneously’ correlated behavior of the EPR pair, even though its constituent
particles may be hundred of light-years apart”. Then he continued that in
the experiments by Zeilinger’s team [13] the conditions of registration were
governed by a random number generator and the ’randomness’ was borrowed
from the object of the study itself, i.e. the quantum world.

Eberly [17] has recently argued that the inequalities of the Bell type by
themselves have nothing to do with quantum theory. He points out that the
inequalities do not take into account that there is no physical sense to an
intermediate polarization in quantum theory. However, that is that state that
Bell’s inequalities have included. Then Eberly stresses: ”The violation of
Bell’s inequality is a simple mathematical result obtained by an uncomplicated
counting of members of objects in clearly deﬁned categories.”

Nevertheless, the study of Bell’s inequalities still continue. Mermin [18]
has recently shown that the some kinds of correlation (or even direct classical
communication) between detectors in fact validate Bell’s theorem. Golshani
and Fahmi [19] asserts that the violation of Bell’s inequality is not necessarily
the violation of Bell’s locality condition and that if there is any nonlocality
in nature, it is not in the form of even more complicated inequalities studied

3

by the authors. The most detailed study demonstrates Zeilinger’s team (see,
e.g. Refs.
[20-24]). They introduce, in particular, the notion of ’quantum
entanglement’ determining it as a feature of a composite system to have more
information contained in correlations than any classical mixture of its individ-
ual constituents could ever have [22]. Working on the developing of the quan-
tum theory of information they have proposed [23] the notion of the irreducible
randomness of individual events, which together with quantum complementary
and quantum entanglement have allowed them to support the nonlocality: The
nonlocality for photons that never interacted has been conﬁrmed by observing
a violation of Bell’s inequality by 4.5 standard deviations [24]. The result ob-
tained is considered as an actual proof of the quantum nature of teleportation.
Thus Zeilinger’s team completely supports Bohr’s idea that they quoted in
Ref.
[23]: ”There is no quantum world. There is only an abstract quantum
physical description. It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to ﬁnd
out how Nature is. Physics concerns what we can say about Nature.”

In interesting theoretical work [25] interference and entanglement have re-
cently been studied in the frame of a so-called intrinsic approach. As a rule
classical states are prescribed to the phase space, while quantum states, which
are considered as linear functions on the dynamical variables, assign to the
vector space formalism (the Hilbert space). Density matrices belong to bilin-
ears in the vectors. The authors [25] propose a generalized method of restoring
an entangled pure state (a puriﬁcation of the linear vector) from mixed states
of the subsystems involved in entanglement. The pure density matrix is then
treated as a measure of entanglement for the quantum system in question. In
orthodox quantum mechanics linear operators, which act on the Hilbert space
of states, are associated with observables. For instance, the Wigner distri-
bution f (x) is related to observables as well. Nevertheless, although f (x) is
deﬁned in the Hilbert space [25] its arguments belong to the phase space (note
in the general case the Wigner function is determined as f (x, p, t)). So the
phase space and the Hilbert one appear as interconnected, though the Hilbert
space describes strictly stationary states of the quantum system in question.
Stapp [26,27] analyzing both theoretical and experimental results, which
touch questions like these: Is quantum theory local or nonlocal? and Is nonlo-
cality is real?, has adduced many arguments for this or that point of views and
speciﬁcally noted that quantum theory is still formulated as an indeterministic
theory.

Among other urgent topics that have been developing we would like to
mention research by Cramer [28], Griﬃths [29], and Holland [30]. Cramer
[28] considered an explicit and fully causal nonlocal mechanics for describing
quantum events, which allowed him to claim about new insight into the reality
behind the quantum mechanical formalism. The basic element of his theory
is transaction describing a quantum event as an exchange of advanced and
retarded waves. However, the author did not touch a nature of the waves, i.e.
whether they are electromagnetic, inert, gravitational, or some other lineage.
Moreover, he noted that the veriﬁcation of the theory met grave diﬃculties.

4

Griﬃths [29] introduces probabilities and stochastic processes as part of the
foundations of quantum mechanics. He uses the mathematics of Hilbert space
and constructs quantum principles known as consistent histories, or decoherent
histories, that appears in his approach as basic principles of quantum theory.
Holland [30] adventures causal deterministic ideas by de Broglie and Bohm,
though a surrounding quantum wave that guides a particle is treated in the
framework of statistical mechanical type probabilities. For further reading on
the Bohmian mechanics we would like to refer the reader to Goldstein [31].
Some other interpretations of quantum mechanics are stated in Refs. [32,33];
some aspects of the measurement problem and approaches to its solution are
posed in Ref. [34].

Although quantum mechanics demonstrates a unique predictive success, it
is still hampered by severe conceptual diﬃculties that scientists have tried to
clarify. Looking for the answer to the question: What is quantum mechanics
about?, researchers extend frames of the probabilistic basis of quantum the-
ory. Nevertheless, quantum mechanics as such seems as a quite closed theory.
Mermin [35] holds the same opinion: ”First of all, by ’quantum mechanics’ I
mean quantum mechanics as it is – not some other theory in which the time
evolution is modiﬁed by nonlinear or stochastic terms, nor even the old the-
ory augmented with some new physical entities (like Bohmian particles) which
supplement the conventional formalism without altering of its observable pre-
I have in mind ordinary everyday quantum mechanics.” Muynck
dictions.
[36] shares this view as well: ”Whether quantum mechanics just describes the
’phenomena’, or whether it describes ’reality behind the phenomena’ ? In par-
ticular, within the quantum mechanics formalism I ﬁnd no reason to conclude
that experimental violation of the Bell inequality would imply any nonlocality
(even though there is some nonlocality involved in the quantum mechanical
formalism!). In my view the conceptual diﬃculties of quantum mechanics are
mainly man-made, as a consequence of too high an expectation of the extent
to which this theory describes ’reality behind the phenomena’.”

Notwithstanding this, the inquisitive mind wishes to light upon a secret
In what way can it be done? It is obvious that
’behind the phenomena.’
we should extend quantum mechanics to the sub atomic area at which the
initial notions quantum mechanics operates with will become clear. Among
such notions we ﬁrst of all should mention the following: de Broglie wave-
length, Compton wavelength, wave-particle, ψ-function, spinor, operators of
physical values, commutativity and noncommutativity of operators, Heisen-
berg’s uncertainties, spin, Pauli exclusion principle, Lorentz noninvariance of
the Scr¨odinger equation, discrepancy between Schr¨odinger’s (nonrelativistic)
and Dirac’s (relativistic) formalisms and the absence of an intermediate for-
malism, Zitterbewegung, and so on.

If we are capable to make clear all of the basic notions of quantum the-
ory, we in fact will clue the constitution of Nature at a deeper level. On
the other hand, disclosing the notions above we shall automatically arrive at
the complete determinism, that is, submicroscopic deterministic quantum the-

5

ory... Such a theory being constructed will unravel new peculiarities and links
in quantum systems (including those that fall within electroweak and strong
interactions).

2 Clariﬁcation of fundamental notions

2.1 Space

De Broglie [37] wrote about a subquantum medium that should be pre-
sented in works studying the problem of the causal interpretation of quantum
mechanics. But what kind of a medium? Many of his ideas disclosed Lochak
(see, e.g. Ref. [38]), the nearest collaborator of de Broglie and the President of
Fondation Louis de Broglie (Paris, France). Nowadays we face a huge number
of works dedicated to such kind of a medium that many researchers call an
aether. Researchers who construct models of an aether note that conceptual
diﬃculties of orthodox quantum theories rise just from denying an aether, be-
cause doing so we exclude the possibility of matter to interact with the aether.
Some of these researchers see all particles as being conceived from a unique
corpuscle (see, e.g. Ref.
[39,40]) and, moreover, some direct experimental
evidences of the interaction of matter with a subquantum medium is indeed
demonstrated by Baurov [40].

What was the opinion of Einstein about an aether? In his well-known
work ”Aether and the theory of relativity” [41] he stated that since space
was endowed with physical qualities, an aether existed. Then he mentioned
that according to the general theory of relativity space without an aether is
unthinkable: in space without an aether light would not propagate; there would
not any space-time intervals in the physical sense, etc. However, in summary
Einstein stressed that this aether might not be thought of as endowed with
quality characteristic of ponderable medium, as consisting of parts that might
be tracked through time.

Notwithstanding Einstein’s determination that rejected the idea of likeness
between an aether and a typical medium, quantum mechanics, which was con-
structed later, introduced a new understanding of space. In work ”Is there an
aether?” Dirac [42] considering relations between general relativity and quan-
tum mechanics noted that although the relativity posed the objections to an
aether, quantum mechanics practically removed them. Thus, a subquantum
medium in fact might be intervened in the behavior of moving particles intro-
ducing a peculiar quantum mechanical strangeness.

However, researchers still did not set themselves the problem of construct-
ing a detailed theory of quantum mechanics derived from the structure of space.
Hitherto we have met only incomplete and uncoordinated models and concepts
of space and quantum mechanics, which consider only separate aspects of the
structure of space and the interaction of quantum systems with the space. In
no circumstances such studies cannot be called rigorous theories of quantum

6

behavior of matter. It should be particularly emphasized that since the begin-
ning of the 1950s de Broglie’s major idea [36] was the construction of a double
solution theory. The theory should satisfy the Scr¨odinger formalism and si-
multaneously introduce the deepest deterministic description of the behavior
of a quantum system.

It seems that so far the author in fact has been along who tried to follow
de Broglie’s ideas as close as possible. The main starting point of the author’s
concept [43,44] was the inner construction of a subquantum medium. Why do
we need a substrate? Because a specialist who works in the ﬁeld of condensed
matter physics cannot see particles that move and interact in an absolute
emptiness, i.e. a vacuum. Note that in the case of condensed matter, particles
move in a lattice of atoms/molecules. The lattice can be ordered or disordered,
dense or not compact, but it always exists! Besides, experiments in high energy
physics unambiguously demonstrate that particles can be created in any place
of space and, moreover, high energy physics predicts a critical size, 10−30 m,
at which all kinds of physical interactions should coincide. Furthermore, high
energy physicists operate with the notion of an abstract superparticle whose
diﬀerent states are electron, positron, muon, quark (u-quark, d-quark, and the
others), etc. Thus a fuller picture of the substrate was beginning to emerge:
The primary substrate might be tightly composed of real superparticles, pri-
mary blocks, whose size is around 10−30 m.

Those ﬁrst steps then passed into a rigorous mathematical theory of the
real space developed by Bounias and me in a series of works [45-47]. Why do
we prefer the notion of the space over that of an aether? The author tried
to answer this interesting question in article [48]. The matter is that this is
the pure historical issue: ancient Indian sages possessed an inexplicable deep
knowledge regarding the constitution of the physical world and they used term
’space’ (’loka’ in Sanskrit) [49]; ancient Greeks partly borrowed their knowledge
and transformed ’loka’ into ’aether’. It is interesting that Newton also adhered
the notion ’space’ that was in his opinion constructed of compactly stacked
small rigid balls.

Ø, ∁

In our works [45-47] studying the constitution of the real space (i.e., a 4-D
space-time) we have used topology, set theory and fractal geometry. An ab-
stract lattice of empty set cells Ø has been shown to be able to account for
a primary substrate in a physical space. This lattice is a fractal lattice if it
allowed for the magma ØØ =
constructed with the empty hyperset and
the axiom of availability. Spacetime is represented by ordered sequences of
topologically closed Poincar´e sections of this primary space. We have demon-
strated that the antifounded properties of the empty set provide existence to a
lattice involving a tessellation of the corresponding abstract space with empty
balls. This structure has thus been called a tessellattice. M. Bounias intro-
duced the ’Moment of Junction’ that allowed us to investigate the composition
of indicative functions of the position of points within the topological struc-
tures and to account for elements of the diﬀerential geometry of space-time.

}

{

The tessellattice represents a degenerate space-time, i.e.

in this case all

7

cells (in other words, balls) are degenerated. A particled ball provides a for-
malism describing the elementary particles proposed in Refs. [43,44]. In this
respect, mass is represented by a fractal reduction of volume of a ball, while
just a reduction of volume as in degenerate cells, which was initially postulated
in Refs. [43,44,50-52], is not suﬃcient to provide mass (because a dimensional
increase is a necessary condition). Accordingly, if Vo is the volume of an abso-
lutely free cell, then the reduction of volume resulting from a fractal concavity
is the following: Vpart = Vo −
Vf. The mass m of a particled ball is a function
of the fractal-related decrease of the volume of the ball:

m ∝ (1/Vpart)

(ev

1) ev>1

(2)

−
where (e) is the Bouligand exponent, and (e
given by the fractal iteration.

·

−

1) the gain in dimensionality

The moment of junction allows the formalization of the topological char-
acteristics of what is called motion in a physical universe. It is the motion
that was called by de Broglie as the major characteristic determining physics.
While an identity mapping denotes an absence of motion, that is a null interval
of time, a nonempty moment of junction stands for the minimal of any time
interval. Sidharth [53] argued that a minimum spacetime interval should exist
and that ”one cannot go to arbitrarily small spacetime intervals or points”. In
our sense, there is no such ”point” at all: only instants that at bottom of fact
do not reﬂect timely features.

In such a manner, a (physical) vacuum that is hazy something or nothing in
all modern quantum theories should be replaced by the real space, or physical
space stated above.

High energy physics working on sub microscopic scales proposes some Higgs
condensate that would be initial at the creation of the physical world. Nonethe-
less, the Higgs condensate of models of grand uniﬁcation of interactions is not
constructed in a real 4D space-time and moreover, it does not give any idea
in what way it can manifest itself in quantum mechanics. Inasmuch as quan-
tum mechanics is the most reliable basis for all other quantum theories, any
new quantum concept has to produce orthodox quantum mechanics as a lim-
iting case of the theory constructed (i.e. de Broglie’s thesis concerning the
double theory solution should be satisﬁed). However, either quantum chro-
modynamics, or some other contemporary theory such as string theory and
others are not able to mutate in the orthodox quantum mechanical formal-
ism. Quantum ﬁeld theories and their derivatives suﬀer from undetermined
ﬁeld variables (ϕ, ϕ4, etc.) constructed in abstract spaces, and so on. Group
methods also isolate themselves from both the constitution of the space and
the direct measurement.

General relativity does not deal with any substrate, its major subject is
geometry. However, we should not forget that the relativity separates the
mass from the geometry, i.e. matter from space. If we assume that matter
appears from the space, which in turn is a substrate, we immediately arrive

8

at the conclusion that the matter should interact with such a space: the space
itself becomes material.

Thus the submicroscopic theory of the real space constructed in Refs. [45-
47] discloses very new horizons in physics. In the area of macroscopic physics
this is the possibility of deriving the theory of gravity starting from quan-
tum mechanics. Recently a deﬁnite success in this direction in fact has been
achieved [50,54-56]. In the sub atomic area the reconsideration of the strong
and electroweak interaction starting from deeper ﬁrst principles is still waiting
for pioneers.

2.2 Long-range action

Ehrenfest [57] pointed out that by conventional quantum mechanics, par-
ticles can interact simultaneously even if they are spaced at any quantity of
kilometers; he even exclaimed: ”What a strange theory we have!” Long-range
action of quantum mechanics was also emphasized by Pauli [58]; in particular,
he noted that quantum mechanics bears up against a hypothetical basis that
the speed of the interaction in the quantum mechanical range c =
and
that the gravitational interaction is negligible, the constant of gravitational
interaction G = 0.

∞

For instance, let us turn to the problem of hydrogen atom, a typical ex-
ample of long-range action in quantum mechanics, which also was stressed by
Arunasalam [59]. The radial part of the Schr¨odinger equation written for a
particle in a spherically symmetric electrostatic potential V (r) has the form
(see, e.g. Schiﬀ [60])

~2

d 2χ
dr2 + hV (r) +

l(l + 1)~2
2mr2

−

2m

iχ = Eχ

where χ(r) is the radial wave function. The second term in the square brackets
is stipulated by the potential energy associated with the moment of momentum
of the particle. The potential energy

(3)

(4)

V (r) +

l(l + 1)~2
2mr2

ensures the stability of the particle orbit. In the case of the hydrogen atom the
potential V (r) = e2/(4πǫ0 r) and the equation of related motion of an electron
and proton has the form similar to Eq. (3).

However, it should be noted that the Schr¨odinger quantum equation (3)
includes the potentials V (r) written in pure classical
terms, much as in the
problem of Newton gravity where V (r) = Gm/r! In Eq. (2) V (r) is a usual
classical presentation of the motionless charge surrounded by the electric ﬁeld.
The mass m that enters quantum equation (4) is also a pure classical param-
eter. Hence even the most comprehensive quantum mechanical description of
the quantum system studied is only a quasi-classical pattern.

9

Thus if one still wishes to remain devoted to orthodox quantum mechanics,

the fundamentals will be kept in the shade of its statistical conformities.

On the other hand, since the tessellattice, or the real space is a lattice of
densely packed balls [45-47], all the phenomena that can take place in the tes-
sellated space a priori are deterministic. In fact we do not need any necessity
to introduce long-range action because all kinds of interactions will now be
occur through superparticles, building blocks of the space. This means that
any actual microscopic theory should be speciﬁed by short-range action, i.e. it
should be characterized by carriers, elementary excitations, or quasi-particles
of the tessellated space. In our theory such excitations were called ’inertons’
It seems this appellation is best matched to their physical nature be-
[43].
cause ’inertia’ means a resistance to the motion. In fact any particle moving
in the tessellattice should undergoes collisions on the side of coming cells, su-
perparticles. Such an interaction results in the creation of the tessellattice’s
excitations, inertons, which therefore for ever become attached to particles.
Moreover, in paper [56] it was directly shown that a particle’s inertons carry
v2
0/c2. The value of mass of
the proper inert mass of the particle, m0/
an inerton can vary approximately from 10−85 to 10−45 kg [57].

1
p

−

2.3 Wave-particle

Classical mechanics is constructed in the real space (i.e. in a 3D space or 4D
space-time) where particles – material points – are endowed with such measur-
able characteristics as the position, velocity, momentum, and kinetic energy. A
classical wave is speciﬁed by measurable properties as well, namely, the wave-
length and frequency. In higher energy physics particles do not demonstrate
wave properties as well; they seem material points. Thus, wave properties of
particles, which appear at low and intermediate energies, can indeed be asso-
ciated with an intervention of a subquantum medium, i.e. space, that imposes
the wave behavior on moving particles.
In 1924 de Broglie (see, e.g. Ref.

[61]) formulating the Jakobi theorem
in the real space derived the de Maupertuis principle: A real trajectory of a
particle that moves from point A to point B of the space is characterized by
the minimum action

S = Et

mv (αx + βy +

−

1
p

−

α2

−

β2 z)

where is E is the kinetic energy of a particle, m its mass, v its velocity, t is
time, and α and β are direction cosines.

Then de Broglie derived the solution to the wave equation that described
a monochromatic wave spreading in an isotropic medium. This allowed him
to write the phase of the wave in the form

ϕ = ν t

(αx + βy +

1
p

−

α2

−

β2 z)

1
λ

−

where ν is the frequency of the wave and λ its wavelength. ϕ is the total
integral of the equation of geometric optics, which takes account of the Fermat

(5)

(6)

10

principle: A real ray spreading from point A to point B is characterized by
the minimum phase.

Setting ν = E/h and then comparing expressions (5) and (6) de Broglie

came to his famous relationships for a canonical particle

E = hν

and

λ = h/mv,

(7)

In expressions (7) parameters E and mv (the energy and the momentum,
respectively) belonged to the particle, but the frequency ν and the wavelength
λ were characteristics of a wave that should accompany and guide the particle
at its motion in the real space.

Note that the relationships (7) enable one readily to derive the Schr¨odinger
equation [61]. So, de Broglie’s transparent idea that a moving particle is
accompanied by an actual wave did not receive any further development.

The Schr¨odinger and Dirac formalisms say nothing about true trajectories
of the quantum system studied that is a direct consequence of the probabilistic
approach to the description of quantum phenomena. Of course, one could use
Feynman diagrams for any entity, with their point-like particles and photons,
all having some absolute position and momentum. However, we cannot get
the true path. Instead we must draw inﬁnitely many Feynman diagrams and
then calculate Feynman’s path integrals, which make it possible to ﬁnd out
only the most verisimilar trajectory of the quantum system.

Once again, the inner reason is that conventional quantum mechanics is
developed in the phase space, but not in the real one. Indeed, can one clarify
the duality of a ”wave-particle” in the real space where only a particle and a
wave can separately be determined? The same is noted by Ligare and Olivery
[62]: ”It is not always clear which aspects of classical wave behavior are related
in a fully quantum-mechanical treatment, or where to draw the line between
wave-like aspects and particle-like aspects and how to justify the division”.

Since in the author’s approach the real space is the tessellattice formed by
densely packed superparticles, a mechanics of a particle should be diﬀerent
from that typical for classical mechanics. The mechanics constructed in the
tessellattice must take into account the interaction of a moving particle with
the surrounding lattice. A detailed theory of the motion of a particle interacted
with superparticles of the tessellated space was constructed in Refs. [43,44,50].
It has been argued that a deformation coat, or a crystallite, is formed around
a created particle, which is identical with the deformation coat that is formed
around a foreign particle in the crystal lattice. The size of the crystallite is
associated with the Compton wavelength of the particle, λ Com = h/mc and
the role of the crystallite is to shield the particle from the degenerate space.
The mechanics constructed is exempliﬁed by elementary excitations of the
surrounding space, i.e.
inertons, which accompany the moving particle. The
Lagrangian of a moving particle has the form (simpliﬁed here)

L = 1

2 gij ˙X i ˙X j + 1

2

˜g(l)
ij ˙xi

(l) ˙xj

N

X
l=1

N

π
Tl

(l) −

X
l=1

δij

X i ˙xj
(cid:2)

(l) + v xj

.

(l)(cid:3)

(8)

11

(9)

(10)

Here the ﬁrst term describes the kinetic energy of the particle, the second
term depicts the motion of the ensemble of N inertons and the third term
characterizes the interaction between the particle and the ensemble.

In the so-called relativistic case, when the particle’s velocity v approaches

to the velocity of light c, the Lagrangian is chosen in the classical form
m0c2

v2/c2

L =

1

−

p

−

in which, however, the following transformation is made

v

−→ (cid:2)

gij ˙X i ˙X j + f (X, x, v, ˙x)

/g
(cid:3)

where the function f includes terms analogous to the second and third terms
of expression (8).

Equations of motion of the particle and its inertons have been studied in
detail.
It has been shown that the motion in fact is marked by de Broglie
relationships (7). Moreover, the inner meaning of all the parameters has been
clariﬁed.
In particular, the particle’s de Broglie wavelength represents the
amplitude of spatial oscillations of the particle. The particle emits inertons
running odd sections λ/2 of its path and its velocity gradually decreases from
v to 0. During even sections λ/2 the particle re-absorbs inertons again and its
velocity is restored to the value of v. The frequency ν = 1/2T where T is the
period of collisions of the particle with the center-of-mass of its inerton cloud.
The particle’s inerton cloud oscillates around the particle with the same

frequency ν and the cloud’s amplitude Λ satisﬁes expression

Λ

λ c/v

≃

(11)

where c is the velocity of inertons, which is of the order or over the velocity of
light. The theory constructed in some aspects is similar to the kinetic theory
of a system of two linked objects that are characterized by free path lengths λ
and Λ.

The availability of the oscillating inerton cloud that accompanies a moving
particle automatically means that the particle indeed goes with a peculiar real
wave. Since the particle is always found in the center of the system ’particle–
inerton cloud’, the system as a whole may be treated as a wave travelling along
a given direction. The range of the space covered by the particle’s inerton
cloud determines an area of employing of the wave ψ-function formalism. So
the double solution theory approach allows us to ﬁll the pure probabilistic
interpretation of the Schr¨odinger wave ψ-function with the concrete physical
contents described above. The problem of the measurement of an abstract
wave ψ-function when it collapses to a measurable actual point now can easy
be account for the re-absorption of inertons by their particle.

2.4 Matter waves

Although in quantum mechanics the behavior of particles are described
by pure formal statistical formalism, canonical particles, nevertheless, demon-
strate properties of real waves, i.e. the matter waves, which received empirical

12

conﬁrmation in the diﬀraction experiments. Therefore, particles in fact possess
real wave properties predicted by de Broglie, which automatically implies that
the pure probabilistic interpretation of the ψ-function is not complete.

Briner et al.

[63] published an experimental work entitled ”Looking at
Electronic Wave Functions on Metal Surfaces”, in which they demonstrated
the colored spherical and elliptical ﬁgures, which the authors called ”the im-
ages of ψ wave functions of electrons”. Virtually they gave the evidence that
the electron is not a point-like object, though the high energy physics asserts
that it is a point object with the size no larger than 10−18 m. Thus they ﬁxed
an actual perturbation of the space around an electron in the metal! The au-
thors subconsciously rose against the probabilistic interpretation of the ψ wave
accepted by the Copenhagen School concept and, moreover, they practically
proved the fallaciousness of the statement of the concept. Consequently, the
experimental data point to the fact that the wave ψ-function is not abstract
but measurable matter.

Evidently, inertons as a substructure of the matter waves have already
received an implicit support among researchers [63]. We shall discuss other
manifestations of inertons in Section 3.

2.5 Lorentz invariance

All correct theories should be Lorentz invariant,

they and Ein-
stein’s special relativity should agree (see, e.g. Ref.
[64]). Nevertheless, the
Schr¨odinger equation is not Lorentz invariant but it perfectly describes quan-
tum phenomena and we trust wholly the results derived from the equation.
How is it possible?

i.e.

It seems that the disagreement between the strong theoretical conclusion
and the experimental veracity is hidden in the statistical approach to the
Schr¨odinger formalism. In papers [43,44] the Schr¨odinger equation was derived
from deeper ﬁrst principles that in fact removed a very unpleasant conﬂict
that so far took place between nonrelativistic quantum mechanics and special
relativity: Unlike the traditional presentation, the Schr¨odinger equation gained
in paper [44] is Lorentz invariant owing to the invariant time entered the
equation. Besides, it has been shown in Refs. [44,56] that the tessellated space
contracts a moving object and its cloud of inertons in accord to the formalism
of special relativity (see also Ref. [46]), i.e. by the factor of

v2/c2.

1

p

−

2.6 Uniﬁcation of Schr¨odinger and Dirac formalisms

Why Schr¨odinger’s and Dirac’s approaches are so dissimilar? Why is an
intermediate approach lacking? It seems that this issue has never been raised
by researchers so far at all. Nevertheless the problem is very serious and it
must be resolved.

In orthodox quantum mechanics there is no singled valued parameters E
and ν in the expression E = hν applied to a moving canonical particle. In

13

one case E = 1
E = m0c 2/

1
p

−

2 m0 v2 (see, e.g. Schiﬀ [60], p. 33 ), and in the other one

v2/c2 (see, e.g. Schiﬀ [60], p. 364). Which is true?

The problem has been studied by the author in paper [50]. To answer the
question let us consider the three relationships below, namely: de Broglie’s
λ = h/mv, Compton’s λ Com = h/mc, and Λ
λ c/v (11). This allows relation
(11) to rewrite as follows

≃

Λ

λ Com

≃

c2
v2 .

(12)

−

1
p

2 m0v2/

It has been shown in Refs. [44,50] that a moving particle periodically passes
its kinetic energy 1
v2/c2 on to the particle’s inerton cloud. That
is why, as follows from relation (12) when the velocity v of a particle satisﬁes
the inequality v << c, the inerton cloud that guides the particle carries the
particle’s kinetic energy E = 1
It is the energy that is measured by
the tool. At a distance about Λ from the particle its inerton cloud undergoes
obstacles and passes the corresponding information to the particle. This is the
typical de Broglie’s ”motion by guidance” and the utilization of the Schr¨odinger
formalism is quite correct in this situation.

2 m0 v2.

→

When v

c, the inerton cloud becomes virtually closed inside of the par-
ticle’s crystallite whose size is determined by the Compton wavelength λ Com.
The total energy of the crystallite coincides with the total energy of the par-
ticle, E = m0c 2/
v2/c2, and if so the tool will measure this energy. In
−
c the energy of the particle at rest m0c2 explicitly
such a manner when v
reveals itself at the measurement and, therefore, in this approximation the
Schr¨odinger formalism fails and the Dirac formalism becomes eﬀective.

1
p

→

2.7 Spin

What is spin? It is one more mystery of the microworld.

In quantum
mechanics spin is perceived to be a certain inner property of canonical particles.
Quantum ﬁeld theories deﬁne spin as an ”inseparable and invariable property
of a particle” (see e.g. Ref. [64], p. 17). That is all.

As a rule the notion of spin of a particle is associated with an intrinsic
particle motion. Several tens of works have been devoted to the spin problem.
Major of them is reviewed in recent author’s papers [50,52]. Main ideas of the
works quoted there were reduced to a moving particle that was surrounded by
a wave, or a small massless particle, or an ensemble of small massless particles,
which engaged in a circular motion.

Of course, it seems quite reasonable to assume that spin reﬂects some kind
of proper rotation of the particle. However, canonical particles possess also
electrodynamic properties and the operation rotor is the principal character-
istic of the particle’s electromagnetic ﬁeld. Since quantum electrodynamics
and quantum mechanics of a particle must be in accord, the idea of rotation
regarding the notion of the particle’s spin should be abandoned.

In the author’s concept particles are determined as spatial objects in the
real space, which in fact makes it possible to investigate the notion of spin in

14

detail. In this case along with an oscillating rectilinear motion, the particle
may undergo also some kind of an inner pulsation, like a drop. Two possible
pulsations of a particle either along its velocity vector or diametrically opposite
to it have been associated with the two possible projections of the particle spin,
i.e., the two own pulsations of the particle in the real space are exhibited by
~/2, in the phase space [50]. Any spin
two so-called spin-1/2 projections,
bigger 1/2 is the property of a composite quantum system.

±

The Pauli principle makes allowance for the spin ”polarization” of inerton
clouds of two interacting particles. If inertons of the two particle transfer the
same projection of spin determined above, the interaction will be repulsive; if
spins of the particles are opposite, the interaction will be attractive.

2.8 Heisenberg’s uncertainties

Although there are Heisenberg’s uncertainties for the coordinate and mo-

mentum and the energy and time of a particle,

∆x∆p

~,

≥

∆E ∆t

~,

≥

(13)

we are not able to write any similar relation for the particle mass, which should
also be fuzzy in a undetermined volume, the same as the particle itself (the
mass must follow the particle!), as the probabilistic formalism prescribes.

De Broglie [65,66] studied the problem of the mass behavior and came
to the conclusion that the dynamics of particles had the characteristics of
the dynamics of the particles with a variable proper mass. He was the ﬁrst
to indicate that the corpuscle dynamics was the basis for the wave mechanics.
With the variational principle, he obtained and studied the equations of motion
of a massive point reasoning from the typical Lagrangian

L =

M0c 2√1

v2/c 2

−

−

(14)

in which the velocity v of the point and the velocity of light c were constant
along a path. De Broglie’s pioneer research allows one to suggest that a real
wave, which indeed has to accompany the moving particle, must complement
the deﬁcient value of the momentum and the energy of the particle. Then, say,
we know the momentum and the energy, but have uncertainties in coordinate
If we assume the existence of an actual wave that travels in the
and time.
space together with the particle, we can readily propose that the particle is
entrained by the given wave and, therefore, position and time of the particle
become in fact undetermined in a concrete point as they become functions of
the travelling wave.

The uncertainty principle is a direct consequence of the probabilistic ap-
proach to quantum phenomena when only one of two subsystems is taken into
account, namely, we treat the behavior only a particle, but totally ignore its
inerton cloud that accompanies the particle.

It seems that in some situations the uncertainties are sound not universally
true. For instance, Gong [67] has recently re-analyzed two well-known ideal

15

experiments: (i) Heisenberg’s γ-ray microscope experiment and (ii) the single
slit diﬀraction experiment. He has shown that in the case (i) the uncertainty
principle cannot be employed for a quantum system if its size is equal or
large than the resolving limit ∆xmic of the microscope. In the situation (ii)
if a particle has a certain position in the slit, the uncertain quantity of the
position is also wanting. Hence in both cases the relation ∆x∆p
0 is held,
which is incompatible with the prediction (13).

∼

A conclusion can be drawn that the uncertainty principle is not universal.
It should be applied with a great caution. The reason is that the nonlinear
behavior of a quantum system would stem from a subtle interaction with the
environment, which is discussed below.

3 Field generated by motion

3.1 Experimental evidence

Classical mechanics itself has evidence that the space should be treated as a
substrate, though such direct demonstrations as inert forces and the centrifugal
force are not yet taken into account in quantum and gravitational physics.

At the same time quantum theories that describe electrodynamics, weak
and strong interactions are characterized by their own carriers, quasi-particles
or particles: photons, W ±- and Z 0-bosons, and gluons, respectively. In this pa-
per we have argued that quantum mechanics being constructed in the real space
immediately gives rise to its proper carriers, namely, inertons. We have already
talked about experimental evidence presented by Baurov [40] and Briner et al.
[63]. Here we would like to inform about other recent data. Benford [68] could
record radiation of a unknown nature from a ferrite disk revolving on its axis.
Urutskoev and co-workers [69] registered a new ”strange” radiation as well
when they studied transmutation of chemical elements in foils during electric
discharge – the eﬀect that is still considered as completely impossible among
the majority of nuclear physicists.

The experimental veriﬁcation of submicroscopic quantum mechanics,
namely, that moving objects are accompanied by inertons, elementary exci-
tations of the space, has been carried out in papers [54,70,71]. In work [54]
we started from a hypothesis that in condensed media inerton clouds of sep-
arate entities should overlap forming the entire inerton ﬁeld that should be
quantized the same as the phonon ﬁeld. In a solid, the force matrix W deter-
mines branches of the solid’s acoustic vibrations. We supposed that the force
matrix should include in addition to the phonon term also the term associ-
ated with the overlapping of inerton clouds; so, the force matrix transformed
to W = Wacust + Winert. Therefore an outside inerton ﬁeld would be able to
inﬂuence the solid in the same way as the acoustic ﬁeld does. Since the Earth
is a power source of the inerton radiation. We in fact could ﬁx changes in the
ﬁne morphological structure of samples studied, Figure 1 (experimental details

16

Figure 1: Resonator of the Earth inerton ﬁeld made of two transparent organic glass
plates and the sample (a razor blade) whose ﬁne morphologic structure changed
under the Earth inerton radiation, which was ﬁxed by the electron microscope [54]
(for further reading about the phenomenon see Ref. [73].)

see in Ref. [54]). The device that measures the inerton radiation has recently
been constructed by my colleagues, Figure 2.

In paper [70] the anomalous photoelectric eﬀect occurring under strong irra-
diation was examined from the submicroscopic standpoint. The phenomenon,
in essence, is this: these are electrons’ inerton clouds which absorb photons of
an incident laser beam, because the cross-section of an electron’s inerton cloud
10−2 nm2 (the actual electron’s
σcloud much exceeds that of an atom σatom ∼
cross-section satisﬁes inequalities λ2 < σcloud < Λ2). It has been shown that
the multiphoton theory that is still employed by the majority of specialists
in quantum optics since the mid-1960s is wrong as the photoelectric eﬀect
studied has a linear dependence on the intensity of light, though the multi-
photon theory is strongly nonlinear theory; this also has long been stressed
by Panarella [71]. The result [70] is supported by comparison with a great
numbers of experimental data.

In paper [72] it is shown that in the KIO3·

HIO3 crystal hydrogen atoms
co-operate in peculiar clusters in which, however, the hydrogen atoms do not
move from their equilibrium positions, but become to vibrate synchronously.
The interaction between the hydrogen atoms is associated with the overlapping
of their inertons. The exchange by inertons results in the oscillation of mass
of hydrogen atoms, which manifested itself in the IR spectra analysed.

3.2 Prospects for quantum physics

Since photons and inertons are two major quasi-particles, which are excited
in the tessellated space [74], we would build up a submicroscopic theory of
the diﬀraction phenomenon both for particles and photons, which today is
still limited by the geometrical optics approximation. The theory will also
elucidate a microscopic origin of the phenomenon of dispersion of light and,

17

Figure 2: Device ”URGA-1” (the Universal Registrar of Geological Anomalies) that
measures the inerton radiation, in particular, in pyramid-like constructions with an
eﬀective size over 1 m.

moreover, it will show that just inertons – carriers of the matter waves – play
the fundamental role in the diﬀraction/dispersion phenomenon.

The said is not a fantasy by the author. A submicroscopic theory of the
phenomenon of the diﬀraction of photons/particles promises new interesting
results that would be very considerable for applied physics. Indeed, a mech-
anism of the diﬀractionless of single photons revealed by Panarella (see, e.g.
his review article [75]) about 20 years ago remains completely unclear. The
behavior of photons was typical for that of classical corpuscles: single photons
passed through a pinhole and did not form any fringe on the target. This would
mean that the diﬀraction pattern is formed only due to the interaction of each
travelling photon with the surrounding clouds of inertons, which ceaseless os-
cillate around their entities. The diﬀractionless would mean a peculiar photon
channelling when a travelling photon is not scattered by surrounding inerton
clouds of the matter. At what conditions is it possible? The answer will shed
light on other quantum phenomena such as entanglement, teleportation, etc.
Thus the inerton ﬁeld is capable to play a role of the control ﬁeld that will
replace an indeterministic ’randomness of the quantum world’.

Nakhmanson [16] notes that the idea of informational experiments with
particles has never been publicly discussed. Then he continues that if par-
ticles have consciousness, they may receive a signal and then will transfer it
to matter. Submicroscopic quantum mechanics constructed in the real space
completely supports this idea, because the particle’s inerton cloud plays the
role of a peculiar ’consciousness’ of the particle, which was hypothesized in
Ref. [16].

As the control ﬁeld, a ﬂow of inertons would provide for controlled low
energy nuclear reactions like those that were revealed by Benford [68] and
Urutskoev et al.
[69], though in their experiments they only claimed about
a new ”strange” radiation. In the recent research conducted by our team we
have obtained much more remarkable results in this area as long as we followed
the submicroscopic theory stated above.

18

4 Concluding remarks

Thus, if we turn from the statistical standpoint on the nature of everything,
we arrive at the very new pattern of the physical world described above. New
peculiarities and links come to light. From the viewpoint of submicroscopic de-
terminism many urgent problems of contemporary physics abruptly lose their
supreme meaning, because these problems appear now as typical phenomeno-
logical issues whose decision is found at a deeper level of our knowledge.

For instance, Arunasalam [59] has recently discussed the views on the fun-
damental problems expressed by diﬀerent sets of famous physicists (Einstein,
Dirac, Feynman, Pauli, Bethe and others) and shown that the views are in
sharp contrast: covariance versus invariance, relativistic versus nonrelativis-
tic electron theories, etc. The problems indeed are considerably important.
However, if we are resting on deeper, i.e. deterministic ﬁrst principles, such
problems as charge conjugation C and CPT violation seem not determined
owing to vagueness of the notions charge, space, and time in the framework of
the theory that tries to resolve the problems.

From the viewpoint of the theory of space constructed in works [45-47]
and submicroscopic quantum mechanics discussed above modern theories on
particle physics do not show up as fundamental. In the future, without doubt,
they will be re-analysed on the basis of the submicroscopic concept. Similar
problems remain to face gravitational physics. For example, the problem of
gravitational waves seems very farfetched. Gravitational waves are not a re-
alistic solution to the Einstein equations, as has been shown by Loinger [76],
and they are forbidden by submicroscopic quantum mechanics developed in
the real space [54].

Consequently, further sophisticated study of the constitution of the real
space and the deriving matter and physics laws from the space are the shortest
road to the progress of science and the advanced technology.

References

[1] N. Bohr, The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic

theory, Nature, no. 121, 580-489 (1928).

[2] E. Schr¨odinger, Die gegebwartige Situation in der Quantenmechanick,

Naturwissnschaften 23, 807-812, 823, 844-849 (1935).

[3] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen, Can quantum mechanical description
of physical reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev. 47, 777-780 (1935).

[4] B. Bush, Just how ﬁnal are today’s quantum structures? arXiv.org e-print

archive http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0103139.

[5] D. F. Styer, Common misconceptions regarding quantum mechanics, Am.

J. Physics 64, 31-34 (1996).

19

[6] J. S. Bell, On the Eistein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, Physics(Long Island

City, New York) 1, 195-200 (1964).

[7] W. M. de Muynck, Foundations of quantum mechanics, an empiricist ap-
proach. Fundamental theories of physics, vol. 127 (Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht, Boston, London, 2002), ch. 9 and 10 (also see W. M. de
Muynck’s Home Page http://www.phys.tue.nl/ktn/Wim/muynck.htm).

[8] F. J. Bellinfante, A survey of hidden variable theories (Pergamon Press,

Oxford, UK, 1973).

302 (Russian translation).

[9] E. P. Wigner, Symmetries and reﬂections, (Mir, Moscow, 1971), pp. 292-

[10] M. B. Mensky, Quantum mechanics: new experiments, new applications,
and new formulations of old questions Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 170, 631-648 (2000)
(English translation: Physics-Uspekhi 43, 586-600 (2000)).

[11] A. Aspect, P. Grangier, G. Roger, Experimental test of realistic local

theories via Bell’s theorem, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 460-465 (1981).

[12] A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, G. Roger, Experimental test of Bell’s inequalities

using time varying analyzers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 1804 (1982).

[13] G. Weihs, T. Jennewein, C. Simon, H. Weinfurter, A. Zeilinger, Vilolation
of Bell’s inequality under strict Eistein locality conditions, Phys. Rev. Lett.
81, 50395043 (1998).

[14] N. E. Evdokimov, D. N. Klyshko, V. P. Komolov, V. A. Yaroshkin, Bell’s
inequalities and EPR-Bohm correlations: working classical radiofrequency
model, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk 166, 91-107 (1996) (English translation: Physics-
Uspekhi 39, 83-98 (1996)).

[15] R. S. Nakhmanson, Physical interpretation of quantum mechanics, Us-
pekhi Fiz. Nauk 171, 441-444 (2001) (English translation: Physics-Uspekhi
44, 421-424 (2001)).

[16] R. Nakhmanson,

Very

promising

hole

in Bell’s

theorem,

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0011022.

[17] J. H. Eberly, Bell inequalities and quantum mechanics, Am J. Phys. 70,

276-279 (2002).

[18] N. D. Mermin, Bell’s theorem in the presence of classical communication,

archive http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0207140.

[19] M. Gohani, A. Fahmi, Is Bell’s local condition necessary for the derivation

of Bell’s inequality? Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie 26, 735-741 (2001).

20

[20] A. Zeilinger, Experiment and the foundations of quantum physics, Rev.

Modern Phys. 74, 288-297 (1999).

[21] C. Simon, ˇC. Brukner, A. Zeilinger, Hidden-variable theorems for real

experiments, http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0006043.

[22] ˇC. Brukner, M.

˙Zukovsky, A. Zeilinger, The essence of entanglement,

http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0106119.

[23] ˇC. Brukner, A. Zeilinger, Information and fundamental elements of the

structure of quantum theory, http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0212084.

[24] T. Jennewein, G. Weihs, J. W. Pan, A. Zeilinger, Experimental nonlocal-
ity proof of quantum teleportation and entanglement swapping, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 017903 (2002).

[25] V.

I. Man’ko, G. Marno, E.C. G. Sudarshan and F. Za-
approach,

entanglement:

intrinsic

and

an

ccaria,
http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0207033.

Interference

[26] H. Stapp, Nonlocal character of quantum theory, Am. J. Phys. 65, 300-

304.

[27] H. Stapp, From Einstein nonlocality to von Neuman Reality, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory Report LBNL-44712; Decoherence, Quantum
Zeno Eﬀect, and the eﬃcacy of mental eﬀort: closing the gap between being
and knowing, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Report LBNL-44229.

[28] J. G. Cramer, The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics,

Rev. Modern Phys. 58, 647-688 (1986).

[29] R. B. Griﬃths, Consistent quantum theory (Cambridge University Press,

New York, 2001).

Press, New York, 1995).

[30] P. R. Holland, The quantum theory of motion (Cambridge University

[31] S. Goldstein,

”Bohmian Mechanics,” The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (winter 2002 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2002/entries/qm-bohm/.

[32] The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (winter 2002 Edition), Edward

N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/contents.html#q.

[33] P.

Budnik,

Measurement

in

quantum mechanics

FAQ,

http://www.mtnmath.com/faq/meas-qm.html

[34] C. Dewdney, G. Horton, M. M. Lam, Z. Malik, M. Schmidt,
Wave-particle dualism and the interpretation of quantum mechanics,
http://www.phys.port.ac.uk/research/quantum/review/zreview.html.

21

[35] N. D. Mermin, The Ithaca interpretation of quantum mechanics,

http://arxiv.org/absquant-ph/9609013.

[36] W. M. de Muynck, private communication.

[37] L. de Broglie, Interpretation of the double solution theory, Ann. Fond. L.

de Broglie 12, 399-421 (1987).

[38] G. Lochak; Louis de Broglie. Some notion about science, Ukr. Fiz. Zhurn.

38, 632-639 (1993) (in Ukrainian).

[39] G. Sardin, Fundamentals of the orbital conception of elementary particles
and of their application to the neutron and nuclear structure, Phys. Essays
12, 204-220 (1999).

[40] Yu. A. Baurov, Structure of physical space and nature of de Broglie wave

(theory and experiment), Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie 27, 443-461 (2002).

[41] A. Einstein. ¨Aether und Relativit¨atstheorie. Lecture presented on 5th May

1920 in the University of Leiden (Springer, Berlin).

[42] P. A. M. Dirac, Is there an aether? Nature 168, 906-907 (1951).

[43] V. Krasnoholovets,

and

cle
vacuum,
http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9910023).

the

Ivanovsky,

D.
Phys. Essays

Motion

6,

554-563

of

a
(1993)

parti-
(also

[44] V. Krasnoholovets, Motion of a relativistic particle and the vacuum, Phys.
Essays 10, 407-416 (1997) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9903077).

[45] M. Bounias, V. Krasnoholovets, Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces. Part 1. Founding principles about mathematical constitution of space,
Kybernetes: The Int. J. of Systems and Cybernetics 32, 945-975 (2003) (also
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0211096).

[46] M. Bounias, V. Krasnoholovets, Scanning the structure of ill-known
space, Kyber-
spaces. Part 2. Principles of construction of physical
netes: The Int. J. of Systems and Cybernetics 32, 976-1004 (2003) (also
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0212004).

[47] M. Bounias, V. Krasnoholovets, Scanning the structure of ill-known
spaces. Part 3. Distribution of topological structures at elementary and cos-
mic scales, Kybernetes: The Int. J. of Systems and Cybernetics 32, 1005-1020
(2003) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0301049).

[48] V. Krasnoholovets, Fisica e Filosoﬁa antica: un ponte tra passato e tu-
toro, Hera magazine (Rome) no. 31, pp. 72-75 (2002); in Italian (see also
V. Krasnoholovets’ Home Page http://www.inerton.kiev.ua in the section
’Recent Events’).

22

[49] R. R. M. Roy, Vedic Physics. Scientiﬁc Origin of Hinduism (Golden Egg

Publishing, Toronto, 1999).

[50] V. Krasnoholovets. On the nature of spin, inertia and gravity of a moving
canonical particle, Indian Journal of Theoretical Physics 48, 97-132 (2000)
(also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0103110).

[51] V. Krasnoholovets, Space structure and quantum mechanics, Spacetime &
Substance 1, 172-175 (2000) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0106106).

[52] V. Krasnoholovets, Submicroscopic deterministic quantum mechan-
ics, Int. J. Computing Anticipatory Systems 11, 164-179 (2002) (also
http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0103110).

[53] B. C. Sidharth, The fractal universe: from the Planck scale to the Hubble

scale, http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9907024.

[54] V. Krasnoholovets and V. Byckov, Real inertons against hypothetical
gravitons. Experimental proof of the existence of inertons, Ind. J. Theor.
Phys. 48, 1-23 (2000) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0007027).

[55] V. Krasnoholovets, On the mass of elementary carriers of gravi-
interaction, Spacetime & Substance 2, 169-170 (2001) (also

tational
http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0201131).

[56] V. Krasnoholovets, Gravitation as deduced from submicroscopic quantum

mechanics, http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0205196.

[57] P. Ehrenfest, Einige die Quantenmechanik betreﬀende Erkundigungsfra-

gen, Z. Phys. 78, 555-560 (1932).

[58] W. Pauli, Raum, Zeit und Kausalit¨at in der Modernen Physik, Scientia

(Milan) 56, 65-76 (1936).

[59] V. Arunasalam, Do incompatible views exist among the giants of physics?,

Phys. Essays 14, 76-81 (2001).

[60] L. I. Schiﬀ, Quantum mechanics (McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New

York – Toronto – London, 1955), Ch. IV, Secs. 14 to 16.

[61] L. de Broglie, Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations and the probabilistic in-
terpretation of wave mechanics (Mir, Moscow, 1986), Ch. 1, pp. 34-46 (Rus-
sian translation).

[62] M. Ligare and R. Oliveri, The calculated photon: Vizualization of a quan-

tum ﬁeld, Amer. J. Phys. 70, 58-66 (2002).

[63] G. Briner, Ph. Hofmann, M. Doering, H. P. Rust, A. M. Bradshaw, L.
Petersen, Ph. Sprunger, E. Laegsgaard, F. Besenbacher and E. W. Plummer,
Looking at electronic wave functions on metal surfaces, Europhys. News 28,
148-152 (1997).

23

[64] L. B. Okun, Elementary particle physics (Nauka, Moscow, 1988), p. 197

(in Russian).

[65] L. de Broglie, Sur la Dynamique du corps `a masse propre variable et la
formule de transformation relativiste de la chaleur, Comptes Rendus 264 B
(16), 1173-1175 (1967).

[66] L. de Broglie, On the basis of wave mechanics, Comptes Rendus 277 B

(3), 71-73 (1973).

stance 4, 43-45 (2003).

[67] B. X. Gong, The uncertainty principle is untenable, Spacetime & Sub-

[68] M. S. Benford, Probable axion detection via consistent radiographic ﬁnd-
ings after exposure to a Shpilman axion generator, J. Theoretics 4 – 1 (2002)
http://www.journaloftheoretics.com/Articles/4-1/Benford-axion.htm

[69] L. I. Urutskoev,V. I. Liksonov, V. G. Tsioev, Observation of transforma-
tion of chemical elemnts during electric discharge, Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie
27, 701-726 (2002).

[70] V. Krasnoholovets, On the theory of the anomalous photoelectric eﬀect
stemming from a substructure of matter waves, Ind. J. Theor. Phys. 49, 1-32
(2001) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9906091).

[71] E. Panarella, Theory of laser-induced gas ionization, Found. Phys. 4, 227-

259 (1974).

[72] V. Krasnoholovets, Collective dynamics of hydrogen atoms in the
HIO3 crystal dictated by a substructure of the hydrogen atoms’ matter
KIO3·
waves, http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0108417.

[73] V. Krasnoholovets, The Great Pyramid of Giza Research Association
http://gizapyramid.com, see in Research Articles (also see V. Krasno-
holovets’ Home page http://inerton.cjb.net in the section ’Recent Events’).

[74] V. Krasnoholovets, On the notion of the photon, Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie

27, 93-100 (2002) (also http://arXiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0202170).

[75] E. Panarella, Nonlinear behavior of light at very low intensities: the ”pho-
ton clump” model, in: Quantum uncertainties. Recent and future experiments
and interpretations. NATO ASI. Series B 162, Physics, eds.: Honig, W. M.,
Kraft, D. W. and Panarella, E., Plenum Press, New York (1986), pp. 105-167.

[76] A. Loinger, On black holes and gravitational waves (LA Goliardica Pavese,

Pavia, 2002).

24

