5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Einstein’s concept of a clock and clock paradox

Wang Guowen
College of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China

January 25, 2005

Abstract

A geometric illustration of the Lorentz transformations is given. According
to similarity between space and time and correspondence between a ruler and a
clock, like the division number in a moving ruler, the tick number of a moving
clock is independent of its relative speed and hence invariant under the Lorentz
transformations. So the hand of the moving clock never runs slow but the time
interval between its two consecutive ticks contracts. Thus it is Einstein’s concept
of slowing of the hands of moving clocks to create the clock paradox or twin para-
dox. Regrettably, the concept of the clock that Einstein retained is equivalent to
Newton’s concept of absolute time that he rejected. This is a blemish in Einstein’s
otherwise perfect special relativity.

Key words: special relativity, time contraction, time dilation, clock paradox, twin
paradox, light clock
PACS: 03.30.+p

1 Introduction

As well known, the concept of slowing of a moving clock as physical interpretation of
relative time was ﬁrst stated in Einstein’s 1905 paper [1] and the lifetime dilation of
moving organisms mentioned in his 1911 paper [2]. This kind of concept has created
the so-called clock paradox or twin paradox. The twin paradox concerns a pair of twins,
one of which aboard a rocket ﬂies into space for years at a speed fractionally less light
speed and the other remains home. According Einstein’s concept, the travelling twin
will be much younger than the other on returning. This seems to be a paradoxical
consequence since motion is relative. As well known, Einstein “solved the paradox by
taking into account the inﬂuence on clocks of the gravitational ﬁeld, which is relative
to (the accelerated system) K ′.′′ [3] He meant that the acceleration and deceleration
effects and the gravity effect are the causes creating an asymmetry of aging of the twins.
The paradox has even led a minute minority of physicists, for example, Herbert Dingle
[4], to argue that Einstein’s relativity must be false. One of the long debated questions
is whether general relativity is required to solve the paradox. If special relativity is
tenable as the overwhelming majority of physicists believes, what mistake might be
ever made by Einstein?

1

In search of an answer to the question, the present author thinks of Einstein’s dis-
cussion of time measurement. He stated: “one determines the rate of the moving clock
by comparing the position of the hands of this clock with the positions of the hands of
other clocks at rest and if it moves with a velocity approximating the velocity of light,
the hands of the clock would move forward inﬁnitely slowly.′′ [2] He asserted also:
“By deﬁnition, to measure the time interval during which an event takes place means
to count the number of time periods indicated by the clock from the beginning till the
end of the event in question.′′ [5] Clearly, his way to measure time is identical with
Newton’s. It seems that the concept of the clock that he retained is equivalent to New-
ton’s concept of absolute time that he rejected. The author discovers that a geometric
illustration of the Lorentz transformations and a graphic display of similarity between
divisions of a ruler and ticks of a clock can make the matter clear.

2 Geometric illustration of the Lorentz transformations

Equivalently to Minkowski’s formulation of special relativity, we consider two four-
dimensional systems (x, y, x, w) and (x′, y′, x′, w′) in relative translational motion and
assume that the origin of the latter moves at the light speed c in accordance with the
following equation:

c2t2 = x2

0 + y2

0 + z2

0 + w2

0, w0 = cτ0

(1)

where τ0 is the proper time. This equation expresses mathematically that a free object
moves at the maximum speed c at which it can travel in the four dimensions (x, y, x, w)
where the variable w is much like the spatial ones, x, y and z [6]. From Eq.(1) we can
draw a ﬁgure shown as Fig.1 to illustrate the Lorentz transformations. In this ﬁgure
only two-dimensional systems (x, w) and (x′, w′) are drawn for the purpose of this
article and x0 = vt is given. From the projective relations of the coordinates in the
ﬁgure, we can write intuitively with ease the Lorentz transformations for the points on
the x′ axis and an identity:

′
x

=

x − vt
γ

, γ = cos φ = p1 − v2/c2

t =

x =

τ =

τ + x′v/c2
γ
x′ + vτ
γ
t − xv/c2
γ
2

′2

2

= c

τ

2

2

t

c

+ x

2
+ x

2

2
2 − x

t

c

= c

2

′2
2 − x

τ

2

The last equation can be changed into

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Figure 1: Geometric illustration of the Lorentz transformations and graphic display
of similarity between divisions of the ruler and ticks of the clock denoted by the V
symbols.

Thus, in general, including y and z, we have

c2t2 − x2 − y2 − z2 = c2τ 2 − x

′2 − y

′2 − z

′2

For a photon or a light pulse, we have

c2t2 − x2 − y2 − z2 = c2τ 2 − x

′2 − y

′2 − z

′2 = 0

(8)

(9)

which describes the principle of constancy of light speed. The τ is often written as t′
in the literature of relativity.

Let a ruler be located on the x′ axis. From Fig.1 we can see directly the length

contraction of the moving ruler:

ρ = Lγ = L cos φ

(10)

Obviously the length contraction of the ruler is a reciprocal projection effect between
the two equivalent inertial systems in relative motion and the division number of the
ruler is independent of the relative speed v and hence invariant under the Lorentz trans-
formations. The length interval between two neighboring divisions of the moving ruler
at the speed v in the x direction contracts by the factor γ. Similarly, let a clock be
located at the origin of the moving system and synchronized with one clock at rest in
the stationary system when the origins of the two systems are coincide at t = 0. For
the moving clock, in his 1905 paper, Einstein derived from Eq.(3) the time contraction
equation [1]

τ0 = tγ = t cos φ

(11)

which is similar to Eq.(10) in form. This contraction can also be seen directly in Fig.1.
Its inverse process is referred to as dilation of the time τ0. According to similarity be-
tween space and time and correspondence between a ruler and a clock, it is evident that
the ticks of the moving clock are nothing but the correspondences of the divisions of

3

the ruler. Obviously the length contraction of the ruler is merely attributed to contrac-
tion of the length interval between its two neighboring divisions, so, similarly, the time
contraction of the moving clock is merely attributed to contraction of the time interval
between its two consecutive ticks and the number of the ticks is also independent of the
speed v and hence invariant under the Lorentz transformations. But we are unable to
employ an existing clock to record the time τ which depends on both the speed v and
the location x′. Therefore, in order to record it, we need devise an alternative clock.

3 Time τ and τ -clock

The clocks that we can devise to indicate the time τ are shown in Fig.2. In the ﬁgure,
on the largest circles on the clock faces, the arc length swept out by the hand represents

Figure 2: The τ -clocks moving in the x direction, for example, running at γ = 0.5:
(a) at the origin of the moving system, (b) and (c) at the positions a light-second away
from the origin on the negative and the positive x′ half- axises.

time t in the stationary system. The γ values (0, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75) on the clock’s hand
represent the different relative speeds. The readings in seconds on the circle to which
the sliding arrow points represent the duration of an event in the moving system judged
by an observer in the stationary system. For example, for the case of relative speed
0.866c, namely, γ = 0.5, Fig.2(a) shows that the clock at the origin of the moving
system ticks 0.5 seconds and Fig.2(b) and Fig.2(c) show that the clocks a light-second
away from the origin tick the same but run 0.866 seconds later and earlier than the one
at the origin, respectively. The counterclockwise and clockwise angular displacements
of the readings τ depend on the term x′v/c2 in Eq.(3). Thus this kind of clock has dual
functions for recording both t and τ simultaneously and hence meets the relativistic
requirement of the equivalence of reciprocal “time measurements′′ by two different
inertial observers. This kind of clock may be called as “τ -clock′′ to distinguish it from
traditional clocks which record only the time in the stationary system or systems at very
low relative speed. With τ -clocks both of the twins can think the other’s one ticks a less
time period. No paradox! The τ -clock is useless in practice but essentially important
for properly understanding special relativity.

4

4 Behavior of a light clock

The discussion of the behavior of a moving light clock is also signiﬁcant for under-
standing special relativity. Imagine a light clock which is composed of a pair of paral-
lel mirrors reﬂecting light pulses separated by the distance d = cTp/2 that light travels
in half a second, here Tp = 1 second. There are a source of light pulses and a light
detector on one mirror for producing every tick signal. When the vertical light clock
moves at uniform speed v in the horizonal x direction, according to Eq.(9), we have

2

c

(Tp/2)

2 − (vTp/2)

2 − y

2

(Tp/2) = 0

(13)
where y′ = y. Thus, different from the real length d, the “relative path′′ of the pule
between the top and bottom mirrors in the y direction is

(τp/2) = 0

(τp/2)

c

2

2 − y

′2

′
d

= y(Tp/2) = cγTp/2 = cτp/2 = γd = d cos φ

that satisﬁes the equation of the right triangle

′2 + v2 = c2
d

here d′ is the contracted light path in the y direction judged by an observer in the
stationary system. It is necessary to emphasize again that the time contraction of the

(12)

(14)

(15)

Figure 3: Illustration of the behavior of the light clock by relative travel paths of the
light pulse for different γ values.

moving light clock is merely attributed to the contraction of the period between its
two consecutive ticks. This means that the light pulse hits the top mirror when the
relative light path equals d′ and the detector produces a tick signal when it gets to
bottom mirror. Fig.3 illustrates the behavior of the light clock by relative travel paths
of the light pulse for different γ values. Thus the explanation of time dilation by the
light clock in textbooks, such as Feynman Lectures on Physics volume 1 [7], is wrong
because of ignoring the relativistic contraction of the travel path of the light pulse.

5

5 Conclusion

We have seen that, like the division number in a moving ruler, the tick number of a
moving clock is independent of its relative speed and hence invariant under the Lorentz
transformations. So the hand of the moving clock never runs slow but the time interval
between its two consecutive ticks contracts. Thus it is Einstein’s concept of slowing of
the hands of moving clocks to create the clock paradox or twin paradox. Regrettably,
his way to measure time τ is identical with Newton’s. In other words, the concept of
the clock that he retained is equivalent to Newton’s concept of absolute time that he
rejected.

Similar to the clock’s ticking, the heart beating of the travelling twin never runs re-
ally slow but according to special relativity the beating period between two consecutive
beats contracts. Since the human lifetime may be considered as being basically deter-
mined by the total number of the heart beats, no one of the twins will become younger
than the other when they reunite. Thus, the general relativity is not required to resolve
the twin paradox. It is Einstein’s assertion of slowing of the hands of moving clocks to
create the paradox and hence make many physicists believe slowing of all physical pro-
cesses with the increased speed, including chemistry reactions, nuclear reactions, life
process and others. This is a blemish in Einstein’s otherwise perfect special relativity.
Finally, the author would say that if the present conclusion is correct, it will pro-
hibits us from believing the assertion that some related experiments [8,9] have con-
ﬁrmed the Einstein’s prediction of slowing of moving clocks that creates the clock
paradox.

References

[1] A. Einstein, Ann. der Phys. 17, 891 (1905)

[2] A. Einstein, Naturforsch. Ges. 56, 1 (1911)

[3] A. Einstein, Naturwissenschaften 6, 697 (1918)

[4] H. Dingle, Nature 216, 119 (1967)

[5] A. Einstein, Arch. Sci. Phys. Natur. 29, 5 (1910)

[6] G. Wang, in Proceedings of the International Conference on High Speed Photog-
raphy and Photonics, Wang Daheng, Ed. (SPIE, Bellingham, Washington, 1988),
vol. 1032, pp. 428-431

[7] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lecture on Physics

(Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1963), vol. 1, sec. 15.4

[8] D. H. Frisch and J. H. Smith, Am. J. Phys. 31, 342 (1963)

[9] J. C. Hafele and R. E. Keating, Science 177, 168 (1972)

6

