Epistemology in Cyclic Time

Moninder Singh Modgil

Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India

email:msingh@iitk.ac.in

Abstract
Consider the scenario, in which human civilization undergoes periodic eras of
progression and regression, and consequently, changes in cosmological knowl-
edge are cyclic. There exist solutions of general theory of relativity, such as
the G¨odel universe, in which the cosmos is rotating. If the real universe is
indeed rotating, than this would be a reversion to rotating universe models,
used in ancient cosmological models. We argue that such reversions in phys-
ical models would be inevitable in a space-time in which time is having S1
(circular) topology.

KEY WORDS: G¨odel universe, Ancient Cosmologies, Epistemology

5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
1
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Introduction

Evolution of events in identical cycles, has been a hall mark of ancient philo-
sophical systems - right from American Indians, and Greeks, on one hand, to
Asian Indians, and Chinese on the other [1]. In more recent times, Poincare
and Nietzsche attempted a mathematical formulation of the idea, which is
now enshrined in mathematical physics as Poincare recurrence concept [2].
In the last quarter of twentieth century, isolated attempts to resolve certain
problems of theoretical physics, using a cyclic concept of time have been
made [3, 4] - notable among them is Segal’s cosmological model [5, 6], which
successfully re-interprets all observational evidence, hitherto attributed to
big-bang cosmology. In this model, universe is closed - having topology of
3-sphere, and time cyclic. In this space-time, light rays return to their origin,
after circling the closed universe in a single time cycle. Popper [7] cedes, that
changes in knowledge occur gradually, but being an evolutionist, he feels that
the changes began billions of years ago, many of which are in built in the
structure of our sense organs and brains - and that this series of changes in
knowledge will continue indeﬁnitely. However, provided one combines, Pop-
per’s concept of gradual change in human knowledge, with Poincare’s concept
of result of a series of changes being a cycle, one is lead to epistemology in
cyclic time.

If one considers the possibility that human civilization has always been
extant in this cyclic time, with number of generations of humans being a
very large integer, then one is lead to the inescapable conclusion, that hu-
man knowledge, science and technology, also change in identical cycles. One
is lead to ask the question, as to what is the driving force in this cyclic
changes in human knowledge. As human knowledge arises by observation
and interpretation, a function of mind and intellect, therefore, the driving
force behind cyclic change in human knowledge, must be cyclic changes in
perspicuity and purity of human mind and intellect.

As a striking example of evolution of knowledge in cycles (within a phys-
ical cyclic time), consider the conceptual status awarded to nature of earth,
and earth’s relationship with cosmos. Prior to Aristotle, as indicated in an-
cient Indian texts, earth was considered ﬂat, and the universe rotating daily
above this ﬂat earth. Around about Aristotle’s time the world view emerged,
that various diﬀerences in Sun’s latitude observed at diﬀerent northern points
could be attributed to a spherical earth. However, the universe continued to
rotate daily around the spherical earth, in Aristotelian cosmology [8]. During

1

the generations of Kepler, Copernicus, and Galileo, the accumulated data on
movements of astronomical bodies, lead them to conclude, that earth was
not the center of universe, but was a planet, and rotated once around the
sun once every year, and this was the cause of seasons.

Both changes, the ﬁrst one around Aristotle’s time, and second one
around Galileo’s time, were based on the generally accepted validity of Eu-
clidean geometry - fundamental assumption being that light travels in straight
lines. However, geometry itself, underwent fundamental changes during 19th
century, when it was realized, that alternatives to Euclidean geometry were
possible, by modifying its axioms [9]. Notable among them was the work
of Riemann, which laid foundation for Einstein’s general theory of relativ-
ity [10]. One immediate result of general relativity was that light stopped
travelling in straight lines, in minds of men, after conﬁrmation of Eddign-
ton’s solar eclipse experiment [11] on bending of star light near sun. Since
then a number of solutions to Einstein’s ﬁeld equation for gravitation have
been found. Einstein’s original cosmological model had a 3-sphere universe,
and an inﬁnite time, and was called ”Einstein’s cylinder”. Hopes of gen-
eral relativists, that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations determine the universe’s large
scale structure uniquely were dashed to the ground by G¨odel’s discovery of
a rotating universe model [12], which though had a same local distribution
of matter as Einstein’s cylinder, nevertheless, diﬀered remarkably from it in
over all properties - most notable among them being that, G¨odel universe
had closed time like curves, and it was possible for an observer to access
its past in principle. G¨odel got around this problem of causality violation,
by denying freewill to observers. Since then, a number of generalizations
of G¨odel universe have been created, including those, in which universe is
charged, and a constant electromagnetic ﬁeld is present everywhere within
universe [13].

Many modern physicists are of the view, that mankind is near climax of
conceptual knowledge [14]. Such being the case, a believer of cyclic time, in
which human observers exist eternally, is lead to ask the question, as to how,
given the present state of human knowledge, will the humans revert back to
the belief of universe rotating daily, above a ﬂat stationary earth. This is an
example of issues facing Epistemology in cyclic time. One possibility is that,
through a series of artiﬁcial or natural calamities, mankind is reduced to a
state deprived of its intellectual inheritance, and therefore, out of ignorance,
such primitive world view prevails. There exists, however, an altogether,
diﬀerent, striking, possibility, which I ﬁnd very exciting, and would like to

2

share with you.

ativity

2 Rotating Universe models in General Rel-

As mentioned earlier, rotating G¨odel universe is a solution to Einstein’s ﬁeld
equations. Behavior of light rays, in G¨odel universe, has the remarkable
property, that light rays curve back, after travelling a ﬁnite distance per-
pendicular to the direction of rotation [15]. Thus imagine, a ﬂat earth in
G¨odel cosmology, with rotation axis perpendicular to the ﬂat earth. A pic-
ture taken from a space-craft, above this ﬂat earth in G¨odel cosmology, will
show light arriving at the camera, only from a circular patch - light from
remaining parts of ﬂat earth curving away from camera and never reaching
it. This will generate illusion of sphericity, for one who assumes that space-
time geometry near earth is basically Euclidean. Similarly, light from stars
such as sun, will be accessible, only from a circular patch, on this ﬂat earth,
remaining parts of earth, being deprived, as the light curves away, as it ap-
proaches earth. At circumference, of this circular patch, light rays will be
tangential to ﬂat earth, thus explaining the apparent sunrise, sunset etc..

Further if such a rotating universe is charged, it will generate a magnetic
ﬁeld which reverses, periodically, as a result of quantum cosmological tun-
nelling between two counter-rotating solutions of quantum gravity Wheeler-
DeWitt equation [16], which describes such a universe.
I have done some
calculations [17] which show magnitude of this geomagnetic polarity reversal
to be 157 degree, which is close to actual value measured from paleo-magnetic
rock samples. My prediction of paleomagnetic intensity during transition pe-
riods also matches that observed in samples. Presentations of these detailed
calculations would however, be beyond scope of this conference and paper. I
invite reader to contact me for these details. However, time is not cyclic in
G¨odel universe, and universe also is not closed. These two objections can be
overcome by what is called as ”conformal compactiﬁcation”, [18] in jargon
of general relativists, which make the time cyclic and universe closed, with
other properties of G¨odel universe, such as rotation, and presence of closed
time like curves, remaining intact.

Needless, to say a number of unresolved issues remain, before widespread
adoption of a ”quantum gravity rotating G¨odel universe”, takes place - which

3

will have to be tackled one at a time, as was the situation faced by Galileo
[19]. Interestingly, it can be shown that notion of causality in G¨odel universe
is actually consistent with implications of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR)
paradox [20], which is claimed to have been experimentally veriﬁed in recent
times [21]. I am of the opinion, that if time is cyclic with eternal existence of
civilized humans, then provided a catastrophe, which breaks the continuity
of evolution of human knowledge, does not occur, then the quantum gravity
G¨odel universe must be the best description of our universe. So I ﬁnd epis-
temology in cyclic time indeed exciting, and welcome the reader to share in
the churning on true nature of time (cyclic or linear) and its implications.

References

[1] Jaki,S.L.: Science and Creation- from eternal cycles to oscillating

universe, Scottish Academy Press, (1974).

[2] Brush, Stephen G.: Kinetic Theory, Vol.2, Irreversible processes,

Pergamon Press, (1966).

D, 6, (1972) 536.

[3] Villaroel, J.: Il. Nuv. Cim., A94, (1986), 405; Castell, L: Phys. Rev.

[4] Schechter, B.M.: Phys. Rev. D, 16, (1977), 3015.

[5] Segal, I.E.: Mathematical Cosmology and Extra-Galactic Astronomy,

(1984) Cambridge University Press.

[6] Guillemin, V.: Cosmology in 2+1 dimensions, cyclic models and de-

formations of M(2,1), (1989), Princeton University Press.

[7] Popper, K.R.: Quantum theory and the schism in physics, (1957),

Hutchinson.

[8] Aristotle, Vol. I and II, Great books of western world, Vol. 8 and 9

resp., (1952), Hutchins, R.M. ed., Ency. Brit. Inc.

[9] Maor, E.: To inﬁnity and beyond, (1987), Birkhauser.

[10] Einstein, A.: Meaning of Relativity, (1956), Hahnemann, London.

4

[11] Wheeler, J.A., Thorne, K.S., and Misner, C.W.: Gravitation, (1973),

Freeman and Co. Inc..

[12] G¨odel, K.: Rev. Mod. Phys., 21, (1949), 447-50.

[13] Ravel, H.M., and Vaidya, P.C.: Current Sci., 36, (1967), 708.

[14] Davis, P. (ed.) , New Physics, (1990), Cambridge University Press.

[15] Laurent, B.E., Rosuist, K., and Sriestins, E.: Gen. Rel. Grav., 13,

(1981), 1093-1115.

Inc., (1967), Benjamin.

[16] Wheeler, J.A.: Battelle Rencontres, ed.s J.A.Whee;er, C.W.DeWitt,

[17] Modgil, M.S.: Red-shift in conformal compactiﬁcation of G¨odel Uni-

verse, unpublished, (1993).

[18] Penrose, R., and Rindler, W.: Spinors and Space-time, Vol I and II,

(1984), Cambridge University Press.

[19] Galileo Galilei: Dialog concerning two chief world systems, transla-

tion by S. Drake, (1967), University of California Press.

[20] Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N.: Phys. Rev., 47, (1935),

777-80.

[21] Aspect, A., Grangier, P., and Roger, G.: Phys. Rev. Lett., 49, (1982),

91-4;47, (1981), 460-3.

5

