5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
1
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Einsteinian blunders

D.S.L. Soares
Departamento de F´ısica, ICEx, UFMG — C.P. 702
30161-970, Belo Horizonte — Brazil

February 9, 2014

‘We are certainly not to relinquish the evidence of experiments
for the sake of dreams and vain ﬁctions of our own devising.’

Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
Book III — I. Newton, 1687

Abstract

The World Year of Physics 2005 celebrates Einstein 1905. Too
much celebration of a single character may be hazardous as an example
for the younger generation. With such a motto in mind, I comment
on some episodes in Einstein’s scientiﬁc career that are at some extent
characterized by what could be dubbed blundering behavior. The ﬁnal
purpose is obviously to humanize the personage as opposed to the
current trend of deiﬁcation.

1 Introduction

“The World Year of Physics 2005 is an United Nations endorsed interna-
tional celebration of physics. Events throughout the year will highlight the

1

vitality of physics and its importance in the coming millennium, and will
commemorate the pioneering contribution of Albert Einstein in 1905.”
This is the opening statement that appears in the electronic page

http://www.physics2005.org, which is dedicated to the World Year of
Physics. The idea seems to be, ﬁrst, to celebrate physics, and, second, to
commemorate Einstein. However, one sees without much eﬀort that already,
in the beginning of the year, there has been too much talking and writing on
Einstein, with a noticeable bias to scientiﬁc idolatry, an unimaginable feature
in science. We, scientists, are supposed to respect Nature as the sole source of
inspiration for our activities both in the experimental and theoretical realms.
It is beyond of doubt that 1905 was Einstein’s annus mirabilis. In that
year the world witnessed the publication of three masterpieces in the lit-
erature of contemporary physics.They were the work on Brownian motion,
establishing the reality of atoms, the work on the photoelectric eﬀect estab-
lishing the quanta of radiation, and the special theory of relativity. There
was though an antecedent of such a high moment in science: the year 1666
is often remembered as Isaac Newton’s annus mirabilis. From 1665 to 1667
he also opened the doors to three new areas of scientiﬁc research, namely, he
laid down the foundation of diﬀerential and integral calculus, he developed
the theory of colors, and put forward his theory of gravitation. The publi-
cation in 1687 of his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy marked
the beginning of a new era in the scientiﬁc endeavor. There is a clear parallel
with Einstein’s contribution to modern science.

In the following three sections I comment on aspects of Einstein’s scien-
tiﬁc life that are often seen with respectful acceptance, in spite of being bad
examples of scientiﬁc manners.

2 The cosmological constant

In an important paper published in the Annals of the Royal Prussian Acad-
emy of Sciences in 1917 entitled “Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur Allge-
meinen Relativit¨atstheorie”, i.e., ”Cosmological Considerations on the Gen-
eral Theory of Relativity”, Einstein inaugurated the era of modern cosmology
applying his ideas from General Relativity to the universe as a whole. To-
wards that aim, he abandoned his original ﬁeld equations in favor of a new
law in which there was an additional constant term that represented a con-

2

stant repulsive gravitational potential. The term gives a small repulsion near
the origin but increased directly proportional to the distance until counter-
balance the gravitational attraction between masses. His intention was obvi-
ously obtain a static model. Remember that at that time even galaxies were
not known as independent cosmological entities. Only in the late 1920s, with
the work of the astronomer Edwin P. Hubble the existence of galaxies came
to be deﬁnitely proved. The solutions he had initially obtained with the
application of the original ﬁeld equations were unstable for gravitational col-
lapse. The modiﬁcation preserved the general covariance of the theory and
solved the instability problem (North 1990, chapter 5). The constant became
known as the cosmological constant, and is until today the matter of much
debate.

I describe now some facts that led to the ﬁrst Einsteinian blunder.

It

turns out to be a double-blunder, as I suggest below.

The introduction of the cosmological constant led to a great debate on
many aspects of the new horizons opened up by General Relativity concerning
the universe. A inﬁnite model has obvious boundary condition problems,
something that was recognized even in the context of a Newtonian cosmology
(see Harrison 2000, chapter 16). With the cosmological constant, Einstein
solved all problems by introducing a ﬁnite, spatially closed and static model,
the latter feature being a result of Einstein’s — and of most scientists at the
time — belief concerning the physical world.

Nevertheless, Einstein came later to reject his own modiﬁcation of the
ﬁeld equations. North (1990, p. 86) quotes that already by 1919 Einstein
considered that the introduction of the constant was “gravely detrimental to
the formal beauty of the theory”; he considered it as an ad hoc addition to
the ﬁeld equations. Later on, he was further led to such a rejection by two
new developments: on the observational side, Hubble’s work on the redshift-
distance relation for galaxies was being interpreted as an indication of an
expanding universe1 — no need of static solutions —, and on the theoretical
1It is worthwhile to note at this point that the interpretation of Hubble’s redshift-
distance relation as indicative of an expanding universe is only true when one takes for
granted that the underlying theory under consideration, i.e., General Relativity in modern
cosmology, is true. This is still a matter of debate since present cosmological models have
led to a variety of hypotheses concerning the matter-energy content of the universe, such as
baryonic dark matter, non-baryonic dark matter and the yet more mysterious dark energy.
None of these have been so far proved to exist by any experimental or observational means.

3

side, the 1922 solution of the ﬁeld equations by the Russian Aleksandr Fried-
mann and the 1927 solution by the Belgian Georges Lemaˆıtre which allowed
for expanding models.

George Gamov (1970) tells the now legendary story that Einstein once
has said to him that the cosmological constant was “my biggest blunder” 2.
But why a double-blunder? Einstein rejected the cosmological constant
based on what he found to be physical and aesthetic inconsistencies that
resulted from its adoption. Here he saw a blunder, his biggest one. On the
other hand, from the strict theoretical and formal point of views, General
Relativity is in fact enriched by the addition of the new term, while still
keeping its features as a viable general covariant theory of gravitation. And
that is where the double character comes from. The simple fact of abandoning
it constitutes a blunder after a blunder. This is also suggested by Norh’s
arguments (North 1990, p. 86), who writes that “he ﬁnally discarded the
term in 1931, and in doing so deliberately restricted the generality of his
theory.”

Recent claims, from the late 1990s and on, of a accelerating expanding uni-
verse have led to the resurrection of the cosmological constant, which would
give the cosmic repulsion responsible for the acceleration. This idea and
other variants became a strong feature of modern cosmology. The present
status quo of modern cosmology is not though free of opposition. An ex-
ample of that has recently materialized in An Open Letter to the Scientiﬁc
Community (Lerner 2004).

3 The 1919 solar eclipse

In a short biography (Bernstein 1976), Einstein’s reactions to the scientiﬁc
results obtained from the solar eclipse of 1919 are described. The main
issue was light bending by a gravitational source, and the occasion was most
appropriate for the observational tests.

Two astronomical expeditions, one in Brazil and another in the African
coast, were organized by Sir Arthur Eddington, a renowned scientist at the
time, in order to measure the stellar positions around the solar disk during the
2This of course entirely justiﬁes the title of the present article: if Einstein admits his
“biggest” blunder, that implies the existence of the “smallest”, and a whole gradation of
blunders in between.

4

total eclipse of May 29, 1919. Ilse Rosenthal-Schneider, Einstein’s student,
tells that Einstein’s ﬁrst reaction to the news that the measurements pointed
to an agreement with General Relativity predictions for the light bending
was: “— I knew it was correct”.

She asked him: “— What would it be if your prediction was not con-
ﬁrmed?”. He replied: “— Da k¨onnt’ mir halt der liebe Gott leid tun, die
Theorie stimmt doch.” Or, “— Then I would be sorry for the good Lord, but
the Theory is correct.”

Is this an acceptable reaction of a theorist when confronted with experi-

ments or observations that are relevant to his theory? Certainly not.

4 Einstein meets Hubble

The protagonist here is another Einstein — Elsa — Einstein’s second wife.
She is sometimes featured as a woman of somewhat faint character (see Pais
1983). The story appears in many sources. The one I quote here is from the
probably best biography of the great extragalactic astronomer Edwin Powell
Hubble (Christianson 1995), the man that successfully proved the existence
of external galaxies and would be awarded the Nobel prize in Physics in the
early 1950s. It did not happen due to his premature death in 1953 (for a
short account, see Soares 2001).

Einstein’s visit to the institutes of Caltech, in early 1931, was motivated
by his curiosity on the work in mathematical physics done by Richard Tol-
man, who was working on relativity, and on the observational work by Hubble
at the Mount Wilson Observatory.

He and wife made their ﬁrst trip to the mountain, where the Observatory
was located, in mid-February. They were accompanied by Hubble and others.
They visit all the installations in the Observatory, including the 100-inch
dome, which houses the Hooker telescope — then the largest telescope of
the world —, where most of Hubble’s work on extragalactic astronomy was
being conducted.

Hubble’s biographer writes (p. 206): “When Elsa Einstein, who seemed
always to be in the defensive, was told that the giant Hooker telescope was
essential for determining the universe’s structure, she is said to have replied,
‘Well, well, my husband does that on the back of an old envelope.’ ” As in the
previous section, one sees here the diminution of the relevance of experimental

5

(strictly speaking, observational) science.

One could argue that this is not a legitimate Einsteinian blunder because
it was Mrs. Elsa’s mouth that has spoken out the words. There are two
counter-arguments against such a claim. The weak and the strong arguments.
The weak one is just a play on words and goes like this: ”Elsa is Einstein
therefore it is an Einsteinian blunder”. The strong argument is that the
episode appears very frequently in Einstein’s biographies and in writings
of various nature about both Einstein and Hubble.
It is an Einsteinian
feature. As such, it might with justice be included in the gallery of authentic
Einsteinian blunders.

5 Concluding remarks

It is understandable that amongst us, physicists and astronomers, there is
frequently almost an adoration of Albert Einstein. He is without doubt the
greatest scientist of the Twentieth century. Such an involuntary worship
is everywhere: the most celebrated Einstein’s biography, namely, that by
Abraham Pais (Pais 1983) is also contaminated. He adopts the usual trend
of skipping uncomfortable details of Einstein’s personal and scientiﬁc life
(Soares 2003).

The reader certainly noticed that none of the above-mentioned stories
refers to Einstein’s annus mirabilis works but are at some extent related
to General Theory of Relativity, which was developed ten years later. The
It is the result of a selection eﬀect, given that the
explanation is simple.
author of the present article is an extragalactic astronomer. That is to say, it
does not means that there are not Einsteinian blunders related to that period.
They can be mined, for example, in Abraham Pais’ book. Not without some
eﬀort, it should be added, as implied by the ﬁrst paragraph,

And what about the atomic bomb? Certainly it cannot be classiﬁed as
an Einsteinian blunder, in spite of Einstein’s deep involvement with the issue
(especially on the political side, see Pais 1983 for details). The atomic bomb
is rather the world biggest blunder.

Scientiﬁc impartiality excludes, by deﬁnition, worshiping and the cult of
personality. To err is human and so has Einstein erred in many occasions.
This is the plain message to the younger generation of students and scientists.
Finally, young and old, let us all remember the famous Brazilian play-

6

wright Nelson Rodrigues that always used to say that “any unanimity is
stupid.” Deﬁnitely right.

6 References

Bernstein, J. 1976, Einstein, Viking Press, New York

Christianson, G.E. 1995, Edwin Hubble: Mariner of the Nebulae, The Uni-

versity of Chicago Press, Chicago

Gamov, G. 1970, My World Line, Vicking Press, New York

Harrison, E.R. 2000, Cosmology, the Science of the Universe, Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge

Lerner, E. 2004, Bucking the Big Bang, New Scientist, 182 (2448), 20 (also

at http://www.cosmologystatement.org)

North, J.D. 1990, The Measure of the Universe: A History of Modern Cos-

mology, Dover Publications, Inc., New York

Pais, A. 1983, Subtle Is the Lord: The Science and the Life of Albert Ein-

stein, Oxford University Press, Oxford

Soares, D.S.L. 2001, Hubble’s Nobel Prize, The Journal of the Royal Astro-

nomical Society of Canada, 95, 10 (also at
http://www.fisica.ufmg.br/~dsoares/hubble/hubble.html

Soares, D.S.L. 2003, Subtle is Abraham Pais...,

http://www.fisica.ufmg.br/~dsoares/abpais/abpais.htm

7

