5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Time reversal noninvariance
in quantum mechanics and in nonlinear optics.

V.A.Kuz’menko1

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

Abstract

The experimental proofs of strong time invariance violation in optics
are discussed. Time noninvariance is the only real physical base for expla-
nation the origin of the most phenomena in nonlinear optics. The exper-
imental study of forward and reversed transitions in oriented in uniform
electric ﬁeld molecules is proposed.

PACS number: 33.80.Rv, 42.50.Hz

Introduction

The idea of the arrow of time is quite natural and recognized in biology,
chemistry and other ﬁelds [1]. However, its recognition in the physics unexpect-
edly turns out to be rather problematical because of the dynamical equations
of the basic laws of physics are time reversal invariant. In classical theories the
arrow of time is introduced as a result of time asymmetric boundary conditions
with time symmetric dynamical equations [2, 3]. But for the full recognition of
this concept the introduction of time asymmetry into the dynamical equations
is a more preferable way [1]. And the nature gives us the grounds for such idea.
However, this process, probably, will be rather long and hard [4, 5].

From our point of view the mistake of physicists is based on the two myths.
The ﬁrst myth is the opinion about absence of any experimental evidences of
time invariance violation in electromagnetic interactions [1, 3, 6]. Below we shall
discuss the three known for present day direct and independent experimental
proofs of strong time invariance violation in optics. The second myth is the
supposition about the existence of the so-called quantum coherent states [7].
This concept has now extremely wide spreading in physics. However, it turned
out, that the concept of coherent states does not have any real physical base [8].

First myth

The interaction of polarized laser radiation with the speciﬁc non-magnetic
metallic planar chiral nanostructures was studied in [9]. The authors believe
that these experimental results unambiguously show the evidence of broken
time reversal symmetry in such unusual object.

In other experiments the splitting and mixing of photons were studied [10,
11]. On the ﬁrst stage the narrowband (∼ 0, 01nm) radiation of nanosecond
laser was transformed through down-conversion in the nonlinear crystal into
two intense broadband beams (each spectral width ∼ 100nm ). On the second

1Electronic address: kuzmenko@triniti.ru

1

stage this two broadband beams were mixed in the sum frequency generator [10]
or in the process of two photon excitation of rubidium atoms [11]. The reversed
process in these cases corresponds to mixing of the so-called entangled photons
and leads to regeneration of the initial narrowband radiation. In contrast, the
mixing of non-entangled photons should give broadband radiation and is the
example of again only the forward process. Both experiments show the same
results: the eﬃciency of reversed process is much greater, than the eﬃciency of
forward process.

In the next case the forward and reversed transitions in SF6 molecules were
studied [12]. In those experiments the authors deal with such speciﬁc object
as the so-called wide component of line in a spectrum of polyatomic molecules
[13]. The forward transition (CO2- laser photon absorption process) in this
case has extremely high spectral width (∼ 150GHz) and relatively small cross-
section (∼ 10−19cm2). In contrast, the reversed into the initial state transition
(stimulated emission) has very small spectral width (∼ 450kHz). The diﬀerence
in spectral widths of forward and reversed transitions exceeds ﬁve orders of
magnitude. Accordingly, the cross-section of the reversed process turns out
to be in several orders of magnitude greater, than the cross-section of forward
process.

So, for the present day we have quite suﬃcient quantity of direct experimen-
tal proofs of a strong time invariance violation in optics. We have also enormous
quantity of indirect experimental evidences, which are connected with the sec-
ond myth about the existence of coherent states.

Second myth

The concept of coherent states appeared and became all pervasive in quan-
tum optics during last several decades. The coherent states usually are inter-
preted as speciﬁc states of atoms or molecules after its interaction with a coher-
ent laser radiation. Most phenomena in nonlinear optics are usually explained
as a result of interference of the coherent states [15, 16].

However, the close theoretical analysis of this concept in [8] has shown that
the inability to measure the absolute phase of an electromagnetic ﬁeld prohibits
the existence of quantum coherent states [7, 17].
It deprives the concept of
coherent states any real physical sense. The concept of coherent states is only
a ”convenient ﬁction” for physicists in the ﬁeld of quantum optics [8].

Physical origin

We believe that the only real physical base of observed phenomena in nonlin-
ear optics is the time reversal noninvariance in electromagnetic interactions or
inequality of forward and reversed processes in the optics. So, most phenomena,
which are explained now as the interference of the coherent states, are really a
manifestation of the time reversal noninvariance. However, time noninvariance
manifests itself usually only in indirect way and this is the main reason why the
concept of coherent states is popular till now.

What is the usual origin of inequality of forward and reversed processes in
optics? The discussed above experiments show extremely high eﬃciency of the
reversed process. However, for experiments with splitting and mixing of photons

2

the origin of this eﬃciency is not clear as a whole. It is connected with the subtle
concept of entanglement and it is the problem for future studies.

For optical transitions in atoms and molecules the high eﬃciency of the re-
versed process is unambiguously connected with its high cross-section. However,
we do not need to have a doubt in equality of the Einstein’s coeﬃcients for for-
ward and reversed transitions [18]. The equality of Einstein’s coeﬃcients means
only the equality of integral cross-sections of the opposite processes and does
not prohibit the inequality of diﬀerential cross-sections. Such possibility is well
illustrated by the discussed above experiments with SF6 molecules [12]. In this
case the high cross-section of reversed optical transition is connected with its
extremely small spectral width in contrast to the forward transition.

The wide component of line is rather speciﬁc object and it exists only in
the large polyatomic molecules. In small molecules and in atoms the line wings
of such kind are absent. What is the reason in these cases of high diﬀerential
cross-section of the reversed optical transition?

Here we should pay attention to the quantum mechanical averaging process
of some parameters of vibrational and rotational motions, which manifests itself
in a molecule absorption spectrum. The lines in absorption spectrum of small
molecules are very narrow.
Its frequency allows calculating the moment of
inertia of molecule with precision ∼ 0, 0001%. From other side the temporal
change of moment of inertia during the period of vibrational motion of the
atoms in molecule usually exceeds the value of 1% [19]. This inevitably means
that there exists some quantum mechanical process of averaging of moment of
inertia during the period of vibration of the atoms in molecule. It is worth to
mention that for polyatomic molecules this process of averaging, obviously, can
undergo some short reversible violations even for the forward transition, which
lead to appearance in absorption spectrum of the so-called line clumps [20].

The time asymmetry may consist in the diﬀerence between the averaging
processes for forward and reversed transitions. For the forward transition the
absorption cross-section does not depend from the phase of vibration motion. In
contrast, for the reversed transition such dependence may exist. If the molecule
has the phase of vibration motion, which allows it to return exactly into the
initial state, then the backward transition will be reversed and its diﬀerential
cross-section will be much higher than the averaged cross-section of the forward
transition. In other cases the diﬀerential cross-section of the backward transition
will be relatively small and such transition should be called over again only as
the forward one. Inequality of forward and reversed processes in a natural way
supposes the existence of the memory of atoms and molecules about the initial
state. In some sense such memory can correspond to the entropy of quantum
system.

So, the discussed above supposition is a good physical base for explanation
of the origin of experimental study of the dynamics of vibration motion of atoms
in molecule [21].

The similar quantum mechanical process of averaging of cross-section, prob-

Oriented molecules

3

ably, takes place for the rotational motion also. The rather common opinion
exists, that the cross-section of interaction between the molecules and radiation
should depend from orientation of molecules with respect to laser beam [22].
Some experiments with the anisotropy of ﬂuorescence or with the successive
transitions conﬁrm this supposition. However, as a whole this is rather knotty
problem. Practically all experiments in this ﬁeld are carried out only with the
linearly polarized laser radiation. Some authors even talk about the absorption
of a linearly polarized photon [23]. Such photon, of course, is absent in nature.
The linearly polarized light is a complex object and consists of the equal quan-
tity of photons with diﬀerent spins. So, we believe, that for the ﬁrst stage of
experiments with oriented molecules the more simple circularly polarized light
should be preferably used.

The process of orientation averaging of absorption cross-section is well illus-
trated, for example, by the experimental results of work [24], where the absorp-
tion of laser radiation by the hydrogen cyanide trimer molecules in the static
electric ﬁeld was studied. The external static electric ﬁeld interacts with the
dipole moment of molecule and tries to orientate it in the space. The experi-
ments show, that when the energy of this interaction is smaller, than the energy
of rotation motion, the perturbation of rotation motion practically does not
manifest itself in the absorption spectrum. In the opposite case the molecules
turn into the so-called pendular states and the absorption spectrum dramati-
cally changes.

The inequality of forward and reversed transitions, again, may be the result
of diﬀerent character of quantum mechanical processes of orientational averaging
of cross-section of molecule interaction with laser ﬁeld. For simpliﬁed illustration
the Fig.1 shows the assumed dependence of transition’s cross-section from the
angle between the molecule axis and the direction of laser beam for forward (1)
and reversed (2) transitions. The integral cross-sections of both transitions are
equal. If the molecule is oriented in the space so that the backward process
returns it exactly into the initial state, then the diﬀerential cross-section will be
very large and such transition is reversed. In other orientation of molecule the
backward process has relatively small diﬀerential cross-section and it should be
called again only as the forward transition. In this case the molecule remains
the memory about its initial state. So, in such way the origin of the so-called
rotational coherency may be explained [25].

The other indirect evidence of inequality of forward and reversed transitions
is the numerous experiments with degenerated or nondegenerated four photon
mixing in the so-called folded boxcars arrangement [21]. Here the three laser
beams of diﬀerent directions are crossed in common point in a liquid, gas or in a
molecular beam. The appearance of the superﬂuorescence in the new direction
is observed. The cross-section of transition for such superﬂuorescence should be
extraordinarily high. The direction and temporal characteristics of appearance
of superﬂuorescence correspond to such orientation and phase of vibrational
motion, which allow molecules to return exactly into the initial states.

New and detailed information about the orientational dependence of cross-
sections of forward and reversed transitions may, probably, be obtained in the

4

experiments on the existent apparatus, which uses the static electric ﬁelds and
molecular beam with cryogenic bolometer [12, 24, 26]. The Fig.2 shows the sim-
pliﬁed arrangement for suggested experiments. The radiation of infrared laser
is split on the two beams (pump and probe). The interaction regions are placed
between the ﬂat electrodes, which have slits for laser radiation and can be in-
dependently rotated round the molecular beam. As the object for experimental
study the stable linear molecules with large dipole moment and small rotational
constant well suit. There are, for example, HCCCN or H(CC)nX molecules,
were n=1–3 and X - is the halogen. The low rotational states of such molecules
may be easily turned into the pendular states at a relatively weak electric ﬁeld.
For the reversed optical transition we can expect, that the experimental depen-
dence of its cross-section from the angle between the pairs of electrodes will be
rather similar to the dependence on Fig.5 in work [12]. As a whole, such ex-
periments can give important information about the orientational dependence
of cross-sections for forward and reversed optical transitions.

Conclusion

Time reversal noninvariance is the only real physical base for explanation the
origin of the most phenomena in nonlinear optics. For present day we have quite
suﬃcient quantity of the direct experimental proofs of the strong time invariance
violation in optics. This is a good reason to introduce the time asymmetry
into the dynamical equations of the basic laws of physics. The corresponding
asymmetric equations for description the dynamics of optical transitions will
substitute for the famous Bloch equations, which are widely and successfully
used in optics now [15], but which does not have any clear physical sense. The
experiments for the study of orientational inequality of forward and reversed
transitions in molecules are proposed.

References

[1] I.Prigogine, From being to becoming: time and complexity in the physical
sciences, Ed. Yu.L.Klimontovich, Editorial URSS, Moscow, p.262, (2002),
in Russian.

[2] A.Bohm and N.L.Harshman, E-print, quant-ph/9805063.

[3] R.J.Creswick, Phys.Rev.Lett. 93, 100601 (2004).

[4] A.R.Bohm, M.Loewe and B.Van de Ven, E-print, quant-ph/0212130 v2.

[5] A.T.Holster, New J.Phys. 5, 130 (2003).

[6] V.B.Berestetsky, E.M.Lifshits and L.P.Pitaevsky, Relativistic Quantum

Theory part1, Nauka, Moscow, p.66 (1968), in Russian.

[7] K.Nemoto and S.L.Braunstein, E-print, quant-ph/0312108.

[8] K.Molmer, Phys.Rev.A 55, 3195 (1997).

5

[9] A.S.Schwanecke, A.Krasavin, D.M.Bagnall, A.Potts, A.V.Zayats and

N.I.Zheludev, Phys.Rev.Lett. 91, 247404 (2003).

[10] B.Dayan,

A.Pe’er,

A.A.Friesem and

Y.Silberberg,

E-print,

[11] B.Dayan, A.Pe’er, A.A.Friesem and Y.Silberberg, Phys.Rev.Lett. 93,

quant-ph/0302038.

023005 (2004).

[12] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[13] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0204003.

[14] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0306148.

[15] E.A.Korsunsky and M.Fleischhauer, Phys.Rev.A, 66, 033808 (2002).

[16] A.K.Popov, S.A.Myslivets and T.F.George, E-print, quant-ph/0501001.

[17] T.Rudolph and B.C.Sanders, Phys.Rev.Lett. 87, 077903 (2001).

[18] M.Xiaochan, E-print, physics/0308037.

[19] S.J.Cyvin, Molecular Vibrations and Mesn Square Amplitudes, Oslo,

[20] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0207111.

[21] M.Schmitt, G.Knopp, A.Materny and W.Kiefer, J.Phys.Chem.A, 102, 4059

(1968).

(1998).

[22] J.S.Baskin and A.Zewail, J.Phys.Chem.A, 105, 3680 (2001).

[23] M.J.Weida and C.S.Parmenter, J.Chem.Phys. 107, 7138 (1997).

[24] P.A.Block, E.J.Bohac and R.E.Miller, Phys.Rev.Lett. 68, 1303 (1992).

[25] P.M.Felker, J.Phys.Chem., 96, 7844 (1992).

[26] L.Oudejans and R.E.Miller, J.Phys.Chem. 99, 13670 (1995).

6

(cid:305)

1

2

(cid:537)

Fig.1   The supposed shapes of dependences of cross-section 
from the angel between molecule axis and the direction of the 
laser beam for forward (1) and reversed (2) transitions. 

 
 

Pump 

Probe 

Nozzle 

Bolometer

Bs 

Chopper 

+

!

El

+

!

M

IR Laser 

Figure  2.      A  schematic  diagram  of  the  apparatus  for  proposed 
experiments  with  oriented  molecules.  Bs  -  beamsplitter,  M  -  flat 
mirror, El - rotated electrodes with slits. 

 

