5
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
2
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Signiﬁcance of the General Principle of Relativity

Sanjay M. Wagh
Central India Research Institute,
Post Box 606, Laxminagar,
Nagpur 440 022, India
E-mail:cirinag ngp@sancharnet.in
(Dated: February 17, 2005)

In this note, we discuss the signiﬁcance of the general principle of relativity for a physical theory
that abandons the newtonian concept of force and, hence, uses an entirely diﬀerent conception for
the “cause” behind motions of material bodies.

I. CONCEPTUAL PRELIMINARIES

To begin with, let us note that the foremost of
the concepts behind Newton’s theory is, undoubt-
edly, (Galileo’s) concept of the inertia of a material
body. We postulate that every material body has
this inertia for motion.

The association of the inertia of a material body
with the points of the Euclidean space is the ﬁrst
primary physical conception that is necessary for
Newton’s theory to describe motions of physical
bodies. Then, with this association, the Euclidean
distance becomes the physical distance separating
material bodies and the Euclidean space becomes
the physical space for any further considerations of
Newton’s theoretical scheme.

Next, a physical clock is a material body under-
going periodic motion or a periodic phenomenon.
Essentially, in Newton’s theory, a physical clock is
a set of points of the Euclidean space exhibiting
periodic motion under a periodic transformation.
Mathematically, in Newton’s theory, let A be the
set of all points xA of the Euclidean space making
up the clock. Let T be the periodic transformation
such that ∀ xA ∈ A, T n xA = xA , where n is the
period of the transformation T .

In Newton’s theory, an observer can observe the
entire periodic motion of the material body of the
clock (under the use of the transformation T ) with-
out disturbing the clock in any manner whatsoever.
Then, the known state or the reading of the clock
represents the physical time. Any “measurement”
of the physical time gives the period or the part of
the period n of the transformation T . It is tacitly
assumed in these considerations that the involved
quantities are exactly measurable.

Now, consider a material point with an initial
location ~xo. In Newton’s theory, the trajectory of
this material point is a (continuous) sequence of
points of the Euclidean space. It is then a “curve”
traced by the point ~xo under some transformation
˜Tt of the Euclidean space where parameter t labels
points of the sequence. Of course, the transforma-
tion ˜Tt need not be periodic.

The label parameter t can then be made to cor-
respond to the physical time in a one-one corre-
spondence. This is theoretically permissible as the
measurement of the physical time does not disturb
the clock in any manner whatsoever in Newton’s
theory. This correspondence is the physical mean-
ing of the labelling parameter t.

An observer can thus check the position of an-
other material point against the state of a physical
clock. Without this “correspondence,” the geomet-
ric curve of the Euclidean space has no physical
sense for the path of a material point.

When such physical associations are carried out,
we say that the material point is at “this” location
given by the three space coordinates and the phys-
ical clock is simultaneously showing “this” time.
This simultaneity is inherent in the physical as-
sociations of Newton’s theory. It is an important
assumption of Newton’s theory.

Also, as a consequence of the fact that Newton’s
theory treats material bodies as existing indepen-
dently of the space, the state of a physical clock or
its reading is assumed to be independent of the mo-
tion of another material point or points separately
under considerations. Then, physical time is inde-
pendent also of the coordination of the metrically-
ﬂat Euclidean space.

But, then, the motion of a material point in the
“physical” space does not produce any change in
that space. Clearly, this fact applies also to the pe-
riodic motion or the periodic phenomenon making
up the physical clock.

The “physical” construction of the coordinate
axes and clocks must also be using the material
bodies, for example, coordinate axes could be con-
structed using “suﬃciently long” material rods,
say, of wood. Then, any material object, a road-
roller, say, crossing the coordinate axis must “af-
fect” the corresponding wooden rod.

But, in Newton’s theory, the coordinate axes of
the Euclidean space do not get aﬀected by the mo-
tions of other material bodies. Clearly, use of non-
cartesian coordinates does not change this state of
aﬀairs with Newton’s theory.

Now, any diﬀerence of coordinates in the Eu-
clidean space is a “measuring stick or rod” that
can be used to “measure” the physical separation
of material bodies.

Furthermore, in Newton’s theory, each observer
has a coordinate system of such measuring rods
and clocks. Then, when one observer is in motion
(relative to another one), the entire system of co-
ordinate axes and clocks is also carried with that
observer in motion.

It needs to be adequately recognized that it is
really the theoretical possibility of making a gen-
uine physical measurement at any stage which is
the issue involved herein.

Conceptually, the aforementioned physical situ-
ation is “acceptable” except in one case. Surely, we
cannot have a material rod with one observer and
simultaneously, another material rod, at the same
place, with other observer in (uniform or not) mo-
tion relative to the ﬁrst one.

But, in Newton’s theory, measuring stick of one
observer does not collide with that of another ob-
server in motion even when both these sticks ar-
rive at the same place. Unacceptably, any two such
measuring sticks just pass through each other with-
out even colliding on their ﬁrst contact.

The same situation does not arise for other ma-
terial bodies which are supposed to collide on their
ﬁrst contact. Then, in Newton’s theory, the mea-
suring rods of the physical space - Euclidean space
- are treated separately than other material ob-
jects. But, measuring rods must also be made up
of material objects. Then, their separate treat-
ment is, theoretically, not appropriate one. Surely,
this problem with Newton’s theory is, undeniably,
of serious theoretical concern.

(This above issue would not have been relevant
if the Euclidean distance were also not, simulta-
neously, the physical distance separating material
bodies. Mathematically, the continuum R × R × R
can be assumed.)

Hence, Newton’s theory attempts to explain all
phenomena as relations between objects existing in
Euclidean space and time. It achieves this mainly
by attributing absolute properties to the space and
the time, thereby totally separating them from the
properties and motions of matter.

Thus, limitations of Newton’s theoretical scheme
(providing his famous three laws of motion) origi-
nate in its use of the Cartesian concepts related to
the Euclidean space and the associations of prop-
erties of material bodies with the points of this
metrically-ﬂat space.

Now, the entire physical structure of Newton’s
theory is woven around only two basic concepts,
namely, those of the inertia and the force.

2

Clearly, the force, as a cause of motion, is an-
other pivotal concept of Newton’s theory. Hence,
consider the status of the concept of force, the
cause behind motions of material bodies, within
Newton’s theory of mechanics.

Firstly, we could ask: What is the cause of this
force? Within Newton’s overall theoretical scheme,
only a material point can be the source of force. A
material point “here” acts on a material point lo-
cated “there” with the speciﬁed force. Newton’s
theoretical scheme is therefore an action at a dis-
tance framework.

Then,

in Newton’s theory, we can consider a
physical body as one material point and also other
physical bodies as other material points. We vec-
torially add the forces exerted by each one on the
ﬁrst physical body to obtain the total force acting
on it. It is this total force that is used by Newton’s
second law of motion to provide the means of es-
tablishing the path followed by that physical body
under the action of that total force.

In Newton’s second law of motion, we must ﬁrst
specify the force acting on a material body. Only
then can we solve the corresponding diﬀerential
equation(s) and obtain, subject to the given initial
data, the path of the material point representing
that material body.

Then, without the Law of Force, it is clear that
the Law of Motion is empty of contents in New-
ton’s theoretical framework. This is an extremely
important issue for a physical theory.

From our ordinary, day-to-day, observations, we
notice that various objects fall to the earth when
left “free” in the air. We then say that objects
gravitate towards the Earth. This is, in a nutshell,
the phenomenon of gravitation.

We then need to explain as to why the objects
“ordinarily” gravitate to Earth, ie, why they have
a tendency to come together or why the distance
between them decreases with time.

In Newton’s theory, only the force “causes” the
motions of material bodies. Then, the gravitat-
ing behavior of objects is “explainable” only by
postulating a suitable force of gravity that makes
material bodies fall to the Earth.

But, in Newton’s theory, a force acts between
any two separate material points possessing the re-
quired source property by virtue of which the force
in question is generated. Furthermore, for the in-
ternal consistency of Newton’s scheme, the force
so generated by one material point on the second
material point must also be equal in amplitude but
opposite in direction to that generated by the sec-
ond material point on the ﬁrst material point. This
is Newton’s third law of motion. This law also has
the status of a postulate within the overall scheme
of the newtonian mechanics.

Newton had assumed that the force of gravity
is proportional to the inertias of the two mate-
rial points under consideration because, following
Galileo, he had postulated that inertia “character-
izes” a physical body.

Such a force of gravity must then be generated
by a chosen body (Earth) on all the other material
bodies because, by postulate, every material body
possessed inertia. The force of gravity must then
be universal in character.

To explain many of the day-to-day observations
involving the terrestrial bodies as well as plane-
tary motions that were already known in details,
Newton was therefore compelled to state a Law of
Force - Newton’s Law of Gravity - to explain the
phenomenon of gravitation.

In fact, in Newton’s theory, a material body has
two independent attributes: the ﬁrst, its inertial
mass, is a measure of the opposition it oﬀers to a
change in its state of motion, and the second, its
gravitational mass, is a measure of the property by
virtue of which it produces the force of gravity on
another material point.

Various observations, since Galileo’s times, then
indicate [1] that the inertial and the gravitational
masses of a material body are equal to a high de-
gree of accuracy. However, this equality becomes
an assumption of Newton’s theory.

Furthermore, the inverse-square dependence of
the gravitational force on the distance separat-
ing two bodies is also an important assumption
of Newton’s theory.

In relation to the inverse-square dependence of
Newton’s force of gravity on distance separating
two bodies, we could then always raise questions:
Why not any other power of distance? Why should
this force not contain time-derivatives of the space
coordinates? Clearly, Newton’s theory oﬀers no ex-
planation for even the inverse-square dependence
of the force of gravitation.

Hence, in Newton’s scheme, his law of gravita-
tion has the status of a postulate about the force
acting between two material particles separated by
some spatial distance.

Also, Coulomb’s law from the electrostatics pro-
vides another, postulated, fundamental force.
It
is also assumed to exist universally between any
two charged material bodies. It is an “additional”
force, over and above that of gravity, which New-
ton’s theory postulates to explain the motions of
charged material points.

Now, every object does not fall to the Earth.
So, “something” opposes the attractive force of
gravity. That “something” must also be another
force. As an example, the force of electrostatic re-
pulsion can balance the force of gravity between
two charged material bodies.

3

Then, under the action of this “another force”
the distance separating two material bodies can
also decrease. As an example, the force of elec-
trostatic attraction between two charged material
bodies can cause the decrement in their separating
distance. Therefore, not every decrement in dis-
tance between material bodies is due to the force
of mutual gravitation.

Thus, in a nutshell, one force can oppose another
force. But, every force must be an assumption of
Newton’s theory.

Then, if we ﬁnd that some physical body, for
example, a star, is stable, we could, in Newton’s
theory, explain its stability by postulating another
suitable force which counterchecks the force of self-
gravity of the star. On the other hand, if the star
were unstable, existence of “unbalanced” forces in
the star is implied.

In Newton’s theory, there are no fundamentally
important issues involved here than those related
to ﬁnding the nature of the force opposing the self-
gravity of the star. It is essential to recognize this
important aspect of Newton’s theory.

Nonetheless, in spite of it being an assumption
of Newton’s theory, Newton’s inverse-square law of
gravitation does possess certain experimental jus-
tiﬁcation - it is this inverse-square dependence that
is known to be consistent with various observations
and experiments.

Still, it cannot be denied that Newton’s law of
gravitation is an important assumption of the new-
tonian mechanics.

To reemphasize the status of the laws of the force
in Newton’s theory, we note that every force is
an assumption of this theory. Some forces are as-
sumed to exist universally between any two mate-
rial bodies. In particular, “the force of gravitation”
is postulated by this theory.

In Newton’s theory, every “fundamental” notion
of the force necessarily requires a source property
to be attributed to material bodies. Then, the
action-at-a-distance force has this important char-
acteristic always.

Obviously, Newton’s theory cannot hope to “ex-
plain” the origin of any of such source attributes,
each of these source attributes being an assump-
tion of that theory. Evidently, the same applies
to other action-at-a-distance theories. It is impor-
tant to recognize this fact at this early stage of our
present considerations.

Perhaps, we would have been satisﬁed even with
these assumptions of Newton’s theory if it were not
for the fact that Newton’s theory does not explain
the phenomena displayed by Light. Moreover, var-
ious observations related to the wave-particle dual-
ity of light as well as matter are also unexplainable
within the newtonian scheme.

Apart from various fundamental reasons of the-
oretical nature as discussed earlier, it is also for
such experiments or observations which cannot be
explained by Newton’s theory, that some suitable
“new” theory becomes a necessity.

(Historically, when various experimental discov-
eries contradicted Newton’s theory, the emphasis
of the theoretical research suddenly changed from
that of working out the detailed implications of
Newton’s theory to the quest for a “new theory.”
However, various serious theoretical diﬃculties of
this theory were, of course, quite well known since
Newton’s own times.)

Of course, diﬀerent results of Newton’s theory
which successfully describe motions of material
bodies must be obtainable within the new theory
in some suitable way.

In view of the overwhelming experimental data
unexplained by Newton’s theory, “new theory” is
inevitable. Then, in order to formulate a suitable
new theory, we need to, not just modify but, com-
pletely abandon some newtonian concepts at a fun-
damental level.

In the passing, let us also note here the princi-
ple of relativity in Newton’s theory. This principle
states that: If a coordinate system K is chosen
so that Newton’s laws of motion hold good without
the introduction of any pseudo-forces with respect
to this frame then, the same laws also hold good
in relation to other coordinate system K ′ moving
in uniform translation relatively to K. This prin-
ciple is a direct consequence of the experiments
conducted by Galileo and inferences that can be
drawn from these experiments.

These issues then bring us to the question of the
status of the principle of relativity in a theoretical
framework that abandons the newtonian concept
of the force. It is to this and other related issues
that we now turn to.

II. THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF
RELATIVITY

To incorporate the physical description of the
phenomena displayed by Light, zero rest-mass ob-
ject, Einstein modiﬁed the newtonian principle of
relativity as: If a coordinate system K is chosen
so that physical
laws hold good in their simplest
form with respect to this frame then, the same laws
also hold good in relation to other coordinate sys-
tem K ′ moving in uniform translation relatively to
K. This is the special principle of relativity. As
is well known, together with the principle of the
constancy of the speed of light in vacuo, it leads to
the special theory of relativity.

4

Einstein’s this special principle of relativity is
essentially the same as the principle of relativity
of Newton’s theory. The word “special” indicates
here that the principle is restricted to the case of
uniform translational motion of K ′ relative K and
does not extend to non-uniform motion of K ′ in
relation to the system K.

But, even the special theory of relativity is not
suﬃciently general to oﬀer explanations for various
physical phenomena as observed. Not only gravity,
but, as should be amply clear, the origin of inertia
as well as the origin of electrostatic charge are also
not explainable in special relativity.

Primarily, the special theory of relativity is an
extension only of the newtonian laws to incorpo-
rate the laws of motion for material bodies with
vanishing inertia [9]. It achieves this extension by
acknowledging the fact that, in our day-to-day ex-
periences, we use Light to observe.

But, the special theory of relativity also rests
on the metrically ﬂat continuum and is, thereby,
beset with the problems of treating the measuring
rods and clocks separately from all other objects.
There is therefore the need to extend the special
principle of relativity.

Then, Einstein extended [2] this principle on the

basis of Mach’s reasoning as follows.

Mach’s reasoning concerns the following situa-
tion. Consider two identical ﬂuid bodies so far
from each other and from other material bodies
that only the self-gravity of each one needs to be
considered. Let the distance between them be in-
variable, and in neither of them let there be “in-
ternal motions” with respect to each other. Also,
let either body, as judged by an observer at rest
relative to the other body, rotate with constant
angular velocity about the line joining them. This
is, importantly, a veriﬁable relative motion of the
two identical ﬂuid bodies.

Now, using surveyor’s instruments, let an ob-
server at rest relative to each body make measure-
ments of the surface of that body. Let the revealed
surface of one body be spherical and of the other
body be an ellipsoid of revolution.

The question then arises of the reason behind
this diﬀerence in these two bodies. Of course, no
answer is to be considered satisfactory unless the
given reason is observable. This is so because the
Law of Causality has the “genuine scientiﬁc” sig-
niﬁcance only when observable eﬀects ultimately
appear as causes and eﬀects.

As is well known, Newton’s theory as well as the
special theory of relativity require the introduction
of ﬁctitious or the pseudo forces to provide an an-
swer to this issue. The reason given by these two
theories is, obviously, entirely unsatisfactory since
the pseudo-forces are unobservable.

Any cause within the system of these two bod-
ies alone will not be suﬃcient as it would have to
refer to the absolute space only. But, the abso-
lute space is necessarily unobservable and, conse-
quently, any such “internal” cause will not be in
conformity with the law of causality.

The only satisfactory answer is that the cause
must be outside of this physical system, and that
must be referred to the real diﬀerence in motions of
distant material bodies relative to each ﬂuid body
under consideration.

Then, the frame of reference of one ﬂuid body is
equivalent to that of the other body for a descrip-
tion of the “motions” of other bodies. As Mach had
concluded, no observable signiﬁcance can be at-
tached to the cause of the diﬀerence in their shapes
without this equivalence.

The laws of physics must then be such that they
apply to systems of reference in any kind of motion
(without the introduction of any ﬁctitious causes or
forces). This is then the extended or the general
principle of relativity.

Clearly, the reference frames must be constructed
out of material bodies and any motions of “other”
material bodies must aﬀect the constructions of the
reference frames. Therefore, the general principle
of relativity also means that the laws of physics
must be so general as to incorporate even these sit-
uations in their entirety.

Now, equally important is the fact that the no-
tion of the physical time must undergo appropri-
ate changes when the above is implemented.
In
particular, the correspondence of the labelling pa-
rameter of the “path” of a physical body with the
time displayed by a physical clock must be dif-
ferent than that in Newton’s theory or in special
relativity. Notably, the underlying continuum and
the physical space are then diﬀerent.

Einstein connected the general principle of rela-
tivity with the observation that a possible uniform
gravitation imparts the same acceleration to all
bodies. This insight leads us to Einstein’s equiva-
lence principle. It arises as follows.

Let K be a Galilean frame of reference relative
to which a material body is moving with uniform
rectilinear motion when far removed from other
material bodies. Let K ′ be another frame of refer-
ence which is moving relatively to K in uniformly
accelerated translation. Then, relatively to K ′,
that same material body would have an acceler-
ation which is independent of its material content
as well as of its physical state.

The observer at rest in frame K ′ can then raise
the question of determining whether frame K ′ is
“really” in an accelerated motion. That is, whether
this is the only cause for the acceleration of bodies
being independent of material content.

5

Now,

let various bodies, of diﬀering material
contents and of diﬀering inertias, fall freely under
the action of Earth’s gravity after being released
from the same distance above the ground and at
the same instant of time. Galileo had, supposedly
at the leaning tower of Pisa, observed that these
bodies reach the ground at the same instant of time
and had thereby concluded that these bodies fall
with the same accelerations.

Hence, the decrement in distance between ma-
terial bodies displaying only the phenomenon of
gravitation is then uniquely characterized by the
fact that the acceleration experienced by material
bodies, occupying suﬃciently small region of space
near another material body of large spatial dimen-
sion, is independent of their material content and
their physical state. Here, the gravitational action
of the larger material body can then be treated as
being that of uniform gravitation.

Therefore, the answer to the question raised by
the observer at rest in the frame K ′ is in the neg-
ative since there does exist an analogous situation
involving the phenomenon of uniform gravitation
in which material bodies can possess acceleration
that is independent of their material content and
the physical state.

Thus, the observer at rest in the frame K ′ can
alternatively explain the observation of the “accel-
eration being independent of the physical state or
the material content of bodies” on the basis of the
phenomenon of uniform gravitation.

The mechanical behavior of material bodies rel-
ative to the frame K ′ is then the same as that
in the frame K, supposedly being considered as
“special” as per the special principle of relativity.
We can therefore say that the two frames K and
K ′ are equivalent for the description of the facts
under consideration. Clearly, we can then extend
the special principle of relativity to incorporate the
“accelerated” frames.

Borrowing Einstein’s words on this issue [2], this
above situation is then suggestive that the systems
K and K ′ may both with equal right be looked upon
as “stationary,” that is to say, they have an equal
title as systems of reference for the physical de-
scription of phenomena. [Note the use of the word
“suggestive” in this statement.]

Now, the equivalence of inertial and gravita-
tional masses of a material body refers to the
“equality” of corresponding qualities of a material
body. But, this is permissible only in a theory that
assumes the concept of a force as an external cause
of motions of material bodies. The concept of the
gravitational mass is, however, irrelevant when the
concept of force is abandoned. Only the concept
of the inertia of a material body is then relevant
to the motions of physical bodies.

What then is the status of the general principle
of relativity in a theory that completely abandons
the concept of force? Does it hold in the absence
of the concept of force?

From the above, it should now be evident that
the general principle of relativity stands even when
the concept of force is abandoned because it only
deals with the observable concept of an accelera-
tion due to gravity. It rests only on the observation
that uniform gravity imparts the same acceleration
to all the bodies. The concept of force is not at all
essential to establish this fact.

Now, it is crucial to recognize that the equiva-
lence principle establishes only the consistency of
the phenomenon of gravitation with that of the
general principle of relativity. Clearly, the equiv-
alence principle is not logically equivalent to the
general principle of relativity.

As noted earlier, Einstein had, certainly, been
quite careful to use the word “suggestive” in stat-
ing the relation of these two diﬀerent principles.
in pursuing the gen-
He further wrote in [2] “...
eral theory of relativity we shall be led to a theory
of gravitation, since we are able to “produce” a
gravitational ﬁeld merely by changing the system
of coordinates.”

From the above discussion, it should be equally
clear that the general principle of relativity can be
reached from more than one vantage issues. Each
such issue can then indicate only that some physi-
cal phenomenon related to that issue is consistent
with this principle of relativity. The mutual con-
sistency of the general principle of relativity and
various physical conceptions then becomes the re-
quirement of a satisfactory theory.

It must therefore be realized that the physical
construction of the frames of reference, the physical
coordination of the physical space using measuring
rods, is the primary requirement of the satisfactory
theory based on the general principle of relativity
- the general theory of relativity.

Then, it should now be also clear that the gen-
eral theory of relativity, a physical theory explicitly
based on the general principle of relativity, will not
be just a theory of gravitation but, of necessity,
also the theory of everything. It is certainly deci-
sive to recognize this.

Therefore, a theory which abandons the concept
of force completely can “explain” the phenomenon
of gravitation by demonstrating that the decrement
of distance between material bodies is, in certain
situations, independent of their material contents
and physical state. By showing this, a theory of
the aforementioned type can incorporate the phe-
nomenon of gravitation.

Why is this above mentioned demonstration ex-

pected to hold only in certain situations?

6

To grasp the essentials here, let us recall that,
in Newton’s theory, only the total force acting on
a physical body is used by Newton’s second law
of motion. We usually also decompose this force
into diﬀerent parts in the well known manner as
the one arising due to gravity, the one arising due
to electrostatic force etc.

We have become so accustomed to this classical
newtonian thinking in terms of the aforementioned
decomposition of the total force that we ignore the
following important fact.

What matters in Newton’s theory for the motion
of any physical body is the total force acting on it
and not the decomposition of this total force in
parts, the decomposition, strictly speaking, being
quite irrelevant.

Thus, the phenomenon of gravitation is, then,
“displayed” by material bodies, essentially, only in
certain situations, those for which the total force
is that due to gravity.

This above is, in overall, the signiﬁcance of the

general principle of relativity.

III. GENERAL EXPECTATIONS FROM
THE NEW THEORY

Now, what are our general expectations from

any “new” theory then?

Clearly, this “new” theory is not the special the-
ory of relativity or even the known quantum the-
ory. As we have already seen before, the concep-
tual framework of special relativity is not suﬃ-
ciently general. The quantum theory too has not
the required general basis as its framework needs
to specify inertia and charge.

The standard formalism of the quantum theory
provides us, essentially, only the means of calcu-
lating the probability of a physical event involv-
ing physical object(s).
It presupposes therefore
that we have speciﬁed, either the lagrangian or the
hamiltonian, ie, certain physical characteristics of
the problem under consideration. Evidently, this
is necessary to determine Schr¨odinger’s Ψ-function
using which we can then make (probabilistic) pre-
dictions regarding that physical phenomenon un-
der consideration.

Therefore, the formalism of the quantum theory,
leading us to the probability of the outcome of a
physical experiment about a chosen physical ob-
ject, cannot provide us the means of “specifying”
certain intrinsic properties of that physical body.
This fact, precisely, appears to be the reason as
to why we have to specify by hand the values of
the mass and the charge in various operators of
the non-relativistic as well as relativistic versions
of the quantum theory.

The “origins” of “intrinsic” properties of physi-
cal bodies cannot then be explainable on the basis
of the quantum theory. Then, the formalism of
quantum theory as well its inherently probabilistic
considerations cannot provide the universal basis
for physics, in general.

Now, the concept of the inertia of a material
body is more fundamental than that of the force
because the conception of gravitational force re-
quires the introduction of gravitational mass which
is conceptually very diﬀerent but “equals” the iner-
tia in value to a high degree of accuracy [1]. Hence,
only the newtonian concept of force comes under
scrutiny for modiﬁcations.

Therefore, it must be adequately recognized that
the newtonian concept of “force” will have to be
abandoned in the process of developing the new
theoretical framework. In other words, the “cause”
behind the motions of material bodies will have to
be conceptually entirely diﬀerent than has been
considered by Newton’s theory.

Consequently, “agreements” of the results of the
new theory with the corresponding ones of New-
ton’s theory can only be mathematical of nature.
The physical conceptions behind the mathematical
statements of the new theory will not be those of
Newton’s theory.

Therefore, any explanation of the phenomenon
of gravitation in the new theory will only involve
the demonstration of the “decrement of distance”
under certain situations involving material bodies.
It must, of course, be shown that this decrement in
distance is, for these situations, such that the “ac-
celeration” of the bodies is independent of their
material content and the physical state. It must
also be shown that the “known” inverse-square de-
pendence of this phenomenon arises in the new the-
ory in some mathematical manner.

Any such “new theory” must then explain the
“origin” of the inertia of material bodies. It must
also incorporate the “physical” construction of the
coordinate system that must, necessarily, change
with the motions of material bodies in the “physi-
cal” space. Without the appropriate incorporation
of these two issues, no theory can be considered to
be physically satisfactory.

Any such “new” theory needs also “explain” the
equality of the inertial and the gravitational mass
of a material body. The equality of these two en-
tirely diﬀerent physical conceptions, even with ex-
perimental uncertainties, is a sure indication that
the same quality of a material body manifests it-
self, according to circumstances, as its inertia or as
its weight (heaviness).

But, it must be remembered that the concept of
the gravitational mass owes its origin to the newto-
nian concept of the force. Gravitational mass is the

7

source of the newtonian gravitational force. Also,
electrostatic charge is the source of Coulomb’s elec-
trostatic force.

But, the “source properties” cannot be basic to
the new theory that abandons the concept of the
force. Consequently, the gravitational mass of the
material body will not be fundamental to the new
theory, but the inertial mass will be. Some “entity”
that replaces the electrostatic charge will also be
basic to the new theory.

The equality of the gravitational mass and the
inertial mass for a material body is then not really
the issue for the new theory.

But, it must also follow from the mathematical
framework of the new theory that the inertial mass
can also be “naturally” considered as the “source”
in the mathematical quantity that can be the new-
tonian gravitational force.

Similarly, the quantity that, in the new theory,
replaces the electrostatic charge must also natu-
rally appear as the “source” in the mathematical
quantity that can be considered to be Coulomb’s
electrostatic force.

Furthermore, we need to demand that the “new”
theory must also not contain the law of motion
which is “independent” of the law of the force.
That is to say, the force as an external quantity,
to be “speciﬁed” separately of the law of motion,
must not occur in this new theory. In it, we can
only have the law of motion.

Crucially, abandonment of the concept of force
that is independent of the law of motion applies,
at the same time, to “every kind of (fundamental)
force” postulated to be acting between the material
particles by Newton’s theory.

Therefore, the conceptual framework as well as
the mathematical formalism or procedure by which
we “replace” the concept of force (as an “exter-
nal cause of motion” that is independent of the
law of motion) will have to be applicable to every
kind of (fundamental) force that Newton’s theory
has to postulate or assume to explain the observed
motions of material bodies.

The Principle of the Simplicity (of Theoretical
Construction) dictates that this above must be the
case for a satisfactory theory.

Replacing only the concept of the gravitational
force is then unacceptable not only from this point
of view of the simplicity but also because the resul-
tant theory then cannot account for the entirety of
charged material bodies within its hybrid frame-
work. Charged material bodies will have to be the
singularities of the electrostatic force but not of the
gravitational force in the mathematical framework
of such a hybrid theory. Any such hybrid frame-
work is then bound to be physically inconsistent
and, hence, unacceptable.

Then, the mathematical procedure by which we
replace the notion of, say, Newton’s gravitational
force cannot be expected to be entirely diﬀerent
than the one adopted, say, for replacing the notion
of Coulomb’s electrostatic force.

Now, the concept of force is, in a deﬁnite math-
ematical sense [3], equivalent to that of certain
transformations of the point of the (Euclidean)
space in Newton’s theory. This is then suggestive
that mathematical transformations of points of the
(underlying continuum) space can, quite generally
as well as naturally, “replace” the newtonian con-
cept of force as a cause of motion.

It should then be evident that the mathemati-
cal laws obtainable in this way will be applicable
to every reference frame, and, hence, this mathe-
matical formalism will be in conformity with the
general principle of relativity.

It should then be also clear that the phenomenon
of gravitation is incorporated in this framework as
the concept of transformation is “applicable” in all
the relevant situations.

This then brings us to the important issue of
the appropriate mathematical formulation for the
new theory whose certain characteristics we have
considered above.

IV. QUANTUM ASPECTS AND THE
MATHEMATICAL FOUNDATION FOR
THE NEW THEORY

Now, quantum theory acknowledges an impor-
tant limitation of the classical newtonian ideas by
recognizing that any observation of a physical sys-
tem involves, necessarily, an uncontrollable distur-
bance of that physical system.
[This is similar in
spirit to special relativity acknowledging the fact
that we ordinarily use electromagnetic radiation to
observe material bodies.]

It is then important to recognize that an “act of
observation” will, necessarily, involve the transfor-
mation of the points of the underlying space repre-
senting the physical system that is being observed.
Therefore, transformations of the underlying space
are the key to quantum aspects.

But, we must ﬁrst realize that “material bodies”
and the “physical geometry of space” aught to be
indistinguishable.

Firstly, moving a material body from its given
“location” should cause changes to the construc-
tion of the coordinate system. Motion of a mate-
rial body will then change the “physical geometry”
because the construction of the coordinate system

8

is the basis of the “metric function” of the geom-
etry. Hence, the physical geometry is determined
by material bodies.

In turn, material bodies are also determined by
the physical geometry in that “given the metric
function of the geometry” we would know how the
totality of all the material bodies are “located”
relative to each other.

In this context, eﬀorts of Rylov [4] at deﬁning
physical geometry as mutual dispositions of the
totality of geometric objects are noteworthy. It is
proved in [4] that the distance function determines
completely the physical geometry, and one does not
need any additional information for determination
of physical geometry.

However, the issue remains of the physical char-
acteristics of material bodies such as, for example,
their inertia, electrostatic charge etc. These are
the “qualities” of every geometric object which is
to be viewed, necessarily, as a measurable set of
the underlying measure space [5].

A chosen measure can be averaged over the ge-
ometrically well-deﬁned size of the geometric ob-
ject under considerations. This averaged measure
provides the non-singular notion of a point-object
with the physical characteristics.

But, the location of the point-object so deﬁned
is indeterminate within the limits of the geomet-
ric object. Consequently, when the measurement
of any characteristics such as the location of this
point-object is performed, an intrinsic indetermi-
nacy is involved. This is expected to lead to vari-
ous quantum aspects. See, for further related de-
tails, [6, 7, 8, 9, 10].

Evidently, these ideas are then fundamentally
diﬀerent from those of Newton’s theory as well as
from those of special relativity. In these new con-
siderations, the concept of “force” is abandoned
and is replaced by suitable properties of the ge-
ometry - its transformations. Since “force” can be
looked upon as a transformation of the points of
the underlying geometry, results of Newton’s the-
ory and those of the special relativity are obtain-
able [11] within the proposed formalism.

Acknowledgments

I am very much grateful to the referees of the
journal General Relativity & Gravitation for hav-
ing raised various queries while reviewing the sub-
mission [8].

9

[1] Fray S, Diez C A, H¨ansch T W and Weitz M
(2004) Atomic interferometer with amplitude grat-
ings of light and its applications to atom based
tests of
the equivalence principle, Database:
physics/0411052 and references therein

[2] Einstein A (1916) Annalen der Physik, 49. See,
also, original works in (1952) The principle of rel-
ativity: A collection of original papers on the spe-
cial and general theory of relativity. Notes by A
Sommerfeld, (Dover, New York)

[3] Hirsch M W and Smale S (1974) Diﬀerential
equations, Dynamical systems, and Linear Alge-
bra (Academic Press, New York)
Abraham R and Marsden J E (1967) Foundations
of Mechanics, (Benjamin, New York)

[4] Rylov Yuri A (2004) Deformation principle as
foundation of physical geometry and its ap-
plication to space-time geometry, Database:
physics/0411103

[5] Srivastava S M (1998) A course on Borel Sets

(Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer, New
York) and references therein

[6] Wagh S M (2004) Some fundamental issues in
general relativity and their resolution, Database:
gr-qc/0402003 and references therein

[7] Wagh S M (2004) Einsteinian ﬁeld theory as
a program in fundamental physics Database:
physics/0404028 and references therein.

[8] Wagh S M (2004) On the continuum origin of
Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations Database:
physics/0404066

[9] Wagh S M (2004) Special Relativity as a Physical

Theory, Database: physics/0410124

[10] Wagh S M (2004) Heuristic approach to a natural
uniﬁcation of the quantum theory and the general
theory of relaivity, Database: physics/0409057
[11] Wagh S M (2005) Foundations of a Universal The-

ory of Relativity, in preparation

