5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TAUP 2806-2005

Relativistic Constraints on the Structure

of Fundamental Forces

School of Physics and Astronomy

Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

E. Comay

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv 69978

Israel

Email: elic@tauphy.tau.ac.il

PACS No: 03.30.+p, 03.50.De

Abstract:

It is proved that Special Relativity imposes constraints on the structure

of fundamental forces. The orthogonality of the 4-force exerted on an el-

ementary particle and its 4-velocity is discussed. The signiﬁcance of the

energy-momentum tensor associated with the ﬁeld is analyzed. Relying on

these issues, it is proved that the Lorentz force is consistent with all con-

straints whereas a force derived from a scalar potential does not satisfy all

requirements. This analysis explains a general discussion of Goldstein, Poole

and Safko.

1

1. Introduction

It is well known that the theory of Special Relativity (SR) changed dra-

matically old concepts concerning the structure of the physical world. The

following lines mention several examples of this kind. Thus, probably the

most well known relativistic formula E = mc2 uniﬁes mass and energy con-

servation laws. (In this formula m denotes the mass measured in the labo-

ratory frame. In all other cases, m is a scalar denoting the self mass of a

particle.) Another notion is the absolute property ascribed to length and

time intervals. This idea has been forsaken and a single absolute quantity

(ds)2 = (dt)2 − (dr)2 is deﬁned. Velocity takes a new form. In SR, velocity of

a massive particle is always smaller than the speed of light v < c. In the case

of massless particles, like the photon, the theory claims that it travels in the

speed of light c in all inertial frames and that c is independent of the velocity

of the source. The introduction of SR into quantum mechanics enabled Dirac

to construct his celebrated equation. Solutions of this equation yield very

good values for the atomic hydrogen energy levels, for the spin of the electron

and for its g-factor. Another result of this equation is the prediction of the

positron - an antiparticle of the electron.

SR shows that one does not need to postulate the existence of ether in

order to explain wave properties of electromagnetic radiation. Thus, the

following very well known textbooks on electrodynamics [1-3] do not have

the words ”ether” or ”aether” in the subject index. The very detailed book

of Jackson (see [4], pp. 503-515) discusses ether and other ideas which are

inconsistent with SR and describes relevant experiments aiming to test these

ideas. All results are consistent with SR.

Another diﬃculty of the ether theory emerges from quantum mechani-

2

cal eﬀects. Experiments proves and this theory explains the particle/wave

duality of other elementary particles, like the electron as well as that of

nonelementary objects like the proton and the neutron. Thus, if one pos-

tulates that for every wave there should be a material medium (analogous

to the case of acoustic waves) then a need for other kinds of ether (or new

properties of the same ether) becomes a necessity. This argument explains

the above mentioned status of ether in the current scientiﬁc literature. In

spite of that, the notion of ether still can be found in modern scientiﬁc and

nonscientiﬁc texts. Thus, a search of the Internet by means of Google shows

about 1000 cases for the strings ”ether waves”, ”aether waves”. This ﬁg-

ure should be compared with the 495,000 cases found for ”electromagnetic

waves”.

SR changed the notions of probability (or charge) density and of energy

density. Thus, in Newtonian mechanics volume is invariant and so is time.

It follows that, at any instant, the amount of physical objects (like charge

or mass) enclosed inside a given volume, takes the same value in all inertial

frames. For this reason, density is an invariant in Newtonian mechanics.

This property does not hold in SR because volumes undergo a Lorentz con-

traction and simultaneity of events is not conserved. Thus, it is proved that

probability density (and charge density) become 0-component of the current

4-vector (see [1], pp. 69-71). This 4-vector is parallel to the local 4-velocity.

In the case of energy density, one ﬁnds that it is represented by the

T 00 component of the energy-momentum tensor T µν. Thus, energy density,

momentum density, energy current and the 3 × 3 tensor (like the Maxwell

stress tensor of electrodynamics) are entries of one tensor T µν (see [1], pp.

77-83). A Lorentz transformation of this tensor indicates the close relations

between these notions.

3

SR explains a tremendous amount of data. Perhaps the most striking

case is found in the colliding electron/positron beams of the LEP accelerator

at CERN. Here electrons and positrons acquire a kinetic energy larger than

100GeV. It means that EK > 200, 000 mec2, where me denotes the rest mass

of the electron (and of the positron). Now, in spite of this gigantic kinetic

energy, the velocity of the particles does not exceed the speed of light c.

Moreover, for these beams, an electron-positron interaction yields plenty of

massive particles, demonstrating the interrelation between mass and energy,

which is expressed by the formula E = mc2. All kinds of processes like

this abide by the law where an elementary particle and its antiparticle are

produced in pairs and the overall energy and momentum (calculated by the

laws of SR) are conserved.

The present work is devoted to the analysis of relativistic constraints

imposed on the structure of fundamental forces. A brief discussion of the

special case of the Lorentz force and of 2 approaches to the problem can be

found in a recent edition of a well known textbook (see [5], pp. 297-300).

This discussion indicates that the status of the problem is still indecisive.

In the notation used here Greek indices run from 0 to 3. The Lorentz

metric gµν is diagonal and its entries are (1,-1,-1,-1). τ denotes the proper

time. In the system of units used here ¯h = c = 1 and the dimensions of every

quantities is a power of the length L. Thus, mass, energy and momentum

take the dimension [L−1] whereas length and time have the dimension [L].

2. The Notion of Force

People are aware of several kinds of forces encountered in everyday life,

4

like the force exerted by an extended (or contracted) spring or other ob-

jects obeying Hooke’s law; the force exerted by the pressure of gas on the

surface of a piston; several kinds of friction forces; forces associated with bi-

ological activity of muscles etc. These forces are treated in textbooks where

appropriate formulas are used. However, these kinds of forces do not have a

fundamental nature and their description applies phenomenological formu-

las. The phenomenological nature of these forces is explained in the following

lines.

In theoretical physics a genuine elementary particle is pointlike. This

property holds in classical physics (see [1], pp. 43-44). Here the authors

use several arguments that rely on SR. One of their arguments assumes that

an elementary particle having a nonzero volume exists. As an elementary

particle, no relative motion between its parts can take place. Now assume

that at a certain instant t a force is exerted on one of its sides. By the

elementary nature of the particle, all its parts must move at the same speed.

Hence, at the volume of this particle, interaction propagates at an inﬁnite

speed. This result contradicts SR.

Similarly, the pointlike nature of elementary particles is obtained in quan-

tum mechanics and in quantum ﬁeld theory, where a genuine elementary

particle is described by a wave function (ﬁeld function) ψ(xµ). This function

depends on a single set of space-time coordinates xµ. Hence, ψ(xµ) describes

a pointlike particle.

The pointlike nature of genuine elementary particles, like electrons, muons

and quarks is consistent with experimental data which indicate that their

size is smaller than 10−16 cm. This limit depends on the energy used in the

experiments. Today it is believed that genuinely elementary particles like

the electron, the muon and the quarks are pointlike. (The discussion carried

5

out below uses both pointlike expressions like evµ and density expressions

like the 4-current jµ (see [1], pp. 69-71). Using the Dirac δ-function and

performing an integration, one derives the ﬁrst kind of expression from the

second one.)

Evidently, pointlike particles cannot collide. Hence, a fundamental force

cannot stem from a contact interaction between 2 particles. It follows that a

mediating ﬁeld F is required for explaining acceleration of a particle as well

as energy and momentum exchanged between interacting particles. Thus,

the rest of this work is devoted to the analysis of the structure of this ﬁeld F

and to its interrelations with the force exerted on particles. Here the tensorial

nature of F is still undeﬁned. A discussion of this aspect of the problem is

presented in the rest of this work. (Hereafter, the word ’collision’ refers to

cases where, at the interaction instant, the distance between the particles is

very short.)

The notion of force holds in classical physics where measurements of po-

sition, velocity and acceleration are assumed to yield results having adequate

accuracy. Let us examine the motion of a particle P from point A to point B

along a curve C (see ﬁg. 1). The particle P accelerates and, in the laboratory

frame, its energy at B is higher that that of A. Let ∆E denote the amount

of energy acquired by P . Due to the laws of SR, energy cannot travel faster

than light. Hence, when the particle P was at A, the energy ∆E was inside

the spherical shell S. But S contains nothing except the pointlike particle P

and the ﬁeld of force F . This argument proves that energy density must be

associated with the ﬁeld of force. The physical expression for energy density

and related quantities is the energy-momentum tensor T µν (see [1], pp. 77-

80). Here the entry T 00 represents energy density. This tensor is a symmetric

second rank tensor.

6

A simple dimensional analysis yields the relations between the ﬁeld of

force and its associated energy-momentum tensor. Using Newton’s law f =

ma, one ﬁnds that, in the system of units used here, the dimension of force

is L−2. Now, energy has the dimension L−1. Therefore, energy density has

the dimension L−4. These values restrict the relations between the ﬁeld F

and T µν.

and momentum.

Another restriction imposed on the system is that, in the vacuum, the

energy-momentum tensor must be divergenceless, T µν

,ν = 0. This restriction

relies on the fact that the vacuum can be neither a source nor a sink of energy

Before proceeding further, let us examine the case of the electromagnetic

force. This case provides an important illustration of the problem and is

used in the analysis carried out later.

3. The Electromagnetic Force

The electromagnetic force (called the Lorentz force) can be derived from

the action principle. Here we have a charged particle and an electromagnetic

ﬁeld. The particle’s part of the Lagrangian is (see [1], pp. 45-49)

L = −m(1 − v2)1/2 − e(Φ − A · v),

where m and e denote the particle’s self mass and charge, respectively. Ap-

plying the Euler-Lagrange equations

(1)

(2)

to ( 1), one isolates the time derivative of the mechanical momentum and

d
dt

∂L
∂v

= ∇L

7

obtains the Lorentz force

This expression can be written in a covariant form

f =

= e(E + v × B)

dp
dt

f µ = maµ = eF µνvν,

where vµ and aµ = dvµ/dτ are the particle’s 4-velocity and 4-acceleration, re-

spectively. Now, since vµ is dimensionless, one ﬁnds that the electromagnetic

ﬁelds and the Lorentz force f µ of (4) have the same dimensions [L−2].

The energy-momentum tensor of the electromagnetic ﬁelds is (see [1], p.

81 or [4], p. 605))

T µν
F =

1
4π

1
4

(F µαF βνgαβ +

F αβFαβgµν)

(5)

Here we see a realization of the discussion presented in the previous Section.

In (4) we see the relation between the mediating electromagnetic ﬁeld F µν

and the force exerted on a charged particle.

In (5) one ﬁnds the relation

between this ﬁeld and the energy-momentum tensor. Thus, the ﬁeld’s part

of the energy-momentum tensor is a homogeneous quadratic function of the

ﬁelds tensor F µν and it is divergenceless at the vacuum (see [1], p. 78)

Moreover, at the position of a charge, it satisﬁes (see [1], pp. 82, 83)

This relation proves energy-momentum conservation where the amount lost

T µν

.ν = 0.

T µν

,ν = −F µνjν.

8

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

by the ﬁelds is transferred to the charged particle.

4. A Deﬁnition of Force and its Properties

The form of the Lorentz force (3) can be used as a guide for the deﬁnition

of force. As explained above, we treat here elementary pointlike particles.

Thus, the force is taken as the time derivative of the mechanical momentum

f =

dp
dt

(8)

(9)

(see a discussion in [5], pp. 297-300). The covariant form of the force is given

in (4). Relation (4) yields the following constraint on a relativistic force

vµvµ = 1 → aµvµ = 0 → f µvµ = 0.

Relation (9) proves that a relativistic force is spacelike. Indeed, let us

examine (9) in the rest frame of the particle where vµ = (1, 0, 0, 0). It follows

that, in this frame, f µ = (0, f) which is a spacelike vector.

Another result that follows (9) is that the force f µ exerted on a particle,

must depend on its 4-velocity vµ. Indeed, there is only one force which is

independent of vµ and satisﬁes (9). This is the null force f µ = 0.

Requirement (9) is satisﬁed by the Lorentz force (4)

f µvµ = eF µνvνvµ = 0,

(10)

where the ﬁnal result is obtained from the antisymmetry of the tensor F µν

and the symmetry of the product vνvµ.

The dependence of the 4-force f µ on the particle’s 4-velocity vµ means

that it is not identical to the mediating ﬁeld F introduced in the second

Section. Thus, in the case of electrodynamics, the Lorentz force (4) illustrates

9

this distinction. Here the ﬁeld takes the form of an antisymmetric tensor

F µν whereas the associated force is (obviously) a 4-vector obtained from the

tensorial contraction of F µν and the 4-velocity vν.

The discussion carried out above proves 3 requirements that should be

satisﬁed by a relativistic force:

A. The 4-force f µ exerted on a particle must be orthogonal to its 4-velocity

vµ.

B. The mediating ﬁeld F must yield a symmetric energy-momentum ten-

sor T µν. In the vacuum, relation (6) T µν

,ν = 0 must hold.

C. At the space-time point where a particle is located, energy-momentum

balance yields the following relation T µν

,ν + f µ = 0 (see (7) for the case

of electrodynamics).

These requirements are used in the following discussion. They are denoted

by the letters A, B and C, respectively. Requirements B and C look like very

serious constraints imposed on an arbitrary formula of force. As a matter

of fact, they have a standard solution for cases where the dynamics of the

system is derived from a Lagrangian density of the ﬁelds (see [1], pp. 77-

80, 270- 273). This aspect provides another argument for the usage of a

Lagrangian density and of the variational principle as a basis of any ﬁeld

theory.

5. The Scalar Potential

The student of Newtonian mechanics regards a scalar potential deﬁned

in the 3-dimensional space, as a self-evident and a very useful expression

10

of the theory. This is not the case discussed here because the potential is

regarded as a scalar in Minkowski space. The realization of a relativistic

scalar potential is the Yukawa potential (see [6], p. 211; [7], p. 122)

where φ satisﬁes the Klein-Gordon (KG) equation (see [8], p. 26)

φ = −g2 e−µr
r

,

(2 + µ2)φ = 0.

(11)

(12)

Here g is a dimensionless coupling constant and µ denotes the mass of the

particle represented by the ﬁeld of force φ. This kind of particle is associated

with the ﬁeld of force and is certainly distinguished from the particle upon

which the force is exerted.

In a free space, namely at points which are free of particles, we have only

the scalar potential φ and all tensorial expressions can be obtained from an

application of the 4-derivative operator ∂µ. Now we can analyze the Yukawa

interaction.

In the system of units used here the action

Ld3xdt is dimensionless.

Hence, all terms of the Lagrangian density L must have the dimension [L−4].

R

Now, the Lagrangian density of a KG particle has a term m2φ2 (see [8], p.

26). It follows that the dimension of a KG wave function φ is [L−1]. This

argument can be used in an examination of the 4-vector obtained from a

diﬀerentiation of the Yukawa potential (11). This is a radial force

fY ukawa = −g2(µr + 1)

e−µr
r2

(13)

which has the dimension [L−2]. (Note that in this expression µ denotes mass

and is not an index.)

Here we see that the 4-vector f µ

Y ukawa of (13) has the dimensions of force.

However, unlike the Lorentz force (4), f µ

Y ukawa is independent of the 4-velocity

11

of the particle upon which it is exerted. Hence, in spite of the fact that

the Yukawa force is derived from the relativistic KG equation (12), f µ

Y ukawa

violates requirement A presented at the end of Section 4. Therefore, it is

relativistically unacceptable.

This problem holds also for the general case of a scalar potential having

a dimension which is diﬀerent from [L−1]. Indeed, in order to have a 4-force

which is orthogonal to the 4-velocity, one requires a ﬁeld tensor which is

antisymmetric in 2 indices (like that of the electromagnetic ﬁelds). However,

such a tensor cannot be obtained from a scalar function because the curl of

a gradient vanishes.

6. General Aspects of the Problem

It is explained above how the pointlike nature of a relativistic elemen-

tary particle entails the requirement for a mediating ﬁeld associated with the

force and with the energy-momentum exchanged between interacting parti-

cles. A simple relativistic analysis ( 9) proves that the 4-force exerted on

an elementary particle must be orthogonal to its 4-velocity. Furthermore, a

pointlike particle may be regarded as an integral of density, provided appro-

priate Dirac δ-functions are used. Therefore, as explained in the introductory

Section, probability density is a 0-component of a 4-vector which is parallel

to the local 4-velocity. This is a very good reason for a derivation of the

4-force as a certain mathematical function of the mediating ﬁeld F and the

particle’s 4-velocity.

Another issue is the connection between the mediating ﬁeld F and a

well deﬁned energy-momentum tensor T µν. In the vacuum (namely, in the

12

entire space, except the points where particles are located) this tensor can

depend only on F and it must satisfy T µν

,ν = 0 (see B at the end of Section 4).

Requirement B is a very stringent mathematical restriction on the form of the

mediating ﬁeld. As is well known (see [1], pp. 77-80, 270-273) the standard

method of constructing the energy-momentum tensor is by an application

of the Lagrangian density L. For this reason, let us examine L and ﬁnd

restrictions imposed by it.

In the system of units used here, the action

S =

Z

Ld3x dt

(14)

is dimensionless. Hence, the dimension of every term of L must be [L−4].

Moreover, since the action S is a Lorentz scalar, and so is the product d3x dt,

one ﬁnds that every term of L must be a Lorentz scalar.

Another issue is the dimension of the mediating ﬁeld F . A general phys-

ical argument states that F must vanish at inﬁnity. Hence, the dimension of

F must be [L−n], where n is a positive integer. Now the interaction term of

the Lagrangian density must be a Lorentz scalar obtained from a tensorial

contraction of the particle’s density (represented by the particle’s 4-current

jµ), whose dimension is [L−3], and another 4-vector, Aµ, associated with the

mediating ﬁeld F . In order to comply with the dimension of the Lagrangian

density [L−4], Aµ must have the dimension [L−1].

As is well known, electrodynamics satisﬁes all the requirements mentioned

above. The electromagnetic 4-potential Aµ has the dimension [L−1]; The

interaction term of the Lagrangian density is proportional to the Lorentz

scalar jµAµ; the electromagnetic ﬁeld is the antisymmetric tensor F µν which

is the 4-curl of Aµ; the Lorentz force (4) is orthogonal to the 4-velocity.

The Yukawa interaction does not satisfy all the requirements stated above.

Indeed, the Yukawa interaction term of the Lagrangian density is the follow-

13

ing Lorentz scalar (see [7], p. 79)

Lint = −gφ ¯ψψ.

(15)

This expression is very strange, because it relies not on the particle’s density

in the laboratory frame ψ†ψ but on its scalar density ¯ψψ. This is a deviation

from the quantum mechanical rule where expectation values are calculated by

means of the ordinary density ψ†ψ and ψ belongs to an orthonormal basis of

the Hilbert space. In particular, consider a moving Dirac particle. Here, due

to the Lorentz contraction, one ﬁnds that in the laboratory frame

¯ψψd3x <

R

1. This result is inconsistent with the orthonormality of wave functions

belonging to the basis of the Hilbert space. Therefore, it casts doubts on

the consistency of the Yukawa scalar interaction. Indeed, as explained at the

end of Section 5, a scalar potential cannot yield a relativistically acceptable

force.

Another issue is the problem of a non-linear force like

f µ
N L = Gµνλvνvλ

(16)

where Gµνλ is antisymmetric in µν. It can be shown that such a force is in-

consistent with the Lagrangian density approach where density of dynamical

quantities is used. Thus, one replaces the 4-velocities of (16) with 4-currents

and ﬁnds that the dimension of the product jνjλ is [L−6]. Now, the dimen-

sion of force is [L−2] and that of force density is [L−5]. It follows that the

dimension of Gµνλ is [L]. Therefore, Gµνλ does not vanish at inﬁnity. This

property proves that this Gµνλ is unphysical. The situation is worse for a G

whose tensorial rank is higher than 3.

The discussion carried out in this work relies on SR. Thus, the Lorentz

metric is uniform and it may be regarded as an inert background. Hence, if

the space-like 4-acceleration aµ = dvµ/dτ does not vanish in a certain frame

14

then it cannot vanish in any frame. This property certainly does not hold for

a gravitational ﬁeld. In this case, the metric acquires dynamical properties

and the equation of motion is (see [1] p. 245)

dvµ
dτ

+ Γµ

αβvαvβ = 0.

(17)

As is well known, the Christoﬀel symbol Γµ

αβ vanishes in frames satisfying cer-

tain conditions (see [1], p. 239). It follows that in these frames gravitational

acceleration vanishes and particles move inertially (like astronauts inside a

spaceship). Hence, the case of a gravitational ﬁeld is certainly outside the

framework of the discussion carried out above.

It is proved above that if one adopts the requirement that the theory

can be derived from a Lagrangian density then the only self-consistent fun-

damental force takes the form of the Lorentz force. Thus, if another kind

of force exists within the framework of SR then it cannot be derived from

a Lagrangian density. However, such a force should satisfy the three very

stringent requirements stated at the end of Section 4. As reported recently

(see [5], pp. 297-300), eﬀorts to ﬁnd such a force ended in vain.

15

References:

amon, Oxford, 1975).

on Physics Vol. II.

1985).

[1] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Perg-

[2] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures

[3] E. M. Purcell, Electricity and Magnetism, (Mc-Graw-Hill, New York,

[4] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley, New York, 1975).

[5] H. Goldstein, C. Poole and J. Safko Classical Mechanics (Addison-

Wesley, San Francisco, 2002).

Graw, New York, 1964).

[6] J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell Relativistic Quantum Mechanics (Mc-

[7] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder An Introduction to Quantum Field

Theory (Perseus, Cambridge, 1995).

[8] J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Fields (McGraw,

New York, 1965).

16

Figure Captions

Fig. 1:

A particle P moves from point A to point B along a curve C. ∆t is the

time duration of this motion. The circle denotes a spherical shell S (whose

scale diﬀers from that of C). The distance between any point on S and a

point on C is larger than c ∆t.

17

S

.

P

A .

C

.

B

