5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interation between inoherent light beams

propagating in exited atomi hydrogen;

appliations in astrophysis.

Jaques Moret-Bailly

∗

20th February 2014

Abstrat

While it is generally assumed that several light beams propagate in-

dependently in a refrating medium, the exeption of laser beams may be

extended to usual time-inoherent light provided that onditions of spae-

oherene are ful(cid:28)lled. Very few moleules have onvenient properties, the

simplest one being atomi hydrogen in 2S and 2P states (alled H* here).

The interation inreases the entropy of a set of beams without a per-

manent exitation of H*, a loss of energy by a beam having a high Plank's

temperature produing a derease of its frequeny, and the thermal radi-

ation getting energy.

Atomi hydrogen in its ground state is pumped to H* by Lyman α

absorptions, produing a redshift of the light. The ombination of the

Lyman absorptions and the redshifts they produe, indue osillations

whih generate a spetrum in whih the lines dedue from eah other by

relative frequeny shifts whih are produts of an integer by a onstant

zb = 0.062.

These purely physial results may be applied in astrophysis, searhing

where H* may appear. In partiular, the omputed spetra of the aret-

ing neutron stars, remarkably idential to the spetra of the quasars, may

explain that these stars seem never observed. The too high frequenies of

the radio signals from the Pioneer probes may result from a transfer of

energy from the solar light allowed by a ooling of the solar wind able to

produe H*. A similar transfer to the CMB may explain its anisotropy

bound to the elipti.

PACS: 42.50.Md: Optial transient phenomena; 32.90 +a: Interation of

atoms with photons; 52.40.Db: Eletromagneti interations in plasma; 98.62.Ra:

quasar spetra.

∗

Laboratoire de physique, Université de Bourgogne, BP 47870, F-21078 Dijon edex,

Frane. email : Jaques.Moret-Baillyu-bourgogne.fr

1

1 Introdution

This is a paper of spetrosopy, not of astrophysis. However, it uses astrophys-

ial ob jets, observations, or theories as starting points for appliations; but the

ob jets are modeled very simply and only very reliable theories are used.

Although the (cid:28)rst extensively studied light-matter interation, the refra-

tion is a parametri (i. e. oherent ) e(cid:27)et, attention is generally more paid

to interations of light with individual moleules. The oherent interation of a

beam of light with a set of moleules, that is an interation suh as the mole-

ular phases (phase of an interating dipole, for instane) are related identially

for all moleules with the loal phase(s) of the implied wave(s), is muh more

powerful than an inoherent interation beause the radiated (cid:28)elds rather than

the intensities are added; thus, the intensity is multiplied by the square root of

the number of moleules, generally very large. Therefore, interations whih are

weak at the level of a single moleule may beome strong.

Using lasers or mirowaves, a lot of parametri interations are studied : re-

fration evidently, photon ehoes, phase onjugate re(cid:29)etions, parametri down

onversion, frequeny shifts in optial (cid:28)bres..., the laser itself. But, if several

waves are involved, these studies remain topis of speialists beause the preser-

vation of the spae-oherene in despite of the dispersions requires generally

sophistiated equipments.

In some parametri interations, the state of the

matter may be permanently hanged. Here, we do not onsider the interations

suh as the Mössbauer e(cid:27)et after whih the matter does not reover its initial

state.

oherent.

When a system is perturbed by an eletromagneti wave, its initial stationary

state mixes with other states, beoming a non-stationary (cid:17)state of polarisation(cid:17).

Supposing that the system reovers its initial state after a pulse of light, that

is that it is perfetly transparent, the light reovers the energy needed for the

polarisation, possibly with some di(cid:27)ration or hange of momentum. It is the

refration, an e(cid:27)et whih is strong although non-resonant beause it is always

In the semilassial theory of the refration by a transparent medium, a

refrating moleule exited in a permanent state of polarisation, emits a wave

late of π/2; thus, an input beam A sin ωt left nearly unhanged while it rosses
a sheet of matter of thikness dx, produes, in this sheet, a dynamial polar-
isation whih radiates oherently Akdx cos ωt; the interferene of these lights
gives A sin(ωt − kdx) whose identi(cid:28)ation with A sin(ωt − 2πndx/λ) de(cid:28)nes the
index of refration n. The refration may be onsidered as the result of the in-

terferene of the input beam with the beam resulting from virtual two photons

interations with the levels mixed with the initial state.

No blur appears in the refration beause the loal phases on the wave

surfaes of the exiting wave are related identially to the loal phases of the

emitted waves. The parametri exhanges of energy needed by the variations of

polarisations are not quanti(cid:28)ed, the matter working in transient, non stationary

states; for instane a beam of the lowest imaginable intensity is refrated by a

2

prism, induing a transient dynamial polarisation of all moleules of this prism,

polarisation whih requires a transient, non-quanti(cid:28)ed hange of the energy of

the individual moleules. The global state of a set of N refrating moleules,
supposed initially in the same non-degenerate state is initially degenerate N

times; the polarisation breaks this degeneray, produing the global state of

polarisation whih emits the wave late of π/2, state haraterisable by the mode

of the exiting light.

The hypothesis of transpareny does not forbid an exhange of energy be-

tween several simultaneous polarisation states of the moleules, therefore be-

tween global states of polarisation. The states of moleular polarisation have

the same parity, so that they an only interat through a Raman type resonane

of frequeny νR for instane quadrupolar eletri. Considering that a refration

results from a virtual two photons interation, these exhanges of energy result

from four photons virtual interations, or a set of two simultaneous, virtual Ra-

man transitions (to and from the state whih produes the resonane), whose

radiations interfere with the inident beams. Using this last model, an elemen-

tary omputation shows that the hanges of energy produe relative hanges of

frequeny ∆ν/ν proportional to νR and whih do not depend on the frequeny

if the dispersion of the optial onstants is negleted [1℄.

If the oherene is

maintained and the Raman resonane strong, the e(cid:27)et is strong.

Various onditions allow to obtain oherent interations, for instane : i) the

sum of the wave vetors of the beams is null or ompensated by a global reoil

of the medium; ii) in a rystal, the wavelengths of rays of di(cid:27)erent frequenies

may be equal using ordinary and extroardinary propagations; iii) the light is

made of ultrashort pulses . . . . The ultrashort pulses are de(cid:28)ned by G. L. Lamb

(cid:16)shorter than all relevant time onstants(cid:17) [2℄; remark that this de(cid:28)nition does

not involve only the pulses of light, but the medium in whih they propagate

too.

Lamb's ondition is ful(cid:28)lled in the optial (cid:28)bres used for very high speed

teleommuniations, so that not quanti(cid:28)ed frequeny shifts of the light must be

ompensated. Although the e(cid:27)et works at any intensity, it is easily observed,

thus generally studied, using peak powerful femtoseond lasers, so that the index

of refration, therefore the relative frequeny shift depend on the intensity; this

e(cid:27)et is named (cid:16)impulsive stimulated Raman sattering(cid:17)(ISRS) [3℄. It produes

transfers of energy (therefore frequeny shifts) from the beams whose tempera-

ture dedued from Plank's law is high, to older beams, often in the thermal

range. These experiments show learly that the usual assumption that the light

beams propagating in matter do not interat, as in the vauum, is wrong.

This assumption is founded on the observation of the propagation of usual

light beams whose interation named (cid:16)Coherent Raman e(cid:27)et on inoherent

light(cid:17) (CREIL

) requires a long path in unusual gases:

1

1

The aronyms ISRS and CREIL are historial, but not very onvenient beause these

e(cid:27)ets are far from an ordinary Raman e(cid:27)et: the Raman referene orresponds only to the

type of virtual transition whih allows a resonane.

3

The usual inoherent light may be onsidered as made of ultrashort pulses

whose length is the oherene time; the CREIL appears if the (cid:16)relevant time

onstants(cid:17) are long enough [4, 5℄. An order of magnitude of this oherene

time in ordinary light is some nanoseonds, orresponding to some hundreds

of megahertz. If Lamb's onditions are ful(cid:28)lled, energy is transferred between

beams of ordinary light

In gases, a (cid:28)rst relevant time onstant is the ollisional time whih orre-

sponds evidently to a deoherene. The kineti theory gives formula allowing a

omputation of the ollisional time, although these formula ontain a (cid:16)ollisional

setion(cid:17) σ whose de(cid:28)nition depends on the e(cid:27)et whih is studied beause there

is no sharp distane limit for the interation between two moleules.

Very roughly, the ollisional time onstant is long enough at pressures of the

order of 100 Pa.

The wave emitted by a polarisation state perturbed by a Raman interation

may be split into the usual wave late of π/2 whih produes the refration,

and a Raman frequeny-shifted wave initially in phase with the exiting wave;

the frequeny shift introdues beats with the exiting wave, whih destroy the

oherene of this part of the wave unless the light pulse is shorter enough than

the Raman period; this period is a relevant time onstant of Lamb's onditions.

Je joins Unhappily, most moleular periods in moleules are muh shorter than

some nanoseonds, or appear in exited states whose population is low. Atomi

hydrogen in its states of prinipal quantum number n = 2 and the seletion rule
∆F = 1 has frequenies lose to 100 Mhz, not too large to forbid the oherene

and high enough to give a large CREIL e(cid:27)et ; this exited hydrogen will be

named here H*.

Many astrophysiists tried to introdue (cid:16)intrinsi redshifts(cid:17) in astrophysis,

but they onsidered interations of a light beam with a single moleule, so that

the transfers of energy were quanti(cid:28)ed, leading to a destrution of the oherene

of the beams, and a blur of the spetra.

The CREIL e(cid:27)et in H* introdues an unusual behaviour of the propagation

of light in atomi hydrogen, so that the topi of the paper splits into a purely

physial study of the propagation of light in hydrogen (setion 2), and into

answering the question : Where an it be some H* in the Universe ? (setion

3).

Setion 2 is pure physis while some notations are borrowed from astro-

physis; it is a big improvement of a former paper [6℄ showing how the ombina-

tion of Lyman alpha absorptions by unexited atomi hydrogen, and the CREIL

produed by the atoms exited by this absorption, may lead to instabilities and

the generation of a sort of spetrum. This setion is split into subsetions orre-

sponding to various marosopi states of the hydrogen and to various exiting

beams. In partiular, subsetion 2.3.3 shows that the spetrum of a small, heavy,

very hot ob jet embedded in hydrogen is extremely ompliated.

Setion 3 suggests simple explanations of many astronomial observations,

only looking for the presene of H* able to (cid:16)atalyse(cid:17) transfers of energy whih

generally redshift the light and heat the thermal radiation.

4

2 Absorption of a ontinuous, high frequeny spe-

trum by atomi hydrogen.

Over a temperature T = 10000K , les moleules of hydrogen are dissoiated.
The ionisation energy equals kT for a temperature T = 156000K ; as the en-
ergy needed for a pumping to the states of prinipal quantum number n = 2
(H* states) is the three fourth of the ionisation energy, it equals kT for T =
117000K . Using Boltzman law, these temperatures may be onsidered as indi-

ating roughly where these partiular states of hydrogen are abundant, remark-

ing however that by a thermal exitation, the proportion of hydrogen in the

H* states is muh limited by the exitation to higher values of n, and by the

ionisation at low pressures.

In its ground state (prinipal quantum number n = 1) atomi hydrogen has

the well known spin reoupling resonane at 1420 MHz, too large to provide

oherent frequeny shifts by CREIL. In the n = 2 states, the resonanes or-
responding to the eletri quadrupole allowed transitions (∆F = 1) have the

following frequenies: 178 MHz in the 2S1/2 state, 59 MHz in 2P1/2 state, and 24

MHz in 2P3/2 .The resonanes in the more exited states may play a seondary

rle, beause the CREIL shifts are proportional to their frequenies whih are

low.

The olumn density of hydrogen (in all states) needed to obtain a given

redshift (for instane a redshift equal to the Lyα linewidth) depends on the

physial parameters of hydrogen, mainly on the temperature :

2.1 Very hot hydrogen (T>200 000K).

At very high temperatures, hydrogen is mainly ionised, without a spetrum,

or exited to states of large prinipal quantum number, pratially not ative

in CREIL. Therefore, there is no frequeny shift.

If the gas ontains impu-

rities, they radiate emission lines of ionised states whih are as sharp as the

temperature and the pressure allow.

As free protons and eletrons do not absorb light, the temperature an be

maintained by ondution, onvetion or eletroni heating only.

In a quiet

system, suh temperatures are reahed only in thin sheets lose to the surfae

of a very hot ob jet.

2.2 Exited atomi hydrogen (T

100 000 K).

≈

Hydrogen is atomi, so that it may be heated to this temperature by absorption

of radiating energy. Remark that an exessive heating ionises the gas, reduing

the absorption, so that the temperature is relatively stabilised. An important

fration of the atoms is in the H* states, so that, if the pressure is not too high,

the gas redshifts the light. The simultaneous shift and emission or absorption

of lines gives to the lines (written in the spetrum) the width of the shift, so

that the absorption is generally low and the lines may be mixed: they annot

be observed.

5

Figure 1: Permanent absorption by a single line uniformly redshifted of ∆ν

in atomi hydrogen. For the Lyman alpha line, the pumping proportional to

W = ∆I∆ν provides the population of H* needed to produe the redshift ∆ν ,

supposing an uniform de-exitation of the exited state.

2.3 Atomi hydrogen in its ground state (T

20 000 K).

≈

The thermal exitation of atomi hydrogen being supposed low, a Lyα pumping

is needed to get H* and a redshift.

2.3.1 Constant, high UV intensity.

Supposing that the UV intensity is large and onstant, a partial, onstant ab-

sorption ∆I of the intensity at the Lyman α frequeny generates H* by a total
exitation proportional to W , produing a redshift ∆ν ((cid:28)g 1). The initial in-

tensity does not matter, but as the instantaneous intensity of the absorption is

proportional to the instantaneous intensity of the light, obtaining the required

absorption ∆I requires a long path if the initial intensity is not muh larger
than ∆I . Along this long path, a notable amount of H* may be produed by a

deay of more exited states, or by the thermal exitation; the CREIL produed

by more exited states may play a small role too.

The onstant absorption inreases the ontrast of a spetrum while the sale

of frequenies is hanged by the redshift ((cid:28)g. 2).

A stabilisation of the temperature stronger than in 2.2 ours beause the

redshift whih inreases the energy available for the Lyα absorption is redued

up by high thermal exitations and a start of ionisation, down by a dimerisation

of the atoms.

2.3.2 Low UV intensity.

If the UV intensity is lower than ∆I , a very long path is neessary both to

absorb the available intensity, and to get from the the seondary soures of

6

Figure 2: Absorption of a spetrum and redshift. The (cid:28)nal spetrum (low)

results from the subtration of a onstant intensity whih inreases the on-

trast of the spetrum, and, assuming a onstant ∆ν/ν , a hange of the sale of

frequenies.

intensity.

redshift desribed in 2.3.1 a redshift su(cid:30)ient to leave the region of low UV

2.3.3 Variable UV intensity.

Suppose that the intensity is generally high, but that a high frequeny absorp-

tion line was written into the spetrum where it was no redshift. The spetrum

is redshifted as indiated in 2.3.1 until the absorbed line gets the the Lyman α

frequeny so that the shift slows down strongly as indiated in 2.3.2. During the

quasi-stop of redshift, absorptions and emissions of the lines of the gas our

at (cid:28)xed frequenies of the light, these lines are well written into the spetrum

((cid:28)g 3). The Lyβ and Lyγ are the strongest lines, their frequenies in the light-

spetrum may be shifted to the Lyα frequeny, produing new absorbed lines,

a multipliation of the absorbed lines.

Remark that this proess works for a previously written emission line beause

it produes an aeleration of the redshift, therefore dereases of the absorptions

similar to emissions.

The lines observed in the spetrum are more easily haraterised by a relative

frequeny shift z from their initial frequeny, than from their (cid:28)nal frequenies.

Thus, the Lyβ (resp.Lyγ ) line, redshifted to the Lyα has the redshift:

z(βresp.γ,α) =

− να

≈ 1 − 1/(32resp.42) − (1 − 1/22)
1 − 1/22

ν(β,resp.γ)
να
≈ 5/27 ≈ 0.1852 ≈ 3 ∗ 0.0617;
z(β,α)
z(γ,α) = 1/4 = 0.025 = 4 ∗ 0.0625.

7

Figure 3: Multipliation of the Lyman spetral lines. The top graph shows

a ontinuous spetrum after an absorption of Lyman lines, and an other line

absorbed previously without redshift. During the redshift (low graph) , the

hahured regions are absorbed, but the intensity ∆I annot be absorbed when

the previously written line omes on the Lyα line, so that the redshift nearly

stops and all lines are visibly absorbed.

8

If speial onditions allow the β line play the same rle than the α:

z(γ,β)

≈ 7/108 ≈ 0.065.

Notie that the resulting redshifts appear, within a good approximation, as the

produts of zb = 0.062 and an integer q . The intensities of the Lyman lines
are dereasing funtions of the (cid:28)nal prinipal quantum number n, so that the
insription of a pattern is better for q = 3 than for q = 4 and a fortiori for
q = 1.

Iterating, the oinidenes of the shifted line frequenies with the Lyman β
or α frequenies build a (cid:16)tree(cid:17), (cid:28)nal values of q being sums of the basi values

4, 3 and 1. Eah step being haraterised by the value of q, a generation of

suessive lines is haraterised by suessive values of q : q1, q2... As the (cid:28)nal

redshift is

qF ∗ zb = (q1 + q2 + ...) ∗ zb,

the addition qF = q1 + q2 + ... is both a symboli representation of the suessive

elementary proesses, and the result of these proesses. The metaphor (cid:16)tree(cid:17),

is impreise beause (cid:16)branhes(cid:17) of the tree may be (cid:16)staked(cid:17) by oinidenes

of frequenies. A remarkable oinidene happens for q = 10, this number is

obtained by the e(cid:27)etive oinidenes dedued from an overlapping sequene of

Lyman lines orresponding to the symboli additions:

10 = 3 + 3 + 4 = 3 + 4 + 3 = 4 + 3 + 3 = 3 + 3 + 3 + 1 = ...

q = 10 is so remarkable that zf = 10zb = 0.62 may appear a value of z more
fundamental than zb .

In these omputations, the levels for a value of the prinipal quantum number

n greater than 4 are negleted, for the simple reason that the orresponding

transitions are too weak.

The gas aquires a struture, depending whether the light whih rosses it

is in a redshift phase, or in a visible line absorption phase.

2.3.4 Mean absorption.

For low densities, the ollisions are negligible during a pulse of light, so that the

CREIL depends only on the olumn density of H*. For higher densities, leading

to ollisional times of the order of the oherene time of the light, for a given

olumn density of H* the CREIL dereases fast as the pressure inreases.

In thermally unexited atomi hydrogen, H* is produed mainly by the Ly-

man α absorption, and destroyed during ollisions, the purely spontaneous de-

exitation needing a very long time. Thus, for a given olumn density, if the

density dereases, the Lyman absorption is invariant while the CREIL inreases.

Consequently, the ratio of the absorptions to the frequeny shifts in the proess

of subsetion 2.3.3 dereases. Thus, the mean remaining intensity inreases.

If the gas ools enough for a dimerisation, the frequenies higher than the

Lyman α are absorbed, so that the side e(cid:27)ets whih allow to leave an absorption

9

phase tend to disappear: there is a large probability to stop the generation of

the Lyman forest during an absorption, so that the redshifts are produts of zb

by an integer.

3 Possible appliations in astrophysis.

The CREIL produes frequeny shifts, heatings of the thermal radiation where

there is some H* : A good rule should be (cid:16)look for H*(cid:17).

Although its previous observation by several authors remains ritiised, it

seems very remarkable that the onstant zb = 0.062 has exatly the value found

in 2.3.3. The CREIL seems able to explain many other observations:

3.1 The areting neutron stars.

The theory of the stars is onsidered as reliable. However, this theory predits

that aretors, neutron stars areting a loud of dirty hydrogen, should be easily

observed [7, 8℄: although they are small (20 km diameter), they are extremely

hot (T> 1 MK), and the size of the loud produed by the explosion of the

generating old and heavy star allows a long life. Preising the spetrum of suh

a star, we will (cid:28)nd properties of quasar observed spetra, therefore give the

orresponding referenes.

The omputation of the gravity shows that, in the hypothesis of a stati

surrounding atmosphere, the thikness of this atmosphere would be between 1

and 10 millimetres. This omputation is not reliable beause the atmosphere

is very dynamial, the gas falling to the surfae of the star probably diretly,

maybe after turns around the star. As the CREIL is not sensitive to the speed

of the moleules that it uses as a atalyst, we make only the hypothesis of an

atmosphere whose density and temperature derease with the distane to the

surfae, without large spatial (cid:29)utuations.

The redshifts produed by H* derease with the olumn density of this gas

between the soure of and the Earth, that is they derease as the distane from

the soure to the surfae inreases.

- The surfae of the star works as the antiathode of an X rays tube, although

the partiles whih hit it, mainly protons and eletrons, have been aelerated

by the gravity whih is very large beause the remaining mass of the small star

is of the order of the mass of the Sun. Thus the surfae emits eletromagneti

waves up to gamma rays. The emissivity of the surfae is not good, so that

the temperature of the emitted light is muh lower than the temperature of the

surfae, and than the temperature of the lose surrounding gas.

- The very lose surrounding gas is extremely hot, strongly ionised, hotter

than the radiation from the surfae, so that it emits, with the maximum redshift,

sharp spetral lines of the impurities, as indiated in 2.1.

- At a larger distane, the gas ools, exited atomi hydrogen appears, whih

shifts the emissions, the lines disappear, as indiated in 2.2, Therefore, there

10

is a gap of redshifts between the sharp lines and the following ones. This is

observed in quasar spetra.

lines desribed in 2.3.3 appear.

- Then the thermal generation of H* almost disappears, and the periodi

At pressures of the order of 100 Pa, it remains ollisions whih widen the

lines and lower the redshift; thus the lines of hydrogen and the impurities are

broad, very strong, saturated. Saturation means that the light reahes, for the

frequenies lose to the entre of the lines, the equilibrium with the temperature

of the gas, a onstant intensity. These broad lines may be emission lines (having

a hat shape), or, at a higher altitude, where the temperature of the gas is lower,

absorption lines (having shape of a trough). However, these pressures favour

the aeleration of free eletrons by radiowaves, and their ollisions with atoms

whih are ionised:

if the star is radio-loud, H* disappears; for a transition, a

single broad line is emitted, then absorbed with a nearly onstant redshift.

With a derease of the pressure, it remains only sharper and sharper Ly-

man lines of hydrogen making a Lyman forest; the mean intensity of the forest

inreases until the intensity at the Lyman α frequeny falls, for instane by

an absorption at short wavelengths resulting of a ooling whih dimerises the

atoms. It is the Gunn-Peterson e(cid:27)et [9℄.

We obtain a spetrum very similar to the spetrum of a quasar; some are-

tors are probably seen, but named quasars. Remark that the identi(cid:28)ation of

quasars with neutron stars is often done for the miro-quasars. The fast speed

of the miro-quasars generated in our galaxy ould explain their evolution into

quasars whose repartition is more isotropi. [11℄

Some problems whih appear in the standard interpretation of the spetrum

of a quasar are solved :

* As the loud was generated by an old star, it may ontain abundant heavy

elements;

* Supposing that the relative frequeny shifts ∆ν/ν are stritly onstant,

the (cid:28)ne struture patterns appear slightly distorted [10℄; the dispersion of the

optial onstants in the CREIL shows that the hypothesis is not strit, so that

it is not neessary to suppose that the (cid:28)ne struture onstant is a funtion of

the time;

* There is a gap in the redshifts after the sharp emission lines [12, 13℄;

* The broad lines whih have the shape of troughs do no exist if there is a

strong radio emission [14, 15℄;

* The observed periodiities [16, 17, 18, 19, 20℄ are simply produed by the

propagation of the light in atomi hydrogen.

A large part of the redshift is intrinsi, as found by Halton Arp [21℄. Being

not extraordinarily far, the quasars are not huge and powerful ob jets [22℄.

3.2 Proximity e(cid:27)ets.

* A statistial over abundane of very red ob jets (VROs) is observed in lose

proximity to quasars (Hall et al. [23℄, Wold et al. [24℄); in partiular, the galaxies

11

whih ontain quasars are often severely reddened, and redshifted relative to

other galaxies having similar morphologies (Boller [25℄). The quasar produes a

CREIL redshift, providing far ultraviolet radiation and maybe hydrogen around

the VROs.

* The bright and muh redshifted ob jets seem surrounded by hot dust [26℄,

and it is di(cid:30)ult to explain the stability of this dust in despite of the pressure

of radiation and the abrasion by ions. The blueshift, that is the heating of the

thermal radiation by the CREIL, as a ounterpart of the redshifts in the optial

range, is a simple interpretation of the observations.

3.3 Kotov e(cid:27)et.

V. A. Kotov and V. M. Lyuty [27, 28℄ observed osillations of the luminosity

of stars and quasars with a period of 160,01 mn. While the light is redshifted,

this period is not. Using CREIL, it is lear that the light pulses are redshifted,

but that their starts are not sub jet to a frequeny shift [29℄. On the ontrary,

supposing a hange in the sale of time by an expansion of the universe, this re-

sult annot be explained. Therefore, thinking that the observations are reliable,

there is no expansion of the universe.

3.4 Frequeny shifts in the solar system.

Studying the variations of the frequeny shifts on the Solar disk allows to om-

pute the frations due to the Doppler e(cid:27)et and to the gravitation. It remains

a redshift proportional to the path of the light through the photosphere, imme-

diately explained by a generation of H* by Lyman pumping.

H* may be generated by a ombination of the protons and eletrons making

the Solar wind where the wind ools enough, at the limits of the solar system :

* Radio signals were sent from the Earth to Pioneer 10 and 11, at a well sta-

bilised arrier frequeny lose to 2.11 GHz, and the Pioneers returned a signal af-

ter a multipliation of the arrier frequeny by 240/221. The blueshift whih re-

mains after a standard elimination of the known frequeny shifts (Doppler, grav-

itation) is interpreted as produed by an (cid:16)anomalous aeleration(cid:17) (Anderson et

al. [30℄).

The CREIL allows to preserve elestial mehanis: The signal obtained dur-

ing a time onstant of a reeiver results from the amplitude of the eletri (cid:28)eld

in the mode of reeption of the reeiving antenna for this time onstant; this

amplitude results from a weak ampli(cid:28)ation of the noise (2.7K radiation) by the

emission antenna, so that this (cid:28)eld is partly inoherent and may be blue-shifted

by a CREIL transfer of energy from the light of the Sun.

* The anisotropy of the osmi mirowave bakground [31℄ seems bound to

the solar system. It may result from an anisotropy of the solar wind observed at

it soure, in the orona; when the CMB reahes the solar system its ampli(cid:28)ation

in an anisotropi density of H* may generate its anisotropy .

12

Experiments should be done to study H* in the solar system, in partiular

hanging the intensities and the oherenes of the radio signals.

4 Conlusion

The CREIL, introdued in previous papers is a parametri e(cid:27)et whih, in

exited atomi hydrogen H*, transfers energy from eletromagneti modes whose

Plank's temperature is high to older modes, a ooling produing a redshift.

Being oherent, the CREIL does not blur the images, and the relative frequeny

shifts ∆ν/ν are usually nearly onstant.

A (cid:28)rst quantitative result of the CREIL is the omputation of the fundamen-

tal period zb = 0.062 of the observed redshifts. Trying to explain observations

by the CREIL and by the standard theory, it appears that the CREIL may

explain more e(cid:27)ets ( frequeny shifts of the Pioneer probes, proximity e(cid:27)ets,

... ) and does not require extraordinary hypothesis (dark matter, ...).

The harsh struggle of some astrophysiists against any evaluation of the

CREIL in astrophysis may be a defene of familiar theories, but it seems more

a rejetion of all parametri e(cid:27)ets justi(cid:28)ed by the neessity to use, in theories

limited to semi-lassial models, Plank's quanti(cid:28)ation rather than Einstein's.

Referenes

[1℄ Moret-Bailly, J., 1998, Ann. Phys. Fr., 23, C1-235-C1-236

[2℄ Lamb G. L. Jr., 1971, Rev. Mod. Phys., 43, 99-124

[3℄ Yan Y.-X., E. B. Gamble Jr. & K. A. Nelson, 1985, J. Chem Phys., 83,

5391

[4℄ Moret-Bailly, J., 1998, Quant. & Semilas. Opt., 10, L35-L39

[5℄ Moret-Bailly, J., 2001, J. Quant. Spetr. & Rad. Transfer, 68, 575-582

[6℄ Moret-Bailly, J., 2003, IEEETPS, 31, 1215-1222

[7℄ Treves, A. & M. Colpi, 1991 Astron. Astrophys., 241, 107-111

[8℄ Popov, S. B., A. Treves & R. Turolla, 2003, astro-ph/0310416

[9℄ Gunn, J. E. & B. A. Peterson, 1965, ApJ, 142, 1633

[10℄ Webb J. K., V. V. Flambaum, C. W. Churhill, M. J. Drinkwater & J.

Barrow, 1999, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82,. 884-887

[11℄ Mirabel, I. F., I. Rodrigues & Q. Z. Liu, arxiv:astro-ph/0408562

[12℄ Rauh, M., W. L. W. Sargent, T. A. Barlow, 1999, ApJ, 515, 500-505

13

[13℄ Franis, P. J. & J. Bland-Hawthorn, arxiv:astro-ph/0405506

[14℄ Briggs, F. H., D. A. Turnshek & A. M. Wolfe, 1984, ApJ, 287, 549-554

[15℄ Anderson, S. A., R. J. Weymann, C. B. Foltz & F. H. Cha(cid:27)ee Jr., 1987,

AJ, 94, 278-288

[16℄ Burbidge, G., 1968, ApJ., 154, L41-L45

[17℄ Ti(cid:27)t, W. G., 1976, ApJ., 206, 38-56

[18℄ Burbidge, G. & A. Hewitt, 1990, ApJ., 359, L33-L36

[19℄ Bell, M. B., 2002, astro-ph/0208320

[20℄ Bell, M. B. & S. P. Comeau, 2003, astro-ph/0305060

[21℄ Arp H., 2003, astro-ph/0312198.

[22℄ Petitjean, P., R. Riediger & M. Rauh, 1996, A&A, 307, 417-423

[23℄ Hall P. B., M. Sawiki, P. Martini, R. A. Finn, C. P. Prithett, P. S. Osmer,

D. W. MCarthy, A. S. Evans, H. Lin & F. D. A.

[24℄ Wold M., L. Armus, G. Neugegauer, T. H. Jarrett & M. D. Lehnert, 2003,

astro-ph/0303090

[25℄ Boller Th., R. Keil , G. Hasinger, E. Costantini, R. Fujimoto, N. Anabuki,

I. Lehmann, L. Gallo, 2003, astro-ph/0307326

[26℄ Omont, A., R. G. MMahon, J. Bergeron, P.Cox, S. Guilloteau, E. Kreysa,

F. Pa jot, E. Peontal, P. Petitjean, P. M. Solomon & L. J. Storrie-

Lombardi, 1997 Early Universe with VLT. Pro. of the ESO workshop,

Garhing, Germany, 1-4 April 1996. (Springer-verlag), 357-360

[27℄ Kotov V.A. & V.M. Lyuty, 1990. CRAS., 310, Ser. II, 743

[28℄ Kotov V.A. 1997. ApJ., 488, 195.

[29℄ Lempel B. & J. Moret-Bailly, 2004, unpublished.

[30℄ Anderson, J. D., P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto & S. G.

Turyshev, 2002, ArXiv:gr-q/0104064

[31℄ Shwarz, D.

J., G. D. Starkman, D Huterer, C.

J. Copi,

Arxiv:astro-ph/0403353

14

