5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Creating chaos and the Life
Boris Chirikov

Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics
630090 Novosibirsk, Russia

Abstract

In this short report the ﬁrst attempt of a new approach to the still mys-
terious phenomenon of the life, and its peak, the human being, is presented
from the view point of the natural sciences, i.e. of the physics in the broad
sense of the word. This idea has come to my mind about 10 years ago when
doing a completely diﬀerent problem I suddenly have noticed to my surprise
(see [1], p.20) a wonderful relation between a very complicated human (phys-
ical) conception creation and the relatively simple mathematical theorem due
to Alekseev - Brudno (see for instance [2]) in an almost unknown for physi-
cists ﬁeld of the so-called symbolic dynamics and algorithmic chaos, which
one I have immediately christen the creating chaos.

Unfortunately, realizing very well an incredible complexity of all the life
and especially the present human being, homo sapiens, as well as my own
complete ignorance in this ﬁeld, I had to put aside any farther studies of my
”creating chaos” for indeﬁnite time.

However, to my surprise, it gradually turned out that not only me, a
curious physicist, beginner in this ﬁeld, but honourable psychologists as well
can neither understand, nor explain what is after all the principal distinction
between the human being and the ape (as a generalized representative of
the common highest primates) in spite it is really striking. This problem
is well known to experts, yet it is not only remains unsolved but, to the
contrary, is beclouding by somewhat misty hints on a possible wisdom of the
ape comparable with human talent (see, for example [3]) !

Here I had just wised up, that the time of my creating chaos has come.
Certainly, some conception of chaos, probability and statistical laws have
been known since long ago, as the random mutations of genes, for example.
Yet, that was not the chaos which could explain the laws of the life, so
diﬀerent from anything else (see for example [4,5]).

1

1. Creating chaos in classical dynamics. A relatively simple and
detailed physical description of the symbolic dynamics is presented in [1], in-
cluding the most interesting, in the problem under consideration, mechanism
of random symbolic trajectories, or the algorithmic chaos. For this problem
the most important peculiarity of the algorithmic chaos is in the statisti-
cal properties (ﬂuctuations) of individual trajectories of a single particular
system instead of averaging over an arbitrary ensemble in which the largest
and most important ﬂuctuations are hopelessly lost. To avoid this one can
make use instead of the ”true” continuous trajectories the so-called symbolic
trajectories which are presented by the projections of the former on a certain
discrete lattice in the system phase space, and moreover, in the particular,
also discrete, instants of time. A ﬁnite time step of the trajectory allows to
introduce a speciﬁc conception of the complexity of symbolic trajectory (after
Kolmogorov) which, under the certain conditions, serves as the ideal algo-
rithmic information (after Chaitin [6]), the main statistical characteristic of
the symbolic dynamics, at least for physicists.

Most interesting and surprising here is that under the certain conditions
the dynamics of such system becomes extremely chaotic in the sense of ab-
sence of any correlations in time. In other words, almost any individual sym-
bolic (discrete) trajectory of such a system becomes absolutely unpredictable,
i.e. it is impossible in principle to calculate almost any of its (discrete) val-
ues, even if all the previous as well as succeeding discrete values are known
exactly ! Such is the eﬀect of incommensurability of the dynamical scales for
the continuous trajectory and its discrete symbolic projection.

In a reduced form the symbolic dynamics is described by a rather simple

equation (see [1], Eq.(2.19)), which can be represented as

lim
|t|→∞

I(t)
|t|

= h = ΣΛ+

where Λ+ are the positive Lyapunov exponents, characterizing the local in-
stability of the limiting continuous trajectory and their sum h stands for
the metric Kolmogorov - Sinai entropy. The latter characterizes the most
important in the problem parameter, the complexity of a single symbolic
trajectory, or the density of algorithmic information about trajectory on the
time interval |t| > 0.

This is still some simpliﬁed mathematics. The physics appears in my
hypothesis [1], that the algorithmic information is just the qualitative char-

2

acteristic of creation. The latter is always present in one form or another for
any model parameters. However, a continuous unrestricted creation requires
extremely strong, exponential instability of the system:

h = ΣΛ+ > 0

On the contrary, any regular sorting out any parameters of the system, in-
cluding any external interactions is going to certainly suppress any creation
after all.

Moreover, for application of the mathematical method of symbolic dy-
namics in physics the complete absence of correlations in algorithmic infor-
mation is required, at least in the limit |t| → ∞.

This is just the end the discrete symbolic trajectories are used which, in
the chaotic regime h > 0, produce the complete indeterminism of individual
trajectories, i.e. rule out any systematic repetition of the algorithmic infor-
mation, which would be a contradiction with our intuition of unrestricted
creation.

In spite of unusual terminology for physicists, the physical meaning of
symbolic dynamics is actually very simple. This is just a speciﬁc observation
(measurement) of system motion by a human being, human itself or its special
device which results only human can use for its own purposes, particularly
for the science, discovered and developing by the human itself.

2. Creating chaos in quantum dynamics. Until now only classical
models have been mentioned for simplicity. However, by the ﬁrst look, the
biological systems seem to be essentially quantum ones. If so, is there any
physical meaning in the study of classical models ? As a hypothesis it is not
completely excluded since in both cases the main point remains the same,
the external with respect to a living system measurement by the macroscopic
observer, the human being. Importantly, that in this case it is not at all the
object to study. On the contrary, it plays a purely ancillary role, absolutely
necessary but still an ancillary one. Without direct continuous participation
of the human it would be impossible to develop any science, any natural
science (= physics, see beginning of this report), even though the human
itself does not directly appear. Otherwise, one can say that the human being
plays in science a double role:

(1) as a certain particular physical system, the extremely speciﬁc and
complicated ”mote” in our Universe, the mote of paramount importance for

3

us as human beings but not as physicists since this ”dust” does not at all
inﬂuence any physics of the World in spite of the so-called anthropic principle
in the physics itself (see for example [7]) which is essentially correct but rather
misleading in formulation, and

(2) as unavoidable ”construction” of the whole physics irrespectively of
the existence of human being itself, particularly before its appearance (!)
during the evolution of the life (see for example [1] and Section 3 below).

It is just this second ”hidden” role of the human being, particularly the
future human, which still brings some physicists to an ”evident” confusion,
especially in quantum mechanics (see for example a detailed discussion in
[8]). In any case, a serious question arises as to an ambiguous human con-
struction of science, that is well known in practice of the science creation
(see for example [9]). Moreover, if the creation itself turns out to be chaotic
indeed, the ”construction of science” becomes completely indeﬁnite ?? This
important question will be also considered in Section 3. So far, one can only
remark that in mathematical language there is no serious cause to expect any
considerable discrepancy between classical and quantum model which corre-
sponds to the same method of symbolic dynamics in both cases. Perhaps,
this is just the reason why physicists don’t like this mathematical inven-
tion, which may look for them ”suspicious”. The point is that until now the
characteristic quantum indeterminism, related just to the measurement, is
regarded as an exclusive peculiarity of the quantum mechanics only.

And suddenly, the unexpected discovery: a complete classical model of
quantum measurement ! The discovery has been made recently [10,11] by
famous soviet (american since the end of 80th, expelled from USSR [12])
physicist Yuri Orlov .During many years, in unbelievable soviet conditions
he was theoretically studying, in the frame of quantum mechanics, the physics
of human psychics, i.e. the physical processes, designating the behavior of
human both a single one as well as in a collective. One of the main problems
of his studies was the so-called human freedom of will, its mechanism and
ability. Already half a century ago Schr¨odinger was fantasizing about this
still unsolved mystery of the life in his remarkable book on the physics of a
living cell [5]. This is how he determined his curiosity to this problem in the
closing chapter of his book

On determinism and the freedom of will
”In reward for the work in presentation of the purely scientiﬁc side of
our problem...I beg now for permission me to express my own, inevitably

4

subjective view at the philosophical value of the question...I beg the reader
to give up, for a time...some particular opinions, and to consider an essential
point..., what could be the contribution of biologist, trying to prove in one
strike both the existence of god and immortality of psyche”.

Orlov’s problem was and remains an incomparably more complicated: to
prove within the physics, not a philosophical fantasy, a possibility of indeter-
minism and the freedom of will in human being and only the human being.
And he has got the interest not simply to a problem of the fundamental sci-
ence but also as an application to the politics (!): what is the freedom of will
?? the freedom of choice or ”the realized necessity” ? - a standard slogan of
the soviet philosophy, attributed to Lenin even though it has been used and
much earlier in the world philosophy but certainly not in such a categorical
form (”old wives’ tale on the freedom of will”).

Generally, it is very important to clearly separate the truth of science
(physics) which is ”ratiﬁed” by the experiment only and remains forever
from various ”surmises” of the so-called ”humanitarian sciences” (see next
Section), very diverse in content and strongly ﬂuctuating in time. True, all
these fantasies may turn out to be extremely useful prompts for the develop-
ment of physics, yet they never are deciding because of their undetermined
nature. A fresh example is the second, auxiliary, role of the human in sym-
bolic dynamics where the human being represents not the content of the
physical law but its symbolic construction only (a pun in symbolic dynam-
ics, see Section 1).

Curiously, a prompt here could be (?) the ﬁnal (critical) Kant philosophy
on the ”thing-in-itself”, unobservable by the human, that almost literally
corresponds to the present mathematics and physics of symbolic dynamics
under conditions of chaos and indeterminism (see for example [1], p.20).
Thus, philosopher Kant had got ahead of mathematician Hadamard by more
than 100 years and of contemporary physicists, in the best case for them,
by 200 years ! Remarkably, that even though Kant’s aim was some (any
?) justiﬁcation of demand on human for the moral (which one ? any ??),
he intuitively understood the necessity of ”freedom-of-will/indeterminism”
combination for the human moral responsibility.

On the other hand, Orlov was the ﬁrst who really has proved, in the frame
of present physics, the principal possibility of such a combination [10,11].
Strikingly, he did this fully independently of the well known mathematical
method of symbolic dynamics ! Naturally, he was using a rather diﬀerent

5

terminology, including, particularly, and some strange expressions like, for
example ”indeterminism without chaos” [11]. Only after fairly prolonged
discussions during the Novosibirsk conference [11] we both (I believe !) have
managed to understand the very important correspondence between Orlov’s
physical theory and the mathematical method of symbolic dynamics .

Mathematically, both models are equivalent, that justiﬁes using the clas-
sical model of symbolic dynamics, at least at the initial stage of studying the
creating chaos of the life. Such a mechanism, classical and quantum, is really
possible. However, is the homo sapiens and its brain actually constructed
like this, still remains to be understood.

To avoid confusions one should note that strange at the ﬁrst glance equiv-
alence of classical and quantum models of the system in question is explained
by a peculiar representation of both models which dynamics is not a ”true”
one but only their macroscopic observation (measurement). In the classical
model (classical limit of quantum mechanics) the full dynamics of a contin-
uous trajectory can be introduced independent of the measurement normal-
ization, i.e. as invariant with respect to the observer. However, in quantum
mechanics this question still reminds open in my opinion. In any event, the
noninvariant measurement is certainly related to a very speciﬁc noncoherent
state of the quantum system during measurement.

A living system open to unrestricted interaction with external sources
could never be transformed into a coherent state of a partly alive ”Schr¨odinger
cat” !
3.

Invariance of the Laws of Physics ? Would it be possible to
develop the invariant Law of Physics in spite of arbitrary actions of the
human being as an auxiliary element of the science construction (see Section
1) ? In a due time, quite a long ago, this question was put and resolved by
Einstein already. Today, his philosophy (logic) of Science could be presented
something like this: ”The human Science is its model of the real World”.

This Einstein’s credo, rather well known in science, is the best resolution,
in my opinion, of the closed circle of the ”mutual aﬀect” between a negli-
gible ”mote” in the Universe, a human being, and its Science which Laws
control the whole Universe including the human itself. In other words, such
a philosophy naturally separates the natural sciences in noninvariant human
model and invariant, with respect to the model, the Law of the World. Thus
I myself, as well as many others, do include in the conception of Science
the Physics only (in the broad sense of the word) which contains all the

6

other Natural Sciences like chemistry and biology but not humanitarian ones
(”unnatural sciences” in a witty remark by S.P. Kapitsa), such as philosophy,
philology, economy, sociology, literature, history, jus, informatics, diplomacy,
politics, in short, all that directly or indirectly depend on the so-called hu-
man freedom of will (see Section 5) and, hence, cannot be invariant with
respect to human models. In other words, ”Supreme verdict of Experiment”
is completely irrelevant to humanitarian ”knowledge”. Instead, the human
can only classify it or as its own ”conditional agreement”, for example, philol-
ogy and even informatics (?), or as emotional favor (”culture”), or, at last, as
”persistent” attempts to guess the ”genuine” interests and wishes of the hu-
mankind, which moreover are always changing. Curiously, such a separation
of some humanitarian disciplinaries has entered even certain languages, the
English, for example (see any Webster’s), yet not the Russian, in any case
not the soviet Russian ! Notice a clear sign of the conditional character of
humanitarian ”laws” or, at least, of a totally special form for some of them.
Particularly, a ”fresh” defence of quantum idealism [13], as a part of philoso-
phy, has nothing to do with any deﬁnite science (quantum physics). Notice,
that one should not to confuse it with the general human construction of sci-
ence as discussed above. This is well known, of course (Section 2), but right
now there is a fresh argument also: the equivalence of observed (measured)
classical and quantum indeterminism (chaos) as discovered by Orlov [10,11]
(Sections 2 and 6).

Coming back to the problem of invariance of Physics, one should also
keep in mind the importance to become free from seeming inﬂuence of the
human on the whole Universe. This still leads to, a hidden though, revival
of ancient mystics while it could be simply an artefact of the structure of
human science (see [7] and Section 2). Unfortunately, such Einstein’s logic
still has not yet received any development because of a formal contradiction
with ”basic” philosophy of the quantum mechanics which ”forbids” using
nonobservable variables in physics.
It is not excluded that now, after the
Orlov discovery, the relation of physicists to the Einstein logic would also
change. In any case, there seem to be here no serious contradictions so far.
4. Evolution of Life prior to the human but according to its
Science ! On this initial stage of the life development the creating chaos
remains the external one with respect to biological objects. Generally, it is
simply heat ﬂuctuations which produce some random changes, particularly
making the molecules of environment more complicated. The critical point of

7

the birth of life may be accepted as the appearance of the so-called Darwin’s
triad (see for example [5]): heritage (providing a long stability of life), vari-
ability (providing a slow evolution of life), and selection (natural, providing
a fast removing of noncompatible competing species).

In the frame of my hypothesis for the physics of life, the evolution of life
seems to be the most interesting as it looks so surprising comparable to other
known physical processes that it still is considered by someone as incredible
mystics. Roughly, there exist, at least, two essentially diﬀerent processes
of the life evolution. One of them, more simple and well studied, could be
termed a local evolution. It is the evolution, which responds to restricted
variations of the life in a regular way. In this case the variability of Darwin’s
triad simply means a suﬃciently quick many-variant adaptation to the new
conditions (see for example [14]).

Another evolution, practically unstudied yet at all, which goes on simul-
taneously, is much more interesting. Generally, this global evolution does not
depend on the life conditions but it is just the evolution which determines
the contemporary ”miracle” of the life with extremely complicated structure
up to homo sapiens itself.

A detailed historical review of both evolution regimes, Darwin’s selec-
tionism and neocatastrophism with sudden births of species, is presented in
[15], including the many-year ”opposition” of these two scientiﬁc directions,
which is still not yet resolved. Nevertheless, the author [15] discerns a per-
spective of a new synthesis of both directions using most recent and most
various achievements of the natural sciences, all well known but one which
is still completely missed. This is the creating chaos, based on also widely
ignorant symbolic dynamics beside some mathematicians.

Meanwhile, the creating chaos (indeterminism) is just the process which
allows a natural explanation of sudden births of unrestricted species produced
by an external symbolic chaos (Sections 1 and 2). If it is really in agreement
with enormous empirical data collected during the epoch of ”opposition”,
this could be considered as the ﬁrst conformation of the creating-chaos hy-
pothesis, which is not only possible in physics but also does work, as a matter
of fact, in the Life, at least prior to the human. Essentially, that conclusion
cardinally depends on the existence of classical model for the quantum mea-
surement discovered by Orlov (Section 2). Very important by itself, this
discovery allows for a direct relation of a seemingly pure quantum indeter-
ministic measurement with the classical conception of creation which, in my

8

opinion, plays the central role in the whole problem of the Life.

Interestingly, the cardinal role of discrete quantum spectrum in biology,
producing ”leap-shape” mutations [5], is essentially the same as a symbolic
discrete trajectory of the classical model, i.e.
in both cases the observable
part of dynamics only. Actually, what is really important is not the discrete
spectrum in quantum model or a discrete classical symbolic trajectory but
the possibility of unrestricted creating Nature and, hence, the evolution of
Life. A quantitative estimate of the evolution parameters is determined by
simple classical equations in Section 1.

5. Human kingdom under chaos control ? Now, let’s turn to
the top of the Nature creation, the human being, contemporary human,
homo sapiens, who is cardinally diﬀerent from any other biological object,
including the most close to the human the highest primates, for example
the ape. Nowadays, one doesn’t need to be an expert for clear seeing the
human ”might” uncomparable with anything else. What is the origin of such
a ”might” and where it is going to bring us in a near future ? This is one of
the most fundamental problem of biology or, more precisely, of contemporary
psychology. This problem is well known to the experts, yet nobody even
tries to solve it.
In my impression, the main obstacle in this and many
other scientiﬁc problems of the Life is a common ignorance of a relatively
new phenomenon of complete indeterminism (Orlov [10,11] or creating chaos
[1] or symbolic dynamics (Sections 1 and 2)) while the ”ordinary” chaos
doesn’t help at all in this case [4,5]. Meanwhile, not only biologists but even
physicists (!) pay no attention to this new part of their science.

In any way, the human is cardinally diﬀerent from all the other Life by
its freedom of will which we directly feel and know simply from our own ex-
perience and our personal unique I. Actually, after creating the human, the
Nature has deprived it of the famous Darwin’s triad based on the dynamics
of biological species and, hence, of the biological evolution as well. With the
freedom of will the human has become its own lord, and seems to be already
ready to make the same with the famous Vernadsky noosphere.

Unlike Darwin’s triad, the human freedom of will, if it really exists ac-
cording to my hypothesis, is determined by an internal rather then external
creating chaos. Roughly, the mechanism of human creation is related to the
structure of its own brain. This structure is rather similar for all the highest
primates beside the two main diﬀerences.

(1) The human language for the wide external information exchange

9

among many people and for the internal thinking of a single person. Some-
body considers this as the cardinal one. In essence, I cannot say anything
here except that in the frame of my hypothesis the second one seems to me
more important.

(2) Only the human brain has asymmetry between the both semi-spheres,

a very important one, not geometrical but deeply functional.

This asymmetry is so serious that in contemporary psychology the fol-
lowing strange paradox has immediately appeared and is still continuing for
quite a lot of time.

On the one hand - the well studied left brain with a relatively simple
structure and a regular operation, which however does not single out the
human within the animals (beside the language), but on the other - a ”zest”
(the priceless pearl) of homo sapiens, the right brain, which is so complicated
that the experts have prefered to forget this to remain ”experts” !

The result ? A science of animals, including the human as well, and a pure
empirics for homo sapiens to control the human by human ??? Certainly, I
somewhat overcolour in the sense that the creation by the human itself as
a product of its right brain and the basis of its ”might” are qualitatively
known and accepted, at least by some experts. However, farther the science
has stopped ! The reason is the same - a new unusual chaos, the complete
indeterminism is required which remains unknown to physicists at all (why
a new one if there is well developed old ?). Moreover, it looks that even
mathematicians don’t understand well their new chaos, at least with respect
to the applications in physics.

Here are a few words by Poincar´e - philosopher from the collection of his

publications and speeches on the philosophy of science [16] (p.515).

”Even though I have to ﬁnish my considerations soon, I cannot pass over
one important point in silence. The science is deterministic, it is such a
priori, it does postulate determinism since it could not exist other way. It is
such a posteriori as well; if it has postulated this from the very beginning as
a necessary condition of its own existence, then later it rigorously proves this
by its own existence, and each of its victory is the victory of determinism..
This is the question which has been studied without any success in many
centuries, and I cannot even to present it in a few minutes I have”.

Poincar´e - philosopher just have missed a new mathematical construction
developed 10 years before (in 1898) by another mathematician and philoso-
pher Hadamard which under particular conditions excludes determinism com-

10

pletely but not at average only as the usual statistical laws do, accepted by
both Poincar´e - philosopher and Poincar´e - physicist. Apparently, Hadamard
himself also missed this phenomenon, at least in applications in physics. Even
contemporary mathematicians, to say nothing about the physicists, don’t
seem to be much curious to a more deep picture of this strange symbolic
dynamics. For example, in a mathematical paper [2] one can read: ..”quasi-
random” behavior ..within the framework of mathematical determinism, i.e.
the uniqueness of the solution of Cauchy’s problem.
.. An apparent loss
of determinism .. caused not by random intervention, but rather by our
assumption of impossibility of a precise determination of the position of a
phase point”.

I would like to stress again that the scientiﬁc foundation of the human
Might is the Freedom of human Will, the real freedom, the freedom of selec-
tion as Orlov conjectured for the human (see Section 2), and as he proved
for a simple example of quantum system [10,11]. It is another problem if the
human brain does correspond to this example ? In any case, my impression
is that to the present time there are already no serious reasons to expect
any essential diﬀerences between the physics of biological objects and the
other structures in the same domain of the parameters. The evolution of life,
including the big leap to the human, is certainly not the Big Bang of the
Universe or its inﬂation. All that is already behind !

The key point is the freedom - of - will reality for the human, its moving
force, which for Schr¨odinger was a subjective philosophy only (Section 2),
the fantasy on the existence of god and immortality of psyche, never con-
ﬁrmed. Unlike this, in physics the conﬁrmation is possible and necessary,
via experiment (Section 3). And if this will be conﬁrmed indeed, one more,
perhaps the most dramatic one, problem is going to start up in a near fu-
ture, the so-called problem of sustainable development of mankind (see for
example [17]). The point is that (complete) freedom of will for the human
means the (complete) absence of any systematic recurrences to the acts of
this freedom (Section 1), hence a random, completely unpredictable behavior
of the human with all its ”might” over a suﬃciently long time |t| → ∞.

A new paradox again ! On the one hand, the human is ”lord and king”,
and can do anything whatever it does ”wish”, but on the other, it does this
completely at random, ”not wising what creating”.

The result ? A random wandering of ”King and its warriors”, that even-
tually will bring all the humankind to a big catastrophe. This danger is well

11

understood by even a rather restricted science of Life, and apparently by the
world public trying last time some active, I would say agonized, attempts,
including the United Nations, to ﬁnd the solution. Preliminary, too prelim-
inary, the expected solution has been termed ”sustainable development of
mankind” (see for example [17]). Here, it means the realization, or rather
an attempt of that, of a certain agreed action of the whole mankind for
realization of a certain selected end.

However, under condition of the freedom of will such a behavior of people

is simply impossible as it is unpredictable by deﬁnition.

In principle, the catastrophe could be push away for a ﬁnite time, if one
would manage (suﬃciently fast !) to understand its nature and mechanism
for some corrections of the chaotic acts of the will. However, also in this case
the serious diﬃculties arise as well concerning coordination of the will even
of very, very but various, various as well.

Does it mean, that all the actions of a human, even the most ”genial”

one are a simple chaos, including the very unusual, symbolic ?

Yes ! If this is the action of the human itself, its main role in life (Section
2). Then, it is not simply chaos but a creating chaos, the inimitable creation
of any particular human with its own I ! What is here about ”the sustainable
development of the whole mankind” ?

Never ! If those are just symbols of the human only, in the discovered by
it and developing Science checked and ”aﬃrmed” by experiment (Sections 2
and 3). Then, the laws of Science themselves can be or not to be chaotic
ones, depending on various conditions. Yet, these are the fundamental laws
of Physics (the natural laws, Section 3), including the speciﬁc laws of Life and
the human itself. The last laws, unlike the ﬁrst are not universal at all but,
to the contrary, in the framework of the accepted hypothesis, do represent
the creating chaos, or the complete indeterminism. Generally, it is true in
the limit |t| → ∞ only, while over a ﬁnite time |t| < ∞ some control of the
creating chaos is possible, and even its regularization via the left brain, for
example (see above and Section 1).

The trouble of contemporary psychology is just in that the latter, rela-
tively simple and very wide-spread, actually the only using method, turns
out to be the least eﬃcient (see above). Moreover, as a matter of fact, it
reduces the human to the ”ape” !

To the contrary, the source of the human ”might” is in the right brain
which should be used for the correction of asymptotically unpredictable hu-

12

man behavior. However, to do this the human needs to understand how does
work this most complicated and still mysterious part of its own brain.

And what is not less important for both the researchers of the science of
life and its practitioners, is to get rid of a wrong impression that the chaos
control on a ﬁnite time could be extended somehow to any |t| → ∞. This
certainly disagrees with the symbolic dynamics (Section 1), which conserves
in the limit the maximal chaos, or the complete indeterminism, only, i.e. the
unique creation of the Nature or that of the human itself.

In my view, this is the main lesson for the human from its own studies of

the creating chaos, no matter do physicists like that or not.

Instead of conclusion

My crucial question on the still mysterious Life:
what diﬀers human from the ”ape”.

My answer:
the freedom of will and its complete indeterminism.

That is the source of unrestricted ”might” of the human leading to in-
evitable catastrophe on our little Earth.
In spite of all increasing self-
delusion, the homo sapiens has hardly enough time to rescue itself from
it own. My only hope is my own crucial mistake !? But where it is if any ???

1. B.V. Chirikov, Natural Laws and Human Prediction, Proc.Intern.Conf.
”Law and Prediction in the Light of Chaos Research” (Salzburg, July
1994), Eds. Paul Weingartner and Gerhard Schurz, Springer, 1996, p.
10.

2. V.M. Alekseev and M.V. Yakobson, Symbolic Dynamics and Hyper-

bolic Dynamic Systems, Phys.Repts. 75 , 287 (1981).

3. P.V. Simonov, Creating brain: Neurobiological foundations of creation,

Moscow, NAUKA, 1993 (see p.9 ???), in Russian.

4. M. Eigen, Naturwiss. 58, 465 (1971); Molecular selforganization and

early stages of evolution, Usp.Fiz.Nauk 109, 545 (1973).

5. Erwin Schr¨odinger, What is life ? The physical aspect of the living cell,

1945.

13

6. G. Chaitin, Algorithmic Information Theory, in: Information, Ran-

domness and Incompleteness, World Scientiﬁc, 1987, p.38.

7. B. Carr & M. Rees, The anthropic principle and the structure of the
physical world, Nature 278, 605 (1979); C. Hogan, Why the universe
is just so, Rev.Mod.Phys. 72, 1149 (2000).

8. M. Gell-Mann and J. Hartle, Quantum Mechanics in the Light of Quan-
tum Cosmology, Proc. 3rd Int. Symposium on the Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics in the Light of New Technology, Tokyo, 1989.

9. A.B. Migdal, The search for truth (some notes on the Science creation),

Moscow, ZNANIE, 1978, in Russian.

10. Yu.F. Orlov, Origin of Quantum Indeterminism and Irreversibility of

Measurements, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 243 (1999).

11. Yu.F. Orlov, Indeterminism without Chaos: Classical Systems with
Quantum Properties, Intern. Conf. ”Dynamical Chaos in Classical
and Quantum Physics”, Novosibirsk, Budker INP, 4-9 August 2003.

12. Yu.F. Orlov, Dangerous ideas: memoirs on the Russian life, Arguments

and Facts, Moscow, 1992, in Russian.

13. M.A. Popov, In defence of quantum idealism, Usp.Fiz.Nauk 173, 1382

(2003).

14. V.K. Shumny, Fundamental biology and new technology, SD RAS Sci-
entiﬁc Session, 2002, Frontiers of Science, To 50th Anniversary of the
DNA double helix discovery, SD RAS, Novosibirsk, 2003.

15. E.I. Kolchinsky, Neocatastrophism and selectionism: the eternal dilemma

or a possibility of synthesis ? SPb, Nauka, 2002; Yu.V. Natochin, re-
view, RAS Bulletin, 2003, Vol. 73, #6, p.555.

16. A. Poincar´e, On Science, Moscow, Nauka, 1983, A collection of publi-
cations and reports about the philosophy of Science, in Russian.

17. M.N. Rutkevich, In search for optimal strategy. To congress ”RIO +

10” in Johannesburg, RAS Bulletin, 2002, Vol. 72, #10, p.934.

14

