hep-th/0503062

Derivation of Quantum Field Dynamics

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

The perturbative dynamics of quantum ﬁeld theories is described by a recursive
expansion similar to the well known loop expansion. The equivalent formulation based
on low-energy dynamics via an expansion in derivatives is well known in the literature;
this is described by terms from low energy to high energy. The coeﬃcients of these
terms are presented in a simpliﬁed algebraic manner. In general, the dynamics of any
bare Lagrangian, including additional higher dimension terms, is found by iteration in
a discrete algorithm. Inversion of the quantized dynamics to the fundamental theory
is possible.

5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The dynamics of quantum ﬁeld theories in general is typically examined within
the loop expansion. The integrals are complicated, and the symmetries of the theory
are not always manifest in this formalism. For example, the well known low energy
solution in two derivatives of supersymmetric ﬁeld and string theories can be examined
via holomorphy, which is useful for the understanding of phase transitions. The
approach in derivatives extends this approach to higher energies, various regimes in
coupling, and shows relations between seemingly diverse theories [1]-[11].

The iterative formalism in [1]-[11] is examined here in more detail and simpliﬁed
with respect to the derivation of the coeﬃcients. The coeﬃcients are generally de-
rived for models in particle physics, condensed matter models, and partially in string
theories (in which a question regarding the coeﬃcients that describe the corners of
moduli space remain).

A solution to the coeﬃcients of the derivative and coupling expansion allows a
determination of relations between them and to coeﬃcients in other theories including
holography, weak-weak dualities, and strong-weak dualities. The accurate modeling
of experimental phenomena requires the accurate determination of these coeﬃcients;
in principle, the quantization of a bare action with the inclusion of higher dimension
operators (and string ﬁelds) allows for a perfect match with experimental phenomena.

Furthermore, the determination of the coeﬃcients of the eﬀective action, without
integrals, but solely in terms of hidden symmetries will permit an extension of the
determination to more complicated theories, such as strings in curved backgrounds;
the calculations in these examples requires terms in the eﬀective action containing
spin degrees of freedom of arbitrarily high number.

Consider for example, the prototype scalar ﬁeld theory described by

λ3
1
3!
2
The inclusion of possible higher derivative terms,

φ∂µ∂µφ +

m2φ2 +

L =

1
2

φ3 +

φ4 .

λ4
4!

L′ =

λ6
6!

φ6
Λ2 + . . .

may be placed in the initial Lagrangian. This inclusion is typically examined in
the renormalization group ﬂow, but also has a consequence in the modeling of the
phenomena as found for example in experiment (e.g. condensed matter or particle
dynamics in high energy theory including the mass derivation). Mathematically these
terms are of also interest.

2

(1)

(2)

The bare theory in (1) and (2) may be examined in the usual quantum expan-
sion. The ’tree-level’ or classical vertices are the usual Feynman rules. However, the
derivative expansion vertices are derived via expanding the classical scattering. These
terms are deﬁned by the kinematic invariants as,

(3)

(4)

(5)

λ(p11,p12,...,pnn)
n

= λ(p11,p12,...,pnn)

n,0

spij
ij

Y

through the series of numbers n and pij. The case of pij = p00 is a scale Λp00. In the
case of multiple masses, a cutoﬀ, or a gravitational scale, the zero index p00 is further
indexed to p00,a. The redundancy in pij via momentum conservation is not included.
The non-analytic terms required by unitarity, that is, the logarithms such as ln sij are
constructed via the usual perturbative unitarity relation ImS = S†S. These terms
are not examined in this work.

These on-shell vertices are, for the mentioned scalar ﬁeld theory,

λ(0)
3 = λ3
λ(n,0,...,0)
4

λ(0)
3/m2 + λ4
4 = λ2
3(−s12)n/m2+2n ,

= λ2

for example. The general vertex is found via the expansion of the classical Feynman
graphs, or the classical scattering.

The full vertex of the prescribed momenta terms including the coupling expan-

sions of a φ4 theory,

gp11,p12,...,pnn
n

=

λn−1+gαp11,p12,...,pnn
n,g

,

∞

Xg=0

with the a parameters rational numbers. Due to momentum conservation there are
relations between the parameters ap11,p12,...,pnn.

The fundamental iteration is accomplished via the sewing procedure as described
in [4]-[11]. The integrals are simple free-ﬁeld ones in x-space, and generate an inﬁnite
series of relations between the parameters of the coupling expansion αpij
n,g in (5). These
relations in theories with the symmetry φ to −φ are,

pij

Xq

n,qλ(n−2)/2+q =
αpij

n+p,iαnij
αlij

n+p,jλn+p+i+j−2I pij

lij ,nij .

(6)

Xi,j,p;lij,nij,mij

The indices i, j are exampled below. The coeﬃcients I pij
mentum expansion of the integrals

lij ,mij are deﬁned by the mo-

3

J σ,˜pij
˜lij , ˜mij

=

Z

ddk

p

1

Ya=1

(k − kσ(a))2 + m2 Y

˜lij + ˜mij
s
ij

|pij ,

(7)

with ˜lij and ˜mij parameterizing a subset of the lines of the vertex lines which are
contracted inside the loop. The integrals are symmetrized over the the external lines
in the formula (6); there are n1 and n2 external lines on each side of the graph
and b parameterizes a subset of these numbers (e.g. n1 = 1, 2, 3, 4, n2 = 5, 6, 7, 8
and b = 3, 4, 5, 6; the lij and mij parameterize the kinematics associated with the
exernal and internal lines. The expansion of the integral in (7) in the momenta
generate the coeﬃcients pij; the set of numbers σ(a) parameterizing the subset of
numbers of the two vertices (forming an integral with n external lines; the numbers
σ(a) label numbers beyond the external lines 1, . . . , n1 and n1 + 1, . . . , n) is actually
irrelevant in the ﬁnal result to the formula in (6); this property lends to a group
theory interpretation of the ﬁnal result in terms of the coeﬃcients

I σ,pij
lij ,nij ,

(8)

after summing the permutations. The numbers i, j in lij and nij span 1 to m (including
internal lines) and those in pij span 1 to n:

lij = (lij, 0, . . . , 0, lij)

nij = (0, . . . 0, nij, . . . , nij, nij, . . . , nij) ,

(9)

and

pij = (pij, . . . , pij) .

(10)

This notation of lij, mij, and pij is used to setup a (pseudo-conformal) group theory
interpretation of the scattering.

The details of the expansion of the integrals in (7) depend on the selection of the

internal lines found via the momenta of the vertices

λ(p11,p12,...,pnn)
n

(11)

on either side of the double vertex graph. Although the ˜lij, ˜mij, and ˜pij depend on the
details of the contractions and sums of the lines of the individual vertices, the actual
coeﬃcients of the iteration, i.e. I pij
lij,nij , are functions only of the vertex parameters.
The details of the expansion and the contractions of the tensors in the integrals (7)

4

are parameterized by pij, which label the momentum expansion of the integrals. The
coeﬃcients pij range from 0 to ∞, in accordance with the momentum expansion of
the massive theory.

Although the coeﬃcients I pij

lij ,nij arise from the integral expansion, they also have
a group theory description. The dynamics of the expansion are dictated via these
coeﬃcients for an arbitrary initial condition of the bare Lagrangian.

The iteration of the coeﬃcients results in the simple expression,

αmij

n,q =

n+p,iαnij
αlij

n+p,jI mij

lij ,nij .

Xi,j,p;lij,nij

(12)

The sums are over the number of internal lines p, the powers of the shared couplings
i and j (in φ4),

n + q = 2(n + p) − 1 + i + j

q = n + 2p − 1 + i + j

(13)

and the numbers of momenta lij and nij (some of which are within the integral). The
parameters mij label the external momenta, interpreted group theoretically through
the coeﬃcient I.

As an example of the procedure, consider the lowest order term αmij

4;1 . It is found

via

αmij
4;1 =

4;0αnij
αlij

4;0 I mij

lij ,nij ,

Xlij,nij

with a summation of lij and nij, for example through the internal lines. As an
example,

m = (c1, 0, 0, 0, 0, c2)

l = (a1, 0, 0, 0, 0, a2)

n = (b1, 0, 0, 0, 0, b2)

with c1 and c2 satisfying ai +bi = ci by dimensional analysis in this four-point example
with two internal lines. The four-point function entering into the right-hand side of
the equation is the tree-level vertex, and by dimensional analysis the momenta of the

5

(14)

(15)

(16)

vertices have to be conserved. There are more general momenta conﬁgurations than
that in (16) that should be included in the summation.

In general the coeﬃcient derivation of the theory is determined by the iteration
algebraically of the formula in (22). The non-analytic terms, for unitarity reasons,
are derivable from these coeﬃcients via ImS = S†S.

The general spin and gauge content may be included by adding more indices on
the coeﬃcients and in the iteration. These indices in gauge theory are the spin content
and the momentum content; the general term contains contractions of the spin ﬁelds
(e.g. the polarizations) with other spin ﬁelds and with momenta. In principle, the
masslessness of the particles (e.g. in gauge theory) is included by letting the indices
lij, mij and pij be negative. The tensors and the integrals are more complicated in
this case.

The general contraction of the spin ﬁelds with momenta is accomplished via spin

1/2 ﬁelds, e.g.,

εi · kjψαk ˙α

αψ ˙α . . . .

(17)

The general gauge theory numerator contains contractions of spin 0, 1/2, and
1 terms, and is represented via traces of terms containing the fermions and gauge
bosons,

tr

(s1k)

tr

(s1/2ks1ks1/2) .

(18)

The general term may be labeled group theoretically (the Lorentz representations
contracted with momenta), via the permutations

(s1, s2, s3, . . . , sn)

(¯s1, ¯s2, ¯s3, . . . , ¯sn) ,

(19)

together with the momenta,

kσ = (kσ(1), kσ(2), . . . , kσ(n)) ,
k¯σ = (k¯σ(1), k¯σ(2), . . . , k¯σ(n)) ,

(20)

which are labeled via the series in σ(i) and ¯σ(i). In the case of momenta in terms of
the spin variables si, the variable si = 0 is used. The contractions of the polarization

6

vectors εµ are split into the representation (1/2, 1/2) via the indices εα and ε ˙α (this
is useful in the spinor helicity formalism). The trace terms are formulated via two
additional vectors t = (a1, a2, a3, . . .) and ¯t = (¯a1, ¯a2, ¯a3, . . .) that contract

These ﬁelds and momenta spanned by s, ¯s and kσ, k¯σ are contracted via the
tensors t and ¯t. The ﬁelds si are labeled by the momenta ki, and are contracted in a
cyclic manner associated via the tensors t and ¯t (e.g. t = (1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2) for two
spinors at positions 1 and 4 and 5 and 8).

In practice the spinor helicity basis is used to simplify calculations, and a judicious
basis of reference momenta is chosen to simplify the end result. In this case, instead
of the ﬁelds, the reference momenta and line factors are inserted in place of the ﬁelds
[12].

The group theory representations on the propagating ﬁelds are also contracted in

general with multiple traces,

(g1, g2, . . . , gn) . . . (h1, h2, . . . , hn) ,

(21)

with gi the representation and h the trace term in a subleading context; for example a
term such as Tr(Ta1Ta2 . . . Tam)Tr(Tam+1 . . . Tan) corresponds to h = (1, 1, . . . , 1, 2, . . . 2).

In this manner the iteration takes the form,

αmij
n,q;sa,¯s¯a,gb =

αn+p,i;s(1)

a ,¯s(1)

Xi,j,p;lij,nij

b

αn+p,j;s(2)

,lij

¯a ,g(1)
Ilij ,nij;s,s(1),s(2);g,g(1),g(2);mij .

¯a ,g(2)

a ,¯s(2)

,nij

b

(22)

A direct calculation of the integrals generates this formula, after taking the product
of the two general vertices and summing the internal lines. However, a group theory
representation of the coeﬃcients I is more elegant. The interpretation of the quantum
wavefunction overlaps, i.e. I, would permit a simpler derivation, and also generalize
to generic theories and possibly string theories. The coeﬃcients I are determined by
1) the volume region in which the integrals are deﬁned, and 2) via the lattice structure
pertinent to condensed matter models.

For practical purposes, the kinematics of the scattering requires the speciﬁcation
of the incoming and outgoing states, i.e. the helicity and four-vectors of the particle
states such as ψα(k) = kα and ε(k)±
µ . These line factors are typically utilized with the
gauge invariance of the amplitudes via the spinor helicity method [12]. The choice

7

of the reference momenta associated with the polarizations of the gauge bosons is
important to simplify both the calculations and the end result of the amplitudes.

It is possible that the best choice for an immediate simpliﬁcation of the terms
in the on-shell eﬀective action is dictated by a function of the quantum numbers
specifying the terms in the derivative expansion. Of course, the terms in the previous
pages should be grouped into gauge invariant combination. Each gauge invariant
set of terms that contributes to the amplitude can be chosen with a separate set of
reference momenta. The simpliﬁcation of the addition of the individual terms requires
momentum conservation and spinor inner product identities (e.g. Fierz identities),
which can be very complicated in general.

The simpliﬁcation and minimization of the use of the possibly large number of
Fierz and momenta identities, both within the gauge invariant combinations and
between these sets, could be accomplished by the appropriate choice of reference
momenta. There is clearly an ideal choice of these auxiliary parameters, for immediate
compression of the end result of the amplitude at each order in the coupling; this ideal
choice is deﬁned by the least number of these identities required to obtain the most
compact result.

The choice of the non-trivial reference momenta in these terms is possibly as-
sociated with polynomial equations parameterized by the quantum numbers of the
individual terms, with solutions generating the reference momenta choices; for exam-
ple, a possibility is that one polynomial could specify the polarizations i and auxiliary
(x − xj)
momenta j via a series of rational number solutions σ(i)/ρ(i) via Pqi(x) =
and xj = σ(i)/ρ(j) (with qi the quantum numbers of the terms in the eﬀective action).
Given a set of choices of reference momenta (σ(j), ρ(j)) for the terms contributing to
the amplitude at a given coupling order there is a minimal number Nσ,ρ of momenta
conservation and Fierz identities required to reach the most compact form (fewest
number of additions).

Q

Because the recent work on the projective variety twistor generation of the tree
and one-loop amplitudes appears to result in more compact forms of the (partial)
amplitudes, there is a natural reason to suggest that this polynomial equation(s) is
related to the twistor geometry and its instantons.

The interpretation of the polynomials Pqi =

(x−xj) and the numbers N(σ(j), ρ(j))

could have interesting geometric and number theoretic interpretations attached to
gauge theory dynamics, including gravity.

Q

Furthermore, the inversion of the prescribed quantum ﬁeld coeﬃcients, as for
example found in experiment, appears direct via the iteration procedure. There is

8

by deﬁnition a pseudo-linear relation (derived via the iteration) between the bare
coeﬃcients λj of the classical theory, including the higher derivative interactions, and
those of the quantum operators gi(λj). The inversion of the formula gi(λj) to λi
requires solving an inﬁnite number of coupled polynomial equations; the solution of
which is useful also in pure mathematics. The group theory interpretation of the
iteration is of use in this, and potentially leads to a simple formulation of a linear
relation between quantum coeﬃcients to bare coeﬃcients including higher derivative
interactions.

The generalization to string theory is direct. In this case, there are an inﬁnite
number of string ﬁelds. The integrals and the analysis are the same, utilizing the
tree-level scattering and the same integrals. The corners of the moduli space not
included in the ’ﬁeld’-theory integrals are compensated for via a series of higher
dimension operators with ’corner-moduli space’ parameters; this appears complicated,
but the coeﬃcients are potentially found via a ’symmetry’. The tree-level scattering is
determined via the quantum numbers labeling the α parameters, labeling the Lorentz
and group theory (the spin, kinematics, and gauge theory).

The computation of the integral coeﬃcients Iq is rather direct and should shed
light on hidden symmetries (inﬁnite dimensional of a twisted Virasoro type) of the
form,

Iq1Iq2 = Iq3

(23)

of the theories. The multiplicative product would also simplify the calculations.

The quantization of branes and extended dimensional membranes (with possible
deformations to avoid a continuous spectrum) is relevant to string theory and math-
ematics. The coeﬃcients of the improved terms required to complete the corners of
the moduli space integration in the string target space action derivation show the
2-dimensionality of the string propagation. The same can be said about membrane
scattering, i.e. d > 1 membranes, and non-standard string propagation such as non-
critical, and the corners of the d > 2 world-volume moduli space. The geometry
and world-sheet action is described by these coeﬃcients, to which there might be a
guiding principle to the numbers for similar world-sheet actions. Also, the general d-
dimensional form might provide insight into a potential classiﬁcation of d-dimensional
compact Riemann surfaces.

9

References

[1] G. Chalmers, Masses and Interactions of Nucleons in the Derivative Expansion.

[2] G. Chalmers, Computing K3 and CY-n Metrics.

[3] G. Chalmers, Comment on the Riemann Hypothesis.

[4] G. Chalmers, hep-th/0209088.

[5] G. Chalmers, hep-th/0209086.

[6] G. Chalmers, hep-th/0209075.

[7] G. Chalmers, hep-th/0209072.

[8] G. Chalmers, Phys. Rev. D 64, 046014 (2001).

[9] G. Chalmers, hep-th/0008162.

[10] G. Chalmers and J. Erdmenger, Nucl. Phys. B 585, 517 (2000), hep-th/0005192.

[11] G. Chalmers, Nucl. Phys. B 580 (2000), hep-th/0001190.

[12] Mangano, S. Parke, Physics Reports 100 (1991).

10

