5 Free Will and Physics

0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
2
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mark J Hadley
Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
email: Mark.Hadley@warwick.ac.uk

PACS numbers: 01.90.+9, 07.05.Tp

Abstract. A scientiﬁc approach to Free Will is described. A model is constructed
that exhibits the essential observable properties commonly called Free Will. The model
is a deterministic algorithm. The key element is an algorithm that recognizes an
attempt to predict responses and has a tendency to resist such challenges. We have
created a computer with Free Will. The implications for the philosophical debates on
Free Will and science are discussed.

1. Introduction

Most academic study and analysis about Free Will takes place in philosophy departments
rather than science departments. However, the relation between free will and scientiﬁc
theories is a major unresolved issue. Links with quantum theory and chaos theory
are alluded to by some philosophers. Here it is argued that the subject of Free Will
is accessible to science, both experimentally and theoretically. Scientiﬁc investigation
has the potential to illuminate and clarify the philosophical debate. The outcome of
research in this area will be of major signiﬁcance leading to either new physics or a
radical change to the cultural view of Free Will.

1.1. Deﬁnitions

Free Will appears in the literature in two ways, as an abstract concept and also as an
actual phenomenon. The deﬁnitions are more often implied than stated in philosophical
writings and the diﬀerent use of the term Free Will reﬂects diﬀering philosophical views.
Both lead to questions that a scientist and experimentalist can explore.

Traditionally Free Will has been described as when

(i) it is ”up to us” what we choose from a number of alternative possibilities.

(ii) the origin of our choices is within us and not in anything over which we have no

And

control. (Kane,2002 p5).

Free Will and Physics

2

There are arguments (Frankfurt, 1969) to show that Free Will is about decisions rather
than the consequential actions. The decision to lift your arm involves some aspect of
Free Will, but the subsequent nerve signals and muscle contractions can be described
by traditional deterministic physical models. This paper is concerned with the decision
making process.

The literature contains two very diﬀerent concepts of Free Will.

Deﬁnition 1.1 (Free Will - The abstract concept) An agent has Free Will if it
makes decisions [in response to external stimuli] that are neither random nor determined
from outside the agent. The choices are not consequences of physical laws.

This is a Libertarian deﬁnition. It is based on the dualist concept, of mind and body
being distinct, with only the body being governed by the known physical laws.

Deﬁnition 1.2 (Free Will - The phenomenon) An agent has Free Will
decision making appears to satisfy the abstract deﬁnition of Free Will.

if

the

Distinguishing the two diﬀerent concepts is vital to a scientiﬁc investigation.

2. Physics questions

The two forms of Free Will raise very diﬀerent questions and suggest diﬀerent analytical
approaches. Modeling Free Will requires that the abstract deﬁnition is false. While
the question Do we have Free Will?
is trivially true from the phenomenological
deﬁnition. The two concepts are both amenable to science; they suggest questions and
investigations that are common to most unexplained phenomena and new theoretical
ideas. This is hardly surprising; the abstract deﬁnition is a theoretical proposition,
while the phenomena are observable but as yet unexplained. Scientists know how to
explore such matters. Scientiﬁc models can illuminate some of the philosophical debates
- perhaps decisively.

The abstract concept is a theoretical idea. It raises the questions:

• Is their any evidence that it exists?
• How would we look for it?

A similar question in current physics research would be the concept of dark matter

as a new form of matter in the Universe. We would ask the same questions.

The phenomenon of Free Will does exist. It is what we perceive as a fundamental

property of our decision making and of other humans too. As scientists we can ask:

• Can we model it?
• Do we need to introduce indeterminism?

The two approaches are inter-related, for if we can model the phenomenon of free will
accurately, then there cannot be compelling evidence for Free Will in the abstract
sense. Of course we cannot disprove a non-physical explanation we can just render

Free Will and Physics

3

it unnecessary. Similarly, Newton’s Laws of gravitation could not disprove that angels
were responsible for planetary motion.

Returning to the example of Dark Matter, a related phenomena would be the
anomalous rotation of galaxies. We could model the rotation of stars in galaxies, if
we could develop an accurate model based on known matter and physical laws then
the supposition of Dark Matter would be unnecessary, if we failed repeatedly then the
concept of Dark Matter would gain credence and importance.

3. The frontiers of Physics

The abstract form of Free Will requires some processes that are not described by the
laws of Physics as we know them. If it is true - that there is evidence of Free Will in
the abstract sense - then we have an opening to new and previously unexplored science.
We are like the pioneers doing the ﬁrst experiments with steam power or electricity.
How ironic that we can spend billions on the next generation of collider in the hope of
revealing new physics when perhaps we could simply study our own students to reveal
even more novel physics. The idea that within ourselves are elements that are beyond
the laws of Physics is quite extraordinary to a scientist. In a reductionist sense we are
composed of molecules satisfying known fundamental laws. While much of physics is
now studying emergent phenomena rather than fundamental interactions, the abstract
concept of Free Will denies that Free will is an emergent large scale property inevitably
following from established physical laws.

Much as the existence of the abstract idea of Free Will has startling ramiﬁcations
for Physics, the contrary hypothesis, that our decision making is governed by known
physical laws would seem to be be contrary to cultural perceptions. Even a model using
combinations of deterministic physical laws and quantum indeterminacy would be a
major departure from our intuitive understanding of Free Will.

Philosophers debate both the form of Free will as well as the consequences of
diﬀerent beliefs. This paper says nothing about the social and religious implications.
The philosophical views of Free Will can be roughly categorized as:

• Libertarians who believe in the abstract notion of Free Will
• Compatibilists who believe in a phenomenological form of Free Will that is
governed by the known physical laws. While it does not satisfy the abstract
deﬁnition of Free Will they believe that we have all the Free Will that matters.
• Hard determinists who believe we have decision making processes governed
by physical laws. And that the decision making processes do not satisfy the
requirements of being called Free Will.

Philosophers will debate the social and religious implications of the alternative
views. That is beyond the scope of a scientiﬁc investigation. But we can provide
substantial evidence to distinguish between the views.

Free Will and Physics

4

One avenue of philosophical debate is how to interpret could have done otherwise
when any attempt to repeat the decision would have diﬀerent initial conditions. This
scenario is familiar to experimental scientists. Good experimental design is vital to limit
variation. Residual uncertainty is dealt with through statistical analysis and designing
experiments that look for correlations rather than absolute single events. Free Will seems
as amenable to experimental test as uncontentious hypotheses about animal behaviour
or medicine.

4. Towards a Simple Model

Before describing a model, it is helpful to eliminate other aspects of our decision making
and behaviour. This will simplify the construction of a model of Free Will.

(i) Free Will is universal Our own experiences of Free Will are the same as other
humans. It is a common assumption in science that what we learn on one system
is applicable to similar systems. This allows us to make inferences from our own
experiences of our own decision making processes and extrapolate to other humans.

(ii) It is not restricted to important or Moral questions Human decision making exhibits
Free Will when making a trivial decision such as shall I lift my arm? Just as much
as when deciding whether or not to commit a crime. Thus we draw a distinction
between the models of Free Will and the moral implications that follow.

(iii) It is independent of intelligence Decisions can be stupid and irrational. They can
be made by a genius or an idiot. The apparent ability to choose freely is largely
independent of intelligence. Intelligence and Free Will are diﬀerent properties, but
not totally unrelated in an experimental sense, because an agent who is so simplistic
that it has no comprehension of the stimuli presented nor any understanding of the
consequences of actions would not be testable.

(iv) It is not predictable Any algorithm that attempts to reproduce the phenomenon of
Free Will has to be unpredictable to an observer. Although certain decisions may
be predicted with a high probability, most are uncertain.

(v) It is not random There are signiﬁcant correlations between stimuli and responses.
Although any one decision is unpredictable, probabilities may be predicted and
correlations and trends do exist.

(vi) It is distinct from creativity. Free Will is exercised in mundane situations where

neither choice is creative.

(vii) It is distinct from an ability to communicate. Decisions exhibit Free Will even if
they are unobserved, if the observer speaks a diﬀerent language or if the agent is
unable to communicate for other reasons.

The design of a model was stimulated by a consideration of how it would be tested.
How would we test a computer to see if it had Free Will? To distance ourselves from
preconceptions about computers; imagine a scenario where an alien spacecraft lands and

Free Will and Physics

5

an agent wearing a suit comes out and appears to do some investigations on the soil
and fauna. How would we tell if the agent was a sophisticated automaton following a
programme, or an agent with Free Will? We infer that another human has Free Will
by extrapolation from our own experiences, but this approach would not suﬃce for the
alien.

To generalize, could we design an agent that could pass a Turing type test? - where
it was not possible for the tester to tell if decisions were made by a human with Free
Will or a programmed agent.

The notion that our decision making is algorithmic and possibly deterministic is
contrary to most personal beliefs. We are certainly unaware of following an algorithm,
but there are common examples of people unknowingly following rules. A parent will
know ways to inﬂuence their children’s behaviour with predictable consequences that
the child is unaware of. On stage Derren Brown’s shows rely on both controlling
and predicting decision-making without the subject being aware of the processes being
followed - the eﬀect is uncanny. It demonstrates clearly that decisions we might attribute
to Free Will are actually following algorithms to some extent - but could they be entirely
the consequences of an algorithm?

As scientists trying to model and test Free Will, we were challenged during a seminar
to test a random number generator to see if it had Free Will. Simple passive observations
would not suﬃce, since a free agent could choose to mimic randomness. If the agent
could not recognize external stimuli nor understand the consequences of a decision then
a Turing test could not be applied. A random response to stimuli is not a characteristic
of Free Will. From an experimental view, a useful model would need to go beyond
passive observation of choices.

It is clear from these examples that while Free Will may be independent of
communication, any experimental test would need some level of communication, possibly
one way. The agent would need some level of intelligence to communicate and
understand the non-trivial concepts. An explanation of decision making by the agent
might also help with the evaluation, but may not be necessary.

5. The Model

The model is based on a very simple decision - having a drink or not having a drink.
The agent has a higher probability of having a drink if its thirst is greater. The level
of thirst adjusts a threshold level. The decision is made by comparing the output of
a pseudo random number generator with the varying threshold. Thirst increases with
time if the agent does not drink.

Implicit in the model is a link between drinking and reducing thirst. Clearly the
model can be expanded to include other stimuli (e.g. being oﬀered food) and other
internal factors (e.g.
laziness). Extra stimuli and better analysis and evaluation of
alternative decisions all serve to add complexity and ”intelligence” to the system, but
the complexity does not make Free Will. The detailed behaviour depends upon the

Free Will and Physics

weightings given to the parameters.

6

The model is deliberately simple. It is not intended to model intelligence nor all
aspects of human behaviour and experience. The aim is to focus on the Free Will aspect
of simple decisions without extraneous complications.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)

(cid:6) (cid:7)

(cid:8)

(cid:2) (cid:9)

(cid:9)

(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:7)

(cid:25)

(cid:26)

(cid:6) (cid:7)(cid:7)

(cid:21)

(cid:3)(cid:5)

(cid:3)

(cid:0)

(cid:22)

(cid:2) (cid:9)(cid:15)(cid:5) (cid:23)

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:11)(cid:6)

(cid:24)(cid:25)

(cid:25)

(cid:18)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:16)

(cid:15)

(cid:7)

(cid:14)(cid:6) (cid:7)(cid:14)(cid:11)(cid:7)(cid:6)

(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)

(cid:26)

(cid:15)

(cid:4)

(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)

(cid:10)(cid:27)(cid:6)

(cid:6)

(cid:28)

(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:31)  (cid:31)!"

(cid:12)

(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)

(cid:6)(cid:7)

(cid:13)

(cid:6)(cid:14)

(cid:16)

(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)

(cid:12)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:5)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:5)

(cid:3)(cid:5)

(cid:3)

(cid:27)

(cid:14)

(cid:17)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:16)

(cid:11)

(cid:3)

(cid:15)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:15)

(cid:6)

(cid:10)

(cid:19)

(cid:5)

(cid:3)(cid:4)

(cid:11)(cid:10)(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:6)

(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:3) (cid:4)

(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)

#$

’

%&

Figure 1. Schematic of decision making system.

The model is unpredictable because of the pseudo random number generator, but
the behaviour is not random because there is a correlation between the degree of thirst
and the probability of having a drink. Implicit in the model is that the agent has a link
between drinking and thirst. Two unique features of the model are:

• Independence To model human Free Will needs some implementation of could
have chosen otherwise that is apparent and testable. To achieve this we introduce
an internal factor that we call independence. Independence is satisﬁed when the
agent resists an attempt to predict behaviour.

• Challenge We also need a recognizable stimulus, which we call a challenge This is
an external attempt to predict behaviour. In the complex real world recognizing a
challenge requires communication and some degree of intelligence, but this model
is explicitly programmed to recognize a challenge.

It has been argued that the ability to do otherwise is constrained by character (Dennet,
1984), and that complete freedom to do otherwise is not necessary for Free Will. In our
model, the algorithm itself encapsulates the rudimentary equivalent of character as an
increase in the weighting for laziness.

Free Will and Physics

7

A computer model was developed and tested with a small number of subjects in a

Turing style test. The model contained:

(i) Stimuli

(a) A cup of Water
(b) Challenges:

1. You will drink the water
2. You will not drink

(ii) The internal factors

(a) Laziness
(b) Thirst
(c) Independence

(iii) Response

(a) Take the water
(b) Do not take the water

(iv) Explanations To aid the test

The last item was not an essential element of Free Will but was required to aid the

test. The agent was given a set of explanations to describe the decision.

6. A Turing Test

In a blind test, a series of Stimuli were presented by the inquisitor to a person and
computer behind a screen. In half the tests, the person was instructed to decide for
themselves from a preset list of actions and also to choose an explanation from a preset
list. In the other half of cases the person followed instructions from the computer and
passed on explanations as directed by the computer. After ten interactions the inquisitor
guessed if the responses were selected by the computer or the person.,

A calibration run was made to adjust the internal parameters to select appropriate
weights to the stimuli and internal factors. A subsequent experiment was run with
diﬀerent people. The total results were that out of 19 tests the computer or person
were correctly identiﬁed on 7 occasions. In this simple test the computer agent and the
person were indistinguishable.

The algorithm also suggests a statistical measure of Free Will. The agent has
a correlation between stimuli and a logical response. The correlation coeﬃcient is
inﬂuenced by the challenge to do otherwise. It is postulated that this is a distinctive
feature of the phenomena known as Free Will.

7. Conclusions

The experiment is limited in scope, but it sets a challenge - how would you test an agent
to see if it had Free Will? We have proposed a tentative answer. We would attempt

Free Will and Physics

8

to predict behaviour and challenge the agent to take an alternative, less favourable,
action to defy our prediction. This test was applied to our simple model and it is
indistinguishable from a human agent.

The same method could be applied to any agent provided we could issue a
challenge. The decision making can be observed passively or aided by communication
(explanations) from the agent. The test is therefore limited to agents that could
recognize a challenge - a feat that requires a limited amount of intelligence and at
least one-way communication. The testing method could be applied to the alien visitor
described above.

With a minimal set of stimuli and actions we have successfully modelled the
phenomenon of Free Will with a deterministic algorithm, There is no need to invoke
quantum uncertainty nor chaotic indeterminism to model the indeterminism of Free
Will. A random number generator based on an intrinsically quantum mechanical process
could be introduced, but as Dennet (1984, p120,p151) says it would serve no more
purpose than the pseudo-random number generator. The essential feature of the model
is that it recognizes a challenge (that attempts to predict choices) and tends to contradict
the challenge.

We conclude that a pure libertarian viewpoint, that Free Will (in the abstract
sense) exists, is unnecessary because an explanation of all observations based on simple
physical laws is possible.

This work answers the long standing philosophical question, is Free Will compatible
with determinism? It is compatible. Supporting the views of Trusted (1984), Hospers
(1958) and others.

The model is very simple. It would be easy to add links between, external stimuli
and the internal factors - and even changing parameters in the evaluation algorithm. A
part of the agent could also act to generate challenges to itself (this seems an intrinsic
part of our experience of Free Will) A history of stimuli, decisions and outcomes could
form the basis of a system that also learnt (and hence could be taught). With added
complexity, and retaining the propensity to resist a challenge, there is no obvious reason
why the system cannot model Free Will for all practical purposes and therefore support
a soft determinist point of view.

It could be argued that an attempt to model Free Will presupposes a soft
deterministic view. This is not the case because a successful outcome is not assumed
and was not inevitable. Consider for example an attempt to model precognition! There
are very good reasons to believe that any attempt to model precognition with a classical
deterministic computer would fail! It is the modest success of the model that supports
soft-determinism, not the attempt to build a model.

The cultural and moral implications may not be as signiﬁcant as the opposing views
of Free Will might suggest. Smilansky (2000) argues that the illusion of Free Will is
suﬃcient for Society. A good model would have to preserve the illusion of Free Will in
order to be accurate. This is achieved because when the agent acts as if it had Free Will
(in the abstract sense) it is unable to describe the internal decision making algorithm

Free Will and Physics

that it uses.

Acknowledgments

References

The intention of this work was to open a new area to theoretical and experimental
In doing so, the model and results contribute to the philosophical debate.
physics.
There may also be consequences for the social sciences because the concepts introduced
here allow a wider range of human behaviour to be modelled.

9

I would like to thank Gareth Jones for writing the computer programs and Peter Nicksen
for carrying out the Turing Test

Kane R, 2002,The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, (New York: Oxford University Press)
Smilansky, Free Will and Illusion (New York: Oxford University Press), 2000
Dennet D, 1984 Elbow Room (MIT Press MA)
Frankfurt H, 1969 Journal of Philosophy 66 829–839
Trusted J, 1984 Free Will and Responsibility (New York: Oxford University Press)
Hospers J, 1958 Determinism and Freedom in the age of modern science (Ed Hook S) (New York:

Collier-Macmillan), p 126–142

