hep-th/0504191

Generalized RSA/DH/ECC via Geometric Cryptosystem

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

A scheme is presented based on numbers that represent a manifold in d dimensions
for generalizations of textbook cryptosystems. The interlocking or intersection of
geometries, requiring the addition of a series of integers qj, can be used to enhance a
cryptosystem via algorithms based on the form of the geometry. Further operations
besides addition of these numbers, e.g. sewing of the geometries, can be given such
as rotations or contractions.

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
9
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Introduction

Textbook RSA, Diﬃe-Hellman, or elliptic curve cryptostems (ECC) in standard
representation requires the factoring of large numbers into two smaller ones. The
time consuming nature of the factoring process protects the security of the methods.

Recently, a polytopic deﬁnition of a manifold was introduced in which a number
speciﬁes a region in space [2, 3]. The presence of the number parameterization allows
a geometric manipulation of the surfaces so that two or more numbers may form a
more complicated geometry. The geometry may serve as a algorithm for an encryption
process; one geometry is speciﬁed by a number p1, and a second geometry by the
number p2, with the two together specifying another geometry. The volumes may
specify a surface-dependent encryption process.

The volume dependence of the combined geometry due to (p1, p2), or a series of
combined geometries (p1, . . . , pn), allows the message sender to encode the content in
a variety of ways. Furthermore, the numbers may be sent in and manipulated via the
secure RSA or DH scheme before the geometric gluing of the numbers and subsequent
encryption/de-encryption using the geometry.

One adaptation of these protocols allow the user numbers pj to be chosen in
an arbitrary manner. Depending on the number chosen the information such as a
password may be encrypted in diﬀerent fashions, which require the geometries to
unlock. This is analogous to having one large integer N factoring into pq (or
pj) for
an arbitrary p and q; the standard methods require the user to possess one number,
which is elliptically multiplied/calculated. The presence of the choice of an arbitrary
pair of numbers in the factoring of a number N results in an exponentiation of the
possible combinations.

Q

Polytopes or Polyhedra

The polytopic surface, or polyhedron, as deﬁned in [2] is described in the number
basis. Take a series of numbers a1a2 . . . an corresponding to the digits of an integer
p, with the base of the individual number being 2n. In this way, upon reduction to
base 2 the digits of the number span a square with n + 1 entries. Each number aj
parameterizes a column with ones and zeros in it. The lift of the numbers could be
taken to base 10 with minor modiﬁcations, by converting the base of p to 10 (with
possible remainder issues if the number does not ’ﬁt’ well).

The individual numbers ai decompose as

i 2m with the components am
am

i being

0 or 1. Then map the individual number to a point on the plane,

P

2

i = am
~rm
i

× mˆe1 + am
i

× iˆe2 ,

(1)

with the original number mapping to a set of points on the plane via all of the entries
in a1a2 . . . am. In doing this, a collection of points on the plane is spanned by the
original number p, which could be a base 10 number. The breakdown of the number
to a set of points in the plane is represented in ﬁgure 1.

A set of further integers pj = a(j)

n are used to label a stack of coplanar
lattices with the same procedure to ﬁll in the third dimension. The spacial ﬁlling
of the disconnected polhedron is assembled through the stacking of the base reduced
integers.

1 a(j)

. . . a(j)

2

The polyhedron is constructed by the single numbers spanning the multiple layers
in 3-d, or by one number with the former grouped as p1p2 . . . pn. The generalization
to multiple dimensions is straightforward.

The addition of the multiple numbers a(j)
i
generate the new geometry and its numbers of ˜a(j)
i
in (1).

in each of the geometric numbers qj
. The lattice picture is represented

Other operations can be implemented in the sewing of the manifolds. There are
rotations, contractions, expansions, and displacements of the individual geometries,
for example. These operations can be implemented before or after the manifolds are
molded together.

Geometric Manipulation

The are various ways in which the geometry may be used as an encryption method.
and construct a polynomial, for

A simple one is to take all of the coeﬃcients a(j)
i
example,

P (z) = X

pjzj ,

(2)

P

a(j)
i 2i, containing the entries of the individual rows on the lattice. This
with pj =
polynomial in (2) is dependent on the geometry of the number and could be used as
a map to alter information. Other polynomials may be found via alternate construc-
tions.

The coeﬃcients associated with the geometry may be used to deﬁne an L-series,
and in turn an elliptic curve. The coeﬃcients pj for example may be used to count
the solutions to a curve

3

(3)

(4)

y2 = x3 + ax + b mod p ,

with p prime numbers. The geometry deﬁnes an L-series

ζ(C, s) = Y (cid:16)1 − app−s + p1−2s

(cid:17)

−1

,

with the numbers ap = p − bp, with bp the number of rational solutions to the curve
with the modding of p.

Elliptic curves are standard in the RSA and DH schemes, and in alternatives.
The construction of the geometries, and their gluing together, naturally deﬁne the
elliptic curves. They could be used in generalizing the textbook RSA/DH or elliptic
schemes.

Another method to make a more direct comparison with the previous techniques
is to have the sender use a number that incorporates with the elliptic factorization of
these standard methods. The breakup of a number into two smaller ones, i.e. N = pq
for a general pair of numbers rather than one prefered pair, allows the p and q to be
used as the individual geometries. Various numbers qj could be generated this way;
these numbers could then be used to enhance the information sharing protocol, for
both ’password’ and message content.

Concluding Remarks

The number representation of a multi-dimensional manifold is used to provide
an enhancement, or alternative, to the well known RSA or Diﬃe-Hellman or elliptic
crypto schemes for password encryption. Numbers pj are used to deﬁne a geometry,
and the sewing of these geometries or possible intersection is deduced by adding them.

The geometries are speciﬁc to the user, the data, and the receiver and depen-
dending on the input manifold a case dependent geometric molding is determined.
This is useful in a variety of protected password schemes and information sharing.

4

References

[1] G. Chalmers, Polytopes and Knots, physics/0503212.

[2] G. Chalmers,

Integer and Rational Solutions

to Polynomial Equations,

physics/0503200.

[3] G. Chalmers, Algebraic and Polytopic Formulation Cohomology, preprint.

5

