Towards a Universal Theory of Relativity

Sanjay M. Wagh

Central India Research Institute,

Post Box 606, Laxminagar,

Nagpur 440 022, India

E-mail:cirinag ngp@sancharnet.in

(Dated: March 5, 2005)

Abstract

We discuss here the signiﬁcance of the generalization of the newtonian concept of force by

that of a transformation of a certain Standard Borel Space of cardinality c of the continuum

as the “cause” behind motions of material bodies that are representable as Borel measurable

subsets of this space. This generalization forms the basis for a Universal Theory of Relativity in

which, importantly, the fundamental physical constants can only arise from mutual relationships

of the so-deﬁned physical bodies. This Universal Relativity also has the potential to explain the

quantum nature of the physical world.

(Essay for Gravity Research Foundation Competition - 2005)

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Galileo’s concept of inertia is the foremost of the concepts behind Newton’s theory

which postulates that every material body has inertia for motion.

Newton’s theory represents physical bodies as points of the space R3 with associated

inertias and Newton’s Three Laws describe their motions. Then, the Euclidean distance
is the physical distance and R3 is the physical space for this theory.

A newtonian observer can observe the entire trajectory of a material body without dis-

turbing it. A physical clock is a material body undergoing periodic motion. Independently
of other material points and the coordination of the metrically ﬂat space R3, an “exact

measurement” of the state of the clock yields the physical time. An observer can check

the position of a chosen material point against the simultaneous state of a physical clock

body. The motion of a material body, including that of the clock body, does not produce
any change in the Euclidean space R3 or in its coordination.

Now, any diﬀerence in coordinates of R3 is a “measuring stick” for physical measure-

ments of distances. Each observer has associated measuring sticks and clocks in Newton’s

theory. Then, the entire system of measuring sticks and clocks is carried with that ob-

server when in motion relative to another observer.

Clearly, two material sticks cannot occupy the same place. But, in Newton’s theory, a

measuring stick of one observer does not collide with that of another observer in motion

even when both these sticks arrive at the same place. Unacceptably, measuring sticks just

pass through each other without colliding on their ﬁrst contact.

But, the same situation does not arise for material points which collide on contact.

Then, in Newton’s theory, measuring sticks and clocks are treated separately than all the

other physical objects. This is very disturbing and unsatisfactory.

Next, the force, as a cause of motion, is another pivotal concept of Newton’s theory.

Only a material point can be the source of force, and, consequently, Newton’s is an action

at a distance framework.

A total force acting on a body then provides the means of establishing its path on the

basis of Newton’s Second Law of Motion. Notably, without the Law specifying Force, the

Law of Motion is empty of contents in Newton’s theory.

From our day-to-day observations, we notice that various objects gravitate towards the

Earth, ie, the distance between them decreases with time as observed.

2

Newton “explained” gravitation by postulating an attractive force of gravity that is

proportional to inertias of two material points varying inversely with the square of dis-

tance separating them. It is a universal force, as inertia characterizes bodies. Newton’s

theory “explains” observations when his Third Law of Motion is also assumed.

In Newton’s theory, a material body in fact has two independent attributes: the ﬁrst,

its inertia, and the second, its gravitational mass. However, various observations, since

Galileo’s times, then indicate [1] that the inertia and the gravitational mass of a material

body are equal to a high degree of accuracy. However, this equality as well as the inverse-

square dependence of the gravitational force on the distance separating two bodies become

assumptions of Newton’s theory.

Now, every object does not fall to the Earth. This is then explainable by postulating

forces opposing attractive gravity. However, in Newton’s theory, every (basic) force is a

postulate needing an assumed source property attributable to physical bodies. Notably,

every action-at-a-distance force has this characteristic always. Then, action-at-a-distance

theories cannot “explain” the origins of assumed source properties.

Such theoretical reasons as well as many well known experiments demand a new theory

that must, fundamentally, abandon some newtonian concepts.

Now, force of gravity needs a source. Although conceptually diﬀerent, this source-mass

“equals” inertia in value for every body. Hence, inertia is a more general concept than

the force, with only the latter then coming under scrutiny for abandonment.

For a physical description of the phenomena displayed by Light, Einstein assumed the

special principle of relativity, which is essentially the same as the newtonian principle of

relativity. Assuming also the constancy of the speed of Light for all inertial observers, he

then developed the Special Theory of Relativity. This theory is an extension only of the

newtonian laws to incorporate the laws of motion for Light [2].

But, Special Relativity also suﬀers from problems of treating the measuring sticks and

clocks separately from all other objects. Following Mach, Einstein then extended [3] its

basis to the general principle of relativity that: The laws of physics must then be such

that they apply to systems of reference in any kind of motion.

Clearly, the same laws of physics must also be such as to allow the reference frames to

be aﬀected by motions of other material bodies.

3

Einstein connected the general principle of relativity with the situation that a possible

uniform gravitation imparts the same acceleration to all bodies and arrived at the well

known (Einstein’s) equivalence principle which reduces the equality of inertia and gravi-

tational mass of a body to a redundancy. Gravitational mass is, clearly, irrelevant when

the concept of force is abandoned. Only the concept of inertia of a material body remains

relevant to its motion perceived by an observer.

The general principle of relativity deals only with observable concepts and stands even

when the concept of force is abandoned. For gravity, it rests on the possibility of uniform

gravity imparting the same (observable) acceleration to all the bodies.

Einstein, while developing these ideas, wrote [3] that “... in pursuing the general theory

of relativity we shall be led to a theory of gravitation, ... .”

True this. But, the general principle of relativity can be reached from more than one

vantage issues. Each such issue can then indicate only that some physical phenomenon

related to that issue is consistent with this principle of relativity. For example, the

equivalence principle establishes the consistency of only the phenomenon of gravitation

with the general principle of relativity.

Clearly, the abandonment of the concept of force applies to “every (fundamental) force”

that needs to be postulated to be acting between the chosen material bodies to “explain”

observations, using Newton’s theory or any other theory.

For example, the mathematical procedure by which we replace the notion of, say,

Newton’s gravitational force cannot be diﬀerent than the one adopted, say, for replacing

the notion of Coulomb’s electrostatic force.

Therefore, the conceptual framework and, hence, also the mathematical formalism,

which “replaces” the concept of force will have to be applicable to every (fundamental)

force that Newton’s theory or any other theory has to postulate to “successfully” explain

the observed phenomena. This is concepually mandatory.

Then, a physical theory based on the general principle of relativity, call it the Universal

Theory of Relativity to diﬀerentiate it from Einstein’s General Relativity that is only a

Theory of Gravitation, will necessarily be a Theory of Everything.

Such a theory can, for example, “explain” the phenomenon of gravitation by demon-

strating that the decrement of distance between material bodies is independent of their

4

material contents and physical state in situations for which the corresponding total force

on bodies is that given by the newtonian law of gravity.

Now, the mathematical framework of the Universal Theory of Relativity cannot be

based on the “orthodox rules” of the Quantum Theory.

Quantum Theory provides us only the means to determine (Schr¨odinger’s) Ψ-function

and thereby obtain the probability of a physical event involving physical object(s) when we

specify, by hand, either the lagrangian or the hamiltonian, ie, certain physical properties,

for physical bodies under consideration. Then, “origins” of, need to be assumed, “intrinsic

physical properties” of bodies cannot be explainable by adopting mathematical rules of

the Quantum Theory for the Universal Theory of Relativity.

Now, the concept of force is, in a deﬁnite mathematical sense [4], equivalent to that of
certain transformations of the point of the (Euclidean) space R3 in Newton’s theory. This

observation is then suggestive that mathematical transformations of points of some suit-

able (underlying) space can, quite generally as well as naturally, “replace” the newtonian

concept of force as a cause of motion.

Evidently, the physical laws obtained by using this generalization will be applicable

to every reference frame, and, hence, this mathematical formalism will be in conformity

with the general principle of relativity.

Consequently, conﬁrmed results of Newton’s theory as well as those of the Special

Theory of Relativity will, evidently, be obtainable in the Universal Theory of Relativity by

treating the involved (newtonian) forces as corresponding transformations of the suitable

underlying space of the Universal Theory of Relativity.

But, it must follow from the mathematical formalism of the Universal Relativity that

the “inertia” can also be “naturally” considered as the “source” in the mathematical

quantity that can be the newtonian gravitational force.

Similarly, the quantity that, in the Universal Theory of Relativity, replaces the elec-

trostatic charge must also naturally appear as the “source” in the mathematical quantity

that can be considered to be Coulomb’s electrostatic force.

Thus, we arrive at the important issue of selecting an appropriate underlying space and

associated mathematical formalism for the Universal Theory of Relativity whose certain

characteristics we have been considering above.

5

Then, let the physical world, excluding time, be based on a 3-dimensional space that
we shall denote by S. We call S the physical space underlying Universal Relativity. We

explore below mathematical properties [5] permissible for it.

A separable, completely metrizable topological space X is a Polish space. A measurable

space is a pair (X, A) with A being a σ-algebra of the subsets of the set X. Members of

the σ-algebra A are called measurable sets. If µ is a measure on A, we call the triplet

(X, A, µ) a measure space. Notably, concepts of measure theory [5] hold (mod 0), ie,

when sets of measure zero are discarded from its considerations.

Smallest σ-algebra containing the topology T on set X of a measurable space (X, A)

is a Borel σ-algebra and we write BX for it. Sets in BX are Borel sets in X.

Standard Borel Space is isomorphic to a Borel subset of a Polish space. Borel set of a

Standard Borel Space is Standard and measure on it, a Borel Measure.

Now, we assume that some suitable continuum underlies the description of the physical
world, ie, the cardinality of the physical space S is c and that the space S is a Lebesgue

space, ie, complete (mod 0) relative to (one of) its basis. Then, physical objects are Borel
subsets of S with Borel measures being their physical properties.

A partition (mod 0) of measure space (X, A, µ) is any family Υ = {Ci : i ∈ I} of

nonempty disjoint subsets of X such that Si Ci = X (mod 0). The sets A ∈ A which are

the unions of the members of Υ are called Υ-sets.

Now, let us call every member of a measurable partition (mod 0) Υ of the physical
measure space (S, BS, µ) as a basic physical object. Hence, any Υ-set, also a standard
Borel set in S, is a compound physical object.

Then, a transformation of the space (S, BS, µ) can be performed which does not aﬀect

some physical object, some Υ-set, whose “location” is being determined, but “moves”

only the measuring stick, another Υ-set, in the manner desired by the observer for the
involved measurement. It is a measure preserving transformation of (S, BS, µ). Then, if a

physical body were representable as “exactly localizable material point” in the framework
of Universal Relativity, ie, a Υ-set “represented” by a singleton subset of S, we could

determine its exact location on moving measuring stick by its side without aﬀecting the
location of that body since a transformation of the space (S, BS, µ) that achieves this,

including Light to “see” the process, is permissible.

6

[Newton’s theory represents a physical body as an exactly localizable material point.

Then, we can determine the exact location of this material point because a transformation
of R3, a force, not aﬀecting the material point but “moving” only the measuring stick in

the desired manner is permissible in this theory.]

This would, however, violate Heisenberg’s celebrated indeterminacy relations ([6]. See,

also, Bohr N in [7].). Then, assuming the “correctness” of indeterminacy relations, we

readily infer that, within Universal Relativity, it must be impossible to hypothesize an

exactly localizable material point to represent a physical object.

Now, a measure averaged over any basic or compound physical object, the average

being a property of each of its points, provides [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] the non-singular

notion of a point object with the physical characteristics. The “location” of the point-

object so deﬁned is intrinsically indeterminate within the corresponding Υ-set.

In Universal Relativity, the action of a (Borel) transformation of the physical space
S as a “cause” of the motion and the intrinsically indeterminate location of a material

point are then the keys to quantum aspects of matter.

The physical distance is then an appropriate mathematical distance between measur-

able sets. “Kinematical” quantities such as “velocity” and “acceleration” involve change

in the so-deﬁned physical distance under the action of the Borel transformation of the
physical space S. Various physical phenomena can then arise from actions of transfor-
mations of (S, BS, µ) on its measurable sets and the measures deﬁned on them. This is

then the framework of the theory of dynamical systems [4].

Notably, there “do not occur” any “physical constants” to be “speciﬁed by hand” in

this above framework. But, all the physical constants can arise in this framework only

from “mutual relationships” of involved physical objects.

For example, in Universal Relativity, the phenomenon of gravitation involves the action

of transformation T for which the “acceleration” of one measurable set relative to another

reference measurable set is independent of the “measure” deﬁned on that set, but is

proportional to the measure deﬁned on the reference set, both measure classes being

invariant under T . Newton’s gravitational constant G then “arises” when “acceleration”

is expressed as the “inverse-square” of the physical distance. Clearly, the possibility of

theoretically obtaining the “value” of G arises in this manner.

7

In Universal Relativity, a physical constant can only “arise” from mutual relationships
of measurable sets and eﬀects of measure preserving transformations of the space S on

them. (Fundamentally, this is also how we determine these constants experimentally.)

Clearly, the “values” of such physical constants cannot be changed and this situation is,

precisely, as per Einstein’s related theorem [7] (p. 63).

Notably, nowhere in Universal Relativity, in its explanations of physical phenomena,

do we require the “intervention” by any “observer,” conscious or not. Newton’s theory
also had the same role for an observer. Then, a transformation of the space S is a unique

evolution of its points and, hence, it represents a unique evolution of a physical system

“ﬁxed” deterministically by the initial conditions. Consequently, Universal Relativity pro-

vides us “the complete description of any individual real situation as it supposedly exists

irrespective of any act of observation or substantiation” [7].

Lastly, the unique identifying characteristic of the physical space S is then provided by

the following key physical situation: physical matter can be assembled (and reassembled) in

any arbitrary manner at any location in the Universe. But, this is equivalent to changing
continuously measurable partitions and Borel measures of the physical measure space S.
Perhaps, for this, the continuum S needs to admit three, linearly independent, homothetic

Killing vectors which uniquely determine it.

Granted the above, mathematical foundations of our fundamental understanding of

the physical world then rest on theories of measures and dynamical systems.

Acknowledgments

I am indebted to S G Dani, M G Nadkarni, R V Saraykar and V M Wagh for drawing my

attention to literature on theories of measures & dynamical systems and, to N Krishnan

as well, for many helpful, clarifying and encouraging discussions.

[1] Fray S, Diez C A, H¨ansch T W and Weitz M (2004) Phys. Rev. Lett., 93,240404

[2] Wagh S M (2004) Special Relativity as a Physical Theory, Database: physics/0410124

8

[3] Einstein A (1916) Annalen der Physik, 49. See, also, original works in (1952) The principle

of relativity: A collection of original papers on the special and general theory of relativity.

Notes by A Sommerfeld, (Dover, New York)

[4] Nadkarni M G (1995) Basic Ergodic Theory (TRIM-6, Hindustan Book Agency, New Delhi)

Hirsch M W and Smale S (1974) Diﬀerential equations, Dynamical systems, and Linear

Algebra (Academic Press, New York)

Abraham R and Marsden J E (1967) Foundations of Mechanics, (Benjamin, New York)

[5] Srivastava S M (1998) A course on Borel Sets (Springer, New York)

Cornfeld I P, Fomin S V & Sinai Ya G (1982) Ergodic Theory (Springer-Verlag, New York)

Hewitt E and Stromberg K (1978) Real and Abstract Analysis (Springer, New Tork)

Halmos P R (1974) Measure Theory (Springer-Verlag, New York)

McCarty G (1967) Topology (Tata-McGraw-Hill, New Delhi)

Spanier E H (1966) Algebraic Topology (McGraw-Hill, New York)

Rohlin V A (1966) American Mathematical Society Transactions, (2) 49, 171

Rohlin V A (1962) American Mathematical Society Transactions, (1) 10, 1

[6] Heisenberg W (1949) The physical principles of the quantum theory (Dover, New York)

Bohr N (1928) Nature (Supplement Series), April 14, 1928, p. 580

[7] Schlipp P A (1970) (Ed.) Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist (Open Court Publishing

Company - The Library of Living Philosophers, Vol. VII, La Salle)

[8] Wagh S M (2004) Some fundamental issues in general relativity and their resolution,

Database: gr-qc/0402003 and references therein

[9] Wagh S M (2004) Einsteinian ﬁeld theory as a program in fundamental physics Database:

[10] Wagh S M (2004) On the continuum origin of Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations

physics/0404028 and references therein.

Database: physics/0404066

[11] Wagh S M (2004) Heuristic approach to a natural uniﬁcation of the quantum theory and

the general theory of relaivity, Database: physics/0409057

[12] Wagh S M (2005) The Signiﬁcance of the General Principle of Relativity, Database:

physics/0502088

[13] Wagh S M (2005) Foundations of a Universal Theory of Relativity, in preparation

9

