5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Why Einstein (Had I been born in 1844!)?

Naresh Dadhich ∗
IUCAA, Post Bag 4, Pune 411 007, India

July 24, 2013

Abstract

In his monumental discoveries, the driving force for Einstein was, I believe, con-
sistency of concept and principle rather than conﬂict with experiment. In this spirit,
I would like to look at the journey from the classical to the relativistic world as a
simple and direct exercise ﬁrst in recognition of universal character of universal
entities and then carrying out the universalization. By this process not only the
relativistic world follows most naturally but I would like to conjecture that if Ein-
stein were born in 1844 (or had I been born in 1844 and had followed this line of
thought as I do now!) it would have in fact been predicted including existence of a
wave with universal constant velocity. That would have indeed been not only the
greatest but most amazing and remarkable feat of human thought.

Beating further on the same track of principle and concept driven ideas, we
ponder over to see beyond Einstein, and ask the questions: in how many dimensions
does gravity live, how many basic forces are there in nature and what are the basic
building blocks of space-time?

1 Introduction

Let me begin by hypothesizing that it is tempting to place Einstein or oneself in the pre-
Maxwell times and follow the natural line of thought which is in the Einsteinian spirit, and
see what happens. Further in the present context, what type of questions does this line

∗email: nkd@iucaa.ernet.in

1

of thought give rise to? In this essay, I wish to follow the Einsteinian spirit of consistency
of principle and concept, and let the rest follow naturally all by itself.

We shall begin by deﬁning universal entities and then identifying the primary examples
of them. The rest of the story is built on seeking relation between the universal entities
and universalization of concepts.

Let us begin at the very beginning by deﬁning universality and the process of univer-
salization. The natural deﬁnition for universal is that it is the same for all and shared by
all. It could be an entity or concept like space, or could be a force like gravity. Since uni-
versal entity is the same and shared by all, this means all universal things must be related.
That is, no two universal things can be independent. Any feature that distinguishes one
universal thing from the other will mean that there exists some property which is not
the same for all. This will violate the universal character. If there exist two universal
entities or concepts, they must thus be related and the relation would have naturally to
be universal.

2 Primary Universal Entities

What are the most primary universal entities we know of? The natural and obvious
answer is space and time. They are indeed the same and shared by all things that exist
in nature. The two questions arise: since both are universal, hence one, they must be on
the same footing and second, there must exist a universal relation between them.

We know that the distance between two points depends upon the path an observer
takes in going from one point to the other point in space. It is a common experience that
kilometer reading in a taxi is path dependent and that is why we are quite watchful that
the driver takes the shortest and not the circuitous path. Thus spatial distance is path
dependent and so must be the time interval between any two events. This is what would
be required to bring the two universal entities, space and time, on the same footing. This
is however not so in the familiar Newtonian world. If we are to adhere steadfastly to our
concept of universality, we are forced to seek new framework.

Secondly, as argued above since both space and time are universal, there must exist
a universal relation between them. The most natural relation between them is through
velocity (which is formally deﬁned by, Velocity = Space/Time). Therefore a universal
velocity is required which is the same for all observers irrespective of their relative motion.
In the Newtonian mechanics, velocities are added by the law w = u + v. For instance, let

2

two cars have velocity u and v relative to you on the ground, the relative velocity between
the cars will be w = u + v. Existence of a universal velocity (which is the same for all
and hence if one of u and v is the universal velocity, c, then w must also be c) cannot
be compatible with the Newtonian law of addition of velocity and consequently with the
Newtonian mechanics. It therefore asks for a new mechanics.

Thus we need a new mechanics simply by appealing to the universal character of
space and time. One of the natural consequences of existence of the universal velocity is
that like spatial distance between two points, time interval between any two events will
now become path dependent as required for space and time to be on the same footing.
Existence of the universal velocity thus addresses both the above questions.

3 Universal Velocity

What should characterize the universal velocity, c ?

• An object moving with c should always be moving, never at rest relative to any

observer.

• It should be a limiting velocity for all observers, no observer can attain c.
• Since an object moving with c can never be at rest, it cannot have non-zero (rest)

mass. Its mass is zero.

• Existence of universal velocity means existence of zero mass particle.
What physical phenomenon could provide universal velocity? To address this question,
let us get at the root of the phenomenon of motion.
It is of two kinds, particle-like
and wave-like. A particle can be given arbitrary velocity, could be held at rest while a
wave’s motion is entirely determined by the elastic properties of the medium in which it
propagates, it is always moving and can never be held at rest. A wave’s velocity could
thus be changed only either by changing or moving the medium. That means a wave
propagating in a universal medium, which could neither be changed nor moved, will have
universal velocity, the same for all observers.

What is the universal medium? Obviously, space free of all matter called vacuum.
Hence the universal velocity we are seeking could then only be provided by a wave propa-
gating in free space (vacuum). Simply on the force of consistency of the concept, we thus
make a profound prediction that there must exist a wave propagation in free space and
it would have a universally constant velocity relative to all observers.

3

4 Had I Been Born in 1844!

Had I been born in 1844, it could have been quite possible to follow this train of thought.
Then in around 1870, I could have, as a Young man of 26, as old as Einstein was 1905,
made the above profound prediction that there must exist a wave propagating in free
space with a universal constant velocity. That would have been a good 5 years before the
Maxwell’s electrodynamics. It would have been simply remarkable that a prediction made
on the force of pure thought and concept comes actually true 5 years later in the form
of electromagnetic wave of the Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory.
Its existence is then
experimentally established by Hertz. Light turns out to be the most familiar example
this new wave and thus its velocity becomes a universal constant.

A great conjecture - I shudder to imagine what would have happened if the events
did happen as projected. Forget me, let us place Einstein as a young man in 1870, what
he was in 1905, he could have very well argued as we did above and would have come
up with the profound prediction before Maxwell’s theory. Had that happened, it would
have been a great display of pinnacle of human thought and Einstein as its purest human
manifestation!

However things don’t happen like this but it is insightful to wonder and probe the

potential of sheer thought and analysis at its most pristine and sublime.

5 New Mechanics

A new mechanics could have thus been predicted by the general principle of universality
that all universal entities be on the same footing and be related by a universal relation.
This leads to existence of a universal constant velocity and the incorporation of this fact
gives rise to a new mechanics which goes by the name, Einstein’s Special Relativity. This
year is being celebrated as the Year of Physics in due recognition of the fact that it marks
the 100th anniversary of this monumental discovery (Simultaneously with this, he also
made two other important discoveries of the photoelectric eﬀect, which was just good
enough to fetch him the Nobel Prize, and of the Brownian motion. But in the absence of
this, they won’t have merited this universal acclaim).

The message of the new mechanics is that space and time are synthesized into one
4-dimensional entity, space-time. Further it leads to the synthesis of mass and energy
through the famous equation, E = Mc2, which has become synonymous with Einstein
and much to his anguish and horror also with atom bomb. Since velocity of light, which

4

is an electromagnetic wave, is universal - the same for all observers, it is the limiting
speed of communication between spatially separated events in space. It therefore deﬁnes
the velocity of causation. Events then get classiﬁed into two classes, those which can be
causally connected and those which cannot be. For instance, light takes 8 minutes to
travel from the sun to the earth. The event which occurred at this moment on the sun
can aﬀect (be causally connected) events on the earth only after 8 minutes have elapsed.
That is, the events occurring on the earth between now and until 8 minutes can have no
connection (cannot be inﬂuenced by) with the this event on the sun. Thus we have ﬁnite
velocity of physical communication - causal relation (causality), which is provided by the
universal character of velocity of light.

The rest of the Einsteinian mechanics is straightforward.
Another way of motivating Special Relativity could have been universalization of me-
chanics for all particles, massive as well as massless [1, 2]. The existence of massless
particle would have as argued above provided the universal constant velocity. Once that
happens, Special Relativity is inevitable.

6 New Gravity

The next natural question is to universalize gravity. That is, it acts on everything includ-
ing massive as well as massless particles. A particle of light, called photon is an example
of zero mass particle. The massless particle, photon propagates always with the universal
constant velocity which cannot change. Photon’s velocity in vacuum is constant - a uni-
versal constant and hence it can never change. On the other hand, action of a force on
anything is measured only through change in its velocity (motion). Velocity could how-
ever remain constant for circular motion but light does not always move in circle instead
in the Newtonian theory it always moves in a straight line.

We have thus landed with a serious contradiction in principle. Since gravity is univer-
sal, it must act on massless photon as well, yet its velocity must not change. How is it
possible? In the classical Newtonian framework, it is impossible to reconcile with these
two opposing properties. What should we do? We have no other go except to expand the
framework [3]. How do we do that?

When one is confronted with such a question of concept, it is only the robust common
sense that can show the way. Let me take an uneducated peasant as personiﬁcation of
uninhibited common sense. I ask him this question. After some ponder, he says that he

5

can’t much appreciate action of gravity on light, and asks back what would you want light
to do in actuality to feel gravity? I reply that if light is grazing past a massive body, it
should bend toward it as every other thing does. He breathes deep and hard, scratches
at his beard and then asks me to follow him, and takes me to the river which ﬂows in
the backyard of the village. He picks up a piece of log and throws that into the river. It
starts ﬂoating freely with the ﬂow of the river.

Then we walk along the river which suddenly bends, and so does the log. He smiles
and inquires, did any force act on the log? No, I say, it is freely ﬂoating. But even then it
bent with the river? He then triumphantly inquires, haven’t you got the answer to your
question? Dumb as I am, I say, No. He asks me where does your light ﬂoat? In space, I
say. Then what is the problem, he says, bend the space. Then it illuminates in me that
why can’t gravity bend/curve space around the massive body, and all particles including
massless photons propagate/ﬂoat freely in the curved space. In fact curved space-time,
as space and time have already been synthesized into one in Special Relativity.

Isn’t this simply astounding?
What have we arrived at? A new theory of gravity where it can honestly be described
by no other means than the space-time curvature itself. Gravity no longer remains a force
but gets synthesized with structure of space-time and it simply becomes a property of
the space-time geometry. Its dynamics, in particular the inverse square law of gravity,
should now follow from the space-time curvature. That it does, all by itself. As Riemann
curvature satisﬁes the Bianchi diﬀerential identities which on contraction yields the second
rank symmetric tensor with vanishing divergence. This leads to the Einstein equation
incorporating the Newtonian inverse square law. Nobody has to prescribe a law of gravity.
We have thus discovered a new gravity - Einsteinian gravity, called by the name General
Relativity.

Gravity distinguishes itself from all other forces by the remarkable feature of impreg-
nating space-time itself by its own dynamics.
It then ceases to be an external force.
Gravitational ﬁeld is fully described by the curvature of space-time geometry. Motion
under gravity will now be geodesic (straight line) motion relative to curved geometry of
space-time. The geodetic motion should naturally include the Newtonian inverse square
attractive pull, and in addition it should also have the eﬀect of curvature of space. Light
cannot feel the former but only feels the latter. Stronger is the gravity, stronger would
be the curvature it produces. As we make the ﬁeld stronger by making larger and larger
mass conﬁned to smaller and smaller region, it is conceivable that space gets so curved
that light cannot propagate out but its orbit closes on itself around the massive body.

6

When that happens a black hole is deﬁned from which nothing can propagate out. Things
can only fall into but nothing can come out - it deﬁnes a one-way membrane. This is the
most remarkable and distinguishing prediction of the Einsteinian gravity.

Let me make one point clear that despite all General Relativity literature being full
of the phrase ’bending of light’ due to gravity, it is as wrong as saying that the sun goes
around the earth. What bends is space and light freely propagates in it. It was bending of
space and not of light that was for the ﬁrst time measured by Eddington in the 1919 total
solar eclipse. We do however measure space bending by measuring deﬂection of light from
the straight path. We do in fact see the sun going around the earth, yet we argue that it
is apparent because we are sitting on the earth. Similarly, light can only freely propagate
in space and can’t bend, and hence its deﬂection is the measure of space bending.

It is the universality of gravity which has ﬁrst demonstrated the inadequacy of the
Newtonian framework, and has then indicated the expansion of the framework by way
of curving space-time such that the contradiction is resolved. That has led to the new
Einsteinian gravity.

7 In how many dimensions does gravity live?

Everything about a universal force has to be determined all by itself - self determined. One
has no freedom to prescribe anything. We have seen that it is the universality property
which leads to space-time curvature for description of the universal force, and then of its
own determined the equation of motion for the force - gravity. Next natural question that
can arise for the universal force is, in how many dimensions should it live? The minimum
dimensions required to deﬁne the curvature tensor is 2, but then it is well-known that full
dynamics of gravity cannot be realized in 2 and 3 dimensions. We thus come to the usual
4 dimensions in which the matter ﬁelds sit in 3 space dimensions. Why should matter
remain conﬁned to 3-space, because its dynamics is fully realized in (3 + 1)-space-time.
Hence there is no compelling physical reason to lift it to higher dimension. Should gravity
then too remain conﬁned to (3 + 1)-space-time?

Gravity is a self-interactive force, and self interaction can only be computed iteratively.
Since the space-time metric is the analogue of gravitational potential, ﬁrst iteration of
self interaction should involve square of its ﬁrst derivative. This is however automatically
included in the Einstein equation which follows from the Riemann curvature involving
second derivative and square of ﬁrst derivative. The question is, why should we stop at

7

the ﬁrst iteration, we should also go to next iterations? We have to get everything from
the curvature tensor, should we square it? That will give higher powers of ﬁrst derivative
but will square second derivative as well. That is no good because the highest order of
derivative must occur linearly in the equation to admit unique solution. If that is not
the case, we will have more than one equation and hence more than one solution. This
property is called quasi-linearity. We should thus seek the most general action for gravity
constructed from the Riemann curvature and its contractions which leads to the second
order quasi-linear diﬀerential equation.

Can we have second order iteration of self interaction and yet retain the quasi-linear
character of the equation? The answer is yes. There exists a speciﬁc combination of
square of Riemann, Ricci and Ricci scalar, called the Gauss-Bonnet combination which
precisely does this. We should hence include the Gauss-Bonnet term which makes non-
zero contribution only in dimension higher than 4. This means physical realization of the
second iteration of self interaction of gravity demands that it propagate in the extra 5th
dimension. It cannot remain fully conﬁned to the 3-space and its self-interaction dynamics
takes it to leak into extra space dimension. This is an important conclusion which follows
purely from classical consideration [4, 5]. It is remarkable that the diﬀerential geometry
does provide a non-linear (in Riemann) action yet yielding the quasi-linear equation.

Another motivation for extra dimension for gravity comes from the general principle
of charge neutrality. A classical force should always be overall charge neutral like elec-
tromagnetic force. All bodies down to an atom are overall electric charge neutral. For
gravity matter in any form deﬁnes charge which has positive energy and hence positive
polarity. Gravitational charge is therefore unipolar. How do we now attain charge neu-
trality? The only option is to make ﬁeld have charge of opposite polarity - negative. That
is why universal force has to be self-interactive and always attractive! This is the most
direct and simplest way to see why gravity is always attractive. Unlike electric charge,
the negative polarity charge is non-localized and distributed with the ﬁeld all over the
space. If you integrate all over the space, negative charge of the ﬁeld will fully balance the
positive charge of matter ﬁeld. However in the local neighbourhood around the matter
distribution, there will be charge imbalance, over-dominance of positive charge, and hence
the ﬁeld has to propagate oﬀ the 3-space locally. However it should not be able to go
deeper in the extra dimension because as it propagates larger and larger region of nega-
tive charge (ﬁeld) will get included and hence its strength will diminish exponentially [3].
This means gravity essentially remains conﬁned with massless mode having ground state
on the 3-space while propagation into the extra dimension is eﬀectively through massive

8

Interestingly this is precisely the picture presented by the Randall - Sundrum
modes.
brane world gravity [6]. Note that ours is purely a classical argument which does not take
a priori existence of extra dimension but it is solely dictated by the dynamics of gravity.
This is a very important diﬀerence.

The curvature of space-time is not purely a geometric entity but it is the carrier
of gravitational dynamics. So long as curved space-time is not isometrically embedded
in higher dimensional ﬂat space-time, it means that curvature does transmit non-trivial
In general, a
gravitational dynamics into the extra dimension and it cannot be ﬂat.
4-dimensional curved space-time is not isometrically embeddable in 5-dimensional ﬂat
space-time unless it is conformally ﬂat. Hence gravity cannot remain fully conﬁned to 4-
space-time. This is purely a geometric argument for higher dimension. On the other hand,
it has been shown that an arbitrary 4-dimensional space-time can always be embedded
in 5-dimensional Einstein space (de Sitter or anti de Sitter) [7]. This again shows that
once we hit conformally ﬂat higher dimensional space-time, the iteration chain should
terminate.

Does this iteration chain stop or it goes on indeﬁnitely to higher and higher dimen-
sions? It naturally stops at the second iteration. In higher dimensional bulk space-time,
only gravity propagates while matter ﬁelds remain conﬁned to the 3-space and hence the
space-time is isotropic and homogeneous. It is then the maximally symmetric space-time
of constant curvature which automatically solves the equation with the Gauss-Bonnet
term and the Gauss-Bonnet parameter deﬁning the constant Λ in the bulk. It will be an
Einstein space which is conformally ﬂat with vanishing Weyl curvature. That means there
exists no more any free gravity to propagate any further in higher dimension. Since Weyl
curvature is zero, it can be isometrically embedded in higher 6-dimensional ﬂat space-
time. The iteration chain thus stops at 5-dimension. The important point to realize is
that it is the property of gravity which naturally leads to higher dimension.

8 How many basic forces should there be in Nature?

Gravity is the unique universal force which is characterized by the following two properties:

(i) Universal linkage, interaction with all particles massive as well as massless
(ii) Long range, present everywhere.
It is shared by all that exist physically and hence could be taken as the mother force.
All other forces should arise out of it by relaxing these two properties [1, 3]. How many

9

diﬀerent possibilities exist to give other forces in nature?

There are naturally three possible options: one, relax (i) and retain (ii), two, retain
(i) and relax (ii) and lastly relax both (i) and (ii).
Including the mother, there could
therefore exist only four basic forces in nature. This is a very simple uniﬁed view of all
the four forces. Let us next see, do these possibilities conform with the forces we know
of?

In general long range forces will be classical while short range forces will be quantum
and nucleus bound. There would exist two of them in each category. The mother force
- gravity is a long range, classical tensor ﬁeld. As we have seen, it is described by the
curvature of space-time. The other long range classical force will arise on relaxing the
property (i) of linkage to all. That means, this force will link to particles having a speciﬁc
new parameter - charge. There should exist a new parameter other than mass/energy
which will characterize this force. Again appealing to the principle of overall charge
neutrality, the new charge will have to be bipolar (unipolar ﬁeld could be only one for
it has to be described by space-time geometry). This suggests that it will have to be a
vector gauge ﬁeld. It is a long range force and hence it should obey charge conservation
which will lead to the usual inverse square law. All this clearly identiﬁes the force to be
Maxwell’s electromagnetic with electric charge being the distinguishing charge parameter.
Is this, like gravity, unique? Its dynamics is fully determined and hence there is no sensible
reason for any other force to exist having the same dynamics as the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Yes, it is indeed like gravity unique.

Long range is characterized by massless and chargeless propagator so that it can freely
propagate everywhere with the universal constant velocity. Short range on the other hand
will be characterized by either propagator being massive and/or charged, or by coupling
being running rather than constant. Short range forces will be quantum and will remain
conﬁned inside some region like the nucleus.

Now if we relax the property (ii) and retain (i);i.e. the force is short range but has
universal linkage to all (massive) particles that can remain conﬁned to short range -
nucleus. The propagator is massive and/or charged and it negotiates interaction between
massive electrically charged as well as neutral particles. It could be the weak force which
interacts with all massive particles including neutrinos [8]. Since this force interacts only
with massive particles, it is predicted that neutrino must have non-zero mass. It is a kind
of complementary ((i) but not (ii)) to the electric force ((ii) but not (i)). In an appropriate
space there should exist a duality relation between them and the electroweak uniﬁcation
is perhaps indicative of that.

10

Lastly, let us relax both the properties, neither linkage to all (i) nor long range (ii).
It is complementary to gravity which respects both the properties. It could be the strong
force through which the smallest building blocks of matter, quarks interact with each-other
[8]. For the strong force, though propagator is massless but coupling is running which
increases with distance and vanishes as distance goes to zero. This feature is known as
the asymptotic freedom. This property is dual of the asymptotic freedom of long range
forces which become free at inﬁnity.

Clearly, unlike the long range forces, it is not possible to establish uniqueness of the
short range nuclear forces. If there exists a new force, this is the right place to look for it.
Until we can establish their uniqueness, the question will remain open. The other question
which this way of analysis prompts is that there should, in some appropriate space,
exist duality based on the complementary character of the forces. That is between the
electromagnetic and the weak force, and between the gravity and the strong force. They
have complementary features. There are some suggestive indications. In the electroweak
uniﬁcation which is though not complete, it is signiﬁcant that the two symmetry groups
can be combined together as product SU(2)XU(1). On the other hand, there exists in
the string theory, now the celebrated AdS/CF T (Anti de Sitter - conformal ﬁeld theory)
correspondence [9, 10]. At the boundary of the AdS space-time there lives the conformal
ﬁeld theory of matter - quantum chromodynamics. So we have AdS as gravity and CFT
as the strong force dynamics of matter. This shows that there is a deeper connection
between gravity and strong force. AdS/CFT correspondence is in fact reﬂection of the
duality between the gravity (space-time) and the strong force (matter).

We would thus strongly argue for probing duality relations indicated by the comple-
mentary features of the forces. Hopefully, it may lead to some new insights. If nothing
else, there emerges a uniﬁed picture of the four forces in a very simple manner. Uniﬁca-
tion of all the forces is the driving theme for the string theory which is also expected to
give a quantum theory of gravity [11]. String theory begins with the two basic universal
principles, the special relativity and the quantum principle, and the rest follows from an
attempt to construct a consistent theory of matter. First, it takes oﬀ to 26 dimensions and
then renormalizability of the theory brings it down to 10 or 11 dimensions. The pertinent
question now is to come down to the 4-dimensional space-time we live in. Unfortunately
there is no unique way to do that. General Relativity appears along with plethora of
other scalar ﬁelds in 4 dimensions as an eﬀective theory in the low energy limit.

11

9 Seeing Beyond Einstein

The other great discovery, which signaled the turn of the 20th century, was that the micro
structure of matter has quantum character - it is made of discrete tiny pieces. That is,
matter is not continuous all the way down. As we make pieces smaller, the process of
observing (probe) them will require smaller and smaller energy. Then there would occur
the limiting situation where the energy of the object and the probe become comparable.
It is again not reconcilable with the classical Newtonian framework and we need a new
mechanics of Quantum Mechanics.

This situation is characterized by the property that the process of observation disturbs
the object non-ignorably. That is, a certain amount of uncertainty in observation becomes
inherent which has to be incorporated in mechanics. That is, physical parameters will have
to have probabilistic meaning and interpretation. This realization is the key to quantum
mechanics. The simplest manifestation of it is oﬀered by the wave motion. On the one
hand, it is characterized by the 4-wavevector and on the other it should, like any other
thing, carry energy and momentum which is given by the 4-momentum vector. It stands
to reason that the two 4-vectors characterizing the same wave motion should be related,
and this relation should be universal for it should be true for any wave motion. This leads
to the basic relation between energy and frequency, and 3-momentum and 3-wave-vector,
for which we have to introduce a new universal constant, called the Planck’s constant.
This constant is also the measure of the inherent uncertainty in measurement.
It is
obvious that it is impossible to localize a wave to determine its position precisely without
making its momentum uncertain. Both position and momentum cannot simultaneously
be determined to arbitrary accuracy. Accuracy of the one is only attainable at the cost
of the other. This is the basic quantum principle, known as the uncertainty principle.
The important message of quantum theory is that whenever object and probe become
energetically comparable, motion tends to be wave-like. It could truly be described by
quantum mechanics. At the micro scale, quantum mechanics thus becomes inevitable.

With the discovery of electromagnetic wave and light its most common visible example,
it is a pertinent and valid question to ask how does it propagate in vacuum? Should
vacuum be completely physically inert or should it have some physical properties? This
is a very contentious issue that brings forth the memory of infamous aether. Howsoever
complex and involved the question be, we have to address it.

Let us get our facts right. That is, what have been observationally established? One,
an electromagnetic wave propagates in vacuum and second, one can’t measure any motion

12

relative to vacuum,i.e. it cannot act as a reference frame. It is the latter property which
has been taken as evidence for untenability of the existence of aether. The former would
naturally ask for oscillation of some basic constituents of the medium, vacuum to make
wave propagate in it. Thereby it will, similar to matter, demand some kind of micro
structure - basic building blocks of space. If that doesn’t happen, nothing can propagate
in it, nor can it bend as required by the Einsteinian gravity. Not only matter has quantum
micro structure, space will also have to have some kind of structure. This is also required
for physical realization of the quantum ﬂuctuations of vacuum. If it has no micro structure,
what will ﬂuctuate? That means, even space cannot retain its continuum character all
the way down.

Does this property necessarily have to conﬂict with the other, that it cannot act as
a reference frame? No, because space is universal and hence is everywhere, it can’t have
anything of its own that could have a distinguishing character. Hence it can’t deﬁne a
reference frame for any motion. This is similar to a situation that in middle of the ocean,
without introducing a ﬂag-post external to the ocean it is impossible to deﬁne a reference
point. Ocean however does have micro structure yet it can’t deﬁne a reference frame.
Similarly, space itself can’t deﬁne a reference frame but that can’t stop it from having
physical micro structure. It is again the universality property of space which makes it
reference-inert, even though it has micro structure. Hence there is no conﬂict between
the two properties.

Quantum character is universal and hence space must also like matter acquire quantum
behaviour at micro level. This view is further reinforced by the Einsteinian gravity in
which space-time acquires physical property that it can bend like any other material
medium. Recall the famous Wheelerian pronouncement, ”Matter tells space how to curve
and space tells matter how to move.” Since space and matter respond to each-other
physically, they should at a deeper level share the same property, or rather be on the
same footing.

Again the principle of universality demands that space-time should have quantum
structure at micro level. The prime question then is, what are the basic building blocks of
space-time? Nobody knows. That is indeed the most challenging question of the day. To
address this question, we will have to ﬁnd quantum theory of space-time itself. That is
what is being done in the canonical approach to quantum gravity, called the loop quantum
gravity [12]. The Einsteinian gravity is described by the curvature of space-time, which
is continuum but at the micro level it can no longer retain its continuum character. It
has to turn into discrete quanta and hence we need a new theory of gravity which takes

13

us beyond Einstein - a quantum theory of space-time and gravity.

On the other hand, the quantum principle (Uncertainty Principle) is universal and
hence it must in some way be related with the most primary entity, space-time. It should
really be deduced as a property of space-time. Until that happens, quantum theory
will, in principle and concept, remain incomplete. The completion of quantum theory is
also therefore asking for a new theory. That will perhaps come about by realizing the
quantum character of space-time itself. That is to formulate quantum mechanics in a
quantum space-time.

Doesn’t it sound crazy and formidable? That it is. That is why the question has
remained open for almost a century which is in good measure indicative of its complexity
both in concept and technique. It is interesting to note that both gravity and quantum
theory are pointing at quantum character of space-time and its incorporation is thus
imperative for new theory of gravity and quantum mechanics. That is the key and the
most challenging question of the day. The two most prominent approaches addressing
this fundamental question are the particle theory based string theory and the general
relativity based canonical loop quantum gravity. There is however yet a long way to go
before a complete theory of quantum space-time and gravity emerges.

10 Outlook

The main theme of the essay is to demonstrate the power and sheer simplicity of pure
thought and robust common sense. It is a tantalizing hypothesis that had a young person
in 1860s wondered about things and argued as we have done above, it would have been
quite possible to predict existence of a wave propagating with universal constant velocity
in vacuum, and consequently the new mechanics of Special Relativity as well as new
gravity of General Relativity. All this could have happened without any experiment
challenging the existing theory. This was precisely what had happened for Einstein’s
discovery of General Relativity which was purely principle and thought driven. We are
taking a one more step forward in that direction. Conceptually, all that what was required
was available not only in 1860s but right from Newton’s time.

Why do I then single out 1860s? Because before that the prediction would have been
too much ahead of its time, and hence would have had a still birth. Take the example
of the greek philosopher, Aristarchus who is believed to have proposed that the earth
goes around the sun and not the other way round as early as in 2nd century BC. This

14

discovery couldn’t survive for want of proper intellectual base and understanding which
came into existence only in 15th century through the observation of planetary orbits.
Then the time was ripe for Copernicus to make the monumental discovery. It is in this
context that 1860s attain signiﬁcance. With the Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism
soon coming, the predicted wave would have been identiﬁed with the electromagnetic
wave to be observed experimentally by Hertz. The stage was therefore well set for the
profound prediction and discovery.

It is interesting to conjecture and wonder, but the hard fact of life is that scientiﬁc dis-
coveries are seldom driven, with the honorable and unique exception of General Relativity,
by pure thought. They are essentially driven by contradiction between theory and obser-
vation, and the latter also depends upon the available technology for instruments. Truly,
they are the products of the times - the prevailing scientiﬁc thought process. However
had it happened as we envision, it would have been an amazing feat.

At any rate, it is a wonderful and straightforward way of looking at things based
purely on simple logic and robust common sense. It is indeed insightful to wonder and
ponder over the fundamental questions, such as the number of dimensions of space-time
and number of basic forces in nature.
In a natural way, one can argue that gravity
requires minimum 4-dimensions for full realization of its dynamics, and it also leaks into
the extra dimension but cannot penetrate deep enough. Thus 4 dimensions are necessary
but not suﬃcient for gravity. Further, it is the unique universal force characterized by the
properties; linkage to all and long range. By peeling oﬀ these properties, it is remarkable
to have a uniﬁed view of all the four basic forces in nature and it also indicates why there
are only four of them? The complementary features of the forces strongly suggest duality
relation between gravity and the strong force, and electromagnetic and the weak force.
This is one of the neat predictions of this way of analysis. Lastly it is important to realize
that it is the completion of both quantum theory as well as general relativity that ask for
a new quantum theory of space-time. The really challenging task is to do both gravity
and quantum theory not in continuum but in quantum space-time.

References

[1] N. Dadhich, Subtle is the Gravity, gr-qc/0102009.

[2] N. Dadhich, The Relativistic World: A Common Sense Perspective, physics/0203004.

15

[3] N. Dadhich, Universalization as a physical guiding principle, gr-qc/0311028.

[4] N. Dadhich, Probing universality of gravity, gr-qc/0407003.

[5] N. Dadhich, Universality, Gravity, the enigmatic Λ and beyond, gr-qc/0405115.

[6] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4690 (1999).

[7] F. Dahia and C. Romero, J. Math. Phys. 43, 5804 (2002).

[8] A.Das and T. Ferbel, Introduction to Nuclear and Particle Physics, John Wiley

(1993).

[9] J. M. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998).

[10] E. Witten, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 253 (1998).

[11] J. H. Schwarz, Introduction to Superstring Theory, hep-ex/0008017.

[12] A. Ashtekar, Gravity and the Quantum, gr-qc/0410054; A. Ashtekar and J.

Lawandowski, Class. Quant. Grav. 21, R53 (2004).

16

