5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint NSF-ITP-02-94

Multi-verses, Micro-universes and Elementary Particles (Hadrons) (†)

Erasmo Recami (∗)
Facolt`a di Ingegneria, Universit`a di Bergamo, Dalmine (BG), Italy.
INFN, Sezione di Milano, Milan, Italy; and
Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, UCSB, CA 93106, USA.

abstract We present here a panoramic view of our uniﬁed, bi–scale theory of gravitational
and strong interactions [which is mathematically analogous to the last version of N.Rosen’s
bi–metric theory, and yields physical results similar to strong gravity’s]. This theory, de-
veloped during the last 25 years, is purely geometrical in nature, adopting the methods of
General Relativity for the description of hadron structure and strong interactions. In partic-
ular, hadrons can be associated with “strong black–holes”, from the external point of view,
and with ‘micro–universes, from the internal point of view. Among the results presented
in this extended summary, let us mention the elementary derivation:
(i) of conﬁnement
and (ii) asymptotic freedom for the hadron constituents; (iii) of the Yukawa behaviour for
the strong potential at the static limit; (iv) of the strong coupling “constant”, and (v) of
mesonic mass spectra.
Incidentally, within this approach, results got for hadrons can yield
information about the corresponding multi-verses, and viceversa.

Premise
Probably each of us, at least when young, has sometimes imagined that every small
particle of matter could be, at a suitably reduced scale, a whole cosmos. This
idea has very ancient origins. It is already present, for example, in some works by
Democritus of Abdera (about 400 B.C.). Democritus, simply inverting that analogy,
spoke about huge atoms, as big as our cosmos. And, to be clearer, he added: if one of
those super-atoms (which build up super-cosmoses) abandoned his “giant universe”
to fall down on our world, our world would be destroyed...
Such kind of considerations are linked to the fantasies about the physical eﬀects of a
dilation or contraction of all the objects which surround us, or of the whole “world”.
Fantasies like these have also been exploited by several writers:
from F.Rabelais
(1565) to J.Swift, the narrator of Samuel Gulliver’s travels (1727); or to I.Asimov.
It is probably because of the great diﬀusion of such ideas that, when the planetary
model of the atom was proposed, it achieved a great success among people.

0 (†) This rasearch was supported in part by the N.S.F. under Grant No.PHY99-07949;

and by INFN and Murst/Miur (Italy).

0(∗) e-mail address: recami@mi.infn.it

1

Actually, we meet such intuitive ideas in the scientiﬁc arena too. Apart from the
already quoted Democritus, let us remember the old conception of a hierarchy of
universes —or rather of cosmoses— each of them endowed with a particular scale
factor (let us think, for instance, of a series of russian dolls). Nowadays, we can
really recognize that the microscopic analysis of matter has revealed grosso modo a
series of “chinese boxes”: so that we are entitled to suppose that something similar
may be met also when studying the universe on a large scale, i.e., in the direction of
the macro besides of the micro. Hierarchical theories were formulated for example
by J.H.Lambert (1761) and, later on, by V.L.Charlier (1908, 1922) and F.Selety
(1922–24); followed more recently by O.Klein, H.Alfv´en and G.de Vaucouleurs, up
to the works of A.Salam and co-workers, K.P.Sinha and C.Sivaram, M.A.Markov,
E.Recami and colleagues, D.D.Ivanenko and collaborators, M.Sachs, J.E.Charon,
H.Treder, P.Roman, R.L.Oldershaw, Y.Ne’eman and others.[1]

Introduction
In this paper we conﬁne ourselves to examine the possibility of considering elemen-
tary particles as micro universes:[2] that is to say, the possibility that they be similar
—in a sense to be speciﬁed— to our cosmos. More precisely, we shall refer ourselves
to the thread followed by P.Caldirola, P.Castorina, A.Italiano, G.D.Maccarrone,
M.Pavsic, V.Tonin-Zanchin and ourselves.[3]
Let us recall that Riemann, as well as Cliﬀord and later Einstein,[4] believed that the
fundamental particles of matter were the perceptible evidence of a strong local space
curvature. A theory which stresses the role of space (or, rather, space-time) curva-
ture already does exist for our whole cosmos: General Relativity, based on Einstein
gravitational ﬁeld equations; which are probably the most important equations of
classical physical theories, together with Maxwell’s electromagnetic ﬁeld equations.
Whilst much eﬀort has already been made to generalize Maxwell equations, passing
for example from the electromagnetic ﬁeld to Yang–Mills ﬁelds (so that almost all
modern gauge theories are modelled on Maxwell equations), on the contrary Einstein
equations have never been applied to domains diﬀerent from the gravitational one.
Even if they, as any diﬀerential equations, do not contain any in-built fundamental
length: so that they can be used a priori to describe cosmoses of any size.
Our ﬁrst purpose is now to explore how far it is possible to apply successfully the
methods of general relativity (GR), besides to the world of gravitational interactions,
also to the domain of the so–called nuclear, or strong, interactions:[5] namely, to the
world of the elementary particles called hadrons. A second purpose is linked to
the fact that the standard theory (QCD) of strong interactions has not yet fully
explained why the hadron constituents (quarks) seem to be permanently conﬁned
in the interior of those particles; in the sense that nobody has seen up to now an
isolated “free” quark, outside a hadron. So that, to explain that conﬁnement, it
has been necessary to invoke phenomenological models, such us the so–called “bag”

2

models, in their MIT and SLAC versions for instance. The “conﬁnement” could be
explained, on the contrary, in a natural way and on the basis of a well–grounded
theory like GR, if we associated with each hadron (proton, neutron, pion,...) a
particular “cosmological model”.

The Model by Micro-Universes
Let us now try to justify the idea of considering the strong interacting particles
(that is to say, hadrons) as micro-universes. We meet a ﬁrst motivation if we think
of the so–called “large number coincidences”, already known since several decades
and stressed by H.Weyl, A.I.Eddington, O.Klein, P.Jordan, P.A.M. Dirac, and by
others.
The most famous among those empirical observations is that the ratio R/r between
1026m of our cosmos (gravitational universe) and the typical radius
the radius R
10−15m of elementary particles is grosso modo equal to the ratio S/s between
r
the strength S of the nuclear (“strong”) ﬁeld and the strength s of the gravitational
ﬁeld (we will give later a deﬁnition of S, s):

≃

≃

R
r ≃

S
s

.

ρ

≡

(1)

This does immediately suggest the existence of a similarity, in a geometrico–physical
sense, between cosmos and hadrons. As a consequence of such similarity, the “theory
of models” yields —by exploiting simple dimensional considerations— that, if we
contract our cosmos of the quantity

ρ = R/r

1041

≈

(that is to say, if we transform it in a hadronic micro-cosmos similar to the previous
one), the ﬁeld strength would increase in the same ratio: so to get the gravitational
ﬁeld transformed into the strong one.
If we observe, in addition, that the typical duration of a decay is inversely propor-
tional to the strength of the interaction itself, we are also able to explain why the
1018 s: duration —for example— of a
mean-life of our gravitational cosmos (∆t
complete expansion/contraction cycle, if we accept the theory of the cyclic big bang)
10−23s) of the
is a multiple, with the same ratio, of the typical mean-life (∆τ
“strong micro-universes”, or hadrons:

≃

≃

∆t

ρ∆τ.

(2)

≃
It is also interesting that, from the self-consistency of these deductions implies —as
(1041)2
we shall show later— that the mass M of our cosmos should be equal to ρ2
times the typical mass m of a hadron:
a fact that seems to agree with reality,
and constitutes a further “numerical coincidence”, the so–called Eddington relation.
Another numerical coincidence is shown and explained in ref.[6]

≃

3

−

By making use of Mandelbrot’s language[7] and of his general equation for self-
similar structures, what precedes can be mathematically translated into the claim
that cosmos and hadrons are systems, with scales N and N
1, respectively, whose
“fractal dimension” is D = 2, where D is the auto-similarity exponent that char-
acterizes the hierarchy. As a consequence of all that, we shall assume that cosmos
and hadrons (both of them regarded of course as ﬁnite objects) be similar systems:
that is, that they be governed by similar laws, diﬀering only for a “global” scale
transformation which transforms R into r and gravitational ﬁeld into strong ﬁeld.
[To ﬁx our ideas, we may temporarily adopt the na¨ıve model of a “newtonian ball”
in three–dimensional space for both cosmos and hadrons. Later on, we shall adopt
more sensible models, for example Fridman’s]. Let us add, incidentally, that we
should be ready a priori to accept the existence of other cosmoses besides ours:
let us recall that man in every epoch has successively called “universe” his valley,
the whole Earth, the solar system, the Milky Way and today (but with the same
simple–mindedness) our cosmos, as we know it on the basis of our observational and
theoretical instruments. . . [8]
Thus, we arrive at a second motivation for our theoretical approach: That physical
laws should be covariant (= form invariant) under global dilations or contractions
of space-time. We can easily realize this if we notice that: (i) when we dilate (or
contract) our measure units of space and time, physical laws, of course, should not
change their form;
(ii) a dilation of the measure units is totally equivalent to a
contraction (leaving now “meter” and “second” unaltered) of the observed world.
Actually, Maxwell equations of electromagnetism —the most important equations
of classical physics, together with Einstein equations, as we already said— are by
themselves covariant also under conformal transformations and, in particular, under
dilations.
In the case when electric charges are present, such a covariance holds
provided that charges themselves are suitably “scaled”.
Analogously, also Einstein gravitational equations are covariant[9] under dilations:
provided that, again, when in the presence of matter and of a cosmological term Λ,
they too are scaled according to correct dimensional considerations. The importance
of this fact had been well realized by Einstein himself, who two weeks before his
death wrote, in connection with his last uniﬁed theory: <<From the form of the
ﬁeld [gravitational + electromagnetic] equations it follows immediately that: if gik(x)
is a solution of the ﬁeld equations, then also gik(x/α), where α is a positive constant,
is a solution (“similar solutions”). Let us suppose, for example, that gik represents
a ﬁnite crystal embedded in a ﬂat space. It is then possible that a second ‘universe’
exists with another crystal, identical with the ﬁrst one, but dilated α times with
respect to the former. As far as we conﬁne ourselves to consider a universe containing
only one crystal, there are no diﬃculties: we just realize that the size of such a crystal
(standard of length) is not determined by the ﬁeld equations. . . >>. These lines are
taken from Einstein’s preface to the Italian book Cinquant’anni di Relativit`a.[10]

4

They have been written in Princeton on April 4th, 1955, and stress the fact, already
mentioned by us, that diﬀerential equations —as all the fundamental equations
of physics— do not contain any inbuilt “fundamental length”.
In fact, Einstein
equations can describe the internal dynamics of our cosmos, as well as of much
bigger super-cosmoses, or of much smaller micro-cosmoses (suitably “scaled”).

−

−

√3)/2; s2 = (i + √3)/2; s3 =

Figure 1: “Coloured” quarks and their strong charge – This scheme represents
the complex plane[3,12,13] of the sign s of the quark strong–charges gj in a
hadron. These strong charges can have three signs, instead of two as in the
case of the ordinary electric charge e. They can be represented, for instance,
by s1 = (i
i, which correspond to the arrows
separated by 120o angles. The corresponding anti-quarks will be endowed with
strong charges carrying the complex conjugate signs s1, s2, s3. The three
quarks are represented by the “yellow” (Y), “red” (R) and “blue” (B) circles;
the three anti-quarks by the “violet” (V), “green” (G) and “orange” (O) circles.
The latter are complementary to the former corresponding colors. Since in real
particles the inter–quark forces are saturated, hadrons are white. The white
colour can be obtained either with three–quark structures, by the combinations
YRB or VGO (as it happens in baryons and antibaryons, respectively), or
with two–quark structures, by the combinations YV or RG or BO [which are
actually quark–antiquark combinations], as it happens in mesons and their
antiparticles. See also note [11].

A Hierarchy of “Universes”

5

As a ﬁrst step for better exploiting the symmetries of the fundamental equations of
classical physics, let us therefore ﬁx our attention on the space-time dilations

x′
µ = ρxµ

(3)

(t; x, y, z) and µ = 0, 1, 2, 3, and explicitly require physical laws to be
with xµ ≡
covariant with respect to them: under the hypothesis, however, that only discrete
values of ρ are realized in nature. As before, we are moreover supposing that ρ is
constant as the space or time position varies (global, besides discrete, dilations).
Let us recall that natural objects interact essentially through four (at least) fun-
damental forces, or interactions: the gravitational, the “weak”, the electromagnetic
and the “strong” ones; here listed according to their (growing) strength. It is pos-
sible to express such strengths by pure numbers, so to be allowed to compare them
each other. For instance, if one chooses to deﬁne each strength as the dimensionless
square of a “vertex coupling constant”, the electromagnetic strength results to be
measured by the (dimensionless) coeﬃcient Ke2/¯h
1/137, where e is the
electron charge, ¯h the reduced Planck constant, c is the light speed in vacuum and K
is the electromagnetic interaction universal constant (in the International System of
units, K = (4πε0)−1, with ε0 = vacuum dielectric constant). Here we are interested
in particular in the gravitational and strong interaction strengths:

≃

≡

α

Gm2/¯hc;

s

≡

N g2/¯hc,

S

≡

N

where G and N are the gravitational and strong universal constants, respectively;
quantities m e g representing the gravitational charge (=mass) and the strong
for example
charge[11,12] (cf. Fig.1), respectively, of one and the same hadron:
of a nucleon
or of a pion π. More precisely, we shall often adopt in the fol-
lowing the convention of calling m and g “gravitational mass” and “strong mass”,
respectively.
Let us consider, therefore, two identical particles endowed with both gravitational
(m) and strong (g) mass, i.e., two identical hadrons, and the ratio between the
strengths S and s of the corresponding strong and gravitational interactions. We
S/s. For
ﬁnd S/s
10−40, while the ppπ or ππρ (or
example for m = mπ one gets Gm2/¯hc
quark-quark-gluon: see below) coupling constant squares are N g2/¯hc
14 or 3 (or
0.2), respectively.
Already at this point, we can make some simple remarks. First of all, let us notice
g, then the strong universal constant N becomes
that, if we put conventionally m

1040÷41, so that one veriﬁes that ρ
1.3

N g2/Gm2

R/r

≃

≡

≡

≃

≃

≃

×

≈
On the contrary, if we choose units such that [N ] = [G] and moreover N = G = 1,
we obtain g = m√ρ and, more precisely (with n = 2 or n = 3),

≃

(4)

≡
N

ρG

hc/m2
π.

go = g/n

≃ q¯hc/G

≡

Planck mass,

6

which tells us that —in suitable units— the so–called “Planck mass” is nothing but
the magnitude of the rest strong–mass [= strong charge] of a typical hadron, or
rather of quarks.[11]
From this point of view, we should not expect the “micro black–holes” (with masses
in fact,
of the order of the Planck mass), predicted by various Authors, to exist;
we already know of the existence of quarks, whose strong charges are of the order of
the Planck mass (in suitable units). Moreover, the fact —well known in standard
theories— that gravitational interactions become as strong as the “strong” ones for
masses of the order of the Planck mass does simply mean in our opinion that the
strong gravity ﬁeld generated by quarks inside hadrons (strong micro-universes) is
nothing but the strong nuclear ﬁeld.

“Strong Gravity”

A consequence of what stated above is that inside a hadron (i.e., when we want
to describe strong interactions among hadron constituents) it must be possible to
adopt the same Einstein equations which are used for the description of gravitational
interactions inside our cosmos; with the only warning of scaling them down, that
is, of suitably scaling, together with space distances and time durations, also the
gravitational constant G (or the masses) and the cosmological constant Λ.
Let us now recall that Einstein’s equations for gravity do essentially state the equality
of two tensorial quantities: the ﬁrst describing the geometry (curvature) of space-
time, and the second —that we shall call “matter tensor”, GT µν — describing the
distribution of matter:

Rµν −

1
2

gµν Rρ

ρ −

Λgµν =

kGTµν ;

−

[k

≡

8π
c4 ].
10−52m−2.

6.7

As well-known, G
×
Inside a hadron, therefore, equations of the same form will hold, except that instead
π and instead of Λ it
of G it will appear (as we already know) quantity N
will appear the “strong cosmological constant” (or “hadronic constant”) λ:

hc/m2

≈

≈

≃

×

s2), while Λ

10−11m3/(kg

N

ρ1G;

≡

ρ2Λ;

λ

≡

ρ1 ≈

ρ,

≈

≃

0.1 barn.

1030m−2 = (1 fm)−2, or λ−1

N Tµν the “strong matter tensor”.

so that λ
For brevity’s sake, we shall call Sµν ≡
What precedes can be directly applied, with a satisfactory degree of approxima-
tion, to the case —for example— of the pion: i.e., to the case of the cosmos/pion
similarity. Almost as if our cosmos were a super–pion, with a super–quark (or
“metagalaxy”, adopting Ivanenko’s terminology) of matter and one of anti-matter.
Let us recall however that, as we already warned in Section 3, the parameter ρ can
vary according to the particular cosmos and hadron considered. Analogously Λ, and

(5)

(6)

7

≃

÷

1038

therefore λ, can vary too: with the further circumstance that a priori also their sign
can change, when varying the object (cosmos or hadron) taken into examination.
As far as ρ1 is concerned, an even more important remark has to be made. Let us
notice that the gravitational coupling constant Gm2/¯hc (experimentally measured
in the case of the interaction of two “tiny components” of our particular cosmos)
should be compared with the analogous constant for the interaction of two tiny com-
ponents (partons? partinos?) of the corresponding hadron, or rather of a particular
constituent quark of its. That constant is unknown to us. We know however, for
the simplest hadrons, the quark-quark-gluon coupling constant: N g2/¯hc
0.2. As
a consequence, the best value for ρ1 we can predict —up to now— for those hadrons
1039 [and, in fact, 1038 is the value which has provided the results
is ρ1 ≃
most close to the experimental data]: a value that however will vary, let us repeat
it, with the particular cosmos and the particular hadron chose for the comparison.
The already mentioned “large numbers” empirical relations, which link the micro-
with the macro-cosmos, have been obtained by us as a by-product of our scaled–down
equations for the interior of hadrons, and of the ordinary Einstein equations. Notice,
once more, that our “numerology” connects the gravitational interactions with the
strong ones, and not with the electromagnetic ones (as Dirac, instead, suggested).
It is worthwhile noticing that strong interactions, as the gravitational —but diﬀer-
ently from the electromagnetic ones,— are highly non-linear and then associable to
non-abelian gauge theories. One of the purposes of our theoretical approach con-
sists, incidentally, in proposing an ante litteram geometrical interpretation of those
theories.
Before going on, let us specify that the present geometrization of the strong ﬁeld is
justiﬁed by the circumstance that the “Equivalence principle” (which recognizes the
identity, inside our cosmos, of inertial and gravitational mass) can be extended to
the hadronic universe in the following way. The usual Equivalence principle can be
understood, according to Mach, thinking of the inertia mI of a given body as due to
its interaction with all the other masses of the universe: an interaction which in our
cosmos is essentially gravitational; so that mI coincides with the gravitational mass:
mG. Inside a “hadronic cosmos”, however, the predominant interaction among
mI ≡
its constituents is the strong one; so that the inertia mI of a constituent will coincide
with its strong charge g (and not with mG). We shall see that our generalization
of the Equivalence principle will be useful for geometrizing the strong ﬁeld not only
inside a hadron, but also in its neighborhood.
Both for the cosmos and for hadrons, we shall adopt Friedmann–type models; taking
advantage of the fact that they are compatible with the Mach Principle, and are
embeddable in 5 dimensions.

In the Interior of a Hadron
Let us see some consequences of our Einstein–like equations, re-written for the strong

8

ﬁeld and therefore valid inside a hadron:

Rµν −

1
2

gµν Rρ

ρ −

λgµν =

kSµν;

−

[Sµν ≡

N Tµν ].

In the case of a spherical constituent, that is to say of a spherically symmetric distri-
bution g′ of “strong mass”, and in the usual Schwarzschild-deSitter r,t coordinates,
the known geodesic motion equations for a small test–particle (let us call it a parton,
with strong mass g”) tell us that it will feel a “force” easy to calculate,[3,13] which
for low speeds [static limit: v << c] reduces to the (radial) force:

F =

c2g”(1

1
2

−

2N g′
c2r

−

+

λr2)(

1
3

2N g′
c2r2 +

2
3

λr).

Notice that, with proper care, also in the present case one can introduce a language
g”d2r/dt2.
in terms of “force” and “potential”; for example in Eq.8 we deﬁned F
In Fig.2 the form is depicted of two typical potentials yielded by the present theory
[cf. Eq.8’].

≡

(7)

(8)

Figure 2: In this ﬁgure the shape is shown of two typical inter–quark poten-
tials Veﬀ yielded by the present theoretical approach: cf. Eq.8. We show also
3s1 states
the theoretical energy–levels calculated for the 1
of “Bottomonium” and “Charmonium”, respectively [by adopting for the bot-
tom and charm quark the masses m(b)=5.25 and m(c)=1.68 GeV/c2]. The
comparison with experience is satisfactory:[17] see Section 5.

3s1 e 3

3s1, 2

−

−

−

At “intermediate distances” —i.e., at the newtonian limit— this force simply reduces
1
2 c2g”(2N g′/c2r2 + 2λr/3), that is, to the sum of a newtonian term and of
to F

≃ −

9

an elastic term `a la Hooke. Let us notice that, in such a limit, the last expression
is valid even when the test particle g” does not posses a small strong mass, but
is —for example— a second quark. Otherwise, our expressions for F are valid
only approximately when also g” is a quark; nevertheless, they can explain some
important features of the hadron constituent behaviour, both for small and for large
values of r.
At very large distances, when r is of the same order of (or is greater than) the
1 fm], whenever we conﬁne ourselves
considered hadron radius [r
≡
1038÷39G), we end
to the simplest hadrons (and thus choose Λ
with an attractive radial force which is proportional to r:

1030 m−2; N

10−13 cm

≥ ∼

≃

≃

F

≈ −

g”c2λr/3.

(9)

(9′)

÷

In other words, one naturally obtains a conﬁning force (and a conﬁning potential
r2) able a priori to explain the so–called conﬁnement of the hadron constituents
V
(in particular, of quarks). Because of this force, the motion of g” can be regarded
in a ﬁrst approximation as a harmonic motion; so that our theory can include the
various and interesting results already found by diﬀerent Authors for the hadronic
properties —for instance, hadron mass spectra— just by postulating such a motion.
Up to now we supposed λ to be positive. But it is worthwhile noticing that conﬁne-
ment is obtained also for negative values of λ. In fact, with less drastic approxima-
tions, for r

1 fm one gets:

≥ ∼

F

≈ −

1
3

g”c2λ(r + λr3/3

N g′/c2),

−

−

where, for r large enough, the λ2 term is dominating. Let us warn however that,
when considering “not simple” hadrons (so that λ, and moreover N , may change
N g′2/r2,
their values), other terms can become important, like the newtonian one,
or even the constant term +N λg′2/3 which corresponds to a linear potential. Let
us observe, ﬁnally, how this last equation predict that, for inter–quark distances
of the order of 1 fm, two quarks have to attract each other with a force of some
tons: a quite huge force, especially when recalling that it should act between two
extremely tiny particles (the constituents of mesons and baryons), whose magnitute
would increase with the distance.
Let us pass to consider, now, not too big distances, always at the static limit. It
is then important to add to the radial potential the usual “kinetic energy term”
(or centripetal potential), (J/g”)2/2r2, in order to account for the orbital angular
momentum of g” with respect to g′. The eﬀective potential[13] between the two
constituents g′, g” gets thus the following form
N g′
c2 )2 1

2λN g′
3c2 r +

(J/g”)2
2r2

2N g′
c2

g”c2[2(

)2r4] +

1
r −

Veﬀ =

r2 +

r2 −

(8′)

λ
3

λ
3

1
2

1
2

(

,

10

which, in the region where GR reduces essentially to the newtonian theory, simpliﬁes
into:

Veﬀ ≈ −

N g′g”/r + (J/g”)2/2r2.

In such a case the test particle g” can set itself (performing a circular motion, for
example: and in Section 7 we shall give more details) at a distance re from the
source–constituent at which V is minimum; i.e., at the distance re = J 2/N g′g”2.
At this distance the “eﬀective force” vanishes. Thus we meet, at short distances,
the phenomenon known as asymptotic freedom: For not large distances (when the
force terms proportional to r and to r3 become negligible), the hadron constituents
If we now extrapolated, somewhat arbitrarily,
behave as if they were (almost) free.
1
g′
3 mp],
the expression for re to the case of two quarks [for example,
g”
= go ≃
|
|
|
1
100 fm. Vice-versa, by supposing
we would obtain the preliminary estimate re ≈
1040G— that the
—for instance in the case of baryons, with g
m
≡
equilibrium radius re be of the order of a hundredth of a fermi, one would get the
Regge–like relation J/¯h
Let us perform these calculations again, however, by using the complete expression
of Veﬀ . First of all, let us observe that it is possible to evaluate the radius at which
the potential reaches its minimum also in the case J = 0. By extrapolation to the
case of the simplest quarks [for which N g2/¯hc
0.2], one ﬁnds always at least one
≃
0.25 fm, for λ positive and of the order of 1030 m−2. Passing to the
solution, re ≈
case J = ¯h (which corresponds classically to a speed v
c for the moving quark),
we obtain under the same hypothesis the value

m2 (where m is measured in GeV/c2).

mp and N

≃

≃

≃

≃

=

|

re ≃

0.9 fm.

|

−

λ
|

λ
|

Actually, for positive λ it exists the above solution only. For negative values of λ,
however, the situation is more complex; let us summarize it in the case of the N
values adopted by us. One meets —again— at least one solution, which for
and
3 = 3N g′/c2
J = 0 takes the simple analytic form re
.
|
1030m−2 one ﬁnds the values 0.7 and 1.7 fm, in correspon-
More precisely, for λ =
dence to J = 0 and J = 1; values that however become 0.3 and 0.6 fm, respectively,
1029m−2.
In the J = 0 case, at last, two further solutions are met, the
for λ =
−
1030 m−2] being once more re ≃
smaller one [for λ =
By recalling that mesons are made up of two quarks (q, ¯q), our approach suggests
for mesons in their ground state —when J = 0, at least— the model of two quarks
oscillating around an equilibrium position. It is rather interesting to notice that for
small oscillations (harmonic motions in space) the dynamical group would then be
SU(3). It is interesting to notice, too, that the value mo = hν/c2, corresponding to
the frequency ν = 1023 Hz, yields the pion mass: mo ≃
Analogous results have to hold, obviously, for our cosmos (or, rather, for the cos-
moses which are “dual” to the hadrons considered).

0.25 fm.

mπ.

−

11

The Strong Coupling Constant
Here we want to add just that, in the case of a spherically symmetric, static metric
(and in the coordinates in which it is diagonal), the Lorentz factor is proportional
to √goo, so that the strong coupling constant αS ≡
S in our theory[14] assumes the
form:[15]

(10)

(11)

since the strong mass g” depends on the speed:

αS(r)

N
¯hc

1

≃

2N g′

−

2

o

g′
o/c2r + λr2/3

,

g” =

g”o
√goo

=

1
p

g”o
o/r + λr2/3

,

2N g′

−
so as the ordinary relativistic mass does. The behaviour of our “constant” αS(r) is
analogous to that one of the perturbative coupling constant of the “standard theory”
(QCD): that is to say, αS(r) decreases as the distance r decreases, and increases as
it increases, once more justifying both conﬁnement and “asymptotic freedom”. Let
us recall that, when[15] g”o = g′
Since the Schwarzschild–like coordinates (t; r, θ, ϕ) do not correspond, as is well
known, to any real observer, it is interesting from the physical point of view to
pass to the local coordinates (T ; R, θ, ϕ) associated with observers who are at rest
“with respect to the metric” at each point (r, θ, ϕ) of space: dT
grrdr, where gtt ≡
goo and grr ≡
√
−
dR/dT (and strong masses) such that √gtt = √1
U
≡
the transparent form

≡
g11. These “local” observers measure a speed
U 2, so that Eq.11 assumes

o, the deﬁnition of αS is αS ≡

S = N g′2/¯hc.

√gttdt; dR

≡

−

g” =

g”o

.

(11′)

−

U 2

[6N g′

λ
o/
|

√1
Once calculated (thanks to the geodesic equation) the speed U as a function of r,
it is easy to ﬁnd again, for example, that for negative λ the minimum value of U 2
corresponds to r = [3N g′
]1/3. While for positive λ we get a similar expression,
|
o/λ]1/3, which furnishes a limiting (conﬁning) value of r, which
i.e., ro ≡
cannot be reached by any of the constituents.
Let us ﬁnally consider the case of a geodesic circular motion, as described by the
“physical” observers, i.e., by our local observers (even if we ﬁnd it convenient
to express everything as a function of the old Schwarzshild-deSitter coordinates).
If a is the angular momentum per unity of strong rest-mass,
in the case of a
test–quark in motion around the source–quark, we meet the interesting relation
g” = g′
1 + a2/r2, which allows us to write the strong coupling constant in the
particularly simple form[14]

op

αS ≃

N
¯hc

g′

o(1 +

a2
r2 ).

(10′)

We can now observe, for instance, that —if λ < 0— the speciﬁc angular momentum
]1/3; in
a vanishes in correspondence to the customary geodesic r
|

rqq = [3N g′

λ
o/
|

≡

12

≃

0.8 fm.

o = mp/3

this case the test–quark can remain at rest, at a distance rqq from the source–quark.
With the “typical” values ρ = 1041; ρ1 = 1038, and g′
313 MeV/c2, we
obtain rqq ≃
Outside a Hadron. Strong Interactions among Hadrons
From the “external” point of view, when describing the interactions among hadrons
(as they appear to us in our space), we are in need of new ﬁeld equations able
to account for both the gravitational and strong ﬁeld which surround a hadron.
We need actually a bi-scale theory [Papapetrou], in order to study for example the
motion in the vicinity of a hadron of a test–particle possessing both gravitational
and strong mass.
What precedes suggests —as a ﬁrst step— to represent the strong ﬁeld around a
source–hadron by means of a tensorial ﬁeld, sµν , so as it is tensorial (in GR) the
gravitational ﬁeld eµν . Within our theory,[3,2,1] Einstein gravitational equations
have been actually modiﬁed by introducing, in the neighborhood of a hadron, a
strong deformation sµν of the metric, acting only on objects having a strong charge
10−41) and not on objects possessing only a
(i.e., an intrinsic “scale factor” f
gravitational charge (i.e., an intrinsic scale factor f
1). Outside a hadron, and
for a “test–particle” endowed with both the charges, the new ﬁeld equations are:

≃

≃

Rµν + λsµν =

8π
c4 [Sµν −

1
2

−

gµν Sρ
ρ].

(12)

They reduce to the usual Einstein equations far from the source–hadron, because
they imply that the strong ﬁeld exists only in the very neighborhood of the hadron:
namely that (in suitable coordinates) sµν →
Linear approximation: – For distances from the source–hadron r
1 fm, when
our new ﬁeld equations can be linearized, the total metric gµν can be written as the
sum of the two metrics sµν and eµν ; or, more precisely (in suitable coordinates):

ηµν for r >> 1 fm.

≥ ∼

ηµν + sµν .

ηµν + hµν (where, let us repeat, hµν →

2gµν = eµν + sµν ≃
<< 1; so that
hµν |
Quantity sµν can then be written as sµν ≡
|
0 per r >> 1 fm). For the sake of
gµν ≃
simplicity, we are in addition conﬁning ourselves to the case of positive λ [on the
contrary, if λ < 0, we should[13] put sµν ≡
One of the most interesting results is that, at the static limit (when only soo 6
the strong ﬁeld becomes a scalar ﬁeld), we get that V
is exactly the Yukawa potential:

= 0 and
1
1) = goo −

ηµν + 2hµν , with

2 (soo −

ηµν −

hoo ≡

2hµν ].

≡

1

V =

g

−

exp[

r]

λ
2
−p
|
r

|

g
r

≃ −

exp[ −

mπrc
¯h

],

(13)

with the correct coeﬃcient —within a factor 2— also in the exponential.[3,2,1]

13

→

1 fm.

Intense ﬁeld approximation: – Let us consider the source–quark as an axially sym-
metric distribution of strong charge g: the study of the metrics in its neighborhood
will lead us to consider a Kerr-Newman-deSitter (KNdS)–like problem and to look
for solutions of the type “strong KNdS black holes”. We ﬁnd that —from the “ex-
ternal” point of view— hadrons can be associated with the above mentioned “strong
black-holes” (SBH), which result to have radii rS ≈
rS, that is, when the ﬁeld is very intense, we can perform the approxima-
For r
sµν. We obtain, then,
tion just “opposite” to the linear one, by assuming gµν ≃
equations which are essentially identical with the “internal” ones [which is good for
the matching of the hadron interior and exterior!]; a consequence being that what
we are going to say can be valid also for quarks, and not only for hadrons. Before
going on, let us observe that λ can a priori take a certain sign outside a hadron,
and the opposite sign inside it. In the following we shall conﬁne ourselves to the
case λ < 0 for simplicity’s sake.
In general for negative λ one meets[14] three “strong horizons”, i.e., three values of
rS, that we shall call r1, r2, r3. If we are interested in hadrons which are stable with
respect to the strong interactions, we have to look for those solutions for which the
SBH Temperature[16] [= strong ﬁeld strength at its surface] almost vanishes. It is
worth noticing that the condition of a vanishing ﬁeld at the SBH surface implies the
coincidence of two, or more, strong horizons;[3,14,16] and that such coincidences
imply in their turn some “Regge–like” relations among m, λ, N , q and J,
if m,
q, J are —now— mass, charge and intrinsic angular momentum of the considered
hadron, respectively. More precisely, if we choose a priori the values of q, J, λ and
N , then our theory yields mass and radius of the corresponding stable hadron. Our
theoretical approach is, therefore, a rare example of a formalism which can yield
—at least a priori— the masses of the stable particles (and of the quarks themselves).

Mass Spectra
We arrived at the point of checking whether and how our approach can yield the
values of the hadron masses and radii: in particular for hadrons stable with respect
to strong interactions; one can guess a priori that such values will possess the correct
order of magnitude. Several calculations have been performed by us, in particular
for the meson mass spectra;[13,14] although they —because of our laziness with
respect to numerical elaborations— are still waiting for being reorganized.
Here we quickly outline just some of the results. At ﬁrst, let us consider the case of
rh). We get
the simultaneous coincidence of all the three horizons (r1 = r2 = r3 ≡
a system of equations that —for example— rules out the possibility that intrinsic
angular momentum (spin) J and electric charge q be simultaneously zero [practically
2;
ruling out particles with J = 0];
and ﬁnally it admits (real and positive) solutions only for low values of J, the upper

it also implies the interesting relation λ−1

2rh

≃

14

≡

≡

≡

J/mc; M

N q2/Kc4; a

limit of the spin depending on the chosen parameters.
The values we obtained for the (small) radii and for the masses suggest that the
“triple coincidences” represent the case of quarks. The basic formulae for the explicit
calculations are the following.[14] First of all, let us put N = ρ1G, so that g
m. Let
N m/c2, and moreover
us then deﬁne, as usual, Q2
1 + λa2/3. Then, the radii of the stable particles (quarks, in this case) are given
δ
by the simple equation r = 3M/2δ; but the masses are given by the solution of a
system of two Regge–like relations: 9M 2 =
The cases of “double coincidence”, that is, of the coincidence of two (out of three)
horizons only, seem to be able to describe stable baryons and mesons. The funda-
a2 + Q2;
mental formulae become, however, more complex.[14] Let us deﬁne η
3δ2
4λδη + 18λM 2. The stable hadron’s radii are then given
δ2 + 4λη; Z
σ
3M σ/Z; while the masses are given by the non simple equation
by the relation r
9M 2σ(δσ
Z) + 2ηZ 2 = 0, which relates M with a, Q and λ. Of course, some
simpliﬁcations are met in particular cases. For example, when λ = 0, we get the
Regge–like relation:

2δ3/λ; 9M 2 = 8δ(a2 + Q2).

≡
≡

−

≡

≡

≡

−

−

≡

which —when q is negligible— becomes M 2 = cJ/G, that is [with c = G = 1]:

On the contrary, when J = 0, and q is still negligible, we obtain [always with
c = G = 1]:

λa2
Also in the cases of “triple coincidence” simple expressions are found, when
|
1. Under such a condition, one meets the simple system of two equations:

|

9M 2

8(a2 + Q2);

9m2

2λ−1,

≃

≃ −

≃

where the second relation is written with c = G = 1.
All the “geometric” evaluations of this Section 9 are referred —as we have seen—
only to stable hadrons (i.e., to hadrons corresponding to SBHs with “temperature”
T
0), because we do not know of general rules associating a temperature T
with the many resonances experimentally discovered (which will correspond[1,2,3]
to temperatures of the order of 1012K, if they have to “evaporate” in times of the
order of 10−23s). Calculations apt at comparing our theoretical approach with
experimental mass spectra (for mesons, for example) have been till now performed,
therefore, by making recourse to the trick of inserting our inter–quark potential Veﬀ ,
found in Section 6, into a Schroedinger equation. Also such (many) calculations
—kindly performed by our colleagues Prof.J.A.Roversi and Dr.L.A.Brasca–Annes of
the “Gleb Wataghin” Physics Institute of the State University at Campinas (S.P.,
Brazil)— have not yet been reordered! Here let us specify, nevertheless, that

15

M 2 = a2 + Q2,

m2 = J.

9m2 =

λ−1.

−

(14)

(14′)

(15)

<<

(16)

potential (8’) has been inserted into the Schroedinger equation in spherical (polar)
coordinates, which has been solved by a ﬁnite diﬀerence method.[13]
In the case of “Charmonium” and of “Bottomonium”, for example, the results ob-
tained (by adopting[17] for the quark masses the values m(charm) = 1.69 GeV/c2;
3s1
m(bottom) = 5.25 GeV/c2) are the following (Fig.2). For the states 1
3s1 of Charmonium, we obtained the energy levels 3.24, 3.68 and 4.13 GeV,
and 3
−
respectively.
Instead, for the corresponding quantum states of Bottomonium, we
obtained the energy levels 9.48, 9.86 and 10.14 GeV, respectively. The radii for
the two fundamental states resulted to be r(c)=0.42 fm, and r(b)=0.35 fm, with
r(c)> r(b) [as expected from “asymptotic freedom”]. Moreover, the values of the
parameters obtained by our computer ﬁt are actually those expected: ρ = 1041 and
ρ1 = 1038
1041 and
(just the “standard” ones) for Charmonium; and ρ = 0.5
1038 for Bottomonium.
ρ1 = 0.5
The correspondence between experimental and theoretical results[17] is satisfactory,
especially when recalling the approximations adopted (in particular, the one of treat-
ing the second quark g” as a test–particle).

3s1, 2

−

−

×

×

Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank D.Gross and D.Hone for the nice hospitality extended
to him at the I.T.P. (where the present paper was completed), and R.Chiao,
J.Eberly, M.Fleishhauer, P.Milonni
for their kind invitation to partecipe in a
Workshop at the UCSB. The present article presents an “extended summary”
of work done in collaboration with V.Tonin-Zanchin and others.
The author
for many useful discussions or for the kind collaboration received
is grateful,
over the years, to P.Ammiraju, P.Bandyopadhyay, C.Becchi, L.A.Brasca–Annes,
P.Caldirola, P.Castorina, R.Collina, A.Italiano, M.Pavˇsiˇc, F.Raciti, W.A.Rodrigues
Jr., J.A.Roversi, A.Salam, and —in particular— to Y.Ne’eman, V.Tonin-Zanchin
and M.Zamboni-Rached.

References
See for example A.Salam and D.Strathdee: Phys. Rev. D16 (1977) 2668;
1
D18 (1978) 4596; A.Salam:
in Proceed. 19th Int. Conf. High-Energy Physics
(Tokio,1978), p.937; Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 294 (1977) 12; C.Sivaram and
K.P.Sinha: Phys. Reports 51 (1979) 111; M.A.Markov: Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.
51 (1966) 878; E.Recami and P.Castorina: Lett. Nuovo Cim. 15 (1976) 347;
R.Mignani: ibidem 16 (1976) 6; P.Caldirola, M.Pavsic and E.Recami: Nuovo Ci-
mento B48 (1978) 205; Phys. Lett. A66 (1978) 9; P.Caldirola and E.Recami: Lett.
Nuovo Cim. 24 (1979) 565; D.D.Ivanenko:
in Astroﬁsica e Cosmologia, Gravi-
tazione, Quanti e Relativit`a – Centenario di Einstein, edited by M.Pantaleo and
F.de Finis (Giunti-Barbera; Florence, 1978), p.131; N.Rosen: Found. Phys. 10
(1980) 673; R.L.Oldershaw: Int. J. General Systems 12 (1986) 137; Y.Ne’eman et

16

The Fractal Geometry of Nature

See for example B.B.Mandelbrot:

See also M.Sachs: Found. Phys. 11 (1981) 329; and General Relativity and

al.: Hadronic J. 21 (1998) 255, and Phys.Reports 258 (1995) 1.
2 See for example E.Recami: in Old and New Questions in Physics, Cosmology,...,
by A.van der Merwe (Plenum; New York, 1983); Found. Phys. 13 (1983) 341. Cf.
also P.Ammiraju, E.Recami and W.A.Rodrigues: Nuovo Cimento A78 (l983) 172.
For an extended summary of that theory, see for example E.Recami: Prog.
3
Part. Nucl. Phys. 8 (1982) 401, and refs. therein; E.Recami, J.M.Mart´ınez and
V.Tonin–Zanchin: Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 17 (1986) 143; and E.Recami and
V.Tonin–Zanchin: Il Nuovo Saggiatore 8 (1992; issue no.2) 13. See also E.Recami
and V.Tonin–Zanchin: Phys. Lett. B177 (1986) 304; B181 (1986) E416.
4 See for example A.Einstein: “Do gravitational ﬁelds play an essential role in the
structure of elementary particles?”, Sitzungsber. d. Preuss. Akad. d. Wiss., 1919
(in German).
5
Matter (Reidel; Dordrecht, 1982).
6 A.Italiano and E.Recami: Lett. Nuovo Cim. 40 (1984) 140.
7
(W.H.Freeman; San Francisco, 1983).
8 This clariﬁes that our geometrico–physical similarity holds between two classes
of objects of diﬀerent scale (hadrons and cosmoses), in the sense that the factor ρ
will vary according to the particular cosmos and hadron considered. That will be
important for the practical applications. At last, let us recall that in Mandelbrot’s
philosophy, analogous objects do exist at every hierarchical level, so that we can
conceive a particular type of cosmos for each particular type of hadron, and vice-
versa. As a consequence, we should expect ρ to change a little in each case (for
example, according to the hadron type considered).
9
Le us notice that we do not refer here to the usual “general covariance” of
the Einstein’s equations (that are supposed to hold in our cosmos), but to their
covariance with respect to transformations (dilations) which bring –for example–
from our cosmos to the hadronic micro-cosmos. Cf. also R.C.Tolman: Phys. Rev.
3 (1914) 244; 6 (1915) 219.
10 M.Pantaleo (editor): Cinquant’anni di Relativit`a (Giunti; Firenze, 1955).
11 Let us recall that the hadron constituents (2 for mesons and 3 for baryons) have
named quarks by M.Gell-Mann. This Anglo-Saxon word, which usually means mush
or also curd, is usually ennobled by literary quotations (for example, Gell-Mann was
inspired —as it is well known— by a verse of J.Joyce’s Finnegans wake, 1939). Let
us here quote that Goethe had properly used such a word in his Faust, verse 292,
where Mephistopheles referring to mankind exclaims: <<In Jeden Quark begr¨abt
er seine Nase”>>!
By considering quarks to be the real carriers of the strong charge (cf. Fig.1), we can
call “colour” the sign sj of such strong charge;12 namely, we can regard hadrons as
endowed with a zero total strong charge, each quark possessing the strong charge

17

gj|

with Σsj = 0. Therefore, when passing from ordinary gravity to “strong
gj = sj|
gravity”, we shall replace m by g = ngo, quantity go being the average magnitude
of the constituent quarks rest–strong-charge, and n their number.12
12 Cf. for example E.Recami: in Annuario ’79, Enciclopedia EST-Mondadori, ed.
by E.Macorini (Mondadori; Milan, 1979), p.59.
13 A.Italiano et al.: Hadronic J. 7 (1984) 1321; P.Ammiraju et al.: Hadronic
J. 14 (1991) 441; V.Tonin–Zanchin: M.Sc. Thesis (UNICAMP; Campinas, S.P.,
1987); E.Recami and V.T.Zanchin: (in preparation).
14 V.Tonin–Zanchin, E.Recami, J.A.Roversi and L.A. Brasca–Annes: “About
some Regge–like relations for (stable) black holes”, report IC/91/219 (ICTP; Trieste,
1991), to appear in Comm. Theor. Phys.; E.Recami and V.Tonin–Zanchin: “The
strong coupling constant: Its theoretical derivation from a geometric approach to
hadron structure”, Comm. Theor. Phys. 1 (1991) 111.
15 Actually, if we considered a (light) test–particle g” in the ﬁeld of a “heavy”
constituent g′ (a quark for instance), we would rather obtain only a square root at
2N g”o/c2r + λr2/3]−1. When
the denominator; namely αS ≃
og”o/¯hc)[
we pass to consider two heavy constituents (two quarks) endowed with the same rest
strong-mass g”o = g′
o, we ought to tackle the two body problem in GR; however, in
an approximate way, and looking at an average situation, one can propose a formula
like Eq.13, where r is the distance from the common “centre of mass”.
16
Comm. Math. Phys. 43 (1975) 199.
17 C.Quigg: report 85/126–T (Fermilab, Sept. 1985).

See for example J.D.Bekenstein: Phys. Rev. D9 (1974) 3292; S.W.Hawking:

(N g′

p

−

1

18

