5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE COUNTERINTUITIVE UNIVERSE

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute for Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
Hyderabad (India) & Udine (Italy)
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

The major advances in physics have been through counterintuitive
breakthroughs– ideas that seemed to go against prevailing convictions.
In the twentieth century the Special and General Theory of Relativity
and Quantum Mechanics have provided very good examples of this
process. However, twentieth century physics has led to an impasse,
one of the most important unsolved problems being the uniﬁcation of
gravitation with other interactions. This has led to another sacred
tenet of physics, viz., spacetime as a smooth manifold, being ques-
tioned in latest approaches, be it Quantum Super Strings or other
Quantum Gravity and similar theories.
In particular spacetime de-
scribed by an underpinning of Planck scale oscillators is investigated.

1 Introduction

The greatest breakthroughs in our concepts of physics, and science in general,
have been counterintuitive. Broadly speaking, intuitive concepts are those
which are in conformity with our ideas of the universe based on experience
gathered till that time. It is diﬃcult to break out of this mould– generally
such a departure is forced upon us due to the inadequacy of the state of our
knowledge to describe new phenomena.
One of the greatest conceptional breakthroughs of this kind was that of the
ancient Indian philosopher, Kanada. Sometime around the seventh century
B.C. he postulated that all material objects were made up of ultimate atomic
constituents in constant vibration. A few centuries later, atomism was also

1

postulated in the Greek world, probably independently. But these atoms
unlike those of Kanada, were not in constant vibration. Though brilliant,
these concepts were much too counterintuitive to be accepted wholeheart-
edly. They remained in the fringes of speculation and philosophy.
Another dramatic counterintuitive breakthrough, which however survived,
was the observation that the earth which looked ﬂat everywhere, was ac-
tually round. Equally radical was the suggestion that the solid earth was
infact not at the centre of the universe, but rather was spinning on its axis
and whirling round the sun. Though such contra ideas were put forward
more than two thousand years ago, they could not be accepted by the people
at large or even scholars. Numerous arguments were put forth over the cen-
turies to prove “decisively” that the earth could not be travelling or rotating.
We had to wait for nearly two thousand years before the next breakthrough.
This had to do with the concept of the universe– the earth was at the centre
surrounded by material transparent spheres each of which rotated, carrying
objects like the sun, the moon, the planets and the stars. Such material
spheres were necessary because, we would have otherwise had to explain why
the moon, or the sun for that matter, doesn’t crash down. Such a question
had been asked for thousands of years.
It is interesting to note that Newton’s answer to this puzzle was, in a sense the
opposite to what one might naively expect. (As we will see, that came much
later from Einstein!). There was no force counterbalancing the tendency to
crash downwards. There was only one force, the force of gravitation which
in the case of the earth-moon system, actually pulled the moon towards the
earth. Yet the moon did not crash because of the mechanics– because of its
motion round the earth. The spin and orbit of the earth were also settled
during this period in which the old Greek Astronomy was ﬁnally thrown
overboard.
Newton’s laws of gravitation and mechanics held sway for just about a tenth
of the length of the reign of the Greek model. Newtonian space was dis-
tinct from time. It provided an absolute background or platform on which
the drama of the universe, the motions of bodies and projectiles took place.
Matter, forces, energy and the like were actors acting out in time. So also the
law of gravitation was an action at a distance theory. Every material particle
exerted the force of gravitation instantly on every other material particle.
In the next century, Coulomb discovered the law of electric, more precisely
electrostatic interaction. It had the same form of an inverse square depen-
dence on distance, as gravitation. This too was an action at a distance

2

force. While the action at a distance gravitational law worked satisfactorily,
in the nineteenth century the Coulomb law encountered diﬃculties when it
was discovered by Ampere, Faraday and others that moving charges behaved
diﬀerently. The stage was being set for Maxwell’s electrodynamics.
Maxwell could unify the experimental laws of Faraday, Ampere and others in
a Field Theory [1]. Already in the seventeenth century itself Olaf Romer had
noticed that light travels with a ﬁnite speed and does not reach us instantly.
He could conclude this by observing the eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter.
Christian Huygens took the cue and described the motion of light in the form
of waves. The analogy with ripplies moving outwards on the surface of a pool
was clear.
Maxwell utilised these ideas in interpreting the experimentally observed laws
of electricity and magnetism. Thus a moving charge would cause a ripple in
an imaginary medium or ﬁeld, and that ripple would propagate further till
it hit and acted upon another charge. This was a dramatic departure from
the action at a distance concept because the eﬀect of the movement of the
charge would be felt at a later time by another charge. Maxwell even noticed
that the speed at which these disturbances would propagate through the ﬁeld
was the same as that of light. Already the stage was being set for Einstein’s
Theory of Special Relativity [2].
Primarily this had to do with the speed of light which seemed to be the same
in all frames. How could that be? This seemed to contradict our everyday
experience. Einstein adopted this counterintuitive principle as a postulate
and the new concept of spacetime emerged. There were other such dramatic
new results such as the relativity of simultaneity or spacetime intervals.
So obscure were these ideas that Einstein was eventually awarded the Nobel
Prize for his work in topics like the Photoelectric Eﬀect, rather than the
Special Theory of Relativity. Even so, it must be mentioned that there is
an earlier formulation of the old action at a distance theory due to Fokker
and others which resembled closely Maxwell’s Field Theory, in mathematical
form.
At this stage it was clear that two closely related concepts were important
and entered the realm of our intuitive thought– locality and causality. We
will return to this shortly but broadly what is meant is that parts of the
universe could be studied in isolation and further, that an event at a point
A cannot inﬂuence an event at a point B which cannot be reached by a ray
of light during this interval. Roughly speaking, all events within this light
radius would be causally connected, but not so events beyond this radius.

3

Till then Newton’s gravitation held its ground. There was an “actual force”
of attraction between any two material objects. Einstein then conceived of
his elevator experiment. If one were in an elevator whose cable had snapped
for example, he would be in free fall and would not experience gravity till he
hit the ground. Conversely if he were in an elevator ﬂoating deep in outer
space without any trace of gravity, and the elevator was then given an ac-
celeration equal to that of the falling body on the earth, this observer would
then feel in the opposite direction the forceof gravity, exactly as on the earth.
From this point of view, there is a counterintuitive conclusion– gravity could
be destroyed or created through suitable accelerations.
It wasn’t a “real”
force. This lead to Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity in which gravita-
tion is an eﬀect of the curvature of spacetime.
There was one other concept that Einstein introduced in the belief that the
constituents of the universe were static. It was essentially the old problem
of Newton and the apple. He postulated a repulsive force via a cosmological
constant– the twentieth century counterpart of the Greek crystalline spheres.
Then around 1920 it was discovered that the universe is expanding, and Ein-
stein retracted, dubbing it the greatest blunder of his life. As we will brieﬂy
see, we may have to resurrect this force again in the twenty ﬁrst century.
In Einstein’s theories, spacetime was no longer a passive background, but it
actually participated in the processes. Nevertheless all this could be called
Classical Physics.
The advent of Quantum Theory was another counterintuitive leap away from
old ideas. In the solar system, planets could orbit the sun with any arbitrary
energy in principle. Within the atom however electrons could orbit only
with certain handpicked energies and nothing else. An electron could how-
ever jump from one energy level to another, absorbing or emitting a discrete
amount or Quantum of energy. Thus energies were no longer arbitrary. While
all this was constructed to explain otherwise inexplicable observations, nev-
ertheless Quantum Theory succeeded in fudging its ad hoc character and
providing a more fundamental justiﬁcation for itself over the years.
A crowning achievement of Quantum Theory was the Standard Model of
Weinberg, Salam and Glashow which provided a uniﬁed description of the
electromagnetic and weak interactions within the frame work of Quantum
In these considerations spacetime is still Minkowski space-
Field Theory.
time, that is Special Relativity holds.
However there has been one problem whose solution has deﬁed nearly a cen-
tury of work. This is the uniﬁcation of gravitation with electromagnetism,

4

Einstein’s unfulﬁlled dream. The solution now seems within sight– in Quan-
tum Super String theory and in Quantum Gravitation approaches, including
the author’s own formulation. However there is a price to be paid– we have to
make a break with the past and introduce another counterintuitive concept,
namely that spacetime is not a continuum, or is not a diﬀerentiable manifold,
but rather is in some sense, itself quantized. This is a major departure from
the Minkowski Spacetime of Special Relativity and Quantum Field Theory
and also the Reimannian Spacetime of General Relativity. We will touch
upon this in the sequel.

2 Renormalization and Fuzzy Spacetime

0. On the other hand if r were not to

Let us start with the problem of renormalization, which as is well known
was encountered ﬁrst in Classical Electrodynamics [3]. This was because the
electromagnetic self energy of an electron viz., e2
as the size r of
→ ∞
the electron
0, that is the electron
had a ﬁnite size, then this would lead to its own problems requiring the
introduction of, for example Poincare stresses to hold the electron together
(Cf.[3]).
Let us consider the electron as having a bare mass and a physical mass, that
is [4]

r would

→

→

mphys = mbare +

e2
r

(1)

→

Then we could still have in the limit r
0, a ﬁnite physical mass, which
would be what is actually measured, by allowing the inﬁnite two terms on
the right side of (1) to cancel each other out. This means we could preserve
Special Relativity and at the same time recover a ﬁnite physical mass.
However on closer analysis, in Quantum Theory, there is no real problem
with Special Relativity and superluminal or non-local velocities if r were to
be non zero, but of the order of the Compton wavelength l. We can see this
as follows. A particle can travel from the spacetime point x1 to the spacetime
point x2 causally only if the interval is time like, that is

x2)α(x1 −
On the other hand because of the Uncertainty Principle there is a non zero
probability for a particle to move from x1 to x2 even if the interval is space

ηαβ(x1 −

x2)β < 0

5

like, that is with superluminal velocity as long as

(x1 −

x2)2

(x0

1 −

−

2)2
x0

≤

h2
m2 (c = 1)

In other words there is a breakdown of causal physics within the Compton
scale [5].
All this illustrates the limitations of point spacetime and has direct relevance
to our discussion in subsequent sections where we will introduce the idea of
a minimum physical scale l, τ and fuzzyness.

3 Action at a Distance Electrodynamics

We begin with classical electrodynamics. From a classical point of view a
charge that is accelerating radiates energy which dampens its motion. This
is given by the well known Maxwell-Lorentz equation, which in units c = 1,
[6], and τ being the proper time, while ı = 1, 2, 3, 4, is,

m

d2xı

dτ 2 = eF ık dxk

dτ

+

gık

4e
3

d3xı
dτ 3

dxl
dτ −

d3xl
dτ 3

dxı
dτ !

dxk
dτ

,

 

The ﬁrst term on the right is the usual external ﬁeld while the second term
is the damping ﬁeld which is added ad hoc by the requirement of the energy
loss due to radiation. In 1938 Dirac introduced instead of (2),

m

d2xı
dτ 2 = e

k + Rı
F ı
{

k}

dxk
dτ

where

1
2 (cid:26)

k

(cid:27)

Rı

(4)

k ≡

F advı

F retı
k −
In (4), F ret denotes the retarded ﬁeld and F adv the advanced ﬁeld. While
the former is the causal ﬁeld where the inﬂuence of a charge at A is felt by
a charge at B at a distance r after a time t = r
c , the latter is the advanced
acausal ﬁeld which acts on A from a future time. In eﬀect what Dirac showed
was that the radiation damping term in (2) or (3) is given by (4) in which an
antisymmetric diﬀerence of the advanced and retarded ﬁelds is taken, which
of course seemingly goes against causality as the advanced ﬁeld acts from the
future backwards in time. It must be mentioned that Dirac’s prescription

(2)

(3)

6

∼

lead to the so called runaway solutions, with the electron acquiring larger
and larger velocities in the absense of an external force. This he related to
the inﬁnite self energy of the point electron as can be seen from the second
term on the right side of (1).
As far as the breakdown of causality is concerned, this takes place within
a period
It was at this stage that Wheeler and
Feynman reformulated the above action at a distance formalism in terms of
what has been called their Absorber Theory. In their formulation, the ﬁeld
that a charge would experience because of its action at a distance on the
other charges of the universe, which in turn would act back on the original
charge is given by

τ , the Compton time.

d
dt

Re =

2e2
3
The interesting point is that instead of considering the above force in (5)
at the charge e, if we consider the responses in its neighbourhood, in fact a
neighbourhood at the Compton scale, as was argued recently by the author
[7], the ﬁeld would be precisely the Dirac ﬁeld given in (3) and (4). The net
force emanating from the charge is thus given by

(¨x)

(5)

F ret =

F ret + F adv

+

F ret

F adv

(6)

1
2 (cid:26)

(cid:27)

−

(cid:27)

1
2 (cid:26)

which is the acceptable causal retarded ﬁeld. The causal ﬁeld now consists
of the time symmetric ﬁeld of the charge e together with the Dirac ﬁeld, that
is the second term in (6), which represents the response of the rest of the
Interestingly in this formulation we have used a time symmetric
charges.
ﬁeld, viz., the ﬁrst term of (6) to recover the retarded ﬁeld with the correct
arrow of time.
There are two important inputs which we can see in the above formulation.
The ﬁrst is the action of the rest of the universe at a given charge and
the other is spacetime intervals which are of the order of the Compton scale.
Infact we can push the above calculations further. The work done on a charge
e at O by the charge at P a distance r away in causing a displacement dx
is given by (ignoring a cosine factor which merely gives a small numerical
factor),

Now the number of particles at distance r from O is given by

(7)

(8)

e2
r2 dx

·

7

n(r) = ρ(r)

4πr2

where ρ(r) is the density of particles. So using (8) in (7) the total work is
given by

E =

Z Z

e2
r2 4πr2ρdxdr

mc2. We thus
which can be shown using a uniform average density ρ, to be
recover in (9) the inertial energy of the particle in terms of its electromagnetic
interactions with the rest of the universe in an action at a distance scheme.
Interestingly this can also be deduced in the context of gravitation: The work
done on a particle of mass m which we take to be a pion, a typical elementary
particle, by the rest of the particles (pions) in the universe is given by

∼

Gm2N
R
√Nl, the well known Weyl-
1080 while R
It is known that in (10) N
Eddington formula. Whence the gravitational energy of the pion is given
by

(10)

∼

∼

where in (11) we have used the fact that

Gm2√N
l

=

e2
l ∼

mc2

Gm2

e2
√N

∼

(It must be mentioned that though the Eddington formula and (12) were
empirical, they can infact be deduced from theory [8], as we will see shortly.)

4 The Machian Universe

This dependence of the mass of a particle on the rest of the universe was
argued by Mach in the nineteenth century itself in what is now famous as
Mach’s Principle [9, 10]. The Principle is counterintuitive in that we tend to
consider the mass which represents the quantity of matter in a particle to be
an intrisic property of the particle. But the following statement of Mach’s
Principle shows it to be otherwise thus going counter to ideas of locality and
causality.
If there were no other particles in the universe, then the force acting on the
particle P would vanish and so we would have by Newton’s second law

(9)

(11)

(12)

(13)

m~a = O

8

Can we conclude that the acceleration of the particle vanishes? Not if we do
not postulate the existence of an absolute background frame in space. In the
absense of such a Newtonian absolute space frame, the acceleration ~a would
infact be arbitrary, because we could measure this acceleration with respect
to arbitrary frames. Then (13) implies that m = 0. That is, in the absense
of any other matter in the universe, the mass of a material particle would
vanish. From this point of view the mass of a particle depends on the rest
of the material content of the universe. This has been brought out by the
above calculations in (9) and (11).
Though Einstein was an admirer of Mach’s ideas, his Special Theory of Rel-
ativity went counter to them. He subscribed as noted, to the concept of
locality according to which information about a part of the universe can be
obtained by dealing with that part alone and without taking into consider-
ation the rest of the universe at the same time. In his words, [11] “But one
supposition we should, in my opinion absolutely hold fast: the real factual
situation of the system S2 is independent of what is done with the system S1
which is spatially separated from the former.”Further, causality is another
cornerstone in Einstein’s Physics.

5 The Quantum Universe

The advent of Quantum Mechanics however threw up as noted several counter
intuitive ideas and Einstein could not reconcile to them. One of these ideas
was the wave particle duality. Another was that of the collapse of the wave
function in which process causality becomes a casuality. To put it simply,
if the wave function is a super position of the eigen states of an observable,
then a measurement of the observable yields one of the eigen values no doubt,
but it is not possible to predict which one. Due to the act of observation,
the wave function instantly collapses to any one of its eigen states in an
acausal manner. To put it another way, the wave function obeys the causal
Schrodinger equation, for example, till the instant of observation at which
point, causality ceases.
Another important counter intuitive feature of Quantum Mechanics is that of
non locality. In fact Einstein with Podolsky and Rosen put forward in 1935
his arguments for the incompleteness of Quantum Mechanics on this score
[11, 12]. This has later come to be known as the EPR paradox. To put it in
a simple way, without sacriﬁcing the essential concepts, let us consider two

9

−

elementary particles, for example two protons kept together somehow. They
are then released and move in opposite directions. When the ﬁrst proton
reaches the point A its momentum is measured and turns out to be say, ~p.
At that instant we can immediately conclude, without any further measure-
ment that the momentum of the second proton which is at the point B is
~p. This follows from the Conservation of Linear Momentum, and is per-
−
fectly acceptable in Classical Physics, in which the particles possess a deﬁnite
momentum at each instant.
In Quantum Physics, the diﬃculty is that we cannot know the momentum at
B until and after a measurement is actually performed, and then that value of
the momentum is unpredictable. What the above experiment demonstrates
is that the proton at B instantly came to have the value
~p for its momen-
tum without any further measurement, when the momentum of the proton
at A was measured. This “instant” or “spooky action at a distance” feature
was unacceptable to Einstein.
In Quantum Theory however this is legitimate because of another counter
intuitive feature which is called Quantum Nonseparability. That is, if two
systems interact and then separate to a distance, they still have a common
state vector. This goes against the concept of locality and causality, because
it implies instantaneous interaction between distant systems. So in the above
example, even though the protons at A and B may be separated, they still
have a common wave function which collapses with the measurement of the
momentum of any one of them and selfconsistently provides an explanation.
This nonseparability has been characterised by Schrodinger in the following
way: “I would not call that one, but rather the characteristic of Quantum
Mechanics.” For Einstein however this was like spooky action at a distance.
All this has been experimentally veriﬁed since 1980 which sets at rest Ein-
stein’s objections.
However this “entanglement” as it is called these days, between distant ob-
jects in the universe, does not really manifest itself though it is perfectly
legitimate and observable in a universe that consists of let us say just two
particles. But a measurement destroys the entanglement. Now in the uni-
verse at large as there are so many particles and correspondingly a huge
amount of interference, the entanglement is considerably weakened. This
was the crux of Schrodinger’s arguments. What is these days called decoher-
ence works along these lines. This is in fact the explanation for the famous
“Schrodinger’s Cat” paradox.
This paradox can be explained in the following simple terms: A cat is in an

10

enclosure along with, let us say a microscopic amount of radioactive material.
If this material decays, emitting let us say an electron, the electron would fall
on a vial of cyanide, releasing it and killing the cat in the process. Let us say
that there is a certain probability of such an electron being emitted. So there
is the same probability for the cat to be killed. There is also a probability
that the electron is not emitted, so that there is the same probability for the
cat to remain alive. The cat is therefore in a state which is a superposition of
the alive and dead states. It is only when an observer makes an observation
that this superposed wave function collapses into either the dead cat state or
the alive and kicking cat state, and this happening is acausal. So it is only
on an observation being made that the cat is killed or saved, and that too in
an unpredictable manner. Till the observation is made the cate is described
by the superposed wave function and is thus neither alive nor dead.
The resolution of this paradox– it is a paradox– is of course quite simple.
The paradox is valid if the system consists of such few particles and at such
distances that they do not interact with each other. Clearly in the real world
this idealization is not possible. There are far too many particles and inter-
ferences taking place all the time and the superposed wave function would
have collapsed almost instantly. This role of the environment has come to
be called decoherence. We will return to this point shortly.
The important point is that all of Classical and Quantum Physics is based
on such idealized laws as if there were no interferences present, that is what
may be called a two body scenario, is implicit. Clearly this is not a real life
scenario.

6 The Zero Point Field

Another counter intuitive concept which Quantum Theory introduces is that
of the Zero Point Field or Quantum Vacuum. If there were a vacuum, in
which at a given point the momentum (and energy) would vanish, then by
the Heisenberg Principle, the point itself becomes indeterminate. More realis-
tically, in the vacuum the average energy vanishes but there are ﬂuctuations–
these are the Zero Point Fluctuations. A more classical way of looking at
this is that the source free vacuum electromagnetic equations have non zero
solutions, in addition to the zero solutions. Interestingly we can argue that
the Zero Point Field leads to a minimum interval at the Compton scale [13].
The momentum operators m~v do not satisfy the Quantum Mechanical com-

11

mutation relations with the position coordinators. But if we add the elec-
tromagnetic momentum due to the background Zero Point Field, then we
recover the Quantum Mechanical commutation relations and spin half [14].
Thus it appears that Classical Mechanics together with the Zero Point Field
leads to Quantum Theory. Infact several authors like Marshall, Boyer and
others had argued for Quantum Mechanics arising from stochastic electrody-
namics [15].
Indeed we could even compute the energy due to the Zero Point Field, which
in turn gives rise to the Lorentz force and recover the inertial energy.
The manifestation of the Zero Point Field has been experimentally tested in
what is called the Lamb Shift, which is caused by the fact that the Zero Point
Field buﬀets an ordinary electron in an atom. It has also been veriﬁed in the
famous Casimir eﬀect [16, 17]. The Zero Point Field in this case manifests
itself as an attractive force between two parallel plates.
Interestingly, based on such a Quantum Vacuum and the minimum space-
time intervals the author had proposed a cosmological model in 1997 which
predicted an accelerating universe and a small cosmological constant. In ad-
dition, several so called large number relations which had been written oﬀ
as inexplicable empirical coincidences (including the Eddington formula and
the electromagnetism gravitation strengths ratio, alluded to) were shown to
follow from the theory [18]. At that time the prevailing cosmological model
was one of dark matter and a decelerating universe. Observational conﬁr-
mation started coming for the new predictions from 1998 itself while the
observational discovery of dark energy, which displaces dark matter, was the
scientiﬁc Breakthrough of the Year 2003 of the American Association for
Advancement of Science [19]. Dark energy goes hand in hand with a cosmo-
logical constant of the kind Einstein proposed and then discarded.
It may be observed that the idea of the Zero Point Field was introduced as
early as in 1911 by Max Planck himself to which he assigned an energy 1
2¯hω.
Nernst, a few years later extended these considerations to ﬁelds and believed
that there would be several interesting consequences in Thermodynamics and
even Cosmology.
Infact later authors argued that there must be ﬂuctuations of the Quantum
Electromagnetic Flield, as required by the Heisenberg Principle, so that we
L (B being the magnetic ﬁeld),
have for an extent

∼

(∆B)2

¯hc/L4

(14)

≥

12

Whence from (14), the dispersion in energy in the entire volume
given by

∼

∆E

¯hc/L

∼
(It should be noticed that if L is the Compton wavelength, then (15) gives us
the energy of the particle.)Interestingly Braﬀort and coworkers deduced the
Zero Point Field from the Absorber Theory of Wheeler and Feynman, which
we encountered earlier. In the process they found that the spectral density
of the vacuum ﬁeld was given by [20]

L3 is

(15)

(16)

ρ(ω) = const

ω3

·

There have been other points of view which converge to the above conclu-
sions. In any case as we have seen a little earlier, it would be too much of
an idealization to consider an atom or a charged particle to be an isolated
system. It is interacting with the rest of the universe and this produces a
random ﬁeld.
It has also been shown that the constant of proportionality in (16) is given
by (Cf.ref.[20])

Interestingly such a constant is implied by Lorentz invariance.
From the point of view of Quantum Electrodynamics we reach conclusions
similar to those seen above. As Feynman and Hibbs put it [21] “Since most
of the space is a vacuum, any eﬀect of the vacuum-state energy of the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld would be large. We can estimate its magnitude. First,
it should be pointed out that some other inﬁnities occuring in quantum-
electrodynamic problems are avoided by a particular assumption called the
cutoﬀ rule. This rule states that those modes having very high frequencies
(short wavelength) are to be excluded from consideration. The rule is justi-
ﬁed on the ground that we have no evidence that the laws of electrodynamics
are obeyed for wavelengths shorter than any which have yet been observed.
In fact, there is a good reason to believe that the laws cannot be extended
to the short-wavelength region.
“Mathematical representations which work quite well at longer wavelengths
lead to divergences if extended into the short wavelength region. The wave-
lengths in question are of the order of the Compton wavelength of the proton;
1/2π times this wavelength is ¯h/mc
≃
“For our present estimate suppose we carry out sums over wave numbers only

10−14cm.

×

2

¯h
2π2c3

13

up to the limiting value kmax = mc/¯h. Approximating the sum over states
by an integral, we have, for the vacuum-state energy per unit volume,

Ee
unit vol

= 2

¯hc
2(2π)3

0
Z

kmax

k4πk2dk =

max

¯hck4
8π2

“(Note the ﬁrst factor 2, for there are two modes for each k). The equivalent
mass of this energy is obtained by dividing the result by c2. This gives

m0
unit vol

= 2

1015g/cm3

×

Such a mass density would, at ﬁrst sight at least, be expected to produce
very large gravitational eﬀects which are not observed.
It is possible that
we are calculating in a naive manner, and, if all of the consequences of the
general theory of relativity (such as the gravitational eﬀects produced by the
large stresses implied here) were included, the eﬀects might cancel out; but
nobody has worked all this out. It is possible that some cutoﬀ procedure that
not only yields a ﬁnite energy density for the vacuum state but also provides
relativistic invariance may be found. The implications of such a result are at
present completely unknown.
“For the present we are safe in assigning the value zero for the vacuum-state
energy density. Up to the present time no experiments that would contradict
this assumption have been performed.”
However the high density encountered above is perfectly meaningful if we
10−13cm: Within this volume the den-
consider the Compton scale cut oﬀ
sity gives us back the mass of an elementary particle like the pion. All this
can be put into perspective in the following way.
It has been shown in detail by the author that the universe can be consid-
ered to have an underpinning of ZPF oscillators at the Planck scale [22].
Indeed in all recent approaches towards a uniﬁed formulation of gravitation
and electromagnetism (including String Theory), the diﬀerentiable spacetime
manifold of Classical Physics and Quantum Physics has been abandoned as
10−33cms and
noted earlier and we consider the minimum Planck scale lP ∼
10−42secs [23]. We can then show that the universe is a coherent mode
τP ∼
of ¯N
10120 Planck oscillators, spaced a distance lP apart, that is at the
Planck scale. Then the spatial extent is given by

∼

∼

R = √ ¯N lP

14

(17)

M = √ ¯NmP

m =

mP
√n

l = √nlP

M = Nm

ψ =

cnφn,

ψ =

bn ¯φn

n
X

The mass of the universe is given by

where mP is the Planck mass. Moreover we can show that a typical elemen-
1040 oscillators and we
tary particle like the pion is the ground state of n
have (Cf.ref.[22])

∼

There are N
have

∼

1080 such elementary particles in the universe. Whence we

We note that equations like (17) and (20) have the Brownian Random Walk
character. At this stage we see asymmetry between equations (18), (19)
and (21). The reason is that the universe is an excited state of ¯N oscillators
whereas an elementary particle is a stable ground state of n Planck oscillators.
Furthermore, let us denote the state of each Planck oscillator by φn; then the
state of the universe can be described in the spirit of entanglement discussed
earlier by

n
X
φn can be considered to be eigen states of energy with eigen values En. It is
known that (22) can be written as [24]

where

bn|

|

2 = 1 if E < En < E + ∆ and = 0 otherwise under the assumption

(cn, cm) = 0, n

= m

(Infact n in (24) could stand for not a single state but for a set of states
nı, and so also m). Here the bar denotes a time average over a suitable
interval. This is the well known Random Phase Axiom and arises due to the
total randomness amongst the phases cn. Also the expectation value of any
operator O is given by

< O >=

2( ¯φn, O ¯φn)/

2

bn|

n |
X

bn|

n |
X

15

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

6
· · ·

Equations (23) and (25) show that eﬀectively we have incoherent states
¯φ1, ¯φ2,
once averages over time intervals for the phases cn in (24) van-
ish owing to their relative randomness.
In the light of the preceding discussion of random ﬂuctuations, we can in-
terpret all this meaningfully: We can identify φn with the ZPF. The time
¯h
averages are the same as Dirac’s zitterbewegung averages over intervals
mc2
(Cf.ref.[8]). We then get disconnected or incoherent particles from a single
background of vacuum ﬂuctuations exactly as before. The incoherence arises
because of the well known random phase relation (24), that is after averaging
over the suitable interval. Here the entanglement is weakened by the inter-
actions and hence we have (21) for elementary particles, rather than (18).
How do we characterize time in this scheme? To consider this problem, we
observe that the ground state of ¯N Planck oscillators considered above would
be, exactly as in (19),

∼

¯m =

mP
√ ¯N ∼

10−65gms

(26)

It is interesting that it follows from thermodynamic arguments that this is
the smallest possible observable mass in the universe. The universe is an
excited state and consists of ¯N such ground state levels and so we have, from
(26)

M = ¯m ¯N = √ ¯NmP ∼

1055gms,

as required, M being the mass of the universe. As can be easily calculated,
the Compton wavelength and time of ¯m turn out to be the radius and age
of the universe.
√n in the levels of the n oscillators making up an
Due to the ﬂuctuation
elementary particle, the energy is, remembering that mc2 is the ground state,

∼

∼
and so the indeterminacy time is

∆E

√nmc2 = mP c2,

¯h
∆E

=

¯h
mP c2 = τP ,

as indeed we would expect.
The corresponding minimum indeterminacy length would therefore be lP .
We thus recover the Planck scale. One of the consequences of the minimum
spacetime cut oﬀ– whether it be in Quantum Super String theory or Quantum

16

Gravity approaches or the author’s own approach– is that the Heisenberg
Uncertainty Principle takes an extra term. Thus we have,

∆x

¯h
∆p

≈

+ α

∆p
¯h

, α = l2(or l2

P )

(27)

where l (or lP ) is the minimum interval under consideration (Cf.[8, 23]). The
ﬁrst term gives the usual Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.
However, the second and extra term in (27) has the implication that as we go
down to arbitrarily small distances, we end up once again at the large scale.
(This is sometimes called duality in String theory.) This not only prohibits
arbitrarily small resolution, but shows up the universe as some sort of a four
dimensional Klein’s bottle.
Application of the time analogue of (27) for the indeterminacy time ∆t for the
ﬂuctuation in energy ∆ ¯E = √Nmc2 in the N particle states of the universe
gives exactly as above,

∆t =

∆E
¯h

τ 2
P =

√N mc2
¯h

τ 2
P =

√N mP c2
√n¯h

τ 2
P = √nτP = τ

In other words, for the ﬂuctuation √N, the time is τ .
It must be re-
emphasized that the Compton time τ of an elementary particle, is an interval
within which there are unphysical eﬀects like zitterbewegung - as pointed out
by Dirac, it is only on averaging over this interval, that we return to mean-
ingful Physics. To continue, we then have,

dN/dt = √N /τ

(28)

On the other hand due to the ﬂuctuation in the ¯N oscillators constituting
the universe, the ﬂuctuational energy is similarly given by

√ ¯N ¯mc2,

which is the same as (26) above. Another way of deriving (28) is to observe
that as √n particles appear ﬂuctuationally in time τP which is, in the ele-
mentary particle time scales, √n√n = √N particles in √nτP = τ . That is,
the rate of the ﬂuctuational appearance of particles is

√n
τP !

 

=

√N
τ

= dN/dt

17

which is (28). From here by integration,

T = √N τ

T is the time elapsed from N = 1 and τ is the Compton time. This gives T
its origin in the ﬂuctuations - there is no smooth “background” (or “being”)
time - the root of time is in “becoming”. It is the time of a Brownian Wiener
τ and therefore the Brownian
process: A step l gives a step in time l/c
relation ∆x = √N l gives T = √Nτ (Cf.refs.[22] and [23]). Time is born out
of acausal ﬂuctuations which are random and therefore irreversible. Indeed,
there is no background time. States are created and states are destroyed,
but the net result is the creation of √N states and time is proportional to
√N, N being the number of particles which are being created spontaneously
from the ZPF by ﬂuctuations to the higher energy states of the coherent ¯N
Planck oscillators.

≡

7 The Underpinning of the Universe

So our description of the universe at the Planck scale is that of an entangled
wave function as in (22). However we percieve the universe at the elementary
particle or Compton scale, where the random phases would have weakened
the entanglement, and we have the description as in (23) or (25). Does this
mean that the N elementary particles in the universe are totally incoherent
in which case we do not have any justiﬁcation for treating them to be in
the same spacetime? We can argue that they still interact amongst each
other though in comparison this is “weak”. For instance let us consider the
background ZPF whose spectral frequency is given by (16). If there are two
particles at A and B separated by a distance r, then those wavelengths of the
r would connect or link the two particles. Whence
ZPF which are atleast
the force of interaction between the two particles is given by, remembering
that ω

∼

1
r ,

∝

Force

∞

ω3dr

1
r2

∝ Z
r
Thus from (29) we are able to recover the familiar Coulomb Law of interac-
tion. The background ZPF thus enables us to recover the action at a distance
formulation. Infact a similar argument can be given [25] to recover from QED
the Coulomb Law–here the carriers of the force are the virtual photons, that

∝

(29)

18

is photons whose life time is within the Compton time of uncertainty per-
mitted by the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.
It is thus possible to synthesize the ﬁeld and action at a distance concepts,
once it is recognized that there are minimum spacetime intervals at the
Compton scale [7]. Many of the supposed contradictions arise because of our
characterization in terms of spacetime points and consequently a diﬀeren-
tiable manifold. Once the minimum cut oﬀ at the Planck scale is introduced,
this leads to the physical Compton scale and a uniﬁed formulation free of
divergence problems.
It must be stressed that this view of spacetime is not only that of a non
diﬀerentiable manifold but also has another characteristic: spacetime rather
than being a container or stage, is a result of its constituents, a view pro-
pounded by Liebniz. It is as if the actors make up the stage itself, another
apparently counterintuitive concept. We now make a few comments.
We had seen that the Dirac formulation of Classical Electrodynamics needed
to introduce the acausal advanced ﬁeld in (4). However the acausality was
again within the Compton time scale.
Infact this fuzzy spacetime can be
modelled by a Wiener process as discussed in [23](Cf. also [26]). The point
0− and 0+
here is that the backward and forward time derivatives for ∆t
respectively do not cancel, as they should not, if time is fuzzy. So we au-
tomatically recover from the electromagnetic potential the retarded ﬁeld for
forward derivatives and the advanced ﬁelds for backward derivatives. In this
case we have to consider both these ﬁelds. Causality however is recovered
as in (6). This is a transition to intervals which are greater in magnitude
compared to the Compton scale in which case the latter can be neglected.
It must also be mentioned that a few assumptions are implicit in the con-
ventional theory using diﬀerentiable spacetime manifolds. In the variational
problem we use the conventional δ (variation) which commutes with the time
derivatives. So such an operator is constant in time. So also the energy mo-
mentum operators in Dirac’s displacement operators theory are the usual
time and space derivatives of Quantum Theory. But here the displacements
are “instantaneous”. They are valid in a stationary or constant energy sce-
nario, and it is only then that the space and time operators are on the same
footing as required by Special Relativity [27]. Infact it can be argued that
0(δx2) but if δx is of the order of the
in this theory we neglect intervals
Compton scale and we do not neglect the square of this scale, then the space
and momentum coordinates become complex indicative of a noncommutative
geometry which has been discussed in detail [28, 29, 23]. What all this means

→

∼

19

dx or d

is that it is only on neglecting 0(l2) that we have the conventional spacetime
of Quantum Theory, including relativistic Quantum Mechanics and Special
Relativity, that is the Minkowski spacetime.
Coming to the conservation laws of energy and momentum these are based
on translation symmetries [30]– what it means is the operators d
dt are
independent of x and t. There is here a homogeneity property of spacetime
which makes these laws non local. This has to be borne in mind, particularly
when we try to explain the EPR paradox.
The question how a “coherent” spacetime can be extracted out of the par-
ticles of the universe could be given a mathematical description along the
following lines: Let us say that two particles A and B are in a neighbour-
hood, if they interact at any time. We also deﬁne a neighbourhood of a
point or particle A as a subset of all points or particles which contains A
and at least one other point. If a particle C interacts with B that is, is in a
neighbourhood of B, then we would say that it is also in the neighbourhood
of A. That is we deﬁne the transitivity property for neighbourhoods. We
can then assume the following property [31]:
Given two distinct elements (or even subsets) A and B, there is a neighbour-
hood NA1 such that A belongs to NA1, B does not belong to NA1 and also
given any NA1, there exists a neithbourhood NA 1
NA1,
that is there exists an inﬁnite sequence of neithbourhoods between A and B.
In other words we introduce topological “closeness”. Alternatively, we could
introduce the reasonable supposition that these are a set of Borel subsets.
From here, as in the derivation of Urysohn’s lemma [32], we could deﬁne a
mapping f such that f (A) = 0 and f (B) = 1 and which takes on all inter-
mediate values. We could now deﬁne a metric, d(A, B) =
f (A)
. We
could easily verify that this satisﬁes the properties of a metric.
It must be remarked that the metric turns out to be again, a result of a
global or a series of large sets, unlike the usual local picture in which it is
the other way round.

such that A

f (B)

NA 1

2 ⊂

−

⊂

|

|

2

8 The Path Integral Formulation

We ﬁrst argue that the alternative Feynman Path Integral formulation es-
sentially throws up fuzzy spacetime. To recapitulate [21, 26, 33], if a path is
given by

x = x(t)

20

then the probability amplitude is given by

ı
φ(x) = e

L(x, ˙x)dt

t2
t1

R

So the total probability amplitude is given by

φ(x) =

Xx(t)

X

t2
t1

ı
e

R

L(x, ˙x)dt

ı
¯h S

e

≡

X

In the Feynman analysis, the path

x = ¯x(t)

appears as the actual path for which the action is stationery. For paths very
close to this, there is constructive interference, whereas for paths away from
this the interference is destructive.
We notice that this is also the formulation of the random phase encountered
earlier [34]. However it is well known that the convergence of the integrals
requires the Lipshitz condition viz.,

∆x2

a∆t

(30)

≈
We could say that only those paths satisfying (30) constructively interfere.
We would now like to observe that (30) is the well known Brownian or Dif-
fusion equation related to our earlier discussion of the Weiner process. This
has been commented upon extensively [35, 8, 23] and also [36]. The point is
that (30) again implies a minimum spacetime cut oﬀ, as indeed was noted
by Feynman himself [21], for if ∆t could
0, then the velocity would
.
→ ∞
these irregularities are such that the
As Feynman and Hibbs put it, “...
“average” square velocity does not exist, where we have used the classical
analogue in referring to an “average.”
“If some average velocity is deﬁned for a short time interval ∆t, as, for ex-
¯h/(ım∆t).
ample, [x(t + ∆t)
That is, the “mean” square value of a velocity averaged over a short time
interval is ﬁnite, but its value becomes larger as the interval becomes shorter.
It appears that quantum-mechanical paths are very irregular. However, these
irregularities average out over a reasonable length of time to produce a rea-
sonable drift, or “average” velocity, although for short intervals of time the
“average” value of the velocity is very high...”

x(t)]/∆t, the “mean” square value of this is

→

−

−

21

To put it another way we are taking averages over an interval ∆t, within
which there are unphysical processes. It is only after the average is taken,
that we recover physical spacetime [24]. If in the above, ∆t is taken as the
Compton time, then we recover for the root mean squared velocity, the ve-
locity of light.
As has been argued in detail [8, 23] this is exactly the situation which we
encounter in the Dirac theory of the electron. There we have the unphysical
zitterbewegung eﬀects within the Compton time ∆t and as ∆t
0 the veloc-
ity of the electron tends to the maximum possible velocity, that of light [37].
It is only after averaging over the Compton scale that we recover meaningful
physics.
This existence of a minimum spacetime scale, it has been argued for quite
sometime is the origin of fuzzy spacetime, described by a noncommutative
geometry, consistent with Lorentz invariance. This was shown a long time
ago by Snyder [38]. In this case we have commutative relations like

→

[xı, xj] = ΘıjO(l2)

(31)

[xı, pj] = ˜Θıj¯h[1 + O(l2)]
It is interesting to note that the momentum position commutation relations
lead to the usual Quantum Mechanical commutation relations in the usual
(commutative) spacetime if O(l2) is neglected where l deﬁnes the minimum
scale. Indeed, as noted elsewhere, we have at the smallest scale, a quantum
of area. Another way of looking at this is to observe that the Quantum
Mechanical path has the fractal dimension 2 (Cf.ref.[23]), corresponding to
the Quantum of area. It is this “ﬁne structure” of spacetime which is ex-
pressed by the noncommutative structure (31). Neglecting O(l2) is equivalent
to neglecting the above and returning to usual spacetime. (In other words
Snyder’s purely classical considerations at a Compton scale lead to Quantum
Mechanics.

9 A Degenerate Bose Assembly Model

We now observe that the coherent N ′ Planck oscillators referred to above
could be considered to be a degenerate Bose assembly. In this case as is well
known we have (z

1)

≈

v =

V
N

22

(Cf.ref.[34]). V the volume of the universe

1084cm3. Whence

∼
10−36

v =

V
N ′ ∼

So that the wavelength

λ

(v)1/3

10−12cm = l

(32)

∼

∼
What is very interesting is that (32) gives us the Compton length of a typical
elementary particle like the pion. So from the Planck oscillators we are able
to recover the elementary particles exactly as in the references [39, 22].
Moreover, let us now consider the distant background assembly which is at
nearly the same energy. In this case we have (Cf.ref.[34])

=

n~ki

h

2
eβhw

1

−

As we have assumed that the photons all have nearly the same energy, we
have,

h
is given by (33), and k

h

=

n~ki

k′)

δ(k

−

n~k′

i
~k
≡ |

where
in the volume V being considered, can be obtained in the usual way,

. The total number of photons N,

n~k′

i

h

|

N =

∞

V
(2π)3

0
Z

dk4πk2

nki

h

where V is large. Inserting (34) in (35) we get,

N =

2V

(2π)3 4πk′2[ǫΘ

−

1]−1[k] Θ

βhw

≡

where [k] is a dimensionality constant of magnitude unity, introduced to
compensate the loss of a factor k in the integral (35), owing to the δ-function
in (34).
We observe that, Θ = hw/KT
energy hw. We also use,

1, since by (6), the photons have the same

≈

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

v =

, λ =

=

and z =

V
N

2πc
w

2π
k

λ3
v

23

λ being the wavelength of the radiation. We now have from (8), using (37),

vk′2
π2 [k] =
At this stage we observe that as z is dimensionless, this equation is perfectly
consistent because both sides are dimensionless. Using (37) we get:

8π
k′

1) =

1
z

[k]

(e

−

(38)

(39)

(40)

From (38) we conclude that, in this case,

z =

8π

k′(e

1)

−

=

4λ

(e

1)

−

[k]

λ =

= 0.4cm

e

1

−
4

≈

It must be observed that we consider the degenerate case in all the above
considerations and so z
1. What is very interesting is that (39) this time
gives us the correct microwave cosmic background radiation wavelength and
temperature.
We can get an alternative justiﬁcation for the above considerations. As
shown in detail elsewhere [40], if we balance the gravitational energy and
Fermi energy of the cold cosmic background neutrinos and identify this with
inertial energy of the neutrino,

GNνm2
ν
R

=

ν ¯h2
N 2/3
mνR2 = mνc2

we get the correct mass of the neutrino mν,
∼
correct number of background neutrinos, Nν ∼
We can then recover these neutrinos as a consequence of Nν Planck oscillators
considered above and also the Cosmic Microwave Background temperature
of
Yet another demonstration of all this is to start with the degenerate Fermi
gas equation [34],

10−8 electron mass and the
1090.

3◦K (Cf. ref.[40] for details).

∼

F = ¯h3(N/V )
p3
If in (41), N = Nν, above, we get back mν and the background temperature.
1◦K, we can get mν and Nν. Thus a neutrino shows
Conversely, taking T
up as a cold electron, reminiscent of quarks and electrons being interchange-
able at high temperatures.

(41)

∼

24

References

1975.

1965, pp.93-94.

Mass., 1965.

[1] Jackson, J.D., ”Classical Electrodynamics”, John Wiley, New York,

[2] Einstein, A., ”The Meaning of Relativity”, Oxford & IBH, New Delhi,

[3] Rohrlich, F., “Classical Charged Particles”, Addison-Wesley, Reading,

[4] Hooft, G.’t., “A Confrontation with inﬁnity” in Proceedings of Fourth
International Symposium on “Frontiers of Fundamental Physics”, Eds.,
B.G. Sidharth and M.V. Altaisky, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
New York, 2001, p.1-12.

[5] Weinberg, S., ”Gravitation and Cosmology”, John Wiley & Sons, New

York, 1972, p.62.

[6] Hoyle, F., and Narlikar, J.V., “Lectures on Cosmology and Action at a

Distance Electrodynamics”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996.

[7] Sidharth, B.G.,

in Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern
Physics: “Pro and Contra”, Eds., A.E. Chubykalo et al., Nova Science
Publishing, New York, 1999.

[8] Sidharth, B.G., “Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science, New York, 2002.

[9] Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S., and Wheeler, J.A., ”Gravitation”, W.H.

Freeman, San Francisco, 1973, pp.819ﬀ.

[10] Narlikar, J.V., ”Introduction to Cosmology”, Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, 1993, p.57.

[11] V. Singh, “Schrodinger Centenary Surveys in Physics”, Eds. V. Singh

and S. Lal, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1988.

[12] P.A. Schilpp, “Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist”, Library of Living

Philosophers, Evanston, 1940.

25

[13] B.G. Sidharth, “Mysterious Dark Energy”, to appear in “Einstein and

Poincare”, Eds., V. Dvoeglazov et al., Apeiron Press, 2005.

[14] Sachidanandam, S., Physics Letters, Vol.97A, No.8, 19 September 1983,

p.323-324.

[15] De Pena, L., “Stochastic Processes Applied to Physics”, Ed., B. Gomez,

World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1983.

[16] Mostepanenko, V.M., and Trunov, N.N., Sov.Phys.Usp. 31(11), Novem-

ber 1988, p.965-987.

[17] S.K. Lamoreauz, Phys.Rev.Lett., Vol.78, No.1, January 1997, p.5-8.

[18] Sidharth, B.G., Int.J.Mod.Phys.A, 13 (15), 1998, p.2599ﬀ.

[19] Science, Vol. 302, No.5653, 19 December 2003, pp.2038.

[20] De Pena, L., and A.M. Cetto, A.M., Found of Phys., Vol.12, No.10,

1982, p.1017-1037.

[21] Feynman, R.P., and Hibbs, A.R., “Quantum Mechanics and Path Inte-

grals”, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.

[22] B.G. Sidharth, Found.Phys.Lett., 17(5), 2004, 503-506.

[23] B.G. Sidharth, “The Universe of Fluctuations”, Springer, 2005, under

publication.

Solitons and Fractals.

[24] B.G. Sidharth, “The Underpinning of Spacetime” to appear in Chaos,

[25] D.H. Frisch and A.M. Thorndike, “Elementary Particles”, Van Nos-

trand, Princeton, 1963, p.96ﬀ.

[26] Nottale, L., “Fractal Space-Time and Microphysics: Towards a Theory

of Scale Relativity”,World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1993, p.312.

[27] Davydov, A.S., ”Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1965,

p.655.

[28] B.G. Sidharth, Found.Phys.Lett., 16 (1), 2003, pp.91-97.

26

[29] B.G. Sidharth, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 22, 2004, 537-540.

[30] Roman, P., “Advanced Quantum Theory”, Addison-Wesley, Reading,

Mass., 1965, p.31.

No.2-3, 1999, pp.167-176.

[31] Altaisky, M.V., and Sidharth, B.G., Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, Vol. 10,

[32] Simmons, G.F., ”Introduction to Topology and Modern Analysis”, Mc-

Graw Hill Book Co. Inc., New York, 1965, p.135.

[33] Itzykson, C., and Zuber, J., ”Quantum-Field Theory”, Mc-Graw Hill,

New York, 1980, p.139.

[34] Huang, K., ”Statistical Mechanics”, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi 1975,

pp.75ﬀ.

[35] Sidharth, B.G., Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 12 (1), 2000, 173-178.

[36] Reif, F., “Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics”, McGraw-

Hill Book Co., Singapore, 1965.

[37] Dirac, P.A.M., ”The Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, Clarendon

Press, Oxford, 1958, pp.4ﬀ, pp.253ﬀ.

[38] Snyder, H.S., Physical Review, Vol.72, No.1, July 1 1947, p.68-71.

[39] Sidharth, B.G., Foundation of Physics Letters, 15(6), 2002, pp.577-583.

[40] Sidharth, B.G., “Neutrinos and the Weak Interactions”, to appear in

Foundations of Physics Letters.

27

