5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Aristotle and Gautama on Logic and Physics

Subhash Kak
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5901

February 2, 2008

Introduction

Physics as part of natural science and philosophy explicitly or implicitly uses
logic, and from this point of view all cultures that studied nature [e.g. 1-4]
must have had logic. But the question of the origins of logic as a formal
discipline is of special interest to the historian of physics since it represents a
turning inward to examine the very nature of reasoning and the relationship
between thought and reality. In the West, Aristotle (384-322 BCE) is gener-
ally credited with the formalization of the tradition of logic and also with the
development of early physics. In India, the R. gveda itself in the hymn 10.129
suggests the beginnings of the representation of reality in terms of various
logical divisions that were later represented formally as the four circles of
catus. kot.i: “A”, “not A”, “A and not A”, and “not A and not not A” [5].
Causality as the basis of change was enshrined in the early philosophical sys-
tem of the S¯am. khya. According to Pur¯an. ic accounts, Medh¯atithi Gautama
and Aks.ap¯ada Gautama (or Gotama), which are perhaps two variant names
for the same author of the early formal text on Indian logic, belonged to
about 550 BCE.

The Greek and the Indian traditions seem to provide the earliest formal
representations of logic, and in this article we ask if they inﬂuenced each
other. We are also interested in the scope of early logic, since this gives
an idea to us of the way early thinkers thought about nature and change.
We will show that Greek and Indian logical traditions have much that is
distinctive and unique.

1

Philosophy and physics were considered part of the same intellectual en-
terprise until comparatively recent times. Thomas McEvilley’s The Shape of
Ancient Thought does an excellent comparative analysis of Greek and Indian
philosophy [6], stressing how there existed much interaction between the two
cultural areas in very early times, but he argued that they evolved indepen-
dently. Some scholars believe that the ﬁve part syllogism of Indian logic was
derived from the three-part Aristotelian logic. On the other hand, there is
an old tradition preserved by the Greeks and the Persians which presents
the opposite view. According to it, Alexander was the intermediary who
brought Indian logic to the Greeks and it was under this inﬂuence that the
later Greek tradition emerged.

In this article, I review the evidence afresh and conclude that although
the Greeks may have been aware of Indian logic, there is no reason to suppose
that it inﬂuenced their own development of the subject in any fundamental
way.
I argue that the ﬁve-part Indian syllogism is likely to have been an
earlier invention than Aristotle’s work. These conclusions can assist us in
ﬁnding the chronological framework for the development of logic within India.

Background

My interest in the question of the connections between Indian and Greek
logic was triggered several years ago by a letter from Andrei Heilper of the
IBM Research Laboratory in Haifa, Israel. Heilper felt that Western logic
might be indebted to Indian logic but this feeling was based on secondary
evidence, and he wanted to know if I could help him reach a more deﬁnitive
conclusion.

Heilper’s interest in Indian logic was born out of a passage in the book
The World as Will and Representation [7] by the German philosopher Arthur
Schopenhauer (1788-1860), who was commenting on the reference by the
Indologist William Jones (1746-1794) on this matter.1

William Jones has the following account on the question of the relation-

ship between Indian and Greek logic (it appears in the 11th discourse):2

Here I cannot refrain from introducing a singular tradition, which
prevailed, according to the well-informed author of the “Dabis-
tan”, in the Panjab and in several Persian provinces, that, “among
other Indian curiosities, which CALLISTHENES transmitted to

2

his uncle, was a technical system of logick, which the Brahmens
had communicated to the inquisitive Greek,” and which the Mo-
hammedan writer supposes to have been the groundwork of the
famous Aristotelean method: if this be true, it is one of the most
interesting facts, that I have met with in Asia; and if it be false,
it is very extraordinary, that such a story should have been fab-
ricated either by the candid MOHSANI Fani; or by the simple
Parsis Pundits, with whom he had conversed; but, not having had
leisure to study the Nyaya Sastra, I can only assure you, that I
have frequently seen perfect syllogisms in the philosophical writ-
ings of the Brahmens, and have often heard them used in their
verbal controversies. ...

Kallisthenes (370-327 BCE), a relative of the philosopher Aristotle, was
the court historian to Alexander who was a member of the campaign. He
was executed by Alexander in 327 BCE. There exists credible evidence that
Kallisthenes was asked by Aristotle to bring texts to Greece. Since his bring-
ing back of the astronomical observations of the Babylonians is attested by
several sources, it is reasonable to assume that the story about his having
brought back Indian logic is also credible. But this cannot be taken to mean
that the texts of Indian logic directly or indirectly inﬂuenced Aristotle.

The relevant passage from the Dabistan-i Madhahib (School of Sects), a
17th century text by Mohsan Fani, a Kashmiri scholar of Persian ancestry
who lived during 1615 - 1670 (?) [8, pages 270-273]:

Tark sastra is the science of dialectics; ... These are the sixteen
parts of the Tarka. The followers of this doctrine judge and af-
ﬁrm that, as this world is created, there must be a Creator; the
mukt, or “emancipation,” in their opinion means striving to ap-
proach the origin of beings, not uniting like the warp and the
web, the threads of which, although near, are nevertheless sepa-
rate from each other. This was related to me by the Imam Arastu
[Aristotle], who was a chief of the learned and said to me that
he had derived it from an old treatise upon logic, the precepts
of which were without explanation, and to have bestowed on it
that arrangement under which it now exists among the learned:
he meant, probably, that the maxims are the same as those ex-
tracted from the Tarka. The same doctrine was taught in Greece;

3

in conﬁrmation of this, the Persians say, that the science of logic
which was diﬀused among them was, with other sciences, trans-
lated into the language of Yonia and Rumi, by order of king
Secander [Alexander], the worshiper of science, in the time of his
conquest, and sent to Rumi.

The similarity in the reasoning of pre-Christian Greece and India was
noted repeatedly by al-Biruni (1030 CE) in his book on India [9]. The Indian
system takes the material processes to be governed by laws in the ancient
philosophical framework of S¯am. khya, which takes the evolution and change
in the world to be entirely materialistic while acknowledging the existence of
consciousness as a separate category.

Aristotle’s logic

In the West, Aristotle’s theory of the syllogism has had enormous inﬂuence.
At one time in Greece, Stoic logic was more inﬂuential until Aristotles ideas
became dominant, and they were subsequently adopted by the Arabic and
the Latin medieval traditions. The commentators grouped Aristotle’s works
on logic under the title Organon (Instrument), which comprised of:

1. Categories

2. On Interpretation

3. Prior Analytics

4. Posterior Analytics

5. Topics

6. On Sophistical Refutations

The central notion in Aristotle’s logic is that of deduction involving
premise of the argument, and the conclusion. It also recognizes induction,
which is an argument from the particular to the universal.

In Aristotle’s syllogism, the primary premise is always universal, and it
may be positive or negative. The secondary premise may also be universal

4

or particular so that from these premises it is possible to deduce a valid con-
clusion. An example is : “All men are mortal; Socrates is a man; therefore,
Socrates is mortal.” Another:

• Everything that lives, moves (primary premise)

• No mountain moves (secondary premise)

• No mountain lives (conclusion)

Aristotle supposed that this scheme accurately represents the true nature
If we take thought, language, and reality to be isomorphic,

of thought.
consideration of our reasoning will help us understand reality.

In Categories, Aristotle makes a distinction among three ways in which
the meaning of diﬀerent uses of a predicate may be related to each other:
homonymy, synonymy, and paronymy (“equivocal,” “univocal,” and “deriva-
tive”). For any such use, he proposed descriptions in ten attributes: sub-
stance, quantity, quality, relative, where, when, being in a position, having,
acting on, and being aﬀected by. The most important of these is substance,
which is the individual thing itself; secondary substances include the species
and genera to which the individual thing belongs. The other categories dis-
tinguish this individual substance from others of the same kind.

In Interpretation, Aristotle considers the use of predicates in combination
with subjects to form propositions or assertions, each of which is either true
or false. But he recognizes that certain diﬃculties arise when speaking of
the future. He suggests that it is necessary that either tomorrow’s event will
occur or it will not, but it is neither necessary that it will occur nor necessary
that it will not occur.

In Prior Analytics, Aristotle used mathematics as a model to show that
knowledge must be derived from what is already known. The process of
reasoning by syllogism formalizes the the deduction of new truths from es-
tablished principles. He oﬀered a distinction between the non-living and
the living in terms of things that move only when moved by something else
and those that are capable of moving themselves. He also distinguished be-
tween the basic material and the form and purpose which jointly deﬁne the
individual thing.

He suggested four diﬀerent explanatory principles or causes in his Physics:
(i) the material cause is the basic substance out of which the thing is made

5

(like the building materials for a house); (ii) the formal cause is the pattern
in conformity with which these materials are assembled (like the builder’s
plan of the house); (iii) the eﬃcient cause is the agent or force immediately
responsible for the production of the thing (builders of the house); and (iv)
the ﬁnal cause is the end purpose for which a thing exists (shelter to the
resident of the house). Aristotle believed that the four causes are essential
in the existence and nature of all things.

The four causes apply clearly to machines built by man. As for things that
appear to arise by pure chance, Aristotle believed that there must likewise
be four causes of which we may not be unaware.

Aristotle’s logic has been the basis of theology in the West. Modern sci-
ence rejects the notion of ﬁnal causes. Creationism and theories of Intelligent
Design are an attempt to bring in ﬁnal causes into biology.

The Indian tradition

Logic (¯anv¯ıks. ik¯ı, ny¯aya, or tarka in Sanskrit) is one of the six classical schools
of Indian philosophy. These six schools are the diﬀerent complementary per-
spectives on reality, that may be visualized as the views from the windows in
the six walls of a cube within which the subject is enclosed. The base is the
system of the traditional rites and ceremonies (P¯urva M¯ım¯am. s¯a), and the
ceiling is reality that includes the objective world and the subject (Uttara
M¯ım¯am. s¯a or Ved¯anta); one side is analysis of linguistic particles (Ny¯aya),
with the opposite side being the analysis of material particles (Vai´ses.ika);
another side is enumerative categories in evolution at the cosmic and indi-
vidual levels (S¯am. khya), with the opposite side representing the synthesis
of the material and cognitive systems in the experiencing individual (Yoga).
Clearly, the use of systematic view of nature had been taken to a very ad-
vanced level.

Logic is described in Kaut.ilya’s Artha´s¯astra (c. 350 BCE) as an inde-
pendent ﬁeld of inquiry ¯anv¯ıks. ik¯ı [10]. The epic Mah¯abh¯arata, which is most
likely prior to 500 BCE because it is not aware of Buddhism in its long de-
scriptions of religion [11], declares (Mah¯abh¯arata 12.173.45) that ¯anv¯ıks. ik¯ı is
equivalent to the discipline of tarka. Clearly, there were several equivalent
terms in use in India for logic in 500 BCE.

The canonical text on the Ny¯aya is the Ny¯aya S¯utra of Aks.ap¯ada Gau-
tama. The most important early commentary on this text is the Ny¯aya

6

Bh¯as.ya of V¯atsy¯ayana which is estimated to belong to 5th century CE. Satisa
Chandra Vidyabhusana, the well-regarded authority on Indian logic, assigned
Aks.ap¯ada Gautama the date of approximately 550 BCE. He based this on
the reference in the K¯an. va recension of the ´Satapatha Br¯ahman. a, in which
Gautama (or Gotama) is shown to be contemporary of J¯atukarn. ya Vy¯asa,
who was a student of ¯Asur¯ayan. a. This and other evidence from the Gr.hya
S¯utras, the V¯ayu Pur¯an. a, and the Buddhist Sanskrit text the Divy¯avad¯ana
is summarized in the introduction of Vidyabhusana’s edition of the Ny¯aya
S¯utra [12].

In his “History of Indian Logic”, Vidyabhusana modiﬁed his views [13]
under the inﬂuence of the then current ideas of history of science and the
now-discredited Aryan invasion theory. He now argued that the texts speak
of two Gautamas who are both associated with logic. He declared that
Medh¯atithi Gautama (was) the founder of ¯anv¯ıks. ik¯ı (circ 550 BCE), and
Aks.ap¯ada Gautama came much later, perhaps 150 CE or so.

Indian science and chronology has come in for a major revision in recent
years. Archaeologists have found no evidence for any large migration into
India subsequent to 4500 BCE, and found that Indian art, iconography, social
organization, and cultural motifs can be traced to a tradition that began
in 7000 BCE [14-17]. There is also new textual analysis that pushes back
the origins of Indian astronomy and mathematics considerably [18-21]. We
see Indian scientiﬁc ideas develop in a systematic manner over a period of
several centuries going back to the second millennium BCE, if not earlier [22-
29]. This development is an enlargement in diﬀerent ﬁelds of the recursive
system of Vedic cosmology [5]. We also know that ancient India and West
Asia had considerable interaction much before the time of Alexander [30].

Parenthetically, we note that genetic evidence related to mitochondrial
DNA and the Y chromosome has allowed the reconstruction of the move-
ments of ancient peoples. According to the highly regarded synthesis of this
evidence by Stephen Oppenheimer [31], India was populated by people who
left Africa about 90,000 years ago, and that in India over the next tens of
thousands of years, both the Mongoloid and the Caucasoid types evolved,
migrating to the northeast and northwest regions about 50,000 years ago.

The earlier chronology of Indian texts was coloured ﬁrst by the then pop-
ular Biblical chronology that took the origin of mankind to go back to only
4004 BCE, and later by the theory of Aryan invasions for which archaeol-
ogists have found no support [15-17]. According to Stephen Oppenheimer,

7

genetic evidence also goes counter to the Aryan invasion theory. One must,
therefore, question Vidyabhusana’s revision of the chronology of Indian logic,
especially in light of the new understanding of the literary tradition and the
evidence related to the presence of Indian kingdoms in West Asia in the
second millennium BCE that provides a late material basis for the cultural
continuity between India and the West.

Gautama’s Ny¯aya S¯utra

The Ny¯aya also calls itself pram¯an. a ´s¯astra, or the science of correct knowl-
edge. Knowing is based on four conditions: (i) The subject or the pramatr. ;
(ii) The object or the prameya to which the process of cognition is directed;
(iii) The cognition or the pramiti; and (iv) the nature of knowledge, or the
pram¯an. a. The four pram¯an. as through which correct knowledge is acquired
are: pratyaks. a or direct perception, anum¯ana or inference, upam¯ana or anal-
ogy, and ´sabda or verbal testimony.

The function of deﬁnition in the Ny¯aya is to state essential nature (svar¯upa)
that distinguishes the object from others. Three fallacies of deﬁnition are de-
scribed: ativy¯apti, or the deﬁnition being too broad as in deﬁning a cow as a
horned animal; avy¯apti, or too narrow; and asambhava, or impossible.

Gautama mentions that four factors are involved in direct perception:
the senses (indriyas) , their objects (artha), the contact of the senses and the
objects (sannikars. a), and the cognition produced by this contact (j˜n¯ana).
The ﬁve sense organs, eye, ear, nose, tongue, and skin have the ﬁve elements
light, ether, earth, water, and air as their ﬁeld, with corresponding qualities
of color, sound, smell, taste and touch.

Manas or mind mediates between the self and the senses. When the
manas is in contact with one sense-organ, it cannot be so with another. It
is therefore said to be atomic in dimension. It is due to the nature of the
mind that our experiences are essentially linear, although quick succession of
impressions may give the appearance of simultaneity.

Objects have qualities which do not have existence of their own. The
color and class associated with an object are secondary to the substance.
According to Gautama, direct perception is inexpressible. Things are not
perceived as bearing a name. The conception of an object on hearing a name
is not direct perception but verbal cognition.

8

Not all perceptions are valid. Normal perception is subject to the exis-
tence of (i) the object of perception, (ii) the external medium such as light
in the case of seeing, (iii) the sense-organ, (iv) the mind, without which
the sense-organs cannot come in conjunction with their objects, and (v) the
self.
If any of these should function improperly, the perception would be
erroneous. The causes of illusion may be dos. a (defect in the sense-organ),
samprayoga (presentation of only part of an object), or sam. sk¯ara (habit based
on irrelevant recollection).

Anum¯ana (inference) is knowledge from the perceived about the unper-
ceived. The relation between the two may be of three kind: the element to
be inferred may be the cause or the eﬀect of the element perceived, or the
two may be the joint eﬀects of something else.

The Ny¯aya syllogism is expressed in ﬁve parts:

1. pratij˜n¯a, or the proposition: the house is on ﬁre;

2. hetu, or the reason: the smoke;

3. dr. s. t.¯anta the example: ﬁre is accompanied by smoke, as in the kitchen;

4. upanaya, the application: as in kitchen so for the house;

5. nigamana, the conclusion: therefore, the house is on ﬁre.

This recognizes that the inference derives from the knowledge of the uni-
versal relation (vy¯apti) and its application to the speciﬁc case (paks. adharmat¯a).
There can be no inference unless there is expectation (¯ak¯a ˙nksh¯a) about the
hypothesis which is expressed in terms of the proposition.

The minor premise (paks. adharmat¯a) is a consequence of perception, whereas

the major premise (vy¯apti) results from induction. But the universal propo-
sition cannot be arrived at by reasoning alone. Frequency of the observa-
tion increases the probability of the universal, but does not make it certain.
Gange´sa, a later logician, suggested that the apprehension of the universal
requires alaukika pratyaks. a (or nonsensory apprehension).

The Ny¯aya system lays stress on antecedence in its view of causality. But
both cause and eﬀect are viewed as passing events. Cause has no meaning
apart from change; when analyzed, it leads to a chain that continues without
end. Causality is useful within the limits of experience, but it cannot be
regarded as of absolute validity. Causality is only a form of experience.

9

The advancement of knowledge is from upam¯ana, or comparison, with
something else already well-known. The leads us back to induction through
alaukika pratyaks. a as the basis of the understanding.

´Sabda, or verbal testimony, is a chief source of knowledge. The meaning
of words is by convention. The word might mean an individual, a form, or
a type, or all three. A sentence, as a collection of words, is cognized from
the trace (sam. sk¯ara) left at the end of the sentence. Knowledge is divided
into cognitions which are not reproductions of former states of consciousness
(anubhava) and those which are recollections (smr. ti).

The Ny¯aya speaks of errors and fallacies arising by interfering with the
process of correct reasoning. The Ny¯aya attacks the Buddhist idea that no
knowledge is certain by pointing out that this statement itself contradicts the
claim by its certainty. Whether cognitions apply to reality must be checked
by determining if they lead to successful action. Pram¯a, or valid knowledge,
leads to successful action unlike erroneous knowledge (vipary¯aya).

More on Gautama’s logic and physics

Gautama’s propositions assume a dichotomy between object and subject.
The objective world is open to logical analysis since it maps to linguistic
categories; the subjective world can suﬀer from invalid perception for a va-
riety of reasons. This is consistent with the Vedic view that the although
the inner world maps the outer, the mind can be clouded by habits or wrong
deductions owing to incorrect assumptions.

The S¯am. khya, attributed to the legendary rishi Kapila, is the ﬁrst philoso-
phy of science that arose centuries before the Buddha and it is the background
to be considered when speaking of Indian logic. In S¯am. khya, evolution oc-
curs due to changing balance and proportion both in the objective and the
subjective worlds. The three gun. as or fundamental modalities are sattva,
tamas and rajas, and they operate both at the large scale as well as in quick
transformation. The normative “thing” behind this ceaseless change is the
witness, or self, who is viewed in the singular for the entire universe.

At the objective level, tamas is inertia, rajas is action or transformation
and sattva is the relative balance or equilibrium between tamas and rajas.
The interplay between the three sets up oscillations in the objective and
the mental levels. In Yoga, the objective is to achieve the cessation of the
ﬂuctuations of the mind.

10

Consciousness or pure awareness is by deﬁnition not an object and there-
fore it does not have attributes. It must for the same reason be beyond the
It must be beyond inertia, or change or
categories of the living or dead.
ﬂuctuations. It is extraordinary that in this analysis the qualities that are
associated with objects become describable by an internal order.

The gun. as do not admit of any further breakdown. This deﬁnes a position
that is deeper and diﬀerent from that of Aristotelian physics. The three
gun. as are present in all objects and we can isolate one only in terms of
the momentary strength of one in relation to the other in a process. Their
ﬂuctuations mark the universal “internal clock” of worldly processes.

In the S¯am. khya, the eﬀect is the cause in a new form, and this is why the
system is also called parin. ¯amav¯ada, or theory of transformation. Between
the cause and eﬀect is a relation of identity-and-diﬀerence, that is identity
of stuﬀ but diﬀerence of form (bhed¯abheda). The method at the basis of the
S¯am. khya and the Ny¯aya S¯utra may be seen in the Yoga S¯utra as well. In the
Yoga S¯utra 3.13 three aspects of change are identiﬁed: transformation of a
thing (dharmi) into a property (dharma), transformation of a property into a
mark (laks. an. a), and the transformation of a mark into a condition (avasth¯a).
This is then the basis of the “unreasonable eﬀectiveness” of mathematics in
the description of the world.

The form of the Ny¯aya syllogism

The ﬁve parts of the Ny¯aya syllogism spring from the idea of bandhu that is
fundamental to Vedic thought. The bandhu is the equivalence between two
diﬀerent systems, which ordinarily are the microworld, the macroworld, and
the individual’s cognitive system.

The Ny¯aya syllogism ﬁrst sets up the propositional system with its two
components (two parts) and then identiﬁes another well known system to
which the ﬁrst is supposed to have a bandhu-like relationship (third and fourth
parts). The conclusion (ﬁfth part) can be made only after the preliminaries
have been formally deﬁned. As we see, this takes ﬁve steps.

The appeal to the bandhu in the syllogism is to acknowledge the agency of
the subject who can be, without such knowledge, open to invalid perception.
One can see how in systems that do not accept transcendental reality (such as
Aristotle’s or Buddhist), a simpliﬁcation from the ﬁve-part to the three-part
syllogism would be most natural.

11

It was pointed out in a 1930 article by the French Indologist Rene Gu´en´on
[32-33], that some later Indian texts on logic present two abridged forms of
the ﬁve-membered syllogism of the Ny¯aya S¯utra, in which either the ﬁrst
three or the last three parts appear alone. The ﬁrst version is similar to
the 6th century Ny¯ayaprave´sa of India (which had much inﬂuence on Chi-
nese Buddhism and on Jain thought), and the latter version resembles the
syllogism of Aristotle.

It appears then that the Ny¯aya S¯utra syllogism was only the most com-
prehensive way of establishing the chain of reasoning consistent with Vedic
ideas of bandhu, and since two diﬀerent simpliﬁcations arose out of it, it is
likely to have been the older tradition.

Concluding remarks

We ﬁnd that as ¯anv¯ıks. ik¯ı Indian logic goes back to at least the 6th century
BCE based on the textual evidence that has been universally accepted. The
syllogism used in the Ny¯aya S¯utra has ﬁve parts, as against the three-part
syllogism of Aristotle’s logic. But we know that simpliﬁcation of the ﬁve-part
logic into one similar to Aristotle’s was also known in India.

It seems that although the Greek and Persian stories related to Kallis-
thenes having brought Indian logic to Greece may have a historical basis,
they are not to be taken as the literal truth. At best, Indian logic provided
inspiration in the sense of the need for a formal text on the subject by the
Greeks. The focus in the two logical traditions is quite diﬀerent, and either
one is unlikely to have borrowed from the other.

Regarding the transmission of the Indian texts, this could have occurred
only at the tail-end of Alexander’s campaign of conquest. It is quite likely
that Aristotle’s logical texts were already in place by that time. It is more
likely that the Greek and Persian traditions merely acknowledge a diﬀerent
system of logic in a civilization that existed far away.

The Ny¯aya S¯utra and Aristotle’s texts are two diﬀerent perspectives that
tie in with the cosmologies of the two civilizations. The Ny¯aya S¯utra, like
other Indian philosophical texts, maintains the centrality of the subject,
whereas in Aristotle’s logic the emphasis is on the design of the world as
a machine. This also corresponds to the diﬀerence in the Indian system
which considers the universe to be composed of ﬁve elements, as against the
four of Aristotle. The ﬁfth element (¯ak¯a´sa) of the Indian system concerns

12

the ﬁeld of sentience.

Diogenes Laertius in his Lives of the Eminent Philosophers [34] says this
of Democritus: “According to Demetrius in his book on Men of the Same
Name and Antisthenes in his Successions of Philosophers, he [Democritus]
traveled into Egypt to learn geometry from the priests, and he also went into
Persia to visit the Chaldaeans as well as to the Red Sea. Some say that he
associated with the Gymnosophists in India and went to Aethiopia” [page
445]. Judging from the rest of the biographical material in Diogenes’ account,
a visit to India is not entirely implausible. Diogenes represents Democritus as
a “student of the Magi” from boyhood, and an enthusiastic and well funded
traveler. This is evidence of the interaction between India and Greece that
goes back much before Aristotle. The legend that Indian logic was taken by
Alexander to Greece is just the acknowledgement that Indians had a fully
ﬂowered system of logic before the time of Aristotle, who himself perhaps
only reworked an earlier Greek tradition.

Acknowledgement

I am thankful to Andre Heilper for asking me about the relationship between
Greek and Indian logic, and to Linda Johnsen for discussion and drawing my
attention to the book by Diogenes Laertius.

Notes

1. “Aristotle collected, arranged, and corrected all that had been discov-
ered before his time, and brought it to an incomparably greater state
of perfection. If we thus observe how the course of Greek culture had
prepared the way for, and led up to the work of Aristotle, we shall
be little inclined to believe the assertion of the Persian author, quoted
by Sir William Jones with much approval, that Callisthenes found a
complete system of logic among the Indians, and sent it to his uncle
Aristotle” [7].

2. Quoted in the note by Heilper.

Bibliography

13

1 S. Kak, “Indian physics: outline of early history.” ArXiv: physics/0310001.

2 A. Pannekoek, A History of Astronomy. Allen and Unwin, London, 1961.

3 O. Neugebauer, The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. Brown University Press,

4 J. Needham, Science and Civilization in China. Cambridge University

Providence, 1957.

Press, Cambridge, 1954.

5 S. Kak, The Architecture of Knowledge. CSC, Delhi, 2004.

6 T. McEvilley, The Shape of Ancient Thought: Comparative Studies in
Greek and Indian Philosophies. Allworth Press, New York, 2002.

7 A. Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, E.F.J. Payne

(tr.). Dover, New York, 1969; page 48.

8 D. Shea and A. Troyer, The Dabistan or School of Manners. M. Walter

Dunne, Washington and London, 1901.

9 E.C. Sachau, Alberuni’s India. Low Price Publications, Delhi, 1989 (1910).

10 R.P. Kangle, The Kaut.il¯ıya Artha´s¯astra. Motilal Banarsidass, 1986. See,

section 1.2.11.

11 K.M. Ganguly, The Mahabharata. Munshiram Manoharlal, 1991.

12 S.C. Vidyabhusana, The Ny¯aya S¯utras of Gotama, revised and edited by

Nandalal Sinha. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1990.

13 S.C. Vidyabhusana, A History of Indian Logic. University of Calcutta,

Calcutta, 1921; page 49.

14 G. Feuerstein, S. Kak, D. Frawley, In Search of the Cradle of Civilization:
New Light on Ancient India. Quest Books, Wheaton, 2001 (1995).

15 B.B. Lal, The Earliest Civilization of South Asia. Aryan Books Interna-

16 J.M. Kenoyer, Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. Oxford

tional, New Delhi, 1997.

University Press, 1998.

14

17 B.B. Lal, The Sarasvati Flows On. Aryan Books International, New
Delhi, 2002. S.Kak, “Early theories on the distance to the sun.” Indian
Journal of History of Science, vol. 33, 1998, pp. 93-100. ArXiv:
physics/9804021.

18 A. Seidenberg, “The origin of geometry.” Archive for History of Exact

Sciences. 1: 488-527, 1962.

19 A. Seidenberg, “The origin of mathematics.” Archive for History of Exact

Sciences. 18: 301-342, 1978.

20 S. Kak, “Birth and early development of Indian astronomy.” In a book on
Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy,
Helaine Selin (editor), Kluwer Academic, Boston, 2000, pp. 303-340.
ArXiv: physics/0101063.

21 S. Kak, The Astronomical Code of the R. gveda. Munshiram Manoharlal,

New Delhi, 2000.

22 S. Kak, “Concepts of space, time, and consciousness in ancient India.” In
S. Kak, The Wishing Tree, Munshiram Manoharlal, 2002; also ArXiv:
physics/9903010.

23 S. Kak, “Physical concepts in Samkhya and Vaisesika.” In Life, Thought
and Culture in India (from c 600 BC to c AD 300), edited by G.C.
Pande, ICPR/Centre for Studies in Civilizations, New Delhi, 2001, pp.
413-437; ArXiv: physics/0310001.

24 S. Kak, “Greek and Indian cosmology: review of early history.” In The
Golden Chain. G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005 (in press);
ArXiv: physics/0303001.

25 S. Kak, “Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early connections.” In The
Golden Chain. G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005 (in press);
ArXiv: physics/0301078.

26 S. Kak, “Yajnavalkya and the origins of Puranic cosmology.” Adyar Li-

brary Bulletin, vol 65, pp. 145-156, 2001. Also in ArXiv: physics/0101012.

15

27 S. Kak, “On Aryabhata’s planetary constants.” Annals Bhandarkar Ori-

ental Research Institute, vol. 84, pp. 127-133, 2003. ArXiv: physics/0110029.

28 S. Kak, “The speed of light and Puranic cosmology.” In Computing
Science in Ancient India, T.R.N. Rao and S. Kak (eds.), USL Press,
Lafayette, 1998, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 2000; pages 80-90;
ArXiv: physics/9804020.

29 S. Kak, “Early theories on the distance to the sun.” Indian Journal of
History of Science, vol. 33, 93-100, 1998; ArXiv: physics/9804021.

29 S. Kak, “The golden mean and the physics of aesthetics.” ArXiv: physics/0411195.

30 S. Kak, “Akhenaten, Surya, and the R. gveda.” In The Golden Chain.

G.C. Pande (ed.). CSC, New Delhi, 2005 (in press).

31 S. Oppenheimer, The Real Eve: Modern Man’s Journey Out of Africa.

Carroll & Graf Publishers, New York, 2003.

32 R. Lance Factor, “What is the ‘logic’ in Buddhist logic?” Philosophy

East and West, Volume 33, no.2, April, 1983, pp. 183-188.

33 Rene Gu´en´on, Introduction generale a l’etude des doctrines hindous. Paris:

1930, pp. 226-227.

34 Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Eminent Philosophers, Vol. 2. R.D. Hicks

(tr.), Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1950.

16

