5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An omission in Special Relativity

Elem´er E Rosinger
Department of Mathematics
and Applied Mathematics
University of Pretoria
Pretoria
0002 South Africa
eerosinger@hotmail.com

Abstract

In Special Relativity there are inﬁnitely many equivalence classes of
frames of reference. In each such class every two frames of reference
move uniformly with respect to one another.
It appears that the following questions have never been asked :
In which of such equivalence classes of frames of reference is Special
Relativity supposed to hold ?
How can we identify such a class, and do so theoretically or empiri-
cally ?

1. Equivalence classes of frames of reference

The two principles of Special Relativity, Einstein [2, p. 39], Durell [p.
30], are :

1. There is no absolute motion. Consequently, it is not possible to
detect uniform motion. Furthermore, in two frames of reference which
move uniformly with respect to one another, the laws of physics are
the same.

In all forms of wave motion, the velocity of the wave propagation
2.
does not depend on the velocity of the source. Consequently, the ve-
locity of light propagation in vacuum does not depend on the velocity
of its source.

1

Let us denote by K the set of all space-time frames of reference given
by corresponding rigid solids and clocks. Each such frame of reference
K in K is supposed to be associated with a respective coordinate sys-
tem (x, y, z, t).

Now, in view of the ﬁrst above principle, let us deﬁne on the set K
of space-time frames of reference a binary relation ≈ as follows. For
every K, K ′ ∈ K we have

K ≈ K ′ ⇐⇒ K ′ moves uniformly with respect to K

In terms of the Lorentz transformations, this means that the coordi-
nate systems (x, y, z, t) in K, and respectively (x′, y′, z′, t′) in K ′, are
related according to the well known relations

x′ = (x − vt)/p(1 − v2/c2)
y′ = y
z′ = z
t′ = (t − vx/c2)/p(1 − v2/c2)

assuming that the frame of reference K ′ moves along the coordinate
axes x of K and does so with constant velocity v.

It is easy to see that, with the above deﬁnition, the binary relation ≈
is an equivalence relation on K, namely :

a) it is reﬂexive, that is, we have

K ≈ K,

for all K ∈ K

b) it is symmetric, that is, we have

K ≈ K ′ =⇒ K ′ ≈ K,

for all K, K ′ ∈ K

c) it is transitive, that is, we have

K ≈ K ′, K ′ ≈ K ′′ =⇒ K ≈ K ′′,

for all K, K ′, K ′′ ∈ K

2

In this way, we can deﬁne the quotient set

EK = K/ ≈

whose elements are the equivalence classes

K≈ = { K ′ ∈ K | K ′ ≈ K }

of frames of reference. Thus each such equivalence class is made up of
all the frames of reference which move uniformly with respect to one
another. Consequently, each such class K≈ contains inﬁnitely many
frames of reference, each two of them being equivalent.

2. Too many equivalence classes : two questions

The important point to note is that in EK itself there are inﬁnitely
many diﬀerent equivalence classes K≈ of frames of reference.
Indeed, the Earth and the Moon, for instance, obviously belong to two
diﬀerent such classes, since the Earth and the Moon do not move uni-
formly with respect to one another. And more near to us, the Earth
and any car which moves along a curved part of a road also belong to
two such diﬀerent classes.

Now clearly, the laws of motion cannot be identical in all these in-
ﬁnitely many diﬀerent equivalence classes K≈ in EK. For instance,
they cannot be identical in the equivalence class of the Earth and in
the equivalence class of a car moving on Earth along a curved part of
the road.

And then the question arises :

• In which of the equivalence classes K≈ of frames of reference in
EK is Special Relativity supposed to hold, yielding in particular
the canonical forms of the laws of motion ?

Furthermore, in case there exists such an equivalence class of frames
of reference K≈ ∈ EK, then :

3

• How can we identify it, and do so theoretically or empirically ?

It appears that, so far, there has not been an explicit enough awareness
of the fact that

• EK does contain inﬁnitely many diﬀerent equivalence classes of

frames of reference

• the laws of motion cannot be identical in all of these inﬁnitely

many frames of reference.

Consequently, the above questions appear not to have been consid-
ered.

3. The case of Newtonian mechanics

In Newtonian mechanics, unlike in Special Relativity, space and time
are considered separately.

As far as time is concerned, it is simply considered to be absolute,
and it is assumed to ﬂow uniformly from past into the future, regard-
less of whatever may happen in space. Therefore, there is no attempt
whatsoever to further elaborate on its possible nature, and it is simply
given by a unique universal frame of reference T , with its coordinate t.

Concerning space, the various frames of reference LN ewton are given
by rigid bodies and are endowed with respective coordinate systems
(x, y, z).

It follows that space-time in Newtonian mechanics is represented by
frames of reference K N ewton = LN ewton × T , with the respective co-
ordinate systems (x, y, z, t).
In this way, in Newtonian mechanics,
the equivalence between the coordinate systems (x, y, z, t) in K N ewton,
and respectively (x′, y′, z′, t′) in K ′ N ewton, is given according to the
well known relations of Galilean relativity

4

x′ = x − vt
y′ = y
z′ = z
t′ = t

assuming again that the frame of reference K ′ N ewton moves along the
coordinate axes x of K N ewton and does so with constant velocity v.

However, in view of this principle of Galilean relativity, which is the
content of Newton’s ﬁrst law, the issue arises to identify at least one
such a spatial frame of reference which is tied to absolute space.
Newton suggested for that purpose that the faraway stars may oﬀer a
good approximation to such a spatial frame of reference which is tied to
absolute space. Let us denote by K F arawayStars that frame of reference.

Now, if we denote by KN ewton the set of all Newtonian space frames of
reference K N ewton, then similar with section 1, this time however using
the Galilean relativity instead of the Lorentzian one, we can deﬁne on
KN ewton a corresponding equivalence relation ≈, and obtain the set

EKN ewton = KN ewton/ ≈

of equivalence classes

K N ewton

≈

= { K ′ N ewton ∈ KN ewton | K ′ N ewton ≈ K N ewton }

Clearly, the set EKN ewton is again inﬁnite. In other words, there are
inﬁnitely many diﬀerent equivalence classes K N ewton

≈

.

In this case, however, the only such equivalence class we are inter-
ested in when considering Newton’s ﬁrst law is K F arawayStars
. Thus
the above two questions - which arise in Special Relativity - do not
arise in Newtonian mechanics, since from the start they are answered
implicitly by the fundamental assumptions about absolute space and
absolute time.

≈

5

4. General Relativity answers the two questions

In General Relativity the concept of equivalent frames of reference is
much enlarged. Indeed, instead of the restrictive Galilean or Lorentzian
conditions on equivalence, now two frames of reference are consid-
ered equivalent if there is a C2-smooth diﬀeomorphism between their
respective space-time coordinate systems. Consequently, for all pur-
poses, there is only one single class of equivalent frames of reference.
Thus the above two question once again cannot arise from the very
beginning.

5. Conclusions

It follows that, apart from all other possible reasons, one of the most
important considerations for going from Special Relativity to General
Relativity is to introduce an equivalence relation between frames of
reference which leads to one single corresponding equivalence class.
In this way one can, among others, go beyond the two questions in
section 2.

Galilean and Lorentzian relativity, and the corresponding equivalence
between frames of reference, happened to be ﬁxated upon a ﬁrst rela-
tivistic realization, namely, that the laws of motion do not depend on
the constant velocity of the observer. Consequently, the laws of motion
have to be given by diﬀerential equations which are of second order in
the coordinates of the moving objects. Aristotle was not aware of this
ﬁrst relativistic phenomenon. Instead, he considered that the velocity
of a moving object is proportional to the force applied upon it, which
in terms of diﬀerential equations would only lead to a ﬁrst order one
in the coordinates of the object. Such a ﬁrst order equation would, of
course, be in an obvious contradiction with the fact that one can set
up two arbitrary and independent initial conditions, when establishing
the motion of a material point.

As seen in section 2, the ﬁrst relativistic realization of Galileo, Lorentz
and of Special Relativity leads to inﬁnitely many equivalence classes
of frames of reference. This is not a problem in Newtonian mechanics

6

where one assumes absolute space and absolute time. However, it be-
comes a problem in Special Relativity, precisely because of the lack of
absolute space or absolute time which is now assumed.

And it needs a second relativistic realization, as provided by General
Relativity, in order to abolish any and all distinctions between frames
of reference, distinctions which may be relevant with respect to the
laws of motion. This second relativistic realization is that the laws of
motion have to be covariant with respect to arbitrary C2-smooth dif-
feomorphic transformations of coordinates. Consequently, all frames
of reference are now equivalent, and we only have one equivalence class
of frames of reference.

In this way, from the earlier Newtonian absoluteness of space-time, we
have moved in General Relativity to what may be seen as the abso-
luteness of the unique class equivalent frames of reference.

References

[1] Angel, Roger B : Relativity, The Theory and its Philosophy. Perg-

amon, New York, 1980

[2] Durell, Clement V : Readable Relativity. Dover, New York, 2003

[3] Einstein, Albert [1] : Relativity. Routledge, London, 2003

[4] Einstein, Albert [2] : Out of My Later Years, The Scientist,
Philosopher and Man Portrayed through His Own Words. Wings
Books, New York, 1996

[5] Schwartz, Joseph & McGuinness, Michael : Introducing Einstein.

Icon Books, Cambridge, 2003

7

