5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The arrow of time in quantum mechanics and in nonlinear optics

V.A.Kuz’menko1

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

Abstract

The direct and indirect experimental proofs of a strong time invariance
violation in optics are discussed. Time noninvariance for present day
becomes the only real physical base for explanation the origin of the most
phenomena in nonlinear optics. This is a good cause to introduce the time
asymmetry into the dynamical equations of the basic laws of physics.

PACS number: 33.80.Rv, 42.50.Hz

Introduction

The idea of the arrow of time is quite natural and recognized in biology,
chemistry and other ﬁelds [1]. However, its recognition in the physics unexpect-
edly turns out to be rather problematical [2]. The main obstacle here is the
widespread opinion, that the basic laws of physics are time reversal invariant
[3].

The experimental search of C,P,T-invariance violations is the important part
of modern physics [4,5]. CP violation was found in the kaon decays [6]. In atomic
physics, the scientists look for the parity nonconcervation and atomic electric
dipole moments (as a manifestation of the time reversal violation) [7]. There is
the ﬁeld of the weak interactions.

It is surprising, but in optics (in the ﬁeld of electromagnetic interactions)
the number of direct and indirect experimental proofs of strong time invariance
violation exists for many years. Even more surprising fact is that the scientiﬁc
community does not ready to accept these results. All this results were received
in the works, which were not aimed to ﬁnd any invariance violations. Only in
one case, the authors understand with what thing they have to do.

Direct proofs

There is the work [8], where the interaction of polarized laser radiation with
the speciﬁc non-magnetic metallic planar chiral nanostructures was studied.
The authors believe that these experimental results unambiguously show the
evidence of broken time reversal symmetry in such unusual object.

In other experiments, the splitting and mixing of photons were studied [9-
11]. The process of photon mixing in this case may be reversed (when the
frequency of formed photons is equal to the frequency of initial photons before
the splitting) or forward (when the frequency of formed photons diﬀers from
the frequency of initial photons). The results of these experiments clearly show

1Electronic address: kuzmenko@triniti.ru

1

that the forward and reversed processes are not equal: the reversed process is
much more eﬃcient.

The direct way for testing the time invariance violation in optics seems to
be very simple: we need to compare the cross-section and spectral width of the
forward process of absorption of photons by molecules with the corresponding
parameters of the reversed process of stimulated emission of photons. However,
this way is rather problematic for usual objects. The main obstacle is the con-
nection of the spectral widths of optical transitions and laser radiation with the
lifetime of excited states of molecules and with the laser pulse width. It makes
impossible to separate the measurements of forward and reversed processes.

However, one object with unusual combination of properties exists in optics.
There is the wide component of lines in absorption spectrum of polyatomic
molecules [12]. Extremely wide homogeneous spectral width in this case is
combined with the long lifetime of excited states toward the process of spon-
taneous emission. The experiments with this object [13] inevitably show that
the value of diﬀerence in spectral widths of the forward process of absorption
of photon and the reversed process of stimulated emission exceeds ﬁve orders of
magnitude. Accordingly, the cross-section of the reversed process exceeds the
corresponding value of the forward process in several orders of magnitude. It
is worth to point out that the integral cross-sections of this opposite processes
must be equal because of equality of the Einstein’s coeﬃcients.

The discussed above examples are the direct experimental proofs of the time
noninvariance or inequality of forward and reversed processes in optics. How-
ever, these examples relate to rather exotic sides of optics. Are there any other
manifestations of the time noninvariance exist in optics? Yes, there are. More-
over, the situation is so, that practically all nonlinear optics is a manifestation
of the time noninvariance. However, such manifestations usually are indirect,
because of the direct comparison of the parameters of forward and reversed
processes usually are complicated.

Indirect evidences

Here we shall discuss as indirect evidences only two nonlinear phenomena,
which however allow understanding and explaining the origin of many other
eﬀects. The ﬁrst phenomenon is the adiabatic population transfer in a two-
level quantum system during the sweeping of resonance conditions [14]. The
essence of this phenomenon is that under action of the resonant radiation in
two-level quantum system the so-called Rabi oscillations of level population
are observed. The frequency of the Rabi oscillations increases with growth of
intensity of radiation. However, if the frequency of radiation is changed, instead
of Rabi oscillations we observe the full population transfer from the initial level
to the opposite one. This result does not depend from the intensity of radiation.
Therefore, the obvious asymmetry appears in spite of its absence in the initial
conditions (the quantum levels and radiation transitions are assumed to be
equivalent).

Nearly sixty years ago the Bloch equations were proposed for description of
such eﬀects [15]. For present day the Maxwell-Bloch equations are the base for

2

description the dynamics of optical transitions. This description is really very
good. However, the problem is that the Bloch equations do not have any clear
physical sense and the physical explanation of the phenomenon is absent until
now.

The concepts of longitudinal T1 and transverse T2 relaxation times are used
in the Bloch equations. The physical sense of T1 is quite clear: it characterizes
the energy relaxation process. In contrast, the physical origin of the transverse
relaxation is unknown. The subsequent experiments allow specifying, that the
transverse relaxation may be of two kinds: T
2 value is
deﬁned as a time of a free polarization decay or incoherent decay of every dipole
moment of molecules. This process should be irreversible. The T ∗
2 value is
deﬁned as a dephasing time or as a time of a free induction decay. This process
may be reversible in the photon (spin) echo phenomenon. However, any clear
2 and T ∗
physical explanation of origin of T

2 processes is absent until now.

2 [16]. The T

2 and T ∗

′

′

′

Such situation seems to be rather typical for the physics. Mathematicians
create equations and models for description the physical phenomena much more
quickly than physicists are able to understand and explain its sense. For ex-
ample, the physicists complain about that, ”the standard model fails to pro-
vide a deep explanation for the physics that it describes” [7]. The creation by
D.I.Mendeleev in 1869 the Periodic law (table) may be also used as a good il-
lustration here of such situation. He builds the periodic table of elements (the
main law in chemistry) on the base of known its atomic weights. It allows to
predict the discovery of new elements and to describe its properties. However,
any physical sense in connection between the atomic weight and the chemical
properties is absent. The physical explanation came several decades later, when
the quantum mechanics was created. Now we know, that the chemical proper-
ties of the element are depended on the structure of electronic levels and on the
nuclear charge, which only correlates with the atomic weight. Similarly, we only
now can give the physical explanation of the concept of transverse relaxation
and origin of number of phenomena in nonlinear optics. It demands to accept
the idea of time noninvariance or inequality of forward and reversed processes
in optics. In order to understand what is the most usual manifestation of this
inequality we shall examine other indirect evidence.

There are the experiments of a four photon mixing in the so-called BOXCAR
arrangement [17, 18]. The simpliﬁed scheme of such experiments is shown in
Fig.1 for the most common case. Three diﬀerent directed laser beams intersect
Its radiation transfer the molecules from the initial level a on
at one point.
the quantum level d. Then the directed spontaneous superﬂuorescence appears
and the molecules return into the initial state. The direction of the superﬂu-
orescence does not coincide with the directions of the laser beams and it is
easily separated. The dependences of the superﬂuorescence intensity from the
delays between the laser pulses allow studying the dynamics of vibrational and
rotational motions of molecules on the diﬀerent quantum levels b,c. The super-
ﬂuorescence is the consequence of the ﬁnal stage of the transition of the quantum
system into the initial state. This transition characterizes the properties of the
reversed processes: extremely high cross-section of the optical transition and its

3

space anisotropy. Therefore, such experiments are the indirect proof of radical
diﬀerence of the reversed optical transitions from the forward one: the exis-
tence of space and phase anisotropy of the reversed transition. For the forward
transition such anisotropy is not characteristic.

This conclusion may be drawn from the analysis of absorption spectrum of
molecules. The lines in rotational absorption spectrum are very narrow. The
value of absorption line frequency allows to calculate the molecule moment of
inertia with the precision ∼ 0, 0001%. From other side the change of moment
of inertia due to vibration of atoms even at the zero vibrational level usually
exceeds 1% [19]. Consequently, the phase of vibrational motion does not mani-
fest itself in the absorption spectrum and we deal with some averaged moment
of inertia. This situation looks like to the other one, which theorists call as the
inability to measure the absolute phase of an electromagnetic ﬁeld [20, 21]. Ap-
parently, the same situation exists also with the orientation of molecules: there
is absent manifestation in absorption spectrum of a freely rotated molecules of
any dependence of absorption cross-section from the orientation of molecules
toward the direction of radiation beam. In spite of the rather common opinion
that such dependence should exist [22]. Therefore, some processes of averaging
in the vibrational and rotational motions of molecules exist.

However, for the reversed transitions such process of averaging, obviously, is
absent. In this case, the cross-section of transition into the initial state with the
same phase of vibration and orientation in space is extremely large and strongly
diﬀers from the cross-section of transition into the state with another orienta-
tion. This situation is shown in a diagram form in Fig.2 as the supposed shapes
of dependences of cross-section from the angel between the molecule axis and the
direction of the laser beam. Such dependences, probably, may be obtained on
the existent apparatus in the experiments with oriented in the external electric
ﬁeld molecules [23]. However, we believe, that in the present case the indirect
evidences, which follow from the four-photon mixing experiments are also quite
convincing proofs.

Physical explanation

In such a way the orientational and phase (vibrational) anisotropy of the
reversed optical transitions is, obviously, most widespread and important mani-
festation of the time noninvariance in the nonlinear optics. On this base, we can
give concrete interpretation of the origin of the transverse relaxation process and
the origin of number of nonlinear phenomena. Thus, the T
2 value characterizes
the loss of memory of two-level quantum system about the initial state due to
molecular collisions. In this case, the curve 2 in Fig.2 turns into the curve 1
and any diﬀerence between the forward and reversed transitions vanishes. Such
process is irreversible.

′

The T ∗

2 value characterizes the loss of resonance for reversed transition due
to rotation of molecules. It is deﬁned by the average speed of rotation and the
width of the spike on the curve 2. This process is periodical and reversible.
After the whole period of rotation, the molecule turns out to be again in the
resonance conditions for reversed transition. There is the explanation of the

4

nutation eﬀect.

It is easy now to explain the origin of the adiabatic population transfer eﬀect.
The rotation (precession) leads away the molecules from the resonance for the
reversed transition. In this case, the cross-section of the backward transition
on the initial quantum level turns out to be smaller, than the cross-section
of forward transition. As a result, the molecules ”get stuck” at the opposite
quantum level.

Furthermore, the photon (spin) echo eﬀect can be explained as a delayed
four photon mixing process [24]. The ﬁrst laser pulse leads to absorption of one
photon. The photon’s spin transfers to molecule the rotational moment. Due to
inhomogeneity of rotational motion, some dephasing process takes place. In the
nuclear magnetic resonance experiments, the special inhomogeneous magnetic
ﬁeld is used for better observation of the spin echo eﬀect. The delayed at time t
second laser pulse ﬁrst interrupts the rotation of molecules by the way of stim-
ulated emission of the photon with the same spin. Then the absorption of the
photon with the opposite spin leads to the rotation of molecule in the opposite
direction. After time 2t the same inhomogeneity of rotational motion leads to
the rephasing process and because the cross-section of reversed transition into
the initial state is extremely high the directed superﬂuorescence emission of the
photon echo occurs. For better understanding the mechanism of a photon echo
eﬀect in the molecular gas, we need to study the subtle particular feature of
inhomogeneity of rotational motion.

In a similar manner, the concept of time noninvariance may be used for
explanation the origin of many other eﬀects in nonlinear optics. In contrast,
the existent explanation of origin of nonlinear phenomena does not go beyond
of making casual mention about the interference of a coherent states [25].

There rather old debate between theorists and experimentalists exists about
the role of the coherency concept in physics [20]. Experimentalists frequently
have some sense of the physical object and they persist in opinion that the con-
cept of coherency or synchronism is an important concept of physics. However,
theorists cannot ﬁnd for this concept any reliable physical base [21]. Both sides,
obviously, are right. But the experimentalists make a mistake when they accept
the concept of coherency as a fundamental one. The coherency is only a con-
sequence of a more fundamental concept of the initial state. In the same way,
theorists do not take into consideration the time noninvariance. In this case,
we do not deal with the measuring of an absolute phase of a wave, but with
the measuring of a comparative phase of the reversed process, which follow the
forward one.

So, it is clear for present day that we need to create the new mathematical
model (alternative analog of the Bloch equations) for description the dynamics of
optical transitions. Such model should include the time asymmetry and should
have a clear physical sense.

The existent experimental results inevitably show that the time noninvari-
ance is the main physical foundation of nonlinear optics. The recognition of the

Conclusion

5

time invariance violation in optics means also a full recognition of the concept
of the arrow of time in physics. It allows and demands to introduce the time
asymmetry in the main dynamical laws in physics.

References

[1] I.Prigogine, From being to becoming:

time and complexity in the physi-
cal sciences, Ed. Yu.L.Klimontovich, Editorial URSS, Moscow, (2002), in
Russian.

[2] A.R.Bohm, M.Loewe and B.Van de Ven, E-print, quant-ph/0212130

[3] R.J.Creswick, Phys.Rev.Lett. 93, 100601 (2004).

[4] I.B.Khriplovich and S.K.Lamoreaux, CP Violation Without Strangeness,

Springer, Berlin, (1997).

[5] R.Bluhm, A.Kostelecky, C.Lane and N.Russell, Phys.Rev.D 68,125008

(2003).

[6] G.D’Ambrosio and G.Isidori, E-print, hep-ph/9611284.

[7] J.S.M.Ginges and V.V.Flambaum, E-print, physics/0309054.

[8] A.S.Schwanecke, A.Krasavin, D.M.Bagnall, A.Potts, A.V.Zayats and

N.I.Zheludev, Phys.Rev.Lett. 91, 247404 (2003).

[9] I.Abram, R.K.Raj, J.L.Oudar and G.Dolique, Phys.Rev.Lett. 57 2516

(1986).

quant-ph/0302038.

023005 (2004).

[10] B.Dayan,

A.Pe’er,

A.A.Friesem and

Y.Silberberg,

E-print,

[11] B.Dayan, A.Pe’er, A.A.Friesem and Y.Silberberg, Phys.Rev.Lett. 93,

[12] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0204003.

[13] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[14] R.L.Shoemaker,

in Laser and Coherence Spectroscopy, ed.J.I.Steinfeld,

N.Y., Plenum, p.197 (1978).

[15] F.Bloch, Phys.Rev. 70, 460 (1946).

[16] L.Allen and J.H.Eberly, Optical Resonance and Two-level Atoms, N.Y.,

John Willey and Sons, (1975).

[17] M.Schmitt, G.Knopp, A.Materny and W.Kiefer, J.Phys.Chem.A, 102, 4059

(1998).

6

[18] T.Lang, M.Motzkus, H.M.Frey and P.Beaud, J.Chem.Phys. 115, 5418

[19] S.J.Cyvin, Molecular Vibrations and Mesn Square Amplitudes, Oslo,

(2001).

(1968).

[20] K.Nemoto and S.L.Braunstein, E-print, quant-ph/0312108.

[21] K.Molmer, Phys.Rev.A 55, 3195 (1997).

[22] J.S.Baskin and A.Zewail, J.Phys.Chem.A, 105, 3680 (2001).

[23] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0502110.

[24] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0306148.

[25] A.K.Popov, S.A.Myslivets and T.F.George, E-print, quant-ph/0501001.

7

 

A 

1

2 

3 

B 

Focusing 
lens 

Collimating 
lens 

Shield 

Sample 
(cell, molecular  beam) 

Detector 

3 

2 
1 

4

d 

c 

b 

a 

4 

3 

2 

1 

Figure 1.  A)  Experimental setup showing the beam path of the BOXCAR 
arrangement for a four photon mixing.  B)  Energy level diagram. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

! 

# 

2 

Figure 2.  The supposed shapes of dependences 
of cross-section from the angel between molecule 
axis  and  the  direction  of  the  laser  beam  for 
forward (1) and reversed (2) transitions. 

" 

 

