5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Wave Interpretation of the Compton Eﬀect

Ching-Chuan Su
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Tsinghua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan

Abstract – The Compton eﬀect is commonly cited as a demonstration of the particle feature
of light. In this investigation, we present an alternative interpretation of the Compton eﬀect
based on the postulates of de Broglie and on the wave scattering from a space- and time-
varying medium, without explicit resort to the conservation of energy and momentum.

PACS numbers: 13.60.Fz, 03.65.Ta, 03.75.-b

1. Introduction
In 1923 Compton found that the x rays scattered from free electrons shift in wavelength.
In Compton’s explanation of the scattering, the collision between a photon and an electron
in conjunction with the conservation of energy and momentum is adopted [1]. Thus the
Compton eﬀect is commonly cited as a demonstration of the corpuscular picture of light
[2, 3]. On the other hand, in 1924 de Broglie introduced the concept of wave nature of
matter with the postulate that a particle is associated with a matter wave of which the
frequency and the wavelength are related to the energy and the momentum of the particle,
respectively [3]. In this investigation, based on the postulates of de Broglie but without resort
to the conservation laws for energy and momentum, we present an alternative interpretation
of the Compton eﬀect by dealing with the scattering of an electromagnetic wave from a
space- and time-varying medium. Such a spatial and temporal variation in turn is due to the
mixed state associated with the electrons during state transition. Further, it is pointed out
that this mechanism for the Compton scattering is similar to those for the Bragg reﬂection
and the Raman scattering from a crystal.

2. Compton Shift
When a beam of x rays of a certain wavelength is incident upon a target made of graphite,
the scattered beam shifts in wavelength with a distribution [1, 2]. For each scattering angle
ϕ, the scattered beam tends to have two peaks in the intensity spectrum. The wavelength of
one peak is identical to the incident one, while the second peak shifts to a longer wavelength.
Further, it has been found that this shift depends on the scattering angle. Quantitatively,
the Compton shift in wavelength is given by [1, 2, 3]

∆λ/λC = 1 − cos ϕ,

(1)

where ∆λ = λs − λi, λi and λs are the wavelengths of the incident and the scattered beam,
λC = h/m0c is called the Compton wavelength, m0 is the rest mass of the electron, and h is
Planck’s constant (see Fig. 1). It is seen that the shift increases with the scattering angle to
a maximum of 2λC. The Compton wavelength of a free electron is λC = 2.43 × 10−12 m. In
order for the Compton shift to be appreciable, the incident wavelength should not be much
longer than λC. In Compton’s experiment the wavelength of x rays is about 70 pm.

1

Fig. 1 The Compton eﬀect. The dot represents an electron loosely
bound in a target, which moves with speed v and angle θ after the collision.

In order to analyze this shift in wavelength, Compton adopted the collision between
a photon and an electron. By taking hc/λ and h/λ as the energy and momentum of the
photon according to the postulates of Einstein, the conservation of energy and momentum
results in the following relations

hc/λi = hc/λs + m0c2(γ − 1)

h/λi = (h/λs) cos ϕ + γm0v cos θ

0 = (h/λs) sin ϕ − γm0v sin θ,





(2)

where γ = 1/q1 − v2/c2, v is the speed of the electron after the collision, and θ is the angle
from the recoiling electron to the incident beam. Then some algebra leads to the Compton
shift given by (1). As the collision between two particles in conjunction with the conservation
of energy and momentum is used, the Compton eﬀect is then commonly cited as evidence
for the corpuscular picture of light.

3. Wave Interpretation
We then go on to present an alternative interpretation of the Compton eﬀect. Under the
illumination of an electromagnetic wave, the electrons loosely bound in the target tend
to be accelerated by the incident electric and magnetic ﬁelds. Suppose that the electrons
gain a velocity v from the action. Thus the initial and the ﬁnal state of the electrons
are respectively of (m0c2, 0) and (mc2, mv) in energy and momentum, where the speed-
dependent mass m = m0/q1 − v2/c2. Based on the postulates of de Broglie for matter wave
[3], these two states can be represented by the wavefunctions Ψ1 and Ψ2 that incorporate the
space-time harmonics e−iω0t and e−i(ωt−k·r), respectively, where ω0 = m0c2/¯h, ω = mc2/¯h,
and k = mv/¯h. During a transition from the initial state to the ﬁnal state, they are expected
to form a mixed state Ψ = c1(t)Ψ1 + c2(t)Ψ2 with suitable coeﬃcients c1 and c2. As the
density of electrons is proportional to the product Ψ∗Ψ, this mixed state leads to a density
incorporating a component that changes with space and time in the form

e±i(∆ωt−∆k·r) = ei(ωt−k·r)e−iω0t,

(3)

where ∆ω = ω − ω0 and ∆k = k. The mixed state results in time-varying charges and
currents, which in turn radiate electromagnetic waves at the angular frequency ∆ω. This
corresponds to the celebrated postulate of Bohr for the emission due to state transition of
the electron bound in an excited atom or of high-energy electrons in a synchrotron. Besides,
the mixed state makes the permittivity of a dielectric medium vary by incorporating the

2

space-time harmonic ei(∆ωt−∆k·r), since the electric susceptibility of a medium is proportional
to the charge density. (The complex conjugate e−i(∆ωt−∆k·r) has a tendency to make the
corresponding scattered wave have a higher frequency. This inverse Compton scattering [2]
is omitted, as the electrons are initially stationary.)

It is known that the polarization current induced in a dielectric medium is determined by
the product of the susceptibility and the electric ﬁeld. Thus the induced charge and current
in the space- and time-varying medium tend to incorporate a key component of which the
spatial and temporal variation is given by the product of the one of the incident ﬁeld and of
the medium. That is,

e−i(ωst−ks·r) = e−i(ωit−ki·r)ei(∆ωt−∆k·r),
(4)
where e−i(ωit−ki·r) and e−i(ωst−ks·r) denote the space- and time-variation of the incident wave
and of the induced current, respectively. Thereby, ωs = ωi − ∆ω and ks = ki − ∆k.
The induced current in turn re-radiates the scattered wave at the angular frequency ωs in
any direction. Although the frequency and hence the wavelength of the scattered wave are
changed, its polarization is not. Then we discuss its propagation direction.

A distribution of radiating currents with phase shift given by the space-harmonic eiks·r
behaves like a linear antenna array with the repeat distance of the antenna element being
vanishing, as far as the radiation pattern is concerned. The progressive phase shift given
by ks determines the pattern. When ks ≤ ωs/c, a main beam with a strong radiation
intensity due to constructive interference can form. Further, ks determines the propagation
direction of the main beam in such a way that the contributions from the various current
elements are in phase along that direction. Under the condition of ks = ωs/c, the main
beam propagates in the direction of ks, as in an end-ﬁre antenna array [4]. Meanwhile, for a
current distribution with diﬀerent ωs or ks (in direction or magnitude), the scattered wave
can also propagate in the aforementioned direction. However, the radiation is not of the
main beam or the angular width of the corresponding main beam is much smaller, especially
for an array much longer than the wavelength [4]. In addition to the re-radiation due to the
induced current, the mixed state also leads to a direct radiation due to the source varying
with e±i(∆ωt−∆k·r), as in the synchrotron radiation. This radiation has an angular frequency
∆ω and hence a wavelength close to the Compton shift ∆λ. However, its intensity is low
as in a long array, since ∆ω/c ≪ |∆k| and thus the main beam disappears. Consequently,
the wave propagating in the direction of ks is mainly the scattered wave due to the induced
current of which the space- and time-variation is given by e−i(ωst−ks·r) with ks = ωs/c.

Thereby,

(ki − k cos θ)2 + (k sin θ)2 = (ωi − ∆ω)2/c2,
(5)
where the relations ks cos ϕ = ki −k cos θ and ks sin ϕ = k sin θ are used, θ is the angle from k
to ki, and ϕ is that from ki to ks. Thus kik cos θ = (ωi −ωs)(ωi +ω0)/c2, where we have made
use of ω2 = ω2
0/(1−v2/c2). Then one has ks cos ϕ = ki−(ki−ks)(1+ω0/kic),
which is identical to (1).

0 +k2c2 as ω2 = ω2

In the well-known Bragg reﬂection of x rays from a crystal, the Bragg angle of reﬂection
which corresponds to the constructive interference is determined by the path diﬀerence de-
pending on the lattice spacing [3]. Alternatively, the lattices can be viewed as a medium of
which the permittivity is time-invariant but is space-varying depending on the lattice con-
stant. The propagation vector of the reﬂected wave is changed by the lattice constant and
then the Bragg angle is determined by the condition of ks = ωs/c, as depicted in Fig. 2a. On
the other hand, for an electromagnetic wave incident upon a time-varying medium, the scat-
tered wave tends to increase or decrease in frequency. This frequency shift has been observed
experimentally for a microwave propagating in a rapidly growing plasma [5]. Similarly, the
Raman eﬀect is associated with the scattering from a sample where the atoms or molecules
are subject to periodic vibration or rotation [2]. The Raman scattering can also be observed
with a crystal where a lattice wave due to atomic vibration (known as a phonon) is involved
[6]. A sample with a lattice wave can be viewed as a medium of which the permittivity is

3

space- and time-varying. Thus, as in the Compton scattering, both the frequency and the
propagation vector of the reﬂected wave are changed by those of the lattice wave, as depicted
in Figs. 2b and 2c. The preceding wave interpretations are presented without explicit resort
to the conservation laws for energy and momentum. Thus the conservation of energy and
momentum in these phenomena can be viewed as a consequence of the scattering.

Fig. 2 Diagrams for the propagation vectors in (a) the Bragg reﬂection, (b) the
Raman scattering, and (c) the Compton scattering. ks = ki − k.
In the Bragg
reﬂection k is determined by the lattice spacing and ω = 0; in the Raman scattering
k and ω are determined by the lattice wave; and in the Compton scattering k and
∆ω are determined by the matter wave.

4

In dealing with the Compton scattering, the postulates of de Broglie for matter wave are
adopted. Thus the Compton eﬀect can be viewed as a demonstration of the wave nature of
electrons and of the postulates of de Broglie, instead of a demonstration of the corpuscular
picture of light. Recently, these postulates in conjunction with the speed-dependent mass
have been derived from a wave equation, with the exception that the particle velocity deter-
mining the quantum energy and momentum is referred to an ECI (earth-centered inertial)
frame for earthbound phenomena [7]. However, as the linear speed due to earth’s rotation
is relatively low, it makes no substantial diﬀerence if the particle speed is referred instead
to a geostationary laboratory frame, as done tacitly in common practice with the Compton
scattering.

4. Conclusion
Based on the postulates of de Broglie for matter wave, an alternative interpretation associ-
ated with the wave scattering from a space- and time-varying medium is presented to account
for the Compton eﬀect, as well as to the Bragg reﬂection and the Raman scattering. The
temporal and spatial variation of the target in the Compton scattering in turn is due to
the mixed state of the electrons during state transition. Thus the Compton eﬀect can be
viewed as a demonstration of the postulates of de Broglie. In this wave interpretation the
conservation of energy and momentum is not used explicitly. Thus in the Compton eﬀect the
two important conservation laws can be viewed simply as a consequence of the scattering.
In addition to the scattered wave, a weak radiation of which the wavelength is close to the
Compton shift is predicted, which may provide a means to test the wave interpretation.

References

[1] A.H. Compton, “A quantum theory of the scattering of x-rays by light elements,” Phys.
Rev., vol. 21, pp. 483–502, May 1923; “The spectrum of scattered x-rays,” Phys. Rev.,
vol. 22, pp. 409–413, Nov. 1923.

[2] In McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science & Technology, 7th ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York,

1992), arts. “Compton eﬀect”, “Raman eﬀect”.

[3] M. Alonso and E.J. Finn, Physics (Wesley, New York, 1992), chs. 30, 36.

[4] D.K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics (Wesley, New York, 1989), ch. 11.

[5] J. Faith, S.P. Kuo, and J. Huang, “Frequency downshifting and trapping of an electro-
magnetic wave by a rapidly created spatially periodic plasma,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 55, pp.
1843–1851, Feb. 1997.

[6] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics (Wiley, New York, 1986), ch. 11.

[7] C.C. Su, Quantum Electromagnetics – A Local-Ether Wave Equation Unifying Quantum

Mechanics, Electromagnetics, and Gravitation (http://qem.ee.nthu.edu.tw).

5

