5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON THE DISPLACEMENTS OF EINSTEINIAN FIELDS
ET CETERA

ANGELO LOINGER

Abstract. I give here: i) a very simple proof that the physical non-
existence of gravitational waves (GW’s) is quite consistent with the ba-
sic principles of general relativity (GR); ii) a new argument against the
physical existence of GW’s; iii) a criticism of Fock’s treatment of the
GW’s; iv ) some remarks on recent experimental investigations concern-
ing the GW’s.

1. – The following is a widespread and erroneous opinion: Without gravita-
tional waves (GW’s), one would have to explain an instantaneous propa-
gation of a change in the metric over the whole universe simply by changing
the distribution of stress or mass of a given physical system. – In reality,
the physical non-existence of GW’s is quite consistent with the principles of
general relativity (GR), as I have shown ad abundantiam in various papers
[1], but perhaps in too concise ways insofar as the above speciﬁc belief is
concerned. I shall give now in sects.2., 3. a detailed treatment of it, with
the hope of convincing even the most naive among the physicists that the
adjective “instantaneous” is not the attribute of a relativistic bugaboo – if
it is properly understood.

In sect.4. I give a new argument against the physical existence of GW’s.
In sect.5. Fock’s computations concerning the GW’s are critically examined.
The Appendix reports some recent (negative) results of the experimental
search of GW’s due to LIGO collaboration.

2. – In previous Notes I have repeatedly emphasized that Einstein ﬁeld is
not analogous to Maxwell ﬁeld, since it has peculiar properties of its own
that are not shared by the electromagnetic ﬁeld. If, however, we neglect for a
moment – ad usum Delphini – the existence of the e.m. waves, we can exploit
a precise property of Maxwell ﬁeld for our purpose. For convenience, I utilize
here the treatment of Li´enard-Wiechert e.m. ﬁelds – created by a moving
point charge – as is developed in the well known treatise by Becker and
Sauter [2]; see in particular p.293 of this book, which gives the expressions
of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds due to Li´enard and Wiechert. For our
aim, it is expedient to consider the ﬁrst part, say E1, of the electric ﬁeld E

To be published on Spacetime & Substance.

email: angelo.loinger@mi.infn.it
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Milano, Via Celoria, 16 - 20133 Milano (Italy).

1

2

ANGELO LOINGER

(e.g.), i.e. the part which does not depend on the charge acceleration. We
have

(cid:20)

(1)

E1(τ )/e =

(r − rv/c)(1 − v2/c2)
(r − r · v/c)3
with evident and standard notations. As Becker and Sauter write, E1 has
the character of a static ﬁeld, it falls oﬀ as 1/r2 for large distances. Since
eq. (1) gives the ﬁrst part of the expression of the global ﬁeld E, which is
valid for all velocities v, it must agree with the ﬁeld, say E′, created by a
uniformly moving charged particle (see sect.64 of [2]):

(cid:21)τ ≡t−r/c

,

E′(t)/e =

r(1 − v2/c2)
[r2 − (r × v/c)2]3/2

;

(2)

(3)

(4)

the formal diﬀerence between expressions (1) and (2) comes from the
diﬀerent meanings of the vector r in the two formulae. In eq.(2) r = r(t)
is set equal to the vector from the instantaneous particle location, say B,
to the ﬁeld point P , while in eq.(1) by r = r(τ ) ≡ r(t − r/c) we understand
the vector from the particle location, say A, at retarded time τ ≡ t − r/c,
to the ﬁeld point P . For the case of constant velocity we obviously have:

r(t) = r(τ ) − r(τ )
c

v .

If we write r(t) ≡ r0, and r(τ ) ≡ r (as in eq.(1)), we ﬁnd from r0 = r−rv/c

for the denominator of eq. (2) that

2
0 − (r0 × v/c)
r

2

= (r − r · v/c)

3

,

h

3/2

i

i.e. the denominator of eq. (1). Thus the ﬁeld E1 actually represents the
ﬁeld moving along with the particle; and this is clearly true also for a non-
constant speed. By contrast, the second part, E2, of the total electric ﬁeld
E = E1 + E2, which is proportional to the acceleration ˙v, has the character
of a wavy (1/r) - decreasing ﬁeld.

(I have reproduced almost literally some passages of Becker and Sauter

[2], only the italics are mine.)

3. – We have seen that the static part E1 of Li´enard-Wiechert electric
ﬁeld E moves en bloc with the particle. Now, the same thing happens,
in the exact formulation of GR, for the Einstein ﬁeld gjk(x0, x) , (j, k =
0, 1, 2, 3), since – as it has been proved [3] – no “mechanism” exists in GR,
which is capable of producing GW’s. In other terms, if we displace a mass,
its gravitational ﬁeld and the related curvature of the interested manifold
displace themselves along with the mass. In general, qualitatively speaking,
we can aﬃrm that under this respect Einstein ﬁeld and Newton ﬁeld behave
in an identical way. This fact is mathematically and physically evident in
Friedmann’s cosmological models, as I have shown [4], owing to the perfect
agreement between Friedmann’s solutions and the solutions of corresponding

ON THE DISPLACEMENTS OF EINSTEINIAN FIELDS ET CETERA

3

Newtonian models. (Furthermore, we can remark that at any stage of the
EIH-method of solution of ﬁeld equations there is a suitable reference frame
for which the solution has a Newtonian form.)

Conclusion: the widespread opinion reported at the beginning of sect.1
is false: the absence of GW’s does not generate any theoretical diﬃculty –
as Levi-Civita had pointed out many years ago.

(Generally speaking, the real existence of physical waves requires the ex-
istence of physically privileged reference frames, or of a material medium as
the cosmic ether. It is not the case of GR: in it a geodesic deviation must
have a Newton-like character – and therefore could be recorded only by an
apparatus in a relative proximity of the gravity source.) –

4. - The Einstein ﬁeld equations share with Laplace-Poisson equation ∇2U =
−4πGρ an important property. Let us consider for a moment only the case
of a “cloud of dust” with mass tensor T jk = ρujuk, (j, k = 0, 1, 2, 3), where
ρ(x0, x) is the invariant mass density and uj(x0, x) is the four-velocity of a
gravitating particle. It is well known [5] that we can always choose a Gaus-
sian normal (“synchronous” in Landau’s terminology [6]) reference frame,
for which:

(5)

2

ds

=

0

dx

2 − hαβ
(cid:1)

0

, x
(cid:1)

x
(cid:0)

(cid:0)

dxαdxβ

, (α, β = 1, 2, 3)

;

if there are only gravitational interactions – as in the present case –,
this frame is also co-moving [7]: the world lines of the “dust” particles
are both time lines and geodesic lines. Our mass tensor T jk has only the
component T 00 = ρ diﬀerent from zero. Thus – exactly as it happens
for Friedmann’s models [4] – the metric tensor gjk(x0, x) depends only on
ρ(x0, x), in perfect analogy with the Newtonian potential U , and it satisﬁes
identically the geodesic equations. No GW’s are emitted – and this fact is
now quite intuitive, because we see that the motion of the ﬂuid has been
formally “obliterated”.

This treatment can be immediately generalized to a continuum, whose
particles are subject to gravitational and non-gravitational (e.g., electro-
magnetic) interactions. It is indeed suﬃcient to choose a co-moving refe-
rence frame – as it is always possible if the particle trajectories do not cross.
Here too the metric tensor does not depend on the motion of the medium
– motion that the metropolitan legend considers responsible of the emission
of GW’s.

5. – Fock [8] pretended erroneously that the so-called harmonic frames
possess a physical privilege with respect to the other co-ordinate systems.
Thus, in particular, all his computations concerning the GW’s are performed
in a harmonic frame, and with mass tensors of extended bodies. Since the
motions of gravitating point masses do not generate GW’s, it is diﬃcult
to believe in a thaumaturgical virtue of largeness.
Indeed, the extended
bodies are composed of particles, and, further, their translational motions
are correctly treated as motions of material corpuscles.

4

ANGELO LOINGER

Fock’s computations regarding the GW’s are rather poor in physical sig-

niﬁcance.

APPENDIX

α) I report here the summary of a communication by I.Leonor at LIGO
Scientiﬁc Collaboration meeting, March 23, 2005, entitled “Searching for
GRB-GWB coincidence during LIGO science runs”.

Summary:

real time

coincident run

- developed scheme for searching for GRB-GWB coincidence in near

- looking forward to S5 run with ∼ 100 GRB triggers in one year of

- performed search for short-duration GW bursts coincident with S4,

S3, and S2 GRB’s using crosscorrelation method

- sample probability distribution consistent with null hypothesis. –

The LIGO scholars are technically very clever, but evidently they can-
not discover a non-existent object as a GW. They can only persevere in
dissipating the money of the tax-payers. –

β) On arXiv:gr-qc/0505029 v1 (6 May 2005) we can read a paper of 23
pages, written by 395 LIGO-researchers all over the world, entitled “Upper
limits on gravitational wave bursts in LIGO’s second science run – LIGO-
P040040-07-R”.

Here are some sentences from the ABSTRACT: “We perform a search
for gravitational wave bursts using data from the second science run of
the LIGO detectors, using a method based on a wavelet time-frequency
decomposition. This search is sensitive to bursts of duration much less than
a second and with frequency content in the 100-1100 Hz range. It features
signiﬁcant improvements in the instrument sensitivity and in the analysis
pipeline with respect to the burst search previously reported by LIGO. [. . .].
No gravitational wave signals were detected in 9.98 days of analyzed data.
[. . .]”.

At p.11 we read: “The WaveBurst analysis applied to the S2 data yielded
16 coincidence events (at zero-lag). The application of the r -statistic cut
rejected 15 of them, leaving us with a single event that passed all the analysis
criteria.”. And at p.13: “The investigation revealed that the event occurred
during a period of strongly elevated acoustic noise at Hanford lasting tens of
seconds, as measured by microphones placed near the interferometers. [. . .].
The source of the acoustic noise appears to have been an aircraft.” –

In spite of the repeated failures, the LIGO scientists are still hopeful. Spes

ultima dea. –

γ) On arXiv:gr-qc/0505042 v1 (10 May 2005) the above 395 scholars have
published an article (7pp.) entitled “Search for Gravitational Waves from
Primordial Black Hole Binary Coalescences in the Galactic Halo”. From
the ABSTRACT: “We use data from the second science run of the LIGO
gravitational-wave detectors to search for the gravitational waves from pri-
mordial black hole (PBH) binary coalescence with component masses in the
range 0.2–1.0M⊙. [. . .]. No inspiral signals were found.” – Obviously: both

ON THE DISPLACEMENTS OF EINSTEINIAN FIELDS ET CETERA

5

GW’s and BH’s are non-existent objects [9]. The so-called observed BH’s
are enormously massive bodies restricted in relatively small volumes – as it
can be demonstrated by a careful scrutiny of the concerned papers [10]. –

δ) Again the mentioned 395 scientists on arXiv:gr-qc/0505041 v1 (12 May
2005): “Search for gravitational waves from galactic and extra–galactic bi-
nary neutron stars” (20pp.). From the ABSTRACT: “We use 373 hours (≈
15 days) of data from the second science run of the LIGO gravitational-wave
detectors to search for signals from binary neutron star coalescences within
a maximum distance of about 1.5 Mpc, a volume of space which includes
the Andromeda Galaxy and other galaxies of the Local Group of galaxies.
[. . .]. No inspiral gravitational wave events were identiﬁed in our search.”
The conclusion of the paper is the following (p.19): “In this paper, we have
presented a data analysis strategy that could lead to a detection of gra-
vitational waves from binary neutron star inspirals. The methods used to
validate the search illustrate the subtleties of the analysis of several detec-
tors with diﬀerent sensitivities and orientations. Moreover, the experience
gained by following up the largest coincident triggers will be crucial input
to investigations of event candidates that are identiﬁed in future searches.”
An Italian jest says: Chi vive sperando muore cantando. –

References

[1] Cf. e.g. A. Loinger, Spacetime & Substance, 3, No.4(14), 2002, p.145; also on
arXiv:physics/0207013 v1 (July 2nd, 2002); also in On BH’s and GW’s, II (La Go-
liardica Pavese, Pavia) 2005, p.1.

[2] R. Becker and F. Sauter, Electromagnetic Fields and Interactions, vol.I (Blaisdell

Publ. Company, New York, etc.) 1964, sect.69.

[3] See [1] and the pertinent literature quoted there, in particular: A. Loinger, Nuovo
Cimento B, 115 (2000) 679; Idem, Spacetime & Substance, 3, No.3(13), 2002, p.129;
also in On BH’s and GW’s, II (La Goliardica Pavese, Pavia) 2005, p.52; also on
arXiv:physics/0202065 v1 (February 27th, 2002).

[4] A. Loinger, arXiv:physics/0504018 v1 (April 3rd, 2005) – in course of publication in

Spacetime & Substance.

[5] D. Hilbert, Mathem. Annalen, 92 (1924) 1.
[6] L. Landau et E. Lifchitz, Th´eorie du Champ (´Editions Mir, Moscou) 1966, sect.99.
[7] Cf. e.g. E. Lifchitz and I. Khalatnikov, Advances in Physics 12 (1963) 185.
[8] V. Fock, The Theory of Space, Time and Gravitation (Pergamon Press, Oxford, etc.)

1964, passim.

[9] See e.g. A. Loinger, arXiv:physics/0402088 v1 (February 18th, 2004); Idem, On
BH’s and GW’s, II (La Goliardica Pavese, Pavia) 2005, pp.13, 17, 26, 30, 35.
The ﬁrst proof that the notion of BH is a nonsense was given by K. Schwarzschild,
Berl. Ber., (1916) 189; for an English translation of this fundamental memoir see:
arXiv:physics/9905030 (May 12th, 1999), and Gen. Rel. Grav., 35 (2003) 951; also in
On Black Holes and Gravitational Waves (La Goliardica Pavese, Pavia) 2002, p.107;
[10] See in particular A. Loinger and T. Marsico, arXiv:astro-ph/0305036 v1 (March 9th,
2003), and Spacetime & Substance, 4, No.2(17), 2003, p.80; also in On BH’s and
GW’s, II (La Goliardica Pavese, Pavia) 2005, p.17.

