5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Misinterpretations in Lorentz
Transformations
Diego Sa´a1

P.A.C.S: 01.55.+b; 03.30.+p; 01.70.+w

1 Introduction

In the present paper some reasons are given to suggest that the inter-
pretation of the Lorentz’ transformations as if they referred to coordinates
instead of to intervals could be incorrect. Besides, the usual form of such
transformations, by using variables that represent ﬁnite values instead of
diﬀerentials, could be another imprecision

2 THE INFINITESIMAL CHARACTER OF

THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATIONS

A seemingly overlooked error, preserved since the original works of Lorentz,
Minkowski and Einstein, is that the Lorentz transformations are written as if
they referred to ﬁnite magnitudes, when in fact they should refer to inﬁnites-
imals. The present author believes that to this error can be traced most of
the so-called “paradoxes” that pervade Special Relativity.

The Lorentz transformations have the purpose of ﬁnding the coordinates
of an event, from the point of view of one coordinate system, given the co-
ordinates of the same event as seen from a second coordinate system.

Einstein wrote [2]: “Any such event is represented with respect to the
co-ordinate system K by the abscissa x and the time t, and with respect to
the system K’ by the abscissa x’ and the time t’. We require to ﬁnd x’ and
t’ when x and t are given.”

Einstein wrote the Lorentz transformation in ﬁnite form, in Appendix I
1Escuela Polit´ecnica Nacional. Quito – Ecuador. email: dsaa@server.epn.edu.ec

1

of his book [2] and also in his original paper of 1905 [1] as follows:

t’ = γ(t - V x/c

)

2

x’ = γ(x - V t)

where V represents the relative velocity between the two frames of reference,
let the two frames be called S’ and S (Einstein named K and K’, but that is
insigniﬁcant). Let us assume that the frame S’ moves to the right in the x
direction (or the frame S moves to the left).

y'

y

v'

V

v

S'

N

V

S

x

Figure 1: Coordinates

The inverses of these equations are:

2
t = γ(t’ + V x’/c

)

x = γ(x’ + V t’)

2

These equations can be used, in theory, to compute the coordinates t’
and x’ of a certain event, as seen from the frame of reference S’, if we know

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

the coordinates t and x of the same event as seen from the frame S, or vice
versa.

Let us try now to reveal that they cannot be used to accomplish this goal.
First, assume that the relative velocity V between the two frames is zero.

Then, the Lorentz contraction factor

2
γ = (1 − V2 /c

)− 1

2

(5)

becomes equal to 1 and the transformations are simpliﬁed to t’ = t and
x’ = x. This means that the coordinates of the event are the same when they
are seen from the two frames of reference and when those frames of reference
do not have a relative movement between them. It can also be concluded
that the two origins are coincident.

Now let us assume that the origin of S’ is displaced a certain given distance
to the left of the origin of S. No matter what the relative velocity between the
two frames of reference, but in particular if it is zero, it would be necessary
to, somehow, add that distance to the coordinate x in order to ﬁnd x’ (or
subtract that distance from x’ in order to ﬁnd x ).

The coordinate transformations that include the mentioned constant dis-
tance are called Poincar´e transformations. But, in the same sense, are mis-
takenly interpreted as that they transform coordinates instead of intervals.
Let us provide some numbers in a given example and then let us do the
computations suggested by equations (1) and (2). Assume that the origin of
the frame S is at rest in our laboratory; also, the velocity V of the frame S’
(moving to the right) is so small that, in practice, can be ignored (assume, for
example, one meter per day). Now, the problem is to compute the coodinate
x’ at the instant in which the origin of the frame S’ is at 100 meters to the
left of the origin of the frame of reference S and the coordinate x of the event
(for example a tennis ball hits the ﬂoor), is produced at 1000 meters to the
right of the origin of the frame S.

A quick “mental” estimation of the value for x ’, assuming that both
frames of reference are static, produces 1100 meters; on the other hand, ac-
cording to equation (2), the coordinate x ’ is given by: γ (1000 meters −1
meter/day * t), where γ is very close to 1 and you should tell me now what
is the time t. Did you obtain minus one hundred days? Fine.
The computation is something like:

1100m = 1000m − 1m/day · (−100day)

3

What is the meaning of this time? It is, evidently, the interval of time since
the event was produced until the origin of the primed frame of reference
reaches the origin of the unprimed frame of reference. From this computa-
tion we can conclude that the magnitude of the time variable is greater when
the speed is smaller, so as to be close to inﬁnite when the relative velocity of
both frames of reference is close to zero. So, one conclusion almost obvious
here, is that it is not an independent time coordinate, because it must de-
pend on the relative positions of the origins of the two frames of reference at
the time when the event occurs and, also, such time depends on the relative
velocity between both frames of reference. In this context we realize that the
phenomena is behaving, and should be explained, as a diﬀerential equation.
The supposed time coordinate is not such thing.

It seems that we still have to do another “Gedanken Experiment” to re-
alize what is happening. Let us assume again that the two frames have a
relative velocity V. The argument is simpliﬁed a little if we assume a small
velocity, for example one meter per day. For such a small velocity we can
ignore γ again. But, strictly speaking, it is not necessary this simpliﬁcation
because the problem to be revealed here is too gross to be overlooked, what-
ever the value of γ. Also, assume that the event occurs close to you, at the
origin of the x -axis of the S frame. This means that the x coordinate of the
event is x =0. With this assumption, the transformation (2) simpliﬁes to: x ’
= - V t. Finally, in order to deﬁne the time coordinate of the event, assume
that the event occurs at the precise instant at which you look at your wrist-
watch. Thus, the time coordinate, t, is precisely the hour you have at this
moment in your watch. If, sometime later, one of your neighbors passes near
you in his/her car, whose frame of reference is S’, and you inform him/her,
written in a piece of paper, the coordinates you just recorded for the event in
your frame S, he/she could, in theory, compute the coordinate x’ where the
event happened, with respect to his/her frame of reference, if he/she replaces
those coordinates in the original equations (1) and (2), or in the simpliﬁed
transformation x’ = - V t.

I am almost sure that he/she will not be able to compute a reasonable
result, in the ﬁrst place because the origin of the time coordinate is usually
diﬀerent for diﬀerent observers. For example, the Gregorian calendar marks
currently a few more than 2000 years, a few more than 1380 years in the
Islamic chronology and a few more than 5760 years in the Jewish calendar.
Those numbers make nonsense if you try to use them as origins of the tem-
poral coordinates in the above equations. So, for example, if I have the time

4

coordinate of 2005 years, he/she could have 5765 or 5766 years. It does not
help much if the beginning of the time coordinate is assumed midnight, be-
cause it is highly probable that I do not have the same hour as you do, due
to our respective geographical position. And you should not suppose that
synchronizing our clocks then you can use the above “coordinate transfor-
mations” because, even if we synchronize our time coordinate, in years, days,
hours, and seconds, the product of a time coordinate by a velocity, produces
nonsense for the problem at hand.

The only reasonable way to compute the interval x’ is if I further specify
that the clock is not a clock but a chronometer or stop-watch that can be
put to zero when the event takes place. In other words, you need to know
what is the elapsed time since the occurrence of the event. You can obtain a
reasonable result only if you know, for example, that the event took place one
hundred days before the origins of the x coordinates of both frames became
coincident.
The conclusion of the above argument is that the variables used in equations
(1) and (2) are not coordinates but intervals. If you use space and time in-
tervals, which are still ﬁnite, those equations work better but not quite.

The Lorentz transformations should be written with diﬀerentials, because,
in that case, the needed constant could enter as a constant of integration.
The same can be sustained for the time transformation (1).

The mathematicians should explain if it is correct, as is usual and ac-
cepted in current Physics, to interpret the Lorentz transformations in diﬀer-
ential form as if they were equivalent to the ﬁnite transformations, or if a
new proof is needed.

The Lorentz transformations with the use of diﬀerentials would be the

following:

2
dt’ = γ(dt - V dx/c

)

dx’ = γ(dx - V dt)

(6)

(7)

Take note that the event is instantaneous and consequently does not have
a velocity of displacement associated with it. The variable V was used in
this section, and should be interpreted, as the relative velocity between the
two frames of reference.

Please verify that these equations are identical to the equations (1) and

(2), except that we are now using diﬀerentials instead of intervals.

5

Let us note that if we look at the event from the origin of a third frame of
reference, such as S”, then the velocity, v ”, to be used both explicitly in the
equations as well as in the Lorentz contraction, should be now the relative
velocity between the frames of reference S” and S’, whose corresponding time
and space intervals we are trying to compute now.

If we require to compute both the time and space diﬀerentials correspond-
ing to the frame of reference S’, given the coordinate diﬀerentials deﬁned for
the frame of reference S”, we will still have to use equations (6) and (7), with
the necessary corrections, which produce the following end result:

′
dt

2
= γ′′(dt” - v” dx”/c

)

′
dx

= γ′′(dx” - v” dt”)

where v ” is interpreted currently as the relative velocity of the frame of
reference S” with respect to the frame of reference S’ (or vice versa).

Equating equations (6), (8) and (7), (9) we come up with:

′
dt

2
= γ(dt - V dx/c

) = γ

′′

2
(dt” – v” dx”/c

) = . . .

′

dx

= γ(dx - V dt) = γ ′′(dx” – v” dt”) = . . .

The velocities V, v”, . . . associated with each frame of reference are equal
to the velocities between the frame of reference S’ and each one of the frames
of reference S and S” of the observers (or vice versa).

The equations for the diﬀerent γ’s are functions of the corresponding

velocities.

Solving the last two equalities (10) and (11) for dt” and dx ” we obtain:

where v is the abbreviation of the expression:

dt ′′ = Γ(dt - v dx/c

2

)

′′

dx

= Γ(dx - v dt)

v =

V − v′′
1 − V ·v′′
c2

6

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

which represents the velocity between the frames of reference S and S” and
is comparable with Einstein’s equation for “composition of velocities”.

Whereas Γ is deﬁned as:

The previous equations reveal the group character of the Lorentz trans-

formations.
Equations (12) and (13) can be rewritten and simpliﬁed by replacing dx/dt
by c:

Γ =

1 − v2
c2

r

dt ′′
dt

=

dx ′′
dx

1 − v/c
1 + v/c

=

s

(15)

(16)

The proportion of time and space diﬀerentials is the same expression and
represents the Doppler redshift of an event as observed from two arbitrary
frames of reference.

Some observations, concerning some eﬀects and objective reality of the

“Lorentz transformations” are presented by the author in other paper.

3 Conclusions

1.

I felt that I could be oﬀending the intelligence of the reader by ex-
plaining in so much detail elementary examples such as the one analyzed
in the section “the inﬁnitesimal character of the Lorentz transformation”
that, in principle, can be grasped by any motivated layman, but the case is
that, apparently, it has not been recognized, throughout the last one hun-
dred years, that the ﬁnite Lorentz transformation should work with intervals
and not with coordinates. Or is the case that physicists, and in particular
the “relativists” didn’t want to recognize it? My suspicion is that we, as
humans, have great diﬃculty in capturing concepts, doing deductions and
considering the cumulus of objections which have been sustained through
the years by many investigators. As Feyerabend says: “the lasting success
of our categories and the omnipresence of some speciﬁc point of view is not
signal of excellence or indicative that truth has been found. Rather it is
indication of the failure of reason to ﬁnd adequate alternatives to overcome

7

an intermediate stage of our knowledge” [3] (my own translation from the
Spanish version of this book). Even though some physicists have been able to
identify the many contradictions related with Special Relativity (one should
have been enough), they have been incapable of constructing an integrated
and coherent theory. Our more advanced reasoning seem to use deductive
chains of about ﬁve resolution steps. Chains of reasoning with about ten
resolution steps are almost impossible for us to ﬁnd and accomplish without
error. An alternative line of investigation, worth of further study, is about
the complexity of the knowledge; this should help to pinpoint, and be careful
with, arguments where the validation of the truth of the premises and of the
chains of deduction are approaching the limits of human comprehension.

2.

It is a well-known fact that Special Relativity is based on the ﬁnite
coordinate transformations, which can be traced back to Voigt, Lorentz and
Minkowski but popularized by, essentially, the original works of Einstein. As
these transformations have been here proved wrong, because they should use
neither ﬁnite nor coordinate distances, many of the applications and para-
doxes based in such equations collapse and disappear.

3. A theory should always be subject to analysis and improvements. In
particular, Special Relativity, as a theory, seems that has not been honest in
the estimation of the degree of uncertainty that it was conveying, even though
the technical aspects had been better founded. This paper has revealed some
misinterpretations, which seem to be better qualiﬁed as errors, that cannot
be corrected or improved with experiments but by changing the theory.

References

[1] Einstein, Albert On the electrodynamics of moving bodies. June 30,

1905. In Web page:
http://www.fourmilab.ch/etexts/einstein/specrel/specrel.pdf

[2] Einstein, Albert

Relativity

- The Special

eral Theory. A Popular Exposition,
http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/eric baird/

1916.

and
the Gen-
In web page:

[3] Feyerabend, Paul K. Against Method: Outline of an anarchistic theory

of knowledge. University of Minnesota, 1970.

8

