hep-th/0506012

Inversions of the Eﬀective Action in Condensed Matter Models

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

The quantum eﬀective action may be used to invert information from phenomena,
either measured or ideal, to the microscopic Lagrangian. As an example of this
procedure the lattice composition of a solid can be determined in principle from
desired critical phenomena. Also, the engineering of scattering and optical properties
of particular degrees of freedom, and excitations, in terms of the temperature and
electro-magnetic ﬁelds may be performed.

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum ﬁeld theory in general can be ’solved’ in terms of the functional inte-
gration of the quantum ﬁelds. One recipe for doing this involves the integration of the
propagating modes in perturbation theory; the perturbative aspect can be changed
once the coupling dependence of series is obtained. A procedure for obtaining the full
scattering, and the quantum eﬀective action that generates it, is described in [1]-[3]
(and references therein); scalar, gauge, and gravitational models are analyzed within
the perturbative context in [1], [2] and classically in [5] and [6]. Further simpliﬁcations
of the tensor algebra may be performed [4].

The quantum action of condensed matter models can also be obtained with the
full dependence on the coupling constants, as a power series. The lattice type and
composition is incorporated into the propagators and integration region (via the Bril-
lioun zone, for example). For example, the action describing phonons and electrons
in the non-relativistic limit can be obtained to all orders in the coupling and energy
scales.

The quantum action as a function of the lattice Λ, the structure constants and
properties of the cores fi, non-linearities associated with the electrons and the band,
the temperature T , and external ﬁelds E and B may be included into the deter-
mination of the quantum action. The microscopic coupling constants in the bare
Lagrangian can be given their full perturbative series.

The eﬀective action in the condensed matter context takes on the form,

ψ∆(x; T, Λ)ψ + mψψ + F 2

phonon + F 2

e.m.

together with the interactions,

Y ψψ . . . ψAp . . . ApAe.m. . . . Ae.m.

combined with the derivatives placed in physically allowed places, which are derived
from the fundamental theory. The bare theory could also include the electromagnetic
interactions derived from the atomic cores, and the non-linearities associated with
the phonon displacements (i.e. quartic and higher order terms).

The quantization of the bare theory should take into account the Brillouin zone
features in the k-space integration. Within the derivative expansion, this integration
change does not alter the complications with the integrals.

2

(1)

(2)

The application of the quantization, or mode expansion in the classical and quan-
tum regime, generates the coeﬃcients of the terms in (2) in momentum space. These
coeﬃcients,

fsij;fi,Λ,T ;gj

(3)

are expansions in the lattice structure Λ, fi and the coupling constants gj. The latter
model the electron, phonon, and electromagnetic eﬀects; they could also represent
the core potentials of the atoms and non-linearities associated with the lattice. These
functions are computable within the derivative expansion to any order once the bare
Lagrangian is speciﬁed. (A momentum representation could be used to formulate the
interaction potential from the cores in the lattice. The temperature dependence is
also included in the bare theory.)

The integral representations in [1]-[2] can be used to ﬁnd the full eﬀective ac-
tion and the coeﬃcients fsij ;fi,Λ,T ;gj as power series. All couplings fi, Λ, gi and the
temperature T can be left as arbitrary parameters in the bare theory. The phonon
(and other modes) populations at a given temperature can be inserted as background
ﬁelds.

The point of this calculation is that with the arbitrariness of these parameters,
the functions f multiplying the eﬀective action’s terms can be used to deduce the
parameters. In a quantum ﬁeld theory form, or at a point at criticality in the lattice
model, this inversion is clear from the power series form in the coupling as computed
in [1]-[6].

It would be useful to compute the entire eﬀective action as a function of all
of these bare interactions, and to produce a computational program to carry out the
inversion. This would enable a reverse modeling, that is, to model desired phenomena
even at non-criticality, to the bare Lagrangian including the construction of the lattice
and its constituents. This program is technically straightforward to carry out in
practice, without complications in principle. The full eﬀective action is available
via the summation of Feynman diagrams, or those in the derivative expansion. The
inversion of the functions fsij;Λ,T,gi to the couplings and lattice involve polynomial and
transcendental equation solutions. However, in principle, any desired phenomena at
or near criticality can be obtained with enough self-consistent information from the
couplings and lattice.

The band electron band information can be obtained from the low-energy eﬀective
action, including the quantum propagator. Associated information from an external

3

photon ﬁeld can be used further to turn on background couplings and change further
these functions f by including the hAe.m. . . . Ae.m.i. The momentum dependence (or
frequency bandwith and amplitude) of the external ﬁeld Ae.m. can be used in theory
to alter a near inﬁnite number of terms, depending on the precision and accuracy
of the waveform. These feature of the backgound electromagnetic ﬁeld can be used
to alter substantially the band structure of the electrons and the Fermi ﬁlling (after
including possible interactions with the lattice cores).

The inversion of the eﬀective action can be done with the background ﬁelds to
obtain a variety of phenomena. Even seemingly complicated lattices, such as the
cuprates, can be modeled in a straightforward fashion, once the bare Lagrangian is
produced. Bandwidth aborption and reﬂection can be produced as a function of
desired properties, and collective phenomena can be made after the appropriate ﬁeld
redeﬁnitions. Speciﬁed quantum eﬀects can be tuned for.

A computational (e.g. computer program) can be made that tunes phenomena to
speciﬁed materials. For example, the band structure, optical properties, electron scat-
tering, criticality involving temperature, and collective phenomena can be inputs and
the lattice structure and external ﬁelds could be outputs. This is direct to implement
using the full eﬀective action, if accurate from the bare Lagrangian and its interac-
tions. An arbitrary number of interactions can be used in the bare theory, without
much complication from a computational perspective including quantum eﬀects.

In principle, desired phenomena can be obtained from the lattice and the external
ﬁelds (involving derivatives); in practice there are technical obstacles. It is markable
that the desired phenomena can be turned into the microscopic data, at bandwidth
involving phase transitions at room temperature once the interaction fsij;Λ,gi,T func-
tions are tunable, which is possible with the eﬀective action. Amorphous materials
with the appropriate bare lattice and core interactions are also available.

4

References

[1] G. Chalmers, Quantum Solutions to Scalar Field Theory Models, physics/050518.

[2] G. Chalmers, Quantum Gauge Theory Amplitude Solutions, physics/0505077.

[3] G. Chalmers, Derivation of Quantum Field Dynamics, physics/0503062.

[4] G. Chalmers, in progress.

[5] G. Chalmers, Tree Amplitudes in Gauge and Gravity Theories, physics/0504173.

[6] G. Chalmers, Tree Amplitudes in Scalar Field Theories, physics/0504219.

5

