5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mesoscale Quantization and Self-Organized Stability

Randall D. Peters
Mercer University Physics

June 2005

Abstract

In the world of technology, one of the most important forms of friction is that of rolling friction.
Yet it is one of the least studied of all the known forms of energy dissipation.
In the present
experiments we investigate the oscillatory free-decay of a rigid cube, whose side-length is less than the
diameter of the rigid cylinder on which it rests. The resulting free-decay is one of harmonic motion
with damping. The non-dissipative character of the oscillation yields to a linear diﬀerential equation;
however, the damping is found to involve more than a deterministic nonlinearity. Dominated by
rolling friction, the damping is sensitive to the material properties of the contact surfaces. For ‘clean’
surfaces of glass on glass, the decay shows features of mesoscale quantization and self-organized
stability.

1 Geometry

Shown in cross-section in ﬁgure 1 are the two objects that comprise this oscillatory system. The cube
side-length dimension is 2a, and the diameter of the cylinder is 2r. Both are assumed to be completely
rigid, so that the torque which restores the cube toward equilibrium is due to gravity. In mechanics
textbooks this problem is commonly treated as an exercise to test for the condition of static equilibrium.

2 Theory without damping

The potential energy is simply mgh. From the other identities provided in the ﬁgure, one can readily
show for small displacements, that

U =

(r − a)θ2

mg
2

The displacement of the center of mass P of the cube is given by ∆x = r sin θ − s sin(φ − θ),

∆y = s cos(φ − θ) − a. For small θ these yield for the center of mass velocity

dθ
dt
The moment of inertia of the cube about its center of mass is given by I = 2

vx → a

vy → 0

= a ˙θ,

energy is the sum of translational and rotational parts; i.e., T = 1
p = ∂T
∂ ˙θ

the Hamiltonian is calculated to be

2 mv2 + 1

2 I ˙θ2 = 5

3 ma2. The kinetic
6 ma2 ˙θ2. Using

Using Hamilton’s canonical equations, ∂H
one obtains the equation of motion

H(p, θ) =

3p2
10 ma2 +
∂p = ˙θ and ∂H

mg
2

∂θ = − ˙p

(r − a) θ

2

¨θ +

3g
5a2 (r − a)θ = 0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

from which the period is determined to be

T = 2π

5a2
3g(r − a)

s

(5)

3 Adding friction to the model

The naive approach to the addition of damping would be to add to to the left hand side of eq.(4) the
term 2β ˙θ, where β is sometimes referred to as the damping constant. In reality, in dozens of experiments
performed by the present author on mechanical oscillators– not a single case has ever been found for
which it is proper to call β a constant. Even if the present system were amenable to the overly-idealized
viscous damping approximation indicated by this term, β is never constant and should be referred to as
the viscous damping coeﬃcient. With ﬂuids it depends on the density as well as the viscosity, and it is
never completely independent of frequency[1].

3.1 Nonlinear damping

From the experimental results it will be seen that the damping is certainly not a classical exponential
decay of the type students are conditioned from their textbooks to expect for virtually every oscillatory
system in free-decay. A closer approximation to most of the cases (although inadequate) is ‘simple’
Coulomb damping; i.e., where one adds to eq.(4) a term that is proportional to sgn( ˙θ). The signum
function causes the eﬀective damping force to depend on the direction of the velocity but not its magni-
tude. It is a nonlinear damping term, and the quality factor Q decreases linearly with time, as opposed
to being constant [1].

4 Experimental Setup

Shown in ﬁgure 2 is a photograph of the apparatus that was employed for this study. The mate-
rial of both cylinder and cube is glass, components normally used for optics experiments. All sur-
faces are highly polished, so that visible light is specularly reﬂected from them. The dimensions are
r = 4.46 cm, & a = 2.54 cm. The thin half-cylinder (length = 1.4 cm) is glued at its bottom to the
aluminum block on which it rests. The block is in turn glued to the wooden base to which the sensor
support ‘post’ is attached with a screw.

Visible in the picture is a thin rectangular piece of sheet copper that was superglued to one side
of the cube. Passing between static electrodes, it is the moving member of the capacitive sensor that
was used to measure the displacement of the cube. The sensor is the symmetric diﬀerential capacitive
(SDC) device invented and patented by the author[2].

The interface to the computer is a Dataq Inc. DI-154 analog to digital 12-bit converter. It was used
instead of their $25 10-bit DI-194 to permit lower-level signals to be studied. The 10-bit ADC would be
satisfactory for many of the cases considered, with the SDC electronics set at maximum gain.

5 Experimental Results

5.1 Frequency

As a test of eq(5), the period of oscillation was measured using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of
free-decay records. A low-level case is shown in the right hand graph of ﬁgure 3. The second harmonic
is down 33 dB (factor of 45) from the fundamental. It is not known whether this harmonic distortion
results primarily from the sensor or if it is a characteristic of the cube/cylinder oscillator. It should be
noted that the decibel, as used in all graphs (excepting ﬁgure 5), is according to the Dataq convention;
i.e.,

dB = 20 log10(32768 v/vf s)

(6)

where the full-scale voltage is for the present ADC not adjustable; i.e., it is ﬁxed at vf s = 10 V . Of
course, as with potential energies, only diﬀerences are important; making the reference inconsequential.
To convert to the more common dB relative to 1 volt, one only needs to subtract 70.3 from the Dataq
dB value.

All spectra, both low-level and high-level, yielded the same 2.2 Hz eigenfrequency. With the dimen-
sions indicated above, the theoretical estimate of the frequency from eq (5) is f = 1
T = 2.1 Hz. This
agreement to within 5% is considered reasonable, since the ‘regularity’ of the cylinder is unknown. Al-
though the cube is polished ﬂat to approximately the wavelength of visible light; variability in curvature
around the cylinder as a function of angle is expected to be more signiﬁcant.

It should be noted that the moment of inertia of the copper strip, which is not factored into the

theory, will lower the frequency only slightly; since its mass is less than 2% the cube’s mass of 329 g.

Although the compressibility of the surfaces has not been considered in a quantitative manner, this
may be important for eﬀorts directed at better than 5% agreement between theory and experiment.
The weight of the cube ﬂattening the cylinder and cupping the cube at the contact point, causes the
frequency to increase.

5.2 Damping

As can be seen from the compressed-time record of ﬁgure 3, the free-decay is not exponential. Moreover,
it is not even symmetric; i.e., the upper and lower turning points of the motion are not mirror-symmetric
about the time-axis.

At low levels of the motion, where the cube’s resting position on the cylinder can be maintained
nearly constant, repeatibility between runs was found to be good, as seen in the example of ﬁgure 4.
To initialize the oscillation at these low levels, a stream of air was directed onto a side of the cube (a
strong puﬀ from the mouth). At high levels the oscillation was accomplished by placing a screwdriver
under one side of the wooden base, tilting it by a small angle and then removing the tilt rapidly (but
not by dropping).

The nonlinearities observed in ﬁgure 4 derive from the oscillator and not from the sensor. The
sensor was determined to be essentially linear over the full operating range of plus and minus voltages
considered in the study. The sensor was calibrated using an optical lever; i.e., by means of a laser
pointer directed onto one surface of the cube (using a screen with a meter stick placed 3.6 m away).
The calibration constant was measured to be 48 V/rad.

Damping Theory

Figure 5 illustrates the diﬀerences among hysteretic, Coulomb, and amplitude dependent damping.
Hysteretic damping yields an exponential free-decay and may be approximated (for ﬁxed frequency) by
the viscous damping model. In actuality, all three of the damping cases shown in ﬁgure 5 are nonlinear.
Only the hysteretic case masquerades as linear [1].

Comparing ﬁgures 4 and 5, one observes that the oscillating cube is closest to the case of Coulomb
damping. Although one normally associates Coulomb damping with sliding surfaces, we see that it is
also a ﬁrst approximation to the rolling friction of the present study. Because the turning points of the
motion deviate from a line (or other simple curve) a non-traditional method of measuring the damping
was employed.

5.3 Short Time Fourier Transform

The left set of curves in ﬁgure 5 may be familiar to the reader, but the middle set of curves is less
common. Because the decay curves of this study are not simple, the method selected for measuring the
damping is one called the short time Fourier transform (STFT). The time-record is analyzed, using the
Fast Fourier transform (FFT), by evaluating at each of a set of points that are equally spaced in time,
and which cover the full span of the record. For a given length record, the maximum allowable number
of STFT points is determined by the ∆t between points and the number of points used in calculating
the FFT. The value of ∆t is governed by the sample rate of the ADC and the total duration of the

decay. For all present work the sample rate was 240 s−1. For most of the graphs the time between
FFT points was 5.2 s, a value made convenient by the modus operandus of the Dataq software. Also for
the present work, the number of points chosen for each FFT calculation was 1024. Spectra calculated
with anything smaller (including 512) yield too poor resolution to be acceptable. For high-level decays
with small damping this permitted more than 30 points to be plotted. At low-levels the number was
reduced by a factor of about two for small damping cases. When the damping was large, due to surface
contamination, the Q was so small as to disallow an accurate assessment of the damping history and
thus the mechanism (too few points). From a given spectrum, the level of the fundamental component
was read in decibels; this value was then plotted in time at the midpoint of the 1024 point-spread.

As seen from ﬁgure 5 (middle graphs), such an STFT yields a straight line if it was obtained from an
exponential (hysteretic) decay. If the decay curve derives from Coulomb friction, the STFT curve falls
at an ever increasing rate, becoming precipitous at the end time. For amplitude dependent damping
(such as from drag of a ﬂuid that is quadratic in the speed), the opposite trend is found.

5.4 Quality Factor

The quality factor in free-decay is deﬁned according to

Q = 2π

E
|∆E|

(7)

where E is the energy of the oscillator at a given time, and |∆E| is the energy loss to the damping
friction per cycle at that time. For the case of hysteretic damping Q is constant, as observed in the right
set of graphs of ﬁgure 5. The exponential decay requires of the amplitude A that ∆A/A = constant,
giving Q = constant, since E ∝ A2.

The Q of Coulomb damping decreases linearly in time as shown in the graph. This can be easily
understood, since the friction force is constant, and the work done against friction is thus proportional
to the amplitude. Noting again that the energy is proportional to the square of the amplitude, the Q
for this case must then be proportional to the amplitude, which itself falls oﬀ linearly. To calculate the
|dB/s| , where f is the frequency of
Q from the falloﬀ slope in dB/s, one uses the expression Q = 27.29
oscillation.

f

A thorough quantitative treatment of these nonlinear damping mechanisms, including the amplitude

dependent case, can be found in [1].

6 Damping Measurements

Shown in ﬁgure 6 are graphs of STFT and Q vs time for the left case of ﬁgure 4. The history of Q is
remarkable in its non-classical properties. There are three separate regions of essentially constant slope,
implying a diﬀerent constant ‘coeﬃcient’ of (internal) friction for each of the three regions. These have
been identiﬁed by the straight line (red) ﬁts to those segments. The most striking feature of the graph
is the peak which occurs at 36 s. Both to the left and to the right of this peak the slope is the same
8.0 s−1. At 68 s, the slope changes discontinuously to the ﬁnal segment value of 2.1 s−1.

These characteristics were found to be essentially reproducible, as can be seen from ﬁgure 7; although
the sharpness of the peak is more pronounced in ﬁgure 7. If the STFT step-size had been smaller, to
improve resolution; perhaps these would be more similar. Although the peak in ﬁgure 7 occurs a little
later at 42 s, it has roughly the same amplitude of 52 db, corresponding to an energy of 0.2 µJ. Either
side of the peak in ﬁgure 7 the slope is the same 7.0 s−1, whereas the ending (third-segment) slope is
2.6 s−1.

7 Energy Transition

For Coulomb damping d∆E
dt = R where R is a negative constant in the absence of any change to the
damping. The discontinuous change in the slope of Q that occurs toward the end of the record, in each

(8)

(9)

(10)

of ﬁgures 6 and 7, corresponds to a downward jump in the rate at which energy is lost per cycle. If
we designate the magnitude of this change in energy rate by |δ(R)|, then from the deﬁnition of Q one
obtains

|δ(R)| =

2πE0
Q 2
0

|δ( ˙Q)|

2 (r − a)θ 2

where the subscript 0 on E and Q identify their values at the time of the change. From the level of the
voltage in dB at this point, and using the calibration constant of 48V /rad, the amplitude was estimated
at θ0 = 0.56 mrad in ﬁgure 6. Also at this transition, Q0 = 76. From eq(3) the energy is found to be
0 , which yields E0 = 9.3 × 10−9J, upon substituting the parameter values
E0 = mg
speciﬁed earlier. From the slope change (estimated using trendline ﬁts to each of the segments),
|δ( ˙Q)| = 5.6 s−1; and so ﬁnally, one obtains an estimate for the energy jump in the rate of
|δ(R)| = 5.7 × 10−11J/s Multiplying this rate by the period T = 0.45 s yields, for the energy jump
that occured at the transition ∆ǫ = 2.6 × 10−11 J. Repeating the process for ﬁgure 7 yielded the value
2.2 × 10−11 J. Their average at

∆ǫest = 2.4 × 10−11 J

is noteworthy.

8 Mesoscale Quantization

The estimated energy transition indicated in eq(9) is tantalizingly close to the ‘hysteron’ postulated by
Erber and Peters[1], having the value

where mc2 is the rest energy of the electron and α is the ﬁne structure constant.

∆ǫh =

= 1.01 × 10−11J

mc2
α

9 Self-organized Stability (SOS)

A well-known fairly recent theory that applies to granular systems is ‘self-organized criticality’ (SOC)
[3]. Internal friction damping in a mechanical oscillator is postulated to involve SOC.

The present author has postulated that creep, as with SOC, is at the heart of internal friction
damping of mechanical oscillators[4]. During creep, structural members of an oscillator evolve toward
metastable states. Thus it appears that ‘self-organized stability’ (SOS) is a process that is likely to
exist in the ‘sea’ of SOC. The probability of an SOS process being observable is expected to generally
increase as the energy of oscillation decreases.

It is postulated that the peaks in ﬁgures 6 and 7 are examples of SOS. Where the Q reaches its
highest level, the energy decrement per cyle has decreased to |∆E| ≈ 5 × 10−10J. Either side of the
peak the decrement is larger by roughly a factor of two. Damping involves defect structures. To decrease
the energy decrement is to decrease the number of defects operating collectively. In other words, to pass
through a peak is to undergo a self-organized stability process that exists in transient form; i.e., a
metastable state whose lifetime we here quantify by the half-width of the SOS structure. In ﬁgures 6
and 7 this is seen to be of the order of 5 s.

10 High-level Oscillation

Reproducibility of SOS is observed by comparing ﬁgures 8 and 9, but there is no evidence for discrete
energy transitions as in ﬁgures 6 and 7. This is in keeping with the earlier postulate that the transitions
are more observable at low energies. Scatter (noise) in ﬁgures 8 and 9 is too large to permit their
observation. Observe also, that the half-life of the SOS is roughly twice that of the lower energy cases;
i.e., now about 10 s.

This author has held to the position for years now, that damping friction is quantized at the
mesoscale. Evidence for his position has been found in a variety of largely diﬀerent experiments, the

ﬁrst of which involved a low-frequency physical pendulum[5]. Another example, involving a torsion
pendulum, is described in an appendix of [1].

It is assumed that dissipation of energy involves the removal of energy ‘packets’ from the oscillator
that are integer multiples of the hysteron energy given in eq(10). Whether the decay is hysteretic
(exponential) as in earlier experiments, or Coulomb in character (present experiment); at larger energies
of oscillation, the discrete nature of the damping is not discoverable in the presence of noise.

11 Surface Contamination

The dramatic inﬂuence on damping of the surface state of cube and cylinder is illustrated in ﬁgure 11.
Prior to the generation of the free-decay record shown, both surfaces were touched with a ﬁnger of the
hand several times and in several places, in the vicinity of the equilbirum contact point. The ﬁngerprints
left on the surfaces resulted in (i) a dramatic reduction in the Q, and (ii) a near perfect example of
Coulomb damping throughout the entire record.

Similar records that are not shown, generated after applying various ﬂuids to the surfaces, also
resulted in behavior similar to ﬁgure 11. Of the three ﬂuids considered for cleaning the surfaces: (i)
alcohol, (ii) a computer monitor cleanser, and (iii) acetone; the monitor solvent of unknown chemical
composition caused enormous Q reduction, and acetone resulted in the lowest dissipation. The data of
ﬁgures 3 & 6 - 10 were all obtained after acetone cleaning, followed by half a dozen decay runs before the
start of data collection. The reason for the half-dozen pre-data ‘conditioning’ is that the decay curves
were found to evolve signiﬁcantly with time through the ﬁrst several runs following the application of
the acetone.

References

CRC Press (2005).

[1] R. D. Peters, “Damping Theory”, Ch. 20, Vibration and Shock Handbook, ed. Clarence deSilva,

[2] U.S.

No.
http://physics.mercer.edu/petepag/sens.htm

5,461,319.

Patent

Online

information

may

be

found

at

[3] P. Bak, C. TAng, &K. Wiesenfeld, “Self-organized criticality, An explanation of 1/f noise”, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 59, 381-384 (1987). Also, same authors, Phys. Rev. A 38, 364-374 (1988), and Geophys.
Res. 94, 15,635-15,637 (1989).

[4] Peters,“Creep

and

mechanical

oscillator

damping”,

online

at

http://arxiv.org/html/physics/0109067.

[5] R. Peters, “Metastable states of a low-frequency mesodynamic pendulum”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 57,

1825 (1990).

Figure 1: Illustration of the geometry of a cube oscillating on a cylinder.

Figure 2: Photograph of the apparatus, showing oscillator, sensor/electronics, and ADC.

Figure 3: Low-level free-decay record and its spectrum.

Figure 4: Comparison of two low-level free-decay curves showing a high level of reproducibility.

Figure 5: Theoretical curves for three common forms of damping.

Figure 6: STFT (left) from which the history of Q is obtained (right) –corresponding to left graph of
ﬁg. 4.

Figure 7: Same as ﬁg. 6, except corresponding to right graph of ﬁg. 4.

Figure 8: STFT and Q histories for a free-decay at higher starting energy.

Figure 9: Repeat of ﬁgure 8 case, showing reproducibility of SOS.

Figure 10: Free-decay records used to generate ﬁgures 8 (left) and 9 (right).

Figure 11: Illustration of the inﬂuence of surface contamination.

