hep-th/0507186

Computing K3 and CY n-fold Metrics

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

The derivative expnsion in the context of IIB string scattering compactiﬁed on
non-trivial K3 and other Calabi-Yau manifolds is formulated. The scattering data
in terms of automorphic functions can be inverted to ﬁnd the these metrics. The
solutions are parameterized by the moduli information, and the metrics may be found
to any desired accuracy in derivatives. Metric information to low orders in derivatives
allows for a counting of curves inside the manifold; in addition, the coeﬃcients of
these exponential terms via D-brane wrappings are polynomials that may admit an
invariant interpretation in cohomology. An interesting case pertaining to M-theory
compactiﬁcations is the collection of seven-dimensional G2 manifolds; they can also
be obtained when the moduli space degenerates into cases, such as a toroidal one or
other limit in which modular functions on the space are known.1

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1This work was written two years ago; the recipe without the explicit form of the scattering and

metrics is given.

1 Introduction

Compact Ricci-ﬂat manifolds were discovered in 1957, but to date there is moder-
ate progress in computing their metric form away from the large volume region or
in some degenerate limit. Knowing the explicit metric would allow for a variety of
computations: holomorphic curve counting, gravitational instanton contributions to
string backgrounds, number theory results, and more.
In this work the derivative
expansion applied to gravitational theories, together with S-duality, generate a recipe
for computing the K¨ahler potential of the manifold to an arbitrary order in deriva-
tives; formally the complete classical gravitational scattering in the K3 background
generates the K3 metric. (Recent work in [1] generated numerically partial metrics
on certain K3 spaces.)

First, the method presented to computing the metrics is described; model de-
pendencies vary the procedure slightly. The bosonic truncation of the covariantized
gravitational eﬀective action has the form in Einstein frame,

=

S

1
G2
N

Z

ddx√g [R + α1 ln R2 + α2R3 + . . . ,

(1.1)

and whose variation generates the on-shell S-matrix evaluated in some background.
The coeﬃcients parameterizing the eﬀective action, in general, are computable through
perturbative and non-perturbative methods. In theories with non-perturbative du-
1
ality structure such as IIB superstring theory with τ
τ , the coeﬃcients of the
curvatures are easier to obtain. The coeﬃcients are obtainable via pseudo free-ﬁeld
x-space diagrams in the derivative expansion.2
IIB compactiﬁed on K3, and other
certain Calabi-Yau manifolds, allow the non-perturbative form to be deduced via
perturbative methods. The non-perturbative terms correspond to various D-branes
(i.e. D-instantons, D1 and D3 branes) wrapping the internal cycles to be computed;
= 4
they are connected to the perturbative terms through S-duality, similar to
supersymmetric gauge theory [11] as the gauge theory instantons are derivable from
the perturbative terms.

↔ −

N

The idea in obtaining the non-trivial metrics of K3, or other Calabi-Yau n-folds,
involves ﬁrst substituting gi¯j = ∂i∂¯jφ within the eﬀective action. The vanishing of
the action density

2The work in the context of various theories is described in [2]-[17].

[φ] = 0

S

S =

[φ]

Z S

(1.2)

2

R

R is a total derivative, and
should generate the K¨ahler potential; the kinetic term
the total action in the quantum regime should vanish as there is a minimum to the
action on the K¨ahler manifold. Whether there is an integration by parts or not,
there should be a minimum. This variation is non-trivial due to both the presence of
the logarithmic terms in the eﬀective actions and the eﬀective vertices which depend
on the modular forms commanded by S- and T-duality. This routine in principle
generates the metric to an arbitrary order of accuracy, in addition to allowing the
computation of all of the gravitational instantons wrapping the sub-cycles within the
manifold (and also the number and type of cycles in the manifold).

2 Nonperturbative coeﬃcients on CY n-folds

First, the IIB superstring derivative expansion in a ﬂat-space background, as formu-
lated in [17], is reviewed. The generating function of the scattering amplitude at two
to four-point order is found from,

1
α4 Z

=

S

d10x√x [R + R

R + α3

fk(τ, ¯τ )(α )kR4 + non

analytic] , (2.1)

−

1

∞

Xk=1

with the derivatives acting genrerally within the components of the contracted R4
terms (the tensor of the R4 term is determined by maximal supersymmetry). The non-
analytic terms have the general expansion of logarithms mingling within the curvature
terms; they may be computed via unitarity - the imaginary parts of amplitudes should
be found via Cutkowsky rules. The prefactors fk are modular functions and under
S-duality transform under τ
1. The remaining
terms in the action are found from a supersymmetric extension of the action (for
example, with a lightcone maximal superspace of [18]).

(aτ + b)/(cτ + d) with ac

bd =

→

−

−

The modular functions at a given order k are spanned by the ring of functions,

E(qi,−qi)

si

,

Y

si = s,

X

qi = 0 ,

X

and

E(q,−q)
s

=

X(m,n)6=(0,0)

τ s
2
(m + nτ )s+q(m + n¯τ )s−q ,

3

(2.2)

(2.3)

with the sum ranging over coprime pairs of integers and s = 3/2 + k/2. The ring
element coeﬃcients (including possible non-holomorphic qi 6
= 0 terms) are determined
by sewing relations, after including the supersymmetric terms.

The formulation previously discussed is valid when the vacuum of the IIB string is
described by the coset SL(2,R)/U(1), the keyhole region in the complex region. When
the vacuum moduli space changes, a diﬀerent set of automorphic functions enter into
the description; for example, S-duality is expected for the IIB string compactiﬁed on
a multi-torus, and the moduli space of the vacuum is described by the semi-direct
product of the SL(2,R) action and the T-duality group of the torus SO(10
d)/SO(10

−
d), a member of the potentially aﬃne duality group E11−d,11−d.

d)/SO(10

d, 10

−

−

−

Next we examine the general graviton scattering on the K3 manifolds. These man-
ifolds have 57 moduli, with a rather simple moduli space, SO(3, 19)/SO(19)/SO(3)
[231-3-171 =57]. The semi-direct product of S and T-duality forms the moduli (Te-
ichmuller) space SO(5, 21)/SO(5)/SO(21); because the K3s moduli space is toroidal
it is possible to formulate the automorphic functions taking values on it; we may also
derive the string scattering and derive the explicit set of metrics.

N

N ≥

Consider the scattering of IIB on T6

K3, with the base space being K3. The
×
number of supersymmetries is naively 32 components as found on the K3 base, with
one covariantly conserved K3 spinor times the eight spinors arising from the T 6 torii;
= 4 in d = 4 with the grav multiplet arising from
however, the theory has only
the K3 and the toroidal space generating a tower of
= 4 multiplets. S-duality
N
16 supersymmetries. We will
is expected to be present in theories containing
neglect all o fthe massless and massive modes entering from the higher dimensional
space, i.e. the T 6, by treating the theory with only the K3 moduli space and neglec-
ing these Kaluza-Klein modes in the sewing procedure; this allows us to examine the
string on the reduced four-dimensional space-time. Furthermore, the massive string
modes are to be decouple, leaving only the massless theory containing the couplings
dictated by the moduli of the K3 background; the latter is the Lagrangian description
of the theory that we examine in the following. Dropping the massive modes allows
the integrals to be computed without detailed knowledge of the massive mode cou-
plings; in principle, however, M-theory graviton scattering can be used to obtain the
coeﬃcients of the S-duality invariant graviton scattering without the massive mode
technicalities, as described later.

The gravitational string scattering on the K3 part of the K3

T 6 is described by

×

4

n−pt
grav =

S

∞

Z

Xk=1

d4x√g

Okβk ,

similar to the ﬂat ten-dimensional background. The most general set of covariantized
gravitational operators consistent with the symmetries of the theory (supersymmetry,
presence of massless modes) is

R,

1

R

R,

R2,

nRk

(mixed tensors)

lnn1(

) . . . lnnm(

) nRk

with the latter terms coming from integrating out massless modes. The general
derivative term is explained in detail in [2]-[17], and the derivatives are in general
placed within the contractions of the curvature terms. The duality invariant moduli
dependent coeﬃcients of the gravitational terms are determined from the ring of
functions (within the S-duality compliant scattering),

E(qi,−qi)
K3,si

,

Y

si = s =

+

3
2

(k

n
2

−
2

4)

,

X

qi = 0 ,

X

and

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.8)

(q,−q)
K3,s =

E

X(na,ma)

1
(naGabmb)s+q(naGabmb)s−q ,

with the sum over the coprime invariants of the toroidal coset metric (the E1 func-
tion is to be replaced with its regularized version). The moduli of the space in this
description have absorbed a factor of the string scale so as to be dimensionless (e.g.
Wilson lines in toroidal compactiﬁcations in the the lattice sum at genus one.) The
on-shell supersymmetric completion is required to complete the terms in the gener-
ating function of the full scattering.

Next, the coeﬃcients of the terms in the ring of the automorphic functions are
described iteratively in the derivative expansion; subsequently, the metric on K3 is
determined.

5

3 Iterative procedure to coeﬃcients

In the iterative procedure to determining the relative coeﬃcients of the ring of au-
tomorphic coeﬃcients, a series of simple x-space integrals are required; the main
complication is the tensor algebra and supersymmetric completion. Once done to a
given order in derivatives, we can exploit the modular properties of the scattering
to ﬁnding some very non-trivial structure of the Calabi-Yau metrics. In this section
we only require the gravitational sector, but we need to eliminate the massive modes
from the scattering in order to obtain the coeﬃcients, without involving the complica-
tions of the explicit massive string to accomplish the same, but the matter couplings
derived on the K3 are not known in this work.)

2

To a given order in the genus expansion, via the coupling τ 3/2−2g

at genus g, the
massive modes begin to contribute at order α2 greate than the massless modes (at the
four-point order). This mixes their roles in the derivative expansion, as opposed to
in the coupling expansion. This is obviously true at loops 0 to 2 and due to unitarity
true also at higher orders (an analysis is performed in [15] and [17]). In order for us
to obtain the coeﬃcients of the modular functions in the duality invariant scattering
without these massive modes, these contributions are to be eliminated through an
expansion of the K3 massive forms.

The expansion at derivative order 2(m + 4) begins with a coeﬃcient at αm. A
modular constrained form of string coupling expansion at this order in derivatives
has the form in the Einstein frame [17],

am,0τ 3/2+m/2
2

+ am,1τ −1/2+m/2

2

+ . . . + τ 3/2−2gmax+m/2

,

2

(3.1)

−

1/2

2gmax =

and maximum genus contribution, 3/2 + m/2
m/2, dictated by the
expansion of the modular functions. Furthermore, there are a series of instantonic
terms coming from the wrapped membranes within the internal space. The truncation
of the massive modes has been examined in [17] and corresponds to throwing away
half the terms in (3.1). There are an even number of terms ranging with indices of
3/2 + m/2 to
m/2, a total of 1 + [m/2] terms. The truncation corresponds
−
to dishing the ﬁrst half terms.

1/2

−

−

−

In the case of the K3 metric the expansion in τ2 is the same as in (3.1), but the co-
eﬃcients am,gmax are dependent on the moduli non-trivially. Due to the multiplicative
nature of the Eisenstein functions on K3, this truncation involves ﬁrst multiplying
the various E-functions contributing at a given derivative order 2m.

6

The perturbative terms have integral or half-integral powers in τ2, and the non-
perturbative terms have exponential factors; the latter corresponds to wrappings of
D-branes on the 1 and 2-cycles of the K3 space. The contribution of these wrappings
are computable via the expansions of the modular functions, similar to instantons in

= 4 gauge theory [11].

N

Next, the sewing of the derivative terms (with the determined modular coeﬃcients
am,g) is performed to ﬁnd the relative coeﬃcients of the modular functions generating
at each order in derivatives. This follows via some straightforward integrals, however,
with some non-trivial tensor components. The implementation is very well suited to
be both analytically computed and numerically computed.

The n-point gravitational vertices derived from the eﬀective action are,

vµσ,νσ
g

=

δ
δˆg µj νj

Y

S[g + ˆg] .

The fermionic and remaining bosonic vertices are similarly derived, or found by su-
persymmetrization. The recursive implementation at the four-point order involves
the sewing relation and the complete set of operators in the derivative expansion.
This sewing procedure is identical to determining higher loops from lower loops in
the usual Feynman diagrams; this is clear by examining the low-energy theory of the
usual loop expansion via a momentum expansion of the graphs. The sewing generates,
in momentum space,

∞

L+1

Z

XL=1

Yj=1

L+1

Yi=1

ddqjv2,L+1
g

∆µj νj;¯µj ¯νj ˜v2,L+1

g

+

∞

L+1

Z

XL=1

Yj=1

L+1

Yi=1

ddqjv3,L+1
g

∆µj νj ;¯µj ¯νj ˜v1,L+1

g

+ perms =

1
2

v4
g .

The complete set of derivatives has been included in the vertices; there are an inﬁnite
v4,j. The graviton
number of terms in ν that have to b expanded as in v4 =
propagator is ∆µν;α,β, and the integrals are easiest to evaluate by Fourier transforming
them to x-space followed by possibly transforming back to x-space. The diagram in
Figure 1 illustrates the sewing relation. This iterative procedure, after including the
fermions, generates all of the required coeﬃcients to any given order in derivatives, in
the massles mode approximation. (In order to obtain the full scattering the massive
modes would have to be included; this is possible by decompactiﬁcation, T-dualizing,

P

7

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

=

Figure 1: The sewing relation illustrated at 4-point. Permutations are not included.

and comparing the result with the d = 11 supergravity coeﬃcients. In principle the
contributions of the virtual massive modes to the graviton multiplet scattering may
be obtained.) This complets the method of deriving all of the coeﬃcients of the
gravitational scattering on the Calabi-Yau manifold.

The integrals required in the sewing procedure are easiest to perform in x-space,
and the string regulator must be used in order to preserve duality; this is analyzed
to multi-loops in [17]. The generating function in the classical limit does not require
the supersymmetric completion in the internal legs. However, as the Eisenstein func-
tions receive genus contributions from internal supersymmetric matter, the massless
supersymmetric completion must be inserted in the loop; an on-shell extension of
maximal supergravity is developed in [18]. The inclusion of the remaining modes,
= 4 supersymmetric gauge theory complicates the quan-

= 4 supergravity and

N
tum description.

N

8

4 Determination of the K¨ahler potential

The K3, and any Calabi-Yau n-fold, metrics are described locally via the K¨ahler
potential gi¯j = ∂i∂¯jφ (or gi¯j = ∂i∂¯j ln φ) with a µk moduli dependent scalar φ(µk).
We may substitute this scalar in the full generating function of the graviton scattering
amplitude in place of the four-dimensional metric. The general form of the graviton
scattering function, classical and quantum, to all point orders is

Sgrav(φ) =

Z

d4x

(φ) ,

S

(4.1)

with

∞

(φ) =

Xk=1 Ok(φ)βk .
The coeﬃcients βk are determined to any order via the method given in the previ-
Ok can be complicated due to the logarithms and the
ous sections. The operators
derivatives; however, only the K¨ahler scalar is involved in the expansion.

(4.2)

S

With this description we take the condition,

(φ) = 0 ,

S

(4.3)

which corresponds to minimizing the classical (or quantum action); this is without
using partial diﬀerentiation to enforce the vanishing of the action. The variation is
similar to minimizing the scalar potential to ﬁnd the true vacuum as in the Coleman-
Weinberg mechanism; this generates an iterative means to obtaining the potential in
terms of the modular functions E(q,−q)
. The variation seems trivial, but only for the
true K¨ahler potential, rather than some general φ, will the condition in (4.3) hold.
Due to the speciﬁc set of automorphic functions pertaining to the K3, and given one
metric (and the moduli spanning this metric) for any set of functions, the solution
should be unique.

s

The classical generating function of φ, including the instantons, depends on the
values of the moduli of the K3 due to the background ﬁeld expansion of the R term
about the metric; the terms coming from the multi-derivative curvatures generate an
equation for φ(µk). The quantum terms involving φ(µk) generate a quantum extension
for the metrics.

9

In general the solution will contain exponentials due to solving (4.3) in the pres-
ence of logarithms (in the quantum case) and also due to massless singularities (in the
classical case). An example series in terms of the K¨ahler scalar is, and for simplicitiy
we ignore the determinant √g,

1
2

1
2

1
2

φ φ +

g1 ln(φ )φ φ +

g2(φ φ)2 + . . . ,

(4.4)

with g(µj) a sample modular function and µj the moduli. The α′ in the expansion
sets the dimensional scale in the derivative expansion; its factor scales the moduli to
be dimensionless (the Eisenstein functions are dimensionless). Setting this function
to be zero, and after a ﬁeld redeﬁnition φ = eσ makes the equation look like a
Liouville equation, which is common in the case of Monge-Ampere equations in the
construction of hyperk¨ahler metrics.

To higher orders in curvatures there are φn terms with n an arbitrarily large
integer. In the case of the classical metric only there are no logarithms, but rather
an inﬁnite number of these φn terms with many derivatives acting on them. The
full solution to the minimization of the action generates the K¨ahler metric, without
integrating by parts to force the vanishing of the action.

Because unitarity mixes graphs at diﬀerent orders, the full loop expansion is
required to obtain the quantum metric; there is no truncation of the expansion that
generates the full metric in this approach. As long as the found potential φ generates
a non-singular metric the solution would have to correspond to the general metric
on K3 simply by symmetries (compact hyperk¨ahler) and smoothness; the latter is a
consistency check on S-duality and the computed expansion.

5 Generalization to other Calabi-Yau manifolds

The same procedure utilized on the K3 manifolds may be generalized to a variety
of other compactiﬁcations. First, non-compact four-dimensional manifolds and their
respective metrics may be examined with both the string scattering and metric infor-
mation. This set includes a variety of 4-dimensional hyperk¨ahler metrics such as the
A,D, and E series.

The Calabi-Yau manifolds of complex dimension 3, 4, and 5 may be exam-
T 4
M4−CY, and
M5−CY. These scenarios have N = 16 in d = 6, d = 8, and d = 10. A

ined through the compactiﬁcations M10 →
M10 →

M3−CY, M10 →

T 2

×

×

10

similar procedure as described in the previous may be used to compute the metrics
on all of the compact Calabi-Yau manifolds having a manageable moduli space, such
as the toroidal ones of projective degenerations; this requirement comes from the re-
quirement of explicit modular forms constructable on the manifolds’ moduli spaces.
The set of CYs also includes the Gepner models. (Non-compact higher dimensional
Ricci-ﬂat manifolds are also in principle available, with the moduli spaces being the
necessary ingredient.)

Furthermore, the seven dimensional G2 Joyce manifols may be analyzed and their
metrics computed for classes in which the automorphic functions can be computed
on the moduli spaces; the latter being useful for M-theory compactiﬁcations. The
models considered are IIB on T 3

MG2.

×

6 Curves

In this section we examine the exponential terms arising from the expansion of the
automorphic forms and the coeﬃcients multiplying them. These terms correspond
to wrapping of membranes on the internal cycles of the K3 (and CY folds), and
explicit numbers may be found from the graviton scattering. Both the exponential
factors and the rational functions multiplying them are of mathematical and physical
interest. The factors are cohomological, potentially corresponding to invariants.

The modular functions have the instanton expansion,

k = bk(G)eW (G) ,
ginst

(6.1)

for a general conﬁguration of the moduli. The instanton series are computed via the
coeﬃcients of the modular functions and is formed physically via the wrapping of
membranes on the compact cycles. The coeﬃcients bk(G) of the exponential terms
model the counting of these wrapped modes in the string coupling expansion, and
include the moduli of the manifold.

7 Summary

The derivative expansion of IIB superstring theory on Calabi-Yau spaces is examined
with the intent of ﬁnding detailied metric information of the background geometry. A

11

recipe for computing the metrics on K3 and higher dimensional Calabi-Yau manifolds,
including Joyce manifolds, is presented, given information of S-duality and string
scattering. To any amount of accuracy these Ricci-ﬂat metrics may be computed via
IIB string theory of M theory amplitudes. The formalism does not have complicated
integrals, but rather somewhat complicated tensorial algebra at higher orders; as a
result, the implementation of the recipe is suitable for a computer implementation.

Furthermore, the metric information found from low orders of derivatives in the
target space-time theory leads to a natural means of computing numbers of holo-
morphic curves of varying orders and the moduli dependent coeﬃcients. In principle
this explicit curve and metric information is computable with the use of the T
S
modular functions as coeﬃcients in the gravitational scattering.

×

12

References

physics/0506012.

physics/0503110.

hep-th/0209088.

[1] M. Headrick and T. Wiseman, arXiv:hep-th/0506129.

[2] G. Chalmers, A Format

for

Instantons and their Characterizations,

physics/0507171.

[3] G. Chalmers, Quantum Solution to Scalar Field Models, physics/0505018.

[4] G. Chalmers, Quantum Gauge Amplitude Solutions, physics/0505077.

[5] G. Chalmers, Tree Amplitudes in Gauge and Gravity Theories, physics/0504219.

[6] G. Chalmers, Tree Amplitudes in Scalar Field Theories, physics/0504173.

[7] G. Chalmers, Inversions of Eﬀective Action in Condensed Matter Models,

[8] G. Chalmers, Derivation of Quantum Field Dynamics, physics/0503062.

[9] G. Chalmers, Masses and Interactions of Nucleons Quantum Chromodynamics,

[10] G. Chalmers, Comment on the Riemann Hypothesis, physics/0503141.

[11] G. Chalmers, N = 4 Supersymmetric Gauge Theory in the Derivative Expansion,

[12] G. Chalmers, Gauge Theories in the Derivative Expansion, hep-th/0209086.

[13] G. Chalmers, Scalar Field Theory in the Derivative Expansion, hep-th/0209075.

[14] G. Chalmers, M Theory and Automorphic Scattering, Phys. Rev. D 64:046014

(2001).

[15] G. Chalmers, On the Finiteness of N = 8 Supergravity, hep-th/0008162.

[16] G. Chalmers and J. Erdmenger, Dual Expansions of N = 4 super Yang-Mills the-
ory via IIB Superstring Theory, Nucl. Phys. B 585:517 (2000), hep-th/0005192.

[17] G. Chalmers, S and U-duality Constraints on IIB S-Matrices, Nucl. Phys. B

580:193 (2000), hep-th/0001190.

[18] P. S. Howe and P. C. West, Nucl. Phys. B 238, 181 (1984).

13

