5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Anomalous frequeny shifts in the solar system

Jaques Moret-Bailly

17th January 2014

jaques.moret-baillyu-bourgogne.fr

Abstrat

The improvements of the observations of the solar system allowed by the use of probes and big

instruments let appear several problems: The frequenies of the radio signals reeived from the

probes sent over 5 UA from the Sun are too high; the explanation by spiules or siphon-(cid:29)ows of the

frequeny shifts of UV emissions observed on the surfae of the sun by SOHO is not satisfatory; the

anisotropy of the CMB seems bound to the elipti.

This problems are solved using a oherent optial e(cid:27)et, dedued from standard spetrosopy and

easily observed with lasers. In a gas ontaining atomi hydrogen in states 2S and (or) 2P , transfers

of energy between light beams, allowed by thermodynamis, produe the required frequeny shifts

or ampli(cid:28)ations.

1 Introdution

The remarkable preision of relastivisti mehanis and eletrodynamis allows, for instane the good

loalizations by the the Global Positioning System. However, a disrepany appears in the observation

of the probes (in partiular Pioneers 10 and 11) when their distane from the Sun beomes larger than

about (cid:28)ve astronomial units. The the frequenies of the reeived radio signals are too high, so that

it seems that the attration by the Sun inreases over Newton's law. Several prudent explanations are

proposed, in partiular new physis or an aeleration by an anisotropi radiation of the energy provided

by the disintegration of the plutonium whih feeds the probes in energy.

In setion 2, we show why the previous explanations annot work, showing that the problem ours

during the propagation of the radio waves.

Other disrepanies are found in observations of the Solar system:

- the explanations of the redshifts of the UV emission spetra of the Sun observed by SOHO, by

spiules or siphon-(cid:29)ows, appear weak;

- the anisotropy of the mirowave bakground appears bound to the Solar system.

This setion de(cid:28)nes the properties required for an optial e(cid:27)et able to solve these three problems.

In setion 3, we study this e(cid:27)et, dedued from standard rules of spetrosopy, but observable only

in onditions whih allow to qualify the light pulses (cid:17)ultrashort(cid:17). This e(cid:27)et appears, in partiular while

light is refrated by a low pressure gas ontaining atomi hydrogen in states 2S or 2P.

2 Desription of the anomalies and their explanations.

2.1 Anomalies of the speeds of the Pioneer 10 and 11 probes.

The original desription of the Pioneer probes, and of the detetion of anomalies in the radio-signals of

several probes was given by Anderson et al. [1, 2℄.

Anderson et al. dedue the radial speed of the probes through an assumed Doppler shift of radio

waves: An eletromagneti wave is sent from the Earth to the probes at a frequeny dedued from the

frequeny of an hydrogen maser by a multipliation suh that the frequeny reeived by the probe is

lose to 2.11 GHz. This frequeny is multiplied by 240/221 to avoid an interferene with the reeived

frequeny, ampli(cid:28)ed and sent bak to the Earth where it is deteted by an heterodyne system, produing

a frequeny lose to 1 MHz. The weakness of the reeived signal requires a trak more and more di(cid:30)ult

with an inrease of the distane.

1

Figure 1: Apparent aeleration orresponding to the residual frequeny shift, as a funtion of distane

of the Sun, from Anderson et al. [2℄.

Taking into aount the main omputed frequeny shifts, Doppler and gravitational, less important

perturbations suh as the pressures of radiation of the Solar light, and the pressure of the Solar wind,

the gravity of the Kuiper belt ..., the reeived frequeny has the omputed value until the distane of the

probe is lower than 5AU; at a longer distane the reeived frequeny beomes more and more too high,

until the extra aeleration stabilises over 15 AU at the value (8.6 ± 1.34) × 10−8

−2

m s

. See (cid:28)gure 1.

If the origin of the aeleration were a leakage of the valves of the thrusters allowing the maneuvers,

the probability that both Pioneers have leaks produing the same aeleration, and that a leak reprodues

after a maneuver, is low. Therefore, the main hypothesis is an anisotropy of the radiation of the 2 kW

produed by the deay of the plutonium on board the airraft. The derease of this energy with the time

is not observed, but it may orrespond to the unertainty of the measure of the aeleration[3, 4℄.

We think that the origin of the anomalous aelerations does not lie in the apparatus for the following

reasons :

signal ?

i)The identities of the aelerations of both Pioneers show that they do not probably result from an

aidental disworking suh as a leakage of a valve.

ii)On (cid:28)gure 2, the interferenes with the orona produe large perturbations of the observed frequen-

ies ("C" regions), but , after, the linear inrease of speed is restored.. If the "N" regions were produed

in the apparatus, the large anomalous speeds whih would appear should translate the following seg-

ments; thus something similar to a path through the orona, happens on the path of the light, and the

properties of this path are more easily restored than the properties of a omplex apparatus.

What an happen on the path of light in the Solar wind ? Maybe the proximity of a planet, maybe

an inrease of the Solar ativity. How do this hange in the Solar wind may be transferred to the radio

2.2 The redshifts of the UV emission lines of the quiet Sun.

The hromosphere of the quiet Sun was studied by Peter and Judge [5℄ using data aquired by the Solar

Ultraviolet Measurement of Emitted Radiation (SUMER), on the SOHO spaeraft.

We onsider here only residual frequeny shifts obtained by subtration from the observed shifts

of a "main orretion(cid:17): a) the the Doppler shift produed by the rotation of the Sun and the relative

2

Figure 2: Doppler residuals as a funtion of time. The top panel shows all of the data. The bottom

shows the residuals, exluding the regions perturbed by the solar orona, designated by an horizontal

bar "C" and the noisy regions, designated "N". From Markwardt[3℄.

3

movement of the Sun and the probe; b) the relativisti shift.

After a desription of spetra, Peter & Judge present the urrent state of their interpretation, founded

on an attribution of the (residual) frequeny shifts of the spetral lines to a Doppler e(cid:27)et produed by

vertial movements of the gas in the hromosphere.

To explain that lines emitted at the same, or at very lose plaes have di(cid:27)erent redshifts, an hypothesis

is that gas is ejeted in vertial spiules, then ools and (cid:29)ows down; an other hypothesis is siphon (cid:29)ows

through loops. But Peter & Judge write : (cid:17)As for the spiule idea, the existing siphon-(cid:29)ow pitures are

either non valid or only part of the story(cid:17). Other hypothesis are tried, but "still more work is needed(cid:17).

With the hypothesis of Doppler e(cid:27)ets and vertial movements, for all lines, there is no (residual)

frequeny shift at the limb of the Sun. This hypothesis implies that the frequenies measured at the

limb are, after subtration of the "main orretion(cid:17), the absolute frequenies. Comparing the absolute

frequenies dedued from SUMER measures at the limb to older measured or omputed frequenies,

disrepanies appear, attributed to a lak of preision of the old results. For instane, a omputed value

of the wavelength of Mg X is 62495.2 pm, while the value dedued from the observation of the limb is

62496.8 ± .7 pm.

The wavelength of the Ne VIII line was measured in the laboratory by Bokasten et al [6℄ who found

77040.9 ± .5 pm. From SUMER measures, at the limb, Peter & Judge obtained 77042.8 ± .7 pm.

Considering that this value is a rest wavelength, there is a disrepany attributed to a too short error

bar in the laboratory measure. Peter & Judge write : "If one would take the Bokasten et al. value for

granted, this would imply that the Ne VIII is indeed redshifted at disk enter and would beg the question

of how the redshift of a line seen at disk enter C an even inrease toward the limb - - we would not be

able to explain suh a variation with our urrent understanding of the solar atmosphere.(cid:17)

Peter & Judge do not rely muh on the theory they use: (cid:17)Neither the nature of the driving motions

nor the response of the plasma an be reliably onstrained by urrently available observations or by

numerial simulations ... It might be that the blueshifts we observe are not aused by the out-(cid:29)owing

solar wind but by some other proesses.(cid:17)

An other proess, a new understanding is supposing that the shifts ours during the propagation of

the light through a shell of the hromosphere: the path through this shell for the rays emitted at C is
the thikness of the shell, while it is larger for other rays. Writing S(M ) the frequeny shift obtained
by Peter & Judge at a point M , s(M ) the newly de(cid:28)ned shift, L being a point at the limb, the relation

between the shifts is:

S(M ) = s(M ) − s(L)

(1)

As |s(L)| is larger than |s(M )|, the signs of S(M ) and s(M ) are opposite, the variations of the

frequeny shifts along a radius are opposite.

Figure 3 shows the shifts of various lines S(C) as a funtion of the temperature of the emitting

gas. Suppose that the olumn density is su(cid:30)ient to reah nearly a saturation, that is an equilibrium

between the temperature of the emitting gas and the temperature of the light

at the entre of the lines.

1

Thermodynamis says that energy (cid:29)ows from hot to old, so that the three high energy lines Ne VIII,

Mg X and Fe XII are allowed by thermodynamis to transfer energy to the other lines provided that the

light is refrated by a onvenient medium playing the role of a atalyst. This transfer redshifts the three

hot lines, and blueshifts the other in onformity with the de(cid:28)nition s(M ) of the redshifts.

Why do the lines emitted at the lowest temperatures (He I, C II, Si IV and C IV) are less blueshifted

than the other old lines? A simple explanation is that the atalyti power of the refrating medium is

nearly zero at temperatures lower than 30 000 K (temperature of emission of He I) and gets a maximal

mean value if the temperature along the path varies from about 170 000 K (maximum of the urve on

(cid:28)gure 3) to 30 000 K, leading to an optimal temperature of the e(cid:27)et, very roughly, of the order of 100

000 K.

2.3 The anisotropy of the osmi mirowave bakground.

In subsetion 2.1, we explained the anomalous inrease of frequeny of the Pioneer probes by an intera-

tion in the solar wind. If this interation is similar to the interation whose harateristis were found in

subsetion 2.2, it is a transfer of energy from the solar light to radio waves. This transfer applies to all

radio waves propagating in the solar wind over 5 UA, in partiular to the osmi mirowave bakground.

1

Temperature dedued from the intensity in a mode, using Plank's formula for the radiation of a blak body.

4

Figure 3: Variation of the frequeny shift S(C)

with formation temperature of the line. Error bars for the data of Brekke et al (1997) were typially 2

km s

. The solid line is a by-eye (cid:28)t of the Doppler Shifts in Peter & Judge study. From Peter & Judge

−1

[5℄.

5

The solar wind is generated in the holes of the orona, so that it is anisotropi. Its struture may

be modi(cid:28)ed by the magneti (cid:28)elds of the planets. Thus, the blueshift of the radio frequenies by the

solar wind is anisotropi. For the CMB, a thermal radiation, this shift is an ampli(cid:28)ation whih adds

a ontribution to the anisotropy due to the movement of the Sun in the galaxy. The analysis of the

observed CMB leads to a similar result [7, 8, 9℄.

3 The Coherent Raman E(cid:27)ets on Inoherent Light (CREIL)

A simultaneous explanation of the anomalies studied in setion 2 uses an optial e(cid:27)et having the

following properties:

weakened;

i)The images and the spetra are not blurred; else the signals from the Pioneers would be too muh

ii)The energy transferred from hot beams to old beams shifts the frequenies;

iii)The interating beams must be refrated by a gas whose optimal temperature is of the order of

100 000 K; observed from the solar frequeny shifts and the ooling of the solar wind.

This setion explains the required e(cid:27)et, whih appears very similar to the refration, but whih

requires very partiular media, or ultra-short laser pulses.

3.1 Conditions for Doppler-like frequeny shifts by interation with matter.

- A Doppler-like redshift must avoid a blur of the images. Therefore, it must be spae-oherent, so that

the wave surfaes are not disturbed: For an involved moleule, it exists relations between the loal phases

of all involved eletromagneti (cid:28)elds, and the phases of all moleular osillators; (cid:16)spae oherene(cid:17) means

that these relations are idential for all involved moleules. Consequently, supposing that the number

of involved moleules is large, Huygens' onstrution shows that the radiated (cid:28)elds generate lean wave

surfaes related with the wave surfaes of the exiting (cid:28)elds.

- For a time-oherent soure (ontinuous wave laser), (cid:16)frequeny shift(cid:17) means that while the soure

emits n yles, the detetor reeives a di(cid:27)erent number m. Thus, the number of yles between the
soure and the reeiver is inreased of n − m; it is an inrease of the number of wavelengths, thus an

inrease of the distane, therefore a Doppler e(cid:27)et. Consequently, a Doppler-like redshift is only possible

with time-inoherent light; a parameter measuring this inoherene must appear in the theory to forbid

an appliation to time-oherent light.

- The energy absorbed by the redshifting proess must not be quantised to avoid a blur of the spetra:

If a light beam exhanges a quanti(cid:28)ed energy with a moleule, a fration of the intensity of the beam

gets a (cid:28)nite shift. In a parametri proess, the moleules leave their stationary state only temporarily,

their states beoming (cid:16)dressed(cid:17) during their interations with the light; the light beams exhange not-

quanti(cid:28)ed energy, the matter plays the role of a atalyst

.

2

3.2 Reminding the semi-lassial theory of refration.

Marosopi theory.

To simplify the explanations, suppose that the refrating medium is perfetly transparent.

A sheet of matter between two lose wave surfaes distant of ǫ is exited at a pulsation Ω. The sheet
radiates a Rayleigh oherent wave late of π/2 whose amplitude is a small fration Kǫ of the exiting
amplitude E0 . From Huygens' onstrution it generates the same wave surfaes, so that the (cid:28)elds add

into

≈ E0[sin(Ωt) cos(Kǫ) + sin(Kǫ) cos(Ωt)] = E0 sin(Ωt − Kǫ).

E = E0[sin(Ωt) + Kǫ cos(Ωt)]

This result de(cid:28)nes the index of refration n by the identi(cid:28)ation

K = 2πn/λ = Ωn/c.

(2)

(3)

2

We do not follow an extended de(cid:28)nition of (cid:16)parametri(cid:17) interations in whih the matter may be (des)exited during

the interation (for instane in a He-Ne laser medium), (cid:16)parametri(cid:17) beoming synonymous of (cid:16)oherent(cid:17).

6

Mirosopi, quantum theory.

Suppose that the light interats with free idential moleules, initially in the same non-degenerate

stationary state φ0 . The perturbation of a moleule by an eletromagneti wave mixes φ0 with other
states φi , produing a non-stationary state Φ = C0φ0 + Pi Ciφi , where the Ci are very small.

We must onsider the set of all interating moleules, adding an upper index k to distinguish the

moleules. Without a (cid:28)eld, the total, stationary state is Ψ0 = Qk φk

0 . Its degeneray is the number of

moleules.

Perturbed by an external (cid:28)eld, the refrating medium radiates a sattered, oherent (cid:28)eld late of

π/2, generating the same wave surfaes than the exiting (cid:28)eld; therefore, the dynamially exited, non-
stationary, (cid:16)dressed (cid:17) ( or (cid:16)polarisation(cid:17) ) state ψm
whih emits this (cid:28)eld is haraterised by an index m

representing the exiting mode.

Considering other refrated modes, Ψ splits as Qm ψm
Remark that the oherent interations are muh stronger than the inoherent: A refration by ≈
0.25µm of water delays the light of π/2, that is the light is fully sattered by the oherent Rayleigh

.

sattering. In a swimming pool, we see well through 25 metres of water, only a fration of the light is

sattered by the inoherent Rayleigh sattering; the fator is 108

.

3.3 Priniple of the CREIL.

The CREIL results from an interation between dressed states ψm

; as these states have the same parity,

the interation must be of Raman type, for instane quadrupolar eletri. Thermodynamis says that

the entropy must inrease, so that the (cid:29)oods of energy are from the modes whih have a high Plank's

temperature to the older ones. For an astrophysial appliation we onsider a purely parametri e(cid:27)et:

the matter, a low pressure gas in low (cid:28)elds, returns to its initial state after an interation.

The dressed state ψm

radiates a mixture of the oherent Rayleigh sattering whih produes the

refration and oherent Raman satterings. These loally weak satterings may be studied independently,

so that the CREIL may be onsidered as a set of simultaneous Stokes and anti-Stokes oherent Raman

satterings with a zero balane of energy for the moleules

. The sattered beams have the same

3

wave surfaes than the exiting beams, so that these beams may interfere, as in the oherent Rayleigh

sattering making the refration; as the sattered (cid:28)elds are muh weaker than the exiting (cid:28)eld, they

may be added independently to it. The pulsations of the Raman beams are shifted by ±ω , and, at the
beginning of a pulse, in phase beause the resonane introdues a −π/2 phaseshift. The sum of the

exiting wave and the oherent anti-Stokes sattered wave is:

E = E0[sin(Ωt) + K

′

E = E0[sin(Ωt) + K

ǫ sin((Ω + ω)t)]

> 0)
ǫ[sin(Ωt) cos(ωt) + sin(ωt) cos(Ωt)]].

(with(K

′

Supposing that ωt and K ′ǫ are small, the seond term, produt of two small quantities, may be negleted,

and the last one transformed:

E ≈ E0[sin(Ωt) cos(K

ǫωt) + sin(K

′

E ≈ E0[sin Ωt + sin(K
′
ǫωt) cos(Ωt) = E0 sin[(Ω + K

ǫωt) cos(Ωt)]
′
ǫω)t].

K ′ǫ is an in(cid:28)nitesimal term, but the hypothesis ωt small requires that the Raman period 2π/ω is large
in omparison with the duration of the experiment t.

This ondition was set by G. L. Lamb Jr.

for the de(cid:28)nition of (cid:16)ultrashort pulses(cid:17) : (cid:16)shorter than

all relevant time onstants(cid:17) [10℄. With ordinary light, the time oherene plays the role of length of the

pulses: thus, the time-oherene, some nanoseonds, must be (cid:16)shorter than all relevant time onstants(cid:17).

We have found a (cid:28)rst relevant time onstant. A seond is the ollisional time onstant, beause the

ollisions destroy the spae-oherene, produing an ordinary, weak, inoherent Raman sattering; a low

pressure gas is needed.

The same omputation, replaing K ′

by a negative K ′′

replae K ′
that is on exp(−hω/2πkT ) − 1 ∝ ω/T , where T is the temperature of the gas.

in formula 5. K ′ + K ′′

by K ′ + K ′′

gives the Stokes ontribution, so that we

depends on the di(cid:27)erene of population in both levels,

(cid:16)Coherent Raman Satterings on Inoherent Light(cid:17) (CREIL) is ambiguous, relative either to a single Raman interation

( ignoring the quasi-resonant, easy transfer of the Raman energy to the thermal radiation ), or to the whole set of

3

interations.

(4)

(5)

′

′

7

The theory of the refration shows that the index of refration is nearly onstant in the absene of

resonane lose to Ω, so that, using for the polarisability a formula equivalent to formula 3, K ′ + K”
appears nearly proportional to Ωω/T , and the frequeny shift is :

∆Ω = (K

+ K”)ǫω ∝ ǫΩω

/T.

2

′

(6)

The relative frequeny shift ∆Ω/Ω is nearly independent on Ω.

All required properties are obtained: spae oherene, limitation of the time-oherene, no exitation

of the gas, nearly onstant relative frequeny shift. As the shift is proportional to ω2
requires a Raman pulsation ω as large as allowed by the preservation of the oherene. As the time-

, a strong e(cid:27)et

oherene of ordinary light is some nanoseonds, an Raman frequeny is of the order of 100 Mhz.

3.4 Laboratory observation of the CREIL e(cid:27)et

Usually, it is not neessary to take into aount the radiations whih reeive energy beause we are

surrounded by thermal radiations whose blueshift is simply a heating.

In a onvenient medium, the

CREIL e(cid:27)et transfers also energy between the radio frequenies whih make the thermal radiation

as long as the thermal equilibrium, inluding the isotropy, is not reahed; this CREIL e(cid:27)et is strong

beause, all involved frequenies being low, it is nearly resonant, so that the radio frequenies get quikly

a thermal equilibrium.

The CREIL in optial (cid:28)bres is so easily obtained that it makes problems for the use of short pulses

in teleommuniations. With the high peak power of femtoseond lasers, the index of refration and

the omponents of the tensor of polarisability beome inreasing funtions of the intensity, allowing a

study of the e(cid:27)et in small ells. This nonlinear e(cid:27)et named "Impulsive Stimulated Raman Sattering"

(ISRS) allows an easy study of the properties of the oherent Raman e(cid:27)et on inoherent light: transfer

of energy from a laser beam to another produing frequeny shifts, veri(cid:28)ation of Lamb's onditions

(Yan et al. [11℄).

While the lengths of the laser pulses inrease, the experiments beome more and more di(cid:30)ult: To

inrease the ollisional time, it beomes impossible to use dense matter, a gas less and less dense must be

used. While it is easy to (cid:28)nd strong Raman resonanes at the rotational and vibrational frequenies of

moleules, resonanes lose to 100 MHz appear generally in highly exited states, almost unpopulated.

Therefore, an observation of a CREIL e(cid:27)et, using ordinary inoherent light would require an expansive

experiment while it is well veri(cid:28)ed in the whole easily aessible domain of frequenies.

3.5 Propagation of inoherent light in atomi hydrogen

As atomi hydrogen has a simple spetrum, its levels of energy may be well populated.

Its eletri

quadrupole spin reoupling transition (∆F = 1) in the ground state has the frequeny 1420 MHz, too
high. But, in the (cid:28)rst exited state, the frequenies 178 MHz in the 2S1/2 state, 59 MHz in 2P1/2 state,
and 24 MHz in 2P3/2 are very onvenient; in these states, the gas will be named H*. It is more di(cid:30)ult

to populate higher states, and the resonane frequenies are low, so that, in these states, the CREIL

e(cid:27)et is negligible.

Exited atomi hydrogen whih redshifts the light may be generated by various proesses:

Thermal exitation of hydrogen.

The ionisation energy equals kT for a temperature T = 156000K ; as the energy needed for a pumping
to the states of prinipal quantum number n = 2 (H* states) is the three fourth of the ionisation energy,
it equals kT for T = 117000K . Using Boltzman law, these temperatures may be onsidered as indiating

roughly where these partiular states of hydrogen are abundant, remarking however that by a thermal

exitation, the proportion of hydrogen in the H* states is limited by the exitation to higher values of

n, and by the ionisation at low pressures. Remark that, from (cid:28)gure 3, we found in 2.2 an approximate
optimal value T = 100000K : H* is learly the soure of the anomalous frequeny shifts on the Sun.

Lyman α pumping of atomi hydrogen.
Over a temperature T = 10000K , the moleules of hydrogen are dissoiated. The strong absorption

of the Lyman alpha line produes H*. The e(cid:27)etive deay of H* is very slow at low pressures beause

this deay an only re-emit the Lyα line whih is strongly, immediately re-absorbed. The surfae of the

Sun is too old to provide muh energy at the Lyα frequeny. But H* may be produed lose to very hot

ob jets suh as quasars, areting neutron stars. A feed-bak may appear in unexited atomi hydrogen

illuminated by a far UV ontinuous spetrum: The exitation at the Lyman α frequeny produes H*,

8

therefore a redshift whih renews the intensity of the light at the Lyman α frequeny until a previously

absorbed line almost stops the redshift, so that the other Lyman lines are strongly absorbed and will

nearly stop the following fast redshift.

Cooling of an hydrogen plasma.

The ombination of the protons and eletrons of a plasma produes atomi hydrogen in various states

of exitation. The 2S state is stable at a low pressure. The optial transitions from the 2P states

generate a Lyα line whih may be reabsorbed. The ooling of the solar wind beyond 5 UA produes

H* and explains the blueshift of the radio-frequenies of the Pioneers 10 and 11, at least a part of the

anisotropy of the CMB bound to the elipti.

4 Conlusion

Introduing oherent optial interations other than the refration seems the key of a lot of explanations

of up to now di(cid:30)ult to understand astrophysial observations.

In partiular, the Coherent Raman

E(cid:27)ets on Inoherent Light (CREIL) is the true origin of frequeny shifts usually onsidered as produed

by a Doppler e(cid:27)et. The use of the CREIL is very simple:

light beams refrated simultaneously by

a gas ontaining atomi hydrogen in states 2S or 2P exhange energy to inrease the entropy of their

set, produing frequeny shifts. Where the physial onditions allow the prodution of H*, anomalous

frequeny shifts appear.

Referenes

81, 2858-2861 (1998) .

65, 082004 (2002).

[1℄ Anderson J. D. , P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, & S. G. Turyshev, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[2℄ Anderson J. D. , P. A. Laing, E. L. Lau, A. S. Liu, M. M. Nieto, & S. G. Turyshev, Phys. Rev. D

[3℄ Markwardt C. B., arxiv:gr-q/0208046(2002).

[4℄ She(cid:27)er L. K. , Phys.Rev. D67 (2003) 08402.

[5℄ Peter H. & P. G. Judge ApJ, 522, 1148-1166 (1999).

[6℄ Bokasten, K., R. Hallin & T. Hughes, Pro. Phys. So. 81 522 (1963).

[7℄ Shwarz, D. J., G. D. Starkman, D. Huterer, C. J. Copi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 221301,

arxiv:astro-ph/0403353 (2004).

[8℄ Land K., & J. Magueijo, Mon. Not. R. Astron. So. 357, 994 (2005).

[9℄ Naselsky P., L.-Y Chiang., P. Olesen & I. Novikov, arxiv:astro-ph/0505011 (2005).

[10℄ Lamb G. L. Jr., Rev. Mod. Phys., 43, 99-124 (1971).

[11℄ Yan Y.-X., E. B. Gamble Jr. & K. A. Nelson, J. Chem Phys., 83, 5391 (1985).

9

