hep-th/0507171

A Format for Instantons and Their Characterizations

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

A characterization of instanton contributions to gauge ﬁeld theory is given. The
dynamics of instantons with the gluon ﬁeld is given in terms of ’classical’ instanton
contributions, i.e. on the same footing as tree amplitudes in ﬁeld theory. This para-
materization depends on the kinematics of the local instanton operators and their
coupling dependence. A primary advantage of this ’classical’ formulation is that the
weak-strong duality and its relations with the perturbative sector are possibly made
more manifest.

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1 Introduction

The classical dynamics of gauge theory has been investigated for many years. Obsta-
cles associated with the computation of these tree amplitudes have been circumvented
for a variety of reasons, including spinor helicity, color ordering, analyticity, KLT re-
lations with gravity, the string-inspired derivation, and the recent twistor formulation
of classical gauge theory. The derivative expansion is useful for ﬁnding results in the
quantum regime [1]-[16].

Potential simpliﬁcations based on a well-ordered formulation of the instanton
contributions to an n-point scattering amplitude can be useful in ﬁnding the total
correction to the quantum amplitudes. These terms to the amplitude take on the
form at n-point,

fm,n = gm,n(g, N) Y

−m 4π
e

g2 +m θ

2π K(εi, ki) ,

(1.1)

1
t[p],ai,p
i

with ai,p labeling the power of the invariant (both negative and positive). The helicity
content containing the factors εi · kj and εi · εj is represented by the function K(εi, kj).
The kinematic invariants t[p]

i are deﬁned by

t[p]
i = (ki + ki+1 + . . . + ki+p−1)2 ,

(1.2)

for an ordering of the external legs in the cyclic fashion (1, 2, . . . , n).

The coeﬃcients gm,n enter as a result of the integration of the non-trivial gauge
ﬁeld conﬁguration at the instanton number m and at n-point. The integration pro-
duces the kinematic invariants. There is expected to be symmetry between the num-
bers gm,n at the various orders spanned m and n.

The classical scattering of the gauge ﬁeld has much symmetry, which is not evident
in the usual perturbative approach. This symmetry is partly based on the collection
φn of numbers as given in [4]-[5]. The n-point scattering can be formulated set-
theoretically in terms of n − 2 numbers which range from 2 to n, for a sub-amplitude
with the color-ordering from 1 to n. These numbers are such that the maximum
number n may occur n − 2 times, with the minimum number 1 not occuring at all.
The multiplicative times the numbers appear is denoted as pi (for i = 1, . . . , n) and the
collection p1, . . . , pn completely label the amplitude. (In another set theoretic form
these numbers give way to a Hopf algebra of the tree diagrams [17].) All combinations

2

of these numbers φn or pi generate the tree contributions to the gauge scattering, in
a given color ordering of the sub-amplitudes.

The suggestive form of these simple groups of numbers suggests that the ’classical’
(or semi-classical) contributions of the multi-instanton conﬁgurations to the scattering
should also be labeled by a partition of the same numbers. These partitions label
the kinematic prefactors in (1.1). The symmetry of the classical form and that of the
partitions labeling the instanton terms should be relevant to duality information in
the gauge theory.

In previous work the classical perturbative tree diagrams are used to ﬁnd the
full quantum scattering by sewing them together; the integals are performed and the
primary complication is the multiplicity of the indices. These tree diagrams are used
as nodes, as essentially vertices. In this work the instanton contributions are formu-
lated to achieve the same result; although the exact functional dependence is not yet
known, the nodes and sewing may be formulated in the same manner as the per-
turbative results. The full quantum scattering, containing also the non-perturbative
physics may be illustrated as in Figure 1. The coeﬃcients of the invididual vertices
(labeled by G1 and G2)

V (G1, G2) =

χn(G1, G2)zn

− 4π
g2

−i θ
2π

z = e

(1.3)

∞

X
n=0

are required to be determined, i.e. χn(G1, G2). These numbers in principle are
found from a unifying function via the pertinent number partitions that are similarly
analyzed in the perturbative gauge context. The perturbative nodes required to ﬁnd
the scattering are given by

V (Gp) = χ(Gp)gm−2 ,

(1.4)

for an m-point tree represented by χn(Gp) (one of many trees required to specify an
m-point classical amplitude).

The classical scattering is brieﬂy reviewed in section 2. A generalizaton based
on the partitions of numbers which gives more kinematic expressions other than per-
turbative tree diagrams is presented in section 3. The instanton analog is given in
section 4. A simple graphical interpretation of these results is presented in section 5.

3

Figure 1: The product form solution to the recursive formulae deﬁning the loop
expansion. The nodes are classical scattering vertices. These vertices are both per-
turbative and non-perturbative

2 Classical Perturbative Scattering

Classical gauge theory scattering has been formulated in terms of the sets φn in [4].
This representation of the gauge amplitudes has not included the spinor helicity tech-
nique, which with some further algebraic manipulations leads to maximally compact
representations; some of the simpliﬁcations are due to the fact that the amplitudes
have a symmetrical representation in terms of the sets of numbers φn. The construc-
tion of the classical amplitudes in terms of these numbers is brieﬂy reviewed.

Brief Review of the φ3 Labeling

The general scalar φ3 momentum routing of the propagators is presented. The
gauge theory tree amplitudes are also formulated with the scalar momentum routing;
their tensor algebra can be found with the use of the string inspired formulation
combined with the number partitions labeling the scalar graphs.

A general φ3 scalar ﬁeld theory diagram at tree-level is parameterized by the set
of propagators and the momenta labeling them. In a color ordered form, consider the
ordering of the legs as in (1, 2, . . . , n). The graphs are labeled by

4

(2.1)

(2.2)

Dσ = gn−2

Y

1
tσ(i,p)

,

and the Lorentz invariants tσ(i,p) are deﬁned by t[p]
i

,

t[p]
i = (ki + . . . + ki+p−1)2 .

Factors of i in the propagator and vertices are placed into the prefactor of the am-
plitude. The sets of permutations σ are what are required in order to specify the
individual diagrams. The full sets of σ(i, p) form all of the diagrams, at any n-point
order. These φ3 diagrams and their labeling, via the sets σ, are required in order to
ﬁnd the gauge theory amplitudes.

The compact presentation of σ can be obtained by a set of numbers φn, dis-
cussed next, that generate the individual diagrams. These sets are quite simple, and
indirectly generate whats known as the Hopf algebra of the diagrams.

First, the vertices of the ordered φ3 diagram are labeled so that the outer numbers
from a two-particle tree are carried into the tree diagram in a manner so that j > i is
always chosen from these two numbers. The numbers are carried in from the n most
external lines.

The labeling of the vertices is such that in a current or on-shell diagram the
unordered set of numbers are suﬃcient to reconstruct the current; the set of numbers
on the vertices are collected in a set φm(j). For an m-point current there are m − 1
vertices and hence m − 1 numbers contained in φm(j). These m − 1 numbers are such
that the greatest number may occur m − 1 times, and must occur at least once, the
next largest number may occur at most m − 2 times (and may or may not appear
in the set, as well as the subsequent ones), and so on. The smallest number can not
occur in the set contained in φm(j). Amplitudes are treated in the same manner as
currents. Examples and a more thorough analysis is presented in [4],[5].

Two example permutation sets pertaining to 4- and 5-point currents are given in
[5]. The ﬁve point amplitudes have sets of numbers such as (5, 5, 5, 5) and (5, 4, 3, 2),
as an example.

The numbers φn(j) are used to ﬁnd the propagators in the labeled diagram. The

external momenta are ki, and the invariants are found with the algorithm,

1) i = φ(m − 1), p = 2, then lam−1 + lam → lm−1

5

2) i = φ(m − 2), p = 2, then lam−2 + lam−1 → lm−2

...

m − 1) i = 1, p = m

(2.3)

(2.4)

The labeling of the kinematics, i.e. t[p]
i

, is direct from the deﬁnition of the vertices.

Alternatively, the numbers φn(i) can be arranged into the numbers (pi, [pi]), in
which pi is the repetition of the value of [pi]; as an example, if the number pi equals
zero, then [pi] is not present in φn. The numbers can be used to obtain the t[q]
invari-
i
ants without intermediate steps with the momenta. The branch rules to determine
the presence of t[q]
i

is,

0) linitial = [pm] − 1

r = 1 to r = pm

1)

2)

if r + P

m−1
j=l pj = [pm] − linitial

then i = [pm]

q = [pm] − linitial + 1

beginning conditions has no sum in pj

else

linitial → linitial − 1 : decrement the line number

linitial > [pl] else l → l − 1 : decrement the p sum

3) goto 1)

The branch rule has to be iterated to obtain all of the poles. The procedure uses the
φ3 vertices and matches with the momentum ﬂow to determine if a tree is present in
a clockwise manner. If not, then the external line number linitial is changed to linitial
and the tree is checked again. The i and q are labels to t[q]
i .

The previous recipe pertains to currents and also on-shell amplitudes. There
are m − 1 poles in an m-point current Jµ or m − 3 in an m-point amplitude. The
comparison between amplitudes and currents is as follows: the three-point vertex
is attached to the current (in φ3 theory), and then the counting is clear when the
attached vertex has two external lines with numbers less than the smallest external

6

line number of the current (permutations to other sets of φn does not change the
formalism). There are n − 3 poles are accounted for in the amplitude with φn and
the branch rules.

Brief Review of the Gauge Theory Labeling

The gauge theory contributions follow a similar labeling [4], but with the added
complexity of the kinematics in the numerator, such as εi ·ki and εi ·εj. These pairings
are determined set-theoretically from the integers in φn, where the latter labels the
momentum ﬂow of the individual tree diagrams.

The κ(a; 1) and κ(b; 2) set of primary numbers used on can be found via the
set of string inspired rules for the numerator factors, and deﬁne their individual
contributions by,

(−

)a1(

)n−a2

1
2

1
2

a1
Y
i=1

ε(κ(i; 1)) · ε(κ(i; 1))

(2.5)

×

a2
Y
j=a1+1

n

Y
p=a2+1

ε(κ(j; 1)) · kκ(j;2) ×

kκ(p;1) · kκ(p;2) ,

(2.6)

together with the permutations of 1, . . . , n. The permutations extract all possible
combinations as explained in [4].

The form of the amplitudes is then expressed as Tσ multiplying the propagators
in (2.1). Tσ is given in (2.6), and the sets κ are determined in [4] (using the string
ispired rules for amplitudes). The normalization is i(−1)n. The numbers a1 and a2
are summed so that a1 ranges from 1 to n/2, with the boundary condition a2 ≥
a1 + 1. Tree amplitudes in gauge theory must possess at least one εi · εj. Also, the
color structure is Tr (Ta1 . . . Tan), and the complete amplitude involves summing the
permutations of 1, . . . , n.

3 Product Form of Invariants

The number partitions have been used to generate scalar φ3 graphs in [5]. Their use is
involved in generating the tensor algebra in gauge theory classical scattering as in [2]
and [4]. The general instanton vertex requires generally non-tree like combinations of
the kinematic invariants, and so a generalization of these number partitions is required

7

to generate their form. The general combination of kinematics can also be used to
label the quantum vertices in the scattering as they are not tree-like kinematically.

In the previous section it was shown how certain partitions of numbers generate
In perturbative gauge

the non-vanishing coeﬃcients Ci,p in the scalar scattering.
theory these coeﬃcients are determined classically from the sets φn as in [1]-[5].

In a similar vein to the the perturbative gauge theory work, these numbers could
be represented pictorially as in Figure 2. Each set of numbers σ(n) corresponds to
deleted entries in the color ordered set (1, 2, . . . , n)

(1, 2, . . . , n)

(1, 2; 3, . . . , n − 2; n − 1, n)

(1; 2, 3; 4, . . . , n)

(3.1)

The deleted entries are grouped together with other numbers in the set as the semi-
colon indicates, but with the deleted entries neigboring the largest non-deleted num-
ber, such as n − 2 with the ’deleted entries 3 to n − 3 in (3.1). These sets of numbers
are in analog to labeling all diagrams with legs grouped together as in the pair in
Figure 2; the second diagram has legs four and ﬁve grouped (corresponding to a set
(1, 2, 3; 4, 5). In this manner the sets of numbers Ci,p;σ(n) span all φ3 diagrams with
ordered sets of legs. The numbers σ(n) can be put into one-to-one correspondence
with the integers from 1 to

as the number is either absent or present (2n−1).

The sets of numbers span all possible ordered pole structures in

n−1

X
i=1

n!
i!(n − i)!

= 2n−1 ,

Y Ci,p;σ(n)

1
ti,p

.

(3.2)

(3.3)

As a trivial example, the second graph in Figure 2 could be n-point graph with the
non-three last legs grouped with the leg n; the set σ is (4, . . . , n − 1) and the single
invariant s12 is obtained in the denominator. In general it is possible to construct
any combinations by grouping into two blocks these numbers, but in doing so the
symmetry of the tree and non-tree diagrams is lost. As in constructing the tree
diagrams of both scalar and gauge ﬁeld theory, the sets φn are very well-ordered sets
of numbers and presumably this holds in the classical vertices of the instanton case
as well.

8

1

5

1

5

4

Figure 2: This number partition, and the additional diagram, reproduces the function
1/s2

12s34.

The 2m−1 possible leg orderings and topologies labeled by the individual φm sets
produce all possible sets of pole terms; these sets φm at m-point together with the
2m−1 possibilities inherit a pseudo-Hopf structure. The construction however is quite
explicit.

The coeﬃcients Ci,p;σ(n) span the graphs generating the pole terms in (3.3). A
sample set of pole terms is given in Figure 2. The perturbative sets of numbers Ci,p
is given by the sets φn as described in [5].

The labeling of the numbers Ci,p;σ(n) is required to obtain the functions gCi,p;σ(n)
that multiply the individual terms. Assumed is that there is a group theory interpre-
tation of the individual g functions for a given set of terms at n-point order, spanned
by the numbers Ci,p;σ(n). This group theory relevance should have an interpertation in
terms of the classical perturbative scattering, together with the 2n−1 global possible
interpretations.

The determination of the vertix kinematics of both the perturbative and non-
instantons) in terms of the possible sets φn and φn, σ(n)
perturbative terms (i.e.
might allow for a better understanding of the quantum duality from the classical con-
ﬁgurations. The full quantum scattering is obtained from both of these contributions,
and any duality must manifest itself at the level of the tree-like nodes. A kinematic
duality in the partitions of the numbers, such as required from φn to generate the
classical perturbative graphs, seems possible with the instanton contributions. The

9

kinematic structure of both are required to ﬁnd for example, S-duality in the N = 4
supersymmetric gauge theory.

4 Instanton Analogue

The perturbative scattering has been modeled through the use of classical tree di-
agrams sewn together to ﬁnd the loop scattering. The non-perturbative scattering
incorporating the e−4π/g2 eﬀects requires the introduction of further terms in the
nodes of Figure 1. These further terms are modeled with the generalized kinematics
of the previous sections together with the full coupling dependence. The reduction
of the instanton contributions to the nodes is an algebraic simpliﬁcation, and the full
quantum scattering requires the iteration of the interactions as in Figure 1. (The
integrals and much of the tensor results have been performed in the latter.)

The instanton vertices are suﬃcient, without logarithmic modiﬁcations, to de-
duce the approprate quantum analog of instantons interacting with the gluon ﬁeld
to any loop order. For example, the instanton vertex at n-point can be deﬁned to
compensate the quantum recursion between the vertices and the result that is truely
non-perturbative gauge theory; this compensation can be seen as adding irrelevant
operators to ﬁne tune a theory, but in this case, the classical instanton vertices are
deﬁned to agree with the quantum gauge theory instantons. The appropriate mat-
ter is to deduce the kinematics and coupling dependence of the ’classical’ instanton
vertices.

The instanton terms to an n-point amplitude recieve contributions from the m-
instanton, and also at loop order L. The most general term, with a coupling structure
f (gYM) has the form,

f L
m,n;C e

−m 4π

g2 +im θ

2π Y Ci,p;σ(n)

1
t[p],ai,p
i

,

(4.1)

with the coupling dependence f arising from a quantum corrected instanton moduli
space; ai,p denotes general powers of the invariants, both positive and negative. The
helicity structure is,

Y εσ(j) · k˜σ(j)εκ(j) · ε˜κ(j) .

(4.2)

10

The coeﬃcients Ci,p are coeﬃcients that take on the values 0 and 1. They are set
theoretic numbers that label the non-vanishing of the invariants t[p]
. The logarithmic
i
possibilities require another set of numbers ˜C to label, but the classical vertices do
not require the soft dimensions so we neglect this notation (which is relevant in
ﬁnal results for quantum scattering). The coeﬃcients Ci,p also generate the tensorial
vectors σ(j), ˜σ(j), and ˜σ′(j), which enter into the polarization inner products.

The function f L

m,n;C is expected to have an analogous determination as the coef-
ﬁcients describing perturbative gauge theory. (In the self-dual N = 4 supersymmet-
ric gauge theory context these functions are determined from the self-dual mapping
g → 1/g; one formulation involves the ansatz of the Eisenstein functions.)

The pre-factor fCi,p;ai,p

, multiplying each term containing the products of εi · kj

and εi · εj has the coupling expansion at m-point,

˜f (m)
Ci,p;ai,p

= X bn(C; g; m)e−n4π/g2+niθ/2π.

(4.3)

The coeﬃcients could in principle be determined from the appropriate expansion of
a manifold.

The vertices associated with every kinematic term in the series is used to ﬁnd the
full scattering in the gauge ﬁeld, after including the perturbative terms. The classical
gauge ﬁeld tree diagrams generates the classical vertices, as used in [1],[2] to generate
the full quantum scattering. These tree diagrams are then added with the instanton
vertices to ﬁnd the full nodes. The quantum theory is obtained by sewing both nodes
together in the ’rainbow’ graphs to determine the scattering, as illustrated in the
Figure 1.

5 Compact graphical form

The notation can be further simpliﬁed graphically with the use of two diagrams for
the non-helicity speciﬁed amplitudes, and only one diagram for the helicity amplitude.
This graphical representation makes closer possible group theoretic and gometry in
the interpretation of the instanton contributions, which could make a determination
of the functions in (4.3) easier.

A labeled diagram G1 with m nodes (m-point vertex) is used to specify the
contractions of the polarizations with the momenta, that is εi · kj and εi · εj. The
nodes label the ordered set of lines, such as 1, 2, . . . , n. There are two lines, with

11

Figure 3: The parameterization of the node kinematics. The dashed and solid lines
represent contractions of the polarizations with the momenta. The circles are the
nodes 1 to 5.

a dashed or solid line, that represent the contraction εi · εj or εi · kj, respectively.
The latter case requires an arrow orientation to label either the polarization or the
momenta; the end of the arrow labels a momenta. The ﬁgure is represented in ﬁgure
3.

The second diagram G2 is used to represent the various momentum invariants in
the denominator and numerator. The line from node i to node j labels the invariant
(ki + . . . + ki+j−1)2, and the index on the line represents its power; for example, the
index of 1 is a denominator and −2 is a double power in the numerator. This diagram
is represented in ﬁgure 5.

Together these two diagrams label an individual contribution to the instanton
vertex in ﬁgure 4. The functional form of the coupling dependence are given by the
equation,

V (m)(G1, G2) =

χ(m)

n (G1, G2; g)e

−n 4π
g2

−ni θ

2π .

(5.1)

∞

X
n=0

The graphical illustration alludes to a geometric derivation of the components χn(G1, G2).
Indeed, writing the ’classical’ multi-instanton contributions as

z = e

− 4π
g2

−i θ

2π ,

(5.2)

generates a holomorphic function,

12

1

1

5

Figure 4: The second diagram represents the contractions (ki+. . .+ki+j−1)2; numbers
represent the powers of these invariants. This graph represents Q

5
i=1 1/si,i+1.

V (m)(G1, G2) =

n (G1, G2; g)zn ,
χ(m)

(5.3)

∞

X
n=0

similar to a K¨ahler potential. Presumably specifying this function through its analytic
properties, based on the symmetries of the graphs G1 and G2, generates the instanton
contributions. The latter allows the perturbative scattering of the quantum gauge
theory to incorporate the non-perturbative terms.

In a spinor helicity format the two diagrams can be reduced to only one diagram
Gs. The lines are arrows, with each one either dashed or solid, representing the inner
products hiji or [ij]. The arrow speciﬁes the orientation from i to j in the graph with
n nodes.

6 Discussion

The classical scattering within gauge theory has a simple formulation in terms of
sets of numbers φn that elucidates the instanton contribution formulation. There
are simpliﬁcations, further due to the spinor helicity implementation in this approach
which are also algebraic. It seems that a simple program will generate all contributions
to obtain the full quantum amplitudes, with both perturbative and non-perturbative
corrections.

The sets of numbers φn, or pi, formulate a direct representation of the non-helicity
format classical amplitudes. The corresponding sets of numbers ˜φn, and pi,n generate
13

Figure 5: The parameterization of the helicity basis nodes. The numbers represent
5
i=1 1/hi + 1, ii
the powers of the invariants hiji and [ij]. This graph represents Q

the instanton kinematics at leading order. The coeﬃcients V (n)(G1, G2) are expected
to follow a similar number theoretic, and an accordant diﬀerential representation. The
group theory in association with these numbers should lead to a full determination
of the instanton contributions to the n-point amplitude.

The instanton interactions with the gauge bosons are modeled with the use of
classical interaction terms entering into the sewing relations, the latter of which gen-
erate the full quantum theory amplitudes. Duality transformations at the basic level
should operate only on these vertices in the coupling constant, as full transformations
are repetitive on the individual nodes. This property possibly simpliﬁes the non-
perturbative g → 1/g transformations within the quantum dynamics, when the ap-
propriate transformations of the ﬁelds between the nodes are given such as a straight
gluon to gluon map, or those in various theories. The appropriate transformations
might generate the instantonic vertices and the non-perturbative contribution to the
quantum theory.

1

1

5

14

References

physics/0506012.

physics/0503110.

hep-th/0209088.

[1] G. Chalmers, Quantum Solution to Scalar Field Models, physics/0505018.

[2] G. Chalmers, Quantum Gauge Amplitude Solutions, physics/0505077.

[3] G. Chalmers, in preparation.

[4] G. Chalmers, Tree Amplitudes in Gauge and Gravity Theories, physics/0504219.

[5] , G. Chalmers, Tree Amplitudes in Scalar Field Theories, physics/0504173.

[6] G. Chalmers, Inversions of Eﬀective Action in Condensed Matter Models,

[7] G. Chalmers, Derivation of Quantum Field Dynamics, physics/0503062.

[8] G. Chalmers, Masses and Interactions of Nucleons Quantum Chromodynamics,

[9] G. Chalmers, Comment on the Riemann Hypothesis, physics/0503141.

[10] G. Chalmers, N = 4 Supersymmetric Gauge Theory in the Derivative Expansion,

[11] G. Chalmers, Gauge Theories in the Derivative Expansion, hep-th/0209086.

[12] G. Chalmers, Scalar Field Theory in the Derivative Expansion, hep-th/0209075.

[13] G. Chalmers, M Theory and Automorphic Scattering, Phys. Rev. D 64:046014

(2001).

[14] G. Chalmers, On the Finiteness of N = 8 Supergravity, hep-th/0008162.

[15] G. Chalmers and J. Erdmenger, Dual Expansions of N = 4 super Yang-Mills the-
ory via IIB Superstring Theory, Nucl. Phys. B 585:517 (2000), hep-th/0005192.

[16] G. Chalmers, S and U-duality Constraints on IIB S-Matrices, Nucl. Phys. B

580:193 (2000), hep-th/0001190.

[17] A. Connes, D. Kreimer, Renormalization in Quantum Field Theory and the
Riemann-Hilbert Problem, Comm. Math. Phys. 210:249 (2000), hep-th/9912092;
D. Kreimer, Structures in Feynman Graphs: Hopf Algebras and Symmetries,
Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 73:49 (2005), hep-th/022110 ; Combinatorics of (Per-
turbative) Quantum Field Theory, Phys. Rept. 363:387 (2002), hep-th/0010059.

15

