5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kolmogorov Complexity, String Information, Panspermia and
the Fermi Paradox

V.G.Gurzadyan

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a “La Sapienza”, Rome, and Yerevan Physics
Institute

Abstract - Bit strings rather than byte ﬁles can be a mode of trans-
mission both for intelligent signals and for travels of extraterrestrial life.
Kolmogorov complexity, i.e. the minimal length of a binary coded string
completely deﬁning a system, can then, due to its universality, become a
key concept in the strategy of the search of extraterrestrials. Evaluating,
for illustration, the Kolmogorov complexity of the human genome, one comes
to an unexpected conclusion that a low complexity compressed string - ana-
log of Noah’s ark - will enable the recovery of the totality of terrestrial life.
The recognition of bit strings of various complexity up to incompressible
Martin-L¨of random sequences, will require a diﬀerent strategy for the anal-
ysis of the cosmic signals. The Fermi paradox ”Where is Everybody?” can
be viewed under in the light of such information panspermia, i.e. a Universe
full of traveling life streams.

1

Introduction

Diametrically opposing views on the existence of advanced civilizations are
mainly due to the uncertainty, to what extent features of our civilization can
be attributed to extraterrestrials. For example, why cannot a civilization be
developed on the basis of elementary particles in entangled quantum states
instead of atoms or molecules? Various strategies for the search of advanced
civilizations range from detection of electromagnetic signals [1] to the search
of physical artefacts in our vicinity [2].

My discussion is based on outlining the information aspect of the carriers
of life. The basic idea is to send a ﬁle containing all the information on
a system, up to such complex systems as human beings. The amount of
information then, of course, can be quite big. The size of the package will
decrease drastically if, instead of sending a ﬁle (byte sequences), one sends
the program (bit strings) which is able to recover it. Then, the Kolmogorov

1

complexity, which is the minimal length of the program deﬁning a system [3],
due to its universality will act as the quantitative descriptor of the messages.
The recent progress in the deciphering of the human genome is used
below to illustrate these ideas (Thus far, sequences of three mammalian
genomes are studied with reasonable accuracy: the complete human genome
sequence was published in 2003 (the draft in 2001), the draft genomes of the
mouse and rat were published in 2002 and 2004, respectively [4]). Evaluating
the Kolmogorov complexity of the human genome, I arrive at an unexpected
conclusion that low complexity strings will enable the complete recovering
of the terrestrial life. If true, the methods of analysis of bit strings in the
radiation arrived from space have to become an important goal.

2 Kolmogorov complexity of the human genome

Kolmogorov complexity, K, is deﬁned as the minimal length of a binary
coded program (in bits) which is required to describe the system x, i.e. will
enable recovery of the initial system x completely [3]:

K(φ(p), x) = minp:φ=xl(p),

(1)

where φ(p, x) is a recursive i.e. algorithmically calculable function, l(p) is
the length of the program p.

The universality of the Kolmogorov complexity is due to the proof by
Kolmogorov that the complexities deﬁned by various Turing machines [3]
diﬀer by no more than an additive constant C

|K(φ(p), x) − K(x | y)| ≤ C,

where the conditional complexity K(x | y) of object x when the complexity
of another object y is known, is

K(x | y) = min l(p).

(2)

The amount of information of object x with respect to an object y is evalu-
ated from the complexities

I(y : x) = K(x) − K(x | y).

Complexities obtained by diﬀerent algorithms diﬀer from the asymptotic
(minimal) one by another additive constant. In other words, a system can be

2

recovered from a compressed string almost independently on the computer
and the algorithm.

Obviously, a repeat or periodic string has a low complexity, and it can be
compressed more compactly than the chaotic one with random sequences.
The precise complexity is usually unreachable for physical complex systems;
however a value not too diﬀerent from it can be estimated, as for example,
for the maps of Cosmic Microwave Background radiation [5].

Let us estimate the complexity of the human genome. The human
genome [4] contains 2.9 109 base pairs, those of the rat and mouse con-
tain 2.75 109 and 2.6 109 pairs, respectively. The number of predicted genes
is about 23.000 for the human and over 22.000 for the mouse genome. About
99% of mouse genes are similar to the human ones, and of these 96% have the
same location for the mouse and human genome, 80% of mouse gene (ortho-
logues) are also the best match for human gene. Therefore, the complexity
of the human genome has to be

K < 10

11

,

(3)

with correspondingly smaller value for the code carrier part. Only less than
1% of mouse proteins are speciﬁc to mice, 99% per cent are shared with other
mammals, and 98% are shared with the humans, while 27% are common to
all animals and 23% to all species, including bacteria. Another feature of
the mammalian genomes is the existence of repeat sequences. Namely, 46%
of the human genome and 38% of the mouse genome consists of recognizable
interspersed repeats while only 2% are the coding genes. The complexity of
a string of length N is limited by K(x) < N , while the fraction of sequences
with

K < N − m

is small if m is suﬃciently large, as it is for the human genome. The chro-
mosomes of the three studied organisms, 23, 21 and 20 pairs for human,
rats and mice, respectively, are related to each other by 280 large regions
of sequence similarity. So, the conditional complexity of terrestial species
is small once the complexity of human genome is known. (The similarities
in the genomes are not only the quantitative indications for the common
ancestors but also for the time periods of the divergence from the common
path of evolution.)

The energy, E, required to communicate B bits of information is E =
BkT ln 2, where T is the temperature of the noise per bandwidth. A lower
bound for the energy to transmit B bits by an antenna can be evaluated by

3

the formula [2]

E = 8 ln 2 BS(

2
)

6
≃ 10

(B/10

11

2
)(d/1pc)

(R/150m)

erg.

(4)

−4

D
A

where D is the communication distance, d, in units of the antenna’s aperture,
A is the antenna’s aperture, R, in units of the transmission wavelength,
and S is the noise spectral energy density. The Arecibo aperture, R =
150m, and 3K antenna temperature is used for the normalization, so it is
seen that larger antennae will enable the coverage of the Galaxy and even
other galaxies within energy limits reasonable for our civilization in foreseen
future.

Thus, the complexity of genomes of terrestrial organisms due to repeat
sequences and common fractions is comparable to the human one and the
resulting package can be transmitted to galactic distances.

3 Network of von Neumann automata

The self-reproduction of information carriers is an eﬃcient strategy for
spreading over the Universe. A simpliﬁed example of such strategy can
include sending N self-reproducing von Neumann cellular automata [6], as
suggested by Tipler [7]. The automata would create duplicates of their own
from the environment upon arrival at the destination, and send them in
other N directions. At a speed 0.001c, an automaton will arrive to the near-
est star situated 1pc away in τ = 3, 000 years, and the time of creation of
automata network within the Galaxy will be

4
10

τ = 30 mln years

(5)

At a speed 0.01c, the Universe within the radius 1026 cm would be reached
in the Hubble time.

Once the network of von Neumann automata is created within Galaxy in
such cosmologically short time scale, the transmission of information pack-
ages i.e. packed travellers, can be as commonplace events as air travels on
the Earth today. I do not discuss many traditionally debated issues, such
as whether the civilizations would have other alternatives to the expansion
in space, etc.

4

4 Conclusion

I advance the idea of propagation of the life not via ﬁles containing the
information on them, but the programs, i.e. coded strings deﬁned by Kol-
mogorov complexity. Considering the Kolmogorov complexity of the human
genome, I have shown that low-conditional-complexity strings are enough
for the complete recovery of terrestrial life. The complexity of the coded
strings, the existence of random sequences in the sense of Martin-L¨of closely
related to Hausdorﬀ dimensionality, will require new methods in the studies
of the cosmic signals, and can eventually approach the solution to the Fermi
paradox ”‘Where is Everybody?” [8].

References

[1] G.Cocconi, P.Morrison, Nature, 184, 844,1959.

[2] C.Rose, G.Wright, Nature, 431, 47, 2004.

[3] A.N.Kolmogorov, Probl.Information Transfer, 1, 3, 1965; Li M., Vi-
tanyi P., An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applica-
tions (Springer, Heidelberg), 1997;

[4] R.H.Waterstone et al, Nature 420, 520, 2002;

[5] V.G.Gurzadyan, Europhys.Lett., 46, 114, 1999;

in: The Physics
of Communication, Proc.XXII Solvay Conference on Physics,
Eds.I.Antoniou, V.A.Sadovnichy, H.Walther, World Sci., p.204, 2003.

[6] J. von Neumann, The General and Logical Theory of Automata, in:
it Cerebral Mechanisms in Behaviour (The Hixon Symposium) (John
Wiley, New York), 1951.

[7] F.Tipler, QJRAS, 21, 267, 1980.

[8] S.Webb Where Is Everybody?: Fifty Solutions to the Fermi Paradox
and the Problem of Extraterrestrial Life (Springer, Heidelberg), 2002.

5

