5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE FUTURE BY TRANSITION
TO THE NEXT LEVEL CIVILISATION∗

Andrei P. Kirilyuk†
Solid State Theory Department, Institute of Metal Physics
36 Vernadsky Avenue, 03142 Kiev-142, Ukraine

kiril@metﬁz.freenet.kiev.ua

Abstract

Universal and rigorously derived concept of dynamic complexity shows that any
system of interacting components, including society and civilisation, is a process
of highly uneven development of its unreduced complexity. Modern civilisation
state corresponds to the end of unfolding of a big complexity level. Such ex-
hausted, totally “replete” structure cannot be sustainable in principle and shows
instead increased instability, realising its replacement by a new kind of structure
with either low or much higher complexity (degrading or progressive development
branch respectively). Unrestricted sustainability can emerge only after transition
to the next, superior level of civilisation complexity, which implies qualitative
and uniﬁed changes in all aspects of life, including knowledge, production, so-
cial organisation, and infrastructure. These changes are speciﬁed by a rigorous
analysis of underlying interaction processes. We propose mathematically rig-
orous description of unreduced civilisation complexity development, including
universal criterion of progress. One obtains thus a working basis for the causally
complete, objectively exact and reliable development science and futurology.

Keywords:

Dynamic redundance, revolution of complexity, criterion of progress, noosphere

1.

Future quest in a high-tech epoch of change

Although permanent change is inherent in a planet, life, and civilisation exis-
tence, it has a highly uneven character of “punctuated equilibrium”, where larger
periods of relatively smooth and slow evolution are interrupted by short periods
of huge and abrupt, “revolutionary” change. Rapidly growing body of evidence
shows that today the planetary life and civilisation on Earth are approaching
very closely the next “bifurcation point” of development, or “generalised phase
transition” [1], which is often referred to as “singularity” (though in terms of

∗Report presented at the Symposium “The Future of Life and the Future of Our Civilisation” (Frankfurt am
Main, 2–6 May 2005), http://archive.future25.org/Symposium05/kirilyuk.pdf
†Address for correspondence: Post Box 115, 01030 Kiev-30, Ukraine.

2

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

particular technological aspects) and marks a global change of unprecedented
scale (see e.g. [2–6]).

It is not surprising that the eternal humanity quest for its future gains today
quickly growing importance and public interest [7] that can be surpassed only
by the global change dynamics itself. A large part of this interest is driven by the
traditional “fear of the (unknown) future”, essentially ampliﬁed now because
of the clearly felt huge scale of emerging change and related uncertainty [3, 4].
An important aspect of the present epoch of change and its “future shock” [6] is
due to the extraordinary growth of “high”, but empirically based technologies
that can now, for the ﬁrst time in history, modify the natural system complexity
at its full depth, in quantum world (high-energy physics), biology (genetics),
environment (industrial over-production) and human dimensions (psychology,
media, information technologies), while remaining effectively blind at the level
of genuine understanding of those real system dynamics [8–11]. Even the
most serious attempts of future studies [7] fail to provide an objectively reli-
able, consistent and uniﬁed understanding of the emerging change meaning and
dynamics, replacing it with empirical interpolation of separate, though impor-
tant aspects of the current development, such as economic and technological
tendencies, ecological system evolution, human behaviour, etc.

In this report we present the results of the causally complete, rigorous anal-
ysis of unreduced planet and civilisation dynamics based on the recently de-
veloped universal concept of dynamic complexity [1, 10–13] and providing
the uniﬁed, many-sided picture, origin, dynamics, and purpose of the begin-
ning revolutionary change [1, 14]. We start with an outline of the universal
concept of complexity (Sec. 2) emerging from the unreduced solution to any
real interaction problem (Sec. 2.1) and leading to the uniﬁed concept of system
development as manifestation of the universal symmetry (conservation) of com-
plexity (Sec. 2.2). In particular, the sustainability transition emerges today as
inevitable and rather rapid “jump” to the next, superior level of civilisation com-
plexity (Sec. 3) prepared by all its previous development and having only one
alternative of irreversible destruction (Sec. 3.1). We then analyse various en-
tangled aspects of life at the new complexity level and corresponding transition
dynamics, including the qualitatively new kind of knowledge (Sec. 3.2), pro-
duction (Sec. 3.3), social organisation (Sec. 3.4), and infrastructure (Sec. 3.5).
Finally, we pay homage to Carl Sagan and Joseph Shklovsky by showing that
discovery of other forms of life and intelligence is related to the new future for
our own civilisation by the same universal concept of complexity (Sec. 4). We
summarise the obtained results by concluding that the causally complete kind
of knowledge of the universal science of complexity provides the unique basis
for the truly scientiﬁc, objectively reliable and intrinsically uniﬁed futurology
urgently needed especially at the modern critical point of development.

Sect. 2: Universal science of complexity

3

2.

2.1

Universal science of complexity

Unreduced interaction dynamics

Any system dynamics and evolution are determined by the underlying inter-
action processes. The way of interaction analysis in usual science (including
the scholar “science of complexity”) involves rough simpliﬁcation (reduction)
of real interaction within a version of perturbation theory (or “model”) that as-
sumes effective weakness of interaction inﬂuence upon system conﬁguration,
which kills any possibility of essential novelty emergence from the beginning
(with the evident fatal consequences for such approach ability to predict any
nontrivial future). Subsequent play with analytical or computer models of thus
heavily reduced reality, empirically postulated (rather than derived) object prop-
erties and arbitrarily adjusted parameters cannot replace the intrinsic creativity
of unreduced interaction processes. It is no wonder that the qualitative knowl-
edge extension to the causally complete understanding of real phenomena, pro-
vided by the universal science of complexity [1], is simply due to the proposed
non-simpliﬁed, truly “exact” analysis of unreduced, real interaction processes.
Its possibilities are conﬁrmed by the obtained consistent solutions to various
stagnating, “insoluble” problems [1], from those of fundamental physics (causal
and uniﬁed extensions of quantum mechanics, relativity, cosmology) [9, 15, 16]
and unreduced many-body interaction (true quantum chaos, quantum measure-
ment, many-body coherence) [10, 17], to reliable basis for nanobiotechnology
[10, 18], genomics [11] and medicine [19], theory of genuine (natural or artiﬁ-
cial) intelligence and consciousness [20], the new kind of communication and
information systems [21], and realistic sustainability concept [14].

Any real interaction can be represented by existence equation, generalising
various models and simply ﬁxing the initial system conﬁguration in a “Hamil-
tonian” form (self-consistently conﬁrmed later) [1, 10–13, 16, 20, 21]:

hk (qk) +

Vkl (qk, ql)

Ψ (Q) = EΨ (Q) ,

(1)

N




Xk=0 





N

Xl>k










where hk (qk) is the “generalised Hamiltonian” for the k-th component, qk is
the degree(s) of freedom of the k-th component, Vkl (qk, ql) is the (arbitrary)
interaction potential between the k-th and l-th components, Ψ (Q) is the system
state-function, Q
, E is the generalised Hamiltonian eigen-
value, and summations include all (N ) system components. It is convenient to
represent the same equation in another form by separating certain degree(s) of
ξ, that correspond to a naturally selected, usually “system-
freedom, e.g. q0
wide” entity, such as “embedding” conﬁguration (system of coordinates) or

q0, q1, ..., qN

≡ {

≡

}

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

common “transmitting agent”:

4




N

Xk=1 



h0 (ξ) +

hk (qk) + V0k (ξ, qk) +

Vkl (qk, ql)

Ψ (ξ, Q) = EΨ (ξ, Q) ,

N

Xl>k










≥


where now Q

1.
We pass now to a “natural” problem expression in terms of free-component

q1, ..., qN

and k, l

≡ {

≥

}

solutions for the “functional” degrees of freedom (k

1):

hk (qk) ϕknk (qk) = εnkϕknk (qk) ,

Ψ (ξ, Q) =

ψn (ξ)ϕ1n1 (q1) ϕ2n2 (q2) ...ϕN nN (qN )

ψn (ξ)Φn (Q) ,

n
X

εnk }
{

are the eigenvalues and

where
component Hamiltonian hk (qk), n
combinations, and Φn (Q)
The system of equations for
tion (1)–(2) is obtained in a standard way [1, 10–13, 20, 21]:

(4)
eigenfunctions of the k-th
runs through all eigenstate
ϕ1n1 (q1) ϕ2n2 (q2) ...ϕN nN (qN ) by deﬁnition.
≡
, equivalent to the starting existence equa-
ψn (ξ)
}
{

ϕknk (qk)
}
{
n1, ..., nN
}
≡ {

≡

n
X

[h0 (ξ) + V00 (ξ)] ψ0 (ξ) +

V0n (ξ)ψn (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ)

[h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ)

Vn0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) ,

n
P
n′6=n
P
= 0 (also below), η

where n, n′

η0 = E

ε0, ηn = E

εn, εn =

≡

−

−

−

(5)

εnk ,

k
P

Vnn′ (ξ) =

V nn′
k0


(ξ) +

V nn′
kl 

,

Xl>k



V nn′
k0

(ξ) =

n (Q)Vk0 (qk, ξ) Φn′ (Q) ,

Xk


dQΦ∗

V nn′
kl

(ξ) =

dQΦ∗

n (Q)Vkl (qk, ql) Φn′ (Q) ,

ZΩQ

ZΩQ

and we have separated the equation for ψ0 (ξ) describing the generalised “ground
state” of the system elements, i. e. the state with minimum complexity (deﬁned
below). The obtained system of equations (5) expresses the same problem as
the starting Eq. (2), but now in terms of intrinsic variables. Therefore it can be
obtained for various starting models, including time-dependent and formally
“nonlinear” ones.

(2)

(3)

(6)

(7)

(8)

6
Sect. 2: Universal science of complexity

5

The usual, perturbative approach starts from explicit simpliﬁcation of the

“nonintegrable” system (5) down to a “mean-ﬁeld” approximation:

ψn (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) ,

(9)

. General problem solution is then

where

V0 (ξ)
|
|

<

h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ) + ˜Vn (ξ)
h

i

<

˜Vn (ξ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Vnn′ (ξ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

n′
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
P
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

obtained as a linear or equivalent superposition of eigen-solutions of Eq. (9) sim-
ilar to Eq. (4). If we want to avoid problem reduction, we can try to “solve” the
unsolvable system (5) by expressing ψn (ξ) through ψ0 (ξ) from the equations
for ψn (ξ) using the standard Green function technique and then substituting
the result into the equation for ψ0 (ξ) [22, 23]. We are left then with only one,
formally “integrable” equation for ψ0 (ξ):

h0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) + Veﬀ (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

(10)

where the operator of effective potential (EP), Veﬀ (ξ; η), is obtained as

Veﬀ (ξ; η) = V00 (ξ) + ˆV (ξ; η) , ˆV (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) =

dξ′V

ξ, ξ′; η

ψ0

ξ′

,

ZΩξ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)
(11)

V

ξ, ξ′; η

=

(cid:0)

(cid:1)
ψ0
ni (ξ)

,
and
truncated system of equations:
(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

(cid:8)

n,i
X
η0
ni

V0n (ξ) ψ0
ni (ξ) Vn0 (ξ′) ψ0∗
η0
η
ni −

εn0

−

ni (ξ′)

, εn0

εn

ε0 ,

(12)

≡

−

are complete sets of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of a

[h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) .

(13)

The unreduced, truly complete general solution to a problem emerges now as a
dynamically probabilistic sum of redundant system realisations, each of them
equivalent to the whole usual “general solution” [1, 10–13, 17]:

ρ (ξ, Q) =

ρr (ξ, Q) ,

(14)

where ρ (ξ, Q) is the observed density, ρ (ξ, Q) =
for “wave-like”
complexity levels and ρ (ξ, Q) = Ψ (ξ, Q) for “particle-like” structures, index
r enumerates system realisations, Nℜ is realisation number (its maximum value
designates the
is equal to the number of components, Nℜ = N ), and the sign
special, dynamically probabilistic meaning of the sum (see below). The r-th

⊕

2
Ψ (ξ, Q)
|
|

Xn′6=n

Nℜ

⊕

r=1
X

6

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

realisation state-function, Ψr (ξ, Q), entering the unreduced general solution,
Eq. (14), is obtained as

Ψr (ξ, Q) =

cr
i [Φ0 (Q) ψr

0i (ξ) +

Φn (Q) ψ0

ni′ (ξ)

dξ′ψ0∗

ni′ (ξ′) Vn0 (ξ′) ψr

0i (ξ′)

i
X

Ωξ
R
ηr
i −

η0
ni′

εn0

−

+

Xn,i′
0i (ξ) , ηr
ψr
where
i }
{
the r-th EP realisation takes the form:

are eigen-solutions of the unreduced EP equation (10), and

(15)



,





Veﬀ (ξ; ηr
V0n (ξ) ψ0

i ) ψr

0i (ξ) = V00 (ξ) ψr

0i (ξ) +
ni′ (ξ′) Vn0 (ξ′) ψr

dξ′ψ0∗

ni′ (ξ)

0i (ξ′)

+

Xn,i′

Ωξ
R
ηr
i −

η0
ni′

εn0

−

.

(16)

Although the “effective” problem, Eqs. (10)–(16), is formally equivalent to its
initial expression, Eqs. (1)–(5), it reveals emerging interaction links, in the form
of EP dependence on the solutions to be found. It leads to a new quality of the
unreduced solution (as compared to usual reduction of Eq. (9)): the former
has many equally real, locally “complete” and therefore mutually incompatible
solutions called (system) realisations [1, 10–13, 16, 17, 19–22]. This quality
of the unreduced solution is designated as dynamic multivaluedness (or redun-
dance). Standard theory tries to obtain problem solution in a “closed”, “exact”
form and therefore resorts to perturbative reduction of the original EP (see
e.g. [23]), thus inevitably killing real system multivaluedness, complexity and
creativity.

Dynamic multivaluedness gives dynamic, or causal, randomness: multiple,
but incompatible system realisations are forced, by the same driving interac-
tion, to permanently replace each other in a truly random order (thus deﬁned),
which leads to the unreduced general solution in the form of (dynamically)
probabilistic sum of Eq. (14). It implies that any quantity is intrinsically unsta-
ble and its value will unpredictably change (together with the system state) to
another one, corresponding to the next, randomly chosen realisation. We obtain
thus a consistently derived and universally valid property of novelty emergence,
or intrinsic creativity of any real system, absent in any its usual, dynamically
single-valued model. We obtain also purely dynamic deﬁnition of realisation
emergence event and its probability:

αr (Nr) =

Nr = 1, ..., Nℜ;

Nr = Nℜ

,

αr = 1 ,

(17)

r
X

!

r
X

Nr
Nℜ  

Sect. 2: Universal science of complexity

7

where αr is the probability of r-th actually observed realisation that contains
Nr elementary realisations (Nr = 1 for each of these).

The obtained picture of real system dynamics can be summarised by the uni-
versal deﬁnition of unreduced dynamic complexity, C, as any growing function
of realisation number, Nℜ, or rate of change, equal to zero for the (unrealistic)
case of only one realisation: C = C (Nℜ), dC/dNℜ > 0, C (1) = 0. Ma-
jor examples are provided by C (Nℜ) = C0 ln Nℜ, generalised energy/mass
(temporal rate of realisation change), and momentum (spatial rate of realisation
emergence) [1, 10–13, 15, 16, 20, 21]. Since dynamic redundance (Nℜ > 1)
is at the origin of dynamic randomness, our dynamic complexity includes uni-
versally deﬁned chaoticity. Whereas all real systems and processes are dy-
namically complex and (internally) chaotic (Nℜ > 1, C > 0), their “models”
in usual science, including its versions of “complexity” and “chaoticity” (cf.
[24, 25]), are invariably produced by artiﬁcial (and biggest possible) reduc-
tion of multivalued dynamics to the unrealistic case of single realisation, zero
complexity, absence of genuine chaos, any real, intrinsic change and related
time ﬂow. This dynamically single-valued, or unitary, science embracing the
whole body of scholar knowledge is a zero-dimensional (point-like) projec-
tion of multivalued world dynamics, which explains both relative (but never
complete!) “success” of unitary science in its formal description of the lowest
complexity levels (
“fundamental physics”) and its explicit failure to under-
stand higher-level dynamics and unreduced complexity features (emergence,
time, chaos, etc.) [1, 10–13, 16, 20].

≃

Unreduced dynamic complexity thus deﬁned includes other major features,
such as essential (or dynamic) nonlinearity, dynamic entanglement, and prob-
abilistic dynamic fractality. Essential nonlinearity designates dynamically
emerging feedback links, described by EP dependence on the eigenvalues to
be found (Eqs. (10)–(12),(16)). It is only incorrectly modelled by usual, mech-
anistic “nonlinearity” of the unitary theory and appears in interaction prob-
lems with a formally linear existence equation (1)–(2), such as quantum chaos
[17, 22]. Dynamic entanglement is physically real mixing of interacting com-
ponents reﬂected by the dynamically weighted products of functions depending
on different degrees of freedom in Eq. (15). Both essential nonlinearity and
dynamic entanglement are ampliﬁed due to multi-level realisation branching
giving probabilistic dynamical fractal.
It is obtained by application of the
same EP method to solution of higher-level, (ever more) truncated systems of
equations, starting from Eqs. (13) [1, 19, 20]. Dynamical fractal is different
from usual, dynamically single-valued fractals by its permanently, chaotically
changing realisations at each level of fractal hierarchy, which leads to the im-
portant property of dynamic (autonomous) adaptability and includes any kind
of emerging structure.

8

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

Quantitative expression of dynamic adaptability takes the form of huge efﬁ-
ciency growth of unreduced many-body interaction with respect to its unitary
models. The unreduced system efﬁciency Preal is determined by the link com-
bination number in the multivalued fractal hierarchy [10, 11, 18, 20, 21]:

Preal

N !

∝

≃

√2πN (N /e)N

N N

∼

C ,

∝

(18)

where the number of links N is very large itself. Unitary (regular, sequential)
dynamic efﬁciency grows only as N β
1). It is this huge efﬁ-
ciency advantage that explains the such “magic” qualities in higher-complexity
systems (very large N ) as life, intelligence, consciousness, and sustainability.
Obtained at the expense of irreducible dynamic randomness, these causally
derived properties are indispensable for the correct analysis of planetary life
and civilisation dynamics.

Preal (β

≪

∼

Further development of the universal concept of complexity includes uni-
ﬁed classiﬁcation of all observed dynamic regimes and transitions between
them [1, 10, 12, 21]. The limiting regime of uniform, or global, chaos is
obtained for comparable interaction parameters (characteristic frequencies).
If they differ essentially, one gets the opposite case of dynamically multival-
ued self-organisation, or self-organised criticality (SOC), where rigid, low-
frequency components conﬁne a fractal hierarchy of similar, but chaotically
changing realisations of high-frequency components. This case uniﬁes the
essentially extended, realistic and multivalued (internally chaotic) versions of
usual, dynamically single-valued “self-organisation” (that in reality does not
describe any new, explicit structure emergence), SOC, fractality, “synchronisa-
tion”, “chaos control”, and “mode locking”. We obtain also a rigorously derived
and universal criterion of transition from SOC to the uniform chaos, occurring
around the main frequency resonance, which reveals the true meaning of the
“well-known” phenomenon of resonance [1, 10, 12, 21]. When the frequency
ratio, or “chaoticity parameter”, grows from small values for a quasi-regular
SOC regime to unity in the global chaos case, system behaviour follows a grad-
ual (though uneven) change towards ever less ordered patterns, reﬂecting the
observed diversity of dynamical structures.

2.2

Universal symmetry of complexity and evolution law

The major feature of explicit structure creation includes emerging elements
of dynamically discrete, or quantized, space (structure) and irreversibly ﬂowing
time (event, evolution). Space element, ∆x, is given by realisation eigenvalue
separation, ∆rηr
i . Time
element, ∆t, determines the duration of the event of space element emergence
(or realisation change) and can be estimated as ∆t = ∆x/v0, where v0 is
the signal propagation speed in the component structure. A universal integral
, whose increment is independently
measure of complexity is given by action,

i , for the unreduced EP equation (10): ∆x = ∆rηr

A

Sect. 2: Universal science of complexity

9

proportional to ∆x and ∆t [1, 10, 13, 20]: ∆
E∆t + p∆x, where the
coefﬁcients E and p are identiﬁed as generalised system energy (mass) and
momentum. They represent thus universal differential measures of complexity:

A

−

=

E =

∆
A
∆t |

−

∆
A
∆x |

x=const , p =

t=const .

(19)

Due to its irreversible (chaotic) character, any real interaction process can be de-
scribed as transformation and conservation (symmetry) of complexity, where the
potential (hidden) form of complexity, or dynamic information I, is transformed
into the unfolded (explicit) form of dynamic entropy S, so that their sum, the to-
tal system complexity C = I + S, remains unchanged, ∆C = 0, ∆I =
∆S.
Although both dynamic information and entropy are expressed in units of ac-
tion, the latter corresponds rather to dynamic information decreasing during
system complexity development:

−

∆I = ∆

=

∆S < 0 .

A

−

(20)

x=const , we obtain differential expression of the sym-
Dividing Eq. (20) by ∆t
|
metry (conservation) of complexity and universal dynamic/evolution equation
in the form of generalised Hamilton-Jacobi equation:

∆
A
∆t |

x=const + H

x,

t=const , t

= 0 ,

(21)

∆
A
∆x |

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where the Hamiltonian, H = H(x, p, t), expresses the differential complexity-
entropy, H = (∆S/∆t)
x=const . The dynamic quantization procedure relates
|
complexity-action increment to that of the generalised wavefunction (or distri-
bution function) Ψ, describing speciﬁc, “disentangled” system state during its
chaotic jumps between realisations, and transforms Eq. (21) to the universal
Schr ¨odinger equation [1, 10, 13, 20]:

∆Ψ
∆t

0

A

= ˆH

x,

(cid:18)

∆
∆x

, t

Ψ ,

(cid:19)

(22)

A

0 is a characteristic action value by modulus (equal to Planck’s con-
where
stant at the lowest, quantum levels of complexity) and the Hamiltonian operator,
ˆH(x, p, t), is obtained from the Hamiltonian H(x, p, t) by causal quantiza-
tion. While the symmetry of complexity uniﬁes and extends all (correct) laws
and “principles” of the unitary science, the Hamilton-Schr¨odinger equations,
Eqs. (21)–(22), connected by causal quantization, unify and extend all particular
(model) dynamic equations [1, 10, 13, 20].

The key implication of the symmetry of complexity is that it provides the
universal meaning, dynamics, and measure of any system existence, evolution,
and progress, in the form of complexity development (internal transformation

10

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

Figure 1.
complexity-information (I) into (increasing) complexity-entropy (S).

Scheme of universal system development by transformation of its (decreasing)

from dynamic information into dynamic entropy) as a result of its conservation,
which gives a well-speciﬁed solution to such “difﬁcult” and “ambiguous” prob-
lems as purpose, or sense of history, meaning of life, objective understanding
(and constructive creation) of the future, etc. Due to the internal chaoticity of
any real (even externally “regular”) system, every structure emergence process
corresponds to growth of complexity-entropy, or chaoticity, which resolves the
long-standing contradiction between entropy growth law and visible order in-
crease in structure creation processes. Another complexity development feature
is that due to the unreduced interaction dynamics (“everything interacts with ev-
erything”) it has a dynamically discrete, step-wise character [1]. The hierarchic
structure creation and complexity development process is shown schematically
in Fig. 1. A sufﬁciently big step of complexity-entropy growth can be de-
scribed as generalised phase transition to the superior level of complexity with
a qualitatively different kind of structure and dynamics.

Let us consider complexity development stages in more detail, Fig. 2, in view
of further application to (modern) civilisation development. First of all, we can
rigorously deﬁne periods of progress (accelerated complexity-entropy growth)
and decline (relative stagnation of complexity development) constituting re-
spectively the steep rise and plateau (saturation) of each discrete step of system
complexity development. Whereas entropy S can only grow for both progress
and decline, H = ∂S/∂t =
/∂t = E > 0, acceleration of dynamic
entropy growth, or the power of development, W = ∂H/∂t = ∂2S/∂t2, is
positive for progress (creative development), W = ∂2S/∂t2 > 0, and negative
for decline (decay, degradation), W = ∂2S/∂t2 < 0. Points of inﬂection of
the entropy growth curve, ∂H/∂t = ∂2S/∂t2 = 0, separate adjacent periods

A

−

∂

Sect. 2: Universal science of complexity

11

Figure 2.
Periods of system progress, decline, and transitions between them rigorously spec-
iﬁed in terms of dynamic entropy change ∆S = −∆A, generalised Hamiltonian H = ∂S/∂t,
or energy E = −∂A/∂t = H, and higher complexity-entropy/action derivatives.

of progress and decline and correspond, at the same time, to maximum (ﬁnal)
progress results (“point of happiness”), ∂H/∂t = 0, ∂2H/∂t2 < 0, and max-
imum decay (“point of sadness/ennui”), ∂H/∂t = 0, ∂2H/∂t2 > 0. One
can also deﬁne the moment of objective culmination of a step-wise complex-
ity jump, progressive transition climax, or the moment of truth as the point of
inﬂection of rising H(t) curve, ∂2H/∂t2 = 0, ∂3H/∂t3 < 0, after which
progressive complexity-entropy upgrade becomes eminent and irreversible. In
a similar way, a critical inﬂection point within the period of decline, or the
moment of sin, ∂2H/∂t2 = 0, ∂3H/∂t3 < 0, marks the deﬁnite establishment
of stagnation and decay. Whereas the points of happiness and sadness separate
the periods of progress and decline as such, the moments of truth and sin, sit-
uated within (around the middle of) progress and decline periods, separate the
intervals of maximum subjective perception of their results within the system.
We can see that such “vague” and “inexact” notions as happiness, sorrow, and
“psychological crises” between them are provided with unambiguous and rig-
orous deﬁnitions within the unreduced science of complexity (one should not
forget, of course, the whole underlying interaction analysis, Sec. 2.1) [1].

Note that partial time derivatives in the above deﬁnitions of system evolu-
tion stages correspond to external observation over system development from
a (generalised) reference (rest) frame. If now an observer is situated within the
developing system, he will see similar development stages, but appearing on
a different, “internal” time scale and determined by the respective total time

12

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

derivatives, such as (generalised) Lagrangian L =
dS/dt [1, 13]. The dif-
ference between those two time ﬂows constitutes the causal, complex-dynamic
basis of generalised special relativity effects emerging at all levels of dynamics,
from quantum particle motion to civilisation development [1].

−

Note ﬁnally that progressive transition to superior level of complexity can be
replaced by another development branch, the “death branch” of purely destruc-
tive degradation of existing system structures, without qualitatively new, “pro-
gressive” structure emergence (Fig. 2). This scenario becomes real when the
stock of complexity-information of the driving interaction process is exhausted
or when further complexity development is seriously blocked in a deep im-
passe (“wrong way”). In the ﬁrst case one deals with the generalised complex-
dynamical system death, which is now rigorously deﬁned [1] and inevitable
(for a closed system) because of the ﬁnite quantity of dynamic information,
whereas in the second case one has a bifurcation of development, where both
progressive transition to a higher complexity level and destructive degradation
can happen with certain, dynamically determined probabilities (see Eq. (17)).

3.

3.1

Sustainability transition as the revolution of complexity

Modern bifurcation of civilisation development:
Causal Apocalypse now

We can apply now the uniﬁed development theory from the previous section
to modern civilisation development, including its recent past and forthcoming
future. Observed features analysis shows that modern civilisation, suitably
represented by its advanced, “locomotive” parts, is situated in the vicinity of
the last “point of sadness (ennui)” (Fig. 2) and maybe already slightly outside
of it in the direction of a probable complexity-growth step (but well before its
“moment of truth”). That modern world position at the beginning of emerging
inﬂection of H(t) curve after its deep minimum (development saturation) is
supported by a variety of clearly observed “ends”, such as End of History,
Science, Art, Religion, etc. (e.g. [4, 5, 25, 26]), appearing as a stable absence
of true novelty emergence (events) and pronounced degradation of existing
structures [1]. In view of the close “death branch” beginning (Fig. 2), we get to
the great bifurcation of development into the death branch of pure destruction
and transition to a superior level of civilisation complexity. Taking into account
the huge, ultimately complete scale of all “ends” involved, we can say that we
deal here with the rigorously substantiated version of Apocalyptic “End of
the World”, Doomsday, etc. appearing in reality as that major development
bifurcation into two main branches of “(system) death” and “(new) life”, where
the latter emerges by transition to a qualitatively higher complexity level of the
whole civilisation dynamics [1, 14]. The latter change can also be designated
as Revolution of Complexity, or sustainability transition (see Secs. 3.2–4).

Sect. 3: Sustainability transition as the revolution of complexity

13

Particular, practically important results of this rigorously derived develop-
ment concept are speciﬁed below (Secs. 3.2–3.5). The causally complete nature
of the underlying interaction analysis (Sec. 2) leaves practically no hope that
the observed bifurcational, “Apocalyptic” state of modern civilisation can be
avoided by usual, “smooth” amelioration of life conditions, often subjectively
privileged by prosperous, “leading” civilisation components (e.g. within stan-
dard, “protective” ecological actions, Secs. 3.3–3.5). Dynamic entropy growth
cannot stop, but the failure to follow the strongly growing, qualitative develop-
ment branch at the current speciﬁc moment will inevitably leave civilisation on
the death branch of irreversible destruction. We see that the causally complete
understanding of unreduced, uniﬁed civilisation dynamics within the universal
science of complexity provides the unique and vitally important basis for the
scientiﬁcally exact, rigorous futurology (Sec. 4).

3.2

The last scientiﬁc revolution

It is convenient to start our more detailed analysis of sustainability transition
and the resulting superior complexity level with the description of respective
changes in the system of knowledge, the more so that the new level of complexity
is characterised by a much greater, decisive role of a new kind of ordered,
“scientiﬁc” knowledge in the whole civilisation development.

Unitary, dynamically single-valued science approach dominating today (and
including zero-complexity imitations of “complexity” and “chaoticity”) is un-
able to provide consistent understanding of any real, dynamically multivalued
system behaviour (Sec. 2.1), which becomes especially evident for higher-
complexity cases (strong interaction, living organisms, intelligent behaviour,
social, ecological systems, etc.). At the same time, the purely empirical, tech-
nological civilisation power has attained today, for the ﬁrst time in history, the
critical threshold of the full depth of any real system complexity, from quan-
tum world (elementary particles and ﬁelds) to the structure of life (genome and
related cell processes, ecosystems, brain processes). This effectively blind but
quantitatively powerful, “stupid” technology uses the conventional trial-and-
error empiricism to strongly modify systems whose real dynamic complexity
exceeds by far the possibilities of zero-dimensional “models” of unitary sci-
ence (they are still shamelessly promoted for “simulation” of ultimately com-
plex behaviour of economic, social, and ecological systems!). The resulting
contradiction creates real and unprecedented dangers at all complexity levels,
from particle physics to genetics and ecology, which are not due to the “risk
of science/technology” in general (cf. [4]), but due to the speciﬁc, artiﬁcial
limitation of the unitary science paradigm and results [1].

Transition to another, causally complete kind of knowledge is therefore ur-
gently needed today and the failure to perform it will inevitably lead to de-

14

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

structive consequences, as the probability of successful empirical “guess” or
unitary “simulation” of the huge power of real system complexity (see Eq. (18))
is very close to zero. It is clear that the new, practically efﬁcient knowledge
can only be based on the detailed understanding of the unreduced interaction
process underlying any real system dynamics, which leads directly to the dy-
namic multivaluedness paradigm [17, 22] and universal science of complexity
(Sec. 2) [1]. Being thus indispensable for real problem solution already at the
existing level of development, the unreduced science of complexity becomes
uniﬁed and unique basis for realisation of sustainability transition and result-
It is this, ultimately complete
ing superior level of civilisation complexity.
and realistic kind of knowledge that can form a practical basis for the “society
based on knowledge” at the superior complexity level. It is clear also that imi-
tations of the unitary “science of complexity” can only be harmful because of
their biggest possible, dynamically single-valued simpliﬁcation of real system
dynamics. Practical organisation of science should follow the corresponding
qualitative change towards a much more liberal, decentralised and adaptable
system with emergent structure [1, 8, 10].

The essential extension of science content, role, and organisation constitutes
thus a major part of the forthcoming Revolution of Complexity. The latter
can be considered, in this sense, as the last “scientiﬁc revolution” of the kind
described by Thomas Kuhn [27], since the unreduced science of complexity
realises the intrinsically complete, permanently creative kind of knowledge,
devoid of antagonistic ﬁght between “paradigms” and people (which originates,
as it becomes clear now, from the speciﬁc, strongly imitative nature of the
unitary, “positivistic” science, rather than scientiﬁc knowledge in general).

3.3

Complexity-increasing production: Growth without
destruction and the universal criterion of progress

Modern industrial production leads to evident and rapid degradation of envi-
ronment and life quality, and therefore cannot provide long-term progress. As
such progress is a necessary condition for planetary civilisation existence, one
is brought to the idea of sustainable development. However, the self-protective
approach of the current system tends to the tacit assumption that sustainability
can be attained by gradual “puriﬁcation” of production methods, without major,
qualitative change of the dominating industrial mode as such [3, 28–30].

The unreduced interaction analysis of the universal science of complexity
rigorously shows, ﬁrst of all, that the latter hope is totally vain and sustainability
cannot be attained within the current way of production, irrespective of the
details, simply because it is invariably reduced to destruction of complexity,
i.e. transformation of higher-complexity structures into lower-complexity ones
[1, 14]. We also use here the rigorous and universal deﬁnition and criterion

Sect. 3: Sustainability transition as the revolution of complexity

15

of progress as optimal growth of complexity-entropy according to the system
development curve (Figs. 1, 2). At the modern moment of maximum/ending
stagnation (Sec. 3.1) civilisation progress can only proceed by self-amplifying
complexity-entropy growth towards its superior level, without which the system
will inevitably follow the death branch of catastrophic destruction.

This criterion of progress can be provided with exact formulation by recalling
that transition to superior complexity level acquires a well-deﬁned character
after the “moment of truth”, or Hamiltonian/Lagrangian inﬂexion point, where
the second time derivative of Hamiltonian/Lagrangian changes sign from plus
to minus (Fig. 2). The ensuing criterion of progress (in its “internal” version
expressed by total time derivatives) is

−

(23)

d3S
dt3 < 0 , or

d2L
dt2 > 0 ,
where L =
dS/dt is the system Lagrangian (Sec. 2.2) [1, 13]. Note that
progressive development thus deﬁned overlaps with both periods of progress
and decline deﬁned before (Sec. 2.2) and includes their “best” parts of essential,
self-amplifying growth of complexity-entropy (even though its rate, dS/dt,
decreases within the beginning period of decline). A narrow understanding
of “deﬁnite” progress would include only progressive development part within
the period progress, d2L/dt2 > 0, dL/dt < 0, while the whole progressive
(dS/dt)death,
development can also be designated by the condition dS/dt
where (dS/dt)death is the maximum entropy growth rate for the death branch
(or its minimum value for the decline period).

≫

Impossibility of sustainable development at the current complexity level fol-
lows from the generalised entropy growth law: any, even “ecologically correct”
production of the current, industrial way can at best only minimise the inherent
complexity destruction (entropy growth), but can never reduce this high enough
minimum to values around zero. But the same entropy growth law underlies
genuine sustainability at the superior complexity level, after the key transition
to complexity-increasing production methods and technologies. That’s why it
is called sustainability transition (Sec. 3.1). Indeed, in this case the inevitable
complexity-entropy growth takes the form of intrinsically progressive creation
of ever more complex structures (“period of progress” in Fig. 2), as opposed to a
“period of decline” where entropy growth is dominated by destruction of previ-
ously created structures. It means that the criterion of progressive development,
Eq. (23), remains practically always valid after the sustainability transition, and
very short periods of formal “decline” are determined by decreasing, but high
rate of entropy growth, d2S/dt2 < 0, dS/dt
(dS/dt)death, within progres-
sive development, d3S/dt3 < 0.

≫

Realistic basis for production sustainability is due to complexity creation
and complexity-based kind of technology, where the unreduced complexity-

16

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

entropy of all production results should be essentially greater, than that of the
initial system conﬁguration. An important example is provided by irreducibly
complex dynamics of realistic sources of pure energy from nuclear fusion reac-
tions (in its both “hot”, less sustainable and “cold”, more prospective versions),
demonstrating the uniﬁed, multi-level structure of the Complexity Revolution.
Contrary to popular ideas about industrial production, its complexity-killing
features are not due to massive use of man-made machines as such, but due
to a certain, “unitary” way of using certain kind of machinery. Those par-
ticular, complexity-reducing tools and methods are closely related to speciﬁc
organisation of usual industrial production characterised by explicitly reduced
dynamic complexity (tendencies of uniﬁcation, regularity, etc.). Correspond-
ingly, the new, intrinsically sustainable production at the superior complexity
level should be organised in a qualitatively different way dominated by the
permanently developing, hierarchic, distributed “ecosystem” of dynamically
connected, generally small units of individually structured production (they
certainly can form loose, dynamic associations at higher ecosystem levels that
will replace modern inefﬁcient and decadent corporate monsters). It becomes
evident that such complexity-increasing production organisation and content is
inseparable from the accompanying personal progress of human complexity,
i.e. the level of consciousness [20] (see also Secs. 3.4–4).

3.4

From unitary to harmonical social structure:
Emerging order without government

Due to holistic dynamics of unreduced interaction [1], sustainability transi-
tion involves a qualitative change of social structure and dynamics. In order to
specify this change, we show ﬁrst that social structure of the current complexity
level, including all known (modern and ancient) social and political regimes,
constitutes a single kind of order called Unitary System [8, 14]. The term
“unitary” (behaviour) has a mathematically exact interpretation in the universal
science of complexity (Sec. 2.1) of “dynamically single-valued” and therefore
qualitatively uniform, regular, zero-complexity, “effectively one-dimensional”,
sequential (dynamics, evolution, etc.). Although any social system cannot be
strictly unitary in this rigorous sense, the Unitary System of social structure is
close to it because it is a rigid, centralised system of preferably regular (con-
trolled) dynamics that can change essentially (usually just to its another version)
only by way of destructive “revolution”. Such unitary social order includes
all previously known social systems (usually considered to be very different),
such as any totalitarian, democratic, or meritocratic political structure. Corre-
spondingly, social structure resulting from sustainability transition should differ
qualitatively from any of these, including allegedly the “best possible system”
of modern democracy (as well as any meritocracy).

Sect. 3: Sustainability transition as the revolution of complexity

17

We call the social organisation type of that qualitatively superior, higher-
complexity level Harmonical System [8, 14]. Contrary to any version of Uni-
tary System, the Harmonical System has the emergent, intrinsically creative,
permanently developing kind of social order whose origin resembles that of
the free market economical structure, but encompasses now the whole civili-
sation structure. It is dominated by a system of interacting, independent units
similar to those of the complexity-increasing production structure (Sec. 3.3),
but including all spheres of activity. Global system dynamics is monitored by
the same kind of independent, interactive units, very different from any unitary
“government” (or even “non-government organisations”, NGO) in that they are
forced to produce explicitly useful services, compete with each other and bear
individual, well-speciﬁed responsibility for their results (similar to small enter-
prises within market economy). Any loose associations of such units, as well
as “high councils”, may exist, but only as far as they are needed and without
any formal power exceeding that of emergent actions of independent enterprises
(including various “forces of order”).

Note that some seeds of such emergent social order may exist within modern
“developed” version of unitary democracy, but any its most “liberal” version
or component (like NGO) is severely limited by the imposed rigid, formal
(“obligatory”), centralised power ensuring the status of unrealistic dream for any
true liberty (= unreduced, natural, progressive development). The Harmonical
System of emergent order realises what is considered as impossible by the
conventional, unitary democracy, a qualitatively higher kind of liberty and
“democratic” order obtained without any “majority vote” (always manipulated
by “minority games”). This “miracle” becomes possible only at the described
superior level of civilisation complexity realised by unreduced interaction of
independent units pervading all spheres of activity (Secs. 3.2–3.5).

The harmonical social order has intrinsically progressive, or sustainable
structure due to permanent, non-antagonistic and essential complexity devel-
opment in the sense of our rigorously deﬁned progress (Sec. 3.3). The very
character of civilisation development changes forever after sustainability tran-
sition, from painful alternation of “stagnation” and “revolution” periods to the
permanent unreduced creativity (that could also be described as “distributed
complexity revolution”). By contrast, the modern “developed” unitary democ-
racy, apparently repeating respective periods of ancient civilisation develop-
ment, represents not the “best possible” social system (according to its own
praise, thoroughly maintained by self-privileged “powers that be”), but rather
the deﬁnite end, generalised complex-dynamical death-equilibrium [1] of the
Unitary System as such, in any its version, followed inevitably by either sus-
tainability transition to a superior complexity level of Harmonical System, or
irreversibly destructive death branch (Sec. 3.1, Fig. 2). In fact, this “ﬁnal”, deca-
dent, equilibrium character of unitary democracy, clearly seen today, does result

18

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

Figure 3.
System followed by globally stable structure of the Harmonical System.

Schematic representation of the critical instability of the developed (modern) Unitary

from its highest possible development of the unitary kind of social structure that
does not need to be, however, its only possible kind and actually represents the
simplest, basically “tribal” (imposed, compulsion-based) kind of social order.
The latter becomes insufﬁcient today just due to the ultimately high develop-
ment of the industrial Unitary System creating self-amplifying, and therefore
insurmountable, dynamic barriers to its own progress.

The origin of modern, inevitably emerging critical instability of the devel-
oped, industrial Unitary System can be conveniently demonstrated with the help
of schematic presentation of its social structure dynamics, Fig. 3. Pre-industrial,
“traditional” Unitary System can be presented by a pyramidal structure stably
resting on its large base of labour classes due to the “gravitational attraction”
towards material production/consumption.
In the post-industrial society, the
same unitary pyramid acquires a strongly deformed, “inverse” (upside-down)
conﬁguration due to huge productivity growth as a result of technological rev-
olutions. But since the material “gravity” force preserves the same downward
orientation, that monstrous construction with now quantitatively dominating
non-productive “elitary layers” becomes critically unstable and can preserve
its normal, “vertical” position only due to the high-speed spinning motion of
production-consumption cycles (similar to spinning top stability). However,
this artiﬁcially maintained, relative stability has its limits, especially due to

Sect. 3: Sustainability transition as the revolution of complexity

19

basically dissipative, chaotic dynamics of any social system, which means that
the unitary “whipping top” will fall in a destructive manner within a reasonably
small time period (like few tens of years). By contrast, the harmonical social
structure, shown at the bottom of Fig. 3 as a distributed arborescence, does not
possess any global, destructive instability: instead, its local, creative instability
provides sustainable progress.

Harmonical System represents thus the unique way of any further progress,
and in order to realise it one should have a realistic sustainability transition.
Such realistic transformation takes the form of generalised “phase transition”
of higher order, where the qualitatively big structure change occurs not in the
whole system volume simultaneously (as in “ﬁrst-order transitions”), but starts
with small, growing “seeds” of the “new phase”, which strongly facilitates the
transition process. The dynamics of both sustainability transition and resulting
Harmonical System can be properly understood and monitored only with the
help of the causally complete understanding of the unreduced science of com-
plexity (Sec. 3.2), which emphasises once more the high role of this new kind
of knowledge in the forthcoming development stages.

3.5

New settlement and infrastructure

It is not surprising that civilisation infrastructure at the unitary level of devel-
opment, including the dynamical structure of settlements, production and com-
munications, reﬂects major features of the Unitary System, such as high cen-
tralisation, rigidity, development rather by destruction, pronounced tendency
towards mechanistic simpliﬁcation, and the resulting urban decadence in the
Indeed, there is the evident degradation to
phase of “developed” unitarity.
over-simpliﬁed, “squared” and “smooth” conﬁgurations and operation modes
in modern infrastructures, despite much greater practical possibilities for their
diversity in the developed industrial technology. Whereas this effective com-
plexity destruction is a part of the emerging “death” tendency of the ending
level of development (Sec. 3.1), it is equally evident that the forthcoming har-
monical level of complexity should be based on a qualitatively different type
of settlement with a distributed, decentralised, and progressively developing
structure (see Sec. 3.3 for the universal progress deﬁnition).

This another kind of settlement can only be realised as a man-made struc-
ture intrinsically and strongly submerged into the “natural environment” and
constructively interacting with it, so as to increase complexity-entropy of the
whole system. Such sustainable civilisation structure can be described as om-
nipresent, man-controlled, progressively evolving forest, or “natural park”,
with submerged, distributed settlement, production and transport infrastruc-
ture, which excludes anything closely resembling modern cities, towns, and
villages, with their centralised structure tendency. Transport networks in such

20

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

“living” infrastructure will be well hidden among other, more “natural” and
complexity-bearing elements, contrary to their domination in the unitary in-
frastructure. The omnipresent and intense creation of “natural”, i.e. complex-
dynamic environment, rather than its unitary “protection” (inevitably failing),
constitutes the essence of complexity-increasing settlement and infrastructure
dynamics. The latter correlates directly with the complexity-increasing pro-
duction mode (Sec. 3.3) because it can be considered as a speciﬁc sphere of
production with strong involvement of “human dimensions”.

Progressively growing dynamic complexity of this new kind of “natural” but
totally man-controlled environment and infrastructure has a positive reverse in-
ﬂuence upon dynamic complexity of man’s consciousness and life style. This
positive feedback loop in the man-environment system leads to a dynamic com-
plexity boost that can be described as Supernature at the level of “environment”
structure and as (realistically speciﬁed) Noosphere at the level of human con-
sciousness (including its individual and “social” aspects). Supernature can have
the same or even much greater dynamic complexity than the “wild” nature (con-
trary to any “protected” environment of the unitary ecology), while Noosphere
emerges as inseparable, fractally structured, and progressively evolving dy-
namic entanglement (Sec. 2.1) of (superior) consciousness and Supernature. In
this sense one can say that nature, in its new form of Supernature, should be-
come again man’s home, at this superior, harmonical (complexity-increasing)
level of their interaction.

4.

Cosmic intelligence, future, and complexity:
Concluding remarks

Summarising the universal science of complexity [1, 8–22] (Sec. 2) and
its application to the problems of modern civilisation development (Sec. 3),
one should emphasize intrinsic uniﬁcation of causally speciﬁed meaning and
purpose of life, future, progress, nature, cosmos, and our destiny within the
universal symmetry of complexity (Sec. 2.2), thus constituting the practical
guiding principle for civilisation development.

Application of the unreduced science of complexity to the problem of cos-
mic life and extraterrestrial civilisations shows that life realisations in cosmos
should be multiple and diverse, while unique civilisation existence is highly
improbable: it follows already from the basic property of dynamic multival-
uedness (Sec. 2.1). The complexity correspondence principle following directly
from the universal symmetry of complexity [1, 10] provides a rigorous basis
for the statement that real, constructive contact between different civilisations
is possible if they have similar levels of unreduced complexity (consciousness)
that should certainly be high enough for the contact at a cosmic scale. Therefore
the complexity/consciousness upgrade of a particular civilisation of the planet

Sect. 4: Cosmic intelligence, future, and complexity: Concluding remarks

21

Earth, which is necessary for its own development (Sec. 3), can be a much
more efﬁcient way of establishing contact with extraterrestrial intelligence than
usually applied technical means (“ﬁnd an alien within yourself”).

There is no other way to a sustainable, non-destructive future than essential
growth of civilisation complexity taking the form of Revolution of Complexity
in all ﬁelds of human activity (Sec. 3.1). But since the latter is determined
by the level of consciousness that can be causally understood itself as a high
enough level of complex interaction dynamics [1, 20], it becomes evident that
modern bifurcation of development is centred around that critical conscious-
ness upgrade, which constitutes today the main factor of civilisation survival:
real Future comes as a superior level of individual consciousness.
It shows
the emerging predominant role of individually speciﬁed results of global inter-
action processes, as opposed to conventional “mass consciousness” effects of
the unitary society at previous development stages. In fact, only consciousness
complexity development provides the basically unlimited progress perspective
after the objective end of the unitary history of “hot” events (cf. [26]).

As every future becomes uncertain at a qualitative transition point of mod-
ern Apocalyptic scale (Sec. 3.1), one should understand now all possible fu-
tures within a uniﬁed vision, by contrast to innumerable “scenarios” and one-
dimensional unitary interpolation “threads” for separate aspects of development
that become totally inefﬁcient and misleading just at such critical point of “gen-
eralised phase transition” [1] (cf. [2–7]). Providing a unique possibility of such
uniﬁed, causally complete vision of multiple interaction processes determin-
ing civilisation development, the universal science of complexity constitutes the
truly scientiﬁc basis for consistent, provably reliable futurology and its critically
important applications to modern development problems [1, 14].

References

[1] A.P. Kirilyuk. Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance Paradigm:
Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate Uniﬁcation of Knowl-
edge. Naukova Dumka, Kyiv, 1997, 550 p., in English. For a non-technical review see also:
physics/9806002 at http://arXiv.org.

[2] V. Vinge. Vernon Vinge on the Singularity.

http://www.ugcs.caltech.edu/∼phoenix/vinge/vinge-sing.html (1993).

[3] W. Steffen, J. J¨ager, D.J. Carson, and C. Bradshaw, editors. Challenges of a Changing
Earth. Proceedings of the Global Change Open Science Conference, Amsterdam, 10–13
July 2001. Springer, Berlin, 2002.

[4] M. Rees. Our Final Hour: A Scientist’s Warning: How Terror, Error, and Environmental
Disaster Threaten Humankind’s Future in This Century—On Earth and Beyond. Basic
Books, New York, 2003.

[5] G. Soros. Open Society: Reforming Global Capitalism. Public Affairs Press, 2000.

[6] A. Tofﬂer. Future Shock. Bantam, New York, 1984.

22

A.P. Kirilyuk: Sustainable Future by Transition to the Next Level Civilisation

[7] World Future Society, http://www.wfs.org/;

The Arlington Institute, http://www.arlingtoninstitute.org/; Spiral Dynamics Integral,
http://www.spiraldynamics.net/; The Global Future Forum, http://www.thegff.com/;
Future-Institute & University, http://www.future-institute.com/; Finland Futures Academy,
http://www.tukkk.ﬁ/tutu/tva/; World Future Council, http://www.worldfuturecouncil.org/;
Inﬁnite Futures, http://www.inﬁnitefutures.com/; Futuribles, http://www.futuribles.com/;
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, http://www.pik-potsdam.de/.

[8] A.P. Kirilyuk. Creativity and the New Structure of Science. Physics/0403084 at

http://arXiv.org/.

[9] A.P. Kirilyuk. 100 Years of Quanta: Complex-Dynamical Origin of Planck’s Con-
stant and Causally Complete Extension of Quantum Mechanics. Quant-ph/0012069 at
http://arXiv.org.

[10] A.P. Kirilyuk. Dynamically Multivalued, Not Unitary or Stochastic, Operation of Real
Quantum, Classical and Hybrid Micro-Machines. Physics/0211071 at http://arXiv.org/abs.
[11] A.P. Kirilyuk. Complex-Dynamical Extension of the Fractal Paradigm and Its Applications
in Life Sciences. In: Fractals in Biology and Medicine, Vol. IV, pages 233–244. Edited by
G.A. Losa et al. Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2005. Physics/0502133 at http://arXiv.org.

[12] A.P. Kirilyuk. Dynamically Multivalued Self-Organisation and Probabilistic Structure
Formation Processes. Solid State Phenomena, 97–98: 21–26, 2004. Physics/0405063 at
http://arXiv.org.

[13] A.P. Kirilyuk. Universal Symmetry of Complexity and Its Manifestations at Different Lev-
els of World Dynamics. Proceedings of Institute of Mathematics of NAS of Ukraine, 50:
821–828, 2004. Physics/0404006 at http://arXiv.org.

[14] A.P. Kirilyuk. Unreduced Dynamic Complexity, Causally Complete Ecology, and Realistic
Transition to the Superior Level of Life. Report at the conference “Nature, Society and
History”, Vienna, 30 Sep – 2 Oct 1999. See http://hal.ccsd.cnrs.fr/ccsd-00004214.

[15] A.P. Kirilyuk. Quantum Field Mechanics: Complex-Dynamical Completion of Fundamen-
tal Physics and Its Experimental Implications. Physics/0401164 at http://arXiv.org.
[16] A.P. Kirilyuk. Complex-Dynamic Cosmology and Emergent World Structure. Report at
the International Workshop on Frontiers of Particle Astrophysics, Kiev, 21–24 June 2004.
Physics/0408027 at http://arXiv.org.

[17] A.P. Kirilyuk. Quantum Chaos and Fundamental Multivaluedness of Dynamical Functions.
Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie, 21: 455–480, 1996. Quant-ph/9511034–38 at
http://arXiv.org.

[18] A.P. Kirilyuk. Complex Dynamics of Real Nanosystems: Fundamental Paradigm for
Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. Nanosystems, Nanomaterials, Nanotechnologies, 2:
1085–1090, 2004. Physics/0412097 at http://arXiv.org.

[19] A.P. Kirilyuk. The Universal Dynamic Complexity as Extended Dynamic Fractality:
Causally Complete Understanding of Living Systems Emergence and Operation. In: Frac-
tals in Biology and Medicine, Vol. III, pages 271–284. Edited by G.A. Losa et al. Birkh¨auser,
Basel, 2002. Physics/0305119 at http://arXiv.org.

[20] A.P. Kirilyuk. Emerging Consciousness as a Result of Complex-Dynamical Interaction
Process. Report at the EXYSTENCE workshop “Machine Consciousness: Complexity As-
pects”, Turin, 29 Sep – 1 Oct 2003. Physics/0409140 at http://arXiv.org.

[21] A.P. Kirilyuk. Complex Dynamics of Autonomous Communication Networks and the In-
telligent Communication Paradigm, Report at the International Workshop on Autonomic
Communication, Berlin, 18–19 October 2004. Physics/0412058 at http://arXiv.org.

Sect. 4: Cosmic intelligence, future, and complexity: Concluding remarks

23

[22] A.P. Kirilyuk. Theory of Charged Particle Scattering in Crystals by the Generalized Optical

Potential Method. Nucl. Instr. and Meth., B69: 200–231, 1992.

[23] P.H. Dederichs. Dynamical Diffraction Theory by Optical Potential Methods. In: Solid
State Physics: Advances in Research and Applications, Vol. 27, pages 136–237. Edited by
H. Ehrenreich et al. Academic Press, New York, 1972.

[24] J. Horgan. From Complexity to Perplexity. Scientiﬁc American, 74–79, June 1995.

[25] J. Horgan. The End of Science. Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight of the

Scientiﬁc Age. Addison-Wesley, Helix, 1996.

[26] F. Fukuyama. The End of History and The Last Man. The Free Press, New York, 1992.

[27] T. Kuhn. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, 1962.

[28] P. Vellinga. Industrial Transformation: Exploring System Change in Production and Con-

[29] J. C. Lillo. Challenges and Road Blocks for Local and Global Sustainability. In [3], pages

sumption. In [3], pages 183–188.

193–195.

[30] J. J¨ager. Summary: Towards Global Sustainability. In [3], page 201.

