5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TAUP 2818-2005

Theoretical Errors in

Contemporary Physics

E. Comay

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv 69978

Israel

School of Physics and Astronomy

Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

Email: elic@tauphy.tau.ac.il

Keywords: Monopoles, Klein-Gordon, QCD, Yukawa Theory, VMD, Aharonov-

Bohm, Diﬀraction-free beams.

Abstract: Errors pertaining to the following physical theories are discussed:

the Dirac magnetic monopole theory; the Klein-Gordon equation; the Yukawa

theory of nuclear force; the idea of Vector Meson Dominance; the Aharonov-

Bohm eﬀects; the idea of diﬀraction-free electromagnetic beams; Quantum

Chromodynamics. Implications of the theoretical errors are discussed brieﬂy.

In particular, relations between the Dirac monopole theory, the idea of Vector

Meson Dominance and Quantum Chromodynamics cast doubt on the current

interpretation of strong interactions.

1

1. Introduction

The purpose of the present work is to discuss several theoretical errors

existing in contemporary physics. Before addressing speciﬁc cases, let us

examine the structure of a physical theory and the meaning of errors that

can be found in it.

A physical theory resembles a mathematical theory. Both rely on a set of

axioms and employ a deductive procedure for yielding theorems, corollaries

etc. The set of axioms and their results are regarded as elements of the

structure of the theory. However, unlike a mathematical theory, one requires

that a physical theory should explain existing experimental data and predict

results of new experiments.

This distinction between a mathematical theory and a physical theory

has several aspects. First, experiments generally do not yield precise values

but contain estimates of the associated errors. (Some quantum mechanical

data, like spin, make an exception.) It follows that in many cases, a certain

numerical diﬀerence between theoretical predictions and experimental data

is quite acceptable.

Next, one does not expect that a physical theory should explain every

phenomenon. For example, it is well known that physical theories yield very

good predictions for the motion of planets around the sun. On the other

hand, nobody expects that a physical theory be able to predict the speciﬁc

motion of an eagle ﬂying in the sky. This simple example proves that the

validity of a physical theory should be evaluated only with respected to a

limited set of experiments. The set of experiments which are relevant to a

physical theory is called its domain of validity. (A good discussion of this

issue can be found in [1], pp. 1-6.)

2

Relations between two physical theories can be deduced from an exami-

nation of their domain of validity. In particular, let DA and DB denote the

domains of validity of theories A and B, respectively. Now, if DA ⊂ DB and

DA 6= DB then one ﬁnds the theory B takes a higher hierarchical rank with

respect to theory A (see [1], pp. 3-6). Here theory B is regarded as a theory

having a more profound status. However, theory A is not “wrong”, because

it yields good predictions for experiments belonging to its own (smaller) do-

main of validity. Generally, theory A takes a simpler mathematical form.

Hence, wherever possible, it is used in actual calculations. Moreover, since

theory A is good in its validity domain DA and DA ⊂ DB then one ﬁnds

that theory A imposes constraints on theory B, in spite of the fact that B’s

rank is higher than A’s rank. This self evident relation between a lower rank

theory and a higher one is called below “restrictions imposed by a lower rank

theory”. It is used here more than once. Thus, for example, although New-

tonian mechanics is good only for cases where the velocity v satisﬁes v ≪ c,

relativistic mechanics should yield formulas which agree with corresponding

formulas of Newtonian mechanics, provided v is small enough.

Having these ideas in mind, a theoretical error is regarded here as a

mathematical part of a theory that yields predictions which are clearly in-

consistent with experimental results, where the latter are carried out within

the theory’s validity domain. The direct meaning of this deﬁnition is obvi-

ous. It has, however, an indirect aspect too. Assume that a given theory

has a certain part, P , which is regarded as well established. Thus, let Q

denote another set of axioms and formulas which yield predictions that are

inconsistent with P .

In such a case, Q is regarded as a theoretical error.

(Note that, as explained above, P may belong to a lower rank theory.) An

error in the latter sense is analogous to an error in mathematics, where two

3

elements of a theory are inconsistent with each other.

There are other aspects of a physical theory which have a certain value

but are not well deﬁned. They may be described as neatness, simplicity and

physical acceptability of the theory. A general rule considers theory C as

simpler (or neater) than theory D if theory C relies on a smaller number

of axioms. These properties of a physical theory are relevant to a theory

whose status is still undetermined because there is a lack of experimental

data required for its acceptance or rejection.

The notions of neatness, simplicity and physical acceptability have a sub-

jective nature and it is not clear how a disagreement based on them can be

settled.

In particular, one should note that ideas concerning physical ac-

ceptability changed dramatically during the 20th century. Thus, a physicist

of the 19th century would have regarded many well established elements of

contemporary physics as unphysical. An incomplete list of such elements

contains the relativity of length and time intervals, the non-Euclidean struc-

ture of space-time, the corpuscular-wave nature of pointlike particles, parity

violation and the nonlocal nature of quantum mechanics (which is manifested

by the EPR eﬀect).

For these reasons, neatness, simplicity and physical acceptability of a the-

ory have a secondary value. Thus, if there is no further evidence then they

should not be used for taking a ﬁnal decision concerning the acceptability

of a physical theory. In this work, properties of a physical theory pertaining

to a lack of neatness, simplicity and physical acceptability are mentioned.

However, this aspect of the problems may be helpful for the reader but they

should not be regarded as decisive arguments. In the text there is no dis-

tinction between neatness and simplicity. Thus, the term neatness is not

used.

4

Before concluding these introductory remarks, it should be stated that

the erroneous nature of a physical theory E cannot be established just by

showing the existence of a diﬀerent (or even a contradictory) theory F . This

point is obvious. Indeed, if such a situation exists then one may conclude that

(at least) theory E or theory F is wrong. However, assuming that neither

E nor F rely on a mathematical error, then one cannot decide on this issue

without having an adequate amount of experimental data.

Another issue is the usage of models and phenomenological formulas. This

approach is very common in cases where there is no good theory or where

theoretical formulas are too complicated. This approach is evaluated by its

usefulness and not by its theoretical correctness. Hence, it is not discussed

in the present work.

The following discussions rely on the ideas described above and are de-

voted to theoretical aspects of the following topics:

the Dirac magnetic

monopole (called just monopole) theory, the Klein-Gordon (KG) equation,

the Yukawa interaction, the idea of Vector Meson Dominance (VMD), the

Aharonov-Bohm (AB) eﬀects and the idea of creating diﬀraction-free elec-

tromagnetic beams. Experimental data pertaining to Quantum Chromody-

namics that have no adequate explanation are presented in the penultimate

Section. The paper contains new material that has not been published yet

and other topics that have already been published. The latter cases are in-

cluded here in order to help the reader see the full picture. However, the

corresponding presentation takes a concise form and references to detailed

articles are given.

In this work units where ¯h = c = 1 are used. The Lorentz metric is

diagonal and its entries are (1, −1, −1, −1). Greek indices run from 0 to 3.

5

The symbol W,µ denotes the partial derivative of W with respect to xµ.

2. The Dirac Monopole Theory

Monopoles are deﬁned by the following duality transformation (called also

duality rotation by π/2)

and

E → B, B → −E

e → g,

g → −e,

(1)

(2)

where g denotes the magnetic charge of monopoles.

A theory of monopoles was published by Dirac in the ﬁrst half of the pre-

vious century[2,3]. At present, there is no established experimental evidence

of these monopoles[4]. This experimental status of monopoles led Dirac later

in his life to state: “I am inclined now to believe that monopoles do not

exist. So many years have gone by without any encouragement from the

experimental side” [5].

Here the following question arises: does the failure of the monopole quest

stems from the fact that they do not exist in Nature or from erroneous

elements in the Dirac’s monopole theory? It is shown in this Section that

the second possibility holds.

Let us examine the established part of electrodynamics. Here the system

consists of electric charges carried by matter particles and electromagnetic

ﬁelds. The equations of motion of the ﬁelds are Maxwell equations

(e) ,ν = −4πjµ
F µν

(e)

(3)

6

and

F ∗µν

(e) ,ν = 0.

maµ

(e) = eF µν

(e) vν.

and the 4-force exerted on charged matter is given by the Lorentz law

Here F µν is the antisymmetric tensor of the electromagnetic ﬁelds, F ∗µν =

1

2εµναβFαβ, εµναβ is the completely antisymmetric unit tensor of the fourth
rank and jµ is the electric 4-current. Subscripts (e),

(m) denote quantities

related to charges and monopoles, respectively. The duality transformation

of ﬁelds (1) can be written in a tensorial form F µν → F ∗µν.

An important quantity is the electromagnetic 4-potential Aµ. This quan-

tity is used in the Lagrangian density of the system. The ﬁelds’ part of the

Lagrangian density is (see [6], p. 71; [7], p. 596)

Lf ields = −

(e) F(e)µν − jµ
F µν

(e)A(e)µ.

1
16π

Using the duality transformation (1), (2) and Maxwellian electrodynamics

(3)-(6), one derives a dual Maxwellian theory for a system of monopoles and

electromagnetic ﬁelds (namely, a system without charges)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

and

Lf ields = −

F ∗µν
(m) F ∗

(m)µν − jµ

(m)A(m)µ.

(10)

F ∗µν
(m) ,ν = −4πjµ

(m),

−F µν

(m) ,ν = 0.

maµ

(m) = gF ∗µν

(m) vν.

1
16π

7

At this point we have two theories: the ordinary Maxwellian electrody-

namics whose domain of validity does not contain magnetic monopoles and a

monopole related Maxwellian theory which does not contain electric charges.

The problem is to determine the form of a covering theory of a system of

charges, monopoles and their ﬁelds.

As explained in the ﬁrst Section, the two subtheories mentioned above

impose constraints on the required charge-monopole theory:

1. It should conform to Maxwellian electrodynamics (3)-(6) in the limit

where monopoles do not exist.

2. It should conform to the dual Maxwellian electrodynamics (7)-(10) in

the limit where charges do not exist.

It turns out that Dirac’s monopole theory is inconsistent with requirement

2. Therefore, it is inconsistent with a restriction imposed by a lower rank

theory.

As a matter of fact, Dirac also uses implicitly a new axiom which has no

experimental support. Thus, his theory assumes that:

A. Electromagnetic ﬁelds of charges and electromagnetic ﬁelds of monopoles

have identical dynamical properties.

This approach forces him to use just one kind of 4-potential Aµ and to

confront a new kind of singularity. Indeed, if the 3-vector A is regular then

∇ · B = ∇ · (∇ × A) = 0

(11)

and monopoles do not exist. Dirac uses the term ’string’ for this kind of

singularity. The utilization of the new axiom A, and the introduction of

a new kind of singularity into electrodynamics indicate a departure from

simplicity.

8

Several additional errors of the Dirac monopole theory have been pointed

out a long time ago. Thus, it was claimed that the Dirac monopole theory is

inconsistent with the S-matrix theory (see [8,9]). A third article [10] claims

that the inclusion of the Dirac monopole in electrodynamics is inconsistent

with relativistic covariance. Another kind of error of the Dirac monopole

theory was published recently [11].

It is sown there that a hypothetical

quantum mechanical system that contains a charge and a Dirac monopole

violates energy conservation (see [11] pp. 98-99).

Another problem is the deﬁnition of the interaction part of the angular

momentum in a system containing an electric charge and a Dirac monopole.

Here one ﬁnds that the interaction part of the ﬁelds’ angular momentum

does not vanish for cases where the distance between the two particles tends

to inﬁnity (see [7] p. 256; [11], pp. 97-98; [12] p. 1366). Such a kind

of interaction is unknown in classical electrodynamics and is regarded as

unphysical.

The discussion carried out in this Section shows several theoretical er-

rors and a deviation from simplicity done by using an additional axiom and

unphysical properties of the Dirac monopole theory. These diﬃculties are

completely consistent with the failure of the experimental eﬀorts aiming to

detect Dirac monopoles.

It is interesting to note that a regular and self-

consistent charge-monopole theory can be constructed without using axiom

A [11,13,14]. This theory derives a diﬀerent set of equations of motion. The

failure of the attempts to detect the Dirac monopoles is predicted in [8] and

it is derived from the equations of motion of the regular monopole theory

9

[15] as well.

3. The Klein-Gordon Equation

The KG equation

(✷ + m2)φ = 0

(12)

was derived in the very early days of quantum mechanics (see [16], bottom

of p. 25). It can be regarded as a quantize form of the relativistic relation

E2 −p2 = m2, where i∂/∂t, −i∇ replace E and p, respectively. Hence, there

is no doubt concerning its correctness as a formula. Indeed, as is well known,

components of a solution of the Dirac equation satisfy the KG equation.

The problem discussed in this Section is the status of the KG equation (12)

as a fundamental quantum mechanical equation derived from a Lagrangian

density. Here the Lagrangian density of an electrically charged KG particle

is

L = (φ∗

,0−ieV φ∗)(φ,0+ieV φ)−

(φ∗

,k +ieAkφ∗)(φ,k −ieAkφ)−m2φ∗φ. (13)

3

X
k=1

(See [17,18], eq. (37). Note that here units where ¯h = c = 1 are introduced.)

This aspect of the KG equation took a controversial status for a very long

time. Dirac’s negative opinion on this equation (see [19] and [20], pp. 3-8)

directed him to construct his famous equation which is now regarded as the

relativistic quantum mechanical Hamiltonian of spin-1/2 particles.

Other researchers disagree with Dirac (see [18], pp. 70-72, 105, 188-

205;

[16], second column of p. 24).

In particular, Pauli and Weisskopf

constructed the second order Lagrangian density (13). Unlike the case of the

Dirac equation, this Lagrangian density does not yield an expression for the

10

particle density but for its charge density.

Before examining the experimental side, let us state a fundamental prop-

erty of particles described by a wave function ψ(xµ). Due to the fact that

ψ(xµ) depends on a single set of space-time coordinates xµ, one concludes

that a particle truly described by ψ(xµ) must be elementary, namely a point-

like structureless particle.

The experimental data of elementary massive spin 1/2 (Dirac) particles,

like the electron, the muon and the u, d quarks is consistent with the point-

like requirement. This is not true for the old candidates for the KG particles,

namely the three 0− π mesons. Indeed, it is now known that a π meson con-

tains a quark and an antiquark. The charge radius of the π± is 0.672 ± 0.008

fm (see [4], p.499). Hence, π mesons are deﬁnitely not pointlike particles.

A recent analysis of the KG Lagrangian density proves that it is also not

free of theoretical diﬃculties [21]. Thus, it is proved that the theory derived

from the KG Lagrangian density (13) has the following diﬃculties:

1. There is no expression for the particle’s density. The expression for the

charge density depends on coordinates of external particles.

2. The Hamiltonian density depends on time derivative of φ. Hence, if

a Hamiltonian of the KG particle exists then the Hamiltonian density

depends on the Hamiltonian.

3. There is no covariant diﬀerential operator that serves as a Hamiltonian

[21]. Furthermore, the Hamiltonian matrix of a charged KG particle

destroys the inner product of the Hilbert space [21]. There is no Hilbert

space for an uncharged KG particle because in this case density is

undeﬁned [17].

4. The second order KG equation ( 12), which is derived from the KG

11

Lagrangian density (13), is not identical to the ﬁrst order fundamental

quantum mechanical equation i∂φ/∂t = Hφ.

5. One cannot construct a self-consistent electromagnetic interaction of a

charged KG particle. The linear interaction eAµjµ entails an equation

imbalance [22] and the quadratic term (pµ − eAµ)(pµ − eAµ) destroys

the inner product of the Hilbert space [21].

6. There is no explanation why the energy-momentum operators (i∂/∂t, −i∇)

are used for the diﬀerent task of representing charge density and cur-

rent.

7. The nonrelativistic limit of the KG equation disagrees with the Schroedinger

equation. Indeed, in the case of the Schroedinger equation, Ψ∗Ψ repre-

sents probability density [23] whereas the KG equation has no expres-

sion for probability density. Hence, the KG equation is inconsistent

with a restriction imposed by a lower rank theory.

(By contrast, it is proved in [21] that an analogous analysis of the Dirac

equation yields completely acceptable relations.)

These theoretical diﬃculties, together with the lack of support from the

experimental side (there is no candidate for a pointlike KG particle) indicate

that, unlike the case of the Dirac equation, the existence of a genuine KG

particle is not very likely.

4. The Yukawa Interaction

The Yukawa interaction is derived from the interaction term of a Dirac

12

spinor with a KG particle (see [24], p.79 and [25], p. 135)

LY ukawa = LDirac + LKG − g ¯ψψφ.

(14)

Here the KG particle plays a role which is analogous to that of the photon

in electrodynamics. The dependence of (14) on the KG Lagrangian density

indicates that it suﬀers from all the diﬃculties of the KG theory which are

pointed out in the previous Section. Furthermore, note that, due to the fact

that all terms of the Lagrangian density are Lorentz scalars, the interaction

term of (14) depends on the Dirac particle’s scalar density ¯ψψ which is not

its actual density ψ†ψ. This situation is very strange because one expects

that the intensity of the interaction of a Dirac particle should depend on its

actual density ψ†ψ which is a component of the Dirac 4-current and not on

the scalar density ¯ψψ. Moreover, it is explained below that (14) is not free

of covariance problems.

term (see [26], p. 211)

An analysis of the nonrelativistic limit of two Dirac particles interacting

by means of a Yukawa ﬁeld, yields the following expression for the interaction

V (r) = g2 e−µr
r

(15)

where µ denotes the mass of the KG particle. The Yukawa theory was sug-

gested as a theoretical interpretation of the nucleon-nucleon interaction. This

idea was proposed in the early days of nuclear theory when nucleons were

regarded as elementary Dirac particles. Now it is known that nucleons are

composite particles containing quarks and this application of (14) is deprived

of its theoretical basis. Furthermore, a recent discussion proves that the clas-

sical limit of the interaction (15) is inconsistent with special relativity (see

[22], p. 13). This argument relies on the relativistic relation between the

13

4-velocity and the 4-acceleration

aµvµ = 0.

(16)

Examining an elementary classical particle, one ﬁnds that relation (16) yields

for the 4-force f µvµ = 0. It is explained below why this relation is inconsistent

with the Yukawa interaction (15).

Let an elementary classical particle W move in a ﬁeld of force. The ﬁeld

quantities are independent of the 4-velocity of W but the associated 4-force

must be orthogonal to it. In electrodynamics this goal is attained by means

of the Lorentz force (5). In this case, one ﬁnds

aµvµ =

F µνvµvν = 0,

e
m

(17)

where the null result is obtained from the antisymmetry of F µν and the

symmetry of the product vµvν. In electrodynamics, the antisymmetric ﬁeld

tensor F µν is constructed as the 4-curl of the 4-potential Aµ. Such a ﬁeld of

force cannot be obtained from the scalar KG ﬁeld. Hence, the classical limit

of the Yukawa interaction is inconsistent with special relativity.

Considering the experimental side, the application of the Yukawa theory

to nuclear interactions cannot be regarded a success. The nuclear force is

characterized by a very hard (repulsive) core and a rapidly decreasing attrac-

tive force outside this core. Therefore, at a certain point of r, the nuclear

potential changes sign (see [27], p. 97). The Yukawa formula (15) is inconsis-

tent with this property. The nuclear force has also a tensorial component as

well as a spin-orbit dependence (see [27], pp. 68-78). Today people use phe-

nomenological formulas for a description of the nucleon-nucleon interaction

14

data (see [27], pp. 97-99).

5. The Idea of Vector Meson Dominance

The idea of VMD has been suggested as an explanation for interaction

properties of high energy photons with hadrons. Here the data show that the

cross section of the interaction of such photons with a proton target is very

similar to that of a neutron target [28]. Since the electric charge of proton

constituents diﬀer from those of a neutron, one concludes that the interaction

of these photons with the electric charge of constituents of nucleons cannot

explain this similarity.

At ﬁrst, the VMD idea was not accepted by all physicists. The humoristic-

sarcastic poster published on page 267 of [28] provides an illustration for

this claim. Moreover, contemporary classiﬁcations of physical subjects (like

PACS and arXiv.org) regard VMD as a phenomenological idea. Now, if VMD

is just a phenomenological idea or a model then the current approach of

the physical community to strong and electromagnetic interactions (namely,

the Standard Model) has no theoretical explanation for the photon-hadron

interaction.

takes the form

The main idea of VMD is that the wave function of an energetic photon

| γ > = c0 | γ0 > +ch | h >

(18)

where | γ > denotes the wave function of a physical photon, | γ0 > denotes

the pure electromagnetic component of a physical photon and | h > denotes

its hypothetical hadronic component. c0 and ch are appropriate numerical

coeﬃcients. The values of c0 and ch depend on the photon’s energy. Thus,

15

for soft photons ch = 0 whereas it begins to take a nonvanishing value for

photons whose energy is not much less then the ρ meson’s mass (see [28] and

[29]).

Theoretical aspects of VMD were discussed recently [30]. This analysis

proves that VMD is inconsistent with well established physical theories and

with experimental data as well. In particular, it is proved in [30] that VMD

is inconsistent with Wigner’s analysis of the Poincare group [31,32] and with

the scattering data of linearly polarized photons impinging on an unpolarized

target of protons [30].

The following simple thought experiment disproves the VMD’s idea stat-

ing that the size of the hadronic components of a photon depend on its energy

[29]. Consider two intersecting rays of optical photons (see ﬁg. 1). In the

laboratory frame Σ, the optical photons of the rays do not interact. Thus,

neither energy nor momentum are exchanged between the rays. Therefore,

after passing through O, the photons travel in their original direction. Let us

examine the situation in a frame Σ′. In Σ, frame Σ′ is seen moving very fast

in the negative direction of the Y axis. Thus, in Σ′, photons of the two rays

are very energetic. Hence, if VMD holds then photons of both rays contain

hadrons and should exchange energy and momentum at point O. This is a

contradiction because if the rays do not exchange energy and momentum in

frame Σ then they obviously do not do that in any other frame of reference.

This argument proves that VMD is a theoretical error.

6. The Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀects

The AB eﬀects refer to the phase diﬀerence between two sub-beams of

16

an electron that travels in a non-simply connected ﬁeld free region [33]. The

phase diﬀerence is manifested by the interference pattern of the sub-beams

(see ﬁg. 2). Hereafter, an electron of the beam is called “the traveling

electron”. The authors of [33] claim that there are two kinds of realization of

this idea. In the electric AB eﬀect, the region R contains a time-dependent

electric ﬁeld whereas in the magnetic AB eﬀect the region R contains a

magnetic ﬁeld.

The AB eﬀects certainly belong to quantum mechanics, because the sub-

beams move in a ﬁeld free region. Hence, no force is exerted on the traveling

electron and its inertial motion is not aﬀected by the ﬁeld at R. How-

ever, quantum mechanical equations of motion depend on the 4-potential

Aµ. Hence, a quantum mechanical eﬀect may take place. The eﬀect emerges

from the diﬀerent phase associated with the sub-beams and is detected by

the interference pattern on the screen S. Hence, both the origin and the

detection of the eﬀects belong to the realm of quantum mechanics.

The original approach of the authors of [33] treat the phase as a single

particle property of the traveling electron. This approach certainly does not

hold in many cases. Indeed, the quantum mechanical system consists of the

traveling electron and of the charges associated with the ﬁeld at R. Let re and

rs denote the coordinates of the traveling electron and of the charges at the

source of the ﬁeld, respectively. Thus, since the traveling electron interacts

with the 4-potential Aµ associated with rs, one ﬁnds that the Hamiltonian

of the system takes the form

H = H(rs, re)

(19)

and the Schroedinger equation is

17

i¯h

Ψ(rs, re) = H(rs, re)Ψ(rs, re)

(20)

∂
∂t

Now, in the experiment, the beam of the traveling electron is split into two

sub-beams. Hence, the system’s wave function can be written as a sum of

two terms

Ψ(rs, re) = φ1(rs)ψ1(re) + φ2(rs)ψ2(re).

(21)

Here ψi(re) is the traveling electron’s wave function of the ith sub beam and

φi(rs) is the corresponding wave function of the source. Now, the traveling

electron interacts with the charge at rs and vice versa. For this reason φ2

may diﬀer from φ1. This analysis proves that the phase is a property of a

term and not of a single particle. It is shown below how this result can help

one to discern between correct and incorrect claims of [33].

Let us examine the magnetic AB eﬀect. Here the source of the magnetic

ﬁeld is a ring which is a single domain of a ferromagnetic material [34]. Thus,

the source of the magnetic ﬁeld is a quantum mechanical system. An analysis

of the interaction of a ferromagnetic atom with the ﬁeld of the traveling

electron indicates that this interaction cannot induce a quantum jump of an

atom’s state in the crystal [35,36]. Hence, in the case of the magnetic AB

eﬀect, the source can be treated as an inert object whose state does not vary

during the process.

the following form

On the basis of this conclusion, one may cast the wave function (21) into

Ψ(rs, re) = φ(rs)[ψ1(re) + ψ2(re)],

(22)

where φ(rs) = φ1(rs) = φ2(rs) denotes the inert state of the ferromagnetic

source. This outcome proves that, in the case of the magnetic AB eﬀect, φ(rs)

is factored out in (22) and the phase of each term of the wave function (21)

18

can be regarded as a single particle property. For this reason, the magnetic

AB’s prediction is correct theoretically and was detected in experiment [34].

It was proved recently [35,36] that if the magnetic source is replaced by

a classical device made of rotating charged material then the magnetic AB

eﬀect disappears. The reason for this result is that the contribution of the

state of the traveling electron to the phase diﬀerence is canceled by that of

the (non-inert) source.

The physics of the electric AB eﬀect diﬀers from that of the magnetic one.

Here the state of the source varies during the process. A close examination

of the process proves that it is analogous to the case of the classical magnet

mentioned above. Thus, the contributions of the traveling electron and that

of the source to the phase diﬀerence cancel each other and the eﬀect disap-

pears [37,38]. Moreover, if one adheres to the AB’s single particle approach

[33,39], then energy conservation is violated [37,38]. This outcome proves

that the prediction of the electric AB eﬀect is wrong.

The AB eﬀects have a general (or philosophical) aspect too. Indeed, in the

AB processes, the traveling electron moves in a nonsimply connected ﬁeld free

region. Thus, the single particle approach to the AB eﬀects leads to the claim

that topology is an inherent element of quantum mechanics [33]. However, it

can be proved that this claim of AB has no profound meaning (see a detailed

discussion in [36], Section V). This conclusion can also be established on the

basis of the linearity of electrodynamics. Thus, the interaction V is a sum of

2-body interactions

V (rs, re) = X
i

V (rsi, re),

(23)

where rsi denotes the coordinates of the ith ferromagnetic atom. Here no

ﬁeld free region exists because the magnetic ﬁeld of a single ferromagnetic

atom does not vanish at re and the magnetic ﬁeld associated with the motion

19

of the traveling electron does not vanish at rsi. This analysis proves that

the fundamental 2-body interaction is not ﬁeld free. Hence, the fundamental

2-body interaction (23) proves that the AB eﬀects make no basis for regard-

ing the topological structure of ﬁeld free regions as an inherent property of

quantum mechanics.

7. Diﬀraction Free Beams

The idea that diﬀraction free beams (called also propagation invariant

beams) exist has been published in the literature [40]. The spatial part of

such a beam is assumed to take the form (see [40], eq. (2))

φ = eiβzJ0(aρ)

(24)

where ρ denotes the radius in cylindrical coordinates, J0 is the zeroth order

Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind and a is a factor having the dimension [L−1].

Article [40] has inspired a lot of activity and it has been cited more than

400 times. Following [40], a family of diﬀraction free solutions of Maxwell

equations has been published [41].

Taking the diﬀraction free idea literally, one obviously realizes that it is

an error, because it is inconsistent with the uncertainty principle. Indeed,

the notion of a beam describes a set of physical objects moving in a speciﬁc

direction and the relevant cross section containing these objects is much

smaller than the beam’s length (see [40], p. 1499, near the bottom of the left

column).

The ratio between the length and the diameter of the beam indicates that

it may be evaluated at the wave zone. It is easy to realize that a Bessel beam

like (24) cannot exist [42]. Indeed, let us examine a circle C at the wave

20

zone having a diameter which equals that of the assumed beam (see ﬁg. 3).

At the source, the beam’s amplitude is a Bessel function, which means that

it changes sign alternately.

It follows that it interferes destructively at C.

Hence, since energy is conserved in the process, one concludes that a part of

the beam does not pass through C. This conclusion means that the beam is

not diﬀraction free. Moreover, a Bessel beam spreads faster than a uniform

beam because, at circle C, interference of the latter is constructive.

Using this result, one infers that the family of diﬀraction free solutions of

Maxwell equations [41] describe solutions of electromagnetic waves inside a

perfect cylindrical wave guide.

Moreover, most (if not all) experiments that follow [40] use a ϕ-invariant

setup and show a strong peak at the center. Now, the ϕ-invariant solutions

of of Maxwell equations [41] are derived from the following vector potential

A = −iJ1(ar)ei(bz−ωt)uϕ,

E = −∂A/∂t = ωJ1(ar)ei(bz−ωt)uϕ.

(25)

(26)

The ﬁelds are

and

B = curlA = −bJ1(ar)ei(bz−ωt)ur − iaJ0(ar)ei(bz−ωt)uz.

(27)

There is a dual solution where E → B, B → −E. Now, the Bessel function

J1(0) = 0, which means that at the beam’s center, energy current E × B/4π

of these solutions has a minimum. This prediction contradicts the data

and provides another proof of the claim that the experiments should not

be described by diﬀraction free beams. A more detailed discussion of these

21

topics can be found in [42].

8. Unexplained Quantum Chromodynamics Data

The discussion presented in the previous Sections contain theoretical ar-

guments showing contradictions pertaining to several parts of contemporary

physics. This approach is analogous to an analysis of errors in a mathemat-

ical theory. In addition to that, it is pointed out in the introduction that a

physical theory should satisfy a second kind of tests - a compatibility of its

predictions with experimental data. Now, QCD is investigated for more than

30 years. Hence, one expects that its main properties are already included

in textbooks. This Section contains a list of several experimental QCD data

that have no adequate explanation in textbooks.

A. The Higgs Mesons.

QCD assumes that quarks interact with particles called Higgs mesons.

In spite of a prolonged search, no evidence of these particles has been

detected (see [4], p. 32).

B. The Photon-Hadron Interaction

The data show that a hard photon (having energy greater than 1000MeV)

interacts with a proton in a form which is very similar to that of a neu-

tron [28]. Due to the diﬀerence between the electric charge of proton’s

constituents and those of a neutron, this similarity cannot be explained

as interactions of the photon with electric charge.

It turns out that

VMD (see Section 5) has been suggested in order to provide an ex-

planation for this eﬀect. Now, it is proved in [30] that VMD contains

22

serious theoretical errors. Moreover, in the PACS classiﬁcation it is re-

garded as just a model and in the xxx archive, VMD is relegated to the

phenomenological category. Hence, QCD has no theoretical explanation

for the interaction of a hard photon with hadrons.

C. Properties of Anti-Quarks in Hadrons

The structure functions of proton constituents show that the width of

x values of antiquarks is much smaller than that of quarks (see [43], p.

281). (x is a dimensionless Lorentz scalar used in the analysis.) Hence-

forth, quarks and anti-quarks are denoted by q and ¯q, respectively. The

width values indicate that, in the nucleon, the uncertainty of momen-

tum of ¯q is smaller than the corresponding value of q (see [43], pp. 270,

271). Therefore, due to the uncertainty principle, one concludes that

in a nucleon, ¯q occupies a volume which is larger than that of q. This

property of nucleons lacks an adequate explanation.

In the literature, the ¯q region is called ”the q − ¯q sea” (see [43] p.

281). This terminology does not aim to be a theoretical explanation

and cannot be regarded as such. Indeed, a π meson is a bound state of

q ¯q, both of which came from the Dirac sea of negative energy states.

Now, in a π meson, the ¯q is attracted just by one q. In spite of that, this

force is strong enough for binding the system in a volume which is even

smaller than the nucleon’s volume (see [4], pp. 499, 854). Hence, it is

not clear why 4 quarks (the 3 valence quarks and the ¯q’s companion)

cannot do that. It is concluded that QCD has no explanation for the

rather large volume of ¯q in nucleons.

D. The Lack of Strongly Bound States of qqqq ¯q (pentaquarks)

Consider the qqqq ¯q system (a nucleon-meson system called pentaquark).

23

The following properties of hadrons is relevant to an evaluation of this

object. Data of strongly interacting systems show that gaps between

energy states are measured by hundreds of MeV. On the other hand,

the binding energy of a nucleon in a typical nucleus is about 8 MeV.

These values can be used for making a clear distinction between true

strong interactions and the nuclear force, which is regarded as a residual

force.

Another property of hadrons can be learnt from the data. The mass

of a π meson is about 140MeV whereas the mass of a nucleon is about

940MeV. Therefore, one concludes that if QCD holds then the q ¯q bind-

ing energy is much larger then that of a qq pair (in a nucleon there are

3 such pairs of interactions).

Let us turn to the case of pentaquarks and examine a particle called Θ+

having a mass of 1540MeV. Evidence of this object has been found in

several experiments (see e.g. [4], p. 916). This object can be regarded

as a union of a neutron and a K + meson. The sum of the masses of

these particles is about 1435MeV. Therefore, the Θ+ is an unbound

state of the nK + system. On the other hand, a strongly bound state of

nK + should have a mass which is smaller than 1400MeV. Hence, QCD

still does not provide an explanation for the absence of strongly bound

states of pentaquarks. Moreover, it does not explain why the deuteron

(a 6 quarks system) is a bound state whereas the nK + (which contain

an antiquark) has no bound state.

E. The Uniform Density of Nuclear Matter

Consider nuclei that contain more than a very small number of nucle-

ons. The data show that for these nuclei, the nucleon density is (very

24

nearly) the same. QCD does not provide an explanation for these data.

Another aspect of this issue is that QCD does not provide an explana-

tion for the striking similarity between the form of the van-der-Waals

force and that of the nuclear force.

F. The EMC Eﬀect

An examination of the mean volume occupied by quarks in nuclei shows

that it increases with the increase of the number of nucleons of the nu-

cleus [44,45]. This eﬀect is analogous to the screening eﬀect of electrons

in molecules. QCD has not predicted this eﬀect and provides no expla-

nation for it.

In principle, one established experimental result which is inconsistent

with a theory, casts doubt on the theory’s validity. In this Section one can

ﬁnd several examples of experimental data which are not explained by QCD.

9. Concluding Remarks

Two diﬀerent aspects of the issues presented above are discussed in this

Section:

implications of speciﬁc problems presented above and the general

treatment of theoretical errors by the community. These aspects are treated

below in this order.

The issues discussed above can be put in two diﬀerent categories: issues

having implications on other parts of theoretical physics and stand alone

topics. It turns out that problems of the Dirac monopole theory (see Section

2), those of the VMD attempt to provide an explanation for the hard photon

- nucleon interaction (see Section 5) and the experimental inconsistencies

25

of QCD described in Section 8 are related.

Indeed, instead of the Dirac

monopole theory, one can construct a regular monopole theory [13,14]. It

can be shown that this monopole theory can explain experimental results

which are unexplained by QCD [11]. Thus, the relations between the topics

discussed in Sections 2,5 and 8 are probably the most signiﬁcant part of this

work.

It is clear that there is a connection between the problems of the KG

equation and those of the Yukawa theory, because these theories examine

the same kind of particle. The KG equation is supposed to be the funda-

mental equation of motion of a spin-0 particle whereas the Yukawa theory

examines this particle as an object that carries interaction between two spin-

1/2 particles. Hence, the diﬃculties of these theories, which are presented in

Sections 3 and 4, respectively, have an underlying basis.

On the other hand, the AB eﬀect and the Diﬀraction-Free idea can be

regarded as stand alone issues. Thus, the electric AB eﬀect does not exist

and the magnetic eﬀect has no inherent dependence on nonsimply connected

ﬁeld free regions of space. Hence, one just concludes that the AB eﬀects do

not prove that quantum mechanics has an inherent topological structure.

The Diﬀraction-Free idea is clearly inconsistent with the uncertainty prin-

ciple. Examining this idea literally, one concludes that it is just wrong.

Hence, fundamental physical theories are not aﬀected by its removal.

The general approach of a typical Journal of Physics to a free critical

debate of existing physical theories is very far from being satisfactory. Indeed,

a publication of Articles presenting pros and cons concerning existing physical

theories practically does not exist in many Journals. One may wonder why

the modern community of physicists has adopted such a practice. After all,

history of scientiﬁc theories teaches us that not all theories survive in the long

26

run. Another aspect of this matter is that the status of a truly correct theory

can only be improved if it is tested critically every once in a while. Hence,

people who genuinely believe in a speciﬁc physical theory should support

such a debate.

As a matter of fact, every topic presented in Sections 2-8 above cries for

a clarifying debate. A suppression of such a debate certainly does not make

a positive contribution to the progress of science. Referring to this issue, it

is interesting to cite S. D. Drell’s ﬁnal speech as a president of the American

Physical Society (APS). In his description of referees of APS’s Journals, he

uses the following quotation: “We have met the enemy and he is us” (see

[46], p.61 second column). In my personal experience, I have seen reports of

many excellent referees. However, there are too many referees belonging to a

diﬀerent category. Considering them, I must say that I cannot deny Drell’s

description.

27

References:

1965).

[1] F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles, (Addison-wesley, Reading mass,

[2] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Royal Soc. A133, 60 (1931).

[3] P. A. M. Dirac, Phys. Rev., 74, 817 (1948).

[4] S. Eidelman et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Lett. B592, 1 (2004).

[5] P. A. M. Dirac, A letter to A. Salam, published in Monopoles in Quan-

tum Field Theory. Ed. N. S. Craigie, P. Goddard and W. Nahm (World

Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1982).

amon, Oxford, 1975).

[6] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Perg-

[7] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley, New York, 1975).

[8] D. Zwanziger, Phys. Rev., B137, 647 (1965).

[9] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev., B138, 988 (1965).

[10]] C. R. Hagen, Phys. Rev., B140, 804 (1965).

[11] E. Comay, published in Has the Last Word Been Said on Classical Elec-

trodynamics? Editors: A Chubykalo, V Onoochin, A Espinoza, and R

Smirnov-Rueda (Rinton Press, Paramus, NJ, 2004). (The Article’s title

is ”A Regular Theory of Magnetic Monopoles and Its Implications”.)

[12] P. Goddard and D. I. Olive, Rep. Prog. Phys., 41, 1357 (1978).

[13] E. Comay, Nuovo Cimento, 80B, 159 (1984).

[14] E. Comay, Nuovo Cimento, 110B, 1347 (1995).

28

[15] E. Comay, Lett. Nuovo Cimento 43, 150 (1985).

[16] H. Feshbach and F. Villars, Rev. Mod. Phys. 30 24-45 (1958).

[17] W. Pauli and V. Weisskopf, Helv. Phys. Acta, 7, 709 (1934).

[18] An English translation of [17] can be found in A. I. Miller Early Quan-

tum Electrodynamics (University Press, Cambridge, 1994). pp. 188-

205.

[19] P. A. M. Dirac, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory Ed. A.

R. Marlow (Academic, New York, 1978). (See pp. 3,4).

[20] Weinberg S 1995 The Quantum Theory of Fields (Cambridge: Univer-

sity Press). Vol. 1.

[21] E. Comay, Apeiron 12, no. 1, 27 (2005).

[22] E. Comay, Apeiron, 11, No. 3, 1 (2004).

[23] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics (Pergamon,

London, 1959). P. 6.

[24] M. E. Peshkin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field

Theory (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995).

[25] G. Sterman An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (University

[26] J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell Relativistic Quantum Mechanics (Mc-

[27] S. S. M. Wong, Introductory Nuclear Physics (Wiley, New York, 1998).

Press, Cambridge, 1993).

Graw, New York, 1964).

2nd edition.

29

[28] T. H. Bauer, R. D. Spital, D. R. Yennie and F. M. Pipkin, Rev. Mod.

Phys. 50, 261 (1978).

[29] H. Frauenfelder and E. M. Henley, Subatomic Physics, (Prentice Hall,

Englewood Cliﬀs, 1991). pp. 296-304.

[30] E. Comay, Apeiron 10, no. 2, 87 (2003).

[31] E. P. Wigner, Annals of Math., 40, 149 (1939).

[32] S. S. Schweber, An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field Theory,

Harper & Row, New York, 1964. pp. 44-53.

[33] Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm Phys. Rev. 115 485 (1959).

[34] A. Tonomura et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 792 (1986).

[35] E. Comay, Phys. Lett A250, 12 (1998).

[36] E. Comay, Phys. Rev. A62, 042102-1 (2000).

[37] E. Comay, Phys. Lett A120 196 (1987).

[38] E. Comay, Phys. Lett A125 403 (1987).

[39] Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm Phys. Rev. 123 1511 (1961).

[40] J. Durnin, J. J. Miceli, Jr. and J. H. Eberly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58,

1499 (1987).

Arkin, p. 273.

[41] Z. Bouchal and M. Olivik, J. Mod. Opt. 42, 1555 (1995).

[42] E. Comay, Focus on Lasers and Electro-Optics Research Ed: W. T.

[43] D. H. Perkins, Introduction to High Energy Physics (Addison-Wesley,

Menlo Park, CA, 1987).

30

[44] J. J. Aubert et al. (EMC), Phys. Lett. 123B, 275 (1983).

[45] A. Bodek et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1431 (1983).

[46] S. D. Drell, Physics Today, 40, 56 (August 1987).

31

Two rays of light are emitted from sources S1 and S2 which are located

at x = ±1, respectively. The rays intersect at point O which is embedded

in the (x, y) plane. (This ﬁgure is published in [29] and is used here with

A beam consists of electrons that travel from left to right . They are split

into two sub-beams at point A. The sub-beams travel in a ﬁeld free region

and interfere on the screen S. The ﬁeld is nonzero in a region R denoted by

Figure Captions

Figure 1:

permission.)

Fig. 2:

the black circle.

Fig. 3:

A beam of electromagnetic wave is emitted from a circular source S. The

beam’s intensity is calculated at a circle C whose radius is the same as that

of the source. (This ﬁgure was published in [41]).

32

OOO

SS1111

SS2222

S

A.(cid:0)(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)

R

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

C

source

