5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Philosophical Principle of Physical World: Objectivity

Kim, Seong Dong∗
Koryo International Patent & Law Oﬃce
Yeoksam–dong 827-25, Kangnam-gu, Seoul, Korea
(Dated: January 21, 2014)

The current physics, which have been founded by Newton, explains modes of phenomena success-
fully by using abstract concepts, but not a reason of phenomena yet. This paper aims to explain
the reason of phenomena on the basis of objectivity. For this explanation, the subjects of cognition
and physical objects that are believed to exist objectively beyond the cognition are discussed from
a philosophical point of view, and then a method for describing phenomena is discussed on con-
dition of the objectivity. From such discussions based on objectivity, we can come to conclusions
that are compatible with the known mathematical structure of physics and explain the reason of
phenomena quantitatively. Subsequently, the electromagnetic and quantum mechanical issues are
examined further. In particular, the Lorentz force and Maxwell equations are derived on the basis
of the objectivity and the conservation law of momentum.

PACS numbers: 01.55.+b, 01.70.+w, 02.30.Em, 03.30.+p, 03.50.-z, 03.50.De, 04.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Ren´e Descartes requested a system of science that ex-
plains both mode and reason of phenomenon (i.e., how
and why)[1], but it seems that he failed in explaining
correctly either of them. Subsequently, Sir Isaac New-
ton made a coup in explaining the mode of phenomena,
but even the Newtonian mechanics, which is the ma-
trix of current physics, failed in explaining the reason
of phenomena. As known in Newton’s own endeavor[2],
the correct understanding of the reason of phenomena is
indispensable for completing a natural philosophy with
consistency. Nevertheless, a question about the reason
of phenomena has been forgotten under the admirable
success of Newtonian mechanics that has been revealed
in description and prediction of phenomena.

This success of Newtonian physics results from adopt-
ing a quantitative description of phenomena, which can
be improved more and more by comparing with experi-
mental results. Here, the quantitative description in the-
ories of physics substantially corresponds to mathemat-
ical abstraction, which is the major feature of modern
physics. Nonetheless, if an essence of mathematical ab-
straction cannot be understood concretely, this abstrac-
tion leads us to understand a phenomenon as just the
phenomenon. In other words, the mathematical abstrac-
tion is merely a quibble for evading the essence of phe-
nomenon and hinders us from understanding the reason
of phenomenon. In this sense, abstract concepts need to
be re-interpreted using substantial concepts in order that
we may have the natural philosophy with consistency.

Meanwhile, some scientiﬁc philosophers have said that
the reason of phenomenon cannot be explained[3][4]. Of
course, if we have an interest in only describing an em-
pirical phenomenon by using abstract concepts, it seems

∗kimseongdong@paran.com

that their despair is unavoidable. But, I believe that their
despair can be overcome. As will be shown later in this
paper, careful considerations to an entity and a process
of cognizing it enable us to understand the reason of phe-
nomenon in a substantial level. These considerations will
start from statements on the entity that is a metaphysical
subject. Nevertheless, it seems that our starting state-
ments, which are given in a postulate form, can be highly
justiﬁed in several philosophical viewpoints and are com-
patible with the known results of current physics. In ad-
dition to this point, given the successful results that will
be presented in this paper, I think that questions related
to phenomena, which have been the subject of science up
to now, can be reduced to metaphysical questions as the
subject of philosophy.

To summarize the following contents, in Sec.II, I will
introduce some postulates to provide that an object of
physical inquiry (i.e., the matter and space), which will
be called an ex-entity, has transcendental, objective,
independent, conservative and singular characteristics.
Here, it is worth noting that the objective characteristic
of ex-entity is the main basis of all arguments that will
be made in this paper. Thereafter, I will introduce addi-
tional postulates that conﬁne possible existential-modes
of the ex-entity; these postulates require that we describe
the magnitude, position and change of ex-entity. In se-
quential consideration to the process of cognition, it will
be explained that the physical world can be recognized by
only the perception of dissimilarity. Next, we will discuss
how to describe the magnitude, position and change of
ex-entity. In this discussion, we will come to conclusions
that the concept of density is required for describing the
magnitude of ex-entity and the density can be written by
a function of position and velocity.

In Sec.III.A, the mode, reason and magnitude of
change will be discussed on the basis of the objectivity
of ex-entity. In Sec.III.B, we will discuss methods of de-
scribing the magnitude, position and change of ex-entity
in order to establish a precondition for describing objec-

tively the physical world. In Sec.III.C, we will obtain the
law of motion, which prescribes a relation between the
motion of object and the external density of ex-entity,
on the basis of the objectivity and conservativeness of
ex-entity. Next, we will compare quantities of ex-entity
that are contained in the stationary cube and the moving
cube, and from this comparison, we will come to a conclu-
sion that Lorentz factor, which is the keyword of special
relativity, represents a change of density caused by the
movement of object. In Sec.III.D, we will discuss the ori-
gin of relativity, which appears to be incompatible with
the objectivity, on the basis of the objectivity of ex-entity.
From this discussion, we will see that the theory of rela-
tivity can be explained from the objectivity of ex-entity
and the afore-mentioned objective description; that is,
we will verify that our conclusions related to the length
contraction, the time dilation and the Lorentz transfor-
mation coincide with those of the theory of relativity. In
Sec.III.E, the gravitational ﬁeld will be considered in con-
nection with the law of motion obtained in Sec.III.C.,
and next, we will discuss how to express mathematically
the density distribution of ex-entity, which generates the
gravitational ﬁeld. Especially, the fact that the Lorentz
factor represents the density of ex-entity will be impor-
tantly used in this discussion. In this section, the afore-
mentioned reason of phenomenon will be answered quan-
titatively, and some issues related to the general theory
of relativity will be examined further.

The aim of Sec.III.F is to expand the idea suggested
in this paper. For this, we will discuss the electromag-
netic and quantum mechanical issues; e.g., a stability of
matter, a force and ﬁeld, a relationship between elec-
tric charge, mass and quantity of ex-entity, a spin, a
size of particle, the Lorentz force and the Maxwell equa-
tions. But, to tell the truth, I fail to develop com-

2

pletely and suﬃciently my arguments related to these
issues, because these issues are deeply connected with dif-
ﬁcult problems that have not solved in even the present
physics. For all that, I think that these issues merit
reader’s sober reﬂection– particularly, the Lorentz force
and Maxwell equations will be plausibly derived from re-
sults obtained on the basis of the objectivity and new ac-
ceptable assumptions such as a conservation of momen-
tum, in Sec.III.F.6.

II. PHILOSOPHICAL CONSIDERATION

A. Entity

Let us deﬁne ’entity’ as anything that can be said to
exist and ’cognition system’ as every mental process per-
formed in the human head. Then, the entity can be
classiﬁed into ’ex-entity’ and ’in-entity’ depending on
whether it exists inside or outside the cognition system.
1. Ex-entity

According to this classiﬁcation, the ex-entity corre-
sponds to the thing-in-itself mentioned by Kant and is
also the subject of physical science under the convic-
tion of its objectivity. However, since the ex-entity has
a transcendental characteristic as will be mentioned in
the following postulate 1, it is the source of consumptive
arguments in that it can be interpreted in various ways
from philosophical viewpoints. In order to avert the con-
sumptive argument and make the starting premises of
this paper clear, I will introduce the following postulates
concerning the ex-entity.

Postulate 1 : Ex-entity is a transcendental basis that makes cognition possible.
Postulate 2 : Ex-entity exists objectively.
Postulate 3 : Ex-entity never disappears.
Postulate 4 : Ex-entity is of only one kind.
Postulate 5 : Ex-entity exists spatially.
Postulate 6 : Ex-entity changes.

Postulate 1 provides the transcendental characteristic
of ex-entity and represents a relationship between the
ex-entity and the cognition through this providing. Pos-
tulate 2 represents that the ex-entity is an objective real
existence that is independent of the cognition system;
therefore, we can say that the ex-entity has objectivity
and independence. Postulates 3 and 4 provide the con-
servative and singular characteristics of ex-entity that are

important for the following physical consideration12. In
conclusion, from the postulates 1 to 4, the ex-entity has
the transcendental, objective, independent, conservative

1 The postulates 3 and 4 seem to be justiﬁed from the postulates
1 and 2, but I will not discuss this subject in this paper to avoid
consumptive arguments.

2 Given that the ex-entity has objectivity by postulate 2, the pos-
tulate 3 is distinguished from conservative characteristic of ab-
stract concepts such as the conservation of energy.

and singular characteristics. Postulates 5 and 6 are state-
ments on possible existential modes of ex-entity, as will
be discussed in detail later.

ity, a positional dissimilarity and a change, respectively,
for convenience.

3

2.

In-entity

The in-entity is the entity that exists within the cogni-
tion system, constitutes the cognition system, and serves
for cognitive processes.
If we exclude egregious mysti-
cism, it is obvious that the world outside the cognition
system (i.e., the world of ex-entity or the physical world)
can be perceived by means of only sensory perceptions
on dissimilarities of ex-entity. (Hereinafter, we will re-
fer to the ’sensory perceptions’ and the ’dissimilarities of
ex-entity’ as ”perceptions” and ”dissimilarities”, respec-
tively, for brevity’s sake.) In other words, if there is no
perceivable dissimilarity, the cognition system is isolated
from the external world (i.e., the physical world). For
this reason, it can be concluded that every cognitive pro-
cess starts from the perception of dissimilarity, and most
of abstract concepts, which do not represent directly the
dissimilarity of ex-entity, are obtained by processing the
perceived dissimilarity within the cognition system. For
example, energy is not measured directly by a sense organ
or measuring equipment; it is just a property of physical
system that is mentioned as something maintained con-
stantly when the perceived dissimilarities are processed
in knowledge system of physics.

In the meantime, since the concept of energy is deﬁned
mathematically, it is clear in the mathematical structure
of physics at least. But, the concept of energy is just
a vague quibble in the substantial aspect; that is, it is
unclear what is constant. Of course, such abstract con-
cepts are manifestly useful to explain a manner of phe-
nomena (i.e., how ). Nevertheless, they are substantially
useless to study a reason of phenomena (i.e., why), for
their vagueness. Here, abstraction is a process of general-
izing phenomenal contents that are hard to be analyzed
using concrete concepts. In this sense, in order to over-
come the vagueness of abstract concepts, it is necessary
to discuss a method for representing the dissimilarity of
ex-entity, which corresponds to the most concrete and
unartiﬁcial content. Only a description of phenomena
based on the dissimilarity enables us to analyze substan-
tially the quibbled concepts. For example, a substantial
analysis of energy will be seen in Sec.III.E.3.

B. Dissimilarity

From the postulates 5 and 6, the dissimilarity of ex-
entity can be classiﬁed into three independent compo-
nents, namely, ’magnitude’, ’position’ and ’change’.
If
there is no evidence that another existential mode of ex-
entity is possible, only such classiﬁcation seems to be
valid. Hereinafter, dissimilarities in magnitude, position
and change will be referred to as an essential dissimilar-

1. Minimum Magnitude for Distinction

Let us deﬁne ’distinction’ as a cognitive process of per-
ceiving the fact that there is dissimilarity, and let us de-
ﬁne a ’minimum magnitude for distinction’ as a minimum
magnitude that makes the distinction possible. Then, it
is obvious that the minimum magnitude for distinction
never vanishes.

Of course, the minimum magnitude for distinction may
decrease by improving the sensitivity of a measuring in-
strument. Nevertheless, it cannot be zero in that only the
perception of dissimilarity makes it possible to cognize the
external world (i.e., because all cognitive processes start
from the perception of dissimilarity). For this reason, the
minimum magnitude for distinction denotes an essential
limitation of cognition, which can be applied to all the
three independent components of dissimilarity.

2. Magnitude

The existence of an object can be recognized by per-
ceiving its essential dissimilarity. Speciﬁcally, if there is
no perceivable essential dissimilarity between an object
and its vicinity, the existence of object cannot be rec-
ognized. In addition, if no object can be recognized by
perceiving its essential dissimilarity, either one of its po-
sitional dissimilarity and change cannot be perceived. It
is necessary to remember this point to understand a con-
cept of complementarity, which will be discussed later.

A degree of essential dissimilarity is typically described
using a physical concept of quantity. The concept of
quantity can be understood as a combination of the ex-
entity for substance and the number for form. Also, the
concept of quantity seems to be most intuitive and es-
sential because it correlates directly the ’ex-entity’ out-
side the cognition system with the concept of ’be’, which
is the most fundamental concept of the cognition sys-
tem. Nevertheless, the concept of quantity has arbitrari-
ness because it does not have a criterion for comparison;
for example, a comparison of quantities contained in two
boxes having diﬀerent volumes is generally meaningless
because of the volume diﬀerence. This arbitrariness in
the concept of quantity can be overcome by using the con-
cept of density that is deﬁned as a quantity of ex-entity
contained in unit volume. (Unless there is any room for
confusion, the ’density of ex-entity’ and the ’quantity of
ex-entity’ will now be referred to as ’density’ and ’quan-
tity’, respectively, for convenience.)

In the meantime, given the relation of mass and ac-
celeration in the Newtonian mechanics, the quantity or
density of ex-entity cannot be directly determined by per-
ceiving the essential dissimilarity of ex-entity. The den-
sity can be determined only through calculation using

information about a positional dissimilarity and change.
This density determination process will be discussed in
detail later.

3. Position

By perceiving a positional dissimilarity, we can recog-
nize that one object is not identical with the other. That
is, unless a positional dissimilarity between two diﬀer-
ent objects can be perceived, we cannot know that the
objects are diﬀerent from each other.

As is well known, a position and a degree of positional
dissimilarity can be described by using the spatial coordi-
nates and spatial length, respectively. Here, contrary to
the density, the spatial length can be determined through
an observation. For example, in the case of two meter-
sticks, one’s length can be directly compared with the
other’s length by observing scales graduated on them,
and this comparison makes it possible to determine the
spatial length. Of course, quantities and densities of
meter-sticks are determined by means of not an obser-
vation but a calculation process based on knowledge of
physics, e.g., the Newton’s second law.

In the meantime, as mentioned in the previous section,
if there was no object whose existence can be recognized,
it would be impossible for us to perceive a positional dis-
similarity. In this sense, the perception of essential dis-
similarity is a precondition for perception of positional
dissimilarity. On the contrary, if essential dissimilarities
of objects are described without specifying their posi-
tions, it is obscure which one of two objects is described.
For this reason, the essential and positional dissimilari-
ties are complementary to each other.

Given this complementarity between the essential and
positional dissimilarities, the magnitude of the essential
dissimilarity of ex-entity should always be described in
connection with the position of ex-entity, for the clarity
of representation. Accordingly, we will introduce a den-
sity distribution function, ρ = ρ(r), which expresses the
density of ex-entity as a function of position and is cal-
culated from the above-mentioned density determination
process.

C. Matter and Space

According to the conventional physical viewpoint, it
is understood that matter is intrinsically of a diﬀerent
kind from space, and the matter is subdivided into sev-
eral fundamental particles according to physical proper-
ties such as mass, electric charge and spin. Furthermore,
according to this viewpoint, the space is a vacuum state,
and the matter is an existing object that is wandering in
the space: it is generally taken for granted that there is
a substantial boundary surface between the matter and
the space to separate being and nothing.

4

But, from the singleness of postulate 4, the entity out-
side the cognition system (i.e., ex-entity) is of only one
kind. Thus, we can say that the matter and space, which
are deﬁnitely present outside the cognition system, are
not intrinsically of diﬀerent kinds from each other. Judg-
ing from the non-vanishment of minimum magnitude for
distinction and the signiﬁcance of perception of essential
dissimilarity explained in Sec.III.B, it can be explained
that diﬀerentiation of the matter from the space is based
on not the kind of ex-entity but the magnitude of density
of ex-entity. That is, the matter corresponds to a local
region of ex-entity where existence can be recognized by
perceiving its essential dissimilarity, and the space cor-
responds to the other region of ex-entity where existence
cannot be recognized - where density is less than the
minimum magnitude for distinction in the essential dis-
similarity.

From this analysis, the space is a non-empty portion
of ex-entity. Consequently, the length, which was intro-
duced to express the degree of positional dissimilarity,
can be understood as a physical magnitude that repre-
sents the quantity of ex-entity corresponding to the posi-
tional dissimilarity: the length can be described in terms
of the quantity of ex-entity. Specially, given that the
quantity of ex-entity has essential objectivity, which is
the origin of physical objectivity, the length must be de-
scribed in terms of the quantity of ex-entity for its objec-
tive description. (The essential objectivity of the quan-
tity of ex-entity will be discussed in connection with rel-
ativity in detail later.)

Although it was concluded that the space is not empty,
this conclusion should be distinguished from any attempt
for resurrecting the ether that was introduced to explain
the propagation of light. According to the ether hypothe-
ses, the ether was interpreted as a kind of matter that is
diﬀerent from conventional matters, such as apples and
electrons, and has transparent and undetectable proper-
ties. Contrary to this, in our above conclusion, the mat-
ter and space are regarded as entity of the same kind. In
this sense, our conclusion of space is deﬁnitely diﬀerent
from the ether hypothesis. As is well known, the ether
hypothesis in which the ether is regarded as another mat-
ter is incompatible with the Michelson-Moley experiment
and the special relativity, but as we shall see later, our
conclusion of matter and space leads to results that are
compatible with them. Furthermore, our conclusion will
provide us with profound knowledge that has not been
revealed in the special theory of relativity.

Similarly, the matter cannot be classiﬁed on the ba-
sis of the kind of ex-entity because of its singular char-
acteristic; that is, the matter is also of only one kind.
In addition, given the transcendental and independent
characteristics of ex-entity, it can be concluded that the
physical properties for classifying the matter do not ex-
ist objectively outside the cognition system. Rather, such
physical properties for classifying the matter are merely
abstract concepts that express phenomenal regularities
detected by making observations of the physical world.

This is because the ex-entity has only the a priori charac-
teristics written in the above postulates, but the regulari-
ties are one of a posteriori characteristics that are learned
only by experiences on ex-entity. For this reason, it can
be concluded that all the a posteriori properties including
the regularities originate from the a priori characteristics
of ex-entity. Particularly, the regularities result from ob-
jectivity of ex-entity, as will be argued later.

III. PHYSICAL CONSIDERATION

The laws of physics are universal statements represent-
ing regularities that can be learned from observations of
physical phenomena, and most of them are generally ex-
pressed by mathematical equations, each of which pre-
scribes a quantitative relation between its left and right
sides. In this aspect, physical regularity means quantita-
tive regularity that is found in a relation between physi-
cal quantities. As we have discussed, the regularity itself
should be interpreted as the result of a priori character-
istics (esp., objectivity) of ex-entity. Furthermore, in the
following section III.A, we will discuss the reason that
the physical regularity can be expressed in a quantita-
tive form.

A. Change

Considering the postulate 1, knowledge of the world
outside the cognition system can be obtained from the
experience of ex-entity. Here, given the postulates 2 and
6, the change of ex-entity is an objective actuality and
enables us to experience the outer world. In the follow-
ing subsections, we will discuss the implications of the
aforementioned postulates in the mode, reason and mag-
nitude of change. Here, the following conclusions will be
obtained from explanations on the basis of the dissimilar-
ity of ex-entity that can be solely objectiﬁed; hence, they
are statements having cognition-independence. There-
fore, the following conclusions should be distinguished
from both the phenomenal explanation of Descartes3 and
the personiﬁed and teleological explanation such as the
least action principle4.

1. Mode of Change

5

A mode of change of ex-entity is restricted by the pos-
tulates 3 and 4-conservative and singular characteristics.
That is, since the ex-entity never disappears and is of
only one kind, it is hard to escape a conclusion that the
change of ex-entity is only the change of density distribu-
tion. Especially, if we exclude mysterious answers, this
conclusion is inevitable. In this respect, we can conclude
that all phenomenal concepts, such as movement of
particle, wave and collision, are derived from processing
of the perceived change of density distribution: they are
just derivative concepts. In conclusion,

[ Mode of Change ]
- The change of ex-entity
can be only achieved by the change of density distri-
bution.

In this case, the change of ex-entity can be described
in two ways - a position-based description and a density-
based description; the former is the way of representing
a change of density at a ﬁxed position, and the latter
is the way of representing a change of position having a
ﬁxed density. By comparison with the descriptive ways
of wave, the position-based description has aﬃnity with
a method of expressing a change of amplitude of wave
at a ﬁxed position, and the density-based description has
aﬃnity with a method of expressing a change of posi-
tion having ﬁxed amplitude. Of course, in both the de-
scriptions, time is inevitably used as a parameter to de-
scribe the change. (We will discuss the essence of time
in Sec.III.B.3-4.)

Notwithstanding, contrary to the vibration of string,
the density of ex-entity cannot be measured directly as
discussed above. Hence, a position-based description
cannot be directly used to describe the change of den-
sity distribution. In contrast to this, since we can ﬁnd
an object with a ﬁxed density in a restricted scope5, the
density-based description can be used to describe the
change of object: that is, we can describe eﬀectively the
movement of object in the way of density-based descrip-
tion. For this reason, the density-based description will
be mainly adopted for the following discussions related to
the description of change, and we will use some terms for
the density-based description, such as matter, movement,
velocity and acceleration, if required.

However, it is worth noting that the density-based de-
scription can be performed only on a perceivable object

3 Descartes wanted to explain the movement of matter on the basis
of phenomena such as collision and vortex. Although such phe-
nomenal concepts have empirical intuitiveness, they should be
analyzed, in a substantial level, based on the dissimilarity of ex-
entity because phenomena are substantially only the derivative
results of dissimilarities of ex-entity as mentioned above.

4 The least action principle demands that a physical object should
search for a course in which the abstract quantity of action is
minimized. But, it is obvious that the ex-entity cannot do such
physical thought.

5 For example, if a change in essential dissimilarity cannot be de-
tected from a perceivable object such as matter and light, the
density of object can be interpreted as being constant at least
within the limit of minimum magnitude for distinction. Nev-
ertheless, the above-mentioned perceivability of object enables
us to measure the positional change (i.e., movement) of object.
The density-based description is therefore possible within this
restriction.

(e.g., matter and light):
it cannot provide us with any
information on regions outside the perceivable object. As
a result, the density-based description can be used to de-
scribe the motion of object but not to obtain the density
distribution of the entire space. In order to obtain the
density distribution of space, we need to establish a quan-
titative relation between the density distribution and the
movement of object, as will be concretely discussed later.

2. Reason of Change

If we want to make physics objective, it is obvious that
the reason of change should be examined in connection
with the ex-entity and its three dissimilarities whose
objectivity can be assured. Also, explanations based on
mysticism must be excluded in this examination. These
requirements related to the reason of change lead to the
conclusion that the dissimilarity of ex-entity causes a
new change (i.e., acceleration) of ex-entity. To put it
more concretely, it seems reasonable to conclude that the
uniform motion of the universe with a uniform density
distribution can make no new change in the moving state
of an object that is co-moving with the universe. We can
therefore conclude that the non-uniform distribution of
ex-entity is the unique and general state of dissimilarities
of ex-entity that can change the moving state of the
object. Accordingly, the reason of acceleration can be
concretely expressed as follows:

[ Reason of Acceleration ]
- A change in the
moving state of an object results from non-uniformity
of density distribution at a position where the object
is located.

This conclusion explains the reason of phenomena re-
quested by Descartes. In particular, since only the ex-
entity and its dissimilarities can be objectiﬁed as men-
tioned repeatedly above, only the above conclusion is an
explanation having cognition-independence. Moreover,
the above conclusion is the most fundamental explana-
tion on the origins of all physical changes in that it is the
universal statement without any conﬁnement; it implies
that the physical regularity (i.e., the law of physics) is
singular in that the above conclusion restricts the reason
of change to only one.

Besides, according to the above conclusion, the con-
cept of action-at-a-distance must be excluded from phys-
ical considerations. In spite of this exclusion of action-
at-a-distance, in order to explain interactions between
distant objects, it is necessary to introduce the concept
of ﬁeld, as is well known. But, the ﬁeld should be also
related to the density distribution on the same ground.
For example, in the case of a gravitational force between
the earth and the sun, it can be understood that one
object (e.g., the sun) is density distribution itself that
can be expressed by a certain density distribution func-
tion as mentioned above, and the other object (e.g., the

6

earth) is aﬀected by the density distribution of the sun.
This is similar to the concept of scalar potential except
for the ontological reality of density; however, it is obvi-
ous that the density distribution function is not identical
with the gravitational ﬁeld in that the density distribu-
tion function is a scalar ﬁeld but the acceleration is a
vector quantity. A relation between the ﬁeld and the
density distribution function will be minutely discussed
later. Additionally, given the sun’s strong stability, it is
highly probable that the density distribution function of
the sun has a particular mathematical structure to main-
tain the sun as it is. This subject will be also discussed
later.

In addition to the new change of moving state (i.e.,
the accelerative motion), the matter may move with a
constant velocity (i.e., uniform motion). From the above
conclusion, we can see that if the cause of change disap-
pears (i.e., if a density distribution become uniform), the
moving state of an object is not changed. In fact, this
is identical with Newton’s ﬁrst/second laws. Nonethe-
less, both the above conclusion and the Newton’s laws
are explaining a condition for uniform motion, but not
the essence of motion6; that is, we don’t know yet why
movement occurs. We will make an answer to the essence
of motion on the basis of density and its conservativeness.

3. Magnitude of Change

If we accept the afore-mentioned reason of acceler-
ation,
it is obvious that the resultant acceleration of
object is only dependent on the magnitude of density
distribution in the neighborhood of the object. Here,
since the density distribution function ρ(r), which was
introduced in Sec.II.B.3, expresses the distributional
magnitude of density, the acceleration of object should
be represented in connection with the density distribu-
tion function. Similarly, given that the uniform motion
of matter is also dependent on the density of space where
the matter is located, we can say that the velocity of
matter is dependent on the density distribution function.
Beyond this qualitative dependence, quantitative rela-
tions between the acceleration/velocity and the density
distribution function will be discussed in detail later. At
all events, the magnitude of change can be concluded as
follows:

[ Magnitude of Change ]
- Physical magnitudes
related to the moving state of object, e.g., velocity
and acceleration, are dependent on the density distri-
bution function.

In the meantime, given that the acceleration is depen-

6 Note that the essence of motion means not a reason of accelera-

tion but that of movement itself.

dent on the density distribution function as stated in the
above conclusion, we can see that the density distribution
function of space can be determined in connection with
the acceleration of phenomenon that occurs at the very
space. It is worth noting that this conclusion enables us
to justify the process of density determination, which will
be discussed later. In addition, since the density distribu-
tion function, which determine the magnitude of change,
can be objectiﬁed and quantiﬁed, the above conclusion ex-
plains not only the origins of physical quantitative reg-
ularities but also the reason of every regularity related
to the magnitude of change, on the objective ground.
Given that these quantitative regularities are expressed
by equations deﬁning the quantitative relations between
physical magnitudes, not only descriptions of respective
physical magnitudes but also establishments of relations
between them should be objectiﬁed so that we can ex-
press the quantitative regularity correctly.

B. Objective Description of Physical Magnitude

1. Reference Magnitude and Ratio

Every physical magnitude is represented as a ratio to a
predetermined reference magnitude. Concretely, a mag-
nitude of comparative object (hereinafter, a comparative
magnitude) in a certain physical substance is represented
as a ratio to a magnitude of predetermined reference
object (hereinafter, a reference magnitude) in the same
physical substance. As a result, the physical substance
of comparative magnitude is expressed by the reference
magnitude, and a numerical relation between the refer-
ence and comparative magnitudes is expressed by a ratio
that is a dimensionless number. Here, the reference mag-
nitude is not measured or calculated but merely deﬁned
as a unit value, and the ratio is empirically determined
by means of a measurement. Hence, in order to describe
the physical magnitude objectively, both the deﬁnition of
reference magnitude and the determination of ratio must
be executed through objective methods.

Although a physical measurement has uncertainty that
depends on the minimum magnitude for distinction, its
method is reliably objective. That is, if two physicists
measure ratios by using the same method of measure-
ment, there is no denying the objectivity of measured
ratios. Of course, a wrong measurement gives rise to a
wrong result, but this is irrelevant to the topic of objec-
tivity under discussion.

Given that the reference magnitude is just deﬁned as
the unity, even if two reference magnitudes deﬁned inde-
pendently by two physicists are expressed by the same
number (i.e., unity), they may be substantially diﬀerent
from each other. For example, both one meter and one
inch are identically expressed by the number of one, but
there is a manifest spatial diﬀerence between them. The
units of ’meter’ and ’inch’ are used to diﬀerentiate such
substantial diﬀerence. In conclusion, one reference mag-

7

nitude deﬁned by one physicist is objective for the physi-
cist’s own sake but not for the others, and two reference
magnitudes deﬁned independently by two physicists can-
not be objectiﬁed until a substantial diﬀerence between
them is revealed (i.e., converted) quantitatively.

In the meantime, given the objectivity of ex-entity, it
is obvious that an object for deﬁning the reference mag-
nitude can be freely selected, and that reference magni-
tudes can be objectively converted to each other. Nev-
ertheless, it is necessary to take facility of conversion be-
tween reference magnitudes into consideration, because
the conversion is actually one of complex procedures for
determining a ratio between magnitudes. In particular,
the dissimilarities of ex-entity are the most fundamental
components that represent the possible existential mode
of ex-entity as discussed above, thus we will discuss how
to deﬁne the reference magnitudes of dissimilarities with
regard to the facility of conversion, in the following sec-
tion.

2. Reference Magnitudes of Density and Length

As discussed in Sec.II.B.2-3, the density and length are
physical quantities that represent the essential and posi-
tional dissimilarities, respectively. Given that an object
for deﬁning the reference magnitude can be freely se-
lected as mentioned in the previous section, space can be
selected as a reference object for deﬁning reference mag-
nitudes of density and length. Especially, this selection
of space is justiﬁed from the fact that the space is a por-
tion of ex-entity with objectivity as discussed in Sec.II.C.
(Hereinafter, we will refer to the reference magnitude of
density as ’reference density’ or ’unit density’ and the ref-
erence magnitude of length as ’reference length’ or ’unit
length’, for brevity’s sake.) For example, an observer A
can select an arbitrary position rA in space to deﬁne his
reference density ρA
0 ρ(rA)], and select a distance
between two arbitrary positions r1 and r2 to deﬁne his
reference length LA

0 , (i.e., LA

0 |r1 − r2|).

0 , [i.e., ρA

This reference density ρA

0 serves as a standard for de-
scribing the density distribution function ρ(r), which was
introduced in Sec.II.B.3. For this description, let us in-
troduce the distribution factor φ(r) that represents a ra-
tio of a density at a position r to the reference density ρA
0
- a spatial variation of density. Then, the density distri-
bution function described by the observer A can be given
by

ρ(r) = ρA

0 φ(r) = ρ(rA)φ(r).

(1)

From the deﬁnition of density, ρ(r) of Eq. (1) represents
a quantity of ex-entity contained in the unit volume at r.
This meaning of ρ(r) should be remembered, because it is
related to the problem of singularity as will be discussed
in the Sec.III.F.4.

In the meantime, similar to the case of the observer A,
another observer B can select other position rB to de-
ﬁne his reference density ρB
0 ≡ ρ(rB)]. But, as

0 , [i.e., ρB

mentioned above, the reference magnitudes are deﬁned
as merely unity and may make a substantial diﬀerence.
That is, even if ρA
0 are expressed by the same
value of unity, they may diﬀerent from each other, be-
cause of the positional diﬀerence between rA and rB.
The diﬀerence between ρA

0 can be written by

0 and ρB

0 and ρB

0 = ρA
ρB

0 φ(rB).

(2)

Nevertheless, it is not until the distribution factor (even-
tually, the density distribution function) is determined
that we can know the substantial diﬀerence.

As discussed in Sec.II.C, the length, which was intro-
duced to represent a degree of positional dissimilarity,
expresses the quantity of ex-entity corresponding to the
In order to express a relation
positional dissimilarity.
between length and its corresponding quantity, let us de-
ﬁne length quantity QL as the quantity of ex-entity cor-
responding to a length L. Then, from the deﬁnition of
density, the quantitative relation between L and QL is
given by

L = QL/Aρ,

(3)

where ρ denotes a density of space where the length L is
measured, and the term A denotes a unit area perpen-
dicular to the direction of L so that a volume equation
of V=AL is satisﬁed. As a result, we can conclude that
the relation between L and QL is also dependent on the
density. Hence, the reference volumes and the reference
lengths that are respectively deﬁned by the observers A
and B may make a substantial diﬀerence depending on
the densities of spaces where they are deﬁned. Similar
to the above argument on density, substantial diﬀerences
in volume and length cannot be revealed quantitatively
until a function of density is known quantitatively.

8

larities of magnitudes of changes that are detected from
various phenomena.

To put it more concretely,

let us assume that the
change-magnitudes of phenomena P1, P2 and P3 are in a
ratio of l:m:n and this ratio is held constant. In this case,
the change-magnitude of one of the phenomena P1, P2
and P3 can be selected as a reference to describe those
of the others. For example, the change-magnitudes of
P2 and P3 can be expressed in constant ratios to P1
(i.e., m/l and n/l). Though not exact, the ratios remain
constant for a relation among movements of pendulum,
sun, moon, earth, and light and changes of our bodies;
moreover, our clocks are fabricated on the basis of the
constant ratios of change-magnitudes.
In addition, al-
though movements of cars, free-falling of apple, etc., are
not in constant ratios to each other, even such phenom-
ena having variable change-magnitudes are not entirely
random in the magnitude of change; rather, they have
some quantitative regularities that can be described by
the change-magnitude of P1.

In this sense, we can say that the uniformity of pas-
sage, which characterizes time, is just the constancy in ra-
tios between change-magnitudes (hereinafter, constancy
in change ratio). Here, it is obvious that the constancy
in change ratio results from the regularity of change-
magnitude mentioned in Sec.III.A.3. In addition, as dis-
cussed there, the regularity of change-magnitude results
from the fact that every change-magnitude depends on
the density of ex-entity that can be objectiﬁed. For this
reason, we can say that the afore-mentioned peculiarity
of time (i.e., the constancy in change ratio) results from
the objectivity of ex-entity (speciﬁcally, the objectivity of
dissimilarities of ex-entity). As a result, the magnitude
of time should be also determined in connection with the
density of ex-entity.

3. Change and Time

4. Reference Magnitude of Change

As is well known, time is used as a standard for de-
scribing the magnitude of change (hereinafter, ’a refer-
It seems that the reason
ence magnitude of change’).
that the time can be used as the reference magnitude
of change results from the peculiarity of time that can
be designated as uniform passage. In that case, is the
time an ontological real existence having the property of
uniform passage? In other words, do the physical phe-
nomena keep in step with the passage of time? Given
that only the ex-entity and its dissimilarities can be ob-
jectiﬁed as discussed above, the time cannot be under-
stood as a real existence having ontological objectivity,
contrary to some philosophical viewpoints. Especially,
if we exclude the personiﬁcation of the physical world,
it is obviously impossible that the physical phenomena
keep in step with the passage of time voluntarily, even
though such personiﬁed interpretation is greatly useful
for physical descriptions. The property of uniform pas-
sage is just an abstract concept that expresses the regu-

Given the freedom of selecting a reference, an arbi-
trary phenomenon can be selected as a phenomenon for
deﬁning the reference magnitude of change (hereinafter,
reference phenomenon). Furthermore, as discussed in
Sec.III.A.1, the change of ex-entity can be only accom-
plished by the change of density distribution, and this
change of density distribution can be validly expressed
by the density-based description that represents a change
of position having a ﬁxed density. Considering these
conclusions, it is clear that the reference magnitude of
change can be deﬁned by an advancing length of reference
phenomenon.
(Here, the advancing length of reference
phenomenon means a magnitude in positional change
of point having a ﬁxed density. For brevity’s sake, we
will now refer to the advancing length of reference phe-
nomenon as a reference advancing length.) In conclusion,
the reference magnitude of change can be represented by
using a spatial length.

Furthermore, since the spatial length represents the

corresponding quantity of ex-entity as mentioned above,
the reference magnitude of change can be represented by
(3),
using a quantity of ex-entity. Similar to the Eq.
the reference advancing length LT can therefore be ex-
pressed in terms of a corresponding quantity of ex-entity
QT (hereinafter, time quantity) as follows:

LT = QT /Aρ

(4)

where ρ denotes the density of space where the reference
phenomenon takes place, and the term A denotes the
unit area of reference phenomenon perpendicular to the
advancing direction of reference phenomenon.

The reference advancing length LT deﬁned by this way
can be used for two purposes – a common reference for
describing the change-magnitude of every phenomenon in
a system and a speciﬁc reference for describing that of in-
dividual phenomenon. The LT as the common reference
serves as a parameter for describing diverse phenomena
and, eventually, corresponds to the parametric time that
is generally used for our physical descriptions. That is, an
observer can determine the magnitude of temporal pas-
sage (i.e., a temporal length) in his system by measuring
the LT . On the contrary, the LT as the speciﬁc refer-
ence is used to describe speeds of individual phenomena,
as will be discussed in the next paragraph. Of course,
the speed can be also described by the parametric time,
as usual; that is, the parametric time can take the place
of LT that is used as the speciﬁc reference. In fact, this
conclusion is natural in that the parametric time – the
reference magnitude of change – can be expressed by a
spatial length.

Let us discuss further a description of speed using
the reference advancing length LT . Since the change
is literally not static unlike the length or the density,
a phenomenon having a ﬁxed change-magnitude cannot
be used as an objective reference for describing diverse
phenomena any more. A change-magnitude of each phe-
nomenon should therefore be expressed by a ratio to that
of a covariant reference phenomenon as follows:

[advancing length of comparative phenomenon]
[advancing length of ref erence phenomenon, LT ]

.

Given that a standard for comparison (i.e., LT ) is
clearly speciﬁed in the above deﬁnition, the magnitude
of change described in this way is objective.
In addi-
tion, given that the reference advancing length serves
as the parametric time, it is obvious that the change-
magnitude expressed by this way is equivalent to the
aforementioned speed of each phenomenon. Particularly,
we can say that the speed is substantially a dimensionless
magnitude7, because both the numerator and denomina-
tor of the above expression have dimensions of spatial

9

length. In addition, we can say that the reference mag-
nitude, which is the basis of objectiﬁcation, is already
implied into the deﬁnition of speed: the speed itself is a
physical concept having its reference magnitude. In this
sense, the length and the density are distinguished from
the speed, because they are objectiﬁed only when their
reference magnitudes are speciﬁed.

Meanwhile, the Lorentz factor is expressed by a ratio
of speeds of object and light (i.e., v/c), but in this ratio
term, the dimension of time in the numerator and de-
nominator are canceled each other. We can therefore say
that the Lorentz factor is actually a function depending
on a ratio of an advancing length of object to that of
light. Furthermore, if the advancing length of light sat-
isﬁes some requisites for the reference advancing length,
we can say that this ratio term is also equivalent to the
afore-deﬁned speed. Of course, given the freedom of se-
lecting reference, it is natural that the advancing length
of light can be used as the reference advancing length,
and moreover, the light can be preferred as the refer-
ence phenomenon, for its peculiarity.
In the following
Sec.III.C.2, we will concretely discuss this peculiarity of
light in connection with features of space and light; for in-
stance, the facts that 1) the space is the common ground
where every phenomenon occurs, and 2) the speed of light
is entirely dependent on the density of space.

Let us discuss the density dependence of temporal
length. Similar to the case of spatial length, since LT
is dependent on the density as written in Eq. (4), LT
corresponding to the same QT is also changed with den-
sity. That is, Eq. (4) implies the relativistic conclusion
that the time is not a physical quantity regardless of a
state of system. In the Sec.III.D.3, we will see that the
famous relativistic time dilation can be explained from
this density dependence of temporal length. Meanwhile,
the spatial and temporal lengths can be mathematically
expressed by a speed of object and a position in a gravi-
tational ﬁeld, as shown respectively in the Lorentz trans-
formation and the general relativity. We can therefore
say that the spatial and temporal lengths have physical
regularities. Here, considering the origin of quantitative
regularity discussed in the Sec.III.A.3, we can conclude
that these regularities of spatial and temporal lengths re-
sult from the objectivity of ex-entity (especially, its den-
sity). The equations (3) and (4) are the quantitative
explanation that reconﬁrms this conclusion.

Finally, as we have seen, a phenomenon having a ﬁxed
change-magnitude cannot be selected as the reference
phenomenon: the reference magnitude of change itself –
time – changes ceaselessly unlike the reference magnitude
of length. For this reason, if LT is used as the common
reference for expressing other change phenomena (i.e., as

7 The fundamental quantities and mathematical structure of
physics need to be further discussed in connection with the con-
clusions that 1) the time can be expressed by spatial length and

2) the speed is substantially dimensionless. These subjects will
however be not discussed anymore, because they have no rele-
vance to the aim of the present article.

time), we need to deﬁne additionally its reference mag-
nitude (i.e., a unit time) for describing the magnitude of
LT objectively. Of course, the unit time must be also
deﬁned in connection with the quantity of ex-entity. For
example, the unit time can be deﬁned as a time needed
for the reference phenomenon to advance the reference
length. In this case, even if the density of space varies,
we can see that the unit time and the unit length of sys-
tem are changed at the same rate regardless of the density
of space. In addition, given the objectivity of ex-entity
and the quantitative regularity derived from it, it is ob-
vious that the times needed for same phenomena (i.e.,
phenomena that are subject to the same mechanism) to
advance the same quantity of ex-entity are equal to each
other.
I believe that these two conclusions, which are
originated from the objectivity of ex-entity, enable us to
explain the ﬁrst postulate of relativity, i.e., the constancy
of light speed. That is, the constancy of light speed is
just other statement that expresses the above conclusions
based on the objectivity.

C. Density Determination I

From the preceding arguments, the density is the phys-
ical magnitude that represents the substance of ex-entity
(i.e., the existence or the essential dissimilarity), and the
spatial coordinates and the velocity are magnitudes for
representing the existential modes of ex-entity (i.e., the
spatial dissimilarity and the change). And, from the pos-
tulate 2, 5 and 6, these three kinds of dissimilarities can
be only objectiﬁed. We can therefore conclude that every
diﬀerence in a physical substance (or content) must be ca-
pable of being completely expressed by a density function
of ex-entity, and this density function must be capable
of being described by using the spatial coordinates and
velocity as variables. For these reasons, in addition to
the distribution factor that describes a change of density
caused by a positional diﬀerence, we need to introduce a
kinetic factor, which is a function of velocity (i.e., that
of change magnitude), to describe a change of density
caused by a movement.

1. The Law of Motion

From the discussion in the Sec.III.A.1, a non-uniform
density distribution causes a change of movement state
of object.
In this section, we will concretely discuss a
quantitative relation between the distribution factor and
the kinetic factor on the basis of objectivity of ex-entity.
As written in Eq. (1), in this case, the observer A will
describe a density distribution of space as follows:

ρ(r) = ρA

0 φ(r) = ρ(rA)φ(r).

Here, ρA
0 – the reference density for the observer A – de-
notes the density of ex-entity at the reference position rA,

10

which is selected by the observer A, and is just deﬁned as
unity in value. Contrary to this, the distribution factor
φ(r) is an unknown function because an essential dissim-
ilarity cannot be measured directly as mentioned above.
Meanwhile, since the reference density is dependent on
a position selected by an observer, the reference density
ρA
0 may vary with the reference position rA. Hence, let
us assume for convenience that the reference position rA
is ﬁxed with respect to the observer A. Then, ρA
0 is a
time-independent constant.

p , rA

p and vA

p and vA

p , respectively. Here, a ratio of ρA

Now, let us denote the density, position and velocity
of test object, which are described by the observer A,
as ρA
p to
ρA
0 may vary with rA
p , but at this stage, we can-
not know the ratio owing to the impossibility of mea-
suring the essential dissimilarity. We can therefore ex-
p by using an unknown ratio X to ρA
press ρA
0 ; that is,
ρA
0 X(rA
p = ρA
p varies with
the movement of test object, thus it can be described by
using time as a parameter: rA
p (t). Since the ve-
locity vA
p , it is
dependent on rA
p = vA
p ). As a result, the density
of test object described by the observer A- ρA
p - can be
written by

p denotes the velocity of test object at rA
p (rA

p ). And, the position rA

p = rA

p : vA

p , vA

p (t) = ρA
ρA

0 X{rA

p (t), vA

p [rA

p (t)]}.

(5)

In the meantime, the test object can be described in
the same manner by another observer B who is co-moving
with the test object. That is, let us assume that a ref-
erence density for B (i.e., ρB
0 ) is deﬁned by the density
of ex-entity at the position rB, which is ﬁxed with re-
spect to the observer B. Then, similar to the observer A,
the observer B will describe the density of test object as
follows:

p (t) = ρB
ρB

0 Y {rB

p (t), vB

p [rB

p (t)]},

(6)

p , rB

p and vB

where ρB
p denote the density, position and ve-
locity of test object, which are described by the observer
p to ρB
B, and Y denotes an unknown ratio of ρB
0 for the
observer B. Here, similar to ρA
0 (t) is a density at the
position that is ﬁxed with respect to the co-moving ob-
server B, thus it is also a time-independent constant to
the observer B: ρB
0 (t) is a constant that is unity in value.
In addition, since the observer B is co-moving with the
test object, we have

0 , ρB

(const.),

(7a)

p (t) = rB
rB
= rA
p (t) = vB
vB
= vA

p (0)
p (t) − rA
p (0)
p [rA

B(t)

p (t)] − vA

B[rA

B(t)] (const.),

(7b)

where rA
observer B, which are described by the observer A.

B denote the position and velocity of the

B and vA

Similar to the conventional physical consideration, let
us assume for convenience that the movement of test ob-
ject is a complete kinematical phenomenon that is not

accompanied by a thermal or internal process8. Then,
although the ratio Y is still an unknown number for B,
the ratio Y is independent of the movement of test ob-
ject, contrary to the ratio X for the observer A; that is,
Y is constant regardless of the movement of test object.
As a result, ρB
p (t) - the density of test object written by
the co-moving observer B - is always a time-independent
constant. That is,

ρB
p (t) = ρB

0 Y (const.).

(8)

But, considering that the reference position rB where
ρB
0 (t) is deﬁned is moving with respect to the ﬁxed ob-
server A, the reference density ρB
0 (t) is not constant for
the observer A. As discussed in Eq. (2), this variation
of ρB
0 (t) is described on the
basis of ρA
0 – the reference density for A. That is, a sub-
stantial magnitude of ρB
0 (t) can be given by the product
of the reference density for A and a magnitude of distri-
bution factor at rA

0 (t) can be revealed when ρB

B(t) as follows:

ρ A
0B(t) = ρA

0 φ(rA

B(t)),

(9)

0B(t) denotes the magnitude of ρB

where ρ A
that is converted in terms of ρA
magnitude of ρB
(9), we can express ρB
That is, substituting ρ A
(8), we have

0 (t), at t=t,
0B(t) is the
0 (t) that is described by A. Using Eq.
(8) in terms of ρA
0 .
0 of Eq.

p (t) of Eq.
0B(t) of Eq. (9) into ρB

0 ; that is, ρ A

ρ A
pB(t) = ρA

0 φ(rA

B(t)) Y,

(10)

0 ; that is, ρ A

pB(t) denotes the magnitude of ρB

p (t) that is con-
pB(t) is the magnitude of

where ρ A
verted in terms of ρA
ρB
p (t) that is described by A.
Now, let us discuss a relation between the unknown
ratios X and Y. For this, let us assume that at t=0, both
the test object and the observer B are at rest relative to
the observer A. Then, from Eq. (5), the initial density of
test object described by A is given by

p (0) = ρA
ρA

0 X(rA

p (0), 0).

(11)

The initial density of test object can be similarly de-
scribed by the observer B. But, for the objective com-
parison, we need to convert the initial density of test
object described by B in terms of ρA
0 . That is, from Eq.
(10), we have

pB(0) = ρA
ρ A

0 φ(rA

B(0)) Y.

(12)

Given the objectivity of ex-entity density, Eqs. (11) and
(12) must be equal to each other, because they express
the identical substance (i.e., the initial density of test

8 For an imperfect kinematical process, it seems that a careful
consideration is needed. But we will not discuss this subject
here.

11

object) using the common reference density (i.e., ρA
Consequently, we have

0 ).

X(rA

p (0), 0) = φ(rA

B(0)) Y.

(13)

In the meantime, since the ratio X of Eq. (5) is not
known, all the observer A can say at t=t is only the
fact that the test object whose initial density factor was
X[rA
p (t)] at a po-
sition rA
p (t) at t=t. This statement of A can be mathe-
matically written using the kinetic factor as follows:

p (0), 0] is moving with a velocity vA

p [rA

ρA
p (t) = ρA

0 X[rA

p (0), 0] γ{vA

p [rA

p (t)]}.

(14)

Similarly, since Eqs. (10) and (14) also express the den-
sity of same test object at the same time using the com-
mon reference density (i.e., ρA
0 ), they must be equal to
each other due to the objectivity of ex-entity density.
That is, we have

φ[rA

B(t)]Y = X[rA

p (0), 0] γ{vA

p [rA

p (t)]}.

(15)

Substituting Eqs. (7) and (13) into Eq. (15), we have

B(t)]}

γ{vA

B[rA
φ{rA

B(t)}

=

1
φ{rA
B(0)}

.

(16)

The above equation has only the position and velocity
of the observer B that are described by the observer A as
variables. Hence, let us remove superscriptions and sub-
scriptions from the above equation, for convenience. In
addition, although the left side of the above equation is
a function of time that expresses the ratio of the kinetic
factor to the distribution factor, it is a time-independent
constant because its right side is constant. Hence, if we
deﬁne the left side of the above equation as a ratio func-
tion M, the above equation can be written in the simple
form as follows:

M [r(t), v(t)] ≡

γ[v(t)]
φ[r(t)]
1
φ[r(0)]

=

(const.).

(17)

This equation is a universal statement obtained from the
objectivity of ex-entity density and prescribes the mode
of movement that should be obeyed by the test object. In
this sense, I will designate Eq. (17) as the law of motion
of ex-entity hereinafter. Here, since the ratio function
M included in the law of motion is the time-independent
constant as mentioned above, it can be understood as
the constant of motion that plays an important role in
a physical analysis. We will see in Sec.III.E.3 that the
energy, which is the famous constant of motion, is closely
related to the ratio function M.

Meanwhile, if the reference positions rA and rB coin-
cide with each other at t=0, the ratio function M be-
comes unity by Eq. (17); that is, the kinetic factor is
always equal to the distribution factor. Here, it can be

comprehended that the kinetic factor represents the in-
ternal density of test object, while the distribution factor
represents the density of space that causes the movement
of test object. In this sense, we can conclude that a test
object moves such that its internal density is equal to the
density of external space. In order to make a profound
comprehension of this conclusion, we will now discuss a
relation between speed and density and possible modes
of change of density.

2. Determination of Kinetic Factor

In order to establish a quantitative relation between
the kinetic factor and the velocity, let us make a compar-
ison of quantities of ex-entity contained in two virtual
cubes having the same volume. First, let us assume that
one cube is at rest relative to an observer A and the other
cube is moving with velocity v relative to the observer
A. (See FIGs. 1 and 2.)
In addition, we will assume
that each of the cubes has a ﬁxed volume regardless of
its movement. Of course, this assumption is incompati-
ble with the theory of relativity and the Michelson-Moley
experiment. But this assumption is just suggested to ob-
jectively compare quantities of ex-entity contained in the
virtual cubes. That is, in the following Sec.III.D, we will
come to the relativity-compatible conclusion that the vol-
ume of a real cube must be contracted in its moving di-
rection.

Before making the comparison of quantities in earnest,
let us discuss how to determine a quantity of ex-entity
contained in the virtual cube. The quantity of ex-entity
in the cube can be determined by using the relation be-
tween the density and the advancing length of reference
phenomenon, as written in Eq. (4). A matter may how-
ever move with various speeds depending on its physical
circumstance. Hence, if the physical circumstance is not
speciﬁed, it is hard to select a movement of matter as
the reference phenomenon for describing the changes of
ex-entity. Contrary to the matter, the speed of light is
dependent only on the properties of space (e.g., permit-
tivity and permeability), thus the light can be desirably
selected as the reference phenomenon9. Especially, given
that the space is the common ground where every phys-
ical phenomenon occurs, the speed of light, which de-
pends only on the properties of space, is enough to be
the reference magnitude of change for describing change

9 Considering that every physical substance can be completely ex-
pressed by using the density function as discussed above, the
permittivity and permeability should be understood as physical
quantities that depend on the density. This subject will be fur-
ther discussed in Sec. III.F.6 related to the electromagnetism.
Meanwhile, if the physical condition is exactly known, it is ob-
vious that the speed of matter can also be used for the reference
magnitude of change and moreover, converted into the speed of
light.

12

F(cid:13)

G(cid:13)

E(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

A(cid:13)

H(cid:13)

C(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

D(cid:13)

B(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

FIG. 1: Stationary Virtual Cube : Volume=l3
0.

magnitudes of various phenomena. For this reason, we
will use the speed of light as the reference magnitude of
change to determine a quantity of ex-entity contained in
the virtual cube.

From Eq. (4), the advancing length of reference phe-
nomenon represents the corresponding quantity of ex-
entity. Hence, by measuring a time taken for the light
to travel from one surface of cube to the opposite surface
thereof, we can compare the quantities of ex-entity con-
tained in the stationary and moving cubes. Here, note
that the compared volumes of cubes should be equal in
two cases10 to make the comparison exact.

First, let us consider the case of rest cube. For con-
venience, let us assume that the advancing direction of
measurement light is perpendicular to the moving direc-
tion of moving cube. That is, we can select the regular
tetragon deﬁned by four points A, B, C and D as a start-
ing surface from which the measurement light starts, as
shown in FIG. 1. Since the cube under consideration is
at rest, the time ts, which is taken for the light to travel
from the points A, B, C and D to the points E, F, G and
H, is given by

ts =

l0
c

,

(18)

where l0 denotes the length of each side of the cube and
c denotes the speed of light.

Now, let us consider the case of moving cube. Just as
the case of rest cube, let us select the regular tetragon

10 This requirement should be importantly considered when the ad-
vancing direction of measurement light is parallel to the moving
direction of moving cube.

F (cid:13)’(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

G(cid:13)’(cid:13)

H(cid:13)’(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

C(cid:13)

D(cid:13)

v(cid:13)

E (cid:13)’(cid:13)

B(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

l(cid:13)0(cid:13)

A(cid:13)

FIG. 2: Moving Virtual Cube : Volume=l3
0.

deﬁned by points A, B, C and D as the starting surface.
But, since this cube is moving with a velocity v relative
to the observer A in the direction parallel to the starting
surface, the observer A will observe that the light beams,
which start from the points A, B, C and D, arrive at
points E′, F′, G′ and H′, which are shifted from the orig-
inal arrival points E, F, G and H, respectively. See FIG.
2. In this case, the time tm measured in the moving cube
can be calculated in the same way as in the conventional
relativistic argument on the time dilation[5]. That is, by
the Pythagorean theorem, tm is given by

tm =

l0
c

1
1 − v2/c2

= ts

1
p
1 − v2/c2 .

Here, note that the stationary and moving cubes have
p
not only the same area of starting surface but also the
same volume. As mentioned above, ts and tm represent
the quantities of ex-entity contained in the stationary and
moving cubes, respectively. We can therefore conclude
that, from a comparison between Eqs. (18) and (19), the
density of cube moving with the velocity v is equal to the
product of the density of stationary cube and the Lorentz
factor as follows:

′

ρ

= ρ

1
1 − v2/c2 .

p

where ρ′ and ρ denote the densities of stationary and
moving cubes, respectively. From this result, we can say
that the Lorentz factor, which is a keyword of special
relativity, is the kinetic factor that expresses the change
of density induced by a movement of object. That is,

(19)

(20)

(21)

γ(v) =

1
1 − v2/c2 .

p

13

Meanwhile, in the above thought experiment, the vir-
tual cube was introduced to mark merely the boundary of
ﬁxed volume. In this sense, the ex-entity quantity calcu-
lated in the above argument corresponds to the ex-entity
quantity contained in the local space that is deﬁned by
the virtual cubes. That is, the quantity considered in the
above argument is the quantity of space conﬁned by the
cube rather than the cube’s own quantity. Nevertheless,
considering Eq. (17), we can say that an object’s own
density does also increase in the ratio of Eq. (21) with
the object’s velocity.

D. Relativistic Consideration

1. Relativity

Let us apply the same thought experiment to the case
of a new observer who is co-moving with the moving cube.
Then, the new observer will come to the same conclusion
that the previous observer A has obtained, similar to the
special relativity. That is, the new observer will con-
clude that the moving cube, which was at rest relative
to A, has an increased density more than the rest cube
that was moving relative to A. Nonetheless, since such
relative description between two observers seems to be
contradictory to the fact that the density is an objective
magnitude, we should explain the reason why such rel-
ative description is possible. For this, it is necessary to
discriminate between an essential objectivity and a de-
scriptive objectivity.

Given the objectivity of ex-entity, the quantity of ex-
entity is essentially objective; therefore, a relative de-
scription of ex-entity quantity is meaningless and is not
allowed to assure the physical regularity. Contrary to
this, it can be stated that the length and time have only
descriptive objectivity because they are merely magni-
tudes that can be objectively described using the quan-
tity of ex-entity, as shown in Eqs. (3) and (4). Of course,
from the postulates 5 and 6, it is obvious that the posi-
tional dissimilarity and the change are objective actuali-
ties. But, their magnitudes (i.e., the spatial and tempo-
ral lengths) are expressed merely in ratios to the deﬁned
reference magnitudes, and each of the deﬁned reference
magnitudes can be objectiﬁed only when it is expressed
using the quantity of ex-entity with the essential objec-
tivity. As a result, every physical magnitude including
the spatial and temporal lengths can be objectiﬁed only
when it is expressed on the basis of the quantity of ex-
entity.

In this sense, we can conclude that the relativity re-
lated to the spatial and temporal lengths is obtained
as the result of descriptive objectivity.
In order to
justify this conclusion, we will verify, in the following
Sec.III.D.4, that comparisons of the spatial and temporal
lengths corresponding to the same quantity of ex-entity
lead to the Lorentz transformation, which implies the rel-
ativity in the spatial and temporal lengths. For all that,

in order to prevent any misunderstanding about the rela-
tivity, it is necessary to remember that the objectivity in
the descriptive objectivity can be achieved on the basis
of the quantity of ex-entity with the essential objectiv-
ity. Given that the density of object is dependent on the
volume of object, we can see that the afore-mentioned
relative description of density results from the relativity
of spatial length.

2. Mode of Density Change

In view of the deﬁnition of density, the change of den-
sity can be accomplished through two diﬀerent ways –
a change of quantity contained in a ﬁxed volume and a
change of volume occupied by a ﬁxed quantity. Neverthe-
less, as mentioned above, since the quantity of ex-entity
has the essential objectivity, the statements on quantity
cannot be relative to each other. Hence, the change of
density induced by a movement of object cannot be ac-
complished by a change of ex-entity quantity. Further-
more, the change of density without any change of vol-
ume is incompatible with the Michelson-Moley experi-
ment that excluded the theory of ether from physics. In
conclusion, the change of density induced by a movement
of object is accomplished by means of not the change in
the ex-entity quantity of object but just the change in the
volume of object. In this sense, the kinetic factor rep-
resents not the change of quantity of ex-entity but the
changes of density and volume, which are caused by the
movement of object. This conclusion enables us to ex-
plain the relativistic contraction of length, as will be dis-
cussed concretely in the following section.

In this sense, we can say that the acceleration of ob-
ject is a conservative compression process in that it is
accomplished by a contraction of its volume without any
change of quantity. The kinetic energy that increases
with acceleration is therefore related not to an increase
in the quantity of ex-entity but to a compression in the
volume of object. For the same reason, the decelera-
tion of object is the conservative expansion process in
that it is accomplished by an expansion of compressed
volume without any change of quantity. But, a volume
expanding in the deceleration process will compress re-
peatedly a corresponding quantity of space, because the
space is not empty. In addition, given the conservative
characteristic of ex-entity, an expansion of volume in the
deceleration will cause a continuous propagation of com-
pressed density through the space.
In this connection,
we can interpret the movement of matter as a wavelike
propagation of density of ex-entity and may intuitively
explain the conservative characteristics of kinetic energy
and momentum. (We will discuss quantitatively the con-
servative characteristics of kinetic energy and momentum
later.)

In the meantime, from the relativistic mass formula
m(v) = m0γ(v), acceleration in the special relativity
is understood as a mass increasing process; that is, it

14

is a mass non-conservative process! In this sense, if we
regard mass as the quantity of ex-entity, the above in-
terpretation is incompatible with the relativistic under-
standing. The mass should therefore be distinguished
from the quantity of ex-entity in spite of similarity in
meaning between them. The reason of this discrepancy
between the mass and quantity of ex-entity will be ex-
plained on the ground of representativeness of mass in
the Sec.III.F.3.

Despite this discrepancy, considering the conservative
characteristic of ex-entity in the acceleration and decel-
eration, it is obvious that the afore-mentioned interpre-
tation of kinetic energy is compatible with the deﬁnition
of energy – the capacity of a physical system to do work.
Owing to this compatibility, we can interpret the rela-
tivistic formula such as E = mc2, which has been exper-
imentally veriﬁed, in the same way as the conventional
viewpoints of current physics. In this respect, we can say,
without any violation of known empirical results, that
the relativistic mass formula represents not the increase
of rest mass but the compression of rest volume.

On the other hand, given that the general relativity,
it seems that the distribution factor does not cause con-
tradictory statements of two observers.
In this sense,
the distribution factor, which is related to the position-
dependent change of density, can be understood to repre-
sent an actual change in the quantity of ex-entity. Even
so, the quantity of ex-entity corresponding to the ref-
erence magnitude may be changed with the density of
ex-entity, and this density dependence of reference mag-
nitude can be objectiﬁed only when the reference magni-
tudes are described on the basis of the same quantity of
ex-entity, as discussed above. The dependence of refer-
ence magnitudes related to the distribution factor will be
again discussed in the relation to the general relativity,
in the Sec.III.E.4.

In addition, from the preceding considerations, we can
conclude that, even in space with uniform density, the
movement of object is the only method that can change
the density of object without any change in quantity of
ex-entity. That is, only the movement of object can sat-
isfy the relation between internal density (i.e., γ) and
external density (i.e., φ), which is required by Eq. (17),
without any change in quantity of ex-entity. This con-
clusion is an explanation for the substantial reason of
movement, which was asked above.

3. Density dependence of behavior of meter sticks and
clocks

As we have seen thus far, the relative description of
quantity is not permitted for the essential objectivity of
quantity. The density dependence of behavior of meter
sticks can therefore be objectiﬁed when it is described by
a quantitative relation between lengths corresponding to
the same quantity of ex-entity. To describe this quanti-
tative relation, let us refer to the lengths of objects with

densities of ρ and ρ′, which correspond to the same quan-
tity of ex-entity, as L and L′ respectively. Then, from Eq.
(3), the quantitative relation between L and L′ is given
by

the density of stationary object11. Then, since LT and
L′
T denote the temporal lengths of stationary and moving
(20) into Eq.
clocks respectively, by substituting Eq.
(24), we have

15

(25)

L

′
T =

LT
γ(v)

.

Here, since LT and L′
T are the reference advancing
lengths, they correspond to the numbers of ticks of clocks
that are initialized to zero; that is, LT and L′
T represent
frequencies of stationary and moving clocks, respectively.
Hence, Eq. (25) also coincides with the special relativis-
tic conclusion that a moving clock runs more slowly than
a stationary clock.

As a result, the conclusions of the present paper on
behavior of meter sticks and clocks coincide with those
of special relativity.
In this sense, it is clear that the
Michelson-Moley experiment, which excluded the con-
cept of ether from physics, can be also explained based
on the above conclusions. Nevertheless, given that the
present conclusions were obtained from the attempt of
describing the quantity of non-empty space objectively,
we can say that the Michelson-Moley experiment is com-
patible with the idea of non-empty space, unlike usual
interpretations. Of course, if we interpreted the space as
a kind of matter like in the ether theory, the compati-
bility would be impossible as in the past 1900 or there-
abouts. But, if we interpret the space and matter as
regions of ex-entity that are classiﬁed according to den-
sity and correlate the movement of matter with the den-
sity of space based on objectivity and conservativeness of
ex-entity, this compatibility between the Michelson-Moley
experiment and the idea of non-empty space is possible,
as discussed above.

In conclusion, the objectivity of ex-entity (especially, in
quantity), which can be found from only the non-empty
space, is the root of all physical regularities, and more-
over it is paradoxically the ground on which the special
relativity, which denied the necessity of non-empty space,
is proved valid. In particular, it is obvious that the afore-
mentioned descriptive objectivity in length and time is
one of such physical regularities and that the invariance
of space-time interval – the keyword of relativistic consid-
eration – is another way of representing the objectivity
of quantity of ex-entity.

4. Coordinate Transformation

Now, we will brieﬂy discuss relations between the co-
ordinates of an event in primed and unprimed coordinate
systems, where the primed coordinate system is moving

′

L

=

ρ
ρ′ L.

(22)

To verify the special relativistic results, let us assume
that a diﬀerence between ρ and ρ′ results from the rel-
ative motion of objects. For example, if ρ′ denotes the
density of an object moving with velocity v and ρ denotes
that of a stationary object, a relation between ρ and ρ′
is written by the above Eq. (20). For convenience, let us
assume that both the objects have the same shape and
volume when both of them are at rest, and that L and
L′ denote the lengths of stationary and moving objects,
respectively, in the direction of motion. Here, as is well
known, the length perpendicular to the direction of mo-
tion is independent of the motion of object[6]. Hence,
from Eqs. (20) and (22), a relation between L and L′ is
given by

′

L

=

L
γ(v)

.

(23)

This equation shows that the length of moving object
becomes shorter than that of stationary object in the
direction of motion: as a result, this is equivalent to the
special relativistic conclusion of length contraction.

In the meantime, we can say that the change of density
related to the kinetic factor has an anisotropic property
in that the length changes only in the direction of motion.
Contrary to this, if we consider a small region of space, it
seems that such anisotropy of density is not found in con-
nection with the distribution factor. We can therefore ex-
pect that the volume of object changes isotropically with
the position of object, unlike the case of kinetic factor.
But, as far as I know, there is no experiment for veri-
fying a relation between distribution factor and volume
and in fact, I am not certain whether such experiment
has a physical meaning and whether it is possible.

Now, let us consider the time dilation that is another
famous result of special relativity. The temporal length
can be determined by measuring the advancing length
of reference phenomenon, as discussed in Sec.III.B.4. In
addition, similar to the case of spatial length, the density
dependence of behavior of clocks can be also objectiﬁed
by making a comparison between temporal lengths cor-
responding to the same quantity of ex-entity. For this
comparison, at ﬁrst, let us assume that two reference
phenomena occur in regions with densities of ρ and ρ′
and that their advancing lengths that correspond to the
same quantity of ex-entity are denoted by LT and L′
T ,
respectively. Then, from Eq. (4), a relation between LT
and L′

T can be written by

L

′
T =

ρ
ρ′ LT .

(24)

Like the case of length, let us assume that ρ′ denotes the
density of object moving with velocity v and ρ denotes

11 This assumption is justiﬁed by equivalence between densities of
(17) and has been

object and space, which is written by Eq.
mentioned in the last paragraph of Sec.III.C.2.

y 

y’ (cid:13)

v 

vt (cid:13)

x 

( x-vt (cid:13)) 

E 

y 

O 

O’ (cid:13)

x’ (cid:13)

x 

FIG. 3: Two coordinate systems in relative motion.

with a velocity v relative to the stationary unprimed co-
ordinate system. To avoid any unnecessary complication,
we assume for convenience that the primed and unprimed
coordinate systems have their axes parallel, that the x
and x′ axes coincide, that the origins O and O’ coincide
at t = t′ = 0, and that the direction of motion is parallel
to the x and x′ axes as shown in Fig. 3.

Consider an event E which occurs at a point (x, y,
z) at a time t in the unprimed coordinate system. Let
the primed coordinates of this event be (x′, y′, z′, t′). Ac-
cording to the well-known Galilean transformation, the
primed coordinates are given by

But, since the coordinates are ratios to the corresponding
reference length, they are in inverse proportion to their
reference lengths. That is, as is well-known, the Galilean
transformation is not correct. Given this point and the
relation of Eq. (23), we can see that the primed coor-
dinate x′ is equal to the multiplication of the Galilean
coordinate (i.e., x-vt) and the kinetic factor (i.e., γ), as
follows:

′

x

= γ(v)(x − vt),

(26a)

Unlike the primed coordinate x′ in the direction of mo-
tion, the primed coordinates y′ and z′, which are perpen-
dicular to the direction of motion, are equal to those of
unprimed system because kinetic factors in these direc-
tions are the unity. That is, we have

′

y

′

= y, z

= z .

(26b)

Finally, the primed time coordinate t′ can be easily ob-
tained by conventional methods[7] [8] that use Eq. (26a)
in order to derive the Lorentz transformation, as follows:

′

t

= γ(v)

t −

vx
c2

.

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(27)

16

E. Density Determination II

1. Equation of Motion

From the law of motion written by Eq. (17), the ratio
function M, which is a function of position and velocity,
is a time-independent constant. Thus, we have

d
dt

M (r(t), v(t)) = 0.

(28)

Using the chain rule, this equation can be rewritten by

∂M
∂xi

dxi
dt

+

∂M
∂vi

dvi
dt

(cid:19)

i=1,2,3 (cid:18)
X

= 0.

(29)

To simplify this equation, let us deﬁne gradient operators
related to position and velocity as follows:

∇ ≡

ˆi +

∂
∂x
∂
∂vx

∂
∂z

ˆk,

ˆj +

∂
∂y
∂
∂vy

ˆj +

∂
∂vz

ˆk.

∇v ≡

ˆi +

Using these operators, Eq. (29) is given by

v · ∇M + a · ∇vM = 0.

(30)

a · ∇vγ =

v · ∇φ.

(31)

γ
φ

From Eq. (21), the term ∇vγ of Eq. (31) is expressed by

∇vγ = γ3 v
c2 .

(32)

Substituting this result into Eq. (31) and then using Eq.
(17) to eliminate γ in the resultant expression, we can
obtain the equation of motion that expresses the quanti-
tative relation between a and ∇φ, as follows:

v ·

a −

(cid:20)

c2
M 2

1
φ3 ∇φ
(cid:21)

= 0.

(33)

It is worth noting that this equation is expressed by
a power per unit mass.
In addition, as mentioned in
Sec.III.A, this equation shows that a non-uniform distri-
bution of density can lead to an accelerative motion of
object and the magnitude of acceleration is dependent
on the function of density distribution (i.e., the distribu-
tion factor). Now, if we know the distribution factor, we
can describe the motion of object using the above Eq.
(33). But the distribution factor should be determined
empirically, because it cannot be directly measured as
mentioned repeatedly above. The next section is related
to a process of determining the distribution factor.

′
x

= x − vt, y

= y, z

= z,

′

′

′

t

= t

Substituting Eq. (17) into Eq. (30), we have

2. Determination of Distribution Factor

3. Meaning of the Constant of Motion

At ﬁrst, let us consider a gravitational ﬁeld that is one
of the most important ﬁelds in the history of physics. As
is known, the gravitational ﬁeld is written by

we have

Substituting Eqs. (21) and (38) into Eq. (17) for M,

17

g = −

Gm
r2 ˆr,

(34)

where G denotes the gravitational constant and m does
the mass of source object that generates the gravitational
ﬁeld. Meanwhile, given a vector equation A · B = A ·
C, two vectors B and C should generally satisfy other
vector equation A × B = A × C so that B is equal to C.
We cannot therefore remove the term ′v·′ from Eq. (33)
freely. But, in the above Eq. (33), if a is parallel with
∇φ, the equation

a =

c2
M 2

1
φ3 ∇φ.

(35)

(36)

holds as the solution of Eq. (33). To satisfy this require-
ment, let us assume that ∇φ is radial (i.e., φ is isotropic).
It is empirically obvious that this assumption is approx-
imately valid for many physical situations. Thus, substi-
tuting Eq. (34) into Eq. (35), we have

c2
M 2

1
φ3

dφ
dr

= −

Gm
r2 .

Solving this diﬀerential equation with respect to φ and r,
we have

φ(r) =

−

2GmM 2
c2

1
φ2
0

(cid:20)

1
r

−

1
r0

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

−1/2

.

(37)

For convenience, let us select the inﬁnity for the reference
position r0 where the reference density is deﬁned. Then,
since the reference density is unity as mentioned above,
Eq. (37) can be written in the simple form as follows:

φ(r) =

1 −

(cid:20)

−1/2

.

2GmM 2
rc2

(cid:21)

(38)

Given that the value of M is dependent on how to select
the reference position as mentioned above, we can prop-
erly select the reference position such that M becomes
the unity. For M=1 like this, the distribution factor of
Eq.
(38) seems to be related to the Schwarzschild so-
lution of the general relativity. It is worth noting that
both the Eq. (38) and the Schwarzschild solution are re-
lated to a static ﬁeld having a spherical symmetry. In
this respect, if the kinetic factor is a keyword of special
relativity, we can say that the distribution factor of Eq.
(38) for M=1 is a keyword for general relativity. In the
following sections, we will examine the meaning of the
constant M and then discuss behaviors of meter sticks
and clocks under the gravitational ﬁeld.

M (r, v) =

1 −

.

(39)

−1/2

v2
c2 +

2Gm
rc2

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

As in the relativistic analysis of the famous formula
E = mc2, expanding the right side of Eq. (39) and then
multiplying the resultant expansion by m0c2, we have

2

2

M m0c

= m0c

+

m0v2
2

−

Gm0m
r

+ O(v

4

,

1
r2 ). (40)

The ﬁrst term of right side of this equation corresponds to
the energy of rest mass, and the second and third terms
do the kinetic and potential energies of the classical me-
chanics, respectively. The remaining terms of right side
can be interpreted as the relativistic kinetic and poten-
tial energies. In conclusion, we can say that the constant
of motion M represents (total mechanical energy)/m0c2,
which is expressed as a function of position and velocity.

4. Distribution Factor dependence of behavior of meter
sticks and clocks

As have been discussed in Sec.III.D.3, the density de-
pendence of behavior of meter sticks and clocks can be
objectiﬁed by the comparisons of spatial and temporal
lengths corresponding to the same quantity of ex-entity.
In that section, we have also obtained Eqs. (22) and (24)
for such objective comparisons of spatial lengths and of
temporal lengths, and the density dependence of behav-
ior of meter sticks and clocks has been discussed in con-
nection with the kinetic factor. But, unlike the kinetic
factor, the change of distribution factor represents not a
change of volume occupied by the same quantity of ex-
entity but an actual variation of quantity of ex-entity con-
tained in the unit volume, as mentioned in Sec.III.D.2. In
this sense, it is expected that a change of density, which
is caused from a positional change, does not result in an
anisotropic change of length (e.g., the length contraction
in the moving direction induced by a movement); that
is, a change of length related to the distribution factor
seems to be isotropic. Given this isotropic property, if
the distribution factor of space is expressed by Eq. (38),
a relation between two lengths L and L′ can be expressed
by

′

L

= L

1 −

(cid:18)

1/6

,

2Gm
rc2

(cid:19)

(41)

where L and L′ denote spatial lengths that are deﬁned
at the reference position r0 and an arbitrary position
r, respectively, and correspond to the same quantity of
ex-entity. But if ever there was unknown anisotropy, a

relation between lengths in the anisotropic direction may
be written by

′

L

= L

1 −

r

2Gm
rc2 .

(42)

At all event, given that a change of distribution factor
represents an actual variation in the quantity of ex-entity,
we can say that L and L′ in Eq. (41) or Eq. (42) represent
not real lengths but just the magnitudes of length cor-
responding the same quantity of ex-entity (hereinafter,
length-values). On the contrary, a variation of length-
value related to the kinetic factor is necessarily accompa-
nied by an actual change of length due to the conservative
characteristic of ex-entity, as we have seen above.

In the meantime, we can identically apply the argu-
ment made in Sec.III.D.3 to a distribution factor depen-
dence of temporal length. That is, if the distribution
factor of space is given by Eq. (38) and two clocks are dis-
posed at the reference position r0 and an arbitrary posi-
tion r, respectively, a relation between temporal lengths,
which are expressed by the two clocks, can be obtained
from Eqs. (24) and (38) as follows:

L

′
T = LT

1 −

2Gm
rc2 ,

(43)

r
where LT denotes a temporal length of one clock at r0
and L′
T denotes that of the other clock at r. Here, as
mentioned above, a frequency of light corresponds to a
temporal length of clock. Thus, the distribution factor
dependence of temporal length expressed by Eq. (43) can
be quantitatively veriﬁed by measuring how a frequency
of light, which is generated at r0, changes at r or vice
versa, as suggested in the theory of general relativity[9].
As a result, the above Eq. (43) coincides with the gravi-
tational time dilation predicted by the theory of general
relativity, and therefore, we can say that our argument is
compatible with the theory of general relativity at least
within the scope that has been discussed so far12.

F. Further Consideration

1. Distribution Factor and Stability of Matter

As discussed in Sec.II.C, the matter is merely a local
part whose existence can be perceived amid the univer-
sal distribution of object. Nevertheless, the mechanical
description based on the matter has been successful as

12 The general theory of relativity have quantitatively predicted
several amazing phenomena, such as precession of mercury, de-
ﬂection of light, and radar echo delay, and these predictions have
been veriﬁed experimentally so far. But, since these predictions
are based on tensor analysis, which is diﬃcult for me, I have not
dealt with these phenomena quantitatively.
I hope that these
general relativistic subjects will be further studied by readers.

18

shown in the classical mechanics. Owing to this success
of mechanical description, we may say that the matter
is a representative that symbolizes the universal distri-
bution of object. But, given that other parts of object
whose existence cannot be perceived may still exist out-
side the matter, it is necessary to explain reasons that
the mechanical description can be successful and that
the matter can be regarded as the representative of uni-
versally distributed object.

Furthermore, the law of motion written by Eq. (17)
governs motions of all points of universally distributed
object, because the law of motion is the universal state-
ment that can be applied for every case. We should there-
fore describe motions of not only the local part, which can
be observed as the matter, but also each and every part
of object, in order to give a complete account of phenom-
ena. In this sense, the mechanical description based on
the matter is not complete, though useful and eﬀective.
Nevertheless, since we should consider motions of in-
ﬁnite points for this universal description, we are in-
evitably confronted with complexity and diﬃculty in the
mathematical description of physical world. In addition,
the universal distributions of objects result in a superpo-
sition or an entanglement of objects over the whole uni-
verse, which causes a diﬃculty in distinguishing a test
object from a source object. In some respect, this dif-
ﬁculty of distinction casts doubt on whether the matter
is proper as the representative of universally distributed
object.

But, the matters such as electrons and protons are re-
markably physically stable, as is well known. I believe
that this stability of matter is a clue to the solution of
afore-mentioned problems. That is, owing to the strong
stability of matter, we can conjecture that the distribution
factor of object has a special mathematical structure that
ensures the stability of matter, and that such mathemat-
ical structure of distribution factor is preserved anyhow.
In this case, the matter can be justiﬁed as the representa-
tive of universally distributed object and the complexity
and diﬃculty in mathematical description can be alle-
viated by the mechanical description based on the mat-
ter. It is also possible to distinguish a test object from
a source object, because the density distributions of test
and source objects will be preserved independently. In
analogy, even though two water waves generated at dif-
ferent positions are superposed at many positions, they
can be independently described by diﬀerent wave equa-
tions, because they propagate independently.

In the meantime, given that the distribution factor of
source object written by Eq. (38) is not homogeneous, we
can see that respective parts of test object will be diﬀer-
ently accelerated with each other depending on their posi-
tions. This position-dependent acceleration of test object
inevitably leads to deformation of distribution factor of
test object. But, from the above conjecture, we can ex-
pect that a distribution factor of object will be restored
to preserve the stability of object.
I believe that this
restoring process can be correlated with electromagnetic

or quantum mechanic phenomena, such as the radiation
caused by the transition of electron. Of course, to justify
this belief, we should further study for answering to re-
maining issues, such as the reason that the distribution
factor of matter has the form of Eq. (38) and the mathe-
matical particularity of distribution factor. It seems that
the remaining issues are closely related to the quantum
mechanics.

2. Force and Field

The concept of force in Newtonian mechanics is deﬁ-
nitely useful for the ﬁrst step of analyzing unknown phe-
nomena, but it is just a concept based on the represen-
tativeness of matter. Though the representativeness of
matter can be successfully used for alleviating the dif-
ﬁculties in physical description, the success of mechan-
ical description based on the representativeness of mat-
ter cannot justify the groundless belief that all physical
substances of object are contained in the local region re-
ferred to as the matter. In this sense, we cannot say that
the force, which describes only a motion of matter, is
always useful for an investigation of the physical world.
In fact, if we can fully know density functions of objects
and calculate acceleration at every point of test object
from the density functions, there is no need to depend
on the representativeness of matter anymore. That is,
further complete information on the physical world can
be obtained from not the concept of Newtonian force but
the acceleration at every point of object.

Contrary to the force, the physical ﬁeld such as the
gravitational ﬁeld and the electric ﬁeld provides us with
physical information, which is related to the acceleration,
at every point of the whole universe, as is well known.
That is, the acceleration at every point may be obtained
from the physical ﬁeld. But, the physical properties of
ﬁeld, such as magnitude and direction, are determined
only by the source object (especially, its density distri-
bution), while the force or the acceleration is an interac-
tion between the test object and the ﬁeld. In this sense,
we cannot identify the ﬁeld with the real acceleration at
every point of test object. To calculate the real accelera-
tion of test object, we should know not only the density
distribution of source object, from which the ﬁeld is gen-
erated, but also a physical property of test object. Of
course, the property of test object that aﬀects the accel-
eration should be naturally related to the density of test
object. In conclusion, we should know the acceleration at
every point of test object in order to have a better under-
standing of the physical world, and we should consider
both the densities of test and source objects to calculate
this acceleration.

In the meantime, given the Galileo’s famous experi-
ment in Pisa, it appears that the magnitude of accelera-
tion of test object is independent of the absolute values
of density of test object. Contrary to this, as we shall
see in following section, the direction of acceleration is

19

dependent on the density directions of test and source
objects. Here, the density direction is deﬁned as a pa-
rameter for indicating whether the density of object is
larger or lesser than unity, and can be understood as the
sign of electric charge as will be argued later.

3. Charge, Ex-entity and Mass

In the above Sec.III.E.2, we have seen that the gravita-
tional ﬁeld can be generated from the density distribution
of ex-entity written in Eq. (38). As is well known, there
are electromagnetic, weak, and strong interactions be-
sides the gravitational interaction in nature. Considering
the singleness of ex-entity, we cannot however introduce
extra distribution factors for each of the remaining ﬁelds.
That is, if we can know the density function of source ob-
ject completely and correctly, the remaining ﬁelds as well
as the gravitational ﬁeld should be obtained from the den-
sity function of source object13.

At ﬁrst, let us glance over the electric force. As is well
known, the electric force is analogous to the gravitational
force in that the intensity of force varies inversely as the
square of distance, but they are diﬀerent from each other
in that the direction of electric force is dependent on the
sign of electric charge. In this sense, it is necessary to
examine a relationship between the density of ex-entity
and the sign of electric charge before having a concrete
discussion on the electric ﬁeld itself.

For this examination, to begin with, let us consider
how to express the afore-mentioned density direction of
object. Once, let us re-write the distribution factor of
source object, written in Eq. (38), in a general form as
follows:

φs(r) =

1 +

"r

2qsks
rc2

−1

.

#

(44)

where ks is a parameter that characterizes the distribu-
tion factor of source object. Considering the above Eq.
(35), if qs is the sign of electric charge, the characteristic
parameter ks will be 1/4πǫ0 for the electric force: ks is
a positive constant. Hence, the value of φs is 1 or less at
every point for positive qs and is 1 or more in the most
region (i.e., 2k/c2 ≤ r ≤ ∞) for negative qs. As a re-
sult, the parameter qs included in Eq. (44) represents
the density direction of source object, which was deﬁned
in the previous section.

Next, let us verify that the parameter q can be under-
stood as the sign of electric charge. For this, substituting
Eq. (44) into Eq. (35), we can express a ﬁeld E gener-
ated from the distribution factor of Eq. (44) as follows:

13 I will discuss the electromagnetic ﬁeld later in this paper, but
not the strong and weak ﬁelds beyond my ability. In addition,
not only the density function of source object but also that of
test object may be needed to describe some interaction.

E = qs

ks
r2 ˆr.

(45)

At this time, since the Eq. (45) is obtained only from
the distribution factor of source object, it corresponds to
not a measurable acceleration ﬁeld but just some physi-
cal ﬁeld (in fact, the electrostatic ﬁeld). Of course, this
is identical to the case of gravitational interaction. But,
for the gravitational interaction, an acceleration of test
object is independent of its density or its density direc-
tion as known empirically. The gravitational ﬁeld can
therefore be expressed as the acceleration ﬁeld of test
object, for convenience. Contrary to this, for the electric
interaction under consideration, the acceleration acting
on the test object is dependent not only on the density
of source object but also on that of test object. (Strictly
speaking, it depends on the density directions of objects-
the signs of electric charges.) In this respect, we need
to consider the density distribution of test object besides
that of source object written in Eq. (44). For this, let
us write the distribution factor of test object in the same
form as that of source object, as follows:

φt(r) =

1 +

"s

2qtkt
(r − rt)c2

−1

.

#

where qt, kt and rt denote the density direction, the char-
acteristic parameter and the position of distribution cen-
ter respectively of test object.
In addition, let us as-
sume14 that the acceleration of test object in the ﬁeld of
Eq. (45) can be written by the product of qt and E, as
follows:

a = qtqs

ks
r2 ˆr.

(46)

In this case, the q-values of source and test objects deter-
mine the direction of acceleration, because ks is positive.
That is, the acceleration of test object is repulsive in the
case of the same q-values and is attractive in the case
of diﬀerent q-values. This feature of direction of accel-
eration coincides with that of the known electric force.
We can therefore conjecture that the q-value denotes the
sign of electric charge.

From this result, we can say that for the electric force,
the q is a sign of electric charge and the characteristic
parameter k is 1/4πǫ0, while for the gravitational force,
the characteristic parameter k is -Gm/q regardless of q.
But, given that extra distribution factors cannot be in-
troduced for several interactions as stated above, we can
conclude that at least one of the gravitational and electric
interactions is a secondary eﬀect. I do not know what the

14 In fact, this assumption is introduced because of its likelihood;
I cannot concretely explain its ground. Further discussion is
needed.

20

primary one is. But given that the gravitational interac-
tion dominates only the electrically neutral world and is
manifestly weaker than the electric interaction, it seems
that the gravitational interaction is the secondary one.
Of course, all attempts at explaining the gravitational
interaction based on the electric interaction have failed
up to now[10]. It is however likely that there is no at-
tempt based on the idea presented in this paper. Hence,
further studies are needed to verify this assumption.

As for another issue, let us discuss a relation between
the quantity of ex-entity and the mass. From the deﬁni-
tion of density, we should consider the volume of object in
order to calculate a total quantity of ex-entity of object.
That is, given the universal distribution of object, the to-
tal quantity of object can be obtained by integrating the
distribution factor over the whole space. But, since the
distribution factor φ is close to unity in the most regions
regardless of q-value, such integral over the whole space
does not converge. This approximate unity in the value of
distribution factor may however be interpreted in connec-
tion with the fact that all existing objects are superposed
and distributed over the whole space. In this sense, let
us introduce a proper distribution factor of object that is
deﬁned as a function of subtracting unity, which can be
apprehended as a consequence of superposition of distri-
butions of other objects, from the distribution factor of
object, as follows:

φ0(r) ≡ φ(r) − 1 =

1 ±

− 1.

(47)

−1

2k
rc2

#

"r

Someone may say that Eq.

(47), which is approxi-
mately zero in the most regions, is relevant to the con-
cept of mass, because the mass is a concept based on the
belief that the space is a vacuum. But, even if the unity
problem is taken into consideration, an integral of Eq.
(47) over the whole universe does not converge as before.
In fact, the total ex-entity quantity of object cannot be
equal to the mass of object, because the mass is just one
of representative magnitudes characterizing the object.
Concretely, the mass is deﬁned as a ratio to accelera-
tion in the Newtonian deﬁnition of force, and the force
is the concept based on the representativeness of mat-
ter as mentioned above. In addition, the mass is based
on the groundless beliefs that it is contained in the local
region referred to as the matter and the space is a vac-
uum. In this sense, we can say that the mass is just a
representative magnitude, as mentioned above. But, the
mean value is no more equal to the total than the mass,
which is a representative magnitude, is equal to the total
ex-entity quantity of object. This situation is identical
to the amount of electric charge that is expressed by the
unit of Coulomb (C). As a result, even if we can calcu-
late the total ex-entity quantity of object, the result may
be not equal to the mass or the charge amount in gen-
eral. Considering this point, the afore-mentioned q-value
- density direction - is not the charge amount of object
but just the density direction of object. This should be

remembered to avoid unnecessary confusion in the fol-
lowing sec. III.F.6.

5. Spin and Size of Particle

21

Up to now, we have discussed the situation in which
the density distribution of source object is static. But,
given that an object is distributed over the whole space,
it is clear that the density distribution of object can be
changed in various ways. In this section, we will discuss
the rotation of object - the revolution of object on its
own center-, and in the next section, we will consider the
inﬂuences of the movement of test object caused by the
movement of source object. But, in this paper, we do not
consider the orbital motion of object in which the object
revolves around some point or axis that is deviated from
its own center.

As is well known, Stern-Gerlach’s experiment has
shown the fact that the electron has a spin angular mo-
mentum, but the known spin angular momentum of elec-
tron is incompatible with the maximum size of electron
that is calculated from scattering experiments. In addi-
tion, if we regard the electron as a point particle, due
to the degree of freedom, we cannot explain the reason
that the electron has a ﬁnite spin angular momentum[11].
Owing to these contradictions, the modern physics ex-
plains that the electron is not a classical particle but a
quantum mechanical particle[12]. Frankly speaking, I am
ignorant of Dirac’s relativistic quantum mechanics that
is known as providing the substantial explanation for the
spin of electron. Owing to my ignorance, I suspect that
the modern physical explanation means not a solution
of above contradictions by the quantum mechanics but
a success of mathematical description of phenomena by
the quantum mechanics.

At all event, if the electron is distributed universally as
mentioned above, though it is qualitative solution, we can
solve the contradiction related to the spin angular mo-
mentum of electron, which confronts the models based
on the classical viewpoint of matter. To begin with, the
contradiction related to the degree of freedom is solved,
because the universally distributed electron has the de-
gree of freedom four and over. Of course, given the uni-
versal distribution of electron and the relativistic limit of
speed, it is obvious that the electron is not a rigid body
whose all parts revolve with the same angular velocity.
Accordingly, the degree of freedom of electron becomes
inﬁnity actually. Nonetheless, we can conjecture that
the electron has a ﬁnite degree of freedom in the macro-
scopic aspect, because the afore-mentioned constraint on
the density distribution, which is required for the stabil-
ity of matter, serves to reduce the degree of freedom of
electron. I believe that the constraint is connected with
the several quantum numbers of particle including the
spin angular momentum. As a result, the contradiction
that remains unsolved at present is the inconsistency be-
tween the spin angular momentum of electron and the
maximum size of electron, which are veriﬁed from exper-
iments.

To solve the inconsistency, it is necessary to under-
stand that the size of particle is a concept based on the

4. Singularity

For q=-1, Eq. (44) is singular at r = 2k/c2 that corre-
sponds to the Schwarzschild radius. This singularity may
be analyzed in connection with the deﬁnition of density
– the quantity of ex-entity contained in the unit volume.
To put it concretely, the singularity of density seems to
be related to the fact that information on volume van-
ishes in a zero-dimensional point.

From the above discussion on the kinetic factor, the
density of object becomes inﬁnity as the speed of ob-
ject reaches that of light. But, as mentioned above, the
increase of kinetic factor is the process of conservative
compression. Hence, even if the density of ex-entity is
inﬁnite at an arbitrary point, the quantity of ex-entity
cannot be inﬁnite at the point. In particular, given that
the inﬁnite quantity may literally ﬁll the whole universe
with inﬁnite quantity, it is obvious that the quantity of
point is physically impossible to be inﬁnite. The inﬁnity
of density related to the distribution factor is equivalent
to this, because the distribution factor should be deter-
mined from the kinetic factor as mentioned in sec. III.E.

This diﬀerence between density and quantity is caused
by the fact that, from the deﬁnition of density, the den-
sity is calculated based on the unit volume. That is,
whenever a ﬁnite quantity contained in a non-zero volume
is compressed into a zero-dimensional point, the resultant
density becomes inﬁnity regardless of initial volume. In
this sense, if we wish to calculate an ex-entity quantity
of point having a speciﬁc density objectively, we should
consider the unit volume, which is used as a reference
for calculating the density.

In the meantime, I thought that the Archimedes’ idea
could be used for a calculation of ex-entity quantity, but
I found recently that my calculation was based on a fa-
tal mistake. The subject on singularity will therefore be
not discussed any more in this paper. Nevertheless, it is
worth noting that the singularity of Eq. (47) is distin-
guished from singularities in conventional ﬁeld physics.
That is, the singularity in the ﬁeld physics is generally re-
lated to the potential, but the potential is just an abstract
concept that is generated from the formalistic approach
based on the mathematics. Hence, this formalistic ap-
proach hinders us from understanding physical meanings
of potential or singularity. Contrary to this, the singu-
larity of Eq. (47) is related to the function of ex-entity
density, and as mentioned above, the ex-entity density is
the concept that can be understood intuitively and has
volume-dependence.
In this sense, if we take the unit
volume into consideration, the singularity of density may
be possibly understood in a substantial level.

classical viewpoint of matter that regards matter and
space as diﬀerent kinds. According to the classical view-
point of matter, there is a substantial boundary surface
between the matter and the space to separate being and
nothing, as mentioned above, and all physical contents
related to the matter are contained in the internal region
of the boundary surface. The size of particle is a concept
based on the belief that there is the substantial boundary
surface, and it means generally a radius of the internal
region of boundary surface. But, the classical viewpoint
of matter is only originated from usual experience, but
there is no proof that can justify the classical viewpoint
of matter. That is, there is no evidence that the substan-
tial boundary surface exists between being and nothing.
In this sense, we need not to have a deep attachment to
the concept of particle size. (I believe that the duality
of matter and wave, which is the origin of quantum me-
chanics, is closely related to nonexistence of substantial
boundary surface, though it will be not discussed here.)
If we exclude the belief in the substantial boundary
surface, we can also solve the inconsistency between the
spin angular momentum of electron and the maximum
size of electron. That is, it can be understood that the
spin angular momentum of electron results from not a
rotation of local region but a revolution of every part
of universally distributed electron. In this case, we can
avoid the contradictory conclusion that the localized elec-
tron should be rotated with the angular speed, which
exceeds the velocity of light, to satisfy the spin angular
momentum of electron. Meanwhile, given that the size
of electron is determined from the calculation based on
scattering experiments, the size of electron corresponds
to not a size of ball that contains all physical contents
of electron but just an impact parameter that is depen-
dent on the kinetic energy of electron. This is because
the scattering experiment does not prove that all phys-
ical contents related to the electron are conﬁned in the
internal region of measured impact parameter. The idea
that the localized electron ball exists is just a ground-
less belief based on the classical viewpoint of matter, as
explained above.

In the meantime, if someone particularly wishes to de-
ﬁne the size of particle, the size of region having a pecu-
liar density seems to be a good criterion for deﬁning the
size of particle. For example, we can deﬁne the size of
electron as that of region with a zero density; in this case,
the radius of electron is zero from Eq. (44) expressing its
density distribution. Similarly, the size of proton can be
deﬁned as that of region with an inﬁnite density; in this
case, the maximum radius of proton can be given by an
electrical Schwarzschild radius deﬁned as follows:

rproton =

2e
4πǫ0c2

e
mp

≃ 3.1 × 10

−18m.

(48)

For all that, it is obvious from above arguments that
these localized regions do not contain all contents of elec-
tron or proton.

6. Electromagnetism

22

As mentioned in the section III.A.2, the dissimilarity
of ex-entity causes a new change (i.e., acceleration) of ex-
entity. Consequently, the movement of test object caused
by a non-static source should be diﬀerent from the move-
ment of test object caused by a static source. A density of
source object may be non-static by various causes. But,
if the afore-mentioned constraint of density distribution
exists, it is likely that most of density changes can be
understood from combinations of translational and rota-
tional movements of universally distributed particles. As
notiﬁed in the previous section, in this section, we will
consider a movement of test object under a translation of
source object (without regard to a rotational movement
of source object), which corresponds to the simplest sit-
uation among such combinations15.

Concretely, as explained in the section III.A.2, the
movement state of test object will not be changed by
the source object that has a uniform density distribution
and moves with a uniform velocity. This case is mean-
ingless. We will therefore consider a special case in which
the source object having a non-uniform density distribu-
tion moves with a uniform velocity u. In this considera-
tion, we will calculate a distributional acceleration (adist)
caused by a non-uniform density distribution of moving
source object and a ﬂowing acceleration (af low) caused
by a movement of source object with a non-uniform den-
sity distribution, separately. Thereafter, we will compare
the algebraic sum of two accelerations with the known
Lorentz force on the assumption that the real accelera-
tion of test object is equal to the algebraic sum of two
accelerations.

At ﬁrst, let us calculate the distributional acceleration
adist. For convenience, we will not consider the retarded
time in the following calculations.
In addition, let us
assume that the whole region of source object is moving
with a uniform velocity u with respect to the ﬁxed ob-
server A and the whole region of test object is moving
with a variable velocity v with respect to the same ob-
server A. Then, the density function ρ of object can be
separately written by the product of a unit density ρ0, a

15 This section is deeply related to Maxwell’s great work on elec-
tromagnetism that was performed on the basis of the postulate
of ether, and the following results coincide with the known laws
of electromagnetism for the most part. But, from the following
results, there are additional terms that are not revealed in the
classical electromagnetic theory and there is some diﬀerence in
the form of scalar potential as will be shown in the end of this
section. In addition, although justiﬁable in the current physics,
concepts of momentum and its conservativeness, which will be
used in the following discussion, are not obtained on the basis of
objectivity but introduced as just an assumption. In this sense,
this argument is incomplete. Nevertheless, I still believe that
these diﬀerence and incompleteness can be overcome by further
careful approach, and I hope that my study can be a help to such
approach.

distribution factor of rest object φ and a kinetic factor
γ, where φ can be written in a form of Eq. (44) as the
function of position and γ can be written in a form of Eq.
(21) as the function of velocity. For example, the density
function of source object written by the observer A will
be given by

ρ(r) = ρA

0 φ(r)γ[u(r)] = ρ(rA)φ(r)γ{u[r(t)]}.

(49)

(See Eq. (1).) From the argument based on the objectiv-
ity of ex-entity in the section III.C.1, Eqs. (5), (6), (7),
(8), (11) and (14) can be identically written for this case.
But, owing to the ﬂow of density distribution of source
object, Eqs. (9), (10), (12) and (13) should be changed
as follows:

ρ A
0B(t) = ρA
ρ A
pB(t) = ρA
ρ A
pB(0) = ρA
X(rA

0 φ[rA
0 φ[rA
0 φ[rA

B(t)]γ{u[rA
B(t)]γ{u[rA
B(0)]γ{u[rA

B(t)]},
B(t)]} Y,
B(0)]} Y,

p (0), 0) = φ[rA

B(0)]γ{u[rA

B(0)]} Y.

From these equations, we can obtain the extended law of
motion that can be applied for this case, as follows:

M (r(t), v(t), u(t)) ≡

γ(v(t))
φ(r(t))γ(u(t))
1
φ(r(0))γ(u(0))

=

(const), (50)

where r and v denote a position and a velocity respec-
tively of a speciﬁc point of test object, u denotes a veloc-
ity of source object at the r, and M is a constant function
of r, v and u. (See the section III.C.1.)

Given the uniform motion of source object, the time
derivative of kinetic factor of source object vanishes.
Hence, the time derivative of Eq. (50) can be written
by

v · ∇M + Es · ∇vM = 0,

(51)

(See the Sec.

III.E.1 and Eq.

where Es denotes the time derivative of velocity of test
object.
(30).) But, as
discussed in the Sec. III.F.3, Es is not a real acceleration
that can be measured from a real experiment, but just
a vector ﬁeld generated by the density distribution of
source object. That is, a real acceleration of test object
is given by q1Es, where q1 denotes the density direction
of test object – the sign of electric charge. Applying the
argument in sections III.E.1-2. to obtain the vector ﬁeld
Es, we have

adist = q1Es =

∇ψ2,

(52)

q1c2
M 2ψ3
2

where as mentioned above, adist denotes the distribu-
tional acceleration of test object that is caused by the
non-uniformity of density distribution of source object,
and ψ2 denotes the multiplication of distribution factor

23

and kinetic factor of source object – φ(r)γ(u). Practi-
cally, these results are similar to the previous example
related to the static source object.

Now, let us calculate the ﬂowing acceleration af low.
For this, we will introduce the concept of momentum
factor, but frankly speaking, I have failed to explain the
necessity of this momentum factor on the basis of the
objectivity, while the necessity of density was explained
in the Sec. II.B.2. That is, the momentum factor will be
introduced to explain merely phenomena (i.e., for coin-
cidence between my results and the known electromag-
netic theory). Nevertheless, for a new study in future,
it is likely to be worth reviewing brieﬂy the necessity of
this introduction, though insuﬃcient. The deﬁnition of
momentum factor will be given mathematically during
this review.

Given the universal superposition of source and test
objects, movements of source and test objects can be un-
derstood as a phenomenon that every part of test object
collide with the source object at every point of the whole
universe. But, this collision is similar to a superposed
propagation of two water waves rather than a head-on
collision between two billiard balls. At all events, it seems
that a concept of momentum is needed for a discussion
on the collision-like phenomena, as the classical mechan-
ics. But, since the mass is a representative magnitude
as explained in Sec. III.F.3, the mechanical momentum,
which is deﬁned as the product of mass and velocity, is
also a physical quantity of local region that is observed as
the matter: it is just a kind of representative magnitude
that is not deﬁned at the outside of the local region.

Contrary to the mechanical momentum, the vector po-
tential, which is the source of magnetic ﬁeld and acts as
the mechanical momentum[13], is deﬁned at every point
of the whole universe and given by the product of scalar
potential Φ and velocity factor u/c2, as follows[14]:

A = Φ

u
c2 .

(53)

Nevertheless, it seems that the vector potential in the
current physics is not understood as a ﬂow of real sub-
stance. As it will be shown later, the vector potential
is related to the ﬂow of real substance but is not the
ﬂow of real substance itself. This is similar to the afore-
discussed case of scalar potential that is related to the
distribution factor but is not the distribution factor it-
self. In this sense, it appears that the understanding of
current physics related to the reality of vector potential
is proper. As a result, for an eﬀective discussion on the
collision-like phenomena, it is necessary to deﬁne a sub-
stantial momentum that represents the substantial ﬂow
of universally distributed object, besides the mechanical
momentum and the vector potential.

By analogy with the mechanical momentum or the vec-
tor potential, let us deﬁne the substantial momentum
(hereinafter, momentum) as the product of density and
velocity. Then, since the test and source objects are mov-
ing with v and u respectively as assumed above, we can

express a momentum of test object P1 and a momentum
of source object P2 respectively as follows:

P1 ≡ ρ1(r, v)v = ρ0ψ1(r, v)v,
P2 ≡ ρ2(r, u)u = ρ0ψ2(r, u)u,

(54a)
(54b)

where ρ0 denotes the unit density and ψ1 and ψ2 denote
ratios of densities of test and source objects respectively
to ρ0. (Hereinafter, we will refer to the ratio ψ as a den-
sity factor.) Strictly speaking, the velocities v and u will
be dependent on the position r, in general. For all that,
given the above assumption that the whole regions of test
and source objects are respectively moving with the same
velocities v and u independently of their positions, the
density factors of test and source objects can be sepa-
rately written by the product of their rest distribution
factors φ and their kinetic factor γ, as mentioned in the
above calculation of adist.

In addition, for brevity’s sake, let us introduce the mo-
mentum factor that is deﬁned as the substantial momen-
tum divided by the unit density. That is, the momentum
factor is equal to the product of density factor and ve-
locity, and the momentum factors p1 and p2 of test and
source objects can be respectively written by

p1 = ψ1(r, v)v = φ1(r)γ1(v)v,
p2 = ψ2(r, u)u = φ2(r)γ2(u)u.

(55a)
(55b)

Let us discuss again the movement of test object un-
der the inﬂuence of ﬂow of source object. For this, it is
necessary to have an equation representing a quantitative
relation between two momentum factors. For the present,
we cannot however know what the equation is, because
the momentum factor was deﬁned by not a deductive
method but the analogical method. Consequently, as an-
other analogy, we will consider the time derivative of al-
gebraic sum of two momentum factors, which is written
in the left side of the following Eq. (56), in the same
manner as the mechanical analysis of collision based on
the law of the conservation of momentum.

d
dt

(p1 + Qp2) = X.

(56)

But, contrary to the conservation of mechanical momen-
tum, we should consider the density direction of object
in a discussion on the substantial momentum, because
a density direction of object can be regarded as an ad-
ditional degree of freedom aﬀecting the physical system,
besides the conventional degrees of freedom expressed by
position or velocity vector. In fact, this has some anal-
ogy to a situation in which the sign of electric charge
should be considered in a discussion on electromagnetic
interaction. The parameter Q of Eq. (56) is introduced
to determine a way of algebraic sum of two momentum
factors. As we shall see later, the parameter Q is related
to the direction of density and required for the confor-
mation between our results and Maxwell equations. In
addition, though we can guess that the total substantial

24

momentum of system is conservative, the momentum fac-
tors of Eq. (56) are physical quantities related to not to-
tal momentums of objects but local momentums of parts
of objects located at a speciﬁc position r. Particularly,
owing to the following requirement of selective descrip-
tion, the left side of Eq. (56) should be calculated not
over the whole space but along the trajectory of speciﬁc
point of test object. In this sense, it is unclear at least
for me whether the left side of Eq. (56) vanishes or not.
The unknown vector X in the right side of Eq. (56) is
introduced to generalize our discussion.

In order to describe a movement of test object, let us
select the speciﬁc point of test object whose the magni-
tude of distribution factor is φ10. (Given the necessity
of density-based description discussed in section III.A.1,
it is likely that this selective description is essentially
needed.) In this case, since the distribution factor of se-
lected point is independent of time, the time derivative
of momentum factor of test object can be written by

dp1
dt

= φ10

dγ1
dt

,

+ γ1a
(cid:21)

(cid:20)
where a denotes the time derivative of velocity of test
object. Here, since the kinetic factor is a function of
velocity, the term of dγ1/dt in Eq. (57) can be given by
the inner product of the time derivative of velocity and
the velocity gradient of kinetic factor, as follows:

(57)

dγ1(v)
dt

= a · ∇vγ1(v).

(58)

Using Eqs. (32) and (58), Eq. (57) can be written by

dp1
dt

= φ10γ1

γ2
1
c2 (a · v)v + a
(cid:21)

.

(cid:20)

(59)

By the BAC-CAB rule, the term of (a · v)v in Eq. (59)
equals to v × (v × a) + v2a. Using this result, Eq. (57)
can be given by

a

1 +

= φ10γ1

dp1
dt

v2
c2 γ2
Using Eq. (21), we can see that the term of (1 + v2γ2
in Eq. (60) equals to γ2
written by

1 /c2)
1 . Equation (60) can therefore be

γ2
1
c2 v × (v × a)
(cid:21)

(60)

+

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:20)

1

.

dp1
dt

3
= φ10γ
1

a +

1
c2 v × (v × a)
(cid:21)

.

(cid:20)

(61)

Now, let us calculate the term of dp2/dt in Eq. (56).
Given that an action-at-a-distance is impossible, the
movement of the selected point of test object is inﬂuenced
by the density distribution and momentum of source ob-
ject at only the position of selected point of test object.
Hence, the time derivative of momentum factor of source
object –dp2/dt– should be calculated along the trajec-
tory of selected point of test object; that is, the term of

dp2/dt in Eq. (56) should be calculated as the convective
derivative, as follows:

of source object. That is, it corresponds to the afore-
mentioned ﬂowing acceleration af low.

dp2
dt

=

∂p2
∂t

+ (v · ∇) p2,

(62)

where v denotes the velocity of selected point of test
object. Here, using the known vector identity (v·∇) p2 =
∇(v · p2) − v × (∇ × p2) − p2 × (∇ × v) − (p2 · ∇)v, Eq.
(62) can be re-written by

dp2
dt

=

∂p2
∂t

+ ∇(v · p2) − v × (∇ × p2)

−p2 × (∇ × v) − (p2 · ∇)v.

But, since the whole region of source object is moving
with the same velocity u as assumed above, the last two
terms of right side in the above equation vanish. That
is, we have

dp2
dt

=

∂p2
∂t

+ ∇(v · p2) − v × (∇ × p2).

(63)

Inserting Eqs. (61) and (63) into Eq. (56) for the term
of a, we have

a = −

Q
φ10γ3

1 (cid:20)

∂p2
∂t

− v × (∇ × p2)
(cid:21)

+ O,

(64a)

where

O ≡

1
φ10γ3

1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

[X − Q∇(v · p2)] −

1
c2 v × (v × a). (64b)

In the above Eq. (64a), the term a is the acceleration
of selected point of test object that is caused by the ﬂow

Meanwhile, we shall see later that the Lorentz force can
be explained from not extra terms written in Eq. (64b)
but only the terms in the square brackets of Eq. (64a). In
this sense, if the classical electromagnetic theory is true,
it is expected that all of extra terms written in Eq. (64b)
or the sum of them should be vanished. So, for a moment,
let us review brieﬂy the extra terms. At ﬁrst, the term
∇(v · p2) seems to be related to the special relativistic
eﬀect[15], and it will vanish when the test and source
objects move perpendicularly to each other or the density
distribution of source object is uniform. Next, the term
X is dependent on the conservativeness of momentum
factors, as mentioned above. Finally, since the term of
v × (v × a) is vanished only when v is parallel to a,
it is just a non-vanishing vector that is perpendicular
to the velocity v. In conclusion, we cannot say that all
extra terms vanish in general. Further study is needed for
verifying the vanishment of extra terms or the accuracy
of classical electromagnetic theory.

Substituting Eq. (50) into γ1 of Eq. (64a), we have

+ O.

(65)

af low = −

Q
M 3φ10ψ3

∂p2
∂t

2 (cid:20)

− v × (∇ × p2)
(cid:21)

Finally, let us conjecture, as mentioned above, that the
total acceleration of selected point of test object, which
is caused by the source object, equals to the addition of
the distributional acceleration adist written in Eq. (52)
and the ﬂowing acceleration af low written in Eq. (65).
Then, the total acceleration atotal can be written by

atotal = adist + af low
q1c2
M 2

1
ψ3

=

(cid:18)

2 (cid:19) (cid:26)

∇ψ2 −

Q
q1M φ10c2

∂p2
∂t

(cid:20)

− v × (∇ × p2)

+ O.

(66)

(cid:21)(cid:27)

Though similar to the Lorentz force, the above equation is not identical with it, because of the non-constant factor
1/ψ3

2. But, we can use the following identities in order to overcome this diﬀerence.

1
ψ3 ∇ψ = −

∇

1
ψ2 ,

1
ψ3 ∇ × (ψu) = −

1
ψ3

∂
∂t
1
ψ3

(ψu) = −

∂ψ
∂t

= −

1
ψ3 ∇ · (ψu) = −

∇ ×

∂
∂t
∂
∂t

∇ ·

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

u
ψ2
(cid:18)
u
ψ2
1
ψ2
u
ψ2

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

,

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

+

3
2ψ2 ∇ × u,
∂u
3
2ψ2
∂t

,

(cid:19)

+

+

3
2ψ2 ∇ · u.

That is, using the above identities (67a)-(67c), Eq. (66) can be re-written without the non-constant term 1/ψ3

2 as

25

(67a)

(67b)

(67c)

(67d)

(67e)

26

(68a)

(69a)

(69b)

(70)

follows:

where

atotal =

−∇

q1c2
2M 2

1
ψ2

+

Q
q1M φ10c2

∂
∂t

u
ψ2

u
ψ2

(cid:26)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:27)

− v × ∇ ×

+ O + O′

,

(68)

At this time, the vector O’ of Eq. (68a) vanishes, because the whole region of source object moves with the constant
velocity as assumed above. Furthermore, in order to simplify Eq. (68), let us deﬁne a scalar function and a vector
function as follows:

O′

= −

3QΦ
M 3φ10c2

∂u
∂t

(cid:20)

− v × (∇ × u)
(cid:21)

.

Φ ≡

A ≡

,

c2
2ψ2
2
u
2ψ2
2

= Φ

u
c2 .

Then, the equation (68) can be expressed by

atotal =

−∇Φ +

q1
M 2

(cid:20)

Q
q1M φ10

∂A
∂t

−

Q
q1M φ10

v × (∇ × A)
(cid:21)

+ O.

Here, the scalar function deﬁned in Eq. (69a) seems to
be related to the scalar potential in the classical elec-
tromagnetic theory, and the vector function deﬁned in
Eq. (69b) is identical to the deﬁnition of vector potential
thereof; see Eq. (53). Particularly, if Q/q1 = −1 and the
term O is neglected, Eq. (70) is very similar with the
Lorentz force. Hence, from comparison of Eq. (70) and
the Lorentz force, let us deﬁne the electric ﬁeld E and
the magnetic ﬁeld B as follows:

E =

−∇Φ +

Q
q1M φ10

∂A
∂t

,

(cid:21)

B =

−

Q
q1M φ10

∇ × A

.

(cid:21)

1
M 2
1
M 2

(cid:20)

(cid:20)

for describing the physical world. The continuity equa-
tion related to the source object can be written by

∂ψ2
∂t

+ ∇ · p2 = 0.

(77)

Multiplying Eq. (77) by c2ψ
tities (67d) and (67e), we have

−3
2 and using the above iden-

∂
∂t

c2
2ψ2

+ ∇ ·

uc2
2ψ2

−

3c2
2ψ2 ∇ · u = 0.

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(78)

Using the scalar potential Φ of Eq. (69a) and the vector
potential A of Eq. (69b), Eq. (78) can be re-written by

In this case, we can see that the divergences and curls
to E-ﬁeld and B-ﬁeld, which constitute the Maxwell
equations, are given by

∂Φ
∂t

(cid:20)

+ c2(∇ · A)
(cid:21)

− 3Φ(∇ · u) = 0.

(79)

1
M 2

(cid:20)

2
−∇

Φ +

Q
q1M φ10

∂(∇ · A)
∂t

, (73)

(cid:21)

The last term of Eq. (79) is vanished, because we have
assumed that the whole region of source object is moving
with a uniform velocity u. As a result, Eq. (79) can be
re-written by

∇ · E =

∇ · B = 0,

∇ × E = −

∂B
∂t

,

Q
q1M 3φ10

∇ × B = −

∇(∇ · A) − ∇

2A

.

∂Φ
∂t

2

+ c

(∇ · A) = 0.

(80)

(71)

(72)

(74)

(75)

(76)

(cid:2)
Meanwhile, from the previous discussion, the physical
world must be understood as a continuum of ex-entity.
Hence, though not mentioned up to now, the continuity
equation must be the most important and essential law

(cid:3)

This equation coincides with the ”Lorentz condition”. (It
is interesting that the Lorentz condition can be obtained
from the continuity equation.) Using Eqs. (71) and (80),
the above Eqs. (73) and (76) can be written respectively
by

Similar to the comparison of Eq. (70) and Lorentz force, let us assume Q/q1 = −1. Then, Eqs. (81) and (82) can

be written in a form having a strong resemblance to the Maxwell equations, as follows:

∇ × B = −

Q
q1M φ10c2

∂E
∂t

+

Q
q1M 3φ10

2A +

∇

∇ · E = −

∇2Φ +

1
M 2

Q
q1M φ10c2
Q
q1M φ10c2

∂2Φ
∂t2
(cid:21)
∂2A
∂t2

,

.

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(cid:20)

∂2Φ
∂t2 − ∇

2

Φ,

∇ ·

2E

M

(cid:0)
M 3φ10B

(cid:1)

∇ ×

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

=

=

1
M φ10c2
∂
1
c2

M 2E
∂t

(cid:0)

1
M φ10c2

∂2A
∂t2 − ∇2A

.

(cid:21)

+

(cid:1)

(cid:20)

Meanwhile, even though the density direction should be
considered in an electromagnetical discussion, we intro-
duced the parameter Q discretionally in the above Eq.
(56) without due regard to the density directions of ob-
jects. Contrary to this, in the calculation of adist, we
introduced q1 to express the density direction of test ob-
ject; for example, Eq. (52). It is obvious that the appear-
ance of factor Q/q1 in Eqs. (81) and (82) results from
this lack of unity related to the expression of density di-
rection. In this sense, we can say that the parameter Q
is related to the directions of densities of objects. Nev-
ertheless, further study is needed to verify whether the
assumption of Q/q1 = −1 is proper or not, although we
will not discuss this issue any more in this paper.

As for the ﬁnal assumption, let us assume that the
wave equations for the scalar potential and the vector
potential are given by

1
M φ10c2
1
M φ10c2

∂2Φ
∂t2 − ∇2Φ =
∂2A
∂t2 − ∇2A =

,

ρ
ǫ0
j
ǫ0c2 .

According to the classical electromagnetic theory, we may
say that this assumption is suﬃciently justiﬁable. For all
that, further study is still needed for obtaining these wave
equations on the basis of objectivity. At all events, using
these equations, Eqs. (83) and (84) can be written by

∇ ·

M 2ǫ0E

= ρ,
∂
∂t

=

∇ ×

M 3φ10ǫ0c2B
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

M 2ǫ0E

+ j .

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

Here, if we introduce the famous Maxwell relation c2 =
1/ǫ0µ0 and deﬁne an electric displacement D and a mag-
netic intensity H as follows:

(85)

(86)

(87)

(88)

(89)

(90)

D ≡ M 2ǫ0E,
M 3φ10
µ0

H ≡

B,

the above equations (87) and (88) can be written by

∇ · D = ρ,

∇ × H =

+ j.

∂D
∂t

At last, all Maxwell equations are completed: Eqs.
(74), (75), (91) and (92) are identical with the known
Maxwell equations.

In addition, comparing the above Eqs. (89) and (90)
with the known formulae between E, D, B and H, we
have

M 2 = 1 + χe = ke,

M 3φ10 =

1
1 + χm

= km.

where χe and χm denote the electric and magnetic sus-
ceptibilities respectively, and ke and km denote the di-
electric constant and the relative permeability respec-
tively. Here, since the constant of motion M means (to-
tal mechanical energy)/m0c2 as discussed in the sections
III.E.2-3, we can correlate χe and ke with the total me-
chanical energy by using Eq. (93). Though not discussed
here, this issue is also needed to study furthermore.

Furthermore, from Eqs. (93) and (94), we can have

where

M φ10c2 =

1
ǫµ

≡ c2
m,

c2
m =

c2
(1 + χe)(1 + χm)

,

where ǫ and µ denote the permittivity and the perme-
ability at the position of selected point. Using Eq. (95),
the above wave equations (85) and (86) are given by

1
c2
m
1
c2
m

∂2Φ
∂t2 − ∇2Φ =
∂2A
2A =
∂t2 − ∇

,

ρ
ǫ0
j
ǫ0c2 .

27

(81)

(82)

(83)

(84)

(91)

(92)

(93)

(94)

(95)

(96)

(97)

(98)

Finally, using Eqs.

(21), (44) and (55a), the scalar

potential Φ of (69a) can be expressed by

Φ =

=

c2
2
c2
2

1 −

u2
c2
qsks
r

(cid:18)

+

1 +

(cid:19) (cid:18)
u2
2

−

−

2qsks
rc2
(cid:19)
qsku2
rc2 .

(99)

(100)

Here, for u ≪ c, Eq. (99) can be approximately written
by

Φ ≈

+

c2
2

qsks
r

.

Since the term c2/2 of Eq.
(100) is constant, it plays
no role in the electromagnetic laws written as the diﬀer-
ential form.
In this sense, we may say that the classi-
cal Coulomb potential is approximation of Eq. (99) for
the case of slow source object, because ks is 1/4πǫ0 as
mentioned above. Nevertheless, the above equation (99)
has some diﬀerence with the known relativistic scalar
potential[16]. As a result, the vector potential A has
also some diﬀerence with the known relativistic vector
potential, because the vector potential A is deﬁned by
the scalar potential Φ as seen in the Eq. (69b). I hope
that further studies will be pursued for overcoming this
diﬀerence and for completing the afore-mentioned some
assumptions.

7. Quantum Mechanics

From the previous discussions, matter and space is
classiﬁed based on the diﬀerence in the density of ex-

28

entity, and the movement of universally distributed ob-
ject can be understood as the phenomenon of wave-like
propagation thereof. In this sense, it seems that wave and
particle are not contradictory concepts but only concepts
that fall under diﬀerent categories. That is, the wave cor-
responds to the phenomenal concept that represents the
change mode of ex-entity or the physical phenomena, and
the particle does the concept on state that represents the
quantitative state of ex-entity or the distributional state
of ex-entity density that has strong stability. Hence, the
duality of matter and wave, which was the starting point
of quantum mechanics, is not contradictory.

In addition, the function of probability density in the
Shr¨odinger equation is very similar to the afore-discussed
function of ex-entity density in that they contain all phys-
ical information of system.
In this sense, it is obvious
that the function of probability density should be under-
stood in connection with the function of ex-entity density,
even though we cannot say that two density functions are
identical with each other. This subject is also needed to
study furthermore. Additionally, in this section III.F.,
we have mentioned several subjects required for further
study, but it seems that most of these subjects are closely
related to the quantum mechanics.

IV. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I would like to thank the late Mr. Albert Einstein,
because his achievement in the relativity theory was a
starting point of this work and has been a compass that
has guided me to the above results. And, I am indebted
to my wife, Choi, Yu Jung, for economical support and
for helpful advice during the translation of manuscript.

[1] Charles Coulston Gillispie,

in The edge of objectivity
(Princeton University Press,1990), Korean translation
edition (Seamulgyul Publishing House,1996), Chap.4,
P.163.

[2] James Ladyman, in Understanding philosophy of science
(Routledge,2002), Korean translation edition (Ehak Pub-
lishing Company,2003), Chap.5, p.247.

[3] Ernest Nagel,

in The structure of science (Hackett
Publishing Company, 1979), Korean translation edition
(Acanet, 2001), Chap.2, P.61.

[4] E.W. Hobson,

The Domain

of Natural

Sci-

ence(London,1923), pp.81-82.

[5] Stephen Gasiorowicz, The Structure of Matter:A Survey
of Modern Physics (Addison-Wesley,1979), pp.14-15.
[6] Stephen Gasiorowicz, The Structure of Matter:A Survey
of Modern Physics (Addison-Wesley,1979), pp.13-14.

[7] David J. Griﬃths,

in Introduction to electrodynam-
ics (Prentice Hall,1989), Korean translation edition
(Kyohak-sa Publishing Company,1992), 2nd Edition,
Sec.10.1.3.

[8] Keith R. Symon, Mechanics (Addison-Wesley,1979), 3rd

Edition, pp.523-25.

[9] Steven Weinberg , Gravitation and Cosmology : Prin-
ciples and applications of the general theoty of relativity
(John Wiley & Sons,1972), pp.77-85.

[10] Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton and Matthew
Sands, Lectures on Physics(Addison Wesley, 1963), Vol.I,
Sec.7-7.

[11] Arthur Beiser, Concepts of Modern Physics (McGraw-

Hill,1995), 5th Edition, Sec.7.1.

[12] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick,

in Quantum Physics of
Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei, and Particles (John
Wiley & Sons,1985), Korean translation edition (Ky-
omunsa,1987), Sec.8.3, pp.321-23.

[13] David J. Griﬃths,

in Introduction to Electrodynam-
ics (Prentice Hall,1989), Korean translation edition
(Kyohak-sa Publishing Company,1992), 2nd Edition,
Sec.7.4.4.

[14] Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton and Matthew
(Addison Wesley,1963),

Sands, Lectures on Physics
Vol.II, Sec.21-13.

[15] Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton and Matthew
(Addison Wesley,1963),

Sands, Lectures on Physics
Vol.II, Sec.13-6.

[16] Richard P. Feynman, Robert B. Leighton and Matthew
(Addison Wesley,1963),

Sands, Lectures on Physics

Vol.II, Sec.21-6.

29

