5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comments on ”Microscale ﬂow visualization”

A. Kwang-Hua Chu ∗

P.O. Box 30-15, Shanghai 200030, PR China

Abstract

We make comments on the presentation of Sinton’s paper (Microﬂuidics and Nanoﬂuidics
1: 2, 2004) about the microscale ﬂow visualization since the eﬀects of the roughness along the
microfabricated wall upon the current macroﬂow visualization methods could be signiﬁcant
and cannot be neglected in microdomain and even nanodomain.

Sinton just presented a rather interesting and comprehensive review about the microscale ﬂow

visualization (Sinton, 2004) due to advances in microﬂuidic and nanoﬂuidic technologies (Li,

2004) being paralleled by advances in methods for direct optical measurement of transport phe-

nomena on these scales. As Sinton noticed, a variety of methods for microscale ﬂow visualization

have appeared and evolved since the late 1990s. These methods and their applications to date

are reviewed therein (Sinton, 2004) in detail, and in context of the both the fundamental phe-

nomena they exploit and the fundamental phenomena they are applied to measure. Where

possible, links to macroﬂow visualization methods are established, and the physical mechanisms

underlying these methods are explained.

We all know that direct ﬂow visualization is of key importance for the fundamental understand-

ing of microﬂows, analyzing, developing and evaluating novel microﬂuidic processes, investigat-

ing non-ideal behavior such as spatial and temporal gradients in surface and ﬂuid properties,

and providing benchmark data for computational investigations (Sinton and Li, 2004). There

are, however, some diﬀerences between macro- and microdomain which will inﬂuence the results

based on particle-based, scalar-based and point-detection scanning microﬂuidic ﬂow visualization

methods. One speciﬁc example is the roughness of the bounded wall, which is quite signiﬁcant in
common microchannels but could be ad hoc neglected in macrochannels (Chu, 2000/2002). For

microfabricated Si-based walls, the roughness cannot be eliminated completely and thus induce

quite random scattering eﬀects (e.g., for the particle image velocimetry (PIV), the motion of

the bulk ﬂuid is inferred from the observed velocity of marker particles, Adrian 1991) especially
for the particle-based ﬂow visualization methods. As claimed before (Santiago et al., 1998),

the stochastic inﬂuence of the Brownian motion of the small particles was signiﬁcant, however,

ensemble averaging over several images was shown to greatly improve the obtained velocity ﬁeld.

It is clear that the near-wall ﬂow ﬁeld would have poor resolution due to the irregular scattering

coming from the random roughness along the wall or the conﬁned boundary (Chu, 2000/2002).

How about the scalar-based ﬂow velocimetry, where the motion of the bulk ﬂuid is inferred from

∗Present Address : P.O. Box 39, Tou-Di-Ban, Xihong Road, Urumqi 830000, PR China.

1

2

the observed velocity of a conserved scalar? What is the roughness eﬀect in microchannels for

the scattering of light emitting molecules (ﬂuorescent or phosphorescent) which are typically

employed to increase the signal from relatively small volumes of ﬂuid (for this same reason

ﬂuorescently labeled particles are employed in particle-based visualization of microﬂows). One

example is, analysis methods for obtaining velocity data from the observed transport of a con-

served scalar which are collectively termed scalar image velocimetry (SIV). The base mechanisms

employed in these scalar-based ﬂow velocimetry techniques are, ﬂuorescence, photobleached ﬂu-

orescence, photochromic reaction, phosphorescence, caged ﬂuorescence, and IR heating. The

essential near-wall ﬂow ﬁeld will be poorly resolved once the microchannel geometry is narrowed

down compared to the intrinsic random roughness produced by the current microfabrication

technology (Dwivedi, 2000; Komvopoulos, 1996). The situations will be worse considering the

gaseous ﬂow visualization in microchannels (as noted before, owing to challenges associated with

seeding and particle inertia, micro-PIV has not been successfully applied to gaseous microﬂows

to date; Wereley and Meinhart, 2004).

As commented by Sinton (2004) : it is expected, however, that these distinctions will become

progressively blurred as more new and hybrid techniques are developed. Particularly as marker

sizes are reduced to the limit of a single molecule, scalar and particle distinctions are no longer

meaningful. The majority of eﬀorts in this area have involved liquid ﬂows, however, recent

developments toward gaseous microﬂow visualization were also discussed. Selection of an ap-

propriate microscale visualization method depends chieﬂy on the phenomena and application

of interest. Micro-PIV is the most well-developed microscale ﬂow visualization method. The

ability to acquire high spatial/temporal resolution velocity ﬁeld data in multidimensional mi-

croﬂows has driven this development. Although micro-PIV technology has matured rapidly and

commercial systems have been available for some time, signiﬁcant improvements continue to ap-

pear in the literature. A variety of scalar-based methods for microscale ﬂow visualization have

been developed and applied to study microﬂows (the most well-developed of which is caged-

ﬂuorescence imaging). Although physical ﬂow-tagging mechanisms vary, scalar- based methods

typically involve tracking a crossstream ﬂow marker and thus are most suitably applied to uni-

directional microchannel ﬂows. One advantage of scalar-based methods is that the nature of

the velocity ﬁeld may be interpreted readily from the image data. Thus, scalar-based methods

are particularly applicable when species transport is of interest, a common focus in microﬂuidic

chip applications. Point-detection scanning based microﬂow visualization methods have shown

promise with respect to spatial resolution, and optical sectioning capability. Temporal resolution

is typically limited by the scanning rate, however, signiﬁcant improvements have been made in
this regard recently. Most of the microscale ﬂow visualization methods discussed have evolved
from methods developed originally for macroscale ﬂows. It is unlikely, however, that developed

microscale ﬂow visualization methods will be translated to nanoscale ﬂows in a similar man-

ner. Resolving nanoscale features with visible light presents a fundamental challenge. Although

point-detection scanning methods have potential to increase the ﬂow measurement resolution

on the microscale, spatial resolution is ultimately limited by the optical probe volume (length

scale on the order of 100 nm), which, in turn, is limited by the wavelength of light employed. In

3

that context, optical-based spatially resolved ﬂow measurements in nanochannels are, at best,

diﬃcult to visualize. Both the future reﬁnement of microscale ﬂow visualization methods and

the development of direct ﬂow measurement methods for nanoﬂows will be followed with great

interest.

The present author believes that the limitation of the current micro- and nanofabrication tech-

nology : how to smooth out the random roughness along the wall or the conﬁned boundary

(Zubel and Kramkowska, 2001) will also produce challenges to the researchers working on the

point-detection scanning techniques for microﬂows and/or nanoﬂows (Li, 2004).

References

Fluid Mech 23:261C304.

[1] Adrian RJ (1991) Particle-imaging techniques for experimental ﬂuid-mechanics. Ann Rev

[2] Chu Z K-H (2000) More about ‘On the physics of micromachines’. Eur. J. Phys. 21:L19-
L20. Chu Z K-H (2002) Comments on ’Scaling laws in the macro-, micro-, and nanoworlds’.
Eur. J. Phys. 23:L23-L24. Chu K-H W (2002) Molecular ﬂows in annuli with corrugated
walls. Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 17:131-137.

[3] Dwivedi VK, Gopal R, and Ahmad S (2000) Fabrication of very smooth walls and bottoms

of silicon microchannels for heat dissipation of semiconductor devices. Microelectronics J.
31: 405-410.

[4] Komvopoulos K (1996) Surface engineering and microtribology for microelectromechanical

systems. Wear 200: 305-327.

[5] Li Dq (2004) The small ﬂow becomes main stream. Microﬂuidics and Nanoﬂuidics 1:1.

[6] Santiago JG, Wereley ST, Meinhart CD, Beebe DJ, Adrian RJ (1998) A particle image

velocimetry system for microﬂuidics. Exp Fluids 25:316C319

[7] Sinton D (2004) Microscale ﬂow visualization. Microﬂuidics and Nanoﬂuidics 1:2-21.

[8] Sinton D and Li D (2003) Microﬂuidic velocimetry with near-wall resolution. Int J Thermal

Sci 42:847C855

(in press).

[9] Wereley ST, Meinhart CD (2004) Micron-resolution particle image velocimetry. In: Breuer

KS (ed), Micro- and nano-scale diagnostic techniques. Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg

[10] Zubel I and Kramkowska M (2001) The eﬀect of isopropyl alcohol on etching rate and
roughness of (1 0 0) Si surface etched in KOH and TMAH solutions. Sens. Actuators A 93:
138C147.

