5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
7
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Choice of the best geometry to explain physics

Jos´e B. Almeida∗
Universidade do Minho, Physics Department, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Choosing the appropriate geometry in which to express the equations of fundamental physics can
have a determinant eﬀect on the simplicity of those equations and on the way they are perceived.
The point of departure in this paper is the geometry of 5-dimensional spacetime, where monogenic
functions are studied. Monogenic functions verify a very simple ﬁrst order diﬀerential equation
and the paper demonstrates how they generate the line interval of special relativity, as well as the
Dirac equation of quantum mechanics. Monogenic functions act as a unifying principle between
those two areas of physics, which is in itself very signiﬁcant for the perception one has of them.
Another consequence is the possibility of studying the same phenomena in Euclidean 4-dimensional
space, providing a diﬀerent point of view to physics, from which one has an unusual and enriching
perspective.

PACS numbers: 02.40.Yy; 03.30.+p; 03.65.Pm

I.

INTRODUCTION

There is a general consensus among physicists about
what is a physical theory. The point of departure is a
set of principles or axioms which are unproven state-
ments, whose validity is sustained on the consistency of
the whole theory and its ability to make correct predic-
tions. Using accepted rules of mathematics and logic it
is possible to derive consequences from the set of princi-
ples, some of which are observables and can be confronted
with experiment and or observation of the physical world.
In general every theory has its own application domain,
that is, a set of conditions where it is capable of providing
veriﬁable predictions.

No physical theory has yet been formulated whose ap-
plication domain is universal and the search for a uni-
ﬁed theory of physics is a strong motivation for many
researchers. The goal is to establish a reduced number of
principles from which one could derive a formalism appli-
cable to physics of all scales, from particles to the cosmos,
and to all times, from the origin of the Universe, through
the present time, allowing predictions for the Universe’s
future.

In this paper we will have a brief look at how a care-
fully chosen point of departure in geometry can lead us
to several important equations of fundamental physics,
using only geometrical reasoning. We will derive equa-
tions with signiﬁcance both for General Relativity and
Quantum Mechanics, in order to emphasize the poten-
tial unifying power of this approach to physics.

Before we begin our exposition a notation issue must
be resolved. We will be dealing with 5-dimensional space
but we are also interested in two of its 4-dimensional sub-
spaces and one 3-dimensional subspace; ideally our choice
of indices should clearly identify their ranges in order to
avoid the need to specify the latter in every equation.
The diagram in Fig. 1 shows the index naming conven-
tion used in this paper; Einstein’s summation convention
will be adopted as well as the compact notation for par-
tial derivatives ∂α = ∂/∂xα.

Indices in the range {0, 4} will be denoted with
FIG. 1:
Greek letters α, β, γ. Indices in the range {0, 3} will also re-
ceive Greek letters but chosen from µ, ν, ξ. For indices in the
range {1, 4} we will use Latin letters i, j, k and ﬁnally for in-
dices in the range {1, 3} we will use also Latin letters chosen
from m, n, o.

II. CHOICE OF GEOMETRY

Our purpose being to establish geometrical relation-
ships which can be read as equations of physics, the
choice of an appropriate geometry becomes crucial, no
less than an educated assignment of coordinates to phys-
ical entities. Here we will postulate the geometry as
ﬁrst principle and in doing so we will not try to ﬁnd
any special justiﬁcation for that particular choice. The
history of trials leading to the present postulates can be
traced through various papers by the author; the inter-
ested reader can ﬁnd guidance for such search in the web-
page http://bda.planetaclix.pt, although our recom-
mendation for complementary reading is centred in three
recent papers1,2,3.

In the introduction we gave a hint that we would be
using 5-dimensional space and this is actually true, be-
cause we have found that 5 is the smallest number of
dimensions that one needs in order to ﬁnd the topology
and symmetries that can produce equations applicable to
physics. In the scope of this paper we need 5 dimensions
in order to establish a unifying principle from which both
special relativity and quantum mechanics can be derived;
however there are other reasons for this choice, which
have to do with the incorporation of the standard model
gauge group symmetries and a possible hyperspherical

symmetry of the Universe.2,3 This 5-dimensional space
can be designated as 5-dimensional spacetime because
one of its dimensions is associated with a frame vector
with negative norm.9 We can now add that dimension
0 will be associated with physical or Compton time t,
the time measured by the Compton frequency of elemen-
tary particles, while coordinate 4 will be associated with
proper or cosmological time τ ; these associations will be-
come clearer further down (see Appendix A.) For the mo-
ment we will consider only geometry without any physical
implications.

We will need a reference frame associated with the set
of coordinates and we will thus assume an orthonormed
frame of vectors, designated by σα; these vectors are such
that σα·σβ = 0, where the dot represents the inner prod-
uct and α 6= β. Furthermore, σ0 has norm minus unity,
given by (σ0)2 = σ0·σ0 = −1 and all the others have unit
norm.

An elementary displacement dx is given by

dx = σαdxα.

As usual the square of a vector equals the square of its
length, which we apply to the elementary displacement

(dx)2 = −(dx0)2 +

(dxi)2.

Xi

This can be recognized as a wave equation in the 4-
dimensional space spanned by σi which will accept plane
wave type solutions of the general form

ψ = ψ0ei(pαxα

+δ),

where ψ0 is an amplitude whose characteristics we shall
not discuss for now, δ is a phase angle and pα are con-
stants such that

By setting the argument of ψ constant in Eq. (6) and

diﬀerentiating we can get the diﬀerential equation

(pi)2 − (p0)2 = 0.

Xi

pαdxα = 0.

2

(6)

(7)

(8)

(1)

(2)

The ﬁrst member can equivalently be written as the inner
product of the two vectors p·dx = 0, where p = σαpα.
In 5D hyperbolic space the inner product of two vectors
can be null when the vectors are perpendicular but also
when the two vectors are null; since we have established
that p is a null vector, Eq. (8) can be satisﬁed either by
dx normal to p or by (dx)2 = 0. In the former case the
condition describes a 3-volume called wavefront and in
the latter case it describes the wave motion. Notice that
the wavefronts are not surfaces but volumes, because we
are working with 4-dimensional waves.

The condition describing wave motion can be expanded

Because we have chosen this space to have one negative
norm frame vector, the length of a vector is not necessar-
ily positive and it can even be zero; we will explore this
possibility at great length.

as

III. MONOGENIC FUNCTIONS AND WAVES

We will now introduce the vector derivative deﬁned by

∇ = σα∂α;

(3)

here we used σα to represent the reciprocal frame such
that σα·σβ = δα
β , where δα
β is the Kronnecker delta. One
sees easily that σ0 = −σ0 and σi = σi.
It turns out
that there is a class of functions of great importance,
called monogenic functions,4 characterized by having null
vector derivative; a function ψ is monogenic if and only
if

∇ψ = 0.

(4)

These functions are not usually scalars and we will say a
bit more about them later on but for now let us deﬁne
the scalar Laplacian operator ∇2 = ∇·∇. The Laplacian
is just the sum of second order partial derivatives with
respect to all the coordinates, the term corresponding to
coordinate 0 having a negative sign ∇2 = −∂00 +
∂ii.
A monogenic function has by necessity null Laplacian,
as can be seen by dotting Eq. (4) with ∇ on the left. We
are then allowed to write

P

∂iiψ = ∂00ψ.

(5)

Xi

− (dx0)2 +

(dxi)2 = 0.

(9)

X
This is a purely scalar equation and can be manipulated
as such, which means we are allowed to rewrite it with
any chosen terms in the second member; some of those
manipulations are particularly signiﬁcant. Suppose we
decide to isolate (dx4)2 in the ﬁrst member: (dx4)2 =
(dxm)2. We can then rename coordinate x4
(dx0)2 −
as τ , to get the interval squared of special relativity for
space-like displacements

P

dτ 2 = (dx0)2 −

(dxm)2.

(10)

X

We have thus derived the space-like part of special rela-
tivity as a consequence of monogeneity in 5D hyperbolic
space and simultaneously found a physical interpretation
for coordinates x0 and x4 as time and proper time, re-
spectively.

A diﬀerent manipulation of Eq. (9) has great signiﬁ-
cance because it leads to the concept of 4-dimensional
optics (4DO).5,6 If we isolate (dx0)2 and replace x0 by
the letter t, we see that time becomes the interval in
Euclidean 4D space

dt2 =

(dxi)2.

(11)

X
From this we conclude that the monogenic condition pro-
duces plane waves whose wavefronts are 3D volumes but

can be represented by wavefront normals, just as it hap-
pens in standard optics with electromagnetic waves.

Several readers may be worried with the fact that
proper time is a line integral and not a coordinate in
special relativity; to this we will argue that the manip-
ulations we have done, collapsing 5D spacetime into 4
dimensions through a null displacement condition and
then promoting one of the coordinates into interval, is
exactly equivalent to the process of deﬁning a light cone
in Minkowski spacetime and then applying Fermat’s prin-
ciple to deﬁne an Euclidean 3D metric on the light cone;
we have just upgraded the procedure by including one
extra dimension.

IV. QUANTUM MECHANICS AND THE
DIRAC EQUATION

The Dirac equation can also be derived from the mono-
genic condition but since it appears formulated in terms
of matrices in all textbooks we will have to rewrite Eq.
(4) also in terms of matrices, so that it can then be fur-
ther manipulated. This is easily achieved if we assign
our frame vectors to Dirac matrices that square to the
the identity matrix or minus the identity matrix as ap-
propriate; the following list of assignments can be used
but others would be equally eﬀective10






, σ1 ≡ 








, σ3 ≡ 





,




0 1
0 0
0 0 −1 0
0 −1 0 0
0 0
1 0

0 1 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0



,




i 0 0 0
0 −i 0 0
0 0 i 0
0 0 0 −i

0 i 0 0
−i 0 0 0
0 0 0 −i
0 0 i 0
0 0 0 −i
0 0 i 0
0 −i 0 0
i 0 0 0

σ0 ≡ 



σ2 ≡ 



σ4 ≡ 





.




(12)

There is no need to adopt diﬀerent notations to refer to
the frame vectors or to their matrix counterparts because
the context will usually be suﬃcient to determine what
is meant.

We can check that matrices σα form an orthonormal
basis of 5D space by deﬁning the inner product of square
matrices as

3

to the solution (6) and the derivative with respect to x4
is evaluated we get

(σµ∂µ + σ4ip4)ψ = 0.

(14)

Let us now multiply both sides of the equation on the left
by σ4 and note that matrix σ4σ0 squares to the identity
while the 3 matrices σ4σm square to minus identity; we
rename these products as γ-matrices in the form γµ =
σ4σµ. Rewriting the equation in this form we get

(γµ∂µ + ip4)ψ = 0.

(15)

The only thing this equation needs to be recognized as
Dirac’s is the replacement of p4 by the particle’s mass m.
We turn now our attention to the amplitude ψ0 in Eq.
(5) because we know that the Dirac equation accepts so-
lutions which are spinors and we want to ﬁnd out their
equivalents in our formulation. Applying the monogenic
condition to Eq. (5) we see that the following equation
must be veriﬁed

ψ0(σαpα) = 0.

(16)

If the σs are interpreted as matrices, remembering that
p is null, the only way the equation can be veriﬁed is
by ψ0 being some constant multiplied by the matrix in
parenthesis, which is a matrix representation of p. We
can set the multiplying constant to unity and ψ0 becomes
equal to p; the wavefunction ψ can then be interpreted
as a Dirac spinor.

In order to separate left and right spinor components
we use a technique adapted from Ref. 4. We choose an
arbitrary 4 × 4 matrix which squares to identity, for in-
stance σ4, with which we form the two idempotent ma-
trices (I + σ4)/2 and (I − σ4)/2. These matrices are
called idempotents because they reproduce themselves
when squared. These idempotents absorb any σ4 fac-
tor; as can be easily checked (I + σ4)σ4 = (I + σ4) and
(I − σ4)σ4 = −(I − σ4).

Obviously we can decompose the wavefunction ψ as

ψ = ψ

I + σ4
2

+ ψ

I − σ4
2

= ψ+ + ψ−.

(17)

This apparently trivial decomposition produces some sur-
prising results due to the following relations

eiθ(I + σ4) = (cos θ + i sin θ)(I + σ4)

= (I cos θ + iσ4 sin θ)(I + σ4)
= eiσ4θ(I + σ4).

(18)

A·B =

AB + BA
2

.

(13)

and similarly

It will then be possible to verify that the inner product
of any two diﬀerent σ-matrices is null, (σ0)2 = −I and
(σi)2 = I; these are the conditions deﬁning an orthonor-
mal basis expressed in matrix form.11

It will now be convenient to expand the monogenic
condition (4) as (σµ∂µ + σ4∂4)ψ = 0. If this is applied

eiθ(I − σ4) = e

−iσ4θ(I − σ4).

(19)

The diﬀerent idempotents produce similar results and it
has been argued that they may be related to diﬀerent
elementary particles.3

V. CONCLUSION

The choice of an adequate geometry to write the funda-
mental equations of physics is important in order to make
the equations as simple as possible. The perception one
has of those equations is also greatly dependent on the ge-
ometry and on the assignment between coordinates and
physical entities. This paper makes use of 5-dimensional
spacetime and studies a special class of functions, called
monogenic functions, demonstrating that this is suﬃcient
for the derivation of equations in special relativity and
quantum mechanics and can thus be seen as a unifying
principle between those two areas of physics.

Monogenic functions in 5D spacetime produce conse-
quences to 4D Euclidean space and Minkowski spacetime
simultaneously, which provides two diﬀerent points of
view from which to perceive the physical meaning of the
solutions. For instance, solutions that can be interpreted
as Dirac particles in Minkowski spacetime are also 4D
”plane like” waves in Euclidean space; although the pa-
per does not explore this latter point of view, other works
by the author have shown that it provides a diﬀerent and
interesting perception of quantum mechanics.

APPENDIX A: NON-DIMENSIONAL UNITS

The interpretation of t and τ as time coordinates im-
plies the use of a scale parameter which is naturally cho-
sen as the vacuum speed of light c. We don’t need to
include this constant in our equations because we can
always recover time intervals, if needed, introducing the
speed of light at a later stage. We can even go a step fur-
ther and eliminate all units from our equations so that
they become pure number equations; in this way we will

4

avoid cumbersome constants whenever coordinates have
to appear as arguments of exponentials or trigonomet-
ric functions. We note that, at least for the macroscopic
world, physical units can all be reduced to four funda-
mental ones; we can, for instance, choose length, time,
mass and electric charge as fundamental, as we could
just as well have chosen others. Measurements are then
made by comparison with standards; of course we need
four standards, one for each fundamental unit. But now
note that there are four fundamental constants: Planck
constant (¯h), gravitational constant (G), speed of light
in vacuum (c) and proton electric charge (e), with which
we can build four standards for the fundamental units.
Table I lists the standards of this units’ system, fre-

TABLE I: Standards for non-dimensional units’ system

Length Time Mass Charge

G¯h
c3 r

G¯h
c5 r

¯hc
G

r

e

quently called Planck units, which the author prefers to
designate by non-dimensional units.
In this system all
the fundamental constants, ¯h, G, c, e, become unity, a
particle’s Compton frequency, deﬁned by ν = mc2/¯h, be-
comes equal to the particle’s mass and the frequent term
GM /(c2r) is simpliﬁed to M/r. We can, in fact, take
all measures to be non-dimensional, since the standards
are deﬁned with recourse to universal constants; this will
be our posture. Geometry and physics become relations
between pure numbers, vectors, bivectors, etc. and the
geometric concept of distance is needed only for graphical
representation.

∗

Electronic address: bda@ﬁsica.uminho.pt; The author
wishes to thank Frank Potter, from Sciencegems.com, for
the enlightening discussions and corrections to the text and
equations.

1 J. B. Almeida, The null subspace of G(4,1) as source of
the main physical theories, in Physical Interpretations of
Relativity Theory – IX (London, 2004), physics/0410035.
2 J. B. Almeida, Geometric drive of the universe’s expansion,
in 1st Crisis in Cosmology Conference, CCC–I, edited by
E. Lerner and J. B. Almeida (To pe published, Mon¸c˜ao,
Portugal, 2005), physics/0507102.

3 J. B. Almeida, Geometric algebra and particle dynamics, in
7th International Conference on Cliﬀord Algebras, ICCA7,
edited by P. Angl`es (To be published, Toulouse, France,
2005), math.GM/0504025.

4 C. Doran and A. Lasenby, Geometric Algebra for Physicists
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 2003).
5 J. B. Almeida, K-calculus in 4-dimensional optics, 2002,

physics/0201002.

6 J. B. Almeida, An alternative to Minkowski space-time, in
GR 16 (Durban, South Africa, 2001), gr-qc/0104029.

7 E. W. Weisstein,

Dirac matrices,

in Math

World – A Wolfram Web Resource
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/DiracMatrices.html.
8 P. Lounesto, Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinors, vol. 286 of Lon-
don Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 2001), 2nd ed.

(1999), URL

9 For any space it is possible to deﬁne a set of orthogonal
frame vectors in a number equal to the the number of spa-
tial dimensions; if one of these frame vectors has negative
length, the associated dimension is called a time dimen-
sion. The frame is orthonormed when all its vectors have
length ±1. Alternatively one can also have only one posi-
tive length frame vector, in which case this corresponds to
the time dimension.

10 There are 16 possible 4 × 4 Dirac matrices,7 of which we
must choose 5 such that (σ0)2 = −I, (σi)2 = I and σασβ =
−σβσα, for α 6= β.

11 A more formal approach to this subject would lead us to
invoke the isomorphism between the complex algebra of
4 × 4 matrices and Cliﬀord algebra Cℓ4,1, the geometric
algebra of 5D spacetime.8

