5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A ” LAYERS OF REALITY TO A WEB OF
INDUCTION ” HYPOTHESIS

Afsar Abbas
Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar - 751005, India
afsar@iopb.res.in

It is shown that as knowledge is structured, it comes in modules. This
provides diﬀerent ” layers of reality ”. Each layer of reality has its own
distinctive inductive logic which may diﬀer from that of the others. All
this is woven together to form a ” web of induction ” in a multidimensional
space. It is the overall resilience, ﬁrmness and consistent interconnectedness
of the whole web which justiﬁes induction globally and which allows science
to continue to ”read” nature using the inductive logic.

ABSTRACT

1

Advanced knowledge of science and other disciplines is imparted through
Universities. Each university has departments and each department special-
izes in a particular discipline. Diﬀerent departments mostly work indepen-
dently of each other. Most of the time they are not even aware as to what
is being taught in the other departments. They continue to do so without in
anyway compromising their ability to impart knowledge in their own disci-
pline. Hence this is the most straight forward acknowledgement of the fact
that scientiﬁc knowledge is structured and comes in modules. By and large
each module of knowledge may exist independent of the other modules of
knowledge.

Succinctly we may state that scientiﬁc knowledge, as a mapping of real-
ity, is structured into ”layers”. In common usage the word layer stands for
two dimensional surfaces in a three dimensional world. Let us not conﬁne
ourselves to this three dimensional world here. When talking of the dimen-
sionality of any reality one necessarily means the dimension ( or number of
degrees of freedom ) of the minimum number of variables needed to describe
that particular aspect of nature completely. Hence here a layer would mean a
surface in this ”large dimensional” ﬁeld of reality. Hence the layers of reality
that we are talking about has multidimensionality built into it.

So, broadly speaking, scientiﬁc knowledge can be considered as not being
an interrelated or interdependent compendium of facts and relationships. It
is ”almost” discrete and exists in diﬀerent compartments which are ’almost’
independent of each other. In fact it is entirely because of this feature of
nature that we have been able to ’uncover’ or understand nature, part by
part and one at a time. In fact, had it been not so, then one may wonder
as to how scientists would have ever been able to acquire any knowledge
whatsoever ?

As scientists, we have gone into diﬀerent layers one at a time. Once
in a while one encounters a boundary between two layers and that creates
In tackling these, one often
unanticipated complications and diﬃculties.
if it turns out that a
discovers other hidden layers of reality. However.
particular boundary is indeed unbreakable, then that too gives information
about still other aspects of what reality is all about. Hence knowledge is not
static. It keeps on changing and evolving.

In physical science, there is a neat way of understanding these layers of
reality. Simply stated, the diﬀerent layers of reality in physics have to do with
diﬀerent energy or length scales. Without going into mathematical details,

2

short length scales imply larger energies in a particular physical phenomenon
and larger length scales mean smaller energies available for relevant physical
It has been a major achievement of the physical sciences that
processes.
it has uncovered the fact that nature is built upon diﬀerent length/energy
scales. And that these energy scales are a few and ﬁnite in number. As
long as one is working within a particular energy scale, one can by and large
ignore eﬀects arising from the other energy scales. Boundaries where the two
energy scales meet require careful handling as that may create unexpected
complications. A proper understanding of these has always been found to
be extremely enlightening as well. However, as long as one stays away from
these complicating cases, then one has a good and independent sub-discipline
of physics.

Gravitational interaction is dominant at large distance scales. Coming
down to smaller scale of a few Angstrom, the gravitational interaction can
be completely ignored for all practical purposes and the molecular forces start
to manifest themselves. The energies involved here are the ones available in
ordinary combustion of wood, paper etc. A little more energy is available
at say a little smaller distance of only one Angstrom or so. At this level
electrons are bound to protons to form atoms. The relevant energies are
approximately an electron volt (in a particular unit) or so. At this scale, one
can study atomic physics without worrying about nuclear forces. Nuclear
forces start becoming signiﬁcant as one goes to a much smaller distance of
a fermi or so. The energies are now measured in a million electron volts or
so. The whole discipline of chemistry need not worry about any other scale
than these two ( atomic and molecular ) to do its work!

One may treat these diﬀerent energy scales as opening up of diﬀerent
layers of the ”onion” of reality.
In nuclear physics ( which is relevant for
nuclear power generation and for nuclear bombs like the ones dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki ) the relevant energy is about a million electron
volts. Still another layer of onion is known to exist at around a billion electron
volt of energy. At this scale quarks start manifesting themselves explicitly
in nuclei. Still another scale occurs at a much higher scale of energy and is
popularly called the Planck scale. A lot of bizarre things are supposed to
happen at the Planck scale and today it forms a frontier of research in physics
( Callender and Nuggett (2001) ). Even the diﬃcult case of the boundary
problems, wherein two scales meet, interesting things happen. For example
phase transitions ( like ice melting of into water ) reveal still other basic

3

features of the mathematical reality - the signiﬁcance of irrational numbers
like the golden ratio etc.

It seems that the reason that so far the philosophers of science have failed
to appreciate the signiﬁcance of the intrinsic existence of layers of reality as
presented here is because intuitively they have been believing in the existence
of a global, uniform and all encompassing reality - which they have been
trying to uncover, if not always through physical arguments than by using
metaphysical arguments.

So far no such universal physical reality has manifested itself. The real-
ity which has become clear in recent decades consists of almost disjoint sets
woven in a structured whole. It is nature which has forced the scientists to
accept the fact that it is structured and consists of diﬀerent layers of real-
ity. Once we have understood this fundamental structuring of the scientiﬁc
knowledge of nature, then it will allow us to tackle the problem of induction
as well.

Since the time of Hume the logical method of induction has been taking
centrestage in the thoughts of mathematicians and scientists in general and
philosophers in particular. There has been an onslaught against induction.
It has been warding oﬀ these attacks but it has had its back to the wall.
Basically the only reason it has managed to survive so far is because the
sciences, wherein it is extensively used, have actually been ”progressing”.
Whatever one may mean by the word progress, science and its associated
technology is indeed changing the world almost on a daily basis at present.
The arguments for and against induction are well documented in text
books ( Ladyman (2002) ) and other compilations ( Balashov and Rosenberg
(2002) ). We do not intend to go into the detail of the same here. however,
still to put the issues in proper context let me quote Broad (1887 - 1971)
who very crisply called induction, ”the glory of science and the scandal of
philosophy”.

In terms of the layers of reality, if one has a theory which explains the re-
ality at a particular layer, it had better be ”complete” in as much as it would
give a consistent description of the physical reality manifested in that layer.
This theory will involve its empirical justiﬁcations, mathematical framework
and reliable predictability. Hence a particular induction shall be applicable
In simple terms, one has to agree to this induction as it
in that regime.
actually ”works”. It works because in the regime under discussion, these set
of physical and mathematical arguments of the relevant inductive framework

4

explain ’all’ empirical information and make predictions which are found to
be correct.

It is a common feature, that scientists working in a particular discipline
( describing a particular layer of reality ) would soon start ﬁnding limits to
the applicability of that particular theory. They would ﬁnd that there are
situations wherein the particular inductive logic inherent in the description
of that layer of reality actually fails. Hence the scientists are forced to deﬁne
boundaries ( in terms of some physical parameters like say high energy/low
energy or small distance/large distance or low temperature/high temperature
etc.) within which a particular inductive logic works and beyond which it
fails.

But this does not mean that the particular theory describing the reality
manifesting itself within that particular layer is wrong.
It was correct in
as far as it was applicable - empirical aspects incorporated in the theory
and useful applications ( if there be any ), as technological spin oﬀs arising
from the particular theory, would testify to it. But it is not universally and
In struggling with these limitations
globally correct for all the situations.
of a particular theoretical reality, one does further experimentations with
diﬀerent mathematical models, until one ﬁnds that he/she has reasonable
understanding of another layer of reality. This forces one to appreciate and
use another set of inductive logic and so on. This is the way that nature has
been unfolding itself to the scientists.

As an example Newton’s gravitational mechanics was useful to explain
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. It was a consistent theoretical framework
which was very successful. Then came along Einstein’s theory of special rela-
tivity in 1905 and which shook the foundations of classical theory of gravity.
Did it prove Newtons gravitational force laws wrong? If one reads the books
in philosophy of science - in general the answer is that yes, Einstein’s theory
proved Newton’s theory wrong. It is unfortunate that many philosophers of
science actually think that Einstein’s theory proved Newton’s Theory wrong.
This involves blatant misunderstanding of the physics involved. In fact, even
today one can use Newtons laws of motion with great conﬁdence to under-
stand planetary motions up to a level of accuracy which is acceptable in most
of the situations. Only when one requires an accuracy to a much higher place
in decimals and when the velocities of objects involved are much higher (ie
approaching the velocity of light) does one need to incorporate the correc-
tions arising from Einstein’s theory. In reality Einstein’s theory deﬁnes the

5

limit (in terms of relative velocity etc.) on the Newton’s Law of Gravitation.
One should bear in mind that when a physical law has been empirically ver-
iﬁed to work under certain conditions (like temperature, pressure, distance,
energy etc) then under the same conditions it will continue to work the same
way always. If at all there arises a situation that one encounters a failure of
the same, then it just shows that one’s initial understanding was limited as
it did not take into account the situation in which it failed.

Another example, wherein one would explore diﬀerent layers of reality in
terms of diﬀerent inductive/theoretical framework, is that of classical ther-
modynamics description going over to kinetic theory of gases description
and thereafter to statistical mechanics description ( which itself may go over
from classical statistical mechanics to quantum statistical mechanics both
for fermions and bosons). At each layer of reality, there were experimental
and empirical statements which were translated into a suitable theoretical
framework with its relevant concepts and proper mathematical language.
Predictions were made and conﬁrmed. One gained conﬁdence in one’s in-
ductive logic when the same was used to ’control’ reality by making relevant
innovative technology to serve mankind and which could not have been visu-
alized without that particular induction involved. Then as one gains control
over various physical parameters like temperature, pressure and density etc
one may be forced to go to another layer of reality with its own inductive
logic. Today quantum statistical mechanics is trying to extend and establish
its own limits of applicability.

Still another example of layers of reality each with its own inductive logic
is that of geometrical optics going over to electrodynamics and thereafter
to quantum optics. All inductive logic in each subdiscipline is accurate and
reliable within its own limits.
It is never wrong or inapplicable in these
regimes. And each furnished its own technology which was applicable within
the limits speciﬁed for that particular layer of reality and its corresponding
inductive logic.

Understanding the boundaries between diﬀerent layers is a more challeng-
ing proposition. For a few such cases one may understand it by utilizing the
limiting process ( for example as in the mathematical language of calculus
). Hence one ﬁnds that in the limit of low density and high temperatures,
quantum statistical mechanical description would go over into the classical
statistical mechanical one.
In other cases like those of phase transitions,
like as in the early universe, as to how matter particles gained masses, ex-

6

otic mechanisms like the Higgs mechanism in the Standard Model of particle
physics are invoked. At present these boundary situations between diﬀerent
layers of reality are under active investigation and one looks forward to a
deeper understanding of nature arising from such endeavours.

Note that induction in ”linear” within each layer of reality. By ’linearity’
here I mean that inductive correlations are understood in a direct manner in
terms of a straightforward interpretation of theoretical terms with the exper-
imental reality. When one jumps to the next layer of reality then another set
of inductive laws are found to be applicable. Those are ’linear’ themselves.
But what about the boundary of the two layers of reality? I suggest that
this boundary involves a ” non-linear ” jump. One goes from one ”linear”
inductive logic of one layer of reality to another set of independent ”linear”
inductive logic of the other layer through a ” non-linear ” jump.

As an example of this non-linear jump let us look at the early universe
scenario in particle physics. As we stated a little earlier, the masses of parti-
cles like electron, quarks etc arise through a mathematical technique called
the Higgs Mechanism. This is a non-linear process with complicated math-
ematics. As such this deﬁnes the boundary between two layers of reality
which themselves are linear. Above the Higgs mechanism scale, the electrons
are massless and are understood in terms of a particular inductive logic and
below it another inductive logic manifests itself in terms of the Standard
Model of Particle Physics. So a ”non-linear” reality acts as a ”knot” to join
together two diﬀerent ”linear realities”.

I therefore propose ” a web of induction hypothesis ”. In terms of induc-
tion one may deﬁne existence of a ”web” of induction. Diﬀerent inductive
logical systems are correlated with each other through limits to form a web
of induction. This web of induction is what justiﬁes induction. There is no
universal and global inductive logic. Induction is justiﬁed because diﬀerent
layers of reality with their own limited but justiﬁed inductive logics hang
together in the form of a ”web”. The linear part of the induction ( at a
particular layer of reality ) forms the ”thread” part of the web. The non-
linear part of induction ( for the boundary cases ) forms the ”knot” part
of the web, So knots in the web connect the threads together. Induction is
”correct” because the resilience of the web of induction gives it strength and
validity.

It is because diﬀerent inductive logics (which describe diﬀerent layers of
reality) from a consistent and solid web in a multidimentional space is that

7

one may use these to describe the reality of nature. Each thread of the web
can only be understood in its total involvement with the rest of the threads
as well as knots. You cannot cut it at a point and hope that the rest will
remain intact. It is this web of induction that gives consistency to the whole
scientiﬁc enterprise.

Note that ”induction” gets justiﬁed as a valid means of acquiring knowl-
edge not because induction itself forms an essentially one single global entity
- as has implicitly been assumed by most of the philosophers of science. As
shown here ”Induction”, gets a global justiﬁcation because it consists of sev-
eral interconnected parts which are relevant for a consistent description of
the diﬀerent layers of reality. The whole thing stands ﬁrm, resilient and
consistently interconnected in the form of a web.

REFERENCES

Balashov, Y. and Rosenberg, A. (Ed.) (2002), ” Philosophy of Science -

contemporary readings ”, Routledge, London

Callender, C. and Nuggett, N. (2001), ” Physics meets philosophy at the

Planck Scale ”, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Ladyman, J. (2002), ” Understanding philosophy of science ”, Routledge,

London

8

