5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A ” RIP VAN WINKLE HYPOTHESIS ” TO
RESOLVE THE REALISM - ANTIREALISM
DEBATE

Afsar Abbas
Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar - 751005, India
afsar@iopb.res.in

The intensity of debate between the realists and antirealists shows no
sign of abating. Here a new hypothesis is proposed to resolve the issue. The
requirement of consistency and continuity are built-in in the methodology of
this hypothesis. This new hypothesis supports realism.

ABSTRACT

1

A persistent feature in the ﬁeld of philosophy of science is that of an-
tagonism between the respective advocates of realism and anti-realism. The
debate has continued since antiquity and shows no sign of petering out. Both
the sides have diligently stuck to their guns. In the present context, Nancey
Murphy (1990) summarizes, ”.. there are both modern and postmodern ver-
sions of realism and antirealism - hence the confusion, the inability to be
quite sure of what one is arguing against”.

This discussion between the various adherents of realism and those of an-
tirealism is well documented in books and treatises on philosophy of science.
I do not intend to go into details of the same here and would refer the reader
to a clear and neat exposition of the issues involved by James Ladyman (
Ladyman (2002) ).

If this is the state of aﬀairs, then clearly the question that one has to
address is whether we have been missing some essential aspect in this debate
between the realists and the antirealists. Given the signiﬁcance of the issues
involved, any new framework, which would help in clarifying the discussion
should be welcome. Here I would like to present a new perspective to resolve
this debate. This is done by proposing a new ”Rip Van Winkle hypothesis”.
To understand it, let me ﬁrst remind the reader of the story of Rip Van
Winkle. Washington Irving (1783 - 1859) wrote ”Rip Van Winkle and the
legend of sleepy hollow”. The story is that of a Dutch by the name of Rip
Van Winkle. He was an easy going fellow who liked to play with kids and
did not want be bothered with work. He had a nagging wife. To escape
her nagging he would often go wandering in the nearby Catskill Mountains
with his faithful dog named Wolf. In one such trip he came across a group
of dwarfs who were playing ninepins. He drank some brew from a keg they
had with them and as a result of this he went to sleep. When he woke up he
found that his dog was gone and he also saw a rusted weapon rather than
his shiny riﬂe, lying by his side. He was extremely puzzled. On coming back
to his village, he came to the amazing realization that he had woken up after
some 20 years of sleep.

Let us conduct a Gedanken experiment ( Gedanken in German means
”thought” ). Such gedanken experiments have been extensively used in sci-
ence and in physics in particular to reach consistent and ”correct” conclu-
sions. Gedanken experiment is a powerful tool in science.

Imagine two persons named respectively ”Antirealist” and ”Realist”. Mr.
Antirealist is a hardcore antirealist living in 17th Century London. Mr.

2

Realist is a committed realist who loves to argue with Mr. Antirealist. (
Here we are using the words realism and antirealism in the canonical manner
that these words are used today in the ﬁeld of philosophy of science in as
broad a context as possible ( Ladyman ( 2002) ) ). Once they both went
wandering into nearby woods. They came across some strange characters
who had a cask of tempting brew with them. Being thirsty they could not
resist drinking it and immediately went to sleep, just like what Rip Van
Winkle had done. But these two slept for a much longer period and let us
say, they wake up today in the 21st Century. How will they react to the new
realities that they shall encounter?

Mr. Antirealist will be completely ﬂabbergasted. His own antirealistic
philosophical convictions would not allow him to make sense of what he shall
observe. He would prefer to think that he is dreaming. He would have to
make arbitrary assumptions like supernatural powers, magic etc to make
sense of what he would be confronted with.

Mr. Realist, after overcoming the initial shock, would smile and say, ”
Aha, I understand it all. Just like in gravity and magnetism one has ﬁelds
which exert forces far away, I can understand transmission of sound and
pictures through some advanced technology as is available today. Well, that
is your TV and mobile phone. I always fancied myself ﬂying like a bird. They,
through ingenious use of science have made these aeroplanes. The light bulbs
are nothing more than controlled energy. What I could only imagine in my
wildest dreams has actually come to pass. Wonderful! Quite clearly I was
correct in believing in the reality of science and my friend Antirealist was
quite clearly oﬀ the track. I hope he realizes that now.”

From this gedanken ”experiment” one may conclude that Mr. Realist
was correct because his philosophy and understanding of nature was shown
to be consistent and continuous. That is - consistency and continuity of his
philosophical perspective over a span of several hundred years conﬁrms the
veracity of his ideology. On the other hand Mr Antirealist had to make in-
consistent and sudden breaks in his perspective of the physical world. Self
consistency and continuity are essential minimum requirements for the cor-
rectness of an ideological framework.

Existence of consistency is an extremely signiﬁcant requirement of any
In the
theoretical or mathematical framework in physics or mathematics.
1920’s the distinguished mathematician D. Hilbert ( Hilbert (1926) ) launched
an ambitious programme to provide a formalization of both logic and arith-

3

metic and which would prove rigorously the complete consistency of the fun-
damental axioms. No one doubted that mathematics being so basic should
indeed be self-consistent as well. However Kurt Goedel shocked everyone
by showing that Hilbert’s expectations were absolutely wrong! He showed (
Goedel (1931) ) that ﬁnitary proofs of self-consistency cannot be established
within the formalism of classical mathematics, or of set theory, or of the
axioms of Russell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica supplemented by
Peano’s axioms. This was a shocking blow to the consistency programme in
mathematics. This shows how signiﬁcant can the requirement of consistency
be for any discipline of knowledge.

The gedanken experiment exempliﬁed by the Rip Van Winkle hypothesis
above proves that due to the in-built consistency, the hypothesis of realism is
correct. Note that here self-consistency means that what was empirically and
theoretically understood to be true in the 17th century continues to be so
at present in the 21st century. Science would have grown in the intervening
period, and so it requires that there be just simple and natural embedding
of the physical structure known then, into the present physical framework.
On the other, hand antirealism fails miserably in this consistency test.

Equally signiﬁcant is the test of continuity which is implied by the Rip Van
Winkle hypothesis. This means that an ideology which can be demonstrated
to hold continuously over a long period of time ( for example in this case
for several hundred years ), demonstrates its resilience and intrinsic strength
which can necessarily arise from it being on the right track. Realism has it
and antirealism does not.

Note that the Rip Van Winkle hypothesis propounded here in support
of realism is very diﬀerent from Putnam’s ”no-miracles” hypothesis, which
supports realism by pointing out that it is the only philosophy which does not
require that the success of science be treated as a miracle. The no-miracles
hypothesis directly compares realism and antirealism at a particular instant
of time. So basically it is a ”static” test of realism. By static one means that
there is no concept of ﬂow of time herein. On the other hand the Rip Van
Winkle hypothesis is a dynamic test of realism. Dynamic means that realism
still holds true in spite of passage of time. In addition the Rip Van Winkle
hypothesis gains strength by relying upon the requirement of ”consistency”
and ”continuity” to conﬁrm the veracity of the ideology of realism. These
ideas do not ﬁgure in the no-miracles hypothesis, which relies directly upon
the concept of miracle itself.

4

REFERENCES

Goedel, K. (1931), ” Ueber formal untenstche ... ”, Mh. Math. Phys.,

Hilbert, D. (1926), ” Ueber das unendliche ”, Math. Annln, 95 , 161-190
Ladyman, J. (2002), ” Understanding philosophy of science ”, Routledge,

38, 173-198

London

Murphy, N. (1990), ” Scientiﬁc realism and postmodern philosophy ”.

Brit. J. Phil. Sci., 41, 291-303

Putnam, H. (1975), ” Mathematics, matter and method: philosophical

papers ” Vol I, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

5

