5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the study of neutrino properties

Y. H. Yuan∗
(Dated: December 12, 2005)

We review the discovery of the neutrino and outline the history of neutrino physics. Many
interesting phenomena involving the neutrino are exhibited. We also discuss the long-standing solar
neutrino puzzle and the properties of the neutrino which lead to various important results. We
present a possible experimental test of the neutrino property. In addition, neutrino oscillation and
neutrino spin precession are also demonstrated.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The elusive neutrino1 has played an important role in
our understanding of physics in many ways: from the par-
ity violation[1, 2, 3] of beta decay to the solar neutrino
puzzle; from the formulation of the four Fermion weak in-
teraction theory to the uniﬁcation of electromagnetic and
weak interactions into the electroweak interaction[4, 5, 6].
There are various open questions about neutrinos that
need both theoretical and experimental exploration. As
the most intriguing and fascinating fundamental parti-
cle, the neutrino is so important that neutrino physics
has become one of the most signiﬁcant branches of mod-
ern physics.

On December 4, 1930, W. Pauli proposed the neutrino
as a desperate-remedy to the observed continuous spec-
tra of energy for the outgoing electrons of beta decay.
In accurate measurements on beta decay process before
1930, physicists found the emited electron with a con-
tinuous energy spectrum, unlike alpha decay and gamma
decay in which the emitted particles carried away the
well-deﬁned energy which is equal to the total energy
diﬀerence of the initial and ﬁnal states. It meant that
a particular nucleus emitted an electron bearing unpre-
dictable energy in a particular transition. This experi-
mental result apparently violated the conservation laws
of energy and momentum. In order to solve this serious
problem Pauli proposed an entirely new particle in his
open letter[7] to the group of radioactives at the meeting
of the regional society in Tubingen:

“...This is the possibility that there might exist in the
nuclei electrically neutral particles, which I shall call neu-
trons, which have spin 1/2, obey the exclusion principle
and moreover diﬀer from light quanta in not travelling
with the velocity of light.”

“... I admit that my remedy may perhaps appear un-
likely from the start, since one probably would long ago
have seen the neutrons if they existed. But ‘nothing ven-
ture, nothing win’, and the gravity of the situation with
regard to the continuous beta spectrum is illuminated by
a pronouncement of my respected predecessor in oﬃce,
Herr Debye, who recently said to me in Brussels ‘Oh, it’s

best not to think about it at all-like the new taxes’. One
ought to discuss seriously every avenue of rescue.”

In his letter, Pauli called his new proposed particle-
the ”neutron” which is now called neutrino due to Enrico
Fermi. Pauli proposed that this new speculative neutral
particle might resolve the nonconservation of energy. If
the proposed neutrino and the electron were emitted si-
multaneously, the continuous spectum of energy might
be explained by the sharing of energy and momentum of
emitted particles in beta decay. The neutrino was ﬁrst ex-
perimentally detected by Fred Reines and Clyde Cowan
in 1956[8] using a liquid scintillation device. Their ex-
periment involved detecting the reaction p + νe → n + e+
exploiting antineutrinos from the Savannah river nuclear
reactor. This important discovery won the 1995 Nobel
prize in physics.
It is worth mentioning that long be-
fore the neutrino was experimentally detected, Enrico
Fermi[9] incorporated Pauli’s proposal in his brilliant
model for beta decay in the framework of quantum elec-
trodynamics in 1934. He showed clearly with his beta
decay theory that the neutron decayed into a proton,
an electron and a neutrino simultaneously. In 1957, B.
Pontecorvo[10] suggested that neutrino ﬂavor eigenstates
are superpositions of its mass eigenstates, thus as the
neutrino propogate it would undergo oscillation, which
is just similar to the K meson system. The little neu-
trino has found its application to a number of diﬀerent
research areas in physics, such as in particle physics, nu-
clear physics, cosmology and astrophysics. Thanks to
the conjecture of the neutrino by Pauli which rescues
the fundamental conservation laws of energy and mo-
mentum. Although his proposal contradicted the well-
accepted knowledge at the time on beta decay process,
his new beta decay process involving the neutrino was
not completely impossible experimentally.

II. THE PROPERTIES OF THE NEUTRINO

The solar neutrino problem is a famous puzzle on the
neutrino. The sun shines mainly because of the hydrogen
burning. The nuclear fusion reaction may be written as,

∗E-mail: henry@physics.wisc.edu
1 In this paper, neutrino means electron neutrino only except when

speciﬁed.

4p →4 He + 2e+ + 2νe

(2.1)

The positions produced in the above nuclear fusion re-
action was annihilated with electrons while the emitted

neutrinos hardly and weakly interact with matter there-
fore the sun may be regarded as a well-deﬁned neutrino
source shown in FIG.1. Thanks to the sun. So we may
have the great opportunity to study the properties of
the neutrino. The pioneering work of detecting the solar
neutrino was carried out by R. Davis[11]. His Homes-
take chlorine experiment was based upon the following
reaction,

37Cl + νe →37 Ar + e−

(2.2)

When detecting the neutrino emitted from the sun,
Davis consistently observed fewer solar neutrino capture
rate than the calculated capture rate predicted by J.
Bahcall[12] in chlorine using detailed computer models
of the solar interior in 1968. Later the missing neutrino
mystery was also observed by other groups using diﬀer-
ent materials. This is the long-standing solar neutrino
puzzel.

The SNO experiment [13] detected the solar neu-
trino which showed the ﬂavor change of the neutrino.
They measured only the high energy 8B solar neutrinos
through the reactions,

νe + d → p + p + e−
νx + d → p + n + νx
νx + e− → νx + e−

(CC)
(NC)
(ES)

.

In their measurement of the 8B neutrino ﬂuxes, they
assumed the standard spectrum shape[14] and obtained,

SNO(νe) = 1.75 ± 0.07 (stat.)+0.12
φCC
×106 cm
SNO(νx) = 2.39 ± 0.34(stat.)+0.16
φES

−2s

−1

−0.11 (sys.) ± 0.05 (theor.)

−0.14 (sys.) × 106 cm

−2s

−1

Their total ﬂux of active 8B neutrinos is,
−2s

φ(νx) = 5.44 ± 0.99 × 106 cm

−1.

(2.3)

which agrees with the predictions made from the stan-
dard solar models[12, 15].

Although SNO uses heavy water to detect the neu-
trino, as far as the charge current reaction is concerned,
SNO experiments are very similar to the ones carried
out at Super-Kamiokande[16, 17], which also show that
the neutrino ﬂavor change. They are both real time ex-
periments sensitive to 8B solar neutrinos only with the
Cherenkov detector. When comparing their measured
ﬂux via charge current reaction with the ﬂux obtained
by Super-Kamiokande Collaboration of the 8B ﬂux using
the elastic scattering reaction, they found the diﬀerence
was 0.57 ± 0.17 × 106 cm−2s−1, which was about 3.3σ.
This gives the direct evidence of the ﬂavor change of the
neutrino. As a consequence of the ﬂavor change, the neu-
trinos should have mass. The neutrino ﬂavor change was
also justiﬁed by the KamLAND reactor neutrino exper-
iment with liquid scintillator detector located at the old
Kamiokande site[18].

2

A great number of explanations were proposed to solve
the solar neutrino puzzle. The most popular one is the
neutrino oscillation. Next we will show the three ﬂavor
neutrino oscillation with the plane wave approximation.
A deﬁnite neutrino ﬂavor ﬁeld νf with ﬂavor f is a lin-
ear combination of the neutrino mass ﬁelds νm with the
deﬁnite mass Mm and deﬁnite energy Em, so

3

3

m=1
X

νf =

Uf mνm

(2.4)

m=1
X
wheref = e, µ, τ , Uf m are the entries of a unitary matrix.
Then we obtain,

|νf i =

U ∗

f m|νmi

(2.5)

namely the neutrino ﬂavor state is the superposition of
the neutrino mass eigenstates. Next, considering the neu-
trino mass state at time t, |νmit, using the Schrodinger
equation yields,

|νmit = e−iEmt|νmi

(2.6)

where |νmi represents the neutrino mass state at time 0 in
its rest frame. Combining with Eq.(2.5) we immediately
obtain the neutrino ﬂavor state at time t,

3

|νf it =

U ∗
f me−iEmt|νmi

=

=

m=1
X

3

f ′  
X

m=1
X

f ′
X

U ∗
f me−iEmtUf ′m

|νf ′i

!

M (νf → νf ′)|νf ′ i

(2.7)

where f ′ = e, µ, τ and M (νf → νf ′) represents the am-
plitude of neutrino ﬂavor transition at time t. That the
neutrino initially with ﬂavor f turns into a superposi-
tion of diﬀerent neutrino ﬂavors after traveling time t is
clearly shown in Eq.(2.7). Therefore we immediately ob-
tain the probability of the neutrino ﬂavor transition in
vacuum from νf to νf ′,

P = |M (νf → νf ′)|2

2

f m e−iEmt Uf ′m
U ∗

f mUf ′mUf m′U ∗
U ∗

=

=

3

(cid:12)
m=1
(cid:12)
X
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
m,m′
X

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
f ′m′ e−i(Em−Em′ )t (2.8)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

where m, m′ = 1, 2, 3 representing the neutrino mass
eigenstates. Next exploit the mass-energy relation due
to Einstein,

Em =

m + m2
p2

m ≈ p +

(2.9)

m2
m
2p

p

where we have assumed that all neutrino mass eigenstates
have the same momentum p and employed the relation
p ≫ mm because of the high energy neutrinos observed.
When plugging Eq.(2.9) into Eq.(2.8), yields the proba-
bility of the neutrino ﬂavor transition in vacuum from νf
to νf ′ ,

P =

f mUf ′mUf m′U ∗
U ∗

f ′m′e

m,m′
X
f mUf ′mUf m′U ∗
= U ∗

f ′m′ e−i(

∆m

2
mm′ t
2E

)t

−i(

m

2
m

2
m′

−m
2p

)t

(2.10)

where E is the neutrino energy in the massless limit
which is approximately equal to its momentum p due
to the extremely small mass of the neutrino and we have
deﬁned,

∆m2

mm′ ≡ m2

m − m2
m′

(2.11)

.

Another possible way in explaining the solar neutrino
puzzle is spin-ﬂavor precession[19, 20, 21].
It is based
upon the neutrino spin precession through the strong
magnetic ﬁeld in the convective zone of the sun. Fol-
lowing their proposals, the neutrino has a magnetic mo-
ment µ ≈ (10−11 − 10−10)µB where Bohr magneton
µB = e~
2mec . The spin of the neutrino would precess from
a left-handed to a right-handed helicity due to the mag-
netic moment as well as the electric dipole moment the
neutrino has when the neutrino passes through the strong
interior solar magnetic ﬁeld. To be more speciﬁc, a νeL
may ﬂip its spin and change its ﬂavor then turn into νµR
or ντ R (where L and R represent left-handed and right-
handed helicity respectively.) which would not interact
with the materials used in the solar neutrino experiments.
As a consequence, the neutrino spin precession leads to
the measured neutrino deﬁcit in the solar neutrino puz-
zle. The measured neutrino deﬁcit may also be explained
by particle interactions. Put in other word, when a neu-
trino interacts with an antineutrino they may produce
muon neutrino and muon antineutrino pair. The cross
section of this interaction would be greatly increased if
the neutrino possesses any charge. We propose that the
neutrino has a magnetic charge which has similarly puz-
zled physicists for a long time. This assumptiom is justi-
ﬁed by another famous interaction in which the neutrino
takes part–beta decay. As we know space inversion will
not conserve in the beta decay process. Actually in all
weak interactions involving neutrinos, parity violations

3

always happen. This behavior of the neutrino is quite
similar to the behavior of monopole under space inver-
sion. As J. Jackson pointed out in his famous book [22]
on Classical Electrodynamics:“...
it is a necessary con-
sequence of the existence of a particle with both elec-
tric and magnetic charges that space inversion and time
reversal are no longer valid symmetries of the laws of
physics. It is a fact, of course, that these symmetry prin-
ciples are not exactly valid in the realm of elementary
particle physics, but present evidence is that their vio-
lation is extremely small and associated somehow with
the weak interaction.” Since magnetic charge density is
a pseudoscalar, the signs of a magnetic charge are oppo-
site when observed from both the right-handed coordi-
nate system and the left-handed coordinate system. This
could result in the parity violation of the weak interac-
tion involving the neutrino. The neutrino has the electric
dipole moment ~d. Since the orientation of the neutrino
in its rest frame is characterized only by the orientation
of the internal vector — intrinsic angular momentum ~J,
~d and ~J must be either in the same direction or in the
opposite direction. We obtain ~d = L g ~J
2m where g is the
magnetic charge a particle has, m is the mass of that par-
ticle and the parameter L is called a Lande factor. Due to
the electric dipole moment of neutrino, nonconservation
of time reversal of weak interactions involving neutrinos
takes place. Moreover T violation induce the CP vio-
lation because of the L¨uders–Pauli theorem. The elec-
tric dipole moment makes the neutrino spin precession
explanation more convincing. When the neutrino mov-
ing through the strong interior solar magnetic ﬁeld, the
magnetic ﬁeld would cause neutrino spin precession, giv-
ing rise to the surprising discrepancy between the calcu-
lated and observed capture rates of solar neutrino. Before
completing this section, we give a possible experimental
test based upon the Faraday induction method. Place
a radioactive source at the center of an enclosed super-
conducting sphere. Whenever β-decay of the radioactive
source happens, an anti-neutrino is released which would
induce the supercurrents on the superconducting sphere
due to the proposal. A magnetometer SQUID (super-
conducting quantum interference device) connected to
the sphere is need to monitor the currents. To elimi-
nate any unwanted inﬂuence of electrically charged par-
ticles, an absorbent layer would be introduced between
the radioactive source and the enclosed superconducting
sphere. Even though, the sensitive devices in the experi-
ment are vulnerable to spurious signals, it is still an ideal
way to detect the monopole since the method is indepen-
dence of the particle’s mass and velocity. The detectors
should be placed inside a magnetic shield made up of
lead or mumetal to protect the detectors from external
magnetic ﬁelds.

III. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

4

FIG. 1: Diagram of the hydrogen burning in the sun which
shows that the sun is a well-deﬁned neutrino source. Through
the nuclear fusion reaction of four hydrogen nuclei(namely
protons), a helium nucleus, two positions and two neutrinos
are produced. Then the positions are annihilated with elec-
trons while the emitted neutrinos interact hardly and weakly.
As a consequence, a number of solar neutrinos are observed
on the earth.

We have reviewed the discovery and the history of neu-
trino physics in our paper. A number of interesting phe-
nomena involving the neutrino have been exhibited. We
have studied the long-standing solar neutrino puzzle and
the properties of the neutrino which lead to various inter-
esting results. In addition, neutrino oscillation and spin
precession have also been discussed. We have presented a
possible experimental test of the neutrino property. This
year is the unprecedented World Year of Physics which
marks the hundredth anniversary of the pioneering con-
tributions of Albert Einstein. We dedicate this paper to
Albert Einstein.

[1] T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 104, 254, (1956).
[2] C. S. Wu, E. Ambler, R. W. Hayward, D. D. Hoppes and

R. P. Hudson, Phys. Rev. 105, 1413, (1957).

[3] R. L. Garwin, L. M. Lederman and M. Weinrich, Phys.

Rev. 105,

[4] S. L. Glashow, Nucl. Phys. 22, 579 (1961).
[5] A. Salam, in Elementary Particle Theory, Proc. of the
8th Nobel symposium, Aspenasgarden, 1968, ed. by N.
Svartholm, p.367

[6] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264 (1967).
[7] Charles Enz, No time to be brief-A scientiﬁc biography

87, 071301 (2001); Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 011301 (2002);
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 011302 (2002)

[14] C. Ortiz et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2909 (2000);
[15] A.S. Brun, S. Turck-Chi`eze, and J.P. Zahn, Astrophys.
J. 525, 1032 (1999); S. Turck-Chi`eze et al., Ap. J. Lett.,
v. 555 July 1, 2001.

[16] Super-Kamiokande Collaboration, S. Fukuda et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 81, 1562 (1998); S. Fukuda et al., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 86, 5651 (2001).

[17] Y. Ashie et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 101801 (2004); Y.

Ashie et al., Phys.Rev. D71 (2005) 112005.

of Wolfgang Pauli, Oxford university press, (2002)

[18] KamLAND collaboration, T.Araki et al., Phys. Rev.

[8] F. Reines and C. Cowan, Science, 124 (1956) 10
[9] E. Fermi, Z. fur Physik 88,161, (1934)
[10] B. Pontecorvo, J. Exptl. Theoret. Phys. 33, 549 (1957),

Sov. Phys. JETP, 6, 429, (1957)

[11] R. Davis, Jr., D. S. Harmer and K. C. Hoﬀman, Phys.

Rev. Lett 20, 1205, (1968).

Lett. 94, 081801 (2005).

[19] A. Cisneros, Astrophys. Space Sci.10, 87 (1971).
[20] M.B. Voloshin and M.I. Vysotski, Yad. Fiz. (Sov. J. Nucl.

Phys.) 44, 845 (1986).

[21] L.B. Okun, Yad. Fiz. (Sov. J. Nucl. Phys.) 44, 847 (1986).
[22] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd edition,

[12] J.N. Bahcall, M. H. Pinsonneault, and S. Basu,

John Wiley & Sons, New York, (1975)

astro-ph/0010346 v2.

[13] SNO collaboration, Q.R. Ahmed et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.

