5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
1
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Historical Background as an Essential

Ingredient for the Understanding of New

Developments in Quantum Mechanics

Departement d’informatique et de recherche oprationnelle

Universite de Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Prashant ∗

Abstract

Quantum Mechanics is being taught for the last many decades at both un-

dergraduate as well as post graduate levels in universities world over.

Inclusion

of historical background i.e. development of the subject in chronological order,

description of Gedanken experiments, information regarding Solvay/ Copenhagen

Conferences/ Colloquium and biographies of well known contributors in this ﬁeld

may deﬁnitely give a broader understanding of the subject. This may create an in-

terest in understanding the new developments and this article is an attempt in that

direction to highlight the rich past of Quantum Mechanics and how it got shaped

by great minds to its present form.

Keywords: Quantum mechanics, historical, Copenhagen, Solvay, Bohr, Einstein.

1 INTRODUCTION:

Quantum Mechanics is being taught for the last many decades at both undergraduate

as well as post graduate levels in universities the world over. If we have a look on the

∗Corresponding author: Prashant, e-mail: prashant@iro.umontreal.ca

1

contents of the syllabi of various Universities, we ﬁnd it starts from wave nature of matter,

Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Schrodinger’s equation - it’s development for solving

one and three dimensional problems. Besides these topics the other topics that are usually

taught include Dirac’s formalism of QM, scattering theory, angular momentum, identi-

cal particles, perturbation theory-various kinds of approximation methods, relativistic

QM, radiation theory both semi-classical and quantum theory, ﬁeld theory and Quantum

electro-dynamics (QED).

When a student is being exposed to the concept of wave nature of matter or Heisenberg’s

uncertainty principle or probabilistic interpretation of the wave function: we generally

lack in providing the essential historical background in the subject matter. Right from

the theory of black body radiation of Planck, De Broglie’s concept of matter waves, the

contributions of Heisenberg, Schrodinger, Dirac and more recently Prof. Feynman to the

subject of QM - due weightage should be given to explain the chronological development

of QM with important events that took place. A suitable coverage of EPR Paradox,

Bell’s theorem and its experimental veriﬁcation, Quantum interference and coherent states

entanglement etc. should be included in the course contents. This will help a student

even from non Physics stream to understand the subject of QM and hence also grasp

new developments taking place in the scientiﬁc world. This type of treatment of the

subject may be helpful to the budding quantum information theorists who are trying to

understand quantum mechanics ab initio.

1.1 Chronological development of Quantum Mechanics:

The story of quantum mechanics is a story full of serendipity, personal squabbles, and

opportunities missed and taken and of luck both good and bad. The development of

quantum mechanics as a uniﬁed structure did not take place in the smooth way that

is usually presented in a text book. But it is important to know the development as

mentioned by Ludwig (1968):

2

Without taking account of its historical development, an existing theory often appears

almost as if it had ”fallen from heaven”. However, the question of the development of a

theory is important not only to satisfy our curiosity but also because much can be learnt

from it for the future.

The three founding fathers of modern QM are Heisenberg, Schrodinger and Dirac. Now

we may deﬁnitely add the name of Prof. Feynman in this list.

The development of QM may be covered under the following heads:

1. The old quantum theory.

2. The matrix formulation of quantum mechanics

3. The wave function formulation of quantum mechanics

4. The Bohr-Einstein Debate and EPR Paradox

5. The amplitude formulation of quantum mechanics.

2 THE OLD QUANTUM THEORY

Although the ideas of Planck did not take the world by storm, they did develop a growing

following and were applied to more and more situations. The resulting ideas, now called

”old quantum theory”, were all of the same type: Classical mechanics was assumed to

hold, but with the additional assumption that only certain values of a physical quantity

(the energy, say, or the projection of a magnetic arrow) were allowed. Any such quantity

was said to be ”quantized”. The trick seemed to be to guess the right quantization rules

for the situation under study, or to ﬁnd a general set of quantization rules that would

work for all situations.

For example, in 1905 Albert Einstein (age 26) postulated that the total energy of a

beam of light is quantized. Just one year later he used quantization ideas to explain

the heat/ temperature puzzle for diatomic gases. Five years after that, in 1911, Arnold

3

Sommerfeld (age 43) at Munich began working on the implications of energy quantization

for position and speed.

In 1913, Niels Bohr (age 28), a Dane who had recently worked in Rutherford’s labo-

ratory, introduced quantization ideas for the hydrogen atom. His theory was remarkably

successful in explaining the colors emitted by hydrogen glowing in a discharge tube, and it

sparked enormous interest in developing and extending the old quantum theory. William

Wilson (England) and Sommerfeld made progress on the implications of energy quanti-

zation for position and speed.

1900: Planck introduced a drastic assumption that the oscillators can only assume

discrete energies. Planck a German scientist was awarded the 1918 Nobel Prize in Physics

for the discovery of energy quanta; his Nobel Lecture was on ’The genesis and present

state of development of the quantum theory’.

• It may be of interest to mention that in an unpublished letter to R.W. Wood, Planck
wrote that the postulate of energy quanta was ’an act of desperation done because

a theoretical explanation had to be supplied at all cost, whatever the price.’

• When Ernst G. Straw having learnt that Max Planck was no more he revealed this
news slowly to Einstein. On hearing it Einstein said, ”He was one of the ﬁnest

people I have ever known and one of my best friends: but you know he did not really

understand Physics.” When asked how he could say such a thing about Planck,

Einstein said, ”during the eclipse of 1919 Planck stayed up all night to see if it

would conﬁrm the bending of light by the gravitational ﬁeld of the sun. If he had

really understood the way the general theory of relativity explains the equivalence of

inertial and gravitational mass, he would have gone to bed the way I did”.

1905: Einstein (German) introduced the light quanta-received the 1921 Nobel Prize in

Physics for his discovery of the law of Photo electric Eﬀect and not for his theory of

relativity.

1913: Bohr (Danish) gave the ﬁrst successful interpretation of atomic spectra. The

quantization of angular momenta was put forward by Bohr in a subsequent paper in the

4

same year. Bohr was awarded the 1922 Noble Prize in Physics for his ’investigation of the

structure of atoms and of the radiation emanating from them’. His Noble Lecture on ’The

structure of the atom’ gives a good summary of the important results in atomic theory.

1914: Franck (German) and Hertz (German) proved experimentally the discrete energy

states of atoms, a hypothesis put forward by Bohr in 1913. Frank and Hertz received the

1925 Noble Prize in Physics ’for their discovery of the laws governing the impact of the

electron upon an atom’.

1917: Einstein put forward the existence of stimulated emission and introduced the

famous A and B coeﬃcients which are now known as the ’Einstein coeﬃcients’.

1922: Stern and Gerlach performed their famous experiment which demonstrated the

existence of space quantization.

1923: Compton Eﬀect. Compton (American) shared the 1927 Nobel Prize in Physics.

1924 : De Broglie (French) - introduced the idea of matter waves - was awarded the 1929

Nobel Prize in Physics ’for his discovery of the wave nature of electrons’.

1925: W. Pauli (Austrian) put forward the ’fourth quantum number of the electron,’ and

the exclusion principle - was awarded the 1945 Nobel Prize in Physics for the discovery of

the exclusion principle. After studying Pauli’s paper, Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit (Dutch)

put forward the idea of the spinning electron.

1925-1928 : In 1925 Heisenberg (German) put forward the ’Quantum-theoretical me-

chanics based exclusively on relationships between quantities observables in principle’ -

further developed by Born (English) and Jordan in the same year.

Schrodinger’s papers came in 1926. In 1927 Heisenberg formulated his famous uncer-

tainty principle. Also in the same year Born developed his Quantum - Mechanical Theory

of scattering of electrons by atoms and -Dirac (English) developed the theory of radiation.

In 1928 Dirac gave his relativistic wave equation which led to the prediction of ’positron’.

In 1932 Nobel Prize in Physics went to Heisenberg for the creation of QM. The 1933

Nobel Prize in Physics was shared by Schrodinger and Dirac for the discovery of new

productive forms of atomic theory and the 1954 Nobel Prize in Physics went to Max

Born for his fundamental research in quantum mechanics, especially for his statistical

5

interpretation of the wave function.

In 1927 Davisson (US) and Germer and independently G.P. Thomson (English) ob-

served electron diﬀraction patterns produced by metal foils which established the exis-

tence of de Broglie waves. The 1937 Nobel Prize in Physics was shared by Davisson and

Thomson ’for their experimental discovery of the diﬀraction of electrons by crystals.’ In

1928 Gamow in Germany and Gurney and Condon in USA reported the ﬁrst major ap-

plication of quantum mechanics, namely, the barrier leakage interpretation of the natural

radioactive decay of some elements emitting alpha particles.

3 THE MATRIX FORMULATION OF QUANTUM

MECHANICS:

As more and more situations were encountered, more and more recipes for allowed values

were required. This development took place mostly at Niels Bohr’s Institute for Theo-

retical Physics in Copenhagen, and at the University of Gottingen in northern Germany.

The most important actors at Gottingen were Max Born (age 43, an established profes-

sor) and Werner Heisenberg (age 23, a freshly minted Ph.D. from Sommerfeld in Munich).

According to Born:

At Gottingen we also took part in the attempts to distill the unknown mechanics

of the atom out of the experimental results..... The art of guessing correct

formulas .... was brought to considerable perfection.

Heisenberg particularly was interested in general methods for making guesses. He

began to develop systematic tables of allowed physical quantities, be they energies, or

positions, or speeds. Born looked at these tables and saw that they could be interpreted

as mathematical matrices. Fifty years later matrix mathematics would be taught even

in high schools. But in 1925 it was an advanced and abstract technique, and Heisenberg

struggled with it. His work was cut short in June 1925.

6

4 THE WAVE FUNCTION FORMULATION OF QUAN-

TUM MECHANICS:

While this work was going on at Gottingen and Helgoland, others were busy as well. In

1923 Louis de Broglie (age 31), associated an ”internal periodic phenomenon” - a wave

- with a particle. He was never very precise about just what that meant. (De Broglie

is sometimes called ”Prince de Broglie” because his family descended from the French

nobility. To be strictly correct, however, only his eldest brother could claim the title.

It fell to Erwin Schrodinger, an Austrian working in Zurich, to build this vague idea

into a theory of wave mechanics. He did so during the Christmas season of 1925 (at age

38).

In short just twenty ﬁve years after Planck glimpsed the ﬁrst sight of a new physics,

there was not one, but two competing versions of that new physics! The two versions

seemed utterly diﬀerent and there was an acrimonious debate over which one was correct.

In a footnote to a 1926 paper Schrodinger claimed to be ”discouraged, if not repelled” by

matrix mechanics. Meanwhile, Heisenberg wrote to Pauli (8 June 1926) that :

The more I think of the physical part of the Schrodinger theory, the more

detestable I ﬁnd it. What Schrodinger writes about visualization makes scarcely

any sense, in other words I think it is shit. The greatest result of his theory is

the calculation of matrix elements.

Fortunately the debate was soon settled: in 1926 Schrodinger and, independently, Carl

Eckert (age 24) of Caltech proved that the two new mechanics, although very diﬀerent

in superﬁcial appearance, were equivalent to each other.

[Very much as the process of

adding Arabic numerals is quite diﬀerent from the process of adding roman numerals, but

the two processes nevertheless always give the same result.] (Pauli also proved this, but

never published the result).

7

4.1 Applications of above approaches

With not just one, but two complete formulations of quantum mechanics in hand, the

quantum theory grew explosively.

It was applied to atoms, molecules, and solids.

It

solved with ease the problem of helium that had defeated the old quantum theory. It

resolved questions concerning the structure of stars, the nature of superconductors, and

the properties of magnets. One particularly important contributor was P.A.M. Dirac,

who in 1926 (at age 22) extended the theory to relativistic and ﬁeld theoretic situations.

Another was Linus Pauling, who in 1931 (at age 30) developed quantum mechanical ideas

to explain chemical bonding, which previously had been understood only on empirical

grounds. Even today quantum mechanics is being applied to new problems and new

situations. It would be impossible to mention all of them.

1931 : In order to explain the continuous beta ray spectra, Pauli in 1931 suggested the

1934 : Fermi (Italian) developed the famous theory of beta decay - was awarded the 1938

existence of the neutrino.

Nobel Prize in Physics.

1935 : EPR Paradox.

5 THE BOHR-EINSTEIN DEBATE AND EPR PARA-

DOX

ment that:

The extraordinary success of quantum mechanics in applications did not overwhelm every-

one. A number of scientists, including Schrodinger, de Broglie, and — most prominently

- Einstein, remained unhappy with the standard probabilistic interpretation of quantum

mechanics. In a letter to Max Born (4 December 1926), Einstein made his famous state-

Quantum mechanics is very impressive. But an inner voice tells me that it is

not yet the real thing. The theory produces a good deal but hardly brings us

closer to the secret of the Old one. I am at all events convinced that He does

not play dice.

8

In concrete terms, Einstein’s ”inner voice” led him, until his death, to issue occasional

detailed critiques of quantum mechanics and its probabilistic interpretation. Niels Bohr

undertook to reply to these critiques, and the resulting exchange is now called the ”Bohr-

Einstein debate”. At one memorable stage of the debate (Fifth Solvay Congress, 1927),

Einstein made an objection similar to the one quoted above and Bohr replied by pointing

out the great caution, already called for by ancient thinkers, in ascribing attributes to

Providence in every-day language.

These two statements are often paraphrased as, Einstein to Bohr. ”God does not play

dice with the universe.” Bohr to Einstein.

: ”Stop telling God how to behave !” While

the actual exchange was not quite so dramatic and quick as the paraphrase would have

it, there was nevertheless a wonderful rejoinder from what must have been a severely

exasperated Bohr.

On Dec. 12, 1951 Einstein had written to his friend Basso ”all these ﬁfty years of

conscious brooding have brought me no nearer to the answer of the question what are light

quanta?” Now a days every Tom, Dick and Harry thinks he knows it, but he is mistaken”.

Incidentally, Einstein and Bohr met for the ﬁrst time in Berlin in 1920 and immediately

appreciated each other. After the meeting Einstein wrote to Bohr,”Not often in life had

a human being caused me such joy by his mere presence as you did”. To which Bohr

responded ”To meet you and to talk with you was one of the greatest experience I ever

had.”

Bohr’s diﬀerences with Einstein were clearly exposed during the Solvay conference of

Brussel’s in 1927. Einstein opposed the basic statistical character of the quantum theory.

His remark is justly famous - ’God does not play dice with the fates of men.’ Bohr’s reply

is equally famous ’One should not prescribe to God what He should do.’

Schrodinger never liked the idea of quantum jumps. He remarked, ”If all this damned

quantum jumping were really here to stay, I should be sorry I ever got involved with

9

quantum theory”. Bohr replied, ”But the rest of us are extremely grateful that you did.”

1964: C.H. Townes (US), Nikolai Basov and A.Prokhorov (Russian) - invention of the

MASER and theory of coherent atomic radiation -awarded 1964 Nobel Prize in Physics.

1965 : Richard Feynman, (US) J. Schwinger (US) and Shin-Ichiro Tomonaga (Japanese)

- awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics (1965) for development of quantum electrodynamics

(QED).

On the other hand, the Bohr-Einstein debate also had at least one salutary product. In

1935 Einstein, in collaboration with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, invented a situa-

tion in which the results of quantum mechanics seemed completely at odds with common

sense, a situation in which the measurement of a particle at one location could reveal

instantly information about a second particle far away. The three scientists published a

paper which claimed that ”No reasonable deﬁnition of reality could be expected to permit

this”. For example, when one ﬂips a coin it appears that the result (either heads or tails)

is a completely random process. On the other hand, if we exactly see how the air in the

room was moving(or, if we did the toss in a place where there was no air) and we used

a machine to ﬂip the coin so we would know, how the coin was ﬂipped, then we could

predict precisely the outcome. Since we lack this knowledge, the results of tossing the

coin appear random but only because there are variables (the air movement and how we

ﬂipped the coin) that we don’t know about. Bohr produced a recondite response and the

issue was forgotten by most physicists, who were justiﬁably busy with the applications of

rather than the foundations of quantum mechanics.

Here I may also mention the culmination of the Einstein - Bohr dual in 1935 that is

what is known as the EPR paradox; E for Einstein, P for Podolsky and R for Rosen. This

time, however, EPR published their apprehension about the uncertainty principle directly

in Physical Review (vol. 47, p. 777 (1935). Bohr and Rosenfeld were working at that

time on some problem in electrodynamics. When Bohr saw this paper he immediately

asked Rosenfeld to stop his work and said ”Let us ﬁrst get this paradox cleared” they, of

course, did it.

10

But the ideas did not vanish entirely, and this eventually raised the interest of John Bell.

In 1964 Bell used the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen situation to produce a theorem about the

results from certain distant measurements for any deterministic scheme, not just classical

mechanics. In 1982 Alain Aspect and his collaborators put Bell’s theorem to the test and

found that nature did indeed behave in the manner that Einstein (and others!) found so

counterintuitive to believe.

6 THE AMPLITUDE FORMULATION OF QUAN-

TUM MECHANICS:

It is called amplitude mechanics (or ”the sum over histories technique”, or ”the many

paths approach”, or ”the path integral formulation”, or ”the Lagrangian approach”, or

”the method of least action” ) and it was developed by Richard Feynman in 1941 while he

was a graduate student (age 23) at Princeton. Its discovery is well described by Feynman

himself in his Nobel lecture. Feynman’s thesis advisor, John Archibald Wheeler (age 30),

was equally impressed. He believed that the amplitude formulation of quantum mechanics

- although mathematically equivalent to the matrix and wave formulations - was so much

more natural than the previous formulations that it had a chance of convincing quantum

mechanic’s much determined critic. Wheeler writes:

Visiting Einstein one day, I could not resist telling him about Feynman’s new

way to express quantum theory. ”Feynman has found a beautiful picture to

understand the probability amplitude for a dynamical system to go from one

speciﬁed conﬁguration at one time to another speciﬁed conﬁguration at a later

time. He treats on a footing of absolute equality every conceivable history that

leads from the initial state to the ﬁnal one, no matter how crazy the motion in

between. The contributions of these histories diﬀer not at all in simpler way to

see what quantum theory is all about ! Doesn’t this marvelous discovery make

you willing to accept the quantum theory, Professor Einstein?” He replied in

a serious voice, ”I still cannot believe that God plays dice. But may be”, he

smiled, ”I have earned the right to make my mistakes.”

11

Now a word of solace for Einstein’s view. Dirac, who earlier strongly advocated Heisen-

berg form of quantum mechanics has said in 1975

The present form of quantum mechanics should not be considered as the ﬁnal form....

it is the best that one could do up till now.... It is quite likely that at some future time

we may get an improved quantum mechanics in which there will be return to determinism

and which will therefore justify the Einstein point of view.

7 A BRIEF HISTORY OF QUANTUM COMPUT-

ING

The idea of a computational device based on quantum mechanics was ﬁrst explored in

1970’s and early 1980’s by physicists and computer scientists such as Charles H. Bennett

of the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Paul A. Benioﬀ of Argonne National

Laboratory in Illinois, David Deutsch of the University of Oxford, and the late Richard

P. Feynman of the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The idea emerged when

scientists were pondering the fundamental limits of computation. They understood that

if technology continued to abide by Moore’s Law, then the continually shrinking size

of circuitry packed onto silicon chips would eventually reach a point where individual

elements would be no larger than a few atoms. Here a problem arose because at the

atomic scale the physical laws that govern the behavior and properties of the circuit are

inherently quantum mechanical in nature, not classical. This then raised the question of

whether a new kind of computer could be devised based on the principles of quantum

physics.

Feynman was among the ﬁrst to attempt to provide an answer to this question by

producing an abstract model in 1982 that showed how a quantum system could be used

to do computations. He also explained how such a machine would be able to act as a

simulator for quantum Physics. In other words, a physicist would have the ability to carry

out experiments in quantum physics inside a quantum mechanical computer.

12

Later, in 1985, Deutsch realized that Feynman’s assertion could eventually lead to a

general purpose quantum computer and published a crucial theoretical paper showing that

any physical process, in principle, could be modeled perfectly by a quantum computer.

Thus, a quantum computer would have capabilities far beyond those of any traditional

classical computer. After Deutsch published this paper, the search began to ﬁnd interest-

ing applications for such a machine.

Unfortunately, all that could be found were a few rather contrived mathematical prob-

lems until Shor circulated in 1994 a preprint of a paper in which he set out a method

for using Quantum Computers to crack an important problem in number theory, namely

factorization. He showed how an ensemble of mathematical operations, designed specif-

ically for a quantum computer, could be organized to enable such a machine to factor

huge numbers extremely rapidly, much faster than is possible on conventional computers.

With this breakthrough, quantum computing transformed from a mere academic curiosity

directly to a national and world interest.

8 NEW DEVELOPMENTS - THE QUANTUM COM-

PUTER

To explain what makes quantum computers so diﬀerent from their classical counterparts

we begin by having a closer look at a basic chunk of information namely one bit. From

a physical point of view a bit is a physical system which can be prepared in one of the

two diﬀerent states representing two logical values - no or yes, false or true, or simply

0 or 1. However, if we choose an atom as a physical bit then quantum mechanics tells

us that apart from the two distinct electronic states the atom can be also prepared in a

coherent superposition of the two states. This means that the atom is both in state 0 and

state 1. There is no equivalent of this superposition in the classical world, it is a purely

quantum mechanical phenomenon. Since we are used to seeing classical physics at work

in the every day world, such quantum phenomena often seem counter-intuitive.

13

Now we push the idea of superposition of numbers a bit further. Consider a register

composed of three physical bits. Any classical register of that type can store in a given

moment of time only one out of eight diﬀerent numbers i.e. the register can be in only

one out of eight possible conﬁgurations such as 000,001,010,......111. A quantum register

composed of three qubits can store in a given moment of time all eight numbers in a

quantum superposition.

This is quite remarkable that all eight numbers are physically present in the register

but it should be no more surprising than a qubit being both in state 0 and 1 at the

same time.

If we keep adding qubits to the register we increase its storage capacity

exponentially i.e. three qubits can store 8 diﬀerent numbers at once, four qubits can store
16 diﬀerent numbers at once, and so on; in general L qubits can store 2L numbers at once.
Once the register is prepared in a superposition of diﬀerent numbers we can perform

operations on all of them. For example, if qubits are atoms then suitably tuned laser

pulses aﬀect atomic electronic states and evolve initial superpositions of encoded numbers

into diﬀerent superpositions. During such evolution each number in the superposition is

aﬀected and as the result we generate a massive parallel computation albeit in one piece of

quantum hardware. This means that a quantum computer can in only one computational
step perform the same mathematical operation on 2L diﬀerent input numbers encoded in
coherent superpositions of L qubits. In order to accomplish the same task any classical
computer has to repeat the same computation 2L times or one has to use 2L diﬀerent
processors working in parallel. In other words a quantum computer oﬀers an enormous

gain in the use of computational resources such as time and memory.

Richard Feynman was among the ﬁrst to recognize the potential in quantum super-

position for solving problems much faster. For example a system of 500 qubits, which

is impossible to simulate classically, represents a quantum superposition of as many as
2500 states. Each state would be classically equivalent to a single list of 500 1’s and 0’s.
Combination of laser light and photons can induce non-trivial logic and can be used in

quantum computation. This kind of quantum logic gates are currently being implemented

by experimental groups both in Europe and in the U.S.A.

14

8.1 Applications of Quantum Computing

Encryption, is one of the applications of a quantum computer. In addition, Shor has put

together a toolbox of mathematical operations that can only be performed on a quantum

computer, many of which he used in his factorization algorithm. Furthermore, Feynman

asserted that a quantum computer could function as a kind of simulator for quantum

physics, potentially opening the doors to many discoveries in the ﬁeld. Currently the

power and capability of a quantum computer is primarily theoretical speculation; the

advent of the ﬁrst fully functional quantum computer will undoubtedly bring many new

and exciting applications.

Thus we see that inclusion of the aspects of Chronological development of QM de-

scription of various Gedanken Experiments, biographies of well known scientists who

contributed in this ﬁeld in our teaching methods will give a broader understanding of the

subject and will deﬁnitely help in understanding the new developments taking place in

the scientiﬁc world.

9 FUTURE OUTLOOK

At present, quantum computers and quantum information technology remains in its pi-

oneering stage. At this very moment obstacles are being surmounted that will provide

knowledge needed to thrust quantum computers up to their rightful position as the fastest

computational machines in existence. Error correction has made promising progress to

date nearing a point now where we may have the tools required to build a computer

robust enough to adequately withstand the eﬀects of decoherence. Quantum hardware,

on the other hand, remain an emerging ﬁeld but the work done thus far suggests that it

will only be a matter of time before we have devices large enough to test Shor’s and other

quantum algorithms. Thereby, quantum computers will emerge as the superior compu-

tational devices at the very least, and perhaps one day make today’s modern computer

obsolete. Quantum computation has its origins in highly specialized ﬁelds of theoretical

physics, but its future undoubtedly lies in the profound eﬀect it will have on the lives of

15

all mankind.

Acknowledgements: I dedicate this article to Almighty in full faith. I also acknowl-

edge the inspiration for research from Prof. Y M Gupta and also Prof. Gilles Brassard

for providing encouragement and support in complementing the work.

10 Reference:

Verlag, New York (1982).

[1] J. Mehra and A. Helmut., The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, Springer-

[2] W. Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond, Harper and Row, Publishers, New-York (1972).

[3] D. Deutsch and A. Ekert, Quantum Computation, Physics World, March (1998).

[4] J. Preskill, ”Battling Decoherence: The Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computer”, Physics

Today, June (1999).

16

