5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Theories of Physics and Impossibilities

Elem´er E Rosinger
Department of Mathematics
and Applied Mathematics
University of Pretoria
Pretoria
0002 South Africa
eerosinger@hotmail.com

Abstract

The role of impossibilities in theories of Physics is mentioned and a
recent result is recalled in which Quantum Mechanics is characterized
by three information-theoretic impossibilities. The inconvenience of
the asymmetries established by such impossibilities is pointed out.

1. Preliminary Remarks

Theories of Physics were seen by Einstein as falling into two main
categories, [1].
Some are constructive as :

”they attempt to build up a picture of the more complex
phenomena out of the materials of a relatively simple for-
mal scheme from which they start out. Thus the Kinetic
Theory of Gases seeks to reduce mechanical, thermal and
diﬀusional processes to movements of molecules ...”.

Other theories can be seen as principle theories, since :

”these employ the analytic, not synthetic method. The
elements which form their basis and starting point are
not hypothetically constructed but empirically discovered
ones, general characteristics of natural processes, princi-
ples that give rise to mathematically formulated criteria

1

which the separate processes or the theoretical representa-
tions of them have to satisfy. Thus the science of Thermo-
dynamics seeks the analytical means to deduce necessary
conditions, which separate events have to satisfy, from the
universally experienced fact that perpetuum motion is im-
possible.”

And in Einstein’s view the Theory of Relativity, for instance, belongs
to the second above category.

These second category theories of Physics recall Euclidean Geometry
which had impressed Einstein himself during his school years. Indeed,
one starts from certain empirically evident principles, and then based
on them, constructs the whole theory by using logical deductions.

Another most intriguing remark of Einstein relates to the foundational
role of impossibilities in certain theories of Physics, [2] :

”The totality of physical phenomena is of such a character
that it gives no basis for the introduction of the concept
of ’absolute motion’, or shorter but less precise : There is
no absolute motion. It might seem that our insight would
gain little from such a negative statement. In reality, how-
ever, it is a strong restriction for the conceivable laws of
nature. In this sense there exists an analogy between the
Theory of Relativity and Thermodynamics. The latter,
too, is based on a negative statement :
’There exists no
perpetuum mobile.’ ”

In fact, Special Relativity is based solely on two impossibilities :

• there is no absolute motion,

• no physical entity can move faster than light in vacuum.

The remarkable fact is that in Physics, within the second category
theories, one can start with principles expressed by very simple im-
possibilities, like for instance those mentioned above.

2

2. Three Impossibilities as the Foundation of

Quantum Mechanics

Recently in [3], see also [4, 5], it was shown that Quantum Mechan-
ics can be characterized by the following three information-theoretic
impossibilities :

• the impossibility of superluminal information transfer between
two physical systems by performing measurements on one of
them,

• the impossibility of perfectly broadcasting the information con-
tained in an unknown physical state, which impossibility for pure
states amounts to ”no cloning”,

• the impossibility of communicating information so as to imple-
ment a ”bit commitment” protocal with unconditional security.

3. Comments

One may, of course, think that in the case of second category theories
of Physics, namely, those called ”principle theories” by Einstein, it is
rather trivial to formulate the respective principles as impossibilities.
Indeed, any principle, say, ”P”, and not only in Physics, can be stated
equivalently by its double negation ”non-non-P”. And then this equiv-
alent form is nothing else but stating as principle the impossibility of
”non-P”.

From the above examples, however, it is clear that the respective im-
possibilities are not of that trivial form. Indeed, as they are given,
none of them is a double negation, but only a simple, one time nega-
tion. And as such, they describe deﬁnite binary choices concerning
fundamental properties of the whole of their corresponding realms of
physical situations, choices in which, a priori and on purely logical
grounds, both alternatives may appear to be possible. Furthermore,
and quite importantly, they describe binary choices in which one of
the alternatives may appear to be particularly convenient, yet it is
precisely that alternative which ends up being denied in principle.

3

In other words, these impossibility principles are establishing asym-
metries in their respective realms, and do so in ways which appear to
be inconvenient.

For instance, a priori, it may not be clear whether there is, or on the
contrary, there is no perpetuum mobile. And needless to say, it would
be so much more convenient for us if there were any at all. Yet the
principle adopted denies the existence of even one single perpetuum
mobile.
A similar situation happens with the limitation given by the velocity
of light in vacuum, or for that matter, with the above three impossi-
bilities which characterize Quantum Mechanics.

References

[1] Einstein A : What is the Theory of Relativity ? London Times,
November 28, 1919. In ”Albert Einstein, Ideas and Opinions”.
Condor, Souvenir Press, London, 2005, p. 228

[2] Einstein A : The Theory of Relativity. In ”Out of my later years”.

Wings, New York, 1996, pp. 39,40

[3] Clifton R, Bub J, Halvorson H : Characterizing Quantum The-
ory in terms of information-theoretic constraints. Foundations of
Physics, Vol. 33, No. 11, November 2003, 1561-1591

[4] Bub

J

: Quantum Information

and Computation.

arXiv:quant-ph/0512125, pp. 74-80

[5] Halvorson H : Remote preparation of arbitrary ensembles and
quantum bit commitment. J. Math. Phys., VOl. 45, 2004, 4920-
4931

4

