5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contemporary development of Einstein’s ideas on
space-time and Brownian motion

Yuri A. Rylov

Institute for Problems in Mechanics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
101-1, Vernadskii Ave., Moscow, 119526, Russia.
e-mail: rylov@ipmnet.ru
Web site: http://rsfq1.physics.sunysb.edu/˜rylov/yrylov.htm
or mirror Web site: http://gasdyn-ipm.ipmnet.ru/˜rylov/yrylov.htm

Abstract

Development of the contemporary theory of physical phenomena in the
microcosm is considered to be a result of development of Einstein’s ideas on
a possibility of the event space modiﬁcation and on a possibility of stochastic
(Brownian) motion of free particles. One considers the space-time modiﬁ-
In the framework of this
cation, based on a new conception of geometry.
conception any geometry is obtained as a result of the proper Euclidean ge-
ometry deformation. In the framework of this conception it is possible such a
space-time geometry, where the free particle motion appears to be stochastic,
although the geometry in itself remains to be deterministic. The stochasticity
intensity depends on the particle mass. It is small for particle of a large mass,
and it is essential for the particle of a small mass. The space-time geometry
may be chosen in such a way, that the statistical description of random world
lines of particles be equivalent to the quantum description (the Schr¨odinger
equation). At such a choice of the space-time geometry the world function
depends on the quantum constant, and the universal character of the quan-
tum constant is a corollary of the fact, that all physical phenomena take place
in the space-time, whose properties depend on the value of the quantum con-
stant. The stochastic motion of free particles may be considered to be a kind
of the relativistic Brownian motion, whose properties are conditioned by the
properties of the space-time geometry. At such a description the quantum
principles are not used. They can be obtained as a corollaries of the sta-
tistical description of nonrelativistic stochastic particles. The nonrelativistic
quantum principles may not be used for description of relativistic phenom-
ena. They are to be modiﬁed. This modiﬁcation should be obtained from the
statistical description of the relativistic stochastic particles.

1

1 Introduction

Papers [1, 2] by A. Einstein on modiﬁcation of the event space model and the
Brownian particle motion concerned the most actual physical problems of the be-
ginning of the 20th century. Elimination of the absolute simultaneity, suggested by
A. Einstein, generated a modiﬁcation of the event space. Isaac Newton considered
the event space as the direct product of time and of the three-dimensional space.
A. Einstein suggested to replace the Newtonian event space by united event space
(space-time) with the common geometry. In his paper [1] he formulated ﬁrst the
idea on possibility and necessity of the event space modiﬁcation. This idea, known
as a revision of the space-time conception, is connected closely with the general
direction of the theoretical physics development – the increasing geometrization of
physics and increasing role of the space-time structure in the explanation of physical
phenomena. The ﬁrst modiﬁcation of the event space structure, produced by A. Ein-
stein and the construction of the space-time geometry, carried out by G. Minkowski
made a start for further modiﬁcations of the space-time. The second modiﬁcation
of the space-time was produced by A. Einstein in the beginning of the 20th century.
This modiﬁcation admitted the space-time curvature, which was generated by the
matter placed in the space-time. The second modiﬁcation, known as the general
relativity, is connected with the supposition that the space-time geometry may be
described by the Riemannian geometry.

In the beginning of the 20th century one discovered that the free particles of
small mass move stochastically. The motion of free particles depends only on the
space-time properties, and one needs the third modiﬁcation of the space-time ge-
ometry. One needed such a space-time geometry, where the free particle motion
be primordially stochastic and the particle mass be geometrized. Such geometry is
impossible in the framework of the Riemannian geometry, which was used for the
space-time geometry in the beginning of the 20th century.

The third modiﬁcation of the space-time, has been produced only in the end of
the 20th century. It was generated by appearance of the non-Riemannian geometry
(T-geometry), possessing the earlier unknown property, that in the space-time with
such a geometry the free particle motion is primordially stochastic (random). This
stochasticity has no other reason, except for the space-time properties. Besides,
the space-time with T-geometry contains an ”elementary length”, determined by
the quantum constant, and the intensity of the stochasticity depends on the particle
mass (on ratio of the elementary length to the particle geometrical mass). The use of
T-geometry as a space-time geometry admits one to refuse the idea about enigmatic
quantum nature of the matter and to explain the quantum phenomena as natural
manifestation of the space-time properties.

The Einstein’s idea on possibility of the random particle motion without a con-
struction of a model of the phenomena, generating incident, was advanced in the
paper [2]. The Brownian motion was considered to be dissipative and nonrelativis-
tic. At the further development of the stochastic particle motion investigation one
discovered that the individual quantum particle is stochastic (in a sense Brownian).

2

However, the ”Brownian motion” of the quantum particles appeared to be nondis-
sipative and relativistic. The random component of the quantum particle motion is
always relativistic, even in the case, when the regular component of the particle mo-
tion is nonrelativistic. This circumstance is very important, because the statistical
description of the random relativistic motion of a particle distinguishes conceptually
from the nonrelativistic random motion.

At this point we face with the importance of the true understanding of the
relativity theory and application of this understanding to the construction of the
It is a common practice to consider, that for taking into
statistical description.
account the relativity theory at a description of a physical phenomenon it is suﬃ-
cient that the dynamical equations describing this phenomenon can be written in
the relativistically covariant form. Indeed, this condition is necessary for the true
relativistic description, but it is not suﬃcient. For instance, describing the free par-
ticle motion, it is important not only to write dynamical equations correctly. It is
necessary more to point out correctly what is the particle state. The classics of the
relativity theory knew this circumstance [3]. In the nonrelativistic theory the state
of several particles is described by their positions and momenta, i.e. by some point
in the phase space. The values of positions and momenta are taken at the same
time moment, which is common for all particles. It means that the physical object
is a particle, i.e. a point in the three-dimensional space of positions.

In the relativistic theory one may not describe the state of several particles by a
point in the phase space, i.e. by positions and momenta taken at the same time mo-
ment, as far as there is no absolute simultaneity. Positions and momenta of several
particles taken at the same time correspond to diﬀerent sets of events in diﬀerent co-
ordinate systems. In the case of deterministic particles the positions and momenta,
taken at the same time in one inertial coordinate system, can be recalculated to
the moving inertial coordinate system, if the particle are deterministic and their
dynamic equations are known. However, one cannot do this in the case of stochastic
particles, for which there are no dynamic equations. It is a reason, why the state of
a relativistic particle is described by the world line. The world line (but not a point
in the phase space) is the physical object, liable to the statistical description.

2 Statistical description of relativistic particles

Any statistical description is a description of physical objects. In the nonrelativistic
case the physical objects are points of the three-dimensional space. In the relativistic
case the physical objects are lengthy objects: world lines. Statistical description
of nonrelativistic particles distinguishes from that of relativistic particles in the
relation, that the state density ρ at the nonrelativistic description is deﬁned by the
relation

whereas in the relativistic case the state density jk is described by the relation

(2.1)

(2.2)

dN = ρdV

dN = jkdSk

3

where dN is the ﬂux of world lines through the inﬁnitesimal area dSk. It follows
from the relations (2.1) ¨ (2.2) that in the nonrelativistic case one can introduce
the concept of the probability density of the state on the basis of the nonnegative
quantity ρ, whereas in the relativistic case it is impossible, because one cannot
construct the probability density on the basis of the 4-vector jk.

Statistical description is a description of the statistical ensemble, i.e. the dy-
namic system consisting of many identical independent systems. These systems
may be dynamical or stochastic. However, the statistical ensemble is a dynamic
It means, that there are dynamic equations, which describe
system in any case.
the evolution of the statistical ensemble state. Investigation of the statistical en-
semble as a dynamic system admits one to investigate the mean characteristics of
the stochastic systems, constituting this ensemble. Besides, in the nonrelativistic
case the statistical ensemble is a tool for calculation of diﬀerent mean quantities
and distributions, because in this case the ensemble state may be interpreted as the
probability density of the fact, that the system state is placed at some given point
of the phase space.

The statistical ensemble is used usually in the statistical physics, where the
statistical description of the deterministic nonrelativistic systems is produced. The
principal property of the statistical ensemble (to be a dynamic system) is perceived
as some triviality, and the statistical ensemble is considered usually as a tool for
calculation of mean values of diﬀerent functions of the state. When one tries to apply
this conception of the statistical ensemble to description of relativistic stochastic
particles, it is quite natural that one fails, because the probabilistic conception of
the statistical ensemble (statistical ensemble as a tool for calculation of mean values)
cannot be applied here. The problem of construction of a dynamic system (statistical
ensemble) from stochastic systems is not stated simply.

We display in the example of free nonrelativistic particles, how the statistical
ensemble is constructed. The action ASd for the free deterministic particle Sd has
the form

where x = x (t). For the statistical ensemble AE[Sd] of free deterministic particles
we obtain the action

ASd [x] =

2

m
2  

dx
dt !

dt

AE[Sd] [x] =

2

m
2  

dx
dt !

dtdξ

(2.3)

(2.4)

where x = x (t, ξ) is a 3-vector function of independent variables t, ξ =
.
The variables (Lagrangian coordinates) ξ label particles Sd of the statistical ensem-
o
ble E [Sd]. The statistical ensemble E [Sd] is a dynamic system of hydrodynamic
type.

ξ1,ξ2, ξ3

n

The statistical ensemble E [Sst] of free stochastic particles Sst is a dynamical

Z

Z

4

system, described by the action

AE[Sst] [x, udf] =

2

m
2  

dx
dt !

+

m
2

u2
df −

∇udf 

dtdξ

¯h
2

(2.5)

Z










where udf = udf (t, x) is a diﬀusion velocity, describing the mean value of the stochas-
tic component of velocity, whereas dx
dt (t, ξ) describes the regular component of the
particle velocity, and x = x (t, ξ) is the 3-vector function of independent variables
. The variables ξ label particles Sst, substituting the statistical
t, ξ =
ξ1,ξ2, ξ3
ensemble. The operator
o

n

(
is deﬁned in the coordinate space x.

∇ =

∂
∂x1 ,

∂
∂x2 ,

∂
∂x2 )

The action for the single stochastic particle is obtained from the action (2.5) by

omitting integration over ξ. However, the obtained action

ASst [x, udf] =

2

m
2  

dx
dt !

+

m
2

u2
df −

¯h
2

∇udf 

dt






Z

(2.6)



has only symbolic sense, as far as the operator ∇ is deﬁned in some vicinity of
the point x, but not at the point x itself. It means, that the action (2.6) does not
determine dynamic equations for the particle Sst, and the particle appears to be
stochastic, although dynamic equations for the statistical ensemble of such particles
exist. They are determined by the action (2.5). Thus, the particles described by
the action (2.5) are stochastic, because there are no dynamic equations for a single
particle. In the case, when the quantum constant ¯h = 0, the actions (2.6) and (2.3)
coincide, because in this case it follows from (2.6), that udf = 0.



Variation of action (2.5) with respect to variable udf leads to the equation

udf = −

∇ ln ρ,

¯h
2m

where the particle density ρ is deﬁned by the relation

ρ =

∂ (x1, x2, x3)
∂ (ξ1, ξ2, ξ3) #

"

−1

=

∂ (ξ1, ξ2, ξ3)
∂ (x1, x2, x3)

(2.7)

(2.8)

The relation (2.7) is the expression for the mean diﬀusion velocity in the Brownian
motion theory.

Eliminating udf from the dynamic equation for x, we obtain dynamic equations

of the hydrodynamic type.

m

d2x
dt2 = −∇U (ρ, ∇ρ) ,

U (ρ, ∇ρ) =

¯h2
8m  

(∇ρ)2
ρ2

∇2ρ

− 2

ρ !

(2.9)

5

By means of the proper change of variables these equations can be reduced to the
Schr¨odinger equation [4].

However, there is a serious mathematical problem here. The fact is that the
hydrodynamic equations are to be integrated, in order they can be described in terms
of the wave function. The Schr¨odinger equation consists of two real equations. To
obtain from them four hydrodynamic equations, one needs to take gradient from one
of real components of the Schr¨odinger equation and to introduce proper designations.
The inverse transition from hydrodynamic equations to their representation in terms
of the wave function needs an integration. Three arbitrary functions appear as a
result of this integration, and two-component wave function is constructed from
these arbitrary functions [4]. The fact, that the Schr¨odinger equation can be written
in the hydrodynamic form, is well known [5, 6]. However, the inverse transition from
the hydrodynamic equations to the wave function was not known until the end of
the 20th century [4], and the necessity of integration of hydrodynamic equations was
a reason of this fact.

Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation as a partial case of dynamic equations,
describing the statistical ensemble of random particles (2.5), shows that the wave
function is simply a method of description of hydrodynamic equations, but not a
speciﬁc quantum object, whose properties are determined by the quantum princi-
ples. At such an interpretation of the wave function the quantum principles appear
to be superﬂuous, because they are necessary only for explanation, what is the wave
function and how it is connected with the particle properties. All remaining infor-
mation is contained in the dynamic equations. It appears that the quantum particle
is kind of stochastic particle, and all its exhibitions can be interpreted easily in terms
of the statistical ensemble of stochastic particles (2.5).

The idea of that, the quantum particle is simply a stochastic particle, is quite
natural. It was known many years ago [7]. However, the mathematical form of this
idea could not be realized for a long time because of the two problems considered
above (incorrect conception on the statistical ensemble of relativistic particles and
necessity of integration of the hydrodynamic equations).

3 Necessity of the next modiﬁcation of the space-

time model

Thus, the quantum mechanics can be founded as a mechanics of stochastic particles.
However, it is not known, why the motion of free particles is stochastic and from
where the quantum constant appears. There are two variants of answer to these
questions.

1. The stochasticity of the free particle motion is explained by the space-time
properties, and the quantum constant is a parameter, describing the space-time
properties.

2. The stochasticity of the free particle motion is explained by the special quan-
tum nature of particles. The motion of such a particle distinguishes from the motion

6

of usual classical particle. There is a series of rules (quantum principles), determin-
ing the quantum particle motion. The universal character of the quantum constant
is explained by the universality of the quantum nature of all particles and other
physical objects. As to event space, it remains to be the same as at Isaac Newton.
It is quite clear that the ﬁrst version of explanation is simpler and more logical,
as far as it supposes only a change of the space-time geometry. The rest, including
the principles of classical physics, remains to be unchanged. The main problem of
the ﬁrst version was an absence of the space-time geometry with such properties.
In general, one could not imagine that such a space-time geometry can exist. As
a result in the beginning of the 20th century one chose the second version. After
a large work the necessary set of additional hypotheses (quantum principles) had
been invented. One succeeded to explain all nonrelativistic quantum phenomena.
However, an attempt of the quantum theory expansion to the relativistic phenomena
lead to the problem, which is formulated as join of nonrelativistic quantum principles
with the principles of the relativity theory.

The choice of the proper space-time geometry appeared to be possible only after a
change of the geometry conception, which determines what (generalized) geometries
are possible, in general. The new conception of geometry appeared to be very sim-
ple. Any generalized geometry is a modiﬁcation of the proper Euclidean geometry.
Constructing a generalized geometry, one repeated conventionally the reasonings of
Euclid. At these reasonings one uses another axioms and deform the space in addi-
tion. In the new conception one suggests to obtain generalized geometries by means
of a simple deformation of the space.

Any geometry is a totality of all geometrical objects and relations between them.
The algorithms of the geometrical objects construction and those of relation be-
tween them has been developed in the proper Euclidean geometry. Besides, the
principles of these algorithms construction have been developed and compatibility
of all axioms, lying in the foundation of these principles has been proved [8]. All
this admits one to consider the proper Euclidean geometry as already constructed
geometry. Conventionally one uses a modiﬁcation of the Euclidean algorithms for
a construction of the generalized geometry. In the new conception of the geometry
the modiﬁcation of the Euclidean algorithms is simpliﬁed essentially. In the new ge-
ometry conception only operand of the Euclidean algorithm is diﬀerent in diﬀerent
generalized geometries, but the algorithm in itself remains to be the same for all
generalized geometries.

In order such a representation of Euclidean algorithms to be possible, it is neces-
sary to use as the operand such a quantity, which determine the generalized geometry
completely. In particular, such an operand is to determine the proper Euclidean ge-
ometry. Such a quantity is the world function σ = 1
2 ρ2, where the quantity ρ is the
distance between two points of the space [9]. The circumstance, that the distance
(or the world function) is an important geometrical quantity was known long ago.
But the fact that the world function is the quantity, which determines the geometry
completely, became to be known only in the end of the 20th century [10, 11]. It was
proved, that the proper Euclidean geometry is determined completely by its world

7

function σE, if it satisﬁes the set of conditions, written in terms of σE. It means,
that the algorithm of any proposition S of the proper Euclidean geometry GE can be
represented in the form S (σE), where S is the Euclidean algorithm of construction
of the proposition S. Then the analogous proposition S of the generalized geometry
G is described by the same algorithm S (σ), but with other operand σ, which is the
world function of the geometry G.

As far as the construction algorithms of all propositions of the proper Euclidean
geometry are supposed to be known, the construction algorithm of all propositions
of a generalized geometry appears to be very simple. Using this algorithm, one
can construct any σ-immanent geometry, i.e. the geometry described completely
by its world function σ. The class of such geometries is very wide.
It is much
more powerful, than the class of the Riemannian geometries, which are used usu-
ally for description of the space-time properties. We shall refer to the σ-immanent
geometries as the physical geometries, because such geometries are very convenient
for description of the space-time, whose main characteristic is interval between two
events (points in the space-time). Any change of the space-time interval is accom-
panied by a change of the world function, and it means some deformation of the
space-time.

The σ-immanent geometry is called also the tubular geometry (shortly T-geometry),

because in such a geometry a hallow tube plays the role of the straight line. A tube
as a generalization of the one-dimensional straight is the general case of T-geometry.
The proper Euclidean geometry, where the tube degenerates into one-dimensional
straight line, is a very special (degenerate) case of T-geometry. If one constructs the
generalized geometry on the basis of the deformation, which does not violate one-
dimensionality of the Euclidean straight (the Riemannian geometry is constructed
like this), one may construct only degenerate geometry with one-dimensional lines
instead of tubes. The stochastic motion of free particles is characteristic for the
nondegenerate space-time T-geometry.
It is connected with the fact, that the 4-
momentum of a free particle is transferred along the world line in parallel, and
simultaneously it is tangent to the world line, i.e. the momentum 4-vector deter-
mines the world line direction. If there is only one direction parallel to the direction
of the momentum vector at the point P , the direction of the momentum vector at
the neighbor point P ′ is determined single-valuedly, and the world line of the particle
appears to be deterministic. If there are many directions parallel to the momentum
vector at the point P , the direction of the momentum vector at the neighbor point
P ′ appears to be multivarious, and the world line appears to be random, because
the direction of the tangent vector appears to be random. The straight is deﬁned
in the proper Euclidean geometry (as in any T-geometry) as a set of such points R,
that the vector P0R is parallel to the vector P0P1, which determines the direction
of the straight, passing through the points P0, P1, given this straight.

Transformation of the one-dimensional Euclidean straight into a tube is con-
nected with the circumstance, that in the nondegenerate T-geometry there are di-
rections (vectors) which are parallel to the given vector, but nonparallel between
themselves. In other words, the parallelism property is intransitive, in general. In

8

the framework of the Riemannian geometry there is only one homogeneous isotropic
space-time geometry. It is the Minkowski geometry. The set of all homogeneous
isotropic space-time geometries is described by the set of functions of one argument.
Such T-geometries are described by the world function of the form

σ = σM + D (σM)

(3.1)

where σM is the world function of the Minkowski geometry, and D (σM) is the
distortion function, which vanishes for the Minkowski geometry. The free particle
motion in such a space-time geometry is stochastic, in general. It is deterministic
only in the case, when D (σM) = 0 and the space-time T-geometry turns into the
Minkowski geometry.

4 Contemporary state of the theory of physical

phenomena in microcosm

The scheme of a fundamental physical theory is shown in the ﬁgure. This theory
is a logical structure. The fundamental principles of the theory are shown below.
The experimental data, which are to be explained by the theory are placed on high.
Between them there are a set of logical corollaries of the fundamental principles. It
is possible such a situation, when for some conditions one can obtain a list of logical
corollaries, placed near the experimental data. It is possible such a situation, when
some circle of experimental data and physical phenomena may be explained and
calculated on the basis of this list of corollaries without a reference to the funda-
mental principles. In this case the list of corollaries of the fundamental principles
may be considered as an independent physical theory. Such a theory will be referred
to as the truncated theory, because it explains not all phenomena, but only a re-
stricted circle of these phenomena (for instance, only nonrelativistic phenomena).
Examples of truncated physical theories are known in the history of physics. For
instance, the thermodynamics is such a truncated theory, which is valid only for the
quasistatic thermal phenomena. The thermodynamics is an axiomatic theory. It
cannot be applied to nonstatic thermal phenomena. In this case one should use the
kinetic theory, which is a more fundamental theory, as far as it is applied both to
quasistatic and nonstatic thermal phenomena. Besides, the thermodynamics can be
derived from the kinetic theory as a partial case.

The truncated theory has a set of properties, which provide its wide application.
Firstly, the truncated theory is simpler, than the fundamental one, because a
part of logical reasonings and mathematical calculations of the fundamental theory
are used in the truncated theory in the prepared form. Besides, the truncated theory
is located near experimental data, and one does not need long logical reasonings for
its application.

Secondly, the truncated theory is a list of prescriptions, and it is not a logical
structure in such extent, as the fundamental theory is a logical structure. The
truncated theory is axiomatic, it contains more axioms, than the fundamental theory,

9

as far as logical corollaries of the fundamental theory appear in the truncated theory
as fundamental principles (axioms).

Thirdly, being simpler, the truncated theory appears before the fundamental
theory, whose corollary it is. It is a reason of conﬂicts between the advocates of
the fundamental theory and advocates of the truncated theory, because the last
consider the truncated theory to be the fundamental one. Such a situation took
place, for instance, at becoming of the statistical physics, when advocates of the
axiomatic thermodynamics oppugn against Gibbs and Boltzmann. Such a situation
took place at becoming of the doctrine of Copernicus-Galileo-Newton, when advo-
cates of the Ptolemaic doctrine oppugn against the doctrine of Copernicus-Galileo-
Newton. They referred that there was no necessity to introduce the Copernican
doctrine, as far as the Ptolemaic doctrine is simple and customary. Only discovery
of the Newtonian gravitation law and consideration of celestial phenomena, which
cannot be described in the framework of the Ptolemaic doctrine, terminated the
contest of the two doctrines.

The main defect of the truncated theory is an impossibility of its expansion
over wider circle of physical phenomena. For instance, let the truncated theory
explains nonrelativistic physical phenomena. It means, that the basic propositions
of the truncated theory are obtained as corollaries of the fundamental principles
and nonrelativistic character of the considered phenomena. To expand the truncated
theory on relativistic phenomena, one needs to separate, what in the principles of the
truncated theory is a corollary of fundamental principles and what is a corollary of
nonrelativistic character of the considered phenomena. A successful separation of the
two factors means essentially a perception of the theory truncation and construction
of the fundamental theory.
If the fundamental theory has been constructed, the
expansion of the theory on the relativistic phenomena is obtained by an application
of the fundamental principles to the relativistic phenomena. The obtained theory
will describe the relativistic phenomena correctly.
It may distinguish essentially
from the truncated theory, which is applicable for description of only nonrelativistic
phenomena.

The conventional nonrelativistic quantum theory is a truncated theory, which
is applicable for description of nonrelativistic phenomena only. This statement is
called in question usually by researchers working in the ﬁeld of the quantum theory.
The problem of the relativistic quantum theory is formulated usually as a problem
of uniﬁcation of the nonrelativistic quantum principles with the principles of the
relativity theory. Conventionally the nonrelativistic quantum theory is considered to
be a fundamental theory. The relativistic quantum theory is tried to be constructed
without puzzling out, what in the nonrelativistic quantum theory is conditioned by
principles and what is conditioned by its nonrelativistic character. It is suggested
that the linearity is the principle property of the quantum theory, and it is tried
to be saved. However, the analysis shows that the linearity of the quantum theory
is some artiﬁcial circumstance [12], which simpliﬁes essentially the description of
quantum phenomena, but it does not express the essence of these phenomena. The
conventional approach to construction of the relativistic quantum theory is shown

10

by the dashed line in the scheme. Following this line, the construction of the true
relativistic quantum theory is as diﬃcult, as discovery of the Newtonian gravitation
law on the basis of the Ptolemaic conception. Besides, even we succeed to construct
such a theory, it will be very diﬃcult to choose the valid version of the theory,
because it has no logical foundation. In other words, the conventional approach of
construction of the relativistic quantum theory (invention of new hypotheses and
ﬁtting) seems to lead to blind alley, although one cannot eliminate the case that it
appears to be successful.

Alternative way of construction of the relativistic theory of physical phenomena
in the microcosm is shown by the solid line in scheme.
It supposes derivation of
fundamental principles and their subsequent application to the relativistic physical
phenomena. Elimination of the nonrelativistic quantum principles is characteristic
for this approach. This elimination is accompanied by the elimination of the prob-
lem of the uniﬁcation of the nonrelativistic quantum principles with the relativity
principles. Simultaneously one develops dynamical methods of the quantum system
investigation, when the quantum dynamic system is investigated simply as a dy-
namic system. These methods are free of application of quantum principles. They
are used for investigation of both relativistic and nonrelativistic quantum systems.
A use of logical construction is characteristic for this approach. Invention of new
hypotheses and ﬁtting are not used.

Application of dynamical methods to investigation of the Klein-Gordon particle
admits one to discover a special quantum ﬁeld responsible for the particle produc-
tion [13]. It is especially important, because in the classical physics such ﬁelds are
not known. Application of dynamical methods to investigation of the Dirac particle
admits one to establish, that the Dirac particle has an internal structure [14], which
is described nonrelativistically [15]. Application of dynamic methods admits one to
establish the interpretation of quantum phenomena, founded on the concept of the
classical stochastic particle. As a result the multiplicity of interpretation of the wave
function and other quantum phenomena has been eliminated. In particular, it was
shown, that the Copenhagen interpretation, where the wave function describes an
individual particle, is incompatible with the quantum mechanics formalism [16, 12].
These results cannot be obtained by the conventional methods, whose capacities are
restricted by a use of the quantum principles. Thus, at construction of relativistic
theory of physical phenomena in microcosm some optimism appears. It is gener-
ated by the derivation of fundamental principles and by application of the dynamic
methods of investigation.

References

(1905).

[1] A. Einstein, Zur Electrodynamik bewegter K¨orper. Ann. d Phys., 17, 891,

[2] A. Einstein, ¨Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der W¨arme
geforderte Bewegung von ruhenden Fl¨ussigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen. Ann.

11

d. Phys. (4) 17, 540-560, (1905).

[3] V.A. Fok, Theory of space, time and gravitation. GITTL, Moscow, 1955. (in

Russian). sec. 29.

[4] Yu.A. Rylov, Spin and wave function as attributes of ideal ﬂuid . Journ. Math.

Phys., 40, pp. 256 - 278, (1999)).

[5] E. Madelung, Quanten theorie in hydrodynamischer Form. Z.Phys. 40, 322-326,

(1926).

45, 99, (1949).

1930.

[6] D. Bohm, On interpretation of quantum mechanics on the basis of the ”hidden”

variable conception. Phys.Rev. 85, 166, 180, (1952).

[7] J.E. Moyal, Quantum mechanics as a statistical theory. Proc. Cambr. Phil. Soc.,

[8] D. Hilbert, Grundlagen der Geometrie. 7 Auﬂage, B.G.Teubner, Leipzig, Berlin,

[9] J.L. Synge, Relativity: The General Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1960.

[10] Yu.A. Rylov, Extremal properties of Synge’s world function and discrete geom-

etry. J. Math. Phys. 31, 2876-2890, (1990).

[11] Yu.A. Rylov, Geometry without topology as a new conception of geometry. Int.

Jour. Mat. and Mat. Sci., 30, iss. 12, 733-760, (2002),

[12] Yu.A. Rylov, Dynamical methods of

investigations in application to the

Schr¨odinger particle (Available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0510243)

[13] Yu.A. Rylov, Classical description of pair production (Available at

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0301020 ).

[14] Yu.A. Rylov,

Is

the Dirac

particle

composite?

(Available

at

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0410045).

[15] Yu.A. Rylov, Is the Dirac particle completely relativistic?

(Available at

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0412032 ).

[16] Yu.A. Rylov, What object does the wave function describe? (Available at

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0405117).

12

