5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Attempt at clariﬁcation of Einstein’s postulate
of constancy of light velocity

Wang Guowen
College of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China

December 5, 2005

Abstract

We have realized that under Lorentz transformations the tick number of
a moving common clock remains unchanged, that is, the hand of the clock
never runs slow, but the time interval between its two consecutive ticks con-
tracts, so the relative time has to be recorded by using the τ -clocks required
by the transformations, instead of unreal slowing clocks. Thus it is argued
that using rest common clocks or the equivalent the measured velocity of
light emitted by a moving source, which is quasi-velocity of foreign light,
is dependent of the source velocity. Nevertheless, the velocity of foreign
light that should be measured by using τ -clocks is independent of the source
velocity. The velocity of native light emitted by a rest source obeys the pos-
tulate of relativity in accordance with both Maxwell equations and the result
of Michelson-Morley experiment. On the other hand, the velocity of foreign
light obeys both Ritz’s emission theory except the Lorentz factor and the
postulate of constancy of light velocity if measured by using τ -clocks. Thus
the emission theory does not conﬂict with special relativity. The present ar-
gument leads to a logical consequence that the so-called positive conclusions
from experiments testing constancy of the velocity of light emitted by mov-
ing sources if using common clocks or the equivalent, instead of τ -clocks,
exactly contradicts Lorentz transformations.

1 Introduction

Einstein’s special relativity has been seriously questioned by many people. Ques-
tions are sharply focused on the postulate of constancy of light velocity. He stated

1

that “light is always propagated in empty space with a deﬁnite velocity c which
is independent of the state of motion of the emitting body” [1]. This statement
means that using common clocks or the equivalent in the stationary inertial refer-
ence frame, the velocity of light emitted by a moving source is identical with the
velocity of light emitted by a rest source. The statement has caused a good deal
of confusion and controversy that surround the following three theories:

The ﬁrst is Lorentz ether theory that argues that light velocity does not de-
pend on the velocity of its emitting source like that of a sound wave emitted by
a moving bell. The Michelson-Morley interference experiment [2,3] relevant to
Maxwell theory involves ether questions. As well known, according to the theory,
the velocity of an electromagnetic wave is

c =

1
√ǫ0µ0

where ǫ0 and µ0 are electric permittivity and magnetic permeability in vacuum. c
is a characteristic velocity. Maxwell concluded that light wave is a kind of elec-
tromagnetic wave since c is equal to light velocity. He thought that the wave
propagated relative to the rest ether and suggested that the velocity of the earth
moving relative to the rest ether could be measured. Michelson was triggered by
Maxwell’s idea and devised an experiment to do it. Since the idea that the ether is
dragged fully by the earth is not supported by the results of Bradley’s observation
of the stellar aberration [4] and Fizeau’s experiment [5], it was predicted that one
could measure the relative velocity from a shift of interference fringes as the in-
terferometer is rotated through 90 degrees. But, contrary to the expectation, they
observed a negligible shift. However Fitzgerald [6] and Lorentz [7] still accepted
the concept of rest ether and in order to explain the surprising result independently
assumed that moving objects actually contract in the direction of motion through
v2/c2. Indeed the result of Michelson-Morley exper-
the ether with a factor q1
iment proves that the hypothetical ether wind passing through the earth is unde-
tectable and light velocity is constant in all directions in the source-rest frame.

−

The second is due to Einstein who abandoned the hypothesis of ether and
made the postulate of constancy of light velocity with his insight of the relativity
of simultaneity. The postulate is described by the following two equations for the
stationary and a moving inertial reference:

(1)

(2)

(3)

x2 + y2 + z2 = c2t2

x′2 + y′2 + z′2 = c2t′2

2

where c is light velocity in vacuum. Thus the mathematical formulation of the
postulate is clear but the physical meaning still needs to be clariﬁed.

The third is emission theory or ballistic theory advocated by such as Ritz [8].
The theory argues that light velocity depends on the velocity of its emitting source
like that of a bullet emitted by a moving riﬂe.

Now, on the basis of Lorentz transformations and Eqs.2-3, this article attempts

to clarify Einstein’s postulate of constancy of light velocity.

2 Common clocks and τ -clocks

In order to clarify the relation between the light velocity and source velocity, it
is most important to distinguish time from clock hand positions. The t in Eq.2
is recorded by using common clocks but t’ in Eq.3 is calculated according to the
Lorentz transformation formula:

t′ =

t

−

xv/c2
γ

, γ = q1

v2/c2

−

(4)

if the relative motion is in the x direction. As mentioned in Ref.[9], according
to similarity between space and time and correspondence between a ruler and a
clock, like the number of the divisions on a moving ruler, the tick number of a
moving common clock is independent of the relative velocity v and thus invariant
under Lorentz transformations. So the hand of the moving common clock never
runs slow but the time interval between its two consecutive ticks contracts (i.e. the
ticking rate (ticks/s) increases). Thus, in the stationary inertial reference frame the
time t can be recorded by using a common hand clock or the equivalent but the
t’ in the moving frame has to be recorded by τ -clocks as shown in Fig.1. It is
the characteristic of the common hand clock that one tick represents one second.
Nevertheless the readings on τ -clocks depend its relative velocity and position in
the moving frame where one tick no longer represents one second. The γ values
indicated on the τ -clocks’ hand represent the different relative velocities. The
readings in seconds on the circle to which the sliding arrow points represent the
duration of an event in the moving frame. For example, for the case of relative
velocity 0.866c, namely, γ=0.5, Fig.1(a) shows that the τ -clock at the origin of the
moving frame ticks 0.5 seconds and Fig.1(b) shows that the τ -clock a light-second
away from the origin ticks the same but runs 0.866 seconds earlier than the one at
the origin.

3

Figure 1: The τ -clocks moving in the x direction, for example, running at γ = 0.5:
(a) at the origin of the moving frame, (b) at the position a light-second away from
the origin on the the positive x′ half-axis.

Einstein’s concept of a clock that one tick of the clock always represents one
second in moving inertial frames is wrong and leads to the clock paradox or twin
paradox as pointed out in Ref.[9]. With the concept of the τ -clock, it will be
possible to clarify the postulate of constancy of light velocity.

3 Light velocity and light quasi-velocity

It is also important to distinguish the velocity unit m/s from m/tick in the context
of special relativity. In classical mechanics the velocity vector v of an object in
a reference frame is deﬁned as v=dr/dt, r=(x,y,z) and the time t is measured by
common clocks. But, in special relativity time has relative simultaneity. The stan-
dard unit of velocity m/s is used in both theories. In special relativity a velocity
with unit m/tick in moving inertial reference frames, instead of m/s, may be called
as quasi-velocity. Equivalently, the velocity of light emitted by a moving source
with respect to the stationary inertial reference frame may also, thus, be called as
light quasi-velocity. We will see light quasi-velocity is dependent of the state of
motion of the emitting body.

For the case of one dimension, from Eqs.2-4, we have

x =

ct

±

(5)

and

x′ =

xv/c2
γ
where t is the time indicated by the tick readings on a common clock. By the
v)/γ (m/tick, in the
deﬁnition of velocity mentioned above, the velocities (c

ct′ =

) =

∓
γ

v)t

(6)

c(

(c

±

±

−

±

t

±

4

moving frame) are light quasi-velocities. From Eq.6 we have two-way average
light quasi-velocity

[(c

v)/γ + (c + v)/γ]/2 = c/γ (m/tick)

(7)

−

so the average light velocity on the interval Lorentz-contracted in the moving
frame is c. This result independent of the relative velocity expresses constancy of
two-way average light velocity on the contracted interval.

Now, we see the light velocity c (m/s), instead of light quasi-velocity (m/tick),
is independent of the relative velocity due to the relativity of simultaneity. Since
Ritz’s emission theory [8] involves the light quasi-velocity (m/tick) dependent
of the source, the theory is consistent with the postulate of constancy of light
velocity except the Lorentz factor 1/γ. In fact, in Einstein’s derivation of Lorentz
transformations he wrote the time increments
v) which
equal to

vt)/(c

t =

(x

△

∓

−

±

t =

△

(x
(c

±

vt)/γ
v)/γ

=

−
∓

±

(c

∓

x′
v)/γ

(8)

It is the same as Eq.6. Indeed, he had already shown that the light quasi-velocity
(m/tick) depended on the relative velocity between inertial reference frames.

4 Native light and foreign light

Concerning the relation between the light velocity and observers, it is important
to distinguish native light from foreign light with respect to rest observers. Ac-
cording to the postulate of relativity, the velocity of light emitted from rest light
sources should have the deﬁnite value c with respect to the source-rest frame. We
call such light as native light. By using rest common clocks, the velocity of native
light relative to the rest observers is deﬁnite c beyond debate.

Now the question is that in the moving frame at velocity v relative to the sta-
tionary frame, observed by a rest observer in it, what is the velocity of the light
emitted by the rest source in the stationary frame? This light may be called as
foreign light by the rest observer in the moving frame. In fact, the c in Eq.3 is
exactly the velocity of foreign light measured by using τ -clocks. Since the case
of the moving observer relative to the source-rest frame is equivalent to that of
the moving source relative to the observer-rest frame, if using common clocks for
the foreign light, instead of τ -clocks, from Eq.6 we get quasi-velocities (c
v)/γ
in the direction of the positive x’ and (c + v)/γ in the opposite direction. They

−

5

do depend on the relative velocity v and in comparison with the Galileo trans-
formations are only different by the Lorentz factor. But the two-way average
light quasi-velocity is c/γ, or saying, on the interval Lorentz-contracted it is c.
Therefore, using common clocks for measuring velocity of foreign light, we have
constancy of two-way average light velocity on the contracted interval.

5 Effects of extinction of light in media

±

As mentioned above, the vacuum velocity of light emitted by a rest source is def-
inite c relative to the source and the vacuum quasi-velocities of light emitted by
the moving source at velocity v are (c
v)/γ in the stationary frame. However we
are aware that there exists extinction of light in media which reﬂect light, transmit
light, and re-emit light along with absorbing light [10-12]. The extinction that
is brought about entirely on the boundary of condensed media can change for-
eign light into native light and thus light quasi-velocity (m/tick) into light velocity
(m/s) in the medium-rest frame. Especially, interstellar gas and dust have cer-
tainly extinction effect although the details are unclear to us. Thus, although the
postulate of constancy of light velocity apparently is viable in some cases under
the condition of using common clocks, we should bear in mind that, according
to Lorentz transformations or Eqs.2-3, the postulate of constancy of light velocity
is valid only provided that we use common clocks to recorded time for measur-
ing the velocity of native light and use τ -clocks to record time for measuring the
velocity of foreign light. In a word, the Lorentz transformations and Einstein’s
equations (Eqs.2-3) are tenable but his statement “light is always propagated in
empty space with a deﬁnite velocity c which is independent of the state of motion
of the emitting body” is incorrect if same clocks are used regardless of whether
the emitting source is in motion or at rest.

6 Conclusion

We have realized that under Lorentz transformations the tick number of a moving
common clock remains unchanged, that is, the hand of the clock never runs slow,
but the time interval between its two consecutive ticks contracts, so the relative
time has to be recorded by using the τ -clocks required by the transformations, in-
stead of unreal slowing clocks. Thus it is argued that using rest common clocks or
the equivalent the measured velocity of light emitted by a moving source, which is

6

quasi-velocity of foreign light, is dependent of the source velocity. Nevertheless,
the velocity of foreign light that should be measured by using τ -clocks is indepen-
dent of the source velocity. The velocity of native light emitted by a rest source
obeys the postulate of relativity in accordance with both Maxwell equations and
the result of Michelson-Morley experiment. On the other hand, the velocity of
foreign light obeys both Ritz’s emission theory except the Lorentz factor and the
postulate of constancy of light velocity if measured by using τ -clocks. Thus the
emission theory does not conﬂict with special relativity. The present argument
leads to a logical consequence that the so-called positive conclusions from experi-
ments testing constancy of the velocity of light emitted by moving sources if using
common clocks or the equivalent, instead of τ -clocks, exactly contradicts Lorentz
transformations.

References

[1] Einstein A., Ann. Phys., 17, 891 (1905).

[2] Michelson A., Am. J. Sci., 22, 120 (1881).

[3] Michelson A. and Morley E., Am. J. Sci., 34, 333 (1887).

[4] Bradley J., Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., 35, 637 (1728).

[5] Fizeau A-H-L, Comptes Rendus, 33, 349 (1851).

[6] FitzGerald G. F., Science, 13, 390 (1889).

[7] Lorentz H. A., Verst. Kon. Akad. Wet. Amsterdam, 1, 74 (1892).

[8] Ritz W., Ann. Chim. Phys., 13, 145 (1908).

[9] Wang Guowen, Einstein’s concept of a clock and clocok paradox, at

http://arxiv.org/PS cache/physics/pdf/0501/0501131.pdf

[10] Ewald P. P., Ann. Phys., 49, 1 (1916).

[11] Oseen C. W., Ann. Phys., 48, 1 (1915).

[12] Born M. and Wolf E., Principles of optics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1980),

p. 101.

7

