5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Cosmic Organism Theory

Ding-Yu CHUNG* and Volodymyr KRASNOHOLOVETS**

* P.O. Box 180661, Utica, Michigan 48318, U.S.A.
e-mail: chung@wayne.edu

**Institute for Basic Research, 90 East Winds Court, Palm Harbor, FL
34683, U.S.A., e-mail: v kras@ayahoo.com

Abstract. We present the cosmic organism theory in which all visible and in-
visible matter has diﬀerent cosmic genetic expressions. The cosmic gene includes
codes for the object structure and the space structure. The cosmic digital code
for the object structure consists of full object (1, 2, and 3 for particle, string, and
membrane, respectively) and empty object (0) as anti de Sitter space (AdS). The
tessellation lattice of empty objects is tessellattice. The decomposition of a full
object in tessellattice results in the AdS/CFT (conformal ﬁeld theory) duality.
The digital code for the object structure accounts for the AdS/CFT duality, the
dS/bulk duality, and gravity. The digital code for the space structure consists of 1
and 0 for attachment space and detachment space, respectively. Attachment space
attaches to object permanently at zero speed or reversibly at the speed of light.
Detachment space detaches from the object irreversibly at the speed of light. The
combination of attachment space and detachment space results in miscible space,
binary lattice space or binary partition space. Miscible space represents special
relativity. Binary lattice space consists of multiple quantized units of attachment
space separated from one another by detachment space. Binary lattice space cor-
responds to the nilpotent universal computational rewrite system (NUCRS) by
Diaz and Rowlands. The gauge force ﬁelds and wavefunction are in binary lattice
space. Binary partition space consists of separated continuous phases of attach-
ment space and detachment space. With tessellattice and binary lattice space,
11D brane is reducing to 4D particle surrounded by gravity and the gauge force
ﬁelds. The cosmic dimension varies due to diﬀerent speeds of light in diﬀerent
dimensional space-times and the increase of mass. The force ﬁelds in tessellattice
are the original gravity before the big bang and the strong force in nucleus. The
cosmology model and dark energy are predicted by the Santilli isodual theory and
the Dirac hole theory.

1

1. Introduction

In the cosmic organism theory (Chung, 2002a), diﬀerent universes are diﬀerent
cosmic organs for the cosmic organism that is the multiverse. Diﬀerent universes
are the diﬀerent expressions of the common cosmic gene. The cosmic gene is the
cosmic digital code (Chung, 2002b) in the cosmic dimension. The cosmic digital
code includes the codes for the object structure and the space structure.

In the analysis of the multiverse (Ellis, Kirchner, and Stoeger (2004) state that
there is a deﬁnite causal connection, or “law of laws”, relating all the universes in
these multiverses. Law of laws can be described as the ultimate law of fundamental
laws, which include relativity, quantum mechanics, and the laws for the existence
of diﬀerent physical constants, dimensionality, particle content, and the size of
universe in the multiverse. The ultimate law connects fundamental laws. In the
cosmic organism theory, the ultimate law is the cosmic gene. The cosmic organism
theory follows the Alfred North Whitehead’s philosophy of organism. According
to Whitehead (Whitehead, 1929), the actual world is a process, and the process is
the becoming of actual entities. An actual entity is not an inert and permanent
substance, but a relational process of becoming. Its ‘being’ is constituted by its
‘becoming’. Michel Bounias (2002) applied the Hamiltonian concept to living
organism in the evolutionary process.

The paper is divided into seven sections: the introduction, the cosmic digital
code for the object structure, the digital code for the space structure, the cosmic
dimension, cosmology, force ﬁelds, and the summary.

2 The digital cosmic code for the object structure

In terms of the current hypothesis, which is still shared by the majority of physi-
cists, fundamental principles of the world are associated with so-called strings and
membranes - abstract entities that are treated as primary elements of the world.
Then the cosmic digital code for object structure can be presented by the full
object, which involves particle, string and membrane (1, 2, and 3, respectively),
and the empty object (0) as anti de Sitter space (AdS). Full object occupies space
fully, while empty object is originally as the gap among full objects.

An empty cell (or topological ball, or superparticle), as a primary element, was
ﬁrst proposed by Bounias and Krasnoholovets (2003a,b) in the tessellattice theory.
A tessellation lattice of empty cells with the size of the Planck is the tessellattice.
A particle is treated as a local deformation of the tessellattice. The behavior of
a moving particle in a cellular space studied by Krasnoholovets (1993,1997,2002)
is characterized by a submicroscopic mechanics that discloses the particle’s hid-
It is
den dynamics behind the formalism of conventional quantum mechanics.

2

important that in submicroscopic mechanics a moving particle interacts with com-
ing cells of the space. Considering space in terms of the tessellattice, Bounias
and Krasnoholovets (2003a,b,c) concluded that a moving canonical particle expe-
riences a fractal decomposition into a core particle surrounded by its inerton cloud
(the notion of an inerton as a carrier of inert properties of the particle, which
thus becomes a substrructure of the particle’s matter waves, was introduced in
works by Krasnoholovets and Ivanovsky (1993) and Krasnoholovets (1997)). The
decomposition generates the gravitational mass, and inerton carries the inertial of
gravitational mass of particles. Gravity comes from the continuous generation of
inerton clouds by the continuous interaction of a moving particle and the empty
cells in the tessellattice.

Empty object as AdS is the active empty cell that can decompose a full object.
In AdS, the cosmological constant (Λ) < 0, indicating a negative expansion. Such
negative expansion can reduce space dimension from non-zero to zero. Empty
object as AdS, therefore, can detach one of the space dimensions of a D dimensional
full object by reducing the space dimension from non-zero to zero. Losing one
space dimension, the D dimensional full object becomes the D − 1 dimensional core
object. The detached one-dimensional space becomes the radial space transverse
to the D − 1 dimensional core object. The D − 1 dimensional core object with the
transverse radial space constitutes the D − 1 dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory
(CFT).

D dim f ull object + D dim empty object ( AdSD)
D − 1 dim core object with 1 dim transverse radial space
= D − 1 dim conf ormal f ield theory (CF T )

the decomposition
−→

(1)

Therefore, this decomposition has the AdS/CFT duality (Maldacena, 1998;
Gubser, Klebanov and Polyakov, 1998; Witten, 1998), though this occurs in tes-
sellattice as AdS. In the decomposition theory for the AdS/CFT duality, D − 1
dimensional CFT is the decomposition product from a D dimensional full object
in tessellattice as AdSD.

Furthermore, tessellattice decomposes not only the D dimensional background
space-time but also internal dimensional space-time. The internal dimension num-
bers for brane, string, particle, and empty object are 3, 2, 1, and 0, respectively.
In the D dimensional background space-time, they are denoted as 3D, 2D, 1D, and
0D. The decompositions for them are as follows

3D + 0D
2D + 0D

the decomposition
−→
the decomposition
−→

2D − 1 11
1D − 1 11

(2)

3

The object in 11 (the transverse radial space) is a virtual particle corresponding
to the inerton surrounding the core object. A D-dimensional full object in AdS is
decomposed into a D − 1 dimensional core object surrounded by a virtual particle.
One example of the degenerate state of tessellattice is the universe before the
big bang or a series of small big bangs, which will be treated in detail in the other
work. As shown later, the most primitive part of the multiverse is the primitiverse
(Chung, 2002a). The primitiverse consists of closely pack 10D strings, denoted
It is the same
as 210. There is no gap among 10D strings in the primitiverse.
everywhere. The primitiverse is ﬂat with Λ = 0.

The combination of n units of strings forms a loop, which then obtains addi-
tional space dimension to form 11D brane, assigned as 311. The additional space
dimension for both background space-time and internal space-time is in the form
of de Sitter (dS) space. dS space has a function of space expansion (Λ > 0) that
can expand one of the space dimension in both the background space-time and
the internal space-time from zero to non-zero. Empty space as AdS space with
a function of negative expansion (Λ < 0) is generated to balance dS, resulting in
Λ = 0

(2 10) n + dS 10

the composition
−→

3 11 + AdS 11 = ( 0 11) n

(3)

tessellattice

The duality in Eq. (3) is the dS/bulk duality. In the composition theory for
the dS/bulk duality, a D + 1 brane as bulk in AdSD+1 is the composition product
from D dimensional strings in dSD.

Normally, the decomposition of 311 results in n units of 210 to complete the
reversible process of the composition and the decomposition. In some abnormal
cases, the decomposition leads to the AdS/CFT duality

3 11 + ( 0 11) n

the decomposition
−→

(2 10)n (1 1) n.

(4)

The full object, 311 in AdS decomposes into the core object, (210) n, surrounded
by the virtual object, (11)n . The virtual object is “pregravity” before a big bang.
Pregravity is the combination of the dS/bulk duality for the composition in Eq.
(3) and the AdS/CFT in Eq. (4) for the decomposition.

When the critical mass for the AdS/CFT duality reaches, the AdS/CFT duality
propagates in the primitiverse, and a universe is generated out of the primitiverse
as shown later.

As shown later, in the present light universe after the big bang, the object
structure is 4D particle, denoted as 14. (210)n(11)n in Eq. (4) becomes (14)n(11)n
in the present (observable) light universe

(2 10)n(1 1)n

bang−→ (1 4)n(11)n = ( 1 4)n g

(5)

4

The transverse radial space from 11 (virtual particle) is added to the ﬂat space
in 14, resulting in the curved space for gravity in general relativity. Thus, gravity
as 11 is the origin of the Riemann tensor to indicate the curved space wrapping
around the ﬂat core object.

3. The digital cosmic code for the space structure

The cosmic digital code for the space structure consists of 1 and 0 for an attachment
space and a detachment space, respectively. Attachment space attaches to object
permanently with zero speed or reversibly at the speed of light. Detachment space
irreversibly detaches from the object at the speed of light. Special relativity deals
with the propagation speeds, particularly, between zero and the speed of light.

As shown later, the universe starts with only attachment space without de-
tachment space (Chung, 2002a). The cosmic origin of detachment space is the
cosmic radiation that initiates big bangs. Some objects in 4D-attachment space,
denoted as 14, convert into the cosmic radiation in 4D-detachment space, denoted
as 04

some objects in 1 4

bang−→ the cosmic radiation in 0 4

(6)

Being massless particle, the cosmic radiation is on detachment space continu-
ously, and detaches from its own space continuously. The emergence of the cosmic
radiation allows the combination of n units of attachment space and n units of
detachment space. The combination results in miscible space, binary partition
space or binary lattice space.

( 14)n attachment space + (04)n detachment space

combination
−→

(7)

miscible space , (14 04)n binary lattice space, or,
(14)n (04)n binary partition space

In miscible space, attachment space is miscible to detachment space, and there
is no separation of attachment space and detachment space. Binary lattice space
consists of repetitive units of alternative attachment space and detachment space.
Thus, binary lattice space consists of multiple quantized units of attachment space
separated from one another by detachment space. Binary partition space consists
of separated continuous phases of attachment space and detachment space.

In miscible space, attachment space contributes zero speed, while detachment
space contributes the speed of light. A massless particle is on detachment space
continuously, and detaches from its own space continuously. For a moving massive
particle consisting of a rest massive part and a massless part, the massive part with
rest mass, m0, is in attachment space, and the massless part with kinetic energy,

5

K, is in detachment space. The combination of the massive part in attachment
space and massless part in detachment leads to the propagation speed in between
zero and the speed of light.

To maintain the speed of light constant for a moving particle, the time (t) in
moving particle has to be dilated, and the length (L) has to be contracted relative
to the rest frame

1 − υ2 / c2 = t0γ,

t = = t0.p
L = L0 / γ,
E = K + m0c2 = γ m 0 c2

(8)

where γ = 1/
traction, E is the total energy and K is the kinetic energy.

1 − υ2/c2 is the Lorentz factor for time dilation and length con-

p

Binary lattice space consists of multiple quantized units of attachment space
separated from one another by detachment space. Binary lattice space slices an ob-
ject into multiple quantum states separated from one another by detachment space.
Binary lattice space corresponds to nilpotent universal computational rewrite sys-
tem (NUCRS) by Diaz and Rowlands (2003). NUCRS starts with “nothing”, and
add new symbols, which must results in “a zero sum” again. The addition of new
symbols involves the sequential iterative path from nothing (nilpotent) through
conjugation, complexiﬁcation, and dimensionalization. Nilpotent corresponds to
detachment space detached from object.

In this paper, the universe starts with attachment space ﬁlled with objects
(information). The addition of detachment space results in binary lattice space
consisting of attachment space and detachment space. Detachment space detaches
from object. Detachment space contains no object that carries information. With-
out information, detachment space is outside of the realm of causality. Without
causality, distance (space) and time do not matter to detachment space. Thus,
detachment space contains nothing (zero information), so detachment space is
non-local in terms of space-time. Detachment can have any space and time. The
non-locality of detachment space in binary lattice space leads to the complete non-
locality of binary lattice space. Because detachment space contains no information,
the non-locality of binary lattice space cannot result in net new information. The
changes of objects in binary lattice space can only be expressed through conju-
gation, complexiﬁcation, and dimensionalization, which must result in zero sums,
indicating nothing (zero information) in detachment space (nilpotent) as in NU-
CRS.

Basically, detachment space (nilpotent) de-localizes space-time in binary lat-
tice space. The non-local property of detachment space provides the violation of
Bell inequalities (Bell, 1964) in quantum mechanics in terms of faster-than-light
inﬂuence and indeﬁnite property before measurement. The non-locality in Bell
inequalities does not result in net new information.

6

In binary lattice space, for every detachment space, there is its correspond-
ing adjacent attachment space. Thus, no part of the object can be irreversibly
separated from binary lattice space, and no part of a diﬀerent object can be in-
corporated in binary lattice space. Binary lattice space represents coherence as
wavefunction. Binary lattice space is for coherent system.

Any destruction of the coherence by the addition of a diﬀerent object to the

object causes the collapse of binary lattice space into binary partition space.

(( 0 4) ( 1 4)) n
binary lattice space

collapse−→

( 0 4) n ( 1 4) n

mixing−→ miscible space

(9)

binary partition space

After the collapse, in binary partition space, attachment space attaches to an
object at any one location according to its probability without absolute certainty,
while detachment space separately detaches from all probability density. By intro-
ducing a diﬀerent object into an observed object, experimental observation causes
the collapse of binary lattice space. All observations bring about binary partition
space. Binary partition space is the space immediately after the collapse of binary
lattice space, and binary partition space then changes to miscible space by mixing
attachment space and detachment space.

Binary lattice space can slice small object into quantum states, but binary
lattice space cannot slice a large object into quantum states due to gravity. The
diﬀerence between a small and a large object might be associated with the com-
parison between the object’s de Broglie wavelength and the object size. Penrose
(2000) pointed out that the gravity of large object pulls diﬀerent quantum states
into one location. On the other hand, the gravity of a small object is not strong
enough to pull diﬀerent states into one location. Therefore, a large object is always
in miscible space, while a small object without outside interference is always in
binary lattice space.

The conventional explanation of the hidden extra space dimensions is the com-
pactiﬁcation of the extra space dimensions. For example, six space dimensions
become hidden by the compactiﬁcation, so space-time appears to be four dimen-
sional.

Bounias and Krasnoholovets (2003c) propose another explanation of the re-
duction of > 4D space-time into 4D space-time by slicing > 4D space-time into
inﬁnitely many 4D quantized units surrounding the 4D core particle. Such slicing
of > 4D space-time is like slicing 3-space D object into 2-space D object in the way
stated by Michel Bounias as follows: “You cannot put a pot into a sheet without
changing the shape of the 2 − D sheet into a 3 − D dimensional packet. Only a
2 − D slice of the pot could be a part of sheet”.

This slicing of space-time dimension is done by detachment space indirectly. As
shown later, the direct slicing is the slicing of “mass dimension” derived from space-

7

time dimension. The indirect slicing of > 4D attachment space by 4D detachment
space is as follows

(14+k)

m

slicing−→

( 14)m

> 4D attachment space

4D core attachment space

k

+

Pk=1

(( 04) ( 14))n,k
k types of 4D units

k types of gauge f orce f ields in lattice space

(10)
The two products of the indirect slicing are the 4D-core attachment space and
4D quantized units of attachment space separated by detachment space, corre-
sponding to binary lattice space. They are k types of 4D quantized units, repre-
senting the total number of space dimensions greater than three-dimensional space.
For example, the indirect slicing of 10D attachment space produces 4D core at-
tachment space and six types of 4D quantized units. The value of n approaches
to inﬁnite for inﬁnitely many 4D quantized units.

The core attachment space surrounded by inﬁnitely many 4D quantized units
corresponds to the core particle surrounded by inﬁnitely many small 4D parti-
cles. The gauge force ﬁelds are made of such small 4D quantized virtual particles
surrounding the core particle.

Unlike tessellattice, binary lattice space for gauge force ﬁelds has no boundary.
It corresponds to the quantized asymptotically ﬂat S-matrix with Λ = 0. Unlike
tessellattice, binary lattice space for gauge force ﬁelds is in low-density region.
The gauge force ﬁelds (Chung, 2002a) include electromagnetism, the strong force
in the low-density pions, two parity-nonconservation interactions, and two CP-
nonconservation interactions.

The transformation from 11D brane to 4D particle is AdS5 X S6 where AdS5
is in tessellattice for gravity, S6 is in binary lattice space for gauge force ﬁelds, and
there is no compactiﬁcation of extra space dimensions. In other words, one extra
space dimension in the seven extra space dimensions from 11D brane is reduced
by tessellattice (AdS) for gravity, and six extra space dimensions are reduced
indirectly by binary lattice space for the gauge force ﬁelds. With tessellattice and
binary lattice space, 11D brane is reduced to 4D particle surrounded by gravity
and the gauge force ﬁelds.

4. The cosmic dimension - varying dimension number

The cosmic digital code is in the cosmic dimension, which is in the framework of
varying dimension number. Varying dimension number is derived from varying
speed of light (VSL) theory (Amelino-Camelia, 2001,2002; Barrow, 2003; Ellis and
Uzan, 2005; Magueijo, 2003). The constancy of the speed of light is the pillar
of special relativity. It is believed the constancy of the speed of light takes place

8

in the four dimensional space-time whose space-time dimension number (four) is
constant. In the model of cosmology (Albrecht and Magueijo, 1999; Barrow, 1999,
2003) that belongs to the VSL model, the speed of light varies in time. The time
dependent speed of light varies as some power of the expansion scale factor a in
such way that

c (t) = c0 an

where c0 > 0 and n are constants. The increase of speed of light is continuous.

This paper posits quantized varying speed of light (QVSL), where the speed
of light is invariant in a constant space-time dimension number, and the speed of
light varies with varying space-time dimension number from 4 to 11. In QVSL,
the speed of light is quantized by varying space-time dimension number

cD = c/α D − 4,

where c is the observed speed of light in the 4D space-time, cD is the quantized
varying speed of light in space-time dimension number, D, from 4 to 11, and α is the
ﬁne structure constant. Each dimensional space-time has a speciﬁc speed of light.
The speed of light increases with the increasing space-time dimension number D.
In the VDN model of cosmology, the universe as the dual chiral universe that has
the speed of light in 11D space-time.

In special relativity, E = M0 c2 modiﬁed by Eq. (12) is expressed as

(11)

(12)

(13a)

(13b)

E = M0 · (cid:16)c2/α 2(D − 4)

(cid:17)

= (cid:16)M0/α 2 (d − 4)

(cid:17) · c 2.

Eq. (13a) means that a particle in the D dimensional space-time can have the
superluminal speed c/α D−4, which is higher than the observed speed of light c,
and has the rest mass M0. Eq. (13b) means that the same particle in the 4D
space-time with the observed speed of light acquires M0/α 2 (d−4) as the rest mass,
where d = D. D in Eq. (13a) is the space-time dimension number deﬁning the
varying speed of light. In Eq. (13b), d from 4 to 11 is “mass dimension number”
deﬁning varying mass. For example, for D = 11 Eq. (13a) shows a superluminal
particle in eleven-dimensional space-time, while Eq. (13b) shows that the speed of
light of the same particle is the observed speed of light with the 4D space-time,
and the mass dimension is eleven. In other words, 11D space-time can transform
into 4D space-time with 11d mass dimension. QVSL in terms of varying space-
time dimension number, D, brings about varying mass in terms of varying mass
dimension number, d.

The QVSL transformation transforms both space-time dimension number and
mass dimension number. In the QVSL transformation, the decrease in the speed

9

of light leads to the decrease in space-time dimension number and the increase of
mass in terms of increasing mass dimension number from 4 to 11,

c D = c D − n/α 2 n,

M0, D , d = M0, D − n, d + nα 2 n,
QV SL−→ (D ∓ n) , (d ± n)

D, d

(14a)

(14b)

(14c)

where D is the space-time dimension number from 4 to 11 and d is the mass
dimension number from 4 to 11. For example, the QVSL transformation steps a
particle with 11D4d to a particle with 4D11d. In terms of rest mass, 11D space-
time has 4d with the lowest rest mass, and 4D space-time has 11d with the highest
rest mass.

In such a way, the QVSL transformation is an alternative to the Higgs mech-
anism to gain rest mass. In the QVSL, the speed of light is constant in a speciﬁc
space-time dimension number, such as 4 for our four-dimensional space-time. In
diﬀerent space-time dimension numbers (from 4 to 11), speeds of light are dif-
ferent.
In our four-dimensional space-time, the speed of light is the lowest, so
according to special relativity (E = M0 c2), with constant energy, the rest mass
in our four-dimensional space-time is the highest. Thus, instead of absorbing the
Higgs boson to gain rest mass, a particle can gain rest mass by decreasing the
speed of light and space-time dimension number. The QVSL transformation also
gains a new quantum number, “mass dimension number” from 4 to 11 to explain
the hierarchical masses of elementary particles. Since the Higgs bosons have not
been found experimentally, the QVSL transformation to gain rest mass is a good
alternative. In terms of vacuum energy, the four-dimensional space-time has the
zero vacuum energy with the highest rest mass, while D> 4 have non-zero vacuum
energy with lower rest mass than 4D. Since the speed of light for a particle with
dimension > 4D is greater than the speed of light for a 4D particle, the observation
of > 4D particles by 4D particles violates casualty. Thus, particles with dimension
> 4D should be treated as hidden particles with respect to 4D particles. In gen-
eral, particles with diﬀerent space-time dimensions are transparent and oblivious
to one another.

In the normal supersymmetry transformation, the repeated application of the
fermion-boson transformation carries over a boson (or fermion) from one point to
the same boson (or fermion) at another point at the same mass. In the “varying
supersymmetry transformation”, the repeated application of the fermion-boson
transformation steps a boson from one point to the boson at another point at
diﬀerent mass dimension number in the same space-time number. The repeated
varying supersymmetry transformation carries over a boson Bd into a fermion Fd

10

and a fermion Fd to a boson Bd−1, which can be expressed as follows

Md, F = Md, B αd, B,

Md− 1, B = Md, F αd, F,

(15a)

(16b)

where M d,B and M d,F are the masses for a boson and a fermion, respectively, d is
the mass dimension number, and αd, B or αd, F is the ﬁne structure constant that
is the ratio between the masses of a boson and its fermionic partner. Assuming
αd, B or αd, F, the relation between the bosons in the adjacent dimensions then can
be expressed as

Md− 1, B = Md, B α2
d.

(15c)

(15) show that it is possible to describe mass dimensions > 4 in the

Eqs.
following way

F5 B5 F6 B6 F7 B7 F8 B8 F9 B9 F10 B10 F11 B11,

(16)

where the energy of B11 is the Planck energy. Each mass dimension between 4d
and 11d consists of a boson and a fermion. Eqs. (15) show a stepwise transfor-
mation that converts a particle with d mass dimension to d ± 1 mass dimension.
The transformation from a higher dimensional particle to the adjacent lower di-
mensional particle is the fractionalization of the higher dimensional particle to
the many lower dimensional particle in such way that the number of lower di-
mensional particles becomes n d−1 = n d/α 2. The transformation from lower di-
mensional particles to higher dimensional particle is a condensation. Both the
fractionalization and the condensation are stepwise. For example, a particle with
4D (space-time) 10d (mass dimension) can transform stepwise into 4D9d particles.
Since the supersymmetry transformation involves translation, this stepwise vary-
ing supersymmetry transformation leads to a translational fractionalization and
translational condensation, resulting in expansion and contraction. At the same
time it should be mentioned that research by Krasnoholovets (2000) points out to
the fact that only fermions are true canonical particles, while bosons are rather
combined particles consisting of fermions.

Another type of the varying supersymmetry transformation is not stepwise. It
is the leaping varying supersymmetry transformation that transforms a particle
with d mass dimension to any d ± n mass dimension. The transformation involves
the slicing-fusion of particle. The transformation from d to d−n involves the slicing
of a particle with d mass dimension into two parts: the core particle with d−n
dimension and the n dimensions that are separable from the core particle. Such
n dimensions are denoted as n “dimensional orbitals”, which become force ﬁelds
(Chung 2002a). The sum of the number of mass dimensions for a particle and the

11

number of dimensional orbitals (DO’s) is equal to 11 for all particles with mass
dimensions. Therefore,

Fd = Fd−n + (11 − d + n) DO

′

s

(17)

where 11 − d + n is the number of dimensional orbitals (DO’s) for Fd−n. For ex-
ample, the slicing of 4D9d particle produces 4D4d particle that has d = 4 core
particle surrounded by 7 separable dimensional orbitals in the form of

B5F5B6F6B7F7B8F8B9F9B10F10B11.

Since the slicing process is not stepwise from higher mass dimension to lower mass
dimension, it is possible to have simultaneous slicing. For example, 4D9d parti-
cles can simultaneously transform into 4D8d, 4D7d, 4D6d, 4D5d, and 4D4d core
particles, which have 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 separable dimensional orbitals, respectively.
Therefore, varying supersymmetry transformation can be stepwise or leap-
ing. Stepwise supersymmetry transformation is translational fractionalization and
condensation, resulting in stepwise expansion and contraction. Leaping supersym-
metry transformation is not translational, and it is slicing and fusion, resulting
possibly in simultaneous formation of diﬀerent particles with separable dimen-
sional orbitals.

In summary, the QVSL transformation carries over both space-time dimension
number and mass dimension number. The varying supersymmetry transforms
varying mass dimension number in the same space-time number as follows (once
again, D = space-time dimension number and d = mass dimension number).

D, d

D, d

D, d

QV SL−→
stepwise varying supersymmetry
−→
leaping varying supersymmetry
−→

(D ∓ n) , (d ± n)
D, (d ± 1)
D, (d ± n)

5. Cosmology

The cosmic gene controls the maturation processes of diﬀerent cosmic organs as
diﬀerent universes. The universal maturation process of our dual Vedic universe
involves four stages: the primitiverse, the dual chiral universe, the dual achiral
universe, and the dual Vedic universe. Diﬀerent stages of the universal maturation
process are diﬀerent cosmic genetic expressions. The emergencies of empty object,
achirality, and zero vacuum energy lead to the dual chiral universe, the dual achiral
universe, and the dual Vedic universe, respectively as follows

12

primitiverse

dual chiral universe

empty object
−→
achirality−→
zero vacuum energy
−→

dual achiral universe
dual expanding universe

The primitiverse consists of the closely packed 10D string-antistrings. The
primitiverse with Λ = 0 does not have empty object and detachment space. The
dual chiral universe started from the combination of n units of 10D strings into 11D
brane as in Eq. (3). Through symmetry, the combination of n units of antistrings
forms 11D anti-brane. The combination of 311 and 011 brings about 210 21, where
21 is pregravity, g. In the same way, the combination of 3-11 and 011 brings about
2−10

1−1, where 1−1 is anti-pregravity, g−.

(210)n + dS
(2−10)n + dS
311 + (011)n
3−11 + (0−11)n
(210)n g + (2−10)n g−

composition
−→
composition
−→
decomposition
−→
decomposition
−→
−→

311 + ( 011)n
3−11 + ( 0−11)n

(211)n (11)1 = ( 210)n g
(2−10)n (1−1)n = ( 2−10)n g−
( 210)n g g− (2−10)n

(18)

Pregravity is repulsive to anti-pregravity, so (210)n and (2−10)n are separated
from each other. When the critical mass of the AdS/CFT duality reaches, the
AdS/CFT duality propagates in the primitiverse continuously, resulting in a large
number for n.

Other than pre-gravity, there are two other forces: the pre-strong force and
the pre-charged force, as the predecessor of the strong force and electromagnetism,
respectively. Both of them are from the quantized vibration of the strings. The
original force in the primitiverse is the short-ranged pre-strong force, “s”, among
strings. It is from the reversible process of the absorption and the emission of the
massless particles among the strings. The pre-strong force also forms the bond
between the primitiverse and the strings with gravity. The vibration of the string
with gravity generates the long-ranged pre-charged force, “e”, as the reversible
process of the absorption and the emission of the massless particles among the
strings with gravity. The string with gravity has the positive pre-charged force,
and the antistring with antigravity has the negative pre-charged force. The positive
pre-charged force is attractive to the negative pre-charged force.

The appearances of diﬀerent forces follow the speciﬁc sequence.

In the se-
quence, the pre-strong force exists ﬁrst. Then, the emergence of the repulsive
force between pregravity and anti-pregravity forces the string and the antistring
to move away from each other. All of the strings go to one domain with pregravity,

13

while all of the antistrings go to the opposite domain with anti-pregravity. Subse-
quently, the pre-strong force connects the newly formed strings or the antistring
with the previously formed strings or antistrings. Finally, the pre-charged force
emerges. The domain occupied by the strings is opposite from the domain occu-
pied by the antistrings, so the strings and the antistrings are chiral. This speciﬁc
sequence provides the formation of the dual chiral universe.

primiti verse s (210 s 210 s)n

g+
e+

g−
e− (2−10 s 2−10 s)n s primiti verse

(19)

where g is the pregravity, e is the pre-charged force, s the pre-strong force and n
numbers of repetitive units.

The dual chiral universe consists of two universes: 10D strings with positive
energy and gravity and 10D antistrings with negative energy and anti-pregravity.
The two universes are opposite (chiral) in CP, energy, and pregravity.

During the steady conversion from the primitiverse to the dual chiral universe
takes place, the total volume of the primitiverse and the dual chiral universe re-
main constant. To maintain this constant volume, the attractive force (A) between
the positive and negative precharged forces is equal to the sum of the repulsive
force (R) between pregravity and anti-pregravity, and the special global short-
ranged pre-strong force (C ) connecting the dual chiral universe and the primiti-
verse. A = R + C is a non-localized global relation for the constant total volume
of the universes. If A > R + C, the total volume is smaller, and if A < R + C, the
total volume is larger.

There is a small amount of the abnormal sequence of the appearance of force
in the dual chiral universe. In the abnormal development sequence, the pre-strong
force exists ﬁrst. Then, the emergence of pregravity occurs simultaneously with the
attractive force from the pre-charged forces, drawing the string and the antistring
together,

−
g+ (210)m e+ e

( 2−10)m g

−

(20)

The combined string-antistring units go impartially to either side of the dual
chiral universe, resulting in the achiral string-antistring units.
(Essentially, at-
tractive force and repulsive force are the tools to form chirality and achirality.)
In the universe, local interactions are either chirality-speciﬁc or achirality-speciﬁc.
Unable to interact with the region inside the dual chiral universe, the achiral
string-antistring units are separated from the dual chiral universe, and congregate
in the area connecting the primitiverse and the dual chiral universe. They form
the achiral domain next to the primitiverse.

−
primiti verse s g + (210)m e+ e

( 2−10)m g

−

s primiti verse

(21)

where m is much smaller than n from Eq. (19).

14

Such achiral domain connects with the primitiverse, but does not connect with
the dual chiral universe. The result is the decrease of the connection between
the dual chiral universe and the primitiverse. However, as a non-localized global
relation, A = R + C continues with the right amount of C contributed by the
primitiverse as long as there is still connection between the primitiverse and the
dual chiral universe.

As the dual chiral universe grows, the achiral domain also grows. Eventually,
the dual chiral universe is disconnected completely from the primitiverse by the
achiral domain. Without C, the excess attractive force (A > R) between positive
charged strings and negative charged antistrings causes the dual chiral universe
to collapse, and the repulsive force between pregravity and anti-pregravity causes
the dual chiral universe to inverse. As the 10D-strings and the 10D-antistrings
move toward each other, the 10D-strings and the 10D-antistrings turn inside, and
pregravity and anti-pregravity turn outside. The “gulf” separates the dual chiral
universe and the primitiverse forms. Eventually, the 10D-strings and the 10D-
antistrings coalesce.

During the coalescence, the two chiral universes coexist in the same space-time,
which is predicted by the Santilli isodual theory (Santilli, 2005). Anitparticle for
our positive energy universe is described by Santilli as follows, “this identity is at
the foundation of the perception that antiparticles “appear” to exist in our space,
while in reality they belong to a structurally diﬀerent space coexisting within our
own, thus setting the foundations of a “multidimensional universe” coexisting in
the same space of our sensory perception” (Santilli, 2005, p. 94). Antiparticles
in the positive energy universe actually come from the coexisting negative energy
universe. With chiral symmetry, the isodual theory describes the coexistence of
the two chiral universes.

The coexisting chiral universes do not remain chiral. The mixing of the two
chiral universes results in the two achiral universes. The mixing process follows
the isodual hole theory that is the combination of the isodual theory and the
Dirac hole theory. In the Dirac hole theory that is not symmetrical, the positive
energy universe has an unobservable inﬁnitive sea of negative energy. A hole in
the unobservable inﬁnitive sea of negative energy is the observable positive energy
antiparticle. The isodual hole theory has two symmetrical sets of coexisting holes
in the symmetrical coexisting seas of positive energy and negative energy.

In the dual chiral universe, one universe has positive energy, strings, and pre-
gravity, and one universe has negative energy, antistrings, and anti-pregravity.
During the mixing when two chiral universes coexist, a half of antistrings in the
negative energy universe moves to the positive energy universe, and the process
leaves the Dirac holes in the negative energy universe. The antistrings moved
become positive energy antistrings in the positive energy universe. In the same

15

way, a half of strings in the positive energy universe moves to the negative energy
universe, and the process leaves the Dirac holes in the positive energy universe.
The strings moved become negative energy strings in the negative energy universe.
The result is that a half of antistrings moves from the negative energy universe to
the positive energy universe to become positive energy antistrings, and a half of
strings from the positive energy universe to the negative energy universe to become
negative energy strings.

Both positive energy universe and negative energy universe have strings-anti-
strings. The universes become achiral in terms of strings and antistrings. With
the odd number (9) of space dimension, 10D string has chiral symmetry. Chi-
ral 10D string cannot survive in the achiral universes, so 10D strings-antistrings
become 10D particles-antiparticles. 10D particles-antiparticles have the multiple
dimensional Kaluza-Klein structure with ﬂexible requirement for space dimension
number, so they do not need to have a ﬁxed space dimension number. Thus, the
isodual hole theory converts the chiral universes into the achiral universes, and
strings-antistrings with ﬁxed space dimension number into particles-antiparticles
with varying space dimension number.

The dual achiral universe consists of positive energy particles-antiparticles with
pregravity and negative energy particles-antiparticles with anti-pregravity. The
two coexisting universes are represented as below:

primiti verse

[gulf] 1/2g+ (110 1−10)n/2 1/2g+ [gulf]

primiti verse

primiti verse

[gulf] 1/2g− (110 1−10)n/2 1/2g− [gulf] primiti verse.

coexisting with

(22)

The dual achiral universe consists of four equal parts: two groups of achiral

particle-antiparticles, pregravity, and anti-pregravity

The size of the dual chiral universe is determined by the ratio between the
number of the chiral units and the number of the achiral units. The primitiverse
and the dual achiral universe are diﬀerent in the composition of objects and spaces,
and are separated from each other permanently. Consequently, the two universes
are completely transparent and oblivious to each other.

Without relation with the primitiverse, the dual achiral universe has its own
vacuum energy that decreases from the non-zero in the primitiverse to zero. With
decreasing vacuum energy and the Kaluza-Klein structure without a ﬁxed number
of space dimensions, the space-time dimension and the mass dimension of particle-
antiparticles decrease to lower dimensional space-time and lower dimensional mass.
The decrease to lower mass dimension results in the fractionalization of particle-
antiparticles into lower mass particles, leading to the expansion of the universe.
The result is the dual Vedic universe in the two diﬀerent modes: the slow mode for
the dark universe and the quick mode for the light universe. As the space energy

16

decreases, the mass-energy is created, corresponding to the cosmology in the Vedas
(Roy, 1999). In the cosmology described by the Vedas, the universe starts with
the void, i.e. the web of space does not have energy, or force. The creation of
mass-energy occurs on the surface of the void web, resulting in the expansion of
space, or the universe. In dual Vedic universe, the universe starts with the high
space energy, leading to the nearly void with nearly zero mass-energy. Thus, the
dual universe is called the dual Vedic universe. As shown later, the dark universe
without detachment space has no light, while the light universe with detachment
space has light.

In the slow mode, the vacuum energy decreases to zero gradually, and the
space-time dimension of the 10D particle-antiparticle with antigravity decreases
In the dark universe, the 10D4d particles at high
from 10D to 4D, stepwise.
vacuum energy transform into 9D5d particles at low vacuum energy through the
QVSL transformation. Through the varying supersymmetry transformation, 9D5d
becomes 9D4d. Such varying supersymmetry transformation brings about the
stepwise translational fractionalization, resulting in cosmic expansion. Further
decrease in vacuum energy repeats the same process again until particles are the
4D particles at zero vacuum energy as follows

The Slow Mode: The Hidden Dark Universe and the Dark Energy Universe

10D4d → 9D5d → 9D4d → 8D5d → 8D4d → 7D5d → • • ••
→ 5D4d → 4D5d → 4D4d 7→ the hidden dark universe
←7→ dark energy ←

The dark universe consists of two periods: the hidden dark universe and the
dark energy universe. The hidden dark universe composes of the > 4D particles.
As mentioned before, since the speed of light for > 4D particle is greater than
the speed of light for 4D particle, the observation of > 4D particles by 4D par-
ticles violates casualty. Thus, > 4D particles are hidden particles with respect
to 4D particles. The universe with > 4D particles is the hidden dark universe.
The 4D particles transformed from hidden > 4D particles in the dark universe are
observable dark energy for the light universe, resulting in the accelerated expand-
ing universe. The accelerated expanding universe consists of the positive energy
4D particles-antiparticles and dark energy that includes the negative energy 4D
particles-antiparticles and the antigravity. Dark energy does not contradict to
Santilli’s (2005) isodual theory (the combination of the isodual theory and the
hole theory), where two universes coexist. Since the dark universe does not have
detachment space, the presence of dark energy is not diﬀerent from the presence
of the high vacuum energy.

The quick mode is used in the light universe. Through zero vacuum en-

17

ergy, 10D4d particle transforms through the quick QVSL transformation quickly
into 4D10d particles. 4D10d particle then transforms and fractionalizes quickly
through varying supersymmetry transformation into 4D9d, resulting in an in-
ﬂationary expansion (Guth 1981; Linde, 1982; Albrecht and Steinhardt, 1982;
Chung, 2002a). The inﬂationary expansion occurs between the energy for 4D10d
=E Planck α 2 = 6 × 1014 GeV and the energy for 4D9d = E10 α 2 = 3 × 10 10 GeV.
At the end of the inﬂationary expansion, all 4D9d particles undergo simulta-
neous slicing to generate equally by mass and number into 4D9d, 4D8d, 4D7d,
4D6d, 4D5d, and 4D4d core particles. Baryonic matter is 4D4d, while dark mat-
ter consists of the other ﬁve types of particles (4D9d, 4D8d, 4D7d, 4D6d, and
4D5d). The mass ratio of dark matter to baryonic matter is 5 to 1 in agreement
with the observation (Rees, 2003) showing the universe consists of 25% dark mat-
ter, 5% baryonic matter, and 70% dark energy. Dark matter contributes to the
inhomogeneous structure of baryonic matter (Chung 2002a).

The mechanism for the simultaneous slicing of mass dimensions requires de-
tachment space that slices mass dimensions. The dual achiral universe consists of
10D particle-antiparticle. With the CP symmetry, 10D particle-antiparticle un-
dergoes annihilation (implosion). Annihilation is the detachment of energy from
the original position. The space is detachment space, and the detached energy
is cosmic radiation. The particles with CP asymmetry remain as the particles
(matter). The whole process becomes

The Quick Mode: The Light Universe

10D4d

quick QV SL transf ormation
−→

4D10d

stepwise varying supersymmetry, inf lation
−→

dark matter (4D9d + 4D8d + 4D7d + 4D6d + 4D5d)

simultaneous slicing
−→

4D9d
+ baryonic matter (4D4d) + cosmic radiation
→ thermal cosmic expansion (the big bang)

For baryonic matter, the slicing of mass dimensions is as follows

(14+6)m

4D > 4d attach. space

slicing−→

(14)m
4D4d core attach. space

6

P1

+

((04) (14))n,6

6 types 4D4d units

where 4 and 6 (for six gauge force ﬁelds) are d mass dimensions.

The two products of the slicing are the 4D4d-core attachment space and six
types of 4D4d quantized units. The 4D4d core attachment space surrounded by
six types of inﬁnitely many 4D4d quantized units corresponds to the core particle

(23)

18

Figure 1: The force ﬁelds as > 4d mass dimensions (dimensional orbitals)

Figure 2: Cosmology.

19

surrounded by six types of inﬁnitely many small 4D4d particles. The gauge force
ﬁelds are made of such small 4D4d quantized virtual particles surrounding the core
particle.

The six > 4d mass dimensions (dimensional orbitals) for the gauge force ﬁelds

and the one mass dimension for gravity are as in Figure 1.

The dimensional orbitals form the base for the periodic table of elementary
particles to calculate the masses for graviton, gauge bosons, quarks, and leptons
(Chung, 2002a).

The summary of cosmology is shown in Figure 2.

6. Force Fields

The two types of force ﬁelds are the force ﬁelds in tessellattice and the force ﬁelds
in binary lattice space. Tessellattice consisting of empty objects corresponds to
AdS (Λ < 0) in high-density region with boundary. The force ﬁelds derived from
the AdS/CFT duality include the original gravity before the big bang and the
strong force in nucleus.

Binary lattice space, consisting of alternative attachment space and detach-
ment space corresponds to S-matrix (Λ = 0) in low-density region without bound-
ary. The force ﬁelds derived from the 4D quantized units of their respective mass
dimensions include electromagnetism, the strong force in pion, and the weak in-
teraction (Chung, 2002a).

The table below lists the two types of force ﬁelds.
Table. Force ﬁelds.

high density region with boundary
original gravity before the big bang

the strong force in baryon

tessellattice (AdS) Λ ¡ 0
The dS/bulk duality and the AdS/CFT
duality
the CFT/AdS duality, the AdS/CFT
duality, and the AdS/SU(3) duality

low density region without boundary binary lattice space (S-matrix) Λ = 0
electromagnetism

the strong force in pion

the weak interaction

the 4D4d quantized units of the 5th mass
dimension
the 4D4d quantized units of the 6th mass
dimension
the 4D4d quantized units of the 7th mass
dimension

20

In the high-density region such as nucleus, the compression as the reverse of the
decomposition in Eq. (2) takes place. The compression theory is the reverse of the
decomposition theory. In the compression theory, the D + 1 dimensional string in
AdSD+1 is the compression product of the CFT in the form of the D dimensional
particle and its virtual particle. The duality in the compression theory is the
CFT/AdS duality, the reverse of the AdS/CFT duality. It can be expressed as
string/particle duality.

One example is the big bang baryonenesis (the baryon formation) that occurred
immediately after the big bang. Within one minute after the big bang before the
big bang nucleosynthesis, when both density and energy were high, baryons, such
as proton and neutron, were formed from pions. Pion is derived from the gauge
force ﬁeld as the 6th mass dimension (dimensional orbital) in binary lattice space
(Chung, 2002a). The high density compressed massive quark and massive pion
as the strong force (massive gluon) into the massive 5D string and tessellattice as
AdS

14 π = 14 11

the compression in nucleus
−→

25 + 05

(24a)

Eq. (24a) shows the CFT/AdS duality for the compression. The 5D string is
the string in the strong force as in the gauge particle/string duality proposed by
Polchinski and Strassler (2003). At low energy, quarks and gluons are combined
as the 5D strings. The diﬀerent oscillations of this 5D string produce diﬀerent
particles. The string can also explain some aspects of masses and spins of the
particles.

With the high-energy input after the big bang, the 5D string interacted with

AdS, resulting in the decomposition

25 + 05

decomposition of space dimension
−→

14 11 = 14 i

(24b)

The result of the decomposition is 1411 that was the quark-inerton. By carry-
ing mass-energy of quark, inerton actually becomes the major part of the con-
stituent masses and the binding energy of quarks. The inerton ﬁeld is the “aux-
iliary dimensional orbital” as in Figure 3. During the simultaneous slicing, the
particles-antiparticles with the CP symmetry between particle and antiparticle
result in annihilation to become cosmic radiation. The particles that are not an-
nihilated have asymmetrical charge-parity (CP asymmetry), in such way that the
particle-antiparticle has two asymmetrical sets of dimensional orbitals. The two
sets of dimensional orbitals are “principal dimensional orbital” and “auxiliary di-
mensional orbital”. The auxiliary set is dependent on the principal set, so the
particle-antiparticle appears to have only one set of dimensional orbital. Auxiliary
dimensional orbital is the hidden dimensional orbital.

21

Figure 3: Dimensional orbitals in the four-mass dimensional (4d) particle (bary-
onic matter): principal dimensional orbital (solid line), and auxiliary dimensional
orbital (dot line) as the inerton ﬁeld; d is the principal dimensional orbital number

For the four-mass-dimensional particle (baryonic matter), the two sets of seven
dimensional orbitals are principal dimensional orbital and auxiliary dimensional
orbital. These hierarchical dimensional orbitals are the force and mass ﬁelds,
including gravity, as shown in Figure 3.

As shown in Figure 3, the seven orbitals of hidden auxiliary dimensional orbital
as the inerton ﬁeld are in the middle of the seven orbitals of principal dimensional
orbital. The structure of the 4d particle with dimensional orbitals resembles to the
structure of atomic orbital. Consequently, the periodic table of elementary parti-
cles is constructed to account for all leptons, quarks, gauge bosons, and hadrons.
The calculation of the masses of quarks is the calculation of the masses in the iner-
ton ﬁeld (see preliminary studies in (Chung, 2002a)), resulting in a good agreement
with the observable masses.

The requirement for the quark-inerton conﬁnement conﬁned 14 i. The bound-
ary of the conﬁnement was dual to the boundary of AdS. Thus, AdS was also in 14
i. At high energy, the high velocity of quark (14) resulted in the repetitive inter-
actions between quark and AdS to generate gluon, resulting in SU (3). The space
dimension of quark, 14, could not be decomposed further by AdS. Therefore, in-
stead of the decomposition of space dimension, the repetitive interactions between
quark (14) and AdS led to the decomposition of massive quark into nearly mass-
less quark, resulting in chiral symmetry of quark and asymptotic freedom between
quark and gluon at high energy

14 i + AdS

decomposition of mass
−→

chiral symmetry and asymptoticly f reedom f or massless 14 g

(24c)

The strong force in baryon is the combination of the CFT/AdS duality, Eq.
(24a), for the compression involving π, the AdS/CFT duality, Eq. (24b), for the
decomposition of space dimension involving inerton, and the AdS/SU(3) duality,

22

Eq. (24c), for the decomposition of mass involving gluon. These three dualities
during the baryonenesis form the base for the mass calculation of hadrons (Chung,
2002a).

After the big bang baryonenesis, the universe was cool enough to form stable
protons and neutrons. The density was high enough for the big bang nucleosyn-
thesis, responsible for the formation of hydrogen, deuterium, helium, and lithium.
It lasted three minutes. Afterward, the temperature and density of the universe
fell below the condition for nuclear fusion.

7. Summary

In the cosmic organism theory, diﬀerent universes are the diﬀerent cosmic organs
for the cosmic organism that is the multiverse. Diﬀerent universes are the diﬀerent
expressions of the common cosmic gene. Diﬀerent stages in a universe, like an
organ, have diﬀerent cosmic genetic expressions.

The cosmic gene is the cosmic digital code in the cosmic dimension. The cosmic
digital code includes the codes for the object structure and the space structure.
The cosmic digital code for the object structure consists of full object (1, 2, and 3
for particle, string, and membrane, respectively) and empty object (0) as AdS (anti
de Sitter space). The tessellation lattice of empty objects, which is constructed in
the real space, is tessellattice. The decomposition of a full object in tessellattice
results in the AdS/CFT duality. The digital code for the object structure accounts
for the AdS/CFT duality, the dS/bulk duality, and gravity.

The digital code for the space structure consists of 1 and 0 for attachment space
and detachment space, respectively. Attachment space attaches to object perma-
nently at zero speed or reversibly at the speed of light. Detachment space detaches
from the object irreversibly at the speed of light. The combination of attachment
space and detachment space results in miscible space, binary lattice space or binary
partition space. Miscible space represents special relativity. Binary lattice space
consists of multiple quantized units of attachment space separated from one an-
other by detachment space. Binary lattice space corresponds to nilpotent universal
computational rewrite system (NUCRS) by Diaz and Rowlands. The gauge force
ﬁelds and wavefunction are in binary lattice space. Binary partition space consists
of separated continuous phases of attachment space and detachment space. The
collapse of wavefunction results in binary partition space. With tessellattice and
binary lattice space, 11D brane is reduced to 4D particle surrounded by gravity
and the gauge force ﬁelds.

The cosmic dimension is in the framework of varying dimension number (VDN).
In VDN, there are diﬀerent speeds of light in diﬀerent dimensional space-times. In
the VDN transformation, the decrease in the quantized speed of light leads to the

23

decrease in space-time dimension number (D) and the increase of mass in terms
of increasing mass dimension number (d). In the same dimensional space-time,
the varying supersymmetry transformation carriers over mass in terms of mass
dimension number.

The four stages in the maturation of our universe are the primitiverse, the dual
chiral universe, the achiral universe, and the dual Vedic universe. Each stage has
diﬀerent cosmic genetic expressions. The most primitive part of the multiverse is
the primitiverse consisting of closely packed 10D strings in attachment space. The
primitiverse does not have detachment space and empty object. The combination
of two strings with additional space dimension results in 11D brane and AdS as
empty object. The interaction of 11D brane and empty object forms 10D string
and pregravity through the AdS/CFT duality. 10D strings and 10D antistrings are
separated in the dual chiral universe separated by the repulsion between pregravity
and anti-pregravity.

The collapse and the bounce of the dual chiral universe result in dual achiral
universe with 10D particles in both domains separated by the repulsion between
pregravity and anti-pregravity. The conversion from the chiral dual universe to the
achiral universe is predicted by the Santilli isodual theory and the Dirac hole the-
ory. With the diﬀerent VDN transformations and varying supersymmetry trans-
formations, the two domains become the light universe and the dark universe. The
dark universe does not have detachment space. The light universe has detachment
space that slices mass dimensions into 4D quantized units that are the origin of
gauge force ﬁelds. The combination of attachment space and detachment space is
the cosmic origin of quantum mechanics and gauge force ﬁelds. The hidden dark
universe develops into dark energy later. In the light universe, dark matter has
diﬀerent mass numbers form baryonic matter.

The force ﬁelds in tessellattice for high-density region with boundary are the
original gravity before the big bang and the strong force in baryon. One can
correspond tessellattice to AdS space. The force ﬁelds in binary lattice space for
low-density region without boundary are electromagnetism, the weak interaction,
and the strong force in pion. Binary lattice space corresponds to S -matrix in gauge
symmetry. The force ﬁelds in tessellattice are the original gravity before the big
bang, or a series of small big bangs, which will be disclosed in a future paper under
preparation, and the strong force in baryon. The force ﬁelds in binary lattice space
are electromagnetism, the weak interaction, and the strong force in pion.

References

Albrecht, A. and Steinhardt, P. J. (1982). “Cosmology for Grand Uniﬁed Theories
with Radiatively Induced Symmetry Breaking”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, pp. 1220-

24

1223 .

Albrecht, A. and Magueijo, J. (1999). “A time varying speed of light as a solution
to cosmological puzzles”, Phys. Rev. D59, 043516 (also astro-ph/9811018).

Amelino-Camelia, G. (2001). “Testable scenario for Relativity with minimum-
length”, Phys. Letts. B510, pp. 255-263 (also hep-th/0012238).

Amelino-Camelia, G. (2002). “Relativity in space-times with short-distance struc-
ture governed by an observer-independent (Planckian) length scale”, Int. J. Mod.
Phys. D11, pp. 35-60 (also gr-qc/0012051).

Barrow, J. D. (1999). “Cosmologies With Varying Light Speed”, Phys. Rev. D59,
043515.

Barrow, J. D. (2003). “Unusual Features of Varying Speed of Light Cosmologies”,
Phys.Lett. B564, pp. 1-7 (also gr-qc/0211074).

Bell, J. S. (1964). “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox”, Physics 1, pp.
195-199.

Bounias, M. (2002). “On Spacetime Diﬀerential Elements and the Distribution of
Biohamiltonian Components”, Spacetime & Substance 3, no. 1, pp. 15-19 (also
physics/0205087).

Bounias, M. and Krasnoholovets, V. (2003a). “Scanning the Structure of Ill-known
Spaces: Part 2. Principles of construction of physical space”, Kybernetes: The Int.
J. of Systems and Cybernetics 32, no. 7/8, pp. 976-1004 (also physics/0212004).

Bounias, M. and Krasnoholovets, V. (2003b). “Scanning the Structure of Ill-
Known Spaces: Part 3. Distribution of Topological Structures at Elementary and
Cosmic Scales”, Kybernetes: The Int. J. Systems and Cybernetics 32, no. 7/8,
pp. 1005-1020 (also physics/0301049).

Bounias, M. and Krasnoholovets, V. (2003c). “Scanning the Structure of Ill-known
Spaces: Part 1. Founding Principles About Mathematical Constitution of Space”,
Kybernetes: The Int. J. Systems and Cybernetics 32, no. 7/8, pp. 945-975 (also
physics/0211096).

Chung, D. (2002a). “The Cosmic Organism Theory for the Multiverse”, hep-th/0201115.

25

Chung, D. (2002b). “The Cosmic Digital Code and Quantum Mechanics”, quan-ph/ 0204033.

Diaz, B. M. and Rowlands, P. (2003). “A Computational path to the Nilpotent
Dirac Equation”, Symposium 10, International Conference for Computing Antici-
patory Systems, HEC Liege, Belgium, August 11-16, 2003, American Institute of
Physics Proceedings of the International Conference of Computing Anticipatory
Systems, ed. Daniel Dubois.

Ellis, G., Kirchner, U. and Stoeger, W. (2004). “Multiverses and Cosmology:
Philosophical Issues”, astro-ph/0407329.

Ellis, G. and Uzan, J. (2005). “‘c’ is the speed of light, isn’t it?”, Am. J. Phys.
73, pp. 240-247 (also gr-qc/0305099).

Gubser, S. S., Klebanov, I. R., and Polyakov, A. M. (1998) “Gauge Theory Corre-
lators from Non-Critical String Theory”, Phys. Lett. B428, pp. 105-114 (also see
hep-th/9802109).

Guth, A. H. (1981). “The Inﬂationary Universe: A Possible Solution to the Hori-
zon and Flatness Problems”, Phys. Rev. D23, pp. 347-356.

Krasnoholovets, V. and Ivanovsky, D. (1993). “Motion of a particle and the vac-
uum”, Phys. Essays 6, no. 4, pp. 554-563 (also quant-ph/9910023).

Krasnoholovets, V. (1997). “Motion of a relativistic particle and the vacuum”,
Phys. Essays 10, no. 3, pp. 407-416 (also quant-ph/9903077).

Krasnoholovets, V. (2000). “On the nature of spin, inertia and gravity of a moving
canonical particle”, Indian Journal of Theoretical Physics 48, no. 2, pp. 97-132
(also quant-ph/0103110).

Krasnoholovets, V. (2002). “Submicroscopic deterministic quantum mechanics,”
Int. J. Computing Anticipatory Systems 11, pp. 164-179 (also quant-ph/0109012).

Linde, A. D. (1982). “New Inﬂationary Universe Scenario: A Possible Solution Of
The Horizon, Flatness, Homogeneity, Isotropy And Primordial Monopole Prob-
lems”, Phys. Lett. B108, pp. 389-393.

Maldacena, J. (1998). “The Large N Limit of Superconformal Field Theories and

26

Supergravity”, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, pp. 231-252, (also see hep-th/9711200).

Magueijo, J. (2003). “New varying speed of light theories”, Rep. Prog. Phys. 66,
pp. 2025-2068, (also astro-ph/0305457).

Penrose, R. (2000). “Wavefunction Collapse as a Real Gravitational Eﬀect” in
Mathematical Physics, eds: by A. Fokas, A. Grigoryan, T. Kibble & B. Zegarlinski
(Imperial College, London), pp. 266-282.
Polchinski, J and Strassler, M. J. (2003) “Deep Inelastic Scattering and Gauge/String
Duality”, J. High Energy Phys. 0305, 012 (also see hep-th/0209211).

Roy, R. R. M., (1999), “Vedic Physics: Scientiﬁc Origins of Hinduism”, Golden
Egg Publishing (Toronto, Canada).

Randall, L. and Sundrum, R. (1999a). “Out of this World Supersymmetry Break-
ing”, Nucl. Phys. B557, pp. 79-118.

Rees, M. (2003). “Dark Matter: Introduction”, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London
361, pp. 2427-2434.

Santilli, R. M., (2005), “Isodual Theory Of Antimatter With Applications to
Antigravity, Grand Uniﬁcation, and Cosmology” (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston/Dordrecht/London), in press.

Whitehead, A. (1929) “Process and Reality”, (New York, Macmillan).

Witten, K. (1998) “Anti-de Sitter Space and Holography”, Adv. Theor. Math.
Phys. 2, pp. 253-291 (also see hep-th/9802150).

27

