6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symmetry, Integrability and Geometry: Methods and Applications

Vol. 1 (2005), Paper ??, 47 pages

Consistent Cosmology, Dynamic Relativity and Causal
Quantum Mechanics as Uniﬁed Manifestations of the
Symmetry of Complexity 0

Andrei P. KIRILYUK

Institute of Metal Physics, 36 Vernadsky Avenue, 03142 Kyiv-142, Ukraine

E-mail: kiril@metﬁz.freenet.kiev.ua
URL: http://myprofile.cos.com/mammoth/

Abstract. The universal symmetry, or conservation, of complexity underlies any law or
principle of system dynamics and describes the unceasing transformation of dynamic infor-
mation into dynamic entropy as the unique way to conserve their sum, the total dynamic
complexity. Here we describe the real world structure emergence and dynamics as manifes-
tation of the universal symmetry of complexity of initially homogeneous interaction between
two protoﬁelds. It provides the uniﬁed complex-dynamic, causally complete origin of phys-
ically real, 3D space, time, elementary particles, their properties (mass, charge, spin, etc.),
quantum, relativistic, and classical behaviour, as well as fundamental interaction forces, in-
cluding naturally quantized gravitation. The old and new cosmological problems (including
“dark” mass and energy) are basically solved for this explicitly emerging, self-tuning world
structure characterised by strictly positive (and large) energy-complexity. A general rela-
tion is obtained between the numbers of world dimensions and fundamental forces, excluding
plausible existence of hidden dimensions. The uniﬁed, causally explained quantum, classi-
cal, and relativistic properties (and types of behaviour) are generalised to all higher levels
of complex world dynamics. The real world structure, dynamics, and evolution are exactly
reproduced by the probabilistic dynamical fractal, which is obtained as the truly complete
general solution of a problem and the unique structure of the new mathematics of com-
plexity. We outline particular, problem-solving applications of always exact, but irregularly
structured symmetry of unreduced dynamic complexity to microworld dynamics, including
particle physics, genuine quantum chaos, real nanobiotechnology, and reliable genomics.

Key words: complex interaction dynamics; dynamic multivaluedness; chaos; dynamically
probabilistic fractal; quantum gravity; dark matter; Planckian units; causal mass spectrum

2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 34K23;47J10;60A99;70H33;70K55;81V25;83D05;85A40

1 Universe structure emergence by the symmetry of complexity

1.1 Unreduced interaction dynamics and elementary particle structure

The universal symmetry (conservation and transformation) of complexity underlies any real in-
teraction process development (any system dynamics and evolution) and constitutes both the
origin and the result of structure emergence at any level of world dynamics, providing a large
scope of problem-solving applications [1–15]. Contrary to usual symmetry expression by exter-
nally imposed, formal operators [16–18], the symmetry of complexity expresses real interaction
dynamics in the form of unceasing chaotic transitions between system realisations and complex-
ity levels [2]. In this report we consider explicit emergence of the lowest complexity levels of
the universe, represented by elementary particles, ﬁelds, all their properties and interactions, as

0Report presented at the Sixth International Conference “Symmetry in Nonlinear Mathematical Physics”

(Kiev, 20-26 June 2005), http://www.imath.kiev.ua/~appmath/conf.html.

2

A.P. Kirilyuk

Figure 1. Scheme of protoﬁeld interaction conﬁguration and development, giving rise to emerging
elementary particles, ﬁelds, their properties and interactions (progressively derived).

well as global and cosmic structure (cosmological) features [1,4,7–10]. We demonstrate how the
symmetry of complexity determines the properties of real-world structures and provides solution
to fundamental and practical problems remaining otherwise unsolved or even growing (e. g. in
cosmology, quantum and classical gravity and ﬁeld theory).

The “fundamental” world structures of lowest complexity emerge necessarily from the simplest
possible interaction conﬁguration, which is uniquely represented, at the universe scale, by two
homogeneous, physically real protoﬁelds uniformly attracted to each other (Figure 1). The
dense and dissipative gravitational protoﬁeld, or medium, plays the role of inert world “matrix”
and eventually gives rise to (dynamically emerging) universal gravitation, while light and elastic
electromagnetic (e/m) protoﬁeld is the “swift” system component that underlies e/m properties.
Interaction development in the protoﬁeld system leads ﬁrst to emergence of most fundamental
world structures, elementary particles (and ﬁelds), and we are going to explicitly obtain them
as unreduced solutions of a quite general equation, called existence equation and actually only
ﬁxing the initial system conﬁguration (it also generalises various “model” equations):

[hg (ξ) + Veg (ξ, q) + he (q)] Ψ (ξ, q) = EΨ (ξ, q) ,

(1)

where Ψ (ξ, q) is the system state-function expressing its state and development (to be found),
hg (ξ) and he (q) are generalised Hamiltonians for the free (non-interacting) gravitational and
e/m protoﬁelds (i. e. measures of dynamic complexity deﬁned below), Veg (ξ, q) is arbitrary
(but actually attractive and binding) interaction potential between the ﬁelds of ξ and q, and E
is the generalised Hamiltonian eigenvalue (energy). The Hamiltonian form of existence equa-
tion generalises various, linear and “nonlinear”, models and is self-consistently conﬁrmed below
(section 1.2) as uniﬁed expression of the symmetry of complexity (the latter can already be
traced in equation (1) as the expressed permanence of energetic system content). The starting
problem formulation of equation (1) does not contain either space or time that will be obtained
as emerging, real manifestations of universe structure development (section 1.3.1).

Expressing Ψ (q, ξ) in terms of the free e/m protoﬁeld eigenfunctions, {φn(q)}, we get

Ψ (ξ, q) =

ψn (ξ)φn (q) ,

he (q) φn (q) = εnφn (q) ,

(2)

n
X

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

3

which after substitution into equation (1) and standard eigenfunction separation gives a system
of equations for ψn (ξ), equivalent to the starting existence equation (1) [1, 2, 7–9]:

[hg (ξ) + V00 (ξ)] ψ0 (ξ) +

V0n (ξ) ψn (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

[hg (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ) ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) − Vn0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) ,

(3)

n
X

Xn′6=n

where ηn ≡ E − εn,

Vnn′ (ξ) =

dqφ∗

n (q) Veg (ξ, q) φn′ (q) ,

ZΩq

N

Xk=1 "

equation with n = 0 is separated from others, so that n 6= 0 from now on, and η ≡ η0. Note that
one obtains exactly the same system of equations (3) starting from a general existence equation
for arbitrary system conﬁguration and number of components (N ) [3, 4, 6, 12–14],

h0 (ξ) +

hk (qk) + V0k (ξ, qk) +

Vkl (qk, ql)

Ψ (ξ, Q) = EΨ (ξ, Q) ,

(4)

(

N

Xl>k

#)

where Q ≡ {q1, ..., qN }. This fact should not be surprising, as arbitrary interaction between
protoﬁeld elements is implied in (1). It demonstrates also the deep underlying universality of
real world structure emergence at all levels, properly reﬂected in our unreduced description.

The unreduced interaction complexity emerges if instead of perturbative reduction of “non-
integrable” system (3) we try to “solve” it by expressing ψn(ξ) through ψ0(ξ) by the standard
Green function technique and inserting the result into the equation for ψ0(ξ), which gives the
eﬀective existence equation of the generalised eﬀective (optical) potential method [11, 19]:

[hg (ξ) + Veﬀ (ξ; η)] ψ0 (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

where the eﬀective potential (EP), Veﬀ (ξ; η), is given by

Veﬀ (ξ; η) = V00 (ξ) + ˆV (ξ; η) ,

ˆV (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) =

dξ′V

ξ, ξ′; η

ψ0

ξ′

,

V

ξ, ξ′; η

=

V0n (ξ) ψ0

ni (ξ) Vn0 (ξ′) ψ0∗
η − η0
ni − εn0

ni (ξ′)

,

Xn,i

(cid:1)

(cid:0)
ni(ξ)}, {η0
and {ψ0
truncated system of equations:

ni} are the complete sets of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for an auxiliary,

ZΩξ

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

εn0 ≡ εn − ε0 ,

[hg (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) .

Xn′6=n

The state function (2) of the initial existence equation (1) is then obtained as [1, 4, 10, 11]:

Ψ (ξ, q) =

ci

φ0 (q) +

φn (q) ˆgni (ξ)

ψ0i (ξ) ,

"

Xi
ψni (ξ) = ˆgni (ξ) ψ0i (ξ) ≡

n
X

dξ′gni

ξ, ξ′

ψ0i

ξ′

,

#

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

gni

ξ, ξ′

= Vn0

ξ′

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:1) Xi′

(cid:0)

ZΩξ
(cid:0)
(cid:1)
ni′ (ξ) ψ0∗
ψ0
ni′ (ξ′)
ηi − η0
ni′ − εn0

,

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

4

A.P. Kirilyuk

Figure 2. Dynamic multivaluedness emergence in any real interaction process. Unreduced interaction
between two objects (e. g. protoﬁelds) with N interacting points or modes each (left) includes N 2 mode
combinations, leading to N -fold redundance of incompatible system realisations thus formed (in agreement
with equations (6), (11)).
It is related to the symmetry of complexity, as the “number of places” for
interaction components and products, determined by the total system complexity, cannot change in
the course of interaction. Therefore all Nℜ = N equally real system realisations are forced, by the same
driving interaction, to permanently replace each other in a dynamically random order thus deﬁned (right).

where {ψ0i(ξ)} are eigenfunctions and {ηi} eigenvalues found from equation (5), while the coef-
ﬁcients ci should be determined by state-function matching on the boundary where the eﬀective
interaction vanishes. The observed system density, ρ(ξ, q), is given by the squared modulus of the
state-function, ρ(ξ, q) = |Ψ(ξ, q)| 2 (for “quantum” and other “wave-like” levels of complexity),
or by the state-function itself, ρ(ξ, q) = Ψ(ξ, q) (for “particle-like” levels) [1].

The unreduced EP problem formulation (5) reveals the key property of dynamic multival-
interaction process that remains hidden in the formally
uedness (or redundance) of any real
equivalent initial problem expression (1)–(4) and is artiﬁcially reduced in usual, perturbative
theories (including conventional EP applications [19]). It is due to the self-consistent, dynami-
cally nonlinear dependence of the unreduced EP (6) on eigen-solutions to be found that leads
to dramatic increase of the maximum eigenvalue power in the characteristic equation and corre-
sponding growth of the number of unreduced problem eigen-solutions with respect to their usual,
“unique-solution” set [1–11]. The unique, incomplete solution of perturbative interpretations is
replaced by many equally real, physically “complete” and therefore mutually incompatible so-
lutions of the unreduced problem called (system) realisations, which are forced to permanently
replace each other in a dynamically random, or chaotic, order thus deﬁned. In addition to the
above algebraic derivation of dynamic multivaluedness (conﬁrmed by geometric analysis [1,10]),
it can also be understood in terms of transparent physical picture, Figure 2, directly reﬂecting the
key features of the unreduced EP expression (6). Measured system density ρ(ξ, q) = |Ψ(ξ, q)| 2
is obtained then as a dynamically probabilistic sum of all realisation densities, {ρr(ξ, q)}, where
each r-th realisation is provided by the dynamically derived, a priori value of its emergence

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

5

(9)

(10)

probability αr:

ρ (ξ, q) =

⊕ρr (ξ, q),

ρr(ξ, q) = |Ψr(ξ, q)| 2 ,

Nℜ

r=1
X

Nr
Nℜ  

αr (Nr) =

Nr = 1, . . . , Nℜ;

Nr = Nℜ

,

αr = 1 .

r
X

!

r
X

where Nℜ is the total number of elementary realisations (equal to the number N of interacting
protoﬁeld modes, Nℜ = N , see Figure 2), Nr is the number of elementary realisations within
actually observed, “compound” r-th realisation, and the sign ⊕ serves to designate the special,
dynamically probabilistic meaning of the sum derived above.

The dynamically probabilistic sum (9) over system realisations provides (together with its
fractal extension (17)) a universal expression of the complete general solution to a problem, as
opposed to its usual version of compatible eigenfunction superposition similar to (2) that does
not contain any intrinsic, dynamically probabilistic change and is obtained as solution to a
perturbative, “mean-ﬁeld” problem approximation of the form

. We deal here with the dynamically single-valued, or uni-

ψn (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) ,

where |V0 (ξ)| ≤

h

h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ) + ˜Vn (ξ)
i
Vnn′ (ξ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

˜Vn (ξ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

n′
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
P
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

≤

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

tary, approximation or model of the whole conventional science that retains only one, averaged
system realisation of their really existing multitude. The real complexity of the unreduced prob-
lem solution becomes evident by comparison of this kind of oversimpliﬁed unitary model with the
corresponding unreduced EP and state-function expressions obtained by explicit substitution of
the EP equation eigenvalues (equation (5)) into equations (6) and (8):

Veﬀ (ξ; ηr

i ) ψr

0i (ξ) = V00 (ξ) ψr

0i (ξ) +

V0n (ξ) ψ0

ni′ (ξ)

dξ′ψ0∗

ni′ (ξ′) Vn0 (ξ′) ψr

0i (ξ′)

Ωξ
R
i − η0
ηr

ni′ − εn0

, (11)

Ψr (ξ, q) =

cr
i 

ψr

0i (ξ) φ0 (q) +

Xi




ψ0

ni′ (ξ) φn (q)

dξ′ψ0∗

ni′ (ξ′) Vn0 (ξ′) ψr

0i (ξ′)

Ωξ
R
i − η0
ηr

ni′ − εn0

,

(12)






where the last state-function expression should be used in the probabilistic general solution (9).
The expressions for r-th realisation EP (11) and state-function (12) reveal the emerging reali-
sation conﬁguration characterised by autonomous dynamical squeeze of the protoﬁeld system. It
is determined by the resonant denominators in combination with the cutting numerator integrals
of the unreduced EP formalism, leading to r-th realisation “concentration” around a particular
eigenvalue ηr
i , which can be interpreted as dynamically emerging space point and elementary par-
ticle core [1,4,7–9]. The eigenvalue separation ∆x = ∆rηr
i for diﬀerent r provides the elementary
space distance between “point”-particles appearing to be close to the “barred” Compton wave-
length ¯λC = λC/2π, ∆x = ∆rηr
i = ¯λC, while eigenvalue separation for diﬀerent i gives the size of
the squeezed state determined, for the electron, by the “classical electron radius” re, ∆iηr
i = re
(see section 1.3.4 for more details). As follows from equations (11)–(12), the dynamical squeeze
has a self-consistent character demonstrating real “self-organisation” (structure formation) pro-
cess and mechanism, where the more is state-function localisation in the emerging EP well,

Xn,i′

Xn,i′

6

A.P. Kirilyuk

the deeper is that well around the state-function localisation centre. This rigorously derived
property has a clear physical interpretation: a local density increase of (suﬃciently strongly)
attracting protoﬁelds will grow until saturation, since the more is local protoﬁeld density the
stronger is their local attraction and vice versa.

Dynamical protoﬁeld squeeze saturates at the point where protoﬁeld attraction is compen-
sated by internal repulsion forces between the protoﬁeld elements (underlying ﬁnal compressibil-
ity of every real medium). After that the self-amplifying system collapse, or “reduction”, loses
its force and the opposite protoﬁeld extension develops due to the same kind of instability related
to protoﬁeld interaction at neighbouring locations. The system thus transiently returns to its
initial, quasi-free state before falling into the next reduction phase involving another, randomly
chosen realisation (physical “point”). We obtain thus the unceasing process of quantum beat,
consisting of repeating cycles of reduction and extension around diﬀerent, chaotically changing
centres, which is equivalent to a dynamically random walk of the squeezed, corpuscular state
called virtual soliton (as opposed to usual, permanently localised and regular solitons). Quan-
tum beat process in the coupled protoﬁeld system thus obtained constitutes the physically real
structure of any (massive) elementary particle called also ﬁeld-particle in view of its permanent
dualistic change between corpuscular (local) and undular (extended) system states [1, 4, 7, 8].
Note that a big change of conﬁguration involves mainly e/m protoﬁeld due to its much larger
compressibility (smaller eﬀective density), whereas the relatively dense and (almost) incompress-
ible gravitational medium-matrix shows much smaller external change of properties (similar to
a liquid), which leads to essentially e/m origin of directly observed structures and properties.

The transient extended state of the ﬁeld-particle provides the causal, physically real interpre-
tation of the quantum-mechanical wavefunction, remaining otherwise completely mysterious and
abstract in the unitary theory framework. The realistic wavefunction thus revealed constitutes
a separate, speciﬁc system realisation called intermediate, or main, realisation and diﬀering
essentially from all other, localised, “regular” realisations. It is explicitly obtained within the
unreduced EP formalism as a special solution with eﬀectively weak, perturbative (“mean-ﬁeld”)
interaction where essentially nonlinear additions to V00 in the general EP expression (11) are
self-consistently small (contrary to the case of regular, localised realisations) [1,4,7]. That’s why
it is only the main, eﬀectively linear and weak-interaction realisation that remains in the usual,
dynamically single-valued theory, in quantum mechanics and beyond, whereas all regular, essen-
tially nonlinear and strong-interaction realisations are neglected, which leads to the well-known
“mysteries” and unsolved problems.

The dynamically discrete, or quantised, structure of the ﬁeld-particle realisation change within
the quantum beat process results from the holistic, self-consistent character of unreduced inter-
action, where any local component displacement entrains neighbouring component shifts and
propagates thus to the whole system, including the initial perturbation point. The system can
have therefore only a limited number of discrete, more stable, structure-forming conﬁgurations,
while the “continuum” of other possible conﬁgurations plays the role of quickly changing in-
termediate phases during system transitions between those regular realisations (and the main
realisation of the wavefunction). When the system is measured at the lowest, “quantum” com-
plexity level, it can only be “caught” in one of its realisations, but not “between” them. Because
of that quantum beat pulsation cannot be traced in detail, but it can be registered as a whole
using e. g. a resonance eﬀect, and recent electron channeling experiment [20] provides a clear
evidence of that kind, conﬁrming quantum beat reality (see also section 1.3.2).

Thus dynamically derived discreteness of the quantum beat process constitutes causal, phys-
ically real basis for all “quantisation”/“uncertainty” eﬀects and properties (including Planck’s
constant origin and universality) [1, 4, 7, 8], which are postulated as unprovable “mysteries” in
the usual theory (see also sections 1.3.4, 1.3.7). Dynamic discreteness should be distinguished
from mechanistic, non-dynamical discreteness used in unitary simulation of quantised behaviour:

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

7

the “steps” of dynamically discrete realisation change are causally determined by the unreduced
interaction process and cannot be replaced by arbitrary values. At the lowest complexity level,
dynamic discreteness is represented by physically real quantum jumps of virtual soliton through
a distance of ∆x = ∆rηr

i = ¯λC for a ﬁeld-particle globally at rest.

One obtains also causally speciﬁed events of protoﬁeld reduction and extension (realisation
change) and with them the emerging change and time, although none of these were present in
or inserted into initial system conﬁguration and problem formulation (see equations (1)–(4)).
Once the reduction-extension events are obtained in the unreduced EP formalism, time becomes
dynamically determined as intensity (represented by frequency) of those structure formation
processes. Speciﬁcally, quantum beat frequency is directly related to the above quantum jump
length, ∆t = ∆x/c = ¯λC/c = τ = 1/ν, where c is the velocity of perturbation propagation in a
physically real medium of e/m protoﬁeld coupled to the gravitational protoﬁeld, or the speed of
light thus causally introduced, ∆t = τ is the quantum beat period, and ν is its frequency. Quan-
tum beat processes within each (massive) elementary particle represent thus the fundamental
physical clock of the universe [1] whose “mechanism” is driven by unreduced interaction of two
initially homogeneous protoﬁelds (where the interaction magnitude determines ∆x = ∆rηr
i and
thus ∆t = ∆x/c according to equations (5)–(6)).

Note that we reveal here the fundamental, universal and physically real origin of time as such,
constituting a stagnating problem of unitary science, despite a lot of most ambitious eﬀorts.
Physically real time we obtain has the main property of unceasing and intrinsically irreversible
ﬂow due to permanent, interaction-driven change of multiple realisations (absent in principle
in any unitary theory) and dynamically random order of realisation emergence respectively. It
is dynamically related to naturally quantised space structure described above. Both quantised
space and irreversibly ﬂowing time (see also section 1.3.1) have eventually emerging multi-level
structure following that of the unreduced dynamic complexity (section 1.3.7).

The key property of dynamic multivaluedness of the unreduced interaction process is com-
pleted by equally important dynamic entanglement of interacting components (here protoﬁelds)
within each emerging system realisation. It is described mathematically by dynamically weighted,
“inseparable” products of functions depending on interacting degrees of freedom ξ and q in the
total state-function expressions (8), (12). Taking into account realisation plurality, one ob-
tains dynamically multivalued entanglement as the unreduced interaction content and meaning.
Physically real protoﬁeld entanglement (whose magnitude varies for diﬀerent particle species)
constitutes tangible, “material” ﬁlling, or “texture”, of the emerging ﬁeld-particles determining
their perceived material quality, which obtains thus its rigorous expression (contrary to purely
abstract, “immaterial” quantities of unitary models).

Dynamically multivalued entanglement is further ampliﬁed by the dynamically probabilistic
fractality of the unreduced problem solution [1, 4–6, 13] that extends essentially usual, dynam-
ically single-valued fractality and gives rise to important system properties, such as dynamic
adaptability. The unreduced fractality, specifying also the notions of nonseparability and non-
integrability of any real interaction, originates from the truncated system (7) whose solutions
enter the unreduced EP expressions (6), (8), (11, (12) of the ﬁrst level. Applying universal EP
method to the truncated system (7), one obtains its eﬀective, externally “separated” version:

[hg (ξ) + V n

eﬀ (ξ; ηn)] ψn (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) ,

where the second-level EP V n

eﬀ (ξ; ηn) is similar to its ﬁrst-level version (6):

V n
eﬀ (ξ; ηn) ψn (ξ) = Vnn (ξ) ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ) ψ0n

n′i (ξ)

dξ′ψ0n∗

n′i (ξ′) Vn′n (ξ′) ψn (ξ′)

Ωξ
R
ηn − η0n

n′i + εn0 − εn′0

Xn′6=n,i

(13)

, (14)

8

and

n′i (ξ) , η0n
ψ0n
n′i

(cid:8)

hg (ξ) ψn′ (ξ) +

(cid:9)

Xn′′6=n′

is the complete eigen-solution set of a second-level truncated system:

Vn′n′′ (ξ)ψn′′ (ξ) = ηn′ψn′ (ξ) , n′ 6= n , n, n′ 6= 0 .

(15)

A.P. Kirilyuk

Similar to dynamic multivaluedness of the ﬁrst-level EP, its second-level version is split into
many incompatible realisations (numbered by index r′) due to the self-consistent dependence on
the eigen-solutions to be found, leading to corresponding splitting of system (7) solutions:

ni (ξ) , η0
ψ0
ni

→

ψ0r′
ni (ξ) , η0r′

ni

.

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

n

o

Substituting now those dynamically split solutions of truncated system (7) into the ﬁrst-level
EP expressions (6), (8), (11, (12), one gets a two-level structure with dynamic multivaluedness,
and thus randomness, at each level. As the process of ﬁnding the truly complete problem solution
continues, one obtains further splitting of solutions of the second-level truncated system (15)
that gives the third level of emerging probabilistic fractal and so on, until one gets all N levels of
dynamically probabilistic fractality (N ≫ 1 is the number of interacting e/m protoﬁeld modes).
The complete general solution of the unreduced interaction problem (9) can now be further
speciﬁed in the form of dynamically probabilistic fractal:

ρ (ξ, q) =

⊕ ρrr′r′′... (ξ, q) ,

where indexes r, r′, r′′, . . . enumerate obtained realisations at consecutive levels of dynamically
probabilistic fractality. The average, expectation value of the dynamically probabilistic fractal
density (valid for long enough observation time) is obtained as

ρ (ξ, q) =

αrr′r′′...ρrr′r′′... (ξ, q) ,

where {αrr′r′′...} are dynamically determined probabilities for the respective levels of dynamical
fractal (cf. equation (10)):

αrr′r′′... =

Nrr′r′′...
Nℜ

,

αrr′r′′... = 1 .

Xrr′r′′...

The obtained dynamically probabilistic fractal of the unreduced general solution (17) is es-
sentially diﬀerent from any unitary “perturbative expansion series”, since any term and level
of the dynamically probabilistic sum (17) expresses the exact, really existing object structure.
The whole unitary solution approximately corresponds, in the best case, to a single term of
the dynamically probabilistic sum. Major physical consequence of the obtained multivalued
extension of usual, dynamically single-valued fractality is the property of interactive dynamic
adaptability of the unreduced system structure which can autonomously adapt to the changing
interaction conﬁguration and eﬃciently ﬁnd its “way” for the most complete interaction process
development due to permanent chaotic, “searching” motion of multivalued fractal branches on
all scales (giving a “living arborescence” kind of structure). The multi-level, multivalued fractal
structure of dynamic entanglement of interacting entities provides a physically real version and
true meaning of mathematical “nonseparability” of a real (generic) interaction process, while
transient component separation (disentanglement) happens locally all the time, during system
transition between realisations (in the phase of thus quasi-linear wavefunction).

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

Nℜ

Xr,r′,r′′...

Nℜ

Xr,r′,r′′...

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

9

Finally, we can now provide the causally complete and universally applicable deﬁnition of the
main physical quantity of (dynamic) complexity, C, as a growing function of the total number,
Nℜ, of (explicitly obtained) system realisations, or rate of their change, equal to zero for the
(unrealistic) case of only one system realisation:

C = C(Nℜ) , dC/dNℜ > 0 , C(1) = 0 .

(20)

Suitable examples are provided by C (Nℜ) = C0 ln Nℜ, C (Nℜ) = C0 (Nℜ − 1), generalised ac-
tion and entropy, generalised energy/mass (temporal rate of realisation change), and momentum
(spatial rate of realisation emergence) [1,4,7,13] (see also sections 1.2, 1.3). As any real system,
object, or phenomenon results from an interaction process with at least few components and
interacting modes, it becomes clear that any real entity, starting from (massive) elementary par-
ticle like the electron, has a strictly positive dynamic complexity (and actually a great realisation
number, Nℜ ≫ 1). Since dynamic multivaluedness (Nℜ > 1) constitutes the basis of genuine,
intrinsic chaoticity (dynamic randomness), it is evident that dynamic complexity thus deﬁned
includes chaoticity as its major content and aspect (we shall see in the next section that chaotic-
ity is represented directly by one of the two complexity forms, dynamic entropy). It is evident
also that the whole unitary, dynamically single-valued science and paradigm (Nℜ = 1, C = 0),
including its versions of “complexity” and “chaoticity”, consider exclusively over-simpliﬁed, zero-
complexity, zero-chaoticity (regular) models of real world dynamics equivalent to its eﬀectively
zero-dimensional (point-like) projection (which is sometimes mechanistically extended to one-
dimensional projection, using a formally imposed time variable). Therefore unitary deﬁnitions of
e. g. “chaoticity” by exponential divergence of close trajectories or inﬁnitely long motion period
(let alone the totally lost case of quantum chaos) describe at best “sophisticated”, “chaotically
looking” regularity cases devoid of any genuine, dynamic randomness and complexity (internal
inconsistency of those unitary deﬁnitions using e. g. incorrect extension of perturbative approx-
imation is a separate issue considered elsewhere [1]).

1.2 Universal symmetry and transformation of complexity

As the full number of system realisations Nℜ determining its total complexity C(Nℜ) (see equa-
tion (20)) depends only on the initial system conﬁguration (e. g. the number N of interacting
protoﬁeld modes, Nℜ = N , see Figure 2), the total system complexity remains unchanged during
interaction development, C = const, ∆C = 0 [1, 2, 4–9, 13]. This universal complexity conser-
vation law constitutes both the result and the origin of unreduced interaction, underlying thus
any real structure emergence and existence. In this sense it is equivalent to a universal symme-
try of nature called the symmetry of complexity: contrary to unitary conservation laws, in the
universal science of complexity, describing explicit (and unceasing) structure emergence, there
is no diﬀerence between complexity conservation law and resulting structure symmetry.

A straightforward, “horizontal” manifestation of the universal symmetry of complexity is the
symmetry between all (elementary) system realisations at a given complexity level: they are
equal by their origin and therefore taken by the system in a causally random order (section 1.1),
so that (true) randomness results from the symmetry of complexity. The latter is uniquely and
completely realised by the system motion dynamics (realisation change process), rather than
any formal “operators” transforming one abstract structure into another (unitary symmetry
concept). Always exact (unbroken) symmetry between irregularly structured and chaotically
changing elementary realisations leads, in particular, to unequal but well-deﬁned probabilities
of compound realisations (10) containing diﬀerent numbers of elementary realisations.

There is a more involved, “vertical” manifestation of complexity symmetry concerning interac-
tion process development with multiple levels of complexity. Indeed, emerging system structures
(grouped realisations) start interacting among them and produce multivalued structure of the

10

A.P. Kirilyuk

next level, and so on. Every such qualitative change of system conﬁguration (also in each tran-
sition between realisations) corresponds to complexity transformation, or development, or un-
folding, from the permanently decreasing potential, latent form of dynamic information I to the
always increasing realised, explicit form of dynamic entropy S, whereas their sum, the total dy-
namic complexity C = I + S, remains unchanged: ∆C = 0, ∆I = −∆S < 0 [1,2,4–7,9,13]. This
permanent complexity transformation from dynamic information to entropy underlies any inter-
action process and therefore complexity symmetry (conservation) can be realised only through
a qualitative change of its form, determining system dynamics.

In order to derive a uniﬁed expression of this relation, we ﬁrst specify a universal integral mea-
sure of dynamic complexity in the form of (generalised) action A as the simplest function, whose
increment ∆A is simultaneously and independently proportional to both emerging elements of
space ∆x and time ∆t obtained above (section 1.1) as universal manifestations of realisation
change process (= unreduced interaction development): ∆A = −E∆t + p∆x, where E and p
are coeﬃcients immediately recognised, however, as energy and momentum by comparison to
classical mechanics. Their generalised, universal deﬁnitions in terms of complexity-action are
obtained in their dynamically discrete (quantised) form:

E = −

|x=const

,

∆A
∆t

p =

|t=const

,

∆A
∆x

where energy and momentum acquire the new, universal meaning of diﬀerential complexity
measures (energy is the temporal and momentum spatial rate of complexity transformation from
dynamic information to entropy). Dynamic discreteness of system jumps between realisations is
eventually due to the holistic character of real, unreduced interaction process and leads to the
causal (dynamic) and universal version of “(quantum) uncertainty relations”, if we just rewrite
the above energy and momentum deﬁnitions as p∆x = |∆A| and E∆t = |∆A| [1].

As both dynamic information and complexity-action can only decrease in any interaction
development (cf. equation (21)), generalised action expresses more directly just informational,
potential form of complexity, I = A, whereas its dual form of dynamic entropy is measured in
the same units but expresses the opposite in sign, always positive, complexity increment:

∆S = −∆I > 0 , ∆A = −∆S .

The last uniﬁed expression of conservation and transformation of complexity leads to the uni-
versal dynamic equation if we divide it by ∆t |x=const [1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 13]:

∆A
∆t

|x=const + H

x,

|t=const, t

= 0 ,

∆A
∆x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where the Hamiltonian, H = H(x, p, t), considered as a function of emerging space-structure
coordinate x, momentum p = (∆A/∆x) |t=const (see equation (22)), and time t, expresses the
implemented, entropy-like form of diﬀerential complexity, H = (∆S/∆t) |x=const . The obtained
generalised, universal Hamilton-Jacobi equation (24) realises the desired dynamic expression of
the symmetry of complexity and takes a yet simpler form for conservative systems where the
generalised Hamiltonian does not depend explicitly on time:

H

x,

|t=const

= E ,

∆A
∆x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

11

with the generalised energy E deﬁned by equation (21). Note that action distribution A (x, t)
corresponds to the above state-function Ψ (x, t) (see equations (8), (12)) for regular, localised
realisations.

The uniﬁed diﬀerential expression of the symmetry of complexity by equations (24)–(25)
would be incomplete without explicit expression of the related complexity transformation and
its direction (from dynamic information to entropy). Due to unceasing realisation emergence in
a causally random order, system information-complexity I = A can only decrease, which means
that not only its partial (discrete) derivative (−E), but also total derivative, or (generalised)
Lagrangian L, is negative:

L =

∆A
∆t

=

∆A
∆t

|x=const +

|t=const

= pv − H < 0 ,

∆A
∆x

∆x
∆t

E, H

x,

|t=const, t

> pv ≥ 0 ,

∆A
∆x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where v = ∆x/∆t is the velocity of global, averaged system motion (i.e. its motion as a whole).
In agreement with the above dynamic origin of time, this dynamic expression of complexity
transformation (within its symmetry), or dynamically generalised second law (“energy degrada-
tion”), equation (27), provides also a rigorous, fundamentally derived expression of the arrow
of time [2, 4, 7, 9]: since ∆A < 0, time advances, ∆t > 0, in the direction of growing (dynamic)
entropy S and decreasing information A (i.e. L < 0). We see that our dynamically based sym-
metry of complexity includes the origin of time and causally derived direction of its unceasing
ﬂow in the form of interaction complexity development. In fact, dynamic time origin and irre-
versible ﬂow, permanent growth of unreduced dynamic complexity-entropy (at the expense of
decreasing dynamic complexity-information), and conservation of the total dynamic complexity
are obtained as closely uniﬁed manifestations of the single, holistic symmetry of complexity.

The universal Hamilton-Jacobi equation (24)–(25) remains naturally valid for the case of el-
ementary ﬁeld-particle dynamics (section 1.1), but takes into account its unreduced complexity
(multivaluedness). The latter includes causally explained quantum duality, where the localised,
corpuscular states of quantum beat process alternate with extended, undular protoﬁeld con-
ﬁguration in the phase of wavefunction (intermediate realisation). Correspondingly, the above
“classical”, corpuscular expression of the Hamilton-Jacobi formalism should have its dual coun-
terpart in the form of explicit undular equation for the wavefunction. It can be obtained with
the help of causal quantisation procedure that describes just those spatially chaotic transitions
between regular (localised) realisations through the extended wavefunction realisation and in-
volves dynamic complexity conservation [1, 2, 4, 7–9, 13]. Hierarchical structure of multilevel
complexity development implies that the total complexity of several neighbouring levels is equal
to the product of individual level complexities. Since quantum beat process can be considered as
cyclic transitions between neighbouring complexity sublevels of localised realisations and wave-
function, its total complexity C is given by the product of localised realisation complexity A
and that of the intermediate realisation expressed by the wavefunction Ψ , C = AΨ . According
to complexity conservation, ∆C = ∆(AΨ ) = A∆Ψ + Ψ ∆A = 0, or

∆A = −A0

∆Ψ
Ψ

= −i~ ∆Ψ
Ψ

,

(28)

where A0 = i~ is a characteristic complexity-action value that may contain also a numerical
constant reﬂecting speciﬁc features of the two considered complexity sublevels (imaginary unit
i in this case) and ~ = h/2π is Planck’s constant.

Note that the above complexity conservation of the quantum beat process reﬂects the phys-
ically transparent fact of system return to the same wavefunction state after each beat cycle.

12

A.P. Kirilyuk

Causal quantisation (28) expresses thus the detailed complex-dynamic realisation change, or
causally speciﬁed “quantum jumps”, of the quantum beat process within the elementary ﬁeld-
particle accounting also for its intrinsic “quantum uncertainty” (the corresponding uncertainty
and quantisation relations are only formally postulated in the conventional quantum mechanics
and its unitary modiﬁcations describing physically real particles by purely abstract “state vec-
tors”). Using relation (28) in the Hamilton-Jacobi equation (24), we obtain the causally derived
Schr¨odinger equation for the realistically interpreted wavefunction:

i~ ∂Ψ
∂t

= ˆH

x,

, t

Ψ (x, t) ,

∂
∂x

(cid:19)

(cid:18)
where the Hamiltonian operator, ˆH
, is obtained from the Hamiltonian function H =
H(x, p, t) of equation (24) by the same causal quantization (28) and we have used the continuous
derivative notations for brevity. The famous Schr¨odinger equation containing, in usual theory,
the whole series of inexplicable “quantum mysteries” excluding any realistic physics is obtained
now as a totally causal consequence of the universal symmetry of complexity [1, 4, 7, 8].

∂x , t

x, ∂

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

The universal version of Schr¨odinger equation applicable at any complexity level is obtained

by the same causal quantisation of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation:

A0

∆Ψ
∆t

|x=const = ˆH

x,

|t=const , t

Ψ (x, t) ,

∆
∆x

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where x designates the corresponding dynamically derived system conﬁguration (section 1.1) and
the generalised wavefunction, or distribution function, Ψ (x, t) describes intermediate realisation
state. The dynamically derived Schr¨odinger equation (29)–(30) is accompanied by the gener-
alised, causally obtained Born rule for realisation probabilities {αr} in terms of the wavefunction,
completing the dynamic origin of probabilities in terms of regular (localised) realisations (10):

(29)

(30)

(31)

αr = |Ψ (xr)|2 ,

where xr is the r-th realisation conﬁguration and one may have the value of the generalised
distribution function itself at the right-hand side for higher, particle-like complexity levels. The
generalised Born rule, extending the corresponding formal postulate of usual quantum mechan-
ics, is valid for any interaction dynamics at any level of complexity and results from the dynamic
matching conditions between regular realisations and intermediate realisation of the wavefunc-
tion, giving the values of coeﬃcients cr
in the state-function expression (8), (12) [1, 4]. This
i
mathematical procedure has a transparent physical origin in the quantum beat dynamics and
the underlying symmetry of complexity: as the localised, “corpuscular” realisations emerge by a
direct, interaction-driven dynamical squeeze of the extended wavefunction realisation to one of
redundant reduction centres, the probability of centre selection will be proportional to the phys-
ically real wavefunction magnitude at the corresponding location. The symmetry of complexity
underlies here the matching condition itself by the evident demand of continuity of complexity
transformation in the realisation change process.

Note that the dynamic rules for realisation probabilities (10), (19), (31) accompanied by
their dynamically fractal structure (section 1.1) describe their “spontaneous”, unreduced, but
interaction-driven, purposeful, “reasonable” emergence, which underlies the important property
of dynamic (probabilistic) adaptability of real interaction processes [1, 4]: the system “automati-
cally” goes everywhere it can and chooses the best possible way for its complexity development
by a natural “competition” of dynamically produced possibilities. That dynamically probabilistic
complexity development from dynamic information to entropy constitutes thus the rigorously
deﬁned system purpose and teleological power/property of universal symmetry of complexity.

Equations (24)–(31) form the basis of the universal Hamilton-Schr¨odinger formalism that
uniﬁes extended versions of all particular (correct) dynamic equations postulated in various

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

13

ﬁelds of unitary theory (whereas the underlying symmetry of complexity uniﬁes causally ex-
tended versions of all usual, postulated laws and “principles” [1]). It can be demonstrated by
Hamiltonian expansion in a power series of momentum and action, which leads to the following
form of universal Schr¨odinger equation (30) [1, 2, 4, 13]

∆Ψ
∆t

|x=const +

hmn (x, t) [Ψ (x, t)]m ∆nΨ

∆xn |t=const = 0 ,

∞

m=0
X
n=1

(32)

where the expansion coeﬃcients hmn (x, t) can be arbitrary functions and we have taken into
account additional Hamiltonian dependence on action (or wavefunction) through the “potential
energy” and more generally due to the dynamically nonlinear EP dependence on the problem
solutions (see equations (6), (11), (14) in section 1.1). It is important that all dynamic equations
should be provided, within the universal science of complexity, with the unreduced, dynamically
multivalued and probabilistic general solution (17)–(19), as opposed to dynamically single-valued
solutions of usual theory. The causally derived Hamiltonian form of the universal formalism
provides also decisive conﬁrmation of the starting existence equations (1), (4), thus closing the
underlying self-consistent cycle of the symmetry of complexity.

We see that various linear and “nonlinear” models and equations, which are often just semi-
empirically “guessed” and postulated in the unitary theory, are obtained in reality as truncated
versions of a general power series of equation (32) (or a similar expansion for the Hamilton-
Jacobi equation (24)) and can therefore be considered as (reduced) consequences of the single,
uniﬁed law, the symmetry of complexity. We can also clearly see the diﬀerence between the im-
itative unitary “nonlinearity” due to formal higher powers of a truncated expansion series and
the genuine, dynamically emerging, essential nonlinearity due to the unreduced EP dependence
of the solutions to be found. Contrary to popular confusion of usual “science of complexity”,
the former, imitative “nonlinearity” cannot provide any true complexity and chaoticity by itself,
without the proper, unreduced analysis of a real interaction process revealing the dynamically
probabilistic fractal of the complete general solution. That usual nonlinearity resembles an arti-
ﬁcially, trickily entangled one-dimensional thread that can, however, be completely disentangled
and does not change its basic properties upon any smooth change of conﬁguration. Since, on
the other hand, essential nonlinearity emerges even for formally “linear” initial problem for-
mulation (section 1.1), one can assume that any usual, formal “nonlinearity” is but a reduced
representation of genuine, dynamic nonlinearity of real interaction process.

As noted above, the symmetry of complexity uniﬁes causally extended, universally applicable
versions of various separated, individually postulated laws and “principles” of usual fundamen-
tal science, such as conservation of energy (or “ﬁrst law of thermodynamics”), entropy growth
(“second law of thermodynamics”), all “quantum” and “relativistic” postulates and principles
(see section 1.3.7). Many of them are related to the corresponding unitary, abstract symme-
tries which, besides being separated among them, appear to be practically always “broken” by
the full-scale, real-world dynamics reducing them to a status of unrealistic, “approximate”, and
therefore false symmetry that can be “more or less” valid only within a limited, ambiguously
deﬁned parameter range. Indeed, the evident irregularity of real-world structures and dynamics
is basically diﬀerent from the “too symmetric”, regular and smooth structures of the unitary,
abstract science paradigm. The universal symmetry of complexity solves the problems of sepa-
ration, violation and excessive regularity of usual symmetries by proposing not only intrinsically
uniﬁed, but also always exact, unbroken symmetry describing real-world irregularity by its own,
dynamic randomness (due to chaotic transitions between asymmetric realisations). Therefore
now all real-world structures (described by essentially random general solution of probabilistic
dynamical fractal (17)–(19)) are explicitly obtained as absolutely symmetric results of complexity
conservation and development supported by the totality of existing observations.

14

A.P. Kirilyuk

An important general manifestation of the universal symmetry of complexity takes the form of
complexity correspondence principle that can have various particular formulations, but always
emphasises the fact that any interaction result depends critically and totally upon relative
complexities of interacting entities [1, 4, 13]. Speciﬁcally, interaction between several (complex)
systems can be “eﬃcient” (induce essential changes) only for interacting systems of comparable
complexity. Moreover, the system with higher complexity tends to “control”, or “enslave”, less
complex interaction partners, which gives rise to complex-dynamic control theory that uniﬁes
and extends essentially usual, unitary control concepts by showing, in particular, that any real
control result and mechanism are basically chaotic and can never be absolute.
If interacting
system complexities are very close to each other, a strong, “global” chaos regime can result.

All particular cases of real (complex) interaction dynamics can be conveniently classiﬁed
and uniﬁed in a single scheme and criterion of unreduced interaction results [1, 3, 4, 10, 11, 13].
If the key interaction parameters (properly represented by characteristic frequencies) are close
enough to each other, one obtains the limiting case of uniform, or global, chaos with rapidly
changing, essentially diﬀerent system realisations and homogeneous distribution of their proba-
bilities. If the characteristic system parameters are essentially diﬀerent, one gets the opposite
limiting case of generalised, dynamically multivalued self-organisation, or self-organised critical-
ity (SOC), that uniﬁes, besides those two concepts, the extended versions of other cases, such
as synchronisation, control of chaos, mode locking, and fractality (they remain separated in
their unitary, dynamically single-valued versions). It contains a small number of rarely changing
“compound” realisations that conﬁne, however, a multitude of rapidly and chaotically changing
but externally similar “elementary” realisations within them. The almost total external regu-
larity of ultimate SOC cases passes gradually (though unevenly) to the maximum irregularity
of global chaos with the corresponding change of characteristic frequency ratio, so that one can
describe and classify, in principle, all possible dynamic regimes in any kind of system.

Speciﬁcally, the point of transition to the strong, uniform chaos is expressed by the universal

criterion of global chaos onset:

κ ≡

∆ηi
∆ηn

=

ωξ
ωq

∼= 1 ,

(33)

where κ is the introduced chaoticity parameter, while ∆ηi, ωξ and ∆ηn ∼ ∆ε, ωq are energy-level
separations and frequencies for inter-component and intra-component motions, respectively. At
κ ≪ 1 one has an externally regular multivalued SOC regime, which degenerates into global
chaos as κ grows from 0 to 1, and maximum irregularity at κ ≈ 1 is again transformed into a
SOC kind of structure (but with a “reversed” conﬁguration) at κ ≫ 1.

Using this universal chaos criterion, it is easy to see, in particular, the dynamic origin of fun-
damental quantum randomness, or “indeterminacy”, appearing in the form of inevitably strong
(global) chaoticity of protoﬁeld interaction process at those lowest, “quantum” levels of the world
structure complexity. Indeed, the characteristic frequencies, or eigenvalue separations, at the
lowest complexity sublevels containing only elementary structures (ﬁeld-particles) coincide par
excellence as other, essentially diﬀerent system parameters “have not yet appeared” in that es-
sentially quantum reality (their deﬁnite appearance marks the emergence of the next complexity
level of elementary classical, permanently localised structures with a much more regular, SOC
kind of dynamics [1, 4, 7–9], see also section 1.3.8). Speciﬁcally, the quantum beat frequency
determines both internal ﬁeld-particle dynamics and its “external” motion and interactions. A
higher sublevel of quantum complexity, that of (true) quantum chaos and (causal) quantum
measurement (section 1.3.8) [1, 4, 10], already contains a possibility of somewhat more regular,
SOC kind of dynamics that further passes to a yet more regular case of classical behaviour.

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

15

1.3 Universe and particle properties by the symmetry of complexity

Using only the unreduced, universally nonperturbative analysis of suﬃciently strong attractive
interaction of two physically real, initially homogeneous protoﬁelds, we have shown above, in
section 1.1, that the elementary ﬁeld-particle will generically emerge from that interaction (for
suitably chosen but non-exotic protoﬁeld “material”), in the form of spatially chaotic process
of quantum beat that can be described as unceasing cycles of protoﬁeld reduction-extension or,
alternatively, as chaotic wandering of the transient corpuscular state of virtual soliton. The
resulting, dynamically multivalued, intrinsically uniﬁed and totally causal (realistic) picture of
microworld dynamics is called quantum ﬁeld mechanics [1, 4, 7–9], as opposed to various irre-
ducibly separated branches of unrealistic (abstract) and largely postulated (formally imposed)
unitary, dynamically single-valued theory, such as quantum mechanics, ﬁeld theory, particle
(high-energy) physics, special and general relativity, and cosmology, including their recent, “ad-
vanced” versions that always remain, however, within the same, eﬀectively zero-dimensional
projection of reality (e. g. “many-world”, “histories”, and other abstract “interpretations” of
quantum mechanics, string and spin-network schemes of modern ﬁeld theory, brane-world imita-
tions, innumerable “cosmological” tricks with “hidden” material species, dimensions and whole
“multi-verses”, etc.). The universal symmetry of complexity (section 1.2) totally determines
the unreduced interaction development, and we shall continue to derive further emerging world
structures and their properties, demonstrating the power of the symmetry of complexity to avoid
and solve the accumulating problems of unitary theory and its simpliﬁed, regular symmetries.

1.3.1 Dynamic origin of 3D space, time, and elementary particles: Occam’s razor

We begin our analysis of the causal, physically real, explicitly emerging, and always exactly
symmetric world structure with recalling the dynamic origin of the naturally quantised, tangible
space structure and irreversibly ﬂowing but immaterial time obtained above (section 1.1) from
the protoﬁeld interaction description as, respectively, eigenvalue separation, ∆x = ∆rηr
i = ¯λC,
of eﬀective existence equation (5) and intensity (speciﬁed as frequency, ν) of quantum beat real-
isation emergence/change, ∆t = ∆x/c = ¯λC/c = τ = 1/ν. The space “coordinate” x expresses,
in general, conﬁguration of explicitly emerging system realisation (in the form of localised vir-
tual soliton), while “time ﬂow” (permanently growing t) reﬂects inevitable change of multiple
and incompatible realisations. Space and time appear thus as universal, basic manifestations
of unreduced interaction complexity and its symmetry/transformation, together with the sys-
tem structure and dynamics itself (represented here by an elementary ﬁeld-particle, such as the
electron, with the dynamically determined size ∆iηr
i = re, performing its quantum jumps to the
distance ∆x = ∆rηr

i = ¯λC with the period of ∆t = ∆x/c, see sections 1.1 and 1.3.4).

Unitary space-time symmetries are strongly broken (and therefore illusive) by dynamic dis-
creteness (quantisation) of space and irreversible, oriented ﬂow (increase) of time variable in a
well-deﬁned direction of growing complexity-entropy (see equation (27)), whereas the symmetry
of complexity just underlies and gives rise to those properties of space and time, remaining ab-
solutely exact symmetry. That fundamental violation of irreducible “smoothness” (regularity)
of unitary projections will continue and involve higher complexity levels and symmetries, e. g.
those from theories of relativity, gravity, and cosmology (see sections 1.3.5, 1.3.7, 2). In partic-
ular, any direct mixture between space and time entities within a single symmetry (constituting
the basis of conventional relativity) is physically senseless, already because of tangible, material
structure of real space and immaterial time origin: real space and time are related by and only by
the system dynamics, which is none other than direct realisation of the symmetry of complexity.
The same interaction-based origin of physically real space and time shows that time cannot
be “curved”, or deformed, in any sense at all, while space emerges as a globally (in average) ﬂat
and homogeneous structure, in agreement with observations and contrary to the corresponding

16

A.P. Kirilyuk

unitary theories (general relativity and cosmology). Moreover, any space inhomogeneity emerg-
ing at a higher complexity level is an average density/tension modiﬁcation of protoﬁelds (see
also section 1.3.7) that can only formally (and very approximately) be described “geometrically”,
similar to any other long-range interaction through a (dense enough) continuous medium.

The symmetry of complexity directly determines also the observed number (three) of space
dimensions and establishes its universal physical origin and link to the interactive base of any
Indeed, the initial interaction conﬁguration includes three and only three global
real world.
entities, the two protoﬁelds and their physically real coupling (interaction) itself (Figure 1).
The symmetry of complexity tells us that the number of equally global entities resulting from
that interaction should be the same, i.e. equal to three. But the only resulting entity of the
truly global scale is the fundamental space structure itself, which should therefore have three
and only three modes, or “dimensions”, according to complexity conservation law rigorously
substantiated and supported by the totality of all experimental observations [1]. We obtain
thus also the genuine, physical origin of those space “dimensions” as such, remaining only
empirically and formally deﬁned in usual science. As the tangible space “material” is obtained
by dynamically multivalued entanglement of global interaction partners, the protoﬁelds (see
section 1.1), its global degrees of freedom, or “dimensions”, are none other than physically real,
equivalent “modes”, or realisations, of that complex-dynamic mixture of interacting e/m and
gravitational protoﬁelds (including the coupling interaction itself).

The obtained rule for the number of space dimensions and their physical origin is valid for
any other system, including higher levels of universe space structure and other possible uni-
verses. In particular, the number of (global) space dimensions of arbitrary universe is equal to
the number of initial interaction components (including coupling entities). Depending on the
driving interaction details, further split into inhomogeneously structured “compound” dimen-
sions is possible, with a three-dimensional space “unity” remaining the “minimal”, most stable
combination (because one cannot have less than two interaction components). Although various
complicated cases are possible, the symmetry of complexity provides a realistic and eﬃcient
ordering and understanding principle, as opposed to arbitrary unitary guesses on the subject
based on the “demands” of a purely abstract, postulated formalism that eventually appears to
be but an eﬀectively zero-dimensional projection of any real-world structure. Thus, according to
the symmetry of complexity, higher-dimensional universes appear from higher-complexity inter-
actions as a sort of “excited states” over the exceptionally stable (and therefore most common,
if not unique) “ground state” of three-dimensional world. The latter may have only one irre-
versibly ﬂowing time, which may also be true for any uniﬁed higher-dimensional world. But a
more complicated substructure of global space dimensions can give rise to multiple time ﬂows in
a higher-dimensional world that would realise a much higher, “excited-state” complexity of such
“multi-time” world [1]. Despite “purely theoretical” character of those possibilities, one can
easily have “higher-dimensional” and “multi-time” situations with local realisation structure at
higher levels of complexity, space and time of the present, globally three-dimensional world.

We shall see below (section 1.3.3) that the number of fundamental interaction forces (and
particle species) enters into the same physically transparent manifestation of the symmetry of
complexity, leading to considerable reduction of the (practically unlimited) number of formal
possibilities of unitary theory, such as “hidden” dimensions and other strangely “invisible”
entities. It becomes clear that space and its dimensions have a physically real origin in a global
interaction process and therefore should not be introduced artiﬁcially, by ad hoc assumptions
in order to save a contradictory imitation of reality, as it is done in the unitary theory. The
symmetry of complexity provides, in this sense, the rigorous and practically eﬃcient extension
of the well-known Occam’s razor, or principle of parsimony, as it speciﬁes how exactly each
real, observed entity emerges in an interaction process from other, equally real entities, which
provides a reliable way of their speciﬁcation [1]. One obtains also a realistic extension of G¨odel

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

17

incompleteness theory, where any interaction result “incompleteness” is due to its intrinsic
uncertainty (multivaluedness) and (partially unknown) interaction components.

1.3.2 Universal dynamic origin of particle mass, charge, and spin

Since the ﬁrst-level world structures, elementary ﬁeld-particles, emerge together with physically
real space and time (see Figure 1), the same complex-dynamic process of quantum beat should
give rise to the “intrinsic” particle properties, such as mass, electric charge, spin, and their
observed features. We start with the major property of mass and can state that its key feature
of inertia is universally and consistently explained by the dynamically chaotic character of the
spatial wandering of virtual soliton within any (massive) ﬁeld-particle (quantum beat process),
rigorously obtained above (section 1.1). Indeed, it is this already existing, never vanishing in-
ternal motion of the particle “matter” that determines its “resistance” to any external force
(attempt to change it) and ensures ﬁnite values of acquired acceleration.
It is evident that
anything diﬀerent from purely dynamic, internal chaoticity cannot solve the problem of intrin-
sic inertia in principle, including any external inﬂuence (e. g. of “zero-point ﬁeld” ﬂuctuations)
often arbitrarily assumed in the unitary theory. Moreover, we show that inertial mass thus dy-
namically emerging in the unreduced protoﬁeld interaction is synonymous, or “equivalent” (up
to a coeﬃcient or measurement unit), to the total, “relativistic” energy and expresses therefore
a diﬀerential form of system complexity (see equation (21)) [1, 4, 7–9]. Following universal deﬁ-
nitions of complexity-action, energy and momentum (21), (22) in section 1.2, we obtain for the
ﬁeld-particle at rest (p = 0): ∆A = −E0∆t and

E0 = −

∆A
∆t

=

h
τ0

= hν0 = m0c2 ,

(34)

where E0 is the particle rest energy, ∆A = −h is the dynamically discrete complexity-action
increment equal at this ﬁrst complexity level to universal Planck’s constant h with the negative
sign (since E0, ∆t > 0), τ0 is the quantum beat period and ν0 frequency for the ﬁeld-particle at
rest, m0 is the particle rest mass introduced above, and c2 is a coeﬃcient for the moment, but
later rigorously shown to be equal indeed to the square of light velocity. One also obtains here
the explicit expression of the elementary dynamical clock of the universe within each (massive)
particle (section 1.1) that has a suﬃciently high frequency (ν0 ∼ 1020 Hz for the electron)
and provides the causal, physically real basis for the famous relation hν0 = m0c2 used by
Louis de Broglie in his original derivation of particle (“de Broglie”) wavelength [21, 22] and
conﬁrmed recently by an electron channeling experiment [20]. We develop below this uniﬁed
causal interpretation of mass, energy, and time to the case of moving particles and obtain the
dynamically derived eﬀects of (special) relativity (section 1.3.7).

The multitude of particle species, reﬂected by their observed mass spectrum, is obtained as
a consequence of fundamental dynamic multivaluedness of the protoﬁeld interaction process,
where the light family of leptons represented by the absolutely stable electron is obtained as a
compound realisation with a relatively small quantum beat amplitude, so that e/m protoﬁeld
pulsation remains rather “close” to the unperturbed protoﬁeld state in Figure 1. The opposite
case of strongest eﬀective protoﬁeld interaction is obtained for the compound realisation of heavy
particles, hadrons, represented by the stable species of proton. Their composition of explicitly
nonseparable quarks corresponds to a compound structure of quantum beat process that cannot
be split, however, into separate interacting beats for individual quarks. This involvement of
quarks, their unique role in strong interaction force, and the absence of strong interaction for
leptons can be uniquely explained by the fact that the gravitational protoﬁeld, or medium, is
represented by a dense quark condensate (probably with “quantum” properties like superﬂuid-
ity and with unknown degree of separate quark individuality as localised, corpuscular states).

18

A.P. Kirilyuk

Recent experimental evidence in favour of quark-gluon liquid [23] (rather than expected plasma
of usual theory) conﬁrms this conclusion and the whole picture of quantum ﬁeld mechanics.

The compound realisations of leptons and hadrons are further split into three canonical “gen-
erations” closely resembling “excited states” of their stable, weakest-interaction species, which
corresponds very well to our interpretation in terms of diﬀerent, progressively growing quantum
beat (or protoﬁeld EP) amplitude. As for the main massless species of photon, it is represented
by a basically regular, non-chaotic oscillation process with relatively very small amplitude, which
is additionally stabilised by permanent attraction to the gravitational protoﬁeld and resembles
thus ordinary, regular solitons (the tiny remaining dissipation of such photon energy provides
just the necessary features for the consistent explanation for the cosmological red shift phe-
nomenon, without the contradictory Big Bang hypothesis, see [9] and section 2.2). The case of
massless photons emphasizes once more the role of truly chaotic, multivalued internal dynamics,
and the associated symmetry of complexity, in the emerging property of particle mass. It also
avoids artiﬁcial introduction of additional entities giving rise to mass, such as hypothetical but
never found Higgs particles and ﬁeld from the unitary theory (contradicting the above causally
extended Occam’s razor, see section 1.3.1). One can see here that our interacting protoﬁeld
construction is indeed explicitly “economical” as it gives rise, within the same quantum beat
process, to both elementary ﬁeld-particles and their intrinsic properties (as well as to all other,
dynamic properties, as we shall see below, in section 1.3.7).

Since all massive particles live within the same, physically uniﬁed protoﬁeld volume (mainly
perceptible from the e/m protoﬁeld side), their respective quantum beat processes should be
synchronised in time, which is necessary for both coherent particle interaction (especially evident
for the case of attraction) and uniﬁed time ﬂow for the whole universe. Such complex-dynamic
synchronisation is a subject of separate study, but irrespective of its details one knows the ﬁnal
result: temporal pulsation phases of all quantum beat processes coincide up to phase inversion
(i.e. one may have either the same or opposite pulsation phases).1 This important feature leads,
in addition, to dynamic interpretation of the next major intrinsic property of electric charge
that emerges now as phase-related measure of the same quantum beat complexity. Indeed, the
synchronised ﬁeld-particles are naturally subdivided into two and only two “opposite” species
according to their quantum beat phase, which explains the existence of two “opposite” charges.
Like charges represented by quantum beat processes with the same phases will naturally repulse
each other because of their direct, “mechanical” competition for the common e/m protoﬁeld
material, while unlike charges will naturally attract each other due to a mutual “help” of their
reduction-extension processes with opposite phases [1]. The famous “quantisation” of elementary
charge (its ﬁxed observed value), remaining unexplained in the unitary theory, is due to the same
global phase synchronisation of all quantum beat processes (most probably at the frequency of
electronic quantum beat) and thus eventually due to quantisation of their complex dynamics
(i.e. dynamically discrete structure of the symmetry of complexity).

The described direct link between elementary electric charge e and quantised complexity of the
quantum beat process (expressed according to equation (34) by the complexity-action quantum
~ = h/2π) constitutes the genuine, causal content of the well-known relation between e and
~, e2 = αc~, where α is the ﬁne structure constant. We shall see below (section 1.3.4) that it
leads also to the new interpretation of the latter (together with Planck’s constant universality).
Needless to say, the electric charge conservation law, appearing as a separate and postulated

1Such synchronisation provides, in particular, a candidate dynamic origin of the observed particle-antiparticle
asymmetry, in contradiction with formal symmetry between particle and antiparticle properties. The propagating
“wave” of inevitable complex-dynamic synchronisation of quantum beat processes will automatically leave only
same-phase/antiphase particle species coupled also to their related spin vorticity (see below in this section). This
necessary dynamic “ordering” phase of material universe content implies also essential modiﬁcation in the related
problems of universe age, dimension, isotropy, etc. (see also section 2.3).

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

19

(empirical) law in the conventional theory, obtains now causal and universal extension as a
particular case of dynamically substantiated symmetry (conservation) of complexity.

It is easy to see that dynamic reduction (squeeze) of the physically real e/m protoﬁeld within
each quantum beat cycle of an elementary ﬁeld-particle should involve a strong vortical twirl of
the squeezing protoﬁeld matter, simply due to its ﬁnite compressibility. The phenomenon can
be described as a highly nonlinear (self-ampliﬁed) version of a liquid whirlpool appearing when
a liquid is forced, usually by gravitational ﬁeld, to pass through a small hole. The unique feature
of unreduced quantum beat interaction and in particular self-amplifying dynamic entanglement
(section 1.1) is that it produces, in a purely dynamic, “spontaneous” way, a never-ending series
of such “holes”, or protoﬁeld reduction centres. The detailed mechanism of protoﬁeld vortex
emergence itself is similar to usual instability against local shift deformation of the liquid/gas
ﬂow, where more rapidly moving parts (closer to the “hole”) experience sideways “twisting”
deviations due to simultaneously emerging pressure diﬀerences in the inhomogeneously moving
matter. The emerging twirl continues in the extension phase, and one obtains in the whole the
physically real, dynamic and essentially nonlinear origin of the universal intrinsic property of
elementary particle spin. The complex, multivalued dynamics of protoﬁeld interaction provides
just a unique combination of properties for this consistent causal interpretation of spin, as
opposed to any unitary “rotating ball” models.

Moreover, the quantitative expression of spin, s (and any other angular momentum I), in
terms of angular momentum quantum ~ (s = ~/2 for the electron) presents it as another form
of (naturally quantised) quantum beat complexity and reveals the origin of the deep dynami-
cal connection between complexity-action quantum h for quantum beat pulsation and angular
momentum quantum ~ for spin rotation within the same quantum beat process [1]. Univer-
sal expression for complexity-action increment will, in general, contain a “rotational” term,
∆A = −E∆t + p∆x + I∆φ, where ∆φ is the angle variable increment, so that the rest energy
(p = 0) of (for example) the electron will contain a contribution from the spin rotation energy:

E0 =

+ sω0 =

hν0
2

hν0 + ~ω0
2

= hν0 = ~ω0 ,

where the circular frequency of spin rotation ω0 should coincide with the circular frequency of
quantum beat pulsation, ω0 = 2πν0, as it is one and the same process, so that its energy partition
into contributions from “pulsation” and “spin rotation” can have only conventional meaning,
as shown above. The “anomalous” values of electron spin and gyromagnetic ratio obtain now a
causal interpretation in terms of two-phase structure of the electronic quantum beat process [1].
The spin-induced rotation of the e/m protoﬁeld matter can now be seen also as fundamental
physical origin of magnetic ﬁeld and eﬀects [1]. And similar to the above case of electric charge,
all conservation laws involving angular (spin and orbital) momentum are universally extended
now to causally substantiated, uniﬁed symmetry of complexity. We can clearly, directly see
how all the diverse quantities conserved according to formally imposed (empirical) conservation
laws of the unitary science are obtained and conserved as measures of only externally diﬀerent
manifestations (or levels) of the same dynamic complexity of unreduced interaction process, which
speciﬁes the physically real, uniﬁed origin of both conserved quantities and their conservation.

1.3.3 Dynamically uniﬁed fundamental interactions, their number and properties

The above intrinsic particle properties are related to fundamental interactions between parti-
cles, which naturally emerge in quantum ﬁeld mechanics in their dynamically uniﬁed state and
observed properties [1, 4, 7, 8]. The uniﬁed dynamic origin of all particle interactions is the
underlying protoﬁeld attraction, in its “implemented” form of quantum beat processes within
each ﬁeld-particle. As every such particle-process changes the surrounding protoﬁeld proper-
ties (because of protoﬁeld deformation), it will inﬂuence the quantum beat parameters of any

20

A.P. Kirilyuk

other particle (by certain analogy to “deformation interaction” between solid state defects and
excitations). As a result, one obtains two such long-range fundamental interactions through
e/m and gravitational media, the e/m and gravitational interactions, which explains now the
respective protoﬁeld names. The e/m interaction forces are introduced in the previous section,
while the dynamic gravitation mechanism thus obtained provides the causal, physically real
basis for universal gravitation (absent in any its unitary description), which possesses all its
observed classical properties, intrinsically quantum origin (due to quantum beat discreteness)
avoiding usual quantum gravity problems (cf. [24]), and relativistic eﬀects without any artiﬁcial
“geometrisation” of physically real space and ﬂowing time (see section 1.3.7 for more details).
The other two, short-range interaction forces, known as “weak” and “strong” interactions, are
simply due to close-contact forces between constituent elements (remaining basically unresolved)
of e/m and gravitational media respectively. We obtain thus exactly the observed number (four)
of fundamental interactions with their observed properties (including two short-range and two
long-range interactions for two protoﬁelds).

Moreover, all the four interactions are naturally uniﬁed from the beginning within every
quantum beat process (the total unity is obtained in the maximum reduction phase for the
heaviest hadronic particles), which resolves the notorious “grand uniﬁcation” problem (also
known as the “theory of everything”), or even avoids any “big problem” around such uniﬁcation
that seems a kind of “magic dream” and desired “super-goal” in the unitary theory just because
of its speciﬁc, eﬀectively zero-dimensional, intrinsically split and postulated, abstract imitation
(projection) of reality. We demonstrate below a rigorously speciﬁed expression of dynamic
interaction uniﬁcation that provides a practically important solution of a series of problems
related to Planckian unit values and interpretation (section 1.3.4). We can also conﬁrm and
understand the causal, physical origin of “partial” uniﬁcation of e/m and weak interactions by
their common material, transmitting basis of e/m protoﬁeld and can predict a similar (though
maybe diﬀerent in details) uniﬁcation of gravitational and strong interactions by the common
gravitational medium actually represented, as mentioned in the previous section, by a dense
quark condensate. The forces of particle interaction as such emerge as a general consequence of
the symmetry of complexity, in the form of complexity development from dynamic information
to entropy, i.e. particles are forced to move so as to preserve the total system complexity by an
optimal increase of its dynamic entropy (through structure creation) at the expense of dynamic
information (or “generalised potential energy”). Rigorous expression of this law is provided by
the universal Hamilton-Schr¨odinger formalism (24)–(32), which can be further speciﬁed to reveal
uniﬁed relativistic, gravitational, and quantum eﬀects (section 1.3.7).

The dynamic structure of fundamental particle interactions thus causally derived can be
further speciﬁed, including e. g. physically real extension of photon exchange processes for e/m
interactions [1], which are described by purely abstract means as unreal (“virtual”) processes in
usual theory. However, we shall concentrate here on important general relation between numbers
of most fundamental entities (dimensions, forces, and particles) valid for any real universe
and following from the symmetry of complexity and its causal manifestations. According to
the dynamic origin of real space dimensions (section 1.3.1), a world emerging from interaction
of n initial entities (protoﬁelds) will have Ndim = n + 1 global space dimensions (and one
irreversibly ﬂowing time), which is a direct consequence of the symmetry of complexity. As
shown above in this section, the same world will have NF = 2n “fundamental” interaction forces
between its (dynamically emerging) particles, physically transmitted through those n protoﬁelds
and subdivided into n short-range and n long-range forces (within protoﬁeld conﬁguration).
One obtains thus the following relation between the numbers of (any) world forces and (space)
dimensions:

NF = 2 (Ndim − 1) , Ndim =

+ 1 ,

NF
2

(35)

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

21

where Ndim−1 interaction forces (one half of their total number) have long-range character, while
other Ndim − 1 forces are short-range, “contact” ones. This relation can be more general than
the underlying dependencies of NF and Ndim on the protoﬁeld number n. Indeed, possible more
complicated, “non-global” structure of protoﬁeld interactions can give rise to various “partial”,
(half-) hidden dimensions and “rare” forces, but relation (35) between numbers of those emerging
entities will remain valid due to its well-speciﬁed physical basis and related absolutely universal
symmetry of complexity. As any starting protoﬁeld entity may have, in principle, more than one
short-, middle-, or long-range kind of excitations and interaction transmission ways, one should
also envisage a yet more general form of relation (35), in the form of lower limit to the number of
forces, NF ≥ 2 (Ndim − 1), even though the strict inequality here should be considered as a more
exotic possibility. The latter is hardly realised in our world, where we have n = 2, Ndim = 3,
and NF = 4, according to equation (35). Next higher-dimensional universes should have {n =
3, Ndim ≥ 4, NF ≥ 6}, {n = 4, Ndim ≥ 5, NF ≥ 8}, and so on. Another relation following
from (35) may be its yet more universal consequence: NF − Ndim = Ndim − 2 ≥ 1 (= n − 1), or
NF ≥ Ndim + 1, where the universal inequality follows from the fact that Ndim ≥ 3 (or n ≥ 2)
for any real, interaction-based world and shows that any additional, real dimension brings about
additional interaction forces (and related particles).

The latter statement introduces important application of equation (35) and similar relations.
As the number of interaction forces can be experimentally checked, it strongly limits the number
of any real (“large”, “small”, or “hidden”) dimensions (Ndim ≤ NF
2 + 1) and gives rise to
additional doubts in various popular violations, in the usual theory, of Occam’s razor principle
(following from the symmetry of complexity) by introduction of additional dimensions ´a la carte,
according to internal, “mathematical” needs of an abstract “model” (e. g.
in string theory,
quantum gravity, brane world models, etc.). Those doubts are yet more ampliﬁed if we take
into account that each new force implies new (observable) particles (or excitations), so that the
number of particles Npart will in any case be greater than the number of short-range forces (or
protoﬁelds), or Npart ≥ NF/2 = Ndim − 1 (which corresponds to unrealistic, absolute minimum
of exchange particles). Thus, in our world with four interaction forces and three dimensions we
have indeed two such “really irreducible” (and therefore stable) particles in the form of electron
and proton originating from the respective protoﬁelds (without counting more ephemeral photon
and all the unstable and “excited-state” species). A world obtained by n protoﬁeld interaction
will have at least NF = 2n fundamental interaction forces, Ndim = n + 1 space dimensions, and
Npart = n “irreducible” (i.e. rather stable and “strongly” observable) particles. Needless to say,
all the unitary, “anti-Occamian”, entity-producing theories directly and strongly violate even
least restrictive, unrealistic versions of those relations between the numbers of dimensions, basic
forces and particles. Instead of incorrect imposition of arbitrary fantasies from a purely abstract
“reality”, one can use the above causally substantiated consequences of the universal symmetry
of complexity for deduction of the total number of (any) world dimensions from the number of
its observed fundamental forces and “basic” elementary particles (as opposed to any “intuitive”
or formal way of deﬁnition of space dimensions and their number).

1.3.4 Complex-dynamic origin of universal constants and realistic Planckian units

Due to the intrinsically creative, structure-forming character of the symmetry of complexity
(section 1.2), all the fundamental world structures and properties have explicitly causal, dynamic
origin in quantum ﬁeld mechanics, including such “intrinsically abstract” features of usual theory
as universal (physical) constants [7, 9]. Thus, the speed of light c is introduced as physically real
velocity of perturbation propagation in e/m protoﬁeld coupled to gravitational medium (see also
section 1.1), rather than “logical” consequence of the postulated, abstract “principle of relativity”
of the unitary theory, after which we rigorously derive major “relativistic” eﬀects as causal

22

A.P. Kirilyuk

manifestations of the underlying complex interaction dynamics (section 1.3.7). Another universal
constant, Planck’s constant h, appears in our approach as a dynamically discrete portion, or
“quantum”, of the universal complexity measure, complexity-action A (sections 1.2, 1.3.2). Its
universality follows from the common, physically uniﬁed structure of the underlying system of
coupled protoﬁelds and the fact that complexity-action quantum h appears at the very ﬁrst,
least structured level of world complexity. However, the truly unlimited, astonishingly large
universality of h, from photon energy to nuclear, subnuclear, and even intra-particle properties,
has a more detailed explanation within that general interpretation, involving also the complex-
dynamic origin of the ﬁne structure constant α and elementary charge e (see also section 1.3.2).

The well-known relation between h, e, and α, e2 = αch/2π, can be written as

m0c2 =

2π
α

e2
λC

e2
¯λC

= N e
ℜ

, N e

ℜ =

, ¯λC =

1
α

λC
2π

,

where m0 is the electron rest mass and λC = h/m0c is the Compton wavelength. As E0 = m0c2
is the causally deﬁned electron rest energy (see equation (34)), equation (36) means that ∆x =
¯λC can be interpreted as the length of virtual soliton jump within the quantum beat process
(in relation to elementary space length ∆x introduced in section 1.3.1), N e
ℜ = 1/α ≈ 137 as
the electron (quantum beat) realisation number, and α as realisation emergence probability (in
agreement with the general dynamic deﬁnition of the latter, equation (10)). The canonical h–e
relation can now be written also as

(36)

(37)

~ = N e
ℜ

= ¯λCp0 , ¯λC = N e

ℜre ,

e2
c

(cid:14)

where p0 = m0c = E0/c and re = e2
m0c2 is the usual “classical radius” of the electron.
Equation (37) provides then a transparent physical interpretation of Planck’s constant and its
universality: ~ (or h) measures the “volume” (in units of action-complexity) of the quantum
beat EP well that remains the same for any particle species (including massless excitations
like photons) and their coherent-beat combinations, due to both complexity conservation and
permanence of the coupled protoﬁeld properties, whereas the EP width, ¯λC (λC) or N e
ℜ (up
to 2π), and depth, p0 or e2/c, vary for diﬀerent species, but with the permanent value of their
complexity-based product, the EP well volume. Since all equal quantum beat realisations should
occupy the closest two-dimensional vicinity of a current reduction centre, i.e. a two-dimensional
circle with the radius ¯λC, one obtains an estimate for the virtual soliton size (in the state of
maximum dynamical squeeze), De = 2πre = πde, which coincides, up to coeﬃcient π, with
the classical electron diameter, de = 2re (we have used this result in elementary space and
ﬁeld-particle size speciﬁcation, section 1.3.1).2 Equation (37) provides also another, particle-
dependent unit of quantum action-complexity, ~e = ~/N e
ℜ = e2/c, that corresponds to one
realisation (reduction-extension cycle).

It is essential that the above relations, written formally for the electron, are directly ex-
tendible to arbitrary spatially coherent (or quantum) particles, their systems and excitations.

2Note that similar result for the virtual soliton size follows directly from equation (36), since the total particle
energy should be equal to Coulomb “self-interaction” within the squeezed ﬁeld-particle state (as an alternative to
its equally valid expression as “dynamic” interaction energy through extended ﬁeld-particle state during N e
ℜ jumps
of the virtual soliton). We obtain thus the direct extension of the usual, formal deﬁnition of the classical electron
radius, where we specify the causal, physical origin of the “compressed” electron state (as well as its dynamic
instability and permanent reappearance). One should also take into account that the above interpretation will
remain valid if we change N e
ℜ, ∆x = ¯λC, and re correspondingly, according to their relations (36)–(37). It means
that the exact number of ﬁeld-particle realisations and its virtual soliton size can, in principle, be somewhat
diﬀerent from the above values. However, the latter should be valid at least approximately, up to numerical factor
like 2π, as otherwise it would be diﬃcult to explain the essential diﬀerence of the virtual soliton size from the
physically reasonable (and now causally justiﬁed) classical radius (for the electron).

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

23

The electron corresponds to a rather shallow and large EP well, admitting “horizontally” as
much as N e
ℜ ≫ 1 “corpuscular” (localised) particle states, as should be expected for that light
particle with weak involvement of gravitational (quark) medium. In the opposite case of heav-
iest hadronic species with the eﬀective charge q, mass MP, and “classical” radius rP, one will
have a very narrow EP well with the width ∼ rP (or Nℜ ∼ 1) and depth PP = MPc (or q2/c)
that corresponds to the highest protoﬁeld deformation/interaction amplitude and ~P ∼ ~. In
that way one obtains the causally complete, complex-dynamic explanation for the remarkable
universality (and physical origin) of Planck’s constant that ﬁnds its additional conﬁrmation in
the case of many-particle quantum system of atomic nucleus, by the fact that largest nuclear
masses are close to the heaviest elementary particle mass, MP ∼ 200 GeV [7–9].

This heaviest species case brings us to the causally complete interpretation of the third uni-
versal constant, the gravitational constant γ from classical Newton’s law, and related realistic,
modiﬁed values of Planckian units. Since any unitary theory does not provide the real, phys-
ical mechanism of gravity, the classical gravitational constant has purely formal origin in the
usual theory, as a simple coeﬃcient in Newton’s gravity law and its equally formal extension
to relativistic and quantum applications. In quantum ﬁeld mechanics gravitational interaction
is causally derived as a deformation inﬂuence of one quantum beat process on another, trans-
mitted through the physically real matter of gravitational protoﬁeld (section 1.3.3), and the
gravitational constant represents a “condensed”, resulting expression of that complex-dynamic
(and basically quantised) transmission process through the gravitational quark condensate. It
becomes evident that this indirectly transmitted interaction is driven by, but remains very dif-
ferent from, the underlying direct attraction between the two protoﬁelds that gives rise to the
quantum beat processes within each particle. It means that formal combinations of the three
universal constants in Planckian units describe actually the internal quantum beat parameters,
i.e. direct protoﬁeld attraction, and therefore should contain another, modiﬁed value of “gravi-
tational” constant, γ0, whose usual value γ refers to much weaker, indirect interaction between
diﬀerent particles. We obtain thus the new, modiﬁed (or “renormalised”) values of the Planck-
ian units of length LP (= rP), time TP, and mass MP that just coincide (approximately) with
the experimentally observed extreme values of the corresponding quantities lexp, texp, and mexp:

(38)

LP =

TP =

≈ 10−17 − 10−16 cm ≈ lexp ,

≈ 10−27 − 10−26 s ≈ texp ,

1
2

1
2

γ0~
c3
γ0~
c5
~c
γ0 (cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)
1
2

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

MP =

≈ 10−22 − 10−21 g

102 − 103 GeV

≈ mexp ,

(cid:0)
where the relation between γ0 and γ can be speciﬁed, for example, using the values of ordinary
Planckian unit of length lP and measured length lexp: γ0 = (lexp/lP)2γ ≈ (1033 − 1034)γ.

(cid:1)

Such essential, causally derived (i.e.

inevitable) modiﬁcation of Planckian units and their
new, realistic meaning lead to consistent solution of various stagnating problems. One of the
most remarkable of them is the so-called hierarchy problem, i.e. the problem of huge gap be-
tween the values of usual Planckian values and observed quantities, especially evident for par-
ticle mass spectrum. We see that the hierarchy gap completely disappears for the modiﬁed,
causally substantiated Planckian units, which shows that the whole particle spectrum is already
basically covered by the existing experimental data and facilities, with evident and important
practical implications for high-energy physics strategy [7–9]. Note the diﬀerence of our intrin-
sically parsimonious solution of the hierarchy problem from anti-Occamian, unitary imitations
of “brane-world” models [25–27] arbitrarily postulating additional (and totally abstract), but
strangely “hidden” dimensions that would inevitably give rise to additional, experimentally ob-

24

A.P. Kirilyuk

served forces and particle species (section 1.3.3). It is easy to see that such artiﬁcial, unreal
entities in this and many other models of unitary science appear as unavoidable replacement for
incorrectly rejected real, naturally plural entities and (dynamic) “dimensions”.

Other applications of the modiﬁed Planckian units include major and fatal consequences for
standard theory concepts essentially relying upon usual Planckian units, such as cosmological
inﬂation and quantum gravity theories. One obtains also consistent, physically transparent
explanation for relative weakness of gravity (as being due to the small ratio γ/γ0), dynamic
uniﬁcation of all fundamental forces, and causal theory of “black holes” and other dense “quan-
tum condensates” [1] (see also below, section 1.3.5). In particular, the above causal diﬀerence
between γ and γ0 eﬀectively disappears in the dynamic uniﬁcation phase of (hadronic) virtual
soliton (section 1.3.3) and at corresponding distances of the order of LP (= rP), where one deals
with the ultimately dense state of original quark matter of the gravitational protoﬁeld (so that
rP = LP should be close to the “quark classical radius”). It becomes clear also that modiﬁed
Planckian units and their practical realisation within quantum beat processes for heavier parti-
cle species represent the real, causally complete version of various “microscopic/quantum black
holes” (“Kerr-Newman” solutions, etc.), often formally introduced in the unitary theory as par-
ticular, exotic possibilities and models whose zero dynamic complexity is often accompanied by
additional, “inexplicably plural” dimensions (see e. g. [28, 29] and further references therein).

1.3.5 Self-tuning, adaptable universe from the creative symmetry of complexity

We can summarise now those ﬁrst “material”, structure-formation results of complexity sym-
metry unfolding on the “cosmological” scale of the whole universe by noting that due to the
intrinsically creative character of the unreduced interaction process and resulting symmetry
of complexity, the emerging universe will automatically have self-tuning, internally consistent
structure and properties, as opposed to intrinsically “anthropic”, as if very specially “designed”
properties of any unitary universe picture. That dynamic consistency of the real, complex-
dynamic universe structure is expressed by general property of dynamic adaptability of unre-
duced interaction process (section 1.1), which is due to the self-consistent dependence of the
unreduced EP formalism on the solutions to be found (equations (5)–(12)) ampliﬁed by the
probabilistic dynamic fractality of interaction-driven structure formation (equations (13)–(19)).
It is important that such “self-tuned” unfolding of the symmetry of complexity includes even
most fundamental, “intrinsic” structures and properties (such as universal constants and internal
particle properties), which are obtained now as dynamically emerging, globally uniﬁed and phys-
ically real entities (sections 1.3.1–1.3.4), contrary to their unconditionally imposed, postulated,
and abstract status in any unitary theory version.

The diﬀerential form of “potential” complexity at the beginning of interaction process,
alias dynamic information, is given by generalised, positively deﬁned potential energy Vinit =
− (∆A/∆t) |x=const and enters the initial existence equation (1) through the interaction po-
tential Veg (ξ, q). Emergence of system realisations in the form of spatially chaotic quantum
beat processes within elementary particles transforms potential energy into the total universe
mass-energy-complexity Munivc2, with the basic equality between the two due to the symmetry
(conservation and transformation) of complexity:

Vinit = Munivc2 .

(39)

It means that, in accord with the underlying EP formalism (equations (5)–(19)), elementary ﬁeld-
particle emergence leads to increase of internal e/m protoﬁeld tension until it becomes greater
than (suﬃcient) attraction between protoﬁelds, so that new particles cannot emerge any more
and further complexity development proceeds to its higher levels driven by interaction between
particles (ﬁrst-level structures) thus formed (see also Figure 1). That multi-level, fractally

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

25

structured universe complexity development, always preserving its major self-tuning property,
can be schematically presented as

Muniv →

Npartmpart +

Natommatom +

(40)

part
X

Vfund
c2 →

atom
X

Vchem
c2 → . . . ,

where“part” and “atom” designate progressively emerging species of elementary particles (and
their interactions Vfund), atoms (and their interactions Vchem), and so on.

Equations (39), (40) show that the more is the initial protoﬁeld interaction magnitude, the
more matter will emerge in the universe thus obtained, which is a major manifestation of the
self-tuning property of interaction-driven universe structure formation. Note that impossibility
to satisfy equations (39), (40) immediately at all universe locations and for those intrinsically
chaotic interaction processes provides a causal explanation for existence of seemingly “redun-
dant” species and generations of unstable elementary particles that can eﬃciently “ﬁll in the
(small) gaps” in the symmetry of complexity, in agreement with its dynamically fractal structure.
The “anthropic” universe image of the unitary theory with the inexplicably unique choice of
parameters is thus replaced, in both reality and its causally complete picture of the universal
science of complexity, by the generically successful universe emergence and development, but
with naturally, consistently variable quantity and speciﬁc features of its material content.3 Those
generic cases of unreduced protoﬁeld interaction can be yet better understood by their causally
speciﬁed non-generic limits at the ultimately strong and weak interaction sides.

The excessively strong protoﬁeld attraction would create a macroscopically large protoﬁeld
collapse region (as opposed to transient microscopic collapse within any quantum beat pro-
cess). Although such peculiar state diﬀers qualitatively from any “ordinary” matter, it can be
causally understood as partially coherent, dense condensate of quantum beat pulsations with
many discrete states (“phases”) of diﬀerent density providing causally complete, physically spec-
iﬁed versions of such “contradictory” stellar objects as black holes and neutron stars [1], which
are only “phenomenologically” (macroscopically) introduced and formally described in usual
theory, leaving too much place for ambiguity and related (often justiﬁed) doubts.

The ultimately weak protoﬁeld attraction is insuﬃcient for appearance of a genuine, chaotic
quantum beat and can give rise only to small, quasi-linear protoﬁeld ﬂuctuations. This is the
“primordial ether” state of the coupled protoﬁeld system that can have its modern realisation far
enough from massive particles, in the (physically real) “vacuum”, where it can account for the
realistic, fundamentally substantiated version of “microwave radiation background”. The latter
appears thus not as a “deﬁnite” sign of the past Big Bang event and related hot universe state,
but as a generic vacuum state of any real universe, where those photonic “vacuum ﬂuctuations”
are driven by weak protoﬁeld interaction and conﬁgured in detail by their multiple interactions
within the e/m protoﬁeld, tending to equilibrium, thermodynamically determined state in an old
enough universe (like ours) with basically created massive particle content.4
It is interesting

3Note, however, that a viable universe with any protoﬁeld interaction parameters needs certain “mechanical”
properties of the protoﬁeld material and in particular suﬃcient e/m protoﬁeld “elasticity”. Such demands do not
seem exotic at that “subquantum” level of reality (internal protoﬁeld mechanics) and in any case are fundamentally
diﬀerent from dynamic or conceptual restrictions of “anthropic” origin. The necessary mechanical properties of
the protoﬁeld material constitute the inevitable minimum of purely physical and realistic “postulates” of our
theory, as opposed to numerous conceptual and “mysterious” (contradictory) assumptions of the unitary theory.
4This interpretation of microwave background radiation as protoﬁeld ﬂuctuations shows also why much larger
ﬂuctuations, in the form of “virtual” massive particles, are actually impossible, contrary to their formal introduc-
tion in the unitary theory. Such greater, massive ﬂuctuations cannot emerge already because of direct, mechanical
impossibility of suﬃcient protoﬁeld deformation in a “mature” universe, but also because their existence would
contradict to the symmetry of complexity (contrary to the case of eﬀectively zero-complexity photons). We ob-
tain thus consistent solution of another group of stagnating unitary problems (in particle physics and cosmology)
related to improper, diverging energy contributions from such “strong” vacuum ﬂuctuations.

26

A.P. Kirilyuk

to note that both these cases of ultimately strong and weak protoﬁeld interaction are realised
also within each massive ﬁeld-particle (quantum beat process), but remain limited there to very
small volumes and short (permanently alternating) time periods.

Describing cosmological results of dynamic adaptability of the unreduced interaction process,
we should ﬁnally mention its causally speciﬁed, exponentially huge eﬃciency [4, 6, 12–14], which
is due to autonomous dynamic branching processes of the fractal realisation hierarchy and leads
to extremely eﬃcient, intrinsically complete structure creation by complex-dynamic search and
invasion processes. They give rise to the observed “unlimited” diversity and complexity of
structures that demonstrates creation eﬃciency of the underlying symmetry of complexity and
inevitably seems “miraculous” (inexplicable) within any dynamically single-valued description.

1.3.6 Positive energy-complexity of the universe and cosmological time arrow

As shown in section 1.2, the universal symmetry of complexity of any real interaction neces-
sarily implies the irreversible time ﬂow in the direction of growing dynamic entropy, which is
equivalent to strictly negative sign of generalised Lagrangian L and positive sign of total energy
E (see equations (26)–(27)), L = ∆A/∆t = pv − H < 0, E = H > pv ≥ 0. Being applied to the
whole universe (interacting protoﬁeld system), the last inequality imposes strictly positive total
energy of the universe, in contrast with the dominating unitary assumption about its zero value,
obtained as a result of compensation between positive “kinetic” (motion) energy and negative en-
ergy of gravitational attraction. The latter statement is widely used, often under the reference of
“Hamiltonian constraint”, in various cosmological models (such as the famous Wheeler-DeWitt
equation in quantum cosmology) and justiﬁes the possibility of universe emergence “from noth-
ing”, by self-ampliﬁed “tunneling” starting from a (genuine) vacuum “ﬂuctuation”.

We can see now that the real basis of the zero-energy assumption of scholar cosmology is
the unitary-science “approximation” reducing the strictly positive (and large) dynamic com-
plexity of the real world to the zero complexity value of its dynamically single-valued projection.
The mechanism that ensures impossibility of any zero-complexity (totally regular ) universe is
the fundamental dynamic multivaluedness of any real interaction (section 1.1) implying that
any imaginary zero-complexity world conﬁguration would immediately change to a positive-
complexity case once all its interactions are turned on in their unreduced, dynamically chaotic
(multivalued) version providing permanently growing entropy and positive total energy.

It follows that no zero-energy “Hamiltonian constraint” or other “nothingness-based” model
can be valid in principle, irrespective of details, which provides an important restriction on ac-
ceptable cosmological theories. Moreover, even when a positive energy value is formally inserted
in a unitary theory, it can hardly lead to a correct description, as the dynamically single-valued
world projection in such theories cannot reveal the genuine, complex-dynamical content and
meaning of energy-mass, in direct relation to the increasingly acute, “unsolvable” problems of
dark mass and dark energy (see section 2). Due to the high degree of randomness in mass-energy
universe content, the positive total energy of the universe is as big as its total material content
(and thus cannot be a relatively small “unbalanced residue”).

As noted above, the positive energy-mass (or dynamic complexity) content of the universe is
equivalent to the real time arrow : since for the (closed) universe E = −∆A/∆t (global motion
velocity v = 0) and ∆A < 0 (chaos-induced loss of dynamic information), time can advance in a
real universe, ∆t > 0 (and thus the universe can exist), if and only if E > 0. The obtained time
arrow orientation to always growing complexity-entropy (or decreasing complexity-information)
solves also all entropy-related problems by implying that entropy grows in all kind of processes,
including an externally “ordered” structure formation (in this latter case one deals with the SOC
regime of multivalued dynamics, see section 1.2). Thus rigorously speciﬁed asymmetry of time
ﬂow and entropy growth constitutes, however, an integral part and inevitable result of the global

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

27

symmetry of complexity (whereas unitary symmetry is opposed to its asymmetric “breaking”).
It is remarkable that the “old” problem of universe time arrow (and the origin of time) is
causally solved together with the energy-mass and entropy-information problems, without play
on “quantum” or other “mysteries” and related ambiguous speculations, but simply due to
the unreduced interaction problem solution, revealing the key, qualitatively new phenomenon of
dynamic multivaluedness and related universal symmetry of complexity.

Note also the causally derived direct link between the real time ﬂow and genuine dynamic
randomness: the basically regular, though arbitrarily involved, “Laplacian” world of the unitary
science cannot exist already because it is devoid of any real, advancing time ﬂow (that’s why
this direct and fundamental relation between time and randomness remains “hidden” in the
conventional, dynamically single-valued science framework).

1.3.7 Uniﬁed complex-dynamic origin of relativistic and quantum properties

We have seen in previous sections 1.3.1–1.3.6 how the global universe structure and properties
(space, time, energy), its universal constants, elementary ﬁeld-particles, their intrinsic properties
(mass-energy, charge, spin) and interaction forces causally emerge as uniﬁed manifestations of the
symmetry of complexity of the underlying protoﬁeld interaction process with generic parameters
and simplest possible initial conﬁguration. We now continue to follow the natural complexity
development of the same interaction towards the basic external, dynamical features of the ﬁeld-
particles thus obtained, in the form of their uniﬁed relativistic and quantum properties that will
be derived as totally causal, realistic manifestations of the same unreduced dynamic complexity
and its symmetry. Moreover, it is the rough rejection of the underlying complex interaction
dynamics in the standard, unitary theory that accounts for the “inexplicable mystery” status of
oﬃcial quantum and relativistic postulates. All “relativistic” and “quantum” eﬀects emerge as
inevitable, standard, and totally causal manifestations of real, unreduced interaction dynamics
and therefore can be generalised to higher complexity levels [1, 2, 4, 6, 13] (see also section 1.2
and below in this section).

We start from the causally derived intrinsic property of inertial particle rest mass m0 deﬁned
by equation (34) (section 1.3.2) that contains already natural, dynamic uniﬁcation of causal
quantisation of the underlying quantum beat process and complex-dynamic origin of relativistic
“equivalence” between mass/inertia and its energetic content.5 If the ﬁeld-particle is not isolated
and interacts with other particles by the causally emerging interaction forces (section 1.3.3), it
leads to (further) growth of complexity-entropy appearing as particle motion. In other words,
we can now rigorously and universally deﬁne the system state of motion itself as any state with
(generalised) energy-complexity exceeding its minimum value in the state of rest (also provided
thus with absolutely universal and fundamental deﬁnition). As energy-complexity is a positively
deﬁned quantity (see equation (27)), such minimum always exists.

Because of the maximum homogeneity of initial (protoﬁeld) system conﬁguration giving rise
to the emerging system (particle) at rest, the latter state corresponds to maximum homogeneity
of realisation probability distribution (cf. the generalised Born rule (31)). On the other hand, as
realisation number is ﬁxed, growth of energy-complexity in a state of motion is possible only due
to appearing (or growing) inhomogeneity of realisation probability distribution (and thus moving
system structure).
It means that action-complexity function A of a moving system acquires
dependence on coordinate x (emerging space conﬁguration, see section 1.3.1), in addition to its
dependence on time t in the state of rest, and ordinary (discrete) time derivative of action in
equation (34) for the state of rest should be replaced by the total (discrete) time derivative of

5It is not a coincidence that a heuristically postulated version of this relation was used by Louis de Broglie in

his original, realistically based derivation of his famous formula for the particle wavelength [21, 22].

∆A
∆t

=

∆A
∆t

|x=const +

|t=const

, E = −

∆x
∆t

∆A
∆t

+

∆A
λ

∆x
∆t

h
T

h
λ

=

+

v = hN + pv , (41)

A.P. Kirilyuk

(42)

(43)

28

where

action for a moving particle:

∆A
∆x

h
τ

E = −

|x=const =

= hν

∆A
∆t

p =

|t=const =

∆A
∆x

|∆A|
λ

=

h
λ

v =

∆x
∆t

≡

Λ
T

is the total energy of a moving system (in accord with its previous deﬁnition (21)) speciﬁed for
the moving ﬁeld-particle,6

is the universally deﬁned system momentum (see equation (22)) speciﬁed now for the moving
ﬁeld-particle,

is the global motion velocity, τ ≡ (∆t) |x=const
is the quantum beat period at a ﬁxed space
point, ν = 1/τ , λ ≡ (∆x) |t=const = λB = h/p is the space element (inhomogeneity) related to
the global ﬁeld-particle motion and known as de Broglie wavelength λB, T = ∆t is the “total”
quantum beat period (T 6= τ ), N = 1/T , and Λ = ∆x.

Equation (41) describes the total energy partition for the globally moving ﬁeld-particle (quan-
tum beat process) reﬂecting its real, complex-dynamical structure that remains hidden in the
unitary theory. It is easy to see that the second term, pv, accounts for the global, averaged, and
therefore regular motion of the quantum beat process (virtual soliton wandering), while the ﬁrst
summand, the negative-sign Lagrangian −L = −∆A/∆t = h/T , describes contribution to the
total energy from the purely random deviations of virtual soliton wandering from that average,
global motion tendency (it is the energy of complex system dynamics in its moving reference
frame). We see that any global motion emerges only as an average tendency of internal chaotic
(dynamically multivalued) process of structure formation, where the above dynamically derived
de Broglie wave of a moving particle is the corresponding (regular) space structure of that global
motion tendency. However, every single jump of the virtual soliton within the quantum beat
process is characterised by the intrinsic uncertainty of dynamically redundant choice of the next
reduction centre, and therefore the whole content of the total energy E possesses the key prop-
erty of inertia, E = mc2, where m is the total (“relativistic”) mass and c2 is a coeﬃcient to be
rigorously speciﬁed below.

According to our causal deﬁnition of the speed of light c (section 1.1), every virtual soli-
ton jump within the globally moving ﬁeld-particle proceeds with the speed c. It becomes clear
now that the global motion velocity v is (usually essentially) diﬀerent from c just because of
the (usually dominating) tendency of purely random wandering of the virtual soliton “around”
global motion tendency, so that only some (usually very small) part of chaotic quantum jumps
falls within that global, “systematic” tendency that forms explicitly observed structure. Speciﬁ-
cally, the ﬁeld-particle moving as a whole with the velocity v performs (in average) a quantised
global-tendency jump of ∆x = λ = λB during the same time period τv = λ/c that includes
nv = c/v purely random jumps around global tendency. As any such jump duration is τ , we
have τv = nvτ , or λ = Vphτ , where Vph = c2/v is the ﬁctitious, apparently faster-than-light
6Expressions containing momentum-complexity can generally be understood in the sense of corresponding
vector deﬁnitions and operations. However, in the considered simplest case of single particle motion, one can
interpret p and v as respective vector moduli.

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

29

“phase velocity” of “matter wave” propagation, appearing if one does not take into account the
irregular, “multivalued” part of the ﬁeld-particle dynamics [21]. Energy and momentum deﬁni-
tions (42), (43) transform this relation between λ and τ into the famous relativistic dispersion
relation (which is now obtained as a causal result of underlying complex interaction dynamics):

p = E

v
c2 = mv ,

where m = E/c2, now by rigorously obtained deﬁnition containing the physically real speed
of light c (we thus also justify, of course, the corresponding mass-energy equivalence for the
rest mass, equation (34)). The genuine meaning of the famous equivalence of mass and energy,
E = mc2, becomes now clear due to its causal, dynamic derivation in quantum ﬁeld mechanics
(whereas it is actually only postulated in the standard theory): particle energy has the property
of enertia due to its well-speciﬁed, complex-dynamic quantum beat content.

Combining equations (44) and (43), we obtain the standard expression for the de Broglie

wavelength of a moving particle:

λ = λB =

h
mv

.

(44)

(45)

Now, however, this famous relation, constituting the basis of the whole quantum physics, is not
formally postulated (as in the standard, unitary theory), or “phenomenologically” explained
(as in the original de Broglie approach [21]), but rigorously derived as a totally consistent
consequence of the underlying complex, multivalued interaction dynamics within every massive
elementary particle. This result and its derivation include, in particular, remarkable, intrinsic
uniﬁcation of “relativistic” and “quantum” particle properties remaining irreducibly split in
the unitary theory but in reality resulting, as we can clearly see now, from the same complex
dynamics of quantum beat process [1,4,7,8]. This omnipresent uniﬁcation appears, for example,
as otherwise “strange” combination of classical quantity v, quantum Planck’s constant h, and
relativistic total mass m in the same relation (45), or as the above complex-dynamical origin of
inertial property of the total energy E due to its internal quantisation.

One can also conclude that the basic dispersion relation (44) results from the symmetry of
complexity as the latter determines the underlying major equivalence between multiple reali-
sations, including those of both global-motion tendency and irregular deviations from it. This
very familiar and apparently “simple” relation, p = mv, includes, as we have seen, the whole
complexity of the unreduced interaction dynamics and has further fundamental and universally
valid consequences. In particular, by taking its time derivative, one obtains rigorously derived,
causally relativistic and universally extended version of Newton’s laws of “classical” dynamics
(usually postulated), without any specially introduced classicality or empirically determined
quantities (mass, energy, momentum, etc.):

∂ (mv)
∂t

= F (x, t) , F (x, t) =

=

= −

, U (x, t) = −

∂p
∂t

∂A
∂x∂t

∂U
∂x

∂A
∂t

,

where force F (x, t) and potential energy-complexity U (x, t) are thus causally deﬁned, and contin-
uous derivative notations are used for brevity, with the general meaning of dynamically discrete
derivatives. Therefore Newton’s laws also result from the symmetry of complexity (and under-
lying multivalued dynamics) if one asks for their consistent derivation. Such causally extended
Newton’s laws are universally applicable to any system and complexity level, although they may
be more suitable and eﬃcient in cases of homogeneous enough, pseudo-unitary dynamics.

Inserting now the obtained relativistic dispersion relation (44) into the complex-dynamic
particle energy partition (41) and using energy deﬁnition (42), we get the explicit expression of

30

A.P. Kirilyuk

dynamically derived time relativity:

τ = T

1 −

(cid:18)

v2
c2

.

(cid:19)

(46)

(47)

(48)

As the period T provides the real (dynamic) time period for the intrinsic clock of the moving
particle (system), we conclude that time slows down within the moving ﬁeld-particle (T > τ )
because time ﬂow is explicitly produced by the same, complex-dynamic (multivalued) interaction
process that gives rise to global motion. Combining equation (46) with a relation involving the
quantum beat frequency ν0 and period τ0 at rest [1, 7],

N ν = (ν0)2

or T τ = (τ0)2 ,

we get the canonical expression of time relativity (but now causally derived from the underlying
complex dynamics):

N = ν0

1 −

or T =

v2
c2

r

τ0

1 −

.

v2
c2

r

Note that equation (47) also follows from the symmetry (conservation) of complexity: it means
that the system realisation number ﬁlling the rectilinear N × ν area remains unchanged. The
complex-dynamic time relativity thus rigorously derived from the symmetry of complexity is
easily extended to other eﬀects of special relativity.

The obtained intrinsic uniﬁcation of causally derived versions of relativistic and quantum
dynamics in a single, complex-dynamical quantum beat process for a moving ﬁeld-particle can
be summarised by insertion of the time relativity expression (48), dispersion relation (44) and
de Broglie wavelength formula (45) into the total energy partition (41):

E = hν0

1 −

v = hν0

1 −

v2
c2 +

h
λB

r

v2
c2 + hνB = m0c2

v2
c2 +

1 −

r

r

m0v2

1 −

r

,

v2
c2

(49)

where hν0 = m0c2 according to equation (34) and de Broglie frequency νB is deﬁned as

νB =

v
λB

=

=

pv
h

= ν

v2
c2 , νB0 =

m0v2
h

= ν0

v2
c2 =

v
λB0

, λB0 =

(50)

h
m0v

.

νB0

1 −

v2
c2

r

The physical reality of de Broglie wave (emerging as a complex-dynamic ﬁeld-particle structure)
is conﬁrmed now by the standard relation between its length, frequency, and velocity, λBνB = v,
which describes occasional quantum jumps of the moving particle wave ﬁeld to the distance λB,
occurring with the average frequency νB and accompanied by extended chaotic wandering of the
particle reduction centre (virtual soliton) around global motion, reducing its velocity from c (for
any single jump) to v. As the frequencies in equation (49) refer to quantised, causally random
ﬁeld-particle jumps, it follows that the quantities α1 = v2
c2 are
none other than dynamically obtained (compound) realisation probabilities of, respectively, global
(average) and totally random tendencies of the moving ﬁeld-particle dynamics, in agreement with
their general deﬁnition (10), which conﬁrms once again the intrinsic unity of “quantum” and
“relativistic” manifestations of the unreduced interaction complexity.

c2 and α2 = 1 − α1 = 1 − v2

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

Equation (49) provides also relativistic transformation of (total) mass and thus de Broglie
wavelength (45), the latter demonstrating dynamic and “quantum” origin of relativistic contrac-
tion of length of a globally moving body (it can also be derived from relativistic time retardation):

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

31

m =

E
c2 = m0 




v2
c2 +

1 −

r

v2
c2

1 −

r



=

v2
c2





m0

1 −

v2
c2

r

v2
c2

h

1 −

m0v

, λB =

r

= λB0

1 −

v2
c2 . (51)

r

The ﬁrst term of the ﬁnal complex-dynamic energy partition (49) taken with the negative sign
provides the causally derived expression for relativistic particle Lagrangian, ∆A/∆t = pv−E ≡ L
(see also equation (26) and above in this and the previous sections), that remains valid, of course,
for any macroscopic body (agglomerate of particles):

L = −hN = −hν0

1 −

v2
c2 = −m0c2

v2
c2 .

1 −

r

r

(52)

We obtain also the causal, complex-dynamic interpretation of Lagrangian as the energy of the to-
tally random part of a system (ﬁeld-particle) dynamics, or its “(internal) heat energy”, specifying
the corresponding heuristically introduced ideas of Louis de Broglie about “hidden thermody-
namics” of a single particle [30], as well as his anticipation of realistic extension of usual “least
action principle”, describing now the real, dynamically chaotic system wandering around the
average (global) motion tendency, rather than formal “variations” of action functional [1, 7].
Minimisation of action corresponds in our description to action-complexity transformation into
entropy-complexity, within conservation (symmetry) of the total complexity. Recalling that rel-
ativistic Lagrangian (52) is only mechanistically guessed and postulated in the standard special
relativity and then used, together with artiﬁcially imposed “principle of relativity” and other
postulates, for “derivation” of time relativity and other related eﬀects, we can state now that
the symmetry of complexity provides the uniﬁed causal extension of all those abstract and sep-
arated principles of the unitary theory, including least action and relativity principles, quantum
postulates (see also below), ﬁrst and second laws of thermodynamics.

It is clear that the obtained dynamic unity of physically real space (structure) and time
(events of its explicit emergence) excludes their mechanistic uniﬁcation in the same, “geometric”
construction. Correspondingly, the symmetry of complexity underlying real world dynamics is
much richer (“less symmetric”) than unitary symmetries of standard relativity, which allows for a
natural solution of all problems of their “violation” (including quantisation, irregularities, etc.),
so that the symmetry of complexity remains always exact and gives the real, somewhat limited
and irregular “relativity” that can also be directly extended to arbitrary levels of physically real
space and time (see below) [1]. These general conclusions concern also the naturally emerging,
dynamically based eﬀects of general relativity.

Indeed, we have seen in section 1.3.3 that gravitational interaction between any material
particles (protoﬁeld perturbations) emerges inevitably and universally due to their “deformation
interaction” through the gravitational medium coupled everywhere to the equally omnipresent
e/m protoﬁeld. This physically real gravity has therefore intrinsically dynamic and quantised,
but not “geometric” origin (even though a formal geometric description can be applied and
give correct results within its validity domain, similar to other cases of deformation interaction
through a quasi-continuous medium). It is evident that gravitational medium perturbation and
interaction magnitude will grow with the above causally speciﬁed inertial mass of interacting
body, which gives the generalised, causally substantiated “principle of equivalence”, as opposed
to its formally postulated version of the conventional general relativity. In a usual case of not
very dense interaction conﬁgurations, essentially beyond the (modiﬁed) Planckian unit situation
(section 1.3.4), the same quantity of inertial mass (temporal rate of action-complexity change,
section 1.3.2) will also play the role of gravitational mass (i.e. “gravitational charge”). Those
gravitational mass-charges and their interaction through gravitational medium are produced

32

A.P. Kirilyuk

by the same, complex-dynamic quantum beat processes that give rise to electric charges and
their interaction through the e/m protoﬁeld, which is another manifestation of the universal
symmetry of complexity and its “naturally broken” character. The latter is due here to diﬀerent
physical properties of e/m and gravitational protoﬁelds (sections 1.1, 1.3.3) and appears e. g. in
the fact that there is no “sign” of gravitational mass-charges and they always attract to each
other (beyond the Planckian-scale situation of uniﬁed interactions) [1].

The intrinsically quantised dynamic origin of mass determining the local ﬂow of time (see
also sections 1.3.1, 1.3.2) naturally leads to causally explained, dynamic eﬀects of general relativ-
ity, demonstrating once more inseparable uniﬁcation of quantum and relativistic manifestations
of dynamic complexity in quantum ﬁeld mechanics [1, 7, 8].
In particular, the quantum beat
frequency ν (see equations (34), (42)) directly depends on the local gravitational protoﬁeld ten-
sion/density created by other material objects and described as “gravitational (ﬁeld) potential”:

M (x) c2 ≡ hν (x) = mc2

g00 (x) ,

(53)

p

where ν (x) is the local quantum beat frequency for a “test” particle, while “metric” g00 (x)
describes in reality the gravitational protoﬁeld tension, g00 (x) = 1 + 2φg (x)/c2, φg (x) being
the classical gravitational potential (we use the standard relation for the weak ﬁeld case [31]).
Since ν (x) determines the causally derived time ﬂow and φg (x) < 0 (g00 (x) < 1) for attrac-
tive gravitational interaction, equation (53) provides the causal, dynamically derived version of
“relativistic time retardation” in the gravitational ﬁeld.

The uniﬁed complex-dynamic origin of both relativistic and quantum eﬀects becomes yet
more complete when we provide the explicit causal derivation of major quantum mechanical
wave equations, as they are associated most closely with the speciﬁc “quantum” (undular) kind
of behaviour. Such complex-dynamic origin and causal derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation
from the underlying symmetry of complexity are provided in section 1.2, together with the related
causal solution of the unitary “quantum mysteries” and Schr¨odinger formalism generalisation
to any higher complexity levels (see equations (23)–(32)).

The key condition of causal quantisation (28) reﬂecting quantum beat dynamics gives rise to
the “Dirac quantisation” rules, which are now dynamically explained [1, 7, 8], but only formally
postulated in the unitary theory:

p =

= −

∆A
∆x

1
Ψ

i~ ∂Ψ
∂x

, p2 = −

1
Ψ

~2 ∂2Ψ
∂x2 ,

=

1
Ψ

E = −

∆A
∆t

i~ ∂Ψ
∂t

~2 ∂2Ψ
∂t2 .
Inserting these causally obtained rules into relativistic equations of the same complex-dynamic
origin, we can obtain various relativistic wave equations. Thus, complex-dynamic energy parti-
tion for a moving particle (49) can be written as

, E2 = −

(55)

1
Ψ

E = m0c2

1 −

r

v2
c2 +

p2
m

or mE = m0c2 + p2 .

Combining equations (54)–(56), we get the Klein-Gordon or Dirac equation for a free particle:

(54)

(56)

∂2Ψ

∂t2 − c2 ∂2Ψ

∂x2 + ω2

0Ψ = 0 ,

where ω0 ≡ m0c2/~ = 2πν0 is the “circular” frequency of quantum beat pulsation at rest (see
equation (34)), which actually accounts for the spin vorticity twirl (see section 1.3). More

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

33

complicated versions of relativistic wave equations for interacting ﬁeld-particles can be obtained
in the same way as causal consequences of the underlying symmetry of complexity, whereas their
nonrelativistic limit leads again to the causally substantiated Schr¨odinger equation [1].

A straightforward analysis shows also that the Schr¨odinger equation (29) with the Hamilto-
nian H(x, p, t) = p2/2m + V (x, t), where V (x, t) is a binding potential well, can be satisﬁed only
for a discrete set of conﬁgurations of the wavefunction Ψ (x, t) determined by integer numbers
of the same action-complexity quantum, h, that describes quantum-beat cycle, or “system real-
isation change” (see section 1.3.4), which explains the famous quantum-mechanical energy-level
discreteness (e. g. in atoms) by complex-dynamical discreteness (or causal quantisation) of the
underlying protoﬁeld interaction process [1] and shows why the same Planck’s constant appears
also at this higher sublevel of quantum dynamics.

Another “postulated mystery” of the unitary quantum-mechanics, linear superposition of
various probabilistically emerging states, including the particular case of quantum entanglement
for a many-body system, reﬂects the real but multivalued dynamics of underlying interaction,
where the system performs unceasing series of reduction-extension cycles, or real quantum jumps,
between the corresponding realisations with the now dynamically determined probabilities (see
equations (9)–(12), (31)). The quasi-linearity of wavefunction behaviour is due to the transiently
weak, perturbative interaction character only within the intermediate (main) system realisation
that constitutes the physically real version of the wavefunction, whereas the actually measured
eigenvalue emergence from the wavefunction realisation, obscured by the “inexplicable” conven-
tional postulates, is due to its essentially nonlinear and physically real reduction to respective
regular, localised realisations (section 1.1). The symmetry of complexity between all system re-
alisations naturally provides thus the necessary dynamic uniﬁcation of those “opposite”, linear
and nonlinear, undular and corpuscular, distributed and localised, types of behaviour within the
single, holistic interaction process.

The revealed uniﬁed, causal origin of quantum, special-relativistic and general-relativistic
eﬀects in the underlying complex (multivalued) interaction dynamics ﬁnds further conﬁrmation
in its straightforward generalisation to (arbitrary) higher complexity levels, where one can also
observe dynamic discreteness (quantisation) and “relativistic” modiﬁcation of the respective
time ﬂow rates and length scales [1]. Rigorous derivation of uniﬁed quantum and relativistic
behaviour for arbitrary (many-body) interaction process starts from the existence equation for
such a process, equation (4), that generalises all (correct) “model” equations (see also section
1.2) and leads to the same basic system of equations (3) as the protoﬁeld existence equation
(1) at the ﬁrst complexity level (section 1.1) [1, 2, 4, 6, 13, 14]. We follow then the standard
complexity development analysis by the unreduced EP method, sections 1.1–1.2, and obtain
universal dynamic discreteness (quantisation) of unreduced, complex interaction dynamics and
its detailed description by the uniﬁed Hamilton-Schr¨odinger formalism (24)–(32).

The universal physical origin of discrete structure of unreduced interaction dynamics accounts
for the basic phenomenon of dynamic multivaluedness itself and takes the form of omnipresent
dynamic instability by interaction feedback loops (section 1.1), where the self-consistent EP
dependence on the solution to be found (equations (5)–(6)) makes impossible an evolutionary,
smooth change of system conﬁguration that follows instead a series of highly inhomogeneous,
“quantum” jumps between its incompatible realisations. Major expression of unreduced inter-
action quantisation at any level of complexity is provided by quantised elements of emerging
space structure ∆x (distance between neighbouring realisation conﬁgurations) and related time
increments ∆t (duration of transitions between realisation, or realisation change events), which
are determined according to universal energy-complexity and momentum-complexity deﬁnitions
(21), (22) (see also equations (42), (43) for the quantum complexity level):

∆x =

, ∆t =

A0
p

A0
E

,

34

A.P. Kirilyuk

where A0 ≫ h is a characteristic action value, which is not as unique/universal, however, as its
value h at the lowest, quantum complexity level. The dynamically determined time increment
∆t = τ is a period of “generalised quantum beat”, and for the system globally at rest, it is
directly related to the generalised inertial (rest) mass m0 and energy E0 (cf. equation (34)):

E0 = m0v2

0 = −

∆A
∆t

=

A0
τ0

= A0ν0 ,

where v0 is the perturbation propagation speed in a lower-level structure (analogous to the speed
of light at the ﬁrst complexity level), and ν0 = 1/τ0 is the generalised quantum beat (realisation
change) frequency determining the corresponding level of causal, irreversible time ﬂow.

Generalised (special) relativity of this higher-level time (and space) for a globally moving
system follows from the universal symmetry of complexity in the same way as the corresponding
relativistic eﬀects at the ﬁrst complexity level (see above in this section). Universal deﬁnitions
of the states of rest and motion by, respectively, minimum and greater than minimum values of
diﬀerential complexity (energy) remain directly applicable at any complexity level. The related
chaotic wandering of the globally moving system around its average motion tendency leads to
essential diﬀerence between its total diﬀerential complexity (total energy E) and pseudo-regular,
averaged motion part (determined by momentum p) expressed by the (generalised) “relativistic
dispersion relation” between E and p (cf. equation (44)):

E = pV (v) ,

where V (v) > v, v0 is the generalised, “faster-than-light” (and actually ﬁctitious) “phase ve-
locity” function; for example, in the simplest case of homogeneous chaotic wandering one has
V (v) = (v0)2/v (this is the case of dynamic relativity at the ﬁrst complexity level with v0 = c).
Using now the generalised dispersion relation (58) in combination with universally applicable
equations (41), (42), and (47), one obtains the universal, dynamically derived time relativity
(retardation) for a globally moving system of any complexity (and time) level (cf. equations
(46), (48) for the ﬁrst complexity level):

τ = T

1 −

, T =

v
V (v)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

τ0

1 −

v
V (v)

r

, N = ν0

1 −

r

v
V (v)

.

As N < ν0, objective, real time goes relatively slower within a globally moving, or in general de-
veloping, system due to investment of a larger part of the whole energy-complexity to that global
motion tendency and corresponding decrease of the “time-producing” energy of purely random
wandering around that average tendency. Similar to the fundamental, ﬁrst-level relativity, the
key point here is the complex-dynamic origin of real physical time itself.

System interaction with omnipresent environment, or (generalised) “ﬁeld”, gives rise to uni-
versal eﬀects of general relativity. Using generalised mass-energy deﬁnition (57) we can directly
extend the ﬁrst-level expression of complex-dynamical time retardation in the ﬁeld of gravity
(53) to arbitrary complexity level:

M (x) v2

0 ≡ A0ν (x) = mv2
0

1 + Φ (x) ,

q

where x is the generalised coordinate of the “test” system, ν (x) is its generalised quantum
beat (realisation change) frequency, determining ﬂow rate of the corresponding level of its in-
ternal, physically real time, and Φ (x) is the (dimensionless) potential of environmental ﬁeld
(|Φ (x)| < 1). Contrary to attractive gravity ﬁeld, one may have both Φ < 0 and Φ > 0 at arbi-
trary complexity levels, and therefore “internal” system time can either slow down or accelerate
depending on the properties of the environment and its interaction with the “test” system.

(57)

(58)

(59)

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

35

Universal relativistic modiﬁcations of length (spatial dimension) and generalised mass are
obtained in a straightforward way together with respective time relativity. By analogy to equa-
tion (51), the “generalised de Broglie wavelength” ΛB, or characteristic size of a globally moving
system (at arbitrary complexity level), and its generalised mass transform as:

m =

, ΛB =

m0

1 −

v
V (v)

r

A0
mv

=

A0
m0v

1 −

v
V (v)

.

r

The universal general-relativistic mass and length transformations follow from equation (59):

M (x) = m

1 + Φ (x) = m0

, ΛB (x) =

q

1 + Φ (x)

1 −

v
V (v)

v
u
u
u
t

A0
1 + Φ (x)

=

A0
m0v

mv

p

1 −

v
V (v)
1 + Φ (x)

.

v
u
u
u
t

The uniﬁed quantum and relativistic manifestations of the symmetry of complexity at the
ﬁrst and higher complexity levels provide the causally complete, realistic and demystiﬁed un-
derstanding of the respective types of behaviour that look irreducibly “weird” and only formally
postulated in the traditional, unitary description. Thus, one can now provide an exact, physi-
cally realistic answer to the question why a moving clock mechanism goes slower with respect
to the one at rest: it happens because a growing proportion of total moving system dynamics
(measured by its energy-complexity) goes to this global motion tendency from the internal mo-
tion that just determines the “proper” time ﬂow rate, for any its measurement mechanism and
in the same way at any level of that mechanism. Moreover, the obtained extension of causal
relativity eﬀects to any system dynamics provides a rigorously speciﬁed explanation even for
such traditionally “subjective” eﬀects as personal, “psychological” time ﬂow change with the
environment (“general relativity”) and internal development (“special relativity”) of a conscious
subject [1]. The practically unlimited power of the universal symmetry of complexity to solve
real-world problems is thus convincingly demonstrated, in addition to various other examples
described in this paper.

1.3.8 Genuine quantum chaos, causal quantum measurement, and complex-dynamic

classicality emergence in closed systems

We have rigorously derived, in previous sections 1.3.1–1.3.7, the lowest, “quantum” sublevels of
world structure and complexity, in the form of physically real space and time, elementary par-
ticles, their intrinsic and dynamical properties, and fundamental interaction forces, all of them
emerging as a result of the uniﬁed symmetry (conservation and transformation) of complexity
of the underlying interaction between two initially homogeneous protoﬁelds. The next sublevels
of world complexity naturally emerge by the same kind of unreduced interaction between those
elementary structures, appearing thus as further, dynamically continuous development of the
same, uniﬁed protoﬁeld interaction (next sublevel of its dynamically fractal hierarchy). They
contain the elements of both quantum (undular, nonlocal) and emerging classical (corpuscular,
localised) behaviour and can take the form of (genuine) quantum chaos for essentially non-
dissipative (Hamiltonian) interaction cases, or causal quantum measurement for slightly dissipa-
tive systems, or complex-dynamic classicality emergence in elementary (closed) bound systems
(like atoms) [1, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 32].

The situation of quantum chaos [1, 4, 10, 11] is described by a particular case of general
existence equation (4), the Schr¨odinger equation (now causally derived) for many (in general)




Xn6=0

36

A.P. Kirilyuk

particles interacting among them and with external, time-dependent ﬁeld(s), for example:

i~ ∂Ψ
∂t

= 

N

−

~2

2mi

∂2
∂x2
i

i,j=1
X
i6=j




+ Vij(xi, xj) + Ui(xi, t)

Ψ (X, t) ,

where X = (x1, x2, . . . , xN ) is the vector of all particle coordinates (xi are also vectors, in
general), Ui(xi, t) is the time-dependent external ﬁeld potential acting on i-th particle with
the mass mi, Vij(xi, xj) are potentials of interaction between i-th and j-th particles, and N
is the number of particles. Time-periodic external ﬁelds Ui(xi, t) are of special practical and
fundamental interest for Hamiltonian chaos problem (where periodic dependence on time is
generally equivalent to periodic dependence of external interaction on one of space coordinates).
In that “canonical” case external ﬁeld can be presented as a Fourier series:

Ui(xi, t) =

Uin(xi) exp(iωπnt) = Ui0(xi) +

Uin(xi) exp(iωπnt) ,

n=∞

n=−∞
X

where ωπ is the perturbation frequency, n takes only integer values, and we can consider, without
limitation of generality, that Ui0(xi) constitute integrable, binding potentials of “free” particle
motion (i.e. their motion in the absence of essential, chaos-bringing interaction).

Our general analysis (section 1.1) shows that both inter-particle interactions and their interac-
tion with the external ﬁeld will lead to dynamic multivaluedness and related intrinsic randomness
in a quantum system with interaction. However, Hamiltonian chaos emerging due to integrable
system interaction with time- or space-periodic ﬁeld constitutes a major, most transparent case,
especially for the quantum chaos problem. Application of the unreduced EP analysis and results
to that situation reveals indeed the genuine, dynamic randomness in a purely quantum system
(that can be far from the semi-classical limit), in the same, universal form of multiple, incom-
patible realisations forced to permanently replace each other in a causally random (probabilistic)
order thus deﬁned [1, 4, 10, 11]. The problem of genuine quantum chaoticity, persisting in the
usual theory, acquires thus the direct, universal and transparent solution.

The universal criterion of global chaos onset (33) remains valid for quantum chaos, but
the characteristic frequency ωq and energy-level separation ∆ηn of intra-component motion are
replaced, respectively, by the perturbation frequency ωπ and “quantum energy” ~ωπ:

κ ≡

∆ε
~ωπ

=

ω0
ωπ

∼= 1 ,

(60)

where ∆ε is energy-level separation in the non-perturbed Hamiltonian system (with the above
integrable potential Ui0(xi)) and ω0 = ∆ε/~ is its characteristic frequency.
It is important,
in particular, that the global Hamiltonian chaos criterion (60) obtained by purely quantum-
mechanical analysis has a classical form (frequency ratio) that coincides (in the limit ~ → 0) with
the respective chaos criterion obtained within classical mechanics [1, 10, 11] and thus conﬁrms
the usual correspondence principle for real, chaotic systems, which constitutes the well-known
unsolved problem of the unitary quantum chaos description. We can conclude that the symmetry
of complexity (here between all realisations of a Hamiltonian quantum system) provides solution
to a practically important and otherwise “unsolvable” problem.

The problem of quantum measurement is diﬀerent from the Hamiltonian quantum chaos situ-
ation by a local, small but ﬁnite energy dissipation towards the measurement device that has no
special “classical” or “macroscopic” character in our analysis, but needs that initial dissipation
as a source of real change of its state. The unreduced EP analysis and results remain basically
the same, but local dissipation violates equality between system realisations and creates a tran-
sient compound, SOC-type realisation (section 1.2) accompanied by spatial system reduction

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

37

(dynamical squeeze) towards the centre of dissipation (cf. section 1.1) that explains all quantum
measurement properties by causal, but complex (multivalued) interaction dynamics [1, 32]. It is
important that before (as well as after) the dynamically random emergence of quantum mea-
surement event, the measured quantum system performs unceasing transitions, i.e. physically
real “quantum jumps”, between all its eigenstates (with the corresponding, now dynamically
determined probabilities), which provides causal, dynamic explanation for the formal quantum
postulates about “linear superposition” of eigenstates (see also section 1.3.7). Self-amplifying
complex-dynamic transformation of externally “linear” combination into “classical”, incoherent
sum of probabilities provides consistent solution to the famous “Schr¨odinger cat” paradox [4].

Classical, permanently localised kind of dynamics emerges dynamically as a natural “ad-
vanced” case of quantum measurement, where transient SOC state during measurement event
becomes permanent, actually giving rise to the next, higher level of dynamic complexity. Specif-
ically, such elementary classical states emerge as bound states of elementary particles (such as
atoms), which have a classical behaviour tendency in a totally closed system conﬁguration,
without any “environmental decoherence” eﬀects necessarily evoked in the standard quantum
mechanics and its unitary modiﬁcations. The role of unreduced interaction complexity is es-
sential in understanding of that qualitative transition (“generalised phase transition” [1]) to a
higher complexity level: it is the dynamically random, “quantum” wandering processes of virtual
solitons of each of the bound system components that determine vanishingly small probability
of longer-distance jump series of all components in the same direction (which would determine
“quantum”, delocalised system behaviour) [1, 4, 7, 8]. The same internal dynamic complexity
of a classical system (in the form of a SOC kind of state) explains the “asymptotic”, fractal
boundary between quantum and classical behaviour and occasional dynamic revivals of quan-
tum behaviour for classical, sometimes macroscopic systems under the inﬂuence of their suitable
interactions (in direct contradiction to all “decoherence” theories).

In terms of our rigorous criterion of chaoticity (33), a classical, bound-SOC state is described
by the chaoticity parameter κ = ωξ/ωq ≈ Uξ/mqc2, where ωξ is the bound motion frequency, ωq
is the component quantum beat frequency, Uξ = ~ωξ is the binding energy, and mqc2 = ~ωq is
the total component mass-energy. In all “usual” bound systems with well-deﬁned components,
including atoms, binding energy is much smaller than mass-energy, Uξ ≪ mqc2, or ωξ ≪ ωq,
which determines the complex-dynamic origin of the “classical”, localised and externally quasi-
regular, SOC type of system conﬁguration, κ ≪ 1 (section 1.2) [4].
It is interesting to note
that in “ultra-relativistic” elementary systems where binding energy can attain the rest energy,
Uξ ∼ mqc2 (so that individual component structure cannot be ensured), the chaoticity parameter
is not small, κ ∼ 1, and thus classicality does not appear, which provides a nontrivial explanation
for globally quantum behaviour of hadrons as “ultra-relativistic” bound systems of quarks.

ℜ , α = 1/N e

In the simplest case of hydrogen atom ωξ coincides with the Bohr frequency and Uξ = ~ωξ
with the atomic energy unit ε0 = mee4/~2, while mq = me is the electron mass, and we have
κ = Uξ/mqc2 = ε0/mec2 = e4/~2c2 = α2 ≪ 1, where α = e2/~c ≈ 1/137 is the ﬁne structure
In that way we conﬁrm the complex-dynamic origin of hydrogen atom classicality
constant.
and develop the above interpretation of ﬁne structure constant in terms of electron realisation
number N e
ℜ (section 1.3.4). Indeed, if the electron quantum beat frequency is the
synchronised frequency of virtual soliton wandering for both electron and proton in the hydro-
gen atom (cf. section 1.3.2), then the probability of their correlated quantum jump in the same
ℜ)−2 = α2 = κ, thus conﬁrming the above classicality inter-
direction will be of the order of (N e
pretation in terms of multivalued SOC dynamics. The probability α(x) of correlated quantum
wandering of two virtual solitons in a bound system to a distance x from their “equilibrium”,
global-motion separation is determined by (Nℜ)−2x/∆x, where ∆x is the quantum jump length
(∆x ≃ ¯λC for the electron, see section 1.3.4), so that α(x) drops exponentially with x. The
pronounced classical, localised behaviour of a bound system is obtained if Nℜ ≫ 1 and interac-

38

A.P. Kirilyuk

tion is not so strong as to destroy component individuality (these two conditions should largely
coincide for our uniﬁed world construction, see Figure 1).

We obtain here a causal, realistic explanation for the “fuzzy” atom structure, with “electron
clouds”, etc. that can have only inexact, ﬁgurative meaning in usual theory. In reality, all the
regular electron “orbits” (Schr¨odinger wavefunction conﬁgurations) represent but the average,
global-motion (and relatively weak) tendency of permanent chaotic wandering of a corpuscular
electron state, or virtual soliton (cf. section 1.3.7). As we have seen above, larger deviations
from a global motion “orbit” are exponentially suppressed, which explains orbit reality and well
deﬁned shape (especially for the ground state), but the relative number of (small) deviations
is large. The above expression for the bound system chaoticity κ deﬁnes it also as a measure
of global motion “relativity”, and a comparison with the complex-dynamic interpretation of
relativistic factor v2/c2 in section 1.3.7 shows that α = 1/Nℜ is also the probability (proportion)
of quantum jumps within the global motion tendency (which should be expected in view of
multivalued dynamics structure). It is easy to verify that for the electron ∆x = ¯λC = αaB, or
ℜ¯λC, where aB = ~2/mee2 is the Bohr radius and “average” radius of the ground-state
aB = N e
orbit of the hydrogen atom. This well-known relation acquires now a new meaning as it shows
that the size of the main electron orbit is intimately adjusted to the complex-dynamical “cycle”
of N e
ℜ (chaotic) quantum jumps around it. The whole internal dynamics of an atom appears now
as a chaotic, complex-dynamical engine causally driven by the underlying protoﬁeld interaction,
instead of ﬁxed, abstract “state-vector” conﬁgurations, related formal “exact solutions”, and
underlying irreducible quantum mysteries of unitary atomic physics.

2 Complex-dynamic solution of major cosmological problems

2.1 Dark mass eﬀects: Unitary projection of multivalued dynamics

In previous sections we have speciﬁed the ﬁrst, most fundamental levels of explicit universe
structure emergence in the process of complex-dynamic, unreduced interaction between two
protoﬁelds governed by the universal symmetry of complexity. We have shown, in particular,
that this uniﬁed symmetry determines self-tuning, dynamically adaptable universe structure
creation without “anthropic” problems (section 1.3.5) and ensures strict positivity (and large
value) of the total universe energy determining also the physically real, dynamically irreversible
time ﬂow (section 1.3.6). We shall continue now to study cosmological manifestations of the
symmetry of complexity at its higher, macroscopic levels conﬁrming its status of the uniﬁed
Order of the World. In this section we show that the same unreduced dynamic complexity that
determines non-zero material content of the universe (its positive mass-energy) provides also a
natural and universal solution to multiple problems of apparently strongly excessive, hidden, or
“dark” mass content of major cosmological objects (galaxies, clusters, etc.).

The dark mass problem involves various observations showing that universe structure dynam-
ics, mostly on the scale of galaxies and related structures, would need larger, and often much
larger, quantities of massive matter, than those that can actually be perceived (see e. g. [33–36]).
Great variability of the missing mass eﬀect is a serious additional complication of a problem. We
show that these diﬃculties of the unitary interpretation are actually spurious and originate from
the same incorrect neglect of the main, chaotic part of real system dynamics, now occurring at
the level of cosmic object dynamics. If one considers the unreduced, dynamically multivalued
system behaviour, the problem will not even appear and the truly chaotic dynamics of real ob-
jects will account for observed dynamical features with the “visible”, normal mass values. It is
important that one should take into account the genuine, dynamically multivalued chaos, rather
than one of its unitary imitations by “involved” but basically regular behaviour.

The main idea is straightforward: because of artiﬁcial cut of all system realisations but one

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

39

in the unitary theory (this is an exponentially big reduction for a many-body system, see section
1.3.5), one inevitably obtains a missing motion problem, which is interpreted as inexplicably
“missing mass”. One can specify this result in various ways, and we start with a demonstration
of incompleteness of the standard virial theorem application to the real, multivalued dynamics
of a many-body system, since it shows how the key balance between potential and kinetic energy
can be modiﬁed by the true chaos.

If system components move under the inﬂuence of gravitational attraction, e. g. in a galaxy,
then the ordinary virial theorem gives the following relation between the time-averaged values
of kinetic ¯T and potential ¯U energy of a system or any its subsystem (see e. g. [37]):

whereas in reality this regular -motion kinetic energy, ¯T = ¯Treg, is a small part of its true, chaotic
content ¯Treal:

where Nℜ is an eﬀective realisation number for a given kind of observation and averaging (usually
Nℜ ≫ 1, while Nℜ = 1 for unitary models of the standard theory).
The observed potential energy, ¯Uobs, gives real kinetic energy:

However, if observations are interpreted within a unitary, deﬁcient version of dynamics (61)
implying that

(61)

(62)

(63)

2 ¯T = − ¯U ,

¯Treal = ¯TregNℜ ,

2 ¯Treal = − ¯Uobs .

2 ¯Treg = − ¯Uobs ,

δ =

= Nℜ .

¯Treal
¯Treg

one obtains a “mysterious” discrepancy, δ, between (62) and (63):

It is explained within the unitary model as being due to “invisible”, but actually present, or
“dark” mass, Mdark = Mreal − Mreg, whose relative value can be estimated as

Mreal
Mreg

=

¯Treal
¯Treg

= δ = Nℜ .

(v2)real = Nℜ(v2)reg .

According to the unreduced, complex-dynamic interpretation, the observed discrepancy δ can
be used for estimation of eﬀective Nℜ values. Since ¯T ∝ M v2, one can say that in reality there
is too much motion, or (deviating) velocity, in a system with respect to unitary expectations, so
that one has rather a “dark velocity (or kinetic energy)” eﬀect:

One can easily reﬁne this result for a distance-dependent case, Nℜ = Nℜ(r) (where r is a
coordinate within the system), in terms of velocity-distance dependence curves, or “rotation
In that case an “anomalous” v(r) dependence is not due to anomalies
curves”, for galaxies.
of mass distribution, M (r) (attributed to “dark matter halos”), but due to “unexpected” (in
the unitary model) contribution to average velocity from chaotic motion parts, so that v(r) is
proportional not to

Mreg(r) + Mdark(r), but to

Nℜ(r). In a general case,

p

γNℜ (r) Mobs (r)
r

v (r) =

r

or Nℜ (r) =

p
rv2 (r)
γMobs (r)

,

(64)

40

A.P. Kirilyuk

where Mobs(r) = Mreal(r) is the ordinary, “visible” mass within radius r, and one can derive the
features of chaotic system dynamics, Nℜ(r), from the observed v(r) and Mobs(r) dependences
for perceivable, “normal” object components.

As should be expected, Nℜ(r), and thus chaoticity, will typically have a wide, often irregular
maximum in “looser” system parts, such as galactic halos and central, inter-component regions
of a cluster. This result correlates with the empirically based MOND hypothesis interpreting
“unusual” motion in those weak-interaction regions in terms of modiﬁcation of Newtonian grav-
itational attraction itself (see e. g. [35, 36, 38–40]). There is even a deeper link between MOND
hypothesis and our unreduced EP approach: in a real many-body system one always deals with
an eﬀective, rather than direct, interaction that bears the self-consistent inﬂuence of all system
components, diﬀers essentially from the direct interaction, and possesses many contributing,
chaotically changing realisations. By contrast, if one takes any MOND-like assumption without
reference to the underlying complex dynamics of the system in question, then any its explanation
should still inevitably rely upon additional “dissipation” of unknown origin.

The observed big variations of dark mass eﬀects for diﬀerent objects represent a “heavy”
diﬃculty for any explanation in terms of additional, “invisible” entities, but are, on the contrary,
inevitable for the above uniﬁed explanation in terms of the true (multivalued) chaos eﬀects. Such
“unlimited” variability and visible “asymmetry” are just unique properties of the symmetry of
complexity (section 1.2) appearing at all, but especially higher complexity levels. Moreover,
one can trace a deﬁnite qualitative correlation between the expected object chaoticity (degree
of irregularity), its spatial dependence, and the observed magnitude of “missing mass” eﬀects
(further extended veriﬁcation is certainly necessary). It seems also to be much more consistent
to explain an observed, variable system property by a fundamental property of its dynamics,
rather than by a new, strangely escaping, and inevitably ﬁxed entity (this situation is quite
similar to interpretation of the origin of mass at the ﬁrst level of complexity, see section 1.3.2).
One should also take into account the spatial dependence of chaotic mass distribution eﬀects
(or “structural” chaos) that tend to accumulate just outside of the main mass and interaction
concentration in the system, in agreement with data interpretation using equation (64).

Finally, we emphasize once more the discovered uniﬁed solution, within the symmetry of com-
plexity, of the missing mass problems at diﬀerent levels of world dynamics, including elementary
particle mass (section 1.3.2), the (total) mass-energy of the universe (section 1.3.6), and “dark
mass” eﬀects at the level of galactic structures (this section), all of them related to consistent
solution of the unreduced interaction problem (sections 1.1–1.2).

2.2 Complex-dynamic solution of dark energy and Big Bang problems

The origin of globally missing, “distributed” universe energy, or “dark energy” [33–35], is di-
rectly related to the vicious circle of the unitary cosmology scheme centred on the zero-energy
universe assumption and related Big Bang hypothesis, or “exploding vacuum” solution. Indeed,
the latter starts from postulated, artiﬁcially imposed nothingness of the universe mass-energy
content (see section 1.3.6), in the form of dynamically single-valued, zero-complexity reduction
of universe dynamics (irrespective of particular “model” details and including occasional models
with formally positive energy, but always zero dynamic complexity). Because of the intrinsic
instability of that fundamentally ﬁxed, static construction, one is forced to impose a mechanistic
“general expansion” (or the reverse squeeze) of the universe as a single possible mode of its (to-
tally illusive) “development”. The choice for expansion, or Big Bang, is justiﬁed by a particular
interpretation of the observed “red shift” eﬀect (involving a number of serious contradictions in
itself). However, the conceptual instability of any unitary model (absence of evolving, adapt-
able degrees of freedom, as opposed to abstract “parameters”) persists in the form of multiple
problems of the Big Bang model whose proposed “solutions” only transform them to other

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

41

formulations or artiﬁcially introduced entities. The dark energy problem represents only the
latest in the list, though scandalously big and long hidden, rupture in the basically frustrated
construction: the discovered slightly uneven red-shift dependence on distance leads to a huge
deﬁciency in the source of uneven expansion, supposed to be a distributed stock of mysterious,
invisible energy that should take very exotic, normally impossible forms.

That ﬁnal impasse of missing energy (and mass) content of the universe (see also the previous
section) simply takes us back to the beginning of the unitary vicious circle, where such emptiness
of the universe content has been explicitly imposed by the unitary paradigm itself. In fact we
deal here with another, though unrealistically simpliﬁed case of the symmetry (conservation) of
complexity, astonishing in its long-lasting reduction, 0 = 0, applied here to the whole universe
content. In other words, the symmetry of complexity provides the rigorous and properly universal
substantiation of the fact that all the artiﬁcially reduced, dynamically single-valued universe
models with zero value of genuine dynamic complexity will inevitably and essentially fail in
description of real, dynamically multivalued universe structure characterised by positive (and
high) value of unreduced dynamic complexity [1, 2, 9].7

By contrast, the unreduced, dynamically multivalued and probabilistically fractal structure
of real interaction dynamics leads to globally stable concept of universe structure development,
just because it is based on the omnipresent and massively adaptable local, dynamic instability
of explicit structure creation (see also section 1.3.5). The explicit universe structure emergence
in the initially homogeneous system of interacting protoﬁelds, starting from the physically real
space, time, and elementary particles, intrinsically uniﬁed with their fundamental properties and
interactions (section 1.3), can be described as a distributed implosion of ubiquitous, fractally
structured creation, as opposed to mechanistic and intrinsically destructive explosion of the
unitary Big Bang (and “inﬂation”) schemes.

Therefore the “dark energy” problem does not even appear in the complex-dynamic, intrin-
sically creative cosmology, quite similar to all “anthropic” kind of problems (section 1.3.5).
The self-tuning universe structure, liberated from artiﬁcial unitary instabilities and related “an-
thropic” speculations, emerges naturally and self-consistently, simply due to the unreduced, truly
exact picture of the underlying interaction processes.

As for the origin of the observed red shift eﬀect in radiation spectra of distant objects, it ﬁnds
its consistent explanation in terms of intrinsically nonlinear radiation propagation properties in
the system of coupled protoﬁelds (see section 1.3.2 and Figure 1), where some (relatively weak)
loss of energy by soliton-like photons, propagating in the e/m protoﬁeld medium, is inevitable
because of their weak, but ﬁnite coupling to the gravitational medium. Note the essential
diﬀerence of this nonlinear energy dissipation from linear scattering eﬀects in any ordinary model.
The soliton-like photon, remaining stabilised by interaction with the gravitational protoﬁeld, can
slowly give its energy to the gravitational degrees of freedom (most probably quarks) without any
noticeable change of its direction of propagation (i.e. without any “blur” eﬀects in the distant
object images). Characteristic “transpiercing” and “circumventing” modes of soliton interaction
with small enough obstacles can explain anomalously small loss and vanishing angular deviation
eﬀects for photons and very high-energy particles (see below).

One should also take into account possible contribution from modiﬁed protoﬁeld parameters
around big mass concentration or various “special” objects, as well as “older” photon propaga-
tion at earlier stages of universe structure development. Detailed calculations of the eﬀect will
inevitably involve many unknown parameters of the system, but qualitative properties and con-

7Note that any usual, zero-complexity cosmology necessarily implies, due to its dynamic single-valuedness,
total basic regularity and thus zero entropy of the universe and any its quasi-closed subsystem, in contradiction
to entropy growth principle. Any observed or described “chaoticity” or randomness of such universe content, on
any scale, is inevitably reduced to mere “entangled regularity”, in agreement with the old Laplacian vision of
totally mechanistic, basically predictable, but maybe practically noncomputable world.

42

A.P. Kirilyuk

sistency of the whole picture provide convincing evidence in favour of this kind of fundamentally
new explanation for the red shift eﬀect (within a broader scope of “tired light” approach) and
its expected reﬁnement, including the necessary clariﬁcation of the detailed physical origin of
photon (missing persistently in the unitary theory framework).

The nonlinear red shift dependence on distance that gives rise to catastrophic consequences in
the unitary cosmology can only be natural in the complex-dynamic, essentially nonlinear picture
(section 1.1). The nonlinear energy-loss mechanism of soliton-like photons explains why this loss
grows more slowly with distance, than any usual mechanism of diﬀuse scattering would imply
(cf. the above note on soliton scattering dynamics). Similar dynamics could solve, by the way,
the persisting puzzle of GZK eﬀect for the ultra-relativistic particles, since at those super-high
energies the motion of a massive particle approaches that of (a group of) photons, according to
the results of quantum ﬁeld mechanics [1, 7, 8]. Another, though maybe less speciﬁc, feature of
red-shift data correlating with our explanation is (increased) growth of average scatter of data
points with distance.

2.3 Complex-dynamic cosmology: Global universe structure development

Returning to the general picture of emerging universe (section 1), note once more that according
to the underlying symmetry of complexity, it cannot contain “motion-on-circles” dynamics, on
any scale of structure creation, so that the initial, positive amount of dynamic information, in the
form of protoﬁeld interaction, gives rise to generalised, complex-dynamical system birth, followed
by its uneven, irreversible, and global transformation into dynamic entropy (developed structure)
within thus universally deﬁned, ﬁnite system life, which ends up in the state of generalised death,
or equilibrium, around the total transformation of the initial dynamic information into entropy
(unless additional dynamic information is introduced into the system) [1].

The generalised “potential energy” of interacting protoﬁelds can be introduced e. g. by their
explicit separation from the pre-existing state of “totally uniﬁed” (mixed) protoﬁelds that could
have the form of a generally inert quark-gluon condensate in its “absolute” ground state. Al-
though these “prehistoric” assumptions are subject to inevitable and increased uncertainty, they
can be estimated rather deﬁnitely by general consistency and parsimony principles, now rigor-
ously speciﬁed by the universal symmetry of complexity (see section 1.3.1). What appears to
be much more certain, however, is that one does need an initial form of “potential” interac-
tion energy, positively deﬁned and speciﬁed here as “dynamic information”, since the birth of a
structured, real universe from absolute “nothingness”, without genuine interaction development
(which is the preferred dogma of the conventional unitarity), contradicts the fundamentally
substantiated and universally conﬁrmed symmetry (conservation) of complexity (section 1.2).

We can add here other perspectives of our complex-dynamical universe description, whose
consistent development within the standard, unitary cosmology paradigm seems much less prob-
able (cf. e. g. [41]). The highly uneven, long-distance concentration of various anomalous, super-
intense sources of energy, as well as their “peculiar” red-shift tendency, point to a (probably
moving) “shape of the world”, which looks quite natural in our interacting protoﬁeld logic, while
it would need additional, “unnatural” assumptions in the Big Bang logic of “exploding empti-
ness”. Growing problems with the universe age can be naturally solved in our complex-dynamic
cosmology as it traces explicitly the real life-cycle dynamics of emerging structures, while the
unitary theory encounters here another series of its inbred “instabilities” (due to the rigidly
ﬁxed, imposed “models” and mechanistic data ﬁt). The same refers to structural diﬃculties
of the omnipresent expansion and natural elimination in our approach of this and other “old”
diﬃculties of the unitary cosmology, such as average space ﬂatness and homogeneity (section
1.3.1), “anthropic” problems (section 1.3.5), causal origin of high-density states, real Planck-
ian units and microwave background radiation (section 1.3.4). Intrinsic inclusion of realistic,

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

43

uniﬁed solution of stagnating problems of quantum mechanics, ﬁeld theory, and relativity (sec-
tions 1.1, 1.3) constitutes the unique feature of our theory that, being highly desirable, cannot
be even expected for any unitary approach. Finally, irreducibly complex dynamics of detailed
formation and evolution of galaxies, stars, and planetary systems is among further applications
of the present theory that will similarly proﬁt from the universal problem-solving power of the
symmetry of complexity demonstrated above.

3 New mathematics of complexity and emergence

We have demonstrated, in previous sections, how the universal symmetry of complexity, includ-
ing conservation and unceasing development of unreduced dynamic complexity describes the
explicit emergence and properties of real universe structures, starting from elementary parti-
cles, their properties and interactions, and provides thus consistent and uniﬁed solutions to
many stagnating problems of usual, zero-complexity models. This problem-solving power of
the symmetry of complexity centered on the obtained property of explicit structure emergence
necessarily involves a qualitatively new, extended application of familiar mathematical tools and
ideas [1, 2, 6]. In this section we summarise the main features of the new mathematics of emer-
gence thus obtained (it can also be called new mathematics of complexity), with the reference
to previous sections presenting its more detailed framework (sections 1.1–1.2) and applications
to fundamental world structures and properties (sections 1.3, 2.1–2.3).

The most important, embracing feature of the new mathematics of emergence and complexity
is that it is represented by the uniﬁed, single structure of dynamically probabilistic fractal ob-
tained as explicit, causally complete solution of real, unreduced interaction problem (Sect. 1.1).
All its properties, describing the exact world structure and dynamics as it is, are uniﬁed within
the single, absolutely exact (never broken) symmetry, or conservation, of complexity including
its unceasing transformation from complexity-information to complexity-entropy (Sect. 1.2). It
means, in particular, that all real-world structures, and thus the world/universe as a whole,
are absolutely symmetric (and dynamically complex ) and in this sense represent the symmetry
of complexity as such, the latter explicitly producing, in particular, all the observed irregular-
ities. By contrast, omnipresent violations of usual, unitary symmetries result inevitably from
their artiﬁcially reduced, dynamically single-valued basis, including all imitative models of usual,
unitary “science of complexity” (cf. [43, 44]).

One can emphasize several speciﬁc, but universally appearing features of this uniﬁed structure
and law of the new mathematics, distinguishing it essentially from the unitary framework [1, 6]:

(i) Nonuniqueness of any real, unreduced (interaction) problem solution, in the form of its dy-
namic multivaluedness (redundance); exclusively complex-dynamic (multivalued, internally
chaotic) existence of any real system (cf. usual “existence and uniqueness” theorems).

(ii) Omnipresent, explicit emergence of qualitatively new structure and dynamic origin of time
(change) and events: A 6= A for any structure/element A in the new mathematics and
reality, while A = A (self-identity postulate) in the whole usual mathematics, which thus
excludes any real change in principle.

(iii) Fractally structured dynamic entanglement of unreduced problem solution (interaction-
driven, physically real intertwining between system components within any realisation): it
is a rigorous expression of material quality of a real structure in mathematics (as opposed
to “immaterial”, qualitatively “neutral”, “dead” structures of usual mathematics).

(iv) Basic deﬁciency of perturbation theory and “exact solution” paradigm: the unreduced
problem solution is dynamically random (permanently, chaotically changing), dynamically

44

A.P. Kirilyuk

entangled (internally textured and “living”) and fractal (hierarchically structured). One
obtains uniﬁed dynamic origin and causally speciﬁed meaning of such basic properties of
unreduced problems and underlying real systems as nonintegrability, nonseparability, non-
computability, (genuine) randomness, uncertainty (indeterminacy), undecidability, “broken
symmetry”, etc. Real interaction problem is nonintegrable and nonseparable but solvable.
Realistic mathematics of complexity is well deﬁned (certain, uniﬁed and complete, cf. [42]),
but its structures are intrinsically “fuzzy” (dynamically indeterminate and really ﬂuctu-
ating) and properly diverse (not reduced to numbers or geometry).

(v) Dynamic discreteness (causal quantisation) of unreduced interaction products (realisa-
tions) resulting simply from the holistic character of every unreduced interaction process.
It appears as qualitative inhomogeneity, or nonunitarity, of any system structure and evolu-
tion and provides universal dynamic origin of (fractally structured) space. It demonstrates
qualitative deﬁciency of usual unitarity, continuity and discontinuity, calculus, and all ma-
jor structures (evolution operators, symmetry operators, any unitary operators, Lyapunov
exponents, path integrals, etc.).

4 Conclusion: Real problem solution by real-world symmetry

The rigorously derived concept of universal dynamic complexity and related symmetry of com-
plexity involve qualitatively extended and intrinsically uniﬁed properties that allow for the
causally complete, totally realistic and consistent, description of world structure behaviour at
any level of complexity in terms of unreduced interaction problem solution (sections 1.1–1.2, 3).
However, this rigorously based consistency of the uniﬁed symmetry of complexity should also
be conﬁrmed by various applications to particular systems and levels of complexity.

A part of this applied aspect comes already from the extended, causally complete interpreta-
tion of the well-known (but often unexplained) observation results and related explicit uniﬁcation
of traditionally separated phenomena and levels of world dynamics. In that way one obtains,
for example, not only causal, dynamically based explanation for major quantum and relativistic
eﬀects, but also their intrinsic uniﬁcation by the symmetry of complexity and extension to any
level of world dynamics (section 1.3.7). All the canonical “mysteries” and “inexplicable”, for-
mally imposed “postulates” and “principles” naturally appear now as inevitable, totally realistic
manifestations of the genuine, complex-dynamic (multivalued) content of any structure and dy-
namics. As this content always obeys the exact symmetry of complexity, it turns out that the
whole real world content, including all changes and structure creation processes, is absolutely
it is a uniﬁed, but properly diverse manifestation of the universal
and exactly symmetric, i.e.
and never broken underlying symmetry, the symmetry of complexity.

The problem-solving power of the universal symmetry of complexity is further conﬁrmed by a
growing number of its successful applications to various particular systems covering the whole hi-
erarchy of world’s complexity and involving explicit solutions of both “old” and new, sometimes
urgent problems emerging for both old and new kind of systems (and remaining “increasingly”
unsolved within the unitary science paradigm) [1, 5–15]. One can brieﬂy summarise such ap-
plications to systems from both lowest complexity levels (considered in this paper) and higher
complexity levels (considered elsewhere) in the following way:

(1) In particle and quantum physics one obtains causal, uniﬁed origin and structure of ele-
mentary particles, all their properties (“intrinsic”, quantum, relativistic) and interactions
(section 1.3) [1, 4, 7–9, 22]. Complex-dynamic origin of mass (section 1.3.2) avoids any ad-
ditional, abstract entities (Higgs bosons, zero-point ﬁeld, extra dimensions, etc.). Renor-
malised Planckian units provide consistent mass spectrum and other stagnating problem

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

45

solution, including causally complete explanation for the physical origin of universal con-
stants and their universality (section 1.3.4). Complex-dynamic cosmology (including higher
complexity levels) resolves the dark mass and energy problems without “invisible” enti-
ties (sections 2.1, 2.2), together with other old and new problems of unitary cosmology
(sections 1.3.5, 1.3.6, 2.3). The established fundamental link between the numbers of (re-
alistically speciﬁed) space dimensions and interaction forces (section 1.3.3) leaves no place
for arbitrary insertion of “additional” entities (e. g. “hidden dimensions”).

(2) At a higher complexity sublevel of interacting particles [1, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 32] (section 1.3.8)
one obtains genuine, purely dynamic quantum chaos for Hamiltonian (nondissipative) dy-
namics and correct correspondence principle for (real) chaotic systems (natural transition
from quantum to classical behaviour as ~ → 0). A slightly dissipative interaction dynamics
leads to the causally complete understanding of quantum measurement in terms of (causal)
quantum dynamics alone. Intrinsic classically emerges as a higher complexity level in a
closed, bound system, like atom, without any ambiguous “decoherence by environment”.

(3) Realistic, causally complete foundation of nanobiotechnology is provided by rigorous de-
scription of arbitrary nanoscale interaction, revealing the irreducible role of genuine chaotic-
ity just on that smallest scale [4, 12]. Exponentially huge power of unreduced, complex
nanobiosystem dynamics explains the essential properties of life and has direct relation to
complex information and communication system development (see item (5) below).

(4) Causally complete description of unreduced genome interactions leads to reliable, rigorously
substantiated genetics and consistent understanding of related evolutionary processes [6].

(5) Higher-complexity applications include general many-body problem solution and related
description of “diﬃcult” cases in solid-state physics, unreduced dynamics and evolution
of living organisms (causally complete understanding of the state of life as a high enough
level of unreduced dynamic complexity), integral (causally complete) medicine, emergent
(genuine) intelligence and consciousness, complex information and communication sys-
tem dynamics, creative ecology and practically eﬃcient sustainable development concept,
rigorously speciﬁed ethics and aesthetics [1, 4–6, 13–15].

These results explicitly demonstrate the expected advantages of applying the (exact) real-world
symmetry to real problem solution and outline practically unlimited development perspectives
of the universal symmetry complexity and its applications.

[1] Kirilyuk A.P., Universal concept of complexity by the dynamic redundance paradigm: Causal randomness,
complete wave mechanics, and the ultimate uniﬁcation of knowledge, Kyiv, Naukova Dumka, 1997; For
a non-technical review see physics/9806002, whereas major details of the quantum ﬁeld mechanics are
summarised in quant-ph/9902015 and quant-ph/9902016.

[2] Kirilyuk A.P., Universal symmetry of complexity and its manifestations at diﬀerent levels of world dynamics,
Proceedings of Institute of Mathematics of NAS of Ukraine, 2004, V.50, Part 2, 821–828; physics/0404006.

[3] Kirilyuk A.P., Dynamically multivalued self-organisation and probabilistic structure formation processes.

Solid State Phenomena, 2004, V.97–98, 21–26; physics/0405063.

[4] Kirilyuk A.P., Dynamically multivalued, not unitary or stochastic, operation of real quantum, classical and

hybrid micro-machines, physics/0211071.

[5] Kirilyuk A.P., The universal dynamic complexity as extended dynamic fractality: Causally complete un-
derstanding of living systems emergence and operation,
in Fractals in biology and medicine, Vol. III,
Editors G.A. Losa, D. Merlini, T.F. Nonnenmacher and E.R. Weibel, Basel, Birkh¨auser, 2002, 271–284;
physics/0305119.

[6] Kirilyuk A.P., Complex-dynamical extension of the fractal paradigm and its applications in life sciences,
in Fractals in biology and medicine, Vol. IV, Editors G.A. Losa, D. Merlini, T.F. Nonnenmacher and
E.R. Weibel, Basel, Birkh¨auser, 2005, 233–244; physics/0502133.

46

A.P. Kirilyuk

[7] Kirilyuk A.P., Quantum ﬁeld mechanics: Complex-dynamical completion of fundamental physics and its

experimental implications, physics/0401164.

[8] Kirilyuk A.P., 100 Years of quanta: Complex-dynamical origin of Planck’s constant and causally complete

extension of quantum mechanics, quant-ph/0012069.

[9] Kirilyuk A.P., Complex-dynamic cosmology and emergent world structure, Report at the International
Workshop on Frontiers of Particle Astrophysics (Kiev, 21–24 June 2004), physics/0408027. See also
physics/0510240.

[10] Kirilyuk A.P., Quantum chaos and fundamental multivaluedness of dynamical functions, Annales de la Fon-

dation Louis de Broglie, 1996, V.21, N 4, 455–480; quant-ph/9511034–36.

[11] Kirilyuk A.P., Theory of charged particle scattering in crystals by the generalized optical potential method,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B, 1992, V.69, N 1, 200–231.

[12] Kirilyuk A.P., Complex dynamics of real nanosystems:

fundamental paradigm for nanoscience and nan-
otechnology, Nanosystems, Nanomaterials, Nanotechnologies, 2004, V.2, N 3, 1085–1090; physics/0412097.

[13] Kirilyuk A.P., Emerging consciousness as a result of complex-dynamical interaction process, Report at the
EXYSTENCE workshop “Machine Consciousness: Complexity Aspects” (Turin, 29 Sep – 1 Oct 2003);
physics/0409140.

[14] Kirilyuk A.P., Complex dynamics of autonomous communication networks and the intelligent communication
paradigm, Report at the International Workshop on Autonomic Communication (Berlin, 18–19 October
2004), physics/0412058.

[15] Kirilyuk A.P., Towards sustainable future by transition to the next level civilisation, Report presented at the
Symposium “The Future of Life and the Future of Our Civilisation” (Frankfurt am Main, 2-6 May 2005),
physics/0509234.

[16] Bluman G.W. and Kumei S., Symmetries and diﬀerential equations, New York, Springer, 1989.

[17] Fushchich V.I., Shtelen V.M. and Serov N.I., Symmetry analysis and exact solutions of equations of nonlinear

mathematical physics, Dortrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.

[18] Elliott J.P. and Dawber P.G., Symmetry in physics, London, Macmillan Press, 1979.

[19] Dederichs P.H., Dynamical diﬀraction theory by optical potential methods, in Solid state physics: Advances
in research and applications, Editors H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz and D. Turnbull, New York, Academic Press,
1972, V.27, 136–237.

[20] Gouan`ere M., Spighel M., Cue N., Gaillard M.J., Genre R., Kirsch R., Poizat J.C., Remillieux J., Catillon P.
and Roussel L., Experimental observation compatible with the particle internal clock, Annales de la Fonda-
tion Louis de Broglie, 2005, V.30, N 1, 109–114.

[21] de Broglie L., Recherches sur la th´eorie des quanta, Th`ese de doctorat soutenue `a Paris le 25 novembre 1924,
Annales de Physique (10e S´erie), 1925, V.III, 22–128. Reprinted edition: L. de Broglie, Recherches sur la
th´eorie des quanta, Paris, Fondation Louis de Broglie, 1992.

[22] Kirilyuk A.P., 75 Years of matter wave: Louis de Broglie and renaissance of the causally complete knowledge,

quant-ph/9911107.

[23] Adams J., et al. (STAR Collaboration), Experimental and theoretical challenges in the search for the
quark gluon plasma: The STAR Collaboration’s critical assessment of the evidence from RHIC collisions,
Nucl. Phys. A, 2005, V.757, 102–183; nucl-ex/0501009.

[24] Rothman T. and Boughn S., Can gravitons be detected?, gr-qc/0601043.

[25] Randall L. and Sundrum R., A large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999,

V.83, 3370–3373; hep-ph/9905221.

[26] Randall L. and Sundrum R., An alternative to compactiﬁcation, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, V.83, 4690–4693;

[27] Sahni V. and Shtanov Yu., New vistas in braneworld cosmology, Int. J. Mod. Phys., 2000, V.D11, 1515–1521;

hep-th/9906064.

gr-qc/0205111.

[28] Burinskii A., Wonderful consequences of the Kerr theorem, hep-th/0506006.

[29] Burinskii A., The Dirac-Kerr electron, hep-th/0507109.

[30] de Broglie L., La thermodynamique de la particule isol´ee (thermodynamique cach´ee des particules), Paris,

Gauthier-Villars, 1964.

[31] Landau L.D. and Lifshitz E.M., Field theory, Moscow, Nauka, 1989. Sixth Russian edition.

[32] Kirilyuk A.P., Causal wave mechanics and the advent of complexity. IV. Dynamical origin of quantum

indeterminacy and wave reduction, quant-ph/9511037.

Symmetry of Complexity: Uniﬁcation of Causal QM, Relativity, and Cosmology

47

[33] Khalil S. and Munoz C., The enigma of the dark matter, Contemp. Phys., 2002, V.43, 51–62;

hep-ph/0110122.

[34] Olive K.A., TASI lectures on dark matter, astro-ph/0301505.

[35] Sahni V., Dark matter and dark energy, in The physics of the early universe, Editor E. Papantonopoulos,

Springer, 2005, 141–180; astro-ph/0403324.

[36] Merriﬁeld M.R., Dark matter on galactic scales (or the lack thereof), astro-ph/0412059.

[37] Landau L.D. and Lifshitz E.M., Mechanics, Moscow, Nauka, 1988. Fourth Russian edition.

[38] Milgrom M., MOND — a pedagogical review, Acta Physica Polonica, 2001, V.B32, 3613–3629;

astro-ph/0112069.

[39] Sanders R.H. and McGaugh S.S., Modiﬁed Newtonian Dynamics as an Alternative to Dark Matter, Ann.

Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 2002, V.40, 263–317; astro-ph/0204521.

[40] Scarpa R., Modiﬁed newtonian dynamics as an alternative to non-baryonic dark matter, Report at the First

Crisis of Cosmology Conference (Mon¸c˜ao, Portugal, 23-25 June 2005),
http://www.cosmology.info/2005conference/.

[41] L´opez-Corredoira M., Observational cosmology: caveats and open questions in the standard model,

astro-ph/0310214.

[42] Kline M., Mathematics: The loss of certainty, New York, Oxford University Press, 1980.

[43] Horgan J., From complexity to perplexity, Scientiﬁc American, 1995, June, 74–79.

[44] Horgan J., The end of science. Facing the limits of knowledge in the twilight of the scientiﬁc age, Helix,

Addison-Wesley, 1996.

