6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

To test the limits of quantum mechanics, a proposal for an experiment
on protons is suggested. The spin component of proton is measured very
rapidly in sequential measurements. The reason for this experiment is
derived from the genuine fortuitousness principle, (A. Bohr, B. R. Mot-
telson, and O. Ulfbeck, (2004)).

The Limits of Quantum Mechanics in the Light of the
Genuine Fortuitousness Principle
Jerzy Czyz
Montana State University - Billings, Department Of Mathematics

This paper is concerned with the limits of quantum mechanics (QM).

In
It is
point 4, we put forward a proposal for a thought experiment on protons.
our opinion that an experiment of the described type must yield results which
deviate from the predictions of QM. Additionally, the ﬁrst three points take a
sober look at some basic concepts of QM to expose the idea and motivation be-
hind our proposal in a pedagogical way. The following methodological principle
is accepted: What belongs to QM (as a physical theory) is only what is needed
to derive it. We hope that the reader will ﬁnd this particular application of the
Occam’s razor quite useful.

It is the basic assumption of QM that

tr(DPA(E))

(1)

(2)

is the probability that the value of the physical quantity represented by a self-
adjoint operator A (acting on a suitable Hilbert space), when the state of the
system is the density operator D, lies in the Borel set E ⊂ R. The function
E → PA(E) is the spectral projection-valued measure of A.
If A and D are
ﬁxed, the function

E → tr(DPA(E))

has the properties of a probability measure on R. Many vexing questions and
paradoxes arise, when ontological assumptions on the nature of states, physical
quantities, quantum systems etc. are incorporated into the formalism of QM.

1. Critique of operational approach to states and physical magnitudes. The
reader can ﬁnd a concise exposition of the operational approach to states and ob-
servables in Araki (1999). We wish to point out some omitted assumptions and
other imperfections there. Let us start with a short review of the operational
approach. QM presupposes the division of the world into three parts:
- a physical system (entity) entering into a measurement process
- a measuring apparatus which must be coupled with the physical entity to

make a measurement

1

- the rest, besides the above, called the environment and observer.
What is taken to be a physical system is beyond the reach of full mathemat-
ical formalization. It is presumed that a part of reality can be cut out in such a
way that physical theory applies to it. Many physical systems have hierarchical
structure, and permit sensible divisions into two or more subsystems, atoms for
example. But there are systems like an electron or a neutrino for which we are
not able to devise a sensible decomposition into subsystems.
In conclusion, a
speciﬁcation of a physical system is to a large degree a matter of convention,
although not completely arbitrary. We will return to this issue one more time
later.

Physical quantities of QM cannot be characterized by a single numerical
value, in general, but by a whole set of possible values the physical quantity
can take. The validity of the above follows from realization that the result of
a single one-time measurement on the system prepared by the most discerning
preparation procedure empirically available, and ultimately controlled arrange-
ment between measuring instrument and measured system cannot be predicted
with certainty. Acausal traits of QM enter the scene here. If this is the case,
then one is left with the following empirical solution: repeat the measurement
many times on many individual systems believed to be prepared in the same
way as the physical system in the ﬁrst measurement. The reader is asked to
keep in mind that the repetition (in diﬀerent times or places simultaneously)
necessary involves assumptions about space-time. The operational approach is
not possible without these assumptions. The ﬁnite sequence (l1, l2, ..., lN ) gives
the record of the measurement of physical quantity. Assuming for simplicity
that the measurement takes only discrete values q1, q2, ... one can compute the
relative frequency fi of the occurrence of the value qi in the record:

is the number of occurrences of qi in the record. We bore the
where nqi
reader with these trivialities to stress the point that for an elusive quantum
system these are the only empirical data we have. Having in mind these elusive
systems, the ﬁrst step towards theory is to talk about records and frequencies
It is an error to say that if
in the probabilistic way.

exists, then one looks for a probability measure such that

pQ
α (E) = lim
N→∞

nE
N

for every set E ∈ B(R) , where B(R) is σ-algebra of Borel sets on real line, and
LHS is the probability to ﬁnd the value of the physical quantity Q in the set
E ∈ B(R) , where α is the ‘state’ of the system.

To begin with, the RHS of (5) depends on inﬁnitely many results in the
Secondly, the frequentist deﬁnitions of probability have well known

future.

(3)

(4)

(5)

fi =

nqi
N

lim
N→∞

nE
N

2

serious mathematical defects, and cannot serve as a basis of a probability the-
ory. The reader can consult C. Caves and R. Schack (2004) to see the total
bankruptcy of frequentist approach in QM. We rewrite (5) in the following form

pQ
α (E) ←−

nE
N

(6)

(7)

(8)

where ←− indicates that RHS serves as the method of estimation of the theo-
retical distribution pQ
α (E) based on the histogram obtained from the record of
in
In this way we reach the ﬁrst preliminary conclusion:
the measurement.
orthodox QM, the mathematical probability theory (i.e., measure theory) on
the lattice of subspaces of a Hilbert space is primary. Records and frequen-
cies (3) serve to verify (falsify) this theory. The above conclusion imposes a
severe limitations on all discussions about the nature of probabilities in QM.
The probabilities belong to mathematics. The theoretical prediction (2) can be
veriﬁed (falsiﬁed) by histograms obtained from (3). This relation has a similar
character to the relation between points and lines in Euclidean geometry, and
material points and lines on a piece of paper, or in the sand. To a mathematical
line of geometry one can correlate material line on the paper or in the sand, and
continue in this way analysis of drawn polygonal ﬁgure. All discussions about
the nature of the line belongs to geometry.
If one thinks that the Euclidean
line is a limit case of real material line, then one commits a serious error.

To make formula (6) more precise, discussion of states and physical quantities
In idealized scheme of Araki (1999), two individual physical entities

is needed.
(systems) s1, s2 are equivalent (s1 ∼ s2) if

s1(E) = pA
pA

s2(E)

for all E ∈ B(R) , and all A , providing that A is real measuring procedure
(apparatus etc.) applicable to both individual systems. This relation ∼ is an
If s1, s2 belong to the same equivalence class, then they
equivalence relation.
cannot be distinguished by any physical quantity A . The crucial point here is
that mathematical entities called states are attached to these equivalence classes
and not to individual systems.

We must admit the possibility that two diﬀerent instruments A1and A2 can
be coupled with every system described by the state s to measure the same
physical quantity. If for all states s and all E ∈ B(R)

s (E) = pA2
pA1

s (E)

holds, then A1and A2 measure the same physical quantity. This deﬁnes an
equivalence class of instrument A .This concludes the operational deﬁnition of
pA
s (E) . The state characterized above by (7) and (8) can be called, after Bub
(1988), a statistical state, and it is an additional assumption that it is heredi-
tary, possessed by each individual system s described by the state s . However,
we do not want to discuss this any further.
Instead, we want to point to a
fundamental assumption which underpins the whole discussion. The elusive

3

physical system is not given directly. What we have at our disposal are instru-
ments which measure physical quantities. The phrase ‘the state of individual
physical system is s ’ presupposes the fusion (stitching) of all relevant physical
quantities into one theoretical structure which pertains or can be attributed to
an individual system. Without this fusion principle there are no entities like
quantum systems. Again, it is additional assumption to say that after perform-
ing this fusion, one arrives in entities with possessive attributes. Imagine a man
blind from birth. He has the natural view of the world based on impressions
from other senses. When he regains his sight after successful surgery, he does
not see red apples and green leaves, but chaos of colors. After some time he will
organize his visual experience, and fuse it with his previous non-visual natural
knowledge of the world - beforehand assumptions about structure of the world.
In this case the fusion is such that it does not destroy his believe in things.
Hence, it is a mistake to assume in advance that after applying fusion to relevant
physical quantities, one will arrive at theoretical structure put beforehand.
In
conclusion, the operational deﬁnition of a state is not possible because of three
main reasons: some knowledge about space-time must be assumed, mathemat-
ical probabilities are primary in interpretation of records, and the deﬁnition of
a quantum system is based on an application of the fusion principle.

2. Second look at quantum systems. We stated earlier that formalization of
the concept of a quantum system is beyond the reach of mathematical formal-
ism. Suppose that an experimentator works with a single electron. What is
the theoretical correlate of an electron? The answer to this question has been
given by Wigner (1939), (1959). Omitting details, the response is this:

-Quantum systems are given by irreducible unitary representations of the
group G of physical theory. Additionally, the group G must satisfy certain
constraints imposed by physics.

-Group G is double covering of the Poincare group P of those transformations
of the special relativity which can be continuously derived from identity or G is
enlarged to account for quantum numbers. For example, group SU (3) is used
for such enlargement.

This characterization of quantum system is connected with symmetries of
the whole Minkowski space-time but not with a particular quantum system.
Additionally, the idea that unitary representation is intrinsic to a quantum
system is absurd. To achieve the complete speciﬁcations of his quantum system,
the operationalist must rely on localization of events in the space-time. One
can use a positive-operator-valued measure (POVM) on the Poincare group to
determine the probability that a measurement of coordinates of the event gives
a result belonging to a given set in space-time, S. Mazzucchi (2000), M. Toller
(1998). However, such a speciﬁcation of quantum system is possible only if
relevant observables in the formalism of POVM are fused together to relate to
the individual quantum system.

If the possibility of states and observables to quantum entities is denied, op-
erational view of QM is considered to be untenable, and the concept of quantum
system is put in doubt, then, at ﬁrst glance, there is nothing left. However,
this is not the case. The missing basic principle has been proposed by A. Bohr,

4

In the next point we give a short
B. R. Mottelson, and O. Ulfbeck (2004).
description of this principle because the idea of the proposed experiment stems
from it.

3. The Principle of Genuine Fortuitousness. QM presupposes the exis-
tence of instruments and their records. The relation between the records and
instruments is the relation of precedence (in the sense that a mother’s birth ab-
solutely precedes the birth of her child) more fundamental then time durations,
and independent of any observer. Therefore, QM presupposes existence of some
knowledge to deal with experimental situations. The requirement that this
knowledge has a form of classical physics is additional, and not needed further.
This knowledge is such that it is independent, and does not involve QM. We
will call it NonQMTh. For instruments with the highest resolution, we accept
(Bohr, Mottelson, Ulfbeck (2004)) the principle of the click.

A click without a precursor, totally acausal, not permitting further analysis,
unfathomable in its nature occurs in the counter of apparatus. Further work
of apparatus leads to an entry in the record of the measurement. An entirely
acausal click is recognized as a macroscopic event, which can be characterized as
a discontinuity in space-time. The concept of impinging particle or other entity
‘acting’ on the counter is denied. The formalism of QM is set in space-time
pocked by clicks. Experimentators organize the clicks into sets. Such sets yield
records.
In orthodox QM the theoretical statistics of the set of clicks comes
from the triple

(ρ, A, tr(ρA))

where ρ is a density operator on suitable Hilbert space H ( a linear, bounded,
self-adjoint, positive, trace-class operator on H), and A is self-adjoint operator
on H . The physical sense of the triple is given by

(9)

(10)

tr(ρPA(E)) ←−

nE
N

for any ﬁnite record (l1, l2, ..., lN ), where PA(E) is projection operator corre-
sponding to E ∈ B(R) .
If the click principle is accepted, then the whole
formula (10) makes sense:
it deals with stochastic character of sets of clicks.
There are no electrons or other fundamental quantum systems as objects or
entities producing (causing) events. They are symbolic structures assembled in
the framework of the theory. These symbolic structures are characterized by
quantum numbers, but quantum numbers do not belong to particles or things.
At a very fundamental level (the highest possible resolution of our instru-
ments) there is only theory of no things. When the resolution of instruments
decrease, then symbolic structures of theory come closer to the concept of a
thing, (Bohr, Mottelson, Ulfbeck (2004)).

Before we propose our experiment a few words are in order on mutual re-
lation between QM and NonQMTh. The principle of genuine fortuitousness
assumes the very basic type of the instrument and physical quantity connected
with it. NonQMTh is based on conceptual structures quite diﬀerent from those
of QM. The properties of an apparatus (complex system of large number of

5

parts and high degree of organization) are described in a rather small num-
ber of terms with no relevance to QM. Therefore, the theoretical description
of the measurement process should revolve about deﬁnitions and construction
of global observables (macroobservables) which can be later ‘identiﬁed’ with
It is unavoidable that such a theory must
macroobservables of NonQMTh.
be based not only on QM (orthodox or algebraic) but also on structures that
account for characteristic features of the instrument. The reader can consult
Sewell (2002), (2005) for details.

4. Limits of QM, and a thought experiment to test it. We do not consider
QM to be the ﬁnal theory, and because of that we will attempt to ﬁnd an
experiment which will falsify QM. The previous discussion is at odds with all
doctrines of hidden variables. Hence, one must look in a diﬀerent direction.
If
essentially acausal character of QM is considered to be primary, then the main
possibilities are:

-There are sets of clicks not discovered yet, which do not obey the laws of
QM (orthodox or algebraic), especially formula (10) is violated. They can be
discovered using instruments of current quality and resolution.

-Spatiotemporal description by Minkowski space-time fails, for example the
Lorentz invariance is violated. The quantum systems support irreducible rep-
resentations of the Poincare group. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that
an insuﬃciency of Minkowski space-time will have far reaching consequences for
QM.

-When the quality and resolution of our instruments are pushed forward,

statistical prediction of QM do not hold.

We want to consider the last possibility. We begin with the simple obser-
vation, that the natural view of the world depends on the speed with which a
living organism receives impressions. Living organisms are capable of receiving
only ﬁnite number of impressions per minute (second).
In consequence, phe-
nomena of such duration that they fall between two consecutive impressions are
not perceived, and the natural view of the world is not only relative but false.
Similarly, the statistical regularities of clicks described by QM depend on
speed with which an apparatus is able to receive clicks.
It is feasible that
all quantum measurements carried out so far missed some collections of clicks
because of their limitations. This calls for an experiment with very rapid
successive measurements. We propose an experiment, where an individual
system is subjected to a series of sequential measurements.

Speciﬁcally, the spin of a proton will be measured sequentially by two devices
A and B. Two measurements are separated by the time interval ∆T . Each
For
device measures the spin component of a proton in its own direction.
simplicity, let us assume that the ﬁrst device measures the spin component
p
along z axis, and the next device measures the spin component along axis z
with the angle θ between them. Both are ideal von Neumann measurements.
If the device A gives value am, then Pam is
The initial state of a proton is ψ.
appropriate state for the device B. Hence, we have the known formula for the

6

probability that the measurement by B will give result bn :

2
prob(B = bn | A = am) = tr(Pam Pbn ) =| (bn, am) |

(11)

This probability does not depend on ψ and ∆T .

Hypothesis: If the time separation ∆T between two completed consecutive
measurements is close enough to the precision of the best atomic clocks (∼ 2 ∗
10−17s) and the total number of measurements is suﬃciently close to 1s
∆T , then
the deviations from formula (10) will occur. It is of paramount importance that
the number of measurements must be large, close enough to 1s
∆T . An instrument
performing such a measurement is qualitatively diﬀerent from two instruments
performing successive measurements with large ∆T . This experiment should
be performed for the diﬀerent angles 0 < θ < π changing rapidly.

If the probability for the direction z of spin is 1 (device A), then for the
direction at the angle θ the probability is | cos 1
2 θ |2. Our hypothesis asserts that
‘eye for the component of the spin’ apparatus described schematically above will
yield a diﬀerent curve. At least, experiment should be performed for θ = 1
2 π, π
because the respective probabilities 1
2 , 0 are best suited for statistical tests.

We put forward this hypothesis motivated by the genuine fortuitousness
It is fruitless to speculate on a character of deviations without ex-

principle.
perimental data. Probably, they are ‘irregular’ and very ‘quantum’.

However, a few words are needed about the choice of quantum system. We
recommend a proton because it is well known stable particle, and its mass
(938.27M eV ) is much greater than that of an electron (0.51M eV ) . We consider
‘point-like’ electron and relativistic photon much more elusive. Our instruments
are governed by laws of electromagnetism. One can speculate that critical time
∆T should surpass Bohr radius
∼= 2 ∗ 10−19 by factor 102 , which accounts for
complexity of an instrument.

c

Our proposal does not assume the existence of hidden variables, new type of
interaction or new particles. We expect a breakdown of QM because probability
measure (2) is not ﬁne enough for the proposed instrument. On the other hand,
qualitative features of QM are preserved.

We ﬁnish with the remark that our hypothesis has nothing to do with the
putative relaxation processes of proton (proton as an entity) happening after
the measurement. Acausal clicks are beyond such processes.

References
1. Araki, Huzihiro (1999), The Mathematical Theory of Quantum Fields,

Oxford University Press

2. Bohr, A., Mottelson, B. R., and Ulfbeck, O. ,(2004) “The Principle
Underlying Quantum Mechanics”, Foundations of Physics, Vol. 34, No. 3, 405
- 417

3. Bub, Jeﬀrey (1988), “How to Solve the Measurement Problem of Quantum

Mechanics”, Foundations of Physics, Vol. 18, No. 7, 701 - 722

4. Caves, C. , and Schack, R. (2004), “Properties of the frequency operator

do not imply the quantum probability postulate”, arXiv:quant-ph/0409144

7

5. Mazzucchi, S. (2000), “On the Observables Describing a Quantum Refer-

ence Frame”, arXiv:quant-ph/0006060

6. Sewell, G. (2002), Quantum Mechanics and Its Emergent Macrophysics,

Princeton University Press

Theory”, arXiv:math-ph/0505032

7. Sewell, G. (2005), “On Mathematical Structure of Quantum Measurement

8. Toller, M. (1998), “Localization of Events in Space-Time”, arXiv:quant-ph/9805030
9. Wigner, E. P. (1939), “On Unitary Representations of the Inhomogeneous

Lorentz Group”, Ann. Math. 40, 149 - 204

10. Wigner, E. P. (1959), Group Theory and Its Applications to the Quantum

Mechanics of Atomic Spectra, Academic Press

8

