Abstract. Einstein’s dream of describing elementary particles as solutions of a
classical ﬁeld theory is severely limited by our current understanding of Nature.
Quantum theory is inconsistent with any local realistic theory such as evolving
topological structures in space. It is shown that allowing time reversal as an intrinsic
part of the structure of elementary particles allows general relativity to explain
quantum theory in principle. Such structures may also explain electric charge and
spin-half.

Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
email: Mark.Hadley@warwick.ac.uk

Mark J Hadley

ingredient

6 Geometric models of particles - the missing
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Geometric models of particles - the missing ingredient

2

1. Introduction

Einstein’s dream was to ﬁnd a grand uniﬁed theory. For him that meant not only a
uniﬁcation of the forces of nature, but also the uniﬁcation of particles and ﬁelds. He
tried repeatedly to ﬁnd ﬁeld theories that included gravitation and also had particle like
solutions. It is interesting to note that some early attempts were dismissed because they
did not have symmetric solutions of unequal masses and opposite charge corresponding
to an electron and a proton - the only know elementary particles at the time.

Although the focus of his later work was on classical ﬁeld theories, Einstein also
held the view that a more fundamental realist theory would eventually explain quantum
theory. Einstein probed the completeness of quantum theory with his EPR experiment,
but it was Bell who used the same thought experiment to show that quantum theory
was fundamentally incompatible with any local hidden variable theory. This ruled out
any realist explanation compatible with causality.

To model elementary particles with a classical ﬁeld theory requires solutions:

(i) with the right properties - such as mass, charge, spin etc

(ii) Interactions between them - scattering, creation annihilation etc.

(iii) The right behaviour - quantum theory

although Einstein considered the ﬁrst requirement in detail, the other two were
largely ignored. It may have seemed expedient to get solutions ﬁrst and then examine
interactions and mechanics afterwards. However, the second and third requirements
place severe constraints upon acceptable solutions and in so doing oﬀer potentially
helpful clues.

2. Interactions and topology change

If particles are modeled as topological structures of space, then interactions such as
annihilation of particles, particle-antiparticle creation and some scattering experiments
will require the topology of a region of spacetime to change. However there are powerful
theorems due to Geroch [7] and Tipler [16] that constrain topology change in classical
general relativity. Topology change in classical general relativity would need to be a
counterexample to Geroch’s theorem. The possible counterexamples are analysed in
Hadley (1999). In summary the possibilities can be classiﬁed as:

(i) Singularities

(ii) Closed timelike curves

(iii) A lack of time orientation

The ﬁrst is a breakdown of general relativity. Since General Relativity is expressed
in terms of a 4D spacetime manifold, a singularity is not consistent with a description
of spacetime as a manifold. Nevertheless some authors (eg Sorkin [15]) have proposed

Geometric models of particles - the missing ingredient

3

a reformulation of general relativity to alow singularities where topology change takes
place.

For closed timelike curves to appear in a region of space that was previously regular
requires negative energy due to Tipler’s theorem. While this cannot be ruled out
absolutely with current theoretical knowledge it is unwelcome as a postulate.

The third option is that some timelines from the initial surface turn around and
return through the same surface. This would be a failure of time-orientability. Further
work on structures that lack time orientability have proved fascinating and fruitful.

3. The Essence of Quantum Theory

Quantum theory has many strange features, but most are not absolutely unique to
quantum theory. For example the uncertainty relationship between position and
momentum is common to classical waves, or the wave equations themselves. While
some, apparently critical, features are largely irrelevant; such as the inability to make
simultaneous measurements of some observables - if this were possible (even for non-
commuting observables) it would not change quantum theory.

A fundamental diﬀerence between quantum and classical physics can be found
in the logical structure of the propositions. Classical physics satisﬁes Boolean logic
while quantum theory is non-Boolean. The distributive law does not hold, instead
the propositions form an orthomodular lattice [1]. This leads to the requirement to
represent probabilities as subspaces of a [complex] vector space rather than as measures
of a volume space. It is this fundamental distinction that leads to the dynamical and
statistical features of quantum theory.

Although the relationship between incompatible observables has a non-Boolean
characteristic, in any one experiment the propositions satisfy the normal Boolean logic.
This is generally expressed by saying that quantum theory is context dependent - within
any single context, the probabilities can be expressed in the normal way.

A consequence of the logical structure of quantum theory and the way probabilities
are represented is an entirely new concept of probability.
In all of classical physics
probability can be ascribed to our ignorance of some variables (typically the precise
initial conditions).
In quantum theory this interpretation is not possible, it cannot
be described in terms of local hidden variables. As shown by the violations of Bell’s
inequalities.

The logical structure and the new way to represent probabilities leads inevitably,
and uniquely, to quantum theory and quantum ﬁeld theory. The continuity and
symmetry of spacetime give rise to the usual equations of quantum theory.

4. The logical structure of acausal spacetimes

A formal proof that acausal spacetimes lead to the logical structure of quantum theory
is given in the paper by Hadley [8]. The proof is formal and can be largely replaced

Geometric models of particles - the missing ingredient

4

by the statement that an acausal spacetime is context dependent. This can been seen
simply in two ways:

With closed timelike curves (CTCs) or a failure of time orientability, it is not
in general possible to set up boundary conditions on an initial surface without some
knowledge of future conditions. Future experiments can set extra boundary conditions
that are not redundant. Simple models with Billiards such as those described by Carlini
and Novikov [2] provide a good illustration. The standing waves on a string provide a
helpful analogy, boundary conditions need to be speciﬁed at both ends before the wave
can calculated.

An alternative way to look at the context dependence, with the same example,
would be to consider the shape of the standing wave as a combination of forward and
backward moving waves. A change of time direction at a future experiment would send
a signal back to the start of the experiment. This can be seen as a realisation of the
Cramer’s transactional interpretation of quantum theory [3].

5. 4-geons

The original term geon was coined by Misner and Wheeler [13] to describe a topological
structure in space that had particle-like properties. They made no claim that their geons
were particles and indeed the analysis above shows that they could never have displayed
quantum like properties or interactions. However general relativity is an intrinsically 4
dimensional theory. The space and time components have equal status (the single time
component is distinguished only by the signature of the metric).

A 4-geon has non-trivial causal structure as well non-trivial spacial topology. The
particle and its evolution are inseparable. Time reversal is an intrinsic part of the
measurement process. The 4-geons form the basis for context dependence in classical
general relativity. Strictly speaking the non-trivial causal structure also needs some
interactions to be taking place. Within the strict limits of classical general relativity,
that could most easily be a gravity wave, so that the characteristics would be dependent
upon boundary conditions formed by both state preparations and measurement.

6. Supplementary results

Manifolds that are not time orientable have some fascinating properties. The integral
linking the enclosed charge to the ﬂux on a closed surface have limited
theorems,
applicability. Stokes theorem requires the enclosed volume to be orientable, while the
divergence theorem requires a co-orientation to exist. When the theorems do not apply,
it is possible to have the appearance of charge arising from the source free equations
because there can be a net surface ﬂux with zero enclosed charge. Sorkin [14] applied
the idea using Stoke’s theorem to a geon that was not space orientable and found that it
could have net magnetic charge. However a 4-geon that is not time orientable does not
have a consistently deﬁned normal vector (it is not co-orientable) and the divergence

Geometric models of particles - the missing ingredient

5

theorem fails, allowing the appearance of net electric charge. See Diemer and Hadley
[4].

The rotational properties of a non-time orientable manifold are intriguing. It was
known that on some 3-manifolds it may not be possible to deﬁne a rotational vector ﬁeld
continuously [12]. On an asymptotically ﬂat manifold that did not admit a rotational
vector ﬁeld, it would be possible to deﬁne a rotation in the asymptotic region but not
possible to extend the rotation throughout the structure. Sorkin [6] used this result to
infer spin-half characteristics in semi-classical gravity. However for a manifold that is
not time orientable, in the general case (without additional symmetry) it would not be
possible to rotate the asymptotic region and extend it through to the whole structure.
The result is described in [10]. Such a manifold would not have a 360 degree rotation as
a symmetry operation, but a 720 degree rotation would be diﬀeomorphic to the identity.
A 4-geon would have the transformation properties of a spinor.

7. Conclusion

To the authors knowledge, the ﬁrst reported solution of general relativity that was
not time-orientable, was the famous Einstein-Rosen bridge [5] (when seen as a bridge
between two parts of the seme Universe). It is not usually appreciated that a traversable
Einstein-Rosen bridge would result in the traveler coming out with the opposite sense
of time direction as an external observer. To the outside observer both mouths of the
bridge would be black holes but the traveler would come out of one and see it as a
white hole, but only because his sense of time is reversed. Probing a time reversing
region is not trivial - as described in [11]. The properties of the bridge arise because the
radial co-ordinate becomes the time coordinate at the event horizon - and the wormhole
smoothly changes an ingoing radial trajectory into an outward one.

At least in principle, General Relativity with non-trivial causal structure could
It may be the uniﬁed theory that

explain quantum theory and much more besides.
Einstein sought for so long.

References

[1] Beltrametti E G and Cassinelli G 1981 The Logic of Quantum Mechanics, Vol 15 Encyclopedia

of Mathematics and its Applications Addison Wesley Publishing Company

[2] Carlini A and Novikov I D 1996 Int. J. Mod. Phys. D5 445–480
[3] Cramer J G 1986 Rev. Mod. Phys. 58 647–688
[4] Diemer T and Hadley M J 1999 Class. Quantum Grav. 16 3567–3577
[5] Einstein A and Rosen N 1935 Phys. Rev. 48 73–77
[6] Friedman J L and Sorkin R D 1982 Gen. Rel. Grav. 14 615–620
[7] Geroch R 1968 J. Math. Phys. 9 1739–1744
[8] Hadley M J 1997 Found. Phys. Lett. 10 43–60
[9] Hadley M J 1999 Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 1481–1492
[10] Hadley M J 2000 Clas. Quant. Gravity 17 4187–4194
[11] Hadley M J 2002 Clas. Quant. Gravity 19 4565-4197
[12] Hendriks H 1977 Bull. Soc. Math. de France Mem 53 81–96

Geometric models of particles - the missing ingredient

6

[13] Misner C W and Wheeler J A 1957 Ann. Phys. 2 525–603
[14] Sorkin R D 1977 J. Phys.A:Math. Gen. 10 717–725
[15] Sorkin R D 1997 Int. J. Theor. Phys. 36 2759–2781
[16] Tipler 1976 Phys. Rev. Lett. 37 879

