Universal Theory of Relativity and the “Uniﬁcation” of

Fundamental Physical Interactions

smw-let-01-06

Sanjay M Wagh

Central India Research Institute, Post Box 606,

Laxminagar, Nagpur 440 022, India ∗

(Dated: February 7, 2006)

Abstract

The “uniﬁcation” of fundamental physical forces (interactions) imagines a “single” conceptual

entity using which all the observable or physical phenomena, ie, changes to physical bodies,

would be suitably describable. The physical, conceptual and mathematical, framework which

achieves this is that of the recently proposed Universal Theory of Relativity [3]. Here, we argue

that the mathematical framework required to achieve the “uniﬁcation” should be that of the

general Category Theory. There are certain unanswered mathematical questions arising out of

this context. In the sequel, we also point out these issues for the wider attention.

6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: cirinag˙ngp@sancharnet.in

1

Physics is our attempt to conceptually grasp the happenings of the observable world.

Various physical concepts are also succinctly expressible in the language of mathematics.

Laws of Physics are therefore mathematical statements about mathematical structures

representing “observable” or “physical” bodies. Unless the theory (concepts and their

mathematical representations, both) is appropriate, it will fail to explain, at least, “some”

observations. Needs of “appropriate” physical concepts and mathematical structures to

represent them are, both, then evident [12].

Experiments “verify” theoretical explanations of phenomena and, in turn, indicate the

appropriateness of our choice of, both, the physical conceptions and the mathematical

structures representing them. There also are purely logical methods to decide, at least

partly, this appropriateness. These methods determine the mutual compatibility of our

concepts, ie, the internal consistency of the theoretical framework.

Using any of these above methods, we then judiciously accept or reject any conceptual

framework as an admissible theory of the observable world. When an internally consistent

theory fails to explain some observations, we need to expand the conceptual basis of that

theory and, hence, mathematical structures representing those concepts. As an acceptable

explanation of the observable world, the conceptual framework of the “expanded” theory

must also be internally consistent in the sense of Logic.

Currently, physical explanations rely on four basic forces (of newtonian conceptual

origin as “means” to cause “changes” to physical bodies), viz, gravity, electromagnetism,

weak nuclear, and strong nuclear interactions. The present goal of theoretical physics is of

“unifying” these four independent forces. Clearly, this aim requires appropriate physical

concepts and their mathematical representations, both.

2

Einstein [1, 2], from (only an apparently) diﬀerent perspective than that of the above,

arrived at the Principle of General Relativity that the Laws of Physics be applicable with

respect to all the systems of reference, in relative acceleration or not, without unnatural

forces (whose origin is not in physical or observable bodies) entering into them. Then,

the Laws of Physics should be based on the same mathematical structures, and be also

the same mathematical statements, for all the reference systems.

Changes in physical bodies are the physical phenomena. Physical reference systems are

physical bodies used as reference. This situation provides [3, 4, 5, 6] us a guiding principle:

mathematical structure(s) representing physical bodies be such that phenomena become

‘changes’ to (mathematical structure of) reference systems themselves.

Here, the uniﬁcation of basic forces is closely related to Einstein’s principle of general

relativity and the aforementioned guiding principle, the former principle helping us with

the formulations of various physical laws and the latter principle helping us select the

unifying mathematical structure. This is the theoretical framework which I had called as

the Universal Theory of Relativity [3].

Now, the “uniﬁcation” of fundamental physical interactions must postulate “some”

single mathematical entity that “represents” not only all the characteristics of physical

bodies but also their “changes” (mathematical transformations).

Then, we note that a mathematical transformation essentially “knows” about the

mathematical structure it “transforms”. This single concept, that of the transformation of

a mathematical structure representing all the characteristics of physical bodies, appears

to possess therefore the ingredients necessary to be the single conceptual entity capable

of “unifying” the four fundamental forces.

3

This is the same as in the case of a category. A category, C, is usually deﬁned in terms

of two collections - the ﬁrst, Co, of objects and the second, CA, of arrows or transformations

and four suitable operations on collections Co and CA satisfying conditions naturally arising

for them to be mutually compatible operations.

However, a category is also deﬁnable [7, 8, 9, 10] in terms of only CA, in an object-free

manner. Objects serve only to index (identity) arrows as far as the functions [13] from a

subset of CA × CA to CA are concerned. Thus, a category can be deﬁned using only CA and

the binary operation of composition of arrows, an operation which is not always deﬁned

and is subject to naturally arising compatibility conditions.

Categorical foundations of the aim of “uniﬁcation” are then manifest. We focus either

on a suitable mathematical structure possessing all the characteristics of physical bodies

and consider appropriate means (equations) arising out of its possible transformations

to arrive at physically veriﬁable conclusions or, completely equivalently, on general

transformations (as arrows of an abstract category) and ‘extract’ all the characteristics

of physical bodies from these transformations alone.

We now turn to some reasons as to why only the most general mathematical framework

of the Category Theory, and nothing short of it, is suitable for concepts behind universal

relativity or the uniﬁcation of basic interactions.

The representation (originating with Euclidean and Cartesian conceptions) of physical

bodies by points is inadequate vis-a’-vis the principle of general relativity and the

aforementioned guiding principle, both: with it, reference systems do not “change” with

the occurrence of observable phenomena. We thus require a mathematical notion other

than a point to represent physical bodies.

4

We may then choose to represent a physical body by a collection of “points”. Now,

any physical body can be considered to possess a “boundary”. (But, see discussion later.)

Then, the “interior” of such a set with boundary is an “open” subset of suitable topological

space X constructible out of many such points. Thus, we could represent physical bodies

by open subsets of the corresponding topological space X.

However, if we consider a physical body as a (collection of) open subset(s) of an under-

lying topological space X, then it will, mathematically equivalently, be also represented

[4, 5, 6] as a spatial Frame [11].

Technically speaking, a Frame is a complete lattice [14], denoted by L, in which binary

meet distributes over arbitrary joins, ie, x ∧ W S = W {x ∧ y|y ∈ S} for all x ∈ L and

S ⊆ L. In considering a Frame, we thus focus essentially on the concept of an “order”

deﬁnable on a set, for example, order by “inclusion” of one open subset in another open

subset. (This is in contrast to the notion of a neighborhood of a point on which topological

considerations focus by generalizing relevant properties of the (Euclidean) real line.) In

this last case, we regain the topology on a set from the order by inclusion on the class of

its (open) subsets, and such Frames are called the spatial Frames.

For a space X, the lattice of its open subsets, OX, forms, trivially, a spatial Frame.

Now, the topology of a space X is always obtainable from suitable spatial Frame, but the

Frame, in general, need not [15] correspond to topology on any space X.

In categorical notions, the category SpFrm of spatial Frames is a full sub-category of

the category Frm of Frames. Also, the category opposite [16] to Frm is called the category

Loc of locales, the notion of a “Locale” being reminiscent of that of the neighborhood of

a point of a set. This is the framework of the Point-free Topology [11].

5

Now, the concept of the boundary of a physical body is not any fundamental physical

notion of the collection of points making up that body. We could, in its place, then focus

on “orders” imposable on the set of points constituting a physical body, that is to say, we

could choose to represent a physical body by a Frame.

Then, representation of some properties of material bodies will involve mathematical

structures (measures or generalizations thereof) deﬁned over Frames or over the arrows

of Frm. Corresponding notions have not been developed as yet.

A map h : L → M between Frames L and M preserving ﬁnite meets (including 1)

and arbitrary joins (including 0) is called a Frame homomorphism. Such maps could then

represent observable phenomena aﬀecting physical reference systems.

So far, the collection of points constituting a physical body is treated as a set from the

intuitive set theory (to avoid paradoxes like Russell’s paradox). This too is not mandatory.

The set-theoretic restrictions can then be relaxed [8, 9] in the setting of a Quasi-Category

which uses a collection of objects (classes) as a conglomerate [17].

We could then represent a physical body as an object (class) of the Quasi-Category.

Presently however, a general mathematical structure (measures or generalizations thereof)

to represent all the physical characteristics of observable bodies does not seem to have

been developed within this framework or within its object-free form.

Nonetheless, Category Theory [7, 8, 9, 10] does appear to provide [4, 5, 6] a mathe-

matical basis to conceptions behind the uniﬁcation of all the basic physical interactions.

Notably, very general physical and mathematical conceptions are identical then. Much

work is of course needed before the physical concepts of universal relativity or of uniﬁcation

of forces can be mathematically represented in a satisfactory way.

6

In the end, we emphasize that the approach adopted here is also logically compelling

if Mathematics is indeed the tool to represent our physical conceptions.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to Partha Ghosh, Gareth Amery, Sunil Maharaj and many others for

helpful discussions.

I am also indebted to Hemant Wagh, MD (Psychiatry) and Dimi

Chakalov (Psychologist) for raising certain conceptual issues and for related discussions.

This work is dedicated to the memory of Prof A K Raychaudhury.

[1] Einstein A (1970) in Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist (Ed. P A Schlipp, Open Court

Publishing Company - The Library of Living Philosophers, Vol VII, La Salle)

See also, Pais A (1982) Subtle is the Lord ... The science and the life of Albert Einstein

(Clarendon Press, Oxford)

[2] See, Einstein A (1968) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (Methuen & Co.

Ltd, London) (Appendix V: Relativity and the Problem of Space.)

[3] Wagh S M (2005) Foundations of a Universal Theory of Relativity and references therein

http://arxiv.org/physics/0505063

[4] Wagh S M (2005) Progress with a Universal Theory of Relativity, Talk delivered at the

SARS Einstein Centennial Meeting, Durban, September 25-26, 2005.

http://arxiv.org/physics/0602032

[5] Wagh S M (2005) Universal Relativity and Its Mathematical Requirements, Talk delivered

at the SAMS 48th Annual Meeting, Grahamstown, October 31 - November 2, 2005.

http://arxiv.org/physics/0602038

[6] Wagh S M and Ghosh P P (2006) Universal Relativity & Category Theory, to be submitted.

Will be made available at http://arxiv.org/physics

[7] Lawvere F W (1966) The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics, (La Jolla

Conference on Categorical Algebra, Springer-Verlag) pp. 1 - 20 and references therein

7

[8] Maclane S (1971) Categories for the Working Mathematicians, (Springer-Verlag, New York)

and references therein

[9] Ad´amek J, Herrlich H and Strecker G E (2004) Abstract and Concrete Categories - Joy of

Cats, Online edition: http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc

[10] Maclane S and Moerdijk I (1992) Sheaves in Geometry and Logic - A First Introduction to

Topos Theory, (Springer-Verlag, New York) and references therein

[11] Banaschewski B (1997) The Real Numbers in Pointfree Topology, (Textos de Matem´atica,

S´erie B, Departamento de Matem´atica, da Universidade de Coimbra) and references therein

[12] As examples, we recall the formulation of the concept of motion using velocity and its

mathematical representation initially as a scalar and later as a vector quantity.

[13] A function f with domain X and codomain Y is treated here as a triple (X, f, Y ), where

f ⊆ X × Y is a relation such that for each x ∈ X, there exists a unique y ∈ Y with

(x, y) ∈ f . We also write y = f (x) or x 7→ f (x).

[14] A lattice, L, is a partially ordered set (poset) such that for all x, y ∈ L there exists a lowest

upper bound (lub or sup or join), denoted as x ∨ y, and a greatest lower bound (glb or inf

or meet), denoted as x ∧ y. A poset P is complete iﬀ every subset of P has a lowest upper

bound and a greatest lower bound. If there exist elements 0, 1 ∈ L such that 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 for

all x ∈ L, we call L a complete lattice and it is a complete poset. [For sets, ∧ corresponds

to set-intersection and ∨ corresponds to set-union.]

[15] Not every “order” deﬁnable on a set is ‘equivalent’ to the order by inclusion on any topology-

forming collection of its (open) subsets. That is why every Frame is not spatial.

[16] Category Opposite or Dual to a category C has the same objects as C but directions of all

the arrows as well as the orders of all the compositions of arrows in C are reversed.

[17] A class is a collection of sets:

for any property P , we can form a class of all sets with

property P . But, there is no surjection from a set to a class that itself is not a set. Every

set is a class. A conglomerate is a collection of classes: for any property P , we can form

a conglomerate of classes with property P . Moreover, we assume an Axiom of Choice for

Conglomerates: for each surjection f : X → Y of conglomerates, there exists an injection

g : Y → X with f ◦ g = idY , the identity of Y . Every class is also a conglomerate. Usual

set-theoretic constructions are permissible for classes and conglomerates.

8

