6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GRAVITATIONAL WAVES FROM BBH-SYSTEMS?
A (DOUBLY) VAIN QUEST

ANGELO LOINGER

Abstract. The theoretical reasons at the root of LIGO’s experimental
failure in searching gravitational waves (GW’s) from binary black hole
(BBH) inspirals.

Summary – 1. A recent LIGO’s search for GW’s. – 2. BH’s and BBH’s are
ﬁctive objects. – 3. Experimental conﬁrmation: no BH’s and no BBH’s have
ever been really observed. – 4. The GW’s according to linear approximation
of GR: ghost undulations. – 5. There exists no physical “mechanism” of
production of GW’s in the exact GR: they are phantom entities; and the
experience conﬁrms. – 6. Conclusion. – Appendices A, B, C, D.

1.– The abstract of a recent paper by LIGO scientiﬁc collaboration [1] runs
as follows: “We report on a search for gravitational waves from binary black
hole inspirals in the data from the second [2003] science run of the LIGO
interferometers. The search focused on binary systems with component
masses between 3 and 20 solar masses. Optimally oriented binaries with
distances up to 1Mpc could be detected with eﬃciency of at least 90%. We
found no events that could be identiﬁed as gravitational waves in the 365.6
hours of data that we searched.”

This is not the ﬁrst LIGO’s failure in the quest of a source of gravitational
waves (GW’s); however, the candid optimism of the authors remains (seem-
ingly) intact. At p.13 of [1] we read: “. . . the characteristics of the BBH po-
pulation (such as spatial, mass and spin distributions) are not known, since
no BBH systems have ever been observed.” And at p.16, in Conclusions
and future prospects: “This search, even though similar in some ways to
the binary neutron star [BNS] inspiral search [a previous complete failure!],
has some signiﬁcant diﬀerences and presents unique challenges. There were
no events that could be identiﬁed as gravitational waves. – The fact that
the performance and sensitivity of the LIGO interferometers is improving
and the frequency sensitivity band is being extended to lower frequencies
makes us hopeful that the ﬁrst detection of gravitational waves from the
inspiral phase of binary black hole coalescences may happen in the near fu-
ture. In the absence of a detection, astrophysically interesting results can
be expected by LIGO very soon.” (What kind of results?) –

To be published on Spacetime & Substance.

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

2

ANGELO LOINGER

2.– Unfortunately for LIGO’s scholars, their hopes are doomed to be frus-
trated – and for several reasons.

First of all, the general form of solution of Schwarzschild problem is given,

in spherical polar co-ordinates, by the following ds2 [2]:

ds2 =

1 −

(cid:18)

2m
f (r)(cid:19)

c2dt2 −

1 −

(cid:18)
−[f (r)]2

−1

[df (r)]2 −

2m
f (r)(cid:19)
dϑ2 + sin2 ϑdϕ2
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

,

where: m ≡ GM/c2; M is the mass of the concerned material point (at
rest); f (r) is any regular function of the radial co-ordinate r. Remark that
no physical result depends on the choice of f (r). If we put

f (r) ≡

r3 + (2m)3

1/3

,

we obtain the original form of solution given by Schwarzschild [3], which

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

is maximally extended since holds for r > 0. Putting

f (r) ≡ r

,

we have the standard (by Hilbert-Droste-Weyl) form (erroneously called
“by Schwarzschild”), which holds only for r > 2m, as it was repeatedly
emphasized by all the Fathers of Relativity; remark that the exterior part
r > 2m of form (3) is diﬀeomorphic to form (2). The notion of black
hole (BH) is a senseless artefact based on an unphysical interpretation of
the singular locus r = 2m and of the region r < 2m [4]. Moreover, an
appropriate computation shows that a continued gravitational collapse of a
massive celestial body ends in a mass point, not in a BH [4].

So far as the binary black hole (BBH) systems are concerned, it is suﬃ-
cient to remember a sentence written by McVittie many years ago, in which
he emphasized that, even if one admits the existence of BH’s (on which he
was frankly sceptical), “there is no way of asserting through some analogy
with Newtonian gravitational theory that a black hole could be a component
of a close binary system or that two black holes could collide. An existence
theorem would ﬁrst be needed to show that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations con-
tained solutions which described such conﬁgurations.” [5].

3.– From the observational standpoint, the “observed” BH’s are only large,
or enormously large, masses concentrated in very small volumes; indeed, no
observation has ever detected any whatever characteristic property of the
hypothetical BH’s, e.g. the existence of a “horizon”. On this matter we owe
to Wolfgang Kundt many interesting remarks [6], for instance: “How about
stellar-mass holes? [. . .] Over 45 black hole candidates have been proposed
during the past 30 years from the class of binary X-ray sources [. . .]. To
me, all of them look like neutron stars surrounded by massive (≈ 5 solar
masses) accretion disks, because of their often hard spectra (up to the γ-ray
range), highly structured, [. . .] and because of their indistinguishable further

GRAVITATIONAL WAVES FROM BBH-SYSTEMS? A (DOUBLY) VAIN QUEST

3

properties, as a class, from all the established neutron-star binaries [. . .]. –
And the postulated supermassive black holes at the centers of (all the active)
galaxies? [. . .] Active galactic nuclei may owe their extreme properties to
those of their central disks.” (See pp.101 and 102 of [6]).
And “no BBH systems have ever been observed.” [1].

4.– In the exact (non-linearized) formulation of GR the GW’s are only
mathematical undulations fully destitute of physical reality, as it was ﬁrst
proved in 1917 by Tullio Levi-Civita [7] – and subsequently with diﬀerent
demonstrations by, in particular, Scheidegger [8], Infeld and Plebanski [9],
and the present writer [10].

How about GW’s in the linear approximation of GR? Strictly speaking,
a detailed investigation is superﬂuous, because ubi maiora minora cessant.
However, since all experimentalists and many theoreticians have inadequate
ideas on this matter, and are fond of the linear version of GR [11], it is
suitable to re-examine the question.

In 1923 Eddington published a limpid paper in which, with utilization of
previous results by Einstein and Weyl, the conceptual bases of the linear
theory of the GW’s were deﬁnitely settled [12].

As it is well known, the crucial postulate of the linear approximation of

GR is the following: one sets approximately:

(4)

gjk ≈ ηjk + hjk

,

((j, k = 0, 1, 2, 3))

,

where ηjk is the customary Minkowskian tensor and the hjk’s are small
deviations, that in our case represent the passage of GW’s. Remark that,
quite generally, hjk is a tensor only under Lorentz transformations of co-
ordinates. Eddington considers in primis – in a generic Cartesian frame –
the emblematic instance of plane waves proceeding with a velocity V (not
ﬁxed a priori!) in the (negative) direction of the axis of x, so that the hjk’s
are periodic functions of (x + V t) only. He ﬁnds that the hjk’s of the undu-
latory disturbance can be separated into three independent sets:

Transverse-transverse: h22, h33, h23;
Longitudinal-transverse: h12, h13, h02, h03 ;
Longitudinal-longitudinal: h11, h01, h00.

(h22 = −h33) ;

One puts: h+ ≡ {h22 = −h33}, and h× ≡ {h23 = h32}; these traceless
types can be transformed into each other with a space rotation of the co-
ordinates x2, x2 around the (x ≡ x1)-axis by an angle of π/4 radians.

Now, the Author proves that the transverse-trasverse waves are propa-
gated with the velocity c of light in vacuo, whereas the other waves are
propagated with an arbitrary velocity, e.g. with the speed of thought. The
curvature tensor depends only on the transverse-transverse waves; the re-
maining waves are only analytical ﬁctions, which disappear with a suita-
ble (inﬁnitesimal) change of co-ordinates. Accordingly, it seems that the
transverse-transverse waves are endowed with a a physical reality. I aﬃrm

4

ANGELO LOINGER

that this is a mere illusion. The simple proof runs as follows: i) the linear
version of GR is only an approximate formulation; ii) in GR there is no
class of physically privileged reference frames; moreover, for the hypothetical
GW’s – solutions of Einstein equations Rjk = 0 – all co-ordinate systems are
physically suitable and appropriate; iii) a ﬁnite transformation of gene-
ral co-ordinates can reduce to zero the transverse-transverse undulations,
which have a tensor character under Lorentz transformations only . An im-
mediate corollary: the watts of the celebrated mass-quadrupole formula are
only ghost watts for the exact GR. (According to some authors, the validity
of this formula goes beyond the linear approximation. Well, even in this case
its physical value would remain inexistent owing to its derivation from the
gravitational energy-momentum pseudo tensor, which can be always reduced
to zero by means of an appropriate change of reference system.)

5.– In 1944 Hermann Weyl published a profound memoir on the linear ver-
sion of GR [13]. He emphasized that in reality the gravitational ﬁeld of
this version is a “powerless shadow” because it exerts no force on matter.
Indeed, “the gravitational force arises only when one continues the appro-
ximation beyond the linear stage [. . .]”: a fundamental result of Einstein-
Infeld-Hoﬀmann method (see e.g.
[9]). An immediate consequence: the
customary linearized computations of the action of a GW on matter (for
instance, on a resonant bar or on a Michelson interferometer) are fully des-
titute of a physical sense.

If we continue the approximation beyond the linear stage, we ﬁnd that
the radiation terms of the gravitational ﬁeld can be always destroyed by
suitable co-ordinate transformations: the GW’s are, quite generally, analy-
tical phantoms, mere products of special choices of the reference frame ([8],
[9]). This result can be also demonstrated independently of any perturbative
treatment; stringently, it can be proved that there exists no “mechanism” of
production of GW’s [10]: in the last analysis, this depends on the fact that
in GR the motions of the particles result in principle from Einstein ﬁeld
equations – as it was ﬁrst demonstrated in the fundamental memoir of 1927
by Einstein and Grommer.

(There are several proofs of the real non-existence of the above “mecha-
it is very easy to prove that the trajectories of the
nism”. For instance:
bodies of a physical system, which interact only gravitationally – as e.g. the
bodies of the solar system – , are geodesic lines, and therefore any emission
of GW’s is clearly impossible. This result can be extended to the cases in
which there are also non-gravitational interactions.)

6.– Conclusion. The black holes are unreal objects and the theory of the
gravitational waves based on the linear approximation of General Relativity
is not tenable from a rigorous standpoint.

GRAVITATIONAL WAVES FROM BBH-SYSTEMS? A (DOUBLY) VAIN QUEST

5

More generally and deﬁnitively, the exact formulation of General Relati-
vity tells us that the gravitational waves are only phantasmic entities – see
particularly [7], [8], [9], [10].

It is time that unfounded ideas on General Relativity start getting aban-

doned.

“Betr¨ubt euch nicht, ihr guten Seelen!
Denn wer nicht fehlt, weiß wohl wenn andre fehlen . . .”
J.W. v. Goethe

APPENDIX A

According to an erroneous conjecture, any GW generates a given gravi-
tational ﬁeld. Now, the stress-energy-momentum tensor of a hypothetical
GW is a pseudo tensor, which can be reduced to zero with a change of refe-
rence system. Only the matter tensor Tjk generates Einsteinian gravitatio-
nal ﬁelds, just as only the mass density µ generates Newtonian gravitational
ﬁelds. Under this respect, the non-linearity of Einstein ﬁeld equations is not
important – and it is remarkable that the supporters of the above surmise
aﬃrm its validity even for the linear approximation of GR (see e.g. at p.391
of the book by Landau et al. [12]), neglecting further the fact that hjk is a
true tensor under Lorentz transformations only.

APPENDIX B

Point ii) of the last paragraph of sect.4.

is also important for a plain
proof of the physical inadequacy of any exact theory of GW’s, for instance
of the theory of the plane waves by Bondi et al.
[14]. Indeed, convenient
transformations of general co-ordinates can destroy the undulatory character
of the wavy disturbances, in particular of the above plane GW’s. (Another
consequence of point ii) is the following: no fundamental velocity exists in
general relativity – contrary to a current belief.) Further, also the stress-
energy-momentum pseudo tensor of Bondi’s plane waves can be obviously
reduced to zero through an appropriate change of reference frame.

Finally, it is true that there is in general the possibility (see e.g. Pirani in
[14]) of building exact wavy solutions of ﬁeld equations for empty spacetime
(Rjk = 0), which have a curvature tensor diﬀerent from zero, but this is
only a mathematical possibility, for the simple reason that (in the exact
GR) there is no physical “mechanism” apt to generate GW’s.
(And the
above wavy solutions do not possess a true stress-energy-momentum tensor,
but only a pseudo one.)

APPENDIX C

The ﬁrst sentence of paper [1] is: “The Laser Interferometric Gravitatio-
nal Wave Observatory (LIGO) [. . .] consists of three Fabry-Perot-Michelson
interferometers, which are sensitive to the minute changes that would be
induced in the relative lengths of their orthogonal arms by a passing gravi-
tational wave.”

6

ANGELO LOINGER

The above “minute changes” represent a mechanical eﬀect produced by
the passage of a (hypothesized) GW. Now, such a wave would be capable
also of production of electromagnetic eﬀects, since it would interact with
the light beams in the Fabry-Perot-Michelson cavities.This interaction has
been the object of an accurate study by Cooperstock and Faraoni, see their
paper quoted in [12]. These authors solved the problem in the linear ap-
proximation of GR, taking properly into account the boundary conditions
for the light beams. They computed the phase shift, the light deﬂection and
the rotation of the polarization axis induced by GW’s. Their results hold
also for detectors which are large in comparison with the wavelengths of the
GW’s. The great majority of the concerned astrophysicists, in particular
LIGO’s members, do not mention the electromagnetic eﬀects of the GW’s
in the interferometric detectors. Why? Are they afraid of an embarras de
richesse?

APPENDIX D

The conclusion of the paper by Hough et al. quoted in [11] is astonishing.
They write: “. . . the 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Hulse
and Taylor for their experimental observations and subsequent interpreta-
tions [which are based essentially on the linear approximation of GR] of
the evolution of the orbit of the binary pulsar PSR1913+16, the decay of
the binary orbit being consistent with angular momentum and energy being
carried away from this system by gravitational waves. Thus it is now univer-
sally accepted that gravitational waves must exist unless there is something
seriously wrong with General Relativity.”

This is quite illogical:

the authors believe that the interpretations of
Hulse and Taylor are fully adequate; now, such interpretations rest on the
linearized version of General Relativity, in which Hough et al.
repose a
complete trust . . . – In reality, the above interpretations are inappropriate,
as it can be proved [15].

The experimental failures in detecting the GW’s are a proof of the expe-

rimental adequacy of General Relativity – if rightly understood.

References

[1] B. Abbott et alii (several hundreds of scholars), arXiv:gr-qc/0509129 v1 (September

30th, 2005).

[2] A. S. Eddington, The Mathematical Theory of Relativity, Second Edition (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge) 1960, p.94.

[3] K. Schwarzschild, Berl. Ber., (1916) 189; for an English version by S. Antoci and A.

Loinger see arXiv:physics/9905030 (May 12th, 1999).

[4] See e.g. A. Loinger and T. Marsico, arXiv:physics/0512237 v1 (December 24th,
2005)– in course of publication on Spacetime & Substance; and references therein.

[5] G.C. McVittie, The Observatory, 78 (1978) 272.
[6] W. Kundt, Astrophysics – A Primer (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, etc.) 2001; see in par-

ticular pp. 37, 81, 101, 102, 131, 132.

[7] T. Levi-Civita, Rend. Acc. Lincei, 26 (1917) 381; an English translation by S. Antoci
and A. Loinger in arXiv:physics/9906004 (June 2nd, 1999). See also H.A. Lorentz,

GRAVITATIONAL WAVES FROM BBH-SYSTEMS? A (DOUBLY) VAIN QUEST

7

Amst. Versl., 25 (1916) 468, and T. Levi-Civita, Rend. Acc. Lincei, 11 (s.6a) (1930)
3 and 113.

[8] A.E. Scheidegger, Revs. Mod. Phys., 25 (1953) 451.
[9] L. Infeld and J. Plebanski, Motion and relativity, (Pergamon Press, Oxford, etc.)

1960, see in particular Chapt.VI.

[10] Cf. e.g. A. Loinger, arXiv:physics/0504018 (April 3rd, 2005) – in course of publication

in Spacetime and Substance; and references therein.

[11] See e.g.: J. Hough, S. Rowan, B.S. Sathyaprakash, arXiv:gr-qc/0501007 (January
4th, 2005); J. Hough, ´E. ´E. Flanagan and S.A. Hughes, arXiv:gr-qc/0501041 (January
12th, 2005)

[12] A. S. Eddington, Proc. Roy. Soc., 102A (1923) 268; see also: Idem, The Mathematical
Theory of Relativity, Second Edition (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) 1960,
sect. 57 and Note 7 (p.246). For comprehensive formal developments on the linearized
theory of the GW’s see e.g. L. Landau et E. Lifchitz, Th´eorie du Champ (´Editions
Mir, Moscou) 1966, sects.101 and 104. See further: F.I. Cooperstock and V. Faraoni,
Class.Quantum Grav., 10 (1993) 1189.

[13] H. Weyl, Amer. J. Math., 66 (1944) 591. – In the Appendix of a paper of mine
– Spacetime and Substance, vol.5, No. 2(22), 2004, pp.53-56 – I have reproduced
the “Introduction and Summary” and the sects. 1, 2 of Weyl’s memoir, which are
particularly relevant to present theme.

[14] H. Bondi, F.A.E. Pirani and L. Robinson Proc. Roy. Soc., A 251 (1959) 519. See

also F.A.E. Pirani, Phys. Rev., 105 (1957) 1089.

[15] A. Loinger, Spacetime & Substance, Vol.6 (2005), No.1(26), pp28-30. Also in

arXiv:physics/0502089 v1 (February 16th, 2005).

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Milano, Via Celoria, 16 - 20133 Milano

(Italy)

E-mail address: angelo.loinger@mi.infn.it

