6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint Institute for Basic Research IBR-TP-09-05
September 5, 2005

THE NOVEL ”CONTROLLED INTERMEDIATE NUCLEAR FUSION”
AND ITS POSSIBLE INDUSTRIAL REALIZATION AS PREDICTED BY
HADRONIC MECHANICS AND CHEMISTRY
Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research
P. O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
ibr@ibr.net, http://www.i-b-r.org

Abstract

In this note, we propose, apparently for the ﬁrst time, a new type of controlled nu-
clear fusion called ”intermediate” because occurring at energies intermediate between
those of the ”cold” and ”hot” fusions, and propose a speciﬁc industrial realization.
For this purpose: 1) We show that known limitations of quantum mechanics, quantum
chemistry and special relativity cause excessive departures from the conditions occur-
ring for all controlled fusions; 2) We outline the covering hadronic mechanics, hadronic
chemistry and isorelativity speciﬁcally conceived, constructed and veriﬁed during the
past two decades for new cleans energies and fuels; 3) We identify seven physical laws
predicted by the latter disciplines that have to be veriﬁed by all controlled nuclear fu-
sions to occur; 4) We review the industrial research conducted to date in the selection
of the most promising engineering realization as well as optimization of said seven laws;
and 5) We propose with construction details a speciﬁc hadronic reactor (patented and
international patents pending), consisting of actual equipment speciﬁcally intended for
the possible industrial production of the clean energy released by representative cases
of controlled intermediate fusions for independent scrutiny by interested colleagues.

1. Limitations of Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Chemistry and Special Rela-
tivity. Following the pioneering research by Fleishmann, Pons and Hawkins [1a] of 1989
vast research [1b,1c,1d] has conﬁrmed the existence of Low Energy Controlled Nuclear Fu-
sions (LECNF) popularly called ”Cold Fusion” (CF). Nevertheless, the achievement of an
industrially relevant energy output has remained evasive, and none is in sight at the moment
on strict scientiﬁc grounds.

Similarly, additional research supported by a collective international investment of about
one billion dollars has shown that the High Energy Controlled Nuclear Fusion (HECNF),
popularly called ”Hot Fusion” (HF), can indeed be attained in laboratory, although this
research too has not achieved results of industrial signiﬁcance, and none is in sight at the
moment, due to uncontrollable instabilities at the initiation of the fusions and other reasons.
In view of the above protracted insuﬃciencies at high and low energies, in this paper
we propose, apparently for the ﬁrst time, a new type of nuclear synthesis under the name
of Intermediate Energy Controlled Nuclear Fusions (IECNF), or ”Intermediate Fusion” (IF)
for short.

1

A main argument is that, for the case of the ”cold fusion”, the available energy is insuﬃ-
cient for a systematic exposure of nuclei via the control of electron clouds, in which case no
fusion is evidently possible. For the case of the ”hot fusion” we have the opposite occurrence
in which the available energy is simple excessive, thus preventing the possibility of a real
control. The name ”intermediate” is here proposed to denote that the available energy is
indeed intermediate between those of the ”cold” and ”hot” fusions.

More particularly, the available energy for the proposed intermediate fusion is set to a
value suﬃcient for the ionization of atoms in order to expose nuclei in preparation for their
controlled synthesis, as it is the case for a plasma created by an electric arc. Such a plasma
is typically at about 10, 000oF , thus having an energy that cannot be credibly qualiﬁed as
belonging to either the ”cold or the ”hot” fusion.

It should be indicated that numerous plasmas have been used in the ”cold fusion” research
[1b,1c,1d]. Nevertheless, dramatic diﬀerences will soon emerge between the ”intermediate
fusion” proposed in this paper and existing plasma fusion research due to irreconcilable
diﬀerences in the assumed basic disciplines.

Another objective of this paper is to propose speciﬁc reactors, called for technical rea-
sons explained below hadronic reactors (patented and international patents pending) for the
possible industrial utilization of the clean energy expected from ”intermediate fusions.” To
achieve this task we shall: 1) Identify the basic disciplines that are applicable to all controlled
fusions, whether ”cold,” ”intermediate” or ”hot”; 2) Identify the basic laws that have to be
veriﬁed for any controlled fusion to occur; and 3) Propose with all necessary construction
details a speciﬁc hadronic reactor based on the realization and optimization of said physical
laws.

To begin, let us recall that the original discovery of the cold fusion [1a] created consid-
erable controversies fueled by authoritative voices stating that cold fusions are not predicted
by quantum mechanics. Subsequently, the existence of CF was experimentally established.
Yet, with the passing of time, said authoritative doubts have been ignored and the CF has
been essentially studied to this day via the use of quantum mechanics.

Another objective of this paper is to resume the authoritative doubts on the incompat-
ibility between CF and established disciplines because the inability to achieve industrially
valid results for both the ”cold” and ”hot” fusions may well be due to insuﬃciencies of the
basic disciplines.

To begin our analysis, recall that limitations on the universal validity of quantum me-
chanics, quantum, chemistry and special relativity were fully known by the middle of the past
century. As an example, this author became a theoretical physicist because of the doubts in
the ”completion” of quantum mechanics expressed by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [2a], or
the doubts expressed by Fermi (Ref. [2b], p. 111 when treating the structure of nuclei) ”as
to whether the usual concepts of geometry hold for such small region of space” and other
authoritative doubts.

With the passing of the decades, debates on these authoritative doubts were suppressed
in most technical journals. However, increasingly cataclysmic events caused by our alarming
environmental problems have rendered mandatory the search for new clean energies and
In turn, said need forced the conduction in the last part of the 20-th century of
fuels.

2

systematic studies [3] on the limitations of quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and
special relativity, that is, the identiﬁcation of the conditions under which said disciplines
can be safely assumed as being exactly valid, and the diﬀerent conditions under which said
disciplines are only approximately valid.

The latter studies [3] (see also independent monographs [4] and comprehensive literature
covering two decades of research in Ref.
[3i]), have conﬁrmed that quantum mechanics,
quantum chemistry and special relativity can indeed be assumed to be exactly valid under
the conditions of their original conception, construction and veriﬁcation, namely, for systems
of point-like particles and electromagnetic waves propagating in vacuum (empty space).

Typical examples of exact validity of quantum mechanics and special relativity are the
structure of the hydrogen atom, particles moving in high energy accelerators, the structure
of crystals and various other structures for which the indicated conditions of applicability
are met.

However, studies [3,4] have identiﬁed precise conditions under which quantum mechanics
and special relativity remain evidently applicable, but are only approximately valid, among
which we note:

1) In particle physics, there exist various cases in which the ﬁt of experimental data
requires the introduction of arbitrary parameters, as it is the case for the Bose-Einstein
correlation that requires four arbitrary parameters. In reality, these parameters constitute
a direct measure of the deviations of the Bose-Einstein correlation from the unadulterated
axioms of quantum mechanics and special relativity. As an example, the two point correlation
function of the Bose-Einstein correlation requires oﬀ-diagonal terms that are incompatible
with the quantum axiom of expectation values of operators that, to be observables, must be
Hermitean, thus diagonal (see monographs [3i,3k] for details).

2) In atomic physics, quantum mechanics and special relativity have not permitted an
exact representation of all spectral data of the helium, with embarrassing deviations from
the experimental data of heavy atoms such as the zirconium, let alone the historical inability
in about one century to understand the spectral emission of the Sun (see, again, refs. [3i,3k]
for details).

3) In nuclear physics, quantum mechanics and special relativity have been unable to
represent the experimental data of the simplest possible nucleus, the deuteron, because of
the inability to explain the spin 1 of its ground state (since quantum axioms require that
the ground state of two particles with spin 1/2 should be 0, while the ground state of the
deuteron has spin 1), the lack of an exact representation of the deuteron magnetic moment
despite all possible relativistic corrections, the historical inability to understand the stability
of the neutron in the deuteron, and other basicœ insuﬃciencies, with truly embarrassing
deviations from experimental data of heavy nuclei [3i,3k].

4) In superconductivity, quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and special relativ-
ity have created a condition similar to that of atomic physics prior to the representation
of the structure of atoms, since said disciplines cannot explain the bond of the two identi-
cal electrons in the Cooper pair (evidently because electrons repel each other according to
quantum mechanics), thus resulting in a description of an ensemble of Cooper pairs without
a true description of their structure [3l].

3

5) In chemistry, quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and special relativity have
been unable to provide an exact representation of the binding energy of the simplest molecule,
the hydrogen molecule (due to the historical 2% missing when using unadulterated quantum
axioms), with larger deviations when passing to more complex molecules such as water (for
which, e.g., electric and magnetic moments are predicted with the wrong sign, let alone
large numerical deviations), not to forget the embarrassing prediction by quantum chem-
istry that all molecules are ferromagnetic (a direct consequence of the independence of the
electrons in valence bonds, thus permitting the polarization of their orbits under an external
magnetic ﬁeld). At the same time, adulterations of quantum axioms now vastly used to
improve the approximation, such as the so-called ”screenings of the Coulomb law,” imply
the abandonment of the very quantum of energy (because no longer admitted for potentials
of the type q1q2
r ef (r)), while the same screenings imply structural departures from quantum
axioms (because the transition from the Coulomb to screened potentials requires nonunitary
transforms, thus exiting from the classes of equivalent of quantum mechanics) (see [3l] for
details).

6) In biology, any claims of exact validity of quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry
and special relativity constitute scientiﬁc deceptions because, as experts are expected to
know to qualify as such, quantum treatments imply that biological structures are perfectly
rigid, perfectly reversible in time and perfectly eternal, as it is typically the case for crystals
(see monograph [3j] for details).

7) In engineering, various equipment show sizable deviations from quantum mechanics,
quantum chemistry and special relativity. An illustration important for the reactors to be
proposed in this note, the use of Maxwell’s equations and quantum chemistry for underwater
electric arcs between graphite electrodes is aﬄicted by a ten fold error in excess in the
prediction of the produced carbon monoxide, a ten-fold error in defect in the production
of carbon dioxide in the combustion exhaust, a fourteen-fold error in defect in the amount
of oxygen present in the combustion exhaust, and other deviations simply too big to be
accountable via the usual ad hoc parameters or other manipulations to adapt reality to
preferred theories.

All the above limitations exist for matter. Additional large insuﬃciencies exist for anti-
matter as presented in details in monograph [3n], such as the inability by Einsteinian theories
to provide a consistent classical treatment of antiparticles because, after quantization, one
obtains a ”particle,” rather than a charge conjugated ”antiparticle” with the wrong sign
of the charge, the impossibility for Einsteinian theories to provide a distinction between
classical neutral bodies made up of matter and antimatter, and other serious insuﬃciencies.
These insuﬃciencies are ignored hereon because we shall evidently deal with nuclei made up
of matter. Nevertheless, the insuﬃciencies for antimatter are suﬃcient, alone, to establish
the nonscientiﬁc nature of any claim of terminal character of quantum mechanics, quantum
chemistry and special relativity.

Independently from these studies, a mere confrontation of reality with the basic axioms
of quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and special relativity is suﬃcient to establish
their limits of exact applicability.

As an example, a confrontation of the pillar of special relativity, the Poincar´e symmetry,

4

and the structure of hadrons, nuclei, molecules and stars is suﬃcient to see the impossibility
for special relativity to be exactly valid for the structures considered.

In fact, a necessary condition for the validity of the Poincar´e symmetry, well known
to experts to qualify as such, is to have a Keplerian structure as occurring in the atomic
and planetary structures, while hadrons, nuclei, molecules, stars and other systems do not
have a Keplerian structure because, e.g., nuclei do not have nuclei. The modiﬁcation of the
Poincar´e symmetry to account for the absence of Keplerian nuclei, no matter how small,
causes its evident breaking, with consequential impossibility beyond scientiﬁc doubt for spe-
cial relativity to be exactly valid for the structures considered (collectively called interior
dynamical systems, while atomic and planetary systems are examples of exterior dynamical
systems [3a,3b]).

Similarly, an inspection of the basic dynamical equations of quantum mechanics and
quantum chemistry is suﬃcient to see the impossibility for the theories to be exactly valid
in interior dynamical systems. In fact, said disciplines are based on the familiar Scr¨odinger
equation

i ×

|ψ >= H(t, r, p)×|ψ >,

∂
∂t

pk×|ψ >= −i×∂k|ψ >, H =

+ V (r),

p2
2 × m

and the equivalent Heisenberg equations for a (Hermitean) observable A, expressible in their
ﬁnite and inﬁnitesimal forms

U × U † = U † × U = I
A(t) = U(t) × A(0) × U †(t) = eH×t×i × A(0) × e−i×t×H ,

i×

= [A, H] = A×H − H×A,

dA
dt

with related canonical commutation rules

[ri, pj] = i ˆ×δi
j,

[ri, rj] = [pi, pj] = 0.

where ¯h = 1 and we have used the symbol × to denote the conventional associative product
of quantum mechanics in order to distinguish it from other products needed for this paper.
Inspection of the above equations conﬁrms their exact validity for systems of point-
like particles moving in vacuum, but also identiﬁes the impossibility to represent, e.g., the
hyperdense ﬁreball of the Bose-Einstein correlation, or the deep overlapping of electrons
in valence bonds and their breaking in chemical reactions due to the strictly linear, local,
potential and reversible character of the equations, while said ﬁreball or chemical reactions
are expected to be dominated by nonlinear, nonlocal, nonpotential and irreversible eﬀects.
Alternatively and equivalently, the impossibility for the above equations to be exactly
valid for conditions 1)-7) above can be derived from their basic Euclidean topology, since
the latter solely admit the treatment of a ﬁnite set of isolated points.

Consequently, any claim of exact validity of Eqs. (1.1)-(1.3) for the Bose-Einstein cor-
relation, chemical reactions and other processes is nonscientiﬁc, since the only scientiﬁcally

(1.1a)

(1.1b)

(1.2a)

(1.2b)

(1.2c)

(1.3)

5

debatable issue is the identiﬁcation of the applicable generalization of quantum mechanics
and special relativity.

When passing to the study of controlled nuclear fusions, the impossibility of quantum me-
chanics, quantum chemistry and special relativity to be exactly valid for becomes dramatic
(see [3k] for details). Besides limitations 1)-7), we here restrict ourself to the indication that
quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and special relativity are strictly invariant under
time reversal, trivially, because all known potentials are reversible in time. Consequently,
said disciplines can only predict the synthesis of nuclei in a form that is time reversal in-
variant, that is, by equally admitting as causal their disintegration. This feature alone, let
alone numerous other technical inconsistencies [3i,3k], is suﬃcient to establish that quantum
mechanics, quantum chemistry and special relativity are not suited for quantitative treatment
of any controlled nuclear fusion, whether cold, intermediate or hot.

In closing this section it should be indicated that the use of the word ”violation” of
quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and special relativity would not be scientiﬁcally
appropriate because said disciplines were not conceived and constructed for the conditions
considered (e.g., antimatter had yet to be discovered when Einstein formulated the special
and general relativities). This illustrates the reason for the use of the word ”inapplicable.”
It should be ﬁnally indicated that, contrary to quasi-religious beliefs during the second
half of the 20-th century, the insuﬃciencies of quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry and
special relativity are multiplied, rather than resolved or even decreased, under the assumption
that the hypothetical quarks are physical constituents of hadrons existing in our spacetime.
As an illustration, the reduction of the deuteron to quarks increases the diﬃculties in
representing the magnetic moment, trivially, because the hypothetical orbits of the hypo-
thetical quarks are too small to yield polarizations suﬃcient to ﬁt experimental data, while
the problem of the spin of the deuteron is equally multiplied, trivially, because of diﬃculties
for quark conjectures to represent the spin of individual protons and neutrons, let alone their
bond, not to mention lack of achievement of a true conﬁnement that bypasses the predic-
tion from Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle of a ﬁnite probability that quarks are free in
dramatic disagreement with available experimental evidence.

Any study of controlled nuclear fusions via quark conjecture is dismissed in this paper also
because quarks cannot experience gravity, since gravity can only be deﬁned in our spacetime,
while quarks are purely mathematical representations of a purely mathematical internal
unitary symmetry deﬁned on a purely mathematical complex-valued unitary space without
any credible deﬁnition in our spacetime (that is prohibited by O’rafearthaigh’s theorem).

Stated in plain language, no serious studies of controlled nuclear fusions can be credibly
voiced under the assumption that the nuclei to be fused can freely ﬂoat in space due to their
reduction to hypothetical quarks without any provable gravity.

In this note, we shall assume that the SU(3)-color, Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of
hadrons into families is of ﬁnal character, and we shall assume quarks what they are techni-
cally, purely mathematical objects useful for said classiﬁcation, while we shall assume that
the physical constituents of hadrons are basically unknown at this writing.

By recalling that the historical contributions to civilization produced by molecules, atoms
and nuclei were based on the capability to extract the constituents free, the assumption of

6

Figure 1: A schematic view of the interactions at the foundation of hadronic mechanics and
isorelativity, those caused by deep wave-overlappings of the charge distribution as well as of
the wavepackets of particles. A main purpose of this paper is to show that these interactions
are crucial for industrial realizations of LENS.

the hypothetical quark as physical particles permanently bound inside hadrons is considered
nowadays one of the biggest obstructions against new clean energies so much needed by
mankind [3k,3m].

2. The Covering Hadronic Mechanics, Hadronic Chemistry and Isorelativity.
Studies [3,4] have established that the basic insuﬃciency responsible for all limitations 1)-7)
of the preceding section is the impossibility to represent interactions due to deep mutual
penetration and overlapping of the wavepackets and/or charge distributions of particles as
illustrated in Figure 1. We are here referring to interactions of contact (thus zero-range) type,
nonlinear (in the wavefunctions), nonlocal-integral (because occurring in a ﬁnite volume), and
nonpotential, thus not representable with a Hamiltonian.

This limitation is evidently due to the fact that quantum mechanics, quantum chemistry
and special relativity are strictly linear, local-diﬀerential and potential theories. Conse-
quently, the interactions depicted in Figure 1 are beyond any hope of representation.

A typical illustration is that of valence bonds that are abstracted by quantum chemistry
into two point-particles interacting at a distance. It is, of course, true that electrons have a
point-like charge. However, the idea that electrons have a ”point-like wavepacket” is outside
the boundary of serious science. When this physical reality is admitted, valence bonds result
to be due not only to electromagnetic interactions but also to contact nonlocal-integral and
nonpotential interactions due to the mutual penetration of the wavepackets as depicted in
Figure 1.

The lack of representation of deep wave-overlappings has been proved to be responsible for
the lack of 2% of experimental data in molecular binding energies [3l,9a,9b], the departures
from spectral data in the helium (where, contrary to popular belief, the two electrons are

7

partially in conditions of mutual overlap as in Figure 1) [3k], and other insuﬃciencies.

When at the Department of Mathematics of Harvard University in the late 1970s, R. M.
Santilli initiated comprehensive research toward a solution of the insuﬃciencies of conven-
tional doctrines outlined in Section 1.

The central problem was to identify a broadening-generalization of quantum mechanics,
quantum chemistry and special relativity in such a way to represent linear, local and potential
interactions, as well as additional, contact, nonlinear, nonlocal-integral and nonpotential
interactions.

Since the Hamiltonian can only represent conventional interactions, the above condition
requested the identiﬁcation of a new quantity capable of representing interactions that, by
conception, are outside the capability of a Hamiltonian. Another necessary condition was the
exiting from the class of equivalence of quantum mechanics, as a consequence of which the
broader theory had to be nonunitary, namely, its time evolution has to violate the unitarity
condition (1.2a). The third and most insidious condition was the invariance, namely, the
broader theories had to represent the new nonpotential interactions in a way as invariant
as that of conventional interactions, so as to predict the same numerical values under the
same conditions at diﬀerent times. We assume that experts are aware of the theorems of
catastrophic inconsistencies of noncanonical and nonunitary theories [5j], which theorems
mandate the achievement of invariance for any theory to have physical value.

It was evident that a solution verifying the above conditions required new mathematics,
e.g. new numbers, new spaces, new geometries, new symmetries, etc. A detailed search
in advanced mathematics libraries of the cantabridgean area revealed that the need new
mathematics simply did not exist.

Following additional (unpublished) trials and errors, Santilli [5a,5b] proposed in 1978 the
solution consisting in the representation of said contact, nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential
interactions via a generalization (called lifting) of the basic unit +1 of conventional theories
into a function, a matrix or an operator ˆI that is positive-deﬁnite like +1, but otherwise has
an arbitrary functional dependence on all needed quantities, such as time t, coordinates r,
momenta p, density µ, frequency ω, wavefunctions ψ, their derivatives ∂ψ, etc.

+1 → ˆI(t, r, p, µ.ω, ψ.∂ψ, ...) = 1/ ˆT > 0,

(2.1)

while jointly lifting the conventional associative product × between two generic quantities
A, B (numbers, vector ﬁelds, matrices, operators, etc.) into the form admitting ˆI, and no
longer +1, as the correct left and right unit

A × B → A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B,

1 × A = A × 1 = A → ˆI ˆ×A = A ˆ× ˆI = A,

(2.2a)

(2.2b)

for all elements A, B of the set considered.

The selection of the basic unit resulted to be unique for the veriﬁcation of the above three
conditions. As an illustration, whether generalized or not, the unit is the basic invariant of
any theory. The representation of non-Hamiltonian interactions with the basic unit permitted

8

the crucial by-passing of the theorems of catastrophic inconsistencies of nonunitary theories
[5j] (skeptic readers are encouraged to try alternative solutions).

Since the unit is the ultimate pillar of all mathematical, physical and chemical formu-
lations, liftings (2.1) and (2.2) requested a corresponding, compatible lifting of the totality
of the mathematical, physical and chemical formulations used by conventional theories, re-
sulting indeed into new numbers, new ﬁelds, new spaces, new algebras, new geometries, new
symmetries, etc, [3,4]. This explains the dimension and time requested by the research.
Following the original proposal of 1978 to build hadronic mechanics [5a,5b], mathematical
maturity in the formulation of the new numbers was reached in memoir [5c] of 1993 and
general mathematical maturity was reached in memoir [5d] of 1996. Physical maturity was
then quickly achieved in papers [5e,5f,5g].

In honor of Einstein’s vision on the lack of completion of quantum mechanics, Santilli
submitted in the original proposal [5a,5b] the name of isotopies for the above liftings, a
word used in the Greek meaning of ”preserving the original axioms.” In fact, ˆI preserves
all topological properties of +1, A ˆ×B is as associative as the conventional product A × B
and the preservation of the original axioms holds at all subsequent levels to such an extent
that, in the event any original axiom is not preserved under isotopies, the lifting is incorrect.
Nowadays, the resulting new mathematics is known as Santilli isomathematics [4], ˆI is called
Santilli’s isounit, A ˆ×B is called the isoproduct, etc.

The fundamental dynamical equations of hadronic Mechanics were submitted by Santilli
in the original proposal [5a], are today called Heisenberg-Santilli isoequations, and can be
written in the ﬁnite form

ˆU ˆ× ˆU † = ˆU ˆ× ˆU = ˆI 6= 1,
ˆA(ˆt) = ˆU (ˆt) ˆ× ˆA(ˆ0) ˆ× ˆU †(ˆt) = (ˆe ˆH ˆ×ˆt ˆ×ˆi) ˆ× ˆA(ˆ0) ˆ×(ˆe−ˆi ˆ×ˆt ˆ× ˆH) =
= [(eH× ˆT ×t×i) × ˆI] × ˆT × A(0) × ˆT × [ ˆI × (e−i×t× ˆT ×H)] =
(eH× ˆT ×t×i) × ˆA(ˆ0) × (e−i×t× ˆT ×H),

(2.3a)

(2.3b)

and inﬁnitesimal form [5a,5g]

ˆi ˆ×

ˆd ˆA
ˆdˆt

d ˆA
dˆt

= i × ˆIt ×

= [ ˆAˆ, ˆH] = ˆA ˆ× ˆH ˆ− ˆH ˆ× ˆA =

= ˆA × ˆT (ˆt, ˆr, ˆp, ˆψ, ˆ∂ ˆψ, ...) × ˆH − ˆH × ˆT (ˆt, ˆr, ˆp, ˆψ, ˆ∂ ˆψ, ...) × ˆA,

(2.4)

where: Eq. (2.3a) represent the crucial isounitary property, namely, the reconstruction of
unitarity on iso-Hilbert spaces over isoﬁelds with inner product < ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >; all quantities
have a ”hat” to denote their formulation on isospaces over isoﬁelds with isocomplex numbers
ˆc = c × ˆI, c ∈ C; and one should note the isodiﬀerential calculus with expressions of the
type ˆd/ ˆdˆt = ˆIt × d/dˆt ﬁrst achieved in memoir [5d] (see below).

The equivalent lifting of Schr¨odinger’s equation was suggested by Santilli [5a,6a], Myung
and Santilli [6b] and by Mignani [6c], all original proposals being formulated on conventional
spaces over conventional ﬁelds. The isoequation was reformulated via the isodiﬀerential

9

calculus by Santilli [5d], it is today called the Schr¨odinger-Santilli isoequation, and can be
written

ˆi ˆ×

| ˆψ >= i × ˆIt ×

| ˆψ >= ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >=

∂
∂ˆt

ˆ∂
ˆ∂ˆt

= ˆH(ˆt, ˆr, ˆp) × ˆT (ˆr, ˆp, ˆψ, ˆ∂ ˆψ, ....) × | ˆψ >= ˆE ˆ×| ˆψ >= E × | ˆψ >,

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7a)

(2.8)

(2.9)

with isoexpectation values

and basic properties

< ˆA >=

< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆA ˆ×| ˆψ >
< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >

< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆI ˆ×| ˆψ >
< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >

= ˆI, ˆI ˆ×| ˆψ >= | ˆψ >,

(2.7b)
conﬁrming that ˆI is indeed the isounit of hadronic mechanics (where the isoquotient ˆ/ = /× ˆI
has been tacitly used [5d]).

ˆI ˆn = ˆI ˆ× ˆI ˆ×... ˆI ≡ ˆI,

ˆ1/2 = ˆI,
ˆI

By the mid 1990’s, despite the isotopic lifting of all possible quantities and operations,
hadronic mechanics had not yet reached an invariant formulation. In particular, hadronic
mechanics still missed a consistent representation of the isotopic momentum, thus preventing
systematic veriﬁcations and applications.

After extensive additional studies, the problem resulted to rest where nobody would
expect it, in the ordinary diﬀerential calculus.
It was popularly believed for centuries in
mathematics that the diﬀerential calculus is independent from the unit of the underlying
ﬁeld. Such a belief is, of course, correct, for constant units. However, isomathematics
uses isounits with an arbitrary functional dependence that does require the lifting into the
isodiﬀerential calculus, that permitted the ﬁrst invariant formulation of the isomomentum
[4d]

ˆpk ˆ×| ˆψ >= −ˆi ˆ× ˆ∂k| ˆψ >= −i × ˆI i

k × ∂i| ˆψ >,

with isocanonical commutation rules

[ˆriˆ,ˆpj] = ˆi ˆ×ˆδi

j = i × δi

j × ˆI, [ˆri, ˆrj] = [ˆpi, ˆpj] = 0.

A few comments are now in order. Note the identity of Hermiticity and its isotopic im-
age, (< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆHˆ†) ˆ×| ˆψ >≡< ˆψ| ˆ×( ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >), ˆHˆ† ≡ ˆH †, thus implying that all quantities that
are observable for quantum mechanics remain observable for hadronic mechanics; the new
mechanics is indeed isounitary, thus avoiding the theorems of catastrophic inconsistencies of
nonunitary theories; hadronic mechanics preserves all conventional quantum laws, such as
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Pauli’s exclusion principle, etc.; hadronic mechanics has
been proved to be ”directly universal” for all possible theories with conserved energy, that
is, capable of representing all inﬁnitely possible systems of the class admitted (universal-
ity) directly in the frame of the observer without transformations (direct universality); and
numerous other features one can study in Refs. [3i,3k,3l].

10

Note the crucial representation of irreversibility under the conservation of the total en-

ergy, as necessary for isolated irreversible processes such as controlled nuclear fusions,

ˆT (t, ...) = ˆT †(t, ...) 6= T (−t, ...),

i × ˆd ˆH/ ˆdˆt = [ ˆHˆ, ˆH] ≡ 0.

(2.10)

Also, one should note that hadronic mechanics veriﬁes the abstract axioms of quantum
mechanics to such an extent that the two mechanics coincide at the abstract, realization-
free level.
In reality, hadronic mechanics provides an explicit and concrete realization of
the theory of ”hidden variables” λ [2c], as one can see from the abstract identity of the
isoeigenvalue equation H ˆ×| ˆψ >= ˆE ˆ×| ˆψ > and the conventional equation H × |ψ >= E ×
|ψ >, by providing in this way an operator realization of hidden variables λ = ˆT (for detailed
studies on these aspects, including the inapplicability of Bell’s inequality [2d] for hadronic
mechanics due to its nonunitary structure, we refer the reader to memoir [7h]).

We should also indicate that the birth of hadronic mechanics can be seen in the following

new isosymmetry, here expressed for a constant K for simplicity,

< ψ| × |ψ > ×1 ≡< ψ| × K −1 × |ψ > ×(K × 1) =< ψ| ˆ×|ψ > × ˆI.

(2.11)

The reader should not be surprised that the above isosymmetry remained unknown
throughout the 20-th century, because its identiﬁcation required the prior discovery of new
numbers, Santilli’s isonumbers with arbitrary units [5c].

Compatibility between hadronic and quantum mechanics is reached via the condition
Limr>>10−13cm ˆI ≡ I,

(2.12)

under which hadronic mechanics recovers quantum mechanics uniquely and identically at all
levels.

The name of ”hadronic mechanics” was suggested by Santilli [5a] to represent strong
interactions as well as all possible short range interactions. The new mechanics was then
constructed in such a way to coincide everywhere with quantum mechanics except inside the
so-called hadronic horizon, namely, a sphere of radius 1F = 10−13cm.

A simple method has been identiﬁed in Refs.

[5f,5g] for the construction of hadronic
mechanics and all its underlying new mathematics. This method is important for controlled
nuclear fusions because it permit the implementation of existing conventional models into
covering isomodels, thus permitting the addition of contact nonpotential interactions that
will soon acquire a crucial role for controlled nuclear fusions. The method consists in:

(i) Representing all conventional interactions with a Hamiltonian H and all non-Hamiltonian

interactions and eﬀects with the isounit ˆI;

(ii) Identifying the latter interactions with a nonunitary transform

U × U † = ˆI 6= I

(2.13)

and

(iii) Subjecting the totality of conventional mathematical, physical and chemical quanti-
ties and all their operations to the above nonunitary transform, resulting in expressions of
the type

I → ˆI = U × I × U † = 1/ ˆT ,

(2.14a)

11

a → ˆa = U × a × U † = a × ˆI,
a × b → U × (a × b) × U † =
= (U × a × U †) × (U × U †)−1 × (U × b × U †) = ˆa ˆ×ˆb,
eA → U × eA × U † = ˆI × e ˆT × ˆA = (e ˆA× ˆT ) × ˆI,
[Xi, Xj] → U × [XiXj] × U † =
oj × Xk) × U † = ˆC k

= [ ˆXiˆ, ˆXj] = U × (C k

ij ˆ× ˆXk =

= C k

ij × ˆXk,

(2.14b)

(2.14c)

(2.14d)

(2.14e)

< ψ| × |ψ >→ U× < ψ| × |ψ > ×U † =
=< ψ| × U † × (U × U †)−1 × U × |ψ > ×(U × U †) =
=< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ > × ˆI,
H × |ψ >→ U × (H × |ψ >) = (U × H × U †) × (U × U †)−1 × (U × |ψ >) =
= ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >, etc.

(2.14f )

(2.14g)

Note that the above simple rules permit the explicit construction of the new isoeigenvalues
equations and related iso-Hilbert space over isonumbers, as well as of all needed aspects,
including isoalgebras, isosymmetries and their isorepresentations [3].

Note also that catastrophic inconsistencies emerge in the event even one single quantity
or operation is not subjected to isotopies. In the absence of comprehensive liftings, we would
have a situation equivalent to the elaboration of quantum spectral data of the hydrogen
atom with isomathematics, resulting of dramatic deviations from reality.

It is easy to see that the application of an additional nonunitary transform W × W † 6= I
to expressions (2.14) causes the lack of invariance, with consequential activation of the
catastrophic inconsistencies of theorems [5j]. However, any given nonunitary transform can
be identically rewritten in the isounitary form,

W × W † = ˆI, W = ˆW × ˆT 1/2,

W × W † = ˆW ˆ× ˆW † = ˆW † ˆ× ˆW = ˆI,

under which hadronic mechanics is indeed isoinvariant

ˆI → ˆI ′ = ˆW ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆW † = ˆI,

ˆA ˆ× ˆB → ˆW ˆ×( ˆA ˆ× ˆB) ˆ× ˆW † =
= ( ˆW × ˆT × A × ˆT × ˆW †) × ( ˆT × ˆW †)−1 × ˆT × ( ˆW ×
× ˆT )−1 × ( ˆW × ˆT × ˆB × ˆT × ˆW †) =
= ˆA′ × ( ˆW † × ˆT × ˆW )−1 × ˆB′ = ˆA′ × ˆT × ˆB′ = ˆA′ ˆ× ˆB′, etc.

12

(2.15a)

(2.15b)

(2.16a)

(2.16b)

Note that the invariance is ensured by the numerically invariant values of the isounit and of
the isotopic element under nonunitary-isounitary transforms,

ˆI → ˆI ′ ≡ ˆI, A ˆ×B → A′ ˆ×′b′ ≡ A′ ˆ×B′,

(2.17)

in a way fully equivalent to the invariance of quantum mechanics, as expected to be neces-
sarily the case due to the preservation of the abstract axioms under isotopies. The resolution
of the catastrophic inconsistencies for noninvariant theories is then consequential.

Hadronic mechanics has nowadays clear experimental veriﬁcations in particle physics, nu-
clear physics, superconductivity, chemistry, astrophysics, cosmology and biology (see mono-
graphs [3j,3k,3l] for details), which veriﬁcations cannot possibly be reviewed here. We merely
mention for subsequent need for controlled nuclear fusions the reformulation of valence bonds
via hadronic chemistry characterized by the isounit [9a,9b]

ˆI = Diag.(n2

11, n2

12, n2

13, n2

14) × Diag.9n2

21, n2

22, n2

23, n2

24)×

×eN ×( ˆψ/ψ)×

d3r×ψ†

↓(r)×ψ↑(r)

(2.18)

R
where n2
ak, a = 1, 2, k = 1, 2, 3 are the semiaxes of the ellipsoids characterizing the two par-
ticles, na4, a = 1, 2 represents their density, ˆψ represents the isowavefunctions, ψ represents
the conventional function, and N is a positive constant.

The use f the above isounit permitted R. M. Santilli and D. Shillady [9a,9b] to reach the
ﬁrst exact and invariant representation on scientiﬁc records of all characteristics of the hy-
drogen, water and other molecules, said representation being achieved directly from ﬁrst ax-
iomatic principles without any ad hoc parameters, or screening adulterations of the Coulomb
law. In reality, due to its nonunitary structure, hadronic chemistry contains as a particular
cases all inﬁnitely possible screenings of the Coulomb laws (see [3l] for details).

Note the admission of quantum chemistry for the atomic structure in molecular bonds
and the use of a covering chemistry only in the short range valence interactions, namely,
inside the ”hadronic horizon.” In fact, at distances suﬃciently greater than 1F , the volume
integral in the exponent of Eq. (2.18) is identically null, the actual dimensions and density of
the particles are ignorable, and Santilli’s isounit (2.18) veriﬁes the crucial condition (2.12).
We should also mention that, when the Schr¨odinger-Santilli isoequation is worked out in
detail under isounit (2.18), there is the emergence of a strongly attractive Hulten potential
that, as well known, behaves at short distances like the Coulomb potential, thus absorbing
the repulsive Coulomb force between the valence electrons [9a,9b].

U × [

p1 × p1 +

p2 × p2 +

−

−

−

−

+

× |ψi] ≈

e2
r12

e2
r1a

e2
r2a

e2
r1b

e2
r2b

e2
R !

1
2µ1

 

1
2µ2

¯h2
2 × µ1

≈

−

 

× ∇2

1 −

× ∇2

2 − V ×

¯h2
2 × µ2

−

e2
r1a

−

−

−

e2
r2a

e2
r1b

13

e−r12×b
1 − e−r12×b −
e2
e2
R !
r2b

+

× | ˆψi,

(2.19)

(see monograph [3l], chapters 4 and 5 for details). The insuﬃciency of quantum chemistry
is now transparent because, without the hadronic lifting, the total electromagnetic force
between the two hydrogen atoms is identically null.

Refs.

[9a,9b] achieved in this way the ﬁrst model of valence bonds in scientiﬁc records
with an explicitly computed and strongly attractive force between the electrons of a valence
bond,for which reason the model is today often referred to as the Santilli-Shillady strong
valence bond, were the word ”strong” evidently refers to the strength of the valence force.

Superﬁcial inspections of hadronic mechanics and chemistry may tend to dismiss the rel-
evance of the strong valence bond for controlled nuclear fusions. Recall that the conventional
quantum view on valence are basically insuﬃcient to explain how two electrons can bond
to each other to form the molecular structures of our everyday life, while having identical
charges that cause extreme repulsions at the distances of valence bonds. For this reason,
the various valence models of quantum chemistry are mere nomenclatures, because none of
them identiﬁes the attractive character of the valence force in an explicit form, let alone with
an a numerical value suﬃcient to represent reality.

A crucial feature established by hadronic chemistry is that the new contact, nonlinear,
nonlocal and nonpotential interactions due to wave-overlapping are strongly repulsive at short
distance for triplet couplings (parallel spins) and strongly attractive in singlet coupling (an-
tiparallel spins.

After (and only after) the above scientiﬁc journey, the importance of hadronic mechanics
and chemistry begins to emerge for the objective that motivated their construction, the
prediction and quantitative treatment of basically new clean energies and fuels, that is,
energies and fuels NOT predicted by quantum mechanics and chemistry.

The isotopic (axiom-preserving) lifting of special relativity required a parallel extensive
research that cannot possibly be review here. We merely mention that this lifting, today
known as isorelativity, was ﬁrst reached by Santilli as follows: the ﬁrst isotopies of the
Minkowski space were presented in Ref. [7a,7b]; the ﬁrst isotopies of the rotational symmetry
were reached in Ref. [7c]; the ﬁrst isotopies of the SU(2)-spin symmetry were formulated in
Ref. [7d]; the ﬁrst isotopies of the Poincar´e symmetry and special relativity were submitted
in Refs.
[7e]; the ﬁrst isotopies of the spinorial covering of the Poincar´e symmetry were
reached in Refs. [7f,7g]; the ﬁrst implications for local realism was reached in ref. [7h]; and
the ﬁrst comprehensive studies on the iso-Minkowskian geometry was presented in Ref. [7i]
(for numerous related works, see monographs [3]).

Note that, due to the positive-deﬁniteness of the isounit and rule (2.14c), all isosym-
metries are locally isomorphic to the original symmetries, as necessary under isotopies, yet
they provide the most general known nonlinear, nonlocal and non-Hamiltonian realizations
of known spacetime and internal; symmetries. Intriguingly, these isosymmetries generally
reconstruct as exact on isospaces over isoﬁeld all symmetries believed to be broken [3h,3i].
The reader should know that isorelativity is based on a geometric uniﬁcation of the
Minkowskian and Riemannian geometries [7i], with consequential uniﬁcation of special and
general relativities that are now diﬀerentiated by the selected realization of Santilli’s isounit.
These uniﬁcations permitted a novel formulation of gravity that is invariant under the
Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry. These advances have permitted the ﬁrst and perhaps only

14

known axiomatically consistent grand uniﬁcation of electroweak and gravitational interac-
tions [8], where the axiomatic consistency is achieved thanks to the reformulation of gravity
via the axioms of electroweak interactions.

The reader should also be aware that isorelativity provides the ultimate formulation of
the possible industrial realization of controlled nuclear fusions proposed in this paper. As
an illustration, certain key features of controlled nuclear fusions predicted by isorelativ-
ity are dependent on the abandonment of the philosophical abstraction of the ”universal
constancy of the speed of light” and the assumption instead that light is a local variable
C = c/n(t, r, p, µ, ω, ...) depending on the characteristics of the medium in which it propa-
gates, assuming that light can propagate at all in a given medium.

Another belief that has to be abandoned for the formulation of ”new” energies is that
the speed of light is the maximal causal speed, and the replacement with a new maximal
causal speed characterized by the geometry of the medium, that happens to be c in vacuum.
An illustration is given electrons propagating in water at a speed 1/3-rd greater than the
local speed of light (Cerenkov eﬀect), with consequential catastrophic inconsistencies in case
special relativity is assumed to be valid within physical media.

If the speed of light in vacuum is assumed as the maximal causal speed in water, we
have the violation of the principle of causality, while if we assume the speed of light in water
to be the maximal causal speed in water, we have the violation of the relativistic addition
of speeds. The statement that special relativity is recovered by reducing light to photons
scattering among atoms has been proved to be nonscientiﬁc because: 1) The reduction to
photons of electromagnetic waves with one meter wavelengths traveling in water with speed
2
3 c has no credibility; 2) The reduction to photons for light traveling faster than that in
vacuum according to vast experimental evidence now available is nonscientiﬁc; and 3) The
nonscientiﬁc character of the reduction is established by the fact that the reduction of light
to photons, even when applicable, is aﬄicted by an error in defect of about 30%, namely, it
can only represent a few percentage of the reduction of the speed of light, and not its 33%
reduction (due to the very low cross section of Compton scattering as serious scientist are
expected to know).

In reality, there is no need for calculations, but only to observe and admit evidence visible
to our naked eye. A source of light submerged within pure water shows no dispersion. This
implies that photons have to scatter along a straight line to represent the lack of dispersion,
a ﬁrst impossibility, while on the other side, the speed of light is decreased of about 33%
compared to the speed in vacuum. The impossibility of a credible manipulation in an attempt
to salvage special relativity under these conditions is beyond credible doubt.

In conclusion, as clearly stated by Albert Einstein in his limpid writing, and as reviewed
in Section 1, special relativity was conceived, constructed and veriﬁed in vacuum. The
validity of special relativity for all conditions existing in the universe has been proﬀered by
Einstein’s followers. Evidence beyond any possible doubt establish that special relativity
is inapplicable for interior dynamical problems, including dynamics within physical media,
systems without a Keplerian nucleus (as it is the case for nuclear fusions) and others.

Rather than being topics of esoterica academic interest, the above issues have direct
In fact, nuclei

societal implications for the much needed new clean energies and fuels.

15

constitute some of the densest media measured by mankind until now. It then follows that
nuclear fusions cannot be reduced to events in vacuum. Consequently, any insistence without
clear evidence on the exact validity of special relativity for nuclear fusions was tolerated in
the past as an act of scientiﬁc fervor, but nowadays the potential severe injury to society
forces the denunciation of such a fervor particularly when proﬀered by experts.

3. Physical Laws of Cold, Intermediate and Hot Fusions as Predicted by Hadronic
Mechanics, Hadronic Chemistry and Isorelativity. One of the ﬁrst contributions of
hadronic mechanics, hadronic chemistry and isorelativity to controlled fusions is the iden-
tiﬁcation of seven diﬀerent physical laws that have to be obeyed by all Controlled Nuclear
Fusions (CNF) to occur, and have to be optimized in engineering realizations for CNF to
acquire industrial relevance. These laws were ﬁrst derived in ref. [3k], they apply for cold,
intermediate and hot fusions, and are referred to in the literature as Santilli’s laws for Con-
trolled Nuclear Fusions. We are not in a position to review here their derivation to avoid
a prohibitive length. Nevertheless, for completeness of this presentation we provide below
their outline with a few comments.

LAW I: CNF must verify the conservation of the energy. This is the trivial law

that needs no comment.

LAW II: The most probable CNF are those occurring under the conservation
of the angular momentum. The diﬀerences between quantum and hadronic mechanics
begin to emerge. Conservation laws of linear momentum and angular momentum are nec-
essary for Keplerian structures, such as planetary or atomic systems, in which no collision
among the constituents is admitted and the constituents are assumed to be point-like. The
same laws are not necessarily veriﬁed for the broader interior systems that include collisions
of extended constituents. To do serious science we must admit that during actual collisions
of extended particles (such as billiard balls), linear momentum can be transformed into angu-
lar momentum, and vice versa. The same feature must be kept under quantization to avoid
evident inconsistencies. Needless to say, whenever linear momentum and angular momentum
transforms into each others, the sum of their energies is conserved. Stated diﬀerently, the
only conservation laws out of ten characterized the Poincar´e symmetry that are necessarily
veriﬁed in the physical reality are the conservation of the energy and the uniform motion
of the center of mass for isolated systems. It is at this point where isorelativity becomes
mandatory to conduct serious scientiﬁc studies of CNF. In fact, the Poincar´e-Santilli isosym-
metry does indeed permit the exchange of linear momentum into angular momentum and
vice-versa (under the conservation of the total energy) because occurring under the lifting
of the conventional symmetry ﬁrstly, to represent extended particles and, secondly, to rep-
resent ”contact” interactions as in Eq. (2.12). Exchanges of linear and angular momenta
under collisions are then consequential. Note that ”cold fusions” may not admit energies
suﬃcient for the transformation of linear into angular momentum. However, these energies
are deﬁnitely available for the ”hot fusions,” while the case of ”intermediate fusions” requires
speciﬁc studies.

16

Figure 2: A schematic view of only two stable couplings permitted by hadronic mechanics,
the ”planar singlet coupling” of the l.h.s. and the ”axial triplet coupling” of the r.h.s. All
other spin conﬁgurations have been proved to produce strongly ”repulsive” forces under which
no CNF is credibly possible. The conﬁguration preferred in this paper is the axial one for
reasons of bigger eﬃciency in the energy output.

LAW III: CNF only occur for nuclei with compatible spins given by the
”planar singlet coupling” or the ”axial triplet coupling” of Figure 3. This is
another law with profound engineering implications indicated in Section 5. This law also
illustrates the structural diﬀerences between quantum and hadronic mechanics, as well as the
necessity of the latter for CNF. The constituents of a bound state of two quantum particles
must necessarily be point-like to avoid structural inconsistencies beginning with the local-
diﬀerential topology. Consequently, singlet and triplet couplings are equally possible for
quantum mechanics. When the actual extended character of the constituents is taken into
account, it is easy to see that planar triplet couplings of extended particles at short distances
are strongly repulsive, while planar singlet couplings are strongly attractive, where the word
”planar” is intended to indicate that the two nuclei have a common median plane (Figure 2).
This law was introduced by Santilli in the original proposal [5a] to build hadronic mechanics
via the so-called gear model. In fact, the coupling of gears in triplet (parallel spins) causes
extreme repulsion to the point of breaking the gear teeth, while the only possible coupling of
gears is in singlet (antiparallel spins). As we shall see, the ﬁrst reason why ”cold” and ”hot”
fusions have not achieved industrial relevance until now is the general lack of controlled
implementation of this basic law.

LAW IV: The most probable CNF are those occurring at threshold energies
(namely, at the minimum value of the energies of the constituents needed to
verify Law 1). A main reason of this law is that all energies above the indicated threshold
value cause instability that reduce the rate of synthesis. As we shall see, the lack of engineering
implementation of this law constitutes another reason why ”cold” and ”hot” fusions have not
achieved industrial relevance until now. Note that this law favors the ”cold” over the ”hot”
fusion. In fact, the lack of achievement of industrial signiﬁcance by the ”hot fusion” until

17

now is particularly due to instabilities caused by the available energies that are excessively
bigger than the indicated threshold value.

LAW V: The most probable CNF are those without the release of massive
particles (such as protons, neutrons and electrons). This law was not expected by
the author. Yet, contrary to popular beliefs, explicit calculations based on hadronic (and
certainly not quantum) mechanics indicated that the probability of a nuclear synthesis with
the release of neutrons is much smaller than that of another synthesis with the emission of
massive particles. As we shall see, this fourth law appears to be veriﬁed by nuclear syntheses
spontaneously occurring in nature.

LAW VI: A necessary condition for CNF to occur is to control the peripheral
atomic electrons in such a way to allow nuclei to be exposed. Nature has set matter
in such a way that nuclei are strongly shielded by their atomic clouds. It is evident that a
”nuclear” synthesis between two conventional ”atoms” is impossible at low energies because
the electron clouds will never allow nuclei to approach each other, let alone to synthesize
a new nucleus. This law explains the diﬃculties for ”cold fusions” to achieve industrial
signiﬁcance in energy output because, by deﬁnition, ”cold fusions” do not have the energy
necessary for the ionization of atoms. This law also illustrates the need for the proposed
”intermediate fusions.”

LAW VII: CNF cannot occur without a trigger (that is, an external mecha-
nism forcing exposed nuclei through the hadronic horizon). All nuclei are positively
charged, thus repelling each other.Without a mechanism that overcomes the Coulomb re-
pulsion and brings nuclei inside the hadronic horizon of 1F = 10−13cm, no nuclear synthesis
is evidently possible. However, when inside the hadronic horizon and the preceding laws are
veriﬁed, the synthesis is inevitable, as we shall see, due to the strongly attractive hadronic
forces as for model (2.19).

Evidently, the achievement of industrially relevant energy outputs by CNF requires the
engineering optimization of all preceding laws. This is less obvious of what may appear in
ﬁrst inspection because each law can be realized in a number of diﬀerent engineering versions.
However, this does not means that all realizations have equal eﬃciency. Maximization of
the energy output is realized only when said engineering realizations ”optimize” the laws.

It is instructive to examine a representative case of ”cold fusion” under the above phys-
ical laws. Consider the Fleishmann-Pons electrolytic cell [1a].
It is easy to see that this
cell does indeed verify Law 1 (conservation of the energy), Law II (conservation of the an-
gular momentum), Law IV (absence of excessive energy over threshold), Law V (absence
of secondary radiation) and law VII (the trigger being characterized in this case by the
electrostatic pressure compressing deuteron atoms inside the palladium).

However, Fleishmann-Pons electrolytic cell [1a] does not verify Law III (control of the
singlet couplings) as well as Laws VI (control of atomic clouds to expose nuclei). In fact,
nuclear spin couplings occur at random, there is no clearly identiﬁed mechanism to expose
nuclei, and there is an equally clear lack of optimization of the veriﬁed laws. Consequently,

18

nuclear syntheses occur at random, thus preventing industrial values of the energy outputs.
It is an instructive exercise for researchers serious in real advances in new clean energies
to inspect other realizations of ”cold fusions” among the large variety existing in the liter-
ature [1b-1c]. One can see in this way that, to our best knowledge at this time, none of
available ”cold fusions” realizes ”all” seven basic laws (the indication of the contrary would
be appreciated).

In conclusion, Santilli’s Laws on Controlled Nuclear Fusions practically rule out the pos-
sible achievement of industrially meaningful ”hot fusions,” by conﬁrming in this way a rather
widespread consensus in the scientiﬁc community. The same laws oﬀer serious possibilities
for ”cold fusions” to achieve industrial relevance under a number of revisions of their engi-
neering realizations, by therefore conﬁrming another widespread consensus. However, the
same laws identify quite clearly the need for the proposed ”intermediate fusions” in order to
optimize their engineering realizations.

4. The New Chemical Species of Santilli’s Magnecules. Inspection of Laws I-VII for
Controlled Nuclear Fusions (CNF) reveals that the most diﬃcult engineering realization is
that of Law VI on the control of electron clouds so as to expose nuclei as a pre-requisite for
for their fusion. The author has worked for years to achieve an industrially relevant solution
of this problem (thanks to large private investments). This section is devoted to a brief
outline of the proposed solution because truly basic for the concrete industrial realization
proposed in the next section.

The current environmental problems are not caused by fossil fuels per se, but rather by
the strength of their valence bonds that has prevented the achievement of a full combustion
for over one century. In fact, hydrocarbons and other pollutants in the exhaust literally are
chunks of uncombusted molecules (for which very reason these pollutants are carcinogenic).
A solution was proposed in Ref. [9c] of 1998 consisting of a new chemical species, today
known as Santilli magnecules (in order to distinguish them from the conventional molecules)
whose bond is stable, but suﬃciently weaker than the conventional valence bond to permit
full combustion (see website [9d] and monograph [3l] for comprehensive studies).

The new species required the identiﬁcation of a new attractive force among atomic con-
stituents that is not of valence type as a central condition, thus occurring among atoms
irrespective of whether valence electrons are available or not.

The solution proposed in Ref.

[9c] was the use of an external magnetic ﬁeld suﬃcient
to create the polarization of atomic orbitals into toroids, as a result of which the orbiting
electrons create a magnetic moment along the symmetry axis of the toroid that is non-existing
in the conventional spherical distribution of the same orbitals.

Evidently, individual toroidal polarizations are, individually, extremely unstable because
the spherical distribution is recovered in nanoseconds following the removal of the external
magnetic ﬁeld due to temperature related eﬀects. Nevertheless, when two toroidal polariza-
tions are bonded together by opposing magnetic polarities North-South-North-South- etc. as
in Figure 3, spherical distributions are again recovered in nanoseconds following the removal
of the external magnetic ﬁeld, but this time such distribution occurs for the bounded pair
as a whole.

19

Figure 3: A schematic view of a ”diatomic Santilli magnecule” consisting of the bonding
of two atoms caused by the attractive force between opposing polarities North-South-North-
South- etc. of toroidal polarizations of at least some peripheral atomic electrons [9c,9d].
Note that, in reality, the ”magnecular bond” is rather complex since it is characterized by the
attraction among ”three” magnetic moments (those of the toroids, plus the intrinsic mag-
netic moments of the electrons and of the nuclei), as well as the repulsive force among equal
nuclear and electron charges. Consequently, the ﬁgure depicts a condition of equilibrium
between these opposing forces. Note also the absence in magnecular bonds of considerations
pertaining to the nature of the atoms and the possible availability of valence electrons. Note
ﬁnally the lack of limits in the number of constituents in magnecules except limits set by in-
stabilities due to collisions. Note that Santilli’s magnecules naturally realize the ”axial” (but
not the ”planar”) compatible spin coupling of Figure 2 (see monograph [3l] for comprehensive
studies).

The experimental detection of magnecules is rather diﬃcult since it requires analytic
instruments and methods diﬀerent than those currently used to detect molecules. Vice
versa, analytic methods so eﬀective to detect molecules generally reveals no magnecules, and
this explains their lack of detection since the discovery of molecules in the mid of the 19-th
century.

An analytic equipment developed for molecules that is also eﬀective for the detection of
gaseous (liquid) magnecules is given by a Gas (Liquid) Chromatographer Mass Spectrometer
necessarily equipped with InfraRed Detector for gases (GC-MS/IRD) or with UltraViolet
Detector for liquids (LC-MS/UVD).

Let us recall that large clusters (of the order of hundreds of amu or more) cannot be
constituted by molecules when without an IR signature for gases or a UV signature for
liquids, because that would require perfect spheridicity that is prohibited by nature for a
large number of constituents.

The detection of a magnecule requires its identiﬁcation, ﬁrstly, with a peak in the MS that
must result to be unknown following the computer search among all known molecules and,
secondly, that peak must show no IR or UV signature at its amu value. The latter condition
explains the need for a GC-MS (or LC-MS) necessarily equipped with IRD (UVD). In fact,
if the same species is tested with an IRD (or UVD) disjoint from the MS, the IRD (UVD) is
not generally focused on the selected MS peak at its amu value, resulting in the detection of

20

a variety of signatures of conventional molecular species that, in reality, are the constituents
of the considered magnecule. Note that the lack of IR or UV signature also conﬁrms the
achievement of the desired bond weaker than the valence, as needed to achievement full
combustion (see, for details, website [9c]).

As indicated in Section 2, the word ”valence” is essentially a nomenclature due to the
lack of explicit and concrete identiﬁcation of the ”attractive” force necessary to produce a
valance bond (for Santilli-Shillady strong valence force as in Eq. (2.19), see Refs. [9a,9b,3l]).
By comparison, Santilli identiﬁed in the original proposal [9c] the attractive character of the
magnecular forces as well as its numerical value, that was conﬁrmed by Kucherenko and
Aringazin [9e] as well as by others [3l].

The importance of the new species of magnecules for controlled nuclear fusions is estab-
lished by an inspection of Figure 3, where one can see that the toroidal polarizations of the
peripheral orbitals does indeed expose nuclei, as desired. The conﬁguration clearly result to
be preparatory for the subsequent nuclear synthesis. Finally, the absence of IR signatures for
gases or UV signatures for liquids conﬁrms that the bond occurs at low energy, as necessary
for controlled nuclear fusions. We therefore have the following:

DEFINITION [9c,3k,3l,]: Santilli’s magnecules are stable clusters consisting of individ-
ual atoms (H, C, O, etc.), dimers (OH, CH, etc.) and ordinary molecules (CO, H2O, etc.)
bonded together by opposing magnetic polarities originating from toroidal polarizations of the
orbitals of atomic electrons.

Numerous new substances with magnecular structures have been identiﬁed experimen-
tally to date, among which we indicate MagneGasT M [9d], MagneHydrogenT M [9h], HHOT M
[9i], and others under industrial development. Their primary features (for which large in-
dustrial investments have been made) is the complete combustion without contaminant in
the exhaust and cost competitiveness over fossil fuels.

It is now customary in the ﬁeld to denote a molecular bond with the symbol ”−” and a
magnecular bond with the symbol ”×.” Consequently, the hydrogen molecule is represented
with H2 = H − H, while hydrogen magnecules are represented with the symbol MH =
H × H × .... A main diﬀerence is that the only possible valence bond is H2 (trivially, because
the hydrogen atom has only one electron), while there is no theoretical limit for the number
of constituents under magnecular bond except those set by collisions. In fact, a species of
MagneHydrogen H14 having seven times the amu of H2 has been detected in independent
laboratories [9h]. The latter measurements provide ﬁnal conﬁrmation on the existence of
magnecules due to the evident impossibility of any credible interpretation via valence.

5. Proposed Industrial Realization of Controlled Intermediate Fusions via Hadronic
Reactors. Without any claim of completeness or uniqueness, in this section we propose in
the necessary construction details a concrete hadronic reactor (patented and international
patents pending),that is, an equipment for the possible industrial utilization of new clean
energies produced by Intermediate Energy Controlled Nuclear Fusions (IECNF), or ”inter-
mediate fusions” (IF) for short, via the engineering implementation and optimization of all
seven Santilli’s Laws on Controlled Nuclear Fusions of Section 3. The application of the re-

21

sults to Low Energy Controlled Nuclear Fusions (LECNF), or ”cold fusions’ (CF)’ for short,
will be left to interested readers. High Energy Controlled Nuclear Fusions (HECNF), or
”hot fusions” (HF) for short, shall be ignored because outside realistic feasibility based on
current scientiﬁc knowledge and technological capabilities.

To begin, we use nature, rather than pre-existing research [1], for guiding lines. As estab-
lished by chemical analyses of air bubbles in amber, about one hundred millions years ago
Earth’s atmosphere had about 40% of nitrogen, while its current percentage is about double
that value. Other chemical analyses show that the increase of nitrogen in our atmosphere
has been gradual. These data establish the existence in our atmosphere of a process for the
natural synthesis of nitrogen from lighter elements.

Among all possible origins of such a synthesis, the most probable is given by lighting,
because a serious scientiﬁc (that is, quantitative) explanation of thunder requires nuclear
syntheses.
In fact, a numerical explanation of one thunder requires energy equivalent to
hundreds of tons of explosives that simply cannot be explained via conventional processes
due to the very small cylindrical volume of air aﬀected by lightning combined with its
extremely short duration of the order of nanoseconds (serious scholars are suggested to do
these calculations to prevent venturing nonscientiﬁc opinions).

By comparison, a relatively low rate of nitrogen syntheses provides indeed a numerical
explanation of thunder as well as its slow rate of increase in our atmosphere. Among all
possible syntheses, the most probable results to be the synthesis of nitrogen from carbon and
deuteron. Needless to say, numerous alternative fusions are also possible and some of them
will be indicated below.

Consequently, by following nature, in this section we propose a speciﬁc and concrete
industrial realization of hadronic reactors that, by central conception, is based on processes
associated to lighting and thunder. Therefore, we have the following optimization of Laws
I-VII for the speciﬁc objective at hand:

Optimization of Law I: For the preferred embodiment identiﬁed below, the implemen-
tation and optimization of energy conservation can be achieved by controlling the tempera-
ture of the chemical species selected for IECNF.

Optimization of Law II: For simplicity, as well as in order to operate at the lowest
possible energies, in this section we shall select engineering realizations and optimization
applicable under the conservation of the angular momentum, with the understanding that
the restriction is not scientiﬁcally necessary for the conditions at hand in which the Poincar´e
symmetry and special relativity are inapplicable, thus permitting a variety of additional
hadronic reactors (that would be suppressed by a nonscientiﬁc imposition of special relativity
for conditions it was not built for with evident damage to society) we plan to address in a
subsequent paper.

Optimization of Law III: With reference to Figure 2, there are two types of engi-
neering implementation and optimization of the condition to have compatible spins, called
in the literature of hadronic mechanics [3i,3k] planar and axial compatible couplings. The
engineering ”implementation” of the planar coupling can indeed be achieved (see the various

22

Figure 4: A schematic view of the geometry of a DC electric arc represented by the verti-
cal line, with the associated magnetic ﬁeld represented by horizontal circles, and the created
magnecules represented by circles perpendicular to the latter. This geometry has the follow-
ing primary implications: 1) Since the magnetic ﬁeld M is proportional to I/r, one can see
that at atomic distances r = 10−8cm from electric arcs with I = 103A the magnetic ﬁeld
is of the order of 1011G, thus being amply suﬃcient to polarize atomic orbitals [3l,9f,9g];
2) Following said polarization, the geometry of electric arcs is such to align automatically
polarized atoms with opposing polarities North-South-North-South-..., thus creating magnec-
ular bonds automatically possessing the axial spin couplings of Figure 2; and 3) For reasons
not entirely understood [9c], electric arcs compress magnecules toward their axis at the time
of their initiation of shut oﬀ, thus assisting in the realization of the trigger necessary for
nuclear fusions.

23

proposals of Refs. [3i,3k,3l]), e.g., by subjecting to opposing polarizations two nuclear beams.
However, the ”optimization” of Law III deﬁnitely suggests the adoption of the compatible
axial coupling over the planar one for various reasons, such as the fact that, for the case of
planar coupling, the control of the polarization is lost at the initiation of the fusion, with
evident dispersal and loss of eﬃciency, while the axial coupling can be controlled all the way
to the completion of the fusion, with evidently higher eﬃciency. Therefore, the preferred
embodiment depicted below is based on the engineering implementation and optimization
of Law III via compatible axial couplings.

Optimization of Law IV: For the preferred embodiment of this section, the engineering
implementation and optimization of the minimal possible threshold energy is also achievable
via the control of the temperature and other features discussed below.

Optimization of Law V: The implementation of this law is achieved by selecting nuclei
in such a way that the original as well as ﬁnal nuclei are natural and stable isotope. The
”optimization” of this law deﬁnitely favors light, natural and stable nuclei over heavier ones
for various reasons, e.g., the fact that the heavier the nuclei, the bigger the possibilities for
secondary radiations.

Optimization of Law VI: As indicated in the preceding section, the hadronic reactors
proposed in this paper are based on the creation of a magnecular bond prior to the nuclear
fusion because this new bond automatically veriﬁes Laws I, II, III, IV, V and VI. However,
the creation of the new species of magnecular is not elementary because as studied by
Aringazin [9f], the polarization of electron orbitals to create magnecular bonds requires
magnetic ﬁelds so intense (of the order of 1010G or more) that cannot be provided by the
most powerful laboratory magnets. The solution adopted by Santilli [9d] in the original
proposal of the new chemical species of magnecules is the use of ﬂowing a selected ﬂuid
through a submerged electric arc so as to continuously remove magnecules from the arc soon
after their formation (this is the so-called ”PlasmaArcFlowT M Process [9d] - US Patented
and international patents pending). In fact, the magnetic ﬁeld surrounding electric arcs has
indeed the intensity necessary for the toroidal polarization of the orbitals. The continuous
removal of the magnecules from the arc is then necesary for control of the process.

Optimization of Law VII: As it is well known in the new ﬁeld of clean burning fuels,
magnecular bonds such as that of Figure 4 cannot yield nuclear fusions, trivially, because
the two nuclei have the same charge, thus experiencing an intense Coulomb repulsion. Mag-
necular structures such as that of Figure 3 essentially consist of a new statistical equilibrium
among a variety of electromagnetic forces. In order to convert a magnecular bond as that
of Figure 3 into a nuclear fusion, there is the need of an external mechanism (the ”trigger”)
that forces the two nuclei at mutual distances of the order of 10−13cm (the ”hadronic hori-
zon”), at which point the new strongly attractive forces identiﬁed by hadronic mechanics
and chemistry take eﬀect and, under the veriﬁcation of all preceding laws, the fusion is in-
evitable. The ”trigger” adopted in this proposal is given by a combination of pressures as
well as pulse DC arcs.

24

The achievement of ”intermediate fusions” of industrial value requires the systematic
production of energy in a reliable and repetitive way without excessive service interruptions.
The ”implementation” of this requirement eliminates liquids as feedstocks of hadronic reac-
tors because of the short life of the electrodes needed for the creation of magnecular bonds
and other reasons. In fact, arcs within liquids can only occur at very short distances pro-
portional to the arc power, thus exposing the electrodes to the large energy of the fusion,
with their consequential rapid disintegration and lack of industrial maturity. More gener-
ally, the ”optimization” of the requirement here considered requires the abandonment of
a rather general tendency in the ﬁeld [1], that of materializing nuclear fusions inside the
electrodes themselves. In fact, this approach prevents any possible industrially viable engi-
neering because of the extremely short life of the electrodes, let alone their cost. To avoid
these problem, the ”optimization” here selected is that ”intermediate fusions” are created
by the arc itself and not by the electrodes.

By using the above optimization, a preferred embodiment of the hadronic reactors herein
proposed consists of a metal vessel capable of withstanding steady pressures up to 10, 000psi
(666bars) as well as impulse pressures up to 100, 000psi (6666bars) in which a 50 Kw DC
electric arc of steady and impulse nature is initiated, maintained and optimized via the
automatic controls of the Magnegas Technology [9d]. The vessel is ﬁlled up with a gaseous
(rather than liquid) feedstock as selected below and continuously recirculated through said
arc. The control of the energy output is done by controlling: 1) the value and frequency of
the impulse pressure; 2) the power and the frequency of the pulse DC arc; and 3) the ﬂow
of the ﬂuid through the arc.

With respect to Figure 5, the proposed hadronic reactor (patented and international
patents pending) comprises: a metal vessel 232 with hemispherical heads 233 and fasteners
252 and bases 234 capable of withstanding a steady pressure of at least 10,000 psi (666 bars)
and an impulse pressure of at least b100,000 psi (6666 bars); a stationary, negatively charged,
tungsten anode 235 that protrudes outside the hemispherical head 233 for connection via
cable 299 to the negative polarity of a steady or pulsing AC-DC converter with at least 50
Kw power (not shown in the ﬁgure), said protrusion occurring through insulating pressure
resistant bushing 236 in phenolic G10 or equivalent; an internally movable, positively charged
tungsten cathode 237 connected via cable 300 and insulating bushing 301 to the positive po-
larity of said outside power source; said cathode 237 being connected via insulating phenolic
G10 block 238 to a metal rod equipped with rake 239 that is internally fastened to vessel
232 via brackets 240; said rake 239 being operated by a pignon 240 that is controlled by an
outside servomotor 242 through insulating pressure resistant bushing 302; vessel 232 being
ﬁlled up with a gaseous feedstock 251 that is recirculated through the electric arc 250 via
blower 252 through pipe 253; the gaseous feedstock is then sucked by pipe 244 for passage
through heat exchanger 245 for continuous recirculation through the arc 250 via blower 252
and pipe 253; the heat acquired by heat exchanger 245 being utilizes via an external ﬂuid
via inlet 246 and outlet 247; the proposed hadronic recycler being completed by pipe 248 for
burst of pressure of the gaseous feedstock inside vessel 232 to realize the hadronic trigger,
said burst of pressure being realized by outlet 260 and impact blower 261, the two check

25

Figure 5: A schematic view of the preferred embodiment for the industrial realization of the
proposed controlled intermediate fusion.

26

valves 262 protecting the primary blower 252 and the heat exchanger 245.

The operation of the proposed hadronic reactor is the following. Firstly, a high vacuum
inside vessel 232 is secured via valve 263. Subsequently, valve 263 is closed and the vessel is
ﬁlled up with the gaseous feedstock 251 via valve 264 up to the preset pressure of at least
10,000 psi (666 bars). At the achievement of the preset pressure, the automatic controls
activate the primary blower 252 and the continuous recirculation of the gaseous feedstock
through the arc is established. DC power is then automatically released to the anode-cathode
pair when the electrodes are at such a distance not to allow an arc for the pre-selected gaseous
feedstock and for the pre-selected pressure (open arc). Via the use of servomotor 242 acting
on pignon 240 that, in turn activates rake 239 solidly connected to cathode 237 via insulating
bushing 238, the automatic control move said cathode 237 toward the stationary anode 235
until such a distance at which an electric arc of high current (e.g., 1,000 A) within said
gaseous feedstock is activated. This ﬁrst phase serves to create magnecules. The automatic
controls then increase the gap between the electrodes to such a value for which the variation of
the voltage is within preset values (one of the twenty adjustable parameters of the automatic
controls of the Magnegas Technology [9d]), so as to maximize the travel of the arc within
the gaseous feedstock for an electric arc with present stability. Following a preset duration
of such high current arc, the automatic control active the high voltage impulse current as
a partial realization of the trigger. According to a pre-set frequency, the automatic control
also activate the impulse blower 261 to create burst of very high pressure inside vessel 232.a
the trigger via a combination of the following three means: 1) Impulse high voltage arcs; 2)
Impulse high pressures; and 3) the enhancement of both preceding contributions by the arc
geometry (Figure 4). It would be naive to assume that the above description is exhaustive,
since numerous other features are needed to render the above hadronic reactor industrially
viable, but they are omitted here for security reasons.

The desired Intermediate Energy Controlled Nuclear Fusions are of the generic type

T R + N1(A1, Z1, J p1

1 ) + N2(A2, Z2, J p2

2 ) → N3(A3, Z3, J p3

3 ) + Heat,

(5.1)

where: TR is the trigger; A is the number of nucleons; Z is the number of protons; J is the
angular momentum; p is the parity; A1 + A2 = A3, Z1 + Z2 = Z3, J1 + J2 = J3, p1 = p2 = p3;
and, by central assumption, the original and ﬁnal nuclei are light, natural, and stable isotope.
To illustrate how restrictive Laws I-VII are, it is important to show that the use of the
deuteron gas for the synthesis of the helium is not recommendable for the proposed hadronic
reactor. In fact, Eq. (5.1) becomes in this case

T R + H(2, 1, 1+) + H(2, 1, 1+)

6→ He(4, 2, 0+) + heat,

(5.2)

that violates Law III on compatible spin coupling, as well as Law II on angular momentum
conservation.

A possible hadronic reactor for the synthesis of the helium verifying Laws II and III

according to the synthesis

T R + H(2, 1, 1+) + H(2, 1, −1+) → He(4, 2, 0+) + heat,

(5.3)

27

would be dramatically diﬀerent than that herein considered, and has been suggested else-
where [3k,3l]. Therefore, the synthesis of the helium is ignored hereon.

A more promising ”intermediate fusion” is that of synthesizing a stable isotope of the
Lithium from a 50-50 mixture of deuteron and helium according to the following realization
of Eq. (5.1)

T R + H(2, 1, 1+) + He(4, 2, 0+) → Li(6, 3, 1+) + heat

(5.4)

that veriﬁes all seven laws of CNF.

A preferred use of the proposed hadronic reactor is that for the synthesis of nitrogen

from carbon and deuteron indicated earlier according to the fusion process

T r + C(12, 6, 0+) + H(2, 1, 1+) → N(14, 7, 1+) + Heat, ]eqno(5.5)

that veriﬁes all seven laws of controlled nuclear fusions. The above fusion can be tested by
using tungsten electrodes and ﬁlling up the hadronic reactor with a 50-50 mixture of carbon
dioxide and deuteron gas. In this case, the electric arc decomposes CO2 into carbon and
oxygen, thus rendering the carbon available ﬂr fusion (5.5). The resulting oxygen is also
expected to have ”intermediate fusions” via the reaction

T R + O(16, 8, 0+) + H(2, 1, 1+) → F (18, 9, 1+),

((5.6)

that also veriﬁes all CNF laws, with the exception that F (18, 9, 1+) is not a stable isotope.
Nevertheless, it decays in about 109 minutes into the oxygen via an electron capture or a
beta plus decay, thus being acceptable on environmental grounds (since the beta are easily
trapped by the heavy steel of the reactor vessel). Another alternative is the use of carbon
electrodes and then ﬁlling up the hadronic reactor with only deuteron gas. In this case the
electrodes will consume since they provide the carbon needed for synthesis (5.5), although
their cost is minimal and fast means of their replacement are possible for minimal service
[9d], to as to maintain industrial maturity.

Numerous other gaseous feedstock are possible for the proposed hadronic reactor. Their

systematic study is left to interested readers for brevity.

The expected energy output of the nitrogen synthesis is signiﬁcant. In fact, we have the

energy release per synthesis

∆E = [C(12, 6, 0+) + H(2, 1, 1+)] − N(14, 7, 1+) = 14.850MeV /c2.

(5.7)

By remember that 1MeV = 1.6021 × 10−13 joule and that in one mole we have 6.022 × 1023
atoms (Avogadro number), the extremely low eﬃciency of one over 107 atoms per mole per
minute of said 50-50 mixture of carbon dioxide and deuteron gas, would yield the energy
release

(14.8×106×1.6×10−19Joule)×(6×1023)×(10−7 reaction/min per mole] = 1.4×106joule/min,

(5.8)
namely, an energy outputm if conﬁrmed, would have full industrial signiﬁcance since the
energy input (50Kw) is essentially ignorable with respect to the above energy output on a
per minute basis.

28

To understand the engineering optimization of the proposed hadronic reactor it is im-
portant to indicate other possibilities verifying all seven CNF laws, but they are not rec-
ommended because of industrial insuﬃciencies. Suppose that the reactor is ﬁlled up with
hydrogen, and that the electrodes are made up of Palladium 106 or 108. In this case we
expect the following fusions at the palladium cathode

T R + P d(106, 46, 0+) + H(1, 1, 1+) → Ag(107, 47,

T R + P d(108, 46, 0+) + H(1, 1, 1+) → Ag(109, 47,

+

),

+

),

1
2

1
2

(5.9a)

(5.9a)

which fusions do verify all CNF laws. Nevertheless, the preceding fusions would imply the
rapid disintegration of the electrodes, with consequential lack of industrial relevance. This
illustrates the need for an embodiment to have a suﬃciently long life prior to service as a
necessary condition for industrial maturity.

A few comments are now in order. Firstly, we stress the impossibility for the proposed
hadronic reactor to produce energy of explosive character, because synthesis (5.5) occur along
the arc, thus displacing the gaseous feedstock away from the arc at their occurrence, with
consequential halting of all eﬀects. This is the very reason why the patented PlasmaArcFlow
Technology is mandatory to reach industrially meaningful results.

Secondly, note the the impossibility for fusion (5.5) to produce any harmful radiation,
evidently because either the nitrogen is synthesized or not, while the emission of neutrons is
impossible because the available energies are dramatically insuﬃcient for the ﬁssion of any
available nucleus, while possible proton and electron radiations are easily trapped by the
heavy metal vessel due to their charges.

Thirdly, one should note that the energy output is easily controllable in the proposed
hadronic reactor in a variety of way, including the control via the values and impulse fre-
quency of pressure and DC power as well as the control of the PlasmaArcFlow.

Despite these intrinsic safety features, all energy productions imply risks, and this is the
In fact, the latter can only operate at high
case also for the proposed hadronic reactor.
pressures, thus requiring safety precautions for any operation, essentially given by operation
under ground with heavy steel reinforced cement protections due to known risks connected
to high pressure, and the sole possible operation via completely automatic remote controls.
This illustrates the need of the proposal to use the already developed automatic and remote
controls of the Magnegas Technology.

We should also indicated that the proposed hadronic reactor is based on preliminary
[9d] in regard to the production
experimental evidence of the MagneGas Reactors of Ref.
of anomalous heat (that is, heat that cannot be entirely accounted with conventional ther-
mochemical reactions), as well as anomalous content of nitrogen in Magnegas. Nevertheless,
these indications should be taken with care due to the need of systematic measurements for
their independent veriﬁcation not conducted until now.

We would like also to conﬁrm that hadronic mechanics, hadronic chemistry and isorel-
ativity do indeed predict that, under the above realization and optimization of all seven
CNF laws via the proposed hadronic reactor, the synthesis of the nitrogen from carbon and

29

deuteron is inevitable following the triggering though the hadronic horizon. However, we
should also indicate that the excessive number of unknowns due to the novelty of the research
prohibit the prediction of speciﬁc numerical values. Their numerical values of pressures, DC
power and PlasmaArcFlow have been suggested above on semi-empirical grounds based on
their maximal possible engineering realization. Therefore, no claim of actual existence of the
proposed ”intermediate fusion” of nitrogen from carbon and deuteron can be voiced prior to
the actual construction and successful test of the proposed hadronic reactor.

In closing, it is appropriate to recall that both the ”cold” and the ”hot” fusions have
produced no industrially value result to date following large investments over a protracted
period of time. While research along these lines should evidently continue, pressing societal
needs caused by ever increasing cataclysmic climactic events requires serious research and
investments on new alternative, of which the ”intermediate fusion” proposed in this paper
is merely one among other possibilities. In the ﬁnal analysis, readers should remember that
the well being of their children is at stake.

Legal Note.
The hadronic reactor proposed in this paper is protected by U.S. Patent numbers 6,926,872;
6,673,322; 6,663,752; 6,540,966; and 6,183,604; issued to R. M. Santilli and assigned to
private corporations plus a number of additional international patents are pending. This
is to acknowledge that, according to international patent laws, any researcher is completely
free to conduct any and all desired research on the proposed hadronic reactor without any
need for prior authorization from the patent holder, under the condition that this paper and
the quoted patents are listed in any possible publication. Prior authorization by the owners
of the intellectual rights is requested by law only in the event of sales or other uses of the
patented technology implying an income.

References

[1] M. Fleishmann,

S. Pons and M. Hawkins, Electroanalyttic

chem. 261,
301 (1989)[1a]. 1. http://www.picosearch.com/cgi-bin/ts0.pl?index=102342 [1b].
http://prola.aps.org/search [1c]. http://www.inﬁnite-energy.com/resources/techrefa-
g.html#top [1d].

[2] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935) [2a]. E. Fermi,
Nuclear Physics, University of Chicago Press (1048) [2b]. D.Bohm, Quantum Theory
(Dover Publications, New York, 1979) [2c]. J. S. Bell, Physica 1, 195 (1965) [11d].

[3] R. M. Santilli, Foundations of Theoretical Mechanics, Vol. I 91978) [3a] and Vol.
II 91982) [3b] Springer–Verlag, Heidelberg–New York; Lie-admissible Approach to
the Hadronic Structure, Vol.I (1978) [3c] and Vil. II (1981) [3d], Hadronic Press,
Palm Harbor, Florida; Isotopic Generalizations of Galilei and Einstein Relativities,
Vol. I (1991) [3e] and Vol. II (1991) [3f], Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, Florida;
Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Vol. (1995) [3g], Vol. II 91995) [3h and Vol. III

30

(in press) [3i], Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev; Isotopic, Genotopic and Hy-
perstructural Methods in Theoretical Biology, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev
(1996) [3j]; The Physics of New Clean Energies and Fuels According to Hadronic
Mechanics, Special issue of the Journal of New Energy, 318 pages (1998) [3k]; Foun-
dations of Hadronic Chemistry with Applications to New Clean Energies and Fuels,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston-Dordrecht-London (2001) [3l]; The Structure of
the Neutron as Predicted by Hadronic Mechanics and the Possible Utilization of its
Energy via its Stimulated Decay, http://www.neutronstructure.org (1995) [3m]; Iso-
dual Theory of Antimatter with Applications to Antigravity, Grand Uniﬁcations and
Cosmology, Springer (in press) [3n].

[4] H. C. Myung, Lie Algebras and Flexible Lie-Admissible Algebras, Hadronic Press
(1982) [4a]. A.K. Aringazin, A.Jannussis, D.F.Lopez, M.Nishioka and B.Veljanosky,
Santilli’s Lie–Isotopic Generalization of Galilei’s Relativities, Kostarakis Publisher,
Athens, Greece (1980) [4b]. J. V. Kadeisvili, Santilli’s Isotopies of Contemporary Al-
gebras, Geometries and Relativities, Second Edition, Ukraine Academy of Sciences,
Kiev (1997) [4c]. D. S. Sourlas and G. T. Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations of the
Lie-Santilli Theory, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1993) [4d]. J. Lˆohmus, E.
Paal and L. Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras in Physics, Hadronic Press, Palm Har-
bor, FL, (1994) [4e]. R. M. Falcon Ganfornina and J. Nunez Valdes, Fondamentos de la
Isoteoria de Lie-Santilli, (in Spanish) International Academic Press, America-Europe-
Asia, (2001), also available in the pdf ﬁle http://www.i-b-r.org/docs/spanish.pdf [4f].
Chun-Xuan Jiang, Foundations of Santilli’s Isonumber Theory, International Aca-
demic Press, America-Europe-Asia (2002), also available in the pdf ﬁle http://www.i-
b-r.org/docs/jiang.pdf [4g].

[5] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 1, 224, 574, and 1267 (1978) [5a]; Phys. Rev. D 20, 555
(1979) [5b]; Algebras, Groups and Geometries 10, 273 (1993) [5c]; Rendiconti Circolo
Matematico di Palermo, Supplemento 42, 7 (1996) [5d]; Intern. J. Modern Phys. D
7, 351 (1998) [5e]; Found. Phys. 27, 625 (1997) [5f]; Found. Phys. 27, 1159 (1997)
[5g]; Advances in Algebras, 21, 121 (2003) [5h]; Journal of Dynamical Systems and
Geometric Theories, 1, 121 (2003) [5i]. Intern. J. Modern Phys. A 14, 3157 (1999)
[5j].

[6] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic Journal 3, 440 (l979) [6a]. R. M. Santilli and H. C. Myung,
Hadronic Journal 5, 1367-1404 (l982) [6b]. R. Mignani, Hadronic Journal 5, 1120
(1982) [6c].

[7] R.M.Santilli, Nuovo Cimento Lett. 37, 545 (1983) [7a]; Lett. Nuovo Cimento 38, 509,
(1983) [7b]; Hadronic J. 8, 25 and 36 (1985) [7c]; JINR Rapid Comm. 6, 24 (1993)
[7d]; J. Moscow Phys. Soc. 3, 255 (1993) [7e]; JINR Comm. No. E4-93-352 (1993) [7f];
Chinese J. Syst. Eng. and Electr. & Electr. 6, 177 (1996) [7g]; Acta Applicanbdae
Math. 50, 177 (1998) [7h]. Intern. J. Modern Phys. A 14, 2205 (1999) [7i].

31

[8] R. M. Santilli, Found. Phys. Letters 10, 305 (1997) [8a]; contributed paper in the
Proceedings of the Eight Marcel Grossmann Meeting in Gravitation, T. Piran, and R.
Ruﬃni, Editors, World Scientiﬁc, pages 473-475 (1999) [8b]; Annales Fondation L. de
Broglie, 29, 953 (2004) [8c].

[9] R. M. Santilli, and D. D. Shillady, Intern. J. Hydrogen Energy 24, 943 (1999) [9a]. R.
M. Santilli and D. D. Shillady, Intern. J. Hadrogen Energy 25, 173 (2000) [9b]. R. M.
Santilli, Hadronic J. 21, 789 (1998) [9c]. R. M. Santilli, http://www.magnegas.com
[9d]. M. G. Kucherenko and A. K. Aringazin, Hadronic J. 21, 895 (1998) [9e]. A.
K. Aringazin, Hadronic J. 24, 395 (2001) [9f]. H. Ruder, G. Wunner, H. Herold,
F. Geyer, Atoms in Strong Magnetic Fields, Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York,
(1994) [9g]. R. M. Santilli, Intern. J. Hydrogen Energy 28, 177 (2003) [9h]. R. M.
Santilli, ”A new gaseous and combustible form of water,” Intern. J. Hydrogen Energy,
in press (2005) [9i].

32

