Pancharatnam Phase and Photon Polarization Optics

S.C. Tiwari
1 Kusum Kutir, Mahamanapuri, Varanasi 221005, India∗

Abstract

Parallel transport of a vector around a closed curve on the surface of a sphere leads to a direction

holonomy which can be related with a geometric phase that is equal to the solid angle subtended by

the closed curve. Since Pancharatnam phase is half of the solid angle subtended by the polarization

cycle on the Poincare sphere, quantum parallel transport law takes recourse o spin-half wave

function to obtain this result. A critique is oﬀered on this factor of half anomaly in the geometric

phase, and a natural resolution using Riemann sphere polarization representation is suggested. It

is argued that spin angular momentum of photon is fundamental in polarization optics, and new

insights are gained based on the hypothesis that two helicity states correspond to two distinct

species of photon. This approach leads to the concept of a physical Poincare sphere: nonlinearity

and jumps in the Pancharatnam phase ﬁnd a simple physical explanation while novel features

pertaining to the discrete and pulsating sphere are predicted. Paired photon spin zero structure of

unpolarized light is also discussed. An outline of possible experimental tests is presented.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Dv, 03.65.CA, 042.50.Dv, 03.65.CA, 03.65.Vf

6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: vns˙sctiwari@yahoo.com

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recent advances in the quantum information science have in a subtle way led to a

paradigm shift on the quantum versus classical debate and controversies; now typical

counter-intuitive aspects of quantum theory are viewed as resources for novel applications.

It is recognized that single photon states, quantum vacuum and entangled photon pairs

constitute one of the most important resources in this endeavor, however polarization quan-

tum optics still depends on the classical notions developed prior to the emergence of the

electromagnetic theory of light. One can marvel on the ingenuity of Stokes [1] that the

vector nature of light could be operationally deﬁned solely based on the intensity (a scalar

quantity) measurements. In fact, even today introducing polarization states of light with-

out any recourse to the electromagnetic ﬁelds gives useful insights [2]. Stokes vectors have

found vast applications in the light scattering experiments, and suitable density matrix rep-

resentation of Stokes four-vector is used to analyze polarization-sensitive cross sections in

particle physics [3]. In quantum optics the Stokes parameters are deﬁned as the expectation

or mean values of the Stokes operators constructed from the canonical ﬁeld operators [4].

Note that polarization is simply an index attached to the ﬁeld operators corresponding to a

quantized simple harmonic oscillator. In the basis of circular polarization, the spin angular

momentum operator for a plane wave is diagonal in the number states, and the diﬀerence

between the number of right circularly polarized (RCP) and left circularly polarized (LCP)

photons determines the spin angular momentum, see Ch. 10 of [4]. Though mechanical

interpretation of classical electromagnetic ﬁelds relates polarization with angular momen-

tum, and Poynting’s suggestion [5] found unequivocal support in the Beth experiment [6],

there exist delicate questions related to gauge invariance and manifest Lorentz covariance.

The problem of time-like and longitudinal ﬁeld excitation is circumvented in quantum optics

working in the radiation gauge. However, the separation of angular momentum of radiation

into orbital and spin parts is not unambiguous. In most cases plane wave approximation

and polarization index associated with the ﬁeld operators imply that it is only the spin of

quantized ﬁeld that is of signiﬁcance. In recent past studies on optical vortices and singular

laser light beams have brought into focus the signiﬁcance of the orbital angular momentum

of light, see the review [7] and references cited therein.

A comprehensive critique on the concept of photon [8] concludes that in spite of the

2

enormous advances in quantum optics the physical reality of photon remains undecidable.

Should we go back to the basics and look afresh on the physical interpretation of the Maxwell

ﬁeld equation? In [8] plausible arguments are put forward to suggest that the Maxwell action

represents the rotational dynamics of photon ﬂuid. I believe that spin angular momentum

and polarization hold the secrets of photon structure [9], and going beyond the co-existence

of quantum and classical descriptions of light there is a need to develop a unitary picture for

optical phenomena. Recently there has been a renewed intense activity to develop insightful

approaches to the polarization of light see [10, 11, 12] and the cited literature. Karassiov

incorporates SU(2) polarization symmetry at the quantization level [10]. Lehner et al [11]

investigate unpolarized light employing rotational and retardation invariance, and oﬀer a

critique to the new class of unpolarized light discussed in [10]. Luis [12] in a series of papers

has developed a formalism based on the probability distribution on the Poincare sphere to

characterize the degree of polarization of light.

The aim of the present paper is to revisit Pancharatnam phase which is an ‘all polarization

eﬀect’, and gain new insights into the nature of light. It is well known that Pancharatnam’s

work [13] was rediscovered after the Berry phase , [14] and since then quantum as well as

classical explanations to the geometric phases in optics have been discussed in the literature.

Experimentally numerous studies have conﬁrmed the existence of this eﬀect in polarization

optics, therefore we proceed in the other way and ask: what could be learnt on the properties

of light from Pancharatnam phase? The main results of our study are as follows. First it is

pointed out in the next section that there is a discrepancy of a factor of half in the phase

obtained in modern approaches, and invoking spin-half for two-level polarization system is

an artifact. In Sec. III a satisfactory formal resolution is established based on the Riemann

sphere representation of polarization [15]. Postulating that LCP and RCP photons are

distinct species, spinor wave function and geometrical mapping of polarization states are

analyzed to seek a probability distribution of the number of photons corresponding to the

states on the Poincare sphere in Sect. IV. Note that elementary particle physics oriented

photon and anti-photon idea was earlier discussed by Good [16], and in the multivector

language advocated by Hestenes [17] plane electromagnetic wave solutions having positive

(negative) frequency correspond to RCP (LCP) light In contrast to them, in our extended

space-time model of photon, the internal structure of photon determines its spin angular

momentum and intrinsic frequency (energy) [9, 18]. The signiﬁcance of the results obtained

3

in the context of nonlinearity and singularity of Pancharatnam phase [19], unpolarized light

and spin angular momentum transfer as a physical mechanism for geometric phase [20] is

discussed in Sect. V.

II. POINCARE SPHERE AND PANCHARATNAM PHASE

A. Pancharatnam’s original approach

Pancharatnam’s motivation in [13] is to understand the physics of crystal optics: inter-

ference of polarized light beams, geometrical approach to the polarization phenomenon, and

spherical trigonometry are the principal ingredients in his approach. It is remarkable that

the operational deﬁnition based on the measurement of intensity of light after its passage

through the polarizer and analyzer settings pioneered in 19th century is followed by Pan-

charatnam. The following proposition is proved by him: the interference between mutually

coherent light beams of intensities I1 and I2 in the polarization states P1 and P2 respectively

is given by the expression (that deﬁnes the phase diﬀerence δ)

I = I1 + I2 + 2

I1I2 cos P1P2 cos δ

p

Here polarization states are described on the Poincare sphere, and P1, P2 is the angular

separation between the points P1 and P2 on the surface of the sphere. Next, the most

important geometrical result is obtained: a phase of pure geometric origin, Γ depends on

the solid angle Ω subtended by the triangle P1P2 P on the Poincare sphere and is given by

(1)

(2)

Γ =

Ω(P1P2P )

1
2

±

In the modern derivations the parallel transport of a vector on sphere naturally leads to

the value of Γ equal to Ω, and it is this anomaly of a factor of half that we wish to elaborate

since it is not suﬃciently recognized in the literature. For this purpose it is important to

realize how a vectorial property of polarization is mapped on to the surface of a sphere

deﬁned in terms of the scalar quantities: the intensity I, and the Stokes parameters (M, C,

S). Adopting the four-vector notation (I, M, C, S) can be written as Sµ , µ = 0, 1, 2, 3. For

a perfectly polarized light

SµSµ = 0

or

I 2 = M 2 + C 2 + S2

(3)

4

y

a

λ

b

x

Polarization Ellipse

K

A

φ

L

Z

P

θ

X’

Equator

X

B

Z’

FIG. 1: Description of spherical surface. Poles Z and Z ′ represent RCP and LCP light on the
Poincare sphere, and points on the equator X ′BX represent linear polarization. Polarization ellipse

is shown as inset.

Eq. (3) deﬁnes the Poincare sphere, and the cartesian coordinates of a point on the sphere

are given by the Stokes vector S (or Si, i = 1,2,3). To make transparent the relationship with

polarization, consider a general polarization state that is described by the orientation of, say

major axis of the ellipse, and the ratio of semi-minor axis to semi-major axis (b/a). Let the

propagation direction of light be ﬁxed, and it is assumed along z-axis, and the orientation

is speciﬁed by the angle λ made by the major axis with the x-axis. Deﬁne the ellipticity by

an angle ξ such that tanξ= b/a. The angles λ and ξ called azimuth and ellipticity uniquely

represent the polarization state; here 0

λ

≤

≤

π and

π/4

ξ

π/4.

−

≤

≤

On the surface of the unit sphere shown in Fig.1, standard geometric deﬁnitions are

introduced: by virtue of Eq.(3) only two coordinates (θ, φ ) of spherical polar coordinate

system are suﬃcient to specify any point P on the sphere. Polar angle θ is the great circle

arc length ZP, and the azimuthal angle φ is the spherical angle XZP. The diametrically

opposite points Z and Z’ represent the poles of the great circle termed the equator. The

great circle arc ZP and the spherical angle AZP deﬁne the latitude [(π/2)-ZP] and longitude

respectively. The meridian ZPBZ’ intersects the equator at B: all points on meridian have

the same longitude. The points on the small circle KPL with poles (Z, Z’) have the same

latitude, and it is called the parallel of latitude.

5

On the Poincare sphere, latitude and longitude have the values 2ξ and 2λ of the polarization
ellipse shown as the inset in Fig.1. Poles Z(Z ′) represent RCP (LCP) light, and points on the

equator represent linearly polarized light. Elliptical polarization corresponds to rest of the

points on the surface, and orthogonal states lie on the antipodal points on the sphere. Now

it is not necessary to go into the details of the derivation of expression (2) for Γ which can be

found in [13], the crucial point is that a polarization rotation in real space corresponds to a

rotation twice of that value on the Poincare sphere and Pancharatnam’s approach takes into

account this naturally while considering decomposition of a coherent polarized light beam

into two parts having arbitrary polarizations. This results into a geometric phase acquired

by a light beam traversing a cycle along the geodesic path on the Poincare sphere equal to

half of the solid angle subtended by the closed cycle.

B. Discrepancy of a factor of half

In a lucid paper [21] Berry brought out the signiﬁcance of Pancharatnam phase in the light

of quantum mechanical adiabatic phase discovered by him in 1984 [14] establishing a close

relation of light polarization description on the Poincare sphere with the spinor evolution

for the Hamiltonian

H(r) = r

σ

·

(4)

Here r is a unit vector parametrized by polar angles (θ,φ) and σ is the Pauli spin matrix.

In the concluding section of [21] spin-half representation for getting Γ for photon which

has spin one is sought to be justiﬁed with the argument that photons have only two states

of helicity. On the other hand, the phase acquired on the closed path on the surface of

the sphere equal to the solid angle subtended by the path can be identiﬁed with the spin

redirection phase on the sphere of directions of the propagation vector, k. The question

arises: could SU(2) symmetry associated with spinor be used for spin one photon? In [22]

we made a brief comment on this question and rather naively suggested that since phase

corresponds to electric ﬁeld vector one has to take the square root of phase factor obtained on

the sphere. In the next section an attempt is made to give a sound basis for this suggestion.

But ﬁrst we elaborate the problem.

It is known that non-Euclidean geometry of the sphere results into the change of direction

of a vector under parallel transport:

it can be proved calculating the Christoﬀel symbol

6

and using geodesic equation that a vector parallel transported around a curve gets rotated

through an angle equal to the solid angle subtended by the area enclosed by the curve. In

another description, one can use the Fermi-Walker parallel transport for curved geometry [23]

and obtain the same result for the sphere. In the context of geometric phase in optics, Chiao

and Wu [24] proposed k space as the parameter space and predicted rotation of polarization

for a light beam propagating through a helically wound optical ﬁber, and immediately

this was experimentally demonstrated by Tomita and Chiao [25].

In the light of earlier

anticipations due to Rytov and Vladimirskii, we term this spin redirection phase as RVCW

phase [26]. Haldane explained this phase in terms of the geometry of ﬁber relating it with

the work of Ross [27]. However, Segert [23] and others have explained the RVCW phase

purely in geometric terms i.e.

tangent bundles and parallel transport laws [28].

In [29]

Berry discusses parallel transport of a vector on the surface of a sphere, and to translate

the direction holonomy to phase holonomy he deﬁnes a complex unit vector and chooses

local basis vectors along the parallel of latitude and meridian of longitude. He obtains the

expected result, namely the phase holonomy is equal to the solid angle subtended by the

closed curve on the sphere. Obviously the RVCW phase ﬁnds natural geometric explanation

in all these modern approaches [21, 23, 28, 29].

To derive Pancharatnam phase Berry replaces the complex unit vector by a quantum

state, and assuming the spinor quantum state for photon arrives at a factor of half. Jordan

[30] similarly states that, ‘since the spin eigenvalue is 1/2, the phase diﬀerence is Ω/2’.

Bhandari [31] asks the question: Is there any paradox in a spin 1 particle like a photon

behaving as a spin 1/2 particle? He answers, ‘there is in fact none’. The reasoning behind

this assertion is two-fold: spin-half representation holds for any two-level system, and Jones

calculus has been eﬀectively in use for light waves in polarization optics. Note that complex

representation of the components of electric ﬁeld vector in Jones calculus does not in any way

imply its interpretation as a wavefunction of photon, and as shown by Jiao et al [32] without

using any quantum rendition Pancharatnam phase can be derived using Jones calculus. At a

basic level, there is an intricate problem in deﬁning a wavefunction for photon [8]. As for the

two-level system, spinor form is merely an analogy; there is nothing quantum mechanical

in it; the fact partly admitted by Bhandari [31] when he says that quantum statistics is

diﬀerent for spin-half particle. The inevitable conclusion is that phase holonomy on the

sphere (in k space) unambiguously corresponds to the RVCW phase, and Pancharatnam

7

phase derived using spinor wavefunction on the Poincare sphere is an artifact.

III. RIEMANN SPHERE

Penrose [15] has remarked that the fundamental role of Riemann sphere is not well rec-

ognized for any two level quantum system.

In the case of photon spin the description is

abstract, but it is worth considering to understand Pancharatnam phase. Let us note some

mathematical properties of the sphere [33] which have importance for the present discussion.
The sphere is deﬁned on the real space i.e. ﬁeld of real numbers R3 and it is orientable. Ori-

entability could be proved considering the parallel transport of a frame where frame is a set

of linearly independent vectors (u, v). The atlas deﬁned on the sphere assigns diﬀerent set
of coordinates on the two hemispheres. Physically for the Poincare sphere, R3 is described

by (M, C, S), and orientability is responsible for the sign of the Pancharatnam phase in

Eq. (2). There cannot exist a continuous, regular vector ﬁeld on the sphere. In a simple

illustration this is reﬂected in the stereographic projection where inﬁnity is mapped on to

the pole of the sphere. The sphere is not a group manifold, and the group manifold of SU(2)
is 3-sphere deﬁned on R4. Further the group of rotations SO(3) has a relationship with

SU(2): the mapping SU(2)

SO(3) is a two-to-one homomorphism. Aitchison [34] gives a

→

nice discussion on the monopole problem and absence of singularity-free vector potential in

terms of the property of the sphere that continuous regular vector ﬁeld cannot be deﬁned

on it. He also shows that the Berry phase-monopole relationship can be made more clear

using the fact that 3-sphere is a group manifold of SU(2). Since SU(2) is double-covering of
the rotation group in R3 i.e. SO(3), the spin-half particle can be described by SU(2); Berry

phase for the neutron using spinor wavefunction on the sphere would be unambiguous.

We propose that parallel transport of a vector on the Riemann sphere representation of

light polarization leads to the Pancharatnam phase. Note that this phase can be obtained

from the geometry of the Poincare sphere (without making use of spinor wavefunction and

quantum parallel transport); see [32] besides Pancharatnam’s derivation [13]. In [33] it is

proved that the complex sphere is homeomorphic to the tangent bundle of the (real) sphere:

could one relate Riemann sphere with the Poincare sphere in a similar fashion? We leave

aside this question here, and proceed to describe Riemann sphere construction following

[15].

8

Argand
plane

−1

p

1

propagation
direction

zero

i

−i

infinity

q =

z
w

FIG. 2: Reimann sphere construction-mapping points on Argand plane on to the surface of sphere.

Inset shows propagation direction of light. Dotted ellipse is a projection of the circle perpendicular

to the line connecting centre to the point p.

Let us consider two complex quantities z and w, and deﬁne their ratio

In the Argand plane, a complex number is geometrically represented as a point with real

and imaginary parts as coordinates along the two orthogonal axes (R,I). Let us construct a

unit sphere whose centre is taken to be the origin of the Argand plane lying horizontally as

shown in Fig.2. The points (1, 0, (0, i), (-1, 0) and (0, -i) lie on the equator of the sphere.

Assuming that one of the poles represents inﬁnity, the projections from this point to the

Argand plane map all of the numbers q (including the one where w = 0) to the surface of

the sphere uniquely; i.e. the stereographic projection.

To represent polarized light on the Riemann sphere, let us write an arbitrary polarized state

as a linear combination of RCP and LCP light

Assuming that the poles represent RCP and LCP light, the complex number q on the

Riemann sphere represents an arbitrary polarization state speciﬁed by its square root

P = RCP + qLCP

p = √q

9

(5)

(6)

(7)

As shown in the inset of Fig. 2 direction of propagation of light is vertically upwards,

and the polarization ellipse is obtained as follows. The plane normal to the line joining the

centre to a point on the sphere intersects the sphere in a circle. Projection of this circle on

to the horizontal plane gives the ellipse which represents the elliptically polarized state at

that point.

It is now straightforward to obtain Pancharatnam phase: square root of the parallel

transport phase holonomy on the Riemann sphere immediately gives the correct value given

by the Eq.(2).To end this section we quote an interesting observation made by Penrose in a

footnote (p.272) [15]: “The square root has to do with the fact that the photon is a massless
particle of spin one, i.e. twice the fundamental unit ~/2. For a graviton – the yet undetected

massless quantum of gravity – the spin would be two, i.e. four times the fundamental unit,

and we should need to take the fourth root of q in the above description”.

IV. PHOTON SPIN AND LIGHT POLARIZATION

The term ‘photon spin’ is freely used by Penrose, however in the light of conceptual prob-

lems and elusive physical realization of photon [2, 4, 8] we have used light polarization in

the preceding section to describe the Riemann sphere. It is known that to picture linearly

polarized photon – a single photon, one has to rely on the counter-intuitiveness of quantum

mechanics. Feynman in his characteristic style discussed this issue [35] and quantum proba-

bility amplitude comes in handy for this purpose. That it does not make sense to imagine a

fraction of one photon means interpreting the thought experiment of the passage of a single

photon through polarizer/analyzer diﬀerently, e.g. he says, ‘Quantum mechanics tells us it
is all there 3/4 of the time’. We argue in this section that spin angular momentum of ~ per

photon (demonstrated in numerous experiments) in the light beams ought to be accorded

a fundamental role in the physical model of a single photon. Before that we draw atten-

tion to the geometric phase unwittingly found by Feynman. In the discussion on what he

calls a ‘curious point’, an interesting result is obtained: RCP (LCP) photon though remains

RCP(LCP) photon if viewed from any arbitrary rotated frame, the photon acquires a phase

factor that distinguishes the frames. Note that this observation predates Byrne’s analysis

[36] that we highlighted in [20].

We adopt a heuristic approach based on the hypothesis: spin of photon is a characteristic

10

property of its internal structure, and spin+ ~ (or RCP) photon is a distinct object than
spin -~ (or LCP) photon. As a consequence there does not exist a linearly or elliptically po-

larized photon, and RCP photon cannot change to LCP photon in a passive optical process.

This hypothesis does not depend on any speciﬁc model of the internal structure of photon

and therefore inconclusive state of the photon model discussed in [9] is unimportant. In the

present paper the polarization optics is discussed based on the ensemble of the constituent

quantum objects: RCP and LCP photons. Intensity of light and polarization state descrip-

tion are the main ingredients for this polarization optics. Note that we are not using second

quantized formulation of optics here. For simplicity we consider light propagation along a

ﬁxed direction, say z-axis. Total average number of photons N determines the light intensity,

I. A reasonable assumption is that I is proportional to N. Let Nr and Nl be the number of

RCP and LCP photons, then the problem is to characterize the state of light. In a stream of

photons possessing on the average equal number of RCP and LCP photons, the net spin of

the light beam is zero. However, the diﬀerence in the distribution of photons will give rise to

the diﬀerent states of what we call linearly polarized light in this case. The intensity being

a scalar is a constant quantity for a ﬁxed N therefore to account for this diﬀerence ‘phase’

seems a natural choice. To understand this, let us go back to the elementary description of

a simple harmonic oscillator. To describe its state, say displacement, one can just record

its instantaneous position at diﬀerent points of time or alternatively describe the motion in

terms of a constant amplitude and a phase variable. Intensity is analogous to the constant

amplitude of the oscillator, and one needs another variable, i.e. phase to describe the photon

stream. Thus probability distribution of Nr and Nl,and phase would represent the light in

an arbitrary polarized state.

Based on our hypothesis we reanalyze the geometrical description of polarization, i.e. the

Poincare sphere. The RCP has N = Nr, and the LCP light N = Nl, therefore the poles have

fundamental signiﬁcance representing these states. We restrict the domain of the surface of

the sphere in two hemispherical regions S+(0

θ < π/2+ǫ) and S−(π/2

ǫ < θ

≤
overlap equatorial region has non-trivial topology. To characterize probability distribution

≤

−

π), and the

11

we reinterpret the spinor functions

ψ+ =

cos θ/2 eiφ/2
sin θ/2 e−φ/2









ψ− = 


eiφ/2
sin θ/2
cos θ/2 e−φ/2





−

Multiplying both sides of Eqs. (8) and (9) by √N we have

P+ = √Nψ+ =

Nreiφ/2 +

P− = √Nψ− =

Nreiφ/2

p

p

p

Nle−iφ/2
Nle−iφ/2

− p

where on S+ and S− respectively Nr and Nl are given by

Nr = √N cos θ/2,

Nr = √N sin θ/2,

p

p

Nl = √N sin θ/2

Nl = √N cos θ/2

p

p

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

Conventionally diametrically opposite points on the Poincare sphere represent orthogonal

(elliptical) polarization states; in the new interpretation these correspond to the light con-

sisting of the mean number of RCP (LCP) photons interchanged with LCP(RCP) photons.

The equator has a special signiﬁcance since near the transition overlap region the diﬀerence

between the numbers Nr and Nl tends to 1, and the cross-over implies a jump in handedness.

For, what one usually refers to as classical light beams, besides the averaged ﬁeld quanti-

ties and corresponding Stokes parameters, one can go a step further and introduce second

order correlations of the ﬁelds. The ﬂuctuations in ﬁelds (and intensities), both spatial and

temporal, are inherent in the light phenomena; ﬁeld correlations at space-time points in the

coherence theory give information regarding such ﬂuctuations. The 2x2 coherence matrix

deﬁned for vector waves embodies the polarization property of light in this second order

coherence theory [4]. In quantum optics, quantum ﬁeld operators have to be used, however

one may simplify the discussion using photon number ﬂuctuations. Evidently such eﬀects

would be more pronounced near the equatorial region of the Poincare sphere. In the next

section some of the physical consequences of the present approach are discussed.

12

V. NEW INSIGHTS AND PROPOSED TESTS

The approach proposed in the preceding section is based on the quantum nature of light

whose constituents are two species of photon distinguished by their uniquely deﬁned spin (or

handed-ness). Note that we are not using the philosophy of quantum mechanics (a la single

particle interpretation of the wavefunction), and do not adopt second quantized ﬁeld theory.

The photon polarization optics (PPO), being developed, is inspired by the geometrical con-

siderations and the extended space-time model of photon. Known polarization properties

of light are incorporated by construction in the PPO, however new insights are also gained

that are presented in the following:

(i) Unpolarized light: The deﬁnition of unpolarized light is not simple in spite of the

fact that natural light is unpolarized. The present work suggests a deﬁnition: uniformly

weighted paired states (P+, P−) spanning the whole surface of the Poincare sphere charac-

terize the unpolarized light. Recall that in any paired state (P+, P−) the number of RCP

(LCP) photons in P+ is equal to the number of LCP (RCP) photons in P−. The pairing

gives rise to net spin zero, and the resulting distribution of paired photons represents unpo-

larized light. In [9] it was argued that a random ensemble of quantum entangled photons

could be viewed as a new state of light. Disregarding quantum mechanical interpretation,

the unpolarized light deﬁned here essentially corresponds to this ‘new state of light’ – let us

call it paired photons unpolarized light (PUL).

Luis deﬁnes unpolarized light [12] in terms of the Q function having the value

Q(θ, φ) =

1
4π

(14)

This corresponds to a uniform distribution for ﬁelds. In his work SU(2) coherent states

are used. Formally our deﬁnition also entails 4π, i.e. the solid angle subtended by the whole

surface of the Poincare sphere, however the physical ideas are diﬀerent. Lehner et al [11]

deﬁne two types of unpolarized light. Type II polarized light is deﬁned by a distribution

function of ﬁelds that is rotationally invariant and symmetric with respect to RCP

LCP

→

transformation. Type I unpolarized light besides these requirements possesses phase retar-

dation invariance. The PUL deﬁned here satisﬁes all the conditions necessary for type I

unpolarized light, however, PUL has a polarization structure of paired photons. Karassiov

[10] speculates on the hidden polarization structure of unpolarized light. Though relating

13

PUL with the formal P-scalar light proposed by him [10] is not clear, we disagree with

Lehner et al that polarization structure of unpolarized light is paradoxical. Interestingly

Simmons and Guttmann [2], (p. 91), also ﬁnd an unusual representation for completely un-

polarized light. Using the property that diametrically opposite points represent orthogonal

polarization states the Stokes four-vector for unpolarized light can be rewritten as

I

0

0

0



















=

+

I/2

M

C

S




























I/2

M

−

C

S

−

−










(15)

Thus unpolarized light is an incoherent superposition of any two polarized states.

The preceding discussion should not be construed to imply that photon pairing is a

basic requirement for unpolarized light. If we relax the plane wave approximation and a

ﬁxed direction of propagation then randomly oriented spinning photons in the beam such

that the net average spin is zero, would also represent unpolarized light. This kind of

unpolarized light cannot be said to have a polarization structure. How to distinguish the

two kinds of unpolarized light? It can be easily guessed that the PUL has the structure of

the correlated quantum entangled pairs, therefore the diﬀerence between the polarization

correlation measurements should throw light on these states. Mandel and Wolf [4], p.649,

point out that each one of the photon pair in quantum entangled state is unpolarized as

deﬁned by the coherence matrix. Thus it would seem that these questions deserve deeper

analysis, and further study.

(ii) The nature of Pancharatnam phase: The Poincare sphere used in the work of

Pancharatnam retains its mathematical idealization for continuous ﬁeld variables represent-

ing light. The quantum nature embodied in the PPO, on the other hand, gives rise to the

idea of a physical Poincare sphere in which two poles representing RCP (LCP) light are in-

dispensable, while the equator relates the topological property of the sphere. Pancharatnam

phase for a polarization cycle on either hemi-sphere is geometrical, while near the equator

due to the constraint that fractional photon is unphysical, one would expect peculiar be-

haviour. Schmitzer et al [19] found such an ‘exotic’ nonlinearity in the Pancharatnam phase.

The cross-over from the excess of Nr to the excess of Nl (or Nl to Nr) in the polarization path

reveals in a topological eﬀect of phase jumps. Bhandari’s observations [19] are proposed to

14

be due to this eﬀect. Thus nonlinearity and singularity in Pancharatnam phase could be

given a physical origin in PPO.

The physical mechanism responsible for the geometric phases (including the RVCW

phase) was suggested to be the transfer of angular momentum in [20]. We have elabo-

rated this suggestion recently [26] and proposed experiments to test these ideas.

In the

context of Pancharatnam phase, the question that we ask is the following. Let us consider

a beam of light that has speciﬁed average values of Nr and Nl; after the passage through

optical elements that change its polarization let it return to the state with the same Nr

and Nl. How to distinguish the two states? Of course, Pancharatnam phase represents a

criterion to distinguish the ﬁnal state from the initial state. In [20, 26] the notion of the

uniform level of angular momentum has been discussed, and it is argued that this level is

changed that manifests as a geometric phase. A quantitative estimate is lacking, however

in the light of PPO a plausible connection with the rearrangement of the distribution of

photons could be made. Though average Nr and Nl are same in the initial and ﬁnal states,

the local distribution and correlations of photons are changed in the rearranged ﬁnal state

of the light. Therefore, we expect that physical Poincare sphere has a granular structure (or

discretized pairs on the surface) and ﬂuctuating radius. To probe the spin transfer mecha-

nism and the hidden structure of the sphere, a great deal of experimental ingenuity would be

required. It is suggested that second-order correlations, and higher-order interference eﬀects

for low intensity light beams undergoing polarization cycles could probe these features.

An intriguing observation is that of frequency shift as an evolving Pancharatnam phase

[37]: a rotating half-wave plate seems to induce a frequency shift. Bretanaker and Le

Floch [38] argued that the experimental observation could be explained in terms of the
energy conservation. They assume that the light beam consists of Nσ+ (RCP) and Nσ−

(LCP) photons, and calculate the energy transfer via rotating half-wave plate. Angular

momentum exchange (torque imparted to the wave plate by the incident beam) leads to

the energy transfer, and energy conservation law gives the frequency shift.

It is known

that for a monochromatic radiation no passive electronic/optical element can change its

frequency, therefore the frequency shift by a rotating wave plate is intriguing. An alternative

explanation consistent with the hypothesis that internal frequency of RCP and LCP photons

cannot be changed unless these are exchanged by photons with diﬀerent frequency, would

be to interpret the observed intensity oscillation in terms of the time-dependent photon

15

numbers Nr and N in Eqs. (10) and (11). The question whether the time-varying phase

change is to be interpreted as frequency shift or oscillations in the number of photons cannot

be decided solely on the intensity measurements. On the physical Poincare sphere the time-

dependence of Nr and Nl should manifest as a pulsating sphere, therefore to observe this

feature measurements on all the Stokes parameters (M, C, S) would be required. Another

possibility is to seek a detection scheme for the output beam intensity that distinguishes

frequency eﬀects and the eﬀect of photon numbers.

VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have proposed an approach to understand the polarization property of

light based on a physical model of photon, and yet did not consider single photon eﬀects. The

reason is two-fold: ﬁrst physical model of photon is at present tentative, and secondly the

approach outlined here is in a developing state. There has been a great deal of understanding

on the classical light, and quantum optics for large number of photons. For a single photon

there are many conceptual problems [8], and the role of quantum vacuum is very signiﬁcant.

Localized photon and the spin angular momentum in more physical terms (i.e. the structure

of photon) than a polarization index have not found a satisfactory solution in quantized ﬁeld

theory. The vacuum ﬁeld becomes crucial in quantum optics even in the case of a beam

splitter, see Sec. 10.9.5 in [4]. The signiﬁcance of Pancharatnam phase to gain insights

has been stressed here. In view of the recent speculations on what has come to be known

as ‘quantum-vacuum geometric phase’, see [39] it would seem that in the context of our

hypothesis the very idea of Pancharatnam phase for a single photon would involve quantum

vacuum. Shen [39] discusses RVCW phase for RCP and LCP photons, and argues that the

phase at quantum-vacuum level could be envisaged. Our hypothesis, on the other hand,

implies that a single photon can be represented only at one of the poles of the physical

Poincare sphere, and any notion of a polarization cycle for a single photon depends on the

existence of a hidden source of photons which could be identiﬁed with aether or quantum

vacuum. Obviously instead of special optical media to realize quantum-vacuum geometric

phase [39], here it is suggested that single photon polarization cycle, if observed carefully,

would reveal the quantum-vacuum eﬀect for Pancharatnam phase and similar to the Casimir

force, quantum vacuum torque would come into the play.

16

In conclusion, we have elaborated a conceptual problem in the derivation of Pancharatnam

phase using quantum parallel transport that depends on the spin-half treatment for photon

having spin one, and suggested that the square root of phase factor obtained on the Riemann

sphere gives correct result. A heuristic approach for polarized light is outlined introducing

the hypothesis that RCP and LCP photons are distinct species, and spin angular momentum

originates due to the structure of photon. The notion of physical Poincare sphere, new

insights on the unpolarized light, and the implications of these ideas on the Pancharatnam

phase are discussed. Qualitative arguments are also presented to test some of the ideas

experimentally. The role of spin angular momentum to address fundamental questions seems

inevitable, both for photon, and electron discussed elsewhere [18, 40].

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The library facility of the Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi is acknowledged.

[1] G.G. Stokes, Trans. Cambridge Philos. Soc.9, 399 (1853)

[2] J.W. Simmons and M.J. Guttmann, States, waves and Photons: A Modern Introduction to

Light (Addison-Wesley, 1970)

[3] W.H. McMaster, Rev. Mod. Phys. 33, 8 (1961); M. Hofer and O. Glatter, Appl. Opt. 28, 2389

(1989); W.S. Bickel and W.M. Bailey, Am. J. Phys. 53, 468 (1985)

[4] L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics (C.U.P., 1995)

[5] J.H. Poynting, Proc. R. Soc. London, A82, 560 (1909)

[6] R.A. Beth, Phys. Rev. 50, 115 (1936)

[7] L. Allen, J. Opt. B.: Quant. Semiclass. Opt. 4, 51 (2002)

[8] S.C.Tiwari, J. Mod. Opt. 46, 1721 (1999)

[9] S.C. Tiwari, J. Opt. B: Quant. Semiclass. Opt. 4, S39 (2002)

[10] V.P. Karassiov, J. Phys. A.: Math. Gen. 26, 4345 (1993)

[11] J. Lehner, U. Leonhardt and H. Paul, Phys. Rev. A53, 2727 (1996). For the earlier work on

unpolarized light, see H. Prakash and N. Chandra, Phys. Rev. A4, 796 (1971); G.S. Agarwal,

Lett. Nuovo Cimento 1, 53 (1971)

17

[12] A. Luis, Phys. Rev. A 69, 023803 (2004); Phys. Rev. A66, 013806 (2002)

[13] S. Pancharatnam, Proc. Ind. Acad. Sci. A44, 247 (1956)

[14] M.V. Berry, Proc. R. Soc. London A392, 45 (1984)

[15] R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind (Oxford University Press, 1989)

[16] R.H. Good, Jr., Am. J. Phys. 28, 659 (1960); Ann. Phys. 1, 213 (1957)

[17] D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys., 39, 1013 (1971)

[18] S.C.Tiwari, Rebirth of the Electron: Electromagnetism (Monograph published by the author,

1997)

[19] H. Schimitzer, S. Klein and W. Dultz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1530 (1993); R. Bhandari, Phys.

Lett. A157, 221 (1‘991); J. Mod. Optics 45, 2187 (1998)

[20] S.C. Tiwari, Phys. Lett. A149, 223 (1990); J. Mod. Optics, 39, 1097 (1992)

[21] M.V. Berry, J. Mod.Optics 34, 1401 (1987)

[22] S.C. Tiwari, Phys. Rev. A56, 157 (1997)

[23] J. Segert, Phys. Rev. A 36, 10 (1987)

[24] R.Y. Chiao and Y.S. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 933 (1986)

[25] A. Tomita and R.Y. Chiao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 937 (1986)

[26] S.C. Tiwari, J. Mod. Optics 51, 2297 (2004)

[27] F.D.M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1788 (1987); J.N. Ross, Opt. Quantum. Electron. 16,

455 (1984)

[28] R. Dandoloﬀ, Phys. Lett. A 139, 19 (1989); Y.Q Cai, G Papini and W.R. Wood, J. Math.

Phys. 31, 1942 (1990); L.H. Ryder, Eur. J. Phys. 12, 15 (1991)

[29] M.V. Berry in Geometric Phases in Physics, eds A. Shapere and F. Wilczek (World Scientiﬁc,

1989) pp.7-28

[30] T.F. Jordan, Phys. Rev. A38, 1590 (1988)

Lenstra (Kluwer, 1990) pp69-81

[31] R. Bhandari, in Analogies in Optics and Micro Electronics, eds. W. Van Haeringen and D.

[32] H. Jiao, S.R. Wilkinson, R.Y. Chiao and H. Nathel, Phys. Rev. A. 39, 3475 (1989)

[33] Y. Choquet-Bruhat and C. DeWitt-Morette Analysis Manifolds and Physics (North-Holland

1982)

[34] I.J.R. Aitchison, Acta Phys. Polonica B18, 207 (1987)

[35] R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics Vol. III

18

(Addison-Wesley, 1965)

[36] J. Byrne, Nature 275, 188 (1978)

[37] R. Simon, H.J. Kimble and E.C.G. Sudarshan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 19 (1988)

[38] F. Bretanaker and A. LeFloch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 2316 (1990)

[39] J.Q. Shen, Eur. Phys. J. D. 30, 259 (2004)

[40] S.C. Tiwari, Found. Phys. Lett. 19, 51 (2006)

19

