6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint IBR-TH-34-05, June 1, 2005
To be submitted for publication in the
Proceedings of the XVIII Workshop on Hadronic Mechanics
University of Karlstad, Sweden, June 20-22, 2005

INCONSISTENCIES OF NEUTRINO AND QUARK
CONJECTURES AND THEIR NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPLICATIONS
Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research
P. O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
ibr@gte.net, http://www.i-b-r.org, http://www.magnegas.com

Abstract

By using a language as accessible to a broad audience as possible, in this note we
present evidence suggesting scientiﬁc caution prior to ﬁnal claims that neutrinos and
quarks are actual physical particles existing in our spacetime. We review historical and
recent evidence dismissing the existence of neutrinos and quarks as physical particles,
and outline recent theories representing experimental data without their existence.
We also identify the negative implications for environmental issues of the neutrino and
quark conjectures since they imply the suppression of due scientiﬁc process on new
clean energies predicted by new structure models of hadrons with massive physical
constituents produced free in spontaneous or stimulated decays. The note ends with
the need of continuing theoretical and experimental research on neutrino and quark
conjectures, but complemented, for evident scientiﬁc democracy, accountability and
societal needs, with theoretical and experimental studies on alternative theories without
the neutrino and quark conjectures and their prediction of new clean energies.

1. The litany of directly unveriﬁable neutrino and quark conjectures.
As it is well known, Rutherford [1] submitted in 1920 the conjecture that hydrogen atoms in
the core of stars are compressed into a new particle he called the neutron according to the
synthesis

(p+, e−) → n.

(1.1)

The existence of the neutron was subsequently conﬁrm experimentally in 1932 by Chad-
wick [2]. However, numerous objections were raised by the leading physicists of the time
against Rutherford’s conception of the neutron as a bound state of one proton p+ and one
electron e−.

Pauli [3] ﬁrst noted that synthesis (1.1) violates the angular momentum conservation law
because, according to quantum mechanics, a bound state of two particles with spin 1/2 (the
proton and the electron) must yield a particle with integer spin and cannot yield a particle

1

with spin 1/2 such as the neutron. Consequently, Pauli conjectured the existence of a new
neutral particle with spin 1/2, charge zero and no mass that is emitted in synthesis (1.1) or
in similar radioactive processes so as to verify the angular momentum conservation laws.

Fermi [4] adopted Pauli’s conjecture, coined the name neutrino (meaning in Italian a
”little neutron”) and presented the ﬁrst comprehensive theory of the underlying interactions
(called ”weak”), according to which synthesis (1.1) should be replaced with the expression

(1.2)

(1.3)

(p+, e−) → n + ν,

n → p+ + e− + ¯ν,

where ν is the neutrino, in which case the inverse reaction (the spontaneous decay of the
neutron) reads

where ¯ν is the antineutrino.

Despite the scientiﬁc authority of historical ﬁgures such as Pauli and Fermi, the conjecture
on the existence of the neutrinos as physical particles was never accepted by the entire
scientiﬁc community because of: the impossibility for the neutrino to be directly detected in
laboratory; the neutrino inability to interact with matter in any appreciable way; and the
existence of alternative theories that do not need the neutrino conjecture (see Refs. [5,6,7]
and literature quoted therein for earlier alternative theories).

By the middle of the 20-th century there was no clear experimental evidence acceptable by
the scientiﬁc community at large conﬁrming the neutrino conjecture beyond doubt, except
for experimental claims in 1959 that are known today to be basically ﬂawed on various
grounds, as we shall see in the next sections.

In the last part of the 20-th century, there was the advent of the so-called unitary SU(3)
theories that attempted the Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of all strongly interacting particles
(known as hadrons) into families. Jointly said theories intended to characterize the structure
of any member of a given hadronic family as a quantum bound state of hypothetical particles
known as quarks. These studies were subsequently extended to the so-called SU(3) color and
ﬂavor theories and are more recently known as the standard model of all elementary particles
(see, e.g., Ref. [8] and vast literature therein).

The validity of the classiﬁcation of hadrons into families via unitary symmetries was
established by clear experimental conﬁrmation of numerous predictions of new physical par-
ticles existing in our spacetime along lines much similar to the historical predictions of new
atoms achieved by the Mendeleev classiﬁcation, which prediction were all experimentally
veriﬁed.

Nevertheless, the conjecture that quarks are physical particles in our spacetime has never
been widely accepted by the scientiﬁc community due to a plethora of conceptual and tech-
nical inconsistencies (see refs.s [9,10]) some of which are outlined in the next section.

More recently, the controversies have been multiplied by the joining of neutrino and
quark conjectures because such a joining has required additional unveriﬁed conjectures. The
standard model does not predict the main features of the hypothetical neutrinos. This
occurrence is considered positive by scientists accepting only the ﬁnal classiﬁcation character
of the standard model, while the same occurrence is considered a major drawback of the
standard model by scientists accepting the conjecture that neutrinos and quarks are physical
particles.

2

The marriage of neutrino and quark conjectures within the standard model has requested
the multiplication of neutrinos, from the neutrino and antineutrino conjectures of the early
studies, into six diﬀerent hypothetical particles, the so called electron, muon and tau neutri-
nos and their antiparticles. In the absence of these particles the standard model would lose
the capability of providing both the classiﬁcation and structure of particles.

In turn, the multiplication of the neutrino conjectures has requested the additional con-
jecture that the electron, muon and tau neutrinos have masses, plus the additional conjecture
that they have diﬀerent masses, as necessary to salvage the structural features of the stan-
dard model. Still in turn, the lack of resolution of the preceding conjectures has requested the
additional conjecture that neutrinos oscillate, namely, that ”they change ﬂavor” (transform
among themselves back and forth).

In addition to this rather incredible litany of sequential conjectures, each conjecture
being voiced in support of a preceding unveriﬁed conjecture, by far the biggest controver-
sies have occurred in regard to experimental claims of neutrino detection voiced by large
collaborations.

To begin, both neutrinos and quarks cannot be directly detected as physical particles in
our spacetime. Consequently, all claims on their existence are indirect, that is, based on the
detection of actual physical particles predicted by the indicated theories. This occurrence is,
per se, controversial. For instance, controversies are still raging following announcements by
various laboratories to have ”discovered” one or another quark, while in reality the labora-
tories discovered physical particles predicted by a Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of particles,
the same classiﬁcation being admitted by theories that require no quarks at all, as well shall
indicate later on.

In the 1980s, a large laboratory was built deep into the Gran Sasso mountain in Italy to
detect neutrinos coming from the opposite side of Earth since the mountain was used as a
shield against cosmic rays. Following the investment of large public funds, the Gran Sasso
Laboratory released no evidence of clear detection of neutrino originated events following
ﬁve years of continuous tests.

Rather than passing to scientiﬁc caution in the use of public funds, the failure of the Gran
Sasso experiments to produce any neutrino evidence stimulated new massive eﬀorts by large
collaborations involving hundred of experimentalists from various countries. The increase in
experimental research was evidently due to the scientiﬁc stakes, because, as well known by
experts, the lack of veriﬁcation of the neutrino conjectures would imply the identiﬁcation of
clear limits of validity of quantum mechanics and special relativity.

These more recent experiments resulted in claims that, on strict scientiﬁc grounds, should

be considered ”experimental beliefs” by serious scholars for numerous reasons, such as:

1) The predictions are based on a litany of sequential conjectures none of which is exper-

imentally established on clear ground;

2) The theory contains a plethora of unrestricted parameters that can essentially ﬁt any

pre-set data;

3) The ”experimental results” are based on extremely few events out of hundreds of
millions of events over years of tests, thus being basically insuﬃcient in number for any
serious scientiﬁc claim;

4) In various cases the ”neutrino detectors” include radioactive isotopes that can them-

selves account for the selected events;

3

Figure 1: DISMISSAL OF THE NEUTRINO CONJECTURE DUE TO LACK OF ENERGY.
Measurements done in the ﬁrst half of the 20-th century have established that the energy of the
electron in nuclear beta decays has a bell-shaped curve with the maximal value of 0.782M eV . the
”missing energy” has been historically attributed to be carried out by the hypothetical neutrino.
However, as indicated in Section 2 (and treated technically in the quoted literature), when the
energy in the beta decay is computed with the inclusion of the Coulomb interactions between the
expelled (negatively charged) electron and the (positively charged) nucleus at diﬀerent directions of
the expulsion, the nucleus acquires the ”missing energy,” without any energy left for the hypothetical
neutrino.

5) The interpretation of the experimental data via neutrino and quark conjectures is not
unique, since there exist nowadays other theories representing exactly the same events with-
out neutrino and quark conjectures (including a basically new scattering theory of nonlocal
type indicated later on).

Neutrino and quark conjectures have requested to date the expenditure of over one billion
dollars of public funds in theoretical and experimental research with the result of increasing
the controversies rather than resolving any of them.

Therefore, it is time for a moment of reﬂection: scientiﬁc ethics and accountability require
that serious scholars in the ﬁeld exercise caution prior to venturing claims of actual physical
existence of so controversial and directly unveriﬁable conjectures.

In a language as accessible to a broad audience as possible, and by delegating techni-
cal issues to quoted references, in this note we collect, apparently for the ﬁrst time, the
main arguments against the existence of neutrinos and quarks as physical particles, outline
alternative theories without neutrino and quark conjectures, and point out their negative
environmental implication.

The predictable conclusion of this study is that theoretical and experimental research
on neutrino and quark conjectures should indeed continued. However, theoretical and ex-
perimental research on theories without neutrino and quark conjectures and their new clean
energies should be equally supported to prevent a clear suppression of scientiﬁc democracy
on fundamental issues, evident problems of scientiﬁc accountability, and a potentially severe
judgment by posterity.

4

2. Catastrophic inconsistencies of neutrino and quarks conjectures.
In regard to the neutrino conjecture, it is important to disprove it ﬁrst as originally conceived,
and then disprove the ﬂavored extension of the conjecture as requested by quark conjectures.
The disproof of the original conjecture of the neutrino can be done with the argument below
and those of the following sections. The disproof of the conjecture of ﬂavored neutrinos is
an inevitable consequence of the catastrophic inconsistencies of the conjecture that quarks
are physical particles.

As reported in nuclear physics textbooks, the energy experimentally measured as being
carried by the electron in beta decays is a bell-shaped curve with a maximum value of
0.782MeV , that is the diﬀerence in value between the mass of the neutron and that of the
resulting proton in decay (1.3). The ”missing energy” has been attributed throughout the
20-th century to be carried out by the hypothetical neutrino.

It is easy to see that these calculations were initially done to adapt reality to the neutrino
conjecture and then adopted by others without their critical examination. The electron in
beta decays is negatively charged, while the nucleus is positively charged. Consequently, the
electron in beta decays experiences a Coulomb attraction from the original nucleus.

Moreover, such an attraction is clearly dependent on the angle of emission of the electron
by a decaying peripheral neutron. The maximal value of the energy occurs for radial emis-
sions of the electron, the minimal value occurs for tangential emissions, and the intermediate
value occur for intermediate directions of emissions, resulting in the experimentally detected
bell-shaped curve.

When the calculations are done without prejudicial interests in existing doctrines, it is
easy to see that the ”missing energy” in beta decays is entirely absorbed by the nucleus via
its Coulomb interaction with the emitted electron. Consequently, in beta decays there is no
energy at all available for the neutrino conjecture, by reaching in this way a ﬁnal disproof of
the conjecture itself.

Supporters of the neutrino conjecture are expected to voice various counter-arguments
on the lack of experimental evidence for the nucleus to absorb said ”missing energy.” These
supporters are suggested to exercise scientiﬁc caution and ﬁrst study the new structure
models of the neutron without the neutrino conjecture, as well as the resulting new structure
models of nuclei before venturing politically motivated views.

In regard to quark conjectures, the author has repeatedly stated in his writing that
the unitary, Mendeleev-type, SU(3)-color classiﬁcation of hadron into families has a ﬁnal
character. All doubts herein considered solely refer to the joint use of the same classiﬁcation
models as providing the structure of each individual element of a given hadronic family.

Consequently, all structure models considered, including those without neutrino and
quark conjectures, must achieve full compatibility with said unitary models of classiﬁcation,
in essentially the same way according to which quantum structures of atoms achieved full
compatibility with their Mendeleev classiﬁcation.

Far from being alone, this author has repeatedly expressed the view that quarks cannot be
physical constituents of hadrons existing in our spacetime for numerous independent reasons
[9,10].

On historical grounds, the classiﬁcation of nuclei, atoms and molecules required two dif-
ferent models, one for the classiﬁcation and a separate one for the structure of the individual
elements of a given family. Quark theories depart from this historical teaching because their

5

Figure 2: DISMISSAL OF THE NEUTRINO CONJECTURE DUE TO THE INAPPLICABIL-
ITY OF THE QUANTUM SCATTERING THEORY. As indicated in Section 3 (and treated tech-
nically in the quoted literature), the scattering theory used in all experimental claims on neutrino
conjectures is structurally insuﬃcient for ﬁnal scientiﬁc claims because it is based on the abstrac-
tion of particles as massive points (top view) that, as such, cannot have collisions. In reality, all
hadrons are extended hyperdense spheroids of radius 1F = 10−13cm, and even though electrons have
a point-like charge, they do not have a ”point-like wavepacket” as necessary for a serious validity of
the quantum scattering theory. When extended particles collide as in the physical reality, we have
a volume of mutual penetration of their charge distributions and/or wavepackets (lower view) that
causes interactions of nonlinear, nonlocal, nonpotential and nonunitary type, namely, interactions
dramatically beyond any dream of treatment via quantum mechanics. A covering nonlocal scattering
theory has been built as part of the new hadronic mechanics outlined in Section 4. It is easy to see
that the elaboration of experimental data via a more realistic nonlocal scattering theory produces
results diﬀerent than those claimed for neutrino conjectures, thus conﬁrming the need for scientiﬁc
caution prior to ﬁnal claims that they are physical particles.

6

conception of representing with one single theory both the classiﬁcation and the structure
of hadrons.

As an example, the idea that the Mendeleev classiﬁcation of atoms could jointly pro-
vide the structure of each individual atom of a given valence family is outside the boundary
of science. The Mendeleev classiﬁcation was achieved via classical theories, while the un-
derstanding of the atomic structure required the construction of a new theory, quantum
mechanics.

Independently from the above dichotomy classiﬁcation vs structure, it is well known by
technicians, but rarely admitted, that quarks are purely mathematical quantities, being purely
mathematical representations of a purely mathematical unitary symmetry deﬁned on a purely
mathematical complex-valued unitary space without any possibility, whether direct or implied,
of being deﬁned in our spacetime (technically prohibited by the O’Rafearthaigh theorem).

It follows that the conjecture that quarks are physical particles is aﬄicted by a plethora
of major problematic aspects today known to experts as catastrophic inconsistencies of quark
conjectures, such as:

1) No particle possessing the peculiar features of quark conjectures (fraction charge, etc.)
has ever been detected throughout the 20-th centuries in any high energy physical laboratory
around the world. Consequently, a main consistency requirement of quark conjectures is that
quarks cannot be produced free even under the extremely high energies achived by current
particle laboratories and, consequently, they must be ”permanently conﬁned” in the interior
of hadrons even. However, it is well known to experts that, despite half a century of attempts,
no truly convincing ”conﬁnement of quarks” inside protons and neutrons has been achieved
to date, nor it can be expected on serious scientiﬁc grounds by assuming (as it is the case
of quark theories) that quantum mechanics is identically valid inside and outside hadrons.
This is due to a pillar of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, according
to which, given any manipulated theory appearing to show conﬁnement for a given quark,
a graduate student in physics can prove the existence of a ﬁnite probability for the same
quark to be outside the hadron at low energies, thus being free, while the probability for
the production of free quarks at very high energy can only be deﬁned as being embarassing.
These fact establish beyond ”credible” doubt that quark conkjectures are in catastrophic
disagreement with physical reality. Consequently, the conjecture that quarks are physical
particles is aﬄicted by catastrophic inconsistencies in its very conception since all quark
theories predict the production of free quarks under suﬃciently energetic collisions, while no
quark has ever been detected free and no true conﬁnement is possible on serious scientiﬁc
grounds accepted by the scientiﬁc community at large [9].

2) It is equally well known by experts that quarks cannot experience gravity because
quarks cannot be deﬁned in our spacetime, while gravity can only be formulated in our
spacetime and does not exist in mathematical complex-unitary spaces. Consequently, if
protons and neutrons were indeed formed of quarks, we would have the catastrophic incon-
sistency that all quark believers should ﬂoat in space due to the absence of gravity [10].

3) It is also well known by experts that ”quark masses” cannot possess any inertia since
they are purely mathematical parameters that cannot be deﬁned in our spacetime. A condi-
tion for any mass to be physical, that is, to have inertia, is that it has to be the eigenvalue
of a Casimir invariant of the Poincar´e symmetry, while quarks cannot be deﬁned via said
symmetry because of their hypothetical fractional charges and other esoteric assumptions.

7

This aspect alone implies numerous catastrophic inconsistencies, such as the impossibility
to have the energy equivalence E = mc2 for any particle composed of quarks, against vast
experimental evidence to the contrary [10].

4) Even assuming that, because of some twist of scientiﬁc manipulation, the above in-
consistencies are resolved, it is known by experts that quark theories have failed to achieve
a representation of all characteristics of protons and neutron, with catastrophic inconsisten-
cies in the representation of spin, magnetic moment, mean lives, charge radii and other basic
features.

5) It is also known by experts that the application of quark conjectures to the structure
of nuclei has multiplied the controversies, while resolving none of them. As an example,
the assumption that quarks are the constituents of the protons and the neutrons composing
nuclei has failed to achieved a representation of the main characteristics of the simplest
possible nucleus, the deuteron. In fact, quark conjectures are aﬄicted by the catastrophic
inconsistencies of being unable to represent the spin 1 of the deuteron (since they predict
spin zero in the ground state), they are unable to represent the anomalous magnetic moment
of the deuteron, they are unable to represent the deuteron stability, they are unable to
represent the charge radius of the deuteron, and when passing to larger nuclei, such as the
zirconium, the catastrophic inconsistencies of quark conjectures can only be deﬁned as being
embarrassing.

In summary, while the ﬁnal character of the SU(3)-color classiﬁcation of hadrons into
families has reached a value beyond scientiﬁc doubt, the conjecture that quarks are the
actual physical constituents of hadrons existing in our spacetime is aﬄicted by so many
and so problematic aspects to raise serious issues of scientiﬁc ethics and accountability,
particularly in view of the ongoing large expenditures of public funds in the ﬁeld.

It then follows that any additional conjecture based on the quark conjecture, such as that
of the electron, muon and tau neutrinos and related additional conjecture of their oscillations,
are so clearly ﬂowed not to warrant detailed dismissals because unresolved conjectures cannot
be credibly bypassed with additional conjectures, while the rather frequent use of academic
power and credibility to support unveriﬁable conjectures can only multiply the controversies.
Above all, the most serious problems of scientiﬁc ethics and accountability emerge when
the belief of neutrino and quark conjecture emerge as having serious negative impact on
major environmental issues, as illustrated in Section 6.

3. The inapplicability of quantum mechanics inside hadrons.
The proton and the electron are the only massive stable particles clearly identiﬁed until now.
Consequently, the idea that, as necessary for the standard model, the proton and the elec-
tron must ”disappear” in synthesis (1.1) and be transformed into hypothetical undetectable
quarks is repugnant to reason.

The most logical expectation is that, being stable particles, the proton and the electron
persist in synthesis (1.1) according to Rutherford’s original conception [1]. This is why,
despite the successes of weak interactions, studies along Rutherford’s original conception
have continued since the times of Ref. [1].

The main obstacle against Rutherford’s conception of the neutron is that it is prohibited
by quantum mechanics, as pointed out by Pauli, Fermi, Schroedinger and other founders of
quantum mechanics, who voiced the following serious objections:

8

1) Quantum mechanics cannot represent the spin of the neutron under Rutherford’s
conception because the total angular momentum of the ground state of a two particles with
spin 1/2, such as the proton and the electron, must be 0, while the neutron has spin 1/2.

2) The representation of synthesis (1.1) via quantum mechanics is impossible because it
would require a ”positive binding energy,” in violation of basic quantum laws requiring that
all binding energies must be negative, as proved in nuclear physics. This is due to the fact
that the sum of the mass of the proton and of the electron,

mp + me = 938.272Mev + 0.511MeV = 938.783MeV,

(3.1)

is smaller than the mass of the neutron, mn = 939.565MeV , with ”positive mass defect”

mn − (mp + me) = 939.565 − (938.272 + 0.511)MeV = 0.782MeV.

(3.2)

Consequently, quantum mechanics would require a positive binding energy bigger than
0.782MeV , under which all quantum equations become inconsistent (technically, the indicial
equations of Schroedinger’s equation becomes inconsistent and prevents the representation
of the total energy with real numbers).

3) Via the use of the magnetic moment of the proton µp = 2.792µN and of the electron
µe = 1.001µB, it is impossible to reach the magnetic moment of the neutron µn = −1.913µN .
4) When the neutron is interpreted as a bound state of one proton and one electron, it is
impossible to reach the neutron meanlife τn = 918 sec that is quite large for particle stan-
dards, since quantum mechanics would predict the expulsion of the electron in nanoseconds.
5) There is no possibility for quantum mechanics to represent the neutron radius of about
1F = 10−13cm since the smallest predicted radius is that of the hydrogen atom of 10−8cm,
namely 5,000 times bigger than the neutron radius.

The above objections were indeed valid at the time of their formulations in the 1940s.
However, due to the knowledge gained on the structure of the proton and neutron since that
time, the above objections are nowadays no longer valid for numerous reasons.

Quantum mechanics was conceived and constructed for the representation of the trajec-
tories of electrons moving in vacuum in atomic orbits, in which ﬁeld the theory received
historical veriﬁcations. The same mechanics cannot possibly be exact for the description of
the dramatically diﬀerent physical conditions of the same electron moving within the hy-
perdense medium inside a proton. Such an assumption literally implies the belief in the
perpetual motion within a physical medium since it implies that an electron must orbit in
the core of a star with a conserved angular momentum, as requested by the quantum axiom
of the rotational symmetry and angular momentum conservation law.

In addition, there exist today a rather large body of evidence according to which quan-
tum mechanics, while being exactly valid under the conditions of its conception (point-like
particles moving in vacuum), is inapplicable wiuthin hadrons, with the understanding that
claims of ”violation of quantum mechanics inside hadrons” would not be scientiﬁc, ﬁrst of
all, because the theory was not constructed for the ﬁeld considered and, second, because all
theories can at best approximate nature.

For comprehensive studies of this issue we refer the reader to monographs [16] and vast
literature quoted therein. In this note it is suﬃcient to recall that quantum mechanics cannot
be exact inside hadrons because its fundamental Galileo and Poincar´e symmetries are broken
since they were conceived for motion in vacuum and certainly not within hyperdense media.

9

Figure 3: DISMISSAL OF THE NEUTRINO CONJECTURE DUE TO THE LACK OF ANGU-
LAR MOMENTUM CONSERVATION IN SCATTERINGS OF EXTENDED PARTICLES. As it
is well known, the neutrino conjecture was formulated on the basis of the quantum mechanical con-
servation of angular momentum. All experimental claims on neutrino conjectures are based on the
Poincar´e invariant scattering theory that, in turn, is based on the angular momentum conservation
law. However, it is equally well known that said conservation only occurs for planetary-atomic
systems, namely for Keplerian systems of point particles in stable orbits without collisions. In the
scattering of extended particles only the total energy is conserved since the angular momentum can
transform itself in linear momentum and vice versa, as illustrated in this picture with the sling-shot,
or as anybody has eyewitnessed in the scattering of billiard balls. The lack of conservation of angular
momentum eliminates the very foundations for the original proposal of the neutrino conjecture.

10

where

As it is well known, the validity of said basic symmetries requires the validity of the
celebrated ten conservation laws of the total energy, linear momentum, angular momentum
and uniform motion of the center of mass that can be classically expressed with the uniﬁed
law

dXi(t, r, p)
dt

=

∂Xi
∂bµ ×

dbµ
dt

+

∂Xi
∂t

= 0,

X1 = Etot = H = T + V,

(X2, X3, X4) = PT ot = Σapa,

(X5, X6, X7) = Jtot = Σara ∧ pa,

(X8, X9, X10) = GT ot = Σa(ma × ra − t × pa),

i = 1, 2, 3, ..., 10; k = 1, 2, 3; a = 1, 2, 3, ..., N,

(3.3)

(3.4a)

(3.4b)

(3.4c)

(3.4d)

with corresponding quantum expressions here ignored for simplicity.

It bis easy to see that, while all the above conservation laws are indeed veriﬁed for
planetary-atomis structures, the sole conservation law valid for physical systems in general
is the conservation of the energy, due to the known lack of conservation of the linear and
angular momentum in actual collisions.

There is no need for high energy laboratories to see this occurrence since it is suﬃcient
to drop a mass on a table. As anyone can observe, in this collision the linear momentum
cannot be conserved. The only conserved quantity is the kinetic energy that, in this case, is
transformed into heat energy.

Similarly, Figure 3 illustrates the exchange of linear and angular momenta, but always
under the conservation of the energy, since we merely have in this case the transformation
of kinetic energy into rotational energy and vice versa.

Note that the above physical collisions among extended objects are suﬃcient to invalidate
the experimental claims that neutrinos and quarks are physical particles since said claims
all result from collision of extended particles. Alternatively, the approximate character of
quantum mechanics in hadron physics can be seen from the fact that the quantum scattering
theory cannot be exactly valid for particle collisions since it must represent the particles
as massive points, and points cannot collide because they are dimensionless. Under these
extreme abstractions, how can ”experimental beliefs” be turned into physical reality?

Unreassuringly, the above arguments are only the beginning of the litany of strong ev-
idence preventing quantum mechanics from being exact for the hadronic structure.
It is
equally well known by expert, but not suﬃciently spoken, that the Galileo and Poincar´e
symmetries can be exactly valid only under the conditions that:

I) All constituents can be eﬀectively approximated as massive points (a condition neces-
sary from the very mathematical structure of the symmetries, beginning from the underlying
topology);

II) The constituents move in stable and quantized orbits without collisions (otherwise

the structural axioms would not apply); and

III) The system considered must exhibit a Keplerian center, namely, the heaviest element

is located in one of the two foci (otherwise the Keplerian structure cannot occur).

11

It is easy to see that none of the above central conditions for the validity of the Galileo
and Poincar´e symmetries are valid inside hadrons, with resulting lack of exact validity of the
Galileo and Poincar´e symmetries and the consequential lack of exact character of quantum
mechanics. In fact:

I*) The constituents of hadrons cannot be eﬀectively approximated as being point-like
because that would require hadronic constituents to have ”pointlike wavepackets,” some-
thing without any scientiﬁc sense. All particles, beginning with the electrons have non-null
wavepackets that are rather large for particle standards because of approximately the size
of all hadrons (1 F). Consequently, hadronic constituents are in a state of total mutual
penetration of their wavepackets, resulting in nonlocal interactions (that is, interactions ex-
tended over a volume) that are beyond any possibility of quantum description since quantum
theories can only represent events occurring among isolated points.

II*) The orbits of hadronic constituents are indeed stable but they cannot be quantized as
for the orbit of atomic electrons, again, because motion occurs within a hyperdense medium.
This is established by the fact that any quantum jump from one orbit to another would
mandate the constituent to exit the hadron, since the minimal spacing in quantum orbits is
greater than the size of hadrons. In diﬀerent terms, the admission of quantized orbits for
quark constituents of the proton mandates that the proton is unstable and the work is free
because, when excited, said quark must jump to a new orbit necessarily outside the proton
itself, in catastrophic disagreement with experimental reality.

III*) The Galileo and Poincar´e symmetries cannot be exactly valid for the hadronic
structure because hadrons do not possess a Keplerian centers as it is the case for atoms.
Consequently, hadrons cannot constitute Keplerian systems, and quantum mechanics cannot
be exact. According to incontrovertible data from deep inelastic scattering, hadrons are
composed of a somewhat homogeneous and isotropic hyperdense medium in which the search
for the remnants of an atomic structure has no scientiﬁc sense.

Note that the absence of an atomic structure inside the proton is suﬃcient, per se,
to invalidate all arguments against Rutherford’s conception of the neutron, since all these
arguments are based on said atomic structure.

In the ﬁnal analysis it has been established by scientiﬁc history that the validity of
any given theory within given conditions is set by the results. Quantum mechanics has
represented all features of the hydrogen atom in a majestic way and, therefore, the theory is
exactly valid within the indicated conditions. By contrast, when extended to the structure
of particles, quantum mechanics has only produced an interlocked chain of individually
unveriﬁable conjectures on neutrinos and quarks, besides failing to achieve ﬁnal results in
various other branches of sciences, such as in nuclear physics, chemistry and astrophysics
[16].

Rather than continuing with additional unveriﬁable conjecture, it is time to re-examine
the validity of quantum mechanics for the structure of hadrons. After all these dramatic
controversies protracted for such a long period of time, there comes a point in time in which
the serious conduction of serious science requires a re-examination of the foundations.

4. The structure model of hadrons with massive physical constituents.
The view advocated by the author is that a deeper understanding of the structure of hadrons
requires a generalization of the quantum theory valid for their classiﬁcation, because a theory

12

Figure 4: ABSENCE OF THE NEUTRINO CONJECTURE IN RUTHERFORD’S SYNTHESIS
OF THE NEUTRON ACCORDING TO HADRONIC MECHANICS. At the initiation of Ruther-
ford’s compression of the hydrogen atom in the core of a star, when the electron penetrates within
the hyperdense medium inside the proton it is constrained for stability to couple with antiparallel
spins, while it is equally constrained to have an angular momentum that coincides with the spin of
the proton, as illustrated in the ﬁgure. In this process the electron is mutated into the isoelectron,
that is, a particle characterized by the covering Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry. Consequently, at
the completion of the compression, the isoelectron has null total angular momentum and the spin
of the neutron coincides with that of the proton without any need for the neutrino conjecture. It
should be indicated that fractional values of angular momenta are anathema for quantum mechan-
ics because they break its unitary structure. However, the same values are normal for the covering
hadronic mechanics since the latter theory has been build for the invariant treatment of nonunitary
structures.

13

constructed for the description of electrons orbiting in vacuum in atomic structures, cannot
be credibly claimed to be necessarily valid for the description of the same electrons when
moving within the hyperdense media inside hadrons.

In view of all the insuﬃciencies and controversies in various branches of sciences, R.
M. Santilli [20] proposed in 1978 the construction of a generalization/covering of quantum
mechanics under the name of hadronic mechanics precisely to represent the dynamics within
hyperdense media inside hadrons, under the conditions of achieving full compatibility with
quantum theories of classiﬁcation, as well as admitting quantum mechanics uniquely and
unambiguously at the limit when all resistive forces caused by motion within hyperdense
media cease to exist and motion returns to be in vacuum.

Following proposal [20], hadronic mechanics was studied by numerous mathematicians,
theoretician and experimentalists (see monographs [11-19,33-39] and vast literature quoted
therein). After decades of studies, mathematical maturity in the formulation of hadronic
mechanics was reached only in 1996 [21], after which it was easy to achieve physical maturity
[22,23].

As we shall see, hadronic mechanics has permitted the exact, numerical and invariant
representation of all characteristics of hadrons without any neutrino and quark conjecture
and via the use of ordinary massive particles as physical constituents in our spacetime,
generally those produced free in the spontaneous decays with the lowest mode.

In particular, as clearly stated in the original proposal [20], hadronic mechanics was pro-
posed for the speciﬁc intent of achieving a consistent quantitative representation of Ruther-
ford’s synthesis (1.1) by resolving all the objections outlined in Section 3. This objective
was set in view of the important environmental implications outlined in the next section.

The main idea of proposal [20] is essentially the following. One of the axioms of quantum
mechanics is that its time evolution must characterize a unitary transform in a Hilbert space
H over the ﬁeld of complex numbers C,

U × U † = U † × U = I.

(4.1)

(4.2)

A necessary condition to achieve a true generalization of quantum mechanics is then that
of exiting from its class of all possible equivalent formulations. Consequently, a central axiom
of hadronic mechanics is that its time evolution must characterize a nonunitary transform
when expressed on H over C,

U × U † 6= I.

However, it was known in 1978 that nonunitary theories do not have consistent physical
predictions when treated via the mathematics of quantum mechanics, such as Hilbert spaces
H and ﬁelds C. This mandated the construction of a basically new mathematics speciﬁcally
conceived for physically consistent treatment of nonunitary theories.

The solution proposed in the original memoirs [20] is the generalization (called lifting)
of the trivial unit I = +1 of quantum mechanics into a positive-deﬁnite, but most general
possible integro-diﬀerential operator ˆI(t, r, p, ψ, ...), today called Santilli’s isounit, that is
assumed to coincide with nonunitary transform (4.2),

U × U † = ˆI(t, r, p, ψ, ...) = 1/T (t, r, p, ψ, ...) > 0

(4.3)

14

In turn, the lifting I → ˆI required a generalization of the conventional associative product
A × B between generic quantities A, B (numbers, matrices, etc.) into the form

under which ˆI is indeed the correct left and right unit

A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B,

ˆI ˆ× ˆA = ˆI × ˆT × A = A ˆ× ˆI = A,

(4.4)

(4.5)

for all elements A of the set considered.

As a pre-requisite for practical applications of hadronic mechanics, the lifting of the unit
and of the product required the construction of a compatible generalization of the totality
of the mathematics of quantum mechanics into a covering formulation today known as San-
tilli’s isomathematice, that includes generalized numbers, ﬁelds, metric spaces, topologies,
functional analysis, algebras, geometries, symmetries, etc. This explains the decades of work
that were necessary to achieve maturity of applications of hadronic mechanicsd.,

On physical grounds, the generalized unit ˆI(t, r, p, ψ, ...) is used for the invariant represen-
tation of contact forces among extended constituents that are completely absent in quantum
mechanics.

Santilli [20] selected the unit for the representation of contact interactions among ex-
tended particles because, on one side, the latter are not potential, thus being outside the
quantum Hamiltonian, and, on the other side, because the unit is the only alternatieve per-
mitting an invariant representation. In fact, whether conventional or generalized, the unit
is the basic invariant of any theory.

Via the use of hadronic mechanics, the original proposal [20] achieved already in 1978 a
new structure model of mesons with actual massive physical constituents according to the
models

πo = (ˆe+, ˆe−)HM ,
π± = (ˆe+ˆe±, ˆe−)HM ,
K o = (ˆπ+, ˆπ−)HM , etc.,
(4.6c)
where e, π, K, etc. represent conventional particles as detected in laboratory and ˆe, ˆπ, ˆK, etc.
represent their mutation, that is, the alternation of their characteristics when in deep mutual
penetration of their wavepackets and charge distributions (a feature tecxhnically treated via
representations of the Galileo-Santilli [13] and Poincar´e-Santilli [14] isosymmetries).

(4.6a)

(4.6b)

Hadronic structure models (4.6) achieved an exact, numerical and invariant representa-
tion of all characteristics of mesons, including characteristics whose representation has been
impossible for quark conjectures after some three decades of failures, such as the represen-
tation of: 1) the charge radius of the particles; 2) Their meanlife, and 3) the reason the
massive constituents are emitted in the spontaneous decays with the lowest mode.

Hadronic mechanics can now be constructed quite simply by applying a nonunitary trans-
form to all quantities and their operations of quantum mechanics, including number, metric
spaces, algebras, geometries, topologies, etc. Recall that the quantum model underlying the
hadronic structure of the πo, Eq. (4.6.a), is the positronium (a bound state at large mutual

15

distances of an electron and a positron). Therefore, model (4.6a) can be easily achieved via
the lifting of the qwuantum Scroedinger’s and Heisenber’s equations

(4.7a)

(4.7b)

(4.7c)

(4.8b)

(4.8)

(4.9)

U × U † = ˆI = 1/ ˆT 6= 1,

dA
dt

i × U ×

× U † = i ×

= U × [A, H] × U † =

ˆd ˆA
ˆdˆt
= ˆA × ˆT × ˆH − ˆH × ˆT × ˆA = ˆA ˆ× ˆH − ˆH ˆ× ˆA = [ ˆAˆ, ˆH],
U × (H × |ψ >) = (U × H × U †) × (U × U †)−1 × (U × |ψ >) =
= ˆH × ˆT × | ˆψ >= ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >= U × (E × |ψ) = ˆE′ ˆ×| ˆψ >= E′ × | ˆψ >,
ˆH = U × H × U †, ˆA = U × A × U †, | ˆψ >= U × |ψ >,

where: the isotopic generalization (4,7b) of Heisenberg’s equation is the fundamental equa-
(4.7b) is
tion of hadronic mechanics proposed in the original memoirs [20] of 1978; Eq.
the isotopic generalization of Schroedinger’s equations achieved subsequently; H and |ψ >
are the Hamiltonmian and wavefunction, respectively, of the positronium; their nonunitary
images ˆH and | ˆψ > are the corresponding expressions for the πo; d/dt is the conventional
diﬀerential; and ˆd/ ˆdˆt is the isodiﬀerential [21].

Rather remarkably, the representation was reached via the following simple isounit

U × U † = ˆI = ek×(ψ/ ˆψ)×

dr3×ψ†(r)↑×ψ(r)↓,

R

dr3 × ψ†(r)↑ × ψ(r)↓, represent the nonlocal inter-
where k is a normalization constant and
actions caused by the deep overlapping of the wavepackets of the electron and positron one
inside the other, a feature that is outside any possible representation via quantum mechanics.

R

At the limit

dr3 × ψ†(r)↑ × ψ(r)↓, → 0,

Z

namely, at the limit of large (atomic) distances and ignorable waveoverlapping, hadronic
model (4.6a) recovers the quantum model of the positronium exactly, uniquely and unam-
biguously.

The use of quantum mechanics for models (4.6) yield the inconsistencies 2) to 5) of
Section 3 but inconsistency 1) required no treatment for mesons because in this case there is
no violation of the quantum conservation of angular momentum, since the spin of the mesons
can be achieved via the spin of their massive constituents. Consequently, it was relatively
easy to reach models (4.6) in the original proposal [20] to build hadronic mechanics.

The representation of Rutherford’s synthesis of the neutron, Eq. (1.1), required consider-
able additional studies on the isotopies of angular momentum and spin (see papers [24,25]).
After decades from the original proposal [20], a nonrelativistic, exact, numerical and invari-
ant representation of all characteristics of the neutron as a bound state of a proton and an
electron was ﬁnally achieved in papers [26] of 1990, with the relativistic extension achieved
in paper [27] of 11993 (see also Ref. [28]), according to the expression

n = (ˆp+, ˆe−)HM ,

(4.10)

16

where ˆp+ and ˆe− are the conventional proton and electron in a deformed (mutated) form
caused by their deep mutual penetration called isoprotons and isoelectrons (technically rep-
resented via irreducible representation of the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry).

It should be noted that, since the proton is about 2,000 times heavier than the electron,

all calculations can be done with the simpler model

n = (p+, ˆe−)HM ,

(4.11)

namely, the sole deformation of the electron caused by its Rutherford’s compression inside
the hyperdense proton is suﬃcient to represent all features of the neutron.

The exact, numerical and invariant representation of the rest energy, meanlife, charge
radius, anomalous magnetic moments and parities were achieved as for models (4.6). The
representation of the spin 1/2 of the neutron turned out to be much simpler than expected,
as outlined in Figure 4.

In particular, the hadronic representation of the synthesis of the neutron does not re-
quire any neutrino conjecture at all, exactly as originally conceived by Rutherford. Once
compressed inside the proton, the electron is constrained for stability to have its spin an-
tiparallel to that of the proton and its orbital angular momentum to coincide with the spin
1/2 of the proton, resulting in the following exact representation (where the proton and the
resulting electrons are assumed to be at rest for simplicity)

1
2
namely, the total angular momentum of the isoelectron is null,

n = sspin
sspin

p + sspin

ˆe + sorb

ˆe =

1
2

1
2

−

+

=

1
2

,

ˆe = sspin
stot

ˆe + sorb

ˆe = 0,

(4.12)

(4.13)

and the spin of the neutron coincides with that of the proton.

Remarkably, after taking into account all contributions, conﬁgurations (4.12) resulted to
yield an exact, numerical and invariant representation of the anomalous magnetic moment
of the neutron, thus providing ﬁnal conﬁrmation [26,27,28].

It should be noted that a fractional angular momentum is pure anathema for quantum
mechanics (because it implies a departure from the nonunitary structure of the theory with
a host of problems), while the same value is perfectly normal for hadronic mechanics deﬁned
on an iso-Hilbert space ˆH over an isoﬁeld ˆC (see Refs. [26-28] for technical aspects)

As a matter of fact, the nonunitary character of fractional values of orbital angular
momenta is a direct conﬁrmation of the need for a nonunitary theory. Hadronic mechanics
is the only known nonunitary theory that has reached invariance and axiomatic consistency,
besides a large number of experimental veriﬁcations in various ﬁelds [11-39].

As one can see, the spontaneous decay of the neutron into physical, actually observed

particles

n = (p+, ˆe−)HM → p+ + e−,
is a mere tunnel eﬀect of the massive constituents. Assuming that the neutron and the pro-
ton are isolated and at rest in the spontaneous decay, the electron is emitted with 0.782MeV
energy. When the decaying neutron is a member of a nuclear structure, the energy pos-
sessed by the electron is generally less than 0.782MeV and varies depending on the angle of
emission, as indicated in Figure 1 and Section 2.

(4.14)

17

Figure 5: THE PREDICTED CLEAN AND INEXHAUSTIBLE ENERGY FROM THE STIM-
ULATED DECAY OF RUTHERFORD’S NEUTRON. The neutron is, by far, the largest and
inextinguishable source of clean energy available to mankind because it releases a high energetic
electron with up to 0.782M eV that can be easily trapped with a thin metal shield, while the hy-
pothetical neutrino, assuming that it exists, is harmless to humans and the environment. If the
neutron is composed of hypothetical quarks, there is no possibility whatever to tap this clean energy,
trivially, because the conjectural quarks cannot be produced free. The same holds if the neutrino ex-
ist because the neutrino hypothesis was developed precisely to prevent that the electron is a physical
constituent of the neutron. On the contrary, if the neutron has Rutherford’s structure, its energy
can be utilized, e.g., via its stimulated decay originating from the excitation of the electron. The
above picture is a reproduction of the original ﬁgure of Ref. [29] to illustrate that the produced en-
ergy is twofold, electric energy in the form of a continuous current (called hadronic battery) caused
by the diﬀerence of potential between the electron shield and the original metallic fuel, as well as
heat acquired by said shield. Hadronic mechanics has predicted the exact value of the resonating
frequency for the stimulated decay of the neutron, the restricted class of nuclear isotopes admitting
such a stimulated decay (hadronic fuel) and other aspects needed for industrial; development [29].
The energy produced is predicted to be a large multiple of the energy used since a high eﬃciency can
be achieved with a small submultiple of the resonating frequency. This energy, the ﬁrst predicted
to originate from industrial hadrons, rather than nuclei, is clean because it releases no harmful
radiations and leaves no harmful waste, as illustrated in the text [see Refs. [16,26] for details).

18

Again, hadronic mechanics permitted the exact, numerical and invariant representation
of features whose treatment with quark conjectures is impossible, such as the representation
of: 1) The charge radius 10−13cm of the neutron, 2) Its mean life τn = 918sec, and the reason
the massive constituents are emitted in the spontaneous decay.

The extension of the model to all remaining unstable particles resulted to be elemen-
tary. Finally, full compatibility of the above hadronic structure models with the SU(3)-color
Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of hadrons resulted to be possible in a variety of ways, such
as, via a multivalued isounit, as expressed below for the meson octet

ˆI = Diag.( ˆIπo, ˆIπ+, ˆIπ−, ˆIK o

S , ...).

(4.15)

(see Ref. [14,16,22] for brevity).

The conclusion beyond scientiﬁc or otherwise credible doubts is that all features of all
unstable (thus composite) particles can be uniquely and unambiguously represented in an
exact, numerical and invariant way as hadronic bound states of massive constituents generally
produced free in the spontaneous decays with the lowest mode, including the representation of
various features that are impossible with quark conjectures, said hadronic structure models
being fully compatible with the unitary Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of hadrons.

5. The negative environmental impact of neutrino and quark conjectures.
Molecular, atomic and nuclear structures have provided immense beneﬁts to mankind be-
cause their constituents can be produced free. Quark conjectures on the structure of hadrons
have no practical value whatever, not even remote, because, by comparison, quarks cannot
be produced free.

On the contrary, the structure model of hadrons based on physical constituents that can
be produced free have predicted new clean energies originating in the structure of individual
hadrons, today known as hadronic energies.

As an illustration, the neutron is the biggest reservoir of clean energy available to mankind
because: 1) The neutron is naturally unstable; 2) When decaying, it releases a large amount
of energy (0.782MeV ) carried out by the emitted electron; and, most importantly, 3) Such
energy is clean because the electron can be trapped with a thin metal shield, the energy
thus being without dangerous radiations and without dangerous waste as occurring for the
nuclear energy.

Moreover, the latter type of hadronic energy is two-fold because, when the decay of the
neutron occurs in a conductor, the latter acquires a positive charge while the shield trapping
the electron acquires a negative charge, resulting in a new clean production of continuous
current ﬁrst proposed in Ref. [29] and today known as Santilli’s hadronic battery. The second
source of energy is thermal and it is given by the heat acquired by the shield trapping the
emitted electrons.

The main motivation of this paper is the indication that the current widespread belief
on neutrino and quark conjectures prevents the orderly scientiﬁc study on how to utilize the
inexstinguishable clean energy inside the neutron, thus raising serious problems of scientiﬁc
ethics and accountability in view of the alarming increase of environmental problems.

If quarks are the actual physical constituents of the neutron, there is no possibility
whatever to utilize the trapped energy, trivially, because the hypothetical quarks are assumed
(but not proved) to be perennially conﬁned inside the neutron.

19

Figure 6: A SCHEMATIC VIEW OF TSAGAS EXPERIMENT ON THE STIMULATED DECAY
OF THE NEUTRON. The selected ”hadronic fuel” is the MO(100,42) that, when hit by photons
with the resonating frequency (5.1b) is predicted to experience a stimulated decay into an unstable
isotope that, in turn, decays spontaneous into a ﬁnal stable isotope with the total emission of two
highly energetic electron, Eqs. (5.3),thus realizing the conditions of Figure 5 with a large gain of
energy (see Refs [16,26] for details).

The neutrino conjecture is even more insidious for environmental issues because it was
conceived to deny Rutherford’s conception of the neutron, that is, to deny that the electron is
an actual physical constituent of the neutron. Consequently, there is no known mechanism
for tapping the large clean energy inside the neutron if the neutrino is admitted to be a
physical particle.

On the contrary, if neutrino and quark conjectures are abandoned in favor of the more
realistic view that, being permanently stable, the electron cannot ”disappear” at the time
of the synthesis of the neutron and it is indeed a physical constituent of the neutron, then
there exist various ways for the industrial utilization of the large energy inside the neutron.
Recall that, unlike the proton, the neutron is naturally unstable. Consequently, it must
admit a stimulated decay. That predicted by hadronic mechanics was ﬁrst proposed by
Santilli [29] in 1994 and it is given by hitting a selected number of nuclear isotopes, called
hadronic fuels, with hard photons having a frequency given by a submultiple of the diﬀerence
of energy between the neutron and the proton

mn − mp = 1.293MeV = h × νreson,

(5.1a)

νreson = (3.288x1020Hz)/1,

(3.288x1020Hz)/2,

(3.288x1020Hz)/3,

.............

(5.1b)

under which the isoelectron is expelled by the neutron, resulting in decay

γreson + n → p+ + e−.

(5.2)

The energy gain is beyond scientiﬁc doubt, because the use of 1/10-th of the exact
resonating frequency (5.1b) would guaranteed the production of a ten-fold clean energy
gain. Note that the energy of the photons not causing stimulated decay is not lost, because
absorbed by the hadronic fuel, thus being part of the heat balance (see Figure 5).

20

Figure 7: PRINTOUTS FROM TSAGAS TEST [32]. The top view is a printout of the back-
ground; the middle view is a printout with only the source of photons with a resonating frequence
(a disk of Eu156; and the bottom view is a printout of the pairing of the Europa source with a
disk of Mo(100, 42) showing new energy lines precisely as predicted by hadronic mechanics for the
stimulated decay of the neutron. Unfortunately, it has not been possible to repeat Tsagas experiment
since its original run of 1996 despite numerous proposals to laboratories around the world because
of academic obstructions dismissing the test on grounds that the stimulated decay of the neutron
is not admitted by neutrino and quark conjectures with evident damage to environmental research
and to society.

21

The synthesis of the neutron from protons and electrons was tested experimentally by
the Italian priest-physicist Don Borghi and his associates [31] with positive, yet preliminary
results in need of independent veriﬁcation. The test can today be conﬁrmed or denied in
a variety of way, such as by hitting a mass of palladium saturated with hydrogen with an
electron beam having the threshold energy of 0.782MeV under certain polarizations to assure
that the coupling of the electrons and the protons is in singlet as requested by Figure 4. The
detection of neutrons emitted by the mass would conﬁrm synthesis (1.1) at low energy, thus
establishing the validity of hadronic over quantum mechanics beyond credible or otherwise
scientiﬁc doubt.

Stimulated decay (5.2) has also been subjected to experimental veriﬁcations by Tsagas
and his collaborators [32] with encouraging results also in need of independent veriﬁcations.
The test was done via the use of resonating photons originating from a radioactive source
hitting a particular isotope of the molybdenum (an admitted hadronic fuel), according to
the reactions

γreson + Mo(100, 42) → T c(100, 43) + β−,
T c(100, 43) → Ru(100, 44) + β−,

(5.3a)

(5.3b)

where the ﬁrst beta decay is stimulated while the second is natural and occurs in 18 sec.

Note that nuclear energy is based on the disintegration of heavy nuclei, thus implying
dangerous radiations and dangerous waste. By comparison, the hadronic energy is based
on the use of light, natural and stable nuclei as in case (5.3), thus implying no harmful
radiation and no harmful waste because both the original nucleus Mo(100, 42) and the ﬁnal
one Ru(100,44) are light, natural and stable elements. For additional detailed studies of the
topic, interested readers should consult Refs. [16,29].

To conclude, the condition of contemporary research can be best illustrated by the fact
that, following the expenditure of over one billion dollars resulted in the multiplication of
the controversies rather than the resolution of any of them, hundred of millions of dollars
continue to be spent by various governments around the world for additional experiments
on neutrino and quark conjectures despite their known catastrophic inconsistencies.

By contrast, manifestly more important and dramatically less expensive experiments,
such as Don Borghi’s synthesis of the neutron [31], Tsagas tests on its stimulated decay [32]
and numerous others [14,16], continue to be discredited, let alone funded and conducted,
via the use of neutrino and quark conjectures.
In any case, the investments of various
governments on serious environmental research continue to be insigniﬁcant, thus identifying
serious problems in our contemporary societies.

The predictable conclusion is that theoretical and experimental research on neutrino
and quark conjectures should indeed continued to be funded, but complemented with the
funding of theoretical and experimental studies on alternative theories without the neutrino
and quark conjectures predicting new clean energies, the latter funding being recommendable
not only on grounds of scientiﬁc ethics and accountability, but also to prevent a predictable
severe condemnation by posterity, particularly vis-a-vis the alarming increase of cataclismic
climactic events no responsible person can any more deny.

22

References

[1] H. Rutherford Proc. Roy. Soc. A 97, 374 (1920).

[2] J. Chadwick Proc. Roy. Soc. A 136, 692 (1932).

[3] W. Pauli, Handbruch der Physik Vol. 24, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1933).

[4] E. Fermim Nuclear Physics, University of Chicago Press (1949).

[5] E. R. Bagge, World and Antiworlds as Physical Reality, Haag & Herchen, Frankfurt

(1994)

[6] A. Franklin, Are There really neutrinos? Westview Press, Boulder, CO (2000).

[7] H. E. Wilhelm, Hadronic Journal 27, 349 (2004)

[8] M. Kaku, Quantum Field Theory, Oxford University Press, New York (1993).

[9] R. M. Santilli, An intriguing legacy of Einstein, Fermi, Jordan and others: the possible
invalidation of quark conjectures (as elementary constituents), Found. Phys. Vol. 11,
383-472 (l981).

[10] R. M. Santilli, Hyperﬁne Interactions, 109, 63 (1997).

[11] R. M. Santilli, Foundations of Theoretical Mechanics, Vol. I (1978), VOL. II (1983),

Springer–Verlag, Heidelberg–New York.

[12] R. M. Santilli, Lie-admissible Approach to the Hadronic Structure, Vol.I (1978), Vol. II

(1981), Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, Florida .

[13] R. M. Santilli, Isotopic Generalizations of Galilei and Einstein Relativities, VolS. I AND

II (1991), Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, Florida.

[14] R. M. Santilli, Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Vol I (1995), Vol. II (1995) and Vol.

III (in preparation), Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev.

[15] R. M. Santilli Isotopic, Genotopic and Hyperstructural Methods in Theoretical Biology,

Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1996).

[16] R. M. Santilli, The Physics of New Clean Energies and Fuels According to Hadronic

Mechanics, Special issue of the Journal of New Energy, 318 pages (1998).

[17] R. M. Santilli, Foundations of Hadronic Chemistry with Applications to New Clean
Energies and Fuels, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston-Dordrecht-London (2001).

[18] R. M. Santilli, Isodual Theory of Antimatter with Applications to Antigravity, Grand

Uniﬁcation and Cosmology, Springer (in press).

[19] R. M. Santilli, The structure of the neutron and the nuclei according to hadronic me-

chanics, http://www.neutronstructure.org

23

[20] R. M. Santilli: Hadronic J. 1, 224, 574 and 1267 (1978).

[21] R. M. Santilli, Rendiconti Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Supplemento 42, 7 (1996)

[22] R. M. Santilli, Found. Phys. 27, 635 (1997).

[23] R. M. Santilli, Found. Phys. Letters 10, 307 (1997).

[24] R. M. Santilli, JINR Rapid. Comm. 6, 24 (1993)

[25] R. M. Santilli, Acta Appl. Math. 50, 177 (1998).

[26] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 13, 513 [1990].

[27] R. M. Santilli, JJINR Comm. E4-93-352 (1993).

[28] R. M. Santilli, Chinese J. Syst. Eng. and Electr. 6, 177 (1995)

[29] 26. R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 17, 311 (1994).

[30] S. Smith in Proceedings of the International Symposium on New Energies, M. Shawe et

al., Editors, Association of New Energy, Denver, Colorado (1996).

[31] C. Borghi, C. Giori and A. DallOIlio [Russian] J. Nucl. Phys. 56, 147 (1993).

[32] N. F. Tsagas, A. Mystakidis, G. Bakos, and L. Seftelis, Hadronic J. 19, 87 (1996).

[33] H. C. Myung, Lie Algebras and Flexible Lie-Admissible Algebras, Hadronic Press (1982).

[34] A.K. Aringazin, A. Jannussis, D.F. Lopez, M. Nishioka, and B. Veljanoski, Santilli’s Lie-
isotopic Generalization of Galilei’s and Einstein’s Relativities, Kostarakis Publishers,
Athens (1991).

[35] D. S. Sourlas and G. T. Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations of the Lie-Santilli Theory,

Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1993).

[36] J. Lˆohmus, E. Paal and L. Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras in Physics, Hadronic

Press, Palm Harbor, FL, USA (1994).

[37] J. V. Kadeisvili, Santilli’s Isotopies of Contemporary Algebras, Geometries and Rela-

tivities, Second Edition, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev, Second Edition (1997).

[38] R. M. Falcon Ganfornina and J. Nunez Valdes, Fondamentos de la Isoteoria de Lie-
Santilli, (in Spanish) International Academic Press, America-Europe-Asia, (2001), also
available in the pdf ﬁle http://www.i-b-r.org/docs/spanish.pdf

[39] Chun-Xuan Jiang, Foundations of Santilli’s Isonumber Theory, with Applications to
New Cryptograms, Fermat’s Theorem and Goldbach’s Conjecture, International Aca-
demic Press, America-Europe-Asia (2002) also available in the pdf ﬁle http://www.i-b-
r.org/docs/jiang.pdf

24

