Beyond Einstein ... Are we all afraid of the Truth?

smw-genart-02-06

Sanjay M Wagh

Central India Research Institute, Post Box 606,

Laxminagar, Nagpur 440 022, India ∗

(Dated: March 20, 2006)

Abstract

The power-point presentation [1] provided herein shows exactly why Einstein’s ﬁeld equations

of his general relativity are based on an illogical approach to representing the observable world.

Einstein had, in fact, discarded these equations way back in 1928 when he had began his solitary

search for a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. However, the rest of us learned, taught, and also put too much

faith for too long (for more than seventy years) in an illogical approach to representing the

observable world. Consequently, we have developed great reluctance, resulting from dogmatic

perceptions, prestige, reputation, ..., that is holding us back from orienting ourselves in the

“right” direction to the understanding of the observable phenomena. This raises the question

mentioned in the title: Are we all afraid of the Truth? Rhetorically speaking, we could then also

ask: are we all afraid of Virginia Woolf? In the sequel, I also illustrate my approach to going

Beyond Einstein for developing an appropriate mathematical framework for the fundamental

physical ideas behind the General Principle of Relativity, for the uniﬁcation of fundamental

physical interactions and, hence, for a theory of everything.

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: cirinag˙ngp@sancharnet.in

1

The title of this article may appear only as an eye-catching one to some, repelling one

to some others, a thought provoking one to few others ... Only the person reading it can

tell. However, before we plunge ourselves into the issues related to this title, a preamble

to it appears necessary to setup the backdrop against which it should be viewed to get

an insight into the question it poses.

Physics is our attempt to conceptually grasp the happenings of the observable world.

Concepts of Physics are also succinctly expressible in the language of mathematics. Then,

to obtain a genuine understanding of the physical phenomena, observable changes in

physical or observable bodies, it is necessary for us to formulate appropriate concepts and

to also express them by proper mathematical notions.

This last issue is clearly perceptible [2] with the pre-Newtonian development of Mechan-

ics. The concept of the motion of a physical body involves change in its “location” relative

to a reference body - another physical body. This “location” is physically “measurable”

using still another, third, physical body as a measuring scale. This measurement yields

a “number” - the “distance” between the reference body and the physical body whose

“location” is being ascertained with respect to the former. The motion of the ﬁrst physical

body is then mathematically expressible as a rate of change of this number, distance, with

respect to Time.

[Time here is a concept related to the “location” of the “hand” of a

clock body relative to the reference physical body. Here, we will not enter into further

details about Time, not that these are unimportant.]

Because the distance is a pure number, a scalar, its rate of change with time is a scalar,

the speed. Descartes then used this notion of speed to formulate and propose the Laws

of Motion of observable bodies using it.

2

Observations with collisions of physical bodies did not, however, support the Laws of

Motion as proposed by Descartes.

Huygens then realized that if we appropriately associated a positive and a negative

sign with the speeds of two colliding bodies, then the Laws of Motion so obtainable are in

agreement with the observed collisions of bodies. This assignment of positive or negative

sign to the speed was only an ad-hoc proposal of Huygens and was restricted only to his

considerations of the collision of two physical bodies.

Of course, it was yet to be realized that an appropriate notion to describe motion is

that of “displacement” and that it involves not just the change in distance to a physical

body but also the “direction” of this change in its distance. That is to say, it was yet to

be realized that we have to treat the “displacement” as a vector.

As is well known, Newton, with a deeper insight than his contemporaries, provided us a

logically consistent conceptual framework for Mechanics using vectors. As Newton’s Laws

of Motion were in “agreement” with most subsequent experiments, the concept of motion

then found its proper mathematical representation. Descartes and others also provided

geometrical background to these notions by invoking the Euclidean geometry and the

mathematical notion of a (Cartesian) coordinate system. This is the representation of

physical bodies by a point of the Euclidean 3-dimensional space.

Experiments “verify” theoretical explanations of phenomena and, in turn, indicate the

appropriateness of our choice of, both, the physical conceptions and the mathematical

structures representing them. Due mainly to Galileo, experimental methods of determin-

ing this appropriateness were already well established before Newton who always used

such methods to substantiate his theoretical conclusions.

3

To state his Laws of Motion, Newton introduced an important concept, Force, as

a “cause” behind the motion. He deﬁned force as the rate of change of (Descartes’s)

quantity of motion, the momentum vector, with time. He then also related force with the

acceleration and the (Galilean) inertia of a physical body.

There also are purely logical methods to decide, at least partly, the appropriateness

of concepts. These determine the mutual compatibility of our concepts, ie, the internal

consistency of the theoretical framework. Newton also used logical methods, eg, the

formulation of his third law of motion, to “construct” theory.

As only a physical body should be the “cause” behind a physical phenomenon, every

force was expected to have physical bodies as source(s). This, however, was not to be

with Newton’s deﬁnition of force. The Coriolis force did not have any source in physical

bodies. This pseudo-force only arises because the chosen reference body, the Earth, is

rotating relative to some “standard” reference physical bodies.

What then are these “standard” reference bodies? To analyze this issue, Newton

devised the famous bucket experiment. This thought experiment was an indication to

Newton himself that his conceptual framework was not logically completely satisfactory.

There also were observations from Optics to indicate to Newton that his framework of

Mechanics was insuﬃcient to explain all the physical phenomena.

Moreover, Newton had mathematically represented a physical body as a point of the

underlying 3-dimensional Euclidean space. Newton’s laws of motion were then closely

related to certain mathematical properties of (time-parametrized) curves of the Euclidean

3-dimensional geometry, and, as is well known, Newton himself developed corresponding

mathematical notions of Calculus.

4

In this connection, Descartes [3, 4] rightly pointed out that this representation of a

physical body by a point of the Euclidean space is not in conformity with our everyday

experience that reference bodies do get aﬀected by physical processes. Speciﬁcally, he

was concerned about the fact that the coordinate system of the Euclidean 3-dimensional

space underlying Newtonian Mechanics, when viewed as a “material construction” of a

reference body, does not get aﬀected by physical precesses.

Generically, using checks of either experimental origin or logical origin (the internal

consistency of the theory), we judiciously accept or reject any conceptual framework as

an admissible theory of the observable world. When an internally consistent theory fails

to explain some observations, we need to expand the conceptual basis of that theory and,

hence, mathematical structures representing those concepts. As an acceptable explanation

of the observable world, the conceptual framework of the “expanded” theory must also

be internally consistent in the sense of Logic.

But, alternative mathematical notions were simply not available in Newton’s times.

Therefore, although Newton and a few others “sensed” that the mechanistic framework

needed “modiﬁcations” at fundamental levels, neither Newton nor could anyone else (of

Newton’s times, sensing this need) suggest any alternative to it.

The world, then, got blinded by successes of the Newtonian Theory, and fell pray to the

Mechanistic Dogma - that the entirety of physical phenomena could be explained using

the Newtonian conceptions from Mechanics.

Scientiﬁc developments after Newton followed the path of “experimental” checks.

Mechanistic Dogma and the lack of alternative mathematical notions, both, prevented

the majority from exploring alternatives to Newton’s Mechanics.

5

As is well known, only the experimental data, increasingly getting inconsistent with

Newtonian theoretical predictions, ultimately severed, once for all, strong links with the

Mechanistic Dogma of the post-Newtonian era.

Perhaps, if fundamental limitations of Newton’s theory were widely known, mechanistic

dogma would not have gripped the majority in the ﬁrst place. Of course, the lack of means

of rapid communication was the reason for these limitations not being widely known. Only

a few centuries after Galileo and Newton, Einstein could free us, still only partially [20],

from the dogmas associated with Newton’s theoretical constructions.

I am referring here to Einstein’s famous contributions [3] to two well known revolutions

in Physics, viz, Special Theory of Relativity and Quantum Theory. Einstein’s analysis

of the role of Light in physical measurements freed us from “ﬁxed” Euclidean 3-space

and “universal” time, both of the Newtonian era. On the other hand, Schr¨odinger’s

and Heisenberg’s mathematical methods of Quantum Theory [5] showed us, among other

things, that mathematical methods signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than those of the Newtonian

theory do describe the observable world in a better manner.

With these revolutions, Science, in general, has developed so rapidly that it has greatly

inﬂuenced almost every aspect of our lives. In comparison to Newton’s and Einstein’s eras,

we have rapid, almost instantaneous, means of communication, thanks to the technological

revolution with Computers, the Internet... . Then, with these developments, experimental

methods have also advanced and have also become exceptionally cutting into the pockets

of the tax payers globe over. The role of “all of us” in promoting an open dialogue over

fundamental physical conceptions and their limitations is therefore quite important to

free us from associated dogmatic perceptions, if any.

6

The above appears to be presently very relevant simply because dogmatic perceptions

do appear to prevail within the physics community at large. The following discussion

considers these dogmatic perceptions from my perspective.

First such deep-rooted dogma appears to be that mathematical methods of Quantum

Theory will [6, 7] lead us to a Theory of Everything. Here, it is then forgotten that

mathematical methods of Quantum Theory do not represent physical bodies in such

a way that the eﬀects of physical phenomena on any reference body are encompassed

by this mathematical representation. That is to say, Descartes’s criticism of Newton’s

mathematical representation of a physical body as a point of the Euclidean space applies

also to this quantum theoretic representation of a physical body.

The issue here is also that of the limitations of the conceptual framework as well as

those of the mathematical methods of Quantum Theory as discussed in [8]. Speciﬁcally,

quantum theory uses inertia, potential, source of the potential and a law of motion as

fundamental notions. These four notions are however mutually logically independent.

Hence, no explanations of any kind for these four basic notions are possible within the

conceptual framework of the quantum theory.

The mathematical framework of the quantum theory faithfully expresses its physical

conceptions and is, consequently, inadequate to remove the mutual logical independencies

of its above basic notions. That is to say, the (extended) Lagrangian, or the Hamiltonian,

method needs the aforementioned four conceptions to ﬁrst yield mathematical expressions

to correspond to them, and only after this has been done that the method provides

the evolution of the system that it represents. But, neither that Lagrangian nor that

Hamiltonian is obtainable within this framework.

7

Then, the mathematical framework of the quantum theory can do no better than the

(extended) lagrangian or hamiltonian frameworks, which cannot of course remove the

mutual logical independencies of the aforementioned four basic notions of the quantum

theory. A question is also whether these frameworks can, with prior speciﬁcations of all

the relevant physical conceptions by appropriate mathematical expressions, account for

the entirety of physical phenomena.

This is really an issue of non-lagrangian and non-hamiltonian mathematical systems.

The point is that mathematical such systems do exist. Then, if a theory better than the

quantum theory were to be fundamentally based on such mathematical notions, lagrangian

or hamiltonian representation for every physical phenomenon may not exist within it. A

better theory here must ﬁrst remove the mutual logical independencies of the fundamental

physical concepts mentioned before.

That is why we need to “look beyond” the mathematical framework of the Quantum

Theory for developing an appropriate theoretical framework within which the mutual log-

ical independencies of fundamental physical notions are removed [8]. Such a “framework”

may be termed as a Theory of Everything. We already have a “good” understanding of

physical phenomena of the microscopic domain (corresponding to electromagnetic, weak

and strong nuclear interactions) on the basis of the quantum theory and an appropriate

inclusion of gravitational phenomena within this “framework” may, thinkably, exhaust

the entire list of observable phenomena needing description.

But, many may have developed a frame of mind that such a theory of everything is

not possible. Surely, we have to be cautious with any such claim, but to turn completely

away from the possibility of a Theory of Everything is dogmatic.

8

In this connection, we recall that the purpose of physical science is to “describe”

changes in physical bodies as are observed. That such a description is possible is the

basis of our developing physical theories.

As we have stressed before, mathematics is the language of physical science and physical

concepts are also succinctly expressible using mathematical notions. Then, we may think

of a single mathematical notion to “represent” not only all the characteristics of physical

bodies but also their “changes” (mathematical transformations).

Here, we then note that a mathematical transformation essentially “knows” about the

mathematical structure it “transforms”. This single concept, that of the transformation of

a mathematical structure representing all the characteristics of physical bodies, appears

to possess therefore the ingredients necessary to be the single conceptual entity that may

be the basis of a Theory of Everything. That this description may really be possible [9]

goes against the dogma that a Theory of Everything is impossible.

Another dogmatic perception appears to be that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations of General

Relativity should describe well the phenomenon of gravitation at least in some suitable

approximation to a better theory. Consequently, predictions obtainable from the analysis

of these equations are considered [10] as physically relevant.

With Schwarzschild’s monumental discovery in 1916 of a spherically symmetric solution

to these highly non-linear, partial diﬀerential equations, the attention of the world, in

particular, of various mathematicians, had turned to these equations [21].

Important

mathematical methods related to solving non-linear partial diﬀerential equations were

developed and numerous solutions [22] of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations were obtained. This

is still an active area of research in General Relativity.

9

In recent times, to be speciﬁc since 1963, the discovery of Quasi Stellar Objects and

high energy phenomena in Active Galactic Nuclei have brought into prominence with

physicists and astrophysicists these solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations and methods of

perturbational handling of these equations themselves. The Black Hole solutions of these

equations are also considered [11] to be very signiﬁcant advances in understanding the

related astrophysical events, considering particularly that precursors to Black Holes, the

Neutron Stars, have been discovered in the form of Pulsars.

Interesting speculations about possible detection of the Black Hole or the Event Horizon

in astronomical observations of certain X-ray sources have also been attempted [12]. These

have also found places as headlines with various media. In a “scientiﬁcally aware society”,

this is certainly desirable as well as inevitable.

The same applies to astrophysical models of the entire Universe - the Cosmology.

Hubble observed that the red-shifts of distant galaxies increase with their distance from

us. When red-shift is interpreted [23] using Doppler’s eﬀect, this all leads to an interesting

picture of an expanding universe of galaxies. One implication of this could be that galaxies

had been closer to each other in the past.

Then, the Universe of Galaxies should have “originated” out of a unique event in

the history of this Universe. This is then as if matter had been thrown out in a Big

Explosion - the Big Bang. The explosive event imagined here should have associated with

it radiation, which should decouple from matter at some stage because of cooling due to

expansion, and should be observable as a relic of the Big Bang. The observed Cosmic

Microwave Background Radiation is then “naturally” explainable on the basis of the Big

Bang assumption as its relic radiation.

10

Apart from the Big Bang conception, an alternative explanation of the expansion of the

Universe of Galaxies is also possible if, in addition to the attractive force of gravity, some

suitable “repulsive force” between galaxies is assumed. With an appropriate behavior of

this repulsive force, galaxies then need not originate out of any unique event such as a

Big Bang. This explanation also becomes as attractive as the Big Bang proposal when

“natural” explanation is provided for the existence of this repulsive force. This is the

basis of the Steady State Cosmology [13, 14].

The sixties had thus witnessed the famous debate of Big Bang versus Steady State

Cosmology. It was then subsequently claimed that the Steady State Model is untenable

vis-a’-vis observations of radio sources. So much had been the general, justiﬁable, interest

in these Cosmological issues that this scientiﬁc debate also found an appropriate place in

various enjoyable novels of satirical nature!

But, a cursory glance at the submissions, of theoretical as well as observational nature,

to various databases is suﬃcient to show that this debate is not settled as yet. However,

the “majority” seems to be favoring the Big Bang Model and most researchers therefore

interpret observations from only the point of view of this model.

As observations improved, the need to postulate the aforementioned repulsive force has

become more imminent. Observations appear to indicate that the rate of expansion of the

universe is currently increasing. Then, the Big Bang conception needs to explain these

observations. Any explanation is possible only if some repulsive force has, in the recent

times, become “operative” to accelerate the expansion. Within this scenario, Inﬂation,

Quintessence, Coasting etc. are just manifestations of diﬀerent behaviors of the assumed

repulsive force, needing natural origin [13].

11

A preliminary mathematical rendering of this physical picture of the universe at large

was then to be “found” within the homogeneous and isotropic Friedmann-Lemaitre-

Robertson-Walker geometry [13] for the spacetime. Of course, this geometrical rendering

is valid if the galaxies are homogeneously and isotropically distributed.

The corresponding solution of the Einstein ﬁeld equations then represents the Big Bang

picture. In this case, the “initial singularity” of the FLRW spacetime then signiﬁes the

unique event of the Big Bang. But, the spacetime singularity implies the breakdown of

the geometric description in terms of Einstein’s equations. The problem of the spacetime

singularity, it was hoped, would then go away with the “quantum” considerations related

to geometry, ie, with the Quantum Theory of Geometry [7, 15].

On the other hand, the Steady State Cosmology uses [13] the same homogeneous and

isotropic FLRW spacetime geometry, but its equations of evolution are modiﬁed away from

those of Einstein’s theory of gravity by the presence of the creation-ﬁeld terms producing

the repulsive force mentioned before. The latest version of this theory, the Quasi Steady

State Cosmology, then assumes [13] certain behavior for the creation-ﬁeld terms, but the

original philosophical appeal is then lost for many.

But, it is crucial to realize that Einstein’s equations are, as the provided power-point

presentation clearly shows, based on an illogical and, hence, unscientiﬁc, approach to

explaining the physical world.

Even if these equations were assumed to provide some “geometric” explanations of

observable phenomena, the corresponding conceptual formalism [24] is not satisfactory.

This is because electromagnetic phenomena will then not be geometrically explainable as

arising due to the curvature of the underlying geometry.

12

We also note here that Einstein had, in fact, begun discarding these equations [3, 4, 16]

by 1928 when he started on his solitary search for some satisfactory Uniﬁed Field Theory

of gravity and electromagnetism.

Moreover, the action-at-a-distance formalism cannot remove [8] the mutual logical

independencies of the fundamental physical conceptions mentioned earlier. This is so

because the action-at-a-distance framework, unavoidably, needs to associate “source

characteristics” with observable bodies corresponding to assumed forces. Explanations

for such source characteristics and the assumed Law of Force are then outside the scope

of any action-at-a-distance framework as was Newton’s.

This is what brings us to the question raised in the title of this article. It refers to

above situations with the aforementioned dogmatic perceptions associated with the two

fundamental pillars of the modern physical science.

In what follows, we will discuss some lopsided developments of ideas when alternative

explanations to concerned phenomena should really have been explored. These lopsided

developments appear to be based on the aforementioned dogmatic perceptions and, hence,

on inappropriate conceptions. Unjustiﬁably, alternative explorations were, time and

again, simply shunned as a result of dogmatic perceptions.

Due to many dogmatic perceptions, there has only been a lopsided development of

models of the Big Bang conception, and that too using the inappropriate mathematical

framework of the Einstein ﬁeld equations of general relativity. Observations have mostly

been interpreted from the point of view of this conception. Alternative cosmological

scenarios have not been explored to the same level of details and researchers exploring

such alternatives do not ﬁnd the required support [25].

13

This lopsided development is also seen with the models of astrophysical bodies such as

Quasars and Active Galactic Nuclei based on an entirely inappropriate notion of general

relativistic Black Holes, not worth mentioning here are the naked singularities (that,

justiﬁably, were complete anathema to Einstein). Alternative models have also been

explored, no doubt, but only by the minority of researchers who ﬁnd it hard to garner

support for their results. An already famous such case related to alternative ideas has

been that of H Arp’s Quasar-Galaxy associations [13].

Such situations have arisen because of dogmatic perceptions at various levels of the

scientiﬁc echelons. If not, then how else do we explain these lopsided and inappropriate

developments of only certain ideas? One could of course blame the lack of means of rapid

communication in the past for the propagation of various inappropriate conceptions. But,

this alone does not completely absolve us of the relevant sin.

In order to proceed “Beyond Einstein,” let us then recall at this place Einstein’s

personal approach to his own theoretical constructions. The pivotal point of Einstein’s

formulation of relevant ideas is the equivalence of the inertia and the gravitational mass

of a physical body, a fact known since Newton’s times but which remained only an

assumption of Newton’s theory.

On the basis of this equivalence principle, Einstein then arrived at the General Principle

of Relativity that the Laws of Physics be applicable with respect to all the systems of

reference, in relative acceleration or not, without unnatural forces (whose origin is not in

physical or observable bodies) entering into them. Then, the Laws of Physics should

be based on the same mathematical structures, and be also the same mathematical

statements, for all the reference systems.

14

The equivalence principle implies that the Lorentz transformations of the Special

Theory of Relativity are not suﬃcient to incorporate the explanation of this equivalence

of inertia and the gravitational mass of a material body. Furthermore, it also follows

that general transformations (of coordinates) are required by the equivalence principle,

and the physical basis is then that of the general principle of relativity, which is certainly

more appealing than the restricted special principle of relativity.

To arrive at his formulation of the general theory of relativity, Einstein ﬁrst raised [3]

(p. 69) the following two questions:

• Of which mathematical type are variables (functions of coordinates) which permit

expression of physical properties of space (“structure”)?

• Only after that: Which equations are satisﬁed by those variables?

In 1949, more than thirty years after he proposed his ﬁeld equations of the general

theory of relativity in 1916, he still wrote [3] that:

The answer to these questions is today by no means certain.

He then elucidated his steps to these questions by his considerations of the

(a) pure gravitational ﬁeld

occur, too).

(b) general ﬁeld (in which quantities corresponding somehow to the electromagnetic ﬁeld

He then wrote [3] about his approach to a general theory of relativity in the following

“recollective” words that:

15

It seemed hopeless to me at that time to venture the attempt of representing

the total ﬁeld (b) and to ascertain ﬁeld-laws for it.

I preferred, therefore,

to set up a preliminary formal frame for the representation of the entire

physical reality; this was necessary in order to be able to investigate, at least

preliminarily, the usefulness of the basic ideas of general relativity.

In 1916, as is well known [10, 13], he then proposed the following equations for his

preliminary explorations of the representation of the entire physical reality:

Rij

− 1
2

R gij = − κ Tij

where the left hand side is a geometric quantity while the right hand side is the energy-

momentum tensor representing physical matter. These equations reduce to appropriate

Newtonian equations in a suitable limit.

In 1949, he still expressed his concerns [3] about these preliminary equations in the

following words:

The right side is a formal condensation of all things whose comprehension

in the sense of a ﬁeld theory is still problematic. Not for a moment, of

course, did I doubt that this formulation was merely a makeshift in order

to give the general principle of relativity a preliminary closed expression. For

it was essentially not anything more than a theory of the gravitational ﬁeld,

which was somewhat artiﬁcially isolated from a total ﬁeld of as yet unknown

structure.

16

In 1949 again, he further wrote [3] about his perception of any satisfactory formulation

of a theory incorporating the general principle of relativity in the following words clearly

indicating that “geometric” singularities are anathema (my underlining):

Maxwell’s theory of the electric ﬁeld remained a torso, because it was unable

to set up laws for the behavior of electric density, without which there can, of

course, be no such thing as an electromagnetic ﬁeld. Analogously the general

theory of relativity furnished then a ﬁeld theory of gravitation, but no theory

of the ﬁeld-creating masses. (These remarks presuppose it as self-evident that

a field-theory may not contain any singularities, i.e., any positions or parts

in space in which the field-laws are not valid.)

Einstein had, in 1928, concluded that his equations of General Relativity were not any

satisfactory formulation of the physical reality. He had attempted numerous formulations

for the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Pauli [16, 17] (p. 347 of [16]) then criticized:

[Einstein’s] never-failing inventiveness as well as his tenacious energy in

the pursuit of [uniﬁcation] guarantees us in recent years, on the average,

one theory per annum ... It is psychologically interesting that for some time

the current theory is usually considered by its author to be the “deﬁnitive

solution”...

and had already demanded to know from Einstein, in a letter to Einstein dated December

19 1929, as to “what had become of the perihelion of Mercury, the bending of light, and

the conservation laws of energy-momentum.”

17

Einstein had no good answers to these questions within his Uniﬁed Field Theory. He

however was not overly concerned about the issues raised by Pauli. But, in a letter written

on January 1, 1930 to W Mayer he wrote: (my underlining)

Nearly all the colleagues react sourly to the theory because it puts again in

doubt the earlier general relativity.

In 1931, in a note [18] he also admitted that his earlier attempts at a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory

constituted a wrong direction to follow.

Interestingly, in the early forties, Einstein also explored [16] (p. 347) the question of

whether the most fundamental equations of physics might posses mathematical structure

other than that of the partial diﬀerential equations.

As Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are based on logically unacceptable substitution of only the

force of gravity by the curvature of the spacetime geometry, their solutions cannot form

any logically or scientiﬁcally acceptable explanations of observable phenomena. Hence,

explanations based on black hole solutions, the naked singularity solutions as well as

the analysis of cosmological solutions of these equations, including perturbations, are no

explanations of the concerned physical phenomena.

Einstein had very clearly recognized that a ﬁeld theory must not contain any singulari-

ties as particles. However, perhaps under the pressure of the “Publish or Perish” syndrome

and due to lack of relevant information, both, we attempted unscientiﬁc descriptions of

physical phenomena for over the last century almost. We also gave to the general masses

an impression of satisfaction with such descriptions.

18

The Truth however remains that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are logically unacceptable

as forming any basis for scientiﬁc explanations of the observable world. Origins of the

persistent dogmatic perception, that Einstein’s equations describe the behavior of matter

when gravity dominates, rest then with the following situations.

It is certainly true that Einstein’s equations provide us a mathematical method of

determining a 4-dimensional geometry. Properties of the 4-dimensional geometries are of

course based on mathematically consistent methods.

Therefore, equations of geodesics of the geometry, equations of geodesic deviations,

perturbational analysis of the underlying geometry, etc. are mathematically consistent. It

also is quite justiﬁable that we construct [7] 4-dimensional geometries using “non-metric

building blocks made up of” spinor variables.

Consequently, any use [7] of quantum theoretic methods for the Einstein-Ashtekar

gravity can also be expected to provide us some mathematically consistent framework of

the “Quantum Theory of Geometry”.

But, how can these methods yield us any acceptable [26] explanations of the observable

phenomena if their basis, Einstein’s equations themselves, is logically unacceptable? How

do the conceptual diﬃculties [19] with the quantum theory of the spacetime get resolved?

These methods are also based on the lagrangian or hamiltonian formalism. In the absence

of logically consistent underlying conceptions of Physics, what have these mathematical

methods got to do with the observable phenomena?

The Truth also remains that procedures of quantum theoretic origin as used in highly

innovative approaches to uniﬁcation of basic forces are based on lagrangian or hamiltonian

methods, which cannot provide explanations for the aforementioned four fundamental

19

conceptions of the quantum theory. No doubt, the conceptions behind various attempts

such as superstring theory, Euclidean quantization program etc. have been ingenious and

highly innovative. The fact still remains that these approaches are explicitly or implicitly

based on lagrangian or hamiltonian method.

How then can the uniﬁcation of fundamental interactions be possible in any of such

approaches [6]? We could again ask, what happens to conceptual diﬃculties with the

quantum spacetime here? How do these diﬃculties get resolved?

Is not an open-minded recognition of such facts by all of us required? We should

remember what Einstein had said:

Anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried anything new.

How true this is! As a child, we all make a mistake, learn from that mistake and turn away

from that mistake to other matters. Is that why we, as children, are creative, innovative,

and always exploring something new?

The elders are reluctant to admitting a mistake, perhaps because of their false notions

of pride, reputation ... Should we be prey to such false notions? Then, is it not in the

wider scientiﬁc interests to accept (in reality, Einstein’s) mistake and progress along the

right path to a better understanding of the observable world?

Einstein was an honest man. Unperturbed by his failures, he had openly admitted to

his formulation of a theory of general relativity in terms of his equations being not right.

Unafraid of losing his reputation, he had solitarily pursued the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Again,

he had openly admitted to his path being not the right one to follow. Due only to his

such qualities, a common person regards him as an Icon of Science.

20

The then torch-bearer of physical science, Einstein, had shown us that the path of his

ﬁeld equations of general relativity is an incorrect one to follow. Due however to the lack

of relevant information in the past, we “followed” that incorrect path even to this date.

In the present IT-era, we are fortunate to possess the means of rapid communication.

Then, are we to discard the inappropriate path and “search” for the “correct” path to

the understanding of the physical world?

My purpose behind this article is to criticize (but not in any manner belittle other lines

of thoughts) and to plainly state all the related facts so that we could all rethink about

pros and cons of approaches to explaining the observable world.

History of Science beyond Galileo and Newton has shown that only right ideas survive

and the incorrect or inappropriate ones simply vanish into oblivion. To accept a mistake

is the right thing to do, and Einstein had openly admitted to that mistake. It is then a

right way to go Beyond Einstein. This is a way to genuine progress. Has not the Time

come today for the majority of us to take a deﬁnitive stance in favor of the Truth and to

take steps in the “right” direction?

Are we then progressive? Or, are we all afraid of the Truth? And, because we are

afraid of the Truth, shall we suppress and not let the Truth be out? Then, rhetorically

speaking, are we all afraid of Virginia Woolf?

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to my brother Hemant Wagh and to Dilip A Deshpande for proposing

that I write this article, for reading it, for suggesting improvements to it and also for

various discussions about concerned issues from time to time.

21

[1] Wagh S M (2006) ﬁle:no-efogr.ppt. This is a part of the talk How do we understand

the Universe around us? given on the occasion of the World Year of Physics 2005 at the

Janakidevi Bajaj Science College, Wardha on January 7, 2006, and also as a part of the

talk Information Communication Technology in Education to participants of the Seminar

on ICT in Education organized by the Institution of Electronics & Telecommunication

Engineers, Nagpur Center and the VMV Commerce, JMT Arts & JJP Science College,

Wardhaman Nagar, Nagpur on February 4, 2006, and also as a part of the talk Use of

Information Communication Technology in Teaching and Education to science and non-

science College Teachers at the Academic Staﬀ College, Nagpur University, Nagpur during

an Orientation Program on March 6, 2006

[2] See an excellent article by von Laue M (1970) in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist

(Ed. P A Schlipp, La Salle: Open Court Publishing Company - The Library of Living

Philosophers, Vol. VII).

[3] Einstein A (1970) in Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist (Ed. P A Schlipp, Open Court

Publishing Company - The Library of Living Philosophers, Vol VII, La Salle). See, in

particular, his Autobiographical Sketch and his reply to essays by others.

[4] See, Einstein A (1968) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (Methuen & Co.

Ltd, London) (Appendix V: Relativity and the Problem of Space.)

[5] See any of the many standard books on Quantum Theory. For example, Varadrajan V S

(1988) Geometry of quantum theory, Vol. I and II (Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York)

Dirac P A M (1970) Principles of Quantum Theory (Dover, New York)

Jauch J M (1968) Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, (Addison-Wesley, Reading)

Also, Messiah A M L (1960) Quantum Mechanics, (North-Holland, Amsterdam)

Richtmyer F K & Kennard E H (1942) Introduction to Modern Physics, (MacGraw Hill,

[6] Greene M B, Schwarz J H & Witten E (1987) Superstring Theory, Vol I and II (Cambridge

New York)

University Press, Cambridge)

Polchinski J (1998) String Theory, Vol 1 and 2 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge)

22

[7] Ashtekar A (2005) New J. Phys., Vol. 7, p. 198 and references therein.

http://stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/7/198

[8] Wagh S M (2005) Foundations of a Universal Theory of Relativity and references therein

http://arxiv.org/physics/0505063

[9] Wagh S M (2006) Universal Theory of Relativity and the “Uniﬁcation” of Fundamental

Physical Interactions, to be submitted. http://arxiv.org/physics/0602042

Wagh S M (2005) Progress with a Universal Theory of Relativity, Talk delivered at the

SARS Einstein Centennial Meeting, Durban, September 25-26, 2005.

http://arxiv.org/physics/0602032

Wagh S M (2005) Universal Relativity and Its Mathematical Requirements, Talk delivered

at the SAMS 48th Annual Meeting, Grahamstown, October 31 - November 2, 2005.

[10] MacCallum M A H (2006) Finding and using exact solution of Einstein’s equations,

http://arxiv.org/physics/0602038

http://arxiv.org/gr-qc/0601102

Kramer D, Stephani H, MacCallum M A H and Herlt E (1980) Exact Solutions of Einstein’s

Field Equations (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge)

C W Misner, K S Thorne and J A Wheeler (1973) Gravitation (W H Freeman, New York)

[11] Chandrasekhar S (1983) Mathematical Theory of Black Holes (Clarendon Press, Oxford)

Penrose R (1998) in Black Holes and Singularities: S Chandrasekhar Symposium (Ed. R M

Shapiro S and Teukolsky S A (1972) Black Holes, White Dwarfs and Neutron Stars (Wiley

Wald, Yale University Press, Yale)

International, New York)

[12] Broderick A E and Narayan R (2005) On the nature of compact dark mass of the galactic

center, http://arxiv.org/astro-ph/0512211 and references therein

[13] Narlikar J V (2000) A cosmic adventure (Rajhansa Prakashan, Pune, India)

Adler S L, Bazin C and Schiﬀer R (1975) Introduction to general relativity (McGraw Hill-

Joshi P S (1993) Global aspects in gravitation and cosmology (Clarendon Press, Oxford)

[14] Hoyle F and Narlikar J V (1978) Action at a distance in Physics and Cosmology (W H

Kogakusha, Tokyo)

Freeman, New York)

23

[15] Ashtekar A, Pawlowski T & Singh Parampreet (2005) Quantum nature of the big bang,

[16] See also, Pais A (1982) Subtle is the Lord ... The science and the life of Albert Einstein

http://arxiv.org/gr-qc/0602086

(Clarendon Press, Oxford)

[17] Pauli W (1932) Nature, 20, 186

[18] Einstein A (1931) Science, 74, p. 438

[19] Ashtekar A and Statchel J (1991) Conceptual problems of quantum gravity (Birkhauser,

Hawking S and Israel W Eds. (1979) General Relativity - An Einstein Centenary Survey

Boston) and references therein

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge)

[20] Even during Einstein’s times, the rapid means of communication were unavailable. Access to

needed information in printed research journals was severely limited and involved inordinate

delays. Media provided scientiﬁc news from time to time. Media therefore played an

exceptionally important role in educating the masses then, and continue to play a similar

role even in the modern IT-era.

[21] Of course, David Hilbert, a mathematician, had also proposed these equations.

[22] However, it should also be noted here that various properties of many of these solutions are,

from the physical point of view, exceedingly perplexing, for example those of the Taub-NUT

and other spacetimes.

[23] But, is this interpretation of red-shift using Doppler’s eﬀect correct? Is there another

permissible explanation for (part of) the red-shift that is more signiﬁcant in the cosmological

[24] Einstein’s intentions behind these equations was that of the representation of the entire

context? These are still open issues.

physical reality. See later.

[25] Substantial support comes neither with the refereed journals nor with the funding agencies.

Most journals then shoot a stereotyped rejection or the referees reject such speculative

research without paying much attention to alternative ideas.

[26] Some beautiful part of Mathematics may not have anything to do with observable situations.

24

