6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON AN IMPROVEMENT OF THE
PLANCK RADIATION ENERGY
DISTRIBUTION

Diego Sa´a 1
Copyright c(cid:13)2006

Abstract

The probability distribution function for thermodynamics and econo-

physics is obtained by solving an equilibrium equation. This approach
is diﬀerent from the common one of optimizing the entropy of the sys-
tem or obtaining the state of maximum probability, which usually
obtains as a result the Boltzmann distribution. It is proved that the
so-called Planck distributions are the source of an inconsistency ap-
parently not yet identiﬁed by the physicists. The Gamma distribution
is proposed as a better equation to describe the blackbody radiation.

PACS : 02.50.-r, 05.20.-y, 65.50.+m

keywords: statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, econophysics, thermo-

dynamic equilibrium, probability distributions

1. INTRODUCTION

Kirchhoﬀ introduced the concept of a perfectly black body, being one
which absorbs all incident radiation. He was the ﬁrst in presenting the enunci-
ation of the principle of the balance between emission and absorption around
1860. The principle of equilibrium of emission and absorption between diﬀer-
ent agents is, essentially, the method that will be used in the present paper
to develop a new equation that describes the radiation distribution of a black
body.

By 1900 Planck devised the known equation that describes the distribu-
tion of radiation emitted by a black body, based on hunch and pure guessing.
Although it is rather accurate over the entire range of frequencies it is sug-
gested here that it has the wrong mathematical form and also results in some
numerical diﬀerences that will be revealed later.

1Escuela Polit´ecnica Nacional. Quito –Ecuador. email: dsaa@server.epn.edu.ec

1

“Although the introduction of energy quanta a century ago has led to the
currently accepted explanation within quantum theory, there is still no ﬁrm
conclusion as to whether or not blackbody radiation can be explained within
classical physics.” [3]

One of the basic assumptions in this paper is that energy exists in particles

or packets, or quanta, which have continuous values.

This deserves some explanation because this is against one of the most
basic and accepted tenets of Physics, in the so-called area of quantum theory.
The elementary particles called fermions, such as the electron and proton,
have some very speciﬁc amounts of energy and also the orbits of the electrons
in the atoms seem to be at discrete levels. Consequently, it can be safely
accepted that those elementary particles satisfy the classical quantum theory.
Moreover, it can be accepted that, when the electrons jump between levels
in the atomic orbits, they emit and absorb photons with discrete levels of
energy.

However, this discrete character is not logically and necessarily extrapo-
lated to the photons produced, for example, in the blackbody or an antenna
radiation. It has not been proved that such photons have discrete levels of
energy. On the contrary, electromagnetic radiation seems to have a continu-
ous spectrum in the whole range of frequencies or wavelengths. The present
author has not been able to ﬁnd any experiment supporting the opposite
position.

“Planck interpolated between the laws of Wien and Rayleigh Jeans but
found that he could only derive a satisfactory equation using what he thought
was merely a mathematical trick, namely that light is only emitted in “pack-
ets”. He did not for many years believe that these packets, known as quanta,
corresponded with reality.” [12]

2. INCONSISTENCIES IN THERMODYNAMICS

The temperature of a body is a measurable eﬀect furnished by the sta-
tistical average of the energies of the enormous amount of photons emitted
by that body. However, this is not the practical way to compute the tem-
perature because we don’t know the energy or temperature of the individual
photons.

I have two objectives in this and the following section: ﬁrst, summarize
some of the equations used in statistical thermodynamics and, second, at-
tempt to put in evidence that the temperature, of a blackbody in particular

2

but in general the temperature of any body, can proﬁtably be interpreted in
Physics as a certain frequency of the photons emitted by that body.

First, the energy density radiated by a black body per unit volume, for
a given wavelength λ and absolute temperature T, is expressed by Planck’s
radiation formula:

ρ(λ, T ) =

8 · π · h · c
λ5

·

exp

1
h·c
λ·k·T

joule
m4 (cid:21)

− 1 (cid:20)

where k is the Boltzmann constant k = 1.3805 · 10−23 · joule/K)
h is Planck’s constant and c is the speed of light in vacuum.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

The total energy radiated by the body at a given temperature is given by
Stefan-Boltzmann law, which is obtained integrating the previous equation
(1) for all values of wavelength from zero to inﬁnity:

where a is a constant given, in terms of more basic constants, by:

The numerical value of this constant is: a = 7.562473 · 10−16 ·

joule
m3·K 4 [1]

The same resulting equation (2) and constant “a” are also obtained by
integrating, for all values of the frequency, from zero to inﬁnity, the expres-
sion of Planck’s radiation formula expressed in terms of frequency instead of
wavelength, which is:

ρ(ν, T ) =

8 · π · h · ν3
c3

·

exp

− 1 (cid:20)

1
h·ν
k·T

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

joule · s
m3

(cid:21)

Let us call maxnu the argument of the exponential function that appears

in this equation:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

E = a · T 4

a =

8 · π5 · k4
15 · h3 · c3

maxnu =

h · ν
k · T

3

Let us replace this deﬁnition in (4) and solve for maxnu for the point
at which equation (4) predicts the maximum radiation. The maximum is
obtained when maxnu is equal to 3*(1-exp(-maxnu)). That is, when maxnu
has the value 2.821439. . .

On the other hand, if we call maxlambda the argument of the exponential

function of equation (1):

maxlambda =

h · c
k · T · λ

(6)

Then, the point of maximum radiation, computed from equation (1) by
replacing in it this deﬁnition (6), is obtained when maxlambda is equal to
5*(1-exp(-maxlambda)). That is, when maxlambda has the value 4.965114. . .

Let us remember the well-known relation between the wavelength and
frequency of a given photon, which says that its product is equal to the
speed of light:

λ · ν = c

(7)

if this expression is replaced in the right hand side of one of the equations
(5) or (6) then both variables, maxnu and maxlambda are proved to be equal
to exactly the same common symbolic expression. However, the said common
expression at the right does not have the same numerical value, given by the
variables maxnu or maxlambda computed above.

If we were expecting, intuitively, that the frequency and wavelength of
the photons emitted at the point of maximum radiation density should be
the same, whether they are computed with equations (5) or (6), this proves
to be wrong.

The reason why these two constants, maxnu and maxlambda, are numer-
ically diﬀerent in current Physics must be because there are two kinds of
photons that participate in the computation of each one of these variables.
So, the problem remains as to which one of them, or none, is the correct
photon emitted at the physical point of maximum radiation. As was said
before, the formula (6) is usually used to compute the properties of the pho-
tons, but with no clear explanation as to why the diﬀerent value produced
with equation (5) is incorrect or does not correspond to the same maximum.

4

(8)

(9)

In principle, either of the last two relations, (5) or (6), could be used to
compute the values of the frequency or wavelength of the photons emitted
when the radiation has its maximum value. Namely, solving (6) for wave-
length:

λmax =

1
maxlambda · T

· c ·

h
k

Consequently, from this equation, we obtain:

λmax · T = b

This is Wien’s law of displacement that allows to compute the wavelength
of the photons emitted at the point where the density of radiation is a max-
imum, by dividing the constant b by the absolute temperature of the body.

b is called Wien’s displacement constant and has units of length multiplied

by temperature:

b =

h · c
k · maxlambda

= 0.0028980841 · m · K

On the other hand, solving equation (5) for the frequency, we ﬁnd an
unnamed equation that is never used to compute the frequency of the same
photons:

νmax = maxnu · T ·

(10)

k
h

Ok, not never but at least seldom used, because equation (8), which is
derived from equation (6), is the most commonly used equation. However,
as an example of the use of equation (10), which is derived from equation
(5), see [2]

The results obtained with these equations are compared in the following

section.

Obviously, the frequency and wavelength provided by equations (8) and
(10), do not belong to the same kind of photons, emitted at the same point
of maximum radiation.

5

3. THE TEMPERATURE IS GIVEN BY THE FREQUENCY

OF PHOTONS

One of the strongest hints, to accept as true that the temperature is
frequency is obtained by replacing the wavelength from Wien’s law, equation
(9), in equation (7) and solving for T :

T = νmax ·

b
c

(11)

That is, the temperature of a body is equal to a frequency multiplied by
a constant that simply converts units. Usually we know the temperature and
wish to know the frequency, so let us deﬁne the constant kel to convert the
temperature in Kelvin degrees to Hertz as:

kel =

= 1.0344505 · 1011 ·

c
b

Hz
K

Once the frequency is computed, multiplying this constant by the tem-
perature of the body, we are able to solve equation (7) for wavelength. Al-
ternatively, divide the constant b by the temperature to obtain wavelength.
For example, to a temperature of about 7300 ◦K, correspond photons with
wavelength of about 3970 angstroms and frequency of about 7.55*1014 Hz.
Compare this with the value of 8.518*1013 Hz obtained with the use of equa-
tion (10).

The product of wavelength and frequency of the two kinds of photons for
which the radiation is a maximum (obtained from the two density of radia-
tion equations, (8) and (10) ) is about 0.568 of the speed of light, which is
the same proportion as between maxnu and maxlambda. This proves that
they are not the same kind of photon.

An interesting application of the constant kel converts Boltzmann’s con-
stant into Planck’s constant. This means that Boltzmann’s constant (by the
way, never written as such by Boltzmann but by Planck) is redundant and
superﬂuous if we only use frequencies instead of temperatures in our compu-
tations.

6

4. DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW EQUATION FOR RADIA-

TION

The criteria used to develop a new equation for radiation, which hope-
fully will provide an expression for the radiation law that avoids the above-
mentioned inconsistencies, are the following:

a.- The product of wavelength by frequency for a certain kind of photons

should give the speed of light.

b.- The point of the maximum radiation, expressed either in terms of

wavelength or of frequency should be the same.

c.- The photon energy is assumed to have a continuous spectrum. This
means that the photon energy is quantized but does not have discrete values.

The conditions “a” and “b” are clear and intuitive and the last one was
explained in the introduction in the sense that the physical particles show
quantum behavior; this means that their “size” (wavelength) and energy (fre-
quencies) are of some ﬁxed values. But the experimentalists have not been
able to ﬁnd discrete values for the corresponding photon variables. Rather,
the values of photon energy and wavelength have a seemingly inﬁnite and
continuous range.

In an open system, the radiation process emits photons to the space,
which are not absorbed again by the system, so the mass or temperature of
the system is reduced.
But what we will be considering in the following is the case of a closed sys-
tem, which is in thermal equilibrium.

Consider an individual photon emitted by a black body. This photon
bumps with other particles and loses and gains energy in this process, before
it is completely absorbed or eventually gets its opportunity to get out through
the small window of the blackbody for its energy to be measured by us. In
fact this opportunity is so small that we are able to consider the blackbody
as a closed system in thermodynamic equilibrium.

Let us try to determine what the distribution of the energies of the

individual photons is.

7

The statistical weight (number of possible states of a system) of a given

(discrete) distribution is

Ω =

N!
i ni!

Q
When the distribution is continuous, each partition i has only one particle
in it and hence each factorial in the denominator is the unity. Moreover, the
factorial in the numerator must be interpreted as the Gamma function, which
is the continuous equivalent of the factorial.

Consequently, the entropy S, that is just the statistical weight Ω, is de-

ﬁned as

S = Ω = Γ(N) = Γ(p)

(13)

where the change from N to the new parameter p is to try to understand
that now we have continuous and not integer values.
In the following we will need to study the actual entropy distribution of these
states among the diﬀerent values of a certain variable, x, such as frequency,
and not merely the total number of states. Therefore, the appropriate form
of the entropy will be:

S(x) = Γ(p, 0, x)

This provides the cumulative number of states for the variable between 0 and
some value x. The cumulative normalized entropy becomes:

S(x) =

Γ(p, 0, x)
Γ(p)

=

Γ(p) − Γ(p, x)
Γ(p)

= 1 −

Γ(p, x)
Γ(p)

Also, to convert the units of the variable x to a non-dimensional form, we
include a constant, λ:

We assume that a system in a state of equilibrium is changing between
microcanonical states in a reversible form. In such case, remember that for
reversible processes the change of entropy is proportional to the change of
heat:

where T is the average temperature of the system.

S(x) = 1 −

Γ(p, λ · x)
Γ(p)

dS(x) =

dQ(x)
T

8

(12)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

Consequently, replacing (16) in (17) we obtain the equation that de-
scribes the probability distribution of energy in a continuous system, as is
assumed the blackbody. More speciﬁcally it also describes the speciﬁc heat of
compounds, where the low-temperature zone corresponding to the so-called
Schottky anomaly has this distribution:

dQ(x)
dx

= T ·

= T ·

dS(x)
dx

λp · xp−1
Exp(λ · x) · Γ(p)

(18)

This is a Gamma distribution.

5. DERIVATION FROM FIRST PRINCIPLES

Let us assume a continuous random variable “X ” that represents some
physical quantity such as the amount of money or energy possessed by agents
or actors in a certain system.

The probability that X lies in a small interval (x, x+∆x ) is

P [x < X ≤ x + ∆x] = F (x + ∆x) − F (x) =

F (x + ∆x) − F (x)
∆x

∆x (19)

If ∆x is small and F (x ) is diﬀerentiable then the following approximation

holds:

P [x < X ≤ x + ∆x] = F ′(x)∆x

in which the prime denotes the derivative of F (x ). Whenever it exists,
the derivative of F (x ) is called the probability density function (pdf) of “X ”
and is denoted by f (x ). Thus,

The units of the pdf are inverse to those of the random variable X.
Therefore, given the pdf, the distribution function of X is computable as

(20)

(21)

(22)

f (x) =

dF (x)
dx

F (x) =

f (u)du.

x

Z

−∞

9

This is the probability that X is less than x. F (x ) is called the cumulative

distribution function (cdf):

Since the cdf is a non-decreasing function, the pdf is always nonnegative:

P [−∞ < X ≤ x] = F (x)

f (x) ≥ 0

In the following we are going to argue that, in a model in which the
agents interact exchanging the quantity X, the equilibrium distribution of
this variable is a Gamma distribution.

We deﬁne a kinetic continuous model in which, for facility of analysis,
consider a ﬁnite number N of agents that interact with each other by “trad-
ing” or “colliding” between them, and exchanging random amounts of the
quantity X, generally referred to as “money” (or energy) in the following.

The evolution of the system is then carried out in the following way. At
every time step two agents i and j are extracted randomly and an amount
of money ∆x is exchanged between them,

(23)

(24)

(25)

x′
i = xi − ∆x,
x′
j = xj + ∆x.

It can be noticed that in this way the quantity X is conserved after each
j are the agent’s wealth after

j = xi + xj, where x′

i and x′

transaction, x′
i + x′
the transaction has taken place.

The proportion of the variable x (money) owned by the system at a

certain point x is:

Then, the amount of money, a, corresponding to a small interval ∆x
around x, is computed as the product of x by the probability density of
occurrence of such amount at that point and by the width of the interval:

a = xf (x)∆x

(26)

xf (x)

10

Similarly, for the point x +∆x:

b = (x + ∆x)f (x + ∆x)∆x

(27)

Let us call delx the amount of money given by the agent at (x + ∆x) to

the agent at x.

If the system is in a state of statistical equilibrium, the amount of money
possessed by the agent at x after the transaction, let us call a’, must be
equal to the amount of money possessed by the (wealthier) agent at (x + ∆x)
before the transaction, that is b, minus the amount given by this agent in
the transaction, that is delx ; and vice versa, b’ is equal to the amount of
money possessed by the agent at x, that is a, plus the amount received from
the other agent, that is delx. In the form of equations this means:

a′ = b − delx
b′ = a + delx

(28)
(29)

But, at equilibrium, the amounts of money before and after the transac-
tion must be equal, therefore a’ = a and b’ = b, so the two previous equations
are in fact the same one.
These equations reﬂect the fact that in a one-dimensional, completely elastic,
head-on, collision, classical mechanics predicts that all the energy of one of
the agents is transferred to the other agent and vice versa. The amount of
“saving” in the collisions is dependent, in general, on the number of degrees
of freedom.

If we assume that there is a ﬁrst agent at position x that is in equilibrium
with the second consecutive element at (x + ∆x), and if this second element
is in equilibrium with the third, then the ﬁrst is also in equilibrium with the
third and thus, successively, we conclude that two agents at any distance will
be in equilibrium.

Next, the amount of money traded between these two agents is assumed

to be composed of two terms.

The ﬁrst term is proportional to the diﬀerence between the amounts of

11

money possessed by the two agents, ∆F (x):

p ∆F (x) = p f (x) ∆x

(30)

Where p is the constant of proportionality. This equality is justiﬁed
above: the derivative of the probability distribution of a variable is equal to
its pdf.

Actually F (x ) is probability; hence, in order to ﬁx the units it must
be multiplied by the amount M of total money of the system, because the
variable interchanged in the process is assumed to be money; however, this
amount can be seen that is simpliﬁed in the following equations.

The physical interpretation of equation (30) and the objective of all this
exercise is the following: if both agents have the same amount of money then
the diﬀerence between these amounts is zero and there is no money inter-
change since the system would be in equilibrium. But if we think that one
of the agents (e.g. a photon) has more money (energy) then it can give more
money in each transaction (energy in a collision), in proportion to its greater
wealth (energy diﬀerence).

In the previous expression, the constant of proportionality, p, is a func-
tion of some given positive numbers usually extracted from a uniform distri-
bution between 0 and 1. Since the number of transactions is very large we
can safely assume that the net eﬀect, if p is a random variable instead of a
constant, is equivalent to its average.

The second term is the amount “saved” by the wealthier agent and is

proportional to the absolute amount of money possessed by that agent:

Or, expanding b

λ(x + ∆x)f (x + ∆x)∆x

where the variable λ is a function of the saving propensity of the agent

and has inverse units to those of the variable x.

(31)

(32)

λb

12

In summary the amount of money given by the wealthier agent to the

poorer one is

delx = (p f (x)∆x − λ(x + ∆x) f (x + ∆x)∆x) ∆x

(33)

Replacing (26), (27) and (33) into (29) gives

(x + ∆x)f (x + ∆x)∆x = xf (x)∆x + (pf (x)∆x − λ(x + ∆x)f (x + ∆x)∆x)∆x
(34)
Simplifying one ∆x and transposing the ﬁrst term in the right hand side

to the left

(x + ∆x)f (x + ∆x) − xf (x) = pf (x)∆x − λ(x + ∆x)f (x + ∆x)∆x

The ﬁrst term is expanded to

xf (x + ∆x) − xf (x) + ∆xf (x + ∆x)

Dividing both sides by (x∆x)

f (x + ∆x) − f (x)
∆x

+

f (x + ∆x)
x

p
x

=

f (x)−λ·f (x+∆x)−

λ · ∆x · f (x + ∆x)
x

Finally, taking the limit when
∆x → 0 we obtain the diﬀerential equation

df (x)
dx

= (p − 1)

− λ · f (x)

f (x)
x

or

whose solution is

f ′(x)
f (x)

=

(p − 1)
x

− λ

f (x) = c · xp−1e−λ·x

where c is some constant of integration that is computed integrating the

distribution and normalizing to 1 and whose result is

The distribution thus obtained, f (x ), is the powerful Gamma distribution.

c =

λp
Γ(p)

13

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

If the value of the variable p is particularized to an integer value then

this distribution converts into the Erlang or Poisson distributions.

If the variable p has the value 1, the Gamma distribution converts into the
negative exponential distribution, also called Boltzmann, Gibbs, Boltzmann-
Gibbs or simply exponential law.

In order to have an expression without the exponential but only with the
power term we need that the parameter λ be zero. But, in that case, it can
be proved that this distribution does not converge.

However, in the area of econophysics it is very common the use of the
so-called Pareto or power law distribution, although it is obvious that it is
not a probability distribution [7]. It should be proﬁtably replaced using the
Gamma distribution with the proper parameters.

If a quantity x is distributed according to the Gamma distribution then

its average is

As a result, if we keep the average of x equal to the unity then p must
be equal to λ. Nevertheless the larger the value of λ the smaller the variance
since this is given by:

The maximum of the Gamma distribution is at the position

xmax =

= hxi −

p − 1
λ

1
λ

This means that the maximum is always towards the left of the average,

except in the limit when λ → ∞.

The parameters λ and p used in this distribution should have in general
values greater than or equal to 1. Accordingly, if the saving propensity of
the agents is presupposed to be some variable between zero and 1 we will
have to compute its inverse in order to get the needed parameter λ. The
maximum is displaced toward the left of the average precisely in proportion
to the saving propensity.

“The functional form of distribution be a Gamma distribution on the
base of an analogy with the kinetic theory of gases, which is consistent with

(39)

(40)

(41)

hxi =

p
λ

σ2 =

p
λ2

14

the excellent ﬁtting provided to numerical data” [8],[9].

6. ENERGY DISTRIBUTION OF AN IDEAL GAS

The Maxwell equation describes the energy distribution of the molecules
of an ideal gas. This was one of the ﬁrst applications of statistical methods
in Physics. James C. Maxwell obtained it for the ﬁrst time around 1857. It
has the form [1]

dn
dE

=

2πN

(π · kT )

3
2

1
2

E
Exp( E

kT )

where dn/N is the proportion of molecules with energy between E and

E +dE.

The Gamma distribution can be deﬁned as the following function

P (p, λ, x) =

λp · xp−1
Exp(λ · x) · Γ(p)

We recover the Maxwell equation after replacing in the Gamma distribu-

tion the parameters p=3/2 and λ =1/kT :

P (

3
2

,

1
kT

, E)

hEi =

= 3kT /2

p
λ

With these values we obtain the average energy of the particles [1]:

In the equation for energy distribution it is possible to replace the energy
variable everywhere by its equivalent kinetic energy, in terms of velocity
squared. The deﬁnition suggested above provides a solid mathematical frame
of reference for not doing that in an ad hoc fashion. The distribution of speeds
becomes:

m
kT (cid:17)
And the average of v 2 is obtained from the formula for average energy,

v2
Exp( m·v2
2kT )

dn
dv

(46)

2
π

r

N

=

(cid:16)

3
2

replacing E by the kinetic energy:

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(47)

h

1
2

m v2i = p/λ = 3kT /2

15

or

7. AN APPLICATION OF THE GAMMA DISTRIBUTION

hv2i = 3kT /m

(48)

Any value for the parameter “p” produces a probability distribution (in-
tegral equal to unity) so the speciﬁc value for a given application must be
given experimentally or by other means.

The ﬁrst alternative is to try to obtain the exponent 3 in the variable ν
of the Gamma distribution, in order that it be equal to the corresponding
term in the Planck distribution. This has the support of Wien analysis and
produces the value 4 for the parameter p.

As was explained for equation (39), the value of p ﬁxes automatically
the value of the variable λ to the same value 4 since we can assume that
the average frequency is the unity. This value of this parameter is close to
the value 3.89327 that is the mean of the values maxnu and maxlambda that
were computed in a previous section.

Normalizing the Planck distribution to unit area becomes:

15p4xp−1
π4(ep·x − 1)

(49)

It is illustrative to compare this Planck distribution (with p=4) with the

Gamma distribution P(4,4,x ), in Figure 1.

Although both distributions are close it must be noted that they are
diﬀerent. The maximum for the Gamma distribution is exactly at x =0.75
whereas the maximum for the Planck distribution is at x =0.70536. The
maximum values are respectively 0.896167 and 0.875546, with around 2.3%
percent diﬀerence between them.

Now let us try to ﬁt both the Planck and Gamma distributions to the
experimental data from the cosmic background radiation, collected by the
COBE satellite [11], [4].

The plot of the COBE data together with the Planck distribution with
parameter p=4 and scale factors vertical=437.987 and horizontal=7.72655
(green), and Gamma distribution with parameters p= λ=4 and scale factors

16

Fig.1: Comparison between Gamma and Planck Distributions

Gamma

Planck

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 1: Gamma vs. Planck

vertical=427.909 and horizontal=7.26667 (red), is shown in Figure 2. The
adjustment was made around the point of maximum radiation.

Although there is a good ﬁt of both curves there are some zones where

we can note some discrepancy.

Just to experiment I made the ﬁt of a Gamma distribution with param-
eters p=λ=3.5 and scale factors vertical=451.258 and horizontal=7.36276
that gives a visually almost perfect ﬁt (Figure 3).

The ﬁgures suggest that neither the Planck distribution nor the Gamma
with parameters p= λ=4 are perfect to adjust the COBE data. However, it
is necessary to analyze more results in order to conﬁrm or refute the pos-
sibility to change the parameter p to the new value 3.5 or to some other value.

In the same sense that the Gamma distribution integrates to the unity for
any combination of “p” and “λ”, both forms of the Planck distribution in-
tegrate to the same (Stefan-Boltzmann) expression. But this does not mean
that both equations are valid, as it is not true that any form of the Gamma
distribution is adequate for expressing the energy distribution of gases, pho-

17

300

200

100

300

200

100

5

10

15

20

Figure 2: COBE data

5

10

15

20

Figure 3: COBE data (p=3.5)

18

tons, money, etc. We have to ﬁnd the correct values for “p” and “λ”.

In general, “p” depends on the degrees of freedom and “λ” depends on

the kinetic energy of the system.

8. CONCLUSIONS

This paper evidences an apparent inconsistency in the maxima computed
using the two accepted equations that describe the blackbody radiation dis-
tribution expressed either as a function of wavelength or as a function of
frequency. This means that the theory could be incorrect. It should be real-
ized that the quotient of the speed of light divided by the photon wavelength
is the same variable as the photon frequency (or vice versa) this means that
there should be only one probability distribution. In other words, there is
no way for frequency and wavelength to be interpreted as independent vari-
ables with diﬀerent and independend probability distributions. The variables
maxnu and maxlambda, used in section 2, should have the same value for the
same kind of photon.

In current Physics now and always remains the same centuries-old spirit
that nothing can be advanced in Physics and that the old theories are cor-
rect. Fortunately there always are some stubborn people that do not believe
in dogmas and tries to understand and explain the behavior of Nature. For
example, it is known that Planck himself “was attracted to Physics despite
having been advised that nothing essentially remained to be discussed in this
branch of learning” [6] or that “in this ﬁeld, almost everything is already dis-
covered, and all that remains is to ﬁll a few holes.” [12]

A good ﬁt to the Cosmic Background Radiation data was shown in this
paper. The Gamma distribution is an all pervasive function that, although
without any theoretical support, has been applied successfully in numerical
applications such as the distribution of money among several agents (econo-
physics) or could proﬁtably be applied to describe the energy and speed
distributions in ideal and real gases as a function of temperature (or, better,
as a function of frequency), distribution of population in cities, etc. While
the origin of the Gamma distribution involves continuous variables its range
of applicability should not be strictly limited to them.

19

We have to distinguish among the new form for entropy, proposed in
the present paper and given by the Gamma function, and the probabilistic
Gamma distribution, which is obtained by the derivative of the Gamma
function.

References

[1] Alonso, Marcelo&Finn, E. Fundamental University Physics, Volume III,
Quantum and Statistical Physics. Addison-Wesley. 1968. chapter 10

[2] Blumler, P. “Thermal and Statistical Physics”, page 88. School of Phys-

ical Sciences, University of Canterbury at Kent.

[3] Boyer, Timothy H. “Blackbody Radiation, Conformal Symmetry, and
the Mismatch Between Classical Mechanics and Electromagnetism.”
arXiv: physics/ 0411034 v1 3 Nov 2004.

[4] COBE/FIRAS CMB monopole spectrum. Table 4 of Fixsen et al. 1996

ApJ 473, 576.

[5] Einstein, A. Concerning an Heuristic Point of View Toward the Emission
and Transformation of Light. Ann. Phys. 17, 132. March 1905. Transla-
tion into English American Journal of Physics, v. 33, n. 5, May 1965.

[6] Kamble, V. B. “Planck and the Quantum of Energy”. In web page:

http://www.vigyanprasar.com/dream/june2001/article-1.htm

[7] Pareto, V.Cours d’Economie Politique. Lausanne,1897.

[8] Patriarca, M.; Chakraborti, A.; Kaski, K. Gibbs versus non-Gibbs dis-

tributions in money dynamics. Physica A 340 (2004) 334.

[9] Patriarca, M.; Chakraborti, A.; Kaski, K. Statistical model with a stan-

dard Gamma distribution. Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) 016104.

[10] Shalhoub, George. Blackbody radiation & Planck Distribution Law. La

Salle University. 1996.

[11] Cosmic Background Explorer: COBE.

http://aether.lbl.gov/www/EAA4536.pdf

20

[12] Wikipedia. Max Planck. Web page in URL
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max Planck

21

