6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity:
Towards the Uniﬁed Science of Intelligent
Communication Networks and Software

Andrei P. Kirilyuk

Solid State Theory Department, Institute of Metal Physics
36 Vernadsky Avenue, 03142 Kiev-142, Ukraine
kiril@metfiz.freenet.kiev.ua

Operation of autonomic communication network with complicated user-oriented
functions should be described as unreduced many-body interaction process. The
latter gives rise to complex-dynamic behaviour including fractally structured hi-
erarchy of chaotically changing realisations. We recall the main results of the
universal science of complexity based on the unreduced interaction problem
solution and its application to various real systems, from nanobiosystems and
quantum devices to intelligent networks and emerging consciousness. We con-
centrate then on applications to autonomic communication leading to funda-
mentally substantiated, exact science of intelligent communication and software.
It aims at uniﬁcation of the whole diversity of complex information system be-
haviour, similar to the conventional, “Newtonian” science order for sequential,
regular models of system dynamics. Basic principles and ﬁrst applications of
the uniﬁed science of complex-dynamic communication networks and software
are outlined to demonstrate its advantages and emerging practical perspectives.

1 Introduction

Although any information processing can be described as interaction between
participating components, communication and software tools used today tend to
limit this interaction to unchanged, preprogrammed system conﬁguration, which
reduces underlying interaction processes to a very special and rather trivial type
of a sequential and regular “Turing machine”. It does not involve any genuine
novelty emergence (with the exception of thoroughly avoided failures), so that
the occurring “normal” events do not change anything in system conﬁguration
and are supposed to produce only expected modiﬁcation in particular register
content, etc. In terms of fundamental science, one deals here with a rare limiting
case of exactly solvable, integrable and certainly computable interaction problem
and dynamics. The latter property, associated with total regularity, predictabil-
ity, and decidability, forms even a major purpose and invariable operation prin-
ciple of all traditional information processing and communication systems (it
can be generalised to all man-made tools and engineering approaches). One can
say also that usual ICT systems do not possess any genuine freedom, or unre-

2

A.P. Kirilyuk

duced, decision-taking autonomy, which is totally displaced towards the human
user side. One should not confuse that truly autonomic, independent kind of
action with a high degree of man-made automatisation that can only (usefully)
imitate a decision making process, while preserving the basic predictability and
computability of such “intelligent” machine behaviour.

In the meanwhile, unreduced interaction processes involving essential and
noncomputable system conﬁguration change conquer practically important spaces
at a catastrophically growing rate. On one hand, this rapid advance of unre-
duced interaction complexity occurs inevitably in communication networks and
related software themselves as a result of strong increase of user numbers, in-
terests, and functional demands (i.e. desired “quality of service”). On the other
hand, it is due to simultaneous, and related, growth of popularity of complex-
dynamical applications of ICT tools, which can be truly eﬃcient only if those
tools possess corresponding levels of unreduced, interaction-driven complexity
and autonomy. It can appear either as unacceptably growing frequency of com-
plicated system failures, or else as the transition to a fundamentally diﬀerent
operation mode that uses inevitable uncertainties of complex interaction dy-
namics to strongly increase system performance quality.

The second aspect has its deep, objective origin in today’s speciﬁc moment of
development, where one can empirically modify, for the ﬁrst time in history, the
whole scale of natural system complexity at all its levels, from ultimately small,
quantum systems (high-energy physics) to the most complicated, biological,
ecological, and conscious systems (genetics, industrial transformation, social
and psychological changes). However, the genuine understanding of complex
dynamics we strongly modify is persistently missing from modern science, which
gives rise to multiple and real dangers (c.f. [1]) and determines the urgency
of complexity transition in major ICT instruments of progress. In fact, any
progress becomes blocked when zero-complexity, regular computing instruments
encounter the unreduced, noncomputable complexity of real systems.

Those reasons determine increased attention to autonomic, complex, “bio-
inspired” operation of communication networks and software tools that appears
within various overlapping research initiatives, such as “pervasive computing”,
“ambient intelligence”, “autonomic communication networks”, “knowledge-
based networks”, “context awareness”, “semantic grid/web”, “complex soft-
ware”, etc. (see e.g. [2–8] for overview and further references). In fact, such
kind of development has become a major, rapidly growing direction of ICT
research. However, as big volumes of “promising” results and “futuristic” ex-
pectations accumulate, the need for a uniﬁed and rigorous framework, similar
to exact science for non-complex, regular models, becomes evident.

Although creation of “intelligent” ICT structures has started from applied,
engineering studies (contrary to traditional science applications), the emerging
qualitative novelties call for a new kind of fundamental knowledge as a ba-
sis for those practically oriented eﬀorts, without which there is a serious risk
to “miss the point” in unlimited diversity of unreliable guesses. The created
proto-science state of autonomic communication and complex software should

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

3

now be extended to the genuine scientiﬁc knowledge of a new kind. This exact
science should provide rigorously speciﬁed and uniﬁed description of real, not
“model”, complex systems with unreduced interaction of “independent” compo-
nents, leading to explicitly emerging, “unexpected” structures and properties.
One can call such unreduced interaction process generalised autonomic net-
work, even though it is realised eventually in any kind of unreduced interaction
process, including complex software systems. We deal here with an important
quality of new knowledge, absent in the model-based and intrinsically split
usual science: once the truly consistent understanding of real complex interac-
tion is established, it should automatically be applicable to any other, maybe
externally quite diﬀerent case of equally complex many-body interaction.1 Thus,
truly autonomic communication networks may show basically the same patterns
of behaviour and evolution as full-scale nanobiosystems, biological networks in
living organisms and ecosystems, or intelligent neural networks. It is a fortu-
nate and non-occasional circumstance, since those complex-dynamic ICT tools
will be properly suited to their material basis and application objects, complex
systems from the “real world”, so that ﬁnally there is no separation and basic
diﬀerence between complex behaviour of “natural”, real-world and “artiﬁcial”,
ICT systems: everything tends to be irreducibly complex, interconnected, and
man-made, whereupon the necessity of a uniﬁed and realistic understanding of
emerging new, explicitly complex world becomes yet more evident.

Note again the essential diﬀerence with the prevailing usual science ap-
proach, where the unreduced complexity of real structures is artiﬁcially reduced,
i.e. completely destroyed, so that “computer simulation” of such basic structures
as elementary particles or biomolecules takes the highest existing “supercom-
puter” (or grid) powers and still cannot provide a really useful, unambiguous
result. In view of such situation one can have justiﬁed doubts in the ability
of usual, scholar science to describe truly complex systems without losing the
underlying rigour (objectivity) of the scientiﬁc method itself (see e.g. [1,9–12]).
In this report we describe a theory of arbitrary many-body interaction lead-
ing to a universally applicable concept of dynamic complexity [13–26] (Sect. 2).
The resulting universal science of complexity provides a working prototype of
the new kind of science claimed by modern development of information and com-
munication systems [21]. We then specify its application to emerging complex
software and autonomic communication systems (Sect. 3). We ﬁnally summarise
the key features of the “new mathematics of complexity” as a fundamental and
rigorous basis for the new science of intelligent information systems (Sect. 4)
and draw major development perspectives (Sect. 5).

1 This diﬀerence from the usual, “Newtonian” science (including its versions of “new
physics” and “science of complexity”) stems from the fact that it does not propose
any solution to the unreduced, realistic interaction problem and does not really
aim at obtaining the related complete explanation of the analysed phenomena,
replacing it with a mathematically “exact” (analytically “closed”), but extremely
simpliﬁed, unrealistic, and often guessed “models” and “postulates”, which are then
mechanically adjusted to separate, subjectively chosen observation results.

4

A.P. Kirilyuk

2 Complex Dynamics of Unreduced Interaction Process

2.1 Multivalued Dynamics and Uniﬁed Complexity Concept

We begin with a general equation for arbitrary system dynamics (or many-body
problem), called here existence equation and simply ﬁxing the fact of interaction
between the system components (it generalises various model equations):

N

(

k=0 "
X

N

l>k
X

#)

hk (qk) +

Vkl (qk, ql)

Ψ (Q) = EΨ (Q) ,

(1)

≡ {

q0, q1, ..., qN

where hk (qk) is the “generalised Hamiltonian” of the k-th system component,
qk is the degree(s) of freedom of the k-th component, Vkl (qk, ql) is the (arbi-
trary) interaction potential between the k-th and l-th components, Ψ (Q) is the
system state-function, Q
, E is the generalised Hamiltonian
}
eigenvalue, and summations are performed over all (N ) system components.
The generalised Hamiltonian, eigenvalues, and interaction potential represent a
suitable measure of dynamic complexity deﬁned below and encompassing practi-
cally all “observable” quantities (action, energy/mass, momentum, information,
entropy, etc.). Therefore (1) can express unreduced interaction conﬁguration of
arbitrary communication/software system. If interaction potential (system con-
ﬁguration) depends explicitly on time, one should use a time-dependent form
of (1), where eigenvalue E is replaced with the partial time derivative operator.
ξ, repre-
senting a naturally selected, usually “system-wide” entity, such as component
coordinates or “connecting agent” (here now Q

It is convenient to separate one of the degrees of freedom, e.g. q0

and k, l

q1, ..., qN

1):

≡

≡ {

}

≥

h0(ξ) +

hk(qk) + V0k(ξ, qk) +

Vkl(qk, ql)

Ψ (ξ, Q) = EΨ (ξ, Q),

(

N

k=1 "
X

N

l>k
X

#)

(2)
We express the problem in terms of known free-component solutions for the

“functional”, internal degrees of freedom of system elements (k

1):

≥

hk (qk) ϕknk (qk) = εnk ϕknk (qk) ,

(3)

Ψ (ξ, Q) =

ψn (ξ)ϕ1n1 (q1) ϕ2n2 (q2) ...ϕN nN (qN )

ψn (ξ)Φn (Q) ,

(4)

n
X
are the eigenvalues and

εnk }
{

eigenfunctions of the k-th
ϕknk (qk)
where
}
{
component Hamiltonian hk (qk), forming the complete set of orthonormal func-
tions, n
runs through all possible eigenstate combinations, and
ϕ1n1 (q1) ϕ2n2 (q2) ...ϕN nN (qN ) by deﬁnition. The system of equa-
Φn (Q)
ψn (ξ)
is obtained then in a standard way, using the eigen-solution
tions for
}
orthonormality (e.g. by multiplication by Φ∗

n (Q) and integration over Q):

≡ {
≡
{

n1, ..., nN

}

≡

n
X

[h0(ξ) + V00(ξ)] ψ0(ξ) +

V0n(ξ)ψn(ξ) = ηψ0(ξ)

[h0(ξ) + Vnn(ξ)] ψn(ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn(ξ)

Vn0(ξ)ψ0(ξ),

(5)

−

n
P
n′6=n
P

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

5

where n, n′

= 0 (also below), η

η0 = E

ε0, ηn = E

εn, εn =

εnk ,

≡

−

−

k
P

Vnn′ (ξ) =

V nn′
k0

(ξ) +

k "
X

V nn′
kl

,

#

l>k
X

V nn′
k0

(ξ) =

dQΦ∗

n (Q)Vk0 (qk, ξ) Φn′ (Q) ,

V nn′
kl

(ξ) =

dQΦ∗

n (Q)Vkl (qk, ql) Φn′ (Q) ,

ZΩQ

ZΩQ

(6)

(7)

(8)

and we have separated the equation for ψ0(ξ) describing the generalised “ground
state” of system elements, i. e. the state with minimum complexity. The ob-
tained system of equations expresses the same problem as the starting equation
(2) but now in terms of “natural” variables, and therefore it results from various
starting models, including time-dependent and formally “nonlinear” ones.

We can try to solve the “nonintegrable” system of equations (5) with the help
of generalised eﬀective, or optical, potential method [27], where one expresses
ψn (ξ) through ψ0 (ξ) from equations for ψn (ξ) using the standard Green func-
tion technique and then inserts the result into the equation for ψ0 (ξ), obtaining
thus the eﬀective existence equation that contains explicitly only “integrable”
degrees of freedom (ξ) [13–17, 25, 26]:

h0 (ξ) ψ0 (ξ) + Veﬀ (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) = ηψ0 (ξ) ,

(9)

where the operator of eﬀective potential (EP), Veﬀ (ξ; η), is given by

Veﬀ (ξ; η) = V00 (ξ) + ˆV (ξ; η) , ˆV (ξ; η) ψ0 (ξ) =

dξ′V (ξ, ξ′; η)ψ0 (ξ′) , (10)

ZΩξ

V (ξ, ξ′; η) =

n,i
X
η0
ni

ψ0

ni (ξ)

and
,
truncated system of equations:
(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(cid:9)

(cid:9)

ni (ξ) Vn0 (ξ′) ψ0∗
V0n (ξ) ψ0
η

εn0

ni (ξ′)

η0
ni −

−

,

εn0

εn

ε0 ,

(11)

≡

−

are complete sets of eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of a

[h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ)] ψn (ξ) +

Vnn′ (ξ)ψn′ (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) .

(12)

n′6=n
X

Since the unreduced EP (10)–(11) depends essentially on the eigen-solutions
to be found, the problem remains “nonintegrable” and formally equivalent to
the initial formulation (1),(2),(5). However, it is the eﬀective version of a prob-
lem that reveals the nontrivial properties of its unreduced solution. The most
important property of the unreduced interaction result (9)–(12) is its dynamic

6
6

A.P. Kirilyuk

multivaluedness meaning that one has a redundant number of diﬀerent but
individually complete, and therefore mutually incompatible, problem solutions
describing equally real system conﬁgurations. We therefore call each of them
realisation of the system and problem. Plurality of system realisations follows
from the dynamically nonlinear EP dependence on the solutions to be found,
reﬂecting the evident plurality of interacting eigen-mode combinations [13–26].
It is important that dynamic multivaluedness emerges only in the unreduced
problem formulation, whereas the standard theory, including usual EP method
applications (see e.g. [27]) and the scholar “science of complexity” (theory of
chaos, self-organisation, etc.), resorts invariably to one or another version of
perturbation theory, whose “mean-ﬁeld” approximation, providing an “exact”,
closed-form solution, totally kills dynamic redundance by eliminating the non-
linear dynamical links in (9)–(11) and retaining only one, “averaged” solution,
usually expressing but small deviations from imposed system conﬁguration:

h0 (ξ) + Vnn (ξ) + ˜Vn (ξ)
i
h

ψn (ξ) = ηnψn (ξ) ,

(13)

<

<

where

V0 (ξ)
|
|

. General problem solution is then ob-
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
tained as an essentially linear superposition of eigen-solutions of (13) similar
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
to (4). This dynamically single-valued, or unitary, problem reduction forms the
(cid:12)
basis of the whole canonical science paradigm.

˜Vn (ξ)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Vnn′ (ξ)

n′
P

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

The unreduced, truly complete general solution to a problem emerges as a
dynamically probabilistic sum of redundant system realisations, each of them
being roughly equivalent to the whole “general solution” of usual theory:

Nℜ

⊕

ρ (ξ, Q) =

ρr (ξ, Q) ,

(14)

r=1
X
where the observed (generalised) density, ρ (ξ, Q), is obtained as the state-
2 (for “wave-like” complexity
function squared modulus, ρ (ξ, Q) =
Ψ (ξ, Q)
|
|
levels), or as the state-function itself, ρ (ξ, Q) = Ψ (ξ, Q) (for “particle-like”
structures), index r enumerates system realisations, Nℜ is realisation number
(its maximum value is equal to the number of system components, Nℜ = N ),
and the sign
designates the special, dynamically probabilistic meaning of the
sum. The latter implies that incompatible system realisations are forced, by the
same driving interaction, to permanently replace each other in a causally (dy-
namically) random order thus consistently deﬁned. The r-th realisation state-
function, Ψr (ξ, Q), in the unreduced general solution (14) is obtained as

⊕

Ψr (ξ, Q) =

i [Φ0 (Q) ψr
cr

0i (ξ) +

Φn (Q) ψ0

ni′ (ξ)

dξ′ψ0∗

ni′ (ξ′) Vn0 (ξ′) ψr

0i (ξ′)

i
X

Ωξ
R
ηr
i −

η0
ni′

εn0

−

+

n,i′
X

(15)

,






Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

7

{

0i (ξ) , ηr
ψr
are r-th realisation eigen-solutions of the unreduced EP
where
i }
equation (9) and the coeﬃcients cr
i should be found from the state-function
matching conditions at the boundary where interaction eﬀectively vanishes.
The corresponding r-th realisation EP takes the form (derived from (10)–(11)):

Veﬀ (ξ; ηr
V0n (ξ) ψ0

i ) ψr
ni′ (ξ)

0i (ξ) = V00 (ξ) ψr
dξ′ψ0∗

0i (ξ) +

ni′ (ξ′) Vn0 (ξ′) ψr

0i (ξ′)

+

n,i′
X

Ωξ
R
ηr
i −

η0
ni′

εn0

−

.

(16)

Equations (14)–(16) reveal, in particular, dynamic localisation of a system in
any its normal, “regular” realisation around its characteristic eigenvalue and
conﬁguration (due to the resonance denominator) and reverse delocalisation
during transition between regular realisations, occurring though a special, in-
termediate realisation of the wavefunction [13, 17, 20, 23, 28] (see also below).

Direct comparison between the unreduced (9),(12),(14)–(16) and reduced
(13) problem solutions reveals the exact dynamic origin and huge scale of dif-
ference between the real system complexity and its model simpliﬁcation in the
unitary theory. In particular, the unreduced solution (14) implies that any mea-
sured value is intrinsically unstable and will unpredictably change to another
one, corresponding to another, randomly chosen realisation. Such kind of be-
haviour is readily observed in nature and actually explains the living organism
behaviour [13, 16–18], but is thoroughly avoided in the unitary approach and
technological systems (including ICT systems), where it is correctly associated
with linear “noncomputability” and technical failure (we shall consider below
that limiting regime of complex dynamics). Therefore the universal dynamic
multivaluedness revealed by rigorous problem solution forms the fundamental
basis for the transition to “bio-inspired” and “intelligent” kind of operation in
artiﬁcial, technological and communication systems, where causal randomness
can be transformed from an obstacle to a qualitative advantage (Sect. 3).

The rigorously derived randomness of the generalised EP formalism (14)-
(16) is accompanied by the dynamic deﬁnition of probability. As elementary
realisations are equivalent in their “right to appear”, the dynamically obtained,
a priori probability, αr, of elementary realisation emergence is given by

αr =

1
Nℜ

,

αr = 1 .

r
X

(17)

However, a real observation may resolve only uneven groups of elementary re-
alisations. The dynamic probability of such general, compound realisation is
determined by the number, Nr, of elementary realisations it contains:

Nr
Nℜ  

αr (Nr) =

Nr = 1, ..., Nℜ;

Nr = Nℜ

,

αr = 1 .

(18)

r
X

!

r
X

An expression for expectation value, ρexp (ξ, Q), follows from (14),(17)–(18) for
statistically long observation periods:

8

A.P. Kirilyuk

ρexp (ξ, Q) =

αrρr (ξ, Q) .

(19)

r
X
It is important, however, that our dynamically derived randomness and proba-
bility need not rely on such “statistical”, empirically based result, so that the
basic expressions (14)–(18) remain valid even for a single event of realisation
emergence and before any event happens at all.

Realisation probability distribution can be obtained in another way, involv-
ing generalised wavefunction and Born’s probability rule [13, 15, 17, 20, 23, 28].
The wavefunction describes system state during its transition between “regu-
lar”, localised realisations and constitutes a particular, “intermediate” realisa-
tion with extended and “loose” (chaotically changing) structure, where system
components transiently disentangle before forming the next “regular” realisa-
tion. The intermediate, or “main”, realisation is explicitly obtained in the unre-
duced EP formalism as the single, exceptional one for which the nonintegrable
terms of the general EP (11),(16) become indeed small and it is reduced to a
separable version of perturbative, “mean-ﬁeld” type (13) [13, 15, 17, 20, 23, 28].
This special realisation provides, in particular, the causal, realistic version of
the quantum-mechanical wavefunction at the lowest, quantum levels of com-
plexity. The “Born probability rule”, now causally derived and extended to any
level of world dynamics, states that realisation probability αr is determined
by wavefunction value (its squared modulus for “wave-like” complexity levels)
2. The generalised
for the respective system conﬁguration Xr: αr =
Ψ (Xr)
|
|
wavefunction (or distribution function) Ψ (x) satisﬁes the universal Schr¨odinger
equation (Sect. 2.2), rigorously derived by causal quantisation of complex dy-
namics, while Born’s probability rule follows from the above dynamic “match-
ing conditions” for the state-function (15), which are satisﬁed during transitions
from regular realisations to the wavefunction and back [13, 15, 17, 20, 23, 28]. It
is only this “averaged”, weak-interaction state of the wavefunction, or “main”
realisation, that remains in the single-valued model and paradigm of unitary
science, which explains both its partial success and basic limitations.

Closely related to dynamic redundance is dynamic entanglement of interact-
ing components, described in (15) by the weighted products of state-function
elements depending on various degrees of freedom (ξ, Q). It is a rigorous expres-
sion of the tangible quality of the emerging system structure, absent in unitary
models. The obtained dynamically multivalued entanglement describes a “liv-
ing” structure, permanently changing and probabilistically adapting its conﬁgu-
ration, which endows “bio-inspired” and “autonomic” technologies with a well-
speciﬁed basis. The properties of dynamically multivalued entanglement and
adaptability are ampliﬁed due to probabilistic fractality of the unreduced prob-
lem solution [13, 16–18, 20], essentially extending usual, single-valued fractality
and obtained by application of the same EP method to solution of the truncated
system of equations (12) used in the ﬁrst-level EP expression (11),(16).

We can now consistently and universally deﬁne the unreduced dynamic com-
plexity, C, of any real system (or interaction process) as arbitrary growing func-
tion of the total number, Nℜ, of explicitly obtained system realisations or the

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

9

rate of their change, C = C (Nℜ) ,
dC/dNℜ > 0, equal to zero for the un-
realistic case of only one system realisation, C (1) = 0. Suitable examples are
provided by C (Nℜ) = C0 ln Nℜ, generalised energy/mass (temporal rate of real-
isation change), and momentum (spatial rate of realisation emergence) [13–25].
It becomes clear now that the whole dynamically single-valued paradigm and
results of the canonical theory (including its versions of “complexity” and e.g.
“multi-stability”) correspond to exactly zero value of the unreduced dynamic
complexity, which is equivalent to the eﬀectively zero-dimensional, point-like
projection of reality from the “exact-solution” perspective (cf. [9–12]).

Correspondingly, any dynamically single-valued “model” is strictly regular
and cannot possess any true, intrinsic randomness (chaoticity), which can only
be introduced artiﬁcially, e.g. as a regular “ampliﬁcation” of a “random” (by
convention) external “noise”. By contrast, our unreduced dynamic complex-
ity is practically synonymous to the equally universal and intrinsic chaoticity,
since multiple system realisations appearing and disappearing in the real space
(and thus forming its tangible, changing structure) are redundant (mutually in-
compatible), which is the origin of both complexity and chaoticity. The genuine
dynamical chaos thus obtained has a complicated internal structure (contrary to
ill-deﬁned unitary “stochasticity”) and always contains partial regularity, which
is dynamically, inseparably entangled with truly random elements.

The universal dynamic complexity, chaoticity, and related properties involve
the essential, or dynamic, nonlinearity of the unreduced problem solution and
system behaviour. It is provided by dynamical links of the developing interaction
process, as they are expressed in EP dependence on the eigen-solutions to be
found (see (9)–(11),(16)). It is the dynamically emerging and irreducible nonlin-
earity, since it appears inevitably even for a “linear” initial problem expression
(1)–(2),(5), whereas usual, mechanistic “nonlinearity” is but an imposed, dis-
pensable imitation of the essential EP nonlinearity. Essential nonlinearity leads
to the omnipresent dynamic instability of any system state (realisation), since
both are determined by the same dynamic feedback mechanism.

1, αr

Universality of our description leads, in particular, to the uniﬁed understand-
ing of the whole diversity of dynamical regimes and structures [13,14,17,19–22].
One standard, limiting case of complex (multivalued) dynamics, called uniform,
or global, chaos, is characterised by essentially diﬀerent realisations with a ho-
mogeneous probability distribution (Nr
1/Nℜ for all r in (18))
and occurs when major parameters of interacting entities (suitably represented
by frequencies) have close values (which leads to a strong “conﬂict of interests”
and resulting “deep disorder”). The complementary limiting regime of multival-
ued self-organisation, or self-organised criticality (SOC) emerges for suﬃciently
diﬀerent parameters of interaction components, so that a small number of rela-
tively rigid, low-frequency components “enslave” a hierarchy of high-frequency
and rapidly changing, but conﬁgurationally similar, realisations (i.e. Nr
Nℜ
and realisation probability distribution is highly uneven). The diﬀerence of this
extended, multivalued self-organisation (and SOC) from usual, unitary version
is essential: despite the rigid external shape of system conﬁguration in this

≈

≈

∼

10

A.P. Kirilyuk

regime, it contains the intense “internal life” and chaos of permanently chang-
ing “enslaved” realisations (which are not superposable unitary “modes”). In
this sense the generalised SOC structure, and with it the whole unreduced com-
plexity, can be described as conﬁned chaos, where global chaos has the lowest
and quasi-regular SOC the highest degree of chaos conﬁnement.

Another advance with respect to unitary “science of complexity” is that
the unreduced, multivalued self-organisation uniﬁes the essentially extended
versions of a whole series of separated unitary “models”,
including “self-
organisation”, “synergetics”, SOC, any “synchronisation”, “control of chaos”,
“attractors”, and “mode locking”. All intermediate dynamic regimes between
those two limiting cases of uniform chaos and quasi-regular SOC, as well as
their multi-level combinations, are obtained for respective parameter values.

The point of transition to the strong chaos is expressed by the universal

criterion of global chaos onset :

κ

≡

∆ηi
∆ηn

=

ωξ
ωq ∼= 1 ,

(20)

≫

where κ is the introduced chaoticity parameter, ∆ηi, ωξ and ∆ηn
∆ε, ωq
are energy-level separations and frequencies for inter-component and intra-
component motions, respectively. At κ
1 one has an externally regular mul-
≪
tivalued SOC regime, which degenerates into global chaos as κ grows from 0 to
1, and maximum irregularity at κ
1 is again transformed into a SOC kind of
structure (but with a “reversed” conﬁguration) at κ
1.

≈

∼

One can compare this transparent and universal picture with the existing
diversity of separated and incomplete unitary criteria of chaos and regularity.
Only the former provide a real possibility of understanding and control of ICT
systems of arbitrary complexity, where more regular, SOC regimes can serve
for (loose) control of system dynamics, while less regular ones can also play a
positive role of eﬃcient search and adaptation means. This combination forms
the basis of any “biological” and “intelligent” kind of behaviour [13, 16–18,
20–22] and therefore can constitute the essence of intelligent ICT paradigm
supposed to extend the now realised (quasi-) regular kind of operation in the
uttermost limit of SOC (κ
0). While the latter inevitably becomes ineﬃcient
with growing system sophistication (where the chaos-bringing resonances of
(20) cannot be avoided), it deﬁnitely lacks the “intelligent power” of unreduced
complex dynamics to generate meaning and adaptable structure development.

→

2.2 Huge Eﬃciency of Unreduced Complex Dynamics and
Universal Symmetry of Complexity

Dynamically probabilistic fractality is the intrinsic property of unreduced inter-
action development [13,16–18,20]. It is obtained by application of the same EP
method (9)–(11) to the truncated system of equations (12), then to the next
truncated system, etc., which gives the irregular and probabilistically adapting
hierarchy of realisations showing the intermittent mixture of global chaos and

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

11

regularity, or conﬁned randomness (Sect. 2.1). The total realisation number
Nℜ, and thus operation power, of this autonomously branching interaction pro-
cess with a dynamically parallel structure grows exponentially within any time
period. It can be estimated in the following way [17–21].

If our system of inter-connected elements contains Nunit “processing units”,
or “junctions”, and if each of them has nconn real or “virtual” (possible) links,
then the total number of interaction links is N = nconnNunit. In most important
cases N is a huge number: for both human brain and genome interactions N is
greater than 1012, and being much more variable for communication/software
systems, it can easily grow to similar “astronomical” ranges. The key property
of unreduced, complex interaction dynamics, distinguishing it from any unitary
version, is that the maximum number Nℜ of realisations taken by the system
(also per time unit) and determining its real “power” Preal (of search, memory,
cognition, etc.) is given by the number of all possible combinations of links, i.e.

(21)

(22)

Preal

Nℜ = N !

√2πN

∝

→

N N

∼

≫≫

N .

N

N
e

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Any unitary, sequential model of the same system (including its mechanistically
“parallel” and “complex” modes) would give Preg

N β, with β

1, so that

Preal

(Preg)N

∼

∼
N β .

Preg

≫≫
101013

∼
101012

∼

Thus, for N
“practical inﬁnity”, also with respect to the unitary power of N β

1012 we have Preal

10N

≫

≫

∼

∼

, which is a

→ ∞
∼

1012.

These estimates demonstrate the true power of complex (multivalued) com-
munication dynamics that remains suppressed within the now dominating uni-
tary, quasi-regular operation mode. Huge power of complex-dynamical interac-
tion correlate with the new quality emergence, such as intelligence and con-
sciousness (at higher levels of complexity) [17, 20], in direct relation to our
intelligent communication paradigm meaning that such properties as sensi-
ble, context-related information processing, personalised understanding and au-
tonomous creativity (useful self-development), desired for the new ICT systems,
are inevitable qualitative manifestations of the above “inﬁnite” power.

Everything comes at a price, however, and a price to pay for the above quali-
tative advantages is rigorously speciﬁed as irreducible dynamic randomness and
thus unpredictability of operation details of complex information-processing sys-
tems. We rigorously conﬁrm here an evident idea that autonomous adaptability
and genuine creativity exclude any detailed, regular programming in principle.
But then what can serve as a guiding principle and practical construction strat-
egy for those qualitatively new communications networks and their intelligent
elements? We show that guiding rules and strategy are determined by a gen-
eral law of real dynamics, the universal symmetry, or conservation, of com-
plexity [13, 15–18, 20–24]. This universal “order of nature” uniﬁes the extended
versions of all usual (correct) laws, symmetries, and principles (now causally
derived and realistically interpreted). Contrary to any unitary symmetry, the

12

A.P. Kirilyuk

universal symmetry of complexity is irregular in its structure, but always exact
(never “broken”). Its “horizontal” manifestation (at a given complexity level)
implies dynamic transformation of the system between its changing realisations,
as opposed to abstract “symmetry operator” idea. Therefore the symmetry of
system complexity totally determines its dynamics and expresses the deep con-
nection between often visibly dissimilar and chaotically changing conﬁgurations.
Another, “vertical” manifestation of the symmetry of complexity determines
emergence and development of diﬀerent complexity levels of a real interaction.
System “potentiality”, or real power to create new structure is universally de-
scribed by a form of complexity called dynamic information and generalising
usual “potential energy” [13, 15, 17, 20, 24]. This potential, latent complexity
is transformed, during interaction development, into explicit, “unfolded” form
of dynamic entropy (generalising kinetic, or heat, energy). Universal conserva-
tion of complexity means that this important transformation, determining ev-
ery system dynamics and evolution, preserves the sum of dynamic information
and entropy, or total complexity (for a given system or process). This univer-
sal formulation of the symmetry of complexity includes its above “horizontal”
manifestation and, for example, extended and uniﬁed versions of the ﬁrst and
second laws of thermodynamics (i.e. conservation of energy by its permanent
degradation). It also helps to eliminate persisting series of confusions around in-
formation, entropy, and complexity in the unitary theory (thus, any real, useful
“information” is expressed rather by our dynamic entropy [13, 17]).

It is not diﬃcult to show [13,15,17,20,23,24] that a universal measure of dy-
known from classical mechanics, but
namic information is provided by action
now acquiring a universal, essentially nonlinear and causally complete meaning.
One obtains then the universal expression of complexity conservation law in the
form of generalised Hamilton-Jacobi equation for

(x, t):

A

=

∆
A
∆t |

∆
A
∆x |

(cid:18)

A

A

(cid:19)

x=const + H

x,

t=const, t

= 0 ,

(23)

A

/∆x)

where the Hamiltonian, H = H(x, p, t), considered as a function of emerging
t=const , and time t, expresses the
space coordinate x, momentum p = (∆
|
unfolded, entropy-like form of diﬀerential complexity, H = (∆S/∆t)
x=const
|
(note that discrete, rather than continuous, versions of derivatives here reﬂect
the quantised character of unreduced complex dynamics [13, 15, 17, 20, 23, 24]).
As in the naturally dualistic multivalued dynamics every localised, “regular”
realisation is transformed into the extended wavefunction and back (Sect. 2.1),
one obtains also the universal Schr¨odinger equation for the generalised wave-
function (or distribution function) Ψ (x, t) by applying causal quantisation pro-
cedure [13, 15, 17, 20, 23, 24] to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation (23):

∂Ψ
∂t

0
A

= ˆH

x,

, t

Ψ ,

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

∂
∂x

(24)

where
0 is a characteristic action value (equal to Planck’s constant at the
lowest, quantum levels of complexity) and the Hamiltonian operator, ˆH, is ob-

A

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

13

tained from the Hamiltonian function H = H(x, p, t) of equation (23) with the
help of causal quantisation (we put continuous derivatives here for simplicity).
Equations (23)–(24) represent the universal diﬀerential expression of the
symmetry of complexity showing how it determines dynamics and evolution of
any system or interaction process (they also justify our use of the Hamiltonian
form for the starting existence equation (1)–(2)). This universally applicable
Hamilton-Schr¨odinger formalism can be useful for rigorous description of any
complex interaction network, provided we ﬁnd its truly complete (dynamically
multivalued) solution with the help of unreduced EP method (Sect. 2.1).

3 Uniﬁed Science of Complex ICT Systems

3.1 Main Principles of Complex ICT System Operation and Design

The rigorously derived framework of the Universal Science of Complexity
(Sect. 2) ﬁnds its further conﬁrmation in numerous applications at diﬀerent
complexity levels, from fundamental physics and cosmology (Quantum Field
Mechanics) [13,17,23–25,28] to living organism dynamics (causally speciﬁed ge-
nomics and nanobiotechnology) [13, 16–19], ecological system development (re-
alistic sustainability concept) [13, 22], and theory of emergent true intelligence
and consciousness [13, 17, 20] (see also Sect. 4). These results give a realistic
hope for an equally successful application of the same complexity concept to
the new generation of communication and software systems with “bio-inspired”
and “intelligent” properties [2–7], which are actually indispensable for eﬃcient
work with the critically emerging real-system complexity from the above appli-
cations (Sect. 1). We provide here an outline of the main principles of expected
behaviour and design of complex-dynamic communication networks and soft-
ware as they follow from the universal complexity framework (Sect. 2).

The single unifying principle of complex system dynamics and evolution is
provided by the universal symmetry of complexity describing complexity conser-
vation by its permanent transformation from dynamic information into entropy
as the uniﬁed structure and purpose of any system evolution (Sect. 2.2). While
the very existence of such uniﬁed law is important for eﬃcient analysis of gener-
alised autonomic networks (Sect. 1), we can specify now the ensuing particular
principles that can be especially useful for their practical design and control.

We start with the complexity correspondence principle that directly follows
from the universal symmetry of complexity and takes various forms for diﬀerent
application tasks [13, 17, 20]. A general enough formulation maintains that any
interaction between complex systems (e.g. within a “global” system) tend to
have maximum eﬃciency for comparable values of interacting system complexi-
ties (see Sect. 2.1 for the universal complexity deﬁnition). Moreover, interaction
components with higher complexity tend to “enslave”, or control, those with
lower complexity within a resulting SOC-type state (Sect. 2.1), while very close
complexities of interacting components often give rise to global chaoticity.

14

A.P. Kirilyuk

It follows that in order to increase eﬃciency one should use tools of certain
complexity for control of structures of comparable and slightly lower complex-
ity. Lower-complexity tools cannot correctly control or even simulate higher-
complexity behaviour in principle, while a much higher complexity tool will
produce a lot of unnecessary activity during control of low-complexity struc-
ture. This “simple” rule has a rigorous, reliable basis and helps to avoid any
ineﬃcient solution (e.g. usual unconditional, “total” elimination of randomness).
Reproduction, or simulation, of a system behaviour by another, “computing”
or controlling system can also be successful only if the simulating system has
superior complexity, which immediately shows, for example, that any quantum
device could at best simulate or compute only another quantum, but not clas-
sical, localised and deterministic behaviour, which provides a rigorous proof of
impossibility of real quantum computation [13,17]. Losses produced by the dom-
inating neglect of underlying hierarchy of complexity are evident and include a
similar situation in nanotechnology (cf. [19]). Another use of complexity corre-
spondence involves popular ideas of “context-based” information technologies,
where the necessity of unreduced dynamic complexity in ICT systems becomes
evident, as any human “context” has a high enough complexity.

The above rule of control (or “enslavement”) of lower-complexity dynamics
by a higher-complexity tool can be extended to a general principle of complex-
dynamical control. Contrary to unitary control schemes (e.g. “control of chaos”),
the realistically substantiated complex-dynamical control paradigm shows that
any resulting, “controlled” dynamics cannot be regular, i.e. “totally controlled”,
as it is implied by the unitary control idea leading to unpredictably (and in-
evitably) emerging catastrophic failures of any technological systems with usual,
“protective” control design. In reality one always obtains a dynamically mul-
tivalued, internally chaotic SOC state, and the general purpose of complex-
dynamic, reality-based control is to ensure optimal, quasi-free development of
the global system complexity, including gentle, “orienting” actions of control that
cannot be separated from the controlled system dynamics and should be consid-
ered within a uniﬁed, unreduced interaction analysis (Sect. 2). In that way one
can realistically obtain a failure-proof, catastrophe-free systems that will avoid
big crashes by using creative power of small, interaction-driven irregularities,
quite similar to unreduced life dynamics, now causally understood [13, 16–18].
This brings us to the principle of huge creative power of unreduced complex
dynamics as it is described above (Sect. 2.2). It implies, practically, that design-
ing truly autonomous and intelligent ICT systems, one should “liberate” them
to go freely, by their own way, unpredictable in its chaotically varying details,
to the well-deﬁned general purpose of maximum complexity-entropy obtained at
the expense of inserted dynamical information that replaces usual deterministic
programme. One obtains thus the exponentially huge, practically inﬁnite gain in
eﬃciency with respect to unitary, sequential operation due to interactive adapt-
ability of probabilistic fractal of dynamically emerging links [17–21] (Sect. 2.2).
In exchange, one should accept the omnipresent, massive, unavoidable uncer-
tainty of unreduced interaction dynamics. It can, however, be properly conﬁned

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

15

and constructively used by alternating uniformly chaotic (irregular, “search-
ing”) and SOC (regular, “ﬁxing”) states, whose separation is governed by our
uniﬁed chaoticity criterion (20) in terms of major system resonances.

In conclusion of this outline of major principles of complex autonomic net-
works, it would be useful to return to the global framework of the symmetry of
complexity that shows, in the above way, what can happen in the strongly inter-
active ICT system of arbitrary complexity and how one can eﬃciently design and
control the unreduced interaction results by its causally complete understand-
ing. The latter can certainly be properly speciﬁed and adapted, where necessary,
to any particular case of reduced, mechanistic “complexity”, but now with the
underlying clear understanding of the performed actions (Sect. 5).

3.2 Complexity Transition in ICT Systems: Towards the New Era
of Intelligent Communication Technology

The qualitatively big transition from unrealistic unitary models to the unre-
duced, multivalued dynamics of real, massively interactive ICT systems can be
designated as complexity transition. It has a narrow meaning of transition from
the uttermost limit of pseudo-regular SOC of usual ICT to the fractal dynamic
hierarchy of various chaotic states, according to the chaoticity criterion (20).
In a wider sense, one deals with a fundamentally based change of concept of
modern technology (Sects. 1, 3.1, 5) and related way of development.

Unreduced complexity appearance should rather be tested ﬁrst at the level
of software. Using the results of complexity correspondence principle described
in the previous section, we can suppose that complexity transition can be con-
veniently started within context-based technology, where complexity-bringing
interaction involves essential, structure-changing, autonomic exchange between
context-bearing elements. Their unreduced interaction should then be designed
according to the principles of complex interaction dynamics (Sects. 2, 3.1).

As the unreduced interaction complexity forms a growing hierarchy of lev-
els [13, 17, 20], one obtains eventually a whole series of system transitions to
ever growing complexity. Software version of initial complexity emergence will
later involve hardware elements into structure-changing interaction processes.
Communication network or its respective parts operate in that case as a sin-
gle, holistic process of “generalised quantum beat” (chaotic realisation change).
Transition to a high enough complexity level will bring about ﬁrst elements of
genuine network intelligence and then consciousness, as both these properties
can be consistently explained as high enough levels of unreduced interaction
complexity [13, 17, 20]. One can designate then intelligence and consciousness
transitions as suﬃciently high-level complexity transitions involving unreduced
soft- and hardware interaction. Whereas lower-level complexity transitions can
be limited to separate network parts and operation layers, such higher-level fea-
tures as intelligence and (machine) consciousness will progressively involve the
whole network dynamics, which is the evident highest level of communication
network autonomy. Whereas already the lowest complexity transition involves

16

A.P. Kirilyuk

context-bearing elements of human complexity, intelligence transition marks
the beginning of inseparable entanglement of machine and human complexity
development that can be the unique real way of progressive development of
“natural” intelligence and consciousness [20, 21].

4 New Mathematics of Complexity and Its Applications

After having outlined, in the previous section, practically oriented principles
of ICT applications of the unreduced complexity, let us now summarise purely
mathematical, rigorously expressed novelties of the unreduced interaction anal-
ysis to be used in the new kind of knowledge (see also the end of paper [18]).

The new mathematics of complexity is represented by the uniﬁed, single
structure of dynamically probabilistic fractal obtained as the unreduced solution
of real interaction problem (Sect. 2.1). All its properties, describing the exact
world structure and dynamics, are uniﬁed within the single, never broken sym-
metry, or conservation, of complexity including its unceasing transformation
from complexity-information to complexity-entropy (Sect. 2.2).

One can emphasize several features of this uniﬁed structure and law of the

new mathematics, distinguishing it essentially from unitary mathematics:

(i) Nonuniqueness of any real (interaction) problem solution taking the form
of its dynamic multivaluedness (redundance). Exclusively complex-dynamic
(multivalued, internally chaotic) existence of any real system (cf. conven-
tional “existence and uniqueness” theorems).

(ii) Omnipresent, explicit emergence of qualitatively new structure and dynamic
origin of time (change) and events: a
= a for any structure/element a in the
new mathematics and reality, while a = a (self-identity postulate) in the
whole usual mathematics, which thus excludes any real change in principle.
(iii) Fractally structured dynamic entanglement of unreduced problem solution
(interaction-driven structure weaving within any single realisation): rigorous
expression of material quality in mathematics (as opposed to “immaterial”,
qualitatively “neutral”, “dead” structures of usual mathematics).

(iv) Basic irrelevance of perturbation theory and “exact solution” paradigm:
the unreduced problem solution is dynamically random (permanently, chaot-
ically changing), dynamically entangled (internally textured and “living”)
and fractal (hierarchically structured). Uniﬁed dynamic origin and causally
speciﬁed meaning of nonintegrability, nonseparability, noncomputability,
randomness, uncertainty (indeterminacy), undecidability, “broken symme-
try”, etc. Real interaction problem is nonintegrable and nonseparable but
solvable. Realistic mathematics of complexity is well deﬁned (certain, uni-
ﬁed and complete), but its structures are intrinsically “fuzzy” (dynamically
indeterminate) and properly diverse (not reduced to numbers or geometry).
(v) Dynamic discreteness (causal quantisation) of the unreduced interaction
products (realisations): qualitative inhomogeneity, or nonunitarity, of any

6
Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

17

system structure and evolution, dynamic origin of (fractally structured)
space. Qualitative irrelevance of usual unitarity, continuity and discontinu-
ity, calculus, and all major structures (evolution operators, symmetry op-
erators, any unitary operators, Lyapunov exponents, path integrals, etc.).

Let us recall now how these fundamental novelties of the universal science
of complexity help to solve consistently real-world problems [13–26, 28] that
accumulate and remain unsolvable within the unitary science paradigm:

(1) In particle and quantum physics one obtains causal, uniﬁed origin and struc-
ture of elementary particles, all their properties (“intrinsic”, quantum, rela-
tivistic), and fundamental interactions [13, 17, 23, 24, 28]. Complex-dynamic
origin of mass avoids any additional, abstract entities (Higgs bosons, zero-
point ﬁeld, extra dimensions, etc.). Renormalised Planckian units provide
consistent mass spectrum and other problem solution. Complex-dynamic
cosmology resolves the dark mass and energy problems without “invisible”
entities, together with other old and new problems of unitary cosmology.
(2) At a higher complexity sublevel of interacting particles [13,17,23,25,26] one
obtains genuine, purely dynamic quantum chaos for Hamiltonian (nondis-
sipative) dynamics and correct correspondence principle. A slightly dissipa-
tive interaction dynamics leads to the causally complete understanding of
quantum measurement in terms of quantum dynamics. Intrinsic classically
emerges as a higher complexity level in a closed, bound system, like atom.
(3) Realistic, causally complete foundation of nanobiotechnology is provided by
rigorous description of arbitrary nanoscale interaction, revealing the irre-
ducible role of chaoticity [17, 19]. Exponentially huge power of unreduced,
complex nanobiosystem dynamics explains the essential properties of life
and has direct relation to complex ICT system development (Sect. 2.2).
(4) Causally complete description of unreduced genomic interactions leads to
reliable, rigorously substantiated genetics and consistent understanding of
related evolutionary processes [16, 18].

(5) Higher-complexity applications include general many-body problem solution
and related description of “diﬃcult” cases in solid-state physics, unreduced
dynamics and evolution of living organisms, integral medicine, emergent
(genuine) intelligence and consciousness, complex ICT system dynamics,
creative ecology and practically eﬃcient sustainable development concept,
rigorously speciﬁed ethics and aesthetics [13, 16–18, 20–22].

Note that only the unreduced, universal concept of complexity can be useful
for real problem solution culminating in creation of complex, autonomic and
intelligent ICT systems, which in their turn form a consistent, necessary basis
for further control and development of real interaction complexity.

18

A.P. Kirilyuk

5 Conclusion and Perspectives

We have presented a rigorously speciﬁed, working prototype of the uniﬁed sci-
ence of complex ICT systems demonstrating its necessity, feasibility and practi-
cal application eﬃciency. One obtains thus a new, intrinsically uniﬁed and real-
istic kind of knowledge with extended possibilities of consistent understanding
and progressive development of real-world complexity.

Application of the universal science of complexity to autonomic communi-
cation and information systems has a special importance among other appli-
cations, since it is the ﬁrst case of totally artiﬁcial, man-made systems that
can possess unreduced complexity features comparable to those of natural sys-
tems and remaining irrational “mysteries” within the unitary science framework
(starting from “quantum mysteries” [13,17,23–26,28]). Successful realisation of
unreduced ICT complexity will open the way to a much larger, unlimited and
now reliable complexity design becoming so necessary today because of the
rapid empirical technology progress (Sect. 1). Those major purposes cannot be
attained within unitary imitations of communication and software complexity
(e.g. [4, 8]), since they avoid the unreduced, network-wide interaction analysis
and use essentially simpliﬁed models even for separate component description
(in particular, they cannot describe the emerging genuine chaoticity [13, 17]).

It is diﬃcult to have serious doubts about basic consistency of a uniﬁed com-
plexity framework based on the unreduced problem solution and conﬁrmed by
a variety of applications (Sects. 2, 4). Understanding of unreduced interaction
complexity is indispensable for eﬃcient design of even regular, but mechanically
“complicated” systems. It is evident that all increasingly popular “bio-inspired”,
autonomic and “intelligent” imitations of natural complexity will be much more
successful with the help of consistent understanding of the unreduced versions
and properties of life, intelligence, etc. In this sense one can say that application
of the universal science of complexity will certainly provide consistent clariﬁca-
tion of what is possible or impossible in artiﬁcial complexity design, whereupon
further development of ICT applications of unreduced complexity analysis can
produce only positive (and urgently needed) result.

References

1. M. Rees, Our Final Hour: A Scientist’s Warning: How Terror, Error, and Envi-
ronmental Disaster Threaten Humankind’s Future in This Century — On Earth
and Beyond (Basic Books, New York, 2003).

2. The First International Workshop on Autonomic Communication (WAC 2004),

http://www.autonomic-communication.org/wac/wac2004/program.html.
Proceedings are being published as LNCS No. 3457, Springer Verlag (2005).
3. European Commission FP6, FET Situated and Autonomic Communications,
http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fet/comms.htm. Links to other related FET initiatives
can be found at http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fet/areas.htm.

Unreduced Dynamic Complexity of Intelligent Communication Networks

19

4. S. Bullock and D. Cliﬀ, Complexity and Emergent Behaviour in ICT Systems,
Foresight Intelligent Infrastructure Systems Project, UK Oﬃce of Science and
Technology (2004), http://www.foresight.gov.uk/
Intelligent Infrastructure Systems/Complexity and Emergent Behaviour.html.
5. G. Di Marzo Serugendo, A. Karageorgos, O.F. Rana, and F. Zambonelli (Eds.),
Engineering Self-Organising Systems: Nature Inspired Approaches to Software En-
gineering, LNCS No. 2977 (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2004).

6. T. Berners-Lee, K. Hendler, and O. Lassila, The Semantic Web, Scientiﬁc Amer-

7. ManyOne Networks, http://www.manyone.net/; Digital Universe Foundation,

8. L. Kocarev and G. Vattay (Eds.), Complex Dynamics in Communication Networks

9. J. Horgan, From Complexity to Perplexity, Scientiﬁc American, June (1995) 74–

ican, May (2001) 35–43.

http://www.digitaluniverse.net/.

(Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2005).

79.

10. J. Horgan, The End of Science. Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight

of the Scientiﬁc Age (Addison-Wesley, Helix, 1996).

11. G.F.R. Ellis, Physics, Complexity and Causality, Nature 435 (2005) 743.
12. G.F.R. Ellis, Physics and the Real World, Physics Today, July (2005) 49–54.
13. A.P. Kirilyuk, Universal Concept of Complexity by the Dynamic Redundance
Paradigm: Causal Randomness, Complete Wave Mechanics, and the Ultimate
Uniﬁcation of Knowledge (Naukova Dumka, Kyiv, 1997). For a non-technical
overview see also physics/9806002 at http://arXiv.org

14. A.P. Kirilyuk, Dynamically Multivalued Self-Organisation and Probabilistic
Structure Formation Processes, Solid State Phenomena 97–98 (2004) 21–26.
physics/0405063 at http://arXiv.org.

15. A.P. Kirilyuk, Universal Symmetry of Complexity and Its Manifestations at Dif-
ferent Levels of World Dynamics, Proceedings of Institute of Mathematics of NAS
of Ukraine 50 (2004) 821–828. physics/0404006 at http://arXiv.org.

16. A.P. Kirilyuk, The Universal Dynamic Complexity as Extended Dynamic Frac-
tality: Causally Complete Understanding of Living Systems Emergence and Op-
eration, in: Fractals in Biology and Medicine. Vol. III, edited by G.A. Losa, D.
Merlini, T.F. Nonnenmacher, and E.R. Weibel (Birkh¨auser, Basel, 2002), pp. 271–
284. physics/0305119 at http://arXiv.org.

17. A.P. Kirilyuk, Dynamically Multivalued, Not Unitary or Stochastic, Operation
of Real Quantum, Classical and Hybrid Micro-Machines, physics/0211071 at
http://arXiv.org.

18. A.P. Kirilyuk, Complex-Dynamical Extension of the Fractal Paradigm and Its
Applications in Life Sciences, in: Fractals in Biology and Medicine. Vol. IV, edited
by G.A. Losa, D. Merlini, T.F. Nonnenmacher, and E.R. Weibel (Birkh¨auser,
Basel, 2005), pp. 233–244. physics/0502133 at http://arXiv.org.

19. A.P. Kirilyuk, Complex Dynamics of Real Nanosystems: Fundamental Paradigm
for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Nanosystems, Nanomaterials, Nanotech-
nologies 2 (2004) 1085–1090. physics/0412097 at http://arXiv.org.

20. A.P. Kirilyuk, Emerging Consciousness as a Result of Complex-Dynamical In-
teraction Process, Report at the EXYSTENCE workshop Machine Conscious-
ness: Complexity Aspects (Turin, 29 Sep – 1 Oct 2003). physics/0409140 at
http://arXiv.org.

20

A.P. Kirilyuk

21. A.P. Kirilyuk, Complex Dynamics of Autonomous Communication Networks and
the Intelligent Communication Paradigm, Report at WAC 2004, see Ref. [2].
physics/0412058 at http://arXiv.org.

22. A.P. Kirilyuk, Unreduced Dynamic Complexity, Causally Complete Ecology,
and Realistic Transition to the Superior Level of Life, Report at the con-
ference “Nature, Society and History” (Vienna, 30 Sep – 2 Oct 1999), see
http://hal.ccsd.cnrs.fr/ccsd-00004214.

23. A.P. Kirilyuk, Quantum Field Mechanics: Complex-Dynamical Completion of
Fundamental Physics and Its Experimental Implications, physics/0401164 at
http://arXiv.org.

24. A.P. Kirilyuk, Complex-Dynamic Cosmology and Emergent World Structure, Re-
port at the International Workshop on Frontiers of Particle Astrophysics (Kiev,
21–24 June 2004). physics/0408027 at http://arXiv.org.

25. A.P. Kirilyuk, Quantum Chaos and Fundamental Multivaluedness of Dynami-
cal Functions, Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie 21 (1996) 455–480.
quant-ph/9511034–36 at http://arXiv.org.

26. A.P. Kirilyuk, Theory of Charged Particle Scattering in Crystals by the General-
ized Optical Potential Method, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 69 (1992) 200–231.
27. P.H. Dederichs, Dynamical Diﬀraction Theory by Optical Potential Methods, in:
Solid State Physics: Advances in Research and Applications, Vol. 27, edited by
H. Ehrenreich, F. Seitz, and D. Turnbull (Academic Press, New York, 1972), pp.
136–237.

28. A.P. Kirilyuk, 75 Years of the Wavefunction: Complex-Dynamical Exten-
sion of the Original Wave Realism and the Universal Schr¨odinger Equation,
quant-ph/0101129 at http://arXiv.org.

