6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LOOKING BEYOND SPECIAL
RELATIVITY

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute for Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
Hyderabad (India) & Udine (Italy)
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity was proposed a little over
It remained a bedrock of twentieth century
a hundred years back.
physics right up to Quantum Field Theory. However, the failure over
several decades to provide a uniﬁed description of Electromagnetism
and Gravitation or alternatively, Quantum Theory and General Rela-
tivity has ﬁnally lead researchers to abandon the diﬀerentiable space-
time manifold on which all of the above was based. In the most recent
approaches we consider a spacetime that is discretized or is noncom-
mutative. This immediately leads to corrections to the Special Theory
of Relativity, more speciﬁcally to Lorentz Symmetry. It is quite sig-
niﬁcant that there are observational indicators, particularly in ultra
high energy cosmic rays which suggest that such corrections are indeed
there. We examine the whole issue in this paper.

1 Introduction

Just over a hundred years ago, Einstein put forward his Special Theory of
Relativity (and subsequently his General Theory of Relativity). Special Rel-
ativity has been a bedrock of much of twentieth century physics including
Quantum Field Theory. But there are two implicit assumptions. The ﬁrst
is that spacetime is a diﬀerentiable manifold. This has been recognized for
a long time. As V.L. Ginzburg puts it [1] ’The special and general relativity

1

theory, non-relativistic quantum mechanics and present theory of quantum
ﬁelds use the concept of continuous, essentially classical, space and time (a
point of spacetime is described by four coordinates xı = x, y, z, ct which
may vary continuously). But is this concept valid always? How can we be
sure that on a ”small scale” time and space do not become quire diﬀerent,
somehow fragmentized, discrete, quantized? This is by no means a novel
question, the ﬁrst to ask it was, apparently Riemann back in 1854 and it
has repeatedly been discussed since that time. For instance, Einstein said
in his well known lecture ”Geometry and Experience” in 1921: ”It is true
that this proposed physical interpretation of geometry breaks down when
applied immediately to spaces of submolecular order of magnitude. But nev-
ertheless, even in questions as to the constitution of elementary particles, it
retains part of its signiﬁcance. For even when it is a question of describing
the electrical elementary particles constituting matter, the attempt may still
be made to ascribe physical meaning to those ﬁeld concepts which have been
physically deﬁned for the purpose of describing the geometrical behavior of
bodies which are large as compared with the molecule. Success alone can
decide as to the justiﬁcation of such an attempt, which postulates physical
reality for the fundamental principles of Riemann’s geometry outside of the
domain of their physical deﬁnitions.
It might possibly turn out that this
extrapolation has no better warrant than the extrapolation of the concept of
temperature to parts of a body of molecular order of magnitude.”
’This lucidly formulated question about the limits of applicability of the
Riemannian geometry (that is, in fact macroscopic, or classical, geometric
concepts) has not yet been answered. As we move to the ﬁeld of increasingly
high energies and, hence to ”closer” collisions between various particles the
scale of unexplored space regions becomes smaller. Now we may possibly
state that the usual space relationships down to the distance of the order of
are valid or, more exactly, that their application does not lead to inconsis-
tencies. It cannot be ruled out that, the limit is nonexistent but it is much
more likely that there exists a fundamental (elementary) length which re-
stricts the possibilities of classical, spatial description. Moreover, it seems
reasonable to assume that the fundamental length is, at least, not less than
the gravitational length lg =
∼
’...It is probable that the fundamental length would be a ”cut-oﬀ” factor
which is essential to the current quantum theory: a theory using a funda-
mental length automatically excludes divergent results.’

10−33cm.

Gh/c3

q

2

Einstein himself was aware of this situation. As he observed [2], ”...It has
been pointed out that the introduction of a spacetime continuum may be con-
sidered as contrary to nature in view of the molecular structure of everything
which happens on a small scale. It is maintained that perhaps the success of
the Heisenberg method points to a purely algebraic method of description of
nature that is to the elimination of continuous functions from physics. Then
however, we must also give up, by principle the spacetime continuum. It is
not unimaginable that human ingenuity will some day ﬁnd methods which
will make it possible to proceed along such a path. At present however, such
a program looks like an attempt to breathe in empty space.”
Attempts were made, starting with the work of Snyder and others in the
late 1940s to introduce minimum and fundamental intervals into spacetime
[3,4,5] to overcome the divergences encountered in Quantum Electro Dynam-
ics. This would mean that we discard smooth spacetime. The divergences in
question themselves arise not from classical considerations but rather from
the Quantum Mechanical Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle:

∆x

∆p

¯h

·

≥

(1)

→

→ ∞

As can be seen from (??), ∆x
0, as would be meaningful in smooth space,
would imply the unphysical fact that ∆p
. Dirac himself noticed this
after he formulated his relativistic electron equation [6]. The velocity of the
electron would equal that of light. His explanation was that we have to take
averages over the Compton scale to eliminate zitterbewegung eﬀects, to get
meaningful physics. It is true that in Quantum Field Theory the divergence
problem was circumvented by renormalization, which was in eﬀect giving up
attempts to exactly specify certain physical quantities, as Nambu observed
[7]. However as Dirac himself noted [8], ”I am inclined to suspect that the
renormalization theory is something that will not survive in the future, and
that the remarkable agreement between its results and experiments should
be looked on as a ﬂuke...”
More recently the fruitless decades of attempts to unify Gravitation and Elec-
tromagnetism or General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics have lead to
the realization that we have to discard smooth spacetime. Quantum Grav-
ity approaches, the author’s fuzzy spacetime formulation and String Theory
work with minimum spacetime intervals [9]. As t’ Hooft observed [10], ”It is
somewhat puzzling to the present author why the lattice structure of space
and time had escaped attention from other investigators up till now...” So
today the implicit assumptioin of smooth spacetime of twentieth century

3

physics is being reexamined.
A second and even less obvious assumption of twentieth century physics has
been the acceptance of the existence of absolute or fundamental laws, a con-
sequence of the reductionist approach. This has lead to several paradoxes
like that of the arrow of time, the Boltzmann paradox, and so on. At a
classical level, the work of Prigogine and his ideas of cooperative behavior
and complex systems gave a contra view and could even resolve problems of
the arrow of time and the Boltzmann paradox [11,12,13,14]. Indeed, as we
will see in a little more detail in the sequel, we should be rather recognizing
the universe to be ”thermodynamic”, in the sense that the laws of physics
have a stochastic underpinning [15,5].
In a private communication to the author shortly before his death, Prof.
Prigogine wrote [14], ”I agree with you that spacetime has a stochastic un-
derpinning”. These ideas are summarized in the recent book of Robert B.
Laughlin where he argues against the reductionist approach [16]. As he puts
it, ”...I must openly discuss some shocking ideas: The vacuum of spacetime
as ’matter’, the possibility that relativity is not fundamental, the collective
nature of computability, epistemological barriers to theoretical knowledge,
similar barriers to experimental falsiﬁcation and the mythological nature of
important parts of modern theoretical physics...”. The author himself has
been in the forefront of many of these radical new developments and we will
touch upon a few which have direct bearing to Special Relativity.

2 Violations of Lorentz Symmetry

Given the two new inputs discussed in Section 1, namely a minimum space-
time interval and a non reductioinist approach, it is natural to expect vio-
lations of Special Relativity, more speciﬁcally Lorentz symmetry. Such vi-
olations however would be small and in a suitable limit we should recover
Special Relativity.
In fact given minimum intervals it is well known that we have, what has now
come to be known as a noncommutative geometry. This is given by

[x, y] =

Lz, [t, x] =

ıa2/¯hc

Mx, etc.

ıa2/¯h
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

[x, px] = ı¯h

(cid:16)
1 + (a/¯h)
h

2

p2
x

(cid:17)
; etc/

(2)

and similar relations, where denotes the minimum extension. One interesting
feature of (2) is that two independent coordinates x and y no longer commute.

i

4

This is also characteristic of all modern Quantum Gravity and String Theory
approaches.
Another interesting feature of (2) is brought out by the last of these equations:
It is as if

Consequently as can be easily shown [17] the energy momentum relation gets
modiﬁed because of (3) and now becomes

¯h

→

¯h

1 + (a/¯h)
h

2

p2

i

E2 = m2 + p2 + αl2p4

where is the fundamental length and α is a dimensionless constantof order
unity. A consequence of (4) is that the Klein-Gordan and Dirac equations
get modiﬁed [17,18].
In terms of observational eﬀects this would imply a modiﬁcation of the Comp-
ton scattering formula which now becomes

(3)

(4)

(5)

k =

mk0 + α l2

[m + k0 (1

2

2 [Q2 + 2mQ]
cosΘ)]

−

l2
(cid:16)

where we use natural units c = ¯h = 1 or, in terms of frequencies, we would
have

(cid:17)i

(6)

hν = hν0

1 + 0
h
As can be seen, both (5) and (6) return to the usual formulae in the limit
in which we neglect l2 . Equation (6) means that due to Lorentz symmetry
violation given in (4) the frequency is increased or the speed of propagation
for a given frequency is increased. It is interesting to note that such eﬀects
are detectable, for example in ultra high energy cosmic rays and latest data
seems to be indicative of this [19].
On the other hand such violations of Lorentz symmetry have been proposed
recently by Glashow, Coleman, Carroll, Jacobsen and others, though from
a phenomenological point of view [20,21,22,23,24]. The major motivation
in this case appears to be the fact that Lorentz symmetry in the context of
cosmic rays implies the well known GZK cut oﬀ (Cf.ref.[17]). To put it simply
the number of cosmic ray events goes down inversely as the third power of
the energy, due to the presence of the cosmic microwave background. This
in turn implies that no cosmic rays with energy greater than or of the order
of 1020eV should be observed, given Lorentz symmetry. However a number
of such events have been reported (Cf.ref.[17]).

5

We would like to stress that from a fundamental point of view such violations
are to be expected due to the non smooth nature of spacetime as pointed out
by the author some years ago [5].
Wer can come to a similar conclusion from a totally diﬀerent point of view,
one that refers to the non reductionist approach. It has been shown by the
author that the photon can be considered to have a non zero but small mass
10−65gms [25,26]. Interestingly from a thermodynamic point of view this
∼
mass is the minimum allowable mass in the universe [27]. Using this and
the fact that from black hole thermodynamics, the minimum temperature
10−28K, we can deduce using the Langevin equation that
of the universe
the photon travels like a Newtonian particle without external forces with a
uniform velocity which is velocity of light (Cf.ref.[25] for details).
This in turn implies that for radiation we would have a dispersive group
velocity for waves of a given frequency. In fact we would have

∼

uγ = c

1
"

−

1/2

m2
2
¯h

γc4
ν2

#

(7)

(Cf.ref.[26]). As noted above such dispersive cosmic ray events might already
have been observed over the past few years [19].
We would now argue that interestingly, the violations of the above Lorentz
symmetry which we have deduced from two apparently diﬀerent view points
namely a noncommutative geometry and a photon mass, are actually the
same. We will give two arguments for this: The ﬁrst argument is that as was
l2 in gauge theory, then
shown in detail [28,29], if we do not neglect terms
the gauge ﬁeld Aµ (Abelian or non Abelian) gets a new term:

∼

Aµ →
Aµ + ∂µf
(8)
l2 eﬀect and plays the role of the Higgs
The last terms in (8) represents the
Field in the usual theory (Cf.ref.[9,30]), so that the kinetic energy term is
given by

∼

|

|

|

f

= β

Dµf

Aµ|
|
where β is a suitable constant. One can immediately see from (9) that it
deﬁnes the mass term, exactly as with the Higgs symmetry breaking mecha-
nism, viz.,

m2AµAµ
The original problem with gauge ﬁelds was that the mass term given in (10)
could not be included in the Lagrangian, as it was not gauge invariant. It

(10)

(9)

· · ·

2

2

2
|

6

∼

now ﬁnds its way back into the Lagrangian via the invariant kinetic energy
l2 terms that are now taken into account,
term (9) thanks to the additional
and which play the same role as the Higgs ﬁeld with the symmetry breaking
mechanism (Cf.ref.[28,29] for a detailed description). The point now is that
in the above considerations could very well stand for the electromagnetic ﬁeld
l2 terms
itself. In the usual point spacetime formulation however in which
had to be neglected, the contribution of the gauge term f would vanish.
We could give an alternative derivation. The noncommutative geometry in
(2) above necessitated by minimum spacetime intervals, as is well known
leads in all these approaches to

∼

∆x =

+

∆p

¯h
∆p

l2
¯h

(11)

The relation (11) which replaces (??) implies

∆x2 =

2
¯h
∆p2 +

l4
2 ∆p2 + 2l2
¯h

so that

∆p

implies

→

∆x2

h

imax =

∆p2 = R2

2

¯h

In the above, R represents the maximum possible extent in the universe
1028cms. This yields the limiting mass
namely the radius of the universe

∼

mγ = ¯h/Rc = 10−65gm

which is the previously deduced mass of the photon. We will brieﬂy return
to the above considerations.

3 Issues Relating to Instantaneous Action At

A Distance

We have remarked earlier that there are unphysical zitterbewegung eﬀects
within the Compton wavelength. Speciﬁcally it is known that if

0 < ( ~r1

~r2)2

c2(t1

t2)2

−

−

−

≤  

2

2
¯h
mc !

(12)

7

holds then the particle has a non zero probability of being at points ~r1 and ~r2
even if this interval is space like [31]. It is interesting to note that if in (12) we
consider a photon and use its mass then the distance between and can be the
radius of the universe, even if t1 = t2. We could interpret this result by saying
that the photon could be found instantaneously at two well separated points.
Such instantaneous action at a distance which was considered by Feynman
and Wheeler in the 1940s [32] has received attention more recently, notably
through the work of Hoyle and Narlikar, Chubykalo, Smirnov-Rueda, the
author himself and others [33,34,35,36,37]. Before proceeding, let us brieﬂy
touch upon the main points of this formulation.
We begin with classical electrodynamics. From a classical point of view a
charge that is accelerating radiates energy which dampens its motion. This
is given by the well known Maxwell-Lorentz equation, which in units c = 1,
[34], and being the proper time, while ı = 1, 2, 3, 4, is (Cf. [34]),

m

d2xı
dτ 2 = eF ık dxk

dτ

+

gık

4c
3

d3xı
dτ 3

dxı
dτ −

d3xl
dτ 3

dxı
dτ !

dxk
dτ

,

 

(13)

The ﬁrst term on the right side is the usual external ﬁeld while the second
term is the damping ﬁeld which is added ad hoc by the requirement of the
energy loss due to radiation. In 1938 Dirac introduced instead

where

m

d2xı
dτ 2 = e

k + Rı
F ı
{

k}

dxk
dτ

Rı

k ≡

1
2

n

F retı

k −

F advı
k

o

(14)

(15)

In (15), F ret denotes the retarded ﬁeld and F adv the advanced ﬁeld. While the
former is the causal ﬁeld where the inﬂuence of a charge at A is felt by a charge
at B at a distance r after a time t = r
c , the latter is the advanced acausal
ﬁeld which acts on A from a future time. In eﬀect what Dirac showed was
that the radiation damping term in (13) or (14) is given by (15) in which an
antisymmetric diﬀerence of the advanced and retarded ﬁelds is taken, which
of course seemingly goes against causality as the advanced ﬁeld acts from the
future backwards in time. It must be mentioned that Dirac’s prescription
lead to the so called runaway solutions, with the electron acquiring larger
and larger velocities in the absence of an external force. This he related to
the inﬁnite self energy of the point electron.

8

∼

τ , the Compton time.

As far as the breakdown of causality is concerned, this takes place within
a period
It was at this stage that Wheeler and
Feynman reformulated the above action at a distance formalism in terms of
what has been called their Absorber Theory. In their formulation, the ﬁeld
that a charge would experience because of its action at a distance on the
other charges of the universe, which in turn would act back on the original
charge is given by

Re =

(¨x)

2e2d
3dt

The interesting point is that instead of considering the above force in (16)
at the charge e , if we consider the responses in its neighborhood, in fact a
neighborhood at the Compton scale, as was argued recently by the author
[37], the ﬁeld would be precisely the Dirac ﬁeld given in (14) and (15). The
net force emanating from the charge is thus given by

F ret =

F ret + F adv

+

1
2

n

1
2

F ret
n

−

F adv

o

o

which is the acceptable causal retarded ﬁeld. The causal ﬁeld now consists
of the time symmetric ﬁeld of the charge together with the Dirac ﬁeld, that
is the second term in (17), which represents the response of the rest of the
Interestingly in this formulation we have used a time symmetric
charges.
ﬁeld, viz., the ﬁrst term of (17) to recover the retarded ﬁeld with the correct
arrow of time. There are two important inputs which we can see in the
above formulation. The ﬁrst is the action of the rest of the universe at a
given charge and the other is minimum spacetime intervals which are of the
order of the Compton scale.
Feynman and Wheeler stressed that the universe has to be a perfect absorber
or to put it simply, every charged particle in the universe should respond back
to the action on it by the given charge - and the other is, as stressed by the
author, minimum spacetime intervals which are of the order of the Compton
scale. We now follow up this line of reasoning, which was essentially from
electrodynamics to a characterization of gravitation itself.
In fact the work done on a charge e at 0 by the charge P a distance r away in
causing a displacement dx is given by (ignoring a cosine which merely gives
a small numerical factor),

(16)

(17)

(18)

e2
r2 dx

9

Now the number of particles at distance r from 0 is given by

n(r) = ρ(r)

4πr2

·

E =

Z Z

e2
r2 4πr2ρdxdr

where ρ(r) is the density of particles. So using (19) in (18) the total work is
given by

∼

mc2. We
which can be shown using a uniform average density ρ, to be
thus recover in (20) the inertial energy of the particle in terms of its electro-
magnetic interactions with the rest of the universe in an action at a distance
scheme.
Interestingly this can also be deduced in the context of gravitation itself.
The work done on a particle of mass which we take to be a pion, a typial
elementary particle, by the rest of the particles (pions) in the universe is
given by

Gm2N
R
1080 while R
√Nl, the well known Weyl-
It is known that in (21) N
Eddington formula. Whence the gravitational energy of the pion is given
by

(21)

∼

∼

where in (22) we have used the fact that

Gm2√N
l

=

e2
l ∼

mc2

Gm2

e2
√N

∼

It must be mentioned that though the Eddington formula and (23) were
originally empirical, they can in fact be deduced from theory in the author’s
formulation (Cf. for references and a summary [5]).
It may also be pointed out that what is clear in the above formulation is the
Machian non reductioinist aspect as was remarked in the introduction. We
can also look at the above arguments from a slightly diﬀerent point of view,
one which considers the neutral atoms in the universe, which nevertheless
have a dipole eﬀect.
In fact as is well known from elementary electrostatics the potential energy
at a distance r due to the dipole is given by

(19)

(20)

(22)

(23)

(24)

φ =

µ
r2

10

10−8cm

103l

∼

∼

ωl, e being the electric charge of the
where µ = eL, L
≡
electron for simplicity and l being the electron Compton wavelength. (There
is a factor cosΘ with µ, but on an integration over all directions, this becomes
as before an irrelevant constant factor 4π.)
Due to (24), the potential energy of a proton p (which approximates an atom
in terms of mass) at a distance r (much greater than L) is given by

As there are N
proton due to all the dipoles is given by

∼

1080 atoms in the universe, the net potential energy of a

In (26) we use the fact that the predominant eﬀect comes from the distant
atoms which are at a distance
We use again the well known Eddington formula encountered earlier,

r, the radius of the universe.

∼

If we introduce (27) in (26) we get, as the energy E of the proton under
consideration

Let us now consider the gravitational potential energy E′ of the proton p due
to all the other N atoms in the universe. This is given by

where m is the proton mass and M is the mass of the universe.
Comparing (28) and (29), not only is E equal to E′, but remembering that
M = Nm, we deduce in this ﬁne tuned model, the relation (23), viz.,

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

e2L
r2

Ne2L
r2

√N l

r

∼

E =

√N e2ω
r

E′ =

GMm
r

e2
Gm2 =

1
√N

.

11

Furthermore, as we have deduced (23), in eﬀect, in this model we have got a
uniﬁed description of electromagnetism and gravitation.

The points to be stressed are that ﬁrstly, we are able to use Quantum Me-
chanical eﬀects to reconcile action at a distance electrodynamics with Special
Relativity, and secondly this is possible because of a Machian or holistic ef-
fect, brought out for example by the Feynman perfect absorber condition, or
what may be called a ﬁne tuned universe.

4 Discussion

As noted in the introduction, Einstein (and much of twentieth century physics)
operated in a diﬀerentiable spacetime manifold and adopted a reductionist
approach. In fact Einstein argued for local realism [38,39]. An element of
physical reality corresponding to a physical attribute of some system is the
value that can be predicted with certainty and without disturbing the phys-
ical system itself. The concept of locality dictates that we can deal in a
physically meaningful manner with parts of the external world without the
necessity of dealing with all or any other part of it. So, eﬀectively the ele-
ments of physical reality of a given system do not depend on measurements
performed on a spatially separated system which is not in direct causal in-
teraction with this system. Causality in this post relativity context, would
mean the following: Any two events separated by a space like interval are
not in causally connected.
This seemed counter to Quantum Mechanics. Einstein with Podolsky and
Rosen constructed the famous EPR experiment which would prove that it
would be possible to obtain information about the angular momentum of a
particle A by making a measurement of a distant particle B. In eﬀect informa-
tion about particle A has been obtained instantaneously without a separate
measurement, as would be required in Quantum Theory though not in Clas-
sical Theory. Schrodinger argued that there was no contradiction and that
this was due to what was then called the non separability property which
distinguished Quantum Theory from Classical Theory-the particles A and
B, once they interact would form what may be called an entangled system
in modern terminology: they would be described by a single wave function,
requiring a single measurement. Several experiments starting with that of
Aspect in the 1980s have since vindicated this property and today Quantum
entanglement is at the heart of the emerging subject of Quantum Comput-
ing. Nevertheless it has been argued time and again that all this does not
contradict Einstein’s causality, that is there is no superluminal transfer of

12

information. As this has been extensively discussed in the literature, we
merely cite some references. [40,41].

References

[1] V.L. Ginzburg., ”Key Problems of Physics and Astrophysics”, Mir Pub-

lishers, Moscow, 1976.

[2] Einstein, A., J. Franklin Inst. Quoted by M.S. El Naschie, Chaos, Soli-

tons & Fractals, 1999, 10 (2-3): 163.

[3] Snyder , H.S., Phys.Rev., Vol.72, No.1, July 1, 1947, p.68-71.

[4] Snyder, H.S., Phys.Rev., Vol.71, No.1, January 1, 1947, p.38-41.

[5] Sidharth, B.G., ”Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science, New York, 2002.

[6] Dirac, P.A.M., ”Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1958, pp.4ﬀ, pp.253ﬀ.

[7] Nambu, Y., Letters to the Editor, PTP, May 14 1952, p.595.

[8] Dirac, P.A.M., quoted in Sachs, M., ’Quantum Mechanics from General
Relativity: A Paradigm Shift’ in ”Directions in Microphysics” Fondation
Louis de Broglie, 1993, p.393ﬀ.

[9] Sidharth, B.G., ”The Universe of Fluctuations”, Springer, Berlin, 2005.

[10] Hooft, G. ’t., ArXiv:gr-qc/9601014.

[11] Prigogine, I., in ” Century of Ideas” , Springer, Berlin, 2006 (to appear).

[12] Prigogine, I., ”End of Uncertainty”, Freepress, New York, 1997.

[13] Nicolis, G., and Prigogine, I., ”Self Organization in Nonequilibrium Sys-

tems”, John Wiley, New York, 1977.

[14] Prigogine, I., Private Communication to the author, 2003.

[15] Sidharth, B.G., Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 11, 2000, 1037-1039.

13

[16] Laughlin, R.B., ”A Diﬀerent Universe”, Basic Books, New York, 2005.

[17] Sidharth, B.G., Int.J.Th.Phys., Vol.43 (9), September 2004, p.1ﬀ.

[18] Sidharth, B.G., Int.J.Mod.Phys.E., Vol.14, No.6, 2005, pp.927-929.

[19] Theodore G. Pavlopoulos, ”Are we observing Lorentz Violation in

gamma ray Bursts?”, Physics Letters B, 625, 2005, 13-18.

[20] Sidney Coleman and Sheldon L. Glashow, ”High-energy tests of Lorentz

Invariance”, Physical Review D, Vol.59, 59 116008-1-14 (1999).

[21] Sean M. Carroll, Jeﬀrey A. Harvey, V. Alan Kostelecky, Charles D. Lane
and Takemi Okamoto, ”Noncommutative Field Theory and Lorentz Vi-
olation”, Physical Review Letters, Vol.87, No.14, 2001, 141601-1-4.

[22] Carroll, S.M., Physics Review Letters, 87, 2001, 141601ﬀ.

[23] Jacobson, T., xxx.astro-ph/0212190, 2002.

[24] Bertolami and Mota, D.F., Phys.Lett.B, 455: 96-103, 1999.

[25] Sidharth, B.G., Foundation of Physics Letters, 19 (1), 2006, pp.87ﬀ.

[26] Sidharth, B.G., ”A Note on Massive Photons”, to appear in Foundation

of Physics Letters.

[27] Landsberg, P.T., Am.J.Phys., 51, 1983, pp.274-275.

[28] Sidharth, B.G. Int.J.Mod.Phys. E., 14 (2), March 2005, pp.215-218.

[29] Sidharth, B.G. Int.J.Mod.Phys. E., 4 (6), 2005, pp.923-925.

[30] Moriyasu, K., ”An Elementary Primer for Gauge Theory”, World Sci-

entiﬁc, Singapore, 1983.

York, 1972, p.62.

[31] Weinberg, S., ”Gravitation and Cosmology”, John Wiley & Sons, New

[32] Wheeler, J.A., and Feynman, R.P., Rev.Mod.Phys., 17, 157, 1945.

[33] Hoyle, F., and Narlikar, J.V., Rev.Mod.Phys., 67 (1), 113, 1995.

14

[34] Hoyle, F., and Narlikar, J.V., ”Lectures on Cosmology and Action at a

Distance Electrodynamics”,

[35] Chubykalo., and Smirnov-Rueda, R., Phys.Rev.E 53 (5), 5373, 1996.

[36] Chubykalo and Smirnov-Rueda, R., Phys.Rev.E 57 (3), 1, 1998.

[37] Sidharth, B.G., ”Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern Physics;
”Pro and Contra”, Eds. A.E. Chubykalo et al., Nova Science Publishing,
New York, 1999.

[38] Singh., V., in ”Schrodinger Centenary Surveys in Physics” (Indore, In-
dia), Eds., V. Singh and S. Lal, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1988.

[39] Bistakis, E., ”Open Questions in Quantum Physics”, Eds. Tarozzi, G.,

and Van der Merwe, A., D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1985.

[40] Chiao, R., Phys.Lett.A, 245, 19, 1998.

[41] Nimtz, G., Foundation of Physics, Vol.34, No.12, December 2004,

pp.1889ﬀ.

15

