Possible Solution to the Poincare Conjecture

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

The Poincare conjecture is analyzed in the context of Calabi-Yau n-folds. A
simple treatment is given by embedding the three-manifolds into these CY manifolds,
and then taking the orbifold limit. The higher-dimensional proofs are also available
in this context.

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Poincare conjecture states essentially that a simply connected three-manifold
is homeomorphic to the S3. The proofs in four and higher dimensions are contained
in [1] and [2]. The analagous statement for non-simply connected three manifolds is
that they are homeomorphic to the S3/Γ, with Γ a discrete subgroup of SO(4).

A possible proof here is proferred by embedding the metric components of the
3-manifold into a Ricci-ﬂat Calabi-Yau manifold. The Calabi-Yau manifolds have
orbifold limits into T 2n/Zp; as such the metric components become functions of the
orbifold in the smooth degeneration of the Calabi-Yau into the orbifold. The curvature
of the metric solution on the tori are constant, hence models a sphere.

Consider the 6 metric components of a Reimannian 3-manifold, gµν. Take these
metric components as holomorphic coordinates of a Calabi-Yau 6-fold, X = g. The
copy of the metric coordinates models the anti-holomorphic coordinates, ¯X. The set
of points generated by the 3-manifold’s metrics then span a locus of points in the
Calabi-Yau 6-fold, possibly the entire holomorphic half of the 6-fold. The curvature
of the metric on the space of g on a T 3/Γ has curvature zero, and the blow up is
found by a diﬀeomorphism eﬀectively which does not change the curvature condition.
Several patches are required to avoid unphysical singularities, with zero curvature
(one reason is by self-consistency as the space is homeomorphic to a T 3/Γ). The
embedding is chosen by using the full metric (periodic) basis of the 3-manifold. In
the case of manifolds with higher homotopy, the singularity of the 3 manifold is placed
at the center of one of the CY 2-spheres in order to coincide with the orbifold limit
of S3/Γ, i.e. all the 2-spheres line up.

The curvature condition of the individual Calabi-Yau manifolds is R = 0. How-
ever, since the coordinates of these manifolds are the metric, the translation of this
curvature into the 3-manifold’s curvature is complicated,

R(y) = Λ(y) ,

(1)

with Λ(y) a non-negative function. This can be seen to be non-negative after the fact
of taking the orbifold limit of the Calabi-Yau. A diﬀeomorpism of the 3-manifold is
required to map the non-negative curvature into the form Λ(y), together with the
appropriate choice of the Calabi-Yau 6-fold.

The Calabi-Yau manifolds have orbifold limits of the form, M6 → T 12/Zp, holo-
morphically. As the metric components g of the 3-manifold are the coordinates of
the Calabi-Yau, in the smooth orbifold limit they span a locus of coordinates of the

2

T 12/Zp. The toriodal limit produces the individual curvatures of the metric compo-
nents as if they were on circles, and they follow as coordinates on Z(y) = Z(y + 2πR).

The constant circle curvatures of these deformed metric components model that
of a 3-manifold with constant curvature in all directions in the metric components.
The question is how this is related to a 3-sphere. The holomorphic space parametrized
by such metric components X = g has the topology of a T 3/Zq, with zero curvature,
but with constant curvature which is non-vanishing along the circles. This has the
same topology as a 3-sphere. Furthermore, the homotopy of the original 3-manifold
is trivial, this requires the coordinates resulting from metric components, to be also
trivial.

The original curvature condition of the 3-manifold follows from (1). A diﬀeomor-
phism of the 3 manifold can change this non-negative curvature into other functions
˜Λ(y). Or rather in the converse, what is required is to change the original 3-manifold’s
curvature into the form of (1). This curvature condition depends on the speciﬁc
Calabi-Yau, in ﬁnding the conditions R6 = 0 and R3(y) = Λ(y).

Thus holomorphically embedding the components of the 3-manifold into the 6-
fold, together with the known smooth degenerations of the latter, generate the home-
omorphisms of the former into the 3-spheres. The proof can also be run backwards,
by starting with a 3-sphere and blowing it up into the Calabi-Yau, after including its
anti-holomorphic half.

The same argument goes through for higher dimensional simply connected man-
ifolds. Furthermore, the argument seems to show how Thurston’s conjecture holds,
for non-simply connected 3-manifolds and S3/Γ.

Gordon Chalmers thanks Albert Whitehead of the Royal Theological Society of

Newark.

3

References

(1982), 357-453.

[1] M.H. Freedman, The topology of four-dimensional manifolds, J. Diﬀ. Geom 17

[2] S. Smale, Generalized Poincare’s conjecture in dimensions greater than four,
Annals. Math. 74 (1961) 391-406; Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 66 (1960) 373-375.

4

