6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TAUP 2831-06

School of Physics and Astronomy

Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

Special Relativity is

an Excellent Theory

E. Comay∗

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv 69978

Israel

PACS No: 03.30.+p, 03.50.De

Abstract:

Criteria for deﬁning errors of a physical theory are formulated.

It is

shown that the Special Theory of Relativity (STR) has a solid mathematical

basis. An enormous amount of experiments carried out in particle physics use

beams of particles having a very high energy. The data of these experiments

are consistent with STR and support our conﬁdence that STR is an excellent

theory. Several speciﬁc cases of this issue are discussed explicitly. Contrary to

a common belief, it is proved that the contemporary mainstream of physicists

adhere to some theoretical ideas that violate STR.

1

1. Introduction

The validity of physical theories should be tested time and again. Such

a practice enables the increase of our conﬁdence in good theories and the

removal of erroneous ones.

In order to carry out this task, one needs to

deﬁne the structure of physical theories and their interrelations. Criteria for

errors in physical theories can be created on this basis. This work presents

the fundamental elements of the Special Theory of Relativity (STR) and

explains why it should be regarded as a self-consistent and excellent theory.

STR is used in classical physics and in quantum physics as well. The main

part of the discussion carried out in this work is restricted to the validity

domain of classical physics.

The second Section discusses the general structure of physical theories

and deﬁnes criteria for a rejection of a theory because of its erroneous prop-

erties. The third Section presents fundamental elements of STR pertaining

to mechanics and to electrodynamics. The fourth Section examines some

peculiar (and counterintuitive) predictions of STR and shows that these pre-

dictions are consistent with experimental data. Several examples proving

that some widely accepted contemporary physical theories are inconsistent

with STR, are discussed in the ﬁfth Section. The last Section contains con-

cluding remarks.

In this work, Greek indices run from 0 to 3 and Latin indices run from 1

to 3. Units where ¯h = c = 1 are used. In this unit system, the celebrated

relativistic formula E = mc2 reduces to E = m. For these reasons, the

symbol c is removed in many cases and the symbol m denotes not the dynamic

mass but the particle’s mass in its instantaneous rest frame. The relativistic

factor γ = (1 − v2)−1/2. The symbol ,µ denotes the partial diﬀerentiation

2

with respect to xµ.

2. The Structure of Physical Theories

A physical theory resembles a mathematical theory. Both rely on a set of

axioms and employ a deductive procedure for yielding theorems, corollaries,

etc. The set of axioms and their results are regarded as elements of the

structure of the theory. However, unlike a mathematical theory, a physical

theory is required to explain existing experimental data and to predict results

of new experiments.

This distinction between a mathematical theory and a physical theory

has several aspects. First, experiments generally do not yield precise values

but contain estimates of the associated errors. (Some quantum mechanical

data, like spin, are the exception.) It follows that in many cases, a certain

numerical diﬀerence between theoretical predictions and experimental data

is quite acceptable.

Next, one does not expect that a physical theory should explain every

phenomenon. For example, it is well known that physical theories yield very

good predictions for the motion of planets around the sun. On the other

hand, nobody expects that a physical theory be able to predict the speciﬁc

motion of an eagle ﬂying in the sky. This simple example proves that the

validity of a physical theory should be evaluated only with respect to a limited

set of experiments. The set of experiments which are relevant to a physical

theory is called its domain of validity. (A good discussion of this issue can

be found in [1], pp. 1-6.)

Relations between two physical theories can be deduced from an exami-

3

nation of their domain of validity. In particular, let DA and DB denote the

domains of validity of theories A and B, respectively. Now, if DA is a subset

of DB then one ﬁnds that the rank of theory B is higher than that of theory

A (see [1], pp. 3-6). Hence, theory B is regarded as a theory having a more

profound status. However, theory A is not “wrong”, because it yields good

predictions for experiments belonging to its own (smaller) domain of valid-

ity. Generally, theory A takes a simpler mathematical form. Hence, wherever

possible, it is used in actual calculations. Moreover, since theory A is good

in its validity domain DA and DA is a part of DB then one ﬁnds that theory

A imposes constraints on theory B, in spite of the fact that B’s rank is higher

than A’s rank. This self-evident relation between lower rank and higher rank

theories is called here “restrictions imposed by a lower rank theory.” Thus,

for example, although Newtonian mechanics is good only for cases where

the velocity v satisﬁes v/c → 0, relativistic mechanics should yield formulas

which agree with corresponding formulas of Newtonian mechanics, provided

v is small enough. As is very well known, STR satisﬁes this requirement.

Having these ideas in mind, a theoretical error is regarded here as a math-

ematical part of a theory that yields predictions which are clearly inconsistent

with experimental results, where the latter are carried out within the the-

ory’s validity domain. The direct meaning of this deﬁnition is obvious. It has,

however, an indirect aspect too. Assume that a given theory has a certain

part, P , which is regarded as well established. Thus, let Q denote another

set of axioms and formulas which hold in (at least a part of) P ’s domain of

validity. Now, assume that Q yields predictions that are inconsistent with

those of P and the inconsistency holds in the common part of their domains

of validity. In such a case, Q is regarded as a theoretical error. (Note that,

as explained above, P may belong to a lower rank theory.) An error in the

4

latter sense is analogous to an error in mathematics, where two elements of

a theory are inconsistent with each other.

There are other aspects of a physical theory which have a certain value

but are not well deﬁned. These may be described as neatness, simplicity

and physical acceptability of the theory. A general rule considers theory C

as simpler (or neater) than theory D if theory C relies on a smaller number

of axioms. These properties of a physical theory are relevant to a theory

whose status is still undetermined because there is a lack of experimental

data required for its acceptance or rejection.

The notions of neatness, simplicity and physical acceptability have a sub-

jective nature and so it is unclear how disagreements based on them can be

settled. In particular, one should note that ideas concerning physical accept-

ability changed dramatically during the 20th century. Thus, a 19th century

physicist would have regarded many well established elements of contempo-

rary physics as unphysical. An incomplete list of such elements contains the

relativity of length and time intervals, the non-Euclidean structure of space-

time, the corpuscular-wave nature of pointlike particles, parity violation and

the nonlocal nature of quantum mechanics (which is manifested by the EPR

eﬀect).

For these reasons neatness, simplicity and physical acceptability of a the-

ory have a secondary value. Thus, if there is no further evidence, then these

aspects should not be used for taking a ﬁnal decision concerning the accept-

ability of a physical theory.

Before concluding these introductory remarks, it should be stated that

the erroneous nature of a physical theory E cannot be established merely by

showing the existence of a diﬀerent (or even a contradictory) theory F . This

point is obvious. Indeed, if such a situation exists then one may conclude

5

that either of the following relations holds: the two theories agree/disagree

on predictions of experimental results belonging to a common domain of

validity. If the theories agree on all predictions of experimental results then

they are just two diﬀerent mathematical formulations of the same theory.

(The Heisenberg and the Schroedinger pictures of quantum mechanics are

an example of this case.) If the theories disagree then (at least) theory E

or theory F is wrong. However, assuming that neither E nor F relies on a

mathematical error, then one cannot decide on the issue without having an

adequate amount of experimental data.

Another issue is the usage of models and phenomenological formulas. This

approach is very common in cases where there is no established theory or

where theoretical formulas are too complicated. A model is evaluated by its

usefulness and not by its theoretical correctness. Hence, models apparently

do not belong to the subject of this compilation of Articles.

3. The Mathematical Structure of the Special Theory of Rela-

tivity

Within the scope of this work, one certainly cannot write a comprehensive

presentation of STR. As a matter of fact, there is no need for doing that, be-

cause there are many good textbooks on this subject. References [2,3] as well

as many other textbooks may be used by readers who are still unacquainted

with STR. Hence, fundamental elements of the mathematical structure of

STR are presented here without a thorough pedagogical explanation.

STR is based on 2 postulates:

1. The laws of mechanics and of electrodynamics take the same form in

6

all inertial frames.

2. The speed of light in vacuum takes the same value c in all inertial

frames (and it is independent of the velocity of the source).

The theory derived from these postulates can be formulated by using ten-

sor calculus within Minkowski space of 4 dimensions. Three equivalent forms

of this space can be found in the literature. In these forms the metric tensor

(denoted by gµν) is diagonal and contains the numbers ±1. The signature of

the three forms takes the values 4, 2 and −2, respectively. In the signature

4, the metric is the unit tensor and calculations use complex numbers. The

metric used here is (1,-1,-1,-1). Apparently, this is the most popular metric

used by modern textbooks.

The diﬀerential of the interval ds is obtained from ds2 = dt2−dx2. Lorentz

transformations are second rank tensors Lµ

ν that conserve the length of the

interval. They are used for transforming quantities from one inertial frame

to another. Lorentz transformations form a group. A subgroup of this group

is the group of rotations in the ordinary 3-dimensional space. The Poincare

group is the group that contains the Lorentz group and the group of space-

time translations.

There are some important physical quantities which are invariant under

Lorentz transformations (these invariants are also called Lorentz scalars).

These invariants are the interval; the following relation of energy and mo-

mentum components of a closed system E2 − P 2; B2 − E2 and E · B of the

electromagnetic ﬁelds. The electric charge is a Lorentz scalar too.

Some other physical quantities are entries of ﬁrst rank tensors (also called

4-vectors). Thus, space-time coordinates are entries of a 4-vector denoted by

xµ. For coordinates of the path of a moving massive particle, the square of

the interval ds2 = dt2 − dx2 > 0. Hence, the 4-velocity of a massive particle

7

vµ ≡ dxµ/ds = γ(1, v) is a well deﬁned 4-vector. Similarly, the 4-acceleration

is deﬁned as follows aµ ≡ dvµ/ds. Energy and momentum of a closed system

are entries of the 4-vector P µ ≡ (E, P). The scalar and vector potentials

of electrodynamics are entries of the 4-vector Aµ ≡ (Φ, A). The 4-current

is another 4-vector. Here jµ ≡ (ρ, ρv), where ρ denotes charge density.

This 4-current satisﬁes the continuity equation jµ

,µ = 0, which proves charge

conservation. The 4-current can be written in a diﬀerent notation, where ρ

denotes probability density and all entries of the 4-vector are multiplied by

the electric charge e. An analogous 4-vector is the mass current where the

rest mass m (which is a Lorentz scalar!) replaces the electric charge.

Electromagnetic ﬁelds are components of a second rank antisymmetric

tensor which is the 4-curl of Aµ. Thus Fµν ≡ Aν,µ − Aµ,ν. Energy and

momentum densities as well as energy and momentum currents are entries

of a second rank symmetric tensor T µν. This tensor is called the energy-

momentum tensor (or the stress energy tensor). Thus, T 00 is the energy

density and T i0 are densities of momentum components.

The density of angular momentum components are entries of a third rank

tensor Sλµν ≡ xλT µν − xµT λν.

It is interesting to note that Maxwellian electrodynamics predicts the exis-

tence of transverse electromagnetic waves that satisfy the following equation

∂2E
∂t2 − ∇2E = 0

(1)

and a similar equation for the components of the magnetic ﬁeld.

In the

vacuum, these waves travel in the speed of light. Moreover, since Maxwell’s

wave equation is independent of quantities of the inertial frame where the

ﬁelds are measured (and of the velocity of the source of the ﬁelds as well), one

concludes that Maxwellian ﬁelds travel in the speed of light c in all frames.

This conclusion agrees completely with postulate 2 of STR.

8

The mathematical structure of Minkowski space is known to be self-

consistent. Moreover, as stated above, STR agrees with Newtonian me-

chanics in cases where v/c → 0. Thus, the mathematical aspect of STR is

ﬂawless and its validity should be examined by means of a comparison of its

predictions with well established experimental data.

4. Experimental Data and Special Relativity

As explained in Section 2, the acceptability of STR should be examined

within its validity domain. Thus experiments where eﬀects of gravitational

ﬁeld or of noninertial frames can be ignored are examined. Hence, terrestrial

experiments of strong, electromagnetic and weak interactions belong to the

validity domain of STR. This section discusses several results of STR, some

of which may look strange to everybody who follows his intuition (which has

been developed on the basis of life experience in a macroscopic world and

where v/c ≪ 1).

1. It is proved in STR that the speed of light is an upper bound for the

velocity of massive particles v < c. This property is veriﬁed in many

experiments. Take for example the CERN’s LEP accelerator where

beams of electrons and positrons are accelerated to a very high kinetic

energy. The beams collide and their center of mass energy exceeds

200 GeV [4]. Thus, electrons and positrons of the beams have kinetic

energy which is more than 200000 times mc2. In spite of this gigantic

kinetic energy, particles do not move faster than light.

Another kind of information are the neutrinos measured from the 1987A

supernova. This supernova exploded about 164000 years ago (data

9

taken from the Internet site of Wikipedia). Thus the number of seconds

elapsed is about 5 · 1012. On earth, the neutrino burst lasted about 13

seconds. A variation in the energy of these neutrinos is expected to

hold, due to Doppler shift and other reasons. According to recent

experimental measurements, neutrinos are massive particles (see [5],

pp. 451-467). Therefore, one may conclude that the variation in speed

of these very high energy particles is less than 10−11 of their mean

speed. This conclusion is consistent with STR. Indeed, in STR the

speed of all very high energy massive particles is c(1 − ε), where ε is a

very small positive number.

2. The equivalence of mass and energy is another result of STR. This

conclusion is seen in many experiments of particle physics. Thus, the

positronium is a bound state of an electron and a positron. These par-

ticles annihilate each other and two or three photons are emitted. Pho-

tons are massless particles found in electromagnetic radiation. Hence,

they are a form of energy (which can be converted into heat, etc.).

Similarly, the particle π0 disintegrates into 2 photons. Another ex-

perimental example of the equivalence of mass and energy is the heat

released from a ﬁssion of heavy nuclei like 235U and 239P u. Here the

sum of the masses of the nuclei produced by ﬁssion is smaller than that

of the original nucleus. The diﬀerence between the masses appears as

a kinetic energy which is eventually converted into heat.

Processes taking the opposite direction are seen too. Thus, photons

having energy greater than 1 MeV are absorbed by matter in a process

called pair production, where an electron and a positron are created [6].

In higher energy processes, meson production [7] (namely a ¯qq bound

state) is observed. In even higher energy, a pair of proton-antiproton

10

are produced [8].

3. The Lorentz contraction of length is another result of STR. Thus, a rod

of length l looks shorter, if it is measured in an inertial frame Σ where

it moves in a direction which is not perpendicular to its length. Lorentz

contraction is seen in an examination of µ mesons having a very high

energy. The half-life time of these particles is about 2.2 · 10−6 seconds.

This time interval should be measured in the particle’s rest frame Σ′.

Hence, if Lorentz contraction does not hold, then after moving 4000

meters, their number should be about 1.5% of their original number.

After passing 10000 meters, the number should be less than 10−4 of

the original number. Now, many µ mesons are produced at the upper

part of the atmosphere as a result of interactions initiated by a very

energetic cosmic ray and a considerable part of these particles reach sea

level. This eﬀect is explained by measuring the time (and the half-life

time) in the particle’s rest frame Σ′ and by the Lorentz contraction of

the distance between the upper part of the atmosphere and sea level,

which holds in Σ′.

This eﬀect can also be seen in a µ meson machine where processes

are under control [9]. Here high energy µ mesons move in a storage

ring. Lorentz contraction of length in the µ meson’s instantaneous rest

frame is seen as a time dilation in the laboratory frame. Thus, in this

speciﬁc case, the time dilation factor is about 30. This outcome is a

very convincing argument supporting the Lorentz contraction of length.

4. Landau and Lifshitz use STR and prove that an elementary classical

particle must be pointlike (see [2], pp. 43-44). This result is supported

by quantum mechanics and by quantum ﬁeld theory. Indeed, in these

11

theories the wave function/ﬁeld function ψ(xµ) depends on a single set

of space-time coordinates xµ. Hence, these functions describe point-

like particles. Experimental results of the elementary Dirac particles:

electrons, µ mesons and u, d quarks are consistent with this prop-

erty. This conclusion is inferred from the experimental support of the

Bjorken scaling in very high energy scattering [10].

The foregoing examples show several kinds of experimental data, all of

which are predicted by STR. In addition to these examples, it can also be

stated that an enormous number of experiments in high energy physics have

been carried out during the last 50 years. These experiments are designed,

constructed and analyzed in accordance with the laws of STR. Therefore,

beside yielding speciﬁc results, these experiments provide a solid basis for

our conﬁdence that STR is an excellent theory.

5. Violations of the Special Theory of Relativity by Contempo-

rary Theoretical Ideas

This Section shows three examples where theoretical ideas adopted by

the mainstream of contemporary physics are inconsistent with STR.

1. The data of high energy photons interacting with nucleons show that

in this case, protons and neutrons are very much alike [7]. These data

cannot be explained by an analysis of the photon interaction with the

electric charge of nucleon constituents. Thus, an idea called Vector

Meson Dominance (VMD) has been suggested for this purpose.

The main point of VMD is that the wave function of an energetic

12

photon takes the form

| γ > = c0 | γ0 > +ch | h >

(2)

where | γ > denotes the wave function of a physical photon, | γ0 >

denotes the pure electromagnetic component of a physical photon and

| h > denotes its hypothetical hadronic component.

c0 and ch are

appropriate numerical coeﬃcients whose values depend on the photon’s

energy [7,11]. Thus, for soft photons ch = 0 whereas it begins to take

a nonvanishing value for photons whose energy is not much less then

the ρ meson’s mass.

The fact that the Standard Model has no other explanation for the

hard photon-nucleon interaction is probably the reason for the survival

of VMD. An analysis published recently proves that VMD is inconsis-

tent with many well established elements of physical theories [12]. In

particular, VMD is inconsistent with Wigner’s analysis of the Poincare

group [13,14]. This outcome proves that VMD violates STR.

This conclusion can also be proved by the following speciﬁc example.

Consider the experiment described in ﬁgure 1. In the laboratory frame

Σ of ﬁg. 1, the optical photons of the rays do not interact. Thus, neither

energy nor momentum are exchanged between the rays. Therefore,

after passing through O, the photons travel in their original direction.

Let us examine the situation in a frame Σ′.

In Σ, frame Σ′ is seen

moving very fast in the negative direction of the Y axis. Thus, in Σ′,

photons of the two rays are very energetic. Hence, if VMD holds then

photons of both rays contain hadrons and should exchange energy and

momentum at point O. This is a contradiction because if the rays do

not exchange energy and momentum in frame Σ then they obviously do

13

Figure 1: Two rays of light are emitted from sources S1 and S2
which are located at x = ±1, respectively. The rays intersect at
point O which is embedded in the (x, y) plane.
(This ﬁgure is
published in [12] and is used here with permission.)

not do that in any other frame of reference. Thus, this simple example

proves that VMD violates STR.

2. The Yukawa interaction is derived from the interaction term of a Dirac

spinor ψ(xµ) with a Klein-Gordon (KG) particle φ(xµ) (see [15], p.79

and [16], p. 135)

LY ukawa = LDirac + LKG − g ¯ψψφ.

(3)

Here the KG particle plays a role which is analogous to that of the pho-

ton in electrodynamics. The following argument proves that a Lorentz

scalar (like the KG particle) cannot be used as a basis for a ﬁeld of

force.

Consider the following Lorentz scalar vµvµ. As a scalar, it takes a ﬁxed

value in all inertial frames. (In the units used here its value is unity.)

Diﬀerentiating this expression with respect to the interval, one ﬁnds

d(vµvµ)
ds

= 2vµaµ = 0.

14

(4)

This relation means that in STR the 4-velocity is orthogonal to the

4-acceleration.

Let an elementary classical particle W move in a ﬁeld of force. The ﬁeld

quantities are independent of the 4-velocity of W but the associated 4-

force must be orthogonal to it. In electrodynamics this goal is attained

by means of the Lorentz force. In this case, one ﬁnds

aµvµ =

F µνvνvµ = 0,

e
m

(5)

where the null result is obtained from the antisymmetry of F µν and the

symmetry of the product vµvν. In electrodynamics, the antisymmetric

ﬁeld tensor F µν is constructed as the 4-curl of the 4-potential Aµ. Such

a ﬁeld of force cannot be obtained from the scalar KG ﬁeld. Now, the

notion of force holds in classical physics. Hence, the classical limit of

the Yukawa interaction is inconsistent with STR.

3. Following historical ideas, π mesons are regarded as KG particles (see

[15], pp. 79, 122). This is certainly wrong because it has recently

been proved that the KG equation is inconsistent with well established

physical theories [17,18]. This conclusion is in accordance with Dirac’s

negative opinion on the KG equation [19,20].

This matter has also an indirect aspect pertaining to STR. Indeed, as

shown in point 4 of Section 4, STR proves that a truly elementary

classical particle should be pointlike. This result is also obtained from

the quantum mechanical wave function Ψ(xµ) which depends on a single

set of space-time coordinates. Now, the KG equation, is supposed to

be a quantum mechanical equation. As such, it must describe pointlike

particles. On the other hand, it is now recognized that π mesons are

not pointlike and that their size is not much smaller than the size of

15

the proton (see [5], pp. 499, 854.). Therefore the usage of π mesons as

KG particles violates STR indirectly.

6. Concluding Remarks

The notion of a theoretical error is deﬁned. It is explained that STR has

a solid mathematical basis. The fact that its formulas agree with Newtonian

mechanics in cases where v/c → 0 proves that it satisﬁes restrictions imposed

by a lower rank theory. Next, it is shown that some peculiar predictions

of STR are conﬁrmed by experiments. The predictions discussed here are

the relation v < c where v denotes the velocity of a massive particle; the

equivalence of mass and energy; the Lorentz contraction; and the pointlike

nature of elementary particles. The enormous number of experiments carried

out in particle physics use particles whose velocity is in the relativistic domain

where 0 < 1 − v/c ≪ 1. The design, construction and analysis of these

experiments abide by the laws of STR. The data obtained are compatible

with STR and provide a solid basis for our conﬁdence that STR is an excellent

theory.

The discussion carried out above concetrates on phenomena belonging to

classical physics. It should be noted that the Dirac equation is a relativistic

quantum mechanical equation. It predicts correctly the spin of the electron

and the existence of antiparticles. It yields very good predictions for the en-

ergy levels of the hydrogen atom and for the electron’s g-factor. Corrections

to these values are obtained from quantum ﬁeld theory, which is a higher

relativistic theory.

It is also proved that, contrary to a common belief, some theoretical ideas,

16

adopted by the mainstream of contemporary physicists, violate STR. These

ideas are VMD, the Yukawa theory of a ﬁeld of force carried by a scalar

meson and the idea that π mesons are Klein-Gordon particles.

17

References:

* Email: elic@tauphy.tau.ac.il

Internet site: http://www-nuclear.tau.ac.il/∼elic

[1] F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles, (Addison-wesley, Reading Mass,

1965).

amon, Oxford, 1975).

[2] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (Perg-

[3] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley, New York,1975).

[4] K. Hubner, Phys. Rep., 403, 177 (2004).

[5] S. Eidelman et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Lett. B592, 1 (2004).

[6] K. S. Krane, Introductory Nuclear Physics (John Wiley, New York,

1988). p. 201.

Phys. 50, 261 (1978).

[7] T. H. Bauer, R. D. Spital, D. R. Yennie and F. M. Pipkin, Rev. Mod.

[8] P. Achard et al., Phys. Lett., B571, 11 (2003).

[9] R. M. Carey et al,, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 1632 (1999)

[10] D. H. Perkins, Introduction to High Energy Physics (Addison-Wesley,

Menlo Park, CA, 1987). Pp 272-273.

[11] H. Frauenfelder and E. M. Henley, Subatomic Physics, (Prentice Hall,

Englewood Cliﬀs, 1991). pp. 296-304.

[12] E. Comay, Apeiron 10, no. 2, 87 (2003).

[13] E. P. Wigner, Annals of Math., 40, 149 (1939).

18

[14] S. S. Schweber, An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field Theory,

(Harper & Row, New York, 1964). pp. 44-53.

[15] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field

Theory (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995).

[16] G. Sterman An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (University

Press, Cambridge, 1993).

[17] E. Comay, Apeiron, 11, No. 3, 1 (2004).

[18] E. Comay, Apeiron 12, no. 1, 27 (2005).

[19] P. A. M. Dirac, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory Ed. A.

R. Marlow (Academic, New York, 1978). (See pp. 3,4).

[20] S. Weinberg The Quantum Theory of Fields (Cambridge, University

Press, 1995). Vol. 1, pp. 3-8

19

