6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The quantum character of physical ﬁelds.
Foundations of ﬁeld theories
L.I. Petrova
Moscow State University, Russia, e-mail: ptr@cs.msu.su

Abstract

The existing ﬁeld theories are based on the properties of closed exterior
forms, which are invariant ones and correspond to conservation laws for
physical ﬁelds. Hence, to understand the foundations of ﬁeld theories and
their unity, one has to know how such closed exterior forms are obtained.
In the present paper it is shown that closed exterior forms correspond-
ing to ﬁeld theories are obtained from the equations modelling conserva-
tion (balance) laws for material media. It has been developed the evo-
lutionary method that enables one to describe the process of obtaining
closed exterior forms.

The process of obtaining closed exterior forms discloses the mechanism
of evolutionary processes in material media and shows that material media
generate, discretely, the physical structures, from which the physical ﬁelds
are formed. This justiﬁes the quantum character of ﬁeld theories.

On the other hand, this process demonstrates the connection between
ﬁeld theories and the equations for material media and points to the fact
that the foundations of ﬁeld theories must be conditioned by the properties
of material media. It is shown that the external and internal symmetries
of ﬁeld theories are conditioned by the degrees of freedom of material
media. The classiﬁcation parameter of physical ﬁelds and interactions,
that is, the parameter of the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, is connected with the
number of noncommutative balance conservation laws for material media.

Introduction
Originally, beginning from the 17th century, the physics based on the dif-
ferential equations, which describe physical processes. However, from the 20th
century, the problem of invariant (independent of the choice of the coordinate
system) description of physical phenomena arose. As the result, the formalisms
based on the tensor, group, variational methods, on the theories of symme-
tries, transformations and so on with the basic requirement of invariance were
developed in physics.

This gave rise to building the ﬁeld theories that enable one to describe phys-
ical ﬁelds and their interactions. Such theories were based on the postulates
turned out practically not to be connected with the equations of mathematical
physics, which describe physical processes. Just the absence of such a connec-
tion produced the emergence of the problems in ﬁeld theories that are connected
with investigation of general foundations of existing ﬁeld theories, their unity,
and constructing the general ﬁeld theory.

In present paper it is shown that the connection of ﬁeld theories with the
equations describing physical processes in material media must lie at the basis
of the general ﬁeld theory.

1

The investigation of the foundations of ﬁeld theories has been carried out us-
ing skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms. Skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms, which
deal with diﬀerentials and diﬀerential expressions, can describe a conjugacy of
various operators and objects. This is of principal importance for mathematical
physics and ﬁeld theories since the conjugated objects are invariants.

The properties of existing ﬁeld theories are those of the closed exterior skew-
symmetric diﬀerential forms [1,2], which are conjugated objects and correspond
to conservation laws for physical ﬁelds. The properties of closed exterior forms
explicitly or implicitly manifest themselves essentially in all formalisms of ﬁeld
theory, such as the Hamilton formalism, tensor approaches, group methods,
quantum mechanics equations, the Yang-Mills theory and others. The gauge
transformations (unitary, gradient and so on), the gauge symmetries and the
identical relations of ﬁeld theories are transformations, symmetries and relations
of the theory of closed exterior forms.

Such connection between ﬁeld theories and the theory of closed exterior forms
enables one to understand the properties of ﬁeld theories, which are common
for all existing ﬁeld theories.

However, this does not solve the basic problems of ﬁeld theories. To under-
stand the general foundations of ﬁeld theories and their unity, one must know
how the closed exterior forms connected with ﬁeld theories are obtained.

It is known that the closed exterior forms are obtained from diﬀerential

equations provided the requirements of integrability of these equations [1].

In the present paper it is shown, ﬁrstly, that the equations describing (bal-
ance) conservation laws for material media serve as the diﬀerential equations
from which the closed exterior forms related to ﬁeld theories and corresponding
conservation laws for physical ﬁelds are obtained. And, secondly, it is developed
the method, which is evolutionary one hence this method allows to ﬁnd not
only closed exterior forms, but also to describe the process of obtaining closed
exterior forms.

The process of obtaining closed exterior forms, on one side, demonstrates the
connection between ﬁeld theories and the equations for material media, and, on
other side, discloses the mechanism of evolutionary processes in material media
and shows that material media generate physical ﬁelds. This underlines the fact
that the foundations of ﬁeld theories, namely, the theories describing physical
ﬁelds, must be conditioned by the properties of material media.

It has been possible to carry out the investigation of general foundations
of ﬁeld theories due to the skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms, which, unlike to
the exterior forms, are deﬁned on deforming manifolds and hence they possess
the evolutionary properties. The mathematical apparatus of such forms in-
cludes some nontraditional elements such as nonidentical relations and degener-
ate transformation, and this enables one to describe the evolutionary processes,
discrete transitions, quantum jumps, and generation of various structures.

In the ﬁrst section the general properties of ﬁeld theories are investigated
with the help of closed exterior forms. In the next section the analysis of the
equations of the balance conservation laws for material media, which describe

2

the state of material system and the mechanism of generating physical struc-
tures forming physical ﬁelds.
In the last section the general foundations of
ﬁeld theories obtained from the analysis of the equations for material media are
discussed.

1 Connection of ﬁeld theories with the theory

of closed exterior forms

Closed exterior forms and conservation laws.

From the closure condition of the exterior form θp (p-form):

one can see that the closed exterior form θp is a conserved quantity. This means
that this can correspond to a conservation law, namely, to some conservative
quantity. If the form is closed only on pseudostructure, i.e. this form is a closed
inexact one, the closure conditions are written as

dθp = 0

dπθp = 0

dπ

∗θp = 0

where ∗θp is the dual form.

Condition (1.3), i.e. the closure condition for dual form, speciﬁes the pseu-
dostructure π. {Cohomology, sections of cotangent bundles, the eikonal surfaces,
potential surfaces, pseudo-Riemannian and pseudo-Euclidean spaces, and oth-
ers are examples of the pseudostructures and manifolds that are made up by
pseudostructures.}

From conditions (1.2) and (1.3) one can see the following. The dual form
(pseudostructure) and closed inexact form (conservative quantity) made up a
conjugated conservative object that can also correspond to some conservation
law. The conservation laws, to which physical ﬁelds are subject, are just such
conservation laws.

The conservative object made up by the closed inexact exterior form and cor-
responding dual form is a diﬀerential-geometrical structure. (Such diﬀerential-
geometrical structures are examples of G-structures.) The physical structures,
which made up physical ﬁelds, and corresponding conservation laws are such
diﬀerential-geometrical structures,

Properties of closed exterior diﬀerential forms

Invariance. Qauge transformations. It is known that the closed exact form
is the diﬀerential of the form of lower degree:

(1.1)

(1.2)

(1.3)

(1.4)

θp = dθp−1

3

Closed inexact form is also a diﬀerential, and yet not total but interior on
pseudostructure

π = dπθp−1
θp
Since the closed form is a diﬀerential (a total one if the form is exact, or an
interior one on the pseudostructure if the form is inexact), it is obvious that the
closed form turns out to be invariant under all transformations that conserve
the diﬀerential. The unitary transformations, the tangent, the canonical, the
gradient transformations and so on are examples of such transformations. These
are gauge transformations of ﬁeld theories.

(1.5)

With the invariance of closed forms it is connected the covariance of relevant

dual forms.

Conjugacy. Duality. Symmetries. The closure of exterior diﬀerential
forms is the result of conjugating the elements of exterior or dual forms. The
closure property of the exterior form means that any objects, namely, the ele-
ments of exterior form, the components of elements, the elements of the form
diﬀerential, the exterior and dual forms, the forms of sequential degrees and
others, turn out to be conjugated.

With the conjugacy it is connected the duality.
The example of a duality having physical sense: the closed exterior form is
a conservative quantity corresponding to conservation law, and the closed form
(as the diﬀerential) can correspond to a certain potential force.

The conjugacy is possible if there is one or another type of symmetry.
The gauge symmetries, which are interior symmetries of ﬁeld theory and with
which gauge transformations are connected, are symmetries of closed exterior
diﬀerential forms. Symmetries of closed dual forms are exterior symmetries of
the equations of ﬁeld theory.

Identical relations of exterior forms. Since the conjugacy is a certain
connection between two operators or mathematical objects, it is evident that,
to express the conjugacy mathematically, it can be used relations. These are
identical relations.

The identical relations express the fact that each closed exterior form is the
diﬀerential of some exterior form (with the degree less by one). In general form
such an identical relation can be written as

dπϕ = θp
π

(1.6)

In this relation the form in the right-hand side has to be a closed one.
Identical relations of exterior diﬀerential forms are a mathematical expres-

sion of various types of conjugacy that leads to closed exterior forms.

Such relations like the Poincare invariant, vector and tensor identical rela-
tions, the Cauchi-Riemann conditions, canonical relations, the integral relations
by Stokes or Gauss-Ostrogradskii, the thermodynamic relations, the eikonal re-
lations, and so on are examples of identical relations of closed exterior forms
that have either the form of relation (1.6) or its diﬀerential or integral analogs.

4

The analysis of the properties of ﬁeld theories using closed
exterior forms.

One can see that the properties of closed exterior diﬀerential forms correspond
to the properties of ﬁeld theories. Hence, the mathematical principles of the
theory of closed exterior diﬀerential forms made up the basis of ﬁeld theories
that is common for all existing ﬁeld theories. (It should be emphasized that the
ﬁeld theories are connected with the properties of inexact closed exterior forms.)
The connection between ﬁeld theories and the theory of closed exterior forms
is primary explained by the fact that the closure conditions of exterior and
dual forms correspond to conservation laws to which physical ﬁelds are sub-
ject. It is known that the conservation laws for physical ﬁelds are those that
state an existence of conservative physical quantities or objects. The physical
structures, which made up physical ﬁelds, and corresponding conservation laws
are diﬀerential-geometrical structures formed by closed exterior forms and dual
ones. [Below, using the evolutionary forms it will be shown that such physical
structures arise in material media discretely.]

The properties of closed exterior and dual forms, namely, invariance, covari-
ance, conjugacy, and duality, lie at the basis of the group, structural and other
invariant methods of ﬁeld theories.

The nondegenerate transformations of ﬁeld theory are transformations of
closed exterior forms. These are gauge transformations for spinor, scalar, vector,
and tensor ﬁelds, which are transformations of closed (0-form), (1-form), (2-
form) and (3-form) respectively.

The gauge, i.e.

internal, symmetries of the ﬁeld theory equations (corre-
sponding to the gauge transformations) are those of closed exterior forms. The
external symmetries of the equations of ﬁeld theory are symmetries of closed
dual forms.

The basis of ﬁeld theory operators is connected with the nondegenerate
If, in addition to the exterior
transformations of exterior diﬀerential forms.
diﬀerential, we introduce the following operators: (1) δ for transformations
that convert the form of (p + 1) degree into the form of p degree, (2) δ′ for
cotangent transformations, (3) ∆ for the dδ − δd transformation, (4) ∆′ for
the dδ′ − δ′d transformation, one can write down the operators in the ﬁeld
theory equations in terms of these operators that act on the exterior diﬀerential
forms. The operator δ corresponds to Green’s operator, δ′ does to the canonical
transformation operator, ∆ does to the d’Alembert operator in 4-dimensional
space, and ∆′ corresponds to the Laplace operator.

It can be shown that the equations of existing ﬁeld theories are those ob-
tained on the basis of the properties of the exterior form theory. The Hamil-
ton formalism is based on the properties of closed exterior form of the ﬁrst
degree and corresponding dual form. The closed exterior diﬀerential form
ds = −Hdt + pjdqj (the Poincare invariant) corresponds to the ﬁeld equation
related to the Hamilton system. The Schr˝odinger equation in quantum mechan-
ics is an analog to ﬁeld equation, where the conjugated coordinates are changed
by operators. It is evident that the closed exterior form of zero degree (and dual

5

form) correspond to quantum mechanics. Dirac’s bra- and cket- vectors consti-
tute a closed exterior form of zero degree [3]. The properties of closed exterior
form of the second degree (and dual form) lie at the basis of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld equations. The Maxwell equations may be written as [4] dθ2 = 0, d∗θ2 = 0,
where θ2 = 1
2 Fµν dxµdxν (here Fµν is the strength tensor). Closed exterior and
dual forms of the third degree correspond to the gravitational ﬁeld. (However,
to the physical ﬁeld of given type it can be assigned closed forms of less degree.
In particular, to the Einstein equation [5] for gravitational ﬁeld it is assigned
the ﬁrst degree closed form, although it was pointed out that the type of a ﬁeld
with the third degree closed form corresponds to the gravitational ﬁeld.)

One can recognize that the gauge transformations as well as the symmetries
and equations of ﬁeld theories are connected with closed exterior forms of given
degree. This enables one to introduce a classiﬁcation of physical ﬁelds and in-
teractions according to the degree of closed exterior form. (If denote the degree
of corresponding closed exterior forms by k, the case k = 0 will correspond to
strong interaction, k = 1 will correspond to weak interaction, k = 2 will corre-
spond to electromagnetic interaction, and k = 3 will correspond to gravitational
interaction.) This shows that there exists a commonness between ﬁeld theories
describing physical ﬁelds of diﬀerent types. The degree of closed exterior forms
is a parameter that integrates ﬁelds theories into uniﬁed ﬁeld theory.

Thus one can see that existing invariant ﬁeld theories are based on the
properties of closed exterior forms. And such a connection also discloses the
problems of existing invariant ﬁeld theories.

There are no answer to the question of how closed inexact exterior forms,
which correspond to physical structures and reﬂect the properties of conserva-
tion laws and on which properties ﬁeld theories are based, are obtained.

Below we will show that the answer to these question may be obtained
from the analysis of diﬀerential equations describing the conservation laws for
material media. These are just the equations from which the closed exterior
forms whose properties correspond to ﬁeld theories are obtained.

The evolutionary method of investigating these equations applied in the
present paper enables one to understand how physical ﬁelds are formed and
what must lie at the basis of the general ﬁeld theory.
[The method that enables
one to ﬁnd the closed exterior forms (the invariants) had been proposed by Cartan [1]. The

diﬀerential equations are imposed by the requirement of obeying the closure condition of

exterior form made up by the derivatives of these equations (it is added the requirement
that the external form diﬀerential vanishes), and next one ﬁnds the conditions that these
requirements are satisﬁed (the integrability conditions). This method enables one to ﬁnd
the closed exterior forms (the invariants) that can possess the equation under consideration.

However, for the evolutionary equations of mathematical physics describing physical processes
it is important not only to ﬁnd closed forms, but it is also important to know how these forms
are obtained, in other words, it is important to know how the closure conditions of exterior
forms are realized evolutionary. For this a principally new evolutionary method is necessary.]

6

2 The equations of balance conservation laws for
material system: The evolutionary processes
in material media. Origination of physical
structures

The conservation laws for material media (material media will be considered
as material systems) are the balance conservation laws for energy, linear mo-
mentum, angular momentum, and mass. They are described by diﬀerential
equations [6-8]. [Material system is a variety of elements that have internal structure and
interact to one another. Thermodynamic and gas dynamical systems, systems of charged
particles, cosmic systems, systems of elementary particles and others are examples of material

systems. Examples of elements that constitute the material system are electrons, protons,

neutrons, atoms, ﬂuid particles, cosmic objects and others. The conservation laws for mate-
rial systems are balance ones. These are conservation laws that establish a balance between

the variation of physical quantity of material system and the corresponding external action.]

Nonconjugacy of the balance conservation law equations:
Noncommutativity of the balance conservation laws.

The conservation laws for material systems have a peculiarity, namely, they
are noncommutative ones. To this it points out the analysis of the equations
of the balance conservation laws. (Just the noncommutativity of the balance
conservation laws is a moving force of the evolutionary processes in material
media that lead to generation of physical ﬁelds.)

It turns out that, even without a knowledge of the concrete form of the
equations for balance conservation laws, with the help of skew-symmetric dif-
ferential forms one can see their speciﬁc features. To carry out such an in-
vestigation, in addition to exterior skew-symmetric forms the skew-symmetric
diﬀerential forms, which possesses the evolutionary properties (and for this rea-
son the author named those as ”evolutionary” ones), will be used. These are
skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms, which, unlike to exterior forms, are deﬁned
on deforming manifolds. Such skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms have a spe-
ciﬁc feature, namely, they cannot be closed. The diﬀerential of such form does
not vanish. This diﬀerential includes the metric form diﬀerential of deform-
ing manifold, which is obtained due to diﬀerentiating the basis and is nonzero.
The evolutionary form commutator, in addition to the commutator made up by
the derivatives of the coeﬃcients of the form itself, includes (in contrast to the
commutator of the exterior form) the metric form commutator being nonzero.
(The role of evolutionary forms in mathematical physics and ﬁeld theory is
due to the fact that they, as well as exterior forms, correspond to conservation
laws. However, these conservation laws are those not for physical ﬁelds but for
material media.)

We will analyze the equations that describe the balance conservation laws

for energy and linear momentum.

7

If ﬁrstly to write down these equations in the inertial reference system and
next pass to the accompanying reference system (this system is connected with
the manifold built by the trajectories of the material system elements), in the
accompanying reference system the energy equation will be written in the form

∂ψ
∂ξ1 = A1

Here ψ is the functional specifying the state of material system (the action
functional, entropy or wave function can be regarded as examples of such a
functional), ξ1 is the coordinate along the trajectory, A1 is the quantity that
depends on speciﬁc features of material system and on external (with respect
to local domain made up by the element and its neighborhood) energy actions
onto the system.

In a similar manner, in the accompanying reference system the equation for

linear momentum appears to be reduced to the equation of the form

∂ψ
∂ξν = Aν ,

ν = 2, ...

where ξν are the coordinates in the direction normal to the trajectory, Aν are
the quantities that depend on the speciﬁc features of material system and on
external force actions.

Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2) can be convoluted into the relation

dψ = Aµ dξµ,

(µ = 1, ν)

where dψ is the diﬀerential expression dψ = (∂ψ/∂ξµ)dξµ.

Relation (2.3) can be written as

dψ = ω

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

here ω = Aµ dξµ is the skew-symmetric diﬀerential form of the ﬁrst degree.

Since the balance conservation laws are evolutionary ones, the relation ob-

tained is also an evolutionary relation.

Relation (2.4) was obtained from the equation of the balance conservation
laws for energy and linear momentum. In this relation the form ω is that of
the ﬁrst degree. If the equations of the balance conservation laws for angular
momentum be added to the equations for energy and linear momentum, this
form in the evolutionary relation will be a form of the second degree. And in
combination with the equation of the balance conservation law for mass this
form will be a form of degree 3.

Thus, in general case the evolutionary relation can be written as

dψ = ωp

(2.5)

where the form degree p takes the values p = 0, 1, 2, 3. The evolutionary relation
for p = 0 is similar to that in the diﬀerential forms, and it was obtained from
the interaction of time and energy of material system.

8

It could be noted that the degree p is connected with the number of inter-

acting conservation laws that is equal to (p + 1).

Relation obtained from the equation of the balance conservation laws has a

speciﬁc feature, namely, this relation turns out to be nonidentical.

To justify this we shall analyze relation (2.4). This relation proves to be
nonidentical since the left-hand side of the relation is a diﬀerential, which is a
closed form, but the right-hand side of the relation involves the diﬀerential form
ω, which is unclosed evolutionary form. The metric form commutator of the
manifold, on which the form ω is deﬁned, is nonzero since this manifold is an
accompanying, deforming, manifold. The commutator made up by the deriva-
tives of coeﬃcients Aµ the form ω itself is also nonzero, since the coeﬃcients Aµ
are of diﬀerent nature, that is, some coeﬃcients have been obtained from the
energy equation and depend on the energetic actions, whereas the others have
been obtained from the equation for linear momentum and depend on the force
actions.

In a similar manner one can prove the nonidentity of relation (2.5).

The nonidentity of evolutionary relation means that the balance conserva-
tion law equations are inconsistent (nonconjugated). This reﬂects the properties
of the balance conservation laws that have a governing importance for the evo-
lutionary processes in material media, namely, their noncommutativity.

[The nonidentity of evolutionary relation points to the fact that on the initial manifold
the equations of the balance conservation laws are nonintegrable ones: the derivatives of
these equations do not make up the diﬀerential, that is, a closed form which can be directly

integrated. This is explained by the fact that these equations, like any equations describing

physical processes, include nonpotential terms.]

Physical meaning of the equations of balance conservation
laws: Description of the state of material system.

Nonequilibrium state of material system.

The evolutionary relation obtained from the equations of balance conser-
vation laws discloses a physical meaning of these equations – these equations
describe the state of material system.

It is evident that if the balance conservation laws be commutative, the evolu-
tionary relation would be identical and from that it would be possible to get the
diﬀerential dψ, this would indicate that the material system is in the equilibrium
state.

However, as it has been shown, in real processes the balance conservation
laws are noncommutative. The evolutionary relation is not identical and from
this relation one cannot get the diﬀerential dψ. This means that the system state
is nonequilibrium. That is, due to noncommutativity of the balance conservation
laws the material system state turns out to be nonequilibrium. It is evident
that the internal force producing such nonequilibrium state is described by the
evolutionary form commutator. Everything that gives the contribution to the
commutator of the form ωp leads to emergency of internal force. (Internal force

9

is a force that acts inside the local domain of material system, i.e. a domain
made up by the element and its neighborhood.)

Nonidentical evolutionary relation also describes how the state of material
system varies. This turns out to be possible due to the fact that the evolution-
ary nonidentical relation is a selfvarying one. This relation includes two objects
one of which appears to be unmeasurable. The variation of any object of the
relation in some process leads to variation of another object and, in turn, the
variation of the latter leads to variation of the former. Since one of the objects is
an unmeasurable quantity, the other cannot be compared with the ﬁrst one, and
hence, the process of mutual variation cannot stop. This process is governed by
the evolutionary form commutator, that is, by interaction between the commu-
tator made up by derivatives of the form itself and by metric form commutator
of deforming manifold made up by the trajectories of material system. (This is
an exchange between quantities of diﬀerent nature, between physical quantities
and space-time characteristics.)

[In essence, the evolutionary equation is a correlative relation. When changing the terms

of this relation cannot become equal to one another, but in this case they correlate to one

another. The terms of the evolutionary form commutator in nonidentical relation also correlate
to one another.]

Selfvariation of nonidentical evolutionary relation points to the fact that the
nonequilibrium state of material system turns out to be selfvarying. State of
material system changes but holds nonequilibrium during this process.

Transition of material system from nonequilibrium state to the

locally-equilibrium state. Origination of physical structure.

The signiﬁcance of the evolutionary relation selfvariation consists in the fact
that in such a process it can be realized conditions under which the inexact,
closed on pseudostructure, exterior form is obtained from the evolutionary form.
This transition is possible only as the degenerate transformation, namely, a
transformation that does not conserve the diﬀerential. The conditions of degen-
erate transformation are those that determine the direction on which interior
(only along a given direction) diﬀerential of the evolutionary form vanishes.
These are the conditions that deﬁnes the pseudostructure, i.e. the closure con-
ditions of dual form, and leads to realization of the exterior form closed on
pseudostructure.

As it has been already mentioned, the diﬀerential of the evolutionary form

ωp involved into nonidentical relation (2.5) is nonzero. That is,

dωp 6= 0

(2.6)

If the conditions of degenerate transformation are realized, it will take place the
transition

dωp 6= 0 → (degenerate transformation) → dπωp = 0, dπ
The relations obtained

∗ωp = 0

dπωp = 0, dπ

∗ωp = 0

(2.7)

10

are the closure conditions for exterior inexact form and dual form. This means
that it is realized the exterior form closed on pseudostructure.

In this case on the pseudostructure π evolutionary relation (2.5) converts

into the relation

dπψ = ωp
π

(2.8)

which proves to be an identical relation. Since the form ωp
π is a closed one, on the
pseudostructure this form turns out to be a diﬀerential. There are diﬀerentials
in the left-hand and right-hand sides of this relation. This means that the
relation obtained is an identical one.

Here it should be emphasized that under degenerate transformation the evo-
lutionary form remains to be unclosed and the evolutionary relation itself re-
mains to be nonidentical one. (The evolutionary form diﬀerential vanishes only
on pseudostructure: the diﬀerential, which equals zero, is an interior one, the
total diﬀerential of the evolutionary form is nonzero.)

The transition from nonidentical relation (2.5) obtained from the balance
conservation laws to identical relation (2.8) means the following. Firstly, the
emergency of the closed (on pseudostructure) inexact exterior form (relation
(2.7) and right-hand side of relation (2.8)) points to origination of physical
structure. And, secondly, the existence of the state diﬀerential (left-hand side of
relation (2.8)) points to the transition of material system from nonequilibrium
state to the locally-equilibrium state. (But in this case the total state of the
material system turns out to be nonequilibrium.)

Identical relation (2.8) points to the fact that the origination of physical
structures is connected with the transition of material system to the locally-
equilibrium state.

The origination of physical structures in material system manifests itself as
an emergency of certain observable formations, which develop spontaneously.
Such formations and their manifestations are ﬂuctuations, turbulent pulsations,
waves, vortices, creating massless particles, and others. (One can see that the
processes described also explain such phenomena as turbulence, radiation and
others.)

Conditions of degenerate transformation: degrees of freedom of

material system.

The conditions of degenerate transformation that lead to emergency of closed
inexact exterior form are connected with any symmetries. Since these conditions
are closure conditions of dual (metric) form, they can be caused by symmetries
of coeﬃcients of the metric form commutator (for example, these can be sym-
metrical connectednesses).

Under describing material system the symmetries are conditioned by degrees
of freedom of material system. The translational degrees of freedom, internal
degrees of freedom of the system elements, and so on can be examples of such
degrees of freedom.

The conditions of degenerate transformation (vanishing the dual form com-
mutator) deﬁne the pseudostructure. These conditions specify the derivative of

11

implicit function, which deﬁnes the direction of pseudostructure. The speeds
of various waves are examples of such derivatives: the speed of light, the speed
of sound and of electromagnetic waves, the speed of creating particles and so
on.
It can be shown that the equations for surfaces of potential (of simple
layer, double layer), integral surfaces, equations for one, two, . . . eikonals, of
the characteristic and of the characteristic surfaces, the residue equations and
so on serve as the equations for pseudostructures.

To the degenerate transformation it must correspond a vanishing of some
functional expressions, such as Jacobians, determinants, the Poisson brackets,
residues and others. Vanishing of these functional expressions is the closure
condition for dual form.

And it should be emphasized once more that the degenerate transformation
is realized as a transition from the accompanying noninertial coordinate system
to the locally inertial system. The evolutionary form is deﬁned in the noninertial
frame of reference (deforming manifold). But the closed exterior form created
is obtained with respect to the locally-inertial frame of reference (pseudostruc-
ture).

Characteristics and classiﬁcation of physical structures. Form-
ing pseudometric and metric spaces.

Characteristics of physical structures.

The physical structure is a diﬀerential-geometrical structure made up by
the dual form and closed inexact form. This is a pseudostructure (dual form)
with conservative quantity (closed inexact form). The conservative quantities
describe certain charges.

Since the physical structures are generated by material media by means
of the balance conservation laws, their characteristics are connected with the
characteristics of material systems and with the characteristics of evolutionary
forms obtained from the equations of balance conservation laws.

It was already mentioned that the pseudostructure is obtained from the
condition of degenerate transformation, which is connected with the degrees of
freedom of material system.

The total diﬀerential of evolutionary form, which holds to be nonzero, deﬁnes

two another characteristics of physical structure.

The ﬁrst term of the evolutionary form diﬀerential, more exactly, its com-
mutator, determines the value of discrete change (the quantum), which the
quantity conserved on the pseudostructure undergoes during transition from
one pseudostructure to another. The second term of the evolutionary form
commutator determines the bending of pseudostructure. The bending speciﬁes
the characteristics that ﬁxes the character of the manifold deformation, which
took place before physical structure emerged. (Spin is an example of such a
characteristics).

The closed exterior forms obtained correspond to the state diﬀerential for
material system. The diﬀerentials of entropy, action, potential and others are
examples of such diﬀerentials.

12

As it was already mentioned, in material system the created physical struc-
ture is revealed as an observable formation. It is evident that the characteristics
of the formation (intensity, vorticity, absolute and relative speeds of propagation
of the formation), as well as those of created physical structure, are determined
by the evolutionary form and its commutator and by the material system char-
acteristics.

Classiﬁcation of physical structures.
The connection of the physical structures with the skew-symmetric diﬀeren-
tial forms allows to introduce a classiﬁcation of these structures in dependence
on parameters that specify the skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms and enter into
nonidentical and identical relation. To determine these parameters one has to
consider the problem of integration of the nonidentical evolutionary relation.

Under degenerate transformation from the nonidentical evolutionary relation
one obtains a relation being identical on pseudostructure. Since the right-hand
side of such a relation can be expressed in terms of diﬀerential (as well as the
left-hand side), one obtains a relation that can be integrated, and as a result he
obtains a relation with the diﬀerential forms of less by one degree.

The relation obtained after integration proves to be nonidentical as well.
By sequential integrating the nonidentical relation of degree p (in the case of
realization of corresponding degenerate transformations and forming the iden-
tical relation), one can get a closed (on the pseudostructure) exterior form of
degree k, where k ranges from p to 0.

In this case one can see that after such integration the closed (on the pseu-
dostructure) exterior forms, which depend on two parameters, are obtained.
These parameters are the degree of evolutionary form p in the evolutionary
relation and the degree of created closed forms k.

In addition to these parameters, another parameter appears, namely, the

dimension of space.

What is implied by the concept “space”?
In the process of deriving the evolutionary relation two frames of reference
were used and, correspondingly, two spatial objects. The ﬁrst frame of reference
is an inertial one, which is connected with the space where material system is
situated and is not directly connected with material system. This is an inertial
space, it is a metric space.
(This space is also formed by the material sys-
tems.) The second frame of reference is a proper one, it is connected with the
accompanying manifold, which is not a metric manifold.

While generating closed forms of sequential degrees k = p, k = p − 1, . . . ,
k = 0 the pseudostructures of dimensions (n + 1 − k): 1, . . . , n + 1 are obtained,
where n is the dimension of inertial space. As a result of transition to the
exact closed form of zero degree the metric structure of the dimension n + 1 is
obtained.

The parameters of physical structures generated by the evolutionary relation
depend on the degree of diﬀerential forms p and k and on the dimension of
original inertial space n.

13

With introducing the classiﬁcation by numbers p, k and n one can under-
stand the internal connection between various physical ﬁelds. Since physical
ﬁelds are the carriers of interactions, such classiﬁcation enables one to see the
connection between interactions.

Such a classiﬁcation may be presented in the form of the table given below.

This table corresponds to elementary particles.

[It should be emphasized the following. Here the concept of “interaction” is used in a
twofold meaning: an interaction of the balance conservation laws that relates to material

systems, and the physical concept of “interaction” that relates to physical ﬁelds and reﬂects
the interactions of physical structures, namely, it is connected with exact conservation laws].

interaction

k\p, n

0

TABLE
1

2

gravitation

3

electro-
magnetic

weak

strong

particles
material
nucleons?
N

2

1

0

exact
forms

3
graviton
⇑
electron
proton
neutron
photon

photon3

photon2
⇑
electron
proton
neutrino

neutrino1
⇑
electron
quanta

quanta1

neutrino2 neutrino3

quanta2

quanta3

quanta0
⇑
quarks?

electron

proton

neutron

deuteron?

1
time

2
time+
1 coord.

3
time+
2 coord.

4
time+
3 coord.

In the Table the names of the particles created are given. Numbers placed
near particle names correspond to the space dimension. Under the names of
particles the sources of interactions are presented. In the next to the last row
we present particles with mass (the elements of material system) formed by
interactions (the exact forms of zero degree obtained by sequential integrating
the evolutionary relations with the evolutionary forms of degree p corresponding
to these particles). In the bottom row the dimension of the metric structure
created is presented.

From the Table one can see the correspondence between the degree k of the
closed forms realized and the type of interactions. Thus, k = 0 corresponds to
strong interaction, k = 1 corresponds to weak interaction, k = 2 corresponds to
electromagnetic interaction, and k = 3 corresponds to gravitational interaction.
The degree k of the closed forms realized and the number p connected with
the number of interacting balance conservation laws determine the type of in-
teractions and the type of particles created. The properties of particles are
governed by the space dimension. The last property is connected with the fact
that closed forms of equal degrees k, but obtained from the evolutionary re-

14

lations acting in spaces of diﬀerent dimensions n, are distinctive because they
are deﬁned on pseudostructures of diﬀerent dimensions (the dimension of pseu-
dostructure (n + 1 − k) depends on the dimension of initial space n). For this
reason the realized physical structures with closed forms of degrees k are dis-
tinctive in their properties.

The parameters p, k, n can range from 0 to 3. They determine some com-
pleted cycle. The cycle involves four levels, to each of which are assign their
own values of p (p = 0, 1, 2, 3) and space dimension n.

In the Table one cycle of forming physical structures is presented. Each
material system has his own completed cycle. This distinguishes one material
system from another system. One completed cycle can serve as the beginning of
another cycle (the structures formed in the preceding cycle serve as the sources
of interactions for beginning a new cycle). This may mean that one material sys-
tem (medium) proves to be imbedded into the other material system (medium).
The sequential cycles reﬂect the properties of sequentially imbedded material
systems. And yet a given level has speciﬁc properties that are inherent charac-
teristics of the same level in another cycles. This can be seen, for example, from
comparison of the cycle described and the cycle in which to the exact forms there
correspond conductors, semiconductors, dielectrics, and neutral elements. The
properties of elements of the third level, namely, of neutrons in one cycle and
of dielectrics in another, are identical to the properties of so called ”magnetic
monopole” [9,10].

Forming pseudometric and metric spaces
The mechanism of creating the pseudostructures lies at the basis of forming

the pseudometric surfaces and their transition into metric spaces.

It was shown above that the evolutionary relation of degree p can generate (in
the presence of degenerate transformations) closed forms of the degrees p, p −
1, .., 0. While generating closed forms of sequential degrees k = p, k = p −
1, .., k = 0 the pseudostructures of dimensions (n + 1 − k): 1, ..., n + 1 are
obtained. As a result of transition to the exact closed form of zero degree the
metric structure of the dimension n + 1 is obtained.

Here the following should be pointed out. Physical structures are generated
by local domains of material system. These are elementary physical structures.
By combining with one another they can form large-scale structures making up
pseudomanifolds and physical ﬁelds.

Sections of the cotangent bundles (Yang-Mills ﬁelds), cohomologies by de
Rham, singular cohomologies, pseudo-Riemannian and pseudo-Euclidean spaces,
and others are examples of pseudostructures and spaces that are formed by
pseudostructures. Euclidean and Riemannian spaces are examples of metric
manifolds that are obtained when going to the exact forms.

What can be said about the pseudo-Riemannian manifold and Riemannian

space?

The distinctive property of the Riemannian manifold is an availability of the
curvature. This means that the metric form commutator of the third degree
is nonzero. Hence, the commutator of the evolutionary form of third degree

15

(p = 3), which involves into the proper metric form commutator, is not equal to
zero. That is, the evolutionary form that enters into the evolutionary relation
is unclosed, and the relation is nonidentical one.

When realizing pseudostructures of the dimensions 1, 2, 3, 4 and obtaining
the closed inexact forms of the degrees k = 3, k = 2, k = 1, k = 0 the pseudo-
Riemannian space is formed, and the transition to the exact form of zero degree
corresponds to the transition to the Riemannian space (see Appendix).

It is well known that while obtaining the Einstein equations it was assumed
that there are satisﬁed the conditions [4,8]: 1) the Bianchi identity is satisﬁed,
2) the coeﬃcients of connectedness are symmetric, 3) the condition that the
coeﬃcients of connectedness are the Christoﬀel symbols, and 4) an existence of
the transformation under which the coeﬃcients of connectedness vanish. These
conditions are the conditions of realization of degenerate transformations for
nonidentical relations obtained from the evolutionary nonidentical relation with
evolutionary form of the degree p = 3 and after going to the identical relations.
In this case to the Einstein equation the identical relations with forms of the
ﬁrst degree are assigned.

From the description of evolutionary processes in material media one can see
that physical ﬁelds are generated by material media. (And thus the causality
of physical processes and phenomena is explained.)

Here it should be emphasized that the conservation laws for material media,
i.e. the balance conservation laws for energy, linear momentum, angular mo-
mentum, and mass, which are noncommutative ones, play a controlling role in
these processes. This is precisely the noncommutativity of the balance conserva-
tion laws produced by external actions onto material system, which is a moving
force of evolutionary processes leading to origination of physical structures (to
which exact conservation laws are assigned). [Noncommutativity of balance conserva-
tion laws for material media and their controlling role in evolutionary processes accompanied
by emerging physical structures practically have not been taken into account in the explicit

form anywhere. The mathematical apparatus of evolutionary diﬀerential forms enables one
to take into account and to describe these points.]

3 On the foundations of general ﬁeld theory.

The results of the analysis of the equations of conservation laws for material
media shows the connection of physical ﬁelds with material media.

This points to the fact that the ﬁelds theories that describe physical ﬁelds

must be connected with the equations that describe material systems.

Such a connection, which is common to all ﬁeld theories, discloses the general
foundations of ﬁeld theories, their quantum character, justiﬁes the unity of ﬁeld
theories and can serve as an approach to general ﬁeld theory.

The theories of exterior and evolutionary skew-symmetric diﬀerential forms,
which reﬂect the properties of conservation laws for physical ﬁelds and material
media, allow to disclose and justify the general principles of ﬁeld theories. In

16

this case the properties of closed exterior forms demonstrate these principles,
and the theory of evolutionary forms justiﬁes this. Below we present certain of
concepts that lie at the basis of ﬁeld theories. (The results obtained with using
the evolutionary forms are italicized).

1. Physical ﬁelds are formatted by physical structures that are described by
closed inexact exterior and dual forms. Physical structures are generated by ma-
terial media. Characteristics of physical structures relate to the characteristics
of material systems.

2. The conservation laws for physical ﬁelds, on which the ﬁeld theories are
based, are connected with the conservation laws for material media (with the
balance conservation laws for energy, linear momentum, angular momentum,
and mass and the analog of such law for the time).

3.

Internal and external symmetries of ﬁeld theories are those of closed
exterior and dual forms. They are conditioned by the degrees of freedom of
material media.

4. The origination of physical structures, from which physical ﬁelds are made
up, proceeds discretely under realization of the degrees of freedom of material
systems. This explains the quantum character of ﬁeld theories.

5. The gauge transformations of ﬁeld theories are transformations of closed
exterior forms. They are connected with the degenerate transformations of the
equations of conservation laws for material media.

6. The constants of ﬁeld theory must be connected with the characteristics

of material systems.

7. The classiﬁcation parameter of physical ﬁelds and interactions, that is,
the parameter of the uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, is the degree of closed exterior forms
corresponding to conservation laws for physical ﬁelds. This parameter is con-
nected with the number of the equations of interacting noncommutative balance
conservation laws. This connection justiﬁes the parameter of the united ﬁeld
theory.

The results obtained show that when building the general ﬁeld theory it is
necessary to take into account the connection of existing ﬁeld theories (which
are based on the conservation laws for physical ﬁelds) with the equations of
noncommutative conservation laws for material media (the balance conservation
laws for energy, linear momentum, angular momentum and mass and the analog
of such laws for the time, which takes into account the noncommutativity of the
time and the energy of material system).

Appendix

Forming pseudo-Riemannian manifold and Riemannian space

The mechanism of emerging the physical structures (that form the physical
ﬁelds) and the material system elements elucidates the mechanism of forming
the pseudometric and metric spaces.

While deriving the evolutionary relation there were used two spatial objects:
the accompanying manifold (connected with the material system), which has no

17

metric structure for actual processes, and the inertial space (not connected with
the material system), which is the metric space.

Assume that the initial inertial space has the dimension n = 3. The material
system in such a space is subjected to the balance conservation laws which
equations in the accompanying frame of reference turn out to be convoluted
into the evolutionary relation with p = n = 3:

(the degree of the form ψ equals 2).

The form ω3 is deﬁned on the accompanying manifold, and therefore this

form is an evolutionary nonintegrable form, that is, its diﬀerential is nonzero

And accordingly, the commutator of the form ω3 is nonzero.

Realization of the pseudostructure (the element of the pseudometric space)
and an emergence of the physical structure, which the closed metric and exterior
forms correspond to, is the transition from the unclosed evolutionary form ω3 to
the closed exterior form ω′3 (this is connected with the degenerate transform).
It must be satisﬁed the following relations:

d ψ = ω3

dω3 6= 0

dπ ω′3 = 0

dπ

∗ω ′3 = 0

(A.1)

(A.2)

(A.3)

(A.4)

In the present case the degree of the closed form is k = p = 3, and the dimension
of the pseudostructure is m = n + 1 − k = p + 1 − k = 1.

From evolutionary relation (A.1) on the pseudostructure it follows the rela-

tion

dπ ψ = ω′3
which is identical one because the closed form ω′3 can be expressed in terms of
the interior diﬀerential.

(A.5)

From this relation it can be deﬁned the form dπψ that speciﬁes a state of
the system, namely, the state diﬀerential. (In the case under consideration this
is the form of degree 3). This corresponds to the conservation law because the
diﬀerential of this form (interior on the pseudostructure) is equal to zero.

Realization of the pseudostructure (connected with an emergence of the
physical structure and a fulﬁllment of the conservation law) is one of the exhibi-
tions of the mechanism of forming metric spaces. It worth to underline that the
pseudostructure is realized with respect to the inertial frame of reference. (The
degenerate transform corresponds to the transition from the frame of reference
connected with the accompanying manifold to the inertial coordinate system).
With the aim to be more clear we shall make the tensor expressions corre-
spond to the diﬀerential forms. We can make the tensor with p bottom (co-
variant) subscripts correspond to the external form of degree p deﬁned on the
diﬀerentiable manifold. As it is known, the diﬀerential of the form of degree p on

18

the diﬀerentiable manifold is the form of degree p + 1. We can make the tensor
with p + 1 bottom subscripts correspond to the diﬀerential of the form of degree
p + 1. Similarly to this we make the tensor expression Kα... correspond to the
diﬀerential or to the commutator of the nonintegrable evolutionary form. With
this notation the commutator of the form ω3 can be written as Kαβγχ, where
three ﬁrst subscripts correspond to the form degree, and the fourth subscript
appears while diﬀerentiating the form (from this point and further we shall use
the Greek subscripts for the accompanying frame of reference and Latin ones
for the inertial that). The commutator of the basic metric form, which can
be denoted as Rαβγχ, enters into the commutator of the nonintegrable form.
We can make the 3-covariant tensors Sjkl and Tjkl (its divergence is equal to
zero as they corresponds to the closed forms) correspond to the closed forms
dπψ and ω′3 (that are formed with relevance to the inertial frame of reference).
And to the pseudostructure we can assign the 1-contravariant pseudotensor T i
(which corresponds to the closed metric form, i.e. the pseudostructure) that is
dual to the tensor Tjkl: T i = ∗Tjkl = 1
6 εijkl Tjkl (here εijkl = eiejekelεijkl,
where εijkl is the completely skew-symmetric unit pseudotensor). Similarly,
by Si = ∗Sjkl denote the tensor dual to Sjkl. Now we introduce the tensor
expressions:

Si

jkl =

Sjkl
Si

n

, Ti

jkl =

Tjkl
T i

n

{These tensor expressions are not tensors with covariant and contravariant sub-
scripts because, ﬁrstly, they combine tensors and pseudotensors, and, secondly,
in these expressions one cannot raise up and lower subscripts because the metric
is not deﬁned as yet}.

The tensor expression Si

form. And to physical structure it is assigned the tensor expression Ti
is the representation of Bi-Structure (forms ω′3 and ∗ω′3).

jkl corresponds to the state diﬀerential and its dual
jkl, which

With taking into account relations (A.3), (A.4), the relation (A.5) can be

written in terms of the tensor expressions as

jkl = Ti
Si

jkl

(A.6)

Relation (A.6) shows that the physical structure emerged (which is obtained
at the expense of external actions processed by the system), and the state diﬀer-
ential and the relevant dual form are in one-to-one correspondence. The tensor
relation Si
jkl relates to the material system (speciﬁes its state), whereas the ten-
sor expression Ti
jkl, which corresponds to physical structure, relates to physical
ﬁeld. Relation (A.6) eﬀects the connection between physical ﬁeld and material
medium.

What is the further mechanism of forming the metric space?
While emerging the physical structure a quantity that is described by the
commutator of the evolutionary form ω3 and acts as an internal force transforms
into the potential force that acts in the direction transverse to the pseudostruc-
ture. (If the diﬀerential of the form ω3 be zero, that is, the commutators Rαβγχ
and Kαβγχ be equal to zero, the potential force will be equal to zero). This

19

potential force becomes a new source of nonequilibrium (even without the extra
external actions) and can lead to further forming the pseudostructures.

Since relation (A.5) is identical one, it can be integrated. Because the form
ω′3 is closed, it is the interior (on the pseudostructure) diﬀerential of the form
of less by one degree

ω′3 = dπω2

(A.7)

From relations (A.5), (A.7) it follows the relation (below, for the sake of conve-
nience, we shall indicate explicitly a degree of the form ψ)

dπ ψ2 = dπ ω2

which can be integrated (within the accuracy up to the less degree forms):

ψ2 = ω2

(A.8)

This is an integration of the nonidentical evolutionary relation (A.1) along a
single dimensionality that has been formed.

From relation (A.7) one can see that the diﬀerential of the form ω2 is nonzero.
The form ω2 (of degree p − 1 = 2) proves to be nonintegrable form (its com-
mutator is nonzero) on the manifold directions remained after integration. To
the commutator of the form ω2 it can be assigned the tensor expression K α
βγχ
(three bottom subscripts is the degree of the exterior form plus 1, and single
top subscript is the pseudometric dimension formed).
In this case the basic
commutator can be written in the form Rα

βγχ.

Here it appears some speciﬁc feature. On the one hand, the form ω2 obtained
turns out to be nonintegrable one, and therefore, it cannot be expressed in terms
of the diﬀerential. And on the other hand, the form ψ2 in the left-hand side of
relation (A.8) must be the state diﬀerential. This form must become the closed
form and be expressed in terms of the diﬀerential:

By comparison of relations (A.8) and (A.9), we get the relation

ψ2 = d ψ1

d ψ1 ∼= ω2

(A.9)

(A.10)

which cannot be identity because the form ω2 is not expressed through the
diﬀerential.

Nonidentical relation (A.10) is a relation of the type similar to initial relation
(A.1), however it is the form of less by one degree. We can repeat the analysis
similarly to that for relation (A.1) and get the pseudostructure of the greater
by one dimension. By sequential integrating the nonidentical relations we can
obtain the pseudometric space. The closed exterior forms of degrees p, p −
1, ..., 0, which are inexact, correspond to this space. The transition to the
exact form of zero degree will correspond to the transition to the metric space.
With application of the tensor expressions these transitions can be schemat-

ically written in the following form:

20

dψ ∼= ω3,

dω3 6= 0 (Kαβγχ 6= 0, Rαβγχ 6= 0)

(A.11)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
m = 1

+d ψ ∼= ω2,

ω2 6= 0 :

βγχ 6= 0, Rα

βγχ 6= 0)

Si
jkl = Ti

jkl
(K α

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
m = 2

d ψ ∼= ω1,

ω1 6= 0 :

γχ 6= 0, Rαβ

γχ 6= 0)

kl = Tij
Sij

kl
(K αβ

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
m = 3

d ψ ∼= ω0,

ω0 6= 0 :

6= 0, Rαβγ

χ

6= 0)

l = Tijk
Sijk

l
(K αβγ
χ

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
m = 4

(A.12)

(A.13)

(A.14)

(A.15)

(A.16)

(A.17)

(A.18)

(A.19)

d ψ ∼=

ω0,

Z

ω0 6= 0 :

(K αβγχ 6= 0, Rαβγχ 6= 0)

Sijkl = Tijkl

ψ = 0

Line (A.11) in this scheme corresponds to the nonidentical initial evolution-
ary relation (with the evolutionary forms of degree 3). Here the inequality
d ω3 6= 0 is written in terms of the tensor expressions for the commutators:
(Kαβγχ 6= 0, Rαβγχ 6= 0).

The dotted line corresponds to the degenerate transform and to the transi-
tion from the nonidentical evolutionary relation to the identical relation on the
pseudostructure of dimension m = 1 (line (A.12)), as well as to the nonidentical
relation of less by one degree (line (A.13)). Line (A.12) involves the identi-
cal relation in the tensor expressions (see relation (A.6)), which corresponds to
identical relation (A.5) in the diﬀerential forms.

Under the degenerate transform it is once again allowed the transition from
the nonidentical relation in line (A.13) to the identical relation on the pseu-
dostructure of dimension m = 2 (line (A.14)) and to a new nonidentical relation
(line (A.15)). Similar transitions can be realized under the degenerate trans-
forms up to the closed inexact forms of zero degree. The solid line corresponds
to the transition to the exact form.

21

Realization of the pseudostructures of dimensions (1, ..., 4) and the closed
inexact forms of degrees (3, ..., 0) (an origination of the physical structures
Si
jkl, ..., Sijkl) correspond to forming the pseudometric manifold. The transition
to the exact form corresponds to a transition to the metric space.

And what can one say concerning the pseudo-Riemann manifold and the

Riemann space?

As it is known, when deriving the Einstein equation [11] it was supposed
that the following conditions to be satisﬁed: the Bianchi identity is fulﬁlled, the
connectedness coeﬃcients are symmetric ones (the connectedness coeﬃcients
are the Christoﬀel symbols), and there exists a transform under which the con-
nectedness coeﬃcient becomes zero. These conditions are those of realization
of the degenerate transforms for the nonidentical evolutionary relations (A.13),
(A.15), (A.17), (A.19) and transition to the identical relation.

If the Bianchi identities be satisﬁed [5], then from the tensor expression Rα

βγχ

it can be obtained the Riemann-Christoﬀel tensor Gi

jkl.
γχ it is assigned the commutator of the ﬁrst degree
νµ), from which under the conditions of symmetry of the

To the tensor expression Rαβ
µν − Γρ

metric form (Γρ
connectedness coeﬃcients (Γj

χ

lk − Γj
To the tensor expression Rαβγ
kl = { j

kl) = 0 the Ricci tensor can be found.
it is assigned the connectedness Γρ
µν from
which under the condition Γj
kl } (the connectedness coeﬃcients are equal
to the Christoﬀel symbols) it can be obtained the tensor expression Sijk
, which
l
l G (the tensors Gk
corresponds to the Einstein tensor Sk
l and G
are obtained from the Riemann-Christoﬀel tensor with taking into account the
symmetry of the connectedness coeﬃcients). To Einstein’s equation it is as-
signed identity (A.16) that relates the tensor expression Sijk
l with the tensor
expression Tijk
that corresponds to the energy-momentum tensor. (It is well
to bear in mind that the metric tensor was not formed as yet, and therefore the
operation of transfer of bottom and top subscripts with the help of the metric
tensor proves to be inapplicable).

l = Gk

l − 1

2 δk

l

To the tensor expression Rαβγχ it is assigned the connectedness coeﬃcients
that under the presence of the degenerate transform vanish, and this corresponds
to forming the closed (inexact) metric form of zero degree gkl = (ekel). However,
at given stage this only corresponds to forming the pseudoriemann manifold.
The transition from the closed inexact form of zero degree to the exact form of
zero degree corresponds to forming the metric (the metric tensor) and going to
the Riemann space.

References

1. Cartan E., Les Systemes Diﬀerentials Exterieus ef Leurs Application Ge-
ometriques. -Paris, Hermann, 1945.

2. Schutz B. F., Geometrical Methods of Mathematical Physics. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1982.

22

3. Dirac P. A. M., The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Clarendon Press,

Oxford, UK, 1958.

4. Wheeler J. A., Neutrino, Gravitation and Geometry. Bologna, 1960.
5. Tonnelat M.-A., Les principles de la theorie electromagnetique et la rela-

tivite. Masson, Paris, 1959.

6. Clark J. F., Machesney M., The Dynamics of Real Gases. Butterworths,

7. Dafermos C. M. In ”Nonlinear waves”. Cornell University Press, Ithaca-

London, 1964.

London, 1974.

8. Tolman R. C., Relativity, Thermodynamics, and Cosmology. Clarendon

Press, Oxford, UK, 1969.

9. Dirac P. A. M., Proc. Roy. Soc., A133, 60 (1931).
10. Dirac P. A. M., Phys. Rev., 74, 817 (1948).
11. Einstein A. The Meaning of Relativity. Princeton, 1953.

23

