Soft correlations in layered niche networks

P. Fraundorf
Physics & Astronomy, U. Missouri-StL (63121), St. Louis, MO, USA∗
(Dated: September 26, 2013)

Multiscale correlations in biological communities are sometimes challenged by limits on free en-
ergy per capita, as well as by environmental change. The standing crop of such correlations might be
assessed by an inventory of niche structures focused inward and outward from the physical bound-
aries of skin (self), gene-pool (family), and meme-pool (culture). Such measures, with information
theory roots, might be useful for monitoring the eﬀect on communities of policy changes as well as
of naturally-ocurring events. They also point the way to more explicit analysis of our relationship
to those replicable codes which help and/or hinder our ability to maintain correlations, particu-
larly in context of our shared pre-historic adaptation for supporting only ﬁve of the six niche layers
mentioned above.

6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
6
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Why might we want to inventory “soft” correlations
in complex systems, like that of a biological community?
Perhaps the simplest reason is to provide a handle on the
rise and fall of life’s quality. Some of these correlations
are already inventoried in piecemeal fashion, for example
through population counts, census data, and employment
statistics.

The information theory insight that subsystem cor-
relations lie at the heart of thermal physics, as well
as of generalized availability measures like net surprisal
(Kullback-Leibler divergence) and mutual information1,
makes possible an integrative approach to this problem
that may come in handy as we explore the limits of our
planet’s ability to sustainably support human commu-
nities in the years ahead2. For example, what behav-
iors and physical limits constrain these measures? What
changes in life’s quality have emerged in societies on the
verge of collapse3, and where and how have communi-
ties managed to reverse these changes in the past? Most
importantly, how can we make the most of this informa-
tion in charting the downstream course of our now-global
community?

FIG. 1: Layered niche network inventory: This one shows four
scales of correlation: self (#), friends (blue), family (green)
& teams (light red).

FIG. 2: Human community layer schematic

II. MONITORING STANDING CROP

Perhaps the simplest thing to do is to count niches, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. Think of it as a census on steroids,
designed (as much as possible) to work for complex sys-
tems of all sorts. Operational deﬁnitions, as well as ob-
jective implementation in practice, will require much dis-
cussion and perhaps locally subjective ﬁne-tuning.
In
some cases, existing measures (like census and employ-
ment data) can be integrated into the layered niche anal-
ysis. Before we address these, the following subsection
discusses the integrative physical context, application to
underlying subsystems, and possible ennumeration of ac-
cessible states for putting these measures into second law
terms.

2

FIG. 3: Life’s Energy Flow: The top half represents some
of the primary processes involved with energy ﬂow, while
the bottom half illustrates signiﬁcant physical repositories for
life’s energies, and paths for conversion of energy from one
form to another.

FIG. 4: Life’s Stores of Availability: Horizontal bars repre-
sent inward-looking correlations, while vertical bars represent
outward-looking correlations. This breakdown seems to work
reasonably well to categorize by domain both the types of
correlations that exist, and the kinds of ideas (i.e. memetic
replicators) used to help maintain them.

A. An integrative physical context

To provide a robust multiscale setting, one might car-
toonify hypothetical correlation measures in the following
way across three quite diﬀerent levels of complex system
organization: the state of a molecule, a metazoan, and a
community of individuals.

• # correlated states/fermion (max 6 in & out from
wave-packet, shell, atom) × # fermions/molecule

• # assignments/molecule

(max 6 in & out
from surface, cell-membrane, and organ) × #
molecules/metazoan

• # niches/metazoan (max 6 in & out

from
skin, gene-pool and meme-pool) × # meta-
zoans/community

Here the number of states or assignments or niches per
agent is in eﬀect an average, so that each total can also
be determined by a sum of all the states or assignments
or niches in the larger unit. Each of the three items
in sequence assesses the mutual-information associated
with order on a larger size scale. Thus each assignment
of a metazoan molecule builds on a certain number of
correlated fermion-states within that molecule, just as
each niche for a community metazoan will build on a
certain number of correlated molecule-assignments with
that metazoan. Nonetheless each assignment or niche, as

an emergent phenomenon, is quite distinct from (hence
something more than) the sum of its constituent states
or assignments, respectively.

Concerning the parenthetic “max 6 in & out from...”
clauses, these basically ﬁgure that individual elements
within a given level of system organization occupy a ﬁ-
nite number of correlated state types. Put another way,
we plan to categorize each element’s “correlation collec-
tion” by viewing it as directed inward and outward with
respect to a set of (in the examples above three) sub-
system boundaries.

For instance, quantum statistics might ﬁrst consider
that single bit of mutual information between up-spin
and down-spin electrons that comprises a carbon atom’s
ground state K-shell. This amounts to a pair correlation
(wave-packet:OUT) between two intact electrons whose
internal structure (wave-packet:IN) is a separate subject.
The other electrons in a ground state atom occupy sites
which correlate with one another, complete their respec-
tive shells (shell:IN), and moreover occupy those shells in
the sequence of increasing energy (shell:OUT). We can
presently take these correlations for granted, since most
carbon atom electrons (except those inside stars) have
too little energy to access electronic excited (atom:IN)
states.

The question of intra-molecule correlations between
electrons (atom:OUT) of course remains an interesting
question at room temperature and below, sometimes with

thermodynamic consequences in everyday life. Thus for
example electrons involved in covalent bonds, or scatter-
ing experiments, are participating in correlations directed
outward from the atom to which they were initially as-
signed. This is also true for electrons participating in
collective solid state excitations, like Bose pairs or the
conduction band electrons of an operating semiconduc-
tor device.

On the level of a metazoan organism, we might simi-
larly consider molecule assignments pointing inward and
outward with respect to molecule surface, cell-membrane,
and organ. For example, hormone molecules required to
convey signals from one organ system to another might
be seen as charged with an inter-tissue (organ:OUT) as-
signment.

B. Community inventories

The original motivation for the correlation scheme out-
lined in the previous subsection was its appropriateness
for layered-niche networks in human communities.
In
this case, humans seem to naturally conceptualize niches
(Fig. 2) as directed inward and outward with respect
to the boundaries of self, family, and culture. Thus roles
taking care of self, friends, family, hierarchy, culture, and
profession are distinguished, as are (respectively) the re-
lated paradigms and participant/leadership obligations
of patient/doctor, colleague/mentor, sibling/parent, cit-
izen/leader, dancer/priest, and professional/scholar.

In other words, this inventory for the case of a com-
munity simply asks: In how many of these six areas are
individuals able to make a name for themselves? If this
is decreasing, things are perhaps getting worse for the
community, independent of what other indicators have
to say. The correlation scheme in principle will work for
organism communities with meme-pools less developed
than in the human case, as well.

III. PROCESS INDICATORS

One might also be interested in the rates at which cor-
relations above are created, and/or the rates at which
they are lost. The rate of change of standing crop should
equal the rate of creation minus loss. Thus the invento-
ries above can at least be checked for consistency with
more direct measures of process dynamics.

Thanks to the second law of thermodynamics, rates of
reversible thermalization are also less than or equal to
the rates of available work used up. Hence the rate at
which available work is fed into the system (i.e. at which
energy is thermalized in Fig. 3) provides an upper limit
on the rate (when converted into second law terms1) at
which correlations are gained in Fig. 4. Such energy-
based measures include the power stream accessible to
life, and for evolving complexity in a more general sense

3

Eric Chaisson’s free energy rate density4,5.

IV. DISCUSSION

A variety of questions are unanswered. For exam-
ple, how do statistical properties of such layered niche-
networks aﬀect information ﬂow, and the capability of
organisms involved in adapting to change? Are there ob-
jective ways to inventory the connections discussed here
in human and non-human communities, and what per-
turbations to those connections would occur as a result?
How might existing instruments of population and em-
ployment statistics be used to augment such network in-
ventories? How are recent changes in demographics and
communications aﬀecting these networks? Can measures
of this sort assist economists e.g. in looking at the long
term costs of a given activity, as issues of sustainability
become more diﬃcult to ignore?

Nonetheless correlation inventories like this, with roots
in the physical sciences, show promise for monitoring the
state and process dynamics of layered niche-networks in-
cluding the metazoan communities of which we are a
part. Other corollaries of the approach may include these
observations: that idea sets (e.g. values) targeted toward
the maintenance of speciﬁc levels of correlation in such
inventories are easily identiﬁed, and that the stone-age
histories shared by most humans6 likely adapted us pri-
marily to deal with only ﬁve of these six levels. Thus as
free energy per capita for humans declines7, the pressure
to blur the lines between levels (e.g. politics, religion,
and science) will likely increase.

One hedge against this trend might involve reporting
on the dynamics of non-constructive idea sets easily am-
pliﬁed in this digital age. For example saying bogeyman
code to terrorists, and observation to intelligent designers
or deconstructionists, may be much more eﬀective than
saying “evil” or “consensus” respectively. This is because
the latter concepts echo ideas that drive each of these
conﬂicts to begin with, while the former concepts address
the problematic codes on their own ﬁeld of play. Thus
the dynamics of replicable codes are important for jour-
nalists as well as for biologists, making multi-disciplinary
complex-system informatics courses a promising place to
forge collaborations between both. Of course without at-
tention to the correlation inventories that memetic codes
impact, the need for such collaborations might continue
to be missed.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Eric Chaisson at Tufts, Peter Ro-
gan at UM-KC, Yaneer Bar-Yam at NECSI, Tom Schnei-
der at NCI-CCRNP, Don Brownlee at U. Washington,
and the late E. T. Jaynes at Washington University for
many interesting papers and discussions.

4

pfraundorf@umsl.edu

∗
1 P. Fraundorf, Amer. J. Phys. 71(11), 1142 (2003).
2 P. D. Ward and D. Brownlee, The life and death of planet

earth (Copernicus, New York, 2000).

3 J. Diamond, Collapse: How societies choose to fail or suc-

ceed (Viking/Penguin, New York, 2004).
4 E. J. Chaisson, BioSystems 46, 13 (1998).
5 E. J. Chaisson, Complexity 9, 14 (2004).

6 J. Diamond, The third chimpanzee: The evolution and fu-
ture of the human animal (Harper Collins, New York, 1992).
7 R. L. Hirsch, R. Bezdek, and R. Wendling, Peaking of
world oil production: Impacts, mitigation, and risk man-
agement, Report for Dept. of Energy National Energy Tech-
nology Lab, Science Applications International Corporation
(2005).

