Extension of Dirac theory and the classiﬁcation of elementary particles

Janet Pan1 and Lu Lin2

Abstract

1. Yale University, P.O. Box 208284, New Haven, CT 06520-8284.

2. Wufeng Institute of Technology, Chia-yi, Taiwan, ROC. E-mail : lulin@mail.wfc.edu.tw

The Dirac theory implies the existence of an internal vector space, in addition to spin
space. Using Dirac’s coupling of variables in internal space to those in physical space, we
construct a new conﬁguration structure for particles in the combined physical plus internal
spaces. The importance of this is that the internal degrees of freedom implicit in Dirac’s
theory allow a new classiﬁcation of elementary particles. An important consequence is
the prediction of a new type of quark. As expected, our theory groups fermions into
doublets, which are then divided into color singlets (leptons) and color triplets (quarks),
If
and which are then further divided into generation singlets and generation triplets.
the Pauli exclusion principle for fermions is also valid within a particle’s internal space,
then our theory makes two important predictions. First, we can explain why the widely
studied quarks (up, down, charm, strange, top, bottom) cannot be observed as free states
in nature. Second, we predict the existence of a new quark which can indeed be observed
as a free state in nature, and whose wave function is antisymmetric in internal space.
W. M. Fairbank, a Guggenheim Fellow, has published experimental data which supports
our second prediction.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Extension of Dirac theory and the classiﬁcation of elementary particles

2

Consider the motion of a free electron (or, in general, a fermion) described by a space-time
4-vector xµ, its momentum pµ, and Dirac matrices αi, β, (i=1 to 3, and µ=1 to 4). The
Dirac Hamiltonian [1, 2] of this system is

H =

X

αi · pi + βm, where ~ = c = 1.

The i-th component of the velocity and the i-th component of the coordinate are given as
(see Chapter XI of ref. [2])

˙xi = αi = ˙ξi + ˙ηi

xi = ξi + ηi

ξi = ai + piH −

1t

ηi =

αiH −

1 − piH −

2

(cid:1)

i
2 (cid:0)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1
2

−

P

where ai is the ξi(t) at t=0. Since αi does not commute with the Hamiltonian, each
component of the velocity of the electron is not a constant of the motion. Also, since αi
has eigenvalues ±1, then a measurement of any component of the velocity of the electron
will give the speed of light, even when pi is zero. On the other hand, since the square
i = 3c2, which is a constant, independent of all pi,
of the velocity operator is v2 =
α2
then v2 commutes with the Hamiltonian and can be simultaneously measured with the
Hamiltonian. However, the result, v2 = 3c2, violates relativity, and forces the electron
mass m(v) = m (cid:16)1 − v2
to have an imaginary value, even when the momentum pi is
c2 (cid:17)
zero. This does not make sense. This trouble can be understood and reinterpreted as the
following. According to Dirac [2], since the αi and the β are independent of, and commute
with xµ and pµ, then they must describe some new degree of freedom, belonging to some
internal motion of the electron. This implies the existence of an internal space, in which
the electron moves, and which is independent of physical space (PS). The Hamiltonian
H in Equation. (1) requires that the motion of the electron in physical space is coupled
to its motion in internal space. We can assert that the same electron is moving in an
enlarged space, which is comprised of physical space plus an internal space. Another
way to look at the problem is that the particle energy has two contributions, and these
two contributions are coupled by the Dirac Hamiltonian. This is analogous to the case
of two classical oscillators, with coordinates z1 and z2, and Hamiltonians H1 and H2. If
the oscillators are coupled, then the total Hamiltonian will be H=H1+H2+H12, and the
normal coordinates will be functions of z1 and z2.
1, which commutes with the Hamiltonian H and has an
Consider an operator c2piH −
eigenvalue pi
M , where M the total mass of the electron. This value is just the value of
vi = ˙ξi in Equations (2) and (4), and is the usual velocity of the electron. Thus, we can
interpret xi = ξi + ηi as a generalized coordinate vector, with ξi in physical space and ηi
˙xi = cαi is the velocity of the
(which is, in general, complex) in internal space. Then,

Extension of Dirac theory and the classiﬁcation of elementary particles

3

generalized coordinates, while vi = ˙ξi is the physical velocity of the electron. (The motion
of ηi is known as Zitterbewegung [1] and is unphysical.)
Since γµpµ=m is a scalar operator obtained from two 4-vectors, where γµ is another
representation of αi, β, then this implies that the internal space is 4-dimensional, and a
vector in this space has 4 independent components. Thus, ηi should have a 4th component,
η4, to make a 4-vector ηµ. Now we can deﬁne our total space as the greater space (GS),
which is comprised of a 4-dimesional physical space (PS) and a 4-dimensional internal
space (IS). A vector xµ in PS has real xi and imaginary x4. However, we do not have
any direct information about the nature of a vector in IS. We now proceed to study the
nature of a vector in IS.

Denote the vectors in PS, and in IS by uµ and ¯uµ respectively, and the time variables
corresponding to u4 and ¯u4 by t and ¯t. The Lagrangian of our system can be generalized
to contain variables of both PS and IS. For a free particle in classical mechanics, the
Lagrangian is a scalar, and is a function of the square of the velocity of the particle.
Velocity terms like d¯ui
dt appear in Equation (2), which implies that, by symmetry, terms
like dui
d¯t should be included in the generalized Lagrangian. This generalized Lagrangian
d¯t , d¯ui
dt , dui
should contain all the velocity terms, dui
d¯t , plus small coupling terms.
Since we are interested only in the main qualitative features of the Lagrangian, in order to
elucidate the nature of the 4-vector in IS, then we may neglect the small coupling terms
and express the Lagrangian as

dt , and d¯ui

L = L1 (cid:0)

d¯ui
d¯t (cid:1)
= L1 (ui, t) + L2 (ui, ¯t) + L3 (¯ui, t) + L4 (¯ui, ¯t)

+ L2 (cid:0)

+ L3 (cid:0)

+ L4 (cid:0)

dui
d¯t (cid:1)

dui
dt (cid:1)

d¯ui
dt (cid:1)

(6)
(7)

This Lagrangian now allows the system to be treated like a problem with four independent
particles. L1 describes a physical particle in PS. Each of the other three parts of the
Lagrangian has either an unphysical particle or an unphysical space. L2 describes a
particle in PS, but which is varying with respect to its internal time. The particle described
by L2 has coordinate variables which should be considered to be independent of the ui
in L1. Since the motion described by L2 is unphysical, then the location described by L2
should be imaginary. Furthermore, the internal time carried by an unphysical real particle
should also be considered as imaginary. For L3 and L4, we can assume that, when the
universe was created, the four vectors were created together by taking all possible real
and imaginary combinations of the (ui,t) with equal probability. As a result, we have the
greater space

GS = P1 (ui, t) + P2 (iui, it) + P3 (¯ui, i¯t) + P4 (i¯ui, ¯t)

(8)

where ui, ¯ui, t, ¯t are real numbers. In 1998, one of the authors [3] suggested this simple
idea of a complex space-time, and now we develop it further.

In physical space, if we can describe the system of L1+L2 of Equation (7), then a well-
behaved wave function Φ(xi, i¯xi; t, i¯t) must exist. For a stationary state, the spatial dis-
tribution must be independent of time, so Φ can be factored,

Φ = Φ(X)Φ(T ), where X = x + i¯x and T = t + i¯t

(9)

Extension of Dirac theory and the classiﬁcation of elementary particles

4

We can reasonably assume the simple conditions that Φ is a harmonic function of (x, i¯x)
and (t, i¯t) respectively, and that Φ has continuous partial derivatives of second order which
satisfy the Laplace equations

Since x and i¯x are
Φ(X) = Φ(x)Φ(i¯x) , and similarly for Φ(T ). The solutions can be written as

can justiﬁably write

independent, we

the

factorization

∂2Φ(X)

∂x2 +
∂2Φ(T )

∂t2 +

∂2Φ(X)
∂ ¯x2
∂2Φ(T )
∂¯t2

= 0

= 0

Φ(X) = A exp(±ikx) exp(±ik(i¯x))
Φ(T ) = B exp(−iωt) exp(−iω(i¯t))

(10)

(11)

(12)
(13)

In Equation (12) we have chosen the direction of k along the x axes, and the i¯x along the
x-axes but independent of x. In Equation (13), note that we are concerned with a free
electron, which is not an anti-particle, and therefore we must take the positive frequency
solution for the wave function. This is also true for wave functions in L2, L3, L4, because
they describe the motion of electrons in diﬀerent regions of greater space.
If we had
taken both the positive and the negative frequencies for ω, then the ﬁnal total wave
function would have the form of a exp(−iωt) + b exp(iωt), which is a mixture of a particle
and an anti-particle. The latter should be clear because negative frequency solutions
correspond to anti-particles. This is easily seen by transforming the Dirac equation in
a electromagnetic ﬁeld by a time-reversal plus a charge conjugation. However, since
the charge operator commutes with the Hamiltonian, then the charge eigenvalue can be
simultaneously measured with the energy eigenvalue. Thus, the energy eigenfunction must
also be a charge eigenfunction. Hence, energy eigenfunctions are not comprised of mixed
charge states. That is to say, energy eigenfunctions are not comprised of a mixture of
particle and anti-particle states. By setting ¯x=¯t=0, we get a projected free wave solution
in physical space with only real space-time variables, corresponding to a particle with
energy and momentum as E = ~ω and p = ~k.

Consider the four independent particles speciﬁed by the four 4-vectors of equation (8).
The single particle states are generated by solving, for each particle, a Dirac equation
In the physical xi-space, there are two single particles, a
in the corresponding region.
physical particle and an unphysical particle, while there are two identical particles, both
unphysical, in the internal ¯xi-space. For a stationary state, a total state function is the
product ψ1ψ2ψ34, where ψ1 and ψ2 are single particle states for particles 1 and 2, and ψ34
is a two-particle state for particles 3 and 4. Each ψ has a spatial xi-part and a spin part.
The xi-part of each ψ must satisfy equation (10). The solution in equation (12) is the
xi-parts of ψ1ψ2. Since p1 corresponds to physical space, ψ1 must have a good momentum,
so there is only one momentum state in ψ1. ψ2 can take two momentum states, those in
equation (10). Similarly, for the unphysical regions of L3+L4, we have 2
2 momentum
states. For the spin part of the wave function, since the spin is diagonalized in the rest
frame of L1, the particle can only take one spin state in L1. This state cannot be mixed

N

Extension of Dirac theory and the classiﬁcation of elementary particles

5

with any unphysical spin state. In the other three parts, L2, L3, L4 of unphysical space,
each part has two independent spin states. Therefore, for a fermion, with spin states
and momentum states taken together, the total number of independent internal states
generated from L2+L3+L4 is

Number of internal states = 2

2

O
O h1

2

O

M

2

2

2

O
O
3i O h1

O
3i O

M

2

= 2

(14)

(15)

The ﬁrst 2 and the last 2 in Equation (15) come from the spin states and the momentum
states of L2 while the two brackets come from those states of L3 and L4. The ﬁrst 2 in
Equation (15) means that, all fermions are grouped in doublets, such as (νe), (νµµ), (νtt)
and (ud), (cs), (tb). The ﬁrst bracket in Equation (15) signiﬁes that, all the above doublets
are divided into color singlets with zero color plus color triplets (each quark has three color
states). The second bracket signiﬁes that, the above entities are further divided into a
generation singlet which we shall explain later, plus a generation triplet which contain
three lepton doublets (νe), (νµµ), (νtt) and three quark doublets (ud), (cs), (tb). As far as
the last 2 is concerned, we postulate that when our universe was created, the creator might
have designed a duality for particles to have a symmetry of electricity and magnetism,
such as an electron and a magnetron, a proton and a magnetic proton, a quark and
a magnetic quark. However, no experimental evidence exists for magnetic charges, or
monopoles. Thus far, experimental evidence is consistent only with asymmetric Maxwell
equations: that we have ∇ · E = 4πρ, but ∇ · B = 0. Could the magnetic matter exist
elsewhere in the universe? If it could, then this would vindicate the brilliant theoretical
argument of Dirac [4]: that the mere existence of one magnetic monopole in the universe
would oﬀer an explanation of the discrete nature of electric charge, and thus solve one of
the most profound mysteries of the physical world.
2, ± 1
For a one particle state, deﬁne the color-spin and the generation-spin as (sc, mc) = ( 1
2)
and (sg, mg) = ( 1
2 ), respectively. Then the two particle color-spin wave functions
Φc(SM) can be written as a singlet state Φc(0, 0), and triplet states Φc(1, 1), Φc(1, 0),
Φc(1, −1). The singlet is anti-symmetric:

2, ± 1

The triplet is symmetric:

Φc(0, 0) = 1

√2 (cid:16)φ(+)

1 φ(

−
2

)

)

− φ(
−

1 φ(+)
2 (cid:17)

Φc(1, 0) = 1

√2 (cid:16)φ(+)

)

1 φ(+)
2 (cid:17)

−

)

−

1 φ(
= φ(+)
)
= φ(
−

2 + φ(
1 φ(+)
1 φ(

−
2

2

)

Φc(1, 1)
Φc(1, −1)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

The two particle generation-spin wave functions Φg(S′M ′) can be written in a similar way.

In the total wave function ψ1ψ2ψ34 of a fermion, ψ1 and ψ2 are single particle wave
functions, and ψ34 is a two identical particle wave function in internal space, as was

Extension of Dirac theory and the classiﬁcation of elementary particles

6

discussed above. We only need to consider ψ34=Φc(SM)Φg(S′M ′). We assert now that
the exclusion principle is also valid in internal space, that the total wave function of
a system of identical fermions must be anti-symmetric. All leptons have singlet color
wave functions Φc(0, 0) with zero color, which are anti-symmetric. The three generations
of leptons, (νe), (νµµ), (νtt), have symmetric triplet generation wave functions,Φg(1, M),
M = 1, 0, −1, so their total wave function Φc(00)Φg(1M) are anti-symmetric. Therefore,
the above three doublets of leptons do not violate the exclusion principle, and are free
states in nature. There are also singlet generation leptons Φg(0, 0), for which the total
wave functions Φc(00)Φg(00) are symmetric. These wave functions violate the exclusion
principle, and cannot be found as free states.
In this work, we shall not discuss the
possibility of having compounds states for this kind of particle.
All quarks have triplet color wave functions, Φc(1, M), M = 1, 0, −1, which are symmet-
ric. The three generations of quarks, (ud), (cs), (tb), have symmetric generation wave
functions, Φg(1, M), so the total wave functions, Φc(1M)Φg(1M) are symmetric. These
wave functions also violate the exclusion principle, and cannot be found as free states.
They can only exist in a compound system.

There is one last case, where a quark takes triplet color state Φc(1, M) and a singlet
generation state Φg(00). This wave function is anti-symmetric, which does not violate the
exclusion principle, and thus this quark can exist as a free state in nature. In 1981, W.
M. Fairbank, a Guggenheim Fellow, and his colleagues [5, 6, 7] reported measurements
which showed unambiguously the existence of fractional charges of ± 1
If Fairbank’s
3 .
measurements are correct, then his quarks could be identiﬁed as the quarks which we
described as Φc(1, M)Φg(00). However, other groups need to conﬁrm Fairbank’s rsults,
and further work is certainly needed.

References

[1] H. A. Bethe, and R. W. Jackiw, Intermediate quantum mechanics, third ed. 1986,

Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. New York.

[2] P. A. M. Dirac, The principles of quantum mechanics, fourth ed. 1958 Oxford Univ.

Press, London.

Phys./9804016, (1998).

[3] L. Lin, On the possibility of a complex 4-dimensional space-time manifold, Gen.

[4] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A133, 60 (1931); Phys. Rev. 74, 883 (1948).

[5] G. S. LaRue, W. M. Fairbank, and A. F. Hebard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1011 (1977).

[6] G. S. LaRue, W. M. Fairbank, and J. D. Phillips, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 142, 1019(E)

(1979).

[7] G. S. La Rue, J. D. Phillips, and W. M. Fairbank, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 967, (1981).

