6 On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

Paul Bird
The Tower, Church Lane, Bedlington, Northumberland, NE22 5EL

E-mail: paulbird@whsurf.net

Abstract.

In this paper we shall show how to construct two new superstring theories
in dimensions 12 and 16 which satisfy the Lorenz symmetries in 4 dimensions after
compactiﬁcation but which satisfy diﬀerent symmetry groups before compactiﬁcation.
The arguments are also applied to supergravity theory. We write the ﬁrst few terms
of these new supergravity actions. The new supergravity actions can be expressed in
terms of 3-branes and 5-branes respectively.

PACS numbers: 04.65+e,04.70.s

Submitted to: Class. Quantum Grav.

0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

2

1. Introduction

One of the most profound results to come from the study of superstring theory is that
the number of dimensions is ﬁxed by the theory. The theory is only consistent in 10
dimensions. We shall argue in this paper that an assumption made in constructing the
superstring theory which arrives at this result can be altered and yet we still end up
with a theory which is consistent and is Lorenz invariant in our 4 space-time dimensions
after compactiﬁcation.

2. Superstring Dimensions

To derive the number of dimensions in standard superstring theory we look for a theory
in D dimensions which is Lorenz invariant in D dimensions. In other words we specify
that the rotation group of the space must be O(D-1,1). We ﬁnd that these constraints
can only be satisﬁed in the quantisized theory when D=26 for bosonic string theory
and D=10 for superstring theory. Next to make contact with the real world we specify
that all but 4 of these dimensions are compactiﬁed. So we end up with a theory with
4 inﬁnite dimensions which are Lorenz invariant in 4 dimensional space with rotation
group O(3,1) and has a gauge group corresponding to how the other dimensions were
compactiﬁed.

3. The Physics

The essential physics of this procedure is that the ﬁnal theory must be Lorenz invariant
in 4 dimensions to be a realistic physical theory. However the assumption that the
uncompacted theory in D dimensions must also be Lorenz invariant is an assumption
which need not necessarily hold true. That is, the rotation group of the D dimensional
space need not necessarily be O(D-1,1). We have no physical evidence that it should
be. The reason this assumption is made is by analogy to the real 4 dimensional space.
However so long as there is a way to compactify the dimensions to leave 4 dimensions
having rotation group O(3,1) then we are free to consider other groups. We should
consider any group for which the group O(3,1) is a subgroup. Not all groups will work
since only certain groups are compatible with the quantisized string theory. We can
summarise this circular relation as:

group family → constraints → number of dimensions → unique group

4. The Superstring groups

The main lie group families that we shall consider are the three that correspond to
Lorenz transformations in real, complex and quaternion space: O(n), SU(n) and HU(n).
See the appendix for alternative names for the group HU(n). These groups apply in

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

3

dimensions of D=n, D=2n and D=4n respectively. After compactiﬁcation they must
leave the rotation group O(3,1) so this must be a subgroup.

For example if we consider the rotation group of the D=2n dimensional space to
be SU(n) then this alters the constraints on the quantisized string theory. Again these
constraints can only be satisﬁed in a certain number dimensions. We shall derive the
number of dimensions in several diﬀerent ways.

5. Light Cone Gauge

Firstly we use the straight forward intuitive method of using the light-cone gauge. In
the light cone gauge, to avoid ghosts, we set:
X ± = X 0 ± X 1

which leaves D-2 transverse dimensions over which we sum when we calculate the string
modes. In real space the anomalous factor to be considered is:

1 −

D − 2
24

which becomes zero if we set D=26.
light-cone co-ordinates to:

Z ± = Z 0 ± Z 1

In complex string theory we set the complex

leaving D-4 transverse dimensions.
dimensions - see appendix). The anomalous factor is then:

(We count each complex dimension counts as 2

This becomes zero when we set D=28 which makes the Lorenz group for complex bosonic
string theory SU(14). For quaternion space the anomalous term is:

1 −

D − 4
24

1 −

D − 8
24

which gives D=32 and Lorenz group HU(8). Since there are no more lie group families
we can’t go any further than this.

6. Superstrings

For superstring theory the anomalous parts that must be set to zero are

1 −

, 1 −

D − 2
8

D − 8
8
respectively, which gives the groups O(10), SU(6) and HU(4) in dimensions D=10, D=12
and D=16. We have outlined the argument in a simple intuitive way in order to show
how to simply calculate the number of dimensions of the three string theories.

D − 4
8

, 1 −

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

4

7. Complex Dimensions

So we ﬁnd that for bosonic strings we have a maximum of 32 uncompacted dimensions,
and for superstrings we have a maximum of 16 uncompacted dimensions. It is hard for
us to imagine a space of higher than 4 dimensions let alone one with a complex Lorenz
group structure but there are no physical reasons for dismissing such spaces so long as
the compactiﬁed model restores the 4 dimensional space with Lorenz group O(3,1).

8. Compactiﬁcaction

When we compactify all but 4 dimensions we need to be careful which dimensions we
choose. For example for the case of SU(6) if we compactify all but 2 complex dimensions
that would leave the group SU(2)=O(3) which is smaller than O(3,1). We can get around
this by compacting all but one component of 4 complex dimensions giving an O(4) group.
In the case of HU(4) we can compactify all complex parts of the dimensions to leave an
O(4) group.

9. Three Models

We have shown the existence of three superstring theories with uncompacted rotation
groups of O(10), SU(6) and HU(4) so which one, if any, represents reality and what
about the other two? If the progress of science is anything to go by then theories with
higher symmetries tend to be less prone to inconsistencies. Therefor we would expect
HU(4) superstring theory to be the closest to reality since it is the only one with the
additional quaternion symmetry. If this is the case then we would expect that the other
two superstring theories contain inﬁnities. Of course the fact that its dimensionality is
4 suggests that we may ﬁnd a simple explanation of why all but 4 of these dimensions
are compactiﬁed.

10. Physics in Complex Space

What exactly is physics in complex space? For the most part physics in D complex
dimensions is the same as physics in 2D real dimensions. In complex space, however,
the physics of an object is not necessarily the same for every O(2D) rotation we make
on it. Only a subset of these rotations namely the ones that form the group SU(D)
leave its physics unchanged. Subsequently there are more distinct geometric objects in
complex space because they can’t be identiﬁed with each other by an O(2D) rotation.
Fortunately due to the identity O(2)=U(1), the physics of 2-dimensional space is the
same in both cases.

As a more complicated example,

imagine embedding a 4 dimensional object
such as a string world path into 2 complex dimensions. Because of the identity
O(4)=SU(2)xSU(2) this means that depending on the orientation of the string in real

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

5

space you actually create a family of string paths in complex space, none of which can
be identiﬁed via complex rotation. We can label these objects with the 3 parameters of
the SU(2) group which is not being used. Hence our intuitive picture of a string world
path in 4 dimensions becomes a family of distinctly diﬀerent world paths in 2 complex
dimensions each with its own unique probability amplitude which is a function of the 3
left over parameters.

Some readers may object to the notion of complex time, however this isn’t a problem
so long as we realise that the theory only makes sense when the extraneous dimensions
are compacted and we are left with 3+1 real space-time dimensions. After that we can
treat the time variable as usual.

11. Complex Superstring theory

String theory in complex space is constructed with analogy to string theory in real space
but now unfortunately we no longer have the direct analogy to vibrating strings that we
ﬁnd in our 3+1 dimensional real space-time. We have to use mathematical consistency
alone. The Polyakov action [3] for complex bosonic string theory is:

S = −

1

4πα′ ZM

(−γ)−1/2γab∂aZµ∂bZ µdσdτ

where the space-time co-ordinates are now complex. Most of string theory can easily
be carried over into complex space. The main diﬀerences being the introduction of
conjugates and a diﬀerent number of dimensions. In fact, the spectrums of the three
string theories have the same number of particles (since this is down to the conformal
properties of the string and not how many space-time dimensions the string exists in).
For example the Type I strings all have 128 bosons and 128 fermions at the ﬁrst level
suggesting that they correspond to a supergravity theory. The interesting bit comes
when we compactify extraneous dimensions to get the gauge groups in 4 dimensional
space-time.

12. Heterotic Strings

These types of string theory can be thought of as combining the bosonic string for
clockwise moving strings and the superstring for anticlockwise moving strings. The
diﬀerence between the number of dimensions of the two theories must be compactiﬁed
on a lattice. For the 10 dimensional heterotic string we must compactify 26-10=16
dimensions. We end up with a gauge group of O(32) or E8xE8 depending on which
even self-dual lattice we chosen. Even self-dual lattices exist only in 8n dimensions.
For all our new string theories the number of dimensions to be compactiﬁed for their
heterotic versions also turns out always to be 16.

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

6

13. Supergravity

Supergravity can be thought of either as superstring theory in some limit or as the low
energy limit of a new 11 dimensional theory of membranes referred to as M-Theory.
Either way supergravity is always one (complex) dimension larger than the equivalent
string theory. Thus we expect to ﬁnd two new supergravity theories in complex and
quaternion space: SU(7/1) supergravity and HU(5/1) supergravity. As in string theory
all but 4 of these dimensions must be compacted to leave a 4 dimensional real space
with O(3,1) Lorenz symmetry.

To show the plausibility of this statement we note that 11 dimensional supergravity

is constructed from three objects:

{eA

M , AM N P , ψM }

Supersymmetry requires that the number of independent boson components is equal to
the number of independent fermion components. We can use this result to construct
In complex
supergravity theories with complex and quaternion Lorenz symmetries.
space, for example, gmn becomes a hermitian tensor. These new restrictions alter the
number of independent components of the ﬁelds and also alters the number of dimensions
that the boson components become equal to the fermion components.

The number of fermion components for real supergravity is given by:

(d − 3)2[d/2]−1

which are the number of gauge-invariant components of a Majorna-Weyl spin 3/2 ﬁeld in
d dimensions. For d=11 this gives 128 components. When we extend this into complex
space the dimensions we are interested in occur when d-3 is a power of 2. For d-3=8, 4
and 2 we expect to ﬁnd supergravity theories OSp(11/1), SU(7/1) and HU(5/1). These
are all 1 (complex) dimension larger than their equivalent superstring theories which is
due to the quantity d-3 being considered as opposed to d-2 for string theory. These three
supergravity theories are the largest possible in their respective categories that have
ﬁelds with spins no higher than 2 when compacted down to 4 dimensions. This is shown
by noting that there are 8 steps between spins of -2 and +2. We calculate the maximum
number of steps for the respective theories as follows: (11-3)=8 for real supergravity,
2x(7-3)=8 for complex supergravity and 4x(5-3)=8 for quaternion supergravity.
[2]
All three theories have precisely 128 bosons and 128 fermions. We might be tempted
to say that therefor they are the same theory, however the particles fall into diﬀerent
groupings for each theory and the resulting gauge groups that we get from compactifying
the dimensions down to 4 is diﬀerent for each theory. SU(7/1) and HU(5/1) supergravity
theories also have additional symmetries not present in OSp(11/1) supergravity.

After compactiﬁaction to 4 dimensions we are left with maxmimum gauge groups
of O(8), SU(6) and HU(5) respectively. It is interesting to note that the last two groups
SU(6) and HU(5) contain within them the minimal guage group of the Standard Model
U(1)xSU(2)xSU(3) which is a distinct advantage over real supergravity. Of course we
get the down side of having to deal with complex space, however this can be sensibily

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

7

dealt with if the correct compactiﬁcation is found so as to leave 3+1 dimensional real
space.

To ﬁnd the action for each of these supergravity theories we can examine the low
energy limits for the equivalent string theory and then extrapolate from there. As in
the case of OSp(11/1) supergravity we don’t expect these to be renormalizable theories.
However they serve as a useful basis in the investigation of string theory and M-Theory.
We will write the ﬁrst few terms of these actions:

14. OSp(11/1) Supergravity Action

We will brieﬂy review the 11 dimensional supergravity action. This is made from three
objects:

{eA

M , AM N P , ψM }

The presence of the 3rd rank tensor tells us that this theory contains membranes (2-
branes). It is thought to be the low energy limit of a new 11 dimensional membrane
theory called M-Theory. The action for this begins [2]:

SOsp(11/1) =

Z

dx11(

eR + a1eF 2 + a2κεM1..M11FM1..M4FM5..M8AM9..M11 + O(ψ))

1
κ2

where F is the curl of A. The a’s are certain deﬁned constants.

15. SU(7/1) Supergravity Action

We can derive this either by considering the link to SU(6) string theory or from ﬁrst
principles by brute force by counting components. We ﬁnd that it includes these three
objects:

{eA

M , AM N

P Q , ψM }

The vierbein, e, is now a hermitian tensor and A is antisymmetric in two pairs of indicies
and anti-hermitian in the other two. The presence of the 4th rank tensor also tells us
that this theory contains 3-branes in 14 dimensions. The action for this begins:

SSU (7/1) =

Z

dz7dz7(

eR + b1e|F |2 + b2κεN1..N7εM1..M7F N1N2N3

M1M2 F N4N5

M3M4M5AN6N7

M6M7 + ...)

1
κ2

We can think of it as the low energy limit of a 14 dimensional theory of 3-branes which
we shall call C-Theory (where C stands for complex).

16. HU(5/1) Supergravity Action

We ﬁnd that it includes these three objects:

{eA

M , AM N P

QRS , ψM }

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

8

The tensors now have quaternion-hermitian and quaternion-antihermitian symmetries.
The presence of the 6th rank tensor tells us that this theory contains 5-branes in 20
dimensions. The action for this begins:

S =

Z

1
κ2

|dq|20(

eR + b1e|F |2 + b2κf N1..N10

M1..M10F N1N2N3N4

M1M2M3 F N5N6N7

M4M5M6M7AN8N9N10

M8M9M10 + ...)

Where f is a constant tensor which preserves the quaternion symmetry. We can think
of it as the low energy limit of a 20 dimensional theory of 5-branes which we shall call
Q-Theory (where Q stands for quaternion). Because of the non-commutative nature
of quaternions, this action is the most diﬃcult to write and calculate. Mixing non-
commutative space-dimensions with anti-commutative super-space dimensions creates
some interesting and nonintuitive objects such as quaternion Grassman numbers which
have intriguing properties such as θ4 = θ2θ2
= 0 and θ3θ 6= 0. Hence although
theoretically this theory is the most symmetric of all three supergravity actions, what
we gain in symmetry we lose in the intuitiveness of the action.

17. Compactiﬁcation

Each supergravity action is one complex dimension larger than the equivalent string
theory. Thus if we compactify one complex dimension of each theory we should get a
string theory. For M-Theory compactifying one real dimension turns the membranes
(2-branes) into strings (1-branes). We get 10 dimensional superstring theory.
For C-Theory we compactify one complex dimension which is the same as two real
dimensions, so this turns the 3-branes into 1-branes so this gives us SU(6) superstring
theory.
For Q-Theory we compactify one quaternion dimension which is the same as 4 real
dimensions so this turns the 5-branes into 1-branes so this gives us HU(4) superstring
theory.

18. Dual Branes

Each theory consists of p-branes and their duals (q-branes). These arise from the dual
of the F tensor and so the simple formula to connect p-branes and their duals is:

p + q + 4 = D

From this we deduce that M-Theory includes Membranes (2-branes) and 5-branes (as
well as other objects) where D=11.
C-Theory includes 3-branes and 7-branes (as well as other objects) where D=14.
Q-Theory includes 5-branes and 11-branes (as well as other objects) where D=20;

19. Conclusion

We have shown that an assumption in constructing superstring theory which leads to the
result that it is only consistent in 10 uncompacted dimensions can be changed and this

On Superstring and Supergravity Dimensions

9

change leads to other superstring theories with 12 or 16 uncompacted dimensions. These
superstring theories possess higher symmetries. We also get diﬀerent gauge groups when
we compactify each theory down to 4 dimensions. We summarise the results below in
this table. These are the primary results of this paper.

20. Table 1

Bosonic String Supergravity
O(26),D=26
SU(14),D=28
HU(8),D=32

Superstring
OSp(11/1),D=11 O(10),D=10
SU(6),D=12
SU(7/1),D=14
HU(4),D=16
HU(5/1),D=20

Appendix A. Appendix

The real, complex, quaternion number ﬁelds are represented by R, C, H where H stands
for ‘hypercomplex’. The quaternion Lorenz group HU(n) is known by other names as
U(n,H), Sp(n), Sp(2n), Usp(2n). We have used this notation in order to emphasise
it as a group of quaternion dimension n. HU(n) is the group of quaterion-unitary
matrices applied on the left only. To include all quaternion rotations we can include
unit quaternions multiplied on the right. This extends the group to HU(n)xH.

The factor 1/24 comes in light-cone string theory comes from summing the inﬁnite

number of modes of the string using zeta function regularisation:

∞

Xn=1

n
2

1
2

=

ζ(−1) = −

1
24

The term ‘dimension’ in this paper refers to any independent degree of freedom. For
example we can talk of a complex number as being 2 dimensional and a quaternion as
being 4 dimensional. When we talk of ‘complex dimensions’ however we are referring
to pairs of variables. For example a complex number has 1 complex dimension. The
variable D always refers to ‘dimensions’, a small d refers to complex dimensions.

References

[1] Polchinski, Joseph, String Theory (Volume 1), (Cambridge University Press, 1998).
[2] Kaku, Michio Introduction to Superstrings and M-Theory, (Springer Verlag New York, 1999).
[3] Polyakov, A.M, Phys Lett. 103B, 207 211 (1981).
[4] Sethi, Savdeep, A Survey of High-Dimensional Supergravity, (July 2001).

