6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Duality : A Bridge Between Physics And Philosophy?∗

A. N. Mitra †

February 2, 2008

Abstract

A generalized view of Duality is oﬀered as a bridge between physical sciences and the more abstract
philosophical dimensions bordering on mysticism. To that end several examples of duality are ﬁrst
cited from from conventional physics sectors to illustrate the obvious powers of this principle. These
include items from reciprocity in Newtonian mechanics to the problem of measurement duality that
characterizes quantum mechanics. It is also noted that the latter has acquired a renewed interest
in recent times, consequent on the emergence of new experimental techniques for testing the actual
laboratory outcomes of traditional gedanken experiments, hitherto taken for granted. Against this
background, the Duality principle is sought to be extended to the mystical domain, with convincing
examples from various human level experiences.

1 Introduction

The year 2005 that has just ended, witnessed the centenary of Einstein’s 1905 revolution that changed
the entire face of Physics. And now comes 2006 which is of special signiﬁcance to this country, namely,
the birth centenary of D.S. Kothari, a philosopher scientist who played a key role in directing the course
of science in Independent India, by stressing the ”value system” that goes with it. Therefore in tune with
his value-based philosophy, it is perhaps appropriate to choose the theme of this article as Duality, since
it touches on both aspects of knowledge, namely physics and philosophy. The idea is not completely new,
since I had written a similar article 20 years ago, on the occasion of his eightieth birthday [1]. While
the theme of the present article overlaps with that of [1], and I shall draw freely from [1], the relative
emphasis nevertheless warrants a fresh presentation of the Duality theme.

Now the traditional implication of Duality in physics concerns the incompatibility of measurement of
two canonically conjigate variables. However, in tune with [1], it is both necessary and suﬃcient to give
an extended meaning of this magic word to cover several other sectors of physics as well. To that end,
we identify as many as FIVE distinct facets of duality in physics, namely: Reciprocity;
Parallelism;
Alternative formulation;

Synthesis; and of course Measurement incompatibility.

2 Aspects of Duality in Physics

We give in this Section some illustrative examples of the ﬁrst four kinds of Duality in Physics, leaving
the (more involved) ﬁfth one for the next Section.

2.1 Reciprocity (Mutuality) Aspect

For certain situations, the mathematical equations suggest a sort of mutuality or reciprocal relationship
between the dual partners. We list three examples [1], each of which implies a deep underlying symmetry
in the corresponding physical situation. The ﬁrst relation is

−
The symmetry implied by this relation is that the mutual potential energy of any two bodies is an
invariant function of their relative distance, and not of their absolute positions. The next one is from

~A(action) =

~R(reaction)

∗This article is dedicated to the memory of Prof D.S. Kothari on his birth centenary.
†e.mail : ganmitra@nde.vsnl.net.in

1

Maxwell equations in vacuum :

E =

∂tB/c;

∇ ×

−

∇ ×

B = ∂tE/c

Such a reciprocal relationship between the electric and magnetic vectors was conjectured by Maxwell
to bring out the full symmetry of their mutual interdependence, which in turn is essential for current
conservation, while the tiny ‘displacement current’ (detected later) was a byproduct of Maxwell’s deep
insight into inter-relationship between the two vectors. A third relationship of this kind stems from the
Hamilton’s equations of motion in terms of canonically conjugate variables (p, q) :

∂pH = dq/dt;

∂qH = dp/dt

These equations, whose physical content is strictly conﬁned to Newton’s original laws of motion, bring
out rather convincingly the reprocity of the roles of the q- and p-variables, a feat achieved through
Hamilton’s penetrating formulation of the laws of Newtonian mechanics, which was subsequently to pave
the ‘golden road to quantization’ [2] at the hands of Heisenberg and Schroedinger.

More examples of mutually inter-dependent pairs may be found from the mathematical theory of
transforms (Fourier, Hilbert) which reveal such relationships (together with their diverse physical con-
sequences) in a most succinct manner. Thus while the theory of Fourier transforms is at the root of
duality between coordinate space )x) and wave number space (k), Hilbert transforms illustrate the value
of analyticity in the complex plane in bringing out the inter-relationship among the real and imaginary
parts of a scattering amplitude. There are many such duality relationships in physics.

2.2 Parallelism (Analogy) Aspect

The analogy aspect is best illustrated by Fermat’s principle for optics, versus Maupertius principle for
mechanics :

δ

Z

µds = 0

δ

Z

⇐⇒

pds = 0

This close parallelism between the respective laws between two widely diﬀerent branches of physics was
to play a crucial role in Schroedinger’s formulation of wave mechanics from its classical ”ray” (¯h
0)
picture, as the mechanical analog of wave vs ray optics.

→

A brilliant example of the parallelism aspect of Duality is expressed by a profound correspondence

between classical and quantum mechanics in the form

A, B

{

} ⇐⇒

1
i¯h

[A, B]

discovered bt Dirac during one of his long evening walks in his early Cambridge days [3]

2.3 Alternative Formulation Aspect

Still another feature of Duality concerns the formal equivalence of certain alternative formulations ap-
parently unrelated to each other, yet having the same physical content. The Heisenberg vs Schroedinger
formulations of quantum mechanics represent precisely such a physical situation. Although their equiv-
alence is now text-book material, their apparent dissimilarity at the initial stages of formulation had
catalyzed the polarization of two strong schools of thought [4] , viz., i) Heisenberg’s algebraic approach
emphasizing the corpuscular aspect characterized by discontinuity; vs ii) Schroedinger’s analytic approach
in terms of a wave equation stressing the elements of continuity [1]. Subsequently it was found that the
two approaches diﬀered only by a unitary transformation !

A dramatic manifestation of the alternative formulation aspect showed up in the orthodox Tomonaga-
Schwinger (ﬁeld theoretic) versus the highly unorthodox Feynman (diagrammatic) formulations of co-
variant quantum electrodynamics. The two formulations looked widely diﬀerent, but it was Dyson’s
catalytic role which reconciled the two when he [5] derived the Feynman diagrams from the premises of
the Tomonaga-Schwinger formalism. And later, the traditional rivalry between Feynman and Schwinger
showed up even more acutely in terms of Path Integral formalism [6] of the former, versus Source Theory
[7] of the latter, even though the respective contents are basically identical !

At a more impersonal level, a good example of the complementary aspect of Duality is aﬀorded by
the empirical ﬁnite energy sum rules (FESR), wherein the contributions to a high energy scattering

2

Figure 1: A three-way interlinkage

amplitude by the direct s-channel resonances are supposed to saturate the corresponding contributions
from the exchange (u, t) channels [8]. This form of duality led to the Veneziano model [9] which received
considerable reﬁnements at various hands (Harari, Rosner, Fubini et al), eventually giving rise to Nambu’s
String Model [10], that was the forerunner of the modern theory of strings.

2.4

Synthesis (Uniﬁcation) Aspect

A major aspect of Duality, relating to the synthesis of certain pairs of physical concepts, is embodied
in the theory of relativity which provides an integrated view of the space-time continuum, as opposed
to the Newtonian ‘partition’ of their respective foundations [1]. The parallel concepts of wave-vector &
frequency; momentum & energy 4-vectors are linked to space-time by Fourier transforms and canonical
conjugation respectively. On the other hand their direct link is provided by quantum theory :

p = ¯hk; E = ¯hω

The situation is illustrated in Fig 1.

A dramatic manifestation of the uniﬁcation aspect of Duality is the prediction of antimatter as a
result of the successful marriage of the dual partners represented by Relativity and Quantum theory
under the auspices of Dirac who eﬀectively showed that the marriage is not possible at the level of single
particles, but only in the collective context of particles and antiparticles; in other words, in a f ield theory
[11].

As a ﬁnal example of the uniﬁcation aspect of Duality, the concept of Supersymmetry [12] purports
to project an integrated view of bosons and f ermions, hitherto believed to be two distinct fundamental
species, totally unrelated to each other. The Bose-Fermi symmetry or SUSY, as this new theory is called,
has some highly attractive theoretical features, like an ability to cure some vexing problems of inﬁnities,
but its predictions are yet to ﬁnd experimental support. The theoretic investment in this ﬁeld has been
extremely rich in recent years, with allied developments in Supergravity, superstrings, and so on, but
there has been almost zero development on the (dual) experimental front. Table 1 below gives a list of
the various dual partners in physics, discussed in the foregoing.

3 Measurement Aspect of Duality

Finally we come to the most important (quantum mechanical) aspect of Duality, namely, the incom-
patibility of measurements of certain pairs of dynamical variables known as canonically conjugate pairs,

3

Table 1: Dual partners (physics items)

II-Member
Reaction(R)
Momenta (p, J)
Magnetism
D,H
Volume, strain
Space (r)
Momentum (p)
Mass (m)
Maupertius principle
δ
Photon
Electron

I-Member
Action (A)
Coordinates (q, θ)
Electricity
E, B
Pressure, stress
Time (t)
Energy (E)
Energy (E)
Fermat principle
µds = 0
δ
electromagnetic wave
e− - wave
Schroedinger (wave mech) Heisenberg (matrix mech) Alternative formulations
Schwinger Source theory
Feynman path integral
Exchanges (t u channel)
Resonances (s-channel)
Observable
Observer ( macro appara-
tem)
tus)
Fermion
Boson

Legend/Ref.
Newton III
Hamilton, Jacobi
Faraday–Maxwell
Cause vs eﬀect
Cause vs eﬀect
Einstein’s relativity
Relativity
Relativity
Parallelism
Optics vs Mechanics
Planck
de Broglie

Language duality
FESR duality ( ref. [8] )
Bohr’s duality

Supersymmetry

ρds = 0

(micro

sys-

R

R

together with their derivatives. This shows up as the famous Uncertainty Principle of Heisenberg, which
is mathematically derivable from any consistent form of quantum mechanics (Heisenberg, Schroedinger),
in the form:

∆q.∆p

¯h/2;

if

[q, p] = i¯h

≥

Although a strict mathematical consequence of the tenets of quantum mechanics, the physical signiﬁcance
of the Uncertainty Principle (UP) is nevertheless profound enough to touch instantly on the philosophical
plane. For one thing, it succinctly reveals the paradox of the wave-particle duality which is profoundly
disturbing inasmuch as it goes against all norms of ”classical justice”. For another, the nature of a
‘gedanken experiment’ by which the eﬀects of the UP is sought to be projected, happens to be such as to
preclude the possibility of simultaneous observation of two canonically conjugate variables in the same
experiment . Indeed, any attempt to measure the second variable in an experiment designed to observe the
ﬁrst, will result in a destruction of the property of the former, and vice versa ! This limitation transcends
either the quality of the experimental apparatus or the extent of the human ingenuity in designing
the experiment, since it stems directly from the mutual interaction between the observer (apparatus)
and the observable ( the physical property under study). To make contact with the corresponding
‘classical’ situation, the eﬀect of this interaction is negligible on a macroscopic entity, but non-trivial on a
microscopic one (of atomic dimensions), so much so, that an accurate measurement of one its attributes
precludes a simultaneous knowledge of the canonically conjugate one.

The last aspect of Duality has no counterpart in the other four categories listed earlier, since there
had been no reference to the quantum limitation in any of them. Now the measurement incompatibility
problem is a typical quantum eﬀect, which introduces a characteristic ‘duality’ situation that has no
classical counterpart. And several of the pairs considered in the foregoing will suﬀer the measurement
limitation if viewed from a quantum mechanical angle. A good example is aﬀorded by the ‘reciprocity re-
lated’ variables E, B which indeed suﬀer the measurement incompatibility problem when viewed quantum
mechanically, using the idea of ‘test charges’ for their measurement [13].

3.1 The Copenhagen Interpretation

The Copenhagen Interpretation, which is based on Bohr’s view of Duality, is concerned with the problem
of observer-observable interaction at the quantum level. In a lecture at the International Physics Congress
at Como in 1927 [1], he introduced the principle of complementarity to reconcile the characteristic
features of individual quantum phenomena with the observational problem ”in this ﬁeld of experience”.
In particular, he emphasized ”the impossibility of any sharp separation between the behaviour of atomic

4

objects and their interaction with measuring instruments which serve to deﬁne the conditions under which
the phenomena appear” (quote from Bohr [1]).

This physical picture, which was Bohr’s response to the mathematical content of the UP, was fully in
consonance with the deep insight which had marked his stewardship of atomic physics since its nascent
beginnings early in the last Century. In contrast, the absolute Wave Function approach of Von Neumann
[14], whose adherents included stalwarts like Wigner, Everett, Wheeler and de Witt (see ref [1]), advo-
cated the use of a master wave function which included the wave functions of both the (microscopic)
system under observation, and that of the (macroscopic) measuring apparatus. Without going into the
elaborate rules governing the interaction between these two systems [15], the Copenhagen Interpretation
takes an intensely pragmatic view of the concept of ‘truth’ ( a la William James ?), as may be summarized
in the following two statements:
(a) The quantum theoretic formulation must be interpreted pragmatically [1] ;
(b) Quantum theory provides for a complete scientif ic account of atomic phenomena.
The pragmatic aspect has found expression in numerous thoughts and writings of Bohr on the measure-
ment process itself (for details, see ref.[15]). The ‘completeness’ aspect of quantum theory is more subtle,
and gave rise to the Bohr-Einstein debate. Bohr’s point of view in this regard is aptly summarized by
Stapp [15]. Namely [1], the well-deﬁned objective speciﬁcations on a given phenomenon under study
are not restrictive enough to determine uniquely the course of the individual processes, yet no further
breakdown is possible because of the inherent wholeness of the process symbolized by ¯h. This ‘wholeness’
has no classical analogue which would have recognized the measuring instruments and the atomic objects
as separate entities. Instead, the inseparability of the atomic object from the entire phenomenon renders
a statistical description unavoidable. This way of reconciling the pragmatic character of quantum theory
with the claim of completeness, is based on ” quantum thinking”. Its ultimate validity must be judged
by its af ortiori success which includes coherence and self-consistency.

3.2

EPR paradox and Bell’s Theorem

What was Einstein’s reaction to Bohr’s philosophy ? It was one of profound unhappiness [16] with such
claims of ”completeness” of quantum mechanics ! Compare the above picture with the tenets of classical
realism, namely, (a) all physical attributes of an individual object have deﬁnite values associated with
them at any instant of time, irrespective of their actual ( non-invasive) measurement ; (b) a commonsense
concept locality which allows us to deal with the external world in a piecemeal fashion, not all at once.
Now look at the situation in quantum mechanics :
if two systems have once interacted together, and
later separated (no matter how far), they can no longer be assigned separate state vectors. A famous
example is a spin-zero object at rest, breaking up spontaneously into two fragments with spins S1 and S2
respectively, moving in opposite directions. Now conservation of angular momentum demands that the
two spins be equal and opposite, so that any measurement of, say, S1 will automatically ﬁx the value of
S2, even without an explicit measurement. This situation goes much against intuition, since a physical
interaction between these two objects, receding far away from each other, is negligible. And this was
the bone of contention of the EPR paper [16] on this paradoxical aspect of quantum mechanics. EPR
[16] sharpened the issue further by introducing two deﬁnitions [17, 18] : i) a necessary condition for the
completeness of a theory is that ” every element of the physical reality must have a counterpart in the
physical theory ” ; ii) a suﬃcient condition to identify an element of physical reality is ” if in any way
without disturbing the system, we can predict with certainty the value of a physical quantity, then there
exists an element of reality correspondity to this physical quantity ”. The result of these considerations
was the EPR Theorem [16], viz., the incompatibility of the following two statements :
1) The description via the ψ function of quantum mechanics is complete ;
2) The real states of spatially separated objects are independent of each other.
The second statement goes by the name of ” Einstein’s locality postulate ”, which is clearly incompatible
with the ﬁrst, which asserts that quantum mechanics is a complete description ! This incompatibility
is the EPR Theorem. Thus there is a conﬂict between classical and quantum realisms, to resolve which
calls for a precise experimental test. This test was formulated by John Bell [19] who made the concept
of Einstein locality more precise by introducing ”hidden variables” as a means of circumventing the
counter-intuitiveness implied in the quantum description, and formulating suitable experimental tests
in the form of Bell’s inequalities for a suitable combination, say F , of the amplitudes for two spin-half
particles moving in opposite directions. These combinations would diﬀer according as the information on
Einstein locality (no correlation for widely separated particles) , or that for ‘quantum entanglement’ (no

5

matter how much their separation is), is incorporated. Then Bell’s inequality reads as

F
|
for the two cases respectively. Actual experiment [20] upheld quantum mechanics, thus vindicating Bohr
at least for now.

F
|

| ≤

| ≥

2;

2√2

3.3 Bohr - Einstein Duality

The Bohr-Einstein controversy is a new form of Duality arising from the measurement problem. This is
a strict consequence of the advent of Quantum theory which formally marked the demise of the so-called
Cartesian Partition between the physique and the psyche, and brought about an intricate interaction
between the two. The issue is one which deeply involves physics with philosophy, but it was lying more
or less dormant for many decades. And now it seems to have suddenly sprung up to life during the
last 3 decades, thanks to the i) growth of new experimental techniques (which have given a fresh lease
of life to the experiments hitherto thought to be at the ‘gedanken’ level) on the one hand, and to the
ii) development of quantum technologies of information processing and transfering on the other [21].
The movement has indeed grown up into a full-ﬂedged industry, and shows no signs of abating, but its
direction is not yet clear. It has no doubt generated a good deal of heat in the form of a glossary of
technological jargon, but its concrete success on the physics front is so far highly questionable, since a
resolution of the actual Bohr-Einstein debate is still far from over. Nevertheless, the physics-philosophy
interaction that has thus been generated, formally opens up a bridge for taking physics to a higher plane
of consciousness. The subject is not, since several stalwarts like Fritzof Capra [22], have addressed the
issue, but the renewed interest generated by the measurement vis-a-vis locality problem gives it a further
push. And this brings us to the last phase of this paper which oﬀers a glimpse of what lies beyond.

4 Duality Partners Beyond Physics

So far we have discussed certain concrete facets of Duality during the historic growth of physics through
the ages since Newton. In this development, the Cartesian Partition had remained in the background,
without publicly appearing to inﬂuence the ‘contingent plane’ of empirical and analytic statements, a la
Holton [4]. Newton himself had been aware of the duality between the physique and the psyche, but was
inclined to project only the former, without active encouragement to the latter. His predecessor Kepler,
on the other hand, had relied more heavily on the thematic concepts of the universe as a ‘mathematical
harmony’, and a central theological order [4]. And Newton’s decisive inﬂuence on Western scientiﬁc
thought had much to do with the uneasy balance between a materialistic pursuit of science and an
idealistic devotion to philosophy, that had characterized the thematic development of physics till the early
part of the twentieth century, when Einstein and Bohr came on the scene [23]. Einstein’s deep philosophy
behind his uniﬁed view of space-time continuum on the one hand, and Bohr’s physical insight leading
him to enunciate the Complementarity Principle (CP) as a paraphrase of the Uncertainty Principle on
the other, marked such a radical departure from the Western attitude to science prevalent till then, that
these had the eﬀect of a ”wind of change” on a relatively close and still atmosphere. In particular, the CP
set the Western community of physicists on the formidable task of reorienting their attitudes as a result
of intrusion of dialectics into their traditional modes of thinking. Interestingly enough, Bohr’s exposure
of the same philosophy before the Japanese community met with little resistance to their traditional
Eastern thought , as recounted by Yukawa to Rosenfeld [23].

What is the extra ingredient in Eastern thought with which Bohr’s CP philosophy found such a ready
resonance , despite sounding so unorthodox to the Western school ? This brings us to the contents of
Table 2 which lists some dual partners on the interface between physics and philosophy that cannot be
fathomed with the ‘standard’ methods of physical science. The items listed in this table need to be
read from intuitive and commonsense considerations, with apologies to the orthodox methods of physical
science (see below for further comments).

For any science in its formative stages, the traditional methods of limited hypothesis, checked against
vigorous experimentation and vice versa, have usually proved much more eﬀective than unfettered spec-
ulation of ideas with no comparable degree of experimentation to provide the balance. There comes
nevertheless a stage in its development when this relatively mundane method fails to do adequate jus-
tice to the intellectual aspirations of the scientiﬁc thinker. A very similar stage has been reached in

6

Table 2: Dual partners (beyond physics)

Theory (interpretation)
Subject
Subjective conjectures
Mind (consciosness)
Psyche
Religion (philosophy)
Heart (emotion)
Mysticism (eastern)
Purusha (Source of energy)
Bhakti (blind faith)
Yin (creative instinct)
Faraday–Bohr (intuitive ﬂash) Maxwell-Dirac (mathematical precision)
Private science (random ideas ) Public science (expository skills) ref [4]
Simplicity
Dreaming

Experiment (data)
Object
Objective analysis
Brain (nerve complex)
Physique
Science (pragmatism)
Head (reason)
Modern science (western)
Prakriti (Manifestation of energy)
Gyan (reasoned knowledge)
Yang (mental exercise)

Thoroughness ( Bethe, ref [1])
Doing

modern physics where the uniﬁcation of opposite concepts represents precisely such an aspiration where
the experimental support often lags so far behind the theoretical ideas, that f aith in the latter must,
in the interim, be sustained by considerations of a thematic nature, well before eventual experimental
conﬁrmation, if at all. Such opposite concepts abound at the sub-atomic level where particles are both
continuous and discontinuous; and force and matter are but diﬀerent aspects of the same phenomena.
In all these examples it turns out that the ” framework of opposite concepts, derived from our everyday
experience, is too narrow for the world of subatomic particles ” (Capra, ref [22]).

Some of these situations have already been illustrated under the uniﬁcation (as well as measurement
incompatibility ?) aspects of Duality in the foregoing. In each case, the uniﬁcation occurs on a higher
plane; e.g., space and time become a single entity only in a 4-dimensional continuum; wave and particle
manifestations of an electron / photon get uniﬁed only at the quantum level; matter and anti-matter
require a further synthesis of relativity and quantum theory for a mathematically self-consistent descrip-
tion ; and so on. Fritjof Capra in his remarkable book, Tao of Physics [22], has documented a large class
of such examples (through extensive quotations from appropriate religious, philosophical and scientiﬁc
authorities), in his exploration of parallels between Western physics and Eastern mysticism, and revealed
a profound harmony between the two. In particular, he portrays a simple picture, emanating from the
Chinese symbolism of the archetypal poles Y in and Y ang– two extremes that are constantly engaged in
a dynamic interplay which brings about their unity (T ao) on a higher plane. This picture has a simple
physical analog in the example of a circular motion and its linear projection [22], which is illustrated in
Fig. 2. Note that the continuous oscillation between the two opposite points (Y in - Y ang) is a charac-
teristic only of the linear projection, while the more complete two - dimensional circular motion shows
no such ﬂuctuation.

At this stage, it should be appropriate to cite an example given by the Man in whose honour this
article has been designed. And this is from the Jain Philosophy of Saidavada which shows a remarkable
parallel in wave-particle duality of quantum mechanics, via its f ourth mode of realization of reality,
namely Avayakta (inexpressibility), as described by Kothari in one of his last publications [24].

4.1 Consciousness Dominated Physics ?

Since consciousness is very much a part of the physique - psyche duality, one might wonder if the roles
of these two items could be interchanged, and a quantum theory based on the dominance of the psyche
(consciousness), instead of the more conventional theory dominated by the physique (matter), be pursued
seriously. Actually one such approach has been oﬀered in a recent book [25] by Amit Goswami, a physicist-
turned- philosopher, but it is still too premature to let such ideas, howsoever appealing, compete on equal
terms with conventional quantum mechanics.

7

Figure 2: The dynamical synthesis of opposites

5 Conclusion

Coming back to our Duality theme, we end this narrative with the observation that mystics through
their meditation transcend the realm of intellectual concepts and in so doing, become aware of the
polar relationship of all opposites. Physicists grope for a glimpse of the same through their language of
mathematics. Western philosophers have been keenly aware of this duality ( see, e.g., Emerson’s thesis on
the hidden law of compensation [1]). And today, theoretical physicists are increasingly feeling its impact
as they probe deeper into the mysteries of the sub-atomic world down to 10−17cm, but theoretically all
the way to Planck’s length, having received its ﬁrst taste in Bohr’s CP, supported experimentally by
wave-particle duality. There is no going back on this journey , irrespective of the source, be it modern
physics or mysticism, of its inspiration.

REFERENCES

[1] A.N. Mitra, Duality in Physical Sciences and Beyond, Pramana-J. Phys.27, 73-87, (1986).

[2] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, USA, (1950).

[3] P.A. M. Dirac, in A Lifetime of Physics, IAEA , Vienna, (1968)

[4] G. Holton, Thematic Origins of Scientiﬁc Thought, Harvard U Press, (1973).

[5] F.J. Dyson, Phys. Rev.75, 486, 1736 (1949).

[6] R.P. Feynman and A.R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals, McGraw Hill, N.Y., (1965).

[7] J. Schwinger, Particles, Sources and Fields, Addison Wesley, Reading MA, (1973).

[8] R.Dolen et al, Phys. Rev.166, 1768 (1968);

A.A. Logunov et al, Phys. Lett. B24, 181 (1967).

[9] G. Veneziano, Nuovo Cimento 57, 190 (1968)

[10] Y. Nambu, in Symmetries and Quark Models, (ed) R. Chand, Gordon and Breach, N.Y. (1970).

[11] F.J. Dyson, Lecture Notes on Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Cornell Univ, (1952).

[12] J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl.Phys.B70, 109, (1974)

[13] N. Bohr and L. Rosenfeld, in Developments in the Theory of the Electron, (ed) A. Pais, Princeton

U Press, (1948).

[14] J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton U Press (1955).

8

[15] See, e.g., H.P. Stapp, Am J. Phys.40, 1098 (1972).

[16] Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, Phys. Rev.47, 777 (1935)

[17] V. Singh, quant-ph/0412148.

[18] A.N. Mitra, quant-ph/0510223

[19] J. S. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1964).

[20] A. Aspect et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 91, 1804 (1982).

[21] D. Home, Perspectives in Quantum vs Classical Reality, 2002 (unpublished).

[22] F. Capra, The Tao of Physics, Fontana, London (1976).

[23] L. Rosenfeld, Phys. Today16, 47, (1963).

[24] D.S. Kothari, Complementarity and Syadavada in Niels Bohr–A Proﬁle, (ed) A.N. Mitra et al, Ind

Natl. Sci. Acad, New Delhi, 1985.

[25] Amit Goswami, Physics of the Soul, Hampton Roads Pub Co, Charlotsville VA, 2001.

9

