6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Moving Observers in an Isotropic Universe

Subhash Kak

Abstract

We show how the anisotropy resulting from the motion of an ob-
server in an isotropic universe may be determined by measurements.
This provides a means to identify inertial frames, yielding a simple
resolution to the twins paradox of relativity theory. We propose that
isotropy is a requirement for a frame to be inertial; this makes it
possible to relate motion to the large scale structure of the universe.

1 Introduction

The twins (or clock) paradox presents a central problem related to the inter-
pretation and use of the relativity principle, namely how to identify inertial
frames. The problem concerns two twins, one of whom leaves the earth on
a spacecraft moving with a speed comparable to the speed of light. After
quick acceleration, the craft moves in uniform motion to a distant star, swings
around and returns to the earth. When the traveling twin has returned home,
he ﬁnds he is younger to the twin who remained earth-bound even though
with respect to him, it is the earth-bound twin who had been in motion.

Excepting for brief intervals when the traveling twin was accelerating,
the twins, according to the relativity theory, belong to inertial frames and,
therefore, the situation appears perfectly symmetrical.

There exist many diﬀerent “resolutions” to the paradox. The most com-
mon of these invokes asymmetry as the twin who leaves the earth undergoes
acceleration whereas the earthbound twin does not. Another explanation is
based on the asymmetry in the Doppler-shifting of light pulses received by
the twins from each other in the outward and inward journeys. Yet another
explains the age diﬀerence to the switching of the inertial frames by the

1

traveling twin. These various “resolutions” are not in consonance with each
other.

The slowing down of all clocks and processes – including atomic vibrations
– on the traveling twin cannot be laid on the periods of acceleration and
turning around during the journey, since they can, in principle, be made as
small as one desires. Furthermore, if there is a slowing down of the clock of
the traveling twin on the complete trip, a component of this slowing down
must have occurred on the outbound trip itself, making the paradox even
more acute.

Einstein’s own “resolution” in 1918, which was an attempt to counter the
criticism related to the paradox until that time [1], used the gravitational
time dilation of the theory of general relativity to explain the asymmetrical
time dilation of the traveling twin. This explanation is generally considered
[2]), and is diﬀerent from the other resolutions recounted
wrong (see e.g.
earlier.

The diversity and the mutual inconsistency of the oﬀered solutions only
reinforces the reality of the paradox within relativity. According to the recent
assessment by Unnikrishnan [2], “ The failure of the accepted views and
resolutions can be traced to the fact that the special relativity principle
formulated originally for physics in empty space is not valid in the matter-
ﬁlled universe.”

In this article, we present a new principle for the identiﬁcation of inertial
frames in a matter-ﬁlled universe that allows us to easily resolve the twins
paradox. The principle implies that the identiﬁcation of a frame as being
inertial depends on whether the universe has spatial isotropy with respect
to it. This is equivalent to determining the motion of objects against the
background of distant stars.

2 Laws and the nature of the universe

According to the principle of relativity, systems of reference moving uniformly
and rectilinearly with respect to each other have the same laws, and the speed
of light is constant in all such systems. “Laws” are deﬁned in operational
terms, by means of readings on instruments that are to be used in a clearly
speciﬁed manner in all inertial reference frames, in which free particles move
in straight lines.

2

Poincar´e enunciated the principle of relativity in 1904 in following words

[3], [4]:

1. The laws of physical phenomena must be the same for a ‘ﬁxed’ observer
as for an observer who has a uniform motion of translation relative to
him: so that we have not, and cannot possibly have, any means of
discerning whether we are, or are not, carried along in such a motion.

2. From all these results there must arise an entirely new kind of dynamics,
which will be characterised above all by the rule, that no velocity can
exceed the velocity of light.

Neither Poincar´e nor Einstein, with his similar statement of the relativity
principle [5], considered its implications for determining the physical nature
of the universe.

Before the advent of the principle of relativity, it was popular to conceive
of the universe as being suspended in absolute space. Given the unstated
assumption of a ﬁnite universe, it led to the notion that the centre of gravity
of the universe should be considered to be absolutely at rest, and the plane
in which the angular momentum of the universe around this centre is the
greatest, should also be considered to be absolutely at rest.

In the late 19th century, the success of the wave theory of light spurred
scientists to determine the earth’s motion relative to the aether that was
taken to be the medium in which the waves propagated. But the failure
of the eﬀorts to measure this velocity led Poincar´e in 1899 to declare that
“absolute motion is indetectible, whether by dynamical, optical, or electrical
means.” [6]

It seems reasonable to assume that physical processes are a consequence
of the large scale nature of the universe as is clear from the Coriolis forces
that tell us that the earth is rotating with respect to distant stars. Likewise,
the earth’s rotation is inferred by the fact that it is slightly ﬂattened at the
poles due to the centrifugal forces.

Since the imperative in science is to take the laws to be the same every-
where, the universe must be isotropic. Expressed diﬀerently, the universal
application of the principle of relativity is a consequence of the fact that the
world is isotropic.

By extension, if the universe deviated from isotropy and if its structure
was diﬀerent in the past, the constants of physical laws (or perhaps the laws

3

themselves) will vary with respect to location and time. Indeed, there are
current theories that propose variation of speed of light as well as variation
in the ﬁne structure constant in the past.

If the laws are independent of the size and the structure of the visible
universe then this universe may be inﬁnite in extent.
In such a case, all
inertial frames in mutual uniform motion must be equivalent, as supposed
by Poincar´e and Einstein.

3 Distribution of speeds

Consider an isotropic universe in which objects are receding from the observer
with speeds that vary uniformly over (−1, 1), where the speed of light, c, is
taken to be 1. The observer can make measurements of Doppler shifts and
conclude that the probability density function of the speeds, x, is uniform:

fX(x) =

, − 1 ≤ x ≤ 1

(1)

1
2

Now, suppose the observer starts moving in a speciﬁc direction with speed
v. The probability density function of the speeds of the objects with respect
to the observer would be changed.

The observer can measure the Doppler with respect to the distant receding
objects in the antipodal directions related to the motion. Let the new variable
of speed be y. By the law of composition of velocities in relativity theory,
the new speed will be given by the equation:

Since the mapping between x and y is a monotonic function, one can de-
termine the probability density function of the variable y by a simple trans-
formation rule on random variables. First, we compute the derivative of the
mapping between x and y:

(2)

(3)

This implies that the new probability density function is:

y =

x + v
1 + xv

dy
dx

=

1 − v2
(1 + xv)2

4

)
y
(
f

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0
y

Figure 1: Probability density function of new speeds for v=0.9

Written in terms of the variables y and v alone, we have

fY (y) = fX(x) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

dx
dy

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

=

(1 + xv)2
(1 − v2)

1
2

fY (y) =

(1 − v2)
(1 − yv)2 , − 1 ≤ y ≤ 1

1
2

Thus the speed of the observer may be inferred in principle by measure-
ments of the distribution of speeds of the receding distant objects in the
direction of the motion.

Example. If v = 0.9, that is if the observer moves with a speed that is 90
percent of the speed of light, the distribution of the recessional speeds of the
distant stars in the direction of the motion will be given by

Figure 1 presents the probability distribution function for y for this case
of v = 0.9. The anisotropy in the directions of motion is great. To such an

=

1
2

0.19

(1 − 0.9y)2 , − 1 ≤ y ≤ 1

5

(4)

(5)

(6)

observer, most distant objects in the direction of the motion would appear
to recede at speeds that are close to the speed of light. Furthermore, there
is marked anisotropy with respect to the antipodal direction.

When y = 1,

f (y) =

(1 + v)
(1 − v)

(7)

Exactly half of this value is reached when y = v.

In principle, it is not essential for the speeds distribution to have been

uniform in the beginning to estimate a departure from it.

4 Anisotropy and ﬂow of time

Consider an observer, A, who is at rest at origin O of an inertial frame.
Observer, B, is also at rest with respect to the same frame. Now B quickly
accelerates and then moves oﬀ at uniform velocity and after reaching a point
C, he reverses his direction and returns to O with the same velocity. Both
observers carry ideal clocks. The clocks of A and B will show local time as
TA and TB, where

TB
q(1 − v2
c2 )
If v ≪ c, one can write this equation as

TA =

In other words, if A and B are twins, and v ≪ c, then twin B would be

younger roughly by the amount:

(8)

(9)

(10)

Because of the symmetry of the travel, a slowing down must occur in both
the outbound and the inbound legs of the journey. Therefore, the slowing
down must be the consequence of a real diﬀerence between the two frames
with respect to the rest of the universe.

TA ≈ TB(1 +

v2
2c2 )

TA − TB ≈

v2
2c2 × TB

6

(12)

(13)

We propose that the diﬀerence in aging is a function, g, of the two prob-

ability density functions, where we now use the same index set x. Or,

TA − TB = g(fX(x), fY (x))

(11)

If the diﬀerence between the two times is a logarithmic function of the
ratios of the probability density functions, it ensures that the diﬀerence is
zero for two frames that have no relative motion:

TA − TB = g(log(fX(x)/fY (x)))

One might also use a relative entropy measure to compare the two distri-

butions:

H(X : Y ) = X fX(x) log

fX(x)
fY (x)

Having seen that the uniform motion with respect to the distant stars is
detectable, it is possible to determine which of the two twins is to be taken
to be inertial. This means that the slowing down of clocks is a consequence
of the universe not being perfectly isotropic to it.

Our analysis shows that Poincar´e’s and Einstein’s implicit equivalence of
all frames in uniform motion in the principle of relativity is incorrect in a
ﬁnite universe.

Time dilation is seen as a consequence of Lorentz transformations, but
it may also be viewed as a consequence of the anisotropic apprehension of
the universe by the moving observer. This allows easy resolution of various
situations related to observers.

For example, if two travelers leave in arbitrary directions with the same
speed and return to an inertial frame, their own clocks would still be syn-
chronized, but lag behind that of the inertial frame.

One could also speak of a set of frames that can be put in an hierarchical

relationship in terms of their suitability as being inertial.

5 Concluding remarks

If it is assumed that “physical laws” are a consequence of the large scale
nature of the universe, then it is valid to assume that there will be a diﬀerence

7

in the experience of two observers in relative uniform motion if isotropy of
the universe is not maintained by them equally.

Could one say that the assumption of a ﬁnite universe goes against the rel-
ativity principle as normally deﬁned because in such a universe it is possible,
in principle, to calculate the distribution of speeds? If the universe is inﬁnite
in size then the change in its isotropy with respect to the moving observer
may not materially alter the isotropy maintained with the non-visible part
of the universe. In such a case, Poincar´e’s and Einstein’s claims regarding
the equivalence of all frames in relative uniform motion remain valid.

It must be stressed that the determination that an observer is in motion
with respect to distant stars does not imply a return to absolute space. An
isotropic universe will have an inﬁnity of inertial frames.

References

1. A. Einstein, Dialog ¨uber Einw¨ande gegen die Relativit¨atstheorie. Die

Naturwissenschaften 6, 1918, pp. 697-702.

2. C.S, Unnikrishnan, On Einstein’s resolution of the twin clock paradox.

Current Science 89, 2005, pp. 2009-2015.

3. E. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity.
vol. 2, Modern Theories. Nelson, London, 1953. Reprinted, American
Institute of Physics, 1987. pp. 30-31.

4. E. Giannetto, The rise of special relativity: Henri Poincar´e’s works be-

fore Einstein. Atti Del 18 Congresso di Storia Della Fisica e Dell’Astronomia,
1998. [ http://www.brera.unimi.it/old/Atti-Como-98/Giannetto.pdf ]

5. A. Einstein, Zur elektrodynamik bewegter k¨orper. Annalen der Physik

17, 1905, pp. 891-921.

6. H. Poincar´e, quoted in Whittaker [3], page 30.

8

