Supersymmetry and Bs, DO, and Aleph i

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon as number@yahoo.com

Abstract

Current results from the D0 exp indicate the presence of an oscillation not ex-
plained by the currently accepted theory. An explanation is oﬀered based on a com-
bination of low-energy ’sring1/n’ and ’particle’ dynamics. The dynamics are described
by extremely accurate nuclear mass data (unpublished 2006 and [1]) in accord with
substringy dynamics (in progress, primary). An event is analyzed with emphasis on
particle Iding, their dynamics and interactions, with implications for/by graviton(ino)
with low-energy phenomenology. Analysis is provided towards enhancing the experi-
mental apparatus, in computation and hardware, and should be numerically simulated
for further safety before implementation.

6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The recent claim of the Bs oscillations has sparked interest in a possible explana-
tion due to low-energy phenomenology. These peaks are explained in rough numbers
using phenomenology and bound states of particles, called sub-string modes, together
with quantum trapping of the excited modes. The masses of these quantum states
and the couplings between these modes can be interpreted in terms of these bound
states and their wavefunction binding between them, such as wavefunction coherence.

The purpose of this short letter is to show how low energy string phenomenology
are responsible for the distribution of bumps in the data presented in ﬁgure 4 in [2].
Furthermore, due to the presence of two gravitational modes, a graviton and gravitino,
the gravity is a a loop eﬀect while symmetry is broken at tree level in accord with the
mass patterns presented in [1],[3]. This event is apparently a supersymmetric form
to subnuclear and impingement on high grade plutonium [4].

Background

The data analyzed in [1] is accurate in ﬁnding the masses to over nine digits. The
probable explanation is a quark preon plasma1. Having sub-string modes available
they can form, with a mass of 1 MeV or 1 KeV for the supersub-string mode pair (in
accord with the mass formula [3]), a bound state together with its resonant modes
in and around the nucleus can be formed between matter (a Lagrangian form and
the bound state formalism is contained within [5]) and its shadow together with the
speciﬁc preon matter that is stable against decay called resonant phenomena and is
contained in the extended version [1] with mass calculations of the proton, deuterium,
hyperion, etc up to eleven places or more in accuracy. This bound state is stable given
that the shell model is reformulated with the sub-string matter, with multiple photons
upon target emitted upon agitation which enhance the phase space and the stability
against nuclear bombardment. A shower of energetic but unstable photons would
follow from a(n) anti-neutrino(s), but whose dynamics might leave room for bound
states or shell with half as many free photinos in the shell model, that occurs at what
seems to be 1 TeV due to a beam at energy what seems to be 300 GeV ampliﬁed by
the coherence eﬀect; this is in contradistinction to neutrinos whose dynamics produce
1Following historical precendence this word is used here as a sub-stringy string mode, and it
implies particle whose thickness appears in the sub-stringy stringy, when multiple scales are included
in the string such as TeV and Planck scale on the same particle mode, quantization of the speed of
light in air for example which can be used to measure a nanometer structure to its dimension; even
less now to sub-nanometer if the particles speed is measured in the presence of additional matter.
The quantization of these string1/2 modes and strings could be incorporated in the recent exactly
solvable string models [11].

2

photons with the same lateral direction. An example to consider is the decay of
hyperion which is anomalously slow; the sub-string bound states in the core nucleus
may swap glue, or actually anti-matter due to the bound state structure, and cause
a resonant phenomena leading to a shorter half-life.

The sub-string matter binds to the matter or anti-matter and produces the mass
of the particles (references having to do with the preon or anything having to do with
subatomic physics omitted due to a sensitive nature but are available per request).
Some of these masses can be read oﬀ the recent Bs data. The particle states found in
the recent Bs data indicate line of ﬁre into the detector or from a direction which is
not straight on. The bumps in the data indicate this by either short or long pulses.
These pulses indicate in a clear manner the presence of additional energy located
within certain regimes; the bumps may be interpreted as zitterberwung (zbg), from
wavefunction coherence between matter and matter. As such, in addition to the actual
pulse, which can be used to ﬁnd the energy, and not mass, of the particle mode, the
bumps on the pulses can be used to ﬁnd the energy of the associated binding modes;
in addition, the location of the energy of the bumps on the zbg can be used to deduce
fast transitions between one particle and the other, and can be used to deduce further
properties in the bending of the particle and its propagation velocity. The location
of the total pulse can be used, if the mass is known, the speed of propagation. In
all, the geometry of the pulse can be used to ﬁnd the energy, the bare mass, its
interactions with close neighboring particles, its excited mode, and possibly its stage
of decay or rather interaction with another particle. An event and its geometry of
energy can be used to deduce particle types, including anti-matter, and presumably
quantum numbers, through the net dispersion of energy; even more interesting is that
the energy distribution of the measured energy can be used with ﬁne enough timing
the stage of interaction between the particles as well as the spatial-temporal history
of each one of them.

Consider the event described in [2],[6] consisting of an energy distribution between
1 picosecond and 25 picoseconds. An FFT or a bimodal, or even tri-modal modal,
FFT could be used to make the picture more clear by similarizing certain the pulses.
An FFT could be used to transform a line of sight zbg trajectory into one coming
in from a angle in space, as well as a bent one in the wavefunction sense. Some
of the particle modes in ﬁgure 5 in [6] could arrive at angle, and with even ﬁner
measurement, how they are bent, with their interactions with other modes that could
also curve their trajectory. More events than the one in ﬁgure 5 are required to
correlate their form, for example, with head on to the scintillator detection.

The event in [6] is used to deduce particle types of its individual constituents. In

3

addition, the rest energy is found, and its redshift is pointed out. The beginning and
end of the pulses, together with the number of additional bumps on them, are used to
determine the event. The additional structure of the zbg’s are not used to determine
further phenomena, including angle of coincidence.

The event considered is semi-leptonic decay of a gauge boson into three partners,
which is both standard and uniform in susy gauge theories. Consider a neutrino
decaying into a susy pair of a slepton and a sneutrino. These decay into both a anti-
neutrino with a charged leptino and a pair consisting of a higgs and higgsino. These
decay further into a pair of gaugino and slepton with number two and half; two for
pair number and half for multiplet number one. The dominant mode for a tau and
stau pair has additional coupling without a gravitational mode; due to the additional
coupling the gravinametric lensing should widen the two as in ﬂight they separate,
much more than an even with a slepton pair and two couplings. This happens in
N = 1 with matter.

The slepton is undiscovered. The gaugino and slepton in the second pair are
localized nearby. Furthermore, the pair of anti-neutrino and charged leptino are time
displaced by 4 picoseconds as in the particle data group [7]. The Higgs and Higgsino
are found by examining the charged leptino and time displacing by 4 units each in
the forward and backward direction; however, an oﬀset of 8 units is provided by an
unknown particle. The data is accumulated in Table 1. The conversion of picoseconds
to time displacement is generated by multiplying the time by one nanosecond for
each picosecond and collecting the mass shift into units of MeV in accord with the
standard [7]. There is an ambiguity in the detection of around 1 picosecond due to an
experimental uncertainty of 1 mm due to possibly misplaced bolts in the apparatus
which is clear in the data by dips at 2.04 mm etc; this uncertainty is clearly a result
of bad coherence as described in the next section.

The mass shifts can be read oﬀ of the data by examining the particle data group
booklet and reading the time displacement in sequence, 1 nanosecond means 1 KeV, 1
picosecond 1 MeV, 1 terasecond 1 103 MeV, etc. This seems opposite to conventional
thinking of mass shifts, however the numbers are backwards to an inversion in the
relation

m =

2πh
2πhc

2πhc0∆m
2πh

2h
c0

,

(1)

where ∆m is measured in time units of a picosecond. The value c0 is the speed of light
in pure vacuum not counting the wave functions of ambient particles and quantum

4

foam of possible sub-strings and/or unattached wavefunctions, and that of c is the
speed of gravity in this ether. The speed of light and gravity are not taken to be the
same, however, their diﬀerence is inconsequential as the speed of gravity is normalized
to one in pico-second units in accord with the particle data group [7]; in the units
here, the speed of gravity is 1 picosecond per time diﬀerential of 1 meter per second
per nanometer; this pertains to the speed in vacuum and not the speed in atmosphere
which is ten times slower [7].

According to lore in beam physics 2 units are added to each particle in sequence

to their occurance, leading to,

anti − neutrino
kaino
keino
gravitino
chargedslepton
higgsino
higgs
higgs2
higgs3
























.3
.3
1.5
3.5 − 14.2
9.3 + 3.4 = 12.7
9.4 + 3.4 + 4.9 = 17.7
9.4 + 3.4 + 4.9 + 4.4 = 21.1
9.4 + 3.4 + 4.9 + 4.4 + 1.5 = 23.6
9.4 + 3.4 + 4.9 + 4.4 + 1.5 + .8 = 24.3 .
























(2)

where the last two bumps are found from the gravinmetric data in the yellow shading,
which means the data are temporally displaced. There is a time dilation factor of 1.3
due to the comparison between the speed of light in air and in vacuum; the listed data
could be normalized with the last higgs points which are gravinametrically displaced.
As the particle type and their speed are of interest the renormalization is not included.
Their speeds can be checked by comparing to [8] and are given in the above list.

Introducing a time lag of 2 units on each time diﬀerence between particle occu-

rance, with 9.3 labeling the bump on the long pulse,

5

anti − neutrino
kaino
keino
gravitino
chargedslepton
higgsino
higgs
higgs2
higgs3
























.3
.3
1.5
3.5 − 14.2
9.3 + 5.4 = 14.7
9.4 + 5.4 + 6.9 = 21.3
9.4 + 5.4 + 6.9 + 6.4 = 27.7
9.4 + 5.4 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 1.5 = 29.2
9.4 + 5.4 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 1.5 + 1.5 = 30.7
























.

(3)

This time lag represents wavefunction from the beam impinging on the particles and
also from local neighbors. The time lag appears to be two particles cohering, one a
photon and the other in the event. Coherence likes anti-temporal time displacement
or time lag, and is modeled by the propagation of particle amplitude but with time
displaced source, and with propagator ∆ = ∂0 ¯ψψ +ψ∂0 ¯ψ; the path integral is relevant
for general quantum scattering and its details including higher derivative terms are
still being worked out. The coherence models wavefunction spread from a particle
to another. In our case, the photon and a charged particle is the strongest source of
coherence in and around the beryllium and beam. The time lag suggests temporal
displaced photons near the beryllium and the beam in a manner so that 4 and 1.5
are obtained. Wavefunction impingement from two sources a micron apart (1.5 ps
is 15 µm) is required to correlate an anti-particle between two higgs or a higgs and
higgsino so as to make it coher like a stable particle wavefunction, or a donut. Another
wavefunction, preferably a photon, is required to stabilize the third event which has
a measured charged lepton. Detailed study of their particle showers should indicate
whether these photons came from the beam or from the primary photon.

On the microscopic level and evaluating the information in table 2, the time lag
separates into 4 and 1.5 picoseconds systematically at 40 µm and 15 µm; this suggests
the occurance of not one but two gamma radiative decays with two time lags, very
remotely there is a chance for three decays. Two photons are frowned upon as this is
the origin for multiple brehmstahllung, and there appear to have energies of x,y µm
with an allowed set of numbers between 1 and 5 due to temporal coherence in the
latter and the data of 1.5 and 4 There appear to be more than one photon due to the
four sets of ordered time lags in the data with two spatial centers of the time lags.

The particles could in principle could have diﬀerent time lapses and between ea-
chother depending on particle type. In addition, the small diﬀerences in the coherence,
such as from those dips, could nonlinear

6

Particle Identiﬁcation

Due to the presence of more than one gamma there should be either a neutrino
or sneutrino to conserve lepton number. According to the work in [3] the mass of
the neutrino could follow .1n; considerations based on renormalization were used
to deduce the canonical Poinc´are invariant relativity allows for mass to be also a
series in the coupling constant and velocity with multiple RG coupling presciptions
[9]. We ﬁnd a small mass of .1 nanoseconds time shifted by .3 nanoseconds; this
means a mass of 10 eV by converting time to mass-energy and using E = mc2
0. c0
is the speed of gravity in vacuum. A time shift of .3 ns translates into the velocity
squared of .9 which corresponds to an alteration in the mass-energy relation. This
alteration can be interpreted as a speed diﬀerential to v = .9c0. An alteration this
much in the rest mass would cause the particle to possibly collapse slowly as the
pressure increases against the vacuum; the phenomenological eﬀect could cause large
gravitational lensing because a graviton propagating around the particle would have
its wavefunction hop in focus with the compressed eather. This focussing eﬀect be
noticeable if the eﬀect was near an interstellar object with gravity like a double star or
a particle traversing around a mini- or supermassive black hole; in the latter of which
could cause bending not in accord with string theory or its deformations by adding
certain transﬁnite representations [11], and in the former the model of a particle by
gravitational energy might test the transﬁnite representation of the exactly solvable
superstring model. Considerations of the energy of a particle as gravitational energy
could also be modeled by a mini-black hole. These three limits have never been
explored in particle detectors.

There is a kino/kaanio pair located at ∆m = 5 ps. This is found by interpreting
the wavefunction a distance 2 ns apart in accord with the rule of Goldhaber; the
particles are traveling backwards in time because the two appear to be in a bound
state with the zbg on the opposite side of one and are correlated so that the Kino is
traveling forward. The Kaana is one half as long as the Kino suggesting sub-criticality
with a forward time displacement depending on its bare mass, which is assumed to
be 200 eV; the Kino is assumed to be at 5 MeV and is lateral in the detector. Due
to the lack of information in backwards in time propagation the relativistic guess for
the Kaana is not available. The Kino appears to be moving .9 the speed of gravity
and its zbg is time displaced by 1 from the left end. It also does not have marked
points on either side of the pulse.

The next particle is a gravitino; due to its pulse and waveform it appears to be
acting gravitational. The invariant mass is m1/m2m3 in time units of ps translated by

7

insertion of two factors of c0 in the numerator and one factor of ¯h in the numerator
to obtain 17 MeV; the invariant mass is computed for the two laterally correlated
particles at mass shift 5 and 15 ps. This indicates gravity as the ps is 16 units
away from the new string scale of 1028 as indicated in [12], with low-energy breaking
Λ at 1012 and quantization (Λ/mpl)n/16 with those quantum numbers connected to
the conformal de Sitter group. Due to the coupling laterally between a Kino and a
charged sleptino it is inferred to be a gravitino with rest mass of 10 MeV. 10 MeV is
in the middle oﬀset to the left a bit which seems less of a choice than 5 MeV; however,
a fast time it takes to measure a particle could be on the order of a few picoseconds
depending on its speed, e.g. 5 ps.
It moves backwards in time due to the bump
in the zbg on the right hand side signalling that it traversed the beam on the way
in and not the way out. The gravitino travels .8 the speed of gravity; the speed of
light is twice that of gravity due to the normalization of α. The background number
of gravitons is four the number of photons from cosmological redshift data such as
COBE or WMAP; the interactions that slow down the particle propagation from its
theoretical maximum to what is observed is caused by the wavefunction interfering
with its neighbors, and as the ratio is 4 to 1 in probability the speed of the particle is
2 to 1; this argument depends on the wavefunction smearing on the adjacent particles
before capture and the type and number of them. The event presented here can be
slown down and rotated, by adding parallel photons in quantity x and x + 1 on each
side of where the line of sight particles are detected. The particles coming in at an
angle can presumably be modulated by adjusting the magnet and another magnet
before the beam phase alters the event.

Due to the (multiple) beta event there should be a charged leptino in addition to
the neutrino, due to the Kino and Kaanio pair. Its mass is 13 MeV with a speed of
travel .9 the speed of gravity. If the time to measure is 1 ns then the mass changes to
12 MeV, or as the moment of inertia increases from nill to 1 from zero speed to some
speed v. 13 MeV is, in accordance with the mass formula in [3], either 223 or 10+2+1
MeV. A correction of this magnitude is not unusual for the quarks or leptons. The
shape of the particle event has a hump with no saddle suggesting a pair of coalescing
charged sleptinos, or a particle that is positioning to decay through its wavefunction
changing in response to nearby particles so that it may propagate at the theoretical
maximum speed of light; the bump appears symmetric precluding cohering with other
particles not seen and indicates that this is two slepton state. One behind the other
with an oﬀset of 2 ns to the left seems probable as the zitterberwurng has a tail.
Some coherence/decoherence can be used to split the particles in the event away from
eachother, including resolving the sleptinos; this can be achieved in many ways, such

8

a spatial temporal location of the grounding required to replete the virtural electron
anti-electron pairs required for coherence; a spatial grounding can resolve the electrons
to one nm and a temporal grounding to maybe .1 nm if a superconducting magnet
is attached to the apparatus and charges the material leading to phase coherence
bipolametrically with possible switching at point of entries. A continuous nano-
scale realignment of the event could require continuous numerical simulations which
includes the quantum aspect of supercoherence, and this is available by the author,
uncited.

There are several naive choices for the remaining 5 bumps in the data, and several
methods to deduce the bump identiﬁcation, and only MSSM like without regards N =
1, 2, 4, 8. There are four bumps signalling particles with a bending of their placing
due to an observed graviton. The bumps are located at 322 − 1.7 and 522 − 1 − nx for
n = 0, 1, 2, with linear a best ﬁt. The masses 322 and 522 suggest the same particle
statistics, but with a dyslexic exponent, that is 2 and 3; this could distinguish a
boson versus a fermion. In a similar fashion, 10 + 7 − .3 and 10 + 9 with a non 2 and
5, and suggests that this 10m number doesnt label as in the work in [3] and is not
considered. Two fermions or two bosons of the same kind will gravinometrically coher
with a graviton and will be noticed by a time shift of the order 9 or 3 roughly; this is
clear from the gravitational force. The gravinometry is aﬀected by swapping of two
photons dihedrally with an exchange with ﬂip of the photon wavefunction explaining
the two numbers probabilistically. The order of magnitude follows from a back of the
envelope calculation of the gravitational force between a graviton winged between the
pair a nanometer in both directions temporally and an angstrom in space. The mass
shift as seen in the data precludes corrections a time unit or more as appears in due
to unitarity, i.e. one loop propagator correction containing ln(k2 ∓ m2), and speeds
restricted to .7 or more. The graviton can be clearly seen at 17 ns, and is 4.3 and 7.9
time units from the remaining two observable peaks. If the two particles have statistics
1/2, 1 versus 0, 1/2 the gravinometric lensing should be half versus none due to the
spin of the combined state using a standard superselection J-rule which tells that
the intermediate wavefunction should transfer twice as more, and furthermore it is
connected by a J = 3/2 spin graviton state. The Wigner-Eckart-Zweig transition rule
is 26 to 1, and for a proper comparison the speed of the particles should be included
in the wavefunction overlap and the event number should multiply the result; this
approach to particle idiing is potentially faster than searching a database containing
106 modes, especially when used to convert 4 bytes of data into 2 long bytes instead
of 6 into 4 [12]. This leaves two alternatives, the standard model like Higgsino and
Higgs and N > 1 Higgs anti-Higgs; the latter is disallowed as former in the pair

9

would travel 5 times the speed of light with the Higgs at .4 times the speed of light.
This disparity appears atypical between particle and anti-particle and is not favored;
gravinametric lensing is not found in the the bumps, which is discussed next.

The Higgsino and Higgs are found at 13.1 and 13.3 time shifted by 5.2 and 4.1;
these are deduced by the relativistic Lamb shift caused by a stiﬀening of the vacuum,
i.e. the Higgs wavefunction interacts with many wavefunctions hopping in the ambient
distribution of the vacuum in the presence of distributed matter, describing diﬀerent
types of matter in various modes of exctitations. This could cause a translucent eﬀect
as the particle moves faster than the local gravitons making the interactions diﬀerent.
An analogy of the stiﬀening would be a particle traversing a cylinder with an aether
that is spatially dependent and perhaps in an excited mode. Stiﬀening causes the
matter to change its velocity on a sub-string scale, i.e. orders of magnitude of the
size of its wavefunction or on the size of an exchange of wavefunction between two
matter modes; the eﬀective action evaluated on-shell can provide time displacement by
using the mass renormalization without inﬁnity to alter the form of the gravitational
force for a 6 MeV graviton by a factor of 6, and 10 MeV photon by a factor of 3
(another guess is 3 by a 5 and 5 by a 3 and so forth), which can be absorbed into
a new string scale α; the speed of light is then 3 times a 108 m/s in vacuum with 8
related to the size of the matter mode. The speed of gravity is then twice the speed
of light to to one loop. A full calculation would be using the two-particle inclusive
cross-section beyond the one-particle zero-momentum form at tree- and one-loop up
to a box, and to higher orders so that the accuracy up to the known digits is obtained.
The gravitational force can be computed by tracking the Higgs on the right of the
pair through three time steps, which increment by 1.5 ns in each step. The Higgsino
is impinging at an angle of arrival which appears to be opposite to the charged lepton
and/or charged leptino and at an angle which adjusts for the gravitational lens. The
1.5 ns per time step increases the mass by 20 percent on average and indicates the
particle is speeding up from a bare mass of .85 the speed of gravity until equilibrium
with the vacuum is attained. This is possibly explained by too much coherence or
additional matter nearby which slows down too much the Higgs boson.

Engineering

There appears to be four issues with systematic error in the experiment, with
dips at 2.04 mm, 1.48 mm, 1.59 mm, and 2.43 mm. The coherence in equipment
can rely on quantum eﬀects, with regards to a photon and virtual electron-photon
pair; the electrons have to be placed back in the parts which are not grounded. For

10

example, if screws or bolts are used and covered in material to avoid coherence, then
they either be periodically be electriﬁed or continuously electriﬁed. This pertains
to bolts and screws close to the beam, which could be cohered without danger to
man and equipment, and not those outside the coherence length of the beam; screws
and bolts which are not grounded have a higher coherence length with the beam if
there is a path of conductance; in this case teﬂon coating for example could be used
as protective coating against electriﬁcation against a non-coher experiment after the
experiment is grounded ﬁrst; this could take days or a month after restarting the
beam which has been cohered with by the apparatus. Photons in the beam could
be scattered oﬀ the wall into the emitter leading to an unwanted somewhat coher
beam, which could be a large amount of coherence. If the bolts are correct this could
provide better beam agility because their type and placement may be sensitive to
particle production, and in conjunction with other modiﬁcations.

Consider a beam with two bars one and below the beam placed vertically. A
temporally cohered beam with spatial resolution to the picosecond can be conﬁgured
by wrapping each beam with wire a nanometer thick in density of m wires per meter,
m-2 wires per meter, etc, until 1 wire is obtained which hits the ground. This conﬁgu-
ration of wires can be charged with a nanosecond or picosecond current to temporally
coher the beam, with spatial resolution in the detector. A pulse timed so that upon
wrapping once around the beam it conﬂagrates or is precisely timed with a small
delay, should coher along the entire beam. The spatiality is with two or more small
pulses interacting uniformly along the axis of the beam. A magnet is used to decoher
the unwanted interactions in the event between the target and detector, such as the
gravitino and its cousins in the event explored here. Good coherence can be obtained
by using two coadjoined wires, one split and one not, with opposite coadjoining at
the ends as could be used in the magnets of the Large Hadron Collider. Last, pulses
are used to distinguish the mode and particle enhancement, which may not be chirp
but rather a step or a step with multiple notches resembling a zbg.

Coherence prefers a temporal displaced pair of particles with one before the other
in space. This can be achieved in the wire conﬁguration by applying two laser beams
of the order of 109 Hz to coher by an exponent of three, with a nanosecond pulse.
Coherence of 1012 is considered unphysical, and the timing can be adjusted if beyond
this number for varying pulsewave forms, such as two saddles with a hump back to
back, for maximal coherence without danger depending on the actual beam. Having
the variabiity in the wavepacket should generate enough room for a varied set of
decay channels apart from the graviton and might allow the interesting exploration
of higher dimensions; of the order of 120 measurements with 5-6 digits each is required

11

to specify the higher dimensional spacetime for example with a saddle with bump left,
anti-bump right, and bump in the almost middle back to back with a saddle with no
hump.

The noise in the detector can be reduced with a simple move. A diﬀractive hole
can be placed between the scatterer and the detector. This plate has a hole opened
on both sides in a butterﬂy; the particle in a lateral or anti-lateral position cohers
with a phase rotation so that the particle rotates back to its original winged shape.
With the two-sided hole, which is essentially two separate holes back to back, the
winged particle should have energy to rotate 180 degrees before a coher traversing
is obtained, but with the symmetric unfolding of the rotated original lateral or anti-
lateral position; the latter cohers more. To avoid the frog (a collapsed wing on a
butterﬂy wavefunction) put coher gum on the wall opposite to entry a nanometer thick
and maybe on the entry wall; this should unfold to a pimple (an almost diametrically
opposite wing on a butterﬂy wavefunction) and should coher naturally. In principle
without any ﬂatness between the two bores, the cohering of the outgoing particle will
be faster due to less dimpliness if the length of the holes are chosen right so that
proper phase rotation is obtained. The ﬂatness is chosen right so that the squeezed
donut shape of the particle wavefunction which is to the right or the left depending
upon entering or leaving the double-bored hole so that it propagates exactly anti-
podally as it exits. This pertains to a graviton, a gravitino, or a set of distributed
lateral particles. The eﬀects of wavefunction projection from one particle to another
and the bending of the particle zbg are subsidiary if the hole has greater diameter
than the particle zbg. This is not to say that anti-lateral particles are admitted, but
rather that the gamma radiation from the source to detector are diminished, possibly
to factor of 10n or more depending on the gamma radiation. This is suited to straight
on graviton or gravitino beam formation.

Coherence is very geometric especially with photons and electrons. Light means
a noncohere amount of electromagnetic radiation, without coherence to other sources
including matter so that only a quantum coherence between adjacent photons could
matter2. In regards to the wire conﬁguration, special temporal retardation may be
lossy due to unexpected light; in dark, light can be added uniformly with a ﬂash
synchronized with the current to enhance the bipolarimetric mingling of light and
wire current with regards to the detector. Light is bipolarimetric due to its form and
content, and wire is too with regards to duration and timing of pulse when inundated
by light; the ﬁnal result is bipolarimetric lensing and possibly gravitational lensing in
2Unpublished. The quantization of the previous action and descendents are available upon re-

quest.

12

an experimental apparatus. A laser diode of magnitude MeV will should mesh with
the wire, given amgiguity in the uncalculated magnitute of the emitted light ﬂash.
Numerical simulation is advised, and the macroscopic coherence of light could coher
as a result long range in the tens of meters. Numerical simulation is advised but
due to the long range coherence and low intensity there is no more danger with the
previous coherence than turning on the room light but focussed, which most likely
has happened without measurable eﬀect and is safe to try; neighboring beams at the
CERN laboratory could get a noticeable gain in certain beams, even by sequencing
them in a fraction of a second distinguished by the photoemitter type, and noticeable
safety by not turning them on and oﬀ in a haphazard manner in the remaining beams
with contiguity.

13

References

physics/0503110.

[1] Gordon Chalmers, “Masses and Interactions in Quantum Chromodynamics,”

[2] V. Abazov et al, (D0), [hep-ex/0603029].

[3] Gordon Chalmers, “Mass Patterns in the Fermion Spectrum,” physics/0508221.

[4] 2 Authors Unpublished.

[5] E. Witten, J. Diﬀ. Geom. 17, 661 (1982).

[6] Sheldon Stone, “Experimental Status of B Physics,” hep-ph/0604006.

[7] S. Eidelman et al. [Particle Data Group], Phys. Lett. B 592, 1 (2004).

[8] M. A. Goldhaber, Interactions and Dynamics of Preons (in subnuclear climate),

Dover Press, ed 4, c.2 (1981).

[9] Gordon Chalmers, “Integrability in String Theories,” physics/0604016.

[10] Gordon Chalmers, “Modiﬁcation of Special Relativity,” in press.

[11] Gordon Chalmers, “Quantum Gravity with the Standard Model,”

hep-th/0209072.

[12] Gordon Chalmers, “A Novel Data Compression,” physics/0510148.

14

