6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
9
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sandage versus Hubble on the reality of the
expanding universe

D.S.L. Soares
Departamento de F´ısica, ICEx, UFMG — C.P. 702
30161-970, Belo Horizonte — Brazil

February 17, 2014

‘We are certainly not to relinquish the evidence of experiments
for the sake of dreams and vain ﬁctions of our own devising.’

Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
Book III — I. Newton, 1687

Abstract

A critical reading of Lubin & Sandage’s 2001 paper on the Tolman
eﬀect for the reality of the expansion of the universe clearly reveals
that Sandage is far from winning the dispute with Hubble on the issue.
After all the years, Hubble’s doubt about the reality of the expansion
remains as valid as Sandage’s certainty expressed in a series of papers
in the last decade.

1 Introduction

To begin with let us state clearly what are Sandage’s and Hubble’s opinions
on the reality of the expanding universe.

1

Since his discovery of the redshift-distance linear relation, Hubble did
not accept the direct interpretation of a Doppler eﬀect as being responsible
for the spectral shifts. He was still reluctant in accepting the reality of the
expansion as late as 1953, the year of his death (Lubin & Sandage 2001,
hereafter LS01).

Sandage, on the contrary, mainly based on his and collaborators’ long
time work on the Tolman eﬀect (in fact, since 1991, see references in LS01),
believes that the expansion of the universe is a reality.

Now, LS01’s conclusion is rather inconclusive, if one sticks to basic con-
cepts of epistemology. After their analysis of the surface brightness (SB) of
34 early-type galaxies is completed, they state, at the end of 4.2: “Therefore,
we assert that we have either (1) detected the evolutionary brightening di-
rectly from the hSBi observations on the assumption that the Tolman eﬀect
exists or (2) conﬁrmed that the Tolman test for the reality of the expansion
is positive, provided that the theoretical luminosity correction for evolution is
real (emphases added).”

What do they assert anyway? We shall keep for the purposes of the
present paper what they write in the abstract: “We conclude that the Tolman
surface brightness test is consistent with the expansion to within the com-
bined errors of the observed hSBi depression and the theoretical corrections
for luminosity evolution (emphases added).” The eﬀect may be consistent
but given the conditional statements it may not exist at all.

On the other side, Hubble’s position was much more coherent, from the
scientiﬁc point of view. Although referred to as “a reductionist bench sci-
entist” (LS01, 1.3), Hubble solely relied (mistakenly, according to Sandage)
on the interpretation of his observational data and their accuracy. As far as
we know, such a procedure – as regular scientiﬁc behavior – was inaugurated
by the brilliant Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, in the XVI century, and
has proved wise and successful beyond any doubt. But Sandage adds that
besides that mistake, Hubble used also a mistaken theory of how redshifts
should vary with distance. Why, one should ask: how could Hubble use the
correct theory if he was, to begin with, looking for the correct theory?

The approach adopted by Sandage in his investigation of the Tolman
eﬀect is in fact a masterpiece of tautology and hermeneutical circularity, in
spite of his clear intention of hiding it (some hints in 2).

In the XXI century, Sandage still plays with q◦, H◦ = 50 and Mattig’s
equations. When he is warned that his cosmology mates are talking now

2

about a Lambda-dominated universe, he reduces (a reductionist?) all of the
entire new-cosmology standard model to a simple and empty q◦ = 0 universe
(quoted as “almost identical”, see LS01, end of 5).

Cosmology is still a heavy-speculated ﬁeld in spite of the enormous ef-
forts on presumable cosmology-sensitive observations. In such an environ-
ment, scientists are not expected to make incisive statements unless they are
supported by deﬁnitely secure evidence, both on the theoretical and exper-
imental or observational sides. The paper under criticism is an example of
the uncertain chain that links speculation to speculation in order to conﬁrm
speculation. The scientiﬁc procedure is there but the scientiﬁc soul is not.
In other words, pretty and nice formal science leading to no real scientiﬁc
conclusion. That is the way LS01 should be read.

2 The Tolman eﬀect

The Tolman (1930) test for the reality of the expansion,
in Friedmann-
Robertson-Walker universes, predicts a (1+z)4 dependence of the surface
brightness with redshift. It is formulated as follows. Consider a source of
luminosity Le at emission, located at comoving distance D, on the time of
reception. An observer receives the luminosity Le/(1 + z)2, dimmed by both
the redshifted photons and by time dilation on reception. The ﬂux detected
by the observer is then given by F = Le/[(1 + z)24πD2].

The observed angular size of the source, with linear size Re at emis-
sion, is θ = Re(1 + z)/D. The average surface brightness is calculated from
hSBi = F/(πθ2) = Le/[4π2R2
e(1 + z)4] = hSBei/(1 + z)4. This can be ex-
pressed in magnitudes as hSBMi = hSBMei + 2.5 log(1 + z)4, which is the
usual presentation of the Tolman surface brightness test for the reality of the
expanding universe.

3 Sandage and collaborators’ inconsistencies

There are a number of inconsistencies in Sandage and co-workers’ approach
to the Tolman test. Of course, these are often overlooked by a biased Reader.
In their last paper, LS01, the following list shows the main drawbacks in their
study.

3

1) The analysis is made upon a toy model of the universe. A Friedmann
model characterized by the deceleration parameter q◦, a Hubble constant of
50, and the classical Mattig’s equations for the dependence of the quantities
of interest on the redshift z.

2) Three decisive proofs, presented in LS01, that the expansion is real are
everything but decisive (see 1.4 and references therein). Two of then, the
time dilation test in the light curves of supernovae, and the running of the
blackbody radiation as a function of redshift are jeopardized by evolutionary
eﬀects, still unsolved. To accept these tests as real tests is left to anybody’s
wish. The third, namely, the so-called “vertical normalization” of the back-
ground Planckian curve is justiﬁed by a conversation between Sandage and
P.J.E. Peebles, as stated in the acknowledgments. Now, science needs more
than authoritative discussions as scientiﬁc demonstrations. Incidentally, the
third proof is considered by LS01 ( 1.4.3) as the deﬁnitive proof of the Tol-
man eﬀect. One might with reason then ask: why go on further with the
investigation?

Speaking of authority, it is worthwhile mentioning two authoritative opin-
ions on the signiﬁcance of the microwave background radiation in cosmology.
Fred Hoyle (2001) states that

“There is no explanation at all of the microwave background in
the Big Bang theory. All you can say for the theory is that it
permits you to put it in if you want to put it in. So, you look and
it is there, so you put it in directly. It isn’t an explanation.”

And Jean-Claude Pecker (2001) reaﬃrms:

“Actually, the 3 degree radiation, to me, has not a cosmological
value. It is observed in any cosmology: in any cosmology you can
predict the 3 degree radiation. So it is a proof of no cosmology at
all, if it can be predict of all cosmology.”

3) Section 5 of LS01 is dedicated to the tired-light speculation, as they put
it. To be fair, the discussion presented in this section is useless, from the
scientiﬁc point of view, since it compares a speculation with a toy model
(the Friedmann cosmology). Besides that, “tired light” is in fact the name
of a general paradigm: it is still a paradigm in search of a theory (note that
the same epithet has been already addressed to another speculation, namely,

4

Guth’s inﬂation). Being such, there are many possible theories of the tired-
light mechanism. It is not clear what theory LS01 considers, which is another
weak point of their comparison. By the way, their intention is to compare
the tired-light model with observations. As shown above, epistemology again
teaches us that their approach is not valid.

4) LS01 naturally recognizes that luminosity evolution aﬀects both the
observed surface brightness and the absolute magnitude of galaxies. But they
make the crucial assumption that it does not aﬀect galaxy radius ( 3.1). Now,
such an assumption is probably not true since the radius is calculated from
the Petrossian metric radius, deﬁned as the diﬀerence in magnitude between
the mean surface brightness averaged over the area interior to a particular
radius and the surface brightness at that radius (see 1.5).

5) The calculation of the theoretical luminosity evolution from stellar
population synthesis is also plagued with LS01’s naive assumptions. The age
as a function of redshift, T(z) (eqs. 8 and 9), is taken from their preferred
toy model. Of course, Sanadge’s stickiness to H◦ = 50 is somewhat alleviated
here. In his (their) words ( 4.1): “For these calculations, we must use the
real value of H◦ (emphasis added).” One should not be surprised to know
that his real value of H◦ is 58 km/s Mpc−1.

6) In 4.2, with the evolutionary calculation, they assume overall solar
abundances because the metallicities of cluster galaxies are not strongly con-
strained from the observations. It is well known that diﬀerent input metal-
licities onto evolutionary codes lead to substantial diﬀerent synthesis results.
7) In section 7, they explicitly admit two systematic uncertainties in the
study. First, a minor technical problem in the galaxy radius calculation –
already contaminated by a major problem, as shown above –, and, second,
they acknowledge the selection bias present in the galaxy sample. Anyway, as
expected, they assure that “neither of them are severe enough to jeopardize
the results.” We may otherwise simply disagree with that.

4 Concluding remarks

As a matter of science, the Tolman surface brightness test for the reality of
the expansion of the universe remains inconclusive.

5

4.1 The contemporaneity of the doubt

Hubble versus Sandage: two antagonized scientiﬁc attitudes. Both scientists
are confronted with the unknown and their reactions are completely opposite
to each other. Why would Sandage’s attitude be on the wrong track? Simply
because Friedmann models were at Hubble’s time as valid as arguing for an
still unknown behavior of Nature as the cause leading to the redshift-distance
relation. As time went by, such an attitude revealed itself to be more and
more trustful. Nowadays, one see that modern cosmological models – in fact,
modiﬁed Friedmann models – are totally unsatisfactory. One of the main
desired outcomes of modern cosmology, namely, the matter-energy content
of the universe does not conform to the real world: out of the total matter-
energy budget only 0.5summary in Soares 2002).

One might well ask: how can Sandage and collaborators make so many
weak assumptions, in the dangerous terrain of the gravely unknown, yet be
tolerated by their science mates, and at the end conclude that something
that is consistent with the expansion model is indeed true, when even the
expansion model itself is totally in question because of its deﬁnitively wrong
matter-energy budget prediction?

Hubble’s initial caution would be much more desired, and remains valid
today. He had the essential skeptical attitude of a real investigator of Nature.
Today, we must doubt the reality of the expansion because the expansion
scenario is part of a cosmological model that has failed in giving a consistent
picture of the universe we live.

4.2 Sandage’s style

The fragility of Sandage’s scientiﬁc approach is hidden under an extreme
pedagogical style of paper writing. His copious use of scientiﬁc references
and textbook style confuses rather than convinces the critical Reader.

It is curious – and one is referred here to the realm of psychology – that
Sandage does not mention the most likely and scientiﬁcally palatable reason
for Hubble’s reluctance in accepting the expanding universe explanation of
his redshift-distance law: the age problem. With Hubble’s constant of the
time, the age of the universe turns out to be about half of the geological age of
the Earth. Hubble died in 1953, precisely when Walter Baade made the ﬁrst
substantial revision of Hubble’s constant. History tells us then that Sandage

6

himself devoted a gigantic eﬀort to put it even down, reaching ﬁnally the now
famous 50 ﬁgure. One might well speculate – in the realm of psychology still –
that Sandage does not mention the age problem as the main scientiﬁc reason
for Hubble’s doubt because he would be revealing his own personal hell: he
ﬁghts also with an age problem – remember, he is a celebrated champion of
modern cosmology – and that is the reason of his beloved 50 or lower.

4.3 Last

The age problem, again and again. Where has it led modern Big Bang
cosmology to? To a completely dark and unknown universe. But, in principle,
that is not a big problem at all, as long as one is satisﬁed with playing with
universe toy-models. Exactly the way we witness Sandage and collaborators
doing with their investigation of the Tolman eﬀect.

5 References

Hoyle, F. 2001, in Universe, The Cosmology Quest, DVD directed by Ran-

dall Meyers, A Floating World Films production

Lubin, L.M. & Sandage, A. 2001, AJ, 122, 1084 (LS01,

arXiv:astro-ph/0106566)

Pecker, J.-C. 2001, in Universe, The Cosmology Quest, DVD directed by

Randall Meyers, A Floating World Films production

Soares, D.S.L. 2002, Do we live in an anthropic universe?,

arXiv:physics/0209094

Tolman, R.C. 1930, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 16, 511

7

