J.H.Field

E-mail: john.ﬁeld@cern.ch

Ernest-Ansermet CH-1211 Gen`eve 4.

D´epartement de Physique Nucl´eaire et Corpusculaire Universit´e de Gen`eve . 24, quai

postulate of special relativity and relativity of simultaneity

6 The train/embankment thought experiment, Einstein’s second
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The relativistic time dilatation eﬀect and Einstein’s second postulate of spe-
cial relativity are used to analyse train/embankment thought expriments, both
Einstein’s original one, and an extension where observers on two trains moving
at diﬀerent speeds, as well as on the embankment, are considered. Whereas the
relativistic analysis of Einstein’s experiment shows, in contradiction to Einstein’s
interpretation, no ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect, the latter is apparent for cer-
tain events in the two-train experiment. The importance of relativistic kinematics
–embodied for photons in Einstein’s second postulate– for the correct interpreta-
tion of the experiments is pointed out and demonstrated by detailed calculation of
a related example.
PACS 03.30.+p

Abstract

1

Introduction

Einstein’s Train-Embankment Thought Experiment (TETE), introduced in his pop-
ular book ‘Relativity, the Special and General Theory’ [1], ﬁrst published in 1920, has
been used in many introductory textbooks1 and articles in the pedagogical literature [6],
to introduce the concept of ‘relativity of simultaneity’ of Special Relativity (SR) before
considering the space-time Lorentz Transformation (LT).

Since the complete relativistic interpretation of the TETE depends both on direct
physical consequences of the space-time LT –the time dilatation eﬀect– and an under-
standing of the relativistic kinematics of photons as embodied in Einstein’s second postu-
late of SR, the possibility of introducing ‘relativity of simultaneity’ in this simple way is
illusory. This will become clear later in the present paper. However, as will be shown, a
somewhat more sophisticated TETE involving observers on the embankment and in two
trains, with suitably chosen speeds, does indeed demonstrate the existence of a genuine
relativity of simultaneity eﬀect for certain events.
In contrast, the correct relativistic
analysis of Einstein’s original TETE shows that the ‘lightning strokes’ will be judged to
be simultaneous by both the train and the embankment observers, in contradiction to
Einstein’s conclusion.

The fallacy in Einstein’s reasoning is simple to understand. If the experiment were to
be performed with non-relativistic massive particles of constant velocity replacing photons,
an analysis of the various space-time events could be performed in either the embankment
or the train frames and would produce identical results. In the case of photons or massive
relativistic particles, as shown explicitly in the example discussed in the Appendix, this is
no longer the case. Then a correct analysis of events in the train frame requires that such
events be speciﬁcally considered. This was not done in Einstein’s interpretation, where
only events observed in the embankment frame were considered.

The structure of the paper is as follows: In the following section, after a brief discussion
of the simplest axioms which may serve as the basis for SR, two consequences of SR –
Invariance of Contiguity (IC) and the time dilatation (TD) eﬀect– are derived. Application
of IC, TD and Einstein’s second postulate of SR are suﬃcient for complete analyses of
the TETEs discussed in later sections of the paper.
In particlar, explicit use of the
space-time LT is not required. Section 3 presents Einstein’s original TETE and discusses
it, and Einstein’s interpretation of it, in a critical manner. A similar experiment where
photons are replaced by sound signals, either in the atmosphere or in the interior of
the train, is also discussed.
In Section 4 a more elaborate TETE with two trains and
a well-deﬁned procedure for synchronous production of light signals is described and
analysed. It is shown that events corresponding to light signals, triggered by coincidence
detection of two other light signals in diﬀerent inertial frames, show a genuine relativity
of simultaneity eﬀect quite distinct from the one proposed by Einstein. Section 5 contains
a discussion of the distinction between ‘relative velocity’ and ‘speed’ as applied in the
TETE as well as the closely related operational meaning of Einstein’s second postulate.
The latter is also shown to be a direct consequence of the relativistic kinematics of massless
particles [7]. Section 6 contains a detailed discussion of a recent paper by Nelson [4] that

1For example, Refs [2, 3]. See also numerous citations in Refs [4, 5].

1

gives a re-interpretation of Einstein’s TETE. Nelson ﬁnally makes the same fundamental
mistake, mentioned above, of attempting an analysis of the problem purely in terms of
embankment frame events, although earlier in the paper came close to the correct solution
of the problem. This was rejected due to a misapplication of IC to diﬀerent events (falsely
assumed to be the same) in the two frames. A summary and the conclusions of the present
paper are to be found in Section 7. An appendix contains an analysis of the TETE from
a diﬀerent point of view.
Instead of analysing light signals produced by the lightning
strokes, the latter are replaced by pulsed laser beams in the embankment frame and the
question of the simultaneity or non-simultaneity of the events where the laser pulses strike
either the embankment at points aligned with the ends of the moving train, or the train
itself, is considered in both the embankment and train frames. The results obtained
demonstrate immediately the fallacy of Einstein’s embankment-frame-only interpretation
of the TETE.

Previous papers by the present author have pointed out the spurious nature of the
correlated ‘Length Contraction’ (LC) and ‘Relativity of Simultaneity’ (RS) eﬀects de-
rived by misapplication of the space-time LT [8, 9, 10, 11]. These eﬀects were invoked
in Nelson’s ﬁnal ‘relativistic’ interpretation of the TETE. The reader is referred to these
papers for a critique of the conventional interpretation of the space-time LT, and par-
ticularly to Ref [10] in which the essential arguments are concisely presented. However
these arguments are also given in the present paper in Section 4 (Eqn(4.2) and Section 6
(Eqns(6.20)-(6.12)). Recognition of the spurious nature of these LT related RS and LC
eﬀects is essential to fully understand the relativistic analyses of TETEs presented in this
paper.

2 Axiomatic bases of special relativity. Invariance of

contiguity

postulates 2

Einstein’s original formulation of special relativity (SR) was founded on two main

(E1) The dynamical laws of nature are the same in any inertial frame.

(E2) The speed of light is the same in any inertial frame, and is

independent of whether the source is stationary or in motion.

One aim of the present paper is to discuss the precise operational meaning of the
postulate E2; however, as was realised shortly after the advent of SR [12], the space-time
LT, from which all predictions of SR may be obtained, can be derived without invoking E2.
See [13, 7] for surveys of the related literature. For example, in Ref [7], the LT is derived
from the requirement that it is a single-valued function of the space-time coordinates and
the following postulate, that is a weak operational statement of the relativity principle:

2Einstein stated explicitly only the two postulates E1 and E2 in Ref. [17], but at least three other
linearity of the equations, spatial isotropy, and the reciprocity postulate (see below) were

postulates:
tacitly assumed.

2

(MRP) Reciprocal measurements of similar rulers and clocks at rest in
two different inertial frames, by observers at rest in these frames, yield
identical results.

It will be instructive, in the present paper, in discussing events observed from diﬀerent
inertial frames, to check that this Measurement Reciprocity Postulate (MRP) is respected
in each case. Unlike in E1, no dynamical laws are in invoked by the MRP. Another
general property of SR that will be found of great importance when comparing diﬀerent
interpretations of the TETE is Invariance of Contiguity (IC) which may be derived directly
from the LT:

(IC) Two events which are in space time contiguity in one inertial frame

are so in all inertial frames.

contiguous’.

Pairs of space-time contigouus events may be, in an obvious way, ‘xt
−
In the following it will be suﬃcient to consider ‘xt
−

’, ‘xyt
’, or
−
‘xyzt
contiguous’
events. The proof of IC is simple. The space-time LT relating the space-time coordinates
of events as speciﬁed by synchronised clocks in two inertial frames S and S’ is:

−

vt)
βvx/c)

−
−

x′ = γv(x
t′ = γv(t
y′ = y
z′ = z

(2.1)
(2.2)
(2.3)
(2.4)

−

1/

1
q

v/c, and γv ≡

β2
v . In (2.1)-(2.4) the frame S’ moves with speed v
where βv ≡
along the common x, x′ axis of S and S’. This usual form of the LT, as derived by Einstein,
is valid provided that the space time origin in S’ is coincident with the x’ coordinate of the
transformed event. The appropriate LT when this condition is not satisifed is discussed in
Section 6 below. Any two events in S: (x1,y1,z1,t1) and (x2,y2,z2,t2) and the corresponding
events in S’:(x′
2) that satisfy (2.1)-(2.4) also respect the interval
relations, that are independent of the choice of the origins of coordinate systems in S and
S’:

1) and (x′

1,y′

2,y′

1,z′

2,z′

1,t′

2,t′

x2 −
t2 −

t2)]
x2)/c]

v(t1 −
βv(x1 −

x′
2 = γv[x1 −
t′
2 = γv[t1 −
y′
y2
2 = y1 −
z′
z2
2 = z1 −

x′
1 −
t′
1 −
y′
1 −
z′
1 −
contiguous’ in S. i.e. if x1 = x2 and t1 = t2 It follows from (2.5)
If events 1 and 2 are ‘xt
and (2.6) that also x′
2. Thus the events are contiguous in S’ for any
value of v, that is, in any inertial frame. An immediate and important corollary for the
discussion of the TETE is that if the x-t world lines of three physical objects intersect
if the three events at the intersection are
at a common point in any inertial frame, i.e.
xt

contiguous, they must intersect at a common point in any inertial frame.

(2.5)
(2.6)
(2.7)
(2.8)

2 and t′

−
1 = x′

1 = t′

−

This demonstration is the only direct use of the space-time LT in following discussion of
TETEs. It will be found possible to completely analyse the diﬀerent thought experiments
considered by noting that a light-transit time in a given inertial frame between objects at

3

rest in that frame, constitutes a ‘photon clock’ [14] that measures the proper time in that
frame. As do all clocks when in uniform motion, such clocks display the time dilatation
(TD) eﬀect. The prediction of the TD eﬀect relating a time interval, ∆t′, recorded by a
clock at rest in the frame S’, but as observed from the frame S , to corresponding time
interval, ∆τ , as measured by a clock at rest in S, may be derived from the time-like
invariant interval relation:

c2(∆τ )2

(∆x)2 = c2(∆t′)2

(∆x′)2

−

−

(2.9)

−

or

v2

c2(∆τ )2(1

A clock at a ﬁxed postion in S’ has ∆x′ = 0. Since also ∆x = v∆τ it follows from (2.9)
that:
c2 ) = c2 (∆τ )2
∆τ = γv∆t′
Consideration of a clock at rest in S, but observed from S’, leads to the similar formula:
∆τ ′ = γv∆t
where τ ′ is the time recorded by a clock at rest in S’, and ∆t is the corresponding time
recorded by a similar clock at rest in S but observed from S’.

= c2(∆t′)2

(2.10)

(2.12)

(2.11)

γ2
v

It is very important to note, in the analysis of space-time problems in special relativity,
the existence of the four diﬀerent time intervals ∆τ , ∆τ ′, ∆t and ∆t′. Where τ and τ ′
are observed proper times and t and t′ are the apparent times of moving clocks. The
intervals ∆τ and ∆t′ relate to one possible experiment and ∆τ ′ and ∆t to a diﬀerent,
although reciprocal, in the sense of the MRP, one. Thus when the LT are used to analyse
experiments it always gives a relation between a proper time and an apparent time, never
between two proper or two apparent times. The erroneous identiﬁcation of τ with t or
of τ ′ with t′ has resulted in many incorrect predictions of relativistic eﬀects, particularly
in classical electrodynamics [15]. Another example of this error of interpretation of the
LT is provided by Nelson’s analysis of the TETE [4] to be discussed below in Section 6.
Indeed, the logical absurdity of setting ∆τ = ∆t and ∆τ ′ = ∆t′ thus mixing up the time
intervals recorded in diﬀerent experiments becomes evident on subsituting these relations
into (2.11) and (2.12) to yield the equations:

∆τ = γv∆τ ′
∆τ ′ = γv∆τ
v = 1 or v = 0, whereas γv in (2.11) and (2.12)
∆t′ and
∆τ ′ correspond to the valid operation of replacing a time dilatation experiment by

Substituting (2.14) into (2.13) gives γ2
can take any positive real value. On the other hand, the substitutions ∆t
∆τ
a reciprocal one, which has the eﬀect of exchanging Eqns(2.11) and (2.12).

(2.13)

(2.14)

↔

↔

The convention of using the symbol τ to denote the observed time of a clock at rest
and t to denote the observed time of a clock in uniform motion is followed throughout
the present paper.

Eqns(2.11) and (2.12) may also be written in a more explicit notation as:

∆τrest = γv∆τ ′

move

4

(2.15)

∆τ ′

rest = γv∆τmove

(2.16)

where all intervals refer to proper times and the subscripts specify whether the corre-

sponding clock is in motion or at rest. It is this form of the TD interval relation that
is used to extract the proper lifetime of an unstable particle ∆τ ′
move from the measure-
ment of the corresponding laboratory lifetime ∆τrest knowing the value of the relativistic
parameter γv from kinematics or direct velocity measurement.

3 Einstein’s presentation of the TETE

In his original presentation of the TETE [1], Einstein considered a train moving with
uniform velocity, v, along an embankment.
In the following, the inertial frame of the
embankment is denoted by S, that of a train by S’ or S”. The positive x-axis is parallel
to the direction of motion of the train. Two lightning strokes hit points A and B of the
embankment, simultaneously in S. The spatially contiguous points on the train, at the
instant of the lightning strokes are denoted by A’ and B’. It is asked whether the lightning
strokes will be perceived by an observer on the train as simultaneous, or not simultaneous.
To answer this question, observers are introduced at M and M’ on the embankment and
the train respectively. M is midway between A and B and M’ is midway between A’ and
B’. The production process of the light signals in the frames S and S’ associated with the
lightning strokes and observed at M and M’ was not discussed by Einstein. As will be
seen, this is not important for Einstein’s interpretation since no observations performed
in the frame S’ are considered.

Einstein’s analysis of the TETE is presented in Fig.1. For deﬁniteness, the ‘observers’
at M and M’ are replaced by photon detectors D and D’. Using his light signal synchro-
nisation procedure, Einstein argues that the events at A and B (or at A’ and B’) will be
simultaneous provided that the corresponding light signals, as observed in the embank-
ment frame, are simultaneous at D (or at D’). From this, it is concluded that the photon
(or light signal) initiating events are simultaneous for the observer on the embankment,
but not for the observer on the train. Clearly (assuming all photons have the same speed
in a given inertial frame) the events will be judged to be simultaneous by the observer
on the embankment (see Fig.1c). Einstein gives the following argument concerning the
observation of the light signals on the train [16]:

Now in reality (considered with reference to the railway embankment) he
the observer in the train) is hastening towards the beam of light coming
(i.e.
from B, while he is riding on ahead of the beam of light coming from A. Hence
the observer will see the beam of light emitted by B earlier than that emitted
from A. Observers who take the railway train as the reference-body must
therefore come to the conclusion that the lightning flash at B took place
earlier than the lighning flash at A. We thus arrive at the important result:
Events which are simultaneous with reference to the embankment are not
simultaneous with respect to the train and vice versa (relativity of
simultaneity).

5

Figure 1: Einstein’s interpretation of the TETE in the embankment frame. a) τ = 0,
photons G’,G, R’ and R are emitted from lightning stroke events at A and B. b) τ =
L/[2(c + v)] , photons, R, R’ are spatially contiguous with DR and D’ respectively. c)
τ = L/[2c] photons G and R are detected in coincidence by D. d) τ = L/[2(c
v)], photons
G, G’ are spatially contiguous with DG and D’ respectively. In this ﬁgure v = c/4. The
photons G’ and R’ that are detected by D’ in the train are assumed to be xt-contigous
with the photons G and R, respectively, that are detected by D on the embankment. Since
the analysis is performed entirely in the embankment frame the events R’-D’; and G’-
D’considered by Einstein are actually the embankment frame events R-DR and G-DG ,
not events in the train frame. Thus the essential problem is not addressed.
In order
to discuss the simultaneity (or lack of it) of events in the train frame, an analysis of
such events, in the train frame itself, must be performed. As discussed in the Appendix,
if the photons are replaced by non-relativistic massive particles analyses in the train and
embankment frames are equivalent, so that a correct space-time analysis may be performed
in either frame. This is no longer the case in special relativity, invalidating Einstein’s
interpretation.

−

6

Figure 2: The Einstein TETE with light signals replaced by sound signals. If uniform
sound propagation, in the stationary atmosphere, unperturbed by the motion of the train,
is considered (signals G, R) results strictly analgous to Einstein’s for the case of light
signals are obtained with the replacement c
VS. If the sound signals in the train instead
→
move in air that is at rest relative to the train, (signals G’,R’), the signals are observed
simultaneously in the train [ c)]. In this ﬁgure v = VS/4. In view of Einstein’s second
postulate, replacing the speed VS of sound by the speed of light c, it may be expected that
the light signals would also be observed simultaneously in the train, in contradiction to
Einstein’s conclusion.

7

Figure 3: Einstein’s interpretation of the TETE in the train frame. As in Fig.1, v = c/4.
It is assumed that the lightning stroke events are also simultaneous in this frame. As
shown in the text, this is the case in both Galilean and special relativity. The events
G’-D’G , G’-R’-D’ and R’-D’R are speciﬁed in the train frame. The times of the events
are obtained from those shown in Fig.1 by exchange of primed and unprimed quantities,
so that the experiments shown in this ﬁgure and Fig.1 are ‘reciprocal’ ones. In Einstein’s
interpretation the events G’-D’G and R’-D’R in the train frame are wrongly identiﬁed
with putative embankment frame events G-D and R-D respectively.

8

Actually, however, all the observations described in this passage are performed by
observers in the embankment frame, never by an observer on the train. When the photon
R’ arrives at D’ (Fig.1b) before the photon G’ arrives at D’ (Fig.1d) what are observed
are events in S, not in S’. To specify precisely, in an operational manner, these events
which are observed in S, it is convenient to intoduce the detectors DR and DG , at rest in
S, that are spatially contiguous with D’ at the apparent instants of photon coincidences
with the latter detector (see Fig.1b and 1d). Since these clocks are at rest in S, a deﬁnite
time (the proper time in S) can be assigned to the R-DR and G-DG coincidence events.
This is not the case for the time in S’ corresponding to apparent R’-D’ and G’-D’ coin-
cidences. Since the detector D’ is in motion, the time of the photon detection events in
S’, which is what is essential for problem under consideration, cannot be a priori iden-
tiﬁed with the S-frame times of the events R-DR and G-DG , which is what is assumed
in Einstein’s interpretation. So, contrary to Einstein’s statement, no conclusion can be
drawn concerning the simultaneity, or non-simultaneity of the observation of the photons
R’ and G’ in the frame S’. Indeed, the postulate E2, stating the equality of the speed of
light in the frames S and S’, is not invoked in Einstein’s argument, as it must be (and is
in the following section) in order to obtain the correct prediction of SR concerning the
simultaneity (or lack of it) of the photon detection events observed in S or S’. For this
it is necessary to consider events not only in the frame of the embankment, as Einstein
does, but also events in the frame of the train.

The argument given in Einstein’s passage quoted above is very similar to that presented
in the original paper on SR [17] where ‘relativity of simultaneity’ was ﬁrst introduced.
A ‘photon clock’ in motion was compared with one at rest, but only events in a single
inertial reference frame were discussed. Indeed, at this point in Ref. [17], no meaningful
discussion of relativity of simultaneity was possible because the LT had yet to be derived.
Similarly in Ref. [1], the LT necessary for a correct analysis of relativity of simultaneity
is introduced only in Chapter XI after previously introducing the TETE in Chapter IX
and relativity of distance (also based on the TETE) in Chapter X.

In fact, the sequence of events seen in a single inertial frame shown in Fig.1 would be
identical in SR, where postulate E2 applies, or in the preferred frame (aether rest frame) of
a theory where E2 does not apply, but instead light may have diﬀerent speeds in diﬀerent
inertial frames, in the case that the embankment is associated with this preferred frame.
Indeed, as shown in Fig.2, the pattern of events is the same if the photons in Fig.1
are replaced by sound signals in air, if the train does not drag the air in the regions
If however the sound signals were detected
where the sound signals are propagating.
inside the train (assuming that the centre of mass of the air in the train is rest in S’)
the production events would be judged simultaneous by both the train and embankment
observers (Fig.2c). However, the sound signals in S would not be seen by an observer
in this frame to arrive simultaneously at the position of D’ in S (Fig.2b and 2d). In the
limit where the speed of sound in air, VS, is much less than the speed of light, c, not only
will the R and G (R’ and G’) signals be received simultanously by the detectors D (D’)
but also the G’-R’-D’ and G-D-R coincidence events will be seen to be simultaneous by
observers in both S and S’ (Fig.2c). As will be seen in the following section, this is no
longer the case when corrections of O((VS/c)2) are included.

Since the postulate E2 states that the speed of light signals is the same in S and S’,

9

regardless of the motion of the source, it would seem that the situation shown in Fig.2
for the motion of the sound signals in the train should be strictly analogous to that of
the light signals in vacuum inside the train, replacing VS by c. The physics underlying
the propagation of the signals is quite diﬀerent in the two cases (constant speed of sound
relative to air in one case, Einstein’s postulate E2 in the other) but, in both cases, the
signals would be expected, contrary to Einstein’s conclusion, to be simultaneous, both in
the train and on the embankment.

Einstein chose to analyse the problem entirely in the reference frame of the embank-
ment observer. What happens if it is instead analysed in the refrence frame of the observer
on the train? This is shown in Fig.3, where it is assumed that the lightning stroke events
are also simultaneous as seen by local observers3 in the train frame. The validity of this
assumption is further discussed below, as well as in the Appendix. Performing exactly
the same analysis as Einstein, but instead considering events only in the frame S’ instead
of only in the frame S, it would be concluded, from Einstein’s argument, that the pro-
duction events of the photons G’ and R’ are simultaneous (Fig.3c) whereas those of G
and R are not (Fig.3b and Fig.3d). This diﬀerent behaviour is perfectly compatible with
the relativity principle as embodied in the MRP. However, there is an apparent violation
of invariance of contiguity if it is assumed that the G-R-D coincidence in Fig.1 and the
G-D and R-D coincidences in Fig.3 represent the same event. The x-t world lines of G,
R and D intersect in a point in S (Fig 1c) but not in S’ (Fig.3b and Fig.3d) Similarly the
x′- t′ world lines of G’, R’ and D’ intersect in a point in S’ (Fig.3c), but not in S (Fig.1b
and Fig.1d). Thus it appears that Einstein’s claimed ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect is
incompatible with IC, that is, as shown in the previous section, a necessary consequence of
the LT. However, as discussed above, such an identiﬁcation of all photon detection events
as common events, viewed either in S or in S’, is fallacious The non-simultaneous events
in S are R-DR and G-DG not R’-D’ and G’-D’ respectively, while the observed events in S’
are (see Fig.3) R’-D’R and G’-D’G not R-D and G-D in S. Indeed, R-DR , G-DG , R-G-D,
R’-D’R , G’-D’G and R’-G’-D’ are all physically distinct events that may be viewed either
from either the train or the embankment frames. There is therefore no conﬂict with In-
variance of Contiguity. This point is further discussed in Section 6 below. In Einstein’s
interpretation it is assumed that only the events R’-D’ (actually R-DR ), G’-D’(actually
G-DG ) and R-G-D exist, and these events are considered only in the embankment frame.

The following section presents an analysis of a more elaborate TETE that will be found
to respect IC and which does indeed lead to the prediction of ‘relativity of simultaneity’
of certain events observed in diﬀerent frames of reference, as a prediction of SR, but in
a way quite diﬀerent to that suggested by Einstein in the passage quoted above, or in
the original SR paper. This analysis, in conjunction with the above critique of Einstein’s
interpretation, will also shed light on the correct operational meaning of the postulate
E2, to be discussed in more detail in Section 5 below.

3i.e., observers situated at A’ and B’.

10

4 The TETE as a photon clock: Two trains for rela-

tivity of simultaneity

A version of the TETE approximating more closely an actual experiment will now be
considered. A schematic is shown in Fig.4. There are two trains TU and TL moving with
velocities v and w = c2(γv −
1)/(vγv) respectively in the positive x-direction relative to the
embankment E. The latter velocity is chosen such that E and TU have equal and opposite
velocities, with absolute value w, relative to TL . The rest frames of TU , TL and E are
denoted by S’, S” and S respectively. Both trains and the embankment are equipped with
light sources G’, R’ Y’; G”, R”, Y”; GU , RU , YU ; GL , RL , YL . The light sources
G’, R’; G”, R”; GU , RU ; GL , RL are connected to an electronic triggering system and
sensors which ﬁre the sources when G’, G”, GU and GL are aligned with the point A on
the embankment and R’, R”, RU and RL are aligned with the point B on the embankment.
The length of the train is chosen so that all eight sources ﬁre simultaneously in the frame
S. This instant, which is the one corresponding to the conﬁguration shown in Fig.4, deﬁnes
the origin of the time coordinates in all three frames of reference: τ = τ ′ = τ ′′ = 0. The
photon detectors D’, D”, DU and DL are situated mid-way between the corresponding
G and R photon sources, and arranged in such a way that D’, D”, DU , DL detect
only the photons emitted by the sources GU and RU , GL and RL , G’ and R’, G” and
R”, respectively. All of the detectors are double-sided and equipped with coincidence
electronics such that, in the case that the photons are recorded, simultaneously, on both
sides of the detector, the light sources Y’, Y”, YU and YL will ﬁre. The purpose of these
sources is to enable the observation of coincidence events in one frame in both of the
other frames.
It will be found that it is precisely these coincidence events (not the G
and R photon production events, that are simultaneous in all frames) that will show a
‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect. As in the previous section, the labels G, R, Y are used
indiscriminately to indicate photons, or their sources.
In the present TETE they can
also be conveniently identiﬁed with the colours Green, Red and Yellow of the respective
photons. Thus the Yellow signal indicates a space-time coincidence (xt
contiguity) of
Green and Red photons. Suitable wavelength ﬁlters in front of the detectors can ensure
that only appropriately coloured photons are detected.

−

The TETE shown in Fig.4 will now be analysed by applying Einstein’s postulate E2 of
SR in each of the frames S, S’ and S”. In Fig.5 is shown the sequence of events in the train
TU (frame S’) and on the embankmement (frame S) as observed from the embankment,
while Fig.6 shows the sequence of events in the train TU and on the embankment as
observed from the train TU . For example, at τ = 0 (Fig.5a), the photons emitted
from G’ and R’ start their transit towards DU . Both of these sources are moving with
velocity v in the +ve x-direction relative to DU . Similarly, in S’ (Fig.6a) the sources
RU and GU move in the -ve x′-direction relative to D’ and the corresponding photons are
emitted in the direction of D’. Application of the postulate E2 in either frame predicts
the observation of the Yellow signals shown in Fig.5b, 5c, 6b and 6c. At time τ = L/(2c)
the photons G’ and R’ arrive in coincidence at DU and the source YU ﬁres. The distance
L′ between the sources G’ and R’ (compare with Fig.3a) can be found by use of the
space-like invariant interval ∆s between arbitary events at A’ and B’ expressed in terms

11

Figure 4: A TETE with two trains TU and TL moving to the right with velocities v and
w = c2(γv −
1)/(vγv) respectively. The velocity w is chosen so that, in the rest frame
of TL , TU and the embankment E have equal and opposite velocities of absolute value
w. Both trains and the embankment are equipped with light sources G and R and photon
detectors D (see text for details). Each detector is also equipped with a light source Y that
ﬁres in the case that case that right- and left-moving photons are detected in coincidence.
The G and R light sources ﬁre when they are all aligned with the points A and B on the
embankment, as shown in the ﬁgure.

12

of space-time coordinate intervals in the frames S and S’:
c2(∆τ )2 = (∆x′)2

(∆s)2
In Fig.5a, τ = t′ = ∆τ = ∆t′ = 0, so from (4.1),

(∆x)2

−

≡

−

c2(∆t′)2

∆s = ∆x

xB′

≡

−

xA′ = L = ∆x′

x′
B′

x′
A′

−

≡

L′

≡

(4.1)

(4.2)

This equation shows that the spatial separation of two physical objects at rest in an inertial
franme is a Lorentz-invariant quantity [18] that takes the same value when measured in any
inertial frame. There is no ‘relativistic length contraction’ eﬀect if the proper frame of the
objects is in motion relative to another inertial frame [8, 9, 10, 11]. By considering events
at A” and B” on the train TL it is shown in a similar manner that x′′
L′′ = L.
B′′
It follows that GU and GR will arrive at D’ in S’ at the time τ ′ = L/(2c). Allowing for
the TD eﬀect, Eqn(2.11), (TU constitutes a moving photon clock) the observer in S will
see the coincidence of GU and RU at D’ (i.e. the signal Y’) at time τ = γvL/(2c) (Fig.5c).
Thus, contrary to the conclusions of Einstein’s analysis of a similar TETE, observers in
both S and S’ will judge the photon production events to be simultaneous. However,
unlike for the case of sound signals, where terms of O(VS/c)2) and higher are neglected,
shown in Fig.2c, the GU -RU -D’ coincidence is observed at a later time than the G’-R’-DU
one. Note however, that the transit of the sound signals in the train in Fig.2 constitutes a
clock just as well as the photon transits in Fig.5, so that if terms of O(VS/c)2) and higher
are included the G’-R’-sound signal coincidence in Fig2c is also predicted to occur later
than the G-R coincidence in this ﬁgure.

x′′
A′′

−

≡

Fig.6 shows the same sequence of events as in Fig.5, but as seen by an observer at rest
in the train TU . The GU -RU -D’ and G’-R’-DU coincidences are observed as before, but
now the former of these events is observed earlier, not later as in Fig.5. The sequences of
events in Figs. 5 and 6 are an example of an application of the MRP. One is obtained from
the other by simple exchange of primed and unprimed quantities. Also, unlike in Figs.1
and 3, as interpreted by Einstein, IC is respected. Observation of the signals Y’ and YU
by observers on both S and S’ shows that both of them agree that the R and G photons
are detected simultaeously, from which the simultaneity of the photon production events
in both frames can be inferred.

In Fig.7 is shown the sequence of events seen by an observer in the train TL that moves
with velocity w along the +ve x-axis relative to the embankment and velocity w along
the -ve x-axis relative to the the train TU . In Fig.7a the conﬁguration of the sources
and detectors in the frame S” at the time τ ′′ = 0 is shown, together with their velocities
relative to the detector D”. Using the photon transit times in the various frames as clock
signals, and taking into account the TD eﬀect (2.11) predicts the sequence of events shown
in Fig.7b and 7c. The GL -RL -D” coincidence (signal Y”) is observed at time τ ′′ = L/(2c).
and the GU -RU -D’ coincidence (signal Y’) and the G”-R”-DL coincidence (signal YL )
are observed simultaneously at the later time τ ′′ = γwL/(2c). Since it is clear, from the
geometry of Fig.4, that the signals YL and YU are xt contiguous in S and therefore, by
IC, simultaneous in all frames, it follows that the signal events Y’ and YU or YL display
relativity of simultaneity:

Observed from E (frame S, Fig.5)
Observed from TL (frame S′′, Fig.7)
Observed from TU (frame S′, Fig.6)

τ (Y′) > τ (YU) = τ (YL)
τ ′′(Y′) = τ ′′(YL) = τ ′′(YU)
τ ′(Y′) < τ ′(YU) = τ ′(YL)

13

Figure 5: Events on the embankment E (frame S) and in the train TU (frame S’) as
observed from the embankment. a) Sources (G’,GU ),(R’,RU ) ﬁre at τ = τ ′ = 0 when
they are both aligned with the points (A),(B) on the embankment. b) τ = L/(2c), photons
from G’ and R’ are detected, in coincidence, by DU ; YU ﬁres. c) τ = γvL/(2c), photons
from GU and RU are detected in coincidence by D’ in S’; Y’ ﬁres and is observed from S.
In this ﬁgure βv = 2/3, γv = 3/√5. For clarity, the vertical positions of the detectors are
shown displaced.

14

Figure 6: Events on the embankment E (frame S) and in the train TU (frame S’) as
observed from the train TU . a) Sources G’, GU , R’ and RU ﬁre at τ = τ ′ = 0. b)
τ ′ = L/(2c), photons from GU and RU are detected, in coincidence, by D’; Y’ ﬁres. c)
τ ′ = γvL/(2c), photons from G’ and R’ are detected in coincidence by DU in S; YU ﬁres
and is observed from S’. In this ﬁgure βv = 2/3, γv = 3/√5. For clarity, the vertical
positions of the detectors are shown displaced.

15

Figure 7: Events on the embankment E (frame S), in the train TU (frame S’) and in the
train TL (frame S”) observed from the train TL . a) Sources GU , GL , G”, RU , RL and
R” ﬁre at τ = τ ′ = τ ′′ = 0. b) τ ′′ = L/(2c), photons from GL and RL are detected, in
coincidence, by D”; Y” ﬁres. c) τ ′′ = γwL/(2c), photons from GU and RU are detected in
coincidence, by D’; Y’ ﬁres. Also photons from G” and R” are detected, in coincidence,
by DL ; YL ﬁres. Y’ and YL are observed simultaneously in S”. In this ﬁgure βv = 2/3,
βw = 0.382, γw = 1.082. For clarity, the vertical positions of the detectors are shown
displaced.

16

Since the times of the signals Y’, YU , YL and Y” are found to be positive in all frames,
and so later than the production time τ = τ ′ = τ ′′ = 0 of the G and R photons, causality
is respected in all observations i.e. no observation of an apparent emission time that is
later than an apparent detection time.

The above behaviour, showing relativity of simultaneity, derived from the synchro-
nised ‘photon clocks’ in S, S’ and S”, will of course be displayed by any other, similarly
synchronised, clocks in these frames. For example, clocks, of any construction, situated
at the same positions as D’, DU , DL and D” and set to τ = τ ′ = τ ′′ = 0 when they are
all in xt-contiguity, as shown in the conﬁguration of Fig.4.

5 Relative velocity and speed: The meaning of the

second postulate

The complete statement of the postulate E2 given in Ref. [17] is:

Any ray of light moves in the ‘‘stationary’’ system of coordinates with
the determined velocity, c, whether the ray be emitted by a stationary or a
moving body.

Hence:

velocity =

light path
time interval

(5.1)

where ‘time interval’ is to be taken in the sense of the definition in Paragraph
14.

This deﬁnition must be treated with some care and circumspection.

In particular
the relative velocity of two photons or of a photon and some massive physical object, as
observed in a particular frame of reference, may well be less than, or greater than, c.

The deﬁnition of the mean relative velocity of of two objects A and B, over some

interval of time ∆t = t2 −

t1, as observed in some frame of reference, is:

vBA ≡

≡

≡

velocity of B relative to A
[xB(t1)
xA(t2)
xB(t2)
−
t1
t2 −
∆xBA(t1)

∆xBA(t2)

−

−

xA(t1)]

−
∆t

where 1-dimensional motion is considered. For the case of three objects, each in uniform
motion along a straight line, the relation ∆xAB =
∆xBA, following from the deﬁnition
of ∆xAB, gives the identity relating three relative velocities:

−

vBA + vAC + vCA = 0

Consider the velocities of the photons R’ and G’ relative to the detector D’ as viewed in
the embankment frame S (Fig.1a). The geometry of the conﬁgurations shown in Fig.1a
4That is, as deﬁned by appropriate clocks synchronised by the light signal procedure deﬁned in Para-

graph 1 of Ref. [17].

(5.2)

(5.3)

17

and Fig.1b give:

vG′D′ = c
v
vD′R′ = c + v
2c
vR′G′ =

−

−

(5.4)
(5.5)
(5.6)

The photons R’ and G’ certainly follow ‘light paths’ in propagating from their points
of production on Fig.1a to their points of detection in Fig1b and Fig.1d respectively,
however,in neither case is the appropriate velocity in Eqn(5.1) the constant c.

The relative velocities in Eqns(5.2)-(5.6) –that between two objects in the same refer-
ence frame– must be distinguished from those appearing in the parallel velocity addition
formula, which connects instead the velocities of a single physical object in diﬀerent frames
of reference. In each frame the velocity of the object as deﬁned as that relative to the
ﬁxed coordinate axes of the frame. It is this velocity, and only this velocity, for the case of
light, that is correctly given, in any inertial frame, by Einstein’s formula (5.1). The speed
of light, the magnitude of its velocity deﬁned in this way, is then the same in all inertial
frames. It is operationally deﬁned as the distance between the ﬁxed points of production
and detection of a photon in an inertial frame, divided by the time-of-ﬂight of the photon
as measured by synchronous clocks at rest in the same reference frame.

It is interesting to note that Einstein did not explicitly state that the speed of light
measured in this way is the same in all inertial frames, when deﬁning, in the passage
quoted above, the postulate E2. This was done later in the paper during the derivation
of the LT. Since Einstein regarded the constancy of the speed of light as a ‘law of nature’,
it was, for him, already implicit in the ﬁrst postulate E1.

In fact the postulate E2 is most easily understood not as a separate ‘law of nature’,
under which aspect it seems highly counter-intuitive 5, but rather as a simple kinematical
consequence of the fact that light consists of massless particles. In the derivation of the
LT in Ref. [7] in which electrodynamics or the propagation of light play no part, it is
found that the relative velocity of two inertial frames, A and B, deﬁned according to the
formula (5.2) with either xA =constant, or xB =constant, has a maximum possible value,
V . If one frame is the proper frame of an object of Newtonian mass, m, moving with
velocity v relative to the other, the relativistic momentum, p, and energy, E, of the object
in the second frame are deﬁned by the relations:

where

1
q
Eliminating successively v and E between Eqns(5.7) and (5.8) gives the relations:

(v/V )2

−

(5.7)
(5.8)

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

p
E

≡
≡

˜γvmv
˜γvmV 2

1

˜γv ≡

E2 = m2V 4 + p2V 2

v =

pV 2
(m2V 4 + p2V 2)

1
2

18

5See Einstein’s discussion of the parallel velocity addition formula in Chapters VI and VII of Ref [1]

It follows from Eqn(5.11), that any massless object has velocity v = V in any inertial
frame. Identifying light with the massless photon then predicts that, in all inertial frames:

speed of light

c = V = constant

(5.12)

≡

so that also ˜γv = γv in all inertial frames. Eqn(5.12) is just Einstein’s postulate E2 of
special relativity. It follows directly from the identiﬁcation of light with massless particles
– for the discovery of which (not special relativity) Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize.

The deﬁnition (5.2) and the identity (5.3) can be used to discuss the apparent veloci-
ties, in the embankment frame S, of the photons GU and GR that are detected by D’ in
the train TU . Referring to Fig.5, the geometry of the conﬁgurations in Fig.5a and Fig.5c,
Eqn(5.2) gives the relations:

Since vD′DU = v, Eqn(5.3) together with (5.13) and (5.14) can be used to derive the
relations:

vGU D′ =

vRU D′ =

vGU RU =

c
γv

−
2c
γv

c
γv

vGU DU = c

β +

 

vRU DU = c

β

 

−

1
γv ! ≥
1
γv ! ≤

c

c

(5.13)

(5.14)

(5.15)

(5.16)

(5.17)

→

vRU DU →

1, vGU DU ≃

The maximum value of vGU DU or √2c occurs when βv = 1/γv = 1/√2. This is also
the value of βv for which vRU DU changes sign and the photon RU apparently moves to
the right, rather than the left in Fig.5. As β
c so that the
relative velocity of the photons GU and RU , as observed from S, vanishes. Comparison
of the relative velocities (5.4) and (5.5) appropriate to Einstein’s interpretation, uniquely
in the frame S, of the TETE, with those (5.13) and (5.14) which describe instead the
behaviour of the moving photon clock constituted by TU , as observed from S, provides
the correct understanding in SR of both the ‘relativity of simultaneity’ phenomenon and
the meaning of ‘velocity’ in Eqn(5.1). The relativity of simultaneity eﬀect describes
diﬀerent time ordering of the same events in diﬀerent inertial frames, e.g.
the events
Y’ and YU described in the previous section. In Einstein’s interpretation of the TETE
diﬀerent events, R’-D’ (actually R-DR ), G’-D’ (actually G-DG ) and G-R-D in the same
inertial frame are compared. The xt-contiguity of G-R-D in S (Fig.1c) and the apparent
lack of it in S’ (ﬁg.3b and Fig.3d) are at variance with IC, which is a necessary consequence
of the LT. In Einstein’s interpretation of the TETE both the photons which are detected
in D (at rest in the frame S) and apparently detected in D’ (at rest in the frame S’)
have velocities, relative to S, of c. However D’ in this case is not a detector in S’, it
is instead identiﬁed with detectors in S, DR and DG , that happen to be at the same
spatial positions in S as D’ when photons are detected. Indeed, the photons detected in
D’ cannot be the the same ones as those detected in DR or DG . When the postulate E2
is correctly invoked, as in the analysis presented in Fig.5, it can be seen that the apparent

19

velocities in S of the photons detected in by D’ in S’, given by Eqns(5.13) and (5.14) are
not, in general, equal to c, so that it is incorrect to calculate the times of coincidence of
photons with D’ by considering only photons with speed c in the frame S. This diﬀerence
of apparent velocity is a consequence of the apparent slowing down of physical processes
(in this case the speed of light progagation in an inertial frame) observed for all moving
clocks as a consequence of the universal relativistic time dilatation eﬀect6.

6 Comments on some previous interpretations of the

Einstein TETE

A recent paper by Nelson [4] presented an extensive re-interpretation of Einstein’s
original TETE. The present author read this paper before writing the present one and
found Nelson’s analysis extremely useful in revealing the crucial questions which need
to be addressed in the problem. Nelson ﬁnally concluded that Einstein’s interpretation
was qualitatively correct, in that the lightning strokes appear to be simultaneous to the
observer on the embankment and non-simultaneous to an observer on the train, but that
actually working out the problem quantitatively, in the embankment frame, according to
Einstein’s prescription, gave a result for the time diﬀerence of the non-simultaneous events
diﬀerent from that found in Nelson’s ‘relativistic’ analysis, to be discussed below. This
disagrees with the conclusion of the present paper that observers both on the embankment
and in the train will judge that the strokes are simultaneous.

Although Nelson’s paper contains many important and true statements concerning the
problem, which will be discussed below, the reason for the diﬀerence, and why Nelson’s
(and Einstein’s) conclusion is wrong becomes immediately obvious on performing a correct
space-time analysis only of the lightning stroke events as observed on the embankment
and in the train. Indeed, the the light signals introduced by Einstein are quite irrelevant
to the question of the simultaneity (or not) of the lightning stroke events themselves7.

According to Einstein’s original formulation of the TETE: (i) the lightning strokes are
simultaneous in the embankment frame. Einstein also states: (ii) ‘But the events A and
B also correspond to the points A and B on the train’. Denote the lightning stroke events
in the embankment frame as EA and EB and in the train frame as EA′ and EB′. The
simultaneity of EA′ and EB′ as a consequence of that of EA and EB follows directly from
the relation (2.11) connecting corresponding time intervals in S and S’. If ∆τA = ∆τB,
according to synchronised clocks in S, so that EA and EB and are simultaneous in S
then also ∆t′
B and EA′ and EB′ are simultaneous in S’. The lightning strokes
6A similar discussion of the apparent velocity of photons in the arms of a Michelson interfermoeter,

A = ∆t′

considered as a ‘photon clock’, may be found in Ref. [8].

7In Chapter VIII of Ref [1] Einstein mixes up the physical deﬁnition of simultaneous events with the
problem of how a single observer would decide, experimentally, that two events were simultaneous. In
connection with the latter, light signals were introduced. This discussion leads directly to the introduction
of the TETE in the following chapter. Simultaneity can be conveniently deﬁned by conceptually simpler
methods e.g. by establishing a network of pre-synchronised clocks and comparing event times recorded
by local clocks. It was the misunderstanding of the physics of detection of the light signals, not of the
lightning strokes, that lead Einstein to the erroneous conclusion of non-simultaneity of the train frame
observations.

20

events speciﬁed in the embankment frame are therefore simultaneous for observers both
on the embankment and in the train as shown in Figs.1 and 3. This follows directly from
Einstein’s statements (i) and (ii) that deﬁne the initial conditions of the TETE, and the
TD relation (2.11). This conclusion is, of course, independent of any subsequent analysis
of light signals produced by the lightning strokes.

Because, unlike in the analysis presented above, using solely the coordinate-free TD
relation (2.11), Nelson used the LT directly in his study of the TETE, the (coordinate-
dependent) description of the experiment using the LT and synchronised clocks is now
reviewed before coming to the critique of Nelson’s arguments. The essential point here
is that the LT is, fundamentally, not a description of the ‘geometry of space-time’ but of
how similar clocks are observed to behave in diﬀerent inertial frames 8. The relation

τ (EA) = τ (EB) = t′(EA′) = t′(EB′) = 0,

(6.1)

as in the analgous TETE conﬁguration shown in Fig.4, corresponds to a particular choice
of the synchronisation convention of clocks in the frames S and S’. Choosing the origins
of the coordinate systems in S and S’ at M and M’, as done by Nelson, the synchronisa-
tion convention (6.1) corresponds to the following space-time transformations for clocks
situated at A’, M’ and B’ respectively:

x′
A′ + L/2 = γv[xA′ + L/2

t′
A′ = γv[τA −
x′
M ′ = γv[xM ′

]

−

vτA] = 0
v(xA + L/2)
c2
vτM ] = 0
vxM ′
c2
vτB] = 0
L/2)

−
v(xB′

−

]

]

−
c2

t′
M ′ = γv[τM −
L/2

L/2 = γv[xB′

−
t′
B′ = γv[τB −
τ = 0 when xA′ =
A′ = t′

x′
B′

−

x′
A′ =

−

L/2,

xA′ =

L/2 + vτ,

t′
A′ =

τ
γv

x′
M ′ = 0,

xM ′ = vτ,

−
t′
M ′ =

τ
γv

x′
B′ = L/2,

xB′ = L/2 + vτ,

t′
B′ =

τ
γv

L/2, xM ′ = 0 and xB′ = L/2, as
Choosing τA = τM = τB ≡
t′ = 0, which is just the
in the conﬁguation shown in Fig.4, gives t′
synchronisation convention (6.1) above. With this convention Eqns(6.2) to (6.7) simplify
at S time9τ to :

−
M ′ = t′
B′

≡

Thus

A′ = t′
t′

M ′ = t′

B′ = t′ =

τ
γv

no ‘relativity of simultaneity’ and

xA′ = L
8Just this remark was made by Einstein in Chapter X of Ref.[1].
9This is the time registered by all synchronised clocks in S.

−

−

x′
A′ = xB′

x′
B′

21

(6.2)

(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

(6.7)

(6.8)

(6.9)

(6.10)

(6.11)

(6.12)

no ‘length contraction’. The relations (6.11) and (6.12) were previously derived above
(Eqn(2.11) and (4.2) respectively), without explicit use of the LT, by considering invariant
space-time intervals in the frames S and S’.

After this preliminary discussion a survey of the arguments presented in Ref. [4] is

made. The crucial statement in the abstract:

It is shown that, under the conditions of the experiment, a simultaneity
in one inertial frame does indeed hold in another inertial frame, but it is
preceived as a non-simultaneity by an observer outside the given frame.

is true and important for the understanding of the problem addressed, but its meaning
depends crucially on that assigned to the word ‘perceived’. I return to this point below.

I agree with almost everything in Nelson’s Sections 2-4. Indeed, since Einstein’s anal-
ysis is carried out only in the embankment frame (there are no primed coordinates or
times) nothing can be said concerning observations in the train frame. If the correspond-
ing events are not even considered in the analysis it is evidently not possible to discuss
simultaneity (or lack of it) in the train frame S’. To put it bluntly, Einstein’s analysis does
not even address the question posed by the TETE. For this, coordinates and times in the
train frame must be considered. This was clearly and correctly stated by Nelson in his
Section 3. In fact the ‘non-simultaneity’ assigned by Einstein to the observations of the
train observer has a trivial explanation –the diﬀerent relative velocities of D’ relative to
the photons G’ and R’ in the frame S (see Fig.1) 10. so, as explained above, what is shown
in Fig.1 is the interaction of photons in the frame S (i.e. moving with the speed c in this
frame, according to the postulate E2) with detectors at rest in S at the same position as
the moving detector D’ in this frame at the instant of photon detection. It tells nothing of
the response of D’ to photons that are moving, according to E2, with the speed c in the
frame S’. This is what is shown in Fig.3. Here D is in motion in S’ with diﬀerent velocities
relative to the photons G and R and the ‘non-simultaneity’ of its apparent11 encounters
with them, is the same purely classical eﬀect 12, following from the deﬁnition of relative
velocity in Eqn(5.2), as seen in Fig.1.

Nelson’s digression 4.1 is irrelevant to the discussion since, as shown above, the ques-
tion of simultaneity or non-simultaneity of the lightning strokes in the frames S and S’
(before any consideration of light signals) has the same answer –yes they are simultaneous
in both frames– whether a Galilean or Lorentz transformation is used. The simple reason
is that the eﬀect of the LT must be the same at the points A and B, – this is just transla-
tional invariance [8]. So if τA = τB then necessarily t′
B. If the same synchronisation
convention 13 is used at A and B this will always be the case. Thus the statement in
Section 4 of Ref. [4]:

A = t′

10In discussing points raised in Ref. [4] the notation of the present paper is used
11As in S, the corresponding S’ frame events are actually speciﬁed, as discussed Section 3 above, by
the concidences of photons with detectors at rest in S’ at the same positions as the moving detector D
at the S’ times of the coincidences.

12It is classical because precisely the same result is obtained in Galilean relativity, where photons are
replaced by massive objects of constant and equal velocities. The same pattern of events is seen in
Fig.2 where light signals are replaced by sound signals. The underlying physical description of sound
propagation is also purely classical.

13That is, the initial settings τ0 and t′

0, as viewed from S, of clocks at rest in S and S’ respectively.

22

Put another way A(embankment) and A(train) are space-time coincident --i.e.

they are one and the same point-- when the strokes occur, so that a stroke
that hits A(embankment) also hits A(train) at the same instant.
stroke hitting B(embankment) also hits B(train).

Likewise the

is true in both Galilean and special relativity, on twice replacing ‘also hits’ by ‘is
also observed from’. It is essential only that the strokes ‘hit’ the embankment, not also
the train. This was the way Einstein’s TETE was deﬁned in Ref‘[1].
Indeed (see the
Appendix) depending of how precisely the ‘strokes’ are deﬁned, they may not even hit
the ends of the train at any time. Also, as shown above, ‘the train spans the same length
in each frame’ – there is no length contraction. Thus Nelson’s remarks in Section 4.1
on the ‘pre-relativistic’ nature of the analysis presented later in Section 7 of Ref. [4] are
ill-founded. Nelson’s Figs.5 and 6 describe correctly the problem in both Galilean and
special relativity. Only the physical meaning of the photon-detector coincidence events
(in the language of the present paper) is misinterpreted by Nelson.

I ﬁnd the ‘Traditional’ analysis of Section 6 of Ref. [4] to be quite spurious. Non-
simultaneous events observed in the frame S due to diﬀerent photon-detector relative
velocities are transformed into the frame S’ and interpreted in terms of photons observed
in this frame (i.e. photons with speed c in S’). I can see no physical rationale for such a
procedure.

The analysis presented in Sections 7 and 8 of Ref. [4] is very similar to that in Section
3 of the present paper. Figures 5 and 6 of Ref. [4] are essentially the same as Figs.1 and 3
of the present paper, the same photon-detector coincidence times being found. In Section
7 is found the statement: ‘This would seem to show that simultaneity in one frame does
indeed hold in another frame, but does not appear this way to an observer outside the
frame’. This point is the same as that quoted above from the abstract of Ref. [4]. The
photons G and R are detected simultaneously in S by D, whereas the other photons G’
and R’ apparently encounter the detector D’ at diﬀerent times in S (Fig.1) On the other
hand the photons G’ and R’ are detected simultaneously by D’ in S’ whereas the photons
G and R apparently encounter the detector D at diﬀerent times in S’ (Fig.3). The phrase
‘does not appear this way to an observer outside the frame’ refers, for example, to the S’
frame observation of temporally distinct G-D and R-D coincidences instead of the triple
G-R-D coincidence observed in S. But of course, as explained above these are not the
same events. The photons G and R detected in S are not the photons G and R detected
in S’. Also the moving detector D in S’ is actually strictly equivalent to detectors at rest
in this frame which happen to be at the same spatial position as the detector D at the
instant at which the photons are detected. Only in this case can a meaningful time (that
in S) be assigned to the corresponding events.

The pattern of events shown in Figs.1 and 3 is, as previously stated, consistent with
the Measurement Reciprocity Postulate. Contrary to what is stated in Section 7 of Ref. [4]
there is no paradox to be resolved here. What are shown in Table 1 of Ref. [4] are not
inconsistent observations of the lightning strokes but the predicted and compatible time
diﬀerences of diﬀerent photon-detector coincidence events

In Section 9.1 of Ref. [4] the important remark is made that space-time coincidences
of diﬀerent events are invariant and so their existence must be agreed upon by observers

23

Event
Time in S, τ
Time in S’, τ ′

R-DR G-R-D G-DG G’-DG ’ G’-R’-D’ R’-DR ’

L
2(c+v)
γvL
2(c+v)

L
2c
γvL
2c

L
2(c−v)
γvL
2(c−v)

γv L
2(c+v)
L
2(c+v)

γv L
2c
L
2c

γv L
2(c−v)
L
2(c−v)

Table 1: Observation times on the embankment (frame S) and in the train (frame S’) of
the six distinct photon-detector coincidence events.

in any frame. – this is just the ‘Invariance of Contiguity’ proved in Section 2 above. It is
suggested (as is done in the reﬁned TETE of Section 4 of the present paper) to generate
a third light signal if a double light signal-detector coincidence is recorded (for example
the G’-R’-D’ coincidence of Fig.3 of the present paper). Of course, as is shown in Fig.5
(which is analagous to Fig.1 for the original TETE) the embankment observer does see the
signal Y’ that shows that the analogous GU -RU -D’ coincidence does occur in the train.
Similarly, as shown in Fig.6, the train frame observer sees the YU signal indicating the
G’-R’-DU coincidence on the embankment which is analogous to the G-R-D one of Fig.1.
Contrary to what is said in Section 9.1 of Ref. [4] there is no ‘repudiation’ of invariants.
The mistake here is the identiﬁcation of the separate R’-D’ and G’-D’ coincidence events
of Fig.1b and 1d respectively in the frame S with the triple coincidence event G’-R’-D’ of
Fig.3c in the frame S’. The photons R’ and G’ of Fig.1, that are detected in S are not the
same as R’ and G’ in Fig.3, observed in coincidence in the frame S’, The three coincidence
events R’-D’-not G’ (Actually R-DR ), G’-D’-not R’ (Actually G-DG ) in S and G’-R’-D’
in S’ all occur, but they are all distinct events, not the same events as viewed in diﬀerent
frames, as assumed by Nelson, so that Invariance of Contiguity is respected..

Contrary then to what is stated in Section 10 of Ref [4] the patterns of events shown
in Figs.5 and 6 of Ref [4] or in Figs.1 and 3 of the present paper are perfectly consistent.
There are three distinct events for observers in either the embankment or the train frames:
two single photon-detector coincidences and one double photon-detector coincidence, giv-
ing, in total, six diﬀerent events seen directly in the embankment and train frames. The
fundamental error of both Einstein and Nelson is the attempt to analyse the problem in
terms of only three events speciﬁed only in the embankment frame. The mistake made
here is similar to that, mentioned in Section 2 above, where it is attempted to analyse the
TD eﬀects for observers in the frames S and S’ uniquely in terms of ∆τ and ∆τ ′ instead
of the four physically distinct time intervals ∆τ , ∆t, ∆τ ′ and ∆t′.

The three coincidence events observed in each of the embankment and train frames,
may, if light signals are also generated by the single photon-detector coincidences (as
described in Section 5 above for the double coincidence events) be observed from the
other frames. This gives, in each frame, six events: the three coincidences recorded by
the detectors at rest in the frame, and three signals produced by the similar coincidence
events in the other frame –in all twelve distinct events instead of the three assumed by
Einstein and Nelson. It should be obvious that all these events are distinct. Six correspond
to ‘baking a cake’, three on the embankment and three on the train while six correspond
to ‘watching the cake bake’, again three on the embankment and three on the train. Of
course the cakes being baked on the embankment and in the train are quite distinct. The
times of all twelve events are presented in Table 1.

In Nelson’s ‘relativistic analysis’ presented in Section 11 and the appendix of Ref [4],

24

as in Einstein’s analysis, only events deﬁned in the embankment frame are considered,
but unlike Einstein, the LT is used to transform these events into the train frame. In the
notation of the present paper, the events R-DR and G-DG are identiﬁed with events R’-D’
and G’-R’, respectively in the train frame and it is concluded, by Lorentz transforming
these events into the train frame, that there is no R’-G’-D’ coincidence event in the latter
frame. A complicated calculation is then performed transforming the lightning stroke
events from S into S’, as well as ﬁnding the propagation delays between light signals in
S’ produced by the transformed stroke events and the moving detector D in this frame,
to show that the double coincidence event R-G-D in S is also observed as such by the
train observer. Actually, this follows directly from the application of IC to this event
without any consideration of the prior lightning strokes and photon propagation. The
spurious ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect given by incorrect use of the LT (6.4) and (6.5)
appropriate to M and M’ to transform the lightning stroke events, (instead of (6.2) and
(6.3) for the stroke at A and (6.6) and (6.7) for the stroke at B), predicts that the lightning
strokes will be seen with a time diﬀrence ∆τ ′
RS = γvvL/c2 by the train observer. Nelson
claims that this time diﬀerence is equal to that between the R-DR and G-DG coincidences
(wrongly identiﬁed with R’-D’ and G’-D’ coincidences observed by the train observer).
Taking into account the TD eﬀect of Eqn(2.12) the train observer will see, from the entries
of Table 1, a time diﬀerence between these events of:

1

∆τ ′

T D =

γvL
1
c + v (cid:21)
c
v −
2 (cid:20)
In order to get agreement between ∆τ ′
RS and ∆τ ′
T D Nelson applied the TD eﬀect in the
opposite direction, i.e. the formula ∆t = γv∆τ ′ was used instead of the correct formula
(2.12). Thus, by dint of not considering events in the train frame, invoking the spurious
‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect and an incorrect calculation of TD, Nelson arrived at a
result in qualitative agreement with Einstein’s one.

(6.13)

γ3
vLv
c2

−

=

To summarise Nelson’s paper: It was correctly pointed out that Einstein’s interpre-
tation, considering events only in the embankment frame says nothing about what an
observer on the train will see, as events in the train frame are not even considered. As-
suming simultaneous lightning strokes on the embankment and in the train, and no length
contraction (stated by Nelson to correspond to a ‘pre-relativistic’ analysis, but actually
the correct prediction of both Galilean and special relativity) the similar sequences of
events on the embankment and in the train are then considered (Section 7 and Figs. 5
and 6 of Ref. [4]). From these it is correctly concluded that both embankment and train
obervers see simultaneous events. It is then assumed (in the notation of the present paper)
that the photon-detector coincidences R-DR , (called R’-D’) and G-DG (called G’-D’) and
R’-G’-D’ are diﬀerent observations of the same event: R’-G’-D’ in S’ and R’-D’ and G’-D’
in S. This is in clearly in contradiction with Invariance of Contiguity, and so Nelson con-
cludes that the R’-G’-D’ coincidence in S’ does not exist. In view of the reciprocal nature
of the events shown in Figs.5 and 6 of Ref. [4], it could have been argued, by the same
logic, that the R-G-D coincidence in S does not exist. The fallacy of such arguments
is, for example, the incorrect identiﬁcation of G-DG with G’-D’ and R-DR with R’-D’.
Actually G-DG and R-DR in S and R’-G’-D’ in S’ are distinct and uncorrelated events
(diﬀerent photons are detected in each case). The ‘relativistic’ solution suggested has
been discussed above. Only events in the embankment frame are considered, the spurious
‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect, resulting from misuse of the LT, is invoked, and the TD

25

eﬀect is incorrectly calculated, to yield an interpretation in qualitative agreement with
Einstein’s one.

Nelson’s correct insistence on the necessity of analysing the problem in both the train
and embankment frames was contested in Comments by Rowland [19] and Mallinck-
rodt [20] Unlike Nelson, no attempt at a quantitative analysis of the problem was pro-
posed, so that only verbal arguments were presented. Rowland correctly stresses the
importance of Invariance of Contiguity for the problem but wrongly concludes from this
that embankment frame analysis only, as in Einstein’s interpretation, is suﬃcient. Only
embankment frame events are discussed, so the essential problem in not addressed. Sim-
ilarly, Mallinckrodt considers only events in the embankment frame but makes the ad-
ditional and incorrect statement (rebutted in Nelson’s reply [21] to the Comments) that
the postulate E2 is essential for Einstein’s interpretation. None of Nelson, Rowland and
Mallinckrodt understand the essential point that diﬀerent events (i.e. events initiated
by diﬀerent photons) are observed in the embankment and train frames, so that it fal-
lacious to assume that they are the same events viewed in diﬀerent frames. This fact is
a consequence of relativistic kinematics, one important aspect of which is encapsulated
in Einstein’s postulate E2. If the photons in the TETE were replaced by massive parti-
cles obeying Galilean kinematics Einstein’s interpretation would be correct and the three
events R-DR , G-DG and G-R-D would be observed at the same time in both the train
and embankment frames and would constitute a complete and correct description of the
problem. But one would not conclude from this, any more than for the sound signals
in Fig.2, that ‘relativity of simultaneity’ an essential feature of Galilean Relativity or of
acoustics.

The essential point, that it is not possible, in special relativity, to associate the times
of coincidence events in detectors at rest in a reference frame with the proper time of
an event in a spatially contigous but moving detector is made particularly clear in the
example discussed below in the Appendix in which the ‘lightning strokes’ of Einstein’s
TETE are replaced by two pulsed laser beams in the embankment frame.

7 Summary and conclusions

A = ∆t′

In Einstein’s TETE the lightning strokes at A and B (see Fig.1a) are, by deﬁnition,
simultaneous in the embankment frame. It then follows directly from the TD formula
(2.11) that these events are simultaneous in the train frame, i.e. if ∆τA = ∆τB in (2.11)
then necessarily ∆t′
B. This is exempliﬁed by comparison of Fig.8b and Fig.12 in
the Appendix –the events corresponding to the photon bunches striking the points A and
B are simultaneous in both the embankment and the train frames. However, in order to
analyse the problem, Einstein did not consider directly the lightning stroke events but
rather light signals produced by the strokes and later seen by observers at the middle of the
train or at point on the embankment midway between A and B. Considering only events
in the embankment frame, as shown in Fig.1, it was concluded that the embankment
observer would see the signals from the lightning strokes simultaneously (Fig.1c) but not
the train observer (Fig.1b and Fig.1d). The latter then infers that the lightning strokes
must occur at diﬀerent times in the train frame. Einstein took this inference of the

26

supposed observations of the train observer as a statement of fact about any two events
in an inertial frame [1]:

Events which are simultaneous with reference to the embankment are not

simultaneous with respect to the train and vice versa (relativity of
simultaneity).

This interpretation is based on the assumption that the times of events in the train
frame may be identiﬁed with the times of events observed in the embankment frame at
the same apparent spatial positions. For example, in Fig.1b, the time of the train frame
coincidence event R’-D’ is assumed to be the same as the embankment frame event R-DR .
As shown by the calculation presented in the Appendix, this would be true if the photons
in Fig.1 would be replaced by massive particles obeying Newtonian kinematics. However
this assumption is false (and therefore invalidates Einstein’s argument) for massive or
massless particles obeying relativistic kinematics. Fundamentally, it is this neglect of
relativistic kimematics, embodied, for photons, by the postulate E2, that leads Einstein
to a conclusion that is the opposite of the correct one. Using E2, and performing the
analysis in the train frame, as shown in Fig.3, leads, in combination with the embankment
frame analysis of Fig.1, to the correct conclusion that the lightning strokes are observed
to be simultaneous by both the embankment and the train observers.

As shown by the analysis of the TETE with two trains presented in Section 4, a genuine
‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect does exist, in special relativity, for certain events, in
diﬀerent inertial frames. However, as shown above, it follows directly from the TD eﬀect
formula that two events which are simultaneous in the same inertial frame are so in all
such frames –contrary to Einstein’s statement quoted above.

In Section 5, the precise operational meaning of the postulate E2 is discussed and
the important distinction between ‘speed’ and ‘relative velocity’ is pointed out.
It is
also shown that E2 does not need to be introduced as a separate (and anti-intuitive)
hypothesis, in special relativity but is direct consequence of the relativistic kinematics
of massless photons [7]. Derivations of the LT not using the postulate E2 are brieﬂy
mentioned in Section 2 where the TD eﬀect and Invariance of Contiguity are introduced
Due to the TD eﬀect, the apparent speed of light signals between events, observed in
a moving inertial frame from another one, may be greater than, or less than, the light
speed, c, as measured in an inertial frame (Eqns(5.16) and (5.17)).

Section 6 contains a detailed discussion of Nelson’s [4] re-interpretation of Einstein’s
TETE. Nelson correctly pointed out the impossiblity to analyse the problem in a mean-
ingful manner by considering only events in the embankment frame. The correct solution
of the problem was presented in Nelson’s Section 7 and shown in his Figs.5 and 6 (the
latter being equivalent to Figs.1 and 3 of the present paper). However, this solution was
rejected by the failure to notice the distinct nature of (in the language of the present
paper) the photon-detector coincidence events in the diﬀerent frames. See Table 1 and
the accompanying discussion in the text. These were misinterpreted by Nelson as obser-
vations, in diﬀerent frames, of the same events, with a resulting apparent ‘repudiation of
invariants’ or violation of Invariance of Contiguity. This lead to the rejection of the correct
interpretation shown in Figs.5 and 6 of Ref. [4] and the introduction of the ‘relativistic
analysis’ of Nelson’s Section 11 and Appendix. This, like Einstein’s interpretation, consid-

27

ered only coincidence events in the embankment frame, which were, however, subsequently
Lorentz-transformed into the train frame. In the calculation the spurious ‘relativity of
simultaneity’ eﬀect (correlated with the equally spurious ‘relativistic length contraction’
eﬀect) resulting from misuse of the space-time LT [8, 9, 10, 11] was invoked, and the
TD eﬀect of Eqn(2.12) between the train and embankment frames was inverted. This
incorrect calculation gave a result in qualitative agreement with Einstein’s interpretation.

In the Appendix of the present paper, instead of considering observations of light
signals produced by the ‘lightning strokes’ of Einstein’s TETE, the latter are replaced
by temporally localised bunches of laser photons generated in the embankment frame
(see Fig.8a). Applying Einstein’s interpretation to the conﬁguration of Fig.8b, where the
bunches of photons hit the points A and B on the embankment, it would be concluded
that the former hit simultaneously the xt-contiguous points A’ and B’ on the train. The
detailed space-time analysis of the problem presented shows that this would indeed be the
case if the photons were replaced by massive particles moving at a constant velocity u,
c, but this is no longer the case when u is of the order of c. Comparison of Figs.10. 11
≪
and 12 shows the profoundly non-intuitive nature of the spatial conﬁgurations of moving
objects at corresponding times (i.e. times linked by the TD formulae (2.11) or (2.12)), in
diﬀerent frames, as predicted by special relativity theory.

28

Appendix

In the analysis above of Einstein’s TETE, light signals produced by lightning strokes
hitting the embankment were considered, as viewed by observers on the embankment or
in the moving train. In this appendix the ‘lightning strokes’ are replaced light pulses,
generated by a source in the embankment frame, that strike the embankment at points
with the same x-coordinates as the ends of the moving train at this instant. The events
corresponding to the detection of these light pulses, –analogous to the lightning stroke
events in the Einstein TETE–are analysed directly rather than the light signals produced
by, say, reﬂection of the pulses at the embankment, as in the Einstein TETE.

A pulsed laser source (PLS) produces two bunches of photons directed towards the
points A and B on the embankment (Fig.8a). The timing of the laser pulses is such
that they arrive at the points A and B at the instant that the ends A’ and B’ of the
train are aligned with A and B (Fig.8b). With parameters θ and L as deﬁned in Fig.8,
this implies that the photon pulses arrive simultaneously at A and B at the time τ =
L/(2c cos θ), if they are emitted from the PLS at τ = 0. The conﬁgurations shown in Fig.8
correspond θ = 60◦ and βv = 0.5. Applying Einstein’s interpretation of his TETE to this
experiment it would be concluded that the photon pulses are observed simultaneoustly
in both the embankment or the train frames.
It will now be demonstrated that this
conclusion, which is correct if the photon pulses are replaced by massive objects obeying
Newtonian kinematics, is no longer true in special relativity, whether or not massive
objects or massless photons are considered. To demonstrate this, the following relativistic
calculations will be performed assuming massive particles rather than photons. Newtonian
kinematics and the case of photons are given by taking the c
0 limits,
respectively, of the relativistic equations for particles with an arbitary Newtonian mass
m.

and m

→ ∞

→

Transforming the photon momenta into the rest frame of the train at τ = τ ′ = 0
gives, for the photon case, the kinematical and spatial conﬁgurations shown in Fig.9 for
v = c/2, √3c/2 and 0.950c. The rationale for the choice of the last value of v is explained
below. Shown in Fig.9, in each case, are the positions of the train and of the points A,
M and B on the embankment deﬁned in the same way as in Einstein’s TETE, as well as
the positions and directions of ﬂight of the photon bunches 14.

The latter are derived from the LT of relativistic momentum according to the equa-

tions:

p± cos θ± = γv(p cos θ
p± sin θ± = p sin θ

βvE
c

)

±

(A1)

(A2)

Eqn(A1) is the transformation equation for the longitudinal component of momentum,
while Eqn(A2) expresses conservation of transverse momentum. Eqns(A1) and (A2),
together with the relations E = γumc2 and p = γuβumc, where the particle of mass m is
assumed to move with speed u, then give:

14In Figs. 8a and 9, the the photon bunches are located at the tails of the wavy arrows, in Figs.8b and

10-12 at the tips of the arrows.

29

Figure 8: a) The pulsed laser source, PLS, produces, simultaneously, two bunches of
photons directed towards the points A and B on the embankment at τ = 0. b) at time
τ = L/(2c cos θ) the photon bunches arrive at A and B at the instant that the points A’
and B’ on the train are xt-contiguous with A and B respectively. In this ﬁgure βv = 0.5.

30

Figure 9: Directions and positions of the photon bunches from the PLS in the train frame
at τ = τ ′ = 0 for various values of βv.

31

Figure 10: Positions of the photon bunches in the train frame at later times. a) βv = 0.5,
photon bunch xt-contiguous with B’; b) βv = 0.866, photon bunch crosses x′-axis; c)
βv = 0.950, photon bunch xt-contiguous with A’.

32

Figure 11: The train-frame xt-contiguous events shown in Fig.10 as observed from the
embankment frame. Coincidences registered by detectors in the train produce the prompt
signals, PS, shown. The positions of the train at τ = 0 are shown dot-dashed.

tan θ± =

u sin θ
γv(u cos θ

v)

±

(A3)

The angles θ and θ± are deﬁned on Fig.8 and Fig.9a respectively. If L+ and L− are the
(positive) distances of A’ and B’, respectively, from M and l± are the (positive) distances
from M of the intersections of the particle trajectories with the x′-axis (see Fig.9c), then
the geometry of Fig.9 gives:

and

It follows from (A4) and (A5) that:

L± =

v

L
2 (cid:18)

u cos θ ±

1

(cid:19)

(A4)

l± =

γvL
2 (cid:18)

v

u cos θ ±

1

(cid:19)

(A5)

l± = γvL±

(A6)

33

Figure 12: The simultaneous embankment frame photon-A and photon-B xt-contiguous
events of Fig.8b, as viewed from the train frame, showing also the correponding positions
of the photon bunches in this frame. The photon-A and photon-B coincidence events
in the embankment frame produce prompt signals, PS’, shown. These events are also
simultaneous in the train frame. In this case there is no ‘relativity of simultaneity’.

34

In the limit c

, γv →
pass through the points A’ and B’ at the end of the train for any values,
In this limit (A2) becomes:

1 of Galilean relativity, l± = L±, so the particle trajectories
c, of v and u.

→ ∞

≪

u± sin θ± = u sin θ

(A7)

showing that both particles have the same transverse velocity. They then arrive si-

multaneously at A’ and B’ in both the train and the embankment frames.

As is clear from inspection of Fig.9, this is no longer the case for photons, given by
setting u = c in (A4) and (A5). All the conﬁgurations in Fig.9 have θ = 60◦. Fig.9a
corresponds to cos θ = βv = 1/2, so that L− = l− = 0 and a photon trajectory passes
through B’. In general, however, (see Fig.9b) the photon trajectories do not pass through
A’ and B’, so contrary to the naive (classical) expectation drawn from inspection of Fig.8b,
detectors situated at A’ and B’ would register no photon detection events.

In Fig.9c, v is chosen so that the condition L+ = l− is respected. In this case the
photon trajectory at the larger angle relative to the x′-axis passes through A’. Setting
L+ = l−, u = c and cos θ = 1/2 in (A4) and (A5) gives a cubic equation for βv:

4β2

v (1 + βv) + βv −

8 = 0

(A8)

The solution of this equation is βv = 0.950 or γv = 3.22.

In Fig.10 are shown the conﬁgurations in the train frame (positions of the embankment
and the photon bunches) for the three cases shown in Fig.9, when the photon bunches
with largest angles to the x′-axis cross the latter. It can be seen that in no case, contrary
to what is observed in the embankment frame, are the points A,A’ or B,B’ contiguous
when the photon trajectories pass through A’ or B’. If it is now imagined that photon
detectors equipped with signal sources similar to Y’, YU , YL and Y” in Fig.4, register
photon coincidences in the train for the conﬁgurations shown in Fig.10, the corresponding
signals (calculated using the TD formula (2.11)), as observed in the embankment frame,
are shown in Fig.11. Only for βv = cos θ = 1/2 are the photon-B’ coincidence in the
train frame and and the photon-B coincidence in the embankment frame observed simul-
taneously in the latter. This is easy to understand as the consequence, in this case, of
exact compensation between the shorter path length in S’ tending to make the photon-B’
coincidence earlier than the photon-B one, and the TD eﬀect that tends to make it later.
Finally, in Fig.12 are shown the simultanous photon-A and photon-B coincidence events
of Fig.8b, as viewed from the train frame, for diﬀerent values of βv In all cases these
events are also simultaneous in the train frame. However, following Einstein’s methodol-
ogy in the orginal TETE and placing an observer at the middle of the train, this observer
sees always the photon-B coincidence events before the photon-A ones due to diﬀerent
light propagation time delays. The observer will then judge, by Einstein’s criterion of
simultaneity, that the events are not simultaneous, whereas, in fact, they are.

It is interesting to note the huge diﬀerences between the AA’ and BB’ separations
on the embankment and in the train in Figs.10, 11 and 12, for corresponding event

35

conﬁgurations in the train and on the embankment, when βv is of order unity. This is the
most deeply counter-intuitive eﬀect among all the predictions for space-time experiments
given by special relativity theory.

36

References

[1] A.Einstein, ‘Relativity, the Special and the General Theory’, English translation by

R.W.Lawson, Methuen, London, 1960.

[2] E.F.Taylor and J.A.Wheeler, ‘Spacetime Physics’, W.H.Freeman and Company, San

[3] P.A.Tipler and R.A.Lewellyn, ‘Modern Physics’ W.H.Freeman and Company, New

Franciso 1966, P69.

York, P18.

[4] A.Nelson, Eur. J. Phys. 24 279 (2003).

[5] G.E.Bowman, Eur. J. Phys. 26 1093 (2003).

[6] R.Sherr, P.Schaﬀer and S.Vokos, Am J. Phys. Suppl, 1 69S 24 (2001); Am J. Phys

70 1238 (2002).

[7] J.H.Field, Helv. Phys. Acta. 70 542 (1997), physics/0410262.

[8] J.H.Field, ‘The Local Space-Time Lorentz Transformation: a New Formulation of
Special Relativity Compatible with Translational Invariance’, physics/0501043.

[9] J.H.Field, ‘Clock rates, clock settings and the physics of the space-time Lorentz

transformation’, physics/0606101

[10] J.H.Field, ‘Uniformly moving clocks in special relativity: Time dilatation, but no

relativity of simultaneity or length contraction’, physics/0603135.

[11] J.H.Field, ‘Absolute simultaneity: Special relativity without light signals or synchro-

nised clocks’, physics/0604010.

[12] W.Ignatowsky, Phys. Zeitschr. 11 972 (1910).

[13] V.Berzi and V.Gorini, Journ. Math. Phys. 10 1518 (1969).

[14] R.P.Feynman, R.Leighton and M.Sands, The Feynman Lectures in Physics, Volume

I (Addison-Wesley, Reading Massachusetts, 1966) Section 15-4.

[15] J.H.Field, ‘Space-time transformation properties of inter-charge forces and dipole
radiation: Breakdown of the classical ﬁeld concept in relativistic electrodynamics,
physics/0604089.

[16] Ref.[1] Ch IX, P25.

[17] A.Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17, 891 (1905).

English translation by W.Perrett and G.B.Jeﬀery in ‘The Principle of Relativity’
(Dover, New York, 1952) P37, or in ‘Einstein’s Miraculous Year’ (Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1998) P137.

[18] J.H.Field, Phys. Scr. 73 639 (2006).

[19] D.R.Rowland, Eur. J. Phys. 25 L45 (2004).

37

[20] A.J.Mallinckrodt, Eur. J. Phys. 25 L49 (2004).

[21] A.Nelson, Eur. J. Phys. 25 L51 (2004).

38

