6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On Controversies in Special Relativity

Anatoli Andrei Vankov,
Bethany College, KS; anatolivankov@hotmail.com

Abstract

Controversies arise when specialists disagree on some particular
issue. This normally occurs in any scientiﬁc brunch. We analyze
some controversies, which have a good cause in Special Relativity. The
paper does not question Special Relativity Theory but it challenges
changing deeply held academic beliefs about imaginary experiments
in Special Relativity Theory.

PACS 03.30.+p

1 Introduction

Special Relativity Kinematics is an old physical discipline, which is self-
consistent and complete (what cannot be said about SR Dynamics), so it
is strange enough that controversies arise in SR Kinematics. Our point is
that they could be results of individual confusions, nevertheless, episodically
appearing in media but hardly noticed or ignored if SR refutation or princi-
pal changes claimed. Sometimes confusions and controversies are caused by
ambiguous or even wrong statements in reputable SR scientiﬁc literature and
textbooks. In this work, we discuss some of such cases illustrating a historical
lack of rigor in some presentations of SR concepts. (However, a systematic
review of relevant publications is not our objective). The following issues are
suggested for disputes.

- Lorentz-to-Galilean transformation reduction (LT physical treatment).
- Shape of light front from a moving source (sphere versus ellipsoid).
- Relativity of simultaneity (prerelativistic versus relativistic concept).
- Does a moving clock run slower? (proper versus improper time).
- Main dogma in SR Dynamics (proper mass treatment).

1

2 Lorentz-to-Galilean transformation reduc-

tion

In recent work [1], it is stated that, contrarily to a common belief (or “myth”),
“the Lorentz transformation does not reduce to the Galilean transformation
when the ratio β = v/c is small”. One needs to clarify this issue bearing
in mind that typical textbooks present a formal (mathematical) rather than
physical meaning of Lorentz transformations (LT). Let us consider the special
Lorentz transformation in the standard geometrical conﬁguration (β-boost
for a motion along x, x′ parallel axes without rotation of a spatial part
in a Cartesian coordinate form). When applied to a 4-coordinate vector
X µ = (ct, x, 0, 0) for a free particle in a coordinate system S, it gives a
vector X ′µ = (ct′, x′, 0, 0) in S′

ct′ = γ(ct

βx), x′ = γ(x

βct), y′ = 0, z′ = 0

(1)

−

−

It is argued that x in the ﬁrst equation in (1) (for a temporal component)
can be however great at small β; hence, generally t′
= t. This argument is
readily supported, for example, by references Peres [2] (p.249) and Sartori
[3] ( p.102), but it is false: the equation in question is equivalent to t′ =
γt
. Next, we summarize
physical basics of the LT.

vx/c2 and has the Galilean limit t′ = t at c

→ ∞

−

−

⇐⇒

The Galilean-Newtonian Kinematics describes a particle motion in 3-
space with a time t playing a role of a common parameter.
In general,
Galilean coordinate transformations present one-to-one correspondence (3-
space mapping) for every instant t: [x′(t), y′(t), z′(t)]
[x(t), y(t), z(t)],
the speed of light signal being assumed inﬁnite. Given an initial condition
x′ = x = 0 at t = 0, we have equations of motion of coordinate origins
x′(t) =
vt in S′ or x(t) = vt in S, respectively. As for SRT Kinematics, it
is based on the LT, perception of which is hard for Euclidean mind in spite
of analogy with Galilean transformation. The LT is an expression of the
Galilean relativity principle in a form of 4-space mapping (x′, y′, z′, t′)
←→
(x, y, z, t), the postulate of speed of light constancy being added. The t
is not a parameter there but the 4-th (temporal) coordinate which can be
mixed with a spatial part of the 4-coordinate vector. Tails of 4-vectors are
put in a common origin of coordinate systems: x0 = x′
0 = 0
(a null, or 0-event) chosen arbitrarily. Tips of vectors point at some another
event represented by a 4-point P in S or P ′ in S′ in Minkowski space. The

0 = 0 at t0 = t′

2

6
vt′, x = vt.
analogous equations of motion for coordinate origins are x′ =
It is seen again that in a Galilean limit the term βx in (1) being of a second
order in β should be zeroed giving γ = 1 and t′ = t.

−

The 0-event is a part of the LT concept and all its applications. So far, it
is not clear how to realize it operationally in consistence with the postulate
of speed of light constancy. Before deliberating this problem, we shall learn
how to treat the LT in methodology of imaginary observers (say, John in
S′ and Mary in S) both conducting metric measurements with the use of
standard clocks and rods. Because of LT linearity, one can use space and
time coordinate intervals ∆x = x
t0 rather than coordinates. In
(1), time intervals ∆t′ and ∆t measured by John and Mary, correspondingly,
are the so-called improper intervals (for their measurements more than one
clock are needed). For better understanding a physical meaning of LT, let
us see how a diﬀerence between proper and improper quantities vanishes
in the Galilean limit. To ﬁnd a relationship between improper and proper
quantities, we need to specify observational conditions.

x0, ∆t = t

−

−

Let us introduce proper time intervals ∆t′

0 and ∆t0 measured by each
observer with the use of his/her individual wristwatch (a standard clock).
Those intervals are, of course, equal. They are temporal components of
proper vectors describing an observer’s state of rest ∆X ′
0, 0, 0, 0)
0
µ = (c∆t0, 0, 0, 0). Suppose, Mary wants to conduct a distant
and ∆X0
measurement of John’s time rate. She can do it using a method of signal
(information) exchange: John’s clock should work as an emitter of light
signal, and Mary’s clock as a corresponding detector. Her set of improper
observational data are put in correspondence with the set of John’s proper
data by means of the inverse LT, the latter being applied to the proper
(primed) vector:

µ = (c∆t′

∆x = γβc∆t′

0, c∆t = γc∆t′
0

It gives X µ = γ∆t0(1, β, 0, 0), where

(2)

(3)

This is a time dilation eﬀect, which is a kinematical relativistic eﬀect. Of
course, John and Mary can interchange their roles in information exchange
experiment: John carries a clock-detector to make observations at distance
while Mary carries a clock-emitter. Again one has to apply the LT, this
time the direct one, to the Mary’s proper set of data (the 4-vector) ∆X µ
0 =

γ∆t′

0 = ∆t

3

(c∆t0, 0, 0, 0). The result is:

∆x′ =

γβc∆t0, γ∆t0 = ∆t′

−

(4)

The Galilean limit immediately takes place at γ

1.

→

The improper length is introduced when a distance of travel of one frame
with respect to another is speciﬁed with the use of standard measuring rods.
For example, Mary can measure John’s time of travel from x = 0 to the
point x = ∆x0 = cβ∆t. Here, ∆x0 is the proper length interval and ∆t is the
improper time interval in Mary’s reference frame. In another experiment, she
can measure her proper time interval ∆t0 between the 0-event and the event
of coincidence of her origin O with John’s mark x′ =
0. She measures
a corresponding improper length interval ∆x such that ∆x = cβ∆t0. Of
course, the observers can interchange their roles.
In accordance with the
Galilean principle of relativity, we have following relations between proper
and improper quantities arising in direct and inverse LT:

∆x′

−

cβ = ∆x0/∆t = ∆x/∆t0 = ∆x′

0/∆t′ = ∆x′/∆t′
0

(5)

where primed and unprimed quantities relate to John and Mary, respectively,
and a zero subscript denotes properness. With (3) taken into account, we
have the length contraction eﬀect

γ∆x = ∆x0

The LT exploits a mathematical identity γ2

γ2β2 = 1 of hyperbolic
rotation ensuring invariance of the vector length (norm) in Minkowski space.
The vector norm is the proper time (or time interval). In general, a time-like
quadratic metric form (the squared norm) is invariant under LT:

−

(ct)2

(x2 + y2 + z2) = (ct′)2

(x′2 + y′2 + z′2)

−

−

From this, the time dilation follows as a relative relativistic eﬀect

t2(1

β2) = t′2(1

β2) = t′
0

2 = t2
0

−

−

If interpreted physically, it says that Mary and John agree that their standard
clocks run synchronously locally in all reference frames (in terms of proper
time). When measured at distance, an elapsed (improper) time becomes de-
pendent on a relative speed. The diﬀerence between proper and improper

(6)

(7)

(8)

4

time does not mean a preference for any observer in inertial motion. Clearly,
in Galilean limit the diﬀerence between proper and improper quantities van-
ishes, and the LT naturally reduces to the Galilean transformation. The
latter automatically preserves the time interval due to the absolute character
of time.

3 Shape of light front, and constancy of the

speed of light

3.1 Typical textbook presentations

There are interesting historical facts concerning the postulate of constancy of
the speed of light, Baierlein[1]. Putting details of the history aside, we want
to discuss the postulate in connection with a relativistic picture of light front
observed in diﬀerent inertial reference frames provided photons are emitted
from a single point source. Baierlein’s view on this matter is in concordance
with reputable SR literature; however, there are controversies about it, as
discussed next. We again consider a standard conﬁguration of two (primed
and unprimed) coordinate systems S′, S in a relative motion in x-direction
with the speed v = cβ. Clocks in both systems are synchronized at t′ = t = 0
when origins O′ and O coincide. The problem was ﬁrst time formulated by
Einstein in 1905 in his revolutionary work[4] in the following way (with some
changes in denotations):

“At the time t′ = t = 0, when the origin of the coordinates is common to
the two systems, let a spherical wave be emitted therefrom, and be propagated
with the velocity c in system S. If (x, y, z) be a point just attained by this
wave, then x2 +y2 +z2 = c2t2. Transforming this equation with the aid of our
equations of transformation (the LT is meant, a.v.) we obtain after simple
calculations x′2 + y′2 + z′2 = c2t′2. The wave under consideration is therefore
no less a spherical wave with velocity of propagation c when viewed in the
moving system (S′ is meant, a.v.). This shows that our two fundamental
principles are compatible.”

In the above paragraph, the statement that the null quadratic metric

form

(ct)2

(x2 + y2 + z2) = (ct′)2

(x′2 + y′2 + z′2) = 0

(9)

−

−

is a consequence of two SR postulates is true. There is the second statement

5

about a shape of the wave front in a moving system; it is asserted that if the
front originated at the O-event is spherical in one coordinate system then
it is spherical in the other coordinate system. Notice, that Einstein did not
indicate whether the source of ﬂash is attached to any of coordinate systems.
However, from the proposition that the spherical front is emitted, say, in S,
it should be understood that the source is attached to the origin O in S.
The question arises if the picture of the spherical front originated in S but
observed in S′ is, indeed, predicted in SRT. We shall return to this question
after a brief review of some references concerning the issue.

Pauli[5] was a student in 1921 when he wrote a book-review “Theory
of Relativity”. In the book he noted a paradox in the statement about two
light spheres from the same source but viewed from diﬀerent reference frames
in relative motion: in his view, those spheres must be diﬀerent that would
be a contradiction. Nevertheless, he justiﬁed the two sphere picture and
concluded: “This contradiction disappears, however, if one admits that space
points which are reached simultaneously for O, are not reached simultaneously
for O′ ”, (p.9). Descriptions of this issue in textbooks later on were more
or less a repetition of Einstein’s or Pauli’s version, as in following examples.
According to Reitz[6] (p.563), if “a light source at the common origin emits
a light pulse”, then both observers see a spherical wave front propagating
outward (the state of motion of the source is not deﬁned). There is no clue
there about which frame the source is attached to. In Jackson’s textbook[7]
It produces a light ﬂash from O at t = 0
(p. 524) a source is speciﬁed.
when two origins coincide; the conclusion was made that “Einstein’s second
postulate implies that observers in both S and S′ will see a spherical shell
of radiation expanding outward from the respective origins with speed c”,
(equation (9) is referred). In Tipler’s textbook[8] (p.21): “A ﬂash of light
starts from the origin of S at t = 0. Since we have assumed that the origins
coincide at t = t′ = 0, the ﬂash also starts at the origin of S′ at t′ = 0. The
ﬂash expands from both origins as a spherical wave, in accordance with two
postulates”. In Panofsky’s[9] (p.243), the issue is discussed closely to Pauli’s
text. In Rindler’s[10] (p.75): A moving sphere presents a circular outline to
all observers....

There are topical questions in this issue need to be discussed next: a
speciﬁcation of a rest frame for the source of light; a light front shape seen
from a moving frame; simultaneity of events involving photons.

Why a speciﬁcation of a rest frame for the source of light is important? A
photon vector (just as a particle vector) is subject to the LT without inquir-

6

ing where the particle or the photon came from. To establish a relationship
of proper/improper quantities, one should specify the rest frame for the par-
ticle. The photon cannot be at rest, so the proper/improper categorization
is not relevant to it. However, when the question arises about photon prop-
erties depending on emission versus observation angle with a source and a
detector being in a relative motion, the source speciﬁcation is important, as
in problems of ray aberration and Doppler eﬀects. Problems of isotropy and
shape of light front observed in diﬀerent reference frames and simultaneity
of events involving photons also require a source speciﬁcation. In most ref-
erences, as in the above and others relevant to the problems, a rest frame
for the source was explicitly or indirectly speciﬁed; otherwise, a problem for-
mulation would be underdeﬁned (ill-posed). If deﬁned, one needs a pen and
a piece of paper to calculate a result with the use of LT technique, as in
the following calculation of the shape of light front emitted from the source
given.

3.2 The shape of wave front in a moving system

Let us put a light source at the coordinate origin O′ in John’s frame S′ and
a light detector at O in Mary’s frame S, both frames being in a standard
geometrical conﬁguration. It is assumed that at the instant t′ = t = 0 of
origin coincidence (the 0-event), both observers veriﬁed their clock synchro-
nization. At the same instant, John triggered an isotropic light ﬂash, which
would reached a spherical surface of a radius r′
0. Obviously, the spher-
ical surface r′ = r′
0 in John’s frame represent simultaneous events involving
O′ photons from a ray of any polar angle of emission θ′ in x′, y′ plane. Those
were physical events detectable by any observer, Mary in S, in particular.
A ray of angle θ′ in John’s frame appears to her at some diﬀerent angle θ
dependent on β. This is the aberration phenomena known in pre-relativistic
and relativistic theories, and it aﬀects the shape of John’s light front seen
from diﬀerent inertial frames. We are in position to calculate the shape of
front in S.

0 = c∆t′

Let us consider a 4-coordinate vector of the photon from a speciﬁed source

in John’s frame

x′µ/c = (∆t′

0, ∆t′

0 cos θ′, ∆t′

0 sin θ′, 0)

(10)

where ∆t′
0 is a ﬁxed time interval. The corresponding vector in Mary’s
frame is obtained from (10) by the inverse LT, giving components of xµ/c =

7

(∆t, ∆t cos θ, ∆t sin θ, 0):

0 sin θ′)
(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

∆t = γ∆t′

0(1 + β cos θ′), ∆t cos θ = γt′

0(cos θ′ + β), ∆t sin θ = ∆t′

from which, after simple algebraic calculations, one gets

∆t/∆t′

0 = γ(1 + cos θ′) = 1/γ(1

β cos θ)

−

tan θ = sin θ′/γ(cos θ + β), cos θ = (cos θ′ + β)/(1 + β cos θ′)

tan θ′ = sin θ/γ(cos θ

β), cos θ′ = (cos θ

β)/(1

β cos θ)

−

−

−

One can put for simplicity c∆t′
light

0 = 1, then, due to constancy of the speed of

r(θ) = c∆t(θ) = γ(1 + cos θ′) = 1/γ(1

β cos θ′)

(15)

−

This is a radius measured by Mary in S when the source is attached to
John’s S′ frame. The radius is a function of a polar emission angle θ in S
corresponding to θ′ in S′ . Both angles are connected by aberration formulae
(13), (14). Clearly, Mary sees an ellipse (15) in (x, y) plane, or an elon-
gated ellipsoid in 3-space with semimajor and semiminor axes a = γ and
b = 1, correspondingly, and the eccentricity ǫ = β. The ellipse is shown in
Fig 1 for r′
It is similar to that presented in
Vankov[11] for photon 4-momentum vectors (the similarity is a consequence
of complementarity of coordinate and momentum space).

0 = 1 and β = 0.7.

0 = c∆t′

Back to sphere-versus-ellipsoid controversies in literature, as reviewed
above: evidently, authors did not pay much attention to the source issue,
and did not attempt to calculate. Hypnotized by (9), they jumped to the
wrong conclusion that if one observer saw an isotropic radiation (a sphere)
than all observers from diﬀerent inertial frames would see the same picture,
provided the initial condition t′ = t = 0 for a light ﬂash was arranged. In our
calculation, the source was put at the origin of S′ (John’s) coordinate system.
Therefore, r′ = r′
(x′2 + y′2 + z′2) = c∆t′ is a sphere of isotropic radia-

0 =
(x2 + y2 + z2) = c∆t(θ) in S (Mary)
tion. At the same time, r = r(θ) =
q
is an ellipsoid of anisotropic radiation containing the same photons, as on
John’s sphere. The LT realizes sphere-to-ellipsoid mapping, which results in
β cos θ),
temporal and spatial (radial) rescaling by the same factor 1/γ(1
a function of a polar angle θ with the boost parameter β. Recall that rel-
ativistic space-time rescaling means a change of length-time units due to a

−

q

8

Figure 1: Sphere-to-ellipsoid conversion in coordinate transformations

±

relative motion in a given direction. Events at the ellipsoid 4-point (except
θ) are, of course, not simultaneous.
for symmetric ones for any pair of angles
Relativistic Physics of the aberration and Doppler phenomena is not
complete without a consideration of the momentum transfer due to “vector
boost” and the corresponding ellipsoid picture in the 4-momentum (com-
plementary) space [11]. In this connection, there is an interesting relation-
−−→OP ′
= r′
0 = 1. The vector diagram reads
ship between
|
−→OP = −−→OP ′ + −−→P ′P where
= ∆x is a magnitude of a boost vector in x-
direction in the LT diagram for photon 4-vectors. The addition is analogous
to the momentum transfer in the 4-momentum space. As a LT consequence,
∆x(θ) as well as r(θ) are linear functions of cos θ′

= r and
−−→P ′P

−→OP
|

|
|

|

|

∆x = (γ

1) cos θ′ + γβ,

r = γ + γβ cos θ′

(16)

−

9

In a low-speed approximation, ∆x = β, r = 1 + β cos θ′.

Several cases illustrating the boost for diﬀerent angles are shown in the

picture and commented below.

Case A. At cos θ′ = cos θ = 1 r = γ(1 + β) =

β); −→OA =
q
1) + γβ. If a frequency is measured, a maximal

(1 + β)/(1

−

−−→OA′ + −−→A′A ; ∆x = (γ
blue-shift will be determined.

−

1)/γβ, cos θ = (γ

Case C. At cos θ′ =
−−→OC ′ + −−→C ′C, ∆x = 2(γ
found.

Case B. At cos θ′ = 0, cos θ = β, r = γ −−→OB = −−→OB′ + −−→B′B; ∆x = γβ.
In this case, a ray perpendicular to the x′-axis in John’s frame is emitted.
From the time interval measured, the time dilation eﬀect will be determined.
1)/γβ , r = 1. −→OC =
If a frequency is measured, no shift is

−
−
β, cos θ = 0, r = 1/γ −−→OD = −−→OD′ + −−→D′D, ∆x = β.
In this case, a ray perpendicular to the x-axis in Mary’s frame is detected.
If a frequency is measured, the transverse Doppler (red-shift) eﬀect will be
determined equivalent to the time-dilation eﬀect.
1, r = γ(1

Case E. At cos θ′ = cos θ =

Case D At cos θ′ =

(γ
−
1)/γβ).

β)/(1 + β),

β) =

(1

−

−

−−→OE = −−→OE′ + −−→E′E , ∆x =
(γ
maximal red-shift will be found.

−

1) + γβ. If a frequency is measured, a

−

q

−

−

−

It is interesting to notice that for every ray of the directional cosine cos θ′
in the primed coordinate system another ray of the directional cosine cos θ
exists in the unprimed system such that r(cos θ′)
θ)) = 1 identically,
as in A and E cases and B and D cases. The case C is unique: there is no
temporal and spatial rescaling for the directional cosine cos θ′ =
1)/γβ.
A continual deviation from this direction leads to either contraction (r < 1)
or extention (r > 1) of time/length scale up to maximal eﬀects at cos θ′ =
1.
In particular, one can verify the identity r(0)

r(π) = 1.

r(cos(π

(γ

−

±

−

−

·

In our view, a historical “picture of two spheres” has made pedagogical
and ideological harm and was a source of many confusions. Let us see some
examples. The paper[12] from the Physics Educational Research AJP Section
presents the problem in a worst (ill-posed) variant, when a relative motion of
a source with respect to an observer is not speciﬁed, and the wrong answer
is stated to be taken for granted. In the next quotation from the paper, we
changed names of imaginary observers for convenience.

“Students are told that two observers, John and Mary, move past each
other at relativistic relative speed. At the instant they pass, a spark occurs

·

10

between them, emitting a ﬂash of light”.

Given this, students “are asked to illustrate the fact that the speed of light

is the same in all directions according to John”.

Then, students “need to recognize that Mary also observes the propagation
of light to be isotropic. Thus, she is at the center of a spherical wave front
in her frame... This exercise is not diﬃcult for most students. However, it
lays important groundwork for the subsequent exercise (train paradox”).

In physical reality, Mary sees an ellipsoid of anisotropic radiation. One
could imagine what a mess could be built up in students’ heads in a course
of “guiding” (brain-washing) exercises composed to teach wrong concepts.

As an example of ideological controversy, a work[13] is worth mentioning,
in which “Einstein’s spherical waves versus Poincare’s ellipsoidal waves” is
discussed. It reveals the fact that Poincare in early 1900’s suggested an el-
liptic picture (though in the methodology of ether) of a light front seen by a
moving observer. The author[13] concluded that both pictures are logically
justiﬁed: Einstein’s one is consequence of his “convention of clock synchro-
nization”, while Poincare’s elliptic picture is “a direct geometrical represen-
tation of Poincare’s simultaneity” in the ether concept. In this connection,
it is stated that known (Einstein’s) relativistic Doppler formula “presents a
strange aspect”; “another relativistic Doppler formula” is suggested, both
formulae to be subject to experimental retesting. In our view, this adds un-
necessary controversy in literature. The truth is that the problem of shape of
light front is, indeed, tightly related to the aberration and Doppler eﬀects but
there is no physical motive to revise the Doppler eﬀect on this ground. The
formulae (12-15) have no alternatives unless the SRT is claimed to be sub-
ject to radical revision either due to incompetence or an attempt of revival
of the ether concept at a new (cosmological) level. This issue was discussed
earlier[11].

Why not to experimentally check the ellipsoid-versus-sphere picture? To
answer this question, one has to take into account the fact that the aberra-
tion and Doppler eﬀects, correspondingly, have leading ﬁrst-order in β terms
what means that the eﬀects are observed in pre-relativistic physics consis-
tently with slow-motion observations to the precision of second order terms.
In this approximation, the ellipsoid (15) becomes a sphere around a center
shifted from the origin to a point β (but the observational radius r(θ) is kept
originating at the common origin). In other words, ellipsoid-versus-sphere
diﬀerence is a true relativistic (of a second order) eﬀect. The corresponding
experimental test of high precision would be costly and should be motivated

11

by something more substantial than an individual confusion or textbook con-
troversies.

In the previous Section, well known time dilation eﬀect independent of
In our view, standard relativistic eﬀects, such as
direction was discussed.
time dilation and length contraction, should be considered a particular case
of a general properties of space-time transformation in Minkowski space. The
ellipsoidal shape of a wave front of light demonstrates space-time rescaling
eﬀects resulting from the LT of null vectors. As an additional exercise, one
can study space-time rescaling arising under general Lorentz transformations
of time-like vectors.

3.3 Einstein’s train/embankment experiment and rel-

ativity of simultaneity

0 between end point x′ = A′ = 0 and x′ = B′ = ∆x′

The problem illustrating the relativity of simultaneity may be formulated in
terms of SRT, as follows. A train (the S′ frame) is characterized by a rest
length interval ∆x′
0, and
it moves uniformly at the speed v = cβ in x-direction with respect to the
embankment (the S-frame). Two points, x = A = 0 and x = B = ∆x0,
on the embankment indicate a similar rest interval ∆x0, that is ∆x′
0 = ∆x0
by deﬁnition. It is assumed that two lightnings strike embankment points
A and B in S simultaneously at t = 0. According to Einstein’s simultaneity
criterion, two lightnings having stricken the end points at the instant are
simultaneous, if photons from ﬂashes at each end intersect at midpoint M
between A and B. Will same photons reach midpoint M ′ between A′ and
B′ in S′ simultaneously if points A′ and A coincide at the moment of strikes
t′ = t = 0?

This problem has a simple solution in SRT if one takes into account that
the 0-event speciﬁed. Two simultaneous events (two ﬂashes) in one coordi-
nate system (S) are not simultaneous in another coordinate system (S′) in
a relative motion: the diﬀerence of photon arrivals to the midpoint M ′ is
t′
t′
B = γβ∆x0/c. In the so-called pre-relativistic (low speed) approxima-
A −
tion, it is t′
t′
B = β∆x0/c. It is seen that a non-simultaneity time diﬀerence
is a linear in β eﬀect, that is why it does not vanish in pre-relativistic photon
kinematics.

A −

The famous thought (train/embankment) experiment suggested by Einstein[14,

15] was intended to illustrate the relativity of simultaneity prior to student

12

knowledge of SRT. So, the problem was actually formulated in the pre-
relativistic approximation of photon kinematics, in which a photon would
propagate with the speed c in a particular reference frame while the Galilean
relativity having been respected but the postulate of the speed of light con-
stancy was not introduced. Consequently, two length intervals, which are
equal at rest, remain equal in relative motion (probably, for this reason, Ein-
stein did not distinguish between coinciding points A′ and A or B′ and B,
and used common A and common B points). Einstein did not commented
his simpliﬁcation of the train/embankment experiment, and did not spec-
iﬁed frames, in which sources of two ﬂashes were at rest. However, from
his statement that photons reached midpoint simultaneously in the embank-
ment frame, one should guess that sources were at rest with respect to the
embankment. From a simple deliberation of the picture of photons ﬂying
either in a positive or negative x direction with a relative speed c + v or
v, correspondingly, with respect to the train, the non-simultaneity ef-
c
−
tA = β∆x0/c (which is the low-speed
fect described by the formula tB −
SRT approximation) follows. One can immediately ﬁgure out that photons
from two ﬂashes intersect the point X ′ between A′ and B′ in the propor-
tion A′X ′/X ′B′ = (1
β)/(1 + β). Photons will reach the point X ′ in the
train frame simultaneously is correct (in the slow motion approximation of
Relativity Theory). In fact, Einstein proposed to check his deﬁnition of si-
multaneity, which is obvious for two spatial points at rest but became not
applicable in the case of relative motion.

−

It should be noted that the conclusion drawn from the thought experiment
is in contradiction with “the two-sphere picture” previously discussed. Let
us consider the train/embankment pre-relativistic scenario with S′ and S
observers at end points coinciding at t′ = t = 0 when ﬂashes occured at A
and B. According to “the two-sphere picture”, each observer at A′ and B′
should see a sphere, which expands isotropically with the speed of light. Hence,
the observers would witness that two spherical fronts starting simultaneously
from A and B touched each other at the midpoint (but not at X ′ point).

In the cited “guiding exercises”[12], the Einstein’s result of the train/embankment

problem was stated on the wrong premises such as: a) the propagation of light
is isotropic in all frames; b) the relativity of simultaneity is a consequence of
the invariance of the speed of light. This is a misleading presentation of the
famous Einstein’s thought experiment.

Einstein’s idea to elucidate the relativity of simultaneity in the train/embankment

scenario prior to knowledge of Relativity Theory was logically acceptable

13

and technically reasonable at the time of theory popularization. Classical
theory of light aberration and Doppler shift in vacuum was known well be-
fore Einstein’s postulate of speed of light constancy, and the corresponding
(ﬁrst-order) eﬀects were measured in early 1900s. Having this, the (ﬁrst-
order) eﬀect of frame dependence of simultaneity is, indeed, understandable
in a fashion of classical light theory. From this historical viewpoint we cannot
agree with Nelson’s criticism[16] of Einstein’s train/embankment experiment.
The criticism is solely focused on the alleged conﬂict of the Einstein’s sce-
nario with the postulate of speed of light constancy. But there is no such
a conﬂict at all because Einstein had good reasons not to care about the
postulate (which is violated in second-order terms in pre-relativistic mod-
els).
Ironically, the Nelson’s claim was immediately denied by “textbook
advocates”[17] who argued that Nelson was thrice wrong in his criticism be-
cause Einstein in his scenario applied the postulate not once but twice right
away...

The next section is devoted to controversies related to problems, which
were earlier discussed in the context of complementarity of coordinate and
momentum 4-spaces[11].

4 Does a moving clock run slower? The clock

(twin) paradox.

The content of this Section contains interrelated topics of the SRT space-time
rescaling phenomenon, which were left blank in previous Sections:

- signiﬁcance and operational meaning of the 0-event;
- physical treatment of the time dilation eﬀect;
- the clock (twin) paradox.

4.1 The role of the 0-event in Lorentz transformations

The LT manifests Minkowskian metric invariance through proper/improper
relationship of time and length units. The corresponding measuring proce-
dures were described in the Section 2 with the exception of an initial clock
synchronization, the O-event. It is assumed that each observer in S and S′
carries a standard clock located in the coordinate origin of each coordinate
system. The clock can play a role of a light signal emitter or a corresponding
detector. Thus, observers can exchange observational data at the instant

14

t′ = t = 0 of origin coincidence (the 0-event); they conduct a similar proce-
dure at any other event labeled P in S or P ′ in S′. The direct (or inverse) LT,
when applied to a 4-vector −→OP (or −−→OP ′), establishes a relationship between
points P and P ′. To make it possible, it is required in the LT concept that
the 0-event is operationally realizable and computationally ﬁxed.

Thus, in the Minkowski metric determination, the 0-event is an arbitrarily
chosen common zero 4-point, from which a 4-distance is measured to any
point (event) P in any coordinate system. In our example, the 0-event was
an emission of light signal by John’s clock in S′ at t′ = ∆t′
0 in y-direction
and a detection of the signal by Mary’s detector in S. Strictly speaking, two
physically diﬀerent events occur (an emission and a detection) at any event
P in a process of information exchange between two imaginary observers.

When we say that two coordinate systems are in relative motion in x
direction, it is often meant that axes x and x′ coincide. If so, both clocks will
collide at the initial moment. To avoid this illogical situation, one should
allow some distance between x and x′ axes. Let us assume that one observer
(say, John in S′) sends a short light signal in y-direction while the other
observer (say, Mary in S) keeps her detector on to detect the signal at an
instant John passes her. Both agreed that it would be the instant t′ = t = 0
at 0-event in spite of some physical delay of a signal propagation. In general,
to detect any event P (t, x, y, z), observers need a multitude of clocks in their
possession, potentially, in every point of 3-space in S and S′, respectively.

In our example, John creates an original event P ′, and Mary observers its
image P . From (12), it is seen that a light signal emitted by John at t′ = ∆t′
0
perpendicularly to the direction of motion, that is cos θ′ = 0, will be detected
by Mary at t = ∆t = γ∆t′
0 by the clock-detector located at x/c = β∆t. The
angle of observation θ is not π/2 because of aberration eﬀect. or ssimplicity,
one may take ∆t′
0 = 1 s. Then, the measured by Mary time interval will be
∆t > 1 s as far as γ > 1.

4.2 On the time dilation eﬀect

The time dilation eﬀect ∆t = γ∆t′
0 follows from (12). This is the case of
the β-boost when the light signal emitted at t′ = ∆t′
0 perpendicularly to the
direction of relative motion in S′ is detected in S. When we derived the time
dilation eﬀect by applying the LT to the 4-coordinate vector of particle, we
meant the procedure of information exchange by means of light signal, but

15

did not get into such concrete details.

There is a textbook cliche expressing a physical meaning of the eﬀect: “a
moving clock runs slower”. Such a clock does not exist, however, because
the improper time interval is measured by, at least, two clocks located at
diﬀerent places along a direction of motion. In reality, standard clocks in
all inertial reference frames run identically in terms of their own (proper)
time records, and a comparison procedure is suggested in terms of proper
It would be illogical to expect that two initially
versus improper records.
synchronized clocks in a relative motion could show diﬀerent proper time
records when brought back to the initial point, provided possible eﬀects of
non-inertial stages of motion were eliminated. Before discussing this issue
(the so-called clock paradox), let us consider the time dilation eﬀect in con-
nection with an ellipsoidal picture of light front in a moving frame. The
picture illustrates relativistic aberration (13, 14) and Doppler eﬀect (12) as a
result of time unit rescaling. Suppose, observers conduct the measurements
0 = 1/∆t′
periodically with the frequency f ′
0 (cycle per second). The light
frequency from a moving source is

f (θ) = f0/γ(1

β cos θ).

−

(17)

Thus, it is clear that the transverse Doppler eﬀect is directly related to
the independent of direction time dilation eﬀect in the case, when the LT is
applied to the coordinate vector aligned in parallel with a direction of motion
(1D problem). In general, the time unit rescaling factor depends on an angle
θ, as in the sphere versus ellipsoid picture (3D problem).

4.3 The so-called clock paradox

Recall that paradox is about a comparison of time records of two initially
synchronized clocks, one being at rest while the other traveled at a constant
speed from A to B and back. When they met, their time record should be the
same due to relativity of motion (provided the eﬀect of a change of direction
was eliminated). On the other hand, the A observer (say, Mary) had to
register a round trip time 2t0 (t0 is a one-way time) using her wristwatch,
while her traveling counterpart (say, John) carried his wristwatch in motion
with respect to A. Hence, in accordance with the the time dilation concept,
his clock run slower; speciﬁcally, it would show lesser time record 2t0/γ. This
is a typical textbook (alleged) solution considered as a well established fact.

16

We analyzed the paradox in detail previously[11]; the main arguments are
summarized here.

There is no paradox because an apparent contradiction is resolved. The
problem is that opposite solutions were given. As opposed to textbooks, we
concluded that no diﬀerence in clock records would be shown. In our view, the
textbook solution is incorrect because it came from a) the ill-posed problem
formulation (in part of end point conditions), and b) a wrong interpretation
of time dilation concept (when a procedure of clock record comparison is
considered). The solution should be based on calculations by a LT means
along with a correct physical interpretation. Let a distance between A and
B be x0: this is the proper distance for Mary in terms of her standard (unit)
measuring rods. She measures a one-way travel time by a time-of-ﬂight
method: x0 = cβt, where t(1) = tB −
tA is the improper time obtained as
a diﬀerence of clock records tA at the starting point A (the 0-event in the
ﬁrst half of travel), and tB at the end point B. The return trip should be
considered separately and symmetrically: t(2) = tA −
tB with a clock record
tB at the starting point B (the 0-event in the second half), and a clock
record tA at the end point A. All clocks there are not wristwatches, they
are Mary’s clocks placed oﬀ the x-axis (side clocks). The results of Mary’s
measurements should be a total (improper) time of John’s travel 2t = tA + tB
and a Doppler-shifted frequency of John’s signal f . It is easy to prove that
the product 2t
f = 2n0 is a number of clock ticks registered by each observer
by his/her wristwatch; this number is Lorentz invariant. In view of a long
history of debates around the paradox, its current (controversial) status in
literature, and beliefs among physical community, we consider the paradox
a great historical myth in Physics.

·

5 Variable proper mass concept in SRT Dy-

namics

SRT Kinematics follows from SRT Dynamics when a ﬁeld of forces vanishes.
However, there is no unique formulation of SRT Dynamics[18, 19]. In par-
ticular, the concept of the proper mass could be diﬀerent depending on the
concept of the Minkowski force K µ acting on a test particle of proper mass m.
In GRT and conventional Relativistic Mechanics, the proper mass is assumed

17

to be constant m = m0, so the generalized Newton’s law has the form

dP µ/ds = d(m0uµ)/ds = m0duµ/ds = K µ

(18)

Our viewpoint is that the proper mass constancy is a long-standing dogma
in Physics. This assumption is neither justiﬁed by direct experiments nor
follows from ﬁrst physical principles: its revision is the issue of theory physical
foundations and subject to experimental falsiﬁcation. The importance of the
proper mass problem is seen, in particular, in the quantum connection of
mass and time mc2 = hf , where h is the Plank constant and f = 1/∆t, and
the de Broglie wave relations. It shows a dependence of a clock rate on ﬁeld
strength.

Let us consider consequences of changing the assumption and allowing

the proper mass to be ﬁeld-dependent m = m(s):

K µ = dpµ/ds = uµ(dm/ds) + m(duµ/ds)

(19)

Now we have a non-zero tangent component of Minkowski force uµ(dm/ds).
It should be noted that the proper mass variability is not a new idea: it was
discussed in classical books by Synge [20] and Moller [21] but did not draw
much attention among physics community. We are going to show that the
introduction of the ﬁeld-dependent proper mass in the relativistic Lagrangean
framework is consistent with (19). Further, the results[22] are reproduced in
a more consistent form.

In order to derive equations of motion by applying the Hamilton’s ex-
tremal action principle, let us introduce the Lagrangian for a particle in a
potential ﬁeld due to the source of mass M >> m0

L(s) = m(s) + W (s)

(20)

where s = s(xµ) is a world line (arc)length, and a ﬁeld is characterized
by potential energy W (s) for a repulsive force; it would be negative for an
attractive force. The concept of potential energy requires that W (xµ)
0
and m(s)
(an equivalent mass-energy unit is used for
→
convenience).

m0 at xµ

→ ∞

→

The Lagrangian L(s) in (20) is used in a variation procedure for the

extremal action S

δS = δ

L(s)ds =

δ(Luµ)dxµ = 0

(21)

b

Z

a

b

Z

a

18

q

Thereafter, m(s), W (s) and ds are subject to variation, bearing in mind that
s = s(xµ), ds = √ds2 =

dxµdxµ, and also dxµ/ds = ds/dxµ = uµ.

Components of 4-position vector xµ comprise a set of dynamical variables.
They indicate 4 degrees of freedom of a test particle in a ﬁeld. Thus, ds is
a subject to variation due to independent variations δxµ. In this sense, a
varying proper mass m(s) of a test particle should not be considered an
additional dynamical variable manifesting the ﬁfth degree of freedom of the
system. The proper mass is determined by the potential and characterizes
the binding energy m(s)
m0. So, both m(s) and W (s) are put on the same
footing.

−

From (21) to continue

δS =

b

∂(Luµ)
∂xν

Z
a

δxνdxµ = 0

∂ [L(s)uµ(s)]
∂xν

= 0

∂ [L(s)uµ(s)]
∂s

= 0

Because variations δxν are independent for diﬀerent ν, the equality δS = 0
in (22) is possible if and only if

or equivalently

Finally, with the Lagrangian (20) substituted into (24), we have the equations
of motion

Together with the equation

∂ [m(s)uµ(s)]
∂s

=

∂ [W (s)uµ(s)]
∂s

−

uµuµ = 1,

uµ(duµ/ds) = 0

characterizing the time-like character of massive particles, they allow us to
determine ﬁve correlated quantities xµ(s), m(s). The case of Lagrangian
L(s) =

m0 (a free particle) for the action variation

−

δS = m0δ

ds = m0 Z

d(δs) = 0

b

Z
a

b

a

follows from (22).

19

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

The equations (25) contain two orthogonal Minkowski force 4-vectors,
one acting along the world line (the tangent, or parallel component) and the
other (orthogonal) acting perpendicularly to the world line:

u(dm/ds) = Kk , m(du/ds) = K⊥,

(Kk ·
uµ∂W /∂s, dm/ds = K s = Kk , m(duµ/ds) =
W (duµ/ds). So the equations (25) can be expressed in the convenient

K⊥) = 0

k =

(28)

−

where uµ(dm/ds) = K µ
K µ
−
4-vector form

⊥ =

or

d(mu)ds = dP/ds = Kk + K⊥ = K

d(muµ)ds = dP µ/ds = K µ

(29)

(30)

Under weak-ﬁeld conditions, predictions of the SRT Mechanics with a
ﬁeld-dependent proper mass is hard to distinguish from corresponding con-
ventional results. Deviations rise with ﬁeld strength, as discussed in our
work[22]. One of the remarkable results is an elimination of a classical prob-
lem of self-energy divergence for 1/r-potential ﬁeld.

6 Summary and conclusions

Relativistic concepts of aberration and Doppler eﬀect, as well as relativity of
simultaneity, are related to eﬀects, which are described in SRT Kinematics
of photon by formulae with leading terms linear in β. Not surprisingly, the
aberration and Doppler phenomena were well understood before the SRT
In Galilean Kinematics
advent in terms of pre-relativistic photon model.
of particles, the speed of light was assumed to be inﬁnite. Consequently,
Newtonian Physics dealt with absolute space and time and events, which
could occur simultaneously regardless of reference frame choice. However, in
pre-relativistic photon concept, photons propagate in space at the speed c
with respect to a source (but not a detector). In this concept, the Galilean
relativity principle is respected but the invariance of c is violated in the
second and higher order terms. To this precision, the Einstein’s idea of
train/embankment experiment retrospectively was a good illustration of rel-
ativity of simultaneity. The controversy about it in literature causes many
confusions.

20

→

→

0, γ

Einstein’s Special Relativity Theory made a revolutionary impact on fur-
ther Physics development.
Introduction of the postulate of speed of light
constancy in addition to the Galilean principle of relativity of motion made
time and length units dependent on motional state of observer (space-time
rescaling). Consequently, proper versus improper physical quantities were in-
troduced, in particularly, the improper time and improper length related to
the so-called time dilation and length contraction eﬀects. Those are relativis-
tic eﬀects determined by the second and higher order terms. At small β, the
approximation β2
1 leads to the Lorentz-to-Galilean transforma-
tion reduction and pre-relativistic photon Kinematics. Thus, SRT principles
are clear and self-consistent. However, controversies in textbooks remain;
they concern SRT applications and physical interpretation of the relativistic
eﬀects. We conducted a critical (retrospective) analysis of some controver-
sies related to the pre-relativistic photon Kinematics as well as relativistic
eﬀects (the time dilation eﬀect and its consequences). The conclusion was
made that controversies caused by lack of rigor in some textbook presen-
tations of relativistic eﬀects make a negative inﬂuence on student Physics
education. Many physicists and specialists in diﬀerent branches of Engineer-
ing and Technology, probably, have already received ambiguous knowledge
about Relativity Theory from “popular” presentation of such issues as rela-
tivity of simultaneity in Einstein train/embankment experiment, constancy
of the speed of light from viewpoint of observers in diﬀerent inertial frames,
time dilation eﬀect sown by a clock running slower in motion, and others.

In this paper, a rigor treatment of relativistic eﬀects at two levels is at-
tempted: a) for interested people (confused about Relativity Theory) whose
specialities require General Physics knowledge; b) for experts in ﬁelds of
Modern Physics, especially, in relativistic theories who may disagree on or
broaden some our points up to further competent disputes. In any case, this
is the reader who decides.

References

[1] R. Baierlein. “Two myths about special relativity”. Am. J. Phys. 74(3),

p. 193-195 (2006). Also: Private communication.

[2] Asher Peres. “Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods”. Kluwer Aca-

demic Publishers, Dordrecht, Boston, London, (1993).

21

[3] L. Sartori. “Understanding Relativity”. University of California Press,

Berkeley, Los Angeles, London, (1984).

[4] A. Einstein “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies”. Annalen der
Physiks, it 17 (1905), p. 891-921. Also in “The Collected papers of Al-
bert Einstein”, John Stachel, Editor, Vol. 2. Princeton University Press
(1989), p. 275-306. Also, “The Principle of Relativity”, Introduction
and comment by Sommerfeld, (English translation), Dover, New York,
p. 37-65 (1952).

[5] W. Pauli. “Theory of Relativity”. Translated from German by G. Field.
Dover Publications, Inc., New York (1981). Originally appeared in
German “Relativitatstheorie”, Encyklopadie der matematischen Wis-
senschaften, Vol. V19, B. G. Teubner, Leipzig,(1921).

[6] J. Reitz, F. Milford, R. Cristy. “Foundations of Electromagnetic The-

ory”. Addison Wesley Longman (1993)

[7] J. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics”, John Wesley and Sons, New

York 1998)

New York (1999).

Wesley Co (1955).

[8] P. Tipler, R. Llewwellyn. “Modern Physics”. W. h. Freeman and Co.

[9] W. Panofsky, M. Phillips. “Classical Electromagnetic Theory”. Addison-

[10] W. Rindler.“Relativity: Special, General, and Cosmological”. Oxford
Press (2001). Also: W. Rindler. “Essential Relativity”. W. Rindler. Van
Nostrand Reinhold Co. (1969).

[11] A. Vankov. arXiv: physics/0603168 “Mass, time, and clock (twin) para-

dox in relativity theory”.

[12] R. Scherr, P. Shaﬀer, and S. Vokos. “The challenge of changing deeply
held students beliefs about the relativity of simultaneity”, Am. J. Phys.
70, 12, p. 1238-1248 (2002).

[13] Y. Pierseaux. “Special Relativity: Einstein’s spherical waves ver-
sus Poincare’s ellipsoidal waves”, arXiv:physics/0411045 (with refer-
ences to Poincare’s works). “Einstein’s relativistic Doppler formula”,
arXiv:physics/0509163. Also: Private communication.

22

[14] P. Bergman. “Introduction to the Theory of Relativity” with a Foreword

by Albert Einstein (1942).

[15] A. Einstein. “Relativity” (authorized translation by Robert W. Lawson).

Three River Press, New York (1961).

[16] A. Nelson. “Reinterpreting the famous train/embankment experiment

of relativity”. Eur. J. Phys. 24, (2003), p. 379-396.

[17] . Eur. J. Phys. (Letters and Comments). 25, (2004): D. Rowland, L45-

L47; Mallinckrodt, L49-L50; A. Nelson, L51-L56.

[18] L. D. Landau and E M. Lifshitz. “The Classical Theory of Fields”, Perg-

amon Press (1975).

[19] H. Goldstein. “Classical Mechanics”. Addison-Wesley Publishing Com-
pany; series in Advanced Physics (1950). H. Goldstein, C. Poole, J.
Safko. “Classical Mechanics”, 3d Edition. Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company (2001).

[20] J. L. Synge. “Relativity: The Special Theory”. North Holland Publish-
ing Company, Amsterdam (1965). “Relativity: The General Theory”.
North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam (1964).

[21] C. Moller. “The Theory of Relativity”. The international series of mono-

graphs on physics. Delhi, Oxford University Press (1972).

[22] A. Vankov. “On the de Broglie Wave Nature”. Annales de la Fondation
Louis de Broglie. Vol. 30, 1, page 15 (2005). A. Vankov. “Testing Rel-
ativistic Mass-Energy Concept in Physics of Gravity and Electricity”.
Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie. (The Special Issue dedicated
to the 50th anniversary of the Yang-Mills, 1954, paper). Vol. 29, 2, page
1035 (2004).

23

