6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
2
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Multiply Connected Universes

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute for Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063, India

Abstract

It is now generally believed that our observable universe is one
amongst a very large number - may be 10500 - of parallel universes.
Following the author’s own model in this context, we argue that this
conglomeration of universes deﬁnes a multiply connected super space.

1 Introduction

The Newtonian universe was one in which there was an absolute background
space in which the basic building blocks of the universe were situated–these
were stars. This view was a quantum jump from the earlier view, based on
the Greek model in which stars and other celestial objects were attached to
transparent material spheres, which prevented them from falling down.
When Einstein proposed his General Theory of Relativity some ninety years
ago, the accepted picture of the universe was one where all major constituents
were stationary. This had puzzled Einstein, because the gravitational pull of
these constituents should make the universe collapse. So Einstein introduced
his famous cosmological constant, essentially a repulsive force that would
counterbalance the attractive gravitational force.
Shortly thereafter there were two dramatic discoveries which completely al-
tered that picture. The ﬁrst was due to Astronomer Edwin Hubble, who
discovered that the basic constituents or building blocks of the universe were
not stars, but rather huge conglomerations of stars called galaxies. The sec-
ond discovery was the fact that these galaxies are rushing away from each
other–far from being static the universe was exploding. There was no need

1

for the counterbalancing cosmic repulsion any more and Einstein dismissed
this as his greatest blunder.
Over the next forty odd years, these observations evolved into the Big Bang
theory, according to which all the matter in the universe possibly some ﬁfteen
billion years ago, was concentrated in a speck, at the birth of the universe,
which was characterized by an inconceivable explosion or bang. This lead to
the matter being ﬂung outwards, and that is what keeps the galaxies rushing
outwards even today. In the mid sixties conﬁrmation for the Big Bang model
of the universe came from the detection of a cosmic footprint. The energy
of the initial Big Bang would today still be available in the form of cosmic
microwaves, which accidentally were discovered [1, 2, 3].
Over the next three decades and more, the Big Bang theory was reﬁned fur-
ther and further. A n important question was, would the universe continue
to expand for ever, though slowing down, or would the expansion halt one
day and the universe collapse back again. Much depended on the material
content or density of the universe.
If there was enough matter, then the
expansion would halt and reverse. If not the universe would expand for ever.
However the observed material content of the universe appeared to be insuf-
ﬁcient to halt the expansion.
At the same time there were a few other intriguing observations. For ex-
ample the velocities along the radius of a galaxy, instead of sharply falling
oﬀ, ﬂattened out. All this led astronomers to invoke dark matter, that is
undetected matter. This matter could be in the form of black holes within
galaxies, or brown dwarf stars which were too faint to be detected, or even
massive neutrinos which were otherwise thought to be massless. With dark
matter thrown in, it appeared that the universe had suﬃcient material con-
tent to halt, and even reverse the expansion. That is, the universe would
expand up to a point and then collapse.
There still were several subtler problems to be addressed. One was the fa-
mous horizon problem. To put it simply the Big Bang was an uncontrolled
or random event and so diﬀerent parts of the universe in diﬀerent directions
were disconnected in the earliest stage and so today need not be the same,
just as people in diﬀerent parts of the world need not wear the same type
of dress. Observation however shows that the universe is by and large uni-
form, like people in diﬀerent countries wearing the same dress–that would
not be possible without some form of intercommunication which would vi-
olate Einstein’s earlier Special Theory of Relativity, according to which no

2

signal can travel faster than light. The next problem was, that according to
Einstein, due to the material content in the universe, space should be curved
or roughly speaking bent, whereas the universe appears to be ﬂat. There
were other problems as well. For example astronomers predicted that there
should be monopoles that is, simply put, either only North magnetic poles
or only South magnetic poles, unlike the North South combined magnetic
poles we encounter. Such monopoles have failed to show up.
Some of these problems were sought to be explained by what has been called
inﬂationary cosmology where by, early on, just after the Big Bang the explo-
sion was a super fast [4, 5].
What would happen in this case is, that diﬀerent parts of the universe, which
could not be accessible by light, would now get connected. At the same time,
the super fast expansion in the initial stages would smoothen out any distor-
tion or curvature eﬀects in space, leading to a ﬂat universe and in the process
also eliminate the monopoles.
One other feature that has been studied in detail over the past few decades
is that of structure formation in the universe. To put it simply, why is the
universe not a uniform spread of matter and radiation? On the contrary it
is very lumpy with planets, stars, galaxies and so on, with a lot of space
separating these objects. This has been explained in terms of ﬂuctuations
in density, that is accidentally more matter being present in a given region.
Gravitation would then draw in even more matter and so on. Such ﬂuctua-
tions would also cause the cosmic background radiation to be non uniform
or anisotropic. Such ﬂuctuations are in fact being observed.
Everything seemed to have fallen into place. The universe appeared to be
well behaved - at least, well understood.
However in 1997 a diametrically opposite approach was proposed by the au-
thor [6, 7, 8, 9], in which matter is created at random from a background
Quantum Vacuum or dark energy.Interestingly the random nature of creation
of the particles take place in a fashion similar to inﬂation, though this eﬀect
would be pronounced in the earliest stages of the birth of the universe, as
in the inﬂation model. This model successfully predicted an ever expanding
and accelerating universe. It explains a number of mysterious relations be-
tween diﬀerent physical and astronomical quantities, for example the radius
of the universe, the number of particles in the universe, the mass and size of
a typical elementary particle, the universal gravitational constant, the speed
of light and so on.

3

Many of these puzzling relations had been known for a long time, but in the
absence of an explanation, they had been dismissed as freak coincidences.
In the present model, all these relations follow from the theory, rather than
being accidental. Apart from the fact that this model provides an expla-
nation for the puzzling time variation of the ﬁne structure constant, it also
gives a mechanism for reconciling the two great irreconcible theories of the
twentieth century, namely Einstein’s General Relativity and Quantum The-
ory. The key to this is the fact that, in both these theories, space and time
were taken to be continuous and smooth, whereas in this model this is no
longer true, though these subtler eﬀects can only be detected at very very
tiny scales or high energies.
However from early 1998 the conventional wisdom of cosmology that had de-
veloped over the past three to four decades, began to be challenged [10, 11].
The work of Perlmutter and co-workers, as also of Schmidt and co-workers
was announced in 1998 and it told a sensational if diﬀerent story. They had
observed carefully very distant supernovae or exploding stars and to the dis-
belief of everyone, it turned out that not only was the universe not slowing
down, but was actually accelerating, which also means that it would keep on
expanding eternally. This was nothing short of an upheaval, and theorists
are under great pressure to explain all this. Of course, this conﬁrmed the
author’s prediction.
Suddenly astronomers were talking about dark energy instead of dark mat-
ter. Dark energy is an unknown and mysterious form of energy that brings
into play repulsion, over and above the attractive force of gravitation. All
this is reminiscent of Einstein’s greatest blunder namely the cosmic repulsion
itself.
However there is a problem. What is dark energy? Physicists speak of such
an energy from what is called the Quantum Vacuum. The idea here is that
there cannot be a background vacuum with exactly zero energy as exact val-
ues of energy are forbidden by Quantum Theory. Only the average energy
In other words energy would be ﬂuctuating about a zero
could be zero.
value. This is called a Zero Point Field. As a consequence what happens
in the vacuum is that electrons and positrons are continuously created, out
of nothing as it were, but these pairs are very shortlived. Almost instanta-
neously they annihilate each other and release energy, which in turn again
manifests itself as electron-positron pairs. These eﬀects could lead to a cos-
mic repulsion, but the only problem is that the value of the cosmological

4

constant, in other words the strength of the cosmic repulsion would be much
too high. This would go against observation. The problem has been known
for long as the cosmological constant problem [12, 13]. So astronomers are
also talking about the dark energy, christened Quintessence by some, leading
to a mysterious new force of repulsion.
Yet another dramatic discovery since 1998 has been made with the help of
the SuperKamiokande experiment in Japan [14]. This facility observed solar
radiation, in particular for the very strange, maverick supposedly massless
particles, neutrinos. It turns out that these particles now possess a miniscule
mass, about a billionth that of an electron. The discovery explains one puz-
zle, what has been commonly called the solar neutrino problem. The point
is that we seem to receive much less than the theoretically expected number
of neutrinos from solar radiation. But the theoretical prediction was made
on the basis of the assumption that neutrinos were massless. Even with the
tiniest of masses, the problem disappears. However these observations chal-
lenge what has come to be known as the Standard Model of Particle Physics,
which takes the masslessness of the neutrino for granted. Could these mas-
sive neutrinos be the elusive dark matter? The answer is no– the mass of
this matter is still much too small to stop the expansion, which is very well
in view of the latest ever expanding scenario.
Another iconoclastic dramatic observation which is gaining conﬁrmation is
that, what is called the ﬁne structure constant, which scientists have con-
sidered to be a sacrosanct constant of the universe, has infact been slowly
decreasing over billions of years [15, 16]. Webb and co-workers have con-
ﬁrmed this by observing the spectrum of light from the distant Quasars and
comparing this with spectra in the vicinity. As the ﬁne structure constant
is made up of the electric charge of the electron, the speed of light, and the
Planck constant, this would mean that one or some or even all of them are
not the sacred constants they have been taken for, but are slowly changing
with time. The consequences of this are quite dramatic. For instance this
would mean that atoms and molecules in the past were not the same as their
counterparts today - this will be true in future also. This again would have
dramatic implications. According to present thinking, life as we know it de-
pends on a delicate balance between the diﬀerent fundamental constants of
nature–otherwise life itself could neither evolve nor sustain. If the values of
these constants change, so would atoms and molecules and the narrow limits
for life get narrower in time.

5

While attempts are being made to modify the successful inﬂation theory and
other theories also to try to explain these latest discoveries there are alter-
native approaches being considered. For example a theory that has been put
forward in the past few years by Moﬀat, Albrecht, Magueijo, Barrow and
others that contrary to Einstein’s Special Relativity the speed of light is not
a universal constant, but rather it has decreased over billions of years [17].

2 Diﬀerent Routes to Multiple Universes

As we saw astronomers believe that our universe was born in a titanic explo-
sion of the skind that would put into shade trillions of trillions of Hydrogen
bombs exploding at once. The out rushing matter then condensed into galax-
ies, stars, planets and other known - and who knows?- unknown objects over
a period of fourteen billion years. During this time the universe has swollen
to a size of some million, billion, billion kilometers. This distance deﬁnes a
horizon beyond which even our most powerful telescopes are unable to peer.
But is this horizon the boundary where the story ends? Probably not, is the
view to which many astronomers are veering. Beyond the horizon of our di-
rect perception, the universe extends to inﬁnity, to any number of trillions of
such universes strewn all across. And who knows, there would be any num-
ber of planets identical, or almost identical to our own earth, complete with
human beings like us. Even with a carbon copy of yourself. In fact we can
do better. Simple calculations reveal that there would be a galaxy identical
to ours, one followed by the number of digits in the radius of our universe
expressed in kilometers–that is twenty ﬁve–that many kilometers away. All
the diﬀerent universes are parallel universes. Multiverse is the name going
around these days.
But even this is not the end of the story. According to other ideas, such
a conglomeration of parallel universes is what may be called the Level One
Multiverse, something that can be thought of as a bubble. According to
modern theories, inﬂation or the super fast blow out could well have created
any number of such bubbles, each bubble being a huge collection of parallel
universes. One could think of these bubbles or the Level One Multiverses as
the many individual bubbles gushing out of a bottle of an aerated drink that
has just been opened.
What could distinguish the various Level One Multiverses from each other?

6

In fact they could all be very diﬀerent with very diﬀerent values of the elec-
tric charge, the gravitational constant and what not.
The story does not stop even here! There could be Multiverses here and now!
That would be the case if an interpretation of the century old Quantum The-
ory due to Hugh Everett 3 is correct [18]. In fact many physicists think it
is. According to our usual physics, a particle travelling from a point A to
a point B is a fairly straightforward event. Quantum Theory however, tells
us that the particle could go from A to B in many diﬀerent ways other than
what we see. The usual interpretation is that by the very act of observing the
particle more from A to B we eliminate all other possibilities. This has been
the generally accepted point of view. But in 1957 Everett proposed that all
other possibilities which have supposedly been snuﬀed out actually do take
place, and its only one of them which we get to see. So in the simple act of,
let us say an electron going from one point to another point, a centimeter
away, there are millions of hidden acts that have taken place, each in its
universe.
And this is not all. Einstein’s Theory of Relativity leads us to the conclusion
that when a star collapses into a black hole, at the very center there is what
is called a singularity. A singularity can be thought of as a junction or cross-
roads of inﬁnitely many diﬀerent roads. Only in our case it is the junction of
inﬁnitely many universes each legitimate in its own right, and moreover each
with its own laws of nature. This is because at the singularity itself, all laws
of nature breakdown, just as, exactly at the North Pole there is no meaning
to the East, West or other directions.
Some scientists have also come to a similar conclusion from the view point
of Superstring theory. It is reckoned that there would be so many universes
well, one followed by some ﬁve hundred zeros! [19]
The author’s own theory of the universe of universes shares some of the above
features. It turns out that the universe can be thought to be a blown up ver-
sion of an elementary particle which is spinning. A huge number of such
”particle universes” would form the analogue of a super particle universe–
the analogue of let us say, gas molecules in a cubic centimeter. And so on,
possibly with increasing dimensionality of space and time at each step [20].
It is a bit like colonies of colonies of colonies and so on. Ofcourse all this is
not a fantasy dreamt out by scientists. There are very delicate tests proposed
which can provide a clue.

7

3 Multiply Connected Universes

We ﬁrst consider descriptions from microphysics on which we can model
multiple universes. Let us consider the usual Hamilton-Jacobi theory of
Classical Mechanics [21]. Here we start with the action integral

I =

L

Z

dx
dt

 

, x, t

dt

!

S(x, t) = ¯I

p =

∂S
∂t

∂S
∂x
p2
2m

E = H(p, x)

ψ = Re(ı/¯h)S(x,t)

and extremalize it [22, 3]. Let us denote, working for the moment in one
space dimension for simplicity, the extremum integral of (1) by

We then have,

E = −

=

+ V (x)

where p denotes the momentum and E denotes the energy. We can combine
(3) and (4) and write,

Equation (5) is well known in Classical Mechanics but let us now introduce
a description in terms of the wave function

where R is slowly varying and S is given by (2). We now get from (6) the
Hamilton-Jacobi equation in one dimension

−

∂S
∂t

= H

∂S
∂x

 

, x

=

!

2

1
2m  

∂S
∂x !

+ V (x)

whose solution is

S = (x, t) = −Et + S {2m [E − V jk]}1/2 dx + S

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

8

In view of the description given in (6), (7) and (8) take on a more general
character in terms of the so called dynamical phase S . Further as is well
known, the requirement

∂S
∂E

= 0

which denotes a constructive interference in the phase of systems described
by wave functions leads us back to a classical particle description as in (4).
We will now apply the above theory to Quantum Mechanical systems and
General Relativity.
In Quantum Theory, the description of the wave function as in (6) when
substituted in the Schrodinger equation

leads to

ı¯h

∂ψ
∂t

¯h2
2m

= −

∇2ψ + V ψ

∂ρ
∂t

+ ~∇ · (ρ~v) = 0

+

∇2R
R

(~∇S)2 +

V
1
¯h2 −
2m
2m(∇2R/R).

∂S
1
∂t
2m
~∇S and Q ≡ − ¯h

1
¯h
where ρ = R2, ~v = ¯h
m
Equation (10) is easily recognized as the equation of continuity and (11) as
the Hamilton-Jacobi equation in three dimensions.
Let us now look at Quantum Theory from a slightly diﬀerent point of view.
We start by reviewing Dirac’s original derivation of the Monopole [23, 24].
He started with the wave function

(11)

= 0

2

He then considered the case where the phase γ in (1) is non integrable. In
this case (12) can be rewritten as

where ψ1 is an ordinary wave function with integrable phase, and further,
while the phase S does not have a deﬁnite value at each point, its four
gradient viz.,

(9)

(10)

(12)

(13)

(14)

ψ = Aeıγ,

ψ = ψ1eıS,

K µ = ∂µS

9

is well deﬁned. We use temporarily natural units, ¯h = c = 1. Dirac then
goes on to identify K in (14) (except for the numerical factor hc/e) with the
electromagnetic ﬁeld potential, as in the Weyl gauge invariant theory.
Next Dirac considered the case of a nodal singularity, which is closely related
to what was later called a quantized vortex (Cf.
for example ref.[25]). In
this case a circuit integral of a vector as in (14) gives, in addition to the
electromagnetic term, a term like 2πn, so that we have for a change in phase
for a small closed curve around this nodal singularity,

2πn + e

~B · d~S

(15)

Z
In (15) ~B is the magnetic ﬂux across a surface element d~S and n is the
number of nodes within the circuit. The expression (15) directly lead to the
Monopole in Dirac’s formulation.
Let us now reconsider the above arguments in terms of recent developments.
The Dirac equation for a spin half particle throws up a complex or non
Hermitian position coordinate [26, 27]. Dirac identiﬁed the imaginary part
with zitterbewegung eﬀects and argued that this would be eliminated once it
is realized that in Quantum Mechanics, spacetime points are not meaningful
and that on the contrary averages over intervals of the order of the Compton
scale have to be taken to recover meaningful physics. Over the decades the
signiﬁcance of such cut oﬀ space time intervals has been stressed by T.D. Lee
and several other scholars as noted earlier [28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. Indeed with a
minimum cut oﬀ length l, it was shown by Snyder that there would be a non
commutative but Lorentz invariant spacetime structure. At the Compton
scale we would have [33],

[x, y] = 0(l2)

(16)

and similar relations.
In fact starting from the Dirac equation itself, we can deduce directly the
non commutativity (16) (Cf.refs.[27]).
Let us now return to Dirac’s formulation of the monopole in the light of the
above comments. As noted above, the non integrability of the phase S in
(13) gives rise to the electromagnetic ﬁeld, while the nodal singularity gives
rise to a term which is an integral multiple of 2π. As is well known we have

~∇S = ~p

10

(17)

(18)

(19)

where ~p is the momentum vector. When there is a nodal singularity, as noted
above, the integral over a closed circuit of ~p does not vanish. In fact in this
case we have a circulation given by

Γ =

~∇S · d~r = ¯h

dS = 2πn

I

I

It is because of the nodal singularity that though the ~p ﬁeld is irrotational,
there is a vortex - the singularity at the central point associated with the
vortex makes the region multiply connected, or alternatively, in this region
we cannot shrink a closed smooth curve about the point to that point. In fact
if we use the fact as seen above that the Compton wavelength is a minimum
cut oﬀ, then we get from (18) using (17), and on taking n = 1,

~∇S · d~r =

~p · d~r = 2πmc

I

Z

1
2mc

=

h
2

(l = ¯h
2mc is the radius of the circuit and ¯h = 1 in the above natural units). In
other words the nodal singularity or quantized vortex gives us the mysterious
Quantum Mechanical spin half (and other higher spins for other values of n).
In the case of the Quantum Mechanical spin, there are 2 × n/2 + 1 = n + 1
multiply connected regions, exactly as in the case of nodal singularities.
Indeed we can see the role of a multiply connected space even within the
context of the non relativistic Schrodinger equation. We consider a Hydrogen
like atom in two dimensional space, for which the Schrodinger equation is
given by [34, 35]

−

¯h2
2µ "

1
r

∂
r
∂r  

∂
∂r !

+

1
r2

∂2
∂φ2 #

Ze2
r

ψ(r, φ) −

φ(r, φ) = Eψ(r, φ)

(20)

As is well known the energy spectrum for (20) is given by

E = −

Z 2e4µ
2¯h2(n + m + 1

2 )2

(21)

If we require that (21) be identical to the Bohr spectrum, then m should
be a half integer, which also means that the conﬁguration space is multiply
connected. In the simplest case of a doubly connected space, we are dealing
wityh R2 × S1, where S1 is a compactiﬁed space, generally considered to be

11

a Kaluza-Klein space.
With the above background let us return to the universe at large. We con-
sider Wheeler’s description of the wave function of the universe in terms of
super space [36]. Superspace is a manofold such that a single point therein
represents the whole of the geometry of three dimensional space. As is usual
we denote such a three dimensional geometry by (3) G . Treating this as a
point we introduce the wave function like description (6), except that we are
in superspace which is essentially a four dimensional manifold.
Interestingly it has been shown by Stern that as long as we are dealing with
Euclidean type three dimensional spaces with positive deﬁnite metric, su-
perspace constitutes a manifold in the sense that each point therein has a
neighborhood homeomorphic to an open set in a Banach space and two dis-
tinct points are separated by disjoint neighborhoods. This enables us to carry
out the usual operations in superspace and we are led back using the princi-
ple of constructive interference as earlier, to this time the ten ﬁeld equations
of Einstein.
Thus the Hamilton-Jacobi theory leads both to Quantum Mechanics and to
General Relativity in terms of the wave function description (6) together
with constructive interference. However it must be borne in mind that in
Quantum Mechanics we are dealing with the usual three dimensional space
whereas for obtaining the Einstein’s equations of General Relativity, we are
using the four dimensional superspace.
To push these considerations further let us consider the general relativistic
formulation in terms of linearized theory. In fact in the case of the electron,
it was shown [37] that the spin was given by,

SK =

ǫklmxlT m0d3x =

Z

h
2

where the domain of integration was a sphere of radius given by the Compton
wavelength. If this is carried over to the case of the universe, we get from
(22)

SU = N 3/2h ≈ h1

where h1 and SU denotes the counterpart of electron spin (Cf.ref.[37]).
h1 in (23) turns out to be the spin of the universe itself in broad agreement
with Godel’s spin value for Einstein’s equations [38, 39]. Incidentally this
is also in agreement with the Kerr limit of the spin of the rotating Black

(22)

(23)

12

Hole. Further as pointed out by Kogut and others, the angular momentum
of the universe given in (23) is compatible with a rotation from the cosmic
background radiation anisotropy [39]. Finally it is also close to the observed
rotation as deduced from anisotropy of cosmic electromagnetic radiation as
reported by Nodland and Ralston and others [40, 41].
In the above h1 ∼ 1093 and we immediately have

R =

h1
Mc

(24)

where R the radius of the universe is the analogue of the particle Compton
wavelength in the macro context and M is the mass.
Thus the multiply connected space considerations of micro physics which we
saw above can immediately be taken over to the case of the macro cosmos. In
this case super space would be multiply connected consisting of three (space)
dimensional universes which mimick particles with spin.

References

[1] Ruﬃni, R., and Fang, L.Z., ”Basic Concepts in Relativistic Astro-

physics”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1983, p.111ﬀ.

[2] Ohanian, C.H., and Ruﬃni, R., ”Gravitation and Spacetime”, New

York, 1994, pp.64ﬀ.

[3] Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S., and Wheeler, J.A., ”Gravitation”, W.H.

Freeman, San Francisco, 1973, pp.819ﬀ.

[4] Zee, A., Unity of Forces in the Universe, Vol.II, World Scientiﬁc, Singa-

pore, 1982, p.40ﬀ.

[5] Sidharth, B.G., Chaos, Solitons and Fractals, 18 (1), 2003, pp.197-201.

[6] Sidharth, B.G., Int.J.Mod.Phys.A., 13 (15), 1998, p.2599ﬀ.

[7] Sidharth, B.G., Int.J.Th.Phys., 37 (4), 1998, p.1307ﬀ.

[8] Sidharth, B.G., Proc. of the Eighth Marcell Grossmann Meeting on Gen-
eral Relativity, Ed. T. Piran, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999, p.476-
479.

13

[9] Sidharth, B.G., “The Universe of Fluctuations”, Springer, Berlin, 2005.

[10] Perlmutter, S., et al, Nature, Vol.391, 1 January 1998, p.51-59.

[11] Kirshner, R.P., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, Vol.96, April 1999, pp.4224-

4227.

[12] Weinberg, S., Phys.Rev.Lett., 43, 1979, p.1566.

[13] Brax, P., Contemporary Physics, Vol.45, No.3, 227-236.

[14] Website http://www.phys.hawaii.edu: 80/jglnuosc-story.html.

[15] Webb, J.K., et al., Phys.Rev.Lett., 87 (9), 2001, pp.091301-1 ﬀ.

[16] Webb, J.K., et al., Phys.Rev.Lett., 82, 1999, pp884ﬀ.

[17] Moﬀat, J.W.,

Int.J.Mod.Phys.,D 2, 1993, p.351, J.W. Moﬀat,

Found.Phys. 23, 1993.

[18] Hugh Everett, III, Rev.Mod.Phys., Vol.29, No.3, 1957, 454-462.

[19] Conlon, J.P., Contemporary Physics, Vol.47, No.2, March-April 2006,

119-129.

tons and Fractals.

1966, pp.76ﬀ.

[20] Sidharth, B.G., “Self Similar Super Universes” to appear in Chaos, Soli-

[21] Goldstein, H., ”Classical Mechanics”, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.,

[22] Wheeler, J.A., and Feynman, R.P., Rev.Mod.Phys., 17, 157, 1945.

[23] Dirac, P.A.M., Proc. Roy. Soc. A 133, 1931, pp.60ﬀ.

[24] Dirac, P.A.M., in “Monopoles in Quantum Field Theory”, Eds. N.S.
Craigie, P. Goddard and W. Nahm, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1982,
p.iii.

[25] Sidharth, B.G., Nuovo Cimento B, 118B (1), 2003, pp.35-40.

[26] Dirac, P.A.M., ”The Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, Clarendon

Press, Oxford, 1958, pp.4ﬀ, pp.253ﬀ.

14

[27] Sidharth, B.G., Foundation of Physics Letters, 15 (5), 2002, 501ﬀ.

[28] Lee, T.D., Physics Letters, Vol.122B, No.3,4, 10 March 1983, p.217-220.

[29] Bombelli, L., Lee, J., Meyer, D., and Sorkin, R.D., Physical Review

Letters, Vol.59, No.5, August 1987, p.521-524.

[30] Kardyshevskii, V.G., Translated from Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR,

Vol.147, No.6, December 1962, p.1336-1339.

[31] Sidharth, B.G., Foundation of Physics Letters, 15 (6), 2002, pp.577-583.

[32] Sidharth, B.G., Foundation of Physics Letters, 17 (5), 2004, 503-506.

[33] Snyder, H.S., Physical Review, Vol.72, No.1, July 1 1947, p.68-71.

[34] Ho, Vu B., Morgan J Michael, J.Phys.A: Math. Gen. 29, (1996), 1497-

1510.

[35] Sidharth, B.G., arXiv/Physics 0605126.

[36] Wheeler, J.A., ”Superspace and the Nature of Quantum Geometrody-
namics”, Battelles Rencontres, Lectures, Eds., B.S. De Witt and J.A.
Wheeler, Benjamin, New York, 1968.

[37] Sidharth, B.G., ”Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science, New York, 2002.

[38] Godel, K., Rev.Mod.Phys., 21, 1949, pp.447ﬀ.

[39] Carneiro, S., Found.Phys.Lett. 11 (1), 1998, p.95ﬀ.

[40] Ralston, J., and Nodland, B., Phys.Rev.Lett., 16 (78), 1999, p.3043ﬀ.

[41] Kogut, A., et al., Phys.Rev.D., 55, 1997, p.1901ﬀ.

15

