6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An improvement of Mach’s deﬁnition of mass

E. Zanchini, A. Barletta

Universit`a di Bologna - Dipartimento di Ingegneria Energetica, Nucleare e del
Controllo Ambientale, Viale Risorgimento, 2 - 40136 Bologna, Italy

Mach’s deﬁnition of mass is completed and simpliﬁed. An operative
deﬁnition of inertial reference frame is proposed. The second and the third
law of dynamics are stated for an isolated pair of material points at rest, in
a form which does not involve the concept of force. By means of the third
law of dynamics, it is proved that the ratio of two masses is independent
of the choice of the reference material point and can be measured directly.
This proof completes Mach’s deﬁnition of mass. Then, force is deﬁned as
the product of mass and acceleration. Finally, the deﬁnitions of mass and
force are extended to the framework of special relativity.

PACS numbers: 01.55.+b General physics; 45.20.D- Newtonian mechanics;
45.50.-j Dynamics and kinematics of a particle and a system of particles; 03.30.+p
Special relativity.

1. Introduction

The problem of stating a rigorous deﬁnition of mass in classical me-
chanics has not yet received a well established and widely shared solution.
Indeed, several diﬀerent proposals can be found in scientiﬁc papers and each
textbook presents the concept of mass in its own way. An interesting analy-
sis of the development of the concept of mass in physics has been presented
by Jammer [1], [2]. The unsatisfactory status of the didactic presentations
of the mass concept has been illustrated also by Padgett [3]. In particular,
the deﬁciency of the customary deﬁnition based on Newton’s second law
of dynamics, still employed in several textbooks, is sharply evidenced in
Ref. [2], by the following sentence. “Today, as then” (the author refers to
a century ago) “most authors deﬁne the inertial mass mi of a particle as
the ratio between the force F acting on the particle and the acceleration
a of the particle ... The deﬁciency of this deﬁnition is of course its use of
the concept of force. For, if force is regarded as a primitive, that is, as
an undeﬁned term, then this deﬁnition deﬁnes an ignotum per ignotius”.

(1)

2

Clearly, the deﬁnition of mass cannot be based on the concept of force; it
must be founded only on kinematic quantities. Similarly, the statement of
the inertia principle and the deﬁnition of an inertial reference frame should
not involve the concept of force.

In the last decades of 19th century, a novel and interesting deﬁnition
of mass was proposed by Mach [4]. Mach’s deﬁnition employs only kine-
matic concepts and is based upon three postulates, which can be resumed
as follows.

• (First and second postulate) Bodies set opposite to each other induce
in each other, under circumstances to be speciﬁed by experimental
physics, contrary accelerations in the direction of their line of junction.
The ratio between the magnitudes of these accelerations is a constant
and is independent, for instance, of the character of the physical state
of the bodies (electrical, magnetic, any other).

• (Third postulate) The accelerations which bodies A, B, C ... induce

in a body K are independent of each other.

The mass-ratio of a body A1 with respect to a body A2 is deﬁned by Mach
as the ratio of the intensities of the mutually-induced accelerations, i.e.

m12 =

a21
a12

,

where a21 is the magnitude of the acceleration induced on A2 by A1 and
a12 is the magnitude of the acceleration induced on A1 by A2. Then, the
mass m1 of A1 can be deﬁned by means of Eq. (1) by replacing A2 with a
reference body A0 whose mass is assumed equal to m0, i.e. by the equation

m1 = m0 m10 = m0

a01
a10

.

A crucial step is to prove that the ratio m1/m2 between the mass of A1 and
that of A2 is independent of the choice of A0 and can be measured directly
by means of Eq. (1), i.e. that

Equation (3) can be rewritten as

m12 = m1/m2 .

a21
a12

=

a01
a10

a20
a02

.

[4] through a gedanken-
The validity of Eq.
experiment which refers to a special case, but is not deduced from the

(4) is illustrated in Ref.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

3

basic postulates. In fact, Eq. (4) is not a consequence of Mach’s postulates.
Therefore, Mach’s deﬁnition of mass is incomplete, because it fails to state
explicitly all the necessary assumptions. In a recent paper revisiting Mach’s
deﬁnition of mass [5], Guerra and Sparzani have presented a proof of Eq.
(4) based on the following postulate:

• (Mach’s third postulate, revised form) If A1, A2, ...

, An form an

isolated system of rigid bodies, then

ai =

aij

,

(5)

Xj6=i
where ai is the actual acceleration of Ai and aij is the acceleration
that Ai would undergo if all the bodies except the pair (Ai, Aj) would
be removed and placed far away.

The superposition postulate stated above is an improvement of Mach’s third
postulate, because it is more precise. However, the proof of Eq. (4) pre-
[5] requires the statement that, for an isolated system of
sented in Ref.
three bodies (A1, A2, A3), when a1 = a2 = 0, then a3 = 0. In our opinion,
this statement is not a rigorous consequence of Mach’s postulates, even if
the third postulate is expressed by Eq. (5). Therefore, Mach’s deﬁnition of
mass is still incomplete. Moreover, it is complicated, so that a simpliﬁcation
thereof is highly needed.

In the present paper, Mach’s deﬁnition of mass is completed and sim-
pliﬁed. Through an operative deﬁnition of inertial reference frame, the
ﬁrst law of dynamics is presented without employing the concept of force.
Mach’s ﬁrst and second postulate are collected in a single rigorous propo-
sition, called second law of dynamics, which refers to an isolated pair of
material points at rest. The mass of a material point is deﬁned through
Eq. (2). Then, the third law of dynamics is stated as the conservation of
momentum for an isolated pair of material points at rest; Eq. (4) is proved
as a consequence of the third law. Following Mach, force is deﬁned as the
product of mass and acceleration. Finally, it shown that the statements
of the laws of dynamics and the deﬁnition of mass do not change if the
kinematic framework of non-relativistic classical dynamics is replaced by
that of special relativity. Thus, the concept of mass in special relativity is
sharpened, in agreement with interesting recent contributions on this sub-
ject [11]–[13].

The restriction to particles with a vanishing relative velocity is neces-
sary for the following reason. The Lorentz electromagnetic force does not
fulﬁl either Mach’s postulates or the third law of dynamics [6], [7]. On
this subject, a controversy is present in the literature. Some authors have

4

proposed an alternative theory of electrodynamics [8] which fulﬁls the third
law. However, it is widely accepted that the standard theory of electro-
dynamics is correct, as is conﬁrmed also by a recent experiment [9], [10].
Therefore, only with reference to an isolated pair of material points at rest
one can restate Mach’s postulates and the third law of dynamics in a form
which holds without exceptions. Once the concepts of mass and force have
been established, the electric charge can be deﬁned and the laws which de-
termine the gravitational and the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be stated. At
this stage, the validity of the third law of dynamics in a broader domain
can be established as a consequence of these laws.

2. Mass and force in non-relativistic classical mechanics

In this section, the framework of non-relativistic classical mechanics is
considered. Operative deﬁnitions of inertial reference frame and of isolated
system of material points are presented. Then, the basic laws of classical
dynamics and the deﬁnition of mass are stated in a form which avoids the
use of undeﬁned quantities. Finally, force is deﬁned as the product of mass
and acceleration. The basic deﬁnitions and principles of kinematics are
considered as previously established.

2.1. Deﬁnition: inertial reference frame

Let A1 be an arbitrarily chosen material point, whose motion is observed
with respect to a reference frame O. If the velocity of A1 is constant when-
ever A1 is placed far away from any other physical object, then O will be
called an inertial reference frame.

2.2. First law of dynamics

Inertial reference frames exist.

2.3. Comment

This formulation of the ﬁrst law of dynamics is an operative statement
of the principle of inertia, in which the concept of force (not yet deﬁned) is
not used. The Galilean transformation of coordinates ensures that, if O is
an inertial reference frame and O′ is any reference frame which moves with
a constant velocity with respect to O, then O′ is an inertial reference frame.

2.4. Deﬁnition: isolated system of material points

Let (A1, A2, ..., An) be a set of arbitrarily ordered material points,
whose motion is observed with respect to an inertial reference frame O.

5

If A1 has a constant velocity whenever A2, ..., An are removed and placed
very far from A1, then (A1, A2, ..., An) will be called an isolated system of
material points.

2.5. Second law of dynamics

Let (A1, A2) be an isolated pair of material points whose motion is
observed with respect to an inertial reference frame O. Let us denote by a1
and a2 the accelerations of A1 and A2 and by a1 and a2 the magnitudes of a1
and a2. At any time instant t chosen so that the velocities of A1 and A2 are
vanishing, if a1 is non–vanishing also a2 is non–vanishing; moreover, a1 and
a2 are parallel to the straight line from A1 to A2 with opposite directions,
and the ratio a1/a2 is independent of the positions of A1 and A2 (i.e., it
depends only on the choice of A1 and A2).

2.6. Comment

This statement of the second law of dynamics speciﬁes the conditions
for the validity of Mach’s ﬁrst and second postulate. First, (A1, A2) must
be an isolated pair of material points whose motion is observed with respect
to an inertial reference frame. Then, the velocities of A1 and A2 must be
vanishing with respect to O, i.e. equal with respect to any inertial reference
frame. This limitation is necessary because for a pair of charged particles
with a non–vanishing relative velocity the mutually induced accelerations
may be non opposite [6], [7].

2.7. Deﬁnition: mass of a material point

Let us consider an isolated pair of material points (A1, A0), whose mo-
tion is observed with respect to an inertial reference frame O. Let A1 be
any material point, while A0 is a reference material point. Let us consider
a time instant t such that the velocities of A1 and A0 are vanishing. Let a1
and a0 be the accelerations of A1 and A0 at the instant t and let a1 and a0
be the magnitudes of a1 and a0. We will call mass of A1 the quantity m1
deﬁned as follows:

m1 = m0

,

a0
a1

(6)

where m0 is a positive real number that will be called mass of A0. Since A0
and m0 are ﬁxed once and for all, the second law of dynamics ensures that
m1 has a unique value, which is strictly positive.

6

2.8. Comment

Clearly, at this stage the deﬁnition of mass is incomplete. The mass
of any material point could be measured only by employing the reference
material point A0.

2.9. Third law of dynamics

Let (A1, A2) be an isolated pair of material points whose motion is
observed with respect to an inertial reference frame O. Let m1 and m2 be
the masses of A1 and of A2 and let a1 and a2 be the accelerations of A1 and
of A2 at any time instant t chosen so that the velocities of A1 and A2 are
vanishing. Then,

m1 a1 + m2 a2 = 0 .

(7)

2.10. Direct measurement of the ratio of two masses

Let (A1, A2) be an isolated pair of material points whose motion is
observed with respect to an inertial reference frame O. Let m1 and m2 be
the masses of A1 and of A2 and let a1 and a2 be the accelerations of A1 and
of A2 at any time instant t chosen so that the velocities of A1 and A2 are
vanishing. Clearly, Eq. (7) implies that

m1
m2

=

a2
a1

.

2.11. Comment

(8)

We have proved that, on account of the third law of dynamics, the ratio
m1/m2 between the mass of A1 and that of A2 is independent of the choice
of the reference material point and can be measured directly, by observing
the motion of an isolated pair of material points (A1, A2) with respect to
an inertial reference frame O. Thus, the deﬁnition of mass of a material
point has been completed.

By substituting Eq. (2) in Eq. (8) and by rewriting a2 as a21 and a1 as
a12, in agreement with Mach’s notation, one easily obtains Eq. (4). Thus,
the third law of dynamics appears to be the missing postulate in Mach’s
treatment.

Clearly, as in Refs.

[4] and [5], we have proposed here a conceptual
deﬁnition of mass. Practical mass measurements can be performed in many
other ways, provided that the results agree with the conceptual deﬁnition.
For instance, if a material point is subjected to a known force (see deﬁnition,
stated below), its mass can be measured as the ratio of the magnitudes of
force and acceleration (even if the particle has a non-vanishing velocity and
does not belong to a pair of isolated material points).

2.12. Deﬁnition: force which acts on a material point

Let A1 be a material point with mass m1, whose motion is observed
with respect to an inertial reference frame O. We will call force which acts
on A1, at a time instant t, the vector

f1 = m1 a1 ,

where a1 is the acceleration of A1 with respect to O at the instant t.

3. Mass and force in special relativity

In this section, the formalism of relativistic kinematics is brieﬂy recalled.
Then, it is shown that the statements of the laws of dynamics and the deﬁ-
nition of mass proposed in the preceding section hold also in the framework
of special relativity. Finally, the deﬁnition of force is extended to this frame-
work.

Let us denote the space coordinates by x1, x2, x3 and the time coordi-
nate by x4 = ct, where t is time and c is the light speed in free space. Let A
be a material point in motion with respect to a reference frame O. At any
time instant t, one can measure the speed v of A with respect to O,

v =

2

dx1
dt (cid:19)

+

dx2
dt (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

+

dx3
dt (cid:19)

(cid:18)

#

"(cid:18)

1/2

2

,

as well as the dimensionless parameters

v
c

β =

, γ =

1 − β
(cid:16)
A time interval dt measured by an observer at rest with respect to O cor-
responds to a proper-time interval (measured by an observer at rest with
respect to A)

(11)

(cid:17)

.

−1/2

2

We will call velocity of A, at an instant t, the four-vector

dτ = dt

2

1 − β

1/2

.

(cid:16)

uν =

dxν
dτ

(cid:17)

,

7

(9)

(10)

(12)

(13)

whose components are given by

u1 = γ

, u2 = γ

, u3 = γ

, u4 = γc .

(14)

dx1
dt

dx2
dt

dx3
dt

8

We will call acceleration of A, at an instant t, the four-vector

αν =

duν
dτ

,

(15)

(16)

whose components are given by

2

α1 = γ

a1 +

(cid:18)

v · a
c2 γ

2

v1

, α2 = γ

a2 +

2

(cid:18)

v · a
c2 γ

2

v2

,

(cid:19)

2

α3 = γ

a3 +

2

v3

, α4 =

(cid:19)
v · a
c2 γ
in Ref.

(cid:19)
[14].

(cid:18)

v · a
c

4

γ

,

(16), v is the three–
as is shown, for instance,
dimensional classical velocity, with components dx1/dt, dx2/dt, dx3/dt, and
a is the three–dimensional classical acceleration, with components d2x1/dt2,
d2x2/dt2, d2x3/dt2. As is well known, the magnitude u of the four-vector
4 = − c2. Moreover,
uν is a constant, because u2 = uνuν = u2
the scalar product of velocity and acceleration, uν αν , vanishes.

1 + u2

3 − u2

2 + u2

In Eq.

The deﬁnition of inertial reference frame, as well as the statements of
the laws of dynamics and the deﬁnition of mass, can be taken from Section
2 without changes. Indeed, the Lorentz transformation ensures that, if O is
an inertial reference frame and O′ is any reference frame which moves with
a constant velocity with respect to O, then O′ is an inertial reference frame
as well. Moreover, as is shown by Eq. (16), in the limit of vanishing velocity
the time component of the four-vector acceleration vanishes and the space
components coincide with the classical ones. Thus, only the deﬁnition of
force must be restated.

3.1. Deﬁnition: force which acts on a material point

Let A be a material point with mass m, whose motion is observed with
respect to an inertial reference frame O. We will call force which acts on A,
at a time instant t, the four–vector

Kν = m αν ,

(17)

where αν is the acceleration of A with respect to O at the instant t.

4. Conclusions

Mach’s deﬁnition of mass has been completed and simpliﬁed. Operative
deﬁnitions of an inertial reference frame and of an isolated system of material
points have been presented. By means of these deﬁnitions, Mach’s postu-
lates have been stated in a rigorous form. In particular, the third postulate

9

has been replaced by a statement of the third law of dynamics which refers
to an isolated pair of material points at rest. Through this statement of the
third law, the deﬁnition of mass has been completed. Following Mach, force
has been deﬁned as the product of mass and acceleration. Then, it has been
shown that the deﬁnition of mass does not change if the kinematic frame-
work of classical dynamics is replaced by that of special relativity. Finally,
the deﬁnition of force has been extended to the relativistic framework.

REFERENCES

[1] Jammer, M., Concepts of Mass in Classical and Modern Physics. Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, 1961.

[2] Jammer, M., Concepts of Mass in Contemporary Physics and Phylosophy.

Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2000.

[3] Padgett, W. T., Problems with the current deﬁnitions of mass. Physics Essays,

3: 178–182, 1990.

[4] Mach, E., ¨Uber die Deﬁnition der Masse. Carl’s Repertorium der Experimen-
talphysik, 4: 355–359, 1868. See also Mach, E. Die Geschichte und die Wurzel
des Satzes von der Erhaltung der Arbeit 2nd edition, (Barth, Leipzig) 1909.
[5] Guerra, M., Sparzani, A., About the deﬁnition of mass in (Machian) classical

mechanics. Foundations of Physics Letters, 7: 75–84, 1994.

[6] Assis, A.K.T., Torres Silva, H., Comparison between Weber’s electrodynamics
and classical electodynamics. Pramana – Journal of Physics, 55: 393–404, 2000.
[7] Jackson, J.D., Classical electrodynamics. Wiley, New York, second edition,

1975.

[8] Pappas, P. T., The original Ampere Force and Biot-Savart and Lorentz forces.

Il Nuovo Cimento, 70 B: 189–197, 1983.

[9] Cavalleri, G., Bettoni G., Tonni E. and Spavieri G., Experimental proof of
standard electrodynamics by measuring the self-force on a part of a current
loop. Physical Review E, 58: 2505–3517, 1998.

[10] Cavalleri, G., Tonni E. and Spavieri G., Reply to ”Electrodynamic force law

controversy”. Physical Review E, 63: 058602-1–2, 2001.

[11] Sachs, M., On the inertial mass concept in special and general relativity.

Foundations of Physics Letters, 1: 163–169, 1988.

[12] Okun, L. B., The concept of mass. Physics Today, 42 (June): 31–36, 1989.
[13] Okun, L. B., Formula E = mc2 in the year of physics. Acta Physica Polonica,

37: 1327–1332, 2006.

[14] Rindler, W., Introduction to special relativity. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1982.

