6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

General relativity and cosmology derived from principle

of maximum power or force

Christoph Schiller∗

2nd February 2008

Abstract

The ﬁeld equations of general relativity are shown to derive from the existence of a
limit force or of a limit power in nature. The limits have the value of c4/4G and c5/4G.

The proof makes use of a result by Jacobson. All known experimental data is consistent

with the limits. Applied to the universe, the limits predict its darkness at night and

the observed scale factor. Some experimental tests of the limits are proposed. The

main counter-arguments and paradoxes are discussed, such as the transformation under

boosts, the force felt at a black hole horizon, the mountain problem, and the contrast

to scalar–tensor theories of gravitation. The resolution of the paradoxes also clariﬁes

why the maximum force and the maximum power have remained hidden for so long.

The derivation of the ﬁeld equations shows that the maximum force or power plays the

same role for general relativity as the maximum speed plays for special relativity.

Keywords: maximum force, maximum power, general relativity, horizon

PACS number: 04.20.Cv

∗Giesecke & Devrient Research&Development, Prinzregentenstraße, 81677 M¨unchen, Germany,

christoph.schiller@motionmountain.org.

1

1

Introduction

A simpliﬁcation of general relativity has welcome effects on the teaching of the

topic. Some years ago, a strong simpliﬁcation has been reported by Gibbons

(Gibbons 2002) and independently, by the present author (Schiller 1997-2004)

General relativity was shown to derive from the so-called maximum force (or

maximum power) principle: There is a maximum force (and power) in nature:

F ≤

= 3.0 · 1043N

and

P ≤

= 9.1 · 1051W .

(1)

c5
4G

c4
4G

Either of the two equivalent expressions can be taken as basic principle. So

far, the arguments used for the connection between these limits and general

relativity were either quite abstract or rather heuristic. The present paper gives

a derivation of the ﬁeld equations from either of the limit values and shows

the equivalence of the two formulations of general relativity. This paper also

includes the discussion of the main paradoxes, uses the limits (1) to deduce

the central points of cosmology and suggests some new experimental tests of

general relativity.

The concept of force needs careful use in general relativity. Force is the

change of momentum with time. Since momentum is a conserved quantity,

force is best visualized as an upper limit for the rate of ﬂow of momentum

(through a given physical surface). Only with this clariﬁcation does it make

sense to use the concept of force in general relativity.

The value c4/4G of the force limit is the energy of a Schwarzschild black
hole divided by twice its radius. The maximum power c5/4G is realized when

such a black hole is radiated away in the time that light takes to travel along

a length corresponding to twice the radius. It will become clear below why a

Schwarzschild black hole, as an extremal case of general relativity, is necessary

to realize these limit values.

Generally speaking, the aim is to prove that the principle of maximum force

(or that of maximum power) plays for general relativity the same role that the

principle of maximum speed plays for special relativity. This unconventional

analogy (Schiller 1997-2004) requires a proof in several steps. First, one has to

2

derive the ﬁeld equations of general relativity from the maximum force. Then

one has to show that no imaginary set-up or situation – thus no Gedanken ex-

periment – can overcome the limit. Subsequently, one has to show that no

experimental data contradicts the statement of maximum force. Finally, one

has to deduce predictions for future experimental tests made on the basis of

maximum force or power. These are the same steps that have lead to the estab-

lishment of the idea of a maximum speed of nature. These steps structure this

paper.

Since force (respectively power) is change of momentum (energy) with

time, the precise conditions for momentum (energy) measurement must be

speciﬁed, in a way applicable in a space-time that is curved. Momentum, like

energy, is a conserved quantity. Any change of momentum or energy thus hap-

pens through ﬂow. As a result, a maximum force (respectively power) value

in nature implies the following statement: one imagines a physical surface and

completely covers it with observers; then the integral of all momentum (re-

spectively energy) values ﬂowing through that surface per time, measured by

all those observers, never exceeds the maximum value. It plays no role how the

surface is chosen, as long as it is physical, i.e., as long as the surface allows to

ﬁx observers on it.

A condition for such a measurement is implicit in the surface ﬂow visual-

ization. The local momentum (or energy) change for each observer is the value

that each observer measures for the ﬂow at precisely his or her position. The

same condition of observer proximity is also required for speed measurements

in special relativity.

Since 3-force and power appear together in the force 4-vector, both the force

and the power limits are equivalent and inseparable. It is sometimes suggested

that the theory of general relativity does not admit a concept of force or of

its zeroth component, power. This is not correct; the value of force is simply

so strongly dependent on observer choices that usually one tends to avoid the

concept of force altogether. On the contrary, it turns out that every quantity

with the dimensions of force (or of power) that is measured by an observer is

3

bound by the limit value. This can either be the magnitude of the four vector
or the value of any of its four components. The force limit c4/4G (and the

corresponding power limit) is valid for all these observables, as will become

clear below.

In particular, it will be shown below why an arbitrary change

of coordinates does not allow to exceed the force or power limit, contrary to

expectation. This result of general relativity is equivalent to the result of special

relativity that a change of coordinates does not allow to exceed the speed limit.

The maximum force and power are also given, within a factor 1/4, by the

Planck energy divided by the Planck length, respectively, by the Planck time.

The origin of the numerical coefﬁcient 1/4 has no deeper meaning. It simply

turns out that 1/4 is the value that leads to the correct form of the ﬁeld equations

of general relativity.

2 The derivation of general relativity

To derive the theory of relativity one has to study those systems that realize the

limit value of the observable under scrutiny. In the the case of the special theory

of relativity, the systems that realize the limit speed are light and massless

particles. In the general theory of relativity, the systems that realize the limit

are less obvious. One notes directly that a maximum force (or power) cannot

be realized across a volume of space. If that were the case, a simple boost could

transform the force (or power) to a higher value. Nature avoids this by realizing

maximum force and power only on surfaces, not volumes, and at the same time

by making such surfaces unattainable. These unattainable surfaces are basic to

general relativity; they are called horizons. Maximum force and power only

appears on horizons (Schiller 1997-2004). The deﬁnition of a horizon as a

surface of maximum force (or power) is equivalent to the more usual deﬁnition

as a surface that provides a limit to signal reception, i.e., a limit to observation.

The reasoning in the following will consists of three additional steps. First,

it will be shown that a maximum force or power implies that unattainable sur-

faces are always curved. Then it will be shown that any curved horizon follows

4

the so-called horizon equation. Finally, it will be shown that the horizon equa-

tion implies general relativity. (In fact, the sequence of arguments can also be

taken in the opposite direction; all these steps are equivalent to each other.)

The connection between horizons and the maximum force is the central

point in the following. It is as important as the connection between light and

the maximum speed in special relativity. In special relativity, one shows that

light speed, being the maximum speed in nature, implies the Lorentz trans-

formations. In general relativity, one must show that horizon force, being the

maximum force in nature, implies the ﬁeld equations. To achieve this aim, one

starts with the realization that all horizons show energy ﬂow at their location.

There is no horizon without energy ﬂow. This connection implies that a hori-

zon cannot be a plane, as an inﬁnitely extended plane would imply an inﬁnite

energy ﬂow.

The simplest ﬁnite horizon is a static sphere. A spherical horizon is char-

acterized by its curvature radius R or equivalently, by its surface gravity a;
the two quantities are related by 2aR = c2. The energy ﬂow moving though

any horizon is always ﬁnite in length, when measured along the propagation

direction. One can thus speak more speciﬁcally of an energy pulse. Any en-

ergy pulse through a horizon is thus characterized by an energy E and a proper

length L. When the energy pulse ﬂows perpendicularly through a horizon, the

momentum change or force for an observer at the horizon is

E
L
The goal is to show that maximum force implies general relativity. Now, the

F =

(2)

.

maximum force is realized on horizons. One thus needs to insert the maximum

possible values for each of these quantities and to show that general relativity

follows.

one gets

Using the maximum force value and the area 4πR2 for a spherical horizon

E
LA
The fraction E/A is the energy per area ﬂowing through any area A that is

4πR2

(3)

=

.

c4
4G

part of a horizon. The insertion of the maximum values is complete when one

5

notes that the length L of the energy pulse is limited by the radius R. The

limit L ≤ R is due to geometrical reasons; seen from the concave side of the

horizon, the pulse must be shorter than the curvature radius. An independent

argument is the following. The length L of an object accelerated by a is limited

by special relativity (D’Inverno 1992, Rindler 2001) by

L ≤

.

c2
2a

(4)

(5)

(6)

Special relativity already shows that this limit is due and related to the appear-

ance of a horizon. Together with relation (3), the statement that horizons are

surfaces of maximum force leads to the following central relation for static,

spherical horizons:

E =

a A .

c2
8πG

This horizon equation relates the energy ﬂow E through an area A of a spheri-

cal horizon with surface gravity a. The horizon equation follows from the idea

that horizons are surfaces of maximum force. The equation states that the en-

ergy ﬂowing through a horizon is limited, that this energy is proportional to

the area of the horizon, and that the energy ﬂow is proportional to the surface

gravity.

The above derivation also yields the intermediate result

E ≤

c4
16πG

A
L

.

This form of the horizon equation states more clearly that no surface other than

a horizon can reach the limit energy ﬂow, given the same area and pulse length

(or surface gravity). No other part of physics makes comparable statements;

they are an intrinsic part of the theory of gravitation.

Another variation of the derivation of the horizon starts with the emphasis

on power instead of on force. Using P = E/T as starting equation, changing

the derivation accordingly, also leads to the horizon equation.

It is essential to stress that the horizon equations (5) or (6) follow from only

two assumptions: ﬁrst, there is a maximum speed in nature, and second, there

is a maximum force (or power) in nature. No speciﬁc theory of gravitation

6

is assumed. The horizon equation might even be testable experimentally, as

argued below. (One also notes that the horizon equation – or, equivalently, the

force or power limits – imply a maximum mass change rate in nature given
by dm/dt ≤ c3/4G.) In particular, up to this point it was not assumed that

general relativity is valid; equally, it was not assumed that spherical horizons

yield Schwarzschild black holes (indeed, other theories of gravity also lead to

spherical horizons).

Next one has to generalize the horizon equation from static and spherical

horizons to general horizons. Since the maximum force is assumed to be valid

for all observers, whether inertial or accelerating, the generalization is straight-

forward. For a horizon that is irregularly curved or time-varying the horizon

equation becomes

δE =

a δA .

c2
8πG

This differential relation – it might be called the general horizon equation – is

valid for any horizon. It can be applied separately for every piece δA of a dy-

namic or spatially changing horizon. The general horizon equation (7) is known

to be equivalent to general relativity at least since 1995, when this equivalence

was implicitly given by Jacobson (Jacobson 1995). It will be shown that the dif-

ferential horizon equation has the same role for general relativity as dx = c dt

has for special relativity. From now on, when speaking of the horizon equation,

the general, differential form (7) of the relation is implied.

It is instructive to restate the behaviour of energy pulses of length L in a

way that holds for any surface, even one that is not a horizon. Repeating the

above derivation, one gets

(7)

(8)

δE
δA

≤

c4
16πG

1
L

.

Equality is only reached in the case that the surface A is a horizon. In other

words, whenever the value δE/δA approaches the right hand side, a horizon is

formed. This connection will be essential in the discussion of apparent counter-

examples to the limit values.

If one keeps in mind that on a horizon, the pulse length L obeys L ≤ c2/2a,

7

it becomes clear that the general horizon equation is a consequence of the max-
imum force c4/4G or the maximum power c5/4G. In addition, the horizon

equation takes also into account maximum speed, which is at the origin of the
relation L ≤ c2/2a. The horizon equation thus follows purely from these two

limits of nature. One notes that one can also take the opposite direction of ar-

guments: it is possible to derive the maximum force from the horizon equation

(7). The two statements are thus equivalent.

One notes that the differential horizon equation is also known under the

name ‘ﬁrst law of black hole mechanics’ (Wald 1993). The arguments so far

thus show that the ﬁrst law of black hole mechanics is a consequence of the

maximum force or power in nature. This connection does not seem to appear in

the literature so far. The more general term ‘horizon equation’ used here instead

of ‘ﬁrst law’ makes three points: ﬁrst, the relation is valid for any horizon

whatsoever; second, horizons are more fundamental and general entities than

black holes are; third, horizons are limit situations for physical surfaces.

The remaining part of the argument requires the derivation of the ﬁeld equa-

tions of general relativity from the general horizon equation. The derivation –

in fact, the equivalence – was implicitly provided by Jacobson (Jacobson 1995),

and the essential steps are given in the following. (Jacobson did not stress that

his derivation is valid also for continuous space-time and that his argument can

also be used in classical general relativity.) To see the connection between the

general horizon equation (7) and the ﬁeld equations, one only needs to gener-

alize the general horizon equation to general coordinate systems and to general

directions of energy-momentum ﬂow. This is achieved by introducing tensor

notation that is adapted to curved space-time.

To generalize the general horizon equation, one introduces the general sur-

face element dΣ and the local boost Killing vector ﬁeld k that generates the

horizon (with suitable norm). Jacobson uses the two quantities to rewrite the

left hand side of the general horizon equation (7) as

δE =

Z

a

b

Tabk

dΣ

,

(9)

where Tab is the energy-momentum tensor. This expression obviously gives

8

the energy at the horizon for arbitrary coordinate systems and arbitrary energy

ﬂow directions.

huri equation, as

Jacobson’s main result is that the the right hand side of the general horizon

equation (7) can be rewritten, making use of the (purely geometric) Raychaud-

a δA = c2

a

b

Rabk

dΣ

,

Z

(10)

where Rab is the Ricci tensor describing space-time curvature. This relation

thus describes how the local properties of the horizon depend on the local cur-

vature. One notes that the Raychaudhuri equation is a purely geometric equa-

tion for manifolds, comparable to the expression that links the curvature radius

of a curve to its second and ﬁrst derivative. In particular, the Raychaudhuri

equation does not contain any implications for the physics of space-times at

all.

Combining these two steps, the general horizon equation (7) becomes

Z

c4
8πG Z

a

b

Tabk

dΣ

=

a

b

Rabk

dΣ

.

(11)

Jacobson then shows that this equation, together with local conservation of

energy (i.e., vanishing divergence of the energy-momentum tensor), can only

be satisﬁed if

Tab =

Rab − (

+ Λ)gab

,

(12)

c4
8πG (cid:18)

R
2

(cid:19)

where R is the Ricci scalar and Λ is a constant of integration whose value is not

speciﬁed by the problem. These are the full ﬁeld equations of general relativity,

including the cosmological constant Λ. The ﬁeld equations thus follow from

the horizon equation. The ﬁeld equations are therefore shown to be valid at

horizons.

Since it is possible, by choosing a suitable coordinate transformation, to

position a horizon at any desired space-time event, the ﬁeld equations must

also be valid over the whole of space-time. This conclusion completes the

result by Jacobson. Since the ﬁeld equations follow, via the horizon equation,

from maximum force, one has thus shown that at every event in nature the

9

same maximum possible force holds; its value is an invariant and a constant of

nature.

The reasoning shown here consisted of four steps. First, it was shown that a

maximum force or power implies the existence of unattainable surfaces, which

were called horizons. Second, is was shown that a maximum force or power

implies that unattainable surfaces are always curved. Third, it was shown that

any curved horizon follows the horizon equation. Forth, it was shown (in the

way done by Jacobson) that the horizon equation implies general relativity.

In other words, the ﬁeld equations of general relativity are a direct conse-

quence of the limited energy ﬂow at horizons, which in turn is due to the exis-

tence of a maximum force (or power). In fact, the argument also works in the

opposite direction, since all intermediate steps are equivalences. This includes

Jacobson’s connection between the horizon equation and the ﬁeld equations

of general relativity. Maximum force (or power), the horizon equation, and

general relativity are thus equivalent. As a result, one ﬁnds the corollary that

general relativity implies a maximum force.

The maximum force (or power) has thus the same double role in general

relativity that the maximum speed has in special relativity. In special relativity,

the speed of light is the maximum speed; at the same time it is the proportional-

ity constant that connects space and time, as in dx = c dt. In general relativity,

the horizon force is the maximum force; at the same time the maximum force

appears (adorned with a factor 2π) in the ﬁeld equations as the proportionality

constant connecting energy and curvature. If one prefers, the maximum force

thus describes the elasticity of space-time and at the same time it describes – if

one dares to use the simple image of space-time as a medium – the maximum

tension to which space-time can be subjected. This double role of material con-

stants both as proportionality factor and as limit value is well-known in material

science.

The analogy between special and general relativity can be carried further.

In special relativity, maximum speed implies dx = c dt and the observation

that time changes with observer change. In general relativity, maximum force

10

(or power) imply the horizon equation δE = a δA c2/8πG and the observation

that space-time is curved. Curvature is a result of the maximum force or maxi-

mum power. Indeed, the derivation above showed that a ﬁnite maximum force

implies horizons that are curved; the curvature of horizons imply the curvature

of surrounding space–time.

One might ask whether rotating or charged black holes change the argument

that lead to the derivation of general relativity. However, the derivation using

the Raychaudhuri equation does not change. In fact, the only change of the ar-

gument appears with the inclusion of torsion, which changes the Raychaudhuri

equation itself. As long as torsion plays no role, the derivation given above

remains valid.

Another question is how the above proof relates to scalar–tensor theories

of gravity. If a particular scalar-tensor theory would obey the general horizon

equation (7) then it would also show a maximum force. The general horizon

equation must be obeyed both for static and for dynamic horizons. If that is the

case, the speciﬁc scalar–tensor theory would be equivalent to general relativity,

as it would allow, using the argument of Jacobson, to deduce the usual ﬁeld

equations. This case can appear if the scalar ﬁeld behaves like matter, i.e., if

it has mass-energy like matter and curves space-time like matter. On the other

hand, if in the particular scalar–tensor theory the general horizon equation (7)

is not obeyed for all moving horizons – which is the general case, as scalar–

tensor theories have more deﬁning constants than general relativity – then the

maximum force does not appear and the theory is not equivalent to general

relativity. This connection also shows that an experimental test of the horizon

equation for static horizons only is not sufﬁcient to conﬁrm general relativity;

such a test rules out only some, but not all scalar–tensor theories.

3 Apparent counter-arguments and paradoxes

Despite the preceding and others proofs (Gibbons 2002) for the equivalence of

maximum force and the equations of general relativity, the idea of a maximum

11

6000 m

 mountain

nuclei

surface A

surface B

      0 m

Figure 1: The mountain problem

force is not yet common. Indeed, maximum force, maximum power and max-

imum mass change directly induce counter-arguments and attempts to exceed

the limit.

The mountain attempt. It is possible to deﬁne a surface that is so strangely

bent that it passes just below every nucleus of every atom of a mountain, like

the surface A in Figure 1. All atoms of the mountain above sea level are then

just above the surface, barely touching it. In addition, one imagines that this

surface is moving upwards with almost the speed of light. It is not difﬁcult to

show that the mass ﬂow through this surface is higher than the mass ﬂow limit.
Indeed, the mass ﬂow limit c3/4G has a value of about 1035 kg/s; in a time of
10−22 s, the diameter of a nucleus divided by the speed of light, only 1013 kg

need to ﬂow through the surface; that is the mass of a mountain.

The mentioned surface seems to provide a counter-example to the limit.

However, a closer look shows that this is not the case. The issue is the expres-

sion “just below”. Nuclei are quantum particles and have an indeterminacy in

their position; this indeterminacy is essentially the nucleus–nucleus distance.

12

As a result, in order to be sure that the surface of interest has all atoms above it,

the shape cannot be that of surface A in Figure 1. It must be a ﬂat plane that re-

mains below the whole mountain, like surface B in the ﬁgure. However, a ﬂat

surface rising through a mountain does not allow to exceed the mass change

limit.

The multiple atom attempt. One can imagine a number of atoms equal to

the number of the atoms of a mountain, but arranged in a way that all lie with

large spacing (roughly) in a single plane. Again, the plane could move with

high speed. However, also in this case the uncertainty in the atomic positions

makes it impossible to say that the mass ﬂow limit has been exceeded.

The multiple black hole attempt. Black holes are typically large and their
uncertainty in position is thus negligible. The mass limit c3/4G or power limit
c5/4G correspond to the ﬂow of a single black hole moving through a plane at

the speed of light. Several black holes crossing a plane together at just under

the speed of light thus seem to beat the limit. However, the surface has to be

physical: an observer must be possible one each of its points. But no observer

can cross a black hole. A black hole thus effectively punctures the moving

plane surface; no black hole can ever be said to cross a plane surface, even less

so a multiplicity of black holes. The limit remains valid.

The multiple neutron star attempt. The mass limit seems in reach when

several neutron stars (which are slightly less dense than a black hole of the

same mass) cross a plane surface at the same time, at high speed. However,

when the speed approaches the speed of light, the crossing time for points far

from the neutron stars and for those that actually cross the stars differ by large

amounts. Neutron stars that are almost black holes cannot be crossed in a short

time in units of a coordinate clock that is located far from the stars. Again, the

limit is not exceeded.

The boost attempt. A boost can apparently be chosen in such a way that
a force value F in one frame is transformed into any desired value F ′ in the

other frame. However, this result is not physical. To be more concrete, one

imagines a massive observer, measuring the value F , at rest with respect to a

13

large mass, and a second, primed observer moving towards the large mass with
relativistic speed, measuring the value F ′. Both observers can be thought to

be as small as desired. If one transforms the force ﬁeld at rest F applying the
Lorentz transformations, the force F ′ for the moving observer can apparently

reach extremely high values, as long as the speed is high enough. However,

a force value must be measured by an observer at the speciﬁc point. One has

thus to check what happens when the rapid observer moves towards the region

where the force would exceed the force limit. The primed observer has a mass

m and a radius r. To be an observer, he must be larger than a black hole; in
other words, its radius must obey r > 2Gm/c2, implying that the observer has

a non-vanishing size. When the observer dives into the force ﬁeld surrounding

the sphere, there will be an energy ﬂow E towards the observer given by the

transformed ﬁeld value and the proper crossing area of the observer. This in-

teraction energy can be made as small as desired, by choosing an observer as

small as desired, but it is never zero. When the moving observer approaches the

large massive charge, the interaction energy increases continuously. Whatever

choice for the smallness of the observer is made is not important. Before the
primed observer arrives at the point were the force F ′ was supposed to be much

higher than the force limit, the interaction energy will reach the horizon limits

(7) or (8). Therefore, a horizon appears and the moving observer is prevented

from observing anything at all, in particular any value above the horizon force.

The same limitation appears when a charged observed tries to measure elec-

tromagnetic forces, or when nuclear forces are measured. In summary, boosts

do not help to beat the force limit.

The divergence argument. In apparent contrast to what was said so far, the

force on a test mass m at a radial distance d from a Schwarzschild black hole

(for Λ = 0) is given by (Ohanian & Rufﬁni 1994)

F =

GM m
1 − 2GM
dc2

.

d2

q

(13)

In addition, the inverse square law of universal gravitation states that the force

14

between to masses m and M is

F =

GM m
d2

.

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

Both expressions can take any value and suggest that no maximum force limit

A detailed investigation shows that the maximum force still holds. Indeed,

the force in the two situations diverges only for not physical point-like masses.

However, the maximum force implies a minimum approach distance to a mass

exist.

m given by

dmin =

2Gm
c2

.

The minimum approach distance – simplifying, this would be the correspond-

ing black hole radius – makes it impossible to achieve zero distance between

two masses or between a horizon and a mass. The ﬁniteness of this length

value expresses that a mass can never be point-like, and that a (real) minimum
approach distance of 2Gm/c2 appears in nature, proportional to the mass. If

this minimum approach distance is introduced in equations (13) and (14), one

gets

and

F =

c4
4G

M m
(M + m)2

1
1 − M

M +m

6

c4
4G

q

F =

c4
4G

M m
(M + m)2 6

c4
4G

.

The maximum force value is never exceeded. Taking into account the size of

observers prevents exceeding the maximum force.

The wall attempt. Force is momentum change. For example, momentum

changes when a basketball is reﬂected from a large wall. If many such balls

are reﬂected at the same time, it seems that a force on the wall larger than

the limit can be realized. However, this is impossible. Every wall has a tiny

surface gravity. For a large, but ﬁnite number of balls, the energy ﬂow limit

of the horizon equation (8) will be reached, thus implying the appearance of a

horizon. In that case, no reﬂection is possible any more, and again the force or

power limit cannot be exceeded.

15

The classical radiation attempt. It is also not possible to create a force

larger than the maximum force concentrating a large amount of light onto a

surface. However, the same situation as for basketballs arises: when the limit

value E/A given by the horizon equation (8) is reached, a horizon appears that

prevents breaking the limit.

The multiple lamp attempt. It might seem possible to create a power larger

than the maximum power by combining two radiation sources that each emit

3/4 of the maximum value. But also in this case, the horizon limit (8) is

achieved and thus a horizon appears that swallows the light and prevents that

the force or power limit is exceeded. (The limited lifetime of such lamps makes

these horizons time-dependent.)

The electrical charge attempt. One might try to get forces above the limit

by combining gravity and electromagnetism. However, in this case, the energy

in the horizon equation, like the ﬁrst law of black hole mechanics (Wald 1993),

only gets gets an additional term. The energy is then a sum of mass–energy

and electromagnetic energy. For example, in the simplest case, that of a static
and charged black hole, the energy δE = c2δm + V δq crossing the horizon

includes the product of the electrical potential V at the horizon and the amount

of charge q crossing the horizon. However, the maximum force and power

values remain unchanged. In other words, electromagnetism cannot be used to

exceed the force or power limit.

The consistency argument. If observers cannot be point-like, one might

question whether it is still correct to apply the original deﬁnition of momentum

change or energy change as the integral of values measured by observers at-

tached to a given surface. In general relativity, observers cannot be point-like,

as seen above. However, observers can be as small as desired. The original

deﬁnition thus remains applicable when taken as a limit procedure for an ob-

server size that decreases towards zero. Obviously, if quantum theory is taken

into account, this limit procedure comes to an end at the Planck length. This

is not an issue for general relativity, as long as the typical dimensions in the

situation are much larger than this value.

16

The quantum attempt.

If quantum effects are neglected, it is possible

to construct surfaces with sharp angles or even fractal shapes that overcome

the force limit. However, such surfaces are not physical, as they assume that

lengths smaller than the Planck length can be realized or measured. The con-

dition that a surface be physical implies among others that it has an intrinsic

uncertainty given by the Planck length. A detailed study shows that quantum

effects do not allow to exceed the horizon force. The basic reason is the men-

tioned equality of the maximum force with the quotient of the Planck energy

and the Planck length, both corrected by a factor of order one. Since both the

Plan energy and the Planck length are limits in nature, quantum effects do not

help at overcoming the force or power limit. (Schiller 1997-2004).

Similar results are found when any other Gedanken experiment is imag-

ined. Discussing them is an interesting way to explore general relativity. No

Gedanken experiment is successful; in all cases, horizons prevent that the max-

imum force is exceeded. Observing a value larger than the force or power limit

requires observation across a horizon. This is impossible.

Maximum force (or power) implies that point masses do not exist. This

connection is essential to general relativity. The habit of thinking with point

masses – a remainder of Galilean physics – is one of the two reasons that the

maximum force principle has remained hidden for more than 80 years. The

(incorrect) habit of believing that the proper size of a system can be made as

small as desired while keeping its mass constant avoids that the force or power

limit is noticed. Many paradoxes around maximum force or power are due to

this incorrect habit.

To see the use of a maximum force or power for the exploration of gravity,

one can use a simple image. Nature prevents large force values by the ap-

pearance of horizons. This statement can be translated in engineer’s language.

To produce a force or power requires an engine. Every engine produces ex-

hausts. When the engine approaches the power limit, the mass of the exhausts

is necessarily so large that their gravity cannot be neglected. The gravity of

the exhausts saturates the horizon equation and then prevents the engine from

17

reaching the force or power limit.

Force is change of momentum with time; power is change of energy with

time. Since both momentum and energy are conserved, all changes take place

through a boundary. The force and power limit state that these values are upper

limits independently of the boundary that is used. Even if the boundary surface

is taken to cross the whole universe, the observed momentum or energy change

through that surface is limited by the maximum values. This requires a check

with experiments.

4 Experimental data

No experiment, whether microscopic – such as particle collisions – macro-

scopic, or astronomical, has ever measured force values near or even larger

than the limit. Also the search for pace-time singularities, which would allow

to achieve the force limit, has not been successful. In fact, all force values ever

measured are many magnitudes smaller than the maximum value. This result

is due to the lack of horizons in the environment of all experiments performed

so far.

Similarly, no power measurement has ever provided any exception to the

power limit. Only the ﬂow of energy through a horizon should saturate the

power limit. Every star, gamma ray burster, supernova, galaxy, or galaxy clus-
ter observed up to now has a luminosity below c5/4G. Also the energy ﬂow

through the night sky horizon is below the limit. (More about this issue below.)

The brightness of evaporating black holes in their ﬁnal phase could approach

or equal the limit. So far, none has ever been observed. In the same way, no

counter-example to the mass change limit has ever been observed. Finding

any counter-example to the maximum force, luminosity or mass change would

have important consequences.

It would invalidate the present approach and

thus invalidate general relativity.

On the other hand, we have seen above that general relativity contains a

maximum force and power, so that every successful test of the ﬁeld equations

18

underlines the validity of this approach.

The absence of horizons in everyday life is the second reason why the max-

imum force principle has remained undiscovered for so long. Experiments in

everyday life do not point out the force or power limit to explorers. The ﬁrst

reason why the principle remained hidden, as shown above, is the incorrect

habit of believing in massive point particles. This is a theoretical reason. (Prej-

udices against the concept of force in general relativity have also played a role.)

The principle of maximum force – or of maximum power – has thus remained

unnoticed for a long time because nature hid it both from theorists and from

experimentalists.

In short, past experiments do not contradict the limit values and do not

require or suggest an alternative theory of gravitation. But neither does the data

directly conﬁrm the limits, as horizons are rare in everyday life or in accessible

experimental situations. The maximum speed at the basis of special relativity

is found almost everywhere; maximum force and maximum power are found

almost nowhere. For example, the absence of horizons in particle collisions is

the reason that the force limit is not of (direct) importance in this domain.

5 Cosmological data

A maximum power is the simplest possible explanation of Olbers’ paradox.

Power and luminosity are two names for the same observable. The sum of all

luminosities in the universe is ﬁnite; the light and all other energy emitted by all

stars, taken together, is ﬁnite. If one assumes that the universe is homogeneous
and isotropic, the power limit P ≤ c5/4G must be valid across any plane that

divides the universe into two halves. The part of the universes’s luminosity that

arrives on earth is then so small that the sky is dark at night. In fact, the actually

measured luminosity is still smaller than this estimate, since a large part of the

power is not visible to the human eye (since most of it is matter anyway). In

other words, the night is dark because of nature’s power limit. This explanation

is not in contrast to the usual one, which uses the ﬁnite lifetime of stars, their

19

ﬁnite density, their ﬁnite size, the ﬁnite age and the expansion of the universe.

In fact, the combination of all these usual arguments simply implies and repeats

in more complex words that the maximum power value cannot be exceeded.

However, this simple reduction of the traditional explanation seems unknown

in the literature.

A maximum force in nature, together with homogeneity and isotropy, im-

plies that the visible universe is of ﬁnite size. The opposite case would be an

inﬁnitely large universe. But in that case, any two halves of the universe would

attract each other with a force above the limit (provided the age of the universe

is sufﬁciently large). The result can be made quantitative by imagining a sphere

whose centre lies at the earth, which encompasses all the universe, and whose

radius decreases with time almost as rapidly as the speed of light. The mass
ﬂow dm/dt = ρAv is predicted to saturate the mass ﬂow limit c3/4G; thus

one has

dm
dt

= ρo4πR2

oc =

c3
4G

,

(18)

a relation also predicted by the Friedmann models. The WMAP measurements

conﬁrm that the present day total energy density ρo (including dark matter and

dark energy) and the horizon radius Ro just saturate the limit value. The maxi-

mum force limit thus predicts the observed size of the universe.

In summary, so far, neither experiment nor theory has allowed to exceed the

maximum force and power values. Nevertheless, the statement of a maximum
force given by c4/4G (and the corresponding maximum power) remains open

to experimental falsiﬁcation. Since the derivation of general relativity from the

maximum force or from the maximum power is now established, one can more

aptly call them horizon force and horizon power.

6 Predictions

A maximum force and power is equivalent to general relativity and thus im-

plies the inverse square law of gravitation for small speed and curvature values.

A maximum force is not equivalent to scalar-tensor theories or to modiﬁcations

20

of the universal law of gravitation.

The exploration of physical systems that are mathematical analogues of

black holes – for example, silent (or acoustical) black holes, or optical black

holes – should conﬁrm the force and power limits. Future experiments in these

domains might be able to conﬁrm the horizon equations (5) or (7) directly.

Another domain in which tests might be possible is the relation that fol-

lows from maximum force for the measurement errors ∆E and ∆x. (Schiller

1997-2004) For all physical systems one has

∆E
∆x

≤

c4
4G

.

(19)

So far, all measurements comply with the relation.

In fact, the left side is

usually so much smaller than the right side that the relation is not well-known.

To have a direct check, one must look for a system where a rough equality

is achieved. This might be the case in binary pulsar systems. Other systems

do not seem to allow checking the relation. In particular, there does not seem

to be a possibility to test this limit in satellite laser ranging experiments. For

example, for a position error of 1 mm, the mass error is predicted to be below
3 · 1023 kg, which so far is always the case.

There is a power limit for all energy sources and energies. In particular,
the luminosity of all gravitational sources is also limited by c5/4G. Indeed,

all formulas for gravitational wave emission contain this value as upper limit

(Ohanian & Rufﬁni 1994). Similarly, all numerical relativity simulations, such

as the power emitted during the merger of two black holes, should never exceed

the limit.

The night sky is a horizon. The power limit, when applied to the night sky,

makes the testable prediction that the ﬂow of all matter and radiation through
the night sky adds up exactly to the value c5/4G. If one adds the ﬂow of pho-

tons, baryons, neutrinos, electrons and the other leptons, including any particles

that might be still unknown, the power limit must be precisely saturated. If the

limit is exceeded or not saturated, general relativity is not correct. Increasing

the precision of this test is a challenge for future investigations.

21

It might be that one day the amount of matter and energy falling into some

black hole, such as the one at the centre of the Milky Way, might be measured.
If that is the case, the mass rate limit dm/dt ≤ c3/4G could be tested directly.

Perfectly plane waves do not exist in nature. Neither electrodynamic nor

gravitational waves can be inﬁnite in extension, as such waves would carry

more momentum per time through a plane surface than allowed by the force

limit. Taken the other way round, a wave whose integrated intensity approaches

the force limit cannot be plane. The power limit thus implies a limit on the

product of intensity I (given as energy per time and area) and curvature radius

R of the front of a wave moving with the speed of light c:

4πR2I ≤

c5
4G

.

(20)

This statement is difﬁcult to check experimentally, whatever the frequency and

type of wave might be, as the value appearing on the right hand side is ex-

tremely large. Possibly, future experiments with gravitational wave detectors,

X-ray detectors, gamma ray detectors, radio receivers or particle detectors will

allow testing relation (20) with precision. In particular, the non-existence of

plane gravitational waves also excludes the predicted production of singulari-

ties in case that two plane waves collide.

Since the maximum force and power limits apply to all horizons, it is

impossible to squeeze mass into smaller regions of space than those given by a

region completely limited by a horizon. As a result, a body cannot be denser

than a (uncharged, non-rotating) black hole of the same mass. Both the force

and power limits thus conﬁrm the Penrose inequality. The limits also provide a

strong point for the validity of cosmic censorship.

The power limit implies that the highest luminosity is only achieved when

systems emit energy at the speed of light. Indeed, the maximum emitted power

is only achieved when all matter is radiated away as rapidly as possible: the
emitted power P = M c2/(R/v) cannot reach the maximum value if the body

radius R is larger than a black hole (the densest bodies of a given mass) or

the emission speed v is lower than that of light. The sources with highest

luminosity must therefore be of maximum density and emit entities without rest

22

mass, such as gravitational waves, electromagnetic waves or (maybe) gluons.

Candidates to achieve the limit are bright astrophysical sources as well as black

holes in evaporation or undergoing mergers.

7 Outlook

In summary, the maximum force principle (or the equivalent maximum power

principle) was shown to allow a simple axiomatic formulation of general rela-
tivity: the horizon force c4/4G and the horizon power c5/4G are the highest

possible force and power values. General relativity follows from these limits.

All known experimental data is consistent with the limits. Moreover, the limits

imply the darkness at night and the ﬁniteness of the universe.

It is hoped that the maximum force principle will have applications for the

teaching of the ﬁeld. The principle might bring general relativity to the level

of ﬁrst year university students; only the concepts of maximum force, horizon

and curvature are necessary.

Apart from suggesting some experimental tests, the principle of maximum

force also provides a guide for the search of a uniﬁed theory of nature that

incorporates general relativity and quantum theory. Any uniﬁed theory of na-
ture must state that the value c4/4G is a maximum force. Within an uncertain

numerical factor, this is the case for string theory, where a maximum force ap-

pears, the so-called string tension. A maximum force is also predicted by loop

quantum gravity. Both string theory and loop quantum gravity thus do predict

gravity, as long as the predicted maximum force has the correct value.

References

36.

Gibbons, G.W., The maximum tension principle in general relativity, Founda-

tions of Physics 32, 1891-1901 (2002).

D’Inverno, R., Introducing Einstein’s Relativity, (Clarendon Press, 1992) page

23

Jacobson, T., Thermodynamics of spacetime:

the Einstein equation of state,

Physical Review Letters 75, 1260-1263 (1995).

Ohanian, H.C. & Rufﬁni, R., Gravitation and Spacetime (W.W. Norton & Co.,

1994).

Press, 2001), page 70.

Rindler, W., Relativity, Special, General and Cosmological (Oxford University

Schiller, C., Motion Mountain – A Hike Beyond Space and Time Along the Con-

cepts of Modern Physics (http://www.motionmountain.net, 1997-2004), section

7: Maximum force – a simple principle encompassing general relativity.

Schiller, C., Motion Mountain – A Hike Beyond Space and Time Along the Con-

cepts of Modern Physics (http://www.motionmountain.net, 1997-2004), section

36: Maximum force and minimum distance – physics in limit statements.

Wald, R.M., The ﬁrst law of black hole mechanics, in B.L. Hu, M.P. Ryan, C.V.

Vishveshwara, Directions in General Relativity, Proceedings of the 1993 In-

ternational Symposium, Maryland: Papers in Honor of Charles Misner, (Cam-

bridge University Press, 1993).

24

