6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

INTERFACING FRIEDMAN AND STRING COSMOLOGIES

J. TOWE

Abstract. Compactiﬁcation and symmetry breaking events in theories of het-
erotic superstrings implicitly indicate ﬁve inﬂation events. Scales of 109 ly and
larger are modeled in terms of these events. The proposed model accounts qual-
itatively for recent observations (of galactic clusters that lie on ”thin,.. semi-
spherical shells”) and motivates a calculation that accounts (approximately)
for the observed number of galaxies.

1. Five Inflation Events

Traditionally it was believed that the distribution of mass-energy was homoge-
neous and isotropic on scales of 108 light years and larger [J. A. Wheeler, 1974]. In
recent years however, the homogeneity of the large-scale distribution has been chal-
lenged. After surveying more than 5000 galaxies, J. P. Huchra and M. Geller con-
cluded that ”galactic clusters lie on thin, sharply deﬁned semi-spherical shells that
surround vast, empty voids.” They compared these phenomena with the ”bubble-
like structures that constitute the foam in a kitchen sink” [J.P. Huchra, 1986]. Thus,
while the distribution of mass-energy is isotropic (established by observations in-
dicating that the background radiation is isotropic), it is not homogeneous. These
observational results have challenged traditional theories, but it is argued here that
they can be understood in terms of a supersymmetric gauge theory that indicates
multiple symmetry breaking events: i.e. multiple inﬂation events.

In the theory of superstrings, one avoids anomalies and contradictions if the
dimension of spacetime is 10. Moreover, one rids the ground state of tachyons
and introduces spacetime supersymmetry through GSO projections. Periodic GSO
projections involve Ramon boundary conditions, which produce a Type IIA the-
ory, containing spin-1 ﬁelds and fermions. Anti-periodic GSO projections involve
Nevu-Schwarz boundary conditions, which produce a Type IIB theory, containing
scaler ﬁelds and fermions. Neither theory is physical. The ﬁrst is not chiral and
the second contains no gauge ﬁelds. One can solve this problem however, by com-
bining the two theories into a mixed or ’heterotic’ theory. One approach to this
involves compactiﬁcation of 16 dimensions from the 26 dimensional bosonic theory,
which imposes a symmetry E8XE8 onto the 10-spacetime that corresponds to the
heterotic theory.

One E8 symmetry characterizes the observable sector while the other character-
izes the hidden sector (where coupling with gauge fermions in the observable sector
is strictly in terms of supergravity). When 10-spacetime is compactiﬁed to produce
M4XK6, each E8 is broken to yield SU(5)XSU(3). Guth inﬂation [A. Guth, 1981]
is a theoretical device that maintains large scale ﬂatness by compensating (by rapid
expansion) for the fattening of the vacuum that is due to a Higgs event (an event in
which Higgs scalers are swallowed by other particles, imparting mass to the latter
and therefore breaking the initial symmetry). Clearly however, a Guth inﬂation
event is also called for by a compactiﬁcation that increases mass-energy density;
1

2

J. TOWE

i.e.
fattens the vacuum by reducing the number of spacetime dimensions. Thus
one Guth event is generated by compactiﬁcation itself. A second Guth event is
generated by the breaking of E8 to yield SU(5)XSU(3). A third inﬂation event is
generated by the breaking of the other E8 symmetry to yield a second version of
SU(5)XSU(3). And ﬁnally fourth and ﬁfth inﬂation events are generated by the
breaking of the two SU(5) symmetries. In the proposed theory then, a single Guth
event is replaced by ﬁve such events.

The proposed additional inﬂation events complement the original shock wave
that is attributed to the big bang with secondary, tertiary etc.
shock waves as
prescribed by Huygens’ principle. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst inﬂation event is regarded
as spherically symmetric. The second inﬂation event is associated with secondary
shock waves that emanate from the points of the initial, spherically symmetric wave
front. Similarly the third inﬂation event is associated with tertiary shock wavelets,
emanating from the points of the secondary wave fronts etc. Because these are
inﬂation events, scales on the secondary, tertiary etc. wavelets are much larger
than the scales on the wave fronts from which they emanate. In this context, it
is argued that the ﬁve inﬂation events that are produced by the breaking of ﬁve
postulated symmetries account for the large scale that is depicted by Figure 1. A
hypothesis relating numbers of galaxies to inﬂation events will now be considered.

2. A Theoretical Number of Galaxies

It is postulated that the original inﬂation event, that interpreted as the big bang,
formed a pre-galaxy; that the second inﬂation event; i.e. the ﬁrst Huygens event
(that associated with the fattening of the vacuum which corresponds to compactiﬁ-
cation of 16 of 26 dimensions onto a torus) produced a cluster of pre-galaxies; that
the third inﬂation event; i.e. the second Huygens event (that associated with com-
pactiﬁcation from 10 spacetime dimensions to M4XK6) generated a supercluster
of pre-galaxies; that the fourth inﬂation event; i.e. the third Huygens event (that
associated with the breaking of one SU(5) symmetry from E8 →SU(5)XSU(3))
generated a cluster of superclusters; and ﬁnally, that the ﬁfth inﬂation event; i.e.
the fourth Huygens event (that associated with the breaking of another SU(5)
(the SU(5) generating from E8 →SU(5)XSU(3) in the hidden sector) generated a
supercluster of superclusters. In the context of this hypothesis and of boundary
conditions that are determined from observations of local clusters, one can calculate
the number of galaxies that populates the universe as modeled.

Based upon observations of local clusters, one adopts the following boundary
conditions: 1. A typical galaxy means that this galaxy is contained in a typical
basic cluster; i.e. a basic cluster containing an average number of galaxies. To
ascertain the nature of a typical basic cluster in the local group of thirty ﬁve or so
galaxies, it is observed that the large and small Magellanic clouds form a pair of
satellites about the Milky Way, and that the Andromeda Nebula is at the center
of a basic cluster that includes satellite galaxies M-32, NGC-205, M-33, NGC-47
and NGC-185. Based upon this and several similar observations, it is concluded
that the average number of galaxies constituting a basic cluster in the local group
is ﬁve; 2. Separations of galaxies are about ten times the diameters of the galaxies;
separations of galactic clusters are about ten times the diameters of the clusters;
separations of superclusters are about ten times the diameters of the superclusters
etc.

STRING COSMOLOGIES

3

The iterative counting process, which is based upon the above stated hypothesis
and boundary conditions, is as follows: It is determined (from observation) that
the typical galaxy is about ct0=105 light years (ly) in diameter. The diameter ctN
of the global state that has resulted from the N th inﬂation event is, by provision
number 2, designated:

(2.1)

ctN = ct010

: N = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...,

N

where the N=0 state corresponds to a single, typical galaxy.

Because ﬁve galaxies populate the typical basic cluster and because, up to a
scale of 108 ly, the number of galaxies can be enlisted as units in terms of which
to express volume (up to this scale, galaxies appear to ﬁll a volume rather than
to populate the surfaces of semi-spherical shells), one can establish the following
equation to describe the N=1 cluster of galaxies:

which implies that

(2.2)

(2.3)

(4/3)πR3

1 = 5,

R1 = 1.06.

From 2.1 the radius of this galactic cluster in light years is about

(2.4)

ct1 = ct010 = 105(10)ly = 106ly.
One now determines the approximate radius (as a number of galaxies) of the
N=2 state. Given the counting device that is italicized above, it is argued that the
radius of the N=2 state (the separation of the N=1 cluster and a second cluster
is ten times the diameter of the local cluster), in terms of a number of galaxies, is
given by

(2.5)

10(diameter(localcluster)) = 10(2(1.06))

∼
= 21.

The radius in light years of a typical N=2 state is (consulting equation 2.1)

(2.6)

ct2 = ct0102 = 105(102)ly = 107ly.
Proceeding in this way, one determines the radius (as an approximate number of
galaxies) of the N=3 state. By analogy with the above calculations, the radius of
the N=3 state, in terms of a number of galaxies, is given as a multiple of a typical
separation of N=2 systems:

(2.7)

10(diameter(N = 3state)) = 10(2(21)) = 420

The radius of the N=3 state in light years is (according to 2.1)

(2.8)

ct3 = ct0103ly = 105103ly = 108ly.
One now determines the radius (as an approximate number of galaxies) of the
N=4 state. The radius of this state, in terms of a number of galaxies, is given by

(2.9)

10(diameter(N = 4state)) = 10(2(420)) = 8400.

(2.10)

The radius in light years of the N=4 state is, according to equation 2.1, given by
ct4 = ct0(104) = (105)(104)ly = 109ly.
Finally, one determines the radius (as an approximate number of galaxies) of the
N=5 state. The radius of this state, in terms of a number of galaxies, is given by

(2.11)

10(diameter(N = 5state)) = 10(2(8400)) = 168000.

4

J. TOWE

Thus, since galactic clusters populate the surfaces of semi-spheres on scales larger
then 108 ly, the number of galaxies in the N=5 state is (summing areas of opposite
semi-spherical shells) given by

(2.12)

4π(R4)2 = 4(3.14)(168000)2 = 3.54X1011.

The radius in light years of the N=5 state is, according to equation 2.1,

(2.13)

ct5 = ct0(105)ly = 1010ly.
In summary, the proposed large scale hypothesis is based upon compactiﬁcation
and symmetry breaking events that are associated with string theory. It is argued
that ﬁve inﬂation events result from these, and that the resulting inﬂations account
qualitatively for the radial inhomogeneity of the large scale structure as recently
observed. Based upon this structure moreover, and upon locally determined bound-
ary conditions, an iterative calculation predicts the approximate number of galaxies
that is indicated by observation.

References

[1] gM68)C. Misner, K. Thorne and J.A. Wheeler, 1974, Gravitation, San Fransisco, W.H. Free-

man and Co.

[2] gM68)J.P. Huchra and M. Geller, 1986, ’The Dynamics and Evolution of Clusters of Galaxies’,

Semi-annual report: Harvard-Smithsonian Observatory, 1 July–31 December.

[3] gM68)A. Guth, 1981, Phys. Rev., D, 23, 198.

Department of Physics, The Antelope Valley College, Lancaster, CA 93536
E-mail address: jtowe@avc.edu

