6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Origin of the pearl neklae of SN1987A

Jaques Moret-Bailly

23rd November 2013

e-mail: jaques.moret-baillyu-bourgogne.fr

Abstrat

The bright irles observed around stars are usually onsidered as produed by shok waves;

but this interpretation does not explain easily the bright spots of the (cid:16)pearl neklae (cid:17)of NS 1987A

supernova.

Assuming that the entral ob jet of SN 1987A is a neutron star heated by the aretion of a

low density loud, non-linear optis, in partiular superradiane and impulsive stimulated Raman

sattering (ISRS), is needed to take into aount the high intensity of the radiated light.

Where the temperature of the surrounding gas dereases enough to allow a ombination of protons

and eletrons into atomi hydrogen in despite of the low density, a spherial shell absorbs in partiular

the Lyman alpha line, but does not populate muh the 2P state beause a tangential superradiane

appears until the exiting line is almost absorbed; the inrease of the 2P population resulting from

the disappearane of the superradiane produes a redshift, so that almost all energy of a wide band

is transferred to tangential modes making an UV pearl neklae in a given diretion of observation.

In a olumn of UV light making a pearl, atomi lines are exited enough to produe new, o-linear

superradianes, in partiular visible.

1 Introdution

Supernova SN1987A shows a (cid:17)pearl neklae(cid:17) and infrared emissions whose interpretation appears dif-

(cid:28)ult (Bouhet et al. 2006, Lawrene et al. 2000, Thornhill & Ransom 2006). A soure or these

partiularities may be simply spetrosopy.

Assuming that the entral ob jet of SN 1987A is a neutron star heated by the aretion of a low

density hydrogen loud, the density of emitted energy is high, so that the transfers of energy are non-

linear, strong. Suh e(cid:27)ets are usually observed with lasers.

Setion 2, realls some of these e(cid:27)ets, speifying the language and the notations.

In setion 3 the generation of the pearl neklae appears as a trivial appliation of these e(cid:27)ets.

2 Some high energy optial e(cid:27)ets.

2.1 Superradiant emissions.

Plank used the notion of eletromagneti modes introdued in the nineteenth entury to study musi

instruments. For this appliation, the used modes were restrited to stationary systems, while the

mathematial de(cid:28)nition is wider: A mode is a ray in the real vetor spae of the solutions of a linear set

of equations (that is, all solutions in a mode depend only on a single real parameter named amplitude

of the solution). Happily, the de(cid:28)nition of the modes does not imply stationary and monohromati

onditions, beause suh onditions would require an in(cid:28)nite duration of the experiments.

The eletromagneti (cid:28)elds in the vauum obey the linear Maxwell's equations up to very high fre-

quenies. Shwarzshild and Fokker trik allows introduing soures replaed by their advaned (cid:28)elds.

Plank mistook omputing the additive term in his equation whih gives the energy of an eletromag-

neti mode inside a blakbody at temperature T , de(cid:28)ning also the temperature of a mode. Nernst (1916)
found the right value hν/2, so that the orret mean energy in a monohromati mode of frequene ν
writes hν(1/(exp(hν/kT ) − 1) + 1/2).

Einstein (1917) introdued the stimulated emission, but justifying the spontaneous emission, he did

not remark that the eletromagneti (cid:28)eld has a minimal mean value orresponding to hν/2 in a blakbody

1

at 0K; laser experiments show that the spontaneous emission is a stimulated emission orresponding to

the ampli(cid:28)ation of this minimal value.

Suppose that only two moleular levels of energies e1 and e2 (e2 > e1 ) are implied in a transition of
energy ν = (e2 − e1)/h. The moleular temperature T12 relative to this transition is dedued from the
moleular populations n1 and n2 in these levels by n1/n2 = exp(hν/kT12).

Suppose that a long ell is (cid:28)lled with this gas; a low temperature light beam entering into the

ell inreases the entropy of the system, being ampli(cid:28)ed, heated to reah temperature T12 . At the

beginning, the ampli(cid:28)ation may be said a spontaneous emission, then it is indued, the energy of the

beam inreasing proportionally to this energy, that is exponentially. But the available moleular energy

is limited, so that the temperature T12 is dereased, usually strongly. Thus, spontaneous emissions in

other diretions are strongly dereased. This derease resulting from a large exitation seems a paradox.

If a long path in a strongly exited medium is real, it is a superradiant emission; if it is virtual, using

mirrors, it is a laser emission.

2.2 The (cid:16)Impulsive Stimulated Raman Sattering (ISRS).(cid:17)

It is usually assumed that there is no interation between light beams refrated by a transparent medium.

Experiments and a regular theory (Giordmaine et al. (1968), Yan et al. (1985), Weiner et al. (1990),

Dougherty et al. (1992), Dhar et al. (1994), ...) show that this assumption is wrong if light and matter

verify onditions set by Lamb (1971). The interation whih inreases the entropy of a set of refrated

usual time-inoherent beams by frequeny shifts, without blurring the images and the spetra, works

well in atomi hydrogen in its (cid:28)rst exited state. Plank's law and thermodynamis show that, usually,

light is redshifted, and the energy it looses is transferred to the thermal bakground. There is no energy

threshold of the energy of the beams, the ISRS beoming the Coherent Raman E(cid:27)et on Inoherent

Light (CREIL) at low intensities (Moret-Bailly 2005-6).

3 Generation of the pearl neklae.

3.1 Absorption of light emitted by the neutron star.

Areting hydrogen, the neutron star beomes extremely hot, at least at hot spots; thus it emits light

Close to the star, an atom is ionized; hydrogen and light element impurities lose all their eletrons,

produing a transparent plasma. Some heavier atoms may absorb light, but they re-emit energy in the

Assuming a low density, a ombination of protons and eletrons requires a low temperature, say 20

000 K. Hydrogen is mainly produed in its ground state, but it absorbs Lyman lines, so that a lot of its

mainly in the far ultraviolet.

UV, so that few energy is lost.

states may be populated.

Hydrogen absorbs frequenies lower than Lyman limit only on the its spetral lines. In next sub-

setion, we will see that a superradiant emission dereases the population of the exited states, so that

few 2P hydrogen remains, able to shift the spetrum, until, paradoxially, the Lyman α line is almost

absorbed: When this happens, the superradiane dereases, so that more 2P hydrogen remains and shifts

the light, the energy at the 2P frequeny and at the frequenies of other absorption lines is renewed.

Finally, the absorption at a Lyman line, whih is strong, nearly omplete, sweeps a wide band.

The (cid:28)nal result is an extremely strong absorption not only at the frequenies of the lines (eventually

not Lyman), but on wide bands orresponding to a redshift whih lasts as long as energy is shifted to the

Lyman α frequeny. The energy lost by the redshifts, blueshifts the thermal bakground, that is heats

it, simulating hot dust.

3.2 Generation of an UV neklae.

Previous subsetion showed that the gas is strongly exited in a spherial shell entred on the neutron

star, by a wide band absorption. Superradiant emissions may appear in diretions for whih the gas is

thik, that is tangentially to the spheres. This system is very similar to a laser pumped transversally by a

light-emitting diode of the same frequeny. Although the gas is exited to eigenstates, the light emitted

by the shell of exited gas makes a ontinuous spetrum beause the olumn density of 2S hydrogen

rossed from the emission point to outside is variable, produing variable redshifts. The frequeny shift

of the emitted lines prevents an absorption at the exiting (Lyman α ...) frequeny.

2

Consider two thin, lose spherial shells emitting lines whose loal di(cid:27)erene of frequenies is of the

order of the linewidth; eah line indues the emission of the other, so that their modes are bound; this

binding extends to the whole superradiant band whose modes are, onsequently, onneted.

The strong absorptions and re-emissions in the shell of exited atomi hydrogen generate for eah

diretion a bright ring in the UV. In this ring, the ompetition of the polyhromati modes selets a

partiular set of modes, produing, in the UV, bright spots. A nearly omplete transfer of energy from

the radial beams to the rings obeys thermodynamis beause the solid angle on whih a ring is seen is

muh larger than the solid angle on whih the entral engine ould be seen.

3.3 Generation of a visible neklae.

Around the shell of far UV absorbing hydrogen, the olumns of UV light emitted to the Earth exite

hydrogen and various atoms strongly, so that, in the diretion of the Earth, the emissions of these atoms

are superradiant and o-linear to the olumns: the visible pearl neklae is generated.

4 Conlusion

The present paper neglets a large part of the omplexity of the problen: the neklae is not a irle;

an the other irles be generated by a similar proess around two other stars ? If yes, why did they

illuminate when the neklae appeared ?

However, although partial, the present theory gives results using few hypothesis and regular physis.

The explanation of the pearl neklae of SN1987A is rough, but it requires very few astrophysial hypoth-

esis, its originality being the use of optial and spetrosopi properties more generally developed and well

veri(cid:28)ed in laser tehnology. The visible neklae should ome with a remaining UV spetrum in whih

absorptions orresponding to the lines observed in the visible may appear. Among other veri(cid:28)ations, it

ould be a positive test of the present theory.

5 Bibliography.

Bouhet, P., E. Dwek, I. J. Danziger, R. G. Arendt, I. J. M. De Buizer, S. Park, N. B. Suntze(cid:27), R. P.

Kirshner, P. Challis, 2006, arxiv:astro-ph/0601495

Dhar, L. , J. A. Rogers, & K. A. Nelson, 1994 Chem. Rev. 94, 157

Dougherty, T. P., G. P. Wiederreht, K. A. Nelson, M. H. Garrett, H. P. Jenssen & C. Warde,1992,

Siene 258,, 770

Einstein A., 1917, Phys. Z., 18 121

Giordmaine, J. A. , M. A. Duguay & J. W.Hansen, 1968, IEEE J. Quantum Eletron., 4,252

Lawrene S. S.,B. E. Sugerman, P. Bouhet, A. P. S. Crotts, R. Uglesih & S. Heathote, 2000,

arxiv:astro-ph/0004191

Moret-Bailly, J., 2005, arxiv: physis/0507141

Moret-Bailly, J., 2006, AIP Conferene Proeedings, 822, 226-238

Nernst W. , Verh. Deutsh. Phys. Ges, 18, 83 (1916)

Thornhill,W. W., & C. J. Ransom 2006 2006 IEEE International Conferene on Plasma Siene, 369

Weiner, A. M. , D. E. Leaird., G. P. Wiederreht, & K. A. Nelson, 1990, Siene 247, 1317

Yan, Y.-X. , E. B. Gamble Jr. & K. A. Nelson , 1985, J. Chem Phys., 83, 5391

3

