String Scale Cosmological Constant

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon as number@yahoo.com

Abstract

The cosmological constant is an unexplained until now phenomena of nature that
requires an explanation through string eﬀects. The apparent discrepancy between
theory and experiment is enourmous and has already been explained several times by
the author including mechanisms. In this work the string theory theory of abolished
string modes is documented and given perturbatively to all loop orders. The holo-
graphic underpinning is also exposed. The matching with the data of the LIGO and
D0 experiments is also explained to the ﬁrst three or more moments in the cosmolog-
ical expansion.

6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

There are three explanations of the cosmological data incorporating the energy
density, the cold dark matter, galactic curve data and galactic halo eﬀect. The in-
formation is encoded in the expansion moment by moment in the expansion of the
cosmological constant density functional. In three prior works a sugra, ﬁeld theory,
and string theory explanation have been given [1],[2]. These three contexts are ﬁnally
uniﬁed in the setting of N = 2 sugra and its broken forms in the context of string
bits which are in fact holographied string fragments. These string bits have never
been fully analyzed in the literature except in the context of holographic forms and
apply in [1].

The expansion of the exact constant goes like

V (Λ, M) =

Λ4(Λ/M 2)n

X

with the ﬁrst term the discrepancy between the experiment and theory. It is com-
monly assumed that the ﬁrst two terms dont match and as told in [1]

is the measured cosmological energy density to a large factor consisting up to nine
digits. This assumes supersymmetry breaking of 3 TeV. The second term namely

(3)

Λ6
M 2 ,
also does not match with the current experimental data being oﬀ by an order of 50
digits and indeed is expected to conform to data. It is explained that not only is
this term the leading correction to the cosmological data from theory. Both the ﬁrst
Λ4 and Λ6 will be explained in addition to the entire series. The ﬁrst two terms
are absent. The ﬁrst term absence can be explained by a holographic dimensional
analysis and the second term by a holographic correspondence with the dimensional
parameter called the ﬁne structure of matter controlled vacuum. The third moment
and its higher order terms generate the cosmological expansion with cold dark matter.
The holography is further explained.

The cosmological constant measures the energy expansion of the universe at vari-
ous stages including the before mentioned eﬀects. It is diﬃcult to resolve in the prior
ages due to the absence of a controled expansion. One is given here. Consider string

Λ8
M 4 ,

2

(1)

(2)

bits which are fragments of a string broken into successive halves and quarters never
ending. In actual fact there is an experimentally determined minimum length. They
wiggle about and actually teleport from one location to the next. They also match
holographically transpose with higher dimensional modes. Take the Λ6/M 2 term and
sum there masses through the formula

Λ4m2/M 2 =

Λ4m2/M 2e−M/Λ

αn = Λ4m2Λ4/M 4α−1

4

(4)

∞

Xn=0

and agrees with Λ6/M 2 when α = Λ2/M 2 which is called the ambient energy denstiy
of spacetime without the string bits. Furthermore there are an inﬁnite number of
power order corrections.

The real constant can now be obtained from the following set m0

α equal to a pref-
actor which agrees with the hubble experiment with Λ the supersymmetry breaking
scale of an approximate 2 TeV. The string scale is m0 and that leads to the ratio
of about nine digits. The next term is Λ suppressed and generates part of the dark
matter which is cold for the simple reason that they are string bits.

Consider N = 2 there is a D-term ﬂatness condition that brings about a term
which is Λ6/M 2 and indeed after summing the entire series of the string bits of the
gravitational multiplet generate the observed value of the cosmological constant. This
is with the ﬁne structure constant of matter controled vacuum. The loop eﬀects have
a vertices containing four derivatives with the exception of several modes. The string
coupling of a massive mode to a massless mode such as the dilatino has four derivatives
and

1
M 2 Z

kαkβkµkν
(k2 − m2)

,

(5)

has four derivatives in one gauge and two in the other. The gauge ﬁxing is determined
to manifest the coupling dependence and the mass is m0enΛ4/M 4α. The net result of
the integral modewise for the entire series of the string bits is controled by α′ by the
expansion previously given with the Λ4 term missing. As explained in previous work
[1] the rest of the higher loop terms are suppressed by successive orders Λ2/M 2. The
regulator is important to determine the supersymmetry broken value of the prefactors.

The graviton propagator in de Donder gauge has only two derivatives and that of
the fermionic gravitino has only one and they cancel in softly broken supergravity. In
our case we have a graviton which is massive by only a tidbit and whose mass is given

3

by a bound state of the massless mode in the langrangian together with the hopping
of the string tidbit from one mode to the other. . This results in the bound state of
the graviton between one particle and another with the string tidbit generating the
mass in the range of 2 TeV. This is observed in the bifurcation of the galactic halo of
mercury around the sun in the precession due to the bending of light. Also it occurs
as observed in the holographic lensing of light around various supernovae including
mercury b and supernova a. The mass shouldnt be shocking because the matter of
gravity hasnt been measured in the MeV range. There are claims to the mass of
gravity being zero but this isnt clear as there data precludes the precession of motion
of mercury around the sun in orbital fashion and the two degrees of arc motion that
general r predicts is wrong. There are another four hundred arcseconds unaccounted
for by the holographic lensing of matter against light. This matter is unaccounted for
but could be made manifest possibly with a four derivative term which at low energy
really obfuscates the mass. The mass can be determined from that. It is actually
holographic and this is made clear later.

The entire series

g =

Λ4(Λ/M 2)n ,

X

(6)

sums up to the perturbative contribution. The holographic contribution is written as
a double sum with wedges

V (Λ, M, α) = f (Λ, M, α) ∧ g(Λ, M, α) ∧ h(Λ, M, α) ,

(7)

which represents multiplication coadjoint like from term to term such as the middle
representing the perturbative the outer left the holographic and the inner right the
twist between the two. It is expected the outer right to be a sixth of the inner left
due to the conformal group. In other words holography to quantize the form of f to
be f 1/nα. The isometry group of SO(6) of the ﬁve sphere is expected to play a role
as in the holographic duality in N = 4 and generates a quantization condition in the
realistic proposed holography1. The outer left is expected to be quantized also. The
two numbers f 1/nα and g1/mα could be related to the group of SO(6) with n = 10 and
the group D6 with twelve generators which twists the action with an endomorphism
on the spacetime. The latter is prefered for the holographic conjecture and is related
to the global structure of spacetime.
1In media res work not printable yet.

4

The cosmological constant has been explained in view of string bits and the holo-
graphic contribution clariﬁed. The holographic extension will be exposed in future
work on gravity and string theory once ﬁnished. It is expected to be very accurate
to the point of testability in the current experiment of LIGO. Three to six moments
are expected to be measurable.

The spectrum of string bits at ﬁnite temperature is expected to follow from the

generating function

p(n)e−kbT E(n) ,

(8)

with p(n) the mode number. Each particle and string indeed which also ﬁt the
expansion gives breaks into a tower of bits. There is a possible exception with the
tachyon which is not discussed. The probability distribution can be further used at
ﬁnite temperature to mildly put a restriction on the entire series of f , g, and maybe
h.

To conclude the data of D0 as described in [3] can be used to further ﬁnd the
gravitational lensing of the gravitino which is claimed to be there and its interaction
with matter. The time spacing between the zbgs could show how the cosmological
constant appears in their experiment. Two or three measurements of the moments
are expected.

5

References

[1] G. Chalmers, “Cosmological constant in broken maximal sugras,” Class. Quant.

Grav. 19, L193 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0103225].

[2] G. Chalmers, “Realistic cosmological constant,” arXiv:physics/0510269.

[3] G. Chalmers,

“Supersymmetry

and B/s,

D0,

and Aleph

i,”

arXiv:physics/0605114.

6

