6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Local microwave background radiation

Domingos S.L. Soares
Departamento de F´ısica, ICEx, UFMG — C.P. 702
30161-970, Belo Horizonte — Brazil

February 21, 2014

‘Big-Bang cosmology, the uncertain chain that links speculation to
speculation in order to prove speculation.’
Let it Bang, Chronicles of Modern Cosmology
– D.S.L. Soares, unpublished

‘A hard rain’s gonna fall means something’s gonna happen.’
No Direction Home: the soundtrack
– B. Dylan, 2005

Abstract

An inquiry on a possible local origin for the Microwave Background
Radiation is made. Thermal MBR photons are contained in a system
called magnetic bottle which is due to Earth magnetic ﬁeld and solar
wind particles, mostly electrons. Observational tests are anticipated.

1 Introduction

Cosmology is still a heavy-speculated ﬁeld in spite of the enormous eﬀorts on
presumable cosmology-sensitive observations. In such an environment, scien-
tists are not expected to make incisive statements unless they are supported

1

by deﬁnitely secure evidence, both on the theoretical and experimental or
observational sides. The cosmological standard model does not fulﬁll the
requirements of scientiﬁc method, therefore, cannot be considered as a likely
model for the actual universe:
it relies heavily on a number of unknowns,
namely, inﬂaton ﬁeld, baryonic dark matter, non baryonic dark matter, dark
energy, etc (see ﬁgures for dark components in Soares 2002). The concept
of a “cosmic” microwave background radiation (MBR) is introduced in the
model in a ad hoc fashion. In spite of that, it is even taken as a proof of the
model. But MBR may not be cosmic at all in the ﬁrst place. Therefore there
is a real necessity of investigating other causes or sources for it. The present
paper considers a local origin for the radiation.

It is worthwhile mentioning two authoritative opinions on the signiﬁcance
of the microwave background radiation in cosmology. Fred Hoyle (2001)
states that

“There is no explanation at all of the microwave background in
the Big Bang theory. All you can say for the theory is that it
permits you to put it in if you want to put it in. So, you look
and it is there, so you put it in directly. It isn’t an explanation.”

And Jean-Claude Pecker (2001) reaﬃrms:

“Actually, the 3 degree radiation, to me, has not a cosmological
value. It is observed in any cosmology: in any cosmology you can
predict the 3 degree radiation. So it is a proof of no cosmology
at all, if it can be predict of all cosmology.”

In this sense, also, it may prove in the future that the word “cosmic” in
the 1978 Nobel prize citation for A. Penzias and R. Wilson was tendentiously
premature: “for their discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation”.
The plan of the present paper is as follows. In section 2, the magnetic
bottle scenario for a local MBR is presented and features of a related physical
model are summarized. Section 3 discusses observational tests of a local
MBR. In section 4, ﬁnal remarks are presented.

2

2 The Microwave Background Radiation and

the magnetic bottle scenario

Halton Arp in one of his books (Arp 1998, p. 237) cites an authentic Fred
Hoyle’s aphorism:

“A man who falls asleep on the top of a mountain and who awakes
in a fog does not think he is looking at the origin of the Universe.
He thinks he is in a fog.”

Let us then consider a local approach to the Microwave Background Radi-
ation (MBR). Being freed from the “conceptual prison” of the Hot Big Bang
Cosmology one may speculate on an earthly origin for the MBR. Earth’s
magnetosphere can be seen as a agnetic bottle whose walls are made by solar
wind particles trapped along the magnetic lines of the Earth ﬁeld. A minute
fraction of Sun’s light reﬂected by the Earth surface is caught within such a
bottle and is thermalized through Thomson scattering on the bottle walls.
The ﬁrst consequence is that one would expect that the thermalized radia-
tion should exhibit a dipole anisotropy, given the nature of Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld. And that is precisely what was observed by the COBE satellite from
its 900-km altitude orbit.

Although WMAP, the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, sits far
away from Earth, at the Lagrangean L2 point of the Sun-Earth system (see
WMAP electronic page at the URL
http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov/m mm/ob techorbit1.html, which means ab-
out 1.5 million km from Earth, that is not enough for it to be released from
the magnetic inﬂuence from Earth.

It is located precisely and deep inside the bullet-shaped magnetopause,
which extends to 1000 times the Earth radius or more – approximately 10 mil-
lion km (see http://www-spof.gsfc.nasa.gov/Education/wmpause.html
for details of the magnetopause).

Figures 1 and 2 display the same geometry, as far as the Sun-Earth system
is concerned. It is clear from the ﬁgures that as the Earth revolves about
the Sun the Lagrangean point L2 – thus WMAP – sits all the time inside
Earth’s magnetopause.

3

Figure 1: Lagrangean point of the Sun-Earth system. WMAP satellite is
shown at point L2. (Image credit: Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe
electronic page.)

4

Figure 2: A view of Earth’s magnetopause. The bullet-shaped magnetopause
is always along the Sun-Earth direction (coordinates in Earth radii). The
magnetopause extends to up to 1000 Earth radii. L2 is inside the magne-
topause at about 230 Earth radii. (Image credit: “The Exploration of the
Earth’s Magnetosphere”, an educational web site by David P. Stern and
Mauricio Peredo.)

5

The Earth magnetosphere has a complex structure with diﬀerent electron
densities in multiple layers around a neutral sheet at its mid-plane. The tail
boundary – the magnetopause – can reach 500-1000 Earth radii (Figure 2).
A simple model for the blackbody cavity may, in a ﬁrst approximation,
neglect anisotropies in the thermal spectrum (Soares 2006b). The magne-
topause is modeled as a cylindrical cavity with its axis – the z-direction –
running along the Sun-Earth direction, and z = 0 at Earth’s centre. Being
φ the azimuth angle, the electron density n(z, φ), is a well-known observed
quantity. Microwave photons are Thomson scattered inside the cavity till
thermal equilibrium is attained in a time-scale much shorter than Earth’s
age. The precise source of the microwave photons is not critical since there
are many possibilities. The most obvious is the long wavelength tail of the
solar spectrum; the Earth itself might be another possibility (see below the
discussion of radio thermal emission from solar system planets).

Hence, there is plenty of room for a coherent physical model of a black-
body cavity that generates the 3 K spectrum. Anisotropies are considered
with a more realistic electron density distribution (Soares 2006b).

3 Observational tests

As long as one considers a local MBR, a plethora of observational tests come
to light. Three major tests are discussed here.

3.1 Non earthly MBR probe

A straight consequence – easily testable – is that the background radiation
from other “magnetic bottles” – other planets – will be diﬀerent, with a
diﬀerent thermal spectrum, possibly non thermal and even nonexistent. A
probe orbiting another solar system planet like Mars, Venus, etc, would verify
the hypothesis.

3.2 MBR anisotropy time variation

The Earth magnetotail oscillates about its axis during the yearly revolution
around the Sun by as much as 5 to 20 degrees (Eastman 2006). This intro-
duces a measurable time variation on MBR anisotropies. An observational

6

program that measures the MBR at diﬀerent phases of Earth’s orbit would
detect such variations.

3.3 Planetary thermal glow

The importance of radio thermal emission from planets is twofold. First,
thermal emission may be the source of background radiation photons, and,
second, the thermal glow may be the exterior manifestation of the background
radiation itself. That is, the radiation which is interpreted as a “cosmic”
background radiation when measured from within the planetary environment
– the magnetic bottle – is observed as a thermal glow from the outside.

There are many antecedents in observing thermal glows from planets in
the radio-wave range. Mercury has a thermal 400 K glow and Venus was
found to have an approximate 500 K glow by Mayer et al. (1958a). Radio
emission from Mars and Jupiter at 3.15 cm and 9.4 cm are reported by Mayer
et al. (1958b). A blackbody temperature of 210 K was found for Mars and
140 K for Jupiter.

A reasonable prediction is that if one looks at the right wavelength range,
one should be able to ﬁnd the magnetic bottle signature of planetary emission.
Thus, the detection of Earth’s 3 K thermal emission from the outside would
be a strong indication of a local MBR.

4 Concluding remarks

The next MBR anisotropy probe, NASA’s Planck satellite, is scheduled for
launch in 2007. Again, it is planned to sit at Lagrangean L2 point, just like
WMAP (see brieﬁng of Planck mission at
http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/database/MasterCatalog?sc=PLANCK.

It would be a great opportunity to test the validity of the magnetic bottle
scenario if Planck’s observation site is moved to outside the earthly environ-
ment. The immediate suggestion is a stationary point on a Mars orbit, with
the probe being obscured from solar radiation by the planet, similar to the
Sun-Earth-WMAP conﬁguration.

The prediction is that the thermal background – if it is indeed thermal
– will be totally diﬀerent from the 3 K spectrum observed from Earth’s
magnetic bottle.

7

5 References

Montreal

Arp, H. 1998, Seeing Red: Redshifts, Cosmology and Academy, Apeiron,

Eastman, T. 2006, private communication; see also

http://www.plasmas.org/space-plasmas.htm

Hoyle, F. 2001, in Universe, The Cosmology Quest, DVD directed by Ran-

dall Meyers, A Floating World Films production

Mayer, C.H., McCullough, T.P., Sloanaker, R.M. 1958a, ApJ, 127, 1

Mayer, C.H., McCullough, T.P., Sloanaker, R.M. 1958b, ApJ, 127, 11

Pecker, J.-C. 2001, in Universe, The Cosmology Quest, DVD directed by

Randall Meyers, A Floating World Films production

Soares, D.S.L. 2002, Do we live in an anthropic universe?,

arXiv:physics/0209094

Soares, D.S.L. 2006a, Sandage versus Hubble on the reality of the expanding

universe, arXiv:physics/0605098

Soares, D.S.L. 2006b, in preparation

8

