The Role of Quantum Vacuum Forces in

Microelectromechanical Systems

G. Jordan Maclay
Quantum Fields LLC, Richland Center WI 53581 USA∗

(Dated: July 28, 2006)

Abstract

The presence of boundary surfaces in the vacuum alters the ground state of the quantized

electromagnetic ﬁeld and can lead to the appearance of vacuum forces. In the last decade, landmark

measurements of the vacuum stress between conducting uncharged parallel plates (Casimir force)

have been made employing Atomic Force Microscopes. The AFM provides a highly accurate

optical measurement of the deﬂection of a metallized sphere attached to the end of a micromachined

cantilever subjected to vacuum forces as small as about 10 picoNewtons. The sphere deﬂects due

to the Casimir force as it is brought within about 20-700 nm of a ﬂat surface. Recently the

ﬁrst micromachined MEMS (microelectromechanical system) device was fabricated that utilizes
the Casimir force between parallel plates. The 1/d4 force dependence allows the device to serve

as a highly sensitive position sensor. The are many other examples of quantum vacuum forces

and eﬀects besides the well known parallel plate Casimir force. Here we discuss potential roles

of quantum vacuum forces and eﬀects in MEMS systems and other systems. With the growing

capability in nanofabrication, some of the roles may be actualized in the future. Because of

the computational complexity, no theoretical results are yet available for a number of potentially

interesting geometries and we can only speculate.

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: jordanmaclay@quantumﬁelds.com

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Zero-point ﬁeld energy density is a simple and inexorable property of a quantum ﬁeld, such

as the electromagnetic ﬁeld, which is a representation of the Lorentz group of transformations

of special relativity. For a quantum ﬁeld, the canonical position and momentum variables

do not commute and consequently the lowest state of the ﬁeld has a non-zero energy, just

as the ground state of a quantum mechanical harmonic oscillator is non-zero.

For the

electromagnetic ﬁeld, if we assume the shortest wavelength photon to be included in the
ground state spectrum has the Planck length of 10−35 m, then the predicted quantum vacuum
energy density is enormous, about 10114 J/m3 or, in terms of mass, 1095 g/cm3. Such an

enormous energy density is clearly a puzzling embarrassment to physicists, who for years

routinely discarded this nearly inﬁnite result in renormalization procedures.

However, there are measurable consequences of the zero point energy which arise because

the ground state vacuum electromagnetic ﬁeld has to meet the usual boundary conditions

for the electromagnetic ﬁeld.

It is the eﬀect of boundaries on the vacuum ﬁeld that leads

to the appearance of vacuum stresses, so called Casimir forces.

The term ”Casimir force” F most commonly refers to the attractive vacuum force per

area (pressure) that exists between two parallel, inﬁnite, uncharged, perfectly conducting

plates separated by a distance d [1][2]

where K = π2ℏc

240 . This force arises from the change in energy density Epp from the free

ﬁeld vacuum density that occurs between the parallel plates:

(1)

(2)

This attractive force F ,which is normal to the surface, arises because the surfaces change

the mode distribution of the ground state quantized electromagnetic ﬁeld.

In the region

between two parallel perfectly conducting plates, no modes with wavelengths larger than

twice the separation can exist. We can also view this force as arising from radiation pres-

sure, the transfer of momentum from the vacuum to the surfaces[4]. The Casimir eﬀect was

ﬁrst predicted in 1948, but was not measured accurately until the last few years[5][6]. Cor-

rections for ﬁnite conductivity and surface roughness have been developed for the parallel

F = −

K
d4

Epp(d) =

K
3d3

2

plate geometry, and the agreement between theory and experiment is now at the 1% level

or better for separations of about 0.1-0.7 µm [7].

In actual practice, the measurements

are most commonly made with one surface curved and the other surface ﬂat, and using the

proximity force theorem to account for the curvature. This experimental approach elimi-

nates the diﬃculties of trying to maintain parallelism at submicron separations. Mohideen

and collaborators have made the most accurate measurements to date in this manner, using

an AFM (Atomic Force Microscope) that has a metallized sphere about 250 µm in diameter

attached to the end of a cantilever about 200 µm long, capable of measuring picoNewton

forces. The deﬂection of the sphere is measured optically as it is moved close to a ﬂat

metallized surface[5]. The more diﬃcult measurement between two parallel plates has been

made and shown to give results that are consistent with theory[8]. Measurements of the

force between two parallel surfaces each with a small (1 nm) sinusoidal modulation in sur-

face height, have showed that there is a lateral force as well as the usual normal force when

the modulations of the opposing surfaces are not in phase [9]. Recent measurements have

conﬁrmed the predictions, including eﬀects of ﬁnite conductivity, surface roughness, and

temperature, uncertainty in dielectric functions, to the 1-2% level for the range from 65-300

nm[10]. There is a small uncertainty in the temperature corrections, particularly at low

temperatures [11].

Casimir forces occur for all quantum ﬁelds and can arise from the presence of surfaces

as well as choices of topology of the space. Initially Casimir forces for plane surfaces were

obtained by computing the change in the vacuum energy with position. Two decades after

Casimir’s initial predictions, a method was developed to compute the Casimir force in terms

of the local stress-energy tensor using quantum electrodynamics[12]. Many innovations have

followed. Several approaches to computing electromagnetic Casimir forces have been devel-

oped that are not based on the zero point vacuum ﬂuctuations directly. These approaches

appeal to scientists who are uncomfortable with the quantum electrodynamical model of en-

ergy in empty space.

In the special case of the vacuum electromagnetic ﬁeld with dielectric

or conductive boundaries, various approaches suggest that Casimir forces can be regarded as

macroscopic manifestations of many-body retarded van der Waals forces, at least in simple

geometries with isolated atoms[13], [14]. Casimir eﬀects have also been derived and inter-

preted in terms of source ﬁelds in both conventional [13] and unconventional [15] quantum

electrodynamics, in which the ﬂuctuations appear within materials instead of outside of the

3

materials. Lifshitz provided a detailed computation of the Casimir force between planar

surfaces by assuming that stochastic ﬂuctuations occur in the tails of the wavefunctions of

atoms that leak into the regions outside the surface, and can lead to induced dipole moments

in atoms in a nearby surface, which leads to an a net retarded dipole-induced dipole force

between the planar surfaces[16]. These various approaches diﬀer in how they visualize the

ﬂuctuations of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, but give consistent results in the few cases of simple

geometries which have been computed[17].

It may be that these diverse approaches will

display diﬀerences for computation of geometries with curvature, or for computations of the

forces between separated, curved surfaces[18].

Parallel plate Casimir forces go inversely as the fourth power of the separation between

the plates. The Casimir force per unit area F between perfectly conducting plates is

equivalent to about 1 atm pressure at a separation of 10 nm, and so is a candidate for

actuation of MEMS (MicroElectroMechanical Systems). In MEMS, surfaces may come into

close proximity with each other, particularly during processes of etching sacriﬁcial layers

in the fabrication process.

In 1995 the ﬁrst analysis of a dynamic MEMS structure that

used vacuum forces was presented by Serry et al[19]. They consider an idealized MEMS

component resembling the original Casimir model of two parallel plates, except that one

of the plates is connected to a stationary surface by a linear restoring force and can move

along the direction normal to the plate surfaces.

The Casimir force between the two

plates, together with the restoring force acting on the moveable plate, results in a bistable

system with two equilibrium separtions. The larger separation is a stable equilibrium and

the smaller one is unstable, leading to the collapse of the movable surface into stationary

plate. The analysis demonstrates that the Casimir eﬀect could be used to actuate a switch,

and might be responsible in part for the “stiction” phenomenon in which micromachined

membranes are found to latch onto nearby surfaces.

If the movable surface is vibrating,

then an “anharmonic Casimir oscillator” (ACO) results.

To explore stiction in common MEMS conﬁgurations, Serry et al computed the deﬂec-

tion of membrane strips and the conditions underwhich they would collapse into nearby

surfaces[20]. Measurements were done by Buks et al on cantilever beams to investigate

the role of Casimir forces in stiction[21]. An experimental realization of the ACO in a

nanometer-scale MEMS system was recently reported by Chan et al [22]. In this experiment

the Casimir attraction between a 500 µm-square plate suspended by torsional rods and a

4

gold-coated sphere of radius 100 µm was observed as a sharp increase in the tilt angle of the

plate as the sphere-plate separation was reduced from 300 nm to 75.7 nm. This “quantum

mechanical actuation” of the plate suggests “new possibilities for novel actuation schemes

in MEMS based on the Casimir force” [22].

In a reﬁnement of this experiment, a novel

proximity sensor was demonstrated in which the plate was slightly oscillated with an AC

signal, and the deﬂection amplitude observed gave an indication of the precise location of the

nearby sphere[23]. A measurement using a similar torsion oscillator was recently reported

using gold on the sphere and chromium on the plate[24].

MEMS currently employed in sensor and actuator technology generally have component

separations on the order of microns, where Casimir eﬀects are negligible. Smaller distances

between MEMS components are desirable in electrostatic actuation schemes because they

permit smaller voltages to be used to generate larger forces and torques. Casimir eﬀects will

be of increasing signiﬁcant in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) as further miniatur-

ization is realized [19].

UUM FORCES

II. LIMITATIONS OF CURRENT THEORETICAL CALCULATIONS OF VAC-

The parallel plate geometry (and the approximately equivalent sphere-plate geometry or

sphere-plate with small deviations geometry) is essentially the only geometry for which ex-

perimental measurements have been conducted and the only geometry for which the vacuum

forces between two separate surfaces (assumed to be inﬁnite) have been computed. Vac-

uum forces are know to exist in other experimental conﬁgurations between separate surfaces,

but rigorous calculations based on QED (quantum electrodynamics) are very diﬃcult and

have yet to be completed[18]. Since it is experimentally possible to measure forces between

various separate surfaces, with the improvement in experimental techniques, theoreticians

may soon see the need for such computations.

Calculations of vacuum stresses for a variety of geometric shapes, such as spheres, cylin-

ders, rectangular parallelepipeds, and wedges are reviewed in [1][2][3].

In general, calcu-

lations of vacuum forces become very complex when the surfaces are curved, particularly

with right angles. Divergences in energy appear, and there are disagreements about the

proper way to deal with these divergences[25]. The material properties, such as the dielec-

5

tric constant and plasma frequency of the metal and the surface roughness also aﬀect the

vacuum forces.

In addition, in the usual calculations only a spatial average of the force for

a given area for the ground state of the quantum vacuum ﬁeld is computed, and material

properties, such as binding energies, are ignored, a procedure which Barton has questioned

recently[26][27][28].

Computation has shown that the vacuum stress on a spherical metal shell, a cubical shell,

or a solid dielectric ball is a repulsive uniform force, or directed outward. Because of the

very special nature of the parallel plate geometry and the high degree of symmetry of the

cube and sphere, it is not reliable to make generalizations about the behavior of vacuum

forces based on these special geometries. The vacuum forces on the faces of conductive

rectangular boxes or cavities show very diﬀerent features compared to those of the parallel

plate, the cube, and the sphere. For a rectangular parallelepiped cavity, the total force on

a given face (the diﬀerential force integrated over the entire face) can be positive, zero, or

negative depending on the ratio of the sides of the box[28][29][30][31].

In fact there are

cavities that have zero force on two sides and a positive or negative force on the remaining

side. There are boxes for which the change in the vacuum energy is negative (or positive)

and the forces on some walls are attractive while the forces on the remaining walls are

repulsive.

Indeed it is diﬃcult to get an intuitive picture of the meaning of these results.

From a technological viewpoint, it would be useful to be able to generate repulsive

vacuum forces as well as attractive vacuum forces. From a fundamental viewpoint, it is

unclear how one can have a repulsive force in vacuum if the force can be correctly modeled as

a dipole-induced dipole force. Thus there is great interest in measuring the vacuum forces

in diﬀerent geometries that are predicted to be repulsive. However, there is no easy way to

measure vacuum forces on spheres or rectangular cavities[32]. One might consider applying

a stress to the spherical shell, and observe the deformation. This is a diﬃcult experiment

since the sphere would probably have to be submicron in diameter for the Casimir force

to be large enough to be measurable.

Further, the deﬂection measured would depend

on the properties of the material of which the sphere was made, and such properties are

not included in the usual calculations of the Casimir force[27]. Alternatively one might

contemplate cutting a sphere in half, and measuring the force between the two hemispheres

using an Atomic Force Microscope. However, the question arises: If we cut a spherical cavity

into two hemispheres, will we ﬁnd a repulsive force between the two separate surfaces? Or

6

will an attractive force between the edges dominate? No computations have yet been done

for this situation for real materials. For optically thin materials Barton shows the net force

will be attractive[26][27].

Vacuum forces computed for a perfectly conducting cube with thin walls are also repulsive

or outward, and experimentalists have the same conundrum regarding the meaning of this

calculated vacuum force. To measure the force one might imagine freeing one face of the

cube, and then moving it very slightly normal to its surface, in the spirit of the principle

of virtual work dE=-Fdx. Unfortunately no one has computed the force between a cube

with one side removed and a nearby surface which is parallel to the missing face. We have

attempted to measure the force between an array of open cavities (wall thickness about 150

nm, cavity width about 200 nm) and a metallized sphere 250 µm in diameter on an AFM

cantilever, and to date have only observed diminished attractive forces[33].

Another limitation of the calculations to date for the rectangular cavity, is that only the

total force on each face is computed. The diﬀerential vacuum stress in not uniform on each

wall, and, in order to avoid issues with divergences, the diﬀerential force is integrated over

the face. How these nonuniformities might aﬀect experiments is unknown.

The sign of the Casimir force depends on the magnetic and electric properties of the

materials.

If it were possible to arbitrarily choose material properties, repulsive forces

could be obtained in a parallel plate geometry, for example, by choosing one plate to be a

perfect conductor (ǫ → ∞) and the other plate as a perfect magnetic material (µ → ∞)

for all frequencies, real and imaginary, with a vacuum in between[34]. Other choices have

also been suggested, however, none have been implemented experimentally, and it appears

they all violate fundmental requirements about ǫ and µ for real materials that arise from

causality.conditions[35].

It has been suggested but not veriﬁed that in curved space-time,

atoms in certain intense electric ﬁelds may exhibit repulsive forces[36].

III. VACUUM FORCE ACTUATED MEMS SYSTEMS

We consider a variety of systems whose function is based on existing calculations of

the properties of the ground state of the quantum vacuum. Several diﬀerent potentially

interesting applications are considered in [17] No experimental investigations have yet been

conducted on most of these systems.

7

FIG. 1: Parallel plates structures with Casimir forces. a) two overlapping square (L x L) conductive

plates, with lateral or transverse movement permitted; b) comb structure of two ﬁxed plates with

a third plate between them which can move laterally, c) conductive moveable piston represented

by the black line in a conductive rectangular cavity L x L x 0.8L.

A. Structures with Parallel Plates

We consider the forces and energy balance in several simple structures with: 1. moving

parallel plates; 2. moving plates inserted in rectangular cavities, and 3. pistons moving in

rectangular cavities[37].

1. Moving Parallel Plates

Consider two conducting, overlapping (x = L), square, parallel plates, a distance L on

each side, that are a distance a apart, with a << L. If we allow the upper plate to approach
the lower (ﬁxed) plate quasistatically, then the attractive force Fpp(a) = −KL2/a4 does

positive mechanical work during this reversible thermodynamic transformation. We are

neglecting edge eﬀects by assuming that the force is proportional to the area. During the
transformation, the vacuum energy Ep(a) = −KL2/3a3 between the plates will be reduced,

conserving the total energy in the system. If the separation decreases from ai to af , then

the energy balance is

Ep(af ) = Ep(ai) = −

Fpp(a)da

(3)

ai

Z

af

If we then separate the plates quasistatically, letting a increase from af to ai, we do work

on the system to restore it to its initial state. Over the entire cycle no net work is done, and

there is no net change in the vacuum energy.

Consider an alternative cycle that several investigators have proposed in order to extract

energy from the vacuum ﬂuctuations: After the plates have reached the point of minimum

separation, slide the upper plate laterally until it no longer is opposite the lower plate (x = 0),

8

eliminating the normal Casimir force, then raise the upper plate to its original height, and

slide it laterally over the lower ﬁxed plate (x = L). Finally we allow the plates to come

together as before, extracting energy from the vacuum ﬂuctuations and doing mechanical

work. If no energy were expended in moving the plate laterally, then this cycle would indeed

result in net positive work equal to the energy extracted from the vacuum. Although no

one has yet computed in detail the lateral forces between oﬀset ﬁnite parallel plates, it is

highly probable that such forces are not zero, and that no net extraction of energy occurs

for this cycle. We can verify this by a simple approximate calculation. We do know that

the vacuum energy is not altered by a single inﬁnite conducting plate [38]. If we neglect

Casimir energy “fringing ﬁelds,” and assume that the energy density diﬀers from the free

ﬁeld density only in the region in which the two square (L × L) plates overlap a distance x,

where 0 < x < L (see Fig. 1a), then we can compute the lateral force FL2 between the two

plates using the conservation of energy (principal of virtual work):

FL2(x) = −d[−KLx/3a3]/dx = KL/3a3

(4)

This constant attractive lateral force tends to increase x or pull the plates towards each

other so they have the maximum amount of overlap. In fact, the positive work done to move

one plate laterally a distance L exactly cancels the work extracted from the vacuum ﬁelds in

moving the plates from a large separation to a distance a apart, so there is no net change in

total energy (mechanical plus ﬁeld) in the complete cycle, as expected. The normal Casimir

force between these L × L plates when they are directly opposite, with complete overlapping

(x = L), is L/a times larger than the constant lateral force given by Eq. (4).

2. Parallel Plate Comb Structure

Consider the case of two ﬁxed, square (L × L), parallel plates separated by a distance

a, with a third moveable plate that slides in between the two parallel plates, separated by

a distance a/2 from each plate (Fig. 1b). If we neglect vacuum energy “fringing ﬁelds”,

as before, that the vacuum energy is diﬀerent from zero only in regions between directly

opposing plates, and we can compute the lateral force on the moveable plate in the middle

as minus the derivative of the vacuum energy. The energy, as a function of the overlap x of

9

the ﬁxed and moveable plate, is

E(x) = −2KLx/3(a/2)3 − KL(L − x)/3a2

which yields a lateral force FL3 = −dE(x)/dx equal to

FL3 = −5KL/a3

(5)

(6)

This force is 5a/L times the normal Casimir force between the plates separated by a

distance a, a factor which is typically much less than one. For a device with a = 0.1

micrometer, L = 1 mm, the lateral force would be an easily measurable 31 nanoNewtons.

This structure is analogous to the electrostatic comb drive that is used extensively in MEMS

(microelectromechanical systems) devices. One key operational diﬀerence between the

Casimir and electrostatic drives is that the Casimir force drive always yields an inward

or attractive force, whereas the voltage on the electrostatic comb drive can be reversed in

polarity, reversing the direction of the force. Another diﬀerence is that the Casimir force

comb drive requires no electrical actuation.

3.

Inserting Parallel Plates into Rectangular Cavities

The mechanical behavior of the parallel plate comb conﬁgurations is determined by the

negative energy density that arises when a << L. If we consider cavities that have dimen-

sions in orthogonal directions that are within about a factor of about 3 of each other, then

we can have regions with positive or negative energy density and can obtain both attractive

and repulsive average forces on sliding plates.

For example, consider a rectangular cavity L × L × a formed from conductive plates.

Imagine that the side of length a is constructed so that we can slowly insert an additional

plate (assumed to have zero thickness) in a direction normal to the a direction, dividing the

cavity into two identical rectangular regions with sides L × L × a/2. By the conservation of

energy we can compute the average force required to insert this moveable plate. If we assume

that no energy is dissipated within the perfectly conducting plate during insertion and that

the vacuum energy density is altered only in the region within the cavity as we insert the

plate, then the change in vacuum energy is equal to minus the average force < F > present

during insertion of the movable plate times the distance L. Deﬁning en(a1, a2, a3) as the

10

vacuum energy of a rectangular cavity with sides (a1, a2, a3), we can express the average

force as

< F (L, L, a) >= −[2en(L, L, a/2) − en(L, L, a)]/L

(7)

Depending on the ratio of L/a we can obtain positive, zero, or negative average forces.

As discussed by [28], the energy for a rectangular cavity is a homogeneous function of the

dimensions: en[ξa1, ξa2, ξa3] = ξ

en[a1, a2, a3]. With this information we can evaluate the

−1

average force for several examples. Assume a/L = 0.816, then by numerical computation we
have the ﬁnal state en(L, L, 0.408L) = 0, and for the initial state en(L, L, 0.818L) = 0.1ℏc/L.

For this geometry, the mean force is therefore positive, which means the vacuum ﬁeld resists

the insertion of the sliding plate:

< F (L, L, 0.816L) >= −[0 − 0.1ℏc/L]/L = 0.1ℏc/L2.

(8)

For a L = 0.1 micrometer, the force is about 2.5 picoNewtons, which is near the current

limit of measurability with an AFM.

Inserting a plane into a cavity is an interesting op-

eration since it does manifest, at least in theory, a repulsive force on the movable element.

Note that we have only computed an average force during insertion. This is consistent with

the theoretical computations which only provide the average vacuum energy density of the

cavity.

have

4. Rectangular structures with a moveable piston

Consider a rectangular conductive cavity (L × L × a) with a moveable, inﬁnitely thin,

perfectly conducting piston that moves along the a−direction, dividing the cavity into two

regions, each with its contribution to the total vacuum energy. We assume the piston is

normal to the a−direction (Fig. 1c). We can then numerically compute the total vacuum

energy EP (L, L, x) of the structure as a function of the distance x between the piston and

one end of the cavity. From our deﬁnition of en(a1, a2, a3), and the deﬁnition ξ = x/L , we

EP (L, L, x) = [en(1, 1, (a/L) − ξ) + en(1, 1, ξ)]/L.

(9)

where we have assumed the energies are additive.

If we diﬀerentiate this equation with

respect to x, we obtain an expression for the force F (x) due to the vacuum stresses on

the moveable plate. Consider an example in which a = 0.8L, so 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 0.8. Figure 2

11

FIG. 2: Plot of the vacuum energy (thinner line) and Casimir force (thicker line) for a 1 x 1 x .8

cavity that is divided into two rectangular cavities by a sliding piston that moves along the 0.8

direction. Note the variable on the abscissa is 20x. The maximum energy is at abscissa of 8 which

corresponds to the center of the cavity, x = 0.4. For these calculations, we have set ˜Nc=1 and set L

equal to 1 unit. To obtain a numerical result, we use the MKS value of ˜Nc. If we let L=0.5 micron,

then the abscissa is in units of 0.025 micron, and the energy scale is in units of 6.3 x 10-20 joule

and the force scale is in units of 1.26 x 10-13 newton. Forces of this magnitude are just measurable

using AFM technology.

shows the dimensionless energy and force respectively LEp(L, L, x) and L2F (x) as functions

of x. For values of x near the center (x ≈ 0.4), the force on the piston is approximately

directly proportional to x, and the energy is approximately a negative parabola with negative

curvature. A small deﬂection from x = 8.0 leads to a force causing an increased deﬂection.

Thus Figure 2 shows the state of the system with the piston near the center is unstable:

the piston would be pushed to the closest end of the cavity. More detailed calculations, in

which the divergences were not dropped, have shown that all divergences exactly cancel for

this piston geometry [39].

However, if we include the restoring force on the piston that arises from the small de-

ﬂection of a deformable membrane as given by Hooke’s Law, then this conﬁguration might

become stable if the material force constant exceeds that for the Casimir force. Of course,

once material properties are included, the theoretically computed vacuum forces may be

changed.

In any event, these results suggest the intriguing possibility of making a struc-

ture that might displays simple harmonic motion for small displacements by employing two

12

FIG. 3: The force on the top surface of a closed, perfectly conducting rectangular cavity 2 µm long

by 0.1µm wide, as a function of the depth c. The equilibrium position is ceq=0.146 µm. The dashed

line (- - -) is a plot of the linear restoring force from a silicon spring as a function of the deformation

of the top of the box, assumed to be made of silicon; the solid line (—) is the destabilizing vacuum

force on the top of the box; and the dot-dash line (− · − ) is the total force on the top of the box.

Note: The force on the y-axis is actually the total force for 1000 boxes.

adjacent cubical cavities, with a common face that can be deﬂected.

B. Vibrating Cavity Walls in MEMS Cavities

The unexpected behavior of forces on the walls of a rectangular cavity mentioned previ-

ously allows us to model a cavity with dimensions such that a wall vibrates in part due to

the vacuum stress[18]. For example, a cavity that is 2 µm long, 0.1 µm wide, and about

0.146 µm deep will have zero force on the face normal to the 0.146 direction. The zero

force corresponds to an unstable energy maximum. Thus a deﬂection inward leads to an

increasing inward (attractive) force, and, conversely, any deﬂection outward (repulsive force)

leads to an increasing outward force. This potential is akin to a harmonic oscillator, except

the force is destabilizing (F = kx) rather than stabilizing (F = −kx).

If we assume that

the box is made of real conductive materials, then there will be a restoring force due to

the material.

If we include the restoring force that arises from the small deﬂection of a

deformable membrane as given by Hooke’s Law, then this conﬁguration might become stable

if the material force constant exceeds that for the Casimir force (Fig. 3).

13

FIG. 4: a. Displacement of the cover plate as a function of time for two starting positions. The solid

curve is for an initial deﬂection from the equilibrium position to a spacing of 0.113 micrometers,

close to the minimum for oscillatory behavior, and clearly shows anharmonic behavior. The dashed

is for a smaller initial oﬀset from the equilibrium position, and results in a more sinusoidal motion.

b. Displacement vs. time for the same two initial displacements, but including a damping ratio of

0.025.

These results suggest the intriguing possibility of making a structure that displays simple

harmonic motion for small displacements with a frequency that depends on the diﬀerence of

the material force constant and the vacuum force constant. The face of a box of the proper

dimensions may oscillate under the mutual inﬂuence of the vacuum force and the Young’s

modulus of the material (Fig. 4a). The oscillations would be damped due to the non-ideal

properties of the material and the friction with the environment (Fig. 4b). A zero point

oscillation of the cavity wall would be expected. The energy in the lowest mode would be

modiﬁed by the temperature.

C. Comment on the Exchange of Energy with the Quantum Vacuum

If QED predicts a large energy density in the quantum vacuum, is there some way to

make use of this vast energy?

In order to maintain the conservation of energy, all forms

of energy, including vacuum energy, must be included. Thus from the scientiﬁc viewpoint,

the answer seems clear that it is possible to transduce vacuum energy into, for example,

mechanical energy. However, the process as currently understood does not appear to have

any practical value. No one has conceived of a system in which energy can be extracted

in a closed cycle from the vacuum. All that can be done is extract energy in a single

14

operation. To illustrate, consider, an arrangement of two perfectly conducting, uncharged,

parallel plates in a vacuum as an energy source. The Casimir energy UC(x) at zero degrees

Kelvin between plates of area A, separated by a distance x is:

If we allow the plates to move from a large initial separation a to a very small ﬁnal sepa-

ration b then the change in the vacuum energy energy between the plates is approximately:

UC(x) = −

π2
720

~cA
x3

∆UC = UC(b) − UC(a)
π2
720

~cA
b3

≈ −

(10)

(11)

(12)

The attractive Casimir force has done work on the plates, and, in principal, we can build

a device to reversibly extract this energy and use it. At the end of the motion (x = b),

the energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the quantum vacuum between the plates has been

reduced by the amount of the work done, so, as is necessary, the total energy is conserved.

In practice the closest distance in separation is about a nanometer due to surface roughness.

However, in practice, the forces are piconewtons over a distance of nanometers, so very little

useful energy is extracted.

In addition, once the plates have moved together, and the

energy has been extracted, one has to do the same amount of work to separate the plates

and return them to the initial positions since this is a conservative system[37].

From a more fundamental perspective, utilizing energy of the quantum ﬂuctuations of

the electromagnetic ﬁeld does not appear to directly violate known laws of physics according

to the work of Forward, and Cole and Puthoﬀf, however improbable or impossible such a

development might seem at ﬁrst consideration [40][41]. Forward showed that it is possible

to conceive of a device, a foliated capacitor, in which one could extract electrical energy from

the quantum vacuum to do work. The energy is extracted as the portions of the capacitor

that repel each other due to electrostatic forces come together under the inﬂuence of the

Casimir force[40]. Cole and Puthoﬀ used stochastic electrodynamics to examine the process

of removing energy from the vacuum ﬂuctuations at zero temperature from the viewpoint of

thermodynamics and showed there is no violation of the laws of thermodynamics[41].

In the

same spirit, Rueda has suggested that very high energy particles observed in space may derive

their kinetic energy from a long term acceleration due to the stochastic vacuum ﬁeld[42].

In a careful analysis, Cole has shown that this process of energy transfer from the vacuum

15

ﬁeld to kinetic energy of the particles does not violate the laws of thermodynamics[43].

In stochastic electrodynamics one treats the vacuum ﬂuctuations as a universal random

classical electromagnetic ﬁeld. A formal analogy exists between stochastic electrodynamics

and quantum electrodynamics:

the ﬁeld correlation functions in one theory are related to

the Wightman functions in the other theory[44].

D. Vacuum Forces on Particles

As we have mentioned, the parallel plate vacuum forces have been extensively measured

and calculated, and even utilized in a sensitive position sensor. Theoretical forces for

geometries with moveable parallel plates, and rectangular cavities have been explored. The

question arises: what other manifestations of vacuum forces, aside from stiction eﬀects,

might be of technological interest as the dimensions of MEMS devices are reduced? We

mention a few examples. The ﬁrst has to do with forces on charged or polarizable particles

in the vacuum. The electromagnetic ﬁeld of the ground state of the quantum vacuum shares

the properties of the ﬁelds arising from excited states of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, when real

photons are present. Whenever there is an inhomogeneous vacuum energy density, there
−→
will a net force on a polarizable neutral particle given by 1
∇hE(x)2i. Local changes in

2α

mode density and therefore vacuum energy density are induced by the presence of curved

surfaces, and, depending on whether the curvature is positive or negative, the force between

the surface and the particle may be repulsive or attractive [25].

The simplest example of

a surface altering the vacuum modes is a perfectly conducting, inﬁnite wall. The change in

the vacuum ﬁeld energy due to the wall produces in this case the well-known Casimir-Polder

for suﬃciently large distances d from the wall. The interaction potential is
interaction:
V (d) = −3α~c/8πd4, where α(0) is the static polarizability of the (ground-state) atom.

This eﬀect has been accurately veriﬁed in the elegant experiments of Sukenik et al in which

he measured the deﬂection of an atomic beam near a surface[46].

In this experiment, the

particles are actually passed between the surfaces of a wedge consisting of two conducting

planes that intersect at an angle β radians. The stress-energy tensor T µν is not constant in
this region, as it is between two parallel plates, but T 00 increases as one moves closer to the

point of intersection, at which there is a singularity.

In the experiment, only the eﬀect of

the force approximately normal to the surfaces was measured. As one might expect, there

16

is also a radial force on a particle at a distance r and at an angle β/2 from the intersection

that tends to accelerate the particle toward the intersection provided the static polarizability

α is positive[47]:

Fr(r) = −

4 (44π4 + 80π2β

2

+ 11β

4

)

α(0)ℏc
90πr5β

For the case of β = π we have a particle near a plane and recover the usual Casimir-Polder

force. The tangential force in the θ direction vanishes along this midline. Note that there

would be a torque on a permanent dipole in this wedge.

There are many geometries for which the stress-energy tensor has not been computed as a

function of position, and we do not know what the forces on a charged or polarizable particle

in the vacuum might be. Consider for example, the forces on a particle within a closed

rectangular cavity, where the kinetic energy of the particle is much less than the change in

vacuum energy due to the surfaces. Very near any surface, away from edges and other walls,

one might expect the particle to experience the usual Casimir-Polder force. In other regions

of the cavity, the forces are not know since calculations of the stress-energy tensor have not

been done without averaging over the entire volume. What is the equilibrium state of a

group of atoms or particles in a region of altered vacuum energy? For example, assume we

have a number of particles in a metal sphere or a metal box in which the vacuum modes

have been altered from the free ﬁeld modes. What is the equilibrium distribution of these

particles?

Since there is a non-homogeneous vacuum ﬁeld, the particles will experience

forces. Will there be some vacuum damping that gives them a terminal velocity? Will the

particles congregate in a region of the lowest energy? Will they bounce oﬀ the walls and

give some kind of force on the walls. Are these vacuum forces negligible, except at very low

temperatures? The motion of one particle inside a box or sphere would be interesting. Does

the interaction provide a window into vacuum energy so that we can make two reservoirs to

operate an engine?? If a hole is put in one of the sides of the box, what happens? There is

one calculation that suggests that very high energy particles observed in space may derive

their kinetic energy from a long term acceleration due to the stochastic vacuum ﬁeld[42].

E. Systems with Torques

Consider the conditions for which we would expect a medium, such as a dielectric slab,

to experience a torque in the vacuum.

If we view the origin of a vacuum torque as the

17

transfer of the angular momentum of zero-point photons to the medium, then it is clear

that to have a torque we need to have a geometrical conﬁguration in which the vacuum

energy depends on the angular orientation of the medium. This requirement cannot be

met with a single object, even if it is not isotropic. However, two plates separated by a

distance d that are birefringent would break the rotational symmetry of the vacuum and be

expected to experience a torque. This torque has indeed been calculated, and compared to

the attractive Casimir force between the plates[48]. From dimensional grounds the torque
between two thick plates (thickness>>separation) of area A goes as f ℏcA/d3, where Enk

has derived an expression for the dimensionless number f which is determined by the square
of the diﬀerence of the refractive indices, and has a typical value of about 10−6. The torque,

which appears measurable, varies as sin2φ, where φ is the angle between the two optic axes.

The dielectrics tend to rotate in opposite directions so the total angular momentum transfer

from the vacuum is zero.

F. Forces on Semiconductor Surfaces

One of the potentially most important conﬁgurations from the technological viewpoint

involves vacuum forces on semiconductor surfaces. The Casimir force for a conducting

material depends on the plasma frequency, beyond which the material tends to act like

a transparent medium. For parallel plates separated by a distance d the usual Casimir
force is reduced by a factor of approximately C(a) = (1 + (8λp/3πd))−1, where λp is the

wavelength corresponding to the plasma frequency of the material[49]. Since the plasma

frequency is proportional to the carrier density, it is possible to tune the plasma frequency

in a semiconductor, for example, by illumination or by temperature, or by the application

of a voltage bias.

In principle it should be possible to build a Casimir switch that is

activated by light, a device that would be useful in optical switching systems. A very

interesting measurement of the Casimir force between a ﬂat surface of borosilicate glass and

a surface covered with a ﬁlm of amorphous silicon was done in 1979 by Arnold et al[50]

They observed an increase in the Casimir force when the semiconductor was exposed to

light. This experiment has yet to be repeated with modern methods and materials. As a

ﬁrst step, Chen et al have measured used an AFM to measure the force between a single Si

crystal and a 200 µm diameter gold coated sphere, and found good agreement with theory

18

using the Lizshitz formalism[51].

G. Vacuum Powered Space Craft

It is possible, albeit impractical, to conceive of a vacuum spacecraft that operates by

pushing on the quantum vacuum[52]. With a suitable trajectory, the motion of a mirror

in vacuum can excite the quantized vacuum electromagnetic ﬁeld with the creation of real

photons. This possibility was ﬁrst noticed in 1970, when Moore considered the eﬀect

of an uncharged one dimensional boundary surface in vacuum that moved, with the very

interesting prediction that it should be possible to generate real photons from a suitable

motion[53][54]. This eﬀect, referred to as the dynamic or adiabatic Casimir eﬀect, has

been reviewed but not veriﬁed experimentally [1][2][55]. Energy conservation requires the

existence of a radiation reaction force working against the motion of the mirror [56], and this

force can result in a net acceleration of the mirror. The vacuum ﬁeld exerts a force on the

moving mirror that tends to damp the motion. This dissipative force may be understood as

the mechanical eﬀect of the emission of radiation induced by the motion of the mirror. The

energy expended moving the mirror against the radiative force goes into electromagnetic

radiation.

The Casimir drive spacecraft is not suggested as practical way to build a spacecraft,

but to illustrate another potential role of the quantum vacuum. Perhaps a more clever

quantum drive will some day become practical or other uses of the dynamic Casimir eﬀect

will arise. Physicists have explored various means of locomotion depending on the density of

the medium and the size of the moving object.

It would be interesting to ﬁnd an optimum

method for moving in the quantum vacuum. Unfortunately we currently have no simple

way to mathematically explore various simple possibilities.

IV. CONCLUSION

The are many potential ways in which the ground state of the vacuum electromagnetic

ﬁeld might be engineered for use in technological applications, a few of which we have

mentioned here. As the technology to fabricate small devices improves, as the theoretical

capability of calculating quantum vacuum eﬀects increases, it will be interesting to see

19

which possibilities prove to be useful and which just remain curiosities, and which limit the

performance of MEMS. In a way the situation is reminiscent of electricity in the 1600s, when

Faraday was asked of what use is electricity?, and answered ”Of what use is a new born

baby?”. We are not very good at predicting the development of technology.

In the 1980’s

many thought AI would revolutionize the world, but it didn’t.

In the 1960s, manufacturers

were hard put to think of any reason why an individual would want a home computer and

today we wonder how we ever survived without them.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Program for their support,

and Jay Hammer for ﬁnite element calculations of the vibrating cavity walls.

[1] G. Plunien, B. M¨uller, W. Greiner, ”The Casimir Eﬀect,” Physics Reports 134, 87 (1986).

[2] M. Bordag, U. Mohideen, V. Mostepanenko, ”New Developments in the Casimir Eﬀect,”

Physics Reports 353, 1 (2001).

[3] Kimball. A. Milton, The Casimir Eﬀect (World Scientiﬁc, 2001).

[4] P. Milonni, R. Cook, M. Groggin, Radiation Pressure form the Vacuum:Physical Interpretation

of the Casimir Force, Phys. Rev. A38, 1621 (1988).

[5] Mohideen, U., Anushree, Roy, “Precision Measurement of the Casimir Force from 0.1 to 0.9

micron”, Physical Review Letters, 81, 4549 (1998).

[6] S. Lamoroux, “ Measurement of the Casimir force between conducting plates,” Phys. Rev.

Lett. 78, 5-8 (1997).

[7] G. Klimchitskaya, A. Roy, U. Mohideen, and V. Mostepanenko, ”Complete roughness and

conductivity corrections for Casimir force measurement” Phys. Rev A 60, 3487-95(1999).

[8] G. Bressi, G. Carugno, R. Onofrio, G. Ruoso, ”Measurement of the Casimir Force between

Parallel Metallic Plates,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 041804 (2002).

[9] F. Chen and U. Mohideen ,G. L. Klimchitskaya and V. M. Mostepanenko, ”Demonstration of

the Lateral Casimir Force,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 101801 (2002)

[10] F. Chen, U. Mohideen, G.l. Klimchitskaya and V.M. Mostepanenko, ” Theory confronts ex-

20

periment in the Casimir force measurements: quantiﬁcation of errors and precision,” Physical

Review A, Vol. 69: pp. 022117 1-11 (2004).

[11] V.M.Mostepanenko, V.B.Bezerra, R.S.Decca, B.Geyer, E.Fischbach, G.L.Klimchitskaya,

D.E.Krause, D.Lopez, C.Romero, ”Present status of controversies regarding the thermal

Casimir force,”J.Phys. A39 (2006) 6589-6600

[12] L. S. Brown and G. J. Maclay, ”Vacuum stress between condicting plates,” Phys. Rev. 184,

[13] P W. Milonni, The Quantum Vacuum. An Introduction to Quantum Electrodynamics (San

[14] E.A. Power and T. Thirunamachandran, ” Zero-point energy diﬀerences and many-body dis-

persion forces,” Phys. Rev. A50 3929-39 (1994).

[15] J. Schwinger, L L DeRaad Jr , and K A Milton, ”Casimir eﬀect in dielectrics,” Ann Phys

[16] E.M. Lifshitz, ”The theory of molecular attractive forces between solids,” Soviet Physics JETP

1272-1279 (1969).

Diego: Academic 1994 )

(NY) 115, 1-23 (1978).

2, 73-83 (1956).

[17] J. Maclay, H. Fearn, P. Milloni, ”Of some theoretical signiﬁcance:implications of Casimir

eﬀects,” Eur. J. Phys. 22, 463 (2001)

[18] J. Maclay, J. Hammer, ”Vacuum forces in Microcavities,” Seventh International Conference

on Squeezed States and Uncertainty Relations, Boston, MA, June 4-6, 2001. Available online

in the ICSSUR proceedings at the website: http://www.physics.umd.edu/robot

[19] F. M. Serry , D. Walliser, and G. J. Maclay, ”The anharmonic Casimir oscillator (ACO) – the

Casimir eﬀect in a model microelectromechanical system,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 4,

193-205 (1995).

[20] F. M. Serry , D. Walliser, and G. J. Maclay, ”The role of eh Casimir eﬀect in the static

deﬂection and stiction of membrane strips in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),” J.

[21] E. Buks and M.L. Roukes, ”Stiction, adhesion, and the Casimir eﬀect in micromechanical

of App. Phys. 84, 2501-2506 (1998).

systems,” Phys. Rev. B 63, 033402 (2001).

[22] H. B. Chan, V. A. Aksyuk, R. N. Kleiman,D. J. Bishop, and F. Capasso, ”Quantum mechan-

ical actuation of microelectromechanical systems by the Casimir force, Science 291, 1941-44

(2001).

21

[23] H. B. Chan, V. A. Aksyuk, R. N. Kleiman, D. J. Bishop, and F. Capasso, ”Nonlinear Mi-

cromechanical Casimir Oscillator,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 211801 (2001).

[24] R. Decca, D. Lopez, E. Fishbach, D. Krause, ”Measurement of the Casimir Force between

Dissimilar Metals,” Phys. Rev. 91, 050402 (2003).

[25] D. Deutsch and P. Candelas, ”Boundary eﬀects in quantum ﬁeld theory,” Phys. Rev D 20,

3063-80 (1979).

[26] G. Barton, ”Perturbative Casimir energies of spheres: Re-orienting an agenda,” Int. Conf.

of Squeezed States and Uncertainty Relations, Boston, May 2000. Available online in the

ICSSUR proceedings at the website: http://www.physics.umd.edu/robot

[27] Barton G Perturbative Casimir energies of dispersive spheres, cubes, and cylinders,” J. Phys.

[28] J. Maclay, “Analysis of Zero-Point Energy and Casimir Forces in Conducting Rectangular

A.:Math. Gen. 34, 4083 (2001).

Cavities,” Phys. Rev. A., 61, 052110 (2000).

Annals of Physics 147, 1-32 (1983).

[29] J.Ambjorn, and S. Wolfram, “Properties of the vacuum, J. Mechanical and Thermodynamics,”

[30] S. Hacyan, R. Jauregui, C. Villarreal, “Spectrum of quantum electromagnetic ﬂuctuations in

rectangular cavities,”Phys.Rev A 47, 4204-4211 (1993).

[31] W. Lukosz, “Electromagnetic Zero-Point Energy and Radiation Pressure for a Rectangular

Cavity,” Physica 56, 109-120 (1971).

[32] Jordan Maclay, and Carlos Villarreal, ” A Model

for Casimir Forces in Closed Cavi-

ties with Finite Conductivity,” presented at the symposium Casimir Forces: Recent Re-

sults in Experiment and Theory, Harvard-Cambridge Center for Astrophysics, Harvard Uni-

versity, Cambridge, MA, Nov. 14, 2002. Talks are available online at ITAMP website :

http://itamp.harvard.edu/itamp online.html. Also see the talks by V. Hushwater, Survey

of Repulsive Casimir Forces; S. Nussinov, New Variants and Other results for the Casimir

Eﬀect; and G. Barton, Casimir Eﬀects for a Conducting Spherical Shell.

[33] J. Maclay, J. Hammer, R. Clark, M. George, L. Sanderson, R. Ilic, Q. Leonard, ”Measurement

of repulsive quantum vacuum forces,” paper AIAA2001-3359, Proc. of 37th Joint Propulsion

Meeting , July, 2001, available from APS Conference Proceedings.

[34] O. Kenneth, I. Klitch, A. Mann, and M. Revzen, ”Repulsive Casimir Forces,” Phys. Rev.

Let.89, 0330001 (2002). Kenneth assumes constant ǫ and µ for all frequencies. The conclusion

22

in Kenneth’s paper is challenged by Iannuzzi and Capasso in Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 029101

(2003).

[35] F. Santos, A. Tenorio, and A. Tort, Phys. Rev. D 60, 105022 (1999).

[36] F. Pinto, Intl. J. Mod. Phys. D 14, 6, 995-1008 (2005).

[37] J. Maclay, ”A Design Manual for Micromachines using Casimir Forces: Preliminary Consid-

erations,” PROCEEDINGS of STAIF-00 (Space Technology and Applications International

Forum), edited by M.S. El-Genk, (American Institute of Physics, New York, 2000).

[38] DeWitt, B., “The Casimir eﬀect in Field Theory,” from Physics in the Making, ed. By A

Sarlemijn and M. Sparnaay, (Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., 1989).

[39] M. Hertzberg, R. Jaﬀee, M. Kardar, A. Scardicchio, Phys. Rev. Let. 95, 250402 (2005).

[40] R. L. Forward, ”Extracting electrical energy from the vacuum by cohesion of charged foliated

conductors,” Phys. Rev. B30, 1700 (1984).

[41] D. C. Cole and H. E. Puthoﬀ, ”Extracting energy and heat from the vacuum,” Phys. Rev. E

48, 1562 (1993).

[42] A. Rueda, Space Science 53, 223 (1990).

[43] D. C. Cole, ”Possible thermodynamic violations and astrophysical issues for secular accelera-

tion of electrodynamic particles in the vacuum,” Phys. Rev. E, 51 , 1663 (1995).

[44] T. H. Boyer, ”Thermal eﬀects of acceleration through random classical radiation,”Phys. Rev.

[45] F. Pinto, ”Engine cycle of an optically controlled vacuum energy transducer,” Phys. Rev.

B 60, 14740 (1999). The assumptions made in this paper about the ﬁnal conﬁguration are

D 21, 2137 (1980).

unphysical.

[46] Sukenik C I, Boshier M G, Cho D, Sandoghdar V, and Hinds E A Measurement of the Casimir-

Polder force Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 560-3 (1993).

[47] I. Brevik, M. Lygren, V. Marachevsky, ”Casimir-Polder eﬀect for a Perfectly Conducting

Wedge,” Annals of Physics 267, 134(1998).

[48] S. Enk, ”Casimir torque between dielectrics,” Phys. Rev. A 52, 2569 (1995).

[49] A. Lambrecht and S. Reynaud, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5672 (2000).

[50] W. Arnold, S. Hunklinger, K. Dransfeld, ”Inﬂuence of optical absorption on the Van der Waals

interaction between solids,” Phys. Rev. B 19, 6049 (1979).

[51] Chen F, Mohideen U, Klimchitskaya GL, and V.M. Mostepanenko, “Investigation of the

23

Casimir force between metal and semiconductor test bodies,” Physical Review A, Rapid Com-

munication, Vol. 72, pp. 020101-1-4, (2005).

[52] J. Maclay, R. W. Forward, A Gedanken spacecraft that operates using the quantum vacuum

(Dynamic Casimir Eﬀect), LANL Arxiv physics/0303108, Found. of Phys.34, 477 (2004).

[53] G. Moore, ”Quantum theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a variable-length one-dimensional

[54] C. K. Law, ”Resonance response of the vacuum to an oscillating boundary,”Phys. Rev. Lett.

[55] N. Birrell and P. Davies, Quantum ﬁelds in curved space, (Cambridge University Press, Cam-

cavity,”J. Math. Phys. 11, 2679 (1970).

73, 1931 (1994).

bridge, England, 1984), p. 48; p. 102.

[56] P. A. Maia Neto and L. A. S. Machado, ”Quantum radiation generated by a moving mirror

in free space,” Phys. Rev. A 54, 3420 (1996).

24

This figure "Fig_1a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

This figure "Fig_1b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

This figure "Fig_1c.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

This figure "Fig_2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

This figure "Fig_3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

This figure "Fig_4a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

This figure "Fig_4b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0608196v1

