6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint of the Institute for Basic Research IBR-EP-39, August 15, 2006

submitted for publication

Conﬁrmation of Don Borghi’s experiment on the synthesis of neutrons
from protons and electrons

Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research, Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
ibr@gte.net, http://www.i-b-r.org, http://www.neutronstructure.org
PACS 13.35.Hb, 14.60.Lm, 14.20.Dh

Abstract

Following Rutherford’s 1920 historical hypothesis of the neutron as a compressed
hydrogen atom in the core of stars, the laboratory synthesis of the neutron from protons
and electrons was claimed in the late 1960 by the Italian priest-physicist Don Carlo
Borghi and his associates via a metal chamber containing a partially ionized hydrogen
gas at a fraction of 1bar pressure traversed by an electric arc with 5J energy and
microwaves with 1010s−1 frequency. The experiment remained unveriﬁed for decades
due to the lack of theoretical understanding of the results.
In this note we report
various measurements showing that, under certain conditions, electric arcs within a
hydrogen gas produce neutral, hadron-size entities that are absorbed by stable nuclei
and subsequently result in the release of detectable neutrons, thus conﬁrming Don
Borghi’s experiment. The possibility that said entities are neutrons is discussed jointly
with other alternatives. Due to their simplicity, a primary scope of this note is to
stimulate the independent re-run of the tests as conducted or in suitable alternative
forms.

In 1920, Rutherford [1a] submitted the hypothesis that hydrogen atoms in the core of stars
are compressed into a new particle having the size of the proton that he called the neutron,
according to the synthesis

p+, e

− → n.

The existence of the neutron was conﬁrmed in 1932 by Chadwick [1b] and its main fea-
tures identiﬁed. Pauli [1c] noted that the spin 1/2 of the neutron cannot be represented
via a quantum state of two particles each having spin 1/2, and conjectured the possible
emission of a new neutral massless particle with spin 1/2. Fermi [1d] adopted Pauli’s con-
jecture, coined the name neutrino (meaning in Italian “little neutron”) with symbol ν, and
developed the theory of weak interactions according to the familiar relations

(1)

(2)

which theory was more recently developed into the so-called standard model [1e].

p+ + e

− → n + ν,

1

Despite historical advances along the latter lines, Rutherford’s legacy of synthesizing the
neutron from protons and electrons, did not remain ignored. In fact, the Italian priest-
physicist Don Carlo Borghi in collaboration with experimentalists from the University of
Recife, Brazil [2a], claimed in the late 1960s to have achieved the laboratory synthesis of
neutrons from protons and electrons.

Don Borghi’s experiment is reviewed in detail in volume [2b] (see in particular L. Daddi
[2c] and P. Giubbilini [2d]). We here merely recall that the experiment was conducted
via a cylindrical metallic chamber (called ”klystron”) ﬁlled up with a partially ionized
hydrogen gas at a fraction of 1bar pressure, traversed by an electric arc with about 500V
and 10mA as well as by microwaves with 1010s−1 frequency. In the cylindrical exterior of
the chamber the experimentalists placed various materials suitable to become radioactive
when subjected to a neutron ﬂux (such as gold, silver and others). Following exposures of
the order of weeks, the experimentalists reported nuclear transmutations due to a claimed
neutron ﬂux of the order of 104cps, apparently conﬁrmed by beta emissions not present in
the original material.

Don Borghi’s claim remained ignored for decades due to its incompatibility with established
knowledge. Even though not widely spoken in the technical literature, synthesis (2) violates
the conservation of energy unless the proton and the electron have a minimum energy of
0.78M eV, in which case no energy is left for the neutrino. This is due to the fact that
the sum of the rest energies of the proton and the electron (938.78M eV ) is 0.78M eV
smaller than the neutron rest energy (939.56M eV ). In the event protons and electrons do
have the missing energy, quantum mechanics predicts that their cross section is so small
(about 10−20barn) to prevent any possible synthesis. For these and additional unresolved
theoretical aspects of Don Borghi’s experiment we refer the interested reader to L. Daddi
[2c] and P. Giubbilini [2c].

In this note we report various measurements showing that, under conditions and processes
identiﬁed below, electric arcs within a hydrogen gas cause processes resulting in the synthe-
sis of neutrons, thus conﬁrming Don Borghi’s experiment; we recommend the independent
re-run of our measurements due to their simplicity; and we propose alternative tests. In
essence, Don Borghi and his associates used the electric arc for the sole purpose of maintain-
ing the hydrogen gas inside the chamber at least partially ionized [2a]. The measurements
presented herein indicate that neutrons originate from processes caused precisely by the
arc.

It is important to show that the objections against Don Borghi’s experiment are essentially
due to a rather widespread belief that novelty beyond quantum mechanics cannot exist. To
begin, Don Borghi’s experiment does not violate the principle of conservation of the energy
because its arc has about 5J energy, 1eV = 1.60 × 10−19J, and 0.78M eV = 1.24 × 10−13J.
Consequently, the use of 10−9J of the arc energy are suﬃcient to provide the energy needed
for the claimed neutron ﬂux of 104cps, the available 5J being essentially dissipated.

2

Figure 1: A schematic view of the alignment of protons and electrons along a magnetic
force line of a DC electric arc.

Also, the geometry of the electric arc, illustrated in Fig. 1, is quite conducive to the
synthesis of the neutron, since it aligns protons and electrons with their magnetic moment
along the tangent of the local magnetic force, thus resulting in the pairing of protons
and electrons under very large Coulomb attractions (due to the short distances) for both
opposite charges and opposite magnetic polarities. A neutral state of the type conceptually
depicted in Fig. 2 is then possible, thus rendering plausible the synthesis of the neutron
either under suitable processes or under a suitable ”trigger” [3a], such as the microwaves
used in Don Borghi’s experiment, the fast pressure surge used by the author as reported
below, or the compression that appears to be caused naturally by electric arcs with high
voltage, as suspected in lighting and related thunder. The remaining objections against
Don Borghi’s experiment equally emerge as not withstanding serious scientiﬁc inquiries.
.

In view of the lack of serious scientiﬁc objections, the author decided to conduct mea-
surements of neutrons expected from a chamber containing hydrogen solely traversed by
an electric arc. All tests were conducted at the lab of the Institute for Basic Research
in Palm Harbor, Florida. The ﬁrst measurements were conducted via a sealed cylindrical
chamber of about 6” diameter and 12” height made of commercially available, transparent,
PolyVinyl Chloride (PVC) housing along its symmetry axis a pair of tungsten electrodes

3

Figure 2: A schematic view of the collapse of the electron on thew proton structure as
expected from attractive Coulomb forces due to opposing charges and magnetic moments.

of 0.250”OD and 1” length fastened to the tip of 0.250”OD conducting rods protruding
through seals out of the top and bottom of the chamber for electrical connections.

The electrodes gap was controllable by sliding the top conducting rod through the seal
of the ﬂange. The PVC was selected to be transparent so as to allow a visual detection
of the arc. Following ﬂushing of air, the chamber was ﬁlled up with commercial grade
hydrogen at 25psi pressure. For power unit we used an ordinary AC-DC welder, a Miller
Sincrowave 300. Radiation counts were done via the sensitive photon-neutron detector
model P M 1703GN , s. n. 52777, purchased from Berkeley Nucleonics and produced by
Polimaster, Inc., with sonic and vibration alarms as well as memory for all readings.

The ﬁrst test was done on Friday, July 27, 2006, at 2 p.m. We ﬁrst used detector
P M 1703GN to verify the background radiations solely consisting of photon counts of
5 − 7µR/h without any neutron count; we delivered a DC electric arc at 27V and 10A
(namely with about 55 times the energy of the arc used in Don Borghi’s test), with about
0.125” gap for about 3s; we waited until the incandescence of the electrodes was no longer
visible (to prevent the override of the photon over the neutron count); and then placed de-
tector P M 1703GN against the PVC cylinder. This resulted in the detection of photons at
the rate of 10 − 15µR/h expected from the residual excitation of the tips of the electrodes,
but no neutron count at all.

4

However, about 3m following the test, the detector entered into sonic and vibration alarms,
speciﬁcally, for neutron detection oﬀ the instrument maximum of 99cps while no anomalous
photon emission was measured. The detector was moved outside the laboratory and the
neutron counts returned to zero. The detector was then returned into the laboratory and
we were surprised to see it entering into sonic and vibrational alarms at about 5′ away from
the arc chamber, again, with the neutron count oﬀ scale without appreciable detection of
photons, at which point the laboratory was evacuated for safety. After waiting for 30m
(double neutron’s lifetime), we were surprised to see detector P M 1703GN go oﬀ scale
again in neutron counts at a distance of 10′ from the experimental set up. Being in late
Friday afternoon, the lab was closed for the day.

Inspection of the lab the following morning indicated no neutron detection in the general
area, but detector P M 1703GN showed clear neutron counts when placed next to the PVC
wall. The same detections persisted for two subsequent days until the hydrogen was ﬂushed
out of the chamber.

The test was repeated the afternoon of the following Friday with the welder operating in
AC mode at 30V and 30A plus a transformer that allowed to deliver an arc with 700V
and 1.2A for 5s with a gap of about 0.375”. We waited again until the incandescence of
the tips was extinguished and placed detector P M 1703GN near the cylindrical PVC wall,
resulting in sonic and vibrational alarms much sooner and deﬁnitely bigger than those of
the ﬁrst test, thus requiring, again, the evacuation of the lab.

A third test was done the following Wednesday in a rectangular, transparent, PVC chamber
3”× 3”× 6” ﬁlled up with commercial grade hydrogen at atmospheric pressure and temper-
ature traversed by a 2” long intermitted electric arc powered by a standard Whimshurst
electrostatic generator. Repeated tests produced no neutron detection.

However, the repetition of the test the following morning caused an unexpected implosion
due to the contamination of the chamber with air and the resulting H − O combustion
triggered by the spark. Despite the rudimentary nature of the equipment, this implosion
caused, by far, the biggest detection of neutrons via continuous alarms due to oﬀ-scale cps
without any appreciable photon detection, as conﬁrmed and documented by the print-outs
of the P M 1703GN detector.

Identical re-runs of the test produced exactly the same results. Detector P M 1703GN
was returned to the manufacturer for control; it was veriﬁed to operate properly; and the
printout of all readings stored in its memory was released conﬁrming the measurements re-
ported above. All additional tests were then halted pending the implementary of regulatory
procedures.

It should be reported that no meaningful neutron counts were detected in using various
other gases, or for electric arcs submerged within liquids. Therefore, the measurements
herein reported, in the way conducted, appear to be speciﬁcally and solely applicable for

5

electric arcs in gaseous hydrogen.

In summary, under suﬃcient power or a suitable ”trigger” under insuﬃcient power, electric
arcs within a hydrogen gas produce ”entities” that 1) are not hydrogen atoms (because in
that case the P M 1703GN counter would show no detection); 2) have dimensions of the
order of those of all hadrons (otherwise, again, the counter would not detect them); 3)
are necessarily neutral (to move freely through the PVC walls); 4) are essentially stable
for hadron standards (more accurate data being grossly premature at this writing); and
5) remain initially conﬁned within the arc chamber under steady conditions to slowly exit,
except for the case of production under implosion causing rapid propagation.

The theoretical interpretation of these ﬁndings will be presented elsewhere [3b]. At this
moment we limit ourselves to indicate the main possible interpretations of the above ﬁnd-
ings.

First interpretation: this possibility is along Rutherford’s historical legacy (1), namely,
that the ”entities” produced by the electric arc, rather than being neutrons, are a new
bound state of protons and electrons at short distances. In fact, the entity depicted in Fig.
2 is a Boson with spin 0 here tentatively called arcogen in the Greek meaning of being
”arc generated”), while the neutron as notoriously spin 1
2 . Hence, the arcogen rest energy
is expected to be the sum of the rest energies of proton and electron (938.78M eV ) less
a large Coulomb binding energy, thus being considerable smaller than the neutron rest
energy (939.56M eV ).

This alternative is due to the possibilities that: i) ordinary stable nuclei absorb the arco-
gens; ii) said nuclei, rather than the arc, synthesize neutrons according to the standard
model, i.e., reaction (2); and iii) ordinary neutrons are then released by the nuclei as part of
their radioactive process. In this case counter P M 1703GN does indeed detects neutrons,
but they are of nuclear origin, rather than synthesized by the electric arc.

In fact, Don Borghi was rather cautious in calling ”neutrons” the entities produced by his
klystron [2a]. The same caution has been voiced by Daddi [2c] and others [2b]. Also.
it
should be noted that new bound states of protons and electrons below the Bohr’s ground
state of the hydrogen have been predicted by various authors (see, e.g., Mills [2e]) and
appear to be necessary in any case for a serious interpretation of the Sun spectral emis-
sion.

Second interpretation: due to the lack of serious scientiﬁc objections, it is also possible
that electric arcs within a hydrogen gas directly synthesize the neutron according to the
standard reaction (2). In this case the energy needed for the neutron synthesis is provided
by the arc, while the conservation of angular momentum is salvaged by the creation and
release of an electron neutrino. According to this interpretation, following their synthesis,
the neutrons slowly migrate, are absorbed by the stable nuclei of the lab environment and
then released as part of natural radioactive processes.

6

Third interpretation: due to intriguing cosmological implications, we should also men-
tion the possibility that neutrons are indeed synthesized by the electric arc, but both the
missing energy and angular momentum are provided by the ether (empty space conceived
as a universal substratum of energy) via a neutral entity here tentatively called neutron
etherino (see [3b] for muon, tau and other particle syntheses) and denoted with the symbol
a (from the Latin aether). The (neutron) etherino is, therefore, conjectured to have: zero
mass and charge, the energy of at least 0.78M eV , and spin 1
2 . In this case, rather than
reaction (2), we would have the alternative form

p+ + a + e

− → n.

(3)

The etherino hypothesis should not be dismissed lightly prior to due study because the idea
of continuous creation of matter in the universe has been repeatedly voiced. The view here
submitted is that, in the event real, the most plausible mechanism of continuous creation
is given precisely by the synthesis of the neutron inside stars.
Note that the alternative formulation p+ + ¯ν + e− → n has no scientiﬁc meaning due to the
impossibility for proton and electrons to bound to or absorb antineutrinos. Also, rather
than being in conﬂict with current claims of neutrino detection, synthesis (3) could be of
help in resolving at least some of the controversies on neutrinos. For instance, according to
the standard model, a neutral entity carrying energy in our spacetime, such as the neutrino,
can traverse very large hyperdense media such as entire stars without any collision. Such
an idea is repugnant to the scientiﬁc reason of various physicists, including the author.
The etherino hypothesis automatically resolves this issue (since no energy would move in
our spacetime), while not necessarily being in conﬂict with available neutrino experiments
and actually having the potential of initiating possible new communications through the
ether.

After all, stars initiate their life as being solely composed of hydrogen and quantitative
studies beyond the level of personal beliefs on the availability of the necessary energy for
the synthesis of the neutron have not been conducted to the author’s best knowledge. There
are also serious doubt as to whether the immense energy needed in supernova explosion
can be truly explained via nuclear syntheses alone and the rather limited level of 20-th
century knowledge. Consequently, it is perhaps time for the scientiﬁc community to admit
the possibility that stars contain mechanisms for extracting energy from space.

A primary objective of this note is to stimulating the independent re-run of the tests by
interested colleagues due to their simplicity, low cost and signiﬁcance. A much needed
alternative test is one permitting the measurement of the energy needed for the neutron
synthesis, something not possible in Don Borghi’s test.

We here propose the conduction of the simple experiment of Fig. 3 essentially consisting of:
A) a cylinder of beryllium saturated with hydrogen and kept at low temperature (so as to

7

Figure 3: A schematic view of the proposed alternative test on the possible laboratory
synthesis of the neutron.

minimize thermal motion of their proton); B) a coherent electron beam with a measurable
energy smaller, equal or bigger than 0.78M eV ; C) a magnetic ﬁeld encompassing both the
beryllium bar and the electron beam in order to achieve the axial coupling of Fig. 1 [3b];
D) means to realize a ”trigger”, such as Don Borghi’s high frequency microwaves or the
fast pressure surge of this note; and E) a suitable neutron detector.

The resolutory character of the proposed test should be noted. In fact, the test would es-
tablish the existence of the (electron) neutrino (only) via the measurement of the electron
beam energy if bigger than 0.78M eV after subtracting the kinetic energy of the neutrons.
However, the possible detection of neutrons synthesized for energies smaller than 0.78M eV
would disprove the existence of the neutrino in favor of the etherino hypothesis and the
continuous creation in the universe. The case of the possible detection of neutrons syn-
thesized at the threshold electron beam energy of 0.78M eV would perhaps be even more
intriguing because it would establish that the sole exchange between matter and the ether
is given by spin.

Whatever the alternative that will result to be applicable among the three possibilities
submitted above, the measurements presented in this note do provide a direct experimental
veriﬁcation of Don Borghi’s experiment. The measurements also support the long suspected
capability of lighting to synthesize natural elements (a condition apparently necessary for a
serious interpretation of thunder due to the numerical failure of standard interpretations),

8

the synthesis of the neutron being the ﬁrst of the chain. Finally, the reported measurements
provide encouraging support for the recently proposed ”Controlled Intermediate Nuclear
Fusion” [3a] that is precisely based on electric arcs, the control being of easy industrial
realization via the control of power, pressure and rigger.

In closing, it is recommendable to note that, irrespective of whether the neutron is syn-
thesized by stars, nuclei or arcs, and irrespective of whether according to the neutrino
hypothesis (2) or the etherino hypothesis (3), the synthesis of the neutrons from protons
and electrons signals the limit of exact applicability of quantum mechanics. This is due to
the fact that quantum mechanics can only describe bound states with the familiar negative
binding energy as occurring in nuclei, atoms and molecules, while the synthesis of neutrons
(as well as all hadrons) requires a positive binding energy as in Eqs. (2) and (3). Under
this condition, the Schroedinger equation no longer provide physical results, as the reader
is encourage to verify by attempting the solution of any conventional bound state in which
the binding energy is turned from a negative to a positive value.

This occurrence required the necessary existing from the class of unitary equivalence of
quantum mechanics via the proposal by this author back in 1978 [3c] to construct a nonuni-
tary covering under the name of hadronic mechanics. The new mechanics was subsequently
developed, veriﬁed and applied by various authors (see [3d-3f] and quoted references), and
achieved the numerically exact and invariant, nonrelativistic [3g] and relativistic [3h] rep-
resentation of all characteristics of the neutron as a generalized bound state of a proton
and an electron [3i].

The generalized structure equation for the neutron is simply achieved via a suitable nonuni-
tary image of the corresponding equation for the hydrogen atoms, in which nonunitarity
represents contact non-Hamiltonian (thus necessarily nonunitary) interactions caused by
the deep penetration of the electron wavepacket within the hyperdense medium inside the
proton. A similar nonunitary image of the positronium permits the numerically exact and
invariant representation of it all characteristics of the πo meson as a generalized bound
state of one electron and one positron, fully achieved since the original proposal of 1978
(see [3c], Section 5). Similar structure models follow for all unstable hadrons with physical
constituents released free, usually in the spontaneous decays with the lowest mode.

Compatibility with S(3)-color theories is possible under their re-interpretation as solely pro-
viding the ﬁnal Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of hadrons. According to this view, quarks re-
main necessary for the elaboration of the theories, but only as mere mathematical quantities
(mathematical representation of a mathematical symmetry in a mathematical, complex-
valued unitary space with no possible connection with our spacetime), since quark are
aﬄicted by a litany of unresolved inconsistencies when interpreted as physical particles in
our spacetime (lack of gravity, since the latter is solely deﬁnable in our spacetime as well
known since Einstein; lack of inertia, since the latter is solely deﬁnable via the Poincare’
symmetry that is inapplicable to quarks as well known, etc.).

9

All in all, rather than having reached the end of knowledge with quantum mechanics,
research in the synthesis and structure of the neutron may stimulate a new scientiﬁc re-
naissance with theoretical experimental and industrial advances perhaps beyond our imag-
ination at this writing.

Acknowledgments. The author would like to thank: Robert Rao and Jim McQuaid
of Berkeley Nucleonics and Arif Mamedov of Polimaster, Inc., for invaluable technical
assistance on neutron detection; L. Daddi, P. Giubbilini and U. Mastromatteo for deep
insights in Dob Borghi’s experiment;’ and H. E. Wilhelm, C. Whitney, G. Mileto and
others for invariable critical comments.

References

[1] H. Rutherford Proc. Roy. Soc. A 97, 374 (1920) [1a]. J. Chadwick Proc. Roy. Soc.
A 136, 692 (1932) [1b]. W. Pauli, Handbruch der Physik Vol. 24, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin (1933) [1c]. E. Fermim Nuclear Physics, University of Chicago Press (1949) [1d].
M. Kaku, Quantum Field Theory, Oxford University Press, New York (1993) [1e].

[2] C. Borghi, C. Giorio and A. Dall’Olio, ”Experimental. evidence on the emission of neu-
trons from a cold hydrogen plasma,” communications of CENUFPE number 8 (1969)
and 25 (1971), reprinted in the (Russian) Phys. Atomic Nuclei 56, 205 (1993) [2a].
Collected Papers on Don Borghi’s Experiment, R. M. Santilli, editor, International
Academic Press (in press) [2b]. L. Daddi, contributed paper in Collected Papers on
Don Borghi’s Experiment [2c]. P. Giubbilini contributed paper in Collected Papers on
Don Borghi’s Experiment [2d]. R. Mills, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 25, 1171 (2000) [2e].

[3] R. M. Santilli, ”The novel ’Controlled Intermediate Nuclear Fusion’ and its possible
industrial realization as predicted by hadronic mechanics and chemistry,” J. Applied
Sciences (in press), also available at http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0602125 [3a]; ”Neu-
trinos or etherino?”, contributed paper to IARD 2006, to appear [3b]; .Hadronic J.
1, 224, 574 and 1267 (1978) [3c]; Rendiconti Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Sup-
plemento 42, 7 (1996) [3d]; Found. Phys 27, 635 (1997) [3e]; Acta Appl. Math.
50, 177 (1998) [3f]; Hadronic J. 13, 513 (1990) [3g]; JJINR Comm. E4-93-352
(1993) published in Chinese J. Syst. Eng. and Electr. 6, 177 (1995) [3h]; Elements
of Hadronic Mechanics, Vol. I (1995), Vol. II (1995), Vol. III (in press), see also
http://www.i-b-r.org/Hadronic-Mechanics.htm [3i].

10

