6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
3
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reality in quantum mechanics,
Extended Everett Concept, and consciousness

Michael B. Mensky
P.N.Lebedev Physical Institute, 53 Leninsky prosp., 119991 Moscow, Russia

Abstract

Conceptual problems in quantum mechanics result from the spe-
ciﬁc quantum concept of reality and require, for their solution, in-
cluding the observer’s consciousness into quantum theory of measure-
ments. Most naturally this is achieved in the framework of Everett’s
“many-worlds interpretation” of quantum mechanics. According to
this interpretation, various classical alternatives are perceived by con-
sciousness separately from each other. In the Extended Everett Con-
cept (EEC) proposed by the present author, the separation of the
alternatives is identiﬁed with the phenomenon of consciousness. This
explains classical character of the alternatives and unusual manifesta-
tions of consciousness arising “at the edge of consciousness” (i.e.
in
sleep or trance) when its access to “other alternative classical realities”
(other Everett’s worlds) becomes feasible. Because of reversibility of
quantum evolution in EEC, all time moments in the quantum world
are equivalent while the impression of ﬂow of time appears only in
consciousness. If it is assumed that consciousness may inﬂuence onto
probabilities of alternatives (which is consistent in case of inﬁnitely
many Everett’s worlds), EEC explains free will, “probabilistic mira-
cles” (observing low-probability events) and decreasing entropy in the
sphere of life.

1

1 Introduction

Paradoxes of quantum mechanics and the resulting so-called “problem of
measurement” are known from the early years of quantum mechanics, but are
not ﬁnally resolved up to now. An essential step in the attempts to solve these
problems was made by Everett in its famous “many-worlds” interpretation of
quantum mechanics [1, 2]. In our days the Everett’s approach became much
more popular. One of the reasons is that it may in a sense be connected
with the problem of consciousness (see, e.g., [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]). Here we shall
discuss the approach called Extended Everett Concept (EEC) suggested by
the author [8, 9, 10, 11]. This approach allows one to introduce the connection
between quantum mechanics and consciousness in a very natural way. The
resulting advantage is that some features of consciousness as well as some
known but not yet explained phenomena of life directly follow from EEC.
Moreover, it directly follows from EEC that these phenomena appear in a
special state of consciousness which may be described as being “at the edge
of consciousness” that may be identiﬁed as sleep or trance.

In Sect. 2 we shall very brieﬂy show how conceptual problems of quantum
mechanics follow from the contradiction between its linearity and the postu-
late of reduction in the description of quantum measurements. In Sect. 3 the
interpretation of quantum mechanics suggested by Everett for overcoming
this contradiction will be presented as well as its extension (EEC) leading to
the quantum deﬁnition of consciousness. Finally in Sect. 4 important con-
sequences of EEC (such as the explanation of the phenomenon of life, free
will and permanent support of health in an organism) will be reviewed. In
Sect. 5 a short conclusion will be given.

2 Quantum measurements: theory and para-

doxes

There is no need to discuss the conceptual problems (paradoxes) of quantum
mechanics in detail because they are well known. Let us only mention that
all of them follow from special features of the concept of reality in quantum
mechanics. These features were ﬁrst explicitly formulated in the paper by
A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen [12], reformulated later in a more
convenient form by John Bell [13, 14], and experimentally conﬁrmed in the
experiments of A.Aspect [15, 16].

2

The essential diﬀerence of the quantum-mechanical concept of reality from
usual classical reality is that in quantum mechanics the properties of material
systems, as they are observed in a measurement, may not exist before the
observation (measurement). If for example the measurement shows that a
particle is located in one of two points A1, A2, this particle may be located
neither in A1, nor in A2 before the measurement. This is the case if the state
of the particle before the measurement, ψ = c1ψ1 + c2ψ2, is a superposition
of the states ψ1, ψ2 localized correspondingly in A1 and A2.

According to von Neumann reduction postulate, after the measurement
distinguishing between these two alternatives, the system having been previ-
ously in the state ψ goes over into one of the states ψ1 and ψ2, with the cor-
responding probabilities |c1|2 and |c2|2. This postulate corresponds to what
is observed in real measurements, so the reduction postulate is accepted as
the basis for the quantum-mechanical calculations. However, it contradicts
to the linearity of quantum mechanics when the process of measurement is
considered as an interaction of two systems (the measured system and the
measuring device).

Let the initial state of the device be Φ0 and the initial state of both
systems, ψiΦ0, goes over, after the interaction described by the unitary evo-
lution operator U, into UψiΦ0 = ψiΦi. Then it follows from the linearity
of the operator U that the initial state ψΦ0 changes, in the course of the
interaction, as follows:

ψΦ0 → UψΦ0 = U(c1ψ1 +c2ψ2)Φ0 = U(c1ψ1Φ0 +c2ψ2Φ0) = c1ψ1Φ1 +c2ψ2Φ2.

If one include in the description not only the measuring device, but also the
observer as one more physical system initially in the state χ0, and apply usual
quantum-mechanical consideration to the three systems, then their evolution
under the interaction will be given as follows:

ψΦ0χ0 = (c1ψ1 + c2ψ2)Φ0χ0 → c1ψ1Φ1χ1 + c2ψ2Φ2χ2.

(1)

Thus, the linearity of the quantum-mechanical evolution requires that
both alternatives 1 and 2 forming the initial superposition ψ exist also (in
the superposition with the same coeﬃcients) after the interaction with the
measuring device. However, the description of the observation seems to re-
quire the reduction, i.e. surviving only a single alternative. The same is of
course valid in case when many alternatives are distinguished by the measure-
ment, instead of two of them. The contradiction arises between the linearity

3

of quantum mechanics and the picture of reduction presenting the observa-
tion. This contradiction is actually the reason of the quantum-mechanical
paradoxes, or conceptual problems.

We see also that the problem is not overcome by the observer as a phys-
ical body being included in the description of the measurement. The key
role is therefore played not by the physical body of an observer but by her
consciousness.

3 Everett (“many-worlds”) interpretation and

its extension

Everett’s interpretation is sometimes estimated to be logically complicated.
However, it seems complicated only from the point of view of macroscopic,
and therefore classical, picture of what happens in the measurement. From
the point of view of quantum mechanics the Everett’s interpretation is quite
simple. Indeed, it excludes the reduction postulate and recovers linear char-
acter of quantum mechanics in full volume. Thus the paradoxical character of
quantum mechanics is overcome not by inclusion new elements in the theory
(and therefore making it more complicated) but by exclusion most unnatural
elements of this theory.

The Everett’s interpretation is not so simple in its treating the picture
arising before the eyes (in the consciousness) of the observer. We shall see
however that this may be essentially simpliﬁed in the framework of the Ex-
tended Everett Concept (EEC).

3.1 Everett interpretation: taking quantum mechanics

seriously

The logic of Everett’s interpretation is very simple. We know that the evo-
lution is linear in quantum mechanics. A measurement is nothing else than
an interaction between the measured system and its environment (including
the measuring device and the observer). Let us take these facts seriously
and accept that the measurement is actually linear process. Then the state
after the measurement has the form of a superposition, as in Eq. (1) or in

4

the corresponding formula with summation over many alternatives:

ψΦ0χ0 = X

ciψiΦ0χ0 → X

ciψiΦiχi.

(2)

i

i

Assuming the linearity, Everett must then somehow interpret all terms of
the superposition in the right-hand-side of this equation, i.e. all alternative
readouts of the measurement. All alternatives are in his concept equally real
and should be considered on equal foot. How it may then occur that the
observer perceives only one of these alternatives? The answer may also be
read oﬀ from Eq. (2). This formula means that the state of the observer is
described also by the various components included in the superposition. The
component χi describes the state of the observer in which she sees that the
measuring device is in the state Φi thus pointing out that the system is in
the state ψi. This is the picture of a single ‘Everett’s world’. The triplets
ψiΦiχi, with all possible i, coexist, forming the “Everett worlds”, or, more
precisely, alternative ‘classical projections’ of a single quantum world. All
such “worlds”, or alternative classical realities, coexist and are equally real
(should be considered on equal foot).

3.2 Extended Everett concept: quantum conscious-

ness and life

It is convenient for us to express the situation in the Everett’s interpretation
as follows. All classical alternatives are perceived by consciousness (of the
observer), however the alternatives are separated by the consciousness: each
alternative is perceived independently from the others.

Note that all the observers in a single Everett’s world (in the same classi-
cal reality) see the same, their observations are in complete agreement with
each other. This follows from the fact that the initial state with two ob-
servers, Pi ciψiΦ0χ(1)
0 will go over, after the measurement, into the state
Pi ciψiΦiχ(1)

(the crossing terms with χ(1)

, i 6= j, cannot emerge).

We may now concentrate on the whole component of the superposition,
Ψi = ψiΦiχi rather than on its factors ψi, Φi and χi. The right-hand-side of
Eq. (2) takes then the form

0 χ(2)

i χ(2)

i χ(2)

j

i

Ψ = X

ciΨi.

(3)

i

5

This equation presents a state of the whole quantum world as a superposition
of classical (more precisely, close to classical, or quasiclassical) states of this
world. In the previously introduced terms, the whole world contains both the
measured system and its environment, including the observer. Now, to move
further, we do not need the picture of measurement in these details. Instead,
we may talk about the state of the (quantum) world as it is reﬂected in
consciousness, hence the superposition of (quasi)classical states of the world.
Now we have to do a decisive step, leading to the radical simpliﬁcation
of the whole concept and to very interesting consequences. Taking into ac-
count that nobody knows actually what is consciousness, we assume that
consciousness is nothing else than the separation of the alternatives. This
identiﬁcation of consciousness with the separation of the alternatives is a
crucial point of the Extended Everett Concept developed in [8, 9, 10, 11].
In this assumption, two unclear concepts, one from quantum mechanics and
the other from psychology, are identiﬁed and thus “explain each other”. The
whole concept becomes simpler. More important is that this leads to new
and very interesting consequences.

First of all, this explains why the alternatives in Eq. (3) should be clas-
sical.
Instead of the vectors Ψi (classical alternatives) we could make use
of the other vectors (linear combinations of Ψi) to present the state of the
quantum world Ψ as a superposition. Why have we to take those vectors
which are close to classical states? Why the alternatives in the description
of consciousness are (close to) classical? The answer is almost evident.

Consciousness is a feature (and the principal feature) of living beings.
(Note that here the term “consciousness” means the most primitive, or the
most deep, level of consciousness, diﬀering perceiving from not perceiving).
If the picture of the world as it is appears in consciousness were far from
classical, then, due to quantum non-locality, this would be a picture of a world
with “locally unpredictable” behavior. The future of a restricted region in
such a world could depend on events even in very distant regions. No strategy
of surviving could be elaborated in such a world for a localized living being.
Life (of the form we know) would be impossible. On the contrary, a (close
to) classical state of the world is “locally predictable”. The evolution of a
restricted region of such a world essentially depends only on the events in
this region or not too far from it. Inﬂuence of distant regions is negligible.
Strategy of surviving can be elaborated in such a world for a localized living
being. Therefore, classicality of the alternatives Ψi is a necessary condition
for life. The very concept of life naturally arises in this way from EEC.

6

4 At the edge of consciousness

It is astonishing that EEC leads to very concrete conclusions about some
special features and unusual abilities of consciousness and, even more as-
tonishing, to the concrete characterization of the conditions providing these
special abilities. Consciousness is predicted to manifest its unusual abili-
ties when it is almost turned oﬀ, i.e.
is in the state similar to sleeping or
trance. The reason is that in this case consciousness, when working with the
given classical alternative, may obtain information from the quantum world
as a whole, i.e. from “other classical alternatives”. This conclusion follows
from the deﬁnition of consciousness accepted in EEC. If, in addition to this
deﬁnition, the assumption is accepted that consciousness may inﬂuence on
probabilities of classical alternatives, then EEC leads also to some well known
but not yet explained features of living organisms (such as free will).

4.1

Information from ‘other classical realities’: Com-
parison of alternative realities and predictions

Let the state of the quantum world be presented by Eq. (3) where each com-
ponent Ψi of the superposition on the right-hand-side is a state presenting a
‘classical alternative’ of the world. Consciousness perceives these alternatives
separately from each other. Moreover, according to the deﬁnition accepted
in EEC, consciousness is identiﬁed with separation of the alternatives. Com-
plete disappearance of consciousness (for example in case of death) means
complete disappearance of the separation (just as no separation exist in the
description of non-alive matter, with no phenomenon of life). If consciousness
does not disappear but becomes weak (in the state of sleep or trance) then,
arguing in the same logic, we have to conclude that the separation of alterna-
tives becomes not absolute. The ‘partitions’ between the alternatives become
transparent. When perceiving one of the alternative classical realities, the
consciousness may then perceive also ‘other alternative classical realities’ (see
Fig. 1). At the moment of returning to the full consciousness (absolute sep-
aration) some part of the information from ‘other realities’ may be kept and
exploited in the usual work of consciousness with ‘its own’ alternative.

The same may be formulated in another form: in case of partial turning
consciousness oﬀ (in the state of sleep or trance) it can extract information
from all classical alternatives, or, in other words, from the whole quantum
world. At the edge of consciousness one obtains access to the whole quan-

7

tum world. This should supply additional (as compared with the regular
functioning of consciousness) and quite unusual abilities.

What are the features of these additional abilities of consciousness? We
can immediately point out two of them. First, information ‘from other clas-
sical alternatives’, i.e. from various scenarios possible for a classical world,
allows one to compare these scenarios and conclude what scenario is the best
(favorable for life). Later (Sect. 4.2) we shall see how this information may
be used.

Second, in the Everett concept the quantum world as a whole (i.e. without
separation of the alternatives) is reversible. Its image is a four-dimensional
manifold rather than a three-dimensional space developing in time. When
consciousness looks out from a single alternative into this reversible world,
it can take information from any part of this world. Returning from the
quantum world as a whole to ‘its own classical reality’, the consciousness may
possess information extracted not only from ‘other (alternative) scenarios’,
but also from any stage of these scenarios, including information from the
future of each scenario. This argument hints that predictions made in sleep
or trance may be possible. We see also that predictions should have relative
rather than absolute character. Indeed, they depend on the concrete scenario:
the predictions become true only if the given scenario will be realized in the
course of the further evolution of ‘my own classical reality’.

There are many evidences of successful predictions made by some people
in sleep or in trance. Many of these evidences seem to be well documented.
The consideration in the framework of EEC may explain both the feasibility
of successful predictions and relative character of each prediction, i.e. its not
full reliability. One may think that a prediction made in explicitly relative
form (something will happen under the condition that something else will
do) should be more reliable (if the predictions made by the same person are
compared).

4.2 Modiﬁcation of probabilities: Free will and prob-

abilistic miracles

Up to now our consideration was based only on the Everett’s interpretation
of quantum mechanics and the identiﬁcation of consciousness with the sep-
aration of alternatives. Let us now accept an additional assumption that
consciousness may modify probabilities of classical alternatives. From the

8

point of view of an observer this means that, perceiving a deﬁnite (alter-
native) classical reality she may have inﬂuence on what alternative she will
perceive in the next moment (next observation). Probabilities of some of the
‘next moment’ alternatives (which seem to be favorable) may be increased,
while the probabilities of others decreased.

Why this assumption seems to be natural in the context of EEC? It looks
natural because in the framework of this concept separation of the alterna-
tives is considered from two qualitatively diﬀerent points of view. First, from
the point of view of quantum mechanics (describing only non-alive matter,
including although bodies of living beings when they are considered simply as
physical systems), and second, from the point of view of psychology. There is
only one universal probability distribution in quantum mechanics (|ci|2 in the
previous example), but the probabilities may in principle be diﬀerent from
the point of view of the consciousness of a living being: various observers
may elaborate diﬀerent probability distributions for what alternatives they
are going to see.

There are two evident objections against this assumption. First one is
purely mathematical. The probability of the ith alternative is naturally de-
ﬁned as the ‘relative number’ Ni/N of the Everett’s worlds of the deﬁnite
type, such that just the ith alternative is realized in all of them. At ﬁrst
glance, this deﬁnition is unambiguous and should imply a universal proba-
bility distribution. However, this is not the case if the ‘number of Everett’s
If both Ni and N are inﬁnite, this ‘deﬁnition’
worlds’ is inﬁnite [10, 11].
becomes ambiguous because of a paradoxical feature of an inﬁnite set:
its
proper subset may be put in one-to-one correspondence with the whole set.
Because of this, diﬀerent probability distributions on an inﬁnite set are com-
patible.

This becomes obvious if one make use of a naive picture where each of the
observers sends her ‘twin-observers’, one after another, into various Everett’s
worlds. Let for simplicity we have two observers and two types of Everett’s
worlds, E1 and E2 (with the inﬁnite numbers of worlds of each type). One
of the two observers may send his ‘twins’ according to the rule: each twin
having odd number goes to a world of type E1 and each even twin, to a
world of type E2. The other observer may use another rule: each twin with
the number divisible by 3 goes to an Everett’s world of type E1 while the
rest are sent to the worlds of type E2. Then the probability for the ﬁrst
observer to ﬁnd herself in the world of type E1 is equal to 1/2, while for the
second observer it is equal to 1/3. Nevertheless, in case of inﬁnite number

9

of worlds and of twins, all twins will be distributed between the worlds, and
each Everett’s world will obtain a single twin of the ﬁrst observer and a single
twin of the second one.

There is another objection against the discussed assumption. If probabil-
ities are not universal, then laws of nature may be violated, but they seem
to always endure experimental check-up. The answer to this objection is
that the experimental check-up is feasible only for very simple events (such
as where an electron should ﬂy etc.). For the events of this type conscious-
ness hardly may modify probabilities because these events are not important
from the point of view of living beings. Since laws of physics govern only
such simple events (and rather simple combinations of them), the laws of
physics should be valid. If the ability of consciousness to modify probabili-
ties may exist, then it should concern only ‘signiﬁcant’ (for life) events. Such
events have much more complicated structure and cannot be reduced to sim-
ple events investigated by physicists. Therefore, probabilities of these highly
complicated (from the point of view of a physicist) ‘signiﬁcant events’ cannot
be calculated with the help of quantum-mechanical formulas. The question
about violation of laws of physics in the scope of such events (in the sphere
of life) is therefore meaningless.

Taking these arguments into account, we may assume that consciousness
may modify probabilities of classical alternatives. How this ability of con-
sciousness may manifest itself? First of all it is evident that ‘probabilistic
miracles’ become possible under this assumption. This means that conscious-
ness may increase the probability of an event which otherwise seems almost
improbable. The probability may even be made close to unity. In the lat-
ter case modifying probabilities looks as a choice of a deﬁnite alternative.
However, this is not a choice but only modiﬁcation of probabilities, since all
non-zero probabilities remain non-zero (although may become very close to
zero). The event that is chosen by consciousness (and therefore looks to be a
miracle) always has non-zero probability even without modiﬁcation of proba-
bilities. It is therefore feasible event even in ‘natural’ conditions, without any
inﬂuence of consciousness. The realization of an event which is characterized
by a low probability, does not strictly speaking violate any laws. Instead, it
may seem a rare coincidence. For example, if someone says that she wishes
to stop rain, and the rain stops, then this may be a probabilistic miracle, but
instead it may be interpreted as a coincidence.

There is one more class of well known and not exotic events which also can
be explained with modifying probabilities by consciousness. These are events

10

realizing what is called free will. If I wish to go to the right and actually
go to the right, how this happens? In fact, there is no explanation of this
simple ability of consciousness. In the framework of EEC, if the modiﬁcation
of probabilities is assumed, free will is explained quite naturally. There are
two alternatives: in one Everett’s world I go to the right, in the other one I go
to the left. Both alternatives have non-zero probabilities. My consciousness
modiﬁes the probabilities increasing the probability of the ﬁrst alternative.
As a result, with a high probability I go to the right. I chose to go to the
right. This was my free will.

It worth noting that in most cases free will is realized ‘unconsciously’, i.e.
in the state ‘on the edge of consciousness’ (in this case only a part of the
consciousness is ‘almost turned oﬀ’, namely the part controlling the body’s
movements). This is in accord with our prediction that the special abilities of
consciousness should manifest themselves just in this state. We shall return
to this important point in Sect. 4.3.

4.3 Unconscious: the miracle of life

According to EEC, at the edge of consciousness it has access to information
from the whole quantum world, i.e. from various classical realities (classical
scenarios). Moreover, if consciousness may modify probabilities of alterna-
tives, it may choose (make more probable) those alternatives (classical reali-
ties) that are favorable for life. Thus, the unusual information obtained from
the quantum world can be used for improving quality of life. This may shed
light on many phenomena in the sphere of life that are well-known and seem
quite usual, but in reality have no explanation up to now. These phenomena
may in fact be called miracles of life.

Two important examples are, ﬁrst, the health and its support and second,
the role of sleep. It is commonly believed that health is supported due to
the great eﬃciency of the organism as a self-regulating machine. However, it
is diﬃcult to imagine that an organism is eﬃcient enough to support health
during the whole life, despite of enormous number of unpredictable damages
happening in this life. It seems almost evident that periodic usage of some
data base is necessary for correcting these damages. But what is this data
base and what is the mechanism of its usage, remains unknown.

In the phenomenon of sleep, among many astonishing facts, the most
strange seems the fact that regular sleeping is absolutely necessary not only
for health, but even for very life. A man certainly dies if he is deprived

11

of sleep during few weeks. Why? The common opinion that sleep supplies
rest for all systems of organism is evidently insuﬃcient to explain absolute
necessity of regular sleeping.

Our consideration in the framework of EEC suggests an explanation of
both these strange features of life: permanent support of health and ne-
cessity of sleep. During sleep (or rather during a deﬁnite phase of sleep,
called paradoxical sleep) a man is at the edge of consciousness and therefore
obtains information from alternative classical scenarios. She can compare
various scenarios, particularly various scenarios for the body, and ﬁnd out
what scenarios are favorable. Returning, after the sleep, to the usual state,
consciousness increases probabilities of just these scenarios. This is a mech-
anism of permanent support of health. It is known that paradoxical sleep of
old people becomes shorter. Perhaps this is the main reason why their health
is not supported well enough.

In this explanation, the hypothetical data base containing recommen-
dations for health is nothing else than the set of all possible scenarios for
functioning the body. This data base is always actual because conscious-
ness may compare those scenarios that start from the present state of the
body. This returns us to the arguments of Sect. 3.2. Once more, now on a
more concrete level, we may conclude that the mystery and miracle of life is
connected with quantum deﬁnition of consciousness, as it is given in EEC.

There is one more unsolved problem in biology that also could obtain its
explanation in EEC. This is the problem of morphogenesis. How an embryo is
constructed starting from a single cell? Where is a plan of the process of con-
structing it, step by step, or how constructing is controlled and directed? It is
possible that the answer is analogous to the argument above: ‘consciousness’
(the primitive-level consciousness, or ability to somehow perceive, which is
connected with a living being from the very beginning) periodically addresses
to the quantum world as a whole, compare various scenarios of constructing
embryo (various ‘building plans’) and then, returning to the usual state, in-
crease probabilities of those scenarios that lead to the right construction. Of
course, this is only a sketch of a possible explanation of the phenomenon, its
main idea.

12

4.4 Flow of time and decreasing entropy in the sphere

of life

One of the problems permanently discussed in literature is how irreversibility
arises if all equations presenting dynamics of physical systems are reversible
in time (see for example [17]). In the framework of EEC this problem obtains
natural solution: quantum world is reversible (and thus reversible is micro-
scopical theory of non-alive matter, its dynamics), while pictures of (alter-
native) classical realities appearing in consciousness are irreversible. Indeed,
in quantum mechanics irreversibility might appear in the course of reduc-
tion, but reduction is excluded from the Everett’s interpretation of quantum
mechanics (see Sect. 3). In the framework of EEC we have, instead of reduc-
tion, separation of alternatives which is identiﬁed with consciousness. Thus,
irreversibility appears only in consciousness.

The quantum world as a whole, without separation of classical alterna-
tives, is (in EEC) reversible. Its adequate image is given by 4-dimensional
manifold with all times considered on equal foot. However, in the picture
seen by an observer as an (alternative) classical reality, the ‘present’ time
moment is distinguished, radically diﬀers from the past and the future. It
is the moment when consciousness chooses (with the help of modiﬁcation of
probabilities) the concrete alternative it will see in the next moment. While
the quantum world looks as something given in its wholeness, an (alternative)
classical reality is permanently becoming. Time moments in an (alternative)
classical reality are divided on the past (when this concrete alternative real-
ity is ﬁxed), the future (when many alternative continuations exist1 for this
concrete alternative reality), and the present (when the choice of future is
performed).

One more important unsolved problem is decreasing of entropy in the
sphere of life where the processes of self-organization are not only possible
but necessary. This contradicts to the general principle accepted in physics
and conﬁrmed many times: entropy may only be constant or increase. In the
framework of EEC this contradiction disappears because the spheres where
1Possibility of various continuations of a given ‘classical reality’ seemingly contradicts to
the previous statement about ‘classical world’ being locally predictable. However, various
continuations are in fact possible (although they cannot diﬀer too much from each other)
because the ‘classical reality’ is not precisely classical, but rather close to classical. This
possibility may be characterized in an adequate way in terms of continuous quantum
measurements (see [10]).

13

entropy correspondingly increases or decreases, are separated.

The quantum world as a whole is reversible, and its entropy is constant.
The entropy of a restricted region of the quantum world may increase. How-
ever, in the sphere of life (which includes consciousness working with alter-
native classical realities) entropy may decrease. Moreover, it is necessary
decreasing for the set of classical scenarios realizing life. This is because con-
sciousness regularly compare alternative classical scenarios and choose (by
modiﬁcation of probabilities) those of them which are favorable for life. The
deep reason of decreasing entropy is that the concept of the goal arises in the
sphere of life. Another important point is that entropy in the sphere of life
characterizes not all possible classical scenarios but only those favorable for
life (selected according to the goal of improving quality of life).

5 Conclusion

We have seen that Extended Everett Concept (EEC) may give a quantum
deﬁnition of consciousness: consciousness is separation of the alternatives.
This puts forward a novel view of a diﬃcult question, what is life. Possessing
the ability to compare various classical scenarios and choose the most favor-
able of them, quantum consciousness turns out to be the very essence of life
and explains such important phenomena in the sphere of life as free will and
eﬃcient support of health. Besides, EEC explains why decreasing entropy in
the sphere of life is compatible with the general law of increasing entropy. It
becomes clear that entropy in the sphere of life is decreasing because life is
presented by a subset of specially selected scenarios.

Consciousness, as it is deﬁned in EEC, is a general part of two quali-
tatively diﬀerent spheres of cognition. Being deﬁned as a separation of al-
ternatives, consciousness is a part of quantum physics, therefore, of natural
sciences. Being a special phenomenon characteristic of living beings, con-
sciousness belongs to psychology, therefore, to the humanitarians or, more
generally, to the sphere of knowledge about spirit. Thus, quantum conscious-
ness, in the sense of EEC, is a common part of, and provides a bridge between,
these two spheres. This seems very interesting because the two spheres are
often considered as having nothing in common (although the conceptual re-
lations between them do of course exist and are actively discussed). It seems
to us that EEC is one of few approaches that establish deep internal connec-
tion between natural sciences and humanitarians, penetrating deeper in the

14

nature of life and human consciousness. EEC lowers the draw-bridge (see
Fig. 2) over the deep precipice dividing two spheres of cognition, the world
of matter and the world of spirit.

References

[1] H. Everett III. ‘Relative state’ formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev.
Mod. Phys., 29:454–462, 1957. Reprinted in J. A. Wheeler and W. H.
Zurek, editors, Quantum Theory and Measurement, Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, 1983.

[2] B. S. DeWitt and N. Graham, editors. The Many-Worlds Interpretation

of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton University Press, 1973.

[3] Euan Squires. The Mystery of the Quantum World. IOP Publishing,

Bristol and Philadelphia, 1994. Second edition.

[4] Michael Lockwood. ‘Many minds’ interpretations of quantum mechanics.

Brit. J. Phil. Sci., 47:159–188, 1996.

[5] Andrew Whitaker. Many minds and single mind interpretations of quan-
In Ph. Blanchard et al., editors, Decoherence: Theoreti-
tum theory.
cal, Experimental, and Conceptual Problems, pages 299–307, Berlin etc.,
2000. Springer.

[6] H. D.Zeh. The problem of conscious observation in quantum mechanical

description, Found. Phys. Lett., 13, 221, 2000.

[7] Henry P. Stapp. Von Neumann’s formulation of quantum theory and

the role of mind in nature. Found. of Phys., 31:1465–1499, 2001.

[8] Michael B. Mensky, Quantum mechanics: New experiments, new ap-
plications and new formulations of old questions, Physics-Uspekhi,43,
585-600, 2000.

[9] M. B. Mensky, Quantum mechanics, consciousness, and a bridge be-
tween the two cultures, “Voprosy Filosoﬁi” (”Issues in Philosophy”)
No.6, p.64-74, 2004 [in Russian].

15

[10] Michael B. Mensky, Concept of consciousness in the context of quantum

mechanics, Physics-Uspekhi 48, 389-409 (2005).

[11] M. B. Mensky, Human and quantum world (Weirdness of the quantum
world and the miracle of consciousness), Fryazino, Editorial “Vek 2”,
2005 [in Russian].

[12] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen. Can quantum-mechanical de-
scription of physical reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev., 47:777–
780, 1935.

[13] J. S. Bell. On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1:195–200,

1964. Reprinted in [14].

[14] J. S. Bell. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987.

[15] Alain Aspect, Philippe Grangier, and G´erard Roger. Experimental tests
of realistic local theories via Bell’s theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett., 47:460–
463, 1981.

[16] Alain Aspect, Jean Dalibard, and G´erard Roger. Experimental test
of Bell’s inequalities using time-varying analyzers. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
49:1804–1807, 1982.

[17] H. D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of The Direction of Time, Fourth edition,

Springer, 2001.

16

Figure 1: No separation, or non-alive matter (top diagram); separation, or
consciousness (middle); weak separation, or ‘at the edge of consciousness’
(bottom)

Figure 2: Lowering the draw-bridge: Identifying ‘Separation’ and ‘Conscious-
ness’ gives ‘Quantum Consciousness’. This supplies a bridge between natural
sciences and humanitarians, between the spheres of matter and spirit

17

