6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the signiﬁcance of the Braxmaier et al. Laser Interferometry
Experiment of 2002 for a Theory of Relativity

Sanjay M. Wagh
Central India Research Institute, Post Box 606,
Laxminagar, Nagpur 440 022, India
E-mail: cirinag ngp@sancharnet.in
(Dated: June 2, 2006)

A recent laser interferometry experiment [1] registered a non-detection of a frequency shift that
. We comment here

amounts to a fractional change in the speed of light δc/c ≈ (4.8 ± 5.3) × 10
on the theoretical signiﬁcance of this experimental result.

−12

An innovative laser interferometry experiment, wherein the frequencies of two sources were compared

over a period of ∼ 200 days, used [1] sources of the following characteristics.

An Nd:YAG laser (frequency stabilized by cryogenically cooled, ultra-stable, Nd:YAG laser using the
Pound-Drever-Hall method [2]) served as the “length standard” for the interference experiment since the
standing wave-mode number, n, of the resonance cavity was held ﬁxed. In this case, the size L of the
cavity controls the wavelength of the emitted light as: λ = 2L/n.

Another Nd:YAG laser (frequency stabilized to a normally forbidden transition of gaseous iodine)
served as the “time standard” for the experiment. In this case, the original beam of emission was split
into two by a polarizing beam-splitter. The stronger of the parts was then used as the pump beam and
the weaker part as a probe beam. The probe beam attenuation by the Iodine gas actively controlled the
resonator and stabilized it on resonance frequency with the used Iodine transition.

Thus, if the length-standard’s frequency varied independently of that of the time-standard, then the
relative frequency shift of these sources would result. So, the λ ≈ 1 µm emission of two sources, one as the
length-standard and another as an “independent” time-standard, was allowed [1] to form the interference
to measure their frequency diﬀerence via the fringe shifts.

This interesting laser interferometry experiment then showed [1] a non-detection of a frequency shift,
to be speciﬁc, δν/ν ≈ (4.8 ± 5.3) × 10−12 over an observation period of ∼ 200 days. This is then also
the fractional change, δc/c, in the speed of light, c, indicating that this constant of special relativity is
unaﬀected by factors like the motion of the Earth relative to the reference system of the cosmic microwave
background radiation [1, 3].

In [3], this result has been shown [15] to mean no or very little expansion of the space, quite contrary to
the well-known interpretation of the galactic redshifts and an implication of the standard cosmology [4]
based on Einstein’s ﬁeld equations of general relativity. It has thus been used [3] to question the reality
of space expansion at the rate inferred from the WMAP data [5].

Of speciﬁc interest to us here is the absence of any noticeable eﬀects of the non-inertial character of the
Earth’s reference system on the frequency shift. Not only is the Earth in motion relative to the cosmic
microwave background, it is rotating about an axis as well. The absence of any eﬀects of these motions
on the frequency-shift should be of fundamental signiﬁcance.

Recall that, along with other experiments, the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment indicated
[6, 7] the spurious nature of the “ether.” In the same spirit, the non-detection of the frequency-shift in
the experiment of [1] indicates that the speed of light (in vacuum) is a fundamental constant that is
independent of whether the system of reference is inertial or non-inertial.

As was shown by Einstein [6], the constancy of the speed of light (in vacuum) (is inconsistent with the
Galilean transformations of Newton’s theory but it) can be made consistent with the special principle
of relativity using the Lorentz transformations, the special principle also being the basis of the Galilean
transformations. Similarly, if this constancy is the above fundamental law, as it seems from [1], then it
needs to be made consistent with the general principle of relativity by selecting a proper mathematical
formulation for this principle [16].
It is but easily seen that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations of the general
relativity are not consistent with this complete constancy of the speed of light.

Einstein, likewise with Newton, had aimed at a comprehensive theoretical description of all the phys-
ical phenomena. Thus, his ﬁeld equations of the general relativity describe the physical entirety on
representing “gravity” by the Einstein tensor and on incorporating the “remaining” forces by way of
the energy-momentum tensor. Of course, only “gravity” gets represented by the spacetime curvature in
these, now famous, Einstein’s ﬁeld equations.

2

But, to go beyond Newton’s theory, the concept of force needs (logical) replacement, and not any
speciﬁc type of force like gravity. It then follows that Einstein’s equations are [8] logically unacceptable.
The solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are then inappropriate for describing any physical situations.
That is to say, various (non-Newtonian) properties of the solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations should
be irrelevant or inconsequential to any of the physical situations.

This above conclusion is inescapable even when Einstein’s ﬁeld equations provide, as solutions, 4-
dimensional (spacetime) geometries, mathematical constructions, which only are mathematically well-
deﬁned but physically certainly dubious.

In fact, by 1928, Einstein had concluded [9, 10] that his ﬁeld equations were not any satisfactory
formulation of the general principle of relativity. He had thus discarded these ﬁeld equations, being
physically ill-posed (see later). Importantly, these are also logically unacceptable [8].

Certain cosmological solutions [4] of Einstein’s equations imply an “expanding” space. In view of the
logical unacceptability of these equations, it is then not surprising that the result of the Braxmaier et al.
experiment [1] is inconsistent [3] with the implied expansion of the space.

Now, the general principle of relativity “looks” for all the laws of physics that are the same for all the
observers, undergoing whatsoever relative motions. Then, these laws of physics will also include the laws
of the quantum. This is the reason why we can expect that a suitable theory based on this principle of
relativity fundamentally includes the phenomena also from the quantum world.

Clearly, the general principle of relativity then seeks also for all the laws about all the permissible

interactions of physical bodies.

The general principle of relativity is a basis [11] for the uniﬁcation of interactions then. It is a basis

provided that we develop a suitable mathematical framework for it.

In this connection, Einstein had expressed [12] his valued judgement about the general principle of
relativity that the idea of general relativity “is a purely formal point of view and not a deﬁnite hypothesis
about nature ...”.

What he means here is that the general principle of relativity is not a statement about the (character
of the laws of) Nature, but it is rather that this is a statement about how one should, as a strategy,
obtain the laws of Nature.

Then, rather than restricting ourselves to the conﬁnes of the special principle of relativity, it is “ad-
visable” to formulate a theory on the basis of the general principle of relativity. This should get viewed
indeed as a statement about a deﬁnite strategy on as to how to obtain the laws of Nature, and not as a
hypothesis about Nature.

Within this strategy of the general principle of relativity, it is then not pivotal as to how many species
of (elementary) particles exist; what their speciﬁc properties as well as interrelationships are, how many
fundamental forces Nature has, etc.

As long as we have a satisfactory mathematical framework for the general principle of relativity, these
above (and results alike) could then be looked upon as some “predictions” of the corresponding theoretical
framework. Essentially, a theory (as a conceptual and the corresponding mathematical framework) will
have to tell us what its “observables” are.

Moreover, such predictions of a “theory of everything” will be “veriﬁable” and could then establish or
demolish the chosen mathematical premise of the general principle of relativity, but not the principle,
which is a purely formal point of view. It therefore follows that if one mathematical formalism fails to
explain observations, then we replace it by suitable other.

This is the meaning of the general principle of relativity being a purely formal point of view then. This
is also why Einstein had been searching for a suitable mathematical framework to represent this principle,
and why he had expressed some doubts [9] [p. 8] as to whether the standard diﬀerential geometry would
help with further progress. (See later.)

It is well known [9, 10] that Einstein attempted numerous formulations for what he called the uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory. All these formulations were however unsatisfactory even for their creator. These later years
of his scientiﬁc career often get described [9] [p. 341] as: “he was as clear about his aims as he was in
the dark about the methods by which to achieve them.”

To understand the problem that so persistently troubled Einstein, let us represent a material body as
a point of the 4-dimensional spacetime geometry. This we do because Newton’s theory so represents a
physical body, explains some phenomena and we demand that our ﬁeld equations reduce to the appro-
priate equations of Newton’s theory in some suitable approximation. Moreover, it is also imperative that
any theory of everything resolves this problem satisfactorily.

3

Now, let a point that is a curvature singularity of the geometry represent a physical body as in, eg,
Schwarzschild’s famous solution of Einstein’s equations. Any mathematical expressions valid at other
points of geometry do not hold at its curvature singularity. Then, the “motion” of a curvature singularity
is a “singular” curve and it is not part of that geometry. Therefore, equations for a curve of the geometry,
geodesic equations, do not provide a law of motion for the singularity. In the absence of any law of motion
for point objects, it is not possible to deﬁne their ﬂuxes and, hence, the energy-momentum tensor. In this
case, Einstein’s equations do not have any physical meaning whatsoever. Einstein had recognized this
problem of the “pure gravitational ﬁelds” as the problem of locations in space where his ﬁeld equations
of general relativity are not valid [9, 10].

Next, let a chosen point of geometry be not its any curvature singularity. Now, geometric equations
(geodesic, geodesic deviation) acquire physical meaning only when any point of geometry at which they
are satisﬁed is ascribed mass, charge etc. This is indeed the same as Newton’s theory using Euclidean
geometry and ascribing mass, charge to a point on the curve of that geometry with equations of the
curve providing Newton’s laws of motion.
In the case of Einstein’s equations, only the geometry is
non-Euclidean. This is then the only relevant diﬀerence in the two cases.

Now, an unambiguous way to ascribe mass etc. to any point of the geometry is needed to deﬁne the
energy-momentum tensor. In Newton’s theory (Special Theory of Relativity), this prescription is “by
hand” for any point of the Euclidean (Minkowskian) geometry. How then for Einstein’s case of a curved
4-dimensional geometry is this unambiguously done?

Following Newton, we may prescribe, by hand, values of mass, charge etc. for any non-singular point on
the curve of a (curved) four-dimensional geometry, formally deﬁne the energy-momentum tensor, write
Einstein’s ﬁeld equations and obtain their (spacetime) solutions.

Where is the problem then? The problem is that the mass of a physical body is represented by the
curvature of the spacetime geometry. “More the matter, the larger is the curvature.” This leads [13] to
the problem of deﬁning the energy (or mass) of a system in general relativity. As is well known [13], there
is no satisfactory deﬁnition of mass in general relativity and, hence, the above prescription of mass for a
point of curved geometry cannot be made in any unambiguous manner. Hence, mass cannot be the part
of the energy-momentum tensor in the above simple way.

By comparison to this trouble of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations, Newton’s theory faces no such diﬃculty.
This is so because mass, charge etc. are the “extraneous” mathematical quantities, which are independent
of the nature of the Euclidean geometry underlying Newton’s theory. These characteristics can, therefore,
be speciﬁed, by hand and at will, for a point of that geometry.

But, unambiguous prescription of mass, charge etc. for a point of the curved geometry becomes im-
possible when we attribute the strength of the gravitational ﬁeld to the curvature of the (spacetime)
geometry. Einstein expressed [10] this diﬃculty in the words that the “right side” of his equations is “a
formal condensation of all things whose comprehension in the sense of a ﬁeld theory is still problematic.”
That is to say, his ﬁeld equations are physically ill-posed.

We also note that a curved (spacetime) geometry is not the unique mathematical notion implied by
Einstein’s equivalence principle, or by the general principle of relativity; the latter being the actual
basis of general relativity. In fact, the general principle of relativity does not “prescribe” any speciﬁc
mathematical framework for itself.

This “explains” why Einstein explored [9] the question of whether the fundamental mathematical basis
for physics might be other than that of the partial diﬀerential equations and had expressed [9] [p. 8]
doubts as to whether diﬀerential geometry be used for further progress [17].

The pivotal issue here is then of an appropriate mathematical framework for the ideas behind the
general principle of relativity. The following then appears to be a relevant step in the direction of this
mathematical framework.

Historically, Descartes [7] was the ﬁrst to express concern that a coordinate system of the Euclidean
space of the Newtonian Mechanics, as a “material construction” of a reference body, does not get aﬀected
by physical precesses. Newton recognized this in the form of the “absolute space” underlying his Me-
chanics. Systems of reference in Newton’s theory and in special relativity, both, cannot be any material
bodies then. This is a deﬁnite drawback of these basic theories.

Unless we address Descartes’s above issue, no mathematical framework for the general relativity would
be satisfactory. Hence, the general principle of relativity must deal with the “physical” reference systems,
physical bodies, undergoing whatever relative motions. This principle of relativity can therefore ﬁnd
its proper mathematical representation only when we have an appropriate mathematical structure to
represent all the physical bodies usable as reference systems.

4

Changes in the physical bodies are the physical phenomena. As only physical bodies get used as
reference in physical measurements, mathematical structure(s) representing physical bodies will have
to be such that phenomena become ‘changes’ to (transformations [18] of mathematical structure(s) of)
reference systems themselves.

Then, a mathematical framework, which is diﬀerent than that of the standard diﬀerential geometry,
that properly represents physical bodies and that is therefore consistent with the general principle of
relativity is needed [14] for further progress. This mathematical framework needs to be based on the
concept of a Quasi-Category [11] and, as such, was called the Universal Relativity to diﬀerentiate it from
Einstein’s general relativity, both being based on the general principle of relativity.

As discussed here, the result of the Braxmaier et al experiment [1] appears to broadly support (certain
parts of) Einstein’s viewpoints of later years [9, 10] and also the general approach together with the
mathematical methodology in [11, 14], both. This approach that utilizes the category theoretical methods
to represent the general principle of relativity is then a promising program for the uniﬁcation of all the
fundamental physical interactions.

We therefore conclude that the Braxmaier et al experiment [1] rules out Einstein’s ﬁeld equations but

supports the general principle of relativity, a strategy for developing a theory.

[1] Braxmaier C, M¨uller H, Prandl O, Mlynek J & Peters A Phys. Rev. Lett., 88, 10401 (2002)
[2] Sifvast W T Laser Fundamentals, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) (1996)
[3] Lieu R and Gregory D A The exclusion of WMAP’s Hubble constant by laser interferometry, Ap. J. Lett.,

(2006) submitted. (arxiv.org/astro-ph/0605611)

[4] Narlikar J V Introduction to Cosmology (Jones and Bartlett, Boston) (1983)

Peacock J A, Heavens A F and Davies A T (Ed. ) Physics of the Early Universe (SUSSP) (1989)

[5] See Spergel D et al Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Three Year Results: Implications for

Cosmology, Ap. J., (2006) submitted. (arxiv.org/astro-ph/0603449)

[6] Lorentz H A, Einstein A, Minkowski H and Weyl H The Principle of Relativity: A collection of original
papers on the special and general theory of relativity. Notes by A Sommerfeld (Dover, New York) (1952)
[7] Einstein A Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (Methuen & Co. Ltd, London) (1968) (See, in

particular, Appendix V: Relativity and the Problem of Space.)

[8] Wagh S M ﬁle:no-efogr.ppt, (2006). (arxiv.org/physics/0603149)
[9] Pais A Subtle is the Lord ... The science and the life of Albert Einstein (Clarendon Press, Oxford) (1982)
[10] Einstein A in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (Ed. P A Schlipp, La Salle: Open Court Publishing

Company - The Library of Living Philosophers, Vol. VII) (1970)

[11] Wagh S M Universal Theory of Relativity and the “Uniﬁcation” of Fundamental Physical Interactions (2006)

(arxiv.org/physics/0602042)

[12] Einstein A The Yale University Library Gazzette, 6, 3 (1930). Referred to in [9], p. 273

See also: Einstein A On the Method of Theoretical Physics, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1933). Referred
to in [9], p. 172

[13] Misner C W, Thorne K S and Wheeler J A Gravitation (W H Freeman) (1973) and references therein
[14] Wagh S M Progress with a Universal Theory of Relativity, Talk delivered at the SARS Einstein Centennial

Meeting, Durban, September 25-26, 2005 (2005) (arxiv.org/physics/0602032)
Wagh S M Universal Relativity and Its Mathematical Requirements, Talk delivered at the SAMS 48th Annual
Meeting, Grahamstown, October 31 - November 2, 2005 (2005) (arxiv.org/physics/0602038)
Wagh S M Foundations of a Universal Theory of Relativity (2005) (arxiv.org/physics/0505063)

[15] A measured value was δν ∼ 1.36 ± 0.63 kHz, while that implied by the (ﬂat) standard model of cosmology
is δν ∼ 6 kHz. One could, however, argue that the cosmological expansion has already “decoupled” from the
locally measurable eﬀects.

[16] Point transformations of coordinates could be used to implement the constancy of the speed of light. However,

such a formalism will not be satisfactory in view of Descartes’s concern discussed later.

[17] Within the mathematical framework of Standard Diﬀerential Geometry, “values” of mass, charge etc. can only
get “speciﬁed by hand” for a point of the geometry. Mathematical methods away from diﬀerential geometry
are, therefore, needed for appropriately “representing origins” of the physical conceptions of inertia etc.
[18] Dirac [(1939) Proc R Soc (Edinb), 59, 122] had emphasized the importance of transformations as: “...
transformations play an important role in modern physics; both relativity and quantum theory seeming to
show that transformations are of more fundamental importance than equations.”

