6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Proposed Mechanism for the Intrinsic Redshift
and its Preferred Values Purportedly Found in Quasars
Based on the Local-Ether Theory

Ching-Chuan Su
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Tsinghua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan

Abstract – Quasars of high redshift may be ejected from a nearby active galaxy of low
redshift. This physical association then leads to the suggestion that the redshifts of quasars
are not really an indication of their distances. In this investigation, it is argued that the
high redshift can be due to the gravitational redshift as an intrinsic redshift. Based on the
proposed local-ether theory, this intrinsic redshift is determined solely by the gravitational
potential associated speciﬁcally with the celestial object in which the emitting sources are
placed. During the process with which quasars evolve into ordinary galaxies, the fragmenta-
tion of quasars and the formation of stars occur and hence the masses of quasars decrease.
Thus their gravitational potentials and hence redshifts become smaller and smaller. This is
in accord with the aging of redshift during the evolution process. In some observations, the
redshifts of quasars have been found to follow the Karlsson formula to exhibit a series of
preferred peaks in their distributions. Based on the quasar fragmentation and the local-ether
theory, a new formula is presented to interpret the preferred peaks quantitatively.

Subject headings: quasars: general — galaxies: distances and redshifts — galaxies: active

1. Introduction
Quasars are known for their high redshifts. It is widely accepted in astronomy that the red-
shift is due to the Doppler eﬀect which in turn depends on the receding speed of the emitting
source with respect to the observer. According to the Hubble law, the higher the redshift,
the farther the source is away from the observer. Thereby, quasars are expected to move
quite fast and be located quite far away from the Earth. Meanwhile, several observations
seem to indicate that some quasars of high redshifts are quite close in angular position to
an active galaxy of low redshift and high luminosity. This closeness is generally expected
to be merely a projection eﬀect as a fortuitous coincidence in their angular positions. How-
ever, some phenomena with morphological connections have been further observed. That is,
quasars occur in a pair and are located on opposite sides of the axis of rotation of the active
center galaxy. Further, the pair of quasars can be of similar redshifts and distances from the
galaxy. Moreover, also along the axis there can be some other pairs of quasars or galaxies
located farther from the center galaxy. There is a trend that the center galaxy is of the
lowest redshift and the strongest luminosity, the nearby quasar is of the highest redshift and
the weakest luminosity, and of the companion quasars or galaxies the redshifts decrease and
the luminosities increase with their distances away from the center galaxy (Arp & Russell
2001). Thus the high redshifts of quasars may not necessarily represent their distances. Fur-
ther, in some observations, the redshifts have been found to exhibit some periodicity in their
distributions as represented by the Karlsson formula (Arp et al. 1990, Burbidge & Napier
2001). The periodicity further makes it diﬃcult for the redshift to represent distance.

1

Thus it may be expected that the quasars are physically associated with the center
galaxy. Speciﬁcally, an ejection model has been proposed to interpret the physical associa-
tion. Thereby, a plausible mechanism is that the center galaxy is an active one and ejects
gas out of it (Arp & Russell 2001). Then a nearby quasar is formed from the cloud of gas
associated with the ejection. By virtue of the conservation of momentum with the ejection,
quasars tend to form in pairs on opposite sides of the active galaxy. Then quasars may
fragment into pieces of smaller sizes, while they gradually condense due to gravitation. Thus
quasars evolve eventually into ordinary galaxies by quasar fragmentation and star formation
while they move away from the parent galaxy. Meanwhile, further ejection forms a newborn
pair of quasars close to the parent galaxy. In this mechanism, the diﬀerence in redshift can
be related to the evolution of quasars and galaxies.

If the quasars are physically associated with the nearby parent active galaxy, then the
diﬀerence in redshift cannot be entirely attributed to the Doppler eﬀect. Accordingly, the
redshift, at least part of it, should be due to some kind of intrinsic properties. One model
proposed for the intrinsic redshift is the time-varying mass. That is, the masses of the
fundamental particles which make up the atoms are very small for newly created matter,
and then they increase with time (Arp & Russell 2001). As transition frequencies of atoms
depend on the mass, the optical spectra will shift as the mass is varying. Alternatively, it
has been pointed out earlier that the redshifts of quasars may be gravitational in origin and
they are likely to be very massive objects (Burbidge & Burbidge 1967). Thus the intrinsic
redshift is attributed to the gravitational redshift which in turn has been observed in the
earthbound Pound-Rebka experiment dealing with the emission and absorption of gamma-
ray by employing iron crystals placed at two diﬀerent altitudes (Pound & Rebka 1960).
However, it has been argued that if a quasar of moderate redshift has a mass near those of
galaxies (say, 1011 times that of the Sun), its radius will be a few percent of a light-year. Thus
gravitational attraction is large and “gravitational implosions” may occur. Then the stability
of such an object is questionable (Greenstein & Schmidt 1964). Nevertheless, the possibility
that a quasar is much more massive than a galaxy should not be excluded. Correspondingly,
a quasar of moderate redshift can have a radius much larger than a light-year as indicated
in some observations and then its density is much lower. They together lead to a much
weaker gravitational force. Thus the stability may not be a problem. In this investigation
we will reexamine the gravitational redshift as an intrinsic redshift for quasars. However,
the gravitational redshift is based on a new theory which is fundamentally diﬀerent and may
lead to diﬀerent consequences particularly for high-redshift cases with strong gravitational
potentials.

Speciﬁcally, it is proposed that the gaseous material constituting a quasar forms a grav-
itational potential which in turn will be shown to lower the energies of quantum states and
hence transition frequencies of atoms of the constituent gas. The total mass of the quasar
contributes to this potential. However, based on the local-ether theory discussed in the next
section, it is supposed that when a quasar breaks into two or more well separated pieces,
then the constituent material of each fragment contributes to the formation of an individual
gravitational potential associated with this fragment. And the quantum states and transi-
tion frequencies are determined solely by one of the gravitational potentials, rather than by
all of them. Moreover, as part of the quasar forms stars, the constituent material of each
star contributes to the formation of an individual gravitational potential associated with
this star, but no longer to the potential of the parent quasar. Thus, during the evolution
process with quasar fragmentation and star formation, the masses of quasars decrease and
hence their gravitational potentials become weaker. Consequently, the transition frequencies
become lower and lower with the evolution process. After the star formation is completed,
a quasar evolves into ordinary galaxies or clusters of galaxies with low redshift and high lu-
minosity. Thus the gravitation-induced redshift in conjunction with the ejection model and
the local-ether theory is used to account for the observed variation of redshift in quasars.
Quantitatively, based on the fragmentation of quasars, a series of preferred values of redshift

2

are derived. They will be compared with the Karlsson peaks in the redshift distributions.
The dependence of transition frequency on the gravitational potential in turn will be derived
from a proposed wave equation based on the local-ether theory, as discussed in the follow-
ing sections. From the local-ether wave equation, various consequences have been derived
to account for a wide variety of phenomena related to special relativity, general relativity,
electromagnetics, and quantum mechanics (Su 2005). The proposed intrinsic redshift then
presents an additional consequence of this wave equation.

2. Local-Ether Theory
It has been proposed that in the region under a suﬃcient inﬂuence of the gravitation due
to the Earth, the Sun, or another celestial body, there forms a local ether which in turn is
stationary with respect to the gravitational potential of the respective body (Su 2001b, Su
2005). Thereby, each local ether together with the gravitational potential moves with the
associated celestial body. According to this model, the earth local ether is inside the sun
local ether, which in turn is inside the galaxy local ether, and so on. The earth local ether
together with earth’s gravitational potential moves with earth’s orbital motion around the
Sun, but not with earth’s rotation. Thus the earth local ether is stationary in an earth-
centered inertial (ECI) frame, while the sun local ether is stationary in a heliocentric inertial
frame. The earth local ether should be at least so large as to encompass geostationary
satellites.

The local-ether theory has been used to account for the Sagnac eﬀect due to earth’s
rotation and the null eﬀect of earth’s orbital motion in the propagation of earthbound elec-
tromagnetic waves in GPS and the intercontinental microwave link, where the Sagnac eﬀect
is related with a modiﬁcation of propagation time for electromagnetic waves due to motion
of the receiver. Meanwhile, in the interplanetary radar, it accounts for the Sagnac eﬀect due
to both of the rotational and orbital motions of the Earth around the Sun. It also accounts
for the null eﬀect of orbital motion of the Sun in the earthbound and interplanetary prop-
agations. Furthermore, the local-ether propagation model has been used to account for the
apparent null eﬀect in the Michelson-Morley experiment.

Based on this brand-new theory, the local ethers associated with their respective planets,
stars, galaxies or quasars, are of ﬁnite extent and are supposed to form a hierarchy structure.
Thus the local ether of a planet is immersed locally inside the local ether of the associated
star, which in turn is inside the local ether of the associated galaxy or quasar. However,
the various local ethers are exclusive. At a certain position, only the lowest-level local
ether determines propagation of waves or properties of particles located there. Thereby, it is
inferred that the gravitational potential of the sun has no eﬀects on the phenomena associated
entirely with earthbound waves or particles. This is in accord with the situation that the
gravity at a given position or the tick rate of an atomic clock located at a given position on
or near the ground is identical between at noon and midnight, though the distance of the
position from the Sun is diﬀerent at diﬀerent hours of a day. And the rate of atomic clocks
onboard various GPS satellites remains unchanged while they are orbiting in circular orbits
around the Earth and thus their distances from the Sun are varying.

A quasar is supposed to be composed of a huge gas cloud of atoms, plasma, and dust.
In the region under a suﬃcient inﬂuence of the gravitational potential of the quasar, there
forms a local ether associated with this quasar. However, due to some internal mechanisms
like nonuniformity in the distribution of particle velocity or density, the gas cloud may
fragment into two or more clouds of smaller sizes. When the fragments of the quasar are
well separated from each other, the local ether and gravitational potential associated with
the previous quasar are supposed to split by some mechanism into multiple individual local
ethers and gravitational potentials associated with their respective fragments. Based on the
local-ether theory, the quantum states and transition frequencies of atoms, molecules, or
ions of the gas constituting a quasar or fragmented quasar which forms a local ether are

3

determined by the gravitational potential associated with this local ether, but not by the
potentials with other local ethers even in close proximity. As the mass and gravitational
potential of a fragmented quasar are smaller than those of the previous quasar, the redshift
becomes lower and lower after repeated fragmentation.

In the meantime, by gravitational attraction of gas, various stars are formed gradually
in each quasar or fragmented quasar. Then various individual local ethers and gravitational
potentials associated with their respective stars are formed inside the quasar local ether,
which in turn covers the whole region of the quasar but excludes the domains of the numer-
ous stellar local ethers enclosed by it. The matter of a star contributes to the gravitational
potential and local ether associated with the star and aﬀects properties of atoms located
within this ether; however, it no longer contributes to the upper-level gravitational potential
and local ether associated with the surrounding parent quasar. Consequently, the gravita-
tional potential associated with the parent quasar and hence its redshift decrease gradually
with star formation. On the other hand, the redshifts of emission from the stars are expected
to be very low, as the gravitational potentials of individual stars are very weak. Thus, by
fragmentation and condensation, a quasar eventually evolves into galaxies or cluster of galax-
ies surrounded by some dilute intergalactic gas. During this evolution process, the redshifts
of all the objects developed from a quasar tend to decrease with time if they are not low.

3. Ejection Model for Quasars and its Evidence
It has been doubted for a long time whether the distances of quasars are necessarily as
far as what their high redshifts indicate, as quasars of high redshifts seem to be physically
associated with a nearby active galaxy of a low redshift. The most compelling mechanism
for this physical association could be the ejection model which has been proposed in as early
as 1967 and states that some material may be ejected in opposite directions from a central
galaxy of low redshift and high luminosity and the ejected material is responsible for the
formation of other galaxies or quasars (Arp 1967). The ejection may involve an accretion disk
and has a tendency to along the rotation axis of the parent galaxy. By virtue of conservation
of momentum with the ejection, quasars tend to form on both sides of that axis. Then, near
the center galaxy, a pair of quasars are formed from the clouds of gas associated with the
ejection. By virtue of the momentum gained from ejection, quasars gradually move away
from the center galaxy. Meanwhile, quasars may condense due to gravitation and then star
formation begins. On the other hand, due to internal disturbance or to nonuniformity in
particle velocity and density, quasars tend to grow in size and may even fragment into pieces
of smaller sizes. The quasar fragmentation is in accord with the observation that “radio and
x-ray sources ejected from active galaxies are often double or triple” (Arp & Russell 2001).
Thus quasars evolve into quasar-like galaxies and then into normal galaxies or clusters of
galaxies. After the quasars moved away, further ejection from the parent galaxy forms a
newborn pair of quasars. And the evolution process repeats itself. Thus quasars, quasar-like
galaxies, and then normal galaxies will be distributed in that order away from the parent
galaxy along the ejection path on both sides of the parent galaxy.

Some observations even indicate that there remains a trail or wake extending out from
the active galaxy toward the quasars. It is seen from the HST image given in (Galianni et al.
2005) that a quasar of strong x-ray source seems to lie within NGC 7319, one of Stephan’s
Quintet group of the Seyfert galaxies, and is located only 8 arcsec from the center of the
galaxy. And a V-shaped ﬁlament extends by a few arcsec from the nucleus of the galaxy
toward the quasar (Galianni et al. 2005). Further, there can be some connection or bridge
between the active galaxy and the nearby quasar. The physical association between these
objects, instead of a fortuitous projection, can be revealed from such a connection. The
galaxy Arp 220 of z = 0.018 has a group of companion galaxies of z
0.09 and located as
close as about 2 arcmin to it. Further, from H I contours it has been observed that a stream
of hydrogen is drawn out of the parent galaxy Arp 220 and ends exactly on that companion

∼

4

group (Arp 2001). For the active galaxy NGC 3628 of z = 0.0028, it is seen from x-ray
contours that a ﬁlament extends from the nucleus of the galaxy and ends on two nearby
quasars of z = 0.995 and 2.15, respectively (Arp et al. 2002). And it has been observed
from optical images that a ﬁlament is situated along the line connecting the compact objects
of NEQ3 which are of high redshifts and the main galaxy (Guti´errez & L´opez-Corredoira
2004). These trails or bridges provide quite direct evidence for the ejection model.

Furthermore, we present some arguments to support the ejection model. Based on the
local-ether theory, the material constituting a quasar forms a gravitational potential asso-
ciated with the quasar, which in turn is determined by the size and density of the cloud
of ejected gas. When a quasar breaks due to internal nonuniformity or disturbance, the
split gravitational potentials become weaker. When a quasar grows in size due to veloc-
ity nonuniformity, its gravitational potential becomes weaker. And when part of a quasar
forms stars, its gravitational potential also becomes weaker. These make the redshifts of
quasars decline, while the starburst makes their luminosities stronger. This contrast is more
pronounced when the star formation is maturer. Thereby, the ejection momentum and the
evolution process with quasar fragmentation and star formation lead to the consequence that
the center galaxy is of the lowest redshift and the highest luminosity, the nearby quasar is of
the highest redshift and the lowest luminosity, and of the companion quasars or galaxies the
redshifts decrease and the luminosities increase with their distances away from the center
galaxy.

This trend is in accord with a conﬁguration proposed in the literature and with many
observations related to various center galaxies, such as the low-redshift galaxies M82, M101,
NGC 6217, and NGC 470/474, to name just a few (Arp & Russell 2001). As an example,
it has been reported that there are two galaxy clusters A873 and A910 which have very
close redshifts and are very well aligned and fairly equally spaced across the very bright and
very active galaxy M82. Along the line connecting A873 and A910, there are four rather
bright quasars. And “close to M82 a dense group of quasars was serendipitously discovered
along a line slightly rotated from its minor-axis direction of ejection” (Arp & Russell 2001).
The ejection path has a tendency to be along the rotation axis and the ejection in transverse
directions is expected to encounter resistance. However, the ejection with multiple directions
seems to be demonstrated from a tight group of galaxies of x-ray sources close to the low-
redshift central galaxy NGC 383, as most of them “lie on opposite ends of diameters passing
close to the central galaxy” (Arp 2001). In some cases the ejection path can be in an S or
spiral shape, such as the structure with the low-redshift parent galaxy Arp 220 (Arp 2001).
This may be due to rotation of the ejection axis itself.

We next go on to consider the connection among the fragments. A quasar may break
into two or more pieces of smaller sizes. When they are well separated from each other,
an individual gravitational potential will establish for each fragment. As their sizes can
be similar or diﬀerent, their respective gravitational potentials and hence the redshifts can
also be so. This situation of a group of sources in close proximity with similar or diﬀerent
redshifts has been observed in many cases. A remarkable one is NEQ3 which is composed of
three compact objects which in turn look like to be connected together without intermediate
spaces (see Figures 1 and 2 in Guti´errez & L´opez-Corredoira 2004) and have redshifts of
z = 0.1935, 0.1939, and 0.2229, respectively. They are believed to be physically associated
with respect to each other, because of the close proximity and of the observation that “the
main halo seems to surround the three objects uniformly” (Guti´errez & L´opez-Corredoira
2004).

Further, we consider the transition of redshift for the emission from the regions across the
space between two nearby objects which may be due to ejection or fragmentation and have
dissimilar redshifts. If the emission is determined by both of the gravitational potentials, it
can be expected that the redshift gradually changes across the intermediate space. However,
based on the local-ether theory, the gravitational potential governing the emission is exclusive
and unique and hence the redshift is determined solely by either of the two potentials.

5

Speciﬁcally, consider the Hα emission observed in MCG 7-25-46 which is a system with two
galaxies of diﬀerent redshifts, z = 0.003 for the main galaxy and z = 0.098 for the minor
one. The uniqueness of the gravitational potential is in accord with the observation that “the
Hα emission at z = 0.003 ﬁnishes exactly where the Hα emission at z = 0.098 begins and
there is no overlap in the two emissions” (L´opez-Corredoira & Guti´errez 2005). This kind
of abrupt change was also observed for NGC 7320 and the nearby galaxies (Guti´errez et al.
2002). The phenomenon of abrupt change in redshift without overlap or smooth transition
provides further support for the local-ether theory in conjunction with the ejection model,
though it may be viewed instead as evidence against the connection between the nearby
objects and for the projection eﬀect (Guti´errez et al. 2002). Thus the local-ether theory
provides physical origins of the intrinsic redshift, its aging, and of its spatial variation. In
the following sections a quantitative treatment of the redshift will be given.

4. Local-Ether Wave Equation and Gravitational Redshift
Under the inﬂuence of the gravitational potential Φg due to a celestial body and the electric
scalar potential Φ due to a charged particle, it is postulated that the matter wave Ψ associated
with a particle of charge q is governed by the local-ether wave equation proposed to be

2

(∇

−

ng
c2

∂2
∂t2

)

ω2
0
c2

(cid:26)

2
¯hω0

(cid:27)

Ψ(r, t) =

1 +

qΦ(r, t)

Ψ(r, t),

(1)

where ¯h is Planck’s constant divided by 2π, the natural frequency ω0 as well as the charge q
is supposed to be an inherent constant of the eﬀector particle, and the position vector r and
the time derivative are supposed to referred speciﬁcally to the associated local-ether frame.
The gravitational index ng is deﬁned as

ng(r) = 1 +

2
c2 Φg(r),

F =

q
−

∇

Φ + m0

Φg.

∇

m0 =

¯h
c2 ω0.

where the gravitational potential is given in a positive-deﬁnite form and the gravitational
index is always greater than unity.

Based on the local-ether wave equation, a time evolution equation similar to Schr¨oding-
er’s equation can be derived. Then, by evaluating the velocity and then the acceleration
in a quantum-mechanical approach, it has been shown that the gravitational force and the
electrostatic force exerted on the charged particle is given by (Su 2002a, Su 2005)

Moreover, the gravitational mass associated with the gravitational force and the inertial mass
with the electromagnetic force have been shown to be identical to the natural frequency by
the familiar form

In addition to the electrostatic force, the other electromagnetic forces have also been derived
from the wave equation with a reﬁnement (Su 2002b, Su 2005). Thereby, the local-ether
wave equation leads to a uniﬁed quantum theory of electromagnetic and gravitational forces
in conjunction with the origin and the identity of inertial and gravitational mass. (The wave
equation proposed in (Su 2002a, Su 2005) is given in a slightly diﬀerent form. However,
this diﬀerence makes the results unchanged.) The wave equation can also be applied to
electromagnetic wave, of which the natural frequency is supposed to be zero. It has been
shown that, with the modiﬁcation where the index ng in (1) is replaced by its square, the wave

6

(2)

(3)

(4)

equation for electromagnetic wave has an immediate consequence that the wave propagates
at a reduced speed of c/ng, which in turn leads to the familiar phenomena of the gravitational
deﬂection of light by the Sun and the increment of echo time in the interplanetary radar (Su
2001a, Su 2005).

We then go on to discuss another consequence of the wave equation for the matter wave
that is bound in an atom or a molecule. It is known that the wave then exists in one of
some particular quantum states in which the temporal variation of Ψ can follow the one of
a pure time harmonic e−iωt, as a consequence of resonance. That is, Ψ(r, t) = ψ(r)e−iωt,
where ψ is independent of time when observed in the local-ether frame. For such a wave,
a manipulation associated with the expectation value renders the preceding wave equation
into the algebraic relation

ω2 =

ω2
0

1
ng

(

1 +

2
¯hω0 h

qΦ

i −

c2
ω2
0

2

,

∇

D

)

E

where the wavefunction is supposed to be normalized. As seen from the wave equation (1),
the angular frequency ω of a bound matter wave depends on the gravitational potential,
while the wavefunction ψ is independent of the potential. Thus the angular frequency can
be easily evaluated from the preceding relation if the wavefunction in the absence of the
gravitational potential is known.

Ordinarily, the scalar potential Φ and the spatial variation of Ψ are weak. Thus, by
evaluating the square root of the right-hand side of the preceding frequency formula with
the binomial expansion to the ﬁrst order, the quantum energy ¯hω of the matter wave bound
in an atom can be given by

¯hω =

1
√ng (

¯hω0 +

qΦ

h

i −

2
¯h
2m0

2

.

∇

D

)

E

It is seen that the gravitational potential, the electric scalar potential, and the spatial vari-
ation of the wavefunction modify the quantum energy. As in quantum mechanics, the fre-
quency of the light emitted from or absorbed by an atom or a molecule is supposed to be
given by the transition frequency which in turn is associated with the diﬀerence in energy
between the two quantum states participating in the transition. It is noted that the major
term of the quantum energy, namely, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of the preceding
energy formula is identical in diﬀerent states and hence its eﬀect on the transition frequency
cancels out. Thus the state transition frequency is due to the minor energy terms.

For the cases with a weak gravitational potential, the transition frequency can be given

in the familiar form (Su 2001c, Su 2005)

(5)

(6)

(7)

f = f0

1
(cid:18)

−

Φg
c2

,

(cid:19)

where f0 denotes the transition frequency in the absence of the gravitational potential. This
gravitation-induced decrease of frequency is known as the gravitational redshift and has
been demonstrated in the frequency deviation in the Pound-Rebka experiment dealing with
emission and absorption of gamma ray, in the clock-rate diﬀerence in the Hafele-Keating
experiment with cesium atomic clocks under circumnavigation, and in the clock-rate adjust-
ment in atomic clocks onboard GPS satellites before their launch to circular orbits. In the
Pound-Rebka experiment the variation of frequency is commonly attributed to the inﬂuence
of gravitation on the photons which are traveling through a region where the gravitational
potential varies spatially. However, based on the local-ether wave equation, the variation
of frequency is due to the gravitation-induced decrease of quantum-state energy and transi-
tion frequency. After emission from atoms, the frequency of the electromagnetic wave will

7

(However, the observed frequency is still subject to change by virtue
no longer change.
of the Doppler eﬀect.) Based on this, we have presented reinterpretations for the afore-
mentioned experiments (Su 2005). Furthermore, the local-ether wave equation leads to the
consequence that the quantum-state energies of an atom decrease with its speed v by the
v2/c2, which in turn looks like the famous factor adopted in the Lorentz trans-
factor
formation of space and time. The derived speed-dependent transition frequency has been
used to account for the east-west directional anisotropy in the Hafele-Keating experiment
and for another factor of the clock-rate adjustment in GPS (Su 2001c, Su 2005). However,
this eﬀect is not so important in high redshift, unless the atom speed is high enough, and is
not considered further in this investigation.

1
q

−

For the general case the frequency formula (6) yields that the gravitation-dependent
transition frequency of the atoms placed on a celestial body with a gravitational potential
Φg is given by

The corresponding gravitation-induced intrinsic redshift is then given by

f = f0/

1 + 2Φg/c2.

q

z =

1 + 2Φg/c2

1.

−

q

(8)

(9)

Based on this formula, a quantitative analysis of the intrinsic redshift, its variation, and of
its preferred values will be given in the following section.

5. Estimates of Gravitation-Induced Intrinsic Redshift
and Preferred Values
As in classical gravitation, the gravitational potential associated with a celestial object is
supposed to be determined by the total mass M of the constituent material by Φg = GM/R,
where G is the gravitational constant and R is the separation distance from the center of the
object. In an attempt to estimate this potential, one should know the size and density of the
object. According to the ejection model, quasars are formed from gas of atoms, plasma, and
dust ejected from a parent active galaxy. The optical spectra from quasars or quasar-like
objects near M82, which is the nearest active galaxy to our Milky Way galaxy, reveal that
the constituent atoms or ions include hydrogen, helium, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, neon,
magnesium, silicon, sulfur, and iron (Burbidge et al. 2003).

From the HST image given in (Galianni et al. 2005), the angular diameter of the quasar
quite close to the nucleus of NGC 7319 is estimated to be 0.7 arcsec. It is widely accepted
that the distance of NGC 7319 from the Earth is about 300 million light-years (Wikipedia).
If this quasar is indeed physically close to the galaxies and of that distance, then the physical
diameter of this quasar will be about 1000 light-years. As a comparison, the diameter of the
Milky Way is 105 light-years. Suppose that the gas cloud forming that quasar has a spherical
shape of that diameter. Next, we estimate its density. For comparison, the average density of
the Sun is about 103 kg/m3 and the density of dry air at standard ambient temperature and
pressure is 1.2 kg/m3. Interstellar gas is more tenuous. For molecular clouds in an interstellar
space, the concentration varies from 109 to 1012 atoms per cubic meter (Wikipedia). This
10−15 kg/m3, as the particles are
amounts to a density ranging from 3.4
molecular hydrogen. Optical spectra indicate that quasars contain heavier atoms or ions.
They probably contain dust as well. Anyway, a quasar should be denser than an interstellar
gas. This is because the star formation is diﬃcult to initiate without a denser gas and, on the
other hand, most of the gas will be depleted after the completion of star formation. Suppose
10−11 kg/m3. Owing to its size, the total
the quasar close to NGC 7319 has a density of 6
1046 kg. For comparison, the mass of the Sun
mass of the quasar will be as large as 2.7

10−18 to 3.4

×

×

×

×

8

1030 and

1042 kg, respectively. It is noted that for such
and of the Milky Way are 2
a massive quasar the Schwarzschild radius, given by Rs = 2GM/c2, is much greater than
its radius, while its density is very low. Based on the local-ether theory, a Schwarzschild
radius being greater than the radius of an object implies that on the surface of the object,
the gravitational potential is so strong that Φg > c2/2 and hence the gravitation-induced
intrinsic redshift z > 0.414.

×

∼

Then suppose that the material of the gas cloud together forms a local ether associated
with the quasar. Thus the gravitational potential on the surface of the quasar, when nor-
malized to c2, is Φg/c2 = 4.2. Although this potential is extraordinarily strong, the gravity
of acceleration on the surface of such a massive quasar is less than one percent of that on the
surface of the Earth. Then, according to the redshift formula, the emission from or absorp-
tion by atoms or ions placed near the surface will have a gravitational redshift of z = 2.07.
This value is close to the observed redshift of z = 2.114. A better agreement can be reached
simply with a slight adjustment in the size or density. On the other hand, suppose another
quasar has a lower redshift of z = 0.06 and a larger diameter of 3000 light-years. Thus the
10−13 kg/m3.
normalized gravitational potential Φg/c2
For comparison, the normalized gravitational potential on the surface of the Earth is about
10−6. For the two cases in the solar
7
system, the gravitational redshift is very small. Thus, based on the ejection model and the
local-ether theory, the wide variation in redshift can be ascribed to a variation in density
and size of the gas cloud, which in turn can be due to the strength of initial ejection from
the parent galaxy, to the speed at which the cloud moves away from the galaxy, to the gas
expansion, to the fragmentation of gas clouds, and to the star formation.

10−10 and that on the surface of the Sun is about 2

0.06 and the density is as low as

×

∼

∼

×

(10)

As the size and density tend to vary widely, it seems that redshifts of quasars vary in
a random way. However, from an analysis of about 600 quasars it has been found that the
redshifts tend to have some preferred values and thus the distribution of the redshifts exhibits
some preferred peaks (Karlsson 1977). Further, these peaks were found to correspond to a
geometric series in (1 + z). That is, the peaks are related by the Karlsson formula (Karlsson
1971)

1 + zn = (1 + z0)1.227−n,
where the index n is an integer. Thus the quantities ln(1 + zn) have a periodicity of 0.205.
Statistically, quasars with redshifts close to z = 1.95 have been found to be quite prominent
in their observed amount (Burbidge & Burbidge 1967). And quasars with redshifts much
higher than 2 are rarely found. However, the preceding formula can be used to trace the
preferred peaks back to high-redshift cases by letting the index n be negative. Thus, by
adopting the preferred value of 1.956 as the zeroth redshift (Karlsson 1971), the Karlsson
formula yields that the redshifts are peaked at z = 5.70, 4.46, 3.45, 2.63, 1.96, 1.41, 0.96,
0.60, 0.30, and 0.06 with n =
4 to 5. The Karlsson peaks are also conﬁrmed in several
subsequent investigations (Barnothy & Barnothy 1976, Arp et al. 1990, Karlsson 1990,
Burbidge & Napier 2001, Burbidge 2003, Napier & Burbidge 2003), particularly for the
structures with multiple quasars around a nearby galaxy of low redshift and high luminosity
(Arp et al. 1990, Karlsson 1990, Burbidge & Napier 2001). But it seems that no physical
interpretation for the periodicity has been proposed. In what follows, we present a model for
the preferred peaks based on the local-ether theory in conjunction with the ejection model.
Due to nonuniformity in particle velocity and density or to some internal disturbance,
a quasar may break into pieces of smaller sizes. By reason of symmetry, it seems to have
a good chance to break into two pieces of identical or similar sizes. Suppose the fragments
are also spherical and the density remains unchanged. Thereby, their radius is shorter than
the previous one by a factor of 2−1/3 and the gravitational potential on the surface of either
fragment will decrease by a factor of 2−2/3. A fragment may even break again, and again.
Thus, after the nth splitting in half, the gravitation-induced intrinsic redshift of one such

−

9

fragment is given by

1 + zn =

1 + [(1 + z0)2

1]2−2n/3,

−

where the quantity (1 + z0)2
1 denotes two times the normalized gravitational potential
−
corresponding to the zeroth redshift z0. For the cases of very high redshifts, the preceding
formula can be approximated as

q

(11)

(12)

1 + zn ≃

(1 + z0)1.26−n.

−

By adopting the preferred value of 1.956 as the zeroth redshift again, formula (11) leads to
the prediction that the preferred intrinsic redshifts are z = 6.08, 4.65, 3.53, 2.64, 1.96, 1.42,
1.02, 0.71, 0.49, 0.33, 0.22, 0.14, 0.09, and 0.06 with n =

4 to 9.

−

For n =

1 to 2, the predicted values are close to the corresponding Karlsson peaks.
For some of the histograms given in (Karlsson 1977, Arp et al. 1990, Burbidge & Napier
2001), our results can ﬁt a little better. The Karlsson peak of 0.60 is quite disparate from
our predicted values. This peak happens to be the mean between the predicted values of
0.71 and 0.49. A redshift distribution around 0.6 may actually be a merger of two close
distributions around 0.71 and 0.49, respectively. This kind of merging due to closeness
seems to ﬁnd preliminary support from some of the histograms given in (Burbidge & Napier
2001, Burbidge 2003). New preferred values of 0.22, 0.14, and 0.09 are also predicted.
Redshifts close to these values can be found in the literature. However, low redshift peaks
are expected to be smeared, since other aﬀecting factors of uneven splitting, gas expansion,
and star formation, will accumulate with time and then they together with the Doppler eﬀect
and the speed-dependent transition frequency will become comparatively signiﬁcant for low-
redshift cases. On the other hand, for the peaks at higher redshifts with n =
4, our
predicted values are a few percent greater than the corresponding Karlsson peaks. Although
quasars of such high redshifts are rarely found, this discrepancy as well as the merging
provides a means to test the proposed mechanism based on the repeated even fragmentation
and the gravitation-induced intrinsic redshift.

2 to

−

−

6. Conclusion
According to the ejection model, quasars of high redshift and low luminosity originate from
the ejected gas from an active galaxy of low redshift and high luminosity. Then quasars
move away from the parent galaxy and eventually evolve into galaxies. Meanwhile, further
ejection forms newborn quasars, which in turn are accompanied by the quasars or galaxies
formed earlier. From observations these companion quasars or galaxies tend to have medium
redshift and luminosity, with an extent depending on their distances from the center galaxy.
Based on the local-ether wave equation, it is shown that the quantum-state energies and
transition frequencies of atoms or ions placed in a celestial object decrease under the inﬂu-
ence of the associated gravitational potential. Thus the gravitational redshift is proposed
as an intrinsic redshift associated with the emission from stars, galaxies, or quasars. Ini-
tially, quasars are massive and their respective gravitational potentials are strong. Thus the
redshifts of quasars are high. However, in the evolution process with quasar fragmentation
and star formation, the masses of quasars decrease and their gravitational potentials become
weaker. Thus their redshifts become lower and lower, while the starburst makes their lumi-
nosities stronger. Thereby, the proposed gravitation-induced intrinsic redshift in conjunction
with the ejection model is in accord with the observed variations of redshift and luminosity
among the parent galaxy, nearby quasars, and the companion quasars and galaxies. The
local-ether theory is further supported by the abrupt change in redshift without overlap or
smooth transition observed in MCG 7-25-46 and NGC 7320, though this phenomenon may
be viewed instead as evidence for the projection eﬀect.

10

Quantitatively, based on the observed angular diameter of the high-redshift quasar near
NGC 7319 and on the density of interstellar gas, we estimate the physical diameter and
density of the quasar. Thereby, the calculated gravitational redshift can agree with the
observed high redshift, while the corresponding gravitational force is weak. Further, based
on the repeated fragmentation of quasars in half, a series of preferred values of redshift are
predicted. Most of them are close to the corresponding Karlsson peaks, except that two new
preferred values of 0.71 and 0.49 are predicted, but our results lack the Karlsson peak of
0.60. It is expected that a distribution around the last peak may be a merger of two close
distributions around the former two, respectively. This merging then provides a quantitative
means to test the proposed mechanism based on the quasar fragmentation and the local-ether
theory.

References

Arp, H. 1967, ApJ, 148, 321
. 2001, ApJ, 549, 780

833

Arp, H., Bi, H.G., Chu, Y., & Zhu, X. 1990, A&A, 239, 33
Arp, H., Burbidge, E.M.,Chu, Y., Flesch, E., Patat, F., & Rupprecht, G. 2002, A&A, 391,

Arp, H., & Russell, D. 2001, ApJ, 549, 802
Barnothy, J.M., & Barnothy, M.F. 1976, PASP, 88, 837
Burbidge, E.M., Burbidge, G., Arp, H.C., & Zibetti, S. 2003, ApJ, 591, 690
Burbidge, G.R. 2003, ApJ, 585, 112
Burbidge, G.R., & Burbidge, E.M. 1967, ApJ, 148, L107
Burbidge, G., & Napier, W.M. 2001, AJ, 121, 21
Galianni, P., Burbidge, E.M., Arp, H., Junkkarinen, V., Burbidge, G., & Zibetti, S. 2005,

ApJ, 620, 88

Greenstein, J. & Schmidt, M. 1964, ApJ, 140, 1
Guti´errez, C.M., & L´opez-Corredoira, M. 2004, ApJ, 605, L5
Guti´errez, C.M., L´opez-Corredoira, M., Prada, F., & Eliche, M.C. 2002, ApJ, 599, 579
Karlsson, K.G. 1971, A&A, 13, 333
. 1977, A&A, 58, 237
. 1990, A&A, 239, 50

L´opez-Corredoira, M., & Guti´errez, C.M. 2004, ApJ, 605, L5

. 2005 (astro-ph/05096302)

Napier, W. M., & Burbidge, G. 2003, MNRAS, 342, 601
Pound, R. V. & Rebka, Jr., G. A. 1960, Phys. Rev. Lett., 4, 337
Su, C.C. 2001a, J. Electromagnetic Waves Applicat., 15, 259

. 2001b, Eur. Phys. J. C, 21, 701
. 2001c, Eur. Phys. J. B, 24, 231
. 2002a, J. Electromagnetic Waves Applicat., 16, 40
. 2002b, J. Electromagnetic Waves Applicat., 16, 1275
. 2005, Quantum Electromagnetics – A Local-Ether Wave Equation Unifying Quantum

Mechanics, Electromagnetics, and Gravitation (http://qem.ee.nthu.edu.tw)

In Wikipedia, http://wikipedia.org, arts. “Stephan’s Quintet”, “Interstellar medium”

11

