6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

“Dark state polariton” is a manifestation of inequality
of forward and reversed processes in optics.

V.A.Kuz’menko1

Troitsk Institute for Innovation and Fusion Research,
Troitsk, Moscow region, 142190, Russian Federation.

Abstract

The physical origin of the so-called “dark states” is connected not with
the low absorption eﬃciency of the ground state of atoms, but with the
ultra high eﬃciency of stimulated emission transition into the initial state.
Simple pump-probe experiments for study the eﬃciency of the reversed
transitions in a two-level system are discussed.

PACS number: 33.80.Rv, 42.50.Hz

The concept of the “dark states” was introduced for designation of atom
ﬂuorescence decreasing eﬀect under speciﬁc conditions of laser excitation [1,2].
It was supposed that the atom gets into some speciﬁc coherent states, in which
it does not absorb laser radiation due to destructive quantum interference [3].
Later the concept of the “dark state polariton” was proposed [4,5]. So, this is
rather usual situation for optics, when we have a mathematical description of
phenomenon but without clear explanation of its physical nature.

The theorists working in the ﬁeld of nonlinear optics look like as a people,
who must explain and describe the technology of a car, but they are forbidden
to use the concept of a wheel. In such conditions, the Bloch equations appeared
which give excellent description of the dynamics of optical transitions, but which
do not have clear physical sense. There was introduced also the concept of
coherent states as some mixture of diﬀerent quantum states. However, this
concept does not have reliable physical base [6].
In addition, similar case is
the concept of a “dark states” in which the atom loses ability to absorb laser
radiation. Physical origin of this phenomenon is not explained.

The same role as the concept of a wheel plays in the mechanics, the concept of
inequality of forward and reversed transitions plays in optics. This concept is the
physical base of nonlinear optics as a whole. We have today several direct and
great number indirect experimental proofs of such inequality [7]. The essence
of this concept is that in spite of equality of integral cross-sections of forward
and reversed transitions (the Einstein coeﬃcients are equal), the diﬀerential
cross-sections can be distinguished in many orders of magnitude.

The cross-section of the reversed transition into the initial state (in con-
trast to the forward transition) has very sharp dependence from orientation
of molecules or atoms in the space, from the phase of vibration of atoms in
the molecule and from the phase of laser radiation. Fig.1 shows the supposed

1Electronic address: kuzmenko@triniti.ru

1

schematic shapes of dependences of cross-section for forward and reversed tran-
sitions from the relative phase diﬀerence of laser radiations.

On the base of such concept, the physical origin of the “dark states” becomes
clear. The main cause of the “dark states” is not in the absence of absorption,
but in the presence of extremely eﬃcient stimulated emission, which allows
the atom to return into the initial state. Let us discuss this explanation in
more detail for the case of Ramsey fringes in the two-pulses excitation of atoms
[8]. Two optical transitions take place under action of the ﬁrst laser pulse:
absorption of photon and it stimulated emission. The atom returns in the
ground state, but not exactly into the initial state.
In this case, the atom
keeps in memory the information about the initial state. Under action of the
second laser pulse, the third forward optical transition excites the atom again.
In this state the atom has extremely high diﬀerential cross-section for optical
transition into the initial state. And such transition takes place, when the
phases of the laser pulses coincide in the space. As a result the decreasing of
spontaneous ﬂuorescence emission is observed, which is incorrectly interpreted
as the decreasing of absorption by atoms of laser radiation.

Very important task today is to study the parameters of a reversed optical
transitions [9]. In the discussed above case the four-photon process takes place.
For reversed transition study, it is more interesting to use more simple two-
photon process in a two-level system. For this purpose, we should use the atoms,
which have the lifetime of excited states greater, than the delay between the laser
pulses. Similar experiments were carried out with Ca atoms in Ref. [10], but the
Ramsey fringes in the two-pulses case were not observed. The main reason of this
failure is connected, obviously, with diﬀerence in the experimental conditions.
The laser wave front curvature in [10] was much greater than in [8]. It can have a
critical rule. Besides the wave front curvature the degree of collinearity of laser
beams has also important meaning. Fig.2 shows the principal experimental
scheme with Ca atoms in the trap for study the eﬃciency of reversed optical
transition. It is case it is very important to use weak probe laser pulse. In this
case we should see ampliﬁcation without inversion as a whole quite similar to
those in Fig.5 of Ref. [11]. It allows evaluating the cross-section of the reversed
optical transition.

In the ﬁeld of so-called atomic interferometry, the experiments with three,
four and more laser pulses are very popular. Such schemes look like very similar
to the photon echo experiments [12,13], which include the stages of dephasing
and rephasing of the rotation (nutation) motion. In this cases the requirements
of wave front ﬂatness and other geometrical parameters, probably, are not so
sever (as in the two-pulses variant) and it makes the observation of the Ramsey
fringes more easy. However, for the study of the reversed optical transitions, the
variant with two pulses and long-lived excited species is more important and
such successful experiments should be carried out. In the other way the short
laser pulses may be used [9].

In conclusion, we propose the physical explanation of origin of the “dark
states”, which is based on the concept of inequality of forward and reversed
In this case, the physical nature of the “dark states” is
processes in optics.

2

connected not with the low absorption eﬃciency of the ground state of atoms,
but with the ultra high eﬃciency of stimulated emission transition into the
initial state. Simple pump-probe experiments with long-lived excited atoms for
study the eﬃciency of reversed transition in a two-level system are proposed.

References

dam), 35, 257 (1996).

quant-ph/0507090.

[1] E.Arimondo and G.Orriols, Nuovo Cimento Lett. 17, 333, (1976).

[2] E.Arimondo, in Progress in Optics

edited by E.Wolf (Elsevier, Amster-

[3] A.V.Taichenachev, V.I.Yudin, V.L.Velichansky and S.A.Zibrov, E-print,

[4] M.Fleischhauer and M.D.Lukin, Phys.Rev.Lett. 84, 5094 (2000).

[5] M.D.Lukin, Rev.Mod.Phys. 75, 457 (2003).

[6] K.Molmer, Phys.Rev.A 55, 3195 (1997).

[7] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0506023.

[8] M.Weitz, T.Heupel and T.W.Hansch, Phys.Rev.Lett. 77, 2356 (1996).

[9] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0603200.

[10] A.Morinaga and Y.Ohuchi, Phys.Rev.A 51, R1746 (1995).

[11] C.Liedenbaum, S.Stolte and J.Reuss, Chem.Phys. 122, 443 (1988).

[12] Sh.Yanagimachi, K.Mizobuchi and A.Morinaga, Phys.Rev.A 64, 041601

(2001).

[13] V.A.Kuz’menko, E-print, physics/0306148.

3

 

σσσσ 

pump 

probe 

1

2 

0 

TRAP 

PM 

θθθθ 

FIG.  2  Experimental  scheme  for  study  the  efficiency  of 
Fig.1     The supposed dependences of cross-section of 
reversed transition for long lived excited atomic states. 
optical transition from the phase difference between the 
 PM, photomultiplier.
laser pulses for forward (1) and reversed (2) transitions. 

 

