Modiﬁcation to Special Relativity

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

The speed of light is usually taken as one of the fundamental constants. String,
and ﬁeld, theories appear to require the altercation of this constant into a functional
form E(m, c) which is not E = mc2. The analysis requires the re-interpretation
of the renormalization group ﬂow equations. There are quantum corrections to the
mass-energy relation generically for particles of any sort. A breakdown of special
relativity follows. Cosmological data might be one of the best testbeds to analyze the
computable functional forms of the mass energy relations.

6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Introduction

Special relativity [1] has been one of cornerstones of modern physics for over a
hundred years. The notion of on-shellness for a particle or string is used to deﬁne
quantum scattering processes through a simple classical propagator; propagators dont
have to be simple to be consistent with basic symmetries however. The renormaliza-
tion group has been fully integrated with special relativity. This work is primarily
dedicated to theories that do not require taking a renormalization limit, such as string
models or quantum ﬁeld models that are eﬀective theories.

A physical interpretation of the renormalization group, together with its consis-
tency, does require that the energy relation E(m, c) be a function derived in a speciﬁc
quantum ﬁeld theory; furthermore in the case of light or gravity this function tells us
that c(E), or that the speed of light varies from our currently accepted value c0, the
value speciﬁed in true vacuum.

The use of the relevant n-point functions deﬁne the masses and couplings through

their bare values,

m2(m2

0, λ(j)

0 ; E, c; Λ)

λ(j)(λ(j)

0 ; m2

0; E, c, Λ) ,

(1)

and Λ here is the string coupling constant, or a UV cutoﬀ in ﬁeld theory; there could
be moduli associated with the compactiﬁed space and the ﬂuxes which have not been
included. The masses and couplings are ﬁxed in energy; if they run, then the running
can be speciﬁed in the left hand side of (1). The latter case is not examined, but
could be with certain running to match experimental data. The functional form is
inverted to ﬁnd c(E, m; m, λ(j)). Of course, higher dimension operators may be added
to change the functional form of the mass-energy relation to model the latter case.
After ﬁnding the functional form, it is substituted or reshuﬄed back into the n-point
functions with higher dimension operators (add and subtract) to determine the full
scattering.

These equations usually are called renormalization equations [2], and are not
used in string theory except for calculations which are renormalization special; such
as three point functions in which phase space requires all momenta to be zero, or
to cancel IR divergences in the S-matrix rather than then the calculation of the full
cross section which will cancel IR divergences. The equation for the couplings, e.g.
3-pt, 4-pt, . . ., are not speciﬁcally the renormalization group form, as a sum has been
2A2 have been grouped together
performed. For example, the terms A2 A2 and A2

2

in one function in k-space rather than separated as is typical in RG. Also, note that
on-shell requires k2 = m2, by deﬁnition.

The naive substitution of E = mc2

0 might not be consistent with (1). Note that
c0 is used here and in (1) the correct value c is used. An example function is not
diﬃcult to ﬁnd; the bare values of m0 are used but the argument can also be obtained
with the observed vales m. Holding m, m0 ﬁxed (with λ(j)
0 ) could generate a function
1 = sin2 E/c2/m0f (k2/m2
0). This function,
as m0 is typically large, varies with the momenta. Although the couplings, including
the masses, are included there is self-consistency that requires the speed of light to
change. This is canceled by changing the renormalization by scaling the RG point
for example. This scaling of the parameters m0 and λ(j)
0 would restore consistency
with special relativity. String theory doesn’t have a UV renormalization point and
the conclusion is that the speed of light must be a function of energy.

0) which would generate E = m0c2g(k2/m2

The renormalization equations (1) for the photon and graviton generate the equa-

tions (with a massless m = 0),

The h-bar is not used but emphasizes the functional dependence of the speed of light
and energy, which is quantum due to the ﬂow equations,

cp(E)

cg(E) .

c = X cjE′j

(2)

(3)

in terms of the plank energy E′ = E/β. The β parameter as the length scale is not
used in terms of compactiﬁed dimensions as these moduli might ﬂow also.

The equations in (1) should be consistent with eachother, including the mass
and couplings. Note that these functions m and λ(j) represent the inﬁnite number
of terms of the particular scattering of the the vertices with independent couplings.
In the two-point function there is one momenta. The entire sum contributes to the
relations in (1).

One consequence of the variability of the speed of light is that there are an
inﬁnite number of quantum corrections to the energy-mass relation, as in (3). Another
consequence is that special relativity has been violated although not in a strong
manner because only one dimension, time, is essentially treated diﬀerently. This
implies a special reference frame. Furthermore, there may be zeros in cp(E) and

3

cg(E); in the case of gravity this would require quantization in the pseudo-topological
teleparallel formalism.

Each species of particle would have its own E(c, m) relation with the zeroth order
being its own E = m0c2
0 relation. The similarities of the various particles would in turn
express similarities of their quantization, and the structure of spacetime, including
the compactiﬁcation.

Energy is deﬁned via the ﬁeld and string theoretic notion of a Hamiltonian and
its action of ﬂows in time on states. Varying the deﬁnition of energy could alter the
energy mass relation; this could lead to a closer pairing at least in practical deﬁnition
of mass and energy.

The variation of the speed of light or gravity range from zero to very large values
including inﬁnity, and perhaps is somewhat periodic in energy due to a ﬁxed mass
parameter and its integer multiples. Cosmological data might want to be re-examined
for clues to these dispersion relations, both in light and gravity, especially in experi-
mental evidence where there are either large energies, such as in supernovae, or when
energy scales radically ﬂuctuates in short time periods so that the dispersion can be
seen next to a peak along a very steep slope. Also, data generated by groups experi-
mentally testing special relativity could hold clues within their precision and energy
range.

4

References

[1] Albert Einstein Annelen der Physik 17, pp.891 (1905).

[2] K.G. Wilson and John B. Kogut, Phys. Rept. 12:75-200,1974.

5

