6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Distinguishing quantum erasure from non-local interference

Ghenadie N. Mardari
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901∗
(Dated: December 12, 2013)

Chaotic beams, generated via spontaneous parametric down conversion, do not always generate
ﬁrst-order interference. However, fringes can be observed in the coincidence count regime, when
associated entangled beams are properly measured in separate contexts. This phenomenon can be
interpreted either in terms of quantum erasure (recovered ﬁrst-order interference), or in terms of
non-local interference (fourth-order eﬀects in superposition). The two explanations lead to diﬀerent
predictions for a speciﬁc context, which is described in the text.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Ta, 42.50.Dv, 42.50.Xa.

Spontaneous parametric down-conversion is a remark-
able source of entangled photon pairs. It has been used
with great success for the investigation of correlated
beams, usually identiﬁed as signal and idler. At the
same time, each of these beams has independent prop-
erties that are interesting on their own. For example,
it has been shown that signal (or idler) beams do not
easily generate ﬁrst-order interference in a Young inter-
ferometer, in the singles count regime [1, 2]. This has
been plausibly explained in terms of the divergence of
these chaotic beams [2], and also in terms of their lack of
spatio-temporal coherence [1]. It is also well established
that certain types of coincident measurements of the two
beams will restore the fringes behind a double slit. (See
[3] and references therein). Usually, they entail far ﬁeld
point-like detection of the idler photons, while the signal
beam is scanned horizontally. This is known as quantum
erasure, but is also referred to by experimentalists as in-
duced coherence. Quantum erasure implies that path in-
formation is erased when just a small subset of idler pho-
tons are detectable. Supposedly, the whole information
would require the detection of all photons. Yet, fringes
are produced only by the coincident subset on the signal
path, which has well-deﬁned properties, due to its EPR
state. Consequently, induced coherence is more appeal-
ing as an interpretive concept, even though the formalism
of quantum erasure has its own advantages.

Induced coherence is very important for the interpre-
tation of quantum mechanics, because of the questions
that it raises. Point-like measurements of the far ﬁeld of
the idler photons select a coincident subset of the signal
photons with similar spatial properties. This can solve
the problem of divergence and improve fringe visibility.
However, these measurements do not have any obvious
eﬀects on the statistics of emission. Accordingly, they
should not be able to overcome the known lack of tem-
poral coherence, speciﬁc to chaotic beams. If so, what
can explain the coherent build-up of fringes that is obvi-
ously happening? And if the preconditions for ﬁrst-order
interference are not met, are we dealing with a diﬀerent
phenomenon?

A good way to test for ﬁrst-order interference is to

close one slit. Normally, this should destroy the inter-
ference process and induce the projection of a diﬀraction
pattern. Yet, coincident detection of idler photons and
signal photons going through a single slit produces in-
terference fringes of high visibility on the path of the
signal [4]. This can be explained in terms of interference
of the bi-photon amplitudes [5], and is also known as
non-local double-slit interference. It also leads to a sur-
prising hypothesis about the set-up with two slits. Co-
incident measurement of the idler beam may also deﬁne
the trajectories of entangled signal photons. The latter
can only go through one slit at a time, but they must also
experience real-time bi-photon interactions after passing
through. Ergo, it is also likely that interference distri-
butions emerge from each slit and project constructively
onto the plane of the detector. According to this de-
scription, quantum erasure must mimic ﬁrst-order inter-
ference, without producing it, at least in some cases. But
how are we to test this hypothesis?

If interference fringes are produced as superimposed
independent sets, then it should be possible to sepa-
rate each component. For example, the slits could be
marked by opposite circular polarizers with orthogonal
fast axes. This would automatically eliminate the pos-
sibility of Young interference behind the slits. On the
other hand, if the distributions are produced by non-local
eﬀects between signal and idler photons, they should
merely become shifted by half a cycle from each other.
Separation can be achieved via coincident detection with
the idler, by ﬁltering the latter with a linear polarizer.
When the axis of the linear polarizer of the idler is paral-
lel to the fast axis of one marker on the path of the signal,
it should reveal a set of fringes for coincident signal de-
tection events. An orthogonal measurement of the idler
should reveal the shifted fringes from the other slit, which
would be called anti-fringes. Measurements for interme-
diate polarization states of the idler would enable again
the detection of coincident signal photons that emerge
from both slits. This would cause an overlap of fringes
and anti-fringes. For the diagonal setting, the overlap
would be perfect and the fringe pattern should wash out
completely.

Di

 

LP

SPDC

QWP1

Slits

QWP2

 

Ds

 

FIG. 1: Basic set-up of the proposed experiment. Quarter-
wave plates QWP1 and QWP2 have orthogonal fast axes and
induce circular polarization in opposite directions on each
path. The idler photons must be detected at Di before the
signal photons can reach either slit. LP is a linear polarizer.
Lenses and ﬁlters that may be required, as well as the coinci-
dence circuit, are not shown.

The experiment proposed above has been already per-
formed by Walborn and collaborators [6]. Their results
are in perfect agreement with the presented description.
However, the authors have shown that the formalism
of quantum erasure explains the outcomes just as well.
Thus, the experiment did not provide enough information
for a clear distinction between competing interpretations.
Either quantum erasure mimics ﬁrst-order interference,
or it actually produces it by overriding the physical pa-
rameters of the experiment via negative temporal eﬀects.
As a consequence, a further reﬁnement of this test is
necessary. The hypothesis presented above implies that
fringes are due to non-local signal-idler interactions in
real time. The passage of a signal photon through a slit
must be treated as a perturbative measurement. Thus,
clear fringe visibility requires the possibility of interaction
between entangled photons behind the slits and prior to
detection.
If the idler were detected before the signal
reached the slits, it would deﬁne its path without being
able to interact with it subsequently. Ergo, fringe visi-
bility should diminish dramatically. On the other hand,

2

if quantum erasure operates literally as commonly inter-
preted, the time of detection of the idler should not have
any eﬀect on the outcome. Fringes should persist at the
same level of quality.

In light of the above, it would be highly instructive to
repeat the experiment of Walborn et al. [6] with the fol-
lowing modiﬁcation (FIG. 1). The set-up must be kept
unchanged for the signal path. The idler beam must be
reﬂected to the side, as close as possible to its source.
A lens with short focal distance may be introduced as
an option, in order to create far-ﬁeld conditions before
signal photons reach the slits. Idler photons must be de-
tected with a point-like detector in the central part of the
beam. It is imperative to ensure that idler photons are
detected before the signal photons reach the double-slit.
It is already well demonstrated that fringe visibility is
high when the idler is detected after the passage through
the slits by the signal, even if the idler is detected long af-
ter the signal. In fact, in the experiment of Walborn et al.
fringes are more symmetrical for delayed detection, than
for early detection. This could be an indication that non-
local interactions happen all the way to the ﬁrst detector,
and the eﬀect on the signal photons is more complete in
the delayed erasure set-up. However, the authors of the
experiment believe that a measurement artifact (such as
k -vector ﬁltering) could also explain the asymmetry of
fringes during early detection [7]. As a corollary, the idler
photons must be detected before the signal photons reach
the slits, in order to remove any interpretive ambiguity
about the real mechanism behind quantum erasure.

∗

Electronic address: g.mardari@rutgers.edu

[1] P. Souto Ribeiro, S. P´adua, J. Machado da Silva, and

G. Barbosa, Phys. Rev. A 51, 1631 (1995).

[2] D. Strekalov, A. Sergienko, D. Klyshko, and Y. Shih, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 74, 3600 (1995).

[3] G. Scarcelli, Y. Zhou, and Y. Shih, quant-ph/0512207.
[4] E. Fonseca, P. Souto Ribeiro, S. P´adua, and C. Monken,

Phys. Rev. A 60, 1530 (1999).

[5] Y. Shih, IEEE J. Sel. Topics in QE 9, 1455 (2003).
[6] S. Walborn, M. Terra Cunha, S. P´adua, and C. Monken,

Phys. Rev. A 65, 033818 (2002).
[7] C. Monken, personal communication.

