6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

How Hilbert has found the Einstein Equations before Einstein and forgeries of
Hilbert’s page proofs

Dieter W. Ebner
Physics Department, University of Konstanz, DE-78457 Konstanz

e-mail: Dieter.Ebner@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract: A succinct chronology is given around Nov 1915, when the explicit ﬁeld equations of
General Relativity have been found. Evidence, unearthed by D.Wuensch, that a decisive document
of Hilbert has been mutilated in recent years with the intention to distort the historical truth is
reviewed and discussed. The procedure how Hilbert has found before Einstein the correct equations
“easily without calculation” by invariant-theoretical arguments is identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time.
However, Hilbert has based his derivation on an incorrect or at least not yet formally proved
invariant theoretical fact.

Key words: History of General Relativity, Field Equations of General Relativity
PACS numbers: 01.65.+g, 04.20.Cv

1

Introduction

At Nov 11, 1915 Einstein still submits incorrect ﬁeld-equations (2) of General Relativity, lacking
the trace term, to Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin [1]. At Nov 20, for the ﬁrst
time, David Hilbert submits the correct equations (5c) to Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu
G¨ottingen [2]. Einstein, 5 days later, now also submits the correct equations (7) at Berlin[3], but
without citing Hilbert, although with a postcard[4] dated Nov 18, Einstein acknowledges receipt of
a postcard from Hilbert (probably dated Nov 16) containing ﬁeld equations for General Relativity.
Hilbert’s postcard is lost.

Most physicist, including those working on General Relativity, either have no deﬁnite opinion or
they believe that General Relativity was the creation of Einstein alone. Only a few, interested in
history of science, believed that Hilbert has ﬁrst published the correct equations, and Einstein 5
days later, either independently or through the inﬂuence of Hilbert, arrived also at the correct
equations.

In 1997 this opinion was challenged by L.Corry, J.Renn and J.Stachel (CRS). After having found
in a G¨ottingen archive the page proofs[2] of Hilbert’s Nov 20 submission, which he has received
from the printery at Dec 6, they publish in Science an article[5] stating: nowhere in the whole page
proofs the correct equations can be found. Thus they revert the opinion held thus far by historians,
by insinuating Hilbert has copied from Einstein, and not Einstein from Hilbert, because Hilbert
had added the explicit equations (5c) with the correct trace term only after Dec 6, appearing in
his published version[6] at Mar 31, 1916 only. Hilbert has made other considerable changes for
his published version without altering the initial date Nov 20 of submission or adding a date of
revision.

After 1997, a tremendous fact was unearthed, turning the Einstein/Hilbert priority dispute from a
purely academic controversy among historians into a criminal story: In 2002 Winterberg discovers
that about one third of a page in Hilbert’s page proofs have been cut oﬀ, and Winterberg was the
ﬁrst to publish[7] the opinion the cut-oﬀ is the deed of a forger with the intention to distort the
historical truth in favour of Einstein. (For a list of earlier mentioning of the cut-oﬀ see Sommer[8].)

CRS defend with vehemence their opinion[9] Hilbert himself had made the cut-oﬀ. However, the
most miraculous item in this case would then be the fact, that CRS did not mention the cut-oﬀ in

2

their Science article, though their main statement was that nowhere in the whole page proofs the
explicit equations can be found.

The refereeing process in Science is very strict. Therefore we conclude that their referees have been
in possession of a copy of the intact page proofs. Otherwise the referees had observed the cut-oﬀ
and they had not passed the article in the present form. Similarly we conclude that indeed the
intact page proofs did not contain the explicit ﬁeld equations.

For historians it was a great triumph[10] to have reverted the opinion about such a milestone in
the development of physics as is the discovery of the correct explicit ﬁeld equations of General
Relativity. However, their triumph was shattered by the early argument Hilbert was the ﬁrst to
have identiﬁed the Ricci scalar R as the correct Lagrangian density and the elaboration by well
known variational procedures were only a trivial exercise, thus Hilbert still deserved the priority.
Thus a forger went out and made the cut-oﬀ in Hilbert’s page proofs. In the remaining page proofs
it can no longer be seen that Hilbert’s K is indeed the ‘invariant stemming from Riemann’s tensor’,
i.e. the Ricci-scalar R, and Hilbert could have added that statement only for his published version
after he has seen the correct ﬁeld equations in Einstein’s publications.

Hilbert’s postcard (dated Nov 16
1 day) in which he has communicated the correct explicit ﬁeld
equations to Einstein is lost, which is curious since more trivial postcards before and later are
preserved. Only from Einstein’s reactions we can safely infer that Hilbert’s Nov 16 postcard indeed
contained the correct ﬁeld equations.

±

Hilbert’s case was also weak because Hilbert did not give detailed explanations how he has found
the equations, but says they follow ‘easily without calculation’ only mentioning invariant theoretical
arguments. A straightforward elaboration of the variational procedure, without using any tricks
discovered only later, though certainly possible, would require several days of calculation. I doubt
if anyone has really done this ‘great calculation’, as I call it in the following, and it seems at least
nobody has published it.

In the published version of his page proofs, Hilbert only gives the following explanations:

The ﬁrst term on the left hand side of [our Eq.(5c)] follows easily without calculation
from the fact that Kµν, except gµν, is the only second rank tensor, and K is the only
k , gµν
invariant which can be formed from gµν and its ﬁrst and second derivatives gµν
kl .

(1)

(Note that Hilbert writes K for the Ricci scalar R, Kµν for the Ricci tensor Rµν, and he adds
additional lower indices for partial derivatives with respect to the coordinates.)

I have pondered about Hilbert’s ‘easy’ method, since I was dissatisﬁed by explanations given by
others[11], who have proposed simple but tricky procedures, and probably are methods discovered
only later. Coincidentally I have ordered further copies of Hilbert’s private notes from the G¨ottingen
archive[12], and I was puzzled about Hilbert mentioning, among general formulae he has obtained
for Riemannian geometry, a ‘special case’ which seemed completely absurd for me until I realized
that this ‘special case’ is suﬃcient to derive the Einstein Equations. For a skilled theorist, as
Hilbert was, that calculation required perhaps 5-10 minutes, thus he described it as ‘easily without
calculation’ meaning avoiding the straightforward but lengthy ‘great calculation’, which would
require several days. Hilbert’s mentioning that ‘special case’ in his private notices is a hint he
actually proceeded along these lines. A lot of other special cases would do also. Therefore Hilbert
did not specify one in his published version. In the following subsection 6.3 we give an even more
elegant derivation, deserving the qualiﬁcation ‘easily without calculation’. It is based on a tacit
assumption, which Hilbert was allowed using his famous power of mathematical intuition.

Unfortunately for Hilbert, the fact mentioned in (1), as it is stated, is incorrect, even if one assumes
that with ‘tensor’ Hilbert means ‘symmetric tensor’, which perhaps was his terminology. Obviously
Hilbert did not know the results of Haskins[13] and Zorawski[14], though in 1908 the “Leipziger
Berichte” were available at G¨ottingen. According to their results, see the following section (7.1),

3

for n = 4, including the Ricci scalar and Ricci tensor, there are 14 independent invariants and
three tensors. Fortunately for Hilbert, the fact mentioned in (1) is correct if invariant and tensor
are required to be linear in the second derivatives gµν
kl . That modiﬁed statement (1) suﬃces for
Hilbert’s derivation.

However, that modiﬁed fact (1) was not known in 1915, and so Hilbert must have been aware his
derivation of the explicit ﬁeld equations is based on a shaky invariant theoretical fact, at least
lacking a formal proof. This may explain why Hilbert did not include them in his page proofs.
Also because for him, as a mathematician, explicit ﬁeld equations did not seem to be of utmost
importance. Only after he has seen them in Einstein’s Nov 25 publication (without acknowledgment
of his private Nov 16 postcard communication) he has added them in a hurry, together with the
insuﬃcient explanation (1).

In his republication[15] 1924, i.e. almost ten years later, Hilbert writes in the introduction: “The fol-
lowing is essentially a reprint of my older communications ... with only slight editorial changes and
rearrangements, which should improve its comprehension.” Despite that statement, he abandons
his previous derivation based on (1) completely and switches to the standard derivation, which
in the meantime was found by others, using Riemannian normal coordinates. In the meantime
Vermeil[16], Weyl[17] and Cartan[18] have given independent formal proofs of Hilbert’s modiﬁed
fact. I do not see any reason for a republication, except Hilbert has realized his 1915 sketch of a
derivation of the ﬁeld equations based on (1) was incomplete. His introductory words should hide
his own derivation was a guess only and not a formal proof.

2 A Chronology[19]

Since 1907 Einstein was working toward a uniﬁcation of special relativity with gravitation. He
had the ingenious idea that gravitation has something to do with curvature of space-time, thus
unifying geometry and gravitation, or geometrizing the gravitational force. The metrical tensor gab
(depending upon chosen generalized coordinates xk) is the formulation of the metric and of the
gravitational ﬁeld, replacing Cartesian coordinates and Newton’s gravitational potential. Masses
(equivalent to energy according to E = mc2) are the source of curvature.

1913 M. Grossmann[20], for the ﬁrst time, proposed the Ricci-tensor Rab as a covariant candidate
expressing curvature in a gravitation theory as intended by Einstein. Unfortunately, Grossmann
erroneously concluded that equations with the Ricci tensor cannot reproduce Newton’s theory of
gravitation in the limit of weak gravitational ﬁelds. According to the published version[20], the error
is due to Grossmann. However, in his Nov 4 paper (see below), Einstein takes the full responsibility
for the error.

1914 and the ﬁrst half of 1915: Tragically, based on this misjudgement by Grossmann, Einstein
publishes several papers stating the gravitational ﬁeld equations in the form of the following Eq.
(2), but with the left-hand side not the Ricci-tensor, but several curious mathematical expressions,
which are not generally covariant but only covariant under linear transformations.
(On the right hand side of (2), κ is the constant of gravitation in certain units, and Tab is the
energy-momentum tensor of matter or radiation, producing the curvature. T00 is the mass density.
The other components are pressure, stress, and mass ﬂux density, which also produce curvature.)

General covariance of a ﬁeld equation such as (2) is mandatory for General Relativity, which
is a theory of the metrical ﬁeld. General covariance means that arbitrary coordinates might be
chosen and the ﬁeld equations such as (2) have the same form (covariance = form invariance), or
in other words (2) should be valid in any coordinate system. Special coordinates can be deﬁned
using the metric. Thus special coordinates bear the danger that they restrict the generality of the
gravitational ﬁeld.

4

June 28 - July 5, 1915 By Hilbert’s invitation, Einstein gives six two-hour lectures about General
Relativity in G¨ottingen.

Nov. 4, 1915 For the ﬁrst time, Einstein[1] postulates the ﬁeld equations in the form (2) with
the left-hand side the Ricci-tensor. But unnecessarily, he uses a special expression for the Ricci
tensor, which is valid only in special coordinates satisfying (4), where g is the determinant of the
metrical tensor, so manifest general covariance is not yet reached.

The most important progress in that paper was that Einstein proved that (2) has Newton’s gravity
as a limit, thus correcting Grossmann’s error, which had cost Einstein almost 3 years of futile work.
Einstein writes[1]: “Thus I regained general covariance, a requirement which I had abandoned with
a heavy heart three years ago, while working with my friend Grossmann.”

At the same time, Einstein freed himself from another quarrel he has had against his theory, namely
his earlier observation that all equations of the form (2), with the left hand side having some (non-
trivial, i.e. local) covariance, violate causality: Knowledge of the metrical tensor ﬁeld in the past
cannot predict it uniquely in the future with the help of (2). Einstein is now recognizing that this
is because of covariance: Coordinates have no objective physical meaning and our free choice in
the future (permitted by general covariance) cannot be predicted by a physical law. Nevertheless,
coordinates are necessary to formulate the metrical-gravitational ﬁeld, namely with the help of
a metrical tensor gab. Therefore (2) must and can be supplemented by 4 additional conditions,
nowadays called gauge-conditions, specifying the choice of coordinates in the future, thus restoring
causality of the ﬁeld equations of General Relativity.

Nov 7, 1915 Einstein sends Hilbert the page proofs of the above Nov 4 paper.

Nov 11, 1915 For the ﬁrst time, Einstein[1] proposes (manifestly) fully covariant ﬁeld equations
for the gravitational ﬁeld:

Rab =

κTab

−

where Rab is now the Ricci tensor formulated in arbitrary coordinates. (The minus sign on the
right-hand side of (2) is conventional, depending on a conventional minus sign in the deﬁnition of
the Ricci-tensor.) A milestone in the development of General Relativity was hereby achieved: (2)
has Newton’s theory of gravitation as a limit, though with κ half the value as given by (8), and
(2) are (manifestly) generally covariant ﬁeld equations, and most spectacularly (see Einstein’s Nov
18 paper) (2) explains Mercury’s perihelion precession, and (2) explains the deﬂection of light as
(allegedly) observed at the 1919 eclipse of the sun by Eddington and Fr¨ohlich.

Nevertheless Einstein was deeply dissatisﬁed with (2). As is now also the accepted view, Ein-
stein was convinced that to every physical equation in special relativity (i.e. in the absence of
a gravitational ﬁeld, e.g. conservation of energy and momentum, Maxwell’s equations, etc) there
corresponds an analogous equation in General Relativity (i.e. in the presence of a gravitational
ﬁeld) whereby the partial derivatives with respect to the coordinates are replaced by covariant
derivatives. Nowadays this is called the principle of minimal coupling, and is the accepted method
for postulating Maxwell’s equations in General Relativity. Conservation of energy and momentum
in ﬂat Minkowski space of special relativity thus leads to the equation

(2)

(3)

T b
a;b = 0

where ; denotes covariant derivative. Einstein observed that (2) does not satisfy (3) except in the
case the trace T = T a
a vanishes. As we know today, the discrepancy between (2) and (3) is serious
because applied to a point particle (e.g. the earth), (3) is equivalent to geodesic motion. Thus the
empirical success of (2) is spoilt, because being based on the assumption of geodesic motion in the
Schwarzschild metric.

Nov 12, 1915 Einstein writes to Hilbert: “Meanwhile, the problem has been brought one step

5

(4)

(5a)

(5b)

(5c)

forward. Namely, the postulate

√

g = 1

−

enforces general covariance.” In modern terms, this means that the gauge-condition (4) (nowa-
days called Einstein gauge) is a permitted gauge, i.e. it does not restrict the generality of the
gravitational ﬁeld. More speciﬁcally: Using completely arbitrary coordinates in the most general
gravitational ﬁeld, it is always possible to introduce new coordinates fulﬁlling the gauge condition
(4). In other words, Einstein’s Nov 4 paper was already generally covariant, if not manifestly so
in the physical sense that in every gravitational ﬁeld one can choose coordinates fulﬁlling (4) and
in these coordinates gravitation is governed by (2) in his Nov 4 version. The only physical rea-
son for the requirement of general covariance is: not to restrict the generality of the gravitational
ﬁeld. Manifest general covariance is a matter of predilection. It has the advantage of making the
non-restriction obvious i.e. manifest. With suﬃcient technical skill it is always possible to ﬁnd the
manifestly generally covariant formulation, the physical contents of the theory being unchanged.

Nov 13, 1915 With a postcard, Hilbert invites Einstein to attend his lecture at G¨ottingen sched-
uled for Nov 16, where he promises to give the solution of Einstein’s ‘great problem’. With ‘great
problem’ Hilbert probably meant the state of aﬀair when Einstein was lecturing in G¨ottingen in
June/July. Obviously, he had not yet absorbed Einstein’s Nov 4 page proofs, and had not realized,
Einstein himself had already solved most of his ‘great problem’. (Only the discrepancy with the
requirement (3) remained.) Hilbert has brought this postcard to the post oﬃce in the night only,
since it bears a postmark of Nov 14, 6-7 a.m.

Nov 13, 1915 After having posted the above postcard, Hilbert writes a second postcard, which
again has received a postmark of Nov 14, 6-7 a.m. Obviously Hilbert has now studied Einstein’s
Nov 4 submission. Hilbert writes on this second postcard:

“As far as I understand your recent work, the solution given by you is completely diﬀerent from
mine, in particular since with me [the energy expression] necessarily contains the electric potential.
Continued on page I with the invitation to come to here at Tuesday 6 p.m.” With the Roman
numeral ‘I’, Hilbert refers to his ﬁrst postcard.

Nov 15, 1915 With a postcard, Einstein declines Hilbert’s invitation for the Nov 16 talk because
of fatigue and stomach-ache, and expresses his hope later to read the printed version of the talk.

Nov 16, 1915 Hilbert gives his talk at the Mathematical Academy of G¨ottingen.

Nov 16, 1915 Hilbert writes Einstein a postcard, which is now lost. So we do not know the exact
date, which could vary by one day, nor exactly what was written on it. According to Wuensch[21]
the postcard contained the following three formulae

H = K + L

(K + L)√g dw = 0

δ

Z

√g (Kµν

1

2 Kgµν) +

−

∂L√g
∂gµν = 0

2 Kgµν. The
(5c) are the correct ﬁeld equations of General Relativity, including the trace term
minus sign under the square root is absent giving the imaginary unit i which drops out of the
equation. Kµν is the Ricci tensor, in the tradition of Gauss for German Kr¨ummung = curvature.
So K is the Ricci scalar. (5b) is Hamilton’s principle of least action. H is the Lagrangian, which by
(5a) is the sum of the Lagrangian K of the gravitational ﬁeld and the Lagrangian L of everything
else (matter, radiation). Since in (5) Hilbert did not restrict L he still considers general matter
(or radiation). Einstein’s later reproach concerning Hilbert’s treatment of matter in a letter to
Ehrenfest[22] as ‘unnecessarily special’ and in a letter to Weyl[23] as ‘childish’ is thus completely
unjustiﬁed. However, it is true, that later in his page proofs, Hilbert specialized L to the Lagrangian
of Mie’s electrodynamics, in which today nobody believes. Hilbert denotes the coordinates by wa

−

1

6

(w = world coordinates instead of xa as is usual today), so dw is the product of the four coordinate
diﬀerentials in the fourfold integral in (5b), and √g dw is the invariant volume element of space-
time. As is well known in General Relativity, given a Lagrangian L of matter (or radiation), its
energy-momentum tensor is

Tµν =

1
√g

∂L√g
∂gµν .

(6)

The coupling constant κ does not occur in (5) as it can be put to unity while choosing suitable
units.

It is curious that this Nov 16 postcard of Hilbert to Einstein is lost, while the more trivial Nov 13
and Nov 19 postcards are preserved.

Of course it is controversial what was on the postcard. A discussion will be found in the following
section.

Nov 18, 1915 Einstein writes to Hilbert, acknowledging Hilbert’s Nov 16 postcard:

“Dear Colleague! The system, given by you, coincides - as far I can see - exactly with what I have
found in the last weeks and have sent to the Academy. The diﬃculty was not to ﬁnd generally
covariant equations for the gµν; for this is easy with the help of the Riemann tensor. But it was
diﬃcult to recognize, that these equations are a generalization, and indeed a simple and natural one,
of Newton’s law. This I achieved only in the last weeks (I have sent you my ﬁrst communication).
The only possible generally covariant equations, which now have turned out to be the correct ones,
I have taken into consideration with my friend Grossmann. Only with a heavy heart we parted
with them, because the physical discussion has seemed me to have given the incompatibility with
Newton’s law. - Main point, the diﬃculties are now overcome. Today I send the Academy a paper,
in which I deduce quantitatively from General Relativity, without any additional ad hoc hypotheses,
Mercury’s perihelion motion, as discovered by Leverrier. Thus far no other theory of gravitation
has achieved that. With best greetings your Einstein.”

The sentence ‘I have sent you my ﬁrst communication’ clearly shows that Einstein refers to his
Nov 4 paper he has sent to Hilbert at Nov 7, where (2) with the Ricci tensor is used. Probably he
has found that equation several weeks ago, but has submitted it only at Nov 4. Thus in his ﬁrst
reaction, Einstein only recognized in (5c) that Hilbert has used the Ricci tensor. Probably only
in the next few days, he observed Hilbert’s additional trace term
2 Kgµν, and Einstein began to
experiment with additional trace terms also.

−

1

The passage ‘But it was diﬃcult to recognize, that these equations are a generalization, and indeed
a simple and natural one, of Newton’s law.’ is a heavy and very justiﬁed reproach against Hilbert.
By good luck Hilbert has taken the Ricci scalar K as the Lagrangian of the gravitational ﬁeld and
by working out the corresponding Euler-Lagrange-equations (5c) (which of course is a tremendous
achievement) for the ﬁrst time has found the correct ﬁeld equations of General Relativity. But
because he did not show that these equations have Newton’s theory as a limit, he does not know
if his equations (5c) have possibly something to do with gravity. Hilbert had not even a change to
do so because he specializes to Mie’s electrodynamics and thus was not in a position to check if a
point mass or a ﬂuid moves according to Newton’s gravity, as Einstein has done. It seems Hilbert
did not even feel an obligation to do so.

Nov 18, 1915 Einstein submits his paper explaining Mercury’s perihelion motion.
The biographer Pais[24] writes: ‘This discovery was, I believe, by far the strongest emotional expe-
rience in Einstein’s scientiﬁc life, perhaps in all his life. Nature had spoken to him.’ Einstein writes
to Ehrenfest: ‘For a few days I was beside myself with joyous excitement’, and to Fokker that his
discovery has given him palpitations of the heart.

Nov 19, 1915 On a postcard, Hilbert congratulates Einstein enthusiastically and in very friendly
words for his explanation of Mercury’s perihelion motion.

7

(7)

(8)

Nov 20, 1915 Hilbert submits his manuscript which was then printed on his page proofs[2].

Nov 25, 1915 Einstein[3] also arrives at the correct equations of General Relativity including the
trace term:

at Berlin, but without citing Hilbert. To be in agreement with Newton’s theory in the limit of
weak ﬁelds one must have:

Rab =

κ (Tab

1

2 gabT )

−

−

κ = 8πγc−4

where γ is Newton’s constant of gravitation, and c is the velocity of light. (7) is equivalent to (5c).
Einstein does not give an explanation how he has now found the additional trace term. He has
only checked that the conclusion T = 0 is no longer possible.

Nov 26, 1915 Einstein writes a letter to his friend Zangger accusing Hilbert, without naming him
explicitly, in drastic words: “The theory has unique beauty. Only one colleague has understood it
really, but he tries in a tricky way to ‘nostrify’ it (an expression due to Abraham). In my personal
experience I have not learnt any better the wretchedness of the human species as on occasion of
this theory and related to it. However, that does not concern me in the slightest.” and in Nov 30,
1915 he writes Besso “Colleagues behave nastily.”

It is diﬃcult to understand such harsh words of Einstein. He must must have been extremely angry
having worked for eight years to the solution of his ‘great problem’ and Hilbert in only a few weeks
elegantly has found the solution before him. Einstein’s fury shows the Hilbert’s Nov 16 postcard
was of considerable help to him.

On the other hand, Hilbert writes with great admiration about Einstein, e.g.[15] “the publications
of Einstein, which are always rich in new approaches and ideas.”

Dec 2, 1915 Einstein’s Nov 25 paper appears. Certainly Hilbert got a copy and very probably he
was angry because Einstein did not credit him for his Nov 16 postcard with the correct equations
(5c), and Hilbert has sent Einstein a letter expressing his grievance. Such a letter, which should
have existed because of Einstein’s mentioning of a ‘certain resentment’ at Dec 20, 1915, is also lost.

Dec 6, 1915 Hilbert receives his page proofs from the printery. Most probably Einstein received
a copy from Hilbert in the following day.

Dec 20, 1915 Einstein asks Hilbert for reconciliation: “There has been a certain resentment be-
tween us, the cause of which I do not want to analyze any further. I have fought against the feeling
of bitterness associated with it, and with complete success. I again think of you with undiminished
kindness and I ask you to attempt the same with me. It is objectively a pity if two real guys that
have somewhat liberated themselves from this shabby world are not giving pleasure to each other.”
In view of their friendly correspondence before, that oﬀer for reconciliation is astonishing. Obvi-
ously other letters or postcards have been lost. Most probably Hilbert was angry Einstein did not
reference him in the Nov 25 submission. However, Hilbert could not have uttered such a reproach
outright, because then Einstein had nothing to analyze. Sommer[8] suspects Einstein’s oﬀer was
not an act of pure love. At that time Hilbert was much more famous than Einstein. A published
reproach by Hilbert would have been disastrous for Einstein.

Mar 31, 1916 The printed version[6] of Hilberts page proofs appear. He has made several revisions,
retaining his date of submission, Nov 20, 1915, nor adding a date of revision.

March 7, 1918 Hilbert sends Klein his page proofs asking him to be careful to them sending
them back because he had no other records.

1924 Hilbert’s republication[15], claiming ‘rearrangements and editorial changes’ only, but in fact

8

1943 Hilbert’s death.

abandoning his own derivation and switching to one already standard at that time, using Rieman-
nian normal coordinates.

1943-1967 Hilbert’s documents are deposited in a adjoining room of the oﬃce of the Mathematical
Institute at G¨ottingen[21].

1966 About 130 letters written by Einstein, Planck, Born, Nernst, Debye, Sommerfeld, Weyl,
Courant, Ehrenfest addressed to Hilbert have been sent to New York in order to copy them. They
have been sent back but not deposited in the oﬃce again. Finally in the year 2000 they were found
by Sommer[8] on an attic of the widow of an assistant of Courant.

1967 The remaining documents (not having been sent to New York) came to the department of
rare documents of the library of the university at G¨ottingen (called the ‘G¨ottingen archive’[12] in
the following).

1985 The correspondence between Hilbert and Klein is published[25].

1994 Corry detects Hilbert’s page proofs at G¨ottingen. He orders copies which are sent to the Max
Planck institute for the History of Science at Berlin where he studies them in the following year.

Nov 14, 1997 Science article by Corry, Renn and Stachel[5], without mentioning the cut-oﬀ.

1999 Tilman Sauer[26]for the ﬁrst time mentions the cut-oﬀ. Also Renn and Stachel, but only in
a footnote[8].

2003 F. Winterberg[7] for the ﬁrst time publishes the suspicion the cut-oﬀ was the deed of a forger.
Also in 2004 by C. J. Bjerknes[27].

Mar 2005 Wuensch’s book[21] appears giving strong evidence the cut-oﬀ has been done in recent
years, most probably by a skilled historian, because curious traces can be seen on Hilbert’s page
proofs, which ﬁnd a plausible explanation only by attempts of cover-ups, presupposing knowledge
of detailed historical facts.

3 What was on Hilbert’s Nov 16, 1915 postcard to Einstein?

It is curious this postcard is lost, while his more trivial Nov 13 and Nov 19 postcards are preserved.
However, we can safely infer what was essentially written on Hilbert’s Nov 16 postcard, namely
from Einstein’s reactions:

Einstein Nov 18:
“The system, given by you, coincides - as far I can see - exactly with what I have found in the last
weeks and have sent to the Academy. The diﬃculty was not to ﬁnd generally covariant equations
for the gµν; for this is easy with the help of the Riemann tensor. But it was diﬃcult to recognize,
that these equations are a generalization, and indeed a simple and natural one, of Newton’s law.
This I achieved only in the last weeks.”

This clearly demonstrates Hilbert has sent explicit ﬁeld equations for general relativity (and e.g.
not only a Lagrangian density).

The passage: “The system, given by you, coincides - as far I can see - exactly with what I have
found in the last weeks and have sent to the Academy.” opens the possibility Hilbert has sent
incorrect ﬁeld equations such as (2) lacking the trace term. However, this can be excluded by

9

(9)

Einstein’s angry reaction in his letter Nov 26 to his friend Zangger. Hilbert had had no chance to
‘nostrify’, if he had sent incorrect ﬁeld equations.

Rather, in his ﬁrst reaction, Einstein did not observe Hilbert’s additional trace term but only
Hilbert’s use of the Ricci-tensor, so Einstein erroneously believed Hilbert’s system coincided with
his own.

Some historians believe Hilbert, after having seen the correct equations (7) in Einstein’s paper,
he had copied from Einstein when he has added the correct ﬁeld equations for his ﬁnal printed
version somewhen after Dec 6. However, this can safely be excluded because Einstein did not give
any method how he ﬁnally arrived at the correct equations (7), and in particular he did not derive
them from a Lagrangian density. So it would be an extreme risk for Hilbert to copy from Einstein,
since he could not know if Einstein’s equations coincide with those following via variational calculus
from his Lagrangian density.

4 How Einstein has found his equations

Einstein was dissatisﬁed with his equations (2), because they led to the unphysical conclusion
T = 0. It is curious Einstein did not attempt a trace term on the left or right hand side of (2).
It am sure, sooner or later, he alone or perhaps by a hint by someone less famous than Hilbert,
had he attempted such trace terms. Perhaps, Einstein’s Nov 26, 1915 letter to Zangger can be
explained by his anger he has not come to this simple idea by his own.

4.1 Was Grossmann a poor mathematician?

Why that hint did not come from Einstein’s friend Grossmann, who should have known the con-
tracted Bianchi identities

(Rb

a −

1

2 Rgb

a);b = 0

which follow from the Bianchi identities, discovered by Bianchi[28] in 1902.

In 1899 a German translation (ﬁrst edition) of Bianchi’s ‘Diﬀerentialgeometrie’ appears, of course
without the Bianchi identities. In his second 1910 German edition, Bianchi has omitted diﬀerential
geometry for curved space with n > 2. Obviously such a subject seemed too devoid of any applica-
tion to be included in a textbook. Only in a footnote, Bianchi has added the symmetry properties
of the Riemann tensor, which are trivial for n = 2. His Bianchi-identities seemed too uninteresting
to be included even in that footnote.

For the years 1850-1915, I have scanned all German journals, the Sommerville bibliography[29], and
all German and non-German text books reviewed in Acta Mathematica, and I did not ﬁnd any
mentioning of Bianchi’s (contracted) identities. 1869 was the start of the excellent reviewing journal
“Jahrbuch ¨uber Fortschritte der Mathematik” reviewing most German and non-German mathe-
matical works. Bianchi’s discovery was reviewed in Vol 33(1902) but completely un-conspicuous
among the enormous amount which was published in mathematics already at that times. Until
1915 not a single mentioning of the identities. They appear for the ﬁrst time in 1918 in Schouten’s
textbook[30].

Also Hilbert had no chance to know (9). So the assumption that he had used it for his derivation
of the explicit ﬁeld equations are untenable. However, after he had derived the ﬁeld equations,
because of Theorem III of his page proofs, he new the contracted Bianchi identities implicitly. But
deﬁnitely, they were not among his explicitly known theorems.

10

4.2 Has Einstein found his equations independently from Hilbert?

In Nov 11, 1915, Einstein still had the equations in the form (2), lacking the trace term. He was
dissatisﬁed because, using the gauge (4), which is always possible, he could conclude

T = const.

(10)

i.e. T

0 by integrating to a vacuum point.

≡

In his Nov 25 paper, Einstein does not give a method how he has arrived at the additional trace
term in (7). He merely shows that with the trace term, conclusion (10) can no longer be drawn. He
does not show (3), which amounts to proving the contracted Bianchi identities (9). Thus in Nov 25,
Einstein did not know his theory was already complete, though he[3] writes on p. 847: “Thus ﬁnally,
general relativity is a closed logical ediﬁce. The relativity postulate in its most general formulation,
according to which coordinates are irrelevant parameters, leads with absolute necessity to a uniquely
speciﬁed theory of gravitation”. Obviously, he relied on Hilbert’s Nov 16 postcard for this (partially
incorrect) conviction. And this again excludes the possibility Hilbert has sent with his Nov 16,
1915, postcard only undetermined coeﬃcients in front of the Ricci tensor and in the trace term.

5 A short introduction to the theory of invariants

Hilbert’s derivation of the Einstein equations are essentially based on invariant theoretical argu-
ments.

5.1 Algebraic invariants

The invention of analytical geometry, i.e. the application of algebra and inﬁnitesimal calculus to
geometry, was a major progress in solving geometrical problems. However, it had a great disad-
vantage, because it required the introduction of a coordinate system which is arbitrary and not
or not uniquely related to the geometrical objects under consideration. This was the birth of the
theory of invariants. We mention the names of Sylvester and Cayley. It was mainly an algebraic
invariant theory and only a binary one, applicable to the Euclidean n = 2 dimensional plane. The
best known algebraic invariant is the sum of the squares of the coordinate diﬀerence of two points
being the geometrical objects, an invariant which has the geometrical interpretation as the square
of the distance between these points. Algebraic invariant theory culminated with the textbooks
1872 by Clebsch and 1885 by Gordan[31]. Most mathematicians at that time and in particular
Hilbert contributed to that ﬁeld. Hilbert has become famous for the ﬁrst time by his ﬁniteness
theorem of the system of algebraic invariants (solving Gordan’s problem for n > 2).

5.2 Gauss’s measure of intrinsic curvature

The ﬁrst milestone in diﬀerential invariants was 1828 Gauss: Disquisitiones generales circa su-
perﬁcies curvas[32], where he considered a general n = 2 dimensional curved surface embedded in
3-dimensional Euclidean space. (Disregarding global topology this is the most general 2-dimensional
Riemannian space.) He introduced the following diﬀerential invariant:

k= 1

4 (EG−F 2

−2

∂E
∂q

)

E
h
(cid:0)
∂q +( ∂E
∂F
∂p −2 ∂E
∂q )

∂p

∂G

+G

∂E
∂p

(cid:0)

2

)−2(EG−F 2

)( ∂

+F
(cid:1)
2
E

(cid:0)
∂p∂q + ∂
∂q2 −2 ∂

F

2

2
G
∂p2

(cid:1)i

∂G

∂q −2 ∂F

∂p

∂G

∂q +( ∂G
∂p )

2

∂E
∂p

∂G

∂q − ∂E

∂q

∂G

∂p −2 ∂E

∂q

∂F

∂q +4 ∂F

∂p

∂F

∂q −2 ∂F

∂p

∂G
∂p

(11)

+
(cid:1)

where E = g11, F = g12, G = g22 and p = x1, q = x2 are arbitrary curvilinear coordinates on
the surface. The invariant has the geometrical signiﬁcance of k what is now called the ‘Gaussian
measure of curvature’. Taking a ﬁnite piece of the surface, he collected all unit normal vectors
(orthogonal to the surface) and ﬁxed them at the origin of a unit sphere. The area of their end
points he called total curvature (curvatura integra) of the surface. k (at a point P ) is the quotient
of that area by the area of the surface itself, taking an inﬁnitesimal neighbourhood of P . k is also
the product of the minimal and maximum exterior curvature of geodesic lines emanating from P .
He showed that k is an invariant against bending (think of a thin material surface resisting to
stretch and tear) and of course against rotation and translation. Since every n = 2 Riemannian
space can be (locally) embedded in R3, ‘bending’ (which is not necessarily a continuous process,
and is also referred to as ‘developing one surface unto another’ e.g. developing a cylinder unto a
plane) is synonymous with ‘isometry’. Thus (11) is a ‘bending invariant’, and k was called ‘internal
curvature of the surface’. Trivially, since no assumptions about the choice of the coordinates p, q
have been made, (11) is also an invariant against arbitrary coordinate transformations. Gauss
called this invariance properties theorema egregium (remarkable theorem.)

5.3 Riemann and Christoﬀel: the n-dimensional case

In 1854 in his Habilitationschrift[33] (where because of the audience he could use words only) Rie-
mann introduced qualitatively the concept of an n dimensional Riemannian space, by considering
the quadratic form

ds2 =

gabdxadxb

n

Xa,b=1

describing the metric. He generalizes Gauss’s work by constructing all geodesic (2-dimensional)
surfaces emanating (with all orientations) from a point P , considering their k given by (11).

The hard formula work was done in 1869 by E.B. Christoﬀel[34] where he introduced his 3-index-
symbols, the 4-index-symbols (now called Riemann tensor), the covariant derivative, permitting to
construct invariants and covariants, i.e. tensors, of arbitrary order. (Only later and posthumously,
it was known that Riemann had done a substantial part of this work before[35].) Gauss’s k is
regained as the (only independent) component of the Riemann tensor:

k = g−1R1212

5.4 Gaussian invariants

A Gaussian invariant of order G of n variables xa is a function J(xa, gab,
, gabk1···kG ) depending
on arbitrary functions gab(xk) and their partial derivatives (denoted by additional indices) up
to the order G, with the condition that the value of J remains unchanged if we introduce new
variables x′µ (coordinate transformation) whereby the g′
µν are found by the well known formulae
for transforming a metrical tensor, and their derivatives are now calculated with respect to the
new coordinates. Symbolically we could write

· · ·

J(xa,

) = J(x′a,

′)

G

G

G

where
summarizes all metrical variables (including their derivatives). On both sides J is the
same mathematical function (‘form invariance’) and the primed und unprimed arguments on
both sides are connected by the coordinate transformation, and are taken at the same objective
geometrical point, having two diﬀerent coordinates (xa and x′a).

11

(12)

(13)

(14)

12

The Ricci scalar is a Gaussian invariant of order G = 2. In this case the function J is the (form-
invariant, i.e. coordinate independent) prescription how the Ricci scalar is calculated. There are
no Gaussian invariants of lower (G < 2) order.

As an exercise we will prove, that an invariant J cannot depend explicitly on the coordinates
xa. Taking a ﬁxed invariant J, (14) is an inﬁnite set of numerical equalities, where the set runs
over all possible choices for the functions gab, all values of the coordinates xa and all possible
coordinate transformations. Arrange the elements of this set in pairs, where two members of the
pair diﬀer by the choice of the coordinate transformation only, namely by an additional translation
(x′′a = x′a + c) with a ﬁxed chosen c and a. Both members have the same left hand side of (14).
By writing down the transformation law for a metric tensor for ′ and for ′′ (and for its derivatives)
′′. Thus the
one sees that for the collection of numerical values (denoted by
right hand side of the members diﬀer only in the variable x′a by c. Since c is arbitrary, J cannot
depend on xa.

) there holds

′ =

G

G

G

5.5 Beltrami invariants

To a quantity constructed from the components of the metrical tensor (and its partial derivatives)
alone (also called a ‘concomitant’ of the metric) we give the speciﬁer ‘Gaussian’.

To subsume Gaussian tensors (also called Gaussian ‘covariants’) to the concept of invariants, we
have to consider Beltrami invariants:

A Beltrami invariant (in the literature also denoted by the strange name ‘diﬀerential parameter
of the ﬁrst kind’) of orders (G, B) is a function J which additionally depends on a scalar function
ϕ(xa) and its partial derivatives ϕa,
(Note that a scalar function is also transformed, i.e. is replaced by a new mathematical function
ϕ′:

ϕk1···kB up to the order B.

· · ·

ϕ(xa) = ϕ′(x′a)

(15)

(16)

though it is usual in physics to omit the prime on ϕ distinguishing diﬀerent functions.)
Beltrami (based on Lam´e) has found the square of the gradient (gabϕaϕb) and the Laplacian
(gabϕa;b), what is now called the ﬁrst (G = 0, B = 1) and second (G = 1, B = 2) Beltrami
invariant.

The concept is enlarged to include S scalar functions ϕs. A Gaussian covariant (e.g. the metrical,
Riemann or Ricci tensor) can be viewed as a Beltrami invariant which is contracted with the
gradients (B=1) of S (S = order of the tensor) scalar ﬁelds. Since we have to deal with symmetrical
second rank tensors Tab only, we can restrict ourselves to S = B = 1, since the invariant T abϕaϕb
for arbitrary ϕa determines the tensor Tab uniquely.

We say that there are N = N (n, G, B, S) Beltrami invariants J1,
J of this or lower order can be expressed as a function

· · ·
of them:

, JN if every Beltrami invariant

J

J =

(J1,

, JN )

J

· · ·

−

and these N invariants are independent, i.e. no one can be expressed (in the sense of (16)) by the
remaining N

1 ones.

The S scalar functions (e.g. take J = J(ϕ) = ϕ) are themselves invariants (though not diﬀerential
invariants). It is usual to discard them as trivial. When the number N of a complete system
of independent invariants J1,
, JN is calculated, they are not counted. Even more radically, an
invariant is called a Beltrami-invariant only if it does not depend on the ϕs (but on their derivatives
ϕs

· · ·

a1···aB only).

This terminology has the consequence that a Beltrami invariant B = 0 is a Gaussian invariant.

As an exercise, we prove this is a good practice. For clarity we distinguish free Beltrami invariants
(‘f-invariants’) from general Beltrami invariants (‘g-invariants’) which may depend on the ϕs. We
, JN is a complete system of independent f-invariants,
will prove the following lemma: When J1,
in (16) with the ϕs as additional
then an arbitrary g-invariant is again given by a function
arguments.

· · ·

J

For simplicity we take the typical case the g-invariant J fulﬁlls the equations:

J(

, ϕ, ϕa) = J(

G

′, ϕ′, ϕ′

a)

G

i.e. S = 1, B = 1 As in our previous exercise, (17) is an inﬁnite set of numerical equalities. Now we
show the same set also corresponds to the equations of the following f-invariant (choosing a ﬁxed
c):

¯J(
G

, ϕa; c) := J(

, c, ϕa) = J(

G

′, c, ϕ′

a)

G

Consider one element of the set, speciﬁed by coordinates xa and a function ϕ (with corresponding
values x′a and ϕ′(x′a) = ϕ(xa) =: C on the right hand side of (18)). When c = C (18) is fulﬁlled.
D out of the set (same xa). Φ and ϕ have
Otherwise pick the element with function Φ = ϕ + c
the same derivatives. So the picked element says (18) is again fulﬁlled.
Since c is arbitrary, ¯J are an inﬁnite set of f-invariants (except when ¯J does not depend on c,
i.e. J was already an f-invariant). Since sum, diﬀerence, constant multiples of invariants are again
invariants, derivatives (to arbitrary order) of ¯J with respect to c are again f-invariants. Assuming
power series for J in its middle argument, we have proved our lemma.

−

6 How Hilbert has found the Einstein equations

6.1 Hilbert’s invariant theoretical prerequisites to ﬁnd the Einstein

equations

L = R + Lem

Hilbert derives the Einstein equation by a variational principle with a Lagrangian density

(Hilbert writes H = K + L, Lem is an electromagnetic Lagrangian density, later specialized to
that one of Mie’s theory.) Thus Hilbert has to calculate the variational derivative

δ√gR
δgab =

∂√gR
∂gab −

n

Xk=1

∂
∂xk

∂√gR
∂gab
k

+

n

Xk,l=1

∂2
∂xk∂xl

∂√gR
∂gab
kl

=: √gGab

where for reasons of convenience we have introduced the quantities Gab for the result of this
calculation. To derive the Einstein equations, he had to show:

Gab = Rab

1

2 Rgab.

−

In Theorem III of his page proofs he shows that Gab is a second rank tensor. Obviously it is a
symmetric one.

R contains the second derivatives gµν
k only bilinearly with
coeﬃcients containing the zero-th derivatives only. Thus inspection into the variational procedure
(20) easily leads to the conclusion Gab can contain the second derivatives only linearly. (Note that
gab are rational functions of the gab and vice versa, with g or 1/g in the denominator.)

kl only linearly and the ﬁrst derivatives gµν

In invariant theoretical language, Hilbert’s assumption (1) says that up to order G = 2, B = 1,
S = 1 there are only 3 independent invariants. As these we can take:

J1 = R,

J2 = gabϕaϕb,

J3 = Rabϕaϕb

13

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

14

which are independent. So every invariant J of that type is a function of them: J =
(J1, J2, J3).
The invariants (22) are linear in the second derivatives of the metric. If J should also have this
property and be bilinear in the ϕa, it follows (assuming power series and because the Ji can assume
independently any values) that

J

Gabϕaϕb = J = [αRab + βRgab + λgab]ϕaϕb.

Since the ϕa are arbitrary, and since both Gab and [

] in (23) are symmetric we have:

Gab = αRab + βRgab + λgab

(for any chosen J) in (16) does not depend on any of the arguments
Note that the function
of an invariant, i.e. not on gab, gab
. This fact, trivial for Hilbert, was perhaps the essential
stumbling-block, why Hilbert’s derivation of the Einstein equations was not understood thus far
since 90 years.

c · · ·

J

For a ﬁxed n (dimension of space) J is a ﬁxed invariant. Thus α, β, λ are numerical constants,
possibly depending on n only.

Thus Hilbert’s method how he has found the Einstein equations ‘easily without calculation’ be-
comes obvious: Take a metric gab as simple as possible, but non-trivial enough so that the constants
α, β, λ are determined uniquely while (20) is evaluated. Otherwise the metric is completely arbi-
trary. It had not to be physically meaningful in any way. That is done in the following subsection.

6.2 How Hilbert has found the explicit form of the Einstein equations

From the G¨ottingen archive[12] one can obtain a Xerox copy of a microﬁlm of Hilbert’s private
folder “Zur Elektrodynamik”. (Hilbert erroneously[36] believed to have shown the electromagnetic
phenomena to be a consequence of gravitation.) In this folder Hilbert’s derivation can be found on
the page with Archive-number 32. Here he collects “Formeln” he has derived for the Ricci-tensor
and the Ricci-scalar in the case of a general diagonal metric:

Rii = 1

2

gkk(gkkii + giikk)

−

Xk,(k6=i) n

1

2 gkk

2giigiiigkki + gkkgkkigkki + 2gkkgiikgkkk + giigiikgiik
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

+ 1

2 gkk

gρρgiiρgkkρ

Xρ

.
o

Then he mentions a “Spezialfall” (special case)

g11 = g22 = g33 = 1,

g44 = γ,

g44 = 1/γ

and for this special case he gives the Ricci scalar

R =

(γ−1γii

1

2 γ−2γ2

i ).

Xi<4

−

γ = γ(x) with x

x1.

≡

2

√g = κ− 1
R =

−
R44 =

−

κ−1κ′′ + 3

2 κ−2κ′2

1

2 κ−2κ′′ + 3

4 κ−3κ′2

We simplify Hilbert’s special case even a bit more by assuming

Introducing κ = g44 = 1/γ (or starting afresh from the deﬁnitions in textbooks; Hilbert’s formulae
diﬀer by a minus sign from the convention in Landau-Lifshitz[37]) one immediately ﬁnds (′ =
derivative with respect to x):

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

Now we do the variational derivative in (20) for µ = ν = 4, which in this case yields zero:

∂√gR

∂κ −
α(

!= κ− 1

2

∂
∂x

∂√gR
∂κ′ +
2 κ−2κ′′ + 3

∂2
∂√gR
∂κ′′ = 0 !=
∂x2
4 κ−3κ′2) + βκ−1(

1

−

(cid:2)

κ−1κ′′ + 3

2 κ−2κ′2) + λκ−1

−

(cid:3)

α, β, γ are independent of the function κ, so we can equate coeﬃcients of κ′′ and κ′ which leads
to λ = 0 and

α + 2β = 0

(Note that we cannot check the other components µν since our simple formulae (27) are not valid
for variations of the other components of gµν.)
By this simple method, Hilbert has derived the Einstein equations and has communicated them to
Einstein on his 1915 Nov 16 postcard. (33) is equivalent to what the contracted Bianchi identities
had given, i.e. the correct trace term. For Einstein the absolute values of α and β are irrelevant,
since Einstein determined the constant of gravitation κ by comparison with Newton’s theory. Since
Hilbert, in contrast to Einstein, also gives an explicit Lagrangian for the sources of the gravitational
2 . He might have found them by calculating
ﬁeld, he needs the absolute values α = 1 and β =
another special case. We have no hint to that. Therefore, in the next subsection, we propose another
even more elegant route Hilbert might have guessed these correct values.

−

1

The derivation, just given, cannot be found in Hilbert’s private folder. Hilbert sometimes has
calculated on letter sheets he has obtained from Swiss hotels (bearing a logo of the hotel in the
letter head). Paper was extremely expensive. Hilbert had in his garden a big blackboard under a
roof where he made his intermediate calculations[38]. Thus on his sheet 32 we only ﬁnd important
formulae such as (25), and the indication of the ‘Special case’ he had used, but not the trivial
calculation itself.

This derivation by Hilbert is not only historically the ﬁrst one, it is also a nice exercise for an
elementary class in General Relativity, presupposing that the ﬁeld equations have the form (24),
and ﬁtting the constant of gravitation by Newton’s limit.

6.3

‘easily without calculation’

In this subsection we give a route how Hilbert immediately might have arrived at (39) using his
tremendous power of mathematical intuition. (λ = 0 was obvious to him, by inspection into the
procedure (20) of variational derivation.)

In an attempt to calculate the left most side of (20) he writes down

δ√g =

1

2 √ggab δgab.

The theory of determinants, which are the most important invariants, was at the focus of interest
at that time. Riemannian spaces for n > 2 have been studied almost exclusively for the isotropic
case

for which F.Schur’s theorem[39] that R is spatially constant, was famous. For variation of the metric

with a spatially constant δχ, we immediately ﬁnd

−

R
n

Rab =

gab,

δgab = gabδχ

δR = R δχ

15

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

since R scales with gab. So from (20) (24), multiplied by (36), we ﬁnd

16

1 = α + (β + 1

2 )n.

Together with (33) we ﬁnd

α = 1,

β =

1

2 .

−

(38)

(39)

Since in the variational procedure (20) and in its result (24) the dimension n of space enters only
as the boundary of a formal sum, perhaps Hilbert, using his intuition, knew that α and β cannot
depend on n. So he has arrived immediately from (38) to (39) even without (20), indeed, ‘easily
without calculation’.

For the reader uneasy with (37) we proceed more formally: Start from the middle expression in (20), and (24) with
λ = 0. Multiply by (36) and integrate over the whole space of (35), taken as the n-dimensional sphere Sn. Reverse
the steps of partial integration, which had led to the middle expression of (20). No boundary terms appear, since
we integrate over a closed space, even for a constant δχ. Instead, the complete diﬀerential δ√gR appears. Consider
the range of metrics χgab, where gab is ﬁxed and given by (35), and χ is spatially constant. Thus the complete
diﬀerential δR is given by (37). Push the constants R and δχ in front of the integrals to arrive at (38).

7 Discussion of Hilbert’s derivation

7.1 Hilbert challenged by Zorawski and Haskins

Sophus Lie (1842-1899) made a tremendous contribution to the theory of invariants by recognizing
that a (transformation) group (its 1-component) is uniquely determined by its inﬁnitesimal trans-
formations. Thus an invariant is already identiﬁed when it is invariant with respect to inﬁnitesimal
transformations. This opened the possibility to determine the number N of (independent) invari-
ants by counting the number of equations and the number of freedoms of the invariants, and using
lemmas guaranteeing the functional independence of the invariants thus found. This method only
gives the number of (independent) invariants, not their (global) explicit form, except in cases where
this is already known otherwise. These numbers have been found in 1891 by Zorawski[14] for n = 2
and for general n in 1904 by Haskins[13].

Table 1 summarizes some of their results.

As an illustration we discuss some of the boxes. The scalar ﬁeld ϕ, being itself an invariant and
belonging to the box (G = 0, B = 0) is a trivial invariant and is not counted as explained in
subsection (5.5).

The ﬁrst Beltrami invariant gabϕaϕb is the one invariant in the box (G = 0, B = 1).

In the box (G = 2, B = 0) we ﬁnd the Ricci scalar R, which only for n = 2 is the only invariant
of that type. Already for n = 3 we have 3 independent Gaussian invariants. They have been given
explicitly in 1873 by Souvaroﬀ[40]:

S1 = R, S2 = g−1Rklεlaαεkbβ Raαbβ,
S3 = g−2RklmnεkaαεlbβεmcγεndδRaαcγRbβdδ

Except the Ricci scalar they are non-linear in the second derivatives.

(40)

For n = 4 we have 14 invariants. They are given explicitly 1956 by G´eh´eniau and Debever[41]. In
Misner, Thorne, Wheeler[42] it is stated that all of them except R are non-linear and do not have
Newton’s gravitation as a limit.

17

G

4
≥
(n+G−1)!
(n−2)!(G+1)!

n G−1
2

N

G = 0

G = 1

G = 2

B = 0

B = 1

B = 2

B = 3

0

1

0

0

0

0

2n

1

−
N =3 for n=2
0

1

12 (n

2)(n

1)n(n + 3)

−

−
N =1 for n=2

n

1

−
N =0 for n=2
1)(n

2)/2

−

(n

−

(n+2)!
(n−1)!3!

G = 3
n (n+2)!
4!(n−2)!
N =1 for n=2
0
N =1 for n=2
0

0

0

0

0

Table 1: Number N of independent diﬀerential invariants in n-dimensional space (n
2). G = 2
means the invariant involves up to second partial derivatives of the metrical tensor with respect
to the coordinates. B = 0 are the Gaussian invariants, which do not involve scalar ﬁelds. B = 1
are Beltrami-invariants involving the ﬁrst derivatives ϕa of a single scalar ﬁeld ϕ. The whole table
counts only Beltrami invariants involving (derivatives of) a single scalar ﬁeld (S = 1). A box (e.g.
G = 3, B = 2) of the table does not count invariants which are dependent (can be constructed via
(16)) by invariants in lower boxes (G
2). The case n = 2 is exceptional, so sometimes its
N is given separately.

3, B

≥

≤

≤

The Ricci-tensor, i.e. the Beltrami invariant Rabϕaϕb is absent in the box (G = 2, B = 1) for
n = 2. Because of Rab = 1
2 Rgab, it can be constructed by lower invariants.

7.2 Was Hilbert’s theory not fully covariant?

Some historians claim Hilbert, while writing his page proofs or sending his Nov 16, 1915, postcard,
cannot possibly have known the correct ﬁeld equations of General Relativity, since in his Axiom
III of the page proofs he deﬁnes special coordinates, which he calls space-time coordinates, thus
he had not yet obtained full covariance. These historians overlook, what Hilbert and Einstein
(in his Nov 4 paper) have clariﬁed almost 90 years earlier: A generally covariant theory must
be supplemented by non-covariant gauge-conditions, i.e. by specializing the coordinates to some
degree. A generally covariant theory means that I can choose the coordinates completely arbitrary,
also in the future. No physical theory can predict my choice of the coordinates in the future
(‘lack of causality’). Therefore, I must tell my choice for the future, and this is done by imposing
non-covariant so called gauge-condition, additionally to the ﬁeld equations. Such gauge conditions
should not restrict the generality of the gravitational ﬁeld (a restriction which is the duty and the
right of the ﬁeld equations only), i.e. the gauge-condition must be a permitted gauge condition. To
prove that a gauge-condition is permitted, one has to show that in an arbitrary gravitational ﬁeld
expressed with arbitrary coordinates, one can always transform to new coordinates fulﬁlling the
gauge conditions.

Hilbert’s space-time coordinates are a gauge condition, but not a permitted one. He recognized
that. Therefore, he suppressed it in the published version of the page proofs. This, however, by no
means aﬀects the general covariance of his ﬁeld equations.

7.3 Are the theories of Hilbert and Einstein diﬀerent?

In his second Nov 13 postcard to Einstein, Hilbert’s claims his theory to be completely diﬀerent
from Einstein’s. However, this remark refers to his treatment of the energy concept of the grav-
itational ﬁeld only. Concerning the ﬁeld equations, Einstein assumes a general (i.e. unspeciﬁed)
energy-momentum-tensor Tab while Hilbert assumes the sources of the gravitational ﬁeld to be
expressible by a Lagrangian density L, see (6). While deriving the gravitational ﬁeld equations,
Hilbert assumes that L depend only on the gµν (not its derivatives) and on some variables qs
and its ﬁrst derivatives. Even in contemporary physics, there is no viable (i.e. non-speculative)

18

model of matter contradicting these assumptions. Therefore, Hilbert’s approach (as is Einstein’s)
is completely general with respect to the sources of the gravitational ﬁeld. It is true, Hilbert calls
the qs ‘the four electromagnetic potentials’ and later he specializes L to that one of Mie’s theory,
into which nowadays nobody believes. However, these verbal denotations and later specializations
do not aﬀect Hilbert’s derivation of the ﬁeld equations, being general with respect to the sources.
Hilbert’s approach was much more far-seeing than Einstein’s, since Hilbert postulates a uniﬁed
Lagrangian formulation of the whole of physics (which at that time was gravitation and electro-
magnetism only), so he must be considered the father of the concept of a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory
including gravitation, to which Einstein turns only much later.

7.4 Has Hilbert found General Relativity before Einstein?

Deﬁnitely Einstein had the idea to interpret gravitation as geometry of 4-dimensional non-
Euclidean space, Einstein had the almost correct (2) ﬁeld equations of general relativity, and
he had pursued the theory consistently during eight years. The question could only be if Hilbert
had found the ﬁnally correct ﬁeld equations (7) before Einstein. We have given stringent arguments
for this question to be answered aﬃrmative. However, we have also argued it was by Hilbert’s good
luck that he has achieved this. His derivation was based on the fact stated in (1), which is incorrect
as it stands, or at least, when modiﬁed by the requirement of linearity in the second derivatives,
was not proved in 1915. Hilbert has displayed an astonishing mathematical intuition by formulating
his famous 23 problems. All of them have tuned out to be non-trivial, and most of them solvable.
This was a remarkable achievement. So also in this case he was guided by his intuition, which in
the end was not misleading.

From the point of view of physics, Hilbert did not bother about the question if his ﬁeld equations
have the correct Newtonian limit. So again it was good luck, that his choice of R as the Lagrangian
turned out to be the physically correct one.

It seems that this was also Hilbert’s own judgment: It is reported[38] Hilbert had joked: “Every
boy in the streets of G¨ottingen understands more about four-dimensional geometry than Einstein.
Yet, in spite of that, Einstein did the work and not the mathematicians.”

Laws of nature cannot be deduced or derived. They can only be guessed, hoping that future
experiments would verify or at least not falsify them. This is because nature did not anticipate our
wishes.

Hilbert was the ﬁrst to have guessed the correct laws of gravitation, and had communicated them
on his Nov 16 postcard, which was lost or was intentionally abolished.

8 Mutilation of Hilbert’s Page Proofs

Since recently, very accurate photos of Hilbert’s page proofs are available on the internet[43]. They
can also be ordered as a copy from the G¨ottingen archive[12].

About one third of a doubly printed sheet (top of page 7 and 8) are cut-out along a wavy line, so
it was not done by scissors but by a razor blade or a knife. Since on page 7 the cut goes irregularly
middle of a printed line, whereas on page 8 the cut goes, though wavy, but exactly between two
lines of text, it is clear the cutter intended page 8. As judged by context and by comparing it with
the published version, the cut-oﬀ contained the deﬁnition of the gravitational part of Hilbert’s
Lagrangian density, which he denoted by K. In the remaining part of the page proofs it can no
longer be seen, that Hilbert has chosen K to be the Ricci scalar R.

19

The page proofs have been investigated thoroughly by the G¨ottingen historian Daniela Wuensch,
who has published the results in her book[21] “Zwei wirkliche Kerle” In the following we give a
reformulation of her proof of circumstantial evidence that Hilbert’s page proofs have been mutilated
in recent years. The logic of the proof is as follows: Several curious facts can be seen today on the
page proofs which cannot be explained in a rightful way, but which ﬁnd a plausible explanation
by the motivation of a historian intending to withdraw Hilbert’s priority and the ensuing need to
cover-up.

8.1 Reasons why the cut-oﬀ was done between 1994-1998

1) The cut-oﬀ was mentioned for the ﬁrst time in T. Sauer[26], an article which has appeared in
1999.

2) In 1998 the page proofs have been ﬁlmed by the G¨ottingen archive, and on the ﬁlm the cut-oﬀ
is already visible. Thus the cut-oﬀ was done before 1998.

3) The main statement in the Science 1997 article[5] was that in Hilbert’s page proofs the explicit
ﬁeld equations cannot be found. It is improbable the editors and referees of Science had not required
a copy of the page proofs, and they had remarked the cut-oﬀ and had insisted on mentioning it.
However, it is possible that personal relationships had exceptionally made a short-cut of the usual
refereeing procedures. An investigation at Science should be initiated. Perhaps a referee or the
editorial board is still in possession of an intact copy of the page proofs.

4) In this article a very minute comparison is made between the page proofs[2], the published
version[6] and the republished version[15] of 1924. In particular on p. 1272 middle column line 5,
the authors of the article[5] write:
“In the proofs of his ﬁrst communication, Hilbert’s world function includes a gravitational term
√gK ...”.
However, they could not see that, because on the incomplete page proofs it cannot be found, and
as judged by the published version, it was stated on the cut-oﬀ.

5) The authors would have mentioned the cut oﬀ. For historians it would be an opportunity to
speculate and to publish about such a peculiarity in a historical document. On the contrary they
let the priority of its discovery to others.

6) Not mentioning the cut-oﬀ in an article, stating the whole historical document does not contain
the ﬁeld equations, would be equivalent to a grossly unethical scientiﬁc behavior which would not
be committed without a strong motivation.

Thus CRS have been in possession of an intact copy of the page proofs. Since they have discovered
the page proofs shortly after 1994, the cut-oﬀ was not yet done before 1994.

8.2 Reasons why Hilbert did not do the cut-oﬀ himself

Besides the evidence just given, it is preposterous to assume Hilbert himself could have done it. Out
of over 62 publications, just this once he has kept the page proofs, in all other cases the reprints
of the published versions only. He had namely omitted something in the ﬁnal publication because
it seemed insecure to him and he intended to improve it later.

Fetching razor blade and glue, making the cut-oﬀ and inserting it somewhere else would cost more
time than copying some simple formulae.

20

In 1918 Hilbert sends the page proofs[2] to Felix Klein, who was interested to see exactly what
Hilbert has omitted in the published version[6]. In the accompanying letter[44], dated Mar 7, 1918,
Hilbert asks Klein expressively to be careful with the page proofs and to send them back, because
he had no other records. But the forger has overlooked that on the backside of the doubly printed
cut-oﬀ was exactly what Hilbert wanted to show Klein.

8.3 Ripping apart of a sheet and hand-foldings

Besides the cut-oﬀ, Hilbert’s page proofs have suﬀered additional disﬁgurements. Sheet one of the
page proofs have been torn into two pieces. There is no reasonable explanation for this fact, when
everything had gone the right way. However there is a plausible explanation for a forger by his
motivation for cover-up.

Originally the page proofs consisted of three big 4-page sheets and of one ﬁnal small sheet. The ﬁrst
big sheet (frontside-backside, i.e. doubly printed) contained pages 1-2 and beneath pages 7-8, so
that after sewing, all pages come into the correct order. (On the small sheet was page 13, backside
empty.) The big sheets have been machine-folded vertically in the middle by the printery. Up to
now, the third sheet has, beside the machine folding, no additional (i.e. hand-) folding. Thus we
can conclude the printery has sent (Dec 6, 1915) the page proofs in a big envelope (approx. 24 cm
x 17 cm).

After the cut-out, as the ﬁrst additional action, sheet one was ripped-apart along the middle vertical
machine-folding (i.e. page 1-2 was separated from page 7-8, the latter with the cut-oﬀ).

Second, page 1-2, page 7-8 and sheet two have been folded by hand to the format 19 cm x 15 cm.

The temporal sequence of these manipulations is undoubted: First the cut-oﬀ (almost one third of
the page 7-8), then ripping apart of sheet one (ripping oﬀ the remaining part of page 7-8 from page
1-2), then folding to the smaller format (19 cm x 15 cm). The cut-oﬀ was made by a razor blade
(as can be seen by the wavy cutting curve), the separation was made by simple tearing oﬀ by hand
along the machine-folding. The cut-oﬀ has two razor blade edges (one vertical, one horizontal), but
no (vertical) tearing edge. Thus, ﬁrst cut-oﬀ, then separation of sheet one.

Only then came the foldings, because page 1-2 and page 7-8 (being only 2/3 of a normal page) are
folded diﬀerently, namely in their respective middles.

At Mar 7, 1918 Hilbert writes a letter to Felix Klein[44] in the format 19 cm x 15 cm:

“Hereby, I send you the ﬁrst proofs * (3 sheets) [= the page proofs[2] discussed here] of my ﬁrst
communication, (* Please, kindly to return them to me, because I have no other records) in which
I just have elaborated also what are now Runge’s ideas, in particular Theorem 1, page 6, where
I have proved the divergence property of energy. But later [i.e. In the published version[6]] I have
suppressed the whole thing, because it did not seem mature to me. I would be very pleased if now a
progress could be achieved.”

Theorem 1 begins on bottom of page 6 and is proved on top of page 7, i.e. at that position of
the page, which is now lacking. Hilbert does not send a reprint but the page proofs, because in
the ﬁnal publication he had omitted (“suppressed”) something. Even more absurd it would be to
assume Hilbert has made the cut-oﬀ before sending the letter to Klein, so exactly that would be
missing he intended to show Klein. At least he would have mentioned the cut-oﬀ with regret, while
mentioning the 3 sheets, he is sending.

According to the temporal sequence established above, Hilbert did not fold the page proofs to the
format of the letter (19 cm x 15 cm). Hilbert has sent the page proofs unfolded in a big envelope
(24 cm x 17 cm, perhaps in the same he had received from the printery). The accompanying letter

21

in the smaller format (19 cm x 15 cm) he had simply enclosed.

Is it possible Hilbert had sent the page proofs to someone else (after Klein) and in order to save postage, he had

folded the page proofs? To everyone else, Hilbert would have sent a reprint of the ﬁnal published version, except the
addressee, as Klein, is exactly interested what Hilbert had suppressed in the ﬁnal version, namely what is written

on the cut-oﬀ page 7. So the same arguments as for Klein are valid also.

Now, we already have three mysteries: Who (Hilbert, his wife K¨athe, a maid, an assistant) has
performed (and why ?) the cut-oﬀ, has ripped apart sheet one, and has folded the pieces to the
format 19 cm x 15 cm? The cut-oﬀ, the separation of sheet one and the hand-foldings are a fact,
which cannot ﬁnd a reasonable explanation when everything has gone the right way. However,
there is a plausible explanation for a forger.

The forger, after having done the cut-oﬀ has pondered how he could further manipulate the page
proofs in order to prove the cut-oﬀ were done in historical times, namely before Mar 7, 1918
(Hilbert’s letter to Klein[44]). The forger must have been in possession of relevant historical details.
He must have known Hilbert has sent a letter to Klein in the format 19 cm x 15 cm, and he must
have known the contents of that letter.

Obviously, the forger did not pay attention to the argument above (about what Hilbert wanted to
show Klein). But he has taken care of for a proof of the temporal sequence: cutting-oﬀ, ripping-
apart, folding. It has seemed plausible to the forger, Hilbert has folded the page proofs to the
smaller format of the accompanying letter, perhaps to save postage. Thus, seemingly, the forger
could prove the cut-oﬀ was done before Mar 7, 1918, because the foldings presuppose the cut-oﬀ.

Notice, the forger had to rip-apart sheet one, because only now, he could fold the mutilated page
7-8 (with the cut-oﬀ) in the middle of the remaining 2/3 of the page, whereby he could make sure,
the foldings have taken place before the sending of the letter (Mar 7, 1918).

8.4 The Roman numerals

There is a further mystery: On the page proofs there are 3 Roman numerals, not in the handwritings
of Hilbert nor of his wive K¨athe. Furthermore, Hilbert practically never used Roman numerals. If
he had to renumber, he used Arabic numerals in a diﬀerent color, Roman numerals for numerating
volumes, chapters or theorems only.

In the accompanying letter to Klein, Hilbert has written[44]: “Hereby, I send you the ﬁrst proofs
* (3 sheets) of my ﬁrst communication, (* Please, kindly to return them to me, because I have no
other records.)”

Knowing this passage, the forger had the problem what Hilbert could have meant with “3 sheets”.
Even to him, it seemed incredible, Hilbert would have denoted page 1-2, the large sheet two (i.e. a
double page with pages 6-3 and 4-5) and the mutilated page 7-8, though all three have a diﬀerent
size, collectively as “sheets”.

Therefore, the forger added Roman numerals. The Roman number III is on page 7 directly beneath
the cut-oﬀ. (The printed number 7 had disappeared because of the cut-oﬀ.) Thus, seemingly, he
could prove the Roman numbers have been written after the cut-oﬀ, or in other words the cut-oﬀ
was done before posting the letter (Mar 7, 1918).

The forger, though very cunning without any doubt, here again has betrayed himself: Even while
assuming (already excluded above) Hilbert had sent Klein the above mentioned variously sized “3
sheets” (i.e. pages 1 to 8), it is still completely incomprehensible Hilbert would have added these
Roman numerals. The consignment already had the original printed pagination, except as usual
the title page 1 and the mutilated page 7-8. Hilbert simply had written a 7 and 8 beneath the

22

cut-oﬀ. The Roman numerals make sense only because the forger was uncomfortable selling such
diﬀerent formats as the “3 sheets” mentioned by Hilbert.

The Roman numerals are a fact which does not have a reasonable explanation when everything
has gone the right way. However, they ﬁnd a reasonable explanation by the motivation of a forger.

8.5 Crossing out pages 7 and 8 with a pencil

Now we arrive at a further mystery: The remaining 2/3 of the page 7-8 (i.e. later than the cut-oﬀ)
have been crossed through from top left to bottom right with a pencil, again erased later on, but
still slightly visible[45].

These pencil vestiges are a fact, which do not have a reasonable explanation if everything has gone
the right way. Plausible explanation for a forger: Soon after the cut-oﬀ (i.e. before the foldings) the
forger had crossed out the remaining page 7-8, suggesting Hilbert is considering the page incorrect,
making it plausible he had cut oﬀ something to save a bit of time. Later the forger had a better
idea of the foldings (because they would date the cut-oﬀ before Mar 7, 1918). Now the cross out is
obsolete, since Hilbert would not cross out what he sends Klein. Also the forger might have realized
Hilbert would have crossed out the whole pages 7-8 to mark them as obsolete, and eventually later
on he had cut-oﬀ something from these wrong pages in order to save time. After the cut-oﬀ the
pages were suﬃciently marked as irrelevant and there were no need of an additional crossing-out.

8.6 Wrong Archive-pagination

One more mystery: Old handwritings or valuable printed documents (such as Hilbert’s page proofs)
coming new into the G¨ottingen archive, are paginated by an archivist in the middle of the right edge
using a pencil. In the following we will call it ‘Archive-pagination’ or ‘A-pagination’ for short. As a
rule, this A-pagination is done with great care. Already originally (i.e. print) paginated documents
(such as Hilbert’s page proofs, pages 1-13), as a rule, are not paginated again.

It is a mystery Hilbert’s page proofs have been paginated at all, and in a completely wrong order,
especially astonishing since an original printed pagination was present. The A-pagination on the
mutilated page was done at the right edge exactly in the middle of the remaining 2/3 of the page,
making it clear - apparently - the A-pagination was done after the cut-oﬀ.

In 1997 Corry phones the archive, reporting the completely wrong A-pagination (wrong order).
The archive rubs out the old (wrong) A-pagination and replaces it by a correct A-pagination. With
a magnifying glass the old A-pagination can still be recognized.

The mystery of the wrong A-pagination ﬁnds a plausible explanation by supposing the page proofs
have not been paginated while they arrived into the archive, since they had already the original
printed pagination. After the forger had done the cut-oﬀ, had ripped-apart the second sheet, he
added an A-pagination. This should prove the page proofs already had the cut-oﬀ while they arrived
into the archive. The intentional wrong A-pagination makes sense, because a new A-pagination
must be done, so the handwriting of the forger disappears.

8.7 Forgery of a date and a dog-ear in Hilbert’s private notes

As we have seen in subsection (6.2) the sheet with archive page number 32 in Hilbert’s folder “ ¨Uber
Elektrodynamik” are his notes while he has found the correct coeﬃcients α = 1, β =
1/2 and
λ = 0 in the explicit ﬁeld equations. As can be seen on a facsimile in Wuensch[21] p. 60, this sheet

−

23

32 on top left bears the date 9/10.IX.15. It is certainly a good habit to add a date in all our own
private notices. But had Hilbert had that habit? At no other sheet of his folder we can ﬁnd such a
date. Only with poor graphological capabilities one would suspect that the date has not the same
handwriting as the remainder of the page, especially since both should be written in the same
minute, with the same quill and with the same ink, and especially comparing it with the facsimile
(Wuensch, p. 22) of a date on Hilbert’s letter to Klein. A possible motivation for a forger would
be to prove Hilbert has found or veriﬁed the explicit ﬁeld equations only after he has seen them in
Einstein’s publications.

But the curiosities continue. I have ordered a copy of Hilbert’s folder from the G¨ottingen archive[12]
and I was struck the date is now absent. From G¨ottingen I got the answer a turned-down-corner
(dog ear) at the top left of Hilbert’s page 32 sheet has prevented the date to become visible on
the microﬁlm from which all requested copies are now made. Coincidence or an attempt by anyone
who is interested to reduce the number of too obvious and thus counterproductive forgeries?

8.8 How is it possible to manipulate documents in the G¨ottingen

archive?

For the question how it is possible to smuggle documents out of the G¨ottingen archive and to
manipulate them alone, I refer to Wuensch’s book[21]. For instance it is possible to put them
between one’s own sheets, because while leaving the archive for a rest, personal working material
is not checked.

8.9 What was on the cut-oﬀ in Hilbert’s page proofs

There is agreement among historians the cut-oﬀ contained equation

H = K + L

(41)

where H is the total Lagrangian density, and K was deﬁned on the cut-oﬀ e.g. as ‘the invariant
stemming from Riemann’s tensor’, i.e. K

R = Ricci-scalar.

≡

Some historians believe the cut-oﬀ also contained the explicit ﬁeld equations (5c). Though we
cannot exclude this possibility deﬁnitely, there are several arguments (see also T. Sauer[47]) that
this is improbable:

The cut-oﬀ is rather short, for all the deﬁnitions and explanations. Furthermore, the subject just
before the cut-oﬀ is diﬀerent, thus some transitional phrasing would be required. To give the
explicit ﬁeld equations does not ﬁt to the position of the cut-oﬀ but rather after Eq. (26) of the
page proofs, a position where they appeared in the printed version.

In the whole article (page proofs, published version and republished version) Hilbert was mainly
interested in general theorems and in the energy concept. Hilbert did not include explicit formulae
for the electromagnetic ﬁeld equations either.

The most decisive argument, however, is the following: the editors of Science would not have passed
the 1997-article without seeing a copy of the page proofs. They had observed the cut-oﬀ, since the
main statement of the paper is, that nowhere in the whole page proofs the explicit ﬁeld equations
can be found. Thus, we can conclude that at the discovery of the page proofs in the G¨ottingen
archive short after 1994, the cut-oﬀ was not yet there. Seeing the complete page-proofs, the editors
had recognized the explicit ﬁeld equations, even if formulated in a version like (5c), diﬀerent from
a modern one. Thus we can conclude the cut-oﬀ did not contain the explicit ﬁeld equations.

24

8.10 What was the motivation of the forger?

Some historians believe the cut-oﬀ on Hilbert’s page proofs contained the explicit ﬁeld equations.
Then the motivation would be to withdraw Hilbert’s priority to have found the explicit ﬁeld
equations before Einstein, and to be able to publish this new historical perspective.

In the above subsection we have collected arguments the cut-oﬀ did not contain the explicit ﬁeld
equations. So what could then be the motivation for a forger to perpetrate the cut-oﬀ?

One strange uttered hypothesis[46] is that self appointed advocates of Hilbert had done the cut-oﬀ
in order at least to have a chance to speculate Hilbert has found the ﬁeld equations before Einstein.

But there is a more serious and very plausible motivation: For a historian of science, it is a great
triumph to be able to reverse the established opinion about the priority of a milestone in scientiﬁc
progress, as was the ﬁnal formulation of general relativity. After having detected the page proofs
did not contain the explicit ﬁeld equations, this success of that historian was jeopardized by the
argument Hilbert was nevertheless the ﬁrst to have given the Ricci-scalar as the correct Lagrangian
density for the gravitational ﬁeld, and the evaluation of the corresponding explicit ﬁeld equations
was merely a straightforward technical exercise.

The human psychology reacts more to a fast change of possession than to its actual level. Thus in a
ﬁt of ill-considered activity the historian, or someone else enjoyed by that initial success, made the
cut-oﬀ by removing with a razor blade Hilbert’s deﬁnition of K as the Ricci-scalar. Thus he hoped
to argue that Hilbert has made his choice for K only while preparing for his printed version and
he has added the deﬁnition of K as the Ricci-scalar only then, together with the corresponding
explicit ﬁeld equations. And that Hilbert had made the cut-oﬀ himself in order to paste some
formulae somewhere else in order to save time.

At no other place on the remaining page proofs it can be decided if Hilbert had really taken
the Ricci scalar, or if he had left his Lagrangian density unspeciﬁed. The only remaining hint is
Hilbert’s choice of the letter K, which is similar to k which was used by Gauss for curvature, see
(11). Even that is now questioned by T. Sauer[47], footnote 7, arguing Hilbert has taken K for
alphabetical reasons. Except that hint, thus far, nobody doubts Hilbert had indeed deﬁned on the
cut-oﬀ his Lagrangian density K as ‘the invariant stemming from Riemann’s tensor’, i.e the Ricci
scalar, as can be seen by the printed version. However, we are not in need to argue the forger was
very anticipating.

8.11 Summary: a chronology of the forgery

After discovery of Hilberts intact page proofs in a G¨ottingen archive after 1994, it was observed
they did not contain the correct explicit ﬁeld equations of General Relativity. A publication of this
spectacular historical fact, reversing the priority dispute in favor of Einstein, was begun.

Shortly, by internal discussions, it was argued Hilbert still deserves the priority of having found the
correct Lagrangian density, and the evaluation of the explicit ﬁeld equations could be considered
a technical computational exercise only.

Therefore, a forger, who must have detailed insight in the relevant physics and mathematics, made
the shortest possible cut-oﬀ, so that to day it is no longer possible to prove with the remaining
part of the page proofs Hilbert had taken the Ricci scalar as the Lagrangian density. One could
now argue Hilbert had inserted not only the correct ﬁeld equations but also the correct Lagrangian
density only after Dec 6, 1915.

The forger, possibly plagued by remorse and anxiety, thought about further actions with the

25

intention to prove the cut-oﬀ was done in Hilbert’s time. First with a pencil, he crossed out the
remaining two-thirds of pages 7 and 8, what he rubbed out later. These traces are a fact on the page
proofs, which do not have a reasonable explanation if everything had gone the right way. However,
they ﬁnd a plausible explanation by the motivation of a forger. One should assume Hilbert had
made the crossings indicating the contents of the pages are obsolete. So it becomes more probable
Hilbert has made the cut-oﬀ himself to save time. Later, the forger recognized Hilbert would have
done the crossing before the cut-oﬀ. After the cut-oﬀ the sheet was already suﬃciently marked as
unimportant. Therefore, the forger erased them again, removing this nonsensical action.

Only now the forger was thinking more seriously about decisive manipulations in order to prove
Hilbert has done the cut-oﬀ himself. The forger must be in possession of relevant historical data,
and in particular about the format and contents of Hilbert’s letter to Klein[44]. He asked himself:
“How could I prove Hilbert has made the cut-oﬀ before sending the page proofs to Klein?”. His
answer: “I could fold the page proofs to the format of the accompanying letter to Klein, and if I fold
the mutilated page in the remaining middle, I can prove the cut-oﬀ was done before sending the
letter, i.e. before 1918.” But the forger had a problem, because pages 1-2 (frontside-backside) are
still connected with the mutilated pages 7-8 on the same large sheet. Therefore he separated page
1-2 from pages 7-8. Only then he was able to make the diﬀering hand-foldings in their respective
middle. In the vertical direction he made foldings to the format of the accompanying letter to
Klein. But now he had a further problem, because in the accompanying letter Hilbert writes that
he will send 3 sheets. The forger had three very diﬀerent sheets: half a sheet (pages 1-2), an intact
sheet (pages 3-4 and 5-6) and a mutilated sheet (pages 7-8). It seemed strange Hilbert had called
them collectively as ‘3 sheets’. Therefore the forger added three Roman numerals to make that
more plausible.

The forger observed Hilbert’s page proofs had no archive pagination. This gave him the opportunity
to add one with the pagination in the middle of the mutilated page. Thus he could prove the cut-
oﬀ was already there when the page proofs came into the archive, which is the time the archive
pagination is usually done.

9 Acknowledgements

I thank Dr. D. Wuensch for the communication of several details not yet contained in her book[21],
and also Dr. K.P. Sommer and Prof. F. Winterberg for clarifying answers to several questions, and
Prof. H. Dehnen for a discussion about the range of empirical validity of Eq. (2).

References

[1] Albert Einstein: Zur allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie. Submitted Nov 4, 1915. Published Nov
11, 1915 in: K¨oniglich Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), Sitzungsberichte
(1915), p. 778-186; and Albert Einstein: Zur allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie (Nachtrag). Sub-
mitted Nov 11, 1915. Published Nov 18, 1915, ibid, p. 799-801. Reproduced in[48] Doc 21 and
22.

[2] David Hilbert, Erste Korrektur der ersten Mitteilungen “Die Grundlagen der Physik”. Submit-
ted Nov 20, 1915. Contained in the folder 634 “ ¨Uber Gravitation”, deposited in Handschriften-
abteilung of the library of the university at G¨ottingen, Germany. In the present paper refered
to as ‘Hilbert’s page proofs’. Photos can be seen on the internet[43] and copies can be ordered
from the G¨ottingen archive[12] by asking for Cod.Ms.David Hilbert 634.
Hilbert received the page proofs Dec 6, 1915 from the printery. Published as [6].

26

[3] Albert Einstein: Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation. Submitted Nov 25, 1915. Published
Dec 2, 1915 in K¨oniglich Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), Sitzungsberichte
(1915), p. 844-847. Reproduced in [48], Doc 25.

[4] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol 8A (Correspondence 1914-1917), Robert Schul-

mann et al (Eds.), Princeton University Press, 1998.

[5] L.Corry, J.Renn, J.Stachel, Belated Decison in the Hilbert-Einstein Priority Dispute, Science

1997, 278; online:[49].

[6] David Hilbert, Die Grundlagen der Physik (Erste Mitteilung). Submitted Nov 20, 1915. Pub-
lished in: Nachrichten von der K¨oniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen,
Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse, (1915), p. 395-407. Appeared only Mar 31, 1916. In the
present paper referred to as ‘Published version of Hilbert’s page proofs’. online:[49].

[7] F. Winterberg, On “Belated Decision in the Hilbert-Einstein Priority Dispute”, published by
L. Corry, J. Renn, and J. Stachel, Zeitschrift f¨ur Naturforschung A 2004, 59, 715. online:[49].

[8] K.P. Sommer, Priorit¨atstreit zwischen Hilbert und Einstein. Wer entdeckte die Allgemeine

Relativit¨atstheorie?, Physik in Unserer Zeit 2005, 5, 230. online:[49].

[9] L.Corry, J.Renn, J.Stachel, Response to F. Winterberg, On belated decision in the Hilbert-

Einstein priority dispute,2004
http://www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/texts/Winterberg-Antwort.html
The orginal text was replaced in 2005 by a now shorter text because of legal pressure from
Winterberg. Testimony of the mentioned opinion can be found in D.Wuensch[21] p. 50, footnote
60.
See also: http://home.comcast.net/~xtxinc/Response.htm

[10] CRS’s revolutionary new historical discovery was also published in several daily newspapers,

including The Washington post by giving interviews.
See: Curt Suplee, Researchers Deﬁnitely Rule Einstein Did Not Plagiarize Relativity Theory,
The Washington Post, Nov 14, 1997, page A24.

[11] Felix Klein, Hilbert’s 13 years older colleague in G¨ottingen, had asked Vermeil in 1918, to
explain him in detail Hilbert’s method. Vermeil proposed a tricky procedure. It is described in
detail by Wuensch[21] p. 65. Vermeil expressively calls Hilbert’s [our box Eq. (1)] an assump-
tion. Thus Vermeil was aware, that it was not a proved fact, as Hilbert had insinuated.

[12] Copies can be ordered from the G¨ottingen Archive by e-mails to: hsd@mail.sub.uni-
goettingen.de. Hilbert’s ‘special case’ is mentioned in his private folder 622 entitled Zur Elek-
trodynamik.

[13] C.N. Haskins: On the invariants of quadratic diﬀerential forms I and II, Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, Vol 3(1902), p71-91, and Vol 5 (1904), p.167-192. The same
criticism as for Zorawski[14] applies also for Haskins (see his p. 168). It is corrected by:
K. Zorawski: Zur Invariantentheorie der Diﬀerentialformen zweiten Grades (Zweite Mit-
teilung), Leipziger Berichte Vol 60 (1908), p. 20-52, see his table p. 32.

[14] Kasimir ˇZorawski: ¨Uber Biegungsinvarianten. Eine Anwendung der Lie’schen Gruppentheorie,
Acta Mathematica Vol 16 (1892/93), p. 1-64. Without giving a reason and hiding this fact,
Zorawski counts only invariants with the restriction G = B
1, see his Eq. (11). He corrects
this limitation in:
K. Zorawski: Zur Invariantentheorie der Diﬀerentialformen zweiten Grades, Leipziger Berichte
(= Berichte ¨uber die Verhandlungen der k¨oniglich s¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften
zu Leipzig, mathematisch-physikalische Klasse, Teubner-Verlag) Vol 59 (1907), p. 160-186, see
his table p. 170.

−

[15] David Hilbert, Die Grundlagen der Physik, Mathematische Annalen 92 (1924)p.1-32

[16] H. Vermeil, Nachrichten von der K¨oniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen,

Mathematisch physikalische Klasse, 1917, p. 334-344.

27

[17] Hermann Weyl, Space, Time, Matter, Dover Publications. See Appendix II. First German

publication 1918.

[18] E. Cartan, Sur les equations de la gravitation d’Einstein, Journal de math´ematiques pures et

appliqu´ees, IX.Ser.,1(1922),p.141-203.

[19] Some literature with information about the Einstein/Hilbert priority dispute: [50]

[51]

[48]

[49]

[21]

[4]

[8]

[52]

[53]

[24]

[27].

[20] M. Grossmann, Entwurf einer verallgemeinerten Relativit¨atstheorie und einer Theorie der
Gravitation: II. Mathematischer Teil (I. Physikalischer Teil von A. Einstein), B.G. Teubner
Verlag, Leipzig und Berlin, 1913, p. 36. Reprinted in: The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein,
Vol 4 (Writings Jan 1912 - Mar 1914), Martin J. Klen et al (Eds.), Princeton University Press,
1995, Doc 13. p. 337.

[21] Daniela Wuensch, “zwei wirkliche Kerle”, Neues zur Entdeckung der Gravitationsgleichun-
gen der Allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie durch Albert Einstein und David-Hilbert, Termessos
Verlag, G¨ottingen, 2005 (http://s-edition.de/EinsteinHilbert.htm).

[22] Einstein’s letter to Ehrenfest, Mai 24, 1916, CPAE [4], Doc 220, p. 288.

[23] Einstein’s letter to Weyl, Nov 23, 1916, CPAE[4] Doc 278, p. 366.

[24] A. Pais, Subtle is the Lord, The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Clarendon Press,

Oxford, 1982.

[25] Felix Klein, Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandlungen, Vol.1, p. 559, Springer-Verlag, 1973.

[26] Tilman Sauer: The Relativity of Discovery: Hilbert’s First Note on the Foundations of Physics,

Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 53(1999)529-575.

[27] C.J. Bjerknes, Anticipations of Einstein in the General Theory of Relativity, Downers Gove

Illinois, 2003.

[28] According to a bibliography by Schouten, an equation of the type of Bianchi-identities were
ﬁrst found 1880 by Voss. Ricci has found them independently, who sent them to Padova, who
published them 1889 in Italian. Bianchi found them independently and published them in
1902: L. Bianchi, Sui simboli q quattro indice e sulla curvatura di Riemann, Rendiconti d.
Lincei (V) 11II, 3-7.

[29] D.M.Y.Sommerville: Bibliography of Non-Euclidean Geometry, Chelsea Publishing Company,

New York, 1970, reprint of 1911.

terdam, 1918. See p.66 Eq. (168).

[30] J.A. Schouten, Die direkte Analysis zur neueren Relativit¨atstheorie, Johannes M¨uller, Ams-

[31] Alfred Clebsch, Theorie der bin¨aren algebraischen Formen, Teubner, Leipzig, 1872.

Paul Gordan, Georg Kerschensteiner, Vorlesungen ¨uber Invariantentheorie, Teubner, Leipzig,
1885

[32] K.F. Gauss: General investigations of curved surfaces, translated from the Latin A. Hiltebeitel

and J. Morehead, Raven Press, 1965.

[33] Bernhard Riemann, Collected works, Dover Publications, 1953

[34] E.B. Christoﬀel: ¨Uber die Transformation der homogenen Diﬀerentialausdr¨ucke zweiten
Grades, Crelle’s Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik, Vol. 70 (1869), p.46-70.

[35] Riemann had submitted this work 1861 for a prize (which was never paid) to the Acad´emie
des Science in Paris, who have asked for the solution of a problem in heat conduction. See: R.
Farwell, C. Knee, Historia Mathematica, 17 (1990), 223-255.

28

[36] Hilbert shows in his page proofs in his Theorem I, which is an anticipation of what is now
called Noether’s theorem, that, because of general covariance, among the 10 gravitational and
4 electromagnetic equations there exist 4 identities, so e.g. the 4 gravitational equations are a
mathematical consequence of the 10 gravitational equations. However, Hilbert overlooks that
this is the case only, because of the electrodynamic terms in the 10 gravitational equations,
which originate by his adding an electrodynamic term L to the Ricci scalar K
R in his
Lagrangian density. So Hilbert’s opinion to have shown electromagnetism as a consequence of
gravitation is untenable. However, it must be emphasized that Hilbert was perhaps the ﬁrst
to have proposed a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of gravitation and other interactions in the form of a
single Lagrangian density.

≡

[37] Landau, L.D. and E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, 1971, Addison-Wesley

[38] Constance Reid: Hilbert, Springer-Verlag, 1970, see p. 109 or p. 142

[39] Today F.Schur’s theorem is proved using the contracted Bianchi identities.

[40] Souvaroﬀ, Bulletin des Sciences Math´ematiques et Astronomiques, Vol 4(1873)p.180

[41] J.Geheniau, R.Debever, Les invariants de courbure de l’espace de Riemann `a quatre diemen-

sions, Acad. Roy. Belgique, Bull.Cl.Sci., V. Ser., 42(1956),114-123.

[42] In: C.W. Misner et al, Gravitation, Freeman and Company, New York, 1973,

21.2. No refer-

ence is given, and none could be found in their bibliography.

§

[43] Photos of Hilbert page proofs [2] on the internet: http://s-edition.de/prooﬀotos.htm.

[44] David Hilbert, Felix Klein, (1985) Der Briefwechsel David Hilbert - Felix Klein (1986-1918),

G¨unther Frei (Ed.), Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, G¨ottingen.

[45] I thank Dr.U.H.Bartell for having drawn my attention to this detail on the page proofs.

[46] J. Renn, Einstein, Hilbert und der geheimnisvolle Schnipsel, Frankfurter Allgemeine Son-

ntagszeitung, Wissenschaft, Nov 20, 2005.
See also: Thomas B¨uhrke, Das zerschnittende Blatt, S¨uddeutsche Zeitung, Sep 14, 2005, p.11.
online:[49].

[47] T. Sauer, Einstein Equations and Hilbert Action: What is missing on page 8 of the proofs
for Hilbert’s First Communication on the Foundations of Physics?, Arch. Hist. Exact Sci.
59(2005)577-590

[48] The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol 6 (Writings Apr 1914 - Dec 1917), A.J. Kox et

al (Eds.), Princeton University Press, 1996.

[49] K.P. Sommer, Termessos-Verlag, documents relating to the Einstein/Hilbert priority:

http://s-edition.de/LinksEinsteinHilbertdispute.htm.

[50] J. Mehra, Einstein, Hilbert, and The Theory of Gravitation. Historical Origin of General

Relativity Theory, Reidel, 1974.

[51] J. Mehra, The Golden Age of Theoretical Physics, World Scientiﬁc, 2001.

[52] A. F¨olsing, Albert Einstein. Eine Biographie, Suhrkamp, 1999.

[53] A.A. Logunov, M.A. Mestvirishvili, V.A. Petrov, http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0405075v3;

Uspekhi 2004, 47(6), 607.

