6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spacetime and Reality

Vesselin Petkov
Science College, Concordia University
1455 De Maisonneuve Boulevard West
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8
E-mail: vpetkov@alcor.concordia.ca

Abstract

Should physicists deal with the question of the reality of spacetime? It is argued
that they should since this is a question about the dimensionality of the world and it
is physics that should answer it.

Almost a hundred years have passed since 1908 when Hermann Minkowski gave a four-
dimensional formulation of special relativity according to which space and time are united
into an inseparable four-dimensional entity – spacetime – and particles are represented by
four-dimensional worldtubes. But so far physicists have not found it necessary to address
the question of the reality of these worldtubes and spacetime itself. It seems most physicists
assume that spacetime and the worldtubes of particles do not have counterparts in the ex-
ternal world since special relativity can be equally formulated in a three-dimensional and a
four-dimensional language. However, while the two formulations of relativity are equivalent
in a sense that they correctly describe the relativistic eﬀects, they are diametrically diﬀer-
ent in terms of the dimensionality of the world. As the world is either three-dimensional or
four-dimensional only one of the formulations of relativity adequately represents its dimen-
sionality.

For this reason it is a valid question to ask whether spacetime and the worldtubes
of particles represent something real or they are just theoretical entities introduced to
describe more concisely the relativistic eﬀects that take place in a three-dimensional world.
Put another way, the question is: “Does relativity describe a three-dimensional or four-
dimensional world?” Many physicists appear to think that these are philosophical questions
which they should not bother to answer. However, I doubt whether anyone would seriously
argue that the dimensionality of the world is a philosophical question. Minkowski would
certainly not.

Dealing with the issue of the reality of worldtubes and spacetime is important for several
reasons. It is natural to resolve this issue, i.e. the question of the dimensionality of the
world according to relativity, ﬁrst before dealing with the multi-dimensional spaces of more
recent theories. Addressing the question of the nature of spacetime will provide us with
a deeper understanding of what relativity tells us about the world.
In particular, the
question of the reality of worldtubes, as will be shown below, has immediate implications
for the proper understanding of the physical meaning of the relativistic eﬀects. And that
is essential since there still exist misconceptions about the interpretation of some of these
eﬀects. For example, the temptation to interpret length contraction in terms of deformation
forces is sometimes diﬃcult to resist despite the fact that the muon experiment, for instance,

1

completely ruled out such an interpretation by demonstrating that space itself (where there
are no deformation forces) contracts relativistically as well (see [1]).

A clear view on the nature of spacetime makes it possible to teach relativity far more
eﬃciently. Everyone who has taught classes on special relativity knows that students often
ask questions which some professors ﬁnd diﬃcult to answer. For instance, you derive length
contraction and try to explain it with the help of a spacetime diagram which depicts how
the instantaneous three-dimensional spaces of two observers in relative motion intersect the
worldtube of a meter stick at diﬀerent angles. The usual questions are: “The two three-
dimensional cross-sections of the meter stick’s worldtube nicely explain the eﬀect but is that
a true explanation? Is the worldtube of the meter stick a real four-dimensional object? Is
spacetime nothing more than a four-dimensional mathematical space or is it a mathematical
model of a real four-dimensional world with time entirely given as the fourth dimension?”
I think the challenge posed by such questions should be faced. These are deep ques-
tions and avoiding them would hardly be the best scientiﬁc and pedagogical approach. The
diﬃculty with these questions is that their answers, though straightforward, are counter-
intuitive. In the case of length contraction relativity of simultaneity clearly demonstrates
that while measuring the same meter stick two observers in relative motion measure two
diﬀerent three-dimensional objects. This becomes evident when it is taken into account
that the meter stick (as an extended three-dimensional body) is deﬁned as “all its parts
which exist simultaneously at a given moment of time”. As the two observers have diﬀerent
sets of simultaneous events it follows that two diﬀerent three-dimensional meter sticks (two
diﬀerent sets of simultaneously existing parts of the meter stick) exist for them. Therefore
the two observers measure two diﬀerent three-dimensional meter sticks. This is possible
only if the worldtube of the meter stick is a real four-dimensional object, which makes it
possible for the two observers to regard two diﬀerent three-dimensional cross-sections of it
as their three-dimensional meter sticks. Hence the physical meaning of length contraction
turns out to be profound – length contraction (and therefore relativity of simultaneity as
well) is a manifestation of the four-dimensionality of the world. And indeed, if the world
were three-dimensional, this eﬀect would be impossible – the meter stick’s worldtube would
not be real and therefore both observers would measure the same three-dimensional meter
stick (the same set of simultaneously existing parts of the meter stick), which would mean
that the observers would have a common set of simultaneous events in contradiction with
relativity.

Although length contraction alone is suﬃcient to settle the issue of the dimensionality of
the world consider the following more general argument as well. The world cannot be three-
dimensional since such a world is deﬁned in terms of (i) the pre-relativistic division of events
into past, present and future, and (ii) the pre-relativistic concept of absolute simultaneity
– as everything that exists simultaneously at a given moment. To see this, assume that
reality is indeed a three-dimensional world. Then it inescapably follows from relativity
of simultaneity that two observers in relative motion have two diﬀerent three-dimensional
worlds since the observers have diﬀerent sets of simultaneous events. But this is possible
only if these worlds are diﬀerent three-dimensional cross-sections of a real four-dimensional
world. As in the case of length contraction it is again evident that relativity of simultaneity
is a manifestation of the four-dimensionality of the world1. That is why no relativity of
1As “in special relativity, the causal structure of space-time deﬁnes a notion of a ‘light cone’ of an event,
but does not deﬁne a notion of simultaneity” [3] one might object that relativity of simultaneity cannot
be used as an argument to determine the dimensionality of the world. However, such an objection leads
to the four-dimensionality of the world even faster. If reality cannot be described in terms of simultaneity,
then the four-dimensional area lying outside the light cone at an event P should represent what exists. On

2

simultaneity is possible in a three-dimensional world – if the world were three-dimensional,
the set of simultaneous events constituting such a world would be common to all observers
in relative motion, which means that simultaneity would be absolute.

Addressing the question of the nature of spacetime may even pave the way for new
results. The realization that the worldtubes of physical bodies are real four-dimensional
objects makes it possible to pursue more rigorously Minkowski’s program – physical laws
might ﬁnd their most perfect expression as reciprocal relations between worldlines [2]. Take
as an example the open question of inertia. We do not know why a body resists its ac-
celeration. But as the worldtube of an accelerating body is deformed (is not geodesic) it
appears natural to assume that a four-dimensional stress arises in the deformed worldtube
of the body, which gives rise to a restoring force that tries to restore the geodesic shape of
the worldtube. This restoring force would manifest itself as the inertial force [4]. A body
whose worldtube is geodesic oﬀers no resistance to its motion because its worldtube is not
deformed.

The worldtube of a body falling in a gravitational ﬁeld is geodesic and the body does not
resist its fall. However, when the body is prevented from falling its worldtube is deformed
and the restoring force that arises in the body’s worldtube has the same origin as in the case
of an accelerating body but in this case it would manifest itself as what is traditionally called
the gravitational force. So, addressing the issue of the reality of worldtubes sheds additional
light on the question of why in general relativity the gravitational force is considered to be
inertial [5] or, put another way, why “there is no such thing as the force of gravity” in
general relativity [6].

References

[1] G. F. R. Ellis and R. M. Williams, Flat and Curved Space Times (Oxford University

Press, Oxford, 1988) p. 104.

[2] H. Minkowski, in H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl, The Principle

of Relativity (Dover, New York, 1952), p. 76.

[3] R. M. Wald, American Journal of Physics 74, 471 (2006).

[4] Calculations of the restoring force show that it does have the form of the inertial
force; see V. Petkov, Relativity and the Nature of Spacetime (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2005), Ch. 10.

[5] W. Rindler, Essential Relativity, 2nd ed. (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1977), p. 244.

[6] J. L. Synge, Relativity: the general theory, (Nord-Holand, Amsterdam, 1960), p. 109.

this view all events in the past and the future light cone should be regarded as non-existent. By the same
criterion, however, the events of the past and future light cone should also exist since they fall in the area
lying outside the light cone associated with another event Q which is space-like separated from P . Therefore
all events of spacetime are equally existent, which means that the world is four-dimensional.

3

