Light Computing

Gordon Chalmers

e-mail: gordon@quartz.shango.com

Abstract

A conﬁguration of light pulses is generated, together with emitters and receptors,
that allows computing. The computing is extraordinarily high in number of ﬂops per
second, exceeding the capability of a quantum computer for a given size and coherence
region. The emitters and receptors are based on the quantum diode, which can emit
and detect individual photons with high accuracy.

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Traditional computing relies on the movement of electrons through logic circuits.
Planned designs for quantum computing [1] require the manipulation of wavefunctions
through nanocircuitry, and this requires special equipment to manafacture. These
two types of circuitries are commonly described in the literature, with emphasis on
the latter in its computational power. There is another possibility using an aspect
of quantum computing, that is coherence of electrons or photons with eachother or
themselves. Laser computing requires the coherence of many photons in a manner
that short pulses in the overall wavefunction can accomplish the equivalent of a circuit.
The concept and several basic architectures are presented.

Laser computing does not require any physical circuits, except the emitters and
receptors that are used in the beam conﬁguration. For example, consider a platform
half a meter in diameter containing, possibly quantum, diodes emitting a cohered
photon shower every picosecond. There would be an approximate 1018 elements or
less in the emitter. Give these diodes an angular precision of ∆θ = 10−4 − 10−6 or
more. The second platform is the receptor platform located a distance d meters away.
The receptor dish should be able to measure the amplitude and phase of the incoming
cohered beam; if the frequencies are required to be measured then their components
have to be separated and directed to the appropriate region in the receptor platform.
Either that or the receptor elements must distinguish the frequency of the incoming
photon. The parameters of the beam, such as the radius and the distance, should be
chosen so that the entire beam has coherence with itself over the distance d.

The type of quantum diodes that are used in the models are deﬁned as a lattice of
a material that has a series of donor atoms in a row which are meta-stable and form
a current when a small current is applied. The row of donated electrons are trapped
in a meta-stable quantum well near the boundary of the material for a small period
of time, where they coher and then escape, emitting a number of cohered photons.
The width and depth of the quantum well (trap) dictate the properties of the emitted
burst of photons.

Next, cohered beams are placed that crossﬁre the previous one; this is described
in ﬁgure 1. The angles and orientation are chosen so as to alter the coherence with
eachother and the ’primary’ beam. Firing photons in patterns, and possibly with
diﬀering frequencies, from the various emitters in the emitter platform generate very
complex coherence patterns in the primary beam and the secondary beams. Consider
ten beams a half meter long with a primary beam three meters. The optimum case
should not coher over the maximum and this puts a constraint on the geometry; the
considered example is illustrative. The secondary beams can alter the primary beam
with an approximate 108 (from the diameter) and maybe 104 during a single cycle

2

Figure 1: A linear laser design.

of the primary beam’s traversing the distance d (if the diode has picosecond timing).
Then there are ten beams, and the individual photons from the secondary beam
quantum cohers with the entire primary beam. The complexity is overwhelming,
and possibly equals or exceeds the concept of a quantum computer. Considering the
length d = 3 meters the complexity with one secondary beam could be 101012
, not
including self-coherence of the two beams. This grows when the coherence of the
secondary beams with themselves and with the other beams are considered.

The coherence length of the lasers should encompass the entire geometry for
maximal eﬀect. If the former is smaller than the size of the system, degradation of
the photon coherence occurs.

A diﬀerent conﬁguration consists of a primary beam along an axis of a sphere.
Diodes are placed for maximal packing along the inner wall of the sphere. This might
lead to maximal coherence of the beam with the sphere’s diodes. Firing the diodes
in various patterns would coher the beam in various ways, generating a very fast
quantum computer.

A small set of beams with receptors and emitters can be used also in an arrange-
ment of a lattice, such as a bipartite diamond conﬁguration, that ﬁts in a box on your
desk, the size of a computer. It would be encased in a material so that coherence
with the outside is minimized. The emitters and receptors span a smaller area. A
secondary fast chip can be used to pattern the emitters.

The conﬁguration of laser beams requires much accuracy and stability to ensure
its quantum coherence as designed. A question is whether the laser computing is
more stable than a nano-sized circuit that captures the wavefunction of an electron

3

diodes

Figure 2: A spherical arrangement. The litte circles are the diode emitters and the
tube is the primary beam.

in a complicated environment.

One diﬃculty in programming the cohered laser computing involves the apparent
non-linear sequence of interference terms in the cohered system (such as the secondary
beams or the sphere of diode light emitters) and their timing. A second diﬃculty is in
the memory allocation; one of the beams or a backup chip could be used for memory
allocation in the role of a cache or larger memory designation with longer lifetime.

The beam conﬁgurations in the laser computing appear to generate computing
with ﬂops per second with extremely large numbers of digits. The architecture is an
alternative to the conventional deﬁnition of a quantum computer. Also the core of
the computing doesn’t involve nano-circuitry.

There exists much coherence stability protection not mentioned in this article,

Jan 2006.

4

.

References

[1] Richard P. Feynman, “Quantum Mechanical Computers,” Plenary talk given
at IQEC-CLEO Meeting, Anaheim, CA, Jun 19, 1984. In *Brown, L.M. (ed.):
Selected papers of Richard Feynman* 968-992.

5

