6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE MACHIAN UNIVERSE

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute for Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
Hyderabad (India) & Udine (Italy)
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

We give arguments from the point of view of Gravitation as well
as Electromagnetism which indicate a Machian view for the universe.

1 Introduction

The dependence of the mass of a particle on the rest of the universe was
argued by Mach in the nineteenth century itself in what is now famous as
Mach’s Principle [1, 2]. The Principle is counterintuitive in that we tend to
consider the mass which represents the quantity of matter in a particle to be
an intrinsic property of the particle. But the following statement of Mach’s
Principle shows it to be otherwise thus going counter to ideas of locality and
causality.
If there were no other particles in the universe, then the force acting on the
particle P would vanish and so we would have by Newton’s second law

ma = 0

(1)

Can we conclude that the acceleration a of the particle vanishes? Not if we
do not postulate the existence of an absolute background frame in space. In
the absence of such a Newtonian absolute space frame, the acceleration a
would in fact be arbitrary, because we could measure this acceleration with
respect to arbitrary frames. Then (1) implies that m = 0. That is, in the
absence of any other matter in the universe, the mass of a material particle
would vanish. From this point of view the mass of a particle depends on the

1

rest of the material content of the universe.
Though Einstein was an admirer of Mach’s ideas, his Special Theory of Rel-
ativity went counter to them. He subscribed to the concept of locality ac-
cording to which information about a part of the universe can be obtained by
dealing with that part alone and without taking into consideration the rest
of the universe at the same time. In his words, [3] ”But one supposition we
should, in my opinion absolutely hold fast: the real factual situation of the
system S2 is independent of what is done with the system S1 which is spa-
tially separated from the former.” Further, causality is another cornerstone
in Einstein’s Physics.

2 The Feynman Wheeler Perfect Absorber

Theory

Feynman and Wheeler [4] gave in 1945 a consistent Electrodynamics which
was called the.a Perfect Absorber Theory. Later this theory was revived
and reviewed by some scholars, notably F. Rohrlick [5] and more recently by
Hoyle and Narlikar in the context of the Instantaneous Action at a Distance
Cosmology [6, 7]. Even more recently scholars like Chubykalo, Smirnov-
Rueda and others have argued in favour of the IAAD Electrodynamics [8, 9].
However by and large these developments have been overlooked due to the
success of Quantum Electrodynamics.
We will now argue that the Perfect Absorber Theory of Electrodynamics is
meaningful in the above context and in the context of very recent work that
points to a small photon mass, which nevertheless is perfectly compatible
with the experimental limits [10, 11]. We will then see the limit in which we
return to the usual Quantum Electrodynamics.
We begin with Classical Electrodynamics. From a classical point of view a
charge that is accelerating radiates energy which dampens its motion. This
is given by the well known Maxwell-Lorentz equation, which in units c = 1,
and τ being the proper time, while ı = 1, 2, 3, 4, is (Cf.[7]),

m

d2xı
dτ 2 = eF ı

k

dxk
dτ

+

glk

4e
3

d3xı
dτ 3

dxl
dτ −

d3xl
dτ 3

dxı
dτ !

dxk
dτ

,

 

(2)

The ﬁrst term on the right side is the usual external ﬁeld while the second
term is the damping ﬁeld which is added ad hoc by the requirement of the

2

(3)

(4)

energy loss due to radiation. In 1938 Dirac introduced instead

m

d2xı
dτ 2 = e
{

k + Rı
F ı

dxk
dτ

k}

where

Rı

1
2{

F ı

F ı

k ≡

k(adv)}

k(ret) −
In (4), F(ret) denotes the retarded ﬁeld and F(adv) the advanced ﬁeld. While
the former is the causal ﬁeld where the inﬂuence of a charge at A is felt by
a charge at B at a distance r after a time t = r
c , the latter is the advanced
ﬁeld which acts on A from a future time. In eﬀect what Dirac showed was
that the radiation damping term in (2) or (3) is given by (4) in which an
antisymmetric diﬀerence of the advanced and retarded ﬁelds is taken. Let us
elaborate a little further.
The Maxwell wave equation has two independent solutions, one having sup-
port on the future light cone, this is the retarded solution and the other
having support on the past light cone which has been called the advanced
solution. The retarded solution is selected to describe the physical situation
in conventional theory. This retarded solution is physically meaningful, as
it describes electromagnetic radiation which travels outward from a given
charge and reaches another point at a later instant. It has also been called
for this reason the causal solution. On the grounds of this causality, the
advanced solution has been rejected, except in a few formulations like those
of Dirac or Feynman and Wheeler.
In the F-W formulation, the rest of
the charges in the universe react back on the original electron through their
advanced waves, which arrive at the given charge at the same time as the
given charge radiates its electromagnetic waves. More speciﬁcally, when an
electron is accelerated at the instant t, it interacts with the other charges at
a later time t′ = t + r/c where r is the distance of the other charge–these
are the retarded interactions. However the other charges react back on the
original electron through their advanced waves, which will arrive at the time
t′
r/c = t. In this formulation, from this point of view, there is no contra-
diction with causality.
It must be mentioned that Dirac’s prescription lead to the so called runaway
solutions, with the electron acquiring larger and larger velocities in the ab-
sence of an external force [6]. This he related to the inﬁnite self energy of
the point electron.
As far as the breakdown of causality is concerned, this takes place within

−

3

∼

τ , the Compton time as we will brieﬂy see below [5, 6]. It was
a period
at this stage that Wheeler and Feynman reformulated the above action at a
distance formalism in terms of what has been called their Absorber Theory.
In their formulation, the ﬁeld that a charge would experience because of its
action at a distance on the other charges of the universe, which in turn would
act back on the original charge is given by

Re =

2e2d
3dt

(¨x)

The interesting point is that instead of considering the above force in (5)
at the charge e, if we consider the response at an arbitrary point in its
neighborhood as was shown by Feynman and Wheeler (Cf.ref.[4]) and, in
fact a neighborhood at the Compton scale, as was argued recently by the
author [12], the ﬁeld would be precisely the Dirac ﬁeld given in (3) and (4).
To see this in detail, we observe that the well known Lorentz Dirac equation
(Cf.[5]), can be written as

maµ(τ ) =

K µ(τ + ατ0)e−αdα

∞

0
Z

where aµ is the accelerator and

K µ(τ ) = F µ

in + F µ

1
c2 Rvµ,

ext −

2
3

e2
mc3 ∼

τ0 ≡

10−23sec

α =

τ ′

τ

,

−
τ0

and

where τ denotes the time and R is the total radiation rate. Incidentally this
is a demonstration of the non locality in Compton time, referred to above.
It can be seen that equation (6) diﬀers from the usual equation of Newtonian
Mechanics, in that it is non local in time. That is, the acceleration aµ(τ )
depends on the force not only at time τ , but at subsequent times also. Let
us now try to characterize this non locality. We observe that τ0 given by
10−23secs. So equation (6) can be
equation (7) is the Compton time
approximated by

∼

maµ(τ ) = K µ(τ + ξτ0)

K µ(τ )

≈

(8)

4

(5)

(6)

(7)

Thus as can be seen from (8), the Lorentz-Dirac equation diﬀers from the
usual local theory by a term of the order of

e2
c3 ˙aµ
the so called Schott term. It is well known that the time component of the
Schott term (9) is given by (Cf.ref.[5])

(9)

2
3

dE
dt ≈

−

R

≈

2
3

e2c
r2

4

,

E
mc2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

where E is the energy of the particle. Whence integrating over the period of
τ0 the Compton time, we can immediately deduce that r the
non locality
scale of spatial non locality is given by

∼

cτ0,

r

∼

which is of the order of the Compton wavelength.
The net force emanating from the charge is thus given by

F ret =

F ret + F adv

+

1
2

n

1
2

F ret
n

−

F adv

o

o

(10)

which is the acceptable causal retarded ﬁeld. The causal ﬁeld now consists
of the time symmetric ﬁeld of the charge together with the Dirac ﬁeld, that
is the second term in (10), which represents the response of the rest of the
Interestingly in this formulation we have used a time symmetric
charges.
ﬁeld, viz., the ﬁrst term of (10) to recover the retarded ﬁeld with the correct
arrow of time. Feynman and Wheeler stressed that the universe has to be a
perfect absorber or to put it simply, every charged particle in the universe
should respond back to the action on it by the given charge.
There are two important inputs which we can see in the above more recent
formulation. The ﬁrst is the action of the rest of the universe at a given
charge and the other is minimum spacetime intervals which are of the order
of the Compton scale. The minimum space time interval removes, ﬁrstly
the advanced ﬁeld eﬀects which take place within the Compton time and
secondly the inﬁnite self energy of the point electron disappears due to the
Compton scale.
The Compton scale comes as a Quantum Mechanical eﬀect, within which we
have zitterbewegung eﬀects and a breakdown of Causal Physics [13]. Indeed

5

Dirac had noted this aspect in connection with two diﬃculties with his elec-
tron equation. Firstly the speed of the electron turns out to be the velocity
of light. Secondly the position coordinates become complex or non Hermi-
tian. His explanation was that in Quantum Theory we cannot go down to
arbitrarily small space time intervals, for the Heisenberg Uncertainty Princi-
ple would then imply arbitrarily large momenta and energies. So Quantum
Mechanical measurements are an average over intervals of the order of the
Compton scale. Once this is done, we recover meaningful physics. All this
has been studied afresh by the author more recently, in the context of a non
diﬀerentiable space time and noncommutative geometry.
Weinberg also notices the non physical aspect of the Compton scale [14].
Starting with the usual light cone of Special Relativity and the inversion of
the time order of events, he goes on to add, and we quote at a little length
and comment upon it, “Although the relativity of temporal order raises no
problems for classical physics, it plays a profound role in quantum theories.
The uncertainty principle tells us that when we specify that a particle is at
position x1 at time t1, we cannot also deﬁne its velocity precisely. In conse-
quence there is a certain chance of a particle getting from x1 to x2 even if
x2|
x1 −
. To be more precise, the
probability of a particle reaching x2 if it starts at x1 is non-negligible as long
as

x2 is spacelike, that is,

x0
1 −

x1 −

x0
2|

>

|

|

(x1 −

x2)2

(x0

1 −

−

2)2
x0

≤

¯h2
m2

×

×

x2)2

10−25sec. Recall that in our units 1sec = 3

where ¯h is Planck’s constant (divided by 2π) and m is the particle mass.
(Such space-time intervals are very small even for elementary particle masses;
10−14cm or in time
for instance, if m is the mass of a proton then ¯h/m = 2
×
1010cm.) We are thus
units 6
faced again with our paradox; if one observer sees a particle emitted at x1,
2)2 is positive (but less than
x0
and absorbed at x2, and if (x1 −
−
or = ¯h2/m2), then a second observer may see the particle absorbed at x2 at
a time t2 before the time t1 it is emitted at x1.
“There is only one known way out of this paradox. The second observer
must see a particle emitted at x2 and absorbed at x1. But in general the
particle seen by the second observer will then necessarily be diﬀerent from
that seen by the ﬁrst. For instance, if the ﬁrst observer sees a proton turn
into a neutron and a positive pi-meson at x1 and then sees the pi-meson and
some other neutron turn into a proton at x2, then the second observer must
see the neutron at x2 turn into a proton and a particle of negative charge,

1 −

(x0

6

which is then absorbed by a proton at x1 that turns into a neutron. Since
mass is a Lorentz invariant, the mass of the negative particle seen by the
second observer will be equal to that of the positive pi-meson seen by the
ﬁrst observer. There is such a particle, called a negative pi-meson, and it
does indeed have the same mass as the positive pi-meson. This reasoning
leads us to the conclusion that for every type of charged particle there is an
oppositely charged particle of equal mass, called its antiparticle. Note that
this conclusion does not obtain in non-relativistic quantum mechanics or in
relativistic classical mechanics; it is only in relativistic quantum mechanics
that antiparticles are a necessity. And it is the existence of antiparticles that
leads to the characteristic feature of relativistic quantum dynamics, that
given enough energy we can create arbitrary numbers of particles and their
antiparticles.”
We note however that there is a nuance here which distinguishes Weinberg’s
explanation from that of Dirac.
In Weinberg’s analysis, one observer sees
only protons at x1 and x2, whereas the other observer sees only neutrons at
x1 and x2 while in between, the ﬁrst observer sees a positively charged pion
and the second observer a negatively charged pion. Weinberg’s explanation
is in the spirit of the Feynman-Stuckleberg diagrams. One particle leaves x1
and then travels causally to x2, where x1 and x2 are within the Compton
wavelength of the particle. But for another observer, a particle ﬁrst leaves
x2 and travels backward in time to x2.
Let us consider the above in the context of a non zero photon mass. Such
10−65gms was recently deduced by the author, and it is not only
a mass
consistent with experimental restrictions, but also predicts a new eﬀect viz.,
10−33eV , which in fact has been observed
a residual cosmic radiation
1028cms,
[10, 11, 15, 16, 17]. Such a photon would have a Compton length
that is the radius of the universe itself.
This would then lead to the following scenario: An observer would see a
photon leaving a particle A and then reaching another particle B, while a
diﬀerent observer would see exactly the opposite for the same event - that
is a photon leaves B and travels backward in time to A, as in the Weinberg
interpretation. This latter gives the advanced potential. The distinction
between the advanced and retarded potentials of the old electromagnetic
theory thus gets mixed up and we have to consider both the advanced and
retarded potentials. We consider this in a little more detail: The advanced
and retarded solutions of the wave equation are given by the well known
advanced and retarded potentials given by, in the usual notation, the well

∼

∼

∼

7

known expression

Aµ

ret(adv)(x) =

1
c Z

jµ(x′)
r′
r

δ (

r

r′

c(t

t′)) d4x′

|

−

| ∓

−

|

−

|
(The retarded part of which leads to the Lienard Wiechart potential of earlier
theory).
It can be seen in the above that we have the situation described within the
Compton wavelength, wherein there are two equivalent descriptions of the
same event–a photon leaving the charge A and reaching the charge B or
the photon leaving the charge B and reaching the charge A. The above ex-
pression for the advanced and retarded potentials immediately leads to the
advanced and retarded ﬁelds (4) and (10) of the F-W description except that
we now have a rationale for this formulation in terms of the photon mass
and the photon compton wavelength rather than the perfect absorber ad hoc
prescription. In fact there is now an immediate explanation for this of the
Instantaneous Action At a Distance Theory alluded to. In this case the usual
causal electromagnetic ﬁeld would be given by half the sum of the advanced
and retarded ﬁelds. We note that as the photon mass is so small, the usual
theory is still a good approximation.
To sum up, the Feynman Wheeler Perfect Absorber Theory required that
every charge should interact instantaneously with every other charge in the
universe, that is that the universe must be a perfect absorber of all elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds emanating from within. If this condition were satisﬁed,
then the net response of all charged particles along the future light cone of
the given charge is expressed by an integral that converges. The present
paper argues that this ad hoc prescription of Feynman and Wheeler as em-
bodied by the inclusion of the advanced potential is automatically satisﬁed
if we consider the photon to have a small mass 10−65gms as deduced by
the author elsewhere, and which is consistent with the latest experimental
limits-this leading to the eﬀect mentioned by Weinberg within the Compton
wavelength, which is really the inclusion of the advanced ﬁeld as well. In any
case the Machian character is evident in this formulation.

3 Gravitation

Gravitation in a sense is a form of weak electromagnetism. A question that
has perplexed us for over a century is, why is gravitation so much weaker

8

than electromagnetism - to the extent given by a factor of 10−40, in fact. One
way in which this can be understood is by realizing that the universe is by
and large electrically neutral, because the atoms consist of an equal number
of positive and negative charges. Strictly speaking atoms are therefore elec-
trical dipoles.
With this background let us consider the following simple model of an elec-
trically neutral atom which nevertheless has a dipole eﬀect. In fact as is well
known from elementary electrostatics the potential energy at a distance r
due to the dipole is given by

µ
r2
where µ = eL, L
ωl, e being the electric charge of the
≡
electron for simplicity and l being the electron Compton wavelength. (There
is a factor cos Θ with µ, but on an integration over all directions, this becomes
an irrelevant constant factor 4π.)
Due to (11), the potential energy of a proton p (which approximates an atom
in terms of mass) at the distance r (much greater than L) is given by

10−8cm

103l

(11)

φ =

∼

∼

As there are N
proton due to all the dipoles is given by

∼

1080 atoms in the universe, the net potential energy of a

In (13) we use the fact that the predominant eﬀect comes from the distant
atoms which are at a distance
We now use the well known Eddington formula,

r, the radius of the universe.

∼

If we introduce (14) in (13) we get, as the energy E of the proton under
consideration

Let us now consider the gravitational potential energy E′ of the proton p due
to all the other N atoms in the universe. This is given by

e2L
r2

Ne2L
r2

√N l

r

∼

E =

√N e2ω
r

E′ =

GMm
r

9

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

where m is the proton mass and M is the mass of the universe.
Comparing (15) and (16), not only is E equal to E′, but remembering that
M = Nm, we get back in this ﬁne tuned model, famous electromagnetism-
gravitation ratio,

e2
Gm2 = √N
Here again, the Machian role of all the N particles of the universe, comes
into play.
It may be mentioned that Einstein himself was much inﬂuenced by Mach’s
ideas in his formulation of the General Theory, which however did not in any
way validate it [18].

References

[1] Narlikar, J.V., ”Introduction to Cosmology”, Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, 1993, p.57.

[2] Sidharth, B.G., ”The Counterintuitive Universe” to appear in ”A Cen-

tury of Ideas”, Springer, New York, 2006.

[3] Singh, V., and Lal, S., Eds., ”Schrodinger Centenary Surveys in

Physics”, Indore, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1988.

[4] Wheeler, J.A., and Feynman, R.P., Rev.Mod.Phys., 17, 157, 1945.

[5] Rohrlich, F., “Classical Charged Particles”, Addison-Wesley, Reading,

Mass., 1965, pp.145ﬀ.

[6] Hoyle, F., and Narlikar, “Action at a Distance in Physics and Cosmol-

ogy”, W.H. Freeman, New York, 1974, pp.12-18.

[7] Hoyle, F., and Narlikar, J.V., “Lectures on Cosmology and Action at a

Distance Electrodynamics”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996.

[8] Chubykalo, A., and Smirnov-Rueda, R., Phys.Rev.E 53 (5), 5373, 1996.

[9] Chubykalo, A., and Smirnov-Rueda, R., Phys.Rev.E 57 (3), 1, 1998.

[10] Sidharth, B.G., Found.Phys.Lett. 19 (1), 2006, pp.87ﬀ.

10

[11] Sidharth, B.G., Found.Phys.Lett. 19 (4), 2006.

[12] Sidharth, B.G.,

in Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern
Physics: “Pro and Contra”, Eds., A.E. Chubykalo et al., Nova Science
Publishing, New York, 1999.

[13] Dirac, P.A.M., ”The Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, Clarendon

Press, Oxford, 1958, pp.4ﬀ, pp.253ﬀ.

[14] Weinberg, S., ”Gravitation and Cosmology”, John Wiley & Sons, New

York, 1972, p.61ﬀ.

[15] B.G. Sidharth, ”A Brief Note on a New Cosmic ”Coincidence” and New

Physics”, to appear in Foundation of Physics Letters.

[16] Mersini-Houghton, L., Mod.Phys.Lett.A., Vol.21, No.1, (2006), 1-21.

[17] Sidharth, B.G., physics/0608222.

[18] Penrose, R., ”The Road to Reality”, Vantage Books, London, 2004,

p.753.

11

