6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
2
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contribution to the Proceedings of IARD 2006, to appear in Foundations of Physics
Preliminary version dated September 23, 2006, revised October 25, 2006

NEUTRINO AND/OR ETHERINO?
Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research
P. O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
ibr@gte.net, http://www.i-b-r.org, http://www.neutronstructure.org

Abstract

By using a language as accessible to a broad audience as possible, in this paper we review
serious insuﬃciencies of the hypothesis that neutrinos and quarks are physical particles in our
spacetime; we introduce, apparently for the ﬁrst time, the hypothesis that the energy and spin
needed for the synthesis of the neutron inside stars originate either from the environment or
from the ether conceived as a universal medium with very high energy density via an entity
here called etherino, denoted with the letter ”a” (from the Latin aether), carrying mass and
charge 0, spin 1/2 and 0.78M eV energy according to the synthesis p+ +a+e− → n; we identiﬁes
compatibility p+ +a+e− → n → p+ +e− + ¯ν and incompatibility p+ +a+e− → n → p+ +e− + ¯a
of the neutrino and etherino hypotheses, the latter representing the possible return of missing
features to the ether without being necessarily in conﬂict with neutrino experiments; we review
the new structure model of the neutron and hadrons at large with massive physical constituents
produced free in the spontaneous decays as permitted by the covering hadronic mechanics; we
show its compatibility with the standard model when interpreted as only providing the ﬁnal
Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of hadrons; we point out basically new clean energies predicted
by the new model; we indicate new experiments conﬁrming the above studies although in a
preliminary form; and we conclude with the proposal of new resolutory experiments suggested
for the much needed search of new clean energies.

PACS 13.35.Hb, 14.60.Lm, 14.20.Dh

1. Historical notes. In 1920, Rutherford [1a] submitted the hypothesis that hydrogen atoms
in the core of stars are compressed into new particles having the size of the proton that he called
neutrons, according to the synthesis

p+ + e− → n.

The existence of the neutron was conﬁrmed in 1932 by Chadwick [1b]. However, Pauli [1c] noted
that the spin 1/2 of the neutron cannot be represented via a quantum state of two particles each
having spin 1/2, and conjectured the possible emission of a new neutral massless particle with spin
1/2. Fermi [1d] adopted Pauli’s conjecture, coined the name neutrino (meaning in Italian “little
neutron”) with symbol ν for the particle and ¯ν for the antiparticle, and developed the theory of
weak interactions according to which the synthesis of the neutron is given by

with inverse reaction, the spontaneous decay of the neutron,

p+ + e− → n + ν,

n → p+ + e− + ¯ν.

1

(1.1)

(1.2)

(1.3)

The above hypothesis was more recently incorporated into the so-called standard model (see, e.g.,
[1e]) in which the original neutrino was extended to three diﬀerent particles, the electron, muon
and tau neutrinos and their anti[particles; neutrinos were then assumed to have masses; then to
have diﬀerent masses; and then to ”oscillate” (namely, to change ”ﬂavor” or transform one type
into the other).

2. Insuﬃciencies of neutrino hypothesis. Despite historical advances, the neutrino hy-
pothesis has remained aﬄicted by a number of basic, although generally unspoken insuﬃciencies
or sheer inconsistencies, that can be summarized as follows:

1) According to the standard model, a neutral particle carrying mass and energy in our space-
time is predicted to cross very large hyperdense media, such as those inside stars, without any
collision. Such a view is outside scientiﬁc reason because already questionable when the neutrinos
were assumed to be massless. The recent assumption that neutrinos have mass has rendered the
view beyond the limit of plausibility because a massive particle carrying energy in our spacetime
simply cannot propagate within hyperdense media inside large collections of hadrons without any
collision.

Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of the dependence of the kinetic energy of the electron in nuclear
beta decays on the direction of emission due to the strongly attractive Coulomb interaction between
the positively charged nucleus and the negatively charged electron.

2) The fundamental reaction for the production of the (electron) neutrino, Eq. (1.2), violates
the principle of conservation of the energy, unless the proton and the electron have kinetic energy
of at least 0.78M eV , in which case there is no energy available for the neutrino. In fact, the sum of
the rest energies of the proton and the electron (938.78M eV ) is 0.78M eV smaller than the neutron
rest energy (939.56M eV ).

3) As reported in nuclear physics textbooks, the energy measured as being carried by the
electron in beta decays is a bell-shaped curve with a maximum value of the order of 0.782M eV
(depending on nuclear data). The ”missing energy” has been assumed throughout the 20-th century
to be carried by the hypothetical neutrino. However, in view of the strongly attractive Coulomb
interactions between the nucleus and the electron, explicit calculations show that the energy carried
by the electron depends on the direction of emission, with maximal value for radial emission and
minimal value for tangential emission (Figure 1). In this case, the ”missing energy” is absorbed by
the nucleus, again, without any energy left for the neutrino.

4) The claims of ”experimental detection” of neutrinos are perhaps more controversial than the

2

Figure 2: A schematic illustration of the lack of established validity of the conventional (quantum)
scattering theory in the elaboration of neutrino experiments due to the abstraction of all particles as
massive points (top view), while particles used in neutrino experiments are extended with hyperdense
medium resulting in deep overlapping and mutual penetrations (bottom view). The latter conditions
require a broader scattering theory including nonlocal, nonlinear and non-Hamiltonian eﬀects under
which the claimed experimental results are not expected to remain valid.

theoretical aspects because of numerous reasons, such as: the lack of established validity of the
scattering theory (se Figure 2); the elaboration of the data via a theory centrally dependent on the
neutrino hypotheses; the presence in recent ”neutrino detectors” of radioactive sources that could
themselves account for the extremely few events over an enormous number of total events; the lack
of uniqueness of the neutrino interpretation of experimental data due to the existence of alternative
interpretations without the neutrino hypothesis; and other aspects.

5) Numerous additional insuﬃciencies exist, such as: the absence of well identiﬁed physical
diﬀerentiations between the electron, muon and tau neutrino; the theory contains an excessive
number of parameters essentially capable to achiever any desired ﬁt; the probability of the synthesis
of the neutron according to Eq. (1.2) is virtually null when the proton and the electron have the
needed threshold energy of 0.78M eV due to their very small scattering cross section (10−20 barns)
at the indicated energy; particles are characterized by positive energies and antiparticles by negative
energies, with the consequential lack of plausibility of the conjugation from neutrino to antineutrino
in the transition from Eq. (1.2) to (1.3) since the same conjugation does not exist for the proton
and the electron; and other insuﬃciencies, a compatibility condition that would require the reaction
n → p+ + e− + ν (rather than ¯ν).

For additional studies on the insuﬃciency os sheer inconsistencies of the neutrino hypothesis,
one may consult Bagge [2a] and Franklin [2b] for an alternative theories without the neutrino hy-
pothesis; Wilhelm [2c] for additional problematic aspects; Moessbauer [2d] for problems in neutrino
oscillations; Fanchi [2e] for serious biases in ”neutrino experiments”; and literature quoted therein.
On historical grounds it should be noted that the original calculations in beta decays were done
in the 1940s via the abstraction of nuclei as massive points because mandated by the axioms of
quantum mechanics, in which case indeed there is no dependence of the electron-nucleus Coulomb
interaction on the direction of beta emission, and the neutrino hypothesis becomes necessary.

However, the abstraction of nuclei as massive points nowadays implies a violation of scientiﬁc

3

ethics and accountability since nuclei are very large objects for particle standards. The represen-
tation of nuclei as they actually are in the physical reality then requires the abandonment of the
neutrino conjectures in favor of more adequate vistas.

3. Insuﬃciencies of quark hypothesis. Some of the fundamental, yet generally unspoken
insuﬃciencies or sheer inconsistencies of the assumption that quarks are physical particles in our
spacetime are the following:

1) According to the standard model [5], at the time of the synthesis of the neutron according
to Eq. (1.2), the proton and the electron literally ”disappear” from the universe to be replaced
by hypothetical quarks as neutron constituents. Moreover, at the time of the neutron spontaneous
decay, Eq.
(1.3), the proton and the electron literally ”reappear” again. This view is beyond
scientiﬁc reason, because the proton and the electron are the only permanently stable massive
particles clearly established so far and, as such, they simply cannot ”disappear” and then ”reappear”
because so desired by quark supporters. The only plausible hypothesis under Eqs. (1.2) and (1.3)
is that the proton and the electron are actual physical constituents of the neutron as originally
conjectured by Rutherford, although the latter view requires the adaptation of the theory to physical
reality, rather than the opposite attitude implemented by quark theories.

2) When interpreted as physical particles in our spacetime, quarks cannot experience any gravity.
As clearly stated by Albert Einstein in his limpid writings, gravity can only be deﬁned in spacetime,
while quarks can only be deﬁned in the mathematical, internal, complex valued unitary space with
no possible connection to our spacetime (because prohibited by the O’Rafearthaigh’s theorem).
Consequently, physicists who support the hypothesis that quarks are the physical constituents of
protons and neutrons, thus of all nuclei, should see their body levitate due to the absence of gravity.
3) When, again, interpreted as physical particles in our spacetime, quarks cannot have any
inertia. In fact, inertia can only be rigorously admitted for the eigenvalues of the second order
Casimir invariant of the Poincar´e symmetry, while quarks cannot be deﬁned via such a basic
spacetime symmetry, as expected to be known by experts to qualify as such. Consequently, ”quark
masses” are purely mathematical parameters deprived of technical characterization as masses in
our spacetime.

4) Even assuming that, with unknown scientiﬁc manipulations, the above inconsistencies are
resolved, it is known by experts that quark theories have failed to achieve a representation of all
characteristics of hadrons, with catastrophic insuﬃciencies in the representation of spin, magnetic
moment, mean lives, charge radii and other basic features of hadrons.

5) It is also known by experts that the application of quark conjectures to the structure of nuclei
has multiplied the controversies, while resolving none of them. As an example, the assumption that
quarks are the constituents of protons and neutrons in nuclei has failed to achieve a representation
of the main characteristics of the simplest possible nucleus, the deuteron. In fact, quark conjectures
are unable to represent the spin 1 of the deuteron (since they predict spin zero in the ground state
of two particles each having spin 1
2 ), they are unable to represent the anomalous magnetic moment
of the deuteron despite all possible relativistic corrections attempted for decades (because the
presumed quark orbits are too small to ﬁt data following polarizations or deformations), they are
unable to represent the stability of the neujtron when a deuteron constituent, they are unable to
represent the charge radius of the deuteron, and when passing to larger nuclei, such as the zirconium,
the catastrophic inconsistencies of quark conjectures can only be deﬁned as being embarrassing.

For additional references, one may consult Ref. [3a] on historical reasons preventing quarks to
[3b] on a technical treatment of the impossibility for

be physical particles in our spacetime; Ref.

4

quarks to have gravity or inertia; Ref.
section; and Refs. [7,9g,9h] for general studies.

[3c] on a more detailed presentation on the topic of this

The position adopted by the author since the birth of quark theories (see the memoir [3a] of
1981), that appears to be even more valid nowadays, is that the unitary, Mendeleev-type, SU(3)-
color classiﬁcation of particles into families has a ﬁnal character. Quarks are purely mathematical
representation of a purely mathematical internal symmetry solely deﬁnable on a purely mathemati-
cal, complex-valued unitary space. As such, the use of quarks is indeed necessary for the elaboration
of the theory, as historically suggested by the originator Murray Gell-Mann, but quarks are not
physical particles in our spacetime.

Consequently, the identiﬁcation of the hadronic constituents with physical particles truly exist-
ing in our spacetime is more open than ever and carries ever increasing societal implications since
the assumption that quarks are physical constituents of hadrons prevents due scientiﬁc process in
the search for new clean energies so much needed by mankind, as illustrated later on.

Needless to say, all alternative structure models, including those without neutrino and quark
conjectures must achieve full compatibility with said unitary models of classiﬁcation, in essentially
the same way according to which quantum structures of atoms achieved full compatibility with
their Mendeleev classiﬁcation.

On historical grounds, the classiﬁcation of nuclei, atoms and molecules required two diﬀerent
models, one for the classiﬁcation and a separate one for the structure of the individual element of
a given family. Quark theories depart from this historical teaching because of their conception of
representing with one single theory both the classiﬁcation and the structure of hadrons.

The view advocated in this paper is that, quite likely, history will repeat itself. The transition
from the Mendeleev classiﬁcation of atoms to the atomic structure required a basically new theory,
quantum mechanics. Similarly, the transition from the Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of hadrons
to the structure of individual hadrons will require a broadening of the basic theory, this time
a generalization of quantum mechanics due tg the truly dramatic diﬀerences of the dynamics of
particles moving in vacuum, as in the atomic structure, to the dynamics of particles moving within
hyperdense media as in the hadronic structure.

4.
Inapplicability of quantum mechanics for the synthesis and structure of
hadrons. Pauli, Fermi, Schr¨odinger and other founders of quantum mechanics pointed out that
synthesis of the neutron according to Rutherford is impossible for the following reasons:

1) As indicated in Section 1, quantum mechanics cannot represent the 1

2 spin of the neutron
according to Rutherford’s conception because the total angular momentum of a ground state of a
two particles with spin 1/2, such as the proton and the electron, must be 0.

2) The representation of synthesis (1.1) via quantum mechanics is impossible because it would
require a ”positive” binding-like energy, in violation of basic quantum laws requiring that all binding
energies must be negative, as fully established for nuclei, atoms and molecules. This is due to the
fact indicated in Section 2 that the sum of the mass of the proton and of the electron,

mp + me = 938.272M ev + 0.511M eV = 938.783M eV,

(4.1)

is smaller than the mass of the neutron, mn = 939.565M eV , with ”positive” mass defect

mn − (mp + me) = 939.565 − (938.272 + 0.511)M eV = 0.782M eV.

(4.2)

Under these conditions all quantum equations become physically inconsistent in the sense that
mathematical solutions are indeed admitted, but the indicial equation of Schr¨odinger’s equation

5

no longer admits the representation of the total energy and other physical quantities with real
numbers (readers seriously interested in the synthesis of hadrons are strongly suggested to attempt
the solution of any quantum bound state in which the conventional negative binding energy is
turned into a positive value).

3) Via the use of the magnetic moment of the proton µp = 2.792µN and of the electron µe =

1.001µB , it is impossible to reach the magnetic moment of the neutron µn = −1.913µN .

4) When the neutron is interpreted as a bound state of one proton and one electron, it is
impossible to reach the neutron meanlife τn = 918sec that is quite large for particle standards,
since quantum mechanics would predict the expulsion of the electron in nanoseconds.

5) There is no possibility for quantum ,mechanics to represent the neutron charge radius of
about 1F = 10−13cm since the smallest predicted radius is that of the hydrogen atom of 10−8cm,
namely 5,000 times bigger than that of the neutron.

Figure 3: A schematic view of the transformation of linear into angular motion and vice-versa that
could play a crucial role in the synthesis of the neutron and its stimulated decay. Note that such
a transformation is outside the capabilities of the Poincar´e symmetry due to its sole validity for
Keplerian systems, that is, for massive points orbiting around a heavier nucleus without collisions.
By comparison, the transformation of this ﬁgure requires the presence of subsidiary constraints
altering the conservation laws, thus altering the very generator of the applicable symmetry.

It should be noted that the above insuﬃciencies of quantum mechanics generally apply for the

synthesis of all hadrons, beginning with that for the neutral pion

e+ + e− → πo,

(4.3)

where the ”positive binding energy” is now of 133.95M eV .

The view advocated in this paper is that, rather than denying the synthesis of hadrons just
because not permitted by quantum mechanics, a covering mechanics permitting quantitative studies
of said synthesis should be built.

The most visible evidence indicating the lack of exact character of quantum mechanics for the
synthesis and structure of hadrons is that, unlike atoms, hadrons do not have nuclei. Consequently,
a mechanics that is exact for the atomic structure cannot be exact for the hadronic structure due
to the lack of a Keplerian structure that, in turn, requires the breaking of the fundamental Galilean
and Loretzian symmetries.

6

Quantum mechanics was conceived and constructed for the representation of the trajectories
of electrons moving in vacuum in atomic orbits (this is the so-called exterior dynamical problems),
in which case the theory received historical veriﬁcations. The same mechanics cannot possibly
be exact for the description of the dramatically diﬀerent physical conditions of the same electron
moving within the hyperdense medium inside a proton (this is the so-cal;led interior dynamical
problems). Such an assumption literally implies the belief in the perpetual motion within a physical
medium since it implies that an electron must orbit in the core of a star with a conserved angular
momentum, as requested by the quantum axiom of the rotational symmetry and angular momentum
conservation law.

In the ﬁnal analysis it has been established by scientiﬁc history that the validity of any given
theory within given conditions is set by the results. Quantum mechanics has represented all features
of the hydrogen atom in a majestic way and, therefore, the theory is exactly valid for the indicated
conditions.

By contrast, when extended to the structure of particles, quantum mechanics has only pro-
duced an interlocked chain of individually implausible and unveriﬁable conjectures on neutrinos
and quarks while having dramatic insuﬃciencies in the representation of particle data, besides
failing to achieve ﬁnal results in various other branches of sciences, such as in nuclear physics,
chemistry and astrophysics.

After all these controversies protracted for such a long period of time, there comes a time in
which the serious conduction of serious science requires a re-examination of the foundational theory.

5. The etherino hypothesis. As clearly shown by the preceding analysis, the synthesis of the
neutron according to Rutherford [1a] not only misses spin 1
2 as historically pointed out by Pauli
[1c] and Fermi [1d], but also misses 0.78M eV energy. Moreover, these quantities must be acquired
by the proton and electron for the synthesis to exist, rather than being ”released” as in Eq. (1.2).
Consequently, a central open problem in the synthesis of the neutron is the identiﬁcation of
”were” these quantities originate. The ﬁrst evident answer is that the missing quantities originate
from the environment in the interior of stars in which the neutron is synthesized. In fact, there is
no doubt that the interior of stars can indeed supply spin 1

2 and 0.78M eV energy.

However, due to the fundamental character of the neutron synthesis for the entire universe,
serious studies should not be solely restricted to the most obvious possibility, and should consider
instead all plausible alternatives no matter how speculative they may appear at this time.

Along the latter lines, we recall the hypothesis of the continuous creation of matter in the
universe that has been voiced repeatedly during the 20-th century. In this paper we point out that
the best possible mechanism for continuous creation is precisely the synthesis of neutrons inside
stars under the assumption that the missing energy and spin originates from the ether conceived
as a universal medium with an extremely large energy density.

Far from being farfetched, the hypothesis is supported by predictably insuﬃcient, yet signiﬁcant
evidence, such as the fact that stars initiate their lives as being solely composed of hydrogen atoms
that miss the energy and spin needed for the ﬁrst synthesis, that of the neutron, after which all
conventional nuclear syntheses follow.

Additionally, explicit calculations indicate that the immense energy needed for a supernova ex-
plosion simply cannot be explained via the sole use of conventional nuclear syntheses, thus suggest-
ing again the possible existence of a mechanism extracting energy from the ether and transforming
it into a form existing in our spacetime.

It is important to point out that the notion of ether as a universal substratum appears to be

7

necessary not only for the characterization and propagation of electromagnetic waves, but also
for the characterization and propagation of all elementary particles and, therefore, for all matter
existing in the universe.

The need for a universal medium for the characterization and propagation of electromagnetic
“waves” is so strong to require no study here, e.g., for waves with 1m wavelength for which the
reduction to photons for the purpose of eliminating the ether loses credibility.

The same notion of ether appears necessary also for the characterization and propagation of the
electron, due to its structure as a ”pure oscillation” of the ether, namely, an oscillation of one of its
points without any oscillating mass as conventionally understood. Similar structures are expected
for all other truly elementary particles.

It should be indicate that the above conception implies that, contrary to our sensory perception,
matter is totally empty and space is totally full, as suggested by the author since his high school
studies [4a]. This conception is necessary to avoid the “ethereal wind” [4b] that delayed studies on
the ether for at least one century, since motion of matter would merely require the transfer of the
characteristic oscillations from given points of the ether to others. Mass is then characterized by
the known equivalence of the energy of the characteristic oscillations, and inertia is the resistance
provided by the ether against changes of motion. For additional recent views on the ether we refer
interested readers to Ref. [4c].

In order to conduct quantitative studies of the above alternatives,

in this note we submit
the hypothesis, apparently for the ﬁrst time, that the synthesis of the neutron from protons and
electrons occurs via the absorption either from the environment inside stars or from the ether of an
entity, here called etherino (meaning in Italian ”little ether”) and indicated with the symbol ”a”
(from the latin aether) having mass and charge 0, spin 1/2 and a minimum of 0.78M eV energy.
We reach in this way the following

Etherino hypothesis on the neutron synthesis

p+ + an + e− → n,

(5.1)

(5.2)

where an denotes the neutron etherino (see below for other cases), and the energy 0.78M eV is as-
sumed to be ”minimal” because of the conventional ”negative” binding energy due to the attractive
Coulomb interactions between the proton and the electron at short distances.

The apparent necessity of the etherino hypothesis is due to the fact that the use of an antineu-

trino in lieu of the etherino

p+ + ˆν + e− → n,

would have no known physical value for various reasons, such as: 1) the proton and/or the electron
cannot possibly absorb 0.78M eV energy and spin 1
2 from the antineutrino due to the virtually null
value of their cross section; 2) being an antiparticle, the antineutrino has to carry a negative energy
[7c], while the synthesis of the neutron requires a positive energy; and others.

In the author view, a compelling aspect supporting the etherino hypothesis is the fact that
the synthesis of the neutron has the highest probability when the proton and the electron are at
relative rest, while the same probability becomes essentially null when the proton and the electron
have the (relative) missing energy of 0.78M eV since in that case their cross section becomes very
small (about 10−20barns).

Another argument supporting the etherino over the neutrino hypothesis is that the former
permits quantitative studies on the synthesis of the neutron as we shall see in subsequent sections,
while the latter provides none, as shown in the preceding section.

8

Still another supporting argument is that the etherino hypothesis eliminates the implausible
belief that massive particles carrying energy in our spacetime can traverse enormous hyperdense
media without collisions since the corresponding etherino event could occur in the ether as a
universal substratum, without any propagation of mass and energy in our spacetime.

In order to prevent the invention of additional hypothetical particles over an already excessive
number of undetected particles existing in contemporary physics, the author would like to stress
that the etherino is not intended to be a conventional particle existing in our spacetime, but an entity
representing the transfer of the missing quantities from the environment or the ether to the neutron.
The lack of characterization as a conventional physical particle will be made mathematically clear
in the next sections.

It is evident that the etherino hypothesis requires a reinspection of the spontaneous decay of the
neutron. To conduct a true scientiﬁc analysis, rather than adopt a scientiﬁc religion, it is necessary
to identify all plausible alternatives, and then reach a ﬁnal selections via experiments. We reach in
this way the following three possible alternatives:
First hypothesis on the neutron decay:

p+ + an + e− → n → p+ + e− + ˆν,

namely, the etherino hypothesis for the neutron ”synthesis” can indeed be fully compatible with
the neutrino hypothesis for the neutron ”decay”;

Second hypothesis on the neutron decay:

namely, we have the return of the missing energy and spin to the environment or the ether; and

Third hypothesis on the neutron decay:

p+ + an + e− → n → p+ + e− + an,

p+ + an + e− → n → p+ + e−,

namely, no neutrino or etherino is emitted. Note that the latter case is strictly prohibited by
quantum mechanics because of known conservation laws and related symmetries. However, the
latter case should be not dismissed superﬁcially because it is indeed admitted by the covering
hadronic mechanics via the conversion of the orbital into the kinetic motion as in Fig. 3.

The synthesis of the antineutron in the interior of antimatter stars is evidently given by

where ¯a¯n is the antineutron antietherino, namely an entity carrying negative energy as apparently
necessary for antimatter [7c]. This would imply that the ether is constituted by a superposition of
very large but equal densities of positive and negative energies existing in diﬀerent yet coexisting
spacetimes, a concept with even deeper cosmological and epistemological implications since their
total null value would avoid discontinuities at creation.

For the synthesis of the neutral pion we have the hypothesis

where aπo is the πo-etherino, namely, an entity carrying mass, charge and spin 0 and minimal
energy of 133.95M eV transferred from the ether to our spacetime. Additional forms of etherino
can be formulated depending on the synthesis at hand.

p− + ¯a¯n + e+ → ¯n.

e+ + aπo + e− → πo,

9

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

The understanding of synthesis (5.7) requires advanced knowledge of modern classical and
operator theories of antimatter (see monograph [7c]) because aπo must be iso-self-dual, namely, it
must coincide with its antiparticle as it is the case for the πo. In more understandable terms, aπo
represents an equal amount of positive and negative energy, since only the former (latter) can be
acquired by the electron (positron), the sign of the total energy for isoselfdual states being that of
the observer [loc. cit.].

Intriguingly, the etherino hypothesis for the neutron decay, Eq.

(5.4), is not necessarily in
conﬂict with available data on neutrino experiments, because it could provide their mere re-
interpretation as a new form of communication through the ether. Moreover, in the event the
propagation of the latter event results to be longitudinal as expected, it could be much faster than
the speed of conventional (transversal) electromagnetic waves.

In the ﬁnal analysis, the reader should not forget that, when inspected at interstellar or inter-
galactic distances, communications via electromagnetic waves should be compared to the commu-
nications by the Indians with smoke signals. The search for basically new communications much
faster than those via electromagnetic waves is then mandatory for serious astrophysical advances.
In turn, such a search can be best done via longitudinal signals propagating through the ether.
Then, the possibility of new communications being triggered by the etherino reinterpretation of
the neutrino should not be aprioristically dismissed without serious study.

6. Rudiments of the covering hadronic mechanics. When at the Department of Math-
ematics of Harvard University in the late 1970s, R. M. Santilli [5a] proposed the construction of
a new broader realization of the axioms of quantum mechanics under the name of hadronic me-
chanics that was intended for the solution of the insuﬃciencies of conventional theories outlined in
the preceding sections. The name ”hadronic ” mechanics” was selected to emphasize the primary
applicability of the new mechanics at the range of the strong interactions, since the validity of
quantum mechanics for bigger distances was assumed a priori. .

The central problem was to identify a broadening-generalization of quantum mechanics in such
a way to represent linear, local and potential interactions, as well as additional, contact, nonlinear,
nonlocal-integral and nonpotential interactions, as expected in the neutron synthesis. as well as in
deep mutual penetration and overlapping of hadrons (Figure 2).

Since the Hamiltonian can only represent conventional local-potential interactions, the above
condition requested the identiﬁcation of a new quantity capable of representing interactions that,
by conception, are outside the capability of a Hamiltonian. Another necessary condition was the
exiting from the class of equivalence of quantum mechanics, as a consequence of which the broader
theory had to be nonunitary, namely, its time evolution had to violate the unitarity condition. The
third and most insidious condition was the time invariance, namely, the broader mechanics had to
predict the same numerical values under the same conditions at diﬀerent times.

It was evident that a solution verifying the above conditions required new mathematics, e.g.
new numbers, new spaces, new geometries, new symmetries, etc. A detailed search in advanced
mathematical libraries of the Cantabridgean area revealed that the needed new mathematics simply
did not exist and, therefore, had to be built.

Following a number of (unpublished) trials and errors, Santilli [5a] proposed the solution con-
sisting in the representation of contact, nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential interactions via a
generalization (called lifting) of the basic unit +1 of quantum mechanics into a function, a matrix
or an operator ˆI that is positive-deﬁnite like +1, but otherwise has an arbitrary functional depen-
dence on all needed quantities, such as time t, coordinates r, momenta p, density µ, frequency ω,

10

wavefunctions ψ, their derivatives ∂ψ, etc.

+1 > 0 → ˆI(t, r, p, µ.ω, ψ.∂ψ, ...) = ˆI † = 1/ ˆT > 0,

(6.1)

while jointly lifting the conventional associative product × between two generic quantities A, B
(numbers, vector ﬁelds, matrices, operators, etc.) into the form admitting ˆI, and no longer +1, as
the correct left and right unit

A × B → A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B,

1 × A = A × 1 = A → ˆI ˆ×A = A ˆ× ˆI = A,

(6.2a)

(6.2b)

for all elements A, B of the set considered.

The selection of the basic unit resulted to be unique for the veriﬁcation of the above three
conditions. As an illustration, whether generalized or not, the unit is the basic invariant of any
theory. The representation of non-Hamiltonian interactions with the basic unit permitted the
crucial by-passing of the theorems of catastrophic inconsistencies of nonunitary theories (for a
[7a]). Since the unit is the ultimate pillar
review one may inspect Section 5, Chapter 1 of Ref.
of all mathematical and physical formulations, liftings (6.1) and (6.2) requested a corresponding,
compatible lifting of the totality of the mathematical and physical formulations used by quantum
mechanics, resulting indeed into new numbers, new ﬁelds, new spaces, new algebras, new geometries,
new symmetries, etc, [5b,5c]. Mathematical maturity in the formulation of the new numbers was
reached only in memoir [5b] of 1993 and general mathematical maturity was reached in memoir
[5c] of 1996. Physical maturity was then quickly achieved in papers [5d-5f].

The fundamental dynamical equations of hadronic mechanics were submitted by Santilli in the
original proposal [5a], are today called Heisenberg-Santilli isoequations, and can be written in the
ﬁnite form

ˆH ˆ×ˆt ˆ×ˆi) ˆ× ˆA(ˆ0) ˆ×(ˆe−ˆi ˆ×ˆt ˆ× ˆH) =
ˆA(ˆt) = ˆU (ˆt) ˆ× ˆA(ˆ0) ˆ× ˆU †(ˆt) = (ˆe
= [(eH× ˆT ×t×i) × ˆI] × ˆT × A(0) × ˆT × [ ˆI × (e−i×t× ˆT ×H)] =
(eH× ˆT ×t×i) × ˆA(ˆ0) × (e−i×t× ˆT ×H),
ˆU † = ˆe−i×t××H , ˆU ˆ× ˆU † = ˆU ˆ× ˆU = ˆI 6= 1,

ˆU = ˆei×H×t,

[H. ˆT ] 6= 0,

(6.3a)

(6.3b)

and inﬁnitesimal form

ˆi ˆ×

ˆd ˆA
ˆdˆt

d ˆA
dˆt

= i × ˆIt ×

= [ ˆAˆ, ˆH] = ˆA ˆ× ˆH ˆ− ˆH ˆ× ˆA =

= ˆA × ˆT (ˆt, ˆr, ˆp, ˆψ, ˆ∂ ˆψ, ...) × ˆH − ˆH × ˆT (ˆt, ˆr, ˆp, ˆψ, ˆ∂ ˆψ, ...) × ˆA,

(6.4)

where: Eq. (6.3b) represent the crucial nonunitarity-isounitary property, namely, the violation of
unitarity on conventional Hilbert spaces over a ﬁeld, and its reconstruction on iso-Hilbert spaces
over isoﬁelds with inner product < ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >; we have used in Eqs. (6.3b) the notion of isoexpo-
nentiation, see Eq. (6.12d); all quantities with a ”hat” are formulated on isospaces over isoﬁelds
with isocomplex numbers ˆc = c × ˆI, c ∈ C; and one should note the isodiﬀerential calculus with
expressions of the type ˆd/ ˆdˆt = ˆIt × d/dˆt ﬁrst achieved in memoir [5c].

The equivalent lifting of Schr¨odinger’s equation was suggested by Santilli and other authors
over conventional ﬁelds, thus violating the condition of time invariance (see [7a] for historical notes

11

(6.5a)

(6.5b)

(6.6)

(6.7)

and quotations). The ﬁnal version was reached by Santilli in memoir [5c] following the construction
of the isodiﬀerential calculus and can be written

ˆi ˆ×

| ˆψ >= i × ˆIt ×

| ˆψ >= ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >=

∂
∂ˆt

ˆ∂
ˆ∂ˆt

= ˆH(ˆt, ˆr, ˆp) × ˆT (ˆr, ˆp, ˆψ, ˆ∂ ˆψ, ....) × | ˆψ >= ˆE ˆ×| ˆψ >= E × | ˆψ >,

ˆpk ˆ×| ˆψ >= −ˆi ˆ× ˆ∂k| ˆψ >= −i × ˆI i

k × ∂i| ˆψ >,

with isocanonical commutation rules

[ˆriˆ,ˆpj] = ˆi ˆ×ˆδi

j = i × δi

j × ˆI, [ˆri, ˆrj] = [ˆpi, ˆpj] = 0.

isoexpectation values

and basic properties

< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆI ˆ×| ˆψ >
< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >

< ˆA >=

< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆA ˆ×| ˆψ >
< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >

= ˆI, ˆI ˆ×| ˆψ >= | ˆψ >,

ˆI ˆn = ˆI ˆ× ˆI ˆ×... ˆI ≡ ˆI,

ˆ1/2 = ˆI,
ˆI

(6.8)

the latter conﬁrming that ˆI is indeed the isounit of hadronic mechanics (where the isoquotient
ˆ/ = / × ˆI has been tacitly used [5c]).

A few comments are now in order. In honor of Einstein’s vision on the lack of completion of
quantum mechanics, Santilli submitted the original Eqs. (6.1)-(6.8) under the name of isotopies,
a word used in the Greek meaning of ”preserving the original axioms.” In fact, ˆI preserves all
topological properties of +1, A ˆ×B is as associative as the conventional product A × B and the
preservation of the original axioms holds at all subsequent levels to such an extent that, in the
event any original axiom is not preserved, the lifting is not isotopic. Nowadays, the resulting new
mathematics is known as Santilli isomathematics, ˆI is called Santilli’s isounit, A ˆ×B is called the
isoproduct, etc. (see the General Bibliography of Ref. [7a] and monograph [8]).

Note the identity of Hermiticity and its isotopic image, (< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆHˆ†) ˆ×| ˆψ >≡< ˆψ| ˆ×( ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >
), ˆHˆ† ≡ ˆH †, thus implying that all quantities that are observable for quantum mechanics re-
main observable for hadronic mechanics; the new mechanics is indeed isounitary, thus avoiding
the theorems of catastrophic inconsistencies of nonunitary theories; hadronic mechanics preserves
all conventional quantum laws, such as Heisenberg’s uncertainties, Pauli’s exclusion principle, etc.;
dynamical equations (6.3)-(6.8) have been proved to be ”directly universal” for all possible theories
with conserved total energy, that is, capable of representing all inﬁnitely possible systems of the
class admitted (universality) directly in the frame of the observer without the use of transformations
(direct universality); and numerous other features one can study in Refs. [6-8].

Also, one should note that hadronic mechanics veriﬁes the abstract axioms of quantum mechan-
ics to such an extent that the two mechanics coincide at the abstract, realization-free level. In reality,
hadronic mechanics provides an explicit and concrete realization of the theory of ”hidden variables”
λ, as one can see from the abstract identity of the isoeigenvalue equation ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >= ˆE ˆ×| ˆψ > and
the conventional equation H × |ψ >= E × |ψ >, by providing in this way an operator realization of
hidden variables λ = ˆT (for detailed studies on these aspects, including the inapplicability of Bell’s
inequality, see Ref. [6g].

12

We should also indicate that the birth of hadronic mechanics can be seen in the following new

isosymmetry, here expressed for a constant K for simplicity,

< ψ| × |ψ > ×1 ≡< ψ| × K −1 × |ψ > ×(K × 1) =< ψ| ˆ×|ψ > × ˆI.

(6.9)

The reader should not be surprised that the above isosymmetry remained unknown throughout
the 20-th century. In fact, its identiﬁcation required the prior discovery of new numbers, Santilli’s
isonumbers with arbitrary units [5b].

Compatibility between hadronic and quantum mechanics is reached via the condition

Limr>>10−13cm

ˆI ≡ 1,

(6.10)

under which hadronic mechanics recovers quantum mechanics uniquely and identically at all levels.
Therefore, hadronic mechanics coincides with quantum mechanics everywhere except in the interior
of the so-called hadronic horizon (a sphere of radius 1F = 10−13cm) in which the new mechanics
admits non-Hamiltonian realizations of strong interactions.

A simple method has been identiﬁed in Refs.
and all its underlying new mathematics consisting of:

[5d] for the construction of hadronic mechanics

(i) Representing all conventional interactions with a Hamiltonian H and all non-Hamiltonian

interactions and eﬀects with the isounit ˆI;

(ii) Identifying the latter interactions with a nonunitary transform

U × U † = ˆI 6= I

(iii) Subjecting the totality of conventional mathematical, physical and chemical quantities and all
their operations to the above nonunitary transform, resulting in expressions of the type

I → ˆI = U × I × U † = 1/ ˆT ,

a → ˆa = U × a × U † = a × ˆI,
a × b → U × (a × b) × U † =
= (U × a × U †) × (U × U †)−1 × (U × b × U †) = ˆa ˆ×ˆb,

eA → U × eA × U † = ˆI × e

ˆT × ˆA = (e

ˆA× ˆT ) × ˆI,

= [ ˆXiˆ, ˆXj] = U × (C k

[Xi, Xj ] → U × [XiXj] × U † =
oj × Xk) × U † = ˆC k
< ψ| × |ψ >→ U × < ψ| × |ψ > ×U † =
=< ψ| × U † × (U × U †)−1 × U × |ψ > ×(U × U †) =< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ > × ˆI,
H × |ψ >→ U × (H × |ψ >) = (U × H × U †) × (U × U †)−1 × (U × |ψ >) =
= ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >, etc.

ij ˆ× ˆXk == C k

ij × ˆXk,

(6.11)

(6.12a)

(6.12b)

(6.12c)

(6.12d)

(6.12e)

(6.12f )

(6.12g)

Note that catastrophic inconsistencies emerge in the event even one single quantity or oper-
ation is not subjected to isotopies.
In the absence of comprehensive liftings, we would have a
situation equivalent to the elaboration of the quantum spectral data of the hydrogen atom with
isomathematics, resulting of dramatic deviations from reality.

13

(6.14a)

(6.14b)

(6.15a)

(6.15b)

It is easy to see that the application of an additional nonunitary transform to expressions (6.12)

causes the lack of invariance, e.g.,

W × W † 6= I,

I → ˆI ′ = W × ˆI × W † 6= ˆI,

(6.13)

with consequential activation of the theorems of catastrophic inconsistencies [7a]. However, any
given nonunitary transform can be identically rewritten in the isounitary form,

W × W † = ˆI, W = ˆW × ˆT 1/2,

W × W † = ˆW ˆ× ˆW † = ˆW † ˆ× ˆW = ˆI,

under which hadronic mechanics is indeed isoinvariant

ˆI → ˆI ′ = ˆW ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆW † = ˆI,

ˆA ˆ× ˆB → ˆW ˆ×( ˆA ˆ× ˆB) ˆ× ˆW † =
= ( ˆW × ˆT × A × ˆT × ˆW †) × ( ˆT × ˆW †)−1 × ˆT × ( ˆW ×
× ˆT )−1 × ( ˆW × ˆT × ˆB × ˆT × ˆW †) =
= ˆA′ × ( ˆW † × ˆT × ˆW )−1 × ˆB′ = ˆA′ × ˆT × ˆB′ = ˆA′ ˆ× ˆB′, etc.

Note that the invariance is ensured by the numerically invariant values of the isounit and of the
isotopic element under nonunitary-isounitary transforms, ˆI → ˆI ′ ≡ ˆI, A ˆ×B → A′ ˆ×′b′ ≡ A′ ˆ×B′,
in a way fully equivalent to the invariance of quantum mechanics, as expected to be necessarily
the case due to the preservation of the abstract axioms under isotopies. The resolution of the
catastrophic inconsistencies for noninvariant theories is then consequential.

Hadronic mechanics has nowadays clear experimental veriﬁcations in particle physics, nuclear
physics, superconductivity, chemistry, astrophysics, cosmology and biology (see monographs [7,8,9h]
for details), which veriﬁcations cannot possibly be reviewed here. We merely mention for subsequent
need the following realization of the isounit for two particles in conditions of mutual penetration

ˆI = Diag.(n2

11, n2

12, n2

13, n2

14) × Diag.9n2

21, n2

22, n2

23, n2

24)×

×eN ×( ˆψ/ψ)×

d3r×ψ†

↓(r)×ψ↑(r)

(6.16)

R
where n2
ak, a = 1, 2, k = 1, 2, 3 are the semiaxes of the ellipsoids representing the two particles,
na4, a = 1, 2 represents their density, ˆψ represents the isowavefunction, ψ represents the conven-
tional wavefunction (that for ˆI = 1), and N is a positive constant. Note the clearly nonlinear,
nonlocal-integral and nonpotential character of the interactions represented by isounit (6.16).

The use f the above isounit permitted R. M. Santilli and D. Shillady to reach the ﬁrst exact and
invariant representation of the main characteristics of the hydrogen, water and other molecules, said
representation being achieved directly from ﬁrst axiomatic principles without ad hoc parameters,
or adulterations via the screenings of the Coulomb law under which the notion of quantum loses
any physical or mathematical meaning, thus rendering questionable the very name of ”quantum
chemistry” (see [7b] for details).
. In reality, due to its nonunitary structure, hadronic chemistry
contains as particular cases all inﬁnitely possible screenings of the Coulomb laws.

To understand this results, one should note that quantum mechanics is indeed exact for the
structure of one hydrogen atoms, but the same mechanics is no longer exact for two hydrogen

14

atoms combined into the hydrogen molecule due to the historical inability to represent the last
2% of the binding energy as well as due to other insuﬃciencies. The resolution of these insuﬃ-
ciencies was achieved by hadronic chemistry [7b] precisely via isounit (6.16), namely, via the time
invariant representation of the nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential interactions occurring in the
deep overlapping of the wavepackets of electrons in valence bonds. The new structure models of
hadrons presented below is essentially an applications in particle physics of these advances achieved
in chemistry.

7. The new structure model of hadrons with massive physical constituents pro-
duced free in spontaneous decays. In this section, we show that hadronic mechanics
permits the exact and (time) invariant representation of ”all” characteristics of the neutron
as a new bound state of a proton and an electron suitable for experimental veriﬁcations;
we extend the results to the new structure model of all hadrons with massive physical con-
stituents that can be produced free in the spontaneous decays; we show the compatibility of
these advances with the standard model when restricted to provide only the ﬁnal Mendeleev-
type classiﬁcation of hadrons; and we show the capability of hadronic mechanics as being
the sole theory capable of permitting quantitative representations of the possible interplay
between matter and the ether, since the latter requires ”positive” binding-like energies for
which quantum mechanics admits no physically consistent solutions. When the Schr¨odinger-
Santilli isoequation is worked out in detail for a bound state of two particles with spin in
condition of total mutual penetration, there is the emergence of a strongly repulsive inter-
action for triplet couplings (parallel spins), and a strongly attractive interaction for singlet
It should be indicated that, to prevent a prohibitive length,
coupling (antiparallel spin).
this section is primarily dedicated to the ”synthesis” of (unstyable) hadrons, while their
spontaneous decays is treated elsewhere.

The case of interest here is the lifting of the Schr¨odinger equation for a conventional two-
body bound state (such as the positronium or the hydrogen atom) via isounit (6.16) where
both particles are assumed to be spheres of radius 1F for simplicity. Hence, we consider
the simple lifting of quantum bound states characterized by the following Animalu-Santilli
isounit [7a]

¯h = 1 → ˆI = U × U † = ek×(ψ/ ˆψ)×

(7.1)
where ψ is the wavefunction of the quantum state and ˆψ is that of the corresponding hadronic
state.

↓(r)×ψ↑(r),

dr3×ψ†

R

In all cases of singlet coupling the lifting yields a strongly attractive Hulten potential
that, as well known, behaves at short distances like the Coulomb potential, thus absorbing
the latter, and resulting in the expressions achieved in the original proposal [5a] (for reviews
see [7a,7b,9g])

U × [

1
2µ1

 

p2
1 +

p2
2 − VCoul(r12)

× |ψi] × U † ≈

!

¯h2
2 × ¯m1

≈

−

 

× ∇2

1 −

× ∇2

2 − Vo ×

e−r12×b
1 − e−r12×b !

× | ˆψi,

(7.2)

where the original Coulomb interaction has been absorbed by the Hulten constant Vo and
the liftings mk → ¯mk, k = 1, 2, are new mass isorenormalizations, that is, renormalizations
caused by non-Hamiltonian (or non-Lagrangian) interactions.

1
2µ2
¯h2
2 × ¯m2

15

Needless to say, the isorenormalization of the mass implies that of the remaining intrinsic
characteristics of particles. This assures the departure from quantum mechanics as necessary
for the problem at hand.

Detailed studies have shown that the constituents of a bound state described by hadronic
mechanics are no longer irreducible representations of the conventional Poincar´e symmetry
(a necessary departure due to the lack of a Keplerian structure indicated earlier), and are
characterized instead by irreducible isorepresentations of the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry
[6]. For this reason they are called isoparticles and are denoted with conventional symbols
plus a ”hat”, such as ˆe±, ˆπ±, ˆp±, etc.

The mechanism permitting physically consistent equations for two-body bound states
requiring a ”positive” binding-like energy, as it is the case for the πo and the neutron, is
due to the mass isorenormalization since it achieves such an increased value under which the
Hulten binding energy can be negative.

In fact, for the case of the πo according to synthesis (7.2) the isorenormalized masses of
the individual isoelectrons become of the order of 70MeV , while for the case of the synthesis
of the neutron according to Eq. (7.2), the isonormalized mass of the electron (assuming that
the proton is at rest) acquires a value of the order of 1.39MeV , thus allowing a negative
binding energy in both cases.

Via the use of hadronic mechanics, the original proposal [5a] achieved already in 1978 a
new structure model of πo meson as a compressed positronium, thus identifying the physical
constituents with ordinary electron and positrons although in an altered state caused by their
condition of total mutual penetration. This permitted the numerical, exact and invariant
representation of all characteristics of the πo via the following single structural equation

U ×Hpositr ×U † ≈

¯h2
2 × ¯m1

−

 

× ∇2

1 −

¯h2
2 × ¯m2

× ∇2

2 − VHult ×

e−r12×b
1 − e−r12×b !

×| ˆψi = E ×| ˆψi (7.3a)

mk =e= 0.511M eV, k = 1, 2, E = 134.97M eV,

τ = 8.4x10−17s, R = b−1 = 10−13cm.

(7.3b)

where the latter expressions are subsidiary constraints on the former (see [7a,7b,9g] for reviews).

The above results were extended in the original proposal [5a] to all mesons resulting in this way
in a structure model of all mesons with massive physical constituents that can be produced free in
the spontaneous decays, generally those with the lowest mode, that are nowadays represented with
the symbols

πo = (ˆe+, ˆe−)HM , π± = (ˆπo, ˆe±)HM = (ˆe+, ˆe±, ˆe−)HM , K o = (ˆπ+, ˆπ−)HM , etc.,

(7.4)

where e, π, K, etc. represent conventional particles as detected in laboratory and ˆe, ˆπ, ˆK, etc. rep-
resent isoparticles, namely, the alteration of their intrinsic characteristics (called mutation [5a])
caused by their deep mutual penetration.

More technically, conventional particles are charactgerized by unitary irreducible representa-
tions of the Poincar´e symmetry, while isoparticles are characterized by the isounitary irreducible
representations of the covering Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry [6].

A few comments are now in order. Firstly, we should note the dramatic departures of the
above structure models from conventional trends in the Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of hadrons.
To begin, when dealing with classiﬁcation the emphasis is in searching for ”mass spectra.” On the
contrary, structure model of type (7.4) are known to be spectra suppressing.

16

In essence, the Hulten potential is known to admit only a ﬁnite spectrum of energy level. When
all conditions (7.3b) are imposed, the energy levels reduces to only one, that speciﬁcally and solely
for the meson considered. Needless to say, excited states do exist, but are of quantum type, that is,
whenever the constituents are excited, they exit from the ”hadronic horizon” because isounit (7.1)
reduces to 1, and quantum mechanics is recovered identically. Consequently, the excited states of
structure model (7.3) for the πo are given by the inﬁnite energy levels of the positronium.

An additional dramatic departure from classiﬁcation trends is given by the number of con-
stituents. According to the standard model, in the transition from one hadron to another of a
given family (such as in the transition from πo to π+) the number of quark constituents remain
the same. On the contrary, according to hadronic mechanics, the number of constituents must
necessarily increase with the increase of the mass, exactly as it is the case for the atomic (nuclear)
structure in which the number of constituents increases in the transition from the H to the He atom
(from proton to the deuteron).

The model also achieved a representation of the spontaneous decays with the lowest mode that
is generally interpreted as a tunnel eﬀect of the constituents through the hadronic horizon (rather
than the particles being ”created” at the time of the decay as requested by the standard model).
The remaining decay are the results of rather complex events under non-Hamiltonian interactions
still under investigation at this writing.

The representation of Rutherford’s synthesis of the neutron, Eq. (1.1), required considerable
additional studies on the isotopies of angular momentum [6a], spin [6b], Lorentz symmetry [6c],
Poincar´e symmetry [6d], the spinorial covering of the Poincar´e symmetry [6e], the Minkowskian
geometry [6f] and their implications for local realism and all that [6g].

Upon completion of these eﬀorts, Santilli achieved in Ref. [9a] of 1990 the ﬁrst known, numeri-
cally exact and time invariant nonrelativistic representation of all characteristics of the neutron as a
hadronic bound state of a proton assumed to be un-mutated and a mutated electron (or isoelectron)

n = (p+, ˆe−)HM ,

(7.5)

via the following single structural equation representing the compression of the hydrogen atoms
below to the hadronic horizon exactly as originally conceived by Rutherford

U × Hhydr × U † ≈

¯h2
2 × ˆmp

−

 

× ∇2

1 −

¯h2
2 × ¯me

× ∇2

2 − VHult ×

e−r12×b
1 − e−r12×b !

× | ˆψi = E × | ˆψi (7.6a)

µe = 0.511M eV, , µp = 938, 27M eV, E = 939.56M eV,

τ = 886s, R = 10−13cm.

(7.6b)

The relativistic extension of the above model was reached in Ref.
the isotopies of Dirac’s equation, and cannot be reviewed here to avoid a prohibitive length.

[9b] of 1993 (see also [6e]) via

Remarkably, despite the disparities between Eqs. (7.3) and (7.6), the Hulten potential admitted
again one single energy level, that of the neutron. Under excitation, the isoelectron exits the
hadronic horizon (again, because the integral in Eq.
(7.1) becomes null) and one recovers the
quantum description. Consequently, according to structure model (7.6), the excited states of the
neutron are the inﬁnite energy levels of the hydrogen atom.

The representation of the spin 1/2 of the neutron turned out to be much simpler than expected,
as outlined in Figure 4. In particular, the hadronic representation of the synthesis of the neutron
does not require any neutrino at all, exactly as originally conceived by Rutherford, of course, not
at the quantum level, but at the covering hadronic level.

17

Once compressed inside the proton, in order to have an attractive bond, the electron is con-
strained to have its spin antiparallel to that of the proton and, in order to achieve a stable state,
the electron orbital momentum is constrained to coincide with the spin 1/2 of the proton (Figure
4), resulting in the following representation of the spin of the neutron

n = sspin
sspin

p + sspin

ˆe + sorb

ˆe =

1
2

−

+

1
2

1
2

,

namely, it the total angular momentum of the isoelectron is null,

ˆe = sspin
stot

ˆe + sorb

ˆe = 0,

(7.7)

(7.8)

and the spin of the neutron coincides with that of the proton.

It should be noted that a fractional value of the angular momentum is anathema for quantum
mechanics, namely, when deﬁned over a conventional Hilbert space H over the ﬁeld of complex
numbers C (because it causes a departure from its nonunitary structure with a host of problems),
while the same fractional value is fully admissible for hadronic mechanics, namely when deﬁned on
an iso-Hilbert space ∧H over an isoﬁeld ∧C in view of its isounitary structure.
As a simple example, under the isounit and isotopic elements ˆI = 1

2 , ˆT = 2 and isonormalization
2 admits the isoexpectation value

< ˆψ| × ˆT × | ˆψ >= 1 the half-oﬀ-integer angular momentum ˆJ3 = 1
1,

= 1.

< ˆJ3 >=

< ˆψ| ˆ× ˆJ3 ˆ×| ˆψ >
< ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψ >
The above occurrence should not be surprising for the reader familiar with hadronic mechanics.
In fact, the sole admission of conventional values of the angular momentum would imply the
admission of the perpetual motion for, say, an electron orbiting in the core of a star.
In the
transition from motion in a quantized orbit in vacuum in an atomic structure to motion within the
core of a star, the angular momentum assumes an arbitrary, locally varying value. The only reason
for the orbital value 1
2 for the neutron is the existence of the constraint restricting the angular
momentum of the isoelectron to coincide with the spin of the proton (Figure 4).

(7.9)

Figure 4: . A schematic view of the intrinsic and orbital angular momenta in Rutherford’s synthesis
of the neutron according to hadronic mechanics.

18

The nonrelativistic, exact and invariant representation of the anomalous magnetic moment of
the neutron (−1.913mN ) from those of the proton and of the electron was also achieved for the
ﬁrst time by R. M. Santilli in Ref. [9a] of 1990.

The magnetic moment of Rutherford’s neutron is characterized by three contributions, the
magnetic moment of the proton, that of the isoelectron, and that caused by the orbital motion
of the isoelectron. Note that for quantum mechanics the third contribution is completely missing
because all particles are considered as points, in which case the electron cannot rotate inside the
proton. As well known, the inability by quantum mechanics to treat the orbital motion of the
electron inside the proton (due to its point-like character) was the very origin of the conjecture of
the neutrino.

With reference to the orientation of Figure 4, and by keeping in mind that a change of the sign
of the charge implies a reversal of the sign of the magnetic moment, the representation of Ref. (9a)
is based on the identity

µn = µp + µˆe−intrinsic − mˆe−orbital = −1.9123µN ,

(7.10)

Since the spin of the proton and of the electron can be assumed to be conventional in ﬁrst

approximation, we can assume that their intrinsic magnetic moments are conventional, i.e.,

µp = +2.793mN , µˆe−intrinsic = µe = −1.001µB = −1, 837.987µN ,

(7.11)

consequently

µp + µe = 1, 835µN ,

(7.12)

It is then evident that the anomalous magnetic moment of the neutron originates from the
magnetic moment of the orbital motion of the isoelectron inside the proton, namely, a contribution
that has been ignored since Rutherford’s time until treated in Ref. [9a].

It is easy to see that the desired exact and invariant representation of the anomalous magnetic

moment of the neutron is characterized by the following numerical values

µˆe−orbital = +1.004µB , µˆe−total = 3 × 10−3µB, µn = −1.9123µN ,

(7.13)

and this completes our nonrelativistic review. Note that the small value of the total magnetic
moment of the isoelectron is fully in line with the small value of its total angular momentum (that
is null in ﬁrst approximation due to the assumed lack of mutation of the proton).

We regret to be unable to review the numerically exact and time invariant relativistic represen-
tation of the anomalous magnetic moment of the neutron [6e,9b] because it provides much deeper
insights than the preceding one with particular reference to the density of hadrons, n2
4, in isounit
(6.16), that is completely absent in conventional treatment via the standard model. In fact, the
numerical value of n4 obtained from the ﬁt of the data on the ﬁreball of the Bose-Einstein corre-
lation permits the exact representation of the neutron anomalous magnetic moment without any
additional quantity or unknown parameters.

As one can see, the spontaneous decay of the neutron into physical, actually observed particles

is given by

n = (p+, ˆe−)HM → p+ + e−,

(7.14)

as a mere tunnel eﬀect of the massive constituents through the hadronic horizon, after which
particles reacquire their conventional quantum characteristics. Assuming that the neutron and the

19

proton are isolated and at rest in the spontaneous decay, the electron is emitted with 0.782M eV
energy. When the decaying neutron is a member of a nuclear structure, the energy possessed by
the electron is generally less than 0.782M eV and varies depending on the angle of emission, as
indicated in Section 2.

The behavior of the angular momentum for reaction (7.14) can be interpreted at the level of
hadronic mechanics and related Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry via the transformation of the orbital
into linear motions without any need for the neutrino, in the same way as no neutrino is needed
for the neutron synthesis .

The extension of the model to all baryons resulted to be elementary, with models of the type

n = (ˆp+, ˆe−)HM ≈ (p+, ˆe−)HM , Λ = (ˆp+, ˆπ−)HM ≈ (ˆn, ˆπo)HM ,

(7.15a)

Σ+ = (ˆp+, ˆπo)HM ≈ (ˆ¯n, ˆπ+)HM , Σo = (ˆΛ, ˆe+, ˆe−)HM , Σ− = (ˆn, ˆπ−)HM ≈ (ˆ¯p−, ˆπo)HM ,

etc.
(7.15)
where one should note the equivalence of seemingly diﬀerent structure models due to the indicated
mutation of the constituents.

Compatibility of the hadronic structure models with the SU(3)-color Mendeleev-type classiﬁ-
cation was ﬁrst suggested in Ref. [5d] and resulted to be possible in a variety of ways, such as, via
a multivalued hyperunit [7a] consisting of a set of isounits each characterizing the structure of one
individual hadrons in a given unitary multiplet

ˆI = Diag.( ˆIπo , ˆIπ+, ˆIπ−, ˆIK o

S , ...) = U × U † > 0.

The lifting of SU(3)-color symmetries under the above hyperunit is isomorphic to the conventional
symmetry due to the positive-deﬁniteness of the hyperunit,

(7.16)

(7.17)

U × SU (3) × U dag ≈ SU (3),

thus ensuring the preservation of all numerical results of the Mendeleev-type classiﬁcations due to
the preservation of the structure constants, Eqs. (6.12e).

In closing, the reader may have noted the dichotomy between the etherino hypothesis of Section
5 for the synthesis of the neutron and its absence in this section for the same topic. This is due
to the fact that the lifting calH → ˆH implicitly represents the absorption of the needed spin and
energy from the ether or from the environment (such as the interior of a star), thus clarifying that,
unlike the neutrino, the etherino is not a physical particle in our spacetime, but merely represents
the indicate transfer of features. We therefore have the following equivalence

n = (p+, ao, e−)QM ≈ (ˆp+, ˆe−)HM ,

(7.18)

with the understanding that the Schr¨odinger equation is physically inconsistent for the QM formu-
lation, while its isotopic image is fully consistent.

We can therefore conclude by saying that hadronic mechanics is the ﬁrst and only theory known
to the author for quantitative invariant studies of the interplay between matter and the background
medium, whether the ether or the hyperdense medium inside hadrons.

8. New clean energies permitted by the absence of neutrinos and quarks. Molec-
ular, atomic and nuclear structures have provided immense beneﬁts to mankind because
their constituents can be produced free. Quark theories on the structure of hadrons have no

20

practical value whatever because, by comparison, quarks by conception cannot be produced
free.

On the contrary, the structure model of hadrons with physical constituents that can be
produced free allows the prediction of new clean energies originating in the structure of
individual hadrons, rather than in nuclei, todays known as hadronic energies [9c], that could
provide the ﬁrst industrial application of hadron physics.

In fact, the neutron is the biggest reservoir of clean energy available to mankind because:
1) The neutron is naturally unstable; 2) When decaying it releases a large amount of energy
carried by the emitted electron; and 3) Such energy can be easily trapped with a thin metal
shield.

Moreover, hadronic energy is two-fold because, when the decay of the neutron occurs in a
conductor, the latter acquires a positive charge while the shield trapping the electron acquires
a negative charge, resulting in a new clean production of continuous current originating in
the structure of the neutron ﬁrst proposed by Santilli in Ref.
[9c] and today known as
hadronic battery [8]. The second source of energy is thermal and it is given by the heat
acquired by the shield trapping the emitted electrons.

Recall that, unlike the proton, the neutron is naturally unstable. Consequently, it must
admit a stimulated decay. That predicted by hadronic mechanics was ﬁrst proposed by
Santilli [9c] in 1994 and it is given by hitting a selected number of nuclear isotopes, called
hadronic fuels, with hard photons γres having energy (frequency) given by a submultiple of
the diﬀerence of energy between the neutron and the proton

∆E = mn − mp = 1.293MeV = h × νreson,

Eres =

MeV, n = 1, 2, 3, ...,

1.294
n

(8.1a)

(8.1b)

Figure 5: The view illustrates a ”hadronic fuel”, the MO(100,42), that, when hit by a neutron
resonating frequency, is predicted to experience a stimulated decay into an unstable isotope that, in
turn, decays spontaneous into a ﬁnal stable isotope with the total emission of two highly energetic
electrons, thus realizing the conditions of Figure 5.

21

under which the isoelectron is predicted to be excited and consequently cross the 1F

hadronic horizon, resulting in the stimulated decay

γres + n → p+ + e−.

(8.2)

The energy gain is beyond scientiﬁc doubt, because the use of 1/10-th of the exact
resonating frequency (8.1b) could produce clean energy up to 100-times the original value,
depending on the energy of the released betas. Note that the energy of photons not causing
stimulated decay is not lost, because absorbed by the hadronic fuel, thus being part of the
heat balance.

One among numerous cases of hadronic energy proposed for test in Ref. [5c] is given by

γres + Mo(100, 42) → T c(100, 43) + β−,

T c(100, 43) → Ru(100, 44) + β−,

(8.3a)

(8.3b)

where the ﬁrst beta decay is stimulated while the second is natural and occurs in 18 sec.

Note that the conventional nuclear energy is based on the disintegration of large and
heavy nuclei,
thus causing well known dangerous radiations and leaving dangerous waste.
By comparison, hadronic energy is based on the use of light nuclei as in thecase of Eqs. (8.3),
thus releasing no harmful radiation and leaving no harmful waste because both the original
nucleus Mo(100, 42) and the ﬁnal one Ru(100,44) are natural, light and stable elements (for
additional studies, see [9g]).

As proposed in Ref. [9d], the above stimulated decay of the neutron could be of assistance
to conventional nuclear energy since it would allow the stimulated decay of radioactive
nuclear waste via the use of a coherent beam of resonating gammas, plus additional feature,
such as high intensity electric ﬁelds. These conditions would cause a sudden increase ofd
positive charges plus an ellipsoidal deformation of large nuclei under which their decay
is unavoidable. The latter equipment is predicted to be suﬃciently small to be used by
nuclear power plants in their existing pools, thus rendering conventional nuclear energy
more accepted by society.

9. The much needed experimental resolutions. The international physics community
has spent to date in neutrino and quark conjectures well in excess of ten billion dollars of
public funds from various countries while multiplying, rather than resolving the controversies
as indicated in Sections 2 and 2. It is evident that the physics community simply cannot
continue this trend without risking a historical condemnation by posterity. When possible
new energies so much needed by mankind emerge from alternative theories without neutrinos
and quarks as physical particles in our spacetime, the gravity of the case emerge in its full
light.

In the hope of contributing toward the much needed expriental resolutions, in this paper

we propose the following basic tests.

Proposed First Experiment: to resolve whether or not there is energy avail-
able for the neutrino in the neutron decay. This experiment can be done today in
numerous ways. That recommended in this note, apparently for the ﬁrst time, is to conduct
systematic measurements of the energy of the electron emitted in the decay of a coherent
beam of low energy (e.g., thermal) neutrons as depicted in Fig. 6.

22

Figure 6: A schematic view of the proposed measurement of the energy of the electron in spontaneous
neutron decays to ascertain whether there is any energy left for the neutrino.

The detection of energies of the electrons systematically less than 0.78MeV (plus the
neutron energy), would eliminate the third hypothesis on tyhe neutron decay, Eq. (5.5),
and support the ﬁrsty and second hypotheses, Eqs. (5.3) and (5.4), but would be unable to
distinguish between them.

The detection of electron energy systematically given by 0.78MeV (plus the neutron
energy) would disprove the emission of a neutrino or an etherino in neutron decays, and
support the third hypothesis, Eq. (5.) in clear favbor ofg the continuous creation of matter
in the unioverse.

Note that the conduction of the proposed test with “high energy” neutrons would not
be resolutory because the variation of the electron energy expected to be absorbed by the
neutrino would be excessively smaller than the electron energy.

The conduction of the test via nuclear beta decays is also not recommendable due to the
indicated expected dependence of the electron energy from the direction of beta emission,
which dependence is ignorable for the case of decay of individual neutrons.

The author has been unable to identify in the literature any conduction of the proposed
trest since all available experiments refer to nuclear beta decays rather than that of individual
neutrons. Any indication by interfested colleagues of speciﬁc reference to tests similar to that
herein proposed would be gratefully appreciatred.

I Proposed Second Experiment: Achieve the laboratory synthesis of the neu-
tron to identify the needed energy. The ﬁrst attempt at synthesizing the neutron in
laboratory known to this author was conducted with positive outcome in Brazil by the Ital-
ian priest-physicist Don Borghi and his associates [9e] (see [3b] for a review). The tests were
apparently successful, although the experimental set up does not allow the measurement of
theenergy needed for the synthesis.

The latter information can be obtained nowadays in a variety of ways. That recommended
in this note, consists in sending a coherent electron beam against a beryllium mass saturated

23

Figure 7: A schematic view of the proposed laboratory synthesis of the neutron from protons and
electrons to identify the needed energy.

with hydrogen and kept at low temperature (so that the protons of the hydrogen atoms can
be approximately considered to be at rest). A necessary condition for credibility is that said
protons and electrons be polarized to have antiparallel spins (singlet couplings), because
large repulsions are predicted for triplet couplings at very short distances for particles with
spin, as it is the case for the coupling of ordinary gears. Since the proton and the electron
have opposite charges, said polarization can be achieved with the same magnetic ﬁeld as
illustrated in Fig. 7.

Neutrons that can possibly be synthesized in this way will escape from the beryllium
mass and can be detected with standard means. The detection of neutron produced with
electron kinetic energies systematically in excess of 0.78MeV would conﬁrm the neutrino
hypothesis. The systematic detection of neutrons synthesized either at the threshold energy
of 0.78MeV or less would support alternative hypotheses, such as that of the etherino, and
render polausible the hypothesis of continuous creation of matter in the universe via the
neutron synthesis as studied in Section 5.

Proposed Third Experiment: Test the stimulated decay of the neutron as
a source for new clean energies. The test of the stimulated decay of the neutron
proposed in Ref.
[9c], Eqs. (8.3) and Figure 5, was successfully conducted by N. Tsagas
[9g for a review and upgrading). As illustrated in Fig. 6,
and his associates [9f] (see Ref.
the latter experiment was conducted via a disk of Europa 152 (emitting photons precisely
with the needed resonating frequency) coupled to a disc of molybdenum, the pair being
contained inside a scintilloscope for the detection of the emitted electrons, the experimental
set up being suitably shielded, as customary. The test was successful because it detected
electrons emitted by the indicated pair with energy bigger than 1 MeV since electrons from
the Compton scattering of photons and atomic electrons can at most have 1 MeV . the same
test can be repeated in a variety of way with diﬀerent hadronic fuels (see [9c] for alternatives).
Needless to say, despite their positive outcome, the available results on the proposed three
tests are empirical, rudimentary and inconclusive. Rather than being reasons for dismissal,
these insuﬃciencies establish instead the need for the ﬁnalization of the proposed basic
experiments, also in view of their rather large scientiﬁc and societal relevance.

24

Acknowledgments. The author has no word to express his appreciation to IARD members
because without their serious commitment to knowledge this paper could not have been
discussed during the meeting of 2006, let alone published. Additional thanks for invaluable
comments and criticisms are due to H. E. Wilhelm of the Institute for Basic Research, Palm
Harbor, Florida, and L. Daddi of the Naval Academy, Livorno, Italy.

References

[1] H. Rutherford Proc. Roy. Soc. A 97, 374 (1920) [1a]. J. Chadwick Proc. Roy. Soc. A
136, 692 (1932) [1b]. W. Pauli, Handbruch der Physik Vol. 24, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
(1933) [1c]. E. Fermim Nuclear Physics, University of Chicago Press (1949) [1d]. M.
Kaku, Quantum Field Theory, Oxford University Press, New York (1993) [1e].

[2] E. R. Bagge, World and Antiworld as Physical Reality, Haag-Herchen, Frankfurt (1994)
[2a]. A. Franklin, Are There Really Neutrinos? Westview Press, Boulder, CO (2000)
[2b]. H. E. Wilhelm, Hadronic Journal 27, 349 (2004) [2c]. R. L. Moessbauer, J. de
Physique C 3, 121 (1984) [2d]. J. Fanchi, Hadronic J. 28, 717 (2006) [2e].

[3] R. M. Santilli, ”An intriguing legacy of Einstein, Fermi, Jordan and others: the possible
invalidation of quark conjectures (as elementary constituents),” Found. Phys. 11, 383
(l981) [3a] R. M. Santilli, Hyperﬁne Interactions, 109, 63 (1997) [3b]. R. M. Santilli, in
Proceedings of the XVIII Workshop on Hadronic Mechanics, V. Dvoeglazov, T. Gill, P.
Rowlands, and E. Trell, Editors, International Academic Press (2006) also available at
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603262 [3c].

[4] R. M. Santilli, Il Pungolo Verde 7, 23 (1956) [4a]]. M. Jammer, The History of Theories
of Space in Physics, Harvard University Press (1954) [4b]. M. C. Duﬀy, Editor, Ether,
Spacetime and Cosmology, International Academic Press, to appear [4c].

[5] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 1, 224, 574 and 1267 (1978) [5a]; Algebras, Groups and Ge-
ometries 10, 273 (1993) [5b]; Rendiconti Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Supplemento
42, 7 (1996) [5c]; Found. Phys. 27, 635 (1997) [5d]; Found. Phys. Letters 10, 307 (1997)
[5e];

[6] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 8, 25 and 36 (1985) [6a]; JINR Rapid Comm. 6, 24 (1993)
[6b]; Nuovo Cimento Lett. 37, 545 and 38, 509, (1983) [6c]; J. Moscow Phys. Soc. 3,
255 (1993) [6d]; Chinese J. Syst. Eng. and Electr. 6, 177 (1996) [6e]; Intern. J. Modern
Phys. A 14, 2205 (1999) [6f]. Acta Applicanbdae Math. 50, 177 (1998) [6g];

[7] R. M. Santilli, Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Volume III: Recent Advances,
Experimental veriﬁcations and Industrial Applications (Naukova Dumka, Ukrainian
Academy of Sciences, Kiev, in press, preliminary version available in pdf format at
http://www.i-b-r.org/Hadronic-Mechanics.htm) [7a]; Foundations of Hadronic Chem-
istry with Applications to New Clean Energies and Fuels, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston-Dordrecht-London (2001) [7b]; Isodual Theory of Antimatter with Applications
to Antigravity, Grand Uniﬁcation and Cosmology, Springer (2006) [7c].

25

[8] H. C. Myung, Lie Algebras and Flexible Lie-Admissible Algebras, Hadronic Press (1982)
[8a]. A.K. Aringazin, A. Jannussis, D.F. Lopez, M. Nishioka, and B. Veljanoski, Santilli’s
Lie-isotopic Generalization of Galilei’s and Einstein’s Relativities, Kostarakis Publish-
ers, Athens (1991) [8b]. D. S. Sourlas and G. T. Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations of the
Lie-Santilli Theory, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1993) [8c]. J. Lˆohmus, E. Paal
and L. Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras in Physics, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL,
USA (1994) [8d]. J. V. Kadeisvili, Santilli’s Isotopies of Contemporary Algebras, Geome-
tries and Relativities, Second Edition, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev, Second Edi-
tion (1997) [8e]. R. M. Falcon Ganfornina and J. Nunez Valdes, Fondamentos de la Iso-
teoria de Lie-Santilli, International Academic Press, America-Europe-Asia, (2001), also
available in the pdf ﬁle http://www.i-b-r.org/docs/spanish.pdf [8f]. Chun-Xuan Jiang,
Foundations of Santilli’s Isonumber Theory, with Applications to New Cryptograms,
Fermat’s Theorem and Goldbach’s Conjecture, International Academic Press, America-
Europe-Asia (2002) also available in the pdf ﬁle http://www.i-b-r.org/docs/jiang.pdf
[8e].

[9] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 13, 513 (1990) [9a]. R. M. Santilli, JINR Comm. E4-93-
352 (1993) [9b]. R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 17, 311 (1994) [9c]. R. M. Santilli, in
Large Scale Collective Motion of Atomic Nuclei, G. Giardina et al., Editors, World
Scientiﬁc (1997) [9d]. C. Borghi, C. Giori, and A. Dall’OIlio, J. Nucl. Phys. 56, 147
(1993) [9e]. N. F. Tsagas, A. Mystakidis, G. Bakos, and L. Seftelis, Hadronic J. 19,
87 (1996) [9f]. R. M. Santilli, The Physics of New Clean Energies and Fuels According
to Hadronic Mechanics, Special Issue of the Journal of New Energy (1999) [9g]. R.
M. Santilli, The structure of the neutron and nuclei according to hadronic mechanics,
http://www.neutronstructure.org [9h].

26

