6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TAUP 2845-2006

The Physical Meaning of Gauge Transformations

School of Physics and Astronomy

Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences

in Electrodynamics

E. Comay∗

Tel Aviv University

Tel Aviv 69978

Israel

PACS No: 03.30.+p, 03.50.De, 03.65.-w

Abstract:

The structure of classical electrodynamics based on the variational prin-

ciple together with causality and space-time homogeneity is analyzed. It is

proved that in this case the 4-potentials are deﬁned uniquely. On the other

hand, the approach where Maxwell equations and the Lorentz law of force

are regarded as cornerstones of the theory allows gauge transformations. For

this reason, the two theories are not equivalent. A simple example substan-

tiates this conclusion. Quantum physics is linked to the variational principle

and it is proved that the same result holds for it. The compatibility of this

result with the gauge invariance of the Lagrangian density is explained.

1

1. Introduction

One may regard the equations of motion of a physical system as the fun-

damental elements of a theory. Thus, the equations of motion can be used

for deriving useful formulas that describe properties of the system. How-

ever, it is now recognized that other principles play a more profound role.

Using this approach, the variational principle, causality and homogeneity

of space-time are regarded here as the basis for the discussion. The present

work examines these approaches within the validity domains of classical elec-

trodynamics and of quantum physics. Thus, the electrodynamic theory that

regards Maxwell equations and the Lorentz law of force as cornerstones of the

theory is called here Maxwell-Lorentz electrodynamics (MLE). The theory

that relies on the variational principle is called here canonical electrodynam-

ics (CE). MLE and CE are very closely related theories. Thus, Maxwell

equations and the Lorentz law of force can be derived from the variational

principle (see [1], pp. 49-51,70,71,78-80; [2], 572-578,595-597). The ﬁrst part

of the discussion carried out here analyzes the two approaches within the

realm of classical electrodynamics and proves that MLE is not equivalent

to CE and that CE imposes further restrictions on the theory’s structure.

Quantum mechanics is strongly linked to the variational approach (see [3],

pp. 2-23). Thus, it is proved that the same results are valid for quantum

mechanics.

It is proved in this work that if one adheres to CE together with causality

and space-time homogeneity then the 4-potentials of electrodynamics are

deﬁned uniquely. On the other hand, the 4-potentials play no explicit role in

Maxwell equations and in the Lorentz law of force. Hence, one may apply any

gauge transformation without aﬀecting MLE. This is the underlying reason

2

for the claim that MLE is not equivalent to CE.

In the present work, units where the speed of light c = 1 and ¯h = 1 are

used. Thus, one kind of dimension exists and the length [L] is used for this

purpose. Greek indices run from 0 to 3. The metric is diagonal and its entries

are (1,-1,-1,-1). The symbol ,µ denotes the partial diﬀerentiation with respect

to xµ. Aµ denotes the 4-potentials and F µν denotes the antisymmetric tensor

of the electromagnetic ﬁelds

F µν = gµαgνβ(Aβ,α − Aα,β) =

0 −Ex −Ey −Ez
−Bz By
Ex
0
0 −Bx
Ey Bz
Ez −By Bx

0








.








(1)

In the second Section, the main point of this work is proved for classical

physics. The third Section describes a speciﬁc example that substantiates

the proof included in Section 2. The fourth Section proves that the same

results are obtain for quantum physics. The last Section contains concluding

remarks.

2. Gauge Transformations and Canonical Electrodynamics

The Lagrangian density used for a derivation of Maxwell equations is (see

[1], pp. 78-80; [2], pp. 596-597)

L = − 1
16π

F µνFµν − jµAµ.

(2)

The following analysis examines a closed system of charges and ﬁelds. For

the simplicity of the discussion, let us examine the ﬁelds associated with one

charged particle e whose motion is given. This approach can be justiﬁed

because, due to the linearity of Maxwell equations, one ﬁnds that the ﬁelds

of a closed system of charges is a superposition of the ﬁelds of each individual

3

charge belonging to the system. Let us examine the electromagnetic ﬁelds

at a given space-time point xµ. Using Maxwell equation and the principle of

causality, one can derive the retarded Lienard-Wiechert 4-potentials (see [1],

pp. 173-174; [2], pp. 654-656)

Here vµ is the charge’s 4-velocity at the retarded time and Rµ is the 4-vector

from the retarded space-time point to the ﬁeld point xµ. These 4-potentials

deﬁnes the ﬁelds uniquely.

A gauge transformation of (3) is (see [1], pp. 52-53; [2], pp. 220-223)

Aµ = e

vµ
Rαvα

.

A′

µ = Aµ − Φ,µ.

(3)

(4)

In the following lines, the laws of CE are used in an investigation of the form

of the gauge function Φ(xµ).

Relying on the variational principle, one ﬁnds constraints on terms of the

Lagrangian density. Thus, the action is a Lorentz scalar and in the unit

system used here where ¯h = 1, it is dimensionless.

In particular, the 4-

potentials Aµ must be entries of a 4-vector whose dimension is [L−1]. This

requirement is satisﬁed by the Lienard-Wiechert 4-potentials (3). Thus, also

Φ,µ of (4) is a 4-vector and Φ must be a dimensionless Lorentz scalar function

of the space-time coordinates.

Now, the coordinates are entries of a 4-vector. Therefore, a Lorentz

scalar depending on the space-time coordinates must be a function of scalar

variables of the following form

fa,b(xµ) = (xµ − xµ

a)(xµ − xbµ),

(5)

where xµ

a and xµ

b denote speciﬁc space-time points. Relying on the homo-

geneity of space-time, one ﬁnds that in the case discussed here there is just

4

one speciﬁc point xµ

a, which is the retarded position of the charge. Thus, (5)

is cast into the following form

fa,b(xµ) → RµRµ.

(6)

This outcome proves that the gauge function, which is a dimensionless quan-

tity, must be a constant.

These arguments complete the proof showing that if one adheres to CE

then the gauge function Φ is a constant and the gauge 4-vector Φ,µ vanishes

identically. Hence, the Lienard-Wiechert 4-vector (3) is unique.

3. An Example

Let us examine a simple system which consists of one motionless particle

whose mass and charge are m, e, respectively. The particle is located in a

spatial region where the external ﬁelds vanish. Therefore, the Lorentz force

exerted on the particle vanishes too and it remains motionless as long as

these conditions do not change. Hence, from the point of view of MLE, the

particle’s energy is a constant

E = m.

Now, let us examine this system from the point of view of CE. For this

purpose, the external 4-potentials should be deﬁned. Thus, the null external

ﬁelds are derived from null 4-potentials

A(ext)µ = 0 → F µν

(ext) = 0.

In order to deﬁne the particle’s energy one must construct the Hamilto-

nian. Here the general expression is (see [1], pp. 47-49; [2], pp. 575)

(7)

(8)

(9)

H = [m2 + (P − eA)2]1/2 + eφ,

5

where P denotes the canonical momentum and the components of the 4-

potentials are (φ, A). Substituting the null values of (8) into (9) and putting

there P = 0 for the motionless particle, one equates the energy to the Hamil-

tonian’s value and obtains

E = m.

(10)

At this point, one ﬁnds that result (7) of MLE is identical to (10) of CE.

Now, let us apply a gauge transformation to the null external 4-potentials

(8). The gauge function and its 4-potentials are

Φ = t2 → A′

(ext)µ = −Φ,µ = (−2t, 0, 0, 0).

(11)

In MLE nothing changes, because the equations of motion depend on elec-

tromagnetic ﬁelds and their null value does not change

F ′µν = F µν = 0.

(12)

Hence, the energy value (7) continues to hold and the gauge transformation

(11) is acceptable in MLE.

does not hold for the CE theory.

The following points show several arguments proving that this conclusion

1. The gauge function of (11) has the dimensions [L2], whereas in CE it

must be dimensionless.

2. The gauge function of (11) is the entry U 00 of the second rank tensor

U µν = xµxν. On the other hand, in CE the gauge function must be a

Lorentz scalar.

3. Substituting the gauge 4-vector A′

(ext)µ of (11) into the Hamiltonian

(9), one ﬁnds the following value for the energy

E′ = H ′ = m − 2et.

(13)

6

Hence, if gauge transformations are allowed in CE then the energy of

a closed system is not a constant of the motion.

These three conclusions prove that a gauge transformation destroys CE.

4. Gauge Transformations and Quantum Physics

As stated in the Introduction, quantum physics is very closely related to

CE. Moreover, the Ehrenfest theorem (see [5], pp. 25-27, 138) shows that the

classical limit of quantum mechanics agrees with the laws of classical physics.

For these reasons, one expects that the laws of CE are relevant to quantum

physics. A direct examination of gauge transformations proves this matter.

The Lagrangian density of the Dirac ﬁeld is (see [3], p. 84; [4], p. 78)

L = ¯ψ[γµ(i∂µ − eAµ) − m]ψ,

(14)

Now, in quantum mechanics, the gauge transformation (4) is accompanied

by an appropriate transformation of the particle’s wave function. Thus, the

quantum mechanical form of gauge transformation is (see [4], p. 78)

µ = Aµ − Φ,µ; ψ′
A′

(xµ) = eieΦ(xµ)ψ(xµ)

(15)

(Note that the symbol e in the exponent denotes the particle’s electric charge.)

Substituting the gauge transformation (15) into the Lagrangian density (14),

one realized the it is gauge invariant indeed (see e.g. [4], p. 78).

Now let us examine the quantum mechanical version of the example dis-

cussed in Section 3. The Dirac wave function of the spin-up state of a mo-

tionless particle is (see [6], p. 10)

ψ(xµ) = e−imt(1, 0, 0, 0).

(16)

7

Thus, one uses the fundamental quantum mechanical equation and obtains

the particle’s energy from an application of the Dirac Hamiltonian to the

wave function (16)

Eψ = Hψ = i

= mψ → E = m.

(17)

∂ψ
∂t

Now, let us examine the gauge transformation (15) for the speciﬁc case

(11). The wave function (16) transforms as follows

ψ′(xµ) = eiet2

e−imt(1, 0, 0, 0).

(18)

A straightforward calculation of the energy for the gauge transformed wave

function (18) proves that the result diﬀers from the original value

E′ψ′ = i

= (m − 2et)ψ′ → E′ = m − 2et.

(19)

∂ψ′
∂t

This is precisely the same discrepancy which was found above for the

gauge transformation of CE of classical physics (13). Thus, one concludes

that gauge transformations are inconsistent with quantum physics.

5. Conclusions

The foregoing results indicate the diﬀerence between an electrodynamic

theory where Maxwell equations and the Lorentz law of force are regarded

as the theory’s cornerstones and a theory based on the variational principle

together with causality and space-time homogeneity.

Indeed, if Maxwell

equations and the Lorentz law of force are the theory’s cornerstone then it is

very well known that one is free to deﬁne the gauge function Φ(xµ) of (4) (see

[1], pp. 52-53; [2], pp. 220-223). On the other hand, this work proves that

gauge transformations are inconsistent with electrodynamics based on the

8

variational principle. For this reason, one concludes that the two approaches

are not equivalent. It is also proved that gauge transformations are forbidden

in quantum physics.

The outcome of this work does not negate the well known gauge invariance

of the Lagrangian density. Indeed, in the Dirac Lagrangian density (14), the

two parts of the gauge transformation (15) cancel each other. On the other

hand, the Dirac Hamiltonian contains only one term of (15).

9

References:

* Email: elic@tauphy.tau.ac.il

Internet site: http://www-nuclear.tau.ac.il/∼elic

[1] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields (El-

sevier, Amsterdam, 2005).

[2] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley, New York,1975).

[3] J. D. Bjorken and S.D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Fields (McGraw-

Hill, New York, 1965).

[4] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field

Theory (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1995).

[5] L. I. Schiﬀ, Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955).

[6] J. D. Bjorken and S.D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-

Hill, New York, 1964).

10

