ON THE MAGNETIC FIELD, AND
ENTROPY INCREASE, IN A
MACHIAN UNIVERSE

Marcelo Samuel Berman1
1Editora Albert Einstein Ltda - Av. Candido Hartmann, 575 - # 17 and

80730-440 - Curitiba - PR - Brazil

(Dated: 01 November, 2006)

Abstract

By means of the experimental result on the present equipartition between background microwave

radiation energy and that of the interstellar magnetic ﬁeld, and by advancing a Machian relation for

the magnetic ﬁeld, which, diﬀerently than in other authors’ papers, is valid for the entire spanlife

of the Universe, implying that the magnetic ﬁeld depends on the inverse radius of the Universe,
we obtain a general formula such that B depends on R−1.Our estimate for Planck’s magnetic
ﬁeld is 10−3 times the Sabbata and Sivaram’s one. It is shown that the energy densities involved
in the above problem are dependent on R−2 . For radiation, this implies, as we show, that the
total entropy of the Universe is increasing with expansion. In particular we show that R ∝ T −2 ,

where T is the absolute temperature.

Keywords: Cosmology; Einstein; Brans-Dicke; Cosmological term; Planck’s Universe; Mach;

Magnetic Field; Entropy; Radiation.

PACS: 04.20.-q ; 04.20.Jb ; 98.80.-k ; 98.80.Jk

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

ON THE MAGNETIC FIELD, AND ENTROPY
INCREASE, IN A MACHIAN UNIVERSE

Marcelo Samuel Berman

In two recent chapters of edited books (Berman, 2006; 2006a) has proposed a new in-

terpretation for Brans-Dicke relation, which, instead of being an aproximate relation only

valid for the present Universe, should be interpreted as meaning that the mass M , of

the causally related Universe, is directly proportional to the radius R , in the entire life

of the Universe. In the same references, it is shown that, the new interpretation of Brans-
Dicke relation, along with the hypothesis that the cosmological ”constant” varies with R−2

, arise from the imposition that the total energy of the Universe, is zero-valued. Sabbata

and Sivaram(1994), have shown that, in analogy with Brans-Dicke aproximate relation, one

could state another similar one for the spin of the Universe L . Again, Berman(2006b),

extending his conjectures on the zero-total energy of the Universe, and including in the total

energy, a term representing the rotational energy, derived Sabbata and Sivaram(1994) rela-
tion, as an exact formula, indicating that L varied with R2 during all times. In all cases,

Berman has made the hypothesis, that the fraction of each kind of energy participation, did
not vary with time, when taken as fractions of Mc2 .

We now extend Berman’s hypotheses, while keeping a new term which contributes to the

total energy of the Universe, dictated by the magnetic ﬁeld. The fraction of magnetic energy
participation to the total energy, is nevertheless kept in a 10−3 orders of magnitude, because

we take for granted that the observed equipartition between the microwave background

radiation, and magnetic ﬁeld energies, for interstellar media, point out to a similar fraction

in the magnetic ﬁeld of the Universe. We impose that such fraction endures for the entire

history of the Universe; in fact, this means that we adjust our Machian relation for the
magnetic ﬁeld, in order that its present value should be around 10−6 Gauss.

As the fractions of energy, of any kind, in the Machian Universe, according to our theory,

are to be maintained, we take for granted, that any kind of energy’s density, varies with
R−2 , as has been shown, for the total energy density, by Berman(2006; 2006a) and Berman

2

and Marinho Jr(2001). For each type of energy, we would have a constant fraction of the

total energy, i.e., constant in time. For the total energy density, we would have:

From Brans-Dicke relation, as modiﬁed by Berman, we have:

ρ = M
4
3 πR3

.

GM
Rc2 = γ = constant

∼
= 1 .

From (1) and (2), we obtain the desired dependence, ρ ∝ R−2 .

The energy density associated with a magnetic ﬁeld B is given by:

ρB = B2
8π

.

(1)

(2)

(3)

In mass units, we have to divide the second member of (3) by c2 . The total energy

fraction for the magnetic ﬁeld, relative to Mc2 would be given by:

4

3πR3

(cid:2)

(cid:3) h

B2
8πc2 i [Mc2]

−1

= γB

∼
= 10−6

.

(4)

We then ﬁnd that B ∝ R−1 because, in fact, from (4) we have:

B2 = 12 c4 γ γB G−1R−2
We then ﬁnd, for the present Universe, with R ∼

.

= 1028 cm, B ∼

= 10−6 Gauss .

(5)

For Planck’s Universe, we would have, with RP l

∼
= 10−33 cm,

BP l = B h

R
RP l i

∼
= 1055 Gauss.

This last value is larger than the maximum limit for the magnetic ﬁeld not to provoke

instabilities in the vacuum, according to a recent analysis made through Quantum Electro-

dynamics theory (QED), by Shabad and Usov(2006). That being the case, we can imagine

this fact as causing the eruption of the inﬂationary phase, immediatly after Planck’s time.

We remark that Sabbata and Sivaram(1994) obtained, in other context, for the Planck’s

magnetic ﬁeld, the value 1058 Gauss, which is larger than in our estimate.

3

Though we have derived the dependency of the magnetic ﬁeld with R−1 , from the zero-

total energy conjecture, in a Machian Universe, (see relation 4 above), this is also obtained
from the energy density dependence on R−2 , as also has been considered above, for any

kind of particular energy, during the lifespan of the Universe.

It has been argued by an annonymous referee, that there would be one kind of energy

density, that would not obey the R−2

- dependence, namely, the radiation one. Though

the radiation energy density obeys the well-known black body law

ρR = aT 4

( a = constant )

,

(6)

where T stands for the absolute temperature, we must ﬁrst agree on the dependence

between R and T

. In standard Cosmology, it is accepted as a general rule, that the

total entropy of the Universe is constant in time; then, it is easily shown that

RT = constant.

(7)

Notwithstanding, this hypothesis for the entropy has been troubled by several observa-

tions, which run from the veriﬁcation that photons’ production in the Universe, must be

accompanied by an increasing value for the entropy of the Universe. Weinberg (1972), has

long ago warned that the perfect ﬂuid hypothesis concerning the non-dissipative ﬂuid, is

problematic. He even advanced the idea of a viscous ﬂuid. It is well-known that a perfect

ﬂuid is isentropic.

If the Machian perspective is taken into account, we should have:

ρR = βR−2

( β = constant )

.

A comparison between (6) and (8), makes us believe that R ∝ T −2

; this relation is

obtainable from the zero-total energy conjecture for the Universe. If we write the energy as
represented by an inertial term (Mc2) minus the potential energy ( GM 2
energy ( 4

3πR3ρR) , and equate the result to zero, we ﬁnd:

2R ) plus the radiation

(8)

(9)

GM
c2R

− 4πR3

3M c2 ρR

∼
= 1

.

4

From Brans-Dicke original relation(Brans and Dicke, 1961), we ﬁnd relation (2). This

suggests that we also should have the following relation:

4πR3ρR
3M c2 = γR

∼
= 1

.

From the above, we obtain:

aGT 4R2
c4

∼
= 1

.

(10)

(11)

We conclude that R ∝ T −2 as we believed above.

We now check the total entropy of this (Machian) Universe:

S ∝ sR3 ∝ ρR

T R3 ∝ T 3R3 ∝ R

3
2

.

(12)

In the above, S and s stand respectivelly for the total entropy, and the entropy density;

from thermodynamics, S = ER
T

, where ER stands for the total radiational energy.

From (12), we have the result that should had been obvious to cosmologists long ago:

total entropy increases with the expanding Universe.

The above result is approximately similar to the one of black hole thermodynamics: the
entropy, in this case, is proportional to the surface area of the event horizon, 4πR2 . Here

R stands for Schwarzschild’s radius, 2GM . Notice that in the expanding Universe, the

event horizon radius grows with time, which causes increasing entropy for black holes, too.

This is a Classical Physics eﬀect, independent of Quantum theory.

The perfect ﬂuid hypothesis, for the Universe, is here challenged by Mach’s Principle.

We conclude that, because we did not restrict ourselves, to a speciﬁc gravitational theory,

like General Relativity, Brans-Dicke or other alternative one theories, any theory can be

Machian, provided that the above framework is accomodated in those theories.

Acknowledgements

The author gratefuly thanks his intellectual mentors, Fernando de Mello Gomide and

M. M. Som, and is also grateful for the encouragement by Albert, Paula and Geni, and

by Marcelo Guimar˜aes, Nelson Suga, Mauro Tonasse, Antonio Teixeira and Herman J. M.

Cuesta. Comments by Dimi Chalakov, on several papers of mine, are highly praised.

5

References

Berman,M.S. (2006) - Energy of Black Holes and Hawking’s Universe - in Trends in

Black Hole Research, ed. by Paul Kreitler, Nova Science, New York.

Berman,M.S. (2006 a) - Energy, Brief History of Black Holes, and Hawking’s Universe, in

New Developments in Black Hole Research, ed. by Paul Kreitler, Nova Science, New York.

Berman,M.S. (2006 b) - On the Machian Properties of the Universe - submitted. (Also

posted in Los Alamos archives, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0610003).

Brans, C.; Dicke, R.H. (1961) - Physical Review, 124, 925.

Sabbata, V.de; Sivaram, C. (1994) - Spin and Torsion in Gravitation - World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore.

Shabad, A.E.; Usov, V.V. (2006) - Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 180401.

Weinberg, S. (1972) - Gravitation and Cosmology, Wiley, New York.

6

