6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interpreting Negative Probabilities
in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry

Ghenadie N. Mardari

Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA

Abstract. Negative probabilities emerged at intermediate steps in various attempts to predict the
distributions of quantum interference. There is no consensus on their meaning yet. It has been sug-
gested (Khrennikov, 1998) that negative probabilities require the existence of unsuspected correla-
tions between detection events. We evaluate this claim in light of several representative experiments.
In our assessment, some of its implications are in good agreement with the data.

Keywords: Negative probability, quantum interference.
PACS: 03.65.Ta, 03.70.+k, 14.70.Bh, 42.50.Xa

INTRODUCTION

It is a matter of common sense that an event can either happen or not. If its occurrence
is certain, the rule is that its probability must be equal to 1. If it cannot happen, the
probability must be equal to 0. In all other instances, the probability can have any value
between 0 and 1. With this in mind, the idea that an event can have a negative probability
of occurrence is non-sense. Or is it?

According to Richard Feynman, all negative numbers defy common sense in real-life
situations. An apple trader may begin the day with 5 apples and end it with 3, after
giving away 10 and receiving 8 apples. At no point in time was the trader in possession
of a negative quantity of apples. Still, the analysis of the process as a whole is greatly
simpliﬁed by showing that 5 − 10 = −5 and −5 + 8 = 3. Similarly, it must be acceptable
to use negative probabilities as well, so long as they simplify thought and calculations
in properly chosen situations. In his famous paper on negative probability [1], which
he began with the apple trader example, Feynman says: “It is not my intention here to
contend that the ﬁnal probability of a veriﬁable physical event can be negative. On the
other hand, conditional probabilities and probabilities of imagined intermediary states
may be negative in a calculation of probabilities of physical events or states” (p. 238).
Indeed, Feynman went on to conclude that “all the results of quantum statistics can be
described in classical probability language, with states replaced by ‘conditions’ deﬁned
by a pair of states (or other variables), provided we accept negative values for these
probabilities” (p. 248).

Negative probabilities are primarily useful for simplifying analysis, as conﬁrmed by
numerous other developments in modern physics. Yet, Richard Feynman went beyond
mere calculations. He showed that negative probabilities have meta-theoretical implica-
tions as well. On the one hand, they can tell us something about the ﬁtness of a theory. If
a model predicts negative probabilities for real detectable states, it must be clearly wrong
or incomplete. On the other hand, they can also tell us something about Nature. In some

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

1

contexts, there might be pairs of events, one of which has an abnormal probability value.
This could mean that only one event is observable during a single act of measurement,
in obvious agreement with Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle. The difﬁculty, from our
point of view, is that interpretation is not always straightforward. In many cases it is hard
to say if a theory is incomplete, or if Nature simply deﬁes common sense. For example,
how does it help us to know that the distribution of detection events in a double-slit
experiment can be predicted with models that involve negative probabilities?

Feynman’s approach to negative probability was further reﬁned in the context of
double-slit interferometry by Scully, Walther and Schleich [2]. They showed that several
questions, formulated by Feynman in abstract terms, can be illustrated physically with
the help of the micromaser which-path detector. This allowed them to develop a very
instructive formalism, and also to produce new insights into the EPR problem. Of
interest to us is the general interpretation, implicit in this work. It shows that quantum
properties are not reducible to classical phenomena (even though classical statistics can
be used to describe it, as suggested by Feynman). The non-local interactions of quantum
processes must be fundamental, providing a direct explanation for the fact that negative
probabilities are required. In other words, the latter cannot be attributed to some sort of
undiscovered physical interaction.

The above comments notwithstanding, Scully, Walther and Schleich did not attempt
to provide any deﬁnitive interpretive conclusions. The problem of explaining the precise
meaning of negative probabilities in the context of double-slit interference remained
open. In this paper we shall focus on the attempt to ﬁnd a plausible solution in terms
of p-adic probability analysis, as formulated by Khrennikov [3]. This approach is very
interesting because it shows that a classical interaction could still explain quantum inter-
ference. We shall provide a brief overview of the main claims and the initial difﬁculties
associated with their veriﬁcation. We shall also note the limitations of the original pro-
posals and discuss a new way to verify this model. More importantly, we shall examine
the results of several experiments, which appear to conﬁrm the main prediction of this
approach.

SEARCHING FOR MEANING

Quantum statistics appeared to be easier to predict than to interpret. Khrennikov [3]
noted that several earlier models had reproduced the distributions of the double-slit
experiment successfully, but none of them was shown to have a clear interpretation. In
contrast to these approaches, which were formulated as measure theories, he developed
a theory in which probabilities were deﬁned as relative frequencies. The outcome was
a model with straightforward physical meaning, in part because of its innovative use of
p-adic number analysis, which was not widely used before.

The main ﬁnding of this approach is that detection events in a double-slit experiment
obey a logarithmic complexity rule. Independent random events obey linear complexity
rules. Therefore, individual quanta cannot generate interference independently. They
must display correlated behavior, in order to produce their well-known distributions. In
other words, self-interference cannot be the reason for the detection pattern. Some sort
of interaction, possibly classical, must occur. This prediction is particularly remarkable,

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

2

because it runs against both the Copenhagen interpretation and the most well-known
pilot-wave models. Moreover, quantum interference was well demonstrated at low rates
of emission, which was widely considered enough to rule out any direct interaction
between single quanta. The concept of self-interference is pretty much taken for granted
today.

Khrennikov showed that direct interaction between the quanta is not necessary for an
interpretation of his results. The correlations required in this context could be produced
by delayed (memory) effects within measurement systems. Such effects could happen
either at the source of emission, or at the slits, or ﬁnally at the detectors. The proposition
was easily testable. Yet, the problem was that the experiments did not seem to conﬁrm it.
Firstly, interference was demonstrated with pairs of independent deterministic sources
of photons, which emit single pulses on demand [4]. This seems to be a convincing
argument against correlation at the source. On the one hand, deterministic sources can
have arbitrary moments of emission, which makes the idea of correlation between con-
secutive events implausible. On the other hand, the same experiment showed that fringe
visibility depended primarily on the parameters of propagation inside the interferome-
ter. Secondly, there are many types of interferometers which do not require slits. In some
cases, even Young interference can happen with or without slits (as shown, for exam-
ple, in ref. [5]). It is possible to argue that the slits are functionally similar to sources in
many set-ups, which further conﬁrms that memory effects at the openings are not essen-
tial, even if conceivably real. Finally, the hypothesis of memory effects at the detector
is undermined by the wide use of modern (other than screen) detectors. For example,
pico-streak cameras satisfy the requirement of having physical changes in the detector
between detections, and they do not have diminished visibility. In fact, they can be used
to observe important details, such as fringe drift, extending the class of observable inter-
ference phenomena (see for example, ref. [6]). More recent detection techniques, such
as ﬁber-optic scanning, reinforce this conclusion even further, reducing the likely impor-
tance of memory effects during measurement. There are also experiments with neutron
interferometers, quoted by Khrennikov et al. in a follow-up paper [7], which did not ﬁnd
the expected memory effects. Consequently, measurement artifacts (such as memory
effects) cannot explain convincingly the peculiarities of non-classical distributions.

Given the above, it seems appropriate to follow the example of Feynman and ask:
what if some of our assumptions are wrong? What if self-interference is not a real phe-
nomenon, despite its popularity as an interpretive tool? After all, the simplest way to
account for correlations among detection events is to assume that quanta interact with
each other, even when they are not involved in direct collisions. Such a hypothesis might
seem to go against the grain, but the relevant question is whether it is possible to formu-
late a plausible model for it. As shown elsewhere [8, 9], such a model can be developed
in a way that is consistent with the relevant experimental evidence. If quanta are treated
as sources of real waves, they can be shown to produce interference fringes without col-
liding directly. In the case of photons, the most important elements would be the length
of pulses and the amplitude of created waves, which tends to diminish with distance
from the source. This means that the reality of self-interference is testable by check-
ing for its indicators in critical cases, where the predictions of different approaches do
not converge. According to our analysis, the expected properties of self-interference did
not materialize in relevant experiments. By implication, Khrennikov’s conclusions are

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

3

strongly supported by empirical data. This means that quantum interference could re-
ally contain a hidden interaction, understandable in the language of classical mechanics.
By switching the explanation of negative probabilities from the properties of individual
quanta to the interactions among them, this approach has reopened the question of com-
pleteness of quantum mechanics. At least in the case of the double-slit experiment, an
alternative interpretation became possible. We review a few of the most relevant experi-
ments in the following chapter.

INTERFEROMETRIC EVIDENCE

The hypothetical absence of self-interference has several experimental implications that
have already been tested, as part of unrelated investigations [9]. Two of them are es-
pecially relevant for the present discussion. Firstly, correlations must vanish when their
physical preconditions are not met. Below predictable energy levels, which translate into
quantum density per volume of space-time, interference must become gradually unde-
tectable. In the case of photons, whose action is proportional to their duration, these
threshold rates must also depend on pulse-width. Secondly, individual quanta are ex-
pected to have well-deﬁned trajectories. Therefore, interference should persist even in
special settings, in which only one slit is accessible at a time, provided quanta have alter-
native access to more than one opening. At least for the situations that involve photons,
both of these predictions are in agreement with the experimental record.

Several preliminary remarks are in order, before we look at the data. When a classical
wave hits an obstacle with two openings, it will come out on the other side in the form
of two waves, displaying interference in their area of overlap. In this sense, the original
wave can be described as interfering with itself. Optical interference conﬁrms the wave
properties of light. Given this, should we expect the quanta of light to interfere with
themselves? If quantized waves were similar to classical waves, then we should always
expect self-interference. Yet, if they were constantly produced as discrete oscillations
by propagating localized sources, self-interference should be impossible. Every local-
ized source could only go through one slit, and the waves (deﬁned here as space-time
perturbations) could not be reﬂected by material obstacles. Both of these possibilities
can be resolved empirically, by looking for evidence of interference at extremely low
energy levels.

It is well-known that a single quantum cannot produce fringes. It can only produce
a detection click. In order to observe interference, large numbers of coherent photons
must be detected. Still, it is possible to determine if interaction prior to detection plays
any role in the ﬁnal outcome. For this, we must ensure that photons do not overlap
in transit and see if they display ﬁrst-order interference at arbitrary intervals between
single pulses. Firstly, single-photon pulses must have ﬁnite duration. Otherwise, they
will always overlap, no matter the time difference between any two detections. So, they
must be chopped, or emitted in discrete pulses. Secondly, the coherence time of the
source must exceed the interval between any two pulses at emission; otherwise the main
pre-condition for interference will not be met. If these technical features are guaranteed,
and interference persists at any rate of emission, then we can be conﬁdent about the
reality of self-interference.

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

4

There are numerous experimental proofs of interference at very low rates of emis-
sion. However, the two conditions mentioned above (especially pulse-width) were not
explicitly enforced in most cases. And in the few cases, when they appeared to be met,
interference vanished. Usually, insufﬁcient coherence at the source is suspected in such
cases. In our opinion, the evidence does not justify such an interpretation. For exam-
ple, Dontsov and Baz [10] suggested that discharge tubes, used as sources of photons,
cannot produce coherent light at low levels of excitation. They demonstrated this by
proving that interference vanished, when their source was weak. Furthermore, interfer-
ence fringes reappeared, when they increased the output of the sources by two orders
of magnitude. Nevertheless, when they placed neutral density ﬁlters behind the source,
diminishing the rate of detection to the same low levels, visibility dropped again. It is
remarkable that Dontsov and Baz were able to recover the fringes by moving the ﬁlters
beyond the interference volume, in front of the detectors. Thus, interference visibility
was independent from the technical state of the detectors, as well as from that of the
source. The main factor was the number of photons passing through the interference
volume per unit of time.

In a modern demonstration, Ribeiro and collaborators discarded the idler beam from
a source of spontaneous parametric down conversion (SPDC), and performed a double-
slit experiment with the signal beam [11]. They used a special set-up to achieve high
rates of emission and controlled the pump (input) beams with neutral density ﬁlters.
Narrow-band interference ﬁlters were used to screen for monochromatic detections
only. The result was a very clear demonstration of interference at high emission rates,
as well as of its gradual disappearance at lower rates. Unfortunately, Ribeiro et al.
concluded that their source cannot produce coherent photons at low rates, without
testing for alternative explanations. They could have placed a neutral density ﬁlter
behind the source, just like Dontsov and Baz, in order to see if fringes can be produced
by coherent photons at the same low emission rates. So, we have to look at other
experiments for a proper interpretation. In one experiment, Kim et al. controlled the
exact interval between independent signal photons emitted in pairs [12]. As the time-
delay between photons was increased, ﬁrst-order interference gradually vanished. This
shows that the interval between the quanta was more important than the state of the
source for the ﬁnal outcome. Though, a possible objection might be that spontaneous
sources cannot ensure phase-coherence, which could be especially important at large
intervals between pulses. Still, there is another experiment, by Kim and Grice [13], in
which sub-wavelength adjustments of time-delay were achieved. In these conditions,
maximum visibility was made possible by ensuring phase coherence between interacting
photons. Still, interference did not persist after a threshold interval between photons.
This evidence is sufﬁcient for us to conclude that self-interference did not happen in a
context, in which its preconditions were met. Whatever the nature of matter waves, they
do not seem to produce quantum interference via self-interaction.

It is also remarkable that interference happened even when quanta did not overlap in
space, provided they were within the threshold boundaries. This is evidence of remote
interaction between them, consistent with our hypothesis of space-time ﬂuctuations from
localized quantum sources. Furthermore, the interval between independent detections
was larger for Dontsov and Baz [10] than for Ribeiro et al. [11], as expected. Longer
pulses are physically closer to each other at ﬁxed rates of emission. This element is

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

5

well supported by the experiment of Santori et al. [4]. They used quantum-dots as
deterministic sources of photons to investigate interference between independent quanta.
They clearly showed that interference visibility for comparable intervals was higher for
quantum dots with longer excitation life-times, i.e. wider single-photon pulses.

A different requirement of self-interference is to have the two slits simultaneously
open at any time that a photon can pass. Its function is self-evident, because the whole
concept hinges on the ability of a wave to propagate from multiple secondary sources
and generate interaction between its components. Thus, it must be impossible to get
interference fringes with a single slit open at a time, if quantum self-interference is to
prevail as a valid theoretical concept. In practice, this requirement was violated in a very
convincing manner.

It is known that interference fringes do not form, when two slits are opened alterna-
tively at a very slow rate. However, it was shown above that photons do not produce
fringes at very low rates of emission even with both slits open. The only relevant set-
tings are those, in which quanta from both paths have sufﬁcient opportunities to interact.
Such a set-up was prepared successfully by Sillitto and Wykes [14], who used an electric
shutter to switch on and off the paths of a Young interferometer. Moreover, they were
able to switch both openings several times before any single photon could reach the de-
tector, even though the two paths were never open simultaneously. The estimated rate of
emission was low enough to have no more than one photon at a time in the apparatus
(106 quanta/sec for a transit time of 10−8 sec). However, the paths were controlled with
a birefringent device, which means that components from the same single pulse could
have accessed both trails. Such components could not have entered at the same time,
and they had to be temporally distinguishable inside the interferometer. Still, they were
close enough to interfere with each other. This, in our opinion, explains the high quality
of the results that were obtained.

The experiment of Sillitto and Wykes was designed to test the role of uncertainty. The
rate of switching exceeded the speed of the detector, making it impossible to link a click
with a path. This, in terms of the Copenhagen interpretation, proves that uncertainty in
our knowledge overrides physical properties. Even though photons must have been dis-
tinguishable during propagation through the interferometer, they were not observable as
such. However, distinguishability should be a matter of principle, independent from the
technological endowment of the observer. It should work regardless of the presence of
the observer, or of its choice of detector. Moreover, the experiment also showed a strong
dependency of fringe visibility on phase coherence, which was controlled by adjusting
the length of one path. Accordingly, the photon had to “know” the technological limits
of the observer as well as the exact length of both paths. Note that the photons also had
to interfere with themselves, without being physically able to access both paths! In our
opinion, the hypothesis of second-order quantum interaction via transient space-time
ﬂuctuations is much more credible for this experiment. Moreover, there are other tests
which conﬁrm our assessment of self-interference.

A very instructive version of the double-slit experiment was performed by Basano
and Ottonello [5]. They used two independent lasers, well isolated from each other,
in order to exclude any interaction between them, or between the photons, prior to
interference. The beams of each source were prepared such as to access only one
of two slits. Thus, every single photon had to pass through one slit at the most (or

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

6

be extinguished at the screen). High visibility interference was achieved. Again, the
experiment allows for speculations that our lack of knowledge somehow “washed out”
the physical parameters of individual photons. Other experiments, nevertheless, are
adding up to close this loophole. Santori et al. [4] have demonstrated photon bunching
with independent deterministic sources. In their set-up, single photons were emitted on
demand and their paths through the interferometer were well-known. The photons had
to have clear physical properties, even though their identity was lost at the detectors.

A possible objection to these last examples is that they refer to experiments with
multiple sources. Yet, there is another experiment, in which Fonseca et al. demonstrated
the so-called non-local double-slit interference [15]. Entangled co-propagating photons
from a single source were shown to produce fringes at independent detectors, without
ever crossing paths. As a result, path knowledge was complete for all the photons that
produced fringes in the coincidence count regime. Again, objections could be raised
that entanglement is a special case that does not apply to this context. However, it is
precisely our claim that all types of Young interference are multiple-photon phenomena
expressing the same underlying physical process. Entangled quanta must also behave as
localized entities, interacting through their associated waves. If our conclusion is wrong,
then the experiment of Fonseca et al. should work with counter-propagating photons as
well (see below). We hope that such an experiment will be performed in the near future.
In any event, the quoted evidence cannot be reconciled with the assumption of self-
interference. This is a strong argument in favor of p-adic valued probability analysis of
quantum interference, which predicted these kinds of ﬁndings. Theory and experiment
appear to converge on the conclusion that double-slit distributions are not reducible to
single-entity phenomena.

DISCUSSION

The wave properties of optical rays can be explained with great accuracy by invoking
Huygens’ Principle. According to the latter, every point on a wave-front can be treated
as a source of secondary waves. On the downside, this approach was known to have dif-
ﬁculties explaining the well-deﬁned directions of light waves, as well as the quantized
nature of electromagnetic energy. However, if quanta are treated as localized propa-
gating particles, generating space-time perturbations, then both of these problems can
be circumvented. Particles become the unobservable causal substratum for the electro-
magnetic waves. (The implication is that electromagnetic interactions could be analyzed
in terms of dynamic effects on the curvature of space-time). This could also explain
the correlations between detection events in a double-slit experiment, as suggested by
Khrennikov’s interpretation of negative probabilities. Quanta could generate discrete de-
tections, while still being under the inﬂuence of each other’s waves, without violating
classical causality. This hypothesis is quite easy to verify.

Pure waves can generate fringes only within their interference volume. Guided quanta,
on the other hand, must maintain their momentum even beyond such regions. Is there
any reason to believe that fringes are observable beyond interference volumes? In our as-
sessment, this phenomenon is fully demonstrated by the so-called position correlations,
displayed by pairs of co-propagating photons during their coincident detection at sepa-

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

7

rate detectors. As demonstrated for the ﬁrst time by Hanbury-Brown and Twiss (HBT),
such correlations are observable at arbitrary distances from the area of co-propagation,
and show up even at unequal distances between the detectors and the beam-splitter [16].
The experiment of HBT is widely believed to be a consequence of classical intensity cor-
relations. However, this hypothesis has very speciﬁc experimental consequences, which
did not materialize in a recent attempt to verify them [17].

Position correlations are an essential element of quantum imaging. The latter phe-
nomenon was also believed to depend on entanglement at the source. However, several
recent experiments have demonstrated quantum imaging with chaotic sources of light
[18, 19, 20, 21]. It should be noted that experiments with chaotic sources of light were
only able to produce quantum effects with low visibility. Still, they raise an important
question. Is entanglement essential for quantum effects, or is it just a superior technique
for generating reproducible states? We would like to propose an experimental solution
to this problem. According to our interpretation, fringe build-up requires (roughly) co-
propagating photons. To the best of our knowledge, quantum imaging, quantum erasure,
and other interference-dependent phenomena have only been demonstrated with set-ups
that began with co-propagating photons. Accordingly, counter-propagating entangled
photons should not be able to reproduce these effects with the same visibility. At the
same time, even independent chaotic beams should be able to produce quantum effects
in co-propagating arrangements. Moreover, we anticipate the possibility of achieving
high-visibility quantum imaging with chaotic sources of light, well above the current 30
percent ceiling. These proposals can be fulﬁlled with technology that is already available
in many labs. Given the high interest in this topic, we hope that such experiments will
be attempted in the nearest future.

The theoretical and experimental developments discussed in this paper are opening a
new perspective on the nature of quantum interference. On the one hand, we have better
means to interpret the peculiarities of quantum statistics. On the other hand, we have the
opportunity to test these implications with unprecedented accuracy. It is still too soon
to claim that a ﬁnal answer on this issue is available. However, we are persuaded that
negative probabilities do not reﬂect any kind of anomaly in Nature. On the contrary, it is
our understanding of Nature that has to improve until the mystery is solved.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is very grateful to Seraﬁno Cerulli-Irelli, Carlos Monken, Shahriar Afshar,
Paul Kwiat, Greg Jaeger, Steve Walborn, Yoon-ho Kim and Giuliano Scarcelli for their
help in ﬁnding relevant data.

REFERENCES

1. R. Feynman, “Negative Probability,” in Quantum Implications, edited by B. J. Hiley and F. D. Peat,

Routledge, London, 1987, pp. 235–248.

2. M. O. Scully, H. Walther, and W. Schleich, Phys. Rev. A 49, 1562 (1994).
3. A. Khrennikov, Il Nuovo Cim. 113B, 751 (1998).
4. C. Santori, et al., Nature 419, 594 (2002).

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

8

L. Basano, and P. Ottonello, Am. J. Phys 68, 245 (2000).
F. Louradour, F. Reynaud, B. Colombeau, and C. Froehly, Am. J. Phys. 61, 242 (1993).

5.
6.
7. D. Dubischar, V. Grundlach, O. Steinkamp, and A. Khrennikov, Il Nuovo Cim. 114B, 373 (1999).
8. G. Mardari (2004), quant-ph/0409197.
9. G. Mardari, AIP Conf. Proc. 810, 360 (2006).
10. Yu. Dontsov, and A. Baz, Sov. Phys - JETP 25, 1 (1967).
11. P. S. Ribeiro, S. Pádua, J. M. da Silva, and G. Barbosa, Phys. Rev. A 51, 1631 (1995).
12. Y.-H. Kim, et al., Phys. Rev. A 61(R), 051803 (2000).
13. Y.-H. Kim, and W. Grice (2003), quant-ph/0304086.
14. R. Sillitto, and C. Wykes, Phys. Lett. A 39, 333 (1972).
15. E. Fonseca, P. S. Ribeiro, S. Padua, and C. Monken, Phys. Rev. A 60, 1530 (1999).
16. R. H. Brown, and R. Twiss, Nature 177, 27 (1956).
17. G. Scarcelli, V. Berardi, and Y. Shih, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 063602 (2006).
18. R. Bennink, S. Bentley, and R. Boyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 113601 (2002).
19. R. Bennink, S. Bentley, R. Boyd, and J. Howell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 033601 (2004).
20. G. Scarcelli, A. Valencia, and Y. Shih, Eur. Phys. Lett. 68, 618 (2004).
21. A. Valencia, G. Scarcelli, M. D’Angelo, and Y. Shih, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 063601 (2005).

Interpreting Negative Probabilities

in the Context of Double-Slit Interferometry January 19, 2014

9

