6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint IBR-TP-06-39, November 14, 2006, sumitted to Physics Today

INSUFFICIENCIES OF THE 20-TH CENTURY THEORIES AND THEIR
NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPLICATIONS

Ruggero Maria Santilli
President
The Institute for Basic Research
P. O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34683, U.S.A.
CV at http://www.i-b-r.org/Ruggero-Maria-Santilli.htm

Abstract

Following a courageous denunciation by Barton Richter in Physics Today, November 2006,
of contemporary particle physics as being ”theological speculations,” we present insuﬃciencies
of special relativity, quantum mechanics, superconductivity, chemistry, standard model, gravi-
tation and astrophysics for conditions beyond those of their original conception.

FOREWORD
The author would like to express his sincere appreciation to Burton Richter for his courageous
denounciation, in Physics Today of November 2006, of the current condition of particle physics as
being esentially that of ”theological speculations.”

At the same time the author would like to lament that Richter did not enter with suﬃcient
technical depth into the ultimate origin of the ongoing crisis in particle physics because, in so doing,
he becomes part of the problem.

As well known, our planet is aﬄicted by increasingly cataclysmic climactic changes whose
solution requires new clean energies and fuels. But all industrially meaningful new energies and
fuels based on conventional disciplines had been discovered by the middle of the 20-th century.

Hence, the solution of said environmental problems crucially depends on the identiﬁcation of
the conditions of unequivocal applicability of the doctrines of the 20-th century, as well as the
broader conditions under which they are at best approximately valid, thus permitting the search
of broader vistas for much needed basic advances.

INSUFFICIENCIES OF SPECIAL RELATIVITY
The author has often indicated in his papers that Special Relativity (SR) has a majestic mathemat-
ical structure as well as historical veriﬁcations for the conditions originally conceived by Einstein
and limpidly identiﬁed in his writing, namely, for point-like particles and electromagnetic waves
propagating in vacuum, thus including relativistic treatments of the hydrogen atom, particle accel-
erators, and similar systems.

Admittedly, doubts on the ﬁnal character of SR within the arena of its original conception
have been voiced for about one century, and have lately increased particularly in view of what is
becoming the ultimate scientiﬁc frontier of basic research, the conception of space as a universal
medium.

Nevertheless, SR works well for systems verifying its original conditions, such as for particle ac-
celerators. Also, these conditions have no known relevance for the solution of current environmental
problems. Consequently, we believe that the ﬁrst reason for the ongoing ”theological speculations”

1

is the widespread lack of attention on the limitations of SR for physical conditions beyond these of
its original conception and experimental veriﬁcation, as outlined below.

ANTIMATTER: SR (as well as General Relativity, see below) provides no meaningful classical
representation of antimatter, in which ﬁeld it should be considered ”inapplicable,” rather than
”violated,” because antimatter had yet to be discovered at the time of conception of the theory.

This limitation is established by the absence of any classical distinctions between neutral systems
of matter and antimatter (that are particularly important for stars). Even for the case of charged
particles it is easy to see the inconsistency of the classical treatment (essentially done via the sole
change of the sign of the charge) because, e.g., the operator image of such a representation is given
by a ”particle” with the wrong sign of the charge, rather than a charge conjugated antiparticle.

Even though considered innocuous by a number of colleagues, in reality the above limitation
carries deep implications for numerous segments of contemporary physics including ”theological”
(rather than scientiﬁc) studies on cancer treatments via antiparticles, the gravity of elementary
antiparticles in the ﬁeld of matter, not to mention catastrophic inconsistencies in grand uniﬁed
theories without due attention to the inclusion of antimatter.

NONLOCALITY: For the evident purpose of enlarging the arena of applicability of SR, the
physical universe was generally believed during the 20-th century to be reducible to point-like
particles that, having no dimension, would always move in vacuum.

However, by the second part of the 20-th century it became already clear that such a view is
a mere approximation due to the fact that particles are generally extended and, even when having
point charges (such as the electron) they have indeed a extended wavepackets causing nonlocal
interaction of integral type (because extended over the volume of mutual penetration) that, as
such, cannot be reduced to a ﬁnite number of points, as needed for SR to apply.

Nonlocal interactions of the above type are dramatically beyond any possibility of scientiﬁc
representation by SR for numerous reasons, such as: the basic topologic of SR is inapplicable being
local-diﬀerential, thus implying the loss of Lie’s theory with consequential loss of the Lorentz and
Poincare’ symmetries; contact interactions are not derivable from a Lagrangian or a Hamiltonian,
while being of ”zero range” or of instantaneous character; the nonlocal interactions here considered
are generally nonlinear in the wavefunctions; and other reasons.

For ”theological” purposes, the nonlocal-integral interactions caused by deep wave overlapping
are generally dismissed as having no valid physical eﬀects. However, in the last part of the 20-th
century these interactions came to full light in chemistry because, after one century of failed eﬀorts,
it became impossible to achieve an exact representation of molecular binding energies (due to the
historical missing of 2 %).

In turn, this limitation forced departures from quantum axioms via the introduction of the
so-called ”screened Coulomb potentials” (see below for the loss of the very quantum of energy
under these adulteration of fundamental axioms). By contrast, recent studies have shows that an
exact representation of molecular characteristics emerges when valence electrons are represented
as they are in realty, point-like charges with extended wavepackets in conditions of deep mutual
penetration, thus experiencing not only potential interactions of Coulomb type, but also contact
nonlocal, nonlinear and non-Hamiltonian interactions.

The implications for particle physics of the above historical occurrence in chemistry begin to
illustrate rather dramatically the ”theological” nature of most contemporary particle research. If
nonlocal, nonlinear and non-Hamiltonian interactions have such implications in the deep wave over-

2

lappings of valence electrons, they are expected to have essentially similar numerical implications
for deep inelastic scattering of particles.

But the totality of contemporary particle experiments in inelastic scatterings are conducted via
the century old ”potential scattering theory” that simply cannot represent nonlocal-integral eﬀorts
expected to be inevitable for deep inelastic scatterings.

Hence, it is indeed possible to state without hesitation that most of contemporary ”experi-
mental results” elaborated via the conventional scattering theory can be at best qualiﬁed as being
”experimental beliefs” and they will remain so until a covering scattering theory is worked out.

IRREVERSIBILITY: Always for the studious intent of extending the arena of applicability of
SR beyond that od its original conception, it was generally believed during the 20-th century that ir-
reversibility is a macroscopic phenomenon because, according to such a theology, when macroscopic
objects are reduced to their elementary point-like constituents, irreversibility ”disappears.”

On serious scientiﬁc grounds, there are theorems (provable by graduate students in physics)
establishing that a macroscopic irreversible event cannot be consistently reduced to a ﬁnite number
of particles all in reversible conditions (and vice versa). Hence, irreversibility originates at the
ultimate level of nature, that of elementary particles.

Since all known potentials are reversible, the only possible or otherwise scientiﬁc origin of
irreversibility is provided precisely by the contact, nonlocal and nonpotential interactions considered
above.

But the entire mathematical and physical structure of SR is reversible in time, as well known.
Consequently, any belief of the exact characters of SR for irreversible processes, such as deep
inelastic scatterings to mention only one, can only be claimed to be purely ”theological,” since the
only credible scientiﬁc issue is the search for a suitable covering of SR that is as irreversible in
mathematical and physical structure as the phenomena to be represented.

At this point, and only following the above technical analysis, we can identify the unreassuring
implications for society of the theological condition of particle physics. On one side, society has a
compelling need for new clean energies, as now denounced by various heads of states and scientists
alike. On the other side, all energy releasing processes are irreversible, from ﬁre discovered since
the birth of human civilization to the most advanced nuclear energies.

Hence, the continued insistence in reducing the entire universe to abstractions compatible with

SR is much more than a ”theological” posture since it constitutes a real threat to society.

LIMITATIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
It is generally believed that Quantum Mechanics (QM) is universally valid for all possible conditions
existing in the universe. This belief too is more than purely ”theological” because it requires the
raising of serious issues of scientiﬁc ethics and accountability for the very survival of the human
society.

There is no doubt that, for the conditions under which particles can be credibly abstracted to be
point-like, QM is indeed exactly valid. This is the case for the hydrogen atom where QM achieved
majestic results with the exact representation of all spectral lines from ﬁrst unadulterated axioms
or the construction of particle accelerators via relativistic QM that do indeed work, in which cases
particles can be approximated as being point-like while moving in vacuum. Despite these historical
results, QM has its own clear limitations, such as:

ATOMIC PHYSICS: In the transition from the hydrogen atom to the helium, there exist

3

clear deviations of the prediction of QM from experimental data; these deviations increase with
the number of atomic electrons; and the deviations become embarrassing when passing to a QM
description of heavy atoms such as the zirconium.

The only possible reason for the insuﬃciency is the presence in systems with many electrons
of interactions beyond the representational capabilities of QM, which interactions can only be of
nonpotential type, that is, not derivable from a Lagrangian or a Hamiltonian.

Perhaps more dramatic has been the failure by QM to achieve any quantitative representation

of the spectral emission of the Sun in over one century of studies.

Under the above conditions, the belief of the universal validity of QM is not only ”theological”
but actually dangerous to society, since the only scientiﬁc issue is the search for a covering -
broadening of QM capable of achieving a more credible representation of nature.

SUPERCONDUCTIVITY: The current status of superconductivity can be compared to the
status of atomic physics prior to the quantum description of the atomic structure. In fact, QM
has indeed permitted a ﬁrst description of superconductivity, but via an ensemble of Cooper pairs
considered as point-like without a quantitative description of their structure (because identical
electrons are predicted by QM to repel each other, and are certainly not predicted to enter into
their deep correlation - bond as need for Cooper pairs).

Anybody who believes that superconductivity can reach truly basic advances without a quanti-
tative description of the structure of its main element, the Cooper pair (hence, without surpassing
QM via a suitable covering theory), rather than doing ”theological speculations,” raises serious
issues of scientiﬁc ethics and accountability.

CHEMISTRY: As stressed above, QM is exactly valid for the structure of ”one” hydrogen atom.
However, the same discipline is no longer exactly valid for the structure of ”two” hydrogen atoms
bonded into the hydrogen molecule because of the historical inability to represent a residual 2 %
of the binding energy from unadulterated ﬁrst principles.

Attempts to bypass this insuﬃciency have been conducted via the so-called ”screening of the
Coulomb law” and then the claim that quantum mechanics and chemistry are still valid. In reality,
the quantum of energy is solely possible for the unadulterated Coulomb law and it is impossible
for any of its various screenings, for which no quantized orbit can be deﬁned, thus raising serious
issues of scientiﬁc ethics and accountability for the very use of the name ”quantum mechanics and
chemistry” under the conditions considered.

The above insuﬃciency of QM should not be surprising because it can be predicted from its
inability to reach an exact representation of the spectral emissions of the helium, since the hydrogen
molecule and the helium both have two electrons.

Besides the above basic insuﬃciency, QM had prohibited a quantitative study of molecular
bonds because nuclei do not participate in such bonds due to their large mutual distance, as a
result of which molecular structures originate solely from valence bonds. But two electrons are
predicted to repel each other according to QM. Hence, the various notions of valence are pure
nomenclatures deprived of scientiﬁc, that is, quantitative content.

QM is also responsible for numerous additional insuﬃciencies or sheer inconsistencies in chem-
istry. One of them is the prediction that all substances are paramagnetic. This is a necessary
consequence of the absence of an actual, attractive force between identical valence electrons in
which case the electron orbitals of diﬀerent atoms are independent. It then follows from quantum
electrodynamics that the applicability of an external magnetic ﬁeld causes the polarization of the

4

orbitals of all the atoms of any chemical species, resulting in the indicated prediction of universal
paramagnetic character in dramatic disagreement with reality.

NUCLEAR PHYSICS.]: There is no doubt that QM has achieved historical results in nuclear
physics or that nuclear power plants conceived and constructed via quantum laws do indeed work.
However, any belief that QM is exactly valid in nuclear physis is asocial because of an excessive

number of unresolved basic insuﬃciencies.

As an example, following one century of eﬀorts, QM failed to achieve an exact representation of
the basic data of the lightest nucleus, the deuteron, since it still misses 1% of the magnetic moment
following all possible relativistic corrections; QM has been unable to represent the spin 1 of the
deuteron ground state (sice quantum axioms predict that the ground state of two particles with
spin 1/2 must be zero); there has been no credible explanation of the stability of the neutron when
a constituent of the deuteron; etc.

In passing to heavier nuclei, the insuﬃciencies of QM can only be qualiﬁed as embarrassing thus
demanding the construction of a covering theory more suitable to represent physical conditions
existing in the nuclear structure, since they are dramatically diﬀerent than the conditions of the
original conception of the theory, the planetary structure of the atom.

Without entering into additional technical insuﬃciency, any belief that QM is exactly valid
in nuclear physics can be easily disqualiﬁed as being asocial, let alone ”theological,” from the
incontrovertible evidence that nuclei do not have nuclei, namely, nuclei do not have a Keplerian
structure. Consequently, the basic symmetries of QM, the Galilean and Poincare’ symmetries,
cannot possibly be exact for nuclei since they notoriously apply solely to Keplerian or planetary
structures.

The social implications of the ”theological” belief of the exact character of QM in nuclear physics
are rather serious. Recall that, as it is the case for SR, QM is also strictly reversible in time. Yet all
energy releasing nuclear processes are irreversible. Consequently, the restriction of all research in
nuclear energies to comply with QM, that has been rigidly imposed by academia and governments
alike during the entire 20-th century, has perhaps done a damage to society of potentially historical
proportion.

PARTICLE PHYSICS: There is no doubt that contemporary particle physics is a synonym for
”quantum theology” with a rather severe price to pay by mankind for the increasingly cataclysmic
climatic conditions of our planet combined with the virtually complete lack by particle physics of
even attempting their solution.

Following the historical results for the structure of the hydrogen atom, the applicability of QM
has been extended to all possible conditions of particles with only rare critical analyses. However,
this ”applicability” has been achieved by introducing free parameter of generally unknown physical
origin, using them to achieve the ﬁt of experimental data, and then claim that QM is exact.

The most embarassing case of asocial particle theology occurs for the Bose-Einstein correla-
tion whose ﬁt of experimental data via QM has requested the two-points correlation function to
have four free parameters (called the ”chaoticity” parameters) to claim that relativistic quantum
mechanics is exactly valid in the ﬁeld. The problem for the supporter of such a view is that four pa-
rameters are prohibited by the quantum axiom of expectation values (because Hermitean operators
in this case have only two diagonal elements, thus allowing only two, rather than four parameters).
Consequently, rather than supporting QM, the chaoticity parameters are a direct measurement of
the deviation of QM from the physical reality of the Bose-EInstein correlation.

5

A fully similar situation occurs in various other particle events in which experimental ﬁts are
reached via ad hoc parameters and experimental results are claimed while in reality we merely have
a scientiﬁc religion.

NEUTRON SYNTHESIS AND DECAY: As originally conceived by Rutherford in 1920 and
veriﬁed by Chadwick in 1932, the neutron is synthesized in the interior of stars from the hydrogen
atoms, namely, from a proton and an electron.

While, on one side, all physicists admit this incontrovertible reality (because stars initiate their
lives as being solely composed of hydrogen, thus synthesizingh ﬁrst the neutron), on the other side,
very few particle physicists admit that QM is completely unable to represent such a synthesis to
such an extent that voids the use of ad hoc parameters because:

1) The familiar reaction p + e → n + ν violates the conservation of the energy unless the proton
and the electron have a kinetic energy of at least 0.78 MeV (in which case there is no energy left
for the neutrino). In fact, the neutron rest energy (939.56 MeV) is 0.78 MeV bigger than the sum
of the rest energies of the proton and the electron (938.78 MeV).

2) Recall that all QM bound states (such those for nuclei, atoms and molecules) have a ”nega-
tive” binding energy. The synthesis of the neutron requires instead a ”positive” binding-like energy.
Few physicists know that Schroedinger’s equation becomes physically inconsistent for the latter sys-
tems, as the reader is encouraged to verify by trying to solve any quantum bound state in which
the conventional negative binding energy is turned into a positive value. When this inconsistency
is attempted to bypass by assuming that the proton and the electron have a relative energy of at
least 0.78 MeV, the synthesis is prohibited because at that value the p-e cross section is extremely
small.

3) Assuming that the above basic problems can be solved along preferred orthodox lines, QM
cannot provide a representation of the meanlife, charge radius, and anomalous magnetic moment
of the neutron.

Rather than admitting the need of a covering of QM capable of a quantitative representation of
one of the most fundamental events in the universe, a widespread posture in support of the quantum
theology is that of ignoring the synthesis altogether. In the scientiﬁc reality, QM is inapplicable
for the synthesis not only of the neutron, but also of all hadrons at large.

The denial of the inapplicability of QM for the neutron synthesis can cause a damage to society
of potentially historical proportions because the neutron is the biggest and most inextinguishable
reservoir of clean energy available to mankind since it decays spontaneously (when isolated) into
a very energetic and easily trapped electron plus the innocuous neutrino (assuming it exists). A
serious scientiﬁc resolution of the synthesis of the neutron is expected to lead to means for its
stimulated decay in a selected class of light natural stable isotopes into equally light, natural and
stable isotopes with lower mass, thus resulting in a much needed clean energy due to the lack of
harmful radiations as well as the absence of radioactive waste.

Besides, the achievement of a serious knowledge on the possible laboratory synthesis and stim-
ulated decay of the neutron could have far reaching implications for society, such as permitting
conceivable means to stimulated the decay of radioactive nuclear waste, thus rendering environ-
mentally acceptable nuclear power plants as currently available. How can any physicist in the ﬁeld
oppose or otherwise ignore eﬀorts at surpassing QM via a suitable covering theory for the study of
environmentally acceptable energies and still expect respect?

The author hopes to be remembered for his irreconcilable disagreement with academic colleagues
and laboratory directors on the fact that QM and SR ”cannot” be exactly valid for the synthesis and,

6

therefore, the structure of hadrons (thus demanding speciﬁc experiments) for numerous reasons,
such as: the impossibility of the exact validity of local-diﬀerential theories within hyperdense media
requiring nonlocal-integral eﬀects; the inability to ﬁt experimental data from ﬁrst principles as done
for the structure of the hydrogen atom; the evidence that hadrons have no nuclei, thus prohibiting
the exact validity of fundamental spacetime symmetries such as the Galileo and the Poincare’
symmetries; and other reasons well known in the technical literature.

One of several resolutory experiments the author has recommended over decades to SLAC,
FERMILAB, CERN and other particle laboratories is the measure of the behavior of the meanlife of
unstable particles with energy, which behavior is expected to deviate from Einsteinian predictions in
view of internal nonlocal and non-Hamiltonian eﬀects. Regrettably, this and other resolutory tests
have been ignored in favor of experiments known to be aligned with pre-existing theories following
the use of ad hoc parameters, thus perpetrating the current status of ”theological speculations,”
rather the conduction of research that will resist the test of time.

INSUFFICIENCIES OF THE STANDARD MODEL FOR QUARK CONJECTURES
Following the above indicated conception of the neutron by Rutherford, and its veriﬁcation by
Chadwick, Heisenberg introduced the SU(2) isospin symmetry for a geometrical uniﬁed treatment
of protons and neutrons, which symmetries was subsequently extended to SU(3), to reach the
current formulation of the standard model.

As a result of historical achievement, we believe that the standard model has indeed achieved
the ﬁnal Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of particles into families. In fact, all fashinating predictions
of new particles, subsequently conﬁrmed by clear experiments, can be all reduced to the primitive
classiﬁcation capabilities of the theory.

However, the hypothesis that quarks are physical particles in our spacetime is a pure Barton’s
”theology” because it has remained aﬄicted by a plethora of fundamental unresolved (as well as
generally unspoken) insuﬃciencies, such as:

1) According to the standard model, at the time of the synthesis of the neutron the proton
and the electron literally ”disappear” from the universe to be replaced by hypothetical quarks as
neutron constituents. Moreover, at the time of the neutron spontaneous decay, the proton and the
electron literally ”reappear” again. Both these views are repugnant to scientiﬁc reason, because
the proton and the electron are the only stable massive particles clearly established so far and, as
such, they simply cannot ”disappear” and then ”reappear” because so desired by quark supporters.
The only plausible hypothesis for the neutron synthesis p + e =¿ n + v is that the proton and the
electron are actual physical constituents of the neutron as originally conjectured by Rutherford,
although the latter view requires the adaptation of the theory to physical reality, rather than the
opposite attitude implemented by quark ”theologies”.

2) When interpreted as physical particles in our spacetime, quarks cannot experience any grav-
ity. As clearly stated by Albert Einstein in his limpid writings, gravity can only be deﬁned in our
spacetime, while quarks can only be deﬁned in the mathematical, internal, complex valued unitary
space with no possible connection to our spacetime (because prohibited by the O’Rafearthaigh’s
theorem). Consequently, physicists who support the hypothesis that quarks are the physical con-
stituents of protons and neutrons, thus of all nuclei, should see their body levitate due to the
absence of gravity.

3) When, again, interpreted as physical particles in our spacetime, quarks cannot have any iner-
tia. In fact, inertia can only be rigorously admitted for the eigenvalues of the second order Casimir
invariant of the Poincare’ symmetry, while quarks and their masses cannot be deﬁned with such a

7

basic spacetime symmetry, as expected to be known by experts to qualify as such. Consequently,
the idea that quarks have physical masses is pure ”theology” deprived of true scientiﬁc content. In
reality, ”quark masses” are arbitrary parameters used to ﬁt things.

4) Even assuming that, with unknown scientiﬁc manipulations, the above inconsistencies are
resolved, it is known that quark theories have failed to achieve a representation of all characteristics
of hadrons, with catastrophic insuﬃciencies in the representation of spins, magnetic moments, mean
lives, charge radii and other basic features of hadrons. The sole need to conﬁne quarks due to the
lack of their detection should be suﬃcient for their dismissal as physical particles since a serious
conﬁnement can only be achieved via the by-passing of Heisenberg’s uncertaintly principle that
always admit a ﬁnite probability for quarks to be free. Hence, the very conception of quarks is
in conﬂict with QM axioms (the sole possibility to have an identically null probability for quarks
to tunnel outside is by rendering incoherent the interior and exterior Hilbert spaces, namely, by
assuming a generalzed mechanics in the interior of particles).

5) It is also known by experts that the application of quark conjectures to the structure of nuclei
has multiplied the controversies, while resolving none of them. As an example, the assumption that
quarks are the constituents of protons and neutrons in nuclei has failed to achieve a representation
of the main characteristics of the simplest possible nucleus, the deuteron. In fact, quark conjectures
multiply the limitations of QM to represent the spin 1 of the deuteron (since there are problems even
in representing the spin or the proton and of the neutron), of the anomalous magnetic moment of the
deuteron (because the ”theological” quark orbits are too small to allow the needed polarizations),
or the stability of the neutron when a deuteron constituent, they are unable to represent the charge
radius of the deuteron, etc.

The author’s view is that quarks are indeed necessary for the standard model, and he uses
them routinely for calculations in the ﬁeld, trivially, because quarks are the regular representation
of the SU(3) symmetry. Yet, after decades of studies in the ﬁeld, the author has been unable to
identify truly serious reasons for quarks to be physical particles in our spacetime. At any rate, the
continuation of claims that quarks are physical particles without a rigorous proof that they have
gravity goes beyond the level of Barton’s ”theology” since it raises serious problems of scientiﬁc
ethics and accountability.

On historical grounds, the classiﬁcation of nuclei, atoms and molecules required two diﬀerent
models, one for the classiﬁcation and a separate one for the structure of the individual elements of
a given family. Quark theories depart from this historical teaching because of their conception of
representing with one single theory both the classiﬁcation and the structure of particles.

The view advocated is that, quite likely, history will repeat itself. The transition from the
Mendeleev classiﬁcation of atoms to the atomic structure required a basically new theory, QM.
Similarly, the transition from the Mendeleev-type classiﬁcation of particles to the structure of
individual particles will require a broadening of the basic theory, this time a generalization of QM
due tg thedramatic diﬀerences of the dynamics of particles moving in vacuum, as in the atomic
structure, to the dynamics of particles moving within hyperdense media as in the hadronic structure.
In the ﬁnal analysis, the ”theology” that quarks are physical particles in our spacetime is, by
far, the most dangerous for mankind because it prevents even the consideration of the new clean
energy contained in the neutron, trivially, because according to the standard model the neutron
constituents cannot be released free. By comparison, if the proton and the electron are the physical
constituents of the neutron according to Rutherford’s conception, the electron can be excited by
stimulating the neutron’s decay with the understanding that QM must be necessarily abandoned
in favor of a covering theory developed for the synthesis, as stressed earlier.

8

The reader should not forget that nuclear, atomic and molecular structures have made mo-
mentous contributions to mankind precisely because their constituents can be produced free. By
comparison, quark conjectures have made no practical contributions whatever and none is even
remotely conceivable precisely because of the ”theology” that quarks are permanently conﬁned.

In short, the insuﬃciencies of the quark hypothesis are a mere manifestation of Richter’s ”the-
ological speculations,” not on marginal aspects, but on the truly fundamental aspect, the impos-
sibility for QM and SR to be exactly valid for the synthesis, structure, scattering and decays of
particles.

INSUFFICIENCIES OF THE STANDARD MODEL FOR NEUTRINO CONJEC-
TURES
Following Pauli’s indication that the synthesis of the neutron from a proton and an electron ac-
cording to QM misses spin 1/2, and Fermi’s hypothesis of the neutrino (meaning ”little neutron”
in Italian), neutrino physics is today part of the standard model.

Despite clearly historical studies, neutrino physics is indeed a clear example of Barton’s ”theo-
logical speculations” because it has remained aﬄicted by fundamental, unresolved (as well unreas-
suringly unspoken), theoretical and experimental problems, such as:

1) Neutrino physics is based on an excessive number of individually unveriﬁable assumptions.
In fact, the original hypothesis of one massless neutrino, was replaced by the sequential hypotheses
that: there exist three diﬀerent neutrinos and their antiparticles; neutrinos have masses; neutrino
masses are diﬀerent; neutrinos “oscillate”; with additional hypotheses expected due to the known
insuﬃciencies of all preceding ones.

2) According to the standard model, said various neutrinos can traverse very large hyperdense
media (such as entire stars) without any collision while being massive particles carrying energy in
our spacetime. This view is outside scientiﬁc reason.

3) As indicated earlier, the synthesis of the neutron p + e → n + ν misses 0.78 MeV. In the
event the proton and the n eutron have the relative energy of 0.78 MeV, there is no energy left for
the neutrino and, in any case, the synthesis is not possible due to the virtually null cross section
of protons and electrons at said energy.

4) Calculations on the “bell shaped” form of the energy of the electron in nuclear beta decays
show that no energy appears to be left for the neutrino, provided hat nuclei are represented in
their actual extended size. In fact, the Coulomb interaction between an extended nucleus and the
emitted electron varies with the direction of the beta emission, with maximal (minimal) value for
radial (tangential) emissions, the ’missing energy” being apparently absorbed by the nucleus.

5) Neutrino experiments are perhaps more controversial than theoretical studies because: the
number of events used as ”experimental evidence” for the existence of neutrinos is excessively small
over an extremely large number of events, thus preventing acceptance by the physics community
at large; experimental data are elaborated with a theory crucially dependent on the existence of
the neutrinos, in which case the ”experimental results” are expected to depend on the theoretical
assumptions; the theory contains an excessive number of parameters (such as the diﬀerent neutrinos
masses and others) essentially capable to achiever any desired ﬁt; some of the recent ”neutrino
detectors” contain radioactive isotopes that could themselves trigger the very few selected events;
and other reasons.

The author fails to understand an argument often voiced as ”evidence” for the existence of the
neutrino, the experimental evidence on the conservation of the leptonic number. In fact, such an
argument de facto implies that the violation of parity in weak interactions is ”evidence” for the

9

existence of another yet unknown particle.

In reality, the lack of existence of the neutrino as physical particle in our spacetime can stimulate
momentous advances, such as conceivable new communications propagating via longitudinal im-
pulses through the ether at a speed predicted to be a multiple of that of the conventional transversal
electromagnetic waves, thus providing hopes that mankind may one day initiate interstellar com-
munications for which light signals can only be compared to smoke signals during the early human
civilization. Yet, the price to pay for these momentous advances is the abandonment of the religious
”theology” of the universal validity of SR for all conditions existing in the universe.

We believe that all the above insuﬃciencies are just a manifestation of the truly basic one,
namely, Richter’s ”theological speculations” not referred to tangential aspects. but to the inap-
plicability of QM and SR for conditions outside those of their original conception, thus being
inapplicable as exact disciplines, rather than violated.

INCONSISTENCIES OF GENERAL RELATIVITY AND ASTROPHYSICS
While QM and SR have their own arena of exact validity outside which they remain valid as an
approximation of reality, General Relativity (GR) is known to be, by far, the most controversial
scientiﬁc ”theology” in history because of an excessive number of structural inconsistencies in its
conception, such as:

1) We have all been teaching at the graduate school of physics that analytic theories without a
Hamiltonian cannot represent any dynamics, trivially, because of the impossibility of formulating
any meaningful time evolution. GR has indeed an identically null Hamiltonian and, consequently,
any attempt at dynamical treatments, such as the evolution of planets, is a pure ”theology” deprived
of serious or otherwise credible scientiﬁc content.

2) Assuming that the above basic inconsistency can be somewhat bypassed, GR is noncanonical
at the classical level and nonunitary at the operator level.
it is today known that these theories
verify the ”theorems of catastrophic inconsistencies.” In fact. GR cannot leave invariant in time
the basic unit of its geometry, thus being unable to preserve in time the numerical values of the
units of measurements, with consequential catastrophic collapse of the mathematical structure (due
to the loss over time of the base ﬁeld), as well as of the physical structure (inability to admit the
same numerical predictions under the same conditions at diﬀerent times, violation of causality, and
other inconsistencies inherent in all noncanonical or nonunitary theories).

3) Einstein’s ﬁeld equations Gµν = 0 are irreconcilably incompatible with quantum electro-
dynamics because they attempt the reduction of gravity to pure curvature without source while
quantum electrodynamics requires the presence of a ﬁrst-order source tensor even for neutral sys-
tems such as the pi-zero meson. In any case, Einstein’s attempt to reduce gravity to pure curvature
without source is disproved by the forgotten ﬁfth identity of the Riemannian geometry, the Freud
Identity (that requires the presence of two source tensors).

4) GR is not compatible with SR on numerous counts, such as the presence in GR of a well
deﬁned Newtonian limit in PPN approximation but the absence of any meaningful Minkowskian
limit; the impossibility for gravitational conservation laws to admit a relativistic counterpart due
to the fact that the latter are the generators of a symmetry, the Poincare’ symmetry, while GR has
no symmetry but only covariance.

5) It is today known that the bending of the light near astrophysical bodies, that lead to a world
wide support of GR as well as to one of Einstein’s Nobel prizes, in reality is due to the Newtonian
attraction of light, and deﬁnitely not to curvature. Also, curvature is irreconcilably incompatible
with a main gravitational event, the free fall of bodies along a radial line for which the notion of

10

curvature has no sense. Additionally, the notion of curvature does not allow a unique representation
of experimental data since there are several possible PPN expansions and, consequently, several
possible numerically diﬀerent gravitational realities. Should the author keep going?

There is no doubt that the religious fervor in support of a catastrophically inconsistent theory
such as GR, while systematically ignoring incontrovertible inconsistencies, has lead to the biggest
scientiﬁc ”theology” in history, including large collateral scientiﬁc damage, such as: wasting a river
of ink and public money in attempting a grand uniﬁcation inclusive of gravitation that is simply
beyond rational science due to dramatic structural diﬀerences; an additional river of ink and public
funds to attempt a reconciliation of QM and GR that have also been theological inquiries since a
ﬁrst year graduate student in physics can prove that, assuming GR admits a consistent operator
formulation, quantities that are observable (Hermitean) at the initial time are no longer so at a
later time for a nonunitary theory (Lopez’s lemma).

The implications for astrophysics of the widespread extension of SR to conditions it is clearly
inapplicable plus the use of a GR aﬄicted by so vast inconsistencies can only be dubbed as dramatic.
To illustrate the gravity of the condition, recall that the statement ”universal constancy of the
speed of light” is one of the most corrupt statement in science when not completed with the words
”in vacuum,” since the veriﬁcation has solely occurred in vacuum and it is today well established
that the speed of light is smaller than that in vacuum for transparent media of low density while
it is generally bigger than that in vacuum for transparent media of high density.

. At any rate, the extension of the speed of light as the maximal causal speed for the hyperdense
media in the interior of stars and quasars is beyond scientiﬁc reason since light does not even
propagate within these media. But then, the use of the speed of light ”in vacuum” to compute the
energy equivalence of a ”hyperdense” star E = mc2, the conjecture of dark matter and all that can
only be dubbed as ”wild theologies” since recently calculated maximal causal speeds within the
hyperdense interior of stars and quasars are so vastly bigger than that in vacuum to void any need
for dark matter.

Similarly, the most plausible explanation not only for the expansion of the universe, but also for
its acceleration, is that the universe is made up of matter and antimatter galaxies under mutual,
continuous gravitational repulsion.

This old cosmological conception has been systematically discredited for about one century
on religious grounds that both SR and GR do not admit antigravity. The point where serious
science turns into a ”wild theology” mandating senatorial investigations when perpetrated under
governmental support is that both the SR an d GR cannot even represent antimatter, as recalled
earlier.

The ”theological” diﬃculty for new vistas in astrophysics is that they mandate the abandonment
of SR and GR for suitable covering theories more plausible for the interior of matter stars and
diﬀerent covering theories for antimatter stars.

THE ONGOING SCIENTIFIC OBSCURANTISM
In the 1970s, the author received research support from the United States Air Force Oﬃce of
Scientiﬁc Research (USAFOSR). One day, in thge mid 1970s, the author received a phone call from
an oﬃcer of the USAFOSR informing him that the U. S. Military had decided to terminate support
for academic research. In fact, soon thereafter funding of academic research was passed to ERDA
that subsequently became the U. S. Department of Energy (DOE).

At that time, the author was rather naive and asked: ”But how can the American Military
remain strong if funding of academic research is ended?” at which the USAFOSR oﬃcer promptly

11

replied ”Because we cannot allow the security of the United States be hostage to pet theories
preferred by professors at leading academic institutions.”

Following the passage of three decades,, nobody can credibly deny that the U. S. Military has
made scientiﬁc and technological advances beyond our imagination, while academic research has
solely seen ”theological speculations” such as neutrino or quark conjectures and the like, without
any truly basic and/or fundamental advance.

The reason for the transparent disparity is precisely that stated by the USAFOSR oﬃcer,
namely, that military research has advanced because without any religious attachment to preferred
”pet theories,” while no possible basic advance for academic research could be predicted since the
mid 1970s, and none actually occurred, because of the systematic restriction of all research funding
and academic positions to be ”hostage” of preferred ”pet theories.”

Few academicians know that a number of U. S. corporations are now following the example of
the U. S.Military, namely, they avoid disclosing to academia the most advanced part of their R&D.
In fact, the author has conducted advanced corporate research under contractual obligations not
to disclose it to academia because of expected abuses of academic authority in the protection of
preferred ”pet theories” causing the termination of corporate research funding.

All these and other unreassuring occurrences are a manifestation of the insuﬃciency of Burton
Richter’s denunciation of the theological nature of contemporary research because, even though
deserving full respect and appreciation by any responsible scientist or citizen, such a denunciation
did not have suﬃcient depth to identify the origin of the problem in the religious dominance of
preferred ”pet theories” now merely belonging to the past century.

After some 50 years of research, the author feels obliged to denounce the ongoing existence of
a scientiﬁc obscurantism of such a dimension to dwarf by comparison the scientiﬁc obscurantism
imposed by the Vatican during Galileo’s times.

Even though fully deplorable, the origin of the latter obscurantism can be seen in actual religious
issues of the time, while Galileo’s ideas eventually proved to have do damaging eﬀect to the Vatican.
By comparison, the origin of the ongoing scientiﬁc obscurantism can be seen in very large organized
interests in pre-existing theories of such a dimension to render lilliputian the religious interests
during Galileo’s time.

Above all, the obscurantism imposed by the Vatican had no impact on the people of Galileo’s
times since it dealt with religious dogmas. By comparison, the ongoing scientiﬁc obscurantism is
having a potentially devastating impact on our planet because, as shown during these comments, the
solution of the increasingly cataclysmic climactic changes is known not to be admitted by quantum
mechanics and special relativity but to require their surpassing via suitable covering theories.

The only possibility of avoiding a condemnation by posterity of historical proportion is that the
U. S., British, German, French and other physical societies implement a serious scientiﬁc democracy
for qualiﬁed inquiries in which research and publications along ”pet theories” do indeed continue
but, jointly, physical societies halt their current practices of dismissing basic advances via attempted
discrdeditations and abuse of authority, rather than credible technical arguments. As a matter of
fact, to really serve society in a moment of need, physical societies should have the opposite posture,
that of providing priority to much needed basic advances and relegate studies along preferred ”pet
theories” for what they are, ”theological speculations” outside contemporary real science.

In short, it is time for the physics community to come to its senses and admit that ”basic
research” primarily refers to the laborious eﬀort of trial and error, not toward tangential issues
of marginal relevance on pre-existing doctrines, but toward basic advanced beyond pre-existing
doctrine. After all, the rather widespread ”theological” belief that quantum mechanics, special and

12

general relativity and the standard model are of ﬁnal character for all events in the universe is
strictly amoral, ascientiﬁc and asocial.

REFERENCES
The literature underlying the studies touched in the above comments is so vast to prevent discrimi-
natory partial lists. Serious scholar may consult the 90 pages long General Bibliography available at
www.i-b-r.org/Hadronic-Mechanics.htm The same web site presents conceivable covering theories
for the solution of the insuﬃciencies and/or inconsistencies herein considered. Additional speciﬁc
studies can be located in the www.arxiv.org by searching papers under the author’s name, and
inspecting the quoted references.

Ruggero Maria Santilli
Carignano (Torino), Italy
November 14, 2006

13

