6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

BR-EP-33-05-01-06 revised 10-03-06 and 10-26-06 1, submitted for publication

Fundamental Neutrino Experiments
Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research, Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
ibr@gte.net, http://www.i-b-r.org
PACS 13.35.Hb, 14.60.Lm, 14.20.Dh

Abstract

We review fundamental open problems in neutrino physics and propose two basic experiments

for their possible resolution.

Following Rutherford’s prediction of the synthesis of the neutron inside stars from protons and
electrons [1a], Chadwick conﬁrmation [1b], Pauli’s objection for the lack of spin 1
2 , Fermi’s hypoth-
esis of the neutrino (meaning ”little neutron” in Italian) [1d], and other advances, the neutrino
hypothesis is today part of the standard model (see, e.g., [1e].

Despite clearly historical results, the neutrino physics has remained aﬄicted by fundamental,

unresolved, theoretical and experimental problems, such as:

1) Neutrino physics is based on an excessive number of individually unveriﬁable assumptions.
In fact, the original hypothesis of one massless neutrino, was replaced by the sequential hypotheses
that: there exist three diﬀerent neutrinos and their antiparticles; neutrinos have masses; neutrino
masses are diﬀerent; neutrinos “oscillate”; with additional hypotheses expected due to the known
insuﬃciencies of the preceding ones.

2) According to the standard model, said various neutrinos can traverse very large hyperdense
media such (as entire stars) without any collision while being massive particles carrying energy in
our spacetime. This view is beyond scientiﬁc plausibility.

3) The familiar reaction p+ + e− → n + ν violates the conservation of the energy unless the
proton and the electron have a kinetic energy of at least 0.78M eV , in which case there is no energy
left for the neutrino. In fact, the neutron rest energy (939.56M eV ) is 0.78 M eV bigger than the
sum of the rest energies of the proton and the electron (938.78M eV ).

4) Calculations on the “bell shaped” form of the energy of the electron in nuclear beta decays
N (A, Z) → N (A, Z + 1) + e− + ¯ν show that no energy appears to be left for the neutrino, provided
hat nuclei are represented in their actual extended size. In fact, the Coulomb interaction between
an extended nucleus and the emitted electron varies with the direction of the beta emission, with
maximal (minimal) value for radial (tangential) emissions, the “missing energy” being apparently
absorbed by the nucleus.

5) Neutrino experiments are perhaps more controversial than theoretical studies because: the
number of events used as ”experimental evidence” for the existence of neutrinos is excessively small
over an extremely large number of events, thus preventing acceptance by the physics community
at large; experimental data are elaborated with a theory crucially dependent on the existence of
the neutrinos, in which case the ”experimental results” are expected to depend on the theoretical
assumptions; the theory contains an excessive number of parameters (such as the diﬀerent neutrinos
masses and others) essentially capable to achiever any desired ﬁt; some of the recent ”neutrino
detectors” contain radioactive isotopes that could themselves trigger the very few selected events;
and other reasons.

For additional insuﬃciency studies, one may consult Bagge [2a] and Franklin [2b] for alternative
theories without neutrinos; Wilhelm [2c] for additional problematic aspects; M¨ossbauer [2d] for

1

problems in neutrino oscillations; Fanchi [2e] for apparent biases in ”neutrino experiments”; and
references quoted therein.

A main point attempted to convey in this note is that the above issues can be best solved via
theoretical and experimental studies on the neutron synthesis and decay. The historical diﬃculty is
that, while neutrons are unquestionably synthesized from protons and electrons inside stars, such a
synthesis cannot be consistently treated via quantum mechanics for numerous reasons, such as: 1)
The Schr¨odinger equation becomes physically inconsistent for the ”positive” binding-like energies
needed for the reaction p+ + e− → n + ν, as the reader is encouraged to verify by trying to solve any
quantum bound state in which the conventional negative binding energy is turned into a positive
value; 2) Quantum mechanics cannot represent the spin of the neutron as per historical objections
[1c.1d]; and, additionally, 3) Quantum mechanics cannot provide a representation of the meanlife,
charge radius, and anomalous magnetic moment of the neutron.

In view of these limitations, comprehensive studies have been conducted for the construction
of a broader nonunitary realization of the (abstract) axioms of quantum mechanics (qm) under the
name of hadronic mechanics (hm) [3a-3c]. The main idea is that quantum mechanics is assumed
to be exactly valid for all mutual distances of particles permitting their credible approximation as
being point-like, while at smaller mutual distances (e.g., of about 1F ) nonunitary corrections are
admitted to represent contact, nonlinear, nonlocal and non-Hamiltonian eﬀects expected in deep
mutual penetrations of particles.

Following applications and veriﬁcations in various ﬁelds [loc. cit.], the new mechanics did
achieve an exact and (time) invariant nonrelativistic [3d] and relativistic [3e] representation of all
characteristics of the neutron synthesized from a hydrogen atom (see [3f,3h] for reviews). Physi-
cal consistency of Schr¨odinger’s equation is regained because nonunitary transforms cause a new
renormalization (called mutations) of the rest energy and other particle features under which the
binding energy returns to be negative. A nonunitary transform U U † 6= I, Limr>>1F (U U †) = I of
the conventional equations for the hydrogen atom then permitted the exact and invariant repre-
sentation, with one single structural equation, of the rest energy, charge radius, meanlife, charge
and parity of the neutron.

The representation of the neutron spin turned out to be easier than expected. To avoid large
repulsive forced as occurring in gears, the electron is constrained to penetrate within the proton in
singlet coupling and to orbit with an angular momentum equal to the proton spin (otherwise the
electron has to rotate against the hyperdense medium inside the proton) resulting in a null total
angular momentum. Consequently, in this model the spin of the neutron coincides with the proton
spin. The exact representation of the neutron magnetic moment follows from the contribution due
to the (generally ignored) orbital motion of the electron within the proton. It should be noted that
an angular momentum with value 1
2 is anathema for quantum mechanics, but fully acceptable for
the covering hadronic mechanics precisely in view of its nonunitary structure [3f,3h].

The model is generally indicated with the symbol n = (ˆp+, ˆe−)hm, where the ”hats” denote par-
ticles ”mutated” (or deformed) by their deep mutual penetration or, more technically, characterized
by irreducible representations of the nonunitary covering of the Poincar´e symmetry known as the
Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry (see [3a] for details and large bibliography). Note that the conven-
tional Poincar´e symmetry cannot be credibly claimed to be absolutely ”exact” for the structure of
the neutron as well as hadrons at large due to the lack of a planetary structure [3a].

Intriguingly, the model admits only one energy level, that of the neutron. Consequently, the
”excited states” of the neutron are given by the conventional energy states of the hydrogen atom,
since at distances bigger than 1F quantum mechanics is regained exactly and uniquely. The

2

extension of the model to the remaining hadrons and its compatibility with the standard model
are discussed in Ref. [3f].

To continue these studies, Santilli [3f] has recently submitted the hypothesis of the etherino
(meaning ”little ether” in Italian) with symbol ”a” (from the Latin aether), representing an ”entity”
with mass and charge 0, spin 1
2 , and energy 0.78M eV and new reaction p+ + a + e− → n. The
missing quantities carried by the etherino are assumed to originate either from the interior of stars
or from the ether conceived as a universal medium with very high energy density. The latter
possibility was submitted to allow quantitative studies of the old hypothesis of continuous creation
of matter in the universe since its most plausible realization could occur precisely in the synthesis
of neutrons inside stars [3f]. Note that the etherino represents the transfer of quantities from the
medium to the neutron and it does not represent a particle as conventionally understood.

The need at the quantum level of a new entity for the neutron synthesis originates from several
reasons [3f], including: the impossibility of using an antineutrino for delivering the missing quan-
tities according to the reaction p+ + ¯ν + e− → n due to impossibility of any realistic scattering
of ¯ν with p+ and/or e−; the impossibility of assuming that the proton and the electrons have the
missing (relative) energy of 0.78M eV because at that value their cross section is extremely small
(of the order of 10−20barns); and other reasons [3a].

It should be stressed that at the level of hadronic mechanics there is no need for the etherino
hypothesis due to the equivalence (p+, a, e−)qm ≈ (ˆp+, ˆe−)hm. In fact, the nonunitary covering of
the Hilbert space (called iso-Hilbert space [3a]) is a direct representation of the missing quantities
in the neutron synthesis [3a,3f]. One should keep in mind that the l.h.s of the preceding expression
is not solvable, while the r.h.s is exactly solvable.

Note that the (quantum) etherino hypothesis is not necessarily in conﬂict with the (quantum)
neutrino hypothesis, because the former deals with the neutron synthesis while the latter deals
with the neutron decay, and we can indeed have the sequence p+ + a + e− → n → p+ + ¯ν + e−.
However, it should be indicated that the neutron decay according to hadronic mechanics does not
mandate the emission of a neutrino, because the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry for non-planetary
structures allows the conversion of rotational into linear motions (e.g., via constraints) as for the
sling shot, with sequence (ˆp+, ˆe−)hm = n → p+ + e−. Additionally, we may have the sequence
p+ + a + e− → n → p+ + a + e− where the ﬁnal a represents the return of the originally missing
quantities to the medium. In con short, despite studies on the issue for decades, this author knows
of no truly conclusive theoretical argument either in favor or against the neutrino hypothesis.

Figure 1: The proposed laboratory synthesis of the neutron from protons and electrons.

It should be also indicated that the possible lack of existence of the neutrino is not necessarily in
conﬂict with neutrino experiments, since the new vistas could merely require their reinterpretation,

3

e.g., via impulses a triggered by the neutron decay and propagating through the ether, n → (p+ +
e−)spacetime + aether, thus eliminating the assumption that massive particles can cross entire stars
without any collision. This possibility could initiate research for new interstellar communications
because the propagation of the ”impulse” a through the ether can only be longitudinal, thus having
a multiple of the speed of conventional (transversal) electromagnetic waves.

The experimental community cannot continue to leave neutrino physics fundamentally unre-
solved without risking a serious condemnation by posterity. In the hope of stimulating the ter-
mination of the current condition, in this note we propose the following experiments that could
establish the existence of the neutrino in a ﬁnal form or support broader vistas.

Proposed experiment on the neutron synthesis. There is no doubt that neutrino physics
will remain fundamentally unresolved until we have resolutory experiments on the neutron syn-
thesis. The ﬁrst laboratory synthesis of the neutron from protons and electrons known to this
author was conducted in Brazil by the Italian priest-physicist Don Carlo Borghi and his associates
[3g] (for a review, see [3h]). The tests were apparently successful, although they do not allow the
measurement of the energy needed for the synthesis.

The latter information can be obtained in a variety of ways. That recommended in this note
consists in sending a coherent electron beam against a beryllium mass saturated with hydrogen
and kept at low temperature (so that the protons of the hydrogen atoms can be approximately
considered to be at rest). A condition for credibility is that said protons and electrons be polarized
to have antiparallel spins due to large repulsions in triplet couplings indicated earlier. Since the
proton and the electron have opposite charges, said polarization can be achieved with the same
magnetic ﬁeld as illustrated in Fig. 1.

Figure 2: The proposed measurement of the electron energy in neutron decays.

Neutrons that can possibly be synthesized in this way will escape from the beryllium mass and
can be detected with standard means. The detection of neutron produced with electron kinetic
energies systematically in excess of 0.78M eV would provide ﬁnal conﬁrmation of the neutrino
hypothesis. The systematic detection of neutrons synthesized either at the threshold energy of
0.78M eV or less would support alternative hypotheses [2,3f], and render plausible the old hypothesis
of continuous creation of matter in the universe via the neutron synthesis. Note that the latter
possibility would not necessarily deny the existence of the neutrino because experimental results
on the neutron synthesis cannot be credibly claimed to apply necessarily for the neutron decay.

Proposed experiment on the neutron decay. It is also clear that neutrino physics will
remain basically unresolved until we have new experimental data on the spontaneous neutron decay.

4

This information can be reached in numerous ways. That recommended in this note is to conduct
systematic measurements of the energy of the electron emitted in the decay of a coherent beam
of low energy (e.g., thermal) neutrons as depicted in Fig. 2. The systematic detection of electron
energies less than 0.78M eV (plus the neutron energy) would not necessarily conﬁrm the existence
of the neutrino due to the alternative decays n → p+ + ¯ν + e− or n → p+ + ¯a + e−. The detection
of electron energies systematically given by 0.78M eV (plus the neutron energy) would support
alternative vistas [2,3f].

Note that the conduction of the proposed test with “high energy” neutrons would not be
resolutory because the variation of the electron energy expected to be absorbed by the neutrino
would be excessively smaller than the electron energy. The conduction of the test via nuclear
beta decays is also not recommendable due to the indicated expected dependence of the electron
energy from the direction of beta emission, which dependence is ignorable for the case of decay of
individual neutrons. The author has been unable to identify in the literature any conduction of
the proposed test since all available experiments refer to nuclear beta decays rather than that of
individual neutrons.

References

[1] H. Rutherford Proc. Roy. Soc. A 97, 374 (1920) [1a]. J. Chadwick Proc. Roy. Soc. A 136,
692 (1932) [1b]. W. Pauli, Handbuck der Physik Vol. 24, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1933) [1c].
E. Fermi Nuclear Physics, University of Chicago Press (1949) [1d]. M. Kaku, Quantum Field
Theory, Oxford University Press, New York (1993) [1e].

[2] E. R. Bagge, World and Antiworld as Physical Reality, Haag and Herchen, Frankfurt (1994)
[2a]. A. Franklin, Are There Really Neutrinos? Westview Press, Boulder, CO (2000) [2b]. H.
E. Wilhelm, Hadronic Journal 27, 349 (2004) [2c]. R. L. M¨ossbauer, J. de Physique C 3, 121
(1984) [2d]. J. Fanchi, Hadronic J. 28, 717 (2006) [2e].

[3] R. M. Santilli, Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Volume III Ukrainian Academy of Sciences,
Kiev (in press), pdf ﬁles available at http://www.i-b-r.org/Hadronic-Mechanics.htm) [3a]. R.
M. Santilli, Foundations of Hadronic Chemistry, Kluwer (2001) [3b]. R. M. Santilli, ]isodual
theory of antimatter, Springer (2006) [3c] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 13, 513 (1990) [3d].
R. M. Santilli, JINR Comm. E4-93-352 (1993) and Chinese J. Syst. Eng. and Electr. 6, 177
(1996) [3e]. R. M. Santilli, ”Neutrino or etherino?” IARD 2006, Found. Phys. (to appear) also
available at http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0610263 [3f]. C. Borghi, C. Giori, and A. Dall’OIlio,
J. Nucl. Phys. 56, 147 (1993) [3g]. R. M. Santilli, The Physics of New Clean Energies and
Fuels According to Hadronic Mechanics, Special Issue of the Journal of New Energy (1999),
http://www.neutronstructure.org [3h].

5

