J.H.Field

E-mail: john.ﬁeld@cern.ch

Ernest-Ansermet CH-1211 Gen`eve 4.

D´epartement de Physique Nucl´eaire et Corpusculaire Universit´e de Gen`eve . 24, quai

6 The physics of space and time I: The description of rulers and
0
clocks in uniform translational motion by Galilean or Lorentz
0
transformations
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
3
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A calculus based on pointer-mark coincidences is proposed to deﬁne, in a math-
ematically rigorous way, measurements of space and time intervals. The connection
between such measurements in diﬀerent inertial frames according to the Galilean
or Lorentz transformations is then studied using new, simple, and practical clock
synchronisation procedures. It is found that measured length intervals are Lorentz
invariant, whereas moving clocks show a universal time dilatation eﬀect. The ‘rel-
ativistic length contraction’ and ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀects of conventional
special relativity theory are shown to be the consequence of calculational error. Two
derivations of the Lorentz transformation from simple postulates, without reference
to electrodynamics or any other dynamical theory, are reviewed in an appendix.

PACS 03.30.+p

Abstract

1

Introduction

The historical development of Special Relativity (SR), which may be deﬁned as the
physical theory of space and time, in the absence of gravitational eﬀects, was intimately
connected during the second half of the 19th Century with that of classical electrody-
namics. The transformation of time and of transverse spatial coordinates was proposed
by Voigt [1] in order to leave invariant the form of the wave equation in diﬀerent inertial
frames. Subsequently, ﬁrst Larmor [2], and later Lorentz proposed [3] a similar trans-
formation of time, as well as a transformation of the longitudinal spatial coordinate, to
obtain a similar invariance of the free-space Maxwell Equations.1. This close connection
has persisted in text-book presentations of SR until the present day. An example is the
emphasis that is still placed, following Einstein’s seminal paper [5], on the space-time
properties of ‘light signals’, ‘light waves’ and, in particular Einstein’s light-signal synchro-
nisation procedure, when deriving or discussing the space-time Lorentz Transformation
(LT). The latter, with the aid of the further deﬁnitions of relativistic velocity, momen-
tum and energy (see Section 7 below) enable all the kinematical predictions of SR to be
derived.

The aim of the present paper is to present the space-time LT –which is the essence
of SR– in a completely new light, without any reference to electrodynamics or any other
dynamical theory.
In particular, two aspects are discussed. The ﬁrst is the axiomatic
basis of the LT. This is done, in a general way, below, in the present section, where
some sets of postulates, from which the LT may be derived, are presented and motivated,
and in more detail in the Appendix where two previously published [6, 7] derivations
of the LT are reviewed. The second and more novel aspect of this paper is a careful
application of the Galilean Transformation (GT) or the LT to measurements of space and
time intervals performed, with the aid of rulers and clocks, in diﬀerent inertial frames.
Important for this discussion are, ﬁrstly, the method by which space and time intervals
are experimentally determined, and secondly, synchronisation procedures for spatially
separated clocks in the same, or diﬀerent, inertial frames. The procedures proposed avoid
completely the ‘conventionality’ [15] associated with the Einstein light signal method [5]
and the subsequent necessity of postulating, in SR, the spatial isotropy of the speed of
light.

The present study provides a simple and clear explanation for the shortcomings in the
current physical interpretation of the space-time LT that have been pointed out, from a
diﬀerent point-of-view in a previous paper [8] by the present author. In fact the ‘relativity
of simultaneity’ and ‘length contraction’ eﬀects of SR, for which, unlike time dilatation,
no experimental evidence exists [8], are found to be illusory –the consequence of a trivial
mathematical error in the description of synchronised clocks by the LT equations.

Since the ﬁrst version of the present paper was completed, but not released, in late
2005, a number of short papers have been written by the present author explaining in
either a logically concise [9] or in a pedagogical [10, 11] manner the conclusions of Ref. [8]

1It is diﬃcult to understand why Larmor’s work, published in 1900, was not cited in Lorentz’ 1904
paper where identical transformation equations were given. See Ref. [4] for a discussion of priority issues
related to the discovery of the Lorentz Transformation.

1

and the present paper. Other papers [12, 13]have pointed out the existence of a genuine
relativity of simultaneity eﬀect in SR, when synchronised clocks in diﬀerent inertial frames
are viewed from a third one. A companion paper [14] gives a detailed reassessment of
Einstein’s 1905 paper on SR [5] in the light of the ﬁndings of Ref. [8] and the present
paper.

Some postulates which may be used to derive the LT are now presented and brieﬂy
discussed. In his original special relativity paper [5] Einstein explicitly stated2 two pos-
tulates, (E1) and (E2) from which he proceeded to his derivation of the space-time LT.
These were:

(E1) The dynamical laws of nature are the same in any inertial frame.

(E2) The speed of light is the same in any inertial frame, and is independent

of whether the source is stationary or in motion3.

The postulate (E1), the ‘Special Relativity Principle’, was not new. Indeed it is equally
valid in pre-relativistic Newtonian mechanics, and had been clearly stated [16] already by
Galileo. The second postulate, (E2), is highly counter-intuitive. Common sense would
suggest that if light is of a corpuscular nature, as imagined by Newton, the speed of a
particle of light would be expected to be greater, if the source moves in the same direction
as its motion, and smaller, if it moves in the opposite direction, than light emitted from a
source at rest. If, on the other hand, it is supposed that light is some kind of wave motion,
as was generally assumed in the second half of the 19th Century, it is expected that some
kind of prefered frame will exist –that of the medium supporting the wave motion that is
identiﬁed with light– the ‘luminferous aether’. In this case the speed of light is expected
to be diﬀerent for observers with diﬀerent velocities relative to the aether frame.

However, it was very soon realised that the postulate (E2) is not necessary to derive
the LT. Indeed, already as early as 1910, Ignatowsky [17] published a derivation of the LT
which (although the postulates on which it is based are not explicity stated) is similar, in
its essential features, to the ﬁrst derivation of the LT presented in the Appendix of the
present paper. That the postulate(E2) is not necessary to derive the LT was pointed out
by Pauli in the monograph on relativity [18] that he wrote in 1921. At the time of this
writing, the literature on derivations of the LT not using postulate (E2) is vast. A partial
list up until 1968 can be found in a paper by Berzi and Gorini [22]. A survey of the more
recent literature is given in the paper [6] by the present author.

These ‘lightless’ derivations of the LT can be divided into two broad categories:

(i) Those in which the postulate (E2) is replaced by some other ‘strong’ kinematical
consequence of the LT such as conservation of relativistic transverse momentum or
relativistic ‘mass increase’.

(ii) Those in which the minimum number of, and only very weak, postulates are em-

2There are also several other postulates that are tacitly assumed such as linearity of the equations,
spatial isotropy and the Reciprocity Postulate that is discussed below. For more details see Reference [6].
3Actually, Einstein did not explicitly state in his second postulate that the speed of light is the same
in all inertial frames, only that it is independent of the motion of its source. The constancy of the speed
of light was considered to be a ‘law of nature’, and so a particular case of postulate E1.

2

ployed.

Examples of derivations of type (ii) may be found in Refs. [19, 20, 21] and Refs. [6, 7]
by the present author. For the reader’s convenience the essential features of two latter
derivations are recalled in the Appendix of the present paper. The postulates used in
these derivations are the following:

(A) Each Lorentz Transformation equation must be a single-valued function

of all its arguments.

(B) Reciprocal space-time measurements of similar rulers and clocks at rest
in two diﬀerent inertial frames S, S’, by observers at rest in S’, S respectively,
yield identical results.

(C) The equations describing the laws of physics are invariant with respect
to the exchange of space and time coordinates or, more generally, with respect
to the exchange of spatial and temporal components of 4-vectors.

The postulate (B) is a generalisation of Pauli’s postulate (c)4 [18].

The derivation of Ref. [6] is based on (A) and (B), that of Ref. [7] on (A) and (C).
These postulates alone are suﬃcient to derive the LT for space and time intervals along
the common x, x′ axis of two inertial frames S and S’ in relative motion parallel to this
axis. The additional postulate of spatial isotropy is needed for the transformation of
events lying outside the x, x′ axis.

It is interesting to compare the postulates (A), (B) and (C) with the Einstein postulates
(E1) and (E2). (A) and (C) are essentially mathematical statements about the structure
of physical equations but make no reference to any dynamical or kinematical laws of
physics.

The meaning of postulate (A) is that, if the LT equations are written as

fx(x′, x, τ, v) = 0,

ft(t′, x, τ, v) = 0

where τ and t′ are times recorded by observers at rest in S of clocks at rest in S and S’
respectively, and v is the velocity of S’ relative to S along the x, x′ axis, the solution for
α1, given α2 and α3 must be a single valued function of α2 and α3. Here, α1 α2 and α3
are any permutation of x′, x and τ for fx and of t′, x and τ for ft. A suﬃcient condition
for this is that fx and ft be multilinear functions of their arguments. The physical basis
of the postulate (A) is very obvious: One, and only one, event (x′, t′) can exist in S’ for
each event (x, τ ) in S.

The postulate (C) makes a much more speciﬁc and powerful statement about the
structure of physical equations but makes no reference, unlike (B), to inertial frames or
the results of space-time measurements performed in these frames. Still, in combination
with the weaker (but still purely mathematical) postulate (A) it is suﬃcient to derive the
LT.

4This postulate states that, in the notation of the present paper, ‘the contraction of lengths at rest in

S’ and observed in S is equal to the contraction of lengths at rest in S and observed in S’.’.

3

The postulate (B), which was termed the ‘Kinematic Special Relativity Postulate’ or
KSRP in Refs.[6, 7], but would be more properly called the ‘Measurement Reciprocity
Postulate’, or MRP, may seem obvious to some readers. Indeed, it is often tacitly assumed
to hold in derivations of the LT. This was eﬀectively done in Einstein’s original derivation.
However, as will be demonstrated below, only kinematical deﬁnitions and pure logic are
needed to show that Einstein’s counter-intuitive postulate (E2) is a necessary consequence
of the ‘obvious’ postulates (A) and (B).

All of the physical consequences of SR can be derived from the space-time LT, either
directly, by applying them to space or time measurements performed in diﬀerent inertial
frames, as discussed in detail below in the present paper, or by using them to deﬁne the
transformation properties of other quantities of physical interest. However, to derive the
LT only the weak and ‘self apparent’ postulates (A) and (B) are necessary.

Given the title of Einstein’s original SR paper ‘On the Electrodynamics of Moving
Bodies’ and that of Poincar´e’s SR paper [23] published in the following year ‘On the
Dynamics of the Electron’ what then is the essential connection between electrodynamics
and the fundamental physics of SR? The perhaps surprising, but simple, answer is: ‘None’.
The properties of space and time (actually because the subject here is physics, those of
measurements of space and time) underlie and take precedence over any dynamical aspect
of physics, with the possible exception of the general relativistic theory of gravitation,
which is not considered here. These properties may be compared to a canvas on which
the electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions paint the picture that we perceive as
the physical world. Paint is not needed to make canvas. The subject of this paper is
just the canvas, that is, the physics of space and time intervals as measured in diﬀerent
inertial frames in the absence of gravitational eﬀects.

Spatial intervals are measured by rulers and temporal intervals by clocks. Therefore
the subject of the present paper reduces essentially to a study of the modus operandi of
rulers and clocks as measuring instruments. The important problem of synchronisation of
spatially-separated clocks is addressed from scratch. A simple procedure of master clock
synchronisation (synchronisation by ‘pointer transport’) is suggested to synchronise an
arbitary number of spatially separated clocks in a given inertial frame. An equally simple
method (synchronisation by ‘length transport’) that may be used to synchronise an ar-
bitary number of spatially separated clocks in the same, or diﬀerent, inertial frames is also
proposed. When this is done, it is seen that measurements of the space intervals between
stationary objects, or of objects moving with the same velocity, are the same whether
the GT or the LT is used. The measured spatial separation of any two such objects, or
equivalently the length of a ruler, is a Lorentz invariant quantity –it is independent of the
frame in which it is measured [24]. There is no relativistic ‘length contraction’. Uniformly
(v/c)2,
moving clocks all appear to run slow according to the time dilatation factor
but all synchronised clocks in any inertial frame show the same time, as viewed from any
other inertial frame –there is no ‘relativity of simultaneity’ in this case.

1
q

−

The structure of this paper is as follows: in the following section the measurement of
space and time intervals is discussed at a fundamental level, where each measurement is
identiﬁed with a spatial pointer-mark coincidence. The equivalence of the physical concept
of time with that of uniform motion, or cyclic motion of constant period, is stressed. In

4

Sections 3 and 4 the the pointer transport and length transport synchronisation methods,
In Section 5 the relation of space and time measurements
respectively, are presented.
in diﬀerent inertial frames is considered. The diﬀerent predictions of the GT and the
LT are compared and contrasted. Section 6 explains the spurious and unphysical nature
of the related ‘relativity of simultaneity’ and ‘relativistic length contraction’ eﬀects of
conventional special relativity theory.
It is shown in Section 7 how Einstein’s second
postulate (E2) is a consequence of indentifying light with massless particles –photons.
Section 8 contains a summary and a brief discussion of the impact of the conclusions of
the present paper and Ref. [8] on other aspects of SR.

2 The measurement of space and time intervals

The equations of physics contain symbols representing quantities at many diﬀerent
levels of mathematical abstraction from those representing the raw data of any experiment.
However, in order to provide meaningful predictions for the result of any experiment, the
mathematical expression of any physical theory must contain, at least, symbols in exact
correspondence with experimental raw data. Only in this way is it possible to compare
theory and experiment. Particularly for space and time measurements, great care must be
taken to ensure this exact correspondence between raw data and the theoretical symbols
that represent them. The raw data itself however has a very simple and universal form.
As succinctly stated in Ref[25]:

However, every experiment in physics in which measurement plays a part

reduces essentially to an operation involving the observation of the
coincidence of a point or pointer with a mark on some scale, or the
comparison of sets of such coincidences; and the symbolic expression of the
observation is made by means of numbers associated with the marks.

This procedure evidently applies to the measurement of the length of an object or the
distance between two objects, but, as will be seen, it applies equally to the measurement
of time intervals –that is the raw data of time measurements can always be expressed in
terms of the measurement of some corresponding spatial interval. For time measurements
the concept of local Pointer-Mark Coincidences. denoted in the following, for brevity, as
PMC, is therefore equally important.

In Einstein’s ﬁrst paper on special relativity [5] can be found the following important

statement concerning the measurement of time:

We have to take into account that all our judgements in which time plays

a part are always judgements of simultaneous events. If, for instance, I say
‘‘The
‘‘That train arrives here at 7 o’clock’’, I mean something like this:
pointing of the small hand of my watch to 7 and the arrival of the train are
simultaneous events’’.

Observation of the time of arrival of the train then requires the simultaneous occurence

5

Figure 1: a) Measurement of the distance,L, between two objects O1,O2, at rest, by a
ruler. The pointers P O1, P O2 on the objects are in spatial coincidence with the ruler
marks MR(5) and MR(22). The times of the corresponding PMC: P 01@MR(5) and
P 02@MR(22) are arbitary. b),c) measurements of the distance between the same two
objects when they are both moving parallel to the ruler with the same uniform velocity,
v. The corresponding PMCs: P 01@MR(5) and P 02@MR(22) in b) and P 01@MR(9)
and P 02@MR(26) in c) must be simultaneous in each case. d) Time measurement by
an analogue clock in terms of the PMC between the hand, constituting a time-dependent
MC(12). The hand rotates with
pointer P C, and the uniformly spaced marks MC(1)
constant angular velocity ω.

−

6

of the two following PMC:

(i) Of a pointer on the train with a mark on the platform at the same position as the

observer with the watch.

(ii) Of the pointer constituted by the small hand of the watch with the mark correpond-

ing to ‘7 hours’ on the dial of the watch.

In order to specify, in a precise mathematical manner, the raw data of space and time
measurements in the following (which deﬁnitions must be rigorously respected by the
symbols of the theory of space and time) a symbolism for pointers, marks and pointer-
mark coincidences is now introduced. The spatial coincidence of a pointer, P, with a mark,
M, at time, t, deﬁnes a PMC at time t : P MC(t)
P (t)@M. As indicated, pointers
are usually (but not necessarily) time dependent whereas marks are time-independent
and in one-to-one coincidence, in an obvious way, with numbers that represent Cartesian
or angular coordinates. Simple examples are the marks on a ruler or on the dial of an
analogue clock.

≡

Einstein’s measurement of the arrival of a train at 7 o’clock at Bern station is then

expressed symbolically as follows:

P MCT (tT )

P T (tT )@MP, P MCW H(tT )

P W H(tT )@MW H(7),

≡

≡

P MCW M(tT )

P W M(tT )@MW M(0)

≡

xT = x(MP ),

tT = t(MW H(7), MW M(0))

Here P T , P W H and P W M are a pointer on the train and the hour and minute hands
of Einstein’s watch respectively. MP is a mark on the station platform at Bern and
MW H(7), MW M(0), are the marks for 7 hours and 0 minutes on the watch dial.
If
Einstein’s watch is correctly synchronised with the Bern master clock then tT = 7h00min
If not, the functional dependence of tT = t(MW H(7), MW M(0)) is more
Bern time.
complicated. If Einstein’s watch is in advance or retarded relative to the Bern master
clock additional constants must be respectively subtracted from of added to tT . A suitable
synchronisation procedure based on a master clock is described in the following section.

Some examples of elementary space and time measurements are shown in Fig.1. In
Fig.1a, the spatial separation between two objects O1 and O2 at rest is measured via the
marks MR(J) on a ruler. Here J is the ordinal number of the ruler mark. To each mark
is associated a number specifying a Cartesian coordinate: xJ = x[MR(J)] The PMC
specifying this measurement are:

P MC1(t1)

P O1(t1)@MR(5), P MC2(t2)

P O2(t2)@MR(22)

(2.1)

≡
The measured separation of the objects is then:

≡

L

L(0) = x[MR(22)]

x[MR(5)]

≡

−

(2.2)

L(v) is the spatial separation of the objects when they are both moving with velocity v
parallel to the ruler. It may be noted that in this case, since the objects are at rest, the
times t1 and t2 at which P MC1 and P MC2 are established are arbitary.

7

In Fig.1b a similar measurement of the spatial separation of O1 and O2 is made
except that both objects now move with uniform speed v parallel to the ruler. Such a
measurement requires simultaneity of P MC1 and P MC2:

P MC1(t1)

P O1(t1)@MR(5), P MC2(t1)

P O2(t1)@MR(22)

(2.3)

The measured separation, L(v, t1) is still given by Eqn(2.2). The measurement may be
performed at any other time provided that the condition of simultaneity is respected. For
example, as shown in Fig.1c:

P MC1(t2)

P O1(t2)@MR(9), P MC2(t2)

P O2(t2)@MR(26)

(2.4)

while

L(v, t2) = x[MR(26)]

x[MR(9)]

−

It is clear from the uniformity of the marks on the ruler that all three measurements of
the spatial separation of the objects give the same result:

≡

≡

≡

≡

L

L(0) = L(v, t1) = L(v, t2)

≡

The measurement of the spatial separation of two objects with equal uniform motion then
evidently, as in the case of the time measurement mentioned by Einstein and quoted above,
requires simultaneous observation of two distinct P MC. The simultaneity requirement
thus presupposes the existence of synchronised clocks at the spatial locations of the two
P MC. In Section 4 below this relation will be inverted to provide a method to synchronise
clocks in the same, or diﬀerent, inertial frames.

The spatial conﬁgurations of the objects and the ruler in Fig.1a,b,c provide indepen-
dent and consistent measurements of the spatial separation of the objects, whether they
are at rest or in uniform motion. The comparison of the conﬁgurations in Fig.1b and 1c
also provides the simplest possible example of the measurement of a time interval. For
this it is necessary to associate P MC1(t1) with P MC1(t2) or P MC2(t1) with P MC2(t2).
That is to consider the coincidences of a given pointer with two diﬀerent marks5

P MC1(t1)

P O1(t1)@MR(5), P MC1(t2)

P O1(t2)@MR(9)

≡

≡

∆t(1) = (t2 −

t1)1 =

x[MR(9)]

x[MR(5)]
}

−

1
v {

or

P MC2(t1)

∆t(2) = (t2 −
From the uniformity of the ruler marks it is clear that:

P O2(t1)@MR(22), P MC2(t2)
1
v {

x[MR(26)]

t1)2 =

−

≡

≡
x[MR(22)]
}

P O2(t2)@MR(26)

(2.9)

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.8)

(2.10)

(2.11)

∆t(1) = ∆t(2)

∆t

≡

In this example it is evident that the concept of time is inseparable from that of rectilinear
motion with the uniform speed v. Comparing Fig1c and 1d it can be seen that the

5That measurements of length intervals require P M C between diﬀerent pointers and diﬀerent marks,
whereas time interval measurements require P M C between the same pointer and the same, or diﬀerent,
marks was previously pointed out by G. Burnison-Brown [26].

8

measurement of a time interval by an analogue clock is in everyway similar to the example
just discussed. The ruler in Fig1c is bent into the form of a circle and the objects O1 and
O2 moving with uniform speed in a straight line are replaced by the hand of the clock,
P C, rotating with uniform angular velocity ω.

An alternative way to introduce the concept of a measurable time into physics is to
assume the existence of physical systems with a reproducible periodic motion. In this
case, the concept of a measurable time interval is inseparable from that of the existence of
physical systems executing cyclic motion with a constant period. It is then clear, ﬁrstly,
that ‘time’ and ‘uniform motion’ are inseparable concepts in physics and, secondly, that
time measurements may always be constructed from P MC, that is from spatial pointer-
mark coincidences, given the existence of physical systems executing uniform motion,
whether rectilinear or periodic. For the case of periodic motion, the P MCs must contain
the same pointer and mark. Consider, for example, the analogue clock of Fig.1c where
the pointer (hand) P C rotates with constant angular velocity ω. The period is deﬁned
by successive P MC of the type P C@MC(J). The corresponding period is τ = 2π/ω.

3 Clock synchronisation by pointer transport

As described in the previous section, in order to measure the length interval between
two moving objects, two instantaneous P MC must be recorded. This requires, in turn,
that synchronised clocks are placed at each ruler mark. The present section describes how
an arbitary number of clocks, all at rest in a common reference frame, may be synchronised
with a master clock, M, also at rest in the same frame.

It is assumed that all clocks may be connected to M by cables C1,C2,... of identical con-
struction but of diﬀerent lengths, so as to conveniently link all of the to-be-synchronised
clocks to M. The pointer is an electrical signal generated at a known value of the time
recorded by the master clock. The slave clocks are stopped at the beginning of the syn-
chronisation procedure and are started by the PMC corresponding to receipt of the pointer
signal from M. One other clock, A, is also equipped with a pointer signal generator similar
to that of M. This clock may then be used as a secondary master clock. Three steps are
necessary to synchronise an arbitary clock, C, at some ﬁxed position in the same reference
frame, with M:

(a) The clocks M, A and B, assumed all to run at the same rate, are connected as shown
in Fig.2a. Cables C1 and C2 are of equal, but arbitary, length (it does no need to
be known) whereas C3 is of precisely known length. Simultaneous pointer signals
are sent from M along C1 and C2 to A and B. The latter two clocks are initially
stopped and set to time zero. On receipt of the pointer signals A and B start and
thereafter indicate synchronous times. The start signals are received simultaneously
by A and B because the cables C1 and C2 are of equal length, and being of similar
construction have the same signal propagation velocity uS.

(b) As shown in Fig.2b, a pointer signal is now sent, at known time tA, from A to B
along C3, after these clocks have been sychronised as described in (a). Reception of

9

Figure 2: a) A procedure to synchronise two clocks A and B in the same inertial frame by
pointer transport using a master clock M (see text). b) Measurement of the signal speed
uS in the cable C3, of known length, using the synchronised clocks A and B.

10

Figure 3: A procedure to synchronise a clock at an arbitary position in the same frame
as the master clock M. The cable C4 is of known length, ℓ4 and known signal speed uS.
When the clock C starts at the time tS = ℓ4/uS it is synchronous with M.

the signal stops B at the time tB. If ℓ3 is the length of cable C3 (suitably corrected
to take into account signal transit times in A and B) the speed of signal propagation
is measured to be:

uS =

ℓ3
tB −

tA

(3.1)

(c) In order to synchronise with M an arbitary clock C, at any distance from M, it is
connected, to M by a cable, C4, of arbitary but known length, ℓ4. This cable is of
similar construction to C1, C2 and C3 and has the same signal propagation speed
uS. The clock C is stopped and set to the time t = tS = t0 + ℓ4/uS. where t0 is a
convenient, pre-determined, time oﬀset, and uS has been determined as in (b) above.
At time t = t0 a pointer signal is sent from M to C. When the clock C is started
by the pointer signal at M time tS it is synchronous with M. This synchronisation
procedure is illustrated In Fig.3 for the case t0 = 0.

The above method enables synchronised clocks to be placed at arbitary positions in
any given frame of reference, but does not address the problem of synchronisation of clocks
in frames in relative motion. A method to synchronise an arbitary number of clocks in
an inertial frame with a similar array of clocks in another inertial frame is described in
the following section.

11

4 Similar motion of two objects in a single inertial
frame. Clock synchronisation by length transport.
The moving ruler clock

Figure 4: Space-time trajectories of two objects O1 and O2 undergoing equal uniform ac-
celeration during one unit of time in the inertial frame S. The distance between the objects
is L at all times. The distance between the objects is also L at all times in their common,
instantaneous, co-moving inertial frame, S’. As the two objects are referred, in both cases,
to a single frame of reference, the above statements concerning their separation are valid
for a space-time geometry described by either the Galilean or the Lorentz transformation.
These transformations relate only space and time measurements, performed in diﬀerent
inertial frames, of a single object.

The motion along the x-axis of an inertial frame S of two objects O1 and O2 is now
considered. At time t = 0 the objects are at rest and separated by the distance L. Each
object is then subjected to an identical acceleration program during the time tacc in S. The
instantaneous co-moving inertial frame of the objects, at any instant, is denoted by S’. For
t > tacc, S’ is a ﬁxed inertial frame moving with speed v relative to S. For deﬁniteness the
acceleration program is chosen to correspond to a constant acceleration, a, in the frame
S during the period 0 < t < tacc. In this case the positions of the objects O1, (O2) in S:
x1(t), (x2(t) at time t are given by the equations:

0 < t < tacc

x1(t) =

1
2

at2

x2(t) = x1(t) + L

12

(4.1)

(4.2)

Figure 5: Deﬁnitions of the diﬀerent PMC used to measure the spatial separation of two
objects O1 and O2 moving parallel to the ruler M1

M2. See Eqns(4.5)-(4.10).

−

13

tacc

≥

t

1
2

x1(t) =

at2

acc + v(t

tacc)

−

x2(t) = x1(t) + L

(4.3)

(4.4)

where v = atacc

The space-time trajectories of O1 and O2 in S are shown in Fig.4. At all times, the
spatial separation of the objects is equal to their initial separation L. Because of the
symmetry of the acceleration program the separation of the objects in the co-moving
inertial frame S’, x′

x′
1, is also L at all times.

2 −

The objects O1 and O2 may be replaced by clocks initially synchronised in the frame
S, by the procedure described in the preceding section. In view of the symmetry of the
acceleration program, it is evident that such clocks must remain synchronised at all times,
including during the phase of uniform motion when t
tacc. The clocks are then mutually
synchronised in the inertial frames S and S’ at all times, but they are not necessarily
synchronised with a clock at rest in S.

≥

A procedure is now established to synchronise a pair of clocks in S’ with a pair of
clocks in S, whether or not the latter have been previously mutually synchronised by the
procedure described in the previous section. The ﬁrst step towards this goal is to set up
an experiment to measure the distance between O1 and O2 during the phase of uniform
motion at speed v of the two objects. As all such measurements in physics they are
constructed from the coordinates corresponding to PMC. The method employed is shown
in Fig.5. A simple ruler with two marks, M1 and M2 separated by the known distance l
is placed along the x-axis and the following PMCs are recorded using synchronised clocks
in S at the positions of M1 and M2:

P MC2(t21)
P MC1(t11)

P O2(t21)@M1, P MC2(t22)
P O1(t11)@M1, P MC1(t12)

P O2(t22)@M2,
P O1(t12)@M2

(4.5)

≡
≡

≡
≡

Observation of the times of the four PMC above and knowledge of the ruler mark sepa-
ration then enables both the spatial separation, L, of the objects and their speed, v, to
be deduced from the equations derived from the space-time geometry of the four conﬁg-
urations, corresponding to the four P MC, shown in Fig.5:

The solution of these equations is:

t22 −
t11 −
t12 −

t21 =

t22 =

t11 =

l
v
L

l
v

l

−
v

L = l

v =

(t12 + t11 −
(t12 −

t22 −
t11 + t22 −
2ℓ
t11 + t22 −
14

(t12 −

t21)
t21)

t21)

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

Now, in the case that t11 = t22, Eqn(4.9) gives:

(t12 −
(t12 −
i.e. the separation of the moving objects is equal to that of the ruler marks M1 and M2.

t21)
t21)

(4.11)

L = l

= l

Inversely, if it is known in advance that the separation of the ruler marks is equal to
that of the objects, observation of P MC1(t11) and P MC2(t22) can be used to synchronise
the clocks in S associated with the ruler marks M1 and M2. More than this, if the objects
O1 and O2 are now replaced by clocks in the frame S’, the evident symmetry between
the marks in S and pointers in S’ and marks in S’ and pointers in S, in this case, means
that the simultaneity of P MC1(t11) and P MC2(t22) enables all four clocks, two in S, two
in S’ to be mutually synchronised. In practice this can conveniently be done by stopping
all four clocks and setting them to a common time. Denote the clocks, in an obvious
notation, as C1(S),C2(S), C1(S’) and C2(S’). The clocks C1(S) and C1(S’) are started by
P MC1(t11) and C2(S) and C2(S’) by P MC2(t22). Since t11 = t22 all four clocks are then
mutally synchronised. A possible practical way to implement this simultaneous starting
of clocks in the frames S and S’ using switches constructed from photon sources, photon
detectors and screens is sketched in Fig.6.

This method for synchronising clocks can also be used, instead of the procedure de-
scribed in the previous section, to synchronise spatially separated clocks in the same
inertial frame. This method, which may be called clock synchronisation by length trans-
port can be graphically illustrated, as in Einstein’s example demonstrating the importance
of simultaneity in the deﬁnition of time measurements, by considering P MC correspond-
ing to train arrival times. On the platform at Cornavin station in Geneva there are two
clocks, C1 and C2 that are unsynchronised but whose corresponding ruler marks M1 and
M2 are a known distance apart. A possible way to synchronise these clocks is as follows.
They are both stopped and set to the same time, Apparata are set up to start them when
suitable pointers are in spatial coincidence with their ruler marks. On the station at
Bern there are two ruler marks the same distance apart as the clocks on the platform at
Cornavin. Two identical locomotives are lined up so that corresponding points on them,
P 1 and P 2, are aligned with these marks. The two locomotives then start at the same
time and move along world lines of identical shape until they arrive at Cornavin station.
When the points P 1 and P 2 of the locomotives are in spatial coincidence with the marks
M1 and M2:

P MC1

P 1@M1, P MC2

P 2@M2

≡

≡

the two clocks are started. They are synchronous. It is clear that any pair of clocks along
the line from Bern to Geneva, separated by the same distance as those at Cornavin, can
be synchronised by the same technique.

The method of clock synchronisation by length transport just described can be gen-
eralised to a large array of synchronised digital clocks in a given reference frame. The
method is illustrated in Fig.7. The ‘mark ruler’ MR is at rest while the ‘pointer ruler’
PR slides along MR at constant speed v. Opposite the mark JM of MR is a detector
of spatial coincidences of JM with the pointer JP constituted by the JP th mark of the
moving ruler PR. Attached to the P MC detector at JM is the digital clock CJM. The
conﬁguration shown in Fig.7a corresponds to the following P MC, each with the structure

15

Figure 6: A practical scheme to synchronise clocks at rest in two inertial frames S and
S’ moving with relative velocity v along their common x,x’ axis. a) shows the z-y, b)
the x-y projection of the apparatus. In both S and S’ there are similar photon sources
So(S) and So(S’) and equidistant photon detectors D(S) and D(S’). When the clocks (not
shown) connected directly to D(S) and D(S’) are spatially separated the detectors D(S) and
D(S’) count continuously the photons emitted by So(S) and So(S’). Identically constructed
screens Sc(S) and Sc(S’) ﬁxed in S and S’ block both photon beams when source-detector
pairs So(S)-D(S) and So(S’)-D(S’) (and hence the connected clocks) have the same x-
coordinate, as shown in b). During the passage of the screens across the photon beams,
the signal in D(S) or D(S’) has the time variation shown in c). The clocks connected to
D(S) and D(S’), when started at the time tS, (which can be at any ﬁxed position on the
signal curve shown in c)) are then synchronised.

16

Figure 7: The moving ruler clock. The ‘pointer ruler’ PR moves with uniform velocity v
parallel to the ﬁxed ‘mark ruler’ MR. The digital clocks C0, C5 and C10 which count the
number of pointer coincidences with the marks MR(0), MR(5) and MR(10) respectively
constitute an array of spatially separated, synchronised, clocks in the rest frame of MR.
a), b) and c) show the relative positions of PR and MR at diﬀerent times in this frame.

17

P MC(JM)

P R(JP )@MR(JM):

≡

P MC(0)

P R(0)@MR(0), P MC(5)

P R(5)@MR(5)

≡

≡

P MC(10)

P R(10)@MR(10)

≡

Each clock CJM contains a simple alogrithm to convert the corresponding pointer, JP (JM)
of the ruler PR into a time:

d(JP (JM)

JM)

t =

−

v

(4.12)

where d is the mark separation of MR or PR. The time t given by (4.12) is independent of
JM, that is, the whole array of clocks is synchronised. Further examples of the readings
of the clocks C0, C5 and C10 are shown in Figs.7b and 7c.

In practice, the P MC detector does not need to identify JP in order to construct the
time, since the time interval recorded by each each clock after the initial conﬁguration
of Fig.7a is proportional to the number of P MC recorded. Each clock is then simply a
counter of the number of P MCs with a visual display of its contents. These counters
constitute an array of synchronised digital clocks with time resolution

d/v.

≃

5 The relation of measurements of space and time
intervals in diﬀerent inertial frames. The Galilean
and Lorentz Transformations

Suppose now that two clocks C1 and C2 are set beside the marks M1 and M2 in Fig.5.
The objects O1 and O2 are replaced by clocks C1’ and C2’, at rest in S’, an inertial frame
moving with velocity v along the positive x-axis in S, and separated by the same distance
L as C1 and C2 in the frame S. The positions of the clocks at rest in S’, in S, at time τ ,
are given, in general, by the relations6:

Similarly the positions of the clocks at rest in S, in S’, at time τ ′, are:

x(C1′)

−

x0 = v(τ

τ0)

−

x(C2′) = x(C1′) + L
x(C2) = x(C1) + L

x′(C1)

−

v(τ ′

x′
0 =

τ ′
0)
x′(C2) = x′(C1) + L
x′(C2′) = x′(C1′) + L

−

−

(5.1)
(5.2)
(5.3)

(5.4)
(5.5)
(5.6)

The equations (5.1)-(5.6) do not assume any particular choice for the origins of spatial
or temporal coordinates. The proper times τ and τ ′ are those recorded by synchronised
6In the present and following sections the symbol τ , τ ′ are used consistently to indicate the times of
clocks at rest in S and S’. as viewed by observers at rest in S and S’, respectively, whereas t and t′ are the
times of clocks at rest in S and S’ as viewed by observers at rest in S’ and S, respectively, The symbols t
and t′ therefore represent the apparent times registered by clocks in uniform motion.

18

clocks at any position in S and S’ respectively. In addition to these ‘frame times’, the
following ‘apparent’ times may also be deﬁned:

t′(C1′, τ ): The time registered by C1’ seen by a local observer in S at time τ .

t′(C2′, τ ): The time registered by C2’ seen by a local observer in S at time τ .

t(C1, τ ′): The time registered by C1 seen by a local observer in S’ at time τ ′

t(C2, τ ′): The time registered by C2 seen by a local observer in S’ at time τ ′

The relations (5.1)-(5.6) may be simpliﬁed by a suitable choice of coordinate origins
and synchronisation of the frame clocks in S and S’. All four clocks are now synchronised
using the length transport procedure described in the previous section. The corresponding
pointer-mark coincidences (for simplicity of notation the clock labels are used to denote
either pointers or marks) are as follows:

P MC1′(τ )

C1′(τ )@C1,

P MC2′(τ )

C2′(τ )@C2,

P MC1(τ ′)

C1(τ ′)@C1′,

P MC2(τ ′)

C2(τ ′)@C2′,

≡

≡

≡

≡

As shown in Fig.8a, the choice τ = τ ′ = 0 enables synchronisation of all four clocks at
these times. With the choice of coordinate origins shown in Fig.8 a, (5.1)-(5.6) simplify
to:

x(C1′) = vτ
x(C2′) = x(C1′) + L
x(C1) = 0
x(C2) = L

−

vτ ′

x′(C1) =
x′(C2) = x′(C1) + L
x′(C1′) = 0
x′(C2′) = L

x′ = x
τ ′ = τ

vτ

−

19

As in (5.1)-(5.6) above it is assumed that all clocks are seen to run at the same rate
when they are in the same inertial frame. The observed behaviour of the moving clocks
is speciﬁed by the four apparent times t′(C1′, τ ), t′(C2′, τ ), t(C1, τ ′) and t(C2, τ ′) deﬁned
above. In the case that all these times are equal to τ , which is in turn equal to τ ′, for all
values of τ , time is universal, for all inertial observers, as Newton assumed. In this case
The equations (5.7)-(5.14) correspond a Galilean Transformation (GT), and its inverse.
The GT formulae are more conventionally written for a single (‘stationary’) clock in S
and a (uniformly moving) one in S’ as:

The Lorentz Transformation (LT) of the times and positions of single clocks in S and S’
is written in a similar manner to the GT (5.15), (5.16) as (equations (A29) and (A30) in

(5.7)
(5.8)
(5.9)
(5.10)

(5.11)
(5.12)
(5.13)
(5.14)

(5.15)
(5.16)

the Appendix):

where

x′ = γ(x
t′(τ ) = γ(τ

vτ )
vx
V 2 )

−

−

γ

≡

1

( v
V )2

1
q

−

and V is the maximum possible relative velocity of the frames S and S’. This particular
choice of coordinate origins and time oﬀsets, introduced by Einstein, corresponds to syn-
chronisation of the clocks in S and S’ so that τ = t′(τ ) = 0 when x = x′ = 0. It reduces
to the GT (5.15) and (5.16) in the limit V
. LT equations suitable to describe the
clocks synchronised as shown in Fig.8a may be derived by generalising (5.17) and (5.18)
to allow an arbitary choice of coordinate origins and clock-time oﬀsets:

→ ∞

x′

t′(τ )

−

−

x′
0 = γ(x
t′
0 = γ(τ

x0 −
τ0 −

−

−

v(τ
v(x

τ0))
x0)

)

−
−
V 2

The importance of such a generalisation, in order to describe synchronised clocks at
diﬀerent spatial positions, was clearly stated by Einstein in the original paper on SR [5]:

If no assumption whatever be made as to the initial position of the moving

system and as the the zero point of τ , (t′ in the notation used above)an additive
constant is to be placed on the right side of each of these (the LT (5.17)-(5.18))
equations.

This consideration was never, however, to the present writer’s best knowledge, taken
into account by Einstein, or any later author, before the work presented in Ref. [8]. The
‘standard’ LT (5.17)-(5.18) has always been employed, regardless of the the position of
the clock in the frame S’. How this results in the spurious predictions of ‘relativity of
simultaneity’ and ‘length contraction’ eﬀects is explained in the following section.

Since (see Fig.8a), τ (C1) = t′(C1′) = 0 when x(C1) = x′(C1′) = 0 Eqns(5.17) and
in (5.19) and

(5.18) already correctly describe the synchronisation of C1 and C1’.
(5.20) the choice x0 = x′

0 = 0 must be made. Substituting the relation:

0 = t0 = t′

i.e.

into(5.18) gives:

x′(C1′) = 0 = x(C1′)

vτ

−

t′(C1′, τ ) = γ

(

v
V

τ
(cid:18)

−

)2τ

=

(cid:19)

τ
γ

The transformation equations for the clock C1’ are then:

(5.17)

(5.18)

(5.19)

(5.20)

(5.21)
(5.22)

(5.23)

x(C1′) = vτ
x′(C1′) = 0
τ
γ

t′(C1′, τ ) =

20

Figure 8: The clocks C1 and C2 are separated by the distance L in S, C1’ and C2’ by the
same distance in S’. a) All four clocks are synchronised by length transport (see text) at
the times τ = τ ′ = 0. b) Times seen by an observer at rest in S at frame time τ = L/v.
c) Times seen by an observer at rest in S’ at frame time τ ′ = L/v. β = v/V = √3/2,
γ = 2. Units of distance and time are chosen so that L/V = 3√3.

21

Figure 9: Further observations of the times of the clocks C1,C2,C1’and C2’, synchronised
as shown in Fig.8a. a) Times seen by an observer at rest in S’ at frame time τ ′ = L/γv.
b) Times seen by an observer at rest in S at frame time τ = L/γ2v. Parameter values
and units as in Fig.8.

22

Figure 10: The series of apparent times of moving clocks seen by ‘backwards looking’
observers alternately in the frames S and S’, starting in S at frame time τ = t0 = L/v.
See text. Parameter values and units as in Fig.8.

In a similar manner, substituting the relation:

x(C1) = 0 = x′(C1) + vτ ′

into the equations, reciprocal7 to (5.17) and (5.18):

gives:

x = γ(x + vτ ′)
vx′
V 2 )

t(τ ′) = γ(τ ′ +

t(C1, τ ′) = γ

(

v
V

−

τ ′
(cid:18)

)2τ ′

=

(cid:19)

τ ′
γ

thus yelding for the tansformation equations of the clock C1:

Comparing with Eqns(5.7) and (5.11) it can be seen that the space transformations are
the same as for the GT whereas the apparent times t′(C1′, τ ) and t(C1, τ ′) diﬀer from τ

7Note that (5.24) and (5.25) are reciprocal to, not the inverses, of (5.17) and (5.18).

vτ ′

x′(C1) =
−
x(C1) = 0
τ ′
γ

t(C1, τ ′) =

23

(5.24)

(5.25)

(5.26)
(5.27)

(5.28)

Figure 11: Apparent times of moving clocks as seen by ‘backward looking’ observers alter-
nately in S and S’, starting in S at frame time τ = t0 = L/v. Plots of t′
i versus tj are
shown for diﬀerent values of γ. The arrows show the direction of observation. e.g. t′
2 is
the apparent time of a clock in S’ as viewed from S at frame time t1. See text and Fig 10.
for the deﬁnitions of the apparent times.

24

and τ ′ respectively. Observers in both S and S’ judge that the clock in the other frame
is running slow by the factor 1/γ –the time dilatation eﬀect ﬁrst derived as a general
consequence of the LT, by Einstein [5].

In order to describe correctly the synchronisation of C2 and C2’, a diﬀerent choice of
constants in (5.19) and (5.20) is necessary. In this case, τ = τ ′ = 0 when x = x′ = L.
This implies that τ0 = t′

0 = L. So that:

x

Deﬁning X
≡
with the replacements x
C2 are then:

−

→

L and X ′

L these equations are identical to (5.17) and (5.18)
X ′. The transformation equations for C2’ and

0 = 0 and x0 = x′
x′

L = γ(x

−

t′(τ ) = γ(τ
x′
≡
−
X and x′

→

L

−
v(x

−

−
V 2

vτ )

L)

)

−

x(C2′) = vτ + L = x(C1′) + L
x′(C2′) = L = x′(C1′) + L
τ
γ

= t′(C1′, τ )

t′(C2′, τ ) =

vτ ′ + L = x′(C1) + L

x′(C2) =
−
x(C2) = L = x(C1) + L
τ ′
γ

= t(C1, τ ′)

t(C2, τ ′) =

(5.29)

(5.30)

(5.31)
(5.32)

(5.33)

(5.34)
(5.35)

(5.36)

(5.31),(5.32) and (5.34),(5.35) are the same as the corresponding GT whereas the apparent
times of C1’ and C2’ as viewed from S are equal, as are the apparent times of C1 and C2
as viewed from S’.

The value of the coordinate oﬀset, x0 = L, necessary to ensure synchronisation of C2
and C2’ is equivalent to choosing a LT which is ‘local at C2’, in the sense that C2’ is
placed at the origin of spatial coordinates in S’. This so because X ′ = x′
L actually
vanishes when x′ speciﬁes the position of C2’. Clearly all such clocks, (i.e., whatever the
value of L) described by a local LT or, equivalently, by Eqns(5.29) and (5.30), will be
synchronous with C1’ at τ = τ ′ = 0 (the instant of synchronisation), as well as at all later
times. The necessity to use, in a systematic manner, such ‘local’ LT to describe clocks
in order to avoid causal paradoxes, and to assure unique predictions in special relativity
that respect translational invariance, has been previously pointed out and discussed in
detail in Reference [8].

−

≡

The observed behaviour of the clocks C1’, (C1) as predicted by Eqns(5.21)-(5.23),
(Eqns(5.26)-(5.28)) or of C2’, (C2) as predicted by Eqns(5.31)-(5.33), (Eqns(5.34)-(5.36))
is illustrated in Figs.8, 9, 10 and 11.
It is assumed, for purposes of illustration, that
v/V = √3/2, γ = 2, so that the apparent rate of the moving clocks is 50% less
β
than that of a similar clock viewed at rest. Units of length and time are chosen such that
L = 3√3V . Twelve units units of time then correspond to a 2π rotation of the hands
of the analogue clocks in Fig.8. As in Fig.1d, there are twelve marks on the faces of the
clocks. Fig.8a shows the clocks as viewed from both S and S’ at the instant, τ = τ ′ = 0, at
which they are synchronised. At time τ = L/v the following ﬁve P MC may be recorded
by observers in S (Fig.8b):

25

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Spatial coincidence of C1’ (pointer) with C2 (mark):

P MC1

C1′(L/v)@C2

≡

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C1:

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C2:

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C1’:

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C2’:

P MC2

P C1(L/v)@MC1(6)

P MC3

P C2(L/v)@MC2(6)

P MC4

P C1′(L/v)@MC1′(3)

P MC5

P C2′(L/v)@MC2′(3)

Spatial coincidence of C2 (pointer) with C1’ (mark):

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C1’:

P MC1′

C2(L/v)@C1′

≡

P MC2′

P C1′(L/v)@MC1′(6)

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C2’:

P MC3′

P C2′(L/v)@MC2′(6)

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C1:

P MC4′

≡

P C1(L/v)@MC1(3)

26

≡

≡

≡

≡

≡

≡

The time τ of C1 and C2 in S is given by the marks MC1(6) or MC2(6) while the
apparent time of C1’ or C2’ as viewed from S, t′(τ ), is given by MC1′(3) or MC2′(3).
That is, with the given choice of space and time units:

τ = 6,

t′(τ ) = t′(6) = 3

(5.37)

The situation at the instant of the same spatial coincidence of C1’ and C2, but as viewed
from S’, is shown in Fig.8c. Again, observations of ﬁve distinct P MC may be made. They
are:

Pointer-mark coincidence of clock C2:

•

P MC5′

≡

P C2(L/v)@MC2(3)

The times in S’ corresponding to the times in S given by (5.38) are:
τ ′ = 6,

t(τ ′) = t(6) = 3

(5.38)

The times shown in (5.37) and (5.38) are a perfect exempliﬁcation of the measurement
reciprocity postulate stated in the Introduction: reciprocal space-time measurements pro-
duce identical results. Both observers see that the moving clocks in the other frame are
running more slowly than similar clocks at rest in their own frames.

It is of interest to now consider how the clocks in, say, S, appear to an observer in S’
at the actual S’ time, τ ′ equal to t′(τ ), the apparent time of clocks in S’ as viewed from
S at time τ . This is shown for τ = L/v in Fig.9a. Here t′(τ ) = t′(L/v) = L/(γv), and
t(t′(L/v)) = L/(γ2v). That is, the apparent time of the clocks in S is earlier than L/v and
also (compare Fig.8b with Fig.9a) there is no spatial coincidence of C2 and C1’ at this
time. This highly non-intuitive behaviour might be called, following Richard Feynman,
’The only real deep mystery of special relativity8’

The process of ‘looking back’ is taken a step further in Fig.9b, where an observer in S
observes the clocks in S’ at the time τ = L/(γ2v), i.e. the apparent time of the clocks in S
for the observer in S’ at the time τ ′ shown in Fig.9a. In this case t′(L/(γ2v)) = L/(γ3v).
The procedure may evidently be repeated indeﬁnitely. The inﬁnite series of apparent times
displays, as shown in Fig.10, a fractal structure. The following notation is introduced for
the series of apparent times viewed alternatively from S and S’:

t0 = τ =

1 = t′(t0) = t′(
t′

) =

L
v

L
v
1) = t′(t′(

L
γv

L
v

)) =

L
γ2v

t1 = t(t′
......

t′
n =

tn =
......

L
γ2n−1v
L
γ2nv

2 + t2 + ...
1
γ2 + ...

+

#

S

1 + t1 + t′
= t′
L
1
γv "
γ
L

1 +

=

=

v(γ

1)

−

27

A similar series of apparent times initiated by an observer in S’ is given by exchange
of primed and unprimed symbols in the above series. The sum of the apparent times
corresponds to the sum-to-inﬁnity of a geometric series:

8Feynman made a similar statement for quantum mechanics, in reference to the interference eﬀects in

the Young double slit experiment [27].

(5.39)

For the particular choice γ = 2 shown in Figs.8, 9 and 10,
V , all apparent (but not frame) time ‘stands still’:
v

S

= t0 = L/v. In the limit

→

1, t1, t′
t′

2, ...

0,

→

t0 = t′

0 = L/V,

0

S →

In the limit V

, γ

1:

→ ∞

→

while

.

S → ∞

t0 = t′

1 = t1 = t′

2 = ... =

L
v

1, t1, t′

The series of apparent times t′

2, ... are shown as two dimensional t′ versus t plots,
for various values of 1/γ in Fig.11. The arrows indicate the directions of observation.
Thus at frame time t0 the observer in S sees that the clocks in S’ indicate t′
1. When an
observer in S’ observes the clock in S at frame time t′
1 it is seen to indicate t1, and so
on. For γ = 1 (Fig.11a) t0 = t′
0 and there are no apparent times. For γ close to one the
apparent times are very closely spaced (Fig.11b), but t0 and t′
0 become very large . For
1 (Fig.11d) the apparent times cluster near to the origins of the t and t′ axes, and
γ
≫
t0 = t′
L/V . Apparently, at γ = 1 what may be termed a ‘topological phase change’
occurs in the t′ versus t plot. For any ﬁnite value of ǫ = γ
1, no matter how small, an
inﬁnite number of apparent times with separation of order ǫL/v lie along the axes. But
for ǫ = 0 there are no apparent times, and the stationary clocks in S and S’ are seen to
be synchronous.

0 ≃

−

Careful inspection of Figs.8 and 9 show that the clocks are, in fact, superﬂuous in order
to determine the frame times, since the clock readings, due to the uniform relative motion
of the frames S and S, are proportional to the separation of corresponding clocks (say C1
and C1’) in either frame. This is evident from Eqns(5.7) and (5.11) above. Dividing the
observed spatial separation by v in either S or S’ gives the corresponding frame times. In
analogy to the ‘moving ruler clock’ discussed in the previous section any pair of objects,
in uniform relative motion, constitute equivalent clocks in their respective rest frames.
Such ’clocks’ can, however, never be observed from the rest frame of the other object, and
so cannot give rise to any apparent times of the type discussed above.

For some applications of the time dilatation relations (5.23) and (5.28) it is convenient

to introduce a diﬀerent notation for the apparent times of of moving clocks:

t′(C1′, τ )
t(C1, τ ′)

τ ′(C1′)
τ (C1)

≡
≡
All time symbols appearing in the LT then represent proper times. However, τ ′(C1′) in
(5.40) must be carefully distinguished from the symbol τ ′ in (5.28) which is the proper
time interval in S’ corresponding to the apparent time interval t(C1, τ ′) of a clock at rest
in S, but observed from S’. Use of the symbols t, t′ has the advantage that all time symbols
in the LT refer to direct observations of time intervals (t, t′ for moving clocks, τ , τ ′ for
stationary ones) and avoids the use of clock labels, since these time intervals are the same
for all synchronised clocks.

(5.40)
(5.41)

An application where the notation of (5.40) is useful is in particle physics where the
P) with the rest-frame

clock C1’ is identiﬁed with an unstable particle, and τ ′(C1′

≡

28

lifetime of the particle.
frame, Eqn(5.23) may be written, using (5.40), as:

If τ (P) is the particle lifetime as observed in the laboratory

τ ′(C1′) =

τ (P)
γ

(5.42)

. In this case the proper-time τ ′(C1′) is not directly observed, but inferred, using the time
dilatation relation (5.42), from the observed value of τ (P) and the value of γ corresponding
the measured speed in the laboratory, v, of the particle.

6 The illusory nature of ‘relativity of simultaneity’
and ‘relativistic length contraction’ of conventional
special relativity theory

0, τ0 and t′

0 = L, τ0 = t′

In the length transport synchronisation of the clocks C1, C2 , C1’ and C2’ in Fig.8a
it was noticed that diﬀerent values of the constants x0, x′
0 in the general LT
equations (5.19) and (5.20) were needed to correctly describe the positions and times of
the spatially coincident clock pairs C1,C1’ and C2,C2’. For C1,C1’, x0 = x′
0 = 0,
while for C2,C2’ x0 = x′
0 = 0. If it is now attempted to describe the times
of the clock pair C2,C2’ with the LT appropriate to C1,C1’ i.e. by using the standard LT
of Eqns (5.17 and (5.18) , denoted as LT(0), the frame times τ and τ ′ and the apparent
times t′(τ ) and t(τ ′) are those shown in the ﬁrst and second rows of Table 1 (for C1 and
C1’) and Table 2 (for C2 and C2’) . The ﬁrst row shows the apparent times t′(τ ) of the
clocks at rest in S’ as viewed from S, whereas the second row contains the apparent times
t(τ ′) of the clocks at rest in S as viewed from S’. Also given in Tables 1 and 2 are the
positions of the ‘moving’ clocks in either ‘stationary’ frame as derived by applying LT(0),
or its inverse, to all the clocks.

0 = τ0 = t′

For example, application of LT(0) to C1 and C1’ at t = 0 gives x = x′ = 0 and

t′(t) = 0. Setting τ = 0 and x′ = L in the inverse of (5.18):

(i.e. now applying LT(0) to the clock C2’) gives t′(τ ) =
for τ ′ and x′ = L into the the inverse of (5.17):

−

vL/V 2 Substituting this value

gives the ‘apparent’ position x(t) of C2’ of

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

τ = γ(t′(τ ) +

vx′
V 2 )

x = γ(x′ + vτ ′)

x(0) = γL(1

v2
V 2 ) =

L
γ

−

29

The diﬀerence between the position x = 0 of C1 or C1’ and the above apparent position of
C2’ is then L/γ. This is the well-known relativistic ‘length contraction’ eﬀect. It is seen

Figure 12: Examples of misuse of the space-time LT leading to the spurious ‘relativity
of simultaneity’ and ‘length contraction’ eﬀects. The clocks C1, C2, C1’ and C2 are
assumed to be initially synchronised by length transport as shown in Fig.8a. In a), LT(0),
appropriate for C1 and C1’ is applied also to C2 and C2’. In S, C1 and C2 are assumed to
be synchronised at t = 0. Setting x′ = L for C2’ in LT(0) then gives the apparent position
(dashed) and time for C2’ shown. In S’ C1’ and C2’ are assumed to be synchronised at
τ ′ = 0. Setting x = L for C2 gives the apparent position (dashed) and time for C2 as
shown. The distance between C1’ and the apparent position of C2’ in S shows the ‘length
contraction’ eﬀect. Also the apparent time of C2’ is not synchronous with the frame times
of C1 and C2. This is the ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect. Reciprocal eﬀects are seen in
a) by the observer in S’. In b) the transformation LT(L), appropriate for C2 and C2’ is
applied also to C1 and C1’. As in a), ‘length contraction’ occurs between the pairs C1’,C2’
viewed from S and C1,C2 as viewed form S’, but now it is C1,C1’ instead of C2,C2’, as
in a) that show ‘relativity of simultaneity’. See the text for further discussion. Parameter
values and units as in Fig.8.

30

to be a spurious consequence of the application of LT(0) appropriate for the synchronised
clocks C1 and C1’ also to the clocks C2 and C2’ for which the synchronous behaviour
shown in Fig.8a requires the LT (5.29) and (5.30), denoted as LT(L). The entries in
the second rows of Tables 1 and 2 are obtained by inverting the roles of the frames S
and S’ in the calculation just performed, that is by substituting τ ′ = 0 and x = L into
LT(0). The entries in the third and fourth rows of Table 1 are the results of performing
analagous calculations where the correct transformation for C2 and C2’, LT(L), is also
applied (incorrectly) to C1 and C1’. The entries of Table 1 and 2 are displayed visually
in Fig.12 where the spurious ‘apparent’ positions of the moving clocks are indicated by
dashed lines.

The so-called ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect of Einstein’s special relativity theory is
apparent in the entries of Table 1 and 2 and in Fig.12. In Fig.12a the observer in S sees
that the clocks C1 and C2, at rest in his own frame, are synchronous, but that that the
moving clocks C1’ and C2’ are not. In contrast the observer in S’ judges C1’ and C2’ to be
synchronous, but not C1 and C2 that are in motion relative to him. Thus events that are
synchronous in one frame (say, particular times of C1 and C2 as viewed by the observer at
rest in S) are not so in another frame (any times indicated by the same two clocks when
viewed by an observer at rest in S’). Since an identical and simultaneous synchronisation
procedure is applied to the clock pairs C1,C1’ and C2,C2’ the behaviour shown in Fig.12a
is clearly wrong; it is simply the consequence of using constants in the LT equations for
C2 and C2’ that do not correctly describe the synchronisation of all four clocks as shown
in Fig8a. It is clear from inspection of Eqs(5.23),(5.33) and (5.28) (5.36) that when the
constants in the LT are chosen so as to correctly describe the synchronisation procedure,
the time ordering of events is the same in any inertial frame –there is, in this case, no
‘relativity of simultaneity’. Indeed this is necessary if causal paradoxes9 are to be avoided.

In Fig.12b, are shown the results obtained when the correct LT for the clocks C2,
C2’, LT(L), is also (incorrectly) applied to the clocks C1 and C1’. In this case C1’ is not
synchronised with the clocks in S at τ = 0, and C1 is not synchronised wih the clocks in
S’ at τ ′ = 0. Again, the imposed synchronisation of all four clocks in both S and S’ as
shown in Fig.8a is not respected.

Comparing the apparent times of C1’ and C2’, as viewed from S, in Fig.12a and
Fig.12b, it can be seen that C1’ is in both cases in advance of C2’ by 4.5 time units.
However, in Fig.12a, C1’ shows the same time as C1 and C2, whereas in Fig.12b it is C2’
that shows the same time as C1 and C2. Also, although the apparent distance between
C1’ and C2’ is always 1/γ times the distance between C1 and C2, the positions of C1’ and
C2’ relative to C1 and C2 are diﬀerent in the two cases. In Fig.12a, C1 and C1’ are aligned
and C2’ is shifted from C2, whereas in Fig.12b, C2 and C2’ are aligned and C1’ is shifted
from C1. So, although the size and sign of the ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀect and the
size of the ‘length contraction’ eﬀect are the same in Fig.12a and Fig.12b, the observer in
S sees that the clocks C1’ and C2’ are in diﬀerent positions, and show diﬀerent times, in
the two cases. Applying instead the Lorentz transformation LT(L/2) to C1’ and C2’ in
Fig.12a instead of LT(0) results again in the same ‘relativity of simultaneity’ and ‘length
contraction’ eﬀects, but the apparent positions of C1’ and C2’ are found to be equidistant
from C1 and C2 respectively, and neither C1’ nor C2’ is seen to be synchronous with

9Some examples are discussed in Reference [29].

31

Obs
S
S’
S
S’

LT
LT(0)
LT(0)
LT(1)
LT(1)

C1

x′(τ ′)
–
0
–

x
–
0
–
0 L(γ

1)/γ

−

C1’

τ
0
–
0
–

t(τ ′)
–
0
–
-vL/V 2

x′
0
–
0 L(γ
–

x(t)
0
–

−
–

1)/γ

τ ′
–
0
–
0

t′(τ )
0
–
vL/V 2
–

Table 1: Apparent times and positions of the clocks C1,C1’ in Fig.12. For an observer in S
the values of τ and x′ are asigned the values shown while x(t) and t′(τ ) are calculated using
the LT. For a observer in S’ the values of τ ′ and x are assigned the values shown while
x′(t′) and t(τ ′) are calculated using the LT. This is the method used, following Einstein, to
calculate the ‘length contraction’ and ‘relativity of simultaneity’ eﬀects of standard special
relativity theory.

Obs
S
S’
S
S’

x x′(t′)
LT
LT(0)
–
LT(0) L L/γ
–
LT(1)
LT(1) L

–
L

–

C2
τ
0
–
0
–

t(τ ′)
–
vL/V 2
–
0

x′ x(t)
L L/γ
–
L
–

–
L
–

C2’
τ ′
–
0
–
0

t′(τ )
-vL/V 2
–
0
–

Table 2: Apparent times and positions of the clocks C2, C2’ in Fig.12. calculated as
described in the Caption of Table 1.

C1 and C2. In fact, as shown in Reference [8], by a suitable choice of the value of the
parameter L in LT(L) given by Eqns(5.27) and (5.28) the apparent position of, say, C2’
in Fig.12a, can be situated at any position along the x-axis! Since evidently the observed
positions of the clocks C1’ and C2’ cannot depend, in this way, on an arbitary choice of
the coordinate origin in S’, all the conﬁgurations shown in Fig.12a as well as those just
discussed are spurious and unphysical. The correct physical situation, according to the
LT and the deﬁned synchronisation procedure at t = 0 is that shown in Fig.8a. There are
then no ‘relativity of simultaneity’ and ‘length contraction’ eﬀects in this example.

The correct relation of measurements of length and time intervals performed in diﬀer-
ent inertial frames can be most simply understood from the properties of the ‘invariant
interval’ derived from the general LT (5.19) and (5.20). This quantity is independent of
the choice of spatial coordinate systems and clock time oﬀsets, which when chosen in an
inconsistent manner, as described above, are responsible for the spurious ‘relativity of
simultaneity’ and ‘length contraction’ eﬀects.

Suppose that the clock pairs C1 and C1’ and C2 and C2’ are now separately synchro-
nised when in spatial coincidence along the x-axis in both S and S’. Eqns(5.23) and (5.33)
may then be written as:

t′(C1′, τ (C1)) = γτ (C1)
t′(C2′, τ (C2) = γτ (C2)

(6.4)
(6.5)

If now the clocks in the frame S are synchronised: τ (C1) = τ (C2)
(6.4) and (6.5) that t′(C1′, τ (C1)) = t′(C2′, τ (C2))

τ , it follows from
t′ so that C1’ and C2’ are also

≡

≡

32

synchronised in the frame S’ –there is no ‘relativity of simultaneity’. Introducing now the
invariant space-like interval ∆s connecting arbitary events on the world-lines of C1’ and
C2 and assuming that C1 and C2 are synchronised::

(∆s)2 = [x(C2′)
= [x′(C2′)

x(C1′)]2
−
x′(C1′)]2
−

−
−

V 2[τ (C2)
τ (C1)]2
−
V 2[t′(C2′, τ (C2))

(6.6)
The spatial separation between C1’ and C2’ in S is deﬁned as the value of x(C2′)
x(C1′)
when τ (C2) = τ (C1) = τ . It then follows from (6.4) and (6.5) that t′(C1′, τ ) = t′(C2′, τ )
so that (6.6) gives the relation:

−

−

t′(C1′, τ (C1)]2

∆s = ∆x = x(C2′)

x(C1′) = L = x′(C2′)

(6.7)
so that as shown previously in Section 5 above, L = L′ –there is no ‘length contraction’
eﬀect. Thus, as discussed in detail in the preceding section, time intervals recorded by a
clock depend on the frame of observation, whereas measured spatial separations of objects
at rest in some inertial frame are Lorentz-invariant, frame-independent, quantities [24].

−

−

x′(C1′) = L′

7 Light at last

The discussion of the previous sections concerned rigorous deﬁnitions of the measure-
ment of space and time intervals and the ways in which the results of such measurements
are related via Galilean or Lorentz transformations. There is no overlap, after the im-
portant remark, quoted above, concerning the measurement of time and the concept of
simultaneity, with the approach of Einstein in his ﬁrst special relativity paper. Einstein
postulated that the speed of light has the same value in any inertial frame and that it does
not depend on the motion of its source. This highly counter-intuitive property of light
is the crux of the conceptual diﬃculty of special relativity –the point at which classical
‘commonsense’ breaks down. It may be compared, in this aspect, with the superposition
principle of quantum mechanics. The reader of the present paper has understood the valid
conclusion of Einstein’s paper concerning space-time geometry: the time dilatation eﬀect,
and also why some other predictions of Einstein’s theory: ‘relativity of simultaneity’ and
‘length contraction’ are incorrect, without having to even encounter a ‘light signal’ of
the type crucial for Einstein’s analysis of space and time.
In the present section it is
demonstrated that the properties of light described in Einstein’s second postulate are in
fact necessary consequences of the LT and the physical nature of light, which consists of
massless particles –photons.

In the approach of the present paper there is, so far, no connection between the limiting
relative velocity, V , introduced in the derivations of the LT presented in the Appendix
and the speed of light, c. In order to make this connection it is necessary to consider
the relativistic kinematics of some arbitary physical object of Newtonian mass m. This
is done by introducing the energy-momentum 4-vector, P , in the frame S of an object of
Newtonian mass m, at rest in the frame S’, according to the deﬁnitions:

where

P

(Pt, Px)

mU

m(γV, γv)

≡

≡

≡

U

≡

dX
dt′ = (V

dτ
dt′ ,

dτ
dt′

dx
dτ

) = (γV, γv)

33

(7.1)

(7.2)

(7.3)
(7.4)

(7.5)

(7.6)

(7.7)

(7.8)

where the diﬀerental form dτ = γdt′ of the time dilatation relation (5.23) has been used.
(V τ, x) is the space-time 4-vector specifyimg the position of the object in S,
Here X
t′ is the apparent time in S of a clock in the rest frame, S’, of the object, and U is its
4-vector velocity. The relativistic energy, E, and momentum, p, of the object are then
deﬁned as:

≡

These last two equations together with the deﬁnition of the parameter γ after Eqn(5.18)
above, lead to the important kinematical relations connecting m, V , p and E:

V Pt = mγV 2
Px = mγv

E

≡
p

≡

E2 = m2V 4 + p2V 2
pV 2
E

v =

=

pV 2
(m2V 4 + p2V 2)

1
2

It is an immediate consequence of Eqn(7.6) that the speed of a massless physical object,
in any inertial frame, is just V . If light consists of such massless particles it follows that
c = V = constant. This is the ﬁrst part of Einstein’s second postulate.

To prove the second part of the second postulate: that the speed of light does not
depend on that of its source, the parallel velocity addition formula, readily derived from
the LT equations (5.17) and (5.18), may be used:

Here, u = dx′/dτ ′ is the velocity of an object relative to S’ and w = dx/dτ is the velocity
of the same object relative to S. Suppose the the light source is a rest in S’. The velocity
of the source for an observer at rest in S is then v, and, since S’ is an inertial frame,
u = uγ = c. The velocity of the photon as observed in S is then given by (7.6) as:

w =

u + v
1 + uv
V 2

=

u + v
1 + uv
c2

wγ =

= c

c + v
1 + v
c

i.e., the speed of the photon as observed in S does not depend on the velocity, v, of the
source in S. This is the second part of the second postulate. It has now been shown that
the second postulate necessarily follows from the space-time LT and the fact that light
consists of massless particles.

Einstein had himself discovered, earlier in 1905, that light indeed does consist of mass-
less particles: his ‘light quanta’, work for which he was later awarded a Nobel Prize, but
did not realise that this together with the space-time LT, derived in his special relativ-
ity paper, necessarily implied the correctness of the second postulate. However, in 1905,
the relativistic kinematics embodied in Eqns(7.5) and (7.6) above, although, as shown in
Ref. [14], aleady implicit in formulae given in Ref. [5], had not yet been developed. This
was done by Planck in 1907 [30].

Note that a complete understanding of the second postulate does not require the
introduction of any concept of classical electromagnetism. In spite of the title of Einstein’s

34

seminal paper, the fundamental concepts necessary for a complete description of the
physics of space and time intervals do not depend, in any way, on those of classical
electrodynamics, or of any other speciﬁc domain of physics. Since, however, any physical
law must, when correctly formulated, respect the space-time geometry embodied in the
space-time LT, as well as the kinematical relations (7.5) and (7.6), the study of such
laws can be used to derive the LT, i.e. to reveal the nature of the underlying space-time
geometry. Thus Einstein’s special relativity paper with its strong emphasis on classical
electrodynamics was actually, and in just the same way as the earlier work of Voigt [1],
Larmor [2] and Lorentz [3] and the contemporary work of Poincar´e [23], of an essentially
heuristic nature. Indeed, from the perspective of a later century, much more so, in spite
of Einstein’s assertion, than the light quantum paper.

The incorrect conclusions of Einstein’s paper (misinterpretations of the physical mean-
ing of the space-time LT) result from an insuﬃciently rigorous discussion of actual mea-
surements of space and time intervals and their relation to clock synchronisation proce-

dures. More precisely they were due to a mismatch between the interpretation given to
certain symbols and the actual physical measurements to which they should correspond.

This is discussed in detail in the companion paper [14].

8 Summary and Discussion

The aim of the present paper has been to construct the fundamental physics of space
and time (in the absence of gravitational eﬀects as described by the general theory of
relativity) on a more secure foundation than hitherto. Two aspects are discussed: the
axiomatic basis of the space-time LT and the experimental science of the measurement of
space and time intervals.

After a brief discussion, in the Introduction, of some initial postulates, two previously
published [6, 7] axiomatic derivations of the LT are recalled in the Appendix. Two of
the three postulates used are weak, and may even seem to be ‘obvious’. None of the
postulates refer to electrodynamics or any other dynamical physical theory. The essential
logic of the ﬁrst derivation, in which a universal parameter, V , with the dimensions of
velocity necessarily appears, was already followed in Ignatowsky’s derivation of the LT [17]
published in 1910. Einstein’s electrodynamics-based 1905 derivation of the LT is then seen
to be of an essentialy heuristic nature, since the simplest logical foundations of space-time
geometry, as described by the LT, are quite unrelated to Einstein’s postulates.

The remainder of the paper is devoted to an attempt to provide a rigorous mathemat-
ical description of the measurement of space and time intervals in terms of ‘pointer-mark
coincidences’ or PMCs. Several authors have suggested that such a concept should form
the basis for specifying the results of all experiments in physical science [25, 26], but
without developing the idea into a calculus that provides a precise deﬁnition of raw ex-
perimental data and their relation to the mathematical symbols expressing any theoretical
prediction of this data. A proposition for such a ‘PMC calculus’ is given in Section 2.

35

Diﬀerent clock synchronisation procedures are described in Sections 3 and 4. Because
of the dependence of Einstein’s light signal synchronisation procedure on postulated phys-
ical properties of light, and its possible subsequent ‘conventionality’ [15] new, simple, and
‘convention free’ methods of clock synchronisation are proposed. The ﬁrst, by ‘pointer
transport’, is applicable to an arbitary number of clocks in the same inertial frame. The
second method, by ‘length transport’, is applicable to an arbitary number of clocks in
the same, or two diﬀerent, inertial frames. A practical device, shown in Fig.6, to syn-
chronise pairs of clocks, one in each of two diﬀerent inertial frames, is proposed. The
associated PMC in the two frames are constructed with the aid of similar light sources,
light detectors and screens, at rest in each of the frames.

In Section 5, the relation of measurements of space and time intervals, provided by
two pairs of, spatially separated, synchronised, clocks in two diﬀerent inertial frames, as
predicted by the Galilean or Lorentz transformations, is discussed. The length transport
method is used to mutally synchronise the four clocks. Two spatially separated clocks, C1
and C2, are situated in the frame S, while two others, C1’ and C2’, with the same spatial
separation as C1 and C2, are situated in the frame S’ moving with a uniform velocity
relative to S. It is found that the description of the spatial positions of the clocks is the
same for the GT and the LT. The measured clock separations are the same in S and S’
and are therefore Lorentz invariant quantities. Relativistic time dilatation, as predicted
by Einstein, by use of the the LT, is found to exist, but the apparent time is the same
for all synchronised clocks at rest in a given inertial frame, when they are viewed by
an observer in a diﬀerent inertial frame –there is here no ‘relativity of simultaneity’ as
predicted in Einstein’s 1905 paper [5]. Successive apparent times seen by observers at
rest in S and S’ ‘looking back’ at the moving clocks in the other frame display a fractal
structure, converging to earlier times at a rate that increases as the relative velocity of
the two frames increases (Fig.11).

In Section 6 it is demonstrated how the spurious ‘relativity of simultaneity’ and ‘length
contraction’ eﬀects of conventional special relativity theory result from an incorrect as-
signment of space and time oﬀsets in the LT used to describe observations of synchronised
clocks in diﬀerent inertial frames. As previously pointed out [8], the correct description
of several synchronised clocks in a given reference frame requires the use of a ‘local’ LT
at each clock, that is, one in which the clock is situated at the origin of coordinates in its
own proper frame. The experimentally well-veriﬁed [8] time dilatation eﬀect is predicted
by the use of just such a local LT. At the end of Section 6 the absence of the length
contraction eﬀect is conﬁrmed by considering the space-like invariant interval between
the world lines of of spatially-separated synchronised clocks C1’ and C2’ at rest in the
frame S’.

In the case that synchronised clocks in two diﬀerent inertial frames are viewed from
a third frame, SR predicts the existence of a genuine ‘relativity of simulaneity’ eﬀect
[12, 13]. Also the distance between two events (although not the spatial dimensions of
a physical object) may be observed to be diﬀerent in diﬀerent inertial frames [31]. This
eﬀect is, however, unrelated to the spurious ‘length contraction’ eﬀect of standard SR,
explained in Section 6 above.

In Section 7, Einstein’s counter-intuitive second postulate stating the constancy of

36

the speed of light in diﬀerent inertial frames, and its source velocity independence, is
demonstrated to be a necessary kinematical consequence of the LT and the identiﬁcation
of light with massless particles –photons. This implies that c = V where c is the speed of
light and V is the maximum relative velocity of two inertial frames whose space and time
coordinates are related by the LT.

Further consequences of the restriction, in special relativity, to local LT, have been
previously discussed in Reference [8]. The relativistic kinematics of point-like physical
objects10 is the same as in conventional SR, since the position of such objects is typically
used as their proper frame origin, corresponding to use of a local LT.

The application of Einstein’s second postulate needs, however, to be reconsidered.
In the conventional description of the ‘photon clock’ constituted by a moving Michelson
Interferometer, as in the discussion of the Michelson-Morley experiment, the speed of
a photon is assumed to be the same in the proper frames of the interferometer and the
observer. However, only in the former case does this correspond to Einstein’s deﬁnition [5]:

light speed = c =

light path
time interval

,

the observer views this measurement, performed in one inertial frame (the rest system
of the interferometer) from another inertial frame. As shown in Reference [8], in these
circumstances, the apparent speed of the photon in the longitudinal arm of the interfer-
ometer is diﬀerent from c. It is greater than c when the photon is moving in the same
direction as the interferometer and less than c when it is moving in the opposite direc-
tion. The average apparent speed is just c/γ, so that rate of the photon clock shows the
universal time dilatation eﬀect when viewed by the stationary observer. This important
point is also discussed in Ref [12] where Einstein’s famous train/embankment thought
experiment is re-analysed from the perspective of the present paper and Ref. [8].

The absence of ‘relativistic length contraction’ indicates that certain calculations in
classical electrodynamics, where the existence of such an eﬀect is assumed, are in need
of revision. One example is a derivation of the Heaviside formula for the electric ﬁeld of
a uniformly moving charge [32, 33], another is the calculation of the force between long,
parallel, conductors in motion [34, 35, 36]. See Refs.[37, 38, 39]

Although it has been argued in the present paper and Reference [8] that the ‘relativity
of simultaneity’ eﬀect predicted by Einstein is spurious and unphysical its existence (or
absence) can, unlike the ‘length contraction’ eﬀect, be readily established using modern
experimental techniques. This is because ‘relativity of simultaneity’ is an O(β) eﬀect
whereas ‘length contraction’ is of O(β2). Satellite experiments to perform such a test are
proposed in References [8, 40]. In Reference [8] is also proposed a Satellite experiment to
test for the existence of an observable O(β2) eﬀect ‘time contraction’ [41], which is absent
when special relativistic predictions are based solely on the use of a local LT.

10This is also true of an extended object whose position is speciﬁed as that of its centroid.

37

Appendix

In the following, the main features of two previously published [6, 7] derivations of the
space-time Lorentz transformation are described. The derivations are based on the three
postulates stated in the Introduction: (A) Uniqueness, (B) the measurement reciprocity
postulate and (C) Space-time exchange invariance symmetry. The ﬁrst derivation [6] is
based on postulates (A) and (B), the second [7] on (A) and (C). As throughout the present
paper, for simplicity, only space-time events lying along the x, x’ axes of the frames S,S’,
previously introduced, are considered. The generalisation of the ﬁrst derivation to events
in three spatial dimensions can be found in [6].

Both derivations consider ﬁrst the transformation of space coordinates between S and
S’. With a suitable choice of coordinate origins and time oﬀsets, the transformation may
be written, in general, as:

fx(x′, x, t, v) = 0

(A1)

The postulate (A) will be satisﬁed provided that the function fx in (A1) has a multi-linear
structure:

x′ + a1x + a2t + b1xx′ + b2xt + b3x′t + cxx′t = 0

(A2)

where the coeﬃcients ai, bj and c may be functions of v but are independent of x′, x and
t. The velocity of S’ relative to S is:

where χ′ may take any constant value. Diﬀerentiating (A2) with respect to t and using
(A3) gives:

v

≡

dx
dt (cid:12)
x′=χ′
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(A3)

v =

a2 + b2x + b3χ′ + cχ′x
a1 + b1χ′ + b′
2 + cχ′t

−

(A4)

Since this equation must hold for all values of x and t it follows that b2 = c = 0 so that:

This equation holds for all values of χ′ provided that:

in which case:

Substituting the above values of the coeﬃcients into (A2) gives:

v =

a2
a1

−

(1 + b3χ′
a2 )
(1 + b1χ′
a1 )

(A5)

b3
a2

=

b1
a1

v =

a2
a1

−

(A6)

(A7)

x′ =

vt)

a1(x
−
b1(x−vt)
a1 −

1

(A8)

38

Choosing coordinate origins such that x′ = x when v = 0 it follows that b1 = 0 and that
in consequence:

where

and γ(v = 0) = 1.

x′ = γ(x

vt)

−

γ

a1

≡ −

(A9)

(A10)

The Lorentz transformation inverse to (A1) may be written as:

x(x, x′, t′, v′) = 0
f ′

(A11)

Postulate (A) implies that this equation may also be written in a multi-linear manner
similar to (A2) above. The velocity v′ of S relative to S’ is deﬁned as:

where χ takes any constant value. Repeating the calculation leading to (A9) for the
inverse transformation gives:

where γ(v′) is the same function of v′ as γ(v) is of v. Postulate (B) may now be used to
prove that [6]:

v′

≡ −

dx′
dt′

x=χ

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(A12)

x = γ′(x′ + v′t′)

(A13)

v′ = v
γ′ = γ

(A14)

(A15)

The ﬁrst of these equations is often introduced as an independent axiom called the ‘Reci-
procity Principle’. It has been shown [22] to follow from the Special Relativity Principle,
space-time homogeneity and spatial isotropy. The alternative derivation [6] from postu-
late (B) is straightforward, but omitted here in the interest of brevity. Note that the
Reciprocity Postulate is often tacitly assumed in published derivations of the LT. This is
the case for Einstein’s original derivation. It is true that it appears to be ‘obvious’. How-
ever, one should be wary of such unsupported assertions in considerations of space-time
geometry.
If indeed it is considered to be ‘obvious’ the present derivation obtains the
Lorentz transformation only from Postulate (A) which is of a purely mathematical nature
–no postulate is made concerning space or time measurements. In this case something of
great importance for our understanding of the physical world would seem to have been
‘pulled out of the air’ !

Substituting (A14) and (A15) into (A13) and eliminating x′ between the equation

so-obtained and (A9) gives:

where

t′ = γ(t

xδ
v

)

−

(A16)

γ2

1

−
γ2

δ

≡

(A17)

39

The parameter γ is a function of v, the relative velocity of the frames S and S’, such that
= 0, γ(v) > 1 or γ(v) < 1. In the former
γ(v = 0) = 1. There are two possibilities when v
case it follows from (A17) that: the function δ(v) satisﬁes the inequality:

and in the latter case the inequality:

1

δ(v)

0

≥

≥

0

δ(v)

≥

1
≥ −

(A18)

(A19)

≥

1 and of the equation δ(V ) =

Consider now the velocity V , deﬁned as the solution of the equation δ(V ) = 1 when
γ(v)
1. It is clear from the inequalities
(A18) and (A19), and that in the former (latter) case δ(v) is an increasing (decreasing)
function of v, that the meaning of V is the maximum mathematically allowed relative
velocity of any two inertial frames. This is the point at which the universal constant, V ,
with dimensions of velocity, makes its entrance into a physical world where space and time
measurements in diﬀerent inertial frames are connected by the Lorentz transformation.

1 when γ(v)

−

≤

Consider now a physical object moving with velocity u parallel to the positive x′ axis
in S’. Its velocity, w, relative to the positive x-axis in S may be derived by diﬀerentiating
(A9) and (A16), taking the ratio of the derivatives, making use of the deﬁnitions of u and
w:

and rearranging the equation so obtained to give:

dx′
dt′
dx
dt

u

w

≡

≡

(A20)

(A21)

w =

u + v
1 + uδ(v)

v

(A22)

Denoting the frame S by A, S’ by B and the proper frame of the physical object introduced
above by C, the velocities v, u and w may be written, in an obvious notation, as relative
velocities:

v = vAB

u = vBC

w = vAC

So that (A22) may be written:

Exchanging the labels A and C in (A23) gives

vAC =

vBC + vAB
1 + vBC δ(vAB )

vAB

vCA =

vBA + vCB
1 + vBAδ(vCB )

vCB

(A23)

(A24)

The reciprocity relation (A14) implies that:

vCA =

vAC

vBA =

vAB

vCB =

vBC

−

−

−

Making these substitutions in (A24) gives:

vAC =

vBC + vAB
1 + vAB δ(−vBC )

vBC

(A25)

40

6
Consistency with (A23) then requires that

vBCδ(vAB)
vAB

=

vABδ(

vBC)

−
vBC

(A26)

which in turn requires (restoring the original notation for the three velocities):

v2
δ(v)

=

u2

δ(

u)

−

=

V 2
δ(V )

±

=

V 2 = constant

(A27)

≤

The constant in (A27) is plus or minus the square of the limiting relative velocity V
discussed after Eqns(A18) and A(19) above. The plus sign correponds to γ(v)
1, the
1. Since v and u in equation (A27) are independent quantites the
minus sign to γ(v)
ratios in the ﬁrst two members of (A27) must both be equal to the same constant.11 It is
demonstrated in Reference [6] that the choice of a negative constant results in transfor-
mation equations that do not respect the Uniqueness postulate (A) and must therefore
be discarded in the present derivation. The existence of the universal constant in (A27)
was pointed out already in 1910 by Ignatowsky [17]. Note that setting u = v in (A27)
implies that δ(v) = δ(
v/V enables
the equation given by the ﬁrst and fourth members of (A27) to be written, on taking the
plus sign, as δ(v) = β2. Substituting this value of δ in (A17) and solving for γ gives:

v), i.e., δ(v) is an even function of v. Writing β

−

≡

≥

γ(β)± =

±

√1

β2

(A28)

1

−

Since (A9) requires that x′
0, γ(0) must be positive so that the plus sign
must be taken in (A28). The transformation equations relating x′ and t′ to x and t are
then given by (A9) and (A16) as

x when v

→

→

x′ = γ(β)(x

−
t′ = γ(β)(t

vt)

vx
V 2 )

−

(A29)

(A30)

γ(β)

γ(β)+ =

≡

√1

β2

(A31)

1

−

where

or

This completes the ﬁrst derivation of the space-time Lorentz transformation.

The second derivation [7] follows the same steps as above up to Eqn(A9). This is
the general expression for the space transformation following from the postulate (A). As
previously, the parameter γ in (A9) is some function of v, γ(v). On reﬂecting the x and
x′ the deﬁnition of v, (A3), and
x’ axes in S and S’ in the origin: x
(A9) give:

x and x′

→ −

→ −
x′ = γ(

−

v)(

x + vt)

−

−

x′ = γ(

v)(x

vt)

−

−

(A32)

11The mathematical situation here is very similar to that of a factorisable solution to a partial diﬀeren-
tial equation. For example, the Schr¨odinger equation for an atom with potential depending only on the
radial coordinate. The constants relating, in a similar fashion to (A27), independent terms containing the
polar and azimuthal angles and the radial coordinate lead to the conserved angular momentum quantum
numbers.

41

Comparing (A9) and (A32) it can be seen that

γ(v) = γ(

v)

−

(A33)

so that γ(v) is an even function of v. In order to now apply the constraints of Postulate
(C), space-time exchange invariance, to (A9) it must ﬁrst be rendered dimensionally
homogeneous. This may be achieved by multiplying the time t by a universal constant
V with the dimensions of velocity.
It is clear that this operation may be applied to
any quantity with the dimensions of time in any equation of physics. Compensating
dimensional changes can always be made in any physical constants appearing in the
equation. In this way all space and time coordinates will have the same dimension, [L],
and are automatically converted to components of a 4-vector with this dimension. In this
way the zeroth components of space-time 4-vectors are deﬁned as:

This enables (A9) to be written as:

x0

V t,

≡

x′0

V t′

≡

x′ = γ(β)(x

βx0)

−

(A34)

(A35)

Applying the space-time exchange operations [7] x
immediately the time transformation equation:

↔

x0 and x′

x′0 to (A35) gives

↔

x′0 = γ(β)(x0

βx)

−

(A36)

In general the transformation inverse to (A36) may be written as:

x0 = γ(β′)(x′0 + β′x′)

(A37)

where (A33) has been used. The same inverse transformation may be obtained by elimi-
nating x between (A35) and (A36):

x0 =

1
γ(β)(1

β2)

−

(x′0 + βx′)

(A38)

Consistency of (A37) and (A38) then requires that:

and

γ(β′) =

1
γ(β)(1

β2)

−

(A39)

β′ = β

(A40)

(A39),(A40) and the condition that γ(β)
0 then gives (A31) above. On using
(A34) to restore t and t′ in (A35) and (A36) the Lorentz transformation (A29)-(A31) is
obtained.

1 as β

→

→

It is interesting to note that in the second derivation the postulates (A) and (C)
necessarily imply the validity of the Reciprocity Postulate (A40). In the ﬁrst derivation
it was found in Reference [6] to be instead a necessary consequence of postulates (A) and
(B).

42

In the above derivations, concerning only events lying along the x, x’ axes, no as-
sumption concerning the geometrical properties of space-time were needed to derive the
Lorentz transformation.
In the case of events with non-vanishing y and z coordinates
the additional postulate of spatial isotropy [6] is required to derive the transformation
equations of the remaining spatial coordinates:

y′ = y

z′ = z

(A41)

(A42)

The derivation of these equations in Reference [6] is very similar to that of Einstein in
Reference [5].

43

References

[1] W.Voigt, Goett. Nachr. 1887 P41.

[2] J.Larmor, ‘Aether and Matter’, (C.U.P., Cambridge, 1900) Chspter X1.

[3] H.A.Lorentz, Proc. K. Ak. Amsterdam 6 809 (1904).

[4] C.Kittel, Am. J. Phys. 42 726 (1974).

[5] A.Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17, 891 (1905). English translation by W.Perrett
and G.B.Jeﬀery in ‘The Principle of Relativity’ (Dover, New York, 1952) P37, or
in ‘Einstein’s Miraculous Year’ (Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey,
1998) P123.

[6] J.H.Field,

Helv.

Phys.

Acta.

70

542

(1997);

arXiv

pre-print:

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0410262.

[7] J.H.Field, Am. J. Phys. 69, 569 (2001).

[8] J.H.Field,

’The Local Space-Time Lorentz Transformation: a New Formulation
of Special Relativity Compatible with Translational Invariance’, arXiv pre-print:
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0501043.

[9] J.H.Field,

‘Uniformly moving clocks

but no relativity of
simultaneity or
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0603135.

in special

length contraction’,

relativity: Time dilatation,
arXiv pre-print:

[10] J.H.Field, ‘Clock rates, clock settings and the physics of the space-time Lorentz

transformation’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0606101.

[11] J.H.Field, ‘Absolute simultaneity: Special relativity without light signals or synchro-

nised clocks’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/060401.

[12] J.H.Field, The train/embankment thought experiment, Einstein’s second pos-
simultaneity’, arXiv pre-print:

relativity and relativity of

tulate of
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0606135.

special

[13] J.H.Field, ‘Muon decays in the Earth’s atmosphere, time dilatation and relativity of

simultaneity’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0606188.

[14] J.H.Field, ‘The physics of space and time II: A reassessment of Einstein’s 1905 special

relativity paper’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0612041.

[15] See. for example, P.Anderson, I.Vetharaniam and G.E.Stedman, Physics Reports 295

93 (1998) and references therein.

[16] Galileo Galilei, ‘Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems’ English trans-

lation, Ed J.A.Green (Greenwood Research, Wichita, Kansas, 2000) P186.

[17] W.Ignatowsky, Phys. Zeitschr. 11 972 (1910).

[18] W.Pauli, ‘Relativit¨atstheorie’ (Springer, Berlin 2000). English translation,‘Theory of

Relativity’ (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1958) Section 4, P11.

44

[19] A.R.Lee and T.M.Kalotas, Am. J. Phys. 43, 434 (1975).

[20] J.M.L´evy-Leblond, Am. J. Phys. 44, 271 (1976).

[21] A.Sen, Am. J. Phys. 62, 157 (1994).

[22] V.Berzi and V.Gorini, Journ. Math. Phys. 10 1518 (1969).

[23] H.Poincar´e, Rend. del Circ. Mat. di Palermo, 21 129 (1906).

[24] J.H.Field, Phys. Scr. 73 639 (2006).

[25] R.B.Lindsay and H.Margenau, ‘Foundations of Physics’, (Dover, New York, 1957)

Section 1.1, P5.

[26] G.Burniston Brown, Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond.53 418 (1941).

[27] R.P.Feynman. ‘The Character of Physical Law’, (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mas-

sachusetts 1986) PPs 130, 145.

[28] A.Einstein, Annalen der Physik 17 132 (1905).

[29] J.H.Field, ‘On the Real and Apparent Positions of Moving Objects in Special Rela-
tivity: The Rockets-and-String and Pole-and-Barn Paradoxes Revisited and a New
Paradox’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0403094.

[30] M.Planck, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 4 136 (1906).

[31] J.H.Field, ‘Relativistic velocity addition and the relativity of space and time inter-

vals’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0610065.

[32] J.D.Jackson, ‘Classical Electrodynamics’, 3rd Ed (Wiley, New York, 1998) P558,560.

[33] L.D.Landau and E.M.Lifshitz, ‘The Classical Theory of Fields’, 2nd Edition (Perga-

mon Press, Oxford, 1962) Section 38, P103.

[34] R.P.Feynman, The Feynman Lectures in Physics, ‘Electromagnetism I’ (Addison-

Wesley, Reading Massachusetts, 1966) Section 13.6.

[35] W.G.V.Rosser, ‘Introductory Relativity’, (Butterworth, London, 1967) Section 7.2,

P220.

[36] E.M.Purcell, ‘Electricity and Magnetism’, Berkeley Physics Course Vol II, (McGraw

Hill, New York, 1965) Chspter 5.

[37] J.H.Field, ‘Forces between electric charges in motion: Rutherford scattering, circular
Keplerian orbits, action-at-a-distance and Newton’s third law in relativistic classical
electrodynamics’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0507150.

[38] J.H.Field,

relativistic
classical electrodynamics: electromagnetic induction in diﬀerent reference frames’,
arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0511014.

‘Inter-charge

forces

in

45

[39] J.H.Field, ‘Space-time transformation properties of inter-charge forces and dipole
radiation: Breakdown of the classical ﬁeld concept in relativistic electrodynamics’,
arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0604089.

[40] J.H.Field,

‘Proposals
for Two Satellite-Borne Experiments to Test Relativity of Simultaneity in Special
Relativity’, arXiv pre-print: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0509213.

[41] J.H.Field, Am. J. Phys. 68 267 (2000).

46

