6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dielectric Theory of the Vacuum∗

J. X. Zheng-Johansson
Institute of Fundamental Physics Research, 611 93 Nyk¨oping, Sweden.
December, 2006

Abstract

The vacuum is proposed to be a dielectric medium constituted of neutral
but polarizable vacuuons based on overall experimental observations in separate
publications. In the present paper I formally develop the dielectric theory for
this dielectric vacuum.

* This is an abbreviated but self-contained introduction to the dielectric theory
I formulated as part of a uniﬁcation scheme I developed since 2000, originally
presented in full in book Uniﬁcation of Classical, Quantum and Relativistic
Mechanics and of the Four Forces, 1st & 2nd printins, Nova Science, NY, 2006.

1

Introduction

The vacuum is induced to be a dielectric medium based on overall experimental
observations in separate publications [1, 2, 3].
In this paper I formally develop
the dielectric theory for this dielectric medium, or vacuum dielectrics, with respect
to an empty space (or free space)— the space left over after the removal of the
dielectric vacuum. I will mainly address the questions that, under the inﬂuence of
an external (vaculeon) charge placed in the vacuum, what is the electric polarization
of the medium, the depolarization ﬁeld, the polarization of each individual vacuuon,
the local ﬁeld acting on a vacuuon dipole, and the electric dipole moment of a
vacuuon. These are the basis for expressing the interaction forces and potential
energies between an external single vaculeon and its surrounding polarized vacuuons,
and between the polarized vacuuons themselves presented in [1, 4], and furthermore
for expressing the gravitational interaction force between masses[2, 5]. This paper
is aimed to elucidate the formalism of the vacuum dielectrics mainly; the detail-
ﬁlling equations for dipole and local ﬁelds for a three-dimensional vacuum, involved
directly for obtaining vacuum interaction forces [1] are left out; these are given in
[1].

A large part of the dielectric theory of the vacuum can be formulated in direct
analogy to the well-established dielectric theory for ordinary dielectric materials
(see e.g.
[6], or see [1] for a brief review), given that vacuum is just one speciﬁc
dielectric medium, and that we have practically based on Proposition 1 an explicit
internal structure for the constituent vacuuon particles of the vacuum, from which

1

the vacuum polarization and dielectric properties derive. Vacuum is actually a very
well behaved dielectric by virtue of its isotropy and nonpolar nature, among others;
although it has also particularities not present with the ordinary dielectric materials
as I will discuss when in question.

2 Dipole Moment and Vacuum Polarization: Deﬁni-

tions

The electric polarization of an ordinary dielectric medium is deﬁned as the dipole
moment p− per unit volume, averaged over a macroscopic volume ∆V : P− = p−
∆V ,
with respect to the vacuum. We similarly deﬁne the electric polarization of the
dielectric vacuum, or the vacuum polarization, with respect to the empty space
after the removal of the vacuum, over a macroscopic volume ∆V as:

P−0 =

p−0
∆V

,

p−0 being the electric dipole moment of the vacuum in the speciﬁed volume ∆V .

By virtue of its structure proposed in [1] namely that, brieﬂy, the vacuum con-
sists of neutral but polarizable entities termed vacuuons, the vacuum presents no
permanent dipoles. In other terms, the vacuuons have zero electric dipole moment
in the absence of an applied ﬁeld, and the vacuum is thus a nonpolar dielectric. In
the presence of an applied electric ﬁeld, the n- and p- vaculeon charges comprising
a vacuuon will be displaced relative to each other, into dipole charges; accordingly
the vacuum is produced with an electric polarization. The n- and p- vaculeons of
a vacuuon are bound each other with a binding energy extraordinarily large, esti-
mated [1] to be 0.5 GeV; therefore normally (except in a pair production) they can
not be separated. The vacuum will therefore maintain electrically neutral even in
the presence of applied ﬁelds. Hence the electric dipole moment in a macroscopic
volume ∆V of the vacuum may be obtained by

p−0 =

Rsqs,

Xs ∈ ∆V

where Rs is the position vector of charge qs. The subscript 0 labels that a speciﬁed
quantity, here p−0, pertains to the (dielectric) vacuum as opposed to an ordinary
(dielectric) material medium. With (2), (1) thus writes
s in ∆V Rsqs
∆V

p−0
∆V

P−0 =

(1a)

P

=

.

For two opposite-signed charges (qp = e, qn = −e) on a polarized vacuuon
s, mutually displaced by a distance vector d (Figure 1), equation (2) gives the
(induced) electric dipole moment of a vacuuon:

(1)

(2)

(2a)

p−v = Rp(e) + Rn(−e)
= e(Rp − Rn) = ed.

2

E *q

+e

d

- e

p
v

Z

R p

R n

X

Figure 1: A neutral vacuuon is in the presence of an applied electric ﬁeld Eq∗
polarized into a vacuuon dipole of dipole moment p−v, with a displacement d between
its two charges +e and −e.

3 Polarization Charge of a Dielectric Vacuum

Consider here a region of the vacuum is subjecting to the inﬂuence of a uniform
applied ﬁeld, Eq as measured in the vacuum. With no loss of generality let this
Eq be produced in between two parallel uniformly charged plates (Figure 2), of
equal but opposite-signed free charges, +q and −q. Figure 2a shows the traditional
representation where one regards the vacuum as non-dielectric while, as one may rec-
ognize, a practically dielectric property is eﬀectively reﬂected through a parameter,
the permittivity of the vacuum.

Unless speciﬁed otherwise we below regard that the vacuum is a dielectric (Figure
2b). Suppose we have managed to remove the dielectric vacuum (i.e. all of the
vacuuons composing it) in a region in question, say in a volume embracing the two
parallel charged plates plus a certain vicinity region, and situate ourselves in the
empty space left over as deﬁned earlier. Then, a free charge in it will be q∗ if it was
q when measured in the dielectric vacuum; and we ﬁnd by measurement the applied
ﬁeld produced by q∗ in this empty space is Eq∗ (Figure 2c).

We now ﬁll in between the charged parallel plates with a piece of dielectric
vacuum medium. The ﬁeld Eq∗ produced by the free charges on the plates then
polarizes the vacuuons constituting the vacuum in between into induced vacuuon
dipoles, each of an electric dipole moment p−v aligned in the direction of Eq∗.
Through the volume between the two plates the displaced charges from each adjacent
vacuuon dipoles are lined up head-to-tail in the direction perpendicular to the plates,
and annul one another, giving a net zero charge in the interim of the chosen volume.
Only on the surface S of the enclosure, see Figure 2d, one ﬁnds net charges, referred
to as polarization charge of the vacuum here, qp, on each face S1 parallel with
the plates; qp has an opposite sign to the free charge q on the plate just beside it.

3

S

1

Eq

Vacuum 
(as non-dielectric)

Vacuum
(as dielectric)

+q

(a)

- q
 +q

*

S

S

S

d

S

S1
Eq*
Empty space
(space after subtracting vacuum)

- q

*

(c)

+q

- q

- q           

p

+q           

p

S1
Eq*

Ep

(b)

S1

P0

(d)

Eq
*
Empty space

Eq

Ep

(e)

Figure 2: (a)-(b): An applied ﬁeld Eq∗ is produced by two parallel plates with free
charges +q and −q on them, and with a dielectric vacuum medium in between. The
vacuum is regarded explicitly as non-dielectric in (a), and as a dielectric in (b). (c)
shows two charged plates as in (a)-(b), but with the vacuum in between removed,
left with an empty space. In (d), without regard to the charged plates, the vacuum
polarized as in (b) (or (a), or by the device in (c)), of a polarization P− is represented
as produced by a polarization charge −qp and +qp in the upper and lower surfaces.
(e) Relationship between the applied-, macroscopic-, and polarization- ﬁeld vectors
Eq∗, Eq, and Ep.
In all graphs, S indicates a chosen Gaussian surface enclosing
charge +q and similarly −qp, and S1 the piece of area on S with a normal parallel
with Eq.

4

4 Gauss’s Law in a Dielectric Vacuum

The formulae of the ordinary form of Gauss’s law (for electricity here) for the vacuum
and for an ordinary dielectric material of dielectric constant k between the plates,
respectively write,

Eq · dS = q,

(a)

∈
0 IS

∈
0 IS

(Eq/k) · dS = q + qp′,

(b)

(3)

0 the permittivity of vacuum and qp′ polarization charge. These are expressed
with ∈
by phenomenologically regarding the vacuum as ”non-dielectric”. In other terms, in
this form one does not regard the microscopic and dielectric property of the vacuum
explicitly.
(See [1] for a review of the derivation of these and related dielectric
relations in terms of directly comparable denotations.)

In analogy to the ordinary form of Gauss’s law, we now establish the correspond-
ing Gauss’s law applied to a general dielectric material with respect to the empty
space. For illustration we choose the ”dielectric material” between the two charged
plates to be just the dielectric vacuum itself, as shown in Figure 2b. In a thought
experiment it is easy to remove the vacuum outside the region enclosed between the
plates, as in Figure 2d or b, and situate ourselves in the empty space and look at
the interface between the vacuum and the empty space, the upper surface S1 here;
on S1 we ﬁnd the polarization charge to be qp, as speciﬁed earlier. And we will ﬁnd
by measurement the total charge on S1 is

q∗′ = q∗ + qp.

We here do not presume any knowledge of the sign of qp, but rather leave it to be
ﬁxed through applying Gauss’s law, as by (9) below.

That is, as viewed in the empty space, Eq is eﬀectively produced by q∗′ (the sub-
script q indicates instead the charge as viewed in the vacuum), and Eq∗ is produced
by q∗ (= q as we will show below).

Now with respect to the empty space, with the total charge as given by (4), we

apply Gauss’s law to the Gaussian surface S enclosing the upper plate:

(4)

(5)

Eq · dS = q∗ + qp.

∈∅ I

Where ∈∅ is the permittivity of the empty space; Eq is now the so-called macro-
scopic ﬁeld produced by q∗ as measured in the dielectric vacuum. Note that since
the empty space has no dielectric property, ∈∅ would merely represent a dimensional
conversion factor.
It is straightforward to prove [1] that (5) is equivalent to the
ordinary form of Gauss’s law for vacuum, (3a).

Since the vacuum is such a particular medium that it extends continuously
throughout the space, in reality we can never actually ﬁnd a real surface separating
the vacuum and the empty space, and situate ourselves on the empty-space side of
it. So, whenever making an actual measurement of the charge, we are only doing

5

this in the interim of the vacuum continuum. In it at any point on any speciﬁed
surface we make measurement, the polarization charges on its two opposite sides
cancel. Consequently in realistic experiments we always measure the true value of
the charge as in the empty space. That is

5 Dielectric Constant. Susceptibility

Similarly as in the dielectric theory for ordinary materials, we introduce a dielectric
constant of the (dielectric) vacuum, denoted by k0∗, with respect here to the
empty space. k0∗ is deﬁned such that the electric ﬁeld measured in the dielectric
vacuum Eq, in relation to the ﬁeld measured in the empty space Eq∗ is

Accordingly the permittivity of the (dielectric) vacuum with respect to the empty
space,1 in relation to that of the empty space is

q∗ ≡ q.

Eq = Eq∗/k0∗ .

∈

0 = k0∗ ∈∅.

(6)

(7)

(8)

A basic notion we maintain in the two alternative (the dielectric and the ”non-
dielectric”) representations of the vacuum is that, the Eq ﬁeld as measured in a
dielectric vacuum with respect to the empty space, is the same as one as actually
measured in the real vacuum. —This must be so since, irrespective of which rep-
resentation, we have one and the same vacuum and the force per charge (per unit
volume) as represented by Eq in this vacuum must be of an unique value. The ﬁeld
produced at R by a point charge q located at R = 0 is given by the Coulomb’s
0 is the same
R2 ; it thus follows that in the latter representation, ∈
law Eq =
quantity as that actually measured for the vacuum through the Coulomb’s law.

q
4π∈

0

Since the dielectric vacuum responds to Eq∗ with a depolarization ﬁeld (see
below) which cancels a portion of Eq∗, thus Eq∗ > Eq. Combining this inequality
with (7) and in turn the resultant with (8) we have

k0∗ > 1

and ∈

1 For the variables χ

0 > ∈∅.
0∗, k0∗ , and q∗ of the dielectric vacuum as measured with respect to the
empty space, and also the applied ﬁeld Eq∗ in the empty space, we have used a subscript ∗ to
distinguish from their counterparts χ0 (≡ 0), k0 (≡ 1) and q (= q∗ numerically but having a
distinct physics), for a ”non-dielectric vacuum” with respect to the vacuum itself, and also Eq. The
latter typically take trivial values only but are ordinarily expressed as variables. By this denotation
method all of the variables including P−0, p−
v, qp, ∈∅ Ep, Edip, Eloc, αv for the dielectric vacuum
with respect to the empty space should also be suﬃxed by ∗, as P−0∗, p−
p, ∈∅∗ , Ep∗, αv∗
in cases where explicitness is needed. We have in this text dropped the ∗ for the latter variables
given that no confusion is being caused.

v∗, q∗

0∗ , p−

0, p−

6

In further analogy to the dielectric theory for ordinary materials in a ”non-
dielectric vacuum”, we express the polarization charge of the dielectric vacuum in
terms of the polarization of the vacuum via a corresponding Gauss’s law:

And we express P−0 in relation to Eq through an electric susceptibility of the
dielectric vacuum, χ0∗:

Substituting with (10), (9) writes:

qp = −

P−0 · dS.

I

P−0 = ∈∅χ0∗Eq.

qp = −∈∅χ0∗ I

Eq · dS.

∈∅ I

Eq(1 + χ0∗) · dS = q∗.

Substituting (9)′ into the right-hand side of (5), rearranging, we have:

The quantity on the right-hand side of (11), q∗, is the free charge measured in
the empty space. According to the principle of Gauss’s law applied here to the
charge in empty space, the quantity on the left-hand side must amount to the total
electric ﬂux produced by the charge q∗. This corresponds to a so-called electric
displacement vector of here the dielectric vacuum:

so deﬁned such that

D0∗ = ∈

0Eq,

D0∗ · dS = q∗.

I

(5)′ and (11) give

D0∗ = ∈∅Eq(1 + χ0∗).
Canceling D0∗ between (13a) and (12) further gives

Substituting into (13b) with (8) we have k0∗ ∈∅Eq = ∈∅Eq(1 + χ0∗). Or,

This gives the dielectric constant of vacuum in relation to susceptibility. Substituting
with (10), (13b) alternatively writes:

0Eq = ∈∅Eq(1 + χ0∗).
∈

k0∗ = 1 + χ0∗.

0Eq = ∈∅Eq + P−0.
∈

7

(9)

(10)

(9)′

(11)

(12)

(5)′

(13a)

(13b)

(14)

(13c)

6 Depolarization Field

Applying Gauss’s law for the Gaussian surface about the upper charged plate and
enclosing qp(< 0) only (Figure 2d), we get the electric polarization ﬁeld of the
vacuum, produced by the charge displacements of the constituent vacuuons under
the inﬂuence of the applied ﬁeld Eq∗. That is

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

Canceling P−0 between (10) and (15) gives:

Ep = −

= −

|qp|
∈∅

P−0
∈∅

.

Ep = −χ0∗Eq.

Ep is explicitly expressed by (16) to be antiparallel to Eq∗ and similarly to Eq, and
therefore is termed the depolarization ﬁeld of the vacuum. Substituting (15) for
P−0 into (13c) we have

Sorting gives

0Eq = ∈∅Eq − ∈∅Ep.
∈

Ep = −Eq(

− 1) = −Eq(k0∗ − 1),

∈

0
∈∅

where the last expression used (8). From (17), we obtain the so-called macroscopic
ﬁeld in the dielectric vacuum:

Eq∗ + Ep = Eq.

This is just the ”applied” ﬁeld Eq (with respect to a ”non-dielectric” vacuum) ac-
tually as measured in the vacuum (cf. the remark on the ”basic notion” after Eq.
8).

The results in this section are the direct dielectric-theoretical basis for the de-

polarization radiation force considered as a cause of gravity[5].

7 Vacuuon Polarizability. Local Field. Dipole Field

We now represent the dielectric response of the vacuum, under the inﬂuence of the
applied uniform ﬁeld Eq∗, in terms of the individual constituent vacuuons. Eq∗ po-
larizes the initially neutral vacuuons into vacuuon dipoles aligned in the direction
of Eq∗, each having a dipole charge |e|, charge displacement d, and an electric dipole
moment p−v expressed earlier in (2a) in terms of d. Assuming Eq∗ is small so that the
resulting charge displacement is linear, accordingly p−v will be in linear proportion
to a so-called local ﬁeld, Eloc, produced by the applied ﬁeld at the vacuuon. That
is

p−v(Rs) = αvEloc(Rs),

(19)

8

where αv is the polarizability of vacuuon.

The local ﬁeld at the site Rs of vacuuon s, is given by the sum of the applied
ﬁeld Eq∗ and the total dipole ﬁeld Edip produced at it by all other vacuuon dipoles
from the surrounding. That is

Eloc(Rs) = Eq∗(Rs) + Edip(Rs).

The electric ﬁeld at Rs as produced by a dipole located at Rs′, having an electric

moment p−vj(Rs′), is given by the standard equation of electrostatics:

Edip,s′(Rs) =

3(p−vj · lj)lj − l

2
j p−vj

,

5
j

l

where lj = Rs − Rs′ is the distance vector from vacuuon s′ to s, j = s − s′ = 1, 2, . . .
for Rs′ > 0; or lj = Rs + Rs′ and j = s + s′ = 1, 2, . . . for Rs′ < 0. The total
electric ﬁeld at the sth dipole’s location Rs as produced by all the other dipoles, or
the total dipole ﬁeld, is the vector sum

Edip(Rs) =

Xj=s−s′(6=0)

3(p−vj · lj)lj − l

2
j p−vj

.

5
j

l

Edip, and accordingly Eloc and p−v are generally dependent on the geometry of the
dielectric specimen and the orientation of Eq∗ relative to the specimen.

Explicit expressions of (22) for a linear chain of vacuuon dipoles and for a three
dimensional vacuum polarized by a point charge are given in [1] and not elaborated
here.

Acknowledgements

for his continued
The author thanks scientist P-I. Johansson of Uppsala Univ.
support of the research. Prof. R. Lundin has given appreciative review of the
uniﬁcation scheme conceived and developed by the author, and has reﬂected this in
the Forward to the two books [1, 2] by the author and collaborator P-I. Johansson.

(20)

(21)

(22)

References

[1] J. X. Zheng-Johansson and P-I. Johansson, with Foreword by Prof. R. Lundin,
Uniﬁcation of Classical, Quantum and Relativistic Mechanics and of the Four
Forces. In: Horizons in World Physics, 2nd printing, (Nova Science Publishers,
New York, 2006) ISBN 1-59454-260-0; arxiv:physics/0412168 (an early brief
outline containing terms out of date).

[2] Inference of Basic Laws of Classical, Quantum and Relativistic Mechanics
from First-Principles Classical-Mechanics Solutions (updated title), (Nova Sci-
ence Publishers, Inc., New York, 2006) ISBN 1-59454-261-9.

9

[3] J. X. Zheng-Johansson, ”Vacuum Structure”, one chapter in [1]a; separate

paper submitted for publication (2006).

[4] J. X. Zheng-Johansson and P-I. Johansson, ”Inference of Schr¨odinger Equation
from Classical-Mechanics Solution,” Quantum Theory and Symmetries IV, 2,
A Supplement to the Bulgarian Journal of Physics 33, ed. V.K. Dobrev, (Heron
Press, Bulgaria, 2006) 763-770; preprint: arxiv:physics/0411134.

[5] J. X. Zheng-Johansson, P-I. Johansson, and R. Lundin, ”Depolarization Ra-
diation force in a Dielectric Medium. Its Analogy with Gravity,” Quan-
tum Theory and Symmetries IV, 2, A Supplement to the Bulgarian Jour-
nal of Physics 33, ed. V.K. Dobrev, (Heron Press, Bulgaria, 2006) 771-780;
”Prediction of Universal Gravity between Charges in a Dielectric Medium,”
arxiv:physics/0411245.

[6] C. J. F. B¨ottcher, Theory of electric Polarization I, (Elsevier Scientiﬁc Pub-
lishing Company, Amsterdam, 1973); N.W. Ashcroft and D. Mermin, Solid
State Physics, (W.B. Saunders College, 1976) Chapter 27. C. Kittel, Introduc-
tion to Solid State Physics, 6ed, (John Wiley & Sons, Inc N.Y., 1986) Chapter
13.

10

