6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
2
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Re-Analysis of the Marinov Light-Speed Anisotropy Experiment

Reginald T. Cahill
School of Chemistry, Physics and Earth Sciences, Flinders University,

Adelaide 5001, Australia

E-mail: Reg.Cahill@ﬂinders.edu.au

The anisotropy of the speed of light at 1 part in 103 has been detected
by Michelson and Morley (1887), Miller (1925/26), Illingworth (1927), Joos
(1930), Jaseja et al. (1964), Torr and Kolen (1984), De Witte (1991) and Cahill
(2006) using a variety of experimental techniques, from gas-mode Michelson
interferometers to one-way RF coaxial cable propagation timing. All agree
on the speed, right ascension and declination of the anisotropy velocity. The
Stephan Marinov experiment (1984) detected a light speed anisotropy using a
mechanical coupled shutters technique which has holes in co-rotating disks, es-
sentially a one-way version of the Fizeau mechanical round-trip speed-of-light
experiment. The Marinov data is re-analysed after correcting for a number of
errors, and the results of his experiment now agree with the above experiments.

1

Introduction

That the speed of light in vacuum is the same in all directions, i.e.
isotropic, for all observers is a critical
assumption in fundamental physics, and was introduced by Einstein in 1905 as one of his key postulates
when formulating his interpretation of Special Relativity. The need to detect any anisotropy has challenged
physicists from the 19th century to the present day, particularly following the Michelson-Morley experiment
of 1887. The problem arose when Maxwell in 1861 successfully computed the speed of light c from his uniﬁed
theory of electric and magnetic ﬁelds: but what was the speed c relative to? There have been many attempts
to detect any supposed light-speed anisotropy, and as discussed in the Sect.2 there have so far been 8 successful
and consistent such experiments, and as well numerous unsuccessful experiments, i.e. experiments in which
no anisotropy was observed. The reasons for these diﬀerent outcomes is now understood: any light-speed
anisotropy produces not only an expected ‘direct’ eﬀect, being that which is expected to produce a ‘signal’,
but also aﬀects the very physical structure of the apparatus, and with this eﬀect usually overlooked in the
design of some detectors. In some designs these eﬀects exactly cancel.

The key point here is not whether the predicted Special Relativity eﬀects are valid or invalid, for the
experimental evidence is overwhelming that these predictions are valid, but rather whether the Lorentz or
Einstein interpretation of Special Relativity is correct. This debate has always been confused by the failure
to understand that the successes of Special Relativity, and its apparent deduction from the above Einstein
postulate, does not actually require that the speed of light be invariant, as Fitzgerald and Lorentz pointed
out over 100 years ago, see discussions in [1, 19]. Rather the issue is whether the Special Relativity eﬀects
are caused by absolute motion of systems through a dynamical 3-space, or whether we have no 3-space and
only a four-dimensional spacetime. So the question is about whether or not the 3-space can be detected by
means of the anisotropy of light, since in this interpretation the speed is c only relative to this space locally.
This comes down to the issue of whether 3-space or spacetime actually exists, not whether the local Special
Relativity eﬀects are valid or not.

As already stated there is overwhelming evidence from 8 experiments that the speed of light is anisotropic,
and with a large anisotropy at the level of 1 part in 103: so these experiments show that a dynamical 3-space
exists, and that the spacetime concept was only a mathematical construct - it does not exist as an entity of
reality, it has no ontological signiﬁcance. These developments have lead to a new physics in which the dynamics
of the 3-space have been formulated, together with the required generalisations of the Maxwell equations (as
ﬁrst suggested by Hertz in 1890 [3]), and of the Schr¨odinger and Dirac equations, which have lead to the new
emergent theory and explanation of gravity, with numerous conﬁrmations of that theory from the data from
black hole systematics, light bending, spiral galaxy rotation anomalies, bore hole anomalies, etc. This data

1

has revealed that the coupling constant for the self-interaction of the dynamical 3-space is none other than the
ﬁne structure constant ≈ 1/137 [9, 10, 11, 12], which suggests an emerging uniﬁed theory of quantum matter
and a quantum foam description of the dynamical 3-space.

The substance of this report is to re-examine a light-speed anisotropy experiment performed by Stefan
Marinov in Graz in 1984 using essentially separated mechanical light choppers in a special modiﬁed version of
the original Fizeau technique - basically Marinov measured the diﬀerence in travel time between light beams
travelling in opposite directions [4]. However there is an apparent problem with the anisotropy velocity vector
that Marinov reported, namely it had a very diﬀerent direction, and also a somewhat diﬀerent speed, from that
which has recently been determined from the 8 experiments discussed in Sect.2. Fortunately we can report
here that Marinov made a number of errors in computing this velocity vector, and that after correcting for
these his data is now consistent with the results from these other experiments. This means that we now have
9 successful and consistent experiments that have detected the anisotropy of the speed of light, and which
conﬁrm that spacetime is merely a mathematical construct, that a dynamical 3-space has been detected.

It is truly amazing that for over 100 year physics has failed to acknowledge the anisotropy of the light speed;
and a very large eﬀect of the order of 1 part in 103. This is partly explained by the fact that any discussion
of these experiments and the implications is banned from mainstream physics. This apparently follows from
the long-standing misconception that the successes of Special Relativity, and of Lorentz symmetry, require
that no such anisotropy exists. Rather, the existence of a preferred direction, of an actual locally detected
frame of reference, is perfectly consistent with Special Relativity and Local Lorentz Symmetry, although the
explication of this is somewhat subtle, requiring a very careful operational deﬁnition of what is meant by the
space and time coordinates in the diﬀerent formalisms.

2 Brief History of Light Speed Anisotropy Measurements

The most famous and inﬂuential of the early attempts to detect any anisotropy in the speed of light was the
Michelson-Morley experiment of 1887, [2]. Despite that, and its inﬂuence on physics, its operation was only
ﬁnally understood in 2002 [5, 6, 7]. The problem has been that the Michelson interferometer has a major
ﬂaw in its design, when used to detect any light-speed anisotropy eﬀect1. To see this requires use of Special
Relativity eﬀects. The Michelson interferometer compares the round-trip light travel time in two orthogonal
arms, by means of interference fringe shifts measuring time diﬀerences, as the device is rotated. However if the
device is operated in vacuum, any anticipated change in the total travel times caused by the light travelling
at diﬀerent speeds in the outward and inward directions is exactly cancelled by the Fitzgerald-Lorentz mirror-
supporting-arm contraction eﬀect - a real physical eﬀect. Of course this is precisely how Fitzgerald and Lorentz
independently arrived at the idea of the length contraction eﬀect. In vacuum this means that the round-trip
travel times in each arm do not change during rotation. This is the fatal design ﬂaw that has confounded
physics for over 100 years. However the cancellation of a supposed change in the round-trip travel times
and the Lorentz contraction eﬀect is merely an incidental ﬂaw of the Michelson interferometer. The critical
observation is that if we have a gas in the light path, the round-trip travel times are changed, but the Lorentz
arm-length contraction eﬀect is unchanged, and then these eﬀects no longer exactly cancel. Not surprisingly
the fringe shifts are now proportional to n2 − 1, where n is the refractive index of the gas. Of course with a
gas present one must also take account of the Fresnel drag eﬀect, because the gas itself is in absolute motion.
This is an important eﬀect, so large in fact that it reverses the sign of the time diﬀerences between the two
arms, although in operation that is not a problem. As well, since for example for air n = 1.00029 at STP,
the sensitivity of the interferometer is very low. Nevertheless the Michelson-Morley experiment as well as
the Miller Michelson interferometer experiment of 1925/1926 [13] were done in air, which is why they indeed
observed and reported fringe shifts. As well Illingworth [14] and Joos [15] used helium gas in the light paths
in their Michelson interferometers; taking account of that brings their results into agreement with those of the
air interferometer experiment, and so conﬁrming the refractive index eﬀect. Jaseja et al. [16] used a He-Ne
gas mixture of unknown refractive index, but again detected fringe shifts on rotation. A re-analysis of the
data from the above experiments, particularly from the enormous data set of Miller, has revealed that a large
light-speed anisotropy had been detected from the very beginning of such experiments, where the speed is

1Which also severely diminishes its use in long-baseline interferometers built to detect gravitational waves

2

some 430 ± 20km/s - this is in excess of 1 part in 103, and the Right Ascension and Declination of the direction
was determined by Miller [13] long ago.

Curiously numerous experimentalists developed vacuum mode Michelson interferometers as vacuum pump
technology became available, and of course the fringe shifts eventually went away, supposedly conﬁrming that
no light-speed anisotropy existed. However one must always be careful of so-called “null” experiments - it
may actually be a “dud” experiment instead. In recent years the vacuum-mode interferometers have been
‘improved’ considerably by using small cryogenic vacuum-mode Fabry-Perot resonators, as for example M¨uller
et al. [20]. Trying to get experimentalists to put some gas in at least one of the resonators, so that the gas
eﬀect enables the device to detect the anisotropy, has proven to be very challenging2.

Another technique that has been successfully used is to measure the one-way travel time of RF waves in
coaxial cables, as in Torr and Kolen 1981 [17] with the one-way travel through 500m of cable, De Witte 1991
[18] using travel time diﬀerences between two 1.5km cables, and Cahill 2006 [19] using two 5 meter cables
facilitated by the optical ﬁber eﬀect for orientation-invariant timing transfers. Over the years the problem
of making very accurate timing measurements that are stable over days has evolved. Torr and Kolen and
De Witte both used multiple atomic clocks, and long coaxial cables, while Cahill uses one atomic clock and
In the DeWitte and Cahill experiments
the optical ﬁber eﬀect. These experiments are discussed in [19].
one measures the diﬀerence in travel time between RF waves travelling in opposite directions. The results
from these 3 coaxial cable experiments and the earlier gas-mode Michelson interferometer experiments are in
excellent agreement. Also as discussed in [19] the optical ﬁber eﬀect permits the construction of very small
1st order in v/c interferometers without the gas n2 − 1 eﬀect, and these are extremely accurate and cheap.
These diﬀerential one-way coaxial-cable time-diﬀerence experiments are analogous to the Marinov mechanical
Coupled Shutter device, which we now ﬁnally discuss.

3 The Marinov Light-Speed Anisotropy Experiment

In 1984 Stephan Marinov performed in Graz a direct measurement of the variations in the one-way speed
of light. This used the classic rotating shutters method where the speed of light is determined by observing
the light transmission intensity when it propagates through vacuum between small holes in separated but co-
rotating disks. The use of a mechanical timing method to determine the speed of light dates back to Fizeau who
in 1849 performed a round-trip speed-of-light measurement in which a beam of light was reﬂected back from
a mirror 8 km away, with the beam passing through the gaps between the teeth of a rapidly rotating wheel.
However there is an import development with the Marinov experiment: it is a one-way speed measurement. As
discussed above the round-trip time measurements cannot determine the one-way speed of light, except under
special circumstance, such as when the light propagates in a gas, as in gas-mode Michelson interferometers and
Fabry-Perot resonant cavities. However the Marinov experiment ideally measures the time-diﬀerence between
the travel-time in two opposite directions. The apparatus involved 2 co-rotating disks separated by a distance
of 120 cm. Light from an Argon laser was split and directed axially towards the disks through small holes at
a radius of 12 cm. Photocells detected the light when it passed through the holes in the opposite disks, with
the whole apparatus rotating at 200 rev/s, and with the axis aligned along the local meridian, i.e. NS. The
intensity of the light emerging from the holes in the disks depends on the light travel time, and is determined
by means of a galvanometer measuring the current from the silicon photodetectors. More details are available
in [4]. Fig.1 shows the current diﬀerences over the 5 days February 9-13. The data clearly shows the expected
time signature.

The geometry of the experiment is explained in Fig.2. The key eﬀect is that the speed of light is c relative
to the space ﬂowing past the Earth with velocity v. This means that the speed of light relative to the axis of
the apparatus varies as the Earth rotates, as the angle between the ﬂow and the detector light beams changes.
At the extremes the projected speeds are va and vb, and are given by

va = v sin(δ − φ),

vb = v sin(δ + φ),

(1)

2S. Dawkins and A. Luiten from the University of Western Australia have now done just that, putting N2 gas into one arm.
At the Australian Institute of Physics 17th Congress in Brisbane, Australia, in December 2006, they reported that beat frequency
shifts, the analogue of fringe shifts, were now detected as the earth rotated - because of extremely good stability they don’t need
to do short term rotations of the apparatus. Of course we must wait until they have optimised the apparatus and reported their
results

3

where v = |v|. However there is an important experimental aspect which must be taken into account, namely
that the two components of the apparatus, namely that part with the light travelling essentially N to S can
never be made identical to the part with the light travelling from S to N at the level of precision required
in this experiment. Marinov acknowledges this problem but in the end actually failed to come to the correct
method for dealing with it. Because of the asymmetry of the two parts of the experiment (1) must be put in
the form

va = v sin(δ − φ) + V,

vb = v sin(δ + φ) + V

(2)

where now va and vb are the speeds determined from the current measurements, and most importantly V is
an eﬀective speed that parametrizes the asymmetry in the apparatus: because even if the ﬂow speed v = 0
the apparatus will register non-zero va = vb 6= 0. The only way to determine V is to rotate the apparatus
while the disks are spinning, from NS to SN orientation. Then this interchanges the two parts, and now the
va and vb are given by (2), but now with V → −V . Then one could compute V , and then the ‘zero speed’ of
the apparatus is properly set. A similar task arose in the Cahill one-way RF coaxial cable experiment. There
timing signals between the ends of the RF cables is facilitated by sending infrared signals through optical ﬁbers
for which the propagation times are invariant, unlike the RF in the coaxial cables. Again the cables cannot be
cut to equal length with suﬃcient accuracy, and to set the ‘zero speed’ reading of the device, one could rotate
the device through 180 degree, which causes the asymmetry eﬀect to manifest with the opposite sign. However
in this experiment another solution was available, namely to fold the cables into a circular loop. Then the
eﬀects of absolute motion cancels, and the ‘zero’ for the instrument is easily established. While Marinov was
certainly aware of this asymmetry problem, in the end he eﬀectively ignored it. In the re-analysis herein we
do take account of this important problem. It means however that because the two equations in (2) now have
three unknowns, v, δ and V , we cannot determine a unique solution. Marinov of course assumed that V = 0,
which then permitted a unique but incorrect solution. Eliminating V from (2) we obtain

v(δ) =

vb − va
sin(δ + φ) − sin(δ − φ)

,

(3)

which at best gives us only a possible relationship between v and δ. In Fig.3 we show various v − δ results from
some ﬁve light-speed anisotropy experiments, as explained in the caption. These are remarkably consistent,
taking into account that they vary over a year because of the changing velocity of the Earth about the
sun. However the Miller and Torr-Kolen results are from February data, and are thus most relevant to the
Marinov experiment. Marinov reported that from the data in Fig.1 he deduced that va = −342 ± 30 km/s and
vb = +143 ± 30 km/s. However the resulting v − δ plot is then almost exactly twice as large as the v − δ values
from the indicated experiments. It is possible that there is an error here in going from photodetector currents
to the va, and vb speeds. So here I have taken va = (−342 ± 30)/2 km/s and vb = (+143 ± 30)/2 km/s. These
generate the curves in Fig.3. If we assume the value for v from the Miller and Torr-Kolen experiments of 430 ±
20km/s the we obtain a declination for −v of 68 ± 4 degrees S, although the actual errors are probably larger.
For this solution one can now extract the value of V from (2), and we obtain V = −228km/s, conﬁrming that
the asymmetry eﬀect is signiﬁcant. So one can conclude that, subject to the factor of two correction, the speed
and declination from the Marinov data is consistent with the other experiments.
Ignoring the asymmetry
speed V Marinov obtained a speed and declination for v of v = 362 ± 40km/s, and δ = −24 ± 7 degrees, i.e a
declination for −v of δ = +24 ± 7 degrees.

Marinov reported a right ascension for v of α = 12.5h ± 1h, based upon the local times for the maximum
and minimum in Fig.1 of 15h ± 1h and 3h ± 1h. However this determination is manifestly incorrect. Let us
carefully work through this determination. At midday on March 21 the local sidereal time at Greenwich is 0h.
Graz has longitude 15026′E, so the corresponding local sidereal time in Graz at midday is approximately +1h.
The experiment was done in the period February 9-13, which is approximately 21 days after March 21, and so
the local sidereal time has advanced by 1.4h, so that on February 11 at midday in Graz the local sidereal time
is 2.4h. Then the local time of 15h = 12h + 3h corresponds to a local sidereal time of α = 3h + 2.4h = 5.4h,
and 3h = 12h − 9h corresponds to α = −9h + 2.4h = −6.6h ≡ 17.4h. Hence the right ascension of −v from
the Marinov experiment is 5.4h ± 1h. This is to be compared to the right ascension of −v reported by Miller
for February of 6h. Hence the Marinov data gives a right ascension for v of 17.4h that agrees with other
anisotropy experiments, and is diﬀerent to the right ascension for v of α = 12.5h ± 1h that he reported in [4].

4

Figure 1: Measurements of photocell current diﬀerences, 2δI, from the Marinov “coupled-shutters” one-way light-
speed experiment in Graz, Austria, February 9-13, 1984, reproduced from [4]. The times in hours are local times. The
“null line” (i.e the abscissa) turns out to be arbitrary, as Marinov did not establish the value of the asymmetry speed
V in (2) of the detector, and in fact incorrectly assumed that V = 0. This oversight and the incorrect computation of
the local sidereal times of the local times for the maximum and minimum of 15±1hr and 3±1 hr, respectively, resulted
in Marinov obtaining the incorrect speed, right ascension and declination. The re-analysis of his data herein brings the
Marinov results into agreement with 8 other light-speed anisotropy experiments, from Michelson-Morley of 1887 [2] to
Cahill 2006 [19].

4 The Cosmic Microwave Background Anisotropy Velocity

The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) velocity is often confused with the Absolute Motion (AM) velocity
or light-speed anisotropy velocity as determined in the experiments discussed herein. However these are totally
unrelated and in fact point in very diﬀerent directions, being almost at 900 to each other, with the CMB
velocity being 369km/s in direction (α = 11.2h, δ = −7.220). Unfortunately in a recent light-speed anisotropy
experiment by Navia et al.
[21] it was assumed in the analysis that the light speed anisotropy velocity is
the same as the CMB velocity. This means that the results of this experiment cannot be compared with the
aforementioned 9 experiments.

The CMB velocity is obtained by deﬁning a frame of reference in which the thermalised CMB 30K radiation
is isotropic, that is by removing the dipole component, and the CMB velocity is the velocity of the Earth in
that frame. The CMB velocity is a measure of the motion of the solar system relative to the universe as a
whole, or at least a spherical shell of the universe some 13Gyrs in the past, and indeed the near uniformity
of that radiation in all directions demonstrates that we may meaningfully refer to the spatial structure of the
universe. The concept here is that at the time of decoupling of this radiation from matter that matter was
on the whole, apart from small observable ﬂuctuations, on average at rest with respect to the 3-space. So the
CMB velocity is not motion with respect to the local 3-space now; that is the AM velocity. Contributions to
the AM velocity would arise from the orbital motion of the solar system within the Milky Way galaxy, which
has a speed of some 250 km/s, and contributions from the motion of the Milky Way within the local cluster,
and so on to perhaps super clusters, as well as ﬂows of space associated with gravity in the Milky Way and
local galactic cluster etc. The diﬀerence between the CMB velocity and the AM velocity is explained by the
spatial ﬂows that are responsible for gravity at the galactic scales.

5 Conclusions

The re-analysis herein of the Marinov one-way light-speed anisotropy experiment has corrected an number
of errors in Marinov’s original report, and now his experiment conﬁrms the velocity of absolute motion that
has now been detected by 9 experiments in total. Signiﬁcantly these use a number of diﬀerent techniques,
proving that the eﬀect is not an instrumental anomaly. To the gas-mode Michelson interferometer technique
and the coaxial cable technique we can now add the mechanical light beam chopper technique. This one

5

Figure 2: Section of the Earth showing the NS direction, reproduced from [4]. The absolute velocity v of the ﬂow
of space past the earth, has declination δ, and Graz has Latitude φ = 45 degrees N. The speeds va and vb are the
projections of v onto the detector, lying along the local NS meridian, at the extremes, leading to the minimum and
maximum shown in Fig.1. Expressions for va and vb are given in (1), but taking into account a signiﬁcant asymmetry
eﬀect, equivalent to adding the speed V , we must use the expressions in (2). We report the ﬁnal result using the Miller
convention that we specify the speed and direction of the Earth through the local space, i.e the right ascension and
declination of the velocity −v, see Fig.3.

is particularly useful as it is completely direct - it measures the one-way light-speed travel time changes as
the device is rotated (by the Earth in Marinov’s experiment), and being 1st order in v/c we can ignore any
relativistic length contraction eﬀects, as they are 2nd order in v/c and are negligible at the accuracy of current
experiments. The observed light-speed anisotropy is very large being in excess of 1 part in 103. This eﬀect
continues to be denied by mainstream physics, despite its detection involving 9 experiments extending over
more than 100 years. What this eﬀect shows is that reality involves a dynamical 3-space, as Lorentz suggested,
and not a spacetime as Einstein suggested. Nevertheless, as discussed in [19], one can arrive at the spacetime
as a well-deﬁned mathematical construct, but which has no ontological signiﬁcance. This means that the
special relativity eﬀects are caused by the actual absolute motion of systems through the 3-space as Lorentz
long ago suggested.
It also means that this 3-space is a dynamical system and the internal dynamics for
this 3-space have already been determined [1], and which has lead to a new explanation for gravity, namely
that it is caused by the refraction of either EM waves or quantum matter waves by the time dependence
and inhomogeneities of the ﬂow of the substructure to this 3-space. As discussed in [1, 19] many of these
absolute motion experiments revealed ﬂuctuations or turbulence in the velocity v, and these correspond to
the gravitational waves. These wave eﬀects occur in v at the 20% level, so even they could be detected in a
modern mechanical light chopper apparatus, although the new optical ﬁber technique is even simpler and does
not involve any mechanical components.

This research is supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery Grant 2005-2006: Development

and Study of a New Theory of Gravity.

6

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

s

r
e
p

m
k

:
v

d
e
e
p
S

- 90

- 80

- 70

- 60

- 50

- 40

Declination: degrees

Figure 3: The curved lines show the Marinov speed-declination (v-δ) plots from (3) for February 8-13, 1984, with the
outer lines deﬁning the range that follows from Marinov’s stated uncertainty in va and vb of ±15km/s. The upper-
left box, indicating uncertainties and/or wave ﬂuctuations, with center indicated by left-most dot, is the speed and
declination in February 1926 from the Miller gas-mode Michelson interferometer [1, 13]. The right-most dot in this
Miller box is the result, believed to be from February 1981, without computed uncertainties, from the Torr-Kolen
coaxial cable experiment [17], see [1, 19] for details, and which is in remarkable agreement with the Miller results.
The other three results are not from February: the lower-right box with center indicated by a dot, is from the Cahill
coaxial cable experiment of August/September of 2006 [19], the partially obscured horizontal line is the lower-limit
speed from the Michelson-Morley gas-mode interferometer experiment on July 11, 1887 at 7:00 hr local sidereal time
[2], see [19] for re-analysis, and the right-most dot is the data from the coaxial cable 1991 experiment by De Witte with
no uncertainties shown [1, 18, 19], which appears to be from October. These results show that the new analysis herein
of the Marinov data reveals that the “coupled shutters” technique worked extremely well, and that by comparison with
the February Miller and Torr-Kolen data by assuming a speed of some 430 ± 20km/s then from the Marinov data we
obtain a declination for −v of 68 ± 4 degrees S, although the actual errors are probably larger and, independent of this
v − δ analysis, a RH = 5.4

h ± 1

h

.

References

New York, 2005.

[1] Cahill R.T. Process Physics: From Information Theory to Quantum Space and Matter, Nova Science Pub.,

[2] Michelson A.A. and Morley E.W. Philos. Mag. S.5 24 No.151, 449-463, 1887.

[3] Hertz H. Electric Waves, Collection of Scientiﬁc Papers, (Dover, New York, 1962).

[4] Marinov S. New Measurement of the Earth’s Absolute Velocity with the Help of the ”Coupled Shutters”

Experiment, Progress in Physics, 1, 31-37, 2007.

[5] Cahill R.T. and Kitto K. Michelson-Morley Experiments Revisited, Apeiron, 10(2),104-117, 2003.

[6] Cahill R.T. Absolute Motion and Gravitational Eﬀects, Apeiron, 11(1), 53-111, 2004.

[7] Cahill R.T. The Michelson and Morley 1887 Experiment and the Discovery of Absolute Motion, Progress

in Physics, 3, 25-29, 2005.

7

[8] Cahill R.T. Dynamical Fractal 3-Space and the Generalised Schr¨odinger Equation: Equivalence Principle

and Vorticity Eﬀects, Progress in Physics, 1, 27-34, 2006.

[9] Cahill R.T. Gravity, ‘Dark Matter’ and the Fine Structure Constant, Apeiron, 12(2), 144-177, 2005.

[10] Cahill R.T. ‘Dark Matter’ as a Quantum Foam In-ﬂow Eﬀect, in Trends in Dark Matter Research, 96-140,

ed. J. Val Blain , Nova Science Pub., New York, 2005.

[11] Cahill R.T. Black Holes in Elliptical and Spiral Galaxies and in Globular Clusters, Progress in Physics,

[12] Cahill R.T. Black Holes and Quantum Theory: The Fine Structure Constant Connection, Progress in

3, 51-56, 2005.

Physics, 4, 44-50, 2006.

[13] Miller D.C. Rev. Mod. Phys., 5, 203-242, 1933.

[14] Illingworth K.K. Phys. Rev. 3, 692-696, 1927.

[15] Joos G. Ann. d. Physik [5] 7, 385, 1930.

[16] Jaseja T.S. et al. Phys. Rev. A 133, 1221, 1964.

[17] Torr D.G. and Kolen P. in Precision Measurements and Fundamental Constants, Taylor, B.N. and Phillips,

W.D. eds.Natl. Bur. Stand. (U.S.), Spec. Pub., 617, 675, 1984.

[18] Cahill R.T. The Roland DeWitte 1991 Experiment, Progress in Physics, 3, 60-65, 2006.

[19] Cahill R.T. A New Light-Speed Anisotropy Experiment: Absolute Motion and Gravitational Waves De-

tected, Progress in Physics, 4, 73-92, 2006.

[20] M¨uller H. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91(2), 0204010-1, 2003.

[21] Navia C.E. et al., Progress in Physics, 1, 54-61, 2007.

8

