6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
2
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Perturbative S-matrices that depend on
parameters of a realistic regularization

Marijan Ribariˇc and Luka ˇSuˇsterˇsiˇc1
Joˇzef Stefan Institute, p.p.3000, 1001 Ljubljana, Slovenia

PACS numbers: 03.20.+i; 41.70.+t
Keywords: Electrodynamics; Point charge; Equation of motion

Abstract

We propose a partial answer to the question of what kind of ultrahigh-

energy physics has to be taken into account to circumvent the ap-
pearance of ultraviolet divergencies; a more than sixty years old open
question in quantum electrodynamics. To this end we introduce a new
theoretical concept to the theory of quantum scattering: Perturbative
S-matrices that depend on parameters of a realistic regularization—
realistic in the sense of Pauli and Villars [Rev. Mod. Phys. 21,
434 (1949)]. We expect that these additional parameters may pro-
vide some new information about the physics of quantum scattering.

1Corresponding author. Phone +386 1 477 3258; fax +386 1 423 1569; electronic

address: luka.sustersic@ijs.si

1

There are such perturbative S-matrices also in the presence of non-
renormalizable interaction terms with no counterterms.

I. Introduction and motivations.—Quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) provides
us with a perturbative theory, whose physical content we can represent by the
Feynman rules, cf. e.g. [1, 2, 3]. Using these rules, we obtain perturbative ex-
pansions of the momentum-space n-point Green functions (Feynman series)
to any desired order, written mainly in terms of ultraviolet-divergent inte-
grals. Within the framework of QFT, Feynman series result, through various
regularizations and renormalization, in the QFT perturbative S-matrices.

All regularizations used in QFT are formalistic [4] computational aids.
Their parameters are eventually eliminated during renormalization by limit-
ing them towards such values that the QFT perturbative S-matrices do not
depend on the choice of regularization.

We propose that, in computing the perturbative S-matrices from the
regularized Feynman series, we retain the dependency on the regularization
parameters, and thus try to gain some new information about the physics
of quantum scattering. However, regularizations used in QFT involve ei-
ther unphysical particles with negative metric or wrong statistic, or discrete
space-time, or lowering the dimensionality of spacetime, or some combina-
tion thereof. Thus, it would be hard not to eliminate their regularization
parameters and consider them as quantities related to the physics of quan-
tum scattering.

In the Preface to [2], ’t Hooft and Veltman gave good arguments for taking
the original, non-regularized Feynman series as the most succinct represen-
tation of our present knowledge about the physics of quantum scattering.
So we intend to use these series as a base for constructing perturbative S-
matrices that depend on parameters of a realistic regularization [4], which
may provide some new information about the physics of quantum scattering.
It is the primary purpose of this paper to propose, for the ﬁrst time, that
constructing a perturbative S-matrix without formalistic regularization, we
should put aside over a sixty-year old open question what kind of ultrahigh-
energy physics has to be taken into account to circumvent the appearence

2

of ultraviolet divergencies; instead we should concentrate on searching for
the possible regularizing modiﬁcations of Feynman propagators that a the-
ory about ultrahigh-energy physics could imply. Using so modiﬁed Feynman
propagators to regularize the Feynman series, we intend to obtain such a per-
turbative S-matrix that (i) involves only the same particles as the QFT one,
(ii) depends on the additional parameters introduced by the modiﬁcations of
Feynman propagators, (iii) can be made equal to the QFT one, and (iv) may
provide some information about ultrahigh-energy physics.

II. Construction of perturbative S-matrices that depend on parameters of
a realistic regularization.—For a given non-regularized Feynman series and
perturbative QFT S-matrix, let us consider construction of perturbative S-
matrices that depend on parameters of a realistic regularization.

As it seems that the vertices of non-regularized Feynman series adequately
describe interactions in quantum scattering, it is taken that their ultraviolet
divergencies are due to the asymptotic, high-energy behaviour of the Feyn-
man propagators [5]. So it is a prudent, conservative approach to retain the
vertices in Feynman series, and modify only the Feynman propagators to cre-
ate so regularized Feynman series that the Lehmann-Symanzik-Zimmermann
reduction formula provides a perturbative S-matrix that: (i) is Lorentz-
invariant and unitary; (ii) involves only the same particles as the QFT one;
(iii) depends solely on parameters that specify the QFT one and the modiﬁca-
tion of the Feynman propagators—for particular values of these parameters
it is equal to the QFT perturbative S-matrix; and (iv) exhibits the same
symmetries as the QFT perturbative S-matrix.

Now, we can search for such modiﬁed propagators that eﬀect a realistic
regularization by considering the perturbative S-matrices they provide and
their ultrahigh-energy behaviour; in particular, we can evaluate the signiﬁ-
cance of their modiﬁcations on the basis of experimental data by statistical
methods. We can facilitate this search by establishing the necessary and
suﬃcient analytic properties of so modiﬁed Feynman propagators that they
provide a perturbative S-matrix as speciﬁed above. As this is beyond the
scope of this paper, we give only an example.

An example of suﬃcient analytic properties.—In the case of QFT of a
single real scalar ﬁeld with φ4 self-interaction, we found out [6, 7] that it

3

suﬃces that the modiﬁed Feynman propagator equals

(k2 + m2 − iǫ)−1f (k2 − iǫ) ,

ǫ ց 0 ,

k ∈ R4

(1)

where the modifying factor f (z) that multiplies the QFT Feynman propa-
gator has the following analytic properties: (a) it is an analytic function of
z ∈ C except somewhere along the segment z ≤ zd < −9m2 of the real axis;
(b) f (−m2) = 1; (c) f (z) is real for all real z > zd, so that f (z∗) = f ∗(z);
(d) we can estimate that for all z ∈ C,

|f (z)| ≤ a0(1 + |z|3/2)−1 ,

a0 > 0 ;

(2)

and that for any real z0 > zd the derivatives f (n)(z) of f (z) are such that

sup
z∈C,ℜz≥z0

(1 + |z|3/2)(1 + |z|n)|f (n)(z)| < ∞ , n = 1, 2, . . . ;

(3)

(e) the coeﬃcients of f (z) depend on a positive cut-oﬀ parameter Λ so that
for any Λ ≥ Λ0, Λ0 > 0, the modifying factor f (z) has properties (a)–(d)
with the constants zd and a0 independent of Λ, and we can estimate that:

sup
Λ>Λ0

sup
z>0

|znf (n)(z)| < ∞ for n = 0, 1, . . . ,

(4)

and that, in the asymptote of inﬁnite cut-oﬀ parameter,

|f (n)(z) − δn0| → 0 as Λ → ∞ for any z0 > 0, n = 0, 1, . . . .

sup
|z|<z0

One can verify that the functions

(1 + q1 − µm2)n′

(1 + q1 + µz)−n′

,

0 < µ < (3m)−2, n′ = 3, 4, . . . , (5)

may be used as a modifying factor, since they satisfy above conditions (a)–
(e) with Λ = µ−1/2 and Λ0 > 3m. As such modifying functions f (z) → 1
if µ → 0, the parameter µ determines the extent of modiﬁcation of the
Feynman propagators and of QFT S-matrix. So we can get a measure of the
physical signiﬁcance of such a modiﬁcation for a particular process on the
basis of the corresponding experimental data by determining the value and
conﬁdence intervals of µ through statistical methods.

4

Non-renormalizable interactions.—If the interaction Lagrangian contains
non-renormalizable terms that do not satisfy the Dyson criterion, e.g. the
Pauli term, that makes no diﬀerence to the above construction [8]. In con-
trast to QFT, no counterterms with free parameters are needed, cf. [9]. How-
ever, if the cut-oﬀ parameter (such as speciﬁed above) tends to inﬁnity, the
perturbative S-matrix might tend to inﬁnity unless the coeﬃcients of the
non-renormalizable interaction terms vanish simultaneously.

III. Non-perturbative theory of quantum scattering.—Eventually, there is
an open question about the kind of non-perturbative theory we should look
for incorporating such a perturbative S-matrix that depends on parameters
of a realistic regularization.

In QFT, the path-integral formalism provides the most direct way to
Feynman series in their Lorentz-invariant form, especially so for non-Abelian
gauge theories, cf. [9, 10]. And according to Feynman, it also gives an insight
into the physics of quantum scattering.

All this suggests we should try to ﬁgure out how to incorporate each
of the above perturbative S-matrices into some path-integral based non-
perturbative theory, which possibly takes account of gravitation, faster-than-
light eﬀects, and/or some ultrahigh-energy physics; for an example see [7, 11].
Which is all beyond the scope of this paper.

IV. Conclusions.—We propose construction of such perturbative S-matrices

with possible non-renormalizable terms that might already provide some new
information about the physics of quantum scattering on the basis of available
experimental data.

References

[1] J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Fields (McGraw-

Hill, New York, 1965), Preface.

[2] G. ’t Hooft and M. Veltman, Diagrammar (CERN report 73-9, 1973);
reprinted in G. ’t Hooft, Under the Spell of Gauge Principle (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994), Introduction.

5

[3] M. Veltman, Diagrammatica (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

1994), p.183.

[4] We use adjectives formalistic and realistic in the sense of W. Pauli and
F. Villars, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 434 (1949), i.e., a realistic regularization
is implied by an acceptable theory.

[5] Which is the reasoning behind the formal Pauli-Villars covariant reg-
ularization by modiﬁcation of Feynman propagators through auxiliary
unphysical particles, cf. F. Villars, in Theoretical Physics in the Twen-
tieth Century, edited by M. Fierz and V. F. Weisskopf (Interscience
Publishers, New York, 1960), p. 78.

[6] M. Ribariˇc and L. ˇSuˇsterˇsiˇc, hep-th/0110010; Fizika (Zagreb) B 11 161

[7] M. Ribariˇc and L. ˇSuˇsterˇsiˇc, hep-th/0310229, Fizika (Zagreb) B 12 275

(2002).

(2003).

[8] According to J. Gomis and S. Weinberg, hep-th/9510087v2, “Today it
is widely believed that all our present realistic ﬁeld theories are actually
accompanied by interactions that violate the Dyson criterion.”

[9] S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields (Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, 1995), Vol.I, Chap.9 and section 12.3.

[10] M. Kaku, Quantum Field Theory (Oxford University Press, Oxford,

1993), Chap.8.

[11] M. Ribariˇc and L. ˇSuˇsterˇsiˇc, hep-th/040384v2.

6

