7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

”Continuum versus Discrete” Physics: brief note on
Endo- and exo-observer of a physical system.

David Vernette and Michele Caponigro

We argue about the following concepts:(i)introduction of endo and exo-observer of a physical
system (ii) possible relation between endo, exo-observer and continuum/discrete nature of the same
system (iii)the distinction about two categories of observers do not help to solve the basic nature
(continuum/discrete)of the system considered. We argue that discrete math tool utilized to describe
behavior of a physical system is to ascribe to the exo-observer description. In other words, discrete-
ness nature of a system is due at the presence of an external observer description, the observation
act. Vice versa, we retain, that endo-observer description give us a continuum nature of the system
but only in a Platonic realm. Finally, we retain that a real theory of the state of matter could to
build a real independence from the observer. These brief considerations open a discussion on the
foundations of discrete math tools and their relation with the observation act, included the possible
extension to foundations of the quantum mechanics.

INTRODUCTION: ROLE OF THE OBSERVER

Recently many works have been dedicated to informa-
tional approaches to the physics, especially in the ﬁeld of
quantum mechanics (Fuchs, Peres, Zeilinger[1]). We are
interested to analyzing this approach respect the problem
of continuum/dicrete nature of physical system. First, we
retain that:

• 1)The informational approach is not a preroga-
tive of quantum mechanics.The structure of infor-
mational approach is applicable in many ﬁelds of
physics.

• 2)The approach is based on:

i) a subjective in-
terpretation of probability ii)the equivalence be-
tween physical reality and our knowledge of phys-
ical reality,this position is supported through the
irreducibly random nature of individual quantum
events.

As we have seen, the approach is centered on the
fundamental role of the observer’s description. We retain
that the presence or apparent absence of the observer
is an important step to establish the nature of physical
system. What we intend with observer? Which is the
nature of the ”relation” with the correspondent physical
system?

We adopt the following general assumptions:

• 1)We call exo-observer system: a physical sys-
tem which is mathematically dependent from an
external observer description(e.g. math description
of the system depend by external observer).

• 2)We call endo-observer system: a physical sys-
tem which is not mathematically dependent by any
external observer description.

We think that above assumptions are not suﬃcient
to distinguish the basic nature (continuun/discrete) of
a physical system. We will analyze this point next sec-
tion. Of course, the ideal hypothesis is that exist a met-
alanguage where any endo/exo-observer can be formu-
lated. We do not see (until now) the existence of a
(neutral) metalanguage. We will argue that the pos-
sible existence of a metalanguage must be linked with
a real theory of the state of matter. For this reason,
our brief analysis will be more general and will diverge
from Primas[2] position: Inescapably, the study of the
endo/exo-dichotomy must be conducted in a metalan-
guage. The language in which any endo/exo-theory can
ever be formulated is neither part of the [...] endo and
exo-observer description. We agree,instead,with the fol-
lowing Primas[2]deﬁnition, which he calls ”the observer-
free”(quantum endophysics):the study of the Platonic
heaven, the realm of non-spatial, non-mental, timeless
but nevertheless real entities. According Primas: A
hard-boiled positivist may have diﬃculties to appreciate
such a quantum endophysics since it refers by deﬁnition
to some kind of a Platonic universe, and not to empiri-
cal facts. The aim of the study of quantum endophysics
is not the hope to ﬁnd the true and real values
for all endophysical observables(these do not exist!)
but to formulate universally valid natural laws endophys-
ically in view of theoretical derivations of operationally
meaningful exophysical descriptions.

CONTINUUM VS DISCRETE: PLATONIC
REALM VS INFORMATION

First, we do not retain a negative element the ”subjec-
tivity” in a description of a physical system. We argue
simple that the ”exo-observer act” introduce a discrete
behavior of the physical system. Vice versa, we retain,

that endo-observer description give us a ”continuum” na-
ture of the system but only in a Platonic realm. The
tension between discrete and continuous aspects seem
without a deﬁnitive solution. As we know, from ancient
philosophy the question of the nature, for instance, of
space (atomicity vs.inﬁnite divisibility) and its consti-
tuting elements has played a great part in metaphysical
studies. This question raised some problems that still
make up interesting research topics not only in philoso-
phy but in mathematics and cognitive sciences as well.
What does constitute space? Here, our intentions are
not to get into philosophical analysis, but rather to try
to evidence the fundamental role of the observer in the
description of the system.

Discrete (respectively continuous) can be related to:
time, real space, phase space etc. This analysis could
be done under diﬀerent levels: a) computational tech-
niques (i.e.informational approach) b) nature of the phe-
nomenon (i.e. quantum nature). The meaning of ”con-
tinuous”, for instance, seem less ambiguous in physics
than in mathematics.

Which are the implications of two observer’s category?

• A)endo-observer ⇒This hidden observer usually
is introduced under form of ”physical laws” (Pla-
tonic Observation). For instance, the Shr¨odinger’s
∂t = HΨ)→ is an example of
equation:
”Platonic observation”.

i¯h ∂Ψ

• B)exo-observer⇒This case is introduced under
form of ”information” (Subjective Observation).
For instance, the collapse of wavefunction →is an
example of ”Subjective observation”.

We argue that both categories of observers do not solve
the basic nature of continuum/discrete dichotomy of the
physical system. How we can infer and to support these
statements? Where are the theoretical reasons?

• 1) Until now, Exo-observer description implies→

a discrete nature of the physical systems (included
the unsuspicious classical systems). The preroga-
tive of this description is the subjective interpreta-
tion of mathematical data.

• 2) Until now, Endo-observer description implies→
a ”continuum” nature of the system but only in
the Platonic realm (The Math models and Physi-
cal Laws).
In other words, we have not any real
”continuum” deﬁnition of a physical system out of
Platonic realm.

2

The following table summarize our brief considera-

tions:

Endo-Observer
1.Physical Law
2.”Continuum”(in Platonic realm) 2.Discreteness(Idealism)
3.Universality
4.Possible Ontic intepretation

3.Contextuality
4.Epistemic interpretation

Exo-Observer
1.Information

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, both approaches do not give us a
deﬁnitive response on the continuum/discrete nature of
physical system. How we can go out? We retain that a
real theory of the state of matter could to build a
real independence from the observer, the metalanguage
auspicate from Primas.

——————

⋄David Vernette:Quantum Philosophy Theories www.qpt.org.uk
david.vernette@qpt.org.uk
⋄ Michele Caponigro: University of Camerino, Physics Department
michele.caponigro@unicam.it

[1] C.Fuchs Quantum Mechanics as Quantum Informa-

tion(and only a little more).
http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0205039
C. Fuchs, A. Peres Quantum theory needs no ’interpreta-
tion’ ” Physics Today page 70, March 2000
J.Koﬂer J, A.Zeilinger, Sciences et Avenir Hors-Srie No.
148, November 2006

[2] H. Primas Endo- and exo-theories of matter, Published in:
Endo and Exo-Concepts of Observation and Knowledge in
Physics, Philosophy, and Cognitive Science,Pp. 163-193
(1994)

