7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

THE LORENTZ-DIRAC AND DIRAC
EQUATIONS

B.G. Sidharth
International Institute for Applicable Mathematics & Information Sciences
Hyderabad (India) & Udine (Italy)
B.M. Birla Science Centre, Adarsh Nagar, Hyderabad - 500 063 (India)

Abstract

It is well known that the Classical theory of the electron reached
the limits of its description at time intervals of the order of 10−23secs,
that is the Compton time. It is widely believed that below these time
intervals Classical Electrodynamics doesn’t work and that a Quantum
description is required. Using the Lorentz Dirac and the Dirac equa-
tions of the electron, we point out that in fact there is a convergence
of the two descriptions at the Compton scale.

1 Introduction

In the thirties when Dirac was working on the relativistic Quantum Theory
of the electron, he was also working on the theory in the Classical description.
Indeed the limitation of the classical description of the electron appears in the
inﬁnity we obtain when the size of the electron → 0 as also in the radiation
reaction term (also called the Schott term) which contains the third derivative
[1, 2, 3]. Herein was the ﬁrst ingredient of what later became renormalization
in electrodynamics. In fact we have the Lorentz Dirac equation,

with

maµ = F µ

in + F µ

ext + Γµ

F µ

in =

F µν

in vν

e
c

1

(1)

(2)

and

F µ =

˙aµ −

2
3

e2
c3

(cid:18)

1
c2 aλaλvµ

(cid:19)

where aµ denotes the acceleration of the electron and

e2
c3 ˙aµ
which appears in (3) is the Schott term.
contains the electromagnetic mass,

2
3

melm =

e2
8πc3

∞

1
r4 r2drdΩ =

e2
2Rc2 ,

R

Z

It must be mentioned that m

where, in (5) R is the radius of the electron treated as a sphere. It must be
mentioned that (1) needs to be supplemented with the condition

that is that the acceleration of the electron → 0 at an inﬁnite time in the
future. This overcomes the well known problem of the run away solutions of
the Lorentz Dirac equation (1). We will return to this brieﬂy. It must further
be noted that there is a non locality, though this is within the interval given
by

limr→∞aµ(τ ) = 0

τ0 ≡

2
3

e2
mc3

m(aµ − τ0 ˙aµ) = K µ

With this input the Lorentz Dirac equation can be written as

where K ν is given by

K µ(τ ) = F µ

in + F µ

ext −

1
c2 Rvµ,

(8) can now be integrated to give

maµ(τ ) =

K µ(τ + ατ0)c−αdα

∞

0
Z
Let us compare (10) with the more familiar Newtonian equation

maµ(τ ) = F µ(τ )

2

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(Cf. ref.[1, 4] for a detailed discussion). (10) diﬀers from (11) in three ways.
Firstly F µ is a function of the coordinates and the velocity, and is a second
order ordinary diﬀerential equation in the coordinates, whereas (10) is an
integro diﬀerential equation because of the fact that the acceleration also
appears in it. Secondly (11) is a local equation in time, unlike (10) in which
the acceleration depends on the force at time τ and also at all later times.
Thirdly it must be noted that (10) needs to be supplemented by an additional
asymptotic condition viz., (6).
Nevertheless it must be noted that the non locality in time is associated with
τ0 in (7) which is of the order of the Compton time and is thus very small.
Explicitly this means that for a classical system we have,

maµ(τ ) = K µ(τ + ξτ0) ≈ K µ(τ )

(12)

which shows that the local theory is approximately correct. We also notice
that if (12) were exact, then the diﬀerence between it and the Lorentz Dirac
equation (1) would be precisely the Schott term (4). It is thus this Schott
term which is responsible for the non local time dependence (via the third
time derivative). On the other hand it has been shown that [4, 5] the above
implies that we have to consider a small region of the order of the Compton
length, around the particle, in our calculations.

2 The Electron Self Force

It has long been known that the root of the problem of Classical Electrody-
namics, which can be seen above is the Electron Self Force. To put it simply,
if the electron is considered to be a charge distribution on a spherical shell,
then as long as the electron is at rest (or even moving with uniform veloc-
ity), we could argue away the force of one part of the charge distribution
on another part as a cancellation due to symmetry. The situation however
changes when the electron begins to accelerate - then using Special Relativ-
ity, we conclude that the electron per se is no longer in equilibrium. It was
Poincare who realized that additional non electromagnetic forces were re-
quired to counteract this self force. These are the so called Poincare stresses
(Cf.refs.[1, 2, 3]).
For simplicity we consider the one dimensional case, then the self force is
given by

F =

2
3

e

Re2 x′′ −

2
3

x′′′ + γ

e2R
c4 x′′ + 0(R2)

(13)

3

The important features of the self force (13) are, ﬁrstly the coeﬃcient of the
triple time derivative of the coordinate is independent of the size or shape
of the electron and secondly the subsequent terms are positive powers of the
size and would thus → 0 as the radius R → 0. On the contrary, the ﬁrst
term is the problematic term which → ∞ as the size of the electron shrinks to
zero. The coeﬃcient in the ﬁrst term is precisely the electromagnetic mass.
Interestingly the second term above leads precisely to the Schott term.
It is well known that in the thirties Dirac argued that we could still eliminate
the troublesome ﬁrst term, while at the same time retaining the necessary
second term if we consider the electromagnetic potential to be the diﬀerence
of the advanced and the retarded potentials, rather than assuming it to be
the retarded potential alone. In this case he showed that (13) becomes

F = −

2
3

e2
c3 x′′′ + 0(R)

(14)

(15)

The interesting thing about (14) is that, the inﬁnite term of (13) is absent.

3 The Lorentz Dirac and the Dirac Equations

With the above input, let us consider the case when the external electromag-
netic ﬁeld becomes vanishingly small. Then using (14) we get from (1), in
this one dimensional case

−

2
3

e2/c3

x′′′ = mx′′

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
What is very interesting is that we get a parallel equation in the Dirac Quan-
tum Mechanical equation of the electron [6]. In this case we have to consider
the velocity operator c~α, where in the Dirac theory as is well known the α’s
are 4 × 4 matrices involving the Pauli spin matrices. However Dirac noticed
that the velocity of the electron in this theory, has in this case, the eigen
values ±c, which of course would be impossible.
On the other hand, it is interesting that the same situation prevails in the
Classical theory. Indeed in this case we can see in a simple way that (ref.[5])

˙x ∝ exp

3mc3
2e2

 

,

t
!

4

and within time τ , the electron acquires due to the run away eﬀect, the
velocity of light.
Dirac then went on to obtain the equation

− ¯h2 ¨α1 = 2ı¯h ˙α1H

(16)

where in (16) H is the Hamiltonian and the subscript 1 refers to the fact that
we consider, let us say the x component of the velocity. Before proceeding
further it can be seen, remembering that ˙x is the velocity component, that
(15) and (16) are identical, if we use the fact that H = mc2, so that ¯h/H is
τ0 the Compton time, except for the factor ı in (16).
Thus mathematically, the Lorentz Dirac and the Dirac equations both lead
to the same equations for the velocity. Next Dirac went on to argue from
(16) that the velocity has real and imaginary parts, the imaginary part being
rapidly oscillating (zitterbewegung). We encounter this situation in the limit
of point space time. In real life our measurements are averaged over intervals
of the order of the Compton scale. In other words space time is fuzzy [7].
Once these mathematical averages are taken over the Compton time then the
rapidly oscillating terms vanish and we are left with the physical velocities
and momenta.
Let us consider the classical case (15). In this case we get

x′′ = e−t/τ0

(17)

where τ0 is given by (7). (17) shows that the runaway, acausal acceleration
→ 0 for t > Compton time. Within the Compton time, however there is
non-locality - which is otherwise well known. The Dirac condition (6) is thus
recovered from the usage of the Advanced potential.
What is very interesting is that in the classical theory of the electron too,
we have encountered minimum space time intervals at the Compton scale
as seen above. We can now see that Dirac’s prescription of the advanced
potential of the Classical theory is indeed meaningful within the Compton
scale, where as is well known there is a breakdown of causality.
This non physical feature within the Compton scale has been elaborated
upon by Weinberg [8].
Starting with the usual light cone of Special Relativity and the inversion of
the time order of events, he goes on to add, and we quote at a little length
and comment upon it, “Although the relativity of temporal order raises no
problems for classical physics, it plays a profound role in quantum theories.

5

The uncertainty principle tells us that when we specify that a particle is
at position x1 at time t1, we cannot also deﬁne its velocity precisely.
In
consequence there is a certain chance of a particle getting from x1 to x2 even
if x1 − x2 is spacelike, that is, |x1 − x2| > |x0
2|. To be more precise, the
probability of a particle reaching x2 if it starts at x1 is nonnegligible as long
as

1 − x0

(x1 − x2)2 − (x0

1 − x0

2)2 ≤

¯h2
m2

1 − x0

where ¯h is Planck’s constant (divided by 2π) and m is the particle mass.
(Such space-time intervals are very small even for elementary particle masses;
for instance, if m is the mass of a proton then ¯h/m = 2 × 10−14cm or in time
units 6 × 10−25sec. Recall that in our units 1sec = 3 × 1010cm.) We are thus
faced again with our paradox; if one observer sees a particle emitted at x1,
2)2 is positive (but less than
and absorbed at x2, and if (x1 − x2)2 − (x0
or = ¯h2/m2), then a second observer may see the particle absorbed at x2 at
a time t2 before the time t1 it is emitted at x1.
“There is only one known way out of this paradox. The second observer
must see a particle emitted at x2 and absorbed at x1. But in general the
particle seen by the second observer will then necessarily be diﬀerent from
that seen by the ﬁrst. For instance, if the ﬁrst observer sees a proton turn
into a neutron and a positive pi-meson at x1 and then sees the pi-meson and
some other neutron turn into a proton at x2, then the second observer must
see the neutron at x2 turn into a proton and a particle of negative charge,
which is then absorbed by a proton at x1 that turns into a neutron. Since
mass is a Lorentz invariant, the mass of the negative particle seen by the
second observer will be equal to that of the positive pi-meson seen by the
ﬁrst observer. There is such a particle, called a negative pi-meson, and it
does indeed have the same mass as the positive pi-meson. This reasoning
leads us to the conclusion that for every type of charged particle there is an
oppositely charged particle of equal mass, called its antiparticle. Note that
this conclusion does not obtain in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics or in
relativistic classical mechanics; it is only in relativistic quantum mechanics
that antiparticles are a necessity. And it is the existence of antiparticles that
leads to the characteristic feature of relativistic quantum dynamics, that
given enough energy we can create arbitrary numbers of particles and their
antiparticles.”
We note however that there is a nuance here which distinguishes Weinberg’s
In Weinberg’s analysis, one observer sees
explanation from that of Dirac.

6

only protons at x1 and x2, whereas the other observer sees only neutrons at
x1 and x2 while in between, the ﬁrst observer sees a positively charged pion
and the second observer a negatively charged pion. Weinberg’s explanation
is in the spirit of the Feynman-Stuckleberg diagrams. One particle leaves x1
and then travels causally to x2, where x1 and x2 are within the Compton
wavelength of the particle. But for another observer, a particle ﬁrst leaves
x2 and travels backward in time to x2.

4 Discussion

We can go beyond the mathematical similarities of the Classical and Quan-
tum theories of the electron if we recognize that there is a minimum funda-
mental length l, the Compton wavelength. Within the Compton wavelength,
space time is fuzzy and is physically meaningless from the point of view of
the point space time theory. The inﬁnity problem as the electron shrinks to a
point is now eliminated from the classical ﬁeld. This inﬁnity exists in Quan-
tum theory as well, as is expressed by the fact that the velocity of the point
electron equals the velocity of light - we have to average over the zitterbewe-
gung Compton wavelength region to recover meaningful physics. Moreover
once the fuzzyness within the Compton length is recognized, then it is clear
that the shape of the electron becomes an irrelevant factor. It might be men-
tioned that Snyder had introduced the concept of this minimum fundamental
length way back in 1947 [9, 10], precisely with the motivation of eliminating
the inﬁnities.
It may be also mentioned in this context that the author has shown that it
is possible to think of the mass m purely in terms of Quantum Mechanical
self interacting amplitudes within the Compton scale [11, 12].
It is interesting to note that we get the advanced potential for example in
(14) by replacing t by −t. Remembering that all this is now considered to
take place in a very small interval of the order of the Compton length, Dirac’s
prescription is precisely a description of the Double Weiner process, in which
case time in that interval becomes non diﬀerentiable (Cf.[7] for a detailed
discussion). Brieﬂy what happens is that the forward and backward time
derivatives are unequal and in an obvious notation we have

d
dt+ x(t) = b+,

d
dt− x(t) = b−,

(18)

7

From (18) we deﬁne two new velocities

V =

b+ + b−
2

, U =

b+ − b−
2

It may be pointed out that in the absence of the double Wiener process, U
given in (19) vanishes while V gives the usual velocity. It is now possible to
introduce a complex velocity

From (20) we can see that it is as if the coordinate x becomes complex:

To see this in detail, let us rewrite (19) as

where we have introduced a complex coordinate X with real and imaginary
parts Xr and Xı, while at the same time using derivatives with respect to
time as in conventional theory.
We can now see from (20) and (22) that

W = V − ıU

x → x + ıx′

dXr
dt

= V,

= U,

dXı
dt

W =

(Xr − ıXı)

d
dt

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

That is, in this development either we use forward and backward time deriva-
tives and the usual space coordinate as in (18), or we use the derivative with
respect to the usual time coordinate but introduce complex space coordinates
as in (21).
At this stage we note that a generalization of three space dimensions leads
to a quarternionic description. That is we will get four coordinates instead
of three and these are represented by the three Pauli spin matrices and the
unit matrix. The coordinates now become non commutative, and in fact we
have equations like

[x, y] = 0(l2)

(24)

Equations like (24) also follow from the work of Snyder already cited. On
the other hand starting from (24) we can not only recover the Cliﬀord alge-
bra of the Dirac matrices, but also the Dirac equation itself (Cf.ref.[7] and

8

[13, 14, 15]). There is still a convergence of the Classical theory of the elec-
tron and its Quantum Mechanical counterpart.
Finally we make the following remark: From the above it appears that causal-
ity and Special Relativity break down within the Compton scale - Special
Relativity as pointed out elsewhere [12] is valid outside the fuzzy Compton
scale, within which space time is ill deﬁned. It is interesting in this connec-
tion to note that if within the Compton scale we were to work with the non
relativistic theory, then as is well known [1] we recover the electron radius
as,

R =

e2
mc2

In other words we get the intertial mass entirely as the electromagnetic mass.
Outside the Compton scale, without contradiction Relativity and Relativistic
Electrodynamics work, this being the new input.

References

[1] Rohrlich, F., “Classical Charged Particles”, Addison-Wesley, Reading,

Mass., 1965, pp.145ﬀ.

[2] Barut, A.O., “Electrodynamics and Classical Theory of Fields and Par-

ticles”, Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1964, p.97ﬀ.

[3] Feynman, R.P., Leighton, R.B., and Sands, M., “The Feynman Lectures
on Physics”, Vol.II, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Mass., 1965.

[4] Sidharth, B.G.,

in Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern
Physics: “Pro and Contra”, Eds., A.E. Chubykalo et al., Nova Science
Publishing, New York, 1999.

[5] Hoyle, F., and Narlikar, J.V., “Lectures on Cosmology and Action at a

Distance Electrodynamics”, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996.

[6] Dirac, P.A.M., ”The Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, Clarendon

Press, Oxford, 1958, pp.4ﬀ, pp.253ﬀ.

[7] Sidharth, B.G., “The Universe of Fluctuations”, Springer, Berlin, 2005.

[8] Weinberg, S., ”Gravitation and Cosmology”, John Wiley & Sons, New

York, 1972, p.61ﬀ.

9

[9] Snyder, H.S., Physical Review, Vol.72, No.1, July 1 1947, p.68-71.

[10] Snyder, H.S., Physical Review, Vol.71, No.1, January 1 1947, p.38-41.

[11] Sidharth, B.G., Ind.J. of Pure and Applied Physics, 35, 1997, p.456ﬀ.

[12] Sidharth, B.G., “Chaotic Universe: From the Planck to the Hubble

Scale”, Nova Science, New York, 2002

[13] Sidharth, B.G., Found.Phys.Lett., 16 (1), 2003, pp.91-97.

[14] Sidharth, B.G., Found.Phys.Lett., 15 (5), 2002, p.501ﬀ.

[15] Sidharth, B.G., ”The Common Origin of Mass...”, Proceedings of the
Eighth International Symposium on Frontiers of Fundamental Physics,
American Institute of Physics, Stonybrook, U.S.A., 2007 (in print).

10

