7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
3
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

String model of the Hydrogen Atom

Omar Y´epez
Department of Chemistry, Memorial University of Newfoundland,
St. Johns, NF, A1B 3X7 Canada.

February 2, 2008

Abstract

A non-moving electron hydrogen model is proposed, resolving a long standing con-
tradiction (94 years) in the hydrogen atom. This, however, forces to not use the ”in
an orbit point particle kinetic energy” as the phenomenon responsible for the atom
stability. The repulsion between the masses of the electron and proton is what is re-
sponsible of such stability. The mass of the electron is a ﬁeld fully described by the
uncertainty principle through the conﬁnement of the particle, which is also consistent
with the general theory of relativity that states: ”mass-energy tells the space how to
bend”. Ergo, mass exerts a tension on its surrounding space and the lighter the mass
the larger the space it will occupy. Based on this concept it is proposed that the orbital
is the electron. The electron’s orbitals are just the electron’s diﬀerent ways of inter-
secting the space; with diﬀerent magnetic momenta. The coupling of this momenta
with the magnetic moment of the proton ﬁnally explains the hyperﬁne structure of the
hydrogen spectrum with an overwhelming simplicity.

1 Introduction

The hydrogen atom, as it is currently understood, involves a non-radiating, moving charged
point particle (the electron) in an orbit around the proton, where the orbit’s shape is dic-
tated by the wave equation [1]. Regardless of the orbit’ size, the electron charge is spread
out within the orbit. The electron mass is somehow contained in that point and the electron
radiates when it jumps from one orbit to another but not while it is moving in it, which
is contradictory. This is required to avoid energy losses and an eventual collapse into the
proton. However, the product of such collapse, a neutron, requires more energy than the

1

sum of the mass energies of the proton and the electron, which means that they can be mo-
tionless together and a neutron will not be produced 1. The energy required for the electron
to move in this orbit has been completely ignored, as well as, how the electron while in this
chaotic movement, copes with all of the shape of the orbit (in dumb bell like orbits) and still
produces a highly directional magnetic moment.
The critics to the orbit model begun with the non-radiating moving point charge which
frontally violates the fact that a moving charge emits electromagnetic waves and continued
with a thermodynamic contradiction: the electron movement will necessarily produce an
induced alternate current in a ﬁne wire approached to the atom [2], i.e. a perpetual motion
machine of the ﬁrst kind. Another well documented contradiction is that a point particle
with inﬁnite energy will have an intrinsic charge instability.
Moreover, historically, successful theories for the hydrogen atom survived until the precision
in the measurements of the hydrogen spectrum increased and, actually, no comprehensible
hydrogen theory exists. The actual wave mechanical description of the hydrogen atom comes
short to explain the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen spectrum because its for-
malism does not include the existence of an electron magnetic moment. Dirac came up with
a solution as the magnetic moment of the electron appears naturally in his treatment, being
able to reproduce Sommerfeld equation (based on a model with elliptic orbits) and explain-
ing the ﬁne structure of the spectrum successfully by invoking the spin-orbit interaction (not
the elliptic orbits!), which is the coupling of the magnetic moment of the electron with the
angular momentum of its own orbit. The Dirac model at the time failed when the hyperﬁne
structure of the hydrogen spectrum was discovered and Lamb and Retherford demonstrated
its inadequacy [3]. Finally, the diﬃculties encountered by the Dirac theory were circum-
vented by quantum electrodynamics making small corrections in the energy levels predicted
by Dirac’s theory. This solution, however, is not a complete and logically satisfactory solu-
tion to the problem of the hydrogen atom: a diﬃculty of principle remains now, as formerly
[3].
By looking to the intersection of a torus by a plane, a completely new particle model that
describes elementary particles as the intersection of a 4 dimensional torus into a 3 dimen-
sional space has been described [6, 10]. Thanks to the use of this higher dimensional view,
unexplainable phenomena such as self -interference and the EPR paradox has been explained
in a simpler way. The main characteristic of this model is that it involves the interaction
between the particle and its surrounding space. This has made it easier to detect that in
order to have mass, an electron uses all the dimensions of the space it is intersecting. The
intersection events produce electric ﬁeld vectors that tense the particle’s surrounding space,
precisely because such dimensions usage and ﬁnally producing the particle mass [6]. The
use of a higher dimensional object intersecting a lower dimensional space has been very pro-
ductive in explaining why the position and momentum of the particle does not commute
and in showing an intimate connection between the magnetic and the anapole moment of a
particle: both properties respectively depend on how the space is intersected by the particle
and that is why each pair of properties respectively do not commute. So far, this model had
explained the charge, magnetic moment, and shapes experimentally found for nuclei [12],

1The mass diﬀerence between the neutron and the sum of the proton and electron is 0.78 MeV. This

energy has to be paid to produce a neutron

2

as well as self-interference, number of rounds before reaching identity for the electron and
photon, Stern-Gerlach experiments, EPR paradox, the appearance of the anapole moment
and parity violation (chirality). Furthermore, this model also provides a possible concept
(at least consistent with the general theory of relativity, GTR) for the mass of the particle
[6, 10].
The ”GTR consistent concept of mass” encounters its direct connection with Quantum Me-
chanics in the uncertainty principle which explicitly relates the energy of the particle (its
mass energy) with its conﬁnement, i.e. the lighter the object, the larger the space it will
occupy. This opens the possibility for the electron to be just the orbital, avoiding the radi-
ation problem because the orbit=electron is not moving.
The kinetic energy can not longer be oﬀered to explain the atom stability. The uncertainty
principle has been invoked to have the kinetic energy of the point electron in the orbit [4],
but the same result can be obtained by the energy-time uncertainty relation where the en-
ergy is not necessarily kinetic. If the electron=orbit is not moving, such energy is proposed
to be the potential energy due to the presence of the particle, i.e. its mass energy, which is
repulsive between the two masses and works against the coulomb attraction. Therefore, the
big energy that has to be paid in order to fuse the masses of the electron and the proton is
what prevents the collapse, because the Coulomb attraction is not enough to produce it.
The energy term that comes from the uncertainty principle and which is inversely propor-
tional to the square of the atom radius is due to the mass energy of the electron and decreases
as the area it occupies increases [4], which is consistent with the general theory of relativity
that states that mass tells the space how to bend [5], i.e. mass exerts a tension on the space,
therefore the smaller the particle mass, the larger the space it will occupy; thus, the electron
can be the orbit.
The advantage of this hypothesis is that the hydrogen model produced goes to a strong
simpliﬁcation, where the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen spectrum are just the
consequence of the interaction between the magnetic moments of the proton and the elec-
tron, dictated by the distance and angle between them.
The descriptions made so far [6, 10] are in complete agreement with the arguments and hopes
driven by superstring theorists. In this paper a Superstring theory consistent model of the
hydrogen atom is oﬀered.

2 Postulates

1) The electron is not moving
After being trapped by the proton and the radiation of the energy quanta equivalent to the
ionization potential has been emitted, the electron is not moving any longer. When
another quantum transition, involving the absorption or emission of a photon happens, the
electron just increases or decreases in size producing the next energy state, just as current
quantum theories explain with the invention of the orbit.
2) The shape of the electron is the intersection of a hypertorus in spaceland
The diﬀerent shapes of the orbits (the electron) are the consequence of the intersection of

3

a hypertorus (4D-toroid) with a three dimensional space (See appendix A). The magnetic
moment vector departs from the geometric center of the hypertorus. These diﬀerent inter-
sections produce diﬀerent magnetic momenta, which interaction with the proton’s magnetic
moment determines the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen spectrum.
3) The atom energy
This is the sum of the following energies:
a) The mass energy: the masses of the proton and the electron repel each other and
therefore this repulsion goes against the coulomb attraction. This energy has been wrongly
designated as the kinetic energy of a point particle in current hydrogen models.
b) The coulomb energy: which produces the attraction between the proton and the elec-
tron and would produce the fusion of both particles (the collapse) unless the mass energy
prevent it.
c) The magnetic energy: which results from the coupling of the magnetic moments of the
proton and the electron and it is the sole responsible for the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure of
the hydrogen spectrum.

3 The Model

Two mobi¨ous string currents embedded in a spiral-toroidal dimension just as it has been
described in [6] intersects the plane, leaving electric ﬁeld vectors with diﬀerent orientations,
resulting in a wave pattern when the object is moving (this is described by the Dirac equa-
tion). These electric ﬁeld vectors use all the dimensions of the space they are intersecting,
producing a tension on such space and curving it: this phenomenon is the particle’s mass (see
Appendix B). The intersection event consumes some time, therefore the charge of the electron
occurs. Also, these electric ﬁeld vectors happen in a toroidal intersecting path, producing an
anapole moment and a magnetic moment depending in how the space is intersected. In the
case of the hydrogen atom, depending on the way that the electron’s hypertorus intersects
the space, diﬀerent magnetic momenta are produced.

3.1 Mass Energy

Main energy levels for the hydrogen atom has been derived in the Bohr model, assuming the
quantization of the orbital angular momentum [7],

and the mechanical stability of the orbit,

L = mvr = n~

1
4πǫ0

e2
r2 = m

v2
r

4

(1)

(2)

solving for v in (1) and substituting in (2) yield the Bohr radius,

However, the same result can be obtained without the quantization of the angular momen-
tum. By invoking the uncertainty principle, where

x = R, the atom radius,

and making

p=p, the kinetic energy is, therefore,

△

where µ is the reduced mass of the atom. The energy of the atom is, ﬁnally [8],

r = 4πǫ0

n2~2
me2

x = ~ =>

p

△

△

△

~

R

p =

△

K =

=

p2
2µ

(

p)2
△
2µ

=

~2
2µR2

E = K + V =

~2
2µR2 −

e2
4πǫ0R

The Bohr radius is obtained again when the minimum energy in equation (6) is obtained
through derivation,

dE
dR

~2
µR3 +

=

−

e2

4πǫ0R2 = 0 => R = r = 4πǫ0

~2
me2

Equation (6) provides the main energy levels of the hydrogen atom. From postulate 1,
equation (6) should be a potential energy instead of kinetic. Equation (4) becomes,

From the uncertainty between energy and time,

Substituting (9) in (8) gives,

x
t △

m△
△

x = m△
△

x2
t

=

E

t =

△

△

=>

t =

△

~

2

~

2

~

2

E

△

x2
m△
~
2

E

△

~

2

=

=>

E =

△

~2

4m

x2

△

x = 1

△

△

E = E and

√2r the ﬁrst part of equation (6) is obtained. If the product
making
of uncertainties is ~, then
x = √2r to have the ﬁrst part of (6). The same result was
obtained with geometrical arguments departing from the ratio between rθ and rϕ of the
deuteron [10]. Thus, the elimination of time as a variable frees the path for any other kind of
energy, since postulate 1 forbids kinetic energy, this energy is designated as the mass energy
of the particle. To obtain the diﬀerent energy levels of the hydrogen atom, the square of the
principal quantum number should multiply the ﬁrst part of (6). Since there is no particle

△

5

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Figure 1: Coupling (no to scale) between the magnetic moment of the electron and the
magnetic moment of the proton

movement the reduced mass should not be used and the ﬁrst part of equation (6) has to be
separated for each particle,

E = Me + Mp + V =

n2~2
2mer2 +

n2~2
2mpr2 −

e2
4πǫ0r

(11)

where M is the mass energy of the electron and the proton respectively. Equation (11) pro-
vides the main energy levels of the hydrogen atom.

3.2 Magnetic Energy

According to postulate 2 the electron magnetic moment would interact with the proton’s
magnetic moment at the very empty center of the atom, regardless of the way in which both
particles are intersecting the 3-D space. Hence, the magnetic energy will come from the
coupling of the magnetic moments of the proton and the electron (see Fig. 1). This energy
is attractive and of the form [9],

Ez =

µ0µeµp(cosγ + sinγ)
4πz3

(12)

where µ0 is the permeability of the vacuum, µe and µp are the magnetic momentum of
the electron and the proton respectively, γ is the angle between both vectors and z is the
separation between the origin of the vectors.
When the magnetic moment vectors involved in the hydrogen atom meet at its geometric
0.01f m), they do so at such an angle as to maintain an energy
center (with a separation z
minimum, such a minimum happens only at two angle values: 135 and 315◦. At these angles

∼

6

9eV . However, a z distance in the order
the fourth term in equation (14) is in the order of 10−
quoted above will produce the energies of the hyperﬁne structure. A direct consequence of
this mechanism is that there are just two states of magnetic coupling between the proton
and the electron, see Fig. 1 and 4.
Therefore, the equation that describe the total energy of the hydrogen atom is,

E =

n2~2
2mer2 +

n2~2
2mpr2 −

e2
4πǫ0r −

µ0µeµp(cosγ + sinγ)
4πz3

by making rθ = ~
becomes,

2mc and the atomic radius being rϕ of the torus (see ref [10]), equation (13)

E =

n2rθ,e~c
r2
ϕ

+

n2rθ,p~c
r2
ϕ

e2
4πǫ0rϕ −

−

µ0µeµp(cosγ + sinγ)
4πz3

According to postulate 3, the natural repulsion between the mass energy ﬁelds of the proton
and the electron does not allow the later to have its total mass energy (mec2 = 0.5 MeV,
which happens at rϕ = 273 fm) because the electric attraction is not enough to compensate
for the repulsion between the masses of both particles. On the contrary, such repulsion
makes the electron expands, reducing its mass energy to 13.6 eV at 53000 fm. Given that
the attractive coulomb energy at that radius is -27.2 eV, a minimum of -13.6 eV is produced,
see Fig. 2.
This reduction in the mass energy of the electron, however, only happens because the at-
tachment to the proton and it is a state in its mass energy ﬁeld described by its conﬁnement.
500000 eV is recuperated when the electron is free and can shrink
The free particle mass
back again to a rϕ = 273 fm because the proton is not there anymore. Therefore, the total
mass energy of the electron is conserved as a ﬁeld in either case. As it can be noticed, the
electron mass is no longer a ﬁxed scalar, but a ﬁeld described by its conﬁnement.

∼

3.3 Magnetic Moment and Charge of the Free electron

As it was discussed for the ﬂat deuteron [10], the charge of the ﬂat electron occurs at the
intersection time θrθ

c , i.e.,

The fraction of spire that intersect the plane will be the arc θrθ in the whole θ perimeter
2πrθ,

therefore, the ﬂat electron’s anapole moment will be,

Since the intersection time is θrθ

T =

1
4πc ·

IV =

1
4πc

θ
2π
c , the magnetic moment will be,

ec
θrθ

2π2r2

θrϕ =

erθrϕ
4

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

e = iθ

=> iθ =

θrθ
c

ec
θrθ

η =

θ
2π

µ =

erθrϕ
4
θrθ
c

=

ecrϕ
4θ

7

Figure 2: Mass and coulomb energies (equation 11) vs atomic radius for the hydrogen atom.
The minimum occurs at the Bohr radius (insert), The mass energy ﬁeld of the proton still
contribute with 7 meV at that radius.

8

for the free particle, rϕ = √2rθ,e, θ = √2

4 to obtain the electron’s magnetic moment,

µ =

ec√2rθ,e
4 √2
4

=

ec~
2mec

=

e~
2me

3.4 Magnetic Moment of the Trapped electron

It was found that when the electron is trapped by the proton to form a hydrogen atom, the
e2
intersection time changes to θrθ
2hǫ0 ,

αc , where α is

e = iθ

=> iθ =

θrθ
αc

eαc
θrθ

therefore, the ﬂat electron’s anapole moment will be,

T =

IV =

1
4πc ·

1
4πc

θ
2π

eαc
θrθ

2π2r2

θrϕ =

eαrθrϕ
4

Since the intersection time is θrθ

αc , the magnetic moment will be,

µ =

eαrθrϕ
4
θrθ
αc

=

eα2crϕ
4θ

3.5 Shapes and the transitions in spaceland

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

As it was fully described in [10], the shapes of the deuteron can be understood as the
diﬀerent ways of intersecting a hypertorus with a 3D space (see appendix A). Those shapes
are: a sphere inside another sphere (ss), a torus (t) and two separated spheres (ts). These
experimental shapes highly resemble an S, a P3/2 and a P1/2 orbitals respectively (compare
[11] with [12]). Hence, it is postulated that the electron orbitals are the diﬀerent ways of
intersection of a hypertorus with a 3D space, i.e. postulate 2.
The hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen atom, require that the shape ss (an S orbital) has
a magnetic moment and according to ref [10], such shape should not have it. This apparent
contradiction happens because the model of intersection between a 3D body and a 2D plane
(ﬂatland) is still far from the real model which consists of a 4D body intersecting a 3D
space. Therefore, it has to be proposed that in the real case, the state ss (an S like state)
will have both kind of momenta. In other words, the anapole moment only happens when
such toroidal dipole moment aims into time (according to the ﬂatland model) and therefore
is not consuming it, otherwise it will be a magnetic moment. Therefore, the transitions
between diﬀerent shapes of the electron will go through a no magnetic moment (anapole
moment) state, see Fig. 3.

9

Figure 3: Transition in between energy levels for an S like intersection of the electron in the
hydrogen atom.

4 Results

As it can be clearly appreciated in ref [13], each electron orbital (energy state or electron
way’s of intersection with the space) presented diﬀerent slopes in their respective plots of
energy (frequency) versus magnetic ﬁeld strength for the hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen
spectrum. This means that the electron magnetic moment is changing between the diﬀerent
kind of intersections. For a ss intersection (S orbital) the magnetic moment measured was
µe, but for the ts intersection (P1/2) the magnetic moment of the electron diminished to
µe
π . Surprisingly, the t intersection state (P3/2) showed two diﬀerent magnetic moments, one
2µe
π and the other that doubles the normal magnetic moment of the free electron, i.e.
at
2 µe. Table 1 presents the angle θ needed in equation (22) to reproduce the experimental
magnetic moment observed for each energy state. Also, it is observed in [13] that for the ss
(S orbital) and ts intersections (P1/2), there are four signals: three of them depart from the
higher energy part of the hyperﬁne transition and one departs from the lower energy part.

10

−

−

2P1/2 is 1057845.0 (9.0) kHz [14], the 2S1/2

In Fig. 4, the total energy levels of the hydrogen atom with principal quantum number
n=1 and n=2 (according to the model presented in this paper) is shown. The Lamb shift,
transition 2S1/2
2P3/2 is 9911200 kHz [15], the
1S hyperﬁne frequency (hﬀ) is 1420.4057517667 MHz [16], the 2S hﬀ is 177556800 Hz [17].
With the later value the 2P1/2 hﬀ was calculated to be 59185595 Hz following the scheme
in ref [18]. The 2P3/2 hﬀ was measured from [13] to be 25 MHz. Then, the theoretical
magnetic momenta (Table 1) and the z distance needed to give the corresponding energy
state are presented. Fig. 4 can be explained as follow: The 4D torus electron intersects the
3D space in diﬀerent ways and with diﬀerent magnetic moments. Each magnetic moment
has two orientations with respect to the proton’s magnetic moment, which also has two
orientations possible. As a result, the combination of both particles magnetic moments and
orientations produces four energy states for each magnetic moment produced. The number
of ways the electron can intersect the space depends on the principal quantum number,
when n=1 just an ss (S orbital) intersection occurs: three of the four possible energy states
have a relative shorter z distance making them relatively more energetics and therefore,
they occur in the upper part of the hyperﬁne energy state. However, one of this group of
three necessarily has an electron magnetic moment orientation that will make it a lower
energy seeker. Hence, even though this energy state is a relative higher energy state at
zero magnetic ﬁeld strength, it will go toward lower energies as the magnetic ﬁeld strength
increases as it is found experimentally [13]. When n=2 the ss intersection increases in size
and maintains the same magnetic moment, µe. Such increase in size changes the main energy
level of such state. But the same ﬁgures as in the lower quantum number state happens.
The higher quantum number, however, opens the possibility of other ways of intersection
with other magnetic moments. For instance, the intersection ts presents the lowest magnetic
moment for this quantum number and therefore the lowest energy state in the family of
intersections. Surprisingly enough, the intersection t occurs with a magnetic moment that
double the magnetic moment of the free electron and with another that is two times the
magnetic moment of the intersection ts.

5 Discussion

When the electron is trapped by the electric ﬁeld of the proton, it expands because the mass
energy of the proton repels it, thus it reduces its mass energy to a minimum. Then, the elec-
tric attraction acts to compress the electron, until the natural repulsion between the mass
energy ﬁelds of the two particles prevents further compression. The electron does compress
in steps, so the movement of its charge from one step to the other produces a vibration,
which translates to an energy releasing process: the emission of an energy quantum (hν).
In this act, a photon or sum of photons equivalent to the ionization potential occurs. This
process is highly reversible and the absorption of photons makes the electron expand against
the electric attraction, decreasing its mass energy toward a minimum again, until the elec-
tron is free from the coulomb attraction and decreases its size, regaining the free particle
size (rϕ=273 fm and rθ=193 fm).

11

Figure 4: Hydrogen Energy levels for states with principal quantum numbers n=1 and n=2.

12

As a result of the atom formation, the electron presents a reduced mass energy at the Bohr
radius and due to the coulomb attraction, a minimum of energy occurs. This process is
responsible for the stability of the atom. The electron can not present its total mass energy
at the Bohr radius because the presence of the proton prevents the electron from reducing
its size further. Its total mass energy is, therefore, warped space between both particles (see
Fig. 2).
This relationship between mass and size, described by the mass energy equation (14) is
consistent with the general theory of relativity, which states that the mass-energy tells the
space how to curve: mass exerts a tension on the space, therefore, the smaller the mass the
lesser the tension and the larger the space the particle will occupy. The mechanism behind
such a tension on the space is the use of all the available dimensions by the electric ﬁeld
vectors upon their intersection and this depends on the structure of the string currents in a
fermion or a photon. If such electric ﬁeld vectors use one dimension less than the available
in such a space, no tension and thus no mass occurs, i.e. the photon [6]. As it has been
shown, this relationship is also derived from the uncertainty principle, which is fundamental
in the quantum realm. Therefore, this relationship is the conceptual connection between
both theories.
Nonetheless, there is experimental evidence that supports ”a larger than a proton electron”
[19, 20]. The classic idea that the electron should be smaller than the proton because it has
a smaller mass, have prevailed precisely because the ”success” of point like particle models
(Bohr model and subsequences). This success, however, has diminished progressively as the
accuracy of the measurements in the hydrogen spectrum increased and those models are now
uncapable to explain the hyperﬁne structure of the hydrogen spectrum.
Postulate 1 requires not using the kinetic energy as the cause of the atom stability, postulate
2 is needed to explain the diﬀerent shapes of the electron (orbits in the current understand-
ing), which leads to diﬀerent magnetic momenta and the soul of the interaction that ﬁnally
explains the hyperﬁne interaction: the coupling between those magnetic momenta of the
electron and the proton (see Fig.4). Therefore, the third postulate is a consequence of the
ﬁrst two.
The shapes of the electron are related to the diﬀerent ways of intersecting space [10] and,
as it was shown in Table 1, with diﬀerent magnetic momenta. This later ﬁnding being an
experimental fact [13]. Probably, the proton, like the electron, also has diﬀerent magnetic
momenta and shapes in its domain but for the sake of simplicity the ”normal” magnetic
moment of the proton was kept constant for the calculations.
The author wonders about the strong similarities between the shape of the orbitals derived
from the Schr¨odinger solution of the hydrogen atom and the intersection of a hypertorus with
a 3D space (the later is equivalent to the revolution of the intersection of a 3D-torus with
a plane), because the former is the consequence of the solutions of the colatitude equation
[23] and the latter comes from geometric arguments [10]. As a matter of fact, this resem-
blance was used to identify each toroidal intersection with a given energy state. However,
Schr¨odinger’s treatment does not say anything about the magnetic moment of the diﬀerent
orbitals and/or establish that an orbital does have a magnetic moment and tell less about
its direction. Moreover, since postulate 1 prevents a wave as the solution for the hydrogen
atom, the same shape structures can be obtained with the revolution of Cassini ovals, which
are the mathematical expression of the intersection of a torus by a plane [21]. Surprisingly

13

this have been done. Cassini ovals has been used to model two center electron orbitals [22].
Therefore, the model presented is self-consistent. Given that it also describes the behavior
of the wave when the electron is moving [6], the present model is a particle-wave model for
real.
Another strong similarity is the statistical interpretation of the present point particle elec-
tron, which can be anywhere in the orbit as a smeared out distribution of mass and charge.
The model presented here produces its charge in the act of intersection with the space, thus
the charge of the electron will appear and disappear from existence all over its intersection
shape; and in a way that the charge will be e at any measurable time allowed by the un-
certainty principle. On the other hand, the mass is the tension exerted by the electric ﬁeld
vectors, which also happens concurrently with the charge. Thus, in all these aspects, both
models coincide.
The model presented has also a strong relation with string theory since two mobi¨ous string
currents in a spiral-toroidal extra-dimension are used to built the same. Therefore, it would
be very interesting to see which of the string theories is consistent with this model.
Fig. 4 shows, clearly, that both the ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure of the spectrum is just the
consequence of the coupling of diﬀerent magnetic moments at diﬀerent distances with the
proton and those distances are at the very empty center of the proton. This explanation
departs completely from the current understandings and unify ﬁne and hyperﬁne structure
as being diﬀerent aspects of the same process, contrary to current understanding which at-
tributes the ﬁne structure to the spin-orbit interaction and the hyperﬁne to the coupling
between the proton and the electron’s spin.
The transition in the majority of the states consist just in the inversion of the electron
magnetic moment, keeping the separation between it and the proton’s magnetic moment,
constant. There is only one state that changes its z distance; this explains why there are
three signals in the upper part of each hyperﬁne frequency and only one in the lower part.
Thus, the whole hydrogen spectrum can be explained with the primary ”big energy” electron
size and mass transition and the secondary ”little energy” electron-proton magnetic moment
coupling.
According to the Shr¨odinger solution of the hydrogen atom, a S orbital should have less en-
ergy than a P orbital. However, as it can be observed in Fig. 4, the appearance of diﬀerent
magnetic moments depending on the way the electron is intersecting the space changes this
previous understanding, where the magnetic moment of the electron did not play any role.
Thus, the fact that the 2S1/2 energy state has more energy than the 2P1/2 (the Lamb shift)
is no longer a mystery since the electron’s magnetic moment of the former is higher than the
later.
Finally, the author is in complete agreement with the idea that it is impossible to imagine
the electron, because the only thing one can see is its multiple shadows.

14

6 Conclusions

A simpler model of the atom has been achieved. This model is free of non-radiating moving
particles and thermodynamics contradictions. It uses the natural coupling of the magnetic
moment of the particles involved in the atom to explain the hyperﬁne structure of the
hydrogen spectrum. The electron is the orbit and its magnetic moment departs from its
geometrical center. This moment changes according to the way it intersects the space and
therefore its coupling with the proton magnetic moment presents diﬀerent energy states
concordantly. The working hypothesis: ”the electron mass is the tension that it exerts
on the space, thus its mass energy decreases when the electron occupies a larger space” is
perfectly consistent with the General Theory of Relativity and with Quantum Mechanics.

7 Acknowledgment

The author fully appreciate the eﬀorts of John Byrne and Constantino Badra for useful
grammar corrections of the text.

References

[1] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), p. 277.

[2] T. Arabatzis and K. Gavroglu, Eur. J. Phys., 18 (1997) 150.

[3] Oxford Library of the Physical Sciences, G.W. Series, Spectrum of Atomic Hydrogen,

(Oxford University Press, 1957), p. 41.

[4] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), p. 297.

[5] Michio Kaku, Hyperspace, A Scientiﬁc Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time

Warps, and the 10th Dimensions Anchor Books, New York, p. 342.

[6] O. Y´epez, ”Matter and Light in Flatland” arXiv:physics/ 0401153 v1 28 Jan 2004.

[7] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), p. 130.

[8] Ibid, 295.

[9] Hull J. R., Supercond. Sci. Technol. 13 (2000) 854.

15

[10] O. Y´epez, ”The Flatland Deuteron” arXiv:physics/ 0510168 v1 18 Oct 2005.

[11] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), p. 300.

[12] J.L. Forest, V.R. Pandharipande, S.C. Pieper, R.B. Wiringa, R. Schiavilla and A. Ar-

riaga, Phys. Rev. C, 54 (1996) 646.

[13] G.F. Bassani, M. Inguscio and T.W. H¨ansch, Proceedings, The Hydrogen Atom

(Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1989), p. 120.

[14] S.R. Lundeen and F.M. Pipkin, Metrologia 22 (1986) 9.

[15] E. W. Hagley and F.M. Pipkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 1172.

[16] R. Ley, D. Hagena, D. Weil, G.Werth, Hyperﬁne Interaction 89 (1994) 327 187 (1990)

145.

Phys., 83 (2005) 283.

[17] S.G. Karshenboim, P. Fendel, V. G. Ivanov, N. N. Kolachevsky, T. W. H¨ansch, Can. J.

[18] J. W. Heberle, H. A. Reich and P. Kusch, Phys. Rev., 101 (1956) 612.

[19] A.H. Compton, Phys. Rev., 14 (1919) 20.

[20] Ibid, 14 (1919) 247.

[21] E. W., Weisstein, ”Cassini Ovals.” From MathWorld–A Wolfram Web Resource,

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/CassiniOvals.html

[22] A.B. Bolotin, A.V. Kazimianec, Lithuanian Journal of Physics 35 (1995) 346.

[23] R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, F´ısica Cu´antica, ´atomos, mol´eculas, s´olidos, n´ucleos y

part´ıculas (Mexico: Limusa, 1999), p. 298.

[24] Thomas F. Banchoﬀ, ”Beyond the Third Dimension, Geometry, Computer Graphics,
and Higher Dimensions” (New York, Scientiﬁc American Library, 1996), Chapter three.

8 Appendix A, Kind of Intersection of a hypertorus
with a 3 D space, the magnetic and the anapole mo-
ment of the electron does not commute

The technique to look at the intersections of a 4D object in a 3D space consist in making
the intersection of its 3D version with a 2D space (a plane) and then revolving the resultant
through a given edge [24]. For example, if a 4D sphere moves through a 3D space, its
intersection will begin as a tiny sphere that increases in size up to a certain limit (the

16

Figure 5: Cross section of a 3D Torus intersecting a plane (bottom) and its orthogonal
projection (above), showing its geometric parameters rθ and rϕ. The arcs ϕrϕ and θrθ are
also shown.

radius of the 4D sphere) and then reduces its size until it stops intersecting such space. The
equivalent operation between a 3D sphere and a 2D plane will be a tiny circle that increases
up to a maximum size (the radius of the sphere) and then reduces its size until it disappears
from the plane. Therefore, it is easy to visualize that the revolution of this circle will give
the equivalent sphere of the previous ”impossible to imagine” operation. This is true for the
sphere which is highly symmetrical, as any given rotation edge will give the same result. In
the case of a 4D torus intersecting the 3D space, however, there are a wide number of possible
intersections depending on the angle between the torus and the plane. However, one is only
concerned with the possible intersections that gives the femtometer toroidal structures found
for the deuteron in reference [12] and these are obtained with just two orientations: ϕ and
θ orientations.
In Fig. 5 the cross section of the intersection of a torus with a plane and its orthogonal
projection are depicted, the upper half of the torus is in the future and the bottom half in the
past. In this ﬁgure the torus is in its θ orientation, which means that the plane is cutting the
torus along this angle and in a symmetric way. The ϕ orientation is obtained when the torus
intersects the plane through that angle in a symmetric way also. Fig. 6 presents the result of
the operation described in the previous paragraph, for a torus that is intersecting the plane
in its θ and ϕ orientations. Given that the string currents travel through the shape of the
toroidal dimension, a torodial charge moment called anapole moment is produced. Electric
ﬁeld vectors are left in the plane following such structure during the act of intersection,
a intersection time is consumed and a charge is produced regardless to the orientations of
the intersection. However, there is a fundamental diﬀerence between these two situations:
when the anapole moment is perpendicular to the plane (ϕ orientation) and when it is in
the plane (θ orientation). In the ϕ orientation the anapole moment is aiming into time and

17

Figure 6: Intersection of a 3D torus with the plane (the paper sheet) and the resultant
revolution through a given edge. The ﬁrst two ﬁgures comes from a θ orientation and shape
at the bottom from a ϕ orientation. The revolution of these projections is on the right side
of the ﬁgure. Such revolution are exactly the shapes found for the deuteron in ref. [12].

thus, it is not consuming it. In the θ orientation such moment is in the plane, consumes
time and becomes a magnetic moment. Therefore, anapole and magnetic momenta should
not commute.

9 Appendix B, The Concept of Mass

On Fig. 7 and 8 the string like structure of the electron and photon are clearly observed.
The pink planes represent our observable universe, the spiral-toroidal dimension is depicted
in grey and the string current is shown as a series of red dots with blue arrows. Previously
[6], it was thought that the current travelled all along the spiral dimension; however, this

18

makes impossible the charge conservation in EPR paradox (Appendix C), because the ϕ
intersection does not leave the charge e at the ﬁxed time θrθ
c as the θ orientation does.
According to Fig. 7, it is proposed that Inertia is due to the counter movement detected
for the electron in its ϕ axis, because the electron has counter movements between its both
toroids and the photon does not show this characteristic, thus photon does not has inertia as
it is required. Also, the counter movement detected is the intrinsic way to make the matter
wave produced to be dependent upon the speed of the particle. In the case of the photon,
both toroids move in the same ϕ direction and therefore, its wave has a ﬁxed speed, i.e.
inertia is a requirement for the matter wave to happen.

Fig. 9 and 10 present the track left by the electron and the photon. As the electron moves
through ﬂatland, its electric ﬁeld vectors occur perpendicularly to the direction of movement,
thus the wave generated oscillates using all the dimensions of the paper sheet: one dimension
to move and the other to oscillate. In the case of the photon, its electric ﬁeld vectors go
with the direction of the movement, thus the wave generated uses one dimension less than
the two available. Given that the photon requires not to have mass, it was concluded that
in order to have mass the object should use all the dimensions of the space it is intersecting.
As the electron’s electric ﬁeld vectors do just that, a tension is exerted into the space and
this is the particle mass.
On Fig. 11 the force produced by an accelerated electron is appreciated. As acceleration
progressed, the electron’s DeBroglie wavelength diminished and therefore more intersections
events will happen per unit of space. As a result, a progressively higher bending of the space
occurs, i.e. a force 2. And this is why force is the product of the mass per acceleration of the
object. As the photon does not tenses the space, a change in its wavelength is irrelevant with
respect to the shape of the space-time and it just follows whatever that shape is. This is
why the photon just has momentum as P = E
c2 and does not produce a force. If the electron
is not accelerated, the same amount of intersection events per unit of space would happen,
the space is not progressively tensed and in this case the electron just has momentum, as
the product of its mass per its velocity. Hence, the electron can have momentum and force
but the photon can only have momentum. A consequence of this concept is that the particle
mass can no longer be treated as a ﬁxed scalar but as a dependable ﬁeld.

10 Appendix C, EPR paradox

On Fig. 12, the ﬂatland equivalence of the Stern-Gerlach experiment for ﬂat electrons is
observed. Since that universe has only two dimensions, a moving particle can go just to the
right or left, or can be accelerated or retarded. In this case, a very clear separation between
up and down oriented magnetic dipole moments to the left and to the right is observed.
Fig. 13 is an example of the travel of ﬂat electrons through diﬀerent oriented magnetic ﬁlters
in ﬂatland. After passing the ﬁrst right-ﬁlter, the change in orientation of the second ﬁlter to

2force is the eﬀect produced by the geometry of the space-time, if there is no bending of the space there

is momentum but no force is produced

19

Figure 7: Flat electron intersection with 2D space (ﬂatland) sequence, propagation is down-
ward the page.

20

Figure 8: Flat photon intersection with 2D space (ﬂatland) sequence, propagation is down-
ward the page.

21

Figure 9: Sinusoidal Electric Field Printed in the Plane by the ﬂat electron. Maximum and
minimum go perpendicular to the direction of movement, which is downward the page.

22

Figure 10: Sinusoidal Electric Field Printed in the Plane by ﬂat photon. Maximum and
minimum go in the direction of movement, which is downward the page.

23

Figure 11: Force because an accelerated matter wave

24

90◦, made the electron to intersect ﬂatland at its ϕ axis. This process is at random, therefore,
the orientation produced by the ﬁrst ﬁlter is lost. However, the number of electrons is reduced
to a half, because in this orientation half of the electrons are accelerated and the other half
are retarded (the blocking device is out of the plane). Also, this orientation produces a
lost in the identiﬁcation of the particle because its magnetic dipole moment is out of the
plane (aiming into time). Finally, upon another random rearrangement of the 8 accelerated
electrons in a left-ﬁlter, 4 electrons with their magnetic dipole moment completely opposed
to the direction of the magnetic dipole moment of the 16 electrons which passes the ﬁrst
ﬁlter, occurs. And this behavior is consistent with the 3D experimental fact.
The change in the orientation of the intersection from θ to ϕ like, accompanied with the 50:50
stochastic process is revealing in regard with the uncertainty principle. The θ orientation
is what produces the sinusoidal electric ﬁeld pattern printed in the plane and it is the way
to know the momentum of the particle with precision. However, to do so the particle is in
two places of the plane at the same time, therefore, the measurement of its exact position
is even nonsensical. It is pure non-local to produce the wave that leaves in the plane. The
stochastic change to the ϕ intersection stops the particle being non-local, to occupy just one
place in ﬂatland, thus its position can be measured very precisely. But in doing so, it stops
also to produce the sinusoidal pattern, ergo its momentum is completely unknown and there
is no way to avoid this, because it is a particle-space intrinsic property. Clearly, this is why
position and momentum do not commute.

25

Figure 12: Stern-Gerlach experiment in ﬂatland.

26

Figure 13: Flat electrons through magnetic ﬁlters with diﬀerent orientations

27

