7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The time at the subplanckian scale

C. Pierre

Institut de Math´ematique pure et appliqu´ee
Universit´e de Louvain
Chemin du Cyclotron, 2
B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
pierre@math.ucl.ac.be

Abstract

With the theory of special relativity [1], time has been linked with
space into a four-dimensional space-time from which a basic question
must be asked: can space be really transformed into time and vice
versa? The response is aﬃrmative if time has the same structural
topological structure as space [2] at the subplanckian quantum level
in such a way that a discrete structural quantum time constitutes the
time part [3] of the space-time internal vacuum of every elementary
particle.

It has thus been shown that a quantum time, quantized alge-
braically according to a lattice of time quanta, really exists and is
emergent in the sense that time quanta can be transformed into space
quanta and vice versa. Furthermore, this quantum time, only relevant
at the subplanckian scale, is proved to be in one-to-one correspondence
with the absolute and relative clock times.

1

1 Universal and relative clock times

Understanding the nature of time has long been a main challenge for scientists
[4]–[8] and philosophers [9]. Indeed, if, at ﬁrst sight, it is relatively easy to
realize that time has a continuous structure composed of a succession of
instants corresponding to points on the line, a deeper insight of it reveals
its close relationship with movement. This is perhaps why Newton [10] in
his attempt to isolate time from the physical reality viewed it as a linear
universal and absolute mathematical object.

Since antiquity until Einstein, time was considered as being exterior to the
physical phenomena [11] allowing the measurement of their evolution. This
absolute time, conceived as a universal clock time, measured the running
ﬂow of time and has been treated as a unidimensional object within the
framework of the Euclidean geometry.

The physical reality was not only described by Newton with respect to
a universal clock time but also in function of an absolute three-dimensional
space: this gave him the absolute mathematical frame allowing to work out
the dynamics of moving macroscopic bodies.

In this classical dynamics [12], macroscopic objects move in the reference
frame of the external three-dimensional space with respect to the absolute
clock time. Until special relativity, space and time were considered as inde-
pendent concepts although mingled with the dynamics they describe.

It was only after the contribution of Minkowski, Lorentz, Poincare [1]
and principally Einstein [13] to special relativity that a four-dimensional
continuous space-time world was introduced in Physics: it is sometimes called
chronogeometry with reference to the clock time and is characterized by a
Minkowski pseudo-Euclidean geometry [1] in which the dimension of time is
perpendicular to the three dimensions of space. However, space and time are
not completely equivalent in this context since time is not a fourth dimension
of space.

A basic concept of special relativity, allowing the description of the events
by space-time coordinates (x, y, z, t) , is the inertial reference frame repre-
sented by a four-dimensional coordinate system moving at constant velocity.
The distance between two space-time events is obtained in the Minkowski-
Lorentz geometry from their space-time interval which is the same in all
inertial frames: this is equivalent to saying that the space-time interval be-
tween two events is an invariant of the transformation from an inertial frame

1

into another given by the Lorentz transformations.

These considerations imply the two following drastic changes in our un-

derstanding of time:

1. the timelike (i.e. real) interval [14] between two space-time events in-
troduces the concept of proper time which is zero for the light in the
vacuum in the frame of special relativity but diﬀerent from zero for
all other kind of matter, for example the elementary particles having a
velocity inferior to the one of light c .

2. the absolute time (and space) of Newton [10], is replaced by a relative
time (and space) associated with each reference body and varying with
respect to its velocity and the other considered reference bodies.
In
this respect, let us quote A. Einstein “Every reference body has its
own particular time; unless we are told the reference body to which the
statement of time refers, there is no meaning in a statement of time of
an event”.

Let then s2

12 be this time like, i.e. causal, space-time interval between

two events “ 1 ” and “ 2 ” [14]

12 = c2t2
s2
12

− r2

12 > 0

where the time and space coordinates of the two events are denoted respec-
tively by r and t with r2 = x2 + y2 + z2 in Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) .
This concept of interval between two space-time events is the corner-
stone of the Einstein-Minkowski-Lorentz-Poincare chronogeometry [1] which
is rigid, i.e. ﬂat, in the frame of special relativity when it is curved in general
relativity [15]–[17] due to the presence of matter deforming the neighbouring
space-time. The clock time is thus aﬀected by gravitational forces as it can
be measured that a clock on the earth will run more slowly than a clock not
subjected to gravitation.

Special and general relativity then tell us that every moving reference

body, submitted to its related dynamics, has its own proper time:

a) calculated with respect to every external (moving) reference body to

which the universal cosmic time can correspond;

b) deformed by (external) gravitational forces.

2

A fundamental question is then the following:
Are space and time dependent in the frame of special (and general) rela-

tivity?

1
2

The Lorentz transformation ∆t′ = ∆t (cid:16)1 − v2
c2 (cid:17)

shows that the (proper)
time ∆t′ of a body moving at velocity “ v ” is shorter than the corresponding
time ∆t in the ﬁxed inertial frame: in other words, a moving clock runs more
slowly than a clock at rest.

Similarly, the Lorentz transformation ∆x′ = ∆x
“1− v2
c2 ”

1
2

gives the (proper)

length ∆x′ of our body moving at velocity v with respect to the correspond-
ing length ∆x in a ﬁxed inertial frame: this shows that there is a dilation of
lengths in the moving reference frame with respect to its equivalent at rest.
So, according to special relativity, a moving body experiences, in its own
reference frame, time contraction and space dilation, with respect to the
factor (cid:16)1 − v2
c2 (cid:17)

1
2

.

But, special relativity does not tell us that the contracted time has been
transformed into dilated length: and, this seems a priori not possible since
the clock time does not have the same topological structure as the three-
dimensional space.

2 Towards a quantum time of structure

To obtain a new breakthrough in this problem, quantum (ﬁeld) theory [18]
must be taken into account, and, especially its connection [19] with special
relativity.

A ﬁrst remark can be made: the time used in quantum theories refers
mostly to the internal dynamics of the considered microscopic object and
appears by means of the frequency “ ν ≃ 1
” inversely proportional to the
tp
period tp [20]. Now, this periodical time can be related to the astronomical
time: there is thus a one-to-one correspondence between these two types
of time. For example, the frequency of the cesium atom is given in terms
of a number of oscillations corresponding to one period of one second of
astronomical time.

A new insight into this question will be reached if the reference frames of
the special (and general) relativity are considered at the level of elementary

3

particles. Indeed, the energy of a particle is given in special relativity by:

E =

m c2
q1 − v2

c2

E ≈ m c2 +

m v2
2

E2 = p2 c2 + m2 c4

where m is the rest mass of the particle. For low velocity ( v ≪ c ), the
development of E in power of v
c

is:

where E = m c2 is the rest energy of the particle.

This allows to ﬁnd the famous relation:

between the square of the energy E of the particle and the square of its
linear momentum p , which implies that:

a) if the particle is at rest, i.e. with p = 0 , then E = m c2 gives
the amount of energy which should be obtained by its annihilation in
photon(s) from its rest mass.

b) E ≃ p c is the amount of energy resulting from the annihilation of its

rest mass m (case m ˜→ 0 ) into photons.

Furthermore, if it is taken into account that, in quantum (ﬁeld) theories,

the following diﬀerential operators:

~

∂
pi −→
∂i
E −→ i~ ∂
∂t

i

( i = x, y, z )

∂t0 where t0 is the proper time)

(and, by analogy, m → i~ ∂
correspond respectively to the i -th component of the linear momentum and
to the energy of our particle, it does not seem unwise to consider that the
mass “ m ” and the energy “ E ” or the linear momentum “ p ” are localized
in two orthogonal spaces respectively of “time” and “space” type allowing
the internal transfer of mass into energy and vice versa.

4

This is only possible if these two orthogonal spaces have a topological

(spatial) structure as it was noticed before.

And, thus, we are forced to admit that elementary particles must be
provided with an internal topological structure as it was introduced by the
author [3]. Mathematics show that this internal topological structure must be
of space (-time) type. And, if we wish to connect [22] quantum ﬁeld theories
(QFT) to general relativity, this internal space (-time) structure must be
expanding in order that the cosmological constant [21] of general relativity
could correspond to it: it then would constitute the fundamental structure
of the QFT vacuum shared out amongst the considered elementary particles.
In this perspective, every elementary particle would then be characterized
by an internal expanding space-time structure constituting its own vacuum
from which its matter shell could be generated.

It was justiﬁed in [3] and in [22] that the internal structure of an elemen-

tary particle must be:

a) composed of three embedded shells ST ⊂ MG ⊂ M : space-time

( ST ), middle-ground ( MG ) and mass ( M ).

b) of bilinear type, i.e. composed of the product of a left semiparticle
localized in the upper half space by a symmetric right (co-)semiparticle
localized in the lower half space.

Remark that the bilinearity was considered (contrary to QFT which
works in a mathematical linear frame) in order to really take into ac-
count the special relativity invariants in QFT.

c) really quantized algebraically in such a way that quanta then are ir-
reducible algebraic closed subsets characterized by a Galois extension
degree N .

In the framework of the global program of Langlands [23], the time com-
ponent of the most internal space-time shell “ ST ” of the vacuum of an
elementary particle (mostly, fermion) was shown to be a time string ﬁeld
[3] composed of a double tower of packets of symmetric strings behaving
like harmonic oscillators and characterized by increasing integers labelling
the number of quanta in these. The time string ﬁeld of a massive fermion
can then generate, from singularities on it, the two covering middle-ground
( MG ) and mass ( M ) string ﬁelds in such a way that the latter corresponds
to the proper mass structure. The space string ﬁeld of the “ ST ” shell of a

5

fermion is orthogonal to the corresponding time string ﬁeld and has the same
type of structure.

Time and space string ﬁelds are thus structured according to a lattice of
quanta and are emergent each one with respect to the other in the sense that
time quanta can be transformed into space quanta by passing throughout
the origin and vice versa.

The time string ﬁeld, which is thus a reservoir of space, is a
discrete quantum time of structure having an (anti)inertial eﬀect on
the corresponding quantum space ﬁeld by slowing down the space-time ﬁeld.
Every string at n quanta of this time string ﬁeld is characterized by:

1. a quantum periodical proper time t0q(n) which can be interpreted as a
distance ﬁlled by a set of cycles referring to one quantum in this string
like the wavelength.

2. a quantum frequency νq(n) which gives the number of oscillations per

quantum in this time string.

In order to connect this quantum time of structure to the clock times, two
basic questions will ﬁnally be considered. The ﬁrst question can be stated as
follows: is there a one-to-one correspondence between the discrete quantum
time of structure and the universal clock time? The reply is aﬃrmative
because to every time quantum of a string at n quanta corresponds:

a) a period t0p(n) which gives the clock time needed for a set of cycles

related to this quantum.

b) a periodical frequency νp(n) = 1

t0p(n) deﬁned from t0p(n) .

The second question consists in knowing if a quantum time of structure
can be deﬁned with respect to all types of clock times considered in this
paper. It is easy to realize that this will be the case if the quantum proper
time t0q(n) and the quantum frequency νq(n) are dependent.

Now, it was proved by the author [3] in an attempt to solve the conjec-
ture of Riemann [24] that the trivial zeros of the zeta function ζ(s) [25]–[26],
related to the structure of strings at n quanta (the integer n varying), are
in one-to-one correspondence with the equivalent non-trivial zeros of which
imaginary parts γn are approximately equal to the energies, i.e. the frequen-
cies of these strings.

6

It then results that the only relevant time at the subplanckian quantum
scale is the quantum structural time of the space-time shell “ ST ” of the
internal vacua of elementary particles in such a way that the universal and
relative clock times be reduced to this quantum time at this microscopic
scale.

References

Dover, N.Y. (1923).

2, 1–6 (1995).

[1] Lorentz, H., Einstein, A., Minkowski, H. The principle of relativity,

[2] Atiyah, M. Reﬂections on geometry and physics, Surveys in Diﬀ. Geom.,

[3] Pierre, C. Algebraic quantum theory, ArXiv math-ph/0404024 (2004).

[4] Penrose, R. Structure of space-time in Battelle rencontres, Ed. de Witt,

B., Wheeler, J.A. Benjamin (1968).

[5] ’t Hooft, G. How does God play dice? (Pre)-determinism at the Planck

scale, ArXiv-hep-th/0104219 (2001).

[6] Hawking, S.W., Pennrose, R. The nature of space and time, Princeton

Univ. Press (1996).

[7] Hawking, S.W. A brief history of time: From Big-Bang to black holes,

Bantam books, N.Y. (1988).

[8] Jasselette, P. Le temps des physiciens, Rev. Quest. Sci., 154, 461–477

(1983).

[9] Wang, W. Time in philosophy and in physics: from Kant and Einstein

to G¨odel, Synthese, 102, 215–234 (1995).

[10] Newton, I. Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, Londini,

Jussu Societatis Regiae ac Typis J. Streater (1687).

[11] Damour, T. La relativit´e g´en´erale in: Qu’est-ce que l’Univers, Universit´e
de Tous les Savoirs, Vol. 4, dir. Y. Michaud, Ed. Jacob, O. (2000).

7

[12] Arnold, V., Avez, A. Probl`emes ergodiques de la m´ecanique classique,

Gauthier-Villars (1967).

[13] Einstein, A. Zur Elektrodynamik Bewegter K¨orper, Ann. Phys., 17,

[14] Einstein, A. Quatre conf´erences sur la th´eorie de la relativit´e, Gauthier-

891–921 (1905).

Villars (1971).

[15] Einstein, A. La th´eorie de la relativit´e restreinte et g´en´erale – Expos´e

´el´ementaire, Gauthier-Villars (1954).

[16] Hawking, S.W., Ellis, G.F.R. The large scale structure of space-time,

Cambridge Univ. Press (1973).

[17] Misner, C., Thorne, K., Wheeler, J.A. Gravitation, Freeman.

[18] Weinberg, S. The quantum theory of ﬁelds, Vols. I & II , Cambridge

Univ. Press (1994).

139–164 (1972).

[19] Dirac, P.A.M. Relativity and quantum mechanics, ﬁelds and quanta, 3,

[20] Feynman, R.P., Leighton, R., Sands, M. The Feynman lectures on

physics, Vol. 1 , Addison Wesley (1964).

[21] Weinberg, S. Einstein’s mistakes, Physics Today, 31–36 (2005).

[22] Pierre, C. A new track for unifying general relativity with quantum ﬁeld

theories, ArXiv org, gr-qc/0510091 (2005).

[23] Pierre, C. N -dimensional global correspondences of Langlands, ArXiv

org, math.RT/0510348 (2005).

[24] Titschmarsch, E.C. The theory of the Riemann zeta function, Oxford

Univ. Press (1967).

[25] Berry, M., Keating, J. The Riemann zeros and eigenvalue asymptotics,

Siam Rev., 41, 236–266 (1999).

[26] Katz, N. Sarnark, P. Zeros of zeta functions and symmetry, Bull. Amer.

Math. Soc., 36, 1–26 (1999).

8

