Physical unknowables∗

Karl Svozil†

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Institut f ¨ur Theoretische Physik, University of Technology Vienna, Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna,
Austria

Different types of physical unknowables are discussed. Provable unknowables are derived from reduction to
problems which are known to be recursively unsolvable. Recent series solutions to the n-body problem and
related to it, chaotic systems, may have no computable radius of convergence. Quantum unknowables include the
random occurrence of single events, complementarity and value indeﬁniteness.

PACS numbers: 01.70.+w,01.65.+g,02.30.Lt,03.65.Ta
Keywords: Unknowables, Church-Turing thesis, induction and forecast, n-body problem, quantum indeterminism

Contents

I. Islands of preliminary insights in an ocean of ignorance

II. Provable physical unknowables

Intrinsic self-referential observers
A.
B. What is an acceptable form of proof?
C. Undecidability of the general forecasting problem
D. The busy beaver function as the maximal recurrence time
E. Undecidability of the induction problem
F. Results in classical recursion theory with implications for

theoretical physics

III. Behavior of three or more classical bodies

A. Deterministic chaos
B. Convergence of the general solution

IV. Quantum unknowables
A. Random events
B. Complementarity
C. Value indeﬁniteness versus omniscience

V. Miracles due to gaps in causal description

VI. Summary

References

1

2
2
3
3
4
4

5

5
6
6

6
6
7
7

8

8

8

... as we know, there are known knowns;
there are things we know we know.
We also know there are known unknowns;
that is to say we know there are some things we do not know.
But there are also unknown unknowns –
the ones we don’t know we don’t know.
United States Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld
at a Department of Defense news brieﬁng on February 12, 2002

I. ISLANDS OF PRELIMINARY INSIGHTS IN AN OCEAN
OF IGNORANCE

Throughout history, the demand to form the physical world
according to people’s wishes has been counterbalanced with

∗Contribution to the international symposium “Horizons of Truth” celebrating
the 100th birthday of Kurt G¨odel at the University of Vienna from April 27th-
29th, 2006
†Electronic address: svozil@tuwien.ac.at; URL: http://tph.
tuwien.ac.at/˜svozil

the inability to predict and manipulate large portions of the
human habitat. As time passed, humankind was able to ﬁg-
ure out ways to tune ever increasing fragments of the world
according to its needs. From a purely behavioral perspective,
this is brought about in the way of opportunistic quasi-causal
rules of the following kind, “if we do this, we obtain that.”
A typical example of such a rule is, “if we move a particular
kind of electric on/off switch, the lights go on, and the room
turns from dark to bright.”

How do we arrive at those kinds of rules? Guided by our
suspicions, thoughts, formalisms and by pure chance, we “ﬁd-
dle” and “roam around,” inspecting parts of our world and
examining their behavior. We observe repeating patterns of
behavior and pin them down by reproducing them. A phys-
ical behavior is anything that can be observed and thus op-
erationally obtained and measured; e.g., the rise and fall of
the sun, the ignition of ﬁre, the formation and the melting of
ice. Note that, due to the ﬁniteness of the resolution, all kinds
of physical behaviors, even the ones that appear continuous,
can be discretized. Ultimately, all physical experiences can be
broken down into yes-no propositions representable by zeroes
and ones, by sequences of single clicks in detectors.

As we observe physical behaviors, we attempt to “under-
stand” them by trying to ﬁgure out the “cause” (1) or “rea-
son” for the behavioral patterns. That is, we invent virtual
parallel worlds of thoughts and intellectual concepts such as
“electric ﬁeld” or “mechanical force” to “explain” the behav-
ioral patterns. We call these creations of our minds “physical
theories.” Contemporary physical theories are heavily formal-
ized, utilizing almost every branch of mathematics and formal
logic which could have been imagined so far to “understand”
the phenomena. A “good theory” provides us with the feeling
of a key properly ﬁtting into the lock of a treasure chest, a key
unlocking new ways of world comprehension and manipula-
tion.

The methods we employ are pretty reliable. Reliability
yields a feeling of security and consolation.
It strengthens
the belief in the applicability and the overall validity of the
method.

Ideally, an “explanation” should be as compact as possible
and should apply to as many behavioral patterns as possible.
We also have the feeling that, as we are able to manipulate
more and more fragments of our habitat, we are converging to

some ﬁnal truth. Ultimately, we seek theories of everything
(2) predicting and manipulating the phenomena at large.

In the extreme form, we envision ourselves as becoming
empowered with omniscience and omni-inﬂuence: we pre-
sume that our ability to manipulate and tune the world is lim-
ited by our own phantasies alone, and any constraints whatso-
ever can be bypassed or overcome one way or another. Indeed,
some of what in the past has been called magic, mystery and
the beyond has been realized in everyday life. Many won-
ders of witchcraft have been transferred into the realm of the
physical sciences. Take, for example, our abilities to ﬂy, the
capability to transmute lead into gold, to listen and speak to
far away friends, or to cure bacterial diseases with a few pills
of antibiotics.

Thereby, we not only trust the rules merely syntactically in
the operational sense, but we take for granted the semantic sig-
niﬁcance of the physical theories that “let us understand” the
behavioral patterns and even lead us to novel predictions of
behaviors. Pointedly stated, we not only accept physical the-
ories as pure abstractions and constructions of our own mind,
but we associate meaning and truth to them. We grant absolute
status to our own constructions of mind, purporting that they
somehow are metaphysically real and eternal; so much so that
only very reluctantly we admit their preliminary character.

Alas, the possibility to formulate theories per se; and in
particular the applicability of formal, mathematical models,
comes as a surprise. There appears to be an unreasonable ef-
fectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences (3) which
seems difﬁcult to explain within science proper. It is not too
unreasonable to speculate that any such reasoning might be
metaphysical.

Sometimes we have the strength to face suspicions that, to
put it in analogy to Shakespeare’s poetry, our own construc-
tions and the baseless fabric of our vision, just like the great
globe itself, shall dissolve and leave not a rack behind. Our
physical theories are such stuff as dreams are made on, and our
little islands of transient insights are rounded with an ocean of
ignorance.

II. PROVABLE PHYSICAL UNKNOWABLES

In the past century, unknowability has been formally de-
rived along the notion of unprovability, accompanied by a pre-
cise meaning of provability (4–6). In formal logic (7) and the
foundations of mathematics (8; 9) as well as theoretical com-
puter sciences (10; 11), unprovability has been established as
a concept proper. Those theoretical frameworks proved strong
enough to derive some of their own limitations; among them
their incompleteness and overall consistency.

This is a remarkable departure from informal suspicions
and observations regarding the limitations of our worldview.
No longer is one reduced to informal, heuristic contempla-
tions and comparisons about what one knows or can do versus
one’s unpredictability and incapability. Formal unknowability
is about formal proofs of unpredictability and impossibility.

Almost since its discovery, attempts (12; 13) have been
made to translate formal incompleteness into the physical sci-

2

ence, mostly by reduction to the halting problem (14–16).
Here reduction means that physical undecidability is linked or
reduced to logical undecidability. A typical example for such
a reduction is the embedding of a Turing machine or any type
of computer capable of universal computation into a physical
system. As a consequence, the physical system inherits any
type of unsolvability derivable for universal computers, such
as the unsolvability of the halting problem: since the computer
is part of the physical system, so are its behavioral patterns.

A clear distinction should be made from the onset regard-
ing two different types of unknowables in the natural sci-
ences: unknowables about physical systems and their phe-
nomena and behaviors on one hand, and unknowables of the
formal theoretical descriptions and models on the other hand.
This section will mostly concern the ﬁrst type of physical un-
knowability; the one which is associated with deterministic
physical systems.

A. Intrinsic self-referential observers

Every physical observation is essentially (i) discrete, (ii) ﬁ-
nite and (iii) self-referential. Whereas ﬁniteness and discrete-
ness has been brieﬂy mentioned earlier, self-referentiality is
a seldom recognized system science aspect of physical world
perception.

Let us start with the assumption that there exist observers
measuring objects, and that observer and object are distinct
from one another. That is, there exists a “cut” between ob-
server and object. Through that cut, information is exchanged.
If we insist on idealized one-way observation, information
is transferred from the object to the observer via the cut. In
this scenario, the object is a transmitter, and the observer is
the receiver.

Symbolically, we may regard the object as an agent con-
tained in a “black box,” whose only relevant emanations are
representable by ﬁnite strings of zeroes and ones appearing on
the cut, which can be modeled by any kind of screen or dis-
play. In this purely syntactic point of view, a physical theory
should be able to render identical symbols like the ones ap-
pearing through the cut. That is, a physical theory should be
able to mimic or emulate the black box it purports to apply to.
This view is often adapted in quantum mechanics, where it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd any meaning (17) for the theory.

A sharp distinction between a physical object and an extrin-
sic, outside observer is a rarely affordable abstraction. Exam-
ples are astronomy, blackbody radiation and classical physical
conﬁgurations allowing an inﬁnitely small (relative to the en-
tire system) subsystem to convey the information transfer.

We are mostly interested in another scenario, in which the
observer is part of the system to be observed. There, the mea-
surement process is modeled symmetrically, and information
is exchanged between observer and object bidirectionally.

The symmetrical conﬁguration makes a distinction between
observer and object purely conventional. The cut is consti-
tuted by the information exchanged. We tend to associate
with the “measurement apparatus” one of the two subsystems
which in comparison is “larger” and “more classical” and up-

3

linked with some conscious observer. The rest of the system
we call the “measured object.”

versa. Indeed, as stated by K. G¨odel in a Postscript, dated
from June 3rd, 1964 (22, pp. 369-370),

Intrinsic observers face all kinds of self-referential situ-
ations. Among the most interesting are paradoxical self-
referential statements. These have been known both infor-
mally as puzzling amusement and artistic perplexion, as well
as a formalized scientiﬁcally valuable resource. There is an
English phrase stating that one should not bite the hand that
feeds oneself. In German, the saying amounts to the advice
not to cut the very tree branch one is sitting on. The liar para-
dox is already mentioned in the Bible’s Epistle to Titus, 1:12
stating that, “one of Crete’s own prophets has said it: ‘Cretans
are always liars, evil brutes, lazy gluttons.’ He has surely told
the truth.”

In what follows, paradoxical self-referentiality will be used
to argue against the solvability of the general induction prob-
lem, as well as for a pandemonium of undecidabilities related
to physical systems and their behaviors. All of them are based
on intrinsic observers embedded in the system they observe.

It is not totally unreasonable to speculate that the limits of
“intrinsic self-expression” seems to be what G¨odel himself
considered the gist of his incompleteness theorems. In a reply
to a letter by Burks (reprinted in Ref. (18, p. 55); see also
Ref. (19, p.554)), G¨odel states,

“. . . that a complete epistemological description
of a language A cannot be given in the same lan-
guage A, because the concept of truth of sen-
tences of A cannot be deﬁned in A. It is this the-
orem which is the true reason for the existence
of undecidable propositions in the formal systems
containing arithmetic.”

B. What is an acceptable form of proof?

There exist ancient and informal notions of proof. An ex-
ample (20) is the Babylonian notion to “prove” arithmetical
statements by considering “large number” cases of algebraic
formulae such as (21, Chapter V), (cid:229) n
i i.
Another example is knowledge acquired by revelation or by
authority. Oracles occur in modern computer science, but
only as idealized concepts whose physical realization is highly
questionable if not forbidden.

i i2 = (1/3)(1 + 2n) (cid:229) n

The contemporary notion of proof is formalized and algo-
rithmic. Around 1930 mathematicians could still hope for a
“mathematical theory of everything” which consists of a ﬁnite
number of axioms and algorithmic derivation rules by which
all true mathematical statements could formally be derived. In
particular, as expressed in Hilbert’s 2nd problem, it should be
possible to prove the consistency of the axioms of arithmetic.
Shortly afterwards, G¨odel (7), Tarski (8), and Turing (10)
put an end to this formalist program. They ﬁrst formalized
the concepts of proof and computation in general, equating
them with algorithmic content. Then, they translated self-
referential statements of the kind mentioned above into the
formalism.

From a purely syntactic point of view, every formal system
of mathematics can be identiﬁed with a computation and vice

. . . due to A. M. Turing’s work, a precise and
unquestionably adequate deﬁnition of the gen-
eral concept of formal system can now be given,
the existence of undecidable arithmetical propo-
sitions and the non-demonstrability of the consis-
tency of a system in the same system can now be
proved rigorously for every consistent formal sys-
tem containing a certain amount of ﬁnitary num-
ber theory.

Turing’s work gives an analysis of the concept of
“mechanical procedure” (alias “algorithm” or
“computation procedure” or “ﬁnite combinato-
rial procedure”). This concept is shown to be
equivalent with that of a “Turing machine.” A
formal system can simply be deﬁned to be any
mechanical procedure for producing formulas,
called provable formulas.

What is an algorithm? In Turing’s own words (10),

“whatever can (in principle) be calculated on a
sheet of paper by the usual rules is computable.”

These concretions limit the expressiveness of any formal-
ism, for either it is too restricted to allow the representation of
rich patterns of behavior, or it is bounded by self-referentiality.
They, however, do not exclude revelations and knowledge of
truth transcending the algorithmic formalism.

C. Undecidability of the general forecasting problem

Logical and undecidabilities are based on intrinsic para-
doxical self-reference. Can we make use of paradoxical self-
reference in physics? Is it possible to ﬁnd physical expres-
sions corresponding to, for instance, the liar paradox? Can we
apply the “G¨odelian program” to physics?

Indeed, we can argue that for any deterministic system
strong enough to support universal computation, the general
forecast or prediction problem is provable unsolvable. This
will be shown by reduction to the halting problem.

G¨odel had doubts about the relevance of formal incomplete-
ness to physics, in particular to quantum mechanics. The au-
thor was told by professor Wheeler that this resentment (also
mentioned in Ref. (23, pp. 140-141)) may have been due to
Einstein’s negative opinion of quantum theory; to the extend
that Einstein may have “brainwashed” G¨odel into believing
that all efforts in this direction were in vain.

One of the ﬁrst researchers getting interested in the ap-
plication of paradoxical self-reference to physics was the
philosopher Popper, who published two almost forgotten pa-
pers (12; 13) discussing, among other issues, Russell’s Para-
dox of Tristram Shandy (24): In Volume 1, Chapter XIV,
Shandy ﬁnds that he could publish two volumes of his life ev-
ery year, covering a time span far smaller than the time it took
him to write these volumes. This de-synchronization, Shandy
concedes, will rather increase than diminish as he advances;

4

and one may thus have serious doubts whether he will ever
complete his autobiography.

D. The busy beaver function as the maximal recurrence
time

More recently, there have been attempts to bring together
researchers interested in the relevance of G¨odelian incom-
pleteness in physics. One of those meetings took place in
Santa Fe (15), another one in Abisko (16).

A straightforward embedding of a universal computer into
a physical system results in the fact that, due to the reduction
to the recursive undecidability of the halting problem, certain
future events cannot be forecasted and are thus provable inde-
terministic. Here reduction again means that physical unde-
cidability is linked or reduced to logical undecidability.

For the sake of getting an (algorithmic) taste of what para-
doxical self-reference is like, we present the sketch of an al-
gorithmic proof (by contradiction) of the unsolvability of the
halting problem. Consider a universal computer U and an ar-
bitrary algorithm B(X) whose input is a string of symbols X.
Assume that there exists a “halting algorithm” HALT which is
able to decide whether B terminates on X or not. The domain
of HALT is the set of legal programs. The range of HALT are
classical bits.

Using HALT(B(X)) we shall construct another deterministic
computing agent A, which has as input any effective program
B and which proceeds as follows: Upon reading the program
B as input, A makes a copy of it. This can be readily achieved,
since the program B is presented to A in some encoded form
pBq, i.e., as a string of symbols. In the next step, the agent
uses the code pBq as input string for B itself; i.e., A forms
B(pBq), henceforth denoted by B(B). The agent now hands
B(B) over to its subroutine HALT. Then, A proceeds as fol-
lows: if HALT(B(B)) decides that B(B) halts, then the agent A
does not halt; this can for instance be realized by an inﬁnite
DO-loop; if HALT(B(B)) decides that B(B) does not halt, then
A halts.

The agent A will now be confronted with the following
paradoxical task:
take the own code as input and proceed
to determine whether or not it halts. Then, whenever A(A)
halts, HALT(A(A)), by the deﬁnition of A, would force A(A)
not to halt. Conversely, whenever A(A) does not halt, then
HALT(A(A)) would steer A(A) into the halting mode. In both
cases one arrives at a complete contradiction. Classically, this
contradiction can only be consistently avoided by assuming
the nonexistence of A and, since the only nontrivial feature of
A is the use of the peculiar halting algorithm HALT, the impos-
sibility of any such halting algorithm.

A universal computer can in principle be embedded into
or realized by physical systems (14). An example for such
a physical system is the computer on which I am currently
typing this manuscript. It follows by reduction that there exist
physical observables, in particular forecasts about whether or
not such computer will ever halt in the sense sketched above,
which are provable undecidable.

The busy beaver function (25–28) addresses the following
question: given a ﬁnite system; i.e., a system whose algorith-
mic description is of ﬁnite length. What is the biggest number
producible by such a system before halting?

Let S (n) denote the busy beaver function of n. Originally,
T. Rado (25) asked how many 1’s a Turing machine with n
possible states and an empty input tape could print on that
tape before halting. The ﬁrst values of the Turing busy beaver
function S T (x) are ﬁnite and are known (27; 28): S T (1) = 1,
S T (2) = 4, S T (3) = 6, S T (4) = 13, S T (5) ≥ 1915, S T (7) ≥
22961, S T (8) ≥ 3 · (7 · 392 − 1)/2.

Consider a related question: what is the upper bound of
running time — or, alternatively, recurrence time — of a pro-
gram of length n bits before terminating? An answer to that
question confers a feeling of how long we have to wait for the
most time-consuming program of length n bits to hold. That,
of course, is a worst-case scenario. Many programs of length
n bits will have halted long before the maximal halting time.
We mention without proof (26; 29) that this bound can be
represented by the busy beaver function: TMAX(n) = S (n +
O(1)) is the minimum time at which all programs of size
smaller than or equal to n bits which halt have done so.

Knowledge of TMAX would “solve” the halting problem
quantitatively. Because if the maximal halting time would
be known and bounded by any computable function of the
program size of n bits, one would have to wait just a little
bit longer than TMAX(n) to make sure that every program of
length n — also this particular program — would have ter-
minated. Otherwise, the program would run forever. In this
sense, knowledge of TMAX is equivalent to a perfect predictor.
Since the latter one does not exist, we may expect that TMAX
cannot be a computable function. Indeed, for large values of
n, S (n) grows faster than any computable function of n.

By reduction we obtain upper bounds for the recurrence of
any kind of physical behavior: for deterministic systems rep-
resentable by n bits, the recurrence time grows faster than any
computable number of n. This bound from below for possible
behaviors may be interpreted as a qualitative measure of the
impossibility to predict and forecast such behaviors by algo-
rithmic means.

E. Undecidability of the induction problem

Induction in physics is the inference of general rules dom-
inating and generating physical behaviors from these behav-
iors. For any deterministic system strong enough to support
universal computation, the general induction problem is prov-
able unsolvable. Induction is thereby reduced to the unsolv-
ability of the rule inference problem (30–34),

Informally, the algorithmic idea of the proof is to take any
sufﬁciently powerful rule or method of induction and, in us-
ing it, deﬁne some functional behavior which is not identiﬁed
by it. This amounts to constructing an algorithm which (pas-
sively!) “fakes” the “guesser” by simulating some particular

function j until the guesser pretends to guess this function
correctly. In a second, diagonalization step, the “faking” al-
gorithm then switches to a different function j ∗ 6= j
, such that
the guesser’s guesses become incorrect.

More formally, assume two (universal) computers U and
U ′. Suppose that the second computer U ′ executes an arbi-
trary algorithm p unknown to computer U, the “guesser.” The
task of U, which is called the rule inference problem, is to
conjecture the “law” or algorithm p by analysing the behav-
ior of U ′(p). The recursive unsolvability of the rule inference
problem (30) states that this task cannot be performed by any
effective computation.

Deﬁne j ∗(0) = 0.

For the sake of contradiction, assume (34) that there exists
a “perfect guesser” U which can identify all total recursive
functions (wrong). Then it is possible to construct a func-
tion j ∗ : N → {0, 1}, such that the guesses of U are wrong
inﬁnitely often, thereby contradicting the above assumption.
j ∗ by sim-
j ∗(2),
ulating U.
Then,
· · ·,
on input n, simulate U, based on the previous series
{0, j ∗(0)}, {1, j ∗(1)}, {2, j ∗(2)}, · · · , {n − 1, j ∗(n − 1)}, and
deﬁne j ∗(n) equal to 1 plus the guess of U of j ∗(n) mod 2. In
this way, U can never guess j ∗ correctly; thereby making an
inﬁnite number of mistakes.

j ∗(1),
Suppose the values j ∗(0),
j ∗(n − 1) have already been constructed.

One may construct

One can also interpret this result in terms of the recursive
unsolvability of the halting problem, which in turn is related
to the busy beaver function: there is no recursive bound on
the time the guesser has to wait in order to make sure that his
guess is correct.

F. Results in classical recursion theory with implications
for theoretical physics

The following theorems of recursive (i.e., computable)
analysis have some implications to theoretical physics (35).
(i) There exist recursive monotone bounded sequences of ra-
tional numbers whose limit is no computable number (36). A
concrete example of such a number is Chaitin’s Omega num-
ber (11; 37), the “halting probability” for a computer (using
preﬁx-free code), which can be deﬁned by a sequence of ra-
tional numbers with no computable radius of convergence.

(ii) There exist a recursive real function which has its maxi-
mum in the unit interval at no recursive real number (38). This
has implication for the principle of least action.

(iii) There exists a real number r such that G(r) = 0 is re-
cursively undecidable for G(x) in a class of functions which
involves polynomials and the sine function (39). This again
has some bearing on the principle of least action.

(iv) There exist uncomputable solutions of the wave equa-

tions for computable initial values (40; 41).

III. BEHAVIOR OF THREE OR MORE CLASSICAL BODIES

An extreme deterministic position was formulated by

Laplace, stating that (42, Chapter II)

5

Present events are connected with preceding ones
by a tie based upon the evident principle that a
thing cannot occur without a cause which pro-
duces it. This axiom, known by the name of the
principle of sufﬁcient reason, extends even to ac-
tions which are considered indifferent . . .

We ought then to regard the present state of the
universe as the effect of its anterior state and as
the cause of the one which is to follow. Given for
one instant an intelligence which could compre-
hend all the forces by which nature is animated
and the respective situation of the beings who
compose it an intelligence sufﬁciently vast to sub-
mit these data to analysis it would embrace in the
same formula the movements of the greatest bod-
ies of the universe and those of the lightest atom;
for it, nothing would be uncertain and the future,
as the past, would be present to its eyes.

In the late 18th hundred, the issue seemed worthy and press-
ing enough to establish a prize by King Oscar II of Sweden,
advised by Martin Lefﬂer, who published the following ques-
tion formulated by Weierstrass:

Given a system of arbitrarily many mass points
that attract each according to Newton’s law, un-
der the assumption that no two points ever col-
lide, try to ﬁnd a representation of the coordi-
nates of each point as a series in a variable that is
some known function of time and for all of whose
values the series converges uniformly.

Poincar´e’s original prize–winning contribution contained er-
rors. The necessary corrections led the author to the conclu-
sion that sometimes small variations in the initial values could
lead to huge variations in the evolution of a physical system
in later times. In Poincar´e’s own words (43, Chapter 4, Sect.
II, pp.56-57)1:

If we would know the laws of Nature and the state
of the Universe precisely for a certain time, we
would be able to predict with certainty the state
of the Universe for any later time. But [[ . . . ]] it
can be the case that small differences in the ini-
tial values produce great differences in the later
phenomena; a small error in the former may re-
sult in a large error in the latter. The prediction
becomes impossible and we have a “random phe-
nomenon.”

1 W¨urden wir die Gesetze der Natur und den Zustand des Universums f¨ur
einen gewissen Zeitpunkt genau kennen, so k¨onnten wir den Zustand dieses
Universums f¨ur irgendeinen sp¨ateren Zeitpunkt genau voraussagen. Aber
[[ ... ]] es kann der Fall eintreten, daß kleine Unterschiede in den Anfangs-
bedingungen große Unterschiede in den sp¨ateren Erscheinungen bedingen;
ein kleiner Irrtum in den ersteren kann einen außerordentlich großen Irrtum
f¨ur den letzteren nach sich ziehen. Die Vorhersage wird unm¨oglich und wir
haben eine “zuf¨allige Erscheinung”.

6

A. Deterministic chaos

IV. QUANTUM UNKNOWABLES

Poincar´e’s recognition of possible instabilities in n-body
problems was the ﬁrst indication of what today is called “de-
terministic chaos.” In chaotic systems it is practically impos-
sible to specify the initial value precise enough to allow long-
term predictions.

A stronger assumption supposes that the initial values are
elements of a continuum and thus are not representable by
any algorithmically compressible number; in short, that they
are random (44). Classical, deterministic chaos results from
“unfolding” such a random initial value drawn from the “con-
tinuum urn” by a recursive, deterministic function.

A weaker form of deterministic chaos just expresses the
fact that linear deviations of initial values which lie within
the measurement precision result in exponential divergences
in the future evolution of the system. For further discussions,
the interested reader is referred to Refs. (45–49)

A third group of physical unknowables arise in the quan-
tum context. Throughout its development, although a highly
successful theory, quantum mechanics, in particular its in-
terpretation and meaning, has been received controversially
within the community. Some of its founding fathers, such as
Schr¨odinger, De Broglie and Einstein had a very critical view
on the validity and considered quantum mechanics a prelim-
inary theory which should give way to a more complete one.
Others, among them Bohr and Heisenberg, claimed that quan-
tum unknowables will stay with us forever. Over the years, the
latter view seems to have prevailed (56), although it was not
totally unchallenged (57–59). Already Sommerfeld warned
his students not to get into the “meaning behind” quantum
mechanics, and, as mentioned by Clauser (60), not long ago
scientists working in that ﬁeld had to be very careful not to be-
come discredited as “quacks.” Richard Feynman (17, p. 129)
once mentioned the

B. Convergence of the general solution

More than one hundred years after its formulation as quoted
above, the n–body problem has been solved by Wang (50–52).
The 3–body problem was already solved in 1912 (53). The
solutions are given in terms of power series.

Yet, in order to be practically applicable, the radius of con-
vergence of the series must be known. We might already ex-
pect from deterministic chaos that these series solution have
a “very slow” convergence. Even the prediction of behaviors
in insigniﬁcantly short times may require the summation of a
huge number of terms, making these series unusable for any
practical work (51).

Alas, the complications regarding convergence of the se-
ries solutions are far more serious. Suppose we are able to
construct a universal computer based on the n–body problem.
This can, for instance, be achieved by ballistic computation,
such as the “Billiard Ball” model of computation (54; 55)
which effectively “embeds” a universal computer into a sys-
tem of n–bodies. Then, by reduction, it follows that certain
predictions are impossible.

What are the consequences of this reduction for the con-
vergence of the series solutions? It can be expected that not
only do the series converge “very slowly,” like in determin-
istic chaotic systems, but that in general there does not exist
any computable radius of convergence for the series solutions.
This is very similar to Chaitin’s Omega number (11; 37) repre-
senting the halting probability of a universal computer, or the
busy beaver function. The Omega number can be “enumer-
ated” by series solutions from “pseudo-algorithms” comput-
ing its very ﬁrst digits. Yet, due to the uncomputable growth
of the time required to determine whether or not terms possi-
bly contribute, the series lack any computable radius of con-
vergence.

“. . . perpetual torment that results from [[the
question]], ‘But how can it be like that?’ which
is a reﬂection of uncontrolled but utterly vain de-
sire to see [[quantum mechanics]] in terms of an
analogy with something familiar . . . Do not keep
saying to yourself, if you can possibly avoid it,
‘But how can it be like that?’ because you will get
‘down the drain’, into a blind alley from which
nobody has yet escaped.”

In what follows, we shall discuss three main quantum un-
knowables: (i) randomness of single events, (ii) complemen-
tarity, and (iii) value indeﬁniteness.

A. Random events

The quantum formalism does not predict the outcome of
single events when there is a mismatch between the context
in which a state was prepared, and the context in which it is
measured. Here, context means maximal observable, or more
technically, the maximal operator from which all commuting
operators can be functionally derived (61, §84).

In the absence of other explanations, one is thus lead to the
conclusion that these single events occur without any causa-
tion and thus at random. Such random “quantum coin toss”
(62) have been used for various purposes, among them de-
layed choice experiments (63; 64). Commercial interface
cards (65) perform at a rate of 4 to 16 Mbit/s.

Note that randomness of this type (66; 67) is postulated
rather than proven. This is necessarily so, for any claim of ran-
domness can only be corroborated with respect to a more or
less large class of laws or behaviors; it is impossible to inspect
the hypothesis against an inﬁnity of conceivable laws. How
can we ever exclude the possibility of our presented, some
day (perhaps by some extraterrestrial visitors), with a (perhaps
extremely complex) device that “computes” and “predicts” a
certain type of hitherto “random” physical behavior?

ball type
1
2
3
4

red
0
0
1
1

green
0
1
0
1

TABLE I Schema of imprinting of four ball types ﬁlling a gener-
alized urn. Whenever the spectator looks through the red eyeglass,
the red symbols printed on the balls appear, whereas the green sym-
bols merge in their black background. Conversely, the spectator may
choose to look at the green symbols through the green eyeglass. In
the latter case, the red symbols become unrecognizable.

B. Complementarity

Another quantum indeterminism is complementarity. Com-
plementarity is the principal impossibility to measure two or
more complementary observables with arbitrary precision si-
multaneously.

Complementarity was ﬁrst encountered in quantum me-
chanics, but it is a phenomenon also observable in the classical
world. To get a better feeling for complementarity, we shall
consider generalized urn models (68; 69) or, equivalently (70),
ﬁnite Moore and Mealy automata (71–74). Both quasi-classic
examples mimic complementarity and even quasi-quantum
cryptography (75).

A generalized urn model is characterized by an ensemble
of balls with black background color. Printed on these balls
are some color symbols from a symbolic alphabet. The col-
ors are elements of a set of colors. A particular ball type is
associated with a unique combination of mono-spectrally (no
mixture of wavelength) colored symbols printed on the black
ball background. Every ball contains just one single symbol
per color.

Assume further some mono-spectral ﬁlters or eyeglasses
which are “perfect” by totally absorbing light of all other col-
ors but a particular single one. In that way, every color can be
associated with a particular eyeglass and vice versa.

When a spectator looks at a particular ball through such an
eyeglass, the only operationally recognizable symbol will be
the one in the particular color which is transmitted through
the eyeglass. All other colors are absorbed, and the symbols
printed in them will appear black and therefore cannot be dif-
ferentiated from the black background. Hence the ball appears
to carry a different “message” or symbol, depending on the
color at which it is viewed. An explicit example is enumer-
ated in Table I.

The difference between the balls and the quanta is the pos-
sibility to view all the different symbols on the balls in all
different colors by taking off the eyeglasses. Quantum me-
chanics does not provide us with such a possibility. On the
contrary, there are strong formal arguments suggesting that
the assumption of a simultaneous physical existence of such
complementary observables yields a complete contradiction.
These issues will be discussed next.

7

C. Value indeﬁniteness versus omniscience

Still another quantum unknowable results from the fact that
no “global” classical truth assignment exists which is consis-
tent with even a ﬁnite number of “local” ones. That is, no con-
sistent classical truth table can be given by pasting together
commeasurable observables. This phenomenon is also known
as value indeﬁniteness or contextuality.

Already scholastic philosophy (76), for instance Thomas
Aquinas Ref. (77), considered questions such as whether God
has knowledge of non-existing things (Part 1, Question 14,
Article 9) or things that are not yet (Part 1, Question 14, Ar-
ticle 13). Classical omniscience, at least its naive expression
that “if a proposition is true, then an omniscient agent (such
as God) knows that it is true” is plagued by paradoxical self-
referential.

The empirical sciences implement classical omniscience by
assuming that in principle, all observables of classical physics
are (co-)measurable without any restrictions, and regardless
of whether they are actually measured or not. No distinction
is made between an observable obtained by an “actual” and a
“potential” measurement. (In contrast compare Schr¨odinger’s
own interpretation of the wave function (78, §7) as a “cata-
logue of expectations.”) Precision and (co-)measurability are
limited only by the technical capacities of the experimenter.
The principle of empirical classical omniscience has given rise
to the realistic believe that all observables “exist” regardless
of their observation; i.e., regardless and independent of any
particular measurement. Physical (co-)existence is thereby re-
lated to the realistic assumption (79) (sometimes referred to
as the “ontic” (80) viewpoint) that such physical entities exist
even without being experienced by any ﬁnite mind.

The formal expression of classical omniscience is the
Boolean algebra of observable propositions (81), the distribu-
tive law satisﬁed by the classical logical operations, and in
particular the “abundance” of two-valued states interpretable
as omniscience about the system. Thereby, any such “disper-
sionless” two-valued state — associated with a “truth table”
— can be deﬁned on all observables, regardless of whether
they have been actually observed or not.

Historically, the discovery of the uncertainty principle and
complementarity seem to have been ﬁrst indications of the de-
cline of classical omniscience. A formal expression of com-
plementarity is the nondistributive algebra of quantum observ-
ables. Alas, nondistributivity of the empirical logical struc-
ture is no sufﬁcient condition for the impossibility of omni-
science. The generalized urn as well as equivalent ﬁnite au-
tomaton models discussed above possess two-valued states in-
terpretable as omniscience.

A further blow to quantum omniscience came from Boole’s
“conditions of possible experience” (82; 83) for quantum
probabilities and expectation functions. In particular, Bell was
the ﬁrst to point to experiments which, based on counterfac-
tually inferred elements of physical reality discussed by Ein-
stein, Podolsky and Rosen (84), seemed to indicate the impos-
sibility to faithfully embed quantum observables into classical
Boolean algebras. To state the issues pointedly, under some
(presumably mild) side assumptions, “unperformed experi-

ments have no results” (85) — there cannot exist a table enu-
merating all actual and hypothetical experimental outcomes
consistent with the observed quantum frequencies (86). Any
such table could be interpreted as omniscience with respect
to the observables in the Bell-type experiments. The impos-
sibility to construct such tables appears to be a very serious
indication against quantum omniscience.

The reason for the impossibility to describe all quantum ob-
servables simultaneously by classical tables of experimental
outcomes can be understood in terms of a “stronger” result
stating that, for quantum systems whose Hilbert space is of di-
mension greater than two, there does not exist any dispersion-
less, two-valued state interpretable as truth table. This result,
which is known as the Kochen-Specker theorem (76; 87–93),
has a ﬁnitistic proof by contradiction. To get a ﬂavor of the
argument, a short version of the proof is depicted in Fig. 1. It
is a brain teaser to argue that no coloring of the points in this
diagram exists which would include only one red point per
smooth, unbroken curve; the other three points all remaining
green.

The violations of conditions of possible classical experi-
ence or the Kochen-Specker theorem do not exclude realism
restricted to a single context, but realistic omniscience beyond
it. It might be a classical anachronism to assume that outside
of a single context in which the particle was prepared, all ob-
servables are (pre-)deﬁned.

V. MIRACLES DUE TO GAPS IN CAUSAL DESCRIPTION

A different issue, discussed by Philipp Frank, is the possi-
ble occurrence of miracles in the presence of gaps of physical
determinism. One might perceive singular events occurring
within the bounds of classical and quantum physics without
any apparent cause as miracles. For, if there is no cause to an
event, why should such an event occur altogether rather than
not occur?

Although such thoughts remain highly speculative, mira-
cles, if they exist, could be the basis for a directed evolution
in otherwise deterministic physical systems. Similar mod-
els have also been applied to dualistic models of the mind
(95; 96).

There exist bounds on miracles and on behavioral patterns
in general due to the self-referential perception of intrinsic ob-
servers endowed with free will: if such an observer is omni-
scient and has absolute predictive power, then free will could
counteract omniscience, and in particular the own predictions.
The only consistent alternative seems either to abandon free
will, stating that it is an idealistic illusion, or to accept that
omniscience and absolute predictive power is bound by para-
doxical self-reference.

VI. SUMMARY

Hilbert’s 6th problem is about the axiomatization of all of
physics. We still do not know whether or not this goal is
achievable. All we know is that even if it could be achieved,

8

omniscience cannot be gained via the formalized, syntactic
route to infer and predict physical behaviors. It will remain
blocked forever by paradoxical self-reference which intrinsic
observers and operational methods are bound to, It remains to
be seen whether or not these G¨odelian-type physical unknow-
ables are relevant for the practical development of physics
proper.

References

[1] P. Frank, Das Kausalgesetz und seine Grenzen (Springer, Vi-

enna, 1932). English translation in Ref. (97).

[2] J. D. Barrow, Theories of Everything (Oxford University

Press, Oxford, 1991).

[3] E. P. Wigner, “The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics
in the natural sciences. Richard Courant Lecture delivered at
New York University, May 11, 1959,” Communications on
Pure and Applied Mathematics 13, 1 (1960).

[4] H. Rogers, Jr., Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective

Computability (MacGraw-Hill, New York, 1967).

[5] P. Odifreddi, Classical Recursion Theory, Vol. 1 (North-

Holland, Amsterdam, 1989).

[6] P. Odifreddi, Classical Recursion Theory, Vol. 2 (North-

Holland, Amsterdam, 1999).

[7] K. G¨odel, “ ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Prin-
cipia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme,” Monatshefte f¨ur
Mathematik und Physik 38, 173–198 (1931). English transla-
tion in (22), and in (98).

[8] A. Tarski, “Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den Sprachen der deduk-
tiven Disziplinen,” Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien.
Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse, Anzeiger 69, 24
(1932).

[9] A. Tarski, Logic, Semantics and Metamathematics (Oxford

University Press, Oxford, 1956).

[10] A. M. Turing, “On computable numbers, with an applica-
tion to the Entscheidungsproblem,” Proceedings of the Lon-
don Mathematical Society, Series 2 42 and 43, 230–265 and
544–546 (1936-7 and 1937). Reprinted in (98).

[11] G. J. Chaitin, Algorithmic Information Theory (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1987).

[12] K. R. Popper, “Indeterminism in Quantum Physics and in
Classical Physics I,” The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 1, 117–133 (1950).

[13] K. R. Popper, “Indeterminism in Quantum Physics and in
Classical Physics II,” The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 1, 173–195 (1950).

[14] C. D. Moore, “Unpredictability and undecidability in dynam-
ical systems,” Physical Review Letters 64, 2354–2357 (1990).
Cf. Ch. Bennett, Nature, 346, 606 (1990), URL http://
link.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v64/p2354.

Santa Fe, NM,

[15] J. L. Casti and J. F. Traub, On Limits (Santa Fe In-
stitute,
94-10-056,
http://www.santafe.edu/research/
URL
publications/workingpapers/94-10-056.pdf.
[16] J. L. Casti and A. Karlquist, Boundaries and Barriers. On
the Limits to Scientiﬁc Knowledge (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1996).

1994). Report

[17] R. P. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law (MIT Press,

Cambridge, MA, 1965).

[18] J. von Neumann, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata (Uni-

versity of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1966). A. W. Burks, editor.

9

(0, 1, −1, 0)

(1, 0, 0, 1)

(1, 1, 1, −1)

(−1, 1, 1, 1)

❣

❣

❣

❣

(1, 0, 0, 0)

❣

❣

(1, 1, 0, −1)

(0, 1, 1, 0)

❣

(0, 0, 0, 1)

❣

❣

(0, 1, 0, 0)

❣

(0, 0, 1, 1)

(1, 1, −1, 1)

❣

(1, 0, 1, 0)
❣

❣
(1, 0, −1, 0)

❣

(1, −1, 1, −1)

❣

❣

❣

❣

(0, 0, 1, −1)

(1, −1, 0, 0)

(1, 1, −1, −1)

(1, 1, 1, 1)

FIG. 1 Proof of the Kochen-Specker theorem (93; 94) in four-dimensional real vector space. Nine interconnected contexts (or four-pods) are
represented by smooth, unbroken curves. The graph contains possible quantum observables represented by 18 points, which are explicitly
enumerated. It cannot be colored by the two colors red (associated with truth) and green (associated with falsity) such that every context
contains exactly one red and three green points. For, by construction, on the one hand, every red point occurs in exactly two contexts (four-
pods), and hence there is an even number of red points in a table containing the points of the contexts as columns and the enumeration of
contexts as rows. On the other hand, there are nine contexts involved; thus by the rules it follows that there is an odd number of red points in
this table (exactly one per context). Thus, our assumption about the colorability and therefore about possible consistent truth assignments for
this ﬁnite set of quantum observables leads to a complete contradiction.

[19] S. Feferman,

“Kurt G¨odel:

conviction and caution,”

Technical Journal XLI(41)(3), 877–884 (1962).

Philosophia Naturalis 21, 546–562 (1984).

[20] M. Baaz, “ ¨Uber den allgemeinen Gehalt von Beweisen,” in
Contributions to General Algebra, vol. 6 (H¨older-Pichler-
Tempsky, Vienna, 1988).

[21] O. Neugebauer, Vorlesungen ¨uber die Geschichte der an-
tiken mathematischen Wissenschaften. 1. Band: Vorgriechis-
che Mathematik (Springer, Berlin, 1934). Page 172.

[22] K. G¨odel, in Collected Works. Publications 1929-1936. Vol-
ume I, S. Feferman, J. W. Dawson, S. C. Kleene, G. H. Moore,
R. M. Solovay, and J. van Heijenoort, eds. (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1986).

[23] J. Bernstein, Quantum Proﬁles (Princeton University Press,

Princeton, 1991).

[24] L. Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy,
Gentleman (London, 1760-1767). URL http://www.
gutenberg.org/etext/1079.

[25] T. Rado, “On Non-Computable Functions,” The Bell System

[26] G. J. Chaitin, “Information-theoretic limitations of formal sys-
tems,” Journal of the Association of Computing Machinery 21,
403–424 (1974). Reprinted in (99), URL http://www.cs.
auckland.ac.nz/CDMTCS/chaitin/acm74.pdf.

[27] A. K. Dewdney, “Computer Recreations: A Computer Trap
for the Busy Beaver, the Hardest-Working Turing Machine,”
Scientiﬁc American 251(2), 19–23 (1984).

[28] A. H. Brady, “The Busy Beaver Game and the Meaning of
Life,” in The Universal Turing Machine. A Half-Century Sur-
vey, R. Herken, ed., p. 259 (Kammerer und Unverzagt, Ham-
burg, 1988).

[29] G. J. Chaitin, “Computing the Busy Beaver Function,” in Open
Problems in Communication and Computation, T. M. Cover
and B. Gopinath, eds., p. 108 (Springer, New York, 1987).
Reprinted in (99).

[30] E. M. Gold, “Language identiﬁcation in the limit,” Informa-
tion and Control 10, 447–474 (1967). URL http://dx.

doi.org/10.1016/S0019-9958(67)91165-5.
[31] L. Blum and M. Blum, “Toward a mathematical theory of in-
ductive inference,” Information and Control 28(2), 125–155
(1975).

[32] D. Angluin and C. H. Smith, “A Survey of Inductive Infer-
ence: Theory and Methods,” Computing Surveys 15, 237–269
(1983).

[33] L. M. Adleman and M. Blum,

“Inductive Inference
and Unsolvability,” The Journal of Symbolic Logic 56,
891–900 (1991). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/
2275058.

[34] M. Li and P. M. B. Vit´anyi, “Inductive reasoning and Kol-
mogorov complexity,” Journal of Computer and System Sci-
ence 44, 343–384 (1992). URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/0022-0000(92)90026-F.

[35] G. Kreisel, “A notion of mechanistic theory,” Synthese 29,
11–26 (1974). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF00484949.

[36] E. Specker, “Nicht konstruktiv beweisbare S¨atze der Anal-
ysis,” The Journal of Smbolic Logic 14, 145–158 (1949).
Reprinted in (100, pp. 35–48); English translation: Theorems
of Analysis which cannot be proven constructively.

[37] C. Calude, Information and Randomness—An Algorithmic

Perspective (Springer, Berlin, 1994).

[38] E. Specker, “Der Satz vom Maximum in der rekursiven Analy-
sis,” in Constructivity in mathematics : proceedings of the col-
loquium held at Amsterdam, 1957, A. Heyting, ed., pp. 254–
265 (North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1959).
Reprinted in (100, pp. 148–159); English translation: Theo-
rems of Analysis which cannot be proven constructively.
[39] P. S. Wang, “The undecidability of the existence of zeros of
real elementary functions,” Journal of the ACM (JACM) 21,
586–589 (1974). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
321850.321856.

[40] M. B. Pour-El and J. I. Richards, Computability in Analysis

and Physics (Springer, Berlin, 1989).

[41] D. S. Bridges, “Constructive mathematics and unbounded
operators—a reply to Hellman,” Journal of Philosophical
(1999). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
Logic 28(5)
1023/A:1004420413391.

[42] P.-S. Laplace, Philosophical Essay on Probabilities. Trans-
lated from the ﬁfth French edition of 1825 (Springer, Berlin,
New York, 1995,1998). URL http://www.archive.
org/details/philosophicaless00lapliala.
[43] H. Poincar´e, Wissenschaft und Hypothese (Teubner, Leipzig,

1914).

[44] C. Calude, Information and Randomness—An Algorithmic

Perspective, 2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 2002).

[45] R. S. Shaw, “Strange Attractors, Chaotic Behavior, and In-
formation Flow,” Zeitschrift f¨ur Naturforschung 36a, 80–110
(1981).

[46] J. P. Crutchﬁeld, J. D. Farmer, N. H. Packard, and R. S. Shaw,

“Chaos,” Scientiﬁc American 255, 46–57 (1986).

10

lestial Mechanics 50, 73–88 (1991).

[51] F. Diacu, “The Solution of the N-Body Problem,” The Mathe-

matical Intelligencer 18(3), 66–70 (1996).

[52] Q. D. Wang, “Power Series Solutions and Integral Manifold
of the n-body Problem,” Regular & Chaotic Dynamics 6(4),
433–442 (2001). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1070/
RD2001v006n04ABEH000187.

[53] K. E. Sundman, “Memoire sur le probl`eme de trois corps,”

Acta Mathematica 36, 105–179 (1912).

[54] E. Fredkin and T. Toffoli, “Conservative Logic,” Interna-
tional Journal of Theoretical Physics 21(3-4), 219–253 (1982).
Reprinted in (102, Part I, Chapter 3)., URL http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/BF01857727.

[55] N. Margolus, “Universal cellular automata based on the
collisions of soft spheres,” in Collision-based computing,
A. Adamatzky, ed. (Springer, London, 2002). URL http:
//people.csail.mit.edu/nhm/cca.pdf.

[56] C. A. Fuchs and A. Peres, “Quantum theory needs no
‘Interpretation,” Physics Today 53(4),
70–71 (2000).
Further discussions of and reactions to the article can
be found in the September issue of Physics Today, 53,
11-14 (2000), URL http://www.aip.org/web2/
aiphome/pt/vol-53/iss-9/p11.htmlandhttp:
//www.aip.org/web2/aiphome/pt/vol-53/
iss-9/p14.html.

[57] M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Me-
chanics (McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1966).
[58] M. Jammer, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (John Wi-

ley & Sons, New York, 1974).

[59] M. Jammer, “John Steward Bell and the debate on the signiﬁ-
cance of his contributions to the foundations of quantum me-
chanics,” in Bell’s Theorem and the Foundations of Modern
Physics, A. van der Merwe, F. Selleri, and G. Tarozzi, eds.,
pp. 1–23 (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1992).

[60] J. Clauser, “Early History of Bells Theorem,” in Quantum
(Un)speakables. From Bell to Quantum Information, pp. 61–
96 (Springer, Berlin, 2002).

[61] P. R. Halmos, Finite-dimensional vector spaces (Springer,

New York, Heidelberg, Berlin, 1974).

[62] K. Svozil, “The quantum coin toss—Testing microphysical
undecidability,” Physics Letters A 143, 433–437 (1990). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(90)
90408-G.

[63] G. Weihs, T. Jennewein, C. Simon, H. Weinfurter, and
A. Zeilinger, “Violation of Bell’s Inequality under Strict
Einstein Locality Conditions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5039–
5043 (1998). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.81.5039.

[64] T. Jennewein, U. Achleitner, G. Weihs, H. Weinfurter, and
A. Zeilinger, “A Fast and Compact Quantum Random Number
Generator,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 71, 1675–1680
(2000). eprint quant-ph/9912118, URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1063/1.1150518.

[47] H. G. Schuster, Deterministic Chaos (Physik Verlag, Wein-

[65] id Quantique, “Quantis - Quantum Random Number Genera-

heim, 1984).

[48] J. Bricmont, “Science of Chaos or Chaos in Science?” An-
nals of the New York Academy of Sciences 775, 131–176
(1996). Also reprinted in (101), eprint chao-dyn/9603009,
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/chao-dyn/9603009.
[49] J. P. Crutchﬁeld, “Chaos and Complexity,” in Handbook of
Metaphysics and Ontology, H. Burkhardt and B. Smith, eds.,
p. 549 (Philosophia Verlag, M¨unchen, 1991). URL http://
cse.ucdavis.edu/˜cmg/papers/COCC.pdf.
[50] Q. D. Wang, “The global solution of the n-body problem,” Ce-

tors,” (2004). URL http://www.idquantique.com.

[66] C. S. Calude, “Algorithmic randomness, quantum physics,
and incompleteness,” in Proceedings of
the Conference
“Machines, Computations and Universality” (MCU’2004),
M. Margenstern, ed., pp. 1–17 (Lectures Notes in Comput.
Sci. 3354, Springer, Berlin, 2004).

[67] C. S. Calude and M. J. Dinneen, “Is quantum randomness al-
gorithmic random? A preliminary attack,” in Proceedings 1st
International Conference on Algebraic Informatics, S. Boza-
palidis, A. Kalampakas, and G. Rahonis, eds., pp. 195–196

(Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 2005).

[68] R. Wright, “Generalized urn models,” Foundations of Physics

20, 881–903 (1990).

[69] R. Wright, “The state of the pentagon. A nonclassical exam-
ple,” in Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory, A. R.
Marlow, ed., pp. 255–274 (Academic Press, New York, 1978).
[70] K. Svozil, “Logical equivalence between generalized urn
Journal of
models and ﬁnite automata,”
Theoretical Physics 44, 745–754 (2005). eprint quant-
ph/0209136, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10773-005-7052-0.

International

[71] E. F. Moore, “Gedanken-Experiments on Sequential Ma-
chines,” in Automata Studies, C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy,
eds. (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1956).

[72] M. Schaller and K. Svozil, “Automaton logic,” International
Journal of Theoretical Physics 35(5), 911–940 (1996).
[73] A. Dvureˇcenskij, S. Pulmannov´a, and K. Svozil, “Partition
Logics, Orthoalgebras and Automata,” Helvetica Physica Acta
68, 407–428 (1995).

[74] C. Calude, E. Calude, K. Svozil, and S. Yu, “Physical versus
Computational Complementarity I,” International Journal of
Theoretical Physics 36(7), 1495–1523 (1997). eprint quant-
ph/9412004.

[75] K. Svozil, “Staging quantum cryptography with chocolate
balls,” American Journal of Physics Vol. , No. , September
74(9), 800–803 (2006). eprint physics/0510050, URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1119/1.2205879.

[76] E. Specker, “Die Logik nicht gleichzeitig entscheidbarer Aus-
sagen,” Dialectica 14, 175–182 (1960). Reprinted in (100, pp.
175–182); English translation: The logic of propositions which
are not simultaneously decidable, reprinted in (103, pp. 135-
140).

[77] T. Aquinas, Summa Theologica. Translated by Fathers
of
the English Dominican Province (Christian Classics,
USA, 1981). URL http://www.ccel.org/ccel/
aquinas/summa.html.

[78] E. Schr¨odinger, “Die gegenw¨artige Situation in der Quanten-
mechanik,” Naturwissenschaften 23, 807–812, 823–828, 844–
849 (1935). English translation in (104) and (105, pp. 152-
167), URL http://wwwthep.physik.uni-mainz.
de/˜matschul/rot/schroedinger.pdf.

[79] W. T. Stace, “The Refutation of Realism,” in Readings
in philosophical analysis, H. Feigl and W. Sellars, eds.
(Appleton–Century–Crofts, New York, 1949). Previously
published in Mind 53, 1934.

[80] H. Atmanspacher and H. Primas, “Epistemic and Ontic Quan-
tum Realities,” in Foundations of Probability and Physics –
3, AIP Conference Proceedings Volume 750, A. Khrennikov,
ed., pp. 49–62 (Springer, New York, Berlin, 2005). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1874557.

[81] G. Boole, An investigation of the laws of thought (Dover edi-

tion, New York, 1958).

[82] G. Boole, “On the theory of probabilities,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 152, 225–252
(1862).

[83] I. Pitowsky, “George Boole’s ‘Conditions od Possible Ex-
perience’ and the Quantum Puzzle,” The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 45, 95–125 (1994). URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1093/bjps/45.1.95.

[84] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered com-
plete?” Physical Review 47, 777–780 (1935). URL http:

11

//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777.

[85] A. Peres, “Unperformed experiments have no results,” Amer-
ican Journal of Physics 46, 745–747 (1978). URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1119/1.11393.

[86] G. Weihs, T. Jennewein, C. Simon, H. Weinfurter, and
A. Zeilinger, “Violation of Bell’s Inequality under Strict
Einstein Locality Conditions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5039–
5043 (1998). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.81.5039.

[87] S. Kochen and E. P. Specker, “The Problem of Hidden Vari-
ables in Quantum Mechanics,” Journal of Mathematics and
Mechanics 17(1), 59–87 (1967). Reprinted in (100, pp. 235–
263).

[88] N. Zierler and M. Schlessinger, “Boolean embeddings of or-
thomodular sets and quantum logic,” Duke Mathematical Jour-
nal 32, 251–262 (1965).

[89] V. Alda, “On 0-1 measures for projectors I,” Aplik. mate. 25,

[90] V. Alda, “On 0-1 measures for projectors II,” Aplik. mate. 26,

373–374 (1980).

57–58 (1981).

[91] F. Kamber, “Die Struktur des Aussagenkalk¨uls in einer
physikalischen Theorie,” Nachr. Akad. Wiss. G¨ottingen 10,
103–124 (1964).

[92] F. Kamber, “Zweiwertige Wahrscheinlichkeitsfunktionen auf
orthokomplement¨aren Verb¨anden,” Mathematische Annalen
158, 158–196 (1965).

[94] A. Cabello,

[93] A. Cabello, J. M. Estebaranz, and G. Garc´ıa-Alcaine, “Bell-
Kochen-Specker theorem: A proof with 18 vectors,” Physics
Letters A 212(4), 183–187 (1996). URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0375-9601(96)00134-X.
“Kochen-Specker
test on hidden variables,”

theorem and experimen-
Journal of
tal
International
Modern Physics A 15(18), 2813–2820 (2000). eprint quant-
ph/9911022, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/
S0217751X00002020.

[95] J. C. Eccles, “The Mind-Brain Problem Revisited: The Mi-
crosite Hypothesis,” in The Principles of Design and Opera-
tion of the Brain, J. C. Eccles and O. Creutzfeldt, eds., p. 549
(Springer, Berlin, 1990).

[96] K. R. Popper and J. C. Eccles, The Self and Its Brain (Springer,

Berlin, Heidelberg, London, New York, 1977).

[97] P. Frank and R. C. (Editor), The Law of Causality and its Lim-
its (Vienna Circle Collection) (Springer, Vienna, 1997).
[98] M. Davis, The Undecidable (Raven Press, New York, 1965).
[99] G. J. Chaitin, Information, Randomness and Incompleteness,
2nd ed. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1990). This is a collec-
tion of G. Chaitin’s early publications.

[100] E. Specker, Selecta (Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 1990).
[101] J. Bricmont, “Science of Chaos or Chaos in Science?” in
Flight from Science and Reason, P. R. Gross, N. Levitt, and
M. W. Lewis, eds. (John Hopkins University Press, 1997).

[102] A. Adamatzky, Collision-based computing (Springer, London,

2002).

[103] C. A. Hooker, The Logico-Algebraic Approach to Quan-
tum Mechanics. Volume I: Historical Evolution (Reidel, Dor-
drecht, 1975).

[104] J. D. Trimmer, “The present situation in quantum mechanics:
a translation of Schr¨odinger’s “cat paradox”,” Proc. Am. Phil.
Soc. 124, 323–338 (1980). Reprinted in (105, pp. 152-167).

[105] J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, Quantum Theory and Mea-
surement (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1983).

