7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Explaining the pearl necklace of SNR 1987A by coherent optics.

Jacques Moret-Bailly
Physique, Universite de Bourgogne Dijon France∗
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

A lot of beautiful observations of Supernova remnant 1987A give a precise idea of its structure
and its evolution. The regular interpretations of the observations set that the large energy needed
to explain the brightness of the pearl necklaces is provided by shock waves involving remnants of
a ﬁrst explosion and a wave produced by the observed explosion although the existence of this
wave is discussed. We develop the alternative explanation of the necklaces by photoionization. Our
main hypothesis is that the explosion of the blue supergiant progenitor produces two neutron stars
and a central brilliant object, a linear system similar to those which were observed by Halton Arp.
We suppose that these stars remains bright in extreme UV, to maintain the strong ionization of a
bubble of hot hydrogen nearly transparent in far UV ( deﬁned as the range of Lyman frequencies of
atomic hydrogen). Outside the bubbles, three shells containing atomic hydrogen generate resonant,
superradiant scatterings at Lyman frequencies, in tangential competing modes. The superradiance
cools the gas and absorbs strongly the radial far UV light, hiding the stars. The shells may be
identiﬁed with the inner active shells found from light echoes.

PACS numbers: 38.Mz,42.65.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Light and neutrinos from Supernova 1987A arrived at
Earth on February 23, 1987 after a 166 000 year trip. Its
brightening was very rapid: by a factor 100 in 3 hours,
reaching magnitude 2,9 in 80 days. This slow rise, and
the slow speed of hydrogen observed in the infrared show
that the mass of hydrogen envelope of the star was of
the order of 10 solar masses. Then the magnitude de-
creased almost linearly to 16 in 1000 days [1]. Its initial
spectrum was very rich in UV and showed broad hydro-
gen and helium emission lines; then the UV decreased
and it remained only emission lines of low ionization el-
ements [2]. Ground based images of SN1987A showed a
weak blob of gas which was resolved as a circumstellar
equatorial ring (ER) by the ESA Faint Object Camera
on Hubble on August 1990. Comparing the time delay
between the maximal emissions of the supernova and the
ring gave a diameter of the ring: 1.2 light-year (ly); know-
ing its angular size, the distance of the supernova was set
[3]. In 1994, two larger outer rings (OR) were detected;
in 1997, bright spots (pearls) appeared on the ER. The
evolution of the rings (necklaces), the existence of the
pearls is now explained using shock waves between mat-
ter ejected by the supernova and matter ejected 20 000
years before in a ﬁrst explosion of a red supergiant star;
however, arguments developed for instance by LLoyd et
al. [4], such as the complexity of the explanation of the
existence of the pearls, of the thinness of the rings, their
inner brightness and of the disappearance of the star let
us suggest the use of an alternative explanation closer to
the interpretation of the spectra of planetary nebulae [5].

Our fundamental hypothesis, developed in section II

∗Electronic address: jacques.moret-bailly@u-bourgogne.fr

is that the result of the explosion of the red supergiant
progenitor star is not only the blue supergiant which was
observed, but, also, two neutron stars aligned with it on
a z’ axis. Inside the rings, we follow the photoionization
model developed by Chevalier et al. [6] and Lundqvist et
al. [7, 8].

Section III explains the emission and diﬀusion of light
inside the ER and the observation of anomalous fre-
quency shifts.

Section IV describes the generation of the equatorial

ring.

Section V studies the geometry of the rings.
All ellipsoids used in this paper are invariant by rota-

tions around axis z’.

II. THE SUPERGIANT PROGENITORS.

The explosion of the red supergiant progenitor 20 000
years before the observed blue supernova explosion [3],
results from a collapse of its core by a fusion of the pro-
tons of iron nuclei with electrons resulting from a cooling
of this core.
It is usually admitted that this collapse
produces a prompt shock, and that the shock wave may
propagate outside the star. However this process works
only with a small core [9] while the mass of the star is
large, at least 20 times the mass of the Sun.

Halton Arp observed a number of alignments of
quasars with a larger object often similar to a BL Lac,
too large to be accidental [10]. These alignments seem
result from the explosion of a progenitor of the larger ob-
ject. The good alignment of three objects seems indicate
the following scenario: the conservation of the angular
momentum during the collapse of the core of the progen-
itor increases the angular speed of the core so much that,
like a spinning drop of liquid, it increases its momentum
of inertia, having successively the shapes of an oblate el-

lipsoid, a prolate ellipsoid, a peanut, ﬁnally exploding.
Whichever the exact process, we suppose that the explo-
sion of the red progenitor of SN 1987A produced, along
a z’ axis, the blue observed supergiant and two neutron
stars; this system is surrounded by ejected external layers
of the red supergiant, having the third of its mass, and
a density decreasing with the distances to the supergiant
star and to z’ axis. This cloud of gas is mainly made
of hydrogen and helium. The bipolar symmetry of the
cloud was observed by Wang et al. [11] and deduced by
Sugerman et al. from the observation of light echoes [12].
Accreting the cloud, the neutron stars play the role of
the anticathode of an X-rays tube (except for the ori-
gin of the acceleration of the particles). Thus, the hot
spots emit X rays and extreme UV, but as they are very
small, in despite of a temperature of several millions of
kelvins, their total radiation at lower frequencies is too
weak to be observable in optical regions. The blue su-
pergiant is heated both by the accretion and its internal
evolution; its emission in extreme UV is not much larger
than the emission of the neutron stars, but it is much
more powerful in far UV region, around the Lyman lines
of hydrogen.

III. THE PLASMA INSIDE THE EQUATORIAL
RING (ER).

After the blue supernova explosion, the remaining star
had the spectrum of a blue star, emitting very broad
Lyman lines of HI and He, and a strong continuous spec-
trum of shorter frquencies (extreme UV). We suppose
that, after the main supernova glow, the surface temper-
ature of the star does not decrease very strongly, so that
its spectrum remains mainly made of less wide Lyman
lines of HI and extreme UV. In a ﬁrst approximation,
suppose that the whole system has a spherical symme-
try. The cooling of the plasma is limited by the absorp-
tion of the extreme UV which ionizes generated HI into
electrons and protons (HII ), building a spherical bubble
of HII inside a cloud of HI [6]. In the bubble, various
ionized atoms (He, C, N, O, ...) absorb some energy, radi-
ate lines and produce a Rayleigh scattering of the Lyman
emission lines. The largest fraction of this scattering is
coherent, producing only the refraction; the weaker in-
coherent scattering produces an opalescence around the
star, similar to the blue of our sky. As protons and elec-
trons are nearly free, they do not play a notable optical
role. As in the atmosphere of the Earth, the Raman inco-
herent scattering is weaker than the Rayleigh incoherent
scattering.

For a chosen orientation, locate a point by its distance
r to the centre of the star, and set r = R at the in-
ner point of the necklace (ﬁgure 1). For r larger than
about 3R/4, the remaining intensity in extreme UV has
decreased enough, and the ionization by several steps is
improbable enough, to let appear some HI , with a den-
sity increasing with r, so that the broad Lyman lines

2

FIG. 1: Variation of the relative densities of HI , HII and
excited atomic hydrogen HI *, relative intensities of light, and
temperature along a radius of the equatorial ring.

FIG. 2: Observed proﬁle from one spatial region. Blank re-
gions are due to contaminants. From Michael et al. [15]

are scattered more strongly [13]. Very close to the ring,
an anomalous redshift of the Lyman alpha line appears,
see, for instance Lawrence & Crotts [14]; a wide absorp-
tion band, probably resolvable into lines was observed
by Michael et al.
[15], similar to the “Lyman forest”
observed in the spectra of the quasars (ﬁg. 2). An ex-
planation, weakly supported by its authors, is a Wolf
process, multiple incoherent scatterings combined with
an asymmetrical weakening of the aisles of the lines [16].

This incoherent process is too weak to allow the large
redshifts which are observed, it blurs the images and
the spectra too much. An “Impulsive Stimulated Ra-
man Scattering” (ISRS) [17, 18, 19, 20] may occur be-
cause, in a low pressure gas containing HI in 2s or 2p
states, the conditions set by G. L. Lamb [21] are fulﬁlled:
the nanosecond pulses which make the ordinary incoher-
ent light are “shorter than all relevant time constants”,
the collisional time, and Raman resonance periods corre-

sponding to 178 MHz in the 2s1/2 state, 59 MHz in 2p1/2
state, and 24 MHz in 2p3/2.

The ISRS renamed “Coherent Raman Eﬀect on Inco-
herent Light” (CREIL) when it uses ordinary incoherent
light rather than ultrashort laser pulses, increases the en-
tropy of a set of electromagnetic beams propagating in a
medium verifying Lamb’s conditions, by frequency shifts;
it does not blur the images because it is coherent, or the
spectra because the relative frequency shifts are nearly
constants. Usually, light is redshifted, radiofrequencies
are blueshifted (in particular, the thermal background is
heated).

The large number of lines which appear in a Lyman
forest results from the following process in unexcited
HI [22, 23]:

The absorption of the Lyα line produces 2p atoms,
therefore a CREIL frequency shift; suppose that a par-
tial absorption shifts the absorbed frequency out of the
bandwidth of the Lyα line; the pumping and the shift
are permanent until a previously absorbed line reaches
the Lyα frequency, so that the frequency shift stops, ab-
sorptions and emissions become regular, increasing the
number of lines in the spectrum. The shift restarts not
easily, mainly by a population of the metastable 2s state
resulting from a de-excitation of higher states pumped by
other Lyman absorptions. In particular, each shift to the
alpha frequency, of Lyman beta and gamma lines writ-
ten in the spectrum, writes new beta and gamma lines,
generating the forest with the characteristic fundamen-
tal relative frequency shift 0.062 which is observed in the
spectra of the quasars [24, 25].

IV. GENERATION OF THE EQUATORIAL
RING (ER).

In despite of the previously described scatterings, far
UV light propagates in ionized hydrogen without a large
absorption until it reaches a region cold enough to de-
crease strongly the ionization of hydrogen: under 50 000
K atomic hydrogen is stable, mainly in excited states;
this temperature was observed by Arnett et al. close to
the necklace [1].

Containing much hydrogen atoms in the excited states,
the medium is able to amplify the Lyman frequencies
much; in their ground state, the hydrogen atoms scat-
ter the Lyman lines too; therefore, in directions where
the excited medium is thick, that is tangentially to the
bubble, a strong superradiance appears, which starts a
catastrophic evolution of the gas:

The superradiance depopulates the excited states in a
spherical shell, cooling hydrogen strongly; ionization dis-
appears, a large amount of atoms becomes available. A
coherent nearly resonant scattering transfers directly en-
ergy from the radial modes to the tangential modes, ex-
actly as in a laser medium pumped transversally. If the
thermodynamic equilibrium were reached, the luminance
of the tangential modes would reach the luminance of the

3

FIG. 3: Section, by the plane containing the axis of symmetry
z’ and the direction z to Earth, of the ellipsoidal shells of
atomic hydrogen which generate the necklaces; noe, ee and
soe: north outer, equatorial and south outer ellipsoids; nor,
er, sor: traces of the hollow, tangent cylinders of light oriented
to Earth; the dotted lines suggest how, taking into account
the variations of density of the gas, the outer shells can get a
more realistic shape of pear.

radial modes; but this is not necessary to hide the star
because the ratio of the solid angles through which are
seen, from the Earth, respectively the star and a pearl
of the necklace, is very small. The opalescence is not
weakened because its luminance, therefore its tempera-
ture computed from Planck’s law, is low.

As energy is strongly transferred from the radial rays,
the tangential luminance of the shell decreases for r in-
creasing [3, 5].

The tangential rays directed to the Earth draw a cir-
cular “necklace”; but the competition of the modes se-
lects some of them, stabilized by permanent perturba-
tions of the system, for instance by dust: the selected
modes make the “pearls”. Remark that the mathemati-
cal deﬁnition of the modes does not imply that they are
monochromatic: a mode is a ray in the space of the so-
lutions of a linear set of equations (here Maxwell’s equa-
tions). This is happy because a perfectly monochromatic
mode never starts and stops, it is not physics! Here,
the nonlinearity of the superradiant process provides an
interaction between modes which could be deﬁned for
diﬀerent frequency bands.

The columns of light generated by the superradiant
modes excite various atoms, generating columns of ex-
cited atoms. These cold atoms radiate nearly monochro-
matic modes collinear with the initial UV modes, increas-
ing the spectral complexity of the pearls.

V. GEOMETRY OF THE RINGS.

We have assumed that the gas is homogeneous to ob-
tain spherical shells; assume now that the density is a
decreasing function of r, the surfaces of equal density be-
ing prolate ellipsoids whose axis is the z’ axis of the stars.

4

are more poorly illuminated than the equatorial shell,
by their quasars in far UV and by the columns of light
emitted by the ER. The variation of the density of the
gas in the z’ direction is asymmetric, so that the shell
takes the shape of a pear, the external necklaces loosing
their centre of symmetry.

Very similar geometries of light reﬂecting shells were
obtained experimentally by Sugerman et al.
[12] whose
ﬁgure 43n, reproduced as ﬁgure 4 shows a metal cup
shape close to our pear shape.

VI. CONCLUSION

Several authors tried to explain the generation of the
pearl necklaces of supernova remnant 1987A using a
photo excitation of surrounding hydrogen: extreme UV
maintains the ionization of a bubble an hydrogen cloud.
outside of the bubble, a shell of atomic hydrogen scatters
far UV light. This explanation fails because it does not
explain the fast decrease of the luminance of the ring for
an increase of the radius; this failure is removed taking
superradiance into account. The existence of the pearls
results from a competition of modes as in a laser. The
anomalous frequency shifts result from an other coherent
eﬀect usually observed using lasers.

The presence of three rings is explained by a nearly
symmetrical ejection of two neutron stars by the red pro-
genitor of the supernova. The accretion of matter by
these neutron stars provides the extreme UV needed to
generate the scattering shell, while the scattered light is
ampliﬁed too by light coming from the necklace of the
main remnant star.

FIG. 4: Section of the “circumstellar hourglass” scattering
shells found from echoes by Sugerman et al. and the rings
(ﬁg. 43n of [12]). Compare with ﬁg. 3 obtained roughly from
our hypothesis.

The far UV ionizing light is absorbed by a certain col-
umn density of HI , therefore, for instance, more strongly
on z’ axis than in other directions; thus, the radius of
the shell is lower in this direction than in the other; the
shell gets a shape close to an oblate ellipsoid (ﬁg 3). The
cylinder tangent to the ellipsoid, directed to the Earth is
elliptical.

The accretion of the surrounding cloud of hydrogen
by the neutron stars heats very small “hot spots” to a
temperature larger than 106 K, so that these stars radiate
light mainly in extreme UV. This UV generates shells
of gas scattering superradiant light beams; these shells

[1] W. D. Arnett & J. N. Bahcall, R. P. Kirshner, S. E.
Woosley, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 27, 629 (1989).
[2] S. E. Woosley & M. M. Phillips, Science 240, 750 (1988).
[3] N. Panagia, R. Gilmozzi, F. Macchetto,H.-M. Adorf, &

phys. J. 492, L139 (1998).

[14] S. Lawrence & A.Crotts IAU circ.7359 (2000).
[15] E. Michael, R. McCray, A. V. Filippenko, P. Lundqvist

etal., Astrophys. J. 593, 809 (2003).

R. P. Kirshner, Astrophys. J. 380, L23 (1991).

[4] H. M. Lloyd,Y. J. O’Brien & F. D. Kahn, Mon. Not. R.

[16] E. Wolf, Nature 326, 363 (1987).
[17] Yan Y.-X., E. B. Gamble Jr. & K. A. Nelson, J. Chem

Astron. Soc. 273, L19 (1995).

Phys. 83, 5391 (1985).

[5] P. C. Plait, P. Lundqvist, R. A. Chevalier & R. P. Kir-

[18] A. M. Weiner, D. E. Leaird., G. P. Wiederrecht, & K. A.

shner, Astrophys. J. 439, 730 (1995).

Nelson, Science 247, 1317 (1990).

[6] R. A. Chevalier & V. V. Dwarkadas, Astrophys. J. 452,

[7] P. Lundqvist & C. Fransson, Astrophys. J. 464, 924

[8] P. Lundqvist, Astrophys. J. 511, 389 (1999).
[9] E.S. Myra & S. A. Bludman, Astrophys. J. 340, 384

45 (1995).

(1996).

(1989).

[10] H. Arp, Astrophys. J. 525, 594 (1999).
[11] L. Wang, J. C. Wheeler, P. Hﬂich, A. Khokhlov et al.,

arXiv:astro-ph/0205337 (2002).

[12] B. E. K. Sugerman, A. P. S. Crotts, W E. Kunkel, S. R.
Heathcote & S. S. Lawrence, arXiv:astro-ph/0502268 &
0502378 (2005)

[13] G. Sonneborn, C. S. J. Pun, R. A. Kimble et al., Astro-

[19] T. P. Dougherty, G. P. Wiederrecht, K. A. Nelson, M.
H. Garrett, H. P. Jenssen & C. Warde, Science 258, 770
(1992).

[20] L. Dhar, J. A. Rogers, & K. A. Nelson, Chem. Rev. 94,

[21] Lamb G. L. Jr., Rev. Mod. Phys. 43, 99 (1971).
[22] J. Moret-Bailly, Quantum & Semiclas. Opt. 10, L35

[23] J. Moret-Bailly, Quant. Spectros. Radiat. Transfer 68,

157 (1994).

(1998).

575 (2001).

[24] K. G. Karlsson, Astron. Astrophys. 13, 333 (1971).
[25] J. Moret-Bailly, AIP Conf. Proc. 822, 226 (2006).

