7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum World as Consciousness

Daegene Song∗

February 21, 2014

Abstract

By examining the consciousness in terms of reference frames in quan-
tum dynamics, it will be shown that the unitary evolution of an arbitrary
wavefunction, including that of the Universe, which one experiences, is
the evolution within the observer’s consciousness.

1 Introduction

The study of consciousness has been approached from diﬀerent branches of
disciplines. For example, there have been various eﬀorts in understanding the
nature of consciousness in philosophy for many centuries. Recently, the ﬁeld of
cognitive neuroscience has given a wider attention to understand consciousness
as an activity of neurons in a brain [1, 2, 3]. Computer scientists have also
attempted to model a neural network to simulate brain activity [4]. There has
also been the suggestion that there might be a macroscopic quantum eﬀect
taking place in a brain [5]. In the present work, a diﬀerent approach will be
taken to the study of consciousness. We will use quantum mechanics, but rather
than attempting to ﬁnd any quantum eﬀect in a brain, we will use the idea of
reference frames of an observer and a object in quantum dynamics. We will show
that, in order to describe consciousness consistently in quantum dynamics, the
unitary evolution of an arbitrary wavefunction should be the evolution within
the observer’s consciousness.

In order to illustrate the main concept of the present work, let us provide
a simple example. Suppose an observer, called Alice, is sitting in a car, called
car A, and she observes another car, called car B, passing by her at 100km/hr.
For this observation, we wish to consider two scenarios that may be happening.
The ﬁrst case is that Alice’s car is staying still and the other car is moving
at 100km/hr as shown in (A) of Fig. 1. The second scenario is that car B
is not moving and car A, i.e., Alice’s reference frame, is moving backwards
at 100km/hr1. If we assume there are no other surroundings and Alice’s car

∗School of Computational Sciences, Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Seoul 130-722,

Korea.; Email: dsong@kias.re.kr.

1In this paper, we are ignoring any relativistic eﬀect.

1

has no speed gauge, then on both occasions, Alice would observe the same
phenomenon, and cannot tell the diﬀerence between the two. Let us consider
another case. Suppose Alice is sitting in the car and there is no car B nor
any other surroundings. Then the observer cannot experience her own speed
whether she is moving at 100km/hr ((C) in Fig. 1) or not moving at all ((D)
in Fig. 1). In the following, we will consider consciousness in terms of reference
frames in quantum mechanics similar to the example of two cars just discussed.
However, unlike the example with the car’s speed, the diﬃculty in discussing
consciousness is that the observer is able to experience whether his or her own
reference frame is moving or not without any surroundings.

In sect. 2, we will introduce quantum dynamics using the notation of quan-
tum computing.
In sect. 3, we examine observables in quantum theory and
show them to be observer’s reference frame. We will discuss consciousness in
terms of reference frames in quantum dynamics and it will then be shown that
considering consciousness in terms of reference frames in quantum dynamics
run into diﬃculties in sect. 4. In sect. 5, we examine consciousness and will
present the main result of this paper, i.e. providing a relation between quantum
dynamics and consciousness. We then provide three cases of example to explain
our main result in sect. 6. Finally, we conclude with some remarks.

2 Preliminaries

In order to discuss quantum theory and consciousness, we wish to deﬁne some
notations in quantum theory. A qubit, a basic unit of quantum information, is
a two-level quantum system written as |ψi = a|0i + b|1i. Using a Bloch sphere
notation, i.e., with a = exp(−iφ/2) cos(θ/2) and b = exp(iφ/2) sin(θ/2), a qubit
2 (1+ˆv·~σ) where (vx, vy, vz)
in a density matrix form can be written as |ψihψ| = 1
= (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ) and ~σ = (σx, σy, σz) with σx = |0ih1| + |1ih0|,
σy = −i|0ih1| + i|1ih0|, and σz = |0ih0| − |1ih1|. Therefore a qubit, |ψihψ|, can
be represented as a unit vector

ˆv = (vx, vy, vz)

(1)

pointing in (θ, φ) of a sphere with 0 ≤ θ ≤ π, 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π. A unitary trans-
formation of a qubit in the unit vector notation ˆv can be obtained by applying
U to σi for the corresponding ith component of the vector ˆv, i.e., vi, where
i = x, y, z (also see [6] for a general transformation of a single qubit in the
Bloch sphere). We will write the transformation of ˆv under the unitary oper-
ation U as ˆv′ = U ˆvU †, implying the unitary transformation is applied to the
corresponding σi. For example, let us consider the case when U is a rotation
about y-axis by α in the Bloch sphere, i.e., U = Uy where

cos α
sin α
2
If we assume the initial state to be ˆv = (0, 0, 1), then Uy transforms it into ˆv′
≡ Uy ˆvU †

2 − sin α
2
cos α
2 (cid:19)

y = (sin α, 0, cos α).

Uy =

(2)

(cid:18)

2

Car B
Car B

100km/hr
100km/hr

Car A
Car A

(A)

Car B
Car B

100km/hr
100km/hr

Car A
Car A

100km/hr
100km/hr

Car A
Car A

Car A
Car A

(B)

(C)

(D)

3

Figure 1: An observer in car A cannot tell the diﬀerence between (A) and
(B) since she would be observing the same phenomenon of car B running at
100km/hr. Without car B and no other surroundings, the observer in car A
cannot tell if her car is running at 100km/hr as in (C) or not moving at all as
shown in (D).

e

v

v

e

e

v

( ) Schrodinger picture
a

( ) Heisenberg picture
b

Figure 2: For the Schr¨odinger picture (a), the vector ˆv evolves while the coor-
dinate basis vector ˆe is intact. In the Heisenberg picture (b), the basis vector ˆe
is rotated into opposite direction by the same amount while ˆv remains, thereby
keeping the angle between the two vectors, therefore the expectation values, the
same in both pictures.

In quantum theory, there is another important variable called an observable.

For a single qubit, an observable can also be written as a unit vector,

ˆe = (ex, ey, ez)

(3)

where (ex, ey, ez) = (sin ϑ cos ϕ, sin ϑ sin ϕ, cos ϑ), pointing (ϑ, ϕ) direction in a
sphere. Therefore if one is to make a measurement in (ϑ, ϕ) direction, the ob-
servable would be ˆe·~σ. In the Heisenberg picture of quantum theory, it is the unit
basis vector ˆe that is transformed (p243, [7]). Using a similar transformation rule
as in ˆv, a unitary transformation of the observable in the basis vector notation
can be obtained by applying U † to the σj by U †σj U for ej which we represent
as ˆe′ = U †ˆeU . If vector ˆe is initially set to point in z-direction, i.e. ˆe = (0, 0, 1),
then the transformation is as follows, ˆe′ ≡ U †
ˆeUy = (− sin α, 0, cos α). As shown
y
in Fig. 2, the directions of transformation for two vectors are diﬀerent for the
Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg pictures. Therefore the expectation value ˆe′ · ˆv in
the Heisenberg picture remains the same as in the case with the Schr¨odinger
picture, i.e., e · ˆv′. For the remainder of this paper, we will treat the two vectors
ˆv and ˆe on an equal footing. The only specialty about ˆe is that it serves as a
coordinate vector such that when a measurement is made on the vector ˆv, the
expectation value is with respect to ˆe.

4

3 Observables as Observer’s Reference Frame

In this section, using the notation introduced in the previous section, we would
like to introduce reference frames in quantum dynamics by considering the con-
cept of observables in quantum mechanics. When we want to check a moving
vehicle’s speed, we may use a speed gun and could read, for example, 80km/hr.
Or we could use a thermometer to measure a room temperature which may
yield, for example, 25 degrees Celsius. While the measurement tools, such as
the speed gun and the thermometer, yield the output with not only numbers
but also units such as km/hr and degrees Celsius, what the actual measurement
yields is rather diﬀerent. For example, a laser speed gun checks the distances
from the gun at two diﬀerent times and is designed to calculate and to yield an
output of the moving vehicle’s speed. A mercury-thermometer is designed to
show the temperature in relation to the increase of the volume of mercury in
the thermometer. The numbers obtained from the measurement represent the
perception experienced by an observer and the meaning of those numbers, such
as speed or temperature represented with units, a concept, is imposed by an ob-
server. In quantum theory, concepts such as position and momentum are called
observables and the numbers that result from the measurements are represented
as eigenvalues (p63, [7]).

Let us take an example of a one-dimensional line as shown in Fig. 3. In
order to claim a dot, which is lying on the line, is either on the right or on
the left, there should be a reference point. For example, with respect to the
origin or with respect to +3, one may say the dot is on the left or on the right.
Instead of looking at the line from outside, suppose there is an observer being
conﬁned to the one-dimensional line facing into the paper as shown in (C) of
Fig. 3. The observer measures or perceives whether the dot is on the right
or on the left. Depending on where the observer is sitting, the outcome of the
measurement, i.e., either on the right or on the left, will change. In this case,
we note that the observer him or herself is serving the role of the reference
point. Therefore when the observer makes a measurement and gets a result
that the dot is on the right or on the left, this implies that with respect to
his or her reference frame of the position on the line, the dot is on the right
or on the left. Let us apply the same logic to the case of a single qubit in
the Bloch sphere. When an observer measures a qubit in a certain direction,
say in ˆn, the outcome of the measurement is either +1 or −1. The eigenvalue
obtained is with respect to the measurement direction ˆn. It is noted that ˆn is
playing a similar role as the reference point in the case of the one-dimensional
line example. We also note that the measurement outcome of +1 or −1 is
the perception experienced by the observer. That is, it is the observer who
obtains the outcome +1 or −1. Therefore, the outcome should be meaningful
with respect to the observer’s certain reference frame. Because we already
know that the eigenvalue outcome +1 or −1 is meaningful with respect to the
measurement direction ˆn, it leads us to consider the observer’s reference frame
as ˆn for our single qubit measurement case. Using the unit vector notations
previously deﬁned, it may be stated that: given a unit vector ˆv, an observer’s

5

-3

-2

-1

0

+1 +2 +3

-3

-2

-1

0

+1 +2 +3

Figure 3: For (A), it is not possible to claim the black dot is on the right or on
the left. In (B), we may say, with respect to the ﬂag in +3, the dot is on the
left. If we assume there is an observer living and sitting at +3 while facing into
the paper (i.e., the same direction as the reader of this paper) as in (C) and if
the observer measures and obtains the result that the dot is on the left, then
it is the observer who is serving the role of the ﬂag in (B), i.e., as a reference
point.

reference frame is identiﬁed with a basis unit vector ˆe. Two pictures of quantum
theory can then have a natural physical realization between an observer and a
system. Fig. 2 shows that, in the Schr¨odinger picture, the observer’s reference
frame, represented by the unit basis vector ˆe, stays still while the state vector is
rotated clockwise by α, and the Heisenberg picture shows the unit vector stays
still and the observer’s coordinate is rotated counterclockwise by α. In both
cases, the observer would observe exactly the same phenomenon.

It should be noted that we are not using a notion of detector or apparatus in
the place of an observer. For a given unit vector, the observer’s reference frame
is represented with a unit basis vector in the Bloch sphere. However, it was
shown that [8] a ﬁnite dimensional detector cannot encode an arbitrary unitary
transformation whereas we stated that the observer’s identiﬁed coordinate unit
basis vector represents an arbitrary measurement basis for a given qubit. There-
fore, we do not use the term detector or an apparatus to replace an observer.
If one wants to include an apparatus or a detector, we may consider the state,
i.e., ˆv, to be a larger system that includes a qubit and an apparatus and the
coordinate vector for an observer would also be represented by the same larger
basis vector. This would also be the case if the observer was given other larger

)A
(

)B
(

)C
(

6

quantum systems. ˆv would be the larger quantum system and ˆe would be the
corresponding larger basis vector representing the observer’s reference frame for
the given larger quantum system.

An the beginning of this section, we discussed that observables are concepts
imposed by an observer. Unlike more familiar inertial reference frames in special
relativity, ˆe serves as the reference frame in observer’s thought. Or one may
put it as the observer is conscious of the state ˆv in terms of the reference frame
ˆe. In the next section, we delve into the direct connection between a reference
frame in the observer’s thought, i.e., ˆe, and the physical state, ˆv.

4 Quantum Dynamics and Consciousness

Let us ﬁrst consider a case where, in the whole Universe, there exist an observer
and a qubit and nothing else as shown in Fig. 4. That is, we are considering a
closed system consisted of a quantum state, represented by the unit vector ˆv =
(0, 0, 1), and an observer, Alice, represented by the reference frame ˆe = (0, 0, 1)
introduced previously. Alice is to transform the unit vector ˆv by χ about y-axis
with Uy in (2). If Alice were to measure the evolved vector state, the expectation
value would be ˆe· (Uy ˆvU †
y ). Therefore, we see that in the Schr¨odinger picture, it
is the system that is evolving while the observer’s reference frame is staying still.
Next, we wish to consider the same procedure in the Heisenberg picture. In the
Schr¨odinger picture we discussed above, the unitary evolution was performed
on ˆv. Therefore, in the Heisenberg picture, the U †
y transforms the observer’s
ˆeUy) · ˆv
reference frame ˆe into U †
y
which is equal to the expectation value in the Schr¨odinger picture. Therefore,
it is the observer’s reference frame that is evolving while the system is intact.
In both cases, the observer would observe exactly the same phenomenon which
is shown through the equal expectation values in both pictures.

ˆeUy. It yields the expectation value of (U †
y

Let us now consider a special case to the example we just discussed. That
is, in the Universe, there is an observer, represented with ˆe but without ˆv as
shown in Fig. 5. We are considering the system to be evolved is the observer’s
reference frame, i.e., ˆv = ˆe. This we may call consciousness in the language
of quantum theory since we are considering the reference frame ˆe is within the
observer’s thought as discussed in the previous section. In the following we will
show that this leads into two problems. Let us describe the ﬁrst problem by
considering the unitary evolution of ˆe. In the Schr¨odinger picture, since ˆe is the
system to be evolved, it then transforms as follows,

ˆe → UyˆeU †

y ≡ ˆe′ = (sin χ, 0, cos χ)

We may now consider the same procedure in the Heisenberg picture. In this
case, the basis vector ˆe, is transformed as

ˆe → U †
y

ˆeUy ≡ ˆe′′ = (− sin χ, 0, cos χ)

Note that

(4)

(5)

(6)

ˆe′ 6= ˆe′′

7

z

y

e

x

z

z

v

v

y

x

x

Schrodinger picture

z

e

y

e

x

z

z

y

v

x

x

Heisenberg picture

Figure 4: An observer and a qubit in the Universe. In the Schr¨odinger picture,
the observer’s reference frame ˆe is staying still and the qubit represented with
the vector ˆv is rotated by χ clockwise.
In the Heisenberg picture, it is the
observer’s reference frame that is rotated counterclockwise by the same amount
and the qubit remains still. In both pictures, the observer would experience the
same phenomenon.

8

unless χ = kπ where k = 0, 1, 2.... For the example of a system with an observer
in the previous paragraph, the vector ˆv has evolved, with respect to ˆe, into the
same output in both the Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg pictures. However, in the
case with ˆe as a system we just considered, the vector that is being evolved, i.e.,
ˆe, transformed into two generally diﬀerent outputs in two pictures. Therefore,
we are led to an inconsistency between the Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg picture
when we consider the evolution of the basis vector itself. This idea has also been
applied to the quantum halting problem in [9].

We now discuss the second problem: Not only did the same vector evolved
into two generally diﬀerent states, but also the evolution of the basis vector
ˆe is physically sensible in neither of the two pictures in quantum dynamics.
We were able to impose a physical meaning on the Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg
In case of the Schr¨odinger picture, the system,
pictures of quantum theory.
i.e. the object to be observed, is evolving while an observer’s reference frame
is intact. For the Heisenberg’s picture, an observer’s coordinate is evolving and
the system is staying still. The equivalence of these two pictures comes from
the fact that the observer would observe the same phenomenon and would not
be able to tell the diﬀerence between them. For example, an observer applying
a unitary operation to a qubit is experiencing a unitary evolution being applied
to the qubit and this experience is the same in both pictures. But when it is
the observer’s reference frame that is evolving, which we seem to experience
without diﬃculties, it is not easy to imagine how an observer is able to observe
or experience it. As shown in (a) of Fig. 4, we considered the vector in the
x − z plane such that initially ˆe is pointing z-direction and with the unitary
operation of rotation about y-axis, ˆe evolves under

in the Schr¨odinger picture. And the ﬁnal state of ˆe would be rotated by χ after
time t, which we will write as χ(t). The diﬃculty of obtaining a physically
sensible picture with this evolution is that in order to experience this unitary
evolution, Alice needs to be in another reference frame, say χ′(t). However, ˆe
itself is the Alice’s reference frame and there cannot be another reference frame.
Similarly, in the Heisenberg picture, ˆe evolves under

(7)

(8)

As shown in Fig. 4, the vector is being rotated counterclockwise and is in
−χ(t). In this case, for the observer in the reference frame of −χ(t), there needs
to be an additional vector in χ′′(t) in order for Alice to experience the evolution
of ˆe. Again, this is not possible because −χ(t) is not only Alice’s reference
frame but also the object that is to be observed. Therefore, in order to have a
satisfactory picture of Alice experiencing her own reference frame’s evolution,
she needs another reference frame or another vector. This shows that neither
the Schr¨odinger nor the Heisenberg picture yield a suitable description for the
evolution of the observer’s reference frame.

U = e−iσyt/2

U † = eiσy t/2

9

e

z

y

e

x

z

e

y

e

x

Schrodinger picture

10

Heisenberg picture

Figure 5: Unitary evolution of ˆe, which we call consciousness in quantum lan-
guage, is considered. The vector ˆe is initially pointing z-direction and is rotated
about y-axis by χ after time t. In the Schr¨odinger picture, the vector is rotated
clockwise and in the Heisenberg picture, the vector is rotated by −χ.

5 Quantum World as Consciousness

Two problems that arise from considering consciousness, i.e. experiencing the
evolution of ˆe, were presented: the ﬁrst was evolution of ˆe evolving into two
diﬀerent outcomes and the second was that the evolution of ˆe being physically
sensible in neither two pictures of quantum dynamics. From the ﬁrst problem,
we see that in order to include consciousness correctly in quantum dynamics,
not both pictures can simultaneously be correct. Secondly we must ﬁnd a phys-
ically sensible description of evolution of observer’s reference frame in quantum
dynamics. Before we go on with our discussion on consciousness and two prob-
lems discussed in the previous section, let us review the example we discussed
with two cars in Fig. 1. We considered that the observer, Alice, would not be
able to tell the diﬀerence whether her reference frame is moving backwards or
the other car is moving forward at the same speed. However, for the cases (C)
and (D) in Fig. 1, Alice is not able to experience her own car’s speed without
any surroundings. This is because she has no other subject that can yield her
the experience of her own speed. The experience comes from the relative dif-
ference of reference frames, i.e., the observer is in one of the reference frames
and experiences the relative diﬀerence with the object in the other reference
frame. If she is to experience her own speed without any surroundings, it may
be done by identifying the observer with the experience rather than treating
them separately. This can be achieved if we can show that the observer is not
in the reference frame and the experience itself deﬁnes the observer. There is no
need to achieve this identiﬁcation for the cases (C) and (D) in Fig. 1 since the
observer does not experience her own speed. However, in quantum dynamics,
the evolution of ˆe is experienced without ˆv as consciousness. We therefore will
attempt to identify observer with the experience χ by ﬁnding a way where the
observer cannot be in the reference frame ˆe, although ˆe does serve the role of
the reference frame when ˆv is present.

Let us make an assumption which will be helpful in the following argument.
It is stated as follows: What an observer observes or experiences must be time
forwarding. Note that we are only assuming that the observer’s experience is
time forwarding and not necessarily the whole system, i.e., including the physical
system and the observer, is time forwarding.

We now proceed with our argument to consistently describe consciousness.
Let us re-consider the evolution of ˆe under the Heisenberg picture. Note that
for the unitary operation in (8), it is possible to change the signs of t and σy
while keeping the whole unitary operator the same, that is

U † = e−iσy (−t)/2

(9)

This corresponds to the vector evolving to χ while t is going to the minus di-
rection compared to the previous Heisenberg case wherein the vector evolved
to −χ with time going forward. In this case, we note that the observer cannot
be in the reference frame χ(−t) because from the assumption that what the
observer observes or experiences is only time forwarding. If Alice is in the refer-
ence frame that is moving backward in time, she would observe everything going

11

backward in time. However, from the assumption we made, this is not possible.
We therefore see that the observer cannot be in the reference frame. With the
example of two cars, we discussed that in order for the observer to experience
her own speed was by, rather than observer being in the reference frame of car
A, identifying the experience itself with the observer. Since Alice cannot be
in the reference frame χ(−t), this picture ﬁts well to describe our criterion to
describe consciousness. That is, rather than Alice being in the reference frame,
the experience of χ deﬁnes the observer while ˆe is still serving the role of refer-
ence frame. Also note that although we are taking the Heisenberg picture with
time going backwards, there is no problem for the observer’s experience is time
forwarding since we are identifying the observer with the experience χ and the
observer is not in the reference frame as argued.

We may consider the same trick with the Schr¨odinger picture evolution,
that is, by putting minus signs for both time and σy. But in this case, it still
requires an additional observer’s reference frame because the observer who is in
the reference frame with time forwarding would simply observe χ in +t. This
is similar to the way an electron in the negative energy would appear as a
positron in the positive energy to an observer who is also in the positive energy.
Therefore, in the Schr¨odinger picture, this new view still requires an additional
reference frame and is not satisfactory.

Therefore in order to have a satisfactory description of experiencing the evo-
lution of ˆe as well as of ˆv, we conclude that the quantum evolution follows
according to the Heisenberg picture, not the Schr¨odinger picture, with time go-
ing backwards as shown in (9). That is, it is the observer’s reference frame that
is evolving not the object that is being observed. Although we considered the
case with ˆv representing a single qubit, it could be any other larger quantum
system, i.e.
including the wavefunction of the Universe. Let us note an arbi-
trary wavefunction of the world which an observer experiences as ˆVworld and
suppose the observer is experiencing the evolution of ˆVworld by some unitary
operator U. According to what we have shown, i.e., by following the Heisenberg
picture, it is in fact the observer’s corresponding reference frame ˆEWorld within
her consciousness for a given world wavefunction that is evolving as follows,
U † ˆEworldU. The evolution of the world wavefunction we experience is the evolu-
tion of our reference frame within consciousness. In the next section, we discuss
some examples.

6 Examples: Three Cases

In our life-time, we never get to see our face directly with a possible excep-
tion of the tips of our nose and lips. Although we are not able to see our own
face directly, we could see our face usually through a mirror (or through pic-
tures, home video movies etc.). In the previous section, we argued that it is
the Heisenberg picture with minus time that yields the suitable description of
observer’s experience of evolution of his or herself’s own reference frame.
In
this section, similar to the indirect observation of our face through a mirror, we

12

wish to examine if our description indeed yields the indirect way of observing
observer’s own reference frame, yet not being in the reference frame as was re-
quired. We will also consider two other cases to give a better physical picture of
what has been claimed in the previous section. We wish to consider the three
cases where the ﬁrst case is the most typical case of observing the object, i.e.,
a state vector, being evolved. The second case will be when, given a vector,
the observer changes his or her own reference frame about the object without
changing the status of the object to be observed. The last case is with no object
to be observed and the observer is observing his or her own reference frame.

Before we go on with the observer and a quantum state, we ﬁrst wish to
consider the three cases with a simple example. Previously, we considered the
example using two cars as in Fig. 1. Although we will be using similar cases,
the diﬀerence would be that the observer sitting in a car would be able to not
only observe the other car but also think or imagine. Suppose an observer,
Alice, is sitting in her car. The ﬁrst case is when Alice, sitting in her car, is
observing another car running at 100km/hr. We will assume there is nothing
else except Alice’s car and the other car. According to what we have shown,
what is in fact may be happening is that Alice’s own car is going at 100km/hr
backwards as in case (i) of Fig. 6. The second case is when, given the same
situation, Alice experiences her car going at 100km/hr to backwards. In the ﬁrst
case, Alice was conscious of the other car’s movement and not of hers. For case
(ii), which is in fact the same situation, Alice is observing her car’s movement
with respect to the other car. We see that since the two situations correspond
to the same physical phenomenon, the two experiences are equivalent. That
is, observing the other car going at 100km/hr is equivalent to Alice observing
herself going at 100km/hr backwards. With this equivalence, we consider case
(iii). In this case, consider the observer in her own car wants to see her own
car’s speed. However, if we assume she cannot get out of her car, how is she
able to observe it? As discussed with the inability to see our face directly,
with possible exception of tips of nose and lips, Alice cannot observe her own
car’s speed while being contained in the car. However, she can get an indirect
observation of, or imagine, her car’s speed by imagining another car pass by. If
she wants to imagine her car going at 100km/hr backwards, she may achieve this
by imagining another car going at 100km/hr. As discussed with cases (i) and
(ii), this is also equivalent to imagining herself going at 100km/hr backwards.
We now consider the three cases with a qubit and an observer. Although
we are considering the case with a single qubit, the same logic can be applied
to a larger quantum system and corresponding observables. In the ﬁrst case,
as we have argued in previous sections, the qubit is staying still and observer’s
reference frame is evolving into χ with time going into a minus direction as
shown in Fig. 7. Again, the observer is unaware of her own evolution. She only
experiences or observes the evolution of the qubit. The second case is when
the qubit stays the same and the observer changes her own reference frame. We
know that applying the Hadamard gate UH ≡ 1
2 (|0ih0|+|0ih1|+|1ih0|−|1ih1|) to
|0i and measuring σx is equivalent to measuring |0i with U †
H σxUH = σz which

13

Experience

Happening

(i)

100km/hr

100km/hr

(ii)

100km/hr

100km/hr

100km/hr

100km/hr

(iii)

100km/hr

Figure 6: Three cases of experiencing speeds. Case (i): Alice is observing the
other car going at 100km/hr when it is in fact Alice’s own car that is going
backwards at 100km/hr. Case (ii): Given the same situation as in case (ii), i.e.,
Alice’s car is going at 100km/hr backwards and the other car staying still, Alice
is now observing her own car with respect to the other car and experiences her
car going at 100km/hr backwards. Case (iii): it is similar to cases (i) and (ii)
except there is only Alice’s car and not the other car. Alice may experience
her car going backwards by imagining the other car going at 100km/hr which
is equivalent to Alice imagining another car staying still and her car is going
backwards.

14

the observer can calculate. As in case (i), this would correspond to evolving
χ with minus time. The realization of χ(−t) in plus time is −χ(t) similar to
the electron in negative energy is positron in positive energy. Therefore, the
physical description of case (i) and case (ii) are the same. The diﬀerence comes
when the observer is conscious of the qubit and unconscious of her reference
frame’s evolution or aware of her own reference frame with respect to the state
vector. Lastly, the third case is when the observer is changing her own reference
frame with no given qubit. As discussed above, this corresponds to the same
evolution as in the case (i), i.e. where the observer’s reference frame is evolving
into χ with time going backwards. Therefore, we see that the evolution is the
same as in the ﬁrst and the second cases except there is no qubit. This can be
explained as follows: As with the example of a car and an observer in Fig. 6, one
may be conscious of the evolution of its reference frame by imagining the other
imaginary vector rotating in clockwise. This is equivalent to the experience
of one’s own reference frame counterclockwise rotation. This is shown in case
(iii) of Fig. 7. We therefore see that the correctly describing the observer’s
experience of evolution of his or her own reference frame is ﬁrst to abandon the
distinction between the observer and the observed. Secondly, the experience
arises as an indirect image (such as looking my car’s speed through another car
or looking at my face through a mirror). In case (i), the observer is experiencing
evolution of ˆv and for case (ii), the observer is experiencing the evolution of ˆe.
However, what is happening is the same except that in the case (i), observer is
observing ˆv and for the case (ii), the observer is observing ˆe. Similarly, Alice’s
way to indirectly observing her own reference frame is by imagining ˆv, which is
equivalent to ˆe in opposite direction.

7 Concluding Remarks

When we look at an apple and say “it is a red apple”, the redness of the apple
is what we perceive and may not necessarily be the actual color of the apple.
When we say the apple is red, we are actually saying the apple ‘as we observe’
has a red color. Scientiﬁc laws, such as electromagnetism and relativity, etc.,
are based on what we observe or experience. Even experiments, as objective as
they may seem, are what we, as observers, experience. Any attempt to have
a completely objective description of nature, which we call ‘physical law’
is
doomed to failure. Instead, what we should attempt is to have a physical law
‘as we observe’. It is in fact rather surprising that this distinction only began
to play a role with the development of quantum theory at the beginning of the
past century. The signiﬁcance of the present paper is that rather than trying to
get rid of the subjectivity in quantum theory, it incorporates the unavoidable
subjectivity of any physical law.

Moreover, not only are physical laws objective, but we can be sure that they
exist only as consciousness. Going back to the example of the red apple, its
redness is what we are conscious of perceiving and this is as far as we can go.
When we observe the apple to be red, all we are certain of is we are conscious

15

Experience

Happening

v^

e^

,(

)-t

z
v^

y

z
v^

y

z

y

x

x

x

e^

,(

)-t

e^

,(

)-t

z
^
e

y

z
v^

y

z

y

(i)

)t-e^
(
,

(ii)

)t-e^
(
,

(iii)

x

x

x

16

Figure 7: Three cases of unitary evolutions: Case(i): when Alice applies U to
a qubit.
In this case, Alice is observing the vector; Case (ii) Given a qubit,
Alice is changing her reference frame. Alice observing her own reference frame
by looking at ˆv. Case (iii): When Alice changes her own reference frame. The
observer observing own reference frame by imagining ˆv’s clockwise rotation
which is equivalent to imagining ˆe’s counterclockwise rotation.

of perceiving the apple as red. It doesn’t really matter whether the apple really
exists or not or has a diﬀerent color. We simply cannot tell. All we can be
sure of is that we are conscious of the perception: This has been observed by
philosophers for centuries.

For example, when we are dreaming and see a red apple in the dream, we
know when we wake up that the apple did not really exist and was only a dream.
However, if we cannot wake up and emerge from the dream, there is no way
we can tell whether the apple is only in a dream or if it exists in reality. One
may think during the dream that he or she is dreaming: however, it can only be
conﬁrmed by waking up. Similarly, since we are only sure that we are conscious
of perceiving the red apple, we cannot conﬁrm the existence of the apple unless
we are out of ourselves and look at the situation from outside. Since this is
impossible, i.e., being out of our consciousness, the only thing we are certain of
is our consciousness of perceiving things and not the things themselves. Physical
laws provide us with not about the laws of objects but the way the consciousness
of perception works.

References

[1] G. Tononi and G.M. Edelman, Science 282, 1846 (1998).

[2] G. Miller, Science 309, 79 (2005).

[3] C. Koch, The Quest for Consciousness: a Neurobiological Approach (Roberts

& Company Publishers, 2004).

[4] R.L. Harvey, Neural Network Principles (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs,

NJ, 1994).

1989).

[5] R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind (Oxford University Press, New York,

[6] L. Hardy and D. Song, Phys. Rev. A 63, 032304 (2001).

[7] A. Peres, Quantum Theory, Kluwer Academic Publishers, (1991).

[8] M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 321 (1997).

[9] D. Song, Remarks on the undecidability of the quantum halting problem,

quant-ph/0701163.

17

