7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Some Unrecorded Science History
My Brush with Einstein’s Relativistic Length
Contraction

James G. Gilson j.g.gilson@qmul.ac.uk∗

February 22, 2007

Abstract

This paper is a short historical note about the origin of the Pole-Barn

and the Fat Man Paradoxes.

1 Introduction

I ﬁrst became interested in Einstein’s relativity theory in pre-war days after
coming across a copy of his famous book The Meaning of Relativity in the local
library. I barely understood it, but was set oﬀ on the idea and determination
that one day I would really understand what it was all about. I was called up
for service in the Royal Navy and demobbed after the war and was lucky to get
a further education grant, available to ex-service men, to attend university. My
next lucky break was to ﬁnd myself in a university department where Wolfgang
Rindler was teaching relativity. His lectures were truly memorable for their
clarity and comprehensiveness. On one occasion, he was talking at length about
the Einstein relativistic length contraction that Einstein predicted should result
from the velocity of a physical body in motion relative to the observer of the
motion. This was one of Einstein’s revolutionary new ideas, seemingly quite
nonsensical in terms of the earlier common sense of the Newtonian concepts of
a rigid body in motion. How could a rigid body contract? This question was a
philosophical dilemma for the scientiﬁc community many of whom were inclined
to accept the mathematics of Einstein’s ideas but could only go along with the
contraction idea by adding the caveat that the contraction was not real but
rather an illusion resulting from the motion and the way the observation was
made. Wolfgang was ﬁrmly convinced that the result was real and therefore was
a technically usable consequence of relativity. Another lecturer on relativity in
the physics department of the same institution took exactly the opposite view,

∗School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road,

London E1 4NS, United Kingdom.

1

that the contraction was not real. There was at that time, the ﬁfties, totally
conﬂicting ideas of the philosophical signiﬁcance of the length contraction idea.
I was also strongly convinced that length contraction was a reality because the
contraction with velocity factor involved (1−(v/c)2)1/2 occurred in so very many
situations in relativistic physical theory that were veriﬁable that it seemed to me
that it had to be accepted as real. However, I also had in mind a graphical proof
that seemed to show that under some conditions the contraction eﬀect could
not be actually used in the practical context. Thus it was that I proposed the
following paradox to Wolfgang Rindler during one of his lectures on relativity.
Suppose a fat man is running fast with a speed v over a drain grating in
a direction perpendicular to the narrow slits in the grating. The fat man, as
the observer according to relativity, will see the narrow slits as even narrower
because they are passing him with velocity −v in the opposite direction to that
which he is running relative to the road and so he will be conﬁdent that he
cannot fall through the grating. However another observer standing by the
drain cover or in the road will, according to relativity, see a thin man running
past and will fear for the runners safety. This very simple but highly ambiguous
observational situation derivable from special relativity theory, I called the Fat
Man Paradox 1. Wolfgang was unsure of the answer but because he believed in
the reality of the relativity contraction idea, he thought the fat man would fall
into the drain. After this lecture we had a tutorial with Wolfgang. I was having
an argument with a student sitting next to me about the paradox who also
thought the runner could fall down the drain and in the course of this argument
I made the remark Rindler is talking through his hat as I had concluded the
runner could not fall into the drain. Unfortunately, I had not noticed Wolfgang
was sitting in the next row directly in front of me giving tutorial help to another
student. To this day, I do not know if Wolfgang heard this remark but certainly
I was very embarrassed by my typical student irreverence. If you are reading
this Wolfgang, I apologise for my rudeness.

Wolfgang went to America and became recognised as a leading World Cos-
mologist as a result of his research on relativity. He also wrote a number of
remarkable books of great clarity and originality based on his ﬁfties lectures.
His most recent book [3], Relativity: Special, General and Cosmological, Sec-
ond Edition, Oxford University Press, is the one mostly relevant to this article.
In 1961, Wolfang wrote a paper on the Fat Man paradox and published it in
the American Journal of Physics ([2]). This essentially showed the reality of
length contraction. He had, I understand, taken about eight years pondering
this paradox before coming to any conclusions. Meanwhile, I had taken up uni-
versity teaching and in 1964 joined the Mathematic staﬀ at Queen Mary College
London and found myself teaching relativity for which I used one of Wolfgang’s
books for course work. During my lectures I used the fat man paradox to il-
lustrate length contraction rather as a little light entertainment in the lectures.
After one such lecture I was waylaid in a corridor by a very irate colleague who

1Professor Rindler had used the fat runner falling through grating image in relation to the

reality issue before my intervention on the symmetry issue

2

was teaching some relativity in connection with another course. He suggested
that I had leaked one of his exam questions about the Fat Man paradox to his
students. He gave me the strong impression that he thought I was stealing his
ideas. I explained that this was part of my course structure and contents which
he seemed to reluctantly accept. I did not tell him that I was the originator of
the idea. It does, however, show how widespread this paradox had permeated
relativity teaching while his reaction seemed something of a joke at the time.

A few years later, I came to realise that the length contraction eﬀect was
central to developing a formula for the ﬁne structure constant [1]. I wrote my
ﬁrst paper on that subject in 1994 and sent a copy of that paper to Wolfgang
Rindler whom I had not seen or communicated with for about 38 Years. He
replied and said he remembered me very well and thanked me for my input of
the paradox for his 1961 paper [2] on the subject. Also see footnote page 63 of
Rinder’s book [3]. In the next section, I shall give the case with a ﬁgure and
explanation as to why I did not think the fat man could fall down the drain.

The Barn-Pole paradox is a derivative of the Fat Man paradox but the former
has some diﬀerent facets from the later which make the questions that one can
ask about them not quite equivalent. Wolfgang mentions them together in his
latest book and perhaps does not give suﬃcient emphasis to their distinctiveness.
The barn pole paradox which also starts oﬀ as a three dimensional idea but is in
essence one dimensional in contrast with the fat man paradox which starts oﬀ
as a three dimension idea but is in essence two dimensional. They both depend
essentially on the relativistic length contraction idea.

2 Can the running Fat Man fall down the Drain?

The diagram below is what I had in mind when I made the regrettable and im-
polite remark about Wolfgang. The diagram represents the view of the situation
of an observer standing by the drain opening, its short dimension is the hole in
the road between the two Hits positions. The long dimension of the grating is
perpendicular to the page and so is not shown but is assumed to be greater than
the diameter of the sphere of which the outer circle is a great circle. The outer
circle can also be taken to represent the stationary observer standing by the
drain. Thus the stationary man according to relativity sees the inner vertical
ellipse shrunk from the circular shape because of its centroidal, horizontal to
the left, speed component v. Thus the outer circle besides representing the ﬁxed
observer can also be taken to represent the rest frame shape of the runner. It is
clear from this why the stationary man fears that the runner can fall through
the grating as his thin man appearance can be tracked down to the Clear, Clear
positions missing the drain edges if he should fall with the additional downwards
velocity component vd. As we have noticed earlier a diagram from the point of
view of the runner would only show a further reduced drain width opening due
to its velocity −v to the right so that from his point of view there is no problem.
He is convinced that he could not fall through such a narrow opening. Thus we
have to reconcile these two apparently contradictory points of view. From the

3

diagram this is easy, if we take into account the true signiﬁcance of relativistic
length contraction with speed which should be expressed as:

The relativistic length contraction of an

object with speed only involves the dimension of

the object lying in the direction of motion

Fat Man Paradox Diagram

W hat the man standing by the grating sees

v o

˜u

y
(cid:25)1

G

`h
t

YY

R

G

1
˜vd
(cid:25)(cid:25)

R YY

t
` h y

Hit

Hit

Clear

˜v

Clear

u

vd

4

Inspecting the diagram reveals that if the thin looking runner is to faultlessly
fall through the hole he must acquire the extra downwards speed vd resulting in
a resultant velocity ˜v that has a direction so that his centroid passes through
the centroid of the hole. This would be OK, if his shape orientation remained
as the vertical ellipse vd, t, u, t. However his orientation does not remain the
same because his resultant velocity will have changed from v to ˜v and the

O
O
o
(cid:15)
(cid:15)
(cid:11)
(cid:11)
(cid:10)
(cid:10)
(cid:11)
(cid:11)
(cid:31)
(cid:31)
(cid:10)
(cid:10)
(cid:11)
(cid:11)
moving ellipse’s major axis will have changed direction from vertical to (˜u, ˜vd).
Thus the falling ellipse will have the shape orientation of the dashed ellipse
in the diagram. Consequently the fall causes bad injuries at both his ends at
the Hit, Hit moment. It seems that according to Einstein’s special relativity
a sphere cannot pass through a rectangular hole if its diameter is greater than
the smallest side of the rectangular hole. This diagrammatic argument is not a
rigorous proof of the previous statement but I think it could be made so.

3 Conclusions

I shall come to no technical conclusions here but instead make a few remarks
about the fat man paradox. Gravity need not be taken into account in this
puzzle for the following reason. Suppose the stationary observer is a baddy
and that there is no gravity present. He decides to settle the issue by hitting a
passing fat man on the head. Referring to the diagram again, we see this will
induce the required downward velocity vd and by the diagram any conclusions
will remain unaﬀected. My intention in writing this article was only to ﬁll in
a little unrecorded science history. However, it might stimulate some further
interest in the philosophical issue of what reality in physical theory means. It
does not seem always to mean usability!

Acknowledgment

I am greatly indebted to Professor Wolfgang Rindler for those
remarkably clear and inspirational lectures many years ago.

References

[1] Gilson, J.G. 1999, www.ﬁne-structure-constant.org

The ﬁne structure constant

[2] Rindler, W. 2006, Am. J. Phys. 29, 365 (1961)

5

[3] J Rindler, W. 2006, Relativity: Special, General and Cosmological, Second Edition, Oxford University Press

