7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Joining inner space to outer space

Gordon McCabe

February 2, 2008

Abstract

The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that it is possible, in
principle, to obtain knowledge of the entire universe at the present time,
even if the radius of the universe is much larger than the radius of the
observable universe.

1 The construction

Cosmologist George Ellis states that “Our view of the universe is limited by
the visual horizon, comprised of the worldlines of [the] furthest matter we can
observe - namely, the matter that emitted the CBR [Cosmic Background Radi-
ation] at the time of last scattering. . . Visual horizons do indeed exist, unless we
live in a small universe, spatially closed with the closure scale so small that we
can have seen right around the universe since decoupling,” (Ellis 2007, section
2.4.2). He asserts that “Claims about what conditions are like on very large
scales - that is, much bigger than the Hubble scale - are unveriﬁable, for we
have no observational evidence as to what conditions are like far beyond the
visual horizon,” (ibid., section 4.3). The purpose of this paper is to devise a
model of our universe in which these assertions would be false.

Let us begin by making the following assumptions:

1. The Friedmann-Robertson-Walker models of general relativistic cosmology
are correct, but the spatial universe in these models is a 3-dimensional
compact manifold-with-boundary Σ. Compactness entails that the spatial
universe is of ﬁnite volume, (see Cornish and Weeks, 1998).

2. The radius of the spatial universe at the current time is many orders of
magnitude greater than the radius of the observable spatial universe.

3. In particle physics, string theory is false, but the preon hypothesis is cor-
rect in the sense that there is only one type of ultimate elementary par-
ticle. Hence, all the quarks and leptons, all the gauge bosons, and all
the Higgs bosons (if they exist), are ultimately composed of preons (see
Bilson-Thompson et al, 2006), and the standard model emerges from the
theory of preons.

1

The model universe I wish to propose is one in which outer space is joined
to inner space, in the sense that each elementary particle contains the universe
to which the elementary particle itself belongs. This is perfectly well-deﬁned
topologically.

Let us suppose that each preon has a Compton wavelength1 of r. The
Compton wavelength can be thought of as the length scale at which relativistic
quantum ﬁeld theory becomes relevant for a particle. Hence, as a ﬁrst approx-
imation which neglects quantum ﬁeld theory, let us represent each preon as a
solid ball Di(r) of radius r, embedded in 3-dimensional space Σ. Given the
assumption that the spatial universe is of ﬁnite volume, there will be a ﬁnite
number N of preons in the universe, so they can be enumerated i = 1, ...., N .
Under the approximation made here, the boundary of each preon is homeomor-
∼
= S2, i = 1, ..., N . Let us also suppose that the
phic to the 2-sphere, ∂Di
boundary of large-scale 3-dimensional space is homeomorphic to the boundary
of each preon, which in this case is the 2-sphere, so that ∂Σ ∼

Now excise from Σ the interior of each solid ball Di. This means taking the
complement Σ♭ = Σ − Si Int(Di). So doing obtains a 3-manifold-with-boundary
Σ♭ containing numerous ‘holes’.

Now identify the original boundary ∂Σ with the boundary of each hole ∂Di,
to obtain a quotient topological space Σ♯. In other words, deﬁne N bijective
identiﬁcation maps φi : ∂Σ → ∂Di, and introduce an equivalence relationship
R which treats p ∈ ∂Σ as equivalent to each φi(p) ∈ ∂Di for i = 1, ..., N . Points
not belonging to any component of the boundary of Σ♭ are each treated as an
equivalence class containing a single member. The quotient space is the set of
all equivalence classes, Σ♯ = Σ♭/R. There is a projection mapping from Σ♭
onto Σ♯, and the quotient topology is deﬁned to be the largest topology one can
bestow on Σ♯ which still permits the projection mapping to be continuous.

= S2.

In such a space-time, each elementary particle is simply an embedding of the
universe within itself. If one tries to probe the inside of an elementary particle,
then one is probing inside the entire universe, for the boundary of the elementary
particle (preon) is also the outer-most boundary of large-scale space-time. In
such a universe, one really can see the universe in a grain of sand.

If such were the case, then we would eﬀectively have both an internal per-
spective on the universe, extending out to the conventional visual horizon, and
we would potentially have an external perspective, which would allow us to
see regions of space beyond our conventional visual horizon. Our observations
would still be restricted to the past light cone, but if the past light cone included
an elementary particle, as deﬁned here, then the information stored within such
an elementary particle would include everything there is to know about the
universe, and would therefore provide us, in principle, with knowledge of those
parts of the universe which lie beyond the radius of the observable universe, as
conventionally deﬁned.

1The Compton wavelength of a particle of mass m is h/mc, where h is Planck’s constant,

and c is the speed of light.

2

References

[1] Bilson-Thompson, S.O., Markopoulou, F. Smolin, L. (2006). Quantum

gravity and the standard model, arXiv:hep-th/0603022

[2] Cornish, N.J. and Weeks, J.R. (1998). Measuring the shape of the universe,
Notices of the American Mathematical Society, Vol. 45, No. 11, pp1463-
1471. arXiv:astro-ph/9807311

[3] Ellis, George F.R. (2007). Issues in the Philosophy of Cosmology, Phi-
losophy of Physics: Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, Volume 2, J.
Butterﬁeld and J. Earman (eds.). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

3

