7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
2
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

OUTLINE OF A SUPERUNIFICATION MODEL

J. TOWE

Abstract. Tensor products of SM bosons and fermions form a spin-2 self-
realization of SU(5), and because every quark can be interpreted as a lepton
that has coupled to an appropriate element of this adjoint representation,
and inversely, SUGRA GUT interactions between proposed spin-2 elements
and baryons of spin-(3/2) can exist as residual manifestations of quark-lepton
transitions that occur within baryonic domains of asymptotic freedom. Such
interactions preserve baryonic structure and continually re-establish a locally
SUSY version of broken SU(5), indicating a recurring inﬂation event that ad-
dresses the large-scale.

1. SUGRA GUT Hypothesis

Einstein’s commitment to the a priori was reﬂected in many comments; e.g. ”...
but the creative principle lies with mathematics.
In a certain sense therefore, I
hold it true that pure thought can grasp reality as the ancients dreamed.” This
philosophy is not antithetical to the current aspirations of physics. General relativ-
ity is the Noether principle that preservation of GL(4) by the equations of physics
is equivalent to the conservation of 4-momentum by classical gravity and the elu-
sive SUGRA GUT theory is probably a Noether principle which identiﬁes a spin-2
adjoint representation of SU(5) with all tensor products of standard model bosons
and fermions that produce spin-2 composites. Speciﬁcally if three generations of
fermions are incorporated, and if generation is preserved by gravitational GUT
interactions, then there are 52 − 1 such composites:

(1.1)

αBgα
T A

µνdxµ ⊗ dxν : A, B = 1, ..., 5; α = 1, ..., 52 − 1,

3

Xµ,ν=0

To demonstrate that this adjoint representation is more than a formal result, it
is shown that the above elements are components of couplings that form a locally
super-symmetric, adjoint representation of SU(5). To establish this, it is observed
that every quark can be interpreted as a lepton that has coupled with an appropri-
ate spin-2 composite from the proposed adjoint representation, and inversely; and
that interactions between spin-2 ﬁelds and spin-(3/2) baryons can therefore be in-
terpreted as residual manifestations of interactions between spin-2 ﬁelds and quarks
within baryonic domains of asymptotic freedom; i.e. manifestations of quark-lepton
transitions within baryonic domains of asymptotic freedom. It can be demonstrated
that there are 52−1 classes of SUGRA couplings (the number required for a SUGRA
self-realization of SU(5)) if and only if interactions between spin-2 composites and
spin-(3/2) baryons are restricted to those that correspond to productions of leptons
from quarks and inversely. Baryons of spin-(1/2) can also be included in the dis-
cussion provided that a photon is absorbed and radiated together with each spin-2
anti-ﬁeld (to preserve local super-symmetry).

1

2

J. TOWE

It will now be demonstrated that SUGRA GUT interactions within baryonic do-
mains of asymptotic freedom produce quark-lepton transitions that preserve bary-
onic structure, provided that the four diagonal (preserved) generators of SU(5) are
identiﬁed with quantum numbers I3, Y (strong hypercharge), F (fermion number)
and ∆Q, where ∆Q describes the diﬀerence between the charges of a quark and
lepton that share the same values of the other three quantum numbers.

2. Sub-Baryonic Interactions

The eight composites that correspond to the light fermionic generation are as

follows:

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.8)

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ e

−
L ⊗ DR

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ DL ⊗ e+
R

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ e

−
R ⊗ DL

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ DR ⊗ e+
L

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ νe

L ⊗ U R

−

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ UL ⊗ νe+

R

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ νe

R ⊗ U L

−

γ ⊗ γ ⊗ UR ⊗ νe+
L .

The conservation laws that are introduced above permit three types of inter-
actions. These three types, which will be designated Type A, Type B and Type
C respectively preserve I3=-1/2, I3=+1/2 and I3=0. A Type A interaction is
exempliﬁed by a locally SUSY vertex

(2.9)

UL ⊗ DL ⊗ DL + γL ⊗ γL ⊗ U R ⊗ νe

L → νe

L ⊗ DL ⊗ DL + γL ⊗ γL,

−

−

and a complementary vertex

(2.10)

−

L ⊗ DL ⊗ DL + γL ⊗ γL ⊗ UL ⊗ νe+
νe

R → UL ⊗ DL ⊗ DL + γL ⊗ γL.

Clearly such interactions preserve baryonic structure, but do these interactions
predict anything that could subject the proposed model to conﬁrmation or discon-
ﬁrmation? Possibly. Typically, each baryon consists of many triplets. Until now it
was assumed that all triplets within a given baryon consist of the same three quark
ﬂavors. But the proposed model seems to indicate that at any given instant, some
quarks may be replaced by dynamical conﬁgurations of leptons and spin-2 compos-
ites. Thus the proposed model seems to predict a ﬁne-grained inhomogeneity of
density for the interiors of baryons. In this context, the proposed theory may lend
itself to conﬁrmation.

SUPERUNIFICATION

3

3. The Standard Model in Terms of Type IIB Strings

AdS/CFT correspondence [E. D’Hoker, 2002] admits a model of the early uni-
verse in which a de Sitter sphere is equivalent to an event horizon that encloses
a world volume of coincident D3-branes (a Type IIB string theory). If these D3
branes consist of three color branes, two left branes, a right brane and a leptonic
brane, then the fermions of the standard model can be constructed by intersec-
tions of these branes with open strings. Due to the D3 nature of postulated branes
moreover, it is argued that this structure permeates 4-spacetime. A 6-dimensional
space is transverse to the world volume (this context parallels that described by
Zweibach and others). The corresponding CFT model is in terms of a symme-
try U(7), which is deﬁned on the postulated seven D3-branes and implicitly then,
on all of 4-spacetime. It is argued that Planck scale was introduced a priori onto
4-spacetime in the limit where radii of curvature of postulated 4-dimensional hyper-
spheres (Section 5) are very small [J. Towe, 2006].

Given a string background, every super Yang-Mills theory corresponds to a
Kaluza-Klein theory on a (4+k)-dimensional product space, where k is the di-
mension of the space that is transverse to the event horizon and to the enclosed
world volume. It is instructive to consider the Dirac operator

(3.1)

iΓADA = iγµDµ(x) + iγmDm(y),
which is deﬁned on the (4+6)-dimensional manifold of the Kaluza-Klein theory that
is relevant to the present discussion:
detgABRABgAB =

detgµνdetγmn[R4(x) + RN (y) + higherorderterms].

(3.2)

p

p

Speciﬁcally, it is instructive to consider the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator on
the 6-dimensional manifold that is transverse to the event horizon. In Planckian
units, these eigenvalues are

(3.3)

iΓADA = iγµDµ(x) + mM : m = 1, 2, 3, ...,
where M is the Planck mass [B. Zweibach, 2004]. Thus the proposed event horizon
is regarded as enclosing an integral multiple of the Planck mass.

One class of interactions preserves gravitational equilibrium outside the horizon
by introducing SUSY pairs of mass-less, closed strings into this domain. The pro-
posed model now focuses upon the Lagrangians that represent this region and the
mass within the space-like interior of the event horizon. It is argued that this mass
is perceived as an imaginary (tachyonic) mass in the time-like sector which lies just
outside the horizon, and that it produces vacua that do not preserve that symme-
try of the gauge Lagrangians. If a Lagrangian undergoes a transformation however,
so that it is expanded about the correct vacuum, the tachyonic mass becomes a
real mass, and elements of the adjoint representation acquire this mass, breaking
the gauge symmetry. The number of gauge bosons that acquire mass is (by the
Nambu-Goldstone theorem) the diﬀerence between the number of elements in the
adjoint representation of the broken symmetry and the number in the adjoint rep-
resentation of the symmetry which characterizes the new symmetric domain. With
reference to SU(5), which initially breaks down to SU(3)XSU(2)XU(1), this number
is 12. Thus the X and Y particles that mediate the GUT interaction acquire mass,
but the vector bosons of SU(2) do not. Subsequently however, SU(2) is broken by
an analogous process. The hierarchy between the two symmetry-breaking events
is maintained by renormalization theorems within super-symmetry. In the string

4

J. TOWE

background, the above processes correspond to erosions of the event horizon, so
that strings that were closed and mass-less again intersect with the branes from
which they were temporarily isolated by the horizon.

The proposed model seems to argue that super-symmetry is never broken; e.g.
that self-realizations of local super-symmetry are continually re-established by the
inﬂux of spin-2 ﬁelds into baryons; i.e. by interactions between spin-2 compos-
ites and valance quarks (quarks experiencing asymptotic freedom), which mani-
fest themselves as residual SUGRA GUT interactions between spin-2 ﬁelds and
spin-(3/2) baryons. And because mass-energy is preserved, and because symmetry-
breaking events reduce the relevant symmetry to SU(3)XU(1), it is argued that
each Planck mass becomes about 1019 baryons (1 GeV each). It is speculated that
a resulting fusion of baryons produces a very dense star and that the resulting
inﬂation event [A. Guth, 1981] produces the ﬁrst galaxy.

4. Quark and Lepton Charges

In the context of the above-described construction, the generators of ﬂavor SU(3)
are regarded as I3 and strong hypercharge, Y. Moreover, Y can be related to I3
by the proposed SU(3) ﬂavor symmetry (so that if (−1/2) ≤ I3 ≤ (+1/2), then
(−2/3) ≤ Y ≤ (+2/3)). In this context, charges, ’Q,’ are assigned to the quarks by

(4.1)

Y = K(±I3 + Q),

where K is a proportionality constant to be determined, where in the absence
of Q, Y is proportional (by SU(3) symmetry) to both +I3 and -I3 and where
the magnitude of the constant of proportionality is (by symmetry) 1.732. The
Y-intercept is Y=KQ. If the I3-Y coordinate system upon which the triplet and
anti-triplet are displayed is centered at the center of symmetry of two mutually
inverted isosceles triangles, then the intercept occurs at Y=-2/3. Combining this
equation with Y=KQ produces

Q =

−2
3K

.

In the SU(3) symmetric context moreover, I3 = ±1/2 when Y=1/3. Thus, one
obtains a second equation

1
3

(4.3)

= K(±

) + KQ.

1
2
Simultaneous solution of Equations 4.2 and 4.3 yields K = ±2. Given the above
result, one can describe the isosceles nature of the triplet by choosing K=+2 for I3
less than zero, and K=-2 for I3 greater than zero. In this context one can calculate
the charges of the quarks; e.g. Inserting a negative (positive) slope for a negative
(positive) value of I3 (dictated by the slopes of the sides of the isosceles triangle
under consideration), one obtains:

(4.2)

(4.4)

and

(4.5)

1
3

1
3

= −2(−

) + 2Q

= +2(+

) + 2Q;

1
2

1
2

i.e. one obtains Q=2/3 and Q=-1/3 for the respective values I3=-1/2 and I3=+1/2.

SUPERUNIFICATION

5

The initial state of the postulated universe (determined in the proposed model
by the seven coincident D3-branes that constitute the initial world volume) involves
a chiral doublet and a singlet. There are two I3 options for strings that begin on
left branes and end on color branes. Such strings therefore occur as doublets:

(4.6)

UL
DL(cid:19)

.

(cid:18)

Similarly there are two I3 options for a string that begins on a left brane and ends
on a leptonic brane. Introducing labels e
L for such strings, one obtains
doublets such as:

−
L and νe

−

−

.

(cid:18)

(4.7)

νe
L
−
e
L (cid:19)
On the other hand, there is only one I3 option for a string that begins on a right
brane and ends on a leptonic-brane. This is the option I3 = 0. Describing this
−
R are
asymmetry in terms of what is called chirality, one states that since e
of the same charge, both cannot be included within a chiral system (deﬁned as a
−
R is
system in which opposite helicities must also be of opposite charge). Thus e
an I3 singlet, which does not interact chirally (transforming I3-up into I3-down or
−
inversely), so that e
R .
In the same context, UR and DR are singlets of I3=0.

−
R is characterized by I3=0. The same statement applies to νe

−
L and e

The charges of both quarks and leptons can be determined by weak hypercharge,
but the charges of quarks and leptons are determined here by ﬂavor symmetry and
strong hypercharge because this approach produces conservation laws in terms of
which one can calibrate the above-described spin-2 adjoint representation of the
symmetry SU(5). The conservation laws ∆I3=0, ∆Y = 0, ∆F =0 and ∆Q=0
permit, and therefore mandate an interaction

Σ

− → Λ0 + b + a
(4.8)
(which is conﬁrmed by observation), where Σ− and Λ are baryons, respectively
characterized by charges -1 and 0 and by strangeness numbers -1 and -1, where a
denotes a non-baryonic fermion that is characterized by I3=+1/2 and b denotes a
non-baryonic fermion of I3=-1/2 and where the sum of the charges of a and b is
-1. In this context one can formulate the following three equations:

Simultaneous solution yields

(4.9)

(4.10)

and

(4.11)

(4.12)

(4.13)

and

(4.14)

Q(b) + Q(a) = −1,

Q(up) − ∆Q = a

Q(down) − ∆Q = b.

∆Q = 2/3,

Q(b) = −1

Q(a) = 0.

6

J. TOWE

5. Large-Scale Structure

The proposed model can be extended to address large-scale structure. As pos-
tulated above, the inﬂux of spin-2 ﬁelds into baryons continually re-establishes
a recurring, broken version of SUSY SU(5), which indicates a recurring inﬂation
event. It will be demonstrated that six Higgs-plus inﬂation cycles is equivalent to
an iterative calculation that produces about 3.54X1011 galaxies, which is roughly
equivalent to the number indicated by observation. This result depends upon two
considerations: one consists of boundary conditions determined by observations of
local galactic clusters. The other consists of a replacement of what has traditionally
been regarded as a cosmological constant by the relativistic 4-scaler:

(5.1)

Λ = [

h
∆τ

]2 : ∆τ = ∆tr1 −

v2
c2 ,

where h represents Planck’s constant and τ denotes relativistic proper time. This
cosmological parameter is applied to a model in which each inﬂation event produces
a new group of 4-momentum states that are characterized by a common recessional
speed; i.e. by a new irreducible representation of the Lorentz group SL(3,1). El-
ements of each irreducible representation are distinguished in terms of mass. The
ﬁrst inﬂation event is envisioned as producing a galaxy, the second a distribution
of galaxies, the third a distribution of galactic clusters etc.
It is observed that
each element of each proposed irreducible representation corresponds to a Fried-
man 4-distribution of mass-energy, and it is postulated that each ﬂat 4-spacetime
distribution is compact (including a boundary beyond which expansion of the ﬂat
distribution does not occur) and simply connected. Thus, it is postulated that each
4-spacetime distribution of mass-energy is a 4-hyper-sphere (feasibility argument
is a 4-dimensional analogue of Poincare’s conjecture), enclosing a 5-dimensional
space. Finally, the radius of curvature that is enclosed by each 4-hyper-sphere
is regarded as proportional to the value of the proposed cosmological parameter,
which is characteristic of the distribution (of the hyper-sphere) in question. Clearly,
this radius of curvature is small–very close to zero–unless the recessional speed of
the 4-spacetime distribution is near the speed of light. For these latter distributions
however, the radii of curvature are signiﬁcant, so that the hyper-spherical nature of
the distributions is revealed. According to this model, one should observe, near the
edge of the observable universe, the fragmentation of homogenous shock fronts into
many smaller shock fronts that coincide with outer hemispheres of the postulated
hyper-spheres. This structure is observed on scales of about 109 ly and larger. It
was ﬁrst observed at Harvard-Smithsonian in 1984 [J. P. Huchra and M. Geller,
1984]. Let us now consider the iterative calculation that was described above.

6. A Theoretical Number of Galaxies

The boundary conditions indicated by observations of the local galactic clusters
are that the number of galaxies in a typical local cluster is ﬁve and that separations
of galaxies represent distances about ten times the galactic diameters; that separa-
tions of clusters represent distances about ten times the diameters of the clusters
etc.

It is determined from observation that the typical galaxy is about ct0 = 105 light
years (ly) in diameter. The diameter ctN of the global state that has resulted from

SUPERUNIFICATION

7

the Nth inﬂation event is

(6.1)

ctN = ct010N : N = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...,

where the N=0 state corresponds to a single, typical galaxy.

Because ﬁve galaxies populate the typical basic cluster, and because up to a
scale of about 109 ly, the number of galaxies can be enlisted as units in terms of
which to express volume (up to this scale galaxies ﬁll a volume rather than populate
the surfaces of semi-spherical shells), one can establish the following equation to
describe the N=1 cluster of galaxies:
4
3

1 = 5,

πR3

(6.2)

which implies that

R1 = 1.06.

From equation 6.1, the radius of this galactic cluster in ly is about

ct1 = ct010 = 105(10)ly = 106ly.

One now determines the approximate radius (as a number of galaxies) of the N=2
state. Given the counting device that is described by the second of the proposed
boundary conditions, it is argued that the radius of the N=2 state (the separation of
the N=1 cluster and a second cluster is ten times the diameter of the N=1 cluster),
in terms of a number of galaxies is given by

10(diameter(localcluster)) = 10(2(1.06)) ∼= 21.

Thus, the radius in light years of the N=2 state is (consulting (6.1))

ct2 = ct0102 = 105(102)ly = 107ly.

Proceeding in this way, one determines the radius (as an approximate number of
galaxies) of the N=3 state, the N=4 state and the N=5 state. The radius of the
N=5 state is (as an approximate number of galaxies) 168000. Thus, since the radius
of the N=4 state in ly is about 109ly, and since (by observation) galactic clusters
populate the surfaces of semi-spheres on scales larger than 108ly, the number of
galaxies in the N=5 state is (summing areas of opposite spherical shells),

4πR2

4 = 4(3.14)(168000)2 = 3.54X1011.

The radius in light years of the N=5 state is, consulting equation 6.1,

(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

(6.7)

(6.8)

which is thought to be the approximate radius of the universe in terms of Schwarzschild
time [J. Towe, 2003, 2006].

ct5 = ct0105ly = 1010ly,

7. Conclusion

One of the major problems that seems to stand in the way of physics beyond
that standard model is that SUSY GUT theories predict a proton decay that has
not been observed. The foregoing discussion addresses this by introducing a new
SUSY GUT that preserves baryonic structure. In this model moreover, a broken
version of the SUGRA GUT structure is continually re-established by the proposed
interactions, so that multiple inﬂation events are predicted, which address the large-
scale structure.

8

J. TOWE

Speciﬁcally it was demonstrated that there are 52 − 1 tensor products of bosons
it was demonstrated that there is, formally,
and fermions that are of spin 2; i.e.
an adjoint representation of SU(5) in terms of spin-2 composites provided that
one adopts three fermionic generations and the preservation of generation by the
implicitly indicated GUT interactions. It was then shown that these composites
are physically signiﬁcant because they are components of couplings that constitute
a locally super-symmetric, adjoint representation of SU(5).

This SUSY GUT formalism was derived by observing that every quark can be
interpreted as a lepton that is coupled with an appropriate element of the proposed
spin-2 adjoint representation. The same was noted regarding every lepton. In this
context it was demonstrated that SUGRA interactions between spin-2 composites
and spin-(3/2) baryons can exist as residual manifestations of quark-lepton transi-
tions within baryonic domains of asymptotic freedom. Finally it was shown that
there are exactly 52 − 1 SUGRA GUT couplings provided that one admits only
those interactions that transform a quark into a lepton or inversely. The nature of
baryons and fermions, as derived from the proposed Type IIB string theory, moti-
vated association of the preserved generators of SU(5) with quantum numbers I3,
strong hypercharge, fermion number and ∆Q (the charge diﬀerence between a quark
and lepton that share the same values of the other quantum numbers). It was noted
that these conservation laws admit only three types of SUGRA GUT interactions:
those that preserve I3=-1/2, I3=+1/2 and I3=0. These were designated Types A,
B and C and examples were considered. It was demonstrated that all such inter-
actions preserve baryon structure, departing from the SUSY GUT tradition that
predicts proton decay. It was noted that all the interactions that were described,
plus others that were implied can also occur within baryons of spin-(1/2), provided
that a photon is absorbed and radiated together with each spin-2 ﬁeld—this to
It was suggested that the proposed interactions
preserve local super-symmetry.
may involve predictions that permit conﬁrmation of the model. Speciﬁcally it was
noted that the proposed interactions indicate that, at any given time, some triplets
within a given baryon may involve three quarks, but that other triplets may involve
replacements including leptons and spin-2 composites. Thus it was concluded that
the proposed model seems to predict an small-scale inhomogeneity of density within
baryons, and in this context, may lend itself to conﬁrmation.

It was demonstrated that the proposed model can be extended to address large-
scale structure. It was argued that the inﬂux of spin-2 ﬁelds into baryons continually
re-establishes a locally SUSY version of broken SU(5), and that these events produce
recurring inﬂation events. It was demonstrated that six Higgs-plus-inﬂation cycles
correspond to an iterative calculation that produces about 3.54X1011 galaxies–a
number which corresponds roughly to that indicated by observation.

It was argued that this process and result involve two considerations. One con-
sists of boundary conditions that are determined by observations of local clusters.
A second involves a new interpretation of what has traditionally been regarded as
the cosmological constant. It was argued that the cosmological constant should be
∆τ ]2. This was motivated by an intuition
replaced by a relativistic 4-scaler: Λ=[ h
that each recurrence of inﬂation produced a new irreducible representation of the
Lorentz group, which was characterized by a recessional speed, and the elements
of which were distinguished in terms of mass. It was argued that the ﬁrst inﬂation
event produced a distribution of stars, the second a distribution of galaxies, etc.

SUPERUNIFICATION

9

Finally, because each distribution was transformed into a ﬂat state by an inﬂa-
tion event, it was argued that each ﬂat 4-distribution of mass-energy constitutes a
compact 4-space (evidently, galaxies, galactic clusters etc. do not expand beyond
the boundaries that are established at the conclusions of the inﬂation events that
produce their common characteristic of ﬂatness). This argument was extended by
postulating that each 4-distribution is simply-connected. Finally then, it was pos-
tulated (parallel to Poincare’s conjecture regarding 3-spaces that are compact and
simply connected) that each such 4-distribution constitutes a 4-spacetime hyper-
sphere that encloses a 5-dimensional space. It was also argued that each 4-hyper-
sphere encloses a radius of curvature that is proportional to the characteristic value
of the proposed cosmological 4-scaler (which is determined by the recessional speed
of the 4-momentum state in question).

Because the value of the cosmological parameter Λ is near zero unless the char-
acteristic recessional speed of a mass-energy distribution is near the speed of light,
it was argued that the 5-dimensional character and the hyper-spherical nature of a
4-momentum state is revealed if and only if that state is receding at a speed near
that of light. Thus it was predicted that shock fronts near the edge of the observable
universe are observed as fragmented into smaller shock fronts that coincide with
the outer hemispheres of predicted hyper-spheres. It was noted that this structure
is indeed observed at scales of 109 ly and larger, and that it was ﬁrst observed in
1984 at Harvard-Smithsonian.

References

[1] E. D’Hoker, and D. Z. Freedman, 2002, ”Supersymmetric Gauge Theories and the AdS/CFT

Correspondence,” arXiv :hep-th/0201253.

[2] J. Towe, 2006, A Diﬀerential Geometric Context in which Quantization is a Necessary Con-

ditin for Gauge Invariance, arXiv :physics/0511041.

[3] B. Zweibach, 2004, A First Course in String Theory, Cambridge, New York, p. 378.
[4] A. Guth, 1981, Phys. Rev. D, 23, 198.
[5] J.P. Huchra and M. Geller, 1986, The Dynamics and Evolution of Clusters of Galaxies.

Semi-Annual Report: Harvard-Smithsonian Observatory, 1 July-31 December.

[6] J. Towe, 2006, ”Interfacing Friedman and String Cosmologies,” arXiv :physics/0607086 v2.
[7] J. Towe, 2003, Proceedings of the Tenth Marcel Grossman Meeting, Rio de Janeiro, p. 1683.

Department of Physics, The Antelope Valley College, Lancaster, CA 93536
E-mail address: jtowe@avc.edu

