7
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
3
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

lgonzalz@vxcern.cern.ch

March 1997

LORENTZ INVARIANCE AND SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES

L. GONZALEZ-MESTRES

Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France
11 pl. Marcellin-Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France

and

Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules
B.P. 110 , 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract

If textbook Lorentz invariance is actually a property of the equations describing a sector
of matter above some critical distance scale, several sectors of matter with diﬀerent critical
speeds in vacuum can coexist and an absolute rest frame (the vacuum rest frame, possibly
related to the local rest frame of the expanding Universe) may exist without contradicting
the apparent Lorentz invariance felt by ”ordinary” particles (particles with critical speed in
vacuum equal to c , the speed of light). Sectorial Lorentz invariance, reﬂected by the fact
that all particles of a given dynamical sector have the same critical speed in vacuum, will
then be an expression of a fundamental sectorial symmetry (e.g. preonic grand uniﬁcation
or extended supersymmetry) protecting a parameter of the equations of motion.

We study the breaking of Lorentz invariance in such a scenario, with emphasis on mixing
between the ”ordinary” sector and a superluminal sector, and discuss with examples the
consequences of existing data. The sectorial universality of the value of the high-energy
speed in vacuum, even exact, does not necessarily imply that Lorentz invariance is not
violated and does not by itself exclude the possibility to produce superluminal particles at
accelerators or to ﬁnd them in experiments devoted to high-energy cosmic rays. Similarly,
the stringent experimental bounds on Lorentz symmetry violation at low energy cannot be
extrapolated to high-energy phenomena. Several basic questions related to possible eﬀects
of Lorentz symmetry violation are discussed, and potential signatures are examined.

1

1 . INTRODUCTION

In several previous papers [1 , 6] , we discussed possible properties of a new class of
superluminal particles which, contrary to tachyons [7], have positive masses and energies.
Whereas the later respect Lorentz invariance and are just space-like states of ”ordinary”
particles (particles with critical speed in vacuum equal to c , the speed of light), the new
superluminal particles would be expressions of new degrees of freedom of matter and have
critical speeds in vacuum substantially diﬀerent from c (in general, by several orders of
magnitude). They may obey sectorial Lorentz invariances, with a critical speed ci ≫ c
playing the role of the space-time metric parameter for the i-th superluminal sector. While
absolute space and time can perhaps be deﬁned in an absolute rest frame (the ”vacuum
rest frame”), the geometry of the space-time felt by matter depends on its dynamical
properties. Particles from diﬀerent sectors, moving at a common velocity ~v 6= 0 with
respect to the vacuum rest frame (assuming such a frame exists), will not feel the same
space-time. Contrary to standard relativity, Lorentz contraction, as seen in the vacuum
rest frame, will be an absolute and physically meaningful phenomenon. It will depend on
the critical speed of the particle. At low energy, and as suggested by experimental tests of
Lorentz invariance, we expect superluminal particles to be very weakly coupled to ordinary
ones. In spite of this weak coupling, high-energy experiments (at accelerators or devoted
to cosmic rays) can potentially discover the new particles (e.g. [5 , 6]) .

If the critical speed in vacuum is not an absolute expression of any intrinsic geometry
of space-time, but depends (like the space-time geometry felt by the particle) on the deep
dynamical properties of the matter under consideration, the fact that several particles
have with great precision the same high-energy speed (i.e. the high p limit of ∇~p E ,
where ~p stands for momentum, E for energy and p is the modulus of ~p) in vacuum is by
itself the signature of a fundamental symmetry of this sector of matter (like preonic grand
uniﬁcation or extended supersymmetry). If, in the vacuum rest frame, free particles obey
equations of the type:

− A ∂2φ/∂t2 + iB ∂φ/∂t + Σ3

j=1 ∂2φ/∂x2

j − D φ = 0

(1)

where A , B and D are sectorial parameters and may be diﬀerent for diﬀerent particles,
the possible universality of the critical speed inside a dynamical sector reﬂects an exact
sectorial symmetry of the parameter A . The non-universality of mass inside the sector
corresponds to a symmetry breaking eﬀect acting on the parameter D . This would be
perfectly compatible, for instance, with standard scenarios of supersymmetry breaking
where the spontaneous breaking is a low-energy eﬀect and leaves physics unchanged in
the high-energy region above the symmetry-breaking scale. Thus, the apparent intrinsic
properties of space and time, as felt by ordinary matter (experiment indicates that B
is small), would just reﬂect the fact that the sectorial universality of A (giving the high-
energy speed of particles) is preserved to a very good approximation by symmetry-breaking
phenomena. The exact universality of the high-energy speed would not by itself imply exact
sectorial Lorentz invariance: B 6= 0 violates such an invariance, but as will be seen later
ﬁnite-energy eﬀects or new Lorentz-violating terms can also arise.
In what follows, we
assume for simplicity that the parameter B vanishes or can be neglected.

2

2 . LORENTZ SYMMETRY VIOLATION

Assume that: a) each sector has a conserved sectorial symmetry broken only sponta-
neoulsy by a low-energy phenomenon (like standard breaking of GUTs or supersymmetry);
b) all particles (or, at least, all basic constituents) belong to a single multiplet of the sym-
metry. If the interaction between two diﬀerent sectors (the ordinary sector and a superlu-
minal one) preserves both sectorial symmetries (but breaks the two Lorentz invariances),
several possible mechanisms can be considered which we describe in a simpliﬁed way:

2a. Intrinsic violations

A typical example is provided by terms due to a possible phase transition at very high
[2 , 5]) above which Lorentz invariance, and even possibly the particles
energy (see, e.g.
under consideration, do no longer exist. If ki is the critical wave vector scale of the i-th
superluminal sector [2] , such terms can be represented by powers of k−2
j times
the usual laplacian. For the ordinary particles, ki is to be replaced by k0 , where k0 is the
critical wave vector scale of the ordinary sector. To lowest order, in the i-th superluminal
j )2 φ , and similarly for the ordinary
sector, we can add to (1) a term αk
sector with k0 instead of ki . The sectorial parameter α is expected to be of order 1 . In
terms of wave function parameters, we can write in the vacuum rest frame from (1):

j=1 ∂2/∂x2

j=1 ∂2/∂x2

i Σ3

(Σ3

−2
i

E = (2π)−1h A−1/2 (k2 + D)1/2

(2)

where E is the energy, ~k the wave vector and we have taken B = 0 in (1). The inclusion
of the new term would replace in (2) k2 by k2 (1 + αk2 k−2
i ) if the sector is superluminal,
and by k2 (1 + αk2 k−2
0 ) if we are considering the ordinary sector. More generally, we can
replace in (1) k2 by k2 f (κ) where κ = k2 k−2
if we are dealing with a superluminal sector
and κ = k2 k
in the ordinary sector. We take f (0) = 1 and expect f (κ) to exhibit a
singularity in the region κ ≈ 1 indicating the dissappearence of the Lorentz regime and the
transition to new expressions of fundamental vacuum dynamics. If the sectorial symmetry
is preserved at high energy, we expect the function f (κ) to be universal inside each sector
and not to generate any diﬀerence in critical speed between particles of the same sector.
Terms involving higher t derivatives can be dealt with in a similar way.

−2
0

i

If the sectorial symmetry remains unbroken at high energy and the value of A remains
universal inside the sector under consideration, we do not expect obvious measurable eﬀects
from conventional tests of Lorentz invariance. Contrary to the scenario recently considered
by Coleman and Glashow [8] , the existence of very high-energy cosmic rays does not
refute the dynamics we propose. Photon decay, as well as Cherenkov radiation in vacuum
by ordinary charged particles, remain forbidden for very high-energy cosmic rays as a
consequence of the sectorial universality of the critical speed in vacuum. At the highest
energies observed (E ≈ 1020 eV , k ≈ 1025 cm−1), the ratio k2k−2
is of order ≈ 10−16
0
(above the bound from [8]) for k0 ≈ 10−33 cm .
It becomes as small as 10−50 for
k ≈ 108 cm−1 (atomic distance scale). If laboratory distance and time scales are ﬁxed
from phenomena occuring at atomic or larger scales, the terms added to (1) do not seem
to have a real inﬂuence on our natural deﬁnition of space and time. If they ever become

3

detectable, they will imply a deﬁnite failure of the relativity principle [9] , as it will become
impossible to write the same equations of motion in all inertial frames. A more detailed
discussion of high-energy phenomena in similar situations is given in Subsection 2b.

2b. Mixing with superluminal sectors

In a previous paper [5] , we pointed out that the existence of superluminal sectors of
matter is not by itself in conﬂict with the basic principles of standard cosmology [10] and
quantum ﬁeld theory (e.g. [11 - 13]) . The new superluminal particles, which have positive
masses and energies, are clearly diﬀerent from the previously proposed tachyons [14 , 15]
and have diﬀerent signatures. By deﬁnition, tachyons explicitly respect standard Lorentz
invariance, whereas our superluminal particles explicitly break it. The superluminal sectors
can couple to the ordinary one, but Lorentz symmetry violations related to this mixing
would be very diﬃcult to observe, as can be seen in two mixing schemes:

a) Scheme 1 . The two sectorial symmetries, as well as the two multiplets, are identical
(an isomorphism can be spontaneously generated). Then, a unique direct mixing scheme
exists for particles of diﬀerent sectors and all ordinary particles undergo the same kind
of mixing with the superluminal sector. In the vacuum rest frame, an ordinary particle
| φ0 > may mix with a superluminal one, | φi > , through a hamiltonian H such that:

< φ0 | H | φ0 > = c (p2 + m2
0 c2)1/2 = E0
i )1/2 = Ei
i c2
< φi | H | φi > = ci (p2 + m2
< φ0 | H | φi > = < φi | H | φ0 > = ǫ (p2)
where ~p is the momentum, p the modulus of ~p , m0 the mass of the ordinary particle,
mi the mass of the superluminal particle and ǫ the momentum-dependent energy mixing
parameter. Zero masses are preserved if ǫ (0) = 0 . The eigenvectors of H are:

(4)

(3)

(5)

| φ > = (1 − α2)1/2 | φ0 > + α | φi >

2 α ǫ = Ei − E0 − [(Ei − E0)2 + 4 ǫ2]1/2

corresponding to the mixed ordinary particle, with eigenvalue E given by:

2E = E0 + Ei − [(Ei − E0)2 + 4ǫ2]1/2

where:

and

| φ′ > = (1 − α2)1/2 | φi > − α | φ0 >

which corresponds to the mixed superluminal particle, with eigenvalue E′ satisfying:

2E′ = E0 + Ei + [(Ei − E0)2 + 4ǫ2]1/2

In the above expressions for E and E′ , the value of the square root is to be taken with

the same sign as Ei − E0 . The speed of particle | φ > is given by:

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

~v (~p) = ∇~p E = ~p [µ(p2)]

−1

4

where µ(p2) is an eﬀective mass given by:

[µ(p2)]−1 = 2 dE/dp2

(12)

ǫ(p2) breaks Lorentz symmetry and reﬂects unknown dynamics. If ǫ(p2) = a p + g (p2)
where p−1 g (p2) → 0 as p2 → ∞ , the high-energy symmetry would require the value
of a to be universal inside the sector, whereas g (p2) can undergo the eﬀect of low-energy
symmetry breaking. Again, very high-energy cosmic rays will not exhibit phenomena like
photon decay or Cherenkov emission in vacuum by charged particles. The high-energy
speed of all particles in the mixed ”ordinary” sector, as measured in the vacuum rest
frame, will tend to vhe , where 2 vhe = c + ci + [(c − ci)2 + 4a2]1/2 . If ci ≫ c
i where c−1 (vhe − c) is of order ≈ 10−2 for
and a ≪ c2
i
a ≈ 102c and ci ≈ 10−6 c . Scenarios involving such ﬁgures would be excluded according
to recent work by Coleman and Glashow [8] if, contrary to the case we are considering,
the shift in critical speed were not the same for all particles of the ordinary sector. Thus,
the high-energy symmetry can play a crucial physical role which deserves further study.

, we get vhe ≃ c − a2c

−1

0 mi c2

For our laboratory deﬁnition of space and time, we should use the low-energy expansion
of ǫ (p2) . Low-energy eﬀects can be much smaller than high-energy eﬀects if there is some
high-momentum threshold contained in the p-dependence of ǫ(p2) . Assume that: a)
i ≈ 1 T eV ; b) between atomic scales and high energies, ǫ(p2) can be
a ≈ 102 c and mi c2
i + p2)−1 where Mici ≈ 1 T eV /c
approximated by the expression: ǫ (p2) ≈ a p3 (M 2c2
is the low-momentum cut-oﬀ. At atomic scales, the energy mixing parameter ǫ will be of
i )−1 ≈ 10−44 on
order ≈ 10−13 eV and we get a relative eﬀect of order ǫ2 (m0 c2
the electron wave equation. Similarly, a free photon with the same values of ǫ (p2) and
i would undergo an energy shift of ≈ 10−38 eV , which amounts at atomic scales to
mi c2
≈ 10−41 times its energy. This does not in principle correspond to a mass, which may be
even smaller, but is already below the most stringent experimental data: the p-dependence
of ǫ can be made much weaker between the low-energy region and the cut-oﬀ. With the
previous numbers, the photon velocity shift would be ≈ 10−41 c and consequently, according
to formulae from [6] , we expect anisotropies in the value of the speed of light measured
on earth to be below ≈ 10−44 c if the vacuum rest frame is close to that suggested by
cosmic microwave background radiation. Part of the eﬀect will be washed out by the
redeﬁnition of space-time automatically performed by apparatus made of mixed ordinary
matter; this redeﬁnition will in general depend on the material the apparatus is made of.
The laws of physics for the mixed ordinary sector will, at such precision levels, depend
on the laboratory velocity with respect to the vacuum rest frame. The mixing with the
superluminal particle at atomic scales would be ≈ 10−25 and, if the interaction with the
superluminal sector occurs only through direct mixing of single particles, the superluminal
contribution to an electromagnetic vertex of mixed ”ordinary” particles can be suppressed
by an extremely small factor. For all the discussed low-energy parameters, experiment
permits much higher values than those obtained with our parametrization.

Thus, the space-time geometry felt by low-energy systems made of (mixed) ordinary
matter can show extremely small deviations from standard Lorentz invariance, even if a
more important eﬀect arises in the kinematics of very high-energy cosmic rays. It must

5

i

also be realized that, even in the case of a small breaking of the high-energy symmetry,
ﬁnite-energy eﬀects can partially protect high-energy cosmic rays. For instance, with the
above parametrization, a 1013 eV photon would have an anomaly in the vacuum-rest-frame
E/p ratio:

(1 − 2p−2 c2

E/p − c ≃ − a2 c−1

i M 2)
(13)
and, with the above parameters, p−2 c2
i M 2 ≈ 10−2 at E ≈ 1013 eV . This term increases
the energy/momentum ratio as the momentum is lowered, and ill severely limit the phase
space for a photon to decay into an electron-positron pair in the presence of a very small
breaking of the high-energy symmetry. The eﬀect will be even stronger if the momentum
cutoﬀ is higher than considered in our example, and may completely protect high-energy
cosmic rays up to energies much higher than those observed. Diﬀerences in speed will
appear below the high-energy limit due to the ﬁnite-energy breaking of the high-energy
symmetry, but will not necessarily prevent the existence of high-energy cosmic rays. The
argument by Coleman and Glashow must be reconsidered in our scheme and, even in
the presence of an asymptotic or ﬁnite-energy breaking of the high-energy symmetry, it
leads to less stringent bounds, not better than δ(E/p) (diﬀerence in E/p ratio) < 10−11
obtained assuming that a 1020 eV proton exchanges all its momentum with another particle.
Bounds on δ(dE/dp) will be much weaker. Breaking of the speed symmetry at high
energy, even by a ﬁnite energy eﬀect, may have another important consequence: not only
particles which are stable at low momentum (in the vacuum rest frame) may be unstable
at high momentum (as pointed out in [8] for the photon), but conversely unstable particles
may become stable when accelerated or produced at high momentum. This may have
cosmological implications and eventually be tested by high-energy experiments.

At p ≈ 1 T eV /c and with the above ﬁgures, we have ǫ (p2) ≈ 10−2 T eV and
a mixing parameter ≈ 10−4 between ordinary and superluminal particles, which means
that the probability for two mixed quarks with T eV /c momenta to simultaneoulsy turn
into superluminal particles is ≈ 10−16 (not necessarily negligible at LHC luminosities).
Similarly, the probability for a hard virtual particle produced at LHC to become superlu-
minal would be ≈ 10−8 , which again cannot be entirely disregarded. Apart from direct
production of superluminal particles, precision speed measurements for muons and protons
at LHC energies deserve consideration. Finally, it may be worth noticing that a mixing
α ≈ 10−4 in the ordinary sector would lead to interaction probabilites slightly lower than
expected, typically by a fraction ≈ 10−3 , and similarly for energy loses. In the presence
of interference phenomena, the eﬀect may become larger.

b) Scheme 2 . If symmetries or multiplets are diﬀerent and direct mixing between
single particles from diﬀerent sectors is forbidden, mixing between the two sectors can
still arise, for instance, through insertions of pairs of superluminal lines inside self-energy
In this case, the energy of an ordinary particle can be written in terms of its
graphs.
momentum as:

E (p) = (p2 + m2)1/2 + Σ (p2)
(14)
where the ﬁrst term ignores the mixing with the superluminal sector and Σ (p2) contains
the superluminal insertions. As before, we can write Σ (p2) = s p + t (p2) , where

6

p−1 t (p2) → 0 as p → ∞ , and (using the high-energy symmetry) require the value of s
to be universal inside the sector while t (p2) can reﬂect the low-energy symmetry breaking.

Arguments similar to scheme 1 can then be developed, and again with the same philos-
ophy we may expect very small numbers in direct searches for Lorentz invariance violations
at low energy even if high-energy eﬀects turn out to be detectable. A particularly inter-
esting possibility would be that the Higgs boson couples to a superluminal scalar through
a φ4 term in the lagrangian (the squared modulus of the Higgs ﬁeld times the squared
modulus of the superluminal scalar ﬁeld like in [1]), and that the superluminal boson has
a rest energy in the T eV range. Then, the new physics expected at T eV scales on the
grounds of Higgs theory considerations could directly involve the production of pairs of
superluminal particles, together with other departures from the standard model.

3. DIRECT SEARCH FOR SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES

With the same ﬁgures as before, LHC collisions can potentially involve interactions
between superluminal components of the high-energy particles. To the already speci-
ﬁed suppression factors, we may be led to add phase space limitations. If, for instance,
ci ≈ 106 c as before, naive on-shell kinematics would require the momenta of the incoming
quarks to cancel with 10−6 precision if superluminal particles must emerge from the col-
lision (otherwise, there would not be enough energy left to produce the free superluminal
particles). We would then expect a strong extra supression factor from these considera-
tions, although our lack of knowledge of the dynamics of superluminal particles prevents
us from formulating deﬁnite conclusions (for instance, some dramatic eﬀect might be gen-
erated by a pair of strongly oﬀ-shell superluminal particles). On the other hand, going
beyond point-like ﬁeld theory, it should be noticed that Lorentz contraction of ordinary
particles may modify their direct mixing with the superluminal sector (see [6] on the ab-
solute physical meaning of Lorentz contraction and its matter-dependence), as it modiﬁes
the relative longitudinal size between ordinary and superluminal particles. If superlumi-
nal particles are smaller by orders of magnitude than ordinary ones (which would most
likely occur if ki ≫ k0), Lorentz contraction of ordinary particles may lead to further
enhancement of direct coupling between particles from the two sectors. Such eﬀects are
new with respect to coventional particle physics, where Lorentz contraction is a relative
phenomenon. The situation would even become more favourable in future generations of
higher-energy accelerators. In the case of direct mixing, the mixing parameter α will reach
its asymptotic value only well above the rest energy mic2
i of the superluminal particle under
consideration. In any case, it seems that some scenarios with superluminal particles can
be explored by LHC experiments, mainly for values of ci between c and 106 c . We shall
not attempt to give here a general parametrization, but obvious examples can be built,
especially for critical speeds in vacuum one or two orders of magnitude above c . Beam
quality will play a crucial role to precisely deﬁne these potentialities.

High-energy cosmic rays of the superluminal sector under consideration would satisfy
modiﬁed versions of the GZK cutoﬀ [16] allowing for higher energies and larger source
distances, and possibly reach cosmic ray detectors on earth, like AMANDA [17]. Particles

7

from other superluminal sectors, more weakly coupled to ordinary matter, would be much
less contrained by the GZK cutoﬀ. The main limitation for a superluminal cosmic ray to
be able to reach earth is likely to come from ”Cherenkov” radiation (i.e. the emission of
particles belonging to a sector with lower critical speed) in vacuum. However, if superlu-
minal matter is very abundant in the Universe, this abundance may generate other cutoﬀs
of the GZK type for superluminal particles. The superluminal particles possibly produced
at accelerators will in general not be the same that we can observe in cosmic ray detectors,
especially if several superluminal sectors of matter exist. The fact that very high-energy
ordinary particles may undergo mixing with superluminal sectors is potentially a motiva-
tion for detailed measurements (e.g. speed, ”Cherenkov” emission in vacuum even at small
rates...) in high-energy cosmic-ray detectors.

We therefore claim that the impressive results of low-energy searches for Lorentz sym-
metry violation at low energy, excluding such phenomena down to very small numbers
(e.g. [18 , 19]), do really not allow to conclude against the potentialities of the search for
superluminal particles in high-energy experiments. On the contrary, high-energy experi-
ments may indeed be the only way to ﬁnd evidence for Lorentz symmetry violation, as well
as for the existence of superluminal sectors. As stressed in our previous papers (e.g.
[1,
5]), the observed stability of Lorentz invariance in the low-energy region and the possible
discovery of superluminal particles in high-energy experiments are not really incompatible,
since Lorentz symmetry violation would be essentially related to phenomena occuring at
very high energy and very short distance scales. Massless ordinary particles may even have
diﬀerent low-energy and high-energy speeds in vacuum, as discussed above.

Signatures in high-energy experiments are a crucial point: can we identify superlumi-
nal particles in such experiments? Cherenkov radiation in vacuum (e.g. the emission of
ordinary particles by the produced superluminal ones) may be a crucial signature in many
cases. At accelerators, its structure and energy dependence would be easy to identify. In
cosmic ray experiments, it may be detectable even if the particle couples very weakly to
ordinary matter. Ordinary cosmic rays resulting from this emission can reach the detec-
tor, even if the superluminal particle does not. Then, the event could most likely not by
explained in terms of known astrophysical sources. In all cases, because of the very high
energy/momentum ratio in the new dynamical sector, ”Cherenkov” radiation in vacuum
by superluminal particles will present special features. At an angle of π/2 with respect to
its momentum, a relativistic superluminal particle (i.e. at speed vi ∼ ci) with momen-
tum pi and energy Ei in the vacuum rest frame can emit an ordinary particle with energy
E ≈ Ei c2 c−2
. This is the highest possible
momentum of an emitted single particle. The longitudinal momentum of emitted single
particles, with respect to the direction of motion of the superluminal particle, is strongly
limited. Cherenkov radiation in vacuum will most likely be mainly made of very heavy
virtual particles quickly decaying into pairs of jets (hadronic or leptonic) back-to-back in
order to account for the small momentum left. Conversion of these vacuum-rest-frame
ﬁgures to the laboratory rest frame can be made according to formulae developed in [6] .

and momentum p ≈ Ei c c−2

i ≃ pi c c−1

i

i

Other signatures exist as well and can be explored. As stressed in previous papers
[5 , 6] , if a high-energy superluminal cosmic ray undergoes a hard interaction inside the

8

detector releasing a sizeable part of its energy, we expect in most cases the production
of two jets ”back-to-back” due to energy and momentum conservation. Furthermore, the
event distribution would be nearly isotropic as a result of the relation between the energy
and momentum of the superluminal particle. Such a signature would be unambiguous,
even at very small event rate. Similarly, precise timing in accelerator experiments may
provide dramatic signatures [6]. Absolute time resolution below 10−8 s would in principle
allow to directly notice a speed well above c in a 10 m detector.

4. NEUTRINO AND OSCILLATION SIGNATURES

As previoulsy suggested in our papers [1 - 6] , and discussed by Coleman and Glashow
in their recent study [8] , a small violation of Lorentz invariance may lead to observable
eﬀects in neutrino physics. The numbers obtained above do not allow, in our scenario, to
exclude Lorentz symmetry violation from low-energy neutrino data, but make further ex-
periments particularly relevant and necessary. Furthermore, other particles than neutrinos
can undergo velocity oscillations, especially at high energy, if such oscillations are allowed.

Due to the existence of a preferred frame and to the intrinsic meaning of velocity
with respect to this frame, there is a real physical diﬀerence between oscillations and
high and low momenta. A high-energy particle is intrinsically diﬀerent from a low-energy
particle: no Lorentz transformation can make them completely equivalent. Exclusion plots
for oscillations should include momentum-dependence if Lorentz invariance is broken, as
they test diﬀerent physical objects when the speed is modiﬁed. While low-energy and
nuclear physics experiments can test important aspects of neutrino oscillations, including
Lorentz invariance, these phenomena are not necessarily the same that can be potentially
uncovered by high-energy experiments. Also, in scenarios like that of Subsection 2b ,
Scheme 1 , the global high-energy symmetry is preserved but gauge symmetries become
sectorial and approximate when mixing between the two sectors is introduced. Therefore,
high-energy experiments may indeed be able to test new physics related to this mixing.

If the above high-energy symmetry undergoes a small breaking leading to diﬀerences
in high-energy speeds escaping the Coleman-Glashow constraints (e.g. Subsection 2b ,
Scheme 1), the experimental consequences can be important even if very high-energy cosmic
rays (e.g. protons and photons) remain allowed. At TeV energies, and assuming masses
to be small enough (typically, δm2 c5 sin2θm ≪ E2 δv sin2θv , where E is the energy , m2
the diﬀerence in squared mass, θm the mass mixing angle and θv the velocity mixing angle
[8]), with a velocity symmetry breaking δv v−1 ≈ 10−19 , oscillation would occur at the
scale of the detector size for all produced ordinary particles able to oscillate. Well above
this value of δv v−1 , the mixing would be full. Such considerations are not only relevant
for neutrinos: for instance, mixing with the superluminal sector at high momentum may
In this case, the oscillation will
result in high-energy mixing between charged leptons.
depend on the details of the p-dependence of the mixing (which reﬂects in turn unknown
details of dynamics inside the superluminal sector). Again, the mixing can be very small
at low energy but signiﬁcant at high energy, similar to Subsection 2b . LHC and cosmic
ray experiments may be able to put relevant bounds on such phenomena.

9

References

[1] L. Gonzalez-Mestres, ”Properties of a possible class of particles able to travel faster than
light”, Proceedings of the Moriond Workshop on ”Dark Matter in Cosmology, Clocks and
Tests of Fundamental Laws”, Villars (Switzerland), January 21-28 1995 , Ed. Fronti`eres,
France. Paper astro-ph/9505117 of electronic library.
[2] L. Gonzalez-Mestres, ”Cosmological implications of a possible class of particles able to
travel faster than light”, Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Theoretical
and Experimental Aspects of Underground Physics, Toledo (Spain) 17-21 September 1995 ,
Nuclear Physics B (Proc. Suppl.) 48 (1996). Paper astro-ph/9601090 .
[3] L. Gonzalez-Mestres, ”Superluminal matter and high-energy cosmic rays”, May 1996 .
Paper astro-ph/9606054 .
[4] L. Gonzalez-Mestres, ”Physics, cosmology and experimental signatures of a possible new
class of superluminal particles”, to be published in the Proceedings of the International
Workshop on the Identiﬁcation of Dark Matter, Sheﬃeld (England, United Kingdom),
September 1996 . Paper astro-ph/9610089 .
[5] L. Gonzalez-Mestres, ”Physical and cosmological implications of a possible class of
particles able to travel faster than light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference
on High-Energy Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 .
[6] L. Gonzalez-Mestres, ”Space, time and superluminal particles”, February 1997 . Paper
mp−arc 97-92 and physics/9702026 .
[7] See, for instance, ”Tachyons, Monopoles and Related Topics”, Ed. by E. Recami,
North-Holland 1978 , and references therein.
[8] S. Coleman and S.L. Glashow, ”Cosmic ray and neutrino tests of special relativity”,
Harvard preprint HUTP-97/A008 , paper hep-ph/9703240 .
[9] The relativity principle was formulated by H. Poincar´e, Speech at the St. Louis Inter-
national Exposition of 1904 , The Monist 15 , 1 (1905).
[10] See, for instance, P.J.E. Peebles, ”Principles of Physical Cosmology”, Princeton Series
in Physics, Princeton University Press 1993 .
[11] S.S. Schweber, ”An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field Theory”, Row, Peter-
son and Company 1961 .
[12] See, for instance, R.F. Streater and A.S. Wightman, ”P CT , Spin and Statistics, and
All That”, Benjamin, New York 1964 ; R. Jost, ”The General Theory of Quantized Fields”,
AMS, Providence 1965 .
[13] C. Itzykson and J.B. Zuber, ”Quantum Field Theory”, McGraw-Hill 1985 .
[14] See, for instance, E. Recami in [7] .
[15] See, for instance, E.C.G. Sudarshan in [7] .
[16] K. Greisen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966); G.T. Zatsepin and V.A. Kuzmin, Pisma
Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).
[17] See, for instance, L. Bergstrom et al., ”THE AMANDA EXPERIMENT: status and
prospects for indirect Dark Matter detection”, same Proceedings as for ref.
[4]. Paper
astro-ph/9612122 .
[18] S.K. Lamoreaux, J.P. Jacobs, B.R. Heckel, F.J. Raab and E.N. Forston, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 57 , 3125 (1986); D. Hils and J.L. Hall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697 (1990).
[19] M. Goldhaber and V. Trimble, J. Astrophys. Astr. 17 , 17 (1996).

10

