7
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
4
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS 03.65.-w; 21.10.Hw; 21.10.Ky
Preprint IBR-TH-=97-039, October 15, 1996

1

Use of relativistic hadronic mechanics for the exact
representation of nuclear magnetic moments and the
prediction of new recycling of nuclear waste

Ruggero Maria Santilli

Institute per la Ricerca di Base

Castello Principe Pignatelli, Molise, Italy

Summary. We present a new realization of relativistic hadronic me-
chanics and its underlying iso-Poincar´e symmetry speciﬁcally constructed
for nuclear physics which: 1) permits the representation of nucleons as ex-
tended, nonspherical and deformable charge distributions with alterable mag-
netic moments yet conventional angular momentum and spin; 2) results to
be a nonunitary “completion” of relativistic quantum mechanics much along
the EPR argument; yet 3) is axiom-preserving, thus preserves conventional
quantum laws and the axioms of the special relativity. We show that the
proposed new formalism permits the apparently ﬁrst exact representation of
the total magnetic moments of new-body nuclei under conventional physical
laws. We then point out that, if experimentally conﬁrmed the alterability of
the intrinsic characteristics of nucleons would imply new forms of recycling
nuclear waste by the nuclear power plants in their own site, thus avoiding its
transportation and storage in a (yet unidentiﬁed) dumping area. A number
of possible, additional basic advances are also indicated, such as: new un-
derstanding of nuclear forces with nowel nonlinear, nonlocal and nonunitary
terms due to mutual penetrations of the hyperdense nucleons; consequential
new models of nuclear structures; new magnetic conﬁnement of the controlled
fusion taking into account the possible alterability of the intrinsic magnetic
moments of nucleons at the initiation of the fusion process; new sources of en-
ergy based on subnuclear processes; and other possible advances. The paper
ends with the proposal of three experiments, all essential for the continuation
of scientiﬁc studies and all of basic character, relatively moderate cost and

2

full feasibility in any nuclear physical laboratory.

1 Open character of total nuclear

magnetic moments.

One of the fundamental, still unsolved problems of contemporary nuclear
physics is the exact representation of the total magnetic moments of nuclei,
particularly those of few-body nuclei such as the deuteron, tritium and helium
in view of their known limited number of free parameters.

As an example, the experimental value of the deuteron magnetic moment

is given by

µexp
D = 0.857406 ,

(1.1)

while its representation via nonrelativistic quantum mechanics (QM) on D-
states yields the familiar epression (see, e.g., [1]).

µQM

theor = gN + gp = 0.880 ,

(1.2)

(where gp and gn are the gyromagnetic factors of the protons and neutron,
respectively) which is about 26 % oﬀ in excess of the experimental value.

It is known that the use of all possible correction via relativistic quan-
tum mechanics (RQM) on a mixture of S-, D- and P -states can reduce the
above deviation down to about 1 %, but RQM cannot produce an exact
representation of µexp

D , as conﬁrmed by the recent studies [2].
It is equally known that the remaining 1 % deviation cannot be eliminated
via quark theories because, unlike the corresponding case in the atomic struc-
ture, the quark orbits are very small, and their polarization yields corrections
to the total magnetic moment of nucleons of the order of 10−3 %.

A similar situation exists for representation of the total magnetic moment

of the tritium helium and other few-body nuclei.

The most plausible explanation of the above occurrence was formulated
by the Founding Father of nuclear physics in the late 1940’s immediately
after the identiﬁcation of the numerical value (1.1). For instance, in p. 31
of [1] one can read: “It is possible that the intrinsic magnetism of nucleon is
diﬀerent when it is in close proximity to another nucleon.”

3

Recall that nucleons are not point like, but have an extended charge dis-
tribution with the radius of about 1 fm (10−13 cm). Since perfectly rigid
bodies do not exist in the universe, it is plausible to expect that such distri-
bution can be deformed under suﬃcient external forces. But the deformation
of a charged and spinning sphere implies a necessary alteration of its intrinsic
magnetic moment, as established by classical electrodynamics.

The above “historical hypothesis” (as referred to hereon) therefore as-
sumes that, when a proton and a neutron are coupled into the deuteron
or other nuclear structure, their charge distributions are altered by the nu-
clear force, resulting in an alteration of their conventional intrinsic magnetic
moments as measured in vacuum.
In turn the assumption of a departure
from standard quantum values of the magnetic moments of nucleons readily
permits an exact representation of the total magnetic moment of few-body
nuclei, as we shall see in Sect. 4.

Since no exact representation of µexp

D has been achieved via conventional
intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons following about three-quarter of a
century of attempts, µexp
D should be assumed to constitute direct experimen-
tal evidence on the alterability of the intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons
in the transition from motion in vacuum to motion within nuclear structure.
Note that the representation of µexp
D requires a decrease of the intrinsic mag-
netic moments of nucleons, and that such a decrease can only occur for a
prolate deformation of nucleons referred to their spin axis.

FIGURE 1. The historical hypothesis on the alterability of the
intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons. A schematic view of the his-
torical hypothesis on the deformability of the intrinsic magnetic moments
of nucleons which constitutes the main topic of study of this paper. As
we hope to illustrate, the above hypthesis may stimulate a new scientiﬁc
renaissance in nuclear physics because it is beyound realistic means of quan-
titative representation via the Poincar´e symmetry and RQM, thus requiring
their structural generalizations with far reaching implications of conceptual,
theoretical, experimental and applicative character.

Note ﬁnally that the above historical hypothesis is model independent,
i.e., it applies independently from any assumed structure of the nucleons, and

4

consists of the geometric deformation of their charge distributions whatever
the constituents are.

Additional preliminary experimental evidence on the alterability of the
intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons were conducted from 1975 to 1979
by H. Rauch and his associates [3] via interferometric measures of the 4π
spinorial symmetry of the neutron. The measures are performed via a familiar
perfect crystal which splits a thermal neutron beam into two branches which
are then coherently recombined. In one (or both) branches experiments [3]
placed an electromagnet calibrated at 7,496 G which, for the conventional
value of the intrinsic magnetic moment of the neutron, would yield an exact
multiple of two complete (4π = 720◦) spin ﬂips, as requested by the Fermi-
Dirac character of the neutron and as necessary for a coherent recombination.
In order to improve accuracy, the experimenters ﬁlled up the electromag-
net gap with Mu-metal sheets which reduce stray ﬁelds [3]. While crossing
the electromagnet gap, the neutron beam is therefore exposed to the ﬁeld of
7,496 G as well as to the intense electric and magnetic ﬁelds in the vicinity of
Mu-metal nuclei. The best interferometric measures date back to 1979 with
re-elaboration done in 1981 [3e], and are given by

θ = 715.37◦ ± 3.8◦ ,

θmin = 712.07◦ ,

θmax = 719.67◦ .

(1.3)

Such, they do not contain 720◦ in the minimal and maximal values. However,
the deviation is smaller than the error and, therefore, the above measures
are inconclusive.

Similar measures were conducted in 1975 by S.A. Werner and his as-
sociates [3f] although also with unsettled results. To our best knowledge,
no additional interferometric measures have been done for the 4π spinorial
symmetry of the neutron since 1979, thus indicating the need for ﬁnal tests
which are now permitted in view of the technological advances and improved
accuracy occurred since the late 1970’s.

Despite the above unsettled character, measures (1.3) are signiﬁcant,
In this respect let us recall the (p, q)-
as shown in theoretical studies [4].
deformations of Lie algebras ﬁrst introduced by Santilli [4a] back in 1967 as
part of his Ph.D. studies with product (A, B) = p × A × B − q × B × A of Al-
bert’s [4a] Lie-admissible type, where p, q, and p ± q are nonzero parameters
and A × B is the usual associative product.

By using the preceding deformations Eder [4c,4d] has shown that the

5

alteration of the charge distribution of the neutron caused by the intense
electric and magnetic ﬁelds in the vicinity of Mu-metal nuclei could indeed
yield “spin ﬂuctuations” with about 1 % deviation of the intrinsic magnetic
moment which is precisely in order of magnitude needed for the resolution
of the historical problem of total nuclear magnetic moments. Note that the
strong interactions of Mu-metal nuclei have an irrelevant conribution here
because their sectional area along the thermal neutron beam is very small.

Also, all median angles measured in tests [3] (with the electromagnet gap
ﬁlled up with Mu-metal sheets) are smaller than the expected 720◦. This
occurrence was studied by Santilli [4e] via the ﬁrst (p, q)-deformations of the
SU(2) spin algebra and called angle slow-down eﬀect. This apparent eﬀect
is signiﬁcant inasmuch as it requires a decrease of the standard magnetic
moment of the neutron for the (polarized) conditions of the experimental set
up which is precisely in line with the decrease of the same magnetic moments
needed for the interpretation of µexp

D , as recalled earlier.

The electric and magnetic ﬁelds in the vicinity of Mu-metal nuclei are
known and result to be of order (in average) of 20,000 G. The biggest un-
known is the deformability of the charge distribution of neutrons under known
external ﬁelds, which can only be established from µexp
D for the deuteron con-
ditions are done in Sect.4, or via interferometric measures for more general
conditions.

As noted earlier, 4π-interferometric tests can only measure the deforma-
bility of neutrons under the intense electric and magnetic ﬁelds of the Mu-
metal (or other heavy) nuclei, but not under the strong nuclear forces as
occuring in the structure of the deuteron.

However, it is known from classical electrodynamics that a small defor-
mation of a spinning and charged sphere can yield a relatively large change
of its magnetic moment. Also, the deformability of the charge distributions
of nucleons in the deuteron structure may eventually be due to the electric
and magnetic ﬁelds of the nucleons themselves. Intense electric and magnetic
ﬁelds of large, many-body nuclei could therefore approximate suﬃciently well
the electric and magnetic ﬁelds of the two-body deuteron.

The above aspects, combined with the resolution of the still open histor-
ical hypothesis as well as with its implications pointed out in Sect. 5, are
suﬃcient to warrant the study of novel methods for the exact representa-
tion of µexp
D , as well as the ﬁnalization of interferometric measures on the
4π-spinorial symmetry of the neutron.

6

2 Expected lack of exact character of quan-
tum mechanics for the nuclear structure

QM is fully established as being exactly valid for the so-called exterior
problems, here referred to as particles moving in vacuum under action-at-a-
distance/potential interactions at suﬃciently large mutual distances to allow
an eﬀective point-like approximation of their wavepackets and/or charge dis-
tributions, as occurring in the atomic structure and electroweak interactions
at large. In fact, QM provided an exact representation of all experimental
data available for the systems considered.

FIGURE 2. Experimental insuﬃciencies of quantum mechanics
in nuclear physics. QM is exactly valid in the atomic structure because it
provided an exact representation and understanding of all its experimental
data. On the same grounds, QM cannot be exactly valid for the nuclear
structure, because it has been unable to provide an exact representation of
various experimental data. For instance, total nuclear magnetic moments do
not follow QM predictions, but are within minimal and maximal values re-
produced in this ﬁgure from [1] which motivated the historical hypothesis of
Fig. 1. Additional insuﬃciencies exist for: nuclear forces; nuclear structures;
total angular momenta; and other aspects. Needless to say, QM provides an
excellent approximation of nuclear data. We are therefore referring to devia-
tions which are generally small, yet they have rather important implications,
as indicated in Sects 4 and 5.

By comparison, QM is not expected to be exactly valid for the so-called
interior problems, here referred to particles whose wavepackets or charge
distributions cannot be eﬀectively approximated as being point-like because
moving at small mutual distances (of the order of 1 fm), as occurring in the
structure of nuclei (as well as of hadrons and stars not considered in this
paper).

The understanding is that the approximate validity of QM in nuclear
physics is out of scientiﬁc debate. We are therefore referring to expected
small deviations from QM treatments.

7

The reasons for the above occurrence are numerous. First, unlike the
corresponding atomic case, QM has been unable to provide an exact repre-
sentation of all nuclear experimental data. The lack of exact representation
of total nuclear magnetic moments considered in Sect. 1.
is only one of
several isuﬃciencies. As an example, Ref. [1] indicates the existence of addi-
tional lack of ﬁnal understanding of: nuclear structures, total nuclear angular
momenta, and other aspects.

The above experimental insuﬃciencies can be established in a rigorous
theoretical way via primitive symmetry principles. Computer visualizations
of the fundamental summetry of QM, the Galilean symmetry G(3.1) or the
Poincar´e symmetry P(3.1), establish their exact validity for Keplerian sys-
tems, that is, for systems of particles without collisions admitting their heav-
iest element in the center (Keplerian center). This conﬁrms the exact char-
acter of QM for the atomic structure.

By comparison, nuclei do not possess nuclei and, consequently, the Galilei
and Poincar´e symmetries cannot be exact for the nuclear structure. In fact,
the lack of Keplerian center requires a necessary breaking of the above sym-
metries. In turn, any expectation of achieving via QM an exact representa-
tion of all nuclear data under these conditions has no theoretical ground.

Not surprisingly, the latter aspects are deeply linked to the preceding ones.
In fact, according to the Galilean and Poincar´e symmetries in their conven-
tional realization (see Sect. 3 for a more general realization) the intrinsic
magnetic moment of nucleons is perennial and immutable. Any quantitative
representation of the historical hypothesis of their deformability therefore
requires a necessary deviation from the above symmetries, thus conﬁrming
the mutual compatibility of the two aspects.

Both preceding aspects can be rigorously established on dynamical grounds.

QM was established for the characterization of action-at-a-distance inter-
actions solely derivable from a potential and this conﬁrms again its exact
validity for the atomic structure, this time on dynamical grounds.

By comparison, nucleons in a nuclear structure are in an average state
of mutual penetration of about 10−3 parts of their charge distribution [4f].
But hadrons are some of the densest objects measured in a laboratory until
now. This indicates the presence in the nuclear force of interactions which
are: 1) of contact, i.e., of zero-range type; 2) nonlinear in the wavefunctions
and possibly their derivatives; 3) nonlocal of a type requring an integral over
the volume of overlapping; 4) nonpotential in the sense of violating the condi-

8

tions to be derivable from a potential or a Hamiltonian; and 5) of cosequen-
tial nonunitary type. By recalling the strictly action-at-a-distance, linear,
local-diﬀerential, Hamiltonian and unitary character of QM, the preceding
characteristics of the nuclear force due to mutual penetration of the hyper-
dense charge distribution of nucleons are dramatically beyond any hope of
quantitative QM treatment.

It should be stressed again that the above isuﬃciencies cannot be resolved
via the transition to quark theories on numerous, independent, experimental
and theoretical grounds. Besides their inability to achieve the needed exact
representation of all nuclear data, the current theories on the hadronic struc-
ture are also of action-at-a-distance, linear, local-diﬀerential, Hamiltonian
and unitary character, thus being unable to represent the above expected
characteristics of the nuclear force.

FIGURE 3. Theoretical insuﬃciences of quantum mechanics in
nuclear phusics. An illustration of the theoretical impossibility for QM to
be exactly valid for the nuclear structure due to its lack of Keplerian center
which requires a necessary breaking of the Galilean and Poincar´e symmetries.
In turn, the above occurrence is only a consequence of the fundamental theo-
retical insuﬃciencies of QM to represent nucleons as extended, nonspherical
and deformable charge distribution, as well as the inability to represent the
component in the nuclear force expected from their mutual penetration which
is of contact, nonlinear, nonlocal, nonhamiltonian and nonunitary type. An
axiom-preserving broadening of QM and its underlying symmetries capable
of providing a quantitative representation of the above characteristics is out-
lined in Sect. 3 and applied in Sect. 4.

Also, quark theories in their conventional formulation are aﬀected by still
unresolved basic problems, such as: the lack of a rigorous conﬁnement of
the unobservable quarks as prohibited by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle;
the inability of quarks to be a representation of the Poincar´e symmetry,
thus preventing their mathematical parameters called “masses” from being
rigorously deﬁned in our space-time (as the eigenvalues) of the second-order
Casimir invariant of P(3.1)); the complete lack of gravity for any nucleus
assumed to be made up of quarks because of the impossibility of deﬁning

9

gravity in current quark theories (gravity is solely deﬁned in our spce-time
while quarks are solely deﬁned in a mathematical unitary space without
interconnections due to the O’Raifeartaigh theorem or known resolution via
supersymmetric models).

Thus, any attempts at shifting open problems in our current description of
nucleons in our space-time to other, considerably more serious, open problems
in their quark constituents, is a de facto abandonment of the search for a
deeper understanding of the nuclear force and structure.

This leaves no other choice than the search, conducted in Sect. 3, of a
broadening-covering of QM capable of providing a quantitative representa-
tion of the nuclear aspects under consideration.

The above aspects can be best illustrated via open problem of the total
magnetic moments of few-body nuclei.
In fact, any quantitative study of
the historical hypothesis herein considered requires the introduction of the
following new notions:

1) The extended, nonspherical and deformable shape of the charge dis-
tribution of nucleons, expectedly of spheroidal ellipsoidic character, hereon
2, n2
2, nk 6= 0, k = 1, 2, 3 , which are
represented with the quantities n1
functions of intensity of external ﬁelds and any other needed local2 charac-
teristic. For particles with spin along the third axis, the above quantities
2 and
represent a spheroidal ellipsoids which are oblate for n1
2. The evident condition of preserving the original
prolate for n1
volume of nucleons then yields the normalization hereon assumed

2 > n3

2 = n2

2 = n2

2 < n3

2, n3

n1

2 × n2

2 × n3

2 = 1 , n1

2 = n2

2 > or < n3

2 .

(2.1)

[It should be noted that in other cases the normalization n1
may be preferable].

2 + n2

2 + n3

2 = 3

2) The density of the medium in which motion occurs hereon represented
2 which, for the vacuum, is assumed to have the nor-

with the functions n4
malized value n4

2 = 1, and we shall write

n4

2 = 1 , < 1 , or > 1 .

(2.2)

As we shall see in Sect. 3, n4 is in reality the local index of refraction of
light, thus characterizing the local causal speed.

3) The alteration called mutation [6b] of the intrinsic magnetic moment

µN of nucleons N = n, p, hereon expressed with the symbol ˆµN = ˆµN (µN ,

10

2, . . .), µ = 1, 2, 3, 4, with ˆµN > µN for oblate deformations and ˆµN < µN
nµ
for prolate ones, where the term “mutation” is preferred over “deformation”
to indicate the fact that the underlying methods [6] (see the next sections)
are structurally diﬀerent than the known “quantum deformations” [4] of the
current literature.

It is evident that the nonspherical and deformable characteristics (2.1)
are beyond any representational capability of QM because the latter can
only represent perfectly spherical and perfectly rigid particles, as necessary
in order not to violate the fundamental rotational symmetry O(3). It should
be stressed that the same occurrence persists in second-quantization and
related form-factors which cannot represent the main characteristics of the
historical hypothesis under study here. By comparison, any real treatment of
the historical hypothesis requires ab initio the representation of nonspherical
and deformable particles.

The above limitations of QM are well known to be inherent in the very
structure of its fundamental carrier spaces, the Euclidean space E = E(r, δ, R)
with coordinates r = {rk}, k = 1, 2, 3, and metric δ = diag (1, 1, 1) over
the ﬁeld of real numbers R = R(n, +, ×) and the Minkowski space M =
M(x, η, R) with coordinates x = {xµ} , µ = 1, 2, 3, 4, and metric η =
diag (+1, +1, +1, −1) over R . In fact, the basic unit of E, I = diag {1, 1, 1}
(which is the space component of the unit of M) represents a perfect and
rigid sphere. Moreover, the theory of deformations is well known to be in-
compatible with the above spaces, their symmetries and, consequently, QM.
Alternatively, it is easy to see that deviations from the exact 720◦ in
the 4π interferometric measures (1.3) imply a deviation from the familiar
spinorial component of Dirac’s wavefunction,

ψ′ = R(θ3) × ψ = eiγ1γ2θ3/2 × ψ ,

where the γ’s are the conventional gamma matrices. This is the very reason
why the experiment is called the 4π spinorial symmetry test.

In fact, mutations of the intrinsic magnetic moment of nucleons imply a
departure from its characterization via Dirac’s equation from which a depar-
ture from law (2.3) follows. At any rate, for an angle of spin ﬂip diﬀerent
than 720◦, spinorial law (2.3) cannot represent the physical setting.

The above occurrences then leave no other choice than the search for a
suitable covering of QM which is more eﬀective for a quantitative represen-

11

tation of the nuclear aspects under consideration.

In the next section we introduce a new representation of extended, non-
spherical and deformable hadrons with main characteristics (2.1) and (2.2)
which implies a covering of the spinorial law (2.3) suitable for the exact rep-
resentation of 4π interferometric measures of type (1.3) and, therefore, of the
magnetic moment of few-body nuclei.

Particularly important is the achievement in the next section, apparently
for the ﬁrst time, of a generalization of the spinorial law (2.3) without al-
tering the spin of nucleons and other QM laws. The latter advances are
needed to dispel a rather general expectation in the earlier studies in the
ﬁeld that a possible conﬁrmation of data (1.3) would imply a departure from
the Fermi-Dirac character of the nucleon, with consequential inconsistency
with established nuclear laws, e.g., Pauli’s exclusion principle. In fact, de-
partures from conventional spin values are present in the “spin ﬂuctuations”
[4c], the ﬁrst SU(p,q)(2) quantum group [4e], the proposed test of
of Ref.
Pauli’s principle under external strong interactions [4f] and are inherent in
all subsequent q-deformations [4g,4h].

In this paper we present the application of the new formulations of Sect. 3
for the apparently ﬁrst, exact representation of the total magnetic moments of
few body nuclei. We then show that 4π-interferometric measures can indeed
provide its independent veriﬁcation. We ﬁnally point out other applications
and expected far reaching implications.

3 Relativistic hadronic mechanics

The insuﬃciencies of QM for the nuclear structure as well as for interior
systems in general have been recognized by various research groups. This has
stimulated the appearance in recent decades of various studies on possible
structural generalizations of QM.

A ﬁrst attempt was that initiated by Santilli [4b] with the parameter
(p, q)-deformations of QM with generalized product (A, B) = p × A × B −
q × B × A of Albert’s Lie-admissible type, generalized time evolution i ˙A =
(A, H), and SUp,q(2) quantum structure [4e,4f].

By the time Biedenharn [4g] and Macfarlane [4h] initiated their studies of
the simpler class of (1, q)-deformations in the mid 1980’s (thereafter followed
by a very large number of papers), the author had already abandoned this

12

line of inquiry because of its rather serious problems of physical consistency
identiﬁed, e.g., in Refs. [5].

In fact, (p, q)-time evolutions are evidently nonunitary, i.e., they have
the structure U × U † 6= I . As such, they are not invariant under their
own time evolution which induces the broader operator (P, Q)-deformations
[6a,6b] with generalized product (Aˆ,B) = A × P × B − B × Q × A also of
Albert’s Lie-admissible type with P = q × (U × U †)−1 and Q = q × (U ×
U †)−1, generalized time evolution i ˙A = (Aˆ,H), and correspondingly broader
SUP,Q(2) deformations.

The problematic aspects [5] originate from the fact that, after having
been achieved via nonunitary transforms, the latter structures are themselves
not form-invariant under further nonunitary transforms, thus lacking the
axiomatic consistensy of QM.

More generally, all existing deformations of QM with a nonunitary time
evolution [4], including q-, k-, quantum-, (p, q)- and (P, Q)-deformations,
when formulated on conventional Hilbert spaces over conventional ﬁelds have
the following rather serious problematic aspects of physical nature [5]: 1)
the basic unit is not invariant, thus preventing unambiguous applications
to experiments; 2) Hermiticity is not conserved in time, thus preventing the
existence of unambiguous observables; 3) special functions and transforms are
not unique and invariant, thus implying lack of uniqueness and invariance of
numerical predictions and physical laws; and other problems.

Most importantly, all the preceding deformations imply the violation
of the special relativity, e.g., because the deformed Minkowski space and
Poincar´e symmetry are not isomorphic to the origin ones (see, e.g., [4j]).
This creates the problem of identifying new axioms replacing Einstein’s ax-
ioms, establishing their axiomatic consistency and, after that, proving them
experimentally.

In this paper we shall use a third class of covering formulations [6] which
apparently resolve the above problematic aspects, thus permitting quanti-
tative studies with invariant basic unit, invariant Hermiticity-observability,
unique and invariant special functions, numerical predictions and physical
laws, yet possessing a nonunitary structure as evidently necessary for nov-
elty.

Above all, the covering formulations presented in this section are based
on the central requirement of preserving the axioms of the special relativ-
ity at the abstract level and merely realize them in a more general way.

13

This illustrates the reasons for our insistence in using terms diﬀerent than
“deformations” [4], such as “mutations” [6].

The emerging theory is known under the name of hadronic mechanics
(HM), today also known (for certain reasons identiﬁed below) as “isotopic
completion” of quantum mechanics, as originally proposed by the author
in [6a,6b] and subsequently studied by numerous researchers (see [7] for in-
dependent studies and comprehensive bibliographies), and outlined in the
recent monographs [6j,6k].

The formulation which is necessary for the study of the historical hy-
pothesis of Fig. 1, and its application to total nuclear magnetic moments is
relativistic hadronic mechanics (RHM) or “isotopic completion” of RQM. Its
study in Refs. [6j,6k] is made for the most general possible mutations as ap-
parently needed for extreme, interior, hadronic and astrophysical conditions.
In this section we shall present the apparently ﬁrst formulation of RHM
speciﬁcally conceived for nuclear physics under the crucial condition of rep-
resenting the historical hypothesis of Fig. 1. In so doing, we shall show, also
for the ﬁrst time, that RHM can provide the above representation while pre-
serving all conventional QM laws, such as Heisenberg’s uncertainties, Pauli’s
exclusion principle, etc.

RHM is constructed via maps of RQM called isotopies [6a] from the Greek
meaning of being “axiom-preserving” and referred to maps of any given lin-
ear, local-diﬀerential and unitary theory into its most general possible non-
linear, nonlocal-integral and nonunitary extensions which are nevertheless
capable of reconstructing linearity, locality and unitarity in certain general-
ized spaces called isospaces, and generalized ﬁelds called isoﬁelds.

It then follows that isotopic images of ﬁelds, spaces, algebras, etc., are
isomorphic to the original structures by conception and construction, and
they coincide at the abstract, realization free level, all this as preparatory
grounds to preserve Einsteinian axioms of the special relativity. Nevertheless,
as we shall see shortly, the two theories are physically inequivalent because
connected by nonunitary transforms.

Recall that the most dominant aspect of the predicted new terms in the
nuclear force is that of not being representable with a Hamiltonian and, of be-
ing nonunitary (otherwise we trivially remain within the class of equivalence
of RQM). The best way to construct the foundations of RHM is therefore by
subjecting the corresponding foundations of RQM to nonunitary transforms.
The fundamental quantities of RQM are: the basic unit of the underlying

14

Minkowski space, I = diag ({1, 1, 1}, 1) in Euclidean space (say, 1 cm) and
the unit of time (say, 1 sec) in dimensionless form with ¯h = 1; the basic
associative product A × B among generic quantities A, B (which is the
same for all products of RQM, those of: numbers, operators, etc., including
the modular action H × |ψi of operators H on Hilbert states |ψi); and the
fundamental relativistic canonical commutation rules [pµ, xν] = pµ × xν −
xν × pµ = −iδµ

ν × I .

Under nonunitary transforms, the above quantities become

U × U † = ˆI = ˆI † 6= I ,
I → ˆI = U × I × U † ,
A × B → ˆA ˆ× ˆB = U × A × B × U † = ˆA × ˆT × ˆB ,

U × [pµ, xν] × U † = [ˆpµˆ,ˆxν] = ˆpµ ˆ×xν − ˆxν ˆ×ˆpµ = −iδµ

ν × ˆI ,

ˆT = (U × U †)−1 = ˆI −1 ,

ˆK = U × K × U † , K = A, B, p, x .

(3.1a)

(3.1b)

(3.1c)

(3.1d)

(3.1e)

The above new images are then assumed as the fundamental quantities of
RHM.

A most dominant aspect of the above nonunitary transforms is that they
imply the joint mapping, called lifting [6a], of the unit I → ˆI while the
product is lifted in an amount which is the inverse of that of the unit, A×B →
ˆA ˆ× ˆB = ˆA × ˆT × ˆB, under which ˆI = ˆT −1 is the correct left and right unit
of the new theory,

ˆI ˆ× ˆA = ˆT −1 × ˆT × ˆA ≡ ˆA ˆ× ˆI = ˆA × ˆT × ˆT −1 ≡ A ,

∀A ,

(3.2)

which case (only) ˆI is called the isounit and ˆT the isotopic element [6a,6b].
The emerging new operator envelope ξ is called isoassociative because it
veriﬁes the associative law with respect to the isoproduct, ˆA ˆ×( ˆB × ˆC) =
( ˆA ˆ× ˆB) ˆ× ˆC. Note that the new unit ˆI is Hermitean and will therefore be
assumed hereon to be positive-deﬁnite. Under these conditions it is evident
that the original envelope ξ and its isotopic image ˆξ are isomorphic by central
objective, ξ ≈ ˆξ, and the map ξ → ˆξ is an isotopy. Yet they are physically
nonequivalent because nonunitarily related.

The representation of system with RQM is done via the knowledge of
one operator only, the Hamiltonian H, under the tacit assumption of the

15

simplest possible basic units I = diag ({1, 1, 1}, 1) . The representation of
systems via RHM requires the knowledge of two quantities, the conventional
Hamiltonian H to represent conventional potential interactions, and a second
quantity, the isounit ˆI, to represent all nonhamiltonian quantities.

We shall therefore assume hereon the realization of the isounit (for ¯h = 1),

ˆI = diag ( ˆIs, ˆIt) = diag ({n1

2, n2

2, n3

2}, n4

2) × ˆΓ(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) > 0 , (3.3a)

2, n2

2, n3

ˆIs = diag {n1

2} × ˆΓs(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) , ˆIt = n4

2 × ˆΓt(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) ,
(3.3b)
where ˆIs and ˆIt are called the space and time isounits, respectively, the nk
2’s
2 is the
are quantities (2.1) representing the shape of the hadron considered, n4
quantity (2.2) representing the density of the medium in which motion occurs,
and ˆΓ is a positive-deﬁnite 4 × 4 matrix representing the contact, nonlinear,
nonlocal, nonhamiltonian and nonunitary interactions (as identiﬁed in Sect.
2). The functional dependence of the isounit remains completely unrestricted
in RHM and must be determined from the characteristics of the case at hand
exactly as it is the case of the Hamiltonian in RQM.

It is important to know that identiﬁcations (3.3) are made following the
historical teaching by Hamilton, Lagrange, Jacobi and other Founders of
analytic dynamics according to which one quantity alone (we today call the
Hamiltonian or the Lagrangian) simply cannot represent the entire physical
reality. For this reason they formulated their analytic equations with external
terms.

Comprehensive classical studies not reported here for brevity (see the
review and bibliography in [6j,6k]) have established that the use of isounits
(3.3) is analytically equivalent to external terms and, in fact, they have the
same number of independent elements. The reformulation of the external
terms via the isounit has resulted to be necessary to preserve Einsteinian
axioms of the special relativity beginning at the classical level because it
permits the preservation of Lie’s theory which would be otherwise lost in
favor of the broader Lie-admissible theory [6a].

These classical studies have resulted in a new analytic mechanics, called
isohamiltonian mechanics which is the unique and unambiguous classical
image of the operator mechanics outlined in this section (see [6l] for the
latest studies and comprehensive bibliography).

16

A criticism is at times moved according to which RHM is “too broad”
because the isounit can have inﬁnitely possible values. This criticism is ev-
idently equivalent to the statement that RQM is “too broad” because it
admits inﬁnitely possible Hamiltonians.

In reality, both the Hamiltonian and the isounits are selected via fully
identiﬁed methods resulting in all applications considered until now in unique
and unambiguous expressions. The Hamiltonian is selected via all conven-
tional criteria which are those of the exterior problems, such as mass, charge,
potential, etc. The isounit is instead selected on the new grounds of the
interior problems, thus requiring the description of extended, nonspherical
and deformable shapes, density/index of refraction and contact interactions
which are absent in the QM literature of this century.

At any rate, any quantitative representation of the historical hypothesis
of Fig. 1 requires the capability to represent all inﬁnitely possible diﬀerent
shapes of the same nucleon, thus requiring for consistency inﬁnitely many
possible isounits for each given Hamiltonian.

Also, the noninitiated reader should know since these introductory lines
that, when an isolated interior system is considered from the outside, internal
nonpotential eﬀects must evidently averaged into constants because they are
short range, by therefore resulting in a mere rescaling of the shape and density
terms via the constant factor ˆΓ0 = hˆΓi . This occurrence renders preferable
the scale invariant description of the characteristic n-quantities, which will
be tacitly adopted hereon.

Once the basic isotopic unit, product and commutation rules are known,
the next step is the identiﬁcation of the axiomatically correct structure of
RHM. Extensive studies in this respect completed only recently with the
appearance of Ref. [6l] have shown that RHM is as axiomatically consistent
as RQM if and only if the nonunitary maps (3.1) are applied to the totality
of the formalism of RQM, without any exception known to the author. In
fact, any mixtures of isotopic structure with conventional QM methods leads
to a host of inconsistencies which generally remain undetected by nonexperts
in the ﬁeld.

This implies that the formalism of RQM must be reconstructed in such a
way to admit ˆI, rather than 1, as the correct left and right unit. Thus, num-
bers, metric spaces, geometries, symmetries, Hilbert spaces, etc., have to be
reconstructed in terms of the isoproduct A ˆ×B with isounit ˆI. The construc-
tion is simple, yet unique and unambiguous, and is done below for the ﬁrst

17

time by deriving each new structure from the single nonunitary map (3.1),
under the notation according to which all quantities with a “hat” are com-
puted in generalized spaces and those without are computed in conventional
spaces.

3.1

Isoﬁelds

The ﬁrst notion of RQM which must be isotopically lifted in order to achieve
invariant units, Hermiticity and numerical predictions is that of the ﬁelds
of ordinary real numbers R(n, +, ×) and complex numbers C(c, +, ×) with
conventional sum a+b, additive unit 0, multiplication a×b and multiplicative
unit I, a = n, c, resulting in the isoﬁelds [6f] ˆR = ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×) and ˆC(ˆc, +, ˆ×)
of isoreal numbers ˆn = U × n × U † = n × ˆI and isocomplex numbers ˆc =
U × c × U † = c × ˆI, n ∈ R, c ∈ C, ˆI 6= R, C equipped with the conventional
sum ˆ+ ≡ + and related additive unit ˆ0 ≡ 0, as well as with the isoproduct
and related isounit

ˆa ˆ×ˆb = U × a × b × U † = ˆa × ˆT × ˆb ,

ˆI = ˆT −1 ,

ˆI ˆ×ˆa ≡ ˆa ˆ× ˆI ≡ ˆa , ∀a = n, c .
(3.4)
The important property is that ˆR and C preserve all axioms of a ﬁeld [6j].
Thus, the liftings R → ˆR and C → ˆC are isotopies.

For consistency, all operations on numbers must then be isotopically lifted
in a simple yet unique and signiﬁcant way. We have in this way the following
isosquare, isosquare root, isoquotient, isonorm, etc. (see [6f] for details).

ˆa2 = ˆa ˆ×ˆa = a2 × ˆI ,

ˆaˆ/ˆb = (ˆa/ˆb) × ˆI ,

ˆ1
ˆa
2 = a
ˆ|ˆa| = |a| × ˆI ,

1

1

1 × ˆI

2 ,

a = n, c .

(3.5)

Thus the tradition statement “2 × 2 = 4” remained unchanged since
biblical times has meaning for RQM but has no meaning for RHM because
one must identify ﬁrst the selected unit and product for the operation “2×2”
to have sense. This illustrates from the outset the insidious inconsistencies
in attempting to appraise the new RHM via the use of old mathematics.

In short, RQM is deﬁned for numbers n whose basic unit is the quantity
+1 dating back to biblical times. RHM is instead deﬁned for new numbers
ˆn = n × ˆI which admit arbitrary (positive-deﬁnite) units ˆI. As we shall

18

see shortly, the introduction of the new isonumbers has deep and intriguing
implications, including the possibility of deﬁning new symmetries for con-
ventional line elements and inner products.

3.2

Iso-Hilbert spaces

The second notion of RQM which must be lifted for consistency is that of
conventional Hilbert spaces H with states |ψi, |φi, . . . , inner product hφ|ψi ∈
C and normalization hψ|ψi = 1, resulting in the iso-Hilbert space ˆH [6j] with
the following isostates, isoinner product and isonormalization

h ˆφˆ| ˆψi = U × hφ| × U † × (U × U †)−1 × U × |ψi × U † =
= h ˆφ| × ˆT × | ˆψi × ˆI ∈ ˆC ,

(3.6a)

h ˆψ| × ˆT × | ˆψi = 1 ,

| ˆψi = U × | ˆψi ,

h ˆφ| = hφ| × U † .

(3.6b)

Note that, again for consistency, the isoinner product must be an isocom-
plex number, i.e., must have the structure ˆc = c × ˆI. The new composition
is still inner (because ˆT i0) and, therefore, ˆH is still Hilbert. Then, ˆH ≈ H
and the lifting H → ˆH is again an isotopy.

The local isomorphism H ≈ ˆH can also be seen from the following new
invariance law of the conventional Hilbert product here expressed for ˆT in-
dependent from the integration variable,

hφ|ψi × I ≡ hφ| × |ψi × ˆT × ˆT −1 ≡ hφ| × ˆT × |ψi × ˆI ≡ hφˆ|ψi .

(3.7)

Thus, RHM is based on conventional Hilbert spaces, only realized in a way
more general than that of current use. 8

The isotopy H → ˆH is equally fundamental for the consistency of the
theory. To see it, note that, under the lifting I → ˆI = ˆT −1 and A × B →
ˆA ˆ× ˆB = ˆA ˆ× ˆT ˆ× ˆB, the action of an operator H on a state must be isotopic,
i.e., of the type ˆH ˆ×| ˆψi = ˆH × ˆT × | ˆψi because this is the only one admitting
the isounit ˆI ˆ×| ˆψi ≡ | ˆψi. Then the formulation of the above expression on a
conventional Hilbert space with inner product h ˆφ| × | ˆψi implies the general
loss of Hermiticity. In fact, we would have the condition {h ˆφ| ˆ× ˆHˆ†} × | ˆψi =

19

h ˆφ| × { ˆH ˆ×| ˆψi}, i.e., ˆHˆ† = ˆT −1 × H † × ˆT 6= ˆH †. On the contrary, the use of
the isoHilbert space implies the conditions

{h ˆφ| ˆ× ˆHˆ†} ˆ×| ˆψi = h ˆφ| ˆ×{ ˆH ˆ×| ˆψi} ,

i.e. ,

ˆHˆ† = ˆH † .

(3.8)

As a result, the conditions of Hermiticity and isohermiticity coincide,
quantities which are Hermitean-observable for RQM remain so for RHM, the
eigenvalues of Hermitean operators of RHM are real, and other properties
(see [6j] from brevity).

The only possible isoeigenvalues equations are then given by

ˆH ˆ×| ˆψi = ˆH(x, p) × ˆT (x, p, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) × | ˆψi = ˆE ˆ×| ˆψi =
= (E × ˆI) × ˆT × | ˆψi = E × | ˆψi .

with corresponding isotopic expectation values

h ˆHi =

h ˆψ| ˆ× ˆH ˆ×| ˆψi
h ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψi

=

h ˆψ| × ˆT × ˆH × ˆT × | ˆψi
h ˆψ| × ˆT × | ˆψi

,

(3.9)

(3.10)

which can be easily seen to coincide with the isoeigenvalues for the same
operator. Note from Eq.s (3.9) that the “ﬁnal numbers” of RHM to be
confronted with experiments are conventional.

The fundamental axioms of RHM, are a simple isotopy of the axioms of
RQM here omitted for brevity [6k]. We only mention for future needs the
axiom.

The above elements illustrate the main property that RHM coincides
with RQM at the abstract realization-free level for which, from the positive-
deﬁniteness of ˆI, we have R ≡ ˆR, C ≡ ˆC and H ≡ ˆH. All other aspects
of RHM are constructed following the same lines. Thus, RHM is not a
new theory, but merely a new realization of the abstract axioms of RHM.
These properties then establish the axiomatic consistency of RHM to such
an extent that any criticism in its axiomatic structure is de facto a criticism
on the axiomatic structure of RQM.

Despite the above abstract axiomatic identity, one should keep in mind
that, as illustrated in Eq.s (3.1), RHM and RQM are physically inequivalent
because the former is a nonunitary image of the latter. Moreover, isotopies
imply the following mapping of eigenvalues

20

H × |ψi = E0 × |ψi → H × T × |ψi = E × | ˆψi , E 6= E0 ,

(3.11)

according to which the same operator H has diﬀerent eigenvalues in RQM
and RHM, and this illustrates the nontriviality of the isotopies.

3.3

Isolinearity, isolocality, isounitarity

It is important to see that, despite their physical inequivalence, RHM pre-
serves the conventional linearity, locality and unitarity of RQM. To begin,
RHM is highly nonlinear in the weavefunctions (and their derivatives), as
evident from isoeigenvalues expressions (3.9). Yet, the theory is isolinear,
i.e., it veriﬁes the linearity conditions in isospace, e.g., for all possible ˆa ∈ ˆR
or ˆC and | ˆφi, | ˆψi ∈ ˆH, we have the identity

ˆA ˆ×(ˆa ˆ×| ˆψi + ˆb ˆ×| ˆφi) = ˆa ˆ× ˆA ˆ×| ˆψi + ˆb ˆ× ˆA ˆ×| ˆφi ,

(3.12)

A similar situation occurs for locality. In fact, RHM is nonlocal-integral
because interactions of that type are admitted in the ˆΓ’s terms of the isounits,
Eq.s (3.3). Nevertheless, RHM is isolocal, i.e., it veriﬁes the condition of lo-
cality in isospace. In particular, RHM is everywhere local-diﬀerential except
at the isounit. On more technical grounds, RHM is equipped with a new
topology called Tsagas-Sourlas integro-diﬀerential topology [7f].

By recalling that RQM is strictly local-diﬀerential, the above new topol-
ogy has fundamental physical relevance inasmuch as it permits mathemati-
cally rigorous quantitative studies of the nonlocal-integral component of the
nuclear force needed to represent the overlapping of the hyperdense charge
distributions of nucleons in the nuclear structure [5f].

Next, RQM is said to be unitary in the sense that the only allowed trans-
formations are of the unitary type, U × U † = U † × U = I. By comparison,
RHM is nonunitary because its transformation theory is based on the re-
quirement W × W † = ˆI 6= I. Nevertheless, RHM reconstructs unitarity
in isospace, a property called isounitarity.
In fact, the above nonunitary
transforms cal be rewritten in the following identical isotopic form

W = ˆW × ˆT 1/2 , W × W † = ˆI 6= I ,

(3.13a)

21

W × W † ≡ ˆW ˆ× ˆW † = ˆW † ˆ× ˆW = ˆI ,

(3.13b)

The necessity of the preceding reformulation is soon established by the
fact that,even though derived via nonunitarity transforms, the isotopic struc-
tures (3.1) and related properties are not invariant under additional nonuni-
tary transforms. However, the needed form-invariance is readily achieved
under the isounitary reformulation (3.13) for which

ˆI → ˆI = ˆW ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆW † = ˆW × ˆT × ˆT −1 × ˆT × ˆW † ≡ ˆI ,

(3.14a)

ˆA ˆ× ˆB → ˆW ˆ× ˆA ˆ× ˆB ˆ× ˆW † = ˆA′ ˆ× ˆB′ ,
ˆKv = ˆA < ˆB ,
ˆK ′ = ˆW ˆ× ˆK ˆ× ˆW † ,

(3.14b)

with a corresponding invariance of the condition of isohermiticity and all
other properties [6k]. This illustrates again that the lack of application of the
isotopies to any aspect of RQM implies insidious axiomatic inconsistencies.
Note that under isotransforms (3.14) the isounit and isotopic element
remain numerically invariant. Note also that the transformation theory of
RQM is restricted to transforms verifying the condition U × U † = I for a
ﬁxed I. Similarly, the isotransforms of RHM are restricted to those verifying
the condition ˆW ˆ× ˆW † = ˆI, this time, for ﬁxed ˆI (because its change would
imply the description of a diﬀerent system).

3.4

Isotopic physical laws

In this paper we are presenting the simplest possible branch of RHM, that
speciﬁcally formulated for applications to nuclear physics via a diagonal,
Hermitean and positive isounit (3.2). It is easy to see that the above branch
does indeed preserve all conventional QM laws.

Recall that generalizations of RQM which are conventionally nonlinear
in the wavefunctions, i.e. of the type H(x, p, ψ, . . .) × ψ = E × ψ [8] imply
the loss of the superposition principle, with consequential inapplicability to
a consistent treatment of composite systems such as nuclei, besides having
additional problematic aspects studied in [6k,9].

RHM is also highly nonlinear in view of the eigenvalue structure (3.9),
i.e., H(x, p) × ˆT ( ˆψ, . . .) × ˆψ = E × ˆψ. However, the mathematical notion of

22

isolinearity has the important physical implication that RHM preserves the
superposition principle in isospace, as one can verify. This has the impor-
tant implication that RHM can indeed be consistently applied to composite
systems such as few-body nuclei.

Moreover, conventional nonlinear systems can be identically reformulated
in the isotopic form, H(t, r, ψ) × ψ ≡ H0(t, r) × ˆT (ψ, . . .)iψ = E × ψ, by
therefore recovering axiomatic consistency in isospace.

Next, it is important to see that RHM preserves Heisenberg’s uncertainty

principle. In fact, from isocommutators (3.1d) we have (¯h = 1)

∆ˆri∆ˆpj ≥

h[ˆriˆ,ˆpj]i =

δi

j .

(3.15)

1
2

1
2

This establishes that the deviations from Heisenberg’s uncertainties predicted
by quantum deformations (e.g., of the so-called squeezed states [4j]) can be
removed via their reformulation in an invariant isotopic form (see [6k] for
details).

Along similar lines, it is possible to prove that the notions of isolocality
and isounitarity permit the preservation of causality under nonlocal-integral
forces (see also [6k] for brevity). The preservation of the Fermi-Dirac statis-
tics and related Pauli’s exlusion principle will be indicated shortly. The proof
of the preservation of other physical laws will be left to the interested reader.
The preservation of conventional laws can be seen from the fact that
the fundamental quantity of representing deviations from RQM, the isounit,
preserves all axiomatic properties of the conventional unit I, it is the basic
invariant of the new theory and its isoexpectation values recover the conven-
tional value I,

ˆI ˆn = ˆI ˆ× ˆI ˆ× . . . ˆ× ˆI ≡ ˆI ,

ˆ1
2 = ˆI ,
ˆI

ˆIˆ/ ˆI ≡ ˆI ,

etc.

(3.16a)

ˆI ′ = ˆW ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆW † ≡ ˆI ,

id ˆI/dt = ˆI ˆ× ˆH − ˆH ˆ× ˆO = ˆH − ˆH ≡ 0 ,

(3.16b)

h ˆIi =

h ˆψ| ˆ× ˆI ˆ×| ˆψi
h ˆψ| ˆ×| ˆψi

=

h ˆψ| × ˆT × ˆT −1 × ˆT × | ˆψi
ˆψ| × ˆT × | ˆψi

= I

(3.16c)

The above properties establishes the occurrence with far reaching im-
plications according to which the validity of conventional QM laws for the

23

nuclear structure, such as Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Pauli’s exclu-
sion principle, etc., by no means, imply that the conventional formulation
of RQM is the only applicable discipline because exactly the same laws are
admitted by the structurally more general RHM.

It should be indicated for completeness that in this paper we are studying
the simplest possible realization of RHM, that speciﬁcally constructed for
the nuclear structure under the condition of preserving conventional physical
laws. More general realizations exist [6k,6l], e.g., those still of isotopic type
with nondiagonal isounit ˆI, or the more general ones of genotopic type with
nonhermitean basic unit and related transforms

I → ˆI = U × I × W † 6= ˆI † , U × U 6= I , W × W † 6= I ,

(3.17)

which are particularly suited to represent irreversibility under open-noncon-
servative conditions, or those of hyperstructural type where ˆI is a set of
nonhermitean elements, which are particularly suited to represent irreversible
biological systems [6k], for which conventional QM laws are not necessarily
preserved.

The formulation of RHM presented in this section is intended to describe
nucleons when members of a nuclear structure with conventional spin veri-
fying conventional laws and merely having a nonspherical-deformable shape.
The more general formulations indicated above are intended for more gen-
eral physical conditions, such as a neutron in the core of a collapsing star
considered as external, and will not be considered in this paper.

3.5

Isotopic realization of “hidden variables”
and EPR “completion” of RQM

The reader should be aware that RHM provides an explicit and concrete re-
alization of the theory of “hidden variables” [10a], which are actually realized
via the operator λ = ˆT (x, ˙x,ˆ, ∂ψ, . . .) and isoeigenvalues

ˆH ˆ×λ| ˆψi = ˆH × λ(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) × | ˆψi = Eλ × | ˆψi .
(3.18)
In fact, the right modular actions “H × ψ” and “H ˆ×ψ” lose any distinction
at the abstract level and, in this sense, they are evidently “hidden” in the
conventional realization.

24

As a result, RHM constitutes a form of “completion” of RQM, hereon
called ”isotopic completion”, which results to be much along the celebrated
argument by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [10b]. In particular, the comple-
tion is permitted by the fact that von Neumann’s theorem [10c] and Bell’s
inequalities [10d] are inapplicable (and not ”violated”) for the isotopic com-
pletion due to its nonunitary structure.

More speciﬁcally, von Neumann theorem is inapplicable because the same
Hamiltonian H has an inﬁnite number of diﬀerent sets of eigenvalues in RHM,
one per each possible isotopic element (”hidden operator”) h= ˆT . Bell’s
inequalities are inapplicable, e.g., because RHM requires a nonunitary image
of Pauli’s matrices (see below for their outline). For detailed studies see ref.
[6k], App. 4.C. The classical limit under isotopies is also studies in ref. [10e].
A consequence of the above occurrences is that all applications of RHM
outlined below, including the exact representation of nuclear magnetic mo-
ments of Sect. 4, are applications of the ”isotopic completion” of RQM much
along the celebrated E = P − R argument.

3.6

Iso-Minkowski spaces

The next notion of RQM which must be isotopically lifted for compatibil-
ity with basic structures (3.1) is that of the underlying carrier space, the
Minkowskian space M(x, η, R) with space-time coordinates x = {xµ} =
{r, c0t}, where c0 is the speed of light in vacuum, and metric η = diag (1, 1, 1,
− 1) and basic unit I = diag ({1, 1, 1}, 1) on R. The listing yields the iso-
Minkowski space ˆM = ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR), ﬁrst proposed by Santilli [6e] in 1983,
which is characterized by the lifting of: the coordinates x into the isoco-
ordinates ˆx = U × x × U † = x × ˆI; the basic unit of M into the isounit
(here assumed to be diagonal from its Hermiticity), I → ˆI, and the lifting
of the metric η of the inverse of that of the unit, η → ˆη = ˆT × η. The basic
isointerval is in then given by or ˆx, ˆy ∈ ˆM

(ˆx − ˆy)ˆ2 = [(ˆxµ − ˆyν) ˆ× ˆNµν(x, ˙x, ˆψ, ∂ψ, . . .) ˆ×(ˆxν − ˆyν)] ˆ× ˆI =
= (x − y)ˆ2 = [(xµ − yν) × ˆηµν(x, ˙x, ˆψ, ∂ψ, . . .) × (xν − yν)] × ˆI =
2 −(x3−y3)2 ˆT 3

3 −(x4−y4)2 ˆT 4

1 +(x2−y2)2 ˆT 2

4 ]× ˆI ∈ ˆR. (3.19a)

= [(x1−y1)2 ˆT 1

ˆI = diag ({ ˆI 1

1, ˆI 2

2, ˆI 3

3}, ˆI 4

4) = ˆT −1 > 0 ,

25

ˆT = diag ({ ˆT 1

(3.19b)
where ˆN is an isomatrix, i.e., a matrix whose elements are isoscalars ˆNµν =
ˆηµν × ˆI ∈ ˆR (and, therefore, its operations and products are isotopic) while
ˆη is an ordinary matrix, i.e., with elements ˆηµν given by ordinary scalars.

4 ) > 0 ,

1 , ˆT 2

2 , ˆT 3

3 }, ˆT 4

Note from the preceding structure that the use of isocoordinates ˆx = x× ˆI
is redundant in the isointerval. Nevertheless we shall keep using the scripture
ˆM = ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) rather than ˆM (x, ˆη, ˆR) to recall that the coordinates are
computed in isospace with respect to a generalized metric. Note also that
the isospace ˆM and the underlying isoﬁeld ˆR share the same generalized unit
ˆI.

Note ﬁnally that ˆM constitutes the most general possible invariant with
signature (+, +, +, −) with a well behaved, yet arbitrary functional depen-
dence on coordinates, wavefunctions, their derivatives of the needed order,
as well as any additional quantity of the interior problem.

For this reason, as shown in details by Aringazin [11], the iso-Minkowski
space ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) is said to be directly universal, i.e., admitting as particu-
lar case all possible signature-preserving generalizations of M (universality),
directly in the coordinates of the observer (direct universality).
In partic-
ular, the iso-Minkowskian metric ˆη admits as particular cases the Rieman-
nian, Finslerian, non-Desarguesian and all other possible metrics in (3+1)-
dimension.

Despite the above arbitrariness, it has been proved that the original (ab-
stract) Minkowskian axioms are preserved under the joint liftings I → ˆI =
ˆT −1 and η → ˆη = ˆT × η. Thus, ˆM ≈ M and the lifting M → ˆM is an
isotopy.

The latter results can also be seen via the new invariance law of the con-
ventional Minkowskian interval (here expressed for a non-null scalar function
n)

(x − y)2 = [(xµ − yµ) × ηµν × (xν − yν)] × I ≡
≡ [(xµ − yµ) × (n−2 × ηµν) × (xν − yν)] × (n2 × I) =
= [(xµ − yµ) × ˆηµν × (xν − yν)] × ˆI = (x − y)ˆ2 ,
The new invariance identiﬁed by RHM is therefore [L = length] × [I =
unit] = Inv. As we shall see shortly, this is the mechanism which permits the
preservation of spin and other conventinal laws.

(3.20)

26

Thus, RHM merely expresses ”hidden” degrees of freedom of conventional
quantum axioms. These degrees of freedom, expressed via the new invariance
laws (3.7) and (3.20) have remained undetected through this century because
they required the prior discovery of new numbers, those with arbitrary units
[6f].

Isodiﬀerential calculus

3.7
Despite the use of the isotransformations theory, dynamical equations on ˆM
are not invariant when expressed in terms of the conventional diﬀerential
calculus. This has requested the construction of the isodiﬀerential calculus
[6l] which is characterized by a simple, yet unique and eﬀective isotopy of
the conventional calculus based on the following isodiﬀerential, isoderivative
and related primary properties

ˆdˆxµ = ˆI µ

α × dˆxα ,

ˆ∂/ ˆ∂ ˆxµ = ˆT α

µ × ∂/∂ ˆxα ,

(3.21a)

ˆ∂ ˆxµˆ/ ˆ∂ ˆxν = δµ

ν × ˆI ,

ˆ∂ ˆxµˆ/ ˆ∂ ˆxν = ˆI µν × ˆI ,

ˆ∂ ˆxµ

ˆ/ ˆ∂ ˆxν = ˆTµν × ˆI ,

(3.21b)

where we have implied identities of the type

ˆx ˆ×| ˆψi = x × | ˆψi ,

( ˆ∂ˆ/ ˆ∂ ˆx) ˆ×| ˆψi ≡ ˆ∂/ ˆ∂ ˆx| ˆψi ,

etc.

(3.22)

The above isocalculus has only recently permitted the achievement of an
axiomatically consistent and form-invariant characterization of the isotopic
linear momentum operator [6l] which had escaped identiﬁcation for over a
decade and which can be written (¯h = 1)

ˆpµ ˆ×| ˆψi = pµ × ˆT (x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) × | ˆψi = −i ˆ∂µ| ˆψi = −i ˆT α

µ ∂α| ˆψi ,

(3.23)

which does indeed recover the fundamental isocommutation rules (3.1d).

Isomomentum (3.23) is of evident fundamental importance because it per-
mits the explicit construction of the Hamiltonian, symmetries, applications,
etc.

The integral calculus also admits a simple isotopy with basic deﬁnitions

× ˆT for which ˆ

ˆ∂ ˆx = ˆx. For additional details, one may consult [6l].

=

R

R

R

27

3.8

Isofunctional analysis

It has been proved [6j] that the elaboration of data in RHM via ordinary and
special functions and transforms is inconsistent because not invariant under
the time evolution of the theory. This has required the isotopic lifting of
functional analysis we cannot possibly review here [6j].

We merely mention for future use that in the transition from the two-
dimensional iso-Euclidean space with basic unit ˆI = diag (n1
2) to the
iso-Gauss plane for the characterization of isotrigonometric functions, the
isounit assumes the value ˆIθ = n1 × n2 and ˆIφ = n3 while angles assume the
isotopic value ˆθ = θ/n1 × n2, ˆφ = φ/n3. This permits the construction of the
isotrigonometric functions

2, n2

isocos ˆθ = n1 × cos(θ/n1 × n2) ,

isosin ˆθ = n2 × sin(θ/n1 × n2) ,

(3.24)

with corresponding isospherical coordinates

x = r isosin φ isocos θ ,

y = r isosin φ isocos ˆθ ,

z = r isocos φ .

(3.25)

The isohyperbolic functions and other structures are then constructed ac-
cordingly. Particular important for application is the iso-Dirac delta function
ˆδ(ˆx) which, in general, has no longer a singularity at ˆx, thus having intriguing
conceptual and technical implications in the possible removal of singularities
ab initio (see [6j], for brevity).

3.9 Lie-Santilli isotheory

The fundamental algebraic structure of RQM, Lie’s theory, is linear, local-
diﬀerential and canonical-unitary. As such, it is insuﬃcient to characterize
the desired nonlinear, nonlocal-integral and noncanonical-nonunitary compo-
nent of the nuclear force due to mutual penetration of the hyperdense charge
distributions of nucleons.

The primary isotopies of the original proposal [6a,6b,6d] to build HM were
those of Lie’s theory, i.e., the isotopies of universal enveloping associative
algebras, Lie algebras, Lie groups, representation theory, etc. which are
today called Lie-Santilli isotheory [7].

28

Again, by conception and construction, the Lie-Santilli isotheory is not
a new theory, but merely a new realization of the abstract axioms of Lie’s
theory. Also, recall that all Lie algebras (over a ﬁeld of characteristic zero) are
known from Cartan’s classiﬁcation. Therefore, the isotopies of Lie’s theory
cannot possibly produce new algebras, and have been constructed instead to
produce novel realizations of known Lie algebras.

The main lines of the Lie-Santilli isotheory can be summarized as follows.
Let ξ(L) be the universal enveloping associative algebra of an n-dimensional
†}, unit I, associative product
Lie algebra L with generators X = {Xk} = {Xk
Xi × Xj, and inﬁnite-dimensional basis I, Xk, Xi × Xj, i ≤ j, Xi × Xj × Xk,
i ≤ j ≤ k, . . . (Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀ-Witt theorem), and related exponentiation
eiXw = I + (i × X × w)/1! + (i × X × w) × (i × X × w)/2! + . . ., w ∈ R.

The universal enveloping isoassociative algebra ˆξ(L), ﬁrst proposed in
[6a,6d], is the isotopic image of ξ(L) with isounit ˆI, the same generators
ˆXk = Xk only computed in isospace, isoassociative product ˆXi ˆ× ˆXj, inﬁnite
dimensional isobasis ˆI, ˆXk, ˆXi ˆ× ˆXj, i ≤ j, ˆXi ˆ× ˆXj ˆ×s ˆXk, i ≤ j ≤ k, . . .
(isotopic Poincar´e-Birkhoﬀ-Witt theorem [6a,6d,7c]), and isoexponentiation

ˆei×X×w ≡ ˆeˆi ˆ× ˆX ˆ× ˆw = {eiX× ˆT ×w} × ˆI ,
(3.26)
where w = {wk} ∈ R, and ˆw = x × ˆI are the isoparameters. The script
ˆξ(L) rather than ˆξ( ˆL) is used in the literature [6,7] because, when ˆI is no
longer positive-deﬁnite, in general ˆL ≈/ [ˆξ(L)]−. This perm, its the study of
a rather intriguing uniﬁcation of all simple, compact and noncompact Lie
algebra of the same dimension into one unique isoalgebra [6j]. Note the
uniqueness of isoexponentiation (3.26) as compared to the lack of uniqueness
of the exponentiation for q- and other deformations [5].

Let L be the Lie algebra homomorphic to the antisymmetric algebra
[ξ(L)]− of ξ(L) over a ﬁeld F (a, +, ×) of real, complex or quaternionic num-
bers a with familiar Lie’s second theorem [Xi, Xj] = Xi × Xj − Xj × Xi =
k × Xk. The Lie-Santilli isoalgebra is the isospace ˆL with elements ˆXk =
Cij
Xk = Xk

† on ˆH over ˆF with the isocommutation rules [6a,6b,6d]

[ ˆXiˆ, ˆXj] = ˆXi ˆ× ˆXj − ˆXj ˆ× ˆXi = ˆC k

(3.27)
whose brackets satisfy Lie’s axioms in the isotopic form [ ˆAˆ, ˆB] = −[ ˆBˆ, ˆA],
[ ˆAˆ,[ ˆBˆ, ˆC]]+[ ˆBˆ,[ ˆCˆ, ˆA]]+[ ˆCˆ,[ ˆAˆ, ˆB]] = 0, and the isodiﬀerential rules [ ˆA ˆ× ˆBˆ, ˆC] =
ˆA ˆ×[ ˆBˆ, ˆC] + [ ˆAˆ, ˆC] ˆ× ˆB.

ij ˆ× ˆXk ,

29

Let G be the (connected) Lie transformation group characterized by the
“exponentiation” of L into the elements U(w) = ei×X×w with familiar laws
U(w) × U(w′) = U(w + w′), U(w) × U(−w) = U(0) = I. Then the (con-
nected) Lie-Santilli isotransformation group ˆG is the “isoexponentiation” of
ˆL according to Eq.s (3.26) with isotopic laws

ˆx′ = ˆU( ˆw) ˆ×ˆx = ˆeˆi ˆ× ˆX ˆ× ˆw ˆ×ˆx =

= {ei×X× ˆT ×w} × ˆI × ˆT × ˆx = {ei×X ˆ× ˆT ×w} × ˆx ,

(3.28a)

ˆU ( ˆw) ˆ× ˆU( ˆw′) = ˆU ( ˆw + ˆw′) ,

ˆU ( ˆw) ˆ× ˆU(− ˆw) = ˆU (ˆ0) = ˆI .

(3.28b)

The nontriviality of the above isotopic theory over the conventional for-
mulation is then established by the appearance of the isotopic element ˆT with
an unrestricted functional dependence in the exponent of the group struc-
ture. This guarantees that the Lie-Santilli isotheory has the most general
possible nonlinear, nonlocal-integral and nonhamiltonian-nonunitary struc-
ture, although reformulated in an identical isolinear, isolocal and isounitary
form.

A main diﬀerence between the Lie theory and the covering Lie-Santilli
isotheory is that the former admits only one formulation, while the latter
admits two formulations, one in isospace over isoﬁelds, and the other given
by its projection in the original space.

As a general rule, the Lie and Lie-Santilli theories coincide when formu-
lated in their respective spaces, and this applies also for weights and the
representation theory. However, the projection of the latter in the space of
the former shows deviations called mutations which will be illustrated shortly.
We are now equipped to indicate the preservation of the Fermi-Dirac
character of nucleons under the simplest possible isotopy are considered that
characterized by nonunitary transforms (3.1) with a diagonal isounit ˆI. The
problem belongs to the study of the axiom-preserving isotopies S ˆU(2) of
SU(2)-spin initiated by Santilli [6h] (which are diﬀeret than the axiom-
violating deformations SUp,q(2) initiated in [4e]). The same isotopies are
reformulated below apparently for the ﬁrst time via general rule (3.1), result-
ing in a new class of isorepresentations of S ˆU(2) of rather simple construction
and eﬀective applications.

30

Recall that the regular (two-dimensional) representation of SU(2) is char-
acterized by the conventional Pauli matrices σk with familiar commutation
rules [σi, σj] = 2×i×ǫijk×σk and eigenvalues σ2×|ψi = σk×σk×|ψi = 3×|ψi,
σ3 × |ψi = ±1 × |ψi on H over C.

RHM requires the construction of nonunitary images of Pauli’s matrices,
which are here submitted for the ﬁrst time (within the context of RHM) via
the rules

ˆσk = U × σk × U † , U × U † = ˆI 6= I ,

(3.29a)

U =

i × m1
0

 

0
i × m2 !

, U † =

−i × m1
0

0
−i × m2 !

,

ˆI =

2

m1

0
0 m2

2

 

!

,

ˆT =

m1

−2

0
−2
0 m2

,

!

(3.29b)

 

 

where the m’s are well behaved nowhere null functions, resulting in the reg-
ular iso-Pauli matrices

ˆσ1 =

0 m1

2

2

m2

 

0 !

,

ˆσ2 =

0
i × m2

2

 

2

−i × m1
0

,

!

ˆσ3 =

 

2

m1

0
0 m2

2

.

!
(3.30)

Another realization is given by nondiagonal unitary transforms

U =

0 m1
m2

0 !

 

, U † =

0 m2
m1

0 !

,

 

ˆI =

2

m1

0
0 m2

2

 

,

!

ˆT =

m1

−2

0
−2
0 m2

 

,

!

(3.31)

with corresponding regular iso-Pauli matrices

ˆσ1 =

 

0
m1 × m2

m1 × m2
0

!

,

ˆσ2 =

0
i × m1 × m2

 

−i × m1 × m2
0

,

!

ˆσ3 =

2

m1

0
0 m2

2

.

!

 

(3.32)

or by more general realizations of transforms (3.29a), e.g. with Hermitean
nondiagonal isounits ˆI .

31

All iso-Pauli matrices of the above regular class verify the following iso-

commutators rules and isoeigenvalue equations on ˆH over ˆC

[ˆσiˆ,ˆσj] = ˆσi × ˆT × ˆσj − ˆσj × ˆT × ˆσi = 2 × i × ǫijk × ˆσk

(3.33a)

ˆσˆ2 ˆ×| ˆψi = (ˆσ1 ˆ×ˆσ1 + ˆσ2 ˆ×ˆσ2 + ˆσ3 ˆ×ˆσ3) ˆ×| ˆψi = 3 × | ˆψi ,

(3.33b)

ˆσ3 ˆ×| ˆψi = ±1 × | ˆψi .
and this establishes the preservation of the Fermi-Dirac statistics and Pauli’s
exlusion principle for the nuclear realization of RHM under consideration in
this section.

(3.33c)

We should note that realization (3.31) is the same as that constructed

via the so-called Klimyk’s rule [6k], according to which

ˆσk = σk × ˆI ,

[ˆσiˆ,ˆσj] = [σi, σj] × ˆI = 2 × i × ǫijk × σk × ˆI ,

(3.34a)

ˆσˆ2 ˆ×| ˆψi = 3 × | ˆψi ,

ˆσ3 ˆ×| ˆψi = ±| ˆψi ,

(3.34b)

although realization (3.29) introduced in this paper is evidently broader.

It should be indicated for completeness that the preservation of conven-
tional values of spin has been speciﬁcally selected here, because in general
the isotopies do not preserve the original eigenvalues. As an illustration, the
isoselfscalar invariance of the Hilbert space, Eq.s (3.7), implies the existence
of the following irregular iso-Pauli matrices [6h]

ˆσk = ∆ × σk × ˆI ,

[ˆσi, ˆσj] = ∆ǫijk × ˆσk ,

(3.35a)

ˆσˆ2 ˆ×| ˆψi = 3 × ∆2 × | ˆψi ,

ˆσ3 ˆ×| ˆψi = ±∆ × | ˆψi ,

(3.35b)

where ∆ is a well behaved but arbitrary non-null scalar function usually
assumed to be ∆ = det ˆI, with evident departure from conventional spin
values.

In essence, the Fermi-Dirac character of the nucleons when members of
a nuclear structure is experimentally established and any generalization of

32

RQM for nuclear physics must recover this fundamental characteristics, as
done with isorepresentation (3.29).

However, the preservation of such Fermi-Dirac character is far from be-
ing established on both theoretical and experimental grounds for the same
nucleons in more general physical conditions, e.g., in the core of a collapsing
star. The more general irregular isorepresentations of S ˆU (2) with general-
ized spin values have been constructed to initiate quantitative studies of the
latter more general physical conditions.

3.10

Iso-Poincar´e symmetry

As it is well known, that the Lorentz symmetry L(3.1), the Poincar´e symme-
try P (3.1) = L(3.1) × T (3.1) and its spinorial covering P(3.1) = SL(2.C) ×
T (3.1) are not exact for isoseparation (3.19). Their isotopic images were con-
structed for the ﬁrst time by Santilli and called iso-Lorentz symmetry ˆL(3.1)
[6e], iso-Poincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1) = ˆL(3.1) ˆ× ˆT (3.1) [6g], and isospinorial
covering ˆP(3.1) = S ˆL(2. ˆC) ˆ× ˆT (3.1) [6i]. It was also proved that the latter
isosymmetries provide indeed the universal invariance of isoseparation (3.19).
Moreover, it has been proved in the literature that the above isosymmetries
represent indeed extended, nonspherical and deformable charge distributions
under conventional values of spin, and characterize indeed contact, nonlin-
ear, nonlocal, nonhamiltonian and nonunitary interactions as expected in the
nuclear force.

The main characteristics of the space-time isosymmetries can be sum-
marized as follows. The basic isotopic structures are the ﬁeld of isoreal
numbers ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×) and the iso-Minkowski space ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) equipped with
the Tsagas-Sourlas isotopology [7f]. The iso-Poincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1) on ˆM
over ˆR is then constructed via the rules of the Lie-Santilli isotheory [6a,6j,7c,
7h]. This essentially consists in preserving the conventional generators and
parameters

X = {Xk} = {Mµν × pα} , Mµν = xµ × pν − xν × pµ ,

(3.36a)

w = {wk} = {(θ, v), a} ∈ R ,

(3.36b)

and by submitting to isotopies the operations constructed of them.

33

FIGURE 4. Iso-Keplerian systems. As it well known, the generators
X = {Xk} = X † of a QM space-time symmetry represent total conserved
physical quantities, such as total energy, total linear momentum, etc. The
preservation under isotopies of the same generators X assures ab initio the
preservation of the same total conservation laws. Since space-time isosymme-
tries imply additional interactions of contact/zero range type, we can there-
fore see from the outset that space-time isosymmetries characterize a new
class of bound states, called isokeplerian systems, for which the isotopies of
Lie’s theory were proposed in the ﬁrst place [6a,6b]. The new bound systems
are characterized by conventional, conserved, total physical quantities, yet
with constituents in mutual physical contact, exactly as desired for the nu-
clear structure. Computer visualization of the iso-Poincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1)
then yields the elimination of the heaviest constituent at the center, the Ke-
plerian nucleus, and its replacement with an arbitrary constituent, exactly
as occurring in the nuclear structure. The iso-Poincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1)
studied in this section and its isospinorial covering ˆP(3.1) studied in the
next section are therefore expected to permit basic novel advances in nuclear
physics studied in Sect.s 4 and 5.

The isotopies considered in this paper preserve conventional connectivity
properties. Therefore, connected component of the iso-Poincar´e symmetry
is ˆP0(3.1) = S ˆO(3.1) ˆ× ˆT (3.1), where S ˆO(3.1) is the connected iso-Lorentz
group [6e] and ˆT (3.1) is the group of isotranslations [6g], with isotransforms
on ˆM ( ˆX, ˆη, ˆR),

ˆx′ = ˆA( ˆw) ˆ×ˆx = ˆA( ˆw) × ˆT (x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) × ˆx = ˜A(w) × ˆx ,

ˆA = ˜A × ˆI ,

(3.37)

where the ﬁrst form is the mathematically correct one, the last form being
used for computation simplicity. Note that the use of conventional linear
transforms ˆx′ = A(w) × ˆx would now violate linearity in isospace, besides
not yielding the desired symmetry of isoseparation (3.19).

The (connected component of the) iso-Poincar´e group can be written in

terms of isoexponentiations (3.26) as (or can be deﬁned by) [6g]

34

ˆP0(3.1) : ˆA( ˆw) = Πk ˆeiX×w = (ΠkeiX× ˆT ×w) × ˆI = ˜A(w) × ˆI .

(3.38)

The preservation of the original dimension is ensured by the isotopic
It is easy to see that structure

Baker-Campbell-Hausdorﬀ Theorem [6a].
(3.38) forms a connected Lie-Santilli transformation isogroup.

To identify the isoalgebra ˆp0(3.1) of ˆP (3.1) we use the isodiﬀerential cal-
culus (Sect. 3.7) and isolinear momentum (3.23) which yield the isocommu-
tation rules [6g]

[ ˆMµνˆ, ˆMαβ] = i(ˆηνα ˆMµβ − ˆηµα ˆMνβ − ˆηνβ ˆMµα + ˆηµβ ˆMαν) ,

(3.39a)

[ ˆMµνˆ,ˆpα] = i(ˆηµα ˆpν − ˆηνα ˆpµ) ,
[ˆpαˆ,ˆpβ] = 0 ,
where [Aˆ,B] = A × ˆT (x, ψ, . . .) × B − B × ˆT (x, ψ, . . .) × A.

The iso-Casimir invariants are then lifted into the forms [loc.cit.]

C (0) = ˆI(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .) = ˆT −1 ,

C (1) = ˆpˆ2 = ˆpµ ˆ×ˆpµ = ˆηµν ˆpµ ˆ×ˆpν ,

C (3) = ˆWµ ˆ× ˆW µ ,

ˆWµ = ǫµαβρ ˆM αβ ˆ×ˆpρ .

The local isomorphism ˆp0(3.1) ≈ p0(3.1) is ensured by the positive-
deﬁniteness of ˆT . Alternatively, the use of the generators in the form ˆM µ
ν =
xµ × pν − xν × pµ yields the conventional structure constants under a general-
ized Lie product, as one can verify via the use of properties (3.21). The above
local isomorphism is suﬃcient, per s´e, to guarantee the axiomatic consistency
of RHM.

The main components of ˆP (3.1) are the following:
3.10.A. Isorotations, which are the space components S ˆO(3)[6e,6g,6h].
They can be computed from isoexponentiations (3.38) and the space compo-
nents ˆTkk of the isotopic element in diagonal form, ˆT = diag (Tµµ), Tµµ = ˆT ν
µ ,
yielding the isorotations in the (x,y)-plane

35

(3.39b)

(3.40a)

(3.40b)

(3.40c)

x′ = x×cos( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 ×θ3)− ˆy × ˆT

1
2

1
2

− 1
11 × ˆT
2

1
2

22 ×sin( ˆT

11 × ˆT

1
2

1
2

22 ×θ3), (3.41a)

y′ = ˆx × ˆT

11 × ˆT

1
2

− 1
22 × sin( ˆT
2

1
2

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3) + ˆy cos( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3) , (3.41b)

1
2

1
2

1
2

(see [6k] for general isorotations in all three Euler angles).

As one can easily verify, isorotations (3.41) leave invariant all inﬁnitely

possible ellipsoidical deformations of the sphere

rˆ2 = x ˆT11x + y ˆT22y + z ˆT33z = R ,
thus conﬁrming the achievement of a representation of the deformation theory
via a covering of Lie’s theory, as needed for a quantitative representation of
the historical hypothesis of Fig. 1.

(3.42)

FIGURE 5. Isosphere. A central objective of RHM (from which the
new mechanics derived its name [6b]) is the representation of hadrons as
they are expected to be in the physical reality: extended, nonspherical and
deformable charge distribution.
In nuclear physics, the representation of
these characteristics must be achieved under the condition of preserving
conventional values of spin. The achievement of this dual objective is ge-
ometrically established by the notion depicted in this ﬁgure, the isosphere,
which maps all inﬁnitely possible ellipsoidical shapes into the perfect sphere
rˆ2 = (rt × δ ˆ×r) × ˆI in the iso-Euclidean spaces ˆE(ˆr, ˆδ, ˆR), ˆr = {ˆrk} = {rk},
ˆδ = ˆTs × δ, δ = diag (1, 1, 1), ˆTs = diag ( ˆT11, ˆT22, ˆT33), ˆIs = ˆT −1
In
turn, the reconstruction of the perfect spheridicity assures the preservation
of the exact rotational symmetry, ˆO(3) ≈ O(3) and S ˆU(2) ≈ SU(2), and ,
consequently, of conventional values of the orbital and intrinsic angular mo-
menta. In fact, the lifting of the semiaxes of the perfect sphere into those of
spheroidal ellipsoids, 1k → ˆTkk, when the related units are lifted of the in-
verse amounts, 1k → ˆT −1
, implies the preservation of the perfect sphericity.
The novel model of nuclear structure permitted by the iso-Poincar´e symme-
try (Fig. 4) is therefore based on nucleons represented as isospheres, which
are perfect sphere when represented in isospace ˆE, but when projected in

[6j].

kk

s

36

our space E are given by all inﬁnitely possible spheroidal ellipsoids, exactly
as desired for the historical hypothesis of Fig. 1.

3.10.B Iso-Lorentz boosts, which can be written explicitly in the (3,4)-

plane [6e]

x1′

= x1 ,

x2′

= x2 ,

(3.43a)

x3′

= x3 × sin h( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × v) − x4 × ˆT

1
2

1
2

− 1
33 × ˆT
2

1
2

44 × cos h( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × v) =

1
2

1
2

= ˆγ × (x3 − ˆT

− 1
33 × ˆT
2

1
2

44 × ˆβ × x4) ,

(3.43b)

x4′

= −x3× ˆT

1
2

33 2×c0

−1 ˆT

− 1
44 ×sin h( ˆT
2

1
2

33 × ˆT

44 ×v)+x4×cos h( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 ×v) =

1
2

1
2

1
2

where

= ˆγ × (x4 − ˆT

− 1
33 × ˆT
2

− 1
44 × ˆβ × x3) ,
2

ˆβ = (vk × ˆTkk × vk/c0 × ˆT44 × c0)

1

2 ,

ˆγ = (1 − ˆβˆ2)−1/2 .

(3.43c)

(3.44a)

(3.44b)

Note that the above isotransforms are nonlinear (in x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, . . .), nonlo-
dv ˆψ† ˆψ
cal-integral (e.g., because the factor ˆΓ in (3.3) can be of the type exp
representing precisely the overlapping of the wavepackets of the constituents)
and nonunitary (because the isoexponentiations (3.38) are indeed nonunitary
in H), precisely as desired, yet they are formally similar to the Lorentz trans-
forms, as expected from their isotopic character. This also conﬁrms the local
isomorphism S ˆO(3.1) ≈ SO(3.1) [6e].

R

3.10.C. Isotranslations, which can be written [6g]

x′ = (ˆeip×a) ˆ×x = x + a × A(x, . . .) ,

p′ = (ˆeip×a) ˆ×p = p ,

(3.45a)

37

Aµ = ˆT 1/2

µµ + aα[ ˆT 1/2

µµ ˆ,pα]/1! + . . .

(3.45b)

3.10.D. Isoinversions, expressible in the forms

ˆπ ˆ×x = π × x = (−r, x4) ,

(3.46)
where ˆπ = π × ˆI, ˆτ = τ × ˆI, and π, τ are the conventional inversion operators;
and the

ˆτ ˆ×x = τ × x = (r, −x4) ,

3.10.E. Isoscalar transforms, which are the new transforms

ˆI → ˆI ′ = n2 × ˆI ,

ˆη → ˆη′ = n−2 × ˆη ,

(3.47)

leaving invariant the conventional or isotopic separation, Eq.s (3.19).

Thus, the iso-Poincar´e symmetry is 11-dimensional, i.e., it has the 10 con-
ventional parameters, plus the parameters n2 of isotransforms (3.47). Need-
less to say, the latter new invariance can also be deﬁned for the conventional
Poincar´e symmetry which, as such, also acquires 11 dimensions.

The isospinorial covering ˆP(3.1) will be identiﬁed in the next section.
The construction of the iso-Galilean symmetry ˆG(3.1) via the isotopies of
conventional techniques on constractions is an instructive exercise for the
interested reader (see also [6k] for an explicit realization).

3.11

Isospecial relativity

On rigorous scientiﬁc grounds, the validity of the conventional formulation
of the special relativity is nowadays restricted to motion of particles or elec-
tromagnetic waves in vacuum with constant maximal causal speed c0. This
is due to the fact that, on one side, it is known since the past century (see,
e.g., the studies by Lorentz [12a] and their review by Pauli [12b]) that elec-
tromagnetic waves propagate within physical media with a locally varying
speed c = c0/n4(x, . . .)hc0, as it is the case in our atmosphere, water, plastic,
glasses, oil, etc.

On the other side, photons propagating within certain guides with speeds
c = c0/n4(x, . . .)ic0 have been experimentally measured [13a,13b], and large
masses have been measured in astrophysics to be expelled at speeds bigger
than c0 [13c,13d,13e].

38

Moreover, wave solutions of conventional relativistic equations with arbi-
trary speeds have been recently detected in [13f]. Thus, nowadays the speed
of electromagnetic waves is no longer a “universal constant” but a local quan-
tity smaller or bigger than c0 which assumes the constant value c0 only in
vacuum.

It is evident that the special relativity in its current formulationis in-
applicable (and not “violated”) for locally varying speeds c = c0/n4(x, . . .).
In addition to the evident loss of the Lorentz and Poincar´e symmetries, the
insistence of the applicability of the special relativity under conditions for
which it was not meant for, e.g., in water, leads to inconsistencies, such as:
the assumption of the speed of light c = c0/n4 in water as the maximal causal
speed implies the violation of the principle of causality because electrons can
travel in water faster than the speed of light (Cerenkov light); the assump-
tion of the speed of light c0 in vacuum as the maximal causal speed in water
to salvage the principle of causality implies the violation of the relativistic
addition of speeds for which the sum of two speeds of light in water does not
yield the speed of light; and other inconsistencies [6k].

Moreover, the special relativity is also known not to be applicable for
the description of deformations, as needed for the historical hypothesis of
Fig. 1, and can characterize only linear, local-diﬀerential and Hamiltonian-
unitary systems, while a primary objective of these studies is a quantitative
treatment of the nonlinear, nonlocal and nonunitary component expected in
the nuclear force.

The isospecial relativity was proposed by Santilli [6e,6g,6k] for: the form-
invariant description of arbitrary speeds c = c0/n4; the characterization of
extended-deformable shapes of particles; and the form-invariant description
of nonlinear, nonlocal and nonunitary interactions. The isospecial relativity
is characterized by the axioms of the conventional formulation merely realized
in isominkowski space ˆM over ˆR under the iso-Poincar´e invariance ˆP (3.1).
As such, the special and isospecial relativity coincide at the abstract level by
conception and construction, as it is the case for all other aspects of RHM.

FIGURE 6. a) Light cone in physical space, b) light “cone” in
physical media, c) isolight cone in isospace. The conventional light cone
is well deﬁned only in empty space where light has the constant speed c0 (Fig.
a). Within physical media the speed of electromagnetic waves is however a

39

local variable, thus implying evident deformations of the conventional light
cone (Fig. B). The iso-Lorentz symmetry (6e) maps the latter deformed
surface into the isolight cone, which is the perfect cone in iso-Minkowskian
space ˆM(ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) (Fig. c). In a way similar to the isosphere, we have the
deformation of the light cone axes ! − µ → ˆTµµ while the corresponding
units are deformed of the inverse amount 1µ → ˆT −1
µµ , thus preserving the
original characteristics of a perfect cone. Such a preservation is then the
geometric foundation of the local isomorphism S ˆO(3.1) ≈ SO(3.1). The
axiom-preserving character of the isotopy of the light cone is so strong that
even the characteristic angle of the cone remains the conventional one, i.e.,
the maximal causal speed in isospace ˆM(ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) remains the speed of light
c0 in vacuum [6g] (it should be noted that the proof of this property requires,
for consistency, the use of the isotrigonometric and isohyperbolic functions
we cannot review here for brevity [6j]). This establishes the capability of all
problems addressed in this paper to be formulated in a way compatible with
the special relativity, only realized in isospace ˆM .

Variable speeds of electromagnetic waves propagating within inhomoge-
neous and anisotropic physical media are geometrically represented in a di-
rect way via the isoseparation on ˆM for ˆT = diag ({n1
−2),
nµ 6= 0,

−2}, n4

−2, n3

−2, n2

xˆ2 = [xµ ˆηµν(x, ˙x, . . .)xν] × ˆI =

= (xx/n1

2 + yy/n2

2 + zz/n3

2 − tt × c0

2/n4

2) × ˆI ∈ ˆR .

(3.48)

Its evident universal invariance is given by the iso-Poincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1).
Propagation within homogeneous and isotropic media is expressed by the new
invariance (3.20),

xˆ2 = [xµ ˆηµν(x, ˙x, . . .)xν] × ˆI =

= (xx/n2 + yy/n2 + zz/n2 − tt × c0

2/n2) × (n2 × I) ≡ xˆ2 ,

(3.49)

40

which is the fundamental symmetry underlying the waves of arbitrary speeds
of ref. [13f].

Note that, despite the formal identity xˆ2 ≡ x2, the use of the iso-Poincar´e
symmetry is necessary for the invariance under arbitrary speeds c = c0/n.
In turn, this implies the activation of the entire isotopic formalism of this
section. The nontriviality of the ˆP (3.1)-invariance is then reﬂected in the
appearance of the function n2(x, . . .) in the arguments of the isorotations,
isolorentz boosts, isotranslations, etc., Eq.s (3.41)-(3.47).

One of the ﬁrst implications of the isospecial relativity is that of per-
mitting the representation of locally varying speeds of light via the conven-
tional, abstract axioms of the special relativity [6e,6g]. This is achieved via
the reconstruction of c0 as the unique and universal maximal causal speed
in isospace, while its projection in our space-time can assume any possible
speed. In fact, jointly with the change c0 → c0/n4 the unit changes by the in-
verse amount 1 → n4, thus preserving the original value c0. In this way c0 is a
“universal constant” only in isospace ˆM , while its projection in conventional
space-time acquires the local form c0/n4.

The compatibility of the isospecial relativity with deformable shapes (in-
dicated from the title of the ﬁrst proposal [6e]) is evident from the unre-
stricted character of the functional dependence of the isounit. The nonlinear,
nonlocal and nonunitary characters are equally evident from the structure of
the iso-Poincar´e symmetry.

Intriguingly, we can say that the special relativity is universally applicable
only in isospace over isoﬁelds, because only in this latter case we have one
single unique and universal causal speeds c0, all possible deformed light cones
are reduced to the perfect cone in isospace, and nonlinear, nonlocal and
nonunitary interactions are identically rewritten in their isolinear, isolocal
and isounitary form.

3.12

Isotopic dynamical equations

The fundamental isorelativistic equations are uniquely identiﬁed by the iso-
Poincar´e symmetry via its iso-Casimir invariants (3.40) and related isorep-
resentation theory which we cannot possibly study here for brevity (see ref.
[6k] for initial studies). The basic equation is the second-order isorelativis-
tic equation which is given by the isoinvariant (3.40b) implemented with
the conventional minimal coupling rule to an external electromagnetic ﬁeld

41

with four-potential ˆAµ(x), and realized in terms of the isodiﬀerential calculus
(3.21)

{[ˆpµ + i × e × ˆAµ] ˆ×[ˆpµ + i × e × ˆAµ] + ˆmˆ2} ˆ×| ˆψi =

= {ˆηµν × [ˆpµ + i × e × ˆAµ] × ˆT × [ˆpµ + i × e × ˆAν] + (m × m) × ˆI] × ˆT × | ˆψi =

= {ˆηµν[−i ˆ∂µ + i × e × Aµ] × [−i ˆ∂ν + i × e × Aν] + m2} × | ˆψi =

= { ˆI µ

α ˆηαν[−i ˆT γ

µ × ∂γ + i × e × Aµ] × [−i ˆT δ

ν × ∂δ + i × e × Aν ] + m2} × | ˆψi = 0 .
(3.50)
A solution for the case of null external ﬁeld and isounits averaged to

constant diagonal elements nµ

2 is given by the isoplane wave (c0 = 1)

ψ(x) = ei ˆI µ

ν ×pµ×xν

,

(3.51)

which does reproduce isoinvariant (3.40b) for constant p’s and n’s.

For completeness, we quote here the nonrelativistic equations [6k,6l]

i ˆ∂t ˆψ = i ˆTt∂t ˆψ = ˆH ˆ×s ˆψ = ˆH × ˆTs × ˆψ =

= ˆE ˆ×s

ˆψ = (E × ˆIs) × ˆTs × ˆψ = E × ˆψ ,

ˆψ(t, r) = {ˆeiH×t} ˆ×sψ(0, r) = {ei ˆH× ˆTs×t} × ψ(0, r) ,

(3.52a)

(3.52b)

i ˆd ˆA/ ˆdt = i ˆItd ˆA/dt = ˆA ˆ×s ˆH − ˆH ˆ×s ˆA = ˆA × ˆTs × ˆH − ˆH × ˆTs × ˆA , (3.52c)

ˆA(t) = {ˆei× ˆH×t} ˆ×s ˆA(0) ˆ×s{ˆeit× ˆH } = {ei ˆH× ˆTs×t}× ˆA(0)×{eit× ˆTs× ˆH}, (3.52d)

42

ˆp ˆ×s ˆψ = ˆp × ˆTs × ˆψ = −i ˆ∇k ˆψ = −i ˆT i

k ∇i ˆψ ,

(3.52d)

[ˆpiˆ,ˆrj] = ˆpi ˆ×sˆrj − ˆrj ˆ×s ˆpi = −iδi

jI ,

[ˆpiˆ,ˆpj] = [ˆriˆ,ˆrj] ≡ 0 ,

(3.52e)

ˆIi = ˆIt(t, r ˆψ, . . .) = n4

2 × ˆΓt(t, r, ˆψ, . . .) = ˆT −1

i0 ,

t

(3.52f )

ˆTs = ˆTs(t, r, ˆψ, . . .) = diag(n1

2, n2

2, n3

2) × ˆΓs(t, r, ˆψ, . . .)i0 = ˆI −1

. (3.52g)

s

with isoplane-wave solution

ˆψ(t, r) = ei×(pk×nk

2×rk−E×n4

2×t) ,

(3.53)

which coincides with (3.51) as in the conventional case.

One should note the compatibility of the relativistic and nonrelativistic
equations, the “decoupling” in the latter of the isounit into i8s space and
time components, as well as the isounitary structure of the time evolution
in ﬁnite form. The proof that the above dynamical equations are indeed
form-invariant under their respective relativistic and nonrelativistic isouni-
tary symmetries is an instructive exercise for the interested reader.

4 Exact representation of nuclear

magnetic moments

Once the new formalism of RHM is known, the exact representation of the
total magnetic moments of few-body nuclei becomes straightforward.
Its
simplicity and exact character should then be compared with the truly com-
plex calculations of ref.
[2] via the conventional relativistic/Bethe-Salpeter
theories and its lack of exact character.

The most eﬀective derivation is that via the iso-Dirac equation, i.e., the
isotopies of the conventional Dirac equation [14a] originating from the lin-
earization of the second-order isorelativistic equation (3.50). This lineariza-
tion has been studied by a number of authors (see [6k], Ch. 10, for details

43

and references), although in its general form it implies a mutation of sp6in
which, quite intriguingly, was ﬁrst discovered by Dirac himself [14b,14c], al-
though without his knowledge of the essential isotopic structure of his own
generalized equation [6k].

In this paper we have to re-inspect the derivation of the iso-Dirac equa-
tion and introduce a new form speciﬁcally intended to represent the mutation
of the intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons while preserving their angular
momentum and spin, as necessary for a study of the historical hypothesis
(Sect. 1). For other generalizations representing the (constant, yet) anoma-
lous magnetic moments of nucleons one may inspect ref.
[14d] and papers
quoted therein.

The linearization of second-order isoinvariant (3.40b) requires a composite
isounit characterized by the tensorial product of two nonunitary transforms,
one acting in the orbital component and on in the spin part, resulting in the
8-dimensional total isounit,

U spin =

0
W †

2×2

(cid:18)

W2×2

0 (cid:19)

, U †spin

=

0 W †
2×2
0

W2×2

(cid:18)

,

(4.1c)

(U orb ⊗ U spin) × (U orb ⊗ U spin)† = ˆI tot =

= ˆI orb ⊗ ˆI spin = ( ˆT orb)−1 ⊗ ( ˆT spin)−1i0 .

ˆI orb = diag (n1

2, n2

2, n3

2, n4

2) , nµ 6= 0 ,

ˆI spin = diag (m1

2, m2

2, −m1

2, −m2

2) , nµ 6= 0 ,

(cid:19)

,

W2×2 =

0 m1
m2

0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

, W †

2×2 =

0 m2
m1

0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

ˆI spin

2×2 = W2×2 × W †

2×2 =

2

m1

0
0 m2

2

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

ˆT spin

2×2 =

−2

m1
0

(cid:18)

0
−2
m2

,

(cid:19)

44

(4.1a)

(4.1b)

(4.1b)

(4.1d)

(4.1e)

ˆI d spin

2×2 = − ˆI †spin

2×2 = −W †

2×2 × W2×2 =

2

−m1
0

(cid:18)

0
−m2

2

,

(cid:19)

ˆT d spin

2×2 =

−2

−m1
0

(cid:18)

0
−m2

.

−2

(cid:19)

The linearization of Eq.s (3.50) can then be written

(ˆηρσ × ˆpρ ˆ×ˆpν + ˆm2) ˆ× ˆψ =

(4.1f )

(4.2)

= (ˆηµν×ˆγµ× ˆT spin×ˆpν× ˆT orb−i×m)× ˆT tot(ˆηαβ×ˆγα× ˆT spin×ˆpβ× ˆT orb+i×m)×ψ =

= [ˆηµν × ˆηαβ ×

× (ˆγµ × ˆT spin × ˆγα × ˆT spin+

1
2

+ˆγα × ˆT spin × ˆγµ × ˆT spin) × ˆpν × ˆT orb × ˆpβ × ˆT orb + m × m] × ˆψ = 0 ,

resulting in the following form of the iso-Dirac equation (apparently intro-
duced here for the ﬁrst time)

(ˆηµν × ˆγµ ˆ×spin ˆpν − i × ˆm2) ˆ×orb ˆψ =

= (ˆηµν × ˆγµ × ˆT spin × ˆpν × ˆT orb − i × m × m) × ˆψ = 0 .

(4.3)

The isogamma matrices deﬁned by

{ˆγµˆ,ˆγα} = ˆγµ × ˆT spin × ˆγα × ˆT spin + ˆγα × ˆT spin × ˆγµ × ˆT spin = 2ˆηµν ,

(4.4)

and admit the explicit realization

ˆγµ = ( ˆT orb

µµ )1/2 × U spin × γµ × U †spin

× ˆI spin ,

(4.5a)

ˆγk = ( ˆT orb

kk

)1/2 × γk × ˆI spin = ˆT 1/2

kk ×

× ˆI spin ,

(4.5b)

0
ˆσd
k

(cid:18)

ˆσk
0 (cid:19)

45

ˆγ4 = ( ˆT orb

44

)1/2×γ4× ˆI spin = ( ˆT orb

)1/2×

kk

2×2

I spin
0

0
ˆI d spin

(cid:18)

2×2 (cid:19)

× ˆI spin, (4.5c)

ˆσd

(4.5d)

ˆσk = W × σk × W † ,

k = −W † × σk × W .

k = −ˆσ†
with a simple extension to the minimal coupling rule hereon tacitly implied.
The nontriviality of the isotopy is then established by the fact that the
isotopic elements ˆTµµ enter into the structure of the isotopic gamma matrices.
As one can see, the conventional Dirac equations is deﬁned on conven-
tional Minkowski space with basic unit I = diag ({1, 1, 1}, 1), thus charac-
terizes the perfect and rigid sphere {1, 1, 1} mowing in vacuum, n4 = 1. The
above isodirac equation represents instead all inﬁnitely possible ellipsoidical
2 under the
deformations of the perfect sphere with semiaxes n1
2 = 1, while propagating
volume preserving condition (2.1), n1
within a physical media with index of refraction n4 6= 1.

2 × n3

2 × n2

2, n2

2, n3

First, it is important to verify that, despite the alteration of the shape of
the charge distribution, the values of the angular momenta are conventional.
This is easily established by the fact that the isodirac equation (4.3) charac-
terizes the following isotopic S ˆO(3) algebra (where all products are referred
to the orbital isotopic product)

ˆO(3) :

ˆMk =

ǫkij

i ˆˆ×ˆpj ,
ˆˆr

1
2

[ ˆMiˆ, ˆMj] = ˆMi × ˆT × ˆMj − ˆMj × ˆMi = ǫijk × ˆMk ,

ˆM ˆ2 ˆ× ˆψ = ˆMk × ˆT × ˆM k × ˆT × ˆψ = m(m + 1) × ˆψ ,

(4.6a)

(4.6b)

(4.6c)

ˆM3 × ˆψ = ˆMk × ˆT × ˆψ = (±m) × ˆψ , m = 0, 1, 2, . . . .

(4.6d)

This assures that Eq.s (4.3) characterize conventional eigenvalues of the an-
gular momentum.

Second it is easy to see that the S ˆU (2) spin algebra on the isoﬁeld
ˆC = ˆC(ˆc, +, ˆ×) as characterized by the above isodirac equation has a gen-
eralized structure, yet conventional eigenvalues as desired. In fact, we have
the following expressions in terms of spin isoproducts

46

S ˆU (2) :

ˆSk =

ǫkij ˆγi ˆ×ˆγj ,

1
2

[ ˆSiˆ, ˆSj] = ˆSi × ˆT × ˆSj − ˆSj × ˆSi = ǫijk × ˆSk ,

ˆSˆ2 ˆ× ˆψ = ˆSk × ˆT × ˆSk × ˆT × ˆψ = (3/4) × ˆψ ,

ˆS3 × ˆψ = ˆSk × ˆT × ˆψ = (±1/2) × ˆψ ,

(4.7a)

(4.7b)

(4.7c)

(4.7d)

which constitute a 4 × 4 extension of results (3.33). This assures the char-
acterization of conventional spin, with consequential preservation of Pauli’s
exclusion principle.

The combined generators M = (Mµν), Mij = ǫijkSk, Mk4 = iˆγk ˆ×ˆγ4
then characterize the isospinorial covering S ˆL(2. ˆC) of the iso-Lorentz alge-
bra ˆL(3.1). The study of the isocommutation rules and local isomorphism
S ˆL(2. ˆC) ≈ SL(2.C) is left to the interested reader, jointly with the isotopies
of the remaining aspects of Dirac’s theory [6k].

Iso-Dirac equation (4.3) provides the desired two generalized expressions
which are needed for a ﬁt of the experimental data on nuclear magnetic
(4.3) implies the following desired mutation of the
moments. First, Eq.
spinorial transformation law, ﬁrst identiﬁed by Santilli in ref. [15]

ˆψ′ = ˆR(θ3) ˆ× ˆψ = eiγ1γ2 ˆθ3/2 ˆψ ,

ˆθ = θ/n1n2 ,

(4.8)

Then, a simple isotopy of the conventional case yields the desired mutation
of the magnetic moment of nucleons (see [6k], Ch. 10. for details)

ˆµN = ˆµN (µN , nµ

2) = µN × n4/n3 .

(4.9)

ﬁrst proposed in [6b]. Sect. 4.20, p. 803.

In summary, RHM can represent in ﬁrst-quantization (and without any
need of form factors) the extended, nonspherical and deformable character
of nucleons and the alteration of their intrinsic magnetic moment while pre-
serving the conventional orbital and intrinsic angular momenta and other
physiacal laws. These conditions are necessary for consistency, evidently be-
cause neutrons are under external electromagnetic ﬁelds for which the angular
momenta are preserved.

47

It is important to apply Eq.s (4.8) and (4.9), ﬁrst, to the exact repre-
sentation of 4π-interferometric measures of type (1.3), and then to the exact
representation of total magnetic moments of few body nuclei. These results
were ﬁrst presented by Santilli [15] during the meeting ¡Deuteron 1993¿ at the
JINR in Dubna, Russia. However, the calculations were done for values of
n4 6= 1 (interpreted as the density of the neutrons), and under a joint muta-
tion of spin. It is important to review these results for the more appropriate
interpretation of n4 introduced in this paper.

Assume that the 4π-mutation is 1%, yielding θ = 713◦, which is of the
order of magnitude of the measures (1.3). The isotopies re-construct the
exact SU(2) symmetry in isospace, thus requiring ˆθ = θ/n1 × n2 = 720◦
[6g,6k]. This yields

n1

2 = n2

2 = 713◦/720◦ = 0.990 , n3

2 = 1/0.990 × 0.990 = 1.020 ,

(4.10)

namely, the deformation is given by the transition from a perfectly spherical
charge disribution to one of prolate character, exactly as needed for the
deuteron (Sect. 1).

Note that the diﬀerent normalization n1

2 + n2

2 + n3

2 = 3 (Sect. 2) yields

the values

n1

2 = −n2

2 = 0.990 , n3

2 = 3 − 2 × 0.990 = 1.020 ,

(4.11)

which coincide with values (4.10).

Then, assuming in ﬁrst approximation that ˆµ/µ = n4/n3 ≈ 713◦/720◦,

we have the remaining value

n4 = n3 × 713◦/714◦ = 1.000 ,

(4.12)

namely, the isodirac equation is capable of deriving the value n4 = 1 occurring
for motion in vacuum, exactly as it is the case for the thermal neutron beam
of tests [3].

We now study the application of isodirac equation (4.3) for the exact-
numerical representation of the total magnetic moments of few-body nuclei.
For this we assume to a good approximation that protons and neutron have
the same size and shape, thus admitting the same ellipsoidical shape with
n1

2 or in3

2 = n2

2 × n2

2 × n3

2 = 1.

2, n1

2hn3

48

In regard to the value of n4, the motion of the proton and neutron in
the deuteron, strictly speaking, is not in vacuum because each particle is
moving within the wavepackets of the other, thus resulting in a diﬀerence of
n4 from 1. However the deuteron size is considerably bigger than the nucleon
charge radius. As a result, we can assume in ﬁrst approximation that n4 = 1,
with the understanding that a reﬁnement of the data is expected whenever
experimental information on the value of n4 for the deuteron is known.

A simple isotopy of the conventional QM model (see, e.g, [1]) then yields

the following isotopic theory for the total nuclear magnetic moments

ˆµtot =

(ˆg L

k × ˆMk3 + ˆg s

k × ˆSk3) ,

(4.13a)

Xk

ˆgn = gnn4/n3 ≈ gn/n3 ,

ˆgp = gpn4/n3 ≈ gp/n3 ,

(4.13b)

e¯h/2mpc0 = 1 ,

gn

s = −3.816 ,

gp

s = 5.585 ,

(4.13c)

gn

M = 0 ,

gp

M = 1 ,

(4.13d)

For the case of the deuteron, the above model yields the exact represen-

tation of µD

exp, Eq. (1.1),

ˆµ tot

theor = gpn4p/n3p + gnn4n/n3n ≈ (gp + gn)n4/n3 ≡ µD

exp = 0.857 , (4.14a)

n4 = 1.000 , n3 = 1.000 × 0.880/0.857 = 1.026 ,

(4.14b)

with consequential ellipsoidical shape of the two nucleons

n3

2 = 1.054 , n1

2 = n2

2 = (1/n3

2)1/2 = 0.974 .

(4.15)

which is precisely of the prolate character, as expected (Sect. 1).

FIGURE 7. The structure of the deuteron according to relativis-
tic hadronic mechanics. A schematic view of the structure of the deuteron
according to the iso-Dirac equation (4.3) for which the charge distribution
of the individual nucleons is deformed into a spheroidal ellipsoid of a prolate

49

type, which implies a decrease of the conventional values of the magnetic mo-
ments of the individual nucleons when in vacuum. In turn, such a decrease
permits the apparently ﬁrst exact-numerical representation of the total mag-
netic moment of the deuteron. It should be indicated that the deformation,
expressed by Eqs. (4.15), is only of a few percentage points. Yet its concep-
tual, theoretical and experimental implications are far reaching, as indicated
in the ﬁnal part of this paper.

Note that the diﬀerent normalization n1

2 + n2

2 + n3

2 = 3 would yield the

values

n3

2 = 1.054 , n1

2 = n2

2 = (3 − n3

2)/2 = 0.973

(4.16)

which are very close to the preceding ones.

Note that the data for the 4π spinorial symmetry tests, Eq.s (4.10), and
those for the deuteron, Eq.s (4.15), are very close. This illustrates that
the 4π-interferometric measures, even though not inclusive of strong nuclear
forces, could provided experimental evidence on the alterability of the intrin-
sic magnetic moments of nucleons in the deuteron structure and, therefore,
resolve the problem of total nuclear magnetic moments.

Note also that, along the historical hypothesis of Fig. 1, the ﬁt (4.14)
is reached via a geometrical representation of the deformation of the charge
distribution, which is applicable to any preferred structure model, the op-
posite approach of adapting the deformation of magnetic moments to any
conjectural structural model being manifestly questionable.

We ﬁnally note that the representation (4.14) is exact via an isorelativistic
treatment in ﬁrst quantization based on only the D state, while the conven-
tional relativistic treatment [2] uses all possible S-, D- and P -states without
achieving such an exact representation.

The following additional applications of HM and its relativistic extension

should also be indicated (in addition to those of ref.s [7]):

1) Nuclear physics: Reconstruction of the exact rotational symme-
try for deformed-oscillating nuclei [6k]; reconstruction of the exact isospin
symmetry in nuclear physics [6h]; axiomatically consistent representation of
dissipative nuclear processes [6k]; and others.

2) Particle Physics:

reconstruction of the exact Minkowski space,

50

Poincar´e symmetry and special relativity at the isotopic level [6k] for all
possible signature-preserving alteration of the ﬂat space-time geometry [16];
exact-numerical representation of the behaviour of the meanlives of unsta-
ble hadron with energy [17]; exact iso-Minkowskian representation [17a] and
experimental ﬁt [18b] of the Bose-Einstein correlation [18c] for high energy
[18d] and low energy [18e] from ﬁrst axiomatic principles and without ad hoc
and unknown parameters as originating form the nonlocal-integral interac-
tions due to mutual overlapping of the wavepackets; numerical interpretation
of the synthesis of the neutron from protons and electrons only as occurring
in stars [6i]; isoquark theory [19] with conventional quantum numbers, exact
conﬁnement and convergent perturbative series; reconstruction of the exact
parity under weak interactions [6k]; new classical and quantum theory of an-
tiparticles characterized by the antiautomorphic isodual map of conventional
classical and quantum theories of matter, A → Ad = −A† [20]; and others.

3) Gravitation and astrophysics: Achievement of the universal in-
variance of gravitation [6g] which is given by the isopoincar´e symmetry of
Sect. 3 for the particular case when the iso-Minkowskian metric equals the
Riemannian metric, ˆη(x, ˙x, . . .) = g(x); achievement of an operator form of
gravity which is as axiomatically consistent as RQM [21], which is again
given by the isopoincar´e formulations of Sect. 3 with ˆη = g(x), since they
are of operator character; numerical representation of the large diﬀerence in
cosmological redshift of quasars when physically attached to their associated
galaxies [22a,22b] as due to the decrease of the speed of light within the huge
quasars chromosphere represented via the iso-Minkowskian geometry under
the isospecial relativity; numerical representation of the internal quasars red-
shift and blueshift [22c]; new isoselfdual cosmology with equal distribution
of matter and antimatter and total null characteristics of the universe [6k];
and others;

4) Superconductivity: achievement of an explicitly attractive inter-
action among the two identical electrons of the Cooper pair [23], which is
reached via the isotopic lifting of the conventional Coulomb problem out-
lined in Sect. 3, in excellent agreement with experimental data.

5) Theoretical Biology: Axiomatic representation of irreversible and
nonconservative characters of biological systems; identiﬁcation of the appar-
ent origin of irreversibility at the ultimate level of constituents with nonlocal
correlation eﬀects; new geometric representations of locomotion and bifurca-
tions in biological systems; and others [24].

51

5 Apparent new recycling of nuclear waste

The experimental ﬁnalization of the alterability of the intrinsic magnetic
moments of nucleons via total nuclear magnetic moments, 4π-interferometric
measures, or other means signals a necessary departure from the conventional
linear, local-diﬀerential and Hamiltonian-unitary formulation of the Poincar´e
symmetry.

First, the above occurrence would establish the applicability in the nuclear
structure of the isopoincar´e symmetry, the isospecial relativity and related
RHM. Since the latter are directly universal for all possible alterations of the
geometry of empty space, they would then apply even when not desired.

At any rate, the isopoincar´e symmetry is the only generalized symmetry
known to this author which permits the preservation of the abstract axioms of
the special relativity under nonunitary maps, because conventional deforma-
tions [4] imply necessary structural departures. As a matter of fact, the ab-
stract identity of the isotopic and conventional symmetries, ˆP (3.1) ≡ P (3.1),
with consequential preservation under “isotopic completion” of conventional
physical laws explains the reasons why their experimental validity, by no
means, implies that conventional QM is the only applicable theory.

Once the above elements are understood, implications of the historical
hypothesis of Fig. 1 are consequential. The ﬁst consists of apparently new
means for recycling nuclear waste which can be used by the nuclear power
companies in their own plants, thus avoiding altogether the dangerous and
expensive transportation of the waste to yet un-identiﬁed dumping site.

In essence, RHM in its nuclear realization and the fundamental isopoincar´e
symmetry predict the possible mutation not only of the intrinsic magnetic
moment of the neutron, but also of its meanlife, to such an extent that the
former implies the latter and viceversa (as one can see via the use of the iso-
boosts). In turn, the control of the meanlife of the neutron de facto implies
new means for recycling the nuclear waste.

In this respect, the ﬁrst physical reality which should be noted (and ad-
mitted) is that total nuclear magnetic moments constitute experimental ev-
idence on the alterability of the inrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons.

The second physical reality which should be noted (and admitted) is that,
by no means, the neutron has a constant and universal meanlife, because it
possesses a meanlife depending on the local conditions. In fact, the neutron’s
meanlife is of the order of seconds when belonging to certain nuclei with rapid

52

beta decays; a meanlife of the order of 15 minutes when in vacuum; a meanlife
of the order of days, weeks and years when belonging to other nuclei; all the
way to an inﬁnite meanlife for stable nuclei.

Once the above occurrences are admitted, the basic principle for possible
new recycling of nuclear waste is the “stimulated neutron decay” (SND)
consisting of resonating or other subnuclear mechanisms suitable to stimulate
its beta decay. Among the various possibilities under study, we quote here
the possible gamma stimulated neutron decay.
(GSND) according to the
reaction [25a]

γ + n → p+ + e− + ¯ν ,

(5.1)

which is predicted by RQM to have a very small (and therefore practically
insigniﬁcant) cross section as a function of the energy, but which is instead
predicted by RHM to have a resonating peak in the cross section at the value
of 1.294 MeV (corresponding to 3.129 × 1020 Hz). As such, the above mech-
anism is of subnuclear character, in the sense of occurring in the structure
of the neutron, rather than in the nuclear structure, the latter merely im-
plying possible reﬁnements of the resonating frequency due to the (relatively
smaller) nuclear binding energy [7b].

When stable elements are considered, the above GSND is admitted only
in certain instances, evidently when the transition is compatible with all
conventional laws. This is the case for the isotope Mo(100,42) which, under
the GSND, would transform via beta emission into the Te(100,43) which, in
turn, is naturally unstable and beta decays into Ru(100,44). For a number
of additional admissible elements see [25a].

The point important for this note is that the GSND is predicted to be
admissible for large and unstable nuclei as occurring in the nuclear waste.
The possible new form of recycling submitted for study in this note is given
by bombarding the radioactive waste with a beam of photons of the needed
excitation frequency and of the maximal possible intensity. Such a beam
would cause an instantaneous excess of peripheral protons in the waste nu-
clei with their consequential decay due to instantaneous excess of Coulomb
repulsive forces.

It should be stressed that this note can only address the basic principle
of the GSND. Once experimentally established (see later on), the recycling
requires evident additional technological studies on the equipment suitable

53

to produce the photon beam in the desired frequency and intensity, e.g., via
synchrotron radiation or other mechanisms [25c].

The imporatant point is that equipment of the above nature is expected to
be deﬁnitely smaller in size, weight and cost than large particle accelerators.
As such, the recycling is expected to verify the basic requirement of usability
by the nuclear power companies in their own plants.

A novelty of the proposed new recycling is that it is speciﬁcally conceived
to occur at the subnuclear level. A virtually endless number of possibilities
exist for the reduction of the meanlife of the waste via mechanisms of nuclear
type. Among them we note mechanisms based on RQM, such as those by
Shaﬀer et al. [26a], Marriot et al. [26b], Barker [26c] and others, as well as
new nuclear mechanisms predicted by RHM and currently under patenting.
The understanding is that, to maximize the eﬃciency, the ﬁnal equipment is
expected to be a combination various means of both subnuclear and nuclear
character.

6 Possible additional advances

The possible experimental veriﬁcation of the alterability of the magnetic mo-
ment and meanlife of the neutron would rather deep implications throughout
all aspects of nuclear physics. In addition to possible new forms of recycling
nuclear waste indicated above, it may be of some value to indicate the fol-
lowing additional, possibilities.

1) Nuclear forces. RHM terminates the study of nuclear forces by
adding terms and terms in the Hamiltonian, because it provides means for
rigorous new studies based on the representation with potentials of terms
truly being of action-at-a-distance, and the representation with the isounit
of contact, nonlinear, nonlocal and nonunitary eﬀects for which the notion
of a potential has no conceptual, mathematical or physical meaning of any
nature;

2) Nuclear structure. RHM permits a deeper understanding of the
nuclear structure via the admission of small, yet signiﬁcant interactions
of nonlocal-integral and nonhamiltonian-nonunitary type, due to the wave-
overlapping of the constituents.
In turn, it can be safely stated that the
inclusion of the latter interactions will inevitably lead to new nuclear mod-

54

els. New nuclear reactions cannot also be excluded in view of the attractive
character of the latter interactions under certain rather selective but well
identiﬁed conditions even against the Coulomb barrier, as theoretically and
experimentally established in [23].

3) Controlled fusion. One of the ﬁrst applications of the studies of this
paper is expected for the attempts at reaching a “hot controlled fusion” with
a positive energy balance. In fact, these attempts are essentially costituted
by a condensation phase caused by magnetic or other means which works as
predicted, followed by the initiation of the fusion process with its notorious
instabilities which have not been controlled to date.

It is evident that RQM is exactly valid for the condensation phase due
to large mutual distances. However, the exact validity of the same discipline
at the initiation of the fusion process does not appear to have solid scientiﬁc
grounds because of the emergence of numerous new eﬀects at short distances,
such as those of nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential type, which are beyond
any hope of quantitative treatment via RQM. In view of evident societal
aspects, deeper studies with a covering disciplines appear, therefore, to be
warranted.

In particular, the studies of this paper suggest that the intrinsic mag-
netic moments of protons and neutrons is expected to change precisely at
the initiation of the fusion process. It is then evident, although not widely
admitted, that such a change has implications for the currently uncontrolled
instabilities, and should be reﬂected in a re-design of the magnetic and other
conﬁnement. After all, the control of the instabilities is currently conducted
under the (tacit) assumption that protons and neutrons preserve their in-
trinsic magnetic process during the fusion process.

4) New subnuclear energy. Any new recycling of nuclear waste is

unavoidably linked to possible new sources of energy. In fact, the GSND

γres + Mo(100, 42) →stim Tc(100, 43) + β →spont Ru(100, 44) + β ,

(6.1)

is de facto a potential new source of subnuclear energy called hadronic energy
[25a] (see also the review [25b]) which releases the rather large amount of
about 5 MeV plus the energy would not release harmful radiations, would
not imply radioactive waste, would not require heavy shield or critical mass,
and would be realizable in large or minuterized forms.

55

5) Other possible applications. Numerous additional applications are
conceivable, such as the production of rare isotopes via GSNT, the prediction
of neutron rays for industrial applications via the synthesis of the neutron
from protons and electrons beams in ﬂight, medical applications, and others.

7 Proposed experiments

The continuation of quantitative scientiﬁc studies on the proposed new re-
cycling of the nuclear waste (as well as on the other applications indicated
above) beyond the level of personal views one way or another, requires the
following three basic experiments, all of truly fundamental character, mod-
erate cost and full realization with current technology.

I. Finalize the interferometric 4π spinorial symmetry measures
[3]. The above measures are manifestly fundamental for possible new forms
of recycling as well as for possible new forms of subnuclear energy. In fact,
they would provide experimental evidence on possible deviations from the
Poincar´e symmetry in favor of our covering isopoincar´e form. This is due to
the fact that, if conﬁrmed, the measures would establish a deviation from the
fundamental spinorial transformation law in favor of the mutated form (4.8).
The alterability of the meanlife of the neutron would then be consequential.
It should be stressed that the primary evidence for the alterability of the
intrinsic magnetic moments of nucleons rests in the experimental values of
total nuclear magnetic moments. The ﬁnalization of interferometric measures
[3] would merely provide additional backing on the same alterability. The
latter would however occur for controllable conditions, thus being invaluable
for other predictions via extrapolations.

II. Repeat don Borghi’s experiment [25d] on the apparent syn-
thesis of the neutron from protons and electrons only. Despite mo-
mentous advances, we still miss fundamental experimental knowledge on the
structure of the neutron, e.g., on how the neutron is synthesized from protons
and electrons only in young stars solely composed of hydrogen (where quark
models cannot be used owing to the lack of the remaining members of the
baryonic octet, and weak interactions do not provide suﬃcient information
on the structure problem).

The synthesis occurs according to the reaction

56

p+ + e− → n + ν ,

(7.1)

which: is the “inverse” of the stimulated decay (6.1); is predicted by RQM
to have a very small cross section as a function of the energy; while the same
cross section is predicted by RHM to have a peak at the threshold energy of
0.80 MeV in singlet p-e coupling [6i].

The possible synthesis of the neutron has a fundamental relevance for
waste recycling, besides other industrial applications. If the electron “dis-
appears” at the creation of the neutron, as in current theoretical views, the
GSND becomes of diﬃcult if not impossible realization.

However, the electron is a permanent and stable particle. As such, doubts
as to whether it can “disappears” date back to Rutherford’s very conception
of the neutron as a “compressed hydrogen atom”. As well known, RQM
does not permit such a representation of the neutron structure on numer-
ous counts. Nevertheless, the covering RHM has indeed achieved an exact-
numerical representation of all characteristics of the neutron according to
Rutherford’s original conception [6i].

The novelty permitting the above result is that, when immersed within
the hyperdense proton, the electron experiences a mutation e− → ˆe− of its
intrinsic characteristics (becoming a quark ?) including its rest energy (be-
cause n4 6= 1 inside the proton, thus Eˆe = mc2 = mec0
2). The excitation
energy of 1.294 MeV is predicted by our covering isopoincar´e symmetry un-
der the condition of recovering all characteristics of the neutron for the model
n = (p+

↓)RHM, including its primary decay for which [6i] ˆe− → e− + ¯ν.

↑, ˆe−

2/n4

A preliminary experimental veriﬁcation of the synthesize the neutron in
laboratory was done by don Borghi’s and his associates [25d]. Since ex-
periments can be conﬁrmed or dismissed solely via other experiments and
certainly not via theoretical beliefs one way or the other, don Borghi’s ex-
periment must be run again and either proved or disproved. The test can
be repeated either as originally done [loc. cit.], or in a number of alternative
ways, e.g., by hitting with a cathodic ray of 0.80 MeV a mass of beryllium
saturated with hydrogen, put at low temperature and subjected to an intense
electric ﬁeld to maximize the p-e singlet coupling. The detection of neutrons
emanating from such a set-up would establish their synthesis.

III. Complete Tsagas’ experiment [25e] on the stimulated neu-
tron decay. A most fundamental information needed for additional quan-

57

titative studies is the veriﬁcation or disproof of the GSND at the resonating
gamma frequency of 1.294 MeV.

The latter experiment has been recently initiated by N. Tsagas and his
associates [25e]. It consists of disk of the radioisotope Eu152 (which naturally
emits gammas of 1.3 MeV) placed parallel and close to a disk of an element
admitting of the GSND, such as the Mo(100, 42) (or a sample of nuclear
waste). The detection of electrons with at least 2 MeV emanating from the
system would establish the principle of the GSND (because such electrons
can only be of subnuclear origin, Compton electrons being of at most 1
MeV). The detection via mass spectrography of traces of the extremely rare
Ru(100,44) after suﬃcient running time would conﬁrm said principle beyond
any reasonable doubt. The practical realization of the proposed form of waste
recycling would then be shifted to the industrial development and production
of a photon beam of the needed frequency and intensity via a relatively small
equipment usable by the nuclear power companies in their own plants.

References

[1] J.M. Blatt and V.F. Weisskopf, Theoretical Nuclear Physics, Wiley &

Sons, New York (1966).

[2] S.G. Bondarenko, V.V. Burov, M. Beyer and S.M. Dorkin, “Magnetic
moment of the deuteron as a problem of relativistic corrections”, JINR
Communication E4-95-440 (1995), Dubna, Russia.

[3] H. Rauch et al., Phys. Lett. A 54, 425 (1975) [3a]; G. Badurek et al.,
Phys. Rev. D 14, 1177 (1976) [3b]; H. Rauch et al., Z. Physik B 29,
281 (1978) [3c]; H. Kaiser et al., Z. Physik A 291, 231 (1979) [3d]; H.
Rauch et al., Hadronic J. 4, 1280 (1981) [3e]; A. Werner et al., Phys.
Rev. Lett. 35, 1053 (1975) [3f].

[4] A. Albert, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 64, 552 (1948) [4a]; R.M. Santilli,
Nuovo Cimento 51, 570 (1967) [4b]; G. Eder, Hadronic J. 4, 541 (1981)
[4c] and 5, 750 (1982) [4d]; R.M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 4, 1166 (1981)
[4e]; C.N. Ktorides, H.C. Myung and R.M. Santilli, Phys. Rev. D 22,

58

892 (1980) [4f]; L.C. Biedenharn, J. Phys. A 22, L873 (1989) [4g]; A.J.
Macfarlane, J. Phys. A 22, L4581 (1989) [4h]; A.N. Sissakian, G.S.
Pogosyan and S.I. Vinitsky, eds., Symmetry Methods in Physics, JINR,
Dubna, Russia (1994) [4i]; T.L. Curtis, B. Fairlie and Z.K. Zachos, eds.,
Quantum Groups, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1991) [4j]; A. Nowiski
and H. Ruegg, Phys. Lett. B 293, 344 (1992) [4k]; A. Jannussis et
al., Nuovo Cimento 103B, 17 and 537 (1989); 104B, 33 and 53 (1989;
108B, 57 (1993) [4l]; J. Modern Optics 39, 771 and 1067 (1992); 40,
441, 1351 and 1369 (1993); Phys. Lett. A 181, 341 (1993) [4m].

[5] D.F. Lopez, in Symmetry Methods in Physics, A.N. Sissakian, G.S.
Pogosyan and S.I. Vinitsky, eds., JINR, Dubna, Russia (1994), p. 300
[5a]; Hadronic J. 16, 429 (1993) [5b]; A. Jannussis, R. Mignani and R.M.
Santilli, Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie 18, 371 (1993) [5c]; A. Jannussis and
D. Skaltsas, Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie 18, 275 (1993) [5d].

[6] R.M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 1, 228 (1978) [6a]; and 1, 574 (1978) [6b];
Foundations of Theoretical Mechanics, vol. 1 (1978) [6c], vol. 2 (1983)
[6d], Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg-New York; Nuovo Cimento Lett. 37,
545 (1983) [6e]; Algebras, Groups and Geometries 10, 273 (1993) [6f];
J. Moscow Phys. Soc. 3, 225 (1993) [6g]; JINR Rapid Comm. 6, 24
(1993) [6h]; Chinese J. Syst. Eng. & Electr. 6, 177 (1996) [6i]; Elements
of Hadronic Mechanics, vol. I (1995) [6j], vol. 2 (1995) [6k], Ukrainian
Acad. Sci., Kiev; Rend. Circ. Matem. Palermo, Suppl. 42, 7 (1996) [6l].

[7] K. Aringazin, A. Jannussis, D.F. Lopez, M. Nishioka and B. Veljanoski,
Santilli’s Lie-Isotopic Generalization of Galilei’s and Einstein’s Relativ-
ities (1990), Kostarakis Publisher, Athens, Greece [7a]; J.V. Kadeisvili,
Santilli’s Isotopies of contemporary Algebras, Geometries and Relativ-
ities, Hadronic Press, FL (1991), 2nd ed. Ukrainian Acad. Sci., Kiev,
in press [7b]; D.S. Sourlas and G.T. Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations
of the Lie-Santilli Theory, Ukrainian Acad. Sci., Kiev (1993) [7c]; J.
L˜ohmus, E. Paal and L. Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras in Physics,
Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL, USA (1994) [7d]; J.V. Kadeisvili, An
Introduction to the Lie-Santilli Isotheory with Application to Quantum
Gravity, Ukraine Academy of Science, Kiev, in press [7e]; G. Tsagas and
D.S. Sourlas, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 12, 1 and 67 (1995) [7f];
J.V. Kadeisvili, in Symmetry Methods in Physics, A.N. Sissakian, G.S.

59

Pogosyan and S.I. Vinitsky, eds., JINR, Dubna, Russia (1994), p. 194
[7g]; J.V. Kadeisvili, Math. Methods in Applied Sciences 19, 326 (1996)
[7h]; A. Jannussis, R. Mignani and D. Skaltsas, Physica A 187, 575
(1992) [7i]; M. Nishioka, Nuovo Cimento 82A, 351 (1984) [7j]; A. Jan-
nussis, D. Brodimas and R. Mignani, J. Phys. A 24, L775 (1991) [7k];
M. Gasperini, Hadronic J. 7, 971 (1984) [7l]; A. Jannussis, M. Mijatovic
and B. Veljanowski, Physics Essays 4, 202 (1991) [7m]; D. Rappoport-
Campodonico, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 8, 1 (1991) [7n]; T.
Gill, J. Lindsay and W.W. Zachary, Hadronic J. 17, 449 (1994) [7o];
E.B. Lin, Hadronic J. 11, 81 (1988) [7p].

[8] M.Razavy, Z. Phys. B26, 201 (1977) [8a]; H.-D. Doebner and G.A.
Goldin, Phys. Lett. A 162, 397 (1992) [8b]; H.-J. Wagner, Z. Phys.
B95, 261 (1994) [8c].

[9] D. Schuch,

in New Frontiers of Hadronic Mechanics, T. Gill, ed.,

Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL (1996).

[10] D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Dover Publications, New York (1979) [10a];
A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935) [10b];
J. von Neumann, The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechan-
ics, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ (1955) [10c]; J.S. Bell, Physics
1, 195 (1965) [10d].

[11] A.K. Aringazin, Hadronic J. 12, 71 (1989); A.K. Aringazin and K.M.
Aringazin, in Frontiers of Fundamental Physics, M. Barone and F. Sel-
leri, eds., Plenum, New York (1994).

[12] A. Lorentz, Versuch einer Theorie der Elektrischen und Magnetischen
Erscheinungen in bewengken K¨orpern, Leyda (1895) [12a]; W. Pauli,
Theory of Relativity, Pergamon Press, New York (1958) [12b].

[13] A. Enders and G. Nimitz, J. Phys. France 2, 1693 (1992) [13a]; A.M.
Steiberg, P.C. Kwait and R.Y. Chiaoo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2421 (1992)
[13b]; F. Mirabel and F. Rodriquez, Nature 371, 464 (1994) [13c]; J.
Tingay et al., Nature 374, 141 (1995) [13d]; D. Baylin et al., IAU Comm.
6173 (1995) [13e]; W.A. Rodriquez, jr. and J.-Yu Lu, “On the existence
of undistorted progressive waves of arbitrary speed”, Found. Phys., to
appear [13f].

60

[14] P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 4th ed. (1958) [14a]; Proc. Roy. Soc. A 322, 435 (1971) [14b];
Proc. Roy. Soc. A 328, 1 (1972) [14c]; A.S. Rabinowitch, Hadronic J.
19, 375 (1996) [14d].

[15] R.M. Santilli, in Deuteron 1993, V.K. Lukianov, ed., JINR, Dubna,

Russia (1994).

[16] D.I. Blochintsev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 272 (1964) [16a]; L.B. Redei,
Phys. Rev. 145, 999 (1966) [16b]; D.Y. Kim, Hadronic J. 1, 343 (1978)
[16c]; J. Ellis et al., Nuclear Physics B 176, 61 (1980) [16d]; A. Zee,
Phys. Rev. D 25, 1864 (1982) [16e]; R.M. Santilli, Lett. Nuovo Cimento
33, 145 (1982) [16f]; V. de Sabbata and M. Gasperini, Lett. Nuovo
Cimento 34, 337 (1982) [16g]; H.B. Nielsen and I. Picek, Nucl. Phys.
B211, 269 (1983) [16h]; M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B177, 51 (1986)
[16i]; Yu. Aronson, Hadronic J. 19, 205 (1996) [16j].

[17] F. Cardone, R. Mignani and R.M. Santilli, J. Phys. G, 18, L61 and
L141 (1992) [17a]; B.H. Aronson et al., Phys. Rev. D 28, 476 and 495
(1983) [17b]; N. Grossman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 18 (1987) [17b].

[18] R.M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 15, 1 (1992) [18a]; F. Cardone and R.
Mignani, Preprint Univ. Rome No. 894 (1993) [18b]; B. Lorstadt, Int.
J. Modern Phys. A 4, 286 (1989) [18c]; UAI Coll., Phys. Lett. B 226,
410 (1989) [18d]; R. Adler et al., Phys. Rev. C 63, 541 (1994) [18c].

[19] R. Mignani, Nuovo Cimento Lett. 39, 413 (1984) [19a]; A.J. Kalnay,
Hadronic J. 6, 1 (1983) [19b]; A.J. Kalnay, R.M. Santilli, Hadronic J.
6, 1798 (1983) [19c]; R.M. Santilli, Comm. Theor. Phys. 4, 123 (1995)
[19d]; R.M. Santilli, Internat. J. Phys. 1, 1 (1995) [19e].

[20] R.M. Santilli, Comm. Theor. Phys. 3, 153 (1994) [20a]; Hadronic J. 17,
257 (1994) [20b]; in New Frontiers of Hadronic Mechanics, T.L. Gill, ed.,
Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL (1996) [20c]; Hyperﬁne Interaction,
in press. [20d]; Ann. Phys. 83, 108 (1974) [20e]; M. Holzsheiter, ed.,
Proceedings of the Sepino Workshop on antimatter gravity, Hyperﬁne
Interactions, in press [20f]; A.P. Mills, jr., Hadronic J. 19, 77 (1996)
[20g].

61

[21] R.M. Santilli, in Proceedings of the VII M. Grossmann Meeting on Gen-
eral Relativity, M. Keiser and R. Jantzen, eds., World Scientiﬁc, Sin-
mgapore (1996) [21a]; in Gravity, Particles and Space-Time, P. Pronin
and G. Sardanashvily, eds., World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1995), p. 369
[21b]; Comm. Theor. Phys. 4, 1 (1995) [21c]; Isospecial Relativity with
Applications to Quantum Gravity, Antigravity and Cosmology, Balkan
Society Publisher, in press [21d].

[22] R.M. Santilli, Hadronic J. Suppl., 4A, 267 (1988) [22a]; R. Mignani,
Physics Essays 5, 531 (1992) [22b]; R.M. Santilli, in Frontiers of Fun-
damental Physics, M. Barone and F. Selleri, eds., Plenum Press, New
York (1994) [22c];

[23] A.O.E. Animalu, Hadronic J. 17, 349 (1994) [23a]; A.O. Animalu and

R.M. Santilli, Int. J. Quantum Chemistry 29, 175 (1995) [23b].

[24] C. Illert and R.M. Santilli, Foundations of Theoretical Conchology,
Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL (1994) [24a]; R.M. Santilli, Iso-
topic, Genotopic and Hyperstructural Methods in Theoretical Biology,
Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1996) [24b].

[25] R.M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 17, 311 (1994) [25a]; S. Smith, in New
Frontiers of Hadronic Mechanics, T.L. Gill, ed., Hadronic Press (1996)
[25b]; R. Driscoll, Hadronic J. Suppl. 10, 315 (1995) [25c]; C. Borghi et
al., (Russian) J. Nucl. Phys. 56, 147 (1993) [25d]; N.F. Tsagas et al.,
Hadronic J. 19, 87 (1996) [25e].

[26] T.B. Shaﬀer et al., US Patent 4,338,215 (1982) [26a]; R. Marriot et al.,
US Patent 4,721,596 (1988) [26b]; W.A. Barker, US Patent 4,961,880
(1990) [26c].

62

