HE 1.2.35
SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES AND HIGH-ENERGY
COSMIC RAYS

L. Gonzalez-Mestres1,2
1Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
2Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

ABSTRACT
Lorentz symmetry has been tested at low energy with great accuracy, but its extrapolation to very
high-energy phenomena is much less well established. We expect a possible breaking of Lorentz
symmetry to be a very high energy and very short distance phenomenon, compatible with existing
data. If textbook special relativity is only an approximate property of the equations describing a sec-
tor of matter above some critical distance scale, superluminal sectors of matter may exist related to
new degrees of freedom not yet discovered experimentally. The new superluminal particles (”super-
bradyons”) would have positive mass and energy, and behave kinematically like ”ordinary” particles
(those with critical speed in vacuum equal to c , the speed of light) apart from the difference in crit-
ical speed (we expect ci ≫ c , where ci is the critical speed of a superluminal sector of matter).
At speed v > c , they are expected to release ”Cherenkov” radiation (”ordinary” particles) in vac-
uum. If superluminal particles exist, they could provide most of the cosmic (dark) matter and produce
very high-energy cosmic rays compatible with unexplained discoveries reported in the literature. We
discuss: a) the possible relevance of superluminal matter to the composition, sources and spectra of
high-energy cosmic rays; b) signatures and experiments allowing to possibly explore such effects.

RELATIVITY, MATTER AND SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES
Lorentz invariance can be viewed as a symmetry of the motion equations, in which case no reference
to absolute properties of space and time is required and the properties of matter play the main role
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996). In a two-dimensional galilean space-time, the equation:

2f /¶ t2 − ¶ 2f /¶ x2 = F(f )

ds2 = dx2 − c2

odt2

with a = 1/c2
invariant the squared interval:

o and co = critical speed, remains unchanged under ”Lorentz” transformations leaving

so that matter made with solutions of equation (1) would feel a relativistic space-time even if the real
space-time is actually galilean and if an absolute rest frame exists in the underlying dynamics beyond
the wave equation. A well-known example is provided by the solitons of the sine-Gordon equation,
obtained taking in (1):

F(f ) = (w /co)2 sin f

where w
is a characteristic frequency of the dynamical system. A two-dimensional universe made of
sine-Gordon solitons plunged in a galilean world would behave like a two-dimensional minkowskian
world with the laws of special relativity. Information on any absolute rest frame would be lost by
the solitons, as if the Poincar´e relativity principle (Poincar´e, 1905) were indeed a law of Nature, even
if actually the basic equation derives from a galilean world with an absolute rest frame. The actual
structure of space and time can only be found by going beyond the wave equation to deeper levels
of resolution, similar to the way high-energy accelerator experiments explore the inner structure of
”elementary” particles. At this stage, a crucial question arises (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995): is c (the
speed of light) the only critical speed in vacuum, are there particles with a critical speed different

(1)

(2)

(3)

7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

a
¶
from that of light? The question clearly makes sense, as in a perfectly transparent crystal it is pos-
sible to identify at least two critical speeds: the speed of light and the speed of sound. It has been
shown (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995 and 1996) that superluminal sectors of matter can be consistently
generated, with the conservative choice of leaving the Planck constant unchanged, replacing in the
Klein-Gordon equation the speed of light by a new critical speed ci ≫ c (the subscript i stands for the
i-th superluminal sector). All standard kinematical concepts and formulas (Schweber, 1961) remain
correct, leading to particles with positive mass and energy which are not tachyons. We shall call them
superbradyons as, according to standard vocabulary (Recami, 1978), they are bradyons with super-
luminal critical speed in vacuum. The rest energy of a superluminal particle of mass m and critical
speed ci will be given by the generalized Einstein equation:

Erest = m c2
i

(4)

Energy and momentum conservation will in principle not be spoiled by the existence of several crit-
ical speeds in vacuum: conservation laws will as usual hold for phenomena leaving the vacuum un-
changed. Each superluminal sector will have its own Lorentz invariance with ci deﬁning the metric.
Interactions between two different sectors will break both Lorentz invariances. Lorentz invariance
for all sectors simultaneously will at best be explicit (i.e. exhibiting the diagonal sectorial Lorentz
metric) in a single inertial frame (the vacuum rest frame, i.e.
the ”absolute” rest frame). In our
approach, the Michelson-Morley result is not incompatible with the existence of some ”ether” as
suggested by recent results in particle physics: if the vacuum is a material medium where ﬁelds and
order parameters can condense, it may well have a local rest frame. If superluminal particles cou-
ple weakly to ordinary matter, their effect on the ordinary sector will occur at very high energy and
short distance (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a), far from the domain of successful conventional tests of
Lorentz invariance (Lamoreaux, Jacobs, Heckel, Raab and Forston, 1986 ; Hills and Hall, 1990). In
particular, superbradyons naturally escape the constraints on the critical speed derived in some spe-
ciﬁc models (Coleman and Glashow, 1997; Glashow, Halprin, Krastev, Leung and Pantaleone, 1997).
High-energy experiments can therefore open new windows in this ﬁeld. Finding some track of a su-
perluminal sector (e.g. through violations of Lorentz invariance in the ordinary sector) may be the
only way to experimentally discover the vacuum rest frame. Superluminal particles lead to consistent
cosmological models (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997b), where they may well provide most of the cosmic
(dark) matter. Although recent criticism to this suggestion has been emitted in a speciﬁc model on
the grounds of gravitation theory (Konstantinov, 1997), it should be noticed that the framework used
is crucially different from the multi-graviton approach suggested in our papers.

IMPLICATIONS FOR HIGH-ENERGY COSMIC RAYS
The kinematical properties and Lorentz transformations of high-energy superluminal particles have
If an absolute rest frame exists,
been discussed in a previous paper (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c).
Lorentz contraction is a real physical phenomenon and is governed by the factor g −1
)1/2
for the i-th superluminal sector, so that there is no Lorentz singularity when a superluminal particle
crosses the speed value v = c . Similarly, if superbradyons have any coupling to the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, we expect the magnetic force to be proportional to v c−1
instead of v c−1 . Contrary to tachyons,
superbradyons can emit ”Cherenkov” radiation (i.e. particles with lower critical speed) in vacuum. If
ci ≫ c , and if the vacuum rest frame is close to that deﬁned requiring isotropy of cosmic microwave
background radiation, high-energy superluminal particles will be seen on earth as traveling mainly at
speed v ≈ 103 c . A superluminal particle moving with velocity ~v with respect to the vacuum rest
frame, and emitted by an astrophysical object, can reach an observer moving with laboratory speed
~V with respect to the same frame, at a time (as measured by the observer) previous to the emission
time. Such a phenomenon will happen if~v.~V > c2 , and the emitted particle will be seen to evolve
backward in time (but it evolves forward in time in the vacuum rest frame, so that the reversal of

i = (1 − v2c−2

i

i

the time arrow is not really a physical phenomenon). If they interact several times with the detector,
superluminal particles can be a directional probe preceding the detailed observation of astrophysical
phenomena, such as explosions releasing simultaneously neutrinos, photons and superluminal par-
ticles. For a high-speed superluminal cosmic ray with critical speed ci ≫ c , the momentum, as
measured in the laboratory, does not provide directional information on the source, but on the vacuum
rest frame. Velocity provides directional information on the source, but can be measured only if the
particle interacts several times with the detector, which is far from guaranteed, or if the superluminal
particle is associated to a collective phenomenon emitting also photons or neutrinos simultaneously.
In the most favourable case, directional detection of high-speed superluminal particles in a large un-
derground or underwater detector would allow to trigger a dedicated astrophysical observation in the
direction of the sky determined by the velocity of the superluminal particle(s). If d is the distance
between the observer and the astrophysical object, and D
t the time delay between the detection of the
superluminal particle(s) and that of photons and neutrinos, we have: d ≃ c D
t .

Annihilation of pairs of superluminal particles into ordinary ones can release very large kinetic
energies and provide a new source of high-energy cosmic rays. Decays of superluminal particles may
play a similar role. Collisions (especially, inelastic with very large energy transfer) of high-energy su-
perluminal particles with extra-terrestrial ordinary matter may also yield high-energy ordinary cosmic
rays. Pairs of slow superluminal particles can also annihilate into particles of another superluminal
sector with lower ci , converting most of the rest energies into a large amount of kinetic energy. Su-
perluminal particles moving at v > c can release anywhere ”Cherenkov” radiation in vacuum, i.e.
spontaneous emission of particles of a lower critical speed ci (for v > ci) including ordinary ones,
providing a new source of (superluminal or ordinary) high-energy cosmic rays. High-energy superlu-
minal particles can directly reach the earth and undergo collisions inside the atmosphere, producing
many secondaries like ordinary cosmic rays. They can also interact with the rock or with water near
some underground or underwater detector, coming from the atmosphere or after having crossed the
earth, and producing clear signatures. Contrary to neutrinos, whose ﬂux is strongly attenuated by the
earth at energies above 106 GeV , superluminal particles will in principle not be stopped by earth at
these energies. In inelastic collisions, high-energy superluminal primaries can transfer most of their
energy to ordinary particles. Even with a very weak interaction probability, and assuming that the su-
perluminal primary does not produce any ionization, the rate for superluminal cosmic ray events can
be observable if we are surrounded by important concentrations of superluminal matter. Background
rejection would be further enhanced by atypical ionization properties.

The possibility that superluminal matter exists, and that it plays nowadays an important role in
our Universe, should be kept in mind when addressing the two basic questions raised by the analysis
of any cosmic ray event: a) the nature and properties of the cosmic ray primary; b) the identiﬁcation
(nature and position) of the source of the cosmic ray. If the primary is a superluminal particle, it will
escape conventional criteria for particle identiﬁcation and most likely produce a speciﬁc signature
(e.g. in inelastic collisions) different from those of ordinary primaries. Like neutrino events, in the
absence of ionization (which will in any case be very weak) we may expect the event to start any-
where inside the detector. Unlike very high-energy neutrino events, events created by superluminal
primaries can originate from a particle having crossed the earth. An incoming, relativistic superlu-
minal particle with momentum p and energy Ein ≃ p ci in the vacuum rest frame, hitting an ordinary
particle at rest, can, for instance, release most of its energy into two ordinary particles with momenta
(in the vacuum rest frame) close to pmax = 1/2 p ci c−1 and oriented back to back in such a way
that the two momenta almost cancel. Then, an energy ER ≃ Ein would be transferred to ordinary
secondaries. Corrections due to the earth motion must be applied (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c) before
deﬁning the expected event conﬁguration in laboratory experiments (AUGER, AMANDA...). At very
high energy, such events would be easy to identify in large volume detectors, even at very small rate.
If the source is superluminal, it can be located anywhere (and even be a free particle) and will not

necessarily be at the same place as conventional sources of ordinary cosmic rays. High-energy cosmic
ray events originating form superluminal sources will provide hints on the location of such sources
and be possibly the only way to observe them. The energy dependence of the events should be taken
into account. At very high energies, the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cut-off (Greisen, 1966;
Zatsepin and Kuzmin, 1966) does not in principle hold for cosmic ray events originating from super-
luminal matter: this is obvious if the primaries are superluminal particles that we expect to interact
very weakly with the cosmic microwave background, but is also true for ordinary primaries as we do
not expect them to be produced at the locations of ordinary sources and there is no upper bound to
their energy around 100 EeV . Besides ”Cherenkov” deceleration, a superluminal cosmic background
radiation may exist and generate its own GZK cutoffs for the superluminal sectors. However, if there
are large amounts of superluminal matter around us, they can be the main superluminal source of cos-
mic rays reaching the earth. To date, there is no well established interpretation of the highest-energy
cosmic ray events. Primaries (ordinary or superluminal) originating from superluminal particles are
acceptable candidates and can possibly escape several problems (event conﬁguration, source location,
energy dependence...) faced by cosmic rays produced at ordinary sources.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is a pleasure to thank J. Gabarro-Arpa, as well as the Director of LAPP M. Yvert and colleagues at
LPC Coll`ege de France, for useful discussions and remarks.

REFERENCES
Coleman, S. and Glashow, S.L., ”Cosmic Ray and Neutrino Tests of Special Relativity”, paper

hep-ph/9703240 of LANL (Los Alamos) electronic archive (1997).

Glashow, S.L., Halprin, A., Krastev, P.I., Leung, C.N. and Pantaleone, J., ”Comments on Neutrino

Tests of Special Relativity”, paper hep-ph/9703454 of LANL electronic archive (1997).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Properties of a Possible Class of Particles Able to Travel Faster than Light”,
Proceedings of the Moriond Workshop on ”Dark Matter in Cosmology, Clocks and Tests of Fun-
damental Laws”, Villars January 21 - 28 1995 , Ed. Fronti`eres, Gif-sur-Yvette (1995).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Physical and Cosmological Implications of a Possible Class of Particles Able
to Travel Faster than Light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference on High-Energy
Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL electronic archive (1996).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Invariance and Superluminal Particles”, paper physics/9703020 of

LANL electronic archive (1997a).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Vacuum Structure, Lorentz Symmetry and Superluminal Particles”, paper

physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive (1997b).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Space, Time and Superluminal Particles”, paper physics/9702026 of LANL

electronic archive (1997c).

Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).
Hills, D. and Hall, J.L., Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697 (1990).
Konstantinov, M.Yu., ”Comments on the Hypothesis about Possible Class of Particles Able to Travel
faster than Light: Some Geometrical Models”, paper physics/9705019 of LANL electronic archive
(1997).

Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J. and Forston, E.N., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 , 3125

Poincar´e, H., Speech at the St. Louis International Exposition of 1904 , The Monist 15 , 1 (1905).
Recami, E., in ”Tachyons, Monopoles and Related Topics”, Ed. E. Recami, North-Holland, Amster-

(1986).

dam (1978).

Schweber, S.S., ”An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field Theory”, Row, Peterson and Co.,

Evanston and Elmsford, USA (1961).

Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).

