HE 1.2.36

ABSENCE OF GREISEN-ZATSEPIN-KUZMIN
CUTOFF AND STABILITY OF UNSTABLE
PARTICLES AT VERY HIGH ENERGY, AS A
CONSEQUENCE OF LORENTZ SYMMETRY
VIOLATION

L. Gonzalez-Mestres1,2
1Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France
2Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

ABSTRACT
Special relativity has been tested at low energy with great accuracy, but its extrapolation to very
high-energy phenomena is much less well established. Introducing a critical distance scale, a , below
10−25 cm (the wavelength scale of the highest-energy observed cosmic rays) allows to consider mo-
dels, compatible with standard tests of special relativity, where a small violation of Lorentz symmetry
(a can, for instance, be the Planck length) produces dramatic effects on the properties of high-energy
cosmic rays. Not only the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoff on very high-energy protons and
nuclei does no longer apply, but particles which are unstable at low energy (neutron, several nuclei,
some hadronic resonances like the D ++...) would become stable at very high energy. The muon would
also become stable or very long lived at very high energy if one of the two neutrinos associated to
the light charged leptons (electron, muon) has a mass. Similar considerations apply to the t
lepton.
We discuss several possible scenarios originating these phenomena, as well as the cosmic ray energy
range (well below the energy scale associated to the fundamental length) and experiments where they
could be detected. Observable effects are predicted for the highest-energy cosmic rays.

LORENTZ SYMMETRY AS A LOW-ENERGY LIMIT
Low-energy experiments (Lamoreaux, Jacobs, Heckel, Raab and Forston, 1986 ; Hills and Hall, 1990)
conﬁrm Lorentz invariance to an impressive accuracy. However, the extrapolation between these re-
sults and high-energy phenomena is far from obvious. Figures can change by 34 orders of magnitude
between keV and 1020 eV scales if Lorentz symmetry violation is proportional to (k a)2 where k is
the wave vector scale and a a fundamental length. Such a behaviour seems to be characteristic of
many models where local Lorentz invariance is broken through non-local phenomena at the funda-
mental length scale (f.i.
the Planck scale). These models lead to a dispersion relation of the form
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997):

E = (2p )−1 h c a−1 e (k a)
where E is the energy of the particle, h the Planck constant, c the speed of light, a a fundamental
length scale that we can naturally identify with the Planck length (but other choices of the fundamental
distance scale are possible), k the wave vector modulus and [e (k a)]2 is a convex function of (k a)2
obtained from vacuum dynamics. We have checked that this is also a fundamental property of old
scenarios breaking local Lorentz invariance (f.i. R´edei, 1967), although such a phenomenon seems
not to have been noticed by the authors. For a particle of mass m , an ansatz based on an isotropic,
continuous modiﬁcation of the Bravais lattice dynamics is (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997):

(1)

e (k a) = [4 sin2 (ka/2) + (2p a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2
whereas we have found that simple extensions of the ansatz by R´edei (1967) lead to expressions like:
e (k a) = [10 + 30 (k a)−2 cos (k a) − 30 (k a)−3 sin (k a) + (2p a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

(2)

(3)

7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

(4)

(5)

(6)

which has similar properties to (2). In both cases, and rather generally, we ﬁnd that, at wave vector
scales below the inverse of the fundamental length scale, Lorentz symmetry violation in relativistic
kinematics can be parameterized writing:

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2 − a

(k a)4 + (2p a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

where a

is a positive constant between 10−1 and 10−2 . At high energy, we can write:

e (k a) ≃ k a [1 − a

(k a)2/2] + 2 p 2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2

and, in any case, we expect observable kinematical effects when the term a (ka)3/2 becomes as large
as the term 2 p 2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 . This happens at:

E ≃ (2p )−1 h c k ≈ a −1/4 (h c a−1/2p )1/2 (m c2)1/2

Thus, contrary to conventional estimates of local Lorentz symmetry breaking predictions (Anchor-
doqui, Dova, G´omez Dumm and Lacentre, 1997) where the modiﬁcation of relativistic kinematics is
ignored, observable effects will be produced at wavelength scales well above the critical length. For
a proton or a neutron, and taking a ≈ 10−33 cm , this corresponds to E ≈ 1019 eV , an energy scale
below the highest energies at which cosmic rays have been observed. Similar considerations apply
to nuclei and would apply to muons, pions and t
leptons if these particles were stable. It must be
realized that, for a proton at E ≈ 1020 eV and with the above value of a , one would have:

(k a)2/2 ≈ 10−18 ≫ 2 p 2 h−2 k−2 m2 c2 ≈ 10−22

(7)

so that, although a (ka)3/2 is indeed very small as compared to the value of e (k a) , the term
2 p 2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 represents an even smaller fraction of this quantity. We therefore expect cor-
rections to relativistic kinematics to play a crucial role at the highest cosmic ray energies. Although
Lorentz symmetry certainly reﬂects to a very good approximation the reality of physics at large dis-
tance scales and can therefore be considered as the low-energy limit of particle kinematics, no existing
experimental result proves that it applies with the same accuracy to high-energy cosmic rays. In view
of the above considerations, the question deserves serious practical study in close connexion with
high-energy experiments. In what follows, we discuss two expected consequences of local Lorentz
symmetry violation, assuming the value of c in (1) to be a universal constant.

THE GZK CUTOFF DOES NO LONGER APPLY
A proton with E > 1020 eV interacting with a cosmic microwave background photon would be
sensitive to the above corrections to relativistic kinematics. For instance, after having absorbed a
10−3 eV photon moving in the opposite direction, the proton gets an extra 10−3 eV energy, whereas
its momentum is lowered by 10−3 eV /c . In the conventional scenario with exact Lorentz invariance,
this is enough to allow the excited proton to decay into a proton or a neutron plus a pion, losing an
important part of its energy. However, it can be checked (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997) that in our scenario
with Lorentz invariance violation such a reaction is strictly forbidden. Elastic p + g scattering is
permitted, but allows the proton to release only a small amount of its energy. The outgoing photon
energy for an incoming 1020 eV proton cannot exceede D Emax ≈ 10−5 E = 1015 eV instead of the
value D Emax ≈ 1019 eV obtained with exact Lorentz invariance. Similar or more stringent bounds
exist for channels involving lepton production. Furthermore, obvious phase space limitations will
also lower the event rate, as compared to standard calculations using exact Lorentz invariance which
predict photoproduction of real pions at such cosmic proton energies. The effect seems strong enough
to invalidate the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin cutoff (Greisen, 1966; Zatsepin and Kuzmin, 1966) and
explain the existence of the highest-energy cosmic rays. It will become more important at higher
energies, as we get closer to the a−1 wavelength scale. Similar arguments apply to heavy nuclei,

a
again invalidating the GZK cutoff. Since, in both cases, the cosmic ray energy was expected to
degrade over distances ≈ 1024 m according to conventional estimates, the correction by several orders
of magnitude we just introduced applies to distance scales much larger than the estimated size of
the presently observable Universe. Obvioulsy, our result is limited by the history of the Universe, as
cosmic rays coming from distances closer and closer to c−1 times the horizon size will be older and
older and, at early times, will have been confronted to rather different scenarios. Nevertheless, the
above modiﬁcation of relativistic kinematics allows much older cosmic rays to reach earth nowadays.
A previous attempt to explain the experimental absence of the predicted GZK cutoff by Lorentz
symmetry violation at high energy (Kirzhnits and Chechin, 1972) led the authors to consider an
expansion in powers of g 4 , where g = (1 − v2c−2)−1/2 , v is the speed of the particle and the
coefﬁcient of the linear term in g 4 had to be arbitrarily tuned to ≈ 10−44 in order to produce an effect
of order 1 for a 1020 eV proton (therefore leading to a divergent expansion at higher energies). No
such problems are encountered in our approach, where the required orders of magnitude come out
quite naturally. If the absence of GZK cutoff is indeed due to the kinematics deﬁned (1), it allows in
principle to set a lower bound on the value of the fundamental length (around 10−34 cm).

UNSTABLE PARTICLES MAY BECOME STABLE AT VERY HIGH ENERGY
In standard relativity, we can compute the lifetime of any unstable particle in its rest frame and,
with the help of a Lorentz transformation, obtain the Lorentz-dilated lifetime for a particle moving at
ﬁnite speed. The same procedure had been followed in previous estimates of the predictions of local
Lorentz symmetry breaking (Anchordoqui, Dova, G´omez Dumm and Lacentre, 1997) for the decay
of high-energy particles. This is no longer possible with the kinematics deﬁned by (1). Instead, two
results are obtained (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997):

i) Unstable particles with at least two massive particles in the ﬁnal state of all their decay
channels become stable at very high energy, as a consequence of Lorentz symmetry violation through
(1). A typical order of magnitude for the energy Est at which such a phenomenon occurs is:

Est ≈ c3/2 h1/2 (a m2)−1/2 (m2 − m2

1 − m2

2)1/2

(8)

where: a) m is the mass of the decaying particle; b) we select the two heaviest particles of the ﬁnal
product of each decay channel, and m2 is the mass of the lightest particle in this list; c) m1 is the
mass of the heaviest particle produced together with that of mass m2 . With a ≈ 10−33 cm , the
neutron would become stable for E >∼ 1020 eV . At the same energies or slightly above, some
unstable nuclei would also become stable. Similarly, some hadronic resonances (e.g. the D ++ ,
whose decay product contains a proton and a positron) would become stable at E >∼ 1021 eV . Most
of these objects will decay before they can be accelerated to such energies, but they may result of
a collision at very high energy or of the decay of a superluminal particle (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996).
The study of very high-energy cosmic rays can thus reveal as stable particles objects which would be
unstable if produced at accelerators. If one of the light neutrinos (n e , n µ) has a mass in the ≈ 10 eV
range, the muon would become stable at energies above ≈ 1022 eV . Weak neutrino mixing may
restore muon decay, but with very long lifetime. Similar considerations apply to the t
lepton, which
would become stable above E ≈ 1022 eV if the mass of the n
is ≈ 100 eV but, again, a decay with
very long lifetime can be restored by neutrino oscillations.

ii) In any case, unstable particles live longer than naively expected with exact Lorentz invariance
and, at high enough energy, the effect becomes much stronger than previously estimated (Anchordo-
qui, Dova, G´omez Dumm and Lacentre, 1997) ignoring the small violation of relativistic kinematics.
At energies well below the stability region, partial decay rates are already modiﬁed by large factors
leading to observable effects. Irrespectively of whether m2 vanishes or not, the phenomenon occurs
at E >∼ c3/2 h1/2 (m2 − m2
1)1/4 a−1/2 (≈ 1018 eV for p + → e+ + n e , if a ≈ 10−33 cm). The effect
has a sudden, sharp rise, since a fourth power of the energy is involved in the calculation.

t
CONCLUDING REMARKS
For similar reasons, a small violation of the universality of c would not necessarily produce the
Cherenkov effect in vacuum considered by Coleman and Glashow (1997) for high-energy cosmic
rays. The mechanism we just described competes with those considered in their discussion and tends
to compensate their effect: therefore, the bounds obtained by these authors do not apply to our ansatz.
On the other hand, the discussion of velocity oscillations of neutrinos presented by Glashow, Halprin,
Krastev, Leung and Pantaleone (1997) for the low-energy region is compatible with our theory. How-
ever, the universality of c seems natural in most uniﬁed ﬁeld theories (whereas that of the mass is natu-
rally violated) and preserves the Poincar´e relativity principle (Poincar´e, 1905) in the low-momentum
limit. In any case, if Lorentz symmetry is broken and an absolute rest frame exists, high-energy
particles are indeed different physical objects from low-energy particles.

It is also interesting to lower the value of a−1 down to the wave vector of the highest-energy
cosmic rays, ≈ 1025 cm−1. Then, a stable neutron is predicted at energies >∼ 104 TeV and, with
respect to the above estimates for other particles, the energy threshold for stability is to be lowered by
a factor ≈ 10−4 . For similar reasons, the departure from standard relativistic values for partial decay
rates would start at E >∼ 100 TeV for the p + → e+ + n e channel. Not only lifetimes do not follow
relativistic formulae, but partial branching ratios become energy-dependent and are sensitive to the
masses of the produced particles. Data on high-energy cosmic rays contain information relevant to
these phenomena and should be carefully analyzed. Cosmic rays seem to indeed be able to test the
predictions of (1) and set upper bounds on the fundamental length a . Experiments like AUGER and
AMANDA present great potentialities in this respect. Very high-energy data may even provide a way
to measure neutrino masses and mixing, as well as other parameters related to phenomena beyond the
standard model. Even if the energy is in principle too low, lifetime measurements at LHC energies
are also worth performing. Because of its stability at very high energy, the neutron becomes a serious
candidate to be a possible primary of the highest-energy cosmic ray events.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is a pleasure to thank J. Gabarro-Arpa, as well as colleagues at LPC Coll`ege de France, for useful
discussions and remarks.

REFERENCES
Anchordoqui, L., Dova, M.T., G´omez Dumm, D. and Lacentre, P., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik C 73 , 465

(1997).

Coleman, S. and Glashow, S.L., ”Cosmic Ray and Neutrino Tests of Special Relativity”, paper

hep-ph/9703240 of LANL (Los Alamos) electronic archive (1997).

Glashow, S.L., Halprin, A., Krastev, P.I., Leung, C.N. and Pantaleone, J., ”Comments on Neutrino

Tests of Special Relativity”, paper hep-ph/9703454 of LANL electronic archive (1997).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Physical and Cosmological Implications of a Possible Class of Particles Able
to Travel Faster than Light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference on High-Energy
Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL electronic archive (1996).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Vacuum Structure, Lorentz Symmetry and Superluminal Particles”, paper

physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive (1997).

Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).
Hills, D. and Hall, J.L., Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697 (1990).
Kirzhnits, D.A., and Chechin, V.A., Soviet Journal of Nuclear Physics, 15 , 585 (1972).
Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J. and Forston, E.N., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 , 3125

(1986).

Poincar´e, H., Speech at the St. Louis International Exposition of 1904 , The Monist 15 , 1 (1905).
R´edei, L.B., Phys. Rev. 162 , 1299 (1967).
Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).

