7
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
5
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IBR PREPRINT TH-96-S033, Sept.3, 1996
PACS 04.60.+n; 03.65.-w,11.10.-z

CLASSICAL AND OPERATOR ISOMINKOWSKIAN
UNIFICATION OF GENERAL AND SPECIAL RELATIVITIES
FOR MATTER AND THEIR
ISODUALS FOR ANTIMATTER

Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Reseach
P.O.Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
E-mail ibr@gte.net Web site http://home1.gte.net.net/ibr/

Abstract

We recall that the Minkowskian geometry possesses basic units of space and time
which are invariant under the Poincar´e symmetry. We then show that, by comparison,
the Riemannian geometry possesses space-time units which are not invariant under the
symmetries of the Riemannian line element, thus causing evident physical ambiguities.
We therefore introduce a novel formulation of general relativity in the isominkowskian
geometry which is an axiom-preserving lifting of the conventional Minkowskian ge-
ometry but which nevertheless admits all possible Riemannian metrics thanks to a
(positive-deﬁnite) 4 × 4 generalization of the basic unit. We construct the universal
symmetry of the isominkowskian line elements called isopoincar´e symmetry, prove that
it is locally isomorphic to the conventional Poincar´e symmetry, and show that, in this
way, conventional Riemannian metrics and related ﬁeld equations can be expressed
with respect to invariant generalized units of space and time. We then show that
the isominkowskian geometry and related isopoincar´e symmetry permit: I) A classical
geometric uniﬁcation of the general and special relativities for matter into a formula-
tion called isospecial relativity in which the former occurs for generalized units while
admitting the latter as a particular case for conventional units; II) A novel operator
formulation of gravity for matter based on the abstract axioms of relativistic quantum
mechanics, thus showing hope for a possible resolution of the ambiguities in current
theories of quantum gravity; and III) A novel classical and operator formulation of
antimatter which is an antiautomorphic image of the preceding formulations for mat-
ter constructed via a map called isoduality. The experimental validity of the classical
isominkowskian formulation of gravity for matter is derived from the preservation of
the conventional Einstein’s ﬁeld equations except for inessential multiplicative terms.
The experimental veriﬁcation of the operator isominkowskian formulation of gravity

1

for matter is derived from the preservation of conventional quantum mechanical laws,
with gravitational eﬀects being notoriously very small as compared to those of other
interactions of the particle word. The validity of the isodual formulations for antimat-
ter is inferred from its compatibility with available experimnental data. The results
of this paper have been made possible thanks to the recent achievement of suﬃcient
maturity for mathematical content in memoir [3f], axiomatiic consistency in memoir
[3g] and generalized symmetry principles in memoir [7a]. Further studies, such as the
formulation of an isotopic grand uniﬁed theory inclusive of gravitation, are presented
in the fortcoming paper [10].

1 Introduction

As it is well known, the special relativity [1] constitutes one of the most majestic scientiﬁc
achievements of this century for mathematical beauty, axiomatic consistency and unambigu-
ous experimental veriﬁcations. By comparison, despite equally historical advances through
this century, the general relativity [2] still remains aﬄicted by basic unresolved problematic
aspects. In this note we therefore initiate studies aimed at a geometric uniﬁcation of the
general and special relativity via the abstract axioms of the special rather than of the general
relativity.

Our central methodological tools for the characterization of matter are the so–called iso-
topies [3] which, for the case at hand, are characterized by the lifting of the unit of relativistic
theories I = Diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) into a well behaved and positive–deﬁnite but otherwise arbi-
trary 4 × 4 matrix ˆI(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...) = 1/ ˆT with associated lifting of the conventional associative
product A × B among generic quantities A, B into the isoproduct A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B under
which ˆI is the correct left and right unit of the new theory.

For consistency the entire mathematical and physical structures of the original theories,
must be reconstructed with respect to thje above generalized unit and product, yielding
the so-called isonumbers, isospaces, isoalgebras, isogeometries, etc.
[3f]. It is easy to see
that, for positive–deﬁnite generalized unit ˆI, all isotopic structures are locally isomorphic to
the original ones and, in this sense, all isotopies are axiom-preserving. We should therefore
indicate from the outset that the isotopies do not produce new theories, but merely new
realizations of existing theories, which is the main line of study of this paper.

The isotopic structures which are particularly signiﬁcant for this paper are: the isominkowskian

spaces [4a]; the isolorentz [4a] and isopoincar´e symmetries [4e,4f]; and the isospecial relativ-
ity [4], which is the axiom-preserving formulation of the conventional relativity on isominkowskian
spaces under the isopoincar´e symmetry (see [4h] for a general presentation).

The methods for the characterization of antimatter are the so-called isodualities [4b,5]
which are characterized by the antiautomorphic map of all quantities A for matter into their
anti-Hermitean forms −A†, thus implying negative-deﬁnite units − ˆI. Again, for consistency
the isodual map must be applied to all mathematical and physical formulations for matter,
yielding isodual isonumbers, isodual isospaces, isodual isoalgebras, etc. The isodual struc-

2

tures which are particualrly important for this paper are: the isodual isominkowski spaces,
the isodual isopoincar´e symmetry, and the isodual isospecial relativity (see [4h] for a general
presentation).

Independent reviews and developments can be found in monographs [6], papers [7] and
literature quoted therein. Ref. [6e] provides a comprehensive bibliography up to 1984, while
a subsequent bibliographical (and technical) survey is available in monograph [6d].

The main lines of the classical geometric uniﬁcation of the special and general relativities
were ﬁrst submitted in ref. [4d] as a natural consequence of the isopoincar´e symmetry. The
main lines of the operator geometric uniﬁcation of the special and general relativities were
submitted for the ﬁrst time at the VII Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity
held at Stanford University in July 1994 [8a].

The above studies still lacked a rigorous form-invariant character because they were
based on the conventional diﬀerential calculus which has resulted to be noninvariant, and
thus inapplicable under isotopies.

In this paper we present for the ﬁrst time the fully form-invariant formulations of:
I) The classical geometric uniﬁcation of the general and special relativities for matter
into the isospecial relativity in which the former occurs for generalized units while admitting
the latter as a particular case for conventional units;

II) The operator formulation of gravity for matter based on the abstract axioms of rela-
tivistic quantum mechanics, thus showing hope for a possible resolution of the ambiguities
in current theories of quantum gravity; and

III) The classical and operator isodual formulations of antimatter.
The experimental validity of the classical isominkowskian formulation of gravity for mat-
ter is derived from the preservation of the conventional Einstein’s ﬁeld equations except for
inessential multiplicative terms. The experimental validity of the operator isominkowskian
formulation of gravity for matter is derived from the preservation of conventional quan-
tum mechanical laws, with gravitational eﬀects being notoriously very small as compared to
those of other interactions of the particle word. The validity of the isodual formulations for
antimatter is inferred from its compatibility with available experimnental data.

The above results have been made possible by the recent achievement of suﬃcient ma-
turity for: mathematical content in memoir [3f] including the isotopies and isodualities of
diﬀerential calculus and their applications to algebras, geometries and analytic mechanics;
general axiomatiic consistency in the physical formulations of both isotopic and isodual the-
ories in memoir [3g]; and generalized symmetry principles for isotopic and isodual theories
in memoir [7a]. Further studies, such as the formulation of a grand uniﬁed theory with
an axiomatically consistent inclusion of gravitation are presented in the fortcoming paper
[10]. An introductory outline of the main mathematical and physical aspects of this paper
is available in Pages 18, 19 of Web Site [7u].

A primary motivation for this paper is the following:

Theorem 1 The basic unit of all (nowhere degenerate, real valued and symmetric) geome-
tries with non–null curvature over conventional ﬁelds is not invariant under the symmetry

3

of their line element in both classical and quantum formulations.

Proof. Let E = E(x, δ, R) and ℜ = ℜ(y, g, R) be n–dimensional Euclidean and Rieman-
nian spaces, respectively, with the same signature (+, +, ..., +), basic unit I =diag.(1, 1, ..., 1),
metrics δ = (δij = Diag.(1, 1, ..., 1) and g(y) = (gij) = gt, and local coordinates x =
{xk}, y = {yk}, i, j, k = 1, 2, ...n, over the ﬁeld R = R(n, +, ×) of real numbers n with
conventional sum + and multiplication ×.

The transformation x → y(x) for which the Euclidean metric is mapped into the Rie-

mannian metric,

is necessarily noncanonical
for non–null curvature. Therefore, the symmetries of the Rie-
mannian line elements y2 = ytgy are necessarily noncanonical. As such, these symmetries
do not generally preserve the basic unit I at the classical level because, by deﬁnition, non-
canonical transforms do not leave invariant the fundamental canonical (symplectic) tensor

δij → gij(y) =

∂yr
∂xi δrs

∂ys
∂xj ,

(ωµν) =

0 −I
I

0 !

,

 

(1.1)

(1.2)

i.e., they are of the type in phase space with local coordinates b = {x, p} → b′(b) = {x′, p′}

ωµν → ω′

∂bβ
∂b′ν = ω′
But the canonical tensor represents the fundamental space units of the theory, and this
establishes the inability of classical conventional geometries with non–null curvature to have
invariant basic units.

∂ba
∂b′µ ωαβ

µν(a′) 6= ωµν

µν =

(1.3)

The symmetries of the same line element in operator formulation are then necessarily
nonunitary for consistency (see Sect. 5), and this proves the lack of invariance of the basic
unit also for operator theories. The same proof evidently applies for indeﬁnite signatures
(+, +, ...−, −....) (see later on for the (3+1)– dimensional case). q.e.d.

To understand the implications of the above theorem, recall that the basic unit of the
(3+1) – dimensional Riemannian geometry is given by I = Diag.((1, 1, 1), 1), where the ﬁrst
three components (1, 1, 1) represent the space units (say 1 cm) in dimensionless form, and
the fourth component represents the time unit (say 1 sec) also in dimensionless form.

Theorem 1 establishes that curvature implies the lack of invariance of the fundamental
space–time units of the theory, thus implying evident problematic aspects in the comparison

4

of the theory with experimental data. In fact, one of the fundamental conditions for the
applicability of the measurement theory is precisely the invariance of the basic unit.

As a result, Theorem 1 provides a new perspective of the various problematic aspects
voiced on Einstein’s gravitation during this century (see, e.g., Ref. [5h] for an outline with
referenbces) because it indicates that they are not necessarily due to Einstein’s ﬁeld equations
but rather to their referral to a geometry in which the basic units opf space and time are
not invariant. In fact, following Theorem 1, the same problematic aspects can be proved to
persist for all possible modiﬁcations–enlargement of Einstein ﬁeld equations.

Equivalently, Theorem 1 establishes that Riemannian spaces are a noncanonical defor-
mation of the Minkowskian spaces (because the former are obtainable via noncanonical
transformations of the latter) and, as such, they suﬀer of all drawbacks of noncanonical
theories when formulated on conventional spaces over conventional ﬁelds.

In the next section we present a formulation of classical gravitation for matyter which
preserves Einstein’s gravitational ﬁeld equations unchanged and merely reformulates them
in a new geometry, the isominkowskian geometry, with generalized yet invariant basic units
under its universal isopoincar`e symmetry. The operator and antimatter proﬁles are studied
in subsequent section. To render this paper selfsuﬃcient as well as for notational purposes,
each section contains an outline of the new methods used therein.

2 Classical isominkowskian uniﬁcation of the special

and general relativities for matter

As it is well known, there cannot be really new physical advances without new mathematics.
It turn, there cannot be really new mathematics without new numbers. Still in turn, the
only possibility of identifying new numbers known to the author is via the generalization of
their basic unit I = +1 → ˆI called lifting (ﬁrst proposed in [3a,3b]), where ˆI is in general a
well behaved, n × n matrix with an unrestricted functional dependence of their elements on
coordinates x, their derivatives of arbitrary order and any needed additional quantity,

I = +1 → ˆI = ˆI(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...).

(2.1)

The fundamental quantities of this paper are therefore given by new numbers with arbi-

trary units studied in details in ref.s [3e,3f].

A mere inspection of lifting (2.1) reveals a signiﬁcant broadening of the conventional
numbers and, therefore, of the mathematical and physical theories built on them. In fact,
we have the following primary classiﬁcation [3f]: 1) Ordinary numbers occurring for ˆI = +1;
2)isonumbers occurring for Hermitean generalized units ˆI = ˆI †; 3)genonumbers occurring
for nonhermitean generalized unit ˆI 6= ˆI †; and 4)hypernumbers occurring for generalized
units given by an ordered set of Hermitean quantities. The latter three classes then admit
subclasses depending on whether the (real part of the)generalized unit is positive–deﬁnite,

5

singular, etc. The numbers, isonumbers, genonumbers and hypernumbers are used for the
description of matter in condition of progressively increasing complexity (e.g., reversible,
nonreversible, etc.), with the most general possible hypernumbers being studied for the
description of matter in its most complex conditions (e.g., the DNA code).

Moreover, the conventional numbers and each of the above generalizations admit an-
tiautomorphic images ˆI → ˆI d = − ˆI † called isoduality [4b,3e,3f] which are used for the
description of antimatter also in physical conditions of progressively increasing complexity
[5].

It is evident that in a ﬁeld of such a diversity we are forced for brevity to restrict our
studies to the ﬁrst lifting, those of isotopic type and its isodual. In this section we shall there-
fore study a classical representation of matter based on the isonumbers, the corresponding
isodual representation of antimatter is studied in the next section. Corresponding operator
images are studied in subsequent sections. The genotopic and hyperstructual extensions of
isotopic formulation of this paper are contemplated for study in subsequent works.

Let F = F (a, +, ∗) be a ﬁeld of numbers (i.e., real numbers a = n ∈ R, complex numbers
a = c ∈ C or quaternions a = q ∈ Q) with conventional sum a + b and product a × b = ab
and corresponding additive unit 0 and multiplicative unit I.

The isoﬁelds are rings ˆF = ˆF (ˆa, +, ˆx) with elements ˆa = a × ˆI, a ∈ F called isonum-
bers,where ˆI a positive–deﬁnite quantity (e.g., a matrix) generally outside the original set
F equipped with:

i) the isosum ˆa + ˆb = (a + b) × ˆI with conventional additive unit ˆ0 ≡ 0, ˆa + ˆ0 ≡ ˆ0 + ˆa ≡
ˆa ∈ F (the preservation of the additive unit 0 is indicated by preserving the symbol
+ unchanged in ˆF (ˆa, +, ˆx)); and

ii) the isoproduct

ˆa ˆ×ˆb = ˆa × ˆT × ˆb = (a × b) × ˆI ∈ ˆF ,

under which the quantity ˆI = ˆT −1 is the correct new left and right unit of ˆF

ˆI ˆ×ˆa ≡ ˆa ˆ× ˆI ≡ ˆA, ∀ˆa ∈ ˆF , ˆI = ˆT −1,

(the change of the multiplicative unit is indicated with the new symbol ˆ× in ˆF (ˆa, +, ˆ×)).
When the above conditions are veriﬁed, the ˆI is called the isounit and ˆT is called the isotopic
element.

The fundamental mechanism of the isotopies responsible for their axiom–preserving char-
acter is that of lifting the multiplicative unit I → ˆI while jointly the product is lifted by the
inverse amount, × → ˆ× = × ˆT ×, ˆI = ˆT −1. This implies the following

Lemma 1 [3e]: Isoﬁelds satisfy all the axioms of a ﬁeld.

(2.2)

(2.3)

6

Despite the local isomorphism ˆF ≈ F , the lifting F → ˆF is not trivial because it requires
a corresponding lifting of all operations of F . For instance, the conventional square of a
number n2 = n × n has no meaning for ˆF and must be lifted into the isosquare ˆn2 = ˆn ˆ×ˆn.
Along similar lines we have the isopowers ˆn ˆm = ˆn ˆ×ˆn ˆ×.. ˆ×ˆn (m times); the isosquare root
2 ; the isoquotient ˆnˆ/m = (ˆn/ ˆm) × ˆI; the isonorm ˆ|ˆaˆ| = |a| × ˆI , where |a| is the
ˆn
conventional norm; etc. (see [3e] for brevity for all details). The nontriviality of the lifting
F → ˆF is then illustrated by the fact that numbers which are not prime for I = +1 may
become prime for other units [3e].

ˆ1
2 = n

2 ˆ× ˆI

1

1

The axiomatic consistency of the emerging new structure is established by the local
isomorphism between the conventional ﬁeld and its isotopic image. In particular, it should
be notes that the isounit preserves all axiomatic properties of the original unit, e.g.,

ˆ1
2 ≡ ˆI; ˆI/ ˆI ≡ ˆI, ˆ| ˆIˆ| ≡ ˆI, etc.
ˆI ˆm = ˆI ˆ× ˆI ˆ×.. ˆ× ˆI ≡ ˆI, ˆI

(2.4)

The assumption of the isonumbers as the fundamental numbers requires a simple, yet
unique and unambiguous reconstruction of contemporary mathematical and physical theories
into forms admitting of ˆI, rather than I, as the correct left and right unit.

Recall that the conventional metric spaces of contemporary physics are based on con-
ventional ﬁelds of number. the ﬁrst and most important implication of the lifting I → ˆI is
therefore the necessity to construct, for evident reason of consistency, corresponding liftings
of metric spaces.

Let M = M(x, η, R) be a conventional Minkowski space [1] with coordinates x =
{xµ} = {r, cot}, µ = 1, 2, 3, 4, where co is the speed of light in vacuum, with basic unit
I = Diag.(+1, +1, +1, +1) and metric η = Diag.(+1, +1, +1, −1) over a ﬁeld R = R(n, +x)
of real numbers n equipped with the conventional sum + and product ×, additive unit 0
and multiplicative unit I.

The lifting R(m, +, ×) → ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×) then requires the corresponding lifting of the
Minkowski into the isominkowski spaces M = M(x, η, R) → ˆM = ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) ﬁrst sub-
mitted in [4a] which are characterized by the isocoordinates ˆx = x × ˆI on ˆR, the isometric
ˆNµν = ˆηµν × ˆI = ˆT α
µ (x, ˙x, ¨x, ..)ηαν × ˆI where ˆI = ˆT −1 is now in general a 4×4 positive–deﬁnite
matrix, and the isoseparation is hereon expressed for diagonal isounits

ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) : ˆx = x × ˆI, ˆeta = ˆT (x, ˙x, ¨x, ...) × η, ˆI = ˆT −1,

(2.5)

(ˆx − ˆy)ˆ2 = (ˆxµ − ˆyµ) ˆ× ˆNµν ˆ×(ˆxν − ˆyν) = [(xµ − yµ) × ˆηµν × (xν − yν)] × ˆI =

= [(x1 − y1) × T11(x, ...) × (x1 − y1) + (x2 − y2) × T22(x, ...) × (x2 − y2) +

+(x3 − y3) × T33(x, ..) × (x3 − y3) − (x4 − y4) × T44(x, ...) × (x4 − y4)] × ˆI,(2.6)

ˆT = Diag.(T11, ˆT22, ˆT33, ˆT44), ˆTµµ > 0, x, y ∈ M, ˆI 6∈ M.

(2.7)

7

Note that all scalars of M must become isoscalar to have meaning for ˆM , i.e., they must
have the structure of the isonumbers ˆn = n × ˆI. This condition requires the re–deﬁnition
x → ˆx = x × ˆI, ˆηµν → ˆNµν = ˆηµν × ˆI, etc.

Note however the practical redundancy of using isocoordinates ˆx = x × ˆI. In fact, we
can write ˆxˆ2 = (xµ × ˆην × xν) × ˆI = xˆ2. For simplicity we shall hereon use the conventional
coordinates. Note also the redundancy of using the full isoscalar form ˆN of the isometric
because the reduced form ˆη with ordinary elements ˆηµν in R is suﬃcient. The understanding
is that the full isotopic formulations are needed for mathematical consistency.

We shall hereon assume the convention, rather familiar in the literature of the isotopies,
that all quantities with a ”hat” are computed in isospaces over isoﬁelds, and the corre-
sponding quantities without a ”hat” are computed on conventional spaces over conventional
ﬁelds.

Note the necessary condition that isospaces and isoﬁelds have the same isounit. This
condition is absent in the conventional Minkowski space where the unit of the space is the
unit matrix I = diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) while that of the underlying ﬁeld is the number I = +1.
Nevertheless, the latter can be trivially reformulated with the common unit matrix I, by
achieving in this way the form admitted as a particular case by the covering isospaces

M(x, η, R) : x2 = (xµ × ηµν × xν) × I ∈ R

Also, one should keep in mind for future needs the following

Basic − Isoinvariant = (length)2 × (unit)2.

A fundamental property of the inﬁnite family of generalized spaces (8) is that the lifting of
the basic unit I → ˆI while the metric is lifted of the inverse amount, η → ˆη = ˆT ×η, ˆI = ˆT −1,
implies the preservation of all original axioms, and we have the following:

(2.8)

(2.9)

Lemma 2 [4]: The isominkowski spaces ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) over the isoﬁelds ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×) with
a common positive–deﬁnite isounit ˆI preserve all original axioms of the Minkowski space
M(x, η, R) over the reals R(n, +, ×).

The nontriviality of the lifting is that of gaining an unrestricted functional dependence

of the metric ˆeta = ˆη(x, ˙x, ¨x) under the conventional Minkowskian axioms.

The local isomorphism ˆM ≈ M holds to such an extent that the isominkowski and
Minkowski spaces coincide at the abstract, realization–free level by conception and construc-
tion. Thus, the isominkowskian spaces are not new spaces, but merely ”new realizations” of
the original abstract Minkowskian axioms. In particular, the maximal causal speeds of both
spaces coincides and it is given by c0 as we shall see.

8

Lemma 2 illustrates again the ”axiom–preserving” character of the isotopies indicated
in Sect.1, this time at the level of metric spaces. It should be stressed that the ”isotopies”
are inequivalent to the various forms of ”deformations” of the current literature for several
reasons, such as: the former are axiom–preserving while the latter are not; the former are
deﬁned over generalized ﬁelds while the latter are not; etc. To avoid confusion, readers
are discouraged from using the term ”deformations” (of given structure into a nonisomor-
phic form) when referring to the ”isotopies” ( of the same structures into axiom–preserving
isomorphic forms).

The isominkowskian geometry was ﬁrst proposed in ref. [4a] (see ref.s [4g,4h] for compre-
hensive studies and ref.s [6,7] for independent works). These studies were however incomplete
because based on the conventional diﬀerential calculus which has resulted to be inapplicable
under isotopies. The foundations of the isominkowskian geometry formulated via the isod-
iﬀerential calculus of ref. [3f] are introduced here apparently for the ﬁrst time, with more
detailed studies presented elsewhere [9].

Stated in a nutshell, the isominkowskian geometry is a symbiotic union of the Minkowskian

and Riemannian geometries along the following main properties:

I) Isoﬂatness. It is easy to see that the isominkowskian geometry is ﬂat in isospace
over isoﬁelds, a property called isoﬂatness [4g]. This is due to the fact that curvature, which
is represented by the factor ˆT in the isometric ˆeta = ˆT × eta, is referred to its own inverse
as unit. In fact, the new geometry permits the deﬁnition in isospace of straight line and
intersecting angles, although in a predictable generalized form, which is not possible in the
Riemannian geometry, thus conﬁrming the preservation of the Minkowskian axioms.

In particular, isoﬂatness allows the reconstruction in isospace ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) of the trigono-
metric, hyperbolic and other functions for a metric with an arbitrary functional dependence,
which we cannot possibly review here (see [4g] for brevity).

More generally, the isominkowskian geometry is based on the new isofunctional analysis
in which the isospace ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) is turned into an isomanifold thanks to Kadeisvili’s iso-
continuity [7p] and Tsagas–Sourlas isotopology [7q]. Within such a setting, the isogeometry
must be solely elaborated with all special isofunctions, isotransforms and isodistributions,
etc. (see [4g,4h] for details).

II) Pseudocurvature. In view of the arbitrary functional dependence of the isometric
ˆη = ˆη(x, ˙x, ¨x), the isominkowskian geometry can also be considered as being curved, but
only when projected in the original space M over the original ﬁeld R, a property is called
pseudocurvature which is of Riemannian (rather than Minkowskian) character.

This illustrates the symbiotic capacity of the isominkowskian geometry of unifying the
main characteristics of both, the Minkowskian and Riemannian geometries. In turn, such
character is evidently at the foundation of the proposed isominkowskian uniﬁcation of the

9

special and general relativities.

To outline the pseudocurved character, consider the isominkowskian manifolds ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR)
equipped with Kadeisvil’s isocontinuity and Tsagas-Sourlas isotopology. The isodiﬀeren-
tial calculus on ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) can be deﬁned via the following notions of isodiﬀerentials and
isoderivatives [3f]

ˆdxµ = ˆI µ

ν × dxν, ˆ∂µ = ˆ∂/ ˆ∂xµ = ˆT ν

µ × ∂ν = ˆT µ

µ × ∂/∂xν ,

ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν = δµ

ν , ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµα ˆ∂xα/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµν,

and other axiom-preserving properties here omitted for brevity, where we have ignored for
notational simplicity the isoquotient and related factorization of the isounit. In this way,
[ ˆ∂xµ

ˆ/ ˆ∂xν] ˆ×F = [ ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν] × F .
Since the isometric ˆη has an explicit dependence on x, the isominkowskian geometry does
indeed allow the introduction of the following isoconnection, called isochristoﬀel’s symbols

ˆΓαβγ =

( ˆ∂α ˆηβγ + ˆ∂γ ˆηαβ − ˆ∂β ˆηαγ) = ˆΓγβα,

1
2

αγ = ˆηβρ × ˆΓαργ = ˆΓβ
ˆΓβ

γ α, ˆηβρ = [|ˆηµν|−1]βρ.

The isocovariant diﬀerential of a vector ﬁeld can then be deﬁned by

ˆD ˆX β = ˆd ˆX β + ˆΓβ

αγ ˆ× ˆX α ˆ× ˆdˆxy,

where isoproduct can be reduced to ordinary ones because of the cancellation of ˆI and ˆT ,
with corresponding isocovariant derivative

ˆX β

↑µ = ˆ∂µ ˆX beta + ˆΓβ

αµ ˆ× ˆX α,

The isotopy of the proof of the conventional Riemannian case [11], pp. 80–81, yields the

following:

Lemma 3 (Isoricci Lemma): Under the assumed conditions, the isocovariant deriva-

tives of all isometrics of the isominkowskian spaces are identically null,

ˆηαβ↑γ ≡ 0, α, β, γ = 1, 2, 3, 4.

(2.16)

10

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)

(2.13)

(2.14)

(2.15)

The novelty is illustrated by the fact that the Christoﬀel’s symbols, the covariant deriva-
tive and the Ricci Lemma persist under: 1) an arbitrary dependence of the metric ˆη =
ˆη(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...), rather than the current restriction to the Riemann dependence only, g = g(x);
2) under the Minkowskian, rather than Riemannian axioms; and 3) with null curvature in
isospace over isoﬁelds.

It should be noted that the above properties were studied in [3f] for the isoriemannian
geometry, and the above isominkowskian reformulation is submitted here for the ﬁrst time.
We now introduce on ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR): the following isocurvature tensor, isoricci tensor, and

isocurvature isoscalar

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

(2.20)

ˆRβ

αγδ = ˆ∂δ ˆΓβ

αγ − ˆ∂γ ˆΓβ

αδ + ˆΓβ

ρ δ ˆ×ˆΓρ

αγ − ˆΓβ

ρ γ ˆ×ˆΓρ

αδ,

ˆRµν = ˆRβ

µνβ,

ˆR = ˆN αβ ˆ× ˆRαβ.

Einstein’s ﬁeld equations on isominkowskian spaces can then be written

ˆGµν = ˆRµν −

ˆ× ˆNµν ˆ× ˆR = ˆk ˆ×ˆτµν,

ˆ1
2

where ˆτµν is the source tensor on ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR), ˆk = k × ˆI and k the usual constant.

Despite apparent diﬀerences, it should be indicated that Eq.s (2.20) coincide numerically
with Einstein’s equations. In fact, the isoderivative ˆ∂µ = ˆT α
µ × ∂α deviates from the con-
ventional derivative ∂µ by the isotopic factor ˆT (here assumed as being diagonal). But its
numerical value must be referred to ˆI = ˆT −1, rather than I, thus preserving the original
value of ∂µ.

Similarly, the isochristoﬀel’s symbols (2.12) deviate from the conventional symbols by the
same factor ˆT (because ˆη ≡ g). But these symbols must be referred to the isounit ˆI, thus
preserving conventional values. A similar situation occurs for the isocurvature tensor (2.17)
because the factor ˆT from the covariant isoderivative ˆ∂ is compensated by the factor ˆI
originating from the contravariant index β, with similar results holding for the remaining
quantities. Possible residual terms are inessential because common factors to both sides of
Eq.s (2.20).

A more detailed study of Eq.s (2.4) and related isominkowskian geometry is presented
in ref. [9], including the use of the forgotten Freud identity of the Riemannian geometry in
isotopic form.

11

III) Isosymmetries. A primary reason for introducing the isominkowskian spaces and
related geometry is that they permit the construction of the universal symmetry of the line
element (2.6) under an unrestricted functional dependence of the isometric ˆη(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...) [4],
while such a possibility is precluded in the Riemannian geometry.

Under the above isotopic reformulations, the symmetries of the isoinvariant (2.6) can be
ˆO(3) [4b]for the space
explicitly computed and are given by: the isorotational symmetry
component of isoinvariant (2.6); the isolorentz symmetry ˆL(3.1) [4a]; the isotopic S ˆU (2)–spin
symmetry [4c]; the isopoincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1)= ˆL(3.1)×T (3.1) [4d]; and the isospinorial
isopoincar´e symmetry ℜ(3.1)= S ˆL(2. ˆC) × ˆT (3.1) [4e].

These isosymmetries are constructed via the isotopies of Lie’s theory including the
isotopies of enveloping algebras, Lie algebras, Lie groups transformation and representa-
tion theories, etc., originally proposed by the author in memoir [3a], developed in various
works [3,4,5], studied by a number of independent researchers [6,7] and today called Lie–
Santilli isotheory [6,7]. The isosymmetries ˆO(3), S ˆU(2), ˆL(3.1), ˆP (3.1) and ˆP(3.1) are essen-
tially the conventional symmetries O(3), SU(2), L(3.1), P (3.1) and P(3.1) reconstructed for
arbitrary generalized units ˆI(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...) of the class admitted (4×4– dimensional, real–valued,
symmetric and positive–deﬁnite matrices with the same dimension of the representation con-
sidered).

Since ˆI is positive–deﬁnite by assumption, the above isosymmetries are isomorphic to the
original symmetries by conception and constructions [4]. As such,they are not ”new symme-
tries”, and merely constitute the most general known nonlinear, nonlocal and noncanonical
realizations of the conventional symmetries.

For classical realizations of the above isosymmerties we have to refer the interested reader

to monographs [4g,4h]. An outline of their operator realization is presented in Sect. 7.

4) Isospecial relativity. The preceding formalism is reduced to primitive laws under
the name of isospecial relativity [4] which is the isotopic image of the special relativity [1]
realized on isominkowskian spaces ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR). As such, we do not have a ”new” relativity,
but merely the most general known realization of the axioms of the conventional relativity.
In fact, the special and isospecial relativity coincides at the abstract level by conception and
construction, to such an extent to have the same light cone with the same maximal causal
speed c0 (see below).

5) Isoanalityc mechanics. Finally, the preceding formalism is complemented with
step–by–step–isotopies of conventional Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics called isoanal-
ityc mechanics, which begins with a basic action in isospace and includes the isotopies of
equations by Lagrange’s, Hamilton’s, Hamilton–Jacobi, etc. (see [3f] for brevity).

12

Despite all these similarities between conventional and isotopic structures, one should
keep in mind that the conventional Minkowski geometry, the Poincar´e symmetry and the
special relativity are strictly linear, local–diﬀerential and Hamiltonian. On the contrary, their
isotopic images are generally nonlinear (in any desired variable), nonlocal–integral (i.e., they
admit integral terms under the Tsagas–Sourlas integro–diﬀerential topology [5q], provided
that they are all embedded in the generalized unit ˆI), and nonlagrangian (in the sense of
admitting terms simply beyond any representational capability of a (ﬁrst-order) lagrangian
(see later on for details).

Also, the isotopic structures have been proved by Aringazin [7r] to be directly universal,
that is, applying for all inﬁnitely possible, well behaved, signature preserving generalizations
of the Minkowski metric (universality), directly in the x–frame of the observer (direct uni-
versality). As a result, any conventional deformation of M can be identically reformulated
via the isotopic formalism, and the isotopic, axiom–preserving representation of deformed
Minkowski spaces holds even when not desired, thus implying the existence of various appli-
cations and experimental veriﬁcations [7r].

The isominkowskian geometry, the isopoincar´e symmetry and the related isospecial rela-
tivity were originally introduced [4] for a direct representation of interior dynamical problems,
e.g., electromagnetic waves propagating within inhomogeneous and isotropic physical media
with a locally varying speed c = c0/n as occurring, e. g., in our atmosphere. In fact, the
ﬁrst physical application of the isotopic line element (2.6) is that of directly representing
in its fourth component the local speed of light c = c0/n with ˆT
2 = n4 = n, while the
remaining components ˆT
kk = nk represent the anisotropy of the medium considered, and
its inhomogeneity is represented, e. g., via a dependence of the quantities nµ in the local
density.

1
2

1

It is evident that the conventional formulation of the special relativity in Minkowski space
M is inapplicable to (and not ”violated” by) locally varying speeds c = c(x, ...). The use
of the isominkowskian space permits the regaining of the validity of the special relativity
because in the latter case the speed of light is deformed by the amount c0 → c = c0/n4 while
the related unit is deformed by the inverse amount, I
44 = n4, thus implying the
constant value c0 in isospace.

44 = 1 → ˆI

1
2

1
2

In this way the special relativity is rendered ”directly universal” under the isotopies, that
is, it is rendered applicable for all possible local speeds of light. Equivalently, we can say
that the speed of light c0 is a ”universal constant” only in isospace ˆM , while its projection
in our space–time M acquires the local value c.

Recall the known problematic aspects of the conventional formulation of the special
relativity when applied to physical media, e.g., for the propagation of electromagnetic waves
in water where c = c0/n4 < c0 and electrons can propagate with speeds greater than the local
speed of light (Cherencov light), thus implying evident problems of causality. If one assumes
as the maximal causal speed in water to be the speed of light in vacuum, the principle of
causality is indeed salvaged, but there is the loss of the relativistic law of addition of speeds

13

because the sum of two speeds of lights in water does not yield the local speed of light or
that in vacuum, vtot = 2c/(1 + c/c0) 6= c and c0, c = c0/n. All the above problematic aspects
are resolved by the isospecial relativity in isospace with a number of additional preliminary
applications and veriﬁcations (see [4–7]for brevity).

The isospecial relativity was also introduced [4] for an invariant description of extended–
deformable particles moving within physical media under unrestricted external forces. This
objective is achieved via the realization of the isounit in the diagonal form (for spheroidal
ellipsoidical shapes)

ˆI = Diag.(n2
2, n2
1, n2

3, n2

1, n2

2, n3

3, n2

4) × ˆΓ(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...),

(2.21)

where: a) the quantities n2
4 provides a geometrical representation of the extended,
nonspherical and deformable shape under the volume preserving condition n2
4 =
1; the quantity n2
4 provides a geometric representation of the density of the medium in which
motion occurs, such as the (square of the) index of refraction; and the quantity ˆΓ(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...)
represents nonlinear, nonlocal integral and nonhamiltonian interactions; all this in a man-
ifestly form–invariant way because the isounit ˆI is the basic invariant of the isopoincar´e
symmetry [4]. These features have permitted additional applications and veriﬁcations with
eﬀects due to deformations of shape [4–7].

3 ×n2

1 ×n2

2×n2

The application of the isospecial relativity submitted in this paper is basically diﬀerent
than the above ones. In fact, in this paper deals with the classical isotopic formulation of
the general relativity for matter via the isominkowskian geometry. It should be stress up–
front that it would be unreasonable to expect in this ﬁrst introductory paper a comprehensive
treatment at all possible epistemological, geometric, operator, quantum ﬁeld ﬁeld theoretical,
experimental and other aspects. The rather limited objective of this study is to identify
the essential axiomatic foundations of the isospecial relativity in its application to gravity,
point out its plausibility for resolving at least some of rather old problematic aspects of the
conventional formulation of gravity, and indicate its experimental validity.

In summary, the representation of gravity via the isospecial relativity is based on the
restriction of the isominkowskian metric to represent identically any given Riemannian met-
ric,and in the isotopic factorization of the conventional Minkowski metric,

relativity is characterized by the isominkowskian geometry whose isometric ˆη is assumed

to coincide with the Riemannian one, ˆη ≡ g(x), and we shall write

ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) : ˆη ≡ g(x) = ˆTgr(x) × η, ˆIgr(x) = [ ˆTgr(x)]−1 > 0.
(2.22)
Note that, since the Riemannian geometry is locally Minkowskian, the 4 × 4 matrix ˆTgr(x)
in the isominkowskian factorization

(2.23)
In this case ˆTgr and ˆIgr are called the gravitational isotopic
is always positive–deﬁnite.
element and isounit, respectively. As an illustration, the gravitational isotopic element in

g(x) = ˆtgr(x) × η,

14

the isominkowskian decomposition of the Schwarzschild’s metric is given by

ˆTgr = Diag.((1 − M/r)−1, (1 − M/r)−1, (1 − M/r)−1, (1 − M/r)−1),

(2.24)

and recovers the conventional value I = Diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) for r → ∞. The isominkowskian
formulation of any other model is then straightforward.

The primary motivations supporting the isominkowskian formulation of gravity are the

following:

A) The formulation possesses an invariant generalized basic unit ˆIgr, thus resolving the

problematic aspects caused by Theorem 1 (Sect. 1).

B) The formulation permits, apparently for the ﬁrst time, the geometric uniﬁcation
of the special and general relativities into one single theory, the isospecial relativity [4],
characterized by inﬁnitely many possible, generalized, positive–deﬁnite units. The selection
of the special or general relativity is then done via the the assumed speciﬁc value of the unit,
the value ˆI ≡ I recovering the special relativity identically, while the more general value
ˆI = ˆIgr(x) = [ ˆTgr(x)]−1 implies the selection of the general relativity (see below on for a
broader dependence).

C) The formulation permits the achievement, also for the ﬁrst time, of a unique and uni-
versal symmetry of gravitation, Santilli’s isopoincar´e symmetry ˆP [3–7]. In fact, as pointed
our earlier, ˆP (3.1) is the universal symmetry of all inﬁnitely possible line elements (2.6)
which admit as particular cases the Riemannian forms. This resolves the historical diﬀer-
ence between the general and the special relativity whereby the latter is indeed equipped
with a universal symmetry, the Poincar´e symmetry, while the former is not. By no means,
the availability of a universal symmetry for gravitation is a mere mathematical curiosity,
because it carries the same rigid physical guidelines as provided for the special relativity,
which are lacking in the current formulation of gravitation.

D) The formulation permits the resolution of known ambiguities in the compatibility of
the general and special relativites. Recall that the generators of any symmetry are the total
conserved quantities and they remain unchanged under isotopies [4]. Then, the total con-
servation laws of general relativity in isominkoewskian formulation are established by mere
visual observation of the generators of the its universal symmetry, the isopoincar´e symme-
try, thus avoiding complex and controversial calculations. Moreover, the compatibility of
relativistic and gravitational conservation laws is established by the mere visual observation
that these generators are the same for both relativities, thus resolving additional known
controversies on their claimed lack of compatibility, and similar occurrences hold for other
aspects (see [4h] for the preservation of weight at the relativistic limit via the use of the
forgotten Freud identity). Therefore, the lack of the rigid guidelines of a universal symmetry
in gravitation appears to be the origin of some of the ambiguities here considered.

E) The geometric uniﬁcation of the general and special relativities constitutes the foun-
dation of a novel operator version of gravity studied in Sect. 7, which is as axiomatically
consistent as relativistic quantum mechanics, thus avoiding known problematic aspects of
conventional forms of quantum gravity.

15

F) The formulation permits the introduction of a novel uniﬁcation of gravitational and
electroweak interactions based on the embedding of the part truly representing curvature,
the gravitational unit ˆIgr(x) = [ ˆTgr(x)]−1 > 0, in the unit of uniﬁed gauge theories, whose
studies were initiated by Gasperini [7o] (see also the review in App. A of monograph [6a])
and pointed out in Ref. [4h].

G) The formulation permits a novel relativistic and gravitational treatment of antimat-
ter at both classical and quantum levels [5] studied in the next section, which avoids the
problematic aspects of the Riemannian representation of antimatter outlined below.

H) The formulation permits a direct geometric representation of interior relativistic and
gravitational problems, for instance, a direct representation of the locally varying speed of
light c = c0/n4 via the metric of the isominkowskian geometry with ˆT44 = n−2
4 ×g44. This lat-
ter possibility is permitted by the unrestricted functional dependence of the isometric which,
when restricted to a sole x–dependence, characterizes exterior gravitational problems in the
homogeneous and isotropic vacuum, while the use of a more general dependence character-
izes interior gravitational problems within inhomogeneous and anisotropic physical media
(with the understanding that the background space remains homogeneous and isotopic).

The axiomatic consistency of the isominkowskian formulation of gravity is assured by the

axiom–preserving character of the isotopies.

The plausibility of the proposed theory is illustrated by a comparison of properties A)–H)

above with the corresponding features of the conventional formulation of gravity.

The experimental veriﬁcation of the isominkowskian formulation of gravity is established
by the fact that Eq.s (2.20) coincide numerically with the conventional Einstein equations,
as indicated earlier. The isominkowskian formulation of gravity therefore possesses the same
veriﬁcations of the conventional Riemannian formulation.

3 Classical isodual isominkowskian uniﬁcation of the

special and general relativities for antimatter.

The current classical representation of antimatter is aﬄicted by a number of problematic
aspects at the classical level, as well as operator levels. The mathematically correct map be-
tween matter and antimatter must be antiautomorphic (or, more generally, anti–isomorphic),
as it is the case for the charge conjugation in quantum mechanics. The contemporary Rie-
mannian representation of antimatter via the simple change of the sign of the charge and
magnetic moments is therefore insuﬃcient.

Also, current theoretical physics admits only one type of quantization, the conventional
one of matter, and there is no separate quantization for antimatter. Therefore, the operator
image of the current, classical, gravitational representation of antimatter is not the correct
charge conjugate antiparticle, but merely a particle with the change of the sign of the charge
and magnetic moments.

Moreover, the only energy–momentum tensor available in the riemannian geometry is the

16

conventional one with positive–deﬁnite energy. Such structure is manifestly incompatible
with the negative–energy solutions of relativistic ﬁeld equations.

Because of these and other problematic aspects, Santilli [5] introduced in 1985 a new
antiautomorphic map, called isoduality, which can be applied to the entire formulations of
matter, beginning at the classical level and then continuing at the operator level.

The fundamental isodual map is that of the isounit

ˆI > 0 → ˆI d = − ˆI † = − ˆI < 0.
(3.1)
This requires the reconstruction of the entire isotopic formalism in such a way to admit ˆI d,
rather than ˆI, as the correct left and right unit.

The most important quantities are, again, new numbers. In fact, isoduality must be ﬁrst
applied to the basic isoﬁelds ˆF (ˆa, +, ˆ×) of isoreals ˆa = ˆn, isocomplex ˆa = ˆc or isoquaternions
ˆa = ˆq, yielding the isodual isoﬁelds ˆF d(ˆad, +, ˆxd) (see [3e] for comprehensive studies), which
are rings of elements called isodual numbers

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

ˆad = a† × ˆI d = −a† × ˆI = −ˆa†, (ˆad)d ≡ ˆa.

ˆnd = −n × ˆI, ˆcd = −¯c × ˆI, ˆqd = −q† × ˆI,

(where † denotes Hermitean conjugation and ¯ complex conjugation), equipped with the
isodual sum ˆad + ˆbd = (a + b)† × ˆI d, and the isodual isoproduct

ˆad ˆ×dˆbd = ˆad × ˆT d × ˆbd, ˆT d = − ˆT † = − ˆT ,

under which ˆI d = ( ˆT d)−1 is the correct left and right unit of ˆF d,

d
ˆI d ˆ×

ˆad ≡ ˆad ˆ×

d ˆT d ≡ ˆad, ∀ˆad ∈ ˆF d,

(3.5)
in which case (only) ˆI d is called the isodual isounit and ˆT d called the isodual isotopic element.
All operations of an isoﬁeld are then subjected to a simple, yet signiﬁcant isodual map
here left to the interested reader [3e]. A quantity is called isoselfdual when it is invariant
under isoduality. This is the case for the imaginary unit because id = −¯i ≡ i as well as other
quantities we shall identify later on.

A property of isodual isoﬁelds most important for this paper is that isoﬁelds and isod-
ual isoﬁelds are antiautomorphic with respect to each others, exactly as desired. Another
important property is that isodual isoﬁelds have a negative–deﬁnite norm

↑ ˆad ↑d= |a| × ˆI d = −|a| × ˆI < 0.

(3.6)

As a consequence, all physical characteristics which are positive for matter become negative
for antimatter under isodual representation, as originally assumed at the discovery of an-
tiparticles (Stueckelberg and others). This implies negative mass, negative energy, negative

17

(magnitude of the) angular momentum, motion back ward in time, change of the sign of
charges and magnetic moments, etc..

The novelty is that these negative characteristics are now deﬁned with respect to neg-
ative units, thus rendering inapplicable existing arguments against negative energy. As a
matter of fact, the referral of the negative–energy solutions to negative units permits the
resolution of their un–physical behavior which historically motivated the ”hole theory” in
second quantization [5].

Similarly, the isodual representation renders inapplicable existing argument against mo-
tion backward in time. In fact, motion backward in time referred to a negative unit of time
is exactly as causal as motion forward in time referred to a positive unit of time (for these
and other aspects, the interested reader may consult [4h,5]).

The next isodual map must be applied to the basic carrier spaces, yielding the isodual

isominkowskian spaces [4d]

ˆM d(ˆxd, ˆηd, ˆRd)

:

ˆxd = −ˆx, ηd = −ˆη, ˆI d = − ˆI = ( ˆT d)−1 = − ˆT −1 < 0,

(3.7)

(ˆxd − ˆyd)ˆ2d = (ˆxµd − ˆyµd) ˆ×d ˆN d

µν ˆ×d(ˆxνd − ˆyνd) =
µν × (xν − yν)] × ˆI d =
= [(xµ − yµ) × ˆηd
= [−(x1 − y1) × T11(x, ...) × (x1 − y1) −
−(x2 − y2) × T22(x, ...)(x2 − y2) −
−(x3 − y3)T33(x, ...) × (x3 − y3) +
+(x4 − y4) × T44(x, ...) × (x4 − y4)] × ˆI d,

ˆT d = Diag.(−T11, − ˆT22, − ˆT33, − ˆT44), ˆTµµ > 0,

with all remaining properties conjugated with respect to ˆM(ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) here omitted for brevity.
The next isodual map is that of the underlying calculus, yielding the isodual diﬀerential

calculus [3f] which is based on the rules

ˆdd ˆxµd = ˆI dµ

ν × dˆxdν ≡ ˆdˆxµ, ˆ∂dˆ/d ˆ∂ ˆxdµ = − ˆ∂ˆ/ ˆ∂ ˆxµ, etc.

(3.10)

The next conjugation is that of the applicable geomety, yielding the isodual isominkowskian
geometry [3e,4g] which can be constructed via the above rules and the following isodualities

αβγ = −ˆΓαβγ, ˆDd ˆX dµ = ˆD ˆX µ, ˆX βd
ˆΓd
ˆRβ
α

↑µd = − ˆX β
↑µ,
µν = − ˆRµν, ˆRd = − ˆR, etc,

γδ = − ˆRβ

αγδ, ˆRd
The isodual isoﬁeld equations then read

d

18

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.11)

(3.12)

ˆGd

µν = ˆRd

µν −

ˆ×

d ˆN d

µν ˆ×

d ˆRd = ˆkd ˆ×

d

ˆτ d
µν,

(3.13)

d

ˆ1
2

and they result to be the negative image of Eq.s. (2.20). Other aspects are studied in the
forthcoming paper [9].

A property of the isodual isominkowskian geometry most important for this paper is
that the isodual energy–momentum tensor is negative–deﬁnite, exactly as needed for overall
consistency in any theory of antimatter.

The next isoduality is that of the basic isosymmetries studied in [4d,4e], yielding the
isodual isorotation, isodual isolorentz and the isodual isopoincar´e symmetry. The next
conjugation is that of the isorelativity, yielding the isodual isospecial relativity, and of
analytic mechanics, yielding the isodual isoanalytic mechanics which are not outlined for
brevity [4d,4h].

In order to apply the above results to a uniﬁed treatment of antimatter, the reader should
be aware that all preceding formulations admit as particular cases the isodual numbers,
isodual Minkowskian geometry, isodual Poincar´e symmetry and isodual special relativity,
namely, they admit hitherto unknown antiautomorphic images of conventional theories which
are here assumed for the relativistic characterization of antimatter in vacuum.

The classical isomincowskian reformulation of general relativity for antimatter is then
given by the isodual isospecial relativity under the particular realization of the isodual iso-
topic element and isodual isounit

gr(x) = [ ˆT d
which admits as particular case the isodual special relativity for ˆI d

ˆM d(ˆxd, ˆηd, ˆRd) : ˆηd(xd) = ˆT d

gr(xd) × η, ˆI d

gr(xd)]−1,
gr = I d = − ˆI.

(3.14)

The axiomatic consistency of the above classical, isodual, relativistic and gravitational
representation of antimatter appears to be established beyond reasonable doubts. Its plausi-
bility is established by its resolution of the problematic aspects of conventional formulations
(see also next sections). Tshe physical validity of the classical isodual theory is established by
the veriﬁcation of the sole classical experimental data on antimatter available at this writing,
those under electromagnetic interactions, because those under gravitational interactions are
still unknown.

We can therefore conclude these introductory considerations on the uniﬁcation of the
special and general relativity for antimatter by indicating that the emerging novelty war-
rants additional studies in the ﬁeld. In fact, the isodual theory permits a mathematically
correct study of the gravitational ﬁeld of astrophysical bodies made up of antimatter and
the initiation of studies for the future experimental resolution whether a far away star or
quasar is made up of matter or of antimatter [5].

19

4 Problematic aspects of quantum gravity

We now pass to the study of the uniﬁcation of the special and general relativities at the
operator level. Again, we have to insist that it would be unreasonable to expect a compre-
hensive treatment in this introductory paper of all operator and ﬁeld theoretical aspects,
because they are so many to discourage even a partial outline.

The remaining scope of this paper is merely that of identify the essential operator founda-
tions of the isospecial relativity, and establish its plausibility as compared to other operator
forms of gravity at the simplest possible level of ”ﬁrst quantization”.
In any reasonable
conduction of research, quantum ﬁeld theoretical aspects can only be considered after the
identiﬁcation of hitherto unknown isogravitational grounds in ﬁrst quantization. By keep-
ing in mind that the physical validity of the conventional quantum treatment of gravity
is still debated after three quarters of a centuries of studies, the reader should not expect
the resolution of the physical validity of the isooperator treatment of gravity in its ﬁrst
presentation.

The basic open problems in the operator version of general relativity are the following:
A) On one side, relativistic quantum mechanics (RQM) needs a meaningful Hamiltonian

while, on the other side, Einstein’s gravitational in vacuum has a null Hamiltonian.

B) There is the need of an operator gravity which is as axiomatically consistent as the
conventional RQM, i.e., invariant under its own time evolution with physical quantities which
are Hermitean–observable at all times, with unique and invariant numerical predictions, etc..
C) Recent studies on interior gravitational problems of black holes (see, e. g., the studies
by Ellis et all. [7s] and references quoted therein) have indicated that operator gravity should
be a nonunitary image of conventional quantum theories, as needed, e. g., for a representation
of irreversibility.

The isominkowskian reformulation of general relativity permits a new operator version
of gravity for matter here called operator isotopic gravity, or operator isogravity (OIG) for
short, which is based on an axiom–preserving lifting of the unit of RQM from the trivial value
I = Diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) to the gravitational value ˆIgr(x). As such OIG requires no Hamiltonian
at all, thus resolving the ﬁrst historical problem. The axiomatic consistency of the proposed
OIG is guaranteed by the preservation of the abstract axioms of RQM, only realized in a
more general way, including form–invariance, Hermiticity of observables at all times, etc.,
thus resolving the second problem. Finally, the proposed OIG is a rather natural nonunitary
image of conventional RQM, thus verifying the third condition.

The isodualites then permit an antiautomorphic isodual operator isogravity (IOIG) which

is based on the negative–deﬁnite gravitational units of the preceding section.

A preliminary comparison of the OIG with the conventional theory currently used, called
quantum gravity (QG) [12] is in order. Even though both theories are of operator character,
OIG and the conventional QG are inequivalent, as illustrated by the fact that, e.g., they are
deﬁned on inequivalent Hilbert spaces and ﬁelds. In any case, the term ”quantum” would be
inappropriate under a nonunitary structure as requested by condition C) and, for this and

20

other reasons we have preferred the generic term ”operator”.

As we shall see, the term ”quantum” is also questionable for ”quantum gravity” because
this latter theory too is outside the equivalence classes of RQM. In shot, this paper presents
evidence supporting the fact that a ”quantum” version of gravity, that is a version obeying
conventional quantum mechanics, cannot exist, as one can anticipate from the noncanonical
structure of the Riemannian geometry (Theorem 1 of Sect.1).

The identiﬁcation of the following problematic aspects of QM [3g,13] is in order, not
only because necessary to appraise the plausibility of OIG on a comparative basis, but also
because they do not appear to be well known in the specialized literature in the ﬁeld:

I) QG does not possess an invariant basic unit, as established by theorem 1. Also, the
time evolution of QG is necesserily nonunitary (otherwise QG would be a trivial element of
the equivalence class of RQM), thus conﬁrming the lack of invariance of the basic unit,

I → I ′ = U × I × U † 6= I.

(4.1)

Therefore, all forms of QG gravity with a nonunitary time evolution (hereon assumed) lack
unambiguous applications to experimental veriﬁcations;

II) QG does not preserve Hermiticity in time when formulated on a conventional Hilbert
space over a conventional ﬁeld. In fact, under a nonunitary transform, the familiar associa-
tive modular action of the Schr¨odinger’s representation H × |ψ >, where H is an operator
Hermitean at the initial time, becomes

U × H × |ψ > = U × H × U † × (U × U †)−1 × U × |ψ >= ˆH × ˆT × | ˆψ >,

U × U † 6= I,

ˆT = (U × U †)−1, |ψ >= U × |ψ >, ˆH = U × H × U †.

(4.2)

By nothing that ˆT is Hermitean, ˆT = (U × U †)−1 = ˆT †, the initial condition of Hermiticity
of H, < ψ| × H × |ψ > = < | × H † × |ψ >, when applied to the conventional Hilbert space
H with states | ˆψ >, | ˆφ >, etc, requires the action of the transformed operator (??) on a
conventional inner product, resulting in the expressions

< ˆψ| × { ˆH × ˆT × | ˆψ >} = {< ˆψ| × ˆT × ˆH †} × | ˆψ >, i.e., ˆH † = ˆT −1 × ˆH × ˆT 6= ˆH.

(4.3)

As such, Hermiticity is not preserved under the time evolution of nonunitary theories when
formulated on conventional space H over conventional ﬁelds C, because of the lack of gen-
eral commutativity of ˆT and ˆH. Consequently, QG does not admit physically acceptable
observables, an occurrence ﬁrst indicated by Lopez [13a].

III) QG does not admit invariant physical laws and numerical predictions. These are
an evident consequence of the nonunitarity of the time evolution and do not require further
elaboration.

An objectives of this paper is to see whether our OIG permits the resolution of at least
some of the above problematic aspects. At any rate, the lack of resolution until now of the

21

above problematic aspects does warrant the study of structurally novel operator formulations
of gravity.

5 Isotopic completion of relativistic quantum mechan-

ics and its isodual

We now outline for the reader’s convenience the operator isotopies, ﬁrst proposed in ref. [3b]
of 1978 and then studied by numerous authors and known under the name of relativistic
hadronic mechanics (RHM).. This outline is recommendable because axiomatic maturity of
the new mechanics has been reached oly recently in memoir [3g], following the achievement
of mathematical maturity in Ref. [3f].

The operator isotopies are nowadays deﬁned as maps of any given linear, local and unitary
structure into its most general possible nonlinear, nonlocal and nonunitary forms, which are
however capable of restoring linearity, locality and unitarity on suitable generalized spaces
over generalized ﬁelds.

The fundamental isotopy is the lifting of the conventional (3 + 1)–dimensional unit of

relativistic quantum mechanics (RQM) as for classical isotheories

I → ˆI(x, ˙x, ¨x, ψ, ∂ψ, ∂∂ψ, ...) > 0,

(5.1)

with the additional dependence on the wavefunctions and their derivatives.

Jointly the conventional associative product among generic operators A, B, A × B = AB

(e.g., the elements of an enveloping algebra ξ) must be lifted into the form

A × B → A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B,
(5.2)
where ˆT is ﬁxed for all elements of ξ. Under the conditional ˆI = ˆT −1, ˆI results to be the
correct (left and right) generalized unit of the new theory,

ˆI ˆ×A = A ˆ× ˆI ≡ A, ∀A ∈ ξ.
The lifting A × B → A ˆ×B is called isotopic in the sense that it preserves the all original
axioms, including associativity, A ˆ×(B ˆ×)C = (A ˆ×b) ˆ×C.

(5.3)

The most direct way to construct operator isotopic methods is via nonunitary transforms
of RQM, called, isotopic completion of relativistic quantum mechanics [3g]. Let U charac-
terize a conventional nonunitary transformation on a conventional Hilbert space H over a
conventional ﬁeld C of complex numbers. The deviation of the transform from I is assumed
to be precisely equal to the isounit of the new theory, U × U † = ˆI = ˆI † 6= I. For the case of
the canonical commutation rules we have

U × U † = ˆI = ˆI † 6= I, ˆT = (U × U †)−1 = ˆI −1 = ˆT †,

(5.4)

22

¯xµ = U × xµ × U †, ¯pν = U × pν × U †,
U × [xµ, pν] × U † = ¯xµ × ˆT × ¯pν − ¯pν × ˆT × xµ =
= i × ηµν × U × I × U † = i × ηµν × ˆI,

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

where one should note that the isounit and the isotopic element have the correct Hermitic-
ity property, and the emerging new commutation rules have precisely the needed isotopic
character of RHM.

It is easy to see that the above isotopic theory suﬀers of essentially the same problematic
aspects of QG indicated in Sect. 4. In fact, the above theory is not form–invariant under
additional nonunitary transforms when treated with the conventional mathematics of RQM.
In particular, nonunitary transforms do not preserve the original unit ˆI, thus preventing
unambiguous applications to measurements. Moreover, such a theory does not preserve
Hermiticity at all times, thus preventing the unambiguous representation of observable.
Finally, it is easy to see that such a theory does not possess invariant numerical predictions,
because of the lack of invariance of the special functions needed in the data elaboration.

A resolution of these problem requires the construction of the isotopies of the entire
structure of RQM [3f,3g] without any exception known to this author. In fact, the char-
acterization of RHM via the use in part of isotopic structures and in part of conventional
quantum structures, is aﬄicted by rather fundamental inconsistencies which often remain
undetected by the non–expert in the ﬁeld. Equivalently we can say that the problematic
aspects are resolved by the application of the nonunitary transform to the totality of the
conventional formalism, including numbers, ﬁelds, metric and Hilbert spaces, algebras, ge-
ometries, etc.

In this way, RQM, RHM is characterized by the following primary structures:
A) the lifting of the ﬁeld C = C(c, +, ×) of complex numbers into the isoﬁelds ˆC(ˆc, +, ˆ×)
of isocomplex numbers of Sect.2 with the isoﬁeld of isoreal numbers ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×) as a particular
case.

B) the lifting of the conventional Minkowski space M = M(x, η, R) into the isominkows-
kian space of Sect. 2 plus the enlarged functional dependence of isotopic element and, thus
of the isometric,

ˆM(ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) : ˆx = x × ˆI, ˆη = ˆT (x, ˙x, ¨x, ψ, ∂ψ, ∂∂ψ, ...) × η, ˆI = ˆT −1.

(5.8)

C) the lifting of the conventional Hilbert space H with states |ψ >, |φ >, ... and inner
| ˆψ >, | ˆφ >, ...,

product < φ|ψ >∈ C(c, +, ×) into the isohilbert space ˆH with isostates
isoinner product and isorenormalization

< ˆφ ↑ ˆψ >=< ˆφ| × ˆT × | ˆψ > × ˆI ∈ ˆC(ˆc, +, ˆ×),
< ˆψ| × ˆT × | ˆψ >= I,

(5.9)

(5.10)

23

D) the lifting of theory of linear operators in Hilbert space into the corresponding theory
on ˆH, including the lifting of the familiar eigenvalue equations H × |ψ >= E0 × |ψ > into
the isoschr¨odinger equation

H ˆ×| ˆψ >= H × ˆT × | ˆψ >= ˆE ˆ×| ˆψ >= E × ˆI × ˆT × | ˆψ >≡ E × | ˆψ, E 6= E0,

(5.11)

indicating that the ﬁnal numbers of the theory are conventional; the proof that the isoeigen-
values of an isohermitean operators area real, etc.

E) the isodiﬀerential calculus on ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) of Sect. 2,

(5.12)

(5.13)

(5.14)

(5.15)

(5.16)

(5.17)

ˆdxµ = ˆI µ

ν × dxν, ˆ∂µ = ˆ∂/ ˆ∂xµ = ˆT ν

µ × ∂ν = ˆT ν

µ × ∂/∂xν ,

ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν = δµ
ˆ∂xµ/

ν , ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµα ˆ∂xα/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµν,

ˆpartialˆxν = ˆηµα × ˆ∂xα/ ˆ∂ ˆxν = ˆηµν;

F) the lifting of Heisenberg’s equation, the equation on the linear momentum and the
fundamental commutation rules into the following isoheisenberg equation, isolinear momen-
tum and fundamental isocommutation rules, ﬁrst formulated in an axiomatically complete
and correct form in memoir [3g]

i × ˆd/ ˆdˆt = [ ˆA,ˆˆH] = ˆA ˆ× ˆH − ˆH ˆ× ˆA,

pµ ˆ×| ˆψ >= pµ × ˆT × | ˆψ >= −i × ˆ∂µ| ˆψ >= −i × ˆT ν

µ × ∂ν| ˆψ >,

[xµ, ˆpν] ˆ×| ˆψ >= (ˆxµ × ˆT × ˆpnu − ˆpnu × ˆT × ˆxµ) × ˆT × | ˆψ >= i × ˆηµν × | ˆψ,

G) the lifting of expectation values < A >=< ψ| × A × |ψ > / < ψ|ψ > into the

isoexpectation values

ˆ<A ˆ> =< ˆψ| × ˆT × A × ˆT × | ˆψ > / < ˆψ| × ˆT × | ˆψ >;

(5.18)

and the compatible liftings of the remaining aspects of RQM [3g].
H) The preceding formalism is completed with the isotopies of the naive or symplectic
quantization, which establish the unique and unambiguous derivability of RHM from the
corresponding classical isoanalitic mechanics (Sect. 2) (see [3f,4h] for brevity).

The following comments are in order. First, it is easy to see that the theory is highly
nonlinear (hereon referred to a nonlinearity in the wavefunction), e.g., isoeigenvalue equa-
tions (5.11) can be written explicitly

ˆH ˆ×| ˆψ >= ˆH × ˆT (x, p, ψ, ∂ψ, ...) × | ˆψ >= E × | ˆψ.

(5.19)

Nevertheless, the theory does satisfy the conditions of linearity in isospace,

24

(5.20)

(5.22)

(5.23)

ˆA ˆ×(ˆa ˆ×ˆx + ˆb ˆ×ˆy) = ˆa ˆ× ˆA ˆ×ˆx + ˆb ˆtimes ˆA ˆ×ˆy, ˆA ∈ ξ, ˆa, ˆb ∈ ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆx), ˆx, ˆy ∈ ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR).

and it is called isolinear.

Also, all nonlinear theories can be identically reformulated in a isolinear form in which

all nonlinear terms are embedded in the isotopic element, e.g.,

H(x, p, ψ, ...) × |ψ >≡ H0(x, p) × ˆT (ψ, ...) × |ψ >= H0 ˆ×|y > .

(5.21)

This resolves the loss of the superposition principle which is inherent in all nonlinear theories,
with consequential loss of consistent treatment of composite systems [3g,13].

Second, the theory veriﬁes the conditions of locality in isospace over isoﬁelds whenever all
nonlocal terms are embedded in the isounit, and it is then called isolocal. Also, all nonlocal
theories can be identically rewritten in an isolocal form.

Finally, the theory readily reconstructs unitarity in isospace, and it is called isounitary.
In fact, nonunitary transforms of the same ”magnitude” ˆI (i.e., such that W × W † = ˆI) can
always be written [3g]

and be, therefore, turned into the isounitary transforms on ˆH,

W = ˆW × ˆT

1

2 ,

ˆW ˆ× ˆW

ˆ† = ˆU

ˆ† ˆ× ˆU = ˆI,

Thus, all nonunitary theories can be identically rewritten in an isounitary form.

As an incidental comment, one should note that the admission of nonunitary transforms
with ”magnitude” U × U † = ˆI diﬀerent than ˆI would imply the transition to a diﬀerent
physical system. The transformation theory of RHM is therefore restricted for each system
considered to the selected ˆI, in exactly the same way as conventional RQM restricts the
admitted transforms to those with conventional ”magnitude” I only.

In view of the above properties, RHM is form–invariant and resolves the physical prob-
In fact, we have the

lematic aspects of other nonunitary theories indicated in Sect. 2.
following properties:

i)RHM possesses an invariant isounit. In fact, ˆI is numerically preserved under isounitary

transforms and it is preserved in time,

ˆI → ˆI ′ = ˆU ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆU

ˆ† ≡ ˆI,

i × d ˆI/dt = [ ˆI, ˆH] = ˆI ˆ×H − H ˆ× ˆI = H − H ≡ 0;

(5.24)

(5.25)

with consequential unambiguous application of the theory to measurements;

ii) RHM preserves Hermiticity and observability at all times. In fact, the condition of

Hermiticity on ˆH over ˆC(ˆc, +, ˆ×) now reads

25

{< ˆψ| × ˆT × H

ˆ†} × | ˆψ >=< ˆψ| × {H × ˆT × | ˆψ >},

ˆ† ≡ ˆT −1 × ˆT × H † × ˆT −1 × ˆT ≡ H † = H,

H

(5.26)

(5.27)

and, as such, it coincides with the Hermiticity on H over C(c, +×). Therefore, all observables
of RQM remain observables for RHM.

iii) RHM possesses invariant numerical predictions, physical laws and special functions.
This is due to the invariance of the isounit and of the isoassociative product, ˆU ˆ×(A ˆ×B) ˆ× ˆU † =
¯A ˆ× ¯B; the invariance of the fundamental isocommutation rules,

ˆU ˆ×(ˆxµ ˆ×ˆpν − ˆpν ˆ×ˆxµ) ˆ× ˆU † ˆ×| ˆψ >= (¯xµ ˆ×¯pν − ¯pν ˆ×¯xµ) ˆ×| ¯ψ >= i × ˆηµν × | ˆψ >,

| ¯ψ >= ˆU ˆ×| ˆψ >, ¯xµ = ˆU ˆ×ˆxµ ˆ× ˆU †, ¯pnu = ˆU ˆ×ˆpnu ˆ× ˆU †.

(5.28)

and other aspects (see [3h,3g] for all details).

Even though evidently not unique, RHM is directly universal in the sense of admitting
all inﬁnitely possible, well behaved, nonlinear, integro–diﬀerential signature–preserving de-
formations of the Minkowski metric ˆη = ˆT × η (universality) directly in the frame of the
observer (direct universality).

We also point out that RHM is a ”completion” of RQM much along the celebrated
argument by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen [14a] and, for this reason, it is also called iso-
topic completion of RQM. In fact, Eq.s (5.11) constitute an explicit and concrete realiza-
tion of the theory of ”hidden variables” λ [14b] actually realized as ”hidden operators”,
λ = λ(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, ...) = ˆT . It should be indicated that the celebrated von Neumann theo-
rem [14c] and Bell’s inequalities [14d] do not apply to RHM, trivially, because of its essential
nonunitary structure (see [4h], App.4.C for details).

The mechanics is called ”hadronic” because it was originally recommended for the study
of the structure and interactions of hadrons [3b] with nonlinear, nonlocal and nonunitary
internal eﬀects, as well as for all interactions of particles with appreciable overlapping of the
wavepackets, irrespective of whether the charges are point–like or not. The application to
hadrons remains the main objective of RHM, as poutlined in Web Site [7t], Page 19, Sect.
V.

In this paper we shall study the particularization of RHM for OIG, thus opening intrigu-
ing possible relationships between what are today called ”strong interactions” and gravi-
tation planned for study elsewhere. At this point we merely note that all veriﬁcations of
RHM [4h,4i,5d] may eventually result to be veriﬁcations of OIG because of the admission of
the latter as a particular case.

The isodual relativistic hadronic mechanics (IRHM) is the antiautomorphic image of
RHM characterized by the application of the isodual map to each and every quantity and
operator, including:

a) the isodual isoﬁelds ˆC d(ˆcd, +, ˆ×d) and ˆRd(ˆnd, +, ˆ×d) with fundamental unit, elements

and product

26

ˆI d = − ˆI = ( ˆT d)−1 < 0, ˆcd = c × ˆI d, ˆnd = n × ˆI d, ˆa ˆ×dˆb = ˆa × ˆT d × ˆb,

(5.29)

b) the isodual isominkowski space ˆM d(ˆxd, ˆηd, ˆRd) of Sect. 3;
c) the isodual isohilbert space ˆHd characterized by the following isodual isostates, isodual

isoinner product and isodual isonormalization

| ˆψ >d= −| ˆψ >†= − < ˆψ|, d < ˆφ| × ˆT d × | ˆψ >d × ˆI d ∈ ˆC d, d < ˆφ| × ˆT d × | ˆψ >d= 1, (5.30)

d) the isodual isoassociative operator algebra characterized by the unit, elements and

product

ˆξd : ˆI d,

ˆX d = − ˆX,

ˆX d

i ˆ×d ˆX d

j = ˆXi × ˆT d ˆX j,

e) the isodual isoeigenvalues equations

ˆH d ˆ×d| ˆψ >d= ˆEd ˆ×d| ˆψ >d= Ed × | ˆψ >d,

with the correct negative eigenvalues Ed = −E; and

f) the isodual dynamical equations

id×d × ˆ∂d

t | ˆψ >d= ˆH d ˆ×d| ˆψ >d= Ed × | ˆψ >d,

id×d ˆdd ˆAd/ddtd = [ ˆA,ˆˆH]d = ˆAd ˆ×d ˆH d − ˆH d ˆ×d ˆAd,

k ˆ×d| ˆψ >d= −id×d
ˆpd

d

ˆpartial
i , [pi,ˆpj]d = [ri,ˆrj]d = 0,

k| ˆψ >d,

[pi,ˆrj]d = −δj

(5.31)

(5.32)

(5.33)

(5.34)

(5.35)

(5.36)

where we have used the isoselfduality of the imaginary unit (Sect. 3)

g) the isodual naive or symplectic isoquantization, which establishes the unique derivabil-
ity of the preceding formalism from the isodual isoanalytic mechanics of Sect. 3 (see [3f,3g,4h]
for brevity).

The prof of the equivalence of isoduality and charge conjugation is presented in ref. [5a].
Note that the above isodual relativistic hadronic mechanics admits as a particular case the
isodual relativistic quantum mechanics. The mechanics emerging from our study and their
unique interconnecting maps can therefore be summarized as follows:

The most convincing evidence in favor of the isodual representation of antiparticles can be
seen in the structure of the conventional Dirac equation (see Sect. 7). Here we mention that
the axiomatic consistency of both, the isotopies and isodualities, can be also established
via the following new invariance laws of the conventional inner product of Hilbert spaces
presented apparently for the ﬁrst time in Ref. [3g]:

27

MATTER

Classical isoanalytic
mechanics

(cid:27)

Isoduality

ANTIMATTER
Classical isodual
isoanalytic mechanics

-

Isoquantiz.

Isodual isoquantiz.

?
Relativistic hadronic
hadronic mechanics

(cid:27)

Isoduality

?
Isodual relativistich
hadronic mechanics

-

1) The isoselfscalarity, expressing the invariance under the charge of the unit, here ex-

pressed for isounit independent from the integration variables

< ψ| × |ψ >=< ψ| × ˆT × |ψ > × ˆT −1 =< ψ ↑ ψ >∈ ˆC,

(5.37)

2) the isoselfduality, which expressed the invariance of the same inner product under the

antiautomorphic isodual map

< ψ| × ˆT × |ψ > × ˆI ≡ d < ψ| × ˆT d × | ˆψ >d × ˆI d.

(5.38)

Evidently invariance (5.37) expresses the preservation of the abstract quantum axioms
under changes of the basic unit (isotopy), thus establishing the transition from RQM to RHM.
Invariance (5.37) establishes that the same laws for particles are also valid for antiparticles
under their antiautomorphic interpretation (isoduality).

In summary, the isominkowskian formalism of Sect. 2 does indeed admit a unique and
unambiguous operator counterpart which cannot be ”quantum”, but which is nevertheless
characterized by the abstract quantum axioms only in a more general realization.

The isodual isominkowskian formalism of Sect. 3 does indeed admit a unique operator
counterpart which is the antiautomorphic image of the preceding one, thus being particularly
suited for the representation of antiparticles. Also, the isodual operator formalism originates
from a new quantization speciﬁcally built for the quantization of antimatter into antiparti-
cles [3g]. This appears to resolve the long standing impasse of the theoretical representation
of antimatter caused by the uniqueness of quantization vis–a–vis the duality of matter and
antimatter, and opens up a new horizon of possibilities.

It should be stressed again that we have indicated in this section the axiomatic con-
sistency and plausibility of the operator isotopic treatment of particles (generally intended

28

for particles in interior conditions) and the isodual isotopic representation of antiparticles
(generally intended for antiparticles in interior conditions).

Preliminary studies indicate encouraging possibilities of experimental veriﬁcations under
the conditions in which the formulations are applicable, although such physical validity can
only be established as a result of collegian and predictably protracted investigations.

6 The universal isopoincar´e symmetry and its isodual

Any appraisal of OIG requires at least a minimal knowledge of the operator form of its
universal symmetry, the isopoincar´e symmetry [4], speciﬁcally realized for gravity, which is
studied in this section following the achievement of suﬃcient maturity in isosymmetries by
Kadeisvili in memoir [7a].

The isopoincar´e symmetry (also called in the literature the Santilli’s isopoincar´e symme-
try [4,5]) is the universal symmetry of isoline element (2.6). Therefore, the basic invariant
quantity is not (length)2, but the broader structure (length)2×(unit)2.

The isopoincar´e symmetry can be constructed via the step–by–step application of the
isotopies of enveloping associative algebras, Lie algebras, Lie groups, transformation and
representation theory, etc called Lie–Santilli isotheory [6–7] and consists in the reconstruction
of the conventional symmetry P(3.1) for the generalized unit ˆI = ˆT −1. Since ˆI > 0, one can
see form the inception that ˆP (3.1) ≈ P (3.1).

Evidently we cannot review here the rigorous construction of the isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) and
we have to limit ourselves for brevity to identify its essential aspects. The lifting P (3.1) →
ˆP (3.1) is constructed by preserving the conventional generators of the Poincar´e symmetry

X = {Xk} = {Mµν, ×pα}, Mµν = xµ × pν − xν × pµ,

k = 1, 2, ..., 10,

µ, ν = 1, 2, 3, 4,

and the conventional parameters

w = wk = (θ, v), a ∈ R,

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

although they are now formulated in isospaces over isoﬁuelds, and by submitting to an
isotopies the operations constructed on them.

In fact the above quantities represent physical characteristics such as energy, linear mo-
mentum, angles, velocities, etc., which are not aﬀected by short range interactions, the latter
being represented by generalized operations among conventional physical quantities.

The connected component of the isopoincar´e symmetry is given by ˆP0(3.1) = S ˆO(3.1) ˆ× ˆT (3.1),

where S ˆO(3.1) is the connected isolorentz group ﬁrst introduced in [4a] and ˆT (3.1) is the
group of isotranslations [3d], and it is characterized by the isotransforms on ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR),

x′ = ˆA( ˆw) ˆ×x = ˆA( ˆw) × ˆT × x = ˜A(w) × x,

ˆA = ˜A × ˆI,

(6.4)

29

where the ﬁrst form is the mathematically correct one, the last form being used for compu-
tational simplicity.

The above isotransforms can be expressed via the isoexponention in ˆξ

ˆA( ˆw) = ˆei×X×w = ˆI + (i × X × w)/1! + (i × X × w) ˆ×(i × X × w)/2! + ...

(6.5)

characterized by the isotopic Poincar´e–Birkhoﬀ–Witt Theorem [3a,3d] and reducible to the
conventional exponentiation for computational simplicity

ˆA( ˆw) = ˆei×X×w = {ei×X×T ×w} × ˆI = ˜A(w) × ˆI.

(6.6)

The (connected component of the) isopoincar´e group can therefore be written as (or

deﬁned by ) [4]

ˆP0(3.1) : ˆA( ˆw) = Πk ˆei×X×w = (Πkei×X× ˆT ×w) ˆI = ˜A(w) × ˆI,

(6.7)

The preservation of the original dimension is ensured by the isotopic Baker–Campbell–
It is easy to see that structure (6.7) forms a connected Lie–

Hausdorﬀ Theorem [3a,3d].
Santilli transformation isogroup with isogroup laws

ˆA( ˆw) ˆ× ˆA( ˆw′) = ˆA( ˆw′) ˆ× ˆA( ˆw) = ˆA( ˆw + ˆw′),

ˆA( ˆw) ˆ× ˆA(− ˆw) = ˆA(0) = ˆI = ˆT −1.

(6.8)

Note that the use of the original Poincar´e transform x′ = A(w) × x would now violate
linearity in isospace, besides not yielding the desired symmetry of isoseparation (2.6).

The isotopy of the discrete transforms is elementary [4e], and reducible to the forms

ˆπ ˆ×x = π × x = (−r, x4), ˆτ ˆ×x = τ × x = (r, −x4),

(6.9)

where ˆπ = π × ˆI, and π, τ are the conventional inversion operators.

To identify the isoalgebra ˆp0(3.1) of ˆP0(3.1) we use the isodiﬀerential calculus [3f] on ˆM

outlined earlier which yields the isocommutation rules [4]

[ ˆMµν,ˆ ˆMαβ] = i × (ˆηνα × ˆMµβ − ˆηµα × ˆMνβ − ˆηνβ × ˆMµα + ˆηµβ × ˆMαν),

[ ˆMµν,ˆˆpα] = i × (ˆηµα× ˆpν − ˆηνα × ˆpµ),
[ˆpα,ˆˆpβ] = 0,

(6.10)

(6.11)

(6.12)

where [A,ˆB] is the Lie–Santilli product which satisﬁes the Lie axioms in isospace, as one can
verify.

The isocasimir invariants are given by

C (0) = ˆI(x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, ...) = ˆT −1,

30

C (1) = ˆpˆ2 = ˆpµ ˆ×ˆpµ = ˆηµν ˆpµ ˆ×ˆpν,

C (3) = ˆWµ ˆ× ˆW µ,

ˆWµ =∈ µαβρ ˆM αβ ˆ×ˆpρ.

(6.13)
The local isomorphism ˆp0(3.1) ≈ p0(3.1) is ensured by the positive–deﬁniteness of ˆT .
ν = xµ × pν − xν × pµ yields the
Alternatively, the use of the generators in the form M µ
conventional structure constants under a generalized Lie product, as one can verify. The
above local isomorphism is suﬃcient, per s´e, to guarantee the axiomatic consistency of
RHM.

The space components S ˆO(3), called isorotations and ﬁrst introduced in [4b], can be
computed from isoexpontiations (6.7) and the space components ˆTkk of the isotopic element
in diagonal form, ˆT = Diag.(Tµµ), yielding the explicit form in the (x,y)–plane

x′ = x × cos( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3) − ˆy × ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × sin( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3),

−

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

y′ = ˆx × ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × ∼ ( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3) + ˆy cos( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3),

1
2

−

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

(6.14)

(see [3h] for general isorotations in all three Euler angles).

As one can verify, isotransforms (6.14) leave invariant all inﬁnitely possible ellipsoidical
deformations of the sphere x × x + y × y + z × z = r in the Euclidean space E(r, δ, R), r =
x, y, z, δ = diag.(1, 1, 1),

rt × δ × r = x × ˆT11 × x + y × ˆT22 × y + z × ˆT33 × z = r.

(6.15)

In the isoeuclidean spaces

ˆE(ˆr, ˆδ, ˆR), ˆr = {ˆrk}, ˆδ = ˆTs × δ, ˆTs = diag.( ˆT11, ˆT22, ˆT33), ˆIs = ˆT −1

,

s

(6.16)

ellipsoid (6.15) become perfect spheres rˆ2 = (rt × δ ˆ×r) × ˆI called isospheres [4g].

In fact, the lifting of the semi axes 1k → ˆTkk while the related units are lifted of the inverse
amounts 1k → ˆT −1
kk , preserves the perfect sphericity. This isoshericity is the geometric origin
of the isomorphism ˆO(3) ≈ O(3), as well as of the preservation of the rotational invariance
for the ellipsoidical deformations of sphere [4b].

The connected isolorentz symmetry S ˆO(3.1) (also called in the literature Santilli’s isolo-
rentz symmetry [6,7], is given by the superposition of the isorotations and the isoboosts ﬁrst
introduced in [4a] which can be written in the (3,4)-plane

x1′ = x1, x2′ = x2,
x3′ = x3 × sinh( ˆT
= ˆγ × (x3 − ˆT

−

1
2

1
2

33 × ˆT
33 × ˆT

1
2

x4′ = −x3 × ˆT

33 × c−1

0 × ˆT

1
2

1
2

44 × v) − x4 × ˆT
44 × ˆβ × x4),
44 × sinh( ˆT

−

1
2

1
2

= ˆγ × (x4 − ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × ˆβ × x3,

1
2

−

1
2

31

−

1
2

1
2

33 × ˆT

44 × cosh( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × v) =

1
2

1
2

33 × ˆT

44 × v) + x4 × cosh( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × v) =

1
2

1
2

1
2

(6.17)

where

ˆβ = (vk × ˆTkk × vk/c0 × ˆT44 × c0)
ˆγ = (1 − ˆβ2)−

2 .

1

1

2 ,

(6.18)

(6.19)

Note that the above isotransforms are nonlinear in x, ˙x, ψ, ∂ψ, ..., precisely as desired,
and are formally similar to the Lorentz transforms, as expected from their isotopic character.
This also conﬁrms the local isomorphism S ˆO(3.1) ≈ SO(3.1) [4].

The Lorentz–Santilli isotransforms characterize the so–called isolight cone [4], i.e., the
perfect cone in isospace ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR). In a way similar to the isosphere, we have the deforma-
tion of the light cone axes 1µ → ˆTµµ while the corresponding units are deformed of the inverse
amount 1µ → ˆT −1
µµ , thus preserving the original perfect cone character. Such a preservation
is then the geometric foundation of the local isomorphism S ˆO(3.1) ≈ SO(3.1).

The isotopy of the light cone is so strong that even the characteristic angle of the cone
remains the conventional one, i.e., the maximal causal speed in isospace ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) remains
the speed of light c0 in vacuum [4] (it should be noted that the proof of this property requires,
for consistency, the use of the isotrigonometric and isohyperbolic functions we cannot review
here for brevity).

The isotranslations in the coordinates can be written [4d]

x′ = (ˆei×p×a) ˆ×x = x + a × A(x, ...),
Aµ = ˆT 1/2

µµ + aα[ ˆT 1/2

µµ ,ˆpα]1! + ...

p′ = (ˆeip×a) ˆ×p = p,

(6.20)

(6.21)

It is generally believed that the conventional, ten-parameter, Poincar´e symmetry is
the broadest possible linear symmetry of the conventional separation on Minkowski spaces
M(x, η, R)

(x − y)2 = [(xµ − yµ) × ηµν × (xν − yν)] × I ∈ R(n, +, ×).

(6.22)

The isotopies have identiﬁed a new symmetry, called isoselfscalarity, ﬁrst identiﬁed in
memoir [3g], which which is given by the lifting of the trivial unit I = diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) with a
new parameter n independent from the integration variables, under which we have the new
invariance

I → ˆI = n2 × I,

η → ˆη = n−2 × η, n 6= 0,

(x − y)2 = [(xµ − yµ) × ηµν × (xν − yν)] × I ≡

≡ [(xµ − yµ) × (n−2 × ηµν) × (xν − yν)] × (n2 × I)
= [(xµ − yµ) × ˆηµν × (xν − yν)] × ˆI = (x − y)ˆ2.

(6.23)

As a result, the most general possible invariance of the Minkowskian line element for

positive-deﬁnite units has eleven, rather than ten dimensions.

32

Note that the invariant for the ﬁrst form of the line element is the conventional Poincar´e
symmetry, while the invariance of the latter form is a bona–ﬁde isopoincar´e symmetry be-
cause the isotopic element ˆT = n2 enters into the arguments of the isorotation (6.14) and
isoboosts (6.17). As such, the above symmetry is nontrivial.

A second, hitherto unknown invariance is characterized by the isodual map [5d]

I → I d = −I, η → ηd = −η, x → xd = −x,

(x − y)2 = [(xµ − yµ) × ηµν × (xν − yν)] × I ≡

≡ [(xµ − yµ) × (−ηµν) × (xν − yν)] × (−I) =
= [(xµ − yµ)d × ηd

µν × (xν − yν)d] × I d ≡ (x − y)d2d.

(6.24)

called by this author isoselfduality, which is at the foundation of the isodual representation
of antimatter [5].

The above invariance evidently assures the plausibility of the isodual treatment of anti-
matter also at the geometric level, because the same Minkowskian invariant holds for both
conventional and isodual systems.

Isoselfduality (6.24) establishes the existence and applicability of the isodual Poincar´e
symmetry ˆP d(3.1) [4d], which can be easily constructed from the isodual rules of the pre-
ceding section, and it is hereon assumed as known.

We here deﬁne as the restricted isopoincar´e transforms that constituted by isorotations,
isolorentz boosts, isotranslations, isoinversions and isoselfscalar transformations when all
parameters are constants, otherwise we have the general isopoincar´e tramnsforms, with cor-
responding deﬁnitions under isodualities.

The most salient diﬀerence between the special and general isotransforms is that the
former preserve the inertial charactyer of the frames, while the latter identify a broader class
of noninertial frames.

Note that isodual parameters are independent of the conventional ones. As a result, the

general invariance of isoseparation (??) has 22–dimensions with structure

ˆSdot = ˆP (3.1)| ˆI × ˆP d(3.1)| ˆI d
and the same result holds for the symmetry of the conventional Minkowskian separation as
a particular case.

(6.25)

The preceding analysis establishes the following property [4,7a]

Theorem 2: The general isopoincar´e group is the universal isolinear invariance of all
inﬁnitely possible, well behaved isoseparations (2.6) on the isominkowski space over isoreal
ﬁelds with a common isounit.

33

The veriﬁcation of the above theorem is trivial and can be done by just plotting the
isotransforms in isoinvariant (??). Note that there is nothing to compute, because the
theory provides the solution for the general invariance of the isoseparation for all inﬁnitely
possible isometrics in the diagonal form ˆη = ˆT × η = diag.(Tµµ × ηµµ). One merely plots
the isotopic elements Tµµ in the isotransforms. The invariance of the isoseparation is then
guaranteed by the isotopic methods.

Note the need for consistency that the generalized unit must be the same for the isospace
and for the isoﬁeld. This is not the case in conventional treatments where the unit of the
space is the unit matrix I = Diag.(1, 1, ...) and the unit of the ﬁeld is the number +1.
Nevertheless, the latter treatment can be easily reformulated for the same unit I.

Note also from the above studies that the abstract identity of the Poincar´e and isopoincar´e
symmetries implies that the special and isospecial relativity also coincide at the abstract
level (and the same occurrence holds under isoduality). However, the special relativity has
only one formulation, the conventional one. On the contrary, all isotopic structures, thus
including the isospecial relativity, have two diﬀerent formulations, one in isospace and the
other in their projection in the conventional space.

All diﬀerences between the special and isospecial relativity solely occur when the latter
is projected in the space–time of the former, because the isospecial relativity in isospace
preserves all features of the conventional relativity, including the perfect light cone, the
maximal causal speed c0, etc. [4].

It should be also noted that that the general isopoincar´e symmetry does not restrict the
value of n (except for the conditions n > 0). Thus, the isospecial relativity predicts arbitrary
causal speeds of light within homogeneous and isotropic media, because c can be smaller,
equal or bigger than c0.

The case of light speeds smaller than c0 is established in homogeneous and isotopic
physical media such as water. Speeds bigger than c0 have been identiﬁed in a number
of cases, such as photons tunneling tests [15a,15d], expulsion of matter in astrophysical
explosions [15c,15d,15e], solutions of ordinary relativistic wave equations [15f] and other
cases.

The isominkowskian space, the isopoincar´e symmetry and the isospecial relativity restore
the validity of the abstract axioms of the special relativity for arbitrary speeds of light,
whether smaller or bigger than c0 ,because they are all projected in isospace into the unique
and universal speed c0, thus rendering the special relativity truly ”universal”.

It is remarkable that the two novel invariances (5.37)– (5.38) and (6.23)–(6.24) have
remained undetected throughout this century, to our best knowledge. This should not be
surprising because their detection required the prior discovery of new numbers, the isonum-
bers with arbitrary positive units for invariances (5.37) and (6.23) and the isodual numbers
with arbitrary negative units for invariances (5.38) and (6.24).

34

7 Operator isominkowskian gravity for matter and its

isodual for antimatter

We are now suﬃciently equipped to identify the foundations of OIG and appraise its plausi-
bility on comparative grounds with QG [12]. A number of applications and veriﬁcations are
presented in future works [4i]. OIG was ﬁrst presented in ref. [8a] and preliminary studied
in [8b,8c]. The basic dynamical equations of OIG in their axiomatically correct form are
presented in this paper for the ﬁrst time following the achievement of mathematical maturity
in memoir [3f] and axiomatic maturity in memoir [3g].

We should indicate from the outset that the expectation of the existence of a ”quan-
tum” description of gravity is disproved by ouur studies. This is established by Theorem
1 which identiﬁes the classical noncanonical structure of gravity with a necessary nonuni-
tary counterpart at the operator level, under which no ”quantum” law is expected to apply
identically.

In fact, QG requires notorious departures from a true ”quantum mechanical” setting and
the isotopic reformulation of gravity does not escape from the same occurrence. The best
that can be done on ground of our current knowledge is a formulation of gravity via the
abstract axioms of quantum mechanics, only realized in a more general form.

Equivalently we can say that the main idea of OIG is to turn the notorious ”nonunitary”
structure of the operator description of gravity on a conventional Hilbert space, into an
identical ”isounitary” formulation on our isohilbert space, thus regaining in this way the
abstract axioms of RQM.

Alternatively, our studies indicate that no formulation of gravity appears to be possible
via the use of the quantum axioms in their simplest possible realization, that with the unit
+1. On the contrary, if more general realizations are admitted, then realistic possibilities
for basic advances emerge.

¿From the analysis of the preceding sections it is evident that RHM, with underlying
isominkowskian geometry, isopoincar´e symmetry and isospecial relativity, provides an oper-
ator characterization of gravity under the sole condition of restricting the isounit and isotopic
element to the gravitational values

ˆIgr(x) = ( ˆIgr(x)µ

ˆTgr(x)µν = ηµα × gαν(x),
ν ) = (| ˆTgr(x)β

α|−1)µ

ν , η ∈ M,

, g ∈ ℜ.

(7.1)

(7.2)

called gravitational isotopic element and gravitational isounit, respectively.

Conventional RQM represents systems via the assignment of the Hamiltonian H and
the tacit assumption of the simplest possible unit I. OIG requires the assignment of two
quantities, the conventional Hamiltonian H which represents conventional interactions, and
the selection of the isounit ˆI = ˆIgr(x) = [ ˆTgr(x)]−1 which represents the essential part
of curvature, the isotopic element in our isominkowskian decomposition of the Riemannian

35

metric g(x) = ˆTgr ×η. We assume the reader is now familiar with the mathematical structure
of OIG which requires all products to be isotopic with isotopic element ˆTgr(x).

Recall that the fundamental notion of RQM is the Poincar´e symmety P(3.1) in operator
realization. By the same token, the ultimate and most fundamental notion of the operator
theory herein submitted from which all properties and applications can be uniquely and
unambiguously derived, is the gravitational Poincar´e–Santilli isosymmetry in operator form
ˆPgr(3.1), i.e., the isosymmetry of the preceding section constructed with respect to the
gravitational isounit ˆIgr(x) .

The main characteristics of the emerging operator gravity are the following:

Property I: OIG is based on the embedding of gravity in the isotopic lifting of Planck’s

constant.

Recall that the Plank constant is the basic unit of RQM. The fundamental isotopy of

OIG is then precisely that of the latter, and we shall write

¯h = I → ˆIgr(r),
(7.3)
where ˆIgr(r) is the 3×3–dimensional space component of the 4×4–dimensional gravitational
isounit ˆIgr(x).

The isotopic character of the lifting is readily established by the fact that ˆIgr(r) preserves

all axiomatic properties of ¯h, e.g.,

gr = ˆIgr ˆ× ˆIgr ˆ×.. ˆ× ˆIgr ≡ ˆIgr, ˆI
ˆI ˆn

ˆ1
gr ≡ ˆIgr, ˆIgr
2

ˆ/ ˆIgr ≡ ˆIgr,

The fundamental dynamical equations of OIG are then based on lifting (5.2). Note that

the conventional Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg’s equations can be written in the form

i × ∂t|ψ >= H(t, r, p) × ¯h−1 × |ψ >= E × ¯h−1 × |ψ >,
i × dA/dt = A × ¯h−1 × H − H × ¯h−1 × A,
pk × ¯h−1 × |ψ >= −i × ∂k|ψ >,
pi × ¯h−1 × rj − rj × ¯h−1 × pi = −δj
i
pi × ¯h−1 × pj − pi × ¯h−1 × pi ≡ ri × ¯h−1 × rj − rj × ¯h−1 × ri ≡ 0.

Then, the fundamental non–isorelativistic dynamical equations of OIG are given by

(7.4)

(7.5)

(7.6)

(7.7)

(7.8)

(7.9)

(7.10)

(7.11)

i × ˆ∂t|ψ >= ˆH(ˆt, ˆr, ˆp) × ˆTgr(r) × | ˆψ >= ˆE × ˆThr(r) × | ˆψ >,
i × ˆd ˆA/ ˆdˆt = ˆA × ˆTgr(r) × ˆH − ˆH × ˆTgr(r) × ˆA,

36

pk × ˆTgr(r) × | ˆψ >= −i × ˆ∂k| ˆψ >,
ˆpi × ˆTgr(r) × rj − rj × ˆTgr(r) × pi = −i × δj
i

(7.12)

(7.13)

pi × ˆTgr(r) × pj − pj × ˆTgr(r) × pi ≡ ri × ˆTgr(r) × rj − rj × ˆTgr(r) × ri ≡ 0,

(7.14)
where the isounit of the time isoderivatives is evidently the fourth component of ˆIgr(x), under
the proviso that the totality of quantities, operations and special functions and transforms
are of isotopic type.

To be more speciﬁc on this fundamental point, the appraisal of OIG with conventional
QG notions, such as the magnitude of the angular momentum J 2 = Jk × J k leads to a host
of inconsistencies which are generally not detected by nonexpert in the ﬁeld (e.g., violation
of isolinearity). Similarly, data elaborations via ordinary trigonometric functions or with
the familiar Dirac’s delta function have no meaning of any nature for OIG, because said
conventional notions cannot be even deﬁned in isospaces over isoﬁelds.

With a clear understanding to above requirements, we note that the gravitational isounit
is inneed the fundamental invariant of OIG because it is numerically invariant under the
transformation theory

and it is preserved under the time evolution

ˆIgr → ˆI ′

gr = ˆU ˆ× ˆIgr ˆ× ˆU † ≡ ˆIgr,

i × ˆdI gr/dt = [ ˆIgr,ˆˆH] = ˆH − ˆH ≡ 0.

(7.15)

(7.16)

Moreover, from isorule (??), the isoexpectation values of the space components of the

gravitational isounit reproduce Plank’s constant ¯h = 1 identically,

< ˆIgr =

gr × ˆTgr × | >
< | × ˆTgr × ˆT −1
×

ˆTgr × | >≡ ¯h = 1. = ¯h = 1.

(7.17)

This identiﬁes the “hidden” character of OIG in conventional RQM and its character of
being a “completion” of RQM much along the E–P–R argument [14]. After all, gravity is
embedded in the unit of RQM. As such, the inclusion of gravity in RQM is so natural to
creep in un–noticed.

Also, property (7.17) establishes that one should not expect OIG to yield deviations
from established quantum mechanical laws. This occurrence is made clearer by the fact that
the uncertainties of the center–of–mass trajectories of a systems of particles obeying OIG
are conventional. In fact, from isocommutation rules (??) we have (¯h = 1) [3g]

∆r × ∆p ≥

< [ˆr,ˆp] >=

(7.18)

1
2

.

The preservation of the fundamental physical laws by our ”axioms– preserving” isotopies
should be compared with the departures from the same laws implied by QG as well as by the

1
2

37

”axiom–violating” deformations, and illustrates again our insistence in avoiding the term
”deformations” whenever dealing with ”isotopies” (Sect. 2).

The presence of gravitational IN OUR OIG is established by numerous aspects, all verify-
ing conventional quantum laws, such as deviations from conventional quantum eigenvalues,
or the resolution of the paradox of quantum mechanics at gravitational singularities [8d] (see
below).

The isorelativistic equations of OIG are uniquely identiﬁed by the isopoincar´e symmetry
via its isocasimir invariants (6.13) and related isorepresentation theory we cannot possibly
study here for brevity (see the study of ref. [44h,7a]). The ﬁrst diﬀerence is that now the
gravitational isounit is given by the full 4×4–dimensional structure ˆIgr(x). The fundamental
gravitational isocommutation rules are given by

pµ ˆ×| ˆψ >= pµ × ˆTgr × | ˆψ >= −i × ˆ∂µ| ˆψ >= −i ˆT ν

grµ∂ν| ˆψ >,
[xµ,ˆpν] ˆ×| ˆψ >= [ˆxµ × ˆTgr(x) × ˆpν − ˆpν × ˆTgr(x) × ˆxµ] × ˆTgr(x) × | ˆψ >= i × δµ

(7.19)
ν × | ˆψ >, (7.20)
The second–order isorelativistic equation of QIG is then given by the realization of the
isoinvariant (??) plus the conventional minimal coupling rule to an external electromagnetic
ﬁeld with four-potential ˆAµ(x)

{[ˆpµ + i × e × ˆAµ(x)] ˆ×[ˆpµ + i × ×e × ˆAµ(x)] + ˆmˆ2} ˆ×| ˆψ >=
gr (x) × [ˆpµ + i × e × ˆAµ(x)] × [ˆpµ + i × ×e × ˆAν(x)]+
ηˆµν
+ (m × m) × ˆIgr(x)} × ˆTgr(x) × | ˆψ >=

= { ˆIgr(x)µ
× [−i × ˆTgr(x)δ

α × ηαν[−i × ˆTgr(x)γ

µ × ∂γ + i × e × ˆAµ(x)]×
ν × ∂δ + ie × ˆAν(x)] + m2} × | ˆψ >=

= {ηρσ × [−i × ∂ρ + i × e × ˆIgr(x)µ

ρ × ˆAµ(x)]×

× [−i × ∂σ + ie ˆIgr(x)ν

σ × ˆAσ(x)] + m2} × | ˆψ >= 0,

(7.21)

(7.22)

(7.23)

(7.24)

(7.25)

(7.26)

(7.27)

where quantities with ”hats” are computed in isospace and those without are conven-

tional.

As one can see, the projection of dynamical equation (7.27) in the conventional space–time
can be expressed via the conventional Klein–Gordon equation plus the ”isorenormalization”
of the electromagnetic potential ˆAµ via the multiplication by the gravitational isounit ˆIgr(x).
Conceivable physical applications of this new setting will be studied elsewhere.

The ”isolinearization” of the second–order equation is done via a simple isotopy of the
In its simplest possible realization for a diagonal

conventional case (see [4h] for details).
isounit, such linearization leads to the following gravitational isodirac equation

(ˆγµ ˆ×ˆpµ +i× ˆm) ˆ×| >= [ηµν(x)×ˆγµ(x)× ˆTgr(x)× ˆpν −i×m× ˆIgr (x)]× ˆTgr(x)×| >= 0, (7.28)

38

{ˆγµ,ˆˆγµ} = ˆγµ × ˆTgr(x) × ˆγν + ˆγν × ˆTgr(x) × ˆγµ = 2 × ˆηµν ≡ 2gµν,

ˆγk = [ ˆTkk(x)]1/2 × γk × ˆIgr(x) = [ ˆTkk(x)]1/2 ×

0
σdk

σk
0 !

× ˆIgr(x)

0
I d
2×2 !

× ˆIgr(x)

 

I2×2
0

 

(7.29)

(7.30)

(7.31)

ˆγ4 = [ ˆT44(x)]1/2 × γ4 × ˆIgr(x) = [ ˆTkk(x)]1/2 ×

with a simple extension with the minimal coupling rule, where the γ’s are the conventional
Dirac matrices, the ˆγ’s are the isodirac matrices, and the symbol d stands for isoduality,
i.e., σd = −σ† = −σ, I d = −I.

As one can see, the anti–isocommutators of the isogamma matrices yield (twice) the
Riemannian metric g(x), thus conﬁrming the representation of gravitation in the structure
of Dirac’s equation with the conventional Riemannian metric g(x), as desired. As an example,
we have the particular case for the iso–Dirac–Schwarzchild equation [2d]

ˆγk = (1 − 2M/r)−1/2 × γk × ˆIgr(x),

ˆγ4 = (1 − 2M/r)1/2 × γ4 × ˆIgr(x).

(7.32)

Similar isorelativistic gravitational equations can be easily constructed by the interested
reader.

It is generally believed that the conventional Poincar´e symmetry in its spinorial covering
P(3.1) = SL(2.c) × T (3.1) is the general symmetry of the conventional Dirac equation. This
belief can be disproved by the isodual mathematics [5]. In fact, we have the following

Theorem 3: The largest possible isolinear symmetry of the isodirac equation is given

by the isospinorial isopoincar´e symmetry in the following 22-dimensional isoselfdual form

ˆStot = ˆP(3.1) × ˆP d(3.1) = [S ˆL(2, ˆC) ˆ× ˆT (3.1)] ˆ×[S ˆLd(2. ˆC d) ˆ× ˆT d(3.1)],

(7.33)

µ = −γ†

Prof. The conventional gamma matrices are isoselfdual, i.e., invariant under isoduality,
γµ ≡ γd
µ. A necessary condition for a Lie transformation group to be a symmetry
of the conventional Dirac’s equation is therefore that it must also be isoselfdual for con-
sistency. The isospinorial Poincar´e symmetry P(3.1) is not isoselfdual, P d(3.1) 6= P(3.1),
and therefore does not verify the indicated necessary condition. However the direct product
Stot = P(3.1) ˆ×P d(3.1) is isoselfdual, Stot ≡ Sd
tot, and therefore veriﬁes this necessary con-
dition. The suﬃciency can be proved as in the conventional case. Since the isotopies are
axiom–preserving, the above properties of the conventional Dirac equation persists under
all its inﬁnitely possible isotopies, including the gravitational particularization. Finally, the
22-dimensional character of the total symmetry originates from the independence of conven-
tional and isodual parameters, as well as the inclusion of the isoselfscalar transforms and
their isoduals of Theorem 2 of Sect. 6 q.e.d.

39

Theorem 3 can also be reached by an inspection of the conventional Dirac matrices
In fact the latter are centrally dependent on the negative 2 × 2–
in Eq.s (??) and (??).
dimensional unit for the internal space of spin which we have merely rewritten in our isodual
form I d
2×2 = −I2×2 = −Diag.(1, 1). This illustrates that the birth of the isodual theories
for antiparticles can be seen in the conventional Dirac’s equation because of the essential
presence of a negative unit in the very structure of the gamma matrices.

The latter was not interpreted by Dirac as a bona–ﬁde unit because he lacked the knowl-

edge of the related new numbers with negative units, the isodual numbers [3e].

Similarly, the space part of the conventional Dirac matrices reveals the presence of the iso-
k = −σk. The latter occurrence

dual Pauli matrices, only written in our formalism σkd = −σ†
has intriguing implications, such as:

a) It establishes the validity of the isodual representation of antimatter.

In fact, the
referral of the negative–energy solutions to negative units eliminates their un–physical be-
havior [5];

b) It establishes the insuﬃcient character of current interpretation of P(3.1) as being the
maximal linear symmetry of the Dirac equations, in favor of the isoselfdual form P(3.1) ×
P d(3.1).

c) It disproves another popular belief according to which th spin in Dirac matrices is
characterized by a 4 × 4–dimensional representation of SU(2).
In fact, the treatment of
spin is restored as being entirely characterized by the 2–dimensional Pauli’s representation
for the case of particles, with the independent antiautomorphic isodual Pauli’s matrices
for the characterization of the spin of antiparticles, again, along the isoselfdual structure
SU(2) × SU d(2) ∈ P(3.1) × P d(3.1). At any rate, SU(2) is not isoselfdual and, as such, it
cannot consistently characterize the spin of Dirac’s equation. For additional studies along
these lines we refer the interested reader to ref.s [4h,5].

Property II: OIG coincides at the abstract level with RQM.

In view of the positive–deﬁniteness of the gravitational isounit ˆIgr(x) (originating from
the local Minkowskian character of the (3+1)–dimensional Riemannian spaces, Sect. 1), at
the abstract level we have the identity of I and ˆIgr(x), H and ˆH, R(n, +, ×) and ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×),
etc. The same holds for the dynamical equations, e.g., at the abstract level we have (γµ ×
pµ + i × m)| >≡ (ˆγµ ˆ×ˆpµ + ˆi ˆm) ˆ×| >.

Needless to say, the above abstract identity of OIG and RQM guarantees the axiomatic
consistency of OIG and, and such, it is simply invaluable for the resolution of the problematic
aspects of QG (see below).

An inspection of the properties of the isopoincar´e symmetry, particularly the isocommu-

tativity of coordinates and momenta, Eq.s (??), established the following

40

Property III OIG is isoﬂat (i.e., it veriﬁes the axiom of ﬂatness in isospace).

By comparison, QG is curved in the sense that its coordinates and momenta do not
commute. This diﬀerence is basic for the understanding of the diﬀerences of the two theories
and their consequential comparative appraisals.

In essence, we can state that the isocommutativity of coordinates and momenta is a
necessary condition for the unambiguous applicability of the theory to measurements (in
view of Theorem 1).

The reader should recall the dual formulation of all isotopic theories, that in isospaces
and its projection in ordinary spaces. Therefore, the isocommutativity of coordinates and
momentum does not imply that the theory is ordinarily ﬂat, in which case no representation
of gravitation is evidently possible owing to the historical teaching of the Founders of the
theory [2]. In fact, the projection of OIG in ordinary spaces over conventional ﬁelds recovers
all conventional Riemannian characteristics.

The distinction between isoﬂatness and ordinary ﬂatness is here merely indicated with

technical treatments presented elsewhere for brevity [9].

An important implication of the above studies is that the isospecial relativity can indeed
unify the special and general relativities in both their classical and quantum versions for
the exterior gravitational problem of matter in vacuum, with isodual images for the exte-
rior gravitational problem of antimatter. The relativities are uniﬁed for both classical and
operator versions via the basic unit which can represent gravitation when assuming the grav-
itational form ˆIgr(x) and admits as particular case the special relativity when assuming the
trivial form I = Diag.(1, 1, 1, 1), with isodual images for antimatter.

It should be noted that the isospecial relativity can also unify the special and general
relativities for interior gravitational problems of matter within physical media in both their
classical and operator versions, with isodual images for antimatter. The latter uniﬁcation
is permitted by the unrestricted functional dependence of the isounit which can represent
interior gravitational conditions via realizations of the type

where K is a positive–deﬁnite 4 × 4 matrix representing arbitrary nonlinear and nonlocal
internal eﬀects, the interior relativistic conditions emerging for the simpler value

ˆIgr,int = K(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...) × ˆIgr(x),

ˆIrel,int = K(x, ˙x, ¨x, ...) × I.

(7.34)

(7.35)

The simplest possible realization of the internal gravitational isounit is given by [3g]

ˆI = [Diag.(n−2

3 , n−2
All conventional exterior gravitational models (e.g., Schwarzschild’s exterior metric [2]) can
the be easily lifted to the above interior conditions.

4 )] × F (x, ˙x, ...) × ˆIgr(x).

2 , n−2

1 , n−2

(7.36)

41

The main physical result is the extension of general relativity to locally varying speeds
of light under the preservation of its abstract axioms. In fact, the speed of electromagnetic
waves in interior conditions is a rather complex function of local variables, such as density
µ, temperature τ , frequency ω, etc., c = c(x, µ, τ, ω, ...) = c0/n(x, µ, τ, ω, ..). The important
point is that the above local speed can be directly represented, that is, represented via the
geometric line element of the theory, rather than current indirect manipulations (e.g., the
representation of the classical speed c = c0/n via the scattering of photons among molecules
in second quantization).

As an example, it is well known that the representation of the locally varying character
of the speed of light in interior conditions is not possible in the Schwarzschild’s geometry. By
comparison, its representation becomes elementary under our isotopic extension to interior
conditions, due to the lifting of the fourth component (here assuming F = I for simplicity)

g44 → ˆg44 = g44/n2
4.

(7.37)

The space components n2
refraction, or via simple application of the Lorentz–Santilli isoboosts.

k then emerge as the space–time symmetrization of the index of

The isominkowskian reformulation of gravity also permits a novel and physically more
accurate representation of gravitational horizons and singularities via the zeros of the isotopic
element or isounit, according to the rules [4h]

Gravit. − Horizons :

Space − component − of − ˆIgr,int = Diag.( ˆI11, ˆI22, ˆI33) = 0,
Time − component − of − ˆTgr,int = ˆT44 = 0,

(

Gravitat. − Singularities :

Time − component − of − ˆIgr,int = ˆI44 = 0.
Space − component − of − ˆTgr,int = Diag.(ˆt11, ˆT22, ˆT33) = 0.

(

(7.38)
To understand there rules, note ﬁrst that they are veriﬁed by the Schwarzschild metric

for which we have [4h]

Gravitational − −Horizons :
Gravitational − −Singularity :

space − −component − −of − − g = (1 − 2M/r)Diag.(1, 1, 1) = 0,

time − −component − −of − − g = (1 − 2M/r)−1 = 0.

As a result, rules (7.38) contain conventional horizons and singularities.

However, gravitational horizons and singularities are some of the most signiﬁcant cases
of interior gravitational problems, thus having nonlinear, nonlocal and nonlagrangian eﬀects
indicated in Sect. 1 which are outside the representational capability of the Riemannian
geometry. Rules (7.38) therefore permit novel studies on gravitational horizons and singu-
larities with a more realistic inclusion of internal, velocity–dependent and nonlocal–integral
eﬀects which will be conducted elsewhere.

It should also be mentioned that gravitational horizons are today studied via the use
of conventional light cones, which implies the assumption of light in vacuum c0. But the

(7.39)

42

exterior of gravitational horizons is made up of hyperdense chromospheres in which the
speed of electromagnetic waves is a locally varying quantity. The use of our isolight cone
then permits more realistic calculations with actual speeds of light, also contemplated in
future works [5e].

OIG also permits the resolution of the paradox of quantum mechanics for gravitational
collapse, identiﬁed and resolved in ref. [5d]. Consider a conventional QM particle in the
interior of a star. As such, the particle obeys conventional uncertainties. Suppose now
that the star collapses all the way to a singularity. Then, the particle considered must be
located at the singularity. But the star is a classical object. The location of its singularity
can therefore be classically determined with the desired precision. The paradox of quantum
mechanics here considered then follows, because the QM particle should have uncertainties
at a point which is classically determined.

It seems evident that no known resolution of this paradox exists in ordinary RQM. On
the contrary, OIG can indeed resolve the paradox. In fact, the isoexpectation value of the
commutation rules reads

< [ˆr,ˆˆp] >=

< | × ˆTgr × (ˆr × ˆTgr × p − ˆp × ˆTgr × ˆr) × ˆTgr × | >
< | × Tgr × | >

(7.40)

where the numerator is of the 4–th order in ˆTgr while the denominator is of the 1–st order.
From rule (5.30) it is then evident that

Lim(∆r × ∆p) ˆTgr→0 =

1
2
namely, the isouncertainties acquire their classical deterministic value at the limit of grav-
itational collapse to a singularity, which is the main result in of ref. [5d] (other results in
the same papers should be reformulate with the subsequent isodiﬀerential calculus to avieve
invariance, as done in this study).

Lim < [ˆr,ˆˆp] > ˆTgr→0≡ 0,

(7.41)

The above ﬁndings provide additional elements of plausibility for OIG and indicate that
the ”completion” of RQM for the inclusion of gravitation along the historical E–P–R teach-
ing [14] is deeper that just the the achievement of an explicit operator realization of the
theory of ”hidden variables” , because it implies rather subtle revisions of current studies
on the relationship between classical and operator theories tacitly restricted to the simplest
possible unit ¯h = 1.

As an example, recall that OIG is an image of RQN under nonunitary transforms which,
as such, are known not to preserve eigenvalues and boundary values. It then follows that
the image of Bell’s inequalities which is applicable to OIG is necessarily given by a nonuni-
tary image of the conventional forms [14d]. This evidently implies the alteration of the
numerical value of the conventional upper boundary of the inequalities which, as such, can
become indeed compatible with conventional classical counterparts for the interior problem
only (see [4h], App. 4.C for details, including the construction of the nonunitary image of

43

Pauli’s matrices). Note the restriction, again, of the latter arguments to the interior classi-
cal and operator problems. In fact, the exterior classical problem remains the conventional
Hamiltonian–unitary one.

In summary, we can state that, subject to further studies and independent scrutinies,
OIG appears to resolve the problematic aspects of QG, i.e., the lack of invariant unit with
consequential ambiguous applicability to measurements, the lack of conservation of Hermitic-
ity in time with consequential lack of physically acceptable observables, the lack of invariance
of the numerical predictions, physical laws and special functions with consequential lack of
consistent physical applications.

Moreover, QG is known to have diﬃculties in achieving a formulation comparable to ordi-
nary RQM because of serious technical problems, e.g., in the construction of PCT symmetry.
These diﬃculties are removed ab initio in OIG precisely thanks to its isotopic character, that
is, the inherent capability of preserving all original characteristics, as illustrated above.

Besides the transparent axiomatic advantages of OIG as compared to QG, the plausibility
of QIG is further established by preservation of conventional quantum laws, such as the
conventional uncertainties for the center–of–mass trajectories, Eq.s (7.18).

The latter property provide evident experimental support for our isominkowskian formu-
lation of gravity, this time, at the operator level, because it indicates its compatibility with
existing, quantum mechanical experimental data, a property which does not appear to be
veriﬁed by QG. The understanding is that contributions at the particle level due to gravity
are notoriously very small as compared to those due to other interactions, as established by
isotopic elements of the Schwarzschild’s type (2.24) where M is now the mass of the particle
considered. These very small contributions can therefore be veriﬁed via suitable tests only
after achieving the necessary technology.

Acknowledgments

The autor would like to thank for invaluable comments the participants to: the 7 Marcel
Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity held at Stanford university in July 1994; the
International Workshops held at the Istituto per la Ricerca di Base in Molise, Italy, on
August 1995 and May 1996; and the International Workshop on Physical Interpretation of
Relativity Theories held at the Imperial College, London, on September 1996. Moreover,
the author would like to express his sincere appreciation to the Editors of Rendiconti Circolo
Matematico Palermo, Foundations of Physics and Mathematical Methods in Applied Sciences,
for invaluable, penetrating and constructive critical comments in the editorial processing of
the respective memoirs [3f,3g,7a] without which this paper could not have seen the light.

44

References

[1] H.A.Lorentz, Amst. Proc. 6, 809 (1904) [1a]; H.Poincar´e, Compte Rendues, Paris 140,
1504 (1905) [1b]; A.Einstein, ANN. Phys. 17, 891 (1905) [1c]; H. Minkowski, Nachr.
Ges. Wiss. G¨ottingen 43 (1908) [1d]; W.Pauli, Theory of Relativity, Pergamon Press,
New York (1958) [1e]

[2] B.Riemann, G¨ott. Nachr. 13, 133 (1868) and Collected Works, H.Weber, Editor, Dover,
New York (1953) [2a]; D.Hilbert, Nachr. Kgl. Ges. Wissench. Gottingen,
!((Akad.
Wissssench Berlin, 1915, p. 844 [2c]; K.Schwartzschild, Sitzber. Deut. Akad. Wiss.
Berlin. K1. Math.–Phys. Tech., 189 and 424 (1916) [2c]; H.Weyl, Raum–Zeit–Materie,
Springer, Berlin (1916) [2d]; A.Einstein, H.Minkowski and H.Weyl, The Principle of
Relativity: A collection of Original Memoirs, Methuen (1923) [2e]; Stachel, Editor, Col-
lected Papers of Albert Einstein, Princeton Univ. Press, Vol.s 1–5 (1987 on), Princeton,
N.J. [2f]

[3] R.M.Santilli, Hadronic J. 1, 224 and 1267 [3a]; Hadronic J. 1, 574 (1978) [3b] (1978);
Phys. Rev. D20, 555 (1979) [3c]; Foundation of Theoretical Mechanics, Vol. 1 (1978)
and 2 (1983), Springer–Verlag, Heidelberg–New York (1983) [3d]; Algebras, Groups and
Geometries 10, 273 (1993) [3e]; Rendiconti Circolo Matematico Palermo, Suppl. 42, 7
(1996) [3f]; ”Relativistic hadronic mechanics: Nonunitary, Axiom-preserving comple-
tion of relativistic quantum mechanics, Found. Phys. bf 27 (1997), in press

[4] R.M.Santilli, Nuovo Cimento Lett. 37, 545 (1983) [4a]; Hadronic J. 8, 25 and 36 (1985)
[4b]; Jinr Rapid Comm. 6, 24 (1993) [4c]; J. Moscow Phys. Soc. 3, 255 (1993) [4d];
Chinese J. Syst. Eng. & Electr. 6, 177 (1996) [4e]; Lett. Nuovo Cimento 3, 509, (1983)
[4f]; Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Vol. 1 [4g] and 2 [4h], Second edition (1995), and
Vol. 3 [4i], in preparation, Ukraine Academyu of Sciences, Kiev (1995).

[5] R.M.Santilli, Comm. Theor. Phys. 3, 153 (1994) [5a]; Hadronic J. 17, 257 (1994) [5b];
Hyperﬁne Interaction, in press. [5c]; in New Frontiers of Hadronic Mechanics, T.L.Gill,
Editor, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL (1996) [5d]; ”Classical isodual theory of an-
timatter”, submitted for publkication [5e]

[6] A.K. Aringazin, A.Jannussis, D.F.Lopez, M.Nishioka and B.Veljanosky, Santilli’s Lie–
Isotopic Generalization of Galilei’s Relativities (1990), Kostarakis Publisher, Athens,
Greece [6a]; J.V.Kadeisvili, Santilli’s Isotopies of contemporary Algebras, Geometries

45

and Relativities, Hadronic Press, FL (1991), Second Edition, Ukraine Academy of Sci-
ences, Kiev, in press [6b]; D.S.Sourlas and G.T.Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations of the
Lie–Santilli Theory, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1993) [6c]; J.Lohmus, E.Paal
and L.Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras in Physics, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL,
USA (1994) [6d]; D.M.Norris et al, Tomber’s Bibliography and Index in Nonassociative
Algebras, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL (1984) [6e]

[7] J.V.Kadeisvili, Math. Methods in Applied Sciences, 19, 362 (1996) [7a]; S.Okubo,
Hadronic J. 5, 1667 (1982) [7b]; R.Mignani, Nuovo Cimento Lett. 39, 413 (19884) [7c];
A.Jannussis, R.Mignani and D.Skaltsas Physica A 187, 575 (1992) [7d]; A.O.E.Animalu,
Adronic J. 17, 349 (1995) [7e]; A.Jannussis, M.Mijatovic and B.Veljanowski, Physics
Essays 4, 202 (1991) [7f]; D.Rapoport–Campodonico, Algebras, Groups and Geometries
8, 1 (1991) [7g]; M.Nishioka, Nuovo Cimento 82A, 351 (1984) [7h]; G.Eder, Hadronic J.
4, 634 (1981) and 5, 750 (1982) [7i]; R.Mignani, Phys. Essays 4, 531 (1992) [7k];
M.Gasperini, Hadronic J. 6, 935 and 1462 (1993) ]7l], D. Constantoupoulos and C.
N. Ktorides, J. Phys. A bf 17, L29 (1984) [7m]; 7, 650 and 951 (1984) [7n]; A.Jannussis,
G.Brodimas and R.Mignani J. Phys. A24, L775 (1991) [7o]; J.V.Kadeisvili, Algebras,
Groups and Geometries 9, 283 and 319 (1992) [7p]; Gr.T.Tsagas and D.S.Sourlas, Al-
gebras, Groups and Geometries 12, 1 (1995) [7q]; A.K.Aringazin, Hadronic J. 12, 71
(1989), and in Frontiers of Fundamental Physics, M.Barone and F.Selleri, Edditors,
Plenum, New York (1995) [7r]; J. Ellis, it Proceedings of the VII M. Grossmann Meet-
ing on General Relativity, R. T. Jantzen, G. Mac Kaiser and R. Ruﬃnni, Editors, World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996), p. 755 [7s]; Ellis, N.E.Mavromatos and D.V.Nanopoulos in
Proceedings of the Erice Summer School, 31st Course: From Superstrings to the Ori-
gin of Space–Time, World Scientiﬁc (1996) [7t]; M. Battler, M. MacBee, S. Smith,
http://home1.gte.net/ibr/ [7u]

[8] R.M.Santilli, in Proceedings of the VII M. Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity, R.
T. Jantzen, G. Mac Kaiser and R. Ruﬃnni, Editors, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996),
p. 500 [8a]; in Gravity, Particles and Space–Time, P. Pronin and G. Sardanashvily, Ed-
itors, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1995), p. 369 [8b]; Comm. Theor. Phys. 4, 1 (1995)
[8c]; R.M.Santilli, Comm. Theor. Phys. 3, 47 (1994) [8d]

[9] R. M. Santilli ”Isominkowskian geometry and its isodual”, to appear

[10] L. P. Horwitz and R. M. Santilli, ”Isotopic grand uniﬁcation with the inclusion of grav-

ity”, to appear

46

[11] D.Lovelock and H.Rund, Tensors, Diﬀerential Forms and Variational Principles, J. Wi-

ley, New York [75]

[12] M.J.G.Veltman, in Methods in Field Theory, R. Ballan and J. Zinn–Justin, Editors,
North–Holland, Amsterdam (1976) [12a]; C.J.Isham, R.Penrose and D.W.Sciama, Edi-
tors, Quantum Gravity 2, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1981) [12b]; Proceedings of
the VII M. Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity, R. T. Jantzen, G. Mac Kaiser
and R. Ruﬃnni, Editors, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996) [12c];

[13] D.F. Lopez, Hadronic J. 16, 429 (1993) [13a]; A. Jannussis, R. Mignani and R.M. San-
tilli, Ann. Fond. L. de Broglie 18, 371 (1993) [13b]; A. Jannussis and D. Skaltsas, Ann.
Fond. L. de Broglie 18, 275 (1993) [13c]; D. Schuch, Phys. Rev. A 55 (1997), in press
[13d].

[14] A.Einstein, B.Podolsky and N.Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935) [14a]; D.Bohm, Quan-
tum Theory, Dover Publications, New York (1979) [14b]; J.Von Neumann, The Math-
ematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N. J.
(1955) [14c]; J.S. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1965) [14d]

[15] A.Enders and G.Nimitz, J. Phys. France 2, 1693 (1992) [15a]; A.M.Steuimnberg,
P.C.Kwait and R.Y.Chiaoo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2421 (1992) [15b]; F.Mirabel and
F.Rodriguez, Nature 371, 464 (1994) [15c]; J.Tingay et al., Nature 374, 141 (1995)
[15d]; D.Baylin et al.,IAU Comm. 6173 (1995) [15e]; W.A.Rodrigues, jr, and J.–Yu Lu,
”On the existence of undistorted progressive waves of arbitrary speed”, Found. Phys.,
to apper [15f].

47

