ICRC97 , Pre-conference Workshop

POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF LORENTZ SYMMETRY
VIOLATION ON THE INTERACTION PROPERTIES
OF VERY HIGH-ENERGY COSMIC RAYS

L. Gonzalez-Mestres1,2
1Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France
2Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

ABSTRACT
Special relativity has been tested at low energy with great accuracy, but these results cannot be extrap-
olated to the very high-energy region. Introducing a critical distance scale, a , below 10−25 cm (the
wavelength scale of the highest-energy observed cosmic rays) allows to consider models, compatible
with standard tests of special relativity, where a small violation of Lorentz symmetry (a can, for in-
stance, be the Planck length ≈ 10−33 cm) produces dramatic effects on the interaction properties of
very high-energy particles. Lorentz symmetry violation may potentially solve all the basic problems
raised by the highest-energy cosmic rays (origin and energy, propagation...). Furthermore, superlu-
minal sectors of matter may exist and release very high-energy ordinary particles or directly produce
very high-energy cosmic-ray events with unambiguous signatures in very large detectors. We discuss
these phenomena, as well as the cosmic-ray energy range (well below the energy scale associated to
the fundamental length) and experiments where they could be detected and studied.

LORENTZ SYMMETRY VIOLATION BY NONLOCAL DYNAMICS
It is a common prejudice that Lorentz invariance may cease to be valid at Planck energy, but the con-
sequences of this possibility for physics at lower energy scales remain basically unexplored. Contrary
to superﬁcial appearance, such a phenomenon would indeed play a crucial role at energies well below
Planck scale. In particular, important observable effects can be predicted at the energy scale of the
highest-energy cosmic rays. In previous papers (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b), we suggested
that, as a consequence of nonlocal dynamics at Planck scale or at some other fundamental length
scale, Lorentz symmetry violation can result in a modiﬁcation of the equation relating energy and
momentum which would write in the vacuum rest frame:

E = (2p )−1 h c a−1 e (k a)

where E is the energy of the particle, h the Planck constant, c the speed of light, a the fundamen-
tal length scale, k the wave vector modulus and [e (k a)]2 is a convex function of (k a)2 obtained
from nonlocal vacuum dynamics. Rather generally, we ﬁnd that, at wave vector scales below the
inverse of the fundamental length scale, Lorentz symmetry violation in relativistic kinematics can be
parameterized writing:

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2 − a

(k a)4 + (2p a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

where a

is a positive constant between 10−1 and 10−2 . At high energy, we can write:

e (k a) ≃ k a [1 − a

(k a)2/2] + 2 p 2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2

and, in any case, we expect observable kinematical effects when the term a (ka)3/2 becomes as large
as the term 2 p 2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 . For a proton at E ≈ 1020 eV and with a ≈ 10−33 cm , one would
have:

(k a)2/2 ≈ 10−18 ≫ 2 p 2 h−2 k−2 m2 c2 ≈ 10−22

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

7
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
6
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

a
so that, although a (ka) /2 is indeed very small as compared to the value of e (k a) , the term
2 p 2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 represents an even smaller fraction of this quantity. We therefore expect cor-
rections to relativistic kinematics to play a crucial role at the highest cosmic ray energies, well below
the energy scale associated to the inverse of the fundamental length. In what follows, we make the
crucial assumption that the earth is moving slowly with respect to the vacuum rest frame.

CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEW KINEMATICS
Particles at the wavelentgth scale of the highest-energy cosmic rays would be sensitive to the new
kinematics. If a were negative, all particles would become unstable at these energies, more precisely
at energies above E ≈ (2p )−1/2 a −1/4 (m c3 h a−1)1/2 . For instance, if c and a had universal
values for all particles and a were negative, and taking a ≈ 10−33 cm , a proton with energy above
≈ 1019 eV would decay into a proton of lower energy and one or several photons, or into a neutron
or a proton plus pions, or by emitting particle-antiparticle pairs. Similar considerations would apply
to electrons above ≈ 1017 eV . The unstability of very high-energy particles would not disappear
if the value of a
, although negative, were not universal. Any very high-energy particle with a < 0
could always decay by emitting its own particle-antiparticle pairs, even if c were not universal (in
this Section, we naturally assume the breaking of the universality of c to be a rather small effect).
With a = 0 , some very high-energy particles would be unstable if c were not universal whereas
others would remain stable (Coleman and Glashow, 1997); but, if a
6= 0 , new mechanisms arise
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b) which compete with that considered by Coleman and Glashow
and, due the wavelength dependence of nonlocal effects, dominate over the Coleman-Glashow (CG)
mechanism at high enough energy. With a > 0 for all particles, the effect of the term − a
(k a)2/2
dominates over the CG mechanism at very high energy, even if the value of a

is not universal.

If c and a

have universal values, and a

is positive, and taking the Planck length to be the

fundamental distance scale, the following new effects arise:

a) The Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoff on very high-energy cosmic protons and nuclei
(Greisen, 1966; Zatsepin and Kuzmin, 1966) does no longer apply (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and
1997b). Very high-energy cosmic rays originating from most of the presently observable Universe
can reach the earth and generate the highest-energy detected events.

b) Unstable particles with at least two massive particles in the ﬁnal state of all their decay chan-
nels become stable at very high energy (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b). In any case, unstable
particles live longer than naively expected with exact Lorentz invariance and, at high enough en-
ergy, the effect becomes much stronger than previously estimated for nonlocal models (Anchordoqui,
Dova, G´omez Dumm and Lacentre, 1997) ignoring the small violation of relativistic kinematics.

c) The allowed ﬁnal-state phase space of two-body collisions is seriously modiﬁed at very high
energy, especially when, in the vacuum rest frame where expressions (1) - (3) apply, a very high-
energy particle collides with a low-energy target (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c). Energy conservation
reduces the ﬁnal-state phase space at very high energy and can lead to a sharp fall of cross sections
starting at incoming-particle wave vectors well below the inverse of the fundamental length.

d) In astrophysical processes, the new kinematics may inhibit phenomena such as GZK-like
cutoffs, photodisintegration of nuclei, decays, radiation emission under external forces, momentum
loss (which at very high energy does not imply deceleration) through collisions, production of lower-
energy secondaries... potentially solving all the basic problems raised by the highest-energy cos-
mic rays (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c). Due to the fall of cross sections, energy losses become much
weaker than expected with relativistic kinematics and astrophysical particles can be pushed to much
higher energies; similarly, they will be able to propagate to much longuer astrophysical distances,
and many more possible sources (in practically all the presently observable Universe) can be consid-
ered for very high-energy cosmic rays reaching the earth; as particle lifetimes are much longer, new
possibilities arise for the nature of these cosmic rays. The same considerations apply to nuclei.

e) If the new kinematics can explain the existence of ≈ 10

eV events, it also predicts that,
above some higher energy scale (around ≈ 1022 eV for a ≈ 10−33 cm), the fall of cross sections
will prevent the cosmic ray from depositing most of its energy in the atmosphere (Gonzalez-Mestres,
1997c). Such extremely-high energy particles will produce atypical events of apparently much lower
energy. New analysis of data and experimental designs are required to explore this possibility.

To be complete, our discussion must also consider situations where a

is positive, but its value is
not universal. This could be the case, for instance, if the composite character of nucleons and nuclei
prevents them from being described as ”elementary” single particles when deriving expressions like
(1) - (3). Due to the loss of Lorentz invariance, it is far from obvious how to extrapolate to Planck
scale the low-energy bound-state structure: the rest structure of the composite object will depend on
its speed with respect to the vacuum rest frame. The value of a may depend on this dynamics.

In a parton-like picture, we could be led to a ≈ 0.05 for quarks, leptons and gauge bosons,
≈ 0.01 for mesons, ≈ 0.005 for nucleons and ≈ 0.05 (3A)−2 for a nucleus with A nucleons. Such
a kinematics implies upper bounds on the allowed energy of a stable nucleon or nucleus (above some
energy, spontaneous emission of photons or electron-positron pairs is kinematically allowed). In this
case, with a ≈ 10−33 cm and assuming a universal value of c , cosmic ray events above ≈ 1019 eV
cannot be protons, and above ≈ 1020 eV they cannot be nuclei. It may be tempting to try to tune the
model in such a way that the maximum allowed energy for cosmic nuclei coincides with that of the
most energetic observed cosmic ray event (around 3.1020 eV ). Among the parameters of the ﬁt would
be the fundamental length a and, for each particle, the values of c and a
. A more unconventional
approach would be to attribute events above ≈ 1020 eV to other kinds of cosmic particles. For instance,
at E ≈ 1018 eV and with a ≈ 10−33 cm , a muon would have a lifetime ≈ 104 s according to standard
relativity; but, in the model we are considering, Lorentz symmetry violation would reduce the phase
space of its decay products at this energy scale, and more and more strongly as energy increases
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b). It is not excluded that, in very high astrophysical magnetic
ﬁelds, muons can live long enough to be pushed to ultra-high energies. Becoming very long-lived
with the help of Lorentz symmetry violation and keeping their energy with the help of the fall of
electromagnetic cross sections (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c), they may subsequently reach the earth.
When studying the event shape in detectors, it should also be kept in mind that, at such energies never
reached by accelerators, new interaction properties may develop.

In general, if a

is positive but does not have a universal value, precise numerical studies are
required for each speciﬁc scenario, but candidates to the highest-energy cosmic-ray events seem to
exist in most cases. It is remarkable that future experiments devoted to ultra-high energy cosmic
rays will indeed be able to test models involving Lorentz symmetry violation at Planck scale and
discriminate between different scenarios, using the shape and spectra of cosmic-ray events.

SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES
Superbradyons, i.e. superluminal particles with positive mass and energy and critical speed in vac-
uum ci ≫ c (c = speed of light), have been considered in previous papers (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996
and 1997d). They can be associated to new dynamical sectors where, for the i-th sector, a Lorentz
symmetry exists with critical speed parameter ci . Mixing between different dynamical sectors would
break these Lorentz invariances, including the ”ordinary” one (i.e.
that of standard relativity, with
critical speed parameter equal to c). Superluminal particles can have very large rest energies due to
the relation E = mc2
i (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996 and 1997d), and produce very high-energy ”ordi-
nary” cosmic rays through astrophysical processes, decays, collisions or ”Cherenkov” radiation in
vacuum (spontaneous emission of particles with lower critical speed). They can also reach the earth
and produce inelastic events in very large-volume detectors: then, due to energy and momentum con-
servation and to the relation E ≃ ci p ≫ cp , an incoming superluminal particle of energy E ,
momentum p and critical speed in vacuum ci would originate two very high-energy showers with

almost exactly equal energy and momentum, and almost exactly ”back-to-back” (Gonzalez-Mestres,
1996 and 1997d). The situation is similar for spontaneous ”Cherenkov” emission. Underground or
underwater very large-volume detectors would be able to unambiguously identify such events, even
at extremely low rate. But, for very high-energy events, a very well-suited ”large-volume” detector
would also be the AUGER observatory (AUGER Collaboration, 1997), which will most likely offer
the largest available target (the atmosphere over a uniquely large surface) and where unconventional
events will develop atypical cascade development proﬁles, again providing unambiguous signatures.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
Future experiments devoted to ultra-high energy cosmic rays will provide unique tests of possible
Lorentz symmetry violation at scales unaccessible to standard tests, and be sensitive to possible de-
partures from the Poincar´e relativity principle (Poincar´e, 1905) at very small distances. At least
two kinds of phenomena violating this principle deserve serious consideration: a) nonlocal effects at
Planck scale or at some other fundamental length scale; b) interaction with superluminal sectors of
matter. In the ﬁrst case, the behaviour of ”ordinary” particles will be modiﬁed. In the second case, we
can try to directly discover the superluminal particles. Contrary to general prejudice, a violation of
Lorentz symmetry at distance scale ≈ a does not require energies close to ≈ (2p )−1 h c a−1 to pro-
duce observable effects at leading level. Assuming c and a
(a > 0) to have universal values, cosmic
ray data suggest a to be in the range 10−35 cm < a < 10−30 cm (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c). Su-
perluminal particles can produce very high-energy events in very large-surface or very large-volume
detectors: future experiments should consider their possible existence. Very high-energy ”ordinary”
cosmic rays may also have been released by cosmic superluminal particles. Very high-energy inter-
actions (as measured in the vacuum rest frame) in astrophysical processes, as well as in cosmic-ray
propagation and in cosmic-ray detectors, are the key to possibly uncover and identify this new physics.

REFERENCES
Anchordoqui, L., Dova, M.T., G´omez Dumm, D. and Lacentre, P., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik C 73 , 465

(1997).

AUGER Collaboration, ”The Pierre Auger Observatory Design Report” (1997).
Coleman, S. and Glashow, S.L., ”Cosmic Ray and Neutrino Tests of Special Relativity”, paper

hep-ph/9703240 of LANL (Los Alamos) electronic archive (1997).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Physical and Cosmological Implications of a Possible Class of Particles Able
to Travel Faster than Light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference on High-Energy
Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL electronic archive (1996).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Vacuum Structure, Lorentz Symmetry and Superluminal Particles”, paper

physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive (1997a).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Absence of Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin Cutoff and Stability of Unstable Par-
ticles at Very High Energy, as a Consequence of Lorentz Symmetry Violation”, contribution HE
1.2.36 to the 25-th International Cosmic Ray Conference. Paper physics/9705031 of LANL elec-
tronic archive (1997b).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Symmetry Violation and Very High-Energy Cross Sections”, contri-
bution to the International Conference on Relativistic Physics and some of its Applications, Athens
June 1997 . Paper physics/9706022 of LANL electronic archive (1997c).

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Superluminal Particles and High-Energy Cosmic Rays”, contribution HE
1.2.35 to the 25-th International Cosmic Ray Conference. Paper physics/9705032 of LANL elec-
tronic archive (1997d).

Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).
Kirzhnits, D.A., and Chechin, V.A., Soviet Journal of Nuclear Physics, 15 , 585 (1972).
Poincar´e, H., Speech at the St. Louis International Exposition of 1904 , The Monist 15 , 1 (1905).
Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).

