A solution of the measurement problem in quantum mechanics by

using a variable hidden in Newtonian mechanics∗

Jae-Hyung Myung

Universit¨at Hamburg,

Hamburg , Germany

22/03/1996

Abstract

The problem of a correct description of the physical phenomena of the Heisenberg uncertainty

relation is solved by using a variable hidden in Newtonian mechanics.

Keywords: Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) argument, uncertainty relation, measurement problem,

foundations of quantum mechanics, Newtonian mechanics, foundations of classical mechanics

7
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
6
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗revised version

1

1

Introduction

The aim of this work is to solve the measurement problem in quantum mechanics. Since the problem

was introduced by Einstein et al.(EPR)[1], although many eﬀorts have been devoted to the solution

of the problem, to date no conclusive solution has been found.

In quantum mechanics two physical quantities described by non-commuting operators cannot be si-

multaneously measured with perfect accuracy, and the relation between these two quantities can be

derived from a wave function. The problem put forward by EPR is that the description of physical

reality as given by the wave function is not complete. The most important part in the EPR paper

is the criteron of reality: ”If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty

(i.e., with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of

physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.” According to the EPR arguments quantum

mechanics is not a complete theory, since there is not the reality element. This criterion implies the

existence of an additional (hidden) variable.

Another important point in the paper is the problem of locality: ”Since at the time of measurement

the two systems no longer interact, no real change can take place in the second system in consequence

of anything that may be done to the ﬁrst system.” The EPR arguments of reality and locality were

developed into the local hidden variable theory in quantum mechanics [2-7]. According to the authors,

quantum mechanics needs a variable for a correct description at small distance.

The Bell theorem deduced from the locality assumptions was generalized [8-10] and experimentally

tested[11-15]. The weak inequalities are fully compartible with the experimental results, while the

strong inequalitites are violated [16]. The EPR arguments concerning the correct description of phys-

ical reality of the wave function are not reasonable, since the physical theories described by a wave

function are in good agreement with experiments.

EPR have not directly referred to the uncertainty relation in their paper. However, since one of the

authors, Einstein, has been against Bohr’s interpretation of the relation, in this paper we conﬁne the

measurement problem to the uncertainty relation. That is, we solve the problem of a correct de-

scription of the physical phenomena of the relation by making use of a variable hidden in Newtonian

mechanics. As we begin to see in next section, the hidden variable plays a crucial role in the solution

of the problem. In this case the hidden variable is a physical quantity that is omited from the object

of measurement, since the quantity is hidden in other quantities. That is, the variable in question is

2

a variable hidden in Newtonian mechanics.

A complete physical theory is in a precise (one-one) correspondence with the object that is being

described. However, a hidden variable makes a physical theory correspond to two objects. The uncer-

tainty relation describes the relation between momentum and position of a particle. If an unknown

variable is hidden in one of these two quantities, we need another physical theory to describe the

relation between the hidden variable and the complementary variable.

The uncertainty relation is a measurement theory of two quantities of a particle, and a kernel in the

measurement theory is interpretation. Whether we can simultaneously know two physical quantities

with perfect accuracy or not, depends only on the interpretation. Various measurement theories were

suggested by many authors[17]. The most exact of these theories is the principle of complementarity

of Bohr [18] and his interpretation. If we arrange matters so that a quantity in the relation is small,

another will be large. Thus, we can simultaneously measure these two quantities with limited accu-

racy. If any two quantities are proportional, the measurement processes are entirely diﬀerent from the

former situation. If we arrange matters so that a quantity is small, another will be also small. Thus,

we can simultaneously measure these two quantities with perfect accuracy. The variable hidden in

classical mechanics is proportional to another known variable. In this work we ﬁnd the hidden variable

and solve the measurement problem by using this variable.

This paper is organized as follows.

In section 2 it is shown that a variable hidden in Newtonian

mechanics plays a key role in the solution of the problem, and in section 3 the hidden variable (the

quantity of motion) is redeﬁned. In section 4 we solve the measurement problem in quantum mechanics

by using the new variable. Section 5 is devoted to conclusions.

2 The uncertainty relation and a variable hidden in Newtonian

mechanics

The uncertainty relation for a bound electron in an atom is given as

if n means the quantum number of the stationary state[19]. The relation (1) can be rewritten as

follows

(1)

(2)

△P △x ∼ nh,

△P △x ≥ h.

3

If we give up the knowledge of the stationary state, that is, if the electron is practically regarded as

free, the uncertainty relation is given as

△P △x ∼ h.

(3)

The relations (1)-(3) say: If we arrange matters so that △x is small, △P will be large. If we reduce

△P in some way, △x will be large. Therefore, we cannot simultaneously measure both momentum

and position with perfect accuracy. We consider the uncertainty relation (3) in this work. The relation

was conﬁrmed by experiment, for example, in the collision of particles in an accelerator. Therefore, we

are convinced that the relation completely and formally describes the physical phenomena (physical

reality) of a moving particle.

To solve the problem of a correct description of the physical phenomena of the relation by an approach

of the hidden variable theoy described in section 1, we must consider the relation and the quantities

in the relation conceptually. That is, we must ﬁnd the variable hidden in Newtonian mechanics. In

the relation, the concept of P is not clear. P (momentum) has two meanings, the quantity of motion

and the force of a moving body. Let us consider these two concepts separately.

If we consider P as the force of a moving particle, then the relation describes the physical phenomena

in the conceptional sense correctly, that is, the relation between force and position of a particle can be

described through the uncertainty relation (3). On the other hand, if we consider P as the quantity of

motion of a particle, then the relation does not describe the phenomena correctly, that is, the relation

between the quantity of motion and position of particle cannot be described through the uncertainty

relation, since the quantity of motion is proportional to the position. Therefore, the variable (the

quantity of motion) hidden in Newtonian mechanics plays a key role for the solution of the problem

of a correct description of the physical phenomena of the uncertainty relation. We must deﬁne the

concept of the quantity of motion to solve the problem exactly. This is done in next section.

3 New foundations of classical mechanics

We deﬁne the product of mass and velocity as momentum. The term momentum has two meanings, the

quantity of motion (’quantitus motus’) and impulse (’impetus’). The former originated from Descartes

[20] and Newton [21] and the latter from Leibnitz [22]. However, these two concepts represent diﬀerent

physical quantities.

4

The measure of the magnitude of the impulse (or force) of a moving body is magnitude of velocity,

while the measure of the quantity of motion is the path length covered by the body. That is, the

quantity of motion is proportional not to the magnitude of velocity but to the covered path length.

Motion is the variation of position in space. Therefore, the quantity of motion is proportional to the

quantity of the variation of position, which can be exactly expressed through the covered path length.

Thus, the quantity of motion Q is deﬁned as the product of mass m and the covered path length l.

The quantity of motion is a scalar quantity, since the covered path length is a scalar. The quantity

of motion Q of a body is described through an integral formula. If a body of mass m moves along a

path from position a to position b in the x-y coordinate system and dQ (=m dl) is the quantity of

inﬁnitesimal motion, then the quantity of motion of the body is given by

Q =

dQ = ml.

Z

The product of mass and velocity is a formal description of a moving body which exerts a force on

another body during a collision. Therefore, the product is deﬁned as the force or the momentum of

a moving body. The magnitude of the momentum P of a moving body is proportional to the rate of

change of the quantity of the motion Q:

P =

dQ
dt

.

The product of mass and acceleration is a formal description of an accelerating body which exerts

a force on another body during a collision. Therefore, the product is deﬁned as the force of an

accelerating body. The further work in classical mechanics is done in the appendix.

(4)

(5)

4 A solution of the measurement problem in quantum mechanics

In this section we solve the problem of a correct description of the physical phenomena of the un-

certainty relation by using the new variable Q. As was referred in section 2, the uncertainty relation

correctly describes the physical phenomena formally. However, the relation is not complete in the

conceptional sense because of the hidden variable Q. We need another theory describing the relation

between the quantity of motion Q and position x.

Let us consider the relation between two physical quantities △Q and △x of a particle according to

the new deﬁnition of the quantity of motion.

If a particle moves in the direction of x in the x-y

coordinate system, then we know from the motion of the wave form of the particle that the position

△x is proportional to the path length △l covered by the particle (see Fig.1) and from the deﬁnition

5

of Q, that △l is proportional to △Q. Consequently, these two proportional relations mean that △Q

is proportional to △x. That is, from the two relations △l = n△x and △Q = m△l, the relation

△Q = k△x(k = mn)

(6)

results. The proportional relation between △Q and △x means that △Q diﬀers from △x by a propor-

tional constant k. This fact says: If we arrange matters so that △x is small, △Q will be also small. If

we reduce △Q, △x will also be reduced. Therefore, if we know the position of a particle, then we can

also know accurately the quantity of motion of the particle and conversely, if we know the quantity

of motion of a particle, then we can also know accurately the position of the particle. In other words,

we can measure simultaneously two physical quantities, i.e., the quantity of motion and the position

of a particle with perfect accuracy. Hereafter we call the relation (6) the certainty relation.

The relation between two observables Q and x can be described through a commutation relation. We

regard the observable Q as a trivial operator. Two trivial operators Q and x then commute:

The uncertainty relation between △P and △x is a well established theory in the formal sense. In this

work we deduce the relation from the de Broglie relation to compare with relation (6) or (7). Let us

consider the de Broglie relation P λ = h. If we take the uncertainty △P (∼ P ) in momentum P, the

relation becomes

If we choose one wavelength as the uncertainty △x in position (locality condition), we can insert △x

instead of λ in the relation and obtain the uncertainty relation

The de Broglie relation thus implies the uncertainty relation between momentum and position of a

particle. If we arrange matters so that △P is small, △x(orλ) will be large. If we reduce △x(orλ) in

some way, △P will be large. Therefore, we cannot simultaneously measure monentum and position

(or wavelength) of a particle with perfect accuracy. The relation between two observables P and x is

also described through the commutation relation. The operator P does not commute with x:

where the operator P is given by

[Q, x] = 0.

△P λ ∼ h.

△P △x ∼ h.

[P, x] = i¯h,

P = i¯h

∂
∂x

.

6

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

The relation (9) or (10) is entirely diﬀerent from the relation (6) or (7). Therefore, the problem

of a correct description of the physical phenomena of the uncertainty relation is due not to the

incompleteness of quantum mechanics but to the variable Q hidden in Newtonian mechanics. That

is, although the uncertainty relation correctly describes the physical phenomena of a moving particle

formally, the relation is not complete in the conceptional sense because of the hidden variable Q. The

relation between the new variable Q and position x is given by the relations (6) and (7).

5 Conclusions

In the present work we conﬁned the measurement problem to the problem of a correct description of

the physical phenomena of the uncertainty relation and solved the problem. The uncertainty relation

is complete in the formal sense. However, if we consider the relation conceptually, the relation is

not complete because of the variable Q hidden in Newtonian mechanics. The quantity of motion Q

and momentum P are diﬀerent physical quantities. The relation between the quantity of motion and

position of a particle is described through the certainty relation, while the relation between momentum

and position of the particle is described through the uncertainty relation. From the locality condition

we see that quantum mechanics is a local theory.

Whether we can simultaneously measure two physical quantities with perfect accuracy or not, depends

only on the interpretation. If we arrange matters so that a quantity in the certainty relation is small,

another will be also small. Therefore, we can simultaneously measure two quantities in the relation

with perfect accuracy. On the other hand, if we reduce a quantity in the uncertainty relation in some

way, another will be large. Therefore, we cannot simultaneously measure two quantities in the relation

with perfect accuracy.

Acknowledgement

This work has been done as a part of dissertation at Universit¨at Hamburg. I will not submit this

paper to any physical journal because of the prejudice of editors.

A Three laws of motion in classical mechanics

According to the new deﬁnition of the quantity of motion, momentum and force, we formulate three

laws of motion in classical mechanics.

The magnitude of the momentum P of a moving body is proportional to the rate of change of the

7

quantity of the motion Q:

P:

motion

This relation is called the ﬁrst law of motion. The relation between momentum and force is given as

follows. The magnitude of the force F of an accelerating body is proportional to the rate of change of

The above relation is the second law of motion. This law is diﬀerent from the Newton’s second law,

since F in new mechanics is no external force. From the above both relations we get the equation of

(12)

(13)

(14)

When a body is accelerated by an external ﬁeld, the magnitude of the force of the accelerating body

is equal to that of the force that the ﬁeld exerts on the body. This is the third law of motion. The

law gives the equation of motion for a body moving in an external ﬁeld. This new mechanics can be

applied not only to microscopic systems, but also to macroscopic systems.

P =

dQ
dt

.

F =

dP
dt

.

F =

d2Q
dt2 .

8

References

[1] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935).

[2] D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166 (1952).

[3] D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 180 (1952).

[4] J.S. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1965).

[5] J.S. Bell, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38,447 (1966).

[6] D. Bohm and J. Bub, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 453 (1966).

[7] F.J. Belinfante, A Survey of Hidden Variables Theories (Pergamon press, Oxford, 1973).

[8] J.F. Clauser, M.A. Horne, A. Shimony and R.A. Holt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 880 (1969).

[9] J.F. Clauser and M.A. Horne, Phys. Rev. D, 10, 526 (1974).

[10] A. Garuccio and V. Rapisarda, Nuovo Cimento A, 269 (1981).

[11] S.J. Freedman and J.F. Clauser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 938 (1972).

[12] J.F. Clauser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 1223 (1976).

[13] J.F. Clauser, Nuovo Cimento B, 33, 740 (1976).

[14] A. Aspect, P. Grangier and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 460 (1981).

[15] W. Perrie, A.J. Ducan, H.J. Beyer and H. Kleinpoppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54,1790 (1985).

[16] D. Home and F. Selleri, La Rivista del Nuovo Cimento (1991).

[17] J.A. Wheeler and W.H. Zurek, Quantum theory and measurement (Princeton Uni.Press, Prince-

ton, 1983).

[18] N. Bohr, Phys.Rev. 48,696 (1935).

9

[19] W. Heisenberg, Physikalische Prinzip der Quantentheorie (Bibliographisches Institut, Mannheim,

[20] R. Descartes, Die Prinzipien der Philosophie (Felix Meiner, Hamburg,1982).

[21] I. Newton, The mathematical principles of natural philosophy (Philosophical Library, New York,

1958).

1964).

[22] G.W. Leibnitz, Specimen Dynamicum (Felix Meiner, Hamburg, 1982).

10

Figure caption

Fig.1 Wave motion of a particle. The covered path length △l is proportional
to the position △x, and the wavelength λ is equal to △x.

11

