7
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
6
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LORENTZ SYMMETRY VIOLATION
AND VERY HIGH-ENERGY CROSS SECTIONS

Luis GONZALEZ-MESTRES1

Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France
11 pl. Marcellin-Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
and
Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules
B.P. 110 , 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract

We discuss the implications of a recently proposed pattern of Lorentz symmetry
violation on very high-energy cross sections. As a consequence of the breaking of local
Lorentz invariance by the introduction of a fundamental length, a , the kinematics is
modiﬁed and the properties of ﬁnal states are fundamentally diﬀerent in collider-like
(two incoming particles with equal, opposite momenta with respect to the vacuum
rest frame) and ﬁxed-target (one of the incoming particles at rest with respect to the
vacuum rest frame) situations. In the ﬁrst case, the properties of the allowed ﬁnal
states are similar to relativistic kinematics, as long as the relevant wave vectors are
much smaller than the critical wave vector scale a−1 . But, if one of the incoming
particles is close to rest in the vacuum rest frame, energy conservation reduces the
ﬁnal-state phase space at very high energy and can lead to a sharp fall of cross sections
starting at incoming-particle wave vectors well below the inverse of the fundamental
length. Then, the Froissart bound may cease to be relevant, as total cross sections
seem to become much smaller than it would be allowed by local, Lorentz-invariant,
ﬁeld theory. Important experimental implications of the new scenario are found for
cosmic-ray astrophysics and for very high-energy cosmic rays reaching the earth.

1 Introduction

In two previous papers (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b), we suggested that, as a
consequence of nonlocal dynamics at Planck scale or at some other fundamental length
scale, Lorentz symmetry violation can result in a modiﬁcation of the equation relating
energy and momentum which would write in the vacuum rest frame:

E = (2π)−1 h c a−1 e (k a)

(1)

1E-mail: lgonzalz@vxcern.cern.ch

1

where E is the energy of the particle, h the Planck constant, c the speed of light, a a
fundamental length scale (that we can naturally identify with the Planck length, but other
choices of the fundamental distance scale are possible), k the wave vector modulus and
[e (k a)]2 is a convex function of (k a)2 obtained from nonlocal vacuum dynamics.

Rather generally, we ﬁnd that, at wave vector scales below the inverse of the fundamen-
tal length scale, Lorentz symmetry violation in relativistic kinematics can be parameterized
writing:

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2 − α (k a)4 + (2π a)2 h

−2 m2 c2]1/2

where α is a positive constant between 10−1 and 10−2 . At high energy, we can write:

e (k a) ≃ k a [1 − α (k a)2/2] + 2 π2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2

(2)

(3)

and, in any case, we expect observable kinematical eﬀects when the term α(ka)3/2 becomes
as large as the term 2 π2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 . Assuming that, apart form the value of the
mass, expression (2) is universal for all existing particles whose critical speed in vacuum is
equal to the speed of light in the Lorentz-invariant limit, we found three important efects:
a) The Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoﬀ on very high-energy cosmic protons and

nuclei (Greisen, 1966; Zatsepin and Kuzmin, 1966) does no longer apply.

b) Unstable particles with at least two massive particles in the ﬁnal state of all their

decay channels become stable at very high energy.

c) In any case, unstable particles live longer than naively expected with exact Lorentz
invariance and, at high enough energy, the eﬀect becomes much stronger than previously
estimated for nonlocal models (Anchordoqui, Dova, G´omez Dumm and Lacentre, 1997)
ignoring the small violation of relativistic kinematics.

Furthermore, velocity reaches its maximum at k ≈ (4π2 α−1/3)1/4 (m c h−1 a−1)1/2 .
Above this value, increase of momentum amounts to deceleration. In our ansatz, observable
eﬀects of local Lorentz invariance breaking arise, at leading level, well below the critical
wavelength scale a−1 due to the fact that, contrary to previous models (f.i. R´edei, 1967),
we directly apply non-locality to particle propagators and not only to the interaction
hamiltonian. In contrast with previous patterns (f.i. Blokhintsev, 1966), s−t−u kinematics
ceases to make sense and the motion of the global system with respect to the vacuum rest
frame plays a crucial role. The physics of elastic two-body scattering will depend on ﬁve
kinematical variables. Noncausal dispersion relations (Blokhintsev and Kolerov, 1964)
should be reconsidered, taking into account the departure from relativistic kinematics.

In this note, we would like to discuss another important consequence of the new kine-
matics, i.e. the appearence of strong limitations in the allowed phase space for ﬁnal states
of two-body collisions, especially when the target is moving slowly with respect to the vac-
uum rest frame. As in previous papers (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b), we assume
that c and α are universal constants for all particles under consideration.
If this were
not the case, our analysis would require modiﬁcations but other new physical phenomena
would equally emerge. Such an alternative will be discussed in a forthcoming paper.

2

2 The new kinematics

No special constraint seems to arise from (2) if, in the vacuum rest frame, two particles
with equal, opposite momenta of modulus p with α (k a)2 ≪ 1 collide to produce a
multiparticle ﬁnal state. When the term α (k a)2 p c/2 becomes ≈ m2 c2 p−1/2 or larger,
the new kinematics favours large momenta and allows for new ﬁnal-state phase space, as
compared to relativistic kinematics. But, as a consequence of Lorentz symmetry violation
(the required transformation would have relative speed v ≃ c), the situation becomes
fundamentally diﬀerent at very high energy if one of the incoming particles is close to rest
with respect to the ”absolute” frame where formulae (1) - (3) apply.

Assume a very high-energy particle (particle 1) with momentum ~p , impinging on a
particle at rest (particle 2) in the vacuum rest frame. We take both particles to have mass
m , and p ≫ mc . In relativistic kinematics, we would have elastic ﬁnal states where
particle 1 has, with respect to the direction of ~p , longitudinal momentum p1,L ≫ mc
and particle 2 has longitudinal momentum p2,L ≫ mc with p1,L + p2,L = p . A total
transverse energy ET ≃ mc2 would still be left for the outgoing particles. However, the
situation is drastically modiﬁed if the kinematics is given by expressions (1) - (3) and if
α (k a)2 p (k being the modulus of the wave vector of the incoming particle) becomes of
the same order as m c or larger. As the energy increases, stronger and stronger limitations
of the available ﬁnal-state phase space appear: with the approximation (3), the ﬁnal-state
conﬁguration p1,L = p − p2,L = (1 − λ) p becomes kinematically forbidden for
α (k a)2 p > 2 m c λ−1(1 − λ)−1/3 . Thus, for momenta above ≈ (m c a−2 h2)1/3 ,
”hard” interactions become severely limited by kinematical constraints.

L = p (g − 1) (gN − 1)−1 , gN ≫ 1 and p′

Similarly, with the same initial state, a multiperipheral ﬁnal state conﬁguration with N
particles (N > 2) of mass m and longitudinal momenta gi−1 p′
L (i = 1, ..., N , g > 1),
where p′
≫ m c , would have in standard rela-
L)−1 (1 − g−1)−1]
tivity an allowed total transverse energy ET (N , g) ≃ m c2 [1 − m c (2 p′
which is positive deﬁnite. Again, using the new kinematics and the approximation (3),
we ﬁnd that such a longitudinal ﬁnal state conﬁguration is forbidden for values of the
incoming momentum such that α (k a)2 p c > 2 (3 g)−1 (1 + g + g2) ET (N , g) .

L

The above, or similar, considerations apply to strong interactions as well as to electro-
magnetic processes. For the initial state conﬁguration where the target is at rest in the
vacuum rest frame, and compared to standard expectations based on relativistic kinemat-
ics, a sharp fall of elastic, multiparticle and total cross sections can be expected at very high
energy. For ”soft” strong interactions, the approach were the two-body total cross section
is the less sensitive to ﬁnal-state phase space is, in principle, that based on dual resonance
models and considering the imaginary part of the elastic amplitude as being dominated by
the shadow of the production of pairs of very heavy resonances of masses M1 and M2 of or-
der ≈ (p m c3/2)1/2 in the direct channel (Aurenche and Gonzalez-Mestres, 1978 and 1979).
But, even in this scenario, we ﬁnd important limitations to the allowed values of M1 and
M2 , and to the two-resonance phase space, when α (k a)2 p becomes ≈ m c or larger. In

3

all cases, the departure from the standard relativistic situation occurs, if the target is close
to rest in the vacuum rest frame, at incoming energies E above ≈ (m a−2 h2 c4)1/3 which
corresponds to a transition energy scale ≈ 1022 eV for m ≈ 1 GeV /c2 and a ≈ 10−33 cm ,
and ≈ 1021 eV if the target mass is ≈ 500 keV /c2 . Lowering the critical wave vector scale
a−1 to ≈ 1026 cm−1 (just above the wave vector scale of the highest-energy cosmic rays),
the fall of cross sections would start at E ≈ 1016 − 1017 eV , which seems excluded
by cosmic ray data if the earth is moving slowly with respect to the vacuum rest frame.
In astrophysical processes, the new kinematics may inhibit phenomena such as GZK-like
cutoﬀs, photodisintegration of nuclei, decays, radiation emission under external forces, mo-
mentum loss (which at very high energy does not imply deceleration) through collisions,
production of lower-energy secondaries... potentially solving the basic problems raised by
the highest-energy cosmic rays. Above E ≈ (m a−2 h2 c4)1/3 , nonlocal eﬀects play a cru-
cial role and invalidate considerations based on Lorentz invariance and local ﬁeld theory
used to derive the Froissart bound (Froissart, 1961), which seems not to be violated but
ceases to be signiﬁcant given the expected behaviour of total cross sections which, at very
high-energy, seem to fall far below this bound. An updated study of noncausal dispersion
relations, incorporating the new kinematics from nonlocal dynamics, can possibly lead new
bounds. As previously stressed (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a) , this apparent nonlocality may
actually reﬂect the existence of superluminal sectors of matter (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996)
where causality would hold at the superluminal level (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c).

1 and pi

1 ≫ pi

2 ≫ mc . Keeping a constant value of λ = pi

Other initial state conﬁgurations can be considered. We may have two incoming parti-
2 and opposite directions in the vacuum rest frame,
1)−1 , we ﬁnd that the fall
1 above ≈ λ1/2 a−1 h . The incoming momenta pi
1
2 may also be pointing in the same direction. Then, the ﬁnal-state phase space starts
1 ≈ λ−1/4 (m c h a−1)1/2 . A more complete discussion, including non-parallel

cles with momenta of moduli pi
and pi
of ﬁnal-state phase space occurs for pi
and pi
to fall at pi
incoming momenta and the case m = 0 , will be presented elsewhere.

2 (pi

3 Experimental considerations

Lorentz symmetry violation prevents naive extrapolations from reactions between two par-
ticles with equal, opposite momenta in the vacuum rest frame (similar to colliders) to re-
actions where the target is at rest in this frame (similar to cosmic-ray events). Assuming
the earth to move slowly with respect to the vacuum rest frame (for instance, if the ”abso-
lute” frame is close to that deﬁned by the requirement of cosmic microwave background
isotropy), the described kinematics predicts the existence of a maximum energy deposition
for high-energy cosmic rays in the atmosphere, in the rock or in a given underground or
underwater detector. Well below Planck energy, a very high-energy cosmic ray would not
necessarily deposit most of its energy in the atmosphere: its energy deposition decreases
for energies above a transition scale, far below the energy scale associated to the funda-

4

mental length. The maximum allowed momentum transfer in a single collision occurs at
an energy just below E ≈ (m a−2 h2 c4)1/3 . For E above ≈ (m a−2 h2 c4)1/3 , the
allowed longitudinal momentum transfer falls, typically, like p−2 (obtained diﬀerentiating
the term α k2 a2 p c/2). To set upper limits, we can take for m the mass of oxigen or
nitrogen in the case of air, oxigen in water, and heavier elements in the rock. At en-
ergies around ≈ (m a−2 h2 c4)1/3 , the cosmic ray will in our scenario undergo several
scatterings in the atmosphere and still lose there most of its energy, possibly leading to
unconventional longitudinal cascade development proﬁles that could be observed by very
large-surface air shower detectors like the AUGER observatory (AUGER Collaboration,
1997). Above E ≈ (m a−2 h2 c4)1/3 , it can indeed cross the atmosphere keeping most of
its momentum and energy and deposit its energy in the rock or in water, or possibly reach
and underground or underwater detector. Thus, some cosmic ray events of apparent en-
ergy far below 1020 eV (perhaps apparently muon or neutrino-like, or exotic-like), as seen
by earth-surface (e.g. air shower), underground or underwater detectors, may actually be
originated by extremely-high energy cosmic rays well above this energy scale.

Interesting constraints on the fundamental length a can be derived from this analysis,
assuming simultaneoulsy (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b) that the absence of GZK
cutoﬀ is due to the same pattern of Lorentz symmetry violation. The combined absence
of GZK cutoﬀ and existence of ≈ 1020 eV energy deposition from cosmic rays in the
atmosphere lead to a in the range 10−35 cm < a < 10−30 cm (energy scale between
1016 and 1021 GeV ). The lower bound comes from the requirement that the violation
of local Lorentz invariance at the fundamental length scale be able to inﬂuence particle
interactions at the 1019 − 1020 eV energy scale strongly enough to suppress the GZK
cutoﬀ. The upper bound is derived from the existence of events with ≈ 1020 eV energy
deposition in the atmosphere (Linsley, 1963; Lawrence, Reid and Watson, 1991; Afanasiev
et al., 1995; Bird et al., 1994; Yoshida et al., 1995).

Then, very high-energy accelerator and cosmic-ray experiments would indeed be com-
plementary research lines: the results of both kinds of experiments would not be equivalent
up to Lorentz tranformations. If the transition energy scale for cross-sections corresponds
1 c ≈ 1020 eV , a p − p collider at ≈ 700 T eV per beam could make possible direct
to pi
tests of Lorentz symmetry violation, comparing collisions at the accelerator with collisions
between a ≈ 1021 eV proton of cosmic origin and a proton or nucleus from the atmosphere.
Simultaneously, other kinds of tests may be possible through the lifetimes and decay prod-
ucts of very high-energy unstable particles (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a and 1997b) in the
cosmic-ray events producing the highest-energy secondaries. We would be confronted to a
new situation, contrary to previous expectations, if the cosmic rays at the highest possible
energies interact more and more weakly with matter because of kinematical constraints.
The existence of a maximum energy of events generated in the atmosphere would not cor-
respond to a maximum energy of incoming cosmic rays. Unconventional events originated
by such particles may have been erroneously interpreted as being associated to cosmic rays

5

of much lower energy. New analysis seem necessary, as well as new experimental designs
using perhaps in coincidence very large-surface detectors devoted to interactions in the
atmosphere with very large-volume underground or undewater detectors.

It is a pleasure to thank P. Espigat and other colleagues at LPC, Coll`ege de France,

Acknowledgement

for useful discussions.

References

Afanasiev, B.N. et al., Proc. of the 24th International Cosmic Ray Conference, Rome,
Italy, Vol. 2 , p. 756 (1995).
Anchordoqui, L., Dova, M.T., G´omez Dumm, D. and Lacentre, P., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik
C 73 , 465 (1997).
AUGER Collaboration, ”The Pierre Auger Observatory Design Report” (1997).
Aurenche, P. and Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Phys. Rev. D 18 , 2995 (1978).
Aurenche, P. and Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik C 1 , 307 (1979).
Bird, D.J. et al., Ap. J. 424 , 491 (1994).
Blokhintsev, D.I. and Kolerov, G.I., Nuovo Cimento 34 , 163 (1964).
Blokhintsev, D.I., Sov. Phys. Usp. 9 , 405 (1966).
Froissart, M., Phys. Rev. 123, 1053 (1961).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Physical and Cosmological Implications of a Possible Class of Parti-
cles Able to Travel Faster than Light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference on
High-Energy Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL (Los Alamos)
electronic archive (1996).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Vacuum Structure, Lorentz Symmetry and Superluminal Parti-
cles”, paper physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive (1997a).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Absence of Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin Cutoﬀ and Stability of Un-
stable Particles at Very High Energy, as a Consequence of Lorentz Symmetry Violation”,
paper physics/9705031 of LANL electronic archive (1997b).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Space, Time and Superluminal Particles”, paper physics/9702026
of LANL electronic archive (1997c).
Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).
Lawrence, M.A., Reid, R.J.O. and Watson, A.A., J. Phys. G , 17 , 773 (1991).
Linsley, J., Phys. Rev. Lett. 10 , 146 (1963).
R´edei, L.B., Phys. Rev. 162 , 1299 (1967).
Yoshida, S. et al., Proc. of the 24th International Cosmic Ray Conference, Rome, Italy,
Vol. 1 , p. 793 (1995).
Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).

6

