7
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
7
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS no.s 04.60.+n, 03.65.-w, 11.10.-z
Preprint IBR-TH-97-S-043, July 9, 1997
Contributed paper for the
WORKSHOP ON MODERN MODIFIED THEORIES OF
GRAVITATION AND COSMOLOGY
June 1997, Ben Gurion University, Beer Shiva, israel

ISOMINKOWSKIAN FORMULATION OF GRAVITY

Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research
P.O.Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
E-address ibr@gte.net; Web Site http://home1.gte.net/ibr

Abstract

We submit the viewpoint that, perhaps, some of the controversies in gravitation
occurred during this century are not due to insuﬃciencies of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations,
but rather to insuﬃciencies in the mathematics used for their treatment. For this pur-
pose we treat the same equations with the novel, broader isomathematics and related
isominkowskian geometry, and show an apparently ﬁnal resolution in favor of existing
relativities of controversies such as: the lack of invariance of the basic units of space
and time; lack of compatibility between gravitational and relativistic conservation laws;
lack of meaningful relativistic limit of gravitation; and others. However, an apparent
necessary condition for the resolution of these controversies is the abandonment of the
notion of curvature used in this century in favor of a conceptual and mathematical
broader notion. A number of intriguing implications and experimental veriﬁcations
are pointed out.

1. Introduction. One of the most majestic achievements of this century for mathemat-
ical beauty, axiomatic consistency and experimental veriﬁcations has been the special theory
of relativity (STR)1. By comparison, despite equally outstanding achievements, the general
theory of relativity (GTR)2 has remained aﬄicted by numerous problematic aspects at both
classical and quantum levels.

1

The view submitted in this note is that, perhaps, some of the controversies in gravitation
are not due to insuﬃciencies in current gravitational theories, but rather to insuﬃciencies in
their mathematical treatment.

More speciﬁcally, we argue that the contemporary mathematics (consisting of conven-
tional numbers and ﬁelds, vector and metric spaces, diﬀerential calculus and functional
analysis, etc.) has produced an outstanding physical consistency when applied to relativis-
tic theories, yet the same mathematics has produced unsettled problems when applied to
gravitation.

As a concrete example, the unit I = diag. ([1, 1, 1], 1) of the Minkowskian geometry
representing in a dimensionless form the basic units of space and time, is invariant under
the Poincar´e symmetry, as well known. By comparison, we have the following

Theorem 1(3t). The fundamental units of space and time are not invariant for all

geometries with non-null curvature.

In fact, the transition from the Minkowskian metric η = Diag(1, 1, 1, −1) to a (3+1)-
dimensional Riemannian metric g(x) is characterized by a noncanonical transformation x →
x′ = U × x, U × U t 6= I, for which (by ignoring the dash) g(x) = U × η × U t. Corresponding
theories of quantum gravity are then generally nonunitary when formulated on conventional
Hilbert spaces over conventional complex ﬁelds. The lack of the invariance of the basic units
then follows at both classical and operator levers form the very deﬁnition of noncanonical
and nonunitary transforms for all gravitational theories with curvature.

Theorem 1 implies rather serious ambiguities in the application of gravitational theories to
actual measurements, evidently because we cannot possibly have a physically valid measure,
say, of length, via a stationary meter varying in time. The hope that the problem is resolved
by the joint change of the entire environment does not resolve the shortcoming because, e.g.,
the impasse remain for measures related to far away objects which, as such, are independent
from our local environment.

We here argue that Theorem 1 is a speciﬁc manifestation of the insuﬃciency of the
mathematics currently used for gravitation, because no corresponding shortcoming exists
for the ﬂat relativistic case.

We also argue that the shortcoming of Theorem 1 is at the foundation in a rather subtle
way with a number of controversies in gravitation existing in the literature. For instance,
as we shall see in this note, the achievement of a formulation of gravity with invariant basic
units will automatically provide a novel unambiguous operator formulation of gravity as
axiomatically consistent as relativistic quantum mechanics. After all, no axiomatically con-
sistent operator theory of gravitation should be expected without the fundamental invariance
of the basic units.

Since there is no conceivable possibility of achieving a formulation of gravitation with

2

invariant units based on conventional mathematics, our basic assumption is the use of a
generalized mathematics which permits the preservation unchanged of Einstein’s ﬁeld equa-
tions and related experimental veriﬁcations while verifying the uncompromisable conditions
of invariant basic units of space and time.

The only known broader mathematics satisfying the above conditions is the novel iso-
mathematics, ﬁrst submitted by Santilli(3a) back in 1978, but which achieved suﬃcient oper-
ational maturity only recently in memoir(3f ), and which includes: new nmumbers and ﬁelds,
new vector and metric spaces, new algebras and geometries, etc.(an outline is also available
in Page 18 of Web Site [4u]).

The isotopies are nowadays referred to maps (also called liftings) of any given linear,
local-diﬀerential, and canonical or unitary theory into its most general known nonlinear,
nonlocal-integral and noncanonical or nonunitary extensions, which are nevertheless capa-
ble of reconstructing linearity, locality and canonicity or unitarity on certain generalized
isospaces over generalized isoﬁelds.

The new geometry capable of yielding the invariance of the basic unit is the isominkowskian
geometry ﬁrst submitted by Santilli(3h) in 1983, but which also reached operational maturity
only recently following the advances of the preceding memoir(3f ). The isominkowskian geom-
etry was originally submitted for the most general possible realization of the Minkowskian
axioms, but only recently has been understood(3u) also to embody jointly all the machinery
of the Riemannian geometry, such as connections, covariant derivatives, etc., although ex-
pressed in a generalized way. In particular, the isominkowskian ’geometry admits all possible
Riemannian metrics for exterior gravitational models in vacuum, as well as their extensions
for interior gravitational models with a well behaved but otherwise unrestricted dependence
on the velocities and other interior variables.

The isominkowskian geometry therefore appears to be ideally suited for our objective.
In fact, on one side it can preserve Einstein’s (or any other) ﬁeld equations, although for-
mulated within the context of a broader mathematics, while achieving the uncompromisable
invariance of the basic units of space and time.

The isotopies of classical and quantum mechanics were also submitted by Santilli(3a) back
in 1978, but they too reached suﬃcient maturity only recently in memoir(3f ) for the classical
proﬁle, memoir(3t) for the operator proﬁle and memoir(3v) for applications and experimental
veriﬁcations.

The delay in the achievement of operational maturity was due to the lack of invariance of
preceding studies for reasons that escaped identiﬁcation for years, and which resulted to rest
where one would expect them the least, the use of the ordinary diﬀerential calculus under
isotopies. Once the isotopic lifting of the diﬀerential calculus was identiﬁed in memoir(3f ),
all other problems of axiomatic consistency were easily solved, by reaching a generalized
mathematics which yields the invariance of the units of space and time while being ”directly
universal”, that is, applicable to all well behaved, signature preserving broadening of a given

3

theory, such as the Minkowskian geometry (universality), directly in the ﬁxed inertial frame
of the observer (direct universality).

In summary, the novel isomathematics applies for the reformulation of all possible non-
canonical or nonunitary theories while achieving the uncompromisable invariance of the basic
units of space and time.

2. Isominkowskian geometry. The fundamental isotopy for relativistic theories is the
lifting of the unit of conventional theories, the unit I = diag. ([1, 1, 1], 1) of the Minkowski
space and of the Poincar´eı symmetry, into a well behaved, nowhere singular, Hermitean and
positive–deﬁnite 4 × 4-dimensional matrix ˆI whose elements have an arbitrary dependence
on local quantities and, therefore, can depend on the space–time coordinates x and other
needed variables, I → ˆI = ˆI(x, ...) > 0.

The conventional associative product A × B among generic quantities A, B is jointly

lifted by the inverse amount, A × B → A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B, ˆI = ˆT −1.

Under these assumptions ˆI is the (left and right) generalized unit of the new theory,
ˆI ˆ×A = A ˆ× ˆI ≡ A, ∀A, in which case (only) ˆI is called the isounit and ˆT is called the isotopic
element.

For consistency, the totality of the original theory must be reconstructed to admit ˆI as
the correct (left and right) unit. This implies the isotopies of numbers, angles, ﬁelds, spaces,
diﬀerential calculus, functional analysis, geometries, algebras, symmetries, etc. (see ref.(3f )
for a recent account).

We now study the possible application of the above isotopies to exterior gravitation in
vacuum for which the dependence of the isounit is restricted to the x-dependence only. Let
M(x, η, R) be the Minkowski space with space–time coordinates x = {xµ} = {r, x4}, x4 = c0t
(where c0 is the speed of light in vacuum), and metric η = diag.(1, 1, 1, −1) over the reals
R = R(n, +, ×). Let ℜ(x, g(x), R) be a (3 + 1)–dimensional Riemannian space with nowhere
singular and symmetric metric g = gt = U × η × U t.

The regaining of the invariance of the basic units is then permitted by assuming as basic
isounit of the gravitational theory theory the quantity ˆI = U × U t = ˆI t > 0 with explicit
form derivable form a Riemannian metric via the isominkowskian factorization(3o,3p)

g(x) = ˆT (x) × η, ˆI(x) = [T (x)]−1 = U × U t.

(1)

As an example, for the case of the celebrated Schwarzschild’s metric(2d), we have U ×U t =
ˆI = Diag.((1 − M/r), (1 − M/r), (1 − M/r), (1 − M/r)−1) and similarly for other metrics.
It should however be indicated that a better representation of the Schwarzschild metric is
that in isotropic coordinates(2f ) which requires a nondiagonal isounit.

4

We note however that ˆI is always positive-deﬁnite, assured by the locally Minkowskian
character of Riemann. For simplicity but without loss of generality, the isounit can therefore
be assumed herein as being diagonal.

An inspection of gravitational theories with conventional Riemannian metrics g(x) =
ˆT (x) × η yet referred to the generalized unit ˆI = ˆT −1 reveals that its axiomatic structure is
that of the isotopies of the Minkowski space(3h) which are characterized by the dual lifting
of η into ˆη = ˆT × η and I into ˆI = ˆT −1. In fact, the isotopies of Riemannian spaces(3r) are
characterized by the diﬀerent dual lifting of g(x) into ˆg = ˆT × g and of I into ˆI = ˆT −1.

The main diﬀerence is that in the former case the entire functional dependence of the
metric is absorbed in the isounit, while this is not the case for the latter case. As we shall
see, the invariance of the basic unit is reached in the former but not in the latter case.

The studies of gravitational theories of type (1) must therefore be conducted within the
context of the isotopies of the special relativity, also called isospecial relativity, ﬁrst submitted
by Santilli(3h) in 1983 and then studied in a variety of works at both classical and operator
levels (see Ref.(3r,3s) for a review of the studied up to 1995 and ref.(3t) for studies following
the advent of the isodiﬀerential calculus of memoir(3f )).

To construct the isospecial relativity we ﬁrst need the lifting of numbers and ﬁelds(3g).
For this we note that the conventional multiplicative unit I is lifted into the isounit, I →
U × 1 × U t = ˆI while the additive unit 0 remains unchanged, 0 → ˆ0 = U × 0 × U t = 0. The
numbers are lifted into the so–called isonumbers, n → ˆn = U × n × U t = n × ˆI with lifting
of the product n × m → ˆn ˆ× ˆm = ˆn × ˆT × ˆm, ˆT = ˆI −1.

The original ﬁeld R = R(n, +, ×) is then lifted into the isoﬁeld(3g) ˆR = ˆR(ˆn, ˆ+. ˆ×) for
It is easy to see that ˆR is locally isomorphic to R by
which all operations are isotopic.
construction and, thus, the lifting R → ˆR is an isotopy. Despite its simplicity, the lifting is
not trivial, e.g., because the notion of primes and other properties of number theory depend
on the assumed unit. For further aspects we refer to(5r) which also includes the isotopies of
angles and functions analysis. Note for later needs the identity, ˆn ˆ×A ≡ n × A.

Next, we need the lifting of the space M into the isominkowskian space(3h) ˆM = ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR)
ﬁrst proposed by Santilli in Ref.3h which is characterized by the isocoordinates x → ˆx =
U × x × U t = x × ˆI, and isometric η → ˆη(x) = U × η × U t ≡ g(x) although, for consistency,
the latter must be deﬁned on ˆR, thus having the structure ˆN = ( ˆNµν) = ˆη × ˆI = (ˆηµν) × ˆI.
The conventional interval on M is then lifted into the isointerval on ˆM over ˆR4h

(ˆx − ˆy)ˆ2 = (ˆx − ˆy)µ ˆ× ˆNµν ˆ×(ˆx − ˆy)ν = [(x − y)µ × ˆηµν × (x − y)ν] × ˆI =

= [(x1 − y1) × ˆT11 × (x1 − y1) + (x2 − y2) × T22 × (x2 − y2) +

5

+(x3 − y3) × T33 × (x3 − y3) − (x4 − y4) × T44 × (x4 − y4) × ˆI.

(2)

As one can see, the above interval coincides with the conventional Riemannian interval

by conception, except for the factor ˆI.

It is instructive to prove that the isoinvariant can also be obtained from the basic non-
canonical transform according to the rule ˆxˆ2 = U × x2 × U t = [(xt × U t) × (U t−1 × U −1) ×
η × (U × x)] × (U × U t) = ˆxt ˆ× ˆN ˆ×ˆx where ”t” stands for transpose. This construction also
clariﬁes that the coordinates x on M are lifted into the form U × x on ˆM.

It easy to see that ˆM is locally isomorphic to M and the lifting M → ˆM is also an isotopy.
In particular, the isospace ˆM is isoﬂat, i.e., it veriﬁes the axiom of ﬂatness in isospace over
the isoﬁelds, that is, when referred to the generalized unit ˆI, otherwise ˆM is evidently curved
owing to the dependence ˆη = ˆη(x) = g(x). In other words, assumptions (1) eliminate the
curvature in isospace while preserving the Riemannian metric. However, this is only the
result of a ﬁrst inspection of the novel isominkowskian spaces and deeper insights will soon
emerge. As we shall these broader views on gravitation appear to be essential to achieve a
theory with invariant basic units.

Note that ˆM and ˆR have the same isounit ˆI. The conventional Minkowskian setting
admitted by the isospecial relativity for ˆI = i is therefore that in which both, the minkowski
space and ]the base ﬁeld have the same unit I = diag. ([1, 1, 1],1), which implies a trivial
redeﬁnition of conventional ﬁelds hereon ignored.

Studies of isocontinuity properties on isospaces have been conducted by Kadeisvili(4r) and

those of the underlying novel isotopology by Tsagas and Sourlas(4s).

The isominkowskian geometry(3r,3u) is the geometry of isospaces ˆM, and incorporates in
a symbiotic way both the Minkowskian and Riemannian geometries. In fact, it preserves
all geometric properties of the conventional Minkowskian geometry, including the light cone
and the maximal causal speed co (see below), while jointly incorporating the machinery of
the Riemannian geometry in an isotopic form. As such, it is ideally suited for our objectives.
It should be indicated that this author has studied until now the interior gravitational
problem via the isotopies of the Riemannian geometry. The use of the isominkowskian
geometry for the characterization of the exterior gravitational problem was brieﬂy indi-
cated in note(3o) and it is studied in more details in this work. Also, the main line of
the isominkowskian geometry inclusive of the machinery of the Riemannian geometry are
presented in this note for the ﬁrst time with detailed study in paper(3u)..

To outline the new geometry, one must know that, as indicated in Sect. 1, the use of the
ordinary diﬀerential calculus leads to inconsistencies under isotopies (e.g., lack of invariance)
because dependent on the assumption of the trivial unit 1 in a hidden way. The central tool
of the isominkowskian geometry is therefore the isodiﬀerential calculus on ˆM (ˆx, ˆν, ˆR), ﬁrst
introduced in(3g), which is characterized by the isodiﬀerentials, isoderivatives and related

6

ν × dxν, ˆdxµ = ˆT ν

properties ˆdxµ = ˆI µ
ν ×∂/∂xν , ˆ∂xµ/∂xν = δµ
ˆI µ

µ × ∂/∂xν , ˆ∂µ = ˆ∂/ ˆ∂xµ =
ν , ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµα× ˆ∂xα/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµν, ˆ∂xµ/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµα× ˆ∂xα/ ˆ∂xν = ˆηµν.
Note that the original axioms must be preserved for an isotopy. Thus, ’ the isodiﬀerential
calculus is isocommutative, i.e., commutative on ˆM over ˆR, ˆ∂α ˆ∂ β = ˆ∂β ˆ∂α. However, the
same isocalculus is not, in general, commutative in its projection on M over R.

µ × dxν, ˆ∂µ = ˆ∂/ ˆ∂xµ = ˆT ν

Note also the hidden isoquotient(3g)A/ˆB = (A/B) × ˆI and isoproduct ˆ∂ ˆ× ˆ∂. Thus, by
including the isoquotient, the quantity ˆ∂ ˆ∂ should be more rigorously written ˆ∂ ˆ× ˆ∂. This
results in an inessential ﬁnal multiplication of the expression considered -by ˆI and, as such,
it will be ignored hereon for simplicity.

The entire formalism of the Riemannian geometry can then be formulated on the isomin-
kowskian space via the isodiﬀerential calculus. This aspect is studied in details elsewhere(3t).
We here mention: isochristoﬀel’s symbols ˆΓαβγ = ˆ1
ˆ×( ˆ∂α ˆηβγ + ˆ∂γ ˆηαβ − ˆ∂β ˆηαγ)× ˆI, isocovariant
diﬀerential ˆD ˆX β = ˆd ˆX β + ˆΓβ
αµ ˆ× ˆX α,
isocurvature tensor ˆRβ

αγ ˆ× ˆX α ˆ× ˆdˆxγ, isocovariant derivative ˆX β
p δ ˆ×ˆΓp
αδ, etc.

|ˆµ = ˆ∂µ ˆX β + ˆΓβ

αγδ = ˆ∂β ˆΓβ

αγ − ˆ∂γ ˆΓβ

αγ − ˆΓβ

αδ + ˆΓβ

p γ ˆ×ˆΓp

2

The veriﬁcation, this time, of the Riemannian properties is shown by the fact that (under
ˆM over ˆR are
the assumed conditions) the isocovariant derivatives of all isometrics on
identically null, ˆηαβ|ˆγ ≡ 0, α, β, γ = 1, 2, 3, 4. This illustrates that the Ricci Lemma also
holds under the Minkowskian axioms.

A similar occurrence holds for all other properties, including the ﬁve identities of the
Riemannian geometry (where the ﬁrth is the forgotten Freud identity, as studied in details
elsewhere3u.

In summary, the study of the isominkowskian geometry reveals the emergence of the
new notion of isocurvature here introduced apparently for the ﬁrst time, here referred to the
redeﬁnition of curvature via the use of isomathematics based on rules (1).

3. Classical uniﬁcation of the special and general relativities. We are now
equipped to present, apparently for the ﬁrst time, the classical equations of our isominkowskian
formulation of gravity, here called isoeinstein equations on ˆMover ˆR, which can be written

ˆGµν = ˆRµν −

ˆ× ˆNµν × ˆR = ˆk ˆ×ˆτµν,

(3)

where ˆτµν is the source isotensor on ˆM , ˆ1

2 = 1

2 × ˆI, ˆNµν = ˆηµν × ˆI = gµν × ˆI, ˆk = k × ˆI

and k is the usual constant.

Despite apparent diﬀerences, it should be indicated that Eqs. (3) coincide numerically
with Einstein’s equations both in isospace as well as in their projection in ordinary spaces
for all diagonal Riemannian metrics.

ˆ1
2

7

The preservation in isospace of the numerical value of the conventional ﬁeld equations
stems from a general property of the isotopies of preserving all original numerical values (see
later on the preservation of the speed of light as the maximal causal speed on ˆM ). In fact,
the isoderivative ˆ∂µ = ˆT α
µ × ∂α deviates from the conventional derivative ∂µ by the isotopic
factor ˆT . But its numerical value must be referred to ˆI = ˆT −1, rather than I. This implies
the preservation in isospace of the original value of ∂µ and, consequently, of the original ﬁeld
equations.

For the case of the projection of in ordinary spaces, the isoequations are reducible to the
conventional equations multiplied by common isotopic factors which, as such, are inessential
and can be eliminated. In fact, the isochristoﬀel’s symbols deviate from the conventional
symbols by the same factor ˆT (again, because ˆη ≡ g), and the same happens with other
terms, except for possible redeﬁnition of the source when needed, thus preserving again the
conventional ﬁeld equations and related experimental veriﬁcations also in our space-time.

Note that the isominkowskian formulation of gravity permits a geometric uniﬁcation of
the special and general relativities into one single relativity, the isospecial relativity3s where
for ˆI = I = diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) we have the special and for ˆI = ˆI(x) = U × U t we have the
general. The invariance of the isounit is illustrated below.

4. Operator uniﬁcation of the special and general relativities. We now indi-
cate that the above classical uniﬁcation admit a step–by–step operator counterpart, called
operator isogravity (OIG), ﬁrst submitted by Santilli at the VII M. Grossmann Meeting on
General Relativity of 1993(30).

It should be indicated from the outset that OIG is structurally diﬀerent than the con-
ventional quantum gravity (QG)6 on numerous grounds, e.g., because OIG and QM have
diﬀerent units, Hilbert spaces, and ﬁelds. In particular, the word ”operator” in OIG is sug-
gested to keep in mind the diﬀerences with ”quantum” mechanics (as it should also be for
QG).

To identify the explicit form of OIG, we note that the original noncanonical transform
U × U t = ˆI 6= I is mapped into a nonunitary transform on a conventional Hilbert space
H over the complex ﬁeld C(c, +, ×). The isounit of the operator theory is therefore ˆI =
U × U † = ˆI †, ˆT = (U × U †)−1 = T † = ˆI −1, where the representation of gravity occurs as per
Eqs. (1). Then, OIG requires the isotopies of the totality of relativistic quantum mechanics
(RQM) resulting in a formulation known as relativistic hadronic mechanics (RHM)(3s,3t).

Besides the preceding isotopies R → ˆR and ˆM → ˆM, RHM is based on the lifting of the
Hilbert space H with states |Ψ >, |Φ >, ... and inner product < Φ|Ψ >∈ C(c, +, ×) into the
isohilbert space ˆH(4t) with isostetes | ˆΨ >= U × |Ψ >, | ˆΦ >= U × |Φ >, ..., isoinner product
< ˆΦ| ˆΨ > = U× < Φ|Ψ > ×U † =< ˆΦ| × ˆT × | ˆΨ > × ˆI deﬁned on the isoﬁeld ˆC(ˆc, ˆ+, ˆ×) with
isonormalization

< ˆΨ| × ˆT × | ˆΨ > = ˆI.

ˆ

ˆ

8

We then have the iso–four–momentum operator(3s,3t) pµ ˆ×| ˆΨ >= −ˆi ˆ× ˆ∂µ| ˆΨ >= −i × ˆT ν
µ ×
∂ν| ˆΨ >, with fundamental isocommutation rules [ˆxµ,ˆˆpν] = U × [xµ, pµ] × U † = ˆxµ × ˆT × ˆpν −
ˆpν × ˆT × ˆxµ = ˆi ˆ× ˆNµν. The (nonrelativistic) isoheisenberg’ equations(3b) and isoschroedinger
equations(3t,3u) can be written in terms of the isodiﬀerential calculus of ref.(3g)

ˆi ˆ× ˆdA/ ˆdt = i × ˆIt × dA/dt = [A,ˆH] = A × ˆTs × H − H × ˆTs × A, ˆI = ˆIs × ˜It,

ˆi ˆ× ˆ∂t| ˆΨ >= i × ˆIt × ∂t| ˆΨ >= H ˆ×| ˆΨ >=

= H × ˆTs × | ˆΨ >= ˆE ˆ×s| ˆΨ >= (E × ˆIs) × ˆTs × | ˆΨ >≡ E × | ˆΨ > .

(4)

Note that the ﬁnal numbers of the theory are conventional. We also have the lifting of
expectation values into the form ˆ<A ˆ> =< ˆΨ| × ˆT × A × ˆT × | ˆΨ > / < ˆΨ| × ˆT × | ˆΨ >, and the
compatible liftings of the remaining aspects of RQM(3t). In particular, ˆI is the fundamental
invariant of the isotheory, i ˆd ˆI/ ˆdt = ˆI ˆ×H − H ˆ× ˆI ≡ 0.

It is easy to prove that RHM preserves all conventional properties of RQM(4t). In partic-
ular: isohermiticity coincides with conventional Hermiticity, H † ≡ H † (all quantities which
are originally observables remain, therefore, so under isotopies); the isoeigenvalues of isoher-
mitean operators are isoreal (thus conventional because of the identity ˆE ˆ×| ˆΨ >≡ E × | ˆΨ >);
RHM is form invariant under isounitary transforms ˆU ˆ× ˆU † = ˆU † ˆ× ˆU = ˆI.
In fact, we
have the invariance of the isounit ˆI → ˆI ′ = ˆU ˆ× ˆI ˆ×hatU † ≡ ˆI, of the isoassociative prod-
uct ˆU ˆ×(A ˆ×B) ˆ× ˆU † = A′ ˆ×′; etc; and the same occurs for all other properties (including
causality). Note that nonunitary transforms on H can always be identically rewritten as
isounitary transforms on ˆH, U = ˆU × ˆT 1/2, U × U † ≡ ˆU ˆ× ˆU † = ˆU † ˆ× ˆU = ˆI, under which
RHM is invariant(3t).

It should be stressed that RHM is not a new theory, but merely a new realization of the
abstract axioms of RQM. In fact, RHM and RQM coincide at the abstract, realization–free
level where all distinctions are lost between I and ˆI, R and ˆR, M and ˆM , H and ˆH, etc. Yet,
RHM is inequivalent to RQM evidently because the two theories are related by a nonunitary
transform. Also, RHM is broader than RQM, it recovers the latter identically for ˆI = I and
can approximate the latter as close as desired for ˆI ≈ I.

On summary, the entire formulation of RHM of memoir(3s,3t) can be consistently special-

ized for the gravitational isounit ˆI(x) yielding the proposed OIG.

5. The Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry. An important property of the isominkowskian
formulation of gravity, which is lacking for conventional formulations, is that of admitting

9

a universal, classical and operator symmetry for all possible Riemannian formulations of
gravitation ﬁrst identiﬁed by Santilli(3h−3l) under the name of isopoincar´e symmetry ˆP (3.1),
and today called Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry(5,6), which results to be locally isomorphic
to the conventional symmetry P (3.1).

The isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) is the invariance of isointerval (2) and can be easly constructed
via the isotopies of Lie’s theory ﬁrst proposed by Santilli(3a,3d) via the lifting of universal
enveloping algebras, Lie algebras, Lie group, transformation and representation theories,
etc., and today called Lie-Santilli isotheory(5,6). The latter theory essentially consists in the
reconstruction of all branches of Lie’s theory for the generalized unit ˆI = [ ˆT ]−1. Since ˆI > 0,
one can see from the inception that the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is isomorphic to the
conventional one, ˆP (3.1) ≈ P (3.1) (see ref.(4t) for a recent accounts).

Note that all simple Lie algebras are known from cartan’s classiﬁcation. Therefore, the
Lie-Santilli isotheory cannit produce new Lie algebras, but only new realizations of known
Lie algebras of nonliinear, nonlocal and nonhamiltonian type.

Moreover, a primary function of the Lie-Santilli isotheory is that of reconstructing as
exact conventional space-time and internal symmetries when believed to be conventionally
broken. In particular, one of the primary functions of the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is
to establish that the abstract axioms of the conventional Poincar´e symmetry remnain exact
under nonlinear, nonlocal and nonhamiltonian interactions, evidently when properly treated.
In this section we shall show in particular that, contrary to a rather popular belief, the
rotational, Lorenzt and Poincar´e symmetry do indeed remain exact for all possible gravita-
tional models.

The operator version of the isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) is characterized by the conventional
generators and parameter only reformulated on isospaces over isoﬁelds X = {Xk} = {Mµν =
xµpν − xνp, pα} → ˆX = { ˆMµν = ˆxµ × ˆpν − ˆxν × ˆpµ, ˆpα}, k = 1, 2, ..., 10, µ, ν = 1, 2, 3, 4, and
w = {wk} = {(θ, v), a} ∈ R → ˆw = w × ˆI ∈ ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×). Since the generators of space-
time symmetries represents conventional total conservation laws, the preservation under
isotopies of conventional generators ensured ab initio the preservation for the isominkowskian
formulation of gravity of conventional total conservation laws.

The isotopies preserve the original connectivity properties(3r). The connected compo-
nent of ˆP (3.1) is then given by ˆP0(3.1) = S ˆO(3.1) ˆ× ˆT (3.1), where S ˆO(3.1) is the con-
nected Lorentz-Santilli isosymmetry ﬁrst submitted in Ref.(3h) and ˆT (3.1) is the group of
isotranslations3k. ˆP0(3.1) can be written via the isoexponentiation ˆeA = ˆI +A/1!+A ˆ×A/2!+
... = (eA× ˆT ) × ˆI characterized by the isotopic Poincar´e–Birkhoﬀ–Witt theorem(3a,3d,5) of the
underlying isoenveloping associative algebra

ˆP0(3.1) : ˆA( ˆw) = Πkˆei×X×w = (Πkei×X× ˆT ×w) × ˆI = ˜A(w) × ˆI.

(5)

10

Note the appearance of the gravitational isotopic element ˆT (x) in the exponent of the
group structure. This illustrates the nontriviality of the lifting and its nonlinear character,
as evidently necessary for any symmetry of gravitation. What is intriguing is that the
isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) recovers linearity on ˆM over ˆR, a property called isolinearity(3t).

Conventional linear transforms on M violate isolinearity on ˆM and must then be replaced
with the isotransforms ˆx′ = ˆA( ˆw) ˆ× ˆX = ˆA( ˆw) × ˆT (x) × ˆx which can be written from (5) for
computational purposes (only) ˆx′ = ˜A(w) × ˆx. The preservation of the original dimension
is ensured by the isotopic Baker–Campbell–Hausdorﬀ Theorem(3a,3d,5,6). Structure (5) then
forms a connected Lie–Santilli isogroup5 with laws ˆA( ˆw) ˆ× ˆA( ˆw′) = ˆA( ˆw′) ˆ× ˆA( ˆw) = ˆA( ˆw +
ˆw′), ˆA( ˆw) ˆ× ˆA(− ˆw) = ˆA(0) = ˆI(x) = [T (x)]−1.

As one can see, ˆP0(3.1) is noncanonical on M over R (e.g., because it does not preserve
the conventional unit I), but it is canonical on ˆM over ˆR, a property called isocanonicity
(because it leaves invariant by construction the isounit). This conﬁrms the achievement,
apparently for the ﬁrst time, of an operator theory of gravity verifying the fundamental
invariance of its unit. The invariance at the classical level is consequential.

One should be aware that a rather The use of the isodiﬀerential calculus on ˆM then

yields the Poincar´e-Santilli isoalgebra ˆp0(3.1)3k

[ ˆMµν,ˆ ˆMαβ] = i × (ˆηνα × ˆMµβ − ˆηµα × ˆMνβ − ˆηνβ × ˆMµα + ˆηµβ × ˆMαν),
[ ˆMµν, ˆpα] = i × (ˆηµα × ˆpν − ˆηνα × ˆpµ), [ˆpα,ˆˆpβ] = 0, ˆηµν = gµν(x),

(6)

where [A,ˆB] = A × ˆT (x) × B − B × ˆT (x) × A is the isoproduct (originally proposed in
(3b)), which does indeed satisfy the Lie axioms in isospace, as one can verify. Note the
appearance of the Riemannian metric ˆηµν = gµν(x), this time, as the ”structure functions”
ˆηµν of the isoalgebra3a,3d,5. Note also that the momentum components isocommute (while
they are notoriously non–commutative for QG). This conﬁrms the achievement of an isoﬂat
representation of gravity.

The local isomorphism ˆp0(3.1) ≈ p0(3.1) is ensured by the positive–deﬁniteness of ˆT . In
fact, the use of the generators in the form ˆM µ
ν = ˆxµ ˆ×pν − ˆxν ˆ×ˆpµ would yield conventional
structure constants under a generalized Lie product, as one can verify. The above local
isomorphism is suﬃcient, per se’, to guarantee the axiomatic consistency of OIG.

The isocasimir invariants of ˆp0(3.1) are simple isotopic images of the conventional ones
C 0 = ˆI = [ ˆT (x)]−1, C (2) = ˆpˆ2 = ˆpµ ˆ×ˆpµ = ˆηµν×ˆpµ ˆ×ˆpν, C (4) = ˆWµ ˆ× ˆW µ, ˆWµ =∈µαβπ ˆM αβ ˆ×ˆpπ.
¿From them, one can construct any needed gravitational relativistic equation, such as the
isodirac equation

(ˆγµ ˆ×ˆpµ + ˆi ˆ× ˆm) ˆ×| >= [ˆηµν(x) × ˆγµ(x) × ˆT (x) × ˆpν − i × m × ˆI(x)] × ˆT (x) × | >= 0,

11

{ˆγµ,ˆˆγν} = ˆγµ × ˆT × ˆγν + ˆγν × ˆT × ˆγµ = 2 × ˆηµν ≡ 2 × gµν, ˆγµ = ˆT 1/2

µµ × γµ × ˆI (no sum), (7)

where γµ are the conventional gammas and ˆγµ are the isogamma matrices. Note that the
anti-isocommutators of the isogamma matrices yield (twice) the Riemannian metric g(x),
thus conﬁrming the representation of Einstein’s (or other) gravitation in the structure of
Dirac’s equation. As an illustration, we have the Dirac–Schwarzschild equation given by
Eqs. (7) with ˆγk = (1 − 2M/r)−1/2 × γk × ˆI and ˆγ4 = (1 − 2M/r)1/2 × γ4 × ˆI, although, as
indicated in Sect. 1, the representation in isotropic coordinates and a nondiagonal isounit
would be preferable. Similarly one can construct the isogravitational version of all other
equations of RQM.

These equations are not a mere mathematical curiosity because they establish the com-
patibility of OIG with experimental data in particle physics in view of the much smaller
contribution of gravitational over electromagnetic, weak and strong contributions. Our uni-
ﬁcation of the special and general relativities is, therefore, compatible with experimental
evidence at both classical and operator levels.

The Poincar´e-Santilli isotransforms are given by:
1) Isorotations. The space components S ˆO(3), called isorotations(3i), can be computed
from isoexponentiations (5) with the explicit form in the (x,y)–plane (were we ignore again
the factorization of ˆI for simplicity)

x′ = x × cos( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3) − y × ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × sin( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3),

1
2

1
2

−

1
2

1
2

y′ = x × ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × sin( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3) + y × cos( ˆT

11 × ˆT

22 × θ3),

1
2

−

1
2

1
2

1
2

(8)

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

(see(3s) for general isorotations in all there Euler angles). Isotransforms (8) leave invariant
all ellipsoidical deformations x × ˆT11 × x + y × ˆT22 × y + z × ˆT33 × z = R of the sphere
x × x + y × y + z × z = r. Such ellipsoid become perfect spheres ˆrˆ2 = (ˆrt × ˆδ × ˆr) × ˆIs in
isoeuclidean spaces(3h,3r) ˆE(ˆr, ˆδ, ˆR), ˆr = {ˆrk} = {rk} × ˆIs, ˆδ = ˆTs × δ, δ = diag.(1, 1, 1), ˆTs =
diag.( ˆT11, ˆT22, ˆT33), ˆIs = ˆT −1

, called isospheres.

In fact, the deformation of the semi-axes 1k → ˆTkk while the related units are deformed
of the inverse amounts 1k → ˆT −1
kk preserves the perfect spheridicity (because the invariant in
isospace is (Length)2×(Unit)2). Note that this perfect sphericity in ˆE is the geometric origin
of the isomorphism ˆO(3) ≡ O(3), with consequential preservation of the exact rotational
symmetry for the space–components g(r) of all possible Riemannian metrics (becomes the
isogeodesics are perfect circles).

s

2) Isoboosts. The connected Lorebntz-Santilli isosymmetry S ˆO(3.1) is characterized

by the isorotations and the isoboosts(3h) which can be written in the (3, 4)–plane

12

x3′ = x3 × sinh( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × v) − x4 × ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × cosh( ˆT

33 × ˆT44 × v) =

−

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

= ˜γ × (x3 − ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × ˆβ × x4)

−

1
2

1
2

x4′ = −x3 × ˆT

33 × c−1

0 × ˆT

44 × sinh( ˆT

33 × ˆT44 × v) + x4 × cosh( ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × v) =

1
2

−

1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2

= ˜γ × (x4 − ˆT

33 × ˆT

44 × ˜β × x3)

1
2

−

1
2

˜β2 = vk × ˆTkk × vk/c0 × ˆT44 × c0,

˜γ = (1 − ˜β2)−

1

2 .

(9)

Note that the above isotransforms are formally similar to the Lorentz transforms, as
expected from their isotopic character. Isotransforms (9) characterize the light isocone((3s)),
i.e., the perfect cone in isospace ˆM . In a way similar to the isosphere, we have the deformation
of the light cone axes 1µ → ˆTµµ while the corresponding units are deformed of the inverse
amount 1µ → ˆT −1

µµ , thus preserving the perfect cone in isospace.

In particular, the isolight cone also has the conventional characteristic angle, as a neces-
sary condition for an isotopy (the proof of the latter property requires the use of isotrigono-
metric and isohyperbolic functions). Thus, the maximal causal speed in isominkowski space
is the conventional speed in vacuum c0. The identity of the light cone and isocones is the
geometric origin of the isomorphism S ˆO(3.1) ≈ SO(3.1) and, thus, of the exact validity of
the Lorentz symmetry for all possible Riemannian metrics g(x).

3) Isotranslations. The isotopies of translations can be written

x′ = (ˆei×ˆp×a) ˆ×ˆx = [x+ a×A(x)]× ˆI, ˆp′ = (ˆei×ˆp×a) ˆ×ˆp = ˆp, Aµ = ˆT 1/2

µµ + aα ×[ ˆT 1/2

µµ ,ˆˆpα]/1!+ .....
(10)

and they are also nonlinear, as expected.

4) Isoselftransforms.

which is absent in the conventional case.
is given by

Intriguingly, the isotopies identify one additional symmetry
It is here called isoselfscalar invariance and it

ˆI → ˆI ′ = n2 × ˆI, η → ˆη = n2 × η,

(11)

13

where n is an 11-th parameter, under which the interval remains invariant, ˆxˆ2 = (xµ × ˆT α
µ ) × ηαν × xν] × (n2 × ˆI).
ηαν × xν) × ˆI ≡ [xµ × (n−2 × ˆT α

Note that, even though n2 is factorizable, the corresponding isosymmetry is not trivial,
e.g., because n2 enters into the argument of the isolorentz transforms (9). Note also that the
isominkowskian representation of gravity is permitted precisely by the latter isoinvariance.
In fact, isoinvariance (11) holds also for the conventional Poincar´e symmetry, by introducing
the generalized unit at the foundation of the isominkowskian gravity.

µ ×

The same symmetry also holds for the isoinner product (whenever n does not depend
on the integration variable), < ˆΦ| × ˆT × | ˆΨ > × ˆI ≡< ˆΦ| × (n−2 × ˆT ) × | ˆΨ > ×(n2 × I).
Note ﬁnally that the latter symmetries have remained undetected throughout this century
because they required the prior discovery of new numbers, those with an arbitrary unit3g.

5) Isoinversions. The isodiscrete transforms(3i) are

π × x = (−r, x4), ˆτ ˆ×x = τ × x = (r, −x4), ˆπ = π × ˆI, ˆτ = τ × ˆI,

(12)

where π, τ are the conventional inversion operators. Despite their simplicity, the physical
implications of isoinversions are nontrivial because of the possibility of reconstructing as exact
discrete symmetries when believed to be broken, which is studied by embedding all symmetry
breaking terms in the isounit(3s)

The general Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is usually deﬁned as the 11-dimensional set
of isorotations, isoboosts, isotranslations, isoinversions, isoselftransforms and isoinversions.
The restricted Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is the general isosymmetry in which the isounit
is averaged into constants.

6. Inclusion of interior gravitation. The attentive reader may have noted that the
isotopies leave unrestricted the functional dependence of the isometric. Its sole dependence
on the coordinates is therefore a restriction which has been used so far for a representation
of exterior gravitation in vacuum.

In the general case we have isometrics with an unrestricted functional dependence, ˆη =
ˆT (x, v, Ψ, ∂Ψ, ...) × η, ˆT > 0, v = dx/dt, which, as such, can represent interior gravitation
problems with a well behaved but otherwise unrestricted nonlinearity in the velocities, wave
functions and their derivatives, as expected in realistic interior models, e.g., of neutron stars,
quasars, black holes and all that.

Note also that the isometric can also contain nonlocal–integral terms, e.g., representing
wave-overlappings(3s). Nevertheless, the theory veriﬁes the condition of locality in isospace,
called isolocality, because its topology is everywhere local except at the unit(3t,4r).

Note that the addition of interior gravitational problems occurs without altering the
axioms of the exterior problem in vacuum, yet gaining an arbitrary functional dependence

14

for more realistic treatments of interior conditions. This evidently permits a geometric
uniﬁcation of exterior and interior gravitational problems which are solely diﬀerentiated by
the functional dependence of the isounits.

A ﬁrst illustration of the extension of the exterior axioms to realistic interior conditions is
oﬀered by the isoselfscalar transforms (11) which permit the representation of electromagnetic
waves propagating within physical media with local varying speed c = c0/n.

This allows the construction, apparently for the ﬁrst time, of Schwarzschild’s and other
gravitational models within atmospheres and chromospheres with a locally varying speed of
light. Applications to speciﬁc cases, such as the study of gravitational horizons via the
light isocone, are then expected to permit reﬁnements of current studies evidently due to
deviations from the value in vacuum of the speed of light in the hyperdense chromospheres
outside gravitational horizons.

Note that the general Poincart´e-Santilli isosymmetry is used for the local speed of light
within the interior of a given atmosphere or chromosphere, while the restricted isosymmetry
is used when the average speed of light is needed.

As an example, the characterization of the speed of electromagnetic waves traveling within
a planetary atmosphere or chromosphere requires the general Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry
because changing with the density, temperature, etc. On the contrary, the characterization of
the average speed of electromagnetic waves propagating through an entire given atmosphere
or chroomosphere requires the use of the restricted isosymmetry.

We ﬁnally note that the realization of the isotopic element ˆTµµ = n−2, µ = 1, 2, 3, 4 is a
particular case of the broader realization ˆTµµ = n−2
µ in which the index of refraction is n4 and
the n′
ks provide its ”space-time symmetrization”. The latter realization is particularly suited
for the direct geometrization of the anisotropy of astrophysical atmospheres or chromospheres
caused by intrinsic angular momenta, as well as their inhomogeneity caused by the radial
change of density and other characteristics.

7. Direct universality of the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry for exterior and

interior gravitations. The results of this note imply the following:

Theorem 2. The 11-dimensional, general, Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry on isominkowski
spaces over real isoﬁelds with well behaved, positive-deﬁnite isounits is the largest possible
isolinear, isolocal and isocanonical invariance of isoseparation (2) (universality) in the ﬁxed
x-frame of the experimenter (direct universality).

The veriﬁcation of the invariant under the Poincar´e-Santilli isotransforms of all possible
separation (2) is instructive. The maximal character of the isosymmetry can be proved as
in the conventional case. Note that for any arbitrarily given (diagonal) Riemannian metric
g(x) (such as Schwarzschild, Krasner, etc,) there is nothing to compute because one merely

15

plots the ˆTµµ terms of the decomposition gµµ = ˆTµµ × ηµµ (no sum) in the above given
isotransforms. The invariance of the separation xt × g × x is then ensured.

The (2 + 2)–de Sitter or other cases can be derived from the theorem via mere changes
of signature or dimension of the isounit. The extension to positive-deﬁnite yet nondiagonal
isounit is trivial and will be implied hereon.

Note ﬁnally that isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) cannot be even deﬁned, let alone constructed in con-
ventional Riemannian spaces and all their possible isotopies, thus rendering the isominkowskian
formulation of gravity rather unique for our purposes.

8. Resolution of some of the controversies in gravitation. In summary, in this
note we have presented, apparently for the ﬁrst time, a geometric uniﬁcation of the special
and general relativities for both classical and operator proﬁles, as well as for both exterior
and interior problems. The results are centrally dependent on the use of the isominkowskian
geometry introduced in this note and Ref.(3u), rather than the use of the isoriemannian form
as studied in Ref.(3s).

The above uniﬁcations are centrally dependent on the achievement of a universal sym-
metry for gravitation which, by conception and construction, is locally isomorphic to the
Poincar´e symmetry of the special relativity. This eliminates the historical diﬀerence between
the special and general relativities whereby the former admits a universal symmetry, while
the latter does not(1,2). Note the necessity of the representation of gravity in isominkowski
space for the very formulation of the above uniﬁcations.

These results have a number of implications. First, they allow to illustrate the viewpoint
expressed in Sect. 1 to the eﬀect that some of controversies in gravitation may well be due
to insuﬃciencies in the used mathematics.

The ﬁrst illustration is given by the physical shortcoming of conventional formulation
of gravitation of being without invariant basic units of space and time (Theorem 1). This
shortcoming can now be rigorous veriﬁed via Theorem 2. In fact, it is easy to see that, when
formulated on conventional spaces over conventional ﬁelds, the isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) does not
leave invariant conventional units.

Theorem 2 also allows to resolve the shortcoming.

In fact, the space-time isounit is
indeed invariant under the isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) by conception and construction. Moreover,
it has ben proved in the adjoint analytic study [3x] that the isosymmetry ˆP (3.1) also leaves
invariant the conventional unit I = diag.
([1, 1, 1], 1) when interpreted as isocanonical
transforms on isospaces over isoﬁelds. This is an expected consequence of the mechanism of
isotopies according to which the joint lifting of a metric while the basic unit is lifted by the
inverse amount preserves all original properties.

Theorem 2 also permits the resolution of the controversy whether the total conservation
laws of general relativity are compatible with those of the special relativity via a mere visual
examination.

16

Recall that the generators of all space-time symmetries characterize total conserved quan-
tities. The compatibility of the total conservation laws of the general and special relativities
is therefore established by the visual observation that the generators of the conventional and
isotopic Poincare’ symmetries coincide. In fact, only the mathematical operations on them
are changed in the transition from the relativistic to the gravitational case.

Yet another controversy which appears to be resolved by our isominkowskian treatment
of gravity is the apparent lack of a meaningful relativist limit in conventional gravitational
theories. In fact, such a limit is now clearly and unequivocally established by ˆI → I under
which the special relativity is recovered identically in all its aspects.

The isominkowskian treatment of gravity also permits a resolution of some of the limita-
tions of conventional gravitational models, such as their insuﬃciency to provide an eﬀective
representation of interior gravitational problems. In fact, conventional formulations of grav-
ity admit only a limited dependence on the velocities, while being strictly local-diﬀerential
and derivable from a ﬁrst-order Lagrangian (variationally self-adjoint(3d)). These character-
istics are evidently exact for exterior problems in vacuum.

By comparison, interior gravitational problems, such as all forms of gravitational collapse,
are constituted by extended and hyperdense hadrons in conditions of total mutual penetra-
tion in large numbers into small regions of space.
It is well known that these conditions
imply eﬀects which are arbitrarily nonlinear in the velocities as well as in the wavefunctions,
nonlocal-integral on various quantities and variationally nonselfadjoint(3d,3e), (i.e. not repre-
sentable via ﬁrst-order Lagrangians). It is evident that the latter conditions are beyond any
scientiﬁc expectation of quantitative treatment via conventional gravitational theories.

The isominkowskian formulation of gravity resolve this limitation too and shows that it is
equally due to insuﬃciencies in the underlying mathematics. In fact, isogravitation extends
the applicability of Einstein’s axioms to a form which is ”directly universal” for exterior and
interior gravitations.

As indicated earlier, this extension is due to the fact that the functional dependence
of the metric in Riemannian treatments is restricted to the sole dependence on the local
coordinates, g = g(x), while under isotopies the same dependence becomes unrestricted,
g = g(x, v, φ, ∂ψ, ...) without altering the original geometric axioms. This results in geometric
uniﬁcation of exterior and interior problems, despite their sizable structural diﬀerences of
topological, analytic and other characters. The latter uniﬁcation was studied in details in
ref.(3s) under the isoriemannian geometry and it is studied with the isominkowskian geometry
in this note for the reasons indicated earlier.

Yet another controversy which appears to be resolved by the isominkowskian formulation
of gravity is the achievement of an axiomatically consistent operator version of gravity, that
is with: invariance of the basic units; preservation of the original Hermiticity at all times;
uniqueness and invariance of the numerical predictions; consistent PCT and other theorems;
etc.

17

Even though far from being a complete theory, our OIG does indeed oﬀer realistic hopes
of achieving such an axiomatically consistent operator form of gravity, as expected from the
validity of the conventional axioms of RQM.

The resolution of other controversies cannot be studied in this introductory note and are

contemplated for study in subsequent works.

Concluding Remarks. By keeping in mind that Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are preserved
unchanged by conception, an important issue is whether the isominkowskian reformulation of
gravity coincides with conventional gravity on physical grounds or it predicts novel physical
features.

It is easy to see that a number of new features are indeed predicted. To begin, the
isominkowskian formulation of gravity predicts that the maximal causal speed in our space-
time is a local quantity which can be arbitrarily smaller or bigger ’than the speed of light in
vacuum.

In fact, except for being well behaved (and non-null), the parameter n of isoselftransforms
(11) remains unrestricted by the isotopies. Therefore, we have n = 1 in vacuum for which
c = co/n = co, but otherwise we can have n > 1(c < co) or n < 1(c > co). As a result, the
Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is a natural invariance for arbitrary causal speeds, whether
equal, smaller or bigger than the speed of light in vacuum.

The case c < co is known since Lorentz’s(7a) who was the ﬁrst to investigate the lack
of applicability of his celebrated transforms for electromagnetic waves propagating in our
atmosphere or other transparent material media (see also the related quotation by Pauli(7b)).
The case c > co has been predicted since some time in interior problems only, but
experimentally detected only recently, e.g., for the speed of photons traveling in certain
guides(8a,8b) or for the speed of matter in astrophysical explosions(8c−8e). The recent Ref.(8f )
has identiﬁed solutions of conventional relativistic equations with arbitrary speeds in vacuum
of which ˆP (3.1) is evidently the natural invariance). If conﬁrmed, these waves would be the
ﬁrst case of speeds c > co in exterior conditions in vacuum.

It should be noted that, despite the local variation of c, the maximal causal speed on
ˆM over ˆR remain c0, again, because the change c → c0/n is compensated by an inverse
change of the unit 1 → n. By recalling that the STR is evidently inapplicable (and not
”violated”) for locally varying causal speeds, we can therefore say that the isotopies render
the STR universally applicable for relativistic and gravitational, classical and operator, as
well as exterior or interior problems, under local speeds of electromagnetic waves.

Yet other novel predictions are related to gravitational singularities. In fact, we have the

following property of self-0evident proof.

Theorem 3. Gravitational singularities (horizons) are the zeros of the space (time)

component of the isounit.

18

The above novel interpretation of gravitational singularities and horizons is trivially
equivalent to the conventional one for the exterior case in vacuum. However, gravitational
collapse is a typical interior case for which the isotopic representation becomes nontrivial,
e.g., because it includes the nonlinear, nonlocal and noncanonical eﬀects indicated earlier.
The isominkowskian formulation of gravity therefore implies a re-examination of gravita-
tional singularities on both mathematical and physical grounds which will be done elsewhere.
Note that the zeros of the isounit have been excluded from Theorem 2 because of their

yet unknown topological structure.

Another important implication of the isominkowskian formulation of gravity is that it
oﬀers realistic possibilities for an axiomatically consistent inclusion of gravitation in grand
uniﬁed gauge theories, as studied in the recent contribution(3y) to the VIII M. Grossmann
Meeting on General Relativity. By comparison, no such inclusion is possible for the Rieman-
nian treatment of gravitation.

Intriguingly, the Isotopic Grand Uniﬁcation is permitted precisely by the elimination of
the conventional notion of curvature, as an evident necessary condition to bring gravitation
into a form axiomatically compatible with electroweak interactions.

We should also indicate the novel prediction of the isodoppler shift(3t), namely, a shift
due to the inhomogeneity and anisotropy of the medium in which electromagnetic waves
propagate, which is suitable for experimental veriﬁcations(3s,5b).

But perhaps the most intriguing novel feature of the isominkowskian formulation of
gravity is that of introducing a novel notion of space-time, where the novelty rests in the
units of space-time itself. For instance, we have a novel local notion of time, as illustrated
by the dependence of its unit from the gravitational ﬁeld in the isotopic reformulation of the
Schwarzschild metric, ˆIt = (1 − 2M/r).

As one can see, time is predicted to have novel diﬀerent ﬂows for diﬀerent gravitational
ﬁelds, according to a behaviour which is diﬀerent than that predicted by conventional grav-
itational theories. Space has a behaviour which is the inverse of that of time. Conventional
space-time is recovered in empty space for M = 0 (or for inﬁnite distances from a gravitational
ﬁeld).

This novel notion of space-time admits additional intriguing and far reaching implication.
For instance, by recalling that the structure of the isotopic invariant is [Length]2 × [Unit]2 =
Inv. we have a new form of geometric propulsion called isolocomotion(3r) in which distances
are covered by their geometric reduction due to the local increase of the energy, rather than
via Newtonian displacement. In fact, the space-isounit increases with the local energy, thus
impllying a decrease of the distance.

Similarly, we have a novel cosmology called isocosmology(3s) which is the ﬁrst on scien-
tiﬁc record being characterized by a universal symmetry, the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry
ˆP (3.1), the ﬁrst to admit a realistic representation of interior gravitational problem and the
ﬁrst to admit arbitrary local values of the maximal causal speed, with a number of conse-

19

quences, such as the elimination of the need for the ”missing mass” in the universe (see ref.
[3s] for brevity).

It should be also indicated that the isotopies with basic lifting I → ˆI(x, Ψ, ...) = ˆI †
constitute only the ﬁrst step of a chain of generalized methods(3f ). The second class is given
by the genotopies(3a) in which the isounit is no longer Hermitean. This broader class ge-
ometrizes in a natural way the irreversibility of interior gravitational problems and it has
been used, e.g., for the black hole model of ref.(4d). A third class of methods is given by the
(multi–valued) hyperstructures(3f ), in which the generalized unit is constituted by a set of
non-Hermitean quantities. The latter class appears to be signiﬁcant for quantitative studies
of biological structures with their typical irreversibility and variation of physical character-
istics for which the conventional RQM is manifestly inapplicable due to its reversibility as
well as sole characterization of conservation laws.

Also, the isotopies, genotopies and hyperstructures admit antiautomorphic images, called
isodualities(3r,3s), and characterized by the map ˆI → ˆI d = − ˆI † which are currently under
study for antimatter(3q). In this case the energy–momentum tensor of antimatter becomes
negative–deﬁnite, thus removing a problem of compatibility between the current represen-
tations of antimatter in classical and particle physics. The gravitational treatment of anti-
matter via the isodualities of the isominkowskian geometry is studied elsewhere(3u) and it is
another necessary condition for the axiomatically consistent inclusion of gravity in uniﬁed
gauge theories of electroweak interactions(3y).

On historical grounds, we note that, as studied in detail in memoir(3t) for the general
case of RHM, our OIG can be interpreted as a nonunitary completion of RQM considerably
along the historical E − P − R argument(9a) for which von Neumann’s theorem(9b) and Bell’s
inequalities(9c) do not apply evidently because of their nonunitary structure.

Moreover, from the abstract identity of the right modular associative action H × |Ψ >
and its isotopic image ˆH ˆ×| ˆΨ >, one can see that the isoeigenvalue equation ˆH ˆ×| ˆΨ >=
E ˆT ×| ˆΨ > characterizes an explicit and concrete operator realization of the ”hidden variable”
λ = λ(x, ...) ≡ ˆT . Our isotopic formulation of gravity can therefore be interpreted as a
realization of the theory of hidden variables. After all, the ”hidden” character of gravitation
in our theory is illustrated by the recovering of the conventional unit under the isoexpectation
value ˆ< ˆI ˆ> = I.

In conclusion, the viewpoint we have attempted to convey in this note is that an alter-
native formulation of gravity always existed. It did creep in un–noticed until now because
embedded where nobody looked for, in the unit of the classical and quantum version of the
special relativity.

Acknowledgments. The author would like to thank for invaluable comments the par-
ticipants to: the VII Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity held at Stanford
university in July 1994; the International Workshops held at the Istituto per la Ricerca

20

di Base in Molise, Italy, on August 1995 and May 1996; and the International Workshop
on Physical Interpretation of Relativity Theories held at the Imperial College, London, on
September 1996; the VIII Marcel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity held at the
Hebrew University in Jerusalem on June 1997 and the Workshop on Modern Modiﬁed Theo-
ries of Gravitation and Cosmology held at the Ben Gurion University, Israel, on June 1997.
The author would like also to express his sincere appreciation to the Editors of Rendiconti
Circolo Matematico Palermo, Foundations of Physics and Mathematical Methods in Applied
Sciences, for invaluable, penetrating and constructive critical comments in the editorial pro-
cessing of the respective memoirs(3f,3t,4q), without which this paper could not have seen the
light. Thanks are ﬁnally due to L. P. Horwitz of Tel Aviv University and E. I. Guendelman
of Ben Gurion University, Israel, for penetrating critical comments and suggestions.

21

References

[1] H.A.Lorentz, Amst. Proc.6, 809 (1904) [1a]; H.Poincar´e, Compte Rendues, Paris 140.
1504 (1905) [1b]; A.Einstein, Ann. Phys. 17, 891 (1905) [1c]; H.Minkowski, Nachr. Ges.
Wiss. Gottingen 43 (1908) [1d].

[2] B.Riemann, Gott. Nachr. 13, 133 (1868) and Collected Works, H.Weber, Editor,
Dover, New York (1953) [2a]; D.Hilbert, Nachr. Kgl. Ges. Wissench. Gottingen, 1915,
p.395 [2b]; A.Einstein, Sitz. Ber. Preuss. Akad. Wissench. Berlin, 1915, p.844 [2c];
K.Schwartzschild, Sitzber. Deut. Akad. Wiss. Berlin. Kl. Math.–Phys. Tech., 189 and
424 (1916) [2d]; H.Weyl, Raum–Zeit–Materie, Springer, Berlin (1916) [2e]; S. Adler, A.
Bazin and L. Schieﬀer, Introduction to General Relativity (Mc.Graw-Hill, New York,
1984) [2f].

[3] R.M.Santilli: Hadronic J. 1, 224 [3a], 574 [3b] and 1267 [3c] (1978); Phys. Rev. D20,
555 (1979) [3d]; Foundations of Theoretical Mechanics, Vol. I (1978) [3d]and II (1983)
[3e], Springer–Verlag, Heidelberg–New York; Rendiconti Circolo Matematico Palermo,
Suppl. 42, 7 (1996) [3f]; Algebras, Groups and Geometries 10, 273 (1993) [3g]; Novo
Cimento Lett. 37, 545 (1983) [3h]; Hadronic J. 8, 25 and 36 (1985) [3i]; JINR Rapid.
Comm. 6, 24 (1993) [3j]; J.Moscow Phys.Soc. 3, 255 (1993) [3k]; Chinese J.Syst.Ing.
& Electr.6, 177 (1996) [3l]; Lett. Nuovo Cimento 3, 509, (1983) [3m]; Comm. Theor.
Phys. 3, 153 (1994) [3n]; in Proceedings of the VII M.Grossmann Meeting on General
Relativity, M.Kessler and R. Jantzen, Editors, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996) [3o];
in Gravity, Particles and Space–Time, P. Pronin and G.Sardanashvily, Editors, World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1995) [3p]; Comm. Theor. Phys. 3, 47 and 4, 1 (1995)[3q]; Ele-
ments of Hadronic Mechanics, Vol. I [3r] and II [3s], Second Edition (1995), Ukraine
Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1995); ”Nonrelativistic hadronic mechanics: Nonunitary
axiom-preserving completion of relativistic quantum mechanics”, Found. Phys 27, 691
(1997) [3t]; ”Isominkowskian geometry and its isodual”, submitted for publication [3u];
”Isospecial relativity for matter and its isodual for antimatter”, Gravitation, in press
(1997) [3v]; ”Invariant, directly universal, isotopic inverse problem for nonlinear, nonlo-
cal and nonpotential interior dynamical systems”, submitted for publication [3x]; ”Iso-
topic grand uniﬁcation with the inclusion of gravity”, Found. Phys. Letters 10 (1997),
in press [3y].

[4] S.L. Adler, Phys.Rev. 17, 3212 (1978) [4a]; S.Okubo, Hadronic J. 5, 1667 (1982) [4b];
Cl.George, F. Henin, F.Mayene and I.Prigogine, Hadronic J. 1, 520 (1978) [4c]; J.Ellis,
N.E. Mavromatos and D.V.Napoulos in Proceedings of the Erice Summer School, 31st
Course: From Superstrings to the Origin of Space–Time, World Sientiﬁc (1996) [4d];
A.Jannussis, R.Mignani and D.Skaltsas Physics A 187, 575 (1992) [4e]; C.N.Ktorides,

22

H.C.Myung and R.M.Santilli, Phys.Rev. D22, 892 (1980) [4f]; A.J.Kalnay, Hadronic
J. 6, 1 (1983) [4g]; D.Rapoport–Campodonico, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 8, 1
(1991) [4h]; M.Nishioka, Nuovo Cimento 82A, 351 (1984) [4i]; A.O.E. Aniamalu and
R.M.Santilli, Int. J.Quantum Chemistry 29, 175 (1995) [4j]; F.Cardone, R.Mignani and
R.M.Santilli I.Phys. C18, L61 and L141 (1992) [4k]; R.Mignani, Physics Essays 5, 531
(1992) [41]; M.Gasperinmi, Hadronic J. 7, 971 (1984) [4m]; G.Eder, Hadronic J. 4,
(1981) and 5, 750 (1982) [4n]; E.B,Lion, Hadronic J. 11, 81 (1988) [4o]; R.Mignani,
Nuovo Cimento Lett. 39, 413 (1984) [4p]; J.V.Kadeisvili, Math.Methods in Applied
Sciences, in press [4q]; G.T.Tsagas and D.S.Sourlas, Algebras, Groups and Geometries
12, 1 (1995) [4r]; T.Gill, J.Lindesay and W.W.Zachary, Hadronic J. 17, 449 (1994) [4s];
C.Myung and R.M.Santilli, Hadronic J. 5, 1277 (1982) [4t]; Mignani, Hadronic J. 5,
1120 (1982) [4u]; J.V.Kadeisvili, Math. Methods in Applied Sciences, 19, 1349 (1996),
Algebras [4v]; M. Battler, M. McBee and S. Smith http://home1.gte.net/ibr [4x] R.
Aslaner and S. Keles, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 14, 211 (1997) [4y]. S. Vacaru,
Algebras, Groups and Geometries 14, 225 (1997) [4z]

[5] A.K.Aringazin, A. Jannussis, D.F.Lopez, M.Nishioka and B.Veljanosky, Santilli’s Lie–
Isotopic Generalization of Galilei’s and Einstein’s Relativities (1990), Kostarakis Pub-
lisher, Athens, Greece [5a]; J.V.Kadeisvili, Santilli’s Isotopies of Contemporary Al-
gebras, Geometries and Relativites, Second Edition, Ukraine Academy of Sciences,
Kiev (1977) [5b]; D.S.Sourlas and G.T.Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations of the Lie–
Santilli Theori, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1993) [5c]; J.Lˆohmus, E.Paal and
L.Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras in Physics, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, USA
(1994) [5d]; D.M.Norris et al, Tomber’s Bibliography and Index in Nonassociative Alge-
bras, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL (1984) [5f]

[6] M.J.G.Veltman,

in Methods in Field Theory, R.Ballan and J.Zinn–Justin, Editors,
North–Holland, Amsterdam (1976) [6a]; C.J. Isham, R. Penrose and D. W. Sciama,
Editors, Quantum Gravity 2, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1981) [6b];

[7] H.A.Lorentz, Versuch einer Theorie der Elektrishen und Magnetishen Erscheinungen in
bewenglen K¨orpern, Leyda (1895) [7a]; W.Pauli, Theory of Relativity, Pergamon Press,
(1958) [7b]

[8] A.Enders and G.Nimitz, J.Phys.France 2, 1693 (1992) [1a]; A.M.Steuimnberg,
P.C.Kwait and R.Y.Chiaoo, Phys.Rev.Lett.68, 2421 (1992) [8b]; F.Mirabel and
F.Rodriguez, Nature 371, 464 (1994) [8c]; J.Tingay et al., Nature 374, 141 (1995)
[8d]; D.Baylin et al., IAU Comm. 6173 (1995) [8e]; W.A.Rodrigus, jr, and J.–Yu Lu,
”On the existence of undistorted progressive waves of arbitrary speed”, Found.Phys., in
press [8f].

23

[9] A.Einstein, B.Podolsky and N.Rosen, Phys.Rev.47, 777 (1935) [9a]; J.Von Neumann,
The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton Univ.Press (1955)
[9b]; J.S.Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1965) [9d]; D.Bohm, Quantum Theory, Dover Publica-
tions, New York (1979) [9e]

24

