7
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
8
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LORENTZ SYMMETRY VIOLATION
AND SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES
AT FUTURE COLLIDERS

Luis GONZALEZ-MESTRES1

Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France
11 pl. Marcellin-Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
and
Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules
B.P. 110 , 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract

If textbook Lorentz invariance is actually a property of the equations describing a
sector of the excitations of vacuum above some critical distance scale, several sectors
of matter with diﬀerent critical speeds in vacuum can coexist and an absolute rest
frame (the vacuum rest frame) may exist without contradicting the apparent Lorentz
invariance felt by ”ordinary” particles (particles with critical speed in vacuum equal
to c , the speed of light). Sectorial Lorentz invariance, reﬂected by the fact that
all particles of a given dynamical sector have the same critical speed in vacuum,
will then be an expression of a fundamental sectorial symmetry (e.g. preonic grand
uniﬁcation or extended supersymmetry) protecting a parameter of the equations of
motion. Furthermore, the sectorial Lorentz symmetry may be only a low-energy
limit, in the same way as the relation ω (frequency) = cs (speed of sound) k (wave
vector) holds for low-energy phonons in a crystal. In this context, phenomena such as
the absence of Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin cutoﬀ and the stability of unstable particles
at very high energy are basic properties of a wide class of noncausal models where
local Lorentz invariance is broken introducing a fundamental length. Observable
phenomena from Lorentz symmetry violation and superluminal sectors of matter are
expected at very short wavelength scales, even if Lorentz symmetry violation remains
invisible to standard low-energy tests. We discuss signatures of this new physics at
LHC and at other possible future colliders.

”The impossibility to disclose experimentally the absolute motion of the earth seems to

1 Introduction

be a general law of Nature”

H. Poincar´e
1E-mail: lgonzalz@vxcern.cern.ch

1

”Precisely Poincar´e proposed investigating what could be done with the equations with-
out altering their form. It was precisely his idea to pay attention to the symmetry properties
of the laws of Physics”
R.P. Feynmann

”The interpretation of geometry advocated here cannot be directly applied to submolecu-
lar spaces... it might turn out that such an extrapolation is just as incorrect as an extension
of the concept of temperature to particles of a solid of molecular dimensions”

A. Einstein

Is relativity the result of a symmetry of the laws of Nature (Poincar´e, 1904), there-
fore necessarily broken at some deeper level (Einstein, late period), or does it reﬂect the
existence of an absolute space-time geometry that matter cannot escape (Einstein, early
papers on relativity)? Most textbooks teach ”absolute” relativity (early Einstein papers)
and ignore the possibility of a more ﬂexible formulation (Poincar´e, late Einstein thought)
that we may call ”relative” relativity (relativity is a symmetry of the laws of Nature ex-
pressed by the Lorentz group: whether this symmetry is exact or approximate must be
checked experimentally at each new energy scale). Modern dynamical systems provide
many examples where Lorentz symmetry (with a critical speed given by the properties of
the system) is a scale-dependent property which fails at the fundamental distance scale
of the system (e.g. a lattice spacing).
In practical examples, the critical speed of the
apparently relativistic dynamical system is often less than 10−5 c and ”relativity”, as felt
by the dynamical system, would forbid particle propagation at the speed of light. Light
would appear to such a system just like superluminal matter would appear to us. In this
note, we would like to emphasize that high-energy physics has reached technical ability
allowing for crucial tests of the nature of relativity combining experiments at the future
machines with data from the highest-energy cosmic ray events.

Non-tachyonic superluminal particles (superbradyons) have been discussed in pre-
vious papers (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996 , 1997a and 1997b) and other papers have been
devoted to Lorentz symmetry violation (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c, 1997d and 1997e) as
well as to its astrophysical consequences (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997f and 1997g) and to its
application to extended objects (Gonzalez-Mestres 1997h). These papers refer also to other
work in the ﬁeld, and are all submitted to the EPS-HEP97 Conference.

2 Superluminal particles

Conventional tests of special relativity are performed using low-energy phenomena. The
highest momentum scale involved in nuclear magnetic resonance tests of special relativity
is related to the energy of virtual photons exchanged, which does not exceede the electro-
magnetic energy scale Eem ≈ αem r−1 ≈ 1 MeV , where αem is the electromagnetic

2

constant and r the distance scale between two protons in a nucleus. However, the extrap-
olation between the 1 MeV scale and the 1 − 100 T eV scale (energies to be covered by
LHC and VLHC) may involve a very large number, making compatible low-energy results
with the possible existence of superluminal particles above T eV scale.

Assume, for instance, that between E ≈ 1 MeV and E ≈ 100 T eV the mixing
between an ”ordinary” particle (i.e. with critical speed in vacuum equal to the speed
of light c in the relativistic limit) of energy E0 and a superluminal particle with mass
mi , critical speed ci ≫ c and energy Ei is described in the vacuum rest frame by a
non-diagonal term in the energy matrix of the form (Gonzalez-mestres, 1997c):

ǫ ≈ ǫ0 p ci ρ (p2)

(1)

where p stands for momentum, ǫ0 is a constant describing the strength of the mixing and
ρ (p2) = p2 (p2 + M 2 c2)−1 accounts for a threshold eﬀect with M c2 ≈ 100 T eV
due to dynamics. Then, the correction to the energy of the ”ordinary” particle will be
≈ ǫ2 (E0 − Ei)−1 whereas the mixing angle will be ≈ ǫ (E0 − Ei)−1 . Taking the
rest energy of the superluminal particle to be Ei,rest = mi c2
i ≈ 1 T eV , we get a
mixing ≈ 0.5 ǫ0 at p c = 100 T eV , ≈ 10−2 ǫ0 at p c = 10 T eV and ≈ 10−4 ǫ0 at
p c = 1 T eV . Such ﬁgures would clearly justify the search for superbradyons at LHC and
VLHC (E ≈ 100 T eV per beam) machines provided low-energy bounds do not force ǫ0
to be too small. With the above ﬁgures, at p c = 1 MeV one would have a correction to
the photon energy less than ≈ 10−32 ǫ2
0 p ci which, requiring the correction to the photon
energy not to be larger than ≈ 10−20 , would allow for large values of ǫ0 if ci is less than
≈ 1012 c . In any case, a wide range of values of ci and ǫ0 can be explored.

More stringent bounds may come from corrections to the quark propagator at mo-
menta ≈ 100 MeV . There, the correction to the quark energy would be bounded only by
0 p ci and requiring it to be less than ≈ 10−20 p c would be equivalent to ǫ0 < 0.1
≈ 10−24 ǫ2
for ci = 106 c . Obvioulsy, these estimates are rough and a detailed calculation of nuclear
parameters using the deformed relativistic kinematics obtained from the mixing would be
required. It must be noticed that the situation is fundamentally diﬀerent from that con-
templated in the T Hǫµ formalism and, in the present case, Lorentz invariance can remain
unbroken in the low-momentum limit, as the deformation of relativistic kinematics for ”or-
dinary” particles is momentum-dependent. Therefore, it may be a safe policy to explore
all possible values of ci and ǫ0 at accelerators (including other possible parametrizations
of ǫ) without trying to extrapolate bounds from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments.
The production of one or two (stable or unstable) superluminal particles in a high-
energy accelerator experiment is potentially able to yield very well-deﬁned signatures
through the shape of decay products or ”Cherenkov” radiation in vacuum events (sponta-
neous emission of ”ordinary” particles). In the vacuum rest frame, a relativistic superlu-
minal particle would have energy E ≃ p ci , where ci ≫ c is the critical speed of the
particle. When decaying into ”ordinary” particles with energies Eα ≃ pα c (α = 1, ..., N)

3

for a N-particle decay product), the initial energy and momentum must split in such a
way that very large momenta pα ≫ p are produced (in order to recover the total energy
with ”ordinary” particles) but compensate to give the total momentum p .This requires
the shape of the event to be exceptionally isotropic, or with two jets back to back, or
yielding several jets with the required small total momentum. Similar trends will arise
in ”Cherenkov-like” events, and remain observable in the laboratory frame. It must be
noticed that, if the velocity of the laboratory with respect to the vacuum rest frame is
≈ 10−3 c , the laboratory velocity of superluminal particles as measured by detectors (if
ever feasible) would be ≈ 103 c in most cases (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a). More details
can be found in the papers quoted as references.

3 Lorentz symmetry violation

If Lorentz symmetry is broken at Planck scale or at some other similar fundamental length
scale, it turns out (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d and subsequent papers) that such a phe-
nomenon can manifest itself at the highest cosmic-ray energies, typically in events above
1017 eV . If Lorentz symmetry violation in the particle propagator follows a p2 law beween
1021 eV c−1 and 100 MeV c−1 , it can be ≈ 1 at the highest observed cosmic ray energies
and ≈ 10−25 at p c ≈ 100 MeV . Furthermore, a ≈ 1 eﬀect in particle propagators
is not needed in order to get leading eﬀects in data. It can be shown, for instance, that
a ≈ 10−18 eﬀect at 1017 eV would be enough to modify π0 lifetime above this energy,
π c3 (2 p)−1 (mπ = pion mass) becomes smaller than 10−18 p c Then, as
as the term m2
energy increases, the particle lifetime would become longer when measured in units of the
standard relativistic Lorentz-dilated lifetime. It is even not impossible that such mecha-
nisms occur at lower energies, but this may be prevented (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e) by the
requirement that cosmic rays with energies below ≈ 3.1020 eV lose most of their energy in
the atmosphere. Detailed calculations adapted to each speciﬁc model should be performed.
A particularly appealing scenario, in view of experimental tests, would be the one where
Lorentz symmetry violation has full strength at Planck scale. Then, in most nonlocal mod-
els we expect (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d and 1997e) that the expression for energy in terms
momentum, in the limit k a ≪ 1 (k = wave vector, a = fundamental scale), contain an
extra term ∆ E ≃ α (k a)2 p where α ≈ 0.1 − 0.01 . Writing ∆ E ≃ Γ (k) p ,
we have Γ (k) ≃ Γ0 k2 where Γ0 = α a2 . Such a behaviour is not incompatible with
a possible gravitational origin of the deformation, although gravity would not necessarily
be a fundamental force at Planck scale and the graviton may be a composite object made
(like all other gauge bosons and presently known matter ﬁelds) of more fundamental (per-
haps superluminal) matter interacting at scales smaller than a (e.g. Gonzalez-Mestres,
1997d). String-like models using Planck scale may then describe composite objects made
of superluminal matter.

Again, very high-energy accelerator experiments (especially with protons and nuclei)

4

can play a crucial role. Contrary to the previous case, they should now be performed in the
very-forward region. At LHC, FELIX could provide a crucial check of special relativity
by comparing its data with cosmic-ray data in the ≈ 1016 − 1017 eV region. VLHC
experiments would be expected to lead to fundamental studies in the kinematical region
which, according to special relativity, would be equivalent to the collisions of ≈ 1019 eV
cosmic protons. With a 700 T eV per beam p − p machine, it would be possible to
compare the very-forward region of collisions with those of cosmic protons at energies up
to ≈ 1021 eV . Thus, it seems necessary that all very high-energy collider programs allow
for an experiment able to cover secondary particles in the far-forward and far-backward
regions. A model-independent way to test Lorentz symmetry between collider and cosmic-
ray data sould be carefully elaborated, but the basic phenomena involved in the case of
Lorentz symmetry violation can be (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d and 1997h):

i) failure of the standard parton model (in any version, even incorporating radiative

corrections);

ii) failure of the relativistic formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation;
iii) longer than predicted lifetimes for some of the produced particles (e.g. the π0).
The role of high-precision data from accelerators would then be crucial to establish the
existence of such phenomena in the equivalent cosmic-ray events. In this way, it would
in particular be possible to perform unique tests of special relativity involving possible
violations coming from phenomena at some fundamental scale close to Planck scale, and
even to determine the basic parameters of Lorentz symmetry violation (e.g. of deformed
kinematics).

References

Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Physical and Cosmological Implications of a Possible Class of Parti-
cles Able to Travel Faster than Light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference on
High-Energy Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL (Los Alamos)
electronic archive (1996).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Space, Time and Superluminal Particles”, paper physics/9702026
of LANL electronic archive (1997a).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Superluminal Particles and High-Energy Cosmic Rays”, paper
physics/9705032 of LANL electronic archive (1997b).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Invariance and Superluminal Particles”, paper physics/9703020
of LANL electronic archive (1997c).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Vacuum Structure, Lorentz Symmetry and Superluminal Parti-
cles”, paper physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive (1997d).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Symmetry Violation and Very High-Energy Cross Sec-
tions”, paper physics/9706022 of LANL electronic archive (1997e).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Absence of Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin Cutoﬀ and Stability of Un-

5

stable Particles at Very High Energy, as a Consequence of Lorentz Symmetry Violation”,
Proceedings of ICRC97 , Vol. 6 , p. 113 . Paper physics/9705031 of LANL electronic
archive (1997f).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Possible Eﬀects of Lorentz Symmetry Violation on the Interaction
Properties of Very High-Energy Cosmic Rays”, paper physics/9706032 of LANL electronic
archive (1997g).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”High-Energy Nuclear Physics with Lorentz Symmetry Violation”,
paper nucl-th/9708028 of LANL electronic archive (1997h).

6

