7
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
9
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LORENTZ SYMMETRY VIOLATION,
VACUUM AND SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES

Luis GONZALEZ-MESTRES1

Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France
11 pl. Marcellin-Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
and
Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules
B.P. 110 , 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract

If textbook Lorentz invariance is actually a property of the equations describing a
sector of the excitations of vacuum above some critical distance scale, several sectors
of matter with diﬀerent critical speeds in vacuum can coexist and an absolute rest
frame (the vacuum rest frame) may exist without contradicting the apparent Lorentz
invariance felt by ”ordinary” particles (particles with critical speed in vacuum equal
to c , the speed of light). Sectorial Lorentz invariance, reﬂected by the fact that
all particles of a given dynamical sector have the same critical speed in vacuum,
will then be an expression of a fundamental sectorial symmetry (e.g. preonic grand
uniﬁcation or extended supersymmetry) protecting a parameter of the equations of
motion. Furthermore, the sectorial Lorentz symmetry may be only a low-energy
limit, in the same way as the relation ω (frequency) = cs (speed of sound) k (wave
vector) holds for low-energy phonons in a crystal. We show that, in this context,
phenomena such as the absence of Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin cutoﬀ and the stability
of unstable particles at very high energy are basic properties of a wide class of non-
causal models where local Lorentz invariance is broken introducing a fundamental
length. Then, observable phenomena are produced at the wavelength scale of the
highest-energy cosmic rays or even below this energy, but Lorentz symmetry viola-
tion remains invisible to standard low-energy tests. We discuss possible theoretical,
phenomenological, experimental and cosmological implications of this new approach
to matter and space-time, as well as prospects for future developments.

”The impossibility to disclose experimentally the absolute motion of the earth seems to

1 Introduction

be a general law of Nature”

H. Poincar´e
1E-mail: lgonzalz@vxcern.cern.ch

1

”Precisely Poincar´e proposed investigating what could be done with the equations with-
out altering their form. It was precisely his idea to pay attention to the symmetry properties
of the laws of Physics”
R.P. Feynman

”The interpretation of geometry advocated here cannot be directly applied to submolecu-
lar spaces... it might turn out that such an extrapolation is just as incorrect as an extension
of the concept of temperature to particles of a solid of molecular dimensions”

A. Einstein

Is relativity the result of a symmetry of the laws of Nature (Poincar´e, 1905), there-
fore necessarily broken at some deeper level (Einstein, late period), or does it reﬂect the
existence of an absolute space-time geometry that matter cannot escape (Einstein, early
papers on relativity)? Most textbooks teach ”absolute” relativity (early Einstein papers)
and ignore the possibility of a more ﬂexible formulation (Poincar´e, late Einstein thought)
that we may call ”relative” relativity (relativity is a symmetry of the laws of Nature ex-
pressed by the Lorentz group: whether this symmetry is exact or approximate must be
checked experimentally at each new energy scale). In the ﬁrst case, ether does not exist:
light just propagates at the maximum speed allowed by the ”absolute” space-time geome-
try; in the second case, the question of ether remains to be settled experimentally at any
new small-distance scale. By introducing important dynamics into the vacuum structure,
particle physics has operated a return to ether: it would be impossible for the W ± and the
Z 0 to be gauge bosons with nonzero masses if they did not propagate in a medium where
the Higgs ﬁelds condense; similarly, modern theories of hadron structure conjecture that
free quarks can exist only inside hadrons, due to non-trivial properties (e.g. superconduct-
ing) of the non-perturbative QCD vacuum. It could still be argued that this new ”ether”
does not necessarily have a preferred rest frame, and that special relativity is an exact
symmetry which prevents us from identifying such a frame. However, this hypothesis does
not seem to naturally ﬁt which general physics considerations. Modern dynamical systems
provide many examples where Lorentz symmetry (with a critical speed given by the prop-
erties of the system) is a scale-dependent property which fails at the fundamental distance
scale of the system (e.g. a lattice spacing). In practical examples, the critical speed of the
apparently relativistic dynamical system is often less than 10−5 c and ”relativity”, as felt
by the dynamical system, would forbid particle propagation at the speed of light. Light
would appear to such a system just like superluminal matter would appear to us.

Furthermore, high-energy physics has deﬁnitely found cosmic-ray events with energies
above 1020 eV (e.g. Hayashida et al., 1997). This energy scale is, in orders of magni-
tude, closer to Planck scale (1028 eV ) than to the electroweak scale (1011 eV ). There-
fore, if Lorentz symmetry is not an exact symmetry of nature and is instead broken at
≈ 10−33 cm length scale, the parameters of Lorentz symmetry violation observed (if ever)
in the analysis of the highest-energy cosmic-ray events will provide us with direct and

2

unique information on physics at Planck scale. This may be the most fundamental physics
outcome of experiments such as AUGER (AUGER Collaboration, 1997) devoted to the
study of cosmic rays at E ≈ 1020 eV : Lorentz symmetry violation at these energies would
unravel phenomena originating at higher energy scales, including the possible existence of
a fundamental length scale. In the vacuum rest frame, particles of the same type moving
at diﬀerent speeds are diﬀerent physical objects whose properties cannot be made identical
through a Lorentz transformation. This essential property remains true in any other frame,
but parameters measured in the vacuum rest frame have an absolute physical meaning.
Indeed, assuming that the laboratory frame moves slowly with respect to the vacuum rest
frame (which may be close to that suggested by the study of cosmic microwave backgroud
radiation), the observed properties of particles at E ≈ 1020 eV may look closer to physics
at Planck scale than to physics at electroweak or GeV scale (e.g. the failure of the par-
ton model and of standard relativistic formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation;
see Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h) , and basic parameters of Planck-scale physics may become
measurable through E ≈ 1020 eV cosmic-ray events if Lorentz symmetry is violated (with
exact Lorentz symmetry, collisions of very high-energy cosmic rays would on the contrary
be exactly equivalent to collider events at much lower laboratory energies).

We review and comment here recent work by the author on Lorentz symmetry violation
and possible superluminal sectors of matter. Non-tachyonic superluminal particles (super-
bradyons) have been discussed in previous papers (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995 , 1996 , 1997a
and 1997b) and other papers have been devoted to Lorentz symmetry violation (Gonzalez-
Mestres, 1997c, 1997d and 1997e) as well as to its astrophysical consequences (Gonzalez-
Mestres, 1997f and 1997g), its application to extended objects (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h)
and its relevance for future accelerator programs (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997i).

2 Lorentz symmetry as a low-energy limit

Lamoreaux, Jacobs, Heckel, Raab and Forston (1986) have set an experimental limit from
nuclear magnetic resonance measurements which, when suitably analyzed (Gabriel and
< 6.10−21 clight in the
Haugan, 1990), amounts to the bound | cmatter − clight
T Hǫµ model of Lorentz symmetry violation (e.g. Will, 1993). However, the T Hǫµ model
assumes a scale-independent violation of Lorentz invariance (through the non-universality
of the critical speed parameter) which does not naturally emerge from dynamics violating
Lorentz symmetry at Planck scale or at some other fundamental length scale, where we
would naturally expect such an eﬀect to be scale-dependent and possibly vary (like the
eﬀective gravitational coupling) according to a E2 law (E = energy scale). The E2 law is
indeed a trivial and rather general consequence of phenomena such as nonlocality, as can
be seen from the generalized one-dimensional Bravais lattice equation (Gonzalez-Mestres,
1997d):

|

d2/dt2 [φ (n)] = − K [2 φ (n) − φ (n − 1) − φ (n + 1)] − ω2

rest φ

(1)

3

where n (integer) stands for the site under consideration, φ(n) is a complex order param-
eter, K an elastic constant and (2π)−1 ωrest the frequency of the chain of oscillators in the
zero-momentum limit. In the limit where the lattice spacing vanishes but K a2 remains
ﬁxed, (1) becomes a two-dimensional dalembertian equation of the Klein-Gordon type,
with two-dimensional Lorentz symmetry and critical speed parameter K 1/2 a . In terms
of the wave vector k and the frequency (2π)−1 ω , equation (1) leads to the dispersion
relation:

ω2 (k) = 2 K [1 − cos (k a)] + ω2

rest = 4 K sin2 (ka/2) + ω2

rest

(2)

equivalent to:

E2 = 2 K [1 − cos (2π h−1 p a) + (2π)−1 h ω2

rest] =

= 4 K [sin2 (2π h−1 p a) + (2π)−1 h ω2

rest]

(3)

where p stands for momentum and h is the Planck constant. The same procedure can be
extended to a wide class of nonlocal models, inclundig those with continuous space, giving:

E = (2π)−1 h c a−1 e (k a)

(4)

(5)

(6)

where [e (k a)]2 is a convex function of (k a)2 obtained from vacuum dynamics. We have
checked that this is also a fundamental property of old scenarios breaking local Lorentz
invariance (f.i. R´edei, 1967), although such a phenomenon seems not to have been noticed
by the authors. Expanding equation (4) for k a ≪ 1 , we can write:

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2 − α (k a)4 + (2π a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

where α is a model-dependent constant, in the range 0.1 − 0.01 for full-strength violation
of Lorentz symmetry at the fundamental length scale (α = 1/12 for the Bravais-lattice
model and its isotropic extension to three dimensions), and

E ≃ p c [1 + α (k a)2/2] + m2 c3 (2 p)−1

and the new term ∆ E = − p c α (k a)2/2 in the right-hand side of (6) implies
a Lorentz symmetry violation in the ratio E p−1 varying like Γ (k) ≃ Γ0 k2 where
Γ0 = − α a2/2 . Such an expression is not incompatible with a possible gravitational
origin of Lorentz symmetry violation, where the eﬀective gravitational coupling would rise
like E2 below Planck energy. However, other interpretations are possible (e.g. Gonzalez-
Mestres, 1997d) where all presently kown ”elementary” particles and gauge bosons would
actually be composite objects made of superluminal matter at Planck scale.

More generally, a k2 law for the parameters of Lorentz symmetry violation, as suggested
by the above formulae, would lead to substantial changes with respect to conventional mod-
els (e.g. Will, 1993). In particular, Lorentz symmetry would remain unbroken at k = 0

4

. With such a law, an eﬀect of order 1 at p = 3.1020 eV c−1 (the estimated momen-
tum of the highest-energy observed cosmic-ray event) would become of order ≈ 10−25
at p = 100 MeV c−1 (the highest momentum scale involved in nuclear magnetic reso-
nance tests of special relativity). Therefore, very large deviations from special relativity
at the highest observed cosmic-ray energies would be compatible with a great accuracy of
this theory in the low-momentum region. Thus, the main and most fundamental physics
outcome of very high-energy cosmic-ray experiments involving particles and nuclei may
eventually be the test of special relativity. If Lorentz symmetry is violated at Planck scale,
the highest-energy cosmic ray events may, if analyzed closely and with the expected high
statistics from future experiments, provide a detailed check of diﬀerent models of deformed
relativistic kinematics and of the basic physics behind the kinematics.

The same kind of deformed relativistic kinematics arises naturally in soliton models

(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h). Starting from the equation:

c−2 ∂2ψ/∂t2 − ∂2ψ/∂x2 = 2 ∆−2 ψ (1 − ψ2)

where ∆ is the distance scale characterizing the soliton size (x = space coordinate, t =
time coordinate), and writing down the one-soliton solution of this equation:

ψ(x , t) = Φ(y) = tanh (λ0 y)

where y = x − v t , v is the speed of the soliton, λ0 = ∆−1 γR and γR is the standard
relativistic Lorentz factor γR = (1 − v2 c−2)−1/2 , we can introduce a perturbation to the
system by adding to the left-hand side of (7) a term − (a2/12) ∂4ψ/∂ x4 which corresponds
to the lowest-order correction to the continuum limit when the Bravais-lattice version of
(7) is expanded in powers of a2 . This new term in the equation will be compensated at
the ﬁrst order in the perturbation by the replacement:

Φ → Φ + ǫ Φ (1 − Φ2)

where ǫ ∝ a2 . We furthermore replace λ0 by a new coeﬃcient λ to be determined form
the perturbed equation. To ﬁrst order in the perturbation, we get the solutions:

ǫ ≃ 1 − λ2 γ−2

R ∆2
R/3)1/2] (1 + a2 ∆−2 γ4
R + a2 ∆−2 γ2

λ2 ≃ [3 ± (1 − 4 a2 ∆−2 γ4
leading for ǫ ≪ 1 to (∆ λ)−2 ≃ γ−2
R/3 . Thus, relative corrections
to standard relativistic Lorentz contraction and time dilation factors are proportional to
a2 ∆−2 γ4
R and dominate when this variable becomes ≈ 1 . Above this value of γR , we
expect departures from special relativity to occur at leading level in many phenomena.
Deformed kinematics can be obtained at the lowest order in the perturbation. A simpliﬁed
calculation, valid for a wide class of soliton models, could be as follows. At the ﬁrst order

R/6)−1 ∆−2 γ2

R/4

(11)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

5

in the perturbation with respect to special relativity, we start from an eﬀective lagrangian
for soliton kinematics:

(12)
where ρ is a constant proportional to a2 ∆−2 , according to (10) and (11). From this
lagrangian, we derive the expression for the generalized momentum:

L = − m c2 γ−1

R (1 − ρ γ4
R)

p = m γR v (1 + 3 ρ γ4
R)

from which we can build the hamiltonian:

H = p v − L = m c2 (γR + 3 ρ v2 c−2 γ5

R − ρ γ3
R)

(13)

(14)

which leads to a deformed relativistic kinematics deﬁned by the relation:

E − p c = m c2 γ−1

R (1 + v c−1)−1 − ρ m c2 [3 v c−1 (1 + v c−1)−1 + 1] γ3

R (15)

and, when expressed in terms of p at v ≃ c and for small values of ρ γ4
approximated by:

R , can be

E − p c ≃ m c2 (2 p)−1 − 5 ρ p3 (2 m2 c)−1

(16)

where the deformation term 5 ρ p3 (2 m2 c)−1 diﬀers from that obtained from phonon
mechanics in the Bravais lattice only by a constant factor η ∝ 2 h2 (2π m c ∆)−2 .

Looking at the low-speed limit of (15), we ﬁnd a renormalization of the critical speed
parameter c , δc , such that δc c−1 ≈ (∆/a)−2 ≈ 10−40 for hadrons if a ≈ 10−33 cm and
∆ ≈ 10−13 cm . This eﬀect (the only one which survives at k = 0) is much smaller than
the eﬀects contemplated by other authors (e.g. Coleman and Glashow, 1997 and references
therein) and, even assuming that it would be diﬀerent for diﬀerent particles, it cannot be
excluded by existing data which can only rule out values of δc c−1 above ≈ 10−20 .

3 Deformed relativistic kinematics

Assuming that Lorentz symmetry is violated at Planck scale or at some other fundamen-
tal length scale, how does the new kinematics apply to diﬀerent particles, nuclei, atoms
and larger objects? Other versions of deformed relativistic kinematics led in the past to
controversies (Bacry, 1993 ; Fernandez, 1996) which can be resolved (Gonzalez-Mestres,
1997h) if the value of α depends on the object under consideration. In the presence of
a fundamental (super)symmetry, it may be reasonable to assume that α has the same
value for leptons and gauge bosons. ¿From the above example with solitons, we conclude
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h) that the value of α for hadrons is naturally of the same order
as for ”elementary” particles, although not necessarily identical. It can also be diﬀerent

6

for diﬀerent hadrons. A crucial question is how to extend deformed relativistic kinematics
to nuclei and larger objects. Two diﬀerent simpliﬁed approaches can be considered:

- Model i) . Due to the very large size of atoms, as compared to nuclei, the transition
from nuclear to atomic scale appears as a reasonable point to stop considering systems as
”elementary” from the point of view of deformed relativity. α would then have a universal
value for nuclei and simpler objects, but not for atoms and larger bodies.

- Model ii) . The example with Φ4 solitons suggests that hadrons can have values of α
close to that of leptons and gauge bosons, and the transition may happen continuously at
fermi scale, when going from nucleons to nuclei. Then, the value of α would be universal
(or close to it) for leptons, gauge bosons and hadrons (solitons) but follow a m−2 law for
nuclei (multi-soliton bound states) and heavier systems, the nucleon mass setting the scale.
Experimental tests should be performed and equivalent dynamical systems should be
studied. However, Model i) would lack a well-deﬁned criterium to separate systems to which
the deformed relativity applies with the same value of α as for leptons and gauge bosons
from those to which this kinematics cannot be applied, and to characterize the transition
between the two regimes. The above obtained m−2 ∆−2 dependence of the coeﬃcient of
the deformation term for extended objects, as described in Model ii), seems to provide a
continuous transition from nucleons to heavier systems, naturally ﬁlling this gap. On the
other hand, a closer analysis reveals that there is indeed a discontinuity between nuclei and
atoms, as foreseen in Model i) . As long as the deformation term in electron kinematics
can be neglected as compared to the electron mass term, we can consider that most of the
momentum of an atom is carried by the nucleus and Model ii) may provide a reasonable
description of reality. But, when the electron mass term becomes small as compared to
the part of the energy it would carry in a parton model of the atom, such a description
becomes misleading. To have the same speed as a nucleon, the electron must then carry
nearly the same energy and momentum. We therefore propose (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h)
a modiﬁed version of Model ii) with ∆ ≈ 10−13 cm from hadrons and nuclei where,
for atoms and larger neutral systems, the coeﬃcient of the deformation term would be
corrected by a factor close to 1 at low momentum and to 4/9 at high momentum if the
number of neutrons is equal to that of protons. This model is obviously approximate and
should be completed by a detailed dynamical calculation that we shall not attempt here. It
assumes that electrically neutral bodies can reach very high energies per unit mass, which
is not obvious: spontaneous ionization may occur at speeds (in the vacuum rest frame) for
which the deformation term in electron kinematics becomes larger than its mass term.

Then, for bodies heavier than hadrons, the eﬀective value of α would decrease essentially
like m−2 . Applying a similar mass-dependence to the κ parameter of a diﬀerent deformed
Poincar´e algebra considered by previous authors (Bacry, 1993 and references therein), i.e.
κ ∝ m for large bodies, yields the relation:

F (M0 , E0) = F (M1 , E1) + F (M2 , E2)

(17)

7

with:

F (m , E) = 2 κ (m) sinh [2−1 κ−1 (m) E]
where M = M1 + M2 , κ(m) is our above mass-dependent version of the κ parameter
of the deformed Poincar´e algebra used by these authors, and E0 is the energy of a system
with mass M made of two non-interacting subsystems of energies E1 and E2 and with
masses M1 and M2 . Deﬁning mass as an additive parameter, the rest energy Ei,rest (in
the vacuum rest frame) of particle i (i = 0 , 1 , 2) is given by the equation:

(18)

Mi c2 = 2 κ (Mi) sinh [2−1 κ−1 (Mi) Ei,rest]
(19)
and tends to Mi c2 as κ (Mi) → ∞ . Equations (17) and (18) lead to additive relations
for the energy of macroscopic objects if the proportionality rule κ (m) ∝ m is applied.
From our previous discussion with a diﬀerent deformation scheme, such a choice seems
to naturally agree with physical reality. Then, contrary to previous claims (Bacry, 1993;
Fernandez, 1996), the rest energies of large systems would be additive and no macroscopic
eﬀect on the total mass of the Universe would be expected.

4 Phenomenological implications

As initially stressed, very high-energy cosmic rays can open a unique window to Planck
scale if Lorentz symmetry is violated. Contrary to standard prejudice which would sug-
gest that energy-dependent eﬀects of Lorentz symmetry violation at Planck scale can be
detected only at energies close to this scale, it turns out that such eﬀects are detectable at
the highest observed cosmic-ray energies. As discussed in Section 2 , we expect standard
relativistic formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation for a proton to fail at ener-
gies such that a2 ∆−2 γ4
R ≈ 1 , i.e. E ≈ 1019 eV for a ≈ 10−33 cm and ∆ ≈ 10−13 cm
(Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h). Similarly, with the same ﬁgures and taking α ≈ 0.1 , the
proton mass term m2 c3 (2 p)−1 in the expression for the proton energy becomes smaller
than the deformation term ∆ E = − p c α (k a)2/2 for E above ≈ 8.1018 eV and, even
if both terms are very small as compared to the total energy, kinematical balances (which
depend crucially on these nonleading terms) are drastically modiﬁed (Gonzalez-Mestres,
1997d). The standard parton picture of hadrons is equally disabled by the new kinematics
at very high energy (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997h), due to the impossibility for ”almost-free”
constituents carrying arbitrary fractions of the total energy and momentum to travel at
the same speed. Apart from the failure of the standard parton model for hadrons at wave
vectors above ≈ (8π2 α−1)1/4 (m c h−1 a−1)1/2 (i.e. at energies above ≈ 1019 eV if
a ≈ 10−33 cm , ≈ 1020 eV for a ≈ 10−35 cm and ≈ 3.1017 eV for a ≈ 10−30 cm),
the following new eﬀects at leading level would occur assuming a universal value of α for
leptons, gauge bosons and hadrons:

a) The Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoﬀ on very high-energy cosmic nucleons
(Greisen, 1966; Zatsepin and Kuzmin, 1966) does no longer apply (Gonzalez-Mestres,

8

1997d and 1997f). Very high-energy cosmic rays originating from most of the presently
observable Universe can reach the earth and generate the highest-energy detected events.
Indeed, ﬁts to data below E = 1020 eV using standard relativistic kinematics (e.g.
Dova, Epele and Hojvat, 1997) predict a sharp fall of the event rate at this energy, in
contradiction with data (Bird et al., 1993 and 1996; Hayashida et al., 1994 and 1997;
Yoshida et al., 1995) which suggest that events above 1020 eV are produced at a signiﬁcant
rate. Lorentz symmetry violation from physics at Planck scale provides a natural way out.
The existence of the cutoﬀ for cosmic nuclei will then depend crucially on the details of
deformed relativistic kinematics, beyond the accuracy of the present discussion.

b) Unstable particles with at least two massive particles in the ﬁnal state of all their
decay channels (neutron, ∆++ , possibly muons, charged pions and τ ’s, perhaps some
nuclei...) become stable at very high energy (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d and 1997f).
In
any case, many unstable particles live longer than naively expected with exact Lorentz
invariance and, at high enough energy, the eﬀect becomes much stronger than previously
estimated for nonlocal models (Anchordoqui, Dova, G´omez Dumm and Lacentre, 1997) ig-
noring the small violation of relativistic kinematics. Not only particles previously discarded
because of their lifetimes can be candidates for the highest-energy cosmic-ray events, but
very high-energy cascade development can be modiﬁed (for instance, if the π0 lives longer
at energies above ≈ 1018 eV , thus favoring hadronic interactions and muon pairs and
producing less electromagnetic showers).

c) The allowed ﬁnal-state phase space of two-body collisions is modiﬁed at very high
energy when, in the vacuum rest frame where expressions (4) - (6) apply, a very high-energy
particle collides with a low-energy target (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d). Energy conservation
reduces the ﬁnal-state phase space and can lead to a sharp fall of cross sections starting at
incoming-particle wave vectors well below the inverse of the fundamental length, essentially
above E ≈ (ET a−2 h2 c2)1/3 where ET is the energy of the target. For a ≈ 10−33 cm ,
this scale corresponds to: ≈ 1022 eV if the target is a rest proton; ≈ 1021 eV if it is
a rest electron; ≈ 1020 eV for a ≈ 1 keV photon, and ≈ 1019 eV if the target is a
visible photon. For a proton impinging on a ≈ 10−3 eV photon from cosmic microwave
background radiation, and taking α ≈ 1/12 as in the Bravais-lattice model, we expect the
fall of cross sections to occur above E ≈ 5.1018 eV , the critical energy where the derivatives
of the mass term m2 c3 p−1/2 and of the deformation term α p (k a)2/2 become equal in
the expression relating the proton energy E to its momentum p . With a ≈ 10−30 cm ,
still allowed by cosmic-ray data (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e), the critical energy scale can
be as low as E ≈ 1017 eV ; with a ≈ 10−35 cm (still compatible with data in the region
of the predicted GZK cutoﬀ), it would be at E ≈ 5.1019 eV . Similar considerations
lead to a fall of radiation under external forces (e.g. synchrotron radiation) above this
energy scale. In the case of a very high-energy γ ray, taking a ≈ 10−33 cm , the deformed
relativistic kinematics inhibits collisions with ≈ 10−3 eV photons from cosmic background
radiation above E ≈ 1018 eV , with ≈ 10−6 eV photons above E ≈ 1017 eV and with

9

≈ 10−9 eV photons above E ≈ 1016 eV . Taking a ≈ 10−30 cm would lower these
critical energies by a factor 100 according to the previous formulae, whereas the choice
a ≈ 10−35 cm would raise them by a factor of 20 .

d) In astrophysical processes, the new kinematics may inhibit phenomena such as GZK-
like cutoﬀs, decays, radiation emission under external forces (similar to a collision with a
very low-energy target), momentum loss (which at very high energy does not imply decel-
eration) through collisions, production of lower-energy secondaries, photodisintegration of
some nuclei... potentially solving all the basic problems raised by the highest-
energy cosmic rays (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e and 1997g). Due to the fall of cross sec-
tions, energy losses become much weaker than expected with relativistic kinematics and
astrophysical particles can be pushed to much higher energies (once energies above 1017 eV
have been reached through conventional mechanisms, synchrotron radiation and collisions
with ambient radiation may start to be inhibited by the new kinematics); similarly, as-
trophysical particles will be able to propagate to much longer astrophysical distances, and
many more sources (in practically all the presently observable Universe) can produce very
high-energy cosmic rays reaching the earth; as particle lifetimes are much longer, new pos-
sibilities arise for the nature of these cosmic rays. Models of very high-energy astrophysical
processes cannot ignore a possible Lorentz symmetry violation at Planck scale, in which
case observable eﬀects are predicted for the highest-energy detected particles.

e) If the new kinematics can explain the existence of ≈ 1020 eV events, it also predicts
that, above some higher energy scale (around ≈ 1022 eV for a ≈ 10−33 cm), the fall
of cross sections will prevent many cosmic rays (leptons, hadrons, gauge bosons) from
depositing most of its energy in the atmosphere (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997e). Such extremely
high-energy particles will produce atypical events of apparently much lower energy. New
analysis of data and experimental designs are required to explore this possibility. Again,
the interaction properties of nuclei will depend on the details of deformed kinematics.

Velocity reaches its maximum at k ≈ (8π2 α−1)1/4 (m c h−1 a−1)1/2 . Observable
eﬀects of local Lorentz invariance breaking arise, at leading level, well below the critical
wavelength scale a−1 due to the fact that, contrary to previous models (f.i. R´edei, 1967), we
directly apply non-locality to particle propagators and not only to the interaction hamilto-
nian. In contrast with previous patterns (f.i. Blokhintsev, 1966), s−t−u kinematics ceases
to make sense and the motion of the global system with respect to the vacuum rest frame
plays a crucial role. The physics of elastic two-body scattering will depend on ﬁve kine-
matical variables. Noncausal dispersion relations (Blokhintsev and Kolerov, 1964) should
be reconsidered, taking into account the departure from relativistic kinematics. As previ-
ously stressed (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d) , this apparent nonlocality may actually reﬂect
the existence of superluminal sectors of matter (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996) where causality
would hold at the superluminal level (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a). Indeed, electromagnetism
appears as a nonlocal interaction in the Bravais model of phonon dynamics, due to the
fact that electromagnetic signals propagate much faster than lattice vibrations.

10

Very high-energy accelerator experiments (especially with protons and nuclei) can play
a crucial role in the test of a possible Lorentz symmetry violation. To ﬁt vith cosmic-ray
events, they should be performed in the very-forward region. At LHC, FELIX (e.g. Eggert,
Jones and Taylor, 1997) could provide a crucial check of special relativity by comparing
its data with cosmic-ray data in the ≈ 1016 − 1017 eV region. VLHC experiments would
be expected to lead to fundamental studies in the kinematical region which, according to
special relativity, would be equivalent to the collisions of ≈ 1019 eV cosmic protons. With
a 700 T eV per beam p − p machine, it would be possible to compare the very-forward
region of collisions with those of cosmic protons at energies up to ≈ 1021 eV . Thus,
it seems necessary that all very high-energy collider programs allow for an experiment
able to cover secondary particles in the far-forward and far-backward regions. A model-
independent way to test Lorentz symmetry between collider and cosmic-ray data sould be
carefully elaborated, but the basic phenomena involved in the case of Lorentz symmetry
violation can be (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d and 1997h):

i) failure of the standard parton model (in any version, even incorporating radiative

corrections and phase transitions);

ii) failure of the relativistic formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation;
iii) longer than predicted lifetimes for some of the produced particles (e.g. the π0).
The role of high-precision data from accelerators would then be crucial to establish the
existence of such phenomena in the equivalent cosmic-ray events. To reach the best possible
performance, cosmic-ray experiments should (if ever feasible) install in coincidence very
large-surface detectors (providing also the largest-volume target) with very large-volume
underground or undewater detectors and with balloon or satellite devices able to study
early cascade development. It would then be possible to perform unique tests of special
relativity involving violations due to phenomena at some fundamental scale close to Planck
scale, and even to determine the basic parameters of Lorentz symmetry violation (e.g. of
deformed kinematics) and of physics at the fundamental length scale.

5 Superluminal particles

Lorentz invariance can be viewed as a symmetry of the motion equations, in which case no
reference to absolute properties of space and time is required and the properties of matter
play the main role (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1996). In a two-dimensional galilean space-time,
the equation:

α ∂2φ/∂t2 − ∂2φ/∂x2 = F (φ)

with α = 1/c2
leaving invariant the squared interval:

o and co = critical speed, remains unchanged under ”Lorentz” transformations

(20)

(21)

ds2 = dx2 − c2

odt2

11

so that matter made with solutions of equation (20) would feel a relativistic space-time
even if the real space-time is actually galilean and if an absolute rest frame exists in the
underlying dynamics beyond the wave equation. A well-known example is provided by the
solitons of the sine-Gordon equation, obtained taking in (20):

F (φ) = −(ω0/co)2 sin φ

(22)

where ω0 is a characteristic frequency of the dynamical system. A two-dimensional uni-
verse made of sine-Gordon solitons plunged in a galilean world would behave like a two-
Information on any
dimensional minkowskian world with the laws of special relativity.
absolute rest frame would be lost by the solitons, as if the Poincar´e relativity principle
(Poincar´e, 1905) were indeed a law of Nature, even if actually the basic equation derives
from a galilean world with an absolute rest frame. The actual structure of space and time
can only be found by going beyond the wave equation to deeper levels of resolution. At
this stage, a crucial question arises (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995): is c (the speed of light) the
only critical speed in vacuum, are there particles with a critical speed diﬀerent from that of
light? The question clearly makes sense, as in a perfectly transparent crystal it is possible
to identify at least two critical speeds: the speed of light and the speed of sound. It has
been shown (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1995 and 1996) that superluminal sectors of matter can be
consistently generated replacing in the Klein-Gordon equation the speed of light by a new
critical speed ci ≫ c (the subscript i stands for the i-th superluminal sector). All standard
kinematical concepts and formulas (Schweber, 1961) remain correct, leading to particles
with positive mass and energy which are not tachyons. We call them superbradyons as,
according to standard vocabulary (Recami, 1978), they are bradyons with superluminal
critical speed in vacuum. The rest energy of a superluminal particle of mass m and critical
speed ci will be given by the generalized Einstein equation:

Erest = m c2

i

(23)

Energy and momentum conservation will in principle not be spoiled by the existence of sev-
eral critical speeds in vacuum: conservation laws will as usual hold for phenomena leaving
the vacuum unchanged. Each superluminal sector will have its own Lorentz invariance with
ci deﬁning the metric. Interactions between two diﬀerent sectors will break both Lorentz
invariances. Lorentz invariance for all sectors simultaneously will at best be explicit (i.e.
exhibiting the diagonal sectorial Lorentz metric) in a single inertial frame (the vacuum
rest frame, i.e. the ”absolute” rest frame). If superluminal particles couple weakly to
ordinary matter, their eﬀect on the ordinary sector will occur at very high energy and very
short distance (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c), far from the domain of successful conventional
tests of Lorentz invariance (Lamoreaux, Jacobs, Heckel, Raab and Forston, 1986 ; Hills and
Hall, 1990). In particular, superbradyons naturally escape the constraints on the critical
speed derived in some speciﬁc models (Coleman and Glashow, 1997; Glashow, Halprin,
Krastev, Leung and Pantaleone, 1997). High-energy experiments can therefore open new

12

windows in this ﬁeld. Finding some track of a superluminal sector (e.g. through violations
of Lorentz invariance in the ordinary sector) may be a unique way to experimentally dis-
cover the vacuum rest frame. Furthermore, superbradyons can be the fundamental matter
from which Planck-scale strings would actually be built. Superluminal particles lead to
consistent cosmological models (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997d), where they may well provide
most of the cosmic (dark) matter. Although recent criticism to this suggestion has been
emitted in a speciﬁc model on the grounds of gravitation theory (Konstantinov, 1997), the
framework used is crucially diﬀerent from the multi-graviton approach suggested in our
papers, where each dynamical sector would generate its own graviton.

Conventional tests of special relativity are performed using low-energy phenomena. The
highest momentum scale involved in nuclear magnetic resonance tests of special relativity
is related to the energy of virtual photons exchanged, which does not exceede the electro-
magnetic energy scale Eem ≈ αem r−1 ≈ 1 MeV , where αem is the electromagnetic
constant and r the distance scale between two protons in a nucleus. However, the extrapo-
lation between the 1 MeV scale and the 1 − 100 T eV scale (energies to be covered by LHC
and VLHC) may involve a very large number, making compatible low-energy results with
the possible existence of superluminal particles above T eV scale. Assume, for instance,
that between E ≈ 1 MeV and E ≈ 100 T eV the mixing between an ”ordinary” particle
(i.e. with critical speed in vacuum equal to the speed of light c in the relativistic limit) of
energy E0 and a superluminal particle with mass mi , critical speed ci ≫ c and energy
Ei is described in the vacuum rest frame by a non-diagonal term in the energy matrix of
the form (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997c):

ǫ ≈ ǫ0 p ci ρ (p2)

(24)

where p stands for momentum, ǫ0 is a constant describing the strength of the mixing and
ρ (p2) = p2 (p2 + M 2 c2)−1 accounts for a threshold eﬀect with M c2 ≈ 100 T eV
due to dynamics. Then, the correction to the energy of the ”ordinary” particle will be
≈ ǫ2 (E0 − Ei)−1 whereas the mixing angle will be ≈ ǫ (E0 − Ei)−1 . Taking the
rest energy of the superluminal particle to be Ei,rest = mi c2
i ≈ 1 T eV , we get a
mixing ≈ 0.5 ǫ0 at p c = 100 T eV , ≈ 10−2 ǫ0 at p c = 10 T eV and ≈ 10−4 ǫ0 at
p c = 1 T eV . Such ﬁgures would clearly justify the search for superbradyons at LHC and
VLHC (E ≈ 100 T eV per beam) machines provided low-energy bounds do not force ǫ0
to be too small. With the above ﬁgures, at p c = 1 MeV one would have a correction to
the photon energy less than ≈ 10−32 ǫ2
0 p ci which, requiring the correction to the photon
energy not to be larger than ≈ 10−20 , would allow for large values of ǫ0 if ci is less than
≈ 1012 c . In any case, a wide range of values of ci and ǫ0 can be explored. More stringent
bounds may come from corrections to the quark propagator at momenta ≈ 100 MeV .
There, the correction to the quark energy would be bounded only by ≈ 10−24 ǫ2
0 p ci and
requiring it to be less than ≈ 10−20 p c would be equivalent to ǫ0 < 0.1 for ci = 106 c .
Obvioulsy, these estimates are rough and a detailed calculation of nuclear parameters using

13

the deformed relativistic kinematics obtained from the mixing would be required. It must
be noticed that the situation is fundamentally diﬀerent from that contemplated in the
T Hǫµ formalism and, in the present case, Lorentz invariance can remain unbroken in the
low-momentum limit, as the deformation of relativistic kinematics for ”ordinary” particles
is momentum-dependent. Therefore, it may be a safe policy to explore all possible values
of ci and ǫ0 at accelerators (including other possible parametrizations of ǫ) without trying
to extrapolate bounds from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments.

The production of one or two (stable or unstable) superluminal particles in a high-
energy accelerator experiment is potentially able to yield very well-deﬁned signatures
through the shape of decay products or ”Cherenkov” radiation in vacuum events (sponta-
neous emission of ”ordinary” particles). In the vacuum rest frame, a relativistic superlu-
minal particle would have energy E ≃ p ci , where ci ≫ c is the critical speed of the
particle. When decaying into ”ordinary” particles with energies Eα ≃ pα c (α = 1, ..., N)
for a N-particle decay product), the initial energy and momentum must split in such a
way that very large momenta pα ≫ p are produced (in order to recover the total energy
with ”ordinary” particles) but compensate to give the total momentum p .This requires
the shape of the event to be exceptionally isotropic, or with two jets back to back, or
yielding several jets with the required small total momentum. Similar trends will arise
in ”Cherenkov-like” events, and remain observable in the laboratory frame. It must be
noticed that, if the velocity of the laboratory with respect to the vacuum rest frame is
≈ 10−3 c , the laboratory velocity of superluminal particles as measured by detectors (if
ever feasible) would be ≈ 103 c in most cases (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a).

The possibility that superluminal matter exists, and that it plays nowadays an impor-
tant role in our Universe, should be kept in mind when addressing the two basic questions
raised by the analysis of any cosmic ray event: a) the nature and properties of the cosmic
ray primary; b) the identiﬁcation (nature and position) of the source of the cosmic ray. If
the primary is a superluminal particle, it will escape conventional criteria for particle iden-
tiﬁcation and most likely produce a speciﬁc signature (e.g. in inelastic collisions) diﬀerent
from those of ordinary primaries. Like neutrino events, in the absence of ionization (which
will in any case be very weak) we may expect the event to start anywhere inside the de-
tector. Unlike very high-energy neutrino events, events created by superluminal primaries
can originate from a particle having crossed the earth. As in accelerator experiments (see
the above discussion), an incoming, relativistic superluminal particle with momentum p
and energy Ein ≃ p ci in the vacuum rest frame, hitting an ordinary particle at rest, can
release most of its energy into two ordinary particles or jets with momenta (in the vacuum
rest frame) close to pmax = 1/2 p ci c−1 and oriented back to back in such a way that
the two momenta almost cancel, or into several jets with a very small total momentum, or
into a more or less isotropic event with an equally small total momentum. Then, an en-
ergy ER ≃ Ein would be transferred to ordinary secondaries. Corrections due to the earth
motion must be applied (Gonzalez-Mestres, 1997a) before deﬁning the expected event con-

14

ﬁguration in laboratory experiments (AUGER, AMANDA...). At very high energy, such
If
events would be easy to identify in large-volume detectors, even at very small rate.
the source is superluminal, it can be located anywhere (and even be a free particle) and
will not necessarily be at the same place as conventional sources of ordinary cosmic rays.
High-energy cosmic ray events originating form superluminal sources will provide hints on
the location of such sources and be possibly the only way to observe them. At very high
energies, the GZK cutoﬀ does not in principle hold for cosmic ray events originating from
superluminal matter: this is obvious if the primaries are superluminal particles that we
expect to interact very weakly with the cosmic microwave background, but is also true for
ordinary primaries as we do not expect them to be produced at the locations of ordinary
sources and there is no upper bound to their energy around 100 EeV . Besides ”Cherenkov”
deceleration, a superluminal cosmic background radiation may exist and generate its own
GZK cutoﬀs. However, if there are large amounts of superluminal matter around us, they
can be the main superluminal source of cosmic rays reaching the earth.

References

Anchordoqui, L., Dova, M.T., G´omez Dumm, D. and Lacentre, P., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik
C 73 , 465 (1997).
AUGER Collaboration, ”The Pierre Auger Observatory Design Report” (1997).
Bacry, H. Marseille preprint CPT-93/P.2911 , available from KEK database.
Bird, D.J. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 , 3401 (1993).
Bird, D.J. et al., Ap. J. 424 , 491 (1994).
Blokhintsev, D.I. and Kolerov, G.I., Nuovo Cimento 34 , 163 (1964).
Blokhintsev, D.I., Sov. Phys. Usp. 9 , 405 (1966).
Coleman, S. and Glashow, S.L. , Phys. Lett. B 405 , 249 (1997).
Dova, M.T., Epele, L.N. and Hojvat, C., Proceedings of the 25th International Cosmic Ray
Conference (ICRC97), Durban, South Africa, Vol. 7 , p. 381 (1997).
Fernandez, J., Phys. Lett. B 368 , 53 (1996).
Eggert, K., Jones, L.W. and Taylor, C.C., Proceedings of ICRC97 , Vol. 6 , p. 25 (1997).
Gabriel, M.D. and Haugan, M.P. , Phys. Rev. D 41 , 2943 (1990).
Glashow, S.L., Halprin, A., Krastev, P.I., Leung, C.N. and Pantaleone, J., ”Comments on
Neutrino Tests of Special Relativity”, Phys. Rev. D 56 , 2433 (1997).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Physical and Cosmological Implications of a Possible Class of Parti-
cles Able to Travel Faster than Light”, contribution to the 28th International Conference on
High-Energy Physics, Warsaw July 1996 . Paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL (Los Alamos)
electronic archive (1996).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Space, Time and Superluminal Particles”, paper physics/9702026
of LANL electronic archive (1997a).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Superluminal Particles and High-Energy Cosmic Rays”, Proceed-

15

ings of the 25th International Cosmic Ray Conference (ICRC97), Vol.6 , p.109 . Paper
physics/9705032 of LANL electronic archive (1997b).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Invariance and Superluminal Particles”, March 1997 , pa-
per physics/9703020 of LANL electronic archive (1997c).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Vacuum Structure, Lorentz Symmetry and Superluminal Parti-
cles”, paper physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive (1997d).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Symmetry Violation and Very High-Energy Cross Sec-
tions”, paper physics/9706022 of LANL electronic archive (1997e).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Absence of Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin Cutoﬀ and Stability of Un-
stable Particles at Very High Energy, as a Consequence of Lorentz Symmetry Violation”,
Proceedings of ICRC97 , Vol. 6 , p. 113 . Paper physics/9705031 of LANL electronic
archive (1997f).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Possible Eﬀects of Lorentz Symmetry Violation on the Interaction
Properties of Very High-Energy Cosmic Rays”, paper physics/9706032 of LANL electronic
archive (1997g).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”High-Energy Nuclear Physics with Lorentz Symmetry Violation”,
paper nucl-th/9708028 of LANL electronic archive (1997h).
Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ”Lorentz Symmetry Violation and Superluminal Particles at Future
Colliders”, paper physics/9708028 of LANL electronic archive (1997i).
Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).
Hills, D. and Hall, J.L., Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697 (1990).
Hayashida, N. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 , 3491 (1994).
Hayashida, N. et al., Proceedings of ICRC97 , Vol. 4 , p. 145 (1997).
Konstantinov, M.Yu., ”Comments on the Hypothesis about Possible Class of Particles
Able to Travel faster than Light: Some Geometrical Models”, paper physics/9705019 of
LANL electronic archive (1997).
Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J. and Forston, E.N., Phys. Rev.
Lett. 57 , 3125 (1986).
Poincar´e, H., Speech at the St. Louis International Exposition of 1904 , The Monist 15 ,
1 (1905).
Recami, E., in ”Tachyons, Monopoles and Related Topics”, Ed. E. Recami, North-Holland,
Amsterdam (1978).
R´edei, L.B., Phys. Rev. 162 , 1299 (1967).
Schweber, S.S., ”An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field Theory”, Row, Peterson
and Co., Evanston and Elmsford, USA (1961).
Will, C.M. ”Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics”, Cambridge University
Press (1993).
Yoshida, S. et al., Proc. of the 24th International Cosmic Ray Conference, Rome, Italy,
Vol. 1 , p. 793 (1995).
Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).

16

