7
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
1
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cosmic Tests for a More Explicit Equivalence
Principle

Rafael A. Vera∗
Deptartamento de Fisica
Fac. de C.Fis y Mat. Universidad de Concepcion
Casilla 4009. Concepcion. Chile

February 2, 2008

Abstract

According to this principle, the relativistic changes occurring to
the bodies, after velocity changes, cannot be detected by observers
moving with them because bodies and stationary radiations change in
identical proportion after identical circumstances, i.e, because bodies
and stationary radiations have identical relativistic laws with respect
to any ﬁxed observer. Eﬀectively the theoretical properties of particle
models made up of stationary radiations agree with special relativity,
quantum mechanics and the gravitational (G) tests. They ﬁx lineal
properties for all of them: the G ﬁelds, the black holes (BHs) and
the universe. The BHs, after absorbing radiation, must return to
the gas state. An eventual universe expansion cannot change any
relative distance because the G expansion of matter occurs in identical
proportion. This ﬁxes a new kind of universe. In it matter evolves in
closed cycles, between gas and BH states and vice versa, indeﬁnitely.
Galaxies and clusters must evolve rather cyclically between luminous
and black states. Most of the G potential energy of a matter cycle must
be released around neutron star and black hole boundaries. Nuclear
stripping reactions would transform G energy into nuclear and kinetic

∗email: rvera@buho.dpi.udec.cl

1

energies. This accounts for many non well explained phenomena in
astrophysics. This work has been published, in more detail, in a book.

1 The New Universe Fixed by the Explicit

Equivalence Principle

It is obvious that to study the universe we must use the most reliable phys-
ical principles. So far the Equivalence Principle is the best tested principle
in physics and, therefore, this is the most solid base for any theory, provided
that it does not depend on arbitrary assumptions. The explicit form of this
principle makes possible to avoid the dependence on any arbitrary assump-
tion because everything is ﬁxed by properties of quantums of radiation. In
this way everything in the universe is ﬁxed by this principle that ultimately
depends rather well known radiation properties. Viceversa, the good ﬁt of
the real universe with the theoretical one turns out to be a good test either
for the EEP or for the radiation properties.

The underlying physical theory based on the EEP has been treated more
extensively, and in more detail, in previous works published and presented in
several meetings during the last 23 years [1]− [12]. This one has been brieﬂy
summarized in another contribution presented in the MG8 meeting [12]. The
present work is a review of the work done to test the new astrophysical and
cosmological contexts ﬁxed by the EEP [11].

In previous works it has been proven that, if all of the intergalactic dis-
tances were increasing with the time, in the same proportion, the G potential
and length of the particle model would also increase with the time, in iden-
tical proportion as that of the universe. Then it would be not possible to
ﬁnd a strictly invariable standard body that does not expands itself in iden-
tical proportion as in the universe. This leads to conclude that An eventual
universe expansion cannot change the relative values of all of them : dis-
tances, velocities, temperatures and cosmological red shifts. This means that
the physical laws are also invariable after universe expansion. This result
turns out to be a self-consistency test of the EEP.

Consequently, according to the EEP, the Hubble red shift cannot depend
on the time and, therefore, the age and lifetime of the universe are not limited
by an eventual universe expansion.

On the other hand, according to the linear ﬁeld equation ﬁxed by the EEP,

2

the new angular momentum law ﬁxes the critical escape angles of the photons
and relativistic particles going away from a neutron star with GM/r > 1/2,
called black hole (BH). Such angles are very small but not null. Thus the
light emission rate of a massive BH is negligible compared with its absorp-
tion rate. So the average relativistic mass-energy of each of its nucleons
must increase with the time, after the radiation absorption. Thus, sooner
or later the BH must become unstable and explode. Such explosion must
transform the relativistic mass-energy of its nucleons into the potential and
kinetic energies of the hydrogen rich cloud generated after such expansion.
The last one would be condensed at faster rates over the dead stars and plan-
etesimals traveling around the BH. This would produce star clusters that,
sooner or later, after radiation emission, must return to BH states, and so
on indeﬁnitely [2], [4], [11].

A chain of BH explosions must produce a luminous galaxy that, sooner or
later, must end as a black galaxy (BG). The last one would also have global
properties resembling a BH.

Similar mechanism holds for a chain of luminous galaxy formations which

would produce clusters.

In general, macro-systems should evolve between rather luminous and
black states, and vice versa, indeﬁnitely. In this way the average universe
entropy would remain constant.

2 Cosmic Tests for the Explicit Equivalence

Principle

The new kind of universe provides crucial tests for the EEP. In particular:

Test Ia.- In order that the radiation lost by all of the luminous galaxies
can be equal to the one absorbed by the black ones, the average number of
the last ones must be of higher order of magnitude than the ﬁrst ones. Thus
most of the universe should be in more dense and dark states.

Test Ib.- The same result comes out from the higher average density of
the universe derived from the constants G and H. Then most of the universe
mass must be in the state of black galaxy (BG). Observe that only the higher
G ﬁelds of massive BGs and their associations can account for the higher
speeds observed in luminous galaxies. This would solve one of the cluster

3

missing mass problem in astrophysics. Notice that in the partially black
galaxies, the BHs and dead star remnants, produced after star evolution, can
also account for their (apparent) missing mass problems.

Test II.- All of the stages of the matter evolution cycles must be present

in the sky.

The new galaxies generated after chains of BH explosions, must have
the highest fractions of random angular momentum and maximum volumes
of low density stars recently formed with hydrogen not contaminated with
metals. They correspond with the red elliptical galaxies. By canceling ran-
dom angular momentum and loosing energy, they must become denser and
bluer, with an increasing number of dead stars in their borders. They must
show disc regions of higher net angular momentum densities that, for this
reason, don’t contract as fast as the random ones of the spherical bulges.
Thus the disc and spiral galaxies correspond to intermediate stages of galaxy
contraction.

The ﬁnal luminous bulge of a galaxy, surrounded by dead star remnants,
must be in lower G potentials. Thence it must emit light with higher G
redshifts1. Due to the smaller volume of the luminous region, and to its
lower absolute luminosity, the relative luminosity changes caused by star’s
explosions are higher. Due to the high average masses and densities of the
ﬁnal luminous stars, they must show more explosive events and emit higher
proportions of ultraviolet light compared with a normal galaxy. Those stages
correspond with the AGNs and quasars.

Then it may be concluded that most of the quasar’s red shift would be
intrinsic (not cosmological) one, and that their absolute luminositys would
be very small compared with ordinary galaxies. They would normally corre-
spond to the last luminous periods of galaxy cycles.

Test III.- According to point I, most of the low temperature cosmic ra-
diation background should come from BGs that are cooled down by BHs and
the rest of the universe. It has been found that most of such photons should
come from BGs located in long distance ranges of the order of magnitude of
the Hubble Radius [11]. This is consistent both with the low value of such
temperature and with its high isotropy.

Test IV.- The net G energy yield per unit of mass- energy [7], [11] cap-
1The existence of an additional red shift occurring during the light trip through strong

ﬁeld gradients of star remnants cannot be ruled out

4

tured by a central mass M turns out to be equal to 1 − exp[−GM/r]. From
this relation it is inferred that :

a) The net G energy yield in a matter cycle is of a higher order of mag-

nitude than the one of nuclear fusion.

b) b)Most of it must be released in the strongest G ﬁelds of neutron stars

(NSs) and BHs, either steadily or explosively.

Since the G binding energies per unit of mass of the neutrons in a NS
are much higher than the nuclear binding energies of ordinary nuclei, then in
principle neutron stripping reactions (NSRs) should occur after the impact
of atomic nuclei on a NS (or BH). The NS would capture neutrons and reject
protons or proton rich nuclei. Globally, NSRs would transform G potential
energy into kinetic and nuclear potential energies, mainly in the states of
relativistic protons of high magnetic rigidities. This kind of reaction would
convert He and heavier atoms into renewed H, at the cost of the lower ﬁnal G
potential of some neutrons captured by the NS. This mechanism is consistent
with the energies and composition of cosmic rays. They are obviously much
richer both in protons and proton rich nuclei.

The main ﬁelds of a NS (or a BH) would drive the external plasma to-
wards its polar regions where it would fall rather vertically. After NSRs,
according to momentum conservation, the rejection angles of the relativis-
tic particles are even smaller than the incident ones. Thus they must have
higher probabilities to escape from the G ﬁeld along the magnetic axis. These
particle beams correspond with the cosmic jets observed in central regions
of galaxies. Such regions are just those with the highest probabilities for
the existence of both: rather naked BHs and gas clouds. Such jets, in their
paths, can excite ﬂuorescence on gas and particles.

In the rather naked BHs that are left over after some supernovas, the even-
tual precession of the magnetic poles can drive the jets along cones producing
visible rings in their intersections with spherical shells of matter ejected from
earlier explosions [11]. These jets are obvious in the Hubble Space Telescope
pictures of: SNA1987A, the Hourglass, the Egg Nebulas, and in PRC95-24
(C. Burrows, J. Hester, J. Morse and NASA). They have been available in
internet, from NASA.

Test V.- From points I and IV), the most powerful stars should have a
NS inside of them2. Their energies should come both from nuclear fusion
2The probable mechanisms of NS formation in stars have been discussed in the reference

5

and neutron stripping. The last reactions must convert large fractions of the
G work into nuclear potential energy that would be used up in the external
shell [7],
local overheating, neutrino
cooling and star collapse (urca process).

[11]. This would prevent all of them:

The new star model has a better deﬁned mass-luminosity relation [7], [11],
which is roughly proportional to M 3.7. This one is consistent with that of
main sequence stars. This is also consistent with the higher densities and
temperatures of such stars, and with the low neutrino luminosity of the Sun
and its magnetic activity.

3 Conclusions

The EEP ﬁxes more simple and uniﬁed physical and astrophysical contexts,
starting from a single quantum and ending with the universe. They are self-
consistent and consistent with the observed facts. The high unity observed
this theory comes from the fact that everything turns out to be ﬁxed by
common properties of radiations. This way also reduces the number of inde-
pendent variables and the uncertainties due either to arbitrary assumptions
or experimental errors (or limitations).

The use of a well deﬁned reference frame, which is equivalent to generalize
the language used in special relativity, prevents the current errors due to the
ambiguity of the ordinary language used in current literature.

I started this work about 24 years ago from very simple but fundamental
questions, trying just to understand by myself the basic phenomena in nature.
Little by little the few ﬁrst ideas have grown up into an extremely simple
and self-consistent theory that can be used as a guide for understanding, in a
uniﬁed way, a wide range of phenomena occurring in the wonderful universe
in which we live [11].

Curiously, the truth may be much more simple than we expect. This may

be just the reason for which we normally do not see it so easily.

2.

6

References

References

[1] R. Vera, Teoria sobre Evolucion Iso-entropica del Universo. In Atenea.
Ediciones Universidad de Concepcion. Universidad de Concepcion. Con-
cepcion. Chile. 429-430, 195-212 (1974)

[2] R. Vera, Una nueva Concepcion Fisica del Universo. In Atenea. Edi-
ciones Universidad de Concepcion, Concepcion. Chile, 429-430, 103-127
(1976)

[3] R. A. Vera, What does the Work in a Gravitational Field? in: Proceed-
ings of The Einstein Centennial Symposium. on Fundamental Physics.
Univ. de Los Andes, Bogota. August 1979. eds. S. M. Moore, A.M. Ro-
driguez Vargas. A. Rueda, Univ. de Los Andes. G. Violini, Universita di
Roma, p. 597-625. (1981)

[4] R. A. Vera, A Dilemma in the Physics of Gravitational Fields. Int. J. of

Th. Phys. 20 19-50. (1981)

[5] R. A. Vera, Introduccion a una Teoria No-Local Aplicada a Campos
Gravitacionales Internal Report (1883). Departamento de Fisica. Uni-
versidad de Concepcion. Chile.

[6] R. A. Vera, Theoretical Properties of Gravitational Fields Derived from
Properties of Light. in: Proceedings of the Fourth Marcel Grossmann
Meeting on Gen. Rel. Universita di Roma, August 1985 ed. R. Ruﬃni.
Elsevier Science Publishers V. B. p. 1743-1752. (1986)

[7] R. A. Vera, A New Model for the Structure and Evolution of Main Se-
quence Stars in: Inside of the Stars. (IAU. Colloquium 137. ASP Confer-
ence Series, 40,. Ed. Werner W. Weiss and Annie Balgin.(Book Crafters
Inc.) p. 798-800 (1993)

[8] R. A. Vera, Uniﬁed relativistic physics from a standing wave particle

model. (http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9509014)

[9] R. A. Vera, The new kind of universe ﬁxed by a standing wave particle

model. (http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/astro-ph/9509053)

7

[10] R. A. Vera, Advances on a Uniﬁed Physics- Astrophysics Theory Based
on a Standing-Wave Particle Model. In Proceedings of the Seventh Mar-
cel Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity. Eds. R. T. Jantzen, G.
Mac Kreiser, R. Ruﬃni. World Scientiﬁc,.511-513 (1996)

[11] R. A. Vera, The New Universe Fixed by the Equivalence Principle and
Light Properties Ediciones Universidad de Concepcion. Casilla 1557.
Correo 3. Concepcion. Chile. (mbachman@udec.cl) (1997)

[12] R. A. Vera. Nonlocal Conservation Laws Derived from a more Explicit
Equivalence Principle (To appear in proceedings of the Eight Mar-
cel Grossmann Meeting. Jerusalem, 1997)(http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-
qc/9711013)

8

