7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TOPOLOGICAL COMBINATORICS

OF A QUANTIZED STRING GRAVITATIONAL METRIC

WAYNE R. LUNDBERG
Physics Department, Wright State University,
Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA

ABSTRACT

A string-theoretic structure of the standard model is deﬁned having a 4-D quan-
tum gravity metric consistent with topological and algebraic ﬁrst principles. Unique
topological diagrams of string states, strong and weak interactions and quark fami-
lies are evolved from this metric but published separately. The theoretical structure
includes known static and dynamic symmetries. A philosophical perspective on mod-
ern physics originates numerous opportunities for formal mathematical discussion.

Consider a-priori the Theorem: The topology of a three-point spinning met-
ric is a necessary and suﬃcient basis for 4-dimensional physical objects. The pre-
geometry of a two-point metric has been shown1 to provide the basis for physically
interesting theories of quantum gravity. Here gµν = hgµν(Yr,y,b)i. Similar topological
mechanisms of mass generation have been explored previously.2

This topological metric is equated combinatorially with Rishons3 using two
orthogonal intrinsic spin orientations. Local colored gauge ﬁelds are identiﬁed with-
out formal mathematical deﬁnition to be compatible with QCD. Perturbations of
the topological structure are not used to construct the static and dynamic symme-
tries of Standard particles and interactions.

Ten dimensional topological objects are constructed with the 3-point metric
as a basis. Three identical preons can be assembled in two distinct ways, corre-
sponding to the electron ( ¯T ¯T ¯T) and neutrino (VVV). It is evident that the 10-D
internal properties of the object literally “curl up”, R10 ⊃ R4, to form the 3+1-D
electron.4 The formal mathematical description of the topological electron is postu-
lated to be rigid.5 The string’s ground state results from minimized internal tensions
under a three-color partition, so it is called the Tripartite String Theory. The usual6
Nambu-Goto action of the Tripartite String becomes S = µ

Rt Rcolor qh(Yr,y,b)d2ξ.

Rishon combinatorics are easily identiﬁed with the standard model group
SU(3)c × SU(2)L × U(1)y. A material analog of this group is provided by restricting
Rubic’s cube. Spontaneous symmetry breaking is analogous to the requirement that
the corner cubies be restricted to their respective positions. An electron is modeled
by a left-hand twist of the r-y-b corner cubie, combinatorially similar to an isolated
quark. Charged quarks are modeled by twisting other cubies as follows.

The electric charge quantum numbers of particles are deﬁned by the orienta-
tion of the intrinsic curvature tensor. Orientation may be graphically indicated by
dark and light sided objects. The quark’s color is determined by the orientation of
the spin axis with respect to the color gauge ﬁelds. The oriented string allows two
permutations of color order (r-y-b, r-b-y) which naturally models antimatter.

The cubic symmetry of the electric and color charge diagram is exploited
to deﬁne the colored combinatorics of Rishonic string states. A unique Rubic’s
cube color scheme is deﬁned to map quark color and anticolor. Spin is modeled in
this paradigm by rotation of the cube to avoid the superﬁcial assignment of spin
quantum numbers.

A Tripartite String proton diagram was copyrighted several years ago. Color
copies of the ﬁgures discussed in this paper may be requested via E-mail from lund-
berg@emsmtp.wpafb.af.mil. The author assumes some artistic license by altering
the scaling so that the Planck length is of the order of the proton scale. The true
scaling accounts for the relative success of open string theories.7

The combinatoric model of a proton on Rubic’s cube requires the operator
[(Y−GYG−)(G−OGO−)(O−YOY−)]2, where G = ¯R. Thus the algebraic group sug-
gested by Golomb8 is deﬁned. Three such proton states exist which may be related
by a strong algebraic operation. The spin content of the proton is evident even
in the algebraic model,9 although the majority of it stems from gluons. It is cer-
tainly a ﬁnite-sized constituent-quark model which is responsible for experimental
measurements of spin dependance in proton collisions.10

Consideration of the toroid-compact string and the spin-orientation basis of
color charges determines the topology of the Tripartite String strong interaction.
This is a fundamental tree-level diagram wherein the string is compacted to wind
once through the handle rather than around it. The two-loop diagram is dissimilar
to that of a second generation quark in that the world sheet self-intersects at the
interaction point. Triangulating the moduli space of closed-string geometric ﬁeld
theory is required at interaction vertices.11

An algebraic gluon operator such as Gy→b = B−PsO(GB−G−B)2O−YsB is
applicable to the proton modeled previously. Multiple gluon exchanges are modeled
by superposition using the dynamical symmetry breaking rule that only r-y-b edge-
cubie states are used. Therefore only a deﬁned subset of Rubic’s cube (R-cube) is
required for complete representation of SU(3)c × SU(2)L × U(1)y.

The toroid compact tripartite string allows three “unmixed” knot states.12
The topological quantum gravity model does not allow world-sheet self-intersections
for non-interacting strings. The τ state resembles a trefoil knot and gives intuitive
motivation to seek mass generation as a function of the volume of the twisted toroid.
The three families explicitly evolved by the theory have been proven empirically.

The six colored gluons are deﬁned in the R-cube algebra. All possible r-y-
b edge states (gluons) have been mapped and shown to correlate identically with
the three knot-states arrived at via the topological approach. For a particle to be
in a bound state a gluon must be present on the cube, disallowing three colorless
edge states. The number of particulate states is now 256; fewer than the number of
generators required for the standard model group.

The 26-dimensional Tripartite String weak interaction world sheet comprises
two 10-D closed, oriented, bosonic strings (4-D quarks) and a 6-dimensional gauge
superﬁeld, or gluon.13 Extrinsic curvature may be ﬁxed while the intrinsic curvature
tensor describes the shape of the quark, which must change during weak interactions.

Thus temperature can be modeled by the extrinsic curvature of the world sheet.14
A weak interaction may only be modeled on one R-cube with the stipulation
that the two interacting particles be superimposed. The two interacting quarks
are operated on via an intermediate vector boson such as [RsP−
s R2](OR−O−R)2 ×
(RP−R−P)2[R2PsR−
s ]. The assembly is then decomposed since no binding gluon
exists and due to spatial separation. This method supplements that used in the
Standard Model with a more detailed notation of the operators used.

The topological model of a π0 meson reveals an ‘extra’ symmetry. The R-
cube model also requires an extra symmetric operator to model r¯r quarks, i.e.
Jr = GsO2G2
s . The total number of allowed states is now 512. Since
a colored supersymmetric operator is meaningless for the uncolored electron and
neutrino, 16 cube states are disallowed, leaving the correct number of generators
for the Standard Model.

s BsG2

s B2R2

s BsY2

A description of a quantum gravitational string theory which evolves uniquely
to the Standard Model is given. A mathematically well-founded proof of such a
physical theory is potentially realizable in the near future.

1. Conclusion

2. References

1. E. Alvarez, J. C´espedes and E. Verdaguer, Phys. Rev. D45 (1992) 2033.
2. R. Floreanini and R. Percacci, Mod. Phy. Lett. A5 (1990) 2247.

T.J. Allen, M.J. Bowick and A. Lahiri, Mod. Phy. Lett. A6 (1991) 559.

3. H. Harari, Festschrift in Honor of Yuval Ne’eman, p. 113.
4. Y. Ne’eman and D. Sija˜cki, Phys. Lett. B174 (1986) 165.
5. G. Fiorentini, M. Gasperini and G. Scarpetta, Mod. Phys. Lett. A6 (1991)

2033, G.D. Robertson, Phys. Lett. B226 (1989) 244.

6. M.B. Green, J.H. Schwarz and E. Witten, Superstring Theory,

Cambridge Univ. Press, I (1987) 22.

7. B. Andersson, Nucl. Phys. A461 (1987) 513c.

G. Siopsis, Phys. Rev. D39 (1989) 534.

8. S.W. Golomb, Sci. Am., ed. D.R. Hofstadter 7 (1982) 24.
9. F.E. Close and R.G. Roberts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 (1988) 1471.
10. European Muon Collaboration, Phys. Lett. B206 (1988) 364.
11. M. Kaku, Phys. Rev. D 41 (1990) 3734; 41 (1990) 3748.
12. V.F.R. Jones, Sci. Am. 11 (1990) 98.

E. Witten, Comm. Math. Phys. 121 (1989) 351.

13. C.G. Bollini and J.J. Giambiagi, Phys. Rev. D39 (1989) 1169.
14. J. Ambj6 orn and B. Durhuus, Phys. Lett. B188 (1987) 253.

