7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics Opportunities Above the
Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin Cutoﬀ:
Lorentz Symmetry Violation
at the Planck Scale

Luis Gonzalez-Mestres∗,†

∗Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
†L.A.P.P., CNRS-IN2P3, B.P. 110, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract. Special relativity has been tested at low energy with great accuracy, but
these results cannot be extrapolated to very high-energy phenomena: this new domain
of physics may actually provide the key to the, yet unsettled, question of the ether
and the absolute rest frame. Introducing a critical distance scale, a , below 10−25 cm
(the wavelength scale of the highest-energy observed cosmic rays) allows to consider
models, compatible with standard tests of special relativity, where a small violation
of Lorentz symmetry (a can, for instance, be the Planck length) leads to a deformed
relativistic kinematics (DRK) producing dramatic eﬀects on the properties of very
high-energy cosmic rays. For instance, the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoﬀ
does no longer apply and particles which are unstable at low energy (neutron, some
hadronic resonances like the ∆++, possibly several nuclei...) become stable at very
high energy. In these models, an absolute local rest frame exists (the vacuum rest
frame, VRF) and special relativity is a low-momentum limit. We discuss the possible
eﬀects of Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV) on kinematics and dynamics, as well as
the cosmic-ray energy range (well below the energy scale associated to the fundamental
length) and experiments (on earth and from space) where they could be detected.

STATUS OF THE RELATIVITY PRINCIPLE

H. Poincar´e was the ﬁrst author to consistently formulate the relativity principle

on the grounds of experiment, stating in 1895 [1]:

”Experiment has provided numerous facts justifying the following generalization:
absolute motion of matter, or, to be more precise, the relative motion of weighable
matter and ether, cannot be disclosed. All that can be done is to reveal the motion
of weighable matter with respect to weighable matter”

The deep meaning of this law of Nature was further emphasized by the same

author when he wrote in 1901 [2], in connexion with Lorentz contraction:

”Such a strange property seems to be a real coup de pouce presented by Nature
itself, for avoiding the disclosure of absolute motion... I consider quite probable

that optical phenomena depend only on the relative motion of the material bodies
present, of the sources of light and optical instruments, and this dependence is not
accurate... but rigorous. This principle will be conﬁrmed with increasing precision,
as measurements become more and more accurate”

The role of H. Poincar´e in building relativity, and the relevance of his thought,
have often been emphasized [3,4].
In his June 1905 paper [5], published before
Einsteins’s article [6] arrived (on June 30) to the editor, he explicitly wrote the
relativistic transformation law for the charge density and velocity of motion and
applied to gravity the ”Lorentz group” (that he introduced), assumed to hold for
”forces of whatever origin”. From this, he inferred that ”gravitational waves” prop-
agate at the speed of light. However, his priority is sometimes denied [7,8] on the
grounds that ”Einstein essentially announced the failure of all ether-drift experi-
ments past and future as a foregone conclusion, contrary to Poincar´e’s empirical
bias” [7], that Poincar´e did never ”disavow the ether” [7] or that ”Poincar´e never
challenges... the absolute time of newtonian mechanics... the ether is not only the
absolute space of mechanics... but a dynamical entity” [8]. It is implicitly assumed
that A. Einstein was right in 1905 when ”reducing ether to the absolute space of
mechanics” [8] and that H. Poincar´e was wrong because ”the ether ﬁts quite nicely
into Poincar´e’s view of physical reality: the ether is real...” [7]. A basic physics
issue (whether ether and an absolute rest frame exist or not), perhaps not deﬁ-
nitely settled, underlies the debate on priority. Actually, modern particle physics
has brought back the concept of a non-empty vacuum where free particles prop-
agate: without such an ”ether” where ﬁelds can condense, the standard model of
electroweak interactions could not be written and quark conﬁnement could not be
understood. Modern cosmology is not incompatible with an ”absolute local frame”
(the vacuum rest frame, VRF) close to that suggested by the study of cosmic mi-
crowave background radiation. If ”ether” and the VRF actually exist, the relativity
principle (the impossibility to disclose absolute motion) will become a symmetry,
a concept whose paternity was attributed to H. Poincar´e by R.P. Feynman [9]:

”Precisely Poincar´e proposed investigating what could be done with the equations
without altering their form. It was precisely his idea to pay attention to the sym-
metry properties of the laws of physics”

As symmetries in particle physics are in general violated at some scale, Lorentz
symmetry may be broken and an absolute local rest frame may be detectable
through experiments performed beyond the relevant scale.
It may even happen
that Lorentz symmetry be just an infrared attractor. Poincar´e’s special relativ-
ity (a symmetry applying to physical processes) could live with this situation, in
which case the relativity principle would refer to the impossibility to disclose ab-
solute motion through low-energy experiments. But Einstein’s approach, such as it
was formulated in 1905 (an absolute geometry of space-time that matter cannot
escape), could not survive. We discuss here two issues: a) the scale where we may
expect Lorentz symmetry to be violated; b) the physical phenomena and exper-
iments potentially able to uncover Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV). Previous
papers on the subject are references [10] to [20] and references therein.

2

RELATIVITY AS A LOW-ENERGY LIMIT

Low-energy tests of special relativity have conﬁrmed its validity to an extremely
good accuracy [21,22], in impressive agreement with Poincar´e’s 1901 conjecture.
But the situation at very high energy remains more uncertain (see [10] to [20]):
high-energy physics corresponds to a domain never covered by the experiments
that motivated special relativity a century ago. Figures can change by more than
20 orders of magnitude between the highest oberved cosmic-ray energies and the
scale explored by the above mentioned tests of Lorentz symmetry. If LSV follows
a E2 law (E = energy), similar to the eﬀective gravitational coupling, it can be
of order 1 at E ≈ 1021 eV and ≈ 10−26 at E ≈ 100 MeV (corresponding to
the highest momentum scale involved in nuclear magnetic resonance experiments),
If LSV is ≈ 1 at
in which case it will escape all existing low-energy bounds.
Planck scale (E ≈ 1028 eV ), and following a similar law, it will be ≈ 10−40 at
E ≈ 100 MeV . Our suggestion is not in contradiction with Einstein’s thought
after he had developed general relativity. In 1921 , A. Einstein wrote [23]:

”The interpretation of geometry advocated here cannot be directly applied to sub-
molecular spaces... it might turn out that such an extrapolation is just as incorrect
as an extension of the concept of temperature to particles of a solid of molecular
dimensions”.

It is in itself remarkable that special relativity holds at the attained accelerator
energies, thus conﬁrming Poincar´e’s conjecture far beyond expectations. But there
is no fundamental reason for this dazzling success to persist above Planck scale.
A typical (and natural) example of models violating Lorentz symmetry at very
short distance is provided by models where an absolute local rest frame exists and
non-locality in space is introduced through a fundamental length scale a [11]. Such
models lead in the VRF to a deformed relativistic kinematics of the form [11,12]:

E = (2π)

−1 h c a

−1 e (k a)

A where h is the Planck constant, c the speed of light, k the wave vector and
[e (k a)]2 is a convex function of (k a)2 obtained from vacuum dynamics. Expanding
equation (1) for k a ≪ 1 , we can write:

e (k a) ≃ [(k a)2 − α (k a)4 + (2π a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

m being the mass, α a model-dependent positive constant ≈ 0.1 − 0.01 for full-
strength LSV at momentum scale p ≈ a−1 h , and in terms of momentum p :

E ≃ p c + m2 c3 (2 p)−1 − p c α (k a)2/2

The ”deformation” ∆ E = − p c α (k a)2/2 in the right-hand side of (3) implies
a Lorentz symmetry violation in the ratio E p−1 varying like Γ (k) ≃ Γ0 k2 where
Γ0 = − α a2/2 . If c and α are universal parameters for all particles, LSV does not
lead to the spontaneous decays predicted in [24]: the existence of very high-energy

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

cosmic rays cannot be regarded as an evidence against LSV. With the deformed
relativistic kinematics (DRK) deﬁned by (1)-(3), Lorentz symmetry remains valid
in the limit k → 0, contrary to the standard T Hǫµ model [25]. The above non-
locality may actually be an approximation to an underlying dynamics involving
superluminal particles [10,12–14,17], just as electromagnetism looks nonlocal in
the potential approximation to lattice dynamics in solid-state physics:
it would
then correspond to the limit c c−1
i → 0 where ci is the superluminal critical speed.
As recently pointed out [16], equation (1) is a fundamental property of old sce-
narios (f.i. [26]) breaking local Lorentz invariance (LLI). An ansatz based on an
isotropic, continuous modiﬁcation of the Bravais lattice dynamics is [11]:

e (k a) = [4 sin2 (ka/2) + (2π a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

and simple extensions of the ansatz by R´edei [26] lead [16] to expressions like:

e (k a) = [10 + 30 (k a)−2 cos (k a) −

30 (k a)−3 sin (k a) + (2π a)2 h−2 m2 c2]1/2

(4)

(5)

In any case, we expect observable kinematical eﬀects when the term α(ka)3/2

becomes as large as the term 2 π2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 . This happens at:

E ≃ (2π)−1 h c k ≈ Etrans ≈ α−1/4 (h c a−1/2π)1/2 (m c2)1/2

(6)

Thus, contrary to conventional estimates of LLI breaking predictions [27] where
the modiﬁcation of relativistic kinematics is ignored, observable eﬀects will be pro-
duced at wavelength scales well above the fundamental length. For a nucleon,
taking a ≈ 10−33 cm and α ≈ 0.1, this corresponds to E ≈ 1019 eV , below the
highest energies at which cosmic rays have been observed. With full-strength LSV,
for a proton at E ≈ 1020 eV and with the above value of a , we get:

α (k a)2/2 ≈ 10−18 ≫ 2 π2 h−2 k−2 m2 c2 ≈ 10−22

(7)

and, although α(ka)3/2 is very small as compared to the value of e (k a) , the
term 2 π2 h−2 k−1 a m2 c2 represents an even smaller fraction. Although relativity
reﬂects to a very good approximation the reality of physics at large distance scales
and can be considered as its low-energy limit, no existing experimental result proves
that it applies with the same accuracy to high-energy cosmic rays.

Are c and α universal? This may be the case for all ”elementary” particles,
i.e. quarks, leptons, gauge bosons..., but the situation is less obvious for hadrons,
nuclei and heavier objects. From a naive soliton model [11], we inferred that: a) c is
expected to be universal up to very small corrections (∼ 10−40) escaping all existing
bounds; b) a possible approximate rule can be to take α universal for leptons, gauge
bosons and light hadrons (pions, nucleons...) and assume a α ∝ m−2 law for nuclei
and heavier objects, the nucleon mass setting the scale.

4

RELEVANCE OF COSMIC-RAY EXPERIMENTS

If Lorentz symmetry is broken at Planck scale or at some other fundamental scale,
and assuming that the earth moves slowly with respect to the VRF, the eﬀects of
LSV may be observable well below this energy and produce detectable phenomena
at the highest observed cosmic-ray energies. This is due to DRK [11,12,15,18]:
at energies above Etrans , the deformation ∆ E dominates over the mass term
m2 c3 (2 p)−1 in (3) and modiﬁes all kinematical balances. Because of the negative
value of ∆ E , it costs more and more energy, as energy increases above Etrans,
to split the incoming logitudinal momentum. The parton model (in any version),
as well as standard formulae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation, are also
expected to fail above this energy [12,15] which corresponds to E ≈ 1020 eV for
m = proton mass and α a2 ≈ 10−72 cm2 (f.i. α ≈ 10−6 and a = Planck length),
and to E ≈ 1018 eV for m = pion mass and α a2 ≈ 10−67 cm2 (f.i. α ≈ 0.1
and a = Planck length). In particular, the following eﬀects are predicted:

a) For α a2 > 10−72 cm2 , and assuming a universal value of α , the Greisen-
Zatespin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoﬀ [28,29] is suppressed [11,15,16,18] for the particles
under consideration and ultra-high energy cosmic rays (e.g. protons) produced
anywhere in the presently observable Universe can reach the earth without losing
their energy in collisions with the cosmic microwave background radiation.

b) With the same hypothesis, unstable particles with at least two stable particles
in the ﬁnal states of all their decay channels become stable at very high energy
[11,16]. Above Etrans, the lifetimes of all unstable particles (e.g. the π0 in cascades)
become much longer than predicted by relativistic kinematics [11,16,18].

c) In astrophysical processes at very high energy, similar mechanisms can inhibit
radiation under external forces, GZK-like cutoﬀs, decays, photodisintegration of
nuclei, momentum loss through collisions, production of lower-energy secondaries...
potentially contributing to solve all basic problems raised by the highest-energy
cosmic rays. Therefore, calculations of astrophysical processes at very high energy
cannot ignore the possibility that Lorentz symmetry be violated [18].

d) With the same hypothesis, the allowed ﬁnal-state phase space of two-body
collisions is modiﬁed and can lead to a sharp fall of cross-sections for incoming
cosmic ray energies above Elim ≈ (2 π)−2/3 (ET a−2 α−1 h2 c2)1/3, where ET is
the energy of the target [19]. As a consequence, and with the previous ﬁgures for
the parameters of LSV, above some energy Elim between 1022 and 1024 eV a cosmic
ray will not deposit most of its energy in the atmosphere and can possibly fake an
exotic event with much less energy.

e) Eﬀects a) to d) are obtained using only DRK. If dynamical anomalies are
added (failure, at very small distance scales, of the parton model and of the standard
Lorentz formulae for length and time [12,15]...), we can expect much stronger eﬀects
in the cascade development proﬁles of cosmic-ray events.

f) Cosmic superluminal particles would produce atypical events with very small

total momentum, isotropic or involving several jets [10,12,14,17].

In what follows, we discuss in more detail the implications of these eﬀects.

5

THE GZK CUTOFF DOES NO LONGER APPLY

For α a2 > 10−72 cm2, with a universal value of α , a E ≈ 1020 eV proton
interacting with a cosmic microwave background photon would be sensitive to DRK
eﬀects [11]. After having absorbed a 10−3 eV photon moving in the opposite direc-
tion, the proton gets an extra 10−3 eV energy, whereas its momentum is lowered
by 10−3 eV /c . In the conventional scenario with exact Lorentz invariance, this is
enough to allow the excited proton to decay into a proton or a neutron plus a pion,
losing an important part of its energy. The small increase in the E/p ratio is enough
to generate, in the ﬁnal state, the increase of the nucleon mass term m2 (2 p)−1 (as
momentum gets lower) as well as the pion mass term and the transverse energy of
both particles. However, it can be checked [11] that in our scenario with LSV such
a reaction is strictly forbidden, as the ≈ 2.10−23 increase of the E/p ratio cannot
provide the energy required, due to the deformation term ∆ E , by the splitting
of the incoming momentum. Elastic p + γ scattering is permitted, but allows
the proton to release only a small amount of its energy. Similar or more strin-
gent bounds exist for channels involving lepton production. Obvious phase space
limitations will also lower the collision rate, as compared to standard calculations
using exact Lorentz invariance which predict photoproduction of real pions at such
cosmic proton energies. The eﬀect is strong enough to invalidate the GZK cutoﬀ
and explain the existence of the highest-energy cosmic-ray events. It will become
more important at higher energies, as we get closer to the a−1 wavelength scale.
If α is not universal, the particle with the highest value of α can always reach the
earth, and other particles can below some energy above the GZK cutoﬀ. Assuming
exact universality of c , the situation for nuclei will crucially depend on the precise
values of α for each nucleus and on the energy range. Models where c is not exactly
universal are not ruled out, as the results from [24] do not apply [13] , and deserve
cosideration [18]. Our result is limited by the history of the Universe, as cosmic
rays coming from distances closer and closer to horizon size will be older and older
and, at early times, will have been confronted to rather diﬀerent scenarios. But it
is clear that DRK allows much older ultra-high energy cosmic rays, generated at
much more remote sources, to reach the earth nowadays.

A previous attempt to explain the experimental absence of the predicted GZK
cutoﬀ by Lorentz symmetry violation at high energy [30] proposed an ansatz re-
placing relativistic kinematics by the relation:

−2)

E = m h (p2 E

(8)
where the positive function h tends to (1 − p2 E−2)−1/2 in the relativis-
tic limit. These authors considered an expansion in powers of γ4 , where
γ = (1 − v2c−2)−1/2 , v is the speed of the particle and the coeﬃcient of
the linear term in γ4 had to be arbitrarily tuned to ≈ 10−44 in order to produce an
eﬀect of order 1 for a 1020 eV proton (leading to a potentially divergent expansion
at higher energies). No such problems are encountered in our approach, where the
required orders of magnitude come out naturally in terms of small perturbations.

6

LIFETIMES AT VERY HIGH ENERGY

In standard relativity, we can compute the lifetime of any unstable particle in
its rest frame and, with the help of a Lorentz transformation, obtain the Lorentz-
dilated lifetime for a particle moving at ﬁnite speed. The same procedure had been
followed in previous estimates of the predictions of LLI breaking [27] for the decay
of high-energy particles. This is no longer possible with the kinematics deﬁned by
(1), which explicitly incorporates LSV. Instead, two results are obtained [11,16]:

i) Assuming universal values of c and α , unstable particles with at least two
massive particles in the ﬁnal state of all their decay channels become stable at very
high energy, as a consequence of the eﬀect of LSV through (1). A typical order of
magnitude for the energy Est at which such a phenomenon occurs is:

Est ≈ c3/2 h1/2 (a m2)−1/2 (m2 − m2

1 − m2

2)1/2

(9)

where: a) m is the mass of the decaying particle; b) we select the two heaviest
particles of the ﬁnal product of each decay channel, and m2 is the mass of the
lightest particle in this list; c) m1 is the mass of the heaviest particle produced
together with that of mass m2 . With a ≈ 10−33 cm and α ≈ 0.1 for all
particles, the neutron would become stable above E ≈ 1020 eV . Some
hadronic resonances (e.g. the ∆++ , whose decay product contains a proton and
a positron) would become stable above E ≈ 1021 eV . Similar considerations
may apply to some supersymmetric particles. Most of these objects will decay
before they can be accelerated to such energies, but they may result of a collision
at very high energy or of the decay of a superluminal particle [10], The study of
very high-energy cosmic rays can thus reveal as stable particles objects which would
be unstable if produced at accelerators. If one of the light neutrinos (νe , νµ) has
a mass in the ≈ 10 eV range, the muon would become stable at energies
above ≈ 1022 eV . Weak neutrino mixing may restore muon decay, but with very
long lifetime. Similar considerations apply to the τ lepton, which would
become stable above E ≈ 1022 eV if the mass of the ντ is ≈ 100 eV but, again, a
decay with very long lifetime can be restored by neutrino oscillations. For nuclei,
the situation will depend on the details of DRK (basically, the value of α for each
nucleus) and deserves further investigation using more precise theoretical models.
ii) With the same hypothesis as i), all unstable particles live longer than naively
expected with exact Lorentz invariance and, at high enough energy, the eﬀect be-
comes much stronger than previously estimated [27] ignoring the eﬀects of DRK. At
energies well below the stability region, partial decay rates are already modiﬁed by
large factors leading to observable eﬀects. Irrespectively of whether m2 vanishes or
1)1/4 a−1/2 (≈ 1018 eV
not, the phenomenon occurs above E ≈ c3/2 h1/2 (m2 − m2
for π+ → µ+ + νµ , if a ≈ 10−33 cm and α ≈ 0.1). The eﬀect has a sudden,
sharp rise, since a fourth power of the energy is involved in the calculation. In the
LSV scenario, partial branching ratios become energy-dependent.

7

FINAL-STATE PHASE SPACE

No special constraint seems to arise from (2) if, in the VRF, two particles with
equal, opposite momenta of modulus p with α (k a)2 ≪ 1 collide to produce
a multiparticle ﬁnal state. But, as a consequence of LSV, the situation becomes
fundamentally diﬀerent at very high energy if one of the incoming particles is close
to rest with respect to the VRF where formulae (1) - (3) apply. Assume a very
high-energy particle (particle 1) with momentum ~p , impinging on a particle at
rest (particle 2). We take both particles to have mass m , and p ≫ mc .
In
relativistic kinematics, we would have elastic ﬁnal states where particle 1 has, with
respect to the direction of ~p , longitudinal momentum p1,L ≫ mc and particle 2
has longitudinal momentum p2,L ≫ mc with p1,L + p2,L = p . A total transverse
energy E⊥ ≃ mc2 would be left for the outgoing particles. But the balance is
drastically modiﬁed by DRK if α (k a)2 p becomes of the same order as m c or larger.
As the energy increases, stronger and stronger limitations of the available ﬁnal-state
phase space appear: the ﬁnal-state conﬁguration p1,L = p − p2,L = (1 − λ) p
becomes kinematically forbidden for α (k a)2 p > 2 m c λ−1(1 − λ)−1/3 . Above
p ≈ (m c a−2 h2)1/3 , ”hard” interactions become severely limited by kinematical
constraints. Similarly, with the same initial state, a multiperipheral ﬁnal state
conﬁguration with N particles (N > 2) of mass m and longitudinal momenta
L = p (g − 1) (gN − 1)−1 , gN ≫ 1
L (i = 1, ..., N , g > 1), where p′
gi−1 p′
and p′
L ≫ m c , would have in standard relativity an allowed total transverse
energy E⊥ (N , g) ≃ m c2 [1 − m c (2 p′
L)−1 (1 − g−1)−1] which is positive
deﬁnite. Again, using the new kinematics and the approximation (3), we ﬁnd that
such a longitudinal ﬁnal state conﬁguration is forbidden for values of the incoming
momentum such that α (k a)2 p c > 2 (3 g)−1 (1 + g + g2) E⊥ (N , g) . Elastic,
multiparticle and total cross sections will sharply fall at very high energy.

For ”soft” strong interactions, the approach were the two-body total cross section
is the less sensitive to ﬁnal-state phase space is, in principle, that based on dual
resonance models and considering the imaginary part of the elastic amplitude as
being dominated by the shadow of the production of pairs of very heavy resonances
of masses M1 and M2 of order ≈ (p m c3/2)1/2 in the direct channel [31,32]). Even
in this scenario, we ﬁnd important limitations to the allowed values of M1 and M2 ,
and to the two-resonance phase space, when α (k a)2 p becomes ≈ m c or larger.
Above E ≈ (2π)−2/3 (m α−1 a−2 h2 c4)1/3 , nonlocal eﬀects play a crucial role and
invalidate considerations based on Lorentz invariance and local ﬁeld theory used
to derive the Froissart bound [33], which seems not to be violated but ceases to be
signiﬁcant given the expected behaviour of total cross sections which, at very high-
energy, seem to fall far below this bound. An updated study of noncausal dispersion
relations [34,35], incorporating DRK and nonlocal dynamics, can possibly lead to
new bounds.
If the target is not at rest in the VRF, but its energy is small as
compared to that of the incoming particle, its rest energy must be replaced by the
actual target energy ET in the above discussions. The absence of GZK cutoﬀ is a
particular application of this analysis, which has a much general validity.

8

EXPERIMENTAL IMPLICATIONS

With DRK, a small violation of the universality of c would not necessarily pro-
duce the Cherenkov eﬀect in vacuum considered by Coleman and Glashow [24] for
high-energy cosmic rays. If c and α are both universal and α is positive, all stable
particles remain stable when accelerated to ultra-high energies and can reach any
energy without spontaneously decaying or radiating in vacuum (the case α < 0 ,
not considered here, would lead to spontaneous decays and ”Cherenkov” phenom-
ena for particles at very high energy). If c is universal but α (positive) is not, there
will in any case be at least one stable particle at ultra-high energy (that with the
highest positive value of α). If none of the two constants is universal, any scenario
is a priori possible. The mechanisms we just described compete with those consid-
ered in [24] and tend to compensate their eﬀect: therefore, the bounds obtained by
these authors do not apply to our ansatz where small violations of the universality
of c can be compensated by the deformation term [13,18]. On the other hand, the
discussion of velocity oscillations of neutrinos presented in [36] for the low-energy
region is compatible with our theory. However, the universality of c seems natural
in uniﬁed ﬁeld theories (whereas that of the mass is naturally violated) and pre-
serves the Poincar´e relativity principle in the low-momentum limit. As previously
stressed, deviations from the universality of c due to nucleon or nucleus structure
are expected to be very small according to naive soliton models.

For ultra-high energy cosmic rays in the E ≈ 1020 eV region, we expect the
most dramatic physical eﬀects to be governed by the values of α for the particles
considered. If Lorentz symmetry is broken and an absolute rest frame exists, high-
energy particles are indeed diﬀerent physical objects from low-energy particles, and
high-energy tests of Lorentz symmetry are required. To reach direct comparison
with a ≈ 3.1020 eV cosmic ray event, a p − p collider with energy ≈ 400 T eV per
beam would be required. Very-forward experiments at LHC and VLHC would be
crucial steps in a systematic check of the validity of Lorentz symmetry, comparing
their data with those of cosmic-ray events above ≈ 1016 eV . Evidence for Lorentz
symmetry violation would no doubt be the most important physics outcome of
particle physics experiments in the decades to come.

The possibility of taking the value of a−1 close to the wave vector of the highest-
energy cosmic rays, i.e. ≈ 1026 cm−1 , was considered in [16] in connexion with
a possible search for DRK eﬀects through particle lifetimes. With α ≈ 0.1 and
formulae (1)-(3), this would not be incompatible with low-energy bounds on LSV.
But the value of Elim would become too low leading to obvious incompatibili-
ties with data in the very high-energy region (the fall of ﬁnal-state phase space).
New bounds on LSV thus emerge from high-energy data using the parametrization
(1)-(3). Requiring that: a) cosmic rays with energies below ≈ 3.1020 eV de-
posit most of their energy in the atmosphere; b) the GZK cutoﬀ is suppressed
at energies above ≈ 1020 eV ,
leads in the DRK scenario to the constraint:
10−72 cm2 < α a2 < 10−61 cm2 , equivalent to 10−20 < α < 10−9 for
a ≈ 10−26 cm . Remarkably enough, assuming full-strength LSV forces a to be in
9

the range 10−36 cm < a < 10−30 cm . Data on high-energy cosmic rays contain
information relevant to the search for DRK signatures and should be carefully an-
alyzed. The energy dependence of the π0 lifetime above E ≈ 1018 eV can be a
basic ingredient in generating the speciﬁc cascade development proﬁle (e.g. elec-
tromagnetic showers versus hadronic showers and muons). Beyond DRK, strong
signatures can be produced by other LSV eﬀects: failure of the parton model for
protons and nuclei (including its dual ”soft” version [31,32]), substantially changing
the multiplicities and event shape; strong deviations from the relativistic formu-
lae for Lorentz contraction and time dilation leading to basic modiﬁcations of the
dynamics... Because of its stability at very high energy, the neutron becomes a
serious candidate to be a possible primary of the highest-energy cosmic-ray events.
Cosmic rays seem to indeed be able to test the predictions of (1) and set upper
bounds on the fundamental length a , as well as constraints on α . Experiments
like AUGER, OWL, AIRWATCH FROM SPACE and AMANDA present great
potentialities. The study of early cascade development (perhaps with balloons
installed in coincidence with the above experiments) will be crucial for the proposed
investigation. Very high-energy data may even provide a way to measure neutrino
masses and mixing, as well as other parameters related to phenomena beyond
the standard model. If Lorentz symmetry were not violated, there would be no
fundamental diﬀerence between the collision of a very high-energy cosmic ray and
the ”Lorentz equivalent” event at a collider. But, if Lorentz symmetry is violated,
the study of the parameters governing LSV will provide us with a unique microscope
directly focused on Planck-scale physics. Indeed, the E ≈ 1020 eV scale is closer,
in order of magnitude, to the Planck scale than to the electroweak scale.

The possibility that above Elim cosmic rays do not deposit all their energy in
the atmosphere suggests to operate underground detectors in coincidence with air
shower detectors, if ever feasible at the required scales. At E ≈ Elim , the cosmic
particle can still deposit enough energy in the atmosphere to produce a detectable
air shower for satellite-based and balloon experiments.

REFERENCES

1. Poincar´e, H., ”A propos de la th´eorie de M. Larmor”, L’Eclairage ´electrique, Vol. 5,

2. Poincar´e, H., ”Electricit´e et Optique: La lumi`ere et les th´eories ´electriques”, Ed.

5 (1895).

Gauthier-Villars, Paris 1901.

3. See, for instance, two essays by A.A. Logunov: ”On the articles by Henri Poincar´e
on the dynamics of the electron”, Ed. JINR, Dubna 1995, and ”Relativistic theory
of gravity and the Mach principle”, Ed. JINR, Dubna 1997.

4. Feynman, R.P. et al., ”The Feynman Lectures on Physics”, Vol. I, Addison-Wesley

1964.

5. Poincar´e, H., ”Sur la dynamique de l’´electron”, Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des

Sciences, Vol. 140 , p. 1504, June 5, 1905.

10

6. Einstein, A., Annalen der Physik 17, 891 (1905).
7. Miller, A.I., in ”Henri Poincar´e, Science and Philosophy”, Ed. Akademie Verlag,

Berlin, and Albert Blanchard, Paris (1996).

8. Paty, M., same reference.
9. Feynman, R.P., quoted by A.A. Logunov in [3].
10. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., contribution to the 28th International Conference on High
Energy Physics (ICHEP 96), Warsaw July 1996, paper hep-ph/9610474 of LANL
(Los Alamos) electronic archive.

11. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., paper physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive.
12. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., talk given at the International Conference on Relativistic
Physics and some of its Applications, Athens June 1997, paper physics/9709006.

13. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., papers physics/9702026 and physics/9703020.
14. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Proceedings of the 25th International Cosmic Ray Conference,
Durban July-August 1997 (ICRC 97), Vol. 6 , p. 113 (1997), paper physics/9705032.

15. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., paper nucl-th/9708028 of LANL electronic archive.
16. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., ICRC Proceedings, Vol. 6 , p. 109 (1997).
17. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., contribution to the Europhysics International Conference on
High-Energy Physics (HEP 97), Jerusalem August 1997, paper physics/9708028.
18. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., talk given at the Pre-Conference ”Pierre Auger” Workshop of

ICRC 97, paper physics/9706032.

19. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., paper physics/9706022 of LANL electronic archive.
20. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., talk given at the International Workshop on Topics on As-

troparticle and Underground Physics (TAUP 97), paper physics/9712005.

21. Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J. and Forston, E.N., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 57 , 3125 (1986).

22. Hills, D. and Hall, J.L., Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697 (1990).
23. A. Einstein, ”Geometrie und Erfahrung”, Preussische Akademie der Wissenchaften,

Sitzungsberichte, part I, p. 123 (1921).

24. Coleman, S. and Glashow, S.L., Phys. Lett. B 405, 249 (1997).
25. See, for instance, Will, C., ”Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics”, Cam-

bridge University Press (1993).

26. R´edei, L.B., Phys. Rev. 162 , 1299 (1967).
27. Anchordoqui, Dova, M.T., G´omez Dumm, D. and Lacentre, P., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik

C 73 , 465 (1997).

28. Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).
29. Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).
30. Kirzhnits, D.A., and Chechin, V.A., Soviet Journal of Nuclear Physics, 15 , 585

(1972).

31. Aurenche, P. and Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Phys. Rev. D 18 , 2995 (1978).
32. Aurenche, P. and Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik C 1 , 307 (1979).
33. Froissart, M., Phys. Rev. 123, 1053 (1961)
34. Blokhintsev, D.I. and Kolerov, G.I., Nuovo Cimento 34 , 163 (1964).
35. Blokhintsev, D.I., Sov. Phys. Usp. 9 , 405 (1966).
36. Glashow, S., Halprin, A., Krastev, P.I., Leung, C.N. and Pantaleone, J., Phys. Rev.

D 56 , 2433 (1997).

11

