7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LORENTZ SYMMETRY VIOLATION AT PLANCK SCALE,
COSMOLOGY AND SUPERLUMINAL PARTICLES

L. GONZALEZ-MESTRES
L. P. C. Coll`ege de France, 11 pl. Marcellin-Berthelot
75231 PARIS Cedex 05 , FRANCE
Laboratoire d’Annecy-le-Vieux de Physique des Particules, B.P. 110
74941 ANNECY-LE-VIEUX Cedex, FRANCE

Although Lorentz symmetry has been tested at low energy with extremely good
accuracy, its validity at very high energy is much less well established. If Lorentz
symmetry violation (LSV) is energy-dependent (e.g. ∝ E2), it can be of order 1
at Planck scale and undetectable at GeV scale or below. Similarly, superluminal
particles with positive mass and energy (superbradyons) can exist and be the
ultimate building blocks of matter. We discuss a few cosmological consequences of
such a scenario, as well as possible experimental tests.

1 Lorentz symmetry violation and superluminal particles

”Experiment has provided numerous facts justifying the following general-
ization: absolute motion of matter, or, to be more precise, the relative motion
of weighable matter and ether, cannot be disclosed. All that can be done is to
reveal the motion of weighable matter with respect to weighable matter” (H.
Poincar´e, 1895)

”Such a strange property seems to be a real coup de pouce presented by
Nature itself, for avoiding the disclosure of absolute motion... I consider quite
probable that optical phenomena depend only on the relative motion of the
material bodies present, of the sources of light and optical instruments, and
this dependence is not accurate... but rigorous. This principle will be conﬁrmed
with increasing precision, as measurements become more and more accurate”
(H. Poincar´e, 1901)

”The interpretation of geometry advocated here cannot be directly applied
to submolecular spaces... it might turn out that such an extrapolation is just as
incorrect as an extension of the concept of temperature to particles of a solid
of molecular dimensions” (A. Einstein, 1921)

1.1 Status of the Poincar´e relativity principle
The Poincar´e relativity principle 1,2 has been conﬁrmed by very accurate low-
energy tests 3,4, but its validity at much higher energies is not obvious 5,6. The
possibility that special relativity could fail at small distance scales was already
considered by A. Einstein 7: it is remarkable that the relativity principle holds

1

at the energies attained by particle accelerators. Experiments devoted to the
highest-energy cosmic rays may provide crucial tests of Lorentz symmetry 5.

1.2 Lorentz symmetry violation (LSV)

Lorentz symmetry can be broken introducing a local absolute rest frame (the
vacuum rest frame, VRF) and a fundamental distance scale a 5. If LSV follows
a ∝ E2 law (E = energy), it can be ≈ 1 at Planck scale and ≈ 10−40 at the
≈ 100 M eV scale, escaping all low-energy tests of Lorentz symmetry. But a
≈ 10−6 LSV at Planck scale can produce 5 obervable eﬀects at the highest
cosmic-ray energies (≈ 1020 eV ). If k is the wave vector, nonlocal models lead
in the VRF 5 to a deformed relativistic kinematics which for k a ≪ 1 gives:

E ≃ p c + m

2

3

c

(2 p)

−1 − p c α (k a)
2

/2

(1)

where p stands for momentum, m for mass and α is a positive constant.

1.3 Deformed relativistic kinematics (DRK)
Contrary to the T Hǫµ model 8, DRK preserves relativity in the limit k → 0 .
A fundamental question is that of the universality of α : is α the same for all
bodies, or does it depend on the object under consideration? If c is universal
and α ∝ m−2 , equation (1) amounts to a relation between E/m and p/m ,
as in relativistic kinematics. From a naive soliton model 9, we inferred that: a)
c is expected to be universal up to very small corrections (∼ 10−40) escaping
existing bounds; b) an approximate rule can be to take α universal for leptons,
gauge bosons and light hadrons (pions, nucleons...) and assume a α ∝ m−2
law for nuclei and heavier objects, the nucleon mass setting the scale.

1.4 Cosmic superluminal particles (CSL)

If Lorentz symmetry is broken at Planck scale, nothing prevents the existence
of particles with positive mass and energy and critical speed in vacuum ci (the
subscript i stands for the i-th superluminal sector) much larger than the speed
of light c 6. Such particles (superbradyons) could be the ultimate building
blocks of matter from which, for instance, strings would be made. They can
satisfy the same kinematics as ”ordinary” particles, but replacing the speed
of light c by the new critical speed ci , and interact weakly with ”ordinary”
matter. Nonlocal models at Planck scale may be the limit of an underlying
−1
→ 0 . CSL can possibly propagate
superluminal dynamics in the limit c c
i
in vacuum just like photons in a perfectly transparent crystal.

2

2 Some cosmological implications
It was suggested 10, using a diﬀerent DRK from (1), that DRK could explain
the dark matter problem: the non additivity of rest energy for non interacting
systems at rest would account for the illusion of a missing mass. But it was later
argued 11 that the eﬀect would actually be opposite to observation. However,
both authors use a model where the additive quantity, instead of energy, is:

F (m , E) = 2 κ (m) sinh [2

−1 κ

−1 (m) E]

(2)

and the constant κ (similar to the parameter α of our model) has a universal
value. There is no fundamental reason for this universality and similar ar-
guments to those developed for our DRK model would suggest 9 κ ∝ m ,
restoring the additivity of rest energy for large non interacting systems at rest.
A generalization of Friedmann equations in the presence of superluminal
sectors of matter can be built 12 and does not present inconsistency with data.
Superluminal particles may actually be most of the cosmic (dark) matter.

References

1. H. Poincar´e, ”A propos de la th´eorie de M. Larmor”, L’Eclairage

2. H. Poincar´e, Electricit´e et Optique: La lumi`ere et les th´eories ´electriques

´electrique, Vol. 5, 5 (1895).

(Gauthier-Villars, Paris 1901).

3. S.K. Lamoreaux, J.P. Jacobs, B.R. Heckel, F.J. Raab and E.N. Forston,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 3125 (1986).

4. D. Hills and J.L. Hall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1697 (1990).
5. See, for instance, L. Gonzalez-Mestres, paper physics/9712047 of LANL

(Los Alamos) electronic archive and references therein.

6. See, for instance, L. Gonzalez-Mestres, paper physics/9712049 of LANL

electronic archive and references therein.

7. A. Einstein, ”Geometrie und Erfahrung”, Preussische Akademie der

Wissenchaften, Sitzungsberichte, part I, p. 123 (1921).

8. See, for a review, C.M. Will, Theory and Experiment in Gravitational

Physics (Cambridge University Press, 1993).

9. L. Gonzalez-Mestres, papers nucl-th/9708028 and physics/9709006 of

LANL archive.

database.

10. H. Bacry, Marseille preprint CPT-93/P.2911 , available from KEK

11. J. Fernandez, Phys. Lett. B 368, 53 (1996). of LANL archive.
12. L. Gonzalez-Mestres, paper physics/9704017 of LANL archive.

3

