7
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
2
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Observing Air Showers
from Cosmic Superluminal Particles

Luis Gonzalez-Mestres∗,†

∗Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Coll`ege de France, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
†L.A.P.P., CNRS-IN2P3, B.P. 110, 74941 Annecy-le-Vieux Cedex, France

Abstract. The Poincar´e relativity principle has been tested at low energy with great
accuracy, but its extrapolation to very high-energy phenomena is much less well estab-
lished. Lorentz symmetry can be broken at Planck scale due to the renormalization
of gravity or to some deeper structure of matter: we expect such a breaking to be a
very high energy and very short distance phenomenon. If textbook special relativity
is only an approximate property of the equations describing a sector of matter above
some critical distance scale, an absolute local frame (the ”vacuum rest frame”, VRF)
can possibly be found and superluminal sectors of matter may exist related to new
degrees of freedom not yet discovered experimentally. The new superluminal particles
(”superbradyons”, i.e. bradyons with superluminal critical speed) would have pos-
itive mass and energy, and behave kinematically like ”ordinary” particles (those with
critical speed in vacuum equal to c , the speed of light) apart from the diﬀerence in
critical speed (we expect ci ≫ c , where ci is the critical speed of a superluminal
sector). They may be the ultimate building blocks of matter. At speed v > c ,
they are expected to release ”Cherenkov” radiation (”ordinary” particles) in vacuum.
Superluminal particles could provide most of the cosmic (dark) matter and produce
very high-energy cosmic rays. We discuss: a) the possible relevance of superluminal
matter to the composition, sources and spectra of high-energy cosmic rays; b) signa-
tures and experiments allowing to possibly explore such eﬀects. Very large volume and
unprecedented background rejection ability are crucial requirements for any detector
devoted to the search for cosmic superbradyons. Future cosmic-ray experiments using
air-shower detectors (especially from space) naturally fulﬁl both requirements.

”The impossibility to disclose experimentally the absolute motion of the earth

seems to be a general law of Nature”

H. Poincar´e

”The interpretation of geometry advocated here cannot be directly applied to sub-
molecular spaces... it might turn out that such an extrapolation is just as incorrect
as an extension of the concept of temperature to particles of a solid of molecular
dimensions”

A. Einstein

(1)

(2)

(3)

RELATIVITY, MATTER AND CRITICAL SPEEDS

If Lorentz symmetry is viewed as a dynamical property of the motion equations,
In a two-

no reference to absolute properties of space and time is required [1].
dimensional galilean space-time, the equation:

α ∂2φ/∂t2 − ∂2φ/∂x2 = F (φ)

with α = 1/c2
formations leaving invariant the squared interval:

o and co = critical speed, remains unchanged under ”Lorentz” trans-

ds2 = dx2 − c2

odt2

so that matter made with solutions of equation (1) would feel a relativistic space-
time even if the real space-time is actually galilean and if an absolute rest frame
exists in the underlying dynamics beyond the wave equation. A well-known example
is provided by the solitons of the sine-Gordon equation, obtained taking in (1):

F (φ) = − (ω/co)2 sin φ

where ω is a characteristic frequency of the dynamical system. A two-dimensional
universe made of sine-Gordon solitons plunged in a galilean world would behave
like a two-dimensional minkowskian world with the laws of special relativity. Infor-
mation on any absolute rest frame would be lost by the solitons, as if the Poincar´e
relativity principle (see [2] to [5] for the genesis and evolution of this deep concept)
were indeed a law of Nature, even if actually the basic equation derives from a
galilean world with an absolute rest frame (a system built ”on top of a table”,
with co ≪ c). The actual structure of space and time can only be found by
going beyond the wave equation to deeper levels of resolution, similar to the way
high-energy accelerator experiments explore the inner structure of ”elementary”
particles (but cosmic rays have the highest attainable energies).

At this stage, two crucial questions arise: a) is c (the speed of light) the only
critical speed in vacuum, are there particles with a critical speed diﬀerent from that
of light? [1,6]; b) can the ultimate building blocks of matter be superluminal? [7,8].
These questions make sense, as: a) in a perfectly transparent crystal it is possible to
identify at least two critical speeds, those of light and sound, and light can interact
with phonons; b) the potential approach to lattice dynamics in solid-sate physics
is precisely the form of electromagnetism in the limit cs c−1 → 0 , where cs is the
speed of sound. Superluminal sectors of matter can be consistently generated [1,9],
with the conservative choice of leaving the Planck constant unchanged, replacing
in the Klein-Gordon equation the speed of light by a new critical speed ci ≫ c (the
subscript i stands for the i-th superluminal sector). All standard kinematical con-
cepts and formulas [10] remain correct, leading to particles with positive mass and
energy which are not tachyons. We shall call them superbradyons as, according
to standard vocabulary [11], they are bradyons with superluminal critical speed in

vacuum. The energy E and momentum p of a superluminal particle of mass m and
critical speed ci will be given by the generalized relativistic equations:

p = m v (1 − v2c−2
i (1 − v2c−2
E = m c2
Erest = m c2

i )−1/2
i )−1/2

i

(4)
(5)
(6)

where v is the speed and Erest the rest energy. Energy and momentum conservation
will in principle not be spoiled by the existence of several critical speeds in vacuum:
conservation laws will as usual hold for phenomena leaving the vacuum unchanged.
Each superluminal sector will have its own Lorentz invariance with ci deﬁning the
metric, and is expected to generate a sectorial ”gravity”.
Interactions between
two diﬀerent sectors will break both Lorentz invariances. Lorentz invariance for all
sectors simultaneously will at best be explicit (i.e. exhibiting the diagonal sectorial
Lorentz metric) in a single inertial frame (the vacuum rest frame, VRF, i.e.
the ”absolute” rest frame). In our approach, the Michelson-Morley result is not
incompatible with the existence of some ”ether” as suggested by recent results
if the vacuum is a material medium where ﬁelds and order
in particle physics:
parameters can condense, it may well have a local rest frame whose identiﬁcation
would be prevented by the sectorial Lorentz symmetries in the low-momentum limit
(where diﬀerent sectors do not mix and the sectorial Lorentz symmetries become
exact laws, so that each sector feels a ”Poincar´e relativity principle”).

If superluminal particles couple weakly to ordinary matter, their eﬀect on the
ordinary sector will occur at very high energy and short distance [12], far from the
domain of successful conventional tests of Lorentz invariance [13,14]. In particu-
lar, superbradyons naturally escape the constraints on the critical speed derived
in some speciﬁc models [15,16] based on the T Hǫµ approach [17] , as their mixing
with the ordinary sector is expected to be strongly energy-dependent [8,18]. High-
energy experiments can therefore open new windows in this ﬁeld. Finding some
track of a superluminal sector (e.g. through violations of Lorentz invariance in the
ordinary sector or by direct detection of a superluminal particle) may be the only
way to experimentally discover the VRF. Superluminal particles lead to consistent
cosmological models [6,7,9], where they may well provide most of the cosmic (dark)
matter [19]. Although recent criticism to this suggestion has been emitted in a
speciﬁc model on the grounds of gravitation theory [20], the framework used is cru-
cially diﬀerent from the multi-graviton approach suggested in our papers where we
propose (e.g. [1,9]) that each dynamical (ordinary or superluminal) sector gener-
ates its own gravitation associated to the sectorial Lorentz symmetry and couplings
between diﬀerent ”gravitons” are expected to be weak. Superbradyons can be the
ultimate building blocks from which superstrings would be made and a ”pre-Big
Bang” cosmology would emerge. Nonlocality at Planck scale would then be an ap-
proximation to this dynamics in the limit c c−1
i → 0 , where superluminal signals
undergo apparent ”instantaneous” propagation similar to electromagnetic interac-
tions described by a potential model of lattice dynamics in solid state physics.

IMPLICATIONS FOR HIGH-ENERGY COSMIC RAYS

Accelerator experiments at future machines (LHC, VLHC...) can be a way to
search for superluminal particles [12,18]. However, this approach is limited by the
attainable energies, luminosities, signatures and low-background levels. Although
the investigation at accelerators provides unique chances and must be carried on,
it will only cover a small domain of the allowed parameters for superluminal sec-
tors of matter. Cosmic-ray experiments are not limited in energy and naturally
provide very low background levels: they therefore allow for a more general and,
on dynamical grounds, better adapted exploration. It must also be realized that,
if the Poincar´e relativity principle is violated, a 1 T eV particle cannot be turned
into a 1020 eV particle of the same kind by a Lorentz transformation, and collider
events cannot be made equivalent to cosmic-ray events.

The highest observed cosmic-ray energies (up to 3.1020 eV ) are closer to Planck
scale (≈ 1028 eV ) than to electroweak scale (≈ 1011 eV ): therefore, if Lorentz
symmetry is violated, the study of the highest-energy cosmic rays provides a unique
microscope directly focused on Planck scale [7,8,21]. The search for very rare
events due to superluminal particles in AUGER, AMANDA, OWL, AIRWATCH
FROM SPACE... can be a crucial ingredient of this unprecedented investigation
[12,18,22,23]. In what follows we assume that the earth is not moving at relativistic
speed with respect to the local vacuum rest frame.

Superluminal kinematics

The kinematical properties and Lorentz transformations of high-energy superlu-
minal particles have been discussed elsewhere [12]. If an absolute rest frame exists,
Lorentz contraction is a real physical phenomenon and is governed by the factor
i = (1 − v2c−2
γ−1
i )1/2 for the i-th superluminal sector, so that there is no Lorentz
singularity when a superluminal particle crosses the speed value v = c in a frame
measured by ordinary matter. Similarly, if superbradyons have any coupling to
the electromagnetic ﬁeld (adding in the standard way the electromagnetic four-
potential to the superluminal four-momentum to build the covariant derivative in
the VRF), we expect the magnetic force to be proportional to v c−1
instead of
v c−1 . Contrary to tachyons, superbradyons can emit ”Cherenkov” radiation (i.e.
particles with lower critical speed) in vacuum. If ci ≫ 103 c , and if the VRF
is close to that deﬁned requiring isotropy of cosmic microwave background radia-
tion, high-energy superluminal particles will be seen on earth as traveling mainly
at speed v ≈ 103 c , as can be seen from the following analysis. Since we expect to
measure the energy of superluminal particles through interactions with detectors
made of ”ordinary” particles, we can deﬁne, in the rest frame of an ”ordinary” par-
ticle moving at speed ~V with respect to the VRF, the energy and momentum of a
superluminal particle to be the Lorentz-tranformed of its VRF energy and momen-
tum taking c as the critical speed parameter for the Lorentz transformation. Then,

i

i and momentum ~p′

the mass of the superluminal particle will depend on the inertial frame. The energy
E′
i of the superluminal particle i (belonging to the i-th super-
luminal sector and with energy Ei and momentum ~pi in the VRF) in the new rest
frame, as measured by ordinary matter from energy and momentum conservation
(e.g. in decays of superluminal particles into ordinary ones), will be:
E′
i = (Ei − ~V.~pi) (1 − V 2c−2)−1/2
i = ~p′
~p′
i,⊥
~p′
i,L = (~pi,L − Ei c−2 ~V) (1 − V 2c−2)−1/2
~p′
i,⊥ = ~pi,⊥

i,L + ~p′

(9)
(10)

(7)
(8)

where ~pi,L = V −2 ( ~V.~pi) ~V , ~pi,⊥ = ~pi − ~pi,L and similarly for the longitudinal
and transverse components of ~p′
i . We are thus led to consider the eﬀective squared
mass:

M 2

i,c = c−4 (E2

i − c2p2

i ) = m2

i c−4c4

i + c−2(c−2c2

i − 1) p2

i

(11)

which depends on the VRF momentum of the particle. mi is the invariant mass of
particle i , as seen by matter from the i-th superluminal sector (i.e. with critical
speed in vacuum = ci). While ”ordinary” transformation laws of energy and mo-
mentum are not singular, even for a superluminal particle, the situation is diﬀerent
for the transformation of a superluminal speed, as will be seen below. Furthermore,
if the superluminal particle has velocity ~vi = ~V in the VRF, so that it is at rest in
the new inertial frame, we would naively expect a vanishing momentum, ~p′
i = 0 .
Instead, we get:

i = − ~pi (c−2c2
~p′

i − 1) (1 − V 2c−2)−1/2

(12)

ic ≪ E′

i ≫ pi , although p′

and p′
i if V ≪ c . This reﬂects the non-covariant char-
acter of the 4-momentum of particle i under ”ordinary” Lorentz transformations.
Thus, even if the directional eﬀect is small in realistic situations (f.i. on earth), the
decay of a superluminal particle at rest into ordinary particles will not lead to an
exactly vanishing total momentum if the inertial frame is diﬀerent from the VRF.
In the rest frame of an ”ordinary” particle moving with speed ~V with respect to

the VRF, we can estimate the speed ~v′

i of the previous particle i writing:

~vi = ~vi,L + ~vi,⊥

(13)
where ~vi,L = V −2( ~V.~vi) ~V , and similarly for the longitudinal and transverse
components of ~v′

i . Then, the transformation law is:
i,L = (~vi,L − ~V) (1 − ~vi. ~V c−2)−1
~v′
i,⊥ = ~vi,⊥ (1 − V 2c−2)1/2 (1 − ~vi. ~V c−2)−1
~v′
(15)
leading to singularities at ~vi = c2 which correspond to a change in the arrow of
time (due to the distorsion generated by the Lorentz transformation of space-time)
as seen by ordinary matter traveling at speed ~V with respect to the VRF.

(14)

Experimental implications

At vi,L > c2V −1 , a superluminal particle moving forward in time in the VRF
will appear as moving backward in time to an observer made of ordinary mat-
ter and moving at speed ~V in the same frame. On earth, taking V ≈ 10−3 c
(if the VRF is close to that suggested by cosmic background radiation, e.g. [24]),
the apparent reversal of the time arrow will occur mainly at vi ≈ 103 c . If
ci ≫ 103 c , phenomena related to propagation backward in time of produced
superluminal particles may be observable in future accelerator experiments slightly
above the production threshold. In a typical event where a pair of superluminal
particles would be produced, we expect in most cases that one of the superluminal
particles propagates forward in time and the other one propagates backward. As
previously stressed, the inﬁnite velocity (value of v′
i) associated to the point of time
reversal does not, according to (7) and (9), correspond to inﬁnite values of energy
and momentum. The backward propagation in time, as observed by devices which
are not at rest in the VRF, is not really physical (the arrow of time is well deﬁned
in the VRF for all physical processes) and does not correspond to any real violation
of causality. The apparent reversal of the time arrow for superluminal particles at
~vi. ~V > c2 would be a consequence of the bias of the laboratory time measure-
ment due to our motion with respect to the absolute rest frame. The distribution
and properties of such superluminal events, in an accelerator experiment or in a
large-volume cosmic-ray detector, would obviously be in correlation with the di-
rection and speed of the laboratory’s motion with respect to the VRF. It would
provide fundamental cosmological information, complementary to informations on
”ordinary” matter provided by measurements of the cosmic microwave background.
From (14) and (15), we also notice that, for V ≪ c and ~vi. ~V ≫ c2 , the speed
i tends to the limit ~v∞
~v′
i

, where:

~v∞
i

(~vi) = − ~vi c2 (~vi. ~V)−1

(16)

i on earth is ~v∞

which sets a universal high-energy limit, independent of ci , to the speed of super-
luminal particles as measured by ordinary matter in an inertial rest frame other
than the VRF. This limit is not isotropic, and depends on the angle between the
speeds ~vi and ~V . A typical order of magnitude for ~v∞
i ≈ 103 c
if the VRF is close to that suggested by cosmic background radiation. If C is the
highest critical speed in vacuum, inﬁnite speed and reversal of the arrow of time
occur only in frames moving with respect to the VRF at speed V ≥ c2C −1 .
Finite critical speeds of superluminal sectors, as measured by ordinary matter in
frames moving at V 6= 0 , are anisotropic. Therefore, directional detection of
superluminal particles would allow to directly identify the VRF and even to check
whether it can be deﬁned consistently, simultaneously for all dynamical sectors. If
a universal, local VRF cannot be deﬁned, translational and rotational modes may
appear between diﬀerent kinds of matter generating signiﬁcant cosmological eﬀects
(e.g. a cosmic rotation axis for ”ordinary” matter).

A superbradyon moving with velocity ~vi with respect to the VRF, and emitted
by an astrophysical object, can reach an observer moving with laboratory speed
~V in the VRF at a time, as measured by the observer, previous to the emission
time. This remarkable astronomical phenomenon will happen if ~vi. ~V > c2 ,
and the emitted particle will be seen to evolve backward in time (but it evolves
forward in time in the VRF, so that again the reversal of the time arrow is not
really a physical phenomenon).
If they interact several times with the detector,
superbradyons can be a directional probe preceding the detailed observation of
astrophysical phenomena, such as explosions releasing simultaneously neutrinos,
photons and superluminal particles (although causality is preserved in the VRF).
For a high-speed superluminal cosmic ray with critical speed ci ≫ c , the momen-
tum, as measured in the laboratory, does not provide directional information on the
source, but on the VRF. Velocity provides directional information on the source,
but can be measured only if the particle interacts several times with the detector,
which is far from guaranteed, or if the superluminal particle is associated to a col-
lective phenomenon involving several sectors of matter and emitting also photons
or neutrinos simultaneously. In the most favourable case, directional detection of
high-speed superluminal particles in a very large detector would allow to trigger a
dedicated astrophysical observation in the direction of the sky determined by the
velocity of the superluminal particle(s). If d is the distance between the observer
and the astrophysical object, and ∆t the time delay between the detection of the
superluminal particle(s) and that of photons and neutrinos, we have: d ≃ c ∆t .
Annihilation of pairs of superluminal particles into ordinary ones can release very
large kinetic energies and provide a new source of high-energy cosmic rays. Decays
of superluminal particles may play a similar role. Collisions (especially, inelastic
with very large energy transfer) of high-energy superluminal particles with extra-
terrestrial ordinary matter may also yield high-energy ordinary cosmic rays. Pairs
of slow superluminal particles can also annihilate into particles of another superlu-
minal sector with lower ci , converting most of the rest energies into a large amount
of kinetic energy. Superluminal particles moving at vi > c can release anywhere
”Cherenkov” radiation in vacuum, i.e. spontaneous emission of particles of a lower
critical speed cj (for vi > cj) including ordinary ones, providing a new source
of (superluminal or ordinary) high-energy cosmic rays. High-energy superluminal
particles can directly reach the earth and undergo collisions inside the atmosphere,
producing many secondaries like ordinary cosmic rays. They can also interact with
the rock or with water near some underground or underwater detector, coming from
the atmosphere or after having crossed the earth, and producing clear signatures.
Contrary to neutrinos, whose ﬂux is strongly attenuated by the earth at energies
above 106 GeV , superluminal particles will in principle not be stopped by earth
In inelastic collisions, high-energy superluminal primaries can
at these energies.
transfer most of their energy to ordinary particles. Even with a very weak inter-
action probability, and assuming that the superluminal primary does not produce
ionization, the rate for superluminal cosmic ray events can be observable if we are
surrounded by important concentrations of superluminal matter, which is possible

in suitable cosmologies [7]. Atypical ionization properties would further enhance
background rejection, but ionization can be in contradiction with the requirement
of very weak coupling to ordinary matter unless the coupling is energy-dependent.
The possibility that superluminal matter exists, and that it plays nowadays an
important role in our Universe, should be kept in mind when addressing the two
basic questions raised by the analysis of any cosmic-ray event: a) the nature and
properties of the cosmic-ray primary; b) the identiﬁcation (nature and position) of
the source of the cosmic ray. If the primary is a superluminal particle, it will escape
conventional criteria for particle identiﬁcation and most likely produce a speciﬁc
signature (e.g.
in inelastic collisions) diﬀerent from those of ordinary primaries.
Like neutrino events, in the absence of ionization we may expect the event to start
anywhere inside the detector. Unlike very high-energy neutrino events, events
created by superluminal primaries can originate from a particle having crossed
the earth. An incoming, relativistic superluminal particle with momentum p and
energy Ein ≃ pi ci in the VRF, hitting an ordinary particle at rest, can, for instance,
release most of its energy into two ordinary particles with momenta (in the VRF)
close to pmax = 1/2 pi ci c−1 and oriented back to back in such a way that the
two momenta almost cancel. Then, an energy ER ≃ Ein would be transferred to
ordinary secondaries. More generally, we can expect several jets in a conﬁguration
with very small total momentum as compared to c−1 times the total energy, or a
basically isotropic event. Corrections due to the earth motion must be applied (see
previous Section) before deﬁning the expected event conﬁguration in laboratory or
air-shower experiments, but the basic trends just described remain. At very high
energy, such events would be easy to identify in large volume detectors, even at
very small rate. If the source is superluminal, it can be located anywhere (and even
be a free particle in the case of ”Cherenkov” emission) and will not necessarily be
at the same place as conventional sources of ordinary cosmic rays. High-energy
cosmic-ray events originating form superluminal sources will provide hints on the
location of such sources and be possibly the only way to observe them. The energy
dependence of the events should be taken into account.

At very high energies, the Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoﬀ [25,26] does
not in principle hold for cosmic-ray events originating from superluminal matter:
this is obvious if the primaries are superluminal particles that we expect to interact
very weakly with the cosmic microwave background, but applies also in practice to
ordinary primaries as we do not expect them to be produced at the locations of ordi-
nary sources and there is no upper bound to their energy around 100 EeV . Besides
”Cherenkov” deceleration, a superluminal cosmic background radiation may exist
and generate its own GZK cutoﬀs for the superluminal sectors. However, if there
are large amounts of superluminal matter around us, they can be the main superlu-
minal source of cosmic rays reaching the earth. To date, there is no well-established
interpretation of the highest-energy cosmic-ray events. Primaries (ordinary or su-
perluminal) originating from superluminal particles are acceptable candidates and
can possibly escape several problems (event conﬁguration, source location, energy
dependence...) faced by cosmic rays produced at ordinary sources.

POTENTIALITIES OF AIR-SHOWER DETECTORS

Since the discovery of superluminal matter would be an unprecedented event in
the history of Physics, and we do not know at what energy scale it would mani-
fest itself, direct detection of cosmic superluminal particles (CSL) deserves special
consideration having in mind the exceptional potentialities of future cosmic-ray de-
tectors. As we expect a very weak coupling between superluminal and ”ordinary”
matter, except possibly at Planck scale, it is crucial to be able to cover an unusually
large target volume. If the coupling increases with energy, it can compensate the
possible fall with energy of the CSL ﬂux and make the highest-energy experiments
especially adapted to the search for CSL. Future air-shower detectors devoted to
the highest-energy cosmic rays will observe the largest target volumes ever reached
in a particle physics experiment (especially in the case of satellite-based programs
such as OWL or AIRWATCH FROM SPACE). Due to the energies they are able to
cover, and considering the possibility that Lorentz symmetry be violated at Planck
scale, such experiments are as sensitive to phenomena generated by Planck-scale
physics as any possible particle physics experiment can be.

To possibly observe CSL, background rejection must be unprecedentedly pow-
erful. This would be the case for ultra-high energy events generated by CSL. As
previously stressed, the ratio Ein ≃ pi ci (in the VRF) provides a unique event
proﬁle: since the total momentum of the produced ordinary particles is very small
as compared to the total available energy (using c as the conversion factor), the
event cannot have the usual, sharply forward-peaked shape of showers produced by
”ordinary” cosmic rays. Instead, it can be made of two or more (broad) jets, or be
basically isotropic. No ”ordinary” ultra-high energy particle can produce such an
event shape. The discussion remains valid in any reference frame moving at low
speed with respect to the VRF, with the corrections discussed previously. There-
fore, air-shower detectors should basically look for events originating at any depth
in the atmosphere (like neutrino-induced events) but which, unlike neutrino events
where a single elementary particle gets part of the incoming neutrino momentum
and subsequently produces a conventional shower proﬁle, do not present a single
privileged direction for the produced particles and have instead a tendency to be
isotropic. Furthermore, if the earth moves at a speed ≈ 10−3 c with respect to the
VRF and c c−1
i ≪ 10−3, the total momentum of the produced particles must in
most events cancel with ≈ 10−3 precision as compared to the total energy, up to
ﬂuctuations due to unobserved neutrals and to measurement uncertainties.

REFERENCES

1. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Proceedings of the Moriond Workshop on ”Dark Matter in
Cosmology, Clocks and Tests of Fundamental Laws”, Villars January 1995 , Ed.
Fronti`eres, p. 645, paper astro-ph/9505117 of LANL (Los Alamos) electronic archive.
2. Poincar´e, H., ”A propos de la th´eorie de M. Larmor”, L’Eclairage ´electrique, Vol. 5,

p. 5 (1895).

3. Poincar´e, H., ”Electricit´e et Optique: La lumi`ere et les th´eories ´electriques”, Ed.

4. Poincar´e, H., Speech at the St. Louis International Exposition of 1904 , The Monist

Gauthier-Villars, Paris 1901.

15 , 1 (1905).

5. Poincar´e, H., ”Sur la dynamique de l’´electron”, Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des

Sciences, Vol. 140 , p. 1504, June 5, 1905.

6. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Proceedings of the IV International
Workshop on Theoretical and Phenomenological Aspects of Underground Physics
(TAUP95), Toledo September 1995, Ed. Nuclear Physics Proceedings, p. 131.

7. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., paper physics/9704017 of LANL electronic archive.
8. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., talk given at the International Conference on Relativistic
Physics and some of its Applications, Athens June 1997, paper physics/9709006
of LANL archive.

9. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., contribution to the 28th International Conference on High

Energy Physics (ICHEP 96), Warsaw July 1996, paper hep-ph/9610474.

10. Schweber, S.S., An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field Theory”, Row, Pe-

terson and Co., Evanston and Elmsford (1961).

11. Recami, E., in ”Tachyons, Monopoles and Related Topics”, Ed. E. Recami, North-

12. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., papers physics/9702026 and physics/9703020.
13. Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J. and Forston, E.N., Phys.

Holland, Amsterdam (1978).

Rev. Lett. 57 , 3125 (1986).

14. Hills, D. and Hall, J.L., Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 , 1697 (1990).
15. Coleman, S. and Glashow, S.L., Phys. Lett. B 405, 249 (1997).
16. Glashow, S., Halprin, A., Krastev, P.I., Leung, C.N. and Pantaleone, J., Phys. Rev.

17. See, for instance, Will, C. ”Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics”, Cam-

D 56 , 2433 (1997).

bridge University Press (1993).

18. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., contribution to the Europhysics International Conference on
High-Energy Physics (HEP 97), Jerusalem August 1997, paper physics/9708028.
19. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Proceedings of the First International Workshop on the Iden-
tiﬁcation of Dark Matter, Sheﬃeld September 1996, Ed. World Scientiﬁc, p. 93.
20. Konstantinov, M.Yu., ”Comments on the Hypothesis about Possible Class of
Particles Able to Travel faster than Light: Some Geometrical Models”, paper
physics/9705019.

21. Gonzalez-Mestres, talk given at the International Workshop on Topics on Astropar-
ticle and Underground Physics (TAUP 97), Gran Sasso September 1997, paper
physics/9712005.

22. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., Proceedings of the 25th International Cosmic Ray Conference,

Durban July-August 1997 (ICRC 97), Vol. 6 , p. 109 (1997).

23. Gonzalez-Mestres, L., talk given at the Pre-Conference ”Pierre Auger” Workshop of

ICRC 97, paper physics/9706032.

24. Peebles, P.J.E., ”Principles of Physical Cosmology”, Princeton University Press

1993.

25. Greisen, K., Phys. Rev. Lett. 16 , 748 (1966).

26. Zatsepin, G.T. and Kuzmin, V.A., Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 4 , 114 (1966).

