Do We See the “Dark Clouds” Again?
— On Some Puzzles in Contemporary Physics

Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China

Guang-jiong Ni∗

Abstract
Some conceptual problems in physics are discussed. Do we need a change in the
concept of matter structure? Why the “i = √
1” is introduced to quantum
mechanics (QM) essentially? What is the relation between QM and special rela-
tivity (SR)? Could we modify the stationary Schr¨odinger equation in conformity
with SR? How can a particle acquire a mass? We propose some tentative answer.
Their philosophical implications are emphasized.

−

PACS: 11.10.-z, 12.15.-y, 14.70.-e

8
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
1
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

0∗E-mail: gjni@fudan.ac.cn

1

The cognition of contemporary physics penetrates, on the one side, into the
microscopic world at the scale of 10−17 cm; on the other hand, it expands to the
universe at the scale of 1010 light year, i.e., 1028 cm. Meanwhile, it permeates
actively into the various ﬁelds of science and technology and play an immense
role in pushing them forward. Now it seems that the pace of progress in physics
itself is not as rapid as that in its applications. so the problems is how could we
speculate about the further development of physics in the next century.

In this paper, I would like to join the discussion of this problem from personal

point of view.
1. Do we see the “dark clouds” again?

In 1900, the British physicist Kelven (W. Thomson) had thought that the
mansion of classical physics was basically established, the work left for the physi-
cists in 20th century would be just mending. but he said again: “In the remote
part of sunny sky of physics, there are two small puzzling dark clouds”. He re-
ferred to the Michelson-Morley experiment and the experiments on black-body
radiation. As was well known, from these two dark clouds emerged the theory
of relativity and the quantum theory. The above story had been cited for many
times (e.g.
[1]). However, now I doubt whether it could reﬂect the overall sit-
uation at that time. The physicists (including Kelven), who had good eyesight,
should not fail to pay attention to the three successive discoveries in three years
1895-1897, the X ray, radioactivity and electron. They actually raised the cur-
tain of symphony of physics, even the whole science and technology in the 20th
century.

The so called dark clouds imply serious conﬂict between the new experimental
facts and existing theory. it seems that the contradictions encountered in present
day physics is not so clearcut or acute as that occurred 100 years ago. but at
least there are four puzzles which are generally recognized.

1.1. Why the quarks can not escape from hadrons? (the puzzle of quark

conﬁnement).

1.2. After the discovery of parity violation in 1956, the violation of CP (i.e.
T) invariance was discovered in 1964. But the extent of violation is only 0.3%.
What does it mean?

1.3 The quasars discovered since the sixties in astronomy are characterized by
their small volumes, high luminosities and strange phenomena in the change of
luminosity. No satisfying explanation has been found for them.

1.4. The luminous matter only comprise the minority part of the universe.

the majority part of universe is composed of dark matter. What are they?

I wish to add a theoretical problem generally emphasized:
1.5. What is the essence or origin of mass?
Another theoretical problem may not be so generally established:
1.6. What is the essence of special relativity (SR)? What is the relation

between SR and quantum mechanics (QM)?

In the following, due to my lack of knowledge in 1.3 and 1.4, only the other

four problems will be discussed.
2. “Why an electron can not fall inside?” and “Why the quark can not escape
outside?”.

In comparison with the consideration about various possibilities beyond the

2

standard model (SM) in particle physics by some theoretical physicists, my point
of view is rather conservative. I suggest that the ﬁrst thing should be to digest so
profound achievements of the 20th century physics. In ancient China, Confucius
had said that“ to gain new insights through restudying old materials”.

For instance, a fact which forms an acute contrast to problem 1.1 occurred
at the beginning of this century. “ Why an electron can not fall into the nucleus
under its attraction?” It was precisely the deep thinking on puzzle of “atom
stability” which prompted N. Bohr to propose his quantum model of atom in
1913. After the establishment of QM by Heisenberg, Schr¨odinger et al. around
1924, one realized that it is the “uncertainty relation” reﬂecting the “wave-particle
dualism” which ensures the stability of atom. When a particle is compressed, its
energy increases. The stronger the attraction force is, the stronger its “repulsion”
against the compression will be.

Now look at the collision between e+ and e− in a collider, say in the BEPC
in Beijing. When the energy in the system of center of mass reaches 3.097 GeV,
a particle J/ψ may be created. J/ψ = (c
¯c) is considered as a binding state
of quark c and anti-quark ¯c. However, either c or ¯c can not be found in isolated
state till now. For example, if the energy is enhanced to 2
1.869 GeV, the
bond connecting c and ¯c is broken, but a pair of d quark, d and ¯d are created
immediately. What we see are two separated D mesons, D+ = (c ¯d) and D− =
(¯cd).

−

×

So the “quark conﬁnement” together with the emergence of quark-antiquark
pair shows a qualitative change in the concept of structure of matter.
In the
past, if two particles a and b are combined into a composite particle A with
binding energy B being much smaller than the rest energy E0, we can say that a
and b are constituent particles or “building blocks” in A=(ab). This is because
the diﬀerence between the binding state of a or b in A and the free state after
separation is small( B/E0
1) . One could often neglect the diﬀerence. Now
the situation is no longer true. The fact of “quark conﬁnement” tells us that
the structure of matter is essentially not piled up by particles but a structure of
something else [2].

It is intimately related to problem 1.5. The rest mass of e+ or e− is only 0.511
10−4 of J/ψ mass. So J/ψ is not hiding inside the e− or e+,
Mev, less than 1.65
but is excited out of vacuum during the collision. But what object is excited?
In our opinion, it is nothing but the “fundamental contradictions” in the nature.
The important thing is: a “contradiction” is massless and invisible before it is
excited. This was a conjecture by G.W.F. Hegel and F. Engels, now is actually
veriﬁed by experiments in physics [3].

≪

×

It seems to us that only the concept of “contradiction” is capable of grasping,
in 100 years time span, two features of matter structure — “Why an electron
can not fall into nucleus?” and “why the quark can not escape from a hadron?”
they seems opposite but virtually are complementary to each other. As this
kind of concept is beyond the scope of usual atomism familiar to western physics
community, physicists had underestimated the “repulsiveness” of contradiction
again and again, now are still underestimating the “identity” of it.
3. The theory of “primary gas” and new “ether”.

For further exploiting the above point of view , let us return back to QM. The

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

wave function of a free particle with momentum ~p and energy E is described by

In our explanation, being an abstract representation of contradiction between
particle and its environment [1], ψ consists of two parts:

Under a phase transformation, it reads:

ψ

exp[

(~p

~x

Et)]

∼

·

−

i
¯h

ψ = Reψ + iImψ

′

ψ

= eiθψ

ψ

→

Reψ
Imψ

→
→

′

Reψ
Imψ

′

sin θImψ
= cos θReψ
−
= sin θReψ + cos θImψ

|

|

Note that: (a) Both Reψ and Imψ are real, but they are all nonobservables. (b)
The distinction between them is necessary. One side regards the existence of
other side as the premise of existence of itself. They are indivisible. Any one of
two sides can not exist individually. (c) They can be transformed each other as
2 invariant.
shown in Eq.(4) while keeping

ψ

In Ref.[4] (earlier by Schwinger et al.

[5]), it was pointed out that for an
antiparticle with momentum ~p and energy E(> 0), the wave function should be
written as:

i
¯h
Accordingly, a particle is not absolutely pure. The ingredient of “antiparticle
state” hiding inside will increase with the velocity of particle. then the mass-
energy relation E = mc2 can be derived.

ψc ∼

Et)]

exp[

(5)

(~p

−

−

~x

·

We would like to add that mass is a low energy phenomenon familiar in daily
life. So its origin, i.e. the essence of E = mc2, must be stemming from one (not
two) universal, simple but subtle law, which in turn must be already contained
in existing experimental and theoretical knowledge. As a contrast, when Einstein
established the SR, he even did not mention the Michelson-Morley experiment
explicitly. When Einstein further established the general relativity, besides the SR
and the gravitational law, he was mainly depending on the experimental fact that
9.8m/sec2”
“ all freely falling body on the earth have the same acceleration g
which was seen by every one.

≈

The postulate implied in Eqs. (1) and (5) is really very simple and universal
— “space-time inversion (~x
t) is equivalent to particle-antiparticle
→ −
transformation”. Basing on this fundamental symmetry, we derived a “relativistic
stationary Schr¨odinger equation for many particle system” [6] with eigenvalue ǫ
related to the binding energy B of system as

→ −

~x, t

B = Mc2[1

(1 +

2ǫ
Mc2 )1/2]

(6)

−

4

(M = Pn
well known in QM that the operators for particle read (see Eq. (1))

i=1 mi), showing the consistency between SR and QM in essence. It is

(7)

(8)

(9)

Now Eq.(5) implies that for an antiparticle:

~p

ih

, E

→ −

∇

→

ih

∂
∂t

~pc →

ih

, Ec → −

∇

ih

∂
∂t

According to the theory of “primary gas” (Yuan-qi) in Chinese philosophy [7],
Reψ and Imψ could be named as “yin” (feminine or negative) and “yang” (mas-
culine or positive). Eqs. (1) and (5) show that two opposite coupling modes of
them correspond to particle and antiparticle. In 1905, the old theory of “ether”
was abandoned for establishing SR. It seems to us that the revival of new theory
of “ether” basing on “Yuan-qi” is inevitable. Now it is the time to combine two
kinds of wisdom of both eastern and western philosophy.
4. Is there an “arrow of time”?

In deﬁning the so called time reversion (T) in QM, one not only sets t

t,
ψ∗, for ensuring the invariance of

→ −

but also takes a complex conjugation: ψ
Schr¨odinger equation. Hence, actually, it implies an equivalence:[8]

→

ψ(~x, t)

ψ∗(~x,

t)

−

∼

Obviously, the usual stationary(eigen) state does satisfy Eq.(9). The discovery of
CP (i.e. T) violation in neutral K system since 1964 has a possible explanation
within the framework of SM. If the eigenstate of quark in strong interaction
not coincides with that in weak interaction, they are linking together via an
unitary transformation, the CKM matrix. Then a phase angle in the matrix
may account for the 0.3% discrepancy in CP violation. If this explanation can
be further veriﬁed in experiments, then the nonconservation of T reversal does
mean a peculiar problem in particle physics (there are two kinds of eigenstates
for quarks, there exists ﬂavor mixing in the weak interaction eigenstates), but
has nothing to do with the basic symmetry in space-time.

C. N. Yang and C. P. Yang had proved that the violation of T reversal has
nothing to do with the macroscopic nonreversibility inferred by the second law in
thermodynamics [9]. In our point of view, with respect to the problem of time re-
versal, the so called “Loschmidt paradox” between “microscopic reversibility and
macroscopic nonreversibility” does not exist at all. This is because the symmetry
discussed in previous section implies that the time reversal must be accompanied
by the transformation of matter to antimatter.
In some sense, the “arrow of
time” already exists at microscopic level. So during the transition from micro-
scopic scale to macroscopic one, instead of the problem that “how can an arrow
of time emerge from none”, we should ask “how can it display explicitly from
implicit existence”. We think that the entropy equals zero when a macroscopic
system is in a quantum coherent state like that in superconductivity or superﬂu-
idity. Once the quantum coherence is destroyed, the entropy increases and the
arrow of time emerges explicitly [10].

5

5. The unity of opposites between individual and its environment.

We set E = m0c2

i¯h/2τ in Eq.(1), yielding

−

∼

ψ(t)

exp[

i
¯h

−

m0c2t

t
2τ

−

],

ψ(t)

2

|

|

∼

exp(

t
τ

)

−

(10)

with τ being the lifetime of particle. Being the “imaginary part of mass”, the
decay constant 1
τ = Γ is determined by its environment. Diﬀerent nuclei have
diﬀerent life time in Beta decay. Correspondingly, the “real part of mass”, m0,
should also depend on its environment. After studying the quantum ﬁeld theory
(QFT) for 40 years, I began to realize that I was totally wrong to think that the
observed mass is generated from an intrinsic “bare mass”. Now I understand that
the calculation of “self-energy” in perturbative QFT has nothing to do with the
mass generation. Can we create a mass from a massless model like NJL model
[11]? Yes, the outcome turns out to be either no mass scale or two mass scales,
but never one mass scale. The reason lies in the fact that besides the mass of
particle, another mass scale is needed as a standard weight, which is provided by
the phase transition of vacuum( e.g. the extra constant Λ
200MeV in QCD,
being a necessary complement to the Lagrangian, plays the role as a standard
weight). [12,13]

≈

We all understand that “Many body system is comprised of individuals. If
there is no individual, there is no system”. But the above statement merely
forms the half of truth. The another half is more important: “The existence of
individual is ensured by its environment. If there is no certain environment, there
is no certain individual”. Chinese philosophy talked about “oneness of heaven
and man”. It makes sense.
6. Inﬁnity is essentially diﬀerent from ﬁniteness

The pertubation theory in QFT is expanded with respect to the loop number
L in Feynman diagram. The tree level corresponds to L=0. Once the quantum
radiation correction is taken into account in L=1, 2, ... calculations, one en-
, immediately. For dealing with it, one devises
counters the divergence, i.e.
∞
many tricks like the counter term and bare parameter, etc.
I don’t believe in
these kind of trick any longer. After learning the relevant literatures and be-
ginning from a former graduate student, J-f Yang, we now adopt a new simple
trick. Then instead of divergence, we have some arbitrary constants Ci. Neither
counter term nor bare parameter is needed. The renormalization is simply to ﬁx
these Ci by experiments. So there is also no arbitrary running mass scale (µ)
after renormalization, [14-17].

Therefore we begin to realize that the appearance of

is no more than a
It is essentially a warning: We expected too much, it is impossible to
signal.
evaluate the mass or charge in pertubative QFT. Only after we confess that our
ability is limited, can we make the target of our theory more clearcut and the
latter becomes more predictive. For example, recently we calculated the Higgs
mass in SM to be 138 GeV [18], which is in conformity with the outcome of
phenomenalogical analysis on present experiments. [19]

∞

Moreover, “

” is by no means a very large ﬁxed number. If performing the
perturbation calculation in QFT to certain order of L, no matter how large it
is, we still have perturbative theory, which is not quite diﬀerent from the tree

∞

6

level calculation in essence. In particular, the mass of a free particle remains the
same. Only after taking L
, i.e. performing the nonperturbative evaluation,
can we try to discuss the problems like mass generation. Then, as mentioned
in previous section, the phase transition of vacuum will occur. The number of
degrees of freedom N in the environment of a particle is not a large number, but
. An elementary example is the geometric series: Sn = 1 + r + r2 +
+ rn
N
is essentially diﬀerent from limn→∞ Sn = (1

r)−1.

→ ∞

→ ∞

· · ·

, N

→ ∞

→ ∞

We believe that L

, this is the diﬃcult problem in theoreti-
cal physics challenging us. We are always facing the dilemma that “the world is
inﬁnite while our knowledge remains ﬁnite”. Hence it is inevitable that every the-
oretical model is limited to its boundary of applicability, where some singularity
is destined to emerge, e.g., the black hole in general relativity. If a theory really
gets rid of any singularity, it must be trivial in the sense of being meaningless or
even wrong, just like what said by the famous Liouville theorem in the complex
variable function theory.
7. “We are actors, and spectators as well”

−

Finally, I don’t think that the basic research of physics in the next century will
enjoy more brilliant achievement than that gained in the 20th century. The reason
is plain: the majority of basic laws governing the existing matter on the earth
seems comparatively clear. However, the applications of physics, the combination
of physics with other science and technology, especially astronomy and life science,
are just in blooming. During this process we will discover the harmony form large
cosmos to tiny world. We will face the inﬁnite world consciously and cognize
ourselves more consciously. As Weisskopf said [20], we, who are living in the 20th
century, are privileged to witness the most exciting phase in the evolution process
of living beings. It is on the earth the greatest adventure of the universe takes
place — that nature in the form of man begins to understand itself. Once upon
a time, Bohr said:“ In searching for the harmony of life, one should never forget
that in the drama of existence, we ourselves are actors, and spectators as well”.
While there are so many challenges facing our mankind, let us unite and work
together for a better world in the next century.

7

∼

∼

∼

∼

5 (1997).

380 (1979).

REFERENCES
[1] Guang-jiong Ni and Hong-fang Li, Modern Physics, Shanghai Scientiﬁc &
Technical Publisher, (1979).
[2] Guang-jiong Ni, What is the structure of elementary particles? Physics, 8(4),
378
[3] G-j Ni, Philosophical thinking on physics, Fudan Journal (Social Sciences Edi-
tion), (2), 3
[4] G-j Ni, Relation between space-time inversion and particle-antiparticle trans-
formation, Fudan Journal (Natural Science Edition), (3-4), 125
134 (1974);
G-j Ni and S-q Chen, On the essence of special relativity, ibid, 35(3), 325
334
(1996); G-j Ni and S- q Chen, preprint, Internet hep-th/9508069, (1995).
[5] J. Schwinger, Proc. nat. Acad. Sc. U.S., 44, 223 (1958); E.J. Konopinski and
H. M. Mahmaud, Phys. Rev. 92 , 1045 (1953).
[6] G-j Ni and S-q Chen, Relativistic stationary Schr¨odinger equation for many-
particle system, Fudan Journal (Natural Science Edition), 36 (1997), (3)247-252;
G-j Ni, preprint, Internet, hep-th/9708156.
[7] <<Ci-Hai>> (Sea of Words), Shanghai Dictionary Publisher (1979), see
“Yuan-qi” and “Tai-ji”; Z-s He, Science in China, (5) 445
[8] J. J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum mechanics, the Benjamin Cummings Publish-
ing Company, Inc., sec. 4.4, (1985).
[9] C. N. Yang and C. P. Yang, Transaction of the New York Academy of Science,
40, 267 (1980).
[10] G-j Ni, S-q Chen and G-s Zhou, Acta Phys. Sinica, 31, 585 (1982).
[11] Y. Nambo and G. Jona-Lasinio, Phys. Rev. 122, 345 (1961).
[12] G-j Ni, J-f Yang, D-h Xu and S-q Chen, Commun. Theor. phys. 21, 73
(1994).
[13] G-j Ni and S-q Chen, << Levinson Theorem, Anomaly and the Phase Tansi-
tion of Vacuum>>, Shanghai Scientiﬁc & Technical Publishers, Chap.8.2, (1995).
[14] Ji-feng Yang, Thesis for PhD, Fudan Univ., unpublished, (1994). Preprint,
hep-th/9708104.
[15] J-f Yang and G-j Ni, Acta Phys. Sinica, 4, 88 (1995). G-j Ni and J-f Yang,
Phys. Lett. B 393(1997), 79.
[16] G-j Ni and S-q Chen, accepted by Acta Physica Sinica (overseas version),
Internet hep-th/9708155.
[17] G-j Ni and Haibin Wang, preprint, Internet hep- ph/9708457.
[18] G-j Ni, S-y lou, W-f Lu and J-f Yang, preprint, Internet hep-ph/9801264.
[19] J. Gillies, Warsaw Conference, CERN Courier, 36(7), 1
[20] V. F. Weisskopf, << Physics in the Twentieth Centurys: Selected Essays>>,
The MIT Press, (1972).
[21] This work was supported in part by the NSF in China.
[22] This paper is a revised English version of its Chinese counterpart, which is
published in the Journal “Physics Bulletin”, (1997), No. 5, 39-42.

455 (1975).

8 (1996).

∼

∼

8

