8
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
4
0
2
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diﬀering Interactions Require Baryon and Lepton Conservation
R. Mirman
PACS numbers: 11.30.-j, 11.30.Fs, 04.20.Cv, 13.40.-f

1

Baryon and lepton numbers are conserved. Why? Baryon number must be
because baryons are subject to strong interactions, leptons are not. Conserva-
tion of baryons leads to that of leptons. This raises further questions which are
noted.

2

A fundamental attribute of elementary particles is their set of conserva-
tion laws. Some arise from the nature of space [ref. 1, p.27, 299], but others
are nongeometrical, such as conservation of baryons, and following from it,
conservation of leptons. Conservation of baryon, so of lepton, numbers, comes
not from space but from their interactions.

This discussion is schematic, excluding everything unneeded, which simpli-
ﬁes the writing and aids understanding, and by not including the irrelevant,
emphasizes the generality of results. We ignore electromag- netism and gravi-
tation and their labels. They do not allow decay of protons. To be concrete,
and as it is often discussed this way, we speak of the decay of the proton, but
this applies to any baryon (a fermion with strong interactions), and antibaryon,
and pions, but that can be any meson (a boson with strong interactions). Also
lepton (a fermion with no strong interactions) means either lepton or antilepton.
All three types of particles have weak interactions, that would cause, if it were
possible, the proton to decay into leptons plus pions, or directly into leptons
(it does not matter if the decay is attributed to other interactions; the label
weak merely denotes the interaction, whatever it is, whatever its properties,
that causes the decay that we wish to show is impossible). Strong interactions
are often stated as plural, for generality. As there are no other stable particles
(known), the analysis indicates that if there are several types, every baryon is
aﬀected by each.

Why is baryon number conserved? If it were not a particle with strong inter-
actions would go into ones without; strong interactions would be ”turned oﬀ”.
But weak interactions cannot ”turn oﬀ” strong ones. There is no Hamiltonian
with one interaction that changes another interaction. We ﬁrst give an intuitive
picture, then a formal argument. Purely heuristically, to see what goes wrong,
take the unphysical case of the proton having weak interactions, the pion not.
This gives a Feynman diagram in which the proton emits a virtual pion and then
decays into three lep- tons. But the pion, being virtual, has to be reabsorbed.
The lep- tons, however, do not interact with it, so it cannot be reabsorbed leav-
ing it in a very unpleasant situation — implying that protons cannot so decay.
Similarly, a state only of leptons, with no strong interactions, cannot go into
one with baryons (without an equal number of antibaryons). The reac- tion is
not possible in either direction.

While the weak interaction of baryons cannot turn the strong one oﬀ or on,
mesons do go into leptons. Why? The photon is analogous; its number is not
conserved, though charge is. However it is neutral, it couples to a neutral object,
taken as a particle-antiparticle pair (the current is of this form). Electron-
photon scattering can be regarded as the creation of a pair by the photon;
the positron annihilates the electron, and the electron of the pair replaces it.
So while the electromagnetic interaction (of an elec- tron) cannot be altered,
photons can be taken as not having a direct inter- action. Their creation or
annihilation does not modify an interaction. Similarly for mesons, which can be
deemed to have no strong interactions, but rather couple to particle-antiparticle

3

pairs. We can view meson-baryon scattering as annihilation of the baryon by the
antiparticle of the pair, and its replacement by the baryon of the pair. Because
of what they are coupled to, mesons can decay into objects not aﬀected by
strong interac- tions.

With this intuitive understanding of why baryons cannot decay into only
leptons, but mesons can, we turn to a formal analysis. To study the decay we
consider the action of the Hamiltonian on a proton. Acting on a state at t = 0,
time-translation operator exp(iHt), H is the Hamiltonian, gives the state at time
t. Can this take a baryon to a state whose fermions are only those not having
strong interactions? The eﬀect of this is seen from that of H, a sum of the free
particle Hamiltonians for the proton, pion and leptons, plus interaction terms,
for the weak and strong interactions. The state of the system is a sum of terms,
one the state of the proton, another (if decay were possible) the product of pion
and lepton states (plus products of lepton states if there were those decays),
each sums over other labels and integrals over momenta or space. Take the ini-
tial state as a proton, say at rest. The free part of H changes its phase. The
weak interaction part, were decay possible, decreases its coef- ﬁcient in the sum,
while increasing that of the (say) pion plus lepton, initially zero — starting as a
proton, the state becomes a sum of the proton, its contribution decreasing, plus
the pion plus lepton state, with increasing contribution. For the decaying pion
the behavior is similar: starting as a pure pion it becomes a sum of that plus
a state of leptons, with the contribution of the ﬁrst decreasing, of the second
increasing.

What is a proton? We deﬁne it as a particle obeying Dirac’s equation,
with mass m(P), where this equation includes the (irrelevant and suppressed)
electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions (whose forms are not needed). It
is the presence of these interactions that determines what a proton is. (Correctly
a particle is an eigenstate of the two Poincar´e invariants [ref. 2, p.114]. For
a free particle, and one with an electromagnetic interaction, Dirac’s equation
is equivalent. Whether this is true with weak and strong interactions seems
unknown so consequences of, perhaps important, diﬀerences, if any, are not
clear. And it is possible that put- ting interactions in invariants, which must be
done whether Dirac’s equa- tion is used or not, might limit them. Particles are
also eigenstates, or sums, of the momentum operators [ref. 3, p.93], of which
the Hamiltonian is one. We ignore these, and refer to Dirac’s equation as it is
familiar, but the discussion could be of invariants, which might be revealing).
The statefunction of the proton then is a solution to coupled nonlinear equa-
tions. We need information about it but cannot solve explicitly so represent it
in a way that allows analysis, using an expansion. The argu- ments though are
exact; we do not calculate, so need not truncate.

The physical particle, labeled with a capital, that obeying Dirac’s equa- tion
with all interactions, is a sum of states (schematically): summing over all states
to which the proton is connected by interactions, including any number of pions,
and so on. The summations represent ones over internal labels and integrals over

4

momenta. These, and all other irrelevancies, like spin, are suppressed. That
they can be shows the generality of this. State p) is the function satisfying
Dirac’s equation with the weak interaction, but not the strong — its eﬀect is
given by this sum, which is thus an eigenstate, with mass m(P), of the total
Hamiltonian, including all interactions. Individual terms in the sum diﬀer in
energy and momenta; it is the sum that has the eigenvalues. We can take pi)
as either bare or physical; for the former each term is an inﬁnite sum, which is
encapsulated by regarding it as physical.

The coeﬃcients are determined by the requirement that this be a solution
of the complete Dirac’s equation, and normalization (P P) = 1. Also the initial
state, say a proton at rest, gives c(x,0), a wavepacket, with all other c’s = 0,
at t = 0; they depend on the statefunction for P). These particles are virtual
in not obeying the physical Dirac’s equation, that with interactions. Only P is
physical. Dirac’s equation (with interactions schematic, and higher-order terms
not excluded) is

States of diﬀerent numbers of pions are orthogonal, so this gives an inﬁnite
set of coupled equations for the c’s; solving (in principle) gives the state of the
(physical) proton. (We need not consider how far this can be taken to ﬁnd, and
solve, recursion relations to obtain physical states; doing so for a particle that
does decay might provide information about it, and its other interactions.) This
expansion has an inﬁnite number of pions, that is terms p)pi)**r, for all r geq 0,
because (writing p) and pi) using creation and annihilation operators acting on
the vacuum) the strong part of the interaction Hamiltonian is (schematically) is
the annihilation, a* the creation, operators for p), the b’s are the ones for pions.
This acting on p)pi )**r gives p)pi)**(r+1) and p)pi)**(r-1), so the expan - sion
includes all r geq 0.

Now the weak interaction acts on p) supposedly causing it to decay, so the

ﬁnal state is

showing the transition to, say, a pion plus a lepton, and to three leptons,
with coeﬃcients of non-occurring terms zero. The energy of fs) is m(P), not
m(p), so needs contributions from sum c(p)pi) l)pi )pi ), and so on. However fs)
is, say, a lepton plus a pion, so these other terms, to which this is orthogonal,
cannot contribute. The decay of the proton cannot conserve energy, thus cannot
occur. Likewise decays of leptons (the tau) to baryons are similarly ruled out.
Contrast this with the strong decay of the Delta; the physical one is Delta(p),
while Delta satisﬁes Dirac’s equation without the strong interaction (thus with
no interaction); pi(p) is the physical pion, pi satisﬁes interaction-free equations.
Then Delta(p) has an expan- sion similar to the proton’s, except that it can
decay by the strong inter- action into a proton plus a pion giving extra terms
(with coeﬃcients w), The Delta ), having no interac- tions, does not decay,
so this expansion cannot be used for an argument like that for the proton’s
weak decay — p) and Delta ) are solutions of the free-particle Dirac’s equation,
there is only a single interaction the strong one (which causes the decay), so the
argument fails. This decay, of the entire sum, is possible. (But Delta ) cannot

5

decay into particles with no strong interaction.)

The neutron has an actual weak decay; why do the arguments not apply?
Taking it at t = 0 in a single particle state, gives obeying Dirac’s equation with
the weak interaction, but not the strong, and N) is the physical particle, with
both interactions. The n) decays to p) l) l)’, so this becomes The d- coeﬃcients
give the physical state P) l) l)’. The state then is the ﬁrst coeﬃcient decreases
in time, the second increases, so the total probability is constant. These two
(orthogonal) states have equal energy. The neutron can decay into a strongly-
interacting particle (the proton), but not otherwise, because it is state n) that
decays to p). But the physical neutron i s a sum of terms like n)pi )**r, so
the resultant proton is a sum of such terms as p)pi)**r, which is the physical
proton state — the proton, aﬀected by the strong interaction, is such a sum
(plus others appearing also for the neutron). If the neutron were to decay into
state L) without the strong interaction, the expansion would have terms like
L)pi )**r, which do not sum to a state of any physical particle — there is no
ﬁnal state with this expansion so the matrix element of the Hamiltonian causing
such decay is zero; decays annulling the strong interaction can- not occur.

Conservation of baryons implies that of leptons. The numbers of fermions
in all states must all be odd, or all even, and we assume that the number
of particles minus antiparticles is constant (it is not clear that otherwise a
hermitian Hamiltonian is possible that would not lead to diﬃculties like those
above, especially if neutrinos have nonzero mass, as we expect [ref. 3, p.70]).
Then leptons cannot be produced or destroyed if baryon (minus antibaryon)
number is constant — lepton number is con- served.

The pion can decay into leptons: Why does the argument not apply? The
physical pion pi(p)) can be written obeys Dirac’s equation with strong inter-
actions, but not the weak — this causes the decay — and the prime indicates
antiparticles. This contains two terms (plus irrelevant ones for other particles
coupled to the pion). The strong part of the pion’s Hamiltonian acting on a
pion gives a particle- antiparticle pair, acting on this pair gives the pion, and
similarly for r pions which is mixed with the pair plus r-1 pions. Only two states
appear in the expansion for the pion, unlike the inﬁnite number for the proton.
The weak part of H acting on pp’) causes it to decay to two leptons; this is
related by crossing to proton-antiproton scattering into two leptons, and also
to the decay n Rightarrow p + 2l, which we saw is possible. Thus both terms
in the sum for the physical particle con- tribute to the decay, it does conserve
energy (and momentum), therefore cannot be ruled out.

The argument for electric-charge conservation is the same. Charge conserva-
tion is related to gauge invariance, a partial statement of Poincar´e invariance
[ref. 3, p.43] — this relates an allowed interaction to the Poincar´e group.
An interaction violating charge conservation would not transform under gauge
transformations as other terms in the Hamiltonian, giving Poincar´e transforma-
tions (on massive objects) that induce gauge transformations (on massless ones)
resulting in physically-identical obser- vers who undergo the diﬀerent gauge

6

transforma- tions — these cannot be fully speciﬁed — thus physically identical,
but who see diﬀerent Hamiltonians. The Hamiltonian would not be well-deﬁned,
implying inconsistent physics. It is fortunate that charge is conserved.

There are other implications requiring investigation; we mention them in

hope of stimulating such.

All interactions known are of lowest order. Why? For electromagnetism
linearity is enforced by gauge (Poincar´e) invariance [ref. 3, p.57]. For strong
interactions, take a particle, a Delta or p, that emits a pion. Higher-order terms
would couple it not to a single pion, but to more.
Intuitively we can guess
why only lowest order occurs since it gives diagrams which we interpret (purely
heuristically) as two, or more, pions emitted sequentially. Higher-order means
that these are emitted together. However this is the limit of the lowest order in
which the time between emissions goes to zero. A higher-order interaction would
be this limit, which is included in the lowest order as one case; higher-order terms
adding nothing, would be irrelevant. Summing all diagrams, and integrating
over time, would give contributions from terms that have the same eﬀect as
higher-order ones, thus changing only the value of the sum, so the value of the
coupling constant — an experimental parameter (at present), thus we could not
distinguish contributions from terms of diﬀerent order, implying higher order
would be undetectable. This regards particles as virtual. But consider a decay in
two steps, each emitting a pion. If the intermediate object’s life were suﬃciently
short, this would be equivalent to pions being emitted simultaneously.
If a
nucleon had an interaction of the form NNN’ pi, the emission of an NN’ pair
could be thought of as due to the decay of a pion, and the interaction taken as
the limit of the emission of a pion, and then its decay, when its lifetime becomes
zero, merely changing the sum.

Suppose that the only particles were nucleons and pions, no excited ones.
With a linear interaction ﬁnal states of pion-nucleon scattering have only a
single pion — the nucleon could not store the extra energy and decay to a
second pion. Nonlinear interactions give states with more than one pion, but
could be simulated by short-lived excited states — the pion scatters and excites
the nucleon which then decays giving a second pion. Nonlinear interactions
would be indistinguishable from existence of excited states; perhaps we could
require all interactions be linear with addition of excited states. Why is the
gravitational interaction of lowest order? The interaction of matter with gravity
is clear [ref. 3, p.73]. But what determines how matter ﬁxes the gravitational
ﬁeld [ref. 3, p.150]? The tensor could be T(mu nu )T(nu rho ), or could it?
These are some questions that should be looked at.

Gravitation raises another point. There are reasons why it may be unable
to act on scalar particles: pions, kaons, ...
[ref. 3, p.61]. Assuming that it
acts on vectors, like rho, then objects aﬀected by gravity decay to ones that are
not (the rho to pions), and ones not aﬀected go to ones that are (the pion to
leptons). Does the argument not forbid this? It fails because there is no such
thing as a state of, say, two gravitons [ref. 3, p.187], nor even a free graviton,

7

since gravity is — necessarily — non- linear [ref. 3, p.69]. The question remains
open. Except for a few particles, it is not even known (experimentally) which
have interactions with gravity, nor what these are — something of great interest.
Theoreti- cal prejudice should not substitute for analysis and experiment. This
emphasizes the diﬀerence between gravity and other interactions, and the value
of these questions as a probe into the laws of nature.

There are strong constraints on physics as seen in many ways [ref. 1, p.2; ref.
2; ref. 3]. It is well known that interactions are greatly limited by the properties
of space, but also because of other interactions. Perhaps this analysis, and more
the questions it leads to, can induce further inquiry. There are reasons for the
laws of nature, and it is fortunate that reasons, and laws, are such that we are
able to ﬁnd, and understand, them.

1. R. Mirman, Group Theory: An Intuitive Approach (Singapore: World

Scientiﬁc Publishing Co., 1995).

2. R. Mirman, Group Theoretical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Com-

mack, NY: Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 1995).

3. R. Mirman, Massless Representations of the Poincar´e Group, elec- tro-
magnetism, gravitation, quantum mechanics, geometry (Commack, NY: Nova
Science Publishers, Inc., 1995).

8

