8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
5
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AquaFuel, An Example Of The Emerging New
Energies And The New Methods For Their
Scientiﬁc Study

Ruggero Maria Santilli

Institute for Basic Research
P. O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
ibr@gte.net, http://home1.gte.net/ibr/
Received April 15, 1998
Abstract

In this paper we initiate systematic studies on the novel methods
needed for quantitative scientiﬁc studies of the emerging new forms
of energy, by using as a representative example the new combustible
gas called AquaFuel, discovered and patented by William H. Richard-
son, jr., whose rights are now owned by Toups Technology Licensing,
Inc. (TTL), of Largo, Florida. In essence, AquaFuel is a new energy
converter capable of transforming Carbon and water into a new com-
bustible gas via the use of a suitable electric discharge. We show that
AquaFuel can be produced easily, safely and rapidly in large amounts,
has novel physical and chemical characteristics, and exhibits greatly
reduced emission pollutants as compared to fuels currently used. We
then review nine basic experimental measures currently under study
by TTL which are necessary for a scientiﬁc appraisal of AquaFuel. We
outline the limitations of quantum mechanics and chemistry for the
treatment of new forms of energies, namely, energies which by deﬁni-
tion should be beyond said theories. We point out the availability of
broader theories speciﬁcally constructed for the study of new energies
and point out available applications. Detailed studies on the origin
of the AquaFuel energy and its energy balance will be presented at a
later time upon completion of the systematic experimental and theo-
retical studies currently under way. These results are expected to be
signiﬁcant for various other forms of new energies.

1

1 The Basic Process Underlying AquaFuel

AquaFuel is a new combustible gas discovered and developed by William
[1]. Its
H. Richardson, jr, which is covered by the patents listed in Refs.
rights are now owned by Toups Technology Licensing, Inc. (TTL), a U. S.
corporation in Largo, Florida, which is continuing its development. Starting
from the three basic elements of nature, Hydrogen, Oxygen and Carbon,
AquaFuel is produced during an electric discharge across an arc between
carbon electrodes immersed in distilled, fresh or salt water.

The patented process is basically diﬀerent from electrolysis.

In fact,
in electrolysis, water must be complemented with electrolyte to carry the
charges from the negative to the positive poles of the power source.
In
AquaFuel charges are instead stimulated by a suﬃcient voltage diﬀerence.
In the latter case, no addition of electrolyte chemicals is needed to create a
conducting path. As we shall see, this property of AquaFuel is important to
minimize pollutants in the various applications.

According to currently available scientiﬁc knowledge, the main process
underlying AquaFuel is constituted by Carbon atoms breaking loose under
discharge from the carbon electrodes and forming particular bonds with the
water constituents, Oxygen and Hydrogen. The resulting new molecules cool
as they bubble up to the water’s surface where they are collected and stored
for various usages. The resulting combustible gas is called AquaFuel.

2 Description of Equipment

As in Figure 1, a one-gallon ﬁshbowl is three-quarters ﬁlled with distilled,
tap or salt water. Copper tubing conducts 24 volts continuous current (DC)
to the tips of two 0.25 diameter Carbon rods composed of 99% pure graphite,
which are immersed in said water, one of whose tips is extended into a large
diameter Carbon block.

The electric arc tunnels thru the water from the tip of the Carbon rod
to the large Carbon block. The AquaFuel gas cools while bubbling to the
water’s surface where it is collected with an inverted funnel.

The electric arc produces a local temperature of the order of 5,000 ◦F .
The process dissociates the water molecules by forming a local high temper-
ature plasma composed of generally ionized atoms of Carbon,

For a picture of AquaFuel (photo by Rob Jaeger and Ken Lindfors) visit

2

the web site http://www.toupstech.com/html/toups - aqua fuel.html. Note
the thin Carbon rod and the large Carbon block and the bubbling of the gas
thru the water and its clean burning at the top.

Hydrogen and Oxygen, which are subjected to a number of physical and
chemical processes. The ﬁnal product is given by the recombination of said
elements into a number of new molecules that cool down in the water sur-
rounding the discharge as they bubble to the collection equipment.

AquaFuel can be most eﬃciently produced via the use of continuous cur-
rent (DC) in the arc. The use of alternating current (AC) in the arc is also
possible, although with a reduced production rate.

The AquaFuel equipment is an energy converter because it converts the
energy originally available (electricity, Carbon and water) into diﬀerent forms
of energy.

In addition, the AquaFuel equipment is a new energy converter because

its underlying processes are basically novel, as shown later on.

This paper deals only with the excellent characteristics of AquaFuel as a
combustible gas without any consideration at this time of the ratio between
the input and output energy which will be considered in a future paper upon
completion of the needed experimental measures.

3 Description of AquaFuel

The actual structure of AquaFuel as well as its main physical and chemi-
cal characteristics are still essentially unknown at this writing on scientiﬁc
grounds because the needed experimental measures are still in progress (see
Sect. 5).

The various studies completed until now have identiﬁed the following

main characteristics:

1) AquaFuel is lighter than air, because it continues to rise in atmosphere;
2) AquaFuel does not self–combust because of its low content of Oxygen

(estimated at about 1% );

of hydrocarbons;

3) AquaFuel is expected to be composed of H2, CO, Oxygen and a number

4) AquaFuel can run existing internal combustion (IC) engines with minor

modiﬁcations in the carburetor;

5) AquaFuel has an astonishingly low pollutant content in its exhaust

when compared to other fuels, such as gasoline, methane, coal, etc. ;

3

6) No pollution control equipment is needed for burning AquaFuel;
7) Engine oils remain much cleaner when burning AquaFuel because of
less pollutants discharged during operation, thus lasting longer and reducing
engine oil disposal;

8) The main gas produced in burning AquaFuel is carbon dioxide as it is

the case of methane, whose precipitation into a solid form is under study;

9) AquaFuel is a stable, permanent gas, not like the mixture of Hydrogen

and Oxygen emitted from ordinary electrolysis;

10) AquaFuel can be stored in ordinary tanks either as a gas or in its

liquid form;

11) AquaFuel can be produced in any desired amount, whether small or

large, and anywhere, whether on land or at sea;

12) AquaFuel is cheaper, simpler and more practical to produce than

other fuels, such as gasoline, methane or pure Hydrogen;

13) The AquaFuel technology can be used for recycling waste, such as

14) The AquaFuel technology can also be used to cleanse the air from

sewer or rubber tires;

pollutants;

15) AquaFuel uses much less Oxygen than other forms of fuels because of
its high internal content of Oxygen in various compounds, thus providing a
signiﬁcant contribution to the reduction of the largest environmental problem
of today: the apparent depletion of over 10% of Oxygen already occurred so
far in our atmosphere, and its exponential increase due to the excessively
large number of automobiles and airplanes all using Oxygen;

16) AquaFuel has a light, yet very characteristic and peculiar odor, which
is an intrinsic characteristic not due to impurities or additives. This odor has
considerable practical and safety values because other gases which are natu-
rally odorless require the addition of odor via chemicals for safety purposes.

4 Available Measurements

Some of the most impressive aspects of AquaFuel are the simplicity, safety
and rapidity of its production. As an indication, preliminary measures under
veriﬁcation indicate that the use of 36 V in the arc permits the produc-
tion in one minute of 30 liters of AquaFuel at ordinary pressure. The same
production increases exponentially with voltage, thus permitting the rapid
production of AquaFuel anywhere needed.

4

Engine tests of AquaFuel were performed on a small IC engine at the
Briggs & Stratton Test Center by comparing the new fuel to gasoline. It was
established that AquaFuel requires only ﬁve parts of air to one part of fuel
due to its large content of Oxygen bonded in various forms. By comparison,
other gases such as methane require from ten to ﬁfteen parts of air to one
part of gas.

The results of the Briggs & Stratton test are as follow:

RPM
Torque
HP
Oil Temp.
Exhaust
Hydrocarbons
CO%
CO2%
Oxygen %
Hydrocarbon
Nitrogen Ox.
CO

AquaFuel
3060
3.20
1.86
165 F
637 F

Gasoline
3060
3.45
2.05
227 F
751 F
2436 ppm 185 ppm
4.343
12.086
0.544
13.367
5.921
421.141

.039
14.695
7.100
0.001 g/hr
0.002 g/hr
0.002 g/hr

(parts per million)

(grams per hour)

The g/hr ﬁgures for CO are most impressive. The engine running on
AquaFuel would have to operate for over 210,000 hours to equal the amount
of CO produced in 24 hours while being fueled by gasoline.

Equally impressive is the presence of 7.1% of Oxygen in the exhaust which
is evidently important to maintain the Oxygen balance in our atmosphere.
This is a clear indication that AquaFuel is not a lien mixture, but a mix with
excess power.

A preliminary analysis of the chemical composition of AquaFuel was con-

ducted by NASA with the following results:

5

Hydrogen
Carbon Dioxide
Ethylene
Ethane
Acetylene
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Methane
Carbon Monoxide
Total

46.483
9.329
0.049
0.005
0.616
1.164
3.818
0.181
38.370
100.015

The above analysis does not conform to the performance of AquaFuel and
other experimental evidence. First, the total BTU content of the gas is less
than 300 according to the above data, while the Briggs test shows almost
90% of the torque and horsepower on AquaFuel as compared to that of the
same mass of gasoline. Also, the presence of free Hydrogen in the combustion
chamber in the amount indicated by NASA would produce Nitrogen Oxide
in an amount much greater than that measured by Briggs & Stratton.

Moreover, comparative permeability tests conducted with AquaFuel and
other gases have established a behavior which disproves the presence in Aqua-
Fuel of 46% Hydrogen, as claimed by NASA.

The test was performed by ﬁlling up similar balloons with Hydrogen,
CO, Acetylene, Helium and AquaFuel. The time needed to fully deﬂate the
balloons back to their original static state was measured as follows:

Eight Hours.

Hydrogen Two hours.
CO
Acetylene Two days.
One week.
Helium
AquaFuel Three to six months.

As the gases leaked out of the AquaFuel balloon, the diameter was reduced
by about 10 %. The other gases still in the balloon were ﬂammable months
into the test. The AquaFuel balloon-test was conducted three times.

In view of the above and other evidence, the chemical analysis by NASA
cannot be considered conclusive, e.g., because of the destruction of the orig-
inal structures during testing.

Other tests on the chemical structure of AquaFuel have also been done,
but they have been all inconclusive. As an example, tests indicating high

6

Nitrogen content are in contradiction with the evidence that much Nitrogen
in the mix would render the fuel a cold burner.

The ratio between the input and output energy is basically unsettled at
this writing. In fact, all measures of input and output energies are under
way thus being unavailable at this writing in a ﬁnal form.

Nevertheless, the presence of additional sources of energy, via stimulated
nuclear transmutations cannot be excluded at this writing because of a num-
ber of direct or indirect indications, such as that on the explosion of water
mist beasured since the early part of this century. These issues require spe-
ciﬁc experimental measures (see Sect. 5) and theoretical studies (see Sect.
6).

All these inconclusive aspects, which have been studied until now by
conventional analytic means, indicate that AquaFuel has new characteristics
beyond existing knowledge. For instance, the compound with atomic weight
14 which is claimed to be Nitrogen could in reality be a new composite
molecule. A similar situation could occur for other data.

5 Ongoing Experimental Measures

The most important experimental measures on AquaFuel of current primary
interest to TTL are listed below. Suggestions and/or participations by inter-
ested colleagues would be appreciated.

1) Measure the energy content of AquaFuel per unit volume in BTU or
other units. It should be indicated that a number of measures of BTU via
conventional means have failed to provide any scientiﬁc answer for various
reasons. As an example, readings of BTU compared to methane were in-
conclusive because the former burns with about half of the air (Oxygen)
requirement of the latter, thus voiding the scientiﬁc value of any measure
without due thermodynamical consideration of the diﬀerent air intakes. Sim-
ilar unsettled results occurred with other measures. Innovative means for the
needed measures are therefore under study.

2) Measure the individual isotopes in AquaFuel originating from distilled
water. These measures are requested for AquaFuel produced from distilled
water and 99% pure graphite so that the initial ingredients are known. The
measures should then identify both the atomic number A (total numbers
of protons and neutrons) as well as the nuclear charge Z (total number of
protons) for each constituent of AquaFuel. Note that the identiﬁcation of

7

all atomic numbers A alone is grossly insuﬃcient for an in depth scientiﬁc
understanding of AquaFuel because of possible unsettled alternatives on Z for
some of the expected A, as it will be explained in the next section. Measures
conducted until now via gas chromatography and other conventional means
have been inconclusive for various reasons. First, because it was not clearly
resolved whether certain values of A refer to pure elements, or to clusters of
them and, second, because of the inability to jointly identify the values of Z.
3) Measure the chemical composition of AquaFuel originating from dis-
tilled water. Upon identiﬁcation of the individual isotopes, or jointly with
the same, the next major measures requested by TTL are the identiﬁcation
of the chemicals that actually compose AquaFuel. Again, various tests done
until now have resulted to be without ﬁnal scientiﬁc value, e.g., because they
were on based on personal beliefs by the experimenter disproved by evidence.
As an example, the belief that AquaFuel is primarily composed by Hydrogen
has been disproved by comparative tests on the permeability of Hydrogen
and AquaFuel, and similar unsettled occurrences resulted in other measures.
4) Measure the chemical composition of AquaFuel originating from wa-
ter inclusive of waste to be recycled. This additional knowledge is essential
for the industrial application of AquaFuel as a means of recycling contami-
nated liquids. Various speciﬁc cases of recycling are under consideration for
measures.

5) Identify the chemical structure of the exhaust following combustion.
This additional knowledge is essential to understand the thermodynamics
underlying the use of AquaFuel.

6) Identify the physical characteristics of AquaFuel, such as speciﬁc
density. A knowledge of these characteristics is evidently a necessary pre-
requisite for indepth scientiﬁc studies on AquaFuel.

7) Identify compressibility of AquaFuel to the liquid state. A knowledge of
the physical characteristics of temperature, pressure, etc., for the compress-
ibility of AquaFuel to the liquid state is needed, as an evident pre-requisite
for its storage in tanks.

8) Identify the structure of the electric discharge in AquaFuel. It is gen-
erally believed that electric discharges are composed of an intense ﬂow of
individual electrons. As explained in the next section, there are reasons to
suspect that this is not necessarily the case for AquaFuel because of the alter-
native possibility already established in superconductivity that the electric
discharge could be composed by an intense ﬂow of electron pairs. The pos-
sible detection of the latter is evidently important, not only for an indepth

8

scientiﬁc study of AquaFuel but, also, as a foundation of a new technology.
9) Optimize AquaFuel. On the achievement of at least the most impor-
tant measures identiﬁed above, an important objective of TTL is the max-
imization of the characteristics of AquaFuel depending on the application
at hand, such as the optimization of the energy/BTU content for combus-
tion, the minimization or elimination of harmful by-products in recycling
applications, etc.

6 Applications of AquaFuel

The applications of AquaFuel as a combustible gas which have been identiﬁed
until now are truly numerous and can be divided into three classes:

APPLICATIONS OF CLASS I: FUEL. In this class we note:
I.1) Motor fuel because of the remarkable reduction of pollutants in the
exhaust, high energy content, better safety, and other aspects indicated ear-
lier;

I.2) Heating fuel for homes and industries, for the same reasons;
I.3) Cooking fuel, because clearly preferable over methane and other

I.4) Industrial fuel for a variety of uses, such as for the furnaces of the

I.5) Emergency fuel, for instance, for the continuation of service in a

gases;

steel industry and others;

broken pipeline of natural gas;

And others.

APPLICATIONS OF CLASS II: SERVICE. In this class we note:
II.1) Production of electricity for various industrial and consumer uses;
II.2) Recycling of liquid waste such as sewage;
II.3) Recycling of solid waste such as rubber tires;
II.4) Environmental clean–ups;
II.5) Desalination;
and other uses.

APPLICATIONS OF CLASS III: PROCESSING. In this class we note:
III.1) Separation of water;
III.2) Production of new chemicals;
III.3) Production of gases;
and other possibilities currently under study.

9

In summary, AquaFuel is a new combustible gas with undeniably less
pollutant when compared to other fuels of current uses, it is very simple
to be rapidly produced in large volumes, and it exhibits features which are
clearly beyond pre–existing theories. As such, AquaFuel not only has many
valuable characteristics and applications available now, but also constitutes
a sound platform for systematic research leading to new technologies.

7

The New Methods Needed For Scientiﬁc
Studies Of New Energies

Quantitative scientiﬁc studies of new forms of energy in general, and of
AquaFuel in particular, require the consideration of all possible or otherwise
expected proﬁles, including studies within the context of particle physics,
nuclear physics, chemistry, thermodynamics, superconductivity, and other
disciplines.

Rather than being a drawback, this occurrence is important because the
conduction of in depth, mathematical, theoretical and experimental studies
on new forms of energy is expected to permit the understanding of their ori-
gin, which is an evident pre–requisite for the improvement of their eﬃciency
in a systematic scientiﬁc way, rather than via the current empirical process
of endless trials and errors.

It should be indicated from the outset that the use of conventional the-
ories, such as Quantum Mechanics and Chemistry, has not permitted a sci-
entiﬁc resolution of the various issues one way or the other, and has only
caused unresolved controversies (see, e.g., the related articles on AquaFuel
and other topics in Refs. [2]).

It is today well established that the sole use of these theories has no
longer a ﬁnal scientiﬁc value for new energies. In fact, these energies, to be
truly new, by deﬁnition and conception, have to be beyond said conventional
theories. This is due to the fact that quantum mechanics and chemistry have
well deﬁned limitations, while the processes underlying new energies clearly
go beyond these limitations.

Unfortunately, the limitations of quantum mechanics and chemistry are
the best kept secrets of the trade in the sense that they are known to true
experts in the ﬁeld, but never disclosed during Ph.D. classes or in orthodox
technical papers. In fact, the very admission of these limitations is a de facto

10

admission of the need for more adequate theories, and this is notoriously
against established interests.

A systematic study of these limitations has been recently made available
by this author in monographs [4]. As a nontechnical outline, we here mention
that quantum mechanics and chemistry have a structure which is linear (i.e.,
only dependent on the ﬁrst power of the wavefunctions), local (i.e., solely
deﬁned for a ﬁnite set of isolated points) and potential (i.e., only admitting
action–at–a–distance interactions derivable rom a potential energy).

As a consequence, quantum mechanics and chemistry can only represent
systems as being composed of point–like particles with action–at–a–distance
interactions. As an example, the valence electrons of the molecules used in
new forms of energy (e.g., the water used by AquaFuel) are represented in
contemporary quantum chemistry as dimensionless points.

Though of unequivocal scientiﬁc value, this is evidently only an approxi-
mation of nature because, in the physical reality, all particles, including the
valence electrons, have an extended wavepacket of the order of 10−13 cm.

When the particles are at the (relatively) large mutual distances of an
atomic structure (10−8 cm – which is 10,000 times bigger than the size of
the wavepackets of the electrons), their extended character can be eﬀectively
ignored and the resulting theories are exact.

The best known example of the exact validity of quantum mechanics
is the atomic structure.
In fact, quantum mechanics has represented in a
numerically exact way the totality of experimental data on the structure of
the Hydrogen atom.

The best known example of the limitations of quantum mechanics and
chemistry is the study of the two Hydrogen atoms composing the Hydrogen
molecule because:

1) Quantum chemistry cannot represent the strongly attractive force
between the two atoms since they are neutral, thus implying null average
Coulomb forces among the atoms;

2) Quantum chemistry has been unable to represent throughout this cen-

tury 100% of the binding energy of the Hydrogen molecule;

3) Quantum chemistry cannot explain why the Hydrogen and water
molecules have only two atoms, since it has been proved to admit an arbitrary
number of atoms;

4) Quantum chemistry cannot permit meaningful thermodynamical stud-
ies on reactions based on the Hydrogen and water molecules because the 2%
of binding energy which is not accounted for is deceptively small, since it

11

corresponds to about 950 Kilocal/mole while an ordinary reaction requires
about 20 Kilocal/mole;

5) Thermodynamics predicts a behavior of the Hydrogen and water
molecules under electric and magnetic ﬁelds dramatically against experimen-
tal evidence (e.g., the capability for the molecule to be magnetized like an
ordinary ferromagnet); and other shortcomings.

The origin of the above shortcomings is in the structure of molecules
themselves, where we have valence electrons which can interact at mutual
distances of the order of the size of their wavepackets, which is a distance
108 times smaller than the atomic distances. Under the latter conditions the
extended size of the wavepacket of the particle is no longer ignorable, thus
implying a clear limitation of quantum mechanics and chemistry.

In fact, the deep overlapping of the wavepacket of particles implies new
interactions which are technically called nonlinear (in the sense of depending
on powers of the wavefunctions bigger than one), nonlocal (in the sense that
they are extended over the volume of wave-overlappings which cannot be
evidently reduced to ﬁnite number of isolated points), as well as nonpotential
(in the sense of being of contact / zero–range type for which the notion of
action–at–a–distance potential has no mathematical or physical meaning of
any type).

As such, the representation of the deep overlapping of the wavepackets of
valence electrons as well as of other nuclear events is beyond any credible hope
of quantitative treatment via quantum mechanics or chemistry on conceptual,
mathematical and physical grounds.

To put it explicitly, any treatment of truly new forms of energy via quan-
tum mechanics and chemistry is not scientiﬁc if considered as of ﬁnal char-
acter because these disciplines approximate everything as points, thus being
unable to represent in any credible way the main mechanisms which are at
the very foundation of the new energies.

Comprehensive studies on the structural generalization of quantum me-
chanics for quantitative treatments of nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential
interactions at short distances were initiated by R. M. Santilli at Harvard
University back in 1978 under support from the U.S. Department of Energy
[3]. The studies were then continued by an increasing number of scientists,
and have resulted in over 10,000 pages of published research, including about
one thousand papers published in numerous mathematics and physics jour-
nals all over the world, some 20 advanced (post Ph. D.) monographs and
about 40 volumes of proceedings of international conferences held in the

12

USA and Europe (see monographs [4]). As a result of these collegial eﬀorts
Hadronic Mechanics has today reached operational maturity (see the recent
104 page long memoir [5]).

The new mechanics was called by Santilli Hadronic Mechanics to char-
acterize the description of strongly interacting particles, such as the nuclear
constituents, collectively called hadrons, under conventional long-range po-
tential, as well as short–range, nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential interac-
tions. It should be indicated that Hadronic Mechanics is the only mechanics
available today for the consistent treatment of the new nonlocal and nonpo-
tential interactions due to deep wave-overlappings. Other generalized theo-
ries have well–known physical inconsistencies, such as the inability to have
unique and invariant numerical predictions.

Note that Hadronic Mechanics coincides with quantum mechanics at large
distances. Moreover, Hadronic Mechanics preserves all conventional quantum
laws, such as Pauli’s exclusion principle, Heisenberg’s uncertainty law, etc.,
and only realize them in a more general way.

The only diﬀerences occur at distances of the order of 10−13 cm. As a
result, Hadronic Mechanics has achieved Einstein’s historical completion of
quantum mechanics with new, generally small contributions at short range.
Hadronic Mechanics has permitted the construction of a broadening of
quantum chemistry called Hadronic Chemistry [12] (also called isochemistry
for certain technical treasons). Again, quantum and hadronic chemistry co-
incide everywhere except at short distances where the new chemistry includes
the nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential eﬀects which are absent in the older
theory.

A main feature of the Hadronic Mechanics and Chemistry which is im-

portant for all new forms of energy, including AquaFuel, is that:

When two particles couple themselves in a singlet at short distances (one
with spin up and one with spin down) the new nonlinear, nonlocal and non-
potential forces due to deep wave–overlappings are so attractive to overcome
possible repulsive Coulomb forces, and permit new bound states at short
distances which simply cannot be conceived - let alone treated – by quantum
mechanics and chemistry.

The sphere with radius 1 fm = 10−13 cm in which Hadronic Mechanics
and Chemistry have the novel eﬀects is called hadronic horizon. In the out-
side of the hadronic horizon conventional quantum mechanics and chemistry
hold, while in its interior the broader hadronic mechanics and chemistry hold.
Conventional physical laws (such as Pauli’s exclusion principle, total conser-

13

vation laws, etc.) hold everywhere including in the interior of the hadronic
horizon.

If particles have opposite charges, they naturally penetrate such a horizon
(when in singlet coupling and under a number of other conditions, such as
the conservation of energy and other total quantities) by therefore activat-
ing the new eﬀects rather spontaneously. This is the case of electrons and
positrons which naturally attract each other and can apparently form a new
bound state at short distance (in addition to the known electronium at large
distances) commonly known as the neutral ∗–meson [3].

On the contrary, if particles have the same charges, they can penetrate
the hadronic horizon only under the assistance of an outside trigger, namely
external conventional interactions which favor the particles to move toward
each other against their repulsive Coulomb force. This is the case of the
coupling of the valence electrons in molecular bonds in which the trigger is
given by the nuclei of the molecules which, being positively charged, attract
the the valence electrons to such short distances to permit their bond [12].

Systematic studies of the physical laws of new forms of energy as predicted
by hadronic mechanics and chemistry are under way [11]. We outline below
some of the advances permitted by the new theories which are playing a
basic role in these studies. In fact, hadronic mechanics and chemistry have
permitted:

1) The ﬁrst theoretical representation of the bond of two identical elec-

trons in the Cooper pair of superconductivity [6]:

e + e + trigger → CP

(Cooper Pair at 10−8 cm) ,

(1)

which is in excellent agreement with experimental data in superconductivity,
where the trigger is given by the Cuprate ions (see Refs.
[6] for technical
details, including the clear emergence of nonlinear, nonlocal and nonpotential
eﬀects as a necessary condition for the attraction).

The scientiﬁc scenario can be here identiﬁed in a way so clear to un-mask

possible nonscientiﬁc postures in favor of old theories for personal gains.

On one side, physical reality establishes that electrons can bond them-
selves, not only in the Cooper pair (where the bond is so strong that the
coupled electrons have been detected to tunnel together through a poten-
tial barrier), but also in the Helium (where the two orbital electrons often
travel bonded together rather than isolated), as well as in ball lightning (in
which electrons bond together in very large numbers as per incontrovertible

14

evidence, this time visible by the naked eye).

On the other side, quantum mechanics and chemistry simply cannot rep-
resent this physical reality at the level of individual electron pairs because
of the Coulomb repulsion (they do provide a representation but only at the
statistical level of an ensemble of pairs which is absolutely not the issue here,
since we are referring to speciﬁc diﬀerential equations of structure clearly
exhibiting an attraction for one single and individual pair of electrons [6]).

Ergo, quantum mechanics and chemistry have limitations which cannot be
denied as a condition for scientiﬁc credibility. The moment these limitations
are admitted, and only then, the door is open to truly basic advances.

Hadronic Mechanics and Chemistry do indeed permit a quantitative-
numerical representation of the attractive force between the identical elec-
trons in the Cooper pair, the Helium, the ball lightning and other events in
excellent agreement with experimental data [6].

By no means these results are expected to be unique because a beauty of
real science is its polyhydric character. Studies with alternative approaches
are not only welcome but actually solicited, provided that they achieve similar
results in an invariant form.

2) A new model of the Hydrogen molecule with the ﬁrst explicitly attrac-
tive force between neutral atoms due to the pairing of the valence electrons
into a hadronic bound state at short distances called isoelectronium [12],

e + e + trigger → IE

(Isoelectronium at 10−11 cm) ,

(2)

where the trigger is in this case given by the positive nuclei of the Hydrogen
molecule.

Hadronic Mechanics and chemistry have resolved all the shortcomings
of quantum chemistry indicated earlier, by reaching for the ﬁrst time: an
explicit attractive force among the neutral atoms of the molecular bond due
to the short range bonding of the valence electrons into a single state; a
representation of 100% of the experimental data; a quantitative explanation
of why only two Hydrogen atoms are admitted in the molecule; and other
advantages over quantum chemistry.

3) A new model of the water molecule which resolves at least some of the
existing problematic aspects [12]. The reader should be aware that despite
the conduction of studies since the initiation of science, the structure of water
remains vastly known at this writing.

In fact quantum chemistry: a) does not admit a signiﬁcant attractive

15

force among the neutral atoms composing the molecule (the esoteric forces
currently believed to yield the bond, such as the exchange or van der Waal
forces, have been rigorously proved to yield very small, thus insuﬃcient at-
tractions); b) has been unable to represent 100% of the experimental data
on the binding energy, electric and magnetic moments and other aspects; c)
has been proved to admit admit an arbitrary number of Hydrogen atoms
in ﬂagrant disagreement with evidence; d) cannot permit meaningful ther-
modynamical studies due to the excessively large error in thermodynamical
units recalled earlier; e) predicts a behavior of water under magnetic and
electric ﬁelds which is in dramatic disagreement with experimental evidence
(e.g., it has been proved via the use of quantum electrodynamics that water
under a magnetic ﬁeld should acquire a net North-South polarity as for an
ordinary ferriomagnet, in gross disagreement with experimental evidence);
and possesses other, generally unknown insuﬃciencies.

It is evident that, under all these insuﬃciencies, no study of new forms
of energy using water, such as AquaFuel, SkyGas, water explosions, etc., can
be considered as ﬁnal.

It is evident that the true scientiﬁc evidence is the limitation of quantum

chemistry for truly scientiﬁc studies of these new forms of energy.

Again, once these limitations are admitted, the door is open to basic ad-
vances. Hadronic Chemistry resolves the above insuﬃciencies by permitting a
deeper (although never ﬁnal) understanding of water [12]. Other approaches
are welcome and encouraged.

4) The ﬁrst theoretical representation of the synthesis of the neutron as
occurring in stars at their formation, namely, from protons and electrons only
(because at their formation stars are solely made up of Hydrogen) according
to the reaction [7]

p + e → n + neutrino .

(3)

The above reaction veriﬁes all known physical laws. Nevertheless, its rate
(cross section) according to quantum mechanics is very small and, therefore,
the reaction is believed not to have practical value. Hadronic mechanics
recovers the above low rate for all energies, except at a speciﬁed threshold
energy in which the rate of reaction (3) has a large peak.

Note that quantum mechanics cannot represent the neutron as a bound
state of a proton and an electron only because of a host of inconsistencies all
resolved by the Hadronic Mechanics and Technologies.

We should ﬁnally note that, though preliminary and in need of indepen-

16

dent re-runs, an experimental veriﬁcation of synthesis (3) was successfully
conducted in Brasil [8].

5) The ﬁrst theoretical representation of the stimulated decay of the neu-

tron [9] according to the reaction

γ + n → p + e + anti–neutrino .

(4)

Again, the above reaction veriﬁes all known physical laws. Quantum me-
chanics predicts that its rate is very small for all possible energies of the
photon, thus having no practical value. Hadronic Mechanics and Technolo-
gies recover this feature, but predict the existence of a large peak in the
rate of reaction (4) at a speciﬁc resonating frequency, thus permitting the
stimulated decay of the neutron in a form suitable for industrial applications.
It should be noted that the proton is stable and, as such, cannot be
stimulated to decay according to current knowledge. On the contrary, the
neutron is naturally unstable. The identiﬁcation of means for its stimulated
decay is, therefore, only a matter of time.

We should ﬁnally note that, though preliminary and in need of indepen-
dent re-runs, an independent experimental veriﬁcation of synthesis (3) was
successfully conducted in Greece [10].

6) Stimulated nuclear transmutations due to an electron capture by cer-
tain nuclei [11]. Nature establishes the existence of the spontaneous electron
capture (EC), a process in which a given nucleus (A, Z) with total num-
ber of protons and neutrons A and total number of protons Z (the nuclear
charge) absorbs one electron from the environment or from the peripheral
atomic cloud. During this process the atomic number A evidently remains
the same, but Z decreases by one unit because we have the synthesis of one
neutron from a proton and an electron as per reaction (3), thus resulting in
the nuclear reaction

(A, Z) + e + trigger → (A, Z − 1) ,

(5)

where the trigger represents all the conditions needed to allow the reactions,
such as the energy missing in order to verify the basic principle of conserva-
tion of the energy.

Since the above reaction occurs spontaneously in nature (under the right
circumstances), Hadronic Mechanics and Technologies predict that it can be
stimulated under suitable conditions.

17

Note that transmutation (5) is predicted at a sub-nuclear level, that is,
it should be studied as a process in the interior of one-nuclear constituent,
because the same transmutation is not possible when studied at the nuclear
level, that is, at the level of a nucleus as a collection of protons and neutrons.
7) Stimulated nuclear transmutations due to neutron decay [11]. If reac-
tion (4) occurs in nature for an isolated neutron, it must evidently occur also
when the same neutron is a member of a nuclear structure, resulting in the
stimulated nuclear decay

(A, Z) + γ + trigger → (A, Z + 1) .

(6)

Note, again, that the above stimulated nuclear transmutation can only
occur at one, single, ﬁxed resonating frequency, and can only occur at the
sub-nuclear level, rather than at the level of a nucleus as a collection of
protons and neutrons.

8) Stimulated nuclear transmutations due to proton capture [11]. Physical
evidence establishes that two identical electrons can bond themselves into
one single state, the Cooper pair in superconductivity, Eq. (1). A similar
occurrence exists in the bond of the valence electrons in molecular structures,
Eq. (2). It is evident that this physical reality is independent of the charge
and the mass. As a result, the experimental evidence on the Cooper pair
is de facto evidence on the expected existence of a similar occurrence for
protons.

Hadronic Mechanics and Technologies therefore predict that, evidently
under certain conditions, one proton can indeed bond itself to a nucleus
despite their repulsive Coulomb forces, according to the reaction

(A, Z) + p + trigger → (A + 1, Z + 1) .

(7)

We merely have an occurrence equivalent to the experimentally estab-
lished creation of ball lightning, which is constituted by individual electrons
bonding themselves to a large number of identical electrons. According to
quantum mechanics, the creation and growth of such ball lightning is not
allowed because of the Coulomb repulsion. Yet the phenomenon exists in the
physical reality. Therefore, to do science, we have to accept physical evidence
and modify the theory to reach its quantitative interpretation, rather than
trying to adapt physical evidence to pre-existing theories. Hadronic Mechan-
ics and technologies do precisely that, by surpassing pre-existing theories to
accommodate experimental facts.

18

The case on one proton bonding itself to a nucleus under the necessary
conditions is fully equivalent in all respects to the accretion of ball lightning.
The sole diﬀerence is that the proton is heavier than the electrons and the
charges of reaction (7) are positive, rather than negative. The important
point is that the underlying physical laws are exactly the same.

9) New thermochemical reactions [6]. It is evident that the availability
of a new model of molecular bonds in general, and of the structure of water
in particular, imply new chemical features and reactions which, as it is the
case for stimulated nuclear transmutations (5), (6) and (7), simply cannot be
predicted, let alone treated via quantum chemistry. One of these predictions
which has already been veriﬁed experimentally is a novel behavior of the
water and new chemical reactions under electric and magnetic ﬁelds with
consequential release of new forms of energy.

It is evident that all the above new advances 1) – 9) are potentially
applicable to new forms of energy, including AquaFuel, and they will likely
identify new technologies.

The theoretical research under way therefore contemplates the systematic
application of the above new advances to various aspects of new energies
including:

A) Particle physics, such as the possibility that electric discharges are
made up of isoelectronium pairs, rather than individual electrons as currently
believed until now;

B) Nuclear physics, such as the expected nuclear transmutation due to
stimulated electron capture, decay of the neutron from the intense light in
the discharge, accretion of protons in the completely ionized plasma, etc.;

C) Chemistry, such as possible new chemical bonds and new chemical
reactions with related release of new energies that are inconceivable for quan-
tum chemistry;

D) Thermodynamics, such as the new energy calculations which are not

possible at the moment due to the excessive error indicated earlier;

E) Superconductivity, because an electric discharge is the ideal limit case

of superconductivity;
and other aspects.
We hope to report in Inﬁnite Energy the most salient advances on the

above research for the beneﬁt of all new forms of energies.

The content of this paper ﬁrst appeared in Hadronic Journal Supplement,

Vol. 13, pages 1–22, 1998.

19

Acknowledgments.

The author would like to thank William H.
Richardson, jr., Jerry Kammerer, Mark Clancy, Ken Lindfors and all other
members of Toups Technology Licensing, Inc., as well as Rob Jaeger, Pe-
ter Gluck, Dieter and Yvette Schuch, and various colleagues, for invaluable
critical comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References

[1] W. H. Richardson, jr., US Pat 5,435,274 ”Electrical power generation
without harmful emissions”, July 25, 1995; US 5,692,459 ”Pollution free
vehicle operation”, Dec 2, (1992); patents pending.

[2] Inﬁnite Energy no. 9, 1996; no. 10, 1996; no. 11, 1996; no. 13 1997; and
no. 14, 1997; International Journal of Hydrogen Energy no. 21, Feb 1996
p 142 in H. Roger Hind’s column ”News and Views”

[3] R. M. Santilli, in Hadronic J. no. 1 and 2, (1978).

[4] R. M. Santilli, Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Vols. I and II, Ukraine

Academy of Sciences, Kiev, second edition, (1995).

[5] R. M. Santilli, Found. Phys. Vol. 27, 625, (1997).

[6] A. O. E. Animalu, Hadronic J. no. 17, p. 379 (1995). A. O. E. Animalu
and R. M. Santilli, Intern. J. Quantum Chemistry 29, 175 (1995).

[7] R. M. Santilli, JINR Comm. no. E4-93-352, Dubna, Russia; and Chinese

J. Syst. Eng. & Electr. (patent pending).

[8] C. Borghi et al. (Russian) J. Nuclear Physics Vol. 56, 147, (1993).

[9] R. M. Santilli, in the Proceedings of International Symposium on Large
Scale Collective Motion of Atomic Nuclei, G. Giardina et al., Editors,
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1997) (patent pending).

[10] N. F. Tsagas et al., Hadronic J. Vol. 19, 87 (1996).

20

[11] R. M. Santilli, ”Physical laws of the emerging new energies as predicted
by hadronic mechanics and chemistry”, I, II and III IBR preprints RMS-
003, 004 and 005 (1998)(patent pending).

[12] R. M. Santilli and D. Shillady, ”Ab initio isochemistry”, I and II, IBR
preprints 1998 submitted for publication. R. M. Santilli and D. D.
Shillady, Hadronic J. vol. 21 (1998), in press.

21

