8
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
7
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Advances in the Proposed Electromagnetic Zero-Point Field Theory of Inertia

Bernhard Haisch
Solar & Astrophysics Laboratory, Lockheed Martin
3251 Hanover St., Palo Alto, CA 94304
E-mail: haisch@starspot.com

Alfonso Rueda
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Dept. of Physics & Astronomy
California State Univ., Long Beach, CA 90840
E-mail: arueda@csulb.edu

H. E. Puthoﬀ
Institute for Advanced Studies at Austin
4030 Braker Lane, Suite 300, Austin, TX 78759
E-mail: puthoﬀ@aol.com

invited presentation at
34th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit
July 13–15, 1998, Cleveland, Ohio
AIAA paper 98-3143

ABSTRACT

A NASA-funded research eﬀort has been underway at the Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center
in Palo Alto and at California State University in Long Beach to develop and test a recently published theory
that Newton’s equation of motion can be derived from Maxwell’s equations of electrodynamics as applied
to the zero-point ﬁeld (ZPF) of the quantum vacuum. In this ZPF-inertia theory, mass is postulated to be
not an intrinsic property of matter but rather a kind of electromagnetic drag force (which temporarily is a
place holder for a more general quantum vacuum reaction eﬀect) that proves to be acceleration dependent
by virtue of the spectral characteristics of the ZPF. The theory proposes that interactions between the
ZPF and matter take place at the level of quarks and electrons, hence would account for the mass of a
composite neutral particle such as the neutron. An eﬀort to generalize the exploratory study of Haisch,
Rueda and Puthoﬀ (1994)1 into a proper relativistic formulation has been successful. Moreover the principle
of equivalence implies that in this view gravitation would also be electromagnetic in origin along the lines
proposed by Sakharov (1968)2. With regard to exotic propulsion we can deﬁnitively rule out one speculatively
hypothesized mechanism: matter possessing negative inertial mass, a concept originated by Bondi (1957)3
is shown to be logically impossible. On the other hand, the linked ZPF-inertia and ZPF-gravity concepts
open the conceptual possibility of manipulation of inertia and gravitation, since both are postulated to be
electromagnetic phenomena. It is hoped that this will someday translate into actual technological potential,
especially with respect to spacecraft propulsion and future interstellar travel capability. A key question is
whether the proposed ZPF-matter interactions generating the phenomenon of mass might involve one or
more resonances. This is presently under investigation.

INTRODUCTION

In an article in New Scientist science writer Robert Matthews (1995)4 summarizes the predictions of various
scientists: “Many researchers see the vacuum as a central ingredient of 21st century physics.” The reason
for this is that, despite its name, the vacuum is in fact far from empty. Create a perfect vacuum, devoid
of all matter and containing not a single (stable) particle, and that region of seemingly empty space will
actually be a seething quantum sea of activity. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle allows subatomic particles
to ﬂicker in and out of existence. Similar quantum processes apply to electromagnetic ﬁelds, and that is

Copyright c(cid:13) 1998 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

1

the origin of the electromagnetic zero-point ﬁeld (ZPF). The entire Universe is ﬁlled with a quantum sea of
electromagnetic zero-point energy whose properties are the basis of Matthew’s predictive statement.

In 1994 we published an analysis which proposed that the most fundamental property of matter — inertia
— could be explained as an electromagnetic force traceable to the ZPF (Haisch, Rueda and Puthoﬀ 1994;
HRP1). The exploratory approach we used had two weaknesses: (1) the mathematical development was
quite complex, and (2) the calculations were dependent upon a simpliﬁed model to represent the interactions
between material objects and the ZPF. But in spite of these two limitations, our analysis yielded a remarkable
and unexpected result: that Newton’s equation of motion, f = ma, regarded since 1687 as a postulate of
physics, could be derived from Maxwell’s laws of electrodynamics as applied to the ZPF. The implication
is that inertia is not an innate property of matter, rather it is an electromagnetically-derived force. If this
proves to be true, the potential exists for revolutionary technologies since the manipulation of electromagnetic
phenomena is the basis of most modern technology.

Thanks in part to a NASA research grant, we have made progress in strengthening the basis of the ZPF-
inertia hypothesis. We have been able to rederive the ZPF-inertia connection in a way that is mathematically
much more straightforward, that is not dependent upon the original simpliﬁed matter-ZPF interaction model,
and that — importantly — proves to be relativistic (Rueda & Haisch 1998a5, 1998b6). This increases our
conﬁdence considerably in the validity of the ZPF-inertia hypothesis.

We suggest that a change in paradigm regarding our conception of matter is not far oﬀ. If inertia proves to
be an electromagnetic force arising from interactions between quarks and electrons and the ZPF, this will
do away with the concept of inertial mass as a fundamental property of matter. The principle of equivalence
then implies that gravitational mass will need to undergo an analagous reinterpretation. A foundation for
this was laid already 30 years ago by Sakharov (1968)2.

Lastly, the Einstein E = mc2 relationship between mass and energy will also be cast in a diﬀerent light.
As it now stands this formula seems to state that one kind of “thing,” namely energy, can mysteriously be
transformed into a totally diﬀerent kind of “thing,” namely mass. . . and vice versa. It is proposed instead that
the E = mc2 relationship is a statement about the kinetic energy that the ZPF ﬂuctuations induce on the
quarks and electrons constituting matter (Puthoﬀ 1989a7). We are used to interpreting this concentration
of energy associated with material objects as mass, but in fact this is more a matter of bookkeeping than
physics.
Indeed the concept of mass itself in all its guises (inertial, gravitational and as relativistic rest
mass) appears to be a bookkeeping convenience. All we ever experience is the presence of a certain amount
of energy or the presence of certain forces. We traditionally account for these energies and forces in terms of
mass, but that appears now to be unnecessary. Interactions of the ZPF with quarks and electrons are what
physically underlie all these apparent manifestations of mass. This opens new possibilities.

Only ﬁfty years ago the concept of space travel was regarded by most, including scientists (who should have
known better), as science ﬁction: this in spite of the fact that the basic knowledge was already in place.
Details and technicalities, of course, were lacking, but the chief handicap was — more than anything — a
mindset that such things simply had to be impossible. Similar prejudices had been at work ﬁfty years prior
to that regarding ﬂight. We have come to a new millenium and the ﬁrst glimmerings of how to go about
ﬁnding a way to achieve interstellar travel have started to appear on the horizon. A very modest — in terms
of cost — but intellectually ambitious program has been established by NASA: The Breakthrough Propulsion
Physics Program (BPP). The rationale is stated as follows: a

NASA is embarking on a new, small program called Breakthrough Propulsion Physics to seek
the ultimate breakthroughs in space transportation: (1) Propelling a vehicle without propel-
lant mass, (2) attaining the maximum transit speeds physically possible, and (3) creating new
energy production methods to power such devices. Because such goals are beyond the accumu-
lated scientiﬁc knowledge to date, further advances in science are sought, speciﬁcally advances

a The Breakthrough Propulsion Physics website is http://www.lerc.nasa.gov/WWW/bpp/

2

that focus on propulsion issues. Because such goals are presumably far from fruition, a special
emphasis of this program is to demonstrate that near-term, credible, and measurable progress
can be made. This program, managed by Marc Millis of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) rep-
resents the combined eﬀorts of individuals from various NASA centers, other government labs,
universities and industry. This program is supported by the Space Transportation Research Of-
ﬁce of the Advanced Space Transportation Program managed by Marshall Space Flight Center
(MSFC).

The ﬁrst NASA BPP workshop was held in August 1997 to survey the territory and assess emerging physics
concepts. Several invited presentations discussed the ZPF vacuum ﬂuctuations, and this area of research
was given a high priority in a ranking process carried out as part of the meeting (Millis 19988 and references
therein). In addition to the proposed ZPF-inertia and ZPF-gravitation hypotheses, the possibility of extract-
ing energy and of generating forces from the vacuum ﬂuctuations were discussed. It has been shown that
extracting energy from the vacuum does not violate the laws of thermodynamics (Cole and Puthoﬀ 1993)9.
As for ZPF-related forces, the recent measurement of the Casimir force by Lamoreaux (1997)10 are in agree-
ment with theoretical predictions. Real, macroscopic forces can be attributed to certain conﬁgurations of the
ZPF, such as in a Casimir cavity. We are proposing that inertia too is a Casimir-like acceleration-dependent
drag force.

NEWTON’S EQUATION OF MOTION: f=ma

(1) Inertial mass: the resistance to acceleration
Physics recognizes the existence of four types of mass.
known as inertia, deﬁned in Newton’s equation of motion, f = ma, and its relativistic generalization. (2)
Active gravitational mass: the ability of matter to attract other matter via Newtonian gravitation, or, from
the perspective of general relativity, the ability to curve spacetime. (3) Passive gravitational mass: the
propensity of matter to respond to gravitational forces. (4) Relativistic rest mass: the relationship of mass
and energy expressed in the E = mc2 relation of special relativity. These are very diﬀerent properties of
matter, yet for some reason they are quantitatively represented by the same parameter. One can imagine a
universe, for example, in which inertial mass, mi, and passive gravitational mass, mg, were diﬀerent. . . but
then objects would not all fall with the same acceleration in a gravitational ﬁeld and there would be no
principle of equivalence to serve as the foundation of general relativity. One can imagine a universe in which
active and passive gravitational mass were diﬀerent. . . but then Newton’s third law of equal and opposite
forces would be violated, and mechanics as we know it would be impossible.

Consider inertial mass, mi. Exert a certain force, f, and measure a resultant acceleration, a. Let this process
takes place under ideal conditions of zero friction. A nearly perfect example — excluding the very small
residual atmospheric drag even at Shuttle altitudes — would be the force exerted by the Space Shuttle engines
and the acceleration of the Shuttle that results upon ﬁring. The inertial mass is a scalar coeﬃcient linking
these two measureable processes f and a (scalar since the vectors f and a point in the same direction).
However since we perceive a material object in the form of the Shuttle, we reify this mi coeﬃcient and
attribute a property of mass to the object and then say that it is the mass of the object that causes the
resistance to acceleration. That is to say, for a given amount of mi residing in the matter of an object it
takes so much force to achieve such a rate of acceleration, which is embodied in f = ma. We thus attribute
mass to all material objects.

It is important to keep in mind that the actual measurement of the thing we call inertial mass, mi, can only
take place during acceleration. . . or deceleration, which is simply the same process in reverse. We assume that
an object always possesses something called mass even when it is not accelerating, and proceed to calculate
the momentum, miv, and the kinetic energy, miv2/2, of an object moving at constant velocity with respect
to us. But there can be no direct evidence that an object possesses mass unless it is being accelerated. The
only way we can directly measure the momentum or the kinetic energy that we calculate is by bringing about
a collision. But a collision necessarily involves deceleration. It makes for good bookkeeping to assume that
an object always carries with it a thing called mass, yielding a certain momentum and kinetic energy, but
this is necessarily an abstraction.

3

The momentum and kinetic energy depend upon relative motion, since no velocity is absolute. Move alongside
an object and its momentum and kinetic energy reduce to zero. We argue that in a somewhat analogous
fashion, mi is not something that resides innately in a material object, but rather that it is an electromagnetic
reaction force (per unit acceleration) that springs into existence the instant an acceleration occurs, and
It is, precisely as deﬁned in Newton’s f=ma, a coeﬃcient
disappears as soon as the acceleration stops.
linking force and acceleration. It is a force per unit acceleration that arises electrodynamically.

This may be brought into sharper focus by considering Newton’s third law. Newton’s third law states that
for every force there must be an equal and opposite reaction force, i.e. f = −fr. For stationary or static
phenomena it is impossible to even conceive of an alternative: If the right hand is pressing against the left
hand with force f, then the left hand must press back against the right hand with the equal and oppositely-
directed reaction force, fr. How could one hand press against the other without the other pressing back? It
would violate a fundamental symmetry, since who or what is to say which hand is pressing and which is not.
Thus for static or stationary situations the balance of forces is the only imaginable circumstance.

If an agent exerts a force on a non-ﬁxed object, experience tells us that a reaction force also manifests against
the agent. But why is this so? The traditional explanation is that matter possesses inertial mass which by
its nature resists acceleration by pushing back upon the agent. The discovery that we have made is that,
on the contrary, there is a very speciﬁc electromagnetic origin for a reaction force fr. Accelerated motion
through the electromagnetic zero-point ﬁeld (ZPF) of the quantum vacuum results in a reaction force. If one
analyses the ZPF using Maxwell’s equations of electrodynamics, one ﬁnds that fr = −mzpa where mzp is
an electromagnetic parameter with units of mass. An electromagnetic reaction force (somewhat like a drag
force) arises that happens to be proportional to acceleration. In other words, if one begins with Maxwell’s
equations as applied to the ZPF, one ﬁnds from the laws of electrodynamics that fr = −mzpa and thus if one
assumes that the electrodynamic parameter mzp really is the physical basis of mass, Newton’s third law of
equal and opposite forces, f = −fr, results in a derivation of f = ma from the electrodynamics of the ZPF.
That being the case, one can, in principle, dispense with the concept of inertial mass altogether. Matter,
consisting of charged particles (quarks and electrons) interacts with the electromagnetic ZPF and this yields
a reaction force whenever acceleration takes place and that is the cause of inertia.

THE ORIGIN OF THE ELECTROMAGNETIC ZERO-POINT FIELD

There are two views on the origin of the electromagnetic zero-point ﬁeld as embodied in Quantum Elec-
trodynamics (QED) and Stochastic Electrodynamics (SED) respectively. The QED perspective is currently
regarded as “standard physics” and the arguments go as follows. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle sets
a fundamental limit on the precision with which conjugate quantities are allowed to be determined. The two
principal conjugate pairs are position and momentum such that ∆x∆p ≥ ¯h/2, and energy and time such that
∆E∆t ≥ ¯h/2 where ¯h is Planck’s constant, h, divided by 2π. It is a standard derivation in most textbooks
on quantum mechanics to work out the quantum version of a simple mechanical harmonic oscillator — a
mass on a spring — in this respect.

There are two non-classical results for a quantized harmonic oscillator. First of all, the energy levels are
discrete and not continuous. By adding energy one can increase the amplitude of the oscillation, but only
in units of hν, where ν is the frequency in cycles per second.
In other words, one can add or subtract
E = nhν of energy where n ≥ 0. The second quantum eﬀect stems from the fact that if an oscillator were
able to come completely to rest, ∆x would be zero and this would violate the ∆x∆p ≥ ¯h/2 limitation. The
result is that there is a minimum energy of E = hν/2, i.e. the oscillator energy can only take on the values
E = (n + 1/2)hν which can never become zero since n cannot be negative.

The argument is then made that the electromagnetic ﬁeld is analogous to a mechanical harmonic oscillator
since the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, E and B, are oscillating plane waves (see e.g. Loudon 198311). Each
Fourier component of the electromagnetic ﬁeld has a minimum energy of hν/2. The density of modes between
frequencies ν and ν + dν can be represented by means of the density of states function Nνdν = (8πν2/c3)dν

4

where each state has a minimum hν/2 of energy, and using the density of states and the zero-point energy
per state one can calculate the ZPF spectral energy density:

ρ(ν)dν =

8πν2
c3

hν
2

dν.

It is instructive to write the expression for zero-point spectral energy density side by side with blackbody
radiation:

ρ(ν, T )dν =

8πν2
c3 (cid:18)

hν
ehν/kT − 1

+

hν
2 (cid:19)

dν.

The ﬁrst term (outside the parentheses) represents the mode density, and the terms inside the parentheses
are the average energy per mode of thermal radiation at temperature T plus the zero-point energy, hν/2,
which has no temperature dependence. Take away all thermal energy by formally letting T go to zero, and
one is still left with the zero-point term. The laws of quantum mechanics as applied to electromagnetic
radiation force the existence of a background sea of zero-point-ﬁeld (ZPF) radiation.

Zero-point radiation is a result of the application of quantum laws. It is traditionally assumed in QED,
though, that the ZPF can for all practical purposes be ignored or subtracted away. The foundation of
SED is the exact opposite. It is assumed that the ZPF is as real as any other electromagnetic ﬁeld. As to
its origin, the assumption is made that for some reason zero-point radiation just came with the Universe.
The justiﬁcation for this is that if one assumes that all of space is ﬁlled with ZPF radiation, a number of
quantum phenomena may be explained purely on the basis of classical physics including the presence of
background electromagnetic ﬂuctuations provided by the ZPF. The Heisenberg uncertainty relation, in this
view, becomes then not a result of the existence of quantum laws, but of the fact that there is a universal
perturbing ZPF acting on everything. The original motivation for developing SED was to see whether the
need for quantum laws separate from classical physics could thus be obviated entirely.

Philosophically, a universe ﬁlled — for reasons unknown — with a ZPF but with only one set of physical
laws (classical physics consisting of mechanics and electrodynamics), would appear to be on an equal footing
with a universe governed — for reasons unknown — by two distinct physical laws (classical and quantum).
In terms of physics, though, SED and QED are not on an equal footing, since SED has been successful in
providing a satisfactory alternative to only some quantum phenomena (although this success does include a
classical ZPF-based derivation of the all-important blackbody spectrum, cf. Boyer 198412). Some of this is
simply due to lack of eﬀort: The ratio of man-years devoted to development of QED is orders of magnitude
greater than the expenditure so far on SED.

ACCELERATION AND THE DAVIES-UNRUH EFFECT

The ZPF spectral energy density of Eq. (1) would indeed be analogous to a spatially uniform constant oﬀset
that cancels out when considering energy ﬂuxes. However an important discovery was made in the mid-
1970’s that showed that the ZPF acquires special characteristics when viewed from an accelerating frame. In
connection with radiation from evaporating black holes as proposed by Hawking (1974)13, Davies (1975)14
and Unruh (1976)15 determined that a Planck-like component of the ZPF will arise in a uniformly-accelerated
cordinate system having constant proper acceleration a (where |a| = a) with what amounts to an eﬀective
“temperature”

(1)

(2)

(3)

This “temperature” does not originate in emission from particles undergoing thermal motions. b As discussed
by Davies, Dray and Manogue (1996)16:

b One suspects of course that there is a deep connection between the fact that the ZPF spectrum that

arises in this fashion due to acceleration and the ordinary blackbody spectrum have identical form.

Ta =

¯ha
2πck

.

5

One of the most curious properties to be discussed in recent years is the prediction that an
observer who accelerates in the conventional quantum vacuum of Minkowski space will perceive
a bath of radiation, while an inertial observer of course perceives nothing. In the case of linear
acceleration, for which there exists an extensive literature, the response of a model particle
detector mimics the eﬀect of its being immersed in a bath of thermal radiation (the so-called
Unruh eﬀect).

This “heat bath” is a quantum phenomenon. The “temperature” is negligible for most accelerations. Only
in the extremely large gravitational ﬁelds of black holes or in high-energy particle collisions can this become
signiﬁcant. This eﬀect has been studied using both QED (Davies 197514, Unruh 197615) and in the SED
formalism (Boyer 198017). For the classical SED case it is found that the spectrum is quasi-Planckian in Ta.
Thus for the case of no true external thermal radiation (T = 0) but including this acceleration eﬀect (Ta),
equation (1) becomes

ρ(ν, Ta)dν =

8πν2
c3 (cid:20)

1 +

2

a
2πcν (cid:17)

(cid:21)

(cid:16)

hν
2

(cid:20)

+

hν
ehν/kTa − 1 (cid:21)

dν,

where the acceleration-dependent pseudo-Planckian component is placed after the hν/2 term to indicate that
except for extreme accelerations (e.g. particle collisions at high energies) this term is negligibly small. While
these additional acceleration-dependent terms do not show any spatial asymmetry in the expression for the
ZPF spectral energy density, certain asymmetries do appear when the electromagnetic ﬁeld interactions with
charged particles are analyzed, or when the momentum ﬂux of the ZPF is calculated. The ordinary plus a2
radiation reaction terms in Eq. (12) of HRP mirror the two leading terms in Eq. (4).

THE ORIGIN OF INERTIA

Two independent approaches have demonstrated how a reaction force proportional to acceleration (fr =
−mzpa) arises out of the properties of the ZPF. The ﬁrst approach (HRP) was based upon a simpliﬁed model
for how accelerated idealized quarks and electrons would interact with the ZPF. It identiﬁed the Lorentz
force arising from the stochastically-averaged magnetic component of the ZPF, < Bzp >, as the basis of
fr. The new approach (Rueda and Haisch 1998a5, 1998b6) considers only the relativistic transformations of
the ZPF itself to an accelerated frame. We ﬁnd a non-zero stochastically-averaged Poynting vector (c/4π)
< Ezp × Bzp > which leads immediately to a non-zero electromagnetic ZPF-momentum ﬂux as viewed by
an accelerating object. If the quarks and electrons in such an accelerating object scatter this asymmetric
radiation, an acceleration-dependent reaction force fr arises. In fact in this new analysis the fr is the space-
part of a relativistic four-vector so that the resulting equation of motion is not simply the classical f = ma
expression, but rather the properly relativistic F = dP/dτ equation.

In the ﬁrst approach a speciﬁc ZPF-matter interaction is needed to carry out the analysis. We used a
technique developed by Einstein and Hopf (1911)18 and applied that to idealized particles (partons, in the
nomenclature of Feynman) treated as Planck oscillators. In the second approach, no speciﬁc ZPF-matter
interaction is necessary for the analysis. Any scattering or absorption process will yield a reaction force
on the basis of a non-zero electromagnetic momentum ﬂux. Presumably dipole scattering of the ZPF by
fundamental charged particles is the appropriate representation, at least to ﬁrst order, since that can be
shown to be a detailed balance process in the non-accelerated case, i.e. dipole scattering by non-accelerated
charged particles leaves the ZPF spectrum unchanged and isotropic (Puthoﬀ 1989b19). In both approaches it
is assumed that the level of interaction is that of quarks and electrons, which would account for the inertial
mass of a composite neutral particle such as the neutron (udd).

The expression for inertial mass in HRP for an individual particle is

(4)

(5)

mzp =

Γz¯hω2
c
2πc2 ,

6

where Γz represents a damping constant for zitterbewegung oscillations. c

This is not to be confused with Γe = 6.25 × 10−24 s (Jackson 197520) which is used for macroscopic
electron oscillations in ordinary radiation-matter interactions. Γz is a free parameter and Γz 6= Γe. In Eq. (5)
ωc represents an assumed cutoﬀ frequency (in radians/s) for the ZPF spectrum and is also a free parameter.

The expression for inertial mass in Rueda and Haisch (1998a5, 1998b6) for an object with volume V0 is

mzp =

V0
c2 Z

(cid:18)

η(ω)

¯hω3
2π2c3 dω

.

(cid:19)

(6)

The interpretation of this is quite straightforward. The energy density of the ZPF (Eq. 1) written in terms of
ω(= 2πν) is ρdω = ¯hω3dω/2π2c3 which is the second term in the integral. The dimensionless parameter η(ω)
represents the fraction of the ZPF ﬂux scattered at each frequency. The total energy involved “generating
mass” is determined by the volume of the object, V0, and the division by c2 converts the units to mass.

CAN INERTIAL MASS BE ALTERED?

The mass of a proton in energy units is ∼ 938 MeV. A proton is composed of two up (u) quarks and one
down (d) quark whose individual masses are ∼ 5 MeV for the u, and ∼ 10 Mev for the d. Thus the mass
of the uud combination constituting the proton is about 50 times more massive than the sum of the parts.
The same is true of a neutron (udd) whose mass is ∼ 940 MeV. This is clearly a naive argument given
the conceptual uncertainty of what “mass” actually means for an individual quark which cannot exist in
isolation. Nonetheless, taking this paradox at face value does oﬀers a useful perspective for speculation.

The expression (Eq. 1) for mzp of an individual particle as derived by HRP involves two free parameters,
Γz and ωc. In HRP we assumed that ωc was some cutoﬀ frequency dictated either by an actual cutoﬀ of
the ZPF spectrum (such as the Planck frequency) or by a minimum size of a particle (such as the Planck
length). Let us assume that in place of a cutoﬀ frequency there is a resonance frequency which is speciﬁc to
a given particle, call it ω0.

One can now imagine that a u-quark has a resonance ω0(u) yielding mzp = 5 MeV and that the d-quark
has a diﬀerent resonance ω0(d) yielding mzp = 10 MeV (assuming the same Γz). It would not be surprising
that a bound triad of quarks such as the uud or the udd would have a radically diﬀerent resonance as
an ensemble. The resonance of a mechanical system bears no simple relationship to the resonances of its
component parts. On this basis it would be easy to see how the same three quarks could have a totally
diﬀerent mass collectively than individually.

This same line of reasoning could be applied to the concept of mass defect. The sum of the masses of two
protons plus two neutrons is greater than the mass of a He nucleus. Again, one can easily imagine the
resonance of a group of 12 bound quarks in a He nucleus being diﬀerent than the sum of the resonances of
four groups of three bound quarks.

c In the Dirac theory of the electron, the velocity operator has eigenvalues of ±c. The motion of an
electron thus consists of two components: some average motion speciﬁc to a given physical circumstance
plus an inherent highly oscillatory component whose instantaneous velocity is ±c which Schr¨odinger named
zitterbewegung (cf. Huang 195221). The amplitude of this zitterbewegung oscillation is on the order of the
Compton wavelength. From the perspective of the ZPF-inertia theory, the ZPF can induce such speed-of-light
ﬂuctuations since at this level the electron would be a massless point-charge. It is the Compton-wavelength
size “electron cloud” that acquires the measured electron inertial mass of 512 keV in energy units via a
relationship like Eq. (5). The Γe = 6.25 × 10−24 damping constant governs the motion of the “electron
cloud” whereas the Γz applies to the internal zitterbewegung. This is an example of an SED interpretation
of an apparent quantum phenomeon. The quantum size of the electron is its Compton wavelength. The
SED interpretation would be one of a massless point charge driven by the ZPF to oscillate at ±c within a
Compton wavelength-size region of space.

7

The advantage of this line of reasoning is that one does not have to convert mass into energy and vice versa.
The quarks themselves can remain basically unchanged entities, whereas the resonances characterizing the
interaction between the quark ensemble and the ZPF vary. This view would not be at odds with the
conventional interpretation that in going from two free protons plus two free neutrons to one bound He
nucleus there is simply a change in potential (binding) energy taking place. That interpretation becomes
one way to “balance the books” but the change in resonance would serve equally well, yet without the need
to convert something material (mass) into something immaterial (energy). One would then interpret the
energy released during fusion in terms of a change in the kinetic energy of the zitterbewegung motions of
the quarks, which are driven by the ZPF. In other words, change in mass becomes instead a change in
the amount of energy involved in ZPF-quark interactions resulting from changes in resonance. The energy
released in fusion would be coming from the ZPF.

We are suggesting that the mass of a particle is determined by a resonance frequency, ω0, and that the mass
of a composite entity can be radically diﬀerent from the sum of the individual masses because of changes in
the resonances due to binding forces. If that proves to be the case, then one would also expect the mass of an
individual particle to be variable if a change in resonance can be induced via external boundary conditions.
This would be somewhat analagous to the well-known ability to change spontaneous emission (by more than
an order of magnitude) by eﬀectively placing an atom in an appropriate electromagnetic cavity.

In semiconductors, the response of an electron to a given force is quite diﬀerent from one material to another.
The “eﬀective mass” of an electron in silicon is heavier than in gallium arsenide, for example. Although not
directly a ZPF-determined eﬀect, it nonetheless provides a cogent example as to how particle masses can
depend on environments to which they are strongly coupled. A similar eﬀect has recently been reported for
particles produced inside collisions between heavy nuclei. Experimental evidence was reported by Wurm for
a change in the eﬀective mass of the ρ-meson during a collision as reported by Schewe and Stein (A.I.P.
Bulletin No. 369). The bulletin also states: “According to Volker Koch of Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory,
this eﬀect can take place for particles inside any nuclear environment, from the most common atoms to
superdense neutron stars.” We speculate that within ZPF modeling it is conceivable that such eﬀective mass
changes might be a result of changes in the electromagnetic boundary conditions aﬀecting the mass-giving
resonance, ω0, of a particle determining its interaction with the ZPF.

ZPF-INDUCED GRAVITATION

One of the ﬁrst objections typically raised against the existence of a real ZPF is that the mass equivalent
of the energy embodied in Eq. (1) would generate an enormous spacetime curvature that would shrink the
universe to microscopic size. The resolution of this dilemma lies in the principle of equivalence. If inertia
is an electromagnetic phenomenon involving interactions between charge and the ZPF, then gravitation
must be a similar phenomenon. The mere existence of a ZPF would not necessarily generate gravitation
or spacetime curvature. Indeed, preliminary development of a conjecture of Sakharov (1968)2 by Puthoﬀ
(1989a)7 indicates that the ZPF in and of itself cannot be a source of gravitation (see also discussion in
Haisch and Rueda [1997]22).

Expressed in the simplest possible way, all matter at the level of quarks and electrons is driven to oscillate
(zitterbewegung in the terminology of Schr¨odinger) by the ZPF. But every oscillating charge will generate its
own minute electromagnetic ﬁelds. Thus any particle will experience the ZPF as modiﬁed ever so slightly
by the ﬁelds of adjacent particles. . . and that is gravitation! It is a kind of long-range van der Waals force.

Such a ZPF-based theory of gravitation is only in the exploratory stage at this point. The Puthoﬀ (1989a)7
analysis that resulted in the calculation of a proper Newtonian inverse-square law of attraction has since
been shown to be problematic, e.g. see Carlip (1993)23 and the reply by Puthoﬀ (1993)24, also Cole, Danley
and Rueda (1998)25. Moreover at this time there is no accounting for the gravitational deﬂection of light
other than to invoke a variable permittivity and permeability of the vacuum due to the presence of charged
matter. However if it can be shown that the dielectric properties of the vacuum can be suitably modiﬁed

8

by matter so as to bring about light deﬂection, this may be a viable alternative interpretation to spacetime
curvature since light propagation serves to deﬁne the metric.

CONCLUSIONS

A concept has been proposed that attempts to account for the inertia of matter as an electromagnetic reaction
force. A parallel gravitation concept along lines conjectured by Sakharov (1968)2 also exists in preliminary
form, and is consistent with the proposed origin of inertia as demanded by the principle of equivalence. On
the basis of this ZPF-inertia concept, we can deﬁnitively rule out one speculatively hypothesized propulsion
mechanism: matter possessing negative inertial mass, a concept originated by Bondi (1957)3 is shown to be
logically impossible. One cannot “turn around” the reaction force an object experiences upon accelerating
into an oppositely directed ZPF momentum ﬂux.

Is it proper to regard the ZPF as a real electromagnetic ﬁeld? The measurements by Lamoreaux (1997)10
of the Casimir force show excellent agreement — at the ﬁve percent level (much better than previous
experiments) — with theoretical predictions. One interpretation of the Casimir force is that it represents the
radiation pressure resulting from the exclusion of certain ZPF modes in the cavity between the (uncharged)
conducting plates (Milonni, Cook and Goggin 198826). There are alternate ways of looking at this (cf.
Milonni 199427). We suggest that it is fruitful at this stage to continue exploring the ramiﬁcations of a real-
ZPF paradigm and that just as a real, measureable Casimir force results upon construction of an uncharged
parallel-plate condenser, so too does a real, measureable reaction force result upon acceleration thereby
creating the inertial properties of matter.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge support of NASA contract NASW-5050 for this work. BH also acknowledges the hospitality
of Prof. J. Tr¨umper and the Max-Planck-Institut where some of these ideas originated during several
extended stays as a Visiting Fellow. AR acknowledges many stimulating discussions with Dr. D. C. Cole.

REFERENCES

1. Haisch, B., Rueda, A. and Puthoﬀ, H.E. (1994; HRP), “Inertia as a zero-point ﬁeld Lorentz Force,” Phys.

Rev. A, Vol. 49, 678.

2. Sakharov, A. (1968), “Vacuum Quantum Fluctuations in Curved Space and the Theory of Gravitation,”

Soviet Physics - Doklady, Vol. 12, No. 11, 1040.

3. Bondi, H. (1957), “Negative mass within general relativity” Rev. Modern Phys., Vol. 29, No. 3, 423.

4. Matthews, R. (1995), “Nothing Like a Vacuum,” New Scientist, Vol. 145, No. 1966, p. 30.

5. Rueda, A. and Haisch, B. (1998a), “Inertia as reaction of the vacuum to accelerated motion,” Physics

Letters A, Vol. 240, 115. (also http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9802031)

6. Rueda, A. and Haisch, B. (1998b), “Contribution to inertial mass by reaction of the vacuum to accelerated

motion,” Foundations of Physics, in press. (also http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9802030)

7. Puthoﬀ, H.E. (1989a), “Gravity as a zero-point ﬂuctuation force,” Phys. Rev. A, Vol. 39, 2333.

8. Millis, M. G. (1998), “Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Workshop Preliminary Results,” in Space Tech-
nology and Applications International Forum–1998, CP420, (M. S. El-Genk, ed.), DOE CONF-980103,
p. 3.

9. Cole, D.C. and Puthoﬀ, H.E. (1993) “Extracting Energy and Heat from the Vacuum,” Phys. Rev. E, 48,

10. Lamoreaux, S.K. (1997) “Demonstration of the Casimir Force in the 0.6 to 6 µm Range,” Phys. Rev.

1562.

Letters, 78, 5.

11. Loudon, R. (1983), The Quantum Theory of Light (2nd. ed)., Oxford Univ. Press, chap. 4.

9

Vol. 8, 609.

D, 53, 4382.

D, Vol. 21. 2137.

4857.

12. Boyer, T. H. (1984) “Derivation of the blackbody radiation spectrum from the equivalence principle in

classical physics with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D, 29, 1096.

13. Hawking, S. (1974), “Black hole explosions?” Nature, 248, 30.

14. Davies, P.C.W. (1975), “Scalar particle production in Schwarzschild and Rindler metrics,” J. Phys. A,

15. Unruh, W.G. (1976) “Notes on black-hole evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D, Vol. 14, 870.

16. Davies, P.C.W., Dray, T. and Manogue, C. A. (1996), “The Rotating Quantum Vacuum,” Phys. Rev.

17. Boyer, T.H. (1980), “Thermal eﬀects of acceleration through random classical radiation”, Phys. Rev.

18. Einstein, A. and Hopf, L. (1910), “ ¨Uber einen Satz der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung und seine Anwen-
dung in der Strahlungstheorie”, Annalen der Physik (Leipzig), Vol. 33, 1096; “Statistische Untersuchung
der Bewegung eines Resonators in einem Strahlungsfeld”, Vol. 33, 1105.

19. Puthoﬀ, H.E. (1989b), “Source of vacuum electromagnetic zero-point energy,” Phys. Rev. A, Vol. 40,

20. Jackson, J.D. (1975), Classical Electrodynamics, (Wiley and Sons), ch. 17.

21. Huang, K. (1952), “On the Zitterbewegung of the Dirac Electron,” Am. J. Phys., 20, 479.

22. Haisch, B. and Rueda, A. (1997), “Reply to Michel’s ‘Comment on Zero Point Fluctuations and the

Cosmological Constant,” Astrophys. J., 488, 563.

23. Carlip, S. (1993), “Comments on ‘Gravity as a zero-point ﬂuctuation force”’, Phys. Rev. A, Vol. 47,

24. Puthoﬀ, H.E. (1993), “Reply to ‘Comment on Gravity as a zero-point ﬂuctuation force”’, Phys. Rev. A,

25. Cole, D.C., Danley, K. and Rueda, A. (1998), “Further analysis on gravity originating from a zero-point

26. Milonni, P.W., Cook, R.J. and Goggin, M.E. (1988), “Radiation pressure from the vacuum: Physical

interpretation of the Casimir force,” Phys. Rev. A, 38, 1621.

27. Milonni, P.W. (1994), The Quantum Vacuum, Academic Pres, chap. 1.

3452.

Vol. 47, 3454.

force,” in preparation.

10

