INERTIA AS EMERGING OF A
HAMILTONIAN CONSTRAINT SYSTEM

Department of Physics, Shahid Beheshti University, Evin, Tehran 19839, Iran.

Farhad Darabi∗

mailing address:

Department of Physics

Shahid Beheshti University

Evin, Tehran 19839 Iran.

January 5, 2014

Abstract

The issue of inertia as opposition to acceleration of a massive point particle in
Minkowski space-time is investigated in the context of a Hamiltonian constraint sys-
tem. It is shown that the inertia as a locally-originating force in Minkowski space-time
may emerge due to a global constraint.
KEYWORDS: Inertia, Hamiltonian constraint system.

8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗e-mail: f-darabi@cc.sbu.ac.ir

1

1 Introduction

Recently, the issue of inertia as an “unresolved mystery in modern physics” has been the subject
of intense investigations. Disagreement of Mach’s principle with general relativity is the well
known fact that have been presented, with additional conﬂicts, by Vigier and Rindler in recent
papers [1]. In his paper, Vigier has used the Dirac vacuum to explain, in an alternative way,
the origin of inertia. More recently, Rueda et al. in a series of papers [2] have explained the
inertia as scattering-like process of the ZPF radiation subject to the electromagnetic vacuum.
In this paper, we shall adopt a diﬀerent approach to explain the possible origin of inertia
based on a Hamiltonian constraint structure. To this aim, we concentrate on a massive point
particle as an elementary constituent of matterial objects for which we shall investigate the
issue of inertia.
In this way, inertia of a matterial object may be described as well. The
motivation in following this approach is the belief that the inertia is a locally-originating
force in Minkowski space-time, emerging of an inherent global (independent of space-time )
constraint in a causal structure. In our opinion, inertia as an inherent property of matter do not
depend on the collective linkage of all matter in the universe according to Mach’s idea, instead
it is just a local eﬀect (even in an empty space-time) which emerge identically all over the
space-time due to the existence of an inherent global constraint. As is well known, the action
of a relativistic free massive point particle has a Hamiltonian constraint structure [3] leading
to the mass-shell condition, where the space-time coordinates are assumed to be dynamical
variables subject to the Minkowski metric. Of course, this constraint structure is independent
of the space-time dimensions, so one may be motivated to reconstruct an equivalent constraint
structure without the need to use the space-time coordinates as dynamical variables. We use
the worldline of a point particle as dynamical variable and parametrize its action by a prefered
time parameter, then we construct the associated constraint structure which is independent of
space-time dimensions as a global one.1. It turns out that inertia as opposition to acceleration
of the point particle in Minkowski space-time may emerge as a consequence of this constraint
structure.

2 Constraint structure

We start with the action of a relativistic point particle

where m0 is the rest mass of the particle, c is the velocity of light and ds the worldline element.
We now rewrite the action as

where ˙s = ds
dθ and θ is assumed to be a prefered time parameter. The question that who observes
the velocity ˙s will be answered later. This linear action admits a Hamiltonian constraint
1This is because the worldline can be deﬁned in arbitrary dimensional space-time with any arbitrary metric.

(1)

(2)

I = −m0c

ds

Z

I = −m0c

θ2

˙sdθ

Z

θ1

2

structure [3] with the primary constraint

which shows the reparametrization invariance of the action (2), where ps is the momentum
conjugate to s. The original Hamiltonian H0 is zero by reparametrization invariance, so the
total Hamiltonian is

where λ(θ) is an arbitrary function of time; hence the dynamics is fully controlled by the
constraint (3). The consistency condition

is satisﬁed since {φ, φ} ≈ 0, so that there is no secondary constraints. The global 2 constraint
(3) is by deﬁnition [3] a ﬁrst class constraint, which generates the following inﬁnitesimal gauge
transformations

φ ≡ ps + m0c ≈ 0

HT = λ(θ) φ

0 ≈ ˙φ = {φ, HT }

δs = ǫ(θ){s, φ} = ǫ(θ)

δps = ǫ(θ){ps, φ} = 0

where ǫ(θ) is an inﬁnitesimal arbitrary function of time. Gauge invariance of the action (2)
holds as long as ǫ(θ1) = ǫ(θ2). It follows from (6) and (7) that the variable s has a gauge
orbit and so is not a measurable quantity, where the momentum ps is a global gauge invariant
quantity on this orbit and is measurable. Considering the constraint (3) reveals the fact that
the whole physical content of this theory, after gauge ﬁxing, is based on this gauge invariant
degree of freedom in phase space since as will be seen, it carries an important characteristic of
a point particle namely its compton wavelength.
The equations of motion are

which integrate to

these are consistent with (6) and (7) provided that δλ = ˙ǫ(θ).

Quantization of this system is done by operating on the Hilbert subspace | ψ > by the

constraint operator (3) as [3]

which gives a time independent wave function

It is remarkably interesting to note that the compton wavelength of the point particle
the natural length scale measuring its worldline length.

2The constraint (3) is global in the sense that it is independent of local space-time coordinates.

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

¯h
m0c , is

˙s = {s, HT } = λ(θ)

˙ps = {ps, HT } = 0

θ

λ(θ′) dθ′

s =

Z

ps = Const.

ˆφ | ψ >= 0

ψ(s) ∼ e−i

m0c
¯h

s

3

3 Equivalence classes

¯h
m0c or

Once the previous constraint structure is constructed, one sees that all arbitrary motions of
a massive point particle in Minkowski space-time correspond to arbitrary dynamics ˙s = λ(θ)
subject to the constraint ˙ps = 0. Therefore the types of functions λ(θ) should be deﬁned
properly. By looking at the action (1) it turns out that the only natural velocity in the theory
is the constant velocity of light c. We assume that the observer, who shall observe the velocity
˙s, does not recognize whether a massive point particle is at rest or in a uniform motion in
Minkowski space-time. This assumption is based on the equivalence of all inertial motions in
Minkowski space-time. Therefore this observer have to associate a unique constant velocity
¯λ = c for all massive point particles at rest or in uniform motion in Minkowski space-time.
It has its origin in the fact that the existence of another constant velocity ¯λ 6= c will give
rise to appearence of an ambiguity in the compton wavelength, because there would not be
¯h
any physical way to recognize a priori which of
m0 ¯λ is the compton wavelength, so,
this breaks down the constraint (3) 3. According to above discussion we deﬁne two types of
functions λ(θ) as follows
1) Constant function ¯λ = c corresponds to all uniform motions of a massive point particle in
Minkowski space-time.
2) Each time dependent function λ(θ) corresponds to each non-uniform motion of a massive
point particle in Minkowski space-time.
Two classiﬁcations are based on the fact that one can distinguish physically between a uni-
form motion and non-uniform motion by resorting to inertial eﬀects such as “inertia” of point
particle and that we expect a correspondence between λ(θ) and appearence of inertia. Using
δλ = ˙ǫ(θ) and δs = ǫ(θ) we can correspondingly deﬁne two types of gauge equivalent motions
of a massive point particle in Minkowski space-time as follows
1) δ¯λ = 0 corresponds to a constant function ¯ǫ and therefore a constant gauge transformation
δs = ¯ǫ.
2) δλ(θ) = ¯λ − λ(θ) 6= 0 corresponds to time dependent function ǫ(θ) and therefore a time
dependent gauge transformation δs = ǫ(θ).
The ﬁrst expresses that the equivalence relation between two arbitrary diﬀerent uniform mo-
tions of a same point particle in Minkowski space-time can be represented as the constant
gauge transformation δs = ¯ǫ with arbitrary constant ¯ǫ. On the other hand, one ﬁnds from
the second one an equivalence relation between a uniform motion ¯λ = c and an arbitrary
non-uniform motion λ(θ) of a same point particle in Minkowski space-time which can be rep-
resented as the time dependent gauge transformation δs = ǫ(θ) with arbitrary ǫ(θ). However,
there is a big diﬀerence between two gauge equivalences (transformations). The ﬁrst gives rise
to a gauge invariant action where the second one does not, since in the later case there is no
requirment to have ǫ(θ1) = ǫ(θ2). Therefore, the second type gauge transformations does not
minimizes the action. This property of the action as diﬀerent responses against diﬀerent gauge
transformations represents remarkably the well known fact that the action becomes minimum
only for uniform motions.

3It appears that once we ﬁx the factor m0c in the action, then the unique constant velocity c is prefered by
which every massive point particle at rest or in uniform motion in Minkowski space-time is forced to move, as
wived by this observer.

4

4 A prefered frame

Comming back to the constraint (3) we concentrate on its physical content. As is well known,
¯h
the compton wavelength of a point particle with rest mass m0 is
m0c which is ﬁxed whenever
one ﬁxes the rest mass of that particle. Indeed this character is independent of any motion of
the particle in space-time. On the contrary, we know de Broglie wavelength ¯h
p depending on
the momentun p of the point particle in space-time. Comparing the compton and de Broglie
wavelengthes, a natural question arises: “Is there any kind of intrinsic momentum associated
with the rest point particle, giving its compton wavelength ? or, Can we ﬁnd a prefered frame
in which a rest point particle in Minkowski space-time appears to have a momentum whose de
Broglie wavelength gives compton wavelength of that particle ?”

Obviously no rest mass m0 can move with the light velocity c or have a momentum m0c in
Minkowski space-time. But, considering the constraint (3) turns out that this rest mass have
this momentum. Then a remarkable result is obtained: “One can deﬁne a prefered observer
who observes this intrinsic momentum of point particle in his prefered frame and ﬁnds its
compton wavelength as de Broglie wavelength”.

From the wievpoint of this prefered observer every massive point particle, at rest or in
uniform motion in Minkowski space-time, is forced to move with the unique constant velocity
c and ˙s = λ(θ) is its instantaneous velocity upon acceleration in Minkowski space-time. So,
in order to have a gauge invariant (constant) momentum m0c, the change c → ˙s(θ) must be
c
compensated by the corresponding change m0 → m ≡ m0
˙s(θ) . We believe that the concept
of inertia as the instantaneous opposition to acceleration of a massive point particle can be
described through this procedure occuring in this prefered frame.

5 Inertia

Here we are going to investigate the issue of inertia in the context of our constraint structure.
In our opinion the concept known as inertia is based on the eﬀects occuring from the wievpoint
of our prefered observer, since the issue of inertia is highly correleted with the acceleration
and makes an absolute line of demarcation between the uniform motion and acceleration;
it is natural to investigate the inertia in a prefered frame in which there is also a similar
demarcation. The equation of motion (9) combined with the constraint (3) gives rise to

which is trivial for the uniform motion giving rise to no dynamical eﬀect. However, for non-
uniform motion it becomes

or

(14)

(15)

(16)

d
dθ

(m0c) = 0

d
dθ

(ps) = m

+

˙s = 0

d˙s
dθ

dm
dθ

m

d˙s
dθ

= −

dm
dθ

˙s

5

Dynamically, we note that the dimensions of both sides are the dimension of force, so it is a
statement of Newton’s third law about a symmetry in nature as 4

~fap = −~fre

~fap ≡ m

, ~fre ≡ ~˙s

~d˙s
dθ

dm
dθ

(17)

(18)

Therefore, this symmetry ﬁnds its truly origin in the global constraint (3). To accelerate a
point particle the force ~fap must be applied by an agent and the agent will necessarily expe-
rience an equall and opposite force ~fre as long as the acceleration continues. Therefore the
reaction force ~fre, corresponds to inertia of the point particle.
It is seen that the origin of
inertia in this wievpoint is the constraint dynamics, in particular a dynamical mass dm
dθ .

with

Discussion

A careful insight turns out that our prefered observer have to be one with zero gauge
transformation (translation) δs = 0. In other words,this observer has a zero velocity ˙s = 0 or
ds = 0 which is the main characteristic of massless particles. Hence, it seems that the concept
of inertia is interrelated with the existence of massless particles moving with light velocity in
Minkowski space-time such as photons. In this way, the relativistic action (2) by which the
global constraint (3) is derived, preserves the causality as the underlying basis of Newton’s
third law and the concept of inertia. In this respect, inertia is a locally-originating force in
Minkowski space-time due to the existence of the global constraint (3). We believe that the
approach considered here, may have an implicit relation with that of works explaining the
origin of inertia by an acceleration-dependent scattering of ZPF momentum ﬂux [2]. This is
because in both approaches the existence of massless particles moving with the velocity of
light plays a key role explaining inertia in a way that preserves the causality. Moreover, the
electromagnetic drag eﬀect with the steady growth of the ZPF momentum contained within the
volume of the object, in that works, may be identiﬁed with dynamical mass dm
dθ obtained here
as the origin of inertia. On the other hand, the existence of a prefered frame associated with
the massless particles, as a requirement to describe the inertia in this work, may remind us to
look at the relation to Dirac’s ether model implying inertial forces assuming the existence of the
absolute local inertial frames associated with the observed local isotropy of 2.7 K background
microwave radiation [4].

4Note that ˙s decreases with θ where m increases with it, so the directions of

~fap and

~fre are opposite.

6

References

[1] J. P. Vigier, Foundations of Physics, 25, No. 10, 1461 (1995);

W. Rindler, Phys. Lett. A 187, 236 (1994).

[2] A. Rueda and B. Haisch, Inertia as reaction of the vacuum to accelerated motion

Phys. Lett. A, in press;
A. Rueda and B. Haisch, Foundations of Physics, in press (1998);
B. Haisch, A. Rueda and H. E. Puthoﬀ, Phys. Rev. A 49, 678 (1994).

[3] P. A. M. Dirac, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Yeshiva University (Academic-Press,

New York 1967).

[4] P. A. M. Dirac, Nature (London) 168, 906 (1951);

M. C. Combourieu and J. P. Vigier, Phys. Lett. A 175, 269 (1993).

7

