8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

To appear in the Nova collection of papers dedicated to the Lorentz symmetry,
V. Dvoeglazov, Editor, Nova Publisher

UNIVERSALITY OF THE ISOSPECIAL RELATIVITY FOR
THE INVARIANT DESCRIPTION OF ARBITRARY SPEEDS
OF LIGHT

Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research
P.O.Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682, U.S.A.
E-address ibr@gte.net; Web Site http://home1.gte.net/ibr

Abstract

We review the recent experimental evidence on arbitrary values of the speed of light
within physical media (interior dynamical problems); we recall that classical (oper-
ator) theories with speeds of light diﬀerent than that in vacuum are noncanonically
(nonunitarily) related to the special relativity, thus losing the original invariant char-
acter with consequential rather serious problems of physical consistency; we show that
the isominkowskian geometry, the isopoincar´e symmetry and the isospecial relativity
provide a formulation of arbitrary speeds of light within physical media as invariant
as that of the special relativity for the propagation of light in vacuum; we prove that
the isospecial relativity is directly universal, in the sense of holding for all possible
spacetime models with a symmetric metric directly in the frame of the observer; we
outline the broader genotopic and hyperstructural formulations which are directly uni-
versal for single- and multiple-valued irreversible systems, respectively, with a generally
nonsymmetric metric; we review the anti-isomorphic isodual formulations for the clas-
sical and operator representation of antimatter and the prediction of the new ”isodual
photon”; we ﬁnally point out a few representative connections between the invariant
isotopic formulations and a rather large variety of generalized theories existing in the
literature.

1. Local character of the speed of light.

One of the most majestic achievements of this century for mathematical beauty, axiomatic
consistency and experimental veriﬁcations has been the special relativity (SR) [1].

1

Nevertheless, science is a discipline that will never admit ”ﬁnal theories”. No matter
how valid a given theory may appear at a given point in time, its generalization for broader
physical conditions should be expected as inevitable.

Along the latter lines, the SR has been challenged during the recent decades on various
grounds. That primarily addressed in this note is the experimental evidence of the local
character of the speed of light c, i.e., its dependence on the local spacetime coordinates x,
the local density µ, the frequency ω, and any other needed variable, according to the familiar
law

c = co/n(x, µ, ω, ...),

(1)

where n is the index of refraction, with the propagation in vacuum at the constant speed co
admitted as a particular case for n = 1.

In fact, speeds c = co/n < co, n > 1 (also called subluminal speeds), are known to exist
in our Newtonian environment since the discovery of the refraction of light in the transition
from air to water. Lesser known is the fact that one of the ﬁrst invariance studies of speeds
c < co was done by Lorentz [2a] (see the related mention in Pauli’s book [2b]).

In short, incontrovertible experimental evidence establishes that electromagnetic waves

have all locally diﬀerent speeds when propagating in water, glass, oil, or other media.

Speeds c = co/n > co, n < 1 (also called superluminal speeds), have been recently mea-
sured by A. Enders and G. Nimtz [2c] in the tunneling of photons between certain guides.
Speeds c = co/n > co, have also been measured for large masses in certain astrophysical
explosions [2e-2g]. The literature on the experimental measurements of superluminal speeds
of electromagnetic waves is nowadays rather vast and it is herein assumed as known (see also
review [2d], the recent data [2h] and the comprehensive review [2i].

The lack of exact validity of the SR for all these diﬀerent local speeds of light c < co and
c > co is then beyond scientiﬁc or otherwise credible doubt, the only scientiﬁc issue being
the identiﬁcation of a more adequate theory.

Note that the old hopes of regaining the exact validity of the SR by reducing light to
photons scattering among molecules are no longer viable because: 1) the reduction, e.g., of
a classical electromagnetic wave in our atmosphere with one meter wavelength to photons in
second quantization cannot evidently eliminate the need for a classical representation prior to
quantum forms acquiring credibility; 2) the reduction does not permit quantitative studies of
superluminal speeds; and 3) the reduction eliminates the representation of the inhomogeneity
and anisotropy of physical media, which have apparent, experimentally measurable eﬀects
(see below).

Numerous additional experimental data have been identiﬁed in recent times which provide
further conditions beyond those of validity of the SR. It is important to see that they
are all reducible or, equivalently, expressible via the arbitrary character of the speed of
electromagnetic waves.

2

Recall that hadrons are not ideal spheres with isolated points in them, but are instead
some of the densest media measured in laboratory until now. If spacetime anomalies have
been experimentally detected for media of relatively low density (such as our atmosphere),
the hypothesis that the SR can be exactly valid within hadrons has little scientiﬁc credibility.
As one among the numerous arguments, the basic topology of the SR (the Zeeman topology
of the Minkowskian spacetime) is purely local-diﬀerential, and, as such, it cannot be exactly
valid under the notorious nonlocal conditions in the interior of hadrons caused by deep mutual
penetration- overlapping of the wavepackets of the hadronic constituents (a feature totally
independent from their point-like charges).

One of the ﬁrst quantitative studies of the above setting was done by D. L. Blokhintsev
[3a] in 1964, followed by L. B. Redei [3b], D. Y. Kim [3c] and others. It should be stressed
that the exact validity of the SR for the center-of-mass behavior of a hadron, e.g., in a
particle accelerator is beyond scientiﬁc doubt. Therefore, Refs.
[3a-3c] solely studied the
interior structural problem of hadrons and argued that a possibility for internal anomalies
due to nonlocal and other eﬀects to manifest themselves in the outside is given by deviations
from the conventional Minkowskian behavior of the meanlives of unstable hadrons with the
speed v (or energy E).

The reduction of the latter deviations to arbitrary speeds of light is then consequential. In
fact, the Minkowski metric was originally written by Minkowski [1d] η = Diag.(1, 1, 1, −c2
o).
Therefore, any deviation ˆη from η necessarily implies a deviation from co, as one can see by
altering any component of the metric and then using Lorentz transforms.

Along these lines, R. M. Santilli [3d] submitted in 1982 the hypothesis that contact-
nonpotential interactions in general, and those in the interior of hadrons in particular, can
accelerate ordinary (positive) masses at speed bigger than the speed of light in vacuum, much
along the subsequent astrophysical measures [2e-2g]. The above hypothesis implies that
photons travel inside the hyperdense hadrons at speeds bigger than that in vacuum. V. de
Sabbata and M. Gasperini [3e] conducted the ﬁrst phenomenological veriﬁcation within the
[3d], and
context of the conventional gauge theories supporting the hypothesis of Ref.
actually reaching limit speeds up to 75co for superheavy hadrons.

The hypothesis of Ref. [3d] is also supported by the phenomenological calculations con-
ducted by H. B. Nielsen and I. Picek [3f] via the spontaneous symmetry breaking in the Higgs
sector of conventional gauge theories, which have resulted in the anomalous Minkowskian
metrics (here written in the notation above)

π : ˆη = Diag.[(1 + 1.2 × 10−3), (1 + 1.2 × 10−3), (1 + 1.2 × 10−3), −c2
K : ˆη = Diag.[(1 − 2.0 × 10−4), (1 − 2.0 × 10−4), (1 − 2.0 × 10−4), −c2

o(1 − 3.79 × 10−3)], (2)
o(1 + 6.00 × 10−4)]. (3)

As one can see, calculations [3f] conﬁrm speeds of photons c = co/n > co, n < 1 for the
interior of kaons, precisely as conjectured in Ref. [3d]. Recall that: spacetime anomalies are
expected to increase with the density; all hadrons have approximately the same size; and

3

hadrons have densities increasing with mass. Therefore, results similar to (3) are expected
for all hadrons heavier than kaons, as supported by phenomenological studies [3e].

The ﬁrst direct experimental measurements on the behavior of the meanlife of K o

S with
energy, τ (E), were done by S. H. Aronson et al.
[3g] at Fermilab and they suggested
deviations from the Minkowskian spacetime in the energy range of 30 to 100 GeV. More
recent elaborations [3j,3k] of these measurements have also conﬁrmed superluminal speeds
inside kaons. Subsequent direct measurements also for K o
S were done by S. H. Aronson et al.
[3h] also at Fermilab, suggesting instead no deviations of τ (E) from the Minkowskian form
in the diﬀerent energy range of 100 to 400 GeV. Nevertheless, ﬁts [3j,3k] of both data [3g,3h]
have conﬁrmed the superluminal character of the speed, despite the conventional character
for the latter data.

More recently, a test of the decay law at short decay times was made by the OPAL
group at LEP [3i]. In the latter experiment the ratio of number of events Z 0 → τ +τ − with
deviations of τ from the conventional law to number of ”normal” events was (1.1±1.4±3.5)%.
In conclusion, the conceptual, epistemological, phenomenological, and experimental evi-
dence on deviations from the SR within hyperdense media such as hadrons or the interior of
stars is so overwhelming to render mandatory the study of a more adequate theory. In partic-
ular, all experimental evidence suggest a local value of the maximal causal speed arbitrarily
bigger than that in vacuum.

We should stress that all the above anomalies have been and are hereon strictly and
solely referred to ordinary photons (those with positive energy) and not to tachyons. In fact,
tachyons are ruled out as possible candidates here, e.g., because the photons for experiments
[2b,2c] are ordinary tardyons before and after the test, thus preventing the possibility that
they acquire a tachyonic state when passing thru the guides. A similar situation occurs for
all other tests here considered, which all suggest conventional particles moving at speeds
greater than that of light in vacuum.

The experimental evidence considered herein therefore requires a new deﬁnition of tachyons,

as the particles traveling within physical media at speeds bigger than the local maximal
causal speed. This study is not considered here for brevity.

By no means experimental evidence [2,3] exhausts all physical conditions beyond the SR,
and numerous others exist in the literature. Several of them are somewhat hidden in ad
hoc parameters which, in reality, measure the deviation from the axioms of the SR. This
is the case for the Bose-Einstein correlation where the ﬁt of experimental data requires
the introduction of the so-called ”caoticity parameters” of unknown physical origin and
motivation. A study of this case [4] has revealed that these experimental data cannot be
represented via the strict use of the SR. Therefore, the ”caoticity parameters” provide a
bona ﬁde quantitative representation of the deviations from the SR.

Deviations from the SR are also hidden in theories which reduce experimental data on
the hadronic structure to hypothetical particles (namely, particles which cannot be directly

4

detected on an individual basis), such as the quarks, whose characteristics cannot be deﬁned
in our spacetime, and are solely deﬁnable in the mathematical unitary space. It is evident
that, under the reduction of real experimental measurements in our spacetime to hypothetical
particles outside our spacetime, the characteristics of the latter can always be adapted to
verify the SR.

However, the lack of a possible, direct and independent veriﬁcations of said characteristics
of undetectable quarks, combined with the serious problematic aspects of quark theories still
basically open (such as the impossibility for a scientiﬁc deﬁnition of gravity for all matter
made up of quarks [15c]) and other factors essentially prevent quark theories from reaching
truly scientiﬁc conclusions.

At any rate, studies [5] have shown that Minkowskian anomalies: A) are fully admit-
ted by quark theories; B) they merely imply a rescaling of certain characteristics; and C)
rather than ”destroying” unitary models, they resolve some of the open problems (such as
conﬁnement), besides permitting otherwise impossible advances (such as convergent pertur-
bative expansions for strong interactions). These results then turn quark theories into one
of the most compelling evidence of deviations from (rather than veriﬁcation of) the SR in
the interior of hadrons.

The above entire scientiﬁc scene can be represented via the following historical distinction,

which was well known in the early part of this century and thereafter ignored:

1) Exterior dynamical problems in vacuum, in which the SR is here assumed as valid;

and

2) Interior dynamical problems within physical media, in which the SR is ”inapplicable

(and not ”violated” because not constructed for that scope).

Under the latter perspectives, there is no need for new experimental data to reach general
physical conclusions. In fact, the conventional ten conservation laws for exterior problems
imply the exact validity of the fundamental Poincar´e symmetry, with consequential validity
of the SR. The same features then imply the impossibility for the SR to be exactly valid for
interior problems because it would imply, e.g., that electrons orbit in the core of a star with
conserved angular momentum, and other nonscientiﬁc beliefs of the type of the perpetual
motion.

Equivalently, exterior problems are solely characterized by ”action-at-a- distance” inter-
actions which, as such, are local-diﬀerential, thus implying the applicability of the mathe-
matical foundations of the SR. Moreover, these interactions are entirely representable via a
Lagrangian or a Hamiltonian, thus implying the applicability of the physical foundation of
the theory.

By comparison, whether within our atmosphere or within a star, interior dynamical
problems require the additional presence of contact interactions as experienced by a space-
shuttle during re-entry in our atmosphere or, along much of the same lines, a protons moving
It is well known that contact interactions can only occur among
in the core of a star.

5

extended objects and have zero range, thus implying the lack of exact applicability, ﬁrst, of
the mathematical foundations of the SR and,then, of its physical structure.

In conclusion, the validity of the SR for exterior problems and its inapplicability for
interior problems can be established beyond scientiﬁc doubt via the mere observation (and
admission) of physical reality. Experiments are only needed to establish the amount of
deviations from the SR for each given interior conditions. As a result, any expectation of the
necessarily exact validity of the SR for interior dynamical problems is outside the boundaries
of science, because the only scientiﬁcally open issue is the selection of a more adequate theory
for interior dynamical problems.

It should be mentioned that, by no means, the above comments exhaust all criticisms
of the SR. An additional serious criticism is that concerning the ether to be a ”universal
substratum”, which is necessary not only to propagate electromagnetic waves, but also for
the existence of elementary particles (such as the electron) which are known to be localized
It is evident that a universal substratum requires the
oscillation of the same medium.
existence of a universal privileged reference frame which is strictly prohibited by the SR.

Arbitrary values of the speed of light combined to the need for a universal substratum
and other insuﬃciencies, have stimulated the return to Galilean forms of relativities for
relativistic conditions. For brevity, we here indicate Ref. [6] and papers quoted therein.

For completeness we should also mention that, contrary to the majestic axiomatic consis-
tency of the SR, the general relativity GR [7] has remained aﬄicted throughout this century
by serious problematic aspects at both classical and quantum levels, when already in its
conventional formulation for exterior gravitational problems in vacuum. As a matter of fact,
the unresolved basic problems are so numerous, to discourage even a partial outline in this
note (one may consult the recent article [8a], Sect. 3 of paper [8b], and the literature quoted
therein).

When passing to interior gravitational problems, all limitations of the SR carry over in
their entirety to the GR, thus implying its lack of exact character for the conditions consid-
ered (because GR is locally Minkowskian). The inapplicability begins with the underlying
Riemannian geometry because it is strictly local-diﬀerential and Lagrangian as compared to
the generally nonlocal and nonlagrangian interior gravitational problems. The inapplicabil-
ity then extends to numerous other aspects, from the limited velocity-dependence of the GR
(which is insuﬃcient to represent the notoriously arbitrary velocity-dependence of interior
problems), to the ﬁeld equations (because of the lack of full veriﬁcation of the Freud identity,
lack of torsion, and other aspects).

Finally, we should mention major insuﬃciencies of both the special and general relativities
for the classical representation of antiparticles in a way truly compatible with their operator
counterpart.

2. Problematic aspects of existing generalized theories.

6

The insuﬃciencies of contemporary relativities outlined in Sect. 1 have stimulated the con-
struction of numerous generalized theories in an attempt to represent broader physical condi-
tions Unfortunately, most of them are aﬄicted by problems of physical consistency so serious
to prevent their application to experiments.

The problems of physical consistency of broader theories have been studied in details in
memoir [9]. Since they are still vastly unknown to the general physics audience, an outline
appears recommendable here.

One of the reasons for the majestic axiomatic consistency of the SR is its invariant struc-
ture, that is, a formulation based on a line element which is invariant under the rotational,
Lorentz and Poincar´e symmetries. In turn, this invariance implies:

1) The invariance of the fundamental units of space, time, energy, etc. which is an
evident pre-requisite for all valid measurements. In fact, the basic invariant of the theory,
the unit of the Poincar´e symmetry I = Diag.([1, 1, 1], 1), represents in a dimensionless way
the units I = Diag.([1cm, 1cm, 1cm], 1cm/1sec).

2) The preservation in time of basic notions such as that of Hermiticity, which then

implies a consistent representation of observables.

3) The uniqueness and invariance of the numerical predictions;
4) The veriﬁcation of rigorous causality and probability laws;
5) the veriﬁcation of basic axioms of unquestionable consistency; and other known features

all essential for physical consistency.

expressed via the following:

The main point of the problems of physical consistency under consideration here can be

LEMMA 1: All classical (operator) theories with speed of light c diﬀerent than that in

vacuum co are noncanonically (nonunitarily) related to the special relativity

In fact, by their very conception, the theories here considered are based on a structural
change of the Minkowski metric which can only be achieved via a noncanonical-nonunitary
transform

η → ˆη = U × η × U †, U × U † 6= I,

(4)

where × is the conventional associative product.

When formulated on conventional spaces over conventional ﬁelds, the above noncanonical-
nonunitary structure of broader theories has then disastrous consequences for their physical
consistency. In fact, it implies (see Ref. [9] for all details and original references):

1’) The lack of invariance of the basic units of space, time, energy, etc., as an evident
consequence of the very notion of noncanonical-nonunitary transforms, with consequential
lack of consistent applicability to real measurements.

2’) The lack of preservation in time of Hermiticity and other basic features, with conse-

quential absence of physically acceptable observables.

7

3’) The lack of uniqueness and invariance of the numerical predictions;
4’) The general violation of causality and probability laws;
5’) The clear violation of the basic axioms of Einstein’s special relativity, with consequen-
tial rather robust problems of identifying new covering axioms, proving their mathematical
consistency and then establishing them experimentally; and other rather serious shortcom-
ings.

In general, the above physical inconsistencies remain hidden in the existing literature for
various reasons. For instance, a number of theories with arbitrary speeds of light are for-
mulated via a seemingly conventional Minkowski space with metric η = Diag.(1, 1, 1, 1) and
speeds of light embedded in the fourth coordinate x4 = ct. However, the lack of uniqueness
of the value c implies consequential problematic aspects and ambiguities in the deﬁnition of
time t.

Generalized theories which exhibit the above physical shortcomings because possessing
a nonunitary time evolution or for other reasons (e.g., nonlinearity in the wavefunction
which implies the collapse of Mackay impriimitivity theorem with consequential invalidity
of the SR, or theories with nonassociative envelopes which ’violate Okubo ”no quantization
theorem”) are rather numerous. Among them we mention (see Ref. [9] for details): dissipa-
tive nuclear models with nonhermitean Hamiltonians [17]; statistical models with external
collision terms [18]; nonlinear theories [19]; theories with nonassociative envelopes [20]; q-
deformations [21]; k-deformations [22]; *-deformations [23]; deformed creation-annihilation
algebras [24]; nonunitary statistics [25]; Lie-admissible interior dynamics [26]; noncanonical
time theories [27]; supersymmetries [28]; Kac-Moody superalgebras [29] and others.

The reader is encouraged to inspect any of the above generalized theories, prove their lack
of unitarity on conventional Hilbert spaces over conventional ﬁelds and verify the occurrence
of physical shortcomings 1’) to 5’).

Other generalized theories appear as consistent as the conventional formulation of the
SR. The problematic aspects emerge in their full light when identifying the necessarily
noncanonical-nonunitary relation to the SR.

This is particularly the case when Darboux’s transforms are used with the reduction of
nonhamiltonian-noncanonical theories in the given coordinate system x of the observer to
seemingly Hamiltonian-canonical theories in a mathematical frame x’. However, Darboux’s
transforms are not only strictly noncanonical, but above all highly nonlinear, thus implying
the loss of the original inertial character of the reference frame, thus implying the evident
loss of the SR. At any rate, there is the impossibility of conducting actual measurements
in the mathematical frame x’. Under these conditions, the validity of the SR in the new
mathematical reference frame x’ has no physical value.

The problematic aspects of Darboux’s and other transforms are the reason for the insis-
tence in achieving ﬁrst a ”direct representation”, i.e., a representation in the ﬁxed reference
frame of the experimenter, before the transformation theory may acquire a physical meaning.

8

It should be stressed to avoid possible misrepresentation that, by no means, all broader
theories verify shortcomings 1’) to 5’). As an illustration, we indicate the theories worked out
by Ahluwalia [3a], Dvoeglazov [10b] and others which do have a fully consistent axiomatic
structure which bypasses said shortcomings.

3. The novel iso-, geno- and hyper-mathematics and their isodual.

Studies conducted by the author during the past decades have indicated that the primary
reason for the physical problematic aspects is the formulation of generalized theories via the
conventional mathematics of the SR, namely, via conventional numbers and ﬁelds, conven-
tional vector and metric spaces, conventional Lie algebras and groups, etc.

To our best knowledge, the occurrence admits no alternatives. On one side there is the
need for noncanonical-nonunitary theories as a mandatory condition for novelty over existing
theories. On the other side, when formulated via conventional mathematics, noncanonical-
nonunitary theories have no physical meaning known to this author because of the unavoid-
ability of the problematic aspects of Sect. 2.

The above occurrence left no other choice than the construction of a new mathemat-
ics, speciﬁcally conceived for the invariant formulation of a broader relativity representing
arbitrary speeds of light via noncanonical-nonunitary structures.

After laborious trials and errors, this author proposed back in 1978 [10] the construction
of a new mathematics with nonsingular well behaved, Hermitean, generalized, n × n units
with an unrestricted functional dependence

ˆI = ˆI(x, µ, ω, ...) = 1/ ˆT ,

(5)

and then the reformulation of number and ﬁelds, vector and metric spaces, Lie algebras and
groups, etc. in such a way to admit ˆI, rather than I, as the correct left and right new unit.
This ﬁrst requires the lifting of the conventional associative product A×B among generic
quantities A, B into the form A ˆ×B = A × ˆT × B (namely, the lifting of A × B by an amount
that is the inverse of ˆI), under which ˆI is indeed the correct left and right new unit called
the isounit, while ˆT is called the isotopic element. For consistency, the totality of the of
the conventional mathematics must then be reconstructed, with no exception known to this
author.

One reaches in this way the isonumbers ˆn = n × ˆI with isoproduct ˆn ˆ× ˆm = (n × m) × ˆI
and related isoﬁelds ˆF (ˆn, +, ˆ×); isospaces deﬁned over ˆF with isometric ˆη = ˆT × η; isolie
algebras and groups; etc.

Since ˆI preserves all the topological properties of I (nonsingularity, positive-deﬁniteness,
etc.), the generalized mathematics resulted to be ”axiom-preserving” and was therefore pro-
posed under the name of isomathematics [10].

9

Regrettably, we are not in a position to review the isomathematics for brevity. A technical
understanding of this paper will however require at least a rudimentary knowledge of Refs.
[11].

For the particular case of theories with arbitrary speeds of light c, the generalized unit
is given by ˆI = Diag.(1, 1, 1, c2). Since the unit is the basic invariant of any theory, the
construction of a theory with new unit ˆI therefore guarantees the invariance for arbitrary
speeds c = co/n(x, µ, ω, ...).

It is however evident that isomathematics permits the invariant formulation of theories
dramatically broader than those with arbitrary speeds of light, evidently in view of the
arbitrariness of the functional dependence of the generalized unit.

A yet broader mathematics is the genomathematics [11], which is characterized by non-
hermitean generalized units called genounits. In this case we have two genounits, I > = 1/T >
and <I = 1/<T = (I >)†, with two corresponding products, one ordered to the right,
A > B = A × T > × B, and one ordered to the left, A < B = A ×< T × B. Genomathematics
is then characterized by two independent liftings of the conventional mathematics, one for
each of the two ordered products. This includes two classes of genonumbers and genoﬁelds,
genovector and genohilbert spaces, genolie algebras and groups, etc.

A still broader mathematics is the hypermathematics [11], which is characterized by non-
3 , ...) and <I = (<I1,< I2,< I3, ...) =
2 ×
1 × B + A ×< I2 × B + A ×< T3 × B..., and related

hermitean multivalued generalized units, I > = (I >
(I >)†, with two corresponding multivalued hyperproducts A > B = A × T >
B + A × T >
hypermathematics.

3 × B... and A < B = A ×< T >

1 × B + A × I >

1 , I >

2 , I >

Once the conventional value of the basic unit +1 dating back to biblical times is aban-
doned in favor of an arbitrary quantity, additional possibilities emerge besides iso-, geno-
and hyper-mathematics. The additional possibility signiﬁcant for this note is the map from
positive into negative generalized units or, more generally, via the map called isoduality
[12b,15]

ˆI = ˆI(x, v, ω, ...) → ˆI d = − ˆI † = − ˆI †(−x, −µ, −ω, ...).

(6)

which characterizes yet novel mathematics called isodual iso-, geno- and hyper-mathematics.
A particular case is the isodual mathematics, that is, the image of the conventional mathe-
matics under isoduality with negative unit -1.

The need for all these generalized mathematics is the following. Since it is axiom-
preserving, isomathematics represents closed-isolated systems with Hamiltonian and non-
hamiltonian internal eﬀects whose center-of-mass trajectories are reversible in time, such as
the classical structure of Jupiter or the operator structure of a hadron with nonhamiltonian
internal eﬀects when the systems are considered as isolated from the rest of the universe. In
fact, conventional potential interactions are represented with the Hamiltonian, while all non-
hamiltonian eﬀects are represented via the isounit. The reversible character is then ensured

10

by the Hermiticity of the isounit, ˆI = ˆI †, which guarantees the identity of the center-of-mass
trajectories for motions forward and backward in time.

Despite their generalized structure, by no means the above systems exhaust physical re-
ality. Genomathematics is then particularly suited for the representation of the broader class
of open-nonconservative systems with Hamiltonian and nonhamiltonian interactions whose
center-of-mass trajectories are irreversible, such as the classical representation of the space-
shuttle during re-entry in our atmosphere or a proton moving in the core of a star. In fact,
potential interactions are again represented with the Hamiltonian and all nonhamiltonian
eﬀects are represented by the genounits. An axiomatic representation of irreversibility is
then guaranteed by the nonhermiticity of the genounits yielding two conjugate representa-
tions, one for the ordered motion forward in time with I > and A > B, and the other for
the ordered motion backward in time with <I and A < B.The conjugation I > = (<I)† then
ensures the transition from motion forward to motion backward in time under time reversal.
Despite its further generalized character, by no means genomathematics can represent
the entire physical reality because a number of structures, such as biological entities, and
even the entire universe are expected to have multivalued structures. Hypermathematics then
permits a representation of multivalued open-nonconservative systems with Hamiltonian and
nonhamiltonian internal eﬀects and irreversible structures, as inherent in the very notion of
multivalued hyperunits and hyperproducts.

Despite its further generalized character, hypermathematics too cannot represent the
entire universe. In fact, it is now known that conventional, iso-, geno- and hypermathematics
cannot provide a consistent classical representation of antimatter which is compatible with
the established operator counterpart [15].

Isodual maps are anti-isomorphic like the charge conjugation, although the latter solely
applies at the level of second quantization, whole the former apply at all levels beginning
at the classical level and then continuing at the operator level where they are equivalent
to charge conjugation. Moreover, isodual theories have negative norm, thus reversing the
sign of all physical characteristics of matter, including charge. In view of these and other
reasons, isodual theories have resulted to be particularly suited for a classical representation
of antimatter in a way which is compatible with their operator counterpart [15].

As a result, conventional, iso-, geno- and hyper-mathematics are used for the repre-
sentation of matter in conditions of increasing complexity, and, respectively for: point-like
abstractions of particles in exterior conditions in vacuum; reversible systems of extended par-
ticles in interior dynamical conditions; irreversible systems of extended particles in interior
conditions; and multivalued irreversible systems of extended particles in interior conditions.
The isoduals of the conventional, iso-, geno- and hypermathematics are used for the

characterization of antimatter in corresponding conditions of increasing complexity.

For all details, we refer the reader to memoir [11b] and monograph [11f].

11

4. Isotopic, genotopic and hyperstructural liftings of the special relativity.

The achievement of an invariant formulation of theories with arbitrary speeds of light re-
quired the isotopic (that is, axiom-preserving) lifting of the entire formalism of the SR,
including the Minkowski space, the Poincar´e symmetry and the basic axioms of the SR,
whose rudiments were ﬁrst submitted in Refs.
[12]. Operator treatments are available in
Refs. [13]. Refs. [14] provides a partial list of directly related presentations among a liter-
ature that is rather vast at this writing. For brevity we can evidently review here only the
main lines.

The fundamental isotopy for relativistic theories is the lifting of the unit of conventional
4-dimensional theories, I = diag.(1, 1, 1, c2
o) of the Minkowski space and of the Poincare’ sym-
metry, into a well behaved, nowhere singular, Hermitean and positive–deﬁnite 4-dimensional
matrix ˆI = 1/ ˆT whose elements have an arbitrary dependence on the needed local quantities.
Since ˆI = 1/ ˆT can always be diagonalized, we shall hereon assume the form of the isotopic

element ˆT = Diag.( ˆT11, ˆT22, ˆT33, ˆT44), ˆTµµ > 0.

Let M(x, η, R) be the Minkowski space with spacetime coordinates x = {xµ} = {r, x4},

x4 = c0t, and metric η = Diag.(1, 1, 1, −c−2

o ) over the reals R = R(n, +, ×).

The original ﬁeld R = R(n, +, ×) is then lifted into the isoﬁeld ˆR = ˆR(ˆn, +, ˆ×) charac-
terized by the above isounit ˆI for which all operations (multiplication, division roots, etc.)
are isotopic. It is easy to see that ˆR is locally isomorphic to R by construction and, thus,
the lifting R → ˆR is an isotopy. Despite its simplicity, the lifting is not trivial, e.g., because
the notion of primes and other properties of number theory depend on the assumed unit
[11a,11g].

Next, we need the lifting of the space M into the isominkowskian space (today also
called the Minkowski-Santilli isospace [14]) ˆM = ˆM (ˆx, ˆη, ˆR) with the same isounit ˆI of the
underlying isoﬁeld, which was ﬁrst proposed by Santilli in Ref. [12a], and which should not
be confused with ”deformed Minkowski spaces” (because the former is based on a new unit
and related mathematics, while the latter is based on the conventional unit and conventional
mathematics).

The isominkowski space is characterized by the isocoordinates ˆx = x × ˆI on ˆR, and the
isometric ˆη = ˆT × η although, for consistency, the latter should be deﬁned on ˆR, thus having
the structure ˆN = ( ˆNµν) = ˆη × ˆI = (ˆηµν) × ˆI. The conventional interval on M is then lifted
into the isointerval on ˆM over ˆR [12a]

(ˆx − ˆy)

ˆ2 = (ˆx − ˆy)µ ˆ× ˆNµν ˆ×(ˆx − ˆy)ν = [(x − y)µ × ˆηµν × (x − y)ν] × ˆI =

= [(x1 − y1) × ˆT11 × (x1 − y1) + (x2 − y2) × ˆT22 × (x2 − y2) +

+(x3 − y3) × ˆT33 × (x3 − y3) − (x4 − y4) × ˆT44 × (x4 − y4) × ˆI.
(7)
It easy to see that ˆM is locally isomorphic to M and the lifting M → ˆM is also an
isotopy. In fact, the lifting of the unit I → ˆI = 1/ ˆT is compensated by the inverse lifting

12

of the metric, η → ˆη = ˆT × η. Despite this axiom-preserving character, it is evident that
the isominkowski space is noncanonically-nonunitarily related to the conventional space, as
necessary for novelty. For a recent detailed study of the isominkowskian geometry we refer
the reader to memoir [12g].

The isopoincar´e symmetry ﬁrst submitted for the ﬁrst time by R. M. Santilli in Refs.
[12] and it is today called the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry [15]. In particular, Ref. [12a]
presented the isotopies of the Lorentz symmetry; Ref.s [12b] presented the isotopies of the
rotational symmetry; Re.s [12c,12d] presented the isotopies of the SU(2)-spin symmetry; Ref.
[12f] presented the isotopies
[12e] presented the isotopies of the Poincar´e symmetry; Ref.
[11g] provided a systematic
of the spinorial covering of the Poincar´e symmetry; and Ref.
study of the underlying geometry. For independent direct treatment of the Poincar´e-Santilli
isosymmetry we refer the reader to various studies by Kadeisvili, e.g., Ref. [11c].

The Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is the image of the conventional symmetry under
isotopies or, equivalently, under the condition of admitting ˆI, rather than I, as the basic
unit. As such, the isopoincar´e symmetry leaves invariant by construction the generalized
interval (7), thus leaving invariant by construction arbitrary speeds c for the particular case
, ˆI = Diag.(1, 1, 1, n−2), co = 1.

Due to the axiom-preserving character, the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry is locally iso-
morphic to the conventional symmetry. Yet, the two symmetries are noncanonically or
nonunitarily related, as established by the diﬀerent basic units. Thus the local isomorphic
occurs only when each symmetry is treated with its own mathematics. Regrettably, we
cannot review here for brevity the new isosymmetry.

Isounit ˆI = Diag.(1, 1, 1, n−2), co = 1 is not suﬃciently symmetrized in spacetime and
must be further lifted into the expression ˆI = Diag.(n−2
4 ), n = n4 which can be
reached via the application of a conventional (or, more properly, an iso-) Lorentz transform,
or just the diagonalization of an arbitrary isounit ˆI. In this case n4 preserves its character
as representing the local index of refraction, while the space nk can represent space charac-
teristics outside any hope of representation via the SR, such as the densities along the three
Euclidean axis, extended, nonspherical and deformable shapes of the particles considered
and other properties of the interior problem at hand.

2 , n−2

3 , n−2

1 , n−2

The isospecial relativity (ISR) [12,13] is the image of the SR under the isotopies. As such,
it is based on the isotopic image of the conventional axioms, here expressed for the simpler
case n1 = n2 = n3 = ns 6= n4 (see Vol. II of Refs. [13b] for a detailed presentation):

ISOPOSTULATE I: The maximal causal speed for interior dynamical problems is given

by

ISOPOSTULATE II: The addition of speeds for interior dynamical problems follows the

ˆVM ax = co × ns/n4.

(8)

13

isotopic law

ˆvT ot = (u + v)/(1 + uk × n−2

k . × vk/co × n−2

4 × co).

(9)

ISOPOSTULATE III: The dilation of time and the space contraction for interior dynam-

ical problems follow the isotopic laws

ˆt′ = ˆγ × t, ˆL′ = ˆγ−1 × L, ˆγ = (1 − ˆβ2)−1, ˆβ = vk × n−2

k × vk/co × n−2

4 × co

(10)

ISOPOSTULATE IV: The isodoppler law for interior dynamical problems is given by the

expression (for the simple case of null aberration)

ˆω′ = ˆγ−1 × ˆω.

(11)

(12)

ISOPOSTULATE V: The mass-energy equivalence for interior dynamical problems fol-

lows the isotopic law

ˆE = m × c2 = m × c2

o/n2
4.

One should note that in the isorelativity the speed of light is not, in general, the maximal
causal speed, with the sole exception of motion in vacuum (where the two speeds trivially
coincide). This is due to the need of avoiding inconsistencies of the SR for interior conditions
such as those occurring for the Cerenkov light in which the assumption of the speed of light
as the maximal causal speed in water would imply the violation of the principle of causality
(because electrons would travel faster). If causality is somewhat salvaged by assuming that
the speed of light in vacuum is the maximal causal speed in water we would have other
inconsistencies, such as the violation of the relativistic law of addition of speeds. For these
and other inconsistencies in assuming the speed of light as the maximal causal speed within
physical media, we refer the reader for brevity to monographs [13b].

Note that, the SR and the ISR coincide at the abstract, realization-free level by con-
ception and construction, as guaranteed by the axiom-preserving character of the isotopies.
Therefore, the isotopies resolve problematic aspect 5’) of Sect. 2, i.e., they avoid the robust
problems of identifying new axioms and proving their axiomatic consistency. They merely
identify new realizations of the abstract Einsteinian axioms of the SR which, of course, re-
mained top be veriﬁed experimentally (see Sections 5 and 7). in particular, criticisms on the
axiomatic structure of the ISR are criticism on the structure of the conventional SR.

As an incidental note, tachyons should be deﬁned as particles traveling faster than the
local maximal causal speed (8), rather than the local speed of light c. In fact, only the former
exit from the causal isocone in isospace [12g]. Also, the assumption of tachyons as particles
traveling faster than the local speed of light would imply that the electrons of the Cerenkov
light are tachyons which is dramatically disproved by physical evidence (e.g., because they
can be proved to be physical particles when exiting water).

14

The above isotopies of the SR evidently admit sequentially broader liftings under geno-
topies and hyperstructures which yield the genospecial relativity (GSR) and the hyperspecial
relativity (HSR), respectively. They are essentially characterized by the relaxation, ﬁrst, of
the Hermitean and, then, of the single-valued character of the generalized units. In partic-
ular, these further liftings imply the relaxation of the totally symmetric character of line
element (7) and then the relaxation of its single-valuedness on ˆR. These additional features
permit the only invariant formulation of single-valued and multivalued irreversible systems
known to this author (the communication of other invariant formulations of irreversibility
by the interested reader would be appreciated). These broader relativities are considerably
more involved on technical grounds and, therefore, they cannot be treated in this elementary
note (for details, see monographs [13b] and the recent update [13c]).

The isodual isominkowskian spaces, isodual isopoincar´e symmetry and isodual isospecial
relativity [12,13,15] are given by the isodual images of the preceding formulations and are
used for the representation of antimatter in interior conditions.

An important particular case is given by the isodual Minkowski space, isodual Poincar´e
symmetry and isodual special relativity for the characterization of antimatter in vacuum.
These novel theories predict the existence of the isodual photon [15c,15e] which is indis-
tinguishable from the ordinary photon for all interactions except gravitation. If conﬁrmed
experimentally, isodual photons would therefore permit in the future quantitative studies as
to whether far away galaxies and quasars Are made up of matter or of antimatter, a study
which is strictly impossible with current theory due to the complete lack in contemporary
physics of a classical theory of antimatter (let alone the availability of a consistent theory).
For additional properties on the latter isodual theories we must also refer the reader to Refs.
[12,13,15].

5. Direct universality of the new relativities.

It is important to see that the isospecial relativity and its isodual are directly universal
for all possible spacetime formulations of matter and antimatter possessing a symmetric
metric, respectively, where ”universality” is referred to all possible spacetime theories of the
indicated type, and ”direct universality” is referred to the representation in the given frame
of the observer (without any use of the transformation theory). This important property
can be easily seen from the arbitrariness of the isounit or, equivalently, of the isometric and
related isointerval [7] which includes all known symmetric spacetime intervals, including the
Minkowski, Riemann, Finsler other intervals.

The reader should be aware that the above direct universality was reached only after
proving that the isogeometries underlying the ISR are directly universality for all possible
(well behaved) nonhamiltonian systems [11b]. This was necessary to avoid the need for a
Darboux’s transform and related physical problematic aspects mentioned earlier.

15

To illustrate the direct universality of the ISR, we ﬁrst note that Galilean-type spacetime
are admitted as a particular case of the isospecial relativity for isounits given by the tensorial
product of a space and a time component, ˆI = ˆIspace × ˆItime, with corresponding, rather
intriguing (and mostly unexplored until now) factorization of the isominkowskian geometry
and of the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry.

As a second illustration, we note that all the several diﬀerent anomalous time evolution
[3] have resulted to be particular cases of the isotopic law (10). In fact, as
laws of Refs.
shown by Aringazin [11h], the former are obtained from the latter via diﬀerent expansions
in terms of diﬀerent parameters and with diﬀerent truncations [13b].

As a third illustration, it is easy to see that the isominkowski metric admits as a particular
case all inﬁnitely possible conventional Riemannian metrics, ˆη = g(x). In fact, all Rieman-
nian metrics are locally Minkowskian, thus admitting the decomposition g(x) = ˆT (x) × η,
where ˆT is a positive-deﬁnite 4 × 4 matrix, which is precisely the fundamental concept
underlying the isominkowskian geometry.

Therefore, the ISR provides the ﬁrst known formulation of exterior gravity via a Minkowskian-

type geometry, with rather important consequences, such has: the geometric uniﬁcation of
the special and general relativities; the ﬁrst formulation of gravity with a universal sym-
metry, the Poincar´e-Santilli isosymmetry, locally isomorphic to the conventional Poincar´e
symmetry; the representation of horizon and singularities via the zeros of the isotopic unit
and isounit; and other advances.

The isominkowskian formulation of gravity also permits the resolution of some of the
controversies in gravitation that are still open following about one century of debates, such
as: the compatibility of gravitational and relativistic conservation laws (which is now resolved
via the visual inspection that the generators of the related two symmetries coincide); the
lack of a consistent relativistic limit of gravitation (which is easily achieved via the limit
ˆI → I); and other resolutions [12g].

As a fourth illustration, we indicate that the arbitrary functional dependence of the
isotopic element ˆT in the isometric also permits a direct representation of interior gravita-
tional problems with the desired arbitrarily nonlinear dependence on the velocities, nonlocal-
integral eﬀects, and other features of interior problems outside realistic capabilities by the
Riemannian geometry.

A ﬁfth illustration of the capability of the ISR is that of having provided the only known
axiomatically consistent grand uniﬁcation of gravitation and electroweak interactions [16]
without structural disparities as in other theories (e.g., electromagnetism deﬁned on a ﬂat
spacetime, with gravitation deﬁned on a curved manifold). This result was precisely due to
the isominkowskian representation of gravity, that is, its formulation in a way axiomatically
compatible with all other interactions.

All the preceding theories are based on a diagonal spacetime metric. An additional class
of still broader spacetime theories is that characterized by nondiagonal isometrics ˆη or,

16

equivalently, nondiagonal isounits ˆI which have far reaching physical implications, such as
the ﬁrst possibility of synthesizing neutrons from protons and electrons as occurring in stars
at their ﬁrst formation [12f].

The geno- and hyper-special relativities are directly universal for all inﬁnitely possible
single- and multi-valued irreversible systems with nonsymmetric metrics, respectively, as the
reader is encouraged to verify.

6. Simple construction of the new relativities.

The need for new mathematics has been a major deterrent for the understanding of the new
relativities, to such an extent that various authors have preferred noninvariant and physically
inconsistent formulations, rather than entering into the study and use of new mathematics.
It is important to clarify that the use of the new mathematics can be completely elimi-
nated, and the entire formalism of the new relativities can be constructed via truly elemen-
tary methods.

First, the ISR camn be simply constructed via the systematic application of the following

nonunitary transform

U × U † = ˆI,

(13)

to the totality of the formalism of the SR.

In fact, transform (13) yields the isonumbers U × n × U † = n × ˆI, the correct form
of the isoproduct, as well as all conventional operations, special functions and transforms,
including the correct structure and representation of the Lie-Santilli isotheory [13a].

Once the structure of the ISR has been achieved in this way, its invariance is easily proved

via the reformulation of nonunitary transforms in the isounitary form

U = ˆU × ˆT 1/2, U × U = ˆU ˆ× ˆU † = ˆU † ˆ× ˆU = ˆI.

(14)

The invariance of the ISR then follows. For instance, we have the numerical invariance
of the basic isounit and related local speed of light ˆI → ˆI ′ = ˆU ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆU † = ˆI; the numerical
invariance of the isotopic element in the isoproduct; and all other invariances of the SR as
the reader is encouraged to verify.

Moreover, the above simple method for the construction of the ISR is also particularly
valuable to generalized existing models in vacuum into models for arbitrary speeds of lights.
In fact, one can merely selects the nonunitary transform U × U † = Diag.(1, 1, 1, n−2

4 ).

The construction of the GSR is equally elementary, and requires the use, this time, of

two nonunitary transforms

U × U † 6= I, W × W † 6= I, U × W † = I >, W × U † =< I,

(15)

to the totality of the formalism of the SR.

17

In fact, transforms (15) yield the genonumbers U × n × W † = n × I >, the correct form
of the genoproduct, as well as all conventional operations, special functions and transforms,
including the correct structure and representation of the Lie-Santilli isotheory [13c]. Once the
genotheory is reached in this way, its invariance is easily proved by rewriting the nonunitary
transforms in their genounitary version.

The HSR can be easily constructed and proved to be invariant via the mere relaxation of
the single-valued character of the genounits and its outline is here omitted for brevity [11f]).

7. Experimental veriﬁcations, applications to other theories and concluding re-
marks.

Another aspect of the new relativities outlined in this note that does not appear to have
propagated at this writing in the physics community is the existence of numerous applica-
tions and experimental veriﬁcations among which we quote (for brevity, see memoir [13a]
for details and all original references): the exact ﬁt of the experimental data on behavior of
the meanlives of unstable hadrons with speed (thanks to Isopostulate III); the exact ﬁt of
the experimental data on the Bose-Einstein correlation for proton-antiproton annihilation
at high and low energies (thanks to various Isopostulate); the ﬁrst exact representation of
total nuclear magnetic moments; the exact representation of the large diﬀerences in cosmo-
logical redshifts between quasars and galaxies when physically related according to gamma
spectroscopy (thanks to Isopostulate IV); the elimination of the need for a missing mass in
the universe (thanks to Isopostulate V); and several other experimental veriﬁcations.

The iso-, geno- and hyper-special relativities also permit the invariant formulation of
existing theories [17-29] by resolving their physical inconsistencies as outlined in Sect. 2 (see
memoir [9] for details).

The new relativities and their isoduals are also directly related to a variety of broader
theories existing in the literature, such as the theories by Ahluwalia [30a], Dvoeglazov [30b]
and others.....

All in all, the above features of the new relativities are suﬃcient to warrant further

studies.

Acknowledgments. The author would like to thank V. Dvoeglazov for permitting this
work to see the light of the day and for invaluable critical comments.

References

[1] H.A.Lorentz, Amst. Proc.6, 809 (1904) [1a]; H.Poincar´e, Compte Rendues, Paris 140.
1504 (1905) [1b]; A.Einstein, Ann. Phys. 17, 891 (1905) [1c]; H.Minkowski, Nachr. Ges.

18

Wiss. Gottingen 43 (1908) [1d];

[2] H. A. Lorentz, Versuch einer Theorie der Elektrishen und Magnetishen Erscheinungen
in bewenglen Korpern, Leyda [1895 [2a]. W. Pauli, Theory of Relativity, Pergamon Press,
New York (1958) [2b]. A. Enders and G. Nimtz, J. Phys. France 2, 1693 (1992) [2c]. G.
Nimtz and W. Heitmann, Progr. Quantum Electr. 21, 81 (1997) [2d]. F.Mirabel and
F. Rodriguez, Nature 371, 464 (1994) [2e]. J. Tingay et al., Nature 374, 141 (1995)
[2f]. D. Baylin et al., IAU Comm. 6173 (1995) [2g]. P. Saari and K. Reivelt, Phys. Rev.
Letters 79 (1997), in press [2h]. E. Recami, Hadronic Journal, in press [2i].

[3] D.I. Blochintsev, Phys Rev Lett 12, 272 (1964) [3a]. L.B. Redei, Phys.Rev. 145, 999
(1966) [3b]. D.Y. Kim, Hadronic J.,1, 1343 (1978) [3c]. R. M. Santilli, Lett. Nuovo
Cimento 33, 145 (1982) [3d]. V. de Sabbata and M. Gasperini, Lett. Nuovo Cimento
34, 337 (1982) [3e]. H.B. Nielsen and I. Picek, Nucl.Phys. B211, 269 (1983) [3f]. S.H.
Aronson et al., Phys.Rev. D28, 495 (1983) [3g]. N. Grossman et al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 59,
18 (1987) [3h]. G. Alexander et al., Phys. Lett. B 368, 244 (1996) [3i]. F. Cardone, R.
Mignani and R. M. Santilli, J. Phys G. 18, L61 and L141 (1992) [3j]. Yu. Areston,R.
M. Santilli and V. Solovianov, Found. Phys. Letters (1998), in press [3k].

[4] R. M. Santilli, Hadronic J. 15, 1 and 73 91992)

[5] R. Mignani, Lettere Nuovo Cimento 39, 413 (1982). R. M. Santilli, Comm. Theor. Phys.

4, 123 (1995).

[6] H. E. Wilhelm, Hadronic J. 19, 1 (1996), and Chinese Syst. Eng. & Electr. 6, 54 (1995).

[7] B.Riemann, Gott. Nachr. 13, 133 (1868) and Collected Works, H.Weber, Editor,
Dover, New York (1953) [2a]; D.Hilbert, Nachr. Kgl. Ges. Wissench. Gottingen, 1915,
p.395 [2b]; A.Einstein, Sitz. Ber. Preuss. Akad. Wissench. Berlin, 1915, p.844 [2c];
K.Schwartzschild, Sitzber. Deut. Akad. Wiss. Berlin. Kl. Math.–Phys. Tech., 189 and
424 (1916) [2d]; H.Weyl, Raum–Zeit–Materie, Springer, Berlin (1916) [2e].

[8] D. V. Ahluwalia, Los Alamos preprint (1998) [8a]. R. M. Santilli, Chinese J. Syst. Eng.

and Electr. 6, 157 (1995) [8b] and Inﬁnite Energy 22, 33 (1998) [8c].

[9] R.M.Santilli, Origin, problematic aspects and invariant formulation of classical and

quantum deformations, Intern. J. Modern Phys. A (1998), in press.

[10] R.M.Santilli: Hadronic J. 1, 224 [10a], 574 [10b] and 1267 [10c] (1978); Phys. Rev. D20,
555 (1979) [10d]; Foundations of Theoretical Mechanics, Vol. I (1978) [3d]and II (1983)
[10e], Springer–Verlag, Heidelberg–New York.

19

[11] R. M. Santilli, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 10, 273 (1993) [11a]; Rendiconti Cir-
colo Matematico Palermo, Suppl. 42, 7 (1996) [11b]. J. V. Kadeisvili, Math. Methods
Applied Sci. 19, 1349 (1996) [11c]. R. Aslaner and S. Keles, Algebras, Groups and
Geometries 14, 211 (1997) [11d]. ]. S. Vacaru, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 14,
225 (1997) [11e]. R. M. Santilli Isotopic, Genotopic and Hyperstructural Methods in
Theoretical Biology, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Liev (1996) [11f]. Chun-Xuan Jiang,
Foundations of Santilli’s isonumber theory, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 15 (1998),
in press [11g]. A.K.Aringazin, Hadronic J. 12, 71 (1989), and in Frontiers of Funda-
mental Physics, M.Barone and F.Selleri, Edditors, Plenum, New York (1995) [11h].

[12] R. M. Santilli, Novo Cimento Lett. 37, 545 (1983) [12a]; Hadronic J. 8, 25 and 36 (1985)
[12b]; JINR Rapid. Comm. 6, 24 (1993) [12c]; Acta Appl. Math. 50, 177 (1998) [11d];
J.Moscow Phys.Soc. 3, 255 (1993) [12e]; Chinese J.Syst.Ing. & Electr.6, 177 (1996)
[12f]; Intern. J. Modern Phys. D 7, 351 (1998) [12g].

[13] R. M. Santilli, Found. Phys. 27, 635 (1997) [13a]; Elements of Hadronic Mechanics,
Vol. I and II Second Edition (1995), Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev (1995) [13b];
Found. Phys. 27, 1159 (1997) [13c].

[14] S.L. Adler, Phys.Rev. 17, 3212 (1978). S.Okubo, Hadronic J. 5, 1667 (1982) [4b];
Cl.George, F. Henin, F.Mayene and I.Prigogine, Hadronic J. 1, 520 (1978). J.Ellis, N.E.
Mavromatos and D.V.Napoulos in Proceedings of the Erice Summer School, 31st Course:
From Superstrings to the Origin of Space–Time, World Sientiﬁc (1996). A.Jannussis,
R.Mignani and D.Skaltsas Physics A 187, 575 (1992). C.N.Ktorides, H.C.Myung
and R.M.Santilli, Phys.Rev. D22, 892 (1980). A.J.Kalnay, Hadronic J. 6, 1 (1983).
D.Rapoport–Campodonico, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 8, 1 (1991). M.Nishioka,
Nuovo Cimento 82A, 351 (1984). A.O.E. Aniamalu and R.M.Santilli, Int. J.Quantum
Chemistry 29, 175 (1995) [4j]; F.Cardone, R.Mignani and R.M.Santilli I.Phys. C18, L61
and L141 (1992). R.Mignani, Physics Essays 5, 531 (1992). M.Gasperinmi, Hadronic J.
7, 971 (1984). G.Eder, Hadronic J. 4, (1981) and 5, 750 (1982). E.B,Lion, Hadronic
J. 11, 81 (1988) [4o]; R.Mignani, Nuovo Cimento Lett. 39, 413 (1984). G.T.Tsagas
and D.S.Sourlas, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 12, 1 (1995). T.Gill, J.Lindesay
and W.W.Zachary, Hadronic J. 17, 449 (1994). C.Myung and R.M.Santilli, Hadronic
J. 5, 1277 (1982) [4t]; Mignani, Hadronic J. 5, 1120 (1982). A.K.Aringazin, A. Jan-
nussis, D.F.Lopez, M.Nishioka and B.Veljanosky, Santilli’s Lie–Isotopic Generalization
of Galilei’s and Einstein’s Relativities (1990), Kostarakis Publisher, Athens, Greece.
J.V.Kadeisvili, Santilli’s Isotopies of Contemporary Algebras, Geometries and Rela-
tivites, Second Edition, Ukraine Academy of Sciences, Kiev, in press. D.S.Sourlas and
G.T.Tsagas, Mathematical Foundations of the Lie–Santilli Theori, Ukraine Academy
of Sciences, Kiev (1993). J.Lˆohmus, E.Paal and L.Sorgsepp, Nonassociative Algebras

20

in Physics, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, USA (1994). D.M.Norris et al, Tomber’s
Bibliography and Index in Nonassociative Algebras, Hadronic Press, Palm Harbor, FL
(1984).

[15] R.M.Santilli, Comm. Theor. Phys. 3, 153 (1994) [15a]; Hadronic J. 17, 257 (1994)
[15b]; JINR Comm. No. E2-96-259 [1996] and Hyperﬁne Interaction, 109, 63 (1997)
[15c]; in New Frontiers of Hadronic Mechanics, T.L.Gill, ed. (Hadronic Press, Palm
Harbor, Florida, 1996) [15d]; Classical isodual theory of antimatter, Intern. J. Modern
Phys. A, in press [1998) [15e].

[16] R. M. Santilli, Found. Phys. Letters 10, 307 (1997); and in Proceedings of the VIII M.

Grossmann Meeting on General Relativity, Jerusalem, June 1998, in press.

[17] J.M.Blatt and V.F.Weiskopf, Theoretical Nuclear Physics (Wiley & Sons, New York,

1964).

[18] W. Band, An Introduction to Quantum Statistics ( D. van Nostrand, Princeton, 1955).

[19] M. Razavy, Z.Phys. B26 201 (1977); H.-D. Doebner and G.A. Goldin, Phys. Lett. A 16

397 (1992); H.-J. Wagner,Z.Phys. B95 261 (1994).

[20] S. Weinberg, Ann. Phys. 194 336 (1989). T.F. Jordan, Ann. Phys. 225 83 (1993).

[21] R.M. Santilli, Nuovo Cimento 51 570 (1967) . L.C. Biedernharn J. Phys. A 22 L873

(1989). A.J. Macfarlane, J. Phys. A 22 L4581 (1989).

[22] J. Lukierski, A. Viowiski and H. Ruegg, Phys. Lett. B 293 344 (1992); J. Lukierski,
H. Ruegg and W. Ruhl, Phys. Lett. B 313 357 (1993). J. Lukierski and H. Ruegg, Phys.
Lett. B 329 189 (1994). S. Majid and H. Ruegg,Phys. Lett. B 334 348 (1994).

[23] F. Bayer, M. Flato, C. Fronsdal, A. Lichnerowicz and D. Sternheimer, Ann. Phys. 111

61 and 111 (1978). C. Fronsdal, Rep. Math. Phys. 15 111 (1978).

[24] A. Jannussis et al,Nuovo Cimento 103B 17 and 537 (1989); 104B 33 and 53 (1989);
108B 57 (l993); Phys. Lett. A 132 324 (1988). S. Sebawe Abdallah et al., Physica A163
822 (1990); A202 301 (1994); Phys. Rev. A 48 1526 and 3174 (1993); J.Modern Optics
39 771 and 1067 (1992); 40 441, 1351 and 1369 (1993); Phys. Lett. A 181 341 (1993).

[25] Cl. George, F. Henin, F. Mayne and I. Prigogine, Hadronic J. 1 520 (1978).

[26] J. Ellis, N.E. Mavromatos and D. V. Nanopoulos in Proceedings of the Erice Summer
School, 31st Course: From Superstrings to the Origin of Space-Time (World Scientiﬁc,
1996).

21

[27] P. Caldirola, Nuovo Cimento 3 297 (1956) and Lett. Nuovo Cimento 16 151 (1976).
A. Jannussis et al. Lett. Nuovo Cimento 29 427 (1980). D. Lee,Phys. Rev. Lett. 122b
217 (1983).

[28] R.N.Mahopatra, Uniﬁcation and Spersymmetries: The Frontirs of Quark-Lepton

Physics (2-nd ed., Springer-Verlag, 1992).

[29] V.G.Kac, Inﬁnite dimensional Lie Algebras (Birkhauser, New York, 1983).

[30] D. V. Ahluwalia, Intern. J. Modern Phys. A 11, 1855 (1996). V. V. Dvoeglazov,

Hadronic J. 20, 435 91997)].

22

