9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CORPUSCULAR INTERPRETATION OF MIKROPARTICLE
DIFFRACTION AND POSSIBLE EXPERIMENTAL TEST

G.L.Bayatian

Yerevan Physics Institute,
Yerevan 375036,Armenia

Abstract

We examine the logical diﬃculties that arise when a particle(wave) interferes
with itself.We propose to carry out to its full extent a ,gedanken’ experiment orig-
inally proposed by Feynman in order to give an unequivocal experimental proof
of the correctness of the wave representation.As an example,we give a corpuscular
interpretation of the diﬀraction pattern.

1 Introduction

Wave interpretation of quantum phenomena was started in 1924 by de Broglie hy-
potesis,which says that wavelength of any particle with P momentum is equal to

where h is Plank’s constant.
This hypothesis was ﬁrst proved by experiment conducted by K.Davisson and
L.Djermer [1].
In this experiment by observing reﬂection of electron beam from
nickel single cristal they have obtained pattern absolutely corresponding to wave
diﬀraction with L,deﬁned by (1) and satisﬁed by the condition

λ = h/P

bSin(θ) = nλ

(1)

(2)

where b is cristal period,n is whole number,θ is observation angle of diﬀraction
maxima.

To develop a stable (observable) diﬀraction pattern in classic optics it is required
to have simultaneous arrival to point of observation of 2 (interference) or more than 2
(diﬀraction) monocromatic and coherent waves. From the point of view of quantum
mechanics, one will obtain interference of wave with itself if a barrier with 2 slits
will be put on a way of single particle.By multiple repetition of the experiment
full diﬀraction picture will be received on the screen.The probable nature of wave
function F allows doing that (of course, on paper).

Let’s assume that a microparticle passes through the ﬁrst slit with probability
ω1 = |ψ1|2, and through the second slit with ω2 = |ψ2|2.The superposition principle
allows to write the following for the wave function Ψ

Ψ = c1ψ1 + c2ψ2,

(3)

1

where c1 and c2 are normalization coeﬃcients. By choosing ψ1 = a1Sin(ωt − φ1)
and ψ2 = a2Sin(ωt − φ2) we will have

2
W = |Ψ|

2
2
2 + 2a1a2Cos(φ1 − φ2),
1 + a
= a

(4)

where W is probability of particle to hit certain point of screen.

One can see from (4) that depending on (φ1 −φ2) the last (interference) term can
be either positive or negative,i.e.in diﬀerent points of the screen the hitting probabil-
ity of particles will be diﬀerent,and by long exposure of the screen by single particles
the full diﬀraction picture can be received. Let’s see what logical contradictions will
occur from superposition principle in interpretation of the diﬀraction pattern. No
doubt that by passing a barrier with two slits the particle(wave) is not spliting into
2 parts, otherwise it would be visible by experiment.This means that each particle
passes through one of these two slits(doesn‘t matter through wich one exactly).Then
in expression (3) for wave function Ψ beyond the barrier either ψ1 = 1, and con-
In both cases the interference term
sequently ψ2 = 0 , or ψ2 = 1, and ψ1 = 0.
disappears in (4).The interference maxima and minima observed in all experiments
show that wave formalism introduced to explain diﬀraction pattern contradicts to
experimental results.This conclusion becomes obvious if one looks at (3) from the
point of view of simultaneous arrival of two waves to point of observation.To satisfy
this condition , obligatory for the interference,the quantum mechanics divides tasitly
the particle (wave) into 2 parts with the help of equition(3).Just in the same tacit
way it is assumed that passing various paths these divided parts meet each other
at a microscopic area λ2 = 10−16sm2 (λ is the de Broglie wavelengt equal to about
1Ao in the experiments [1] and [2]) of the macroscopic screen surface ∼ 10cm2.

In this work we show that the observed maxima and minima of the diﬀraction
pattern can have other origin ,connected with the action discretness which served
for the development of the quantum mechanics.In this way one can escape the wave
presentation and the connected with them logical diﬃculties of explaining the inter-
ference of single particle(wave) with itself. To obtain an answer to this important
question we propose a ,gedanken’ experiment considered by Feynman,which will
give unambigeous answer on the validity of the wave presentations. The discussion
of the corpuscular interpretation of the diﬀraction pattern is also given.

2 Two slits experiment

According to [3] the attempt to understand the phenomenon of single particle (wave)
interference with itself is an unnecessary intellectual masochism. However,the ab-
sence of the unambigous test of the inﬂuence of the second slit through which the
particle did not pass, makes such a statement groundless. The contemporary atomic
interferometers [2, 4, 5] allow one to realize such a test according to the folloving
scheme:it is necessary to compare the interferometer pattern, obtained with the
help of two slit interferometer [2], for instance, when both slits are open,with the
summary pattern composed of two expositions when consequently one of the slits
is closed. In the last case the interference term in (4) is absent and the maxima
and minima must not be observed. If the summary pattern will diﬀer from the one

2

when both slits are open,then this will be anambigeous experimental conﬁrmation
of the fact that the open slit, through which the particle did not pass,is not equiv-
alent to the close slit and it inﬂuences the interference pattern. And vice versa,if
the summary pattern will be identical to the one when both slits are open,then this
will mean that the wave interpretation of the appearance of maxima and minima is
incorrect,and it is necessary to look for other explanation.

3 The corpuscular interpretation

To overcome the above mentioned well known logical contradictions, connected with
the interference of a single particle (wave) with itself,it is necessary to take into ac-
count the interaction of this particle with the slit matter (diﬀraction grating) as
well as with subsidiary exiting electron [2] and laser [5] beams. At the ﬁrst sight,the
problem seems to have no solution. However, it can be solved using Planck’s con-
stant h, common for all types of interactions quantum of action,together with the
hypothesis that the action is multiple to h for the unbound states,as for bound
states. Let us follow how this can be done.

Let a parallel beam of microparticles wit momentum P moves along the direction
x and falls on a single cristal with period b (distance between the cristallographic
planes),or on a slit with width b. As a result of interaction with the cristal(slit)
matter the particle gets a transverse momentum Pr and will be scattered under an
angle θ, deﬁned by the relation:

It is necessary to ﬁnd Pr from the following diﬀerential equation

where Fr is the force acting on the particle by the cristal in a direction perpendicular
to the beam direction.

Multiplying (6) by dr one obtains

where dSr is the action on the path dr in the direction r for the time dt. Using the
hypothesis of multiplicity of action to h and choosing the integration limits from 0
to t for the time and from 0 to b for r one obtains

Sin(θ) = Pr/P

dPr = Frdt

dPrdr = Frdrdt = dSr

bh = Sr = nh,

bSin(θ) = nh/P = nλ

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

or taking into account (5)

where λ is the well known de Broglie wave length. Formula (9) shows that the
agreement the experimental data with the de Broglie hypothesis is not accidental. In
a hidden form the de Broglie hypothesis contains the hypothesis of the multiplicity
of action to h in an interaction used in this work. Just for this reason,as it is
seen from (9) the diﬀractive scattering angles take discrete volues,imitating the
diﬀraction pattern.

3

4 Conclusion

To test the above proposed interpretation it is very important to perform the Feyn-
mans,gedanken’ experiment with two slits completely with the help of atomic inter-
ferometers.

References

[1] C.Davisson and L.Germer,Phys.Rev.30,705 (1927).

[2] O.Carnal and J.Mlynek,Phys.Rev.Lett.66,2689(1991).

[3] CERN COURIER,v.36,n.2 ,p.27 (1996).

[4] D.W.Keith,C.R.Ekstrom et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett.66,2693(1991).

[5] M.S.Chapman et al.,Phys.Rev.Lett.75,3783(1995).

4

