9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PROPULSION THROUGH ELECTROMAGNETIC SELF-SUSTAINED

AIAA-99-2144

ACCELERATION

Vesselin Petkov
Physics Department, Concordia University
1455 De Maisonneuve Boulevard West
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8
E-mail: vpetkov@alcor.concordia.ca

Abstract

As is known the repulsion of the volume elements
of an uniformly accelerating charge or a charge sup-
ported in an uniform gravitational ﬁeld accounts for
the electromagnetic contribution to the charge’s iner-
tial and gravitational mass, respectively. This means
that the mutual repulsion of the volume elements of
the charge produces the resistance to its accelerated
motion. Conversely, the eﬀect of electromagnetic at-
traction of opposite charges results in a self-sustaining
accelerated motion of the charges provided that they
have been initially uniformly accelerated or supported
in an uniform gravitational ﬁeld. The signiﬁcance of
this eﬀect is that it constitutes a possibility for altering
inertia and gravitation.

Introduction

In 1881 J. J. Thomson [1] ﬁrst realized that a charged
particle was more resistant to being accelerated than
an otherwise identical neutral particle. His observa-
tion marked the origin of the concept of electromag-
netic mass of charged particles. This concept was de-
veloped in a full theory mostly by Heaviside [2], Searle
[3], Lorentz [4, 5], Poincar´e [6, 7], Abraham [8], Fermi
[9, 10] and Rohrlich [11, 12]. It follows from this theory
that it is the unbalanced1 repulsion of the volume el-
ements of an accelerating charged particle that causes
the resistance to its acceleration known as inertia.
Alternatively, the unbalanced attraction of accelerat-
ing opposite charges results in further enhancement of
their acceleration. By the equivalence principle the op-

1The mutual repulsion of two inertial like charges is com-
pletely balanced and there is no net force acting on the charges.

posite eﬀects of resistance to like charges’ acceleration
and increase of unlike charges’ acceleration resulting
from the unbalanced repulsion of like charges and the
unbalanced attraction of unlike charges, respectively
should also occur when the charges are in a gravita-
tional ﬁeld. The equivalence principle requires that
these eﬀects be present in a gravitational ﬁeld as well
but does not provide any insight into what causes them
there. The answer to this question is that it is a space-
time anisotropy around massive bodies (and in accel-
erating reference frames) that causes those eﬀects. It
manifests itself in the anisotropy of the velocity of elec-
tromagnetic signals (for short - the velocity of light).
Since it is now believed that the anisotropy of the ve-
locity of light around massive bodies results from the
curvature of spacetime, here we shall discuss two inde-
pendent results which indicate that the correct inter-
pretation of general relativity is in terms of spacetime
anisotropy, not spacetime curvature. While the ﬁrst
result just shows that there is no need for spacetime
curvature since spacetime anisotropy alone accounts
for all inertial and gravitational eﬀects, the second
one directly demonstrates that the standard curved-
spacetime interpretation of general relativity contra-
dicts the gravitational redshift experiments. The im-
plication that there is no spacetime curvature is crucial
not only for understanding and possible utilization of
the eﬀects discussed but also for gaining deeper in-
sight into the nature of inertia and gravitation. One
far-reaching consequence from the anisotropy of space-
time is that inertia and gravitation can (at least in
principle) be electromagnetically manipulated.

It is the anisotropy of spacetime that causes the
phenomena traditionally called inertia and gravitation.
An analysis of the classical electromagnetic mass the-
ory in conjunction with general relativity leads to the

1

conclusion that (i) gravitational attraction is caused
by the anisotropy of spacetime around massive ob-
jects and (ii) inertia originates from the spacetime
anisotropy in accelerating reference frames [13, 14].
The essence of this analysis is as follows. Consider
a classical2 electron in the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld.
Due to the anisotropy of the velocity of light in a non-
inertial reference frame (in this case - in the Earth’s
gravitational ﬁeld) the electric ﬁeld of an electron on
the Earth’s surface is distorted which gives rise to a
self-force originating from the interaction of the elec-
tron charge with its distorted electric ﬁeld3. This self-
force tries to force the electron to move downwards4
and coincides with what is traditionally called grav-
itational force. The electric self-force is proportional
to the gravitational acceleration g and the coeﬃcient
of proportionality is the mass ”attached” to the elec-
tron’s electric ﬁeld which proves to be equal to the elec-
tron mass. The anisotropy of the speed of light in the
Earth’s vicinity is compensated if the electron is falling
toward the Earth’s surface with an acceleration g. In
other words, the electron is falling in order to keep its
electric ﬁeld not distorted. A Coulomb (not distorted)
ﬁeld does not give rise to any self-force acting on the
electron; that is why the motion of a falling electron is
non-resistant (inertial, or geodesic)5. If the electron is
prevented from falling it can no longer compensate the
anisotropy of the speed of light, its ﬁeld distorts and
as a result a self-force pulling the electron downwards
arises. The resistance which an electron oﬀers to being
accelerated is similarly described in an accelerating ref-
erence frame as caused by the anisotropy of the speed
of light there. When the electron accelerates its elec-
tric ﬁeld distorts and the electron resists that defor-
mation. In such a way, given the fact that the speed of
light is anisotropic in non-inertial reference frames, all
inertial and gravitational eﬀects (including the equiva-

2At present quantum mechanical treatment of the electro-
magnetic mass is not possible since quantum mechanics does
not oﬀer a model for the quantum object itself.

3That explanation of the origin of the self-force is another
way of saying that the force arises from the mutual repulsion of
the volume elements of the electron charge.

4The self-force acting on the electron is caused by its de-
formed electrical ﬁeld (which originates from the spacetime
anisotropy) and for this reason strives to make the electron move
downwards with the acceleration g in order to compensate the
anisotropy of spacetime and thus to eliminate the distortion of
its electric ﬁeld. In other words, the self-force is a manifestation
of the resistance an electron oﬀers to the distortion of its electric
ﬁeld.

5It is clear from here that a falling electron does not radiate
since its electric ﬁeld is the Coulomb ﬁeld and therefore does
not contain the radiation r−1 terms.

lence of inertial and gravitational mass) of the electron
and the other elementary charged particles are fully
and consistently accounted for if both the inertial and
passive gravitational mass of the elementary charged
particles are entirely6 electromagnetic in origin. The
gravitational attraction and inertia of all matter can
be accounted for as well if it is assumed that there are
no elementary neutral particles in nature. A direct
consequence from here is that only charged particles
or particles that consists of charged constituents pos-
sess inertial and passive gravitational mass7. Stated
another way, it is only elementary charges that com-
prise a body; there is no such fundamental quantity
as mass. This means that a body’s (inertial or passive
gravitational) mass corresponds to the energy stored
in the electric ﬁelds of all elementary charged parti-
cles comprising the body. However, the inertial and
passive gravitational mass of a body manifest them-
selves as such - as a measure of the body’s resistance
to being accelerated - only if the body is subjected
to an acceleration (kinematic or gravitational). This
resistance originates from the unbalanced mutual re-
pulsion of the volume elements of every elementary
charged constituent of the body. The active gravita-
tional mass of a body proves to be also electromag-
netic originating from its charged constituents8 since
there is no mass but only charges. As there is no need

6On the one hand, the entirely electromagnetic mass of an
elementary charged particle - an electron for example - is sup-
ported by the fact that the electromagnetic mass of the classical
electron is equal to its observable mass. On the other hand,
however, the electromagnetic mass raises the question of stabil-
ity of the electron (what keeps its charge together). This ques-
tion, however, cannot be adequately addressed until a quantum-
mechanical model of the electron structure is obtained. On the
other hand, the stability problem does not interfere with the
derivation of the self-force (acting on a non-inertial electron)
containing the electromagnetic mass [13, 14]. This hints that
perhaps there is no real problem with the stability of the elec-
tron (as a future quantum mechanical model of the electron
itself may ﬁnd); if there were one it would inevitably emerge in
the calculation of the self-force.

7It is evident that in this case the electromagnetic mass the-
ory predicts zero neutrino mass and appears to be in conﬂict
with the apparent mass of the Z 0 boson which is involved in
the neutral weak interactions. The resolution of this apparent
conﬂict could lead to either restricting the electromagnetic mass
theory (in a sense that not the entire mass is electromagnetic)
or reexamining the facts believed to prove (i) that the Z 0 boson
is a fundamentally neutral particle (unlike the neutron), and
(ii) that it does possess inertial and gravitational mass if truly
neutral.

8Given that the inertial and passive gravitational masses are
electromagnetic the electromagnetic nature of the active gravita-
tional mass follows immediately since the three kinds of masses
are equal.

2

for spacetime curvature since all gravitational eﬀects
are fully accounted for by the electromagnetic nature
of the passive gravitational mass and the anisotropic
velocity of light in the vicinity of a massive object
[13, 14], it follows that it is the object’s charges (and
their ﬁelds) that cause that anisotropy of spacetime
around the object.

One thing concerning the electromagnetic mass the-
ory which is often overlooked should be especially
stressed: even if the mass is viewed as only partly
electromagnetic, as presently believed, it still follows
that inertia and gravitation are electromagnetic in ori-
gin but in part. It should be also noted that once the
fact of the partly electromagnetic origin of inertia and
gravitation is fully realized a thorough analysis of this
open issue can be carried out which will most proba-
bly9 lead to the result that electromagnetic interaction
is the only cause behind inertia and gravitation which
are now regarded as separate phenomena.

The concept of spacetime curvature is in direct con-
tradiction with experiments. A recently obtained re-
sult [15] shows that the gravitational redshift contra-
dicts the curved-spacetime interpretation of general
relativity. It has not been noticed up to now that both
frequency and velocity of a photon change in the grav-
itational redshift experiment. In such a way the mea-
surement of a change in a photon frequency is in fact
an indirect measurement of a change in its local veloc-
ity in this experiment. This shows that the local veloc-
ity of a photon depends upon its pre-history (whether
it has been emitted at the observation point or at a
point of diﬀerent gravitational potential) - a result that
contradicts the standard curved-spacetime interpreta-
tion of general relativity which requires that the local
velocity of light be always c [16]. Therefore the grav-
itational redshift demonstrates that general relativity
cannot be interpreted in terms of spacetime curvature.
The gravitational redshift, however, does not contra-
dict the mathematical formalism of general relativity
since there has always existed the possibility of inter-
preting the Riemann tensor not in terms of spacetime
curvature but in terms of spacetime anisotropy thus
linking gravitation to the anisotropy of spacetime [13].
In such an interpretation the Riemannian geometry
describes not a curved but an anisotropic spacetime.

9Such an analysis will be presented in another paper. The
basic idea of this analysis is to demonstrate that it is highly un-
likely that Nature has invented two drastically diﬀerent causes
of gravitation - an anisotropic spacetime for elementary charged
particles and a curved spacetime for elementary neutral ones
(such as the Z 0 boson if it turns out to be a truly neutral par-
ticle).

An additional

indication that spacetime around
massive bodies is anisotropic (not curved) comes from
the following argument. According to the standard
curved-spacetime interpretation of general relativity
the gravitational eﬀects observed in a non-inertial ref-
erence frame N g on the Earth’s surface are caused
by the curvature of spacetime originating from the
Earth’s mass. The principle of equivalence requires
that what is happening in N g be happening in a non-
inertial (accelerating) frame N a as well. The grav-
itational eﬀects in general relativity, in addition to
the pre-relativistic ones (falling of bodies and their
weight), include time and length eﬀects as well. These,
according to the standard interpretation of general rel-
ativity, are also caused by the spacetime curvature
around the Earth. By the principle of equivalence the
time and length eﬀects must be present in N a as well.
An inertial observer can explain those eﬀects happen-
ing in N a by employing only special relativity [17].
An observer in N a, however, can explain them neither
by directly making use of the frame’s acceleration nor
by the anisotropic velocity of light there. The non-
inertial observer in N a has only one option - ﬁrst,
to regard the anisotropic velocity of light in N a as
not directly caused by N a’s acceleration but by the
anisotropy of spacetime in N a which does originate
from the frame’s acceleration, and only then using the
anisotropic spacetime interval in N a to derive the time
and length eﬀects there. Therefore the standard inter-
pretation of general relativity leads to a picture in-
volving the principle of equivalence that is not quite
satisfying:
if one cannot distinguish between the ef-
fects in N a and in N g then why is the spacetime in
N a anisotropic while in N g it is curved. Taking into
account the two results discussed above the picture be-
comes perfectly consistent: spacetime in both N a and
N g is anisotropic (in N a the spacetime anisotropy is
caused by the frame’s acceleration while in N g it orig-
inates from the elementary charges that comprise the
Earth).

The result that spacetime is anisotropic (in which
the velocity of light is diﬀerent in diﬀerent directions)
has enormous implications for both understanding the
nature of inertia and gravitation and the possibility
of controlling them since both inertia and gravitation
turn out to be electromagnetic in origin (at least in
part10). There exist two theoretical possibilities for
electromagnetic manipulation of inertia and gravita-

10It is now an established (but unexplainably ignored [18])
fact from the electromagnetic mass theory that the inertial mass
and inertia are at least partly electromagnetic in origin [12, 19].

3

tion:

(i) Changing the anisotropy of spacetime. Since one
of the corollaries of the electromagnetic mass theory
is that the anisotropy of spacetime around a body
is caused by the body’s charged constituents (and
their electromagnetic ﬁelds), the employment of strong
electromagnetic ﬁelds can create a local spacetime
anisotropy which may lead to a body being propelled
without being subjected to a direct force.

(ii) Using the spacetime anisotropy. Due to the
anisotropic velocity of light in an accelerating reference
frame the electromagnetic attraction of the opposite
charges of an accelerating electric dipole enhances its
accelerated motion - it leads to a self-sustaining accel-
erated motion perpendicular to the dipole’s axis [20].
By the principle of equivalence an electric dipole sup-
ported in an uniform gravitational ﬁeld should levitate
[21]. In such a way a strong electromagnetic attrac-
tion between oppositely charged parts of a non-inertial
device may lead to its propulsion or at least to a re-
duction of its mass; thus allowing for the external force
that accelerates the device (or the weight of the device)
to be reduced.

The possibility of manipulating inertia and gravita-
tion by changing the anisotropy of spacetime was re-
ported in [14]. This paper deals with the possibility of
altering inertia and gravitation by using the spacetime
anisotropy.

Self-Sustained Acceleration

The equations of classical electrodynamics applied to
an accelerating electric dipole show that it can undergo
self-sustaining accelerated motion perpendicular to its
axis, meaning that not only does the electromagnetic
attraction of the opposite charges of a dipole not resist
its accelerated motion but further increases it. The ap-
plication of the principle of equivalence shows that an
electric dipole supported in an uniform gravitational
ﬁeld will be also subjected to a self-sustained accelera-
tion which may lead to the dipole’s levitation. Here we
shall derive this eﬀect in a gravitational ﬁeld directly
without applying the equivalence principle.

Consider a non-inertial reference frame N g sup-
ported in a gravitational ﬁeld of strength g. The
gravitational ﬁeld is directed opposite to the y axis.
A dipole with a separation distance d between the
two charges is laying along the x axis. Due to the
spacetime anisotropy in N g (manifesting itself in the
anisotropic velocity of light in N g) the electric ﬁeld

of the negative charge −q with coordinates (d, 0) at a
point with coordinates (0, 0), where the positive charge
+q is, is distorted11 [13]

Eg

−+ =

−q
4πǫo (cid:16)

n−+
d2 −

g · n−+
c2d

n−+ +

(1)

g
c2d (cid:17)

where n−+ is a unit vector pointing from the nega-
tive charge toward the positive charge and n−+ = −ˆx
where ˆx is a unit vector along the x axis. Since
g · n−+ = 0 (g is orthogonal to n−+) the electric ﬁeld
(1) reduces to

Eg

−+ =

−q
4πǫo (cid:18)

−ˆx
d2 +

g
c2d (cid:19)

.

The force with which the negative charge attracts the
positive one is [13, 14]

Fg

−+ = q

1 −

(cid:16)

g · n+−
2c2

(cid:17)

Eg

−+

where n+− is a unit vector pointing from the posi-
tive charge toward the negative charge. Noting that
g · n+− = 0 we can write

g.

Fg

−+ =

q2
4πǫoc2d

q2
4πǫod2 ˆx−
The ﬁrst term in (2) is the ordinary force with which
the negative charge attracts the positive one. The
second term represents the vertical component of the
force (2) that is opposite to g and has a levitating
eﬀect on the positive charge.

(2)

The calculation of the force with which the negative
charge of the dipole is attracted by the positive one
gives

Fg

+− = −

q2
4πǫod2 ˆx−
The net (self) force acting on the dipole as a whole is
directly obtained from (2) and (3)

q2
4πǫoc2d

(3)

g.

self = Fg
Fg

−+ + Fg

+− = −

q2
2πǫoc2d

g.

(4)

11This is the electric ﬁeld of a charge at rest in a gravitational
If the charge is uniformly accelerated with a = −g its
ﬁeld.
electric ﬁeld at a distance d from the negative charge is [22, 23]

Ea

−+ =

−q
4πǫo (cid:16)

n−+
d2 +

a · n−+
c2d

n−+ − a

.

c2d (cid:17)

This is the electric ﬁeld in an inertial reference frame. The cal-
culation of the electric ﬁeld in the accelerated frame in which the
dipole is at rest gives the same expression due to the anisotropy
of spacetime in that frame [13].

4

Therefore, unlike the attraction of the charges of an
inertial dipole which does not produce a net force act-
ing on the dipole, the mutual attraction of the charges
of a dipole in a gravitational ﬁeld results in a self-force
which opposes the dipole’s weight. The eﬀect of the
self-force (4) on the dipole can be explained in a sense
that a fraction of the dipole of mass

matt =

q2
2πǫoc2d

,

(5)

resulting from the unbalanced attraction of the two
charges, is subjected to an acceleration −g as long as
the dipole stays in a gravitational ﬁeld of strength g.
While the mass (5) remains smaller than the dipole
mass the eﬀect of the self-force (4) will be a reduction
of the dipole mass by matt since the self-force is oppo-
site to the dipole’s weight. When matt becomes equal
to the dipole mass (i.e. when Fg
self becomes equal to
the weight of the dipole), the dipole starts to levitate.
Further increase of matt will result in lifting of the
dipole.

If the charges of the dipole are an electron and a
positron its weight is F = 2meg, where me is the mass
of the electron (and the positron). Using the electron
electromagnetic mass [5]

me =

e2
4πǫoc2r0

,

(6)

where r0 is the classical electron radius, we can calcu-
late the resultant force acting on the dipole supported
in a gravitational ﬁeld

Fres = F + Fg

self =

e2
2πǫoc2 (cid:18)

1
r0

−

1
d (cid:19)

g.

(7)

As seen from (7) the dipole will start to levitate when
the separation distance d between its charges becomes
equal to r0. However, this could hardly be achieved in
a laboratory since r0 ∼ 10−15 m.

Consider now a reference frame N a which is uni-
formly accelerating with an acceleration a = −g. Let
the dipole be at rest in N a placed in such a way that
the acceleration a is perpendicular to its axis.
In a
similar fashion to what we have done in the case of a
dipole in N g here too can be shown that due to the
anisotropic speed of light in N a there is a self-force
acting on the dipole as a whole which is given by

Fa

self =

q2
2πǫoc2d

a

(8)

5

(the self-force (8) can be directly obtained from (4)
by applying the equivalence principle and substituting
g = −a). A fraction of the dipole of mass matt result-
ing from the unbalanced attraction of the two charges
will be subjected to an acceleration a as long as the
whole dipole is experiencing the same acceleration a.
This means that the fraction of the dipole of mass matt
accelerates on its own (due to the attraction of the two
charges) which results in a reduction of the dipole’s
resistance to being accelerated by the external force.
Therefore in order to maintain the same acceleration
a the external force accelerating the dipole should be
reduced. Stated another way the dipole mass is ef-
fectively reduced and the resistance which the dipole
oﬀers to being accelerated will reduce as well. When
matt becomes equal to the dipole mass the resistance
of the dipole to being accelerated will cease and con-
sequently there will be no external force needed to
accelerate it. The dipole will continue to maintain its
acceleration entirely on its own - it will be in a state
of self-sustained accelerated motion. This type of mo-
tion resembles the inertial motion of an object: as a
free object continues to move with constant velocity
until being prevented from doing so, a dipole (initially
accelerated by an external force) whose charges and
separation distance ensure that matt is equal to the
dipole mass will continue to move with constant ac-
celeration on its own until being prevented from doing
so.

If the charges of the dipole are an electron and a
positron the external force accelerating the dipole will
be

Fext = 2mea.

Taking into account (8) the dipole will be subjected to

a uniform acceleration if

Fext + Fa

self = 2mea.

Noting that for an electron and a positron the mass in
(8) will be

we can write

matt =

e2
2πǫoc2d

Fext = (2me − matt) a.

If we assume that matt > 2me (which is unlikely to
be achieved since the separation distance d between
the charges should be smaller than the dimension r0
of the classical electron considered) an external force

would be needed to slow down the dipole in order that
it maintains its uniform acceleration a.

The eﬀect of mass reduction caused by the mutual
attraction of the dipole’s charges can be described in
Instead of regarding the
the following way as well.
self-force (8) as subjecting only a part of the dipole of
mass matt to the acceleration a it is also possible to say
that Fa
self subjects the whole dipole of mass 2me to an
acceleration aatt originating from the unbalanced at-
traction between the electron and the positron. Then
using the electron electromagnetic mass (6) we obtain
the relation between aatt and a

e2
2πǫoc2r0

aatt=

e2
2πǫoc2d

a

or

[1] J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. 11, 229 (1881).

[2] O. Heaviside, The Electrician 14, 220 (1885).

[3] G. F. C. Searle, Phil. Mag. 44, 329 (1897).

[4] H. A. Lorentz, Proceedings of the Academy of Sci-

ences of Amsterdam 6, 809 (1904).

[5] H. A. Lorentz, Theory of Electrons, 2nd ed.

(Dover, New York, 1952).

[6] H. Poincar´e, Compt. Rend. 140, 1504 (1905).

[7] H. Poincar´e, Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico

di Palermo 21, 129 (1906).

[8] M. Abraham, The Classical Theory of Electricity
and Magnetism, 2nd ed. (Blackie, London, 1950).

aatt =

r0
d

a.

(9)

[9] E. Fermi, Phys. Zeits. 23, 340 (1922).

[10] E. Fermi, Atti Acad. Nazl. Lincei 31, 184; 306

As seen from (9) the dipole will experience a self-
sustained acceleration aatt ≥ a if d ≤ r0.

(1922).

Conclusion

At present it does not appear realistic to expect that a
self-sustained acceleration of a body (equal or greater
than its initial acceleration) can be achieved. How-
ever, the possibility for eventual practical applications
of the eﬀect of mass reduction can be assessed if macro-
scopic charge distributions are considered. It appears
that most promising will be the use of specially de-
signed capacitors like the commercial ones which con-
sist of alternatively charged layers of metal foil rolled
into the shape of a cylinder with the cylinder axis par-
allel to a or g. Such capacitors can be charged to
large amounts of charge. There are capacitors already
available on the market that can carry a charge well
above 1C. With such (and greater) amounts of charge
the experimental testing of the mass reduction eﬀect
appears now possible although it is not a real issue
since this eﬀect is a direct consequence of the classical
electrodynamics when applied to a non-inertial dipole
and for this reason there should be no doubt that it
will be experimentally conﬁrmed. The purpose of this
paper is to demonstrate that the practical applicabil-
ity of the mass reduction eﬀect may be within reach if
proper technological eﬀort is invested.

References

[11] F. Rohrlich, Am. J. Phys. 28, 639 (1960).

[12] F. Rohrlich,

Classical Charged Particles

(Addison-Wesley, New York, 1990).

[13] V. Petkov, Ph.D. Thesis, Concordia University,

Montreal, 1997.

[14] V. Petkov,

34th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE
Cleveland,
Joint
Ohio, July 12-15, 1998; Paper AIAA-98-3142
(http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9805028).

Conference,

Propulsion

[15] V. Petkov, Found. Phys. Lett.,

submitted

(http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9810030).

[16] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne and J. A. Wheeler,
Gravitation (Freeman, San Francisco, 1973), p.
385.

[17] L. Schiﬀ, Am. J. Phys. 28, 340 (1960).

[18] P. Pearle, in D. Teplitz, ed. Electromagnetism:
Paths to Research (Plenum Press, New York,
1982), p. 213.

[19] J. W. Butler, Am. J. Phys. 37, 1258 (1969).

[20] F. H. J. Cornish, Am. J. Phys. 54, 166 (1986).

[21] D. J. Griﬃths, Am. J. Phys. 54, 744 (1986).

[22] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd ed.,

(Wiley, New York, 1999), p. 664.

6

[23] D. J. Griﬃths, Introduction to Electrodynamics,
2nd ed., (Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1989), p. 424.

7

