9
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
7
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interpreting the collapse process in terms of
new motion of particle

Gao shan
Institute of Quantum mechanics
11-10, NO.10 Building, NO.21, YueTan XiJie DongLi, XiCheng District
Beijing 100045, P.R.China
E-mail: gaoshan.iqm@263.net

Aiming at providing an objective picture for the collapse process of wave function during measure-
ment, further analysis about the quantum discontinuous motion [10] is presented, when considering
general relativity we show that the new motion is essentially replaced by the quantum jump motion,
which naturally results in the collapse process of the wave function. Furthermore, a concrete theo-
retical model is given to interpret the collapse process quantitatively, and the coincidence between
its theoretical prediction and the experimental evidences is also discussed. At last, the possibility
to conﬁrm the collapse model is analyzed.

I. INTRODUCTION

In order to provide a complete theory, the founders of quantum mechanics cleverly added a simple projection
postulate to its consistent axiom system to account for the measurement process [16], whereas this postulate is
evidently a conditional description about the measurement process, it says nothing about how the measurement can
and does bring about one deﬁnite result, or how the collapse process of the wave function happens during measurement,
so the projection postulate needs to be further explained in physics [4] [17] [19].

In recent years many eﬀorts have been made to tackle the so-called collapse problem, and it is well known that
in order to bring about the collapse process of the wave function, some kind of randomness should take eﬀect in the
normal deterministic evolution of the wave function, but, up to now, the randomness has not been introduced into
on a solid basis yet, for example, in the well-known GRWP theory [11] [12] [17] [18] the randomness comes from the
special quantum ﬂuctuations of space-time, which is still ill-deﬁned without a consistent quantum theory of gravity;
while in Penrose’s proposal of gravity-induced quantum state reduction [19] [20], the origin of the randomness is not
touched on at all, in fact, based on the fundamental conﬂict between the principle of general covariance of general
relativity and the principle of superposition of quantum mechanics, what he can conclude in a heuristic way is only
that the collapse process should happen when relativistic gravity is considered in the evolution of the wave function,
since in the absence of randomness this conﬂict alone can not provide an answer about how the collapse process
happens.

Now, the new motion of particle [10] just provides such a broad framework for objectively studying the microscopic
process that it may also help to solve the collapse problem, for example, there may exist many kinds of concrete motion
modes among the new motion, and the new motion may display diﬀerently in the nonrelativistic and relativistic
domains, especially when involving relativistic gravity the new motion of particle may naturally provide the origin of
randomness in the collapse process, and further result in the objective collapse process.

The plan of this paper is as follows: In Sect. 2 we ﬁrst analyze and give the natural origin of randomness in
the collapse process. Then in Sect. 3 the possible role of gravity in the collapse process is carefully examined, and
the proper existence of local position state is demonstrated. In Sect. 4 we give a strict deﬁnition of the quantum
jump motion, and its evolution principles are also presented, especially its relation with the collapse process is deeply
analyzed. In Sect. 5, as one example, we analyze in detail the collapse process for two-state system using the evolution
principles of quantum jump motion, and the concrete collapse time for such system is deduced out. In Sect. 6 we
give a general evolution equation of the quantum jump motion, which can be used to account for the collapse process
of any wave function. Then in Sect. 7 some experimental evidences supporting our collapse model are discussed, and
their coincidence with the prediction of our collapse model is demonstrate. In sect. 8 we give some further theoretical
implications on the future theory of quantum gravity. At last, in Sect. 9 we analyze the possibility to conﬁrm our
collapse model using present technology.

1

II. THE NATURAL ORIGIN OF RANDOMNESS IN THE COLLAPSE PROCESS

As we have known, what the wave function objectively describes is the new motion of the particle [10], while the
essential discontinuity of the new motion may provide the inherent randomness in the collapse process from the inside.
But in case of no gravity this kind of randomness does not appear in the normal deterministic evolution of the new
motion state, since even during inﬁnitesimal time interval the particle undergoing the new motion can still move
throughout the whole space with a certain position measure density ρ(x, t), namely the essential discontinuity or
randomness is de facto absorbed in the deﬁnition of the new motion state such as ρ(x, t) etc; on the other hand, when
the normal deterministic evolution of the new motion is invalidated in some situation, the veiled inherent randomness
of the new motion may appear, in the following we will analyze the possible invalidation of normal deterministic
evolution of the new motion.

According to the analysis about the new quantum discontinuous motion [10], there are two important preconditions
for the normal deterministic linear evolution of the wave function, one is the evolution of the wave function is studied
in the nonrelativistic domain, the other is the existence of the nonlocal space-time reference framework.

As to the ﬁrst precondition, when in nonrelativistic domain the transfer of interaction is instantaneous, thus for
the wave function describing the quantum discontinuous motion of particle, its diﬀerent branches will not interact,
this ensures the linear superposition principle of the wave function at an exterior level, when in relativistic domain
the transfer velocity of interaction is ﬁnite, thus for the wave function describing the quantum discontinuous motion
of particle, its diﬀerent branches will interact through the transfer particle of the interaction including no gravity,
for example, in quantum electrodynamics the diﬀerent branches of the electron wave function will interact through
the photon, which is characterized by the interaction term ¯ψγµAµψ, this interaction between the diﬀerent branches
of the wave function will exteriorly invalidate the linear superposition principle of the electron wave function, but
as we have done in relativistic quantum ﬁeld involving no gravity, this kind of interaction can still be naturally and
consistently included in the framework of the normal linear evolution, so there exists no ultimate threat, and the
inherent randomness is still veiled in the state deﬁnition.

As to the second precondition, the existence of the nonlocal space-time reference framework ensures the linear
superposition principle of the wave function at an interior level, since as we have demonstrated [10], its existence will
essentially result in the existence of the equivalent nonlocal momentum description of the new motion, which further
determines the one-to-one relation between the nonlocal momentum description and local position description, then
the most important linear superposition principle of the wave function is deduced out, thus the existence of the nonlocal
space-time reference framework is the essential basis of the linear superposition principle of the wave function, or we
can say, it ensures the normal deterministic linear evolution of the wave function from the inside, and its nonexistence
may essentially result in the breakdown of the normal deterministic linear evolution of the new motion, and the veiled
inherent randomness of the new motion may appear. In the following, we will study where the nonlocal space-time
reference framework fails to exist, and how the veiled inherent randomness of the new motion appears.

III. THE POSSIBLE ROLE OF GRAVITY IN THE COLLAPSE PROCESS

A. A general analysis

As we have known, according to general relativity there does not exist any nonlocal space-time reference framework
at all, then the usual nonlocal momentum eigenstate eipx for describing the normal new motion can not be properly
deﬁned, and the usual linear superposition principle of the wave function will be broken from the inside, thus the
ubiquitous gravity will essentially invalidate the above second precondition of the normal linear evolution of the wave
function.

Furthermore, in case of the nonexistence of any nonlocal space-time reference framework, no nonlocal momentum
state of the new motion is permitted, and the local position state will be the only proper state, thus the evolution of
the new motion, as well as the existence of the new motion, will be extremely diﬀerent from the normal one, although
no complete formulation of quantum gravity is in hand, we can still discuss the essential characters of this kind of new
existence and evolution involving relativistic gravity, and give a crude but rational theoretical model to account for
the resulting collapse process, in the following discussions we will always call relativistic gravity gravity for simplicity.

2

B. The existence of local position state

On the one hand, when gravity comes into play, the only existence of local position state for the new motion will
essentially change the motion mode of the new motion, concretely speaking, during inﬁnitesimal time interval the
particle undergoing the new motion can no longer move throughout the whole space with the original position measure
density ρ(x, t), on the contrary, it can only be in a local position state, we suppose the space size of this local position
state is Lg.

On the other hand, the discontinuous nature of the new motion requires that during a ﬁnite time interval the
particle undergoing the new motion can still move throughout the whole space with the original position measure
density ρ(x, t), while in order not to destroy the local spreading law of energy this ﬁnite time interval will be terriﬁcally
small, during which the usual proper deﬁnition of energy, or even time, may not exist, since this time interval provides
a time limit of the valid existence of the new motion state, we call this ﬁnite time interval the minimal valid existing
time Te of the new motion state, or wave function describing the new motion, it further means that if the particle
stays in a local region much longer than this time interval, then it will collapse into the local state in this region, or
we can say, this time interval may also provide a determinant condition for the occurrence of the collapse process;
furthermore, the particle will generally stay in a local region Lg for a time interval much shorter than this time
interval, we assume the minimal average staying time in a local region Lg as Tg, and in the following we will discuss
how to ﬁnd this minimal average staying time Tg of the particle.

C. The implications of the space-time uncertainty

As Karolyhazy et al have denoted [14], when combining quantum mechanics and general relativity the uncertainty
pL, and Adler et al have recently re-demonstrated that the well-known
p∆p/¯h is universally valid [2], thus we assume that the above

of space-time is ∆T 3 = T 2
gravitional uncertainty principle ∆x
uncertainty relation of space-time is an universal one, and we will further analyze its deep implications.

p T and ∆L3 = L2

¯h/∆p + L2

≥

First, when T < Tp and L < Lp we have ∆T > T and ∆L > L, then this result evidently indicates that when T < Tp
and L < Lp the uncertainty of time and space will be larger than the time and space themselves, and the space-time
stage on which everything is deﬁned will fall into ruins, thus the inherent uncertainty of quantum mechanics makes
itself invalid within the extraordinarily small Planck time Tp when satisfying general relativity, and the deﬁnition of
the wave function in quantum mechanics will be also essentially invalid, or the usual nonlocal state of the quantum
discontinuous motion will be also ill-deﬁned and meaningless within the Planck size Tp and Lp.

Secondly, the above uncertainty of space-time indicates that there exists an absolute minimum uncertainty Lp and
Tp for the space-time where all particles exist and move, namely the minimum distinguishable size of position and
time of the particle are Lp and Tp, thus in physics the rational existence of the particle is no longer in one position
at one instant, but limited in a space interval Lp during a ﬁnite time interval Tp, furthermore, during this ﬁnite
time interval Tp the particle can only be limited in a space interval Lp, since if it can move throughout at least two
diﬀerent local regions with separation size larger than Lp during the time interval Tp, then there essentially exists a
smaller distinguishable ﬁnite time interval than Tp, which evidently contradicts the above conclusion, thus the above
uncertainty of space-time essentially results in the rational existence of local position state for the new motion, in
which the particle stays in a local region with size Lp for a time interval Tp, and since the time uncertainty formula
∆T 3 = T 2
p T is irrelevant to the mass of the particle, as well as the concrete form of the wave function, this kind of
local position state will be the same for any wave function of any particle, and will be one kind of general existence,
we may call such general local position state Planck cell state.

Thirdly, since the original new motion state or wave function in quantum mechanics is deﬁned during inﬁnitesimal
time interval, the above conclusion will further result in that the proper state which can be consistently deﬁned should
be only the local state, and the new motion state or wave function can only be in use for a ﬁnite time interval much
larger than Tp, during which the particle may move throughout the whole space with the position measure density
ρ(x, t) =

2 in quantum mechanics.
ψ(x, t)
|
|

IV. THE APPEARANCE OF QUANTUM JUMP MOTION

”In essence, it is general relativity that turns the quantum discontinuous motion into quantum jump motion.”
Now, according to the above analysis, the quantum discontinuous motion will be naturally replaced by a new kind
of motion mode, which is diﬀerent from both quantum discontinuous motion and classical continuous motion, we call
it quantum jump motion.

3

A. The deﬁnition of quantum jump motion

Here we will give a strict deﬁnition about the quantum jump motion.
(1). The quantum jump motion state of a particle in space is the local position state, in which the particle stays in

a local region with size near Lp for a time interval near Tp.

(2). During a time interval much larger than Tp, which is still extremely smaller than usual time interval in quantum
mechanics, the particle will move throughout the whole space, which average state is described by the position measure
2 and position measure ﬂuid density j(x, t) as deﬁned for the normal quantum discontinuous
density ρ(x, t) =
ψ(x, t)
|
|
motion.

(3). The evolution of the quantum jump motion is determined by both quantum mechanics and general relativity.
The visual physical picture for the quantum jump motion will be that during a ﬁnite time interval near Tp the
particle will stay in a local region with size near Lp, then it will still stay there or jump from this local region to
another local region, while during a time interval much larger than Tp the particle will move throughout the whole
space with a certain position measure density ρ(x, t) as deﬁned in quantum mechanics.

B. A general discussion

First, it is the requirement of general relativity that results in that the quantum discontinuous motion is replaced
by the quantum jump motion, while the appearance of quantum jump motion just releases the randomness inherent
in the quantum discontinuous motion, thus it will provide the objective origin of randomness or probability in the
collapse process.

Secondly, on the one hand, the particle undergoing the quantum jump motion stays in a local region during
inﬁnitesimal time interval, this is similar to the property of classical continuous motion; on the other hand, during a
ﬁnite time interval much larger than Tp the particle will continually jumps from one local region to another local region,
and move throughout the whole space with a certain position measure density ρ(x, t), this is similar to the property
of quantum discontinuous motion, thus the quantum jump motion is evidently some kind of compromise of quantum
discontinuous motion and classical continuous motion, and it will undoubtedly be responsible for the transition from
quantum discontinuous motion to classical continuous motion, or from microscopic world to macroscopic world, at
the same time, it will be also the origin of the mysterious collapse process of the wave function.

C. The evolution principles of quantum jump motion

As to the quantum jump motion, the particle does stay in a local region for a ﬁnite nonzero time interval, and
jump from this local region to another local region stochastically, thus the position measure density ρ(x, t) of the
particle will be essentially changed by the ﬁnite nonzero stay time in a stochastic way related to the stochastic stay
region, and the normal deterministic linear evolution of the wave function will be also stochastically changed, in fact,
as we will demonstrate, this new element of stochastic evolution just plays an essential role in generating the collapse
process.

1. The ﬁrst principle
As we have demonstrated, the quantum discontinuous motion is some kind of average of the quantum jump motion
2 of the particle
during a ﬁnite time interval much larger than Tp, thus the position measure density ρ(x, t) =
ψ(x, t)
|
|
will be also the average of the position distribution of the particle undergoing the quantum jump motion during this
time interval, then it is natural that the stochastic position in which the particle stays will satisfy the position measure
density ρ(x, t), which may evolve diﬀerently from the normal deterministic linear evolution, namely the stochastic
stay position of the particle satisﬁes the distribution

2
ψ(x, t)
|
|
similar to the assumption in usual dynamical collapse models [11] [17] [6] [18] [7] [12], the probability of the stochastic
stay position, which naturally brings about the noise ad hoc introduced in usual dynamical collapse models, is larger
in the regions where the position measure density ρ(x, t) is larger, but here it is not an implausible assumption, but
a sound physical principle, which can be naturally deduced out from the objective picture of quantum jump motion.

P (x, t) =

(1)

2. The second principle
Now, according to the original deﬁnition of the position measure density ρ(x, t) for the quantum discontinuous
motion, the ﬁnite nonzero stay time for the quantum jump motion in a local region evidently implies that the position

4

measure density ρ(x, t) in that region will be increased after this ﬁnite nonzero stay time interval, and the increase
will be larger when the stay time is longer.

We assume the particle undergoing the quantum jump motion stays in a local region or Planck cell Lp for a time
interval Tp, then according to the deﬁnition of the position measure density its value ρc(x, t) in this region will be
increased, after normalization it is

ρc(x, t) =

ρc(x, t) + ∆ρ
1 + ∆ρ

(2)

where ∆ρ = Tp/∆tm, is the increase of the position measure density ρc(x, t) in this region, and k is a dimensionless
¯h/∆E, is some average maximum permitted stay time, which evidently results from the dimensional
constant, ∆tm ≈
requirement and will be further discussed in the following, in fact, this formula essentially diﬀers with the corresponding
ad hoc assumption in usual dynamical collapse models, since here it naturally results from the existence of the
objective quantum jump motion, which is physically generated by the combination of general relativity and quantum
discontinuous motion.

Then we will further analyze the validity of the formula of ∆ρ, ﬁrst, according to the original objective deﬁnition
of the position measure density ρ(x, t) describing the new motion, it essentially describes the real position measure
distribution of the particle during a time interval, and its probability interpretation is only a derived exterior concept,
thus the change of the position measure density ρ(x, t) resulting from the stay time will be essentially related to the
stay time itself, not its square or other forms, especially the increase of the position measure density ρ(x, t) will be
proportional to the stay time, when the stay time ∆t is longer the increase of the position measure density ρ(x, t) in
this stay region will be larger.

Secondly, we will analyze the validity of the concrete form of ∆ρ, and the origin and meaning of the average
maximum permitted stay time ∆tm, on the one hand, according to the above general analysis, the existence of gravity
will essentially change the structure of space-time, and when combined with the new quantum discontinuous motion
this kind of change will naturally result in the discrete quantum jump motion of the particle with average minimum
time interval Tp, thus it is rational we assume the above time interval Tp in the above formula of ∆ρ.

On the other hand, according to the principle of energy conservation, during a ﬁnite nonzero time interval ∆t the
¯h/∆t, then the particle can hardly
possible change of energy ∆Ej will be limited by the uncertainty relation ∆Ej ≈
jump from this local region to another local region when the diﬀerence of the whole energy ∆E between these two
regions satisﬁes the condition ∆E
∆Ej , namely after the stay time ∆t the position measure density ρ(x, t) will be
greatly increased, concretely speaking, it will be nearly one in this local region, and nearly zero in other regions, in
fact, the wave function has collapsed into this local region in order to satisfy the requirement of energy conservation,
and this situation has also manifested that in order to satisfy energy conservation the quantum jump motion will
naturally result in the collapse of the wave function; on the contrary, the particle can more easily jump from this
local region to another local region when the diﬀerence of the whole energy ∆E between these two regions satisﬁes
the condition ∆E
∆Ej , namely after the stay time ∆t the position measure density ρ(x, t) will be only changed
slightly.

≪

≫

In one word, these two extreme situations have indicated that the increase of the position measure density ρc(x, t)
will relate to both the average minimal stay time Tp, which denotes the limitation from the combination of general
relativity and quantum mechanics, and the average maximum permitted stay time ∆tm = ¯h/∆E, or the diﬀerence
of the whole energy ∆E of the particle between the destination local region and original region, which denotes the
limitation from the principle of energy conservation. Furthermore, the increase of the position measure density ρ(x, t)
will be proportional to the stay time Tp, and reversely proportional to the average maximum permitted stay time
∆tm = ¯h/∆E, thus when considering both the dimensional relation and ﬁrst order approximation, it is rational that
we assume the relation ∆ρ = k∆t/∆tm.

3. The third principle In essence, we can not obtain the continuous limit of the above evolution of the quantum jump
motion in physics, since according to the above analysis about the space-time uncertainty, there exists a minimum
stay time near Tp of the particle undergoing the quantum jump motion in reality, the motion is essentially discrete,
although when Tp →

0 we can get the continuous limit formally in mathematics.

V. THE COLLAPSE PROCESS FOR TWO-STATE SYSTEM

In this section, as one example we will ﬁrst analyze the collapse process for a simple two-state system, and work

out the concrete collapse time formula.

We suppose the initial wave function of the particle is ψ(x, 0) = α(0)1/2ψ1(x)+β(0)1/2ψ2(x), which is a superposition
of two static states with diﬀerent energy levels E1 and E2, which are located in diﬀerent regions R1 and R1 with the
Lp.
same spreading size L, and we assume the relation L

≫

5

Now, for simplicity but lose no generality, we consider the space of both static states as a whole local region, and
only study the quantum jump motion between these two regions, namely we directly consider the diﬀerence of the
E1 between these two states, we assume the sequence of n jumps as binary bit sequence
whole energy ∆E = E2 −
[δn] = δ1δ2...δk...δn, where δk = 1 denotes the particle stays in the region R1, δk = 0 denotes the particle stays in the
region R2, the probability for this sequence as P[δn], then according to the above principles, if the particle stays in
the region R1 for a time interval Tp during the n-th jump, the position measure density in this region will be changed
as follows:

where ∆ = kTp/∆tm, and ∆tm = ¯h/∆E; if the particle stays in the region R2 for a time interval Tp during the n-th
jump, the position measure density in this region will be changed as follows:

Then similar to the continuous measurement theory for two-state system, we can analyze the collapse process for
the above two-state system, ﬁrst, we will calculate the diagonal elements of the density matrix of the two-state system,
according to the deﬁnition of the quantum jump motion we have

ρ11(n + 1) = X
[δn]

(P[δn]α[δn]α[δn]1 + P[δn]β[δn]α[δn]0)

ρ22(n + 1) = X
[δn]

(P[δn]β[δn]β[δn]0 + P[δn]α[δn]β[δn]1)

while the deﬁnitions of the diagonal elements are

and the initial conditions are

then the discrete evolution equations will be

when in the continuous mathematical limit, these evolution equations for the diagonal elements will be

α[δn]1 =

α[δn] + ∆
1 + ∆

β[δn]1 =

β[δn]
1 + ∆

α[δn]0 =

α[δn]
1 + ∆

β[δn]0 =

β[δn] + ∆
1 + ∆

ρ11(n) = X
[δn]

P[δn]α[δn]

ρ22(n) = X
[δn]

P[δn]β[δn]

ρ11(0) = α(0)

ρ22(0) = β(0)

ρ11(n + 1) = ρ11(n)

ρ22(n + 1) = ρ22(n)

˙ρ11(t) = 0

6

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

˙ρ22(t) = 0

Now it is evident that the above principles essentially guarantee that the collapse results distribution satisﬁes the

position measure density ρ(x, t), this is consistent with the prediction of quantum mechanics.

Secondly, in order to work out the concrete collapse time for the above two-state system, we will calculate the non-
diagonal elements of the density matrix, similar to the above calculations we can get the discrete evolution equation,
namely

ρ12(n + 1) = [1

(

∆
1 + ∆

−

)2]1/2ρ11(n)

ρ12(n) = [1

)2]n/2ρ12(0)

∆2n)ρ12(0)

(

∆
1 + ∆

−

(1

≈

−

1
2

then the solution will be

and the collapse formula is

νc = 1

1
2

−

∆2n

νc = 1

τ /τc

−

Now according to the relation ∆ = kTp/∆tm = k∆E/EP , where EP = ¯h/Tp, is the Planck energy, Tp is the average
minimum stay time of the particle in one of the two local regions during each jump, and the relation n = τ /Tp, where
τ is the whole time interval of the quantum jump motion, the above collapse formula will be

Ep
∆E ·

·

≈

2
k2

¯h
∆E , is the collapse time.

where τc ≈
Then we will further discuss the collapse time formula, ﬁrst, according to the above general discussions about the
collapse process, when ∆E = Ep, the collapse time will be Tp, then we may simply assume k = √2, and the collapse
time will be τc = ¯h
∆E , this evidently denotes that the normal quantum evolution of the wave function is invalid at
Ep, and in fact the evolution is mainly determined by the collapse process, thus we may call
the critical point ∆E
¯h
the Planck energy Ep collapse critical energy; when ∆E
∆E ,
this result means that for microscopic objects the collapse time is much longer than the normal evolution time of the
wave function, thus quantum mechanics is still approximately valid before the collapse process happens; while when
¯h
∆E
∆E , which means that for macroscopic objects the collapse
time is much shorter than the normal evolution time of the wave function in quantum mechanics, then quantum
mechanics will be naturally replaced by classical mechanics. In fact, the border between microscopic objects and
macroscopic objects mostly results from the experience and sense of our mankind, thus the above discussion may
be improper, the relevant criterion may be that if the collapse time of the objects is small in our sense, say a small
section of one second, we may call such objects macroscopic objects, then for macroscopic objects we may assume
∆E

Ep, namely for microscopic objects, we get τc ≫

Ep, namely for macroscopic objects, we get τc ≪

10M ev.

≪

≫

Secondly, since the above diﬀerence of energy ∆E is irrelevant to the position measure density ρ(x, t) of the wave
function, the above collapse time is also irrelevant to the initial position measure density ρ(x, t) of the wave function, in
fact, this conclusion essentially results from the existence of quantum jump motion and assumed dynamical continuity
of the collapse process.

≥

Thirdly, it can be easily seen that the above collapse formula is just Fivel’s assumed formula resulting from the
experimental considerations [9], but the meaning of ∆E is a little diﬀerent, here the diﬀerence of energy ∆E will
include all the energy diﬀerence obtained from the last uniﬁed theory, especially include the possible diﬀerence of the
gravity energy of the particle in the states, which will essentially result from the complete theory of quantum gravity,
while the diﬀerence of energy in Fivel’s formula is just the dispersion of the usual energy of the particle in quantum
mechanics, the obvious distinction of these two kinds of deﬁnitions lies in that the former may relate to the space
separation of the wave function, while the latter relates not to the space separation of the wave function, although
in general situation the diﬀerence of the gravity energy of the particle may be proportional to the dispersion of the
usual energy of the particle.

Fourthly, the existence of the above collapse formula will imply the nonexistence of the continuous limit in physics,
namely in reality there should exists a nonzero minimum average stay time Tp for the particle undergoing the quantum
jump motion, and this minimum average stay time will also appear in the collapse formula, and determine the collapse
time of the wave function, this also results in the appearance of the collapse critical energy scale Ep in the above
collapse formula, in the following, we will further analyze the validity of the formula of the collapse critical energy

7

Ep = p¯hc3/G. First, when the new quantum discontinuous motion does not exist, namely ¯h = 0, this energy scale
Ep will turn to be zero, since the continuous motion has been local, it needs no additional energy to collapse into a
local region; secondly, when gravity disappears, namely G = 0, this energy scale Ep will turn to be inﬁnite, since the
collapse process never happens; thirdly, when in nonrelativistic domain, namely c
, the collapse process will also
never happen, then it is also rational that when c
this energy scale Ep turns to be inﬁnite, thus from the analysis
about the constants involved in Ep the formula of the collapse critical energy Ep = p¯hc3/G is rational, and will be
the only one when involving only the above constants in the formula. Furthermore, this conclusion also strongly
implies that the Planck energy Ep will appear in the collapse time formula, thus Penrose’s formula of gravity-induced
quantum state reduction may be inappropriate, while the above collapse formula will be more appropriate.

→ ∞

→ ∞

Ep
∆E ·

At last, the problem of energy conservation needs to be considered, as Fivel has pointed out [9], the collapse
¯h
formula τc ≈
∆E guarantees the principle of energy conservation, now the above collapse model resulting from
the continual jump of the particle undergoing the quantum jump motion will be also consistent with the principle of
energy conservation, concretely speaking, for any single particle in the state, the energy change during the collapse
process lies within the limit of the uncertainty principle, while for the ensemble of the particles in the state the average
energy change is evidently zero, since the collapse result is one of the energy eigenstates, and the distribution of the
collapse results is just the initial distribution of the energy eigenstates.

Furthermore, we will demonstrate that for a single particle in the state, the energy change during the collapse
process lies within the limit of the uncertainty principle, ﬁrst, during any single jump the collapse critical energy scale
Ep( or the maximum permitted energy change ) and the minimal stay time interval Tp satisﬁes the energy uncertainty
relation Ep = ¯h/Tp, and the principle of energy conservation is naturally satisﬁed; secondly, when considering the
whole collapse process Fivel has demonstrated that the principle of energy conservation is also satisﬁed [9], here we
give some further discussions, since when ∆E < Ep, we have the relation τc ≈
∆E , this means that the
Ep, we
energy change during the collapse process lies within the limit of the uncertainty principle; while when ∆E
Tp, this relation implies that the collapse process happens within the minimum stay time
have τc ≈
interval Tp, namely such superposition states with the energy diﬀerence larger than Ep can not exist at all, thus no
problem of energy conservation is involved for this situation. In one word, the above collapse model and the resulting
collapse formula τc ≈

¯h
∆E is consistent with the principle of energy conservation.

∆E > ¯h

¯h
∆E ≤

¯h
∆E ≤

Ep
∆E ·

Ep
∆E ·

Ep
∆E ·

≥

¯h

VI. THE GENERAL EVOLUTION EQUATION OF THE QUANTUM JUMP MOTION

In the following, we will give a general evolution equation of the quantum jump motion, which can be used to

account for the collapse process of any wave function describing the quantum jump motion.

For simplicity but lose no generality, we consider a one-dimension initial wave function ψ(x), whose spreading size
is L, and divide the whole size of the wave function L into many local Planck cells with size Lp, which are denoted
by number i, the basic local position state of the particle is limited in one of such local cells, then according to the
above analysis, the concrete evolution equation of the quantum jump motion will be essentially one kind of revised
stochastic evolution equation based on Schr¨odinger equation for the wave function, here we adopt the stochastic
diﬀerential equation ( SDE ), it is

dψ(x, t) =

HQψ(x, t)dt +

1
i¯h

1
2

[

δ(x

xN )
ρ(x, t) −

−

1]

∆E(xN , xN )
Ep

ψ(x, t)dt

(21)

−

xN ) is the discrete δ-function, ρ(x, t) =

2, is the measure density, ∆E(xN , xN ) is the total diﬀerence
where δ(x
ψ(x, t)
|
|
of the energy of the particle between the cell containing xN and all other cells xN , xN is a stochastic position variable,
2. In physics, this stochastic diﬀerential equation should be taken
ψ(x, t)
whose distribution is P (xN , t) = ρ(xN , t) =
|
|
as a continuous mathematical description of the discrete evolution equation of the quantum jump motion.

VII. SOME EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCES

Even though we have not directly conﬁrmed the above collapse model up to now, there still exists some experimental
evidences which may support the above collapse model, in fact, these coincidences have strongly implied its validity,
and confuted other collapse models.

The ﬁrst experimental evidence is the gravity-induced CP violations discussed by Fivel, as he analyzed in an elegant
paper [9], the observed magnitude of CP violation in KL meson decay remarkably indicates that the collapse process
4√π,
may happen during the decay and the collapse time satisﬁes the above collapse formula when we assume k

≈

8

while according to Penrose’s formula, the collapse time will be inﬁnite, since the diﬀerence of the gravity self-energy
of the states in the superposition is zero, but this result can hardly account for the bizarre coincidence of the observed
magnitude of CP violation with the above prediction of collapse time; at the same time, the above collapse model may
also provide an economical explanation of the origin of the CP violations, namely all the CP violations just results
from the gravity-induced collapse of the wave function of the particle, which has been also demonstrated from other
perspects [3].

The second experimental evidence comes from the avalanche photodiodes devices used for detecting the particles
in short time intervals, just as Berg has analyzed [5], even if the time resolutions and energy consumption of these
devices can not translate into an immediate estimate of the collapse time, we can still estimate the upper bounds of the
collapse time, his calculation indicates that b = 2Ep/k2∆E
1021, namely the prediction of the above
collapse formula is consistent with the detection property of these measuring devices; on the other hand, according to
Penrose’s formula, the collapse time will be τc = b ¯h
¯h
1021,
∆Eg
thus this result has evidently invalidated Penrose’s formula.

, and the equivalent value of b is b

1017 < 3.8

∆E ≈

1040

3.8

≫

×

≈

≈

×

The third experimental evidence comes from the experimental results about the Ramsey fringes in atomic beam
spectroscopy, according to Berg’s calculations [5], we get the evident relation b = 2Ep/k2∆E
1011,
which indicates that the experiments in atomic beam spectroscopy are also consistent with the above collapse formula.

1028 > 1.35

≈

×

VIII. SOME FURTHER THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS

Although it may be very diﬃcult to formulate a complete theory of quantum gravity on the basis of the quantum
jump motion and resulting collapse process, we can still discuss its direct implications in theory, which will be very
valuable for understanding the nature of quantum gravity.

First, the existence of the quantum jump motion naturally results from the combination of quantum mechanics
and general relativity, and consistent with the well-known gravitional uncertainty relation [2], according to which the
continuous space-time concept can not be properly used within the Planck scale Tp and Lp, the local position state
will be the only proper state for the quantum motion, in fact, this conclusion is also implied by the fact that a particle
with mass larger than Mp = Ep/c2

5gm has a Compton wavelength smaller than its Schwarzschild radius.

Secondly, as Feynman suggested in his Lectures on Gravitation [8], the quantum jump motion just provides the
objective reason that gravity need not be quantized, because when involving gravity the linear Schr¨odinger evolution of
the wave function will be broken, and replaced by the nonlinear stochastic evolution, which, as we have demonstrated,
will result in the immediate collapse of the wave function at the Planck scale Ep.

10−

≈

Thirdly, since the Planck mass Mp is essentially macroscopic, the above collapse model based on the quantum
jump motion can easily explain the apparent instability and collapse of Schr¨odinger cat states in which there is
dispersion of a macroscopic observable, and will be responsible for the transition from the microscopic world to the
macroscopic world, furthermore, the evolution of the quantum jump motion also naturally provides a generalization
of the Schr¨odinger equation that interpolates between linear evolution and collapse, which may unify the descriptions
about the microscopic world and macroscopic world.

Fourthly, as to the above collapse model based on the objective quantum jump motion, there does not exist the
usual tails problem inherent in other dynamical collapse models at all [11] [17] [6] [18] [7] [12], and arithmetic can still
apply to ordinary macroscopic objects [15], since according to our collapse model, the collapse process results from
the quantum jump motion, which is essentially discrete, the continuous stochastic evolution of the wave function is
just an illusion, especially in the last stage of the collapse process, when the particle stays in one of the branches long
enough it will de facto collapse into that branch owing to the limitation of energy conservation, and the ostensible
description—wave function also completely disappears in other branches, while this will never happen if the continuous
wave function is taken as the last objective description of the quantum process, and the tails will survive forever.

At last, the existence of the quantum jump motion will naturally tackle the well-known time problem involved in
formulating a complete theory of quantum gravity [20] [13], since as to the quantum jump motion, the local position
state will be the only proper state, and during a ﬁnite time interval near Tp, let alone at one instant, the particle
can only be limited in a space interval near Lp, namely there does not exist any essential superposition of diﬀerent
positions at all, thus the essential inconsistency of the superposition of diﬀerent space-time in the theory of quantum
gravity will naturally disappear, and the new physical picture based on the quantum jump motion will be that at
any instant the structure of the space-time determined by the ostensible superposition state in quantum mechanics
is deﬁnite or ”classical”, while during a ﬁnite time interval it will be stochastically disturbed by the discontinuous
quantum jump motion of the particle in the superposition state, and this stochastic disturbance picture just reﬂects
the real quantum nature of the space-time and matter.

9

Certainly, the essential nonexistence of the superposition of diﬀerent space-time structure will also invalidate Pen-
rose’s proposal of gravity-induced quantum state reduction [19] [20], even though his start point involving gravity is
undoubtedly right, since as to the quantum jump motion, there does not exist any essential ”fuzziness” of the time
translation, in fact, it has been replaced by the stochastic disturbance of space-time resulting from the quantum jump
motion of the particle, thus his collapse formula τc ≈

¯h
∆E will be essentially improper.

IX. SOME FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT THE EXPERIMENTAL CONFIRMATION

Although some experiments have been presented to conﬁrm the usual dynamical collapse models and gravity-
induced collapse models, it may be very diﬃcult to implement them using present technology, and many eﬀorts need
to be made along this direction, here we will further discuss some possible experiments to conﬁrm our collapse model.
At ﬁrst, we will analyze the general relation between the above collapse process and environment-induced decoher-
ence, since the decoherence process will generally introduce the energy diﬀerence among the corresponding decoherence
branches of the wave function, and further result in the dynamical collapse process according to our collapse model, at
the same time, the decoherence eﬀects will also prevent us from detecting the collapse eﬀects, these two processes are
closely interconnected, through a simple mathematical analysis we can ﬁnd the general relation between the collapse
time τc and decoherence time τd, it is

τc = (

¯hEp
k2 )

1

3 (

τd
γT

2
3

)

≈

107(

τd
γT

2
3

)

where k is Boltzmann constant, γ = 4ε/(1 + ε)2, is the energy transfer factor during a single interaction with the
particles in the environment, ε = Ei/E is the energy ratio, Ei is the energy of the particles in the environment, T is
the temperature of the environment.

From this relation between the collapse time τc and decoherence time τd, we can see that the decoherence process
will generally happen before the collapse process, thus for this situation we can not detect and conﬁrm the existence
of the collapse process; on the other hand, if the temperature of the environment is so high, say when T > 1010, the
collapse process will happen before the decoherence process and can be detected, thus this situation will provide the
possible experimental conﬁrmation of our collapse model.

Secondly, we will further analyze the above possibility to conﬁrm our collapse model, on the one hand, it may exist
everywhere in the universe, say inside the stars, on the other hand, we had better devise a similar experiment in the
earth, as we know, for this situation, in a single interaction the energy transfer will be very large, while the dephasing
eﬀect is smaller than the collapse eﬀect resulting from the increased diﬀerence of energy, here we consider a trapped
neural particle, say a neuron, in a initial superposition state ψ = 1
2) of diﬀerent positions with the same
√2
energy, and let a high-energy neural atom in state ϕ with energy E collide with one of the neuron states, say ψ1,
then the state of the whole system after interaction will be ω = 1
1ϕ1 + ψo
2ϕ2), then the energy diﬀerence between
√2
the neuron states ψo
2 will be approximately 4mnE/ma, and the whole energy diﬀerence in the state ω will
be 8mnE/ma, thus according to our collapse model, this state will collapse into the branch ψo
2ϕ2) after a
collapse time

1ϕ1) or ψo

2 and ψo

1 + ψi

(ψo

(ψi

(22)

(23)

τc = (

ma
8mn

)2 ¯hEp

E2 =

1
16

¯hEp
nv4
m2

where v is the velocity of the collision particle, while the dephasing eﬀect of this process will be very small, since the
mass of the atom is assumed to be very larger than that of the neutron, and the diﬀerence between the states of the
4me/mn, at the same time, we
atom ϕ1 and ϕ2 will be very small, and not change with time, namely < ϕ1|
assume the decoherence eﬀect resulting from the gravitational ﬁeld can also be omitted, thus one of the direct ways
is to keep the last state ω long enough, then we can easily detect the predicted collapse eﬀect, the concrete relation
will be t > mn
16me

From the above relation we can see that, there exists an optimal mass for the collision particle limited by present
technology, if its mass is too large, we can hardly generate higher velocity, then the collapse time will be too long and
it will be very diﬃcult to keep the last state; while if its mass is too small, its energy E will be also too small, and
the collapse time will be also too long.

¯hEp
E2 .

ϕ2 >

−

≈

1

Now, as one example, we let mn/ma = 100 and E = En/100 = 9.3M ev, which means that the velocity of the atom
104s, which is in the level of minutes, so if we can keep the
100s, we can diﬀerentiate the dephasing eﬀect and collapse

is approximately c/100, then we get the collapse time τc ≈
last state of the whole system longer than 4mn/maτc ≈
eﬀect, and conﬁrm the existence of the assumed collapse process.

10

X. CONCLUSIONS

On the whole, we present a concrete collapse model on the basis of the new quantum discontinuous motion, according
to this model, it is the combination of general relativity and quantum mechanics that turns the quantum discontinuous
motion into the quantum jump motion, and further results in the collapse process of the wave function, while the
resulting quantum jump motion just provides the inherent randomness or probability involved in the collapse process.
Furthermore, a crude theoretical model is given to interpret the collapse process quantitatively, and the consistence
between theoretical prediction and experimental evidences is also discussed. At last, we analyze the possibility to
conﬁrm the collapse model using present technology.

Acknowledgments

Thanks for helpful discussions with X.Y.Huang ( Peking University ), A.Jadczyk ( University of Wroclaw ), P.Pearle
( Hamilton College ), F.Selleri ( University di Bari ), Y.Shi ( University of Cambridge ), A.Shimony, A.Suarez ( Center
for Quantum Philosophy ), L.A.Wu ( Institute Of Physics, Academia Sinica ), Dr S.X.Yu ( Institute Of Theoretical
Physics, Academia Sinica ), H.D.Zeh.

[1] Aharonov, Y., Anandan, J. and Vaidman, L. (1993). Meaning of the Wavefunction. Physical Review A, 47, no. 6, 4616-4626.
[2] Adler, R.J., gr-qc/9904026
[3] Ahluwalia,D.V., quant-ph/9901274.
[4] Anandan, J. (1993). Protective measurement and quantum reality. Foundations of Physics Letters, 6, No. 6, 503-532.
[5] Berg, B.A., hep-ph/9609232.
[6] Diosi, L. (1987). A universal master equation for the gravitational violation of quantum mechanics. Phys. Lett. A, 120,

377- 381.

D, 34, 470-491.

313-328.

Press), 84-108.

2277- 2289.

[7] Diosi, L. (1989). Models for universal reduction of macroscopic quantum ﬂuctuations. Phys. Rev. A 40, 1165-1174.
[8] Feynman, R. (1995), Feynman Lectures on Gravitation (edited by B. Hatﬁeld). Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley
[9] Fivel, D. I. (1997), “An Indication From the Magnitude of CP Violations That Gravitation is a Possible Cause of Wave-

Function Collapse”, e-print quant-ph/9710042.

[10] Gao shan. (1998). Interpreting the wave function and its evolution in terms of new motion of particle. (unpublished).
[11] Ghiradi, G. C., Rimini, A. and Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems. Phys. Rev.

[12] Ghiradi, G. C., Grassi R. and Rimini, A. (1990). A. Continuous- spontaneous-reduction model involving gravity. Phys.

Rev. D, 42, 1057-1064.
[13] Isham, C.J., gr-qc/9210011.
[14] Karolyhazy, F., Frenkel, A., and Lukacs, B. (1986), “On the Possible Role of Gravity on the Reduction of the Wavefunction”,
in R. Penrose and C. J. Isham (eds.), Quantum Concepts in Space and Time. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, pp. 109-
128.

[15] Lewis, P. (1997) ”Quantum Mechanics, Orthogonality, and Counting”, The British Journal for Philosophy of Science, 48,

[16] Neumann, John von. (1955). Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton University Press
[17] Pearle, P. (1986). Models of reduction. Quantum Concepts in Space and Time, eds. R. Penrose and C. J. Isham (Clarendon

[18] Pearle, P. (1989). Combining stochastic dynamical state-vector reduction with spontaneous localization. Phys. Rev. A 39,

[19] Penrose, R. (1986). Gravity and state vector reduction. Quantum Concepts in Space and Time, eds. R. Penrose and C. J.

Isham (Clarendon Press), 129-146.

[20] Penrose, R. (1996). On gravity’s role in quantum state reduction. Gen. Rel. and Grav., 28, 581-600.

11

