9
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
0
7
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Identiﬁcation and collapse

Gao Shan
Institute of Quantum Mechanics, 11-10, NO.10 Building, YueTan XiJie DongLi, XiCheng District, Beijing 100045,
P.R.China. Email: gaoshan.iqm@263.net
(June 14, 1999)

We deeply analyze the relation between the identiﬁcation process of the classical deﬁnite states
and collapse process of the measured superposition state of such deﬁnite states, and show that these
two processes are essentially irrelevant, which then provides one possibility to achieve quantum
superluminal communication.

The special role of measurement was ﬁrst stressed by Bohr [1] in his complementarity principle to consistently
interpret the non-classicality of the quantum world, then von Neumann [8] rigorously formulated the measurement
process in his measurement theory involving projection postulate, but the inherent fuzziness in their deﬁnition of
measurement or projection still exists, thus in order to end the inﬁnite spreading of linear superposition, identiﬁcation
of the observer is implicitly resorted by von Neumann [8] and further advocated by Wigner [14] to break the linear
superposition and generate the deﬁnite result, this may be the ﬁrst statement about the relation between identiﬁcation
and collapse, it is simply if identiﬁed then collapse.

But, when facing the problem of quantum cosmology, this relation needs to be greatly revised, since for the state of
the whole universe, no outside measurement device or observer exists, the special role of measurement and identiﬁcation
are essentially deprived, and the collapse process, if exists, must be the own thing of the wave function. The recent
dynamical collapse theories [6] [9] [11] [2] [3] [10] [7] [13] [5]further revise the above relation, according to which the
normal linear evolution and projection process of the wave function are uniﬁed in one revised stochastic Schr¨odinger
equation, the collapse process is just the natural result of such evolution, thus the new relation is whether or not
identiﬁed the collapse process will happen.

Although the collapse process is no longer relevant to the identiﬁcation of the observer, people still implicitly stick
to the orthodox view, which asserts that after the classical deﬁnite state is identiﬁed by the conscious observer, the
collapse process for the superposition of such states must happen, and have still tried to demonstrate that according
to the dynamical collapse theory, our brain just satisﬁes this condition [12], thus it appears that identiﬁcation is
essentially connected with the collapse process again, which is evidently not accounted for by the dynamical collapse
theory itself, and de facto results only from the requirement of the orthodox interpretation of present quantum
theory; on the other hand, the wide acceptance of this orthodox view is also due to its confusion with the following
conclusion, namely when the measurement result of the superposition state is identiﬁed by the conscious observer,
then the collapse process must happen, where the identiﬁcation time denotes the time to identify the deﬁnite result
for the measured superposition state, not for the measured classical deﬁnite state, while this conclusion is reasonable,
since it only means that if the observed result is a deﬁnite result, then the collapse process must happen, on the
contrary, if the identiﬁcation part of the conscious observer is in the superposition state, then no deﬁnite perception
exists, and no deﬁnite result is identiﬁed either.

In the following, we will physically re-analyze the relation between the identiﬁcation and collapse process on the
basis of the dynamical collapse theory without tails problem [5], and show that their combination can result in
an astonishing conclusion, namely quantum superluminal communication can be achieved [4]. First, if the collapse
process of the measured superposition state is completed before the conscious observer identiﬁes the measurement
result, which may result from the entanglement of the measuring device, then the identiﬁcation is indeed irrelevant
to the collapse process, since what he identiﬁes is just a classical deﬁnite state; Secondly, if the collapse process of
the measured superposition state is not completed before the conscious observer identiﬁes the measurement result,
then the identiﬁcation process of the conscious observer will surely inﬂuence the collapse process of the measured
superposition state, especially in an extreme situation, if the conscious observer is the only ”measuring device”, then
the collapse process will be mainly determined by the identiﬁcation process, we will further analyze this situation in
detail.

On the one hand, as to the identiﬁcation process of a conscious observer about a classical deﬁnite state, which is
one of the states in the above measured superposition state, there are mainly two physical properties characterizing
the process, one is the entangled energy to identify the state, the other is the identiﬁcation time after which the result
is identiﬁed, and in general there exists no essential relation between them, but it is reasonable that with the natural

1

selection, in which only the classical deﬁnite states are input to the conscious observer, the entangled energy will turn
to be smaller and smaller, and the identiﬁcation time will turn shorter and shorter.

On the other hand, according to the general dynamical collapse theories, if the entangled energy turns to be small,
then the collapse time will turn to be long, then it is reasonable that with the natural evolution there must appear the
conscious observer, whose collapse time for identifying some superposition state is much longer than his identiﬁcation
time for identifying one of the deﬁnite classical states in the corresponding superposition state, so that the conscious
observer can be conscious of the time diﬀerence of these two processes, then for such conscious observer the collapse
process for the superposition state indeed happens after the relevant classical deﬁnite state is identiﬁed, and it will
be an easy thing to achieve quantum superluminal communication [4], especially this conclusion is irrelevant to the
concrete identiﬁcation theory of the conscious observer.

On the whole, we have shown that the collapse process of the measured superposition state and identiﬁcation
process of the measured classical deﬁnite states in the corresponding superposition state are essentially irrelevant, and
this irrelevance provides one possibility to achieve quantum superluminal communication.

1987

470-491. 1986

1057-1064. 1990

84-108. 1986

2289. 1989

[1] N.Bohr, Nature( London ). 121, 580-590. 1927
[2] L.Diosi, A universal master equation for the gravitational violation of quantum mechanics. Phys. Lett. A, 120, 377- 381.

[3] L.Diosi, Models for universal reduction of macroscopic quantum ﬂuctuations. Phys. Rev. A 40, 1165-1174. 1989
[4] Gao Shan. How to realize quantum superluminal communication? quant-ph/9906116. 1999
[5] Gao shan. The collapse problem can be tackled in terms of new motion of particle. physics/9907002. 1999
[6] G.C.Ghiradi, A.Rimini, and T.Weber, Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems. Phys. Rev. D, 34,

[7] G.C.Ghiradi, R.Grassi and A.Rimini, A Continuous- spontaneous-reduction model involving gravity. Phys. Rev. D, 42,

[8] John von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1955
[9] P.Pearle, Models of reduction. Quantum Concepts in Space and Time, eds. R. Penrose and C. J. Isham, Clarendon Press,

[10] P.Pearle, Combining stochastic dynamical state-vector reduction with spontaneous localization. Phys. Rev. A 39, 2277-

[11] R.Penrose, Gravity and state vector reduction. Quantum Concepts in Space and Time, eds. R. Penrose and C. J. Isham

(Clarendon Press), 129-146. 1986

[12] R.Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1989.
[13] R.Penrose, On gravity’s role in quantum state reduction. Gen. Rel. and Grav., 28, 581-600. 1996
[14] E.P.Wigner, Symmetries and reﬂections, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 1967

2

