9
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Possibility of Sound Propagation in Vacuums with the
Speed of Light

Robert Lauter
Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Kolloid- und Grenzﬂ¨achenforschung,
Max-Planck Campus, Haus 2, Am M¨uhlenberg 2, 14476 Golm
(Potsdam)

An important question of theoretical physics is whether sound is able
to propagate in vacuums at all and if this is the case, then it must lead
to the reinterpretation of one zero restmass particle which corresponds to
vacuum-sound waves. Taking the electron-neutrino as the corresponding par-
ticle, its observed non-vanishing rest-energy may only appear for neutrino-
propagation inside material media. The idea may also inﬂuence the physics
of dense matter, restricting the maximum speed of sound, both in vacuums
and in matter, to the speed of light.

PACS numbers: 03.30.+p; 14.60.Pq; 43.35.Gk; 97.60.Jd

Introduction:

Since the idea of sound propagation in vacuums is generally rejected, I will
begin by discussing the various reasons for which this idea is not believed by
the great majority of physicists. The most obvious reason is that the trans-
mission of normal acoustic sound waves is, in contrast to electromagnetic
waves, not observed in vacuums. Nevertheless, this is not an argument en-
tirely against sound propagation in vacuums, since sound waves correspond
to zero restmass particles which have to propagate with velocity c in vacu-
ums. Therefore, from the very high ratio of the phase velocity of sound in
vacuums and, for example, in air of approximately 106, one has to expect
negligible transmission of normal acoustic sound waves into vacuums even
when sound propagation in vacuums exists.

The second reason why it is not believed that sound propagates in vac-

1

uums, is that compressionable waves do not exist in vacuums. However,
the criterion compressibility does not determine which thermodynamical pa-
rameter of state is altered during a particular propagation of sonic waves.
Hence, there are some examples of acoustic wave propagation which occur
without altering the pressure, the density, or the volume of the medium.
The most ordinary case is the propagation of transversal sound waves which
occur without altering the volume of the medium. The second example is
the propagation of the so called “second sound” and the third one, the so
called ”zero sound”. The two latter types of acoustic phenomena only occur
inside superﬂuid matter, the ﬁrst of which represents periodic oscillations of
the temperature without altering the pressure (while the density is altered)
while zero sound propagates without altering the density of the medium
(while pressure changes). Thus, in material media, it depends on the actual
physical circumstances inside the medium as to which parameters of state
are changed during sound propagation, and neither changes of pressure or
volume, nor changes in density are necessary preconditions for sound prop-
agation in general. It is therefore doubtful if compressibility is a necessary
property of a medium to permit sound propagation in general.

The third argument against sound propagation in vacuums is the same as
that used during the discussion about the ether-hypothesis in the last century.
Most people, including physicists, could not imagine any wave propagation
without the displacement of particular components (atoms, molecules) inside
a medium. But since there is no doubt that electromagnetic waves propagate
in vacuums without the oscillation of any material medium through which
they are propagating, the same question also has to be asked for acoustic
waves.

In the following investigation I shall ﬁrst derive some basic properties
of vacuum-sound waves from the thermodynamical properties of a vacuum.
This is possible because thermodynamics do not make any restriction con-
cerning the internal structure of matter. Therefore the whole thermodynam-
ics remained true even if matter was a continuum (which we will treat the
vacuum as). Another approach is the investigation of vacuum-sound waves
by means of lattice-theory. Secondly the results of this investigation are com-
pared to the electron-neutrino’s properties, which seem to ﬁt the properties
of vacuum-sound waves.

Investigation of the vacuums properties, concerning sound propagation:

2

The thermodynamical investigation of sound-propagation in vacuums re-
quires at ﬁrst a classical, i.e. non-quantized, deﬁnition of a vacuum. I shall
adopt the deﬁnition of T. H. Boyer [1] who states that a vacuum is a region
of space from which all rest-energy and additionally all thermal radiation
has been removed. This region of empty space still contains the zero-point
energy which comes from the ﬂuctuating ﬁelds of the strong and weak nu-
clear as well as the electromagnetic force, which can not be removed [2].
Thus, propagation of sound in vacuums is considered as occurring at zero K
like zero sound in material media. The above classical deﬁnition of a vacuum
consequently leads to vanishing values for the pressure and the total energy
density of a vacuum, or p → 0 and ǫ → 0. The relativistic relationship due
to the velocity of sound propagation according to Bludman and Ruderman
[3] is:

s = c2 · (
c2

dp
dǫ

)s

with:
cs speed of sound
c speed of light
p pressure
ǫ total energy density (including rest energy)
S entropy.

This equation was derived by replacing the density, ρ, by the energy-density.
This is possible because of the mass-energy equivalence which resulted from
the theory of special relativity. It shows that rest-energy and hence matter,
as a supporting medium, is not a necessary precondition for propagation of
sonic waves in general, hence sound propagation in vacuums is permitted due
to the theory of special relativity. It also shows that cS equals c if, as in the
case of a vacuum, the following equation is fulﬁlled:

According to Bludman and Ruderman [3], Lorentz-invariance imposes no
restriction on the speed of sound in material media (this can also be explained
by the inapplicability of the Lorentz-transformation to zero-restmass parti-
cles, since they have to propagate with velocity c in a vacuum). Thus, the

(
lim
dp→0,dǫ→0

)s = 1

∂p
∂ǫ

3

(1)

(2)

principle of sound propagation in vacuums provides a limiting condition for
the velocity of signal transmission. Bludman’s and Ruderman’s treatment
proved that a material system which became ultrabaric, i.e. p exceeds ǫ,
had to become superluminal before, i.e. dp exceeds dǫ. This is only possible
in the case of one-dimensional pressure-ﬂuctuations, since otherwise p ≤ 1
3ǫ
(the equality holds for a photon-gas). Thus I want to investigate the case
of a one-dimensional photon-gas in order to show that a vacuum which can
be constructed according to the above given deﬁnition will yield p → 0 and
ǫ → 0 while p = ǫ always holds true.

Consider a system of non interacting photons which are moving in par-
allel direction between two ideally reﬂecting surfaces perpendicular to the
direction of the movement of the photons. The pressure on the two plates
can be calculated from the momentum which is applied per time-interval on
the two plates. For one photon this yields:

p pressure
F Force
A surface-area

and:

P momentum
t time

also write:

Since we considered non-interacting photons and ideal reﬂection we can

∆P
∆t
The time which is needed by a photon to return to the same position

F =

(5)

after two reﬂections is:

l, distance between the two plates

(3)

(4)

(6)

p =

F
A

F =

dP
dt

∆t =

2l
c

4

Consequently:

c∆P
2lA
At each reﬂection a photon transfers twice its momentum to a plate, thus:

p =

(7)

E, energy of one particle
V , Volume

For a system of N particles this gives:

p =

=

= ǫ

cP
lA

E
V

p = ǫ =

PN =N
N =1 EN
V

N, number of particles

In this regime the vacuum can be constructed by two approaches. Either the
number of particles approaches zero or the volume approaches inﬁnity. In
both cases p = ǫ always holds true. Thus it is possible to apply thermody-
namical functions to a vacuum. Since p → 0 and dp → 0 in vacuum, sonic
excitations must represent isobaric changes of state, or dp = 0. The heat
which is changed in an isobaric process is the enthalpy, H.

The total diﬀerential of the enthalpy is:

U, internal energy For isobaric changes of state this reduces to:

dH = dU + pdV + V dp

dH = dU + pdV

Because of its Lorentz-invariance, every zero-restmass ﬁeld which propa-
gates in a vacuum must represent isoentropic (or adiabatic) changes of state.
Since p → 0, no work is applied to the vacuum for sonic excitations and since
for adiabatic changes of state:

δW = δQ

5

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

W , work
Q, heat

It follows that:

dH = dU = 0

dU = (

)V dT + (

)T = CV dT + pdV

∂U
∂T

∂U
∂p

and , since p = 0

dU = (

)pdT = CV dT

∂U
∂T

(13)

(14)

(15)

which reproduces the condition that the temperature of a vacuum always
remains zero K. (This means that empty space can be heated up yielding
a thermal, in addition to its zero-point spectrum, hence a vacuum is equiv-
alent to empty space at zero K. Brieﬂy summarising the results obtained
until now, one can conclude that no thermodynamical parameter of state
is changed during sound-propagation in vacuums. This result is obtained
because we used a classical description of a vacuum. Considering quantum-
theory, the particle corresponding to sound waves carries a momentum as
well as energy. The energy is added to a vacuum merely for time-intervals
which are permitted due to the uncertainty-principle while the momentum
of zero restmass particles is a global property of the corresponding wave-ﬁeld
since individual particles are not localizable. But since the corresponding
wave-ﬁeld carries a momentum, a wave of determined internal symmetry
(longitudinal or transversal) would also apply a pressure on the vacuum be-
cause in this case maxima and minima of pressure would have to appear.
Thus we additionally have to assume that the vacuums sonic wave ﬁeld must
be a scalar one.

The theory of wave-propagation in periodic structures (lattices) shows
another property of the vacuum. This theory shows that waves only suﬀer
from dispersion (i.e. the phase-velocity is a function of the energy) when the
wave length is comparable to twice the distance between lattice-points [4].
No dispersion is observed for wavelengths, which are large compared with

6

the distance between lattice-points. Thus, no dispersion for all wavelengths
only agrees with vanishing distances between lattice-points which is generally
known as the continuum-limit. This implies that the vacuums sonic waves
suﬀer from dispersion when they propagate in material media and hence they
obtain a virtual restmass, like photons which propagate inside optical dense
media. Since I want to compare the above derived properties of vacuum-
sound waves to the properties of the electron-neutrino, I want to resume the
obtained results. We have to expect the following properties of vacuum-sound
waves:

• Sound waves correspond to zero-restmass particles which have to prop-

agate with velocity c in a vacuum.

• The corresponding zero-restmass-particle should be emitted only from
matter whose density is high enough to permit sound-propagation near
velocity c inside the material. This restricts emission of vacuum-sound
waves to material of nuclear density. The high energy which is liber-
ated in nuclear processes causes an equivalent short wavelength of the
emitted particles.

• Thus, these sound waves should interact negligibly with matter of nor-
mal density, e.g. air, due to the high ratio of the phase-velocity of
sound propagation in a vacuum and in air of approximately 106 and
because of their very short wavelength which is smaller than double the
lattice-spacings of normal materials.

• Propagation of those sound waves inside material of suitable phase-
velocity should lead to a non-vanishing virtual restmass as in the equiv-
alent case of photons when they propagate through optical dense media.

• The corresponding elementary particle should correspond to a scalar

wave-ﬁeld.

• The corresponding particle should carry no electric charge.

As far as it is known to the author, the electron-neutrino (νe, ¯νe) repre-
sents the unique zero-restmass particle which corresponds to a scalar wave-
ﬁeld and is additionally electrically neutral. Thus we now want to con-
sider this elementary particle as corresponding to the vacuum-sound wave’s

7

zero-restmass particle. Other theoretical evidence which agrees with this as-
sumption represents the description of neutrino-emission in neutron-stars by
statistical physics. Ruderman et al.
[5] showed that below the transition-
temperature of the neutron ﬂuid to the superﬂuid state, pairs of excited
neutron quasiparticles may recombine, resulting in the emission of neutrino-
antineutrino pairs. This process is similar to the phonon emission by recom-
bination of quasiparticles in conventional superconductors and hence any
diﬀerence between the emission of sound-quanta (phonons) and the emission
of neutrino-antineutrino pairs cannot in this case be distinguished.

Furthermore, neutrinos are emitted only from matter of nuclear or even
higher density in which the speed of sound approaches the speed of light.
They also have very short wavelengths due to their generation in high en-
ergetic, nuclear processes (neutrinos are, in a sense, the γ-quanta of sound)
which causes them to be transmitted through materials of normal density.

Actually, there is some discussion as to whether the observed rest-energy
of the electron-neutrino appears only for neutrino-propagation inside matter
or also in a vacuum. A non-vanishing rest-energy of this particle would en-
able it to be transformed into diﬀerent kinds of neutrinos, νµ and ντ [6]. Until
now it is not clear whether this transformation is possible also in a vacuum
or only when the particle propagates in material media [6]. The latter case
is similar to that of photons, since photons also omit no rest-energy when
they propagate in a vacuum but obtain a rest-energy when they propagate
in optical dense media. This leads to the proposal of an experiment which
is, in principle, able to show, whether neutrinos propagate in a vacuum as
zero-restmass particles or as non zero-restmass particles: If neutrinos are
zero-restmass particles when they propagate in a vacuum, a detector which
approaches the sun will recognise an intensity-increase which is exactly pro-
portional to d−2 (d = distance of the detector from the sun).

Conclusion:

Firstly, the possibility of sound-propagation in vacuums implies an important
consequence for the cooling of neutron-stars by neutrino-emission. If neutri-
nos are the corresponding zero-restmass particles to vacuum-sound waves,
a star whose matter remains in a state which approaches the velocity c for
sound propagation is able to emit internal energy of heat by the emission

8

of its acoustic excitations in form of neutrinos. This cooling-mechanism has
to be considered as an important process for the calculation of the stellar
collapse of stars which have exhausted their nuclear fuel.

Secondly, the idea of sound propagation in vacuums distinguishes clearly
between Einstein’s and Lorentz’s classical interpretation of the principle of
relativity. Lorentz’s interpretation that there exists only one distinguished
inertial frame, that one in which the speed of light is isotropical c, permits
the existence of an “ether” [7] (the medium’s properties of empty space)
which according to J. Brandes [7] is every physical property which empty
space has additionally to its volume. Generally it is assumed that there is
no measurable consequence between both theories of gravitation. But since
Lorentz’s attitude allows for the concept of an ether, this concept is really
a necessary consequence of his theory. Thus, the necessary existence of an
ether and hence of sound waves which propagate inside this medium of empty
space, consequently requires the existence of a zero restmass particle which
corresponds to these sonic waves. For this particle, only zero rest-energy
is permitted when it propagates through a vacuum.
If neutrinos can be
interpreted as the corresponding particle, the only measurable consequence
which leads to a decision between Einstein’s and Lorentz’s attitude may be
its rest-energy in vacuums.

Acknowledgement: I wish to thank all my colleagues who contributed to this
paper through engaged discussion.

References:

[1] T. H. Boyer, Scientiﬁc American, 70, (August 1968).
[2] P. Yam, Scientiﬁc American, 54, (December 1997).
[3] S. A. Bludman, M. A. Ruderman, Phys. Rev. 170, 1176 (1968).
[4] L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation in Periodic Structures, (Dover Publica-

tions, 1953) p. 4.

[5] M. Ruderman, E. Flowers, P. Sutherland, Ap.J. 205, 541 (1976).
[6] G. Drexlin, Phys. Bl. 55/2, 25 (1999/2).
[7] J. Brandes, Die relativistischen Paradoxien und Thesen zu Raum und

Zeit: Interpretationen der speziellen und allgemeinen Relativittstheorie,

9

(Verlag relativistischer Interpretationen, 1995) p. 176 ﬀ.

10

