9
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
9
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

c(cid:13) 2000 The American Institute of Physics

to be published in AIP Conference Proceedings of the
Space Technology and Applications International Forum (STAIF-2000)
Conference on Enabling Technology and Required Scientiﬁc Developments for Interstellar Missions
January 30—February 3, 2000, Albuquerque, NM

TOWARD AN INTERSTELLAR MISSION:
ZEROING IN ON THE ZERO-POINT-FIELD INERTIA RESONANCE

Bernhard Haisch1 and Alfonso Rueda2

1Solar & Astrophysics Laboratory, Lockheed Martin, L9-41, B252, 3251 Hanover St., Palo Alto, CA 94304
2Dept. of Electrical Eng. and Dept. of Physics & Astronomy, California State Univ., Long Beach, CA 90840

1haisch@starspot.com 2arueda@csulb.edu

Abstract. While still an admittedly remote possibility, the concept of an interstellar mission has
become a legitimate topic for scientiﬁc discussion as evidenced by several recent NASA activities and
programs. One approach is to extrapolate present-day technologies by orders of magnitude; the other
is to ﬁnd new regimes in physics and to search for possible new laws of physics. Recent work on
the zero-point ﬁeld (ZPF), or electromagnetic quantum vacuum, is promising in regard to the latter,
especially concerning the possibility that the inertia of matter may, at least in part, be attributed
to interaction between the quarks and electrons in matter and the ZPF. A NASA-funded study
(independent of the BPP program) of this concept has been underway since 1996 at the Lockheed
Martin Advanced Technology Center in Palo Alto and the California State University at Long Beach.
We report on a new development resulting from this eﬀort: that for the speciﬁc case of the electron, a
resonance for the inertia-generating process at the Compton frequency would simultaneously explain
both the inertial mass of the electron and the de Broglie wavelength of a moving electron as ﬁrst
measured by Davisson and Germer in 1927. This line of investigation is leading to very suggestive
connections between electrodynamics, inertia, gravitation and the wave nature of matter.

BACKGROUND

Although at this time there are no known or plausible technologies which would make interstellar travel
possible, the concept of an interstellar mission has recently started to become a legitimate topic for scientiﬁc
discussion. In July 1996 NASA formally established a Breakthrough Propulsion Physics (BPP) Program.
The initiation of a program operating under the auspices of NASA provides a forum for ideas which are
required to be both visionary and credible. This approach was designed by program manager Marc Millis to
provide a valuable and necessary ﬁlter for ideas and their proponents. The ﬁrst BPP activity was a workshop
held in August 1997 to carry out an initial survey of concepts; this is now available as a NASA conference
proceedings (NASA/CP—1999-208694). Following additional funding, the BPP program issued a NASA
Research Announcement (NRA) in November 1998 soliciting proposals. Out of 60 submissions, six studies
were selected for funding.

Three other events relevant to interstellar exploration but not directly connected with the BPP program have
also taken place. In February 1998, the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) hosted a four-day workshop
on “Physics for the Third Millenium” directed by Ron Koczor of the MSFC Space Science Laboratory. In
July 1998 a four-day workshop on “Robotic Interstellar Exploration in the Next Century” sponsored by the
Advanced Concepts Oﬃce at JPL and the NASA Oﬃce of Space Science was held at Caltech. In Septem-
ber 1998 an Independent Review Panel was convened to assess the NASA Space Transportation Research
Program (STRP). The STRP supports such areas of investigation as ﬁssion- and fusion-based advanced
propulsion and even a serious attempt to replicate a claimed “Delta-g Gravity Modiﬁcation Experiment.”
A report was issued in January 1999 entitled: “Ad Astra per Aspera: Reaching for the Stars.”

1

The report had the following to say about the Delta-g Gravity Modiﬁcation Experiment:

An experimental demonstration of gravity modiﬁcation, regardless of how minute, would be
of extraordinary signiﬁcance. The Delta-g experiments now being carried out at MSFC are an
attempt to duplicate a claimed anomalous weight loss of up to two percent in objects of various
compositions suspended above a rotating 12-inch diameter Type II ceramic superconductor. This
apparent phenomenon was discovered by accident during superconducting experiments by a Russian
scientist, Dr. Eugene Podkletnov, then working at Tampere University in Finland. Initial results of
the MSFC replication have been published in Physica C, 281, 260, 1997. As of November 1998 the
group, led by David Noever and Ron Koczor, had made a 12-inch YBCO disk that survived pressing
and heat treating in one piece. This is now being characterized and cut up to do mechanical testing.
The next step is to make a 2-layer disk of the sort used by Podkletnov.

The review committee was impressed with the high quality of the researchers and the care-
ful and methodical approach. We believe that this research is a prime candidate for continued
STR support and urge that funding is adequate to permit a deﬁnitive replication to be carried to
completion.”

In all of these activities (in which the ﬁrst author participated) it became clear that there are two approaches
to conceptualizing an interstellar mission. The ﬁrst is to extrapolate certain relevant present-day technologies
by orders of magnitude and then see what possibilities might emerge. One example — discussed at the
Caltech workshop — would be a craft propelled by a laser-pushed lightsail. . . but this would require a 1000
km-diameter sail and a 10 km-diameter lens having an open-loop pointing capability of 10−5 arcsec (given
a feedback time of years): quite a formidable challenge!

Another “known technology pushed to the limit” example is based on production and storage of huge amounts
of anti-matter. This makes a good example of overwhelming technical diﬃculties in pushing present-day
technology. Based on energy arguments alone (i.e. ignoring the issue of speciﬁc impulse) one can achieve a
speed of 0.1c by annihilating 0.5 percent of the mass of a starship; this is simply calculated by equating the
ﬁnal kinetic energy of the starship, msv2/2, where v = 0.1c, to the rest energy of the propellant, mpc2, a good
approximation in this regime. It would take an equal amount of energy to stop, and similarly for the return
to Earth. Under perfectly ideal conditions then, one percent of the mass of the starship in antimatter and
one percent in ordinary matter would, in principle, suﬃce as propellant. One hundred percent eﬃciency for
conversion of rest mass energy into kinetic energy is out of the question. Let us take an optimistic 10 percent.
This means that for a starship as modest as the space shuttle in size — about 100 tons, hardly adequate for
a century-long out and back mission to Alpha Centauri — one would require 10 tons of antimatter.

The manufacture of antiprotons is extremely ineﬃcient. Techniques for creating antiprotons at CERN require
approximately two and one-half million protons each accelerated to an energy of 26 GeV to create a single
antiproton. This amounts to an energy eﬃciency of 3 × 10−8. This is further reduced by a factor of 20 or so
for the eﬃciency of the proton accelerator, leaving a net eﬃciency of perhaps 1.5 × 10−9, i.e. about one part
in a billion! At a cost of 5 cents per kilowatt-hour of electricity the cost of 10 tons of antiprotons would be
1.4×1021 dollars. A good way to imagine this is to say that it represents the total current U. S. federal budget
(app. $1.2 trillion per year) spent every year for the next 1.2 billion years (cf. M. R. LaPointe, NASA SBIR
Phase I Final Report for contract NAS8-98109). Other technological extrapolations for propulsion discussed
in the various workshops and reviews suﬀer from similar tremendous order-of-magnitude problems. Building
a starship based on extrapolation of known technology might be likened to insisting on building some kind
of sailing ship capable of crossing the Atlantic in 6 hours, when one really has to discover ﬂight to do that.

The second approach is to try to ﬁnd new regimes in physics or perhaps even new laws of physics. When
Alcubierre (1994) published his article, “The Warp Drive: Hyper-fast Travel within General Relativity,”
this aroused considerable enthusiasm since it demonstrated that, in principle, general relativity allowed for
local metric modiﬁcations resulting in expansion of space faster than the speed-of-light. Indeed, as is well
known in cosmology, there is no speed limit to the expansion of space itself; in conventional inﬂationary big
bang theory there must be regions of the Universe beyond our event horizon whose Hubble speed (relative
to us) is greater than c and this in no way conﬂicts with special relativity. Relativity merely forbids motion
through space faster than c. Alcubierre demonstrated that the mathematics of general relativity allowed for

2

the creation of what might be termed a “bubble” of ordinary ﬂat (Minkowski) space — in which a starship
could be situated — that could surf, so to speak, at arbitrarily large speeds on a spacetime distortion, a
faster than light stretching of spacetime; this would indeed be a warp drive. The Alcubierre bubble was soon
burst, though, by Pfenning and Ford (1997) who showed that it would require more energy than that of the
entire Universe to create the extremely warped space necessary. However recently Van den Broeck (1999)
has shown that this energy requirement can be reduced by 32 orders of magnitude via a slight change in the
Alcubierre geometry. While this still leaves us a long way from a feasible interstellar technology, warping
space or creating wormholes are physics possibilities meriting further theoretical exploration.

Another regime of “new physics” is in actuality almost a century old. The concept of an electromagnetic
zero-point ﬁeld was developed by, among others, Planck, Einstein and Nernst. If an energetic sea of elec-
tromagnetic ﬂuctuations comprising the electromagnetic quantum vacuum ﬁlls the Universe — for reasons
discussed below — then this suggests the possibility of generating propulsive forces or extracting energy
anywhere in space. Even more intriguing possibilities are opened by the linked proposed concepts that grav-
itation and inertia may originate in the zero-point ﬁeld. If both gravitation and inertia are manifestations of
the vacuum medium and in particular of its electromagnetic component, the ZPF, they can be treated by the
techniques of electrodynamics, and perhaps they can be manipulated. The concept of gravity manipulation
has been a staple of science ﬁction, but in fact inertia manipulation would be even more far reaching. As
exciting as it would be to reduce the (gravitational) weight of a launch vehicle to zero, this would merely set if
free from the gravitational potential well of the Earth and of the Sun. The problem of adding kinetic energy
to reach high interstellar velocities would remain. . . unless one can modify inertia. Modiﬁcation of inertia
would (a) reduce energy requirements to attain a given velocity and (b) possibly allow greatly enhanced
accelerations. The latter would open many possibilities since it would be far more eﬃcient to have a perhaps
enormously large acceleration device that never has to leave the ground and needs to act over only a short
distance to rapidly impart a huge impulse, slingshotting a starship on its way. (We assume that the inertia
of everything inside the starship would be modiﬁed as well. For the time being we overlook the problem of
deceleration at the end of the journey, it being prudent to tackle only one apparent impossibility at a time.)

The concept of inertia modiﬁcation may forever remain a practical impossibility. However at the moment it
has become a legitimate theoretical possibility. In the following sections we summarize a recently developed
theoretical connection between the ZPF and inertia and report on the discovery that a speciﬁc resonance
frequency is likely to be involved. It is shown that such a resonance would simultaneously oﬀer an explanation
for both the inertia of a particle and the de Broglie wavelength of that particle in motion as ﬁrst measured
for electrons by Davisson and Germer (1927).

THE ELECTROMAGNETIC ZERO-POINT FIELD

The necessary existence of an electromagnetic zero-point ﬁeld can be shown from consideration of elementary
quantum mechanics. The Heisenberg uncertainty relation tells us that a harmonic oscillator must have a
minimum energy of ¯hω/2, where ¯h is the Planck constant divided by 2π and ω is the oscillation frequency
in units of radians per second. (Expressed in cycles per second, Hz, this minimum energy is hν/2.) This
is the zero-point energy of a harmonic oscillator, the derivation of which is a standard example in many
introductory quantum textbooks.

The electromagnetic ﬁeld is subject to a similar quantization: this is done by “the association of a quantum-
mechanical harmonic oscillator with each mode of the radiation ﬁeld” (cf. Loudon 1983). The same hν/2
zero-point energy is found in each mode of the ﬁeld, where a mode of the ﬁeld can be thought of as a plane
wave speciﬁed by its frequency (ν), directional propagation vector (ˆk), and one of two polarization states
(σ). Summing up over all plane waves one arrives at the zero-point energy density for the electromagnetic
ﬁeld,

ρZP (ν) =

νc

4πhν3
c3

Z
0

dν ,

(1)

where νc is a presumed high-frequency cutoﬀ, often taken to be the Planck frequency, νP = (c5/G¯h)1/2 =
1.9 × 1043 Hz. (See the appendix for a brief discussion of the Planck frequency). With this assumed cutoﬀ,
the energy density becomes the same (within a factor of 2π2) as the maximum energy density that spacetime

3

can sustain: with νc = νP , the ZPF energy density is ρZP = 2π2c7/G2¯h. This is on the order of 10116 ergs
cm−3 s−1. The term “ZPE” is often used to refer to this electromagnetic energy of the zero-point ﬂuctuations
of the quantum vacuum. Note that the strong and weak interactions also have associated zero-point energies.
These should also contribute to inertia. Their exact contributions remain to be determined since we have yet
to consider these in the present context. For now we restrict ourselves to the electromagnetic contribution.

Can one take seriously the concept that the entire Universe is ﬁlled with a background sea of electromagnetic
zero-point energy that is nearly 100 orders of magnitude beyond the energy equivalent of ordinary matter
density? The concept is inherently no more unreasonable in modern physics that that of the vast Dirac
sea of negative energy anti-particles. Moreover the derivation of the zero-point energy from the Heisenberg
uncertainty relation and the counting of modes is so elementary that it becomes convoluted to try to simply
argue away the ZPF. The objection that most immediately arises is a cosmological one: that the enormous
energy density of the ZPF should, by general relativity, curve the entire Universe into a ball orders of
magnitude smaller than the nucleus of an atom. Our contention is that the ZPF plays a key role in giving
rise to the inertia of matter. If that proves to be the case, the principle of equivalence will require that
the ZPF be involved in giving rise to gravitation. This at least puts the spacetime-curvature objection in
abeyance: in a self-consistent ZPF-based theory of inertia and gravitation one can no longer naively attribute
a spacetime curving property to the energy density of the ZPF itself (Sakharov, 1968; Misner, Thorne and
Wheeler, 1973; Puthoﬀ, 1989; Haisch and Rueda, 1997; Puthoﬀ, 1999).

One might try taking the position that the zero-point energy must be merely a mathematical artifact of
theory. It is sometimes argued, for example, that the zero-point energy is merely equivalent to an arbitrary
additive potential energy constant. Indeed, the potential energy at the surface of the earth can take on any
arbitrary value, but the falling of an object clearly demonstrates the reality of a potential energy ﬁeld, the
gradient of which is equal to a force. No one would argue that there is no such thing as potential energy
simply because it has no well-deﬁned absolute value. Similarly, gradients of the zero-point energy manifest
as measurable Casimir forces, which indicates the reality of this sea of energy as well. Unlike the potential
energy, however, the zero-point energy is not a ﬂoating value with no intrinsically deﬁned reference level.
On the contrary, the summation of modes tells us precisely how much energy each mode must contribute to
this ﬁeld, and that energy density must be present unless something else in nature conspires to cancel it.

Another argument for the physical reality of zero-point ﬂuctuations emerges from experiments in cavity
quantum electrodynamics involving suppression of spontaneous emission. As Haroche and Raimond (1993)
explain:

These experiments indicate a counterintuitive phenomenon that might be called “no-photon
interference.” In short, the cavity prevents an atom from emitting a photon because that photon
would have interfered destructively with itself had it ever existed. But this begs a philosophical
question: How can the photon “know,” even before being emitted, whether the cavity is the right
or wrong size?

The answer is that spontaneous emission can be interpreted as stimulated emission by the ZPF, and that, as
in the Casimir force experiments, ZPF modes can be suppressed, resulting in no vacuum-stimulated emission,
and hence no “spontaneous” emission (McCrea, 1986).

The Casimir force attributable to the ZPF has now been well measured, the agreement between theory and
experiment being approximately ﬁve percent over the measured range (Lamoreaux, 1997). Perhaps some
variation on the Casimir cavity conﬁguration of matter could one day be devised that will yield a diﬀerent
force on one side than on the other of some device, thus providing in eﬀect a ZPF-sail for propulsion through
interstellar space.

Independent of whether a propulsive force may be generated from the ZPF is the question of whether energy
can be extracted from the ZPF. This was ﬁrst considered — and found to be a possibility in theory — in
a thought experiment published by Forward (1984). Subsequently Cole and Puthoﬀ (1993) analyzed the
thermodynamics of zero-point energy extraction in some detail and concluded that, in principle, no laws
of thermodynamics are violated by this. There is the possibility that nature is already tapping zero-point
energy in the form of very high energy cosmic rays and perhaps in the formation of the sheet and void
structure of clusters of galaxies (Rueda, Haisch and Cole, 1995). Another very useful overview is the USAF

4

Report by Forward (1996) and also the discussion of force generation and energy extraction in Haisch and
Rueda (1999).

THE INERTIA RESONANCE AND THE DE BROGLIE WAVELENGTH

Can the inertia of matter be modiﬁed? In 1994 we, together with H. Puthoﬀ, published an analysis using the
techniques of stochastic electrodynamics in which Newton’s equation of motion, F = ma, was derived from
the electrodynamics of the ZPF (Haisch, Rueda and Puthoﬀ [HRP], 1994). In this view the inertia of matter
is reinterpreted as an electromagnetic reaction force. A NASA-funded research eﬀort at Lockheed Martin
in Palo Alto and California State University in Long Beach recently led to a new analysis that succeeded
in deriving both the Newtonian equation of motion, F = ma, and the relativistic form of the equation of
motion, F = dP/dτ , from Maxwell’s equations as applied to the ZPF (Rueda & Haisch, 1998a; 1998b). This
extension from classical to relativistic mechanics increases conﬁdence in the validity of the hypothesis that
the inertia of matter is indeed an eﬀect originating in the ZPF of the quantum vacuum. Overviews of these
concepts may be found in the previous STAIF proceedings and other conference proceedings (Haisch and
Rueda, 1999; Haisch, Rueda and Puthoﬀ, 1998; Haisch and Rueda, 1998; additional articles are posted or
linked at http://www.jse.com/haisch/zpf.html).

In the HRP analysis of 1994 it appeared that the crucial interaction between the ZPF and the quarks and
electrons constituting matter must be concentrated near the Planck frequency. As discussed in the previous
section (and in the appendix), the Planck frequency is the highest possible frequency in nature and is the
presumed cutoﬀ of the ZPF spectrum: ν = (c5/G¯h)1/2 ∼ 1.9 × 1043 Hz. In contrast, the new approach
involves the assumption that the crucial interaction between the quarks and electrons constituting matter
and the ZPF takes place not at the ZPF cutoﬀ, but at a resonance frequency. We have now found evidence
that, for the electron, this resonance must be at its Compton frequency: ν = mec2/h = 1.236 × 1020 Hz.
This is 23 orders of magnitude lower (hence possibly within reach of electromagnetic technology) than the
Planck frequency.

In Rueda and Haisch (1998a, 1998b) we show that from the force associated with the non-zero ZPF mo-
mentum ﬂux (obtained by calculating the Poynting vector) in transit through an accelerating object, the
apparent inertial mass derives from the energy density of the ZPF as follows:

where η(ν) is a scattering parameter (see below).

It was proposed by de Broglie that an elementary particle is associated with a localized wave whose frequency
is the Compton frequency, yielding the Einstein-de Broglie equation:

mi =

η(ν)ρZP (ν)dν .

V0
c2 Z

hνC = m0c2.

(2)

(3)

As summarized by Hunter (1997): “. . . what we regard as the (inertial) mass of the particle is, according to
de Broglie’s proposal, simply the vibrational energy (divided by c2) of a localized oscillating ﬁeld (most likely
the electromagnetic ﬁeld). From this standpoint inertial mass is not an elementary property of a particle, but
rather a property derived from the localized oscillation of the (electromagnetic) ﬁeld. De Broglie described
this equivalence between mass and the energy of oscillational motion. . . as ‘une grande loi de la Nature’ (a
great law of nature).” The rest mass m0 is simply mi in its rest frame. What de Broglie was proposing is that
the left-hand side of eqn. (3) corresponds to physical reality; the right-hand side is in a sense bookkeeping,
deﬁning the concept of rest mass.

De Broglie assumed that his wave at the Compton frequency originates in the particle itself. An alternative
interpretation is that a particle “is tuned to a wave originating in the high-frequency modes of the zero-point
background ﬁeld” (de la Pe˜na and Cetto, 1996; Kracklauer, 1992). The de Broglie oscillation would thus be
due to a resonant interaction with the ZPF, presumably the same resonance that is responsible for creating
inertial mass as in eq. (2). In other words, the ZPF would be driving this νC oscillation.

5

We therefore suggest that an elementary charge driven to oscillate at the Compton frequency by the ZPF
may be the physical basis of the η(ν) scattering parameter in eqn. (2). For the case of the electron, this
would imply that η(ν) is a sharply-peaked resonance at the frequency, expressed in terms of energy, hν = 512
keV. The inertial mass of the electron would physically be the reaction force due to resonance scattering of
the ZPF at that frequency.

This leads to a surprising corollary. It can be shown (Haisch and Rueda, 1999; de la Pe˜na and Cetto, 1996;
Kracklauer, 1992) that as viewed from a laboratory frame, the standing wave at the Compton frequency
in the electron frame transforms into a traveling wave having the de Broglie wavelength, λB = h/p, for
a moving electron. The wave nature of the moving electron appears to be basically due to Doppler shifts
associated with its Einstein-de Broglie resonance frequency.

The identiﬁcation of the resonance frequency with the Compton frequency would solve a fundamental mystery
of quantum mechanics: Why does a moving particle exhibit a de Broglie wavelength of λ = h/p? It can be
shown that if the electron acquires its mass because it is driven to oscillate at its Compton frequency by
the ZPF, then when viewed from a moving frame, a beat frequency arises whose wavelength is precisely the
de Broglie wavelength (Haisch & Rueda, 1999; de la Pe˜na & Cetto, 1996). Thus within the context of the
zero-point ﬁeld inertia hypothesis we can simultaneously and suggestively explain both the origin of mass
and the wave nature of matter as ZPF phenomena. Furthermore, the relative accessibility of the Compton
frequency of the electron encourages us that an experiment to demonstrate mass modiﬁcation of the electron
by techniques of cavity quantum electrodynamics may soon be feasible.

We acknowledge support of NASA contract NASW-5050 for this work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

Alcubierre, M., “The Warp Drive: Hyper-fast Travel Within General Relativity,” Class. Quantum Grav.,

Cole, D.C. and Puthoﬀ, H.E., “Extracting Energy and Heat from the Vacuum,” Phys. Rev. E, 48, 1562

Davisson, C.J. and Germer, L.H., “Diﬀraction of Electrons by a Crystal of Nickel,” Phys. Rev, 30, 705

11, L73 (1994).

(1993).

(1927).

de la Pe˜na, L. and Cetto, A.M., The Quantum Dice: An Introduction to Stochastic Electrodynamics, (Kluwer

Acad. Publ.), (1996).

Phys. Rev. B, 30, 1700 (1984).

Forward, R., “Extracting electrical Energy from the Vacuum by Cohesion of Charged Foliated Conductors,”

Forward, R., “Mass Modiﬁcation Experiment Deﬁnition Study,” J. of Scientiﬁc Exploration, 10, 325 (1996).
Haisch, B. and Rueda, A., “Reply to Michel’s ‘Comment on Zero-Point Fluctuations and the Cosmological

Constant’,” Astrophys. J., 488, 563 (1997).

Haisch, B., and Rueda, A., “The Zero-Point Field and Inertia,” in Causality and Locality in Modern Physics,
(G. Hunter, S. Jeﬀers and J.-P. Viger, eds.), (Kluwer Acad. Publ.), 171, (1998). xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-
qc/9908057

Haisch, B., and Rueda, A., “Progress in Establishing a Connection Between the Electromagnetic Zero-Point
Field and Inertia.” AIP Conference Proceedings No. 458, p. 988 (1999) xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9906069
Haisch B. and Rueda, A., “On the Relation Between Zero-point-ﬁeld-induced Inertial Mass and the Einstein-

de Broglie Formula.” Phys. Lett. A, in press (2000) xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9906084

Haisch, B., Rueda, A. and Puthoﬀ, H.E. (HRP), “Inertia as a Zero-point-ﬁeld Lorentz Force,” Phys. Rev.

A, 49, 678 (1994).

(1993)

Haisch, B., Rueda, A. and Puthoﬀ, H.E, “Advances in the Proposed Electromagnetic Zero-point-ﬁeld Theory

of Inertia.” AIAA 98-3143 (1998) xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9807023

Haroche, S. and Raimond, J.M., “Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics,” Scientiﬁc American, 268, No. 4, 54

Hunter, G., “Electrons and photons as soliton waves,” in The Present Status of the Quantum Theory of

Light, (S. Jeﬀers et al. eds.), (Kluwer Acad. Publ.), pp. 37–44 (1997).

6

Kracklauer, A.F., “An Intuitive Paradigm for Quantum Mechanics.” Physics Essays, 5, 226 (1992).
Lamoreaux, S.K., “Demonstration of the Casimir Force in the 0.6 to 6 µm Range,” Phys. Rev. Letters, 78,

5 (1997)

(1997).

Loudon, R., The Quantum Theory of Light, chap. 1, (Oxford: Clarendon Press) (1983).
McCrea, W., “Time, Vacuum and Cosmos,” Q. J. Royal Astr. Soc., 27, 137 (1986).
Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S. and Wheeler, J.A., Gravitation, (Freeman and Co.), pp. 426–428 (1973).
Pfenning, M.J. and Ford, L.H., “The Unphysical Nature of ‘Warp Drive’,” Class. Quant.Grav., 14, 1743-1751

Puthoﬀ, H.E., “Gravity as a Zero-point-ﬂuctuation Force,” Phys. Rev. A, 39, 2333 (1989).
Puthoﬀ, H.E., “Polarizable-Vacuum (PV) Representation of General Relativity,” preprint, (1999).

xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9909037

Rueda, A. and Haisch, B., “Inertia as Reaction of the Vacuum to Accelerated Motion,” Physics Lett. A,

240, 115 (1998a). xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9802031

Rueda, A. and Haisch, B., “Contribution to Inertial Mass by Reaction of the Vacuum to Accelerated Motion,”

Foundations of Physics, 28, 1057 (1998b). xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/9802030

Rueda, A., Haisch, B. and Cole, D. C., “Vacuum Zero-Point Field Pressure Instability in Astrophysical

Plasmas and the Formation of Cosmic Voids,” Astrophys. J., 445, 7 (1995).

Sakharov, A.D., “Vacuum Quantum Fluctuations in Curved Space and the Theory of Gravitation,” Sov.

Van den Broeck, C. “A ‘warp drive’ with Reasonable Total Energy Requirements,” preprint, (1999)

Phys.-Doklady 12, No. 11, 1040 (1968).

xxx.lanl.gov/abs/gr-qc/9905084

APPENDIX: THE PLANCK FREQUENCY

The Planck frequency is assumed to be the highest frequency that spacetime itself can sustain. This can be
understood from simple, semi-classical arguments by combining the constraints of relativity with those of
quantum mechanics. In a circular orbit, the acceleration is v2/r, which is obtained from a gravitational force
per unit mass of Gm/r2. Letting v → c, one obtains a maximum acceleration of c2/r = Gm/r2, from which
one derives the Schwarzschild radius for a given mass: rS = Gm/c2. The Heisenberg uncertainty relation
speciﬁes that ∆x∆p ≥ ¯h, and letting ∆p → mc one arrives at the Compton radius: rC = ¯h/mc, which
speciﬁes the minimum quantum size for an object of mass m. Equating the minimum quantum size for an
object of mass m with the Schwarzschild radius for that object one arrives at a mass: mP = (c¯h/G)1/2 which
is the Planck mass, i.e. 2.2 × 10−5 g. The Compton radius of the Planck mass is called the Planck length:
lp = (G¯h/c3)1/2, i.e. 1.6 × 10−33 cm. One can think of this as follows: Due to the uncertainty relation,
a Planck mass cannot be compressed into a volume smaller than the cube of the Planck length. A Planck
mass, mP , in a Planck volume, l3
P , is the maximum density of matter that can exist without being unstable
to collapsing spacetime ﬂuctuations: ρP,m = c5/G2¯h or as an energy density, ρP,e = c7/G2¯h. The speed-of-
light limit constrains the fastest oscillation that spacetime can sustain to be νP = c/lP = (c5/G¯h)1/2, i.e.
1.9 × 1043 Hz.

7

