Interaction of the Past
of parallel universes

Alexander K. Guts

Department of Mathematics, Omsk State University
644077 Omsk-77 RUSSIA

E-mail: guts@univer.omsk.su

October 26, 1999

ABSTRACT

We constructed a model of ﬁve-dimensional Lorentz manifold with foliation of
codimension 1 the leaves of which are four-dimensional space-times. The Past of
these space-times can interact in macroscopic scale by means of large quantum
ﬂuctuations. Hence, it is possible that our Human History consists of ”somebody
else’s” (alien) events.

9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In this article the possibility of interaction of the Past (or Future) in macroscopic
scales of space and time of two diﬀerent universes is analysed. Each universe is
considered as four-dimensional space-time V 4, moreover they are imbedded in ﬁve-
dimensional Lorentz manifold V 5, which shall below name Hyperspace. The space-
time V 4 is absolute world of events. Consequently, from formal standpoints any
point-event of this manifold V 4, regardless of that we refer it to Past, Present or
Future of some observer, is equally available to operate with her. In other words,
modern theory of space-time, rising to Minkowsky, postulates absolute eternity of
the World of events in the sense that all events exist always. Hence, it is possible
interaction of Present with Past and Future as well as Past can interact with Future.
Question is only in that as this is realized. The numerous articles about time machine
show that our statement on the interaction of Present with Past is not fantasy, but
is subject of the scientiﬁc study. In articles [1, 2, 3] we used theory of foliations for
construction one of the possible ways of travel to the Past (Future). Exactly this
theory seems to be useful for decision of problem on interactions ”nearby” universes.
So, it is assumed that manifold V 5 has foliation F of codimension 1, but our

Universe is a leaf F 4

0 in him. Other leaves represent diﬀerent universes.

Consider ﬁve-dimensional manifold that is got by multiplying on IR3 of axial

section of foliation of Reb in the torus S1 × D2 ([4, 468], refer to Pic.1).

Model Hyperspace of Reb with interacting Past

Pic. 1.

1

Our Universe and we as its Observers are not single in this mathematical theory
of Time. In Hyperspace other worlds are also situated. Fix certain spatial section X
in leaf F 4
0 . It represents ”Present”. Similar ”Present” we will ﬁx in other leaves, for
1 which is near to leaf F 4
example, section Y in leaf F 4
0 (see Pic.1). We shall consider
only those universes, i.e.
leaves, which are situated in certain neighborhood of
our Universe and, accordingly, Present of ”somebody else’s” (alien) universes are
situated in suﬃciently small neighborhood of ”Present” of our Universe.

For this model of ﬁve-dimensional Reb Hyperspace it is distinctive that Past of
our Universe and Past of ”someone else” (alien) universe are approached that more
strong, than further from Present will run away past epoches. On Pic. 1 ring is
image of Hyperspace, curly lines are universes, each with its Observers. One line
is our four-dimensional Universe F 4
0 , we are its Observers. Beside we see ”someone
else” (alien) four-dimensional universe F 4
1 with its own observers. Our Present is
point X, Present of ”someone else” universe is a point Y . If we begin a trip to the
Past against of the streem of time, we shall move in our World against the arrow
on line 1 (point X) and coil all more and more on the circle S1. Similarly, travel in
the Past in nearby universe F 4
1 or line 2 (point Y ) is a coiling motion around the
circle S1 along line 2 against the arrow of time. Past of two worlds are approached
in topology of Hyperspace. That can one occur?

For the answer to this question we will use geometrodynamics ideas of Wheeler
which we shall apply to ﬁve-dimensional theory of gravitation. Amplitude of prob-
ability of transition from Universe F 4
1 will represent by means of
Feynman integral over 5-geometries:

0 to universe F 4

< F 4

0 |F 4

1 >=

Dg(5) exp

−

iS
¯h

,

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

F 4
1

ZF 4
0

where

S =

R(5)

−g(5)d5x

c3
8πGT
is action in ﬁve-dimensional Lorentz geometry [6, p.52] with metrics g(5)
AB, moreover T
is a constant with dimensionality [cm], connected with 5-th coordinate (for instance,
it characterizes cyclicity on the ﬁfth coordinate in the Kaluza-Klein theories). From
(1), (2) it follows [5] that (1) is not changed under quantum ﬂuctuations of ﬁve-
dimensional geometries g(5)

AB (A, B = 1, ..., 5):

(2)

q

Z

(1)

(3)

∆g(5) ∼

L∗
L s

T
L0

,

2

where L∗ ∼ 10−33cm is constant of Plank, but L4 × L0 is a size of 5-region of
ﬂuctuations.

Formula (3) means that as soon as Past of universes F 4

1 2 are approached
”suﬃciently close”, quantum ﬂuctuations of metrics begin to change topology and
geometry of two universes; they begin to stick together by means of wormholes; one
will appear the tunnel transition between worlds. This means that at least on the
microscopic scale the Past of these two worlds are indistinguishable.

0 and F 4

Formula (3) is not contradictory with classical four-dimensional formula for quan-

tum ﬂuctuations

∆g(4) ∼

L∗
L

,

(4)

because it was got under assumption

det g(4) ∼ 1 [7].

q

But ﬂuctuations are signiﬁcant on the macroscopic scale too. In fact, suppose
that L ∼ 1 km. This corresponds the time interval ∼ 3 · 10−6 sec. Then, as it
follows from (3), quantum ﬂuctuation of 5-metrics ∆g(5) ∼ 1, if L0 ∼ 10−76T . In
other words, to begin the Past of our Universe and universe F 4
1 to interact by means
of formation of wormholes between them in considered model of Reb Hyperspace,
it is necessary that it was suﬃciently removed from Present. Otherwise, to interact
leaves F 4
1 must powerfully draw together. Herewith one interact spatial
regions of size 1km, and time of interaction is 10−6 sec. For more extensive spatial
regions time of interactions increases. In principle it become possible a transition
between universes meaning exchange of the Past. Past our Universe can contain
events which are not belonging to our History.

0 and F 4

Note that large quantum ﬂuctuation, i.e. those that could arise at large spatial
scale, are essential detail of four-dimensional quantum theory [7]. In ﬁve-dimensional
theory one can be found an universe F which is contained in suﬃciently thin neigh-
borhood of our Universe. It follows from (3) that there exist large quantum ﬂuctu-
ations which are the interactions between Present of our Universe and ”Present” of
universe F . The existence of such interactions is very serious question. It possible
that such interaction at scale L0 < T0, O < T0 < T in ﬁfth dimension are suppressed
by, for example, scale-dependent cosmological term Λ(L, L0) or some external ﬁeld
[7].

Hyperspace of Reb can be a subject of compression of part of ring one border of
which is cylinder S1 and other is cylinder S2 labeled on Pic.1 by means of dotted
line (Pic.1). If S2 tends to points X, Y , then interacting Past will all closer to the
current epoch.

Hyperspace of Reb can be a subject of local compression (Pic.2). Then we shall

have a model of periodic ”strong” interactions of chosen epoches of the Past.

3

Pic. 2.
Model of hyperspace with interacting nearby Past

Wholly it can turn out to be that principal details of explored model situation
will found in the Reality and this has direct relations to the problems in the historic
science, which were open N.A.Morozov, A.T.Fomenko and his co-authors [8]. His-
torical text-books are contradictory, and this is objective Law of Nature [9]. Human
History contains many diﬀerent variants of events. Maybe, one is openned prospect
of building of Multivariant World History of Human Civilization which can conciliate
supporters of traditional and new chronology [10].

References

[1] Guts, A.K. Many-dimensional gravitation and time machine // Izvestiya VUZov.

Physics. 1996, N 2. P.14-19. (Russian).

[2] Guts, A.K. Time Machine as a result of rolling ups of space-time in the spring //
Theoretical and experimental problems an . Thesises of reports IX Russian gravitational
conferences. Part I. – Novgorod, June 24-30, 1996. – Moscow,1996. (Russian).

[3] Guts, A.K. Time machine and foliations // Proceeding of the The Eighth Marcel Gross-
mann Meeting on General Relativity. – Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publ., 1999. Part
A.

[4] Fomenko, A.T., Fuks, D.B. Course of homotopic topology. – Moscow.: Nauka Publ.,

1989. (Russian)

4

[5] Wheeler, J. Ann. of Phys. 1957. V.2. P.604-614, or in book: Wheeler J.Gravitation,

neutrino and Universe. – Moscow: Foreign Lit. Publ, 1962. P.336.

[6] Vladimirov, Yu.S. Dimension of physical space-time and union of interactions. –

Moscow: Moscow State Univ. Publ., 1987. (Russian)

[7] Modanese, G. Virtual dipoles and large ﬂuctuations in quantum gravity // Phys. Lett.

1999. V.B460. P.276-280.

[8] Nosovsky, G.V., Fomenko, A.T. Empire. – Moscow.: Factorial, 1996. (Russian)

[9] Guts, A. K. Restoration of the Past and three Principle of Time. – Los Alamos E-

Preprint physics/9705014. – http://xxx.lanl.gov /abs/physics/9705014

[10] Guts, A.K. True History of Russia. – Omsk: Omsk State Univ. Publ., 1999. 192 p.

(Russian)

5

