About Charge Density Wave
for Electromagnetic Field-Drive

Benoˆıt T. Guay†
Qu´ebec, November 24, 1999

9
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
0
1
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

To generate a propulsive force without propellant and ex-
ternal couplings, it has been shown that two conﬁned macro-
scopic and time-varying charge density waves well separated
in space are needed. Here, some physical conditions will be
proposed to support and maintain these particular collective
modes of charge distributions.

I. INTRODUCTION

Within the framework of classical electrodynamics, it
has been shown [1] how an electromagnetic propulsive
force and, in particular, an electric (conservative) propul-
sive force can be generated without propellent mass and
external couplings by using two conﬁned, time-varying,
neutral and macroscopic charge density waves (CDW).
These CDW own a same symmetry axis, are adequately
separated in space and have a relative temporal phase-
shift. This last one controls the propulsive force’s inten-
sity.

From far ﬁelds point of view, these CDW are able to
induce an asymmetry into the space distribution of the
far ﬁelds momentum variation rate along the symmetry
axis. They can do that because the relative temporal
phase-shift controls the space distribution of construc-
tive and destructive interferences of far ﬁelds produced by
the two CDW [1]. So, this relative temporal phase-shift
controls the asymmetry. When this last one is created,
an electromagnetic propulsive force along the symmetry
axis is generated and applied on both CDW in a same
direction. Such propulsive eﬀect is impossible in statics
because ﬁelds’ interferences can be produced only with
time-varying ﬁelds. Because this propulsive force is gen-
erated by a spatial asymmetry in the (electromagnetic)
ﬁeld, it is a propulsion driven by the electromagnetic ﬁeld
or more simply an electromagnetic ﬁeld-drive (EFD).

In our ﬁrst paper [1] we have used the CDW concept in
a theoretical way. Actually, nothing has been said about
the material or the conductive ﬂuid needed to sustain
a neutral macroscopic charge density wave. The only
thing we have mentioned was this CDW is a longitudi-
nal (i.e. φ direction in cylindrical coordinates) charge
oscillation mode, it has a wave number “n”, it oscillates
at frequency ω and it is pinned (circular standing wave)
inside a ring made with an electrical conductor. In this
simpliﬁed model, we have used two identical planar ﬁli-
form rings with radii R’, placed in vacuum and separated
by a distance D along the z axis. Planes of rings were per-

pendicular to the z axis; the symmetry axis, the thrust
axis. In a more realistic way, rings have a cross section
Ro smaller than D and R’ according to section 4 in [1].
However, we have never mentioned that a relation must
exist (dispersion relation) between n and ω and what is
this relation. Furthermore, what are needed conditions
to support and maintain a time-varying CDW able to
create the desired propulsive eﬀect? Is it possible to use
solid rings? Metallic ones? Or what else? In this work,
we would like to give preliminary and partial answers to
some of those questions.

II. A LONGITUDINAL PLASMA MODE

A time-varying longitudinal CDW involves a time-
varying longitudinal charge separation among opposite
charges.
In that case, there must be a restoring force
among these charges and consequently, this creates a col-
lective oscillation mode (i.e. longitudinal plasma mode)
at plasma frequency ωp [2,3,4,5,6]. So, to sustain a large
amplitude of charge separations in a neutral conductor
or, more generally, in a conductive “ﬂuid” and then sup-
port and maintain sources of large electric ﬁelds, our fre-
quency ω must be close to (at least equal or greater than)
the “resonant” frequency ωp. Thus, we will get an ap-
propriate CDW (n6=0) if each neutral conductive ﬂuid of
our two rings is a neutral plasma.

The other reason to use a ω > ωp is this. In a sense
ωp can be considered as a cut-oﬀ [7]. So, if ω is greater
than this cut-oﬀ, ﬁelds created by one conductive ﬂuid
in a given ring will penetrate deeply inside the conduc-
tive ﬂuid of the other ring to create propulsive eﬀect
throughout the ring’s cross section for non-ﬁliform rings
(i.e. torus for instance). Actually, if ω < ωp ﬁelds gen-
erated by one ring will remain near the surface of the
other; they will be mostly reﬂected by this one and they
will be nearly zero inside of it except to its surface. In
such a case, the thrust’s amplitude will be limited and
restricted to the rings’ surface. In addition, this will in-
crease the probability of cold emission like in a metal
(see below) because ﬁelds must be relatively strong (i.e.
at least about 100kv) to get a good thrust [1]. So, things
like that can reduce the propulsive eﬀect.

According to the model in [1], the value of ω must be in
the range of radio frequency or TV range. Consequently,
our plasma must have a ωp in these ranges too. However,
if n=0 there are no charge separations at all; we have
only a uniform longitudinal current on each ring. In this
last case, we don’t need a longitudinal plasma mode; a

1

neutral conductive ﬂuid with a ωp much larger than ω can
be used. But let’s remember this, if n=0 the propulsive
force has no electric contribution (i.e. no conservative
part), only a magnetic one (i.e. a dissipative part because
radiative) and we know that this last contribution has a
poor eﬃciency according to section 6 in [1].

For our purpose and for now, at least four limits or con-
ditions must be considered in a neutral plasma. The ﬁrst
is related to the collision rate f . Our macroscopic time-
varying CDW is a collective oscillation mode; a longitu-
dinal plasma mode. Collisions break “coherence” among
charges’ motions and then break the collective oscillation
and, the CDW itself can be destroyed. To get collective
oscillations, we must have f ≪ ωp ∼ (e2no/meǫo)1/2 (SI
units) [2,3,4,5,6]; me is the eﬀective electron’s mass, e
the electron’s charge, no the electron density when n=0
(for electronic plasma with heavy positive ions as uniform
background) and ǫo is the vacuum electrical permittivity.
We have to mention that f increases with no and tem-
perature (see below).

The second limit is associated with the wave number
or the wave length of the charge density in a conductive
ﬂuid. For us, this is related to “n”. There is an upper
limit for this wave number. Above this limit, the CDW
cannot oscillate; the damping (i.e. Landau damping [8])
is too strong and thus, CDW does not exist (it’s too “vis-
cous”). In a nondegenerate conductive ﬂuid, like an ion-
ized gas with relatively small density of electrons and ions
for instance, this upper wave number is the Debye wave
−1 ∼ (Te/no)1/2 cm [9,10] (no
number kD given by kD
in cm−3). Te is the electrons’ temperature (in Kelvin); a
measure of their mean kinetic energy. An electron within
−1 cannot move easily (“viscous” area) but outside, it
kD
can. So, if the wave length of our CDW is larger than
−1, the damping won’t exist or it will be weak or quite
kD
weak and then, this CDW will survive and will be able
to oscillate.

In a degenerate neutral conductive ﬂuid like an electron
gas in a solid metal at low temperature (i.e.
low com-
pared to the Fermi energy EF [11,12]), kD is replaced by
the Fermi wave number kF [9]. In that case, the typical
kinetic energy is EF not Te.

In our situation, we need a neutral plasma with ωp ∼
100 MHz (radio frequency as order of magnitude) and
−1 smaller than about 10−2 cm. 10−2 cm is a
a kDorF
lower limit for the wave length of our CDW; a macro-
scopic length scale for which our classical approach in
[1] is certainly correct. With solid alkali metals like Li,
−1
Na, etc. or solid noble metals like Cu, Ag, Au, kF
respects the above condition. For example, solid copper
−1 ∼ 10−8 cm
(Cu) at room temperature (∼ 300K), kF
[13,14]. But the problem with solid metals like alkali (or
noble) is their ωp belong to ultraviolet frequency range
(∼ 1015Hz) [15,16]. The reason for such a big value is
a large no (∼ 1022 cm−3) [16] and a very small eﬀective
mass of charge carrier (i.e. electron). So, solid metals can
bee used only if n = 0 (i.e. uniform currents on rings)
according to above discussion (ω < ωp).

For instance, if n = 0, we could use two metallic and
solid torus (i.e. planar rings with cross section Ro smaller
than D and R’ according to above), ﬁxed apart with dis-
tance D by some adequat isolators and placed in good
vacuum at “room temperature”. However, one possible
problem with metals is the cold emission [17]; when ﬁelds
applied over metallic crystal become relatively strong,
electrons (carriers) can be expelled outside the crystal
by “quantum tunneling”. In that case, the charge’s mo-
mentum of carriers won’t be given to the whole crystal
along the thrust axis so, the momentum transfer eﬃ-
ciency will be diminished and then, the propulsion too.
Furthermore, with metals we will have ω < ωp and, as
mentioned above, this is limitative.

With n 6= 0, we need something else. For instance an
ionized gas; a neutral conductive gas formed by electrons
and ions with a smaller electron density: no ∼ 108 cm−3.
In that case this neutral plasma has a ωp in the range
that we want according to its expression given above.
On the other hand, we want a relatively “cold” plasma
because we wish to satisfy the condition f ≪ ωp and
also because we want to avoid any complications about
plasma conﬁnement (“walls”). For example, let’s con-
sider a temperature Te between 1000K to 10000K. Such
−1 ∼ 10−3 to 10−2
values for Te and no give us a kD
cm according to the above expression so, they give us a
classical plasma (i.e. nondegenerate electrons gas where
classical statistics can be applied) quite similar to the
ionosphere’s one [18]. Actually, at 90km into ionosphere,
collision rate is f ∼ 106Hz and at 300km, f ∼ 103Hz [19].
Such last values respect the preceding inequality between
f and ωp. This doesn’t mean ion species we need must
be the same as the ionosphere’s ones. Best ion species
we need is another issue. But it shows that such a kind
of plasma exist. So, a priori, a neutral ionized gas with
relatively “low”temperature, 103 to 104K, and low elec-
trons density, no ∼ 108 cm−3, (i.e. a cold plasma) could
be a good candidate for our purpose when n 6= 0.

Let’s take an example to get an order of magnitude
of the propulsive force when a cold plasma gas is un-
der consideration. Let us consider a lithium gas with
electrons density no ∼ 108 cm−3 and electrons temper-
ature Te ∼ 5000K. According to above expressions, ωp
−1 ∼ 7×10−3 cm. By simplicity, let’s
∼ 564MHz and kD
imagine all atoms of lithium are ionized such as Li →
Li+ + e−. Atomic weight of Li is about 6.9a.m.u. so
lithium mass density is about: no×6.9×1.66×10−27kg ∼
10−18kg/cm3. (Of course, this doesn’t take into account
the mass of conﬁning “walls”). Mass of Li+ is about
104 times larger than the one of e−. So, ion Li+ is at
rest compared to e−; only electrons move at frequency
ω along φ direction. Now to get an order of magnitude
of the propulsive force, we can use the Coulomb force
expression. Coulomb force is one of main contributions
(conservative part) to the thrust in [1]. So, in these con-
ditions if we consider a small volume of 1cm3 of charges
on each ring (or torus), the force we can get between

2

these small volumes if D = 0.1m (same order of magni-
tude than the one used in [1]) is given approximately by
2e2/4πǫoD2 (cid:1) ∼ 10−10N. This evaluation is
(1cm3)2·(cid:0) no
a maximum one because it doesn’t take into account de-
structive interferences among ﬁelds produced by positive
and negative charges in a same CDW and applied over
charges in the other CDW.

The reason for such a small force is the relatively small
−1 ≪ 10−2 cm
value of no. If we increase no, condition kD
will be always satisﬁed but certainly not ωp ∼ 100MHz.
However, if we use an “ionic plasma” instead of an “elec-
tronic one” as in the above example, we will have ωp ∼
−1 ∼ (Ti/no)1/2 cm where no is
(e2no/miǫo)1/2 and kD
now the ions density, Ti the ions temperature and mi, the
ion mass. Consequently, if no is increased, we will keep
ωp ﬁxed if we take an appropriate ion mass mi larger
than me. Let’s give an example.

Let’s take Li + Cl → Li+ + Cl−.

Ion chlorine Cl−
is about 5 times heavier than ion Li+. Here, mi ≡
mLi = 11.4×10−27kg and Ti ≡ TLi. As before we take
same temperature TLi ∼ 5000K. Now to get the same
plasma frequency; ωp ∼ 564MHz, we must take no ∼
−1 ∼ 6.2×10−5cm and
1.3×1012cm−3. In that case, kD
2e2/4πǫoD2(cid:1) ∼ 3.9×10−2N with the same D
(1cm3)2·(cid:0)no
as before. Here, condition f ≪ ωp is still respected.
We can evaluate f by using its expression [20,21] for
an ideal gas (i.e.
low density and pressure). One has
f ∼ no¯vσi = no(8kBTi/πmi)1/2σi ∼ 641Hz. kB is the
Boltzmann’s constant, σi ≡ σLi ∼ 4π(1˚A)2 is the scat-
tering cross section of lithium ion and ¯v, its mean speed.
Finally, mass density is no(6.9+35.4)×1.66× 10−27kg ∼
9.1×10−14kg/cm3. So, as we can see, the choice of ion
species is quite important.

The neutral plasma gas must be ionized by some exter-
nal source (at the beginning at least) but, because tem-
perature is relatively small, after a speciﬁc time there are
recombinations among electrons and ions (or ions-ions)
and then a radiation (named secondary here) is emitted.
The primary radiation is the one emitted by the longi-
tudinal plasma oscillations of both CDW at frequency ω
>
∼ ωp. Other kinds of secondary radiations can also be
emitted like breaking radiation (bremsstrahlung) [22,23]
and spectral radiation coming from excited atoms (not
ionized). Recombinations among charges imply that a
third limit has to be considered in our neutral plasma.
This limit is given by fr ≪ ωp where fr is the recombina-
tion rate between negative and positive charges. Clearly,
this quantity depends on electrons (or ions) density no
fr in-
and electrons (or ions) temperature Te (or Ti).
creases when temperature decreases because kinetic en-
ergy of opposite charges (i.e. their thermal energy) be-
comes smaller than their potential energy (i.e. mutual
attraction). This is why temperature, on the other hand,
cannot be too small.

III. ANISOTROPIC CONDUCTIVE GAS

According to the model given in [1], charges must be
well conﬁned along the z direction (i.e. the thrust direc-
tion) and along the ρ direction in some restricted regions
(i.e. “ﬁliform” rings). So, some constraints have to ex-
ist to maintain charges in these limited areas along those
directions. These constraints have to ensure also the mo-
mentum transfer from charges to conﬁning “walls”, spe-
cially along z.
In that sense, the conductive ﬂuid (or
gas) must be strongly anisotropic; charges can move eas-
ily along φ but should be nearly “at rest” along z and ρ
directions.

<
∼ kD

Now, to get an appropriate anisotropic conductive gas
(ionic and cold plasma gas), the cross section’s radii Ro of
−1 so, the
a ring (or torus) must be smaller or equal to kD
−1 ∼ 6.2 × 10−5 cm (using pre-
fourth limit is Ro
ceding value of chlorine-lithium gas) so, a “micro-torus”
with a relatively large radii R’. The reason is this. Any
−1, around the heavier ion; the Cl−
charges inside kD
in our previous example, are in “viscous” area. This is
true for Li+ ions and for induced dipoles of the dielectric
“walls” (see below). Consequently, with the above limit,
any relative motions between Cl− and Li+ along z and ρ
are quite well limited and this is true also among Cl− and
dipoles, induced by this ion, inside the internal surface
of the dielectric walls along those directions.

In addition, the wall of this micro-torus must be a good
dielectric. The neutral ionized gas will ﬁll the micro-
torus. The dielectric wall must be transparent to primary
and secondary radiations. This is obvious for primary
ﬁelds according to above; ﬁelds must reach the gas. But
it is also important for the secondary to maintain a ﬁxed
temperature and get and sustain an equilibrium between
ionization and recombination. Furthermore, this dielec-
tric wall must be able to support high mechanical stress
and relatively high temperature.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a well conﬁned neutral ionized gas at
relatively low density and temperature (i.e. a nondegen-
erated conductive gas; a “cold plasma”) is proposed as a
substrate in which a CDW (n 6= 0) can be sustained; the
CDW needed to produce a conservative propulsive force,
according to the model given in our ﬁrst work.

Up to now, cold plasma is the most appropriate mate-
rial to meet conditions given in this paper. But, plasma
stability, plasma conﬁnement, momentum transfer from
accelerated charges to the conﬁning “walls” along the
thrust axis, choice of best ion species and dispersion re-
lation are certainly complicated issues to deal with in the
near-term. In addition, the fourth condition is diﬃcult
to satisfy from a technological point of view now. On
the other hand, as shown in [1], this model (i.e. rings
and the speciﬁc charge and current density distributions

3

used; the CDW) has a poor eﬃciency. For all of these
reasons, modiﬁcations to this model (i.e. to charge dis-
tributions) are needed to get a more eﬃcient and realistic
near-term EFD.

† e-mail address: bguay@interlinx.qc.ca

[1] Guay, B.T., Propulsion Without Propellent Mass;

a Time-Varying Electromagnetic Field Eﬀect,
physics/9908048

[2] Jackson, J.D., Classical Electrodynamics, second ed.,
Wiley and Sons, 1975, chapter 7, p. 288, chapter
10, p. 492.

[3] Jordan, E.C. and Balman, K.G., Electromagnetic
Waves and Radiating Systems, second ed., Prentice-
Hall, 1968, chapter 9, p. 293.

[4] Lorrain, P. et Corson, D.R., Champs et ondes
´electromagn´etiques, ´ed. Armand Colin, Paris, 1979,
chapter 11, p. 506. (French version of: Electromag-
netic Fields and Waves, edited by W.H. Freemann and
Company, U.S.A., 1962, 1970).

[5] Ashcroft, N.W. and Mermin, N.D., Solid State
Physics, 1st ed., Saunders College/HRW, 1976,
chapter 1, p. 18.

[6] Kittel, C., Physique de l’ ´Etat Solide, 5e ´ed., Dunod,
1983, chapter 10, p. 289, (French version of: Introduc-
tion to Solid State Physics, Wiley and Sons, 1976.

[7] ref. [3], chapter 9, p. 295.
[8] ref. [2], chapter 10, pp. 495-496.
[9] ref. [2], chapter 10, p. 494, 497.
[10] ref. [3], chapter 17, pp. 697-698.
[11] ref. [5]. chapter 8, pp. 141-142.
[12] ref. [6], chapter 6, p. 156.
[13] ref. [6], chapter 6, p. 152, table 1.
[14] ref. [5], chapter 2, p. 38, table 2.1.
[15] ref. [5], chapter 1, p. 18.
[16] ref. [6], chapter 10, p. 291.
[17] Yavorski, B. et Detlaf, A., Aide-M´emoire de

Physique, 3e ´ed., Editions Mir, Moscou, 1975, 1984,
pp. 440-441.

[18] Plasma Science Report, Contents and Overview, 1995,

Intro., see ﬁgure S.1,
(http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books
/plasma/contents.html#intro).

[19] ref. [3], chapter 17, p. 670.
[20] Reif, F., Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal
Physics, 1st ed., McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1965, chapter
12 p. 490.

[21] Reichl, L.E., A Modern Course in Statistical Physics, 1st
ed., University of Texas Press, 1980, chapter 13 pp.
457-459.

[22] ref. [17], p. 605.
[23] ref. [2], chapter 15, pp. 708-715.

4

