9
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
2
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Classical approaches to Higgs
mechanism

Assen Kyuldjiev∗

Institute of Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy,
Tzarigradsko chauss´ee 72, Soﬁa 1784, Bulgaria

June 8, 2011

Abstract

The standard approach to Higgs mechanism is based on the ex-
istence of unitary gauge but, unfortunately, it does not come from a
coordinate change in the conﬁguration space of the initial model and
actually deﬁnes a new dynamical system. So, it is a questionable ap-
proach to the problem but it is shown here that the ﬁnal result could
still make sense as a Marsden-Weinstein reduced system. (This reduc-
tion can be seen as completely analogous to the procedure of obtaining
the “centrifugal” potential in the classical Kepler problem.)

It is shown that in the standard linearization approximation of
the Coulomb gauged Higgs model geometrical constraint theory oﬀers
an explanation of the Higgs mechanism because solving of the Gauss
law constraint leads to diﬀerent physical submanifolds which are not
preserved by the action of the (broken) global U(1) group.

∗E-mail: KYULJIEV@INRNE.BAS.BG. Supported by the Bulgarian National Foundation

for Science under grant Φ-610.

1

Despite the phenomenal success of the Standard Model, Higgs mecha-
nism remains yet experimentally unveriﬁed. The current presentation of the
spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) is still not quite convincing. It boils
down to applying change of variables (which a closer inspection reveals not
to be a coordinate change), in order to rearrange the quadratic terms in the
Lagrangian in a form suggesting presence of certain particles and absence
of others. Elimination of dynamics along the action of the global symmetry
group to be broken is done by hand and without justiﬁcation. It would be
interesting to reanalyse the problem from purely classical viewpoint without
appealing to the quantum mystique.

To be concrete we shall concentrate on the Lagrangian analysed in [1] in

its form highlighting “radial-angular” decomposition:

L = −

FµνF µν −

∂µR ∂µR−

e2R2AµAµ+eR2Aµ ∂µθ−

R2∂µθ ∂µθ−V (R2)

1
4

1
2

1
2

1
2

and the corresponding Hamiltonian (when we assume the Coulomb gauge
condition ∇. A = 0) is:

H =

1
R + (∇R)2 + π2
2 hπ2
π2
θ
2R2 + eA0πθ + V (R2)
+

A + (∇ × A)2 − 2 (∇A0)2 + R2(eA − ∇θ)2

i +

(1)

where πR = ∂0R, πA = E, Ek = F0k and πθ = R2(∂0θ − eA0) and (− + + +)
metric signature is assumed.

Most of the treatments of Higgs model make use of the so called unitary

gauge deﬁning eBµ = eAµ − ∂µθ and rewriting the Lagrangian as:

L′ = −

1
4

1
2

FµνF µν −

∂µR ∂µR −

e2R2BµBµ − V (R2).

1
2

Like any Lagrangian, L is a function on a tangent bundle T M and in this
case the conﬁguration space M is the space of potentials Aµ and the ﬁelds
R and θ; while L′ is function on the tangent bundle of the new ﬁeld Bµ and
the ﬁeld R. The mixing of variables on the conﬁguration and tangent space
means that L′ presents a new dynamical system (possibly quite sensible one)
which is not equivalent to the initial one and which cannot be obtained by a
mere coordinate change in the conﬁguration space. The standard explanation
is that after a local gauge transformation the Lagrangian could be rewritten

2

in the new form but, in general, this is not an allowed procedure. A natural
question arises whether there is a more rigorous explanation of this recipe.

The present paper claims that the ﬁnal result coincides with the Marsden-
Weinstein (MW) reduction [2] of the initial dynamical system (and is actually
analogous to the treatment of the classical Kepler problem leading to the
“centrifugal” potential). To remind, when we have a group G with a Lie
algebra G acting on a symplectic manifold P in a (strongly) Hamiltonian
manner and deﬁning a Lie algebra homomorphism, we have a momentum
mapping J : P → G* given by

hJ (p), ai = fa(p) ∀a ∈ G

where fa is the Hamiltonian function of the fundamental vector ﬁeld deﬁned
by the action of a and also satisfying

[fa, fb] = f[a,b] ∀a, b ∈ G
then the MW quotient manifold J −1(µ)/Gµ has a unique symplectic struc-
ture (provided µ is weakly regular value of J and the action of the isotropy
group of µ – Gµ on J −1(µ) is free and proper). This is a powerful method for
obtaining reduced dynamics on a symplectic space starting from symplectic
dynamical system with a symmetry. (We shall skip here any technicalities
like which group actions admit momentum maps, Ad*-equivariance, clean
intersections etc.) In our case the group to be broken U(1) acts as

θ → θ + φ

(2)

and the space J −1(0) is the subspace deﬁned by πθ ≡ −R2B0 = 0. The
group action quotiening of this space amounts to elimination of any residual
θ-dependence. Reducing the Hamiltonian (1) (and assuming that the Gauss
law constraint ∆A0 = eπθ is solved) we obtain the Hamiltonian corresponding
to L′ in the B0 = 0 gauge, in conformity with the standard interpretation.

It is noteworthy to analyse the more general case when we reduce by
a nonzero value µ of the dual algebra G* . The MW quotiening would be
equivalent to ﬁxing πθ = const 6= 0 and again factoring out θ from the phase
space and the Hamiltonian. As a result the initial potential V (x) = −ax+bx2
with a, b > 0 will be modiﬁed by a cx−2 term (with c > 0) and this will lead
to higher values of the Higgs mass without possibility for its vanishing. (This
could also add a new free parameter in possible future experimental testing
of the Higgs mechanism.)

3

This is actually not an explanation why θ-symmetry is spontaneously
broken—this is just a more rigorous procedure for factoring out (θ, πθ) de-
gree of freedom and thus eliminating the movement along θ which would be
the dynamics typical for a massless ﬁeld. It is precisely this movement along
the ﬂat bottom of the potential surface which could lead to a massless (Gold-
stone) ﬁeld. One could still ask what prevents movement in this direction
and hence causing SSB. Being aware that SSB could only exist in systems
with inﬁnite degrees of freedom, one may also wonder where this property is
encoded in the above mentioned procedures.

A rigorous approach to these problems could be found e.g. in [3] where
a structure of Hilbert space sectors (HSS) is found in solutions of nonlin-
ear classical relativistic ﬁeld equations. Each sector is invariant under time
evolution, has a linear structure and is isomorphic to a Hilbert space; and
may be labeled by conserved dynamical charges. Diﬀerent HSS deﬁne “dis-
joint physical worlds” which could be considered as a set of conﬁgurations
which are accessible in a given laboratory starting from a given ground state
conﬁguration. Then any group which maps a HSS into another HSS is spon-
taneously broken and only “stability” groups which map a HSS into itself
would be proper symmetry groups.

Despite the nontriviality of existence of stable linear structures in the set
of solutions of certain nonlinear equations and the possibility to explain in
principle the existence of SSB this approach does not seem very practical.
Another possible route is oﬀered by the use of geometrical constraint theory.
Higgs model is a beautiful example of a constrained system. Lagrangian does
not depend on θ but only on ∂µθ, thus allowing solutions with θ-rotations
but (θ, πθ) degree of freedom remains coupled with the potential Aµ. The
assumption that θ-rotations are frozen (and consequent writing them oﬀ)
obviously seems ungrounded.

In what follows we shall return to our model in the Coulomb gauge. This
case was successfully tackled [4] by linearisation of the equations leading to
massive wave equation for θ. Here we shall be interested not so much in
the (linearised) equations but in the symmetry breaking. We have primary
constraint π0 ≡ ∂L
∂(∂0A0) = 0 and the condition of its preserving gives the
Gauss law constraint equation ∆A0 = eπθ. To be precise, this equation is
not the proper constraint – the submanifolds determined by its solutions will
give the surfaces on which the dynamics will be constrained after factoring
out the (A0, π0) degree of freedom. Obviously, the solutions of the equation

4

are

A0 = G ∗ eπθ + f

where G is a Green function for the Laplacian, ∗ denotes convolution i.e.
g(x−y) h(y) dy and f is any function satisfying ∆f (x, t) =
(g ∗ h)(x) =
0. Solutions of this equation would deﬁne diﬀerent physical submanifolds
labeled by solutions of this equation. After diﬀerentiation we obtain

R

˙A0 = eG ∗ ˙πθ + ˙f = −eG ∗ ∂k(R2Bk) + ˙f

and taking into account that ∂k(R2Bk) = ∆(R2θ) in the linearisation ap-
proximation [4], we have:

˙A0 = eR2θ + ˙f
This shows that we will have diﬀerent dynamics on diﬀerent physical sub-
manifolds because the general form of the “massive wave equation” for θ
would be ✷θ = e2R2θ + e ˙f (as long as linearisation approximation could be
trustworthy). More interestingly, transformations (2) does not act by lifting
from the “conﬁguration space”:

A0 → A0

˙A0 → ˙A0 + eR2φ

and does not preserve the chosen submanifold. Transformation actions of
this kind are not very typical in physics (the standard N¨other theorem, for
example, assumes only lifted transformations ). Thus we have a geometrical
analog of HSS and its origin could be traced to the requirements to the phys-
ical constrained submanifolds in inﬁnite dimensions [5].(In this reference one
could also see how this phenomenon appears in an exactly solvable model.)

Acknowledgements

The author is indebted to Prof. F. Strocchi for an illuminating and inspiring
discussion.

References

[1] P. Higgs, Phys. Rev. 145 (1966) 1156

[2] J. Marsden and A. Weinstein, Rep. Math. Phys. 5 (1974) 121

5

[3] C. Parenti, F. Strocchi and G. Velo, Phys. Lett. B 59 (1975) 157; C.
Parenti, F. Strocchi and G. Velo, Comm. Math. Phys. 53 (1977) 65; F.
Strocchi, SISSA preprint 34/87/FM, Trieste, 1987

[4] J. Bernstein, Rev. Mod. Phys. 46 (1974) 7

[5] A. Kyuldjiev, Phys. Lett. B 293 (1992) 375

6

