0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

8
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
6
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cooling of Particle Beams in Storage Rings

E.G. Bessonov,

Lebedev Physical Institute AS, Moscow, Russia

Old and new cooling methods are discussed in reference to e±, ion and µ± beams.

Abstract

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of particle

beams in storage rings by laser beams
2.1 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of ion beams in storage

rings by broadband lasers

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of electron beams in

storage rings by lasers

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 One-dimensional laser cooling of ion beams

in storage rings

4 Two-dimensional method of cooling of particle

beams in storage rings

5 Two-dimensional method of cooling of ion

beams in storage rings

6 On the ionization cooling of muons in storage rings

7 Laser cooling of ion beams trough the e± pair production.

8 Radiative cooling of e± beams in linear accelerators

9 Conclusion

9 References

10 Appendix 1

11 Appendix 2

1

2

3

4

6

7

8

12

13

14

15

16

17

19

20

1 Introduction

Diﬀerent cooling methods were suggested to decrease the emittances of charged particle
beams in storage rings. Among them methods based on synchrotron radiation damping [1]-
[4], electron cooling [5], laser cooling in traps [6] and in storage rings [7], [8], ionization cooling
[3], [9]-[12] and stochastic cooling [13]. Almost all cooling methods are based on a friction
of particles in external electromagnetic ﬁelds or in media. The friction and corresponding
energy losses are determined by the next processes:

1) the spontaneous emission of the electromagnetic radiation in external ﬁelds produced
by bending magnets, undulators/wigglers, laser beams et al. (radiative reaction force origi-
nating through self-ﬁelds),

2) ionization and excitation of atoms of a target at rest installed on the orbit of the

storage ring,

3) the elastic scattering and the corresponding transfer of the kinetic energy from particles

of a being cooled beam to particles of a co-propagating cold beam of e−, e+ or ions [12],

4) excitation of being cooled ions and emission of photons by these ions through the

inelastic intrabeam scattering [14], [15], [16],

5) the e± pair production by photons of a laser beam in ﬁelds of being cooled ions [17].
Only stochastic method of cooling is not based on a friction. It consists in the individual
observation of particles and acting on them by external control ﬁelds introduced in the
storage ring and correcting theirs trajectories.

A friction originating in a media or in the process of emission (scattering) of photons by
charged particles in external ﬁelds under deﬁnite conditions leads to a damping of amplitudes
of both betatron and phase oscillations of these particles when they are captured in buckets
leads to a three-dimensional cooling of particle beams1. In this case
of storage rings, i.e.
particles of a beam loose theirs momentum. At that the friction force is parallel to the
particle velocity, and therefor momentum losses include both transverse and longitudinal
ones. Longitudinal momentum losses are compensated by a radio frequency accelerating
system of the storage ring.
In time the longitudinal momentum of a particle tends to a
certain equilibrium value as the rate of the momentum loss of the particle is higher/less then
the equilibrium one when the value of this momentum higher/less then the equilibrium one.
The transverse vertical momentum of particles disappears irreversibly.

The transverse radial and longitudinal particle oscillations are dispersion coupled through
energy losses [4]2. Theirs damping rates can be corrected or redistributed by insertion devices
placed at straight sections of storage rings to introduce an additional friction of particles3
and by corresponding correction of lattice parameters of these rings. The damping rates of
both transverse and longitudinal oscillations can be redistributed by coupling transverse and
longitudinal particle oscillations near betatron and synchro-betatron resonances [3].

In the case of emission of particles in a laser wave the radiation friction force appears
together with the laser wave pressure force. Friction force is determined by self-ﬁelds of
the accelerated particles and the pressure force is determined by the electromagnetic ﬁelds

1This conclusion is valid for all possible types of friction processes and was emphasized in some pioneer

papers on damping/cooling (see, e.g. [3, 10]).

2Owing to this coupling radial betatron oscillations can have negative damping rate.
3Undulators, laser beams having in general case non-homogeneous density in the radial direction at the

position of being cooled particle beam, wedge shaped material targets.

2

of the laser wave (average of the vector product of the particle velocity and the magnetic
ﬁeld strength of the laser wave which is not equal to zero when the self-force is taken into
account) [18]. The total averaged force can be directed both in the same, in the transverse
or in the opposite direction relative to the particle velocity. It depends on the direction of
the particle velocity relative to the direction of the wave propagation. We will consider the
relativistic case γ ≫ 1 and conditions corresponding to the interaction angle between vectors
of the particle velocity and the direction of the laser beam propagation θint ≫ 1/γ, where
γ = ε/Mc2 is the relativistic factor of the particle, M particle rest mass, ε the energy of the
particle4. In this case both the radiation friction force and the pressure force are directed in
the opposite site to the particle velocity.

The process of cooling of particle beams based on friction forces has a classical nature
and can be described in the framework of classical electrodynamics. However such data
as atomic and nuclear levels, oscillator strengths, degeneracy parameters and so on which
determine the corresponding laser wavelengths, cross-sections of particle interactions and
friction forces have to be used from quantum mechanics. At the same time the excitation of
longitudinal and transverse oscillations of particles in storage rings has a quantum nature.
In this case the quasi-classical description of excitation of these oscillations can be used [4].
Friction forces can have both non-resonance and resonance nature or can have an energy
threshold (e± pair production, interaction of ions with a broadband laser beam having sharp
frequency edges), the target can overlap the being cooled beam partly, the degree of over-
lapping can depend on time. All these features can be used for cooling. That is why many
methods can be suggested which depend on kind of particles of being cooled particle beam,
theirs energy and so on.

In this paper some peculiarities of one-, two- and three-dimensional cooling methods
based on a friction are discussed in reference to electron, ion and muon storage rings. The
main characteristics of cooling methods (damping time, equilibrium emittance of the cooled
beam) will be presented.

2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of particle

beams in storage rings by laser beams

In the method of the three-dimensional radiative laser cooling of particle beams in buckets of
storage rings the laser beam overlap the particle beam on a part of its orbit. We will consider
a cooling conﬁguration in which a laser beam is colliding head-on with a particle beam in a
dispersion-free straight section of a storage ring. Both the laser beam and the particle beam
are focused to a waist at the center of the storage ring. In limits of this region the particle
beam is aﬀected by a friction force through a scattering of laser photons. Particles lose theirs
energy mainly in the process of backward Compton or Rayleigh scattering of laser photons.
The radiofrequency accelerating systems of storage rings are switched on and compensate
the radiative losses of the particle energy. We assume that the incident laser beam has an
uniform spectral intensity Iω = dIL/dω = IL/∆ωL in the frequency interval ∆ωL centered
around ωL, where IL is the total intensity (power per unit area).

In the case of an ion cooling the electronic transitions of not fully stripped ions or nuclear

4In the case θint < 1/γ the particles will be accelerated by the light pressure force.

3

transitions and broadband laser beam have to be used. When the ion beam has an angular
spread ∆ψ around ψ = 0, and relative energy spread ∆γ around an average value γ, the
full bandwidth required for the incoming laser to interact with all ions simultaneously (to
shorten the damping time of radial betatron oscillations) is (∆ω/ω)L = (∆ψ)2/4 + ∆γ/γ,
where ωL = ωtr/γ(1 + βz), ωtr the resonant transition energy in the rest frame of the ion,
βz = vz/c, vz the longitudinal component of the vector of the particle velocity. In the case of
radiative cooling of electron and positron beams a monochromatic laser beam can be used.
The physics of a damping in this method is similar to a synchrotron radiation damping
originating from a particle emission in bending magnets of storage rings. Diﬀerence is in the
appearance of another regions where the emission of photons takes place, lattice parameters
of these regions and in spectral distributions of emitted (scattered) photons.

Equilibrium emittances of particle beams are determined by a product of a damping
times and rates of excitation of longitudinal or transverse oscillations of particles in the
storage rings. The rate of excitation of particle oscillations is determined by a hardness
and a power of the emitted radiation and by lattice features of the storage ring such as
its global parameter ”momentum compaction factor α” and its local parameter ”dispersion
function” at the regions where the particle emit radiation [4]. By analogy with synchrotron
radiation damping to shorten a bunch length in a storage ring one can reduce α → 0 by
manipulating the ring optics [19, 20]. To shorten the transverse radial emittance one have
to use long dispersion-free straight sections ﬁlled with strong wigglers or laser beams (to
produce fast damping without additional excitation of betatron oscillations).
In the case
of cooling of electron beams the lattice of the storage ring must have large radius arcs
with strongly focused FODO to produce low quanta excitation by synchrotron radiation in
bending magnets of the ring [21]-[23].

2.1 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of ion beams in storage

rings by broadband lasers

In the three-dimensional laser cooling method ion beams are cooled under conditions of
Rayleigh scattering of laser photons when all ions interact with the homogeneous laser beam
simultaneously and independently on theirs energy [24]-[27]. In this case the average cross-
section of the photo-particle interactions σ = πf12reλtr(ω/∆ω)L is larger then the Compton
e/3 ≃ 6.65·10−25 cm2 by about a factor (λtr/re)(ω/∆ω)L,
(Thompson) cross-section σT ≃ 8πr2
which is large, about 106 − 109 for many examples of the practical interest. In the previous
expressions the value f12 is the oscillator strength, re = e2/mc2 the classical electron radius.
Assuming that photon-ion interactions take place in dispersion-free straight sections, the
damping time of horizontal betatron oscillations τx is the same as the vertical one τy, because
a variation in the radiated energy due to a variation in the orbit vanishes. The damping
time of amplitudes of betatron and phase (τǫ) oscillations of ions are

τx = τy =

τǫ

(1 + D)

=

2ε
P

,

(1)

where P = f ∆Nintεls is the average power of the electromagnetic radiation emitted (scat-
tered) by the particle, f the frequency of the particle beam revolution in the storage ring,
∆Nint = (1 + β)IsatlintσD/c¯hωL(1 + D) the number of interactions of a particle with photons
of the laser beam per one collision of the particle with the laser beam, lint the length of the

4

interaction region of the laser and particle beams, λtr = 2πc/ωtr, D = IL/Isat the saturation
parameter, Isat = [g1/4(g1 + g2)](¯hω4
tr/π2c2γγ)(∆ω/ω)L the saturation intensity, g1(g2) are
the degeneracy factor of state 1(2), εls = ¯hωtrγ = (1 + β)¯hωLγγ the average loss of the
particle energy per one event of interaction of the particle with the laser photon.

The expression τǫ in Eq(1) is speciﬁc to the assumption that the spectral intensity of
the laser beam Iω(ω, x, y) is constant inside its bandwidth and inside the area of the laser
beam occupied by the being cooled ion beam5. Moreover we assume that the length of
the ion decay ldec = c2g2βγ/2g1f12reω2
tr is much less then the length of the dispersion-free
straight section [24]-[27]. The length of the ion decay is determined by the spontaneous decay
time τsp = 1/Γ21, where Γ21 = 2g1f12reω2
tr/g2c is the probability of the spontaneous photon
emission of the excited ion or the natural line width ∆ω. Usually the relative natural line
width (∆ω/ω)nat = 4πf12(g1/g2)(re/λtr is less then the line width of a laser beam (∆ω/ω)L
necessary for the three-dimensional ion cooling by broadband laser beams and determined
by the energy and angular spreads of the ion beams. Otherwise the monochromatic laser
beams can be eﬀectively used for the same purpose.

The quantum nature of scattering of laser photons leads to an excitation of betatron and
phase oscillations of particles. The calculation of equilibrium amplitudes is similar to one
for the case of ordinary electron storage rings, except that the spectral-angular probability
distribution of the scattered photons here is given by that of the undulator radiation. We
found that rms relative energy spread of the particle beam at equilibrium is given by [26]

σε
ε

= q1.4(1 + D)¯hωtr/Mc2.

(2)

In the present case, where the interaction takes place in a dispersion-free straight section,
the excitation of both the horizontal and vertical betatron motions are due only to a small
eﬀect that the directions of propagation of emitted photons are not exactly parallel to the
vector of the particle momentum. The equilibrium rms horizontal particle beam emittance
is found to be

ǫx =

3
20

¯hωtr
γ 2Mc2 < βx > .

(3)

In (3) < βx > is the average horizontal beta function in the interaction region. The
equilibrium vertical emittance is obtained by replacing βx by βy. The rms transverse size of

the particle beam at the waist σx = √βx · ǫx.

Three-dimensional method of laser cooling of bunched ion beams by narrowband or
In

monochromatic laser beam is possible when radiofrequency cavities are switched on.
this case the two stage cooling can be done.

On the ﬁrst stage the value of the laser frequency have to choose so that the related to
this frequency resonance ion energy was situated above the equilibrium energy of the storage
ring and was higher then the maximum amplitude of oscillations of the energy of ions in
the ion beam. Then the laser frequency have to scan so that to move the corresponding
resonance ion energy εr = Mc2γr to the equilibrium one with some velocity ˙εr = dεr/dt
corresponding to the condition ˙εr < Pmax, where the resonance relativistic factor γr =

5The presence of a derivative ∂Iω/∂ω will lead to another value τǫ [26]. The longitudinal-radial coupling
arising in non-zero dispersion straight sections of the storage rings leads to a redistribution of the longitudinal
and radial damping times when the radial gradient of the laser beam intensity ∂Iω/∂x is introduced [24, c].

5

[1 + (ωtr/ωL)2]/2(ωtr/ωL), ωL = ωL(t). The damping time of longitudinal ion oscillations
and the laser power in this case will be less (the enhanced cooling) then in the previous
case because of ions of the energy less then the equilibrium one will not interact with the
laser beam and hence will not decrease theirs energy6. The longitudinal cooling in this case
corresponds to a version of the one dimensional laser cooling (see Section 3).

The nature of the transverse cooling by the narrowband or monochromatic laser beam on
the second stage does not diﬀer from the case of the broadband laser cooling. A diﬀerence
is in conditions of interaction of ion and laser beams.
In the case of a broadband laser
beam all ions interact with the laser beam simultaneously and continuously. In the case of
a narrow or monochromatic laser beam every ion interacts with the laser beam only a part
of time when it passes the ion resonance energy in the process of its phase oscillations in
a bucket of a storage ring. The minimal damping time of transverse oscillations, according
to (1), is limited by the maximal average power of scattered radiation that is by saturation
intensity and by the useful part of time when the ion and laser beams are in the state
of interaction. The saturation intensity and the average power of scattered radiation are
increased with the increasing of the width of spectrum of the laser beam. It follows that
in the case of ion cooling under conditions of a minimal damping time of transverse ion
oscillations, i.e. under conditions of continuous interaction of ion and laser beams along the
interaction region and high saturation parameter (D ∼ 1), we must increase the width of the
laser beam simultaneously with its power or, in a limit, by using the high power broadband
laser. Small value of the transverse damping time is the advantage of the broadband laser
cooling method in this case of the tree-dimensional laser cooling.

The employment of the one-dimensional method of cooling on the ﬁrst stage and three-
dimensional one on the second stage will permit to shorten the value of the bandwidth of
the laser beam and the power of the laser.

Experimentally the version of the longitudinal cooling of a bunched non-relativistic beam
of 24Mg+ ions (kinetic energy ∼ 100 keV) was observed ﬁrst in the storage ring ASTRID
[28]. The monochromatic laser beam co-propagated with the ion beam (conditions of the
ion acceleration) at the regime of scanning of its frequency and under conditions of switched
on the accelerating system of the storage ring was used. At the conditions of such cooling
some degree of the radiative transverse cooling could be observed.

2.2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of electron beams in

storage rings by lasers

A three-dimensional cooling of electron and positron beams based on the backward Compton
scattering of laser photons in the dispersion-free straight sections of the storage rings can
be used [26, 29, 30].
In this case we can use the expressions (1) - (3) if we replace the
values σ → σT , IsatD = IL and accept D = 1. The method is identical to one suggested in
papers [21]-[23] where magnetic wigglers were used instead of laser beams7. In this case the
excitation of radial betatron oscillations will take place only through the emission of photons
of synchrotron radiation from bending magnets of the ring. At the same time the rate of

6The longitudinal cooling in the method of the three-dimensional ion cooling is based on a diﬀerence of
rates of energy change of ions with positive and negative energy deviations from the equilibrium energy. In
our case the unwanted energy change of ions corresponding to theirs negative energy deviation is absent.

7 Electromagnetic waves can be considered as objects which belong to a type of undulators/wigglers [31].

6

damping of particle oscillations will be determined by the total power emitted both in the
form of synchrotron radiation and Compton scattering of laser photons. The electromagnetic
radiation emitted by electrons in the process of Compton scattering can lead to a signiﬁcant
shortening of damping times and hence equilibrium emittances of stored beams if the power
of scattered radiation will be much higher then the power of the synchrotron radiation.

*

*

*

The three-dimensional method of the radiative cooling considered in a section 2 is not
selective one. All particles of a beam interact with the broadband laser beam simultaneously
independently on the energy and the position of particles. The gradient of the rate of
the energy change of particles and the corresponding rate of damping of amplitudes of
betatron oscillations are small in this case. This fact leads to the result that the damping
times are approximately twice as higher as the time interval for which particles emit the
electromagnetic energy equal to theirs kinetic energy.

The damping times and emittances of particle beams can be shortened signiﬁcantly by
using selective interaction of particles and laser beams. The selectivity can be achieved by
diﬀerent ways. Among them there are the ways based on resonance and threshold interaction
of complicated particles with a laser beam, not full overlapping of a being cooled particle
beam and moving targets, using of broadband laser beams with sharp frequency edges. Below
we will consider one- and two-dimensional cooling methods based on selective interactions
of particle beams and targets.

3 One-dimensional laser cooling of ion beams

in storage rings

The one-dimensional method of laser cooling is a method of enhanced longitudinal cooling.
In this method ions are cooled mainly in the longitudinal phase space (energy-longitudinal
coordinate). A typical version of the one-dimensional method of cooling is based on the
resonance interaction of unbunched ion beams and homogeneous monochromatic laser beams.
The frequency of the laser wave (photon energy) in this version of cooling is chosen such
a way that the laser beam interacts ﬁrst with the most high energy ions of the ion beam.
Then the frequency is scanning in the low frequency direction (frequency chirp) and ions of
a lower energy begin to interact with the laser beam and decrease theirs energy up to the
time corresponding to the given minimal energy of the ions in the beam. Then the scanning
of the laser frequency is stopped and all ions are gathered at the given energy of the beam.
The cooling time of the ion beam in this case is equal to the time interval for which ﬁrst
particle emit the energy of the electromagnetic radiation equal to the initial energy spread
σε in of the ion beam and the energy spread of the cooled beam is determined by either the
average energy of the scattered photons or the natural line width of the laser beam

τǫ =

σε in
P

,

σε
ε

= max  εls

Mc2γ

,

(

∆ω
ω

)nat! .

(4)

The cooling time of the ion beam in the method of the one-dimensional laser cooling
∼ ε/σε in ∼ 103 ÷ 104 times lower then that in the case of the three-dimensional one. This
is the consequence of the selective resonance interaction of photon and ion beams in the

7

one-dimensional method when initial energies of ions are higher then some given energy and
the minimal energy of the resonance interaction of ion and laser beams determined by the
maximal laser frequency is limited by the given energy.

The considered method is one of possible one-dimensional ion cooling methods8. First
similar method was used for cooling of non-relativistic ion beams [8], [32]9. Relativistic
version of such method was developed in the paper [34].

One-dimensional laser cooling of bunched ion beams by monochromatic laser beam is
possible when radiofrequency cavities are switched on (see section 2.1) [28]. The broadband
laser beam with a sharp low frequency edge can be used as well.
In this case the edge
frequency must have such value that only ions with energies above some given one (in the
case of cooling in the bucket - above the equilibrium energy) can be excited [35].

After cooling of ions under conditions of switched oﬀ accelerating ﬁelds the energy of
ions can be increased by eddy electric ﬁelds of induction accelerators located in straight
sections of storage rings, phase displacement mechanism or another way to move the orbits
of ions to the central part of the storage ring. To gather the ion beam in short bunches the
radiofrequency accelerating cavity can be switched on adiabatically.

*

*

*

One-dimensional method of laser cooling of ion beams in storage rings based on the
resonance interaction of monochromatic laser and ion beams is one of possible methods of
enhanced longitudinal cooling. Similar method can be applied to electron, ion and muon
beams when another targets and selective interactions are used.

One dimensional laser cooling is highly eﬃcient in the longitudinal direction, but diﬃ-
cult in the transverse direction unless a special longitudinal-radial coupling mechanism is
introduced (synchro-betatron resonance [3, 36, 24], dispersion coupling [9, 16]). In papers
[24]-[27] another three-dimensional RIC method is proposed and considered above. Never-
theless the quest for new more eﬃcient laser cooling methods remains vital for the cooling
of electrons, protons, mesons and both not fully stripped and fully stripped high current ion
beams. Below we would like to discuss one of such methods.

4 Two-dimensional method of cooling of particle

beams in storage rings

Below the basic principle of the two-dimensional method of cooling of particle beams in
storage rings will be presented. We will consider the process of change of amplitudes of
betatron oscillations and positions of instantaneous orbits in the process of the energy loss
of particles when the RF accelerating system of the storage ring is switched oﬀ 10[37].

Let us the instantaneous particle orbits are distributed in a region xη ± σx ε and am-
plitudes of particle radial betatron oscillations are distributed in a region σx b relative to

8In the another version of cooling the laser frequency can be constant and acceleration of ions in the
direction of given resonance energy can be produced by eddy electric ﬁelds of a linear induction accelerator.
Using of induction accelerator is not eﬃcient in high energy (ε > 1 Gev/nucleon) storage rings.

9Two laser beams of diﬀerent frequencies co- and counter-propagated with the ion beam can be used in
the non-relativistic and moderate relativistic case. In the coordinate system connected with the ion beam
the frequencies of laser waves can be equal and form a standing wave at the resonance energy [33].

10Using coupling resonance of betatron oscillations permits to cool particle beam in all three dimensions.

8

instantaneous orbits corresponding to a particle energy ε, where xη is the location of the
middle instantaneous orbit of particles of the beam, σx ε mean-root square deviation of in-
stantaneous orbits from the middle one. The value σxε is determined by the initial energy
spread σε in.

At the ﬁrst stage of the two-dimensional cooling a target T1 (laser beam or material
medium target) is situated at the orbit region (xT , xT − a), where a is the target width
(see Fig. 1). The internal edge of the target has the form of a ﬂat sharp boundary. The
target overlaps only a part of the particle beam so that particles with largest amplitudes of
betatron oscillations interact with the target. At that the interaction takes place only at the
moment when the particle deviation caused by betatron oscillations have approximately the
amplitude value and the deviation is directed toward the target.

1
2
3

1

2

3

6

7

8
9
10
11

❄~v2

✻~v1

T2

T1

✲
y

1
2
3

✻

xT

❄
✻

a

❄

Fig.1: The scheme of the two-dimensional ion cooling. The axis y is the equilibrium

orbit of the storage ring, 1-1, 2-2 ... the location of the instantaneous ion orbit

after 0,1,2 ... events of the ion energy loss, T1 and T2 are targets moving
by turns with the velocity ~v1,2 from outside to the equilibrium orbit.

In this case immediately after the interaction the position and the direction of the particle
momentum stay the same but the instantaneous orbit is displaced inward in the direction
of the target (we suppose that the damping caused by the friction leads to decrease of the
momentum by the value only and neglect the scattering of the particle in the target). The
radial coordinate of the instantaneous orbit and the amplitude of betatron oscillations are

9

decreased at the same value. After every interaction the position of the instantaneous orbit
will be nearer and nearer to the target and the amplitude of betatron oscillations will be
smaller and smaller until it will reach some small value. At the same time the instantaneous
orbit will reach the edge of the target. Up to this time the instantaneous orbit went in the
direction of the target but particle was not moved forward deeper and deeper into the target.
At the moment when the instantaneous orbit of a particle will be deepened into the target
the amplitude of the particle betatron oscillations will be decreased much. The instantaneous
orbit will continue its movement in the target with some velocity ˙xη in. Now the amplitude
will be being increased proportionally to the root-mean-square of the number of interactions
of the particle with the target that is slowly then the decreasing of the amplitude in the
previous case when it was changed proportionally to the number of interactions. This is
because of the particle inside the target will interact with the target both with positive and
negative deviation from the instantaneous orbit (see Appendix 1).

The particle beam has a set of amplitudes of betatron oscillations and instantaneous
orbits. To cool all the beam we must move the target radial position in the direction of the
particle beam or move instantaneous orbits of the particle beam in the direction of the target
11. This velocity must be much less then the velocity of the instantaneous
at some velocity v1
orbit crossing the target ˙xη in. In this case the amplitudes of betatron oscillations will be in
time to be decreased to small values before they enter the target. After all particles of the
beam will be in the state of interaction with the target then the target must be removed
or the particle beam must be returned to the initial position for a short time. After this
all particles will have small amplitudes of betatron oscillations and increased energy spread.
The corresponding spread of instantaneous orbits must be in the limits of the working region
of the storage ring.

Notice that in general case the velocity of a particle ˙xη depends on the position of its
instantaneous orbit. When the instantaneous orbit cross the target and the particle pass the
target every turn (the orbit enter the target at the depth higher then the amplitude of the
particle oscillations A) then its velocity ˙xη in is higher then the velocity ˙xη corresponding
to the orbit position outside of the beam. This is because of in the second case particles
interact with the target not every turn (see Appendix 2).

At the ﬁrst stage of the two-dimensional cooling of particle beams it is desirable to use the
straight section with low-beta and high dispersion functions. In this case it is required less
events of the photon emission to cool the beam in the transverse direction. This is because
of the change of amplitudes of betatron oscillations is equal to the change of positions of
instantaneous orbits of the particle and at the same time in such straight section the spread of
amplitudes of betatron oscillations is small and the step between positions of instantaneous
orbits is high.

At the second stage of this method we can use a second target from the opposite side of
the particle beam. At this stage the particle beam will have small amplitudes of betatron
oscillations. The radial position of the second target T2 must be moved in the direction
of the particle beam (or instantaneous orbits of the particle beam must be moved in the
direction of the target) with a velocity v2 slightly higher then the velocity of the instantaneous
particle orbit ˙xη in. In this case particle orbits will be in time to enter into the target at a
distance higher then the residual amplitudes of particle betatron oscillations without essential

11A kick, decreasing of the value of the magnetic ﬁeld in bending magnets of the storage ring, a phase

displacement or eddy electric ﬁelds can be used for this purpose.

10

increasing of theirs amplitudes. After the particle beam enter the target the amplitudes of
betatron oscillations will be increased slowly with the number of interactions (according to
the root-mean-square law). High energy particles ﬁrst of all and then particles with smaller
energies will interact with the target. This process must last until the target will reach
the instantaneous orbit with the least energy and then the target must be removed or the
particle beam instantaneous orbits must be returned to the initial position for a short time.
At that the energy spread of the particle beam will be decreased (1 − 1/kb 2)−1 times, where
kb 2 = v2/ ˙xη in ≥ 1. Such a way we can repeat the cooling process N times and decrease the
energy spread of the particle beam ∼ (1 − 1/kb 2)−N times. The energy spread of the cooled
particle beam will be

σε
ε

> max  εls

Mc2γ

,

δr
R

,

(

∆ω
ω

)nat! ,

(5)

where δr is a width of the sharp edge of the target, R the average radius of the storage ring.

The total damping time of the particle beam is τ = τs + τb, where

τb =

σεb
kb 1P

,

τs =

σε in
P

,

(6)

τs, τb are the damping times for the longitudinal and transverse radial phase spaces, σεb =
σx bε/αR the energy interval corresponding to the energy spread of the particle beam whose
instantaneous orbits are distributed through the interval of radii σx b, kb 1 = v1/ ˙xη in ∼
0.1 ÷ 0.2 the ratio of the velocity of movement of the ﬁrst target v1 to the velocity of
movement of the particle instantaneous orbit ˙xη in caused by the interaction of particles with
the target, α the momentum compaction function.

The two-dimensional method of cooling of particle beams is based on the longitudinal-
radial coupling arising from the storage ring dispersion and on using of moving targets (or
moving instantaneous orbits). The eﬀect is due to the fact that the amplitudes of betatron
oscillations are decreased proportionally to the number of interactions in the target when
theirs instantaneous orbits are outside of the target and increasing proportionally to the
root-mean square of the number of interactions when theirs orbits are inside of the target.
This method of cooling is valid in a general case when both resonance and non-resonance
selective interactions of particles are used.
It is an enhanced method because of in this
method the rates of change of spreads of instantaneous orbits and amplitudes of betatron
oscillations of particles are equal to the rate of change of positions of instantaneous orbits in
the target which is much higher then the rate of change of amplitudes of betatron oscillations
of particles in the three-dimensional method of cooling.

The described process of transverse cooling is based on particle interactions with external
and internal targets. Similar interactions were described in 1956 by O’Neil [9]. However
targets in his case were motionless12. They could only transform the longitudinal phase
space occupied by the beam to the radial one and back. The volume in the 4- and 6-
dimensional phase space occupied by the beam was not changed. That is why the targets
could be used for injection and capture of only one portion of particles. For the purpose
of the multi-cycle injection and storage of heavy particles O’Neil, in addition to targets,
suggested the ordinary three-dimensional ionization cooling based on a thin hydrogen target

12Internal target could be rotated out of the medium plane to stop particle movement inward direction

and such a way to prevent the beam losses.

11

jet situated in the working region of the storage ring (the multiple scattering of particles at
the nuclei of the target was not considered).

5 Two-dimensional method of cooling of ion

beams in storage rings

In the case of two-dimensional ion cooling by the selective resonance interaction the targets
can be laser beams having sharp frequency edges and scanning central frequencies. The
second target can be a monochromatic laser beam overlapping the ion beam as a whole
and having a sweeping frequency. In this case the ordinary one-dimensional resonance laser
cooling will take place at the second stage of the laser cooling. The high and low boundary
frequencies of the ﬁrst and second lasers must correspond to the internal boundary instan-
taneous orbits which are located higher and lower of the central instantaneous orbits of the
beam. The ﬁrst target must be a broadband laser beam with the sharp edge. At that we
can start from the second stage. Then the ﬁrst stage and the second one must be repeated.
Metal screens can be used on the exit of the laser beams from an optical resonator to

produce the extracted laser beam with sharp geometrical edge13.

The two dimensional method of laser cooling of particle beams will work in the case when

the RF system of the storage ring is switched on as well.

When the RF system of the storage ring is switched on then the scanning of the frequency

of the RF system is possible instead of moving targets.

Example 1. The two-dimensional cooling of a hydrogenlike beam of 207

82 P b+81 in the
CERN LHC through the backward Rayleigh scattering of photons of two laser beam targets.
The broadband laser beams overlap the ion beam, have sharp frequency edges and scanning
central frequencies.

The relevant parameters of LHC and the beam in LHC are: 2πR = 27 km, f = 1.11· 104
Hz, α = 2.94 · 10−4, γ = 3000, Mc2γ = 575 TeV, σε in/ε = 2 · 10−4 (σε in = 1.15 · 1011 eV),
the value σεb = σε in, σx b = σx ε = 1.2 · 10−2 cm.
The relevant characteristics of the hydrogenlike (f12 = 0.416, g1 = 1, g2 = 3) lead ions
are: the transition between the 1S ground state and the 2P excited state of the particle
corresponds to the value of the resonant transition energy ¯hωtr = 68.7 keV, λtr = 1.8 · 10−9
sm, (∆ω/ω)nat = 2.72 · 10−4.
the laser wavelength λL = 4πcγ/ωtr = 1080˚A,
¯hωL = 11.49 eV, the bandwidth of the laser beam (∆ω/ω)L = 5 · 10−4, the rms transverse
laser beam size at its waist σL = 1.52 · 10−2 cm, the Rayleigh length zR = πσ2
L/λL = 67.2
cm, lint = 2zR = 135 cm, the power of the laser beam is PL = 400 W.

The relevant parameters of a laser:

In this case the average energy of the scattered photons < ¯hωs >= εls = γ¯hωtr = 206
MeV, Isat = 4.94 · 1012 W/cm2, IL = 5.48 · 105 W/cm2, D = 1.1 · 10−7 ≪ 1, σ = 1.32 · 10−18
cm2, ∆Nint = 3.52 · 10−3, P = 8.04 · 109 eV/sec, the longitudinal damping time τs ≃ 14.3
sec., the damping time for the betatron oscillations τb|kb1=0.1 ≃ 143 sec. According to (4),
(5) the limiting relative energy spread in this case σε/ε ≃ (∆ω/ω)nat ≃ 2.72 · 10−4.
A monochromatic laser beam can be used in this example because of the natural line
width (∆ω/ω)nat is approximately equal to the laser line width (∆ω/ω)L which is determined

13 Production of a laser beam with a sharp edge in a resonator is a diﬃcult problem.

12

by the large initial energy and angular spreads of the ion beam (in time these spreads will
be decreased and the necessity in the so large value (∆ω/ω)L will disappear).

Using of monochromatic laser beams with scanning frequencies is possible in the case
when the RF system of the storage ring is switched both oﬀ and on. The gradient of the
laser intensity ∂I/∂x can be introduced in the region of the ion beam by analogy with the
three-dimensional ion cooling (see section 2.1). Experiments [16] conﬁrm this observation.
Two-target scheme (Fig. 1) can be considered as a version of the enhanced scheme based on
the longitudinal-radial coupling in the storage ring.

6 On the ionization cooling of muons in storage rings

Muons have rather small lifetime (∼ 2.2µs) in theirs rest frame. They can do only about
3·103 turns in the strong magnetic ﬁeld (∼ 10 T). That is why muon beams require enhanced
cooling14. Muons have no nuclear interactions with the material medium of the target. That
is why they have no problems with the inelastic scattering in the target.

The material medium target can be used for the muon cooling. The rate of the momentum
loss of muons through the ionization friction in such target is high. The momentum loss is
parallel to the particle velocity and therefor includes transverse and longitudinal momentum
losses. The element of the irreversibility takes place in this case. The reacceleration of the
muon beam in rf cavities restores only longitudinal momentum. The transverse emittance is
reduced by 1/e with as little as 2ε of the total energy exchange. The longitudinal cooling of
muons is also possible when the energy losses are increased with the increasing of the energy
of being cooled particles. Both the natural energy loss function for muons (ε > 0.3 GeV)
and the wedge-shaped absorber at a non-zero dispersion region can be used in this case (in
the framework of the three-dimensional method of a particle cooling the transverse cooling
is decreased with the increasing of longitudinal cooling through the dispersion).

Such three-dimensional method of cooling of muon beams discussed in the paper of
D.V.Neuﬀer [38] is similar to one intended for the multi-cycle injection and storage of heavy
particles in storage rings suggested by O’Neil [9]. In the last paper the particle beam was
supposed to inject from the outside of the working region of the ring at radial position a
little higher then the position of the second target. The instantaneous orbit radii of particles
interacting with this target would shrink after injection and after deﬁnite number of turns
would be at radii at or less then the inside edge of the target. At that the injected particles
would be drawn aside from the inﬂector. After that moment the diﬃculty would appeared
with the enhanced increasing of the betatron oscillations (see Appendix 1). This diﬃculty
could be overcome by involving a ﬁrst target placed at the inner limit of the good region
of the storage ring. This target would move the instantaneous orbits of particles inward as
soon as betatron oscillations become serious and would then continue reducing the betatron
oscillation amplitudes until the ﬁrst target (foil) itself was rotated out of the medium plane.
Then the betatron oscillations would continue to be reduced by a thin hydrogen target
jet under condition of the switched on radio frequency accelerating cavities and wait the
injection of the next portion of particles.

The idea of a more eﬃcient method of the two-dimensional cooling of particle beams in
storage rings can be used in the case of muon cooling as well. Two material medium targets

14The development of this topic was stimulated by V.Telnov after repeated discussions of the paper [37].

13

have to be placed in the inner and external sides of the working region of the storage ring.
Quick-moving (velocity ∼ ˙xη in) and quick-disappearing targets must be used (in a time of a
few particle revolutions in the storage ring). The using of the material medium targets will
lead to the high rate ionization energy losses of muons in the targets. The kick/bump can
be used for the displacement of the instantaneous orbits forth and back with high velocity
(instead of the displacement of targets).

If the velocity of movement of the instantaneous orbit by a kick in the direction of the
external target is about the velocity of movement of the orbit in the target ˙xη in then during
the stage of longitudinal cooling the instantaneous orbits will be gathered at the inner orbit
position in a damping time (4), (5), where P is the average power of the ionization energy
loss. At this moment the kick must be switched oﬀ in a short time. In this case the muon
beams will be high degree cooled.

On practice the beam has some initial spread of betatron oscillations. That is why the
velocity of movement of the orbit by kick must be increased 1.2÷2 times to prevent enhanced
transverse heating process target for a time when the instantaneous orbits of particles will
pass the distance ∼ A in the target.
The enhanced transverse muon cooling will take place when the inner target will be
moved in the direction of the muon beam with a velocity ˙xη T1 ∼ 0.1 ˙xη in (see section 4) or
the instantaneous orbits will be moved in the direction of the target. The two-stage cooling
process can be repeated several times to increase the degree of cooling.

Notice that in this method of cooling the target can have sharp edge and the cooling of
particles at the second stage can lead the energy spread of the beam to the values near to
zero when the beam has not betatron oscillations and the velocity of the target v2 = xη in
(see Appendix 2).

7 Laser cooling of ion beams trough the e± pair pro-

duction.

The three-dimensional method of laser cooling of ion beams based on the nonselective in-
teraction of counterpropagating ion and photon beams through the e± pair production were
considered in the paper [17]. More eﬀective two-dimensional method of cooling based on the
threshold phenomena of the e± pair production in Coulomb ﬁelds of ions was considered in
the paper [37]. Below we will consider the last case.

The cross-section of the electron-positron pair production has the form

σ|¯hω−mec2≤mec2 ∼

π
12

Z 2αr2

e  ¯hω − 2mec2

mec2

!3

,

28
9

Z 2αr2

e[ln

σ|¯hω≫2mec2 ≃

109
42 − f (αZ)],
where Z is the atomic number of the ion, f (ν)/ν 2 ≃ 1.203 − ν 2 [39].
We see that the cross-section (7) has a threshold photon energy ¯hω ′
thr = 2mec2 in the ion
rest frame or ¯hωthr = 2mec2/(1 + βthr)γthr in the laboratory reference frame, where the ion
threshold relativistic factor γthr = [1 + (ω ′
thr/ωL). It means that all ions of the

2¯hω
mec2 −

thr/ωL)2]/2(ω ′

(7)

14

energy ε > ¯hωthr will interact with the photon beam and will be gathered at the threshold
energy εthr = Mc2γthr. This is a version of a method of the one-dimensional laser cooling.

Below we will consider an example of the two-dimensional laser cooling of the lead ion

beam trough the e± pair production.

Example 2. The two-dimensional cooling of the fully stripped ion beam of lead 207

82 P b+82

in the CERN LHC through the e± pair production.

The relevant parameters of LHC and the beam in LHC are the same as in the previous
example: 2πR = 27 km, f = 1.11 · 104 Hz, α = 2.94 · 10−4, γ = 3000, Mc2γ = 575 TeV,
σε in/ε = 2 · 10−4 (σε in = 1.15 · 1011 eV), the value σεb = σε in, σx b = σx ε = 1.2 · 10−2 cm.
thr = 0.01217˚A, ¯hωthr =
2mec2/(1 + β)γ = 170 eV, λthr = 73˚A.

thr = 2mec2 = 1.02MeV , λ′

In this method of cooling ¯hω ′

The relevant parameters of lasers: the laser wavelength λL = 36.5˚A, ¯hωL = 340 eV, the
bandwidth of the laser beam (∆ω/ω)L < 10−4, the rms transverse laser beam size at its
waist σL = 1.52 · 10−2 cm, the Rayleigh length zR = πσ2
L/λL = 1989 cm, lint = 2zR = 3978
cm, the power of the laser beam is PL = 400 W.

In this case the average energy loss per one event of pair production εls ≃ 2γmec2 = 3.06
GeV, IL = 5.48· 105 W/cm2, σ = 8.1· 10−24 cm2, ∆Nint = 2.69· 10−9, P = 6.43· 1010 eV/sec,
the longitudinal damping time τs ≃ 1.58 · 105 sec., the damping time for the betatron
oscillations ∼ 10 times higher. According to (5) the limiting relative energy spread is σε/ε ≃
5.3 · 10−6.
The average power of the X-ray laser in the considered example is rather high but it can
be realized in the future FELs [40]. The X-ray FELs are proposed to work in the pulsed
regime.
In this case the damping time or/and the power of the laser can be decreased
essentially (two-four orders) if we will use ion beam gathered in short bunches separated by
a long distances (duty cycle ∼ 102 ÷ 104) and will use interaction regions with more small
diameters of ion and photon beams.

8 Radiative cooling of e± beams in linear accelerators

The electron beams can be cooled in linear accelerators if external ﬁelds (wigglers, electro-
magnetic waves) producing radiation friction forces will be distributed along the axes of the
accelerators. The physics of cooling of electron beams under conditions of linear accelera-
tion is similar to one in storage rings when external ﬁelds are created in the dispersion-free
straight sections of the rings and when the synchrotron radiation in bending magnets of the
rings can be neglected. The element of the irreversibility takes place in this case too. The
electron momentum losses are parallel to the particle velocity and therefor include transverse
and longitudinal momentum losses. The reacceleration of the electron beams in accelerat-
ing structures of linear accelerators restores only longitudinal momentum. The transverse
emittance is reduced by 1/e with as little as 2ε of the total energy exchange. The expected
emittances of cooled beams are small in both transverse directions.

In the paper [41] the eﬀect of synchrotron radiation damping on the transverse beam
emittance for an inverse free-electron laser linear accelerator is studied. In the paper [42]
the same eﬀect applied to the case of the radio frequency linear accelerators is considered.
In the paper [43] the case of linear acceleration was investigated, where a laser beam was
used instead of a wiggler. General formulas in this cases are similar. Some peculiarities are

15

in the hardness of the emitted radiation. The emittances of beams are proportional to the
hardness of the emitted radiation. The hardness of the backward scattered laser radiation is
more high. That is why laser beams for damping can be used at small (∼ 100 MeV) electron
energies. A strong focusing of electron and laser beams at the interaction point is necessary
in this case. Damping wigglers can be used at high energies (10÷ 100 GeV) and in the limits
of long distances along the axis of the accelerator (about some kilometers).
The described method of cooling is the three-dimensional one. Ion and muon beams can
be cooled in linear accelerators as well. The analogues of the enhanced particle cooling in
linear accelerators are possible as well.

9 Conclusion

This paper was intend mainly for those who are interested in a cooling of relativistic particle
beams15. We have considered diﬀerent methods of cooling in a single particle approximation,
when the interactions between particles are negligible (low density beams).

The fundamental ideas of cooling of particle beams based on a friction were invented
long ago. However only synchrotron radiation damping/cooling was developed and used for
a long time in e± accelerators and storage rings. The development of the e± colliders and
the next generations of the synchrotron and undulator radiation sources have led to the
development of storage ring lattices (straight sections with high- and low-beta functions,
zero momentum compaction factors and large bending radii of storage rings). The necessity
in increasing of the luminosity of the p, p colliders have led to a development of the electron
and stochastic methods of cooling of particle beams. The development of the idea of the
inertial conﬁnement fusion have led to a necessity of ion cooling of non-fully stripped ion
beams through the intrabeam scattering [14, a]. The development of µ colliders have led to
development of schemes based on ionization friction and an enhanced cooling through the
longitudinal-transverse dispersion of the storage rings. Laser cooling in gaps was naturally
extended to the laser cooling in storage rings.

We hope that the development and adoption of diﬀerent methods of cooling of relativistic
particle beams will lead to the next generation of storage rings dedicated to colliders of
diﬀerent particles, new generations of light sources in optical to X-ray and γ -ray regions
[27], ion fusion [14, a], sources of gravitational radiation in IR and more hard regions [44]
and so on.

15Nevertheless it can be useful for those who deal with a cooling of non-relativistic ion beams.

16

References

[1] D.Bohm, Phys. Rev. v.70, 249, (1946).

[2] M.Sands, Phys. Rev., v.97, p. 740 (1955).

[3] K.W.Robinson, Phys. Rev., 1958, v.111, No 2, p.373; A.Hoﬀman, R.Little, J.M.Peterson

et al., Proc. VI Int. Conf. High Energy Accel. Cambridge (Mass.), 1967, p.123.

[4] A.A.Kolomensky and A.N.Lebedev, Theory of Cyclic Accelerators. North Holland Publ.,
C o, 1966; M.Sands, ”The physics of electron storage rings, an Introduction”, SLAC
Report 121, Nov. 1970 (unpublished); H.Bruk, Accelerateurs Circulaires de Particules
(Press Universitaires de Frannce, 1966).

[5] G.I.Budker, Atomnaya Energia 22, 346(1967); Ya.A.Derbenev, A.N.Skrinskii, Sov. Phys.

Rev., v.1, p.165, 1981.

[6] D.J.Wineland and H.Dehmelt, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 20, 637, (1975); T.W.H¨ansch and

A.L.Shawlov, Opt. Commun., v.13, p.68 (1975).

[7] P.J.Channel, J.Appl.Phys., v. 52(6), p.3791 (1981); L.D.Selvo, R.Bonifacio, W.Barletta,

Optics Communications, v.116, (1995), p.374

[8] S.Shr¨oder, R.Clein, N.Boos et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., v. 64, No 24, p.2901 (1990);
J.S.Hangst, K.Berg-Sorensen, P.S.Jessen et al. Proc. IEEE Part. Accel. Conf., San Fran-
cisco, May 6-9, NY, 1991, v.3, p.1764.

[9] O’Neil G., Phys. Rev., 102, 1418 (1956); A.Shoch, Nucl. Instr. Meth, v.11, p.40 (1961).

[10] A.A.Kolomensky, Atomnaya Energia, v.19, No 5, 1965, p.534.

[11] Yu.M.Ado, Atomnaya energia, v.31, No 1, 1971, p.40.

[12] A.N.Skrinskii, Uspekhi Physicheskich Nauk, v.138, No 1, p.3, 1982.

[13] S. van der Meer, CERN Internal Report CERN/ISR-PO/72-31 (1972).

[14] a) C.Rubbia, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A278, 253 (1989); b) M.-J.Miesner, R.Grimm,

M.Grieser, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. v.77, No4, p.623 (1996);

[15] R.Grimm, U.Eisenbarth, M.Grieser et al., Advanced ICFA Beam dynamics Workshop
on Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc, Ed. Pisin Chen, Monterey,
California, USA, 1998, p.200.

[16] I.Lauer, U.Eisenbarth, M.Griezer, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., V.31, No 10, p.2052, 1998.

[17] E.G.Bessonov, F.Willeke, Preprint DESY HERA 95-09, December 1995.

[18] Ya.B.Zel’dovich, Sov. Phys. Uspekhi, v.18, No 2, p.79 (1975).

[19] K.W.Robinson, ”Storage Ring for obtaining Synchrotron Radiation Line Spectra”,

CEAL 1032 (1966).

17

[20] J.B.Murphy, Microbunches workshop, AIP Conference Proceedings 367, Upton, NY,

September, 1995, p.109.

[21] A.Hutton, Particle accelerators, 1976, v.7, p.177.

[22] R.Chasman, G.K.Green, Proc. 5th All-Union Conference on charged particle accelera-

tors, Dubna, 5-7 Oct. 1976, v.2, p.172, Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

[23] L.Emery, Proc. Workshop on 4th Generation Light sources, Febr.24-27, 1992, p.149,

Ed.M.Cornacchia and H.Winick, SSRL 92/02.

[24] E.G.Bessonov, a) Preprint FIAN No 6, 1994; b) Proc. of the Internat. Linear Accel.
Conf. LINAC94, Tsukuba, KEK, August 21-26, 1994, Vol.2, pp.786-788; c) Journal of
Russian Laser Research, 15, No 5, (1994), p.403.

[25] E.G.Bessonov, Proc. of the 15th Int. Free-Electron Laser Conference FEL94, Nucl. Instr.

Meth. v.A358, (1995), pp. 204-207.

[26] E.G.Bessonov and Kwang-Je Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, vol.76, No3, p.431.

[27] E.G.Bessonov, K.-J.Kim, Proc. of the 1995 Part. Accel. Conf. and Int. Conf. on High-
Energy Accelerators, p.2895; Proc. 5th European Particle Accelerator Conference, Sitges,
Barcelona, 10-14 June 1996, v.2, p. 1196.

[28] J.S.Hangst et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., v.74, No 22, p.4432 (1995).

[29] K.-J.Kim, Proc. of the 7th Workshop on Advanced Accelerator Concepts, Lake Tahoe,

CA, 1996, AIP Conference Proceedings 398, p.243; LBNL-40004 (1996)

[30] Zh. Huang, R.D.Ruth, Phys. Rev. Lett., v.80, No 5, 1998, p. 976.

[31] E.G.Bessonov, Preprint FIAN No 35, Moscow, 1978; Proc. VI All-Union Conf. on
charged particle accelerators (Dubna, Oct. 11-13, 1978), Dubna JINR, 1979, p.203;
Trends in physics, 1978: Proc. IV EPS general Conf., York (UK), 1978, Bristol 1979,
p.471.

[32] W.Petrich et al., Phys. Rev. A, v.48, No 3, 1993, p.2127.

[33] E.Bonderup, Proc. 5th Accelerator School, Ed.: S.Turner, CERN 95-06, v.2, p.731,

Geneva, 1995.

[34] D.Habs et al., Proc. of the Workshop on Electron cooling and new techniques, Lengardo,

Padowa - Italy, 1990, World Scientiﬁc, p.122.

[35] E.G.Bessonov, Bulletin of the American physical society, Vol.40, No 3, May 1995,

p.1196.

[36] H.Okamoto, A.M.Sessler, and D.M¨ohl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3977 (1994); T.Kihara,

H.Okamoto, Y.Iwashita, et al. Phys. Rev. E, v.59, No 3, p. 3594, (1999).

[37] E.G.Bessonov, K.-J Kim, F.Willeke, physics/9812043.

18

[38] D.V.Neuﬀer, Nucl. Instr. Meth., 1994, v.A350, p.24.

[39] V.B.Berestetskii, E.M.Lifshitz and L.P.Pitaevskii, Quantum electrodynamics, 2nd ed.

(Pergamon Press, New York, 1982).

[40] J.Feldhause, B.Sonntag, Synchrotron Radiation News, 1998, v.1, No 1, p.14.

[41] A.C.Ting, P.A.Sprangle, Particle accelerators, 1987, v.22, p.149

[42] N.S.Dikanskii, A.A.Mikhailichenko, Preprint 88-9, BINP, Novosibirsk, 1988; The Proc.

VI All-Union Particle Accelerator Conf., v.1, p.419, 1988, Dubna D9-89-52, 1989

[43] V.Telnov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78 (1997), p.4757; Advanced ICFA Beam dynamics Work-
shop on Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc, Ed. Pisin Chen, Monterey,
California, USA, 1998, p.173.

[44] E.G.Bessonov, Advanced ICFA Beam dynamics Workshop on Quantum Aspects of
Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc, Ed. Pisin Chen, Monterey, California, USA, 1998, p.330.

10 Appendix 1

In the smooth approximation the movement of a particle relative to its instantaneous

orbit position xη is described by the equation

′

x

= A cos(Ωt + ϕ).

(8)

where x′ = x − xη.

The amplitude of betatron oscillations of the particle A0 = qx′ 2

0 is the
particle deviation from the instantaneous orbit at the moment t0 of change of the particle
˙x′
energy in a target (laser beam, material medium),
0 = −Aω sin(ωt + ϕ) the transverse
velocity of the particle. After the interaction the instantaneous orbit will be changed. The
particle will continue its movement relative to a new orbit. At that its deviation relative to
the new orbit will be x′
0 + δxη and the angle will not be changed. The new amplitude will

0 /Ω2, where x′

0 + ˙x′ 2

be A1 = q(x′

0 − δxη)2 + ˙x′ 2

0 /Ω2. The change of the square of the amplitude

′

1 − A2

δ(A)2 = A2

0δxη + (δxη)2.

0 = −2x

(9)
When δxη ≪ x′
0 < A0 then the second term in (2) can be neglected16. In this case the
value δ(A)2 ≃ −2x′
0δxη and the amplitude of betatron oscillations of the particle will be
16 The damping of particle beam emittances in storage rings is a classical eﬀect. In the framework of
classical electrodynamics particles loose theirs energy smoothly. That is why the value (δxη)2 in (9) can
0δxη >6= 0 when the gradient of the energy loss ∂P/∂x 6= 0 (see
be neglected. The averaged value < 2P x
Appendix 2). Both damping and antidamping of betatron oscillations of particles in storage rings can be in
this case [4]. The term < P δx2
η > leads to the excitation of betatron oscillations only in the case of random
energy loss.

′

19

increased by the low δA ≃ δxη when x′
0 ≃ A. It means that the particle will increase its
amplitude of oscillations proportional to the number of passages N of the particle through the
target when the instantaneous orbit of the particle is at a distance of about their amplitude
(∼ A) away from the target. This is the highest rate of increase of the amplitude of the
particle oscillations.
It follows that when the target is located at the external side of the working region of
the storage ring xT > 0, the instantaneous orbit position xη < xT , the particle enter the
edge of the target under conditions of deviations x′
0 > 0 and when the loss of the energy of
the particle leads to the decrease of its instantaneous orbit position (∂xη/∂ε > 0) then the
amplitude of betatron oscillations of the particle will be increased (heating regime). The
In the opposite case when the
rate of heating in this case is maximal (∆A ∼ δxη · N).
target is located at the inner side of the working region of the storage ring xT < 0, xη > xT ,
and x′
0 < 0 the amplitude of betatron oscillations of the particle will be decreased (cooling
regime). The instantaneous orbits in this case will shrink under conditions of maximal rate
of cooling (∆A ∼ −δxη · N).
The value δxη = Dx∆p/p, where Dx is the local dispersion function [4], p = Mcβγ the
momentum of the particle. It means that the scheme works when the dispersion function
Dx 6= 0. The higher Dx the higher the rate of cooling.
0δxη in (9) determine the classical damping (antidamping) processes in par-
ticle beams of storage rings. The value (δxη)2 determine the excitation processes of particle
beams in storage rings.

The term 2x′

10 Appendix 2

In general case the value ˙xη depends on the distance xT − xη between the target and
the instantaneous orbit and on the amplitude of the particle oscillations A. The ratio F =
F (xη, xT , A) = ˙xη/ ˙xη in is the probability of the oscillating particle to pass through the target.
This probability in the case of the homogeneous target with the sharp edge is determined
by the part of the period of betatron oscillation of the particle where the deviation of the
particle from the instantaneous orbit is higher then the distance between the orbit and the
target (|xη − xT| ≤ x′
0 ≤ A). In the second stage of cooling (xT > 0) the value F = ϕ2/π,
where ϕ2 = arccos[(xT − xη)/A]. In the ﬁrst stage of cooling (xT < 0) the value F = ϕ1/π,
where ϕ1 = π − ϕ2. The value ˙xη in < 0 is given by the thickness of the target and the kind
of its material matter or in another case by the intensity of the laser beam and the length
of the interaction region.

In the approximation when the random processes of excitation of betatron oscillations
of particles in a storage ring can be neglected the behavior of the amplitudes of beta-
tron oscillations of these particles is determined by the equation ∂A2/∂xη = 2 < x′
0 >
or ∂A/∂xη =< x′
0 > is the particle deviation from
the instantaneous orbit averaged through the range of phases of betatron oscillations corre-
sponding to the particle passage of the target (|x′
0| > |xη − xT|). In the ﬁrst stage of cooling
the value < x′
0 >= −Asin ϕ2/(π − ϕ2) = sinc ϕ1, where sinc ϕ1 = sinϕ1/ϕ1. In the second

0 > /A (see Appendix 1), where < x′

20

stage of cooling the value < x′
ﬁrst and second stages (labels 1,2) are determined by the system of equations

0 >= Asinc ϕ2. It follows that the cooling processes at the

∂A
∂xη

= ±sinc ϕ1,2,

∂xη
∂t

=

˙xη in

π

ϕ1,2,

ϕ2 = arccos

xT − xη

A

,

ϕ1 = π − ϕ2,

(10)

where signs + and − are related to the ﬁrst and the second stages (lower and upper targets)17.

First stage of cooling

Suppose that the initial spread of amplitudes of betatron oscillations of particles σx b 0
does not depend on the position of the initial instantaneous orbit of the beam. Let the
internal target is displaced in the direction of the being cooled beam step by step with a
pitch ∆xT = σx b 0/M, where M ≥ 2 is the whole number.
In this case at the ﬁrst step of the ﬁrst stage of cooling the target overlap a pitch ∆xT
of being cooled beam. The instantaneous orbits of this part of particles after the moment t0
of theirs entry the target will go in the direction of the internal target with a velocity ˙xη.

It follows from the equations (10) that when M ≫ 1, xη − xT ≫ ∆xT then the value
A − (xη − xT ) ≃ const = ∆xT . ϕ1 ≃ q2∆xT /A, sinc ϕ1 ≃ 1 − ∆xT /3A. Up to the time
when the instantaneous orbit will approach the target to the distance ∼ ∆xT the value
∂A/∂xη ≃ 1. When the orbit will enter the target (ϕ1 = π/2) then the value dA/dxη will
be decreased only π/2 times. When the orbit will be deepened into the target at the depth
higher then the amplitude A then the amplitude will stay constant (ϕ1 = π, ∂A/∂xη = 0).
It means that the amplitude of betatron oscillations will not tend to zero but to some ﬁnite
value A ∼ ∆xT ∼ σx b 0/M. Really in this case the amplitude of the particle oscillations
is determined by the equation ∂A/∂xη ≃ 1 − ∆xT /3A or by the expression A − A0 +
(∆xT /3) ln[(3A − ∆xT )/(3A0 − ∆xT )] = xη − xη 0. When the instantaneous orbit reach the
target (xη = xT ) then xη − xη 0 = −A0 and the amplitude is determined from the equation
A ≃ (∆xT /3) ln[A0/(A − (∆xT /3)]. Speciﬁcally when M = 10 then A ≃ 1.1∆xT .
At the same conditions M ≫ 1, xη − xT ≫ ∆xT the value A ≃ xη − xT and according to
(10) the value ∂xη/∂t ≃ ( ˙xη in/π) q2∆xT /A = ( ˙xη in/π)q2∆xT /(xη − xT ). It follows that
the evolution of the instantaneous orbit is described by the low (xη − xT )3/2− (xη0 − xT )3/2 =
(3√2∆xT /2π) ˙xη in(t − t0). According to this low and the condition A0 = σx b 0 = xη 0 −
xT the particles of the ﬁrst boundary instantaneous orbit corresponding to the maximal
initial energy of particles of the beam will reach the target (xη = xT ) in a time interval
∆t1 = π√2M σx b 0/3| ˙xη in|. When the beam has the spread of instantaneous orbits σε b 0

then we must move the target uniformly step by step the distance σε b 0 + σx b 0 with the

17This result is valid when the thickness of the target lT is much less then the length of the period of
betatron oscillations. In this case the particle will interact with the target not every turn. When the thickness
of the target is large (say the target is distributed uniformly along the orbit in the form of a set of thin foils
of the same total thickness and at the deﬁnite depth) then the particle will interact with the target every
turn (every period of betatron oscillations) but only along a part F of the length of its trajectory. However
this case can be realized technologically only when the targets are at rest. The velocity of the instantaneous
orbits in general case depend on the azimuth direction. That is why in this case the presented expressions
˙A, ˙xη and F are valid only for the case when the β-function and the dispersion functions of the storage
for ϕ,
ring does not depend on azimuth.

21

step ∆xT = σx b 0/M. In this case the total time of the M-multiple damping of betatron
oscillations of the beam ∆t = ∆t1(σε b 0 + σx b 0)/∆xT or

∆t =

πM√2M

3

σx b 0 + σε b 0

| ˙xη in|

.

(11)

The spread of instantaneous orbits after the ﬁrst stage of cooling (transverse direction)

will be equal σε b 1 = ∆t · |xη in| or

σε b 1 =

πM√2M

3

(σx b 0 + σε b 0).

(12)

Hence it follows that at the ﬁrst stage of cooling the spread of amplitudes of betatron
oscillations is decreased ∼ M times and at the same time the spread of instantaneous orbits
is increased ∼ M√M times.
Notice that we can move the target uniformly with the velocity v1 = ∆xT /∆t1 =
3| ˙xη in/πM√2M instead of moving it step by step.

At the ﬁrst stage of the two-dimensional cooling of particle beams it is desirable to use
the straight section with low-beta and high dispersion functions. In this case less events of
the photon emission is required to cool the beam in the transverse direction as the change
of amplitudes of betatron oscillations is approximately equal to the change of positions of
instantaneous orbits of the particle and at the same time in such straight section we have
a small spread of amplitudes of betatron oscillations and high step between positions of
instantaneous orbits.

Second stage of cooling

At the second stage of cooling the target is moving with a velocity v2 < 0 from outside
of the working region of the storage ring in the direction of the being cooled particle beam.
The instantaneous orbits of particles after the moment t0 of theirs entry the target will go
in the same direction with a velocity ˙xη (| ˙xη| < | ˙xη in|). According to the expression (10) the
process of change of positions of instantaneous orbits and amplitudes of betatron oscillations
is described by the system of equations (10), where xT = xT 0 +v2(t−t0) is the given function
of time.
From the equations (10) and the expression ∂A/∂xη = [∂A/∂t]/[∂xη /∂t] the equation is

followed

∂A
∂t

=

˙xη in

π s1 − (

xT − xη

A

)2.

(13)

According to (10), (13) the value ∂A/∂t ≤ ˙xη in/π for the arbitrary time and the value
∂xη/∂t ≤ ˙xη in/2 when xt − xη ≥ 0 that is up to the time t1/2 < t0 + A0/|v2 − ˙xη in/2|
when the target will reach the instantaneous orbit. For the time t1/2 − t0 the target will
pass the way ∆xT < A0|v2|/|v2 − ˙xη in/2|, the instantaneous orbit will pass the way ∆xη <
A0| ˙xη in|/2|v2 − ˙xη in/2| and the amplitude of betatron oscillations will be increased on the
value ∆A < A0| ˙xη in|/π|v2− ˙xη in/2|. Speciﬁcally when v2 = 1.5 ˙xη in the values ∆xT = 1.5A0,
∆xη < A0/2, ∆A < A0/π. After the target will pass outdistance the instantaneous orbit
then in a time interval t1 − t1/2 ≃ t1/2 − t0 the value ˙xη will be increased to the value ˙xη in
and the value ∂A/∂t will be decreased to zero. After this moment the value xT − xη < −A

22

and the amplitude of betatron oscillations will be constant. Speciﬁcally when v2 = 1.5 ˙xη in
then t1 − t2 ≃ 2(t1/2 − t0) and at this step the amplitude of betatron oscillations will be
increased to the value ∆A < A0(1 + 1/π)(2/π) ≃ 0.8A0.
When the spread of instantaneous orbits is much higher then the spread of amplitudes of
betatron oscillations then the spread of the instantaneous orbits of the particle beam (or the
energy spread) will be decreased (1 − 1/kb 2)−1 times, where kb 2 = v2/ ˙xη in ≥ 1. Speciﬁcally
in the previous example the value kb 2 = 1.5, (1 − 1/kb 2)−1 = 3.
When the spread of amplitudes of betatron oscillations is zero then we can get the
parameter kb 2 = 1. In this case the cooled beam will be monochromatic one (1− 1/kb 2)−1 →
0. In general case the value kb 2 has some optimum. This optimum can be received by more
precise numerical calculations. The second stage can be repeated N times to decrease the
energy spread of the beam (1 − 1/kb 2)−N times.
Notice that the equation (10) do not take into account that the target pass a ﬁnite
distance for the period T = 1/f of the particle revolution around its orbit in the storage
ring δxT = |v2| T . When the value δxT > σx b 0, v2 ≥ |xin| then all instantaneous orbits of
the particle beam can enter the target at the distance xη 0 − xT > σx b 0, that is all at once
under conditions ∂A/∂t = 0 (ϕ2 = π). This case can be realized easier when we will do a
high degree cooling (M ≫ 1) of the particle beam for the ﬁrst stage of cooling and when
the target will be installed at the straight section with low β - function and high dispersion
function at the second stage of cooling.

Thus at the ﬁrst stage of cooling we can have signiﬁcant degree of decreasing of amplitudes
of betatron oscillations (transverse cooling) and at the same time more signiﬁcant degree
of increasing of the spread of instantaneous orbits (longitudinal heating). At the second
one we can have signiﬁcant degree of decreasing of the spread of instantaneous orbits and
some degree of increasing of amplitudes of betatron oscillations. We hope that successive
application of two stages will lead to cooling of the particle beam in both degrees of freedom
even in the case when the interaction ot the particle beam and the target has not the
resonance or threshold nature (say muon cooling).

The value σx ε 0/ ˙xη in = σε in/ ˙P determine the damping time τs in (5).

23

