0
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
2
v
7
6
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cooling of Particle Beams in Storage Rings

E.G. Bessonov,
Lebedev Physical Institute RAS, Moscow, Russia

Old and new cooling methods are discussed in reference to e±, ion and µ± beams.

Abstract

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of particle

beams in storage rings by laser beams
2.1 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of ion beams in storage

rings by broadband lasers

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of electron beams in

storage rings by lasers

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Enhanced cooling of particle beams

3.1 One-dimensional laser cooling of ion beams in storage rings . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Two-dimensional cooling of particle beams in storage rings . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .
3.2.1 Enhanced laser cooling of ion beams in storage rings
3.2.2 Enhanced laser cooling of electron and proton beams . . . . . . . . .
3.2.3 Enhanced ionization cooling of muon beams in storage rings
. . . . .
3.2.4 Enhanced cooling of ion beams through the e± pair production . . . .

4 Cooling of electron and ion beams in linear accelerators

5 Conclusion

6 References

7 Appendix A

8 Appendix B

i

1

3

4

6

6
7
8
16
17
17
18

19

20

21

24

25

1 Introduction

Diﬀerent cooling methods were suggested to decrease the emittances of charged particle
beams in storage rings. Among them methods based on synchrotron radiation damping [1]-
[4], electron cooling [5], laser cooling in traps [6] and in storage rings [7], [8, 9], ionization
cooling [3], [10]-[13], cooing of ions through the inelastic intrabeam scattering [15], [16], [17],
and stochastic cooling [14]. The majority of cooling methods are based on a friction of
particles in external electromagnetic ﬁelds or in media when the Liouville’s theorem does
not work. Only stochastic method of cooling is not based on a friction. It consists in the
individual observation of particles and the action of external control ﬁelds introduced in the
storage ring for the correction of particle trajectories.

The friction and corresponding energy losses are determined by the next processes:
1) the spontaneous incoherent emission of the electromagnetic radiation in external ﬁelds

produced by bending magnets, undulators/wigglers, laser beams etc.

2) ionization and excitation of atoms of a target at rest installed on the orbit of the

storage ring,

3) the transfer of the kinetic energy from particles of a being cooled beam to particles of

a co-propagating cold beam of e−, e+ or ions in the process of the elastic scattering [13],

4) excitation of being cooled ions and emission of photons by these ions through the

inelastic intrabeam scattering [15], [16], [17],

5) the e± pair production by photons of a laser beam in ﬁelds of being cooled ions [18].
A friction originating from a media or in the process of emission (scattering) of photons
by charged particles in external ﬁelds leads, under deﬁnite conditions, to a damping of am-
plitudes of both betatron and phase oscillations of these particles when they are captured
in buckets of storage rings, i.e. there occurs a three-dimensional cooling of particle beams1.
In this case particles of a beam loose theirs momentum. At that the friction force is parallel
to the particle velocity, and therefore the momentum losses include both the transverse and
longitudinal ones. Longitudinal momentum losses are compensated by a radio frequency
accelerating system of the storage ring. Meanwhile the longitudinal momentum of a particle
tends to a certain equilibrium. This is because the rate of the momentum loss of the particle
is higher/less than the equilibrium value when this momentum is higher/less than the equi-
librium value. The transverse vertical momentum of particles disappears irreversibly. Such
a way the compression of phase-space density for a given ensemble of particles takes place.
The transverse radial and longitudinal particle oscillations are dispersion coupled through
energy losses [4]2. Their damping rates can be corrected or redistributed by insertion devices3
placed at straight sections of storage rings to introduce an additional friction of particles,
and by a correction of the ring lattice parameters. The damping rates of both transverse
and longitudinal oscillations can be redistributed by coupling transverse and longitudinal
particle oscillations near betatron and synchro-betatron resonances [3].

1This conclusion is valid for all possible types of friction processes and was emphasized in some pioneer

papers on synchrotron radiation and ionizing damping/cooling (see, e.g. [3, 11]).

2Owing to this coupling radial betatron oscillations can have negative damping rate.
3Undulators, laser beams, wedge shaped material targets having in general case non-homogeneous ﬁeld

strengths or density in the radial direction at the position of being cooled particle beam .

1

In the case of emission of particles in a laser wave the radiation friction force appears
together with the laser wave pressure force. Friction force is determined by self-ﬁelds of the
accelerated particles and the pressure force is determined by the electromagnetic ﬁelds of
the laser wave (average value of the vector product of the particle velocity and the magnetic
ﬁeld strength of the laser wave which is not equal to zero when the self-force is taken into
account) [19]. The total averaged force can be directed both in the same direction, or in the
transverse and the opposite directions relative to the average particle velocity. It depends
on the direction of the particle velocity relative to the wave propagation. We will consider
the relativistic case γ
1 and conditions corresponding to the interaction angle between
1/γ,
vectors of the particle velocity and the direction of the laser beam propagation θint ≫
where γ = ε/Mc2 is the relativistic factor of the particle, M particle rest mass, and ε the
energy of the particle4. In this case both the radiation friction force and the pressure force
are directed opposite to the particle velocity.

≫

The process of cooling of particle beams based on friction forces has a classical nature
and can be described in the framework of classical electrodynamics. However, such data
as atomic and nuclear levels, oscillator strengths, degeneracy parameter, and so on, which
determine the corresponding laser wavelengths, cross-sections of particle interactions and
friction forces should be used from quantum mechanics. At the same time, the excitation of
longitudinal and transverse oscillations of particles in storage rings has a quantum nature.
In this case the quasi-classical description of excitation of these oscillations can be used [4].
In the ordinary three-dimensional cooling, the particle beams are cooled under conditions
when all particles interact with the external ﬁelds or media independent of their energy
Insertion devices/targets in this case (wigglers,
and amplitudes of betatron oscillations.
laser beams, material media) overlap the particle beam and are motionless.
In this case
the diﬀerence in the rates of energy losses of particles of the beam having maximum and
minimum energies is not high. That is why the cooling time of the particle beam determined
by this diﬀerence is high and equal to the time interval, at which particle energy losses in
the target are equal to about the two-fold initial energy of the particle5. At that the particle
energy must be recovered by the RF system of the storage ring.

Cooling of particle beams can be enhanced. In this case the damping time of the particle
beams in the longitudinal phase space can be reduced essentially (in the energy of particle
over the energy spread of the particle beam ratio) if we will use selective interactions of
particles of the beam and targets. For this purpose we have to choose such targets which
interact with particles having deﬁnite energies or amplitudes of betatron oscillations and
do not interact with another particles of the same beam. For example, target can interact
with particles of the energy higher then minimum energy of the beam and do not interact
with particles of minimum and lesser energy.
In this case the rate of the energy loss of
particles is not increased but the diﬀerence in the rates of losses of particles of the beam
having maximum and minimum energies will be increased essentially and all particles will
be gathered at the minimum energy in a short time (equal to the time interval, at which a
particle looses the energy equal to the initial energy spread of the particle beam).

In this paper some peculiarities of ordinary and enhanced cooling methods based on
4In the case θint < 1/γ the particles will be accelerated by the light pressure force.
5 This conclusion is valid for damping times both in the longitudinal and transverse planes.

2

a friction are discussed in reference to electron, ion and muon storage rings. The main
characteristics of cooling methods (damping time, equilibrium emittance of the being cooled
beam) will be presented. Cooling of electron and ion beams in linear accelerators will be
presented as well.

2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of particle

beams in storage rings by laser beams

In the method of the ordinary three-dimensional radiative laser cooling of particle beams in
buckets of storage rings, a laser beam overlaps a particle beam at a part of its orbit. We shall
consider a cooling conﬁguration where the laser beam is colliding head-on with a particle
beam in a dispersion-free straight section of a storage ring. Both the laser beam and the
particle beam are focused to a waist at the center of the straight section of the storage ring.
In limits of this region the particle beam is aﬀected by a friction force through scattering
of laser photons. Particles lose their energy mainly in the process of backward Compton or
Rayleigh scattering of laser photons. The accelerating ﬁelds of the radiofrequency systems
of storage rings compensate the radiative losses of the particle energy. We assume that the
incident laser beam has a uniform spectral intensity Iω = dIL/dω = IL/∆ωL in the frequency
interval ∆ωL centered around ωL, where IL is the total intensity (power per unit area).

In the case of an ion cooling, the electronic transitions of the not fully stripped ions
or nuclear transitions and broadband laser beam have to be used. If the ion beam has an
angular spread ∆ψ, around ψ = 0, and a relative energy spread ∆γ, around average γ, the
full bandwidth required for the incoming laser to interact with all ions simultaneously (to
shorten the damping time of radial betatron oscillations) is (∆ω/ω)L = (∆ψ)2/4 + ∆γ/γ,
where ωL = ωtr/γ(1 + βz); ωtr, the resonant transition energy in the rest frame of the ion;
βz = vz/c; and vz, the longitudinal component of the vector of the particle velocity.
In
the case of radiative cooling of electron or fully stripped ion beams (Compton scattering) a
monochromatic laser beam can be used.

The physics of damping in this method is similar to a synchrotron radiation damping
originating from a particle emission in bending magnets of storage rings. The diﬀerence
is in the appearance of other regions, where the emission of photons takes place, lattice
parameters of these regions, and in spectral distributions of the emitted (scattered) photons.
Equilibrium emittances of particle beams are determined by a product of damping times
and the rates of excitation of longitudinal or transverse oscillations of particles in the storage
rings. The rate of excitation of particle oscillations is determined by hardness and power
of the emitted radiation and by the lattice features of the storage ring such as its global
parameter ”momentum compaction factor α” and its local parameter ”dispersion function” in
the regions where the particle emits the radiation [4]. By analogy with synchrotron radiation
damping, in order to shorten a bunch length in a storage ring, one should reduce α
0 by
manipulating with the ring optics [20, 21]. To shorten the transverse radial emittance one
should use long dispersion-free straight sections ﬁlled with strong wigglers or laser beams
(to produce fast damping without additional excitation of betatron oscillations). In the case
of cooling of electron beams by lasers, the lattice of the storage ring must have large-radius

→

3

arcs with strongly focused FODO to produce low quanta excitation by synchrotron radiation
in bending magnets of the ring [22]-[24].

2.1 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of ion beams in storage

rings by broadband lasers

In the three-dimensional laser cooling, the ion beams are cooled under conditions of Rayleigh
scattering of laser photons when all ions interact with the homogeneous laser beam inde-
pendent of theirs energy and position [25]-[28].
In this case, the average cross-section of
the photo-ion interactions, σ = πf12reλtr(ω/∆ω)L, is larger than the Compton (Thompson)
10−25 cm2, by about a factor of (λtr/re)(ω/∆ω)L, which
8πr2
cross-section, σT ≃
109 for many cases of the practical interest. In the previous expressions,
is large, about 106
−
value f12 is the oscillator strength, re = e2/mc2 the classical electron radius, λtr = 2πc/ωtr.
Assuming that photo-ion interaction takes place in dispersion-free straight section, the
damping time of horizontal betatron oscillation τx is the same as the vertical oscillation τy,
because a variation in the radiated energy due to a variation in the orbit vanishes. The
damping time of amplitudes of betatron and phase (τǫ) oscillations of ions is

6.65

e/3

≃

·

τx = τy =

τǫ
(1 + D)

=

2ε
P

,

(2.1)

where P = f ∆Nintεloss is the average power of the electromagnetic radiation emitted (scat-
tered) by the ion; f , the frequency of the ion beam revolution in the storage ring, ∆Nint =
(1 + β)IsatlintσD/c¯hωL(1 + D), the number of ion interactions with the laser beam photons
per one ion-laser beam collision, lint the length of the interaction region of the laser and ion
tr/π2c2γγ)(∆ω/ω)L,
beams; D = IL/Isat, the saturation parameter; Isat = [g1/4(g1 + g2)](¯hω4
the saturation intensity, g1(g2), the degeneracy factor of the state 1(2); εloss = ¯hωtrγ =
(1 + β)¯hωLγγ the average loss of the ion energy per one event of ion-photon interaction.

The expression τǫ in Eq(2.1) is speciﬁc to the assumption that the spectral intensity of
the laser beam Iω(ω, x, y) is constant inside its bandwidth and inside the area of the laser
beam occupied by the being cooled ion beam6. Moreover, we assume that the length of the
ion decay ldec = c2g2βγ/2g1f12reω2
tr/8π2g1f12re is much less than the length of
the dispersion-free straight section [25]-[28]. The length of the ion decay is determined by
the spontaneous decay time τsp = 1/Γ21, where Γ21 = 2g1f12reω2
tr/g2c is the probability of
the spontaneous photon emission of the excited ion or the natural linewidth ∆ωnat. Usually
the relative natural linewidth (∆ω/ω)nat = 4πf12(g1/g2)(re/λtr) is less than the line width
of a laser beam (∆ω/ω)L necessary for a three-dimensional ion cooling by broadband laser
beams, and is determined by the energy and angular spreads of ion beams. Otherwise the
monochromatic laser beams can be eﬀectively used for the same purpose.

tr = g2βγλ2

6The presence of a derivative ∂Iω/∂ω will lead to another value τǫ [27]. The longitudinal-radial coupling
arising in non-zero dispersion straight sections of the storage rings leads to a redistribution of the longitudinal
and radial damping times when the radial gradient of the laser beam intensity ∂Iω/∂x is introduced [25, c].
Experiments [17] conﬁrm this observation. The same idea is in the three-dimensional scheme of the ionizing
cooling of muon beams through dispersion coupling in the wedge-shaped material target. It was discussed
in the paper of D.V.Neuﬀer [29].

4

The quantum nature of the laser-photon scattering provides excitation of betatron and
phase oscillations of ions. The calculation of equilibrium amplitudes is similar to the case of
ordinary electron storage rings, except that the spectral-angular probability distribution of
the scattered photons here is given by that of the undulator radiation. We have found that
the relative r.m.s. energy spread of the ion beam at equilibrium is given by [27]

=

1.4(1 + D)¯hωtr/Mc2.

(2.2)

σε
ε

q

In the present case, where the interaction takes place in a dispersion-free straight section,
the excitation of both the horizontal and vertical betatron motions is due to the fact that
the propagation direction of emitted photons is not exactly parallel to the vector of the ion
momentum. The r.m.s. equilibrium horizontal ion beam emittance is found to be

ǫx =

3
20

¯hωtr
γ2Mc2 < βx > .

(2.3)

In (2.3), < βx > is the average horizontal beta function in the interaction region. The
equilibrium vertical emittance is obtained by replacing < βx > by < βy >. The r.m.s.
transverse size of the ion beam at the waist σx = √βx ·
In practice the three-dimensional method of laser cooling of ion beams have to realize
after one-dimensional one (see Section 3). This will permit to cool the ion beam in the
longitudinal plane for a short time using low power monochromatic laser beam in the ﬁrst
case and then to shorten the bandwidth and power of the laser beam in the second one. After
that the one dimensional cooling can be used again to decrease the longitudinal emittance
of the being cooled ion beam7.

ǫx.

The three-dimensional laser cooling of ion beams can be realized by a monochromatic
laser beam with accelerating ﬁelds of radio frequency cavities as well. The nature of the
transverse cooling by the monochromatic laser beam in the three-dimensional method of
cooling does not diﬀer from the case of the broadband laser cooling. A diﬀerence is in
conditions of interaction of ion and laser beams. In the case of a broadband laser beam all
ions interact with the laser beam independent of their energies and amplitudes of betatron
oscillations. In the case of a monochromatic laser beam every ion interacts with the laser
beam only a part of time, when it passes the ion resonance energy in the process of phase
oscillations in a bucket of a storage ring. That is why it has greater damping time at the same
saturation parameter as in the case the broadband laser and the same cooling conﬁguration
(at that the power of the broadband laser is higher). Smaller value of the transverse damping
time is the advantage of the broadband laser cooling in the case of a three-dimensional laser
cooling of ion beams.

Experimentally, the version of longitudinal cooling of a bunched non-relativistic beam
of 24Mg+ ions (kinetic energy
100 keV) was observed ﬁrst in the storage ring ASTRID
[30]. The monochromatic laser beam co-propagated with the ion beam (conditions of the ion
acceleration) at scanning of its frequency and using the accelerating system of the storage
ring. At such cooling, some degree of the radiative transverse cooling could be observed.

∼

7The energy spread of the being cooled beam is minimum in the case of one-dimensional laser cooling.

5

2.2 Three-dimensional radiative cooling of electron beams in

storage rings by lasers

→

A three-dimensional cooling of electron and proton beams based on the backward Compton
scattering of laser photons in the dispersion-free straight sections of the storage rings can be
used [25, 27, 31, 32]. In this case we can use the expressions (2.1) - (2.3) if we replace the
σT , IsatD = IL and accept D = 18. The method is identical to that suggested
values σ
in papers [22]-[24] where magnetic wigglers were used instead of laser beams9. In this case
the excitation of radial betatron oscillations will take place only through the emission of
photons of synchrotron radiation from bending magnets of the ring where the dispersion
function diﬀer from zero. At the same time, the rate of the betatron oscillation damping
will be determined by total power emitted both in the form of synchrotron radiation and
Compton scattering of laser photons. The electromagnetic radiation emitted by electrons
in the process of Compton scattering can lead to a signiﬁcant shortening of damping time
and hence equilibrium emittance of stored beams if the power of scattered radiation will be
much higher than the power of the synchrotron radiation.

The method of the radiative cooling considered in this section is not optimal. The
damping time and the emittance of particle beams can be shortened signiﬁcantly by using
a selective interaction of particles and laser beams. Below we shall consider one- and two-
dimensional enhanced cooling schemes based on selective interactions of particle beams and
targets.

3 Enhanced cooling of particle beams

In the case of ordinary longitudinal cooling all particles of a beam loose their energy in
storage rings such a way that the ratio of a diﬀerence in rates of the energy loss of particles
having maximum and minimum energies is small. The small diﬀerence in rates in comparison
with the rates of the energy loss of particles leads to a small relative velocity of bringing
closer of their energies. That is why the damping time of longitudinal emittance of the
particle beam is high. It is determined by about two-fold loss of the initial particle energy
in the external ﬁelds or targets under conditions of recovering of the energy in the radio
frequency system of the storage ring.

Introduction of special damping magnets (wigglers) or wedge-shaped targets can lead to
decreasing of damping time of particles in the longitudinal phase space. But such insertion
devices simultaneously, according to Robinson’s damping criterion, lead to increase of damp-
ing time of the particles in the transverse radial phase space or to untidamping [4]. This is
8The diﬀerence in the physics of cooling of electron and ion beams is in the dependence of the average
hardness εloss and power P of scattered radiation on the energy γ. The damping time of the longitudinal
oscillations and equilibrium energy spread of a particle beam are determined by the derivative ∂P/∂γ. The
powers emitted by electron and ion are: Pe
¯hωγ (ωtr = const, ion of higher energy scatter
laser photons of lesser energy!). Because of this diﬀerence we will have correct result for the case of cooling
of electron beams if we will choose D = 1 in (2.1), (2.2) [27].

γ2, Pion

9 Electromagnetic waves can be considered as objects which belong to the type of undulators/wigglers

∼

∼

[33]. Wigglers with high deﬂecting parameters can change the lattice parameters of the storage ring.

6

because of the Robinson’s theorem is valid for the case of linear systems, when target overlap
the particle beam completely and when longitudinal and transverse betatron oscillations are
dispersion coupled.

The damping time of the particle beam in the longitudinal phase space can be reduced
essentially (in the energy over the energy spread ratio) if we will use selective interactions
of a particle beam and a target when only a part of particles of the beam interact with
the target. In this case we have to choose such targets and conditions of interaction, when
targets interact with particles having deﬁnite energies or amplitudes of betatron oscillation
and do not interact with another particles of the same beam. For example, we can switch on
interaction between target and particles of the beam having maximum energy ﬁrst, extend in
time continuously the interaction with particles of lesser energy and switch oﬀ the interaction
at the energy equal to minimum energy of particles in the beam10. Then we can repeat this
manipulation and gather all particles of the beam at minimal energy. Such a way we will
realize the cooling of a particle beam in the longitudinal plane. In this case the rate of the
energy loss by a particle must depend mainly on the position of its instantaneous orbit and
must not depend on the deviation of the particle from this orbit because of the betatron
oscillations. The damping time of the particle beam will be determined by the condition in
which a particle having maximum energy will loose the energy equal to the energy spread of
the being cooled beam.

The selectivity can be achieved in diﬀerent ways. Among them note a method based on
a resonant and energy threshold interaction (e± pair production, interaction of ions with a
broadband laser beam having sharp frequency edges), a time dependent degree of overlapping
in the radial direction of a being cooled particle beam and a moving target.

We can see a similarity between enhanced longitudinal and stochastic cooling of particle
beams in the individual manipulations in turns with parts of particle beams which are diﬀer
by deﬁnite parameters (energies, amplitudes of betatron oscillations) in the ﬁrst case and
individual particles in the second case. However this is only similarity. The reason of the
enhanced cooling is in a friction and the selective interaction of particles and transversely
moving target (the degree of overlapping of the target and particle beam depends on time,
particles of the energy lesser then minimum one does not interact with the target, the dura-
tion of interaction is proportional to the energy deviation of the particle from the minimum
initial energy of particles in the beam). The enhancing eﬀect is possible only in the case
when the cooled beam occupies a small lauer in the phase space. It is proportional to the
ratio of the minimum energy of the beam to its energy spread. The enhanced cooling would
be absent when the particles of the beam where distributed in the range of energies from
zero to maximum one. Below we will discuss some possible enhanced schemes of cooling.

3.1 One-dimensional laser cooling of ion beams in storage rings

A typical version of one-dimensional laser cooling of ion beams is based on the resonant
interaction of unbunched ion beam and homogeneous monochromatic laser beam overlapping
the ion one in the transverse direction. The initial frequency of the laser beam (photon
10At that the velocity of extending of the interaction with particles must be higher then the maximum

velocity of shrinking of the instantaneous orbits of particles under interaction with the target.

7

energy) in this version of cooling is chosen so that photons interact ﬁrst with the most
high energy ions. Then the frequency is scanning (frequency chirp) in the high frequency
direction, and ions of a lower energy begin to interact with the laser beam and decrease their
energy. The scanning of the laser frequency is stopped when all ions are gathered at the
minimum energy of ions in the beam.

The resonance ion energy εr = Mc2γr, where γr = [1 + (ωtr/ωL)2]/2(ωtr/ωL) is the
resonance relativistic factor. The initial resonance energy is above the equilibrium energy of
the storage ring, and is higher than that corresponding to the maximum ion energy in the
beam. Minimum ion energy must be higher than the equilibrium one as well (the accelerating
RF electric ﬁeld strength will be switched on after cooling). The rate of scanning must
correspond to the condition ˙εr = dεr/dt < P , where P corresponds to the power of radiation
scattered by an ion at resonance conditions.

The cooling time is equal to the time interval, at which the particle with maximum initial
energy emits the electromagnetic radiation energy equal to the initial energy spread σε in of
the ion beam, and the energy spread of the cooled beam is determined by either the average
energy of the scattered photons εloss or the natural line width of the laser beam:

τǫ =

,

σε in
P
ε/σε in ∼

σε
ε

= max

εloss
Mc2γ

 

=

¯hωtr
Mc2 ,

(

∆ω
ω

)nat

.

!

(3.1)

This time is

104 times lower than that in the case of the three-
dimensional cooling. This is the consequence of the selective resonance interaction of photon
and ion beams in the one-dimensional method when ions of the energy higher than minimum
initial energy of the beam interact with the laser beam.

103

∼

÷

The considered method is one of the possible one-dimensional ion cooling methods11.
The ﬁrst similar method was used for cooling of non-relativistic ion beams [8], [9], [34]12.
Relativistic version of such a method was developed in [36].

One-dimensional laser cooling of bunched ion beams by monochromatic laser beam is
possible with accelerating ﬁelds of radiofrequency cavities (see section 2.1) [30]. The broad-
band laser beam with a sharp low frequency edge can be used as well. In this case the edge
frequency must have such a value that only ions with energies above the equilibrium one
can be excited [37]. To gather the cooled ion beam into short bunches the radiofrequency
accelerating cavity should be switched on adiabatically.

3.2 Two-dimensional cooling of particle beams in storage rings

One-dimensional laser cooling is highly eﬃcient in the longitudinal direction, but rather
diﬃcult in the transverse direction unless a special longitudinal-radial coupling mechanism
11In another version of cooling, the laser frequency can be constant, and the acceleration of ions in the
direction of given resonance energy can be produced by eddy electric ﬁelds of a linear induction accelerator
or by phase displacement mechanism. The use of an induction accelerator is not eﬃcient in high energy
(ε > 1 Gev/nucleon) storage rings.

12Two laser beams of diﬀerent frequencies, co- and counter-propagating with the ion beam, can be used
in the non-relativistic and moderate relativistic case. In the coordinate system connected with the ion beam
the frequencies of laser waves can be equal and form a standing wave at the resonance energy [35].

8

is applied (synchro-betatron resonance [3, 38, 25], dispersion coupling [10, 17]). Moreover
this is the resonance method of cooling. It can be applied to cooling of only complicated
ions. In papers [25]-[28] a three-dimensional radiative ion cooling method is proposed and
considered above. Nevertheless, the quest for new more eﬃcient enhanced three-dimensional
cooling methods remains vital for cooling of electrons, protons, muons and both not fully
stripped and fully stripped high current ion beams. Below we will discuss a two-dimensional
method of cooling when alternative targets and selective interactions are used13.

1

2

3

1

2

3

6

7

8

9

10

11

~v

T

2

?

(cid:9)

?

~v

T

1

6

T

2

x

(cid:17)

T

1

6

6

-

y

1

2

3

x

T

1

?

6

a

?

Figure 1: The scheme of the two-dimensional ion cooling.The axis y is the equilibrium orbit of the
storage ring, 1-1, 2-2 ... the location of the instantaneous ion orbit after 0,1,2 ... events of the
ion energy loss, T1and T2 are the targets moving in turn with the velocity ~vT1,2 from outside to an
equilibrium orbit.

We consider the process of change of amplitudes of betatron oscillations A and positions
of instantaneous orbits xη in the process of the energy loss of particles in targets when the
RF accelerating system of the storage ring is switched oﬀ [39]. The internal target T1 at
the ﬁrst stage and external target T2 of constant thickness at the second one will be moved
in the transverse directions in turn (see Fig.1). They can be located in diﬀerent positions
along the way of the particle beam in the storage ring. Every stage of cooling can be used
in combination with another schemes of enhanced cooling or with schemes of the emittance
13Coupling resonance of betatron oscillations permits cooling of a particle beam in three dimensions.

9

1

exchange in the longitudinal and transverse planes.

xη
The velocity of a particle instantaneous orbit ˙xη depends on the distance xT1, 2 −
between the target and the instantaneous orbit, and on the amplitude of particle oscillations.
When the instantaneous orbit of a particle enters the target at the depth higher than the
amplitude of the particle oscillations then its velocity ˙xη in is maximum one by the value and
negative. The velocity xη in is given by the material target thickness or the intensity and the
length of the interaction region of the laser target.

In the general case particles do not interact with the target every turn. That is why the
W , where W < 1 is the probability of a particle to cross the target. The
velocity ˙xη = ˙xη in ·
probability W is determined by the ratio of the period of betatron oscillations of a particle
to a part of the period which is determined by conditions: 1) the deviation of the particle
from the instantaneous orbit is greater than the distance between the orbit and the target
x
xT1 2 −
A), 2) the deviation is directed to the target. It can be presented in
(
0| ≤
|
the form W = ∆ϕ1, 2/π, where ∆ϕ1 = π
xη)/A,
labels 1, 2 correspond to ﬁrst and second targets used at ﬁrst and second stages of cooling
accordingly.

arccosξ1, ∆ϕ2 = arccosξ2, ξ1, 2 = (xT1, 2 −

xη| ≤ |

−

′

In the approximation when random processes of excitation of betatron oscillations of
particles in a target of a storage ring can be neglected the behavior of the amplitudes of
betatron oscillations of these particles is determined by the equation ∂A2/∂xη =
0 >
or ∂A/∂xη =
0 > /A (see Appendix A), where < x
0 > is the particle deviation from
the instantaneous orbit averaged through the range of phases 2∆ϕ1, 2 of betatron oscillations
where the particle cross the target14. The value < x
Asinc ∆ϕ1 2, where sinc∆ϕ1 2 =
sin∆ϕ1 2/∆ϕ1 2, signs + and
are related to the ﬁrst and second stages of cooling. Thus the
cooling processes at the ﬁrst and second stages are determined by the system of equations

0 >=

2 < x

< x

−

−

±

−

′

′

′

′

=

∂A
∂xη

sinc∆ϕ1,2,

˙xη in
π
arccosξ1, ∆ϕ2 = arccosξ2, ξ1, 2 = (xT1, 2 −

∂xη
∂t

±

=

−

∆ϕ1,2.

xη)/A.

where ∆ϕ1 = π

These equations are valid both for one and for a set of thin foils of the same total
thickness, located at diﬀerent azimuths and at deﬁnite depths of storage rings. This system
of equations permits to investigate the main processes connected with cooling of particle
beams.

From the Eqs. (3.2) and the expression ∂A/∂xη = [∂A/∂t]/[∂xη/∂t] it follows:

∂A
∂t

=

˙xη in
π

sin ∆ϕ2 =

˙xη in
π

ξ2
1, 2.

1
q

−

Let the initial instantaneous particle orbits be distributed in a region xη ±

σx,ε,0 and initial
amplitudes of particle radial betatron oscillations A0 be distributed in a region σx,b,0 relative
to their instantaneous orbits, where xη is the location of the middle instantaneous orbit of
particles of the beam; σx,ε,0, the mean-root square deviation of instantaneous orbits from
the middle one. The value σx,ε,0 is determined by the initial energy spread σε,0. Suppose
14We suppose that particles loose their energy in the target. When a complicated ion is excited in the
target, then we suppose that the length of decay of the excited ion is much less then the length of betatron
oscillations of the particle.

(3.2)

(3.3)

10

that the initial spread of amplitudes of betatron oscillations of particles σx,b,0 is identical
for all instantaneous orbits of the beam. The velocity of the instantaneous orbit in a target
˙xη,in < 0, the velocity of the ﬁrst target vT1 > 0 and the velocity of the second target vT2 < 0.
Below we will use the relative velocities of targets k1,2 = vT1,2/ ˙xη,in. In our case k1 < 0 and
k2 > 0.

First stage of cooling

At the ﬁrst stage of the two-dimensional cooling, an internal target T1 (laser beam or a
a), where a is the target
material medium target) is located at the orbit region (xT1, xT1 −
width (see Fig. 1). The internal edge of the target has the form of a ﬂat sharp boundary.
At the initial step the target overlaps only a part of the particle beam so that particles with
largest initial amplitudes of betatron oscillations interact with the target. The interaction
takes place only at the moment when the particle deviation caused by betatron oscillations is
σx,b,0.
directed toward the target and has approximately the maximum initial amplitude A0 ≃
In this case immediately after the interaction and loss of energy the position of a particle
and the direction of its momentum remain the same, but the instantaneous orbit is displaced
inward in the direction of the target15. The radial coordinate of the instantaneous orbit and
the amplitude of betatron oscillations are decreased to the same value owing to the dispersion
coupling. After every interaction the position of the instantaneous orbit will approach the
target more and more and the amplitude of betatron oscillations is coming smaller until it
will reach some small value when the instantaneous orbit will reach the edge of the target.
Up to this moment the instantaneous orbit go in the direction to the target, but the particle
depth of dipping do not move forward deeper into the target.

At the moment when the instantaneous orbit of the particle enter the target the amplitude
of the particle betatron oscillations is much decreased. The instantaneous orbit will continue
its movement in the target with constant velocity ˙xη in if the target is homogeneous one, has
constant thickness and when its depth of dipping in the target is greater then the amplitude
of particle betatron oscillations16.

The particle beam has a set of amplitudes of betatron oscillations and instantaneous
orbits. To cool the beam we must move the target in the direction to the particle beam
or move instantaneous orbits of the particle beam in the direction to the target17 at some
velocity vT1 until the target will reach the instantaneous orbit having maximum energies.
After all particles of the beam will interact with the target, the latter must be removed or
the particle beam must be returned to the initial position for a short time. After this, all
particles will have small amplitudes of betatron oscillations and increased energy spread.

Here we will estimate the possibilities of the transverse cooling of particle beams at the
ﬁrst stage of cooling. Let the internal target be displaced in the direction of the being cooled
15We suppose that the friction leads to a decrease in the momentum by the value only and neglect scattering

of the particle in the target for the time of the enhanced cooling

16The amplitude will be increased in proportion to the r.m.s. number of particle interactions with the
target when random processes of deviation of energy losses from an average value exist. The amplitude
increase here is slower than the amplitude reduction when it changed proportionally to the number of
interactions. We will neglect this increase here.

17A kick, decreasing of the value of the magnetic ﬁeld in bending magnets of the storage ring, a phase

displacement or eddy electric ﬁelds can be used for this purpose.

11

≥

xT1 ≃

∆xT1 then ∆ϕ1 ≃

beam step by step with a pitch ∆xT1 = σx,b,0/M, where M
2 is the whole number. In this
case at the ﬁrst step of the ﬁrst stage of cooling the target overlaps a pitch ∆xT1 of a being
cooled beam. The instantaneous orbits of particles having maximum amplitudes of betatron
oscillations after the moment of their entry into the target will be displaced in the direction
of the target with a velocity ˙xη and the amplitudes of betatron oscillations will be reduced.
Af ≫
When xη −
∆xT1/3Af ≃
1, sinc ∆ϕ1 ≃
1
∆xT1 up to the time
xT1)
(xη −
and according to (3.2) the value ∂A/∂xη ≃
when the instantaneous orbits approach the target to the distance xη ≃
xT1 and when ﬁnal
∆xT1. When the orbits enter the target (∆ϕ1 = π/2)
amplitude of betatron oscillations Af ∼
the value dA/dxη is decreased by π/2 times only. Then the orbits of particles will be deepened
into the homogeneous target at the depth greater than their ﬁnal amplitudes of betatron
oscillations Af , i.e. when ∆ϕ1 = 0, ∂A/∂xη = 0. After that the particles will interact with
the target every turn without change of their amplitudes. This means that amplitudes of
betatron oscillations in the ﬁrst approximation will not tend to zero, but to some ﬁnite value
Af ∼
the equation (B.5) for the motionless target (k1 = 0, ξ0 =
the Table 1.

More accurate numerical calculations of the dependencies Af /A0 and Af /∆xT1 based on
1 + ∆xT1/A0.) are presented in

2∆xT1/Af ≪
1, A(ξ1)
−

∆xT1 ∼

σx b 0/M.

≃

−

−

q

1

Table 1

∆xT1/A0
Af /A0
Af /∆xT1 —–

0.000
0.000

0.010
0.024
2.40

0.050
0.082
1.640

0.100
0.137
1.37

0.500
0.442
0.884

1.00
0.707
0.707

The regime of the target movement step by step was considered for illustration of the
In practice we can move the target uniformly with the velocity vT1.
cooling mechanism.
Detailed numerical calculations of the ﬁrst stage of the transverse cooling in this case are
presented in the Appendix B. According to these calculations Af /A0 =

/(
k1|
|
σx,0/vT1, where
The time of the target movement in the ﬁrst stage of cooling is ∆t1 ≃
q
σx,0 = σx,b,0 + σx,ε,0 is the total initial radial dimension of the particle beam. For this
time the instantaneous orbits of particles of a beam having minimum energy and maximum
∆t1. Hence the ﬁnal radial
amplitudes of betatron oscillations will pass the distance
dimension of the beam determined by the ﬁnal energy spread of the beam and the total
radial dimension of the beam will be increased to the value

˙xη in|

+ 1).

k1|

≃ |

|

σx,f ≃

σx,ε,f = σx,0

.

1
k1|

|

(3.4)

Thus, at the ﬁrst stage we have a high degree enhanced cooling of particle beams in the

transverse plane (3.4) and more high degree of heating in the longitudinal one (B.6).

At the ﬁrst stage of the two-dimensional transverse cooling of particle beams it is desirable
to use the straight section with low-beta and high dispersion functions. In this case, less
events of the photon emission are required to cool the beam in the transverse direction. This

12

is because the change of amplitudes of betatron oscillations is the same as the change of
positions of instantaneous orbits of the particle. Meanwhile, the spread of amplitudes of
betatron oscillations is small and the step between positions of instantaneous orbits is high.

Second stage of cooling

At the second stage of cooling an external target T2 is moving with a velocity vT2 < 0 from
outside of the working region of the storage ring in the direction of a being cooled particle
beam (or instantaneous orbits of the particle beam are moved in the direction of the target).
˙xη,in
The instantaneous orbits of particles will go in the same direction with a velocity ˙xη ≤
after the moment of their ﬁrst interaction with the target. In this case, the target will start
to interact ﬁrst with particles having the largest amplitudes of betatron oscillations and the
highest energies at some moment t0. Then it will interact with particles of lesser amplitudes
and energies. When the target will pass through the instantaneous orbit of particles having
zero amplitudes and minimum initial energies then it must be removed to the initial position.
We will start from the estimation of the value of the transverse heating. According
ξ2
/π for the arbitrary time
1, 2 ≤ |
t0 +
0 that is up to the time t1/2 ≃
t0
1), the instantaneous orbit will pass the
1) and the increase of the amplitude of betatron oscillations will
1). Speciﬁcally, when vT2 = 1.5 ˙xη in the values ∆xT2 = 1.5A0,

to (3.2) and (3.3) the value ∂A/∂t = ( ˙xη in/π)
/2 when xT2 −
and the value
| ≤ |
A0/
vT2 −
the target will pass the way ∆xT2 < 2A0k2/(2k2 −
way ∆xη < A0/(2k2 −
be ∆A < 2A0k2/π(k2 −
∆xη < A0/2, ∆A1 < A0/π.

1
−
xη ≥
q
when the target will reach the instantaneous orbit. For the time t1/2 −

|
˙xη in/2

˙xη in|

˙xη in|

∂xη/∂t

|

|

After the target passed the instantaneous orbit at a moment tc then in a time interval
t1/2 the value ˙xη is increased to the value ˙xη in, and ∂A/∂t is decreased to zero. At that
tc −
the value xη < xT2 + A and the amplitude of betatron oscillations will reach its ﬁnal value
t0), and at this step the increase
Af . Speciﬁcally, when vT2 = 1.5 ˙xη in then tc −
0.42A0. Finally
of the amplitude of betatron oscillations will be ∆A2 < A0(1 + 1/π)(1/π)
we will have the amplitude Af ≃
Now we will estimate the behavior of the energy spread of the beam in the second stage
of cooling. Let, for the simplicity, that the initial spread of positions of instantaneous orbits
σx,ε,0 is much greater then the spread of the amplitudes of betatron oscillations σx,b,0 of the
beam. In this case high energy particles ﬁrst and then particles with smaller energies will
interact with the moving target until the target will reach the instantaneous orbit with the
least energy. Then the target must be removed or the particle beam instantaneous orbits
must be returned to the initial position for a short time.

A0 + ∆A1 + ∆A2 ≃

2(t1/2 −

1.74A0.

t0 ≃

≃

The particles of the beam having maximum energy and zero amplitudes of betatron
oscillations will interact with the target during the time ∆t
σx,ε,0/vT2. For this time
∆t2
2 σε,b,0. At that
the instantaneous orbits of particles will pass the distance
particles having minimum energy and zero amplitudes of betatron oscillations will stay at
rest. Hence it follows that the spread of instantaneous orbits of these particles will be
k−1
compressed to the value σx,ε,f ≃
2 ). If we take into account the fact that the
behavior of the instantaneous orbit depends on the initial amplitude of particle betatron
oscillations then the total radial dimension of the beam can be presented in the form σx,ε,f =

2 ≃
˙xη in|

′ = k−1

σx,ε,0(1

−

|

′

13

σx,ε,0(k2 −
Appendix B, can be represented in the form (t > t

1)/k2 + ∆σx,ε, which, according to the numerical calculations produced in the
0)

′

[ k2−1
k2
[ k2−1
k2

σx,0−AT2

σx,b,0 −
σx,0
σx,b,0 +

q

ξ2,st ·
k2
k2−1 −

D2,tr + 0.28]σx,b,0,
π(k2 −

σx,ε,f ≤ 





1)ψ(k2, ξ2,c) + 0.28]σx,b,0, AT2 > lc, σx,0,

σx,0 ≤

AT2 < lc;

(3.5)

where AT2 is the amplitude of displacement of the second target; ξ2,st, the parameter ξ2
at the moment of the second target stop; D2,tr = Af /A0, the coeﬃcient of the decompres-
sion of the amplitudes of betatron oscillations of particles at the second stage of cooling;
lc = πk2ψ(k2, ξ2,c)A0, the way of movement of the second target, for which the instantaneous
orbits of particles having maximum initial amplitudes of betatron oscillations will be deep-
ened into the target on the depth higher then their ﬁnal amplitudes of betatron oscillations;
is because of we have got the maximum value 0.28 in (3.5) for the value ∆σx,ε,1.
the symbol
Notice that the Eq. (3.2) does not take into account that the target pass of a ﬁnite
T , where T = 1/f is the period of the particle revolution

≤

distance per one turn δxT2 =
around its orbit in the storage ring. When

vT2| ·

|

δxT2 > σx,b,0,

(3.6)

˙xη in|
vT2| ≥ |
then all instantaneous orbits of the particle beam can enter the target at the
|
xT > σx,b,0, that is, all at once under conditions ∂A/∂t = 0 (ϕ2 = π). In this
distance xη −
case there will not be any heating process in the transverse plane. This case can be realized
easier if we do a high-degree cooling of the particle beam for the ﬁrst stage of cooling, and
when the target is installed at the straight section with low β - function and high dispersion
function at the second stage of cooling.

We considered the example of the transverse heating and longitudinal cooling at the
second stage for illustration. Detailed numerical calculations of the amplitude of betatron
oscillations increase and damping of the energy spread of the beam at the second stage of
cooling are presented in the Appendix B.

The energy spread of the particle beam being cooled in the storage ring

σε
ε

> max

εloss
Mc2γ

,

 

δr
R

,

(

∆ω
ω

)nat

,

!

where δr is the length of the slope of the target edge; R = cT the average radius of the ring;
εloss, the average loss of the particle energy per one event of particle-photon interaction. The
value δr/R inﬂuence on the energy spread mainly at the second stage of cooling.

The damping times of the particle beam at the ﬁrst and second stages of cooling in the

transverse and longitudinal planes are

(3.7)

(3.8)

where in the smooth approximation σeq = εσx,b,0/αR the energy interval corresponding to
the energy spread of the particle beam whose instantaneous orbits are distributed through

τx =

σeq
k1P

,

τs =

σε in
P

,

14

the interval of radii σx,b,0; k1 ∼
power of the particle energy loss.

0.1

÷

0.2; α, the momentum compaction function, P is the

The transverse emittances of beams are proportional to theirs damping times. It means
that the emittance of a beam in the plane ”i” in the two-dimensional method of cooling ǫ(2)
is equal to the emittance corresponding to a three-dimensional one ǫ(3)
i multiplied by the
ratio of their damping times

i

i = ǫ(3)
ǫ(2)

i

τ (2)
i
τ (3)
i

.

(3.9)

The described process of transverse cooling is based on particle interactions with external
and internal targets. Similar interactions were described in 1956 by O’Neil [10]. However,
the targets in that case were motionless and could not lead to cooling18. They could be
used for injection and capture of only one portion of particles. For the purpose of the multi-
cycle injection and storage of heavy particles O’Neil, in addition to targets, suggested the
ordinary three-dimensional ionization cooling based on a thin hydrogen target jet situated
in the working region of the storage ring.

Discussion

The dynamics of positions of instantaneous orbits and amplitudes of betatron oscilla-
tions of particles interacting with a target strongly depends on the target velocity when the
instantaneous orbits are deepened into the target on the depth less then the amplitude of
particle betatron oscillations (see (3.2)). Moreover, the moving target begin interact with
particles of the beam located at diﬀerent instantaneous orbits at diﬀerent moments of time
and that is why can compress or decompress the spread of these orbits. These features of
interaction of moving target can be used for improving existing and adopting new schemes
of enhanced three-dimensional cooling.

|

|

q

)/

k1|

k1|

We have found (see (B.6), (3.4)), that at the ﬁrst stage of cooling there is the signiﬁcant
decrease of amplitudes of betatron oscillations (transverse cooling) and, at the same time,
a greater increase of the spread of instantaneous orbits (longitudinal heating). If the degree
of transverse cooling (B.6) is deﬁned by the coeﬃcient of compression C1,tr = A0/Af =
then, according to (3.4), the increase of the spread of the instantaneous

(1 +
orbits of the beam (decompression) will be D1,l ≃
At the second stage of cooling there is a signiﬁcant decrease of the spread of instantaneous
orbits of particles deﬁned by the compression coeﬃcient C2,l = σx,ε,0/σx,ε,f and, at the
same time, lesser value of increase of amplitudes of betatron oscillations (see (3.5), (B.8),
Tables 8, 9). If the condition (3.6) is not fulﬁlled then the degree of the transverse heating
(decompression) can be about the square root of the degree of the longitudinal cooling
σx,b,0 (see
0 (see Table 8,9) or when ξ2,st =
(D2,tr ≃
1, AT2 = 101σx.b.0). In the last case the degree of selectivity of interaction
Table 9 at ξ2,st =
of a target with instantaneous orbits is greater. It can be realized easier if we will locate
18 Internal target could be rotated out of the medium plane only to prevent the particle beam losses.

C2,l), when ξ2,st ≃
−

1, AT2 ≃
−

σx,ε,0 ≫

1,tr times.

C 2

q

15

the target in the straight section of the storage ring with a low-beta and high dispersion
function. When the condition (3.6) is fulﬁlled then heating process can be neglected at all.
The successive application of two stages of the two-dimensional cooling in tern will lead
to cooling of the particle beam in both degrees of freedom only in the case when the condition
(3.6) is fulﬁlled.

When the interaction of the particle beam and the target has the resonance or threshold
nature then we can use transverse cooling of particles at the ﬁrst stage of the two dimensional
method of cooling and then to use one dimensional method of longitudinal cooling at the
second one (see section (3.2.1)).

At the second stage, contrary to the ﬁrst one, the degree of longitudinal cooling can be
much greater then the degree of heating in the transverse plane. That is why we can use
the emittance exchange between longitudinal and transverse phase spaces (say using the
synchro-betatron resonance) and such a way to have enhanced two-dimensional cooling of
the particle beam based on the second stage of cooling only. In this case the ﬁrst stage of
cooling can be omitted and the second one can be repeated many times (see sections (3.2.2),
(3.2.3)).

3.2.1 Enhanced laser cooling of ion beams in storage rings

In the two-dimensional method of ion cooling based on the selective resonant interaction,
as the targets one can use two diﬀerent laser beams. The ﬁrst broadband laser beam must
have sharp geometrical internal boundary. Metal screens can be used at the exit of the laser
beams from an optical resonators to produce the extracted laser beams with sharp edges19.
The second laser beam must overlap the ion beam as a whole, have sharp frequency edge
or can be monochromatic one and must have scanning central frequency. In this case the
ordinary one-dimensional resonance laser cooling will take place at the second stage (see
Section 3.1). At that we can start from the second stage. Then the ﬁrst stage and the
second one must be repeated.

Example 1. The two-dimensional cooling of a hydrogen-like beam of 207

82 P b+81 in the
CERN LHC through the backward Rayleigh scattering of photons of two laser beam targets.
The broadband laser beams overlap the ion beam, have sharp frequency edges, and scanning
central frequencies.

Hz, α = 2.94
(σε,0 = 1.15

·

·

The relevant parameters of LHC and the beam in LHC are: 2πR = 27 km, f = 1.11

10−4, < βx > = 0.5m, γ = 3000, Mc2γ = 575 TeV, σε,0/ε = 2

1011 eV), the value σx,b,,0 = σx,ε,0 = 1.2

10−2 cm.

·

The relevant characteristics of the hydrogen-like (f12 = 0.416, g1 = 1, g2 = 3) lead ions
are: the transition between the 1S ground state and the 2P excited state of the particle
10−9
corresponds to the value of the resonant transition energy ¯hωtr = 68.7 keV, λtr = 1.8
cm, (∆ω/ω)nat = 2.72

10−4.

The relevant parameters of a laser: the laser wavelength λL = 4πcγ/ωtr = 1080˚A,
10−4, the r.m.s. transverse
L/λL = 67.2

¯hωL = 11.49 eV, the bandwidth of the laser beam (∆ω/ω)L = 5
laser beam size at its waist σL = 1.52
cm, lint = 2zR = 135 cm, the power of the laser beam is PL = 400 W.

10−2 cm, the Rayleigh length zR = πσ2

·

·

·

·

104
·
10−4

·

19 Production of laser beams with sharp edges in resonators is another problem which would be solved.

16

·

·

·

·

·

4.2

10−7

105 W/cm2, D = 1.1

σε, 0/ε, ldec ≃
105sec., εx = 3

Under this condition the average energy of the scattered photons < ¯hωs >= εloss =
1,
109 eV/s. According to (3.1), (3.7) (3.9)
143

1012 W/cm2, IL = 5.5
γ¯hωtr = 206 MeV, Isat = 4.94
≪
10−18 cm2, ∆Nint = 3.52
10−3, P = 8.04
σ = 1.32
·
14.3 sec., the transverse damping time τx|k1=0.1 ≃
the longitudinal damping time τs ≃
sec., the total damping time τ = 157.3 sec., the limiting relative energy spread σε/ε
≃
10−3 cm. According to (2.1), (2.3), the damping time and
(∆ω/ω)nat ≃
the emittance of the ion beam in the case of three-dimensional ion cooling method are:
rad20. It means that in the two-dimensional method of
τx = 1.43
ion cooling, according to (3.9), εx = 2.86

10−16 m
·
·
Notice, that at the ﬁrst stage of the resonance ion cooling the width of the frequency
Af . In
band can be small. It can correspond to the spread of the instantaneous orbits ∆xη ≃
this case the amplitude of betatron oscillations of particles will be in time to be cooled before
their instantaneous orbits will go out of the spread and will be stopped without interaction
with the laser target. Heating of the particle beam in the transverse plane at the another
side of the laser target will be absent.

·
10−15 m
·

rad.

·

·

The two-dimensional method of laser cooling of ion beams will work in the case when
the RF system of the storage ring is switched on as well. In this case the scanning of the
frequency of the accelerating ﬁelds can be used instead of moving targets. At that the laser
targets T1 and T2 have to be switched on and oﬀ in turn.

3.2.2 Enhanced laser cooling of electron and proton beams

To produce the enhanced laser cooling of electron and proton beams based on the backward
Compton scattering we are forced to use laser beams with sharp geometrical boundaries.
We can not neglect synchrotron radiation of electron beams in the guiding magnetic ﬁelds of
lattices of storage rings. That is why we are forced to coll such beams in the radio frequency
buckets. Cooling of the particle beams in buckets is another problem which can be considered
in a separate paper. Obviously this problem can be solved when only second stage of cooling
is used under conditions of synchro-betatron resonance.

Here we would like to notice that when the spread of amplitudes of betatron oscillations
is near to zero then we can take the parameter k2 = 1. In this case the cooled beam according
to (3.5) will be monochromatic. It means that we can add the second stage of cooling to the
case of the three dimensional laser cooling of electron beams considered in [32] one time and
then extract the beam with low both transverse and longitudinal emittances.

3.2.3 Enhanced ionization cooling of muon beams in storage rings

103
Muons have rather small lifetime (
turns only in the strong magnetic ﬁeld (
10 T). That is why the muon beams require
enhanced cooling. Muons have no nuclear interactions with the material medium of the
target. That is why they have no problems with the inelastic scattering in the target.

2.2µsec) in their rest frame. They can do about 3

∼

∼

·

The enhanced method of the two-dimensional cooling of particle beams in storage rings
can be used in the case of muon cooling as well. Two material medium targets are to be

20The damping time of bunched ion beams can be done less at the same average power P [27].

17

∼

placed in the inner and external sides of the working region of the storage ring. The use of
thick targets can lead to high rate of the ionization energy losses of muons in the targets.
The kick/bump can be used for the displacement of the instantaneous orbits forth and back
with high velocity (

˙xη in) instead of the displacement of targets.

If the velocity of movement of the instantaneous orbit ˙xT2 by a kick in the direction of
the external target is slightly greater then the velocity of movement of the orbit in the target
(k2 = ˙xT2/ ˙xη in ≃
1) then during the second stage of longitudinal cooling the instantaneous
orbits will be gathered at the inner orbit position in a damping time (3.1), (3.8), where P is
the average power of the ionization energy loss. At this moment the kick must be switched
oﬀ for a short time. In this case, the muon beams will be cooled down to high degree in the
longitudinal plane. To avoid the heating of the beam in the transverse plane we must work
21.
under condition (3.6), that is ˙xT2 ·
be moved to the muon beam with the velocity ˙xT1 ≃
The two-stage cooling process can be repeated several times to increase the degree of
cooling. To keep the position of instantaneous orbits of particles at central part of the
working region of the storage ring after cooling stages the magnetic ﬁeld of the storage ring
can be decreased in time.

The enhanced transverse muon cooling will take place when the instantaneous orbit will

xη in (see section 3.1).

T > σx, b, 0

0.1

·

Another version of the two-dimensional muon cooling is based on using of the second
stage of cooling only and the coupling of the longitudinal and transverse planes through the
synchro-betatron resonance. In this case the ﬁrst stage of cooling can be omitted.

3.2.4 Enhanced cooling of ion beams through the e± pair production

The three-dimensional method of laser cooling of ion beams based on the nonselective in-
teraction of counterpropagating ion and photon beams through the e± pair production were
considered in [18]. More eﬀective two-dimensional method of cooling based on the threshold
phenomena of the e± pair production in Coulomb ﬁelds of ions was considered in [39]. Below
we will consider the latter case.

The cross-section of the electron-positron pair production has the form

σ

|¯hω−2mec2≤mec2

∼

π
12

Z 2αr2
e

 

¯hω

2mec2

−
mec2

3

,

!

σ

|¯hω≫2mec2

≃

28
9

Z 2αr2

e[ln

2¯hω
mec2 −

109
42 −

f (αZ)],

(3.10)

where Z is the atomic number of the ion, f (ν)/ν2

1.203

≃

ν2 [40].

′

−

The cross-section (3.10) has a threshold photon energy ¯hω

thr = 2mec2 in the ion rest
frame or ¯hωthr = 2mec2/(1 + βthr)γthr in the laboratory reference frame, where the ion
threshold relativistic factor γthr = [1 + (ω

thr/ωL)2]/2(ω
Below we will consider an example of the two-dimensional laser cooling of the lead ion

thr/ωL).

′

′

beam through the e± pair production.

21We suppose that after acceleration the transverse and longitudinal emittances of muon beams are much

less then the corresponding acceptances of the storage ring.

18

Example 2. The two-dimensional cooling of the fully stripped ion beam of lead 207

82 P b+82

in the CERN LHC through the e± pair production.

The relevant parameters of LHC and the beam in LHC are the same as in the previous
10−4, γ = 3000, Mc2γ = 575 TeV,

104 Hz, α = 2.94

·
1011 eV), the value σεb = σε in, σx b = σx ε = 1.2

·
thr = 2mec2 = 1.02MeV , λ

·
thr = 0.01217˚A, ¯hωthr =

10−2 cm.

′

′

·

example: 2πR = 27 km, f = 1.11
σε in/ε = 2

10−4 (σε in = 1.15

In this method of cooling ¯hω
2mec2/(1 + β)γ = 170 eV, λthr = 73˚A.

·

·

The relevant parameters of a laser: wavelength λL = 36.5˚A, ¯hωL = 340 eV, the bandwidth
10−2 cm, the Rayleigh

(∆ω/ω)L < 10−4, the r.m.s. transverse size at a beam waist σL = 1.52
length zR = πσ2

L/λL = 1989 cm, lint = 2zR = 3978 cm; the power PL = 400 W.

105 W/cm2, σ = 8.1
·
1.58
·

10−24 cm2, ∆Nint = 2.69
105 s., the damping time for the betatron oscillations

In this case the average energy loss per one event of pair production εloss ≃
10−9, P = 6.43
·

GeV, IL = 5.48
·
longitudinal damping time τs ≃
10 times greater. According to (3.7) the limiting relative energy spread is σε/ε

∼
10−6.
The average power of the X-ray laser in the considered example is rather high but it
can be realized in future FELs [41]. The X-ray FELs are proposed to operate in the pulsed
regime.
In this case the damping time or/and the power of the laser can be decreased
essentially (two-four orders) if we use ion beam gathered in short bunches separated by a
104), and use interaction regions with smaller diameters
long distances (duty cycle
of ion and photon beams.

2γmec2 = 3.06
1010 eV/s., the

102

5.3

∼

≃

÷

·

·

4 Cooling of electron and ion beams in linear accele-

rators

Electron beams can be cooled in linear accelerators if external ﬁelds (undulators, electromag-
netic waves) producing radiation friction forces will be distributed along the axes of these
accelerators. The physics of cooling of electron beams under conditions of linear accelera-
tion is similar to one in storage rings where external ﬁelds are created in the dispersion-free
straight sections of the rings, and the synchrotron radiation in bending magnets of the
rings can be neglected (see Section 2). The element of the irreversibility takes place in this
case too. The electron momentum losses are parallel to the particle velocity and therefore
include transverse and longitudinal momentum losses. The reacceleration of the electron
beams in accelerating structures of linear accelerators restores the longitudinal momentum.
The transverse emittance is reduced by 1/e with as little as 2ε of the total energy exchange.
The expected emittances of cooled beams are small in both transverse directions.

First, the eﬀect of undulator/wiggler radiation damping on the transverse beam emittance
was studied by A.Ting and P.Sprangle for linear accelerators based on inverse free-electron
lasers [42]. In [43], the same eﬀect applied to the case of the radio frequency linear acceler-
ators is considered. In [44] and later in [45], the case of linear acceleration was investigated,
where a laser beam was used instead of a wiggler. General formulas in this cases are similar.
Some peculiarities are in the hardness of the emitted radiation which determines the energy
spread and transverse emittance of being cooled beams. The hardness of the backward scat-
tered laser radiation is more high then undulator/wiggler radiation. That is why laser beams

19

104 MeV) electron energies. A strong focusing of
for damping can be used at small (
electron and laser beams at the interaction point is necessary in this case. Damping wigglers
can be used at high energies (10
100 GeV) and in the limits of more long distances along
the axis of the accelerator (about some kilometers).

103

÷

∼

÷

The analogies with the enhanced particle cooling in linear accelerators are possible as
well when bending magnets will be used for dispersion separation of particles and selective
cooling. Monochromatization of ion beams can be realized by broadband lasers with sharp
frequency edge located at the exit of the linear accelerator.

5 Conclusion

The fundamental ideas of cooling of particle beams based on a friction were invented during
the past ﬁve decades. First the synchrotron radiation damping/cooling was developed theo-
retically. The theory of the synchrotron radiation damping is used during designing of the e±
synchrotrons and storage rings for the e± circular colliders and next generations of the syn-
chrotron and undulator radiation sources. Activity in this ﬁeld have led to the development
of storage ring lattices (straight sections with high- and low-beta functions and zero momen-
tum compaction factors, using of magnets with low magnetic ﬁelds and large bending radii).
The necessity in increasing of luminosity of the p, p colliders have led to a development of
electron and stochastic methods of cooling of heavy particles. The development of the idea of
the inertial conﬁnement fusion have led to a necessity of ion cooling of non-fully stripped ion
beams through the intrabeam scattering [15, a]. The development of µ colliders stimulated
development of schemes based on well-known methods of ionization friction. Laser cooling in
gaps was naturally extended to the enhanced one-dimensional laser cooling in storage rings,
to the enhanced three-dimensional cooling through a synchro-betatron resonance or through
the longitudinal-transverse dispersion in storage rings.

In this review we have presented diﬀerent methods of cooling of relativistic particle beams
in a single particle approximation. We hope that the development and adoption of these
methods will lead to the next generation of storage rings for colliders of diﬀerent particles,
new light sources in optical to X-ray and γ -ray regions [28], [32], ion fusion [15, a], sources
of gravitational radiation in IR and more hard regions [46], and so on.

20

References

[1] D.Bohm and L.Foldy, Phys. Rev. v.70, 249, (1946).

[2] M.Sands, Phys. Rev., v.97, p. 740 (1955).

[3] K.W.Robinson, Phys. Rev., 1958, v.111, No 2, p.373; A.Hoﬀman, R.Little, J.M.Peterson

et al., Proc. VI Int. Conf. High Energy Accel. Cambridge (Mass.), 1967, p.123.

[4] A.A.Kolomensky and A.N.Lebedev, Theory of Cyclic Accelerators. North Holland Publ.,
C o, 1966; M.Sands, ”The physics of electron storage rings, an Introduction”, SLAC
Report 121, Nov. 1970 (unpublished); H.Bruk, Accelerateurs Circulaires de Particules
(Press Universitaires de France, 1966); H.Wiedemann, Particle Accelerator Physics I &
II (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993.

[5] G.I.Budker, Atomnaya Energia 22, 346 (1967); Ya.A.Derbenev, A.N.Skrinskii, Sov. Phys.

Rev., v.1, p.165, 1981.

[6] D.J.Wineland and H.Dehmelt, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 20, 637, (1975); T.W.H¨ansch and

A.L.Shawlov, Opt. Commun., v.13, p.68 (1975).

[7] P.J.Channel, J.Appl.Phys., v. 52(6), p.3791 (1981); L.D.Selvo, R.Bonifacio, W.Barletta,

Optics Communications, v.116, (1995), p.374.

[8] S.Shr¨oder, R.Clein, N.Boos et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., v. 64, No 24, p.2901 (1990).

[9] J.S.Hangst, M.Kristensen, J.S.Nielsen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., v. 67. 1238 (1991);
J.S.Hangst, K.Berg-Sorensen, P.S.Jessen et al. Proc. IEEE Part. Accel. Conf., San Fran-
cisco, May 6-9, NY, 1991, v.3, p.1764.

[10] O’Neil G., Phys. Rev., 102, 1418 (1956); A.Shoch, Nucl. Instr. Meth, v.11, p.40 (1961).

[11] A.A.Kolomensky, Atomnaya Energia, v.19, No 5, 1965, p.534.

[12] Yu.M.Ado, Atomnaya Energia, v.31, No 1, 1971, p.40.

[13] A.N.Skrinskii, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, v.138, No 1, p.3, 1982.

[14] S. van der Meer, CERN Internal Report CERN/ISR-PO/72-31 (1972).

[15] a) C.Rubbia, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A278, 253 (1989); b) M.-J.Miesner, R.Grimm,

M.Grieser, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. v.77, No4, p.623 (1996);

[16] R.Grimm, U.Eisenbarth, M.Grieser et al., Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop
on Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc, Ed. Pisin Chen, Monterey,
California, USA, 1998, p.200.

[17] I.Lauer, U.Eisenbarth, M.Griezer, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., v.31, No 10, p.2052, 1998.

[18] E.G.Bessonov, F.Willeke, Preprint DESY HERA 95-09, December 1995.

21

[19] Ya.B.Zel’dovich, Sov. Phys. Uspekhi, v.18, No 2, p.79 (1975).

[20] K.W.Robinson, ”Storage Ring for Obtaining Synchrotron Radiation Line Spectra”,

CEAL 1032 (1966).

September, 1995, p.109.

[21] J.B.Murphy, Microbunches Workshop, AIP Conference Proceedings 367, Upton, NY,

[22] A.Hutton, Particle accelerators, 1976, v.7, p.177.

[23] R.Chasman, G.K.Green, Proc. 5th All-Union Conference on charged particle accelera-

tors, Dubna, 5-7 Oct. 1976, v.2, p.172, Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

[24] L.Emery, Proc. Workshop on 4th Generation Light Sources, Febr.24-27, 1992, p.149,

Ed.M.Cornacchia and H.Winick, SSRL 92/02.

[25] E.G.Bessonov, a) Preprint FIAN No 6, 1994; b) Proc. of the Internat. Linear Accel.
Conf. LINAC94, Tsukuba, KEK, August 21-26, 1994, Vol.2, pp.786-788; c) Journal of
Russian Laser Research, 15, No 5, (1994), p.403.

[26] E.G.Bessonov, Proc. of the 15th Int. Free-Electron Laser Conference FEL94, Nucl. Instr.

Meth. v.A358, (1995), pp. 204-207.

[27] E.G.Bessonov and Kwang-Je Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, vol.76, No 3, p.431.

[28] E.G.Bessonov, K.-J.Kim, Proc. of the 1995 Part. Accel. Conf. and Int. Conf. on High-
Energy Accelerators, p.2895; Proc. 5th European Particle Accelerator Conference, Sitges,
Barcelona, 10-14 June 1996, v.2, p. 1196.

[29] D.V.Neuﬀer, Nucl. Instr. Meth., 1994, v.A350, p.24.

[30] J.S.Hangst et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., v.74, No 22, p.4432 (1995).

[31] K.-J.Kim, Proc. of the 7th Workshop on Advanced Accelerator Concepts, Lake Tahoe,

CA, 1996, AIP Conference Proceedings 398, p.243; LBNL-40004 (1996)

[32] Zh. Huang, R.D.Ruth, Phys. Rev. Lett., v.80, No 5, 1998, p. 976.

[33] E.G.Bessonov, Preprint FIAN No 35, Moscow, 1978; Proc. VI All-Union Conf. on
charged particle accelerators (Dubna, Oct. 11-13, 1978), Dubna JINR, 1979, p.203;
Trends in Physics, 1978: Proc. IV EPS General Conf., York (UK), 1978, Bristol 1979,
p.471.

[34] W.Petrich et al., Phys. Rev. A, v.48, No 3, 1993, p.2127.

[35] E.Bonderup, Proc. 5th Accelerator School, Ed.: S.Turner, CERN 95-06, v.2, p.731,

Geneva, 1995.

[36] D.Habs et al., Proc. of the Workshop on Electron Cooling and New Techniques,

Lengardo, Padowa - Italy, 1990, World Scientiﬁc, p.122.

22

[37] E.G.Bessonov, Bulletin of the American Physical Society, Vol.40, No 3, May 1995,

p.1196.

[38] H.Okamoto, A.M.Sessler, and D.M¨ohl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3977 (1994); T.Kihara,

H.Okamoto, Y.Iwashita, et al. Phys. Rev. E, v.59, No 3, p. 3594, (1999).

[39] E.G.Bessonov, K.-J Kim, F.Willeke, physics/9812043.

[40] V.B.Berestetskii, E.M.Lifshitz and L.P.Pitaevskii, Quantum Electrodynamics, 2nd ed.

(Pergamon Press, New York, 1982).

[41] J.Feldhause, B.Sonntag, Synchrotron Radiation News, 1998, v.1, No 1, p.14.

[42] A.C.Ting, P.A.Sprangle, Particle Accelerators, 1987, v.22, p.149

[43] N.S.Dikanskii, A.A.Mikhailichenko, Preprint 88-9, BINP, Novosibirsk, 1988; The Proc.

VI All-Union Particle Accelerator Conf., v.1, p.419, 1988, Dubna D9-89-52, 1989

[44] P.Sprangle, E.Esarey, in High Brightness Beams for Advanced Accelerator Application,

(AIP, New-York, 1992), p. 87; Phys. Fluids B4, 1992, p.2241.

[45] V.Telnov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78 (1997), p.4757; Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Work-
shop on Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc, Ed. Pisin Chen, Monterey,
California, USA, 1998, p.173; Proc. of the Int. Symp. on New Visions in Laser-Beam
Interactions, Oct. 11-15, 1999, Tokyo, Metropolitan University Tokyo, Japan. To be
published in Nucl. Instr. Meth. B (see also arXiv:hep-ex/0001028)

[46] E.G.Bessonov, Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop on Quantum Aspects of
Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc, Ed. Pisin Chen, Monterey, California, USA, 1998, p.330.

23

In a smooth approximation, the movement of a particle relative to its instantaneous orbit

Appendix A

position xη is described by

′

where x

= x

xη.

−

′

x

= A cos(Ωt + ϕ).

(A.1)

The amplitude of betatron oscillations of the particle A0 =

0 is the
particle deviation from the instantaneous orbit at the moment t0 of change of the particle
q
AΩ sin(Ωt + ϕ) the transverse
energy in a target (laser beam, material medium),
velocity of the particle. After the interaction, the position of the instantaneous orbit will
be changed at a value δxη. The particle will continue its movement relative to a new orbit.
Its deviation relative to the new orbit will be x
δxη, and the angle will not be changed.
′ 2
0 /Ω2. The change of the square of the
The new amplitude will be A1 =
amplitude

0 −
δxη)2 + ˙x

˙x
0 =

0 −

(x

−

q

′

′

′

′ 2
0 + ˙x
x

′ 2
0 /Ω2, where x

′

′

′

′

−

2x

A2

0 =

1 −

δ(A)2 = A2

x
0|
0δxη and δA =

0δxη + (δxη)2.
< A0, the second term in (A.2) can be neglected22. In this case the
δxη| ≪ |
When
|
value δ(A)2
2x
0/A)δxη. The amplitude of betatron oscillations of the
≃ −
−
δA
δxη|
A. It means that the particle
particle will be changed by the low
will change its amplitude of oscillations proportional to the number of passages N of the
particle through the target when the instantaneous orbit of the particle is at a distance of
A) away from the target. This is the highest rate of increase in
about their amplitude (
the amplitude of the particle oscillations.

x
0| ≃

(A.2)

when

| ≃ |

(x

∼

|

|

′

′

′

When the target is located at the external side of the working region of the storage
ring xT2 > 0, the instantaneous orbit position xη < xT2, the particle enter the target under
0 > 0, and when the energy loss of the particle leads to the decrease
conditions of deviations x
of its instantaneous orbit position (∂xη/∂ε > 0) then the amplitude of radial betatron
oscillations of the particle will be increased (heating conditions). In the opposite case when
the target is located at the inner side of the working region of the storage ring xT1 < 0,
xη > xT1, and x
0 < 0 the amplitude of radial betatron oscillations of the particle will be
decreased (cooling conditions).
2x

0δxη in (A.2) determines the classical damping (antidamping) processes in
particle beams of storage rings. The value δxη = Dx∆p/p, where Dx is the local dispersion
function [4], p = Mcβγ the momentum of the particle. This means that the scheme works
when the dispersion function Dx 6

= 0. The greater Dx the greater the rate of cooling.

The term

−

′

′

22In the framework of classical electrodynamics particles loose theirs energy continuously. That is why the
= 0 when the
= 0 (see Appendix B). Both damping and antidamping of betatron
)(δxη)2 > leads to

value (δxη)2 in (A.2) in this framework can be neglected. The averaged value < 2P (x
′
gradient of the energy loss ∂P (x
oscillations of particles in storage rings can be eﬀective in this case [4]. The term < P (x
the excitation of betatron oscillations only in the case of a intermittent random energy loss.

′
)/∂x

)x

>

′

′

′

24

6
6
Appendix B

From the deﬁnition of ξ1, 2 we have a relation xη = xT1, 2 −

ξ1, 2A(ξ1, 2). The time derivative
[A + ξ1, 2(∂A/∂ξ1, 2)]∂ξ1, 2/∂t, where vT1,2 = dxT1,2/dt is the velocity of the

∂xη/∂t = vT1,2 −
target. Equating this value to the second term in (3.2) we will receive the time derivative

∂ξ1, 2
∂t

=

˙xη in
π

πk1,2 −

∆ϕ1, 2

A(ξ1, 2) + ξ1, 2(∂A/∂ξ1, 2)

.

(B.1)

Using this equation we can transform the ﬁrst value in (3.2) to the form

sinc∆ϕ1,2(ξ1, 2) =

±

∂A
∂ξ1, 2

∂ξ1, 2
∂t

/

∂xη
∂t

=

πk1,2 −

∆ϕ1,2

[A + ξ1, 2(∂A/∂ξ1, 2)]∆ϕ1,2

∂A/∂ξ1, 2.

which can be transformed to

∂ ln A
∂ξ1, 2

=

±
(∆ϕ1,2 ±
When velocities of targets vT1 2 and velocities of instantaneous orbits in the targets ˙xη in
are constant (targets have constant thickness) then the received equation leads to the law of
change of the amplitudes of betatron oscillations of particles in the storage ring

ξ1, 2 sin ∆ϕ1,2)

πk1,2 −

.

sin ∆ϕ1,2

Af = A(ξ1, 2, f ) = A0 exp

ξ1,2,f

ξ1,2,0

Z

sin ∆ϕ1,2dξ1, 2, f
±
(∆ϕ1,2 ±
πk1,2 −

ξ1, 2 sin ∆ϕ1,2)

,

(B.2)

where the labels 0, f correspond to the initial time t0 and observation time tf accordingly.
The time dependence of the amplitudes and positions of the instantaneous orbits of
particles are determined by (3.2) through the parameter ξ(t). This parameter is determined
by (B.1) and (B.2). Substituting the values A and ∂A/∂ξ1, 2, f , which are determined by
(B.2), in (B.1) we can ﬁnd the connection between time of observation and parameter ξ1, 2

where

t0 =

t

−

πA0
˙xη in|

|

ψ(k1,2, ξ1, 2, f ),

(B.3)

ξ1, 2, f

ψ(k1,2, ξ1, 2, f ) =

−
πk1, 2 −
The equations (B.3) determine the time dependence of the functions ξ1, 2(tf −
−

t0). The
t0)] is determined by the equation (B.2) through
t0) in a parametric form. The time dependence of the position of the

time dependence of the amplitudes A[ξ1, 2(t
the functions ξ1, 2(t
instantaneous orbit follow from the deﬁnition of ξ1, 2

ξ1, 2, f sin ∆ϕ1, 2)

−

ξ0

Z

.

[A(ξ1, 2, f )/A0]dξ1, 2, f
(∆ϕ1, 2 ±

xη(t

t0) = xT1, 20 + vT1, 2(tf −

−

t0)

A[(ξ1, 2(tf −

−

t0)]

ξ(tf −

·

t0).

(B.4)

25

First stage of cooling

The law of change of the amplitudes of particle betatron oscillations is determined by

the equation (B.2), which in the ﬁrst stage of cooling can be presented in the form

Af = A0 exp

ξ1, f

ξ0

Z

πk1 + π

−

ξ2
1dξ1

1

−

q
arccos ξ1 + ξ1

−

−

.

ξ2
1

1
q

−

(B.5)

The dependence of the ratio Af /A0 of the ﬁnal amplitude of betatron oscillations of
particles Af to the initial one A0 on the relative velocity k1 < 0 of the target T1 is described
by the equation (B.7). The numerical calculations of this dependence are presented at the
Fig.2 and in the Table 2 for the case ξ0 =

1, ξf = 1.

−

A f /A 0

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

k1

Figure 2: The dependence of the ratio Af /A0 on k1.

Table 2

k1|
|
C −1
1 = Af /A0
k1|
/(
k1|

|

|
q

+ 1)

0
0
0

0.2
0.408
0.408

0.4
0.535
0.535

0.6
0.612
0.612

0.8
0.667
0.667

1.0
0.707
0.707

26

1

This dependence can be presented by the next approximate expression (possibly this

expression is the exact solution: precision of an estimate 10−10).

(B.6)

(B.7)

k1|
|
k1|
+ 1

Af ≃

A0v
u
u
t
Second stage of cooling

|

.

1) The law of change of the amplitudes of particle betatron oscillations is determined by

the equation (B.2), which in the second stage of cooling can be presented in the form

.

ξ2
2
tst, tA}

Af = A0 exp

ξ2,f

ξ0

Z

πk2 −

1

ξ2
2dξ2

−
−
arccos ξ2 + ξ2

q

1
q

|

|

vT2|

vT2|

is the moment of the target T2 stop, AT2/

−
, where tst = t0 +
where the parameter ξ2,f is determined by a moment tf = min
{
AT2/
is the duration of movement of the
target T2 through its amplitude of displacement AT2 and tA, corresponds to the moment when
the instantaneous orbit of a particle will reach in the target the depth equal its amplitude of
betatron oscillations A, i.e. when ξ2,A = ξ2,f (tA) =
1. After this moment the amplitude of
the particle oscillations is not changed. We will consider here the cooling of particle beams
under conditions ξ0 = 1. When AT2 < lA then, according to (B.7), the value Af has to be
calculated in the limits (ξ2,st, 1), where ξ2,st >

1 corresponds to the moment tst.

−
The moment tA can be realized only when the relative velocity of the second target
k2 > 1 and tst > tA. This moment, according to (B.3), is determined by a moment tA =
t0 + πA0ψ(k2, ξ2,c)/
t0 the target T2 will pass a way
lA0 =
t0) = πk2A0 ψ(k2, ξ2,c). The dependence ψ(k2, ξ2,c) determined by (B.9) is
vT2|
presented in the Table 3. The value lA depends on initial amplitude of a particle betatron
oscillations and tend to maximum one lc = πk2ψ(k2, ξ2,c)σx,b,0.

. During the time interval tc −

(tA −

xη,in|

−

|

|

Table 3
k2
ψ(k2, ξ2,c)

1.0

∞

1.02
13.80

1.03
9.90

1.05
6.52

1.1
3.71

1.2
2.10

1.3
1.51

1.4
1.18

1.5
0.980

1.7
0.735

2.0
0.538

The ratio of a maximum amplitude of betatron oscillations of a particle to the initial one
D2,tr,c = Af,c/A0 (Af,c = Af (ξ2,c) corresponding to the case tst > tc on the relative velocity k2
of the second target is presented at the Fig.3 and in the Table 4. According to calculations
this ratio can be presented by the next approximate expression (possibly this expression is
the exact solution: precision of an estimate 10−10).

Af,c ≃
2) The function ψ(k2, ξ2,f ) according to (B.3) can be presented in the form

A0

s

1

.

k2
k2 −

(B.8)

27

ψ(k2, ξ2,f ) =

1

exp

ξ2,f

Z

1
x [√1
R

−
πk2 −

t2/(πk2 −

arccos t + t√1
x2

arccos x + x√1

−

t2)]d t

dx.

−

(B.9)

A f, c /A 0

3.2

3

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

k2

Figure 3: The dependence of the ratio D2,tr,c = Af,c/A0 on k2.

Table 4

1)

1.0010
31.64
31.64

1.0001
100.005
100.005

k2
D2,tr,c = Af,c/A0
k2/(k2 −
Numerical calculations of this function for the cases k2 = 1.0, k2 = 1.1 and k2 = 1.5 are
presented in the Table 5, Table 6 and Table 7 accordingly. It can be presented in the next
approximate form

2.0000
1.414
1.414

1.0100
10.04
10.04

1.1000
3.32
3.32

1.5000
1.73
1.73

q

ψ(k2, ξ2,f )

C3(k2)ψ(

≃

),

ξ2,f
1
−
k2 + ξ2,f
1)2 + ... , ψ[(1

0.680(k2 −

1) + 0.484(k2 −

−

ξ2,f )/(k2 + ξ2,f )

−

|k2=1 ≃

(B.10)

where C3(k2)
(1

0.492
ξ2,f )/(1 + ξ2,f )).

≃

−

28

1

Table 5

(k2 = 1.0)

ξ2
ψ(k2, ξ2)

1.0
0

0.5
0.182

0.2
0.341

0
0.492

-0.2
0.716

-0.5
1.393

-0.8
4.388

-0.9
10.187

-1.0
-

∞

Table 6

(k2 = 1.1)

ξ2
ψ(k2, ξ2)

1.0
0

0.5
0.163

0.2
0.300

0
0.423

-0.2
0.595

-0.5
1.033

-0.8
2.076

-0.9
2.759

-1.0
3.710

Table 7

(k2 = 1.5)

ξ2
ψ(k2, ξ2)

1.0
0

0.5
0.116

0.2
0.202

0
0.273

-0.2
0.359

-0.4
0.466

-0.6
0.602

-0.8
0.772

-1.0
0.980

3) The evolution of instantaneous orbits and amplitudes of betatron oscillations under

the inﬂuence of the target pass the next moments.

′

ξ2,f σx,b(ξ2,f ), where xT2 = xT2,0 + vT2(t

a) First, the target T2 will interact with particles having the largest initial amplitudes
of betatron oscillations A0 = σx,b,0 and the highest energies. The instantaneous orbit of
these particles, according to the deﬁnition of the function ξ2 will be changed by the low
x
t0) up to the time t = tc. At the
η = xT2 −
same time instantaneous orbits x”
η of particles having the same maximum energy but zero
amplitudes of betatron oscillations will be at rest up to the moment t
vT2|
.
The orbit x
η by the distance
x”
∆xη|
η < 0. At
|
the moment t

, where the diﬀerence between the positions of orbits ∆xη|t0≤t≤t

0 will be displaced relative to the orbit x”
= x

will be maximum. It will be determined by the value

η at the moment t

0 = t0 + σx,b,0/

η −

−

0 the distance

′
0

|

′

′

′

′

′

∆xη|

|

∆xη,1 = ∆xη|t=t
−
0), according to (B.3) and the condition

σx,b(t

0) < 0,

ξ2(t

0)

=

′
0

·

′

′

′

(B.11)

′

(t

vT2|

|

0 −

t0) = σx,b,0, will

0)] = 1/πk2.
0)

′

1/π, ξ2,f (k2, t

0) =
0.28σx,b,0. This distance will be decreased with in-

0.22 (see Tables 5-7), σx,b(t

|k2≃1 ≃

′

where the parameter ξ2(t
be determined by the equation ψ[k2, ξ2,f (t

′

The value ψ[k2, ξ2,f |k2≃1 ≃

1.26σx,b,0 and the distance
creasing k2.

|

∆xη,1| ≃

b) The instantaneous orbit of particles x”
σx,b,0 + ˙xη, in(t
η = xT2,0 −

tc will be
changed by the low x”
). The diﬀerence between the
−
positions of two instantaneous orbits of particles having maximum and zero initial amplitudes
of betatron oscillations and equal initial energies will be equal to ∆xη,2 = [(k2 −
1)/k2][σx,b,0 +
ξ2,f σx,b(ξ2,st). At the moment tst, i.e. at the position of maximum displacement
vT2(t
of the second target, when tst −

η inside the time interval t
vT2|

AT2/vT2 the distance

t0 −

0 < t

σx,b,0/

t0 =

t0)]

−

−

≤

|

′

∆xη,2|t0≤tst≤tc =

− "

1

+ ξ2,stD2,tr)

σx,b,0,

(B.12)

#

−
k2 −
1
k2  

AT2
σx,b,0 −

!

where D2,tr = D2(k2, ξ2,st) = σx,b,st/σx,b,0, σx,b,st = σx,b,f |t=tst, AT2 = πk2ψ(k2, ξ2,st)σx,b,0 ≤
The typical dependence D2,tr deﬁned by (B.7) is presented on the Fig.4.

lc.

29

c) After the moment tc (tc < t < tst) the value (B.12) have a maximum corresponding to
1):

1, AT2 = lc, D2,tr,c =

ξ2,st = ξ2,c =

−

q
1

k2/(k2 −
k2
k2 −

+

s

k2 −
k2





∆xη,2|tc≤tst≤∞ =

π(k2 −

1 −

1)ψ(k2, ξ2, c)

σx,b,0.

(B.13)





k

= 1:01

2

D

= A

=A

2;tr

st

0

k

= 1:1

2

k

= 1:5

2

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

(cid:24)

2;st

Figure 4: The dependence of the ratio D

= A

=A

= (cid:27)

=(cid:27)

on (cid:24)

.

2;tr

st

0

x;b;f

x;b;0

2;st

′

First the target T2 interacts with instantaneous orbits of particles x

η having maximum
energy and amplitudes of betatron oscillations. The energy of particles is decreased and
amplitudes of betatron oscillations are increased. The instantaneous orbits of particles x”
η
having zero amplitudes and the same maximum energy will be at rest up to a moment t
0.
The diﬀerence between positions of these orbits ∆xη,1 at the moment t
0 will be maximum by
the value and negative. Instantaneous orbits of particles having maximum initial energies
and total set of amplitudes of betatron oscillations at this moment will be mixed with
instantaneous orbits of particles having lesser initial amplitudes and energies. The maximum
value
between the orbits
|
η and x”
x
η = 0, and then it will
be increased up to the moment tc (AT2 = lc), where it will be maximum. After the moment

0.28σx,b,0. After the moment t
η will be decreased, at some moment t”

∆xη,2(t)
0 will be equal zero ∆x”

∆xη,1|max ≤

0 the distance

|

|

′

′

′

′

10

8

6

4

2

30

2

1

tc both the amplitude of betatron oscillations and the spread of instantaneous orbits ∆xη,2
will be constant. This assertion is valid for the instantaneous orbits of the arbitrary energy.
When the value ∆xη,1 is negative then the instantaneous orbits of particles having min-
imum initial energies and maximum amplitudes of betatron oscillations will leave behind
the instantaneous orbits of particles having the same initial energies and zero amplitudes
of betatron oscillations. When the value ∆xη,2 is positive then the instantaneous orbits of
particles having maximum initial energies and amplitudes of betatron oscillations will fall
behind from the instantaneous orbits of particles having the same initial energies and zero
amplitudes of betatron oscillations. That is why the energy spread of the beam (3.5) will
have an addition ∆σx,ε =
]. This addition is proportional to the
initial spread of amplitudes of betatron oscillations of particles in the beam.

+ 0.5[∆xη,2 +

∆xη,1|

∆xη,2|

|

|

Examples

In the Tables 8, 9 the examples are presented for the longitudinal cooling of ion beams
at k2 = 1.0 and k2 = 1.1. The next notations were used: AT2/σx,b,0 = πψ(k2, ξ2,st); σx,ε,0 =
AT2 −

σx,b,0, D2,tr = σx,b,f /σx,b,0, C2,l = σx,ε,0/σx,ε,f ; Cx,b = σx,0/σx,f .

Table 8

k2 = 1.0,

lc =

AT2 = σx,0 = σx,ε,0 + σx,b,0

∞

ψ(1.0, ξ2,st) AT2/σx,b,0 σx,ε,0/σx,b,0 D2,tr
1.414
0.492
1.636
0.716
2.261
1.392
7.314
10.187

0.545
1.25
3.38
31.00

1.545
2.25
4.38
32.00

σx,ε,f /σx,b,0 C2,l Cx,b
0.92
0.278
1.00
0.61
1.19
1.41
2.26
6.86

1.96
2.05
2.40
4.52

Table 9

k2 = 1.1,

lc = 12.82σx,b,0,

AT2 = σx,0 = σx,ε,0 + σx,b,0

ψ(1.1, ξ2,st) AT2/σx,b,0 σx,ε,0/σx,b,0 D2,tr σx,ε,f /σx,ε,0 C2,l Cx,b
0.82
0.423
0.89
0.595
1.02
1.033
1.70
2.759
1.85
3.71
6.76
3.71

0.28
0.584
1.245
3.02
3.60
11.61

1.33
1.87
3.25
9.54
12.82
101

0.33
0.87
2.25
8.54
11.82
100

1.17
1.49
1.80
2.82
3.06
8.61

1.35
1.52
1.93
3.04
3.32
3.32

The high degree enhanced cooling of a particle beam in the longitudinal plane and much

lesser degree of heating in the transverse one takes place at the second stage of cooling.

The MAPLE V computer program was used to calculate the dependencies presented in

the Tables and Figures of this Appendix.

ξ2,st
0.0

0.2
0.5
0.9

−
−
−

ξ2,st
0.0

0.2
0.5
0.9
1.0
1.0

−
−
−
−
−

31

