0
0
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
1
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Superconducting TESLA Cavities

Dedicated to the memory of Bjørn H. Wiik

B. Aune1, R. Bandelmann4, D. Bloess2, B. Bonin1,11, A. Bosotti7, M. Champion5, C. Crawford5,
G. Deppe4, B. Dwersteg4, D.A. Edwards4,5, H.T Edwards4,5, M. Ferrario6, M. Fouaidy9, P.-D.
Gall4, A. Gamp4, A. G¨ossel4, J. Graber4,12, D. Hubert4, M. H¨uning4, M. Juillard1, T. Junquera9,
H. Kaiser4, G. Kreps4, M. Kuchnir5, R. Lange4, M. Leenen4, M. Liepe4, L. Lilje4, A. Matheisen4,
W.-D. M¨oller4, A. Mosnier1, H. Padamsee3, C. Pagani7, M. Pekeler4,10, H.-B. Peters4, O. Peters4,
D. Proch4, K. Rehlich4, D. Reschke4, H. Safa1, T. Schilcher4,13, P. Schm¨user8, J. Sekutowicz4,
S. Simrock4, W. Singer4, M. Tigner3, D. Trines4, K. Twarowski4, G. Weichert4, J. Weisend4,14,
J. Wojtkiewicz4, S. Wolﬀ4 and K. Zapfe4

1 CEA Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2 CERN, Geneve, Switzerland
3 Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
4 Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
5 FNAL, Batavia, Illinois, USA
6 INFN Frascati, Frascati, Italy
7 INFN Milano, Milano, Italy
8 II. Institut f¨ur Experimentalphysik, Universit¨at Hamburg, Germany
9 I.P.N. Orsay, Orsay, France
10 Now at ACCEL Instruments GmbH, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany
11 Now at CEA/IPSN, Fontenay, France
12 Now at Center for Advanced Biotechnology, Boston University, USA
13 Now at Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland
14 Now at SLAC, Stanford, California, USA

Abstract

The conceptional design of the proposed linear electron-positron collider TESLA is
based on 9-cell 1.3 GHz superconducting niobium cavities with an accelerating gradient
of Eacc ≥ 25 MV/m at a quality factor Q0 ≥ 5 · 109. The design goal for the cavities of
the TESLA Test Facility (TTF) linac was set to the more moderate value of Eacc ≥ 15
MV/m. In a ﬁrst series of 27 industrially produced TTF cavities the average gradient at
Q0 = 5 · 109 was measured to be 20.1 ± 6.2 MV/m, excluding a few cavities suﬀering
from serious fabrication or material defects. In the second production of 24 TTF cavities
additional quality control measures were introduced, in particular an eddy-current scan to
eliminate niobium sheets with foreign material inclusions and stringent prescriptions for
carrying out the electron-beam welds. The average gradient of these cavities at Q0 = 5·109
amounts to 25.0 ±3.2 MV/m with the exception of one cavity suﬀering from a weld defect.
Hence only a moderate improvement in production and preparation techniques will be
needed to meet the ambitious TESLA goal with an adequate safety margin. In this paper
we present a detailed description of the design, fabrication and preparation of the TESLA
Test Facility cavities and their associated components and report on cavity performance
in test cryostats and with electron beam in the TTF linac. The ongoing R&D towards
higher gradients is brieﬂy addressed.

1

1

Introduction

In the past 30 years electron-positron collisions have played a central role in the discovery and
detailed investigation of new elementary particles and their interactions. The highly successful
Standard Model of the uniﬁed electromagnetic and weak interactions and Quantum Chromo-
dynamics, the quantum ﬁeld theory of quark-gluon interactions, are to a large extent based
on the precise data collected at electron-positron colliders. Important questions still remain
to be answered, in particular the origin of the masses of ﬁeld quanta and particles – within
the Standard Model explained in terms of the so-called Higgs mechanism – and the existence
or nonexistence of supersymmetric particles which appear to be a necessary ingredient of any
quantum ﬁeld theory attempting to unify all four forces known in Nature: the gravitational,
weak, electromagnetic and strong forces. There is general agreement in the high energy physics
community that in addition to the Large Hadron Collider under construction at CERN a lepton
collider will be needed to address these fundamental issues.

Electron-positron interactions in the center-of-mass (cm) energy range from 200 GeV to
more than a TeV can no longer be realized in a circular machine like LEP since the E4 depen-
dence of the synchrotron radiation loss would lead to prohibitive operating costs. Instead the
linear collider concept must be employed. This new principle was successfully demonstrated with
the Stanford Linear Collider SLC providing a cm energy of more than 90 GeV. Worldwide there
are diﬀerent design options towards the next generation of linear colliders in the several 100
GeV to TeV regime. Two main routes are followed: colliders equipped with normal-conducting
(nc) cavities (NLC, JLC, VLEPP and CLIC) or with superconducting (sc) cavities (TESLA).
The normal-conducting designs are based on high frequency structures (6 to 30 GHz) while
the superconducting TESLA collider employs the comparatively low frequency of 1.3 GHz. The
high conversion eﬃciency from primary electric power to beam power (about 20%) in combi-
nation with the small beam emittance growth in low-frequency accelerating structures makes
the superconducting option an ideal choice for a high-luminosity collider.

The ﬁrst international TESLA workshop was held in 1990 [1]. At that time superconducting
rf cavities in particle accelerators were usually operated in the 5 MV/m regime. Such low gradi-
ents, together with the high cost of cryogenic equipment, would have made a superconducting
linear electron-positron collider totally non-competitive with the normal-conducting colliders
proposed in the USA and Japan. The TESLA collaboration, formally established in 1994 with
the aim of developing a 500 GeV center-of-mass energy superconducting linear collider, set out
with the ambitious goal of increasing the cost eﬀectiveness of the superconducting option by
more than an order of magnitude: ﬁrstly, by raising the accelerating gradient by a factor of
ﬁve from 5 to 25 MV/m, and secondly, by reducing the cost per unit length of the linac by
using economical cavity production methods and a greatly simpliﬁed cryostat design. Impor-
tant progress has been achieved in both directions; in particular the gradient of 25 MV/m is
essentially in hand, as will be shown below. To allow for a gradual improvement in the course
of the cavity R&D program, a more moderate goal of 15 MV/m was set for the TESLA Test
Facility (TTF) linac [2].

The TESLA cavities are quite similar in their layout to the 5-cell 1.5 GHz cavities of the elec-
tron accelerator CEBAF in Newport News (Virginia, USA) which were made by an industrial
company [3]. These cavities exceeded the speciﬁed gradient of 5 MV/m considerably and hence
oﬀered the potential for further improvement. While the CEBAF cavity fabrication methods
were adopted for TTF without major modiﬁcations, important new steps were introduced in
the cavity preparation:

2

• chemical removal of a thicker surface layer

• a 1400◦C annealing with titanium getter to improve the Nb heat conductivity and to

homogenize the material

• rinsing with ultrapure water at high pressure (100 bar) to remove surface contaminants

• destruction of ﬁeld emitters by a technique called High Power Processing (HPP).

The application of these techniques, combined with extremely careful handling of the cavities
in a clean-room environment, has led to a signiﬁcant increase in accelerating ﬁeld.

The TESLA Test Facility (TTF) has been set up at DESY to provide the necessary infra-
structure for the chemical and thermal treatment, clean-room assembly and testing of indus-
trially produced multicell cavities. In addition a 500 MeV electron linac is being built as a test
bed for the performance of the sc accelerating structures with an electron beam of high bunch
charge. At present more than 30 institutes from Armenia, P.R. China, Finland, France, Ger-
many, Italy, Poland, Russia and USA participate in the TESLA Collaboration and contribute
to TTF.

The low frequency of 1.3 GHz permits the acceleration of long trains of particle bunches
with very low emittance making a superconducting linac an ideal driver of a free electron laser
(FEL) in the vacuum ultraviolet and X-ray regimes. For this reason the TTF linac has recently
been equipped with undulator magnets, and its energy will be upgraded to 1 GeV in the coming
years to provide an FEL user facility in the nanometer wavelength range. An X-ray FEL facility
with wavelengths below 1 ˚A is an integral part of the TESLA collider project [4].

The present paper is organized as follows. Sect. 2 is devoted to the basics of rf super-
conductivity and the properties and limitations of superconducting (sc) cavities for particle
acceleration. The design of the TESLA cavities and the auxiliary equipment is presented in
Sect. 3. The fabrication and preparation steps of the cavities are described in Sect. 4. The
test results obtained on all TTF cavities are presented in Sect. 5, together with a discussion
of errors and limitations encountered during cavity production at industry, and the quality
control measures taken. The rf control and the cavity performance with electron beam in the
TTF linac are described in Sect. 6. A summary and outlook is given in Sect. 7 where also the
ongoing research towards higher gradients is shortly addressed.

2 Basics of RF Superconductivity and Properties of Su-

perconducting Cavities for Particle Acceleration

2.1 Basic principles of rf superconductivity and choice of supercon-

ductor

The existing large scale applications of superconductors in accelerators are twofold, in magnets
and in accelerating cavities. While there are some common requirements like the demand for
as high a critical temperature as possible1 there are also characteristic diﬀerences. In magnets
operated with a dc or a low-frequency ac current the so-called “hard” superconductors are

1The High-Tc ceramic superconductors have not yet found widespread application in magnets mainly due
to technical diﬃculties in cable production and coil winding. Cavities with High-Tc sputter coatings on copper
have shown much inferior performance in comparison to niobium cavities.

3

needed featuring high upper critical magnetic ﬁelds (15–20 T) and strong ﬂux pinning in order
to obtain high critical current density; such properties can only be achieved using alloys like
niobium-titanium or niobium-tin. In microwave applications the limitation of the superconduc-
tor is not given by the upper critical ﬁeld but rather by the so-called “superheating ﬁeld” which
is well below 1 T for all known superconductors. Moreover, strong ﬂux pinning appears undesir-
able in microwave cavities as it is coupled with hysteretic losses. Hence a “soft” superconductor
must be used and pure niobium is still the best candidate although its critical temperature is
only 9.2 K and the superheating ﬁeld about 240 mT. Niobium-tin (Nb3Sn) looks more favorable
at ﬁrst sight since it has a higher critical temperature of 18 K and a superheating ﬁeld of 400
mT; however, the gradients achieved in Nb3Sn coated single-cell copper cavities were below 15
MV/m, probably due to grain boundary eﬀects in the Nb3Sn layer [5]. For these reasons the
TESLA collaboration decided to use niobium as the superconducting material, as in all other
large scale installations of sc cavities. Here two alternatives exist: the cavities are fabricated
from solid niobium sheets or a thin niobium layer is sputtered onto the inner surface of a copper
cavity. Both approaches have been successfully applied, the former at Cornell (CESR), KEK
(TRISTAN), DESY (PETRA, HERA), Darmstadt (SDALINAC), Jeﬀerson Lab (CEBAF) and
other laboratories, the latter in particular at CERN in the electron-positron storage ring LEP.
From the test results on existing cavities the solid-niobium approach promised higher acceler-
ating gradients, hence it was adopted as the baseline for the TTF cavity R&D program.

2.1.1 Surface resistance

In contrast to the dc case superconductors are not free from energy dissipation in microwave
ﬁelds. The reason is that the radio frequency (rf) magnetic ﬁeld penetrates a thin surface layer
and induces oscillations of the electrons which are not bound in Cooper pairs. The number of
these “free electrons” drops exponentially with temperature. According to the Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieﬀer (BCS) theory of superconductivity the surface resistance in the range T < Tc/2 is
given by the expression

RBCS ∝

ω2
T

exp(−1.76 Tc/T )

(1)

where f = ω/2π is the microwave frequency. In the two-ﬂuid model of superconductors one can
derive a reﬁned expression for the surface resistance [6, 7]

RBCS =

C
T

ω2 σn Λ3 exp(−1.76 Tc/T ) .

(2)

Here C is a constant, σn the normal-state conductivity of the material and Λ an eﬀective
penetration depth, given by

Λ = λLp1 + ξ0/ℓ .

λL is the London penetration depth, ξ0 the coherence length and ℓ the mean free path of
the unpaired electrons. The fact that σn is proportional to the mean free path ℓ leads to the
surprising conclusion that the surface resistance does not assume its minimum value when the
superconductor is as pure as possible (ℓ ≫ ξ0) but rather in the range ℓ ≈ ξ0. For niobium the
BCS surface resistance at 1.3 GHz amounts to about 800 nΩ at 4.2 K and drops to 15 nΩ at
2 K; see Fig. 1. The exponential temperature dependence is the reason why operation at 1.8–2
K is essential for achieving high accelerating gradients in combination with very high quality
factors. Superﬂuid helium is an excellent coolant owing to its high heat conductivity.

4

1000

RS [nW

]

100

10

RBCS

Rres = 3 nW

1

2

3

4

5

Tc/T

6

7

Figure 1: The surface resistance of a 9-cell TESLA cavity plotted as a function of Tc/T . The
residual resistance of 3 nΩ corresponds to a quality factor Q0 = 1011.

In addition to the BCS term there is a residual resistance Rres caused by impurities, frozen-
in magnetic ﬂux or lattice distortions. This term is temperature independent and amounts to
a few nΩ for very pure niobium but may readily increase if the surface is contaminated.

2.1.2 Heat conduction in niobium

The heat produced at the inner cavity surface has to be guided through the cavity wall to the
superﬂuid helium bath. Two quantities characterize the heat ﬂow: the thermal conductivity
of the bulk niobium and the temperature drop at the niobium-helium interface caused by
the Kapitza resistance. For niobium with a residual resistivity ratio2 RRR = 500 the two
contributions to the temperature rise at the inner cavity surface are about equal. The thermal
conductivity of niobium at cryogenic temperatures scales approximately with the RRR, a rule
of thumb being

λ(4.2K) ≈ 0.25 · RRR [W/(m · K)].

However, λ is strongly temperature dependent and drops by about an order of magnitude when
lowering the temperature to 2 K, as shown in Fig. 2.

Impurities inﬂuence the RRR and the thermal conductivity of niobium. Bulk niobium is
contaminated by interstitial (mostly hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen) and metallic impu-
rities (mostly tantalum). The resulting RRR can be calculated by summing the individual
contributions [10]

RRR = Xi

fi/ri!−1

(3)

2RRR is deﬁned as the ratio of the resistivities at room temperature and at liquid helium temperature. The
low temperature resistivity is either measured just above Tc or at 4.2 K, applying a magnetic ﬁeld to assure the
normal state.

5

RRR = 1070

RRR = 380

1000

1 0 0

]
 

K

 
·
 

m

 
/
 

W

 
[

1 0

1

2

4

6

8

1 0

3 0

T [K]

Figure 2: Measured heat conductivity in niobium as a function of temperature [8]. Continu-
ous curves: parametrization by B. Bonin, using the RRR and the average grain size as input
parameters [9]. These data do not show an enhancement at 2 K (the so-called “phonon peak”)
which was observed in some earlier experiments [5].

Table 1: Resistivity coeﬃcients of common impurities in Nb [10]

Impurity atom i
N
ri in 104 wt. ppm 0.44

O
0.58

C

0.47

H
0.36

Ta
111

where the fi denote the fractional contents of impurity i (measured in wt. ppm) and the ri the
corresponding resistivity coeﬃcients which are listed in Table 1.

A good thermal conductivity is the main motivation for using high purity niobium with
RRR ≈ 300 as the material for cavity production. The RRR may be further improved by
post-puriﬁcation of the entire cavity (see Sect. 5).

The Kapitza conductance depends on temperature and surface conditions. For pure niobium

in contact with superﬂuid helium at 2 K it amounts to about 6000 W/(m2K) [11].

2.1.3

Inﬂuence of magnetic ﬁelds

Superheating ﬁeld. Superconductivity breaks down when the rf magnetic ﬁeld exceeds the critical
ﬁeld of the superconductor. In the high frequency case the so-called “superheating ﬁeld” is
relevant which for niobium is about 20% higher than the thermodynamical critical ﬁeld of
200 mT [12, 13].
Trapped magnetic ﬂux. Niobium is in principle a soft type II superconductor without ﬂux
pinning. In practice, however, weak magnetic dc ﬁelds are not expelled upon cooldown but
remain trapped in the niobium. Each ﬂux line contains a normal-conducting core whose area
is roughly πξ2
0. The coherence length ξ0 amounts to 40 nm in Nb. Trapped magnetic dc ﬂux

6

l
therefore results in a surface resistance [6]

Rmag = (Bext/2Bc2)Rn

(4)

where Bext is the externally applied ﬁeld, Bc2 the upper critical ﬁeld and Rn the surface resis-
tance in the normal state3. At 1.3 GHz the surface resistance caused by trapped ﬂux amounts
to 3.5 nΩ/µT for niobium. Cavities which are not shielded from the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld are
therefore limited to Q0 values below 109.

2.2 Advantages and limitations of superconducting cavities

The fundamental advantage of superconducting cavities is the extremely low surface resistance
of about 10 nΩ at 2 K. The typical quality factors of normal conducting cavities are 104–105
while for sc cavities they may exceed 1010, thereby reducing the rf losses by 5 to 6 orders
of magnitude. In spite of the low eﬃciency of refrigeration there are considerable savings in
primary electric power. Only a tiny fraction of the incident rf power is dissipated in the cavity
walls, the lion’s share is either transferred to the beam or reﬂected into a load.

The physical limitation of a sc resonator is given by the requirement that the rf magnetic ﬁeld
at the inner surface has to stay below the superheating ﬁeld of the superconductor (200–240
mT for niobium). For the TESLA cavities this implies a maximum accelerating ﬁeld of 50–
60 MV/m. In principle the quality factor should stay roughly constant when approaching this
fundamental superconductor limit but in practice the “excitation curve” Q0 = Q0(Eacc) ends at
considerably lower values, often accompanied with a strong decrease of Q0 towards the highest
gradient reached in the cavity. The main reasons for the performance degradation are excessive
heating at impurities on the inner surface, ﬁeld emission of electrons and multipacting4.

2.2.1 Thermal instability and ﬁeld emission

One basic limitation of the maximum ﬁeld in a superconducting cavity is thermal instability.
Temperature mapping at the outer cavity wall usually reveals that the heating by rf losses is
not uniform over the whole surface but that certain spots exhibit larger temperature rises, of-
ten beyond the critical temperature of the superconductor. Hence the cavity becomes partially
normal-conducting, associated with strongly enhanced power dissipation. Because of the expo-
nential increase of surface resistance with temperature this may result in a run-away eﬀect and
eventually a quench of the entire cavity. Analytical models as well as numerical simulations are
available to describe such an avalanche eﬀect. Input parameters are the thermal conductivity
of the superconductor, the size and resistance of the normal conducting spot and the Kapitza
resistance. The tolerable defect size depends on the RRR of the material and the desired ﬁeld
level. As a typical number, the diameter of a normal-conducting spot must exceed 50 µm to be
able to initiate a thermal instability at 25 MV/m for RRR > 200 .

There have been many attempts to identify defects which were localized by temperature
mapping. Examples of defects are drying spots, ﬁbers from tissues, foreign material inclusions,
weld splatter and cracks in the welds. There are two obvious and successful methods for reducing
the danger of thermal instability:

3Benvenuti et al. [14] attribute the magnetic surface resistance in niobium sputter layers to ﬂux ﬂow.
4 “Multipacting” is a commonly used abbreviation for “multiple impacting” and designates the resonant
multiplication of ﬁeld emitted electrons which gain energy in the rf electromagnetic ﬁeld and impact on the
cavity surface where they induce secondary electron emission.

7

Figure 3: Superconducting 1.3 GHz 9-cell cavity for the TESLA Test Facility.

• avoid defects by preparing and cleaning the cavity surface with extreme care;

• increase the thermal conductivity of the superconductor.

Considerable progress has been achieved in both aspects over the last ten years.

Field emission of electrons from sharp tips is the most severe limitation in high-gradient
superconducting cavities. In ﬁeld-emission loaded cavities the quality factor drops exponentially
above a certain threshold, and X-rays are observed. The ﬁeld emission current density is given
by the Fowler-Nordheim equation [15]:

jF E = c1E2.5

loc exp(cid:18)−

c2

βEloc(cid:19)

(5)

where Eloc is the local electric ﬁeld, β a so-called ﬁeld enhancement factor and c1, c2 are
constants. There is experimental evidence that small particles on the cavity surface (e.g. dust)
act as ﬁeld emitters. Therefore perfect cleaning, for example by high-pressure water rinsing, is
the most eﬀective remedy against ﬁeld emission. By applying this technique it has been possible
to raise the threshold for ﬁeld emission in multicell cavities from about 10 MV/m to more than
20 MV/m in the past few years.

The topics of thermal instability and ﬁeld emission are discussed at much greater detail in

the book by Padamsee, Knobloch and Hayes [16].

3 Design of the TESLA Cavities

3.1 Overview

The TTF cavity is a 9-cell standing wave structure of about 1 m length whose lowest TM mode
resonates at 1300 MHz. A photograph is shown in Fig. 3. The cavity is made from solid niobium
and is cooled by superﬂuid helium at 2 K.

Each 9-cell cavity is equipped with its own titanium helium tank, a tuning system driven
by a stepping motor, a coaxial rf power coupler capable of transmitting more than 200 kW, a
pickup probe and two higher order mode couplers. To reduce the cost for cryogenic installations,
eight cavities and a superconducting quadrupole are mounted in a common vacuum vessel and
constitute the so-called cryomodule of the TTF linac, shown in Fig. 4. Within the module the
cavity beam pipes are joined by stainless steel bellows and ﬂanges with metallic gaskets. The
cavities are attached to a rigid 300 mm diameter helium supply tube which provides positional
accuracy of the cavity axes of better than 0.5 mm. Invar rods ensure that the distance between
adjacent cavities remains constant during cooldown. Radiation shields at 5 K and 60 K together
with 30 layers of superinsulation limit the static heat load on the 2 K level to less than 3 W
for the 12 m long module.

3.2 Layout of the TESLA cavities

8

Figure 4: Cryogenic module of the TESLA Test Facility linac comprising eight 9-cell cavities
and a superconducting quadrupole.

3.2.1 Choice of frequency

The losses in a microwave cavity are proportional to the product of conductor area and surface
resistance. For a given length of a multicell resonator, the area scales with 1/f while the surface
resistance of a superconducting cavity scales with f 2 for RBCS ≫ Rres and is independent of f
for RBCS ≪ Rres. At an operating temperature T = 2 K the BCS term dominates above 3 GHz
and hence the losses grow linearly with frequency whereas for frequencies below 300 MHz the
residual resistance dominates and the losses grow with 1/f . To minimize the dissipation in the
cavity wall one should therefore select f in the range 300 MHz to 3 GHz.

Cavities in the 350 to 500 MHz regime are in use in electron-positron storage rings. Their
large size is advantageous to suppress wake ﬁeld eﬀects and higher order mode losses. However,
for a linac of several 10 km length the niobium and cryostat costs for these bulky cavities
would be prohibitive, hence a higher frequency has to be chosen. Considering material costs
f = 3 GHz might appear the optimum but there are compelling arguments for choosing about
half this frequency.

• The wake ﬁelds losses scale with the second to third power of the frequency (Wk ∝ f 2,
W⊥ ∝ f 3). Beam emittance growth and beam-induced cryogenic losses are therefore much
higher at 3 GHz.

• The f 2 dependence of the BCS resistance sets an upper limit5 of about 30 MV/m at 3 GHz,
hence choosing this frequency would deﬁnitely preclude a possible upgrade of TESLA to
35–40 MV/m [17].

The choice for 1.3 GHz was motivated by the availability of high power klystrons.

3.2.2 Cavity geometry

A multicell resonator is advantageous for maximizing the active acceleration length in a linac of
a given size. With increasing number of cells per cavity, however, diﬃculties arise from trapped
modes, uneven ﬁeld distribution in the cells and too high power requirements on the input
coupler. Extrapolating from the experience with 4-cell and 5-cell cavities a 9-cell structure
appeared manageable. A side view of the TTF cavity with the beam tube sections and the
coupler ports is given in Fig. 5.

The design of the cell shape was guided by the following considerations:

• a spherical contour near the equator with low sensitivity for multipacting,

• minimization of electric and magnetic ﬁelds at the cavity wall to reduce the danger of

ﬁeld emission and thermal breakdown,

• a large iris radius to reduce wake ﬁeld eﬀects.

5See Fig. 11.22 in [16].

9

pick up
 flange

HOM coupler
     flange

 HOM coupler
       flange
(rotated by 65˚)

115.4 mm

power coupler
       flange

1061 mm

1276 mm

Figure 5: Side view of the 9-cell TTF cavity with the ports for the main power coupler and
two higher-order mode (HOM) couplers.

The shape of the cell was optimized using the code URMEL [18]. The resonator is operated
in the π mode with 180◦ phase diﬀerence between adjacent cells. The longitudinal dimensions
are determined by the condition that the electric ﬁeld has to be inverted in the time a rela-
tivistic particle needs to travel from one cell to the next. The separation between two irises is
therefore c/(2f ). The iris radius Riris inﬂuences the cell-to-cell coupling6 kcell, the excitation
of higher order modes and other important cavity parameters, such as the ratio of the peak
electric (magnetic) ﬁeld at the cavity wall to the accelerating ﬁeld and the ratio (R/Q) of shunt
impedance to quality factor. For the TESLA Test Facility cavities Riris = 35 mm was chosen,
leading to kcell = 1.87 % and Epeak/Eacc = 2. The most important parameters are listed in
Table 2.

The contour of a half-cell is shown in Fig. 6. It is composed of a circular arc around the
equator region and an elliptical section near the iris. The dimensions are listed in Table 3. The
half-cells at the end of the 9-cell resonator need a slightly diﬀerent shape to ensure equal ﬁeld
amplitudes in all 9 cells. In addition there is a slight asymmetry between left and right end cell
which prevents trapping of higher-order modes (see Sect. 3.5).

3.2.3

Lorentz-force detuning and cavity stiﬀening

The electromagnetic ﬁeld exerts a Lorentz force on the currents induced in a thin surface layer.
The resulting pressure acting on the cavity wall

p =

1
4

(µ0H 2 − ε0E2)

(6)

leads to a deformation of the cells in the µm range and a change ∆V of their volume. The
consequence is a frequency shift according to Slater’s rule

∆f
f0

=

Here

(ε0E2 − µ0H 2)dV .

6The coupling coeﬃcient is related to the frequencies of the coupled modes in the 9-cell resonator by the

formula fn = f0/p1 + 2 kcell cos(nπ/9) where f0 is the resonant frequency of a single cell and 1 ≤ n ≤ 9.

10

1

4W Z∆V
4ZV

1

W =

(ε0E2 + µ0H 2)dV

(7)

(8)

Table 2: TTF cavity design parameters.a

type of accelerating structure
accelerating mode
fundamental frequency
design gradient Eacc
quality factor Q0
active length L
number of cells
cell-to-cell coupling
iris diameter
geometry factor
R/Q
Epeak/Eacc
Bpeak/Eacc
tuning range
∆f /∆L
Lorentz force detuning at 25 MV/m
Qext of input coupler
cavity bandwidth at Qext = 3 · 106
RF pulse duration
repetition rate
ﬁll time
beam acceleration time
RF power peak/average
number of HOM couplers
cavity longitudinal loss factor kk for σz = 0.7 mm
cavity transversal loss factor k⊥ for σz = 0.7 mm
parasitic modes with the highest impedance :

type

π/9
2π/9

(R/Q)/
(R/Q)/

frequency
frequency

bellows longitudinal loss factor kk for σz = 0.7 mm
bellows transversal loss factor k⊥ for σz = 0.7 mm

standing wave
TM010 , π mode

1300 MHz
25 MV/m
> 5 ·109
1.038 m

9

1.87 %
70 mm
270 Ω
518 Ω

2.0

4.26 mT/(MV/m)

± 300 kHz

315 kHz/mm

≈ 600 Hz

3 ·106
430 Hz
1330 µs

5 Hz
530 µs
800 µs

208 kW/1.4 kW

2

10.2 V/pC

15.1 V/pC/m

TM011

80 Ω/2454 MHz
67 Ω/2443 MHz

1.54 V/pC

1.97 V/pC/m

aFollowing common usage in ac circuits and the convention adopted in the Handbook of Accelerator Physics
and Engineering [19], page 523, we deﬁne the shunt impedance by the relation R = V 2/(2P ), where P is the
dissipated power and V the peak voltage in the equivalent parallel LCR circuit. Note that another deﬁnition is
common, which has also been used in the TESLA Conceptual Design Report: R = V 2/P , leading to a factor of
2 larger shunt impedance.

11

Rc

Requator

b

a

Riris

length

cavity axis

Figure 6: Contour of a half cell.

Table 3: Half-cell shape parameters (all dimensions in mm).
endcup 2
cavity shape parameter
equator radius Requat.
103.3
39
iris radius Riris
42
radius Rarc of circular arc
9
horizontal half axis a
vertical half axis b
12.8
57.0
length l

midcup endcup 1
103.3
35
42.0
12
19
57.7

103.3
39
40.3
10
13.5
56.0

is the stored energy and f0 the resonant frequency of the unperturbed cavity. The computed
frequency shift at 25 MV/m amounts to 900 Hz for an unstiﬀened cavity of 2.5 mm wall thick-
ness. The bandwidth of the cavity equipped with the main power coupler (Qext = 3 · 106) is
about 430 Hz, hence a reinforcement of the cavity is needed. Niobium stiﬀening rings are welded
in between adjacent cells as shown in Fig. 7. They reduce the frequency shift to about 500 Hz
for a 1.3 ms long rf pulse7, see Fig. 26.

The deformation of the stiﬀened cell is negligible near the iris where the electric ﬁeld is large,
but remains nearly the same as in the unstiﬀened cell near the equator where the magnetic ﬁeld
dominates. The deformation in this region can only be reduced by increasing the wall thickness.

3.2.4 Magnetic Shielding

As shown in Sect. 2.1.3 the ambient magnetic ﬁeld must be shielded to a level of about a µT
to reduce the magnetic surface resistance to a few nΩ. This is accomplished with a two-stage
passive shielding, provided by the conventional steel vacuum vessel of the cryomodule and a
high-permeability cylinder around each cavity. To remove the remanence from the steel vessel

7Part of this shift is due to an elastic deformation of the tuning mechanism.

12

conical head plate

reference flange

stiffening ring

Figure 7: End section of a cavity with stiﬀening ring, conical head plate for welding into the
helium tank and reference ﬂange for alignment.

the usual demagnetization technique is applied. The resulting attenuation of the ambient ﬁeld
is found to be better than expected from a cylinder without any remanence. The explanation
is that the procedure does not really demagnetize the steel but rather remagnetizes it in such a
way that the axial component of the ambient ﬁeld is counteracted. This interpretation (see also
ref. [20]) becomes obvious if the cylinder is turned by 180◦: in that case the axial ﬁeld measured
inside the steel cylinder is almost twice as large as the ambient longitudinal ﬁeld component,
see Fig. 8a.

The shielding cylinders of the cavities are made from Cryoperm8 which retains a high per-
meability of more than 10000 when cooled to liquid helium temperature. Figure 8b shows the
measured horizontal, vertical and axial components inside a cryoperm shield at room temper-
ature, which was exposed to the Earth’s ﬁeld. The combined action of remagnetized vacuum
vessel and cryoperm shield is more than adequate to reduce the ambient ﬁeld to the level of
some µT. An exception are the end cells of the ﬁrst and the last cavity near the end of the
cryomodule where the vessel is not eﬀective in attenuating longitudinal ﬁelds. Here an active
ﬁeld compensation by means of Helmholtz coils could reduce the fringe ﬁeld at the last cavity
to a harmless level.

3.3 Helium vessel and tuning system

The helium tank contains the superﬂuid helium needed for cooling and serves at the same
time as a mechanical support of the cavity and as a part of the tuning mechanism. The tank
is made from titanium whose diﬀerential thermal contraction relative to niobium is 20 times
smaller than for stainless steel. Cooldown produces a stress of only 3 MPa in a cavity that
was stress-free at room temperature. Titanium has the additional advantage that it can be
directly electron-beam welded to niobium while stainless steel-niobium joints would require an

8Cryoperm is made by Vacuumschmelze Hanau, Germany.

13

Figure 8: Shielding of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. (a) Shielding of axial component by the steel
vacuum vessel of the cryomodule. Shown is also the arrangement of the cavity string in the
vessel. (b) Shielding of the axial, horizontal and vertical ﬁeld components by the cryoperm
cylinder surrounding the cavity (measured without vacuum vessel).

14

intermediate metal layer.

The assembly of cavity and helium tank proceeds in the following sequence: a titanium
bellows is electron-beam (EB) welded to the conical Nb head plate at one side of the cavity, a
titanium ring is EB welded to the conical Nb head plate at other side (see Fig. 7). The cavity
is then inserted into the tank and the bellows as well as the titanium ring are TIG welded to
the Ti vessel.

The tuning system consists of a stepping motor with a gear box and a double lever arm.
The moving parts operate at 2 K in vacuum. The tuning range is about ±1 mm, corresponding
to a frequency range of ±300 kHz. The resolution is 1 Hz. The tuning system is adjusted in such
a way that after cooldown the cavity is always under compressive force to avoid a backlash if
the force changes from pushing to pulling.

3.4 Main Power Coupler

Design requirements

A critical component of a superconducting cavity is the power input coupler. For TTF several
coaxial couplers have been developed [21], consisting of a “cold part” which is mounted on
the cavity in the clean room and closed by a ceramic window, and a “warm part” which is
assembled after installation of the cavity in the cryomodule. The warm section contains the
transition from waveguide to coaxial line. This part is evacuated and sealed against the air-ﬁlled
wave guide by a second ceramic window. The elaborate two-window solution was chosen to get
optimum protection of the cavity against contamination during mounting in the cryomodule
and against window fracture during linac operation.

The couplers must allow for some longitudinal motion9 inside the 12 m long cryomodule
when the cavities are cooled down from room temperature to 2 K. For this reason bellows in
the inner and outer conductors of the coaxial line are needed. Since the coupler connects the
room-temperature waveguide with the 2 K cavity, a compromise must be found between a low
thermal conductivity and a high electrical conductivity. This is achieved by several thermal
intercepts and by using stainless steel pipes or bellows with a thin copper plating (10–20 µm)
at the radio frequency surface. The design heat loads of 6 W at 70 K, 0.5 W at 4 K and 0.06 W
at 2 K have been undercut in practice.

Electrical properties

An instantaneous power of 210 kW has to be transmitted to provide a gradient of 25 MV/m for
an 800 µs long beam pulse of 8 mA. The ﬁlling time of the cavity amounts to 530 µs and the
decay time, after the beam pulse is over, to an additional 500 µs. At the beginning of the ﬁlling,
most of the rf wave is reﬂected leading to voltage enhancements by a factor of 2. The external
quality factor of the coupler is Qext = 3 · 106 at 25 MV/m. By moving the inner conductor of
the coaxial line, Qext can be varied in the range 1 · 106 – 9 · 106 to allow not only for diﬀerent
beam loading conditions but also to facilitate an in-situ high power processing of the cavities.
This feature has proved extremely useful on several occasions to eliminate ﬁeld emitters that
entered the cavities at the last assembly stage.

9The motion of the coupler ports is up to 15 mm in the ﬁrst cryomodules but has been reduced to about

1 mm in the most recent cryostat design by ﬁxing the distance between neighboring cavities with invar rods.

15

Figure 9: Simpliﬁed view of the power input coupler version A.

Input coupler A

The coupler version A is shown in Fig. 9. It has a conical ceramic window at 70 K and a
commercial planar waveguide window at room temperature.

A conical shape was chosen for the cold ceramic window to obtain broad-band impedance
matching. The Hewlett-Packard High Frequency Structure Simulator program HFSS was used
to model the window and to optimize the shape of the tapered inner conductor. The reﬂected
power is below 1 %. The ceramic window is made from Al2O3 with a purity of 99.5%. OFHC
copper rings are brazed to the ceramic using Au/Cu (35%/65%) braze alloy. The inner con-
ductors on each side of the ceramic are electron-beam welded, the outer conductors are TIG
welded. The ceramic is coated on both sides with a 10 nm titanium nitride layer to reduce
multipacting.

The waveguide-to-coaxial transition is realized using a cylindrical knob as the impedance-
transforming device and a planar waveguide window. Matching posts are required on the air
side of the window for impedance matching at 1.3 GHz.

Input couplers B, C

Coupler version B uses also a planar wave guide window and a door-knob transition from the
wave guide to the coaxial line, but a cylindrical ceramic window at 70 K without direct view
of the beam. Owing to a shortage in commercial wave guide windows a third type, C, was
developed using a cylindrical window also at the wave guide - coaxial transition. It features
a 60 mm diameter coaxial line with reduced sensitivity to multipacting and the possibility to
apply a dc potential to the center conductor. In case of the LEP couplers [22] a dc bias has
proved very beneﬁcial in suppressing multipacting. Similar observations were made at DESY.
All couplers needed some conditioning but have then performed according to speciﬁcation.

3.5 Higher order modes

The intense electron bunches excite eigenmodes of higher frequency in the resonator which
must be damped to avoid multibunch instabilities and beam breakup. This is accomplished
by extracting the stored energy via higher-order mode (HOM) couplers mounted on the beam
pipe sections of the nine-cell resonator. A problem arises from “trapped modes” which are
concentrated in the center cells and have a low ﬁeld amplitude in the end cells. An example is the
TE121 mode. By an asymmetric shaping of the end half cells one can enhance the ﬁeld amplitude
of the TE121 mode in one end cell while preserving the “ﬁeld ﬂatness” of the fundamental mode
and also the good coupling of the HOM couplers to the untrapped modes TE111, TM110 and
TM011. The eﬀects of asymmetric end cell tuning are sketched in Fig. 10.

The two polarization states of dipole modes would in principle require two orthogonal HOM
couplers at each side of the cavity. In a string of cavities, however, this complexity can be avoided
since the task of the “orthogonal” HOM coupler can be taken over by the HOM coupler of the
neighboring cavity. The viability of this idea was veriﬁed in measurements.

16

TM011

TM010, TE111, TM110

TE121

TE121

TM011

left end cell

right end cell

Figure 10: Eﬀect of asymmetric end cell shaping on various modes. The main accelerating mode
TM010 and the higher modes TE111 and TM110 are not aﬀected while TM011 is enhanced in the
left end cell, TE121 in the right end cell. Using HOM couplers at both ends, all higher order
modes can be extracted.

HOM coupler design

The HOM couplers are mounted at both ends of the cavity with a nearly perpendicular ori-
entation10 to ensure damping of dipole modes of either polarization. A 1.3 GHz notch ﬁlter
is incorporated to prevent energy extraction from the accelerating mode. Two types of HOM
couplers have been developed and tested, one mounted on a ﬂange, the other welded to the
cavity.

The demountable HOM coupler is shown in Fig. 11a. An antenna loop couples mainly to
the magnetic ﬁeld for TE modes and to the electric ﬁeld for TM modes. The pickup antenna is
capacitively coupled to an external load. The 1.3 GHz notch ﬁlter is formed by the inductance
of the loop and the capacity at the 1.9 mm wide gap between loop and wall. A niobium bellows
permits tuning of the ﬁlter without opening the cavity vacuum. The antenna is thermally
connected to the 2 K helium bath. In a cw (continuous wave) test at an accelerating ﬁeld of
21 MV/m the antenna reached a maximum temperature of 4 K, which is totally uncritical.

The welded version of the HOM coupler is shown in Fig. 11b. It resembles the couplers used
in the 500 MHz HERA cavities which have been operating for several years without quenches.
The good cooling of the superconducting inner conductor by two stubs makes the design insen-
sitive to γ radiation and electron bombardment.

Both HOM couplers permit tuning of the fundamental mode rejection ﬁlter when mounted
on the cavity. It is possible to achieve a Qext of more than 1011 thereby limiting power extraction
to less than 50 mW at 25 MV/m.

4 Cavity Fabrication and Preparation

4.1 Cavity fabrication

4.1.1 Niobium properties

The 9-cell resonators are made from 2.8 mm thick sheet niobium by deep drawing of half cells,
followed by trimming and electron beam welding. Niobium of high purity is needed. Tantalum
with a typical concentration of 500 ppm is the most important metallic impurity. Among the
interstitially dissolved impurities oxygen is dominant due to the high aﬃnity of Nb for O2

10The angle between the two HOM couplers is not 90◦ but 115◦ to provide also damping of quadrupole modes.

17

(a)

capacitive
coupling

output

capacitor of notch filter

(b)

output

Figure 11: The higher-order-mode couplers: (a) demountable HOM coupler, (b) welded HOM
coupler.

18

Table 4: Technical speciﬁcation for niobium used in TTF cavities

Impurity content in ppm (wt)
Ta ≤ 500 H ≤ 2
W ≤ 70
N ≤ 10
Ti ≤ 50 O ≤ 10
Fe ≤ 30
C ≤ 10
Mo ≤ 50
Ni ≤ 30

Mechanical Properties

Residual resistivity ratio RRR ≥ 300
grain size
yield strength
tensile strength
elongation at break
Vickers hardness HV 10

≈ 50 µm
> 50 MPa
> 100 MPa
30 %
≤ 50

above 200◦C. Interstitial atoms act as scattering centers for the unpaired electrons and reduce
the RRR and the thermal conductivity, see Sect. 2.1. The niobium ingot is highly puriﬁed by
several remelting steps in a high vacuum electron beam furnace. This procedure reduces the
interstitial oxygen, nitrogen and carbon contamination to a few ppm. The niobium speciﬁcation
for the TTF cavities is listed in Table 4.

After forging and sheet rolling, the 2.8 mm thick Nb sheets are degreased, a 5 µm surface
layer is removed by etching and then the sheets are annealed for 1–2 hours at 700–800◦C in a
vacuum oven at a pressure of 10−5 – 10−6 mbar to achieve full recrystallization and a uniform
grain size of about 50 µm.

4.1.2 Deep drawing and electron-beam welding

Half-cells are produced by deep-drawing. The dies are usually made from a high yield strength
aluminum alloy. To achieve the small curvature required at the iris an additional step of forming,
e.g. coining, may be needed. The half-cells are machined at the iris and the equator. At the
iris the half cell is cut to the speciﬁed length (allowing for weld shrinkage) while at the equator
an extra length of 1 mm is left to retain the possibility of a precise length trimming of the
dumb-bell after frequency measurement (see below). The accuracy of the shape is controlled
by sandwiching the half-cell between two metal plates and measuring the resonance frequency.
The half-cells are thoroughly cleaned by ultrasonic degreasing, 20 µm chemical etching and
ultra-pure water rinsing. Two half-cells are then joined at the iris with an electron-beam (EB)
weld to form a “dumb-bell”. The EB welding is usually done from the inside to ensure a smooth
weld seam at the location of the highest electric ﬁeld in the resonator. Since niobium is a strong
getter material for oxygen it is important to carry out the EB welds in a suﬃciently good
vacuum. Tests have shown that RRR = 300 niobium is not degraded by welding at a pressure
of less than 5 · 10−5mbar.

The next step is the welding of the stiﬀening ring. Here the weld shrinkage may lead to a
slight distortion of the cell shape which needs to be corrected. Afterwards, frequency measure-
ments are made on the dumb-bells to determine the correct amount of trimming at the equators.
After proper cleaning by a 30 µm etching the dumb-bells are visually inspected. Defects and
foreign material imprints from previous fabrication steps are removed by grinding. After the
inspection and proper cleaning (a few µm etching followed by ultra-clean water rinsing and
clean room drying), eight dumb-bells and two beam-pipe sections with attached end half-cells
are stacked in a precise ﬁxture to carry out the equator welds which are done from the outside.
The weld parameters are chosen to achieve full penetration. A reliable method for obtaining
a smooth weld seam of a few mm width at the inner surface is to raster a slightly defocused
beam in an elliptic pattern and to apply 50 % of beam power during the ﬁrst weld pass and

19

100 % of beam power in the second pass.

4.2 Cavity treatment

Experience has shown that a damage layer in the order of 100 µm has to be removed from the
inner cavity surface to obtain good rf performance in the superconducting state. The standard
method applied at DESY and many other laboratories is called Buﬀered Chemical Polishing
(BCP), using an acid mixture of HF (48 %), HNO3 (65 %) and H3PO4 (85 %) in the ratio 1:1:2
(at CEBAF the ratio was 1:1:1). The preparation steps adopted at DESY for the industrially
produced TTF cavities are as follows. A layer of 80 µm is removed by BCP from the inner
surface, 30 µm from the outer surface11. The cavities are rinsed with ultra-clean water and
dried in a class 100 clean room. The next step is a two-hour annealing at 800◦C in an Ultra
High Vacuum (UHV) oven which serves to remove dissolved hydrogen from the niobium and
relieves mechanical stress in the material. In the initial phase of the TTF program many cavities
were tested after this step, applying a 20 µm BCP and ultra-clean water rinsing before mounting
in the cryostat and cooldown.

Presently, the cavities are rinsed with clean water after the 800◦C treatment and then
immediately transferred to another UHV oven in which they are heated to 1350–1400◦C. At
this temperature, all dissolved gases diﬀuse out of the material and the RRR increases by
about a factor of 2 to values around 500. To capture the oxygen coming out of the niobium
and to prevent oxidation by the residual gas in the oven (pressure < 10−7mbar) a thin titanium
layer is evaporated on the inner and outer cavity surface, Ti being a stronger getter than Nb.
The high-temperature treatment with Ti getter is often called post-puriﬁcation. The titanium
layer is removed afterwards by a 80 µm BCP of the inner surface. A BCP of about 30 µm is
applied at the outer surface since the Kapitza resistance of titanium-coated niobium immersed
in superﬂuid helium is about a factor of 2 larger than that of pure niobium [11]. After ﬁnal heat
treatment and BCP the cavities are mechanically tuned to adjust the resonance frequency to
the design value and to obtain equal ﬁeld amplitudes in all 9 cells. This is followed by a slight
BCP, three steps of high-pressure water rinsing (100 bar) and drying in a class 10 clean room.
As a last step, the rf test is performed in a superﬂuid helium bath cryostat.

A severe drawback of the post-puriﬁcation is the considerable grain growth accompanied
with a softening of the niobium. Postpuriﬁed-treated cavities are quite vulnerable to plastic
deformation and have to be handled with great care.

5 Results on Cavity Performance and Quality Control

Measures

5.1 Overview

Figure 12 shows the “excitation curve” of the best 9-cell resonator measured so far; plotted is
the quality factor12 Q0 as a function of the accelerating electric ﬁeld Eacc. An almost constant
and high value of 2 · 1010 is observed up to 25 MV/m.

11These numbers are determined by weighing the cavity before and after etching and represent therefore the
average over the whole surface. Frequency measurements indicate that more material is etched away at the iris
than at the equator.

12The quality factor is deﬁned as Q0 = f /∆f where f is the resonance frequency and ∆f the full width at

half height of the resonance curve of the “unloaded” cavity.

20

11

10

10

10

Q

0

9

10

8

10

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

E      [MV/m]

acc

Figure 12: Excitation curve of the best TESLA 9-cell cavity measured up to date. The cavity
was cooled by superﬂuid helium of 2 K.

The importance of various cavity treatment steps for arriving at such a good performance
are illustrated in the next ﬁgure. A strong degradation is usually observed if a foreign particle is
sticking on the cavity surface, leading either to ﬁeld emission of electrons or to local overheating
in the rf ﬁeld. At Cornell University an in situ method for destroying ﬁeld emitters was invented
[23], called “high power processing” (HPP), which in many cases can improve the high-ﬁeld
capability, see Fig. 13a. Removal of ﬁeld-emitting particles by high-pressure water rinsing, a
technique developed at CERN [24], may dramatically improve the excitation curve (Fig. 13b).
The beneﬁcial eﬀect of a 1400◦C heat treatment, ﬁrst tried out at Cornell [25] and Saclay [26],
is seen in Fig. 13c. Finally, an incomplete removal of the titanium surface layer in the BCP
following the 1400◦C heat treatment may strongly limit the attainable gradient. Here additional
BCP is of advantage (Fig. 13d).

5.2 Results from the ﬁrst series of TTF cavities

After the successful test of two prototype nine-cell resonators a total of 27 cavities, equipped
with main power and HOM coupler ﬂanges, were ordered at four European companies. These
cavities were foreseen for installation in the TTF linac with an expected gradient of at least
15 MV/m at Q0 > 3 · 109. However, in the speciﬁcation given to the companies no guaranteed
gradient was required. According to the test results obtained at TTF these resonators can be
classiﬁed into four categories:

(1) 16 cavities without any known material and fabrication defects, or with minor defects which

could be repaired,

(2) 3 cavities with serious material defects,

21

1011

Q

0

1010

109

0

1011

1010

Q

0

1011

(a)

Q

0

1010

5

10

20

15
 [MV/m]

E

acc

before HPP
after HPP

25

30

(c)

x-ray  starts

109

0

1011

5

10

20

15
 [MV/m]

E

acc

quench quench

no quench
lim ited  by  am plifier

Q

0

1010

109

0

no H T , R R R  400
H T  800 C , R R R  400
H T  1400 C , R R R  770

5

10

15
20
 [MV/m]

E

acc

25

30

109

0

5

10

20

15
 [MV/m]

E

acc

(b)

before HPR
after HPR

25

30

(d)

first test
second test

25

30

Figure 13: Improvement in cavity performance due to various treatments: (a) high power pro-
cessing, (b) high pressure water rinsing, (c) successive application of 800◦C and 1400◦C heat
treatment, (d) removal of surface defects or titanium in grain boundaries by additional BCP.

(3) 6 cavities with imperfect equator welds,

(4) 2 cavities with serious fabrication defects (not fully penetrated electron beam welds or with

holes burnt during welding; these were rejected).

One cavity has not yet been tested.

The test results for the cavities of class (1) in a vertical bath cryostat with superﬂuid helium
cooling at 2 K are summarized in Fig. 14. It is seen that the TTF design goal of 15 MV/m is
clearly exceeded. Nine of the resonators fulﬁll even the more stringent speciﬁcation of TESLA
(Eacc ≥ 25 MV/m at Q0 ≥ 5 · 109).

The excitation curves of the class 2 cavities (Fig. 15) are characterized by sudden drops
in quality factor with increasing ﬁeld and rather low maximum gradients. Temperature map-
ping revealed spots of excessive heating at isolated spots which were far away from the EB
welds. An example is shown in Fig. 16a. The defective cell was cut from the resonator and sub-
jected to further investigation [27]. An eddy-current scan, performed at the Bundesanstalt f¨ur
Materialforschung (BAM) in Berlin, showed a pronounced signal at the defect location. With
X-ray radiography, also carried out at BAM, a dark spot with a size of 0.2–0.3 mm was seen
(Fig. 16b) indicating an inclusion of foreign material with a higher nuclear charge than nio-
bium. Neutron absorption measurements at the Forschungszentrum GKSS in Geesthacht gave
no signal, indicating that the neutron absorption coeﬃcient of the unknown contamination
was similar to that of Nb. The identiﬁcation of the foreign inclusion was ﬁnally accomplished
using X-ray ﬂuorescence (XAFS) at the Hamburger Synchrotronstrahlungslabor HASYLAB

22

1011

Q0

1010

C3
C18
C21
C28

5

109

0

10

15

20

25

30

Eacc  [MV/m]
(a)

s
e

i
t
i
v
a
c
 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
n

4

3

2

1

0

0

5

10

20

15
25
Eacc  [MV/m]

(b)

30

35

40

Figure 14: (a) Excitation curves of the best 9-cell resonator of each of the four manufacturers.
(b) Distribution of maximum gradients for the resonators of class 1, requiring a quality factor
Q0 ≥ 5 · 109.

23

1011

Q0

1010

109

0

5

10

15

20

Eacc  [MV/m]

Figure 15: Excitation curves of three cavities with serious material defects (class 2). Cavity C5
(N) exhibited a jump in quality factor.

(a)

(b)

Figure 16: (a) Temperature map of cell 5 of cavity C6 showing excessive heating at a localized
spot. (b) Positive print of an X-ray radiograph showing the “hot spot” as a dark point.

at DESY. Fluorescence was observed at photon energies corresponding to the characteristic
X-ray lines of tantalum L1 = 11.682 keV, L2 = 11.136 keV and L3 = 9.881 keV. The SYRFA
(synchrotron radiation ﬂuorescence analysis) method features suﬃcient sensitivity to perform
a scan of the tantalum contents in the niobium by looking at the lines Ta-Kα1 = 57.532 keV,
Ta-Kα2 = 56.277 keV and Ta-Kβ1 = 65.223 keV. The average Ta content in the bulk Nb was
about 200 ppm but rose to 2000 ppm in the spot region. The RRR dropped correspondingly
from 330 to about 60.

The six cavities in class 3 were produced by one company and exhibited premature quenches
at gradients of 10–14 MV/m and a slope in the Q(E) curve (Fig. 17). Two of the resonators
were investigated in greater detail [28]. Temperature mapping revealed strong heating at several
spots on the equator weld (Fig. 18b). The temperature rise as a function of the surface magnetic
ﬁeld is plotted in Fig. 18c for one sensor position above the weld and three positions on the
weld. In the ﬁrst case a growth proportional to B2 is observed as expected for a constant surface
resistance. On the weld, however, a much stronger rise is seen ranging from B5 to B8. This is
clear evidence for a contamination of the weld seam.

Once the reason for the reduced performance of the cavities in class 3 had been identiﬁed
a new 9-cell resonator was manufactured by the same company applying careful preparation
steps of the weld region: a 2 µm chemical etching not more than 8 hours in advance of the EB
welding, rinsing with ultrapure water and drying in a clean room. A rastered electron beam

24

1011

Q0

1010

109

0

5

15

10
20
Eacc [MV/m]

25

30

Figure 17: Excitation curves of six cavities with imperfect equator welds (class 3). Also shown
is a resonator ((cid:4)) made later by the same company, following stringent cleaning procedures at
the equator welds.

was used for welding with 50% penetration in the ﬁrst weld layer and 100% in the second. The
new cavity indeed showed excellent performance and achieved 24.5 MV/m, see Fig. 17. The
same applies for later cavities made by this company.

The average gradient of the cavities without serious material or fabrication defects amounts

to 20.1 ± 6.2 MV/m at Q0 = 5 · 109 where the error represents the rms of the distribution.

5.3 Diagnostic methods and quality control

The deﬁciencies encountered in the ﬁrst series production of TESLA cavities have initiated the
development of diagnostic methods and quality control procedures.

Electron microscopy

Scanning electron microscopy with energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) is used to identify
foreign elements on the surface. Only a depth of about 1 µm can be penetrated, so one has to
remove layer by layer to determine the diﬀusion depth of titanium or other elements. Alter-
natively one can cut the material and scan the cut region. The titanium layer applied in the
high temperature treatment has been found to extend to a depth of about 10 µm in the bulk
niobium. The sensitivity of the EDX method is rather limited; a Ti fraction below 0.5 % is
undetectable. Auger electron spectroscopy oﬀers higher sensitivity and using this method tita-
nium migration at grain boundaries has been found to a depth of 50–100 µm. Hence this large
thickness must be removed from the rf surface by BCP after post-puriﬁcation with Ti getter.
The detrimental eﬀect of insuﬃcient titanium removal has already been shown in Fig. 13d.
The microscopic methods are restricted to small samples and cannot be used to study entire
cavities.

25

cavity surface

board

equator weld

1.2 cm

24 x

D T [K]
0.250

0.000

(a)

14
(b)

16

18

20

22

24

D T [K]
0.040

0.000

D T [K]
0.250

Board 22
on the weld

~ B 5

quench location
Board 24
on the weld

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

D T [K]
0.020

0.000

D T [K]
0.070

Board 14
above the weld

~ B 2

Board 1
on the weld

0.000

0.000

~ B 8

~ B 2

(c)

Figure 18: (a) Location of temperature sensors to determine heating at the equator weld.
(b) Temperature map of the equator region from cell 5 of cavity C9 just below the quench.
(c) Temperature rise at various locations as a function of Bn with n between 2 and 8.

26

(a)

(b)

Figure 19: (a) Schematic view of the xy eddy-current scanning system. (b) Photo of the new
rotating scanning system.

X-ray ﬂuorescence

The narrow-band X-ray beams at HASYLAB permit element identiﬁcation via ﬂuorescence
analysis. In principle the existing apparatus allows the scanning of a whole niobium sheet such
as used for producing a half-cell, however the procedure would be far too time-consuming.

Eddy-current scan

A practical device for the quality control of all niobium sheets going into cavity production is
a high-resolution eddy-current system developed by the Bundesanstalt f¨ur Materialforschung
(BAM) in Berlin. The apparatus is shown in Fig. 19. The frequency used is 100 kHz corre-
sponding to a penetration depth of 0.5 mm in niobium at room temperature. The maximum
scanning speed is 1 m/s. The scanning probe containing the inducing and receiving coils ﬂoats
on an air pillow to avoid friction. The machined base plate contains holes for evacuating the
space between this plate and the Nb sheet. The atmospheric pressure is suﬃcient to ﬂatten the
265 x 265 mm2 niobium sheets to within 0.1 mm which is important for a high sensitivity scan.
The performance of the apparatus was tested with a Nb test sheet containing implanted tan-
talum deposits of 0.2 to 1 mm diameter. The scanned picture (Fig. 20a) demonstrates that Ta
clusters are clearly visible. Using this eddy-current apparatus the tantalum inclusion in cavity
C6 was easily detectable.

In the meantime an improved eddy-current scanning device has been designed and built at
BAM which operates similar to a turn table and allows for much higher scanning speeds and
better sensitivity since the accelerations of the probe head occuring in xy scans are avoided. A
two frequency principle is applied in the new system. Scanning with high frequency (about 1
MHz) allows detection of surface irregularities while the low frequency test (about 150 kHz) is
sensitive to bulk inclusions. The high and low frequency signals are picked up simultaneously.
Very high sensitivity is achieved by signal subtraction.

Neutron activation analysis

The eddy-current scan allows the detection of foreign materials in the niobium but is not
suitable for identiﬁcation. Neutron activation analysis permits a non-destructive determination
of the contaminants provided they have radioactive isotopes with a suﬃciently long half life.
Experiments were carried out at the research reactor BER II of the Hahn Meitner Institut in
Berlin. The niobium sheets are exposed to a thermal neutron ﬂux of 109 cm−2s−1 for some 5
hours. The radioactive isotope 94Nb has a half life of 6.2 min while 182Ta has a much longer
half life of 115 days. Two weeks after the irradiation the 94Nb activity has dropped to such
a low level that tantalum fractions in the ppm range can be identiﬁed. Figure 20b shows
the implanted tantalum clusters in the specially prepared Nb plate with great clarity. Also the
uniformly dissolved Ta is visible and the inferred concentration of 200 ppm is in agreement with
the chemical analysis. The activation analysis is far too time consuming for series checks but
can be quite useful in identifying special contaminations found with the eddy-current system.

27

(a)

(b)

Figure 20: (a) Eddy-current scan of a specially prepared Nb sheet with Ta implantations at 5
locations. (b) Neutron activation analysis of the same sheet.

Ten Nb sheets from the regular production were investigated without showing any evidence for
tantalum clusters.

5.4 Present status of TTF cavities

5.4.1

Improvements in cavity production

For the second series 25 cavities have been ordered at four ﬁrms. The second production diﬀered
from the ﬁrst one in three main aspects.

(1) Stricter quality control of niobium

The niobium sheets for the second series were all eddy-current scanned to eliminate material
with tantalum or other foreign inclusions before the deep drawing of half cells. From 715 sheets
637 were found free of defects, 63 showed grinding marks or imprints from rolling and 15
exhibited large signals which in most cases were due to small iron chips. No further Nb sheets
with tantalum inclusions were found. Most of the rejected sheets will be recoverable by applying
some chemical etching. The iron inclusions were caused by mechanical wear of the rolls used
for sheet rolling. In the meantime new rolls have been installed. The eddy-current check has
turned out to be an important quality control not only for the cavity manufacturer but also for
the supplier of the niobium sheets.

(2) Weld preparation

Stringent requirements were imposed on the electron-beam welding procedure to prevent the
degraded performance at the equator welds encountered in the ﬁrst series. After mechanical
trimming the weld regions were requested to be cleaned by a slight chemical etching, ultrapure
water rinsing and clean-room drying not more than 8 hours in advance of the EB welding.
The success of these two additional quality control measures has been convincing: no foreign
material inclusions nor weld contaminations were found in the cavities tested so far.

(3) Replacement of Nb ﬂanges by NbTi ﬂanges

In the ﬁrst cavity series the ﬂanges at the beam pipes and the coupler ports were made by
rolling over the 2 mm thick niobium pipes. The sealing against the stainless steel counter ﬂanges
was provided by Helicoﬂex gaskets. This simple design appeared satisfactory in a number of
prototype cavities but proved quite unreliable in the series production, mainly due to a softening
of the niobium during the 1400◦C heat treatment. Most of the nine-cell cavities had to be ﬂanged
more than once to become leak tight in superﬂuid helium. This caused not only time delays
but also severe problems with contamination and ﬁeld emission. Therefore an alternative ﬂange
design was needed [29]. The material was selected to be EB-weldable to niobium and to possess
a surface hardness equivalent to that of standard UHV ﬂange material (stainless steel 316 LN/
DIN 4429). Niobium-titanium conforms to these requirements at a reasonable cost. Contrary

28

]

/

m
V
M

[
 
 

c
c
a

E

3 0

2 5

2 0

1 5

1 0

5

0

pw

bd

pw

bd

bd

pw

pw

pw

bd

bd

bd

pw

pw

pw

bd

pw

pw

pw

TESLA 
     goal

bd

bd

bd

8
2
C

9
2
C

0
3
C

1
3
C

2
3
C

3
3
C

4
3
C

5
3
C

6
3
C

7
3
C

8
3
C

9
3
C

0
4
C

1
4
C

2
4
C

3
4
C

4
4
C

5
4
C

6
4
C

7
4
C

9
4
C

Figure 21: Test results of the second cavity series (cross-hatched bars); plotted is the highest
gradient achieved in the ﬁrst rf test of each cavity at Q0 ≥ 5 · 109. Cavities with poor initial
performance were subjected to an additional BCP and high pressure water rinsing and tested
again (open bars). Field limitation by ampliﬁer power (pw) or thermal breakdown (bd) is
indicated for the best gradient.

to pure niobium the alloy NbTi (ratio 45/55 in wt %) shows no softening after the 1400◦C heat
treatment and only a moderate crystal growth. O-ring type aluminum gaskets provide reliable
seals in superﬂuid helium and are easier to clean than Helicoﬂex gaskets. During cavity etching
the sealing surface must be protected from the acid.

5.4.2 Test results in vertical cryostat

All new cavities were subjected to the standard treatment described in Sect. 4.2, including the
post-puriﬁcation with titanium getter at 1400◦C. Twenty resonators have been tested up to
date. Only one rf test was performed for each resonator in the ﬁrst round. If some limitation
was found the cavity was put aside for further treatment. The results of the ﬁrst test sequence
are summarized in Fig. 21. It is seen that 8 cavities reach or exceed the TESLA speciﬁcation
of Eacc ≥ 25 MV/m with a quality factor above 5 · 109. Eight cavities are in the range of 18
to 23 MV/m while four cavities show a much lower performance. In cavity C43 a hole was
burnt during equator welding which was repaired by welding in a niobium plug; the cavity
quenched at 13 MV/m at exactly this position. It is rather unlikely that C43 can be recovered
by repeating the repair. Therefore, in future cavity production repaired holes in EB welds will
no longer be acceptable. The cavities C32, C34 and C42 showed very strong ﬁeld emission in
the ﬁrst test. They have been improved in the meantime by additional BCP and high pressure
water rinsing, see Fig. 21. Excluding the defective cavity C43, the average gradient is 25.0 ± 3.2
MV/m at Q0 = 5 · 109.

29

t
s
e
t
 
l
a
t
n
o
z
i
r
o
h

 
]

/

m
V
M

[
 

c
c
a

E

40

30

20

10

0

0

10
E

acc

20

30
 [MV/m] vertical test

40

Figure 22: Comparison of vertical and horizontal test results. The average accelerating ﬁeld
achieved in the vertical test with cw excitation is 22.3 MV/m, in the horizontal test with pulsed
excitation 22.5 MV/m. Most of these cavities are from the second production.

5.4.3 Tests with main power coupler in horizontal cryostat

After the successful test in the vertical bath cryostat the cavities are welded into their liquid
helium container and equipped with the main power coupler. The external Q is typically 2 · 106,
while in the vertical test an input antenna with an external Q of more than 1011 is used. Four
cavities of the ﬁrst production series and thirteen of the second series have been tested together
with their main power coupler in a horizontal cryostat. The accelerating ﬁelds achieved in the
vertical and the horizontal test are quite similar as shown in Fig. 22. In a few cases reduced
performance was seen due to ﬁeld emission while several cavities improved their ﬁeld capability
due to the fact that with the main power coupler pulsed operation is possible instead of the
cw operation in the vertical cryostat. These results indicate that the good performance of the
cavities can indeed be preserved after assembly of the liquid helium container and the power
coupler provided extreme care is taken to avoid foreign particles from entering the cavity during
these assembly steps.

5.4.4 Cavity improvement by heat treatment

The beneﬁcial eﬀect of the 800◦C and 1400◦C heat treatments has been shown in Fig. 13c. Ten
of the 9-cell cavities have been tested after the intermediate 800 ◦C step yielding an average
gradient of 20.7 MV/m. The 1400 ◦C treatment with titanium getter raised the average gradient
to 24.4 MV/m. It should be noted that part of the 3.7 MV/m improvement may be due to
the additional etching of about 80 µm. An interesting correlation is obtained by plotting the
maximum gradient as a function of the measured RRR of the cavity, see Fig. 23. This ﬁgure
clearly indicates that a higher heat conductivity leads to higher accelerating ﬁelds, at least if

30

30

25

20

15

]

/

m
V
M

[
 

c
c
a

E

10

5

0

0

annealed at 800C         
annealed with Ti at 1400C

100

200

300

400
RRR

500

600

700

800

Figure 23: Maximum gradient as a function of RRR.

the standard BCP treatment is applied to prepare the cavity surface.

6 RF Control System and Performance of the Cavities

with Electron Beam

6.1 General demands on the rf control system

The requirements on the stability of the accelerating ﬁeld in a superconducting acceleration
structure are comparable to those in a normal-conducting cavity. However the nature and mag-
nitude of the perturbations to be controlled are rather diﬀerent. Superconducting cavities pos-
sess a very narrow bandwidth and are therefore highly susceptible to mechanical perturbations.
Signiﬁcant phase and amplitude errors are induced by the resulting frequency variations. Per-
turbations can be excited by mechanical vibrations (microphonics), changes in helium pressure
and level, or Lorentz forces. Slow changes in frequency, on the time scale of minutes or longer,
are corrected by a frequency tuner, while faster changes are counteracted by an amplitude and
phase modulation of the incident rf power.

The demands on amplitude and phase stability of the TESLA Test Facility cavities are
driven by the maximum tolerable energy spread in the TTF linac. The design goal is a relative
spread of σE/E = 2 ·10−3 implying a gradient and phase stability in the order of 1 ·10−3 and
1.6◦, respectively. For cost reasons up to 32 cavities will be powered by a single klystron. Hence
it is not possible to control individual cavities but only the vector sum of the ﬁeld vectors in
these 32 cavities.

One constraint to be observed is that the rf power needed for control should be minimized.
The rf control system must also be robust against variations of system parameters such as beam
loading and klystron gain.

The pulsed structure of the rf power and the beam at TTF, shown in Fig. 24, puts demanding

31

]

u

.

a

[
 

e
d
u

t
i
l

p
m
a

Fill time

Flat top

Accelerating voltage

incident power

beam current

time[ m s]

0

500

1000

1500

2000

cavity phase

cavity detuning

Figure 24: Pulse structure of TTF cavity operation. Shown are: accelerating voltage with
500 µs ﬁlling time and 800 µs ﬂat top, incident power, beam current, cavity phase and cavity
detuning.

requirements on the rf control system. Amplitude and phase control is obviously needed during
the ﬂat-top of 800 µs when the beam is accelerated, but it is equally desirable to control the
ﬁeld during cavity ﬁlling to ensure proper beam injection conditions. Field control is aggravated
by the transients induced by the subpicosecond electron bunches which have a repetition rate
of 1 to 9 MHz.

For a detailed discussion of the basic principles of rf systems used in superconducting electron

linacs and their operational performance, refer to [30] and [31].

6.2 Sources of ﬁeld perturbations

There are two basic mechanisms which inﬂuence the magnitude and phase of the accelerating
ﬁeld in a superconducting cavity:

• variations in klystron power or beam loading (bunch charge)

• modulation of the cavity resonance frequency.

Perturbations of the accelerating ﬁeld through time-varying ﬁeld excitations are dominated
by changes in beam loading. One must distinguish between transients caused by the pulsed
structure of the beam current and stochastic ﬂuctuations of the bunch charge. The transients
caused by the regular bunch train in the TTF linac (800 picosecond bunches of 8 nC each,
spaced by 1 µs) are in the order of 1% per 10 µs; the typical bunch charge ﬂuctuations of 10%
induce ﬁeld ﬂuctuations of about 1%. In both cases the eﬀect of the fast source ﬂuctuations on
the cavity ﬁeld is diminuished by the long time constant of the cavity13.

Mechanical changes of the shape and eigenfrequency of the cavities caused by microphonics
are a source of amplitude and phase jitter which has bothered superconducting accelerator
technology throughout its development. In the TTF cavities the sensitivity of the resonance
frequency to a longitudinal deformation is about 300 Hz/µm. Heavy machinery can transmit

13The cavity with power coupler is adjusted to an external Q of 3 · 106 at 25 MV/m, corresponding to a time

constant of about 700 µs. The consequence is a low-pass ﬁlter characteristic.

32

−5

−10

−15

−20

−25

]
z
H

[
 

g
n
i
n
u
t
e
d

−30

17:30

cavity C3

40

30

20

10

s
t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

 
f
o

 
.

o
n

cavity C3

   = 4 Hz
D f

18:00
time [h]

(a)

18:30

0
−20

−10

  0

10

20

     f-f   [Hz]

0
(b)

Figure 25: Fluctuations of the cavity resonance frequency. (a) Slow drifts caused by helium pres-
sure variations. The sensitivity is 10 Hz/mbar. (b) Random variations of resonance frequency
after correction for the slow drift.

vibrations through the ground, the support and the cryostat to the cavity. Vacuum pumps
can interact with the cavity through the beam tubes, and the compressors and pumps of the
refrigerator may generate mechanical vibrations which travel along the He transfer line into the
cryostat. Also helium pressure variations lead to changes in resonance frequency as shown in
Fig. 25a. The rms frequency spread due to microphonics, measured in 16 cavities, is 9.5 ±5.3 Hz
and thus surprisingly small for a superconducting cavity system (see Fig. 25b).

At high accelerating gradients the Lorentz forces become a severe perturbation. The cor-
responding frequency shift is proportional to the square of the accelerating ﬁeld according to
acc with K ≈ 1 Hz/(MV/m)2. Figure 26a shows a cw measurement of the resonance
∆f = −K ·E2
curve with a strong distortion caused by Lorentz forces. In cw operation the frequency shift can
be easily corrected for by mechanical tuning. In the pulsed mode employed at the TTF linac
this is not possible since the mechanical tuner is far too slow. Hence a time-dependent detuning
is unavoidable. In order to keep the deviation from the nominal resonance frequency within
acceptable limits the cavities are predetuned before ﬁlling. The measured dynamic detuning
of cavity C39 during the 1.3 ms long rf pulse is shown in Fig. 26b for accelerating ﬁelds of 15
to 30 MV/m. Choosing a predetuning of +300 Hz, the eigenfrequency at 25 MV/m changes
dynamically from +100 Hz to −120 Hz during the 800 µs duration of the beam pulse.

In steady state (cw) operation at a gradient of 25 MV/m and a beam current of 8 mA a
klystron power of 210 kW is required per nine-cell cavity. In pulsed mode ≈ 15 % additional rf
power is needed to maintain a constant accelerating gradient in the presence of cavity detuning.
The frequency changes from microphonics and helium pressure ﬂuctuations lead to comparable
extra power requirements. The klystron should be operated 10 % below saturation to guarantee
suﬃcient gain in the feedback loop.

6.3 RF control design considerations

The amplitude and phase errors from Lorentz force detuning, beam transients and microphonics
are in the order of 5% and 20◦, respectively. These errors must be suppressed by one to two
orders of magnitude. Fortunately, the dominant errors are repetitive (Lorentz forces and beam
transients) and can be largely eliminated by means of a feedforward compensation. It should
be noted, however, that bunch-to-bunch ﬂuctuations of the beam current cannot be suppressed
by the rf control system since the gain bandwidth product is limited to about 1 MHz due to the

33

s
D f = - K · Eacc

2

K = 0.9 Hz

(MV/m)2

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

]

/

m
V
M

[
 
t
n
e
i
d
a
r
g

0
−80

−60

−40

−20
D f [Hz]

0

20

40

(a)

]
z
H

i

[
 
g
n
n
u
t
e
d

300

200

100

0

−100

−200

−300
0

fill: 500 m s
flat: 800 m s

500

15 MV/m
20 MV/m
25 MV/m
30 MV/m

1500

2000

1000

time [m s]

(b)

Figure 26: (a) Inﬂuence of Lorentz forces on the shape of the resonance curve of a sc cavity in
cw operation. The left part of the curve was mapped out by approaching the resonance from
below, the right part by coming from above. (b) Dynamical detuning of cavity C39 during the
TESLA pulse. In pulsed operation the resonance is approached from above.

low-pass characteristics of the cavity, the bandwidth limitations of electronics and klystrons,
and cable delay.

Fast amplitude and phase control can be accomplished by modulation of the incident rf
wave which is common to 32 cavities. The control of an individual cavity ﬁeld is not possible.
The layout of the TTF digital rf control system is shown in Fig. 27. The vector modulator for
the incident wave is designed as a so-called “I/Q modulator” controlling real and imaginary
part of the complex cavity ﬁeld vector instead of amplitude and phase. This has the advantage
that the coupling between the two feedback loops is minimized and the problem of large phase
uncertainties at small amplitude is avoided.

The detectors for cavity ﬁeld, incident and reﬂected wave are implemented as digital detec-
tors for real and imaginary part. The rf signals are converted to an intermediate frequency of
250 kHz and sampled at a rate of 1 MHz, which means that two subsequent data points yield
the real and the imaginary part of the cavity ﬁeld vectors. These vectors are multiplied with
2×2 rotation matrices to correct for phase oﬀsets and to calibrate the gradients of the indi-
vidual cavity probe signals. The vector sum is calculated and a Kalman ﬁlter is applied which
provides an optimal state (cavity ﬁeld) estimate by correcting for delays in the feedback loop
and by taking stochastic sensor and process noise into account. Finally the nominal set point
is subtracted and a time-optimal gain matrix is applied to calculate the new actuator setting
(the Re and Im control inputs to the vector modulator). Adaptive feedforward is realized by
means of a table containing the systematic variations, thereby reducing the task of the feedback
loop to control the remaining stochastic ﬂuctuations. The feedforward tables are continuously
updated to take care of slow changes in parameters such as average detuning angle, microphonic
noise level and phase shift in the feedforward path.

6.4 Operational experience

The major purpose of the TESLA Test Facility linac is to demonstrate that all major accelerator
subsystems meet the technical and operational requirements of the TESLA collider. Currently
the TTF linac is equipped with two cryomodules each containing 8 cavities. The cavities are

34

vector

modulator

klystron

  master
oscillator

1.3 GHz

Im

Re

C
A
D

C
A
D

power transmission line

Cavity 1

Cavity 8

8x
......

...

Cavity 25

8x
......

Cavity 32

cryomodule 4

LO

LO

LO

cryomodule 1

    1.3 GHz 
+ 250 kHz

LO

1.3GHz
field probe

250 kHz

clock

f  = 1 MHz
s

C
D
A

a -b

(    )ab

1

. . . .
(    )ab

a -b

8

...

C
D
A

C
D
A

C
D
A

. . . .
(    )ab

a -b

32

a -b

(    )ab

25

vector-sum

Re

Im

+
Re  

Im

+
Re  

Im

digital
low pass

filter

gain
table

Re  

Im

setpoint
table

DSP

system

Figure 27: Schematic of the digital rf control system.

feed

forward

table

routinely operated at the design gradient of TTF of 15 MV/m, providing a beam energy of 260
MeV.

An important prerequisite of the proper functioning of the vector-sum control of 16 to 32
cavities is an equal response of the ﬁeld pickup probes in the individual cavities. A ﬁrst step is
to adjust the phase of the incident rf wave to the same value in all cavities by means of three-
stub tuners in the wave guides. Secondly, the transients induced by the bunched beam are used
to obtain a relative calibration of the pickup probes, both in terms of amplitude and phase.
Typical data taken at the initial start-up of a linac run are shown in Fig. 28. Ideally the lengths
of the ﬁeld vectors should all be identical since the signals are induced by the same electron
bunch in all cavities. The observed length diﬀerences indicate a variation in the coupling of
the pickup antenna to the beam-induced cavity ﬁeld, which has to be corrected. The diﬀerent
phase angles of the ﬁeld vectors are mainly due to diﬀerent signal delays. The complex ﬁeld
vectors are rotated by matrix multiplication in digital signal processors to yield all zero phase.
Moreover they are normalized to the same amplitude to correct for the diﬀerent couplings of
the pickup antennas to the cavity ﬁelds. Once this calibration has been performed the vector
sum of the 16 or 32 cavities is a meaningful measure of the total accelerating voltage supplied
to the beam. The calibration is veriﬁed with a measurement of the beam energy in a magnetic
spectrometer.

The required amplitude stability of 1 · 10−3 and phase stability of σφ ≤ 1.6◦ can be achieved
during most of the beam pulse duration with the exception of the beam transient induced when
turning on the beam. Without feedback the transient of a 30 µs beam pulse at 8 mA would
be of the order of 1 MV/m. This transient can be reduced to about 0.2 MV/m by turning
on feedback. The eﬀectiveness of the feedback system is limited by the loop delay of 5 µs and
the unity-gain bandwidth of about 20 kHz. The 0.2 MV/m transient is repetitive with a high
degree of reproducibility. Using feedforward it can be further suppressed by more than an order

35

S
Measured Transient [MV/m]

90

  0.25

60

  0.2

  0.15

  0.1

  0.05

30

5

expected transient

0

6

1

8

330

120

4

150

7

180

210

240

3

2

300

270

Figure 28: Beam induced transients (cavity ﬁeld vectors) obtained by measuring the cavity
ﬁelds with and without beam pulses. The noise in the signals can be estimated from the erratic
motion at the center of the plot. This region represents the ﬁrst 50 µs of the measurement
before the arrival of the beam pulse.

of magnitude, as shown in Fig. 29. Slow drifts are corrected for by making the feedforward
system adaptive [32]. The feedforward tables are updated on a time scale of minutes.

7 Cavities of Higher Gradients

Both the TESLA collider and the X-ray FEL would proﬁt from the development of cavities
which can reach higher accelerating ﬁelds (i.e. higher particle energies) and higher quality factors
(i.e. reduced operating costs of the accelerators). The TESLA design energy of 250 GeV per
beam requires a gradient of 25 MV/m in the present nine-cell cavities. The results shown in Sect.
5.4 demonstrate that TESLA could indeed be realized with a moderate improvement in the
present cavity fabrication and preparation methods. However, for particle physics an energy
upgrade of the collider would be of highest interest, and hence there is a strong motivation
to push the ﬁeld capability of the cavities closer to the physical limit of about 50 MV/m
which is determined by the superheating ﬁeld of niobium. Three main reasons are known why
the theoretical limit has not yet been attained in multicell resonators: (1) foreign material
contamination in the niobium, (2) insuﬃcient quality and cleanliness of the inner rf surface, (3)
insuﬃcient mechanical stability of the resonators. An R&D program has been initiated aiming
at improvements in all three directions. Furthermore, the feasibility of seamless cavities is being
investigated.

36

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

]

V
M

[
 
e
g
a
t
l
o
v

 

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
l
e
c
c
a

0

0

]

V
M

 

[
 
e
g
a
t
l
o
v
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
l
e
c
c
a

61

60.5

60

59.5

59

58.5

58

57.5

57

30 m s beam

only feedback
(feedback gain: 70)

feedback with 
feed forward
compensation
(feedback gain: 70)

500

1000
time [ m s]

1500

2000

30 m s beam

feedback with 
feed forward compensation
(feedback gain: 70)

only feedback
(feedback gain: 70)

400

600

800
time [ m s]

1000

1200

Figure 29: Field regulation of the vector-sum of 8 cavities without and with adaptive feedfor-
ward. The lower graph shows an enlarged view of the plateau region.

7.1 Quality improvement of niobium

Niobium for microwave resonators has to be of high purity for several reasons: (a) dissolved
gases like hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen reduce the heat conductivity at liquid helium temper-
ature and degrade the cooling of the rf surface; (b) contamination by foreign metals may lead to
magnetic ﬂux pinning and heat dissipation in rf ﬁelds; (c) normal-conducting or weakly super-
conducting clusters close to the rf surface are particularly dangerous . The Nb ingots contain
about 500 ppm of ﬁnely dispersed tantalum. It appears unlikely that the Ta clusters found in
some early TTF cavities might have been caused by this “natural” Ta content. Rather there is
some suspicion that Ta grains might have dropped into the Nb melt during the various remelt-
ings of the Nb ingot in an electron-beam melting furnace because such furnaces are often used
for Ta production as well. To avoid contamination by foreign metals a dedicated electron-beam
melting furnace would appear highly desirable but seems to be too cost-intensive in the present
R&D phase of TESLA. Also more stringent requirements on the quality of the furnace vacuum
(lower pressure, absence of hydrocarbons) would improve the Nb purity. The production steps
following the EB melting (machining, forging and sheet rolling of the ingot) may also introduce
dirt. The corresponding facilities need careful inspection and probably some upgrading. The
present TTF cavities have been made from niobium with gas contents in the few ppm range and
an RRR of 300. Ten 9-cell cavities have been measured both after 800◦C and 1400◦C ﬁring.
The average gain in gradient was about 4 MV/m. It would be highly desirable to eliminate
the tedious and costly 1400◦C heat treatment of complete cavities. One possibility might be
to produce a niobium ingot with an RRR of more than 500. This is presently not our favored
approach, mainly for cost reasons.

37

For the present R&D program, the main emphasis is on the production of ingots with
RRR ≥ 300, but with improved quality by starting from niobium raw material with reduced
foreign material content, especially tantalum well below 500 ppm. Stricter quality assurance
during machining, forging and sheet rolling should prevent metal ﬂakes or other foreign material
from being pressed into the niobium surface deeper than a few µm. To increase the RRR from
300 to about 600, it is planned to study the technical feasibility14 of a 1400◦C heat treatment
at the dumb-bell stage (2 half cells joined by a weld at the iris). This procedure would be
preferable compared to the heat treatment of whole cavities which must be carefully supported
in a Nb frame to prevent plastic deformation, while such a precaution is not needed for dumb-
bells. However, there is a strong incentive to ﬁnd cavity treatment methods which would permit
elimination of the 1400◦C heat treatment altogether. According to the results obtained at KEK
[33] electropolishing seems to oﬀer this chance (see below).

7.2

Improvement in cavity fabrication and preparation

Once half cells or dumb-bells of high RRR have been produced it is then mandatory to perform
the electron-beam welding of the cavities in a vacuum of a few times 10−6 mbar in order to
avoid degradation of the RRR in the welds. The EB welding machines available at industrial
companies achieve vacua of only 5·10−5 mbar and are hence inadequate for this purpose. An EB
welding machine at CERN is equipped with a much better vacuum system. This EB apparatus
is being used for a single-cell test program. For the future cavity improvement program a new
electron-beam welding apparatus will be installed at DESY with a state-of-the-art electron
gun, allowing computer-controlled beam manipulations, and with an oilfree vacuum chamber
fulﬁlling UHV standards.

The industrially produced cavities undergo an elaborate treatment at TTF before they
can be installed in the accelerator. A 150–200 µm thick damage layer is removed from the rf
surface because otherwise gradients of 25 MV/m appear inaccessible. As explained in Sect. 4
the present method is Buﬀered Chemical Polishing (BCP) which leads to a rather rough surface
with strong etching in the grain boundaries. An alternative method is “electropolishing” (EP)
in which the material is removed in an acid mixture under current ﬂow. Sharp edges and burrs
are smoothed out and a very glossy surface can be obtained. For a number of years remarkable
results have been obtained at KEK with electropolishing of 1-cell niobium cavities. Recently,
a collaboration between KEK and Saclay has convincingly demonstrated that EP raises the
accelerating ﬁeld by more than 7 MV/m with respect to BCP. Several 1-cell cavities from
Saclay, which showed already good performance after the standard BCP, exhibited a clear gain
after the application of EP [34]. Conversely, an electropolished cavity which had reached 37
MV/m suﬀered a degradation after subsequent BCP. These results are a strong indication that
electropolishing is the superior treatment method.

CERN, DESY, KEK and Saclay started a joint R&D program with electropolishing of
half cells and 1-cell cavities in August 1998. Recent test results yield gradients around 40
MV/m [35] and hence the same good performance as was achieved at KEK. The transfer of
the EP technology to 9-cell resonators requires considerable eﬀort. It is planned to do this in
collaboration with industry.

Recently it has been found [36] that an essential prerequisite for achieving gradients in the
40 MV/m regime is a baking at 100 to 150◦C for up to 48 hours while the cavity is evacuated,

14At Cornell University cavities have been successfully fabricated from RRR = 1000 material. Likewise, the

TTF cavity C19 was made from post-puriﬁed half cells and showed good performance.

38

1011

Q

0

1010

109

0

5

10

20

15
 [MV/m]

E

acc

quench

25

30

Figure 30: Excitation curve of a TESLA 9-cell cavity showing a drop of quality factor without
any ﬁeld emission.

after the ﬁnal high-pressure water rinsing. In electropolished cavities this procedure removes
the drop of quality factor towards high gradients which is often observed without any indication
of ﬁeld emission. Such a drop is usually also found in chemically etched cavities; see for example
Fig. 30. Experiments at Saclay [37] have shown that a baking may improve the Q(E) curve;
however, part of the Q reduction at high ﬁeld may be due to local magnetic ﬁeld enhancements
at the sharp grain boundaries of BCP treated cavities [38].

7.3 Mechanical stability of the cavities

The stiﬀening rings joining neighboring cells in the TESLA resonator are adequate to limit
Lorentz-force detuning up to accelerating ﬁelds of 25 MV/m. Beyond 25 MV/m the cavity
reinforcement provided by these rings is insuﬃcient. Hence an alternative stiﬀening scheme
must be developed for cavities in the 35–40 MV/m regime. A promising approach has been
taken at Orsay and Saclay. The basic idea is to reinforce a thin-walled niobium cavity by a
2 mm thick copper layer which is plasma-sprayed onto the outer wall. Several successful tests
have been made [39]. The copper plating has a potential danger since Nb and Cu have rather
diﬀerent thermal contraction. The deformation of a cavity upon cooldown and the resulting
frequency shift need investigation. Another phenomenon has been observed in cavities made
from explosion-bonded niobium-copper sheets: when these cavities were quenched, a reduction
in quality factor Q0 was observed [40]. An explanation maybe trapped magnetic ﬂux from
thermo-electric currents at the copper-niobium interface. It is unknown whether this undesirable
eﬀect happens also in copper-sprayed cavities. An alternative to copper spraying might be the
reinforcement of a niobium cavity by depositing some sort of metallic “foam”, using the plasma
or high velocity spraying technique. If the layer is porous the superﬂuid helium penetrating the
voids should provide ample cooling.

The cavity reinforcement by plasma or high-velocity spraying appears to be a promising

39

approach but considerable R&D work needs to be done to decide whether this is a viable
technique for the TESLA cavities.

7.4 Seamless cavities

The EB welds in the present resonator design are a potential risk. Great care has to be taken
to avoid holes, craters or contamination in the welds which usually have a detrimental eﬀect
on the high-ﬁeld capability. A cavity without weld connections in the regions of high electric
or magnetic rf ﬁeld would certainly be less vulnerable to small mistakes during fabrication. For
this reason the TESLA collaboration decided several years ago to investigate the feasibility of
producing seamless cavities. Two routes have been followed: spinning and hydroforming.

At the Legnaro National Laboratory of INFN in Italy the spinning technique [41] has been
successfully applied to form cavities out of niobium sheets. The next step will be to produce
a larger quantity of 1-cell, 3-cell and ﬁnally 9-cell cavities from seamless Nb tubes with an
RRR of 300. In the cavities spun from ﬂat sheets a very high degree of material deformation
was needed, leading to a rough inner cavity surface. Gradients between 25 and 32 MV/m were
obtained after grinding and heavy etching (removal of more than 500 µm) [42]. Starting from a
tube the amount of deformation will be much less and a smoother inner surface can be expected.
This R&D eﬀort is well underway and the ﬁrst resonators can be expected in early 2000.

The hydroforming of cavities from seamless niobium tubes is being pursued at DESY [43].
Despite initial hydroforming diﬃculties, related to inhomogeneous mechanical properties of the
niobium tubes, four single cell cavities have been successfully built so far. Three of these were
tested and reached accelerating ﬁelds of 23 to 27 MV/m. In a very recent test15 32.5 MV/m was
achieved at Q0 = 2 · 1010. Most remarkable is the fact that the cavity was produced from low
RRR niobium (RRR = 100). It received a 1400◦C heat treatment raising the RRR to 300–400.
The surface was prepared by grinding and 250 µm BCP.

7.5 Niobium sputtered cavities

Recent investigations at CERN [44] and Saclay [45] show that single-cell copper cavities with
a niobium sputter layer of about 1 µm thickness are able to reach accelerating ﬁelds beyond 20
MV/m. These results appear so promising that CERN and DESY have agreed to initiate an
R&D program on 1.3 GHz single cell sputtered cavities aiming at gradients in the 30 MV/m
regime and quality factors above 5 · 109. High-performance sputtered cavities would certainly
be of utmost interest for the TESLA project for cost reasons. Another advantage would be the
suppression of Lorentz force detuning by choosing a suﬃciently thick copper wall.

7.6 The superstructure concept

The present TTF cavities are equipped with one main power coupler and two higher order
mode couplers per 9-cell resonator. The length of the interconnection between two cavities
has been set to 3λ/2 (λ = 0.23 m is the rf wavelength) in order to suppress cavity-to-cavity
coupling of the accelerating mode. A shortening of the interconnection is made possible by
the “superstructure” concept, devised by J. Sekutowicz [46]. Four 7-cell cavities of TESLA
geometry are joined by beam pipes of length (λ/2). The pipe diameter is increased to permit

15Preparation and test of the hydroformed cavities were carried out by P. Kneisel at Jeﬀerson Laboratory,

Newport News, USA.

40

an energy ﬂow from one cavity to the next, hence one main power coupler is suﬃcient to feed
the entire superstructure. One HOM coupler per short beam pipe section provides suﬃcient
damping of dangerous higher modes in both neighboring cavities. Each 7-cell cavity will be
equipped with its own LHe vessel and frequency tuner. Therefore, in the superstructure the
ﬁeld homogeneity tuning (equal ﬁeld amplitude in all cells) and the HOM damping can be
handled at the sub-unit level. The main advantages of the superstructure are an increase in the
active acceleration length in TESLA - the design energy of 250 GeV per beam can be reached
with a gradient of 22 MV/m - and a savings in rf components, especially power couplers.

A copper model of the superstructure is presently used to verify the theoretically predicted
performance. This model allows individual cell tuning, ﬁeld proﬁle adjustment, investigation of
transients in selected cells, test of the HOM damping scheme and measurement of the cavity
couplings to the fundamental mode coupler. Also the inﬂuence of mechanical tolerances is stud-
ied. First results are promising [47]. A niobium superstructure prototype is under construction
and will be tested with beam in the TTF linac beginning of 2001.

8 Acknowledgements

We are deeply indebted to the late distinguished particle and accelerator physicist Bjørn H.
Wiik who has been the driving force behind the TESLA project and whose determination and
enthusiasm was essential for much of the progress that has been achieved. We want to thank the
many physicists, engineers and technicians in the laboratories of the TESLA collaboration and
in the involved industrial companies for their excellent work and support of the superconducting
cavity program. We are grateful to P. Kneisel for numerous discussions.

References

[1] Proceedings of the 1st TESLA WORKSHOP, CLNS-90-1029, edited by H. Padamsee,

Cornell University, USA (1990).

[2] TESLA TEST FACILITY LINAC-Design Report, TESLA-Report 95-01, edited by

D.A. Edwards, DESY (1995).

[3] C. Reece et al., Proceedings of the Particle Accelerator Conference and International Con-

ference on High Energy Accelerators, Dallas (1995), p. 1512.

[4] Conceptual Design Report of a 500 GeV e+e− Linear Collider with Integrated X-ray Laser
Facility, DESY 1997-048, ECFA 1997-182, edited by R. Brinkmann, G. Materlik, J. Ross-
bach, A. Wagner (1997).

[5] G. M¨uller, Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on RF Superconductivity, ANL-PHY-88-1,

edited by K.W. Shepard, Argonne, USA (1988), p. 331.

[6] B. Bonin, CERN Accelerator School “Superconductivity in Particle Accelerators”, CERN

96-03, edited by S. Turner, Hamburg (1995).

[7] W. Weingarten, CERN Accelerator School “Superconductivity in Particle Accelerators”,

CERN 96-03, edited by S. Turner, Hamburg (1995).

[8] T. Schilcher, TESLA-Report, TESLA 95-12, DESY (1995).

41

[9] B. Bonin, Supercond. Sci. Technology 9 (1996), p. 453.

[10] K. Schulze, Journal of Metals 33 No. 5 (1981), p. 33.

[11] A. Boucheﬀa et al., Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on RF Superconductivity,

CEA/Saclay 96 080/1, edited by B. Bonin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France (1995), p. 659.

[12] J. Matricon and D. Saint-James, Phys. Lett. A 24 (1967) 241.

[13] T. Hays et al., Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, CEA/Saclay

96 080/1, edited by B. Bonin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France (1995), p. 437.

[14] C. Benvenuti et al., Proceedings of the IEEE Part. Accel. Conf., San Francisco, USA, Vol.

2 (New York: IEEE) (1991), p. 1023.

[15] R.H. Fowler and L. Nordheim, Proceedings of the Roy. Soc. A 119, 173 and Math. Phys.

Sci. 119 (1928) 173.

[16] H. Padamsee, J. Knobloch and T. Hayes, RF Superconductivity for Accelerators, John

Wiley, New York 1998.

[17] H. Padamsee, Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Superconductivity, Hamburg, Germany

(1991), p. 904.

[18] U. Laustr¨or et al., URMEL and URMEL-T USER GUIDE (Mode Analysis of Cylindrically

Symmetric Cavities; Evaluation of RF-Fields in Waveguides), DESY M-87-03 (1987).

[19] Alexander Wu Chao and Maury Tigner, Handbook of Accelerator Physics and Engineering,

World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1999.

[20] W. Albach and G.A. Voss, Zeitschr. Angew. Phys 9 (1957) 111.

[21] W. D. M¨oller, Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[22] J. T¨uckmantel, Proceedings of the Particle Accelerator Conference and International Con-

ference on High Energy Accelerators, Dallas, USA (1995), p. 1642.

[23] J. Graber, Nucl. Instrum. and Methods A 350 (1994) 572.

[24] P. Bernard et al., Proceedings of the 1992 European Particle Accelerator Conference, edited

by E. Henke et al., Editions Frontieres (1992), p. 1269.

[25] H. Padamsee et al., Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, edited by

Y. Kojima, Tsukuba, Japan (1990).

[26] H. Safa et al., Proceedings of

the 7th Workshop on RF Superconductivity,

CEA/Saclay 96 080/1, edited by B. Bonin, Gif-sur-Yvette, France (1995), p. 649.

[27] W. Singer, D. Proch and A. Brinkmann, Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on RF Super-
conductivity, edited by V. Palmieri and A. Lombardi, Abano Terme, Italy (1999), p. 850
and LNL-INFN (Rep) 133/98.

42

[28] A. Brinkmann et al., Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, edited
by V. Palmieri and A. Lombardi, Abano Terme, Italy (1999) p. 452 and LNL-INFN (Rep)
133/98.

[29] K. Zapfe-D¨uren et al., Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, edited
by V. Palmieri and A. Lombardi, Abano Terme, Italy (1999) p. 457 and LNL-INFN (Rep)
133/98.

[30] H.-D. Gr¨af, Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, DESY M-92-01,

Hamburg, Germany (1992), p. 317.

[31] S. Simrock, Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Newport News,

USA (1993), p. 294.

[32] M. Liepe and S. Simrock, Proceedings EPAC 1998, Stockholm, Sweden (1998), p. 1735.

[33] K. Saito, Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA (1999)

to be published.

[34] E. Kako et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[35] L. Lilje et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[36] P. Kneisel, Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[37] P. Charrier et al., Proceedings EPAC 1998, Stockholm, Sweden (1998), p. 1885.

[38] J. Knobloch et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe,

USA (1999) to be published.

[39] S. Bousson, Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[40] T Fujino et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[41] V. Palmieri, Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, edited by
V. Palmieri and A. Lombardi, Abano Terme, Italy (1997), p. 553 and LNL-INFN (Rep)
133/98

[42] P. Kneisel, V. Palmieri and K. Saito, Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Supercon-

ductivity, Santa Fe, USA (1999) to be published.

[43] I. Gonin et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

[44] C. Benvenuti et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe,

USA (1999) to be published.

43

[45] P. Bosland et al., IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, ASC’98, Vol. 9, No.

2 (1999).

[46] J. Sekutowicz, M. Ferrario and Ch. Tang, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams, Vol. 2, No. 6

(1999).

[47] H. Chen et al., Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, USA

(1999) to be published.

44

This figure "fig1_cav1.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "FIG4_schoen.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "FC8.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "Fig8Diagn.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "Fig10Diagn.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "F12a_BWPh.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "F12b_OJS.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "F17.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

This figure "FigEDA.jpeg" is available in "jpeg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0003011v1

