0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
3

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rotating Band Pion Production Targets for Muon Colliders and

Neutrino Factories a

B.J. King

Brookhaven National Laboratory, Building 901A, P.O. Box 5000, Upton, NY11973

email: bking@bnl.gov

web page: http://pubweb.bnl.gov/people/bking

An update is presented on a conceptual design for a pion production target station using
a rotating cupronickel band and that was originally proposed for use at a muon collider
facility with a 4 MW pulsed proton beam. After reviewing the salient design features
and motivations for this target, ongoing studies are described that are attempting to
benchmark the thermal stresses and radiation damage on the target band using data
from the Fermilab antiproton source and other operating targets. Possible parameter
optimizations and alternative technologies for the rotating band are surveyed, including
discussion on the the various proton beam parameters that might be encountered for
rotating band targets at either muon colliders or neutrino factories. Finally, an outline
is proposed for a possible R&D path towards capability for the actual construction of
rotating band pion production targets.

1 Introduction and Motivation

Conceptual design studies for muon colliders that have taken place since the mid-
1990’s have motivated the design of pion production targets that can operate and
survive with megawatt-scale pulsed proton beams. Over the past few months, the
design timescale and potential learning curve for such targets has eﬀectively been
abbreviated by the expanded interest in neutrino factories – muon storage rings ded-
icated to producing neutrino beams that will require similarly large muon currents
to muon colliders and that have prospects for being built on a shorter timescale –
perhaps to be ready within the next decade.

We present an update on a previous report [1] describing a conceptual design
for a cupronickel rotating band pion production target for muon colliders that was
proposed as a relatively conservative extrapolation from existing targets. A more
detailed write-up on this target is in progress [2]. (Note that another rotating band
design based on reference [1] is presented elsewhere in these proceedings [3].)

The rotating band design is readily adaptable to neutrino factories and, indeed,
its conservative nature makes its development particularly well matched to the
shorter timescales for this application. Alternative, more exotic, targetry options
that were originally proposed for muon colliders – such as pulsed mercury jets –
may involve extensive multi-year exploratory experimental R&D programs [4] that
do not appear to be particularly compatible with the shorter timescales envisaged
for neutrino factories.

This paper is laid out as follows. General design considerations and strategies
for high power solid targets form the topic of the following section. Sections 3
through section 5 then focus in on a review of the speciﬁc cupronickel band design
that was proposed in reference [1]. Speciﬁcally, section 3 gives an overview of the

aPresented at the ICFA/ECFA Workshop ”Neutrino Factories based on Muon Storage Rings”
(νFACT’99), Lyon, France, 5–9 July, 1999.

1

conceptual design and strawman speciﬁcations, section 4 summarizes the results of
computer simulations predicting its pion yield performance and characterizing the
heating eﬀects from the beam, and section 5 discusses stress and durability issues.
Section 6 steps back from the parameters in [1] to examine the technology options
and parameter optimizations available to the rotating band target concept for the
spectrum of possible proton driver scenarios at both muon colliders and neutrino
factories. The paper concludes with comments on the potential for the rotating
band target concept and with an outlook on the R&D program required to bring
this conceptual design to practical fruition.

2 General Design Strategies for High Power Production Targets

This section gives an overview of the general design goals that were considered
important when proposing the target design of reference [1], and on the strategies
employed to achieve these design goals. The intention was to design a target station
that:

1. can be designed quickly and with relatively modest resources, so it will as-
suredly not hold up the overall development of neutrino factories or muon
colliders

2. will clearly survive any beam-induced stresses it might be subjected to and

have an acceptable lifetime

3. is relatively straightforward and aﬀordable to build and maintain (including

target replacement and disposal)

4. has pion yields per proton and phase space densities that are as good as, or
not much inferior to, what could be achieved with the more idealized targets
that could be designed for operating with low beam powers.

The ﬁrst item implies that the R&D program for such a target can be conducted
mainly through paper studies, computer simulations and engineering computer-
assisted design studies, perhaps augmented by a modest amount of mechanical pro-
totyping and/or beam tests if convenient. Such an R&D program appears plausible
for the strawman design scenario of reference [1]. Items 3 and 4 also appear to be
met by this scenario, as can be judged from the information presented in section 3
of this paper and elsewhere [1, 2].

The remainder of this section addresses item 2 in the list, since the single most
diﬃcult design constraint for rotating bands and other solid targets for muon col-
liders is the requirement of survivability in the face of instantaneous beam energies
per proton pulse of order 100 kJ and megawatt-scale beam powers, i.e., comparable
to or larger than the largest existing proton facilities. A sound design strategy to
satisfy item 2 is to choose beam and target parameters such that the maximum ma-
terial stresses and radiation exposures do not go beyond what has been explicitly
achieved in existing targets or targetry studies. It is clear that this can always be
achieved in principle, even for the highest beam powers under consideration, by:

2

1. choosing a target material with appropriate mechanical properties and mod-
erate thermal stresses, consistent with optimizing the pion yield. In practice
this might mean choosing from materials with medium atomic numbers in the
range from titanium (Z = 22) through nickel (Z = 28), as discussed further in
sections 4 and 6, and

2. suﬃciently spreading out the spot size to cope with higher energy beam pulses,

and

3. rotating or otherwise moving the target to continually expose new areas of the
target to each beam pulse. This limits both the instantaneous local thermal
stresses and the lifetime radiation exposure of the target material.

Concerning the ﬁnal item of strategy, the considerable potential for designs
that continually expose the beam to new target material is amply illustrated by the
tungsten target design for the proposed Accelerator Production of Tritium (APT)
project [5] at Los Alamos National Laboratory. A 1.7 GeV, 100 mA beam is con-
tinually rastered across a 19 x 190 cm area of the APT tungsten target to limit
the local heating and thermal shock stresses. Impressively, the projected 170 MW
beam power onto the APT target is approximately two orders of magnitude larger
than the applications considered in this paper.

As a detailed diﬀerence from the approach for the APT, the band target uses
the more traditional solution for high power targets of moving the target material
rather than the beam spot. The idea of rotating or scanning high-power targets
has already found successful application in several existing facilities including, for
example, the trolled tungsten-rhenium target for the SLC positron source [6] and
the rotating nickel target at the BNL “g-minus-2” experiment [7]. Target rotation
can limit temperature rises and the consequent thermal stresses on timescales of a
second or less and, in the longer term, it spreads out the radiation load over much
more material. The Fermilab antiproton source target [8] is rotated more slowly
than the preceding examples in order to spread out the radiation dose over the
circumference of the target disk, as is discussed further in section 5.

3 A Conceptual Design and Straw-man Speciﬁcations for a Cupronickel

Rotating Band Target

Table 1: Strawman parameters for the cupronickel target band, taken from reference [1].

target band radius (R)
band thickness (t)
band width (w)
beam path length in band (L)
proton interaction lengths (λ)
band tilt angle (α)
band rotation velocity (v)

2.5 m
0.6 cm
6 cm
30 cm

2

150 mrad

3 m/s

3

Figure 1: A conceptual illustration of the targetry setup proposed in reference [1].

Figure 2: A conceptual illustration [1] of the target layout around the pion production region.

Table 2: The proton beam parameters that correspond to the strawman target parameters of
table 1. Except for the beam spot size, which is speciﬁc to the target design, these parameters
have been taken from reference [9] and are appropriate for the muon collider speciﬁcations in that
reference.

parameter
beam energy
protons per pulse (ppp)
pulse energy
pulse duration
pulse repetition rate
beam power
gaussian spot size

value
16 GeV
1.0 × 1014
256 kJ
instantaneous (<< 1 µsec)
15 Hz
3.84 MW
σx = 1.5 mm, σy = 10 mm

4

Figure 3: The trajectory of the proton beam into the cupronickel target band [1]. The aspect ratio
is very distorted – only a small chord of the target circumference is shown.

The discussion presented in this section and the two that follow are speciﬁc
to the cupronickel rotating band target design proposed in reference [1], beginning
with the overview of that conceptual design given in this section.

Figure 1 gives a schematic overview of the target concept presented in refer-
ence [1] and ﬁgure 2 zooms in on the production region. It should be emphasized
that such details as the rollers and cooling setup are shown only schematically and
that no concerted eﬀort has been put into their design or layout. The cupronickel
target band is enclosed in a 20 Tesla solenoidal magnetic pion capture magnet whose
general design has previously been studied [9] by the Muon Collider Collaboration.
The pion secondaries spiral along the solenoidal magnetic channel before decay-
ing into the muon bunches needed for cooling, acceleration and injection into the
collider ring. The radius of the solenoidal channel, 7.5 cm, and the magnetic ﬁeld
strength, 20 Tesla, are those commonly assumed for recent muon collider studies [9].
The design modiﬁcation speciﬁc to this particular geometry concerns the provision
of entry and exit ports for the target band. Example coil geometries [10] show that
these ports can be provided with little modiﬁcation to the design of the solenoidal
channel.

Table 1 gives some relevant parameters for the cupronickel band and ﬁgure 3
illustrates the trajectory of the proton beam into the target band. The band param-
eters correspond to the proton beam parameters for a muon collider that are given
in table 2. Diﬀerent parameter values might be appropriate for alternative beam
scenarios at muon colliders or for neutrino factories. The geometry of the band is
chosen to approximately maximize the pion yield. The general requirements are
that the proton pathlength through the target material should be approximately 2
nuclear interaction lengths and that the band should be thin enough to allow most
of the pions to escape the target. To optimize the pion yield [1], the trajectory of
the beam through a chord of the target band is at a tilt angle of 150 milliradians
to the axis of the solenoid.

5

The cupronickel band is guided and powered by several sets of rollers that can be
connected by driveshafts to remotely housed motors outside any radiation shielding.
This scenario has been taken from the Zenzimmer mills that are used for pressing
metal sheets and has the attraction of being mechanically very simple in the high
radiation area surrounding the production region. Bennett [3] even suggests the
total elimination of moving parts other than the target band by using electromag-
netic guidance and rotation of the target band by linear motors. Procedures for
installation and extraction of the target band are proposed in reference [2].

The rotation rate of 3 m/s given in table 1 corresponds, for the 15 Hz beam
frequency, to a target advance per pulse by 1/3 of the chord spanned by the proton
beam. The three overlapping proton pulses in any part of the band imply [1] a
maximum total temperature rise approximately double the instantaneous rise from
each individual pulse. Temperature rises and stresses will be further discussed in
section 5.

A competing concern to the target heating stress that limits the acceptable
rotation rate of the target is the eddy currents induced by the rapidly rotating
band in a strong magnetic ﬁeld. The eddy current power is proportional to the
conductivity and to the square of the band velocity and a very approximate analytic
calculation [2] predicts that the power dissipated will be of order several kW. This
is more than an order of magnitude below the beam heating and so is clearly a
manageable heat source. The power will have to be supplied by the electric motor
driving the rotation of the target and the requirements on the drive mechanism are
within typical operating parameters for Zenzimmer steel mills.

Cupronickel alloys are preferred over both copper and nickel for the particular
targetry application considered in this paper because their lower electrical conduc-
tivity will reduce the eddy currents from rotation through the magnetic ﬁeld of the
solenoidal capture magnet. Cupronickel alloys such as, for example, alloy 715 pro-
duced by Olin Brass [11] have essentially the same density and interaction lengths
as copper and nickel and have very similar mechanical properties. However, Olin
alloy 715 has an electrical conductivity at 20 degrees centigrade of only 2.6 MS/m,
compared to 58 MS/m for copper and 14 MS/m for nickel.

The hot portion of the band is rapidly carried away from the production region
into a water cooling channel, as is the case for the nickel production target at
the BNL g-2 experiment [7]. Although both the peak temperature and power are
much larger than in the g-2 experiment, the surface area of the band has been
chosen large enough to give heat transfer rates of approximately 30 W/cm2 [1]
that are comfortable even in the presence of a steam boundary layer. It has been
suggested [3] that the target and capture channel should be in a helium atmosphere
to allow the easy distillation of water vapor and any other impurities. This will
have negligible eﬀect [2] on pion production due to helium’s low density and low
atomic number.

6

1.5

)
n
o

t

o
r
p

1.0

Y at 0.05<p<0.8 GeV/c
π+  Y+=0.622
π−  Y−=0.612

 
r
e
p
 
c
/
V
e
G
1
(
 
p
d
N
d

/

/

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

p (GeV/c)

Figure 4: Pion momentum spectra [1] at the plane 90 cm downstream from the central intersection
of the beam with the target, determined for the beam and target parameters of tables 2 and 1,
respectively.

Table 3: A summary of the MARS Monte Carlo results and derivative predictions for pion yields
and thermal parameters that were presented in reference [1]. The simulation used the target band
and proton beam parameters of tables 1 and 2, corresponding to a 3.84 MW proton beam power.

parameter
π+ (π−) yield/proton
peak energy deposition/pulse
peak inst. temperature rise
peak total temperature rise
total power deposition in target band
average cooling rate

CuNi

0.622 (0.612)

69 J/g
151oC
∼ 300oC
0.324 MW
31 W.cm−2

4 Pion Yield Predictions and Thermal Parameters of the Cupronickel

Band Target

Detailed MARS [12] tracking and showering Monte Carlo simulations were per-
formed [1] to obtain the pion yields per proton for the beam and target parameters
of [1] that are reproduced in tables 1 and 2. The graphical results in ﬁgure 4 cor-
respond to yields of Y+ = 0.622 and Y− = 0.612 positive and negative pions per
proton for the momentum range 0.05<p<0.80 GeV/c. The peak energy deposi-
tion density was found to be 68.6 J/g per pulse, corresponding to a temperature
rise of ∆T =151◦C and a total power dissipation in the target of 0.324 MW. These
predictions are summarized in table 3.

These pion yields and the predicted phase space densities are almost identical
to the best predicted yields for the exotic liquid mercury jet targets that are also
under consideration [4] for muon colliders and neutrino factories. Optimization
studies [13, 9] for both mercury jet and band targets further suggest that such

7

yields are rather close to the optimum that could be obtained even for a low power
proton beam, thus satisfying the fourth of the design goals stated in section 2.

5 Stress and Durability Issues for the Cupronickel Band

As an application of the design strategy presented in section 2, this section exam-
ines the possibilities for evaluating the survivability of the cupronickel band target
through benchmarking to existing targets. The Fermilab antiproton source tar-
get [8] appears to be one of the most suitable targets for benchmarking the band,
so we begin by summarizing its design and operating parameters.

The Fermilab antiproton target consists of [14] a vertical stack of 3 nickel target
disks plus one copper target disk, each approximately 1 cm thick and 4.7 cm in
radius, and interspersed with copper cooling disks. The target is cooled by forcing
air up the vertical axis and through channels in the copper cooling disks. The stack
of disks is enclosed in a titanium can that would contain target the material in
case of failure, but the can is not in contact with the disks and so is irrelevant for
considerations of mechanical survivability. A 120 GeV proton beam passes through
a chord of the selected target disk, with an intensity [8] of 1.6 to 2.1×1012 protons
per 1.6 µsec pulse, which is incident every 2.4 seconds.

The energy per pulse of the antiproton source, up to 40 kJ, is almost an order
of magnitude below the 256 kJ muon collider speciﬁcation of table 2. Despite this,
the round beam spot has a gaussian sigma at entry of only 140 microns [8], and
this exposes the antiproton target to local energy deposits and temperature rises
much larger than MARS predictions for the cupronickel band, which assume a much
larger elliptical spot of dimensions σx = 1.5 mm, σy = 10 mm. As shown in table 1,
the cupronickel band is predicted to sustain a maximum instantaneous energy de-
position of approximately 70 J/g per proton pulse, compared to the 500-600 J/g
maximum depositions at the the Fermilab antiproton source. The impressive peak
temperature rise in the antiproton target is 1100oC over 1.6 µsec, to be compared
to 150oC instantaneously and approximately 300oC over a fraction of a second for
the band.

While the comparison of the preceding paragraph is suggestive that the instan-
taneous heat stresses on the cupronickel band might be acceptable, there are several
issues to be resolved before one has conﬁdence in the benchmarking comparison with
the Fermilab antiproton target. Issues include the eﬀects of the diﬀerent target ge-
ometries and the question of how closely the 1.6 µsec timescale for energy deposition
in the antiproton target approximates the instantaneous energy deposition in the
band.

To further understand the shock heating stresses on the cupronickel band, ﬁnite
element computer simulations have been performed [15] using ANSYS, a commercial
package that is very widely used for stress and thermal calculations. Energy den-
sity distributions for the simulations were generated using the MARS [12] particle
production Monte Carlo package. The very preliminary simulations show periodic
returns to maximum stress (i.e. “ringing”) but with little or no ampliﬁcation be-
yond the initial stress. This is encouraging, and seems plausible given that the
oscillations occur in the band dimension that is much shorter than the other two so

8

the geometry is quasi-one dimensional and with little potential for focusing. Further
ANSYS simulations of band target geometries are commencing [16], and these are
intended to include explicit benchmarking simulations on the Fermilab antiproton
target.

The other threat to the survival of the target band comes from exposure to ra-
diation. This can change the material properties of target materials by transmuting
some of the target atoms to new isotopes or elements and by causing dislocations
in the atomic lattice. Face-centered cubic metal lattices such as copper and nickel
are known from experience to survive radiation damage better than body-centered
cubic metals like iron or tungsten. Target damage studies at Los Alamos National
Laboratory and elsewhere [17] predict a risk of failure for copper and nickel targets
after integrated doses somewhere in the range 1021 to 1022 minimum ionizing par-
ticles per square centimeter, which corresponds to approximately 0.3 – 3 GJ/g of
deposited energy.

It is straightforward to obtain a rough estimate of the integrated doses on the
cupronickel by noting that the parameters of tables 1 and 2 correspond to doses,
along the centerline of the band and for an accelerator year of 107 seconds, that
accumulate to:

summed energy deposition ∼ 140 J/g ×

3 m/s

2π × 2.5m

× 107s ∼ 0.3 J/g,

(1)

where 140 J/g is the energy deposited per rotation and the second term is the target
rotation frequency. Since 0.3 GJ/g is the lower limit for predictions of target failure,
the initial conclusion to be drawn is that it may well be acceptable to replace the
target band after each year’s running. More detailed studies are obviously needed
to check and reﬁne this ﬁrst simple estimate.

To recap, this section has provided a ﬁrst look at benchmarking the cupron-
ickel band target to the Fermilab antiproton target and other existing data from
operating targets. The two indications from these initial comparisons are that:

1. the much greater temperature rises in the operating Fermilab target give some
initial conﬁdence in the short-term survivability of the target but the com-
parison has not yet been made rigorous

2. the simple calculation of equation 1 suggests that potentially damaging ra-
diation doses would accumulate over an acceptably long timescale for the
cupronickel band target, despite the 3.8 MW beam power, because the ra-
diation dose is spread over the entire circumference of the band rather than
being concentrated in one region.

More detailed studies are beginning to check and clarify these very preliminary
ﬁndings.

6 Technology Options and Parameter Optimizations

The parameters of the cupronickel band target presented in reference [1] and sec-
tion 3 represent no more than an educated guess at a relatively optimal conﬁguration

9

for the 4 MW proton driver parameters of table 2. The R&D required to verify and
reﬁne this design is just beginning and it is expected that other parameter values
and design reﬁnements will likely turn out to be better suited for this and other
proton driver scenarios.

Entry-level neutrino factories have been discussed with proton driver powers of
1 MW or less, and this will clearly allow some relaxation of target design parameters.
At the other end of the scale, proton drivers for neutrino factories of up to 20 MW
have also been discussed at CERN. In some neutrino factory scenarios, the proton
beam is partitioned into smaller bunches than is feasible for muon colliders and this
will generally also allow for a relaxation of target parameters.

Some examples of parameters that need to be optimized depending on the

speciﬁc proton driver scenario are:

1. the beam spot size and the cross-sectional area of the band. These will tend

to become larger for increasing proton pulse energy

2. the target circumference and rotation rate: these will both tend to increase
with increasing average beam power; the ﬁrst to increase the surface area
available for cooling the target and the second to moderate the localized target
heating.

These parameter values and the those of the proton driver will also determine the
optimal technology decisions for several design options, including:

1. the cooling technology. Helium gas cooling might perhaps be technically sim-
pler than water cooling but the latter can provide larger heat transfer rates
per unit area. Radiative cooling is a third possible option for refractory target
materials such as graphite [18], tantalum [3] or tungsten

2. the band drive and guidance. The optimal choice might depend on the level of
frictional drag from eddy currents in the magnetic ﬁeld of the capture solenoid
and this depends in turn on the target band cross section, the target material
and the target rotation velocity. The Zenzimmer-type rollers presented in
reference [1] can comfortably handle the several kilowatt frictional drag for
the cupronickel band and default parameter set. Smaller frictional loads would
instead allow for more modest electromagnetic guidance and a linear electric
drive, as suggested in reference [3]

3. the choice of target band material, as will now be discussed further.

Evaluations of several targets for pion yield and for heating and shock stresses
were performed [13, 18] using MARS simulations. It should be noted that these
comparisons between elements depended on target densities and on the speciﬁc
targetry scenario used, so they provide only approximate guidance. However, the
trend in heating stress was clear, with the stresses best for low atomic number
(Z) elements and becoming rapidly worse with increasing Z. To balance this, pion
yields were predicted to be lower for low-Z materials than for those with medium
or high atomic number. Instead of a steady rise in yield, the yield was found to
plateau somewhere between Al (Z=13) and Cu (Z=29) (elements in between were

10

not investigated) and then to remain constant to within the accuracy of the study
all the way out to the high-Z elements tungsten (Z=74) and mercury (Z=80).

This comparative study of target elements, along with the outstanding track
record of both copper and nickel as target materials, was part of the basis for
the choice of cupronickel as the target band material proposed in reference [1], with
nickel (Z=27) and copper (Z=28) both towards the low-Z end of the plateau in pion
yield. It would clearly be helpful to repeat the yield study for elements between
Al and Cu to pin down the exact fall-oﬀ position of the yield plateau, especially
since some of the elements in between and their alloys are known to have excellent
mechanical and thermal properties for targetry applications, particularly Ti (Z=22),
V (Z=23), Cr (Z=24) and Mn (Z=25) [19, 20].

While initial studies suggest the suitability of these medium-Z elements for
a 4 MW proton driver for muon colliders, lower-Z elements such as graphite can
always be considered as options to extend the rotating band design to larger safety
margins or to even more demanding beam speciﬁcations. The penalty to be paid is
that graphite, for example, appears to have [21] only about 2/3 the pion yield of the
elements on the yield plateau. Despite this, such bands might anyway be used in the
same target station as uses medium-Z bands – either as insurance against problems
with the medium-Z band or as an entry-level band to be eventually replaced by one
with a higher yield.

7 Conclusions and Outlook

This paper has reviewed and enlarged on a previously proposed design [1] for a high
power pion production target station based around a rotating cupronickel band tar-
get. The design scenario is mechanically rather straightforward and can be readily
extrapolated from, and benchmarked to, existing targets. Initial computer simula-
tions [1] have predicted relatively optimal pion yields and the initial comparisons,
made in section 5, with the operating Fermilab antiproton target suggest that the
cupronickel band target parameters of [1] will survive the proton beams for at least
some of the neutrino factory and muon collider scenarios that are under discussion.
More generally, it was argued in sections 2 and 6 that viable rotating band target
designs almost certainly exist for any of the proton driver scenarios that have been
seriously discussed for either muon colliders or neutrino factories. The question
is one of design optimization rather than feasibility, and whether the demands of
target survivability force any signiﬁcant compromises on the pion yield or phase
space density that can be supplied by the target.

The evolutionary nature and relative simplicity of the target design and concept
appears to make it compatible with a few-year R&D program to ﬁrst explore the
options and parameter space and then, if all goes well, to reﬁne and develop the
design towards construction at a neutrino factory or muon collider. Such an R&D
program might develop something like this:

• in 2000: A) Paper studies to further clarify the design options and issues,
including developing databases of target material properties, existing targets,
past experimental targetry studies and contact information on targetry ex-
perts and contacts, B) stress simulations and optimization studies using AN-

11

SYS or a similar ﬁnite element analysis package. C) beginning engineering
studies on the target layout, mechanical issues and cooling options, D) de-
velop a conceptual design for the beam dump, E) further yield optimization
studies on target geometry and the band material, using MARS or similar
particle production codes, F) further particle tracking studies to explore the
integration of the target design with the beam dump and capture and phase
rotation channels.

• in 2001: More detailed design studies for speciﬁc scenarios. Detailed assess-

ments of, and comparisons with, other target options.

• 2002 and beyond: continuing design studies might lead to mechanical proto-
typing if this is found to be necessary and to beam tests if these are convenient
and would add signiﬁcantly to the existing pool of experimental knowledge.

• by approximately 2004: ready to begin constructing a rotating band target

for a neutrino factory or muon collider.

The R&D issues for successive years have been spelled out in progressively less
detail but will necessarily involve a ramp-up in manpower, beginning from perhaps
2 full-time equivalent people in 2000. Such an R&D program looks to be of modest
extent compared to the eﬀorts required for the more exotic targets needed for,
e.g., neutron spallation sources. Indeed, the overall program looks compatible with
installing a rotating band target station at a neutrino factory or muon collider
facility for potential operation as early as 2006 or 2007.

8 Acknowledgments

Studies on the cupronickel band target design have been conducted in collaboration
with R.J. Weggel, N.V. Mokhov and S.S. Moser. This work has also beneﬁtted
from discussions and techical advice from G. Bunce and C. Pai. The organizers and
secretariat of NUFACT99 are to be commended for a well-organized and stimulating
workshop.

This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy

under contract no. DE-AC02-98CH10886.

References

[1] B.J. King, S.S. Moser, R.J. Weggel and N.V. Mokhov, “A Cupronickel Rotat-
ing Band Pion Production Target for Muon Colliders”, Proc. PAC’99, BNL-
66236.

[2] B.J. King, S.S. Moser, R.J. Weggel and N.V. Mokhov, paper in preparation.

[3] Private communication with J.R.J. Bennett (RAL).

[4] Alessi et al., “An R & D Program for Targetry and Capture at a Muon-
Collider Source - A Proposal to the BNL AGS Division”. Now accepted into

12

the BNL experimental program as experiment E951, with spokesperson Kirk
T. McDonald (Princeton U.).

[5] The web page for the Accelerator Production of Tritium (APT) project is
http://apt.lanl.gov/ . The APT target layout is illustrated and the basic over-
all design parameters are tabulated.

[6] E. Reuter et al., “Mechanical Design and Development of a High Power Target

System for the SLC Positron Source” IEEE PAC (1991).

[7] Internal notes on the BNL g - 2 pion production target, courtesy G. Bunce.

Private communications with G. Bunce and C. Pai (BNL).

[8] S. O’Day et al., “New Target Results from the FNAL Antiproton Source”,

Proc. IEEE 1993 PAC 4, 3096.

[9] C. Ankenbrandt et al. (The Muon Collider Collaboration), “Status of Muon
Collider Research and Development and Future Plans”, Phys. Rev. ST Accel.
Beams 2, 081001 (1999).

[10] R.J. Weggel, unpublished plots of magnet coil conﬁguration and on-axis mag-

netic ﬁeld proﬁle. These plots can be viewed at
http : //pubweb.bnl.gov/people/bking/targetberkeley99/sld010.htm and
http : //pubweb.bnl.gov/people/bking/targetberkeley99/sld011.htm , respec-
tively.

[11] Olin Brass, http : //www.olinbrass.com/

[12] N.V Mokhov, “The MARS Code System User’s Guide, Version 13 (98)”,

FERMILAB-FN-628 (Feb. 1998).

[13] The µ+µ− Collider Collaboration, µ+µ− Collider Feasibility Study, BNL-

52503, FERMILAB-Conf-96/092, LBNL-38946 (July 1996);
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/book.html

[14] S. O’Day (FNAL) unpublished engineering drawing of the Fermilab antiproton

source target, dated 1-31-94.

[15] Private communications with S.S. Moser (St. Joseph’s College, Indiana).

[16] Private communications with C.J. Densham and R.J.R. Bennett (RAL).

[17] Private communications with N.V. Mokhov (FNAL).

[18] “FNAL Feasibility Study on a Neutrino Source Based on a Muon Storage

Ring”, report in preparation,
http://www.fnal.gov/projects/muon collider/nu-factory/ .

[19] “Conceptual Design of a 500 GeV e+e- Linear Collider with Integrated X-ray
Laser Facility”. DESY 1997-048, ECFA 197-182 (1997). See table 3.4.4, p.
429 for the parameters of various titanium alloys that are candidates for high
power production targets.

13

[20] An archive of material properties relevant to fusion reactors, assembled by

the ARIES Fusion Power Plant Studies Team, can be found at
http://aries.ucsd.edu/PROPS/props.html .

[21] N.V. Mokhov, “Pi/Mu Yield and Power Dissipation for Carbon and Mercury
Targets in 20-Tesla Solenoid with Matching Section”, Muon Collider Internal
Note 61, (1999).

14

