0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

9
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
7
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–8481
June 2000

Upgrade of the PEP-II Low Beta Optics1

Y. Nosochkov, M. Biagini, Y. Cai, F.-J. Decker, M.H.R. Donald, S. Ecklund

A. Fisher, W. Kozanecki, P. Krejcik, A. Kulikov, M. Minty, I. Reichel

J. Seeman, M. Sullivan, U. Wienands, Y. Yan

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract

The successful commissioning and operation of the PEP-II asymmetric e+e− collider moti-
vated further studies to increase luminosity. In this paper, we discuss a modiﬁcation of the
PEP-II lattice to reduce the vertical beta function at the Interaction Point (IP) from the de-
sign value of β ∗
= 1.5cm to 1.0cm. This could potentially reduce the colliding beam size,
increase the particle density at IP and the probability of beam-beam interactions. In this pa-
per, we outline the optics modiﬁcations, discuss tracking simulations, and overview machine
implementation.

y

Presented at the 7th European Particle Accelerator Conference (EPAC 2000)

Vienna, Austria, June 26–30, 2000

1Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

UPGRADE OF THE PEP-II LOW BETA OPTICS†

Y. Nosochkov, M. Biagini, Y. Cai, F.-J. Decker, M.H.R. Donald, S. Ecklund, A. Fisher, W. Kozanecki

P. Krejcik, A. Kulikov, M. Minty, I. Reichel, J. Seeman, M. Sullivan, U. Wienands, Y. Yan, SLAC, CA 94309, USA

Abstract
The successful commissioning and operation of the PEP-
II asymmetric e+e− collider motivated further studies to
increase luminosity. In this paper, we discuss a modiﬁca-
tion of the PEP-II lattice to reduce the vertical beta func-
tion at the Interaction Point (IP) from the design value of
y = 1.5cm to 1.0cm. This could potentially reduce the
β ∗
colliding beam size, increase the particle density at IP and
the probability of beam-beam interactions. In this paper,
we outline the optics modiﬁcations, discuss tracking simu-
lations, and overview machine implementation.

1

INTRODUCTION

The luminosity of the PEP-II asymmetric e+e− collider [1]
has been steadily increased since the beams were ﬁrst
brought into collision in July 1998. The present record
luminosity is 2.2 · 1033cm−2s−1 which is 73% of the de-
sign value. The luminosity is currently limited by the to-
tal beam current which is below design value due to vac-
uum chamber heating problems near IP in the High Energy
Ring (HER) and electron cloud instability in the Low En-
ergy Ring (LER). While it may take some time before all
design beam parameters are achieved, other options can be
explored to increase the luminosity. Speciﬁcally, the verti-
y function at the IP could be reduced below its design
cal β ∗
and operating value of 1.5cm. With preserved beam emit-
tance, this would result in a smaller colliding beam size,
increased probability of particle interactions and, hence,
the luminosity.
In this paper, we discuss an upgrade of
the PEP-II Interaction Region (IR) [2] to reduce the β ∗
y to
1cm. The potential improvement of the luminosity is up
to 22.5% if the emittance and other beam parameters are
not changed, and up to 50% if vertical emittance is reduced
with the same rate as β ∗
y. One limitation on the minimum
y is placed by the bunch length which is currently about
β ∗
σl ≈ 1cm. Reduction of β ∗
y below this level would not be
very effective because the colliding area at the bunch ends
(±σl from IP) will start to grow and offset the luminosity
gain near the bunch center.

2 BETA SQUEEZE

x/β ∗

The PEP-II has been operated for more than a year with
In order to
the design values of β ∗
raise the luminosity, our present goal is to reduce β ∗
y to
1cm, the level of the bunch length. The Interaction Re-
gion has locally matched optics and local correction sys-
tems [2]. One of the requirements for the IR with lower β ∗
y

y = 50/1.5cm.

† Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–

76SF00515.

1

is to maintain locally matched optics and correction sys-
tems to avoid global optics perturbations. This requires
simultaneous adjustment of the following IR magnets: 1)
quadrupoles; 2) local sextupoles compensating non-linear
chromaticity from the ﬁnal focus doublets; 3) local skew
quadrupoles compensating x-y coupling caused by the de-
tector solenoid; and 4) local dipole correctors compensat-
ing orbit from the tilted solenoid.

The theoretically matched IR optics with β ∗

y = 1cm was
developed for the HER and LER using MAD code [3]. The
most noticeable and unavoidable effect caused by the lower
y is an enlargement of βy peak at the ﬁnal focus doublets,
β ∗
proportional to 1/β ∗
y. The higher βy peak further increases
sensitivity of the doublets to ﬁeld, alignment and energy er-
y = 1cm, the natural vertical chromaticity grows
rors. At β ∗
by 24% and 15% in the HER and LER, respectively, mainly
due to increased contribution from the doublets. Compen-
sation of doublet chromaticity was done mostly by raising
the ﬁeld in the vertically correcting IR sextupoles by 37%
in HER and 22% in LER. In the LER, the desired ﬁeld at
these sextupoles (SCY3) could not be reached due to mag-
net ﬁeld limitation, hence the βy function at the SCY3 was
raised by 11% to compensate the lack of the ﬁeld. The
strengths of the IR local skew quadrupoles were adjusted
to account for the change in optical transformation between
the solenoid and the skew quads.

Because of independent optics adjustment on the left
and right side of IR, about 40 magnet families in each
ring change strength to make 1cm lattice. The typi-
cal quadrupole ﬁeld change is a few percent, but sev-
eral quads require 10-18% change. As stated earlier,
the sextupoles correcting the doublets require the most
raise in magnet ﬁeld. The strength change of IR skew
quadrupoles have rather large variation, though many of
the quads have reduced ﬁeld. At β ∗
y = 1cm, the new IR
strengths are still within magnet limitations except the LER
SCY3 sextupoles described above and LER SK5 and SK5L
skew quadrupoles.
In the latter case the required skew
quadrupole strength was made up by creating ∼ 2mm ver-
tical orbit bumps in the SCY3 sextupoles located next to
SK5 and SK5L. The B1 and QD1 magnets near IP, shared
by the two beams, were not changed, therefore each ring
could be adjusted independently.

Machine implementation and tuning of the more sensi-
tive 1cm optics could be difﬁcult without smooth transition
from the present IR conﬁguration. For that reason, an in-
termediate matched optics with β ∗
y = 1.25cm was designed.
Furthermore, a two step linear “low beta knob” was made
to provide a continuous transition from β ∗
y = 1.5cm to
1.25cm (step 1) and from 1.25cm to 1cm (step 2). In each
step, all IR variable strengths are linearly changed with β ∗
y

between two matched conﬁgurations. With this knob, the
IR optics would not be exactly matched everywhere except
the above three β ∗
y points. However, the residual optics
effects for entire transition are rather small. MAD calcu-
lations show that distortions are below 0.0007 for betatron
tune, 0.2 for chromaticity and ±3% for β functions. There-
fore potentially, the knob could be used not only for transi-
tion, but for operation at transition β ∗

y as well.

3 TRACKING SIMULATIONS

y , the higher sensitivity of IR doublets to er-
At lower β ∗
rors and stronger sextupoles could increase the effects of
betatron resonances and lead to reduced dynamic aperture,
especially in the vertical plane where most optics changes
have occurred. To evaluate the impact of the new optics
on dynamic aperture, we performed tracking simulations at
the present and lower β ∗
y values, using LEGO code [4]. To
identify the nearby resonances which may be affecting the
beam lifetime, dynamic aperture was also scanned around
machine working point.

3.1 Dynamic Aperture
The typical tracking simulation with LEGO included: 1)
an assignment of ﬁeld, multipole and alignment errors to
magnets according to PEP-II speciﬁcations; 2) global cor-
rection of tune, linear chromaticity, coupling and orbit; and
3) tracking of particles injected at various x and y ampli-
tudes to determine dynamic aperture, the area of particle
stable motion. The particles were tracked for 1024 turns
with synchrotron oscillations and initial relative energy er-
ror of 8σδ, where σδ is 0.061% in HER and 0.077% in
LER. The tracking was done at the present machine tune
of νx/νy = 24.569/23.639 in HER and 38.649/36.564 in
LER, and the dynamic aperture was evaluated at the PEP-
II injection point. The typical rms orbit observed in the
PEP-II operation is on the order of 1mm. For realistic re-
sults, the orbit correction in the simulations was adjusted to
provide similar residual orbit. The linear chromaticity was
corrected to zero for the tracking. The beam-beam effects
were not included at this time.

The tracking results at β ∗

y = 1.5cm, 1.25cm and 1cm for
both rings are shown in Fig. 1, where the dash lines cor-
respond to dynamic aperture at injection point for 10 dif-
ferent machine error settings, and the solid ellipse shows
for comparison the size of 10σx,y fully coupled beam with
emittance of ǫx = 48nm and ǫy = ǫx/2. Note that normally
the circulating beam with corrected coupling has ǫy/ǫx ra-
tio on the order of 3% and the 10σy size four times smaller
compared to the ellipse in Fig. 1. However, it is important
to maintain large vertical dynamic aperture because of the
vertical injection with initial amplitude equal to ∼ 8σy of
a fully coupled beam. The x-offset of the LER dynamic
aperture in Fig. 1 is due to non-zero dispersion at the LER
injection point and 8σδ initial energy error in tracking.

As shown in Fig. 1, the lower β ∗

y causes gradual reduc-
tion of dynamic aperture. Compared to 1.5cm lattice, dy-

Figure 1: Dynamic aperture vs. β ∗

y for 10 error settings.

namic aperture at 1cm is reduced by about 15% and 30%
in the x and y planes, respectively. The vertical aperture
is more affected since most optics changes occurred in the
vertical plane. For instance, at lower β ∗
y, particles in the
vertical plane experience stronger non-linear ﬁeld in the
IR doublets and IR vertically correcting sextupoles due to
larger oscillations in the doublets and stronger sextupoles.
According to Fig. 1, it is expected that operation at lower
y would require more careful machine tuning to minimize
β ∗
any effects causing large particle oscillations. It appears
that injection conditions are adequate at 1.25cm, but be-
come tighter at 1cm. Note that dynamic aperture in Fig. 1
is for particles in the tail of energy distribution (δ = 8σδ).
The particles in the beam core will have larger aperture.

3.2 Tune Scan
The working point used in the current PEP-II operation and
in this study differs from the design [1]. It was selected ex-
perimentally in the machine operation based on maximum
luminosity, while the design tune was better optimized for
maximum dynamic aperture with single beam. For better
understanding the tune space and effects of betatron reso-
nances near present working point, dynamic aperture tune
scan was performed. In this study, the betatron tune was
varied in 0.0025 steps around the machine working point
within the range of ±0.04 for νx and νy, and dynamic aper-
ture was calculated at each point. Due to extensive com-
puting time in this study, the number of particle launching
conditions was limited to ﬁve, namely with 1-2) ±x, y = 0;
3) x = 0, y > 0; and 4-5) x = ±y, y > 0 initial ampli-
tudes. The minimum aperture among the ﬁve conditions at
each tune point was then used to determine dynamic aper-
ture dependence on νx and νy. As in the previous study,
machine errors were applied to the magnets, and the ini-
tial particle energy error was set to 8σδ with synchrotron
oscillations included. Similar to machine operations, the
tune variation was done with the “tune knob” which uses
pre-calculated linear dependence of quadrupole strengths
in the tune sections with the tune.

The HER and LER tune scan diagrams for β ∗

y = 1cm

2

0.67

0.66

0.65

0.64

0.63

0.62

0.61

e
n
u
T

 
l

a
c
i
t
r
e
V

0.6

0.53

0.54

0.55

0.56
0.58
Horizontal Tune

0.57

0.59

0.6

Figure 2: HER tune scan for β ∗

y = 1cm.

0.6

0.59

0.58

0.57

0.56

0.55

0.54

0.53

e
n
u
T

 
l
a
c
i
t
r
e
V

0.61

0.62

0.63

0.64
0.66
Horizontal Tune

0.65

0.67

0.68

Figure 3: LER tune scan for β ∗

y = 1cm.

are shown in Fig. 2 and 3, where a smaller aperture corre-
sponds to a darker shade and the present working point is in
the center. Numerical analysis of the tune scan reveals sev-
eral lines of reduced dynamic aperture on the tune plane,
associated with synchro-betatron resonances.

In the HER, the strongest resonance identiﬁed near
working point is 2νx + kνs = 49, where k = -1,-2,-3 and
the synchrotron tune νs = 0.044. The dynamic aperture
practically disappears at the ﬁrst synchrotron side band of
the 2νx resonance. Two other weaker resonances were ob-
served: 3νy = 71 and νx − νy + νs = 1. According to the
tune scan, the HER aperture could be improved by moving
further away from the nearby 2νx −3νs resonance.

In the LER, the following resonances were identiﬁed: 1)
2νy + lνs = 73, with l = -2,-3; 2) 3νx + mνs = 116, with
m = -2,-1,0,1; and 3) 2νx +νy +nνs = 114, with n = 1,2,3
and νs = 0.025. The ﬁrst two resonances above are the
strongest and result in rather small or vanished dynamic
aperture close to resonance conditions. The effect is more
pronounced near the lowest order synchrotron side bands
of the resonances. Compared to 1.5cm lattice, at β ∗
y = 1cm
the 2νy + lνs resonance is enhanced due to increased ver-
tical chromaticity and sensitivity in the IR doublets, thus
further limiting the available vertical tune space near the
working point. According to the tune scan, the LER dy-
namic aperture could be improved by increasing the νy and

3

reducing the νx tunes by ∼ 0.015, however the beam-beam
conditions in this area have not been veriﬁed yet.

Note that the tune scan results are valid for one partic-
ular set of machine errors and particles with δ = 8σδ os-
cillations. Particles with smaller energy error will be less
affected by the resonance synchrotron side bands.

4 MACHINE IMPLEMENTATION

The ﬁrst step of the described low beta modiﬁcation has
been recently implemented in the machine, and the IR op-
tics is currently set at β ∗
y = 1.25cm. The transition to
1.25cm lattice was done using the “low beta multi-knob”
described earlier, with the beams stored in the machine. In
this way, any residual distortions (tune shifts, chromatic-
ity, etc.) could be compensated as they appeared in the
transition, and any effect of the larger beam size in the IR
quadrupoles on the backgrounds could be detected imme-
diately. The spurious tune shift observed during this oper-
ation was about 0.006 in x and < 0.001 in y planes. The
global change in the beam orbit was ∼ 0.4mm, which was
easily compensated with orbit correctors. Residual chro-
maticity amounted to less than one unit in either plane.

The effect of the new β ∗

y on lattice functions was veriﬁed
using the on-line phase advance and β function measure-
ment facility. Fig. 4 shows the ratio of the new HER βy
functions with respect to the old values, measured at BPMs
(circles) near IP (at center of the ﬁgure). The agreement
with the MAD prediction (solid line) is satisfactory.

5

.

,

1
y

ß
/
5
2

.

,

1
y

ß

1.200

1.100

1.000

0.900

100

200
Distance (m)

300

Figure 4: Ratio of HER βy functions near IP at β ∗
1.25cm with respect to βy values at β ∗

y = 1.5cm.

y =

No increase in the background was observed during and
after implementing the 1.25cm lattice. Luminosity did not
visibly increase immediately after the β ∗
y change. A few
days later, solenoids to reduce the effect of photoelectrons
on the LER beam were powered up. After that, luminosity
increased signiﬁcantly, raising the record from the previous
value of 1.6·1033 to 1.95·1033cm−2s−1.

5 REFERENCES

[1] PEP-II Conceptual Design Report, SLAC–418, 1993.
[2] Y. Nosochkov et al., “Lattice and Compensation Schemes for

the PEP-II Interaction Region”, ICFA’97, Frascati, 1997.
[3] H. Grote, F. C. Iselin, CERN/SL/90–13 (AP) Rev.4, 1994.
[4] Y. Cai, et al., SLAC–PUB–7642, 1997.

