THE SPALLATION NEUTRON SOURCE:

A POWERFUL TOOL FOR MATERIALS RESEARCH ∗

T.E. Mason, T.A. Gabriel, R.K. Crawford, K.W. Herwig, F. Klose, and J.F. Ankner,

SNS Project, 701 Scarboro Rd. Oak Ridge, TN 37830

• The simplicity of the magnetic and nuclear interac-

tions make interpretation of results straightforward.

Advances in neutron scattering have, from its earliest
days, been driven by the scientiﬁc opportunities presented
by improved source performance and instrumentation op-
timized to take advantage of that performance. The Spal-
lation Neutron Source represents a substantial advance in
neutron source performance over any facility in the world
and, together with improved instrumentation, will make
possible measurements of structure and dynamics with un-
precented intensity, resolution, and dynamic range. The
accelerator complex that is the proton driver for the SNS
is described elsewhere in these proceedings. What follows
is a brief summary of the Experimental Facilities that will
turn the protons into science.

2 SNS EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES

2.1 Target Systems

The development of the SNS Target System, including pre-
liminary design and research and development, is progress-
ing as planned. A global overview of the target/instrument
hall is shown in Fig. 1. The mercury-based target system,
which will receive the short-pulsed, proton beam (2 MW,
1-GeV protons, 60 Hz, < 1.0 µs/pulse), will be located
in the center of the bulk shielding. As shown in Fig. 1,
the shielding is slightly left of center, with the maintenance

0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

9
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
6
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The wavelengths and energies of thermal and cold neutrons
are ideally matched to the length and energy scales in the
materials that underpin technologies of the present and fu-
ture: ranging from semiconductors to magnetic devices,
composites to biomaterials and polymers. The Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS) will use an accelerator to produce
the most intense beams of neutrons in the world when it is
complete at the end of 2005. The project is being built by
a collaboration of six U.S. Department of Energy laborato-
ries. It will serve a diverse community of users drawn from
academia, industry, and government labs with interests in
condensed matter physics, chemistry, engineering materi-
als, biology, and beyond.

1

INTRODUCTION

With materials of ever increasing complexity becoming key
elements of the technologies underpinning industrial and
economic development there is an ongoing need for tools
that reveal the microscopic origins of physical, electrical,
magnetic, chemical, and biological properties. Neutron
scattering is one such tool for the study of the structure and
dynamics of materials[1]. Neutrons are well suited to this
purpose for several reasons:

• Neutrons are electrically neutral leading to penetration

depths of centimeters;

• Neutron cross sections exhibit no regular dependence
on atomic number and are similar in magnitude across
the periodic table giving rise to sensitivity to light el-
ements in the presence of heavier ones;

• The range of momentum transfer available allows
probing of a broad range of length scales (0.1 to 105 ˚A)
important in many different materials and applica-
tions;

• Thermal and cold neutrons cover a range of energies
sufﬁcient to probe a wide range of lattice or magnetic
excitations;

• Neutrons have magnetic moments and are thus

uniquely sensitive probes of magnetic interactions;

Figure 1: Cross-sectional view of the bulk shielding, shut-
ters, instruments, maintenance cells, and mercury target.

• Neutrons can be polarized, allowing the cross-
sections(magnetic and nonmagnetic) to be separated;

∗ Work supported by the U.S. Dept. of Energy under contract DE-

AC05-00OR22725

cells to the right. The ﬁrst maintenance cell will moni-
tor and maintain the mercury process and pumping sys-
tem. Additionally, because the system is designed to re-
quire only ﬁve days for replacement of the stainless steel

(SS316L) target container and because the ﬁrst mainte-
nance cell will allow replacement every six weeks, a good
availability of neutrons will be maintained. The remaining
cells will be used for storage, maintenance, and shipping
of various components such as shutters, the proton beam
window, and the inner core plug that holds the moderators.

Figure 2: Cross-sectional view of the cryogenic, compos-
ite, and ambient moderators and the mercury target. The
proton beam arrives from the upper left of the drawing.

A sliced section of the target, moderator, and reﬂector
system is shown in Fig. 2 . Cryogenic moderators [super-
critical light hydrogen (H2) @ 19 K] are located on the top
of the target. The upstream bottom moderator will contain
a composite of supercritical light hydrogen and light water.
The purpose of this composite is to increase the number
of neutrons in the 100 K range. Neutrons in this energy
range can be used for a multitude of applications. Prelim-
inary analysis indicates that this increase could approach
the neutron yield expected from a liquid methane moder-
ator. The downstream bottom moderator is ambient light
water.

In support of the target design, we have focused our
R&D program on the development of a mercury target sys-
tem and have included research in thermal shock, thermal
hydraulics, material damage and compatibility, and remote
handling. All of our large R&D mercury loops are now op-
erational. The use of these loops will yield valuable infor-
mation on thermal hydraulics, remote handling, and opera-
tor requirements and training. The enclosure structure and
part of the mercury loop structure are shown in Fig. 3. This
structure is a prototypical mercury loop that will be simi-
lar to the one used in the actual SNS facility. The target
end is located in the left side of the enclosure. The motor
and sump pump can be seen on the right side. The sys-
tem, which holds about 20 metric tons of mercury, became
operational on October 31, 1999, and reached its design re-
quirements shortly after startup. At the maximum pump
speed of 600 rpm, the mercury ﬂows at a rate of 30 l/s.

Figure 3: Target test facility showing the actual location
of the target cell, mercury pump, and process loop equip-
ment. In the actual facility the proton beam would be com-
ing from the left side.

Instrument Systems

2.2
When SNS is complete and operating at 2 MW, it will of-
fer unprecedented performance for neutron-scattering re-
search, with more than an order of magnitude higher ﬂux
than any existing facility. Fig. 4 shows the layout of the
SNS accelerator complex, experimental facilities, and sup-
port facilities. To realize the potential this offers for re-

Figure 4: Spallation Neutron Source site plan showing the
front end, linac, accumulator ring, target, instruments, and
central lab/ofﬁce and other support facilities.

search in chemistry, condensed matter physics, materials
science and engineering, and biology, a world-class suite
of instruments is being developed that makes optimal use
of the SNS beams and that is suited to the needs of users
across a broad range of disciplines. The mechanisms by
which instruments are built and operated will be respon-
sive to varying degrees of experience, from new graduate
students and ﬁrst-time neutron users to experienced users
with an interest in instrument design. As a DOE user fa-
cility, the SNS construction budget includes funds for an
initial suite of instruments that will be available to users
through a peer-reviewed proposal system. These instru-
ments are being selected in consultation with the user com-
munity, following advice from our Instrument Oversight

Committee (IOC), and are being designed in consultation
with prospective users through Instrument Advisory Teams
(IATs). We expect that 75% of the beam time on this instru-
ment suite will be available through the proposal system,
with the remaining 25% for use by in-house scientiﬁc staff,
for testing and calibration, for feasibility studies by users
before submission of proposals, and for rapid response ex-
periments that occur outside the regular proposal schedule.
In addition to providing a fast start on instruments for
SNS users, the initial instrument suite will allow the de-
velopment of core technologies such as choppers, data ac-
quisition systems, and control software that will form the
basis for similar systems in other instruments. These sys-
tems will be standardized where appropriate to simplify
use and maintenance and to reduce costs. Full ”target-to-
detector” computer simulation is being developed to opti-
mize and integrate target and instrument design. In many
cases, the SNS will require instrument technologies beyond
the current state of the art. Consequently, our construc-
tion budget for instruments is supplemented by a signiﬁ-
cant R&D program, which will allow development of new
technologies that will form the basis for the initial instru-
ment suite and provide room for growth. Although the
current instrumentation budget allows for 10 or 11 best-
in-class neutron-scattering instruments, a total of 24 can
be accommodated on the high-power target station. Over
time, new instruments will be built for the additional beam
lines as part of the normal operating life of the SNS. How-
ever, to achieve full utilization of SNS, with the possibil-
ity of serving the focused research needs of groups willing
to commit to building and operating neutron instruments,
it is desirable to provide for instrumentation built by In-
strument Development Teams (IDTs) that may or may not
include SNS as a member.
IDTs would provide at least
partial funding for an instrument and would receive dedi-
cated beam time in return for their ﬁnancial commitment.
For an instrument fully funded (including operation) by the
IDT, up to 75% of beam time could be reserved for the IDT,
with the remainder open to general users. The basic prin-
ciples by which instruments are approved for SNS are the
same, whichever mode of access is involved. The main cri-
teria for instrument selection are the scientiﬁc program and
the need for the unique capabilities of the SNS. The SNS
is committed to seamless user access and instrument opti-
mization across the facility. Instruments should be built on
the beam line that best suits their requirements, and access
for users should be uniform across the facility, indepen-
dent of the funding source for the instrument. Guidelines
for instrument team proposals that will facilitate fair and
systematic evaluation are being developed in consultation
with our advisory committees as well as the broader user
community.

The instrument team proposal process will advance in
two phases: an initial letter of intent followed by a detailed
proposal. The letter of intent will broadly outline the pro-
posal with sufﬁcient detail for evaluating the scientiﬁc po-
tential, funding mechanism(s), and management plan. An

approved letter of intent would be followed by a more de-
tailed proposal. The IOC, as well as expert review, will be
involved at the appropriate stage. Similar guidelines would
be followed for other (nonscattering) uses of the SNS facil-
ities, with the modiﬁcation that review would be by the Sci-
entiﬁc Advisory Committee, supplemented by subject mat-
ter experts (because the IOC is a neutron-scattering expert
panel). Such potential uses of the SNS would also be sub-
ject to the condition that they not compromise the neutron-
scattering mission of the SNS and that the funding must be
incremental to the project and cover all incurred costs. In
addition to project-funded instruments (with an IAT) and
totally externally funded instruments (with an IDT), there
is a possibility for hybrid arrangements that would be nego-
tiated on a case-by-case basis with the understanding that
funding level and dedicated beam time are commensurate.
There are currently three instruments that have been rec-
ommended for construction as part of the SNS Project.
These are shown in Fig. 5 together with other instruments
under consideration and are described brieﬂy below.

Figure 5: Schematic instrument suite for the SNS. The
actual instrumentation will be determined in consultation
with the user community.

High Resolution Backscattering Spectrometer A
mechanism for achieving high energy resolution in inelas-
tic scattering is to make use of Bragg scattering close to
the backscattering condition to determine the ﬁnal wave-
length of neutrons scattered from the sample. With a pulsed
source, time-of-ﬂight is used to determine the incident
neutron energy. [2, 3, 4] The SNS instrument is a near-
backscattering, crystal-analyzer spectrometer designed to
provide extremely high-energy resolution (¯hω = 2.2µeV
FWHM, elastic). The design requires a long initial guide
section of 84 m from moderator to sample to achieve the
timing resolution necessary to achieve the desired δω. The
scattering chamber design is illustrated in Fig. 6. Neu-
trons focused onto the sample by the supermirror funnel
scatter towards the analyzer crystals. The strained, per-
fect silicon (111) crystals reﬂect neutrons with a narrow
distribution of energies centered at 2.082µeV onto the de-
tectors. The design is optimized for quasi-elastic scat-
tering but will provide 0.1% resolution in energy trans-
fer ¯hω, up to ¯hω = 18 meV. This spectrometer will pro-

vide an unprecedented dynamic range near the elastic peak
of −258µeV < ¯hω < 258µeV , about seven times that
of comparable reactor-based instruments. For experiments
that require the full dynamic range available at reactor-
based instruments (or greater), we expect this spectrome-
ter to have an effective count rate of 100 times that of the
current best spectrometers.

Figure 7: Three-dimensional representation of the reﬂec-
tometry beamlines, viewed from the detectors looking to-
wards the cryogenic moderator. On the left is the polarized
beam reﬂectometer (vertical surface), on the right the liq-
uids reﬂectometer (horizontal surface)

The liquids instrument features a novel design that uses
the broad angular dispersion produced by the tapered
guide. By sampling different incident angles (5-15) with
beam-deﬁning slits and using the relatively narrow wave-
length bandwidth available at 60 Hz, we can efﬁciently
cover a large range of momentum (hQ) transfer. Opera-
tion in this mode uses all of the source ﬂux and combines
the counting efﬁciency of a ﬁxed-wavelength reﬂectometer
with the wide Q coverage of a broadband instrument.

3 CONCLUSIONS

The Spallation Neutron Source will be the world’s leading
facility for studies of the structure and dynamics of materi-
als using thermal and cold neutrons. It leverages state of the
art accelerator technology, to deliver a high power (more
than a factor of 12 times ISIS, currently the world’s most
intense pulsed spallation source), high reliability tool to
physicists, chemists, biologists, and engineers. When it is
fully instrumented it will support 1000-2000 users per year
drawn from universities, industry, and government labora-
tories in the U.S. and abroad. Ultimately it will support two
target stations, operating at different frequencies and power
levels, doubling the capacity and more than doubling its
scientiﬁc performance.

4 REFERENCES

[1] For a recent review see: MRS Bulletin, 24, 1999.
[2] P.M. Gehring, D.A. Neumann, Physica B 241, 64 (1997).
[3] B. Frick, A. Magerl, Y. Blanc, R. Rebesco, Physica B 234-

236, 1177 (1997).

[4] C.J. Carlile and M.A. Adams, Physica B 182, 431 (1992).
[5] J.F. Ankner and G.P. Flecher, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 200, 741

(1999).

Figure 6: View of the scattering chamber of the backscat-
tering spectrometer. With the analyzer crystals located 2.5
m from the sample, the chamber will have a diameter of
approximately 6 m.

Reﬂectometers Neutron reﬂectometry is the study of
elastic scattering from surfaces and interfaces at glancing
angles. It provides structural information about surface and
near surface atomic and magnetic order. [5] Two reﬂec-
tometers are being considered for installation on a single
beam line at SNS, one featuring an incident polarized beam
for the study of magnetic materials and one with a hori-
zontal sample surface to facilitate the study of liquids (see
Fig. 7). Both instruments will use advanced neutron op-
tics. Supermirror-coated microguide beam benders elim-
inate fast-neutron and gamma backgrounds. Tapered su-
permirror guides transport high ﬂux to the sample position.
The incident optics and bandwidth chopper system deliver
( λ > 2.5 ˚A) neutrons to the sample at repetition rates of
60, 30, or 20 Hz. Running at 60 Hz, the instruments will be
capable of measuring reﬂectivities of R < 10−9, an order-
of-magnitude improvement over the best existing instru-
ments. Similar or greater improvements in data-collection
rates have exciting implications for kinetic studies.

The polarized-beam reﬂectometer employs a vertical
sample geometry to accommodate large superconducting
magnets and other ancillary equipment. In addition to col-
lecting data in reﬂection geometry, the instrument will have
a detector bank at high angles for diffraction studies. Use of
a Drabkin-ﬂipper-type beam conditioning device and dif-
ferent polarizer, analyzer, and spin-ﬂipper options are the
objects of a vigorous R&D effort.

