0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

BEAM SWITCHING AND BEAM FEEDBACK SYSTEMS AT KEKB LINAC

K. Furukawa∗, A. Enomoto, N. Kamikubota, T. Kamitani, T. Matsumoto,

Y. Ogawa, S. Ohsawa, K. Oide and T. Suwada

High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK)

Oho 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan

Abstract
The KEK 8-GeV electron / 3.5-GeV positron linac has been
operated with very different beam speciﬁcations for down-
stream rings, KEKB, PF and PF-AR. For the reliable oper-
ation among these beam modes intelligent beam switching
and beam feedback systems have been developed and used
since its commissioning.

A software panel is used to choose one of four beam
modes and a switching sequence is executed in about two
minutes. Most items in a sequence are simple operations
followed by failure recoveries. The magnet standardiza-
tion part consumes most of the time. The sequence can
be re-arranged easily by accelerator operators. Linac beam
modes are switched about ﬁfty times a day using this soft-
ware.

In order to stabilize linac beam energy and orbits, as well
as some accelerator equipment, about thirty software beam
feedback loops have been installed. They have been uti-
lized routinely in all beam modes, and have improved its
beam quality. Since its software interfaces are standard-
ized, it is easy to add new feedback loops simply deﬁning
monitors and actuators.

1

INTRODUCTION

The KEK electron/positron linac had been upgraded for
KEK (KEK B-factory) asymmetric electron-positron col-
lider since 1994. Commissioning of the ﬁrst part of
the linac has started at the end of 1997 and has already
achieved designed beam parameters after its completion in
1998[1]. It has been providing beams for the B-physics ex-
periment (Belle) of the CP-violation study at KEKB since
1999.

The performance of the experiment depends on the inte-
grated luminosity at the KEKB, which is largely dependent
on stability and intensity of linac beams. Since the linac
have to provide four beam modes which are very different
(KEKB e
−, PF-Ring, PF-AR), it had been re-
alized that it was important to achieve reproducibility and
stability of each of those four beam modes[2].

+, KEKB e

2 LINAC CONTROLS

The linac control system was also upgraded[3] to support
the upgraded high-intensity linac based on the system re-
juvenation in 1993[4]. It consisted of layered components

that communicate each other, where hardware and lower-
layer information were hidden from the upper layer and
only useful features are exposed to the upper layers. New
components were added to accommodate new accelerator
equipment and features for the KEKB injection. Especially
software for beam position monitors was developed and
database for equipment and beam lines was much enriched.
In the commissioning, many pieces of application soft-
ware were developed as clients to the control system. Many
of them were designed with user interface on X-Window
employing SAD-Tk or tcl/tk scripting languages for rapid
development and simple manipulation. They use common
library routines to facilitate maintenance as well as devel-
opment. The number of application programs exceed 100
including ones for beam studies.

3 COMMISSIONING

In the commissioning of the upgraded linac the quality
of beams had gradually improved as the beam study ad-
vanced, and design values were achieved for a short term.
It was, however, realized that much effort was required to
reproduce the quality and to maintain it for a longer period.
One of the main reasons was switching between quite
different four beam modes. The other was short-term insta-
bilities and long-term drifts of equipment parameters[2].

In order to cure these, software for beam-mode switch-
ing and feedback loops has been reﬁned, while they had
been developed since the beginning of the commissioning.

4 SOFTWARE

The software has been developed with the tcl/tk scripting
language under the same environment as other application
software[3].

4.1 Beam Mode Switch

In the linac beam mode switching, as described above, it is
important to select operation conditions and parameters of
accelerator equipment reliably, and to achieve reproducible
beam qualities. In order to meet the purpose, the software
was developed to be easily re-arranged, and it currently has
following switching items.

• Suspension of beam feedback loops and other sub-

∗ e-mail: kazuro.furukawa@kek.jp

systems.

• Information to operators via a speech processor.

Items related to the radiation safety are not included, and

are handled by a separate safety-interlock system.

Fig. 1 shows an example of the software panel. Each
item on the panel can be enabled or disabled by any opera-
tor, and its status can be saved or restored. New items can
be introduced by adding entries in the database. If some
troubles occurs, which cannot be removed through the con-
trol system, that event is reported to the operator, who may
retry it after the problem was removed.

Items listed as ‘Parameters’ are normally taken from the
equipment parameters when the last time the same beam
mode was used, while other parameter sets can be chosen
from the menu if a operator needs one.

For the initialization of the magnets following issues are
repeatedly tested: reproducibility of magnetic ﬁelds, tol-
erance of the power supplies to the steep current changes
and failure recoveries in control and application software.
Since this part consumes most of the time in the switch, it
is still being improved.

4.2 Beam Feedback Loops

Figure 1: An example of linac beam mode switch panel.
In this example, KEKB e
+ injection was selected. Check-
buttons on the left are used to select items to go through.
Pull-down-menus are used to choose parameter ﬁles.
Boxes on the right show execution status.

• De-gauss of a bending magnet (only for PF injec-

tion)1.

• Simple standardization of magnets.
• Selection of a gun, magnets, and rf systems.
• Parameters for magnets (mostly magnetic ﬁelds).
• Parameters for rf systems (mostly phases).
• Parameters for timing systems.
• Parameters for guns.
• Operation on positron targets and chicane.
• Operation mode of beam instrumentations and their

dynamic ranges.

• Initial beam proﬁle monitor selection.
• Initial beam repetition rate.
• Selection of beam transport lines.
• Information to downstream ring control systems.
• Review of equipment parameters.
• Display and record of equipment status and parameter

differences.

• Resumption of corresponding beam feedback loops.

1 This should be replaced by a simple standardization after some beam

studies.

Figure 2: Energy feedback panel at the R sector as an ex-
ample. Parameters and processing speciﬁcations can be
modiﬁed anytime.

Software feedback loops installed in the linac are cate-
gorized into three groups: stabilization for equipment pa-

rameters, the beam energy and the beam orbit. Their ba-
sic software structure is the same and is built of following
parts.

• Check the conditions of beam modes, beam current,

parameter limit, etc.

• Read the monitor value applying moving average,

limit check and other speciﬁc post-processing.

• Derive the feedback amount applying conversion fac-

tors, gain and limit check.

• Set the actuator value applying limit check and other

speciﬁc pre-processing.

• Flow control, graphics display, recording and inter-

face to other software.

Fig. 2 shows an example panel for one of the energy
feedback loops. Each parameter in the panel can be modi-
ﬁed anytime.

Energy feedback loops are composed of a monitor of a
beam position at a large dispersion and an actuator of rf
phases at two klystron stations, in order to maintain the
energy spread small. This type of energy feedback is in-
stalled at 4 locations at 180-degree arc and the end of the
linac. Some parameters are different depending on the
beam modes[5].

Orbit feedback loops use beam positions as monitor val-
ues and steering magnets as actuators. A monitor value
is actually a weighed average of beam position monitors
(BPM’s) over a betatron wavelength according to the re-
sponse function for the corresponding steering magnet.
Normally two subsequent regions, which are apart by 90-
degree betatron phase, are grouped as in Fig. 3. Some feed-
back loops read only one BPM and used to keep the beam
position at the end of the linac.

Beam Orbits

Steerings

Weighed Average of BPM's

Figure 3: A group of orbit feedback loops. Weighed av-
erage of BPM’s over a betatron wavelength as a response
function is fed into steering magnet strength.

This type of orbit feedback loops are installed at many

sectors and the current number of groups reached 15.

Since BPM’s can be read at 1 Hz, most of the beam feed-
back loops are operated at this speed[6]. Feedback gains
are chosen to be small, 0.2 to 0.5, in order to avoid oscilla-
tion.

The same feedback software has been applied to stabi-
lize accelerator equipment. Although these loops may be
gradually moved to local controllers or even to hardware,
they are effective to suppress newly found instabilities in
accelerator equipment. Recently, it was applied to suppress

long-term drift of the trigger timing of the electron gun and
found to be effective[7].

New feedback loops can be easily built simply by deﬁn-
ing monitors, actuators and some parameters. Standard
software libraries provide environment to tune those new
loops even during operation.

In order to manage large number of feedback loops, sev-
eral software panels were developed such as a global feed-
back status display and feedback history viewer.

5 CONCLUSIONS

Software was developed to stabilize the linac beam, and
successfully improved the beam reproducibility and relia-
bility. Since it was designed to be re-arranged easily, oper-
ators could solve problems modifying software parameters
even when a beam operation mode had to be modiﬁed.

The beam-mode switching panel has become much re-
liable and reproduced beams sufﬁciently with switching
more than 50 times a day. Switching time, which is im-
portant for integrated luminosity, was shorten to be 90 to
120 seconds.

Feedback loops cured both the short-term instabilities
and long-term drifts of the beam energy, orbits and equip-
ment parameters. Depending on the accelerator status they
suppressed the beam instability to a half and drifts to a ﬁfth
without any operator manipulations. It also was useful to
keep beams when beam studies were carried under unusual
beam conditions and to ﬁnd some anomalies in the acceler-
ator.

Those software systems were used in the routine opera-
tion and contributed to enhance the KEKB experiment ef-
ﬁciency.

6 REFERENCES

[1] A. Enomoto et al., “Performance of the KEK 8-GeV Electron

Linac”, Proc. EPAC2000, Vienna, Austria, to be published.

[2] K. Furukawa et al., “Towards Reliable Acceleration of High-
Energy and High-Intensity Electron Beams”, these proceed-
ings.

[3] K. Furukawa et al., “Accelerator Controls in KEKB Linac
Commissioning”, Proc. ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, Italy, 1999,
p.98.

[4] K. Furukawa et al., “Upgrade Plan for the Control System
+ Linac”, Proc. ICALEPCS’91, Tsukuba,

of the KEK e
−/e
Japan, 1991, p.89.

[5] K. Furukawa et al., “Energy Feedback Systems at KEKB
Injector Linac”, Proc. ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, Italy, 1999,
p.248.

[6] N. Kamikubota et al.,

“Data Acquisition of Beam-
Position Monitors for the KEKB Injector-Linac”, Proc.
ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, Italy, 1999.
T. Suwada et al., “New Data-Acquisition System of Beam-
Position and Wall-Current Monitors for the KEKB”, Proc.
APAC’98, Tsukuba, Japan, 1998.

[7] S. Ohsawa et al., “Pre-injector of the KEKB Linac”, Proc.

EPAC2000, Vienna, Austria, to be published.

