0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
1
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

USE OF COHERENT TRANSITION RADIATION TO SET UP THE APS RF

THERMIONIC GUN TO PRODUCE HIGH-BRIGHTNESS BEAMS FOR

SASE FEL EXPERIMENTS ∗

N. S. Sereno, M. Borland, A. H. Lumpkin,

Argonne/APS, Argonne, IL, 60439-4800, USA

Abstract

We describe use of the Advanced Photon Source (APS) rf
thermionic gun [1], alpha-magnet beamline, and linac [2]
to produce a stable high-brightness beam in excess of 100
amperes peak current with normalized emittance of 10
π mm-mrad. To obtain peak currents greater than 100
amperes, the rf gun system must be tuned to produce a
FWHM bunch length on the order of 350 fs. Bunch lengths
this short are measured using coherent transition radiation
(CTR) produced when the rf gun beam, accelerated to 40
MeV, strikes a metal foil. The CTR is detected using a
Golay detector attached to one arm of a Michelson inter-
ferometer. The alpha-magnet current and gun rf phase are
adjusted so as to maximize the CTR signal at the Golay
detector, which corresponds to the minimum bunch length.
The interferometer is used to measure the autocorrelation
of the CTR. The minimum phase approximation [3] is used
to derive the bunch proﬁle from the autocorrelation. The
high-brightness beam is accelerated to 217 MeV and used
to produce self-ampliﬁed spontaneous emission (SASE) in
ﬁve APS undulators installed in the Low- Energy Undula-
tor Test Line (LEUTL) experiment hall [4]. Initial optical
measurements showed a gain length of 1.3 m at 530 nm.

1

INTRODUCTION

The APS rf thermionic gun serves both as an injector for the
APS [2] storage ring as well as a high-brightness source for
SASE FEL experiments as part of the APS LEUTL project.
Tuning of the gun as a high-brightness source was accom-
plished using CTR from the rf gun beam accelerated to 40
MeV. The gun, linac, and CTR setup are shown in Fig-
ure 1. The beam emerges from the 1.6 cell π mode rf gun
and proceeds to the alpha magnet via a beamline contain-
ing focusing, steering, a kicker, and an entrance slit. The
alpha-magnet vacuum chamber contains a scraper that is
used to remove the low energy/high emittance tail from the
beam. After the alpha-magnet, the beam traverses some fo-
cussing and correction elements, then proceeds through a
3-m SLAC s-band accelerating waveguide to the CTR foil.
The CTR foil is mounted on an actuator along with a YAG
crystal, which is used to focus the beam to a small beam
spot at the foil position. The CTR is collected by a lens and
sent to a Michelson interferometer with a Golay detector
mounted on one arm. The autocorrelation of the CTR is

∗ Work supported by U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Basic En-

ergy Sciences, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38.

Golay Detector

CTR Foil

1.6 cell rf thermionic
gun.

SLAC Accelerating
Waveguide

Slit

Interferometer

Scraper

Alpha Magnet

Figure 1: Layout of rf gun, alpha magnet, CTR apparatus,
and linac beamline components.

performed by moving one arm of the interferometer while
recording the Golay detector output. The Golay detector
output can be maximized at the peak of the autocorrelation
scan and used to adjust rf gun power and phase, beam cur-
rent, and alpha-magnet current so as to minimize the bunch
length out of the alpha magnet. Once this is done, the CTR
signal is a good relative measure of the bunch length.

2 BEAM OPTIMIZATION

To prepare the rf gun to produce a high-brightness beam
one must ﬁrst scan the alpha-magnet current to ﬁnd the
minimum bunch length. Typically the rf gun is powered
anywhere from 1.5 to 1.7 MW, and the heater current is ad-
justed to produce 1 to 2 nC in a train of 23 s-band bunches.
The gun power and beam current are kept constant during
the scans. Prior to the scan, the beam is focused on the
YAG using quads before and after the alpha magnet, with
the alpha magnet “close” to the setting required for mini-
mum bunch length. During the scan, the rf gun phase must
be adjusted linearly to compensate for path length changes
in the alpha magnet. To maximize scan resolution, the in-
terferometer is set to maximize the Golay detector signal.
Figure 2 shows a typical alpha-magnet scan showing a peak
at 175 amperes. The curve represents the output of the Go-
lay detector from a gated integrator ampliﬁer.

Once the minimum bunch length has been found, an
alpha-magnet scraper scan is performed. Simulations show
a microbunch proﬁle that has a low-emittance, high-energy
core beam and a high-emittance, low-energy tail. The
scraper scan is performed to optimize removal of the low-
energy tail. Figure 3 shows a typical scraper scan where
the CTR signal is plotted vs scraper position. The edge of
the core beam is at approximately 9.5 cm. Figure 4 shows

Figure 2: CTR gated integrator signal vs alpha magnet cur-
rent.

a plot of CTR signal vs beam current, as measured by a
beam position monitor (BPM) adjacent to the CTR foil,
taken during the scraper scan.
Included with the data is
a quadratic ﬁt, showing the expected quadratic dependence
of the coherent radiation on the number of particles.

Figure 4: Plot of CTR gated integrator signal vs beam cur-
rent as measured by a BPM. The plot shows a quadratic
ﬁt along with the data indicating a strong quadratic depen-
dence of the CTR.

Figure 3: CTR gated integrator signal vs alpha-magnet
scraper position.

3 BUNCH PROFILE MEASUREMENT

Once the scraper position is determined, the interferome-
ter is used to measure the autocorrelation of the digitized
gated integrator CTR signal. Figure 5 shows the auto-
correlation measured for a beam of 1 nC in 23 S-band
micropulses. Autocorrelation processing begins with tak-
ing the fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the autocorrela-
tion, which gives the square of the bunch spectrum. The
method of Lai and Sievers is then used to reconstruct the
phase spectrum from the amplitude spectrum by comput-
ing a principal value integral. Once the phase spectrum
is obtained, an inverse FFT is performed to derive the mi-
crobunch proﬁle. Additional processing is performed to

Figure 5: Autocorrelation of the gated integrator CTR sig-
nal.

correct for the reduced response of the Golay detector at
low frequencies (long wavelengths). Since any bunch spec-
trum approaches low frequencies quadratically, a quadratic
ﬁt is performed for frequencies from the Golay detector 3-
dB point to a user-selectable higher frequency, typically in-
cluding 3 to 5 frequency points [3]. The ﬁt is then used
to extrapolate quadratically to DC from the Golay detector
3-dB point. Figure 6 shows the amplitude spectrum de-
rived from the measured autocorrelation and the corrected
spectrum for low frequencies. The main effects of this low-
frequency correction is to broaden the derived bunch pro-
ﬁle and ﬂatten the dips in the autocorrelation adjacent to the
peak. These dips are unphysical since the autocorrelation is
always positive. Figure 7 shows the derived bunch proﬁle
from the the corrected autocorrelation spectrum. The over-
all proﬁle contains a high-current peak (> 100 amperes),
a lower current shoulder, and is overall about 400 fs wide.
This beam was used for SASE measurements.

Figure 6: Amplitude spectrum derived from the autocorre-
lation and corrected spectrum at long wavelengths.

Figure 8: SASE gain measured at undulator diagnostics
stations.

5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank J. Lewellen, S. Milton, and J. Galayda
for useful comments and suggestions.

6 REFERENCES

[1] M. Borland, “An Improved Thermionic Microwave Gun and
Emittance-Preserving Transport Line,” Proc. 1993 PAC, May
17-20, 1993, New York, 3015-3017.

[2] J. Lewellen et al., “Operation of the APS RF Gun,” Pro-
ceedings of the 1998 Linac Conference, ANL-98/28, 863-865
(1999).

[3] R. Lai and J. Sievers, “Determination of Bunch Asymmetry
from Coherent Radiation in the Frequency Domain,” AIP Vol.
367, 312-326 (1996).

[4] S.V. Milton et al., “Observation of Self-Ampliﬁed Sponta-
neous Emission and Exponential Growth at 530 nm,” (sub-
mitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.).

[5] A. H. Lumpkin et al., “First Observation of Z-Dependent
Electron Beam Microbunching Using Coherent Transition
Radiation,” (submitted to Physical Review).

Figure 7: Bunch proﬁle derived from corrected autocorre-
lation amplitude spectrum.

4 MEASUREMENT OF SASE GAIN

The beam prepared as described above was accelerated to
217 MeV. The emittance was measured in the transport line
using the standard three-screen technique, giving a normal-
ized emittance of approximately 10 π mm. The energy
spread is estimated to be 0.1%. The beam was transported
to the undulator hall and passed through ﬁve APS undu-
lators with diagnostics stations between them. Figure 8
shows the measured photon intensity (corrected for spon-
taneous background) at each undulator diagnostic station.
The solid line is an exponential ﬁt to the data showing a
gain length of 1.3 m for both undulator radiation and coher-
ent transition radiation data [5], in agreement with a calcu-
lation using the previously listed peak current, emittance,
and energy spread.

The rf thermionic gun beam was quite stable once tun-
ing was completed. One limitation of the beam is that the
microbunch length is on the order of the electron slippage
length. The ﬁnal saturated power is therefore expected to
be lower for this beam.

