0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
6
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LATEST DEVELOPMENTS FROM THE S-DALINAC∗

M. Brunken, H. Genz, M. Gopych, H.-D. Graef, S. Khodyachykh, S. Kostial, U. Laier, A. Lenhardt,

H. Loos, J. Muehl, M. Platz, A. Richter, S. Richter, B. Schweizer, A. Stascheck, O. Titze,

S. Watzlawik (TU Darmstadt), S. Doebert (CERN)

Abstract

The S-DALINAC is a 130 MeV superconducting recircu-
lating electron accelerator serving several nuclear and ra-
diation physics experiments as well as driving an infrared
free-electron laser. A system of normal conducting rf res-
onators for noninvasive beam position and current mea-
surement was established. For the measurement of gamma-
radiation inside the accelerator cave a system of Compton-
diodes has been developed and tested. Detailed investiga-
tions of the transverse phase space were carried out with a
tomographical reconstruction method of optical transition
radiation spots. The method can be applied also to non-
Gaussian phase space distributions. The results are in good
accordance with simulations. To improve the quality fac-
tor of the superconducting 3 GHz cavities, an external 2K
testcryostat was commissioned. The inﬂuence of electro-
chemical polishing and magnetic shielding is currently un-
der investigation. A digital rf-feedback system for the ac-
celerator cavities is being developed in order to improve
the energy spread of the beam from the S-DALINAC.

1

INTRODUCTION

A comprehensive discussion of the layout and the proper-
ties of the recirculating superconducting electron acceler-
ator S-DALINAC is given in [1]. The electrons are emit-
ted by a thermionic gun and then accelerated electrostat-
ically to 250 keV. A normal conducting 3 GHz chopper-
prebuncher system creates the required 3 GHz time struc-
ture of the beam. An additional subharmonic 600 MHz
chopper/buncher allows for a 10 MHz bunch repetition rate
for FEL operation. The superconducting injector linac con-
sists of one 2-cell capture cavity (β=0.85), one 5-cell cavity
(β=1), and two 20-cell cavities operated in liquid helium at
2 K. The electron beam behind the injector with a max-
imum energy of 10 MeV can either be directed to a ﬁrst
experimental site or it can be injected into the main linac.
There, eight 20-cell cavities provide an energy gain of up to
40 MeV. When leaving the main linac, the beam can be ex-
tracted to the experimental hall or it can be recirculated and
reinjected one or two times. The maximum beam energy
after three passes through the linac amounts to 130 MeV.
An infrared FEL with wavelengths between 3 and 10 µm is
driven by the electron beam with an energy from 25 up to
50 MeV.

For the different experiments, a beam current from some

∗ Supported by DFG under contract no.

FOR 272/2-1 and

Graduiertenkolleg ”Physik und Technik von Beschleunigern”

nA up to 60 µA can be delivered. In the subharmonic injec-
tion mode, a peak current of 2.7 A can be passed through
the FEL undulator.

2 BEAM- AND POSITION MONITORS

A combination of normal conducting TM010- and TM110-
cavities as displayed in ﬁg. 1 was recently developed for the
S-DALINAC to measure the beam intensity and position.
The cavities are fabricated from stainless steel, they have a
common centerpiece and two covers which connect to the
beam line. The rf outputs use ceramic feedthroughs. The
monitors are operated at loaded Qs of less than 1000. Thus,
they need no frequency or temperature stabilization.

Figure 1: Non intercepting 3 GHz rf monitor.

The sensitivity is 15 nW/(µA)2 for the intensity monitor
and 15 pW/(mm µA)2 for the position monitor. For the de-
tection of the rather low signals, lockin techniques are used.
Dedicated electronics close to the monitor convert the sig-
nal to a dc voltage, enabling even the measurement of a
0.1 mm beam position change at a beam current of 1 µA
or a 10 nA current change. Seven monitor units have been
installed in different sections of the accelerator. The moni-
tor signals can be displayed graphically in the S-DALINAC
control room.

3 COMPTON-DIODES

For a detailed examination of effects of the bremsstrahlung
background in the accelerator cave on accelerator system
components, a monitoring system has been constructed and
is currently being tested. The layout of the bremsstrahlung
monitors (also referred to as Compton-diodes) is shown in
ﬁg. 2. They consist of an inner lead electrode and an outer

4 TRANSVERSE PHASE SPACE

TOMOGRAPHY

The method of transverse phase space tomography [2] has
been applied to the electron beam behind the injector of the
S-DALINAC. The setup shown in ﬁg. 4 consists of an op-
tical transition radiation (OTR) target, a CCD camera and
a PC with a framegrabber board. Two quadrupoles have
been used to change the beam transport matrix accordingly.
A computer code written in the Interactive Data Language
(IDL) reconstructs the transverse phase space with a to-
mographical algorithm. The advantage of this method is
the capability of reconstructing the phase space distribution
without assuming any particular shape.

Figure 4: Set up for phase space tomography.

The accuracy of the reconstruction algorithm was tested
by simulations. A total of 18 projections of a non-
symmetric distribution interpolated to 90 projections lead
to a reconstruction result with an emittance error of less
than 15%. First measurements with an 8 MeV electron
beam showed good agreement of the so determined emit-
tance with the one from the common method.

5 Q-VALUE OF THE ACCELERATOR

CAVITIES

The accelerator cavities used at the S-DALINAC are oper-
ated at 2 K, the frequency of the π-mode, used for acceler-
ation is 2.997 GHz. The design parameters of the 1 m long
20-cell cavities consisting of niobium (RRR=280) assumed
an unloaded quality factor of 3·109 and an accelerating gra-
dient of 5 MV/m. Almost all gradients achieved during rou-
tine operation exceed this design criteria, some resonators
reach up to 10 MV/m. On the other hand, although differ-
ent preparation techniques have been tested, currently none
of the cavities has achieved a Q-value signiﬁcantly higher
than 1·109. The reduction of the Q-values in comparison
with the design criteria increases the dissipated power per
cavity from 4.2 to 12.6 W. As a consequence the maximum
energy of the S-DALINAC in the cw-mode is limited by
the installed He-refrigerator power. A measurement of the

Figure 2: Layout of a Compton-diode.

aluminium electrode insulated by plexiglas. Due to the dif-
ferent Compton cross sections of the electrodes, a photon
beam penetrating the monitor creates a small current be-
tween the electrodes, typically several pA for a dose rate
of 10 mSv/hr. This current is converted to a voltage, am-
pliﬁed and read out via ADCs. The linearity of the output
voltage over the photon ﬂux was demonstrated at a radia-
tion physics setup behind the injector. The electrons were
targeted onto a copper bremsstrahlung converter, the result-
ing gamma beam was collimated by a copper collimator.
Figure 3 shows the monitor output voltage as a function of
the electron current on the converter target. The Compton
diodes are very rugged and form a ﬂexible system which
can monitor any location outside the beam pipe. Thus ra-
diation impact on accelerator components can be measured
and beam losses can be detected.

Figure 3: Linearity of the Compton-diode shown in ﬁg. 2.

Klystron

Vector

Modulator

3 GHz

Cavity

Reference
Oscillator

LO

+250 kHz

250 kHz

ADC

1 MHz
Timer

DAC

DAC

Re

Im

Gain

DSP

-

x

+

Set Point

Feed

Forward

Figure 6: Digital rf-control system.

space reconstruction will provide more detailed informa-
tion on the electron beam structure. The studies on cavity
Q-values will hopefully result in a higher average Q, thus
enabling a higher achievable beam energy. The new digital
rf system should reduce the energy spread of the beam and
improve the stability of accelerator operation.

8 REFERENCES

[1] A. Richter, Operational Experience at the S-DALINAC, Proc.
of the 5th Europ. Particle Accelerator Conf., Eds. S. Myers et
al., IOP Publishing, Bristol, (1996) 110

[2] C.B. McKee, P.G. O’Shea, J.M.J. Madey, Phase space tomog-
raphy of relativistic electron beams, Nucl. Instr. and Methods
in Physics Research A358, (1995) 264

[3] T. Schilcher, Vector Sum Control of Pulsed Accelerating
Fields in Lorentz Force Detuned Superconducting Cavities,
DESY Print TESLA 98-29, (1998)

quality factor as a function of temperature has revealed that
the resonators have a residual resistance of 276 nΩ com-
pared to the BCS-resistance of 50 nΩ at 2 K.

Figure 5: Layout of the external 2 K testcryostat.

In order to ﬁnd an explanation for this behaviour a ver-
tical 2 K testcryostat was turned into operation (see ﬁg. 5).
This test setup allows to perform systematic studies with-
out interfering with accelerator operation. We intend to
develop an improved magnetic shielding for the cavities
which takes the constraints of the complicated geome-
try (couplers, tuners) better into account than the present
shielding. Additionally, systematic studies on the inﬂuence
of different surface and material preparation methods on
the Q-value are planned.

6 DIGITAL RF-CONTROL SYSTEM

The superconducting accelerator cavities have to be con-
trolled to an rf phase error of less than 1◦ and a relative
amplitude error of less than ±1·10−4. The present analog
control system fullﬁlls the phase speciﬁcations, but it does
not quite meet the amplitude speciﬁcations and it does not
allow the use of modern digital control methods or detailed
control data analysis. Figure 6 displays the schematic lay-
out of a new digital control system which is currently under
development in cooperation with DESY, Hamburg [3]. The
3 GHz signal extracted from a sc cavity is converted down
to an intermediate frequency of 250 kHz. An ADC sam-
ples this signal at a rate of 1 MHz yielding a complex ﬁeld
vector. A digital signal processor (DSP) using techniques
like feed forward tables creates a new output ﬁeld vector.
This vector is converted by DACs and mixed up to 3 GHz,
ampliﬁed by klystrons and fed into the cavity. The remain-
ing energy spread of the electron beam should be smaller
by a factor of three with the new sytem.

7 CONCLUSION

At the S-DALINAC, several improvements were made with
respect to beam diagnostics. Especially the rf intensity and
position monitors as well as the Compton diodes will give
substantial aid in linac operation. The tomographical phase

