0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
8
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
2
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

TOWARDS RELIABLE ACCELERATION OF HIGH-ENERGY AND

HIGH-INTENSITY ELECTRON BEAMS

K. Furukawa∗ and Linac Commissioning Group†

High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK)

Oho 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan

Abstract
KEK electron linac was upgraded to 8 GeV for the KEK
B-Factory (KEKB) project. During the commissioning
of the upgraded linac, even continuing SOR ring injec-
tions, we had achieved a primary electron beam with 10-nC
(6.24 × 1010) per bunch up to 3.7-GeV for positron genera-
tion. This could be classiﬁed as one of the brightest S-band
linac’s.

Since the KEKB rings were completed in December
1998, those 3.5-GeV position and 8-GeV electron beams
have been injected with an excellent performance. More-
over, we have succeeded in switching among the high-
intensity beams for KEKB and beams for two SOR rings
with sufﬁcient reproducibility.

After the commissioning of the KEKB ring started, we
have launched a project to stabilize the intensity and qual-
ity of the high-current beams furthermore, and have accom-
plished it investigating every conceivable aspect.

of the beams.

2 COMMISSIONING

The commissioning started at the end of 1997 using the ﬁrst
part of the linac just before the completion of the upgraded
linac. In order to carry it a task force called a linac com-
missioning group was formed, in which 7 persons from the
linac and 12 persons from the ring perticipated. This group
later became a part of the whole KEKB accelerator com-
missioning group.

The beam was operated at the linac local control room
at the beginning. After the completion of the KEKB rings
the operation rooms for the linac and the ring were merged
with some computer network and video switch prepara-
tions. Part of the operation log-book has been recorded
electronically to facilitate communication between local
engineers and remote operators.

1

INTRODUCTION

3 STABILITY AND RELIABILITY

KEK B-factory (KEKB) project has started in 1994 to
study CP-violation in B-meson decays with an asymmetric
electron-positron collider. The performance of the exper-
iment depends on the integrated luminosity of KEKB and
hence the beam injection efﬁciency from the injector linac.
In order to achieve the efﬁcient full-energy injection, the
original 2.5-GeV electron linac was upgraded up to 8 GeV,
with enforcing acceleration gradient by a factor of 2.5 and
with extending the length of the facility by about 40 %.
Because of the site limit, two linac’s with 1.7-GeV and 6.3-
GeV were combined using a 180-degree bending magnet
system to form a J-shape linac. And the primary electron
beam was designed to be 10 nC per bunch to produce 3.5-
GeV positron with 0.64 nC.

The upgraded electron/positron linac has been commis-
sioned since the end of 1997 even continuing the injection
to Photon Factory (PF). We had overcome many practical
difﬁculties, and had already achieved most of the designed
beam parameters[1, 2].

However, to pursue the capability of the linac and KEKB
to its utmost limit, we still continue to improve the quality

∗ e-mail: <kazuro.furukawa@kek.jp>
† Linac Commissioning Group: N. Akasaka, A. Enomoto, J. Flanagan,
H. Fukuma, Y. Funakoshi, K. Furukawa, T. Ieiri, N. Iida, T. Kamitani,
M. Kikuchi, H. Koiso, T. Matsumoto, S. Michizono, T. Nakamura,
Y. Ogawa, S. Ohsawa, K. Oide, Y. Onishi, K. Satoh, M. Suetake and
T. Suwada

After the commissioning of the KEKB ring started, we
have realized that it was necessary to manipulate the beam
delicately and continuously in order to maintain the quality
of the high-intensity beams for a long term without degrad-
ing the injection performance. Thus, we have launched a
project to stabilize the intensity and quality of the high-
current beams.

3.1 High Current Beam

At the beginning of the commissioning it was necessary to
make much effort to transport a 10-nC electron beam on
to the positron generation target. It was often difﬁcult to
keep the beam more than an hour. Otherwise local bumps
had to be made to cure the beam instabilities, which was
caused by the ﬂuctuation of accelerator equipment and the
transverse wake-ﬁelds.

Such difﬁculties, however, were resolved gradually after
understanding the sources of the instabilities with careful
beam studies as surveillance systems were installed for rf
systems and other equipment[]. Since the commissioning
had started before the completion of the whole linac, some
part of the accelerator equipment was not operated at the
optimum condition. The largest contributions to the in-
stabilities came from many parameters in the pre-injector
section[3].

Thus we had realized that it was important to study the
tolerances of beams to each parameter. Table 1 shows some
of those results.

Table 1: Tolerances of a 10-nC beam

Parameter
Gun high voltage
Gun timing
SHB1 (114MHz) phase
SHB2 (571MHz) phase
Buncher phase
Buncher power
Sub-booster-A phase
Sub-booster-B phase

Tolerance
± 0.38 %
± 45. ps
± 1.1 deg.
± 1.3 deg.
± 1.7 deg.
± 0.47 %
± 3.5 deg.
± 4.0 deg.

These tolerance values were obtained to keep 90 % of
the maximum beam current at the positron production tar-
get by changing only one parameter around a good set of
parameters. Software to ﬁnd correlation was used in order
to acquire these data[5].

For a long term each parameter may drift independently.
If the room temperature changes, most parameters may
correlate with it. Thus, while above tolerance values are
good reference to consider the beam stability, parameters
of equipment have to be kept in much better limits.

In order to stabilize equipment parameters following
above guidelines, stabilization software, which will be de-
scribed later, was implemented as well as the hardware im-
provement.

After such challenging effort, we had achieved a primary
electron beam with 10-nC (6.24 × 1010) per bunch up to
3.7-GeV for positron generation, without any loss at the
180-degree bending system. This could be classiﬁed as one
of the brightest S-band linac’s.

3.2 Four Beam Modes

It was anticipated that it might degrade the performance of
the linac to switch beams between four injection modes.
After the high-current beam was achieved, we had some-
times found that the beam parameters were not optimal.
Actually, the beam parameters in four beam modes are
quite different as shown in Table 2.

The major challenging issues here were reproducibility
of the beams in one of four modes, reliability of switching
and the switching speed to improve the integrated luminos-
ity.

In this area, software to switch beam modes had been
developed since the beginning of the commissioning. In
order to accomplish above tasks the software was reﬁned
especially in the magnet initialization for the reproducibil-
ity and in recovery of the equipment failures for the relia-
bility. It can be even re-conﬁgured easily in several aspects
by an operator. The details are described elsewhere[6].

13.7-GeV primary electron beam.

Table 2: Beam Modes of the Linac

KEKB

PF

PF-AR

HER
8 GeV

−

e

1.28 nC

50 Hz

LER

3.5 GeV

2.5 GeV 2.5 GeV

+

e

0.64 nC
(10 nC)1
50 Hz

−

e

0.2 nC

−

e

0.2 nC

25 Hz

25 Hz

1-2 min.
1 - 2 hr.

5-10 min.
1 - 2 hr.

3-5 min.
24 hr.

3-5 min.
2 - 4 hr.

Energy
Particle
Charge

Repetition
Reﬁll

Time
Interval

Using this enhanced software the loss time caused by the
beam mode switching was made negligible, and the beams
became well reproduced over the frequent mode switches.
Switching time for the KEKB modes became 90 to 120
seconds, which is acceptable. Thus it is not a major issue
at linac any more.

There are several plans for experiments that use high-
energy electrons in the linac. An example is the slow
positron facility for solid-state and particle physics[7].
While the priorities of these experiments are currently low,
new beam modes for them may be added to the routine op-
eration if it is possible to solve new switching issues.

3.3 Beam Feedback Loops
Even with the efforts on beam stabilization and reliable
beam mode switching, it was sometimes necessary to tune
the equipment parameters delicately in order to maintain
some beam parameters in a long term. Only some experts
could tune the beam and it took some time.

Simple feedback loops to limit energy ﬂuctuations of
the beams had been installed since the beginning of the
commissioning[8]. And the same software was applied to
stabilize equipment parameters as already described above.
And it was also applied to stabilize beam orbits. More than
30 feedback loops have been installed and are working de-
pending on the beam modes. The details are described
elsewhere[6].

These feedback loops have improved short-term linac

stability, and have cured long-term drifts as well.

3.4 Beam Optics
In order to reproduce the beam well under different condi-
tions the beam optics along the linac has to be understood
well. We have investigated several aspects to ﬁnd discrep-
ancy between design and real optics.

In order to measure the beam emittance well, both the
Q-magnet-scan method and wire scanners have been used
depending on the locations. The errors in energy gain eval-
uations along the linac were not small unfortunately. We
are trying to reﬁne it using a gain derived from the rf mea-
surement, beam energy measurement by an analyzer mag-
net and longitudinal wake-ﬁeld estimation.

Using such beam information software systems were de-
veloped to match the beam optics at the ﬁxed energy[9] and
to re-match the optics after a rf-power re-conﬁguration[10].
Although it does not cover whole linac yet since we have
several matching points along the linac, they are used daily.
The effect of the transverse wake-ﬁeld is not small es-
pecially with high-intensity beams, and it degrades the
beam emittance and the stability. Evaluation and reduction
of the wake-ﬁeld effects are tried with some success[11].
Quadrupole wake-ﬁeld effects were also observed for the
ﬁrst time[12].

4 OPERATION STATISTICS

With the help of above improvement, the linac operation
has become fairly reliable. The total operation time in FY
1999 was 7296 hours, which much increased because of
the full KEKB operation[1]. The availability of the linac
for injection was 99.0 %, which have been much improved.
The average intensity of the positron in spring 2000 was
0.62 nC, which is just less than the safety limit at the beam
transport line.

5 MORE CHALLENGES

5.1 Discharge in Accelerator Structures

The discharge in the accelerator structures at sections A1
(buncher and the ﬁrst normal structure) and 21 (positron
generator) became severe in March 2000, where beam
charge (and loss) is high and is surrounded by solenoid
coils. It was found that the discharge frequently occurred
near the trailing edge of the rf pulses.

The wave guides at these sections, hence, were re-
arranged to shorten the pulse width and the rf-power was
optimized to the improved beams with lower voltage. Then
such discharge decreased to the rate less than once a day.

Since it

is important

to understand the phenomena
deeply, a test stand for such stations was built for the in-
vestigation of the discharge phenomena as well as for the
conditioning of accelerator structures.

5.2 Two Bunch Acceleration

In order to double the positron beam charge, it is considered
to have two bunches in a linac rf pulse. Because of the
rf synchronization scheme between the linac and the ring
those bunches have to be separated by 96 ns at minimum2.
A preliminary study was made on this two-bunch
scheme, and got promising results on the energy compen-
sation of the second bunch with a carefull rf-pulse timing
control. Energy difference was estimated to be 2.5 % for
the 8-nC beam comparing the longitudinal wake-ﬁeld with
the one for a low-intensity beam. Devices for this scheme
is under preparation.

2275th bucket in the linac and 49th bucket in the ring

6 CONCLUSIONS

In the commissioning of the KEKB injector linac we have
overcome challenging issues and have accomplished the
stabilization project investigating every conceivable aspect.
The linac is providing fairly stable beams with very high
availability.

During normal operation operators rarely change the
beam parameters. Instead, software for beam-mode switch-
ing and feedback loops takes care of them. Since the charge
limit at the beam transport line induced by the safety rea-
sons will be removed soon, the performance of the linac
may be more enhanced.

During this improvement, we had valuable experiences
on tolerance studies and stabilization technique of the tim-
ing and rf systems especially at the buncher section. We
also gained a knowledge on the physical phenomena of the
beams particularly of an emittance growth. They are indis-
pensable for the design and construction of the next gener-
ation accelerators such as a linear collider, an FEL and an
injector for super-high-luminosity machines.

7 REFERENCES

[1] A. Enomoto et al., “Performance of the KEK 8-GeV Elec-
tron Linac”, Proc. EPAC2000, Vienna, Austria, to be pub-
lished.

[2] Y. Ogawa et al., “Commissioning Status of the KEKB

Linac”, Proc. PAC’99, New York, U.S.A., 1999.
Y. Ogawa et al., “Commissioning of the KEKB Linac”,
Proc. Linac’98, Chicago, U.S.A., 1998.

[3] S. Ohsawa et al., “Pre-injector of the KEKB Linac”, Proc.

EPAC2000, Vienna, Austria, to be published.

[4] H. Katagiri et al., “RF Monitoring System in the Injector

Linac”, Proc. ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, Italy, 1999, p.69.

[5] K. Furukawa et al., “Accelerator Controls in KEKB Linac
Commissioning”, Proc. ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, Italy, 1999,
p.98.

[6] K. Furukawa et al., “Beam Switching and Beam Feedback

Systems at KEKB Linac”, these proceedings.

[7] T. Shidara et al., “The KEK-PF Slow-Positron Facility at a

New Site”, Proc. LINAC’98, Chicago, U.S.A., 1998.

[8] K. Furukawa et al., “Energy Feedback Systems at KEKB
Injector Linac”, Proc. ICALEPCS’99, Trieste, Italy, 1999,
p.248.

[9] N. Iida et al., “Recent Progress of Wire Scanner systems
for the KEKB Injector LINAC and Beam Transport Lines”,
Proc. EPAC2000, Vienna, Austria, to be published.

[10] T. Kamitani et al., “Optics Correction for Klystron Switch-
ing at the KEKB Injector Linac”, Proc. EPAC2000, Vienna,
Austria, to be published.

[11] S. H. Wang et al., “Simulations of Wake Effects on a High-
Current Electron Beam at the KEKB Injector Linac”, KEK
Report 2000-4.

[12] Y. Ogawa, “Quadrupole Wake-Field Effects in the KEKB
Linac”, Proc. EPAC2000, Vienna, Austria, to be published.

