0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
1
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A HIGHLY FLEXIBLE BUNCH COMPRESSOR

FOR THE APS LEUTL FEL ∗

M. Borland, J. Lewellen, S. Milton, ANL, Argonne, IL 60439, USA

Abstract

The Low-Energy Undulator Test Line (LEUTL) free-
electron laser (FEL) [1] at the Advanced Photon Source
(APS) has achieved gain at 530 nm with an electron beam
current of about 100 A [2, 3]. In order to push to 120 nm
and beyond, we have designed and are commissioning a
bunch compressor using a four-dipole chicane at 100-210
MeV to increase the current to 600 A or more. To provide
options for control of emittance growth due to coherent
synchrotron radiation (CSR), the chicane has variable R56.
The symmetry of the chicane is also variable via longitu-
dinal motion of the ﬁnal dipole, which is predicted to have
an effect on emittance growth [4]. Following the chicane, a
three-screen emittance measurement system should permit
resolution of the difference in emittance growth between
various chicane conﬁgurations. A vertical bending magnet
analysis line will permit imaging of correlations between
transverse and energy coordinates [5]. A companion paper
discusses the physics design in detail [4].

1 APS LINAC OVERVIEW

The APS injector consists of a linac, an accumulator ring,
and a 7-GeV booster synchrotron. In addition to delivering
beam to the accumulator, the linac can be conﬁgured [6] to
deliver beam to the LEUTL experiment hall [1]. The linac
consists of 13 Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC)
type accelerating sections powered by four klystrons, two
thermionic rf guns (TRFG) [7, 8, 9] powered (one at a time)
by a single klystron, and one photocathode gun (PCG) [10]
powered by a single klystron. Figure 1 shows a schematic
of the system and the location of the newly-installed bunch
compressor.

The original purpose of the linac was to create positron
beams and deliver them to the accumulator ring for injec-
tion into the APS. The positron target was subsequently
removed when the APS switched to electron operation. In
both situations, the requirements on the linac were mod-
est in terms of emittance, energy spread, bunch length, and
stability. However, the requirements for reliability were
and are very high, which was one reason for elimination of
positron operation. The FEL project requires much higher
beam quality and beam stability. The required beam qual-
ity is typically only achieved using a photocathode gun;
however, the reliability of such guns (particularly the drive
laser) is insufﬁcient to act as an injector for the APS. The
dual thermionic guns have a distinct advantage here, having
proven themselves as components of the injector at SSRL

∗ Work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Basic

Energy Sciences, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38.

[11]. The use of alpha magnets [7] for magnetic bunch
compression in these guns allows the guns to be placed
off-axis, leaving the on-axis position for the PCG. This
is an important consideration in preserving the PCG beam
brightness.

2 MAGNETIC BUNCH COMPRESSION

The principle of magnetic bunch compression is well-
known, so we only review the basic idea here. In a mag-
netic chicane (see Figure 1) the path length traveled by a
particle is s = so+R56δ, where so is the central path length
and δ = (p − po)/po is the fractional momentum deviation.
For simple chicanes, R56 < 0 so that high-energy particles
take a shorter path.

Phasing the beam ahead of the crest in the precompressor
linac introduces an “energy chirp” into the beam, so that the
tail of the beam has higher energy than the head. As a re-
sult, the tail will catch up to the head in the chicane, giving
a shorter bunch. If the beam is undercompressed, then the
energy spread imparted in the precompressor linac can be
removed by phasing behind the crest in the postcompressor
linac.

It is possible to derive formulae for the phasing required
to obtain a desired bunch length and minimized energy
spread. However, accurate calculation requires including
wakeﬁeld effects and depends on the detailed initial bunch
shape. Hence, we used simulation to ﬁnd the optimal val-
ues [4].

3 LEUTL BEAM REQUIREMENTS

The primary goal of the bunch compressor is to provide
higher current beam to the LEUTL FEL. A secondary goal
is characterization of CSR effects. The bunch compres-
sor was designed with two LEUTL operating points in
mind. These operating points, distinguished primarily by
the beam current of 300 or 600 A, are summarized in Ta-
ble 1. The requirements for charge and emittance are not
difﬁcult compared to the state-of-the-art for photoinjector
systems. We hope that these parameters can be achieved
repeatably and easily to provide for routine and stable op-
eration.

Because of the very non-Gaussian longitudinal phase-
space distributions one typically sees in the compressor, we
use the following deﬁnition for the beam current: I80 =
0.8∗Qtotal
where Qtotal is the total charge in the beam and
∆t80 is the length in time of the central 80% of the beam.
The value of 80% was used because this includes most of
the particles but typically excludes high-current spikes that
tend to occur at the head and tail. Also, when we refer to

∆t80

PC gun

TC RF guns

L3

L1

B2

B3

Q1

B1

BPM
scraper

flag

Q2

B4

 magnets

L2 (SLED)

matching quads

emittance measurement

vertical bend diagnostic

CTR
diagnostic

emittance measurement

to
FEL

L4 (SLED)

L4 (SLED)

Figure 1: Schematic of the APS linac with the bunch compressor.

bunch length, we mean ∆t80.

Because the initial emittance is relatively large, it is de-
sirable that compression not make it larger. For the 600-A
case, however, simulations [4] predict an emittance growth
of up to 40% due to CSR. Hence, this part of the LEUTL
requirement may not be met.

Table 1: Desired LEUTL Operating Points

Current (A)
Energy (MeV)
RMS en. spread (%)
Initial charge (nC)
Final charge (nC)
∆t80 (ps)
Norm. emittance (µm)
Light wavelength (nm)

Nominal

100
217
<0.1
0.5
0.5
4
5
530

300 A 600 A
600
300
457
217
<0.15
<0.1
0.5
0.5
0.42
0.42
1.1
0.55
5
530

5
120

tion of the bending angle without having to design magnets
with large good ﬁeld regions. As a result, we can vary R56
between 0 and -65 mm. Presently, due to delivery prob-
lems with the ﬂexible chambers, the chicane is installed
with ﬁxed chambers. Later this year we will install ﬂexible
curved chambers in all the dipoles and telescoping cham-
bers between the dipoles. The hardware required for mo-
tion of the magnets is already in place.

Table 2: Bunch Compressor Parameters

Maximum bend angle
Maximum bend ﬁeld
Effective bend length
Maximum R56
Maximum transverse motion
Maximum longitudinal motion

13.5◦
0.86 T
192 mm
-65 mm
184 mm
602 mm

4 BUNCH COMPRESSOR FEATURES

Figure 1 provides a detailed schematic of the compressor
chicane. One sees that most of the beam energy at the en-
trance to the bunch compressor is due to the “L2” sector
of the linac, which consists of a single SLEDed klystron
driving four SLAC-type 3-m structures, delivering a beam
energy of up to 210 MeV. The bunch compressor was de-
signed with the range from 100-210 MeV in mind.

Table 2 shows some of the principle parameters of the
bunch compressor. A noteworthy feature of the APS de-
sign is that the R56 is designed to be variable, which will
be accommodated through transverse motion of the central
dipole pair (B2 and B3 in Figure 1). This permits varia-

The symmetry of the chicane will also be variable
through longitudinal motion of the ﬁnal dipole, B4. The
ratio of the B3-B4 distance to the B1-B2 distance will be
variable from 1.0 to 2.0, corresponding to variations in the
ratio of the angle of B1 to the angle of B4 from 1 to 1.8.
Two “tweaker” quads are required within the chicane to
allow matching the dispersion for asymmetric conﬁgura-
tions.

Variable R56 and symmetry is thought to be interesting
in that the effect of CSR should change with these parame-
ters (or, more fundamentally, with the bending angles). The
asymmetric conﬁgurations have weaker bending in B3 and
B4, where the beam is shortest, which should decrease CSR
effects. However, these conﬁgurations also have a larger
drift between B3 and B4, which allows CSR more room to
act. Simulations show a slight beneﬁt to the asymmetric

a
bunch compressor is about 600 MeV.

7 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to acknowledge valuable suggestions from
and calculations done by Paul Emma and Vinod Bharad-
waj, both of SLAC. Their technical note [13] provided a
valuable starting point for our design.

8 REFERENCES

[1] S.V. Milton et al., “The FEL Development at the Advanced
Photon Source,” Proc. FEL Challenges II, SPIE, January
1999, to be published.

[2] S.V. Milton et al., ”Observation of Self-Ampliﬁed Sponta-
neous Emission and Exponential Growth at 530 nm,” (sub-
mitted to Phys. Rev. Lett.).

[3] N.S. Sereno et al., “Use of Coherent Transition Radiation
to Set Up the APS RF Thermionic Gun to Produce High-
Brightness Beams for SASE FEL Experiments,” these pro-
ceedings.

[4] M. Borland, “Design and Performance Simulations of the
Bunch Compressor for the APS LEUTL FEL,” these proceed-
ings.

[5] D. Dowell et al., ICFA Workshop on High Brightness Beams,

Nov. 9-12, 1999, UCLA, to be published.

[6] R. Soliday et al., “Automated Operation of the APS Linac
Using the Procedure Execution Manager,” these proceedings.
[7] M. Borland, “A High-Brightness Thermionic Microwave
Electron Gun,” SLAC-Report-402, 1991. Stanford University
Ph. D. Thesis.

[8] M. Borland, “An Improved Thermionic Microwave Gun and
Emittance-Preserving Transport Line,” Proc. 1993 PAC, May
17-20, 1993, New York, 3015-3017.

[9] J.W. Lewellen et al., “A Hot-Spare Injector for the APS
Linac,” Proc. 1999 PAC, March 29-April 2, New York, 1979-
1981.

[10] S.G. Biedron et al., “The Operation of the BNL/ATF Gun-
IV Photocathode RF Gun at the Advanced Photon Source,”
ibid., 2024-2026.

[11] J.N. Weaver et al., “Experience with a Radio Frequency Gun
on the SSRL Injector Linac,” Proc. 1993 PAC, op. cit., 3018-
3020.

[12] B.X. Yang, private communication.
[13] P. Emma, V. Bharadwaj, private communication.

conﬁguration for 600 A, and greater beneﬁt beyond that.
We hope to test these predictions once the ﬂexible cham-
bers and emittance diagnostics are fully implemented.

At present, no attempt has been made to shield CSR by
placing small-gap chambers in the dipoles. Our intention
is to add this feature if we ﬁnd it necessary and to thus
measure the effect.

5 DIAGNOSTICS

Because of concerns about CSR and jitter effects in the
bunch compressor, we have planned for extensive diagnos-
tics for the system. Although not all diagnostics are com-
pleted at this time, we expect completion this year. Figure
1 shows most of the planned diagnostics.

There are BPMs upstream and downstream of the chi-
cane, plus one in the center of the chicane that will give
information on the energy centroid. This new design is
monopulse-receiver-based and should have single-shot res-
olution and reproducibility of 15 µm for charge of 0.1 to 2
nC.

The compressor will have a total of seven beam-imaging
ﬂags. One ﬂag is in the chicane center, downstream of
the two-blade beam scraper. Another is at the exit of B4,
where a small horizontal beamsize is required to minimize
CSR effects. Three ﬂags with 1-m spacing provide a three-
screen emittance measurement system. Several of these
ﬂags use a new design incorporating two cameras—one for
low magniﬁcation and another for high magniﬁcation. The
high magniﬁcation cameras should achieve a beam size res-
olution of 7 to 15 µm, depending on charge sensitivities.

The chicane bends the beam in the horizontal plane. A
vertical spectrometer magnet is installed downstream of the
chicane with two ﬂags. The ﬁrst ﬂag allows imaging the
x − δ correlations in the beam [5], which should give infor-
mation on the effects of CSR and wakes. The second ﬂag
is used for energy spread and centroid resolution.

For bunch length measurements, we will initially use a
coherent transition radiation (CTR) diagnostic [3]. This di-
agnostic has been successfully used with one of the TRFGs
and showed features on the 100-fs scale. We have also left
space for synchrotron light ports on all of the dipoles and
may use this radiation for bunch-length measurements in
the frequency domain [12].

6 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

We are also interested in use of the bunch compressor with
the TRFGs. Bunch lengths of 350 fs have been obtained
with one of these guns, using alpha-magnet-based com-
pression [3]. Simulations predict that by also using the
bunch compressor, bunch lengths of 5-10 fs are possible
with currents on the order of 500 A. While this is not use-
ful for FEL work, it may be useful to those interested in
ultrashort pulses.

We are also planning an energy upgrade to the APS linac
to allow energy of up to 1 GeV. The present limit with the

