0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
0
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
3
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Results of an RF Pulsed Heating Experiment at SLAC∗

D. P. Pritzkau and R. H. Siemann, Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford, CA, 94309, USA

Abstract
Results are reported from an experiment on RF pulsed heat-
ing of copper at SLAC. Damage in the form of cracks
may be induced on the surface after the application of
many pulses of RF. The experiment consists of two circu-
larly cylindrical cavities operated in the TE011 mode at a
resonant frequency of 11.424 GHz. Each cavity received
8.5 MW, 1.2 µs pulses at 60 Hz corresponding to a calcu-
lated temperature rise of 120 K on the copper surface. After
5.5×107 pulses, the experiment was stopped and the cop-
per surfaces were examined. Damage is present on the area
of the surface where the maxiumum heating occurred.

1

INTRODUCTION

RF pulsed heating is a process by which a metal is heated
from magnetic ﬁelds on its surface due to high-power
pulsed RF. Since the heating occurs over a short time,
the inertia of the material prevents expansion and thermal
stresses are induced. If these stresses are larger than the
elastic limit, known as the yield strength, then damage in
the form of microcracks on the surface may occur after
many pulses. This type of damage is known as cyclic fa-
tigue. For fully-annealed OFE copper, we expect this dam-
age to occur above temperature rises of 40 K [1]. However,
this expectation is based on a static yield strength. It may
be more appropriate to use a dynamic yield strength to pre-
dict the damage threshold, which may be two to three times
higher [2, 3].

This experiment to study RF pulsed heating on copper
consists of circularly cylindrical cavities operating in the
TE011 mode at a resonant frequency of 11.424 GHz. The
dimensions of the cavities were chosen to maximize the
heating on the endcaps which are the test pieces of the ex-
periment and were designed to be removable. For more
details see [4, 5, 6].

2 PARAMETERS OF EXPERIMENT

2.1 Endcap preparation
Two cavities were connected to a 50 MW X-band klystron
through a magic-tee in order to protect the klystron from
reﬂected power. Four endcaps are tested at one time with
this setup. The endcaps are approximately 22 mm in radius
and made of OFE copper. They are cut to a class-16 ﬁn-
ish and then brazed onto stainless-steel rings so they could
be welded onto stainless-steel pistons that are inserted into
the cavities. Before welding, the endcaps are diamond

∗ Work supported by Department of Energy Contract DE-AC03-

76SF00515

ﬂy-cut to a mirror-ﬁnish and cleaned for vacuum with a
light chemical etch. The damage from pulsed heating de-
pends on the material and on surface preparation, and the
chemical etch may have had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the re-
sults of the experiment [7].

2.2 Cavity parameters
The unloaded and external cavity Q’s were measured with
a network analyzer before and after the experiment. These
values are listed in Table 1.

The diagnostic TE012 mode operating at 17.8 GHz was
not used in this experimental run [4, 5, 6] because inter-
ference with other modes prevented measurements of dy-
namic temperature rise and Q change. This problem should
be resolved for the next run.

3 RESULTS

Each cavity received 1.2 µs, 8.5 MW square pulses from
the klystron. The surface magnetic ﬁeld at the endcaps is
radial with a J1 variation along the radius. The maximum
ﬁeld and temperature rise occur at a radius of 10.6 mm.
The calculated maximum temperature rise on the surface is
120 K based on measurement of the input power. For de-
tails about this calculation see [4, 5]. The experiment was
run for 5.5×107 pulses at this temperature rise. After com-
pletion, ﬁnal measurements of the cavity Q’s were taken
and are listed in Table 1. The endcaps were then removed
and examined.

RF breakdown occured at the coupling irises and ini-
tially limited the input power to 8.5 MW. Although the
cavity eventually processed, we elected to remain at a tem-
perature rise of 120 K to simplify the accounting of the
pulses. After the end of the experiment, we discovered
the coupling irises were melted on the inside of the cavity.
Since the holes became effectively larger, the coupling to
the TE011mode was increased. This explains the reduction
in the external Q’s.

In Figure 1, one can see a visible change in the crys-
tal grains in the region approximately 10.4 mm to 11.0 mm
from the center with an average width of approximately
4 mm to 5 mm. From GdifdL [8] simulations, the ﬁelds in
the region closer to the coupling iris is 5% higher than the
ﬁelds diametrically opposite of this region. This simulation
would then explain why there is more damage in the region
closer to the aperture, since the region farther away has a
temperature rise approximately 10% lower.

Several other effects that are not critical to the central
goal of measuring damage from pulsed heating were also
observed.
Initial examinations have shown that copper
sputtered onto the endcaps from the coupling irises. The

Cavity # Theoretical

Table 1: Cavity Q’s for TE011 mode
Initial

Final

Initial

Final

1
2

Q0

21890
21890

Measured Q0 Measured Q0 Measured Qext Measured Qext

20350
20610

14360
16810

12315
12220

7690
7140

Figure 1: One of the copper endcaps. The other endcaps
are similar in appearance.

density of the copper globules increases closer to the plane
of the coupling irises. One may also see dark circles along
the area of maximum magnetic ﬁeld. Since they seem to
occur in pairs and the magnetic ﬁeld in this area is radial,
we believe these patches are due to multipacting. However,
it is not yet understood why this occurs since the electric
ﬁeld in this region is zero.

The endcaps were examined with a scanning electron
microscope using secondary emission and a 5 keV electron
beam. Figure 2 shows a region where maximum damage is
expected. Note that this endcap pictured is different from
the one shown in Figure 1; however, all four endcaps are
similar in appearance. The little bumps along the surface
are the copper globules sputtered from breakdown at the
coupling iris. More importantly, one can easily see the nu-
merous cracks that have occured on the surface. For com-
parison, a region at the center where the temperature rise is
close to zero is shown in Figure 3. This picture was taken at
the same magniﬁcation. There are no cracks in this region.
The copper globules are also noticeable here. Because of
the sputtering, we cannot isolate the unloaded Q degrada-
tion shown in Table 1 due to sputtering from that due to the
presence of the cracks.

Each endcap was scanned along a random diameter. The
scans show that cracks are only evident in the region of visi-
ble grains in Figure 1 where maximum damage is expected.
Higher magniﬁcation images of the regions of cracks were

Figure 2: Region (0.9 mm × 0.9 mm) where maximum
damage is expected. The scale in the upper right-hand cor-
ner is 100.7 µm. Figure 4 has higher magniﬁcation images
of the indicated regions.

Figure 3: Center of endcap. The scale in the upper left-
hand corner is 100.7 µm.

taken. For the endcap shown in Figure 2, the average loca-
tion of all higher-magniﬁcation images of cracks is approx-
imately 10.4 mm from the center with a standard deviation
of 1.3 mm. Close-up shots of a few of these cracks are
shown in Figure 4.

An internal cross-section of

the endcap shown in
Figure 1 was completed. Not as many cracks were evident
in the cross-section, but they did occur in the region of max-
imum temperature rise. One interesting crack is shown in
Figure 5. It begins at the surface and propagates down to an
internal grain boundary. Afterwards, the crack propagates
along the grain boundary.

Figure 5: A cross-section of the endcap shown in Figure 1
showing an internal crack in the region of maximum tem-
perature rise. The crack extends 24 µm into the surface
before touching the grain boundary.

per. The principle improvement will be use of the diagnos-
tic TE012 mode to measure temperature rise and change of
cavity Q during the RF pulse. This will also allow mea-
surement of the evolution of Q0 during the course of the
experiment.

RF pulsed heating is a limit to accelerator performance,
and additional experiments need to be done for differ-
ent temperature rises, pulse counts, materials and surface
preparation.

5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank Gordon Bowden for his
help with the design of the test cavities. The authors would
also like to thank Al Menegat for his assistance with run-
ning the experiment.

6 REFERENCES

[1] H.M. Musal, Jr., “Thermomechanical Stress Degradation of
Metal Mirror Surfaces Under Pulsed Laser Irradiation”, Laser
Induced Damage in Optical Materials 1979, pp. 159–173.

[2] V.F. Kovalenko, Physics of Heat Transfer and Electrovacuum
Devices, ch.7, Moscow: Sovetskoe Radio, 1975. In Russian.
[3] O.A. Nezhevenko, “On the Limitations of Accelerating Gra-
dient in Linear Colliders Due to the Pulse Heating”, PAC’97,
Vancouver, Canada, May 1997.

[4] D.P. Pritzkau, et al., “Experimental Study of Pulsed Heating
of Electromagnetic Cabities”, PAC’97, Vancouver, Canada,
May 1997.

[5] D.P. Pritzkau, et al., “Possible High Power Limitations From
RF Pulsed Heating”, 4th RF Workshop (RF98), Watsonville,
California, October 1998. SLAC-PUB-8013.

[6] D.P. Pritzkau, et al., “Experimental Design to Study RF

Pulsed Heating”, PAC’99, New York, March 1999.

[7] Prof. Reinhold Dauskardt, private communication, 2000.
[8] Warner Bruns, GdﬁdL v1.2, 2000.

Figure 4: Regions 1–3 from Figure 2. The scale shown in
each image is 10.0 µm.

4 CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated that RF pulsed heating with a tem-
perature rise of 120 K poses a danger to OFE copper struc-
tures. The evidence is the surface modiﬁcation and damage
shown in Figures 1, 2, 4 and 5. We have measured degra-
dation of the cavity Q0 also. Because of copper sputtered
from breakdown at the coupling iris, it is not conclusive
that this degradation was caused by the surface damage.

We are preparing one more experiment with OFE cop-

