0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
2
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The RTA Betatron-Node Experiment:

Limiting Cumulative BBU Growth In A Linear Periodic System

S. Lidia, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

T. Houck, G. Westenskow, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

Abstract

The successful operation of a Two-Beam accelerator based
on extended relativistic klystrons hinges upon decreasing
the cumulative dipole BBU growth from an exponential to a
more manageable linear growth rate. We describe the theo-
retical scheme to achieve this, and a new experiment to test
this concept. The experiment utilizes a 1-MeV, 600-Amp,
200-ns electron beam and a short beamline of periodically-
spaced rf dipole-mode pillbox cavities and solenoid mag-
nets for transport. Descriptions of the beamline are pre-
sented, followed by theoretical studies of the beam trans-
port and dipole-mode growth.

1

INTRODUCTION

A Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) collab-
oration is studying the application of induction accelera-
tor technology to the generation of microwave power. We
refer to this scheme of power generation as the Relativis-
tic Klystron Two-Beam Accelerator (RK-TBA) [1]. This
scheme is considered a TBA approach as the extraction of
microwave power is distributed along a drive beam parallel
to the high-energy rf linear accelerator. The RK designa-
tion indicates that the power is generated by the interac-
tion of the relativistic modulated drive beam with resonant
structures similar to those used in a conventional klystron.
The primary advantage of TBA concepts is that the con-
version of drive beam power to microwave power can be
highly efﬁcient (>90%). This efﬁciency is realized by
distributing the power extraction over an extended length.
The interest in RK-TBA’s is that induction accelerators
are efﬁcient at producing very high power electron beams.
Present induction accelerators operate at currents of sev-
eral kilo-amperes and accelerate the beam to 10’s of MeV
for beam power of 100’s GW [2]. The induction accelera-
tor can realize improved efﬁciency at converting wall plug
power into beam power by replacing the standard electro-
magnet solenoids for beam transport with permanent mag-
nets. Even higher efﬁciency can be attained if the induction
cells are used as high-voltage step up transformers driven
by a relative low voltage (∼20 kV) pulsed power system.
Present designs of a RK-TBA predict efﬁciency of about
40% in conversion of wall plug power into beam power [3],
or a total wall plug to microwave power efﬁciency of about
36%. The main section of an RK where the microwave
power is generated is comprised of many repeating mod-
ules as illustrated in Figure 1. Within each module, the in-

duction cells replace the energy extracted from the electron
beam by the microwave output structure. The efﬁciency of
this process — extraction and reacceleration — is nearly
100%. Not shown in Figure 1 are the beam generation and
modulation sections and the ﬁnal beam dump. Fixed en-
ergy losses in those processes have to be included in calcu-
lating the total beam energy to microwave conversion efﬁ-
ciency. Thus, it is imperative that the RK have many of the
efﬁcient extraction and reacceleration cycles to reduce the
relative value of ﬁxed losses with respect to the total energy
transferred to the beam.

Several proof-of-concept experiments have been per-
formed to demonstrate the viability of the RK-TBA con-
cept. These experiments have shown the generation of
collider-scale drive beam in induction linacs, production of
high-quality, high-power microwaves from standing- and
traveling-wave structures driven by induction accelerator
beams, and multiple reacceleration and extraction cycles
[4, 5]. As will be described below, we are continuing to per-
form experiments to study speciﬁc physics and technology
issues while constructing a prototype relativistic klystron.

2 BEAM DYNAMICS ISSUES

The ultimate efﬁciency of a RK is determined by the induc-
tion beam dynamics i.e.
the number of extraction struc-
tures that the beam can transit. We have identiﬁed three
critical areas of beam dynamics that must be understood.
The ﬁrst involves maintaining the longitudinal modulation
of the beam or ”rf bucket” structure. In the drifts between
output structures, space charge forces will cause the beam
to lengthen in phase space, i.e., ”debunch”. If this effect
is not corrected, the rf current (Fourier component of the
beam at the modulation frequency) will decrease resulting
in a decrease in the microwave power that can be extracted.
Inductively detuning the output structures, similar to the
penultimate cavity in conventional klystrons, can counter
the space charge forces. The requirement for long-term
longitudinal stability is reestablishing the initial longitudi-
nal charge distribution at the end of a synchrotron period.
Computer simulations have shown that with proper detun-
ing, the rf current can be maintained over the 150 output
structures envisioned for a full scale RK-TBA [6].

The other issues involve transverse instabilities. The
beam will excite dipole modes in the induction cell acceler-
ating gaps as well as in the resonant output structures. The
induction cell accelerating gaps can be severely damped
with rf absorbers for all resonant modes since the applied
voltage pulse is quasi-static compared to the resonant fre-

quencies. In addition, the natural energy spread over the
rf bucket contributes to phase mixed, or Landau, damp-
ing. The combination of rf absorbers and energy spread
is expected to maintain the transverse instability due to the
dipole modes in the accelerating gaps at acceptable levels.
The resonant output structures present a more difﬁcult
transverse instability issue. The fundamental mode must
couple sufﬁciently with the beam to extract the required en-
ergy. Various techniques exist to damp higher order modes
in both output and accelerating structures. However, the
permanent magnet focusing system envisioned for an RK-
TBA allows the application of a new technique that we re-
fer to as the Betatron Node Scheme.

Transverse beam instability theory is well developed and
the exponential growth predicted is supported by exper-
iment. However, the standard theoretical approach as-
sumes that the discrete cavities interacting with the beam
are closely spaced compared to the betatron wavelength
due to the focusing system. Our design for an RK-TBA
system requires strong focusing to maintain the required
beam radius and a constant average energy over each ex-
traction/reacceleration cycle. This combination leads to
spacing between output structures of one betatron wave-
length and the basic assumption of the standard theoretical
approach does not hold.

An alternative approach to studying the transverse in-
stability uses transfer matrices [7]. Assuming a monoen-
ergetic beam and a thin cavity, Equations (1) through (3)
indicate the salient parts of this theory. Equation (1) repre-
sents the transverse momentum change an electron receives
passing through the cavity. R is an integral operator that
accounts for the part of the beam that has already passed
through the cavity. The ﬁrst matrix on the RHS of Equation
(2) is then the transfer matrix for the beam going through
the cavity. For a sufﬁciently thin cavity, the transverse posi-
tion does not change. Only the momentum is affected. The
second matrix represents the betatron motion of the elec-
trons between cells where θ is the phase advance. Thus,
Equation (2) advances the position and momentum of elec-
trons from the exit of on cavity to the exit of the following
cavity. By repeatedly multiplying the two transfer matrices,
the position and momentum at the exit of any cavity can be
related to the initial conditions. For the situation where θ
is constant for all sections and θ ≪ 1, the series of matrix
multiplications can be shown to yield the same expected
exponential growth as the more standard approach.

∆p⊥ = R · x

p⊥ (cid:21)n+1exit
(cid:20) x
(cid:20) 1
R 1 (cid:21)(cid:20) cos θ

ω sin θ

sin θ

0

=

ω

cos θ (cid:21)(cid:20) x

p⊥ (cid:21)nexit

(1)

(2)

For the case where θ = 2π (or any integral multiple of
π), the matrix multiplication is greatly simpliﬁed. The be-
tatron motion returns the electrons to the original transverse

Solenoid

RF Cavity

Aperture 4.75 cm

RF BPM

Pumping Port

CL

Period ~ 60 cm

Figure 1: Minimum beamline conﬁguration.

position and momentum (oppositely directed for odd multi-
ples of π). The multiplication involves only the matrix de-
scribing the effect of the cavity, and, as shown in Equation
(3), this leads to a linear growth in the transverse instability

0

=

p⊥ (cid:21)n+1exit
(cid:20) x
R 1 (cid:21)n(cid:20) x
nR 1 (cid:21)(cid:20) x

p⊥ (cid:21)(n=1)exit
p⊥ (cid:21)(n=1)exit

0

= (cid:20) 1
= (cid:20) 1

(3)

There are many non-ideal factors in a realistic acceler-
ator including cavities of ﬁnite thickness and variation in
phase advance due to energy and/or focusing errors. Pa-
rameter studies through computer simulations indicate that
the transverse instability is signiﬁcantly reduced for sys-
tems with reasonable variations in parameters. We intend
to experimentally test the validity and robustness of the Be-
tatron Node Scheme.

3 BETATRON NODE SCHEME

EXPERIMENT

The basic elements involved in a test of the Betatron Node
Scheme are: a set of devices that generate a localized trans-
verse impedance, a tunable focusing and transport system,
and diagnostics to measure the BBU mode signal on the
beam as a function of time and distance along the beamline.
A schematic for a possible beamline is shown in Figure 1.
The localized impedances are generated in simple pill-
box cavities, tuned so that the T M110 mode frequency
matches the modulation of the beam; a series of solenoid
magnets provide tunable focusing; and rf BPMs placed be-
tween cavities provide a means of collecting the dipole
mode signal carried by the beam. We have built several
sections of this beamline, using off-the-shelf components
wherever possible. Each section is one betatron wave-
length long and is comprised of one pillbox cavity, a pump-
ing port, a diagnostic, and three solenoids. The rf cavities
have a simple pillbox design, with a dielectric insert (Alu-
mina 99.5%, ǫ ≈ 9) to adjust the mode frequency. The
dipole mode resonates at ∼5.2 GHz, with a wall-loaded
Q-value of ∼100 and a normalized transverse impedance

h Z⊥
Q i ∼6.5Ω.

Computer simulations of the increase in power mea-
sured by the rf diagnostics at the dipole mode frequency

)
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
(
 
r
e
w
o
P

107
106
105
104
103
102
101
100

0.9

After 10 Sections

0.95

1

Bz (kG)

1.05

1.1

Figure 2: Dipole mode power vs. solenoidal ﬁeld (phase
advance).

has been completed and commissioned. Before continuing
with the next section of the prototype, we intend to per-
form a series of beam dynamics experiments. In particular,
we will demonstrate the effectiveness of the Betatron Node
Scheme. We are also continuing to study and optimize col-
lider designs based on the RK-TBA scheme.

5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Swapan Chattopadhyay, George Caporaso, Kem
Robinson, and Simon Yu for their support and guidance.
Dave Vanecek and Wayne Greenway provided invaluable
mechanical engineering and technical services. John Cor-
lett and Bob Rimmer designed the rf diagnostics. This
work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. De-
partment of Energy by University of California Lawrence
Berkeley Livermore National Laboratory under contract
No AC03-76SF00098 and Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory under contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.

1.08 kG

6 REFERENCES

1. Sessler, A.M. and Yu, S.S., Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 889
(1987).
2. Burns, M.J., et al., ”DARHT Accelerator Update And
Plans For Initial Operation”, in Proceedings of IEEE 1999
Part. Accel. Conf., NY, 1999, pp. 617-621.
3. Houck, T.L. (ed.), et al., “Appendix A: A RF Power
Source Upgrade to the NLC Based on the Relativistic
Klystron Two-Beam Accelerator Concept”, SLAC-474,
Stanford University (1996).
4. Westenskow, G.A. and Houck, T.L., IEEE Trans.
Plasma Sci. 22, pp. 424-436 (1994).
5. G.A. Westenskow and T.L. Houck, “Results of the
Reacceleration Experiment: Experimental Study of the
Relativistic Klystron Two-Beam Accelerator”, in
Proceedings of the 10th Intl. Conference on High Power
Particle Beams, San Diego, CA (1994).
6. Giordano, G., et. al., “Beam Dynamics Issues in an
Extended Relativistic Klystron”, Proceedings of IEEE
1995 Part. Accel. Conf., Dallas, TX, 1995, p. 740-742.
7. Neil, V.K., Hall, L.S., and Cooper, R.K., Part. Accel. 9,
pp. 213-222 (1979).

)
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
(
 
r
e
w
o
P

106
105
104
103
102
101
100
10-1

0.92 kG

1.06 kG

0.98 kG

0

2

1.04 kG
6
4
Section #

8

10

Figure 3: Dipole mode power vs.
length for varying
solenoid ﬁelds, displaying linear and exponential growth
regimes.

are shown in Figures 2 and 3.

Variations of ±10% in the solenoidal ﬁeld (betatron
phase advance) from the optimum should produce several
orders of magnitude increase in measured mode power af-
ter only a few sections. The graphs indicate the maxi-
mum power expected during the main body of the beam
(”ﬂat top”). The temporal power variation during the pulse
(not shown) is predicted to have different characteristics
between under- and over-focused scenarios.

4 SUMMARY

The long-term goal of the RTA Facility is to build a proto-
type relativistic klystron that has all the major components
required for a RK suitable for collider applications. The
prototype would serve as a test bed for examining physics,
engineering, and cost issues. The ﬁrst major component,
the 1-MeV, 600-A, induction electron gun, of the prototype

