0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
9
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Investigations of Slow Motions of the SLAC Linac Tunnel ∗

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94309 USA
2 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Abstract

Andrei Seryi

Investigations of slow transverse motion of the linac tun-
nel of the Stanford Linear Collider have been performed
over period of about one month in December 1999 – Jan-
uary 2000. The linac laser alignment system, equipped
with a quadrant photodetector, allowed submicron resolu-
tion measurement of the motion of the middle of the linac
tunnel with respect to its ends. Measurements revealed two
major sources responsible for the observed relative motion.
Variation of the external atmospheric pressure was found to
be the most signiﬁcant cause of short wavelength transverse
motion of the tunnel. The long wavelength component of
the motion has been also observed to have a large contribu-
tion from tidal effects. The measured data are essential for
determination of parameters for the Next Linear Collider.

1

INTRODUCTION

The electron-positron linear colliders envisioned for the fu-
ture must focus the beams to nanometer beam size in or-
der to achieve design luminosity. Small beam sizes impose
strict tolerances on the positional stability of the collider
components, but ground motion will continuously change
the component positions.

For linear colliders, the ground motion can be speciﬁ-
cally categorized into fast and slow motion. Fast ground
motion (roughly f >∼ 0.1Hz) causes the beam position to
change from pulse to pulse. In contrast, slow ground mo-
tion (f <∼ 0.1 Hz) does not result in an offset of the beams
at the interaction point since it is corrected by feedback on
a pulse to pulse basis. However slow motion causes emit-
tance dilution since it causes the beam trajectory to deviate
from the ideal line. Investigations of slow ground motion
are essential to determine the requirements for the feedback
systems and to evaluate the residual emittance dilution due
to imperfections in the feedback systems.

Investigations of slow motion of the SLAC linac tunnel,
described in this paper, were performed in the framework
of the Next Linear Collider [1]. The measurements were
taken from December 8, 1999 to January 7, 2000. Earlier
measurements using the same technique were performed at
SLAC in November 1995 for a period of about 48 hours
[2]. The goal of the measurements was to systematically
study the slow motion and to ﬁnd correlations with various
external parameters in order to identify the driving causes.

The measurements of slow ground motion were performed
using the SLAC linac laser alignment system [4]. This sys-
tem consists of a light source, a detector, and about 300
targets, one of which is located at each point to be aligned
over a total length of 3050 m. The targets are installed in
a 2-foot diameter aluminum pipe which is the basic sup-
port girder for the accelerator. The target is a rectangular
Fresnel lens which has pneumatic actuators that allow each
lens to be ﬂipped in or out. The light source is a He-Ne
laser shining through a pinhole diaphragm. The beam di-
vergence is large enough to cover even nearby targets and
only transverse position of the laser, but not angle, inﬂu-
ences the image position. The lightpipe is evacuated to
about 15 microns of Mercury to prevent deﬂection of the
alignment image due to refraction in air. Sections of the
lightpipe, which are about 12 meters long, are connected
via bellows that allow independent motion or adjustment.
A schematic of the measurement setup is shown in Fig.1.
The measurements were done with a single lens inserted
which was not moved until the measurements were ﬁnished
in order to ensure maximal accuracy. (In multi target mode
the repeatability of the target positioning limits the accu-
racy). We used the lens 14-9 located at the end of the 14th
sector of 30 total, almost exactly in the middle of the linac.
For these measurements, we replaced the standard de-
tector for this system with a quadrant photodetector (pro-
duced by Hamamatsu) which has a quadratic sensitive area
( ∼ 10 × 10 mm2) divided into four sectors. By combining
preampliﬁed signals ui from these quadrants, the quantity
to be measured X = x1 + x3 − 2x2 (see Fig.1) can be
determined as X ∝ [(u1 + u2) − (u3 + u4)]/Σui for both
the horizontal and vertical (Y ) planes. Calibration of the
system was done by moving the detector transversely. The
sensitivity is linear in the range of ±1 mm.

The measured data are shown in Fig.2. Two particular
characteristics are clearly seen: the tidal component of the
motion is very pronounced and there is a strong correlation
of the motion with external atmospheric pressure.

The linac tunnel was closed, with temperature stabilized
water through the RF structures during the entire period

  L i g h t p i p e

S L C   L a s e r

F r e s n e l
L e n s

L a s e r

Q u a d r a n t
d e t e c t o r

~ 1 5 0 0 m

x
3

∗ Work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Contact Number

DE-AC03-76SF00515.

~ 1 5 0 0 m

x
2

x1

Figure 1: Schematic of the measurement setup.

80

40

0

)
n
o
r
c
i
m

(
 

Y

 
,

X

-40

-80

P

Y

X

1032

1028

1024

1020

)

B
m

(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

1016

1012

342

346

350

354

358

362

Time (day)

366

1999 2000

370

Figure 2: Measured horizontal X and vertical Y displace-
ments plotted along with external atmospheric pressure.
of the measurements. The girder temperature was stable
within 0.1oC over a day and within a few 0.1oC over a
week. The RF power was switched off starting Dec. 24 and
turned on again Jan. 3. This resulted in a slow (weekly)
change of the girder temperature by 0.5oC in the middle of
the linac and 1.5oC at the beginning. The average exter-
nal temperature varied by about 10oC over the month. No
signiﬁcant correlation of the measured data with these and
other parameters was observed.

Figure 3: Subset of data where tides are seen most clearly.

Figure 4: Normalized 1/χ2 showing quality of ﬁt of the
measured data by sum of 37 tidal harmonics. Behavior of
1/χ2 if the speed of one harmonic would vary. Example
for the harmonics M2 (principal lunar), N2 and J1. Vertical
lines show theoretical speed of these harmonics.

The tidal component of the motion has a surprisingly
large amplitude (∼ 10µm) (see Fig.3). The most pro-
nounced harmonics in the measured data are M2 (principal
lunar), N2 and J1. The primary effect of tidal deformation
is to change the slope of the earth’s surface (∼ 100µm/1km
assuming total deformation ∼ 0.5m). The secondary effect
is to change the curvature of the surface (∼ 0.01µm/1km2
if one assumes uniform earth deformation). The laser sys-
tem is not sensitive to the slope change, but only to the cur-

Figure 5: Correlation (real and imaginary parts) of dis-
placement with atmospheric pressure.

Figure 6: Spectra of displacement (multiplied by f 2) and
the noise of electronics. Peaks around 10−5 Hz correspond
to tides. Horizontal lines correspond to the ATL spectra.
vature change, which is an advantage. The observed 10µm
change of the curvature can only be explained if a local ef-
fect of the tides, with Reﬀective ∼ 500km, is assumed. This
local anomaly at SLAC is caused by loading on the coast-
line as the ocean water level varies due to the tides. This
phenomenon has been known for many years and is called
ocean loading. This effect is also responsible for an en-
hancement of the tidal variation of the earth surface slope
observed in the San Francisco Bay Area [5]. The ocean
loading effect vanishes away from the coastline. Regard-
less, these tidal effects are harmless for a linear collider,
because the motion is slow, very predictable and, most im-
portantly, has a wavelength much longer than the length of
the accelerator.

Correlation of the tunnel deformation with changes of
external atmospheric pressure, clearly seen in Fig.2 and
5, is signiﬁcant from the lowest observed frequency up to
∼0.003Hz. Above this frequency the characteristic size
over which the pressure changes, which is ∼vw/f ,where
vw is the wind velocity (typically 5m/s), becomes shorter
than the linac length and the correlations vanish. In this
frequency range, the ratio of deformation to pressure is al-
most constant at about 6µm/mbar in Y and 2µm/mbar in
X. The inﬂuence of such global changes of pressure on the
ground deformation can be explained if the landscape or the
ground properties vary along the linac. One should note
that deformations of the lightpipe itself or motion of the
targets caused by external pressure variation appear to be
eliminated by design [4].

The spectra of the tunnel deformations exhibits 1/f 2 be-
havior over a large frequency band (see Fig.6). The 1/f 2

behavior vanishes at f >∼ 0.01 Hz where the signal to noise
ratio becomes poor due to noise in the detector and elec-
tronics. Evaluation of this noise, also shown in Fig.6, has
been done by means of a light source attached directly to
the photodetector. The spot size and intensity of this light
source were very similar to those of the laser. Inﬂuences
of other sources of error (vacuum and temperature varia-
tion in the lightpipe, temperature in the tunnel, etc.) were
analyzed but were found to be insigniﬁcant.

Above 0.1 Hz the signal to noice ratio again becomes
good as seen in the Fig.6. This is also conﬁrmed by com-
parison of the measured lightpipe displacement with mea-
surements from a vertical broadband (0.01-100Hz) seis-
mometer STS-2 installed at the beginning of the linac,
which measures the absolute motion of the ground. The si-
multaneous measurements of the tunnel motion and of the
absolute motion by STS-2 were performed during 3 days
from January 4 to January 7. The coherence between STS-
2 and vertical displacement measured by photodetector was
found to be about 0.5 at F >∼ 0.2 Hz.

During the 3-day period when the tunnel motion was
measured simultaneously with STS-2, only two remote
earthquakes were detected by the seismometer. One of the
earthquakes did not produce any noticable effect on the mo-
tion measured by the photodetector, probably because of
the speciﬁc orientation of the waves. The second earth-
quake, however, was clearly seen in both signals, as shown
in Fig.7. The ratio of the measured absolute motion and the
relative deformation of the tunnel is consistent with a phase
velocity of about 2.5 km/s, consistent with earlier correla-
tion measurements performed at SLAC [1].

Figure 7: Displacement of the tunnel and displacement
measured by STS-2 seismometer during remote earthquake
started January 6, 2000 at 02:49:00 local time (supposedly
corresponds to 5.8MS earthquake at Alaska happened at
10:42:27 UTC). A passband ﬁlter 0.02–0.08Hz has been
applied to the data.

One model of slow ground motion is described by the
ATL-law [3]. For our 3 point motion, the ATL spec-
trum corresponding to the measured X or Y is P (ω) =
ω2 with L = 1500m. Fig.6 shows that the measured
4AL
spectrum corresponds to a parameter A of about 10−7–
2·10−6µm/(m·s), somewhat changing with frequency.

Spectral analysis of subsets of the data, however, shows
that this parameter actually varies in time (see Fig.8). The
variation of atmospheric activity is again responsible for

Ax

Ay

1E-6

)
 
)
s
*
m

(
/
2
*
*
n
o
r
c
i
m

(
 

A

1E-7

342

346

350

354

358

Time (day)

362

366

370

1999

2000

Figure 8: Parameter A deﬁned from ﬁt to spectra in the
band 2.44E-4 to 1.53E-2 Hz for all data.

Figure 9: Parameter Ay deﬁned from all vertical motion
data in the frequency band 3 · 10−5–10−3 Hz versus ampli-
tude Ap of the atmospheric pressure spectrum.
the variation of parameter A. The spectra of pressure ﬂuc-
tuations was found to behave also as Ap/ω2 and its ampli-
tude Ap correlates with the parameter A, as seen in Fig.9.
The temporal pressure variation can therefore be a major
driving term of the A/ω2-like motion. This effect strongly
depends on geology [7].

3 CONCLUSION

Atmospheric pressure changes were found to be a major
cause of slow motion of the shallow SLAC linac tunnel. In
deep tunnels or in tunnels built in more solid ground, this
mechanism would vanish, as it and location. Other sources
could then dominate.

I would like to thank G.Bowden, T.King, G.Mazaheri,
M.Ross, M.Rogers, L.Grifﬁn, R.Ruland, R.Erickson,
T.Graul, B.Herrmannsfeldt, R.Pitthan, C.Adolphsen,
N.Phinney and T.Raubenheimer
technical
assistance and valuable discussions.

for help,

4 REFERENCES

[1] NLC ZDR Design Group, SLAC Report-474 (1996).
[2] C. Adolphsen, G. Bowden, G. Mazaheri, in Proc. of LC97.
[3] B.Baklakov,

V.Parkhomchuk,

P.Lebedev,

A.Seryi,

A.Sleptsov, V.Shiltsev, Tech. Phys. 38, 894 (1993).

[4] W. B. Herrmannsfeldt, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 12, 9 (1965).
[5] Milton D. Wood, Ph.D. thesis, Stanford, May 1969.
[6] R. Assmann, C. Salsberg, C. Montag, SLAC-PUB-7303, in

Proceed. of Linac 96, Geneva, (1996).

[7] A. Seryi, EPAC 2000, also in these Proceed.

