0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
0
2
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

APPLICATIONS OF TIME DOMAIN SIMULATION TO COUPLER

DESIGN FOR PERIODIC STRUCTURES∗

N. M. Kroll1,2, C.-K. Ng1 and D. C. Vier2

1 Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309, USA

2 University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA

Abstract

We present numerical procedures for analyzing the prop-
erties of periodic structures and associated couplers based
upon time domain simulation. Simple post processing pro-
cedures are given for determining Brillouin diagrams and
complex ﬁeld distributions of the traveling wave solutions,
and the reﬂection coeﬃcient of the traveling waves by the
input and output. The availability of the reﬂection coeﬃ-
cient information facilitates a systematic and eﬃcient pro-
cedure for matching the input and output. The method
has been extensively applied to coupler design for a wide
variety of structures and to a study directed towards elim-
ination of the surface ﬁeld enhancement commonly experi-
enced in coupler cells.

I. Introduction

Numerical simulation procedures for designing waveg-
uide couplers to accelerator structures are described in [1]
and an example of its application to the design of the in-
put coupler for the NLC linac is given in [2]. A coupler
cavity is designed with the intent of providing a matched
connection between a waveguide and a uniform accelerator
structure with dimensions corresponding to those of the
cell adjacent to the coupler cavity. A symmetric structure
consisting of two coupler cavities (with associated waveg-
uides) connected by a short section of accelerator structure
(typically two cells worth) is modeled and subjected to a
(let us assume single frequency) time domain simulation.
The entire assembly is treated as a single structure with
two wave guide ports. The coupler cell dimensions are ad-
justed until an apparent match is achieved, that is, until no
reﬂection is experienced at the ports (the external match-
ing condition). To eliminate the possibility that the match
arises from a fortuitous cancellation between forward and
backward waves within the accelerator structure, both the
amplitude and phase of the accelerating ﬁeld on the beam
axis are observed and required to have the periodicity and
phase advance properties appropriate to a pure traveling
wave (the internal matching condition). As a check one
may add a cell to the accelerator structure and see whether
all these conditions are still satisﬁed. It is often the case
that accelerator structures are slowly varying rather than
uniform, in which case the input and output couplers are
matched separately.

In practice the procedure (we refer to it as the standard
procedure) has been quite time consuming, involving trial

and error rather than a systematic procedure to simultane-
ously satisfy both the internal and external matching con-
ditions. Another limitation arises from the fact that the
method assumes that evanescent bands can be neglected
but provides no procedure for demonstrating their absence.
In the next section we describe a new simulation pro-
cedure which has been found to be much more eﬃcient,
and also which provides information about the presence of
evanescent bands. The basic elements of the method were
brieﬂy described in [3] in connection with the design of a
coupler for the zipper structure. Because it has since re-
placed the old method for all of our coupler design work,
a more complete presentation together with examples will
be presented in the following sections.

II. The New Simulation Procedure

As in the case of the old standard procedure one applies
a single frequency time domain simulation by driving the
input port of a two port structure consisting of an input
cavity, an N cell periodic structure with period P , and an
output cavity. Instead, however, of focusing attention on
the S parameters of the structure as a whole, we direct our
attention to the simulated accelerating ﬁeld Ez(z, t) eval-
uated along the beam axis. We assume a steady state has
been reached, so that the subsequent time dependence can
be expressed in terms of the complex Ez(z) (Ec(z) hence-
forth), obtained in the standard way by combining the sim-
ulated real ﬁelds at two times separated by a quarter pe-
riod. Then from Floquet’s theorem (neglecting evanescent
bands, losses, and an irrelevant overall phase factor)

Ec(z) = E(z)[exp(−jφ(z)) + Rexp(jφ(z))].

(1)

Here E(z) is a real positive amplitude function with period
P , and φ(z) is a real phase function, periodic except for a
cell to cell phase advance ψ. Thus

E(z ± P ) = E(z), and φ(z ± P ) = φ(z) ± ψ.

(2)

R is a z independent complex reﬂection coeﬃcient. Note
that one is free to shift φ by an arbitrary constant with a
compensating phase shift in R, since the overall phase of
Ec is irrelevant. This freedom corresponds to the choice of
reference plane through some point z0 where we take φ = 0.

We now consider the quantities

Σ(z) = F +(z) + F −(z), and ∆(z) = F +(z) − F −(z), (3)

∗Work supported by the Department of Energy, contract DE-AC03-
76SF00515, grants DE-FG03-93ER40759 and DE-FG03-93ER40793.

where

F ±(z) = Ec(z ± P )/Ec(z).

(4)

Elementary algebraic manipulation leads to the relations:

2Cos(ψ) = Σ(z),

(5)

Rexp(2jφ) = [2Sin(ψ) − j∆(z)]/[2Sin(ψ) + j∆(z)]. (6)

We note that while the RHS of (5) is formed of z dependent
complex quantities, it nevertheless turns out to be real and
z independent. Similarly the absolute value of the RHS of
(6) is also z independent. Both these results should hold
for all “allowed” z values, i.e., values such that the three
points z +P , z, and z −P all lie within the periodic portion
of the structure simulated, and together they constitute a
powerful constraint on the validity of the Floquet represen-
tation Eq. (1). Their failure beyond small numerical ﬂuc-
tuations or small deviation from steady state is evidence
for the presence of evanescent bands. An example will be
presented in the section on the Zipper structure.

It is noteworthy that these relations allow one to de-
termine all the properties of the traveling wave solutions,
including the functions φ(z) and E(z) from a simulation
which contains an arbitrary mixture of forward and back-
ward waves. Of particular importance is the fact that it
gives the magnitude and phase of the reﬂection coeﬃcient.
In contrast to the old standard method, there is here only
one matching condition to be satisﬁed, namely |R| = 0.
Typically match is achieved by varying two parameters in
the coupler design. Once one has determined how the real
and imaginary parts of R vary with the parameters, one
can choose linear combinations of changes which acceler-
ate the process of converging to the origin in the complex
R plane [4]. Because the phase of R does depend upon
the position of the reference point relative to the couplers,
one naturally keeps it ﬁxed while carrying out this process.
Note that it is the output cavity that is matched by this
procedure. While not necessary, it is usually convenient to
construct a symmetric mesh. The input and output cav-
ities are then the same, and the structure as a whole is
matched when R vanishes.

III. Applications and Examples

(a) The NLC four port output coupler

As an example of the principal features of the new
method we use the new NLC four port output coupler cav-
ity [5]. The purpose of the four port design was to provide
damping for those dipole modes that reach the end of the
structure while also providing an output for the accelerat-
ing mode. These dipole modes are typically those which
had been poorly damped because of decoupling of the last
cells from the manifolds. The four port symmetry provides
damping for both dipole mode polarizations and has the
added advantage of eliminating quadrupole distortion of
the coupler ﬁelds.

The design simulation was carried out with a three cell
periodic structure, and results are illustrated in Fig. (1).
Two cases are shown, one matched, the other not. The re-
ﬂection coeﬃcients |R| as computed from Eq. (5) for the
two cases are shown as functions of z. The allowed z values
are those lying within the central cell, and one sees that for

both cases |R| is constant over that range. The real part
of Cos(ψ) is also plotted as a function of z. One sees that
the two values are indeed constant over the allowed range,
but contrary to expectations they diﬀer somewhat from
each other and from the expected value of one half. This is
due to the fact that a diﬀerent and coarser mesh than that
used to determine the phase advance parameter was used
for the time domain simulations. The two cases diﬀer from
one another because the parameter variations in the cou-
pler associated with the matching procedure induce small
but global changes in the meshing. It has been conﬁrmed
in a number of cases that there is good agreement be-
tween the phase frequency relation determined from single
cell periodic boundary condition frequency domain calcu-
lations and that determined from the time domain method
described here so long as the same mesh is used for both
simulations.

1.0

0.5

0.0

−0.5

)

ψ
(
s
o
C
d
n
a

 

 
|

R

|

Matched
Unmatched

|R|

Cos(  )ψ

−1.0

0.005

0.015

0.025

z (m)

Figure 1

0.035

|R| and Cos(ψ) along the axis of the NLC four-port

output coupler.

(b) A Photonic Band Gap (PBG) structure

A snapshot of electric ﬁeld in the PBG structure.

Figure 2

A coupler cell very similar to those of the SLAC struc-
tures has been designed for a PBG structure, that is, a
cylindrical cell with a pair of symmetrically placed waveg-
uide ports, a conventional beam pipe, and conventional
beam iris coupling to the periodic PBG structure. The
PBG cell structure [6] is a seven by seven square array

of metallic posts aligned in the beam direction and termi-
nated by metallic end plates, the cell cavity being formed
by removing the central post. A circular aperture in the
end plates, identical to that between the coupler cell and
the adjacent PBG cell, provides cell to cell coupling and
a path for the beam. A perspective representation of the
four cell quarter structure used for the simulations is shown
in Fig. (2). Also shown is the simulated electric ﬁeld dis-
tribution, scaled logarithmically to enhance the visibility
of weak ﬁeld strengths. The ﬁgure illustrates the eﬀec-
tiveness of the PBG structure in conﬁning the acceleration
ﬁelds to the interior of the structure. The matching proce-
dure worked well, and, as in the four port coupler above,
there was no evidence for evanescent band contamination.
Fabrication of an experimental model with 5 coupled PBG
cells and complete with couplers is in progress at SLAC.
(c) The Zipper structure

The zipper is a planar accelerator structure described in
[3]. A 25 (counting the coupler cavities) cell W band model
has been built, cold tested, and subjected to bead pull
measurements as reported in [7]. The design was governed
by a decision to avoid bonded joints involving tiny structure
elements such as the vanes which serve as cell boundaries
and also form the beam iris. The coupler cell is a quarter
wave transformer terminating in WR10 waveguide.

Early attempts at matching the coupler using the old
standard method failed, and it was this failure which led
to the development reported here. Matching using this
method was accomplished by making use of a time domain
simulation of a structure with 22 periodic cells. Fig. 3
shows the resultant Re Cos(ψ), Im Cos(ψ), and |R| plots
as computed from Eqs. (5) and (6). One sees large de-
viations from the expected z independent behavior as one
moves away from the center of the structure. This eﬀect in-
dicates a clear violation of Eq. (1). From the fact that the
violation fades away as one moves away from the couplers
indicates that the eﬀect is due to the couplers generating an
evanescent band, the nearby monopole band pointed out in
[3]. This example demonstrates how the method indicates
the presence of evanescent band interference, and also how
one can carry out the matching procedure even when it is
present.

IV. The Coupler Field Enhancement Problem

Electrical discharge damage has been commonly ob-
served in the coupler cells of accelerator structures and has
been attributed to the ﬁeld enhancement noted in simula-
tions. We have taken advantage of our enhanced matching
capability to initiate a study of this long standing problem.
Exploration of the situation for the NLC coupler [2] showed
that the largest enhancement occurred on the coupler side
of the aperture of the iris separating the coupler from the
adjacent cell with azimuthal maxima opposite the coupler
waveguides and azimuthal minima 90 degrees away. This
observation was consistent with the pattern of discharge
damage [9]. It is pointed out in [8] that the azimuthal vari-
ation is due to the quadrupole component introduced by
the coupler waveguides and that the enhancement can be
reduced by introducing a racetrack like modiﬁcation of the
coupler cell shape designed to eliminate it. This eﬀect and
its cure have been conﬁrmed in our own studies of the NLC
coupler. Two other modiﬁcations have also been explored.
The simplest and most eﬀective was simply to reduce the
radius of the cell adjacent to the coupler. The eﬀect for a
2% reduction is illustrated in Fig. 4 where it is seen that
the ﬁeld on the coupler cell iris is signiﬁcantly less than
that on the interior coupling irises. An undesirable conse-
quence is a 10 degree phase advance deﬁciency in the mod-
iﬁed cell. An even larger ﬁeld reduction would be obtained
by removing the quadrupole enhancement. We attribute
the reduction to an increase in group velocity. The other
modiﬁcation consisted of enlarging the coupler iris com-
bined with an increase in the adjacent cell radius chosen so
as to preserve the cell phase advance, but the exploration
of this eﬀect is incomplete. Experimental investigation to
determine whether such changes actually do reduce electri-
cal discharge damage in the coupler is clearly needed.

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

x direction
y direction

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
y
a
r
t
i
r
b
r
a
(
 

l

i

d
e
F
 
c
i
r
t
c
e
E

l

0.0
−0.005 0.005 0.015 0.025 0.035 0.045 0.055 0.065

z (m)

Figure 4

z variation of electric ﬁeld magnitude at radial positions

of the beam irises.

References

[1] C.K. Ng and K. Ko, Proc. CAP93 p243 1993
[2] G.B. Bowden et al, Proc. PAC99 p3426 1999
[3] N.M. Kroll et al Proc. PAC99 p3612 1999
[4] We are indebted to Roger H. Miller for suggesting this procedure
and emphasizing the advantage of tracking the complex R rather
than |R|.

|R| and Cos(ψ) along the axis of the zipper structure.

Figure 3

[5]

J.W. Wang, et al, Oral Poster TUA3, This Conference; R.M.
Jones, et al, Poster TUA8, This Conference

[6] D.R. Smith, et al, AAC94, AIP Conf. Proc. 335, p761 (1995)
[7] D.T. Palmer, et al, The Design, Fabrication, and RF Measure-
ments of the First 25 cell W-Band Constant Impedance Accel-
erating Structure, AAC2000, to appear in AIP Conf. Proc. for
AAC2000
J. Haimson, B. Mecklenberg, and E.L. Wright, AAC96, AIP
Conf. Proc. 398, p898 (1997)
Juwen Wang, private communication

[8]

[9]

