0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
3
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
2
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

HIGH POWER MODEL FABRICATION OF BIPERIODIC L-SUPPORT

DISK-AND-WASHER STRUCTURE

H. Ao ∗, Y. Iwashita, T. Shirai and A. Noda,

Accelerator Laboratory, NSRF, ICR, Kyoto Univ.,
M. Inoue, Research Reactor Institute, Kyoto Univ.,

T. Kawakita, K. Ohkubo and K. Nakanishi, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.

Abstract
The high power test model of biperiodic L-support disk-
and-washer was fabricated. Among some trouble in the
fabrication, the main one was a vacuum leak in a brazing
process. The repair test of the leak showed a good result;
four units were recovered out of ﬁve leak units (recover rate
80%). While an accelerating mode frequency was tuned at
an operating frequency of 2857 MHz by squeezing method,
a coupling mode frequency of 2847MHz and the 3.4% ﬁeld
ﬂatness (peak to peak ratio) were achieved.

1

INTRODUCTION

A disk-and-washer (DAW) structure is developed as an ad-
vanced structure of a coupled cell cavity. The DAW struc-
ture has a high shunt impedance in the high β region and
good vacuum properties. A coupling constant of the DAW
is much larger than that of a side-couple cavity, which
brings easy frequency tuning and large tolerance in fabrica-
tion. The large coupling does not require a frequency tun-
ing for each cell. Only the average frequency of entire cells
must be controlled. Electric ﬁeld distribution can be ad-
justed by slight movement of the washer position, because
the distribution depends on the coupling constant balance
between cells.

Higher mode acceleration complicates mode analysis for
cavity design. The DAW requires a few supports which dis-
turb an axial symmetry, so that the electromagnetic ﬁeld of
the DAW is more complicated than that of a side couple
structure. Nevertheless, the feature of the DAW is attrac-
tive for a high β region accelerator. This study of the DAW
introduced the biperiodic L-support structure whose advan-
tage was proposed by a calculation study.[1] This study in-
vestigates its feasibility through the test model fabrication
and the measurement.

A coaxial bridge coupler connects two accelerator tubes
of 1.2 m length. The total length is about 2.8 m. The oper-
ating frequency of this test model is 2857 MHz which is the
same as that of the disc-loaded linac in our facility. These
speciﬁcations were designed so that a high-power test can
be carried out with the existing beam line and RF sources
in future.

This paper describes the fabrication process of two ac-
celeration tubes (No.1 and No.2) and the tuning operation.

∗ Present address: High Energy Accelerator Research Organization

(KEK), 1-1 Oho, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan

2 FABRICATION

2.1 Fabrication process and structure
The DAW structure is
steps.(See ﬁg.1)

fabricated by three brazing

Figure 1: Fabrication steps of the biperiodic L-support
DAW

The wall loss on the metal surface requires water paths
in the washer and support. Cooling water enters from one
side of the supports and goes out from another side. Two
rough processed half washers were brazed together (step1),
and then it was machined to the ﬁnal dimensions.

The frequency and the ﬁeld ﬂatness of each unit were
measured at the stage of step2 with aluminum units and
terminating plates, which are used for the cold model test.
These properties were optimized by ﬁne corrections based
on the measurement[?]. A detail of the measurement and
optimization are describes in §3.

The accelerator tube is installed into a water jacket made

of SUS, which keeps the strength.

2.2 Brazing
In this DAW structure, some brazed areas separate vacuum
region from water. The reliability of the brazing is impor-
tant for the DAW. The test model was fabricated in ﬁve
times for the physical and technical R&D (from 1st to 5th
model generations). Following sections describe the prob-
lems and actions taken throughout this study.

Leak The fabricated model was inspected against vac-
uum leak in every brazing step. Although only the wash-
ers that passed the leak-test at step1 were used in step2,
vacuum leaks arose in washer parts. Rates of the leak are
summarized in Table 1.

Although the 1st and 5th models had no leak, the 2nd to
4th models exhibited bad yield (50 to 67%). The reason
is considered as follows. When ﬁfty washers were brazed
which were mainly used from the 2nd to 4th models, a vac-
uum leak arose on half of them. These washers were re-
paired by putting an additional brazing ﬁller metal on the
washer surface and brazing again. Although the leak was
repaired at the time, the ﬁne machining, as mentioned in
§2.1, removed the surface and the brazed area became to

Model generation Leak/Total %
0
63
50
67
0

0/6
5/8
6/12
8/12
0/12

1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th

Table 1: Leak-test results after brazing STEP2

thin. Even these washer parts passed the leak-test. Heating
in step2, however, caused the vacuum leak again.

The original reason for the washer repair is considered
that they waited about one year after the machining till the
step1 brazing. It caused oxidation on the surface of brazing
area, which degraded the brazing quality.

The 1st and 5th model had no idle time, hence there is

no vacuum leak.

Leak repairing The ﬁve leak units were tested for re-
pair, and the four of them were successful at the stage of
step2. The way of repairing was as follows. After paste
mixed with a brazing metal powder was injected into a
cooling path, these units were heated up again. Because
the paste metal must not ﬁll up the cooling path, viscos-
ity of the paste was adjusted by additional acetone, and
compressed air was blown after inserting the paste. The
repaired washer was set at lower side in a heat up process
for the brazing metal not to ﬂow out.

Figure 2: Repairing a vacuum leak by paste of brazing ﬁller
metal.

Although three units had no vacuum leak after an en-
tire brazing (step3), one unit caused a small vacuum leak
again. The leak rate was 5.0 × 10−9[torrl/s]. Because the
brazing metal for the repair has melting temperature at the
middle between step2 and step3, the margin of the melting
temperature was ensured. Endurance of the repaired area,
however, seems not enough.

This structure requires three steps brazing, so that some
improvements are required in the washer fabrication. It is
necessary to reduce the waiting time from the ﬁne machin-
ing to the brazing process. As for a basic improvement, the
inner structure have more strong brazed junction.

3 MEASUREMENTS OF PROPERTIES

Regular units

Frequency The accelerating and coupling mode fre-
quencies were measured at step2. Figure 3 shows the mea-
surement results as a scatter diagram.

Figure 3: Single unit measurements of frequencies.

The frequency errors are small within the same model
generations.
It means that the fabrication process keeps
good reproducibility.
It is important to examine the de-
pendence of the frequency on the number of units for the
design of a multi-cell-DAW. Many aluminum models were
used to optimize dimensions[3]. Figure 4 shows the fre-
quency convergence up to 12 units of the optimized test
model.

Figure 4: Unit number dependence on the accelerating and
coupling mode frequencies.

The tolerance of the accelerating mode frequency is
about 1 MHz at this stage. Because the squeeze method can
raise the accelerating mode frequency up to about 1.5 MHz.
The coupling mode frequency is about 10 MHz lower than
the operating frequency 2857 MHz from this result. This
10 MHz error is considered as tolerable, because the DAW
has a large coupling constant, and thus the mode separation
is about 30 MHz.

Electric ﬁeld distribution The electric ﬁeld distribu-
tion depends on the displacement of the washer. This study
chose the following way to keep the precision of the washer
position.

1. A coordinate measuring machine measures the sup-

port (ﬁxed in a ﬂame) positions after step1 brazing.

2. The support socket is machined on the washer surface

so that the washer center ﬁts on the beam line.

3. A carbon rod holds the centerline throughout the heat-

up process in the step2 brazing.

The tolerance of the washer position is ±0.1 mm from a
concentric center and a parallel position.

Two sources of assembling error are considered. One is
the displacement in the heat-up process. The other is the
miss handling after brazing. The carbon rod must be re-
moved without washer displacement. This work was some-
times not easy. This is because a thermal expansion of cop-
per might tighten the clearance between the beam-hole of
the washer and the carbon rod.

The holding scheme of carbon supports should be easy to
remove after brazing. These assembling error in the beam-
axis direction can be easily corrected.
It is not easy on
the transverse direction. The assembling tolerance and the
loose contact should be compromised.

In the DAW, the ﬂatness of the electric ﬁeld distribution
can be corrected without changing the frequencies. Figure
5 shows the example of the ﬁeld correction. The ﬁeld dis-
tribution was checked before whole brazing (step3) assem-
bled temporarily. A coordinate measuring machine mea-
sured the washer positions, and then they were corrected
by hand. The ﬁnal ﬁeld distribution is also shown in Fig.
5.

Figure 5: Correction of the electric ﬁeld distribution and
the ﬁnal distributions of No.1 and No.2 accelerating tubes.

4 CONCLUSION

The feasibility of the biperiodic L-support DAW was con-
ﬁrmed at S-band as the result of this study. The fabrication
procedure was established; machining, brazing and assem-
bling. We took care of following points. The unit num-
ber dependence on the frequency must be considered dur-
ing the frequency optimization. This optimization would
need some test model measurements. The brazing pro-
cess is most important in the fabrication. The reliability
of the washer should be kept for the three brazing steps.
More R&D’s are needed for managements of brazing and
improvements of the inner structure of the washer. A ma-
chining process is important for frequency control. The
ﬁne machining of NC turning center achieved the sufﬁcient
precision for the reproduction. The electric ﬁeld distribu-
tion can be corrected by hand after assembling based on the
measurement data, so that it is not necessary to keep the
ﬁne precision throughout the fabrication. This correction
has no inﬂuence on the frequencies. The squeeze has the
1.5 MHz tuning range. This tolerance would be enough to
optimize the cavity dimensions considering the frequency
convergence.

5 REFERENCES

[1] Y. Iwashita, ”Disk-and-washer structure with biperiodic sup-
port”, Nucl. Instrm. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A 348(1994)15-
33

[2] H. Ao, et al.,”FABRICATION OF DISK-AND-WASHER
CAVITY”, Proc. First Asian Particle Accelerator Conf.,
KEK, Japan (1999) p. 187.

[3] H. Ao, et al., ”Model Test of Biperiodic L-support
Disk-and-Washer Linac Structure”, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys.
Vol.39(2000)651-656 Part1. No.2A

