0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
0
1
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of the six Dimensional Phase Space

at the New GSI High Current Linac

Gesellschaft f¨ur Schwerionenforschung GSI, Planck Strasse 1, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany

P. Forck, F. Heymach, T. Hoffmann, A. Peters, P. Strehl

e-mail: p.forck@gsi.de

Abstract

For the characterization of the 10 mA ion beam deliv-
ered by the new High Current Linac at GSI, sophisti-
cated, mainly non-intersepting diagnostic devices were de-
veloped. Besides the general set-up of a versatile test
bench, we discuss in particular bunch shape and emittance
measurements. A direct time-of-ﬂight technique with a di-
amond particle detector is used to observe the micro-bunch
distribution with a resolution of ∼ 25 ps equals 0.3o in
phase. For the determination of the energy spread a co-
incidence technique is applied, using secondary electrons
emitted by the ion passing through an aluminum foil 80
cm upstream of the diamond detector. The transverse emit-
tance is measured within one macro pulse with a pepper-pot
system equipped with a high performance CCD camera.

1 BEAM DIAGNOSTICS FOR THE

LINAC COMMISSIONING

At GSI upgraded ion sources [1] as well as a new 36 MHz
RFQ- and IH-Linac designed for high current operation
was commissioned in 1999 [2]. New beam diagnostic de-
velopments were necessary due to the high beam power
up to 1.3 MW at an energy of 1.4 MeV/u within a macro
pulse length of maximal 1 ms. A beam diagnostics bench
was installed behind each Linac-structure during the step-
wise commissioning, the scheme is shown in Fig.1. Non-
destructive devices are used for following tasks:
The total current is measured using beam transformer [3]
made of Vitrovac 6065 core having a 2×10 differential sec-
ondary winding. The resolution is 100 nA at a bandwidth
of 100 kHz. Due to a feedback circuit the droop is less than
1 % for 5 ms macro-pulses.
The beam energy is determined by a time-of-ﬂight tech-
nique using two 50 Ω matched capacitive pick-ups [4]
with 1 GHz bandwidth, separated by 2 m. A precision of
∆W/W = 0.1 % is achieved.
The beam position is monitored by digitizing the power of
the 6th harmonics of the rf frequency (216 MHz) of the 4
segments of these pick-ups.
The beam proﬁle is determined by a residual gas moni-
tor [4], where residual gas ions are detected on a 23 strip
printed board. For typical beam parameters no signiﬁcant
broadening of the proﬁles due to space charge inﬂuence is
expected. For lower current or shorter macro pulses con-
ventional proﬁle grids are used.

The instruments are now installed behind the last IH2
cavity as well as behind the gas stripper. In the following

Figure 1: Scheme of the test bench as arranged for the com-
missioning of the RFQ.

we discuss the measurement in the longitudinal plane using
particle detectors and of the transverse emittance using the
pepper-pot system.

2 MEASUREMENT OF BUNCH

STRUCTURE

For the comparison to calculations, as well as for matching
of different Linac structures the knowledge of the bunch
shape is important, but measurements are not as common
as for the transverse case. At velocities much below the
speed of light the signal on a transverse pick-up does not
represent the details of the bunch shape due to the large
longitudinal electric ﬁeld component. A comparison of
the pick-up signal to the bunch shape measured with the
method described below is shown in Fig.2 for a velocity of
β = 5.5 % (1.4 MeV/u) to visualize the broadening of the
pick-up signal detecting bunches with less than 1 ns width.
We developed a device where the arrival of the ion in a par-
ticle detector is measured with respect to the accelerating
rf, see Fig.3. The method demands for less than one ion hit
per rf period. This reduction is done by Rutherford scatter-
ing in a 210 µg/cm2 tantalum foil (∼ 130 nm thickness) at
a scattering angle of 2.5o deﬁned by a collimator with 16
cm distance and Ø0.5 mm apertures to give a solid angle
of ∆Ωlab = 2.5 · 10−4. The parameters are chosen to get
an attenuation of ∼ 10−8 of the beam current. A high tar-
get mass is preferred, so the energy spread for a ﬁnite solid
angle is lower than the required resolution. For our parame-
ters the largest contribution to the energy spread arises from
the electronic stopping in the foil, which amounts e.g. for
Ar projectiles to ∼ 0.25 % and for U to ∼ 0.15 % (FWHM)

2 ns/div
100 mV/div

pick-up

diamond
FWHM=0.71 ns

Figure 2: Comparison of a pick-up signal to the bunch
shape determination using the particle detector setup for
a 1.4 MeV/u Ar1+ beam 3 m behind the IH2 output. (The
50 Ω termination of the pick-up leads to a differentiation)

disc.

TDC

stop

accelerator rf

thin Ta-target

collimator

θ

Lab

start 1
start 2
delay

disc.

MCP

disc.

amp.

diamond

sec. e from Al-foil

beam

Figure 3: Sketch of the designed TOF method for the bunch
shape (Sec.2) and phase space distribution (Sec.3) mea-
surement with particle detectors.

at 1.4 MeV/u. More details can be found in [5].

A drawback of this method is the high sensitivity of the
tantalum foil due to the heating by the ions energy loss.
Therefore, the beam has to be attenuated, which can be
done by defocusing. The device is now installed behind
the gas stripper and the ﬁrst charge separating magnet so
that another type of attenuation can be applied by changing
the gas pressure or by selecting a different charge state. By
this means also space charge effects can be studied.

Another approach would be the use of a supersonic high
density Xenon gas target instead of the Tantalum foil; es-
timations of the effect of the larger elongation have to be
done.

After a drift of ∼ 1 m the scattered ions are detected by
a CVD diamond detector [5, 6]. Besides the very low ra-
diation damage, we gain mainly from the very fast signals,
having a rise time below 1 ns. The conversion to logical
pulses is done by a double threshold discriminator [7]. The
logical pulses serve as a start of a VME time-to-digital con-
verter (CAEN V488), where the stop is derived from the
36 MHz used for accelerating. The timing resolution of the
system is about 25 ps corresponding to a phase width of
0.3o.

As an example, the bunch structure of a 120 keV/u Ar1+
beam at the output of the Super Lens (and an additional

Figure 4: Example of the bunch shape measurements 2.4
m behind the Super Lens. On the left bottom the result for
a low current 0.1 mA Ar1+ beam is shown, on top the cal-
culated emittance is plotted. On the right the measurement
and simulation are shown for a high current of 5 mA Ar1+.

drift of 2.4 m) is shown in Fig.4. The two measurements
for low (left) and high (right) current show a quite differ-
ent bunch shape having a larger, ﬁlamented emittance for
the low current case. The particle tracking calculation [8]
shows a strong ion current dependence for the longitudinal
emittance. The applied rf power in the cavity counteracts
the space charge force for a high current beam. For a low
current ﬁlamentation occurs due to the missing damping by
the space charge. Other experimental results can be found
in [2].

3 MEASUREMENT OF LONGITUDINAL

EMITTANCE

The main advantage of using particle detectors is the pos-
sibility to measure the longitudinal emittance using a co-
incidence technique. As shown in Fig.3, a second detector
can be moved in the path of the scattered ions. It consists
of a 15 µg/cm2 Aluminum foil (∼ 50 nm) where several
secondary electrons per ion passage are generated. These
electrons are accelerated by an electric ﬁeld of 1 kV/cm to-
wards a micro channel plate equipped with a 50 Ω anode
(Hamamatsu F4655-10). The time relative to the acceler-
ating rf is measured as well as the arrival time of the same
particle at the diamond detector located 80 cm behind the
MCP. From the difference in time of the individual particles
one can generate a phase space plot.

An example of such a measurement is given in Fig.5
(left) for a low current Ar beam 2.5 m downstream of the
gas stripper. The arrival times at the diamond detector
are used as the phase (or time) axis having a width of 1.4
ns equals 18o phase width. The time difference between
diamond and MCP is plotted at the y-axis, the width is
about 0.4 ns (FWHM) corresponding to an energy spread of
∆W/W = 1.7 %. For a high current beam (5 mA before
stripping) a double structure is visible in the bunch pro-
ﬁle and an energy broadening to ∆W/W = 2.8 % with a
clear correlation in the phase space. Here the attenuation is

Figure 5: Measured longitudinal phase space distribution
for a low current Ar-beam (left) and a high current beam
(right) 2.5 m behind the stripper. Note that the measured
energy spread might be too large.

done by selecting a high charge state (Ar15+) far from the
maximum of the stripping efﬁciency curve (Ar10+). The
measured values are larger by a factor of 2 as expected by
tracking calculation. Therefore it is believed that some er-
rors contribute to the measurement: Having a drift length of
only 80 cm between the two detectors and an ion velocity
of 5.5 % of the ions (corresponding to 48 ns time of ﬂight)
the accuracy in time has to be 25 ps to have a precision of
∆W/W of 0.1 %. The imperfections of the device, in par-
ticular the lack of homogeneity of the accelerating ﬁeld for
the electrons towards the MCP effect the resolution in time.
An optimization has to be done. A large distance (e.g. 3 m)
between the two detectors would lower the requirement for
the time resolution of the detectors. Recently it was discov-
ered that there might be some problems inside the stripper
[2] due to inhomogeneity of the gas jet resulting in a wider
energy spread as the design value.

It is shown, that this type of setup can be used for the de-
termination of the longitudinal emittance at low ion veloc-
ities, but a careful design of the components is necessary.

4 MEASUREMENT OF TRANSVERSE

EMITTANCE

For the measurement of the transverse emittance two de-
vices were installed at the diagnostic bench. A conven-
tional slit-grid system [4] having a coordinate resolution of
0.05 mm and an angular resolution of 0.3 mrad. Due to
the high beam power, this device can only be used for the
lower energy part of the Linac. For high current operation
we developed a pepper-pot system capable to measure the
emittance within one macro-pulse, see [9] for more details.
Here the coordinates are ﬁxed by a 45 × 45 mm2 copper
plate equipped with 15 × 15 holes with Ø0.1 mm. After a
drift of 25 cm the beam-lets are stopped on a Al2O3 screen.
The divergence of the beam is calculated with respect to the
image of the pepper-pot pattern. This image is created on
the screen with a HeNe laser, which illuminate the pepper-
pot via a pneumatic driven mirror. This calibration elimi-
nate systematic errors due to mechanical uncertainties. A

Figure 6: Screen shot from the pepper-pot device for an Ar
beam and, as an insert, the projection onto the horizontal
plane.

plot

Figure 7: Phase
space
of
the data shown
above.

high resolution 12 bit CCD camera (PCO SensiCam) trans-
mits the digital data via ﬁber optics. A typical image of
such a measurement is shown in Fig.6, together with the
projection onto the horizontal or vertical axis. This projec-
tion is used for the emittance calculation with an algorithm
like for the slit-grid device.

For a precise measurement the beam width should be
large enough to illuminate several holes in the pepper-pot
plate (spacing 3 mm). This also avoids overheating of the
pepper-pot, as well as saturation of the light intensity emit-
ted from the screen. In addition, a background level (about
5 %) has to be subtracted from the data, probably caused
by scattered light in the screen. Therefore the beam optics
have to be changed in some cases to use this modern and
reliable system for a fast measurement in a high current
operation.

5 REFERENCES

[1] H. Reich, P. Sp¨atke and L. Dahl,P. Sp¨atke , this proceedings
[2] W. Barth and W. Barth, P. Forck this proceedings
[3] N. Scheider, AIP proceedings 451, p. 502 (1998).
[4] P. Forck, A. Peters, P. Strehl, AIP proceedings of the Beam

Instrumentation Workshop, Boston (2000).

[5] P. Forck et al., proceedings of the 4th DIPAC, Chester, p. 176

(1999).

[6] E. Berdermann et al., Proc. XXXVI Int. Winter Meeting of

Nucl. Phys., Bormio (1998).

[7] C. Neyer, 3rd Workshop on Electronics for LHC Experi-

ments, London, CERN/LHCC/97-60 (1997).

[8] A. Schempp, LINAC 96, procedings, Geneva (1996.)
[9] T. Hoffmann et al., AIP proceedings of the Beam Instrumen-

tation Workshop, Boston (2000).

