0
0
0
2

 

g
u
A
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
1
0
8
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Energy Absorber R&D ⋆

IIT-HEP-00/1

Daniel M. Kaplan, Edgar L. Black, Kevin W. Cassel

Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616

and

Mary Anne Cummings

Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL 60115

Abstract

We describe the program of research and development being undertaken by a
consortium of Illinois university groups to develop liquid-hydrogen energy absorbers
for muon-beam cooling.

1 Introduction

Ionization cooling of a muon beam can be accomplished by passing the beam
through energy-absorbing material and accelerating structures, both embed-
ded within a focusing magnetic lattice. The rate of change of the normalized
transverse emittance with path length is then approximately described by [1,2]

dǫn
ds

= −

1
β 2

dEµ
ds

ǫn
Eµ

+

1
β 3

β⊥(0.014 GeV)2

2EµmµLR

,

(1)

where s is the path length, Eµ the muon energy, LR the radiation length of
the absorber medium, β = v/c, and β⊥ is the betatron function of the beam
(where the size of the beam is given by σx = σy = qǫnβ⊥/βγ).

⋆ Presented at the NuFact’00 Workshop, Monterey, California, May 22–26, 2000.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

In Eq. 1 we see, in addition to the dE/ds transverse cooling term, a trans-
verse heating term due to multiple Coulomb scattering of the muons in the
absorbers. Since cooling ceases once the heating and cooling terms are equal,
Eq. 1 implies an equilibrium emittance, which in principle (neglecting other
limiting eﬀects) would be reached asymptotically were the cooling channel
continued indeﬁnitely. Since the heating term is proportional to β⊥ and in-
versely proportional to the radiation length of the absorber medium, the
goal of achieving as small an equilibrium emittance as possible requires us
to locate the absorber only in low-β⊥ regions and to use a medium with the
longest possible radiation length, namely hydrogen. To achieve low β⊥, we
want the strongest possible focusing elements. We are thus led to supercon-
ducting solenoids ﬁlled with liquid hydrogen as possibly the optimal solution. 1

2 Cooling channel designs

A variety of solenoidal focusing lattices have been considered for muon-
beam cooling, including the so-called Alternating-Solenoid, FOFO, DFOFO,
SFOFO, and Single- and Double-Flip designs [3–6]. In all of these, liquid-
hydrogen (LH2) absorbers are used to minimize multiple scattering. The spec-
iﬁcations of the absorbers for some representative cases are given in Table 1.

3 Absorber power handling

A key problem is handling the heat deposited in the hydrogen by the muon
beam. As shown in Table 1, this can exceed 100 watts per absorber. LH2 targets
have been successfully operated in such a heat-deposition regime, notably the
target for the SAMPLE experiment at Bates [9]. These high-power target
designs have followed the approach developed at SLAC [10], in which the liquid
is pumped around an external cooling loop (see Fig. 1). The loop includes a
heat exchanger, within which the deposited heat is transferred to a supply of
cold helium gas, as well as a heater for fast regulation of temperature. The
diﬃculty in such designs is assuring ﬂow of the LH2 within the absorber cell
that is predominantly transverse to the beam direction, since any little parcel
of LH2 that ﬂowed along the beam would be quickly heated above the boiling
point. In the SAMPLE target (Fig. 1b) transverse ﬂow was accomplished using
a specially-designed perforated baﬄe, and for the proposed SLAC Experiment

1 However, lithium lenses might give an even lower equilibrium emittance than
solenoids with liquid hydrogen, since stronger focusing ﬁelds may be feasible with
liquid-lithium lenses than with magnets, and this may overcome the radiation-length
advantage of hydrogen.

2

Table 1
Speciﬁcations of typical absorbers (from Ref. [5]).

Lattice:

Single-Flip

FOFO1

FOFO2

30

20

38

160

Absorber property

length L

density ρ

radius r

volume V

power P ∗

temperature T

pressure P

boiling point

freezing point

12.6

0.0708

15

9

68

20†

1

20.2

13.8

13.2

10

4

71

unit

cm

g/cm3

cm

l

W

K

atm

K

K

window material

Al alloy (6061-T6)

window shape

ellipsoidal

torispherical

ellipsoidal

window thickness t

300

400

200

µm

∗ Assuming 5 × 1012 muons/bunch at 15 Hz at 200 MeV/c.
† Operation at 1 atm will probably require a somewhat lower operating temperature
to give more “headroom” with respect to the boiling point; this will be iterated once
the ﬂuid-ﬂow and thermal models have been fully calculated and veriﬁed in bench
tests.

158 target (Fig. 1a) the use of asymmetrically-perforated screens is under
investigation [12]. We are developing a design in which transverse ﬂow within
the absorber cell is produced by variously-angled nozzles placed around the
periphery.

In addition to the external-loop approach, we are considering as an alterna-
tive heat exchange internal to the absorber vessel, using driven convection
to provide mixing and transverse ﬂow (Fig. 2). This has the obvious virtue
of fewer moving parts. Moreover, the transverse ﬂow arises naturally, rather
than being imposed by a clever but complicated design. The key question is
whether there will be suﬃcient convection at the anticipated power level to
give the necessary rate of heat exchange via the cooling tubes at the periphery
of the cell. We are addressing this by a series of computational-ﬂuid-dynamics
(CFD) calculations that numerically solve the Navier-Stokes equation on a
suitable two-dimensional 2 grid to evaluate the Nusselt number (the dimen-

2 Given the deﬂection of the absorber windows (discussed below) a three-
dimensional calculation would be preferable but is impractical for any reasonable

3

(a) Proposed SLAC E158 target with cooling loop.

(b) SAMPLE target.

Fig. 1. Target designs exmploying an external cooling loop.

4

He

A

A

LH2

(a) Top view.

He Cooling Tubes

Muon
Beam

Heater

(b) Section A-A.

Fig. 2. Schematic of absorber/heat exchanger design in the convection approach.

sionless parameter that characterizes the rate of convective heat transport)
vs. the Rayleigh number (the dimensionless parameter, proportional to the
power dissipation, that characterizes the degree of turbulence). Preliminary
indications are that there will be suﬃcient convection; this will be investi-
gated further numerically and tested experimentally on the bench.

4 Absorber windows

The thickness of the absorber windows is a critical parameter. They must be
thick enough to sustain the pressure from the LH2, yet as thin as possible so as

amount of computing resources.

5

to minimize multiple scattering. The window thicknesses in Table 1 have been
chosen based on the ASME standard for pressure vessels [7]. This choice also
satisﬁes the Fermilab safety code for liquid-hydrogen targets [8]. As illustrated
in Fig. 3, ASME [7] speciﬁes three standard window proﬁles: hemispherical,
ellipsoidal, and torispherical. The minimum thickness required in each case is

(hemispherical)

(ellipsoidal)

(torispherical)

t =

t =

t =

0.5P R

SE − 0.1P

0.5P D

SE − 0.1P
0.885P D
SE − 0.1P

,

,

,

s = R = 0.5D

s = 0.25D

s = 0.169D ,

(2)

(3)

(4)

where P is the pressure diﬀerential, R the radius of curvature (for hemispher-
ical windows), D the length of the major axis (for ellipsoidal or torispherical
windows), i.e. the absorber diameter, S the maximum allowable stress, and
E the weld eﬃciency. In the above equations we give also s, the sagitta of
the window at its center, which determines which window shapes can be used
for absorbers of given dimensions: since each absorber has two windows, the
absorber length L must satisfy L > 2s. (Note that for ellipsoidal windows the
ASME code considers only the case where the length of the major axis is twice
that of the minor axis, and for the torispherical case the radius of curvature of
the “knuckle” is 6% that of the main cap; see Fig. 3.) The maximum allowable
stress is the smaller of (ultimate stress)/4 or (yield stress)/1.5 [8]. In practice
we ﬁnd that it is the ultimate stress that is the limit.

The hemispherical window shape minimizes the needed thickness. However,
a hemispherical window is practical only for absorbers whose length exceeds
their diameter. Since our absorbers are typically wider in diameter than they
are long, we choose either the ellipsoidal or torispherical window proﬁle. As an
example, we show in Fig. 4 the mechanical design for the “FOFO1” absorber
of Table 1. Given the 15 cm radius of the absorber, both hemispherical and
ellipsoidal windows are ruled out. Torispherical windows with 5.1 cm sagitta
leave just 2.4 cm for the ﬂange and manifold assembly that joins the two
windows and connects to the hydrogen inlets and outlets. Our solution is to
machine each window with an integral ﬂange out of a single block of material.
The two ﬂanges bolt together in “clamshell” fashion to form the manifold.

In the Neutrino Factory Feasibility Study [5] we consider FOFO and Single-
Flip options for the cooling channel. In both designs the cooling performance
is signiﬁcantly limited by scattering in the absorber windows. To minimize
this eﬀect we propose to operate the absorbers at 1 atm pressure. 3 In the

3 Operation of high-power LH2 absorbers at 1 atm pressure is not an established
technique, 2 atm having been used in previous high-power target designs [9–11].

6

hemispherical

ellipsoidal

torispherical

Fig. 3. Comparison of ASME window shapes for given absorber diameter.

Single-Flip design the absorbers are long enough to permit the use of 300 µm
ellipsoidal windows. 4 In the FOFO design two cooling sections are used having
two diﬀerent absorber sizes. In the ﬁrst (“FOFO1”) section, 400 µm torispher-
ical windows are used as discussed above. 4 By the second section, the beam
has become small enough to permit a reduction in absorber diameter, allow-
ing use of 200 µm ellipsoidal windows. 4 The reduction in window thickness
results in a lowering of the equilibrium emittance from 2.6π to 2.2π mm·rad
and a corresponding increase in the cooling rate.

We have also begun to explore the option of customizing the thickness proﬁle
of the window in order to minimize the thickness at the center while maximiz-
ing strength. An ANSYS ﬁnite-element calculation has been carried out that
shows that the stresses in a torispherical window are greatest near the edge,
in the region in which the window curvature under pressure exhibits a point
of inﬂection (Fig. 5). By thickening the material near the edge one can reduce
the maximum stresses substantially, allowing the material near the center to
be thinner by perhaps as much as a factor of 5. Of course manufacturability

There may be safety concerns that will prevent such operation [13]; this is a topic
for R&D.
4 We assumed a weld eﬃciency E = 0.9 in specifying these window thicknesses,
however in the integral-ﬂange approach discussed above, E = 1, allowing 10% thin-
ner windows, or alternatively, operation at 1.1 atm with the thicknesses given.

7

Fig. 4. Mechanical design of FOFO1 absorber (external-cooling-loop version).

will also impose a limit on how thin the center of a machined window can be;
we will explore this soon by building and testing prototypes.

5 R&D issues

Beryllium or AlBeMet (a composite of 62% beryllium/38% aluminum) could
reduce the impact of the windows on the cooling performance. However, based
on the CEA bubble-chamber accident, beryllium is believed to be incompati-
ble with liquid hydrogen, and an R&D program will be required to establish
safe design parameters for these materials. With 40% greater strength than
aluminum and 2.1 times the radiation length, AlBeMet has the potential to
lower the total radiation-length fraction per absorber from 2.4% to 1.8% or
less, depending on the detailed optimization of absorber dimensions. (While
beryllium windows may also be feasible, there may be little additional gain in
going beyond AlBeMet.) Other cooling scenarios (e.g. SFOFO) use absorbers
that are thicker compared to their diameter. Here eﬀects of windows on cooling

8

Muon Collider Window, Deformation under Pressure

ANSYS 5.5.1SP
MAY 16 2000
10:02:57
PLOT NO.   2
DISPLACEMENT
STEP=1
SUB =1
TIME=1
PowerGraphics
EFACET=1
AVRES=Mat
DMX =.039861

DSCA=18.815
ZV  =1
DIST=8.25
XF  =7.5
YF  =27.819

Muon Collider Window, Deformation under Pressure

(a) Uniform thickness.

ANSYS 5.5.1SP
MAY 16 2000
10:10:45
PLOT NO.   4
DISPLACEMENT
STEP=1
SUB =1
TIME=1
PowerGraphics
EFACET=1
AVRES=Mat
DMX =.009236

DSCA=82.617
ZV  =1
DIST=8.393
XF  =7.63
YF  =27.835

Muon Collider Window, Thick End

Muon Collider Window, Thick End

(b) Tapered proﬁle.

Fig. 5. Comparison of deformation and stresses vs. position under pressure for a)
standard torispherical and b) tapered torispherical windows. (Note that the defor-
mation has been exaggerated for visibility.)

performance are reduced, and aluminum windows may be adequate. Whether
R&D on exotic window materials is worthwhile may thus depend on which
cooling approach prevails.

In all scenarios the speciﬁc power dissipation in the absorbers is large and
represents a substantial portion of the cryogenic load of the cooling channel.
Handling this heat load is a signiﬁcant design challenge. An R&D program
is already in place at IIT to understand the thermal and ﬂuid-ﬂow aspects
of maintaining a constant temperature within the absorber volume despite
the large spatial and temporal variations in power density. This program is

9

beginning with CFD studies and is planned to proceed to bench tests and
high-power beam tests of absorber prototypes over the next year.

In some scenarios (especially those with emittance exchange), lithium hydride
(LiH) absorbers may be called for. Since it is a solid, LiH in principle can be
fabricated in arbitrary shapes. In emittance-exchange channels, dispersion in
the lattice spatially separates muons according to their energies, whereupon
specially shaped absorbers can be used to absorb more energy from muons of
higher energy and less from those of lower energy. However, solid LiH shapes
are not commercially available, and procedures for their fabrication would
need to be developed. Such an eﬀort is challenging since LiH reacts with
water, releasing hydrogen gas and creating an explosion hazard.

6 Acknowledgements

We thank M. Boghosian of IIT who carried out the CFD calculations and
Z. Tang of Fermilab who carried out the ANSYS window calculations. This
work was supported in part by the U.S. Dept. of Energy, the National Science
Foundation, and the IIT Research Institute.

References

[1] D. Neuﬀer, in Advanced Accelerator Concepts, F. E. Mills, ed., AIP Conf.

Proc. 156 (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1987), p. 201.

[2] R. C. Fernow and J. C. Gallardo, Phys. Rev. E 52, 1039 (1995).

[3] C. Ankenbrandt et al., Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 2, 081001, 1–73 (1999).

[4] D. M Kaplan, “Muon Collider/Neutrino Factory: Status and Prospects,” IIT-
HEP-99-3, FERMILAB-CONF-00-019, physics/0001037, to appear in Nucl.
Instrum. Meth. (2000).

[5] N. Holtkamp et al., “A Feasibility Study of a Neutrino Source Based on a Muon
Storage Ring,” FERMILAB-PUB-00-108-E (2000), submitted to Phys. Rev. ST
Accel. Beams.

[6] V. Balbekov, E. Kim, G. Penn, et al., various MUCOOL Notes;

see

http://www-mucool.fnal.gov/notes/notes.html.

[7] “ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code,” ANSI/ASME BPV-VIII-1

(American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1980), part UG-32.

[8] “Guidelines for the Design, Fabrication, Testing, Installation and Operation of
Liquid Hydrogen Targets,” Fermilab, Rev. May 20, 1997; J. Kilmer, private
communication.

10

[9] E. J. Beise et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A378 (1996) 383.

[10] J. W. Mark, SLAC-PUB-3169 (1984) and references therein.

[11] R. W. Carr et al., SLAC-Proposal-E-158, July 1997.

[12] R. W. Carr et al., “E158 Liquid Hydrogen Target Milestone Report,”
21,

http://www.slac.stanford.edu/exp/e158/documents/target.ps.gz
1999).

(April

[13] J. Kilmer, private communication.

11

