0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
7
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
8
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MEASURING AND CONTROLLING ENERGY SPREAD IN CEBAF∗

G. A. Krafft, J.-C. Denard, R. W. Dickson, R. Kazimi,

V. A. Lebedev, and M. G. Tiefenback

TJNAF, Newport News, VA23606, USA

Abstract

As compared to electron storage rings, one advantage of re-
circulating linacs is that the beam properties at target are no
longer dominated by the equilibrium between quantum ra-
diative diffusion and radiation damping because new beam
is continually injected into the accelerator. This allows the
energy spread from a CEBAF-type machine to be relatively
small; the measured energy spread from CEBAF at 4 GeV
is less than 100 parts per million accumulated over times
of order several days. In this paper, the various subsystems
contributing to the energy spread of a CEBAF-type accel-
erator are reviewed, as well as the machine diagnostics and
controls that are used in CEBAF to ensure that a small
energy spread is provided during routine running. Exam-
ples of relevant developments are (1) stable short bunches
emerging from the injector, (2) precision timing and phas-
ing of the linacs with respect to the centroid of the beam
bunches on all passes, (3) implementing 2 kHz sampling
rate feedback systems for ﬁnal energy stabilization, and
(4) continuous beam energy spread monitoring with opti-
cal transition radiation devices. We present measurement
results showing that small energy spreads are achieved over
extended periods.

1 INTRODUCTION

In this paper we summarize the present status on energy
spread measurement and control in the Jefferson Lab nu-
clear physics accelerator called CEBAF. A schematic dia-
gram of CEBAF appears in Fig. 1 and a summary of rele-
vant beam parameters is given in Table 1, where all sizes
are rms quantities. CW beam, originating in the injector,
is recirculated up to ﬁve times through each linac. The
beam may be directed into up to three experimental halls
simultaneously, the beam current in the halls being at the
third subharmonic of the accelerator operating frequency of
1497 MHz. Because of the low charge-per-bunch at even
the highest operating current, collective effects are not an
important source of energy spread in CEBAF. Fig. 1 lo-
cates some of the feedback system hardware, discussed in
Section 6 below.

Table 1: CEBAF Accelerator Parameters

Value
Item
0.8-6
Beam Energy
180
Beam Current
1
Normalized rms Emittance
499
Repetition Rate
<0.4
Charge per Bunch
Extracted rms Energy Spread < 10−4
<100
Transverse rms Beam Size
60(200)
Longitudinal rms Beam Size
Beam rms Angular Spread
< 0.1/γ

Unit
GeV

µA/Hall
mm mrad
MHz/Hall

pC

µm

µm(fsec)

2 SOURCES AND TYPES OF ENERGY

SPREADS IN RECIRCULATING

LINACS

Because the electron beam remains in CEBAF for times
that are short compared to the usual radiation damping
times for the recirculation rings, the energy spread of the
recirculating beam is not determined by the equilibrium
deﬁned by the quantum character of the emission of syn-
chrotron radiation. What effects do determine the energy
spread? The sources of energy spread will be grouped
into two broad categories: the single bunch energy spread
which is the same for all bunches in the train, and ﬂuctua-
tion energy spread which is derived from ﬂuctuations in the
beam centroid energy.

Sources of single bunch energy spread are: (1) the in-
jected single bunch energy spread, (2) energy spread gen-
erated by the ﬁnite phase extent of the bunches interacting

Figure 1: Schematic of the CEBAF Accelerator

∗ Work supported by the United States Department of Energy under

Contract No. DE-AC05-84ER40150.

with the time-dependent accelerating ﬁeld, (3) synchrotron
emission in the arcs, (4) average phase errors in the syn-
chronization of the cavity RF to the beam, (5) summed
phase errors from whole linac sections that are not properly
balanced, and (6) interactions of the beam energy spread
with non-zero M56 in the arcs, which might cause the in-
jected bunch length to grow.

Sources of energy ﬂuctuations are: (1) RF phase ﬂuctu-
ations in individual RF cavities, (2) RF amplitude errors in
the individual cavities, (3) master oscillator noise, and (4)
magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations in dipole magnets that are used
for energy measurements by the feedback system. We will
address each of these potential sources of energy spread.
The general philosophy used at CEBAF is to use measure-
ments to ensure the machine setup minimizes the single
bunch energy spread, and to use feedback systems to cor-
rect energy ﬂuctuations. Our point-of-delivery diagnostics
allow us to ensure that the energy spread is under control
throughout the duration of physics running.

3 LONGITUDINAL MANIPULATIONS IN

INJECTOR

In general terms, the function of the injector is to accelerate
the electron beam to an energy high enough that the phase
slip caused by different passes being at different energies
is small, and to manipulate the longitudinal phase space of
the beam in a way that minimizes the overall extracted en-
ergy spread. To solve the ﬁrst problem, 45 MeV injection
energy is sufﬁcient for 4 GeV total acceleration. A simple
calculation gives guidance on injection conditions that pro-
duce the optimal energy spread. Assume for the moment
that one could phase each linac cavity for exactly maxi-
mum energy gain. Then the energy of a bunch electron
after leaving the accelerator is E = Einj + Egain cos(Φ)
where Einj and E are the initial and ﬁnal energy, respec-
tively, and Φ is the phase of the electron with respect to
the bunch centroid (assumed on crest at Φ = 0). Utilizing
the single particle distribution function for the electrons at
injection to perform the proper statistical averages one ob-
tains

longitudinal phase space “matched” to this bunch length.

A way of providing this match has been developed and
documented in various conference proceedings and work-
shops [1, 2]. Here we concentrate on the measurements
done routinely to ensure that proper bunching has been
achieved. A main diagnostic used at CEBAF is to perform
phase transfer function measurements [3, 4]. The basic idea
is to phase modulate the beam at the beam chopper, with
the rest of the RF phases in the accelerator held constant.
By analyzing the longitudinal transfer function for its lin-
ear and non-linear behavior, one has a way to ensure that
the beam longitudinal phase space is bunched in a way that
minimizes distortion in the bunching process, including the
non-linearities due to RF curvature and higher order terms
[2]. Such measurements are routinely used to restore the
proper operation of the injector after machine downs, or
when certain types of operational problems arise.

Next we present a summary viewgraph from another talk
at this conference, which shows that the bunch length is
properly adjusted [5].
In Fig. 2, we present the bunch
length as measured by the zero-phasing method [6], as a
function of current over the full operating range of the CE-
BAF accelerator. One observes a roughly constant bunch
length between 150 and 200 fsec (45 and 60 µm). This
value is matched well enough that the extracted single
bunch energy spread is less than 1.5 × 10−5.

)
s
f
(
 
h
t
g
n
e
l
 
h
c
n
u
b

250

200

150

100

50

0

0

50

100

150

Beam current (µµµµA)

σE/E = qσ2

E,inj /E 2 + σ4

Φ/2,

where σE and σE,inj are the rms energy spreads after ac-
celeration and at injection, respectively, and σΦ is the rms
phase spread at injection. The ﬁrst term damps as energy
is increased because the initial spread becomes a smaller
part of the total, whereas the ﬁnal term does not depend
on the energy because both energy and energy spread ac-
cumulate at the same rate due to a non-zero bunch length.
Given a certain longitudinal emittance from the source ǫl
and the ﬁnal energy, there is an optimum energy spread of
σE/E = p3/2(ǫl/E)2/3 at the optimal injected bunch
length of σΦ,opt = (ǫl/E)1/3. A typical measured value
for ǫl is 6.7 keV ◦, yielding an optimal energy spread of
1.16×10−5 at 4 GeV, with a bunch length of σΦ = 0.18◦ =
320 fsec. A primary function of the injector is to provide a

Figure 2: Bunch Length vs. Beam Current out of Injector

What are the effects associated with breaking the as-
sumption of ideal phasing? In an analysis that was used to
set tolerances for the RF controls [7, 8, 9], it was demon-
strated that as long as: (1) the uncorrelated amplitude errors
in the cavities were under 2 × 10−4, (2) the uncorrelated
phase ﬂuctuations in the cavities were under several tenths
of a degree, (3) the phasor sum of the gradients obtained
from each cavity is purely real, and (4) the thermal drifts
along the linac were stabilized to an error less than 2.6◦,
then the resulting energy ﬂuctuations in the beam would be
less than 2.5 × 10−5 for an assumed bunch length of 0.3◦.
Another way of stating condition (3) is that for each pass

through the accelerator, one would like to arrive at the time
that provides the crest energy for the whole linac. Next, we
discuss how this condition is achieved in practice.

4 PATH LENGTH AND M56

Suppose for the moment that the phase of one pass through
one linac was off crest by Φe radians. Then the relative
energy spread generated by this error is σe/E = σΦΦe/10,
the factor of ten appearing because we have assumed one
linac pass is not phased properly out of ten linac passes
total. To have the resulting energy spread at 10 ppm, one
needs the phase error to be less than 35 mrad = 2◦ for a
bunch length of 300 fsec.

Likewise, suppose that we require less than 10% growth
in the bunch length going through each arc of CEBAF. By
a statistical argument, there will be less than 30% bunch
length growth after going through the nine arcs of the CE-
BAF accelerator. Given a beam energy spread less than
10−4, the M56 of the arcs should not exceed 10 cm, a fairly
weak limitation.

Presently, the apparatus in routine use to perform this
measurement is based on measuring the time-of-arrival of
each separate beam pass with a longitudinal pickup cavity
tuned to the beam fundamental, whose output is mixed with
the master oscillator in a phase detector arrangement [10].
The development of this device from ﬁrst experiments to
ﬁnal instrument is documented in several Particle Acceler-
ator Conference contributions [10, 11, 12]. Because only
relative times-of-arrival are required, the precision of the
method is very high. With 4.2 µsec 4 µA beam pulses, a
precision of 0.1◦ = 185 fsec is routinely achieved. Such
precision is clearly sufﬁcient for setting the path length,
and allows M56 of the arcs to be determined to under 3 cm
by an energy modulation experiment where the energy is
changed by 2 × 10−3.

5 MASTER OSCILLATOR
MODULATION SYSTEM

There is a signiﬁcant limitation in the present system used
to set the path length. Path length checks must be done in-
vasively to normal beam delivery, by going into a pulsed
beam mode.
It would be far better to have a method to
monitor the linac phases, including higher passes, contin-
uously and accurately. During the last few years a system
has been developed that will allow continuous monitoring
and cresting of the linacs on all passes [13]. This system
had its origin in an automatic beam-based linac cresting
routine [14], and it is already used routinely to set the ﬁrst
pass through each linac close to crest.

The system takes advantage of the CW electron beam
delivered by CEBAF and standard lockin techniques. It is
based on phase modulating the master reference going to
each of the linacs, at 383 Hz for measurements of the ﬁrst,
so-called north linac, and at 397 Hz for the south linac.
Simultaneously and coherently with the modulations, one

observes the position motion on a beam position monitor
(BPM) downstream of both linacs at a point of non-zero
dispersion. Linac cresting corresponds to zero output from
the BPM at the modulation frequency. Long integration
times permit cresting to be performed with high precision.
The required phase modulation is small enough that the en-
ergy spread generated by the dither remains small.

Table 2 summarizes the system parameters and perfor-
mance of the Master Oscillator Modulation system. Its per-
formance, especially in the next step in setting the higher
pass beams close to crest, should allow us to reduce the en-
ergy spread of the extracted beam by roughly a factor of
two.

Table 2: Master Oscillator Modulation System

Item
Modulation Amplitude
Modulation Frequencies
Sensitivity
Operating Current
Dispersion at BPM
Measurement Precision

Value
0.05

383, 397
>6000

>2
1.4
<0.1

Unit

1497 MHz ◦

Hz
µV /◦
µA
m

1497 MHz ◦

6 FAST FEEDBACK SYSTEM

As mentioned in the introduction, sources of bunch energy
centroid ﬂuctuations are corrected by a fast digital feedback
system [15]. The system corrects beam position and energy
near the targets of the nuclear physics experiments utiliz-
ing energy measurements obtained from the bend magnets
which deliver the beam to the various halls, see Fig. 1. The
system is capable of suppressing beam motion in the fre-
quency band from 0 to 80 Hz and also performs narrow
band suppression at the ﬁrst twelve power line harmon-
ics. The system operates with a 2.1 kHz sampling rate and
utilizes two VME board computers to compute the correc-
tions. Energy corrections are fed back as analogue signals
to the gradient set points in the RF controls of a few cavities
in the linac called vernier cavities.

For the standard optics in CEBAF, the horizontal disper-
sion is maximum in the middle of the bend magnets deliv-
ering the beam to the halls. Its value is approximately 4 m,
meaning position ﬂuctuations at 10 ppm correspond to 40
µm of beam motion. The feedback system suppresses the
ﬂuctuations to around 20 µm, limited by BPM noise [15].
The beam noise to be corrected is primarily at frequencies
of 60 Hz and its ﬁrst few harmonics.

Because the energy information is so closely tied to the
magnetic ﬁelds in the beam delivery lines to the halls, a
question arises about the stability of the magnetic ﬁelds
themselves at the 10−5 level. The total magnetic ﬁeld at
several points within the magnets have been veriﬁed to be
stable to 10 ppm, and the power supplies deliver current
having similarly small ﬂuctuations. Recently, we have in-
stalled a magnetic ﬂux loop monitor through the dipole

strings to the halls. This monitor will provide better quan-
titative information than we currently possess on residual
ﬂuctuations in the magnets, and will be able to address the
issue of magnet stability directly.

7 ENERGY SPREAD DIAGNOSTICS

The accelerator is equipped with slow wire scanners us-
ing 22 µm diameter tungsten wires. Beam proﬁles for
currents in the 2 to 5 µA range can be accurately mea-
sured once a minute with such scanners. More recently,
we have developed a proﬁle monitor that can measure even
the most intense beams using forward optical transition ra-
diation (OTR) [16, 17]. A very thin (1/4 µm) carbon foil
inserted into the beam path is not invasive to physics exper-
iments for most CEBAF energies and currents. Presently,
OTR monitors are installed in each of the Experimental
Hall A and C beam transport lines at the high dispersion
points of the beam optics. These monitors provide the ex-
periments and the accelerator with 5 Hz measurement rates
for each instrument by using a common image process-
ing hardware. A dedicated software, developed under the
EPICS [18] control system, multiplexes up to four video
input channels connected to a single MaxVideo image pro-
cessing board [19]. The global processing speed is 10 Hz,
5 Hz for each of the two OTR monitors. The Hall A OTR
measures beams in the 1 to 180 µA operational range; in
Hall C, the dynamic range extends down to 0.1 µA. The
resolution of these monitors is limited by the CCD camera
to about 2 pixels. This amounts to approximately 70 µm of
rms beam size.

200

m
µ

150

 

n
i
 
s
e
z
i

 

S
m
a
e
B
 
s
m

r

100

50

0

H oriz ont al beam siz e 

Vert ical Beam Siz e

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Beam Current in µA

Figure 3: Beam Size vs. Beam Current at high dispersion
point in beam delivery line.

Fig. 3 shows that the energy spread is relatively stable
and below 4 × 10−5 for a wide range of beam currents.
The horizontal size, measured at the 4 m dispersion point,
is mostly due to the energy spread. Neglecting the beta-
tron beam size, 40 µm, and the camera resolution, 70 µm,

overestimates the actual energy spread by less than 25%.

Continuous small energy spread became an operational
requirement at CEBAF in Dec. 1999, for a hypernuclear
experiment housed in Hall A, and continued until May
2000 with a similar experiment in Hall C. Both experi-
ments ran simultaneously during one month last March,
with 2-pass beam for Hall A and a 4-pass beam for Hall
C. Delivering two beams with tight energy spread and en-
ergy stability requirements instead of one proved demand-
ing. The energy requirements for each experiment were
similar: dp/p ≤ 5 × 10−5, with energy stability better than
1 × 10−4. In addition, Hall A needed the transverse beam
sizes at the target to be less than 200 µm but greater than
100 µm and a beam position stable within 250 µm.

The energy spread requirements have been routinely
achieved for the hall under feedback control. Because the
feedback system can correct the energy ﬂuctuations only in
a single hall as presently conﬁgured, there were uncertain-
ties that the spread in the other hall would remain small.
Fig. 4 shows energy spreads and relative energies in the
Hall C beam recorded over a 2-week period, with Hall C
transport line providing the energy corrections to the en-
ergy feedback system. Small energy spreads were deliv-
ered throughout the period to Hall C, however drifts led
to energy spread increases in the Hall A beam, as seen in
Fig. 5.

Hall C Beam 

X Position => relative energy

rms X width => Energy Spread

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0

dE/E = 1E-4

m
m
n

 

i
 

 

X
a
m
g
i
s
 
d
n
a
X

 

23-Mar

25-Mar

27-Mar

29-Mar

31-Mar

2-Apr

4-Apr

Time

Figure 4: Horizontal position and size of Hall C beam dur-
ing delivery period. Note that the Hall C beam line pro-
vided the energy locking data.

Throughout the experiments in either hall, the energy
spread and stability of both beams were continuously
recorded. The OTR monitors have been critical in this task.
They were initially too cumbersome to be easily used by all
operator crews. The implementation of scripts that periodi-
cally check and adjust the camera illumination, that initial-
ize the image processing board according to the beam, and
that set a “data valid” ﬂag quickly improved the instrument
availability to 95% [19]. After these improvements, the

m
m
n

 

i
 

 

X
a
m
g
i
s
 

d
n
a
X

 

Hall A Energy spread and Energy Stability for 2 Weeks

X position => relative Energy

rms X Width => Energy spread

dE/E = 1E-4

dE/E  = 5E -5

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0

23-Mar

25-Mar

27-Mar

29-Mar

31-Mar

2-Apr

4-Apr

Time

Figure 5: Horizontal position and size of Hall A beam dur-
ing delivery period. Note the degradation of the spread with
time due to uncorrected drifts. Even with drifts, the spread
is remarkably small.

machine crews were able to correct quickly unacceptable
energy spreads, usually without interrupting beam delivery.
We are planning to improve the energy spread monitor-
ing for two reasons: 1) At lower energies (<1.2 GeV), the
beam current had to be lowered to under 50 µA to have ac-
ceptable radiation levels on sensitive beam-line equipment.
2) Experiments scheduled in 2002 require monitoring an
energy spread of 2 × 10−5. As an alternate to OTR moni-
toring, we are planning to use synchrotron light beam mon-
itoring, which is less invasive to the experimenters. How-
ever, the resolution of such a device is limited to about 100
µm in the visible using the bending magnets of the hall
transport lines. We are starting a development effort in or-
der to reach about 30 µm resolution utilizing the UV syn-
chrotron emission.

8 CONCLUSIONS

We have demonstrated the ability of a CEBAF-type accel-
erator to produce beams with small energy spreads over
long periods of time. We ensure that the energy spread re-
mains small by: (1) ensuring the bunch length out of the
injector is small, (2) ensuring that the beam remains close
to the crest phase on each separate pass (soon continuously
and automatically!), and (3) providing continuous fast cor-
rection of 60 cycle harmonic noise on the beam. We have
developed beam diagnostic devices to continuously moni-
tor and record beam conditions with 5 Hz update rates us-
ing digitization of multiple video monitors.

9 REFERENCES

[1] R. Abbott, et. al., “Design, Commissioning, and Operation
of the Upgraded CEBAF Injector”, Proc. of the 1994 Linac
Conf., 777 (1994)

[2] G. A. Krafft, “Correcting M56 and T566 to obtain very short
bunches at CEBAF”, Proc. of the Microbunches Workshop,
AIP Conference Proceedings 367, 46 (1996)

[3] C. G. Yao, “A New Scheme for Measuring the Length of Very
Short Bunches at CEBAF”, Proc. of the 1990 Beam Instru-
mentation Workshop, AIP Conference Proceedings 229, 254
(1990)

[4] G. A. Krafft, “Status of the Continuous Electron Beam Ac-

celerator Facility”, Proc. of the 1994 Linac Conf., 9 (1994)

[5] R. Kazimi, C. K. Sinclair, and G. A. Krafft, “Setting and Mea-
suring the Longitudinal Optics in CEBAF Injector”, these
proceedings

[6] D. X. Wang, G. A. Krafft, and C. K. Sinclair, “Measurement
of Femtosecond Electron Bunches Using a RF Zero-phasing
Method”, Phys. Rev. E, 57, 2283 (1998)

[7] A detailed calculation is performed in an internal note,
G. A. Krafft, J. J. Bisognano, and R. Miller, “ Revised Energy
Spread Estimate”, CEBAF-TN-0050 (1987). A similar calcu-
lation is performed in L. Merminga and G. A. Krafft, “Energy
Spread from RF Amplitude and Phase Errors”, Proc. of the
1996 European Part. Acc. Conf., 756 (1996)

[8] G. A. Krafft, et. al., “Energy Vernier System for CEBAF”,
Proc. of the 1993 Part. Acc. Conf., 2364 (1993) summarizes
the results in the internal note [7] above.

[9] S. N. Simrock, et. al., “Operation of the RF Controls
the 2nd European

in the CEBAF Injector”, Proc. of
Part. Acc. Conf., 824 (1990)

[10] Y. Chao, et. al., “Commissioning and Operation Experience
with the CEBAF Recirculation Arc Beam Transport System”,
Proc. of the 1993 Part. Acc. Conf., 587 (1993)

[11] G. A. Krafft, et. al., “Measuring and Adjusting the Path
Length at CEBAF”, Proc. of the 1995 Part. Acc. Conf., 2429
(1995)

[12] D. Hardy, et. al., “Automated Measurement of Path Length

and M56” Proc. of the 1997 Part. Acc. Conf., 2265 (1997)

[13] V. A. Lebedev, J. Musson, and M. G. Tiefenback, “High-
precision Beam-based RF Phase Stabilization at Jefferson
Lab”, Proc. of the 1999 Part. Acc. Conf., 1183 (1999)

[14] M. G. Tiefenback and K. Brown, “Beam-based Phase Mon-
itoring and Gradient Calibration of Jefferson Laboratory RF
Systems”, Proc. of the 1997 Part. Acc. Conf., 2271 (1997)

[15] R. Dickson and V. A. Lebedev, “Fast Digital Feedback Sys-
tem for Energy and Beam Position Stabilization”, Proc. of the
1999 Part. Acc. Conf., 646 (1999)

[16] P. Piot, et. al., “High Current CW Beam Proﬁle Monitors
Using Transition Radiation at CEBAF”, Proc. of the 1996
Beam Instrumentation Workshop, AIP Conference Proceed-
ings 390, 298-305 (1997)

[17] J.-C. Denard, et. al., “High Power Beam Proﬁle Moni-
tor with Optical Transition Radiation”, Proc. of the 1997
Part. Acc. Conf., 2198 (1997) Vancouver, BC.

[18] L. Dalesio, et. al., Proc. Int. Conf. on Accelerators and
Large Experimental Physics Control Systems (ICALEPS),
278 (1992)

[19] D. Hardy, et. al., “Multivideo Source Image Processing for
Beam Proﬁle Monitoring System”, Proc. of the 2000 Beam
Instrumentation Workshop, AIP proceedings to be published.

