0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
7
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
4
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC-AAS-97
KEK-ATF-11
October 2000

Bunch Length Measurements at the
ATF Damping Ring in April 2000 1

K.L.F. Bane,

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford,

CA 94309, USA

T. Naito, T. Okugi, and J. Urakawa

High Energy Research Organization (KEK), Oho 1-1, Tsukuba,

Ibaraki, Japan

1Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

1

Bunch Length Measurements at the
ATF Damping Ring in April 2000

K.L.F. Bane, T. Naito, T. Okugi, and J. Urakawa

1

Introduction

We want to accurately know the energy spread and bunch length depen-
dence on current in the ATF damping ring. One reason is to know the
strength of the impedance: From the energy spread measurements we know
whether or not we are above the threshold to the microwave instability, and
from the energy spread and bunch length measurements we ﬁnd out the ex-
tent of potential-well bunch lengthening (PWBL). Another reason for these
measurements is to help in our understanding of the intra-beam scattering
(IBS) eﬀect in the ATF. The ATF as it is now, running below design energy
and with the wigglers turned oﬀ, is strongly aﬀected by IBS. To check for
consistency with IBS theory of, for example, the measured vertical beam
size, we need to know all dimensions of the beam, including the longitudinal
one. But beyond this practical reason for studying IBS, IBS is currently a
hot research topic at many accelerators around the world (see e.g. Ref. [1]),
and the eﬀect in actual machines is not well understood. Typically, when
comparing theory with measurements fudge factors are needed to get agree-
ment (see e.g. Ref. [1]). With its strong IBS eﬀect, the ATF is an ideal
machine for studying IBS, and an indispensable ingredient for this study is
a knowledge of the longitudinal phase space of the beam.

The results of earlier bunch lengthening measurements in the ATF can
be found in Refs. [2]-[4]. Measurements of current dependent eﬀects, espe-
cially bunch length measurements using a streak camera, can be diﬃcult
to perform accurately. For example, space charge in the camera itself can
lead to systematic errors in the measurement results. It is important the
results be accurate and reproducible. In the measurements of both Decem-
ber 1998[3] and December 1999[4], by using light ﬁlters, the authors ﬁrst
checked that space charge in the streak camera was not signiﬁcant. And
then the Dec 99 authors show that their results agree with those Dec 98,
i.e. on the dates of the two measurements the results were reproducible.

2

Since IBS is so strong in the ATF, in the Dec 99 measurements an
attempt was made to estimate the impedance eﬀect using the following
method: First, from the form of the energy spread vs. current measure-
ments it was concluded that the threshold to the microwave instability was
beyond 2 mA. Then, by dividing the bunch length vs. current curve by
the energy spread vs. current curve the eﬀect of IBS was divided out, and
PWBL was approximated. The assumption is that PWBL can be treated as
a perturbation on top of IBS. The result was that this component of bunch
lengthening was found to grow by 7-15% (depending on the rf voltage) be-
tween the currents of .5 mA and 2 mA, about a factor of 3 less than the total
bunch length growth. The conclusion was that the inductive component of
the impedance was small, in fact much smaller than had been concluded
earlier in Ref. [2].

Electron machines generally run in a parameter regime where IBS is an
insigniﬁcant eﬀect, and impedance measurements and calculations have also
normally been performed for machines where IBS is unimportant. To sim-
plify the interpretation of the impedance from bunch length measurements,
in April 2000 the energy spread and bunch length measurements of Dec
99 were repeated, but now with the beam on a linear (diﬀerence) coupling
resonance, where the horizontal and vertical emittances were approximately
equal. For this case the eﬀect of IBS was expected to be very small. An
energy spread vs. current measurement under such conditions will also al-
low us to more clearly see whether we reach the threshold to the microwave
instability. As part of the April data taking we, in addition, repeated the
earlier oﬀ-coupling measurements, in order to check the reproducibility of
the earlier results. In this report we present and analyze this recent set of
data, and compare it with the results of the earlier measurements, particu-
larly those of Dec 99.

The measurements and analysis of data in this report follow essentially
the same procedure as was used in Ref. [4]. In the present report we will
try to be relatively brief. The comparison of our results with IBS theory
will be given in a following report. For more details about the measurement
and analysis techniques presented in this report, the reader should consult
Ref. [4].

2 Energy Spread Measurements

Energy spread vs. current measurements were performed on March 21-22,
2000, with the beam both on and oﬀ the coupling resonance, for rf volt-

3

ages of Vc = 150 kV and 300 kV. As usual the beam width is measured
after extraction on a thin screen in a dispersive region. The data is ﬁt to a
Gaussian, yielding the rms energy spread σδ (see Fig. 1). (For these mea-
surements the energy spread was not calibrated, but from earlier experience
we expect the zero value results to be near 5.5 × 10−4, which allows us to
estimate the scaling factor.) In the ﬁgure the points in the plots are ﬁt to
y = 5.5(1 + a · xb).

Figure 1: Energy spread as a function of current for various values of cavity
voltage. The measurements were performed on 3/21-22/00. The curves give
a simple ﬁt to the data.

We note from Fig. 1 that, as expected, on the coupling resonance the
energy spread is almost independent of current, only increasing by 3-4%
by 2.5 mA. With the vertical beam size enlarged, the eﬀect of intra-beam
scattering becomes small. Oﬀ the coupling resonance the change by 2.5 mA
is 35-40%. We also note in (a) and (b) that there is no evidence of the
threshold to the microwave instability, whose signature would be a kink in
the data.
If there is no microwave instability on resonance, then almost
certainly there is no microwave instability oﬀ resonance, since in the latter
case the longitudinal phase space volume is increased, which tends to sta-
bilize the beam. Finally, note that the 150 kV and 300 kV on-resonance
results are statistically identical, as would be expected in the case of no mi-

4

crowave instability and negligible intra-beam scattering. Note also that for
the oﬀ-resonance results the energy spread is slightly larger for the higher
voltage. This would be expected, since a higher voltage means a smaller
bunch length, which increases intra-beam scattering, which, in turn, more
increases the energy spread.

The measurements were repeated for the nominal (oﬀ-resonance, Vc =
300 kV) settings on April 13 and 14 (see Fig. 2), just before and after the
bunch length measurements to be presented in the next section. We note
that the results of the two measurements are essentially the same, and they
are also essentially identical to the March results with the beam oﬀ-resonance
and Vc = 300 kV (Fig. 1c). This indicates that the machine conditions, as
concerns intra-beam scattering (the horizontal and vertical beam sizes; the
lattice), are the same during all these measurements, as well as during the
oﬀ-coupling, bunch length measurements presented below.

Figure 2: Energy spread as a function of current oﬀ-resonance, at Vc = 150
and 300 kV. Measurements were performed April 13 (a) and 14 (b).

Finally, in Fig. 3 we compare the ﬁts to the Vc = 150 and 300 kV,
oﬀ-coupling measurements with those to measurements—under the same
conditions—taken in Dec 99 and presented in Ref. [4]. We note that the
corresponding curves for the two dates are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. For ex-
ample, for Vc = 300 kV and I = 1 mA the new results are 8% higher than
the earlier results. This suggests that (when oﬀ coupling) the machine, con-
cerning intra-beam scattering, was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for the two dates.

5

Figure 3: Fits to the March, oﬀ-resonance energy spread measurements,
for Vc = 150 and 300 kV, compared to results of Dec 99 (the dashed curves).

3 Bunch Length Measurements

For the streak camera measurements ﬁrst, to make sure that space charge in
the camera itself was not a problem, tests were made at the highest current
(2.5 mA) with diﬀerent light ﬁlters, and an appropriate ﬁlter was chosen.
Then, the main data taking process consisted of storing a high current beam
and measuring the longitudinal bunch proﬁle ∼ 50 − 70 times at ﬁxed time
intervals, while the current naturally decreased. Each trace, along with its
DCCT current reading, was automatically saved to disk. To let in more
light at the lower currents the light ﬁlter was automatically switched half-
way through each data taking sequence. Measurements were performed with
the beam on and oﬀ the coupling resonance, and with 4 diﬀerent settings of
rf voltage.

As before the streak camera traces were ﬁt to an asymmetric Gaussian,

given by

λz =

A

√2πσ0

exp(cid:20)−

1
2

(z − ¯z)2
0(1 ± t)2(cid:21)
σ2

z ≷ ¯z

,

(1)

with the convention that more negative values of z are more to the front of
the bunch. The ﬁtting constants are A, σ0, ¯z, and the asymmetry factor t
(a constant, platform oﬀset is also included in the ﬁt). Note that the full-
width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the ﬁt is zf whm = 2√2 ln 2 σ0 and the
rms bunch length σz = σ0p1 + (3 − 8/π)t2. For small t, σz ≈ σ0. The skew
z , is given by s ≈ 4t/√2π, for small
moment, deﬁned by s = h(z − hzi)3i/σ3
t. Note also that from physical considerations, we generally expect t > 0,
i.e. the leading edge of the distribution to be steeper than the trailing edge.

6

Four example scans, with their ﬁts, are shown in Fig. 4. We note that the
ﬁts are reasonably good, though we see some, what are likely anomalous,
deviations from the ﬁts in the data. We have lots of data and we will use
the statistical Method of Maximum Likelihood to do the error analysis[5].

Figure 4: Four example scans, and their asymmetric Gaussian ﬁts, for the
beam on the coupling resonance with Vc = 250 kV. The horizontal axis has
been shifted so that all peaks are at z = 0.

The results for the beam on the coupling resonance and for rf voltages
Vc = 150, 200, 250, 300 kV are given in Figs. 5-8, and for the beam oﬀ
the coupling resonance in Figs. 9-12. Shown are the parameters of the
asymmetric Gaussian ﬁt to the measured proﬁles: the area (a), the rms
σ0 (b), the asymmetry factor t (c), and an estimate of the relative rms
error in the ﬁt (d). Plots (a)-(c) give the zeroth, the second, and the third
moments of the charge distribution. The line in (b) is a straight line ﬁt
to the bunch length, where each data point has been weighted inversely by
the variance in the ﬁt to the asymmetric Gaussian [note that for the ﬁt
y = x · mf it + bf it]. The line in (c) is a straight line ﬁt to y = x · mf it.
In the (a) part of the ﬁgures we note that the area is roughly propor-
tional to current—with the constant of proportionality diﬀerent for the low
and the high current results due to the two diﬀerent light ﬁlters used—
though with some scatter in the data. In (b) we note that the scatter in the
measured bunch lengths is quite signiﬁcant, especially at the lower currents,

7

Figure 5: Bunch length as function of current for the beam on the coupling
resonance and Vc = 150 kV. Given are the parameters of the asymmetric
Gaussian ﬁt to the measured proﬁles. The lines in the plots are straight line
ﬁts to the results (with zero oﬀset in the case of the asymmetry parameter).

Figure 6: Bunch length as function of current for the beam on the coupling
resonance and Vc = 200 kV.

8

Figure 7: Bunch length as function of current for the beam on the coupling
resonance and Vc = 250 kV.

Figure 8: Bunch length as function of current for the beam on the coupling
resonance and Vc = 300 kV.

9

Figure 9: Bunch length as function of current for the beam oﬀ the coupling
resonance and Vc = 150 kV.

Figure 10: Bunch length as function of current for the beam oﬀ the coupling
resonance and Vc = 200 kV.

10

Figure 11: Bunch length as function of current for the beam oﬀ the coupling
resonance and Vc = 250 kV.

Figure 12: Bunch length as function of current for the beam oﬀ the coupling
resonance and Vc = 300 kV.

11

with an rms deviation from the straight line ﬁt varying from .35-.80 mm.
In (c) we see even more scatter in the asymmetry factor. We expect this
parameter to start at zero, and to increase with increasing current, and the
data does seem to support an increasingly positive asymmetry factor with
current. The results are near .1/mA, and slightly decrease with voltage. We
will show in a future ATF report that this parameter gives us information
about the higher mode losses and the real part of the impedance. Note
that the measured asymmetry factors oﬀ-resonance are about half of those
on-resonance, qualitatively consistent with the bunch being longer, and the
higher mode losses being less, when oﬀ-resonance. Finally, in (d) we note
that the relative rms error in the ﬁt to the asymmetric Gaussian is ∼4-10%.
There is more noise than in the measurements of Dec 99, reﬂected in the
fact that the ﬁts then were twice as good.

3.1 Comparisons and Discussion

In Fig. 13 we reproduce the linear ﬁts to the bunch length parameter for the
measurements with the beam oﬀ the coupling resonance (the solid lines).
Note that these ﬁts are not valid below I . .4 mA, where there is no data;
in fact, the bunch lengths are expected to drop below these lines for lower
currents. In (a) the results are compared with the on-coupling results; in (b)
with oﬀ-coupling results of Dec 99. In all cases the bunch length curves move
up as the voltage moves down, as expected. Also, in (a) the bunch length
is larger oﬀ the coupling resonance than on, due to the eﬀect of intra-beam
scattering, as expected.

We expect σz(0), for Vc = 200 kV, to be 6.2 mm. For the case of on-
resonance, we ﬁnd the value at the origin of the curves to be 3.7%, 10.4%,
4.6%, 5.0% larger than the zero value calculation for Vc = 150, 200, 250,
300 kV, respectively. For the case of oﬀ-resonance the values are 4.5%, 6.4%,
15.3%, 27.1% larger than the zero value calculations. We expect the real
bunch lengths to follow curves with negative curvature, so an overshoot is
not unexpected. Note that these overshoots are signiﬁcantly less than the
∼ 35% for the Dec 99 results (see Fig. 13b), which, at the time, made us
suspect a scaling error in the streak camera results.
In Sec. 2 we saw that, for the on-coupling case, the energy spread was
almost independent of current. For example, by I = 2 mA the energy
spread has grown by only 3%. Here we see that at I = 2 mA the bunch
length has grown by 33-39%, depending on the rf voltage. Since IBS on
the coupling resonance is very weak, this growth must be almost entirely
due to PWBL. Thus, it appears that, after all, PWBL is a big factor in the

12

Figure 13:
Linear ﬁts to measurements with the beam oﬀ the coupling
resonance (solid lines). The curves represent results for Vc = 150 kV, 200 kV,
250 kV, and 300 kV. The dashes in (a) are the on-coupling results; those
in (b) are results of Dec 99. Note that for each case the bunch length
monotonically decreases as the voltage is increased.

ATF, and the machine must have a large inductive component of impedance.
Note that this conclusion is diﬀerent from that reached in Dec 99, where
PWBL was estimated by dividing the bunch lengthening oﬀ-resonance by
the energy spread growth. There it was found, for example, that the PWBL
contribution to the bunch length at 2 mA, divided by the contribution at
.5 mA, ranged from 7-15% depending on voltage. Here the equivalent (on-
coupling) results range from 18-26%, a marked diﬀerence. Or, if we try to
compare the present on and oﬀ-coupling results using the same prescription,
we ﬁnd that oﬀ-coupling the results are increases of 21.4% and 6.1%, for
respectively the case Vc = 150 and 300 kV; on-coupling the results are 23.5%
and 20.1%. These also don’t agree.
In making the earlier approximate
calculation of PWBL we had assumed that PWBL can be treated as a
perturbation on top of IBS. That is, we assumed that (1) PWBL doesn’t
aﬀect IBS signiﬁcantly and (2) the bunch length increase due to PWBL can
be added on top of that due to IBS, and the result would be similar whether
on or oﬀ resonance. It appears that these assumptions taken together are
wrong and the interaction of IBS and PWBL is, in fact, more complicated.
In Fig. 13b we note that the new oﬀ-coupling results are very diﬀerent
from those of Dec 99. We saw in Sec. 2 above that the energy spread vs.
current was diﬀerent for the two measurement days, presumably due to a
diﬀerence in the IBS eﬀect, so we would expect diﬀerences also in bunch
length, since it is also aﬀected by IBS. In addition the bunch length (below

13

threshold) is aﬀected by the impedance through PWBL. To say more, quan-
tatively, about such measurements we would need a better understanding of
how IBS and PWBL interact and, in addition, a knowledge of the transverse
beam sizes and optics on the days of the measurements.

4 Conclusions

We have performed energy spread and bunch length measurements with
the beam on and oﬀ the coupling resonance. Our energy spread results
show that, with the beam on-resonance, the eﬀect of intra-beam scattering
is small, and that the threshold to the micro-wave instability is beyond
2.5 mA. Our on-resonance bunch length results show that potential well
bunch lengthening is large—by 2 mA the bunch has lengthened by 33-39%—
indicating that the impedance has a large inductive component.

Our energy spread and bunch length measurements with the beam oﬀ-
resonance give results that are very diﬀerent from those of Dec 99. This
suggests that the horizontal and vertical emittances and/or the lattice were
diﬀerent than during the earlier measurements, resulting in a diﬀerent intra-
beam scattering eﬀect. These measurements should be repeated both on
and oﬀ the coupling resonance, under the same conditions—veriﬁable by
ﬁnding the same energy spread vs.
current curves—to see if the bunch
length measurements are reproducible. We have assumed here that the
streak camera measurements are suﬃciently accurate for our purposes. The
results appear to be consistent, but we have no independent way of checking
their accuracy. (We might suggest installing in the ATF, sometime in the
future, a bunch length measuring apparatus that works in a completely
diﬀerent way, such as the spectrum approach of Ref. [6], as an independent
check on the streak camera results.)

In the future, when doing any such current-dependent measurements
the energy spread vs. current measurement should always be performed,
as a speciﬁer of the intra-beam scattering machine conditions, and since it
is a rather quick and simple measurement. To study speciﬁcally impedance
questions, measurements should be performed with the beam on the coupling
resonance, where intra-beam scattering is very weak. With the beam oﬀ-
resonance, bunch length and energy spread measurements are important
ingredients, along with the horizontal and vertical emittances and optics, for
attempting a full understanding of intra-beam scattering and its interaction
with the impedance in the ATF damping ring.

14

5 Acknowledgements

One of the authors (K.B.) thanks the ATF scientists and staﬀ for their
hospitality and help during his visits to the ATF, and M. Ross for his en-
couragement and support to make such visits.

References

[1] C. Kim, “A Three-Dimensional Touschek Scattering Theory,” LBL-

42305, September 1998.

[2] H. Hayano, et al, “Impedance Measurement of ATF DR,” Proc. of

EPAC 1998, Stockholm, Sweden, May 1998, p. 481.

[3] K. Bane, et al, “Bunch Lengthening and Current-Dependent Energy

Spread at ATF,” ATF Report 98-38, December 1998.

[4] K. Bane, T. Naito, T. Okugi, “Bunch Length Measurements at the ATF

Damping Ring in 1999,” ATF Report 00-05, May 2000.

[5] See, for example, P. Bevington and K. Robinson, Data Reduction and
Error Analysis for the Physical Sciences, Second Edition, (McGraw-
Hill, Inc., New York, 1992).

[6] T. Ieiri, “Measurement of Bunch Length Based on Beam Spectrum
at KEKB Rings,” Proc. of EPAC 2000, Vienna, Austria, June 2000,
p. 1735.

15

