1
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
0
1
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC-AP-129
July 2000

On Resonant Multi-Bunch Wakeﬁeld Eﬀects in
Linear Accelerators with Dipole Mode Detuning ∗

Karl L.F. Bane and Zenghai Li
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94309

∗Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

On Resonant Multi-Bunch Wakeﬁeld Eﬀects in
Linear Accelerators with Dipole Mode Detuning

Karl L.F. Bane and Zenghai Li

In this report we explore resonant multi-bunch (transverse) wakeﬁeld
eﬀects in a linear accelerator in which the dipole modes of the accelerator
structures have been detuned. For examples we will use the parameters of
a slightly simpliﬁed version of an optimized S-band structure described in
Ref. [1]. Note that we are also aware of a diﬀerent analysis of resonant
multi-bunch wakeﬁeld eﬀect[2].

It is easy to understand how resonances can arise in a linac with bunch
trains. Consider ﬁrst the case of the interaction of the beam with one single
structure mode. The leading bunch enters the structure oﬀset from the axis
and excites the mode. If the bunch train is sitting on an integer resonance,
i.e. if f ∆t = n, with f the mode frequency, ∆t the bunch spacing, and n an
integer, then when the 2nd bunch arrives it will excite the mode at the same
phase and also obtain a kick due to the wakeﬁeld of the ﬁrst bunch. The
mth bunch will also excite the mode in the same phase and obtain (m − 1)
times the kick from the wakeﬁeld that the second bunch experienced (for
simplicity we assume the mode Q is inﬁnity). On the half-integer resonance,
i.e. when f ∆t = n + .5, the mth bunch will also receive kicks from the
wakeﬁeld left by the earlier bunches, but in this case the kicks will alternate
in direction, and no resonance builds up. For a transverse wakeﬁeld eﬀect,
such as we are interested in here, however, this simple description of the
resonant interaction needs to be modiﬁed slightly. For this case the wake
varies as sin(2πf t), and neither the integer nor the half-integer resonance
condition will excite any wakeﬁeld for the following bunches. In this case
resonant growth is achieved at a slight deviation from the condition f ∆t = n,
as is shown below.

In the following, for simplicity, we will use the “uncoupled” model to
investigate resonant eﬀects in the sum wake for a structure with modes with
a uniform frequency distribution. According to this model (see, for example,

2

Ref. [3])

Nc

Xn

W (t) ≈

2ksn sin(2πfsnt/c)

[t small],

(1)

where Nc is the number of cells in the structure, and fsn and ksn are, re-
spectively, the frequency and kick factor at the synchronous point, for a
periodic structure with dimensions of cell n. Therefore, one can predict
the short time behavior of the wake without solving for the eigenmodes of
the system. The point of using the uncoupled model is that it allows us to
study the eﬀect of an idealized, uniform frequency distribution. As is well
known, an ideal (input) frequency distribution becomes distorted by the
cell-to-cell coupling of an accelerator structure. (For simplicity we will drop
the s in the subscripts for frequency below.) For examples we will use the
parameters of a slightly simpliﬁed version (all kick factors are equal, the fre-
quency distribution is uniform instead of trapezoidal) of the optimized 3π/4
S-band structure described in Ref. [1]: there are Nc = 102 cells (also modes),
the central frequency ¯f = 3.92 GHz, and the full-width of the distribution
∆δf = 5.8%; for bunch structure we consider the nominal conﬁguration of
M = 95 bunches in a train and a bunch spacing ∆t = 2.4 ns. The re-
sults for the real structure, with coupled modes, will be slightly diﬀerent yet
qualitatively the same.

Consider ﬁrst the case of a structure with only one dipole mode, with
frequency f , and a kick factor that we will normalize (for simplicity) to 1/2.
Suppose there are M bunches in the bunch train. The sum wake at the mth
bunch is given by

S(1)

m (f ∆t) =

sin (2π[i − 1]f ∆t)

m

Xi=1
sin (π[m − 1]f ∆t) sin (πmf ∆t)
sin (πf ∆t)

=

.

(2)

As with the nominal (2.8 ns) bunch spacing in the S-band prelinacs, let us,
for an example, consider M = 95 bunches and the region near the 11th
harmonic. In Fig. 1 we plot f ∆t vs the sum wake for the M th (the last)
bunch, S(1)
M , near the 11th integer resonance. It can be shown that, if M is
not small, the largest resonance peaks (the extrema of the curve) are at

f ∆t ≈ n ±

[M not small]

,

(3)

with values ±.72M . Note that at the exact integer and half-integer resonant
spacings the sum wake is zero.

3
8M

3

Figure 1: The sum wake at the last bunch in a train vs bunch spacing, due
to a single mode (Eq. 2); M = 95 bunches.

Now let us consider a uniform distribution of mode frequencies. For
simplicity we will let all the kick factors be equal, and be normalized to 1/2.
The sum wake, according to the uncoupled model, becomes

Sm( ¯f ∆t) =

1
Nc

Nc

Xn=1

S(1)
m (cid:20)

¯f ∆t

(cid:18)

1 +

(n − Nc/2)
Nc

∆δf

(cid:19)(cid:21)

,

(4)

with Nc the number of cells (also the number of modes), ¯f the central fre-
quency, and ∆δf the total (relative) width of the frequency distribution.
As an example, let us consider the optimized 3π/4 S-band structure, with
Nc = 102 and ∆δf = 5.8%. The sum wake at the last (the M th) bunch
position, SM , is plotted as function of ¯f ∆t in Fig. 2. Note that the uni-
form frequency distribution appears to suppress the integer resonance. The
extrema of the curve (the “horns”) that are seen at ¯f ∆t = 11 ± .32 are res-
onances due to the edges of the frequency distribution, with the condition
¯f ∆t ≈ 11/(1 ± ∆δf /2). Note, however, that the sizes of even these spikes
are small compared to those of the single mode case.

Suppose we add frequency errors to our model. We can do this by, in
each term in the sum of Eq. 4, multiplying the frequency by the factor
(1 + δferrrn), with δferr the rms (relative) frequency error and rn a random

4

Figure 2: The sum wake at the last bunch in a train vs bunch spacing, due
to a uniform distribution of mode frequencies (Eq. 4). The total frequency
spread ∆δf = 5.8%, and Nc = 102.

number with rms 1. Doing this, considering a uniform distribution in fre-
quency errors with rms δferr = 10−4, Fig. 2 becomes Fig. 3. Note that this
perturbation is small compared to the frequency spacing 5.7 × 10−4, so it
does not really change the frequency distribution signiﬁcantly. Nevertheless,
because of resonance-like behavior we can see a large eﬀect on SM through-
out the range between the horns of Fig. 2 (10.68 ≤ ¯f ∆t ≤ 11.32). To model
cell-to-cell misalignments, we multiply each term in the sum of Eq. 4 by the
random factor rn. The results, for a uniform distribution of errors with rms
1, are shown in Fig. 4. Again resonance-like behavior is seen throughout the
range between the horns of Fig. 2.

We can understand these results in the following manner: Only when
there are no errors does using a uniform frequency distribution suppress the
resonance in the region near the integer resonance. But otherwise, using a
uniform frequency distribution basically only reduces the size of the reso-
nances, at the expense of extending the range in bunch spacings where they
Instead of being localized in the region near the integer
can be excited.
resonance ( ¯f ∆t ≈ n), resonance-like behavior can now be excited anywhere

5

Figure 3: The sum wake at the last bunch in a train vs bunch spacing, due
to a uniform distribution of frequencies, including frequency errors. The
total frequency spread ∆δf = 5.8%, the number of modes Nc = 102, and
rms relative frequency error is 10−4.

between the limits

( ¯f ∆t)± =

n
1 ∓ ∆δf /2

.

(5)

Note that this implies that if ∆δf > 1/( ¯f ∆t), then the resonance-like be-
havior cannot be avoided no matter what bunch spacing (fractional part) is
chosen. For example, for the X-band linac in the NLC, where the total width
of the dipole frequency distribution (of the dominant ﬁrst band modes) is
10%, even for the alternate (1.4 ns) bunch spacing, where the integer part
of ¯f ∆t is 21, the resonance region cannot be avoided.

The authors thanks V. Dolgashev for carefully reading this manuscript.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] K. Bane and Z. Li, “Dipole Mode Detuning in the Injector Linacs of the

NLC,” SLAC/LCC Note in preparation.

6

Figure 4: The sum wake at the last bunch in a train vs bunch spacing, due to
a uniform distribution of frequencies, including random misalignment errors
with rms 1. The total frequency spread ∆δf = 5.8% and then number of
modes Nc = 102.

[2] D. Schulte, presentation given in an NLC Linac meeting, summer 1999.

[3] K. Bane and R. Gluckstern, Part. Accel., 42, 123 (1994).

7

