1
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
1
5
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC-PUB-8846
May 2001

Impedance Analysis of Bunch Length
Measurements at the ATF Damping Ring∗

K.L.F. Bane, T. Naito‡ , T. Okugi‡, Q. Qin§, and J. Urakawa‡
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94309 USA.

Abstract

We present energy spread and bunch length measurements at the
Accelerator Test Facility (ATF) at KEK, as functions of current, for
diﬀerent ring rf voltages, and with the beam both on and oﬀ the
coupling resonance. We ﬁt the on-coupling bunch shapes to those of
an impedance model consisting of a resistor and an inductor connected
in series. We ﬁnd that the ﬁts are reasonably good, but that the
resulting impedance is unexpectedly large.

Presented at the 10th International Symposium on Applied
Electromagnetics and Mechanics (ISEM2001)
Toshi Center Hotel, Tokyo, Japan
May 13-16, 2001

∗Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515, and by the

Chinese National Foundation of Natural Sciences, contract 19975056-A050501.

‡High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), 1-1 Oho, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,

Japan.

§Institute of High Energy Physics (IHEP), Beijing, People’s Republic of China.

1 Introduction

In future e+e- linear colliders, such as the JLC/NLC, damping rings
are needed to generate beams of intense bunches with very low emit-
tances. A prototype for such damping rings is the Accelerator Test
Facility (ATF)[1] at KEK. One important consideration for such rings
is that the (broad-band) longitudinal impedance be kept suﬃciently
small, to avoid (longitudinal) emittance growth caused by potential
well distortion and/or the microwave instability. Measurements of en-
ergy spread and bunch length as functions of current are a way of
verifying the size of the impedance and its eﬀects. The ATF, as it
is now—running below design energy and with the wigglers turned
oﬀ—is strongly aﬀected by intra-beam scattering (IBS), an eﬀect that
modiﬁes all dimensions of the beam. To study the impedance eﬀects
alone, however, the machine can be run on a (diﬀerence) coupling res-
onance, where the vertical beam size grows and the IBS forces become
weak.

Calculations of the impedance of the ATF ring vacuum chamber
yield a total inductive component (at the typical bunch lengths) of
∼ 15 nH[2]; the dominant resistive component, the rf cavities, are ex-
pected to contribute ∼ 100 Ω. To obtain the impedance from bunch
shape measurements, if the data is noisy (as it will be in our case),
we need to ﬁt to a relatively simple model of impedance. A pure
resistor[3], a pure inductor[4], and a broad-band resonator[5] are all
impedance models that have been used to characterize the impedance
of storage rings. A simple model that can account for both poten-
tial well bunch lengthening and parasitic mode losses is a resistor
and an inductor connected in series. This model was used to analyze
bunch length measurements at CESR, where it appeared to ﬁt the
In this report we present bunch length measurements
data well[6].
at the ATF, we use this model to estimate the real and imaginary
parts of the ATF impedance, and then we compare our results with
the earlier estimates.

2 Measurements

To obtain the beam energy spread in the ATF damping ring, the
beam width is measured after extraction on a thin screen in a region
of high dispersion. In Fig. 1 we plot the measured rms energy spread
σδ vs. current I for peak rf voltage Vc = 300 kV, for the case of the

2

beam on resonance (a), and oﬀ (b). We note that, by I = 2.5 mA,
on the coupling resonance the energy spread growth is still very small
(3%), whereas oﬀ resonance it is not (36%). Note also that Fig. 1a im-
plies that the threshold to the microwave instability—whose signature
would be a kink in the data—must be beyond I = 2.7 mA.

Figure 1: Energy spread as function of current when the ring voltage Vc =
300 kV, with the beam on (a) and oﬀ (b) the coupling resonance.

The bunch length in the ATF ring was measured using a Hama-
matsu C5680 streak camera. The data taking process consists of stor-
ing a high current beam, and then measuring the longitudinal bunch
proﬁle 50-70 times at ﬁxed time intervals, while the current natu-
rally decreased. The proﬁles were stored to disk, along with their
DCCT current monitor readings. The measurements were repeated
for Vc = 150, 200, 250, 300 kV, and for the beam both on and oﬀ
the coupling resonance. Each trace was ﬁt to an asymmetric Gaus-
sian composed of two half-Gaussians with lengths σ(1 ± ǫ), where σ
is the rms bunch length and ǫ the asymmetry parameter. The pa-
rameters σ (ǫ) gives us information about the imaginary (real) part of
the impedance. Note that for the asymmetric Gaussian ǫ ≈ .63zskew,
where zskew is the skew moment of the distribution. Note also that we
expect the bunch to lean forward, which, in our convention, will mean
ǫ > 0. Instead of the 3rd moment we would prefer to use the 1st mo-
ment of the bunch distribution to probe the real part of the impedance;
the streak camera trigger, however, is not accurate enough to resolve
the kind of centroid shifts needed (on the order of picoseconds).

Results for Vc = 250 kV are shown in Fig. 2. We note that σ
increases with current, even on resonance (at 2mA the growth is 40%),
implying that there is signiﬁcant potential well distortion in the ATF.
Oﬀ-resonance, however, the growth is much larger (at 2mA, 72%),

3

Figure 2: Bunch length (σ) and asymmetry parameter (ǫ) of the asymmetric
Gaussian ﬁt to the measured bunch distributions, as functions of current, for
the beam on resonance (a,b) and oﬀ (c,d). Vc = 250 kV. The curves are ﬁts
to these results.

due to IBS. As for the asymmetry parameter, we see much scatter
in the data. We ﬁt the ǫ results with a straight line through the
origin (see Fig. 2b,d). On-resonance we ﬁnd that ǫ ≈ .1I/mA, and it
decreases slightly with Vc. Note that for all eight sets of measurements
(four voltages, both on and oﬀ the coupling resonance) the slopes are
positive, as we expect from physical considerations. Thus, despite the
large scatter in the data, there appears to be physical information in
the ﬁtted ǫ (or equivalently, the skew moment of the distribution) that
we can draw out through statistics. Finally, note that more details of
the bunch length measurements can be found in Ref.[7].

3 Ha¨ıssinski Solution for an R+L Impedance

To obtain the steady-state bunch distribution for a series R+L impedance
we begin with the Ha¨ıssinski equation[8]:

exp

(cid:18)

− z2
2σ2
z0

+ 1
V ′
rf σ2
z0

z
0 Vind(z′) dz′

(cid:19)

∞
−∞ exp

− z2
2σ2
z0

+ 1
V ′
rf σ2
z0

(cid:18)

z
0 Vind(z′) dz′

dz

(cid:19)

λ(z) =

R

,

(1)

R

R

4

where the induced voltage is given by

Vind(z) = −

W (z

)λ(z − z

) dz

,

′

′

′

(2)

∞

Z
0

with λ the bunch position distribution, z longitudinal position (z < 0
is toward the front of the bunch), V ′
rf the slope of the rf voltage at the
synchronous point, σz0 the nominal (zero current) bunch length, and
∞
−∞ λ(z)dz = 1. Eq. 1
W (z) the (point charge) wakeﬁeld. Note that
can be written as a ﬁrst order, non-linear diﬀerential equation

R

λ′
λ

= −

+

z
σ2
z0

Vind(z)
V ′
rf σ2
z0

.

For the special case of a resistive plus inductive impedance in series,
with resistance R and inductance L,

′
Vind = −eN c(Rλ + cLλ

)

.

For this case, Eq. 3 can be written in normalized units as

(3)

(4)

(5)

′

y

= −y

(x + ry)
(1 + ℓy)

,

where x = z/σz0, y(x) = λσz0. The normalized induced voltage v =
Vind/(V ′
rf σz0). Note that there are two free parameters in our equa-
tion: the (normalized) resistance times current, r = ecN R/(V ′
z0),
and the (normalized) inductance times current, ℓ = ec2N L/(V ′
z0).
To solve Eq. 5, we begin at a position x0 far in front of the bunch,
choose y(x0) (a small number), numerically solve the diﬀerential equa-
tion, and compute the total integral of y(x). We then iterate this
process, adjusting y(x0) until the integral equals 1.

rf σ2
rf σ3

Numerical results are shown in Fig. 3. In (a,b) we show represen-
tative bunch shapes and induced voltages for the example r + ℓ = 8;
in (c,d) we give the ﬁrst and second moments of the bunch shape, and
also the full-width-at-half-maximum zf whm, as functions of (r + ℓ).

4 Fitting to Bunch Length Measure-
ments

We ﬁt the on-coupling bunch length measurements to a0 + a1x +
a2yH(r, ℓ, xshif t, σz0), where yH is the Ha¨ıssinski solution to the R + L

5

For a series R + L impedance, the bunch shape (a) and the
Figure 3:
induced voltage (b) for example cases when r + ℓ = 8; the rms length of the
distribution (c) and the centroid shift (d)as functions of (r + ℓ). The dashes
in (c) give xf whm/2.355.

impedance. The ﬁtting parameters are a0, a1, a2, r, ℓ, and xshif t, a
centroid shifting parameter. We use the Method of Maximum Like-
lihood to do the error analysis, a method that assumes all errors are
purely random and normally distributed[9]. Fig. 4 shows four sample
ﬁts (here x is in the unshifted Ha¨ıssinski frame). We see some scatter
in the data, though the ﬁts are reasonably good.

In Fig. 5 we summarize the ﬁts for Vc = 250 kV. Shown are the
ﬁtting parameters ℓ (a) and r (b); the full-width (c) and centroid
position (d) of the ﬁtted distributions. In (a) and (b) the solid lines
are least squares ﬁts to the results, the dashed lines are least squares
ﬁts through the origin. We see that the least squares ﬁt for ℓ naturally
passes very close to the origin; the ﬁt for r, however, does not pass
so close, indicating that the resistive part of the model does not ﬁt
as well. (This observation is also true for the cases of the other rf
voltages.) Nevertheless, as our solution we take the least squares ﬁt
through the origin for both parameters (the dashes). The resulting
full-width and centroid shift are given by the dashes in (c,d). We
should note also that the ﬁtted values of a2, a parameter that should
be proportional to the bunch charge, correlated very well with the
actual DCCT current readings.

6

I= 1.9 mA

I= 1.0 mA

I= 1.5 mA

I= 0.5 mA

y

y

x

x

Four measured bunch shapes and their ﬁts to the Ha¨ıssinski
Figure 4:
solution of a series R + L impedance. Here Vc = 250 kV. Note that the head
of the beam is to the left.

In Table 1 we give a summary of the ﬁtting results for the four
diﬀerent voltages. From the scatter in the entries the overall results
are estimated to be: R = 1.25 ± .35 kΩ and L = 44.5 ± 7.5 nH.
When the measurements were repeated six months later, and a slightly
diﬀerent analysis was applied, the results were: R = 1.65 ± .20 kΩ and
L = 32.5 ± 1.0 nH.

Table 1: Fitting Summary.

Vc (kV) R (kΩ) L (nH)
54±.7
1.3±.05
50±.6
1.7±.05
39±.4
1.1±.04
35±.4
0.8±.04

150
200
250
300

5 Discussion

From Table 1 we note that the scatter in the results, for both R and
L, is much larger than the estimated errors, implying that there are

y

y

7

Figure 5: Fitting results for Vc = 250 kV: the ﬁtting parameters ℓ (a), r (b);
for the ﬁtted distributions, the full-width (c) and the centroid position (d).

signiﬁcant systematic errors or problems with the model. Systematic
errors might include problems with the streak camera, such as residual
space charge or aberrations in the optics. Error in the rf voltage, and
consequently in the parameter σz0, can also contribute to a systematic
error in the results, though we don’t think that this a signiﬁcant eﬀect.
To improve the ﬁt to the data (remember: the least squares ﬁt to the
ﬁtted r(I) deviated from the origin) a diﬀerent impedance model, such
as a broad-band resonator, can also be tried. Nevertheless, the ﬁts to
our model were fairly good and the results are reasonably consistent,
at least to ±(20-30)%.

The impedance values implied by our analysis are much larger than
expected: L is about a factor of 3 larger than earlier calculations, and
R is about a factor of 10 larger, a result that is especially puzzling.
To see whether there actually is such a large, resistive impedance
in the ATF, it is planned, in the near future, to directly measure
the beam synchronous phase shift with current using a synchroscan
streak camera, one whose timing is accurately tied to the rf system
timing. With such hardware, we believe that the expected 2-3 degree
phase shift (at 714 MHz) in going from high to low current should be
relatively easy to detect.

8

References

[1] F. Hinode, editor, KEK Internal 95-4 (1995).

[2] E.S. Kim, Proc. of the 1st Asian Particle Acc. Conf. (APAC98),

Tsukuba, Japan, 1998, 489.

[3] See, e.g., R. Holtzapple, SLAC-R-0487, PhD Thesis, June 1996.

[4] See, e.g., K. Bane, SLAC-PUB-5177, February 1990.
[5] See, e.g., A. Hoﬀman, et al, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., NS-26, No.

3, 3514 (1979).

[6] R. Holtzapple, et al, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams, 3:034401, 2000.

[7] K. Bane, et al, KEK-ATF Report 00-05, May 2000; T. Naito, et

al, KEK-ATF Report 01-01, January 2001.

[8] J. Ha¨ıssinski, Il Nuovo Cimento, 18B, No. 1, 72 (1973).

[9] See, e.g., P. Bevington and D. Robinson, Data Reduction and Er-
ror Analysis for the Physical Sciences, 2nd Ed., (McGraw-Hill,
Inc.) 1992.

9

