1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–8313
December 1999

NLC Extraction Line Studies∗

Y. M. Nosochkov and T. O. Raubenheimer
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract

In this note, we brieﬂy review the current lattice of the NLC extraction line which
was designed for the nominal NLC beam parameters [1, 2]. Then we describe
the beam parameters for the high luminosity option with larger beam disruption
parameter [3] and discuss its eﬀect on beam loss in the extraction line. Finally,
we present a summary of the optics study aimed at minimizing the beam loss
with high disruption beams.

∗Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

1 Introduction

In a linear collider, the rate of colliding bunches tends to be low when compared with a
colliding beam storage ring. Fortunately, because the beams are not stored, the disruptive
eﬀect of the beam-beam forces is not a dynamical limitation and thus the beams can be
focused to very small spot sizes to attain the high charge densities necessary to achieve the
desired luminosity. When the high energy electron and positron beams collide, the space
charge forces of the opposing beam cause large deﬂections. This has two eﬀects: ﬁrst,
the eﬀective beam emittance of the outgoing beam is increased due to the non-linearity of
the beam-beam force and, second, when the high energy particles are deﬂected, they can
radiate a signiﬁcant fraction of their energies as synchrotron radiation which is referred to
as beamstrahlung.

The NLC extraction line must be designed to transport this disrupted particle beam and
the beamstrahlung photons away from the interaction point (IP) to dumps. In addition, the
extraction line should provide diagnostics to fully instrument the collisions. This includes the
ability to measure the outgoing beam angle and position, measure the energy spectrum of the
outgoing beam, and measure the polarization of the outgoing beam. Because of the increased
angular divergence and energy spread of the disrupted beam, it is a very diﬃcult task to
capture this beam and control it suﬃciently well to make measurements of its properties.

In the next sections, we will review the present NLC design for the extraction line and
some of the studies that have been made to further improve the performance. Many details
of the present design are described in Ref. [4].

2 Current Lattice Design

The current lattice of the NLC extraction line is shown in Fig. 1. The magnet apertures are
designed to allow the outgoing main beam and beamstrahlung photons to be transported to
one shared dump at about 150 m from IP. The design provides 6 m of free space after IP to
avoid interference with the quadrupoles needed to focus the incoming beam.

The optics consists of two multi-quad systems in the beginning and at the end of the
beam-line, and a four-bend horizontal chicane in the middle. The ﬁrst set of quadrupoles
focuses the beam to a waist at the center of the horizontal chicane and then the second set
of quadrupoles creates a parallel beam at the dump. The chicane creates 2 cm of horizontal
dispersion at the secondary IP which will facilitate the measurement of the disrupted beam
energy spread from which one can infer the luminosity spectrum. In addition, the chicane
separates the particle beam from the core of the beamstrahlung photons which will allow
measurements of the photon distribution. Finally, the electron beam waist and chicane pro-
vide an ideal location to measure the beam polarization using a Compton laser polarimeter,
similar to the one developed for the SLC [5].

One of the main issues for the extraction line design is the minimization of beam loss;
this is necessary to control backgrounds in the detector as well as the instrumentation in the
extraction line. Most of the losses occur for the very low energy particles which experience
large deﬂections in the magnets. For the typical NLC beam parameters [1, 2], the beam-

2

Figure 1: Current lattice of the NLC extraction line (IP at s = 0).

beam collisions generate an extremely broad energy spread in the outgoing beams. The
spectrum at 500 GeV in the center-of-mass (cms) is narrower, but, with collisions at 1 TeV
cms, the spectrum is so wide that there is still a signiﬁcant number of electrons with energy
deviations δ = ∆p
p below -80% [6]. An example of the disrupted beam energy distribution
is shown in Fig. 2 which corresponds to the beam parameters with the largest disruption at
an energy of 1 TeV cms in the nominal NLC operation; these beam parameters are listed in
Table 1 and are referred to as the ‘NLC 1 TeV case A’ parameter set. In this paper, we will
refer to this case as the ‘nominal disruption’ case.

The low energy over-focusing in the extraction line is minimized with the use of alter-
nating gradient multiple quadrupole systems rather than simple doublets. The strength of

Figure 2: Energy distribution for the nominal disruption beam (NLC 1 TeV case A;
50,000 particles).

3

Table 1: IP parameters for the nominal disruption beam (NLC 1 TeV case A).

Beam parameter

Undisrupted Disrupted

Emittance (m·rad) [10−13]
rms beam size (nm)
rms divergence (µrad)
β∗ (mm)
α∗
Energy cms (GeV)
Particles per bunch
Bunches per train
Repetition rate (Hz)
Disruption parameter
Average energy loss per particle

x/y
39/0.59
198/2.7
20/22
10/0.125
0/0

x/y
120/1.02
198/3.2
125/33
3.259/0.103
1.805/0.306

1046
0.75 · 1010
95
120
0.094/6.9
9.5%

individual quadrupoles in these systems is reduced compared to the doublet. This results
in less over-focusing, smaller amplitude of the low energy particle oscillations and reduced
beam loss.

For the beam parameters in Table 1 and optimized quadrupole strengths, the beam power
losses in the extraction line are below 0.3 kW/m (see Fig. 3) with the total loss of 4.8 kW
or 0.25% particles; the energy distribution of the lost and survived particles is shown in
Fig. 4.
It should be noted that at a cms energy of 500 GeV, the losses are roughly an
order-of-magnitude smaller.

The azimuth distribution of particle loss is shown in Fig. 5, where θ = atan y

x and x, y
are the ﬁnal coordinates of the lost particles. Due to somewhat larger horizontal beam size
in the ﬁrst half of the extraction line, there are more losses in the x-plane (θ = 0, ±180◦)

Figure 3: Power loss distribution for the nominal disruption beam in the current lattice
(NLC 1 TeV case A).

4

Figure 4: Energy distribution for the lost (thick line) and survived (thin) nominal disruption
beam particles in the current lattice (NLC 1 TeV case A; 50,000 particles).

Figure 5: Azimuth distribution of lost particles (dots) for the nominal disruption beam
(NLC 1 TeV case A).

than in the y-plane (θ = ±90◦). Though not yet fully studied, it is hoped that this level of
beam loss can be safely absorbed without signiﬁcant complications.

3 High Disruption Beam

It has been reported recently that the NLC luminosity can be increased several times by
using near-equal horizontal and vertical beta functions at the IP [3]. In this scenario, the
undisrupted horizontal beam size at the IP is reduced and the vertical size is increased. The
latter has an additional advantage of much looser tolerances in the ﬁnal focus system. The
disadvantage of this scenario is a signiﬁcant increase in the angular beam divergence and
beam energy spread after the collision. The IP parameters for the ‘high disruption’ case,
similar to the case in Table 1, are listed in Table 2 [3]. The corresponding energy distribution
for the disrupted beam is shown in Fig. 6.

Tables 1 and 2 show that the angular divergence of the high disruption beam is increased

5

Table 2: IP parameters for the ‘round(er) beam’ collisions at 1 TeV.

Beam parameter

Undisrupted Disrupted

Emittance (m·rad) [10−13]
rms beam size (nm)
rms divergence (µrad)
β∗ (mm)
α∗
Energy cms (GeV)
Particles per bunch
Bunches per train
Repetition rate (Hz)
Disruption parameter
Average energy loss per particle

x/y
39/0.59
62.5/7.7
62.5/7.7
1.0/1.0
0/0

x/y
235/7.4
67.3/10.7
531/103
0.192/0.154
1.143/1.100

1046
0.75 · 1010
95
120
0.85/6.9
41%

Figure 6: Energy distribution for the high disruption beam (15,000 particles).

by a factor of 3-4 compared to the nominal beam. This larger divergence translates into
larger beam size in the quadrupoles, and therefore larger quadrupole apertures are required.
Secondly, as seen in Fig. 2 and 6, the low energy tail in the high disruption beam is much more
populated than in the nominal beam option. For comparison, the nominal disruption beam
has about 1.2% low energy particles with δ below -60%, while the high disruption beam has
30% particles in this range and 10.6% particles with δ below -80%. To achieve beam loss in
the high disruption case similar to the nominal case (about 5 kW), the chromatic bandwidth
of the extraction line has to be increased to δ = −92% from the -70% for the nominal beam.
Thus, the lowest particle energy accepted by the optics has to be further reduced by a factor
of 4. Note that at δ = −92% the particles experience 12 times larger deﬂections in the
magnets compared to the on-momentum beam. These very large deﬂections make it diﬃcult
to conﬁne the tail particles within the aperture.

6

4 Study of High Disruption Beam Loss

As a ﬁrst step, we veriﬁed the high disruption beam loss for the current extraction line
design. In the simulations, we used disrupted beam distributions at the IP generated with
GUINEA–PIG code [6], and then tracked the beam to the dump using modiﬁed DIMAD
code which correctly simulates large energy deviations [8]. With 15,000 initial particles, the
total beam loss was 28.2% particles, all in the range of δ below -60%. Most of these losses
are due to the very low energy particles, but are also enhanced by the large beam divergence
at the IP. About half of the beam loss (15.2%) occurred in the ﬁve-quadrupole system after
IP.

Clearly, the above losses need to be signiﬁcantly reduced for a realistic design with high
disruption beams. Below we describe various methods we tried to reduce the beam loss.
However, more studies are needed for an acceptable solution.

Finally, note that in this paper we discuss one particular option for the high disruption
beam parameters (Table 2). There are other scenarios with less severely disrupted beams
which still beneﬁt from the near-equal beta functions at the IP [3]. There are also parameters
for high luminosity operation at 1 TeV with ‘ﬂat’ beams that have much smaller disruption
and beamstrahlung [2].

4.1 Optics Modiﬁcations

As mentioned earlier, a large portion of the high disruption beam (15.2% particles) is lost
in the ﬁve quadrupoles after IP. It indicates that the optics optimization has to begin with
this quadrupole system. The main causes of the excessive beam loss are: much larger than
nominal the low energy tail and increased beam divergence at the IP.

The larger IP divergence increases the beam size in the quadrupoles. To improve the
quadrupole acceptance, we increased the quadrupole aperture by a factor of 2 (for instance,
from ap = 10 to 23 mm in the ﬁrst quad, etc., where ap is the pole tip radius). For realistic
design, we kept the quadrupole pole tip ﬁeld Bp below 12 kG. The resultant reduction in ﬁeld
gradient Bp/ap was compensated by lengthening of the quadrupoles. The longer quadrupoles,
in turn, increase the beam size; thus, both the length and aperture were optimized.

The quadrupole focusing depends on energy as KL

1+δ , where KL is the on-momentum
focusing strength. In the high disruption beam most losses are caused by the low energy
over-focusing. This happens when the quadrupole oﬀ-momentum focal distance 1+δ
KL becomes
too small compared to the distance between quadrupoles. One way to reduce this eﬀect is
to make smaller the on-momentum KL values. This can be done by increasing the num-
ber of alternating gradient quadrupoles after IP. Since the total on-momentum focusing in
the quadrupole system has to remain about the same (to focus to the secondary IP), the
individual quadrupole KL values are reduced with more quads. As a result, the low energy
particles experience less deﬂections in each quadrupole and less betatron amplitude in the
system. The disadvantages of this method are the longer quadrupole system, the increased
on-momentum beam size and larger aperture.

In this study, we added one more quadrupole to make a six-quadrupole system after IP.
Due to the larger aperture and additional quadrupole, the length of this focusing system

7

increased from the current 25.2 m to 45.8 m. The quadrupole parameters were optimized to
provide at least 5σx/10σy disrupted beam acceptance in the quadrupoles within the energy
range of δ from 0 to -70%. The resultant apertures vary from ap = 23 mm in the ﬁrst
quadrupole to 69 mm in the sixth quadrupole (compare to ap = 10 to 32 mm in the current
lattice).

The described lattice option for the high disruption beam is shown in Fig. 7. The
parameters of the last quadruplet were also optimized for the maximum acceptance. The
apertures of these quadrupoles range from ap = 114 to 157 mm and were deﬁned by the
±1 mrad IP divergence of the beamstrahlung photon beam. In the chicane, the bend x/y-
apertures were increased from ±202/50 mm to ±250/108 mm. For realistic design, the long
quadrupoles were made of a number of short quadrupoles with gaps between them.

Tracking simulation with the high disruption beam showed that the total beam loss in
the modiﬁed lattice is still very high: 21.2% particles versus 28.2% in the original lattice.
Despite the larger quadrupole apertures after IP, about 14.7% particles are lost in the six-
quad system. The energy distribution of the lost and survived particles is shown in Fig. 8.
Clearly, all of the beam losses occur in the low energy tail at δ below -60%. The analysis of
the beam distribution at IP showed that the highest energy lost particles (δ ≈ −60%) had
also large horizontal angles at IP, while the particles with small IP angles survived up to
δ ≈ −75%.

For comparison, we tracked the nominal disruption beam in this modiﬁed lattice. The
total beam power loss reduced to 3.9 kW (4.8 kW in the original lattice), and the number
of lost particles reduced from 0.25% to 0.23%. The power loss distribution in the modiﬁed
lattice is shown in Fig. 9 and the energy distribution of the lost and survived particles is
shown in Fig. 10. Note that increased bandwidth in Fig. 10 compared to Fig. 8 is due to
smaller IP angular divergence in the nominal disruption beam.

Figure 7: Lattice option for the high disruption beam.

8

Figure 8: Energy distribution for the lost (thick line) and survived (thin) high disruption
beam particles in the modiﬁed lattice (15,000 particles).

Figure 9: Power loss distribution for the nominal disruption beam in the modiﬁed lattice
(NLC 1 TeV case A).

Figure 10: Energy distribution for the lost (thick line) and survived (thin) nominal disruption
beam particles in the modiﬁed lattice (NLC 1 TeV case A; 50,000 particles).

9

Since the particle deﬂections in the quadrupoles increase at low energies rather fast
(∼ 1/energy), very large magnets would be needed for a signiﬁcant improvement of the
chromatic acceptance with the high disruption beam. Further discussions are needed to
decide if the use of larger magnets is acceptable.

4.2 Sextupole Correction

In accelerators sextupoles are typically used to compensate linear and some high order
deviations in quadrupole focusing caused by energy errors. The correction requires non-
zero dispersion at the sextupoles to generate compensating quadrupole eﬀect on the orbit
of the oﬀ-momentum particles. For a small energy spread, the focusing in quadrupoles and
sextupoles depends linearly on δ, therefore the correction works for all particles in the bunch.
In the case of the high disruption beam with a very broad energy spread, the focusing and
trajectories change non-linearly at large |δ| and the sextupole eﬀect may vary signiﬁcantly
for particles with diﬀerent energies.

To study the eﬀect of sextupoles on high disruption beam loss, we added a sextupole to
each of the ﬁrst six quadrupoles in the modiﬁed extraction line lattice and a horizontal bend
at s = 2 m from IP (4 m before the ﬁrst quad) to generate dispersion. For the maximum
eﬀect, we assumed that the sextupole ﬁeld can be superimposed over full length of the
quadrupoles. Though a large dispersion helps reduce the sextupole ﬁeld, its amplitude is
limited by the quadrupole aperture ap and desired energy acceptance. In our case, the bend
at s = 2 m generates spread in oﬀ-momentum particle trajectories, so at the entrance of the
ﬁrst quadrupole the horizontal orbit as a function of energy is x(δ) = η δ
1+δ , where η is the
linear dispersion at this point. Applying |x(δ)| < ap for ap = 23 mm and δ > −92% results
in the maximum dispersion value of |η| = 2 mm. This corresponds to 8.34 kG·m ﬁeld in the
dispersion generating bend at 500 GeV.

Optimization of the sextupole strengths showed that this correction does not signiﬁcantly
improve the low energy beam acceptance. With the sextupole ﬁeld eﬀectively imposed over
quadrupole length and for the optimized values of the pole tip ﬁeld in the six sextupoles
(Bsext
p = 4, 0.5, −9.5, 13, −5, −1 kG), the particle loss at the end of the six-quadrupole system
is reduced from 14.7% to 11.3%. This marginal reduction in the beam loss seems to not justify
the complications of an extra bend near IP, superimposed sextupole and quadrupole ﬁelds
and the need for dispersion cancellation after the sextupoles.

4.3 Octupole Correction

In a separate study, we investigated the eﬀect of octupoles on the beam loss. As in the case
with sextupoles, we eﬀectively superimposed six octupoles over the six quadrupoles after IP.
Since the octupole ﬁeld increases as a cube of a particle amplitude, we consider that its most
eﬀect will be on the low energy particles experiencing large deﬂections in the quads, and will
not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the rest of the beam.

In quadrupoles the beam is focused or defocused either in horizontal or vertical direction.
Accordingly, the main losses of the low energy particles are expected to be in x and y-planes

10

(see Fig. 5). Octupoles also provide horizontal and vertical focusing which can be used
to compensate the quadrupole eﬀect at large amplitudes. Compared to the quadrupoles,
a normal octupole provides simultaneous non-linear focusing along the x and y-axes and
defocusing along the |x| = |y| lines, or vice versa.

In the quadrupole system the net x and y focusing is dominated by the horizontally (F)
and vertically (D) focusing quads, respectively. Therefore, to reduce the net low energy
over-focusing in both planes one has to reduce the horizontal focusing in F-quads and ver-
tical focusing in D-quads. Since the octupoles simultaneously focus (or defocus) in the x
and y-planes, all six compensating octupoles need to be defocusing in order to reduce the
quadrupole focusing at large amplitudes.

In simulations, we varied the individual octupole strengths and conﬁrmed that the six
octupoles have to be defocusing for the most reduction of the high disruption beam loss. The
same aperture and eﬀective length was used for the combined octupoles and quadrupoles.
Fig. 11 shows the particle loss as a function of octupole pole tip ﬁeld (same for the six
octupoles). For realistic ﬁeld values the particle loss at the end of the six-quadrupole system
reduces to 12.6% from 14.7% without octupoles. This is rather small improvement and we
do not yet consider this compensation as a practical solution.

Figure 11: High disruption beam loss N(%) at the end of the six-quadrupole system versus
octupole pole tip ﬁeld.

4.4 Low Energy Tail Separation

An alternative way to avoid large beam loss in the extraction line is to separate the low
energy tail from the beam and direct it to a diﬀerent transport line. In this case, the energy
acceptance requirement can be relaxed for the main beam extraction line and the transport
line for the tail can be better adjusted for the lower energy or designed to absorb the energy.
Since the large losses start in the quadrupoles after IP, the separation has to be done before
the beam enters the quads.

11

Dipole bending naturally spreads the particle trajectories with diﬀerent energies. The low
energy particles experience the largest deviations from the on-momentum orbit, which are
proportional to δ
1+δ . For the beam separation study, we introduced a symmetric horizontal
chicane between s = 6 and 18.6 m after IP and moved the ﬁrst quadrupole to s = 18.9 m
as shown in Fig. 12. Each individual chicane bend is 1.2 m long and has 12 kG ﬁeld at
500 GeV. The goal for the ﬁrst two chicane bends was to generate a large spread between
trajectories of the low energy particles and the core beam. Then the septum bends in the
middle of chicane are used to deﬂect back only the core beam particles and allow the low
energy tail travel unbent into a diﬀerent transport line. The dispersion at the end of the
chicane is canceled, and if the energy spread in the beam is signiﬁcantly reduced after the
tail separation, then a simpler quadrupole system, such as a doublet, can be used to focus
to the secondary IP.

We used the beam separation condition which required that the separated tail particles
did not strike the face of the ﬁrst quadrupole located at s = 18.9 m. In other words, the sep-
tum bends would separate only the tail particles with deﬂection at the ﬁrst quadrupole larger
than the outer quadrupole radius. We estimated that the aperture of the ﬁrst quadrupole
needs to be about ap ≈ 60 mm and the outer radius of such a permanent magnet with 12 kG
pole tip ﬁeld can be on the order of 150 mm.

The high disruption beam distribution was tracked through the ﬁrst two deﬂecting bends,
and Fig. 13 shows the horizontal angular divergence versus energy at the entrance to the
ﬁrst separating septum bend at s = 9.6 m. The horizontal phase space at this point is
shown in Fig. 14, where the vertical line at x = −34.8 mm separates the beam core and
the tail. Counting the particles shows that only 3.1% particles are in the tail. The energy
distributions of the core and tail beams are shown in Fig. 15.

Since the number of low energy particles in the core beam is still large after the separation,
we conclude that the above scheme is not very eﬀective. For this reason we did not proceed
to study other important issues such as the design and eﬃciency of septum bends and the
transport line for the low energy tail.

Figure 12: Beam separation with chicane and septum bends.

12

Figure 13: Horizontal angular distribution vs. energy at the separating septum bend.

Figure 14: Horizontal phase space distribution of the high disruption beam at the separating
septum bend. The vertical line separates the tail (on the left) from the core.

5 Summary

We investigated various methods to reduce the beam loss in the NLC extraction line caused
by a large number of very low energy particles in the high disruption beam option. The
study included the use of larger quadrupole aperture, weaker quadrupole focusing, sextupole
compensation, octupole focusing at large amplitudes, and beam tail separation with chicane
septum bends. We did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant reduction of the beam loss with the above methods.
Further studies and new ideas are needed to ﬁnd a practical solution for the high disruption
scenario.

References

13

Figure 15: Energy distribution for the tail (thick line) and the core (thin) high disruption
beams at the separating septum bend (15,000 particles).

[1] K. A. Thompson and T. O. Raubenheimer, “Luminosity for NLC Design Variations,”

SLAC note LCC–0014 (1999); on the web at:
http://www-project.slac.stanford.edu/lc/ilc/TechNotes/LCCNotes/lcc notes index.htm.

[2] T.O. Raubenheimer, “Parameters and Possible Operating Modes of the NLC,” SLAC

note LCC–0031 (1999); on the web at:
http://www-project.slac.stanford.edu/lc/ilc/TechNotes/LCCNotes/lcc notes index.htm.

[3] K. A. Thompson, et al., “High-luminosity NLC Designs with Near-equal Horizontal and

Vertical Beta Functions,” SLAC note LCC–0022 (1999); on the web at:
http://www-project.slac.stanford.edu/lc/ilc/TechNotes/LCCNotes/lcc notes index.htm.

[4] Y. Nosochkov, et al., “The Next Linear Collider Extraction Line Design,” Proceedings of
the 1999 IEEE Part. Acc. Conf. (PAC99), New York City, NY (1999); SLAC–PUB–8096
(1999).

[5] M. Woods [SLD Collaboration], “The Scanning Compton Polarimeter for the SLD Exper-
iment,” Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on High-Energy Spin Physics
(SPIN 96), Amsterdam, Netherlands (1996); SLAC–PUB–7319 (1996).

[6] The disrupted beam distributions were calculated by K. A. Thompson using GUINEA–

PIG code [7].

[7] D. Schulte, Ph.D. thesis (1996).

[8] P. Tenenbaum, et al., “Use of Simulation Programs for the Modeling of the Next Linear
Collider,” Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Part. Acc. Conf. (PAC99), New York City, NY
(1999); SLAC–PUB–8136 (1999).

14

