1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–8096
March 1999

The Next Linear Collider Extraction Line Design1

Y. Nosochkov, T. O. Raubenheimer, K. Thompson and M. Woods
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract

The two main functions of the NLC extraction line include: 1) transmission of the outgoing
disrupted beam and secondary particles to the dump with minimal losses; and 2) beam diag-
nostics and control. In this report, we describe the extraction line optics, present the results
of tracking studies, and discuss the extraction line instrumentation.

Presented at the 1999 IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference (PAC99)
New York City, New York, March 29 – April 2, 1999

1Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

THE NEXT LINEAR COLLIDER EXTRACTION LINE DESIGN†

Y. Nosochkov‡, T. O. Raubenheimer, K. Thompson and M. Woods
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract

The two main functions of the NLC extraction line include:
1) transmission of the outgoing disrupted beam and sec-
ondary particles to the dump with minimal losses; and 2)
beam diagnostics and control. In this report, we describe
the extraction line optics, present the results of tracking
studies, and discuss the extraction line instrumentation.

1

INTRODUCTION

The power of the Next Linear Collider (NLC) [1] beams
at 1 TeV (cms energy) can be as high as 10 MW and has
to be safely disposed after the interaction point (IP). For
the NLC beam parameters at the IP, a signiﬁcant disruption
[2] of the beam distribution occurs due to the beam-beam
interaction, notably an increase in the beam angular diver-
gence and energy spread. In addition, the beam collisions
generate a signiﬁcant amount of beamstrahlung photons,
low energy e+e− pairs and other secondary particles; the
number of the beamstrahlung photons from the IP is com-
parable to that of the primary beam particles. The need to
transport the photon power to the dump places constraints
on the extraction line design. Following earlier studies [3],
the current design is based on a shared dump for the pri-
mary leptons and photons. To minimize beam losses due to
large energy spread in the disrupted beam, it is critical to
design optics with large chromatic bandwidth. Additional
constraints are imposed by planned diagnostics after IP.

Several scenarios are currently under study for NLC
beam parameters [1]. In this paper, we present the results
for one scenario which gives the largest energy spread and
beam loss for the disrupted beam. This set of beam param-
eters includes: 1046 GeV cms energy, 120 Hz repetition
rate, 95 bunches per RF pulse and 0.75 · 1010 bunch charge
(see also Table 1). Since the colliding beam parameters are
identical at IP, the extraction line design described below is
applicable to both beams.

2 LATTICE

The primary requirement for the NLC extraction line is to
transport the outgoing beams to the dump with minimal
losses and provide conditions for beam diagnostics. The
main optics includes: 1) a set of quadrupoles after IP to fo-
cus the outgoing lepton beam; 2) a horizontal chicane and
secondary IP in the middle of chicane for beam measure-
ments; and 3) a second quadrupole set at the end of the
line to make a parallel beam at the dump. The strength of

† Work supported by the Department of Energy Contract DE-AC03-

76SF00515.

‡ E-mail: yuri@slac.stanford.edu.

Figure 1: Lattice functions in the extraction line.

the ﬁrst quadrupole system is deﬁned by the point-to-point
transformation from IP to secondary IP (R12=R34=0), and
the second set of quadrupoles provides a point-to-parallel
transformation to the dump (R22=R44=0). The optics cal-
culations were made using MAD code [4].

The lattice functions of the extraction line are shown in
Fig. 1. Since the beam size at IP is much smaller in the ver-
tical plane, the ﬁrst quadrupole after IP focuses the beam
horizontally. This minimizes the overall beam size in the
extraction line. For realistic magnet design, we use the
quadrupole pole tip ﬁeld ≤12 kG at 1 TeV (cms energy)
and 8.2 kG ﬁeld in the bends. The total length of the beam
line is about 150 m.

The beam line optics is constrained by the following pa-

rameters and requirements:
- Crossing angle and positions of the ﬁnal focus quads,
- Disrupted beam parameters at IP,
- Angular divergence of the beamstrahlung photons,
- Shared dump for a primary beam and photons,
- Secondary IP and chicane for beam diagnostics.

2.1

IP Constraints

The NLC beams cross at 20 mrad horizontal angle, and
the nearest ﬁnal focus quadrupoles are placed 2 m before
the IP. To minimize geometric interference between the ﬁ-
nal focus and extraction line magnets, the latter should be
placed as far as possible from the IP. However, a long free
space after IP increases the beam size, apertures and length
of the extraction line quadrupoles. In this design, we place
the ﬁrst extraction line quadrupole 6 m after IP. This clears
the ﬁrst three ﬁnal focus quadrupoles.

2.2 Disrupted Beam Parameters

The strong beam-beam interactions change the beam pa-
rameters at IP. Notably, a signiﬁcant increase occurs in
the beam energy spread and horizontal angular divergence.
The horizontal phase space for the disrupted primary beam

1

Figure 2: Horizontal phase space at IP: dots - disrupted
beam, ellipse - 1σ undisrupted beam.

Table 1: Beam parameters at IP.

Beam parameter

Emit. (m·rad) [10−13]
rms size (nm)
rms divergence (µrad)
β∗ (mm)
α∗

Undisrupted
x/y
39 / 0.59
198 / 2.7
20 / 22
10.0 / 0.125
0 / 0

Disrupted
x/y
120 / 1.02
198 / 3.2
125 / 33
3.259 / 0.103
1.805 / 0.306

at IP is shown in Fig. 2. The beam distribution was calcu-
lated using GUINEA PIG beam-beam simulation code [5].
The undisrupted 1σ phase ellipse is shown for comparison
in Fig. 2. The nominal and disrupted beam parameters are
given in Table 1.

The energy distribution for the disrupted beam is shown
in Fig. 3. The low energy tail extends to δ ∼ −90%
(δ=∆p/p), and up to 1% of the beam power (∼100 kW) is
carried by the particles with δ<-50%. To minimize losses
in this energy range, the optics requires a huge chromatic
bandwidth and large magnet apertures. The methods used
to improve the chromatic transmission are discussed below.

2.3 Chromatic Bandwidth

To satisfy optics conditions for the nominal energy, the use
of quadrupole doublets in the beginning and end of the ex-
traction line is sufﬁcient. However, the strong doublets sig-
niﬁcantly overfocus the particles in the low energy range
and lead to beam losses. To reduce the overfocusing, we
replaced the doublets by 5 alternating gradient quadrupoles
in the beginning and 4 quadrupoles at the end of the beam
line (see Fig. 1). Since the net focusing for the nominal
energy has to remain the same, the strengths of individ-
ual quadrupoles are reduced. As a result, the low energy
particles experience less focusing in each quadrupole and
oscillate through the alternating gradient system with less
overfocusing. The strengths of individual quads were opti-
mized by minimizing the low energy betatron amplitudes.
The limitations of the described multi-quad system are the
increased length of the focusing system and the large beam
size and magnet apertures.

A simpliﬁed explanation of the multi-quad bandwidth
can be made using analogy with a FODO system of n iden-
tical cells with ﬁxed total phase advance µ. In such a sys-

Figure 3: Energy distribution for disrupted beam.

tem, the range of low energies satisfying stability condi-
tions increases with n proportional to 1-sin(µ/2n).

2.4 Beamstrahlung Photons

Bending of the particle orbits due to beam-beam forces at
IP results in radiation and signiﬁcant ﬂux of beamstrahlung
photons from IP. The GUINEA PIG simulation shows that
the rms angular spread of the photons is on the order of
±100 µrad in the horizontal plane and a factor of 2 smaller
in the vertical plane. In this design, the primary beam and
the photons are transported to one shared dump. For beam
diagnostics in the extraction line, it is desirable to avoid any
material in the path of the beamstrahlung photons. There-
fore, large apertures of the magnets and beam pipe have to
be used to include the photon ﬂux. For this design, we as-
sumed the maximum photon beam divergence of ±1 mrad
and ±0.5 mrad in the horizontal and vertical planes, respec-
tively.

2.5 Chicane

The horizontal chicane allows to separate the outgoing
electron and photon beams for measurements. In this de-
sign, the chicane is made of 4 pairs of bends which pro-
duce a closed bump with 2 cm of horizontal displacement
and dispersion. This dispersion is sufﬁcient to measure the
energy spread of the undisrupted beam at the secondary IP.
Since there are no quadrupoles between bends, the orbit
bump is closed for all energies. The maximum displace-
ment for the low energy particles increases with 1/E.

2.6 Magnet Apertures

Large physical aperture is required for maximum transmis-
sion of the beam to the dump. We determined the extraction
line aperture by: 1) 10σ beam size; 2) low energy horizon-
tal excursions in the chicane; and 3) the maximum photon
ﬂux size. Schematically, this is shown in Fig. 4. Outside the
chicane region the aperture is dominated by the ±1 mrad
horizontal angle of the photon ﬂux. The quadrupole aper-
tures vary from ±1 cm for the ﬁrst quadrupole after IP to
±13 cm near the dump.

To minimize beam losses in the chicane region, we in-
creased apertures to include low energy orbits up to δ =
−90%. With the beam size included, the maximum hor-
izontal aperture in the chicane is ±20 cm. Since the or-
bit excursions in the chicane occur in the horizontal plane,

2

Figure 4: Aperture constraints: solid line - nominal beam;
dash: ±1 mrad photon x-angle; dash-dot: δ=-90% x-orbit.

a smaller vertical aperture can be used in the bends. The
tracking simulations showed that ±50 mm vertical gap in
the bends is sufﬁcient to minimize beam losses and include
the ±0.5 mrad vertical photon angle.

3 DIAGNOSTICS

Beam line diagnostics fall into three categories: 1) standard
diagnostics (BPMs, toroids and ion chambers) to facilitate
cleanly transporting the beam to the beam dump; 2) lumi-
nosity diagnostics to measure and optimize the luminosity;
and 3) physics diagnostics to measure the beam polariza-
tion, energy, and energy spread.

The luminosity diagnostics will include BPMs with 1
µm resolution for measurements of deﬂection angles, as
well as detectors to monitor low energy particles produced
at the IP from radiative Bhabha and pair production pro-
cesses. The physics diagnostics will include a Compton
polarimeter, an energy spectrometer, and a wire scanner
to measure energy spread. The Compton polarimeter will
collide a laser beam with the electron beam in the mid-
dle of the chicane, and its detector will analyze Compton-
scattered electrons below 50 GeV after the chicane. A
conventional wire scanner in the chicane can be used for
the energy spread measurements. An SLC-style energy
spectrometer is planned between the chicane and the beam
dump to measure the separation of synchrotron light due to
a precisely calibrated spectrometer magnet.

4 BEAM LOSS

The methods used to improve the beam transmission in-
cluded: 1) the use of multi-quad focusing systems for
large chromatic bandwidth; and 2) sufﬁciently large mag-
net apertures. To assure accuracy of the beam transport
with low energy tail, we used a modiﬁed version of the
DIMAD code [6] which can handle chromatic terms to all
orders.

With up to 10 MW of the NLC beam power, even the
loss of just 0.3% would be equivalent of losing the whole
SLC beam (30 kW). Therefore, our goal was to reduce to a
minimum the overall beam losses. In addition, an excessive
beam loss would interfere with the planned diagnostics and
experiments in the extraction line.

In tracking simulations, we used a disrupted distribution
of 15,000 primary beam particles calculated with GUINEA
PIG code. This distribution was tracked from IP to the
dump and the beam losses were monitored along the beam

3

Figure 5: Distribution of the beam power loss.

line. We used round apertures for the quadrupoles and
drifts, and rectangular aperture for the bends.

The most losses occur for the very low energy particles
which experience strong overfocusing in quadrupoles and
large horizontal deﬂections in the bends. The calculated
beam power loss along the beam line is shown in Fig. 5.
In this case, all particles with δ>-50% and most with the
lower energies are transported to the dump. The total loss
is 4.7 kW (0.25% particles) and the distributed power loss
is below 0.5 kW/m. At the dump, the rms (x/y) beam size
is 7.7/4.7 mm with the tails extending to ±100/40 mm.

The simulations included the 6 T detector solenoid (12
Tm after IP). Due to the crossing angle, the solenoid in-
duces vertical orbit distortions. The study showed that with
corrected vertical orbit after IP, the solenoid effect on the
beam loss is negligible.

5 FUTURE STUDIES

In future studies, we need to increase statistics of GUINEA
PIG simulations to obtain more accurately the distributions
of electrons in the low energy tail and beamstrahlung pho-
tons at large angles. Tracking of these particles is needed
to calculate signal to background ratios in the diagnostic
detectors.

More details have to be included in the design of the
beam line diagnostics, in particular the magnets for the en-
ergy spectrometer.

Methods of directing the main beam and photons to sep-
arate dumps and possibly reducing the backgrounds and
neutron back-shine from the dump need to be investigated.

6 REFERENCES

[1] NLC ZDR Design Group, “Zeroth-Order Design Report for
the Next Linear Collider,” SLAC Report 474 (1996); with
updated parameters at:
http://www-project.slac.stanford.edu/lc/nlc-tech.html.
[2] R. Hollebeek, “Disruption Limits for Linear Colliders,”

NIM, 184, p. 333 (1981).

[3] J. Spencer, et al., “The SLAC NLC Extraction & Diagnos-
tic Line,” Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE Part. Acc. Conf.,
Dallas, p. 713 (1995).

[4] H. Grote, F. C. Iselin, CERN/SL/90-13 (AP) Rev.4 (1994).
[5] D. Schulte, Ph.D. thesis (1996).
[6] P. Tenenbaum, et al., “Use of Simulation Programs for the

Modelling of the NLC,” these proceedings (1999).

