1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New 357 MHz Sub Harmonic Buncher

M. Kuriki, H. Hayano, K. Hasegawaa
High energy accelerator research organization, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
(a)Scientiﬁc university of Tokyo, Noda, Chiba, Japan

Abstract

KEK-ATF is doing R&D establishing high-current and
low-emittance electron beam for the future linear colliders.
In ATF, 15 ps length electron beam is generated by com-
bination of a thermionic gun, a couple of 357 MHz SHBs,
and a S-band TW buncher. In the linac, beam instability
caused by the ﬂuctuated amplitude and phase of SHBs has
been observed. The reason of the ﬂuctuation is considered
to be the multi-pacting in the SHB cavity. In addition, Q
value of the cavity is almost half of the designed value,
then SHBs are not operated in an optimum condition. We
have fabricated new SHBs with considerations avoiding the
multi-pacting and recovering Q value. A simulation shows
that bunching quality is improved with the new SHB cavity.

1

INTRODUCTION

KEK-ATF is a test facility to study the low-emittance
multi-bunch beam and beam instrumentation technique for
the future linear collider. That consists from 1.5 GeV S-
band linac, a beam transport line, a damping ring, and a
diagnostic extraction line.

In the linac,

the electron beam is generated by a
thermionic electron gun. Typical intensity is 1010 elec-
tron/bunch. The bunch length shrinks from 1 ns to less
than 20 ps by passing a couple of sub-harmonic bunchers
and a TW buncher. The electron beam is accelerated up to
1.3 GeV by 8 of the S-band regular accelerating sections.
In April 2000, we achieved horizontal emittance 1.3 ×
10−9rad.m, vertical emittance1.7 × 10−11rad.m (both for
2.0 × 109electron/bunch, single bunch mode )[1] which
are almost our target.

In November 2001, we have started the multi-bunch
beam operation. 20 of bunches separated by 2.8 ns are ac-
celerated by one RF pulse. This multi-bunch method is one
of the key technique in the linear collider. The commission-
ing was successfully done. 6.0 × 1010 electron/train was
obtained at the extraction line. We now struggle to develop
many instrumentation devices to measure the multi-bunch
proﬁle clearly.

In ATF, the instability of the injection part of the linac
has been an issue. From a study, the amplitude and phase
ﬂuctuation of SHB cavities are one of the reason of the
instability.

Fig. 1 shows the ring current measured by DCCT as
function of phase of SHB1 RF. Both variables are normal-
ized by average of itself. From this ﬁgure, the SHB1 phase
makes the ring current unstable. Similar property is found
on the amplitude and both for SHB2 too.

T
C
C
D
 
y
b
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
c

1.05

1

0.95

Figure 1: DR current
by DCCT as function of
SHB1 phase. Both vari-
ables are normalized by
its average.

5800

5900

6000

6100

shb1 phase

In single bunch operation,

the injection instability
changes only the beam current. On the ohter hand, in case
of multi-bunch operation, it changes not only the total cur-
rent, but also the bunch by bunch proﬁle. Response of most
of the instrumentation device such as BPM depends on the
bunch by bunch proﬁle. The ﬂuctuation causes therefore
an extra ambiguity on the measurement. It is currently the
most serious problem of the beam instrumentation for the
multi-bunch beam.

The instability of the bunching system extends the bunch
length leading large energy spread. The injection efﬁciency
to the ring becomes therefore worse. To examine the sta-
bility of the bunching system, the bunch length is a good
index rather than the injection current.

In ATF, a device to measure the bunch length has been
placed at the end of the injector part. This device, so called
Bunch Length Monitor, BLM detects amplitude of 6.5 GHz
and 11.4 GHz signals induced by beam. Bunch length is
reconstructed from the both information.

Tab. 1 shows contributions from various sources on the
bunch length instability. The bunch length instability is
evaluated as the standard deviation normalized by its av-
erage. From these data, phase of SHB1 and amplitude of
SHB2 have large contributions. Distribution of SHB2 am-
plitude has two peaks and this value is calculated for both
peaks. If we take only one peak, it becomes 0.0009.

Table 1:
Contri-
butions from various
sources to the bunch
length ﬂuctuation. The
bunch length, Lb is
normalized by its aver-
age.

Source

Gun HV
SHB1 phase
SHB1 amplitude
SHB2 phase
SHB2 amplitude

∆x

∂Lb
∂x
0.0012
0.0067
0.0034
0.0013
0.0097 (0.0009)

By monitoring RF in the SHB cavity, RF amplitude dis-
tortion is observed by multi-pacting. This strong multi-
pacting can be suppressed by optimizing magnetic ﬁeld
of Helmholtz coils surrounding the cavities. Even though,
these results suggests that weak multi-pacting still exists in
SHBs and causes the bunch length instability.

2 NEW SHB CAVITY
To stabilize SHB cavity by avoiding multi-pacting, we have
newly made SHB cavities. Fig. 2 shows half of the cross
sectional view of the new SHB cavity. The bottom of the
ﬁgure corresponds to the center of the beam line. The cav-
ity design was performed with MAFIA which is a electrical
magnetic ﬁeld simulator.

Comparing to the ordinal pill box cavity, the cavity space
is extended to up-stream direction. This geometry com-
poses λ/2 structure, i.e. the left end of the cavity is close
(electrically terminated) and the cavity gap, the right end,
works as open end. The beneﬁt of this geometry was clear
if the accelerating gap was placed at the center of the cav-
ity. In that case, the cavity length would be twice of the
designed to keep same resonant frequency.

Figure 2: Half of cross sectional view of the new SHB cav-
ity. The bottom of this ﬁgure corresponds to the center of
the beam line.

Another tip is the waist at the center of the cavity. Due to
the narrow gap at this waist, the electrical ﬁeld is concen-
trated here rather than on the accelerating gap. It decreases
R/Q of the cavity. Because the beam loading effect is pro-
portional to R/Q, this geometry makes the cavity strong to
the beam loading. It is a big advantage for the multi-bunch
operation. The designed R/Q is 46.2 Ω.

An important issue on the current SHB cavity is low Q
value. The designed Q value is around 8000, but the ac-
tual Q value is only 3000. That can be explained by power
loss with the contact resistance of copper gasket. The SHB
cavity is composed from three parts, barrel and end plates.
These parts are assembled with copper gasket vacuum seal.
Electrical contact is also made through the gasket with very
sharp edges.

In the new SHB cavity, the copper gasket is still used,
but the electrical contact is made directly on the inner wall.
To make a good electrical contact by keeping vacuum seal,
careful turning on the barrel end where electrical contact is
made, was performed. The designed Q value for the new
SHB cavity is 7800, and the measured value is 7300. By the
careful machining, an ideal electrical contact was obtained.
Fig. 3 shows pictures of the new SHB cavity. From left,
the up-stream end plate which has a long nose correspond-
ing to the beam pipe, the barrel, and the down-stream end
plate. The length of the cavity along the beam direction is
213 mm. The diameter is varied from φ170 to φ90. The
length of the accelerating gap is 40 mm.

As mentioned in the next section, preventing the multi-
pacting is one of the most important purpose of this new

Figure 3: Pictures of the new SHB cavity. From left, the
up-stream end plate, the barrel, and the down-stream end
plate.

SHB. To suppress it, the cavity wall is coated by TiN after
taking this picture.

3 MULTI-PACTING
Multi-pacting is resonant electron emission. Electron emit-
ted from the cavity wall is accelerated by RF ﬁeld and at-
tacks to the wall again. This initial incident electron would
make secondary electron(s). The expectation number of
the secondary electron(s) is deﬁned as yield. If the yield
is more than unity and this condition is kept during the
iterations, number of electron is increased and increased
through the chain process. Finally, the cavity RF ﬁeld is
totally distorted by tons of ﬂying electrons. This process is
called as multi-pacting.

For a simple geometry like two parallel plates, the multi-
pacting is well formalized, but in general cases a simulation
is only way to examine it. In design phase, we have there-
fore perform a simulation to prevent the multi-pacting in
SHB.

Assumptions for the simulation are as follows;
• RF ﬁeld was evaluated by MAFIA.
• Cavity surface is copper (determins the yield).
• The initial momentum of secondary electron is 1/3 of

that of the incident electron.1

• Secondary electron is emitted always perpendicular to

• The simulation is terminated if the yield is less than

the cavity surface.

unity.

• If an electron is still alive after 50 processes, it is de-

ﬁned as a possible multi-pacting condition.

Fig. 4 shows yield of secondary electrons as function of
incident electron energy. These data are taken with cop-
per surface baked at 300 ◦C temperature[3]. It means that
the incident electron with its kinetic energy between 0.05
and 3.0 keV generates more than one secondary electrons
leading the multi-pacting.

It is well known that TiN has yield less than that for cop-
per. Because the inner wall of the new SHB cavity is coated
by TiN, then this assumption, copper surface is conserva-
tive. Real SHB cavity is supposedly stronger to the multi-
pacting than the simulated.

With these assumptions, test particles were placed at the
cavity wall with 1.0 mm steps and cavity RF phase was
scanned with 2.0 deg. step.

1This number is experimentaly evaluated[2].

Assuming Q=3000 and R/Q=45 corresponding to the
current SHB, bunch length on TW buncher exit was ob-
tained as 30.0 ps. It is larger than that required by stable
S-band acceleration. It may be a reason of the large beam
loss at the injection part in ATF.

From this study, the bunching performance will be im-
proved and the transmission will be better by the new SHB
cavity.

5 SUMMARY
In ATF, the beam instability caused by injection part has
been a big issue. From a correlation study, SHB phase
and amplitude ﬂuctuations induce the instability. The most
candidate of the mechanism generating such ﬂuctuations is
multi-pacting.

The current SHB has another problem that it has only Q
value of 3000. That is much lower than the designed value,
7800.

Because of these reasons, we have made newly SHB cav-
ities with careful cosiderations; low R/Q, high Q, prevent-
ing multi-pacting.

We have manufactured SHB cavities with Q-value of
7300 which is very close to the designed value, 7800. All
of the corner of the inner wall is rounded by 5.0 mm radius
suggested by the simulation to prevent multi-pacting.

By a particle tracking simulation, it is expected that the
bunching performance and the beam transmission of the
injector system is improved.

6 REFERENCES

[1] http://lcdev.kek.jp/ATF/

[2] A. J. Hatch, NIM 41 (1966)261-271

[3] R. Calder, G. Dominichini, N. Hilleret, NIM B13 (1986) 631

d
l
e
i
y

1.0

Figure 4:
Yield of
secondary electrons as
of
function
incident
electron.
These data
were taken with copper
baked by 300◦C

0.05

3.0 (keV)

Kinetic energy

There are two types of multi-pacting; one point and two
point. Two point multi-pacting occurs between parallel
plates, on the other hand, one point multi-pacting occurs
on a same plane. As results of the simulation, we have
found only one point multi-pacting. Basically, the two
point multi-pacting hardly occurs with external magnetic
ﬁeld because the magnetic ﬁeld breaks the spatial symme-
try between two plates.

The place where the one point multi-pacting was found,
was the corner edge of the cavity. In such area, the electric
ﬁeld is relatively weak and electron velocity is not so fast,
so that it can rotates back to the same plane without hitting
other side.

The reason that electric ﬁeld becomes weak at the cor-
ner is boundary condition on a conductor surface; electric
ﬁeld must be perpendicular to the surface. Because con-
ductor surfaces are crossing perpendicular to each other at
the corner edge, electric ﬁeld perpendicular to one surface
is parallel to another surface. As the result, electric ﬁeld
is going to be weak by approaching to the corner.Such area
where electric ﬁeld is very weak, can be vanished by round-
ing the corner edge because electric ﬁeld perpendicular to
the tangent of the rounding arc is allowed.

According to this study, all of the corner of the new SHB
cavity is rounded by 5 mm radius. This 5 mm radius was
determined since multi-pacting was not found more than 3
mm away from the corner.

4 BUNCHING QUALITY
Bunching quality which will be obtained by the new SHB
cavity was estimated by a simulation. The simulation was
performed by using a simulator for particle tracking code
accounting the space charge effect, GPT (General Particle
Tracking).

Elements set in the simulation were as follows; SHB cav-
ities, a TW buncher, and many Helmholz coils. The posi-
tion of each element is same as the current ATF setting, i.e.
we did not perform any optimization for the position of the
elements.

The ﬁrst and second SHBs are placed at 1.46 m and 2.42
m away from the Gun exit respectively. TW buncher which
has 10 cells including the coupling cells is placed at 2.81
m. The magnetic ﬁeld along the beam axis induced by the
Helmholz coils is varied from 0.005 tesla at SHB1 to 0.09
tesla at the exit of TW buncher. Input power for SHB1 and
SHB2 are set to be 6.0 and 13.0 kW respectively.

Assuming Q=7300 and R/Q=46 for the new SHB, bunch
length on TW buncher exit was obtained as 13.2 ps. This
value is enough to ﬁt S-band acceleration.

