1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–8871
June 2001

Study of Beam Energy Spectrum Measurement
in the NLC Extraction Line 1

Y. Nosochkov and T.O. Raubenheimer
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Abstract

The NLC extraction line provides a secondary focal point with a low β function and 2 cm
dispersion which can be used for measurement of the beam energy spectrum. In this study,
tracking simulations were performed to transport the 0.5 TeV electron beam from the Inter-
action Point (IP) to the secondary focus (SF), “measure” the resultant transverse beam proﬁle
and reconstruct the disrupted IP energy spread. In the simulation, the obtained energy spec-
trum reproduced the initial IP spread reasonably well, especially with the vertical dispersion
at SF which provides larger ratio of dispersion to the betatron beam size. More details of this
study can be found in Ref. [1].

Presented at the 2001 Particle Accelerator Conference (PAC 2001)
Chicago, Illinois, June 18–22, 2001

1Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

STUDY OF BEAM ENERGY SPECTRUM MEASUREMENT
IN THE NLC EXTRACTION LINE †
Y. Nosochkov and T.O. Raubenheimer
SLAC, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309, USA

Abstract

The NLC extraction line provides a secondary focal
point with a low β function and 2 cm dispersion which can
be used for measurement of the beam energy spectrum. In
this study, tracking simulations were performed to transport
the 0.5 TeV electron beam from the Interaction Point (IP)
to the secondary focus (SF), “measure” the resultant trans-
verse beam proﬁle and reconstruct the disrupted IP energy
spread. In the simulation, the obtained energy spectrum re-
produced the initial IP spread reasonably well, especially
with the vertical dispersion at SF which provides larger ra-
tio of dispersion to the betatron beam size. More details of
this study can be found in Ref. [1].

1

INTRODUCTION

In a linear collider, the strong beam-beam interaction
generates signiﬁcant beamstrahlung. For the high-energy
physics experiment to make optimal use of the luminosity,
it is important to know the luminosity spectrum. This is
done in the NLC design by measuring the energy spectrum
of the disrupted beam in the beam extraction line which
transports the beam from the IP to the beam dump.

The present design of the NLC extraction line optics
[2, 3] is shown in Fig. 1, where the beam travels from
the IP (on the left) to the dump. The optics contains two
multi-quadrupole systems, where the ﬁrst system performs
a point-to-point focusing from the IP to a secondary focus
(SF), and the second system generates a parallel beam at
the dump. Between the two quadrupole sets there is a sym-
metric four bend chicane generating 2 cm displacement and
dispersion at the SF.

To accurately measure the energy spectrum of the dis-
rupted beam, the dispersive beam size ηδ should be large
compared to the betatron beam size pβ(δ)ǫ. The original
optics was designed with the horizontal chicane as shown
in Fig. 1, but vertical bends may be used as suggested by
K. Kubo of KEK [4] to improve the resolution.

The on-energy β functions at the SF can be derived from
the IP β∗ values and linear matrix Rij between IP and SF:

R12 = 0, R11 = −4.5233, βx = R2
R34 = 0, R33 = −0.4549, βy = R2

11β
33β

∗
x,
∗
y .

(1)

In this study, we used one particular set of the NLC
beam parameters [5] listed in Table 1. These parameters
correspond to the disrupted 0.5 TeV beam at the IP. The
beam disruption occurs in the collision and signiﬁcantly in-
creases the beam divergence, emittance and energy spread.
The disrupted distribution at the IP was obtained using

† Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–

76SF00515.

Figure 1: Extraction line lattice functions.

GUINEA–PIG code [6, 7], and the corresponding emit-
tance and lattice functions were reconstructed from this dis-
tribution as shown in Table 1.

According to Eq. 1 and Table 1, for a ﬁxed 2 cm disper-
sion, optics with the vertical chicane provides a larger ratio
of the dispersion to the same plane betatron size at the SF,
and therefore should result in better accuracy in the energy
spectrum measurement. Note, that β(δ) at SF can grow
signiﬁcantly with δ due to the shift of β waist.

Below we compare tracking and measurement simula-
tions for the extraction line with the horizontal and verti-
cal 2 cm chicane. The particle tracking was done using a
version of DIMAD code with accurate handling of large en-
ergy errors [8]. Effect of the corrected 6 T detector solenoid
is included.

Table 1: Disrupted beam parameters at IP.

y (nm)

y (µrad)

Emittance, ǫx/ǫy (m·rad) [10−13]
x/σ∗
Beam size, σ∗
Divergence, σ∗′
x /σ∗′
β∗
x/β∗
y (mm)
α∗
x/α∗
y
Energy per beam (GeV)
Particles per bunch
Bunches per train
Repetition rate (Hz)
Disruption parameter, x/y
Average energy loss per particle

120 / 1.02
198 / 3.2
125 / 33
3.259 / 0.103
1.805 / 0.306
523
0.75 × 1010
95
120
0.094 / 6.9
9.5%

2 SIMULATIONS

The GUINEA–PIG code was used to generate 5 · 104
macro-particles to represent the disrupted distribution at the
IP. As shown in Fig. 2, this distribution has a huge energy
spread. The disrupted beam then was tracked to the sec-

1

Figure 2: Disrupted beam energy spread at IP.

Figure 3: x and y distributions vs. δ at the SF for horizontal
and vertical chicane, respectively.

ondary focus using DIMAD.

The small betatron beam size and non-zero dispersion at
the SF result in a signiﬁcant correlation between a particle
transverse position x (or y for vertical η) and energy. This
makes it possible to reconstruct the beam energy spectrum
based on the beam proﬁle measurement at the secondary
focus. Neglecting synchrotron radiation, a particle coming
into chicane on axis will have a transverse deﬂection

xη =

ηδ
1 + δ
at the secondary focus. Equation 2 can be used to estimate
the particle energy deviation δ based on measured x (or y)
and known η at the secondary focus:

(2)

δ =

x
η − x

.

(3)

Using Eq. 3, one can also convert measured beam pro-
ﬁle N (x) into the energy spectrum N (δ). Equation 3 is
only correct if δ is constant and the deﬂections are caused
entirely by dispersion. In reality, several other factors con-
tribute to particle position at the secondary focus:

• Betatron motion ∼ pβ(δ)ǫ.
• Synchrotron radiation causing random energy loss.
• Quadrupole misalignment and bending ﬁeld errors.
• Incoming beam offsets x∗, y∗ at the IP.

Measurement errors have to be taken into account as well.
Denoting the above contributions as ∆x, particle deﬂection
at the SF can be expressed as x = xη + ∆x. Clearly, an
accurate estimate of δ in Eq. 3 requires that |∆x| ≪ |xη|.

2.1 Energy Resolution Analysis

To verify the actual dependence of particle positions on
energy, the disrupted beam of 5·104 particles was tracked
from IP to SF. The simulation included synchrotron radia-
tion effects, but no magnet errors were used. The resultant
x and y distributions versus δ at the SF are shown in Fig. 3
for 2 cm horizontal and vertical chicane, respectively. The
solid line in Fig. 3 is the analytic displacement in Eq. 2, and
∆p
p is the initial energy error at the IP. Note that synchrotron
radiation between IP and SF reduces average particle δ at
the SF by ∼ 1.5×10−3 compared to IP δ.

As shown in Fig. 3, the particle ∆x spread versus δ is
wider in optics with the horizontal chicane due to a larger
σx. Therefore, the reconstruction of beam energy spectrum

based on beam proﬁle measurement should be more accu-
rate with the vertical chicane where the dispersive contri-
bution (Eq. 2) is dominant.

The energy resolution can be also examined using anal-
ysis suggested by Kubo [4]. In this method, the simulated
beam at SF is divided into almost monoenergetic slices
with different energy which are then evaluated in terms of
x and y size, position and orientation. Fig. 4 and 5 show
these slices at different δ in the form of one sigma ellipses
on the x-y plane. Clearly, the resolution between the slices
is better in the vertical chicane optics.

Note that the ellipse δ in Fig. 4 and 5 is the initial IP δ.
Synchrotron radiation randomly reduces the energy which
distorts particle deﬂections at the SF, but relatively it affects
more the particles with δ ∼ 0. This results in a dispropor-
tionally wide ellipse in the direction of dispersion at δ = 0.
This effect is negligible for |δ| > 1%.

Further analysis [1] shows that the ellipse size at SF is
approximately proportional to |δ|, which can be interpreted
as β(δ) ∼ δ2, and that this dependence mostly comes from
the shift of β(δ) waist. Analysis of the ellipse size and po-
sition shows that the ratio of an average particle displace-
ment at SF to the beam size as a function of δ is almost a
factor of 3 larger with the vertical dispersion, and therefore

Figure 4: Monoenergetic ellipses at the SF with ηx = 2 cm.

2

Figure 5: Monoenergetic ellipses at the secondary focus with ηy = 2 cm.

loss. At the very low energies, accuracy is reduced due to
low statistics in the beam tail and smaller ∆δ width. Ac-
cording to Eq. 4, one could obtain constant ∆δ distribution
for a beam proﬁle measurement with ∆x = (η−x)

2

η ∆δ.

is better for energy resolution.

2.2 Energy Spectrum Measurement

In the simulation, the beam proﬁle measurement at the
secondary focus was done using 50 µm steps over the range
of 25 mm in the direction of dispersion to simulate a wire
scanner. The particles were collected for each of the 50 µm
bins (x or y), and the beam proﬁle histogram N (x) was
generated, where N is the number of particles per bin. The
range beyond 25 mm was not considered due to low statis-
tics, and no measurement errors were included.

(4)

∆δ =

The beam energy spectrum N (δ) can be obtained from
the N (x) proﬁle by converting the x (or y) bins into δ bins.
According to Eq. 3, the width of δ-bin varies with x as
η

(η − x)2 ∆x,
where ∆x = 50 µm is the x (or y) bin width. At 2 cm
dispersion, the ∆δ width gradually reduces from 0.25% at
x = 0 to 0.05% at -25 mm. To avoid dependence on the
bin width, we normalized N (δ) to the corresponding width
∆δ. For a more general result, we also normalized N (δ)
to the total number of particles Ntot in the histogram. The
dN
dδ was compared with
resultant energy distribution
the initial spectrum at the IP. Both histograms are shown
in Fig. 6 for the horizontal and vertical chicane, where the
blue line (darker shade) is for the original IP spectrum and
the green line for the “measured” spectrum at SF. The δ
range in Fig. 6 is limited at about δ = −55% due to 25 mm
range used in the beam proﬁle measurement.

1
Ntot

Comparison of the histograms in Fig. 6 shows that optics
with the vertical chicane provides a more accurate recon-
struction of the initial IP energy spectrum. A closer view
shows that the vertical measurement even reproduces the
incoming double peak proﬁle near δ = 0, while the hori-
zontal histogram is not accurate in this range. In the hor-
izontal spectrum, there are some particles in δ > 0 range
that are not present in the initial IP distribution. This is the
result of larger horizontal betatron oscillations which are
interpreted as positive δ in Eq. 3. This effect, though, is
somewhat exaggerated in Fig. 6 due to logarithmic scale.

The most uncertainties in the measured energy spectrum
appear near δ = 0 and at the very low energy tail. At small
δ, the Eq. 3 may be not accurate due to relatively large beta-
tron oscillations and effects of synchrotron radiation energy

Figure 6: Original (blue, darker shade) and measured
(green) energy spectrum 1
Ntot

dN
dδ for x and y chicane.

3 CONCLUSION

Tracking simulations and beam analysis in the NLC ex-
traction line show that a beam proﬁle measurement at the
secondary focus can be used to reconstruct the disrupted
beam energy spectrum. Optics with the vertical chicane is
preferred because of the smaller ratio of betatron size to
dispersion and therefore better energy resolution.

4 REFERENCES

[1] Y. Nosochkov, et al., SLAC note LCC–0045 (2000).
[2] Y. Nosochkov, et al., SLAC–PUB–8096 (1999).
[3] Y.M. Nosochkov, et al., SLAC–PUB–8313 (1999).
[4] K. Kubo, presented at ISG5 Workshop (2000).
[5] K.A. Thompson, et al., SLAC note LCC–0014 (1999).
[6] D. Schulte, TESLA–97–08 (1996).
[7] K.A. Thompson, GUINEA–PIG simulations (2000).
[8] P. Tenenbaum, et al., SLAC–PUB–8136 (1999).

3

