1
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
6
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–8232
August 1999

Dynamic Aperture Studies for SPEAR 31

J. Corbett, Y. Nosochkov, J. Safranek
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

A. Garren
UCLA Center for Advanced Accelerators, Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract

The SSRL is investigating an accelerator upgrade project to replace the present 130 nm·rad
FODO lattice with an 18 nm·rad double bend achromat lattice: SPEAR 3. In this paper, we
review the methods used to maximize the SPEAR 3 dynamic aperture including optimization
of linear optics, betatron tune, chromaticity and coupling correction, and effects of machine
errors and insertion devices.

Presented at the 1999 IEEE Particle Accelerator Conference (PAC99)
New York City, New York, March 29 – April 2, 1999

1Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE–AC03–76SF00515.

DYNAMIC APERTURE STUDIES FOR SPEAR 3†

J. Corbett, Y. Nosochkov‡, J. Safranek, SLAC, Stanford, CA 94309
A. Garren, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095

Abstract

The SSRL is investigating an accelerator upgrade project
to replace the present 130 nm·rad FODO lattice with an 18
nm·rad double bend achromat lattice: SPEAR 3. In this pa-
per, we review the methods used to maximize the SPEAR 3
dynamic aperture including optimization of linear optics,
betatron tune, chromaticity and coupling correction, and
effects of machine errors and insertion devices.

1

INTRODUCTION

SPEAR 3 is a machine upgrade project under study at
It aims at replacing the current 130 nm·rad
SSRL [1].
FODO lattice with an 18 nm·rad double bend achromat
(DBA) lattice. To reduce the cost of the project and to
use the existing synchrotron light beam lines, the new de-
sign [2] closely follows the racetrack conﬁguration of the
SPEAR tunnel, with the magnet positions ﬁt to the 18 mag-
net girders. The 3 GeV lattice has two-fold symmetry and
periodicity with two identical arcs and two long straight
sections.

The lattice functions for one quarter of the ring are
shown in Fig. 1. Similar to other light source rings, it has
been found advantageous to use combined function bends
to relax the optics and reduce sextupole strength.

Though the DBA design has an advantage of a high
brightness beam, the strong focusing increases beam sensi-
tivity to machine errors and generates larger chromaticity.
The stronger sextupoles increase the amplitude dependent
and non-linear chromatic aberrations and reduce the dy-
namic aperture. It is especially important to maximize the
horizontal size of dynamic aperture to minimize the Tou-
schek effect and allow large injection oscillations.

In the following sections we review the lattice optimiza-
tion and tracking studies. The tracking simulation was
done using LEGO [3]. The dynamic aperture was cal-
culated at the symmetry point between arc cells where
βx/βy = 10.1/4.8 m.

2 ERROR FREE LATTICE

The DBA cell was made to ﬁt the existing 11.7 m cell
length with the magnet positions constrained by the exist-
ing photon beam lines and ∼3 m space for the insertion
devices (ID). This results in a compact DBA design with
stronger focusing and increased sensitivity to machine er-
rors. Vertical focusing added to the bends increased the
separation of x and y focusing and reduced strength of the

† Work supported by the Department of Energy Contract DE–AC03–
76SF00515 and the Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemi-
cal Sciences.

‡ E-mail: yuri@slac.stanford.edu.

Figure 1: Optics of one quadrant of SPEAR 3.

quadrupoles and sextupoles. Further reduction of the sex-
tupole strengths was achieved by moving the bends as far
apart as possible.

The phase advance per arc cell was chosen to be near
µx=0.75×2π and µy=0.25×2π. This provides conditions
for local cancellation of: 1) geometric aberrations from arc
sextupoles located −I apart, and 2) ﬁrst order chromatic
beta waves from sextupoles and quadrupoles located π/2
apart, as well as systematic quadrupole errors. With this
choice, the total tune would be near νx=14.5 and νy=5.5.
To move the working tune away from the 1/2 resonance and
to minimize resistive wall impedance effects, the tune was
moved into the lower quarter on the tune plane (ν<1/2).

The matching cell optics was optimized by performing a
horizontal dynamic aperture scan across the matching cell
phase advance. The dynamic aperture including δ= ∆p
p up
to ±3% was maximized at µx,m = 0.78×2π and µy,m =
0.42×2π per matching cell.

To minimize the effect of low order betatron resonances
the working tune was chosen slightly below 1/4, away from
the 3rd and 4th order resonance lines. The ﬁnal choice
(νx = 14.19, νy = 5.23) was based on favorable horizon-
tal injection conditions and the results of dynamic aperture
tune scan. With the chosen tune, the phase advance per arc
cell is µx = 0.7907×2π and µy = 0.2536×2π.

As mentioned previously, the chosen phase advance in
the arc cells provides conditions for local compensation of
chromatic and geometric aberrations. This scheme would
work optimally for the number of arc cells of 4×integer.
With only 7 cells per arc, constrained by the SPEAR ge-
ometry, the correction is not complete.

The study showed that chromaticity correction with only
2 sextupole families did not provide adequate dynamic
aperture for particles up to δ=±3%. Since the 2 families
only compensate linear chromaticity, the off-momentum

1

Table 1: Systematic rms multipole ﬁeld errors.

Table 2: Random rms multipole ﬁeld errors.

Magnet
Dipole

r(mm)
30

Quadrupole
Sextupole

32
32

n
2
3-14
6,10,14
4
5
9
15

∆Bn/B
1 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
−8.8 × 10−4
−6.6 × 10−4
−1.6 × 10−3
−4.5 × 10−4

aperture is limited by the non-linear chromatic effects. A
signiﬁcant amount of non-linear chromaticity is generated
in the matching cells which break periodicity of the 14
arc cells and contribute ∼20% to the total chromaticity.
Two additional sextupole families (SFI, SDI) placed in the
matching cells reduced the non-linear terms by a factor of
3 and signiﬁcantly improved the off-momentum aperture.
The matching cell sextupoles also generate geometric
aberrations and therefore have to be kept relatively weak
in order to preserve the on-momentum aperture. The op-
timum strengths of the SFI, SDI were evaluated through a
horizontal aperture scan versus SFI, SDI strengths.

To increase optical separation between the SF and SD
sextupoles two other options were studied. In one option,
the SD was combined with part of the adjacent bend. This
increased βy but reduced dispersion at the SD which led to
smaller dynamic aperture. In the second study, the SF was
combined with the center quadrupole QFC. This increased
dispersion and βx at the SF and reduced its strength, but
dynamic aperture did not improve.

3 MACHINE ERRORS

In tracking simulations, we included random main ﬁeld er-
rors, random and systematic multipole errors, and random
alignment errors. In addition, a skew octupole component
was added to skew quadrupoles combined with sextupoles,
and a feed-down multipole ﬁeld was included due to a large
trajectory in the bends [4].

The alignment rms errors for bends, quads and sex-
tupoles used in the study were: ∆x,∆y = 200 µm, roll
= 500 µrad. The rms main ﬁeld errors due to differences
in magnetic core length were assumed to be (1-2)·10−3.

The multipole ﬁeld errors were deﬁned in terms of ratio
of the multipole ﬁeld ∆Bn (normal or skew) to the main
magnet ﬁeld B at radius r, where n = 1, 2, . . . is the multi-
pole order starting with a bend. The normal systematic and
random rms values ∆Bn/B used in the study are listed in
Tables 1,2. Conservatively large values were speciﬁed for
n = 3, 6, 10, 14 multipoles on the quads.

The skew quadrupoles physically combined with chro-
matic sextupoles provided an efﬁcient coupling correction.
In total, we used 24 skew quads arranged in 4 families. The
induced vertical dispersion was small and far outweighed
by the improved aperture. As a future option, the vertical
dispersion can be corrected as well by using more indepen-
dent skew quads. The combined skew quad and sextupole

Magnet
Dipole
Quadrupole

r(mm)
30
32

Sextupole

32

n
2
3,6,10,14
4,5,7-9,11-13
5
7

∆Bn/B
1 × 10−4
5 × 10−4
1 × 10−4
1.5 × 10−3
4.8 × 10−4

gives rise to a skew octupole ﬁeld that was systematically
added in the simulations.

4 DYNAMIC APERTURE WITH ERRORS

For tracking simulations, LEGO ﬁrst generates a set of
magnet errors, then applies tune, orbit, chromaticity and
coupling corrections, and ﬁnally tracks the particles. For
tune correction, two families of doublet quads in the cells
were used. Linear chromaticity typically was adjusted to
zero with the SF, SD sextupoles. An RF voltage of 3.2 MV
was used to generate synchrotron oscillations.

The resultant dynamic aperture without ID’s for 6 ran-
dom seeds of machine errors is shown in Fig. 2. The hori-
zontal dynamic aperture is 18-20 mm for δ=±3% momen-
tum range. This provides sufﬁcient aperture for a long Tou-
schek lifetime and injection oscillations.

In real machines, the linear chromaticity ξ=∆ν/δ is typ-
ically set slightly positive. Since non-zero chromaticity
increases the momentum dependent tune spread, the off-
momentum particles would cross more betatron resonances
during synchrotron oscillations. Resonance effects can re-
duce the δ6=0 aperture if ξ is large. The δ=0 aperture is
affected only by the increased sextupole strength.

Fig. 3 shows dependence of horizontal dynamic aperture
on ξ for various δ (the vertical dependence is similar). In
this study, the chromaticity was set equal in both planes.
Clearly, for the SPEAR 3 tune the particles lose stability
near 1/2 resonance, when ∆ν≈-0.2. Though the dynamic
aperture for the core beam (small δ) is not much affected,
the Touschek lifetime can be reduced for ξ>5.

In the study, typical β distortions after correction were
∆β/β<±10%. In a real machine larger modulations can

Figure 2: Dynamic aperture for 6 seeds of machine errors
for δ = 0 (solid) and 3% (dash).

2

Figure 3: Horizontal dynamic aperture versus linear chro-
maticity for δ = 0 (solid), 1% (dash) and 3% (dot-dash).

Figure 4: Peak vertical excursion vs initial horizontal am-
plitude for δ = 0, 1, 2, 3%.

occur. To verify the effect of large β modulation the quad
ﬁeld errors in two matching quad families were increased
to generate ∆βx/βx≈±30% and ∆βy/βy≈±20%. The
observed aperture reduction was about 15%. Though this
aperture is still adequate to operate the machine, such large
errors have to be resolved in practice.

The effect of large orbit distortions was studied by in-
cluding an additional set of uncorrected rms alignment er-
rors. For rms orbit distortions of ∆x=3 mm, ∆y=1.5 mm
a maximum of 2 mm reduction of dynamic aperture was
observed for the particles within δ<±3%.

Similarly, large sextupole misalignments were studied
while the orbit was well corrected. In simulation, 1 mm rms
sextupole misalignments were included which are equiv-
alent to about 10 times the focusing errors from ring
quadrupoles. Of the 6 seeds studied, 5 cases showed >17
mm horizontal dynamic aperture for δ=0 particles. The ver-
tical aperture was larger than the ±6 mm ID chamber size.
At δ=3%, the horizontal aperture remained >13 mm.

The actual physical aperture can be a limiting factor for
a beam lifetime.
In the vertical plane, SPEAR has two
ID’s with y=±6 mm vacuum chamber. In case of strong
coupling, the large off-momentum horizontal motion can
be transferred into vertical amplitude which could increase
beam loss at the vertical physical aperture. To study this
effect, we monitored the maximum vertical excursion at an
ID location as a function of initial horizontal amplitude.
Fig. 4 shows the peak y-orbit averaged over 6 random sets
of machine errors with δ=0-3% energy oscillations. At 10
mm injection oscillations, the induced vertical amplitude is
below 2 mm and should not limit the beam lifetime.

In addition to chromatic effects, sextupoles generate ge-
ometric aberrations such as amplitude dependent tune shift
and high order resonances. Clearly, the dynamic aperture
would reach its maximum if the geometric aberrations were
zero. One way to verify this limit is to track particles with
ﬁxed δ=0 and without sextupoles. The simulation showed
that on-momentum aperture could be 40% larger without
sextupole aberrations.

The geometric effects can be reduced by using ’har-
monic’ sextupoles placed in non-dispersive regions. Based
on analysis in [5] we tested a scheme of two harmonic
sextupole families placed in the arc cells. The sextupole
strengths were scanned to maximize dynamic aperture. The
harmonic correction reduced the amplitude dependent tune
shift by about 40% and the error free dynamic aperture im-
proved by 10-15%. With machine errors, however, the im-
provement reduces to a minimum. Currently, the harmonic
correction is not included in the design.

The ﬁelds in insertion devices further reduce the dy-
namic aperture. The detailed report of wiggler effects in
SPEAR 3 is presented in [6].
In summary, the ﬁrst or-
der wiggler focusing will be locally compensated using
cell quadrupoles on either side of a wiggler. Simulations
showed that with corrected wigglers, included systematic
multipole errors and intrinsic wiggler ﬁelds up to dode-
capole, the dynamic aperture reduces to about 18 mm and
8-9 mm in x and y planes, respectively.

5 CONCLUSIONS

Tracking studies combined with optimization of SPEAR 3
lattice show sufﬁcient dynamic aperture for 10 mm injec-
tion oscillations and >100 hrs of Touschek lifetime. The
dynamic aperture results have also been conﬁrmed by M.
Borland with the tracking code ELEGANT.

6 REFERENCES

[1] R. Hettel, S. Brennan, Synchrotron Radiation News, 11,

No. 1 (1998).

[2] SPEAR 3 Conceptual Design Report, in press.
[3] Y. Cai, et al., SLAC-PUB-7642 (1997).
[4] J. Corbett et al., “Multipole Spilldown in the SPEAR 3

Dipole Magnets”, these proceedings (1999).

[5] E. A. Crosbie, Proceedings of the 1987 IEEE Part. Acc.

Conf., Washington, DC, p. 443 (1987).

[6] J. Corbett, Y. Nosochkov, “Effect of Insertion Devices in

SPEAR-3”, these proceedings (1999).

3

