1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
0
9
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spontaneous and stimulated undulator
radiation by an ultra-relativistic positron
channeling in a periodically bent crystal ⋆,⋆⋆

W. Krause 1 A. V. Korol A. V. Solov’yov W. Greiner

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit¨at,
Postfach 11 19 32, 60054 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Abstract

We discuss the radiation generated by positrons channeling in a crystalline undu-
lator. The undulator is produced by periodically bending a single crystal with an
amplitude much larger than the interplanar spacing. Diﬀerent approaches for bend-
ing the crystal are described and the restrictions on the parameters of the bending
are discussed. We also present numeric calculations of the spontaneous emitted radi-
ation and estimate the conditions for stimulated emission. Our investigations show
that the proposed mechanism could be an interesting source for high energy photons
and is worth to be studied experimentally.

Key words: undulator radiation, channeling positrons, periodically bent crystal
PACS: 41.60

1 Introduction

We discuss a new mechanism, initially proposed in [1,2], for the generation
of high energy photons by means of the planar channeling of ultra-relativistic
positrons through a periodically bent crystal. In this system there appears,
in addition to the well-known channeling radiation, an undulator type radia-
tion due to the periodic motion of the channeling positrons which follow the
⋆ long version of our contribution to the 22nd International Free Electron Laser
Conference, Durham, NC, USA, 13-18 August 2000
⋆⋆Peprinted
1–3,
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/nima.
1 E-mail: krause@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de

474,
in press, Copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier Science.

and Methods A, Volume

from Nuclear

Instruments

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

2 February 2008

bending of the crystallographic planes. The intensity and the characteristic
frequencies of this undulator radiation can be easily varied by changing the
positrons energy and the parameters of the crystal bending.

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of spontaneous and stimulated radiation due to
positrons channeling in a periodically bent crystal. The y- and z-scales are incom-
patible!

The mechanism of the photon emission by means of the crystalline undulator
is illustrated in Figure 1. It is important to stress that we consider the case
when the the amplitude a of the bending is much larger than the interplanar
spacing d (∼ 10−8 cm) of the crystal (a ∼ 10 d), and, simultaneously, is much
less than the period λ of the bending (a/λ ∼ 10−5 . . . 10−4).

In addition to the spontaneous photon emission by the crystalline undulator,
the scheme we propose leads to a possibility to generate stimulated emission.
This is due to the fact, that photons emitted at the points of the maximum
curvature of the trajectory travel almost parallel to the beam and thus, stimu-
late the photon generation in the vicinity of all successive maxima and minima
of the trajectory.

2 The bent crystal

The bending of the crystal can be achieved either dynamically or statically. In
[1,2] it was proposed to use a transverse acoustic wave to dynamically bend
the crystal. The important feature of this scheme is that the time period of the
acoustic wave is much larger than the time of ﬂight τ of a bunch of positrons
through the crystal. Then, on the time scale of τ , the shape of the crystal
bending doesn’t change, so that all particles of the bunch channel inside the
same undulator. One possibility to couple the acoustic waves to the crystal is
to place a piezo sample atop the crystal and to use radio frequency to excite
oscillations.

2

The usage of a statically and periodically bent crystal was discussed in [3].
The idea is to construct a crystalline undulator based on graded composition
strained layers.

We now consider the conditions for stable channeling. The channeling process
in a periodically bent crystal takes place if the maximum centrifugal force in
the channel, Fcf ≈ mγc2/Rmin (Rmin being the minimum curvature radius of
the bent channel), is less than the maximal force due to the interplanar ﬁeld,
Fint which is equal to the maximum gradient of the interplanar ﬁeld (see [2]).
More speciﬁcally, the ratio C = Fcf /Fint has to be smaller than 0.1, otherwise
the phase volume of channeling trajectories is too small (see also [4]). Thus,
the inequality C < 0.1 connects the energy of the particle, ε = mγc2, the
parameters of the bending (these enter through the quantity Rmin), and the
characteristics of the crystallographic plane.

A particle channeling in a crystal (straight or bent) undergoes scattering by
electrons and nuclei of the crystal. These random collisions lead to a gradual
increase of the particle energy associated with the transverse oscillations in
the channel. As a result, the transverse energy at some distance Ld from
the entrance point exceeds the depth of the interplanar potential well, and
the particle leaves the channel. The quantity Ld is called the dechanneling
length [5]. To estimate Ld one may follow the method described in [6,7]. Thus,
to consider the undulator radiation formed in a crystalline undulator, it is
meaningful to assume that the crystal length does not exceed Ld.

Let us demonstrate how one can estimate, for given crystal and energy ε, the
ranges of the parameters a and λ which are subject to the conditions for-
mulated above. For doing this we assume that the shape of the centerline of
the periodically bent crystal is a sin(2π z/λ). Figure 2 illustrates the above
mentioned restrictions in the case of ε = 500 MeV positrons channeling in Si
between the (110) crystallographic planes. The diagonal straight lines corre-
spond to various values (as indicated) of the parameter C. The curved lines
correspond to various values (as indicated) of the number of undulator periods
N related to the dechanneling length Ld through N = Ld/λ. The horizontal
lines mark the values of the amplitude equal to d (with d = 1.92 · 10−8 cm
being the (110) interplanar distance in Si) and to 10 d. The vertical line marks
the value λ = 2.335 · 10−3 cm, for which the spectra (see section 3) were
calculated.

3 Spectra of the spontaneous emitted radiation

We calculated the spectra of the spontaneous emitted radiation using the
quasiclassical method [8]. The trajectories of the particles were calculated

3

Fig. 2. The range of parameters a and λ for a bent Si(110) crystal at ε = 500 MeV.

numerically and then the spectra were evaluated [7]. The latter include both
radiation mechanisms, the undulator and the channeling radiation.

The spectral distributions of the total radiation emitted in forward direction
for ε = 500 MeV positrons channeling in Si between the (110) crystallographic
planes are plotted in ﬁgure 3. The wavelength is ﬁxed at λ = 2.335 · 10−3 cm,
while the ratio a/d is changed from 0 to 10. The length of the crystal is
Ld = 3.5 · 10−2 cm and corresponds to N = 15 undulator periods.

Fig. 3. Spectral distributions of the total radiation emitted in forward direction for
ε = 500 MeV positrons channeling in Si between the (110) crystallographic planes
for diﬀerent a/d ratios.

The ﬁrst graph in ﬁgure 3 corresponds to the case of the straight channel
(a/d = 0) and, hence, presents the spectral dependence of the ordinary chan-
neling radiation only. The spectrum starts at ~ω ≈ 960 keV, reaches its max-
imum value at 1190 keV, and steeply cuts oﬀ at 1200 keV. This peak cor-
responds to the radiation into the ﬁrst harmonic of the ordinary channeling
radiation, and there is almost no radiation into higher harmonics. The latter
fact is consistent with general theory of dipole radiation by ultra-relativistic
particles undergoing quasiperiodic motion. The dipole approximation is valid

4

provided the corresponding undulator parameter pc = 2πγ(ac/λc) is much less
than 1. In this relation ac and λc stand for the characteristic scales of, corre-
spondingly, the amplitude and the wavelength of the quasiperiodic trajectory.
In the case of 500 MeV positrons channeling between the (110) planes in Si
one has pc ≈ 0.2 ≪ 1 and all the channeling radiation is concentrated within
some interval in the vicinity of the energy of the ﬁrst harmonic.

Increasing the a/d ratio leads to modiﬁcations in the spectrum of radiation.
The changes which occur manifest themselves via three main features, (i) the
lowering of the ordinary channeling radiation peak, (ii) the gradual increase
of the intensity of undulator radiation due to the crystal bending, (iii) the
appearing of additional structure (the sub-peaks) in the vicinity of the ﬁrst
harmonic of the ordinary channeling radiation. A more detailed analysis of
these spectra can be found in [7].

4 Discussion of stimulated photon emission

The scheme illustrated by ﬁgure 1 allows to discuss the possibility to generate
stimulated emission of high energy photons by means of a bunch of ultra-
relativistic positrons moving in a periodically bent channel. Indeed the photons
emitted in the nearly forward direction at some maximum or minimum point
of the trajectory by a group of particles of the bunch stimulate the emission
of photons with the same energy by another (succeeding) group of particles
of the same bunch when it reaches the next maximum/minimum.

In [2] estimates for the gain factor for the spontaneous emission in crystalline
undulators were obtained. It was demonstrated that to achieve a total gain
equal to 1 on the scale of the crystal length (equal to the dechanneling length),
one has to consider volume densities n of the channeling positrons on the
level of 1020 . . . 1021 cm−3 for positron energies within the range 0.5 . . . 5 GeV.
These magnitudes are high enough to be questioned whether they can be really
reached.

Let us estimate the volume density n of a positron bunch which can be achieved
in modern colliders. To do this we use the data presented in [9, see p. 142]
for a beam of 50 GeV positrons available at SLC (SLAC, 1989). The bunch
length is 0.1 cm and the beam radius is 1.5 µm (H) and 0.5 µm (V), resulting
in the volume of one bunch V = 2.4 · 10−9 cm3. The number of particles per
bunch is given as 4.0 · 1010. Therefore, one obtains n = 1.7 · 1019 cm−3.

This value, although being lower by an order of magnitude than the estimates
obtained in [2], shows that the necessary densities should be reachable in the
future with accelerators optimized for high particle densities.

5

Finally let us discuss the required transverse emittance of the beam. For doing
this we need to consider the angle between the particle’s trajectory and the
crystal plane. If this angle is larger than the Lindhard angle ΨP, the particle
will not be captured into the channeling mode and leaves the channel immedi-
ately [10]. For 5 GeV positrons channeling between the (110) planes of silicon,
we have ΨP = 72 µrad and for 50 GeV positrons it equals to ΨP = 23 µrad.

One can compare these values with the divergence of the SLC beam, which
transverse emittance in vertical direction is given as 0.05 π rad nm [9]. With
a vertical beam radius of 0.5 µm we get for the vertical beam divergence
Ψ = 100 µrad. Thus the divergence of the beam is about four times higher
than the acceptance of the channel and so only a quarter of all particles will
participate in the channeling process. Evidently it is necessary to reduce the
divergence of the beam, for example by increasing the beam radius. But then
it is also necessary to reduce the bunch length, to keep the particle density
high enough. Fortunately, like for the particle density, the values achievable
today diﬀer only about one order of magnitude from the values estimated
above for the stimulated emission.

5 Conclusion

To conclude we point out that the use of crystalline undulators is a new
interesting way to produce high energy radiation. As we have shown above,
the present accelerator technology is nearly suﬃcient to achieve the necessary
conditions. Also, it looks like that by means of modern technology it is possible
to construct the required crystalline undulator, which, as compared to the
undulators based on magnetic ﬁelds, will allow to generate photon emission of
much higher energy.

In our opinion the eﬀect described above is worth experimental study which,
as a ﬁrst step, may be concentrated on measurements of the spontaneous
undulator radiation spectra.

The related problems not discussed in this paper, but which are under con-
sideration, include the investigation of the crystal damage due to the acoustic
wave, photon ﬂux and beam propagations.

Acknowledgements

The research was supported by DFG, GSI, and BMBF. AVK and AVS ac-
knowledge the support from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.

6

References

[1] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, J. Phys. G. 24 (1998) L45.

[2] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 8 (1) (1999) 49.

[3] U. Mikkelsen, E. Uggerhøj, Nucl. Inst. and Meth. B 160 (2000) 435.

[4] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 9 (1) (2000) 77.

[5] D. S. Gemmel, Rev. Mod. Phys. 46 (1) (1974) 129.

[6] V. M. Biruykov, Y. A. Chesnokov, V. I. Kotov, Crystal Channeling and its

Application at High-Energy Accelerators, Springer, Berlin, 1996.

[7] W. Krause, A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, J. Phys. G: Nucl. and

Part. Phys. 26 (2000) L87.

[8] V. N. Baier, V. M. Katkov, V. M. Strakhovenko, High Energy Electromagnetic
Processes in Oriented Single Crystals, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1998.

[9] C. Caso et al, Review of Particle Physics, Eur. Phys. J. C 3 (1998).

[10] J. Lindhard, K. Dan. Viddensk. Selsk. Mat. Phys. Medd. 34 (1) (1965) 14.

7

