1
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
9
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Photon emission by ultra-relativistic positrons
in crystalline undulators: the high-energy
regime. ⋆

W. Krause 1 A. V. Korol A. V. Solov’yov W. Greiner

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit¨at,
Postfach 11 19 32, 60054 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Abstract

This paper discusses the undulator radiation emitted by high-energy positrons dur-
ing planar channeling in periodically bent crystals. We demonstrate that the con-
struction of the undulator for positrons with energies of 10 GeV and above is only
possible if one takes into account the radiative energy losses. The frequency of the
undulator radiation depends on the energy of the particle. Thus the decrease of the
particle’s energy during the passage of the crystal should result in the destruction of
the undulator radiation regime. However, we demonstrate that it is possible to avoid
the destructive inﬂuence of the radiative losses on the frequency of the undulator
radiation by the appropriate variation of the shape of the crystal channels. We also
discuss a method by which, to our mind, it would be possible to prepare the crystal
with the desired properties of its channels.

Key words: undulator radiation, channeling positrons, periodically bent crystal,
tapered undulator, strained crystals
PACS: 41.60.-m

1 Introduction

In this paper we discuss a mechanism, initially proposed in [1,2], for the genera-
tion of high-energy photons by means of planar channeling of ultra-relativistic
positrons through a periodically bent crystal. In addition to the well-known
channeling radiation, there appears an undulator type radiation due to the
⋆ contributed to the 23rd International Free Electron Laser Conference, Darmstadt,
Germany, 20-24 August 2001
1 E-mail: krause@th.physik.uni-frankfurt.de

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

21 February 2014

periodic motion of the channeling positrons which follow the bending of the
crystallographic planes. The intensity and the characteristic frequencies of this
undulator radiation can be easily varied by changing the positrons energy and
the parameters of the crystal bending.

spontaneous
undulator
radiation

stimulated
emission

a

d

z

S(z)

l

stable
channeling

periodically
bent
crystal

Fig. 1. Schematic ﬁgure of the crystalline undulator. The scale in y direction is
magniﬁed by a factor > 104. The function S(z) deﬁnes the shape of the centerline
of the periodically bent channel.

The mechanism of the photon emission by means of the crystalline undulator is
illustrated in ﬁgure 1. It is important to stress that we consider the case when
the amplitude a of the bending is much larger than the interplanar spacing d
10−8 cm) of the crystal (a
10 d), and, simultaneously, is much less than
(
∼
∼
10−5 . . . 10−4 λ).
the period λ of the bending (a

∼

In addition to the spontaneous photon emission the scheme leads to the possi-
bility to generate stimulated emission. This is due to the fact, that the photons
emitted at the points of maximum curvature of the trajectory travel almost
parallel to the beam and thus, stimulate the photon generation in the vicinity
of all successive maxima and minima of the trajectory.

We consider two methods for bending the crystal. First, a transverse acoustic
wave could be used to bend the crystal dynamically [1,2]. One possibility to
create acoustic waves in a crystal is to place a piezo sample atop the crystal
and to use radio frequency to excite oscillations. Second, a statically and
periodically bent crystal could be constructed using graded strained layers [3].
We will present a detailed description how a static crystalline undulator can
be produced.

The conditions for stable channeling has been discussed in [2,4,5]. Channeling
only takes place if the maximum centrifugal force in the bent channel, Fcf ≈
mγc2/Rmin (Rmin being the minimum curvature radius of the bent channel),

2

is less than the maximal force due to the interplanar ﬁeld, Fint which is equal
to the maximum gradient of the interplanar ﬁeld (see [2]). As shown in [4] the
ratio C = Fcf /Fint has to be smaller than 0.15, otherwise the phase volume of
channeling trajectories is too small. Thus, the inequality C < 0.15 connects the
energy of the particle, ε = mγc2, the parameters of the bending (these enter
through the quantity Rmin), and the characteristics of the crystallographic
plane.

Another important eﬀect is the dechanneling of the projectiles. The channel-
ing particles scatter with electrons and nuclei of the crystal. These random
collisions lead to a gradual increase of the particle energy associated with the
transverse oscillations in the channel. As a result, the transverse energy at
some distance Ld from the entrance point exceeds the depth of the interplanar
potential well, and the particle leaves the channel. The quantity Ld is called
the dechanneling length [6] and can be calculated using the methods described
in [5,7]. Thus, to consider the undulator radiation formed in a crystalline un-
dulator, it is meaningful to assume that the crystal length does not exceed
Ld.

In [5] we estimated the parameters a and λ for given energy ε, regarding the
dechanneling length of the bent crystal and the reduction of the phase-space
volume due to the bending. For 500 MeV positrons in Si(110) the optimal
10−3 cm. The spectral distribution
parameters are a/d = 10 and λ = 2.335
of the emitted radiation in this case is discussed in the next section (see also
[5]).

·

In the present paper we discuss the possibility to construct undulators to
generate photons with energies larger than 1 MeV using positron energies
above 10 GeV when the radiative energy losses cannot be neglected and, thus,
must be taken into account [4].

The frequency of photons generated in the undulator is determined by the
energy of the projectiles and also by the undulator parameter (for deﬁnition
see equation (1)). In the regime in which the energy of the projectiles is not
constant during their passage through the undulator, the frequency of the
emitted undulator radiation can nevertheless be kept constant if one chooses
the appropriate variation of the shape of the undulator along its length.

We also discuss a method by which, to our mind, it would be possible to
prepare crystals with the desired properties of their channels.

3

2 Spectra of the spontaneous emitted radiation

To illustrate the undulator radiation phenomenon, which we discuss, let us
consider the spectra of spontaneous radiation emitted during the passage of
positrons through periodically bent crystals.

The photon emission spectra have been calculated using the quasiclassical
method [8]. The trajectories of the particles were calculated numerically and
then the spectra were evaluated [5]. The latter include both radiation mecha-
nisms, the undulator and the channeling radiation.

Figure 2 shows the spectral distribution of the total radiation emitted in for-
ward direction for ε = 500 MeV positrons channeling in Si along the (110)
crystallographic planes. The wavelength of the periodically bent crystal is
10−3 cm and its amplitude is a = 10 d. For the length of the crystal
λ = 2.335
10−2 cm. This corresponds to N = 15 undulator periods.
we chose Ld = 3.5

·

·

a/d=10

200

150

100

50

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

Photon energy in MeV

Fig. 2. Spectral distributions of the total radiation emitted in forward direction for
ε = 500 MeV positrons channeling in Si along the (110) crystallographic planes for
a/d = 10.

The ﬁrst and third harmonic of the undulator radiation are visible on the
left side of the spectrum (about 100 keV). The large triangular peak around 1
MeV corresponds to the ﬁrst harmonic of the channeling radiation. The smaller
triangular peaks appear due to the coupling of undulator and channeling radi-
ation. The two types of radiation are well separated and the inﬂuence from the
channeling radiation on the undulator radiation is negligible small. A detailed
discussion of this spectrum is given in [5].

3 Undulator eﬀect in the high-energy regime

The spectra of the emitted radiation presented in the previous section has
been calculated in the regime in which the energy losses of the positrons during
their passage through the crystal are negligible. In this section, we analyze the
opposite situation, which occurs when the energy of the projectiles becomes
larger than 10 GeV. On the ﬁrst glance, the undulator phenomenon can hardly

4

take place in this energy range, because the energy of positrons during their
passage through the crystal can no longer be considered as constant due to
the radiative energy losses [4].

Indeed, the frequency ω(1)
the forward direction is given by [2,9]:

und of the ﬁrst harmonic of the undulator radiation in

ω(1)
und =

4 ω0 γ2
2 + p2

und

=

4π c γ2(z)

λ + 2π2 a2

λ γ2(z)

.

(1)

Here we use ω0 = 2π c/λ and the undulator parameter pund is deﬁned as
pund = γ 2π a/λ. The shape of the crystal is S(z) = a sin(kz).

Equation (1) shows that the frequency of the emitted radiation depends on
the energy of the projectile. If the decrease of the particle’s energy due to
the radiative losses is signiﬁcant (γ(z) < γ0 for z > 0), the frequency ω(1)
und
becomes dependent on the particle’s penetration distance z into the crystal.
The decrease of the particle’s energy leads to the broadening of the undulator
lines in the photon emission spectrum and the reduction of their intensity.

However, the monochromaticity of the undulator radiation in the high-energy
regime can be restored if one allows the variation of the shape of the crystal
channels. Let us consider this condition in more detail and assume that the
shape of the channels in the crystal is as follows:

S(z) = a(z) sin(ϕ(z))

(2)

with ϕ(z) =
the bent crystal channels as function of the penetration depth z.

z
0 2π/λ dz, a(z) and λ(z) are the amplitude and the “period” of
R

Let us formulate the conditions for the choice of the shape function S(z).
For the given dependence γ(z) the functions a(z) and λ(z) have to be cho-
sen to keep constant the frequency of the ﬁrst harmonics, ω(1)
und(z) = const.
In addition, we require C(z) = C = const. It was shown in [5,9], that the
parameter C = ε(z)/(Rmin(z)
max) is characteristic for the channeling pro-
cess in bent channels and the regime in which the process happens. Here,
λ2(z)/(4π a(z)) is the curvature radius of the shape function S(z) in
Rmin ≈
the points of its extrema.

U ′

·

The two conditions ω(1)
und(z) = const. and C(z) = C = const. and the knowl-
edge of γ(z) allow the calculation of a(z) and λ(z). Thus the shape S(z) of
the crystal is known. For comparatively low energies of the projectile (ε < 10
GeV) the dependence γ(z) can be calculated using the approach suggested
in [4]. To describe the radiative losses of particles in the high-energy regime,

5

one has to modify the formulas outlined in [4] and consider the continuously
decreasing energy.

Thus, using the initial values ε0, a0 and λ0, one can calculate the energy ε(z)
as function of the penetration distance z. Using this dependency we then can
calculate the shape S(z) of the channel. The latter, in turn, ensures that the
frequency of the undulator radiation and the parameter C remain constant
during the passage of the positrons through the crystal, even in the regime in
which the radiative energy losses are high. We consider the possibility of the
construction of such bent crystals in the next section.

To illustrate the described method we consider positrons with an initial energy
of 50 GeV channeling in Si(110). Figure 3 (a) presents the energy of positrons
as a function of the penetration depth. We have chosen C = 0.15 and the initial
amplitude a0 = 10 d. These parameters deﬁne λ0 = qε π2 a d/(U ′
max C) =
10−2 cm. The argumentation for the choice of C and a one ﬁnds in
2.25
[4] and [5]. The calculated values for λ(z) and a(z) are presented in ﬁgure 3
(b). Knowing these dependencies, one can easily calculate the shape of the
channels.

·

V
e
G

 
/
 
)
z
(

55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20

(a)

e (z)

(b)

l (z)
a(z)

m
c
 
/
 
)
z
(

2.4e−02

2.2e−02

2.0e−02

1.8e−02

1.6e−02

1.4e−02

1.2e−02

2.4e−07

2.2e−07

2.0e−07

1.8e−07

1.6e−07

1.4e−07

1.2e−07

m
c
 
/
 
)
z
(
a

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

z / cm

z / cm

Fig. 3. (a) The energy of the positrons as function of the penetration depth z in
the high-energy channeling regime for Si(110) and initial positron energy 50 GeV.
The averaging over the possible initial conditions of the positrons was performed as
described in [4]. (b) The wavelength λ and the amplitude a of the bent crystal as
function of the penetration depth z.

The particle density of channeling positron beams decreases exponentially
along the channel [7,9]. The dechanneling length for positrons of ε = 50 GeV
and C = 0.15 is approximately 1.46 cm and the number of undulator periods
on this length is about 75. The emitted undulator radiation should have high
intensity and narrow spectral width. The energy of photons at the ﬁrst har-
monic emitted in the forward direction is ~ω(1)
und = 7.1 MeV and the spectral
width can be estimated as Γ(1)

und/Nund = 44 keV.

und/2 = ~ω(1)

6

e
l
4 Growing of crystals with periodically bent channels

In this section we propose a method of preparing crystals with periodically
bent channels whose shape function S(z) has either the pure sine form, a sin kz,
or a more general one deﬁned by (2). In [10] the deﬂection of proton beams
by means of strained crystal layers was demonstrated. The construction of
the crystals was described and experimental data that proves the deﬂection of
protons was presented.

Using well-known methods of crystal growing (like molecular beam epitaxy
or chemical vapour deposition, see the references in [10]) it is possible to add
single crystal layers onto a substrate. Let us consider a pure silicon substrate
on which a Si1−xGex layer is added (x denotes the germanium content in this
layer). The doping with germanium leads to the enlargement of the lattice
constant of the added layer. The strain due to the lattice mismatch of the
substrate and the Si1−xGex layer leads to an increase of the lattice spacing
perpendicular to the surface of the substrate (the ˜z-direction in ﬁgure 4). The
lattice constant parallel to the surface remains unchanged.

Prior to discussing the growing of periodically bent channels, let us summarize
the main ideas presented in [10] that we need for our description. The spacing
between the (100) layers is dSi = 1.358 ˚A in Si and dGe = 1.414 ˚A in Ge. The
distance between two Si1−xGex layers is given by d(x) = dSi + ∆d
x, where
dSi. In [10] the critical thickness of the strained layer is discussed.
∆d = dGe −
If the thickness of the strained layer is larger than the critical value hc, then
lattice defects appear and destruct the channels.

·

To obtain periodically bent channels, one starts with a pure silicon substrate
and adds Si1−xGex layers with continuously increasing Ge content. This results
in bending of the (110) channels in the direction of the (100) channels. The
periodicity of the shape requires the change of the direction of the bending
toward the (010) channels. This, in turn, can be achieved by reducing x until
it reaches 0. Figure 4 schematically illustrates the ﬁrst period of the bent (110)
channel.

The last crystal layer of the ﬁrst period consists of pure silicon, so that the
second period can be built up on top of the ﬁrst in the same manner. To be
captured by the bent channel, the positron beam should be directed towards
the (110) channel of the substrate.

The crystal strain is strongest after half a period, when the germanium content
reaches its maximum. The thickness of the layers corresponding to half a pe-
riod needs to be smaller than the critical thickness hc. If this condition is met,
then crystals with arbitrary number of undulator periods can be constructed.

7

Si substrate

Si Ge layer

1-x

x

S(z)

(010)

(110)

(100)

t
n
e
t
n
o
c

~

)
z
(
x

e
G

z

z~

Fig. 4. Schematic ﬁgure of the ﬁrst period of the bent crystal.

For a given shape S(z) it is possible to calculate the germanium content x(˜z) as
a function of the thickness ˜z (see ﬁgure 4). The formulas can be derived using
simple geometric considerations and are discussed in [11]. We now consider
two examples.

First we discuss growing the Si crystal with the sine-like shape S(z) = a sin kz
10−3 cm. These
with a = 10 d = 1, 92
parameters correspond to the undulator emission spectrum presented in ﬁgure
2 for a/d = 10. The germanium content obtained by our calculations is plotted
in ﬁgure 5.

10−7 cm and λ = 2π/k = 2.335

·

·

The maximum germanium content is 5%. The layer thickness that corresponds
10−3 cm. The critical thickness hc
to half a period is given by λ/(2 √2) = 0.8
for a strained crystal with 5% of Ge is about 1.2

10−3 cm [10].

·

·

The second example concerns the shape function given by (2) with a(z) and
λ(z) as in ﬁgure 3 (b). To ﬁnd the dependence x(˜z) in this case is not so
straightforward as for the sine proﬁle. The calculation of x(˜z) results in neg-
ative values. To avoid this problem one can consider the crystal growth in
Ld. Then the calculated
the inverse direction: S(z)
germanium content is positive for all ˜z > 0. The projectiles are injected not
through the substrate, as in the ﬁrst example, but from the opposite side of
the crystal. For more details and the analytic description see [11].

z) for 0

S(Ld

→

−

≤

≤

z

8

%
n

 

i
 
)
˜z
(
x

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025

˜z / cm

Fig. 5. Germanium content as function of ˜z for a bent Si(110) crystal. The param-
eters are equal to those used for the calculation of the spectrum shown in ﬁgure
2.

5 Summary and outlook

In this work we have discussed the high-energy regime of the undulator ra-
diation emitted by ultra-relativistic positrons channeling in periodically bent
crystal channels.

This regime is typical for positron energies well above 10 GeV, when the
channeling eﬀect is accompanied by noticeable radiative losses. The latter,
being mainly due to the channeling radiation, lead to the gradual decrease
of the positron energy. This, in turn, strongly inﬂuences the stability of the
parameters of the emission of undulator radiation.

We demonstrated that the frequency of the undulator radiation can be main-
tained constant provided the parameters of the periodic bending are changed
with the penetration distance to take into account the decrease of the projec-
tile energy.

Our investigation shows that the discussed modiﬁcation of the shape of the
crystal channels allows the generation of undulator radiation of high-energy
photons (up to tens of MeV). The calculation of the spectral distributions of
the emitted photons in this regime is currently in progress and will be reported
soon.

We described a method that should allow the growing of the crystal channels
that are necessary for the experimental measurement of the photon spectra.
The feedback from experimentalists would be very helpful to check the pre-
dictions, models and assumptions that were used in this work.

9

Acknowledgements

The research was supported by DFG, BMBF and the Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation.

References

49–100.

77–105.

[1] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, J. Phys. G. 24 (1998) L45.

[2] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 8 (1) (1999)

[3] U. Mikkelsen, E. Uggerhøj, Nucl. Inst. and Meth. B 160 (2000) 435.

[4] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 9 (1) (2000)

[5] W. Krause, A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, J. Phys. G: Nucl. and

Part. Phys. 26 (2000) L87–L95.

[6] D. S. Gemmel, Rev. Mod. Phys. 46 (1) (1974) 129.

[7] V. M. Biruykov, Y. A. Chesnokov, V. I. Kotov, Crystal Channeling and its

Application at High-Energy Accelerators, Springer, Berlin, 1996.

[8] V. N. Baier, V. M. Katkov, V. M. Strakhovenko, High Energy Electromagnetic
Processes in Oriented Single Crystals, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1998.

[9] A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, J. Phys. G: Nucl. and Part. Phys. 27

(2001) 95–125.

[10] M. B. H. Breese, Nucl. Inst. and Meth. B 132 (3) (1997) 540–547.

[11] W. Krause, A. V. Korol, A. V. Solov’yov, W. Greiner, Proceedings of the
International Workshop on “Electron-Photon Interaction in Dense Media” in
Nor-Hamberd, Armenia .

10

