1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Single Shot, Sub-picosecond Beam Bunch Characterization with Electro-optic
Techniques

Y.K. Semertzidis, R. Burns, V. Castillo, R. Larsen, D.M. Lazarus, D. Nikas,
C. Ozben, T. Srinivasan-Rao, A. Stillman, and T. Tsang
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA

L. Kowalski
Montclair State University, Upper Montclair, NJ 07043, USA
(Dated: November 19, 2013)

In the past decade, the bunch lengths of electrons in accelerators have decreased dramatically to
the range of a few picoseconds [1, 2]. Measurement of the length as well as the longitudinal proﬁle
of these short bunches have been a topic of research in a number of institutions [3, 4, 5]. One of the
techniques uses the electric ﬁeld induced by the passage of electrons in the vicinity of a birefringent
crystal to change its optical characteristics. Well-established electro-optic techniques can then be
In this paper we present a
used to measure the temporal characteristics of the electron bunch.
novel, non-invasive, single-shot approach to improve the resolution to tens of femtoseconds so that
sub-millimeter bunch length can be measured.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The development of very short beam pulses is a crucial part of the eﬀort to achieve the desired luminosity for
the future accelerators which are being designed to bring us to the next energy frontier and for SASE for FEL.
The Lorentz cone of an ultra-relativistic charged particle beam bunch (CPB) has a very small opening angle [6]
and therefore the amplitude of the generated electric ﬁeld has a longitudinal proﬁle very close to the longitudinal
charge distribution of the beam. One way to measure the produced electric ﬁeld in a non-invasive way is the
electro-optic eﬀect (Pockels eﬀect) using an electro-optic crystal as the electric ﬁeld sensor. A polarized laser
light goes through the electro-optic crystal and the E-ﬁeld from the CPB induces an ellipticity in the polarization
state of the laser light. Ellipsometer techniques are used to analyze the laser light polarization state. The ﬁrst
electro-optic detection of charged particle beams have been reported in references [7, 8, 9, 10, 11].

The techniques that are used to read out the ellipsometers are:

1. The pump-probe method where a short laser pulse is used with a determined time delay between the
electron beam and the laser pulse. The time delay is varied so diﬀerent parts of the electron beam can
be probed. This approach can in principle give the average longitudinal beam proﬁle of many electron
pulses [8, 9].

The time resolution of this method is determined by the appropriate combination of the laser pulse length,
the laser pulse size in the crystal and the crystal length (CL) along the laser propagation direction.
The latter is equal to σcl = CL/(c/n) with c the speed of light and n ≈ 2.2 the index of refraction
for the LiNbO3 crystal at the laser frequency. For a crystal length of 1 mm, σcl ≈ 7.5 ps.
If the
CPB length is shorter than the crystal length, the time resolution would be equal to the CPB pulse
length.
If the laser pulse and the CPB move in the same direction then the pulse broadening equals
σcl = CL(1 − 1/n)/c ≈ 1.8 ps for the above example which is consistent with the resolution reported in
reference [8]. In order to reach sub-picosecond time resolution the crystal length needs to be less than
100 µm. Crystals with 100 µm or smaller lengths are already commercially available.

2. The single shot technique where the light after the ellipsometer is either (a) read by a streak camera [12],
or (b) the laser light is stretched after it goes through the crystal so that the signal can become slow
enough to be read out using conventional electronics [5] or (c) by measuring the laser pulse spectra with
and without the presence of an electron pulse [13]. The advantage of the single shot method is that it
can, in principle, provide information on the longitudinal beam proﬁle on a single pulse basis.

The time resolution of this approach is limited by the laser pulse size in the crystal and the crystal length
along the laser propagation.

We report a recent development [14] based on the electro-optic eﬀect which is capable of reaching sub-

picosecond time resolution down, in principle, to a few fs in the single shot mode.

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

II. THEORY

Let us consider an electron beam bunch of charge density σ(x, y), and bunch length l, focused to a sheet
beam with transverse dimension D. Let this relativistic charged particle beam move along x axis, the length of
a birefringent crystal. The electric ﬁeld experienced by the crystal at a distance r from the electron beam, due
to the charge σ(x, y)dxdy can be written as

dEz = (γ/4πǫ0)σ(x, y) dy dx /ǫr2

where ǫ is the dielectric constant of the crystal in Z direction and γ is the relativistic Lorentz factor. This
ﬁeld is present at this location for the time dt taken by this charge to traverse the distance dx. A polarized
laser beam propagating along the y-axis inside this birefringent crystal would then experience this ﬁeld over a
distance dL = dx/n where n is the refractive index of the crystal, along the direction of propagation at the laser
frequency. The phase retardation experienced between the two orthogonal polarization components (z and x)
of the laser beam dΓ(t) is:

dΓ(t) = κ(2π/λ) dL dEz(t)

where κ is the electro-optic coeﬃcient and λ is the wavelength of the laser beam. The total retardation is
obtained by integrating over the entire charge distribution, the time taken by the laser to cross the crystal
and the length of the crystal. The limits of integration would then depend on the smaller of these interrelated
parameters. If the transmitted laser beam is detected after passing through a quarter wave plate and a crossed
analyzer, then the transmitted intensity I(t) is given by

2
I(t) = I0[η + sin

(Γ0 + Γb + Γ(t))]

where η is the intensity extinction coeﬃcient, Γ0 is the residual retardation by the crystal in the absence of
the electric ﬁeld and Γb is the retardation introduced by the quarter wave plate. Typical values for Γ0 and
Γ(t) are in the range of tens of milliradians. The value of Γ is chosen to suit the detector capabilities and the
experimental conditions.

III. MEASUREMENT OF SUB PICOSECOND ELECTRON BUNCH LENGTH

This scheme has been successfully used to measure the bunch length of 45 MeV electron beam [10, 11]. The
limit on the resolution had been the bandwidth of the detection system. A number of schemes to measure sub-
picosecond electron bunch have been proposed so far. These include characterizing the frequency modulation
on a laser spectrum caused by the electron bunch, performing autocorrelation measurements and using the
FROG technique to determine both the frequency and time distribution of the laser beam transmitted through
a birefringent crystal. In the following section another scheme that converts temporal information to spatial
information to measure sub-picosecond electron bunch is described. Bunch length measurement with resolution
down to the response time of the crystal is possible using this method since linear arrays with small pixel
dimensions is readily available. Furthermore, where pixel dimension proves to be the limitation, eﬀective use of
optical imaging can be used eﬀectively to overcome this limitation.

A short laser pulse polarized in the YZ plane, 45o to the z-axis, focused using a cylindrical lens to form a line
focus, propagates along the y-axis. A thin birefringent crystal with optic axis along z and ordinary axis along
x is positioned at the waist of the laser beam. The electron bunch propagates simultaneously along the x-axis,
at a minimum distance r from the laser beam. The transmitted intensity is passed through a crossed analyzer
and detected by a linear detector array. As shown in the Figure 1, only those sections of the laser beam that
are below the electron bunch will experience a phase retardation linearly proportional to the charge density of
the electron beam and reach the linear array. The acceptable jitter between the electron beam bunch and the
laser beam is determined by the x dimension of the crystal, length and sensitivity of the detector array, length
of the line focus of the laser and laser energy available. For a typical diode array of 1024 elements, 1 cm crystal
length and ∼ 100 pJ of laser energy in a 1 cm line focus, jitter up to 30 ps can be tolerated as well as measured
using this arrangement.

The pulse duration and the thickness (y dimension) of the crystal determine the resolution and ﬁdelity of the
temporal proﬁle. The distance traveled by the electron bunch during the laser pulse constitutes the uncertainty

3

FIG. 1: Schematic of the experimental arrangement to measure subpicosecond electron bunch.

in the bunch length measurement. A relativistic electron travels 30µm during a laser pulse duration of 50 fs
(for n = 2), causing a corresponding broadening of the image on the detector array. The laser pulse duration
should then be a small fraction of the electron pulse duration to be measured. Short laser pulses down to tens of
femtoseconds are readily achievable. However, the optical beam transport must be designed carefully to reduce
pulse broadening and minimize high order dispersion.

The phase rotation of a single photon traveling along the crystal is caused by the integrated charge density
along the diagonal of the sheet of charge, seen by the photon while in the crystal. Thus, only an inﬁnitely thin
crystal would preserve the temporal proﬁle of the electron bunch. The choice of the thickness of the crystal is,
hence, a function of the magnitude of the obtainable electric ﬁeld (determined by charge density achievable and
distance between the electron beam and the laser), the electro-optic coeﬃcients, the sensitivity of the detection
system, and the structural integrity of the system.

In conclusion a number of electro-optic detection schemes are available to measure the length of subpicosecond

electron bunches. These techniques need to be tested for limitations before a judicial choice can be made.

[1] M. Uesaka et al., Phys. Rev. E, Vol. 50, No. 4 (1994), p 3068.
[2] S. Trotz, W. J. Brown, B. G. Danly, J.-P. Hogge, M. Khusid, k. E. Kreischer, M. Shapiro and R. J. Temkin, Proc.
Advanced Accelerator Concepts, Ed. S. Chattopadhyay, J. McCullough and P. Dahl, AIP Press, NY, (1997) P. 717.
[3] M. Uesaka, T. Ueda, T. Watanabe, M. Kando, K. Nakajima, H. Kotaki, and A. Ogata, Proc. Advanced Accelerator

Concepts, Ed. S. Chattopadhyay, J. McCullough and P. Dahl, AIP Press, NY, (1997), p 687.

[4] Y. Liu, d. B. Kline, X. J. Wang, M. Babzien, J. M. Fang and V. Yakimenko, Proc. Advanced Accelerator Concepts,

Ed. S. Chattopadhyay, J. McCullough and P. Dahl, AIP Press, NY, (1997), p 664.

[5] S. C. Hutchins, CLF Tech Note 2000-06, CERN, Geneva
[6] J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2
[7] Y.K. Semertzidis et al., Proc. PAC’99, p.490.
[8] X. Yan et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3404 (2000).
[9] M.J. Fitch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87:034801, 2001.
[10] Y. K. Semertzidis, V. Castillo, L. Kowalski, D. E. Kraus, R. Larsen, D. M. Lazarus, B. Magurno, D. Nikas, C.

Ed., John Wiley & Son, NY, 1975, p. 555.

nd

Ozben, T. Srinivasan-Rao, and T. Tsang, NIM A452/3, (2000), p 396.

[11] T. Tsang, V. Castillo, R. Larsen, D. M. Lazarus, D. Nikas, C. Ozben, Y. K. Semertzidis, T.Srinivasan-Rao, and L.

Kowalski, Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 89, No. 9, (2001) p. 4921.

[12] D. Nikas et al., in preparation.
[13] I. Wilke et al., Abstract contribution # Tu-O-10 to FEL2001, 20-24 August, 2001, Darmstadt, Germany.
st
[14] T. Srinivasan-Rao et al., presentation at the 21

ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop on Laser-Beam Interactions,

11-15 June, 2001, Stony Brook, USA.

