1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
6
0
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

MODEL DRIVEN RAMP CONTROL AT RHIC∗

J. van Zeijts, Collider-Accelerator Department,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA

FRBT004

Abstract

At the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), magnets are
ramped from injection energy to storage energy in several
minutes where it is to remain for several hours. The path
up the ramp is marked by ’StepStones’ where the the optics
of the machine, which can change dramatically when we
perform a beta*-squeeze, is given in units like Quadrupole
focusing strength or Corrector-Dipole angle. The machine
is tuned at these Stepstones, and at Injection or Storage, by
specifying physics properties like Tunes and Chromatici-
ties. An on-line model server handles conversion to magnet
strengths, and predicts the optics along the whole ramp.

We will describe the underlying principles, the client-
server environment, including on-line model servers, Ramp
Manager and Editor, and present operational experience
with the system.

1

INTRODUCTION

The RHIC magnets are driven by about 1000 Wave Form
Generators (WFG). Most Quadrupole magnets are hooked
up through a nested power supply scheme, which mini-
mizes the number of high current cryogenic feed-throughs,
but complicates their programming considerably. A more
detailed description of the Ramp control is given in [1],
here we concentrate on the physics control and modeling
sections.

2 MAGNET CONTROL

Magnets are programmed in physics units like KL (in-
tegrated strength), and angle. The WFG’s execute for-
mulas at 720Hz that read the machine magnetic rigidity
from the real time data link (RTDL), look up the interpo-
lated requested magnet strength, calculate the required ﬁeld
strength, and use the magnetic transfer table to calculate
currents for the associated power-supplies.

2.1

StepStones

StepStones are placeholder for a set of magnets and their
associated strengths. The strengths is split up in a ‘Design’,
and ‘Trim’ part. The machine is set to the design level
by modifying the trim settings, client applications usually

∗ Work supported by U.S. DOE under contract No. DE-AC02-

98CH10886.

use the design part of the strength for model calculations,
since it more closely resembles the real machine. Step-
Stones are sparse, in a sense that only some magnets need
to be set explicitly, all other are interpolated as a function
of the relativistic gamma. The interpolation scheme is crit-
ical for proper power supply performance, and involves cu-
bic splines for Quadrupole and Sextupole magnet strengths.
Other types of magnets use linear interpolation of strength.

2.2 Ramps

Ramps are placeholder for a set of StepStones. The ramps
in use at the moment for RHIC accelerate, and Beta*-
squeeze at the same time. The model server does optics
simulations at many points along the ramp, giving tunes
and chromaticity predictions that can be compared with
measured numbers. The model can contain multiple named
ramps simultaneously, each containing tens of stepstones
(see Fig. 1 for a typical ramp layout, Fig. 2 for a graph of
the main quadrupole strength).

3 MODEL SERVERS

Multiple model servers are available, each presenting an
identical interface. The differences are in speed and ac-
curacy. The fast model only considers linear un-coupled
optics. There are on-line models available which consider
full coupling, nonlinearities etc. [2], but with the associ-
ated longer execution time. For regular machine operation
the linear model is preferred, for studies we can switch to a
more complete model.

The model server is implemented using the CDEV [3,
4, 5] generic server framework, which allows for rich
data structures to be passed between client and server.
Ramps and StepStones are accessible as CDEV devices,
and present properties which can be monitored by client ap-
plications. Clients receive updates when magnet strengths
are modiﬁed. All typical optics properties are exported, the
most commonly used ones include:

• ‘LatticeFunctions’, clients specify a beam line (Blue
or Yellow) and a list of element names. The server
by default returns a full set of lattice functions. The
context can be modiﬁed to only request certain lattice
functions.

• ‘OpticsFunctions’, clients specify a beam line. The

server returns a list of tunes, chromaticities, etc.

Figure 1: High-level display of a ramp in the Ramp-Editor. Tunes and Chromaticities are modiﬁed from this page.

• ‘Orbit’, clients specify a beam line, and a list of el-
ement names. The server returns the predicted orbit
using the dipole corrector set points.

for optimized injection, and closed orbits are calculated and
sent to the Ramp Manager. Predicted and measured orbits
are displayed.

4 CLIENT APPLICATIONS

4.3 Orbit Correction

The on line model server is the hub for lattice and optics in-
formation. Magnetic element strength are handled in a sep-
arate Ramp-Manager. Applications routinely retrieve and
monitor element strengths and lattice functions at speciﬁc
StepStones, and (at a higher resolution) along the ramp.
Below is a subset listed of client applications connected to
the model.

Global Ring Orbit-Correction, Local Correction, 3 and 4
Bump construction etc. are supported in this application.
Dipole correctors strengths are calculated and set though
this application. Lattice function information, including
phase advance between correctors and Beam Position Mon-
itors (BPM) is retrieved from the model. Predicted and
measured orbits are displayed.

4.1 Ramp Editor

4.4 Transverse Proﬁle Manager

The main Ramp control GUI allows modiﬁcation to tunes,
chromaticities, and individual element strengths. On each
change the model recalculates the predicted optics at each
stone, and along the ramp.

Lattice functions at the Proﬁle pickups are monitored by
the ’Proﬁle-Manager’, measured proﬁles are then con-
verted to normalized emittance at injection, up the ramp,
and at storage energies.

4.2

Injection Application

4.5 Luminosity Monitor

Injection into both the RHIC rings is facilitated by the ‘In-
jection Application’. This application retrieves the trans-
verse lattice functions in the transfer line and the ﬁrst sex-
tant of the rings from the model server. Dipole corrections

Beta functions at the interaction regions are monitored by
the ’Luminosity-Monitor’, which combines this informa-
tion with beam intensity and compares measured and pre-
dicted luminosity.

Figure 2: Main Quadrupole magnet strength vs. gamma. The Green markers are at the location of the StepStones, the
smooth lines are the cubic-spline interpolation.

4.6 Coupling-Correction Application

In order to correct transverse coupling in the machine the
tune set-points are swept over a given range while plotting
the measured tunes vs. set-points.. The correction applica-
tion utilizes the model to calculate the required set points.

4.7

Sequencer

Progress though the many steps required to run the RHIC
through its machine cycle is choreographed by the ’Se-
quencer’ program [6, 7]. This program sets the ‘liveR-
amp’ and ‘liveStone’ CDEV devices to their appropriate
value during the cycle. Client applications usually use
these aliases to get updates on the current optics, instead
of named stepstones.

5 OPERATIONAL EXPERIENCE

Having a consistent source of optics information is critical
for commissioning a complex machine. The on-line model
servers provide such a source. The servers have been in
operational use for several years serving client applications
routinely used to run the machine. The interface to the
servers is through a well deﬁned CDEV interface, which
much simpliﬁes the client application programming. The

system of servers is ﬂexible, and performs reliably even
under simultaneous load of tens of client applications.

6 REFERENCES

[1] J. Kewisch, J. van Zeijts, S. Peggs, T. Satogata, “Ramp Man-
agement in RHIC”, proceedings of PAC 1999, New York.

[2] T. Satogata, K. Brown, F. Pilat, A. Alai Tafti, S. Tepikian,
J. van Zeijts, ”The RHIC/AGS Online Model Environments:
Design and Overview”, proceedings of PAC 1999, New York.

[3] J. Chen, G. Heyes, W. Akers, D. Wu, W. Watson, “CDEV: An
Object -Oriented Class Library for Developing Device Con-
trol Application”, proceedings of ICALEPCS 1995, Chicago.

[4] W. Akers, “An Object-Oriented Framework for Client/Server
Applications”, proceedings of ICALEPCS 1997, Beijing.

[5] J. van Zeijts, “CDEV Generic Servers for RHIC Commis-
sioning and Operations”, proceedings of ICALEPCS 1999,
Trieste.

[6] J. van Zeijts, T. D’Ottavio, B. Frak, “The RHIC Sequencer”,

proceedings of PAC 2001, Chicago.

[7] T. D’Ottavio, B. Frak, J. Morris, T. Satogata, J. van Zeijts,
“Description of the RHIC Sequencer System”, these proceed-
ings.

