1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
2
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

INSERTION DEVICE CONTROLS AT THE SWISS LIGHT SOURCE

TUAP019

T.Korhonen, B.Kalantari
Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

Abstract

In the initial phase of the Swiss Light Source, four inser-
tion devices (ID) will be installed for the ﬁrst four beam-
lines. The control system for all the ID’s follows, where
possible, an uniform concept to allow a rapid installation
schedule, while at the same time allowing for a variety in
operational requirements. The components of the control
system include the gap drive system with encoders, temper-
ature monitoring, beam position monitoring, power supply
controllers for corrector magnets [1] and a timing module
[2]. The gap drive system requirements range from micron-
level accuracy to driving double undulators in synchronism
with each other and also with the other beamline elements.
The local synchronism is achieved with a tightly coupled
system having an intelligent motor controller and the global
synchronism by extending the machine timing distribution
to the insertion devices and the beamlines with the capabil-
ity to add beamline-speciﬁc timing events.

parallelism (taper) of the magnet arrays.

The UE56 is an undulator capable of producing linearly
and elliptically polarized light. The switching of polariza-
tion mode is achieved by splitting the upper and lower mag-
net arrays into two halves and having a mechanism to move
them relative to each other. Thus, there are a total of four
motors, two for the gap and two for controlling the shift
arrays. Two identical IDs will be installed for the beamline
and these have to be controlled synchronously, giving us 8
axes to control.

The fourth device is an electromagnetic double undulator
UE212. This ID has no moving parts, but the ﬁelds are gen-
erated by electromagnets. As power supplies for this device
we use the standard power supplies of the SLS machine [1].
Very little additional development was thus necessary, ex-
cept of the operation of the device in several modes deﬁned
for it. These could be implemented as additions on top of
the generic SLS power supply control software.

1

INTRODUCTION

2 GAP CONTROL

At SLS the ﬁrst insertion devices are a wiggler for the mate-
rial science beamline, an in-vacuum minigap undulator for
protein crystallography, an elliptically polarizing undulator
(two identical devices) and a long electromagnetic undula-
tor (two devices.) The core of the control system is speciﬁc
for each device, but they also have a number of components
common to all.

First of the devices installed was an in-vacuum undulator
(U24), developed in collaboration with Spring-8 in Japan.
The gap drive of it has a single tepper motor and an abso-
lute rotary encoder. These are controlled through a local
controller that has an GPIB bus interface. To integrate it to
our control system, we just wrote the EPICS device support
code for that controller in order to poll the status and send
commands to drive the gap to a desired position. How-
ever, the common part of the control system and the user
interface in general was ﬁrst developed for this device and
adopted for the others.

For the two other permanent magnet devices, namely the
wiggler W61 and a double undulator UE56, the gap con-
troller had to be developed in-house. The aim was also to
design a system that would serve as a basis for the control
system of future insertion device development.

The wiggler W61 has two motors to control the gap. It
was decided to have two motors to be able to control the

The gap control is the centerpiece of an insertion device
control system. For the W61 and UE56, the gap control
system had to be developed in-house. Although the devices
are quite different, we strived to ﬁnd a a common design
that could also be used as a basis for future developments.
Essentially, the gap control consists of a drive system to
move the magnet arrays and a position measurement sys-
tem to monitor the distance (=gap) between them. The po-
sitions are typically measured by encoders. The philosophy
was to have a gap measuring device as close as possible
to the real mechanical gap. To have a high precision over
a quite large range, we decided to use linear incremental
encoders manufactured by Heidenhain [4]. The selected
encoders (ULS300) have high precision absolute reference
marks. This allows a high reproducibility of the gap set-
ting.

For the motor controller we selected to use the Oregon
Microsystems OMS58 motor controller card [7]. This card
had a good software support from the EPICS community
and was already in wide use at SLS beamline controls. One
big advantage was also that this card has support for both
servo and stepper motors, with essentially the same soft-
ware interface, so we could use a large part of the software
for both the servo and stepper motor-based systems.

The devices had a number of different requirements,

from the ability to drive to a ﬁxed setting with open loop
control only, to real time position hold feedback.
In all
cases, several motors have to be moved synchronously.

For the development of the gap drive we decided to build
an “ID test stand”, a mechanical model of an ID with which
we could try and debug the control system before having
the actual devices. The test system had only the gap drive
and the linear encoders, but turned out to be an extremely
valuable development tool. Especially because the time
between ID delivery to PSI adn installation was always
short and the time for control system development very
limited. With the teststand the control could be developed
without having the actual device. Without the teststand it
would have been almost impossible to meet the construc-
tion schedule.

For the W61, the gap accuracy requirement is not that
strict and the movement is only in the gap direction, so
it was sufﬁcient to have stepper motors and an open loop
control with capability to monitor the linear encoders and,
if necessary, do a position correction. The system has two
motors that have to run synchronously to keep the taper,
i.e., the inclination angle of the magnet arrays, close to
zero. To have a protection in the low level we built a con-
troller with a PLC to act as an interface between the power
drive system and the control system. The PLC monitors
that both the motors are running and that the taper does
not get too large, and stops the drives if there is a prob-
lem. The foreseen operation mode for the wiggler is to be
driven into a gap value and left there for a long period of
data taking at the experiment. For this reason, there were
no requirements of closed loop control and a an open-loop
control with stepper motors is adequate. The system can
however be controlled with high resolution, by correcting
the position with the help of the linear encoders.

The UE56 has more demanding requirements. The de-
vice has a possibility to change the light polarization from
linear to elliptical by shifting the upper and lower magnet
arrays relative to each other. The large magnetic forces
push the gap mechanically open when the shift arrays are
moved. The difference was measured to be about 300 mi-
crons, which is not acceptable for operation. The system
thus required closed loop position control, with four axes
to control. The drive system uses AC servo motors. The
conventional way would be to use rotary encoders on the
motors for the position feedback, but to get the required
high precision, we decided to do the feedback directly from
the linear encoders. This is more difﬁcult to tune, because
the whole system is included in the feedback loop and the
components cannot be individually tuned. However, this
simpliﬁes the additional software because the regulation
is directly based on the gap and no corrections for the ef-
fects of the mechanical elements in between (like backlash,
bending, creep) are required.

Like for the W61, a PLC system for low-level local con-
trol was developed, this time by an external company to our
speciﬁcations.

Two identical devices will be installed for the beamline.

The reasons for having two devices are ﬁrst to have a larger
photon ﬂux, but also to have a fast switchable polarisation
selection available. The switching is achieved with steer-
ing the beam horizontally a little apart through the undu-
lators, putting them into different polarization modes and
then having a mechanical beam chopper to select one of
the two photon beams. In this mode, the two undulators
have to be controlled as a single device.

We have achieved 1 micron precision and repeatability
for the UE56 gap drive. The polarization mode can be
changed dynamically and the feedback keeps the gap value
constant regardless of the highly nonlinear magnetic forces
from the magnet array shifts.

3 ADDITIONAL SYSTEMS

For the operation of the insertion devices, additional moni-
toring systems are necessary to guarantee the safety of the
operation and to optimize the performance.

3.1 Beam Position Monitors

For monitoring the beam position close to the insertion de-
vice, we use a separate beam position monitor system, con-
sisting of pickups, a BPM processing module (Bergoz) [3]
and an (SLS standard) ADC to record the positions. The
main purpose of these BPMs is to provide signals to an
external interlock system that would dump the beam if the
beam orbit had a too large offset or an angle at the insertion
device. These BPMs have however proven very valuable to
monitor the effect of the ID to the beam because they are
situated close to the ID and thus give direct information of
the beam orbit at that point. Further study is however nec-
essary to fully understand the behaviour and calibration of
these BPMs.

3.2 Beam Loss Monitors

Beam loss monitors have been installed near the insertion
devices. Especially critical is the U24 in-vacuum undula-
tor and for that there have been installed large area scintil-
lators. The scintillators are very sensitive and have a fast
response and they have been proven to be very useful for
the commissioning. The output from the beam loss moni-
tors is pulses; the frequency gives the loss rate. The pulses
are read out with a (SIS [6]) multichannel scaler into Epics
channels.

3.3 Temperature measurement

Monitoring of the vacuum chamber temperature is a safety
measure against heating when the orbit is bad, or, as in the
case of the in-vacuum undulator also serves as an indicator
of possible problems in the cooling system. In this device,
the control program constantly monitors the temperature
and if it rises over a speciﬁed threshold, the gap is automat-
ically opened. The temperatures are measured with ther-
mocouples and Greenspring [5] thermocouple IP (Industry

Pack) cards. For U24 we can also monitor the cooling sys-
tem through a serial port interface.

3.4 Correctors

Each insertion device has horizontal and vertical correc-
tor magnets placed close to the device upstream and down-
stream. These correctors are used to minimize the effect of
the residual kicks from the ID at different settings. The cor-
rector values for each gap setting follow breakpoint tables
that have been measured during commissioning of each de-
vice. At the time of writing, the detailed implementation of
these lookup tables for the UE56 was still partially open,
because there are two parameters: the gap and the polariza-
tion mode (magnet array shift.) Both of these have an effect
of the orbit and we need two- (or perhaps even three-) di-
mensional lookup tables to fully implement the automatic
correction.

3.5

Synchronization

It is foreseen that in the future the insertion devices should
be operated in synchronism with the other beamline com-
ponents. For most parts this can be achieved simply with
Epics Channel Access. A method for tighter synchroniza-
tion has been foreseen with an extension of the machine
event distribution system to the beamlines. Although the
main interest of tight synchronization is in the experimental
stations, the extension is done in the ID system by putting
an event generator to the ID crate. In this way, additional
events that are speciﬁc to each beamline can be generated
by accessing the event generator. As an example would
be a sequence of movements that could be pre-loaded to
the beamline control IOCs and synchronously triggered by
sending the events from the ID control system crate.

4 THE SOFTWARE

The control system is implemented in Epics, using mostly
readily available driver and device support modules plus
standard records. At least for the requirements so far, all the
functionality could be achieved without having to modify
any of the low-level components (record types etc.), except
of course writing device support for cards that did not have
it already.

4.1 User Interface

Although the devices are very different, much effort has
been put to make them look similar to the operator and to
hide the (different levels of) complexity behind a common
operating interface. Basically, only the minimum of infor-
mation is normally presented. The operator normally can
only switch on or off the drives and to set the gap to the de-
sired value. Before turning on the power for instance, the
devices go internally through a series of checks and settings
(the gap setpoint is synchronised with the actual gap value,
for instance) before the motor power is turned on.

At the time of writing the devices are still considered to
be in commissioning and the user interface is rather rudi-
mentary.

4.2

Integration to the beamline

So far, the devices have been operated as independent units
without any direct connection to the corresponding beam-
line.
In the future, however, it will become increasingly
important that the beamline components are aware of each
other and can be controlled as one system. For this, it is re-
quired to agree on the method and rules of communication
between the component control systems. The fact that all
the beamline components are controlled with EPICS eases
the integration.

The regular operation when a device is set to a certain
gap/energy value is straightforward. More complicated
will the system get when we want to do synchronised scans,
i.e., operate the beamline monochromator in sync with the
insertion device. However, as the monochromator and the
gap control are fairly slow devices, the synchronization is
easily achieved with Epics channel access over the net-
work.

5 CONCLUSIONS

We have initially commissioned all
the four types of
planned insertion devices at SLS. Although work still re-
mains to be done to ﬁnalize the operator interface and de-
bug and calibrate the components, the concept has proven
to work quite well and to fulﬁll all the requirements. Two
big factors that contributed to the successful development
were the strong support and availability of software from
the EPICS community, and the fact that we had been able
to standardize our control hardware to a large extent and
thus could reuse the elements and also had an extensive
in-house expertise of the components. One more big fac-
tor was having built a “test stand”; a mechanical model of
an insertion device, with the possibility to simulate (nonlin-
ear) magnetic forces. Using the test stand we could develop
the gap drive system before the devices were available for
testing; this gave us almost one year of lead time before
the delivery of the device. When the real device arrived,
testing and commissioning could proceed smoothly with-
out big surprises.

6 REFERENCES

[1] A.Luedeke et.al.,’Digital Power supplies for the Swiss Light

Source’, ICALEPCS’01, San Jose, California, USA.

[2] T. Korhonen, M.Heiniger, ’Timing System of the Swiss Light

Source’, ICALEPCS’01, San Jose, California, USA.

[3] Bergoz SA., “BPM system user’s Manual”

[4] Heidenhain GmBH. www.heidenhain.com

[5] SBS Greenspring, www.greenspring.com

[6] SIS GmBH. www.sis.de

[7] Oregon Microsystems, Co.. www.omsmotion.com

