1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CONVERTING EQUIPMENT CONTROL SOFTWARE
FROM PASCAL TO C/C++

L. Hechler, GSI, Darmstadt, Germany

WEAP034

Abstract

The equipment control (EC) software of the GSI accelera-
tors has been written entirely in Pascal. Modern software
development is based on C++ or Java. To be prepared for
the future, we decided to convert the EC software from Pas-
cal to C in a ﬁrst step. Considering the large amount of
software, this is done automatically as far as possible. The
paper describes our experiences gained using a Pascal to C
translator, Perl scripts, and, of course, some manual inter-
action.

1 MOTIVATION

The EC software comprises the device representation layer,
the real-time layer, and the device drivers [1]. Except for
some assembler code, it has been written entirely in Pascal.
For embedded applications there are no integrated cross
development systems that support Pascal any more. The
system we use runs under VMS and its support expires
completely by the end of 2001.

However until now we invested about 40 person-years in
developing and maintaining EC software. A lot of special
know-how has gone especially into the real-time layer. The
functionality gained in this work must be preserved.

Future control system developments have to be realized
with modern object-oriented methodes. Appropriate up-to-
date tools are based on C++ or Java nearly without excep-
tion.

Existing hardware (400 VME boards) has to be used in
the future as well since it cannot be replaced completely
due to cost reasons. And, last but not least, the conversion
must not affect the day by day accelerator operation.

2 CONVERSION

We decided to convert the EC software from Pascal to C in
a ﬁrst step. This allows us to “re-use” the software on one
hand and to establish a basis for re-engineering the con-
trol system with modern methods and tools [2] on the other
hand.

Considering that EC software consists of about 170 000
lines of code (LOC), comments not counted, it is clear that
conversion has to be done automatically as far as possible.
The basis for a conversion is EC software for one de-
vice class. There are 61 different device classes, each one
controlled by dedicated software. To ease the conversion,

we issued a cookbook [3] that describes the process step by
step.

To convert the Pascal code into C automatically we use

the Pascal to C translator p2c1.

Perl scripts are used to adapt the notation of identiﬁers

to our style guide.

In spite of the automation there is a lot of manual inter-
action left over. Beside the preparations for p2c and Perl
there are four essential reasons that make manual interac-
tion neccessary.

2.1 Compatibility of Data Structures

The p2c manual pages state that “most reasonable Pascal
programs are converted into fully functional C which will
compile and run with no further modiﬁcations”. This may
be true for stand-alone programs. Given the EC software
it has to be taken into account that in case of communica-
tions with other modules, e. g. programs of the operating
layer, the structure of interchanged data has to be kept fully
compatible, because those modules have not been changed.
1. Pascal supports PACKED records und arrays to facilitate
minimal alignment space between elements. C does not
support this feature.

2. At GSI we use the Organon Pascal compiler from
CAD-UL which supports the dialect of the Oregon Pascal/2
compiler. Their syntax only differ in one key word, but they
generate completely different codes. However p2c makes
some assumptions about the generated code, e. g. the or-
der of bits in a bitset, which is crucial for instance when
hardware registers are accessed.

3. In Pascal the allocation size of an enumeration type
depends on the number of its elements. It may be one or
two bytes. In C the allocation size is always an int.

4. The Pascal string ARRAY [1..len] OF CHAR contains
len characters. Its allocation size in memory is len bytes.
A C string with equal size is char s[len]. It can hold only
len - 1 (printable) characters because of the terminating \0.

2.2 Linking of Pascal and C modules

A CPU of the device representation layer hosts EC software
of up to 12 different device classes. On this layer it must
be possible to combine modules written both in Pascal and
C because EC software for a number of device classes can
not be converted at the same time.

1p2c is part of many Linux distributions. It runs under VMS as well.

Combining Pascal and C modules means that they have
to be linked together. In this case identical procedure call-
ing mechanisms have to be ensured.

1. P2c translates routine parameters into a structure that
contains a pure C function pointer and a “static link”, a
pointer to the parent procedure’s locals. This structure is
passed to the called function. Both of our compilers, the
Pascal as well as the C compiler, need plain C function
pointers. The option to force p2c to use this concept is
available but it does not work.

2. Pascal can handle conformant array routine parame-

ters deﬁned as

f(a: ARRAY [lo..hi: INTEGER] OF MyType);

Often there is no explicit type for the ﬁeld the WITH state-
ment references. In those cases p2c needs to declare an ad-
ditional pointer type ﬁrst (typedef struct T field ...)
before it can deﬁne the pointer itself.

These constructs are hardly found in common C pro-

grams as well.

3. Pascal allows to deﬁne an array of structures within

one statement. A variable deﬁnition looks like this:

VAR x: ARRAY [1..7] OF

RECORD i: INTEGER; c: CHAR END;

Although C supports a corresponding construct, p2c de-

clares a structured type before it deﬁnes the array.

by syntactically passing the array as actual parameter

only:

typedef struct _REC_x {int i; char c} _REC_x;
_REC_x x[7];

VAR x: ARRAY [7..13] OF MyType;
f(x);

To do so p2c must generate a name for the structured

type, which is REC x where x is the name of the array.

On calling the routine, the array, or its address in case
of a VAR parameter, as well as the lower and upper limit of
the array are pushed onto the stack. Thus the array bounds
may be checked by the called routine.

P2c generates C code where the routine is declared and
called with three parameters explicitly. The order the pa-
rameters are pushed onto the stack differs from that of the
Pascal compiler.

2.3 Maintainability

It has to be
The converted software is no ﬁnal product.
maintained for changed or extended future requirements.
Therefore readable and comprehensible code is indispens-
able. To achieve this sufﬁcient work has to be invested into
simplifying and refurbishing the plain C code produced by
p2c and the Perl scripts2.

1. Pascal supports nesting of routines. The parent rou-
tine’s local variables lie in the scope of the nested routine.
C does not provide this concept. So p2c combines the par-
ent routine’s locals to a single structure and adds an addi-
tional link parameter to the sub-routine’s parameter list that
points to this structure thus allowing the sub-routine to ac-
cess its parents’ variables. C code designed like this looks
somewhat odd.

2. Pascal provides the WITH statement to abbreviate the

notation for references to ﬁelds of structured variables.

WITH struc.field DO subfield := 1;

P2c creates a pointer for every WITH statement with gen-
erated names WITH, WITH1, WITH2, etc. to access the ﬁeld of
a structure.

2.4 P2C Errors

We encountered only two substantial p2c errors not men-
tioned in the p2c manual. Both of them are very difﬁcult
to detect since the compiler does not report an error. Over-
looking them during the manual interaction means they oc-
cur during the runtime of the software where they are more-
over hard to debug.

1. In some cases p2c translates a Pascal 32 bit wide un-

signed integer type

TYPE uns_long = 0..16#FFFFFFFF;

myType = uns_long;

into a single C character type.

typedef char myType;

The error occurs only unfrequently. Unfortunately we
were not able to reproduce the circumstances of its occur-
rence.

2. The Pascal pointer ptr should point to a 16 bit wide
type, e. g. a hardware register, that has an offset of 4 bytes
to a base address addr.

TYPE uw_p = ^uns_word;
VAR

ptr: uw_p;
addr: uns_long;

ptr := loophole(uw_p, addr + 4);

In rare cases p2c translates the pointer assignment to

ptr = (uns_word*)((uns_long*)addr + 4);

T_field *WITH = &struc.field;
WITH->subfield = 1;

2Due to restricted space only some items are mentioned here.

which results in a miscalculated pointer value. The ex-
pression (uns long*)addr type-casts addr to a pointer to
a 32 bit type and thus adding 4×4 = 16 bytes to the base
address instead of 4.

3 APPLYING THE STYLE GUIDE

Unlike C Pascal identiﬁers are case insensitive. P2c takes
the ﬁrst occurence of an identiﬁer to determine the notation
of all subsequent occurences. Mostly these notations do
not conform to our style guide. To force the notation of
identiﬁers according to the style guide, we developed some
Perl scripts that do most of the job.

A Perl script recognizes expressions for instance like

#define The_Answer 42
typedef struct my_type {...} my_type;

and suits the identiﬁers accordingly (getting THE ANSWER

and MyType).

To handle more complex constructs a parser-like script
would be required. This is not implemented yet. Thus
manual modiﬁcations are neccessary whereby each iden-
tiﬁer has to be adjusted only once.

All changes of identiﬁers in the software of one device
class are then stored as key value pairs in a device class
speciﬁc local data base (DB). The pairs describe the trans-
lation from the old into the new style guide conform nota-
tion. The creation and completion of the local DB is done
by another Perl script.

A third script is used to apply the translations stored in
the local DB to all identiﬁers in all ﬁles of a device class.
Additionally a global DB is used which applies the transla-
tion of the identiﬁers of the system interface.

4 STATUS

Meanwhile EC software for 15 different device classes has
been converted. Devices are operated with the converted
software since more than 6 months. Some of them even
in therapy operation [4]. Apart from teething troubles in
the beginning of the conversion process the software has
showed good quality and bug ﬁxing is an amazingly rare
necessity.

4.1 Time

To estimate the manual interaction effort to convert the
software for one device class the process can be split into 4
phases. The outcome is the following distribution:
p2c including some preparations

1.
2. manual interaction, part I
3.
Perl including building of local DB
4. manual interaction, tests, bug ﬁxing

10%
20%
20%
50%

Phase 2 is neccessary since some manual interactions are
better done before using the Perl scripts. Although 1 and 3
are the “automatic” phases they also need manual actions,
particularly phase 3. With more experience the percent-
age of phase 4 increases but the overall conversion time
decreases.

On an average EC software for one device class consist
of 2200 LOC. Its conversion requires us about 2 person-
weeks. To convert the whole EC software consisting of

170 000 LOC we will need approximatly 39 person-months
or 3.25 person-years.

Without the help of p2c and Perl scripts we roughly es-
timate twice to four times the effort. There was only one
attempt to convert a device class completely manually.

Balzert [5] states that software development results in

350 LOC per person-month.

Given this our method is 2 to 4 times faster than a pure
manual conversion and more than 10 times faster than a
redevelopment.

5 CONCLUSION

Using p2c and Perl scripts converting EC software from
Pascal to C is feasible without major problems. In spite
of the automation tools there is a lot of manual interaction
left over until C software for a device class is ready to be
released.

Our method allows us to convert EC software in reason-
able time. Entirely re-engineering the EC software would
have exceeded our manpower capacity excessively.

With EC software converted to C we are well-prepared
to take the next step to C++ (or Java). It should be possible
at least on the device representation layer to re-use the C
functions, which are usually straight forward, as methods
of classes in C++. The use of C++ on the real-time layer
has to be investigated, particularly with regard to the highly
demanding 50 Hz linear accelerator operation.

6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks to Peter Kainberger for all the Perl scripts, and to
him, Gudrun Schwarz, and Regine Pfeil for contributions
to the cookbook.

7 REFERENCES

[1] U. Krause, V. Schaa, R. Steiner, “The GSI Control System”,
Proceedings of ICALEPCS ’91, Tsukuba, Japan, 1991.

[2] U. Krause, “Re-Engineering of the GSI Control System”,

these proceedings.

[3] L. Hechler, P. Kainberger, G. Schwarz, “P2C - Umstel-
lung der Ger¨atesoftware von Pascal nach C/C++”, Acceler-
ator Controls Documentation U-GSW-08, GSI, Darmstadt,
November 2000, http://bel.gsi.de/mk/sty/p2c.html.

[4] U. Krause, R. Steiner, “Adaption of a Synchrotron Con-
trol System for Heavy Ion Tumor Therapy”, Proceedings of
ICALEPCS ’95, Chicago IL, USA, 1995.

[5] Helmut Balzert, “Lehrbuch der Software-Technik: Software-
Entwicklung”, Spektrum Akad. Verlag GmbH, Heidelberg,
Berlin, Oxford, 1996.

[6] Dave Gillespie, “p2c - Pascal to C Translator Manual Pages”,

Caltech.

[7] Udo Krause, “C/C++ Style Guide”, Accelerator Controls
Documentation O-SIS-10, GSI, Darmstadt, December 2000,
http://bel.gsi.de/mk/sty/cstyle.html.

