1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
1
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

WECT006

BEAM FEEDBACK SYSTEMS AND BPM READ-OUT SYSTEM
FOR THE TWO-BUNCH ACCELERATION AT KEKB LINAC

K. Furukawa∗, N. Kamikubota, T. Suwada
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan
T. Obata
Mitsubishi Electric System Service, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0045, Japan

Abstract

In order to double the positron injection rate into the KEKB
ring, a two-bunch acceleration scheme has been studied at
the linac, in which bunches separated by 96 ns are accel-
erated in 50 Hz. In this scheme the stabilization of energy
and orbit of each bunch is indispensable. Thus the beam
energy and orbit feedback systems have been upgraded.

Since beam characteristics are acquired through beam
position monitors (BPM), their read-out system was im-
proved to meet two-bunch requirements. Combined wave-
forms from BPM’s were adjusted with delay cables avoid-
ing overlaps and they enabled simultaneous measurement
of beam positions of two bunches.

The beam energies of two bunches were balanced by tun-
ing rf pulse timings, and the average energy was stabilized
by adjusting the accelerating rf phases. The average beam
orbits were also stabilized. Slow feedback systems at the
injector section for charge and bunching stabilities are be-
ing planned as well. These systems were used successfully
in the test beams and will be employed in the routine oper-
ation.

1

INTRODUCTION

The electron/positron linac at KEK injects 8-GeV electron
and 3.5-GeV positron beams into KEKB rings, where CP-
violation study is carried. Since the efﬁciency of the exper-
iment increases by shortening the injection time, several
mechanisms have been introduced to accomplish it[1, 2].
Especially much effort has been made to improve of the
positron injection time, since it is longer compared with
electron[3].

One of such effort is a two-bunch acceleration plan,
which have been studied and applied[4, 5]. In this scheme
two bunches of positron are accelerated in one rf pulse,
which is 50 Hz, and they may double the injection rate. The
time space between two bunches is, however, restricted by
the rf frequencies of linac and rings, and the smallest space
is 96.29 ns since the common frequency is 10.38 MHz.
Thus a precise beam control and diagnosis are necessary.

∗ e-Mail: <kazuro.furukawa@kek.jp>

The beam diagnosis so far has been made by employing
strip-line-type beam position monitors (BPM), wire scan-
ners for transverse proﬁles and streak cameras for longi-
tudinal proﬁles. In order to maintain the stable beams, it
is essential to have these beam instrumentations work for
both two bunches. The two-bunch read-out of BPMs is es-
pecially important, because it is used in number of orbit
and energy feedback loops to stabilize beams.

2 BPM AND READ-OUT SYSTEM

Along the 600-m linac, 90 BPMs are installed and their
signals are transferred to one of 18 measurement stations.
Signals are delayed and combined so as not to overlap each
other, and are fed into a 5-Gs/s waveform digitizer (Sony-
Tektronix TDS-680B/C) as in Fig. 1[6]. Although the BPM
signal is fast bipolar signal, the readout precision is opti-
mized using the interpolation function of the digitizer. All
18 digitizers are triggered by a single distributed signal
which is synchronized with beam repetition and rf frequen-
cies.

The waveform is read through the GPIB and a sig-
nal from each electrode is analyzed with predetermined
response function once per second by a VME computer
(Force 68060). Response functions include 3rd-order
position-mapping functions, attenuation factors of various
components and position offsets against the center of cor-
responding quadrupole magnet derived from a beam-based
alignment.

Since the timing and amplitude ranges of BPM signals
are different depending on the beam modes and locations,
the process is driven by a control database system[7].

Acquired beam positions at 18 stations are sent to cen-
tral computers once per second and are served for various
beam-energy and orbit feedback systems to maintain stable
beam operation.

3 TWO-BUNCH OPERATION

The BPM system was improved for two-bunch operation.

Ch.2

Oscilloscope  (5GS/sec)

1st BPM

2nd

Right

Left

Right

Left

Ch.1

Up

Up

Down

Down

Combiner

Combiner

16ns Delay x 4

16ns Delay x 4

Right

Left

Down

Up

1st BPM

2nd BPM

Beam

Figure 1: Signals from multiple BPMs are arranged so that
combined waveforms can be processed properly.

3.1

Improvements to BPM System

As written above, it is important to acquire beam positions
of two bunches along the linac simultaneously to study
beams.
In our instrumentation, signals from those two
bunches appear as two signals separated by 96.29 ns on
the waveform. Although it was sometimes necessary to
add more delay lines so as to avoid waveform overlapping,
there was no need to add speciﬁc hardware to handle such
signals with small separations.

Calibration factors were re-examined since delay lines
were added, and beam-timing database for the signal anal-
ysis was extended to accommodate two-bunch information.
Processing functions/commands for BPMs on the cen-
tral computers are also extended or added for two bunches,
keeping old functions as before for single-bunch opera-
tions.

With these modiﬁcations the BPM processing system
was extended for two-bunch operation without any perfor-
mance loss in both precision and speed. It has been used in
beam operation since March 2001.

3.2 Operation Software with BPM

Most of operation software which utilize the BPM infor-
mation was extended to meet both single- and two-bunch
operations. One of such examples is Fig. 2, which mea-
sures beam energies of two bunches by correlation between
a steering-magnet ﬁeld and the beam-position response at
the bunching section.

Figure 2: A software panel to measure the beam energies
of two bunches with a steering magnet (BX A1 B8) and a
BPM (SP A1 C5). After adjusting the timing system, they
became almost the same energy 15.5 MeV and 15.8 MeV.

3.3

Two Bunch Controls

In order to accelerate the beams properly, the beam char-
acteristics of two bunches need to be adjusted to be the
same. For example, in order to adjust the beam energy dif-
ferences, we change the beam timing and rf pulse timing.
The beam timing can be changed by a 10-ps step [4] and
the rf pulse timing can be changed by a 1.75-ns step at each
sector independently. Most of other parameters in the linac
are not sensitive against the time separation of 96.29 ns.

With such adjustments the 10-nC primary electron
bunches are accelerated up to 3.7 GeV and positrons are
generated as shown in Fig. 3.

3.4

BEAM FEEDBACK LOOPS

The beam feedback loops in the linac for energy and orbit
stabilization [2] were also extended to control two-bunch
beams. Since we don’t have many mechanisms to con-
trol two bunches independently, most feedback loops were
modiﬁed to use positions derived from charge-weighted av-
erages of two bunches. With these changes those loops can
maintain the average orbit and energy. In software, only the
monitoring function was extended to read average positions
if two bunches are accelerated. For the positron injection
about 20 beam feedback loops are used, and they are all
extended for two bunches.

[1] K. Furukawa et al., “Beam Switching and Beam Feedback
Systems at KEKB Linac”, Proc. of LINAC2000, Monterey,
USA., 2000, p.633.

[2] K. Furukawa et al., “Energy Feedback Systems at KEKB In-
jector Linac”, Proc. of ICALEPCS99, Trieste, Italy, 1999,
p.248.

[3] K. Furukawa et al., “Towards Reliable Acceleration of
High-Energy and High-Intensity Electron Beams”, Proc. of
LINAC2000, Monterey, USA., 2000, p.630.

[4] S. Ohsawa et al., “Increase of Positrons by High-intensity
Two-bunch Acceleration Scheme at the KEKB Linac”, to be
published in Proc. of PAC2001, Chicago, USA., 2001.

[5] Y. Ogawa et al., “Two-Bunch Operation of the KEKB Linac
for Doubling the Positron Injection Rate to the KEKB Ring”,
to be published in Proc. of APAC2001, Beijing, China, 2001.

[6] T. Suwada et al., “Stripline-Type Beam-Position-Monitor
System for Single-Bunch Electron/Positron Beams”, Nucl.
Instr. and Meth. A440 (2000) 307.

[7] N. Kamikubota et al.,

“Data Acquisition of Beam-
Position Monitors for the KEKB Injector-Linac”, Proc. of
ICALEPCS99, Trieste, Italy, 1999, p.217.

Figure 3: Beam orbit and charge of electrons (left) and
positrons (right) along the 600-m linac. Two slightly dif-
ferent lines indicate the ﬁrst and the second bunches.

Beam
Fluctuation

Read Beam Position (x and δx)
at Reference Points
BPM

BPM

Beam

Klystron Klystron

––>  Convert into Timings

for rf Energy Doublers

Beam Positions

of 2-Bunches

Timing Knob

BPMs

–  Beam Fluctuation

––>  Convert into Energy

Difference

Average (Integration)

x  Gain  –  Offset

Energy Difference Feedback

Figure 4: Energy-difference feedback loop at the J-arc.

While normal energy and orbit feedback loops use
charge-weighted average positions, feedback loops to min-
imize energy differences use a position difference between
two bunches as shown in Fig. 4.

Although the energy difference does not change fre-

quently, such loops stabilize the beam in a long term.

4 SUMMARY

The data-acquisition system for the linac BPMs was up-
graded to provide beam positions in two-bunch operation
without losing any original features. Along with improve-
ments of the streak camera and wire scanner systems, it
has been still indispensable to study and operate on linac
beams. The system is also used by many operation soft-
ware including beam-energy and orbit feedback systems.

5 REFERENCES

