1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
1
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

FRBT005

SIGNAL ARCHIVING AND RETRIEVAL: ESSENTIAL LONG TERM
PERFORMANCE TUNING TOOL∗

R. Bakker, T. Birke, R. M¨uller, BESSY, Berlin, Germany

Abstract

The ﬁrst two years of user service of the third generation
light source BESSY II emphasized the importance of a re-
liable, comprehensive and dense logging of a few thousand
setpoints, readbacks, status and alarm values. Today data
from sources with various characteristics residing in differ-
ent protected networks are centrally collected and retriev-
able via an uncomplex CGI program to any desktop sys-
tem on the site. Data post-processing tools cover Windows
applications, IDL, SDDS and custom programs matching
users skills and preferences. In this paper illustrative sam-
ple data explorations are described that underline the im-
portance of the logging system for operations as well as
for the understanding of singular events or long term drifts.
Serious shortcomings of the present installation and focus
of further development are described.

1

INTRODUCTION

Like other third generation light sources BESSY II exceeds
many of the primary design goals. Users not only appreci-
ate the additional potential of the excellent beam deﬁnition
and stability — an increasing number of experiments sim-
ply depend on the high and reliable beam quality. Espe-
cially important are minimal beam center of mass drifts,
well deﬁned beam energy with minimal spread and high
beam intensity with a long lifetime. It is difﬁcult to prevent
drifting of these parameters over the several days necessary
for an experiment. Many effects originating from facil-
ity operating conditions and user activities can contribute.
Since there is never enough time to isolate all possible ef-
fects by dedicated accelerator development studies archives
of logged data are most important sources of information.

2 SETUP AND STATUS

Despite the eminent importance of archived data the archiv-
ing system at BESSY is far from being well settled. Ade-
quate carefully done is the collection both of snapshot ﬁles
and long term monitoring data [1]. Loss or omission of es-
sential data would destroy unrecoverable knowledge about
past behaviour of the facility. Retrieval tools are still cum-
bersome, immature and subject of maloperation frequently
resulting in loss of work time. Conﬁguration is mainly

∗ Funded by the Bundesministerium f¨ur Bildung, Wissenschaft,

Forschung und Technologie (BMBF) and the Land Berlin

hand-work, thus not fault free. Surveillance of data source
availability and data integrity is done occasionally. Only
the collector programs themselves are systematically su-
pervised by watch-dog or stop/restart procedures.

2.1

SDDS based Data Store

Initially the BESSY archiving conﬁguration was based on
the SDDS toolkit. Storage format are compressed SDDS
ﬁles spanning a device class and a full day, sorted into a
calendar mapping directory structure. A TclTk glue appli-
cation combines navigation, SDDS data retrieval, correla-
tion and export [1].

This data store is still a good compromise even though
not optimal with respect to data format and size, network
resources and CPU requirements: channel selection, pre-
viewing facility, available post-processing tools cover most
of operators requirements. The SDDS archive is not dis-
continued, collects 20 GB/y and serves as valuable backup
system. A more or less frozen and easy maintainable list of
signals essential for the understanding of basic operation
parameters are monitored. Major obstacle for a site-wide
usage of the archive is the (intended) in-accessibility of the
data store residing in the protected accelerator control pro-
duction area.

2.2 Central Channel Archiver

Since mid 2000 a Channel Archiver [2] instance has been
set up in addition.
It is intended to overcome the self-
containment of the (accelerator) SDDS archiver and serve
the whole site. Any major development and conﬁgura-
tion effort goes into this system. Data collector engine(s)
and CGIExport retrieval tools are installed in a dedi-
cated environment[1]. A six processor HP N-class server
(archive server) in a non-routable private network stores
the data on a RAID system that is backed up to a tape robot.
It is planned to migrate mass storage to a ﬁbre channel sys-
tem attached to a tape library this year.

2.3 Data Flow

In an attempt to minimize adverse effects on the system
caused by unexpected activities and to maximize uptime
neither user accounts nor NFS access to the archiver net-
work are provided. For data collection all data sources re-
siding on dedicated networks are connected by two multi-
homed CA-gateway computers (8 network interfaces each).

Presently a single archiving engine (process) stores 50
GB/y accelerator relevant data. A second engine has been
set up early this year for the beamline area and auxiliary
data presently collecting about 15GB/y.

Common retrieval method is HTTP invocation of
CGIExport [2] via the central network router. Typically
the available gnuplot presentation of the data requested
is used as a preview ensuring that the data selection pro-
vides the desired information. Then the data are retrieved
in spread-sheet or matlab format and stored on local disk.
Favourite postprocessing tools are PC Windows tools (Ori-
gin, Excel) or UNIX applications (IDL, Matlab). A small
program (caa2sdds) converts the spread-sheet output to
SDDS format enabling data analysis with the full data se-
lection, post-processing and display power of SDDS.

3 TYPICAL UTILIZATION

3.1

Identiﬁcation of Singular Events

Probably tracking down sudden perturbations to its causes
is the most common usage of the archive. Examples for this
application are e.g. an unusual large drift that corresponded
to the failure of a water pump or the sudden onset of orbit
jumps that was due to an improper motor reset resulting in
a constant rotation of strong chicane magnets.

3.2 First Hints on Unexpected Effects

Archived data help to get a ﬁrst idea of possible explana-
tions: Mid 2001 for example a strong, periodic orbit pertur-
bation has been reported by the operators. By phase anal-
ysis it was possible to locate the problem source with a
few meters precision at a ring segment where no active ele-
ments are installed. The time pattern of perturbation onset
and disappearance (see ﬁg. 1) suggested an unknown cor-
relation with user activities. Targeted investigation found
out that one user group reversed the ﬁeld of a 1 [T] magnet
twice a minute several meters apart from the beampipe.

3.3 Analysis of Changes*

Daily results during operation:

Landaus on

1999

2000

2001

Landaus 
off

2000

1500

1000

500

)
h
A
m

(
 
 
e
m

i
t
e
f
i
L
 
*
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C
m
a
e
B

 

0

0

400

800

1200

1600

2000

Accumulated Dose D (Ah)

Figure 2: Vacuum effects on lifetime shown as a function
of accumulated beam dose. Postprocessing tool: EXCEL

On the long term extreme the archive provides the data
needed to make evolutions visible that are hardly percep-
tible on a ﬁll to ﬁll basis. Plotting e.g.
the normalized
lifetime [mAh] against the accumulated dose [Ah] over the
full operating time of the facility is a powerful mean to ﬁnd
out very fundamental factors: From ﬁg. 2 it can be con-
cluded, that the vacuum related lifetime reduction is basi-
cally overcome by beam scrubbing 1000 [Ah] after start
up of the accelerator. Every venting due to installation re-
quirements needs another 100 [Ah] to reinstall the previous
performance. On top of these basic conditions global life-
time improving effects of Landau cavities (mid 2000) as
well as reducing effects of imperfectly corrected insertion
devices (beginning 2001) can be seen.

4 DEMANDING REQUIREMENTS

4.1 Uptime, Reliability

Requirements on uptime, reliability and consistency of the
archive are substantial. The archive data have to contain
signals of very different importance. Beam intensity e.g. is
analyzed and correlated in any thinkable way: integration
(dose), differentiation (beam loss), pattern analysis (user
runs) etc. Here a loss of data would be serious, but rec-
ognized within minutes. Other signals are monitored as a
precaution. They could potentially help to ﬁnd candidates
for sources of performance degradation. Dispensable for
the all day business they are not under human surveillance.
Regardless they have to contain reliable data when needed.

Figure 1: Orbit perturbations due to switched user mag-
net outside the storage ring tunnel. Phases of experimental
activity are clearly visible. Viewing tool: Xarr.

4.2 Data Density, Aging

The most common approaches to prevent growing of the
archive to unmanageable dimensions are removal of ‘old’

Figure 3: Raw data of (uncorrected) vertical orbit stability
(+/- 5 µm RMS) during all user ﬁlls (220 mA - 80 mA) at
user run #4 (Aug. 2000, left). General degradation and spu-
rious exotic drifts can be clearly identiﬁed at run #5 (Oct.
2000, right). Postprocessing Tool: Origen

data (tape, deletion) or a progressive reduction of data den-
sity. Fig. 3 and 4 are examples of the opposite require-
ment for a dense and long term archive. In Fig. 3 spurious
observations and user complaints could be quantiﬁed after
serious hardware modiﬁcations. The comparison of perfor-
mance and inﬂuence of a new operation mode required per
ﬁll details (8h) months apart for ﬁg. 4.

5 PRESENT FOCUS OF ACTIVITIES

5.1 Data Collector

Today management and conﬁguration of collector engines
is further robustiﬁed. Usage of the system is simpliﬁed
by GUI administration tools. Signal conﬁguration manage-
ment based on the reference RDB is still missing.

5.2 Retrieval

Performance of data retrieval from large and multiple
archives has been drastically enhanced. Channel detection
method for a given time interval is improved. Volume of
intermediate data needed for previewing is reduced to the
minimum allowed by the anticipated gnuplot resolution.

5.3 Data Partitioning

From the iterator model and the hash table directories the
binary data format of the Channel Archiver is optimized for
retrieval of data from archives containing a moderate num-
ber of channels and starting e.g. from ‘now’ going back-
wards in time. Retrieving a dozen of channels out of the
‘middle’ of a continuous archive holding several thousands
of channels requires patience.

As a ﬁrst improvement approach the huge monolithic
data block is split into a moderate number of weekly or-
dered chunks holding certain fragments of the whole signal
collection. Adjustment of the I/O routines results in orders

Figure 4: Stability comparison of ‘Uncorrected’ with ‘Drift
Corrected’ Fills. Data Postprocessing Tool: IDL.

of magnitude retrieval acceleration. But however home
grown data formats are optimized: ultimately the retrieval
of arbitrary data selections out of huge data stores is best
done with commercial RDB systems. Consequently the uti-
lization of a RDB storage format has to be re-considered.

6 SUMMARY

Ideally one would like to be able to ‘replay’ any control-
lable and measurable parameter out of the signal archive
with the reasonable time resolution of a few seconds. For a
BESSY size facility this would require data stores of sev-
eral TB/y. The Channel Archiver provides a robust data
collector and retrieval toolkit but the archive itself has to
be reduced to manageable dimensions.

The challenges today are conﬁguration (select relevant
signals, grouping, choose proper archiving frequencies),
correlation detection (identify signals) and data organisa-
tion (optimized search). Plotting options and postprocess-
ing requirements have to be provided by the end-user ac-
cording to his speciﬁc skills and varying needs.

7 REFERENCES

[1] T. Birke, R.J. Bakker, S. Bub, R. M¨uller, “Logging of Su-
pervisory Data at BESSY”, Proc. of the 7th Int. Conf on Ac-
celerator and Large Experimental Physics Control Systems
(ICALEPCS99),Trieste, Italy, p. 431 (1999).

[2] K. Kasemir, L. Dalesio, “Overview of the Experimental
Physics and Industrial Control System (EPICS) Channel
Archiver”, these proceedings, THAP019.

