1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
1
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EPICS DEVICE SUPPORT
FOR NETWORK-BASED CONTROLLERS

K. Furukawa∗, J. Chiba, N. Kamikubota, H. Nakagawa
High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0801, Japan

TUAP066

Abstract

In the control system of the JAERI-KEK joint project (High
Intensity Proton Accelerator Facility), it is planned to em-
ploy network-based controllers such as PLC’s and mea-
surement stations instead of using other ﬁeld control net-
works, since the network hardware and software can be
standardized and they have been successfully utilized in
other accelerator control systems in KEK.

EPICS software support for those controllers was de-
signed paying special attention to robustness and has been
implemented and applied for the accelerator test stand. Ba-
sic functionalities were conﬁrmed and miscellaneous func-
tions such as diagnosis of the software itself would be
added.

Since many kinds of network-based equipment such as
oscilloscopes have become available recently, they are con-
sidered to be integrated as well. They may enable more
manageable controllers.

OPI's
CA clients

PLC management
stations

CA access

Maintenance

Network
Switch(s)

Polling, etc

IOC
(VME or PC)

PLC's
(Network Controllers)

Figure 1: The same network is shared between differ-
ent purposes between network controllers, EPICS IOCs,
EPICS OPIs and management stations.

the joint project are described.

1

INTRODUCTION

2 CONTROLLER USAGE UNDER EPICS

Phase 1 of the JAERI-KEK joint project for high-intensity
proton accelerators was recently approved for construction.
The control system is being designed in detail. The overall
conceptual design is given elsewhere [1]. The EPICS con-
trol software environment [2] will be used in the system
after having investigated several options. The main reasons
for EPICS are the recent success of EPICS in the KEKB
ring controls [3] and the feasibility to share software re-
sources of accelerator controls with other facilities.

In the linac part of the project it has been planned to
employ controllers based on the IP (Internet Protocol) net-
work instead of using special ﬁeld networks if they meet
the performance requirement. And the selection of such
network-based controllers are being extended to the whole
project. The reasons why we intend to use them are that we
successfully utilize hundreds of such controllers in another
accelerator at KEK [4, 5] and that we need only standard IP
network software and infrastructure for both controls and
management [6].

In this article the usage plan and the software implemen-
tation of such network-based controllers under EPICS in

∗ e-Mail: <kazuro.furukawa@kek.jp>

A network-based controller and an EPICS IOC1 may be
connected with IP network as shown in Fig. 1, with a PLC2
as an example. (Other network-based controllers act the
same way.) There are ﬁve components in this scheme and
their tasks are listed below.

• A PLC controls local equipment and carries local pro-
cessing. It is mostly designed by an equipment expert
and it may have a simple local-operation panel. It may
be tested by a management station without EPICS en-
vironment. Sometimes such an autonomous controller
is useful when a robust control is required.

• An IOC may covers several PLCs and others. And it
processes logics between several PLCs and keeps their
current status on memory. It may be designed by an
equipment expert or an operator.

• An OPI3 sees such an IOC as an ordinary IOC. It does
not notice the existence of network-based controllers.
• A management station is utilized to develop ladder
software which may be downloaded to a PLC, and to

1IOC: input output controller.
2PLC: programmable logic controller.
3OPI: operator interface.

diagnose it. If some mistakes exist in EPICS database
or programming, it is useful to test from outside of
EPICS.

• Network hubs between them should be based on
switch technology not to be suffered from message
collisions. The design of the network topology is rela-
tively ﬂexible compared with other ﬁeld networks be-
cause of the IP network. A connection to OPIs may
be isolated by a network router to limit the communi-
cation to PLCs locally.

Figure 1 is symmetric between them since it shows the
physical view. Logically PLCs are on local network and
OPIs are on global network. They communicate in three
ways.

• A PLC communicates with an IOC in its own pro-
tocol, since it cannot use the EPICS channel access
(CA) protocol. While it is based on polling, an impor-
tant PLC may send urgent information to IOC without
being asked.

• An IOC communicates with OPIs through the CA pro-

tocol in normal way.

• A management station maintains PLCs during main-
tenance time. It is important to manage them over IP
network, since the number of PLCs may become hun-
dreds.

3 NETWORK-BASED CONTROLLERS

In the project these kinds of network-based controllers are
considered to be used.

• Programmable logic controllers (PLC) for simple and

medium-speed controls.

• Measurement stations (Yokogawa’s WE7000) for

medium speed waveform acquisition.

• Plug-in network controller boards for relatively large

power supplies for magnets.

Although we use VME modules installed in EPICS IOCs
for other purposes, new network equipment may be added.
Measurement equipment such as a network-based oscillo-
scope may be especially useful.

3.1

PLC

At the electron linac in KEK, about 150 PLCs are used
for rf, magnet and vacuum controls, which are managed
through central computers. A PLC called FA-M3 (Fac-
tory ACE) from Yokogawa Co. was chosen because the
network software was relatively reliable and the manage-
ment of the PLCs could be carried over IP network. Even
the ladder software can be downloaded into a PLC over
network. Such functionality was not available from other
venders. Thus we decided to use the same type of PLCs at
the joint project as well.

The communication and control routines for PLCs were
originally developed for Unix environment. While they

Figure 2: An example panel for testing the ion source of
the linac, which utilizes the EPICS PLC records.

were designed to access the shared-memory registers on
the PLCs, they can also directly access I/O modules over
network.

Since the routines were written with a generalized IP
communication package [7], they were easily ported on to
VxWorks and Windows operating systems. The routines
on Windows machines are often useful for developers of
ladder software of PLCs even without EPICS environment.
EPICS device support software was written utilizing
those routines on VxWorks, providing EPICS standard ac-
cess methods which could be called from any channel ac-
cess (CA) clients. It basically reads and writes registers on
PLCs, each of which is speciﬁed by an INP/OUT ﬁeld of
an EPICS record using an IP address or a host name and a
register address.

As an example of CA clients, a MEDM panel is shown
in Fig. 2, which includes current values and strip charts
of high voltages of the ion source which was being condi-
tioned at the linac.

Although such an application can be handled by current
software without any problems, the current implementation
of the device support software is not optimal yet and a con-
ditional write function, which is described later, may be
necessary. Thus the software is planned to be upgraded
soon.

3.2 Measurement Station

A waveform acquisition is often essential in beam instru-
mentation and microwave measurements.
In this area, a
measurement station called WE7000 from Yokogawa Co.
seems to be promising when cost performance and electro-
magnetic noise elimination are taken into account. And it
was well adopted in beam instrumentation at KEK [8].

Three types of waveform digitizers, 100ks/s, 100Ms/s

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the KEKB ring control
group people and the joint project staffs for valuable dis-
cussions.

7 REFERENCES

[1] J. Chiba et al., “A Control System of the Joint-Project Accel-

erator Complex”, in these proceedings.

[2] L.R. Dalesio et al., “The Experimental Physics and Industrial
Control System Architecture”, Proc. of ICALEPCS93, Berlin,
Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A352 (1994) 179.

[3] N. Yamamoto et al., “KEKB Control System: The Present
and the Future”, Proc. of PAC99, New York, USA., 1999,
p.343.

[4] K. Furukawa et al., “Microwave Control and Measurement
System at the KEKB Linac”, Proc. of ICALEPCS97, Beijing,
China, 1997, p.146.

[5] N. Kamikubota et al., “Introduction of Modern Subsystems

at the KEK Injector- Linac”, in these proceedings.

[6] K. Furukawa et al., “Network Based EPICS Drivers for
PLC’S and Measurement Stations”, Proc. of ICALEPCS99,
Trieste, Italy, 1999, p.409.

[7] K. Furukawa, “s2 Communication Routines”, unpublished.

[8] J. Kishiro et al., “A New High Performance Data Acquisition
System and Application to a Betatron Oscillation Monitor”,
Proc. of ICALEPCS97, Beijing, China, 1997, p.208.

and 1Gs/s, are currently considered to be employed. For the
EPICS device support software, we thought that it would be
a good example of out-sourcing. Thus we asked a company
to build software. Although it took some time for them
to understand the EPICS software environment, waveform
records were built using disclosed information from Yoko-
gawa. We are now evaluating the performance of the soft-
ware.

3.3

Plug-in Network Controller

As we designed the magnet power supplies for drift-tube
linac (DTL) and a separated DTL, we realized that we’d
better develop a speciﬁc controller, since power supplies
were intelligent and had many functions.

Thus we designed a plug-in-type network controller
board, which transfers information and commands between
IP network and a local processor inside a power supply.
The number of registers are about 50, half of which are uti-
lized for network communication and include registers for
diagnostic purposes such as the last IP address accessed.

The controller boards are being built with the power sup-
plies and will be evaluated soon. The software will be al-
most compatible with PLC’s.

4 CONSIDERATION

Since network-based controllers may reside on global net-
work, we should be very careful about programming and
conﬁguring them. Although the number of persons who ac-
cess such controllers were limited in the previous project,
we don’t know it in the new project now and some misun-
derstanding may occur easily. Thus we decided to make
several rules to use it.

• We will put an unique identiﬁcation number (ID) to
each PLC and plug-in network controller. Since it will
be written in hardware or ladder software, a mistake in
the conﬁguration of the IP-address may be found from
a management station.

• A clock counter of the controller should be consulted
routinely from a management station to monitor that
it works properly.

• While read functions are not restricted, write func-
tions should be limited to some range of register ad-
dresses. For important controllers a value should be
always written indirectly with a value and a address.

5 CONCLUSION

The combination of EPICS toolkits and network-based
controllers may enhance the manageability of the control
system. The software for EPICS toolkits has been devel-
oped and are being tested. They will be used in commis-
sioning of the ﬁrst part of linac soon.

